=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Ngugi-Wa-Thiongo-Moving-the-Centre(1).pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 194
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:13:26.833548
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
MOVING THE CENTRE
The Struggle for Cultural Freedoms
1


--- PAGE 2 ---
Studies in 
African Literature
NEW SERIES
NGUGI WA THINOG’O
Decolonising the Mind
Moving the Centre
ELDRED DUROSIMI JONES
The Writings of Wole Soyinka
SIMON GIKANDI
Reading the African Novel
Reading Chinua Achebe
EMMANUEL NGARA
Ideology & Form in African Poetry
ADEOLA JAMES (Editor)
In Their Own Voices
African women writers talk
JANE WILKINSON (Editor)
Talking with African Writers
Interviews with African poets, playwrights & novelists
MILDRED MORTIMER
Journeys through the French African Novel
KENNETH HARROW (Editor)
Faces of Islam in African Literature
EAEP Nairobi
HEINEMANN Portsmouth (N.H.)
James Currey London
2


--- PAGE 3 ---
MOVING THE CENTRE
The Struggle for Cultural Freedoms
NGUGI WA THIONG’O
EAEP
NAIROBI
James Currey
London
3


--- PAGE 4 ---
East African Educational Publishers Ltd.
Mpaka Road/Woodvale Grove
Westlands 
P.O. Box 45315, Nairobi
James Currey Ltd.
54b Thornhill Square, Islington
London N1 1BE
© Ngugi wa Thinog’o 1993
 First published 1993
 1 2 3 4 5 97 96 95 94 93
British Library Calaloguing in Publication Data
Ngugi, wa Thiong’o
Moving the Centre: The Struggle for Cultural Freedoms
ISBN 9966-46-785-8 (EAEP)
ISBN 0-85255-530-X (James Currey Paper)
ISBN 0-85255-531-8 (James Currey Cloth)
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Ngugi wa Thiong’o, 1938-
Moving the centre: the struggle for cultural freedoms / Ngugi wa Thiong’o.
p. cm.- (Studies in African literature. New series)
A collection of talks and essays, created between 1985 and 1990, and 
translated from Kikuyu by the author.
1. African Literature-20th century-History and criticism. 
2. African literature – European influences. I. Title. II. Series.
PL8010.N485 1993
809’ .8896-dc20 92-30303
CIP
Printed by:
English Press Ltd.,
P.O. Box 30127,
Enterprise Road,
Nairobi, Kenya.
4


--- PAGE 5 ---
Dedication
To my wife
Njeeri
5


--- PAGE 6 ---
6


--- PAGE 7 ---
Contents
Acknowledgements ix
Preface xiii
I Freeing Culture from Euro centrism 1
1. Moving the Centre: Towards a Pluralism of Cultures 2
2. Creating Space for a Hundred Flowers to Bloom: 
The Wealth of a Common Global Culture 12
3. The Universality of Local Knowledge 25
4. Imperialism of Language: English, a Language for the World? 30
6. Cultural Dialogue for a New World 42
7. The Cultural Factor in the New-colonial Era 47
II Freeing Culture from Colonial Legacies 59
7. The Writer in a Neo-colonial State 60
8. Resistance to Damnation: The Role of Intellectual Workers 76
9. The Role of the Scholar in the Development of African Literatures 82
10. Post-colonial Politics and Culture 88
7


--- PAGE 8 ---
11. In Moi’s Kenya, History is Subversive` 96
12. From the Corridors of Silence: The Exile Writes Back 102
13. Imperialism and Revolution: Movements for Social Change 109
III Freeing Culture from Racism 115
14. The Ideology of Racism: War on Peace Within 
and Among Nations 116
15. Racism in Literature 126
16. Her Cook, her Dog: Karen Blixen’s Africa 132
17. Biggles, Mau Mau and I 136
18. Black Power in Britain 142
19. Many Years Walk to Freedom: Welcome Home Mandela 146
IV Matigari, Dreams and Nightmares 153
20. Life, Literaure and a Longing for Home 154
21. Matigari , and the Dreams of One East Africa 159
Index 179
8


--- PAGE 9 ---
Acknowledgements
The original versions have been edited for this collection; occasionally they 
have been rewritten or enlarged. The author and the publisher wish to thank 
the following for premission to use the original material: 
Moving the Centre: Towards a Pluralism of Cultures
The  University  of  Leeds.  Originally  given  as  The  Arthur  Ravenscroft 
Commonwealth Literature, Lecture, 4 December 1990. Also published in the 
Journal of Commonwealth Literature, Vol. 26, No. 1, 1991.
Creating Space for a Hundred Flowers to Bloom: The Wealth of a Common 
Culture
The  University  of  Yale.  Address,  originally  enticed  in’ The  Wealth  of  a 
Common  Culture’ given  at  the  conference  on  ‘Tradition  and  Transition  in 
African Letters’, 19-22 April 1990. The section dealing with African Literature 
was first published in The Times Literary, Supplement, December 1990.
The Universality of Local Knowledge
The Whitney Humanities Centre, Yale and the  Yale Journal of Criticism. 
(Originally published as a response to the main presentations by Professor 
Geertz and Professor Goody, Spring 1992.
Imperialism of Language: English a Language for the World ?
BBC World Service and the  Yale Journal of Criticism. This chapter was 
originally given as a talk with the title ‘The Imperialism of 
9


--- PAGE 10 ---
Language’ in a BBC seminar on the theme ‘English a Language for the World’ 
that  took  place  on  27  October  1988.  Also  published  in  Yale  Journal  of 
Criticism, Fall 1990.
The Cultural Factor in the Neo-colonial Era
Originally the  keynote  address at a conference on ‘US Imperialism in the 
1990s’ held at Sheffield University in April 1988; paper given under the title 
‘Fighting Neo-colonialism’.
The Writer in a Neo-colonial State
Vita Books and  Black Scholar:  Journal of Black Studies and Research. 
Originally  an  address  at  the  African  Literature  Association.  Northwestern 
University, USA, 1985; published by Vita Books, June 1986, under the title 
‘Writing  Against  Neo-colonialism’  and  subsequently  published  in  Black 
Scholar under the president title.
Resistance to Damnation: The Role of Intellectual Workers
UNICEF. An address to the conference, held in Harare, 1-5 March 1988, of 
artists, writers, musicians and intellectual workers, on the situation of children 
in Southern Africa, particularly in Mozambique and Angola.
The Role of the Scholar in the Development of African Literatures
Hans  Zell  Publishers.  First  published  in  Research  Priorities  in  African 
Literatures, edited by Bernth Lindfors, 1984.
Post-colonial Politics and Culture
The University of Adelaide. First published in Southern Review, Vol. 24, No. 
I, March 1991.
In Moi’s Kenya, History is Subversive
Zed Books. First published as the Foreword to  Kenya’s Freedom Struggle, 
edited by Maina wa Kinyatti, 1987.
From the Corridors of Silence: The Exile Writes Back
The  Guardian (London).  Published  in  Weekend  Guardian,  21-22  October 
1989, under the title ‘From the Corridors of Silence’.
10


--- PAGE 11 ---
Imperialism and Revolution; Movements for Social Change
The  Sixth  International  Radical,  Black  and  Third  World  Book  Fair. 
Originally an address to the Fair in London, March 1987. It was dedicated to 
Wanyiri  Kihoro  then  in  detention  without  trial  in  Kenya  for  his  previous 
activities in London as a member of the Committee for the Release of Political 
Prisoners in Kenya, founded in London in July 1982.
The Ideology of Racism: War on Peace Within and Among Nations
Liberation. Originally  an  address  at  the  Racism  and  Peace  conference, 
Camden Town Hall, London, 1985, given under the title ‘Racism is War on 
Peace’.
Racism in Literature
Hackney Race Relations Unit and Hackney Library Services. Originally 
given as a public lecture in 1984.
Her Cook, her Dog: Karen Blixen’s Africa
Bogens Verden. Given as an address to the 70th anniversary of the Danish 
Library Association, it was first published in Bogens Verden as ‘A Tremendous 
Service in Rectifying the Harm Done to Africa’, Copenhagen, December 1980.
Biggles, Mau Mau and I
The Guardian (London). Published in The Guardian, 13 August 1992 under 
the title ‘Ngugi wa Thiong’o: Ambivalent Feelings about Biggles’.
Many Years Walk to Freedom: Welcome Home Mandela!
EMERGE. Published in April 1990, under the title ‘Mandela Comes Home’.
Life, Literature and a Longing for Home
The Guardian (London). First published as Guardian Diary, 27 May 1989.
Matigari and the Dreams of One East Africa
Geo magazine (Hamburg). First published in Geo, October 1989.
11


--- PAGE 12 ---
From the Author:
I would like to thank my publisher James Currey Ltd who first suggested the 
idea of bringing the new collection together. In particular, I would like to thank 
Keith  Sambrook for his editorial input that gave the collection its present 
shape.
12


--- PAGE 13 ---
Preface
The title of this collection is taken from that of the first Arthur Ravenscroft 
Lecture that I gave at Leeds University on 4 December 1990. But the talks and 
the essays themselves are products of diverse occasions at different times and 
places.
The earliest piece, Her Cook, her Dog: Karen Blixen's Africa, was given in 
Copenhagen in 1981. The talk created an uproar in Denmark where Karen 
Blixen, alias Isaak Dinesen, was then regarded as a saint. A racist saint? I was 
accused of exaggerating despite the fact that I was quoting directly from her 
books, Out of Africa and Shadows on the Grass. The latest piece, Post-colonial 
Politics  and  Culture, is  a  transcript  of  a  talk  I  gave  at  the  University of 
Adelaide in September 1990 during a month's tour of Australia. It describes the 
continuity of Karen Blixen's Africa into post-colonial Kenya. Otherwise the 
majority were created between 1985 and 1990. Thus, with the sole exception of 
the Copenhagen piece, they fall within my years of exile from Kenya.
There are two that give me special satisfaction:  English, a Language for 
the  World?  and  Many  Years  Walk  to  Freedom.  Welcome  Home  Mandela! 
because they are translations from the Gikuyu originals. The first piece was 
part of a BBC seminar on English as a possible language for the world held on 
27  October  1988.  The  translation  was  later  broadcast  on  the  BBC  World 
Service. The English version, under the title  English: A Language for the 
World?; and the Gikuyu original, Kiingeretha: Ruthiomi rwa Thi Yoothe? Kaba 
Githwairi!, were first published in the 1990 Fall issue of the Yale Journal of 
Criticism. The second piece, commissioned by EMERGE, a New York based 
African-American news magazine, 
13


--- PAGE 14 ---
was the lead article in their March 1990 issue featuring the historic release of 
Nelson Mandela. But whereas the Gikuyu original of the piece on language has 
been published in the Yale journal, the Gikuyu original of the Mandela piece is 
still in my drawer among a good number of others. In their different destinies, 
the two pieces illustrate the difficulties in the way of those writing theoretical, 
philosophical, political and journalistic prose in an African language, moreover 
in conditions of exile. The Gikuyu language community for instance is largely 
within Kenya. There are no journals or newspapers in the language inside or 
outside Kenya. This is true for all the other African languages in Kenya apart 
from the All-Kenya national language, Kiswahili. This means that those who 
write  in  African  languages  are  confronted  with  a  dearth  of  outlets  for 
publication and therefore platforms for critical debate among those using the 
languages. They can only publish in translation or else borrow space from 
European languages journals and both options are clearly not solutions. The 
situation does not help much in the development of conceptual vocabulary in 
these languages to cope with modern technology, the sciences and the arts. The 
growth of writing in African languages will need a community of scholars and 
readers in those very languages, who will bring into the languages the wealth 
of  literature  on  modern  technology,  arts  and  sciences.  For  this  they need 
platforms. It is a vicious circle. So while the two pieces mirror my current 
involvements in the struggle to move the centre of our literary engagements 
from European languages to a multiplicity of locations in our languages, they 
also  illustrate  the  frustrations  in  the  way  of  immediate  and  successful 
realisation  under  the  present  conditions  of  a  continent's  disbelief  in  itself. 
However, difficulties in nature and life are there to be overcome. Without 
struggle there is no progression, said Hegel. The struggle to meet the challenge 
of decolonising the imagination continues and the two pieces add to my other 
steps in the novel, drama and children's stories, in what is clearly a long 
journey.
Although  these  talks  were  given  and  the  essays  written  for  diverse 
occasions at different times and places, I found that there are certain prevalent 
assumptions and recurring themes and concerns that unite them.
First is the assumption that for a full comprehension of the 
14


--- PAGE 15 ---
dynamics,  dimensions  and workings  of a society,  any society,  the  cultural 
aspects cannot be seen in total isolation from the economic and political ones. 
The  quantity  and  quality  of  wealth  in  a  community,  the  manner  of  its 
organisation from production to the sharing out, affect, and are affected by the 
way in which power is organised and distributed. These in turn affect and are 
affected by the values of that society as embodied and expressed in the culture 
of that society. The wealth and power and self-image of a community are 
inseparable.
The other assumption is the changing character of all societies. Nothing, 
not even culture, in a society can be said to have arrived at the best of all 
possible worlds. But since culture while being a product of the development of 
that society is also a repository of all the values that have been evolved by the 
different social strata in that society over time, in the sense that it holds a given 
society together it is more conservative than the economy and political life of 
the society which change relatively more rapidly. Culture gives that society its 
self-image as it sorts itself out in the economic and political fields. It therefore 
tends to appear as both neutral, (equally expressive of all and accessible to all) 
and unchanging, a stable resting place for all its members. Hence the talk of 
'our values' by different societies. However, changes whether evolutionary or 
revolutionary  can  occur  as  result  of  the  internal  working  out  of  the 
contradictions in that society in a delicate or even turbulent relationship to the 
external  environment.  In  this  sense  society  is  like  a  human  body  which 
develops  as a result  of  the  internal  working out of  all  its  cells  and other 
biological processes - those dying and those being born and their different 
combinations  -  and  also  in  the  external  context  of  the  air  and  other 
environmental factors. The air and food the body takes from its contact with 
the external environment are digested and become an integral part of the body. 
This is normal and healthy. But it may happen that the impact of the external 
factor is too strong; it is not taken in organically, in which case the body may 
even die. Floods, earthquakes, the wind, too much or too little air, poisoned or 
healthy food, overeating, overdrinking, are all external factors or activities to 
do with absorbing the external and they can affect the body adversely. The 
same with society. All societies develop under conditions of external contact 
with  other  societies  at  the  economic,  political  and  cultural  levels.  Under 
'normal' circumstances, a given society is able to absorb whatever it borrows 
15


--- PAGE 16 ---
from other contacts, digest it and make it its own. But under conditions of 
external domination, conquest for instance, the changes are not as a result of 
the working out of the conflicts and tensions within, and do not arise out of the 
organic development of that society, but are forced upon it externally.
This  may  result  in  the  society  becoming  deformed,  changing  course 
altogether or even dying out. Conditions of external domination and control, as 
much  as  those  of  internal  domination  and  oppression,  do  not  create  the 
necessary climate for the cultural health of any society.
Thus, cultures that stay in total isolation from others can shrivel, dry up or 
wither away.  Cultures under total domination from others can be crippled, 
deformed,  or  else  die.  Cultures  that  change  to  reflect  the  ever-changing 
dynamics of internal relations and which maintain a balanced give and take 
with external relations are the ones that are healthy. Hence the insistence in 
these essays on the suffocating and ultimately destructive character of both 
colonial and neo-colonial structures. A new world order that is no more than 
the global dominance of neo-colonial relations policed by a handful of Western 
nations,  whether through the United  Nations  Security Council  or not,  is a 
disaster for the peoples of the world and their cultures. While there is a need 
for cultures to reach out to one another and borrow from one another this has to 
be on the basis of equality and mutual respect. The call for the Western-based 
new world order should be countered by a continued call for a new, more 
equitable  international  economic,  political  and  cultural  order  within  and 
between nations, a world order that reflects the diversity of world peoples and 
cultures. Hence the struggle for cultural freedoms.
Arising from all of this is the theme of moving the centre. It is this that 
most underlies the collection and hence the title. I am concerned with moving 
the centre in two senses at least. One is the need to move the centre from its 
assumed location in the West to a multiplicity of spheres in all the cultures of 
the world. The assumed location of the centre of the universe in the West is 
what goes by the term Eurocentrism, an assumption which developed with the 
domination of the world by a handful of Western nations:
Eurocentrism  [says  Samir  Amin  in  his  book  of  the  same  title]  is  a 
culturalist  phenomenon  in  the  sense  that  it  assumes the  existence  of  
16


--- PAGE 17 ---
irreducibly distinct cultural invariants that shape the historical paths of 
different peoples. Eurocentrism is therefore anti-universalist, since it is not 
interested in seeking possible general laws of human evolution. But it does 
present itself as universalist, for it claims that imitation of the Western 
model by all peoples is the only solution to the challenges of our time.
Although  present  in  all  areas,  economic  and  political  and  so  on,  the 
Eurocentric basis of looking at the world is particularly manifest in the field of 
languages,  literature,  cultural  studies  and  in  the  general  organisation  of 
literature departments in universities in many parts of the globe. The irony is 
that  even  that  which  is  genuinely universal  in  the  West  is  imprisoned  by 
Eurocentrism. Western civilisation itself becomes a prisoner, its jailors being its 
Eurocentric  interpreters.  But  Eurocentrism  is  most  dangerous  to  the  self-
confidence  of  Third  World  peoples  when  it  becomes  internalised  in  their 
intellectual conception of the universe.
The  second  sense  is  even  more  important  although  it  is  not  explored 
extensively in these essays. Within nearly all nations today the centre is located 
in the dominant social stratum, a male bourgeois minority. But since many of 
the male bourgeois minorities in the world are still dominated by the West we 
are  talking  about  the  domination  of  the  world,  including  the  West,  by  a 
Eurocentric bourgeois, male and racial minority. Hence the need to move the 
centre from all minority class establishments within nations to the real creative 
centres among the working people in condition of gender, racial and religious 
equality.
Moving the centre in the two senses - between nations and within nations - 
will contribute to the freeing of world cultures from the restrictive walls of 
nationalism,  class,  race  and  gender.  In  this  sense  I  am  an  unrepentant 
universalist. For I believe that while retaining its roots in regional and national 
individuality, true humanism with its universal reaching out, can flower among 
the peoples of the earth, rooted as it is in the histories and cultures of the 
different peoples of the earth. Then, to paraphrase Marx, will human progress 
cease to resemble the pagan idol who would drink nectar but only from the 
skulls of the slain, 
My hope is that this collection should contribute to the debate about how 
best to wage and win the struggle for cultural freedoms in 
17


--- PAGE 18 ---
the world. For me, moving the centre to correct the imbalances of the last four 
hundred years is a crucial step in that direction.
Yale
New Haven
18


--- PAGE 19 ---
I
Freeing Culture
From
Eurocentrism
19


--- PAGE 20 ---
1 Moving the Centre
Towards a Pluralism of Cultures
Sometime in 1965 I handed a piece of prose to Professor Arthur Ravenscroft in 
what  was  a  class  exercise  in  language  use.  It  was  a  description  of  a 
carpenter-artist at work on wood. Later this became part of a larger evocation 
of life in a village in colonial Kenya between the end of the Second World War 
and the beginning of the Mau Mau armed struggle against British rule in 1952. 
When in 1966 I attended the first conference of Scandinavian and African 
writers in Stockholm, I presented it under the title, Memories of Childhood. By 
then it had become part of an even larger enterprise, a novel, A Grain of Wheat, 
which I wrote during my time in Leeds. The novel came out in 1967. In the 
copy that I signed for Arthur Ravenscroft I was happy to draw his attention to 
the chapter containing the exercise.]
I  mention  the  novel  because  in  so  many  ways  A  Grain  of  Wheat 
symbolises,  for  me,  the  Leeds  I  associate  with  Arthur  Ravenscroft's  time, 
which was also a significant moment in the development of African literature. 
This was the sixties when the centre of the universe was moving from Europe 
or, to put it another way, when many countries particularly in Asia and Africa 
were  demanding  and  asserting  their  right  to  define  themselves  and  their 
relationship to the universe from their own centres in Africa and Asia. Frantz 
Fanon became the prophet of the struggle to move the centre and his book, The 
Wretched of the Earth; became a kind of Bible among the African students 
from West and East Africa then at Leeds. In politics this moving of the centre 
was clear. Between 1960 and 1964, the year I came to Leeds, many countries in 
Africa  like  Tanzania,  Uganda,  Zaire,  Nigeria,  to  mention  only a  few,  had 
hoisted their 
20


--- PAGE 21 ---
national flags and were singing new national anthems instead of those of their 
conquerors from Europe as was the practice in the colonial era. Kenya had not 
even properly got used to its new anthem sung for the first time at the midnight 
of 12 December 1963. A Grain of Wheat celebrated the more than sixty years 
of Kenyan peoples' struggle to claim their own space. The political struggles to 
move the centre, the vast decolonisation process changing the political map of 
the  post-war  world,  had  also  a  radicalising  effect  in  the  West  particularly 
among the young and this was best symbolised by the support the Vietnamese 
struggle was enjoying among the youth of the sixties. This radical tradition had 
in turn an impact on the African students at Leeds making them look even 
more critically at the content rather than the form of the decolonisation process, 
taking their cue from Fanon's critique in the rightly celebrated chapter in the 
The Wretched of the Earth entitled 'The Pitfalls of National Consciousness'. A 
Grain of Wheat was both a celebration of independence and a warning about 
those pitfalls.
In the area of culture, the struggle to move the centre was reflected in the 
tri-continental  literature  of  Asia,  Africa  and  South  America.  It  was  more 
dramatic in the case of Africa and the Caribbean countries where the post-war 
world saw a new literature in English and French consolidating itself into a 
tradition. This literature was celebrating the right to name the world and  A 
Grain of Wheat was part of that tradition of the struggle for the right to name 
the world for ourselves. The new tradition was challenging the more dominant 
one in which Asia, Africa and South America were always being defined from 
the capitals of Europe by Europeans who often saw the world in colour-tinted 
glasses. The good and the bad African of the racist European tradition, the 
clowning  Messrs  Johnsons  of  the  liberal  European  tradition  or  even  the 
absence of consciousness of the colonised  world in the mainstream of the 
European literary imagination were all being challenged by the energy of the 
Okonkwos of the new literature who would rather die resisting than live on 
bent knees in a world which they could no longer define for themselves on 
their terms, characters who, with their every gesture in their interaction with 
nature and with their social environment, were a vivid image of the fact that 
Africa was not a land of perpetual childhood passed over by history as it 
passed from East to West to find its highest expression in the Western empires 
of the twentieth 
21


--- PAGE 22 ---
century. Hegelian Africa was a European myth. The literature was challenging 
the Eurocentric basis of the vision of other worlds even when this was of 
writers who were not necessarily in agreement with what Europe was doing to 
the rest of the world. It was not a question of substituting one centre for the 
other. The problem arose only when people tried to use the vision from any one 
centre and generalise it as the universal reality.
The modern world is a product of both European imperialism and of the 
resistance waged against it by the African, Asian, and South American peoples. 
Were we to see the world through the European responses to imperialism of the 
likes of Rudyard Kipling, Joseph Conrad or Joyce Cary, whose work in terms 
of  themes  or  location  or  attitude  assumed  the  reality  and  experience  of 
imperialism?  Of  course  they  responded  to  imperialism  from  a  variety  of 
ideological assumptions and attitudes. But they could never have shifted the 
centre of vision because they were themselves bound by the European centre of 
their  upbringing  and  experience.  Even  where  they  were  aware  of  the 
devastating  effects  of  imperialism  on  the  subject  peoples,  as  in  Conrad's 
description of the dying victims of colonial adventurism in Heart of Darkness, 
they could not free themselves from the Eurocentric basis of their vision.
It was actually at Makerere University College, but outside the formal 
structure,  that  I  first  encountered  the  new  literatures  from Africa  and  the 
Caribbean. I can still recall the excitement of reading the world from a centre 
other than Europe. The great tradition of European literature had invented and 
even defined the world view of the Calibans, the Fridays and the reclaimed 
Africans of their imaginations. Now the Calibans and the Fridays of the new 
literature were telling their story which, was also my story. Even the titles, like 
Peter Abrahams' Tell Freedom, seemed to speak of a world that I knew and a 
hope that I shared. When Trumper, one of the characters in George Lamming's 
novel, In the Castle of My Skin, talks of his suddenly discovering his people, 
and therefore his world, after hearing Paul Robeson sing, 'Let My People Go', 
he was speaking of me and my encounter with the voices coming out of centres 
outside Europe. The new literatures had two important effects on me.
I wanted to  write,  to  tell  freedom,  and by the  time I came  to  Arthur 
Ravenscroft's class in Leeds in 1965, I had already written two novels,  The 
River Between and Weep Not Child, a three-act 
22


--- PAGE 23 ---
play,  The Black Hermit, two one-act plays, and nine short stories. My third 
novel, A Grain of Wheat, was to be written in Leeds but even the first two carry 
memories  associated  with Leeds.  The River Between, the first novel  to be 
written but the second to be published, came, put in 1965 and the launch was 
held in Leeds with Austicks bookshop across the road flattering the author's 
ego with a fine display of the new book. Weep Not Child, the second novel but 
the first to be published by Heinemann in 1964, won a UNESCO First Prize in 
the first Black and African Writers and Artists Festival in Dakar. I heard the 
news while in Leeds. I got congratulations from all over the world. A UNESCO 
prize for literature? My financial worries in Leeds were over and I voiced my 
hopes to my fellow students who were not a little impressed by the fortune 
befalling one in their midst. You can imagine my disappointment when later I 
learnt that the prize was honorary after all. An honorary first prize. I have never 
talked about this prize or cited it as one of my accomplishment. Fortunately I 
heard the honorary news after I was already in the middle of my third novel, A 
Grain of Wheat, and I hoped that it would not win any honorary first prize. Not 
while I was a British Council Scholar in Leeds anyway.
Quite as important as my call to write was also my desire to study the new 
literature further. For a time, I was torn between Joseph Conrad, whom I had 
formally studied as a special paper in my undergraduate studies at Makerere, 
and  George  Lamming  who  was  not  known  in  the  official  curriculum  at 
Makerere. Joseph Conrad had a certain amount of attraction. He was Polish, 
born  in  a  country  and  a  family  that  had  known  only  the  pleasures  of 
domination and exile. He had learnt English late in life and yet he had chosen 
to write in it, a borrowed language, despite his fluency in his native tongue and 
in French. And what is more he had made it to the great tradition of English 
literature. Was he not already an image of what we, the new African writers, 
like the Irish writers before us, Yeats and others, could become? There was an 
added reason for his attraction. Conrad's most important novels were mostly 
located  in  the  colonial  empire:  in  Asia,  Africa  and  South  America.  The 
experience of the empire was central to the sensibility in his major novels, 
Lord Jim,  Heart of Darkness,  Victory and  Nostromo, not to mention all the 
other long and short stories set in the various outposts of the empire. Notice for 
instance the dominance of the images of ivory in 
23


--- PAGE 24 ---
Heart of Darkness; of coal in  Victory; of silver in  Nostromo.  Nostromo, in 
particular, was among the earliest novels to depict the coalescence of industrial 
and bank capital to create finance capital: what Lenin in his book Imperialism 
the  Highest  Stage  of  Capitalism once  described  as  one  of  the  crucial 
characteristics of modern imperialism. Alienation underlies most of the themes 
in his novels as in Nostromo. But Conrad had chosen to be part of the empire 
and the moral ambivalence in his attitude towards British imperialism stems 
from that chosen allegiance. George Lamming was also born in exile in the 
sense that his foreparents did not go to the Caribbean on a voluntary basis. The 
experience of the empire was also central to his novels from In the Castle of 
My Skin to Season of Adventure. Colonial alienation underlay all the themes in 
his work and he was to underwrite the centrality of the theme in his work in a 
book of essays under the title:  The Pleasures of Exile. But Lamming, unlike 
Conrad, wrote very clearly from the other side of the empire, from the side of 
those who were crying out `Let My People Go'. Conrad always  made me 
uneasy with his inability to see any possibility of redemption arising from the 
energy of the oppressed. He wrote from the centre of the empire. Lamming 
wrote from the centre of those struggling against the empire. It seemed to me 
that George Lamming had more to offer and I wanted to do more work on him 
and on Caribbean literature as a whole.
For if the struggle to shift the base from which to view the world from its 
narrow base in Europe to a multiplicity of centres was reflected in the new 
literatures from Asia, Africa and South America, it was not similarly reflected 
in the critical and academic institutions in the newly independent countries, or 
in Europe for that matter. The study of the humanities meant literally the 
humanity  contained  in  the  canonised  tradition  of  European  critical  and 
imaginative literature and, further, confined within the linguistic boundaries of 
each of the colonising nations. The English department at Makerere, where I 
went  for  my  undergraduate  studies,  was  probably  typical  of  all  English 
departments in Europe or Africa at the time. It studied English writing of the 
British isles from the times of Chaucer, Spenser and Shakespeare up to the 
twentieth  century  of  T.  S  Eliot,  James  Joyce  and  Wilfred  Owen.  This 
narrowness in the study of literature based on a purely national tradition was 
alleviated in countries where there were other literature 
24


--- PAGE 25 ---
departments - of French, for instance. In such institutions there were competing 
or comparative centres in the study of humanities: the very fact that one was 
studying in a university where there were other literature departments meant 
that one was aware of other cultures. But most of these departments were 
largely confined to the languages of Europe and within Europe to the literature 
produced by the natives of that language. American literature departments were 
for  instance  completely  oblivious  of  the  poetry  and  fiction  of  the 
African-American  peoples.  In  the  discussion  of  the  American  novel  for 
instance,  Richard  Wright,  James  Baldwin,  Ralph  Ellison  were  hardly 
mentioned as part of the central tradition of the American literary imagination. 
It was possible all round to graduate with a literature degree in any of the 
European languages without ever having heard of Achebe, Lamming, Tagore, 
Richard Wright, Aimé Cesairé, Pablo Neruda, writers from that area of the 
globe that has come to be known as the Third World. In short, most universities 
tended to ignore the vast literatures produced, although in European languages, 
outside the formal boundaries of Europe and Euroamerica.
At Makerere, there was no room for this new literature (Makerere did not 
then have a graduate section anyway) or, from what I could gather, anywhere 
else  at  the  time.  Leeds  came  to  my  rescue.  A Commonwealth  literature 
conference had already been held at Leeds in 1964. Wole Soyinka one of the 
new voices had been a student at Leeds. Other students from Makerere, Peter 
Nazareth, Grant Kamenju, Pio Zirimu were already there. There had to be 
something at the University of Leeds and I felt that I had to go there to get my 
share.
As it turned out there were no formal studies of the new literatures at 
Leeds. Neither the Third World literature in general nor the Commonwealth 
literature or even more narrowly African and Caribbean literature were then an 
integral part of the mainstream of the literary curricula. But there were already 
visiting Fellows from different parts of the world who introduced visions from 
centres other than Europe. There was also an openness to the voices coming 
out of other centres which enabled me to do research on Caribbean literature 
focusing  on  the  theme  of  exile  and  identity  in  Caribbean  literature  with 
particular reference to the work of George Lamming. My memory of the Leeds 
of Arthur Ravenscroft was of an institution 
25


--- PAGE 26 ---
which was among the first to recognise and admit that there was something 
worthwhile  out  there  beyond  the  traditional  location  of  the  European 
imagination even though it had used a political determinant to demarcate an 
area for formal admission, an area it called Commonwealth literature. The 
creation of a chair in Commonwealth studies, with Professor Walsh as the first 
occupant, and the launch of the Journal of Commonwealth Literature had the 
effect of legitimising the literature from the new centres as worthy of serious 
academic attention and discussion. The term `Commonwealth literature' was 
woefully  inadequate  and  African  and  Caribbean  literature  has  always  sat 
uneasily in it. African and Caribbean literature whether in English or French or 
Portuguese, shared a more fundamental identity and its natural literary ally was 
the entire literature of struggle emanating from the former colonised world of 
Asia, Africa and South America irrespective of linguistic barriers. But it did 
point out the possibility of moving the centre from its location in Europe 
towards a pluralism of centres; themselves being equally legitimate locations 
of the human imagination.
What was only tentative in the Leeds of our time, the possibility of opening 
out the mainstream to take in other streams, was later to become central to the 
debate about the relevance of literature in an African environment that raged in 
all the three East African universities at Nairobi, Dar es Salaam and Makerere, 
after most of the students who had been at Leeds at the time later returned and 
questioned the practices of the existing English departments. There was Grant 
Kamenju  in  Dar  es  Salaam,  Tanzania;  Pio  and  Van  Zirimu  in  Makerere, 
Kampala, Uganda; and I in Nairobi, Kenya. I was horrified, when I returned to 
Kenya in 1967, to find that the Department of English was still organised on 
the basis that Europe was the centre of the universe. Europe, the centre of our 
imagination? Ezekiel Mphahlele from South Africa, who was there before me, 
had  fought  hard  to  have  some  African  texts  introduced  into  the  syllabus. 
Otherwise the department was still largely oblivious to the rise of the new 
literatures  in  European  languages  in  Africa  let  alone  the  fact  of  the  long 
existing tradition of African-American literature and that of Caribbean peoples. 
The basic question was: from what base did African peoples look at the world? 
Eurocentrism or Afrocentrism? The question was not that of mutual exclusion 
between Africa and Europe but the basis and the starting point of 
26


--- PAGE 27 ---
their interaction. I remember the excitement with which I and my two African 
colleagues at the University of Nairobi in the year 1968 called for the abolition 
of  the  English  department  as  then  constituted.  The  department  was  to  be 
replaced by one which put Third World literatures, available either directly in 
English  or  through  translations  into  English,  at  the  centre  of  the  syllabus 
without of course excluding the European tradition. Such a syllabus would 
emphasise  the  literatureness  of  literature  rather  the  Englishness  of  that 
literature. The department would thus be recognising the obvious fact: that 
knowing oneself and one's environment was the correct basis of absorbing the 
world; that there could never be only one centre from which to view the world 
but that different people in the world had their culture and environment as the 
centre. The relevant question was therefore one of how one centre related to 
other centres. A pluralism of cultures and literatures was being assumed by the 
advocates of the re-named departments of literature. If the debate was initiated 
by the ex-students of Leeds, the actual implementation of the new structures 
fell to some of the professors who were there in the Leeds of the sixties. 
Professor  Arnold  Kettle  in  Dar  es  Salaam and  Professor  Andrew  Gurr  at 
Nairobi were instrumental in giving the new departments of literature in East 
Africa firm and workable structures.
It is to be noted that the mediating languages in both the new literatures 
from Africa and the literature  departments that were accommodating  them 
were European languages. This was a question that was to haunt me for a long 
time until 1977 when I started writing in Gikuyu, an African language: Once 
again my decision finally to opt for doing all my writings mainly in Gikuyu 
had roots in the Leeds of Arthur Ravenscroft's time. My novel,  A Grain of 
Wheat, came out in 1967. Many people who have commented on my work 
have pointed out the obvious change in form and mood. The change in the 
political mood was a reflection of the intense ideological debate taking place 
amongst both students inside Professor Arnold Kettle's seminar on the novel 
and outside the formal classroom. I came to realise only too painfully that the 
novel in which I had so carefully painted the struggle of the Kenya peasantry 
against colonial oppression would never be read by them. In an interview 
shortly afterwards in the Union News, the student newspaper, in 1967, I said 
that I did not think that I would continue 
27


--- PAGE 28 ---
writing in English: that I knew about whom I was writing, but for whom was I 
writing? A full discussion of the politics of language in African literature - in a 
sense answering that very question posed at the Leeds of the sixties - was to 
take place in 1987 when I published a book, Decolonising the Mind. But the 
most  important  thing  in  the  immediate  context  is  that  the  issue  of  the 
appropriate language for African literature had been posed at Leeds in the 
sixties. It was once again the question of moving the centre: from European 
languages to all the other languages all over Africa and the world; a move if 
you like towards a pluralism of languages as legitimate vehicles of the human 
imagination.
I believe  that  the  question  of moving  towards  a pluralism of cultures, 
literatures  and  languages  is  still  important  today  as  the  world  becomes 
increasingly  one.  The  question  posed  by these  new  literatures  whether  in 
European  or  African  languages  is  this:  how  were  we  to  understand  the 
twentieth century, or for that matter the three hundred years leading up to the 
twentieth century, (assuming, that is, that the study of literature is not simply a 
masochistic act of dwelling with the dead a la scholar Casaubon in George 
Eliot's Middlemarch)? Slavery, colonialism, and the whole web of neocolonial 
relationships so well analysed by Frantz Fanon, were as much part of the 
emergence of the modern West as they were of modern Africa. The cultures of 
Africa, Asia and South America, as much as those of Europe, are an integral 
part of the modern world. There is no race, wrote Aimé Césaire in his famous 
poem, 'Return to My Native Land', which held for all time the monopoly of 
beauty, intelligence and knowledge; and that there was a place for all at the 
rendezvous of victory, human victory.
1  have  noted  from  a  spell  of  teaching  in  the  USA that  Third  World 
literatures  tend  to  be  treated  as  something  outside  the  mainstream.  Many 
epithets and labels ranging from 'ethnic studies' to 'minority discourses' are 
often used to legitimate their claims to academic attention. I am not sure of 
course how far Leeds has gone since the days of Arthur Ravenscroft in the 
sixties. But the languages and the literatures of the peoples of Africa, Asia and 
South America are not peripheral to the twentieth century. They are central to 
the mainstream of what has made the world what it is today. It is therefore not 
really a question of studying that which is removed from ourselves wherever 
we are located in the twentieth century but rather 
28


--- PAGE 29 ---
one of understanding all the voices coming from what is essentially a plurality 
of centres all over the world. Institutions of higher learning in Africa, Europe, 
Asia and America should reflect this multiplicity of cultures, literatures and 
languages in the ways they allocate resources for various studies. And each 
department  of literature while  maintaining  its identity in the language  and 
country of its foundation should reflect other streams, using translations as 
legitimate texts of study. An English or French or Spanish or Swahili student 
should at the same time be exposed to all the streams of human imagination 
flowing from all the centres in the world while retaining his or her identity as a 
student of English, French, Spanish or Kiswahili literature. Only in this way 
can we build a proper foundation for a true commonwealth of cultures and 
literatures.
29


--- PAGE 30 ---
2 Creating Space for a Hundred 
Flowers to Bloom
The Wealth of a Common Global Culture
Looking  at  the  world  today,  one  sees  many  countries,  nations,  peoples, 
customs, languages, and a multiplicity of apparently unsolvable conflicts and 
problems. But in reality the world is becoming one. Human beings who live in 
space circle the earth within only a few hours. They can hardly settle their eyes 
for long on any one country - even their own. On the earth itself, the ease of 
transportation has put every corner of the globe  within general reach in a 
matter of hours, a far cry from the days of Phineas Fogg and his wager of going 
round the earth in eighty days.
Economic  links  are  quite  obvious.  The  leading  financial  institutions  - 
banks, insurances, credit cards - operate in nearly all the capitals of the earth. 
Transnationals of all kinds link economic activities of several countries; some 
brands becoming almost national to many people so familiar a sight they have 
become in their daily lives. So a worker in Nairobi, Kenya in an automobile 
warehouse can have the same employer as many others in North, Central, 
South American and Asian cities. Messrs Coca-Cola and MacDonalds, between 
themselves, are making the world in their own image. It is of course true that 
these processes are controlled by a handful of Western transnationals. IMF and 
the World Bank dictate the social and economic policies of many countries. But 
it does mean that many workers, many nations, even when they may not be 
consciously aware of it, are linked to the same controlling central forces. Their 
apparently individual struggles against any excesses of the central command 
are invisibly linked to others. Workers for instance could be struggling against 
the same employer even though they are located in the different capitals and 
nations of the earth. As for the 
30


--- PAGE 31 ---
distribution of power, a handful of Western nations still dominate various other 
nations. Hence the experiences of national liberation and even the internal 
social struggles of many nations might be shaped in a similar way by the fact 
of their being aimed against the practices of a common enemy.
Those  global  economic  and  political  processes  invariably  give  rise  to 
cultural links. The evolution of the present global order over the last five 
hundred years has seen the world being dominated by a handful of languages; 
European languages of course and the cultures these have carried will have 
shaped the dominated in similar ways. The fax, the telex, the computer, while 
facilitating communications, also mean the instant spread of information and 
culture across national boundaries. Television images via satellites enable the 
whole world to experience the Palestinian uprising in the Middle East, the 
struggle  for  Amandla  in  South  Africa,  the  mass  uprisings  and  calls  for 
democratic accountability to the people in Eastern Europe, at about the same 
time. Mandela could speak to billions in the world from his platform at the 
Wembley stadium in London, the concert in his honour there becoming part of 
a global instant experience. His release from 27 years in prison was watched by 
millions. Words like perestroika, glasnost, amandla, a luta continua, people 
power, democracy, socialism have become part of a common vocabulary.
In terms of the structures of domination, subordination and resistance, a 
common global experience is emerging. Gradually a vocabulary of concepts of 
domination and revolt become part of a shared intellectual tradition.
Literature, more than all the fleeting images brought about by the screen or 
newsprint, is one of the more enduring multinational cultural processes which 
have been building the basis of a shared common tradition. From the ancient 
and modern literatures names of characters like Rama, Sinbad, Ali Baba, Isis 
and Osiris, Abunuwasi, Anansi, Hercules, Odysseus, Achilles, Helen, Oedipus, 
Prometheus, Gargantua and Pantagruel, Faustus, Hamlet, Okonkwo, to mention 
just a few;  arid writers like  Aeschylus, Shakespeare, Pushkin,  Dostoevsky, 
Tolstoy,  Goethe,  Schiller,  Thomas  Mann,  Brecht,  Richard  Wright,  Alice 
Walker,  Faulkner,  Melville,  Lu  Hsun,  Kim  Chi  Ha,  the  Grimm  brothers, 
Andersen, Chinua Achebe, Wole Soyinka, Alex la Guma, Sembene Ousmane, 
31


--- PAGE 32 ---
have become part of a global inheritance.
Inevitably because of the position of domination of Europe  vis-à-vis the 
rest of the globe over the last five hundred years,  European literature has 
occupied a place of great prominence on the world stage. It has, unarguably, 
given rise to a great humanistic tradition. It has given us fantastic images of the 
world  of  struggle,  of  great  upheavals,  of  change,  of  movement.  When 
Shakespeare's King Lear breaks down under the storm occasioned by the fact 
of the old feudal order and conception of nature being challenged to the roots 
by the new bourgeois conception of nature and asks, who is that can tell me 
who I am, or the assassins in Julius Caesar, bathing themselves in the blood of 
the victim, and one of them wondering how many times their deeds would be 
duplicated in the world in times and states as yet unborn, could they not have 
been painting images of the twentieth century? When Adam and Eve are taken 
by the angel Gabriel on to a hill just before their expulsion from paradise in 
Milton's  Paradise Lost and are shown visions of the world to be; they are 
actually being given a global vision of all the cities and civilisations of the 
world  among  which  are  the  great  African  empires  of  Songhay  and  the 
twelfth-century city states along the Kenyan  coast of such as Malindi and 
Mombasa.
The  humanistic  side  of  European  literature  reflects  of  course  the 
democratic social struggles of the European peoples. But given the domination 
of  the  West  over  the  rest  of  the  world  through  such  repressive  historical 
moments  as  the  slave  trade  and  slavery,  colonialism  and  currently 
neo-colonialism,  this  literature  tends  to  opt  for  silence  or  ambivalence  or 
downright collaboration. Of course there are writers who show great sensitivity 
to  the  social  evils  perpetrated  against  other  peoples:  William Blake,  Walt 
Whitman, Brecht, Sartre for instance. But taken as a whole this literature could 
not avoid being affected by the Eurocentric basis of its world view or global 
vision, and most of it, even when sympathetic, could not altogether escape 
from the racism inherent in Western enterprise in the rest of the world.
The nearer we come to the twentieth century, the more this literature seems 
ambivalent to the humanity of those struggling from outside the borders of the 
West. To illustrate my point; I shall choose four texts which fall quite easily 
into a canonised tradition of English literature. I am of course aware of the 
limitations of drawing 
32


--- PAGE 33 ---
a general conclusion from selected texts but the four texts are quite tempting 
because of the centrality of the figure of the colonised as perceived by the 
coloniser. Further, I merely want to illustrate a tendency and not make a literary 
evaluation.
The  evolution  and  transformation  of  the  figure  of  Caliban  in  English 
literature is a good example, in fact quite a revelation, of this tendency. We 
meet Caliban in Shakespeare's Tempest in the seventeenth century. I need not 
go into the details of the drama. Everybody knows all about Prospero taking 
over the island previously presided over by Caliban and his mother Sycorax. 
The  exchange  between  Prospero  and  Caliban  focuses  over  the  issue  of 
language.  Prospero  reminds  the  hostile  Caliban  that  it  was  he  who  gave 
Caliban a language:
When thou didst not, savage, 
Know thine own meaning, but wouldst gabble like 
A thing most brutish, I endowed thy purposes 
With words that made them known
Note the assumption that Caliban's language was mere gabble. Caliban, if you 
remember, answers not by reminding Prospero that he too had a language, but 
by showing him the uses to which he had put his knowledge of Prospero's 
tongue.
You taught me language; and my profit on 't 
Is, I know how to curse. The red plague rid you
For learning me your language.
The play is interesting in that it has all the images that are later to be reworked 
into  a racist  tradition  particularly in popular  European  literature  about  the 
colonised  peoples:  the  savage  as  a rapist,  lazy,  a lover  of  whisky,  stupid, 
cannibalistic. But the main thing is that Shakespeare does give to Caliban the 
capacity  or  the  voice  to  say  `no'.  Caliban  is  invested  with  energy.  And 
remember that at the time, Europe has occupied only a little corner of the 
globe.
We meet Caliban in a different guise in the early eighteenth century, say in 
the character of Friday in Daniel Defoe's Robinson Crusoe. Again the story of 
the  shipwrecked Robinson Crusoe is well known. But note  the process  of 
Crusoe conferring humanity on 
33


--- PAGE 34 ---
Friday. It is done through language. When they first meet, Friday does actually 
utter or speak some words and Crusoe, the narrator, is sufficiently moved to 
say that though `I could not understand them, yet I thought they were pleasant 
to hear'. But in subsequent encounters between the teacher and the student, we 
never really get to hear, more about Friday having a language:
In a little time I began to speak to him and teach him to speak to me; and 
first I made him know that his name was Friday which was the day I saved 
his life… I likewise taught him to say Master, and then let him know that 
was to be my name.
And now see the results:
I was greatly pleased with him and made it my business to teach him 
everything that was proper to make him useful, handy, and helpful; but 
especially to make him speak and understand me when I spake; and he was 
the  aptest  scholar  that  ever  was,  and  particularly  was  so  merry,  so 
constantly diligent, and so pleased when he could but understand me or 
make me understand him, that it was very pleasant to talk to him.
Defoe  has  the  usual  images  of  cannibalism, tribal  wars and  savagery; but 
Friday also is given a voice; he is, for instance, made to doubt some of Crusoe's 
explanation of the origins of the universe. But there is no language of revolt, 
nothing closely resembling the energy of the seventeenth-century Caliban. And 
remember that by this time Europe has occupied a bit more of the globe and 
Africa has become a hunting ground for what resulted in one of the biggest 
forced mass exodus of peoples in history. Nor of course to forget the millions 
killed in the process.
We move to another text which covers the nineteenth century and the years 
of entry into the twentieth century. The text,  Heart of Darkness by Joseph 
Conrad, was first published in 1902. By this time colonialism has become 
policy and the world is divided among a handful of oppressor nations. To be 
sure, Conrad's text is one of the most gripping evocations of the horror of 
imperialism particularly in its colonial guise. He debunks all the do-goodness 
associated with the nineteenth-century European colonial enterprise in Africa. 
34


--- PAGE 35 ---
He  is even aware of the racism inherent in such enterprises.  Through the 
character of the narrator, there is this very telling comment:
They were no colonists; their administration was merely a squeeze and 
nothing more, I suspect. They were conquerors, and for that you only want 
brute force - nothing to boast of, when you have it, since your strength is 
just an accident arising from the weakness of others. They grabbed what 
they could get for the sake of what was to be got. It was just robbery with 
violence, aggravated murder on a great scale, and men going at it blind. 
The conquest of the earth, which mostly means the taking it away from 
those  who  have  a  different  complexion  or  slightly  flatter  noses  than 
ourselves, is not a pretty thing when you look into it too much.
In the text there is no individual Caliban. Here Conrad assumes the collective 
figure  of  those  Africans  who accompany Marlowe  into  the  interior  of the 
continent. They are not given a voice, except, indirectly, through the narrator 
when they express a wish to eat their enemies. They have otherwise been 
divested of all energy. The only words uttered are by a Westernised boy, an 
Ariel figure, who announces: Mr Kurtz, he dead.
The fourth text was published in 1987 and it is by Coetzee, of European 
descent, born in South Africa, this last outpost of empire. He reworked the 
Friday story in the novel he called Foe, which was the original name of Daniel 
Defoe. One would have thought that Coetzee living in South Africa would 
bring new and exciting insights into the relationships between the coloniser and 
the colonised. The novel comes out after Sharpeville, after Soweto, and in the 
midst of the armed struggle waged by the African people under Umkhonto we 
Sizwe. But that is not the point. What interests me is that here Friday's tongue 
is actually pulled out. He has no tongue, no voice, no language, and hardly any 
energy. Coetzee's twentieth-century Friday, written on the eve of South African 
peoples' fierce determination to get rid of European domination, is a far cry 
from the energy of protest and self affirmation in Shakespeare's seventeenth
century Caliban created at a time when South Africa was only beginning to be 
the object of plunder by European powers.
The authors of the four texts could not be accused of being in 
35


--- PAGE 36 ---
sympathy with the European colonial enterprise. If anything, they are opposed 
or at the very least sceptical. But they carry in themselves a collaborationist 
tendency  while  they  remain  outside  the  central  stream  of  consciously 
collaborationist letters.
 The collaborationist literature, mostly popular literature, was downright 
racist. I shall not here dwell on this since it has been discredited enough in all 
serious discourse. Its very simplism speaks loudly enough about its intentions. 
The African was often depicted in the diametrically opposed polarities of the 
good and the bad, the noble and the savage. The good, the noble and the 
intelligent was the character who co-operated with the colonial process. The 
bad and the ugly was the African who opposed colonialism.
Thus, if people were really to depend on European literature, even at its 
best, they would get a very distorted picture of the modern world, its evolution 
and its contemporary being. The twentieth century is a product of imperialist 
adventurism, true, but also of resistance from the people of the Third World. 
This resistance is often' reflected in the literature of the Third World and it is an 
integral part of the modern world, part of the forces which have been creating 
and are still creating the heritage of a common culture. They come from Asia. 
They come from South America. They come from Africa. And they come from 
the oppressed national sectors and social strata in North America, Australasia 
and Europe. The Third World is all over the world. There is of course no 
absolute uniformity in this literature and within itself as a modern tradition, a 
twentieth-century tradition, it carries all sorts of tendencies. Let me concentrate 
on literature from the African continent.
There are, as you know, three traditions in the literature from Africa. First 
is that of the oral tradition or orature. It is the literature passed on from mouth 
to ear, generation to generation. It consists of songs, poems, drama, proverbs, 
riddles, sayings and it is the richest and oldest of heritages. Furthermore, it is 
still  very  much  alive  and  readily  incorporates  new  elements.  It  can  be 
extremely  simple  or  very  complex  depending  on  the  time,  place  and  the 
occasion. I can think of no better demonstration of this tradition than in the 
remarkable recording of the Ozidi Saga by J. P Clark. Here the epic of Ozidi 
and his grandmother Oreame is told over a period of seven nights. The section 
dealing with the education of the epic hero, Ozidi, by his very demanding 
grandmother, is a remarkable example 
36


--- PAGE 37 ---
of narrative in orature while the scene involving the empowerment of Ozidi 
illustrates even more remarkably the fusion of theatre, drama, poetry, magic, 
ritual,  music,  song,  audience  participation,  the  real  and  the  marvellous  in 
orature.  Among  the  Agikuyu  of  Kenya  there  used  to  be  a  Gikuyu  poetry 
festival, or shall I say, competition, which drew large crowds. The best poets of 
the various regions would meet in the arena, like in a battle, and compete with 
words and instant compositions. These poets had even developed a form of 
hierographics which they kept to themselves. This kind of festival was killed 
by the British for they did not want crowds of people meeting and practising 
things  that  they,  in  the  colonial  administration,  could  not  understand.  The 
importance of the oral tradition is that through its agency African languages in 
their most magical form have been kept alive. One of the highest developments 
of this was the  griot tradition in West Africa. Whole epics and histories of 
families and nations were banked in the memories of these keepers of the 
word.
The second tradition is that of Africans writing in European languages 
particularly in those of the former colonisers. This is clearly a product of the 
fatal encounter between Africa and Europe in two ways. First is the question of 
language  choice  and  this  links  it  inevitably  to  the  literatures  carried  by 
European languages. This literature is branded with the Europeanness of the 
word. A case of black skins in white linguistic masks? Secondly, it arose out of 
and was generally inspired by the great anti-colonial resistance of the African 
masses. Much of the literature was initially often a reaction to the conception 
of the universe in European literature in which the African was depicted as the 
negation of history. It had done a remarkable job in re-drawing the images of 
the world as previously drawn by the literature of Europe. It has rescued the 
world defined by European languages from the total grip of Eurocentrism. But 
in another sense it continued and even aided in that Eurocentrism by its very 
choice of languages. In other words it does not really matter how much Caliban 
is able to curse in European languages. He can do very remarkable things with 
it as we can see in The Tempest, in that great poetic evocation of Caliban's love 
of the island and his total identification with its landscape. But in so far as he 
has not been forced to abandon his language, as happened in the case of the 
African diaspora, he is accepting Prospero's racist assumptions about 
37


--- PAGE 38 ---
the universe and contributing to Prospero's linguistic universe. He accepts that 
only by adopting the European tongue can he manage to express his humanity 
adequately. He has colluded in Prospero's uprooting of the African tongue à la 
Coetzee; the African peasant and worker in this literature reappears on the 
stage of world history speaking not his gabble but perfect English, French or 
Portuguese, a remarkable case of literary surgery and transplant since in reality 
the masses of African people do continue speaking and using and creating in 
African languages. Note that the new Caliban comes to Prospero's linguistic 
high table with an offering, a linguistic bottle of wine so to speak. Thus, this 
tradition has tried to forge an identity by borrowing very heavily from African 
languages, that is from the rich harvest of orature as developed by African 
languages over the years. But note also that Caliban is not borrowing from 
Prospero to enrich his own gabble. On the contrary. He sees his role as that of 
borrowing  from  his  own  gabble  to  enlarge  the  possibilities  of  Prospero's 
languages. He gives nothing, absolutely nothing, back to his languages. This 
ultimately is the tragedy of the Europhone tradition which has come to wear 
the mask of African literature. It is now a case of black skins in white masks 
wearing black masks.
In the area of economics and geography, it is the raw materials of gold, 
diamonds, coffee, tea, which are taken from Africa and processed in Europe 
and then resold to Africa. In the area of culture, the raw material of African 
orature and histories developed by African languages are taken, repackaged 
through English or French or Portuguese and then resold back to Africa. In 
both cases one is not questioning the quality of the products for this is not 
really what is at issue.
The third tradition is that of Africans writing in African languages. In the 
pre-colonial era, this was a minority tradition among the nations in that not 
many of the African languages had been reduced to writing. But it has always 
been there and as Professor Abiola Irele has pointed out it is these languages 
which contain the classical era of African literature, a pre-colonial tradition. It 
is the one that owns the label, the title, the name, ‘African literature'. It has 
been  overshadowed  by  the  more  recent  Europhone  tradition.  But  African 
languages are coming back. The language debate has dominated every single 
literature conference to do with Africa over the last few years and it is going to 
continue to do so with even 
38


--- PAGE 39 ---
greater aggressive insistence as we face the twenty-first century. To the old 
voices of Cheikh Anita Diop and David Diop calling for reconnection with that 
tradition are newer voices from the oral tradition adding to the continental 
chorus of concern. The Somali poet of the oral tradition, Mohamed Ismail of 
Garce,  has  gone  so  far  as  to  accuse  the  educated  Africans  of  committing 
treason against their own languages:
Oh my friends, the Somali language is very perplexed;
It is all anxiety in its present condition;
The  value  of  its  words  and  expressions  are  being  gagged  by its  own 
people; 
Its very back and hips are broken, and it accuses its own speakers of 
neglect;
It is weeping with deep sorrow;
It is being orphaned and its value is vanishing.
A reconnection  with  the  classic  tradition  of  our  languages  to  express  the 
contemporary world will not be an easy, `walkover' kind of task. Writing in 
African languages has many difficulties and problems. Problems of literacy. 
Problems of publishing. Problems of the lack of a critical tradition. Problems 
of orthography. Problems of having very many languages. in the same country. 
Problems of hostile governments with a colonised mentality. Abandonment by 
some of those who could have brought their genius  - demonstrated by their 
excellent performance in foreign languages - to develop their own languages.
In short, literature in African languages suffers from a lack of a strong 
tradition, creative and critical. Writers in African languages are having to create 
several traditions simultaneously; publishing, critical vocabulary, orthography, 
and even words. But it has the advantage of being able to establish a natural 
give and take relationship to the rich heritage of orature. African writers in 
African  languages  are  giving  something  back,  however  tiny,  to  the 
development of African languages.
That is why I still believe that despite the hue and cry about reductionism, 
nativism,  backwardlookingness  from  the  Europhonist  opponents  of  this 
development, writing in African languages still holds the key for the positive 
development of new and vital traditions in African literature as we face the 
twenty-first century. Many 
39


--- PAGE 40 ---
more  people  are  facing  up  to  the  creative  necessity of  writing  in  African 
languages and to do for African languages what Spenser, Shakespeare and 
Milton did for English; what Cervantes did for Spanish; what Rabelais did for 
French; what Martin Luther, Goethe and Schiller did for the German language; 
what Pushkin, Gogol and Tolstoy did for Russian; what Elias Lonnrot of the 
Finnish classic, the Kalevala, did for Finnish; indeed what all writers in history 
have done for their languages. In short they are hearkening to the rescue call by 
the Somali poet quoted earlier.
African writers in African languages are engaged in the great adventure 
and drama of creating a new and great tradition. In this task they have at least 
two  great  reservoirs:  the  heritages  of  orature  and  of  world  literature  and 
culture.
All great national literatures have rooted themselves in the culture and 
language of the peasantry. The Homeric Iliad and Odyssey, as was all Greek 
drama,  were  rooted  in  the  legends  and  stories  that  everybody  knew.  The 
Russian writers of the nineteenth century; particularly Pushkin, rooted their 
work in the culture of the peasantry. The Kalevala, the founding text of modern 
Finnish literature and language, was rooted in the folklore of the peasantry. The 
oral tradition will then be the basis or the foundation of the new tradition in 
African literature. 
African languages must not be afraid of also borrowing from the best in 
world culture. All the dynamic cultures of the world have borrowed from other 
cultures in a process of mutual fertilisation. In his very interesting essay on the 
relationships between languages and cultures From the Prehistory of Novelistic 
Discourse, Bakhtin has this to say on the development of Latin:
Latin literary language in all its generic diversity was created in the light of 
Greek literary language. Its national distinctiveness and the specific verbal 
thought  process  inherent  in  it  were  realised  in  creative  literary 
consciousness in a way that would have been absolutely impossible under 
conditions of monoglossia. After all it is possible to objectivise one's own 
particular language, its internal form, the peculiarities of its world view, its 
special linguistic habitus only in the light, of another language belonging to 
somebody else, which is almost as much `one's own' as one's own native 
language.
40


--- PAGE 41 ---
One could add the rhetorical question: and is it possible to conceive of the 
development of  Greek  literature  and  culture  without  Egyptian  - and  other 
Mediterranean cultures? African languages, as we have seen, have contributed 
immensely to  the  development  of  European  languages  and  extended  their 
possibilities through the Europhone literary tradition of the modern African 
experience. Indeed the new  Oxford English Dictionary has canonised quite a 
number of new words from Kiswahili and other African languages.
African languages will borrow from one another; they will borrow 'from 
their classical heritages; they will borrow from the world from the Caribbean, 
from  Afroamerica,  from  Latin  America,  from  the  Asian  - and  from  the 
European worlds. In this, the new writing in African languages will do the 
opposite of the Europhone practice: instead of being appropriated by the world, 
it will appropriate the world and one hopes on terms of equal exchange, at the 
very least, borrow on its own terms and needs.
The growth and the development of the new African literature in African 
languages will have vast implications for critical scholarship. Currently no 
expert on the so-called `African literature' need ever show even the slightest 
acquaintance  with  any African  language.  Can  you  imagine  a  professor  of 
French literature and culture who does not know a single word of French? 
Unfortunately it is not just the case of non-African scholars. African scholars of 
African realities need never show any acquaintance with African languages, 
even  with  their  mother  tongues.  An  African-languages-based  critical 
scholarship would have a very vital role to play in the further development of 
the new African literature. The Europhone would occupy its proper place; as an 
appendage of European literature or as a footnote in African literature.
It is these revitalised African languages rooting themselves in the traditions 
of orature and of written African literature, inspired by the deepest aspirations 
of the African people for a meaningful social change, which-will also be best 
placed to give and receive from the wealth of our common culture on an equal 
basis.
Similar cases can be made for the literature of Asia and South America 
over the last four hundred years. These literatures growing in the shadow of 
both  great  classical  pasts  and  of  European  literatures,  sometimes  bitterly 
resisting their appeal, at other times 
41


--- PAGE 42 ---
borrowing  from them, but  absorbing  the  borrowed  features  to  create  their 
unique traditions, creating so to speak their own space in a world dominated by 
cultural imperialism from the West, all add to the literature and culture of 
resistance. They are an integral part of what makes up the twentieth century 
and the foundation of the literature and cultures of the twenty-first century. The 
languages and literatures of Asia, Africa and South America, the literatures of 
peoples of non-European stock but who are now part of the economic, political 
and cultural reality of the West, are all creating space for a hundred flowers to 
bloom on a global scale; and the organisation of cultural studies all over the 
world should reflect this multi-coloured reality of the human creative stream. 
The continued domination of the world by a handful of European languages 
and literatures can only make the world poorer not richer. The transition in 
African,  Asian,  South  American,  North  American  and  European  letters  is 
towards traditions that will freely give and take, on the basis of equality and 
mutual respect, from this vast heritage of human creativity.
The wealth of a common global culture will then be expressed in the 
particularities  of  our  different  languages  and  cultures  very  much  like  a 
universal garden of many-coloured flowers. The 'flowerness' of the different 
flowers  is  expressed  in  their  very diversity.  But  there  is  cross-fertilisation 
between them. And what is more they all contain in themselves the seeds of a 
new tomorrow.
42


--- PAGE 43 ---
3 The Universality 
of Local Knowledge
There are two reasons why I am drawn towards Professor Geertz's emphasis on 
the importance of local knowledge or of starting from the particular to the 
general. As a writer, a novelist, I like to see, in the words of William Blake, 
`the world in a grain of sand', or in those of an African proverb quoted by 
Professor Geertz in his book Local Knowledge: Fact and Law in Comparative 
Perspective, `to get wisdom from an ant heap'. A novelist is almost wholly 
dependent on the particular. Whatever he may have to say about life, it must be 
rooted in the particularities of daily experience. Coming from that part of the 
globe, called, for lack of a better word, the Third World, I am suspicious of the 
uses of the word and the concept of the universal. For very often, this has 
meant  the  West  generalising  its  experience  of  history  as  the  universal 
experience of the world. What is Western becomes universal and what is Third 
World becomes local. Locality becomes measured by the degree of its distance 
from the metropolis of the Western world. Thus Professor Geertz's warning 
about the relativity of terms, even of the local and the universal, is timely, for, 
in  our  case,  the  Eurocentric  basis  of  seeing  the  world  has  often  meant 
marginalising into the periphery that which comes from the rest of the world. 
One  historical  particularity  is  generalised  into  a  timeless  and  spaceless 
universality. In that sense, shifting the focus of particularity to a plurality of 
centres, is a welcome antidote.
However, I share Professor Goody's unease about the tendency to see the 
universal and the local in absolute opposition to each other. Professor Geertz 
talks of confusion in the social and human sciences over three notions, of the 
universal,  the  generalisation,  and  the  law.  Again  he  talks  as  if  the  three 
categories are mutually opposed, which 
43


--- PAGE 44 ---
in fact goes against the logic of his observation about wisdom coming from an 
ant  heap.  The  ant  heap  is  particular.  Wisdom  is  a  generalisation  tending 
towards the universal codified into a proverb. The process of cognition begins 
with noting, observing the particular and then working out what is general from 
the particular. From the general, a regulating principle, a law, emerges which 
can take the form of the universal. The universal, the law, and the general are 
then tested against the ground of particularity in practice. Practice is both the 
starting point and the testing ground of our conceptualisation of the world. 
What is needed is not so much the recovery of practical philosophy as the 
recovery of the philosophy of practice.
The problem arises from the tendency to see the local and the universal in 
mechanical opposition; and the relativity of cultures in a temporal ground of 
equality  almost  as  if  cultures  within  a  nation  and  between  nations  have 
developed on parallel bars towards parallel ends that never meet, or if they 
meet, they do so in infinity. The universal is contained in the particular just as 
the particular is contained in the universal. We are all human beings but the fact 
of  our  being  human  does  not  manifest  itself  in  its  abstraction  but  in  the 
particularity of real living human beings of different climes and races. We can 
talk of the human capacity for languages but that capacity manifests itself in 
real concrete languages as spoken by different peoples of the earth. In other 
words,  we  realise  language  as  a  universal  human  phenomenon  not  in  its 
abstract universality but in its particularity as the different languages of the 
earth.  Even  the  limited  universality  of  a  single  language,  say  English,  is 
realised  through  the  language  as  actually spoken.  But  it  is  also  from  the 
particularity  of  these  numerous  utterances  that  we  can  recognise  general 
features that can make us talk of English as a language different from, say, 
Kiswahili. There are other categories in Professor Geertz's statement and from 
other pieces that reinforce this tentative feeling that he tends to emphasise 
mutual opposition of phenomena instead of seeing the linkages and therefore 
the real differences. I agree with Professor Goody that meaning and machinery 
are not necessarily opposed absolutes. The hydrologist may very well be a 
swimmer. At any rate if there is no water there can never be a swimmer and the 
hydrologist who can make possible the realisation of actual water may be the 
maker of a swimmer.
44


--- PAGE 45 ---
Which  brings  me  to  my  last  observation.  Culture  develops  within  the 
process of a people wrestling with their natural and social environment. They 
struggle with nature. They struggle with one another. They evolve a way of life 
embodied in their institutions and certain practices. Culture becomes the carrier 
of their moral, aesthetic and ethical values. At the psychological level, these 
values become the embodiment of the people's consciousness as a specific 
community. That consciousness in turn has an effect on how they look at their 
values, at their culture, at the organisation of power, and at the organisation of 
their wealth extracted from nature through the mediation of their labour. Within 
a given community any change in any of the major aspects of their lives, how 
they manage their wealth for instance, or their power, may well bring about 
changes at all the other levels and these in turn will bring about mutual action 
and reaction on all the other aspects. Here there is no stillness but constant 
movement and the problem with the study of cultures, no matter from what 
academic centre, is how to study them in their movement and linkages to other 
processes in that society or community. It is like studying a river in its very 
movement, that is in its very being as a river. What I noted, or thought I noted, 
in Professor  Geertz's  statement is the  almost  total  exclusion  of notions  of 
struggle, movement and change.
But  cultures  do  not  always  develop  out  of  the  workings-out  of 
contradictions within themselves or with the other features of that society only. 
They also develop in an external environment of contact with other societies. 
This contact can be one of hostility, indifference, or of mutual give and take. 
The same is of course true of the development in thought and even in academic 
disciplines. There are internal arguments within a discipline and also arguments 
arising  from  contact  with  other  thoughts  and  disciplines  bringing  about 
sometimes what  Professor  Geertz  has  elsewhere  argued  as  the  blurring  of 
genres or the refiguration of social thought.
Over the last four hundred years the developments in the West have not 
just been the result of internal social dynamics, but also their relationship with 
Africa, Asia and South America. But both the internal relationships within 
them and their external relations with Africa, Asia and South America, have not 
been those of equality but of dominance and domination at the economic, 
political 
45


--- PAGE 46 ---
and cultural levels. The slave trade and slavery bringing about mass relocation 
of peoples; colonialism bringing about, immense economic, political, cultural 
and psychological violence on colonised communities, have meant that there is 
no  culture  which  has  not  been  affected  adversely  or  otherwise  by  those 
relationships of dominance and domination. But they have also been affected 
by the traditions of resistance from the dominated. This external domination 
and the resistance to it can be parallelled, in the colonised communities and in 
the  dominating nations,  with  the  internal  disempowerment  of  peoples  and 
resistance to this. Any study of cultures which ignores structures of domination 
and control and resistance within nations and between nations and races over 
the last four hundred years is in danger of giving a distorted picture. Western 
scholarship for instance has not escaped from the racism which necessarily 
arose out of those structures. Disciplines like anthropology and ethnography 
initially meant the study of those remote communities which seem to have 
some remote resemblance to `ours'; perhaps they are the missing social link to 
`our' arrival at the twentieth century of 'the West and the rest of us', to borrow a 
phrase from Chinweizu's book of the same title. The persistence of a certain 
vocabulary  - the  primitive,  the  tribal  community,  simpler  societies  is  a 
reminder of the remote kinship between scholarship and colonialism. Even the 
organisation of disciplines and syllabi can be affected by that history. Over the 
last so many years voices from those nations and sectors of the communities 
which were dominated have been speaking out, naming their world so to speak. 
But what has been the place of African literatures, African languages, African 
political and philosophic thought in the organisation of departments that house 
various  disciplines?  The  world  of  academic  study  is  still  almost  wholly 
dominated by that which has been initiated from the languages and centres of 
power in the West.
This does not mean that societies cannot be studied by people from other 
communities. But whether studying other communities, our communities or 
any other social phenomenon, it is important to see phenomenon in nature, 
society, even in academia, not in its isolation but in its dynamic connections 
with other phenomena. It is important to remember that social and intellectual 
processes, even academic disciplines, act and react on each other not against a 
spatial and temporal ground of stillness but of constant struggle, of 
46


--- PAGE 47 ---
movement, and change which brings about more struggle, more movement, 
and change, even in human thought.
In a situation of flux, the effective use of the delicate skills of navigating 
our way through may very well depend on whether we are swimming against 
or with the currents of change or for that matter whether we are clear in what 
direction we are swimming, towards or away from the sea of our connections 
with our common humanity. Local knowledge is not an island unto itself; it is 
part of the main, part of the sea. Its limits lie in the boundless universality of 
our creative potentiality as human beings.
47


--- PAGE 48 ---
4 Imperialism of Language
English, a Language for the World?
Everyone in the world has a language, either the language of his or her parents 
or one adopted at birth or at a later stage in life. So when we consider English 
as a possible language for the world, we are all drawing from the languages 
and cultures in which we are rooted. The topic also brings up the question of 
choosing one language from among many languages. What we are therefore 
discussing is the relationship between English and the various languages of the 
world. In short, we are really talking about the meeting of languages.
Every language has two aspects. One aspect is its role as an agent that 
enables us to communicate with one another in our struggle to find the means 
for survival. The other is its role as a carrier of the history and the culture built 
into the process of that communication over time. In my book  Decolonising 
the Mind I have described language as the collective memory bank of a people. 
The two aspects are inseparable; they form a dialectical unity.
However, either of these two aspects can become more pronounced than 
the other, depending in the circumstances surrounding the use of a language, 
and  particularly  those  surrounding  an  encounter  between  languages.  For 
instance,  are  the  two  languages  meeting  on  terms  of  equality  and 
independence? The quality of the encounter between languages both in the past 
and in the world today, and hence the dominance of one aspect over the other at 
a given time, has been determined by the presence or absence of independence 
and quality between the nations involved.
Let me give one or two examples. Scandinavians know English. But they 
do not learn English in order for it to become the means of 
48


--- PAGE 49 ---
communication among themselves in their own countries, or for it to become 
the carrier of their own national cultures, or for it to become the means by 
which foreign culture is imposed on them. They learn English to help them in 
their interactions with English people, or with speakers of English, to facilitate 
commerce,  trade,  tourism,  and  other  links  with  foreign  nations.  For  them 
English  is  only  a  means  of  communication  with  the  outside  world.  The 
Japanese, the West Germans, and a good number of other peoples fall in the 
same category as the Scandinavians: English is not a substitute for their own 
languages. ,
When nations meet on terms of independence and equality, they tend to 
stress the need for communication in the language of the other. They choose 
the language of the other merely to ease communication in their dealings with 
one another. But when they meet as oppressor and oppressed, as for instance 
under  imperialism,  then  their  languages  cannot  experience  a  genuinely 
democratic  encounter.  The  oppressor  nation  uses  language  as  a  means  of 
entrenching itself in the oppressed nation. The weapon of language is added to 
that of the Bible and the sword in pursuit of what David Livingstone, in the 
case  of nineteenth-century imperialism, called  'Christianity plus  5 percent,' 
Today he would have probably described the same process as Christianity, 
debt, plus 40 percent in debt servicing. In such a situation, what is at stake is 
language as more than a simple means of communication.
Needless to say, the encounter between English and most so-called Third 
World languages did not occur under conditions of independence and equality. 
English, French, and Portuguese came to the Third World to announce the 
arrival of the Bible and the sword. They came clamouring for gold, black gold- 
in chains, or gold that shines as sweat in factories and plantations. If it was the 
gun  which  made  possible  the  mining  of  this  gold  and  which  effected  the 
political captivity of their owners, it was language which held captive their 
cultures, their values, and hence their minds. The latter was attempted in two 
ways, both of which are part of the same process.
The first was to suppress the languages of the captive nations. The culture 
and  the  history carried  by these  languages  were  thereby thrown  onto  the 
rubbish heap and left there to perish. These languages were experienced as 
incomprehensible noise from the dark 
49


--- PAGE 50 ---
Tower of Babel. In the secondary school that I went to in Kenya, one of the 
hymns we were taught to sing was a desperate cry for deliverance from that 
darkness.  Every  morning,  after  we  paraded  our  physical  cleanliness  for 
inspection in front of the Union Jack, the whole school would troop down to 
the chapel to sing: `Lead kindly light amidst the encircling gloom, lead thou 
me on.' Our languages were part of that gloom. Our languages were suppressed 
so that we, the captives, would not have our own mirrors in which to observe 
ourselves and our enemies.
The second mode of captivation was that of elevating the language of the 
conqueror. It became the language of the elect. T 'hose inducted into the school 
system, after having been sifted from the masses of the people, were furnished 
with new mirrors in which to see themselves and their people as well as those 
who had provided the new mirrors. In short, they were given a language called 
English or French or Portuguese. Thus equipped with the linguistic means of 
escape from the dark Tower of Babel, the newly ordained, or those ready to be 
ordained as servants of the new order, had their minds systematically removed 
from  the  world  and  the  history  carried  by their  original  languages.  They 
looked, or were made to look, to a distant neon light on a faraway hill flashing 
out the word EUROPE. Henceforth Europe and its languages would be the 
centre of the universe.
The French, faithful to the philosophical and aesthetic traditions of their 
culture, had given the whole process a name: assimilation. The English, less 
aesthetically  and  philosophically  inclined,  simply  called  it  education.  But 
Lugard, a soldier-turned-administrator who nonetheless retained the bluntness 
of a military man, had provided the key to understanding what lay behind this 
pragmatic education programme, one that was often formulated in bits and 
pieces:  indirect  rule. He had coined  the  phrase  to refer to the practice of 
co-opting  chiefs  to  facilitate  British  rule  in  Africa.  In  fact,  subsequent 
educational practice produced more faithful `chiefs' for the system as a whole 
than those who had been appointed earlier by Lugard. The point however is 
that the mastery of the English language was the measure of one's readiness for 
election into the band of the elect.
In Decolonising the Mind I have 'described how the process of alienation 
from our own languages with the acquisition of a new one 
50


--- PAGE 51 ---
actually worked. I have told of instances of children being punished if they 
were caught speaking their African languages. We were often caned or made to 
carry plaques inscribed with the words 'I am stupid' or ' I am an ass'. In some 
cases,  our  mouths  were  stuffed  with  pieces  of  paper  picked  from  the 
wastepaper basket, which were then passed from one mouth to that of the latest 
offender. Humiliation in relation to our languages was the key. 'Look up unto 
the hills' was the constant call: that was where the light from Europe shone, and 
the gateway to it was English. The English language was the bearer of all 
knowledge in the arts and sciences. According to Greek tradition, Archimedes 
could have moved the world had he had a firm ground on which to stand. In 
twentieth-century Africa he would have been advised to stand on the firm 
ground of the English language in order to move the world. Indeed for some of 
us, English was made to look as if it was the language spoken by God.
One of our English teachers, ironically a Scotsman, used to urge us to 
follow the footsteps of Christ in the use of the English language. As you know, 
when young people learn a new language, they tend to favour the heaviest and 
longest of words because such words sound more learned. The teacher would 
tell us that Jesus Christ used the simplest English. The Bible contained the 
greatest sentence in English literature which happened also to be the shortest. It 
was left to a student to remind him that Jesus probably spoke Hebrew, and that 
the Bible from which the King James Version had been translated, was more 
likely to have been written in Hebrew. [I note that Christ spoke Aramaic and 
not Hebrew and that the New Testament was written in Greek. To correct the 
child's misconception is hardly to weaken his point, which retains its polemical 
truth with respect to the teacher's assumptions.]
You  may  think  that  I  am talking  about  some  attitudes  to  the  English 
language that prevailed thirty years ago. Well, you are very wrong. Recently, 
on my way to Berlin with my mind very much on this seminar, I chanced to 
open the London  Evening Standard of 7 October 1988, and came across an 
article concerning the British education secretary Kenneth Baker's visit to the 
Soviet Union. The paper told us how Baker had been amazed to find English 
being spoken in a certain part of the Soviet Union: Just think of it. There I was 
in Novosibirsk. Two thousand miles from anywhere, and yet the people could 
speak English perfectly. They've never been to England or America. But they 
read our classics.' That is well and 
51


--- PAGE 52 ---
good. Any group learning the language of another group is a positive thing. But 
why were these citizens of Novosibirsk putting so much work into perfecting 
their English? According to Kenneth Baker, as quoted by the same issue of the 
Standard, there was a deeper motive: `The Russians associate England with 
progress, so they work thoroughly and very hard at their English. They want to 
get away from the old-fashioned totalitarian state-controlled society.' You have 
heard it for yourselves. Socialism, which is only seventy years old, is already 
old-fashioned. Capitalism, which is four hundred years old, is modern. But the 
point to note for our argument is that even today English is the means of taking 
people  away  from  the  `gloom'  of  socialism  into  the  `light'  of  modern 
capitalism.
Let me now relate to you very briefly how some of us were taken by 
English  from  the  dark  Babelic  towers  of  nineteenth-century  Africa  to  the 
modernity of twentieth-century colonial Africa. In my primary school we were 
taught English from a text under the general series 'Oxford Readers for Africa'. 
We used to read the story of a boy called John and a girl called Joan. And it 
thus came to pass that, while still in my village and before I knew the names of 
any other towns in Kenya, I already knew about a town called Oxford where 
the two children were born and another called Reading, where John and Joan 
went to -school. We, the new readers, followed them wherever they went. One 
day we went to visit another town called London; we went to a zoo and walked 
along the banks of the river Thames. It was a summer holiday. Oh, how many 
times did the river Thames and the British Houses of Parliament beckon to us 
from the pages of our English language text books! Even today, when 'l hear 
the name of the river Thames or travel in its vicinity, I still remember Joan and 
John. And Oxford represents to me less the great seat of exclusive scholarship 
that it is supposed to be than the exclusive home of the fictitious John and Joan 
of my primary school textbook.
Don't get me wrong. I do not think it a bad thing for a language to be 
taught in the geographical, cultural, or historical setting of the land which 
produces it. After all, even the communicative aspect of a language cannot be 
divorced from its cultural emblems - the Thames for the English language, the 
Eiffel Tower for the French, the Leaning Tower of Pisa for the Italian, the Great 
Wall of China 
52


--- PAGE 53 ---
for the Chinese, Mecca for the Arabic, Mombasa for the Kiswahili. To know a 
language in the context of its culture is a tribute to the people to whom it 
belongs, and that is good. What has, for us from the former colonies, twisted 
the natural relation to languages, both our own and those of other peoples, is 
that the languages of Europe - here, English - were taught as if they were our 
own languages, as if Africa had no tongues except those brought there by 
imperialism, bearing the label MADE IN EUROPE.
Thus  English  and  the  African  languages  never  met  as  equals,  under 
conditions of equality, independence, and democracy, and this is the root of all 
subsequent  distortions.  They  met  with  English  as  the  language  of  the 
conquering nation, and ours as the language of the vanquished. An oppressor 
language inevitably carries racist and negative images of the conquered nation, 
particularly in its literature, and English is no exception. I do not want to go 
into this aspect of the language here. Many studies in this area have already 
been done. Suffice it to say that some works bearing these offensive images, 
like those of Elspeth Huxley, Karen Blixen, Rider Haggard, Robert Ruark, 
Nicholas  Monsarrat,  to  name just  a  few,  found  their  way into  the  school 
English curriculum. Imagine it: if the African languages had all died, African 
people would have had to define themselves in a language that had such a 
negative conception of Africa as its legacy.
What prevented our languages from being completely swallowed up by 
English and other oppressor languages was that the rural and urban masses, 
who had refused to surrender completely in the political and economic spheres, 
also continued to breathe life into our languages and thus helped to keep alive 
the histories and cultures they carried. The masses of Africa would often derive 
the strength needed in their economic and political struggles from those very 
languages. Thus the peoples of the Third World had refused to surrender their 
souls to English, French, or Portuguese.
But the Third World was not the only place where English tried to grow on 
the graveyard of other peoples' languages. Even in Britain I have heard similar 
complaints from regions whose original languages had been swallowed up by 
English or in regions where they are putting up a last ditch struggle to prevent 
their languages from being killed and buried forever.
Once again, I am not only talking about complaints that I heard 
53


--- PAGE 54 ---
many years ago. When I returned from West Berlin, I happened to open a 
newspaper, the Morning Star of 21 October 1988, only to find an article by Lyn 
Marierid of the Welsh Language Society protesting the continuing decline of 
the Welsh language:
In recent years, rural areas, which have for decades been considered 
strongholds  of  the  language,  have  become  completely  Anglicised  as 
ordinary working-class people have been systematically priced out of their 
native areas.
Perhaps some readers are asking at this point why it should be so 
important to retain such a language as Welsh.
' If we consider it important for a people to be aware of their past in 
order to be able to shape their future, .then it is pointedly relevant. For 
generations, the Welsh working class was utterly dependent on the Welsh 
language and culture.
Now it appears that the Welsh language in Wales is under threat of 
death. That, indeed, is the cost of `yuppiefication' in this particular part of 
Britain. Should it die; then the history of a whole people would be a closed 
book for many people.
As socialists we know that capitalist culture seeks to deny working 
people their rightful place in their own history so that it may not be a 
source of inspiration for their continued struggle in the present.
Language too is denied them for similar reasons.
Languages do not grow, age and die. They do not become irrelevant to 
the `modern age' due-to some intrinsic fault in their composition. .
They are lost when the predominant class in society has no use for 
them.
The  decline  of  the  Welsh  language  has  roots  in  the  inequality  prevailing 
between  the  nationalities  that  inhabited  the  two  linguistic  regions.  Even 
Kenneth Baker, when talking about the spread of English in Russia, did not 
say, from what one gathers in reading the report in the Evening Standard, that 
the Soviets looked up to Britain for progress. They looked to England, the 
original home of the English language.
Today, the West European languages and African languages are where they 
are 
54


--- PAGE 55 ---
in  relation  to  one  another,  not  because  they  are  inherently  progressive  
or backward but because of the history of oppression on one hand, and the 
resistance to that oppression on the other. That history of oppression dates back 
a long time, but it is best symbolised by the Berlin Conference of 1884 at 
which Africa, for example, was carved up into various 'spheres of influence' of 
the European powers. Today we can see that English, outside its home base in 
Britain and the United States, has firmly taken root in all respects only in those 
areas of the globe - and these are quite considerable - which have been within 
the  Anglo-American  economic and  political  empire  stretching  from Queen 
Victoria  to  Ronald  P.  Reagan.  These  are  also  the  areas  in  which 
neo-colonialism has taken firm root. The rulers of these neo-colonies feel that 
they share the same outlook as the rulers of the United States and Britain 
because, quite apart from many other things they have in common, they speak 
the same tongue and share the value systems of the English speaking ruling 
classes the world over.
The consequences of that history of inequality and oppression can be seen 
in each of the affected countries in Africa, particularly in the internal relations 
between the various classes and in the external relations with other countries. 
In these countries, English, French, and Portuguese occupy the centre stage. 
They are the official languages of instruction, of administration, of commerce, 
trade, justice, and foreign communications. In short, they are the languages of 
power.  But  they  are  still  spoken  only  by  a  minority  within  each  of  the 
nationalities that make up these countries. The majority of the working people 
in Africa retain our African languages. There- d fore the majority of the people 
are excluded from centre stage since they do not have mastery of the language 
of power. They are also excluded from any meaningful participation in modern 
discoveries. English, French, and Portuguese are the languages in which the 
African people have been educated; for this reason the results of our research 
into science, technology, and of our achievements in the creative arts are stored 
in those languages. Thus a large portion of this vast knowledge is locked up in 
the linguistic prison of English, French, and Portuguese. Even the libraries are 
really  English  (or  indeed  French  or  Portuguese)  language  fortresses 
inaccessible to the majority. So the cultivation of these languages makes for 
more effective communication only between the elite and the international  
English-speaking bourgeoisie. In short the elite in Africa is, 
55


--- PAGE 56 ---
in linguistic terms, completely uprooted from the peoples of Africa and tied to 
the West.
As for external relations between Africa and the world, African languages 
hardly occupy any place of honour. Once again their place has been occupied 
by English, French, or Portuguese. Among the official languages at the United 
Nations there is not a single language of African origin. In fact it is interesting 
that of the five continents, the only one not represented linguistically at the 
United Nations is Africa. It is surely time that Kiswahili, or Hausa, Wolof, 
Shona, Amharic, or Somali be made one of the official languages of the United 
Nations Organisation and all its organs; but that is a matter for another seminar. 
At present we are discussing English as a possible language for the world.
I have  so  far  discussed  or pointed  out  only the  racist  tradition  of the 
English language. As a language of imperialism, it could not but be marked by 
the very disease it carried. But as the language of the people of Britain and 
America, it also has a democratic tradition, reflecting the democratic struggles 
and heritage of the British and American people. In its democratic tradition it 
has added to the common pool of human creativity; in the arts, for instance, 
with  such  great  names  as  Shakespeare,  Milton,  Blake,  Shelley,  Dickens, 
Conrad, Bernard Shaw, Graham Greene, to name only a few. I am not surprised 
that Kenneth Baker found Soviet children in Siberia reading some of these 
classics of the English language. If he had also gone to even the remotest 
village in Africa he might very well have found more children struggling with 
Dickens,  alongside  Brecht,  Balzac,  Sholokhov,  and  of  course  Sembene 
Ousmane, Alex  la  Guma,  Veiera,  and  other  African  writers.  A lot  of  this 
material would be available in English translation. That side of the English 
language is important, and it is part of the common heritage of humankind 
along with what has been contributed by other languages, including those from 
Africa. But English as a language for the world is another matter.
English, a language for the world? It would certainly be good for each 
country in the world to have a language in which all nationalities inhabiting its 
boundaries  could participate. It would be equally good if the world had a 
language in which all the nations of the earth could communicate. A 'common 
language  of  communication  within  a  country,  a  common  language  of 
communication for the 
56


--- PAGE 57 ---
world: that is the ideal, and we have to struggle for it.
But that language, whichever it would be, should not be planted in the 
graveyard of other languages within one country or in the world. We must 
avoid the destruction that English has wrought on other languages and cultures 
in its march to the position it now occupies in the world. The death of many 
languages should never be the condition for the life of a few. On the contrary, 
the lives of many languages should add life to whichever language emerges as 
the transnational or universal language of communication between people. We, 
the present generation, must distance ourselves from the false and bloody logic 
of  development  theory  handed  to  us  by  imperialism:  the  claim  that  the 
cleanliness of one person must depend on pouring dirt onto others; that the 
health of a few must depend on their passing their leprosy onto others; that the 
wealth of a few people or a few nations must be rooted in the poverty of the 
masses of people and nations.
So,  what  would  be  the  proper  foundation  for  the  emergence  and  the 
universal acceptance of a language for the world?
First,  the  absolute  independence  and  equality  of  all  nations  in  the 
economic, political, and cultural spheres. Such an equality would of course be 
reflected in the equality of languages. We live in one world. All the languages 
in the world are real products of human history.
They are our common heritage. A world of many languages should be like 
a field of flowers of different colours. There is no flower which becomes more 
of a flower on account of its colour or its shape. All such flowers express their 
common `floralness' in their diverse colours and shapes. In the same way our 
different languages can, should, and must express our common being. So we 
should let all our languages sing of the unity of the people of the earth, of our 
common  humanity,  and above  all  of the  people's  love  for  peace,  equality, 
independence, and social justice. All our, languages should join in the demand 
for a new international economic, political, and cultural order.
Then the different languages should be encouraged to talk to one another 
through  the medium of interpretation  and translation.  Each country should 
encourage the teaching of languages from the five continents of the earth. 
There is no reason why each child should not master at least three languages as 
a matter of course. The 
57


--- PAGE 58 ---
art of translation and interpretation should be an integral subject in schools, but 
it is sad to note that in the English education system and in English culture 
generally, the art of translation does not enjoy the same status as the other arts. 
Through translations, the different languages of the world can speak to one 
another.  European  languages  have  always  communicated  with  one  another 
such that today it is possible to read nearly all the classics of Russian, French, 
or German literature and philosophy in any of those languages, thanks to the 
art of translation. But there is very little mutual translation between African 
languages  and,  say,  English  and  French.  And  the  colonial  dominance  of 
English and French in African lives has made African languages so suspicious 
of one another that there is hardly any inter-African communication. In any 
case, very few resources, if any, nationally or internationally, have been put 
into the development of African languages. The best minds among lettered 
Africans have been channelled into the developing of English, French, and 
Portuguese. But, difficult as the case may be, interlanguage communication 
through translation is crucial. If on top of all of this there were one common 
language, then the different languages of the world could further communicate 
with one another via the international common language. In that way, we could 
build a real foundation for a common world culture that is firmly rooted in, and 
draws its real sustenance from, all the peoples of the world with their distinct 
experiences and languages. Our internationalism would be truly rooted in all 
the peoples of the world.
When there is real economic, political, and cultural equality among nations 
and there is democracy, there will be no reason for any nation, nationality, or 
people to fear the emergence of a common language, be it Kiswahili, Chinese, 
Maori, Spanish, or English, as the language of the world. A language for the 
world? A world of languages! The two concepts are not mutually exclusive 
provided there is independence, equality, democracy, and peace among nations.
In  such  a  world,  English,  like  all  the  other  languages,  can  put  in  an 
application,  and  despite  its  history  of  imperialist  aggression  against  other 
languages  and  peoples,  English  would  make  a  credible  candidate.  Such 
applicants must in the meantime work hard to remove such negative qualities 
as racism, sexism, national 
58


--- PAGE 59 ---
Chauvinism, and negative images of other nationalities and races so as to meet 
the criteria of acceptance as a language for the world. In this respect Kiswahili 
would make an excellent candidate for the world language. It already has the 
advantage  of  never  having  grown  in  the  graveyard  of  other  languages. 
Kiswahili  has  created  space  for  itself  in  Africa  and  the  world  without 
displaying any national chauvinism. The power of Kiswahili has not depended 
on its economic, political, or cultural aggrandisement. It has no history of 
oppression or domination of other cultures. And yet Kiswahili is now spoken as 
a major language in Eastern, Central, and Southern Africa as well as in many 
other parts of the world.
I have nothing against English, French, Portuguese, or any other language 
for that matter. They are all valid in as far as they are languages and in as far as 
they do not seek to oppress other nations', nationalities, and languages. But if 
Kiswahili or any other African language were to become the language for the 
world, this would symbolise the dawn of a new era in human relations between 
the nations and peoples of Africa and those of other continents. For these 
reasons I for one would like to propose Kiswahili as the language for the 
world.
Translated from the Gikuyu by Wangui wa Goro and Ngugi wa Thiong'o
59


--- PAGE 60 ---
5 Cultural Dialogue 
for a New World
Culture is a product of a peoples' history. But it also reflects that history and 
embodies a whole set of values by which a people view themselves and their 
place in time and space. Cultural contact can therefore play a great part in 
bringing  about  mutual  understanding  between  peoples  of  different  nations. 
Instead of armaments and nuclear weapons, instead of imposing one's own 
version of democracy on tiny islands and continents through Rapid or Low 
Deployment Forces, let people of the world dialogue together through culture.
But what culture are we talking about? Cultural contact on what basis? It is 
easy to identify two warring traditions of culture in Africa today.
First,  the  imperialist  tradition.  Imperialism,  the  conquest  and  the 
subjugation of the entire labour power of other countries by the concentrated 
capital, or money power, of another country came to realise that the economic 
exploitation and the political domination of a people could never be complete 
without cultural and hence mental and spiritual subjugation. The economic and 
political conquest of Africa was accompanied by cultural subjugation and the 
imposition of an imperialist cultural tradition whose dire effects are still being 
felt today.
Under colonialism this took the form of destroying peoples' languages, 
history,  dances,  education,  religions,  naming  systems,  and  other  social 
institutions that were the basis of their  self-conception as a people. White 
adventurers and fortune hunters also stole precious works of art. Some of these 
stolen items can still be seen in many highly reputable museums in many 
capitals of the West. But 
60


--- PAGE 61 ---
more important in its negative consequences was the wholesale destruction of 
artistic creations; either melting them into bars of gold, or, fired by a crusading 
Christian zeal, simply burning them as symbols of witchcraft or graven images 
of the devil. Colonialism went for the flattening or fossilisation of its victims' 
cultures.
On  this  wasteland  of  its  creation,  colonialism erected  an  art  in  which 
Europe was always at the centre. In many paintings of the colonial period, the 
white adventurer was always at the centre of action with the rays of light 
radiating outwards from him. Africans were background shadows merging with 
the outer darkness and the natural landscape. A variation of the white theme in 
the arts was the presentation of a white God, Jesus, Virgin Mary and the angels 
in  heaven  as  the  universal  religion.  In  schools,  African  students  were 
encouraged to paint collaborators with colonialism in good positive colours. 
Where the figure of a possible black Jesus appeared, it was in his humble 
subservience to violence. Other dominant figures in such schools and colleges 
were of black Christian martyrs, a martyrdom conferred on the basis of their 
holy zeal in collaborating with the colonial enemies of their people. You will 
find a variation of the same theme in literature encouraged for use in the 
schools of the period. Up Frogs Slavery by Booker T. Washington, a book that 
argued that slavery had actually been quite beneficial to black people was in 
many school libraries and classrooms all over Africa.
Finally this colonialism recognised as truly African only art and artistic 
activities  which  were  completely emptied  of  all  meaningful  content.  Thus 
lifeless carved figures of giraffes and elephants were paraded as authentically 
African just as empty acrobatic dancing and bodily contortions were similarly 
paraded for the colonial governor and visiting dignitaries. Thus colonialism 
was not entirely averse to associating itself to reactionary backward elements 
in peoples' cultures which it more often than not fossilised in museums or 
paraded as irrelevant, static traditionalism labelled as the authentic remnants 
and manifestation of true African culture.
The  imperialist  cultural  tradition  in  its  colonial  form  was  meant  to 
undermine  peoples'  belief  in  themselves  and  make  them  look  up  to  the 
European cultures, languages and the arts, for a measurement 
61


--- PAGE 62 ---
of themselves and their abilities. It was meant to undermine their belief in their 
capacity to struggle successfully for control of their whole social and natural 
environment.
Unfortunately the same continues in the Africa of today. Independence 
which  at  the  very  least  should  have  meant  the  liberation  of  a  peoples' 
productive forces from foreign control was in most cases merely a change of 
form from colonial economic and political arrangement and practices to a more 
vicious neo-colonial arrangement. Some of these regimes have gone so far up 
the neocolonial path that they have ceded their territory for use by US military 
forces; and thus for a small commission fee these regimes have put their entire 
populations at the mercy of whoever is occupying the White House. This is 
reflected  in  the  new  regimes' attitude  to  culture.  What  is,  therefore,  often 
officially paraded as authentic African culture today is virtually a repeat of the 
colonial  tradition:  tourist  art,  dances,  acrobatic  contortions  emptied  of  the 
content of struggle, or else subservient theatre, music and film that always 
praises the leader as faultless and imbued with a wisdom that comes to him 
directly from heaven. This officially sanctioned African culture looks outwards 
for alliances in the most backward elements in Western culture.
But  fortunately there  is  another  tradition  in  African  culture.  This  is  a 
patriotic  national  tradition  developing  in  resistance  and  opposition  to 
imperialist-sanctioned African culture. Under colonialism this was a culture 
which through songs, dances, poetry, drama, spoke of and reflected peoples' 
real  needs  as  they  struggled  against  appalling  working  conditions  in  the 
settler-occupied farms and in factories or which- sang of their hopes as they 
took up arms against colonial exploitation and political oppression. Whether in 
sculpture, poetry, songs, or dances, the patriotic arts looked to the past for 
progressive elements in form but always injected them with a new content born 
of the urgent present that raised them to a higher level. At the same time, the 
patriotic resistance arts were not afraid of incorporating new forms.
During  the  colonial  period  the  practitioners  of  this  culture  were  often 
jailed,* maimed or even killed. Their songs, dances and even their sculptures 
were  often  banned.  Colonial  Kenya  for  instance  saw  such  popular,  but 
politically-conscious,  dances  and  songs  like  Kanyegenyuri  and  Muthirigu 
actually banned by the 
62


--- PAGE 63 ---
colonial authorities. Mau Mau writers and poets were jailed without trial or 
else killed. Unfortunately, even after independence the new regimes maintained 
this  hostility  to  national  patriotic  cultures  that  reflected  peoples'  total 
opposition to-the continued plunder of their labour and wealth by imperialism 
and its local black allies. Artists and writers belonging to this tradition have 
been 'jailed, maimed and killed. Peasant and worker-based theatre movements 
have  -been  banned.  Cultural  centres  built  by  the  efforts  of  peasants  and 
workers have been destroyed.
I am not talking of abstractions. Not so long ago, three truckloads of armed 
policemen were sent by the Moi-Kanu regime to Kamiriithu Community and 
Cultural Centre in Limuru, Kenya and razed the peoples' open-air theatre to the 
ground. The administration banned any theatre activities in the area. Yet the 
same regime was quite happy to sponsor Elspeth Huxley's television version of 
her settler memoirs Flame Trees of Thika at about the same time that it was, 
banning the Kenya peoples' interpretation of the same history. Thus a few 
months after my own play Maitu Njugira was stopped, a worse fate met the 
author of the play, Kilio cha haki. Al Amin Mazrui was detained without trial 
for over two years at various maximum security prisons in the country after his 
play talking about the conditions of workers was performed at the University 
of Nairobi . . . Leading Kenyan writers like Abdulatif Abdulla, Kimani Gecau, 
Ngugi wa Miri, now live in exile. Yet the same regime will go cap in hand to 
Western capitals to seek aid, even for culture. So we cannot be talking about 
the same culture, even African culture, or are we?
Imperialism in its colonial form was not able to destroy a people's fighting 
culture. I can firmly say this: that Imperialism in its neo-colonial clothes will 
not be able to destroy the fighting culture of the African peasantry and working 
class for the simple reason that this culture is a product and a reflection of real 
life struggles going on in Africa today. You can destroy a people's culture 
completely only by destroying the people themselves and I suppose that we can 
safely leave that task to those who think that they can win a limited nuclear war 
so that they can continue to eat up, unmolested, uncontested, the resources of 
the people of Asia, Africa and South America.
The resistance culture and values of the African peasantry and 
63


--- PAGE 64 ---
working class have no basic contradiction with the democratic and humanistic 
cultures and values of the European and American peoples. These can hold a 
meaningful,  fruitful  dialogue.  This  is  the  dialogue  and  contact  we  must 
continue to aid, encourage and support by every means at our disposal.
64


--- PAGE 65 ---
6 The Cultural Factor in 
the Neo-colonial Era
The two most obvious features of imperialism today are its neocolonial form 
and the leadership of the USA. But the two are not entirely new in the history 
of modern imperialism.
The USA, or more precisely its constituent parts, was born in the era of the 
primitive accumulation of capital with the African based slave trade, slavery 
and semi-slavery being central. The USA's own capitalism begins its youthful 
stage with the declaration of independence and does not come of age until its 
political  hegemony over the  slave-owning rural  economies  of the southern 
States. This coincided with the high noon of laissez-faire capitalism in Europe, 
the era of industrial capitalism, with Britain boasting of its role as the work-
shop of the world.
The  very  triumph  of  the  European  laissez-faire  capitalism  with  its 
increasing need for the security of the sources of raw materials and for control 
of both the home and foreign markets was already turning competition into its 
opposite: monopoly! European capitalism was entering its imperialist stage 
with monopoly at home and abroad becoming the national clarion call. The 
subsequent  greed  for colonies  in  Africa  was  barely covered  by the  verbal 
grandiloquence  about  discovery,  exploration,  missionary-do-goodness, 
telescopic philanthropy: it was simple national jingoism but quite profitable 
wearing the banner of spreading civilisation to the world. The symbol of the 
new  turn  in  the  fortunes  of  European  capitalism  was  the  1884  Berlin 
conference which carved Africa up into colonies and spheres of influence of 
the  various  European  powers  and  their  capitalist  associations.  The  USA's 
capitalism, emerging from its youthful stage to claims of adulthood was a keen 
observer at the conference.
65


--- PAGE 66 ---
Thus by the time the USA's capitalism matured into the imperialist stage, 
the world had already been divided into colonies and semicolonies of the rival 
European imperialisms. The USA could only turn to the newly independent 
countries  of  Central  and  South  America  which  had  been  disengaging 
themselves from the weaker European powers of Portugal and Spain. Thus the 
passage  of  US  capitalism  into  imperialism  almost  immediately  took  on  a 
neo-colonial form. Between 1899 and 1917, the armed forces of the USA had 
intervened in at least seven South American countries and Caribbean islands, 
some  enjoying  this  uninvited  armed  visitation  more  than  three  times. 
Intervention?  Invasion  is  the  correct  word  since  these  victims  were.  in 
international  law.  sovereign  independent  countries.  But  the  USA was  not 
intervening to rule directly but to defend comprador classes and install client 
regimes that would oversee the smooth operation and security of the USA's 
economic interests.
But  by  the  time  the  USA  had  started,  and  turned  into  routine,  its 
interventions to maintain neo-colonies in Central and South America, another 
world shattering event had taken place: in 1917, the great October Revolution 
in Russia had ushered, on to the historical stage, the era of socialism. And so, 
the USA imperialism which had taken on the neo-colonial form as opposed to 
the colonial form of the older European powers, did so in the era of socialism 
and  of  the  national  liberation  struggles  now irrevocably influenced  by the 
October socialist revolution.
However, until the advent of the Second World War, colonialism remained 
the dominant form of imperialism. With the weakening of the old imperialist 
powers by the war; the upsurge of national liberation struggles; the resurgent 
democratic working-class struggles within the old imperialist beast; and the 
increasing triumph of socialism,' the neo-colonial form into which a retreating 
European imperialism was encasing itself eventually came into ascendancy. 
The USA, hardly scathed by the war and with far more experience in the new 
form, gradually assumed the leadership. The USA for instance rushed to bring 
South-East Asia, Vietnam being the best example of this, under its influence, 
determined to take over after the French had retreated.
By the end of the sixties, most of the newly independent countries in Asia 
and Africa had completed the transition from 
66


--- PAGE 67 ---
colonies to neo-colonies. A native neo-colonial elite was now flying the flags 
and  managing  the  armies  and  the  police  ready  to  crush  the  population, 
ensuring, by every military and political trick possible, the stability necessary 
for the continued Western control of the economy while loudly claiming their 
non-alignment in international affairs. The USA had become the main guardian 
of the neo-colonial regimes, arming their military; ensuring the continued flow 
of western financial aid packages; and often ready to intervene, directly or 
indirectly, through one of the former European colonial powers, to prop up a 
threatened regime. Over the years, the USA became the main agency for the 
destabilisation  of  any country in  Asia  and  Africa  and  South  America that 
leaned a bit too heavily on the side of social change; or that wanted to break 
the neo-colonial chains around its economy, politics and culture. The USA was 
not even shy of direct invasions as in the case of Grenada in the eighties. But 
its main means of destabilisation in the countries leaning towards fundamental 
social change was the creation, followed up by active support, of fake freedom 
fighters like the Nicaraguan Contras and Angolan Unita. Today the US military 
bases are everywhere in Asia, Africa and South America, the areas that used to 
be the sole domain of European capital.
But despite these glaring realities, the two features of modern imperialism - 
the neo-colonial form and the USA factor  -are not often sufficiently at the 
forefront of the consciousness of those engaged in the anti-imperialist struggles 
today. These two features are not part of the general mass consciousness in the 
same way that colonialism and the leadership of the old European oppressor 
nations  used  to  be  perceived  and  hence  successfully  fought  out. 
Neo-colonialism and the US leadership of it do not evoke the same sense of 
horror as the old colonialism and the oppressor nations of Europe used to 
evoke in the general imagination and in political practice. In some quarters the 
USA is not even seen as an imperialist power.
All  this  is  partly due  to  the  success  of  the  cultural  aspect  of  modern 
imperialism. Cultural control today has blunted perceptions and more so the 
feelings about those perceptions. Cultural control? But we are no longer in the 
days of the French policies of assimilation or of the British educational policies 
of creating a compliant native middle class. The USA is not in such direct  
67


--- PAGE 68 ---
management of any of these territories as to control and influence cultural  
policies  and. practices.  We  may concede  indirect  or even  direct  economic 
control, but cultural control?
In fact even where neo-colonialism and the USA and the dominant role of 
the USA are recognised, a lot of literature is devoted to the economic and 
political aspects of modern imperialism to the almost total exclusion of the 
cultural  factor.  Where  the  cultural  factor  is  taken  into  account,  it  is often 
relegated to the outer edges of the assumed real concerns: the economic and the 
political. This is partly because the areas of culture and psychology are not as 
easily quantifiable as the areas of economy and politics. But it is also due to the 
failure  to  recognise  the  integrated  and  dialectical  character  of  the  various 
aspects that make up the totality of modern imperialism.
It is of course true that imperialism, in whatever form and guise, aims at 
the  complete  ownership,  management  and  control  of  the  entire  system of 
production, exchange and distribution of the wealth in its home base and those 
of other nations and territories. This was perfectly clear in the old colonial 
system. The bourgeoisie of the oppressor nations of Europe hardly disguised 
the fact that they were on a mission of economic plunder. Today, US finance 
capital and the USA-based transnationals are equally on a mission of economic 
robbery and theft of the resources, the labour, and the produce of the entire 
`Third' World. The nations of Asia, Africa and South America are bleeding 
under  the  weight  of  unpayable  debts.  A  traveller  in  any  one  of  the 
tri-continental countries will find the same, familiar names: IMF; World Bank; 
General  Motors,  Firestone,  Del  Monte,  Coca-Cola,  MacDonalds  etc;  Esso, 
Caltex, Mobil oil, etc; Hilton, Sheraton, etc; and of course other similarly 
familiar signs from Japan and Western Europe. In short the same tiny group of 
financial,  industrial  and  commercial  interests  from the  USA and  the  West 
generally still control the economies of the various `Third' World countries.
The economic goes hand in hand with political control. Under colonialism 
political control was often direct through the. settler representatives or through 
a white-controlled native administration; and of course through the colonial 
army and  police  forces.  Under  the  neo-colonial  form, control  is  exercised 
through  a  comprador  bourgeoisie.  Under  the  USA's  leading  role  in  the  
management of 
68


--- PAGE 69 ---
the  neo-colonial  system,  this  takes  the  particular  form  of  erecting  and 
supporting  the  most  reactionary  and  the  most  repressive  civil  or  military 
dictatorships in the world  - Pinochet's Chile, Somoza's Nicaragua, Marcos' 
Philippines, South Korea, Kenya, El Salvador, etc are just a few examples - for 
as long as they guarantee the continued dominance of USA interests.
The entire economic and political control is effectively facilitated by the 
cultural factor. In any case, economic and political control inevitably leads to 
cultural dominance and this in turn deepens that control. The maintenance, 
management, manipulation, and mobilisation of the entire system of education, 
language and language use, literature, religion, the media, have always ensured 
for the oppressor nation power over the transmission of a certain ideology, set 
of values, outlook, attitudes, feelings etc, and hence power over the whole area 
of  consciousness.  This  in  turn  leads  to  the  control  of  the  individual  and 
collective self-image of the dominated nation and classes as well as their image 
of the dominating nations and classes.
By thus controlling the cultural and psychological domain, the oppressor 
nation and classes try to ensure the situation of a slave who takes it that to be a 
slave is the normal human condition. If the exploited and the oppressed of the 
earth can view themselves and their place in the universe as they are viewed by 
the imperialist bourgeoisie, then they can become their own policemen, no 
longer able to see any significant contradiction between their own condition 
and that of the oppressor nations and classes.
In the era of classical colonialism, this mental control was effected through 
the confined walls of the colonial school: But generally there was a systematic 
assault on peoples' languages, literature, dances, names, history, skin colour, 
religions, indeed their every tool of self definition. In their place were imposed 
the languages, literatures, religions, names, histories of the colonising nations 
and classes. Fortunately the colonial school and the churches could not take in 
the whole population. So only a tiny elite was educated into the culture, values, 
outlook, and consciousness of the imperialist bourgeoisie. Some even revolted 
and joined the masses, utilising their very knowledge of the culture of the 
oppressor to map out strategies and tactics for national self-survival.
This thoroughly colonised petty bourgeoisie was the class that 
69


--- PAGE 70 ---
inherited the management of the colonial state under new flags raised aloft at 
independence.  
It  received  almost  completely  intact  the  colonial  army,  the  police,  the 
administrative structures and personnel, the judiciary, and of course the entire 
prison system as developed and refined by colonialism. Their mission became 
that of overseeing  the  continuity of the  colonial state  in a new  guise, the 
neo-colonial guise.  They are able  to carry out their  mission  with absolute 
conviction because they have inherited the same world outlook, even vis-à-vis 
themselves, formerly held  by the  imperialist  bourgeoisie.  This  is  seen  for 
instance in Africa where in a neocolonial regime the same old disregard of 
African  lives  continue.  In fact  under  neo-colonialism, the  cultural  and  the 
psychological  aspects  of  imperialism  become  even  more  important  as 
instruments of mental and spiritual coercion.
Today the USA and the West in general control nearly all the news to and 
from Third World countries. By that fact alone, they determine how those 
countries will see themselves in the media. The whole area of news-gathering, 
the selection of the facts and the angle of viewing them is so important to the 
USA  that  when  UNESCO  persisted  in  insisting  on  a  new  international 
information order, the USA withdrew its financial dues and summoned Britain 
to follow suit. The same pattern of control extends to the cinema, television, 
the video, and the radio. Most of the images on the cinema and television 
screens  of  the  Third  World  are  actually  manufactured  in  the  USA.  This 
dominance is likely to continue with the vast US investment in information 
technology.  With  the  satellite  TV,  Cable  TV,  and  the  USA-based  video 
productions, these images `made in the USA' will be received directly by many 
Third  World  families.  We  have  already  seen  the  devastating  use  of  this 
technology in religious propaganda by the USA-based millionaire foundations 
who now promote idiotic illusions about the pleasures of the heaven to come 
on  a  mass  hypnotic  scale.  Even  such  publicly  discredited  characters  as 
Swaggert and Oral Roberts will occupy regular spots running into hours of 
prime  television  time  in  a  number  of  African  and  Third  World  countries. 
Jesus-is-my-personal-saviour  religions  will  spread  on a mass  scale  through 
cassettes, glossy leaflets and videos.
The  USA and  the  West  control  the  production,  training  and  even  the 
placement of most Third World intellectuals. A good number 
70


--- PAGE 71 ---
become trained and cultured into drawing pictures of the world in harmony 
with  the  needs  of  US  imperialism.  Book  and  magazine  production  and 
distribution is dominated by the USA and. the West so that what people in the 
Third World read is largely determined in the major capitals of the West. In 
short, the USA and the West control the whole area of the production and 
dissemination of ideas so basic to cultural determination and the shaping of 
outlooks on life and social struggles.
Throughout  all  the  above,  the  Third  World  is  being  trained  to  feel 
completely  at  home  with  the  ruling-class  values  of  the  US  imperialist 
bourgeoisie. After a time, any other articulated world view may sound very 
strange and unreal in the ears of the political believers. With the advent of 
transnationals the world is finally being made in the image of the West.
The 1990s is going to see at least three centres of imperialism, and possibly 
rival  imperialisms. Western  Europe will become united as one centre:  this 
centre will try to bring its spheres of influence in the Third World under the 
direct European wing. This will mean mainly Africa where British and French 
interests  still  predominate.  These  two  nations  for  instance  still  maintain 
sizeable armies in their former colonies. Secondly, there is the Japanese centre 
with its sphere of economic influence in South-East Asia. And finally of course 
the North American centre, meaning mainly the USA. This will try to hold on 
to its leadership of the entire imperialist camp; but the three centres could well 
see  greater  inter-imperialist  rivalry.  Kwame  Nkrumah  once  described 
neo-colonialism as the last stage of imperialism. How prophetic he was may 
well be proven by world events in the 1990s, and particularly the incorporation 
of Eastern Europe into junior membership of the West. The 1990s will see the 
neo-colonialist  form  of  imperialism  entering  its  last  but  desperate  period 
especially  in  the  face  of  intensified  national  liberation  assertions  and  the 
increasing demands for fundamental social change. The theatre of struggle will 
still be in the `Third' World.
The 1990s will therefore see even greater battles for the control of the 
minds and hearts of the exploited and the oppressed of the world, trying to 
mould them in the image of the neo-colonial father in the American heaven. 
The aim will still be what it has always been: to divide, weaken and scatter 
resistance. For how a people view themselves will affect how they view their 
values, their culture, 
71


--- PAGE 72 ---
their politics, their economics, and ultimately their relationship to nature and to 
the entire universe.
An oppressed class, or nation, that believes in itself, in its history, in its 
destiny, in its capacity to change the scheme of things, will obviously be the 
stronger in its class and national struggles for political and economic survival. 
Similarly an oppressed class or nation that loses faith and belief in itself, in its 
history, in its capacity to change the scheme of things, becomes weakened in its 
political and economic struggles for survival. Such a class or nation can only 
work out its destiny within the boundaries clearly drawn by the dominating 
class and nation.
Fortunately things will never go the way intended by the oppressor for the 
simple reason that the dominated have always resisted and will always resist. 
In fact  imperialism would never  have taken  so  much  trouble  to  invest  so 
heavily in its repressive machinery or in cultural engineering if the exploited 
and the oppressed had themselves merely succumbed to their economic fate of 
forever being the unquestioning drawers and hewers of wood.
In the particular case of Africa, people struggled against the slave trade and 
slavery; against the colonial invasions and occupations by forces armed with 
the latest technologies; and today they continue that titanic struggle against 
neo-colonial  encirclement.  Between  the  fifteenth  and  nineteenth  centuries, 
African people fought wars to preserve their independence against the various 
invasions from Europe. Under the colonial phase they fought wars for national 
independence. Today Africa is still engaged in wars to complete the national 
democratic  revolutions  as  the  very first  and  necessary step  towards  social 
change. And in all these phases, the struggle to bring about people's power, 
social change, a new society is still continuing with even greater intensity as 
imperialism and its internal class allies in Africa put up barrier after barrier.
In  all  these  struggles,  the  cultural  and  intellectual  worker  has  always 
played an important role. Intellectual workers can draw pictures of the world in 
harmony with the needs of the forces of human destruction; or in harmony with 
the forces or resistance for human survival, creativity and renewal. Intellectuals 
can draw pictures of the universe and its workings to instil fear, despondence, 
and selfdoubt in the oppressed while legitimising the world of the oppressor 
nations and classes as the norm; or they can draw pictures that instill 
72


--- PAGE 73 ---
clarity, strength, hope, to the struggles of the exploited and the oppressed to 
realise their visions of a new tomorrow. 
The `Third' World that is entering the 1990s can be divided into four main 
areas corresponding to the four stages in the development of a revolutionary 
process for fundamental social change.
First, there are those countries which are still under some kind of colonial 
occupation. These are few in number. Direct occupation of a colonial type is 
increasingly a  thing  of  the  past.  It  is  too  obvious  and  too  costly for  the 
occupying forces. These colonial types are opposed by liberation movements.
Then there are the neo-colonies. These are nominally independent with 
comprador-type  regimes  running  the  economy,  politics,  and  culture  of  the 
country consistently on behalf of the West. Such neo-colonial regimes also 
invariably harbour Western military personnel, bases and facilities. In these 
countries  there  are movements,  people-based movements,  spearheading  the 
struggle for democracy and social change. .
A third group of countries lean towards social change. They are genuinely 
trying to safeguard a people-based democracy and to preserve their national 
independence. Such countries are constantly under threats of destabilisation.
And lastly, there are those countries which have already crossed into the 
socialist  path  of  development  and  which  once  again  face  imperialist 
encirclement and economic strangulation. Cuba, for instance, has been facing 
an economic blockade. Should its economy fail we shall be told that this is 
because of socialism. The 'Third' World struggles against imperialism in its 
neocolonial  form  will  be  the  stronger  if  always  linked  to  the  overall 
international struggle for a new world. Imperialism is a three-headed monster 
with one head spitting or threatening to spit fire at the socialist world; the other 
head is spitting fire at the working people in its own home base; and the third 
head is directing fire and brimstone at the national liberation struggles in the 
`Third' World that seem committed to fundamental social change.
It is in the interests of `Third' World peoples to support the democratic 
struggles  in  the  USA,  Japan,  and  Western  Europe  such  as  the  anti-racist 
groupings, the womens’ movements for equality, the ‘workers’ struggles, the 
peace and the environmentalist movements. These democratic movements in 
the West in turn have to see that 
73


--- PAGE 74 ---
the fate of the values they stand for is linked with the success or failure of the 
national democratic struggles for real  liberation in the 'Third' World. They 
must,  out  of  their  own  interests,  actively  intensify  their  support  for 
anti-neo-colonial  democracies  and  movements  in  Asia,  Africa,  and  South 
America.  This  means,  at  the  very  least,  opposing  their  own  government's 
support for dictatorships and tyrannies of various kinds in the 'Third' World. 
They should also oppose their government's eagerness to send troops to AASA 
countries when these regimes are threatened by popular forces.
But for the 'Third' World peoples an even more important requirement is 
the  linkages  of  their  struggles.  In  this  respect  the  notion  of  south  /south 
dialogue  should  go  beyond  the  level  of  sentiment  and  wishes.  Economic 
exchanges and co-operation, can strengthen the links that bind. But quite as 
important as political dialogues and economic exchange is the cultural factor. 
The literatures of 'Third' World peoples of Asia, Africa and South America for 
instance have a lot to learn from each other: Cultural exchanges at the people 
to people and at institutional levels are vital. This culture is not in contradiction 
with the democratic tradition in the literatures and cultures of the Western 
peoples. I am thinking of a tripartite cultural dialogue and exchange between 
the people of Asia, Africa and South America, on the one hand, and between 
the peoples of AASA and those of the West, on the other. For quite apart from 
anything else there are now millions of AASA peoples in the West and they are 
contributing to the democratic culture of struggle in the West.
The resistance of 'Third' World peoples - mostly of AASA - is a continuing 
process and it is a struggle against imperialism in whatever form and guise, 
colonial,  neo-colonial,  USA-backed  or  otherwise.  For this resistance  to be 
successful it has to be waged at all the levels we have been talking about: 
economic, political, cultural and psychological. In other words the success of 
the entire process will be judged finally on how far the economy, politics, 
culture, indeed the humanity of the peoples of AASA have been liberated. For 
we are talking about nothing less than the right of all the peoples of the earth to 
be human. Culture, freed from all the structures of subjugation, national and 
international, is the best measure of this humanity. 
Culture in other words is not something extra, like say a sixth 
74


--- PAGE 75 ---
finger on a human hand. Culture has rightly been said to be to society what a 
flower is to a plant. What is important about a flower is not just its beauty. A 
flower is the carrier of the. seeds for new plants, the bearer of the future of that 
species of plants. If economic and political liberation are essential for our 
liberation, equally the liberation of our cultures, our feelings, values, outlook, 
are  a necessary measure  of the  true  extent  of that  economic  and political 
liberation. Or put it another way: if culture is the product of the totality and 
continuity of our economic and political struggles, it is also a 'contributor, a 
reflection, and a measure of the success of those struggles.
The cultural and the psychological aspects of the continuing resistance 
against imperialism in the 1990s are an integral part of the overall struggle. 
Should we ignore the cultural aspects of both imperialism and the resistance 
against it, we shall merely have scotched the snake not killed it. Imperialism is 
an integral whole and the struggle against it must also be an integral whole 
countering, blow for blow, all the areas of its aggression - economic, political, 
cultural and psychological - with a people-based economy, politics and culture, 
in the hope of ending up with a liberated people's consciousness and creativity.
Then the positive in each of our cultures-would form a foundation for a 
shared set of human values and heritage on a global scale. The collapse of 
neo-colonialism and all the international and national structures of domination, 
dependencies, parasitisms, (Nkrumah's last stage of imperialism), would see 
the birth of a new world, the beginnings of a truly universal human culture.
75


--- PAGE 76 ---
76


--- PAGE 77 ---
II
Freeing 
CultureFrom 
Colonial 
Legacies
77


--- PAGE 78 ---
7 The Writer in 
a Neo-colonial State
The African writer who emerged after the Second World War has gone through 
three decisive decades which also mark three nodal stages in his growth. He 
has gone, as it were, through three ages within only the last thirty years or so: 
the age of the anti-colonial struggle; the age of independence; and the age of 
neo-colonialism.
First was the fifties, the decade of the high noon of the African people’s 
anti-colonial  struggles  for  full  independence.  The  decade  was  heralded, 
internationally, by the triumph of the Chinese Revolution in 1949 and by the 
independence of India in 1947. It was the decade of the Korean revolution, the 
Vietnamese defeat of the French at Dien Bien Phu, the Cuban people’s ouster 
of Batista, the stirrings of heroic independence and liberation movements in 
Asia, the Caribbean and Latin America. In Africa the decade saw the Nasserite 
national assertion in Egypt culminating in the triumphant nationalisation of the 
Suez Canal, armed struggles by the Kenya Land and Freedom Army, Mau 
Mau, against British colonialism and by FLN against French colonialism in 
Algeria, as well as intensified resistance against the South African Apartheid 
regime, a resistance it responded to with the Sharpeville massacre. What marks 
the  decade  in the  popular  imagination,  however, was  the  independence  of 
Ghana in 1957 and of Nigeria in 1960 with the promise of more to follow. In 
Europe,  the  immediate  post-war  decades,  particularly  the  fifties,  saw 
consolidation.  of  socialist  gains  in  Eastern  Europe  and  important 
social-democratic gains in the West. In the USA, the fifties saw an upsurge of. 
civil rights struggles. spearheaded by Afro-American people.
It was, in other words, the decade of tremendous anti-imperialist 
78


--- PAGE 79 ---
And  anti-colonial  revolutionary  upheavals  occasioned  by  the  forcible 
intervention of the masses in history. It was a decade of hope, the people 
looking  forward  to  a  bright  morrow  in  a  new  Africa  finally  freed  from 
colonialism. Kwame Nkrumah was the single most important theoretician and 
spokesman of this decade. Towards Colonial Freedom: that was in fact the title 
of the book Kwame Nkrumah had published at the beginning of the fifties. 
How sweet it must have sounded in the ears of all those who dreamt about a 
new  tomorrow!  His  Ghana  became  the  revolutionary Mecca  of  the  entire 
anti-colonial  movement  in  Africa.  Hutchison,  a  South  African  nationalist, 
captured Ghana’s centrality to the era when he called  his book  - itself an 
account of his own life and escape from South Africa - simply, Road to Ghana. 
All the continent’s nationalist roads of the fifties led to Kwame Nkrumah’s 
Ghana. Everywhere on the continent, the former colonial slave was breaking 
his chains, and singing songs of hope for a more egalitarian society in its 
economic, political and cultural life and Nkrumah’s Ghana seemed to hold the 
torch to that life!
The African writer we are talking about was born on the crest of this 
anti-colonial  upheaval  and  worldwide  revolutionary  ferment.  The 
anti-imperialist energy and optimism of the masses found its way into the 
writing of the period. The very fact of his birth was itself evidence of this new 
assertive Africa. The writing itself, whether in poetry, drama or fiction, even 
where it was explanatory in intention, was assertive in tone. It was Africa 
explaining itself, speaking for itself and interpreting its past. It was an Africa 
rejecting the images of its past as drawn by the artists of imperialism. The 
writer even flaunted his right to use the language of the former colonial master 
anyway he liked. No apologies. No begging. The Caliban of the colonial world 
had been given European languages and he was going to use them even to 
subvert the master.
There is a kind of self-assuredness, a confidence, if you like, in the scope 
and-mastery of material in some of the best and most representative products 
of the period: Chinua Achebe’s Things Fall Apart, Wole Soyinka’s A Dance of 
the Forests, Camara Laye’s The African Child; and Sembene Ousmane’s God’s 
Bits  of  Wood. The  decade,  in  politics  and  in  literature,  was  however  best 
summed up in the very title of Peter Abraham’s autobiography, Tell Freedom, 
while the optimism is all there in David Diop’s poem ‘Africa’.
79


--- PAGE 80 ---
After evoking an Africa of freedom lost as well as the Africa of the current 
colonialism, he looks to the future with unqualified, total confidence:
Africa tell me Africa 
Is this you this back that is bent 
This back that breaks under the weight of humiliation 
This back trembling with red scars 
And saying yes to the whip under the midday sun 
But a grave voice answers me 
Impetuous son that tree young and strong 
That tree there 
In splendid loneliness amidst white and faded flowers 
That is Africa your Africa 
That groves again patiently obstinately 
And its fruit gradually acquires 
The bitter taste of liberty.
The writer and his work were products of the African revolution even as the 
writer  and  the  literature  tried  to  understand,  reflect,  and  interpret  that 
revolution. The promptings of his imagination sprang from the fountain of the 
African anti-imperialist, anti-colonial movement of the forties and fifties. From 
every tongue came the same tune: Tell Freedom.
But very often the writer who sang ‘Tell Freedom’ in tune and time with 
the  deepest  aspirations  of  his  society  did  not  always  understand  the  true 
dimensions  of  those  aspirations,  or  rather  he  did  not  always  adequately 
evaluate the real enemy of these aspirations. Imperialism was far too easily 
seen in terms of the skin pigmentation of the coloniser. It is not surprising of 
course that such an equation should have been made since racism and the tight 
caste system in colonialism had ensured that social rewards and punishments 
were  carefully structured  on  the  mystique  of  colour.  Labour  was  not  just 
labour but black labour: capital was not just capital but white-owned capital. 
Exploitation  and  its  necessary  consequence,  oppression,  were  black.  The 
vocabulary  by  which  the  conflict  between  colonial  labour  and  imperialist 
capital was perceived and ideologically fought out consisted of white and black 
images, sometimes freely interchangeable with the terms ‘European’ 
80


--- PAGE 81 ---
and ‘African’. The sentence or phrase was ‘. . . when the white man came to 
Africa .’ and not ‘. . . when the imperialist, or the colonialist, came to Africa . .  
.’, or ‘. . . one day these whites will go . . .’ and not ‘. . . one day imperialism, 
or these imperialists, will go. . .  ‘! Except in a few cases, what was being 
celebrated in the writing was the departure of the whiteman with the implied 
hope that the incoming blackman by virtue of his blackness would right the 
wrongs and heal the wounds of centuries of slavery and colonialism. Were 
there classes in Africa?  No! cried  the  nationalist politician, and the writer 
seemed to echo him. The writer could not see the class forces born but stunted 
in a racially demarcated Africa.
As a result of this reductionism to the polarities of colour and race, the 
struggle of African people against European colonialism was seen in terms of a 
conflict of values between the African and the European ways of perceiving 
and reacting to reality. But which African values? Which European values? 
Which  Black  values?  Which  White  values?  The  values  of  the  European 
proletariat  and  of  the  African  proletariat?  Of  the  European  imperialist 
bourgeoisie and of the collaborationist African petty bourgeoisie? The values 
of the African peasant and those of the European peasant? An undifferentiated 
uniformity  of  European,  or  white,  values  was  posited  against  an  equally 
undifferentiated uniformity of African, or black, values.
This  uniformity of  African  values  was  often  captured  in  the  realm of 
political parlance by the grandiloquent phrase, African socialism. The phrase 
was  to  be  given  even  greater  intellectual  sophistication  by Julius  Nyerere 
(whose personal integrity has never been in any doubt) when in his famous 
paper ‘Ujamaa: the basis of African socialism’ he defined  socialism as an 
attitude of mind. A millionaire (while remaining a millionaire I presume) could 
be a socialist, and a worker (while remaining a worker) could be a capitalist. 
Socialism (and therefore its opposite, imperialist capitalism) was reduced to a 
matter  of  beliefs,  moral  absolutes,  and  not  that  of  a  historically changing 
economic,  political  and  cultural  practice.  Values  without  the  economic, 
political and cultural practice that gives rise to them even as they in turn reflect 
that practice were seen as racially inherent in a people.
In short the writer and the literature he produced did not often 
81


--- PAGE 82 ---
take  and  hence  treat  imperialism  and  the  class  forces  it  generated  as  an 
integrated economic, political and cultural system whose negation and the class 
struggles this generated had also to be an integrated economic, political and 
cultural  system  of  its  opposite:  national  independence,  democracy  and 
socialism.
And so the writer, armed with an inadequate grasp of the extent, the nature 
and the power of the enemy and of all the class forces at work could only be 
shocked by the broken promises as his society entered the second decade.
The  beginning  of  the  sixties  saw  an  acceleration  of  the  independence 
movements.  Tanzania,  Uganda,  Zaire,  Kenya,  Zambia,  Malawi,  Congo 
(Brazzaville), Senegal, Ivory Coast, Mali: country after country won the right 
to fly a national flag and to sing a national anthem. At the end of the sixties 
only a few smudges on the map represented old colonies. The OAU was the 
symbol of the new age, or rather it was the promise of greater unity to come. 
But if the sixties was the decade of African independence, it was also the 
decade  when  old  style  imperialism  tried  to  halt  the  momentum  of  the 
anti-colonial struggles and the successes of the fifties. Old style imperialism 
tried to make a last stand. Thus Portuguese colonialism clung tenaciously to 
Angola, Guinea-Bissau and Mozambique. In Zimbabwe, Ian Smith and his 
Rhodesian Front, with the active covert and overt encouragement of the big 
imperialist bourgeoisie, tried to create a second South Africa by means of an 
American-sounding Unilateral Declaration of Independence (UDI).
Internationally  -that  is,  outside  of  Africa  - this  last  stand  of  old  style 
imperialism was represented by the USA in South Vietnam. But US domination 
of  South  Vietnam  also  represented  new  style  imperialism;  that  is  US-led 
imperialism ruling through puppet regimes. Thus in Vietnam lay a clue as to 
what  was  happening  to  the  Africa  of  the  sixties,  happening  that  is, to  its 
independence  from  classical  colonialism.  New  style  imperialism  was 
dependent on the ‘maturing’ of a class of natives, already conceived and born 
by colonialism, whose positions and aspirations as a group were not in any 
fundamental conflict with the money-juggling classes, the financial gnomes of 
the real centres of power like Zurich, the City of London and Wall Street. 
There is a Kikuyu word, Nyabaara, derived from Kiswahili Mnyapala which 
adequately describes 
82


--- PAGE 83 ---
these mediators between the imperialist bourgeoisie and the mass of workers 
and peasants in the former colonies. George Lamming in his novel,  In the 
Castle of My Skin, had called  it an overseer  class. The Boer racist  South 
African regime, not to be outdone, was to caricature the new process when they 
too went ahead to create their own Bantustans. Bantustanism! How innovative 
the Boers are! But in a sense, how true!
To the majority of African people in the new states, independence did not 
bring about fundamental changes. It was independence with the ruler holding a 
begging bowl and the ruled holding a shrinking belly. It was independence with 
a question mark. The age of independence had produced a new class and a new 
leadership that often was not very different from the old one. Black skins, 
white  masks?  White  skins,  black  masks?  Black  skins  concealing  colonial 
settlers’ hearts?  In each  of the  African  languages  there  was an  attempt  to 
explain the new phenomenon in terms of the ‘White’ and ‘Black’ symbols by 
which colonialism had been seen and fought out. But really, this was a new 
company,  a  company of  African  profiteers  firmly  deriving  their  character, 
power and inspiration from their guardianship of imperialist interests.
It was Frantz Fanon in his book Les Damnés de la Terre, first published in 
French in 1961 and later (1965) in English under the title The Wretched of the 
Earth, who  prophetically  summed  up  the  character  of  this  emergent 
phenomenon.  The  class  that  took  over  power  after  independence  was  an 
underdeveloped middle class which was not interested in putting the national 
economy on a new footing, but in becoming an intermediary between Western 
interests and the people, a handsomely paid business agent of the Western 
bourgeoisie:
Before independence, the leader generally embodies the aspirations of the 
people for independence, political liberty and national dignity. But as soon 
as independence is declared, far from embodying in concrete form the 
needs of the people in what touches bread, land and the restoration of the 
country to the sacred hands of the people, the leader will reveal his inner 
purpose: to become the general president of that company of profiteers 
impatient for their returns which constitutes the national bourgeoisie.
83


--- PAGE 84 ---
I have always argued that literature written by Africans, and particularly the 
literature of this period, cannot really be understood without, a proper and 
thorough reading of the chapter ‘Pitfalls of National Consciousness’ in Fanon’s 
The Wretched of the Earth. The literature of this period was really a series of 
imaginative footnotes to Frantz Fanon.
The  new  regimes  in  the  independent  states  increasingly  came  under 
pressure from external and internal sources. The external pressure emanated 
from the West who wanted these states to maintain their independence and 
non-alignment firmly on the side of Western economic and political interests. 
Where a regime showed a consistent desire to break away from the Western 
orbit, destabilisation through economic sabotage and political intrigue was set 
in motion. The US role in bringing down Lumumba and installing the Mobutu 
military regime in Zaire at the very beginning of the decade was a sign of 
things to come.
The  internal  pressure  came  from  the  people  who  soon  saw  that 
independence had brought no alleviation to their poverty and certainly no end 
to political repression. People saw in most of the new regimes dependence on 
foreigners, grand mismanagement and well-maintained police boots. To quote 
Fanon:  ‘scandals  are  numerous,  ministers  grow  rich,  their  wives  doll 
themselves up, the members of Parliament feather their nests and there is not a 
soul down to the simple policeman or the customs officer who does not join in 
the great procession of corruption.’
Some  military  intervened  either  at  the  promptings  of  the  West  or  in 
response to what they genuinely saw and felt as the moral decay. But they too 
did not know what else to do with the state except to run the status quo with the 
gun held at the ready - not against imperialism - but against the very people the 
army had ostensibly stepped in to save.
Thus the sixties, the age of independence, became the era of coups d’état 
whether Western-backed or in patriotic response to internal pressures. Zaire in 
1960  and  1965;  Nigeria  and  Ghana  in  1966;  Sierra  Leone,  Sudan,  Mali, 
Uganda: all these and more fell to the armies and by 1970 virtually every 
independent  state  had  experienced  a  measure  of  military coups,  attempted 
coups or threats of coups. The result was often intra-class fratricide as in the 
case of Zaire and Nigeria but one that dragged the masses into 
84


--- PAGE 85 ---
meaningless deaths, starvation and stagnation. Wars initiated by "Nyabaarars! 
The era of coups d’état also threw up two hideous monstrosities: Bokassa and 
Idi Amin, two initial darlings of the West, who were to make a total mockery of 
the notion of independence, but who also, in those very actions, made a truthful 
expression of that kind of independence. Hideous as they were, they were only 
symbols of all the broken promises of independence.
What  was  wrong  with  Africa?  What  had  gone  wrong?  The  mood  of 
disillusionment engulfed the writer and the literature of the period. It was 
Chinua Achebe in A Man of the People who correctly reflected the conditions 
that bred coups and rumours of coups.
The  fictional  narrator  captures  in  the  image of  a  house  the  deliberate 
murder of democracy by the new leadership:
We had all been in the rain together until yesterday. Then a handful of us - 
the smart and the lucky and hardly ever the best - had scrambled for the 
one shelter our former rulers left, and had taken it over and barricaded 
themselves in. And from within they sought to persuade the rest through 
numerous loudspeakers, that the first phase of the struggle had been won 
and that the next phase  - the extension of our house  - was even more 
important  and  called  for  new  and  original  tactics;  it  required  that  all 
argument should cease and the whole people speak with one voice and that 
any more  dissent  and  argument  outside  the  door  of  the  shelter  would 
subvert and break down the whole house.
A Man of the People, coming out at about the same time as the first Nigerian 
military coup, had shown that a writer could be a prophet. But other writings - 
particularly Ayi Kwei Armah’s The Beautyful Ones Are Not Yet Born, and Okot 
p’ Bitek’s Song of Lawino – were equally incisive in their horror at the moral 
decay in the new states. The writer responded to the decay by appealing to the 
conscience of the new class. If only they would listen! If only they would see 
the error of their ways! He pleaded, lamented, threatened, painted the picture of 
the disaster ahead, talked of a fire next time. He tried the corrective antidote of 
contemptuous laughter, ridicule, direct abuse with images of shit and urine, 
every filth imaginable. The writer often fell back upon the kind of revenge 
Marx once saw the 
85


--- PAGE 86 ---
progressive  elements  among the  feudal  aristocracy taking  against  the  new 
bourgeoisie  that  was  becoming  the  dominant  class  in  nineteenth  century 
Europe. They, the aristocracy, ‘took their revenge by singing lampoons on their 
new  master,  and  whispering  in  his  ears  sinister  prophecies  of  coming 
catastrophe’.
In this way arose feudal socialism; half lamentation, half lampoon; half 
echo of the past, half menace of the future; at times, by its bitter, witty and 
incisive  criticism,  striking  the  bourgeoisie  to the  very heart’s  core  but 
always ludicrous in its effect, through total incapacity to comprehend the 
march of history.
The Communist Manifesto
Thus the writer in this period was still limited by his inadequate grasp of the 
full dimension of what was really happening in the sixties: the international 
and national realignment of class forces and class alliances. What the writer 
often reacted to was the visible lack of moral fibre of the new leadership and 
not  necessarily the  structural  basis  of  that  lack  of  a  national  moral  fibre. 
Sometimes the writer blamed the people - the recipients of crimes - as well as 
the perpetrators of the crimes against the people. At times the moral horror was 
couched in terms perilously close to blaming it all on the biological character 
of  the  people.  Thus  although  the  literature  produced  was  incisive  in  its 
observation, it was nevertheless characterised by a sense of despair. The writer 
in this period often retreated into individualism, cynicism, or into empty moral 
appeals for a change of heart.
It was the third period, the seventies, that was to reveal what really had been 
happening in the sixties: the transition of imperialism from the colonial to the 
neo-colonial stage. On the international level, the US-engineered overthrow of 
the Allende regime in Chile showed the face of victorious neo-colonialism. The 
decade saw the clear ascendancy of US-dominated transnational financial and 
industrial  monopolies  in  most  of  Asia,  Africa  and  Latin  America.  This 
ascendancy was to be symbolised by the dominance of the IMF and the World 
Bank in the determination of the economies and hence the politics and culture 
of the affected countries in Asia, Africa and Latin America. The era saw the 
USA surround Africa 
86


--- PAGE 87 ---
with military bases or with some kind of direct US military presence all the 
way from Morocco  via  Diego  Garcia  to  Kenya,  Egypt  and  of  course  the 
Mediterranean Sea. The aims of the Rapid Deployment Forces formed in the 
same decade were unashamedly stated as interventionist in Third World affairs, 
i.e.  in  affairs  of  the  neo-colonies.  Indeed,  the  decade  saw  an  increasing 
readiness of former colonial powers to enter Africa militarily without even a 
trace of shame. The increasingly open, naked financial, industrial (e.g. Free 
Trade Zones etc), military and political interference of Western interests in the 
affairs of African countries with the active co-operation of the ruling regimes in 
the same countries, showed quite clearly that the so-called independence had 
only  opened  each  of  the  African  countries  to  wider  imperialist  interests. 
Dependence abroad, repression at home, became the national motto.
But if the seventies revealed more clearly the neo-colonial character of 
many of the African  countries,  the  seventies  also saw  very important  and 
eye-opening  gains  by the  anti-imperialist  struggles.  Internationally (outside 
Africa), the single most important event was the defeat of the USA in Vietnam. 
But there were other shattering blows against neo-colonialism: Nicaragua and 
Iran, for instance.
In Africa, the seventies saw a victorious resurgence of anti-imperialism. 
The armed struggles in Angola, Mozambique, Guinea-Bissau and Zimbabwe 
had clearly gained from errors of the earlier anti-colonial movements in the 
fifties. They could see the enemy much more clearly and they could clearly 
analyse their struggles in terms that went beyond just the question of colour 
and  race.  Their  enemy  was  imperialism  and  the  classes  that  allied  with 
imperialism. Within the independent African countries, coups d’état began to 
take on a more anti-imperialist and anti-neocolonial character.
Although  occurring  in  1981  and  1983  respectively,  Rawlings’ coup  in 
Ghana and Sankara’s in Burkina Faso (previously Upper Volta) are the better 
examples of this tendency. But a more telling symbol was the emergence in the 
seventies  of  a  people-based  guerrilla  movement  fighting  for  a  second 
independence. The armed liberation guerrilla movements in places like Uganda 
and Zaire may well come to stand to neo-colonialism what Kenya Land and 
Freedom Army and RN in Algeria stood to colonialism 
87


--- PAGE 88 ---
in the fifties. The phenomenon of university-educated youth and secondary 
school graduates opting to join workers and peasants in the bush to fight on a 
clear programme of a national democratic revolution as a first end necessary 
stage  for  a socialist  transformation is  something  new  in the  Africa  of  the 
seventies.  Whatever  their  ultimate  destiny,  these  post-colonial  guerrilla 
movements certainly symbolise the convergence of the worker’s hammer and 
the peasant’s machete or jembe with the pen and the gun.
The awakening to the realities of imperialism was reflected in some very 
important theoretical political breakthroughs in the works of Amilcar Cabral, 
Walter Rodney, Samir Amin, Dan Nabudere, Bala Mohamed, Nzongola-Ntalaja 
and in many papers emanating from university centres in many parts of the 
continent. Imperialism was becoming a subject of serious and even passionate 
academic debate and scholarly dissertations. The Dar es Salaam debate, now 
published as  Debate on Class, State and Imperialism, stands out. But other 
places like Ahmadu Bello University and Ife University in Nigeria, Nairobi 
University in Kenya,  and the  Universities  of Cape Coast and Ghana  were 
emerging as centres of progressive thought; but even outside the university 
campuses, progressive debate was raging and it is not an accident that the 
Journal of African Marxists should emerge in the seventies.
Once again this new anti-imperialist resurgence was reflected in literature. 
For the  writer from Mozambique, Angola, Guinea Bissau,  his content and 
imagery were clearly derived from the active struggles of the people. Even in 
the countries that became independent in the fifties and the sixties, the writer 
started  taking  a  more  and  more  critical  stand  against  the  anti-national, 
anti-democratic,  neo-colonial  character  of the ruling  regimes. He began  to 
connect these ills not just to the moral failings or otherwise of this or that ruler, 
but to the perpetuation of imperialist domination through the comprador ruling 
classes in Africa.
The writer in the seventies gradually began to take imperialism seriously. 
He was also against the internal classes, those new companies of profiteers that 
allied with imperialism. But the writer tried to go beyond just explanation and 
condemnation. One can sense in some of the writing of this period an edging 
towards  the  people  and  a  search  for  new  directions.  The  writer  in  the  
seventies was coming 
88


--- PAGE 89 ---
face to face with neo-colonialism. He was really a writer in a neo-colonial 
state. Further he was beginning to take sides with the people in the class 
struggle in Africa.
The  writer  who  edged  towards  the  people  was  caught  in  various 
contradictions. Where, for instance, did he stand in relation to the neo-colonial 
state in which he was a citizen, and within which he was trying to function?
A neo-colonial regime is, by its very character, a repressive machine. Its 
very being, in its refusal to break with the international and national structures 
of exploitation, inequality and oppression, gradually isolates it from the people. 
Its real power base resides not in the people but in imperialism and in the 
police  and  the  army.  To  maintain  itself  it  shuts  all  venues  of  democratic 
expression. It, for instance, resorts to one-party rule, and since in effect the 
party  is  just  a  bureaucratic  shell,  this  means  resorting  to  one  man  rule, 
despotism a la Marquez’s novel, The Autumn of the Patriarch! All democratic 
organisations are outlawed or else brought under the ruler, in which case they 
are emptied of any democratic life. Why then should the regime allow any 
democracy in the area of culture? Any democratic expression in the area of 
culture becomes a threat to such a regime’s very peculiar brand of culture: the 
culture  of  silence  and  fear  run  and  directed  from police  cells  and  torture 
chambers.
The Kenya that emerged from the seventies is a good illustration of the 
workings of a neo-colonial state. At the beginning of the decade Kenya was a 
fairly ‘open society’ in the sense that Kenyans could still debate issues without 
fear of prison. But as the ruling party under Kenyatta, and later under Moi, 
continued  cementing the neo-colonial links to the West, the Kenya  regime 
became  more  and  more  intolerant  of  any  views  that  questioned 
neo-colonialism. In the fifties, Kenyans had fought to get rid of  all foreign 
military presence from her soil. In 1980 the Kenyan authorities had given 
military  base  facilities  to  the  USA.  The  matter  was  not  even  debated  in 
Parliament. Kenyans learnt about it through debates in the US Congress. Now 
within the same decade which saw the Kenyan coast turned over for use by the 
US military machine, the Kenya regime had banned all centres of democratic 
debate.  Even  the  university  was  not  spared.  University  lecturers  were  
imprisoned or detained 
89


--- PAGE 90 ---
without trial;  among  them were writers like  Al Amin Mazrui and Edward 
Oyugi.
Another lecturer, but also a writer and Kenya’s foremost national historian, 
Maina wa Kinyatti, has served a prison sentence in a maximum security prison 
for doing intensive work on Mau Mau. Maina wa Kinyatti was educated in 
Kenya and in the United States of America. On returning to Kenya at the 
beginning  of  the  seventies,  he  joined  the  History Department  at  Kenyatta 
University College. He became very concerned that ten years after the Kenya
Land and Freedom Army had  -forced colonialism to retreat and allow 
Kenya a measure of self-rule and independence, no work had been done by 
Kenyan scholars on the actual history and literature of those who died that 
Kenya might be free. He set about collecting the songs and poems of the Mau 
Mau  era,  some  of  which  he  later  edited  into  a  book:  Thunder  From  the 
Mountain:  Mau  Mau  Patriotic  Songs.  He  also  started  work  on  the  whole 
anti-colonial resistance within the context of the Kenyan history of struggle 
from the nineteenth to twentieth centuries. The result? He languished in jail, 
going blind. [ Released October 1989 after 6 1/2 years.]
Over the same decade, the regime became very intolerant of theatre and 
any cultural  expression that sided  with the people. Kamiriithu  Community 
Education and Cultural Centre’s Open Air Theatre was razed to the ground. A 
number of plays were stopped. Kenyan writers like Micere Mugo, Ngugi wa 
Mirii, Kimani Gecau, were forced intoexile. In February 1985, the regime 
climaxed its decade of intolerance by bludgeoning 12 students to death, and 
150 others into hospital; 14[Released after serving their 6-month term in jail.] 
went to jail to join another 10 serving long jail terms of up to 10 years. Five 
others were tortured and subsequently sentenced from 6 to 12 months in jail for 
holding  an  interdenominational  prayer  meeting  in  day  time  on  an  open 
university sports ground.
How does a writer function in such a society? He can of course adopt silence or 
self-censorship, in which case he ceases to be an effective writer. Or he can 
become  a  state  functionary,  an  option  some  Kenyan  writers  have  now 
embraced, and once again cease to be an effective writer of the people. Or he 
may risk jail or exile, in which 
90


--- PAGE 91 ---
case  he is driven from the  very sources of his inspiration. Write  and risk 
damnation. Avoid damnation and cease to be a writer. That is the lot of the 
writer in a neo-colonial state.
There are other contradictions of a writer in a neo-colonial state. For whom 
does he write? For the people? But then what language does he use? It is a fact 
that the African writers who emerged after the Second World War opted for 
European languages. All the major African writers wrote in English, French 
and  Portuguese.  But  by and  large,  all  the  peasants  and  a  majority of  the 
workers - the masses - have their own languages.
Isn’t the writer perpetuating, at the level of cultural practice, the very 
neo-colonialism  he  is  condemning  at  the  level  of  economic  and  political 
practice?  For  whom  a  writer  writes is  a  question  which  has  not  been 
satisfactorily resolved by the writers in a neo-colonial state. For the African 
writer, the language he has chosen already has chosen his audience.
Whatever the language the writer has opted for, what is his relationship to 
the content? Does he see reality in its unchangingness or in its changingness? 
To see reality in stagnation or in circles of the same movements is to succumb 
to despair. And yet for him to depict reality in its revolutionary transformation 
from the standpoint of the people - the agents of change - is once again to risk 
damnation by the state. For a writer who is depicting reality in its revolutionary 
transformation is, in effect, telling the upholders of the status quo: even this too 
shall pass away.
I think I have said enough about the writer in the third period the seventies- 
to show that his lot, particularly when he may want to edge towards the people, 
is not easy.
In the world, the struggle between democratic and socialist forces for life and 
human progress on the one hand, and the imperialist forces for reaction and 
death on the other is still going on and it is bound to become more fierce. 
Imperialism is still the enemy of human kind and any blow against imperialism 
whether in the Philippines, El Salvador, Chile, South Korea is clearly a blow 
for democracy and change. In Africa, the struggle of the Namibian [Namibia is 
now free] people and of South African/Azanian people has intensified. And 
91


--- PAGE 92 ---
as the Zimbabwean,  Angolan, and Mozambican struggles  took the  African 
revolution a stage further than where it had been left by the FIN and the Kenya 
Land and Freedom Army in the fifties, in the same way the successful outcome 
of  the  Namibian and  South  African  peoples’ struggle  will  push  the  entire 
continent on to a new stage. In a special way, the liberation of South Africa is 
the key to the liberation of the entire continent from neo-colonialism.
Within the neo-colonial states, the anti-imperialist alliance of democratic 
forces  will  intensify  the  struggle  against  the  rule  of  the  alliance  of  the 
comprador  classes  and  imperialism.  There  will  be  more  and  more 
anti-imperialist coups of the Sankara type. There will be an increase in the 
Uganda type anti-neocolonial guerrilla movements. There will be greater and 
greater  call  and  demand  for  a  Pan-Africanism  of  the  proletariat  and  the 
peasantry through their progressive democratic organisation. Each new stage in 
the struggle for real independence, democracy and socialism will have learnt 
from the errors of the previous attempts, successes and even failures. We shall 
see a further heightening of the war against neocolonialism. For as in the days 
of colonialism, so now in the days of neo-colonialism, the African people are 
still struggling for a world in which they can control that which their collective 
sweat produces, a world in. which they will control the economy, politics sand 
culture to make their lives accord with where they want to go and who they 
want to be.
But as the struggle continues and intensifies, the lot of the writer in a 
neo-colonial state will become harder and not easier. His choice? It seems to 
me that the African writer now, the one who opts for becoming an integral part 
of the African revolution, has no choice but that of aligning himself with the 
people:  their  economic,  political  and  cultural  struggle  for survival.  In  that 
situation, he will have to confront the languages spoken by the people in whose 
service he has put his pen. Such a writer will have to  rediscover the real 
languages of struggle in the actions and speeches of his people, learn from their 
great heritage of orature, and above all, learn from their great optimism and 
faith  in  the  capacity  of  human  beings  to  remake  their  world  and  renew 
themselves. He must be part of the song the people sing as once again they take 
up  arms  to  smash  the  neo-colonial  state  to  complete  the  anti-imperialist 
national democratic revolution they had started in the fifties, and even earlier. 
92


--- PAGE 93 ---
A people united can never be defeated and the writer must be part and parcel of 
that revolutionary unity for democracy, socialism and the liberation of the 
human spirit to become even more human.
93


--- PAGE 94 ---
8 Resistance to Damnation
The Role of Intellectual Workers
The  liberation  of  South  Africa  is  the  key  to  the  social  liberation  of  the 
continent. Even our enemies know this. That is why they so tenaciously hold 
on to the key with guns and a racist ideology. But even as an adult, my talking 
about the survival of children is not an act of charity.
Children are the future of any society. If you want to know the future of a 
society look at the eyes of the children. If you want to maim the future of any 
society, you simply maim the children. Thus the struggle for the survival of our 
children is the struggle for the survival of our future. The quantity and quality 
of that survival is the measurement of the development of our society. Enslave 
the children and you enslave parents. Enslave the parents and you enslave 
children. Thus if you  enslave children, you are enslaving the survival and 
development of the entire society  - its present and its future. Survival and 
development are  an integrated  whole.  Survival  is the  pre-condition of any 
development. And development is the basis of our continued survival.
Let me  very briefly isolate the five crucial elements in that integrated 
whole:  physical  survival,  economic  survival,  political  survival,  cultural 
survival, and psychological (or identity) survival.
Let us first take physical survival and development. That the precondition 
of any human development is physical survival is obvious. But it also, needs 
saying. Even a new-born baby has mechanism of self-defence however fragile 
to ensure its survival. Mother and father will do anything to protect the young 
first  against  any harm from nature  -diseases, wild animals  etc  - and from 
human enemies. We have to be in order to be!
94


--- PAGE 95 ---
But physical survival is also dependent on food, clothes and shelter. We 
struggle with nature to procure the basic means of our survival: food, clothes 
and shelter. We produce the means of our life. Thus we ensure the economic 
survival, through production and distribution. We need the earth, we need our 
labour. We need tools. We produce, we create, we survive, we change, we 
develop.
But this condition of our physical and economic survival need regulation to 
ensure resolution of conflicts in a manner that would not threaten our survival. 
A society needs political survival - that is the retention of power in its hands - 
to regulate the life of that society in a manner beneficial to that society. The 
question of power, and of who wields this power-, and on whose behalf that 
power  is  wielded  is  crucial  as  a  guardian  of  its  physical,  and  economic 
survival.  The  power  to  decide  between  options,  alternatives,  tactics  and 
strategies for survival should be wielded by the society.
And then there is the question of cultural survival: education, languages, 
art, literature, music, dances. These are evolved in society. What holds that 
society together is the culture it develops in the course of its struggles for 
economic and political survival. Thus culture is not an extra growth, like say an 
extra finger. It is an integral part of our growth. It is a product of our growth. It 
is what a flower is to a tree. The important thing about a flower, as I have said 
in another context, is not just its beauty. A flower contains the seeds of the 
tree's future growth, its survival.
Culture carries the values, ethical, moral and aesthetic by which people 
conceptualise or see themselves and their place in history and the universe.
These values are the basis of a society's consciousness and outlook, the 
whole area of a society's make-up, its identity. A sense of belonging, a sense of 
identity is part of our psychological survival. Colonialism through racism tried 
to turn us into societies without heads. Racism, whose highest institutionalised 
form is apartheid, is not an accident. It is an ideology of control through divide 
and rule, obscurantism, a weakening of resistance through a weakening of a 
sense of who we are. Thus psychological survival is necessary. We need values 
that do not distort our identity, our conception of our rightful place in history, 
in the universe of the natural and human.
A sense of who we are in turn reacts on our values, on our cultural, 
95


--- PAGE 96 ---
political,  economic,  and  physical  being.  Psychological  survival  - identity  
survival - thus reacts on all the other levels of survival. Development is thus an 
integrated whole. When we talk of survival and development say of a child, we 
are talking about the development of the whole.
The five levels are true for the child as they are for the adult. Only the 
child is more vulnerable, at all those levels. A people are truly free when they 
control  all  the  tools,  all  the  instruments,  all  the  means  of  their  physical, 
economic, political, cultural and psychological survival. In short, when they 
control the means and context of their integrated survival and development. 
But in the Africa of the twentieth century, or for that matter the Africa of the 
last 400 years, that free integrated self-development had not been possible, has 
in fact been brutally prevented. What has threatened, thwarted, and prevented 
Africa's integrated survival?
First it has been the external factor of foreign invasion, occupation and 
control and second, the internal factor of collaboration with the external threat. 
Whether under Western slavery and the slave trade, under colonialism and 
today under neo-colonialism the two factors have interacted to the detriment of 
our being. The greedy chief and feudal elements collaborated with the slave 
dealer from Europe. The same story repeats itself under colonial invasion and 
occupations. Some greedy chiefs and other elements bred by the new colonial 
overlords, collaborated  with the main external imperialist factor. The story 
repeats itself, in a more painful way, under neo-colonialism.
This interplay between the external threat and internal collaborator is best 
seen in South Africa today. But I don't want to be vague about this external 
factor. For the last 400 years South Africa has been feeding Western Europe. 
After all, Vasco da Gama landed at the Cape in the fifteenth century. Today 
South Africa continues to feed and develop Western Europe and the USA. 
US-based  transnationals  are  the  dominant  factor  in  South  Africa.  Western 
interests are thus partners in apartheid. South Africa is itself a Frontline State - 
for Western interests. But that external factor (imperialism) is aided by internal 
collaborating forces.
Nowhere is this clearer than in Angola and Mozambique. The two states 
had correctly perceived the Enemy  - within and without. The examples of 
Angola and Mozambique producing integrated 
96


--- PAGE 97 ---
development  - thus providing an alternative model to the neocolonial model 
adopted by many who received their independence in the early sixties  - was 
going to be a real threat to those interests that had for centuries impoverished a 
continent.  MNR  and  UNITA had  to  be  created.  Who  supports  MNR  and 
UNITA today? Where do they get their diplomatic and material support? I am 
asking a rhetorical question. An internal collaborating force is being forced on 
Mozambique and Angola. For a neo-colony cannot be created without such 
collaborating  neo-slave  drivers!  Imperialism  led  by  USA  wants  to  turn 
Mozambique and Angola into neo-colonies!
In short, Western interests are behind apartheid which in turn attempts a 
racist hegemony over Southern Africa. In .the process these interests have 
threatened  our  physical  survival  (through  killings),  our  economic  survival 
through land confiscation and the plunder of natural and human resources, or 
through destabilisation, our political survival through direct brutal occupation 
or through collaborating elements like MNR/UNITA and our cultural survival 
and  psychological  survival  through  the  control  of  the  media, the  arts  and 
television.  In  short  through  control  of  the  instruments  of  collective 
self-definition. Image control: this is the phrase. We have even been stripped of 
our  names,  and  languages,  the  two  immediate  symbols  of  the  means  of 
self-definition.
I have so far concentrated on the forces threatening our survival, the forces 
of our exploitation and control. But what of the forces ensuring our survival? 
They go by the name of resistance. What has ensured our survival is because 
for the last 400 years African people have waged resistance. And this resistance 
necessarily had to be at all the levels we have been talking about. We have 
created resistance armies to fight for our physical survival. We have organised 
in order to seize back the means of our economic survival. We have fought 
back and organised to seize back the means of our political survival. And we 
have fought back to seize back the means of our self-definition. This resistance 
today is being carried to even higher levels by the ANC and all the other 
progressive liberation forces in South Africa.
The degree, intensity, quality and success of this resistance has always 
been dependent on how all the five levels have been seen as an integrated 
whole.
But the success of the resistance is also dependent on an internal 
97


--- PAGE 98 ---
factor and an  external factor. Put it this way. The main antagonism today is 
between imperialist enemy classes and the internal resistance classes. But just 
as imperialism, the external factor is helped by traitorous internal elements. So 
the resistance forces need an alliance with external friends of human liberation. 
Thus imperialism and its internal allies and the national liberation forces and 
their external allies are the two contending forces in Africa.
Children in Africa best exemplify the struggle between the two contending 
forces in Africa today: the forces of our demise on the one hand, and the forces 
of our survival on the other.
The children have been the most vulnerable victim of the forces of our 
demise. That is very clear. But the children are also part of the resistance. 
Soweto children have become a metaphor of the best and the most heroic in 
our  resistance  history.  Mozambican  children,  in  their  flight  and  refusal  to 
succumb show we can look to the future with hope. We shall overcome!!
Indeed  this  resistance  will  eventually  succeed.  And  it  will  be  finally 
successful when people are in total control of all the means of their physical, 
economical, political,  cultural,  psychological,  and  spiritual  survival.  So  we 
have to strengthen our capacity, and that of our children, to resist the evil.
When and where do the arts and artists come into this? From the above 
analysis it is clear that artists are part of the image making processes. They 
draw the pictures of the world. The arts and artists and intellectual workers can 
draw pictures of the world in harmony with the needs of the forces of human 
destruction; or in harmony with the forces of resistance and survival. And here 
there are no neutral images. If you find an MNR bandit cutting the limbs off a 
child, what neutral song can you sing about it? What neutral image can you 
draw?  What  about  the  picture  of  the  forces  supporting  MNR  or  those 
supporting the child? What neutral song can you sing? What neutral image can 
you draw; what neutral philosophy can you articulate? Yes, what neutral prayer 
can you give?
Art and artists can draw pictures of the universe of our struggle that instill 
strength, clarity, hope, to our struggle to realise visions of a new tomorrow as 
embodied in the struggle and survival of our children; or pictures that instill 
fear and despondence or give rational, artistic legitimacy to the world of the 
oppressor-nations and 
98


--- PAGE 99 ---
classes. Artistic and intellectual ideological struggles, are part of the overall 
struggle for survival and development.
Finally what is to be done? We must not mislead the people as to who the 
real enemy is! MNR, UNITA, Apartheid, these are particular manifestations of 
our enemy. But who arms them? For whose benefit? The Western forces behind 
the Contras in Nicaragua are exactly the same force behind apartheid and the 
MNR/UNITA banditry.
While the internal resistance factor can confront these forces, the friends 
and allies of the resistance must bring pressure to bear on those governments 
that  ally  with  apartheid,  the  MNR  and  UNITA.  Even  within  Africa,  the 
neo-colonial regimes that ally with apartheid and harbour spokesmen of MNR 
and UNITA bandits should be exposed. The democratic struggle in the Western 
world, the peace movement in the world, the anti-racist movements in the West 
and the anti-neo-colonial movements in Africa must together support the forces 
of resistance in Southern Africa. In other words, there should be a two-pronged 
attack:  bring  pressure  to  bear  on  these  governments  that  collaborate  with 
apartheid; and support every effort of the Frontline States and the liberation 
forces in South Africa to strengthen their continuing capacity for resistance.
But  within- our  field  as  artists,  writers  and  intellectuals,  let  our  Pen, 
Brushes and Voices articulate the dreams of all the children of Southern Africa 
for a world in which their integrated survival and development is ensured. Let 
us  sing  songs  of  the  possibility of a  new tomorrow, a new  world.  A luta 
continua!
99


--- PAGE 100 ---
9 The Role of the Scholar 
in the Development 
of African Literatures
Scholars and works of scholarship have had an important influence on the 
development of African literatures. Some of the major African writers started 
off  as  would-be  scholars.  They  began  writing  as  students  or  teachers  on 
university campuses or on school compounds. Often their inspiration, at least 
initially, came from the textbooks they were reading; many of them tried to 
write stories, poems or plays imitating the styles of their favourite textbooks. 
Scholars  have  also  made  an  impact  on  these  new  literatures  by 
commenting on them. Writers have been affected by critical assessments of 
their  work,  and  so  too  have  readers,  whose  responses  to  a  book  can  be 
conditioned by what they read about it. So the scholar, as a critic, has been in a 
position to influence the direction of the literature he comments upon. He can 
play a vital role as an interpreter of African fictions and realities. 
The  question  is,  how  can  he  perform  his  role  more  effectively?  The 
obvious answer, of course, is that he must always be committed to the truth - 
that is, be faithful to what he sees, what he hears, what he touches. But how he 
perceives things will depend on the base from which he operates. The act of 
seeing can be hampered or limited by the point at which one is located when 
trying to see. For instance, twenty people sitting around a table in a room will 
see slightly different things, depending on where they sit in relation to others 
and to those objects. If these people were to be asked to describe the room, 
each would strive to express the truth about what he saw, but since all of them 
would be observing from different angles of vision, they might end up with 
twenty different descriptions 
100


--- PAGE 101 ---
of the same room. And this in turn could lead people outside the room to 
suspect them of telling lies, for how else could there be so many conflicting 
stories about the same place?
The base I am talking about need not be a physical locality. It can also be 
the social base from which one is looking at literary or historical reality. This 
base too can affect a person's vision and be decisive as to what features are 
highlighted  or  not.  If  one  reads  commentaries  on  African  literature,  for 
instance, one occasionally will find two critics saying things about a literary 
work  that  are  totally  irreconcilable.  If  one  looks  very  carefully  at  their 
statements, one will discover that the base of their disagreement does not really 
reside in the text but rather in the social positions from which they are viewing 
the text.
So let me re-state the two factors that do affect scholars and scholarship: 
faithfulness to what is being observed; and the social or class base from which 
the scholar is viewing reality.
But there is a third factor, a very important factor, and that is the attitude of the 
scholar to that which he has observed from his chosen base. Scholars must always 
strive to be conscious of the attitude they develop toward the object of their 
observation. Assuming that they have opted for the kind of social base that will 
afford them the widest possible angle of vision so that they can see clearly and 
record clearly, they must still be alert to their attitudes toward that which they are 
viewing.
Now  one  thing  affecting  the  development  of  African  literature  is 
imperialism, the most important social force in Africa in this century. But most 
scholars in African literature have refused to recognise that there is such a force 
as imperialism. Indeed, if it is discussed at all, usually it is to dismiss it as 
phrase-mongering work of politicians only. Such literary scholars tend to say, 
'Oh,  that's  politics.  That's  really  not  for  us.'  Scholars  in  other  disciplines 
-economics and politics, for instance - have long recognised imperialism as a 
social force in Africa, but literary scholars are suspicious of it. When it creeps 
into academic studies, they claim that such studies are not really accept- able as 
literary scholarship but are political scholarship, and so on. Yet imperialism, 
both  in  its  colonial  and  neo-colonial  stages,  is  the  one  force  that  affects 
everything in Africa - politics, economics, culture, absolutely every aspect of 
human life. African literature itself has grown and developed in response to 
imperialism.
One of the most obvious ways in which imperialism has affected 
101


--- PAGE 102 ---
the development of African literature is in language choice. During the colonial 
stage of Western imperialism in Africa, African languages were suppressed and 
European  languages  were  deliberately  given  a  status  that  made  them  the 
inevitable vehicle of African peoples' self-definition. [ For a fuller discussion 
of this point, see my book Decolonising the Mind.]
This has resulted in an enormous contradiction. These languages may be 
the official languages in Africa today but they are not the languages of the 
majority of people inhabiting Africa. The vast majority in each nationality  - 
that is, the  peasants and the  workers  - still  use their own languages. Yet, 
African writers feel it necessary and natural to write in European languages 
about African peasants and workers.
Thus, a scholar is immediately confronted with the question of identity: 
what is African literature? Because today it is generally expected that Africans 
will  write  in  European  languages,  my  own  attempts  to  write  in  African 
languages have prompted interesting reactions from some scholars. People will 
say, 'Oh, but this literature won't be available to us. Why are you becoming so 
chauvinistic?' One senses in these remarks the assumption that in writing in an 
African language one is departing from what is normal and behaving in a 
manner that is abnormal. In fact, abnormality has been turned into normality. 
That which is normal in all other civilisations, in all other societies, in all other 
phases in history is transformed into abnormality. Once reality is perverted so 
totally, everyone begins to see things upside-down. This topsy-turvy vision has 
been convenient for 'African' literature scholars who have been spared the 
necessity of having to learn African languages in order to come to terms with 
the literature produced and the realities embodied in those languages.
In addition to 'creating these contradictions and distortions, imperialism 
has led to the active repression of African literature and to the persecution of 
writers, artists and scholars in several African countries. During the colonial 
era,  this  was  a  norm.  But  how  does  one  explain  this  persecution  in  the 
post-colonial era? Basically, it has to do with the class character of the national 
leadership. The African bourgeoisie that inherited the flag from the departing 
colonial powers was created within the cultural womb of imperialism. That 
102


--- PAGE 103 ---
is, it was a bourgeoisie with a mentality, an outlook, which was in harmony 
with the outlook of the bourgeoisie in the colonising countries. So even after 
they inherited the flag, their mental outlook, their attitudes toward their own 
societies,  toward  their  own  history,  toward  their  own  languages,  toward 
everything national, tended to be foreign; they saw things through eyeglasses 
given them by their European bourgeois mentors.
As  a  consequence,  the  economic,  political  and  cultural  structures  of 
colonialism have more or less remained intact. There has been no dismantling 
of the colonial state. The result has been the gradual political alienation of the 
ruling  elite  in  these  countries.  And  the  way  they  have  responded  to  this 
political alienation has been by repression. They have been making sure that all 
centres of democratic expression or opposition are crushed, for this is the only 
way they can maintain themselves in power.
Remember that in this they have not been practising anything new. It has 
been very much in character with them, who are themselves the products of 
imperialism, because their image of power derives from the colonial past and 
their exercise of power is therefore modelled on colonial practices. During the 
colonial period there was no democracy; there was only repression. So the 
notion these neocolonial leaders have of power comes straight from the very 
womb from which they emerged as a class.
Their repression does not choose only politicians or political activists as 
targets. When these regimes shut off avenues of democratic expression, they 
suppress every aspect of life. This is where cultural workers come into .the 
picture. Literature, which often carries within it seeds of revolt and seeds of 
human  affirmation, now comes to be seen as a threat.  So after they have 
suppressed parliament, after they have banned people-based political parties, 
after they have put opponents of neo-colonialism in jail, why should they give 
free expression to that other voice, the cultural voice which is articulating the 
same  anti-imperialist  position  but  inbetween  hard  covers?  Why allow  that 
voice to be heard? Why allow it in theatre, in poetry, in song? So cultural 
activity becomes  increasingly a  target  for  wholesale  political  and  military 
repression.
A good example of this kind of cultural repression can be seen today in 
Kenya, a country which for a long time was painted as a shining example of 
stability and democracy in Africa. So great was 
103


--- PAGE 104 ---
Kenya's reputation that when university lecturers, scholars like you and me, 
were thrown in jail - some of them detained without trial, others put away for 
ten years for doing no more than discharging what we are now discussing as 
the responsibilities of the scholar the international outcry was minimal. These 
scholars  and their students are still  in jail  today.  The majority of Kenya's 
scholarly community have kept silent in face of this neo-colonial tyranny.
I would have liked to see more scholars, both in and outside the country, 
particularly those researching on Kenya and on Africa, come out more strongly 
and  more  solidly  in  aid  of  their  colleagues  in  the  jails  of  the  Kenya 
neo-colonial regime. This is part of their responsibility as scholars. But I have 
come across some who were more worried about their visas into the country 
to-do research on the Kenyan situation than in expressing even the faintest 
concern about their counterparts.
In the end everything depends on the attitudes we adopt toward what we 
see. In terms of the interpretation of literature, we will project our political 
views on what we read. A scholar or critic who in real life is suspicious of 
people who fight for liberation will be suspicious of characters in a novel or 
play who are  freedom fighters. His critique  of them as characters will be 
conditioned  by how he feels about  such  people  in real  life.  Similarly,  his 
attitude  to  the  literary  depiction  of  repression  and  the  persecution  of 
progressive writers and scholars, will be in harmony with what he feels about 
those processes in real life.
My  own  view  is  that  scholarship  will  be  able  to  contribute  to  the 
development of African literatures only if scholars manage to free themselves 
from limiting angles of vision. To accomplish this they will have to adopt a 
social base that enables them to see, hear, smell and taste more accurately. And 
I would hope that as a result of adopting that kind of social base, they would 
also form attitudes that would encourage them to raise their voice in real life 
against the repression of scholars, writers and artists in Africa today, be it in 
neo-colonies  like  Kenya  or  in  the  older  colonies  like  South  Africa  and 
Namibia.
In a situation where one class or nation is sitting on other classes and 
nations, there are only two types of scholars: those on the side of oppression 
and those on the side of resistance. Neutrality in such a situation is a myth; or, 
rather, it means that such a scholar is 
104


--- PAGE 105 ---
basically on the side of the bully. Hence the importance of scholars recognising 
(or refusing to be blind to) the continuing Western imperialist stranglehold on 
Africa albeit in a neo-colonial form  -that is, a form that allows the Western 
bourgeoisie  to  continue  fattening  on  Africa's  wealth  through  the  political 
alliance of an armed  - mercenary, really  - native ruling clique installed and 
maintained by the West in the first place.
A consistent anti-imperialist position  - that is, a position that struggles 
against  or  that  exposes  the  continued  neo-colonial  control  of  African 
economics and cultures by the Western bourgeoisie - is the minimum necessary 
for a committed, responsible scholarship in Africa, or anywhere in the `Third' 
World. Certainly both African literature and Afro-European literature cannot be 
understood outside the framework of consistent anti-imperialism.
105


--- PAGE 106 ---
10 Port-colonial Politics 
& Culture
Culture in Kenya, even during the colonial times, has always been an important 
theatre of political confrontation.
The infamous Berlin conference of 1884 saw the beginnings of formal 
British influence in Kenya, but the country was not really colonised until 1895. 
Of course it wasn't given to them. The British colonised Kenya by force. But 
right from the start, military and subsequently political domination went hand 
in hand with cultural repression. The route to effective control lay through 
cultural dominance. Wherever and whenever there were communal or national 
festivals, which of course meant a gathering of peoples, these were stopped. A 
good example was the Itulka ceremony in central Kenya which was banned by 
the British colonial authorities in 1925. The Itulika festival was held every 
thirty years or so to mark the handing over of power from one generation to 
another. This was enacted through songs, poetry and drama. So the ban meant 
the suppression of a whole cultural heritage that had taken generations to build. 
Under the colonial rule, then, native cultures were repressed while, through the 
school system, other imported traditions were encouraged. For instance, in the 
school  that  I  went  to,  Scottish  country dances  were  allowed  even  as  the 
so-called tribal dances were banned.
One of the most important aspects of our pre-colonial literature was the 
oral tradition. Prior to the missionary presence in the country, there were very 
few languages, apart from Kiswahili, which had been reduced to writing. The 
oral tradition has always been very rich and it is not surprising that it was the 
one most utilised by the anti-colonial forces to make statements of resistance. 
Hence it was 
106


--- PAGE 107 ---
the oral tradition and the artists who operated within it that were  the objects of 
colonial wrath. For instance in 1921, Harry Thuku, a leader of the workers' 
movement, was arrested and about 150 people killed at a march demanding his 
release. This confrontation was recorded in songs that in turn became very 
popular. One of the songs was called Kanyegenyuri. It was very beautiful, very 
well constructed, with very strong, colourful and erotic images describing the 
arrest of Harry Thuku and the demands for his release. It was mostly sung and 
danced by women and it became so powerful a statement of protest that it was 
banned by the colonial authorities. There was another called Muthirigu. Again, 
a powerful combination of song, poetry and dance, mostly by young men. This 
became very popular particularly in central Kenya. It was also banned. Many 
people were actually arrested and put in prison for singing and dancing it. One 
of the verses defies threats of arrests and imprisonment:
Even when we go to prison 
We shall still dance Muthirigu.
Both Kanyegenyuri and Muthirigu are good examples of the culture of the oral 
tradition as a theatre of anti-colonial resistance, against colonial oppression.
Writers  and  books however were  not  spared.  Between 1952  and  1962 
political resistance took the form of armed struggle and this was led by the 
Mau Mau. This phase of the struggle had been preceded by a kind of cultural 
renaissance. Newspapers, for instance, and small publishing houses flourished. 
Books of poems and songs, in African languages, were brought out. It was a 
period of a literary upsurge. The energy came from the entire anti-colonial 
movement. Not surprisingly, when a state of emergency was declared in 1952, 
culture came under siege. Many books were banned. All the small presses 
publishing in African languages were closed down. All these books of poetry 
and songs were lost to Kenyans. Writers of the banned books were imprisoned 
without trial. The most prominent of them was Gakaara wa Wanjau. He wrote 
in the Gikuyu language during the colonial times and he continues to do so in 
the post-colonial period. As a writer, he has suffered both in the colonial era, 
detained without trial for nine years, and in post-colonial Kenya, imprisoned 
without trial for a month, badly tortured and then forced into a mysterious car 
107


--- PAGE 108 ---
accident. He survived it. He is therefore a very good example of political and 
cultural repression in Kenya, in both times, colonial and post-colonial. His fate 
symbolises the link between the two periods.
Post-colonial  Kenya,  economically  and  politically,  saw  in  reality  a 
continuation of colonial structures. Colonial society can be looked at as a social 
pyramid with the people divided on racial lines and occupying the different 
zones. The narrow part at the top was occupied by the white settler community, 
the middle part by the Asian community, and the broad base by the Africans. 
Now you can think of independence as simply the removal of the racial barriers 
to social mobility but the pyramid structure remaining the same. Some Africans 
could now climb up the pyramid. to the middle and top zones. But there was 
hardly any mobility downwards. In other words the white community still 
occupies the room at the top, and the Asian community the middle zone. In 
short although there has been some movement upwards for some Africans arid 
Asians, with some of them occupying positions of real economic and political 
power, the colonial social structure remained essentially the same. Now this 
has resulted in the political alienation of the majority of the base. The base 
remained dissatisfied.  The  very things that  made  the  people  take  up  arms 
against colonialism - external domination and internal repression - still exist.
This has been reflected in Kenyan culture, for instance in the kind of 
programmes encouraged by the post-colonial regimes. It is a culture that has 
reflected  the  dependence  of  the  Kenyan'  economy  and  politics  on  outside 
influence.  Western  cultural  dominance  has  been  underwritten  by  the 
post-colonial political practices, for instance by what has been allowed on 
television, on film, and in educational programmes. What has happened in the 
area of language education and policy is a good example of this tendency. 
Before independence, African languages were taught for the first four years of 
the students' primary education. But after independence, African languages 
were abolished in schools. For years, until the policy was reversed, Kenyans 
were taught English from the nursery to university. One can imagine how hard 
it must have been for all those children. They were being programmed in the 
English language so that there was a complete break between the language they 
were actually using in their own homes, and the languages they were using in 
schools  to  conceptualise  the  world.  Today there  is  a  whole  generation  of 
Kenyan youth 
108


--- PAGE 109 ---
who live between two worlds. They may be perfect in the English language but 
the majority culture of post-colonial Kenya in which they live and work is not 
an English-speaking culture.
The result of this economic, political and cultural alienation of the majority 
from their post-colonial rulers has been a perfect replica of colonial practices. 
In order for the post-colonial regimes to maintain themselves in power they 
have had to repress democracy. They ensure that the people do not have much 
leeway in criticising, in organising, and even in simply expressing a different 
viewpoint. There can only be one viewpoint - that of the ruling regime. If they 
allow democratic practices, particularly in the electoral process, the people 
might express their dissatisfaction by returning to parliament a different party 
or leadership. Kenya is now a one-party state[Since  this talk was given, political 
parties have been allowed but still under repressive conditions.] with all the other political 
and social organisations banned or else integrated into the ruling party. It does 
not take too much imagination to see how this has affected culture. If it cannot 
allow people to 1 express democracy in political life, the regime will certainly 
not allow democratic measures in the cultural life of the community. If there is 
a policy like the one we have in Kenya today where more than five people 
cannot meet without a police licence, then this automatically affects cultural 
practices  as  well.  People  cannot  meet  for  a  cultural  activity,  any cultural 
activity, without a licence. Whether they are meeting to write, to produce plays 
or to dance, the very fact of their having to have a licence in order to gather 
will adversely affect their creativity.
Thus, even what has happened in the culture of post-colonial Kenya is 
really a reproduction of colonial times. I will now cite a few examples. Songs 
were subversive in colonial times. Today songs have been found to be the most 
subversive  element  of  Kenyan  national  life.  In  July  1990  for  instance 
musicians were among those arrested and imprisoned simply because of their 
music. Many of the songs they sang were inspired by events in Muoroto, a 
small urban area of Nairobi, where a number of the dwellers were killed by the 
police. The government denied that there had been any killings. It even denied 
that there had been any fighting between the police and the people. Yet the 
people had seen it all. The musicians sang about the plight of the dwellers. 
Some of the songs had been couched in terms 
109


--- PAGE 110 ---
of heaven and earth, devils and angels, the deadly combat between God and 
Satan. They were received and interpreted by the people in very earthly terms, 
certainly one not to the liking of the regime. In colonial times religious groups 
which  had  songs  that  carried  a  social  message  were  objects  of  colonial 
repression. The same thing has been happening in post-colonial Kenya.
But it is in theatre that the struggle has most intensified. Indeed theatre and 
the place it has come to occupy in the political arena in post-colonial Kenya 
can  only  be  compared  with  a  similar  position  literature  occupied  in 
nineteenth-century Russia. Because of the repressive character of the Tsarist 
regime, literature became the cultural voice of the people. In between the hard 
covers of a literary text, characters could talk and argue about matters that no 
political party could talk about openly. This may explain why Russian literature 
came  to  be  so  highly  valued  in  the  country.  In  some  ways  theatre  in 
post-colonial Kenya has come to occupy a similar position: with the banning of 
political parties and social organisations, theatre became the only arena outside 
the church and the mosque where two or more characters could argue out 
issues openly. People would go to the theatre expecting aesthetic packages of 
entertainment, but they would also find issues that were affecting their lives 
being  debated.  Not  surprisingly  the  post-colonial  regimes  followed  the 
footsteps of their colonial predecessors and came down heavily on the theatre.
In 1976, I was a member of a group that produced a play called The Trial 
of Dedan Kimathi. We wanted to use the Kenya National Theatre, but at that 
time it was dominated by settler or allied settler interests with productions that 
included  musicals  such as  Annie Get Your Gun,  The King and I, Alice in 
Wonderland, and Jesus Christ, Superstar. We even had problems in securing 
space in the building. The struggle became so intense that it was taken up in 
newspaper  articles.  But  even  after  the  The  Trial  of  Dedan  Kimathi was 
produced at the National Theatre, the director of the play, Seth Adagala, and I 
were  called  to  CID  headquarters  and  were  specifically  warned  against 
interfering with European Theatre. In fact we had not interfered with European 
Theatre  qua  European  Theatre.  We  were  only  guilty  of  offering  Kenyan 
alternatives.
The difficulties with securing space at the National Theatre for Kenyan 
African plays, in part, made the Department of Literature 
110


--- PAGE 111 ---
at the University of Nairobi decide it would be better to take theatre to the 
people.  Why  quarrel  over  a  building  anyway?  They  developed  what  had 
already been tried at Makerere in- Uganda long before - a travelling theatre. It 
was to be a free travelling theatre that would take plays to all parts of the 
country.  This  popularised  theatre  quite  significantly.  In  1977  some  of  us 
actually moved into the countryside. We worked at the University of Nairobi 
for a living but in theatre we worked at Kamiriithu village where peasants and 
workers became involved in producing a play called  1 Will Marry When 1 
Want. The  play which  reflected  the  contemporary social  conditions  of  the 
working people as well as their history of resistance became very popular. I 
have written  about this experience in several  of my books, particularly in 
Detained: A Writer's Prison Diary, Barrel of a Pen and Decolonising the Mind. 
The play was banned and I myself was put in detention without trial between 
December 1977 and December 1978.
The repressive measures in the area of theatre became even more marked 
in 1982. After I came out of prison we tried to do another play called Mother 
Sing  For  Me by the  same group  of  peasants  and  workers.  We  wanted  to 
perform at the National Theatre. This time we were not even allowed to get 
onto the premises. We were locked out with the police waiting outside to see if 
we would force our way into the theatre or become involved in any rioting. So 
we moved to the University of Nairobi and continued to hold what we called 
public rehearsals which were of course open to everybody. There we were able 
to hold about ten performances before the police once again moved in and 
locked  us  out  of  the  University of  Nairobi.  Thereafter  the  police  went  to 
Kamiriithu village itself and razed the entire community theatre to the ground 
and banned any theatre events in the entire area. Our group was banned.
There are a few other examples all occurring in 1982.  Muntu by Joe de 
Graft, which had been commissioned by All-Africa Conference of Churches in 
1976 was now banned because it was allegedly talking about violence. A play 
written by some school children was banned and some of the students who had 
written the script suspended from the school. Al Amin Mazrui, the Kenyan 
linguist and playwright and a lecturer at Kenyatta University was imprisoned 
without trial three weeks after his own play,  Cry for Justice, opened at the 
University of Nairobi. But of course since 1982 there have 
111


--- PAGE 112 ---
been  more  plays,  particularly  those  in  African  languages,  stopped  by  the 
regime.
Poets  and  other  writers  have  not  escaped  the  politics  of  culture  in 
post-colonial  Kenya.  One  of  our  leading  poets.  Abdulatif  Abdulla,  was 
imprisoned for three  years  in 1969 for writing and circulating  a pamphlet 
called:  Kenya, Where Are We Heading To? Asking questions is a dangerous 
exercise in a post-colonial society. You would think that all this would cripple 
Kenyan Literature?
In a strange kind of way these repressive conditions have seen a rebirth of 
a kind of national literature in the country. For instance the theatre which has 
developed  under  these  conditions  has  been  very  progressive  in  form  and 
content.  Jails  have  produced  a  whole  tradition  of  prison  literature.  When 
Abdulatif Abdulla was imprisoned, he wrote poems later published as a book 
under the  title  Voice  of  Agony, and  which,  ironically,  later  won the Jomo 
Kenyatta prize for literature. When I was imprisoned I wrote the novel Devil 
on the Cross. Some of you may know that it was then that I decided not to 
write any more plays or creative works in the English language; that I would in 
future write in Gikuyu and other African languages. This decision and the 
debate arising from it have revived the tradition of writing in African languages 
in Kenya, although it is still not the dominant trend. In 1986 following another 
wave of intensified repression, many more academics were imprisoned. Some 
of them, on coming out, are writing their memoirs.
There are many other writers who have been forced into exile and no doubt 
this will produce its own kind of literature. For those who remain, there is the 
question of self-censorship. They have to be very careful about what they say 
and how they say it. The extreme form of self-censorship is silence. There is of 
course the category of writers who have chosen to work with the repressive 
regime. In fact one of our leading writers in Kenya is a Minister of Culture.
And so in post-colonial Kenya one cannot really speak of uniformity of 
writers, because they don't actually occupy the same position vis-à-vis cultural 
repression. They have taken very contradictory and often conflicting positions. 
One can only meaningfully say there are two types of writers in Kenya today. 
There are the official writers, or officially approved writers; and the unofficial 
ones, that is those who are not accepted by the government.
112


--- PAGE 113 ---
All  this  demonstrates  the  complexity  of  the  politics  of  culture  in  a 
post-colonial society. The situation cannot be properly understood outside the 
framework of the neo-colonial economic and political structures which are, in 
effect, colonial structures under another name.
113


--- PAGE 114 ---
11 In Moi's Kenya, 
History is Subversive
Why is history subversive?
Human beings make history by their actions on nature and on themselves. 
History is therefore about human struggle: first with nature as the material 
source of the wealth they create, food, clothing and shelter; and secondly, 
struggle with other humans over the control of that wealth. Labour, human 
labour, is the key link between the two struggles. It is labour, with all the 
instruments  and  accumulated  skills,  that  makes  wealth  out  of  nature.  The 
struggle  among  humans  is  over  control  of  the  entire  organisation  of  the 
production, exchange and distribution of the fruits of labour.
Development in society is brought about by changes in the human struggle 
with  nature;  and  in  the  social  struggle.  The  changing  social  formations, 
institutions, values, outlook, reflect the ever-changing relationships between 
labour  and  nature,  and  between  social  groups  in  one  nation  and  between 
nations.
Change, movement, is hence the eternal theme in history. It is the universal 
expressed in all the particularities of the various nations and people of the earth 
over the centuries. Therefore no society is ever static: there is movement all the 
time  since  the  two  relations  or  struggles  are  ever  active.  History  is  ever 
reminding The Present of any society: even you shall come to pass away. 
Tomorrow will be The Present; and The Present will be The Yesterday.
But it is precisely because history is the result of struggle and tells of 
change  that  it  is  perceived  as  a  threat  by  all  the  ruling  strata  in  all  the 
oppressive  exploitative  systems.  Tyrants  and  their  tyrannical  systems  are 
terrified at the sound of the wheels of history. History is 
114


--- PAGE 115 ---
subversive. And it is because it is actually subversive of the existing tyrannical 
system that there have been attempts to arrest it. But how can one arrest the 
wheels of history? So they try to rewrite history, make up  official history; if 
they can put cottonwool in their ears and in those of the population, maybe 
they and the people will not hear the real call of history, will not hear the real 
lessons of history.
Kenya,  under  British  colonialism and  now under  neo-colonialism, is a 
good example.
If there is one consistent theme in the history of Kenya over the last four 
hundred years or so (since the sixteenth century), it is surely one of the Kenyan 
peoples' struggle against foreign domination. At various times and places, they 
have fought against the Arab, Portuguese and British invaders. The British 
invasion in the nineteenth century and their colonial occupation in the first half 
of the twentieth century were accompanied by the heroic resistance of Kenyan 
people  of  all  nationalities.  Some  names,  like  those  of  Waiyaki,  Koitalel, 
Hassan,  Me  Katilili  have  become  legends.  Brilliant  battles  were  fought. 
Fortifications built by Bukusu nationality around Mount Elgon, for instance, 
still stand as a reminder of Kenya's heroic tradition of resistance and struggle.
And  during  the  years  of  British  settler  occupation,  the  resistance  was 
continued, acquiring a new character because a new class, a wage-earning class 
(a proletariat) was born with colonial capitalism. The new working class joined 
hands with peasants and tried to forge links with the workers and peasants of 
all  the  nationalities  to  overcome  the  divide-and-rule  tactics  of  British 
colonialism. The highest peak of this heroic tradition of resistance was the 
armed struggle initiated and carried out by the Kenya Land Freedom Army 
(KLFA), otherwise widely known as Mau Mau. The supreme leader of Kenya 
Land Freedom Army was Dedan Kimathi.
But  of  course  there  has  been  another  tradition:  Sell-Out,  a  traitorous 
tradition  whose  highest  expression  was  in  the  actions  of  the  homeguard, 
loyalist  collaborators  with  the  British  enemy,  which  are  continued  in  the 
neo-colonial system suffocating millions of Kenyans today.
British colonialism tried to cover up the true history of Kenya. They tried 
to rewrite Kenya's history to justify their invasion and subsequent occupation 
of  the  country.  Kenya  Land  Freedom  Army,  the  first  of  its  kind  in  the 
post-Second World War period in Africa, 
115


--- PAGE 116 ---
became the focus of British propaganda, to prevent armed struggle becoming a 
model for a form of resistance. The British even trained some Kenyans and 
brought  them  up  to  look  at  Kenya  history  with  the  eyes  of  the  British 
bourgeoisie.  The  British  propaganda  history  consisted  of  burying  the  real 
tradition  of  struggle  and,  erecting  in  its  place,  the  tradition  of  loyalist 
collaboration. Loyalist historians were praised, honoured, while the people's 
historians were incarcerated.
This attempt to bury the living soul of Kenya's history of struggle and 
resistance, and the attempt to normalise the tradition of loyalism to imperialism 
has continued into neo-colonial Kenya. The loyalist colonial homeguards of 
yesterday are the neo-colonial Mbwa Kalis (guard dogs) of imperialism today. 
There have been two types of history in Kenya: the real living history of the 
masses; and the approved official history. Those who run neo-colonialism are 
mortally afraid of any symbols or reminders of the Kenya peoples' history of 
struggle and resistance. And naturally, KLFA (Mau Mau) and Dedan Klmathi, 
as the highest symbols of that tradition, have received total official neglect or 
distortion.
The two types of histories have produced two types of historians. There are 
the  official  historians,  the approved  state  historians, whose  role  is to  give 
rational  legitimacy  to  the  tradition  of  loyalism  and  collaboration  with 
imperialism. These have received state accolades and honours.
But the Kenya people's real history of struggle and resistance has thrown 
up its own historians. First are the ordinary people who, in their songs, poems, 
stories,  sayings,  anecdotes,  remembrances,  still  talk  of  the  Waiyakis;  the 
Koitalels; the Me Katililis; the Hassans and the Kimathis of Kenya history. And 
secondly, a few progressive intellectuals who have negated their roots among 
the pettybourgeoisie, and joined hands with the people. These have put their 
learning, their intellect, at the service of the people. They are committed to 
unearthing the buried history of struggle and resistance.
In Guyana we have the example of Walter Rodney. In Kenya we have the 
example of Maina wa Kinyatti. Since his return to Kenya in the 1970s, Maina 
wa Kinyatti saw his role as that of being the ears and eyes of the people as far 
as this concerned their history. Whereas the official state historians borrowed 
eyes and ears from the colonial 
116


--- PAGE 117 ---
and neo-colonial heritage, Maina wa Kinyatti and other patriotic historians, 
borrowed their eyes and ears from the people. Maina wa Kinyatti travelled 
extensively in Kenya. He spent many an evening and week-ends in the homes 
of those who had fought the British and who were now condemned to living in 
hovels, and on the edges of starvation. He recorded their stories. They in turn 
came to trust him. They started giving him documents they had hidden for 
years. They gave him information they had kept among themselves for fear of 
official, neo-colonial wrath. They knew that those holding the reins of power in 
post-independent  Kenya  were  those  actually  sabotaging  the  struggle  for 
independence.  But  here  was  a  historian  who seemed  not  afraid;  who was 
talking their language of struggle.
The papers Maina wa Kinyatti was able to rescue are contained in his 
book. They speak for themselves. They need no introduction, or defence or 
explanation. It is a record of how the participants, the Kenya Land Freedom 
Army, saw the struggle as contained in some of their written documents.
Theirs  was  a  national  struggle:  for  land,  independence,  freedom  from 
hunger,  freedom from foreign  control,  freedom from external  and  internal 
social oppression, and they put their lives at the service of those ideals of 
political liberation.
They  were  completely  surrounded  by  the  enemy.  Unlike  the  armed 
liberation movements that followed them in Africa (in Algeria, Mozambique, 
Angola, Guinea-Bissau, Zimbabwe, etc) they had no rear or supply bases in 
neighbouring countries, for the simple reason that these were also under the 
same colonial enemy. Their bases were entirely among the Kenyan people.
For arms they depended almost totally on what they could capture from the 
British army, and on their own factories in the liberated and semi-liberated 
zones around Mount Kenya and Kirinyaga.
Again,  they  had  hardly  any  easy  access  to  national  and  international 
propaganda  to  counter  the  stream  of  lies  coming  from  the  British  settler 
colonial regime in Kenya and the Colonial Office in London. In the country, 
KLFA depended  mostly  on  word  of  mouth  to  explain  their  case  and  the 
progress of the struggle to Kenyan people. But still, with all the limitations 
under  which  they  operated,  they  tried  to  keep  written  records  of  these 
activities; and to establish written communications with the national and the 
international community.
117


--- PAGE 118 ---
Some of the documents were later captured by the colonial enemy. Some 
were  destroyed,  or  distorted.  Some  are  still  held  in  secret  by  the  British 
government and the neo-colonial regime in Kenya. But some escaped capture; 
and it is to the credit of Maina wa Kinyatti that he managed to recover a 
number of these letters and documents and put them at the disposal of the 
Kenyan and the international community.
When the history of the armed liberation struggles in Africa is finally 
written,  KLFA will  stand  supreme,  not  so  much  because  of  the  heights  it 
reached but because of the depths from which it rescued Kenya and Africa. 
KLFA (Mau Mau) was the first organised armed blow against imperialism in 
Africa.  In  this  they showed  the  way which  was  later  followed  with  such 
brilliant results in Algeria, Mozambique, Angola; Guinea-Bissau, Zimbabwe, 
anal in South Africa today.
Maina wa Kinyatti[He was released in October 1989.] has now paid a price for 
his work in Kenya history. In 1982, he was arrested, and imprisoned for six 
years. He just about escaped the fate of another historian of the people, Walter 
Rodney from Guyana. But has he? He is losing his eyesight. His health has 
been deteriorating. Conditions in Kenya prisons are among the worst in the 
world.
Those who have imprisoned him hope that he will lose sight of the Real 
History of Kenya. But they are wrong. These documents and his other works 
like  Thunder from the Mountains; Mau Mau Patriotic Songs and Mau Mau: 
The  Highest  Peak  of  Resistance,  will  always  stand  as  a  memorial  of  his 
commitment and courage.
But even if they were to silence Maina wa Kinyatti, would they silence the 
history of Kenya? Would they arrest, imprison the living history of Kenya? 
This history is being written by the millions of workers and peasants of all the 
nationalities  in  Kenya  who  in  their  actions  and  songs  are  saying  'No'  to 
imperialism and its comprador alliances in Kenya. The spirit of the Kenya 
Land Freedom Army (KLFA) and its leader Dedan Kimathi is being reborn in 
.Kenya today!!
History  is subversive because  truth is! The unavenged father's ghost of 
Kimathi's  struggle  and  his  KLFA,  walks  the  days  and  nights  of  today's 
neo-colonial Kenya. The masses know it. So, too, do the 
118


--- PAGE 119 ---
ruling  comprador. bourgeoisie.  Hence  the  continuing  repression;  and  its 
opposite - resistance. The 1990s will see the conflict played out to its logical 
conclusion - liberation from neo-colonialism. Maina wa Kinyatti's papers will 
play their part in that struggle by providing lessons from the weaknesses and 
strengths; the failures and the successes of the past.
119


--- PAGE 120 ---
12 From the Corridors 
of Silence
The Exile Writer Back
I had come to Britain to promote the English translation of my novel, Devil On 
The Cross, originally written in Gikuyu at Kamiti Maximum Security prison in 
Kenya in 1978. Heinemann, my publishers, had put me up at the Russell Hotel 
so that I could be near their offices at Bedford Square and to the press. But the 
book that first caught my eye on entering a London bookshop was a slim 
volume titled  Writers In Exile, by Andrew Gurr. I was surprised, on leafing 
through it, to find myself in the company of Katherine Mansfield from New 
Zealand and V. S. Naipaul from Trinidad, as those modern writers who had 
followed the path set by the Irish writer, James Joyce: that of flight to the 
metropolis of a foreign country. You remember the position of Joyce's hero in 
A Portrait of the Artist As a Young Man?
I will tell you what I will do and what I will not do. I will not serve that in 
which I no longer believe, whether it call itself my home, my fatherland or 
my church; and I will try to express myself in some mode of life or art as 
freely as I can and as wholly as I can, using for my defence the only arms I 
allow myself to use silence, exile and cunning.
Home, father/ motherland, exile? I, a writer in exile? I had just arrived in 
Britain on June 8, firmly intending to leave for Kenya on 31 July. In my book, 
Detained.- A Writer's Prison Diary, published the same year as Andrew Gurr 's 
Writers  In  Exile, I had rejected  the  option  of  exile  into  which the  Kenya 
government has been trying to force me by denying me jobs, virtually banning 
me from the premises 
120


--- PAGE 121 ---
of schools and colleges. I was even feeling not a little pleased with myself for 
having confirmed the date and the flight of my return home. I was not going to 
be one of James Joyce's heroes, obeying only the laws of my imagination on 
the banks of the Thames or Seine, or in a new Bloomsbury around Bedford 
Square.
I took time off from the busy schedule of interviews and talks to visit the 
late C.L.R. James at his place in Railton Road, Brixton. I had first met him in 
Makerere  University in  1969  where  I  then  held  a  one-year  fellowship  in 
creative writing. He was on a brief visit.
We readily found 'common ground in our interest in Caribbean literature 
and  Pan-Africanist  politics.  And now,  in  1982,  James readily recalled  our 
conversations  in  Makerere,  particularly  about  his  old  comrade-in- 
Pan-Africanism, the late Jomo Kenyatta, about whom James did not always 
have the most endearing of things to say.
I had fallen out with the Kenyatta regime in 1969 over the suppression of 
academic freedom at the University of Nairobi and I had resigned in protest. In 
1977 Kenyatta had imprisoned me for my activities in community theatre at 
Limuru, in Kenya, although some other people argue that it was my novel, 
Petals of Blood, which had really angered the regime.
I briefed James about the intensified repression under the new Moi regime. 
I told him about the recent wave of arrests which had led to the detention 
without trial of a number of intellectuals, including Al Amin Mazrui, a Kenyan 
playwright. 'And you are still intending to go back on July 31?' he asked, 
slightly raising his frail body from the bed. 'They will kill you in six months, 
the way they did Walter Rodney.' I would go home, I insisted. On parting he 
gave me one of his books with the inscription: 'For Ngugi. Please stay for a 
while at least. Today we need you here.' The book was a critical evaluation of 
Melville's Moby Dick, a novel we used to read as an exam text in Kenya in the 
fifties.
On arrival in my hotel, I found an urgent coded message from Kenya: 'A 
red carpet awaits you at Jomo Kenyatta airport on your return.' Later I was able 
to confirm the message: I was due for arrest and another detention without 
trial, or worse . . . It took a while for the reality of the message to sink in. I 
could not accept the fact of exile, or the pleasures of exile as George Lamming 
once described it in a book. And even after I had cancelled my return and 
121


--- PAGE 122 ---
progressively descended from my residency in the Russell Hotel to a wanderer 
in London in search of a place in which to live, I could not bring myself to use 
the word `exile' in reference to myself. `Shipwrecked' was the word I often 
used, perhaps remembering James's mariners, renegades, and castaways. But 
the fact is that I was now living the reality of the modern writer in Africa.
Such  a  writer  was  born  in  captivity  in  more  ways  than  one.  The 
twentieth-century African literature, particularly that in European languages, 
has  roots  in  nineteenth-century  slave  narratives  by  the  likes  of  Olaudah 
Equiano. In his autobiography,  The Interesting Life of Olaudah Equiano, or 
Gustavus  Vassa  the  African,  he  wrote  of  the  Africa  of  his  childhood  as 
consisting of nations of dancers, musicians and poets, very much in terms that 
would later become the central themes of the Negritude writers of the thirties 
and forties. But while Equiano's prison-house was the entire landscape outside 
Africa, for many writers their prison-house is inside their countries.
The twentieth century has seen many an African writer confined by the 
colonial and neo-colonial state to corridors of silence. Thus British Kenya saw 
many of the militant Mau Mau in jails and detention camps in the fifties; 
apartheid South Africa has at various times jailed writers like Dennis Brutus, 
Caesarina Kona Makhoere, and the late Alex La Guma; independent Kenya 
imprisoned writers like Abdulatif Abdulla and Al Amin Mazrui; Egypt ensured 
a taste of prison for such writers as Sherif Hetata and Nawal el Saadawi; Kofi 
Awoonor from Ghana has also had a prison experience; and currently Jack 
Mapanje of Malawi is languishing in prison[Jack Mapanje was released in May 1991.]. 
And there have been classic cases of writers like Gakaara wa Wanjau of Kenya, 
who were jailed by both the colonial and neo-colonial authorities for their 
writing.
These are only a few representative examples from East, West, South, and 
North Africa. These prison graduates have produced a literature born of their 
experiences  in  the  corridors  of  silence.  It  is  telling  that  the  first  African 
recipient of the Nobel Prize for Literature, Wole Soyinka, is himself a prison 
graduate, having spent three years in various jails in Nigeria, the land from 
which Equiano had been abducted in the eighteenth century. Thus, just as there 
is a 
122


--- PAGE 123 ---
tradition of slave narratives, there is in the twentieth century a whole tradition 
of prison literature from Africa.
Unfortunately a few other writers never survived their prison houses to tell 
the tale. Idi Amin's Uganda had a number of writers killed, just as in South 
Africa today. Which of the two would have been my fate - prison or death - had 
I returned to Moi's Kenya, I am not too keen to know.
I had spent a year in a maximum security prison in 1977-78 and I know 
how much of a waste of human life prison is, especially in Kenya where the 
jailing of intellectuals has been a punitive measure. Perhaps James was right 
but I didn't want to try to prove him wrong.
What finally convinced me about the truth of the messages of a red-carpet 
welcome in 1982 by President Moi at Jomo Kenyatta airport was the flight into 
exile of two writers, Kimani Gecau and Ngugi wa Mirii. I had worked with 
both at the community theatre in Limuru in Kenya. They had been only one or 
two steps ahead of Moi's agents. Kimani and Ngugi had become part of the 
community of African writers in exile.
I am here  talking about  physical exile.  There have been two types of 
writers in exile from Africa. There are the voluntary exiles, those forced to live 
abroad through choice or through circumstances other than threats of prison or 
death. These are the ones who are comparable to the expatriate writer of the 
James Joyce  or Hemingway tradition,  or that of the Bloomsbury circle  of 
Katherine Mansfield.
In the twenties and thirties, the group of African students who lived in 
Paris produced a literature that later acquired the semblance of a .distinctive 
movement under the name Negritude. Sedar Senghor, later the president of 
Senegal, was one of the leading lights of this expatriate type of literature.
The second category is that of those writers forced into exile through fear 
of certain death or prison or both. These are victims of state terror and they are 
in flight for their lives. They belong to the category of Brecht and others who 
fled Nazi Germany.  From them there  has not been any distinctive literary 
movement,  I  suppose  because  they  do  not  always  come  from  similar 
circumstances.
Nevertheless physical exile has been part and parcel of twentieth-century 
African literature. Beginning with Peter 
123


--- PAGE 124 ---
Abrahams, South Africa has contributed most to this category. Home and Exile 
is the title of a book by another South African writer, Lewis Nkosi, and it very 
well  captures  the  underlying  themes  and  contradictions  in  modern African 
literature.
Home? Even after I had accepted that I had been shipwrecked on an island 
called Great Britain, I could never bring myself to unpack the bags I had kept 
ready for my return to Kenya.
Then  in  1983/84  I  wrote  Matigari, a  novel  of  return,  in  the  Gikuyu 
language, and I felt a sense of belonging such as I had felt when in 1978 at 
Kamiti Maximum Security Prison  in Cell  No. 16,  1  had  written  Caitaani 
Mutharabaini (Devil on the Cross) as an attempt to reconnect myself to the 
community from which I had been so brutally cut by the neo-colonial regime 
its Kenya. Now I had done the same thing and experienced not too dissimilar 
emotions. Was there a connection between prison and exile?
In both cases the writer is keenly aware of his loss of freedom. He is 
haunted by a tremendous longing for a connection. Exile can even be worse 
than prison. Some people have been known to survive prison in their own 
countries better than 'freedom' in physical exile.
But there is another sense, a larger sense, in which we can talk of exile in 
African literature. The writers who emerged after the Second World War were 
nearly all the products of universities at home and abroad. Some of these 
universities like Ibadan in Nigeria, Makerere in Uganda, Achimota in Ghana 
had  been  set  up  to  manufacture  an  elite  that  could  later  make  a  good 
partnership  with  the  British  ruling  circles.  The  curricula  reflected  little  or 
nothing of the local surroundings.
The situation was quite ironic. Many of the educated Africans had been 
sent to the higher seats of learning by their peasant communities so they could 
come back and help in the collective survival. But at the end of the educational 
pipe-line, these select few had more in common with the very social forces 
which had kept their communities down in the first place. In colonial times 
they would probably have joined the state administration as junior partners, but 
with the hope that a little bit more would fall to them from the master's table. In 
neo-colonial times - that is, after independence - they joined the multinationals 
whose profits depended on the misery of the very people who had sent them 
out to bring back their share.
124


--- PAGE 125 ---
Writers were part of the educated elite, and there was no way they could 
escape  from  these  contradictions.  For  instance,  they  nearly  all  opted  for 
European  languages  as  the  means  of  their  creative  output.  Thus  English, 
French, and Portuguese became the languages of the new African literature. 
But these languages were spoken by only about 5 per cent of the population. 
The African Prometheus had been sent to wrest fire from the gods, but instead 
became a captive contented with warming himself at the fireside of the gods. 
Otherwise he carried the fire in containers that were completely sealed and for 
which the majority had no key. For whom were they writing?
I was a student at Leeds University in the mid-sixties when I first strongly 
felt a sense of despair at that contradiction in my situation as a writer. I had just 
published  A  Grain  of  Wheat,  a  novel  that  dealt  with  the  Kenya  people's 
struggle for independence. But the very people about whom I was writing were 
never going to read the novel or have it read for them. I had carefully sealed 
their lives in a linguistic case. Thus whether I was based in Kenya or outside, 
my opting for English had already marked me as a writer in exile. Perhaps 
Andrew Guff had been right after all. The African writer is already set aside 
from people by his education and language choice.
The situation of the writer in twentieth-century Africa mirrors that of the 
larger society. For if the writer has been in a state of exile  - whether it is 
physical or spiritual - the people themselves have been in exile in relationship 
to their economic and political landscape.
`During the colonial era, the African people were dispossessed of their land 
and labour and mind. The colonial power took on the form of an inaccessible 
god, set on dismembering a people and a continent. The remnant of this Africa 
can still be seen in South Africa.
But independence did not always result in the empowerment of the people. 
Economic power still lay in the hands of multinationals, and political power in 
the hands of a tiny elite exercising it on behalf of the dominant interests of the 
West. This elite, pampered with military gadgets of all kinds with which to 
reign in a restive population, has often turned an entire country into a vast 
prison-house.  Africa  is  a  continent  alienated  from itself  by years  of  alien 
conquests and internal despots. Thus the state of exile in the literary landscape 
reflects a larger state of alienation in the society as a whole, a clear 
125


--- PAGE 126 ---
case of colonial legacy which has left scars on the body, heart, and mind of the 
continent.  The  Man  Died;  Things  Fall  Apart;  No  Longer  at  Ease;  The 
Beautyful Ones Are Not Yet Born; From a Crooked Rib; the titles of many 
novels in Africa speak clearly of this alienation, or this dismemberment of parts 
that could have made a whole.
Is African literature capable of .a successful homecoming? It has already 
gone through at least three phases within the last three or four decades. In the 
fifties its sentiments - Tell Freedom - were largely in harmony with the general 
sentiments for independence. The sixties, the era of coups d'état, gave birth to 
a literature of disillusionment. Attacks and lamentation were the key tones in 
this literature. The seventies and the eighties saw some writers seeking to find a 
way out of the earlier despair by trying to connect the works of the imagination 
with the struggles of the people for social change and social justice. But their 
search for a way back among the people was hampered by the very linguistic 
prison they had been thrown into by their colonial legacy.
The nineties will see more and more writers trying to break out of the 
linguistic prison to seek their genuine roots in the languages and rhythms of 
life of the dispossessed majority. Only in this way will African literature find 
its real homecoming among the African masses who have always struggled to 
overcome the state of alienation. Otherwise it is doomed to die, or stagnate in 
the linguistic prison of its colonial legacy.
The nightmare of the latter half of the twentieth century is the fear that a 
human creation, the Bomb, has come to threaten the very existence of the 
human  race,  and  indeed  all  life.  A universal  sense  of  exile,  of  not  really 
belonging, still haunts humankind.
In its search for a genuine homecoming, African literature will truly reflect 
the universal struggle for a world which truly belongs to us all.
126


--- PAGE 127 ---
13 Imperialism & Revolution
Movements for Social Change
In 1986,  three  young  men  were hauled  into  court  in Kenya  charged  with 
engaging in acts of sabotage against the ruling neo-colonial regime. The three, 
Tirop arap Kitur, Samuel Mungai and Karimi Nduthu, remained splendidly 
defiant, and, to borrow words from an account of a similar situation, ‘as the 
trial  went  on,  the  roles  were  reversed:  those  who  came  to  accuse  found 
themselves accused, and the accused became the accusers!’ Kadmi Nduthu told 
the kangaroo court ‘I love Kenya. Truth must be told without fear. Change like 
death it inevitable.’
Those words were very much in my mind in accepting the invitation to 
open the Sixth International Book Fair of Radical, Black and Third World 
Books whose theme is ‘Movement for Social Change’. Change, it has been 
observed,  is  the  constant  theme  in  nature,  society  and  human  thought. 
Everything changes.
Our own century, the twentieth century, has been one of such great and 
spectacular changes as were only the stuff of dreams, myths, and fantasies in 
earlier centuries. Science and technology have wrought great changes in our 
relationship to nature and the universe. National struggles have brought about 
changes  in  the  relationship  between  countries.  And  social  struggles  have 
brought about even greater changes in relationships between different classes 
in the same country.
In terms of social change, the present face of the twentieth century is a 
product  of the  struggle  between  two  contending  forces.  On the  one  hand, 
imperialism which saw the elevation not simply of the non-producer but of the 
parasitic non-producer into the dominant ruling power not just over people 
from one country but over 
127


--- PAGE 128 ---
several nations, races and countries. ‘On the other has been social revolution 
which for the first time in human history sought change and often fought for 
power on behalf and from the  standpoint of the producer working peoples.
Let us look at the two phenomena: Imperialism and Revolution. Capitalism 
entered its imperialist stage towards the end of the nineteenth- century. The 
Berlin  Conference  and  the  division  of  Africa  into  spheres  of  European 
influence and the subsequent colonisation was its external political expression. 
The reign of finance capital with its home base in Europe and abroad had 
begun.
Imperialism is the power of dead capital. A few shareholders in the City 
and Wall Street by merely manipulating and playing the monopoly game of 
sale and purchase of stocks and shares can determine the location, death and 
life of industries; they can determine who eats, what and where. They can 
create famines, deserts, pollution, and wars. The peasant in the remotest part of 
the globe is affected by the power of those who hoard billions even though 
only visible in figures on computer screens in the finance houses we call banks. 
Currently, the IMF, the World Bank, are determining the lives and deaths of 
many in Africa, Asia and South America.
Imperialism has maintained its power in three ways:
It  feeds  on  colonies  and  neo-colonies.  In  colonies  yesterday  and 
neo-colonies today, imperialism through its ruling agents in Asia, Africa and 
South America supports any and every anti-people barbarity. Thousands can be 
massacred  in  say  Kenya  and  imperialism  will  continue  propping  such 
anti-people  regimes  in  the  name  of  stability.  The  South  African  apartheid 
regime could not last a day without the support of imperialist nations.
It also arms itself to the teeth to protect its power against rival imperialism 
or from real or imagined threats from successful people-based revolutions. The 
arms race is a race against human life. Those who for instance have insisted on 
nuclear weapons are saying: ‘ better  to profit by human  death than profit 
human life’.
And third, in its own home (say in the USA, Western Europe and Japan), 
imperialism  protects  its  power  from  threats  of  people’s  power  by  social 
oppression,  racism,  sexism,  and  even  through  religious  divisions.  Police 
violence against the population and sections of the population is a fact of life in 
all the heartlands of imperialism. Racism and even gender discrimination like 
women’s oppression is 
128


--- PAGE 129 ---
not an accident but a product of imperialism in its home base. These social 
oppressions are exported to neo-colonies where in South American military 
republics or in South Africa, they can be seen in all their naked glory.
But  pitted  against  imperialism have  been  forces  for  meaningful  social 
change.  Dead capital,  moribund  capitalism, has been challenged  and  often 
successfully so, by living labour. Through the various movements for social 
change in the world, life has been triumphing over death. Working people’s 
power  is  the  revolutionary  alternative  and  challenge  to  moneyocracy  of 
imperialism.
In  the  twentieth  century,  there  have  been,  three  broad  but  interrelated 
movements for social change:
First  have  been  movements  which  have  sought  and  brought  about 
successful  social  revolutions  - that  is  social  transformation.  The  greatest, 
because it ushered a new era in the twentieth century, was the 1917 Russian 
Revolution. But it was followed by others: China and Cuba for instance. Thus 
the gory dawn of imperialism at the beginning of the twentieth century with its 
near  total  control  of  the  world  through  colonies,  semi-colonies  and  other 
dependencies, saw the rosy dawn of its opposite: revolutionary people’s power.
Second, there have been national liberation movements in two stages  - 
movements  for  independence  from  colonialism and  those  for  national 
democratic  revolutions  against  neo-colonialism.  Many  of  the  Third  World 
movements fall within this category. South Africa is a unique case which sees a 
convergence  of  all  the  above  features:  a  people’s  movement  against 
colonialism, neo-colonialism and for revolutionary change. And that is why 
South African people’s struggles are really the story of our lives: a metaphor of 
the twentieth century.
And, third, within the belly of the beast, that  is within the imperialist 
nations and countries, there have been democratic forces for change. The social 
democratic  gains  in  Western  Europe  after  the  Second  World  War  was  a 
response to these democratic forces. Today, working class struggles; women’s 
movements; Black people’s movements; the peace movement, are all part of 
the democratic forces for change.
All the three major movements  - revolutionary, national liberation, and 
democratic - are different stages of the same struggle of the living labour of the 
majority against the dead capital of a parasitic few. 
129


--- PAGE 130 ---
In all the three movements, Black and Third World peoples have been at 
the  centre.  For  instance,  all  the  successful  major  social  revolutions  in  the 
twentieth century, apart from the Russian Revolution, have been in the Third 
World: China, North Korea, Vietnam, Cuba are well known examples. The 
independence  struggles  in  Africa,  Asia  and  South  America  against  old 
colonialism have already changed the political map of the twentieth century 
while  the  current  struggles  for  national  democratic  revolutions  against 
neo-colonialism  will  vastly  change  the  power  equation  in  the  world. 
Everywhere  people’s  power  is  knocking  at  the  door  as  we  move  towards 
the-twenty-first century.
And lastly, in the imperialist countries  - like USA and Western Europe  - 
Black people’s movements and, others involving people of Third World origins 
are challenging the racist anti-people structures and in the process bringing 
about rumblings of profound changes to come. The civil rights movement of 
the sixties in the USA did affect and continues to affect the general politics of 
the country. Even within the limited democracy of presidential elections in the 
USA, it was a black presidential candidate, Jesse Jackson, who, through the 
concept of a Rainbow Coalition, was to articulate the centrality of people of 
African, Asian and South American origins, in the struggle for people’s power 
in the USA. ‘Our Time Has Come’ was an apt rallying call. Here in Britain, the 
rise of black people’s organisations in the seventies and eighties is already 
affecting the  vocabulary and the terms by which the  struggle for people’s 
power is being perceived and fought for. Black is coming back, somebody 
wrote of the black democratic upsurge in the USA of the sixties and the same, 
at  a  higher  level,  can  be  said  of  black  people’s  assertions,  struggles  and 
challenges for real changes in this society.
All the three major movements outlined above have been accompanied by 
an  explosion  of  artistic  talents  and  general  intellectual  creativity.  The 
emergence of African writers in African and European languages after the 
Second  World  War  cannot  be  divorced  from  the  great  anti-imperialist 
movements for independence. The revolutions in Cuba, China and Vietnam 
gave rise to new talents and creativity in all the different areas of the arts. The 
social struggles in the USA and those in Britain have been accompanied by 
similar explosions of talents and artistic movements, and our presence here 
today is a testimony to this.
130


--- PAGE 131 ---
What is important has been the convergence of the Black and Third World 
peoples’ political and artistic movements within Western countries and those 
from inside Africa and the Third World countries themselves.
It has been clearer in politics for instance with the Pan-Africanism in the 
heyday of the anti-colonial struggles. But parallel to the Pan-African political 
movements were also artistic movements. The Black Writers Congresses in 
Rome and Paris in 1956 and 1959; the FESTAC in Dakar and Lagos in 1966 
and  1976;  were  all  manifestations  of  that  independent  search  for  an 
anti-imperialist unifying artistic sensibility. The strengthening of the links that 
bind us in the area of politics and the arts can only strengthen the movement 
for social change.
The International Book Fair of Radical, Black and Third World Books is a 
continuation of that convergence and a further strengthening of the links that 
bind us.
But in some ways the Book Fair is more unique because it has given and it 
continues to give that convergence of radical political and artistic sensibility 
from Africa, Asia, South America and Europe, an institutional form so that it is 
an annual event, and a concrete form by way of a meeting of real books, real 
writers and thinkers in flesh and blood, from the four continents. At the same 
time the  Fair, as you  can see, is people-based and it is organised  by real 
movements that are actually engaged in daily struggles here in Britain. The 
Fair itself is an example of a twentieth-century movement for social change as 
well as being a reflection and a product of social struggles and changes in Asia, 
South America and Europe.
131


--- PAGE 132 ---
132


--- PAGE 133 ---
III
Freeing Culture
From Racism
133


--- PAGE 134 ---
14 The Ideology of Racism
War on Peace Within & Among Nations
There once lived a short-sighted colonial farmer who on Sunday mornings 
would  stand  on  the  prostrate  bodies  of  his  gardeners  to  look  through  the 
window and enjoy the sight of the vast tea plantation that spread out from the 
manorial  house.  'What  a  beautiful  day,  so  peaceful',  he  would  murmur 
genuinely moved by the apparent stability all round. So absorbed was he by the 
peace that he could not hear the rumblings-of their tummies or their silent 
groans  of  discontent.  'A peaceful  country,  don't  you  think',  he  would  say 
turning to the house servants who stood by ready to serve him his breakfast. 
And the house servants would also  stand  on some of the bodies but at a 
respectful distance from the master and they would chorus back: 'Yes master, 
peace'.
Today that colonial farmer could be one of the white masters of apartheid 
standing on the backs of millions  of blacks in South Africa and Namibia, 
shouting peace while carrying out war against the people. Or he could be the 
West standing on the backs of Asia, Africa and South America shouting peace 
while arming their favourite puppets who carry out war against the people. Or 
he could be the Euroamerican or any national ruling class standing on the 
backs of the vast working majority shouting peace while arming themselves to 
the teeth to protect the status quo of the few over the many within the nation 
and among nations.
These talk of peace  today. But where is the peace for the millions of 
victims of  apartheid?  Where  is  the  peace  for  the  black  people  in  Britain, 
Continental Europe, North America? Where is the peace for the millions 
134


--- PAGE 135 ---
and millions under the cruel neo-colonial regimes in Asia, Africa and South 
America? Where is the peace for millions in the most advanced industrial 
nations who are jobless and homeless? Where is the peace for the working 
people who make the wealth of nations and yet shiver and starve?
The fact is that all these people live in a permanent state of war waged 
against them through two kinds of fatal weapons: the instruments of mental 
and spiritual subjugation and the instruments of physical suppression.
First  take  the  weapon  of  mental  and  spiritual  subjugation.  This  is the 
ideological weapon and it comes wrapped up in many forms: as religion, the 
arts, the media, culture, values, beliefs, even as feelings. Racism is one of the 
most devastating of all the ideological weapons wielded by imperialism today 
and it is meant to safeguard the entire system of exploitation of the many by 
the few in one nation and among nations. Racism is a conscious ideology of 
imperialism with five interlinked features.
One is obscurantism. Racism obscures the real relationship between the 
wealth of the few and the poverty of the many within a capitalist nation; and, 
internationally, between the wealth of Western nations and the poverty of the 
majority of nations in Asia, Africa and South America.
Within a single nation, say a Western nation, racism is part of the. entire 
strategem that obscures the obvious fact (except, of course, when there are 
strikes and whole industries come to a halt) that the labour of the majority 
produces and the capital of the few disposes. But through all sorts of mental 
manipulations, reality is turned upside down, making it seem as if it is the 
capital of the few that produces the wealth of that nation and not the labour of 
the majority. Workers are therefore expected to be grateful to the owners of 
capital for creating jobs and hence wages. Where there is a black segment (or 
any easily recognisable foreign, racial, religious segment among the workers) it 
is expected to exhibit even servility and gratitude because, by and large, the 
capital engaging that labour is white-controlled. Propagandists of capital talk 
and write as if black labour ought to kneel down in eternal gratitude to the 
white god of capital. White workers might even come to identify with the 
whiteness of capital against the blackness of labour. In time this is shortened to 
an easy racist formula: blacks ought to be grateful to whites. The fact that black 
labour produces is obscured by the racist formula.
135


--- PAGE 136 ---
Between  the  Western  capitalist  nations  and  the  Third  World  countries, 
racism obscures the fact that the wealth of Europe arid America (and Japan) is 
partly made out of the labour of Asia, Africa and South America. The wealth of 
the West is rooted in the poverty of the rest of us. This is true historically. 
Western  Europe  and North America accumulated capital  through  the  slave 
trade,  slave  labour  and  colonial  labour.  It  is  still  true  today  through  the 
neo-colonial arrangements that still bind Africa to the West in a partnership of 
the rider and the horse. But here again, as in a racially divided nation, reality is 
turned upside down. Propagandists of Western capital make it seem as if it is 
their capital which creates wealth in the `Third' World. Such countries, bled 
daily into ever-mounting poverty, are nevertheless expected to show gratitude 
to that Western capital, meaning the West, and since by and large the West is 
European, the expected abject relations are reduced to the same racist formula 
but now in the international context: Asia and Africa ought be grateful to 
Europe. Asian and African labour needs white capital but never the other way 
round. The false formula once accepted, the neo-colonial ruling elites in the 
`Third' World will do almost anything, murder their own people even, to create 
stability  for  Western  capital.  Black  gratitude  to  white  charity  becomes  a 
national ideal and the expected basis of international relations between the 
West and the rest of us, to borrow the phrase from Chinweizu's book of the 
same title. Neo-colonialism adds considerable stains of blood to those that 
Western  capital  already  acquired  through  the  slave  trade,  slavery  and 
colonialism.
Obscurantism leads  us to the other  feature  of racism: divide  and rule. 
Racism obscures not only the real relationship between capital and labour, but 
also the relations that bind capital to capital and more importantly the links of 
labour  to  labour  under  the  sway  of  the  same  financial  and  industrial 
conglomerates, nationally and internationally. The aim is to make labour see 
itself in national, racial, religious, or tribal enclaves.
Within a nation, workers of a given racial or religious section are put into a 
more priveleged position, for instance being assured of job security, better pay, 
promotional  opportunities,  easier  access  to  housing,  vis-à-vis others  of  a 
different skin pigmentation, or mode of speech or accent. These privileges, or 
advantages, are not of course paid for from profits but from lowering the wages 
of another 
136


--- PAGE 137 ---
section of the workers. Definite attitudes begin to grow on the foundation of 
that differentiation or discrimination and these may develop into a system of 
assumptions about the racial character of the other. Mutual suspicions among 
the  workers  begin  and  these  are  passed  on  and  may  become  a  tradition. 
Workers begin to defend their job security against other workers. Workers 
begin to resent demands from other workers for solidarity, for such a solidarity 
might jeopardise their own seemingly secure jobs, and this is particularly so in 
times of hardship. This division between workers of different racial groups has 
been raised to the status of philosophy and political practice in, apartheid South 
Africa. The result of this bribe and take is the divide and rule tactics employed 
against the workers within the same nation.
But the same tactics of bribe and take, divide and rule, can also be seen at 
work at the international level. Essentially the working people of the colonies, 
semi-colonies and neo-colonies and the working people of Europe- and North 
America often face the same capital with identical ownership. For instance, the 
financial institutions in New York, London, Paris, Bonn, Tokyo, are largely the 
same as those in Lagos, Nairobi, Johannesburg, Cairo, Manila, Seoul. The 
same is true for industrial and commercial enterprises. Thus, in most cases, the 
worker in Kenya, South Africa, South Korea, the Philippines, Chile, Brazil, El 
Salvador, and the worker in Western Europe or North America and Japan are 
engaged  by  the  same  institutions,  really  the  same  employer  or  group  of 
employers. But racism, while obscuring the links that bind working people, 
adds to the divisions by ensuring differentiation in the rewards given to global 
labour on racial lines. The great divide between the West and the `Third' World 
or between North and South, depending on one's favourite euphemism, wears a 
racial camouflage: it is largely the whites of European stock versus the dark 
races of the earth. The huge profits extracted from the workers in Asia, Africa 
and South America are brought back to Europe and North America and Japan 
and help in raising the standard of living of the West as a whole. The working 
class in Europe, North America and Japan becomes the international labour 
aristocracy  vis-à-vis the  workers  of  the  colonies,  semi-colonies  and 
neo-colonies.  The  internationalism  of  capital  is  not  met  with  an 
internationalism of labour. Racism, and to a certain extent nationalism and  
religion, 
137


--- PAGE 138 ---
play the same role of divide and rule on the global scale as they play on the 
national stage. Which now brings us to the third feature of racism: political 
domination.
In  places  like  South  Africa  political  domination  is  clear-cut.  A white 
minority, through the vicious apartheid system, can dominate the majority. But 
even within a Western country, racism, by dividing the working people or 
diverting  their  attention  from  the  real  causes  of  their  misery,  necessarily 
weakens their struggle and results in the domination of the majority by a social 
minority.  Conservative  parties  in  Western  Europe,  some  with  even  fascist 
leanings, are often sustained by the votes of the workers especially when such 
parties directly or indirectly conjure up the spectre of race. Again this is also 
reflected in international relations. A handful of Western nations continue to 
dominate a score of nations in Asia, Africa and South America. Despite the fact 
that the workers in the West are the natural allies of the working people of the 
'Third'  World,  the  Western  bourgeoisie  has  not  the  slightest  fear  of  their 
workers  holding  them in check. Yet  the  Western bourgeoisie  has its allies 
among  the  dominated  nations  of  Asia,  Africa  and  South  America. This  is 
because they have brought up, from among the colonies, semi-colonies and 
neo-colonies, a native elite imbued with an almost pathological self-hatred and 
contempt. through years of racist cultural engineering. Racism has thus pro-
duced an elite endowed with what Frantz Fanon once described as an incurable 
wish for the permanent identification with the West.
Obscurantism,  division,  and  domination,  bring  in  a  fourth  feature  4f 
racism: exploitation. In other words the first three features are not an end in 
themselves. The end is more profit. The end result is the appropriation and 
control  of  the  wealth  produced  by  labour.  Capital  bleeds  labour  on  both 
national  and  international  scales.  The  ideology  and  practice  of  racism 
facilitates that exploitation. For although white workers may be robbed less 
than black workers, the fact remains that they are all robbed. Otherwise where 
would profit come from? Surplus value which goes to profit rightfully belongs 
to labour, and yet labour does not get it all. So between the robbed less and the 
robbed more it is simply a case of unequal distribution of loss. But the robbed 
less, 'happy' with their jobs, job 'security' and better pay, do often identify with 
capital against other sections of labour frequently racially-defined.
138


--- PAGE 139 ---
Whenever any section of labour sides with capital no matter the reasons for 
doing so, capital is happy and gains reprieve to continue robbing them all 
without any fear of a united front. Thus disunity in the labour front, nationally 
and  internationally,  aids  the  exploitation  of  labour.  The  easiest  of  all  the 
time-honoured tools for bringing about this disunity is direct or indirect appeals 
to racism. The highest concentration of racism as an ideology of exploitation is 
still  South  Africa,  but  apartheid  expresses  in  crude  naked  form  what  is 
embedded in imperialist capitalism as a whole.
The  effect  of  the  accumulation  of  all  those  features  creates  a  fifth: 
oppression. Racism, though an ideology, is not felt as a mental or spiritual 
abstraction. It is felt in the flesh, in the very practice of daily living. The 
wounds in the flesh of the police violence concentrated on a section of. the 
population identifiable by their colour or religion or both are easier to see. 
Easier to see?
One of the worst effects of racism is the way it numbs human sensibility. 
Horrendous things can be done to a section of the population without other 
sections registering the horror, because their feelings have been numbed to a 
point where they are unable to see, or hear, what is in front of their eyes and 
ears. In Western countries, this can be seen in white indifference to police 
brutality  against  black  people.  Internationally,  it  can  be  seen  in  the  way 
advanced  capitalist  nations  can  so  easily  use  "Third'  World  countries  for 
experiments in new types of medicines and weapons; or as dumping ground for 
dangerous chemicals and nuclear waste. The question has been asked: if Japan 
had been white in the European sense, would the USA have been so ready to 
drop the bomb as it did at Hiroshima and Nagasaki? As it is today, Japan has 
been made an 'honorary' white, Western, almost European, country on account 
of its wealth. Hitler used the weapon of racism to numb Nazi Germany into not 
seeing the crimes against humanity. European nations used the same weapon to 
make their people not see the crime committed against Africa during the years 
of the slave trade and slavery and the colonialist occupation of Africa.
Institutional  racism  permeating  many  educational,  social,  and  political 
structures of the West has ended up affecting the general consciousness in 
society.  Personal  relationships,  feelings,  attitudes,  values,  outlook, 
self-perception and perception of others, even in the everyday acts of daily 
living, become affected by racism. Racist 
139


--- PAGE 140 ---
values  become the  norm innocently passed  on  in  the  family and  in  other 
formative social circles. In fact, so long and so much has racism been part of 
the imagination and practices of the West that some people are often tempted to 
see racism as the foundation of all the social evils of the West. The history of 
capitalism, from the merchant and industrial capital to the finance capital of the 
imperialist era, gives credence to this interpretation of history and politics. For 
racism  has  indeed  been  part  and  parcel  of  slavery,  colonialism  and  now, 
neo-colonialism.
Those  fighting  racism  must  never  forget  that  racism,  no  matter  how 
all-pervasive, is nevertheless an- ideology founded on an economic system of 
exploitation  and  social  oppression  and  today this  is imperialist  capitalism. 
Equally they must never forget that its victims live its effects hourly, daily, 
weekly, monthly, all the year round on their bodies, in their bellies, in their 
minds, in their houses and in the streets. Racism is a psychological, cultural, 
political, and economic reality and not some disembodied abstraction. The 
economic, political,  cultural  and  psychological  empowerment  of  the  social 
victims of racism as part of the overall struggle against the roots of racism is 
the only way of defeating it. The alternative is the continued threat to the peace 
of humankind.
The question then arises: is there a connection between racism and the 
issues of peace in the world today? Yes. For racism, as we have seen, is, one of 
the weapons used against the possible peace of millions of working people in 
the world. Racism we have argued is meant to, and inevitably has the effect of, 
stemming the tide of a determined and united struggle of a proud and confident 
people. Racism is meant to scatter, confuse, and weaken resistance, prevent it, 
if you like, from reaching the stage of demanding and effecting revolutionary 
changes in the status quo. Racism is meant to win peace for the exploiting 
classes and nations. Racism is war against the people by other means.
But when the ideological weapon of racism fails to silence the people, then 
the  ruling  bourgeoisie  may  resort  to  open  arms,  to  the  time-honoured 
instruments of physical subjugation. The minority, ruling social classes and 
nations are determined to maintain and defend the status quo of inequality 
among peoples, nationalities, nations, and regions of the earth by every means 
at their 
140


--- PAGE 141 ---
disposal.  The  dominant  Western  economic  interests  are  unanimous,  or  
almost unanimous, in saying or taking a position that seems to say that better 
the whole world is dead than that the status quo of the starving, homeless and 
naked millions should radically change.
Racism has been part of all the wars fought in Europe and the world since 
the seventeenth and eighteenth century. For instance nearly all the wars fought 
among the British, the French and the Spanish in the eighteenth and nineteenth 
centuries had to do, among other things, with the slave trade and the slavery of 
African peoples. The same was true in the American civil war. The First and 
the Second World Wars were fought over the issue of colonies. When the 
German imperialist interests lost their African colonies during the First World 
War, they later tried, through Hitler, to recover them by colonising Europe 
itself. Note that Nazism had used racism, anti-semitism and anti-blackism, as 
ideological weapons long before resorting to open arms.
But racist fascism was not invented by Nazi Germany. What of the millions 
of Africans wantonly killed by the British, the French and the Dutch during the 
years of slavery and the slave trade? What about the massacres of the same 
peoples by the same forces in all the colonies? The Jewish holocaust was 
preceded by an even bigger black holocaust, and we must never forget this. 
Racism and racist theories to rationalise the wanton massacre of human beings 
had been voiced, argued out, philosophised about, aestheticised over, by a 
whole line of respectable artists and , intellectuals of the Western world: Hume, 
Hegel,  Carlyle,  Froude,  and  many  other  image-makers  of  the  Western 
imagination. The African had to be dehumanised in the mind to explain away 
the necessity of treating him like a brute in the flesh. But that very racism, 
grown and nurtured in the system in the seventeenth, eighteenth and nineteenth 
centuries, struck back in the Europe of the twentieth century by way of Franco, 
Mussolini, and Hitler. All the methods learnt and practised in the maintenance 
of  the  slave  trade,  slavery,  and  colonialism,  were  now  being  used  in  the 
European homelands. The fact is, as has so often been said, that the working 
class in the imperialist nations will never be fully liberated as human beings 
without  the  total  liberation  of  all  the  peoples  of  the  semi-colonies  and 
neo-colonies. Racism has always been and will always be a 
141


--- PAGE 142 ---
threat to world peace. At the very least the victims will never accept any peace 
and stability based on racism.
Today there is every indication that the third world war will be fought over 
the re-division of the world, particularly the Third World, among competing 
giant imperialisms, or in the attempt by the same giant imperialisms to prevent 
the Third World from controlling its own natural resources. The third world 
war may well turn out to be a truly `Third World' war. Most of the trouble spots 
in the world today lie in Asia, Africa and South America. And in all these, the 
wars have been waged by, or on behalf of, imperialist interests against the 
struggles of the peoples for real social changes. The very concept of such 
arrangements, like the Rapid Deployment Forces, implies the, right of the USA 
or Europe to intervene in Asia, Africa and South America whenever they and 
they alone deem their interests in those countries to be threatened by external 
or internal forces. Today the USA has military and nuclear bases in many coun-
tries in Asia, Africa and South America. In addition, USA, Britain and France 
have armed, and continue to arm, many trigger-happy regimes in Asia, Africa 
and  South  America.  And  finally,  if  one  wanted  more  evidence,  there  is 
apartheid  South  Africa.  It  is  a  modern  troubleshooter  for  imperialism  in 
Southern Africa. It is not an accident that the most racist state, in the sense that 
racism is its ideological foundation, is also the most heavily armed by the West. 
In South Africa, the ideological offensive of racism and the armed offensive of 
conventional and nuclear weaponry meet and therefore show, in clear, naked 
and concrete form, the connection between racism and arms against peace, or 
rather between racism and war.
It is important therefore that the peace movement in Europe and North 
America, out of its own interests, fully backs the anti-neocolonial national and 
democratic 'struggles in Asia, Africa and South America. The peace movement, 
again out of its own interests, should fully support the demands of all the racial 
minorities in the West and Japan for complete racial equality in law and in 
institutional practice. It should also back the struggles of all the working people 
for the control of that which their hands and brains and skills produce. The 
arms  race  should  be  turned  into  a  race  to  arm  the  human  race  against 
starvation, and homelessness. It should be a race for arming the human race 
with the means of making us all even more human.
142


--- PAGE 143 ---
Peace  is  impossible  in  a  world  dominated  by  imperialism.  Peace  is 
impossible in a world guided by the ideology and practice of racism. Hence the 
struggle for peace in the world must be a concerted struggle against racism and 
imperialism.
143


--- PAGE 144 ---
15 Racism in 
Literature
Racism often wages its offensive in print between hardcovers, magazines and 
newspapers long before it is imprinted on the general consciousness as the 
basis of personal and institutional practices. The passage of racism into the 
general practice of the ruling powers is often made smooth by what is agitated 
for in books, in songs, on the stage, on TV and on the cinema screens. The 
library in the larger sense of a store house of printed images and. whether 
located in schools, bookshops, public places or in our homes, can become the 
temple of racism; and literature is often the softest of all the bread and wine 
served in it.
Racism is the most vicious part of that general ideology that gives rational 
expression and legitimacy to exploitation, oppression and domination. It does 
so through obscurantism, that is the masking of the real links between the 
creation of wealth and of poverty within the nation or in the world; through 
dividing the dominated on racial lines and therefore weakening the resistance; 
and  through  sapping  the  moral  energies  of  the  victims  by  moulding  and 
remoulding their personalities and their perceptions to make them view the 
world in accordance with the needs and programmes of the exploiter and the 
oppressor.
Ideology  is  the  whole  system  of  symbols,  images,  beliefs,  feelings, 
thoughts, and attitudes by which we explain the world and our place in it. It 
often comes wrapped up in culture, as cultural practice, but it can also come up 
wrapped up in books as the conscious programme of a ruling class of a given 
race or 
144


--- PAGE 145 ---
nation. Ideology had a material base and also reflects that material base though 
with differing degrees of accuracy, depending on which class in that race or 
nation is controlling the ideology and the material base of that society.
Literature, and particularly imaginative literature, is one of the most subtle 
and most effective ways by which a given ideology is passed on and received 
as the norm in the daily practices of our being. Since racism is part of ideology 
it  necessarily finds  its  rites  of  passage  in  the  whole  field  of  imaginative 
literature. So where there is racism, it will be reflected in the literature of that 
society.
What and how is the connection? All human beings have been infected 
with the biblical curse of Adam and Eve. You all know the Jewish myth: that 
Adam and Eve used to dwell in a garden of Eden, an earthly paradise where 
everything  was  provided  but  on  condition  that  they  remained  in  .blissful 
innocence, a phrase for absolute ignorance. Then they were tempted by the 
desire to know. They wanted to eat from the tree of knowledge. The result? 
They were thrown out and they were told that henceforth they would live by 
the sweat of their brow. They were doomed always to struggle for everything 
by which they lived. Since then, human beings have had to wrestle with nature 
to get their food, their clothes, their houses, all forms of their material wealth. 
Their effective struggle with nature has been aided by the development of tools 
ranging from the simplest stone, knife or axe of the Stone and Iron ages, to the 
most complicated technologies and gigantic machines of the twentieth century. 
It has also been aided by co-operation with one another and hence combining 
their labour in a way that enables them to maximise their general output, often 
dividing the tasks so that the maker of spears is not at the same time the maker 
of pots. The biblical curse was a cure after all. It for ever freed human beings 
from being dependent on the caprices of their environment. In short through 
the sweat of their brow they developed the means of their emancipation from 
either kindly or cruel nature. They could now begin to make history. They 
could now begin to create a human community.
But human beings also struggle among themselves in their interaction with 
nature  -and  to  control  that  which  they have  got from their  struggles  with 
nature. In short, they struggle to control the labour of others, the tools they use, 
the ground on which these tools are used and eventually the actual wealth 
produced during their 
145


--- PAGE 146 ---
primary  struggle.  They  have  even  developed  tools  and  other  means  of 
facilitating that social struggle, ranging again from the simplest stone of earlier 
ages to the most modern weapons of mass destruction.
Out of the two struggles a people evolve into a community with a shared 
economic and political life. Such a community, by doing similar things over 
and  over  again  against  the  background  of  a  shared  geography,  evolve  a 
common way of life expressed in their languages, in their naming systems, in 
their  dances,  songs,  religion,  art,  literature;  and  in  their  entire  education 
system. Their culture which is what we are talking about, becomes a kind of 
social body that carries the values they have evolved in the course of their 
economic, political and cultural praxis. A given culture carries and transmits 
concepts of what is right and wrong; what is good or bad; what is beautiful and 
ugly; and a whole lot of other concepts of honour, courage, glory, heroism - 
concepts of what in fact they consider to be human. The entire structure of 
these values often forms the basis of that community's consciousness of itself 
as a distinct community and the consciousness of its members as belonging to 
that community rather than any other. It is the basis of their consciousness of 
who  they are  in  relation  to  other  communities  and  to  the  universe,  what 
elsewhere I have called their collective and individual images of self. The 
selfhood of a community is really their image of who they are.
Their consciousness of who they are may make them look differently at 
their values, their culture, their political and economic life, at their relationship 
to nature and to the entire universe. Their economic, political, cultural, and 
psychological processes are intricately linked to make a complex whole made 
even more so by the fact that these processes are never at a standstill. Now we 
can see the importance of who controls any of the processes and particularly 
the material base of the entire complex whole. But equally well the control of 
the culture, and hence the values and the self-conception of that community, 
can  effectively retard,  accelerate,  guide  or  lead  astray their  economic and 
political struggles.
Even within a given community, the social group which controls the wealth 
also controls the dominant politics and culture of the community. Such a group 
controls the means of self-definition of that community and it desires to make 
all the other people view 
146


--- PAGE 147 ---
themselves and the world through the set of images it provides. They want to 
make the entire community; and particularly that section robbed of its wealth, 
see the world in their way including how to view the whole mechanism of the 
production and distribution of their wealth. It can never be in the interests of 
the section controlling the wealth, power and the instruments of self-definition 
to provide the other sections with the true and correct picture of things as they 
are. On the contrary, it will use any and every means of obscurantism; of 
divisions; of shaking their faith in what they actually touch, see, hear, and 
smell. Racism, or any other' form of sectionalism, will be used by the dominant 
social  group  to  prevent  any  clear,  resolute  and  united  action  against  its 
dominant position in that society. It will use each and every myth disguised as 
education, history, philosophy, religion, aesthetics, to bolster its hegemony on 
the one hand; and to scatter, confuse and even lead astray the entire resistance 
hegemony of the other sections.
This is true whether one is talking about the slave owner over the slave in a 
slave system; the landlord over the serf in a feudal society; the capitalist over 
the worker in a capitalist society; or the imperialist over the workers of its own 
and of other countries in a world dominated by imperialism. Such groups try to 
construct a picture of the universe which bolsters their conception of their 
place and role in society and in the universe; their conception of the place and 
the role of all the other people in that universe; and furthermore they will try to 
sell, by every ideological, educational and cultural means at their disposal, that 
picture as the eternal, unchanging truth about the nature of the universe.
Racism is part of the ideology of the ruling class of an oppressor nation 
over all the classes of another nation in another country; or of an oppressor 
nationality over all the classes of one or more nationalities within the same 
country. It is inherent in any and every structure of inequality be it slavery, 
feudalism, capitalism or imperialism in our day. Literature and the general 
media such as TV, film, radio, newspapers, are merely vehicles for generalising 
it as the norm in society.
Nobody today talks of slavery as having been necessary for the salvation of 
the benighted souls of the African. The basis and growth of the slave trade and 
slavery were  economic.  C.L.R.  James,  Eric  Williams, W.E.B.  DuBois  and 
others have documented the fact 
147


--- PAGE 148 ---
that many of the wealthiest cities in Europe were built on the flesh of millions 
of Africans. At the time of the slave trade and slavery, many academic and 
scholarly  works  on  everything  from  history  to  religious  treatises  and 
philosophy were written to rationalise the system on the supposed biological 
inequalities of the races. Popular and serious works of poetry and fiction were 
written carrying and reinforcing the images of the inherent inferiority of the 
oppressed  and  the  inherent  superiority of  the  oppressor.  The  images were 
meant to weaken the resistance of the slaves by lowering their conception of 
their worth and ,abilities and by raising the spectre of the invincibility of the 
enemy.
Thus  long  before  direct  colonialism  had  robbed  the  African  of  his 
geography through military conquest and settler economic occupation-of his 
history through the usurpation of the means of making it, of his culture through 
alien religions, he had already been robbed of all of these in the literature that 
was inspired by the slave system or that took that system as the everlasting 
norm in human relations. Colonialist literature was built on that tradition. The 
only difference was that during the colonial era the racism in the academic and 
imaginative  literature  could  now  be  passed  on  as  gospel  truth  into  the 
education system. The geography, history, languages, names and all the gods of 
Europe  became  the  centre  of  the  academic  universe  of  the  African  child. 
Racism as a doctrine had left its hiding place in between the hardcovers and 
was now being paraded as academic brilliance in the colonial classroom.
Literature belongs to those arts that deal directly with the manipulation of 
images. Its effects can therefore be more poisonous than the poison in the more 
academic works of learned men like Hegel and Hume and all the other heroes 
of the imperialist intellectual establishment.
The literature that carried images of Africa and the African ranged from 
that  depicting  the  self-effacing  African  as  the  real  human  being,  or  the 
fun-loving, always smiling type as the more sympathetic being, to that which 
showed  the  African  resistance  fighter  as  the  very reincarnation  of  cruelty, 
cowardice,  ignorance,  stupidity,  envy,  and  even  cannibalism.  The 
collaborationist African was glorified. The one who opposed colonialism was 
vilified. Of course it was not always so directly stated. It was simply the way 
an author guided the emotions of readers to make them identify 
148


--- PAGE 149 ---
with the African who saw no contradictions between himself and colonialism 
and to distance themselves from the African who argued back, the one who 
demanded his rightful dues, or the one who, in the banana plantations; plotted 
against  the  master.  But  these  were  only  characters  in  stories.  They  were 
harmless. Harmless?
The  cumulative picture  could  be  quite  destructive  in  its  psychological 
effects; we in Africa are today reaping the fruits of that presentation of history 
in ways that we may not always be able to identify.
The leader of a neo-colonial regime who loses no sleep after annihilating a 
thousand people in three, days; the academic who thrives on writing learned 
treatises on the backwardness of the African masses and who laughs at every 
effort of the people to liberate themselves from the neo-colonial bondage; who 
knows  what  images  of  Africa  and  the  African  these  people  might  have 
encountered in the literature of their educational upbringing?
Fortunately for us, history is not one-sided. There is no history which is 
purely and for all time that of actors and those always acted upon. We already 
have a glorious history of struggle. The struggle for national liberation has 
involved a re-evaluation of our culture. The culture of resistance particularly in 
the songs and poems of the masses has always been part and parcel of that 
national liberation.
National liberation is a continuous process. I believe it is imperative for the 
progressive  teacher,  writer,  educator,  to  give  African  children  a  picture  of 
themselves in the world consistent with their deepest aspirations for peace, 
equality and a higher quality of life. The writing of literature, the criticism of 
literature, the teaching of literature: all these ought to be part and parcel of a 
total and relentless struggle against the material base of racism which in today's 
world means capitalism and imperialism.
149


--- PAGE 150 ---
16 Her Cook, her Dog
Karen Blixen's Africa
Up to now, for Western Europe, there have been at least three Africas.
There is first of all the businessman's Africa, or I should say the European 
hunter after profit. This hunter after profit knows and has always known that 
Africa is a lucrative ground for his investment. There is a character in Balzac's 
novel,  Eugénie Grander, who is advised by his miserly uncle to go to the 
tropics to sell human flesh. Charles, the character goes to the tropics, he makes 
his profit by trading in human beings and of course returns to France, wealthy, 
a wealthy man who can now marry into nobility. Charles' Africa is the Africa of 
the European hunter after profit.
Africa has an abundance of raw materials and an abundance of human 
labour. Like Balzac's Charles, the hunter for profit knows this. It does not 
matter what, in terms of human beings, the cost is of that profit that enables 
him to live in palaces and to marry well. His guiding spirit is the rate of profit: 
whether it is rising or falling. When he looks at Africa it is not to see the human 
faces of the masses whose poverty and degradation and oppression are the real 
conditions for his rising rate of profit. No, what he is looking for are conditions 
of stability, and it does not matter if that stability is founded on the blood and 
the flesh of millions. It does not matter, if you like, if that stability is founded 
on the fact that the tongues of millions have been mutilated to make them 
unable  to shout their  discontent.  Thus, for instance  in South Africa  today, 
millions of African workers are being ruthlessly oppressed and silenced, so that 
the hunter for profit can count his coins in peace and then talk about the aids 
and loans from the `developed' world to the developing countries.
150


--- PAGE 151 ---
The Danish Library Association would render a great service to our mutual 
understanding if through such anthologies it could bring home to the Danish 
people  that  Europe's  vaunted  development  is  founded  on  Africa's 
underdevelopment; that the food and the water that Europe's hunter for profit 
eats and drinks is often snatched from the mouths of the hungry and the mouths 
of the thirsty.
The  other  kind  of  Africa  is  the  Africa  for  the  European  hunter  after 
pleasure. This is the tourists' Africa. When coming in the plane, by Sabena 
Airlines, -I looked through the current issue of the Sabena magazine and came 
across an article on safari-hunting in Kenya. To the writer of the article, Kenya 
is completely devoid of human beings. The Kenya in that magazine is a vast 
animal landscape, ruled over by elephants, lions and leopards. A lot of books 
about Africa are like that: they cater to the taste of the hunter for pleasure, the 
hunter after wild game, the tourists.
When  human  beings  traverse  that  landscape  depicted  in  the  tourist 
literature, it  -is only as a part of that animal landscape. If you go into many 
libraries or bookshops to look for books about Africa, you are more likely to 
find such titles as Vanishing Africa, The Authentic African, and so on. In the 
pictures that illustrate the books, such Africans are nearly always naked and 
they are often photographed with animals to show the harmony with the animal 
landscape. The hunter for pleasure is really the hunter for profit but on holiday. 
He does not want to see or face up to the reality that it is the African worker 
who creates his profit. Hence the literary deathwish for the African engaged in 
the active struggle against nature and against human degradation.
But there is a third Africa - and for me a most dangerous Africa beloved by 
both the hunter for profit and the hunter for pleasure. This is the Africa in 
European fiction.
The creators of this kind of Africa are best represented by the Danish 
writer by the name of Karen Blixen, alias Isak Dinesen. Karen Blixen had a 
farm in Kenya, which formed the basis of her book Out of Africa. Out of Africa 
is  one  of  the  most  dangerous  books  ever  written  about  Africa,  precisely 
because this Danish writer was obviously gifted with words and dreams. The 
racism in the book is catching, because it is persuasively put forward as love. 
But it is the love of a man for a horse or for a pet. She writes: `When you have 
151


--- PAGE 152 ---
caught the rhythm of Africa, you find that it is the same in all her music. What 
I learned from the game of the country was useful to me with my dealings with 
the native people.'
What she is really saying is that her knowledge of wild animals gave her a 
clue to the African mind. I'll give you another example before I finish with this 
Africa. In the same book, Out of Africa, she writes a great deal about her cook; 
Kamante. But he is described in terms of a pet dog: I quote: 'Kamante could 
have no idea as to how a dish of ours ought to taste and he was in spite of his 
conversation and his connection with civilization at heart an arrant Kikuyu 
rooted in the traditions of his tribe and in his faith in them as the only way of 
living worthy of a human being. He did at times taste the food he cooked, but 
with a distrustful face like a witch who takes a sip out of her cauldron. He 
stuck to the maize-cob of his fathers, even here his intelligence sometimes 
failed him and he came and offered me a Kikuyu delicacy, a roasted sweet 
potato, or a lump of sheep's fat, even as a civilized dog who has lived for a long 
time with people will place a bone on the floor before you as a present.'
So to Karen Blixen, Kamante is comparable to a civilised dog that has 
lived long with human beings, Europeans of course.
It might be argued that the racist views in the book,  Out of Africa, were 
accidental; that they were the views of a young romantic but ignorant lady of 
an  aristocracy  in  decline.  But  in  her  other  book  Shadows  in  the  Grass 
published in 1960 when Karen Blixen was already aged and when a number of 
African  countries  were  getting  their  independence,  she  repeated  her  racist 
views even more emphatically:
'The  dark  nations  of  Africa,  strikingly  precocious  as  young  children, 
seemed to come to a standstill in their mental growth at different ages. The 
Kikuyu, Kawirondo and Wakambo, the people who worked for me on the farm, 
in early childhood were far ahead of white children of the same age, but they 
stopped quite suddenly at a stage corresponding to that of a European child of 
nine. The Somali had got further and had all the mentality of boys of our own 
race at the age 13 to 17.'
In the same book she describes how in her old age in Denmark, African 
people would appear to her in dreams. But they came to her disguised as 
animals, dwarf elephants, bats, leopards and jackals.
I could quote more passages of a similar nature but those will do. 
152


--- PAGE 153 ---
Karen Blixen is, of course, entitled to her views, however sickening. But 
Karen Blixen is more than this. She is a European phenomenon. To Western 
Europe she is a saint, a literary saint, and she has been canonised as such. She 
embodies  the  great  racist  myth  at  the  heart  of  the  Western  bourgeois 
civilisation. She is the authority on Africa and many European and American 
children are brought up on Karen Blixen. 
So by bringing to the Danish people this type of anthology where African 
writers are talking about themselves and their conditions, the Danish Library 
Association is doing a tremendous service in rectifying the harm done to Africa 
by the likes of Karen Blixen, who was really in effect a spokeswoman for the 
hunter for gold and the hunter for pleasure.
153


--- PAGE 154 ---
17 Biggles, Mau Mau and I
I met Squadron-Leader James Bigglesworth, DSO DFC MC, at one time of the 
Royal Flying Corps, later The Royal Air Force, and known to his readers as 
simply Biggles, at Alliance High School, in Kenya, back in 1956. I followed 
his every adventure in Europe, Asia and Africa.  Biggles and Co; Biggles in 
Spain; - Biggles Flier East: Biggles in the Orient; Biggles Defies the Swastika; 
Biggles Hunts Big Game; Biggles here, Biggles there, Biggles everywhere: the 
shelves in the school library could not have enough of Biggles to satisfy the 
thirst and hunger for adventure of, a sixteen-year-old boy from the rural areas 
of Kenya. Through him I could even fly in aeroplane and travel to all those 
places and emerge triumphant against all those crooks  - mostly Germans, at 
least not English bent on ruining the world as made by Pax Brittanica. Britain 
ruled the waves, earth and sky, bringing about the best of all possible worlds, 
and all that was now needed was the resolve of her brave sons to police the 
new world order and defeat any evil that threatened it. These braves had done 
so during both the First and Second World Wars and Biggles symbolised this 
breed of tough Englishmen, the breed of the happy few, whose long line of 
selfless service went back to the founders of the empire.
I  must  say  that  even  then  Biggles  never  captured  my  whole  hearted 
affection  the  way  Stevenson's  creations  in  Treasure  Island or  Dickens'  in 
Oliver Twist had done. Jim Hawkins; Long John Silver; Oliver Twist: these 
characters had become my cherished companions and lines like 'Yo ho and a 
bottle of rum/Sixteen men on a dead man's chest . . .' or 'Please sir can I have 
some more', kept on intruding in my mind like one's favourite tunes. I cannot 
for 
154


--- PAGE 155 ---
instance remember the number of times I read and reread Treasure Island. In 
the case of the Biggles series, there were no memorable lines or episodes or 
images. Not a single title could stand the test of a second read. Nevertheless 
there was a way in which more than Stevenson's Jim Hawkins or Dickens' 
Oliver Twist, Biggles, the creation of Captain W. E. Johns belonged to the 
school and my world.
It was a colonial school in a colonial world. The school, founded by an 
Alliance of Protestant Missions way back in the thirties, was the leading elitist 
school for African children. Its motto, 'Strong to Serve', expressed the ideals of 
the school: to produce leaders who of course, had the necessary character and 
knowledge to faithfully but intelligently serve  King  and Empire.  It  was  a 
boarding school run on military lines. Wake up in the morning at five. Make 
beds. Cold showers. Clean the compound. Parade. Marching band of bugles, 
trumpets and drums. Raise the British flag. Inspection for cleanliness with 
marks awarded to the various residential dormitories. Chapel. Organ or piano 
music. 'Lead kindly light amidst the encircling gloom, lead thou me on'. Boy 
scouts. Mountain climbing. Sports. Anything that went to build physical health, 
moral character and sound intellect, the three most important arms against the 
gloom. It was a school where Kipling's poem 'If’ was so very important. And of 
course Shakespeare. But Biggles? Oh yes, Biggles. He was on a mission to 
defeat all those forces that were part of the gloom. The flag which we saluted 
every day accompanied by bugles, trumpets and drums, and 'God Save the 
Queen, Long to reign over us', was central to the Biggles enterprise. Biggles' 
loyalty was first and foremost to the flag. Our school was bringing up young 
men for whom loyalty to God and to the flag would be two sides of the same 
coin. The enemies of the Empire  whether the French, the Germans or the 
Russians would also be our enemies.
The Germans especially were already familiar villains in our school history 
lessons.  Had  they not  tried  to  remove  the  British  from East  Africa?  And 
remember the many Kenyans who had died in both the First and Second World 
War fighting against those villains? In our school the teachers always talked 
about  the  rigid teutonic  mentality against  of  course  the  more  flexible  and 
morally superior English character. Biggles in action represented this ideal, the 
English character of Kipling's 'If’. So did the school. The headmaster led in the 
recitation of the poem 'If.’ When he came to the 
155


--- PAGE 156 ---
last lines of the poem, he would pause, look at the assembled eyes and ears and 
then, with a trembling voice, he would make the dramatic call: `and what is 
more; you'll be a man, my son'. Kenyan sons of Kipling aspiring to graduate as 
real British men. Oh, we the happy few. Some of the teachers saw themselves 
as part of this heroic few. Had they not given up life in an English climate to 
bring light to the dark corners of the Empire? Some of the teachers had seen 
action in the Second World War. One in the Royal Air Force. The Royal Air 
Force? That should have alerted me, should have made Biggles my enemy.
I came from a large peasant family in Limuru. The school, ten miles away, 
was the furthest I had been away from home. Opposite the African reserves at 
Limuru were the Kenya Highlands, since 1895 occupied by British settlers 
determined to turn Kenya into a White Man's country. The school grounds 
were also adjacent to huge farms also owned by white settlers. Among these 
settlers were those soldiers who had fought in the First and Second World War. 
But the Kenyan Africans who had been active in the same wars were part of the 
landless and jobless majority in the cities and rural areas. The white soldiers 
had  the  votes;  the  Kenyan  Africans  did  not.  The  white  soldiers  were  the 
beneficiaries of British colonial presence. The African soldiers rejected their 
destiny as hewers of wood and joined the Mau Mau guerrilla army. Among 
these was Dedan Kimathi who later became the supreme leader of the guerrilla 
army. The Mau Mau war to oust the British from Kenya broke out in 1952, the 
year of the Queen Elizabeth's accession to the throne; and of Jomo Kenyatta's 
arrest. In 1954 my elder brother ran to the mountains to join the Mau Mau 
guerrilla army. In the three years from 1953 to 1956, the year of Kimathi's 
capture, the Mau Mau forces were at their strongest, constituting a parallel 
government authority in the land. What actually broke the back of Mau Mau in 
the mountains was the intensive bombing by the Royal Air Force. Mau Mau 
had no reply to the terror from the sky. My brother, who survived the war, still 
talks with awe of the bombings.
So in reading Biggles in the years 1955 and 1956, I was involved in a 
drama of contradictions. Biggles, the flying ace and squadron leader of the 
Royal Air Force, could have been dropping bombs on my own brother in the 
forests of Mount Kenya. Or he could have been sent by Raymond of Scotland 
Yard to ferret out those who were 
156


--- PAGE 157 ---
plotting against the British Empire in Kenya. Either way he would have been 
pitted against my own brother who, amidst all the fighting in the forest, still 
found  time  to  send  messages  to  me  to  cling  to education  no matter  what 
happened  to  him.  In  the  forests  they,  who  were  so  imbued  with  Kenya 
nationalist patriotism, had celebrated my being accepted into the same Alliance 
High School where I was to meet Biggles, an imaginary character so imbued 
with  a  sense  of  British  patriotism.  This  may  have  explained  the  distance 
between me and Biggles. He was nothing but English. Englishness represented 
a human ideal; and the human ideal ended in the Englishness of his being and 
actions and motives.
This was also the basis of the gender and racist definition of the world. In 
the world of Biggles women do not really exist. After all empire-building and 
its defence was a masculine feat, to be applauded by admiring, but delicate, 
white females.
The world was a racial hierarchy of the English, the whites and the rest of 
malekind. All white people were equal in relation to the non-European universe 
but the English were more equal than the other whites.
A good example is in the description of the Anglo-German struggle and 
their non-European allies in Biggles Flier East. This book introduces Biggles' 
German  adversary,  Hauptmann  Erich  von  Stalhein.  There  is  a  kind  of 
admiration of this particular German, he is the German Biggles if that were 
possible; he does for the German side the kind of spectacular feats of courage 
and daring that Biggles does for the British side. At one time Biggles after 
being forced to land somewhere in the Middle East, suddenly sees von Stalhein 
conferring with some Arabs:
His astonishment gave way to curiosity and then to intense interest as he 
watched the scene. It seemed to him that von Stalhein, from his actions, 
was  exhorting  the  Arabs to do  something, something they were either 
disinclined to do, or about which they were divided in their opinions. But 
after a time it became apparent that the more powerful personality of the 
white  man  was making  itself  felt,  and in the end there was a general 
murmur of assent . . .
Note that in being made to arrive at that conclusion by the author, Biggles 
is not described as having heard a single word spoken, or deciphered the actual 
arguments. But from where he is well hidden 
157


--- PAGE 158 ---
he can still discern that whiteness is an important ingredient of the German's 
make-up.
But of course in the white zone itself the English character occupies the 
whitest spot. In Biggles Hunts Big Game, the hero goes to Africa to root out 
some crooks who are ruining the post-war world of the victorious British and 
their allies by printing fake currencies: The criminal mastermind is of some 
European stock but he is of course being helped by African-American crooks 
dressed like real natives of the African jungle. In Cairo before both hero and 
villain board a plane for Kudinga in Central Africa, Biggles is able to observe 
the criminal mastermind whom he describes as being very well-dressed with a 
suit of European cut.
His complexion was so pale that at first, from a distance, Biggles took him 
to be a pure European; but as a result of a more prolonged scrutiny he 
changed his mind, and concluded that the smooth, olive-tint was almost 
certainly that of an Euroasian, or at any rate a European with more than a 
trace of mid-eastern blood in his veins - a guess that was supported by the 
flash of a diamond tie-pin of a size so vulgar that no British visitor would 
be likely to wear it at such a time and place.
Nearly all the books in the Biggles series are shot through and through with 
this racial and gender demarcation of the universe and in this it is very much in 
line with all the racist popular literature Rider Haggard, John Buchan, Nicholas 
Monsarrat for instance that glorified imperialism and the deeds of its British 
actors while vilifying those of its opponents be they from rival imperialisms or 
from the native resistance like the Mau Mau of which my own brother was an 
active agent.
What, then, made me read all the Biggles then available in the school? I 
had discovered literature, written literature. I had seen a library for the first 
time in my life. Books. Books everywhere. Book, any book, was magic to me. 
This was a time when I looked forward to being able to read all the books that 
had ever been published. I was at an age when I could happily read Emily 
Bronte and Tolstoy alongside John Buchan and Rider Haggard and enjoy them 
equally. But it was also a stage in my life when what was most important in 
literature was the story and the element of what happens next. And this the 
Biggles books had in plenty. The Biggles series were full of 
158


--- PAGE 159 ---
actions, intrigues, thrills, twists, surprises and a very simple morality of right 
against wrong, angels against devils, with the good always triumphant. It was 
adventure all the way, on land and in the sky. And what is more one did not 
have to read more than fifty pages before one was in the thick of the action. 
They were the kind of books that told a young man: once you start reading me, 
you will not put me down. It was the strong action which made one forget, or 
swallow, all  the  racist  epithets of the narratives. The books did not invite 
meditation, just the involvement in the actions of the hero and his band of 
faithfuls, Ginger, Algy and Bertie.
They were a boy's books really. I could never think of Biggles as an adult. 
He learnt to fly at the age of seventeen as described in Biggles Learns to Fly 
and he remained just that: an adolescent, a boy scout, and this was probably the 
image that beckoned the youth from the rural area of a basically oral society. 
Biggles was a boy, daring to try, never giving up, stretching the boundaries of 
what was credible, it is true, but still inviting the boy readers to join in the 
adventure, albeit in a race-coloured universe of the English, the Whites and the 
rest of us.
159


--- PAGE 160 ---
18 Black Power 
in Britain
If I could make every black person read one book on the history of black 
people in the West, that would have to be C. L. R. James's, The Black Jacobins. 
The second would be Eric Williams's Capitalism and Slavery. To that list I will 
now add, particularly for people in Britain, Peter Fryer's Staying Power: The 
History of Black People in Britain.
It opens with a startling declaration: 'there were Africans in Britain before 
the English came here.' It then goes on to unearth a mass of details to show that 
there has been a continuous black presence in this country for the last four or 
five hundred years or, at least, since the sixteenth century. They were brought 
here often against their will, to serve this country. This fact has also been 
vividly captured by a twelve-year-old resident of Hackney, Brian Collins, in a 
recent poem, `Our Country Now', to be found in a collection of poems by 
London school students titled, Our City, and Published by Young World Books 
in 1984 to mark the Year of Anti-Racism.
Our Country Now 
My home is Grenada 
My home is London 
One day long ago 
My brothers came from the islands. 
We worked on the buses 
We worked in the hospitals 
We worked on the railways 
We were asked over here 
To make Britain work again.
160


--- PAGE 161 ---
We sweated long hours 
Every day and every night,
Hard work all our lives.
We say we built Britain 
We bled for our children's children,
This is our home.
I am part of Grenada 
I am part of London 
My brothers are part of England 
For all time,
Our country now.
By their very presence here, these people always brought with them the very 
issues which were being  argued out, with words or blows or both,  in the 
plantations and goldmines of the British Empire. Mother England could afford 
to look benign and benevolent and even pretend that those things happened 
only in the outposts of the Empire or in the United States of America. Racism 
was something peculiar to South Africa and the USA, conveniently forgetting 
that these were creations of the British colonial genius.
It has taken the shrinking of the Empire in the fifties and sixties, the racist 
immigration laws of the sixties and seventies, and the Black people's resistance 
to institutional and personal discrimination to bring the issues to the doors and 
sitting rooms of every inhabitant of this country. The riots of the eighties, the 
violence  unleashed  against  Black  people,  and  the  activities  of  National 
Front-type  organisations,  made  it  abundantly  clear  that  racism  was  not 
necessarily  a  monopoly  of  the  USA and  South  Africa.  Racism  no  longer 
resided only 'out there' in the outposts of the Empire but also here in the 
original belly of the beast.
In fact 'racism has been an integral part of the growth of capitalism' from 
its  inception  in  the  seventeenth- and  eighteenth-century  slave  trade,  the 
plantation  slavery,  and  the  industrial  revolution  that  followed  the  slave 
products  of  sugar,  cotton  and  tobacco  through  to  nineteenth-century 
laissez-faire capitalism and the domination of imperialist finance capital of the 
colonial and neo-colonial era. Capitalism, it has been said and correctly so; 
came to the world dripping with blood. This blood was mostly of Asian and 
African peoples.
161


--- PAGE 162 ---
Thus the effects of racism are not lived through as disembodied capital but 
as a reality. Its victims, particularly those of African and Asian origins, live it 
daily, hourly, in their places of work, in the streets, in their homes and in their 
very beings. Racism as a felt experience is brilliantly captured in the works of 
the young writers, mostly born and brought up here in Britain, in that collection 
of  poems,  Our  City,  that  I  have  already referred  to.  A poem  by Kashim 
Chowdhury, a twelve-year-old from Spitalfields, captures the general mood of 
the haunting presence of impending violence experienced by the young living 
in Britain today:
Our City 
I live in London 
Where racism turns to violence. 
My family are struggling 
When news comes of bills going up. 
Where I live 
The streets are dirty 
With rubbish thrown out that is stinking.
The housing is bad 
Because burglars could get in 
And then we turn sad. 
We are frightened to go out at night 
just in case we are hauled into a fight.
We wake up at dawn again 
And give a big yawn. 
We've got to go to school through a dark tunnel 
Where we're sure there's got to be trouble. 
We get most of the bullying in school, 
But there's nothing I could do.
When it gets dark 
White bullies come out with dogs that bark 
With knives that glow in the dark, 
We're sure we're going to be struck.
The weather is usually cloudy,
162


--- PAGE 163 ---
Sometimes it turns rainy.
Prices of food go up day by day,
Which makes our simply enjoying life go away.
The answer to that reality so graphically described by Chowdhury is given by 
another youth, Paul Lehane (eleven years old), in the same collection and in 
just two lines at the end of his poem on the city:
Harmony is what we want
But we'll have to fight for it.
Fight for it. Struggle for it! Not least of the significance of the testimony in 
Staying Power is the fact that the book is written by a white person; and, 
according to him, it was a chance remark during the 1981 riots which finally 
led him to start this massive compilation of data that grew into such a gripping 
story of black people's presence and their contribution in Britain over so many 
years. In other words, it was an act of resistance to racism by its bruised 
recipients which prompted him to attempt a general re-evaluation of the black 
presence in Britain.
The book itself is, in part, a record of that resistance and of the staying 
power  of  black  people  we  saw  described  in  Brian  Collins'  poem.  Many 
brilliant. minds jump out of its pages to illuminate our perception of the history 
of  Britain  and  its  dialectical  link  to  that  of  an  Empire  now  reborn  as 
neo-colonies: Ottobah Cugoano, Olaudah Equiano, William Davidson, Robert 
Wedderburn, William Cuffy, Mary Seacole, and many others right up to the 
present day likes of George Padmore and C.L.R. James. We should know their 
stories.
But the real staying power is that of the struggles of labour, black labour 
and other people's labour, ordinary men and women whose names will never 
appear in history text-books. It is their struggles in Britain, which added to 
those of the national liberation efforts of their counterparts in Asia, Africa and 
the Caribbean which have put racism on the agenda in the twentieth century, 
calling out loudly for immediate solutions.
163


--- PAGE 164 ---
19 Many Years Walk 
to Freedom
Welcome Home Mandela!
Watched by thousands who had gathered in Cape Town to witness the miracle 
and by millions of others around the world via television, Mandela walked 
hand in hand with his wife, Winnie, to a personal freedom and triumph. He was 
writing the date - February 11, 1990 - into world history. And when he spoke 
he brought joy as he publicly rearmed his belief in the people of South Africa 
and in the principles for which he had been prepared to die  - a democratic, 
nonracial and unitary South Africa.
Millions had waited for this event over many years but intensely more so 
in the few days preceeding it, a fact best symbolised by a nine-year-old girl, 
Lashambi, and her mother, Njeeri wa Ndung'u. From the age of six Lashambi 
had collected every newspaper and magazine article and pictures of Nelson and 
Winnie  Mandela  she could  get.  The door and walls of her bedroom were 
literally pasted with the Mandelas under a big heading: Free Mandela. For 
years  she  had  urged  her  mother,  who  she  of  course  thought  could  move 
mountains, to simply telephone the South African Presidents and demand the 
release of Mandela. If her mother could intervene with school Presidents, why 
not with all Presidents? When nine days earlier F. W. De Klerk had announced 
that Mandela would be free, she greeted the news by jumping up and down and 
urging her mother: `Let's make a big card and send it to Mandela. Welcome 
Home, Baaba Mandela, we will say.' Lashambi and her mother, Njeeri, live in 
Newark, NJ, USA. In 1963 when Mandela was jailed for life, the mother, who 
was born in Mang'u, Kenya, had been only seven years old. Now she and her 
nine-year-old  daughter  were  waiting  for  Mandela.  Quite  clearly  
Mandela has been in the minds 
164


--- PAGE 165 ---
of and hearts of several generations - not only in Africa but in many parts of 
the world, in the minds and hearts of all who value human freedom. Thousands 
had marched for his release in virtually every city and village in the world. 
Streets had been named after him. Music in his name was selling in millions of 
records. Books had been written about him. Sculptors and painters too had 
tried to capture the image of this prisoner of apartheid. The whole world had 
been waiting for Mandela.
Why have Mandela's name and personality captivated so many people? He 
was not the only prisoner for life. Indeed, many political detainees have died in 
the prisons of South Africa. Others have been massacred before the eyes of the 
world: Sharpeville in the sixties; Soweto in the seventies. In fact, for the black 
people of South Africa the whole country has been one vast jailhouse. This was 
particularly so in the years of pass laws and passbooks.
The most compelling thing about Mandela is how he endured those years 
of solitary confinement and other tortures without ever surrendering to the 
racist vampires. In him people see the infinite capacity of the human spirit to 
resist and to conquer. Hurrah for the spirit of resistance! Do we not for the 
same reason identify in literature with characters like Prometheus? And in 
history with people like Paul Robeson, Kwame Nkrumah, Ho Chi Minh, Nat 
Turner,  Toussaint  L'Overture,  Kenyan  freedom  fighter  Dedan  Kimathi, 
Zimbabwean resistance leader. Mbuya Nehanda, and martyred Chilean poet 
and singer Victor Jara?
All these figures are heroic because they reflect more intensely in their 
individual  souls  the  souls  of  their  community.  Their  uniqueness  is  the 
uniqueness of the historical moment. They make history even as history makes 
them. They are torches that blaze out new paths. Such a torch has been set 
alight by the fire of the masses, and every time it seems to fade; the great ones 
turn to their people for more energy. Mandela has been such a torch for the 
South  African  people.  The  black  people  of  South  Africa  are  reflected  in 
Mandela.
In  Mandela  the  people  of  the  world  have  really been  applauding  the 
courage, the endurance, the resistance and spirit of the South African masses. 
The people of the world, particularly Africans and those of African descent. 
outside Africa, have in turn seen themselves reflected in the struggling South 
African masses. Or put 
165


--- PAGE 166 ---
another way, Mandela is to black South Africa's struggles what black South 
Africa's struggles are to the democratic forces of the world in the twentieth 
century. Indeed, South Africa is a mirror of the modern world in its emergence 
over the last four hundred years.
A large claim? Not really. When Vasco da Gama landed at the Cape of 
Good Hope in 1498, he not only found for Western Europe an easier route to 
India's riches, he also started the long era of Africa's unequal and unwilling 
partnership in the development of Europe and the newly discovered Americas. 
Europe's two greatest political economists and philosophers, Adam Smith and 
Karl Marx, agree in their writings that the 'discovery' of the sea route to India 
via South Africa and of the continent of America were the two most important 
events in the emergence, growth and development of post-Renaissance Europe. 
Adam Smith called them 'the two greatest and most important events in the 
history of mankind'; Karl Marx described them as opening up 'fresh ground for 
the  rising  bourgeoisie'  and  as  giving  to  trade,  commerce  and  industry 'an 
impulse never before known'
South  Africa,  though  farthest  removed  from  Europe,  became  Europe's 
gateway to the heart of the continent. In a world context, South Africa also 
became the knot that tied together the diverse histories and fortunes of Asia, 
Europe and America. Like the rest of the continent, South Africa saw her 
people hunted down and carried away as slaves. Their labour was used to 
develop what later became the United States, and profits from the sale of their 
bodies as commodities became part of the capital that authorities like W.E.B. 
DuBois, C.L.R. James and Eric Williams have proved was the basis of Western 
Europe's nineteenth-century industrial takeoff.
From 1652, when first the Dutch and French and finally the British settlers 
streamed into South Africa and began forcibly taking land from the Africans, to 
the nineteenth century (when the whole country became first a British colony 
and then a neo-colony supervised by a white minority), the gold, diamonds and 
minerals of South Africa were used to develop Western European industries - 
and later America's, too - and for the building of enormous gold reserves. Is 
there  any bank,  financial  institution  or  industry of  any significant  size  in 
Western  Europe,  the  US  and  Japan  that  is  not  indebted  to  the  gold  and 
diamonds of South Africa?
The  majority  of  the  industries  inside  South  Africa  are  branches,  
166


--- PAGE 167 ---
subsidiaries or partners of those in the West, and their enormous profits have 
been clearly rooted in the slave wages of black workers and in the general 
poverty of the majority guaranteed by the cruel system of apartheid. The South 
African economy is inextricably tied to that of the West. So it's not surprising 
that Britain and the United States have been hostile to calls for economic 
boycotts. To respond to such calls would in reality be to institute boycotts 
against themselves. In fact, boycott calls began to have some kind of effect 
only when the democratic forces in the US realised that the pillars of apartheid 
were  right  at  their  doorstep.  The  USA then  started  to  consider  economic 
sanctions and to pressure its business community to co-operate.
In the South African system, people see the bitter fruition in this century of 
at least five forces that have bedeviled the real development of human beings: 
classical colonialism, neo-colonialsm, slave wages, racism and the usurpation 
of the people's sovereignty through the denial of democracy. But black South 
Africans do not present the picture of endlessly helpless victims of superior 
forces. Their history presents a people who have pioneered in the struggle for 
communal survival, national liberation and social emancipation. The success of 
their resistance can be measured more accurately by juxtaposing their history 
with  that  of  the  other  major  areas  invaded  by  European  settlers  in  the 
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. In the Americas, Canada and Australia, 
Europeans virtually wiped out the native populations, whereas the ferocity of 
black South Africans' resistance blunted the determined efforts of European 
settlers to annihilate them. Shaka, the great king of the Zulu, is possibly the 
best known of all the leaders of pre-twentieth-century resistance in Africa, and 
his name continues to inspire liberation efforts.
Black South Africa has had to pay a high price for its resistance. From 
Shaka to Mandela, its people have experienced one massacre after another at 
the hands of Europeans. The Sharpeville and Soweto massacres make African 
people  recall  other  massacres  in  colonial  African  history  - Hola  Camp  in 
Kenya, Miriyamu in Mozambique, Algiers in Algeria. But the black people of 
South Africa have never given up hope, not even when others, who began 
organised  struggles  years  after  theirs,  have  raised  national  flags  and  sung 
national anthems.
There have been other pioneering successes in black South Africa. 
167


--- PAGE 168 ---
The African National Congress, formed in 1912, is one of the oldest of modern 
political parties in Africa. The ANC can be described as the father and mother 
of  all  the  other  African  liberation  movements. Its  anthem,  'Nkosi  Sikelele 
Africa' [God Bless Africa], is the nearest thing to a pan-African internationale, 
and  even  today  it  is  the  national  anthem  of  Tanzania  and  Zimbabwe. 
Furthermore, Africa is not the only beneficiary of the pioneering liberation 
struggles of the black South African people. Remember that Mahatma Gandhi 
of India started his political activism in South Africa. And the independence of 
India in 1948 had quite an impact on independence movements throughout the 
rest of Asia and Africa.
In literature too: the names of Thomas Mofolo, Vilikazi, Peter Abrahams, 
Eskia Mphahlele, Alex la Guma, Mazisi Kunene, Miriam Tlali to mention just 
a few are virtually inseparable from the development of literature in the rest of 
the continent.
But the one thing that makes every African, every black person in the 
world, see him /herself reflected in the history of the black South African 
people - and therefore of Mandela - is the titanic fight against racism and the 
colour line, once described by W.E.B. DuBois as the problem of the twentieth 
century. Racial oppression carries within it many denials -economic, political, 
cultural and psychological.  Who does not see him/herself  reflected  in that 
mirror?
South Africa is me.  South Africa is you. South Africa is all the black 
people of the earth. South Africa is all the workers of the world. South Africa is 
humanity in a struggle to save itself. If that struggle for the recovery of a sense 
of human community is led by South Africa's masses through their political 
organisations,  like  the  South  African  Communist  Party,  the  ANC  and  the 
Pan-African Congress, it is equally true that Nelson Mandela  has been its 
leading symbol. He has firmly held aloft the mirror in which the twentieth 
century has been looking at itself.
One hopes that his release, coming as it does in the closing decade of the 
twentieth century, amid so many changes taking place in the power map of the 
world and the cries everywhere for power to the people, will be only a short 
step to the liberation of the black South African people so that they can control 
their economy, their politics and their culture. Whether they achieve that kind 
of empowerment or not will depend on the extent to which they can resist  
being 
168


--- PAGE 169 ---
pressured by the West to accept the Kenya solution.
In 1962, Jomo Kenyatta was released from eight years in prison, and he 
proceeded to negotiate away everything that the Mau Mau armed struggle had 
fought  for.  Colonial  structures  were  left  intact,  and  today  Kenya  under 
successor Daniel arap Moi is one of the most repressive states in the world, a 
neo-colony completely and pathetically dependent on the West. Kenyatta lost 
on the negotiating table what had already been won on the battlefield by the 
Kenyan people.
Black South Africa cannot accept, or indeed afford, the replacement of the 
1910 neo-colonial arrangement under white-minority supervision by a 1990s 
refined neo-colonial arrangement to be run by a black minority. The history of 
the  last  four  hundred  years  calls  upon  them  to  overthrow  forever  and 
completely  the  triple  burdens  of  colonialism,  neo-colonialism  and  racial 
oppression and to start on a genuine march toward social justice for all.
Mandela's release is his own victory and the victory of the ANC and the 
other liberation movements; of the black South African people and of all black 
and  African  peoples;  and  of  all  the  lovers  of  human  freedom.  Now  that 
Mandela is free, people of the world must redouble the support for liberation 
movements in their demands for independence and freedom.
Perhaps  the  nine-year-old  girl  was  so  excited  about  Mandela's  release 
because in it she caught a glimpse of tomorrow  - as it will be created by a 
generation  determined  to  ensure  that  the  twenty-first  century  will  be  the 
century of Africa and of all other exploited and oppressed people of the earth.
169


--- PAGE 170 ---
170


--- PAGE 171 ---
IV
Matigari, 
Dreams and 
Nightmares
171


--- PAGE 172 ---
20 Life, Literature 
& a Longing 
for Home
Have you ever had the sensation of being in two places at the same time? 
Tomorrow for instance I am returning to England from New England after five 
months of teaching literature and politics for the English and Comparative 
Literature Departments at Yale University in New Haven, not too far from New 
London.
The colleges are a replica of Oxford, down to the colour of the stones. 
They were built during the Depression by imported Italian craftsmen who left 
their signatures on the roofs and walls of the gothic architecture by way of 
gargoyles - with faces mocking at scholarship.
The first student was a Jacob Heminway, enrolled in March 1702, paving 
the way for a long line of others who would be instructed in the Arts and 
Sciences and 'fitted for public Employment both in Church and Civil State'. 
Until  the  sixties  and  seventies  this  long  line  hardly  included  Blacks  and 
women. Today it is coeducational and multiracial, although Blacks are still a. 
minority.
Like the other Ivy League colleges Yale attracts very good students and its 
graduates readily find employment in all sorts of places and positions. One of 
its law graduates has even found his way to the highest position in Civil State. 
His  name is  George  Bush,  and  he  has  employed  another  Yalian,  D.  Alan 
Bromley, as his national adviser in the sciences and technology.
Writers  are  supposed  to  have  an  opinion  on  everything  from  geography, 
history, physics and chemistry to the fate of humankind. 
172


--- PAGE 173 ---
Recently I attended a workshop in Stockholm on Development Assistance for 
the  Nineties.  I  gave  a  paper  on  'The  Impact  of  Donors  and  Development 
Assistance on the Recipient Cultures'. .
I joined the other Africans present in taking a position which was different 
from that  of  the  expert  from the  World  Bank  who kept  on  citing  Kenya, 
Malawi, Cameroon, and Ivory Coast - all repressive, all subservient to the West 
- as the success stories of IMF Africa.
These  were  experts  on  micro  and  macroeconomics  who  had  drawn 
complicated graphs and figures and quoted statistics, and were supposed to 
understand each other's languages.
When later during a boat ride in the Stockholm waters I met Per Wästberg, 
the Swedish novelist and former President of International PEN, I suddenly 
realised how glad I was simply to talk shop with another writer.
Wästberg  is  the  author  of  Edens  Skugga  (The  Shadows  of  Fire) and 
Bergets Kalla (Source of the Mountain), and numerous other articles and books 
on Africa. As the boat moved towards the centre of Stockholm he talked about 
the places of his childhood which were also the landscape of a number of his 
novels set in Stockholm.
Do you see that statue? It is Gustaf III, the King of Sweden, murdered in 
1792 at a masquerade ball at Stockholm opera. Many. people  have drawn 
parallels between his murder and that of Olof Palme. And there he suddenly 
stopped, obviously reliving the pain and other memories for a person who was 
not only his country's loved premier but also a personal and family friend.
What  was  emerging  was  Wastberg's  love  of  the  physical  and  social 
landscape of his upbringing as a citizen and as a writer, and I felt slightly 
overwhelmed by a sense of my own exile from Kenya.
For the last six years I have lived in Islington, and this self-contained urban 
village near the heart of London has become a kind of second home. My novel, 
Matigari, was written in Gikuyu at 85c Noel Road which makes me identify 
with Islington all the more. When I was invited to Yale last year I hesitated.
Would this not drive me even farther away from Kenya and Africa? So as 
soon as I landed in New Haven in mid January, I threw myself into writing a 
filmscript,  Kariuki,  for  a  project  involving  film-makers  from  Zimbabwe, 
Tanzania, Mozambique, Zambia and Sweden.
173


--- PAGE 174 ---
Writing has always been my way of reconnecting myself to the landscape 
of my birth and upbringing. For a few weeks I completely shut out New Haven 
from my consciousness. I was back in Africa of the twenties and thirties. I 
lived its landscape, its rivers, its history and only after this imaginative return 
did I wake up to where I was - New Haven, Connecticut.
I was living in the Taft apartments on College Street facing. Bishop Tutu's 
corner. Bishop Tutu in Yale? In fact the South Africa issue is all around Yale. 
My students talk about it. And outside the offices of the President of Yale are 
shacks made of cardboard, paper and sacks. These were built by the students 
and maintained there as a constant reminder that Yale should divest itself of 
interests in South Africa.
Yale has one of the best libraries in the United States. I one day walk 
through the corridors of its silence. I tiptoe to the section which I have been 
told  contains  nearly all  the  newspapers  in  the  world.  I  go  for  the  Kenya 
newspapers which I have not seen for a long time.
It was early March. And what do I see staring at me from the pages of the 
newspaper? President Moi of Kenya at a public meeting denouncing me and 
claiming that I was in Sudan, obviously plotting against him. We'll talk of 
being in two places at the same time. I have never been to Sudan.
I should not have worried about being very far from Kenya. On arrival in 
New Haven, one of the earliest internal letters I get is from the director of the 
programme of African Languages at Yale written in perfect Gikuyu. She is an 
American.
Kiswahili, Yoruba, Hausa and Zulu are taught at Yale and this summer they 
are introducing Gikuyu and Shona. The programme has quantities of teaching 
material and books in Gikuyu and Kiswahili. One of the 24 graduate students 
in my seminar on literature and politics has studied Kiswahili, Gikuyu Hausa, 
on top of her knowledge of European languages.
She is one among the 10 students admitted every year into the graduate 
programme  of  the  Comparative  Literature  Department  from  more  than  a 
hundred  applicants.  When  I  had  dinner  with  one  of  the  editors  of  the 
prestigious  Yale Journal of Criticism I tried to get out of her request that I 
contribute an article by telling 
174


--- PAGE 175 ---
her that I only wrote in Gikuyu She looked me in the eye and said: write in 
Gikuyu We shall publish it.
I have enjoyed being in the classroom again after more than six years. 
Seminars can be very stimulating although very demanding. The students with 
their passionate debates, quarrels, shoutings, and arguments make me feel at 
home, and I begin looking forward to every seminar. But of course I am daily 
struck by the absurdity of the situation. In my own country I was banned from 
teaching at the university, or in any school.
The kind of issues we are raising in the classrooms of Yale would land all 
of us in prison for anything between one and ten years. I tell the students this, 
and  they  look  amazed  since  what  we  are  saying  is  nothing  particularly 
revolutionary. We are only looking at the relevance of fiction to the facts of 
life!
Every time I give a public reading from the English translation of my novel, 
Matigari, I am in two minds about telling the story behind its being banned in 
Kenya in its Gikuyu original. But the story does illustrate the absurdity of a 
writer's situation in a repressive state. The novel was first published in Kenya 
in October 1986. Soon after, reports reached President Moi that peasants in 
Central Kenya were talking about a man called Matigari who was going round 
the country demanding truth and justice. Moi ordered the man's immediate 
arrest.
The police reported that Matigari was only a character in a book. Still in 
February 1987 Matigari was 'arrested' and removed from all the bookshops in 
Nairobi  and  from  the  publisher's  warehouse.  Which  reminds  me  that  my 
previous novel in Gikuyu Devil On the Cross, had met a similar fate at Kamiti 
Maximum Security Prison in 1978. But that was only written on toilet paper 
and it was later returned to me as harmless. Well, Matigari seems to be made of 
sterner stuff.
A writer inhabits two places at the same time: the land of facts and that of 
fiction. But in a neo-colonial situation fiction seems to be more real than the 
absurditv of the factual world of a dictator. The world of a dictator has an 
element of pure fantasy. He will kill, jail, and drive hundreds into exile and 
imagine that he is actually loved for it.
One of course wishes that the world of a dictator was only 
175


--- PAGE 176 ---
confined to hardcovers. But it isn't and a dictator will even think of dragging 
characters from fiction into the streets. Perhaps that proves the relevance of 
literature to life. Or put it this way: dictators are the best students of literature. 
Or the most serious! This does not mean that they have learned anything from 
either literature or history.
176


--- PAGE 177 ---
21 Matigari, 
& the Dreams 
of One East Africa
They called themselves the Happiness Club and for me, a Kenyan, returning to 
the  region  of  my  birth  for  the  first  time since  I  fled  into  exile  from the 
dictatorial regime of Daniel Toroitich arap Moi in June 1982, they symbolised 
the essential East Africa. It was April 1987, I had just arrived in Dar es Salaam 
from London via Harare, a guest of Walter Bgoya, and here I was in the midst 
of a group dedicated to Happiness. Only two months before, February, the 
Kenya police had siezed my novel, Matigari, and I was wondering what they 
would do to the author if they knew that he was now just across the border with 
the Happiness Club. The members and their guests were not all Muslims; but 
they had gathered for dinner in the house of a Tanzanian woman of Asian 
origin to celebrate the end of the fast of Ramadhani. She wore a long kanga 
cloth and she spoke flawless Kiswahili. My eyes kept on moving from her to 
another woman, a Tanzanian of Arab-African origin, whose ebony neck and 
face were casually but beautifully profiled by a white satin cloth which fell in 
folds over her shoulders. She was born in Zanzibar, and now lived in Dar es 
Salaam. The men were mostly from Tanzania, Uganda, Somalia and I from 
Kenya. Two of the men wore long white kanzus and Muslim caps; the rest 
wore Western clothes.
The dinner was a feast of fish, lamb, chicken in curried coconut gravy, 
chapatis, parathas, spinach, pawpaws, and other varieties of tropical greens and 
fruits. And of course rice. From another room where the younger people were, 
there drifted Tarabu music with its hints of Arabia, India, Africa and even Cuba 
blended into one. I savoured the smell of the food; the music of the voices; the 
colours 
177


--- PAGE 178 ---
of the clothes; the anecdotes and the stories; the warmth of the laughter of the 
evening, for all these, even the feast of Ramadhani bespoke the East Africa of 
my upbringing and experience.
I was born in 1938 in Limuru, Kenya, near Kamiriithu, where then stood 
what we called the 'Swahili' village but which really was simply a Muslim 
settlement.  Their  style  of  dressing  - earrings,  noserings,  black  buibuis, 
ntandios, colourful kangas, embroidered caps - and their tinroofed houses were 
very much the same as I was later to see in Mombasa and Nakuru, Kenya; in 
Kampala, Uganda; and in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. It was as if the coast had 
been reproduced in the different parts of East Africa. As a child I played with 
others in Kamiriithu who bore names like Juma, Abdi, Omali, Amina besides 
others who answered to names like John, Peter, Samuel, and Margaret; and of 
course the majority who had the more common African names like Kamau, 
Onyango, Mulwa and Akinyi.
We always envied the dwellers of the Muslim village when Ramadhani 
ended. They always ate plenty of white gleaming rice, something we had only 
at Christmas, but even then in small quantities. Thus Christmas and Ramadhani 
were  oddly connected  in  my  mind,  with  rice  and  chapatis  being  the  real 
material symbolic links. It was years, many years later, that I realised that 
chapatis, parathas and curries were of Indian origin and were also used in 
Hindu festivals like the Diwali, the festival of light, which the Indian kids in 
Limuru town used to celebrate with fireworks. Christmas, Ramadhani, Diwali, 
the  Irua  initiation  ceremony among  the  Agikuyu  all  these  were  connected 
together by curry and rice. That was in the fifties.
In 1978 Ramadhani and Kamiriithu were to reappear in my life. I was then 
in  political  detention-without-trial  at  Kamiti  maximum  security  prison  in 
Kenya because of my activities in community theatre at Kamiriithu, and more 
so because of writing plays in a language, an African language, that people of 
the area could understand. The Muslim village had long disappeared, actually 
destroyed by the colonial administration in the fifties during the Mau Mau-led 
armed struggle. But in my cell at Kamiti-, I one day recalled it because it was a 
Ramadhani festival that interrupted our monotonous rhythm of the filthy prison 
food that passed for a diet. Some of the political prisoners were Muslims and 
they were given special permission to have rice, white gleaming rice, at the end 
of the feast. We all took part in the eating.
178


--- PAGE 179 ---
Now, here in Dar es Salaam, I was marking my temporary return to the 
region with a Ramadhani feast in the company of Muslims, Christians and 
others who were neither of these but who were all members or guests of the 
Happiness Club. This was East Africa. A kaleidoscope of colours, cultures, and 
contours of history.
After the feast we went to the Indian Ocean to cap the evening's Happiness 
with fishing at midnight in a motorboat belonging to the lady in white satin. We 
headed  for  Mbudya  and  other  tiny islands.  The  moon  and  the  stars  were 
reflected in the slightly moving folds of the surface of the sea. As the land 
gradually receded behind us I began to understand why Dar es Salaam had 
been named so: the Haven of Peace. The roaring of the engine or even our 
voices raised in fishermen's songs or anecdotes, only deepened the encircling 
peace. The silence was pregnant with memories.
In the days when there were no steamships, the monsoon winds provided 
the sailing power which enabled seasonal migrations between this East African 
coast  and  all  the  others  bordering  the  Red  Sea  and  the  Indian  Ocean, 
particularly those of Arabia, Persia, India and Ceylon. From May to September 
the ships went away with the south-westerly winds; but from November to 
March, the north easterly winds reversed the process. The ensuing trade turned 
East Africa into a prosperous area, the subject matter of poetic imagination and 
travellers'  tales.  Between  the  tenth  and  fifteenth  centuries,  with  the 
incorporation of the area into the worldwide Muslim culture and commerce 
extending from the coast to the Sahara, West Africa and Spain, there arose 
several city states with Islam as part of the way of life and Kiswahili as the 
unifying language of culture and commerce. Preeminent among them were 
Kilwa, Mombasa, and Malindi, celebrated in Milton's Paradise Lost as among 
the cities and civilisations which Angel Gabriel showed Adam and Eve as 
visions of the future just before their expulsion from Paradise. They were a 
kind of paradise regained through human efforts aided by the monsoon winds.
On the night of Happiness we were therefore fishing in the waterways of 
history, waters which had seen the rise and fall of these peculiarly East African 
cities  whose  cosmopolitan  culture  was  so  well  reflected  in  the  food,  the 
clothes, the music and even the composition of the Happiness Club.
The boat stopped at different places and we would cast our lines 
179


--- PAGE 180 ---
and baits into the waters. The silence of the sea was now so profound that we 
were  all  drawn  into  it  and  the  conversation  was  reduced  to  the  level  of 
whisperings. If we went southwards from here, my host is explaining to me, we 
would end up in Kilwa. We go straight across, and we end up in Zanzibar and 
Pemba. But northwards we come to Bagamoyo and even beyond to Mombasa 
and Malindi. You would then be back home in Kenya. Well, I feel at home 
already . . . I tell him. You are right . . . East Africa is really one country.
A line  drawing  of  a  map  of  the  physical  features  of  Kenya,  Uganda  and 
Tanzania looks to me like a sketch of a bust of a human head wearing a slightly 
flat muslim cap whose slightly flattened top is the long border with Ethiopia. 
The neck rests on the Ruvuma river to the south. The back is formed by the 
tiny folds of the coastline on the Indian Ocean. The face is the line of lakes to 
the west from Malawi to Albert with Lake Tanganyika and Kivu making the 
outline of the chin and mouth. Lakes Edward and Albert form a retreating 
forehead. This strong human shaped head is facing into the heart and belly of 
the continent.
Indeed the rivers form a network of waterways linking East Africa to the 
continent and they contribute to the oceans that link East Africa to the world. 
Tana river with its origin in snow-capped Mount Kenya; Athi river with its 
origin in the Ngong hills and Mount Kilimanjaro; Pangani from Kilimanjaro 
and Meru; the Rufiji river; all flow into the Indian Ocean. Other streams and 
rivers from Lake Tanganyika join the mighty Congo into the Atlantic Ocean. 
The Nile, the most famous of them all, originates from Lake Victoria, through 
Kioga and Albert, into the Mediterranean Sea. Lake Victoria itself is fed by 
numerous rivers with sources in the highlands of Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania. 
Lake Victoria is truly Lake East Africa and it should be renamed so.
Then  there  are  the  famous  mountains:  Ruwenzori,  Elgon,  Kenya, 
Kilimanjaro. They are very East African with Kilimanjaro shared by both. 
Kenya and Tanzania and Elgon by Kenya and Uganda. Standing tall into the 
sky, they are the natural guardians of our land, really the permanent seat of 
God watching over Africa. Kilimanjaro after all is the highest in the Continent. 
The Ruwenzoris are the legendary Mountains of the Moon; and Kenya and  
Kilimanjaro 
180


--- PAGE 181 ---
excited nineteenth-century Europe with the reports of their having defied the 
equatorial sun by wearing permanent caps of snow.
The Great Rift Valley is another natural feature that is uniquely East Africa. 
From Beira to Mozambique, it forks into a V-shape at the north end of Lake 
Malawi. The western half of the V contains the necklace of lakes that make the 
western boundary from Tanzania to Uganda; while the eastern half, containing 
the lakes from Eyasi and Manyara to Turkana, goes through the heartlands of 
Tanzania and Kenya all the way to the Red Sea and beyond.
This  landscape-of  mountains,  lakes,  rivers,  hills,  great  valleys  and  a 
coastline  endowed  with  natural  harbours  has  affected  East  African  history 
profoundly. For years the coast had connected East Africa to the world, to as 
far  as China where giraffes  had already reached, the  gifts of the  King of 
Malindi to the Chinese Emperors. The good, the bad and even the ugly had 
come from the sea, the ugliest being the Portuguese presence at the end of the 
fifteenth century that ushered in the more than' four hundred years of unequal 
relationship with Western Europe. In the wars of resistance against foreign 
occupation  the  mountains  formed  a  natural  fortress  to  which  our  forces 
retreated  for  refuge  and  sustenance  and  as  rear  bases.  And  of  course  the 
richness of the earth became the central bone of contention between Europe 
and East Africa in the twentieth century. Not surprisingly the natural landscape 
dominates the East African literary imagination. This awareness of the land as 
the central actor in our lives distinguishes East African literature from others in 
the continent and it certainly looms large in my own writings from The River 
Between to Matigari.
Limuru,  where  I  was  born,  is  on  the  edge  of  the  Rift  Valley.  The 
escarpment and the forest bush around it were part of my growing up and I 
have never stopped being overwhelmed by the sight of the valley from the 
Limuru end. It becomes even more mysterious when it is covered by the mist 
in the morning or evening.
The railway line built by the British in 1901 to connect Kenya to Uganda 
descends into the mighty Rift at a point not very far from my childhood home. 
We used to stand on a hill and watch the trains bound for Uganda steaming 
away and it seemed to us that they were actually singing about their journey. 
We made up a song to the rhythm of the movement of the trains:
181


--- PAGE 182 ---
Nda-thii-a-ganda
Nda-thii-u-ganda
I-am-go-ing-to-u-ganda
I-am-go-ing-to-u-ganda
We would quicken the pace of the song to keep up with the speeding of the 
train to a climax when the train seemed to be saying nothing more than just the 
repetition of the word Uganda. Uganda then seemed far far away and really it 
would have been nice if the train could have carried us there.
Later in 1959 the train did carry me to Uganda, to Kampala, and on to 
Makerere  University  College,  then  an  external  wing  of  the  University  of 
London, where I read English literature and where I was to discover myself as 
a writer.
Kampala is a city of high hills. Makerere, after which the college was 
named, is one of the nine hills on which the city stands. But the name Makerere 
had  come to  symbolise  higher  learning  in  East  Africa  and  for  those  who 
ascended the hill it meant a passage into the membership of a band of the very 
elect. But the college was more than that.
In the fifties and early sixties Makerere was the intellectual capital of East 
and Central Africa, a role later taken over by the Dar es Salaam University of 
the early sixties. The majority of the students came from Kenya, Uganda and 
Tanzania. Tanzania was then in its two separate identities of Tanganyika and 
Zanzibar. But there were others from Malawi (then Nyasaland), Zambia (then 
Northern Rhodesia), and Zimbabwe (then Southern Rhodesia). As students, 
members  of  the  same  institution,  we  became  accustomed  to  doing  things 
together.  An  example  of  this  was  the  running  of  the  students  clubs  and 
associations and particularly the main students body, Makerere Students Guild. 
These were led by whoever commanded the confidence of the majority no 
matter the country of their origins. We were East Africans, Pan-Africanists, at 
least we regarded ourselves as such, and we were proud of it.
For  us  Kenyans, Uganda  of  the  fifties  held  a special  significance  and 
fascination.  All my life  I had been surrounded  by a white  colonial  settler 
presence. Kenya like Uganda had become a British sphere of influence with the 
carving up of the continent at the 
182


--- PAGE 183 ---
infamous Berlin Conference in 1884. But unlike Uganda, Kenya was targeted 
for white  settlement.  With  the  building  of  the  Kenya  Uganda  railway,  the 
settlers came and kept on coming, and they were determined to make Kenya a 
whiteman's country. Born just before the outbreak of the Second World War, 
growing up in Limuru I assumed that the white presence, owners of the tea 
plantations and mansions across the railway, were a normal part of our lives. 
This normality was challenged by the Mau Mau in 1952. The settler presence 
reacted  to  the  challenge  with  white  terror.  Kenya  came  under  a  State  of 
Emergency. Through this, the British colonial regime had hoped to contain the 
Mau Mau resistance and the Kenya people's fight for independence. In practice 
this meant terrorising the entire African population. Thus going into Uganda 
during that period was an escape from the terror that stalked our daily lives. An 
escape? There was also a sense of arrival, a sense of homecoming. Except for a 
comparatively small Indian  presence  in Kampala  and  other. urban  centres, 
Uganda was visibly, clearly, unarguably an African people's country. Before 
this, I had never had the experience of being and living in a country of blacks 
without whites.
It was Makerere and Uganda which made me discover my sense of being a 
Kenyan. It had established a home, a base, and a distance from which I could 
look back on my Kenyan experience and try to recapture its meaning in words. 
There were literary journals like Penpoint and later Transition to take in some 
of my earliest attempts in that direction.  The Black Hermit, a play; the two 
novels,  The River Between and  Weep Not, Child; numerous short stories and 
journalism were written while I was a student at Makerere. It was also at 
Makerere that we celebrated the very first Independence in East, Central and 
Southern Africa  - the Independence of Tanganyika, later Tanzania, in 1961 
-which was also a celebration of a new dawn in the region.
Tanzania came to occupy a very special place in the political imagination 
of East Africans. It was not simply because of her history of anti-colonial 
resistance, symbolised by the great Maji Maji armed struggle in 1905 and 
independence in 1961. It was not even because of her later role in the liberation 
of Southern Africa although this has been a great contribution at great national 
self-sacrifice.  In  the  sixties  and  early  seventies  Tanzania  provided  an 
anti-neo-colonial intellectual and political leadership best 
183


--- PAGE 184 ---
symbolised  by the  University of  Dar  es  Salaam becoming the  intellectual 
revolutionary hub of East Africa, Africa, and the Third World generally. In its 
heydey Dar es Salaam attracted a brilliant crowd of progressive scholars from 
all over the world, Africa in particular, whose thought and actions are still 
influencing the shape of things in East Africa. Walter Rodney's  How Europe 
Underdeveloped Africa; Issa  Shivji's  The  Silent  Class  Struggle;  The  Dar 
Debate on Imperialism, Nationality and Class - these and more produced by 
academics who had been at the Dar Campus and all published by Tanzania 
Publishing House in its days of glory under Walter Bgoya, have become part of 
the common intellectual heritage of East Africa. Julius Nyerere became the 
philosopher-king some of whose words still fire my own thinking on education 
and culture. The new education in the post-colonial era was for self-reliance 
economically, politically, culturally and psychologically. Otherwise as he once 
told teachers at Dar es Salaam,
You will teach to produce clerks as the colonialists did. You will not be 
teaching fighters but a bunch of slaves and semi-slaves. Get your pupils 
out of the colonial mentality. You have to produce tough people; stubborn 
youths - who can do something - not hopeless youths.
Julius Nyerere was a student at Makerere when it was the intellectual capital of 
East Africa. The present day Ugandan leader, Yoweri Museveni, was a student 
at Dar es Salaam University when it was the revolutionary mecca of East 
Africa.
Under Nyerere, Tanzania was also behind two declarations, first Nairobi 
and later Arusha, which are still part of the political agenda in East Africa 
because they address themselves to the themes of unity and social change. 
They held aloft the banner of hope, visions of tomorrow to which we all could 
relate, because they seemed such a clear and logical outcome of what was 
happening in the region. What a time it was, those days at Makerere, in East 
Africa! It was a replica of the Wordsworthian bliss at being alive at the birth of 
a revolution and the possibilities of a new future. Africa, Our Africa, was 
coming back.
They had been meeting in Nairobi for a few days and then on 5 June 
184


--- PAGE 185 ---
1963 they announced their pledge to merge the three countries into a political 
Union. What! An East African Federation? Tanganyika, with Julius Nyerere as 
the first Prime Minister and later President, had been independent for over a 
year; Uganda, under Apollo Milton Obote as the Premier, for slightly over six 
months; and Kenya had just attained internal self rule with Jomo Kenyatta, 
recently released from eight years in prison as a Mau Mau convict, as its Prime 
Minister. Yet their declaration for a larger political unit had no hesitation and 
no ambiguities:
Our meeting, they said, is motivated by the spirit of Pan-Africanism and 
not by mere selfish regional interest . . . There is no more room for slogans 
and words. This is our day of action in the cause of the ideals we believe 
in, and in the unity and freedom for which we have suffered and sacrificed 
so much.
It was not the first time that the federation of the three territories had been 
discussed. From 1919, or since Tanganyika was-taken over from the Germans, 
the British Government had tried to bring about a closer union of the three 
colonies.  The  various  efforts  resulted  in  some  services  like  transport  and 
customs being run on an East African basis from about 1932. The Governors of 
the three countries began regular meetings, with Kenya in the chair. In 1948 the 
Governors conference was replaced by a High Commission as the executive 
arm, and an East Africa Assembly as the legislative arm. In 1961, the High 
Commission  changed  its  name  and  status  and  it  now  became  East  Africa 
Common Services Organisation with a 'Parliament' - The Central Legislative 
Assembly.
What had escaped all the previous efforts was the formal act of political 
union. In colonial times the people most keen on such a union with a central 
state were the white settlers in Kenya. They could see their economic hold on 
the region being strengthened by their control of such a state. The African 
people  had  always  opposed  it  for  the  same  reasons.  But  now,  with 
independence  promising  a  new  era  of  paramountcy of  African  interests,  a 
centralised East African state could only strengthen them. Our time had come!
The  declaration  was  met  with  ululations  by  the  people  of  the  three 
countries. In the villages, in the towns, in the streets, everywhere, the workers, 
peasants and the youth composed songs in support of it:
185


--- PAGE 186 ---
Tulimtuma Nyerere 
Kwa Uhuru Kenya, 
Uganda, Tanganyika 
Sisi twasaidiana
We sent Nyerere 
On a mission for freedom 
Kenya, Uganda, Tanganyika 
We support one another
I was then a student at Makerere and I can remember the excitement at the 
news.  After  all,  we  the  students  had  been  doing  things  together  as  East 
Africans. Our unity was now about to flower and bear a big and juicy political 
fruit in the very creation of an East African federation promised with so much 
fanfare at the end of 1963.
 We had a chance to express our feelings. One day we heard that the three 
leaders, Nyerere, Obote and Kenyatta, were going to have a public meeting at 
the Clock Tower in Kampala. It was a Saturday, the 29th of June, 1963. We 
trooped to the meeting ground singing and dancing: Uhuru cha cha cha . . . 
Umoja cha cha cha . . . The meeting was well attended and our student voices 
joined  those  of  the  working  people  who  had  massed  there.  Thunderous 
applause greeted Nyerere, or Obote or Kenyatta when any of them referred to 
their Nairobi declaration. Uhuru cha cha cha . . . Unity cha cha cha . . .
What were we really cheering? The three leaders could tabulate all the 
advantages of an East African federation. These were obvious and even the 
white settlers had correctly identified them in earlier years. Western interests 
would not have opposed such a closer unity, particularly if it ensured a greater 
and more secure territory for their operations. But the fact is that the Nairobi 
declaration  had  not  really  addressed  itself  to  the  ideology  guiding  the 
foundation of such a federation. Whose state was it going to be? What social 
interests in East Africa was it going to serve? Where did it stand  vis-à-vis 
neo-colonialism  and  the  fundamental  question  of  social  change  for  the 
majority, the working people of East Africa so well represented by the crowd 
that had gathered at the Clock Tower?
And then came the Arusha declaration, addressing itself to Tanzania only. 
But in some ways it was more East African than the 
186


--- PAGE 187 ---
Nairobi declaration. Arusha reflected realities and articulated a vision beyond 
the borders of Tanzania:
We have been oppressed a great deal, we have been exploited a great deal 
and we have been degraded a great deal. It is our weakness that has led to 
our being oppressed, exploited, disregarded. Now we want a revolution - a 
revolution which brings to an end our weakness so that we are never again 
exploited, oppressed and humiliated.
With the Arusha declaration, Nyerere and Tanzania had secured their place in 
the political imagination of East Africa for years to come, for in articulating the 
vision of the emancipation of the workers and peasants of Tanzania, they were 
actually stating the links that really bound the peoples of the three territories. 
The fact is that the working people of all three areas had been exploited a great 
deal, oppressed a great deal, humiliated a great deal and only the unity and the 
economic, political and cultural empowerment of the masses would meet the 
real needs.
As it turned out, the Nairobi declaration and the Clock Tower meeting at 
Kampala were to remain the pinnacle of the dreams for a centralised East 
African state. The Arusha declaration was to bring out sharply and clearly the 
different paths of social development opted for by the three states. Tanzania 
was experimenting with social democracy, under the name Ujamaa. Kenya 
grew into a classical neo-colony, preferring its cosy relationship with the West, 
as client state, to the risks of a different social order. The Kenya leadership 
took it that it was better to be a well-fed slave than to chance the search for self 
reliance as a free and independent nation. Uganda under Obote tried to face 
different  directions  at  the  same  time,  signalling  right,  left  and  centre 
simultaneously. And then with the  coup d’état of Idi Amin, fascism came to 
Uganda. In the end, even the East African Community which had replaced the 
East  African  Common  Services  Organisation  could  not  be  saved.  In  1978 
Tanzania and Uganda went to war. The border between Kenya and Tanzania 
was closed between 1977 and 1983. And since the fall of Idi Amin and of the 
second reign of Obote, Dictator Moi has tried his best to provoke a war with 
Museveni's Uganda. Thus today in the nineties, the three countries seem no 
nearer a political union than 
187


--- PAGE 188 ---
they were  in  1963  when  Nyerere,  Obote  and  Kenyatta  made  the  Nairobi 
declaration and thrilled the hearts of millions. Does it mean that the declaration 
was only sound and fury signifying nothing?
East  Africa  is  condemned  by the  inheritance  of  geography and  history to 
forever keep on trying to forge unity for its common survival as a strong force 
in Africa and world affairs or else be doomed to remain weak, subject to 
humiliations and manipulations by other more powerful nations. Our history 
has already given us a number of legacies, as guides and warnings, on which 
we can forge real unity. Two of the most crucial are the gifts of a common 
language  and  a  common  tradition  of  resistance  to  foreign  domination  and 
struggle against internal repression.
An overwhelming number of scholars now accept that Kiswahili is an 
African language. It is originally the language of the Waswahili at the coast and 
it clearly belongs to the Bantu group of languages. But it has been enriched by 
cultural  contact  with  the  different  forces  which  have  interacted  with  East 
Africa. Its capacity to absorb new words, new expressions, new experiences, 
makes it .one of the fastest-growing languages in the world. It is today the 
national  and  official  language  in  Tanzania;  it  is  the  all-Kenya  national 
language, despite the fact that English is still the official language; and it is 
assuming a  similar  position  in  Uganda.  We  have  many languages  in  East 
Africa.  But  Kiswahili  enables  us  to  communicate  across  all  the  different 
languages. The beauty of it is that this is an African language, an authentic 
product of East Africa, of our history, and. in its development at the coast, it 
always  functioned  as  a  language  of  unity,  facilitating  culture  contact  and 
commerce.
Resistance is yet another common theme in our history. By the fifteenth 
century at  the  coast  and  up  to  the  eighteenth  century in  the  interior,  the 
struggles with nature itself as well as social struggles through trade, commerce, 
and even inter-community wars, were bringing about the integration of the 
various regions into ever larger units and formations often with a centralised 
authority, the Bunyoro-Kitara, Ankole and Buganda kingdoms in Uganda, and 
the Ntemi chiefdoms in Tanzania, being the best examples. The process of the 
internal  workings-out  of  the  contradictions  with  nature;  of  contradictions 
between communities; and contradictions within a community was interrupted 
by the various invaders from 
188


--- PAGE 189 ---
the  sea.  The  Portuguese  in  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries  were 
followed by those of the Omanite Arabs of the eighteenth century; and then 
those of the Germans and the British in nineteenth century. Divide and rule was 
the common theme in the practice of these conquerors. Division of the East 
African  communities  by  external  forces  is  best  symbolised  by  the  Berlin 
Conference  of  1884  which,  with  the  subsequent  treaties,  saw  the  various 
boundaries drawn literally through even single language communities so that 
today the three territories share certain nationalities who live on either side of 
their borders. The Maasai, for instance, inhabit both Tanzania and Kenya. It is 
the  struggle  against  these  external  forces  of  occupation  that  created  the 
common tradition of resistance.
Kenya provides one of the best examples of this tradition. I need hardly 
mention all the wars fought by the Mombasans against the Portuguese in the 
last  years  of  the  fifteenth  century  and  throughout  the  sixteenth,  and  the 
seventeenth centuries. One of the most memorable was the 1630 resistance led 
by Yusuf bin Hasan against the Portuguese occupation of Mombasa. Another 
memorable event was the three-year siege of Mombasa towards the end of the 
seventeenth  century,  which  finally  broke  the  backbone  of  the  Portuguese 
presence at the East African coast. By 1728 the Portuguese had been driven out 
of Kenya never to return, leaving behind Fort Jesus, destroyed cities, and a few 
words as the only mark of their two hundred years presence. Similar feats of 
resistance  were  later  enacted  against  the  Omanites,  the  Germans,  and  the 
British,  in  the  three  countries.  The  Maji  Maji  armed  struggle  against  the 
Germans in Tanzania in 1905 began the era of armed anti-colonial uprisings. It 
was however the Mau Mau armed struggle from 1952 to 1962 which captured 
the imagination of all East Africa and which best symbolised the determination 
of the African people to be free. And just as the three-year siege of Mombasa in 
the seventeenth century broke the back of the Portuguese occupation, so did the 
Mau Mau break the back of the entire British colonial policy in East Africa and 
beyond. Colonial control could no longer be effected in the old way. From the 
Great Mombasa resistance through Maji Maji to Mau Mau, our history glitters 
with many heroic characters: Yusuf bin Hasan, Mbarak Ibn Rashid, Mwakawa, 
Kabarega,  Mwanga,  and  Klmathi:  all  these  honour  that  great  tradition  of 
resistance.
189


--- PAGE 190 ---
There are other lessons from that history. Those at the forefront in the 
struggle  against  foreign  occupation  and  domination  were  the  forces  most 
conscious of the need for unity within the various national communities. Such 
a leadership always felt it necessary to draw closer to the people, getting their 
strength from the broad masses. Those that allied with foreign occupation and 
domination always worked against the unity of the various peoples. Collabora-
tion with the foreign invader always alienated such individuals and leaders 
from the people. They therefore ruled through tyranny. Or putting it another 
way,  tyrannies  always  thrived  through  divisions  among  the  peoples  and 
between communities.
Still the people had an answer to tyranny. In his book  The Meadows of 
Gold and the Mines of Gems written in Cairo in 943 AD, al Mas'udi, who had 
travelled to the East Africa coast in 916 AD, describes the people as being 
ruled by a supreme king under whom were other smaller kings. Such kings 
were chosen on the condition that they ruled in justice:
Once the king becomes a tyrant, and stops ruling justly they kill him and 
refuse to allow his descendants to inherit the throne. They do this because 
in ceasing to rule justly the king has ceased to be the son of the Supreme 
Lord that is to say the God of Heaven and Earth.
Thus our history of resistance is full of guides and warnings about our present 
and our future. So simple and yet so easy to forget. In unity lies strength; in 
divisions, weakness.
With  the  inheritance  of  a  common  geography,  a  common  tradition  of 
resistance, a common language, and with political unity bringing about the 
economic integration of our 60 million people under one strong federal state, 
what a wonderful base this would be from which we could face the twenty-first 
century. This substantial home market would enable us to sustain big modern 
industries, raise our agricultural production to new heights, open up internal 
tourism, develop  complementary economic activities  instead  of the  current 
duplication, and exploit all the possibilities of internal commerce long before 
we need explore foreign markets. We could interact with foreign markets on 
the basis of strength, not weakness, equality and not dependence. We would in 
the process say farewell 
190


--- PAGE 191 ---
to  colonial  borders  and  the  divisions  of  nationalities  as  we  leap  into  the 
twenty-first century. A midnight dream of an amateur fisherman on the high 
seas? The dream was not mine alone: It has been with us on the land and on the 
sea.
`Tanzania, Uganda and Kenya once had a dream  - or a vision that we 
would all become part of one large unit. Some of us still hold on to that dream, 
and believe it can be made into a reality,' so said Julius Nyerere on 7 June 
1968, probably referring to the Nairobi declaration which had promised to 
bring about a federation at the end of 1963.
Today the architects of the Nairobi declaration are no longer on the scene. 
Kenyatta is dead, Obote out of power. Nyerere is no longer the head of state. 
And while Tanzania under Mwinyi, and Uganda, under Museveni, are still 
experimenting with forms of democratic participation in the national life and 
have adopted a pro-Africa policy in international relations, Kenya, under Moi, 
has become a dictatorship crushing any forms of popular participation in the 
political  and  cultural  life  of  the  country.  The Moi/Kanu  regime  has given 
military facilities to the USA; and under the guise of merely providing tropical 
conditions for their training, the regime has ensured a British military presence 
in the country. The country has become a tourist paradise for Western hunters 
of sex, sun and sand. Malindi for instance is now German territory. Other areas 
of the coast have been colonised by American, Italian, and British tourists. The 
dictatorship with its vast machinery of terror  - more than five people cannot 
meet even for a family tea party, funeral or wedding without a police licence - 
was in the era of the Cold War never exposed in the West because of its 
alignment. Hundreds of political prisoners rot in Moi's jails. Others are in exile. 
The gap between the rich and the poor is one of the widest in Africa. The 
dictatorship has set nationalities and regions against one another. If it is so 
scared of democracy and unity within Kenya, how could it possibly welcome 
democracy and unity on a far larger scale?
But the dream and the vision are still there among the progressive youth of 
the  three  countries.  For  instance  the  1987  Draft  Minimum  Programme  of 
Mwakenya - the underground resistance movement in Kenya - states as one of 
its goals the realisation of the political unity of the three East African countries 
`on the basis of the 
191


--- PAGE 192 ---
indivisible common interests of the peasants and workers' and 'on the firm 
conviction that many of our problems can be solved more effectively on an 
East African basis.'
What emerges is that genuine African unity on a continental or regional 
basis will not be possible unless founded on consistent anti-neo-colonialism 
and democracy. Such unity would have to be sought from the standpoint of the 
people. It cannot be imposed from above or from without. A commitment to 
genuine independence, democracy and social change is essential to the success 
of any new phase in the struggle for regional and even continental economic, 
political and cultural integration. For that reason I prefer the poetry of the 
Arusha declaration to the inflated prose of the Nairobi declaration. For only on 
the basis of profound social change, an increase in wealth and the insurance 
that the wealth remains within the country and within the majority, can there be 
genuine social justice and happiness for all in any one of the countries or in one 
East Africa.
Since my exile in 1982, I have been a wanderer. I have lived and worked in 
many places, my latest being as Visiting Professor at Yale University in the 
USA. But there is a Kenya I always carry with me, a Kenya that nobody, not 
even Dictator Moi, can take from me. It is the Kenya of the working people of 
all the nationalities within it and their heroic struggles against domination by 
nature or other humans, over the centuries. In my novels, I have tried to capture 
this sense of national pride and dignity. It is the working people of Kenya who 
took on the post-war might of the British Empire and forced colonialism to 
retreat for fear that Mau Mau-type armed insurrections might break out in other 
parts of the British-colonised world. But the neo-colonial state under Moi has 
been at war with this aspect of our history. The facts testify to this.
When  in  1977  I  co-authored,with  Ngugi  wa  Mirii,  a  play,  Ngaahika 
Ndeenda, celebrating the fact that the ordinary people, and not outstanding 
individuals,  are the  makers  of our history,  I was  arrested  and placed  in a 
maximum  security  prison.  How  dare  I  write  that  about  people  and  in  a 
language that those very people could understand? When in 1982, we tried to 
perform  another  play,  Maitu  Njugira,  again  celebrating  the  same  kind  of 
history, the police closed the theatre where we were due to perform and later 
192


--- PAGE 193 ---
Moi  sent  three  truckloads  of  armed  policemen  to  raze  to  the  ground  the 
Kamiriithu open air theatre. And lastly when later I wrote a novel, Matigari, on 
the same theme, and it was published in Gikuyu in Kenya in 1986, the results 
were even more dramatic.
Matigari, the main character, is puzzled by a world where the producer is 
not the one who has the last word on what he has produced; a world where lies 
are rewarded and truth punished. He goes round the country asking questions 
about truth and justice. People who had read the novel started talking about 
Matigari and the questions he was raising as if Matigari was a real person in 
life. When Dictator Moi heard that there was a Kenyan roaming around the 
country asking such questions, he issued orders for the man's arrest. But when 
the police found that he was only a character in fiction, Moi was even more 
angry and he issued fresh orders for the arrest of the book itself. That's why, in 
February 1987, in a very well co-ordinated police action, the novel was seized 
from all the bookshops and from the publisher's warehouse. The novel is now 
published in English for a readership outside Kenya,  the first case, in our 
history, of a fictional character being forced into exile to join its creator. But 
this was Moi's Kenya where facts are stranger than fiction, where state actions 
in  the  streets  here  induced  more  terror  in  its  citizens  than  that  of  their 
nightmares, where the words of the head of state about himself, spoken in all 
seriousness, would more than match those of the cleverest of satirists.
I am telling my host about Matigari's Africa as we return to the mainland from 
our midnight fishing in the Indian Ocean. The story has emerged from the 
current joke in the boat: that he and I belong more to the world of publishing 
than to that of fishing. The ocean had been mean with us, yielding us only two 
tiny fishes after three hours of throwing hook, line and sinker into its waters. 
He is suggesting turning the book into a film so that Matigari would return to 
East Africa as a visual image. Strange that we too are talking about Matigari as 
if he was indeed a real person. But on or out of celluloid, I know, in a sense 
more deep than words can tell, that Matigari shall one day return to Kenya, to 
East Africa, for his world is shared by the essential East Africa once envisioned 
in the Arusha declaration and the glimpses of which we still get when looking 
at our history as East Africans. 
193


--- PAGE 194 ---
As later in the week I board Air Tanzania for Harare I cannot help thinking 
that  this  was  once  part  of  the  mighty  East  African  Airways,  senselessly 
wrecked in the seventies because Moi and his then close associates wanted to 
start a private airline. I recall the Happiness Club who had given me a little 
happiness to carry back with me on the highways of the world. And despite the 
fact that I was literally next to Kenya and I, like Matigari, could not set foot on 
the land of my birth, I was happy. For I had been in touch with East Africa, my 
East Africa, communing for a time with the dreams and visions of a politically 
united region as a 'prelude to the United States of Africa. Africa will come 
back!
194

