=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: NYU Press Pimps Up Hos Down Hip Hops Hold on Young Black Women Mar 2007.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 206
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:13:35.190896
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
pimps up, ho’s down


--- PAGE 3 ---



--- PAGE 4 ---
hip hop’s hold on young black women
t. denean sharpley-whiting
a
new york university press
new york and london


--- PAGE 5 ---
new york university press
New York and London
www.nyupress.org
© 2007 by New York University
All rights reserved
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Sharpley-Whiting, T. Denean.
Pimps up, ho’s down : hip hop’s hold on young Black women / 
Tracy D. Sharpley-Whiting.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN–13: 978–0–8147–4014–9 (cloth : alk. paper)
ISBN–10: 0–8147–4014–6 (cloth : alk. paper)
1. African American women— Social conditions. 2. Young women—United
States— Social conditions. 3. Hip-hop— Social aspects— United States.
4. Sex role—Political aspects—United States. 5. Sexism—United States.
6. African American women—Psychology. 7. Young women—United
States— Psychology. 8. African American women— Interviews. 9. Young
women— United States—Interviews. 10. United States—
Social conditions— 1980– I. Title. 
E185.86.S515 2007
305.48'896073—dc 22 2006101234
New York University Press books are printed on acid-free paper,
and their binding materials are chosen for strength and durability.
Manufactured in the United States of America
1 0987654321


--- PAGE 6 ---
contents
Acknowledgments vii
Prologue
Sex, Power, and Punanny ix
Introduction
Pimpin’ Ain’t Easy, But Somebody’s Got to Do It1
1 “I See the Same Ho”: Video Vixens, Beauty Culture,
and Diasporic Sex Tourism 23
2 Too Hot to Be Bothered: Black Women
and Sexual Abuse 53
3 “I’m a Hustla, Baby”: Groupie Love and
the Hip Hop Star 85
4 Strip Tails: Booty Clappin’, P-poppin’,
Shake Dancing 115
5 Coda, or a Few Last Words on Hip Hop
and Feminism 149
Notes 157
Index 167
About the Author 187
v


--- PAGE 7 ---



--- PAGE 8 ---
vii
acknowledgments
here are many people who
have assisted me in writing this book. There were times
when I had just had enough and those individuals offered
support, encouragement, and feedback. I would like to
thank my editor, Eric Zinner, Emily Park, as well as the pro-
duction and marketing team at NYU Press. Your enthusiasm
at the early stages was catching. I would like to thank my
former colleagues at Hamilton College and those at Vander-
bilt University, in particular Mona Frederick at the Robert
Penn Warren Center for the Humanities, Linda Manning,
Director of the Women’s Center, and Monica Casper, Direc-
tor of Women’s and Gender Studies. Thanks to Aishah Sim-
mons (everyone should view NO!:therapedocumentary.com),
Nekesa Moody, whose essay on hip hop and women contin-
ues to be inspiring, and Elizabeth Hadley . Ketura D. Brown,
my research assistant, deserves a special thanks for her dedi-
cation and smarts. I’d also like to thank Alice Randall (keep
those novels coming), Tiffany Patterson, Thadious Davis,
W. Jelani Cobb, Davarian Baldwin, Yelitza Nieves, Pamela
Des Barres, rock and roll’s ﬁrst groupie to tell all, Tiona Mc-
Clodden, Dwight McBride, and Mir eille Miller-Young for
the intriguing conversation on net porn in Brazil at ASWAD.
I’d like to thank the Frist Center for Visual Arts in Nash-


--- PAGE 9 ---
ville, where I volunteer twice a month, for providing a space
for contemplation in the Art Library, Mark Anthony Neal,
Marcyliena Morgan and the Hip Hop Archive at Stanford
University, Joy James, Julie Beverly, editor and publisher of
Ozone magazine, Jonathan Shecter of Game Video, Inc., the
young women interviewees in the book’s concluding chapter
as well as Anna and the women in various strip clubs who
shared their experiences, Michael Eric Dyson and Reverend
Marcia Dyson, and Darlene Clark-Hine, who listened to me
express misgivings one morning at the Hilton Garden Inn in
Evanston, IL; and last but certainly not least, hip hop and
feminism—may we continue the dialogue.
I have to thank my extended family as well as my parents,
Muriel and Gina Sharpley. Gilman Whiting, thank you for
your wit and proofreading; and Haviland, thank you for pa-
tiently drawing pictures of princesses and queens and singing
wonderful songs as Mommy typed.
Acknowledgments / viii


--- PAGE 10 ---
ix
prologue
Sex, Power, and Punanny
So listen up all the ladies, nubian queens,
black princesses, african goddesses, choir girls,
young girls, models,
skeezas, bitches, hos, playettes, dykes, divas,
house wives, gold diggers,
sac chasers, cum guzzlers, chicken heads, crack
heads, baller bitches,
shake dancers and boosters.
Say what you want, we’re all one in the same.
No matter what they call you, or you call your-
self.
There’s only 3 rules in this game:
keep your nappy-ass hair done, do your mother
fucking sit-ups,
and whenever you lay on your back, make sure
your paper is stacked.
— “Intro” by Sommore, Trina’s Diamond
Princess
n mid-December 1992, Dr.
Dre’s The Chronic dropped. Snoop Dogg with his souther n
drawl reminded me of home—St. Louis—before names like
Nellyville and The Lou caught on. St. Louis has a markedly
southern-derived black culture thanks to the black migration
from the rural South to cities up north in search of better
lives and jobs. My maternal side of the family was living


--- PAGE 11 ---
proof of that migration: they were formerly tenant farmers
on a plantation in Aberdeen, Mississippi. However, raised by
my ambitious single black father with the help of his practi-
cal midwestern mother and grandmother, I only heard those
southern inﬂections in the neighborhood alleyways where I
played kickball and “cork”—tomboy that I was—with
other kids, or when visiting my mother’s family.
Though my father speaks in that highly sought-after
news-anchor-style regional-accent-free diction, by the time I
reached college in the Northeast, several friends called me
“Twang.” Words like hair, chair, and care came out ﬂat and
with a “u” where the “ai” should have been and double
“r’s” replaced words ending in “re”: 
churr, hurr, curr. Over
the years I had worked to shed the accent as I continued my
education in the Northeast (though it still naturally reasserts
itself in the company of those closest to me). But as I strolled
into the Rites and Reasons Theatre one Tuesday morning in
March 
1993, I was doing my best impression of Snoop’s
“One, two, thr ee and to the fo’ ” from “Nuthin’ But a G-
Thang.”
I was one of three graduate teaching assistants for Profes-
sor Michael Eric Dyson’s Introduction to African American
Studies class at Br own University and it was my day to lec -
ture before the class of sixty plus students. W e were reading
and discussing bell hooks’ s provocative essay “Selling Hot
Pussy: Representations of Black Female Sexuality in the Cul-
tural Marketplace.” It was one of those rare moments where
my contradictions wer e laid bare—humming such a sala-
cious, sexist tune after immersing myself in the brilliance of
hooks. But of course, that (and my accent-repressing acro-
batics) was just the beginning of my contradictions.
Prologue / x


--- PAGE 12 ---
Perhaps I was too implicated in the essay. hooks’s bit
about modeling sent me into a tailspin. In my lecture, I
waxed on about the modeling profession—explaining the
strides black models had made and commenting on the con-
tinued color and size biases of the industry as well as the
practice of calling women “girls.” The students were chomp-
ing at the bit. Phrases such as “oppressive beauty standards,”
“anorexia,” and “bulimia,” came rushing toward me at the
podium. The Brown undergraduates were sharp. This was
the era before the popularity of Tyra Banks’s 
America’s Next
Top Model, the height of Naomi Wolf’s exciting The Beauty
Myth, and so the debate began. Dyson sat bemused in the
audience, listening. The quick-witted womanist thinker Mar-
cia Dyson was also there. Together we engaged the students
in a lively back and forth on beauty culture, black women,
and their own refusal to undertake that same rigorous cri-
tique of sexism in rap music and videos. Who was I to talk
about “rigorous critique”? I slinked out of the classroom at
noon and hopped into my car with 
The Chronic blasting. I
was on my way to Boston to model in a mid-afternoon run-
way show at Saks Fifth Avenue.
In hindsight, I r ealize that models, like the strip club
dancers and “video vixens” (disparagingly r eferred to as
“video-ho’s”) that I discuss in this book, and even female
rappers such as T rina, Lil’ Kim, and Foxy Brown, occupy a
peculiar place of cultural antipathy . We are all in the busi-
ness of selling illusions, as we move various pr oducts— in-
cluding our own sexuality —but we often stand accused of
selling out. Blamed for participating in the exploitation of
women, these women and their stories, like mine, are al-
ways much more complicated. Nothing—be it modeling,
Prologue / xi


--- PAGE 13 ---
stripping, or rapping about punanny power, and the motiva-
tions behind such choices—is ever so clear cut.
My turn as a print and runway model primarily involved
a desire to live above the poverty line as a graduate student.
While the four-year Dorothy Danforth Compton fellowship
at Brown was generous, the monthly stipend was wanting. I
had won out on some counts in the genetic roll of the die,
and so modeling seemed a viable alternative.
Like erotic dancers, I assumed the money would be fast
and easy. Like my fellow Brown alum Heidi Mattson, whose
book 
Ivy League Stripper describes her tenure at Brown as a
student by day, Providence Foxy Lady stripper by night (or
dayshift), I did not necessarily see modeling as conspiring
with the multibillion-dollar beauty and sex entertainment in-
dustries. Many of my graduate student colleagues found my
choice of pick-up work anti-intellectual. Some even attrib-
uted my success in graduate school to high heels, long legs,
and short skirts. I, on the other hand, had come to fully ap-
preciate the meaning of the Ph.D.—Player Hating Degree.
With my feet in both worlds, I felt quite grounded. When
I overheard models obsess about their imperfections, breast
jobs, “go-sees” (castings), photographers, and comp car ds, I
envisioned a car eer as an intellectual. When my academic
colleagues took themselves way too seriously, I turned to the
less-lofty world of modeling. It is not that models ar e stick-
ﬁgured pinheads; they just don’t get worked up about Hege-
lian dialectics. If an academic job didn’ t materialize, I in -
formed my dissertation advisor that I would return to Paris
(I had an agency—Specimen) to work on my “book” (mod-
eling portfolio) and seriously pursue modeling, instead of
Prologue / xii


--- PAGE 14 ---
tracking down obscure documents in the libraries and ar-
chives of the Bibliothèque Nationale de France and the
Musée de l’Homme.
It was the perfect mind-body split. Like Kimberly Jones,
who professes in a 
2000 interview in The Washington Post
with Kristal Brent Zook that “Lil’ Kim is what I use to get
money . . . a character I use to sell my records,” I too was
whatever the client, photographer, or my agent wanted me
to be—lingerie runway model, African American girl next
door, high-fashion print model. I didn’t anticipate the hours
on the Stairmaster and the verbal blows delivered with preci-
sion to the body or face by an agent, photographer, client, or
even a make-up artist. I remember doing a freebie runway
show for the high-end salon Safar on Newberry Street in
Boston, which netted me a year and a half of cuts, coloring,
and styling by a skillful Czechoslovakian stylist. When I sat
in the make-up artist’s chair with my hair teased about
wildly, he frowned but went to work. Afterwards, he re-
marked how fabulous I looked; he had wonder ed what was
so special when I ﬁrst sat down. And he was so sincere.
These were also pre-Beyoncé and Jennifer Lopez days. And
my hankerings for sweet potato pie, hot chocolate, and
peach cobbler easily moved my 
5'10", 118 lb. frame from a
size six to an eight — plus-size model territory.
Despite the hoo-hah in the Brown classroom that day,
I was a card-carrying member of the Rhode Island chapter
of NOW (National Or ganization for Women). My pr ogres-
sive politics were unwavering. They had been shaped by un-
cles who ﬂirted with Marxist-Humanism and “Free Angela
Davis” campaigns and parents who gnashed their teeth
Prologue / xiii


--- PAGE 15 ---
about Reaganomics. In the mid- to late 1980s, I had plunged
into four years of intense study and dialogue on race, sex,
gender, class, and politics at an elite, private coeducational
university in upstate New York. I found Paula Giddings’s
When I and Where I Enter inspiring and Barbara Smith’s
All the Women Are White, All the Men Are Black, But Some
of Us Are Brave: Black Women’s Studies all that and then
some. My ﬁrst encounter with Gloria Watkins (bell hooks)
was at a forum sponsored by a multiracial women’s student
organization that myself and another student co-founded.
With her seeming affection for titles with the word “pussy”
in them, she discussed her essay “Whose Pussy Is It?”—a
critique of Spike Lee’s 
She’s Gotta Have It,black sexual pol-
itics, and feminism. Belatedly recognizing that unforgettable
scene between Nola Darling and her paramour, Jamie Over-
street, as one of rape, Spike Lee now wishes that it had been
left on the cutting room ﬂoor. In a 
1998 interview, “[He
Got] Game Plan,” with Gary Dauphin of The Village Voice,
Lee reﬂects on his breakout ﬁlm:
I would take the rape scene out of She’s Gotta Have It. ...
Rape is obviously a very violent act, and I just wish I hadn’t
put the scene in. It br ought a lot of things into the pictur e
that didn’t belong there, and it just wasn’t necessary. It was
my ignorance at the time that I put it there. . . . [N]obody
told me. I’m 41 now. I was 24 when I wrote that script. It
just didn’t belong in the movie. You grow and you learn.
We had all seen Lee’s ﬁlm when it debuted, stunned into si-
lence by the “whose pussy is it” scene. And yet, we were not
quite audacious enough to muster the word “rape”—though
rape it was.
Prologue / xiv


--- PAGE 16 ---
We were students galvanized by apartheid, steeped in rap
music, and committed to extracurricular reading groups,
black studies courses, and faculty-supervised independent
study on black women’s literature and history, so much so
that by the time I reached Brown University as a graduate
student, French feminist theory had had its shot at me and
black women’s studies were squarely on my radar, with hip
hop always somewhere blaring in the background. We were
part of a new black youth culture, “the hip hop generation”
as MBA Wharton school graduate Ivan Juzang ﬁrst put it in
a
1992 market-research piece released by Motivational Edu-
cational Entertainment, “Reaching the Hip-Hop Genera-
tion.” This term deﬁnes those born in the post-movement
era—post–civil rights, black power, and women’s move-
ments—yet profoundly inﬂuenced by those movements. It is
a term that transcends geography in that it refers to those
coming from urban epicenters and suburban outposts. And
in the context of this book, it refers speciﬁcally to blacks
born between approximately 
1965 and 1984.1
Despite my fellowship with hip hop, the relationship be-
tween young women and hip hop, even in those late 1980s
college days, proved knotty in places. When the late Scott La
Rock had “had ’em all” being a “super ho” with his “super
sperm,” I often wondered just how many “ﬂy girls, shy girls,
black girls, white girls” he had run up in and then kicked
to the curb. An undeniably unﬂattering depiction of male
boarishness, La Rock’s reference to himself as a “super ho”
nonetheless r eﬂected the universal use of the term “ho,”
quite unlike its exclusive use for women in post-
1980s hip
hop.
Prologue / xv


--- PAGE 17 ---
Even Sir Mix A Lot’s booty anthems, a precursor to 2
Live Crew, and the friendly ﬁre battles of “Roxanne, Rox-
anne,” Roxanne Shante, and “The Real Roxanne,” left us
all standing intact. The seemingly endless parade of Rox-
annes—part of the ﬁrst wave of female rappers—Salt-N-
Pepa, MC Lyte, Latifah, and Monie Love (the second wave),
presented young women with an alternative worldview, a fe-
male perspective on the underclass, urban youth, and sexual
politics. However, these progressive counterpoints were of-
ten overshadowed by women’s footnoted status in hip hop.
As the grind and ravages of the Reagan-Bush eras whirred
along thrashing urban communities, youth unemployment
rose unchecked along with crack-cocaine addiction, and
dealing became a full-time job. Gangsta rap emerged to hold
it down for the West Coast and the South with Scarface and
others. That genre of rap music provided insights similar to
Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five’s “The Message,”
as it described the depressed and violent environs of the
mostly black and Latino Los Angeles and the Deep South,
but it was a mixed one as far as gender. The war on drugs
led to prison culture and black youth culture meeting some-
where in the middle. Scor es of black and br own men, fr esh
from juvenile detention centers or prison stints, deﬁ ned a
new masculinity in which the unique sexual hierar chies
formed in those spaces were transferred to heterosexual re-
lations. Outside these institutional walls, men became the
proverbial “punks in prisons” — those incarcerated men de-
scribed as “bitches” and “ho’s,” used to satisfy sexual needs,
tasked with prison clean-up, cooking, laundry duties, etc.,
and oftentimes exploited brutally to assert manhood and
masculinity.
Prologue / xvi


--- PAGE 18 ---
From the late 1980s onwards, the gender-bending term
“ho” was exclusively used to describe women or “unmanly”
men, and “bitch” could be heard ad nauseam. The “g’s up,
ho’s down” mentality of late 
1980s hip hop laid the ground-
work for the “pimp-playa-bitch-ho” nexus that has come
to dominate hip hop culture. A third wave of stalwart fe-
male rappers—Lauryn Hill, Missy Elliot, Eve—emerged that
nonetheless also included artists who many accused of pan-
dering to the nexus, thus representing a marked departure
from ﬁrst- and second-wave female hip hop artists. For
some, this pandering ran parallel to a new wave in feminism
of the sex-power-punanny variety. Lil’ Kim, Shawnna, Jacki-
O, Remy Ma, Trina, and Foxy Brown were pushing the en-
velope with respect to gender relations, sexuality, and beauty
culture. Alternately called “feminist glamazons” or rain-
makers of a “new” or “post” feminist era (seems folks can’t
make up their minds whether feminism is indeed passé), they
fearlessly exempliﬁed punanny politics, status consumption,
and the ever -provocative word “bitch.” And so while this
bitchy hip hop sextuplet rapped about sex as part of a young
woman’s arsenal to be deployed when necessary (and deﬁ-
nitely for money), and fr equently r eclined at the altar of
beauty culture as enabling rather than oppressive, their more
egg-headed counterparts founded the magazine 
Bitch: Femi-
nist Response to Pop Culture in 1996.
While the editors of Bitch surprisingly tiptoe ar ound the
issue of hip hop and the “bitchy sextuplet,” their pitch r e-
garding the magazine’s name rings a strikingly familiar tone.
In the same way that hip hop embraced and redeﬁned the
“n-word,” the magazine’s mission statement suggests that
“bitch” describes “all at once who we are when we speak
Prologue / xvii


--- PAGE 19 ---
up, what it is we’re too worked up over to be quiet about,
and the act of making ourselves heard.”
Though Bitch “refuses to ignore the contradictory and
sometimes uncomfortable details that constitute the realities
of women’s lives,” I don’t think the “Queen Bee” Lil’ Kim
(who identiﬁes herself as a feminist), “Da Baddest Bitch”
Trina, or “That Beeyatch” Remy Ma will be gracing the
magazine’s covers or interiors anytime soon. Perhaps those
“bitches’” contradictions are too uncomfortable and raw for
Bitch; but what their exclusion aptly points to is the fork
in the road between hip hop and feminism—mainstream,
black, or otherwise.
It is in this in-between space where I would like to dwell.
I believe we have reached a fascinating, and predictably ret-
rogressive, moment in American pop culture regarding class,
gender, and race. As a member of the hip hop generation, I
am continually intrigued by the ways in which hip hop sets
the tone for how women—myself included—think and act. I
have written this book as a way to explor e how and why we
women do the things we do, what hip hop has to say about
it all, and what we have to say back.
Prologue / xviii


--- PAGE 20 ---
1
introduction
Pimpin’ Ain’t Easy, But Somebody’s Got to Do It
This is a man’s world
But it wouldn’t be nothing without a woman or
a girl.
— James Brown, “It’s a Man’s, Man’s World”
Women are the weaker sex. . . . women’s bodies
are made to attract and to please men. . . . now
that women are equal, they should be able to ac-
cept being told that they aren’t, quite.
— Harvey Mansfield, Manliness
hen hip hop impresario
Russell Simmons appeared at Hamilton College for an eve-
ning lecture on “Hip Hop, Culture, and Politics” in April
2004, no one could have anticipated the fallout. Simmons,
considered a veritable maverick in the hip hop industry, co-
founded with Rick Rubin the highly successful record label
Def Jam. Under Def Jam, Simmons promoted and developed
rap acts like Kurtis Blow, LL Cool J, and the ﬁrst crossover
rap triumvirate, Run DMC, in which his brother Joseph
Simmons—the “Run” in the DMC—was also a member.
He would later go on to establish another label, Russell
Simmons Music Group. Setting up a quasi-entertainment and
fashion empire through his company Rush Communications,
Simmons’s entrepreneurial talents expanded to include a


--- PAGE 21 ---
clothing company, Phat Farm, which was sold in 2004 to
the tune of $ 140 million, soft drinks (DefCon 3), television
shows such as Def Comedy Jam, and a Broadway show with
spoken word acts in Def Poetry Jam. The New York Times
estimates that he sold his stake in Def Jam in 1999 for over
$100 million to Universal Music Group. Indeed, his net
worth hovers around $ 400 million. It is Simmons’s power
moves and business acumen that set the pace and tone for
the likes of Shawn “Jay-Z” Carter and the more ﬂamboyant
Sean “Puffy” Combs.
But all these accomplishments were not the reason for his
invitation to lecture at Hamilton College. Russell Simmons
is also the chairman of the Hip Hop Summit Action Net-
work (HSAN). The year 2004 was a critical election year for
many who were tired of the mendacity and chicanery of the
Bush administration. Some were also openly smarting from
the voter fraud and widespread black disenfranchisement in
Florida in 2000. Simmons’s HSAN had voter registration
among hip hop generationers and other political and social
machinations as their mission, which included challenging
the New York State Rockefeller drug laws as unethical,
racially biased, and harshly punitive.
His lecture morphed into a Q&A session, as he made a
last-minute decision to stray from the contractual script to-
ward a “just kickin’ it” dialogue. As with comedian Dave
Chappelle’s bodacious, street-cred-upholding character in
the skit “When Keeping It Real Goes Wrong,” Simmons’s at-
tempt at “keeping it real” fell ﬂat. The result was a number
of challenging questions from female audience members
about hip hop culture, sex, and women.
Introduction / 2


--- PAGE 22 ---
Riled by the television show BET Uncut, and speciﬁcally
the rapper Nelly’s sexually provocative video “Tip Drill,” fe-
male students swapped volleys with Simmons. At one point
he dismissively chided the students about being up at 2 a.m.
— apparently, the so-called godfather of hip hop had forgot-
ten the crucial late-night aspect of the college experience. He
went on further to suggest that the students just “turn off
their television sets,” an increasingly used line by corporate
representatives when directly confronted by critics of such
programming. Simmons’s argument had the effect of identi-
fying him more with his lucrative ﬁnancial interests than
with his audience. The students, of course, could have easily
turned off their television sets. But they were more con-
cerned about the millions of other television sets (79,999,998
to be exact, given BET’s recent market penetration) that
were left on, and the unpleasant gender politics and sexual
provocations that continually ﬂowed from them.
1
One of the Hamilton students, a young woman, was es-
pecially agitated. While she was clearly misguided in her
assertion that there were no networks devoted to promot-
ing white culture (I sat mouth agape thinking about MTV,
VH1, NBC, ABC, FOX, CBS, etc.), she nonetheless rightly
zeroed in on hip hop culture’s contradictory relationship
with women, and boldly declared that these videos impinged
upon her sense of womanhood. As she ﬂed the auditorium in
a huff, Simmons delivered the “keep it street” coup de grace.
He attempted to evoke empathy for the hard-knock life of so
many male rappers. He suggested that after acquiring the
requisite material trappings of success—cars, houses, jew-
elry, and “all the pussy” they wanted—many rappers were
Introduction / 3


--- PAGE 23 ---
still quite unfulﬁlled. I stiﬂed a “What?” on the order of
crunkmaster Lil’ Jon. Audible gasps could be heard in the
auditorium, almost ﬁlled to capacity. With the president and
dean of the college and a gaggle of professors in the audi-
ence, Simmons’s “When Keeping It Real Goes [Very] Wrong”
moment exempliﬁed for many the role that hip hop has
carved out for young women. They were either “hot pussy
for sale”—and hence Nelly swipes a credit card through a
young woman’s buttocks in the now infamous “Tip Drill”
video—or they were “pussy for the taking,” as Louisiana
rapper Mystikal explains in “Pussy Crook.”
But of course, hip hop’s relationship to young women is
much more complicated and varied than that. I also realize
that hip hop, like every other socio-cultural and political
phenomenon, has its quasi-saints and wholesale sinners.
Some artists are just trying to make a buck; other hip hop
artists can barely be called artists at all. But nevertheless, in
the course of just my own lifetime, hip hop has risen from
schoolyard battle sessions to become an astounding cultural
force. Hip hop artists speak to, and for, a generation very of-
ten described as alienated and disaffected—feelings voiced
by Kanye West, who blasted George W. Bush during the on-
going saga of Hurricane Katrina in New Orleans with those
now-famous seven unscripted words: “George Bush doesn’t
care about black people.” Whether one thoroughly appreci-
ated West’s timing or not (or even believed that George Bush
ever really cared about black people in the ﬁrst place) he set
off dialogues and prompted polls dealing with race (and
poverty) much in the way the O. J. Simpson debacle did
when it played itself out nationally. West also did not spare
Introduction / 4


--- PAGE 24 ---
the media from criticism, pointing out its biased reporting of
the chaos in New Orleans (for example, captioned pictures
describing blacks as “looting” and whites as “ﬁnding” food
stuff). America once again had to confront its own unal-
loyed racialist baggage even during a national crisis.
My own appreciation for hip hop music and culture stems
from its unabashed articulation of the most distressing issues
facing my generation and a younger generation—often re-
ferred to as the millennium generation—that has grown up
in hip hop’s wake. The list of social ills and sexual contra-
dictions confronting the hip hop and millennium generations
boggles the mind. Varyingly deﬁned as those born between
1965 and 1984 or more broadly, as the post–civil rights,
post-segregation generation,
2 the hip hop generation in par-
ticular is attempting to explore and afﬁrm its sexuality in an
era rife with pornography, the mainstreaming of strip clubs,
and the sexualization of everything from blue jeans ads to
prime-time television. They are also simultaneously running
up against chronic unemployment, mind-numbing poverty,
afﬁrmative action backlash, police brutality, the growth of
the prison-industrial complex, the HIV/AIDS pandemic, the
continued war on drugs, and increasing suicide rates, vio-
lence, and despair. It is no wonder that irreverence, that
old standby of youth, and “girls (and boys) gone (sexually)
wild” appear to be the hallmarks of hip hop.
***
As a cultural phenomenon, rap music made its appearance
in the late 1970s with artists like Melle Mel and Lady B.
The music could be ﬁrst heard at youth centers, DJ battles,
Introduction / 5


--- PAGE 25 ---
and house parties in the predominantly black and brown
communities of the South and West Bronx. By the 1980s,
hip hop music swept across the nation and captured the
socio-political realities of youth from New York to Los An-
geles to Chicago to New Orleans. By the 1990s, the music
was ubiquitous. The gangsta funk of Dr. Dre’s solo album
The Chronic altered the commercial landscape of gangsta
rap music. And in 1998 the unprecedented ﬁve Grammy
wins of rapper Lauryn Hill for The Miseducation of Lauryn
Hill ﬂew in the face of critics who had long ago dismissed
the music as a fad. Indeed, upon ascending to the podium to
claim her Grammy for Album of the Year, an incredulous
Hill responded, “This is crazy . . . this is hip hop.”
Due to technological innovations, consumer capitalism,
and media and entertainment mergers, hip hop naturally ex-
panded beyond its DJing, MCing, break dancing, and tag-
ging origins. The hip hop universe soon included fashion, ﬁc-
tion, movies, and magazines. Frat parties on predominantly
white campuses like Vanderbilt and Stanford universities
suddenly had hip hop twists, from “CEOs and Corporate
Ho’s,” to “Pimps and Ho’s,” to “G.I. Joe and Barbie Ho.”
Homecoming performance invitations were extended to rap
acts like Busta Rhymes, Chingy, and the Ying Yang Twins.
Even politics has not been immune to hip hop’s tentacle-
like grasp. Dissent and critique have long been a cornerstone
of hip hop, though it is clear that the collective political
agenda of this generation is still a nascent one. Materialistic
and hypercommodiﬁed, any political ideals put forth by this
generation risk co-optation as fashionable. As hip hop cul-
ture comes to be increasingly marketed globally and identi-
Introduction / 6


--- PAGE 26 ---
ﬁed as mainstream, its more progressive political ambitions,
like those signiﬁed by the 2004 and 2006 National Hip Hop
conventions, will continue to face serious challenges. 3
Indeed, Marc Anthony Neal captures the political “iro-
nies” faced by progressive hip hop generation artists such as
Talib Kweli, the Black-Eyed Peas, Sista Souljah, and Com-
mon: “[T]his generation . . . speaks to the ironies of hip hop
itself—an art form that seeks to neither delegitimize nor un-
dermine the logics of late-stage capitalism, but rather to re-
orient those logics to serve the interests of its constituents.
It’s not a perfect science.”
4 No, it isn’t. For as the late black
feminist poet Audre Lorde cautioned about using the “mas-
ter’s tools to dismantle the master’s house,” consumer capi-
talism is in large part responsible for the huge race and class
disparities about which hip hop artists—progressive and not
—w ax poetic.
According to the Recording Industry Association of Amer-
ica and the market research ﬁrm NPD Group, hip hop CD
sales amounted to $ 1.7 billion in 2002 and $ 1 billion in
2003, while hip hop’s popularity as a musical genre garnered
13.8 percent of the market.
5 Despite its dominance in CD
sales and cultural inﬂuence, for some—like cultural critic
Stanley Crouch and jazz great Wynton Marsalis—hip hop
music and culture continues to inhabit the profane and ridic-
ulous. Hip hop is especially lacking, they say, when com-
pared to that other genre of race-transcending music honed
by black musicians and singers—jazz.
In his essay collection, The Artiﬁcial White Man: Essays
on Authenticity, Crouch, an acclaimed essayist and consum-
mate jazz and blues devotee, “spanks” hip hop artists and
Introduction / 7


--- PAGE 27 ---
producers who dabble in what he deems hedonistic buffoon-
ery characteristic of D. W. Grifﬁth’s portrayals of blacks in
The Birth of a Nation. Crouch varyingly casts these offend-
ers of taste and morals as “neo-Sambos” with their “mug-
ging or scowling” and “gold teeth, drop-down pants, and
tasteless jewelry.” And from his roost at New York’s Daily
News, Crouch has lobbed many a rock, brick, and bat at hip
hop (the titles of his articles include “Hip Hop’s Thugs Hit
New Low,” “Hip Hop Gets the Bruising It Deserves,” “Hip
Hop Takes A Hit”). His latest verbal beat-down of hip hop,
in a January 23, 2005 piece in the Daily, manages to saddle
up to black women in their ensuing battle over images and
lyrics in hip hop. As a follow-up to his excoriating column
on the 2004 protest against Nelly’s “Tip Drill” video at Spel-
man College, the not-always-chummy Crouch, particularly
in his editorializing on black women and American sexual
politics, writes in praise of Essence magazine:
The magazine is the ﬁrst powerful presence in the black me-
dia with the courage to examine the cultural pollution that is
too often excused because of the wealth it brings to knuckle-
heads and amoral executives.
This anything-goes-if-sells attitude comes at a cost. The el-
evation of pimps and pimp attitudes creates a sadomasochis-
tic relationship with female fans. They support a popular id-
iom that consistently showers them with contempt.
Crouch touches upon the very ethos that has gradually con-
sumed the most popular expressions of hip hop’s gender pol-
itics: a most debasing duet of female adulation and sacriﬁce
in the face of misogyny and misanthropy.
Just as rabble rousing and critical, his Lincoln Center
Introduction / 8


--- PAGE 28 ---
colleague Wynton Marsalis regards hip hop performers as
“entertainers” not “artists.” In a 2003 interview with The
Guardian (“Blowing Up a Storm”), he suggests that hip hop
is a “new minstrel show,” a caricature, with “rappers, call-
ing each other niggas and bitches.” For Marsalis such im-
ages peddle racism and “the youth are fooled, and a lot of
money is being made.” Crouch and Marsalis believe hip hop
is all loutish dissonance, a cacophonous mess, while jazz em-
bodies at once a black aesthetic and the enduring principles
of American democracy that emphasize a harmonious union
of seemingly cacophonous sounds and people.
In the United States and abroad, jazz, with its origins in
blues, has inspired and continues to inspire generations of
artists, writers, and activists. In the wake of the music, a
unique style, attitude, fashion, and language followed. Jazz
also had a sexual dimension. It was imagined to be emanat-
ing from the free and funky way that only black folks made
love. It also had its political dimension, and indeed, Billie
Holiday’s “Strange Fruit,” “God Bless the Child,” and
“Good Morning, Heartache,” to name a (very) few, tell tales
of depression, poverty, and state-sanctioned lynching.
The innovation of jazz artists moved jazz from the mar-
gins to the center of American life as a unique and authen-
tic American musical genre. Although jazz record sales rep-
resent only roughly 2 percent of the total market, jazz has
become sacred. Centers for jazz studies nestled on elite uni-
versity campuses have cropped up. In 2003, the Interna-
tional Association of Jazz Educators’ conference in Toronto
drew ten thousand participants. There is also Jazz at Lincoln
Center as well as commercial and academic books, not to
Introduction / 9


--- PAGE 29 ---
mention the PBS-funded Ken Burns documentary on jazz.
(Resistance to jazz’s legitimacy, of course, still rears its head.
The brouhaha over jazz violinist Regina Carter playing Nic-
colo Paganini’s Cannon in Genoa, Italy, was as much about
jazz’s race and class origins as Italian nationalism—the fear
of the “Coca-Cola-lization” of Italy by American culture.)
And so while jazz has become sacred, hip hop still daw-
dles, for some, in the profane. This is despite Harvard Uni-
versity’s having housed the Hip Hop Archives (now at Stan-
ford with Professor Marcyliena Morgan), hip hop’s arrival
at the Smithsonian, and Pulitzer and Nobel prize-winning
novelist Toni Morrison’s hip hop rendition of Aesop’s Fables
in her children’s books. Hip hop, like jazz, has also made se-
rious inroads in France with the emergence of French rap
and rai music in Paris and Marseille. And here we return to
the intent of this book. Notwithstanding its incipient politi-
cal agenda, scholarly legitimacy, and progressive cadre of
artists and thinkers, the profane in hip hop culture has come
to be identiﬁed as its public face and voice. This profanity is
tied to its raunchy street lyrics, nihilism, prepackaged “thug-
lite” recipes for commercial success, and gender foibles.
***
Hence, Pimps Up, Ho’s Down continues to take our na-
tional banter on hip hop culture in a gender-inclusive direc-
tion. This is a book about young women and hip hop cul-
ture. More speciﬁcally, the book addresses the male-domi-
nated culture of hip hop and the various ways in which
young black women connect with that culture. It is about a
new gender politics that hip hop has helped to deﬁne. While
Introduction / 10


--- PAGE 30 ---
many believe we know exactly who’s down with hip hop in
its present “pimps up” transmutation—the groupies, the
strippers, the video vixens—here I tease that out. In fact, I
believe it’s a provocative cultural commentary that makes a
case for hip hop’s commercial success as heavily dependent
upon young black women. Overexposed young black female
ﬂesh, “pimpin’,” “playin’,” “sexin’,” and “checkin’” in vid-
eos, television, ﬁlm, rap lyrics, fashion, and on the Internet,
is indispensable to the mass-media-engineered appeal of hip
hop culture, which is helping to shape a new black gender
politics.
This is not a book that chronicles rap lyrics and sexism.
That line of inquiry has been vigorously pursued and will
continue to be a touchstone for dialogue about hip hop gen-
eration men and misogyny, as it has been with Essence mag-
azine’s “Take Back the Music” campaign and before that the
late civil rights activist Dr. C. Delores Tucker’s much pooh-
poohed anti-rap crusades. It is not a “who’s who” of hip hop
women artists or a history of hip hop in general, although it
will touch upon all of these matters. (For a discussion of
women’s trailblazing roles in hip hop, I refer the reader to
Vibe’s Hip-Hop Divasand black feminist writer Gwendolyn
Pough’s standard-bearing Check It, While I Wreck It, 2004).
Rather Pimps Up, Ho’s Down aims to cast the net wider
and deeper on hip hop culture and young black women. As
a feminist writer of the hip hop generation, I cannot help but
question the complexities of young black women’s engage-
ment with hip hop culture. I recognize that the madness
visited upon hip hop generation black women comes as
much from within their own communities as from without.
Introduction / 11


--- PAGE 31 ---
Sexual violence, sexism, “beat-downs,” sexual dishonesty,
anti-lesbianism, and the legacy of color prejudice all hammer
away at self-esteem.
6 Most young black women experience
at least one of these challenges. This book attempts to ex-
plicate where hip hop culture contributes to these distinctly
female difﬁculties. It is not that these issues never existed
before the hip hop global takeover. But the very public cele-
bration and commercial trafﬁcking in such images and be-
haviors has made them appear normal, acceptable, and en-
tertaining. That young black men face their own set of chal-
lenges is undeniable; patriarchal and misogynistic notions
of manhood and masculinity combined with racism have
deeply impacted the ways in which men interact both with
one another and with women. These interactions have cur-
rency in hip hop and thus greatly inform this book.
Critical questions guiding my work include the following:
How has color prejudice permeated hip hop culture? How
has mainstream beauty culture, primarily through hip hop
music videos, impacted young black women? How have hip
hop’s lyrics and visual riffs on the acrimonious and sexually
charged nature of male-female relationships encouraged the
sexual abuse of young black women?
Pimps Up, Ho’s Down also tackles head-on two other
issues. The ﬁrst is hip hop’s increasing alliance with the
$10 billion a year adult entertainment industry through the
gloriﬁcation of strip clubs in hip hop–oriented movies, vid-
eos, and music. Artists like Snoop Dogg, Ice-T, Mystikal,
and N.E.R.D. have even released pornographic videos, and
in some cases compact discs are accompanied by X-rated
DVDs and songs not featured on the album. Hip hop’s asso-
Introduction / 12


--- PAGE 32 ---
ciation with the sexually explicit has led to the 2002 and
2005 VH1 sponsored documentaries: “Hip-Hop and Hot
Sex” and “Hip-Hop Videos and Sexploitation on the Set,”
respectively. The implications for young black women and
girls are less than optimal. When Snoop Dogg gave up host-
ing the Euro-focused Girls Gone Wild videos to launch a
1-900 number and Snoop’s Doggystyle—w inner of an Adult
Entertainment Award — he explained his reason in that
“keep it real” logic that has come to deﬁne this new black
gender politics: “No black girls, no Spanish girls—all white
girls. And that ain’t cool, because white girls ain’t the only
hos that get wild.”
7
Second is the rise of groupie culture in the hip hop world.
This culture is not restricted to women. Tales are legion of
black male groupies and the homoerotic and homophobic
tensions their presence incites. But for our purposes, black
women and groupie culture will remain the focus of Pimps
Up, Ho’s Down. Of the many roles young black women
play in hip hop, one of the most rapped about is the groupie.
Groupies have always had their part to play in the entertain-
ment industry. But prior to hip hop, young black women
were considered bit players in the groupie scene despite
their prevalence among the jazz, blues, funk, and soul set.
Mass media and the mainstreaming of hip hop culture have
teamed up, however, to expose young black women’s willing
participation in sex escapades. Lying prostrate or on bended
knees, black groupies are an essential cog in the “playa-
pimp-ho-bitch” gearshift of hip hop culture. Like wet wipes,
they are convenient and disposable. Indeed, our generation
has witnessed the steady emergence of a hip hop groupie
Introduction / 13


--- PAGE 33 ---
culture as a crucial part of the larger hip hop culture. Unfor-
tunately, many of these young black women see their ver-
sions of “girls gone wild” as the fruit of women’s sexual lib-
eration.
At this juncture I would be remiss to not take on the rab-
idly heterosexist nature of hip hop. In this near compulsory
heterosexual culture, women are routinely reduced to con-
quests and objects. What are the possibilities and challenges
for young, black lesbians, those “not so strictly dickly”
women? Because hip hop culture is generally ﬁltered through
a lens of heterosexuality and posturing around masculinity,
same-sex-loving women have been generally co-opted into
the male fantasy of a ménage à trois on the order of Lu-
dacris’s “Splash Waterfalls” video from his album Chicken-
N-Beer. In “Splash Waterfalls,” female sexual arousal and
coupling is arbitrated electronically by a virile male presence
(for example, Ludacris on computer screen).
Interestingly, a study conducted by Motivational Educa-
tional Entertainment, This Is My Reality: The Price of Sex:
An Inside Look at Black Urban Youth Sexuality, which sum-
marized ﬁndings from forty focus groups across nine cities in
2002, found that there is increased openness about young fe-
males having sex with other females. According to the study,
Overwhelmingly, across all nine cities, [black urban] youth of
both genders spoke openly about the increased occurrence of
female-on-female sexual relationships (i.e., lesbianism) in
their schools, communities, and even in their own personal
lives. . . . Overall, youth seemed to struggle with whether this
phenomenon should be described as a “trend” or as some-
thing that is here to stay.
8
Introduction / 14


--- PAGE 34 ---
Viewed through the prism of the hypermasculine culture of
hip hop, lesbians and lesbianism are in some respects the
ﬁnal frontier of conquest. The prevailing mentality is that
all lesbians need is a “good stiff one” to set them on a
“straight” (or at the very least, bisexual) course. This idea
was parodied, to a fault, some would say, by Spike Lee in
She Hate Me with the help of “lesbian consultant” and Vil-
lage Voice columnist Tristan Taormino. Taormino stopped
Lee from throwing the ﬁlm over the lesbian-fantasy precipice
as he imagined a ﬁnal scene with all three characters moving
toward the bedroom. Though Lee aimed to force the audi-
ence to contemplate new conﬁgurations of the family (two
fathers, one mother, two mothers, one father), that the ﬁlm’s
major lesbian protagonists were of the “lipstick” variety and
that She Hate Me ’s ﬁnal scene seemed to reproduce the mé-
nage à trois fantasy with a kiss as opposed to intercourse,
raised more than a few brows.
Failing co-optation, the words “lesbian,” “butch,” and
“dyke” are usually hurled as epithets at women who do
not respond to male sexual charisma, as in Lloyd Banks’s
“Groupie Love”: “If shorty ain’t feelin me shorty must like
girls. . . . If the bitch don’t like me the bitch must don’t like
men.” Here women are cast as either groupies or lesbians.
And while some female rappers who have achieved main-
stream success, such as Lil’ Kim, make clear that “I ain’t gay,
this ain’t no lesbo ﬂow” (“Get Money”). Others like Trina—
Kim’s Southern “get money” counterpart—tease that she’s
“quick to deep-throat the dick / And let another straight lick
the clit” (“Nann-Nigga”), lyrics suggestive of a bisexual mé-
nage à trois or a heterosexual threesome with Trina on both
Introduction / 15


--- PAGE 35 ---
receiving ends. In this way the lesbian ﬁgure is used as a
trans-gendered trope in hip hop culture. As the archetypal
straw women, she is simultaneously a foil to male sexual
endeavors (as rapper Trick Daddy asserted, “It just don’t
seem right for a woman not to want dick”
9), a measurement
of what is deemed culturally unfeminine, a testament, if “set
straight,” of the limitlessness of charismatic masculinity, and
she is also a cock-tease for sybaritic heterosexual sex.
Flesh-and-blood black lesbians live, as do we all, much
more complicated and fuller lives than depicted in rhyming
couplets. And despite hip hop’s heterosexism and homopho-
bia, black lesbians have carved a space for themselves within
the culture. Hip hop’s various enterprises and intersections
have long included athletes from Cheryl Swoopes to Cynthia
Cooper, artists such as DJ Pam of the Coup, Miss Money,
and Medusa, and ﬁlmmakers Yvonne Welbon, Doria Rob-
erts, Aishah Simmons, Sidra Smith, and Tiona McClodden,
festivals like Queerstock and the now-defunct woman- and
gay-positive Black Lily Tour.
Many artists though, who are “closeted” or have one foot
in and one foot out, have had to tolerate, oftentimes silently,
slights and aspersions regarding their personhood and femi-
ninity. And so they must grit their teeth as they ﬁlm, rap,
sing, and write about every aspect of their triumphs and dis-
appointments except those relating to their sexual being. All
the while heterosexual artists gloat or wail about theirs. This
arrangement demonstrates hip hop’s glaring double standard
regarding lesbians.
In the current national homophobic climate—tweaked by
the gay/lesbian marriage debate and our “don’t ask, don’t
Introduction / 16


--- PAGE 36 ---
tell” military policy—silence and secrecy in the industry pre-
vails. Tiona McClodden, an Atlanta ﬁlmmaker and hip hop
videographer who has worked with artists like Murder Inc.
and Twista, relates that the situation for lesbians is espe-
cially precarious in the South:
Some people only come out during pride and go back in.
These are fragile times because of the political climate and
religion in the South. You have to balance your art, private
life and career. Since so much of southern hip hop is call and
response, it can be really tough. Your sexuality can become
the focus of a battle. Some women will adapt an extreme
masculinity to get along, dress aggressively—then people re-
spond to your lyrics. The problem is you are left with the
very same sexism and misogyny of male rappers.
10
In describing the climate for lesbian artists in the South, Mc-
Clodden reveals the bind they face should they choose to
“out” themselves. Their sexuality and private lives could po-
tentially overshadow their artistic contributions. Should they
conform to the ideals of black masculinity performed by
their male peers in order to be taken seriously as artists, they
risk duplicating the very male privilege that their presence
on the hip hop scene is meant to disrupt. Underground hip
hop artist Medusa, who lends her voice and song, “One Bad
Sista,” to Tina Andrews’s animated ﬁlm Sistas ’N the City,
weighed in on the question of sexuality and artistry in Curve
magazine: “I think people avoid speaking on that [lesbian-
ism] because they don’t want that to be the primary focus of
who they are. Because that can dilute everything else.”
11 It is
not only with commercial hip hop that lesbiphobia is pres-
ent, but even in the supposedly safe, progressive spaces of
Introduction / 17


--- PAGE 37 ---
the underground. Tiona McClodden continues, “As opposed
to being called ‘dyke,’ in mixed gendered underground
spaces, the men talk to you like a pimp.” McClodden reveals
that male practices of heterosexism extend to include verbal
versus overtly sexual conversions. Lesbians can be “talked
straight” by a “conscious brother,” and the moniker “queen”
replaces “dyke.”
Indeed, the merest intimation of female sexual desire out-
side the heterosexual paradigm sparks urban tales and bi-
zarre panics such as singer Tweet and Missy Elliot’s collabo,
“Oops, Oh My!” with the verse: “I tried and I tried to
avoid / but this thing was happening / Swallow my pride . . .
But this body felt just like mine.” In any case, that there are
black lesbian hip hop artists is an open secret in the industry
and the hip hop nation. Of course, the lesbiphobic lyrics that
spew forth from the mouths of various underground and
mainstream colleagues are troubling. Yet truth be told the
most concentrated lesbiphobia and backlash—the kind that
inspires compulsory silence—can be found among the mul-
tiracial, hip hop CD-purchasing public.
Like the “Golden Age” of Hollywood under the studio
system where actors and actresses were often contractually
discouraged from revealing their sexual orientation (Greta
Garbo, Marlene Dietrich) or their marriages in order to
maintain the illusion of their availability as partners or
lovers (hence their box ofﬁce draw) to the ﬁlm-going pub-
lic, many aspiring and mainstream hip hop artists play it
straight for the public. In a patriarchal culture, women in
the rap game too are molded like Pygmalion’s Galatea, or
better still, George Bernard Shaw’s Eliza Doolittle and Spike
Introduction / 18


--- PAGE 38 ---
Lee’s closeted lesbian rapper Evelyn (from the ﬁlm She Hate
Me) into the perfect strumpets of heterosexual hip hop gen-
eration male desire—“strictly dickly.”
As much as the sexploitation of young black women is
necessary to the “keep it real” mantra of hip hop artists,
corporate bottom lines, and marketing strategies, we must
acknowledge our own role in this troubling relationship.
We are enthralled by hip hop culture, and we conspicu-
ously (and happily) consume its primary products—music,
fashion, and values. As Joan Morgan poignantly asserts,
“women love hip hop—as sexist as it is—is ’cuz all that in-
yo-face testosterone makes our nipples hard.”
12 Young black
women do in fact represent a core audience of hip hop con-
sumers, as studies by the Center for AIDS Research at
Emory University and Motivational Educational Entertain-
ment reveal. The truism of the mass media, as demonstrated
by everyone from conservative John McWhorter
13 to the
decidedly left-of-center Essence magazine “Take Back the
Music” campaign, is that white males are hip hop’s core
consumers. While Soundscan data may support these earnest
claims, what such narrow coverage of hip hop’s core audi-
ences has effectively done is ignite national hand-wringing
and hysteria among whites. This angst is linked to the per-
ceived negative inﬂuence that hip hop has on America’s
youth (read: whites). The relationship of young black women
to hip hop culture is just as fraught with complexities, but
has only just begun to register on the national radar.
Though much of America remains oblivious, there are
many that have tried to move the dialogue on hip hop culture
and gender forward. These include widely read progressive
Introduction / 19


--- PAGE 39 ---
feminist critics and activists like bell hooks, Johnetta Cole,
Kierna Mayo, Rosa Clemente, Martha Diaz, Lisa Fager,
Maya Rockeymore, Kimberlé Crenshaw, Tricia Rose, Bev-
erly Guy-Sheftall, Raquel Rivera, Joan Morgan, Schehera-
zade and Salamishah Tillet, and ﬁlmmaker Aishah Simmons.
Essence magazine’s “Take Back the Music” campaign, spear-
headed by Michaela Angela Davis, Cynthia Gordy, and
Akiba Solomon, is but one example of engaged work from
within the belly of the beast. We have seen town hall meet-
ings around the country, including at Spelman College for
women, and “Rap Sessions” on gender. Political organiza-
tions, such as the National Coalition of 100 Black Women
and the Congressional Black Caucus, have gotten involved,
and yes, even activists like Dr. C. Delores Tucker have all
tried, regardless of how poorly their efforts have been re-
ceived. But in this melee, we must not forget the voices of
young black women themselves. Though as a country we of-
ten don’t listen to them, rest assured, these women have
plenty to say on matters that vitally concern them. A group
of young women at Sarah Lawrence College attempted to
launch a national protest from Howard University to Stan-
ford University against rap music’s misogyny. Spelman Col-
lege undergraduates, led by Moya Bailey, met the scourge of
the black media when they protested rapper Nelly’s visit to
their campus after the airing of “Tip Drill.” But more often
then not, these objections, like those of so many other young
black women, are mufﬂed by the music.
I hope to help turn down the volume, but amplify our un-
derstanding, with voices of young black women themselves.
In the ﬁnal chapter of the book, as I close with a discussion
Introduction / 20


--- PAGE 40 ---
of feminism and hip hop culture, I offer insights from young
black women on the various issues raised throughout the
book. Pimps Up, Ho’s Down attempts then to provide a
space for young black women’s voices to be heard in all of
their complex contradictions, dissent, and complicity.
Introduction / 21


--- PAGE 41 ---



--- PAGE 42 ---
23
“i see the same ho”
Video Vixens, Beauty Culture, and 
Diasporic Sex Tourism
Every other video . . .
I see the same ho
— Tupac (featuring Nate Dogg, YGD Tha
Top Dawg), “All About U”
Watching the videos, you see the long curly hair
[and] think, “Man that would be nice to have
some long, curly hair.”
— Sela, eighteen-year-old undergraduate
Brazilian women are usually desirable, as often
women of mixed ethnicities are. . . . Our leaders
should make a law demanding intercultural
breeding to ﬁll our planet . . . thus ending all the
world’s problems.
— AskMen.com , Top 99 Most Desirable
Women 2005
hen Michelle “Micki”
Burks decided to take on the role of eye candy in the now-
defunct rap-reggae group Ruff Neck Sound System’s music
videos “Stick by Me” and “Luv Bump,” little did she know
that her decision would land her years later in the category
of “video ho.” Her performances in the music videos did
not involve provocative backside acrobatics, but her video


--- PAGE 43 ---
persona in “Luv Bump” is interestingly transmogriﬁed into a
“hoochie” by the video’s end due to fast-living and hustling
men. Shot in New York, the video aired in 1995 on the
Rachel-hosted Black Entertainment Television format Carib-
bean Rhythms. At 5'8" with long brown highlighted hair
and honey-toned skin, Micki attended the prestigious Berk-
lee School of Music in Boston from 1986 to 1990. A so-
prano with a superb vocal range, she toured Europe and
Japan, releasing an album called Inca, and then took up
modeling with Models, Inc. in Boston as a side gig until her
music career took off. She met the Ruff Neck crew in the
Boston music scene. Her then-boyfriend, Chris, was a well-
known producer who had teamed with such venerable acts
as the late Donnie Hathaway’s daughter Lahla. 
When asked about the moniker “video ho,” she emphati-
cally rejects any description of her experiences as degrading.
She does nonetheless lament the portrayals of women in hip
hop videos of late, stating that, “It is unnecessary. They
don’t have to treat the women like that.” When asked if she
would work in the emerging lucrative music video industry
today if the opportunity presented itself again, the still-lithe
thirty-six-year-old says with a laugh, “Yeah, if I were thinner
[and] as a model not a ‘video ho.’”
While sales in the music industry continue a downward
spiral that even the gestalt of rapper 50 Cent’s The Massacre
(which moved over one million units in just under four days)
cannot break, the music video DVD has emerged as a boon
to the recording industry. In an April 7, 2004, press release,
Jay Berman, Chairman of IFPI (International Federation of
the Phonographic Industry), an afﬁliate of the Recording
Video Vixens, Beauty Culture, and Diasporic Sex Tourism / 24


--- PAGE 44 ---
Industry Association of America (RIAA), the organization
responsible for the world’s largest music market, noted that
music video sales are rapidly becoming an important rev-
enue stream for the industry. The music video, popularized
by the launch of cable television stations such as Black En-
tertainment Television (BET), Music Television (MTV), and
Video Hits 1 (VH1), represents the lion’s share of formatting
for these stations. Launched in 1980, 1981, and 1985 re-
spectively, the ﬁrst popular music video to debut on MTV
was The Buggles’s “Video Killed the Radio Star,” a video
that predicted rather prematurely that the music video genre
would supplant the radio. Music videos have exploded, with
budgets as large as some indie ﬁlm projects, more developed
narratives and sets, and digital technology, which has also
allowed for a clearer picture and a larger than life celluloid
image.
1 The hip hop music video in particular also provides
brand product placement with a bumping beat. Like a four-
to six-minute advertisement, the music video DVD sells mu-
sic and the fabulous lifestyle signiﬁed by whatever material
acquisitions are worn (or not), driven, or drank within its
frames—all at a general sticker price between thirteen and
eighteen dollars. Borrowing from cultural critic Greg Tate’s
observations on hip hop culture in “Nigs R Us, or How
Blackfolk Became Fetish Objects,” the hip hop video has
“collapsed art, commerce, and interactive technology into
one mutant animal.”
2 Similar to the ﬁlm industry, which ties
its potential box ofﬁce take to A-list stars as well as well-
known directors, the directors of music videos have become
a highly sought after group, particularly veterans such as
Hype Williams, Paul Hunter, Little X, and Chris Robinson.
3
Video Vixens, Beauty Culture, and Diasporic Sex Tourism / 25


--- PAGE 45 ---
Recording artists recognize that the music video can make or
break a career, and heavy rotation on MTV, BET, and VH 1
all but guarantees break-out success. Indeed, 70 percent of
BET’s programming, the go-to station for urban hip hop
generationers, is music videos and infomercials. And the ca-
ble station reaches some eighty million homes.
4
In “All about U,” a Tupac Shakur, Nate Dogg, and YDG
Tha Top Dawg collaboration, the rap artists bond over their
disdain for “video ho’s” and “groupies” who they encounter
in every city they tour and video they see. Like Micki, many
of these women are singers, professional models, dancers,
and aspiring actresses, earning their rent, tuition monies, or
commercial exposure for a day’s work on a shoot. And some
dance and shake for free for their ﬁve minutes of fame,
jumping in front of the camera when Young Buck or any
one of the St. Lunatics roll up on a North Nashville or
North St. Louis block with a ﬁlm crew in tow. As Atlanta
hip hop industry insider and videographer Tiona McClod-
den suggests, “Many of the background video models use
their bodies as demos because they know that much of what
is shot will be left on the ﬂoor of the editing room. They
have one opportunity. If they do something provocative
enough to stand out, they anticipate that the shot just may
remain in the ﬁnal video.”
5 That the impact of these sexually
suggestive videos is undeniably regressive in terms of gender
politics and young girls and women’s self-identity is revealed
in a 2003 year-long study conducted by the Center for AIDS
Research (CFAR) at Emory University. Tracking 522 Ala-
bama girls’ hip hop video consumption and behaviors, the
study revealed that a higher consumption of hip hop videos
Video Vixens, Beauty Culture, and Diasporic Sex Tourism / 26


--- PAGE 46 ---
corresponded negatively with higher frequency of sexually
transmitted diseases, alcohol and drug abuse ( 60 percent),
and multiple sex partners (twice as likely).
***
But just as important as the complex motivations behind
young women’s suggestive performances in hop-hop videos
— rumps moving with the alacrity of a jackhammer, hips gy-
rating like a belly dancer on amphetamines, limbs akimbo,
mouths agape in a perpetual state of the orgasmic “oh”—is
the repetition of particular ideals of femininity. Hip hop is
now as much about images as it is skills and beats. That the
vast majority of the young women in these videos are either
fairer-skinned, ethnically mixed, or of indeterminate ethnic/
racial origins, with long, straight, or curly hair would sug-
gest that along with the stereotype of hypersexuality and
sexual accessibility, a particular type of beauty is offered up
as ideal. In some respects, the majority of these women rep-
resent what historian Tiffany Patterson calls “ascriptive mu-
lattas,” that is, those whose physical beauty transcends char-
acteristics such as darker hues, full lips, and the like, his-
torically preﬁgured as less than ideal (non-European). The
“mulatta” ﬁgure, a pejorative term if ever there was one, is
typically depicted as tragic because of her “in-between” ra-
cial status. Yet the “mulatta” has also been deemed in liter-
ary and ﬁlm annals as the most ideal in the arena of femi-
nine beauty, and the secretly longed for in the heterosexual
marketplace of desire. This status comes about precisely be-
cause of her mixed-race heritage involving some conﬁgura-
tion of “black” and “white,” which in the European and
Video Vixens, Beauty Culture, and Diasporic Sex Tourism / 27


--- PAGE 47 ---
American male imagination signals the perfect blending of
skillfulness in matters of sex (read: black) and physical
beauty (read: white).
The physical appeal to both white and black men of Gab-
rielle Union, Ciara, Beyoncé, and Tyra Banks falls into as-
criptive mulatta territory, as did that of Lena Horne and
Dorothy Dandridge—just ask the men at askmen.com where
Union, Ciara, Banks, and Beyoncé are ranked among the
2006 edition of the top ninety-nine most desirable women.
On any given segment of MTV’s Top Twenty, or BET’s Rap
City and 106 & Park, roughly 70 percent of the videos fea-
ture superbly toned, nubile, hybrid ﬂesh. One could certainly
argue that practically all seemingly black ﬂesh in the “New
World” is a hybrid given the history of transracial contact.
But it is precisely because of the enormous range of black-
ness (as a result of consensual and non-consensual) sex that
the incredibly narrow prototype of beauty is even more trou-
bling.
As writer Kevin Powell argues in Who’s Gonna Take the
Weight, hip hop generationers still do not fully appreciate
the range of black women’s beauty. Even the fallout in the
hip hop community from the 2002 Grammy Awards cere-
mony over Alicia Key’s multiple Grammy wins over India
Arie hinged unfortunately (and mistakenly I would add) for
some on the issue of color. Another example is the ruckus
over the fall 2004 season of America’s Next Top Model
(ANTM), a reality show that attempts to demystify high-
fashion modeling by demonstrating that models, while born
with certain assets like height, are primarily talent-develop-
ment projects and that “can-do” attitudes go the distance.
The show is undeniably in the service of beauty culture,
Video Vixens, Beauty Culture, and Diasporic Sex Tourism / 28


--- PAGE 48 ---
which in general has been less accepting, if not hostile, to
black women. However, in the 2004 season ANTM was
UPN’s highest-rated program among women ages eighteen
to forty-nine as well as teens. As the network’s newest cash
cow, it was also one of the top ten programs among African
American adults, and the highest-rated reality show among
African Americans. Its host, übermodel Tyra Banks, con-
sistently emphasizes personality over a particular “look.”
Nonetheless, the conclusion of the fall 2004 season caused
viewer squabbles regarding the hair and skin color of the ﬁ-
nal two contestants, Yaya DaCosta Johnson and Eva Pig-
ford. In an interview with TV Guide’s Daniel Coleridge, the
runner-up, Yaya, a Brown University graduate, responded to
the interviewer’s perception of her “look” as “Afrocentric,”
a perception that may have contributed to her loss:
I’m not Afrocentric, I’m just natural. But in this country,
black women who don’t straighten their hair with chemical
processing are stereotyped and labeled. Not all black women
with straight hair need chemical processing, but I would have
to to achieve that look. Just because we don’t straighten our
hair doesn’t mean we’re trying to be anything else—we’re
being ourselves. If anything hurts me about that, it’s that I
wasn’t allowed the luxury of being myself like the other girls
were. Nobody asks Cassie, Ann or Amanda to be “less
white.” I’m used to having to defend my very being. That
makes me a little sensitive.
6
DaCosta Johnson’s browner skin and unprocessed hair
moved her into an Afrocentric space when compared to Eva
Pigford’s African American girl-next-door look with chemi-
cally straightened hair, light eyes, and lighter hue.
DaCosta Johnson’s predicament on Top Model raises old
Video Vixens, Beauty Culture, and Diasporic Sex Tourism / 29


--- PAGE 49 ---
questions in this new era on assimilation, identity, and
beauty. And yet, the mixing bowl with a wee bit of nutmeg
and cinnamon standard of beauty endorsed ostensibly by
American culture (more speciﬁcally on Madison Avenue)
parallels the shifting ideas of beauty in hip hop videos that
are, some would argue, necessarily still derivative of a white
ideal.
In “Generation E.A.: Ethnically Ambiguous,” a feature in
the Fashion & Style section of The New York Times, adver-
tising executives and fashion magazine editors offered run-
ning commentaries that ranged from disquieting to just plain
dim on marketing trends to “tweens,” teens, and hip hop
generationers in both the mainstream and high-end market-
place: “Today what’s ethnically neutral, diverse, or ambigu-
ous has tremendous appeal”; “What is perceived as good,
desirable, successful is often a face whose heritage is hard to
pin down”; “We’re seeing more of a desire for the exotic,
left-of-center beauty . . . [It] represents the new reality of
America, which includes considerable mixing . . . It’s the
changing face of American beauty.”
7 That racial categories
are social constructs rather than biological realities—though
this does not alter the lived experiences of those who occupy
those categories—that “considerable” “race” mixing is not
“a new reality” but has been historically widespread in the
United States, and that America is not as “white” as it be-
lieves itself to be has been duly noted since at least the nine-
teenth century by writers and activists such as Frances Ellen
Harper Watkins in her novel Iola Leroy. Even in The Birth
of a Nation, a racist ﬁlm posing as an American cinematic
masterpiece, racial amalgamation is a core preoccupation
Video Vixens, Beauty Culture, and Diasporic Sex Tourism / 30


--- PAGE 50 ---
because of its prevalence. The contemporary scholarly writ-
ing of philosophers of race Kwame Anthony Appiah and
Naomi Zack are only a few examples of our awareness of
the power of social constructs. Both Appiah and Zack have
argued that “race” and therefore categories of race are bio-
logically non-existent, dishonest, and in bad faith. That we
as a culture cling to them relates more to our desires to enact
and maintain social, political, and economic powers and
privileges.
In effect, racial categories are themselves racist. In her
1993 book Race and Mixed Race, Zack argues presciently
for the category of gray, an almost uncanny predecessor to
“ethically ambiguous.” Therefore, the excited tone of dis-
covery evoked in the “Generation E.A.” article seems more
than a bit out of touch. The rhetoric that still situates white-
ness at the center of American beauty culture and darker
hues on this schematic shifting to the left (one wonders what
right of center beauty looks like) quite simply reinforces a
hierarchy of beauty, as well as the notion of ﬁxed racial cat-
egories. Indeed, ethnic ambiguity does not guarantee racial
ambiguity, particularly in relationship to those possessing
“African” ethnicities and origins. One may be ethnically
mixed (ambiguous) but racially marked as black.
Despite the hubbub about Generation E.A., editors and
ad executives admit that whiteness continues to dominate
the beauty and fashion industries. Where does, pray tell,
such a hierarchy leave Generation Non-E.A. (non–ethnically
ambiguous) black women? In her widely read book Beauty
Myth, Naomi Wolf relates how the beauty industry essen-
tially creates angst in women regarding their choices—Yaya
Video Vixens, Beauty Culture, and Diasporic Sex Tourism / 31


--- PAGE 51 ---
DeCosta Johnson, for example. While not a treatise against
the beauty industry and practices of adornment (though
some critics have reductively read the book as Wolf’s femi-
nist cri de coeur against lipstick wearing), The Beauty Myth
in fact argues for something very basic: a women’s right to
choose. Wolf makes the radical assertion that women should
choose how they want to look, without fear of employment
discrimination, or of being castigated as unfeminine, or of
being subjected to the litany of other charges leveled at those
whose beauty practices (or lack thereof) run counter to dom-
inant ideas about what it means to be a woman.
Women who choose not to indulge in beauty practices are
often disadvantaged and made to feel guilty for their lack of
conformity in a culture that overemphasizes physical appear-
ance. Simultaneously women who embrace beauty products
and their images still “second guess” themselves and are
subject to descriptions such as “high maintenance” and “not
natural.” And those women who embrace beauty culture
and also fall outside the current rage over Generation E.A.
or Ascriptive Mulattas are left to endlessly negotiate a maze
of images and ideas that are not especially afﬁrming and
seem, at each turn, to lead to a dead end.
***
As with the behavioral implications for hip hop video con-
sumption, the collision between hip hop culture and beauty
culture, the marketing and packaging of the “same” video
girl who resembles the high-fashion model who resembles
the latest Hollywood “It” girl, also has a clear and deleteri-
ous impact on what young black female consumers come to
Video Vixens, Beauty Culture, and Diasporic Sex Tourism / 32


--- PAGE 52 ---
identify as desirable. And the desire to be desirable seems
especially costly and laborious for young black women, as
the product-hawking, image-projecting hip hop video pumps
cash into the mainstream and hip hop’s multibillion-dollar
fashion and beauty industries. In effect, what young black
women cannot be, they now buy.
Who can forget the purchased artiﬁces of Lil’ Kim? Her
“so unpretty” motivations for dofﬁng and donning colored
contact lens, purported skin-lightening procedures, nose con-
tourings, platinum hair, breast augmentation, and liposuc-
tion. The visceral pain she articulated watching her Svengali-
lover-father ﬁgure and public and very private abuser, the
Notorious B.I.G., marry the lighter-skinned, fairer-maned hip
hop/R&B singer Faith Evans nine days after meeting her.
8 Or
the cracks of insecurity seeping from her admission: “Halle
Berry, Sally Richardson, Stacy Dash, Jada Pinkett? I used to
wish I looked like them motherfuckers!”?
9 On the question
of breast augmentation, she says, “I laughed at ﬁrst. But then
I went home and really thought about it. I went to the best,
most expensive doctor available, but that was the most pain I
ever felt in my life.”
10
As with Lil’ Kim, the overwhelming majority of us black
and Latina women offer our labor in a marketplace—one
that still does not pay us equally—in order to purchase some
happiness through beauty.
11 (The median weekly earnings of
black women who worked full time in 2001 was $451 com-
pared with $521 for white women, $518 for black men, and
$694 for white men; these ﬁgures are for non-college-edu-
cated black women; in 2004, college-educated black women,
roughly two million, outearned both the white women and
Video Vixens, Beauty Culture, and Diasporic Sex Tourism / 33


--- PAGE 53 ---
Latinas.) Using data from over three thousand households
surveyed by the Department of Commerce, marketers and
corporations have determined that black women, with their
increasing income, have the most inﬂuence on the growth in
African American spending. Between 2001 and 2002, our
spending on personal care products increased (by 18 per-
cent), as did our expenditures on women’s apparel and foot-
wear (2 percent and 13 percent, respectively). Our generos-
ity with ourselves was rivaled only by our generosity with
others, as gift spending spiked by 155 percent.
12
The July 2004 report released by The U.S. Multicultural
Women Market suggests that the buying power of multicul-
tural women (deﬁned as African American, Asian American,
and Hispanic American) will exceed $ 1 trillion by 2008
and African American women over eighteen years of age
will keep the dominant share of the market. African Ameri-
can women’s educational attainment is high; we are more
conﬁdent and secure with ourselves, and one in four of us
occupy professional or managerial positions. Yet, we are si-
multaneously least likely to be married (as our race loyalties
tend to constrain our options) or even in fulﬁlling relation-
ships with a female partner; dieting and exercise appear less
of a concern while health risks are high. We are also very
brand conscious, loyal, and receptive—or vulnerable, de-
pending on your interpretation of the data—to media, and
particularly to television.
Savvy marketers will continue to pitch products that seem
to tap into our greatest strengths and deepest insecurities
about beauty and desirability. Hair-care products accounted
for $174 million of our disposable income in 2002.
13 Plastic
Video Vixens, Beauty Culture, and Diasporic Sex Tourism / 34


--- PAGE 54 ---
surgery, once the strict domain of white women and a taboo
subject, is now democratized and featured prominently in
the same headline as the words “black or African American”
in magazines and online portals such as Essence, News-
week, and AOL Black Voices (though most African Ameri-
can women seek surgeries for breast reduction and tummy
tucks). These spending trends on beauty and fashion have
been chalked up to “African-American women hav[ing] ﬁ-
nally just decided that it’s time to love ourselves” by Essence
beauty editor Miki Taylor.
14 While Asian American women
also spend a great deal, more even, on fashion and beauty
products and are just as brand conscious, they are also the
leading consumers among women of ﬁnancial services.
15
One wonders if our “loving ourselves” reﬂects our “security
and conﬁdence,” or, given our marked receptivity to all me-
dia, our insecurity and self-doubt bred by the conﬂuence of
media, beauty, and hip hop culture? Shouldn’t the slicing
away, camouﬂage, and enhancement offered by plastic sur-
gery and beauty products considered part of this new phe-
nomenon of “loving ourselves” include a concomitant up-
tick in ﬁnancial investments as well as diet- and exercise-
related spending given our health risks? Purchased beauty is
undeniably a depreciating asset, while health and ﬁnancial
solvency guarantees some degree of longevity. And yet, I am
clearly aware that there are those hip hop generation women
who would argue that if beauty enhancement lands you a
“baller,” it was money well spent.
In the end, despite all the hype about diversity and Gener-
ation E.A., hegemony prevails. Blondes, the stand-in for un-
adulterated whiteness, still have more fun. Generation E.A.
Video Vixens, Beauty Culture, and Diasporic Sex Tourism / 35


--- PAGE 55 ---
comes in at quite a distant second, and Generation A.M
(Ascriptive Mulattas)—those left-of-center beauties—clinch
third. Those of us who remain—the unaesthetically pleasing,
racially marked plebeians, or Generation B (read: black)—
anchor the bottom or the far left of the beauty schema, par-
ticularly with respect to mainstream culture.
Hip hop culture as represented through the “video vix-
ens” and Madison Avenue collide on the beauty hierarchy
in the ambiguous space between generations E.A. and A.M.
And who determines the contours of this space? More often
than not, it is black men. Besides sports—which has gen-
erated a cottage industry of books on the black male ath-
lete—hip hop culture represents another cultural terrain
dominated and shaped by black men. Certainly Erica Ken-
nedy’s hilarious debut novel Bling!, a tale of the hip hop in-
dustry, offers interesting commentary on black men as cul-
tural brokers of desire who resemble modern-day Svengalis
as they develop, control, and project what is desirable and
equally cultivate the public’s desire for E.A. and A.M. artists
who nonetheless read “black.”
16 In Kennedy’s make-believe
world that seamlessly channels the contradictions of hip
hop culture, darker skin among women is a handicap to be
overcome; dreaded, braided, or “happy to be nappy” hair
are “no-no’s”; and “big,” as in body type, is deﬁnitely not
beautiful.
Lest one get the impression that those women who self-
identify as black and fall into the E.A. and A.M. categories
of desirability do not also contend with demons not of their
own making, they do. Idealization is often accompanied
by alienation, “trophied” status, and petty jealousies. Anita
Lewis, former Communications/Public Relations Liaison for
Video Vixens, Beauty Culture, and Diasporic Sex Tourism / 36


--- PAGE 56 ---
Pennsylvania State Senator Vincent Hughes and one of Phil-
adelphia Business Journal ’s “40 Under 40,” admits that be-
ing a lighter-skinned black woman has its own challenges:
The ﬁghting began in middle school with other girls pulling
my hair, trying to put glue in it, and taking swipes, with their
ﬁngernails, at my face. As a professional, there are those who
think I have landed certain positions because of my looks.
Undoubtedly, there are those who may perceive me as less
threatening, more acceptable. I cut my hair extremely short
at one point in my career so that people, especially men,
would take me seriously, stop ﬁxating on my hair and listen
to what I was saying. My looks may have allowed my foot in
the door, but my talents and skills keep me there.
17
Singer Beyoncé Knowles, part of a roundtable discussion
with other professional black women featured in Newsweek,
also spoke to these very issues of color and beauty and her
experiences as a lighter-skinned black woman. Knowles,
who is incidentally identiﬁed as part of “Generation E.A.” in
The New York Times article, ranked number eight on 2005’s
askmen.com’s top ninety-nine, and somersaulted Jennifer
Lopez off the “booty pedestal” with her “Bootylicious” an-
them and appearance on Q magazine’s cover with the head-
line, “The Ass that Shook the World,” offered: “Well, I
could complain about being light-skinned. But that’s life.
People judge you by the way you look, unfortunately.... ”
18
So while black men may have questionable standards of
beauty for black women, they are not, unlike Madison Av-
enue, necessarily worshipping at the altar of white beauty.
They linger rather, as I have suggested, somewhere between
Generation E.A. and Generation A.M. That heterosexual
black youth culture leans toward “left-of-center beauty” is a
Video Vixens, Beauty Culture, and Diasporic Sex Tourism / 37


--- PAGE 57 ---
direct result of the political landscape, ideology, and social
gains offered by both the civil rights and black power move-
ments. While integration offered by the civil rights move-
ment presented access to corridors, classrooms, and bed-
rooms heretofore inaccessible, the 1970s’ slogan “Black Is
Beautiful” carried over into the 1980s and helped shape the
worldview of the hip hop generation. It is not so much that
black is no longer beautiful but too familiar. The forbidden-
fruit aura once enveloping white women has also been
thoroughly demystiﬁed as they too avail themselves of the
most hedonistic offerings of hip hop culture, ergo the por-
nographic videos Girls Gone Wild with Snoop Dogg and
Groupie Love with G-Unit. Moreover, beauty culture’s stok-
ing of white women’s obsession with thinness, the aim for
103 lbs. whether one is 5'1" or 5'10", disinvites the devel-
opment of “junk in the trunk,” those protuberant charms es-
sentialized in hip hop culture. Most white women are left
“assed out.”
Besides breeding misogyny and sexism, a surprising an-
cillary effect of such black male privilege and familiarity
has been the desire for the unknown, the “exotic” femi-
nine ideal. The ideal woman is indeed black-derived, curvy,
and “thick,” but she is “paprika’d” and salted with differ-
ence, as with the October 2004 Black-Irish-Cherokee-Asian
“Eye Candy” centerfold in the hip hop magazine XXL, or
December 2004’s African-American-Egyptian-Brazilian “Eye
Candy” spread. Beginning at opposite ends of the great
chain of beauty’s color spectrum, hip hop culture and main-
stream beauty culture meet somewhere in the middle in their
fetishization of ethnic brewing.
Video Vixens, Beauty Culture, and Diasporic Sex Tourism / 38


--- PAGE 58 ---
The desire for the unknown, the exotic and highly ethni-
cally seasoned black woman of late has been satiated beyond
U.S. borders—namely among the black diaspora in coun-
tries like Brazil. The mirror of Brazil is being reﬂected back
on U.S. women. This latest “desire for the exotic,” as the
Generation E.A. article put it, then transcends not only
“rigid social categories of race, class,” but U.S. borders as
well. Raquel Rivera has skillfully argued in New York Ri-
cans in the Hip-Hop Zone that Latinas as the buttapecans,
the mamis, have often served as the exotic detour in the pre-
dominantly black male world of hip hop. The interesting re-
ality is that they too have now become part of “The Known
World” (borrowing Edward P. Jones’s Pulitzer prize-winning
novel’s title). The search for the beautiful is now in the fa-
velas (the ghettos) of Brazil. Hence it is no small surprise to
see advertisements by Game, Inc., a company based out of
Las Vegas, Nevada, for the porn collection Hip-Hop Hon-
eys: Brazil Boom Boom, “with the bootylicious bodies that
make Brazil a fantasy favorite for the hip hop generation” in
“hip hop on a higher level” magazines likeXXL (see p. 41).
19
In some respects, hip hop generation African American
men’s latest fetish parallels Brazil’s own fetishizing of racial
admixture as embodied by the mulatta ﬁgure. In a country
where a cliché on the order of “white woman to wed,
mulatta to bed, black woman to work” is beﬁtting, Alma
Guillermoprieto, author of Samba, notes:
Mulatas are gloriﬁed sex fetishes, sanitized representations of
what whites view as the savage African sex urge, but they are
also, of course, tribute and proof of the white male’s power:
his sexual power, and his economic power, which allowed
Video Vixens, Beauty Culture, and Diasporic Sex Tourism / 39


--- PAGE 59 ---
him to wrest the mulata’s black mother away from her black
partner. At the same time the mulata serves to perpetuate one
of the myths that Brazilians hold most dear, that there is no
racism in Brazil, that miscegenation has been natural and
pleasant for both parties, that white people really, sincerely,
do like black people. In fact, the aesthetic superiority ac-
corded to light-skinned black women— mulatas— underlines
the perceived ugliness of blacks before they have been “im-
proved” with white blood. The white skin also serves to
lighten a sexual force that in undiluted state is not only
threatening but vaguely repulsive, and at the same time, the
myth goes, irresistible.
20
The ﬂeshy hips, thighs, ample posterior, and thrust-forward
breasts of the mulatta ﬁgure is offered as a sign of all things
Brazilian, speciﬁcally Rio de Janeiro, as is Sugar Loaf, Cor-
covado (the Jesus Christ statue reigning majestically high
above the city of Rio de Janeiro), the historic district of
Lapa, Capoeira, and the favelas. As if taking cues from its
northerly American neighborhoods, racial and ethnic brew-
ing is celebrated but whiteness dominates the high-end bill-
boards of Ipanema and the beauty industry. In interviewing
a model talent scout for a May 2005 article on Brazil enti-
tled “Beauty and the Beach,” Condé Nast Traveler writer
Julia Chapin uncovered that “right now what’s hot are girls
who have a European face but the body movements and
attitude of a Latin.” The talent scout admits that “dark-
skinned girls from northern Brazil have a harder time getting
work.”
21
The summer of 2003 brought the upbeat, radio-ready
“Beautiful” collaboration between Snoop Dogg, Pharrell,
and Uncle Charlie Wilson, formerly of the Gap Band. We all
Video Vixens, Beauty Culture, and Diasporic Sex Tourism / 40


--- PAGE 60 ---
Courtesy of Game Video, Inc. Hip-Hop Honeys name and logo and all contents
of this advertisement are © Game Video, Inc.


--- PAGE 61 ---
sang along in Pharrell’s Marvin Gaye–esque falsetto, ignor-
ing the ﬁrst refrain offered by Snoop about “Long hair,
wit’cha big fat booty.” By the time Snoop arrived at, “Black
and beautiful, you the one I’m choosin’ / Hair long and
black and curly like you’re Cuban,” some black women
were singing, “No, No, No, No!” instead of “Yeah, Yeah,
Yeah, Yeah!”—mocking the Pharrell and Charlie Wilson re-
frain. The heavily rotated Chris Robinson–directed video
was shot on location in Brazil. Stunning because of the lo-
cale and the women, “Beautiful” the video provides a visual
representation of the new black feminine ideal in hip hop
culture with the charge to “Look far Southward!” to ﬁnd it.
Surrounded by a bevy of Brazilian beauties, Snoop and Phar-
rell move through this postcard-like sonata, showcasing the
history of New World race mixing of imported African cap-
tives, indigenous Indians, and conquering Europeans. While
some have argued that the video vixens were not Brasilieras,
the fact of the matter is that the video provides the illusion
of an authentic Brazilian experience. The video has become
perhaps the best advertisement the Brazilian travel and tour-
ism industry could hope for in its recent attempts to tap into
a speciﬁcally African American market.
Snoop is not the ﬁrst hip hop artist to use Brazil and its
women as backdrops, nor will he be the last. Indeed, south-
ern rapper T.I. ﬁnds himself in Rio among frolicking women
on Copacabana Beach in his 2006 “Why You Wanna”
video. The Neptunes, the Pharrell Williams–Chad Hugo hit-
making duo, acted in Dude: We’re Going to Rio, the 2003
hip hop musical comedy directed by C. B. Harding. In this
campy tale of love at ﬁrst sight, Pharrell sees a travel poster
Video Vixens, Beauty Culture, and Diasporic Sex Tourism / 42


--- PAGE 62 ---
for Brazil featuring a Brazilian woman with whom he falls in
love, and he travels to Rio de Janeiro to ﬁnd her. Ja Rule’s
video “Holla, Holla,” directed by Hype Williams and from
the 1999 CD Venni Vetti Vicci, broke ranks at the time of its
release by featuring Brazilian women and shooting on loca-
tion in Brazil. In an interview with AllHipHop.com, Ja Rule
relates that
At that point in Hip-Hop, it was still about your n*ggas in
the videos with you. We ﬂew out to Brazil, and it was magic
instantly. We set up cameras, scouting ladies. There were
mad beautiful chicks coming to the camera, and on the beach
topless. All types of shit, man! I was extra amped! We turned
the cameras on, and girls started ﬂocking. We only brought
one professional girl (Gloria Velez), and the rest were just
girls from Brazil that wanted to get down.
22
While “Holla, Holla” is an anthem to the rough-and-tumble
life of thugdom, playin’ bitches and poppin’ snitches, “Beau-
tiful” is purposely G-rated commercial fare, untarnished by
bleeps; it is an ode to beauty by one of hip hop culture’s leg-
endary gangsta pimps, Snoop Dogg, a purveyor of style, a
barometer for “what” and “who” is the “in” thing to do
and screw.
When revolutionary writer Frantz Fanon wrote in his
1963 “handbook of the Black Revolution,” The Wretched
of the Earth, of “the pitfalls of national consciousness” and
globalization with respect to developing nations and tour-
ism, who would have imagined how prophetic his pro-
nouncements were? And who would have thought that hip
hop generation black men would join the Western bourgeois
tourist “avid for the exotic . . . the beaches of Rio, the little
Video Vixens, Beauty Culture, and Diasporic Sex Tourism / 43


--- PAGE 63 ---
Brazilian . . . girls ...,  [t]he banking magnates, the techno-
crats, and the big businessmen of the United States [who]
have only to step onto a plane and they are wafted into sub-
tropical climes, there for a space of a week or ten days to
luxuriate in . . . delicious depravities”?
23 Despite harrowing
statistics about poverty, unemployment, incarceration, HIV/
AIDS, and drug use, hip hop generation black men have
been able to access, generate, and beneﬁt from the unprece-
dented wealth that has made the United States the most
powerful capitalist nation in the world.
The Selig Center for Economic Growth’s survey The Mul-
ticultural Economy 2004 reports that African Americans
have enjoyed a steady rise in income, resulting in $ 723 bil-
lion in buying power as of September 2004, an increase of
3.9 percent over the $ 631 billion earned in 2002 as re-
ported in the 2003 Target Market News’ analysis The Buy-
ing Power of Black America. This extraordinary wealth gen-
eration has allowed them the means and opportunity to act
in many respects with the same arrogance and license as
their white American and European male contemporaries
and the imperialist tourists of Fanon’s era.
Latin America, Fanon wrote, is “Europe’s brothel,” and
Brazil, in particular, has become to the heterosexual black
American male what Tahiti was to the nineteenth-century
painter Paul Gauguin—an idyllic place where one could
“fuck, tan, and eat,” or “ baiser, bronzer et bouffer,” as the
French Club Med experience was once described. Accord-
ing to a BBC report on sex tourism and prostitution in
Brazil, sex work in Brazil is on the upswing, as Brazilian
women and girls look for a way out of dire poverty. Brazil
has been pressed into the role of purveyor of sex tourism
Video Vixens, Beauty Culture, and Diasporic Sex Tourism / 44


--- PAGE 64 ---
as a result of the void left by Asia—speciﬁcally Thailand—
and the tsunami crisis. A casualty of its savvy and relentless
marketing, particularly with respect to women and sex, Bra-
zil is identiﬁed as the land of samba, sensuality, the bikini
wax, and the Brazilian bunda, a string/thong bikini.
24 Such
are the obsessions with Brazilian sexuality that plastic sur-
geons offer a procedure called the Brazilian butt lift.
25 For a
few Brazilian reais, which amount to nominal amounts in
American dollars (and sometimes the promise of a better life
for Brazilians in the United States), one can experience the
fantasy that is Brazil—and generally from women from the
favelas.
In Brazil, the reputedly large parties thrown by moguls
such as Damon Dash and Sean “Puffy” Combs during Car-
nivale and the Brazilian fascination with all things Ameri-
cana, especially mass-produced and globally exported black
commodities such as music and music videos, provide cul-
tural currency for hip hop generation black men that gives
them a Brazilian ghetto tour pass that includes discounts on
women. For those poor and working-class black men unable
to procure the fantasy on the ground, their imaginations,
like those writers of beguiling eighteenth- and nineteenth-
century travel narratives of exotic places and eager-to-be-
had women, will travel for them. For a mere $ 72 including
shipping and handling—a far cry from a $ 1,000 plane ticket
to Rio—they can be transported to Brazil via pornographic
visual aids like Hip Hop Honeys: Brazil Boom Boom ’s
three-volume set and a poster.
In 2004, African Americans spent $ 4.6 billion on travel,
lodging, and transportation.
26 While the Caribbean and Af-
rica have long been heavily marketed to African Americans
Video Vixens, Beauty Culture, and Diasporic Sex Tourism / 45


--- PAGE 65 ---
by the travel and tourism industry, partnerships between the
Brazilian government and African American media moguls
like Essence magazine founder Clarence Smith have resulted
in deal-brokering between Varig Airlines and Avocet Travel
and Entertainment that now includes direct ﬂights from
New York to Salvador, Bahia. Brazil represents an untapped
market for African American businesses, and vice versa. As
Brazzil Online Magazine suggests,
This place (Brazil) has so much to offer African-Americans.
Much more than any place on the continent of Africa. The
environment here is stable; there is no civil war here. There
are no famines on the scale of what a visitor would encoun-
ter in Africa. Brazil offers access to state of the art tele-
communications, reliable banking systems, good roads and
health facilities.
27
Furthermore, the emergence of interest groups on the Web
such as “African American Men & Brazilian Women” sig-
nals the global inclinations and democratization of wander-
lust and leisure afforded by the U.S. economic boom. Replete
with visuals, The African American Men & Brazilian Women
message board also provides insight into some of the kinds
of leisure activities sought. There is a “do’s and don’ts” list
offered by one aﬁcionado of Brazilian women. A sort of “Mr.
Manners” for African American men traveling to Brazil,
ChgoBachelor31_4u took his counsels from postings at Rio-
exposed.com and Brazilmensclub.com, sites that promote sex
tourism. Among other things, ChgoBachelor31_4u advises
African American men not to “ﬂirt with females unless your
[sic] serious” or “go in the favelas unless your [ sic] with
someone you know & trust,” but do “wear a condom,” and
Video Vixens, Beauty Culture, and Diasporic Sex Tourism / 46


--- PAGE 66 ---
“if your [ sic] there (1) week you should average 10 females,
if your [sic] there (2) weeks you should average 20 females,”
and ﬁnally, “Even if you dont [sic] need it fellas, ‘blue devils’
aka viagra. dont [sic] be ashamed to use it.”28
For those interested in making “honest women” out the
Brasilieras, bgcaliber1 offers some handy tips as well:
1. Though it may be tough . . . try to see her a few times in
Brazil b 4 bringing her back. Learn some Portuguese (or
bring someone who knows the language) and try to ask
around her neighborhood what type of girl she is from the
local guys (last thing you want to do is bring back a full
ﬂedged hoe). See how her family is (full of nice spiritual
people or a group of thieves). Remember, the apple does-
n’t fall far from the tree.
2. If you do eventually get her here, do not trust her to visit
other girlfriends living here by herself. keep her away
from other brazilian girls here in the states (unless
you’re absolutely sure the girl is living a clean simple life).
If she has to visit, go with her. Unless you’re independ-
ently wealthy and can afford to give her money to send
back to Brazil, she’ll want to start working. With limited
English and no papers yet, where is the 1st place she’ll
think about going. You got it . . . the strip club ! Once
some of these girls ﬁnd out how much other girls make in
the sex trade . . . you’re screwed!
3. Many of these girls really do just want the papers. Once
they get them, many times it’s . . . adios! Unless you . . .
(refer to #4 & #6)
4. If your libido isn’t up to par, you better get those blue
pills. The majority of Brasilieras I know love sex and if
you’re not doing the job. .....
5. Keep tabs and don’t give too much freedom (at least in the
beginning) to go off by herself (or not calling in to check
up on her). Once again, refer to # 2 & #4.
Video Vixens, Beauty Culture, and Diasporic Sex Tourism / 47


--- PAGE 67 ---
6. learn the language! You will meet so many more Bra-
zilian women if you can even basically commuicate [ sic]
with them and you will tend to keep them longer (never
mind the fact that you will be able to understand what
she’s talking about on the phone). . . .
Good luck in ﬁnding your ideal woman brothers!
29
While many of my colleagues in second language acquisition
studies cringe at such utilitarian approaches to language
learning, as a professor of French studies, I can in principle
appreciate bgcaliber1’s emphatic suggestion to learn the Por-
tuguese language, despite the suggestion’s questionable con-
text. But that context necessarily feeds into the myth that
these ethereal beauties, these “ideal wom[e]n,” are sex god-
desses to boot. They require constant monitoring for fear of
cuckolding, are predisposed to work in the sex entertain-
ment industry, and require ﬂaccid-penised paramours to
come with a prescription of Viagra. In the Brazilian woman,
the African American male has met his sexual match—at
least in these scripts of sexual insatiability penned by African
American men. Better still, with all this talk of Viagra, the
African American male, that quintessential cocksman, “the
keeper of the impalpable gate,” in Fanon speak, “that opens
into the realm of orgies, of bacchanals, of delirious sexual
sensations,”
30 has been bested by Brasilieras.
That the mania over Brazil has reached an interesting
pitch is bizarrely revealed by a certain John Nicholson who
claims to be an associate of pioneering ﬁlmmaker Warring-
ton Hudlin, whose box ofﬁce draws Boomerang and House
Party helped to establish hip hop ﬁlm as a subgenre of
American cinema. Nicholson wants African American men
Video Vixens, Beauty Culture, and Diasporic Sex Tourism / 48


--- PAGE 68 ---
on the African American Men & Brazilian Women message
board to provide him and Hudlin insight into their Brazil
connections as they are purportedly making a documentary
on Brazil, much to the chagrin of many of the men who fre-
quent the site:
This is John Nicholson, and i [ sic] would like to address
what appears to be some growing concerns expressed by
some of the men about the motives and results of the docu-
mentary Warrington Hudlin and I are working on about afri-
can american men who love/enjoy the women in brasil. First,
my 100% goal is to present a very fair and unbiased look at
the entire situation on Rio. I have zero interest in making a
T&A (tits and ass) documentary, this will be a serious and
fair look at Rio.
Now some have expressed concerns that i am interested in
doing this documentary at all. I and Warrington feel that its a
compelling and interesting story to be told. Some have said
that they prefer if we did not complete the documentary at
[all], for fear that too many people will ﬁnd out and ruin a
“good thing.” I think its fair to say that after Snoops [ sic]
music video, if it was a secret before, it certainly is not one
now.
Men need to keep in mind, that the talk about Brasil is
spreading in the african american community, and while my
goal is to do a fair look at this issue, there may be others
who might simply want to make a one sided and sensational
type piece, that would not be fair and balanced. Maybe some
show like Oprah will eventually send down a production
team with hidden camera’s and mics and blow brothers out
the water with the video.
Which is why its important to me that i complete this proj-
ect and get it out there as soon as i can. I will gladly answers
any concerns, issues or questions any of you may have, please
feel free to email me at JNicholson 30339@yahoo.com.
31
Video Vixens, Beauty Culture, and Diasporic Sex Tourism / 49


--- PAGE 69 ---
What is most telling about Nicholson’s posting is the exclu-
sive reference to Rio de Janeiro, his use of “or,” signaled
by the slash between “love/enjoy,” rather than “and” in ref-
erence to loving “or” enjoying Brazilian women, and the
“good thing” his documentary will ruin—sexual paradise
spoiled by a sea of competing African American males. Af-
rican American men have choices. They can “love” Brazil-
ian women, as many of them genuinely do, but Brasilieras
can also be merely enjoyed, sampled like exotic victuals as
ChgoBachelor31_4U suggests, depending on “if your [ sic]
there (1) week . . . ( 10 females) . . . ( 2) (20 females).” In-
deed, the sheer number of Brazilian female dishes available
depending on one’s travel schedule rather resembles a colo-
nial Indonesian rice table in which the wealthy colonists se-
lected the ﬁnest and most succulent dishes from the isles of
Asia.
The exclusive mention of Rio tells yet another story. The
Avocet T&E-Varig deal to Bahia is targeted to African Amer-
ican females between the ages of twenty-ﬁve and ﬁfty-ﬁve,
seeking a more spiritual vacation. The ﬁrst imported en-
slaved Africans arrived in Salvador, Bahia in the sixteenth
century. Bahia and northern Brazil represent the stronghold
of African culture with the ever-present martial-art school
teaching the Angolan-inspired Capoeira and Yoruban-de-
rived spiritual practices such as Candomblé. Though sex
tourism is a persistent problem in Salvador da Bahia and the
North, and the Bahian Carnival is also ballyhooed on sex
tourist sites like Brazilmensclub.com as such a celebration
that “every man owes it to himself to go once in his life,”
Rio becomes the exclusive playground for African American
Video Vixens, Beauty Culture, and Diasporic Sex Tourism / 50


--- PAGE 70 ---
male sexual prerogatives. And the arrest of twenty-nine Afri-
can American men on charges of sexual tourism with forty
Brazilian sex workers ( garota de programa, also known as
GDP) on the schooner Shangrilá, leaving the Marina da
Glòria in Rio on June 11, 2005, demonstrates the exercising
of those prerogatives. It is then not particularly surprising
that Rio, the favelas, and the women are varyingly put to
use in hip hop culture.
With “Beautiful,” “Why You Wanna,” Dude: We’re Go-
ing to Rio, and “Holla, Holla” videos, Snoop, T.I., Pharrell,
and Ja Rule not only represented the mobility, inﬂuence, and
access to afﬂuence available to African American hip hop
generation men as part of our new global condition, but also
offered up the latest fetishized commodity of beauty in the
heterosexual African American male realm of desire. That
the “Eye Candy” section of hip hop magazines like XXL and
the Dirty South’s Ozone feature video vixens remarkably
similar to the women in “Beautiful” is no coincidence. That
we seem to see the “same ho[s],” using Tupac’s rancid poetic
maneuver, in Brazil, in XXL, and in hip hop videos in gen-
eral is unfortunately a conundrum of the new black gender
politics that uses art, technological innovation, and global-
ization in the service of color chauvinism, sexist exploitation,
and hair neurosis. It is a new black gender politics com-
pletely in the service of a jack-legged black masculinity. And
that black masculinity has been cobbled together from the
stultifying remains of white supremacy, media, and the un-
deserved privileges accrued globally by American manhood.
That young black women continue to negotiate these im-
possible ideals that literally gyrate around them in videos,
Video Vixens, Beauty Culture, and Diasporic Sex Tourism / 51


--- PAGE 71 ---
assail them from above in Madison Avenue billboards, and
stare back at them in mainstream and hip hop magazines in
myriad ways is nothing new. We have always attempted to
carve spaces for ourselves in an American culture that has
resolutely tried to deny our very humanity and womanhood.
But the spaces that have emerged in commercial hip hop are
categorically one-dimensional. Beauty is nothing short of the
helpmate to sex; and we have become reducible to our sexu-
ality as the predominate arbiter of our reality. Into this rot-
ten stew of hypersexuality and insatiability, one can add the
distressing outcome of sexual abuse—of which young black
women and girls are 10 percent more likely to be survivors.
Video Vixens, Beauty Culture, and Diasporic Sex Tourism / 52


--- PAGE 72 ---
53
too hot to be bothered
Black Women and Sexual Abuse
[W]e, black women, have always been supportive
of black men in the struggle against racism, even
while we were being raped. Even while rape and
assault has been going on in our communities.
This is important because so many react as if
talking about rape and assault in our communi-
ties is somehow not being supportive of black
men, or as if it were not being loyal to black men.
— Aishah Shahidah Simmons , 
Independent Filmmaker1
The larger question is, “What transpires in our
community that allows such a thing to be on the
minds of young men who are six and seven years
old?”
— Creg Williams , former superintendent
of the St. Louis Public Schools, in 
response to the sexual assault of a 
second-grader by twelve of her peers 
in spring 2006 at a school playground
during recess
“
ave you seen the tape?” a
rather smart female student inquired of the R. Kelly tape.
“That was him! And that was obviously a very young girl.
She had to ask him for sexual directives!” But no sooner
than I had proceeded to lecture about interstate trafﬁcking


--- PAGE 73 ---
of child pornography (we were in New York, the R. Kelly
tape was made in Illinois), another sex tape surfaced fea-
turing Louisiana rapper Mystikal. These Jive Record label
mates obviously had a predilection for video recording their
peccadilloes. Whether those peccadilloes are more accurately
described as consensual pornography or plain old sexual
abuse continues to be debated in the court of public opinion.
And the mainstreaming of hip hop has broadened the um-
brella under which male celebrities, speciﬁcally, can seek and
acquire protection from allegations of sexual violence. In-
dustry movers and shakers, legal eagles, hip hop magazines,
blogs, a multiracial fan base, and sundry artists rise to the
occasion with the result being the minimalization of the
crimes (reduced sentencing plea deals) and the further de-
moralization of the survivors who become tagged as group-
ies, hoochies, and chickenheads.
While it is undeniable that blacks have been used in vari-
ous ways to further our national dialogues on sex and vio-
lence, sociological and crime studies have found that young
women, regardless of race, are more likely to be raped or
sexually assaulted and young black women are least likely to
report such violence. The usual racial defensiveness or pro-
tectiveness of black communities minimizes the negative im-
pact of sexual violence within black communities, especially
when the perpetrator is a celebrity.
Feminism helped to politicize rape, which has led to legis-
lation such as the Violence Against Women Act of 1998 and
rape shield laws, which funded programs to address domes-
tic violence and sexual abuse and disallowed probing into
women’s past sexual histories in rape cases, respectively.
Black Women and Sexual Abuse / 54


--- PAGE 74 ---
Rape shield statutes were invoked during Mike Gerard
Tyson v. The State of Indiana and challenged in The State of
Colorado v. Kobe Bean Bryant. Feminists’ treatises on rape
have historically led to interesting developments around the
issue of black-on-black rape and the protectiveness of black
communities. In the nineteenth century, the history of black
male lynching on trumped-up charges of interracial rape
were referred to as “southern horrors” by feminist Ida B.
Wells in her withering newspaper editorials and pamphlets.
2
Almost a century later in the 1970s, feminist tracts such as
Susan Brownmiller’s popular book Against Our Will pre-
sented highly problematic treatments of Emmett Till and the
interracial sexual abuse of black women. In their respective
eras, and with salient resonance even today, both contrib-
uted to the racial defensiveness of African American commu-
nities. Each in their own way ironically contributes to the
erasure of black women’s sexual abuse by black men.
In efforts to distance themselves from the “paranoia” and
overbearing “victim” status conferred on women by femi-
nism, hip hop generation feminist writers like Katie Roiphe
(The Morning After: Sex, Fear and Feminism ) reject the no-
tion that we live in a “rape culture.” According to Roiphe:
As I see it, there are more than two sides to any issue. . . .
The image that emerges from feminist preoccupations with
rape and sexual harassment is that of women as victims,
offended by a professor’s dirty joke, verbally pressured into
sex by peers. This image of a delicate woman bears a striking
resemblance to that ﬁfties ideal my mother and the other
women of her generation fought so hard to get away from.
They didn’t like her passivity, her wide-eyed innocence. They
didn’t like the fact that she was perpetually offended by
Black Women and Sexual Abuse / 55


--- PAGE 75 ---
sexual innuendo. . . . they worked and marched, shouted and
wrote, to make her irrelevant to their daughters. But here she
is again, with her pure intentions and her wide-eyes. Only
this time it is the feminists themselves who are breathing life
into her.
3
Roiphe’s impatience with these “retrograde” tendencies in
feminism, especially on college campuses, relates to its insis-
tence on conferring victim status on women and the cul-
ture of fear into which she sees feminism breathing new
life. Instead of liberating women, Roiphe sees feminism as
painting women into a corner of passivity and fear. Criticism
of American culture as a whole as fear-ridden and danger-
obsessed has also been taken up in Barry Glassner’s book
The Culture of Fear: Why Americans Are Afraid of the
Wrong Things. Glassner’s thesis was featured, particularly
with respect to black males, in ﬁlmmaker Michael Moore’s
Bowling for Columbine. In his book, Glassner explains how
poignant anecdotes are often substituted for scientiﬁc evi-
dence; he demonstrates how pundits with little to no back-
ground on various social, political, or economic issues are
routinely transformed into experts. Incidents that in most
other cultures would invite no more than a passing reference
become trends of this or that social or moral failing. Where
Glassner’s analyses would incite from Roiphe an enthusias-
tic, “Here, here!” would certainly be his unpacking of cul-
tural stereotypes of groups of people (men) writ large as in-
nately dangerous. Feminist’s efforts to tackle sexual abuse
via “Take Back the Night” vigils, educational literature,
workshops, and seminars are read by Roiphe and others as
part of the fear-inciting trends endemic in American culture.
Black Women and Sexual Abuse / 56


--- PAGE 76 ---
But quite different from the boy who cried wolf only to
have his third call ignored when the wolf actually appeared,
sexual abuse in the United States statistically occurs with
odds greater than one in three.
4 Research on historic under-
reporting by institutions, from the military to universities
and colleges, and by those who experience sexual abuse bear
this out.
5 And women’s organizations committed to sexual
abuse education on college campuses must balance an insti-
tution’s desire to present itself as a safe place for female coeds
and their own missions to inform young women about sex,
safety, and numbers that oftentimes vastly differ from the of-
ﬁcial institutional count of sexual assaults. Indeed, on my
very own campus, by the ﬁfth week of school in fall 2005,
eighteen sexual assaults had occurred and were reported to
the Women’s Center, though only twelve had been reported
to university authorities. Silence, shame, and secrecy are
pervasive. Women’s organizations, for all of our stereotyped
yelping and victim-status-seeking antics, as Roiphe would
have it, provide potentially sex life altering services.
As much as we would like to wish away sexual abuse in
our body politic and sexual politics, that 61 percent of in-
stances of sexual violence go unreported, that black women
are 10 percent more likely to be victimized than all other
women, that 90 percent of sexual assaults and rapes are in-
traracial, that white men represent 52 percent of rapists de-
spite the black male boogeyman in the white imagination,
that perpetrators of violence against black women serve less
time than perpetrators of violence against white and Latina
women, that 94 percent (or 15 out 16) of rapists will never
spend a day in prison, compels hip hop generationers to
Black Women and Sexual Abuse / 57


--- PAGE 77 ---
seriously engage the issue. 6 If we can, and we should, revel
proudly in hip hop’s inﬂuence in spheres from fashion to lex-
icon, then the overtly sexual and sexist nature of much of
hip hop culture also suggests its guidance on matters of sex.
While statistics on sexual assault and rape are crucial in
this context, just as important to explore is how hip hop
generationers interpret sexual abuse, and how women in
particular perceive the perpetrators of this abuse. In this
chapter, I explore the relationship between hip hop culture
and sexual abuse. In what ways does hip hop culture ride
shotgun in a culture already rife with sexual abuse? How
does this culture reinforce stereotypes of black women as
“so hot” that they are rendered fair game for rape and sex-
ual assault? As I explore these questions, I draw from vari-
ous high-proﬁle cases and hip hop generation ﬁlms including
Michael “Mystikal” Tyler v. The State of Louisiana, The
State of Colorado v. Kobe Bean Bryant, Robert R. Kelly v.
The State of Illinois, and Ice Cube’s The Player’s Club and
Aishah Shahidah Simmon’s rape documentary NO! to fur-
ther tease out issues of consent, hip hop generation gender
politics, and sexual violence.
***
Hip hop culture is no more or less violent and sexist than
other American cultural products (think Playboy, prime-time
news and television, the ﬂourishing Hooters restaurant chain
and now-bankrupt airline, The O’Reilly Factor, hard rock,
country music, the blues, or Abercrombie and Fitch cata-
logues). However, it is more dubiously highlighted by the
media as the source of violent misogyny in American youth
Black Women and Sexual Abuse / 58


--- PAGE 78 ---
culture. But this is really not the point. As gifted an MC as
DMX is, the lyrics to “X Is Coming” (“If you gotta daugh-
ter older than ﬁfteen, Ima rape her”) deeply disturb, as do
Tupac Shakur’s “First let my nigga fuck then I fuck / That’s
how we do it (ha, ha),” NWA’s “One Less Bitch” (“I was
thinking the worst but yo I had to let my niggaz fuck her
ﬁrst yeah / Loaded up the 44 yo, then I straight smoked the
ho”), which fantasizes about the gang rape and snufﬁng of a
woman, or the forced abortion suggested by hip hop artist
Joe Budden in the remix of Usher’s “Confessions” (“If she’s
talkin’ ’bout keepin’ it / One hit to the stomach, she’s leakin’
it”). Even if one dismisses outright causal relationship theo-
ries (rap gloriﬁes and thereby sanctions and leads to sexual
abuse, etc.), the urban, ghetto (sur)reality that hip hop art-
ists claim to be merely describing or fantasizing about—pull-
ing trains, forced abortions, and rape—offers a rather for-
lorn snapshot of young black women’s sexual experiences.
Dr. Dre’s very public 1991 physical beat-down of Dee
Barnes, former host of the Pump It Up rap show, at a party
provided the earliest glimpse into the kinds of brutality di-
rected at black women for “getting out of pocket” by their
hip hop generation male peers. Barnes had incurred Dre’s
wrath because she allowed former NWA member Ice Cube
to deliver a verbal slap at NWA on her show. Gender vio-
lence directed at black women was not new. Criticisms of
rap music’s misogyny were also not new. But no one was
prepared for the very visceral display of what many had con-
cluded was hip hop generation men’s emerging worldview
vis-à-vis black women, that is, in borrowing those fateful
seven words from Kanye West, “Black men don’t care about
Black Women and Sexual Abuse / 59


--- PAGE 79 ---
black women.” That one of the tracks from the Ying Yang
Twin’s United States of Atlanta could be jokingly referred to
as the “date rape song” or “porn on record,” comparing its
lewdness to the seductive talk of Barry White by DJ Smurf in
an interview in XXL magazine, is unsettling for a number of
reasons. The inability to distinguish seduction from rape and
the high frequency of acquaintance rape are two that come
to mind.
7 Indeed, DMX’s autobiography, E.A.R.L.: The Au-
tobiography of DMX, refers disparagingly to his casual sex-
ual partners as “dirty bitches” and “rats,” as in “hood rats,”
with whom he had trysts on project rooftops, in stairwells,
and in parks.
8 When women are reduced to a sort of species
rodentia any matter of treatment goes.
NWA’s and DMX’s lyrics are perhaps more aptly de-
scribed as sexually violent fantasies or more speciﬁcally, as
Robin D. G. Kelly relates, “snuff [porn].”
9 And yet the fre-
quent occurrence of Tupac Shakur–style sex trains are cer-
tainly corroborated by the chilling narratives in Tricia’s
Rose’s Longing to Tell: Black Women Talk About Sexuality
and Intimacy as well as the Motivational Educational Enter-
tainment study, This Is My Reality: The Price of Sex. And
artists are no longer content with just rapping about their
pornographic lifestyles. From the blog The Porning Report
to The New York Times, many have noted hip hop culture’s
crossover into the $ 11 billion pornographic ﬁlm industry
with grand marquee names such as Mystikal’s Liquid City,
Snoop Dogg’s Buckwild Bus Tour, Doggystyle, and Diary of
a Pimp, G-Unit’sGroupie Love, Luther “Uncle Luke” Camp-
bell’s Best of Luke’s Freakshows, volumes 1–6, and Lil’ Jon
and the Eastside Boyz’s American Sex Series. Pornography is
Black Women and Sexual Abuse / 60


--- PAGE 80 ---
often associated with visual pleasure—magazines, celluloid,
and the Web—but the sexual and sometimes violent misog-
yny offered up by hip hop music provides aural pleasure.
The lyrical stimuli of “The Whisper Song,” with its refrain,
“Wait till you see my dick, I’mma beat that pussy up,” ap-
pear straight out of a phone sex junky’s repertoire. That
male hip hop generationers have also transformed the porn
industry is not especially surprising given hip hop’s penetra-
tion into every aspect of American commerce. Hip hop’s
varyingly sexually violent misogyny, encased in “bitch-ho-
pimp” gender politics, has been superimposed onto an al-
ready raunchily perceived industry. According to Univer-
sity of California, Santa Barbara, Women’s Studies professor
Mireille Miller-Young, who researches black women sex
workers in pornography, this evolving gender politics has
made it increasingly difﬁcult for the black women profes-
sionals in the porn industry.
10
2 Live Crew’s As Nasty as They Want to Be ﬁrst sparked
the national debate about hip hop culture as a purveyor of
aural and visual pornographic pleasure. The release of the
1989 album immediately fanned the ﬂames of an ongoing
battle over the government’s authority in dictating what con-
stitutes obscenity and what citizens should listen to, watch,
and read. As a prelude to the court case brought on appeal
in Broward County, Florida, state prosecutors charged an
owner of a record store with obscenity for selling As Nasty
as They Wanna Be. In June 1990 conservative lawyer Jim
Thompson convinced a federal district judge to declare the
rap group’s third album, which contained the chart-topping
“Me So Horny,” legally obscene. Two days after the ruling,
Black Women and Sexual Abuse / 61


--- PAGE 81 ---
the group performed songs from the album live at a night-
club in Broward County, complete with booty-shaking danc-
ers; they were subsequently arrested.
The ensuing trial hosted a cast of personages that in-
cluded public intellectual and distinguished Harvard Univer-
sity professor Henry Louis Gates, who was then a professor
of English at Duke University. With his notable book The
Signifying Monkey: A Theory of African American Literary
Criticism, which described signifying as part of the black
vernacular tradition, Gates proceeded to parse the linguistic
merits of 2 Live Crew’s lewd puns and sexual braggadocio
and rap music’s claim as art. The defense queried whether
the use of “four letter words” detracted from rap’s being
considered an art form. As a defense witness, Gates re-
sponded that, “The greatest literary tradition in English lit-
erature . . . people such as Chaucer and Shakespeare, Greek
literature, Western literature, has always in its vernacular
...  included a lot of lewdity, a lot of verbal puns, sexual
puns, curse words, etc.”
11
Playing a barely audible tape of the concerts at various
moments during trial, the prosecution in its turn recited at
length the group’s lyrics from the album: “I will be fucking
you / you will be sucking me then licking my asshole; lick it
’til your tongue turns doodoo brown.” In cross-examining
Professor Gates, the prosecutor asked, “[T]hat’s great classi-
cal literature?” Gates offered the rejoinder: “I never said it
was Shakespeare.”
12 The obscenity ruling was overturned on
appeal. And the trial in fact greatly bolstered album sales. As
Nasty as They Wanna Be went on to move more than three
million units. Though trial jurors requested permission from
Black Women and Sexual Abuse / 62


--- PAGE 82 ---
the presiding judge to laugh at the recital of various lyrics,
we have now ﬁnally come to understand that 2 Live Crew’s
lyrical antics were no laughing matter.
Ahead of the curve and in response to the 2 Live Crew
obscenity hullabaloo and Gates’s defense of such rap as art
and signifying, writer and law professor Kimberlé Crenshaw
suggests in an editorial appearing in the Boston Review,
“Beyond Racism and Misogyny: Black Feminism and 2 Live
Crew,” that this variety of aural pleasure is
no mere braggadocio. Those of us who are concerned about
the high rates of gender violence in our communities must
be troubled by the possible connections between these im-
ages and tolerance for violence against women. Children and
teenagers are listening to this music, and I am concerned that
the range of acceptable behavior is being broadened by the
constant propagation of anti-women imagery. I’m concerned,
too, about young Black women who, like young men, are
learning that their value lies between their legs. Unlike men,
however, their sexual value is a depletable commodity; by ex-
pending it, girls become whores and boys become men.
13
Crenshaw’s “concerns,” while raised almost ﬁfteen years
ago, still have relevance today. In these male-spun “raps of
passage” or “bildungsrap,” black women’s bodies are preﬁg-
ured as accessible, exchangeable, and expendable. Discus-
sions—academic, ﬁctionalized, and pedestrian—have given
us plenty of insight and opinions into the historical exploita-
tion and misrepresentations of black female sexuality. From
nineteenth-century black women activists to historians Dar-
lene Clark Hine and Nell Painter to writers Toni Morrison
and Akiba Solomon, black women have explored every facet
Black Women and Sexual Abuse / 63


--- PAGE 83 ---
of the twin myths of hypersexuality and easy accessibility
that emerged in the New World as part and parcel of black
women’s initiation into what it meant to be chattel.
In post-antebellum America, black and white men antago-
nistically retreated to their separate corners over charges of
interracial rape, with vows to protect their respective com-
munities and women. Black males, ﬁrst as slaves and then as
freedmen, were far less able to conform to American patriar-
chal rituals and rites of protection. And the focus on interra-
cial rape allowed a peculiar silence to reign with respect to
women’s sexual lives within both communities. Where black
women raised the issue of intraracial sexual abuse, particu-
larly if publicly, as in the 1970s–1980s ﬁction of Toni Mor-
rison, Alice Walker, Ntozake Shange, and countless others,
the level of vitriol was intense.
The maturation of hip hop and its generation of writers
and thinkers are confronted with a very different, highly
complicated world regarding gender and racial politics,
linked explicitly to feminism and the civil rights and black
nationalist movements. Given the historical backdrop of
chattel slavery and sexual violence and the overarching
puritanical obsessions of American culture, a respectability
yoked to sexual conservatism emerged in post-antebellum
America. While explicitly linked to the middle class, it be-
came the overarching code dominating black conduct irre-
spective of class and despite stereotypes and myths of black
disrepute. In matters of sex, relations deemed respectable
were always within a heterosexual and preferably marital
and monogamous framework.
While the sexual and racial liberalism wrought by the
Black Women and Sexual Abuse / 64


--- PAGE 84 ---
women’s and black rights efforts pried open white women’s
knees and loosened black men’s belts, on the whole, black
women continued to struggle against ungenerous characteri-
zations of their moral and sexual integrity. Like their fore-
mothers of the late-nineteenth- and twentieth-century Black
Women’s Club movement, respectability still offered the
surest path toward safeguarding their integrity.
The ethos of sexual liberalism nonetheless permeated the
stranglehold sexual puritanism maintained on American cul-
ture. The generation following second wave feminism and
civil rights and black power era struggles, the hip hop gen-
eration, experiences sexual innuendo in the most mundane
of consumer activities and banter. Hip hop culture’s sexual
expressivity is a marked contrast to the old-guard code of
respectable sexual conduct, and thereby holds itself out as
freedom (even if it is a mere perversion of freedom), a re-
lease. Young black women are torn between the politics
of respectability and a bizarre version of “sexual libera-
tion.” Disseminated by an omnipresent media culture, this
distorted vision of sexual freedom is built upon the age-
old twin myths—of hypersexuality and easy accessibility—
against which so many young women continue to struggle.
The new transracial dialogue surrounding hip hop cul-
ture also advances the visual, aural, and physical trafﬁc in
women—all women, regardless of race. The gains made by
movement mommas and pappas have equally allowed
women the autonomy to decide whether or not they will
participate in such consumption-oriented sexual trafﬁcking.
Despite the “multiculti” mantra of hip hop pundits and the
multinational corporate interests that have much at stake in
Black Women and Sexual Abuse / 65


--- PAGE 85 ---
such rhetorical marketing, black women’s bodies continue to
be the primary free-ﬂoating signiﬁer of sex showcased in hip
hop for multiracial and transnational consumption. The sad
irony about the notion of “choice” and “autonomy” for us
black women who choose to appropriate and project the
twin myths whether as rap artists, “video ho’s,” or Jane
Does (perhaps “Jainnye Doe,” for we black women would
never spell our names so—well—plainly), is that the choice
is never fully ours, and thus, the sexual freedom is illusory.
Hip hop’s corporate formula for female desirability includes
large helpings of the crudest manifestations of supposed
male desires that reproduce the twin myths. Black women’s
sexuality in the marketplace of hip hop—in this instance,
the supine or prostrate variety—is then devalued and heavily
discounted.
Interestingly, in an era when intraracial sexual abuse can
be systematically documented as alarming, where black
women are aurally (music) and visually (music videos, hip
hop porn, and hip hop ﬁlms) molested, our coordinated re-
sponses and efforts have not even received the same vitriolic
reception or coverage from black men as Michelle Wallace’s
Black Macho and the Myth of the Superwoman, Walker’s
The Color Purple, and Shange’s For Colored Girls gener-
ated during the black power era. Incendiary reviews, name
calling, and ostracism from the Black Scholar to the Black
Collegian came down like a deluge on these black women
writers. These rabid responses helped to legitimize black
women’s studies and black feminist criticism, and opened
the door for black women writers. Our concerns about the
sexually violent misogyny of hip hop culture or artists in
Black Women and Sexual Abuse / 66


--- PAGE 86 ---
particular have been generally fobbed off in such a way as to
generate more inﬂammatory materials for public consump-
tion and therefore colluding media coverage, press junkets,
and more billions of dollars in CD and DVD sales. A vivid
example is Tupac Shakur’s open letter to the late activist C.
Delores Tucker in response to her highly publicized national
campaign about the demeaning treatment of black women
in hip hop. In his ditty, “Wonda Why They Call U Bitch,”
Shakur attempts to justify why some women are “bitches.”
He mocks Tucker by explaining: “Figured you wanted to
know / why we call them hos bitches / and maybe this might
help you understand.”
14 Critiques of sexual abuse in hip hop
by black women seem to invite more pugilism—physical and
lyrical. It is not so much that we don’t count. We do—in ob-
viously various insidious ways. But we also in truth do not
add up to too much—certainly not more than the proﬁts to
be had at our expense.
These perversions of desirability set young black women
up as “too hot to be bothered,” so accommodating sexually
that that bothersome word, “No!” has no place in our rep-
ertoire. In effect, it would appear that in our own communi-
ties black women are viewed as not sexually assailable un-
less we are trespassed by white male interlopers (as was the
case with the alleged interracial rape of Tawana Brawley
that riveted the nation and mobilized black communities
with Reverend Al Sharpton at the helm). Conversely, we are
ostracized (Desiree Washington, Ayanna Jackson) within our
communities if the accused is a well-known black male
(Mike Tyson, Tupac Shakur). But the vast majority of young
black women who have been sexually assaulted end up as
Black Women and Sexual Abuse / 67


--- PAGE 87 ---
piles upon piles of anonymous bodies relegated to a scrap
heap of unprosecuted and unsolved crimes. This scrap heap
allows the practices of sexual abuse to continue with near le-
gal impunity, thereby dangerously reinforcing the idea that
sexual violence is not a pressing issue among hip hop gener-
ationers. Rather unemployment, law enforcement malfea-
sance, black male-on-male violence, black men on the down-
low, and the HIV/AIDS pandemic are the paramount issues.
Hence, frenzied public debates about culpability rage on, re-
gardless of the damning, and growing, bodies of evidence—
from vaginal lacerations to tearful testimonies, from pubes-
cent ﬂesh to all of those pornographic videotapes.
***
Despite a long history of sexual misconduct, the repeatedly
“saved,” as in spiritually redeemed, multi-talented R&B/
gospel and hip hop collaborating hit-maker R. Kelly alleg-
edly mocked before a mostly female audience the pending
criminal charges against him at the September 29, 2004,
Chicago kickoff of the disastrous “The Best of Both Worlds”
tour with rapper Jay-Z. And he does have a record: four set-
tled lawsuits of sexual harassment, one twelve-count child
pornography case in Polk County, Florida, dropped in 2003
because of prosecutorial misconduct involving an explora-
tory search and seizure warrant, a 2005 pending civil suit by
a woman who alleges hip hop generationer Kelly taped their
sex interlude and distributed it widely on the Internet with-
out her consent, and one 2002 pending case of fourteen
counts of possession of child pornography stemming from a
twenty-nine-minute home-recorded video. Jim DeRogatis, a
Black Women and Sexual Abuse / 68


--- PAGE 88 ---
reporter who has been doggedly following the Robert R.
Kelly vs. The State of Illinois case, documented Kelly’s con-
cert in an article entitled “R. Kelly Flouting His Foes.” Ac-
cording to Kelly’s attorneys, DeRogatis “is so focused on
Kelly’s criminal case that he sees it everywhere—even in
places it is not.”
15
DeRogatis’s allegations stemmed from a number of con-
cert antics that included: a skit involving young women in
orange prison gear in a simulated jail cell, an e-mail message
displayed on a concert screen requesting a female compan-
ion at least nineteen or over, and, the decisive stroke, ﬂowing
yellow water on the stage as a backdrop (several of the sex-
ual charges against Kelly involve urination). DeRogatis is
perhaps not the best at semiotics, as the yellow ﬂowing wa-
ter is a reference to “Honey Love” from Kelly’s 1991 Born
into the 90s album. He is also probably not the most objec-
tive. He is a witness for the prosecution. And R. Kelly, who
has pled not guilty, is of course innocent until proven guilty,
and absolutely free to exercise his ﬁrst amendment rights
as his lawyers contend. But as African American journalist
Mary Mitchell perhaps too pithily argues, Kelly is “the
poster child for the dysfunctional relationship that has devel-
oped between adult men and girls in our society.”
16
Kelly’s “devil-may-care” attitude might stem in no small
way from his millions of albums sold, the number two Bill-
board debut of 2004’s Happy People/U Saved Me, the num-
ber one Billboard debut of 2005’s TP3 Reloaded with ﬁve
hundred thousand units moved in three days, the urban pop-
ularity of his ﬁve-part ballad “Trapped in the Closet,” the
repeated requests for collaborations from artists as varied as
Black Women and Sexual Abuse / 69


--- PAGE 89 ---
Britney Spears and Celine Dion, the calls to write music for
Broadway, and the invitation to perform from the Congres-
sional Black Caucus.
17 The highlight of Kelly’s rafﬁsh atti-
tude can literally be seen on the Spring 2004 cover of XXL
magazine, where a pimped-out Kelly is dubbed the “Teﬂon
Don.”
18 Like the New York crime boss John Gotti’s evasion
of federal prosecution thoughout the 1980s, Kelly has been
thus far able to escape repeated attempts by prosecutors to
make criminal charges stick to him.
The specter of race in such matters of sex, however, can-
not help but rear its untoward head. That Kelly à la Mitchell
would become “the poster boy” for illicit sex with underage
girls reeks of a sort of bizarre cultural whitewash and knee-
jerk journalistic response that works, inadvertently in Mitch-
ell’s case, to buttress stereotypical ideas regarding black male
and female sexuality.
Our Lolita-obsessed culture is neither the invention nor
the exclusive domain of blacks. R. Kelly’s media turn as
Vladimir Nabokov’s Humbert Humbert with Clare Quilty of
the hip hop generation reminds me of the ways in which
blacks, in this case, black males, predictably become poster
boys for sexual impropriety in America’s high-stakes battles
over morality and (white) innocence. For example: Tupac
Shakur and Mike Tyson become synonymous with our exor-
cising of demons over date rape rather than William Kennedy
Smith, a well-known serial date rapist who media pundits
concluded was an “unlikely candidate for the rapist’s role”;
19
Clarence Thomas with sexual harassment rather than serial
harasser Senator Robert Packwood; O. J. Simpson with do-
mestic violence rather than all-star baseball player Steve
Black Women and Sexual Abuse / 70


--- PAGE 90 ---
Garvey; Michael Jackson with child molestation rather than
the droves of devout Catholic priests; the Indiana Pacers trio
of Ron Artest, Jermaine O’Neal, and Stephen Jackson with
violence in sports rather than the slew of assaults in the
(mostly white) National Hockey League against other play-
ers and fans.
Hyperbole aside, the fact of the matter is that R. Kelly is
not the “poster child for the dysfunction between adult men
and girls.” Rather the public’s wishy-washiness—at times
“shocked and awed” then shushed by a beat-laced Kelly lull-
aby—epitomizes, as Mary Mitchell rightly concludes in this
instance, that “most of us don’t give a darn about the sexual
exploitation of [black] girls,” or women for that matter. And
a good number of those to be counted among that “most of
us” who don’t give a darn are black women—those avid
purchasers of Kelly concert tickets and albums, and continu-
ing participants in Kelly-orchestrated sexcapades.
In an interesting twist in the tale of the tape, Dirty
South platinum-rapper Mystikal’s foray into homemade
porn helped land him a six-year prison term on reduced
charges of sexual battery of the inﬁrmed on January 15,
2004. The “inﬁrmed” in this case suggested that ( 1) “the
victim is incapable of resisting or of understanding the na-
ture of the act by reason of stupor or abnormal condition of
the mind produced by an intoxicating, narcotic, or anes-
thetic agent administered by or with the privity of the of-
fender; ( 2) The victim has such incapacity, by reason of a
stupor or abnormal condition of mind from any cause, and
the offender knew or should have known of the victim’s in-
capacity.”
20 While Kelly’s lawyers have assiduously denied
Black Women and Sexual Abuse / 71


--- PAGE 91 ---
that the male participant in the tape is Kelly, throwing a
sideways glance to Kelly’s brother as well as forcing the
prosecution to pin down the ﬁfty-one-month window in
which the sex acts allegedly occurred, Michael “Mystikal”
Tyler could neither deny his presence on the tape nor his
participation in the premeditated sex acts on his hairstylist.
Angered that his longtime friend and hairstylist cashed un-
authorized checks from his account upward of $ 80,000, he
forced the woman to perform oral sex; he then invited two
male acquaintances over to rape and sodomize her. Portions
of the interlude were video-recorded for posterity, or, as de-
fense attorney J. David Bourland would later argue, to prove
that the interlude was consensual.
21
Prosecutors added extortion to the charge, for the rapper
effectively extorted sex from the woman by asking her to do
something “degrading”
22 in exchange for his not pressing
charges against her for theft. While Mystikal’s attorneys at-
tempted to ﬁnagle a signed afﬁdavit of consensual sex from
the woman to buttress his original claim of innocence, the
discovery of the tape by the police in a safe at Mystikal’s
Baton Rouge, Louisiana apartment forced the rapper into a
plea agreement. The original charges of aggravated rape and
extortion, respectively carrying a mandatory life sentence
and up to ﬁfteen years, were bartered down to sexual bat-
tery of the inﬁrmed, which carried the possibility of proba-
tion. The rapper underwent sexual assault counseling and
performed community service. He, and his record label, also
arranged for monetary compensation for the woman and an-
ticipated, like the other 94 percent of sexual abusers, that he
would never spend a day in prison.
Black Women and Sexual Abuse / 72


--- PAGE 92 ---
Despite the fact that the prosecution and the defense had
agreed to keep the videotape sealed and not submit it into
evidence in the case, Judge Anthony Marabella asked to
view the tape prior to sentencing. The tape was of such
an inﬂammatory nature that the judge concluded that the
woman had been “terrorized” and that Mystikal believed
“he was above the law and can take the law into his own
hands.”
23 Judge Marbella could have sentenced the rapper
to the maximum ten-year term. He instead sentenced him to
six years with eligibility for parole in 2006, and ﬁve years
probation for extortion. Marbella closed by further admon-
ishing the rapper, “You received a signiﬁcant break when the
district attorney reduced the charges. ...I fi tw e r e n ’ tf o r
the victim, the sentence would have been the maximum 10
years.”
24 The rape survivor effectively offered Mystikal a
reprieve by accepting the terms of the plea agreement. Pros-
ecution of the rapper on the original “aggravated rape”
charge would have allowed that “inﬂammatory” tape to be-
come part of the public record.
That Mystikal believed that rape is “just deserts” for theft
rings out loudly during an interview with Sister2Sister pub-
lisher Jamie Foster Brown. All the while proclaiming “gen-
uine love” for the woman (one shudders in thinking about
the punishment meted out to those he does not hold dear),
when asked what would he do if he could do it all over
again, he says, “Probably what I did—or something real
close to it.”
25 The rapper accuses the hairstylist of breaking
“his trust” and offers ersatz solidarity with rape victims:
“They’re getting swept kicked. Their feet are getting swept
under. This is a direct blow to them. You just don’t do that.
Black Women and Sexual Abuse / 73


--- PAGE 93 ---
Especially, the person that is accusing me of it. Y’all can’t
fathom how painful that is.” 26
That there is something painfully disturbing about Mys-
tikal’s revelations with respect to sexual violence, masculin-
ity, power, and loyalty is an understatement. Restitution of
the ill-gotten funds and termination (surely there were scores
of hairdressers to be had in Baton Rouge) were not even on
the table. Hip hop’s “keep it real, keep it street” codes of
conduct, regardless of women’s desires to abide by them and
own them, are highly male-centric and regulated, and so
women are often casualties in their complicity.
Take Lil’ Kim, who was sentenced to serve a year and a
day for lying under oath to protect her former label mates
(these same label mates repaid her in kind by turning state’s
evidence and trying to proﬁt from the trial proceedings).
In her last interview before turning herself over to authori-
ties to serve her time, Kim offers: “Unfortunately, me as a
woman, I had to take one for the team, and when I say for
the team I say hip hop, because I was the poster child for the
federal government, for their investigations.”
27 While there
might be some truth to Kimberly Jones’s attempts to cast her
lot in a grand narrative of prosecutorial overzealousness and
a government crackdown on hip hop (the same claims could
certainly be made about the maven of domesticity Martha
Stewart as a celebrity poster child for insider trading), what
is closer to the truth is that she took one for the hip hop
team composed predominantly of men admittedly undeserv-
ing of such sacriﬁce.
In hip hop generation gender politics, women’s transgres-
sions are often met with verbal, sexual, or physical assault.
Black Women and Sexual Abuse / 74


--- PAGE 94 ---
This übermasculine ethos is governed by its own makeshift
rules, as the “po-po” (police) or legal system has proven it-
self ineffective at best and antagonistic and untrustworthy at
worst. Hip hop is not a culture of violence. American cul-
ture, however, thrives on aggression. Violence, when deemed
necessary, is seen as a viable alternative, one that has been
sanctioned, institutionalized, and unilaterally practiced in
the United States, from the hang-’em-high foreign and do-
mestic policies of the Bush administration to the sexual as-
saults in the Abu Ghraib prison as a way to interrogate and
terrorize prisoners to the bombings of U.S. abortion clinics.
Violence in hip hop is a manifestation (and an easy scape-
goat) for a much more prevalent American violence that
much of (white) America would rather ignore. Despite the
fact that young black men like Mystikal have multiplatinum-
selling albums that guarantee them a life outside a ghetto
reality, they prefer to stay connected to the street culture
whose invaluable lessons and realness have allowed them to
earn their bread and butter as “authentic” hip hop artists. In
effect, the hairstylist took Mystikal’s “shit,” his money, what
was his, and he took in return what was undeniably hers.
It is clear from his various interviews that he felt person-
ally and understandably violated; in delivering his version
of street justice—a gendered street justice—he violates her
publicly by not only sharing her violation with his entourage
but by taping the incident.
Borrowing from feminist lawyer and anti-pornographer
campaigner Catharine MacKinnon’s charge that writer Car-
lin Romano publicly raped her on the printed page,
28 writer
Tanya Horeck, in her book Public Rape, argues that sexual
Black Women and Sexual Abuse / 75


--- PAGE 95 ---
violence on ﬁlm is indeed a form of “public rape.” 29 A pri-
vate violation that usually occurs between victim and victim-
izer(s), scenes of sexual abuse and rape in ﬁlms invite public
participation—whether they are offered up for interpreta-
tion in courtrooms, courts of public opinion, or screened at
home in designated media rooms among one’s boys. In the
case of Mystikal and Kelly, the taped sexual acts continue
to be debated as proof of guilt in courtrooms and courts
of public opinion despite Mystikal’s conviction. Indeed,
Mystikal’s attorney argued that while the videotape “evapo-
rated their opportunity to go to trial ...i tw a sn o t done
for any voyeur-type purposes. It was done because [Tyler]
didn’t want there to be a misunderstanding. . . . But Michael
wanted it to be a record that he wasn’t trying to make some-
one do something beyond their will.”
30 The subtleties of co-
ercion, and the bartering of sex for perceived transgressions
of loyalty, seem lost on the defense attorney and the rapper.
Given the defense’s ﬁght to keep the tape out of court and
the way Mystikal’s secretly stowed the tape in a safe and
never offered it as corroborative evidence, Bourland’s asser-
tion regarding the tape’s corroborative nature begs the ques-
tions: A record for whom? And who exactly would need to
view the tape to determine that there was no malfeasance in-
volved? If the sex acts were indeed consensual why make a
tape at all? After all it was the tape that corroborated the
sex acts and led to Mystikal’s imprisonment.
***
While many hip hop stars have been counseled by old school
hustlers, pimps, and stars to tape sex acts to disprove false
Black Women and Sexual Abuse / 76


--- PAGE 96 ---
charges of rape, it would appear that Mystikal intended the
tape for other purposes—blackmail/extortion, or merely fu-
ture viewing pleasure. In truth, the Mystikal “sex, lies, and
videotape” debacle and R. Kelly’s turn as sex taskmaster
on ﬁlm to underage girls are nothing more than homespun
porn, which depicts black women and sexual abuse on the
order of Ice Cube’s Player’s Club (1998) and Joe Esterhaz
and Paul Voerhoven’s Showgirls (1995).
In some respects Player’s Club, Cube’s directorial debut, is
the black answer to Showgirls. Both ﬁlms are morality tales
that conclude with rape scenes: “bad things happen to nice
girls who hang out with the glamorized strippers that are
Vegas showgirls” and “bad things happen to naïve girls
who become strippers.” Esterhaz’s rape scene, where a black
woman is gang raped to the battle call “Fresh Pussy” has
been proclaimed “over the top” (when is rape ever not over
the top?) by the late ﬁlm critic Gene Siskel. Similarly, the on-
line reviewer for celebritywonder.com suggests that Cube’s
“unsure directorial skills” did not provide enough “buildup”
to his ﬁlm’s rape scene, which could have rendered it “expo-
nentially more harrowing.” Rape is indeed a spectator sport,
when some viewers prefer it less “over the top,” while others
require a “buildup.”
The Player’s Club is neither poorly written, nor directed,
nor acted. As the black version of Showgirls only better—
better casting, better acting, better script— Player’s Club,
coming three years after Showgirls, attempts to right some of
Showgirls’s wrongs by explicitly addressing the issues of sex-
ual violence, race, gender, class, and power. Though Show-
girls’s heroine, Nomi, beats the wealthy white male celebrity
Black Women and Sexual Abuse / 77


--- PAGE 97 ---
(that lethal combination of audacious privilege) rapist silly,
he will never do a day’s time in jail for his orchestrated gang
rape of the ﬁlm’s moral center, a collegiate black seamstress.
In contrast, the working-class, clownish, and patently dull
(as in not too bright) rapist and his stereotyped predatory
lesbian sister in The Player’s Club will do deserved time in
what have become young black men and women’s homes
away from home: prison. Unlike Showgirls, the show will
not go on at The Player’s Club. At movie’s end, the ill-fated
club is ceremoniously torched. And in the wake of its smoke
and rubble go young men’s fantasies and dollars and young
women’s hopes and dreams of easier money and lives.
The wrongs seem to be righted in The Player’s Club’s de-
nouement: Junior and Ronni are carted off for jail; the shady
“Dollar Bill,” played by Bernie Mac, is disappeared by the
loan shark St. Louis and his henchmen; Diana/Diamond
graduates college, and Ebony is a reformed stripper dis-
pensing unsolicited counsels and trading barbs with sharp-
tongued shake dancers between selling them shoes. How-
ever, the rape scene in The Player’s Club troubles, and not
because of Cube’s “unsure directorial skills” that precluded
“a buildup” necessary to convey the “harrowing” act that
rape is. Indeed it is the buildup to the rape that disturbs
because it touches upon the very crux of the dilemma re-
garding the sexual abuse of black women and black male
complicity via their participatory silence in the abuse.
Miffed that a few nights earlier he and his partner were
unable to “pull a train” on the inebriated Ebony (played
wonderfully by Monica Calhoun) due to her cousin’s (Dia-
mond/Diana) cock blocking, Clyde (Ice Cube) re-approaches
Black Women and Sexual Abuse / 78


--- PAGE 98 ---
Ebony at Junior’s bachelor’s party. Her arrival has been ea-
gerly anticipated by the assembled men, who in the mean-
time had been bonding over pornographic videos. The now-
sober Ebony unceremoniously tells him, “No! motherfucker,
No! Don’t you know what ‘No’ means?” Ice Cube’s charac-
ter does an interesting take on the feminist “Take Back the
Night” battle cry against sexual violence: “No means No!”
and Clyde sets up the dimwitted Junior by telling him that
Ebony will “let him fuck her.” Like a snake-oil salesman he
then gives Junior a condom and tells him to inform Ebony
that he and his partner understand “that ‘No! means No!’”
Like sexual voyeurs, the other male partygoers wait outside
of the door listening passively to cries, slaps, screams, and
lamps crashing. Rather than stop the rape, they shake their
heads in mutual disgust and leave.
The response is quite reminiscent of that of Tupac Shakur,
whose unwillingness to intervene in the assault of his female
companion Ayanna Jackson by his associates landed him in
Rikers. When asked by Kevin Powell in an April 1995 inter-
view with Vibe why he did not intervene, Shakur revealed
that male camaraderie superseded his intervention, “How do
I look saying, ‘hold on’? That would be like I’m making her
my girl.” As the men bonded over the pornographic ﬁlms
awaiting Ebony’s arrival, they too bonded silently over her
rape—in disgust and shameless lack of intervention.
The politics of respectability and the protection of wom-
anhood has been thoroughly replaced in black youth culture
by variations of male bonding found prominently in an “it
ain’t no fun if my homies can’t have none” mentality. But
every now and then, there may be a break in the male ranks
Black Women and Sexual Abuse / 79


--- PAGE 99 ---
on the order of hip hop generation sports icon Kobe Bry-
ant. Many black men were willing to stand empathetically
with Bryant in solidarity against Colorado native Katelyn
Faber’s allegation of rape, despite the media’s attempts early
in his career to set him apart as a smarter, multilingual loner,
who usually listened to hip hop via headphones after prac-
tice. Bryant was cast as a man apart from the supposed
rogue-ridden, outlaw culture of the predominantly black
NBA. Overnight, Bryant fell from his lofty perch amidst
the hailstorm of tarnishing news media comparisons with
the Othello-like Jack Johnson and O. J Simpson. Black men,
all too familiar with white America’s ﬂeeting paeans to the
race-transcending black male athlete, offered Bryant shelter.
However, when investigators’ interviews revealed that Bry-
ant stated that his former teammate Shaquille O’Neal dealt
with “bimbo eruptions” with payoffs, a male chorus could
be heard chanting variations of: “Weak, Weak, Weak!” Bry-
ant had broken the ranks of male privilege and silence re-
garding sexual assault. His self-serving, hand-caught-in-the-
till revelation of O’Neal’s philandering and payoffs shed
some light equally on the sex and gender dynamics in the
realm of sports among, in critic Todd Boyd’s words, “the
young, black, rich, and famous.” After all, charges of sexual
abuse are fairly common.
Despite Katelyn Faber’s varied semen-specimen-stained
panties, Bryant’s predilection for ejaculating on women’s
faces while allegedly asking, “Do you like it when a black
(m-f) comes on your face?”
31 and, according to Denver7
News legal analyst Craig Silverman, the defense’s “nut (as
in mental instability) and slut” theories, what is especially
troubling is that the word “No!” and consent, more speciﬁ-
Black Women and Sexual Abuse / 80


--- PAGE 100 ---
cally, seem to be a high-stakes game of interpretation. “No!”
may be clearly articulated, as in the ﬁctionalized rape of
Ebony in The Player’s Club; it can be maliciously under-
stood by Ice Cube’s Clyde; it may also prove a source of be-
fuddlement as was the case with the detectives in the Bryant
trial who questioned why Faber never clearly told Bryant,
“No!”
32 Similarly, consent may be coerced as in the case of
Mystikal’s hairstylist, or incapable of being given from the
legal standpoint of age, as in the R. Kelly case. But what is
evidently clear is that in each of these instances, the respon-
sibility for male sexual impropriety seems to falls squarely to
hip hop generation women.
***
It comes as no surprise that hip hop generation independent
ﬁlmmaker Aishah Simmons’s documentary NO! about rape
and silence offers up hip hop videos featuring gyrating scant-
ily clad women between clips from Fallen Champ: The Un-
told Story of Mike Tyson of a National Baptist Convention
support rally for Mike Tyson (amid charges of rape and
deviant sexual conduct) and Minister Louis Farrakhan’s be-
rating of women regarding, “How many times . . . have you
said, ‘no,’ and you meant, ‘Yes?’ ” Over soy-laced caffein-
ated drinks and hot chocolate at Nashville’s Bongo Java,
Simmons explains:
These lyrics ...r ecent footage of “Tip Drill,” perpetuates
the myth of black women wanting, willing, able and asking
for what they get. I used the images [hip hop videos] in the
context of sexual violence. We see it as entertainment. I want
to challenge these images in the context of women talking
about their experiences of sexual violence.
33
Black Women and Sexual Abuse / 81


--- PAGE 101 ---
NO! then presents the varied ways that black women are
forced to carry the responsibility for male sexual impropri-
ety in a global culture that accrues billions of dollars by ob-
jectifying them.
Simmons’s documentary suggests that there is a direct cor-
relation between the sexual abuse of black women and the
visual culture that objectiﬁes black women as sexually avail-
able. The stereotyping nature of visual media informs hip
hop generationers’ sexual politics. Taken as a whole, Sim-
mons’s ﬁlm seems to propose that the stereotype of sexual
availability in hip hop provides a bridge to all other verbal
and physically exploitive acts. In this argument Simmons
builds upon an idea stated most powerfully by Catharine
MacKinnon regarding public violation. And to further ex-
pand our understanding of sexual abuse in the black com-
munity, NO! does not dabble long in the straightforward
(in terms of legal adjudication) condemnable act of stranger
rape, with only one of the women’s narratives recounting a
stranger rape. Rather, Simmons takes us into the more com-
plex and frequently occurring realm of acquaintance rape.
Blending narratives of trauma by black women, archival
footage, historical recreations, and commentaries from a
cadre of both female and male scholars and community ac-
tivists, the ﬁlm challenges us to confront head on the issue of
rape and sexual assault by black men (and boys) in black
communities. Questioning the silence surrounding sexual-
ized gender violence, Simmons reveals that she decided to
make the ﬁlm in response to the silence of communities at
large and the black community in particular. Acknowledg-
ing her own status as a survivor of sexual violence, she also
Black Women and Sexual Abuse / 82


--- PAGE 102 ---
relates that her mother, featured in NO!, is also a survivor.
“Why are we silent when so many women and girls are af-
fected by this?” Simmons asks in exasperation. The audience
then understands immediately that the women featured in
the ﬁlm are no longer silent, as Simmons uses each of the
women’s voices in one scene simultaneously. We hear words
like “my rapist,” “I refused to give him,” and others. That
Simmons has author Charlotte Pierce-Baker read from her
courageous book Surviving the Silence hammers home the
importance of giving voice to the trauma and its impact on
women’s lives and the communities within which they live.
But perhaps one of the most telling moments in NO!,
which brings us back to the issue of consent and the “ag-
gressor-take-all” interpretation of the word “No!” is the
simple but stark revelation of rape activist John T. Dicker-
son, Jr., of Bluegrass Rape Crisis Center. Dickerson states
that, “Men can stop rape if they want.” In the matter of ac-
quaintance sexual abuse, communication on matters of sex
between hip hop generationers is imperative. Accepting that
“no means no,” despite elder Minister Farrakhan’s willy-nilly
“no-means-yes-damned-deceitful-games-you-play”
34 counsels
about black women, could go a long way toward edifying
our generation’s most intimate interactions.
But sadly, black men are not going to suddenly wake up
one morning with a new understanding of “No.” The larger
and more difﬁcult question is, If men can stop sexual abuse,
why wouldn’t they want to? And as the former superintend-
ent of the St. Louis Public Schools queried, What is tran-
spiring in our communities that would sanction such jarring
behavior? Truth be told, too much of our culture—both
Black Women and Sexual Abuse / 83


--- PAGE 103 ---
hip hop culture and American culture at large—gives men
and boys every reason to continue gender violence. How to
counteract such behavior is at the crux of the hip hop gen-
eration’s dilemma. Statistics on the sexual abuse of black
women and girls tell only part of the story. Interventions like
NO! and poignant stories of sexual abuse like those laid
bare by black women in Surviving the Silence and Longing
to Tell move us toward understanding the exacting costs of
rape to communities (mistrust, crippling fear), despite black
women’s personal narratives of resiliency. Such interventions
reveal rape as not an act of lust or sexual desire, but a vio-
lent crime motivated by the desire to punish, humiliate, or
dominate. They reveal the sexual abuse of black women and
girls as a betrayal of community. Male sexual coercion—of
the nagging, persistent, “Please, baby, please” sort, or the
threatening violent variety—leading up to female acquies-
cence does not add up to consent. What we need then is to
continue the dialogue in earnest about how hip hop genera-
tion men and women understand sexual abuse as it relates to
culpability, responsibility, and that gnarled concept, at least
when it comes to matters of sex, of respect.
Black Women and Sexual Abuse / 84


--- PAGE 104 ---
“i’m a hustla, baby”
Groupie Love and the Hip Hop Star
Tonight you wanna fuck with me its 
alright with me
Come on an gimme that groupie love
— G-Unit , “Groupie Love,” Beg for Mercy
You ain’t no better cuz you don’t be 
fucking rappers
You only fuck with actors, you still getting
fucked backwards . . .
— Jay-Z, “Bitches & Sistas,” The Blueprint 2:
The Gift & The Curse
very generation of artists
has its followers and fans. However, groupies are a world
apart. And with the increasing popularity of hip hop and the
coarsening of mainstream taste manifested by the public’s
tolerance for sexist obscenity and misogynist pornography
on wax marketed as entertainment, what used to be clan-
destine sexual activities reserved for backstage, hotel, or lim-
ousine chatter has become exhibitionist male fodder for a
voyeuristic public. Along with the video vixen whose curvy
silhouette can command as much as three thousand dollars
per video appearance (e.g., Esther of Petey Pablo’s “Freek-
A-Leek”),
1 inspire internet forums and threads, and Vibe
music award categories (“Sexiest Video Vixen”—Ki Toy for
85


--- PAGE 105 ---
OutKast’s “I Like the Way You Move”), there are strip club
dancers whose fancy foot, butt, and pole work inform an en-
tire generation of young women and tantalize generations of
men. Hip hop groupies and the sexual favors they dispense
— thanks to the wagging tongues of male hip hop artists—
have also been catapulted into the limelight.
Not since the 1960s– 1970sr ock scene have groupies
been so cavalierly feted and lyrically ﬂogged. Rock music’s
groupie following, while predominantly white, did include
black groupies. Emmaretta Marks, a Rolling Stones favorite,
and one-monikered women like Winona and Devon—Jimi
Hendrix’s muse for the song “Dolly Dagger”—are just a few
well-known rock-era black groupies. The Rolling Stones’
song “Brown Sugar” clearly rejoices in more than the granu-
lated substance found in most kitchen cupboards. And Sir
Michael “Mick” Jagger’s liaisons with Hair actress and for-
mer groupie Marsha Hunt (the result of which was daugh-
ter Karis Jagger) are testaments made ﬂesh to the words,
“(a-ha) brown sugar how come you taste so good / just like
a just like a black girl should.” While black groupies could
be found here and there in rock culture, hip hop enjoys an
even broader multiethnic groupie base with a palette of vari-
ously shaped and hued black women holding down more
than their fair share of that base.
The word “groupie” made its ﬁrst appearance in the
American lexicon in the 1960s. Rolling Stone magazine cele-
brated the groupie in its February 1969 issue. And, the spate
of mainstream ﬁlm releases on groupie culture and rock mu-
sic— The Banger Sisters and Cameron Crowe’s Almost Fa-
mous, with its groupie entourage humorously referred to as
the “Band-Aids”—attests to the prevalence of groupie mania
Groupie Love and the Hip Hop Star / 86


--- PAGE 106 ---
in that era. When rock groupie Pamela Des Barres penned
her experiences in I’m With the Band: Confessions of a
Groupie (1987) (a volume that has gone through several
reprintings), her coming-of-age rock memoir became the ﬁrst
insider account of rock groupie culture.
2 Candid in its reve-
lations about drug abuse, depression, sex, and her naïve dis-
appointment with feckless rock stars, Des Barres portrays
rock-era groupies as a celebrated yet ragtag lot. Des Barres’s
groupies become cast, at least in her narrative, as muse-like
characters on the music scene, setting the social pace and
even going as far as creating their own groupie rock band,
the GTOs, under the tutelage of the venerable Frank Zappa.
Nonetheless Des Barres’s rosy spin on her turn as a groupie
is punctuated with a good deal of deep knee bending and
head bobbing, which speaks to the hard-and-fast purpose
of groupies of her era and beyond. While the romanticized
stuff of ﬁlms, songs, magazine articles, and memoirs, rock-
era groupies were an undeniably stigmatized collection of
women whose use-value directly corresponded with their
sexual liberalism.
In hip hop culture, groupies are often referred to as
“bitches,”“hoochies,”“chickenheads,”“golddiggers,”“ho’s,”
“tricks,” and “skeezas,” although some would argue that
hip hop artists are not as discriminating in their tossing out
of derogatory terms for women. Groupies are not mere au-
tograph seekers, avid fans, or loyal followers. Groupies are
intimacy aspirants who vicariously derive power or fame
(however small) from knowing public men privately.
The relationship between hip hop celebrities and group-
ies, however, is a tenuous one. The sheer number of rap
tracks that riff on groupies reveals the symbiotic relationship
Groupie Love and the Hip Hop Star / 87


--- PAGE 107 ---
between groupies and rappers. While disparaged, dismissed,
and perennially “fucked backwards,” in the words of Jay-Z,
the presence of groupies is integral to safeguarding a seem-
ingly fragile masculinity that is heavily contingent upon fe-
male acquiescence and accessibility. In an era where women
are rapidly scaling the education and socioeconomic ladders,
where on average college-educated black males earn less
than men from every other ethnic group (and a mere $ 3,900
more annually than college-educated black women),
3 and
where policing and prisons exert in great disparity social
authority over poor and working-class black men’s lives, the
bedroom, at once a private space, has become a public one
via music videos, porn ﬂicks, and music tracks. In this space,
the mythic dominance of black men and their perfected craft
of “dicksmithing” appear uncontested by all, irrespective of
race, class, and gender.
In general, groupies authenticate the hip hop star’s suc-
cessful cultivation of his craft, his ﬂow, his game, which is
thoroughly part and parcel of his selfhood. Groupies may be
handy, interchangeable, throwaway women, but they are
also ego-intoxicating and self-afﬁrming for hip hop stars.
They sexually bear witness to the extraordinariness of men
who without a microphone, corporate ofﬁce at Bad Boy En-
tertainment or Def Jam Records, a New Line Cinema picture
deal, nimble crossover or lay-up, or enviable batting or rush-
ing average would be otherwise quite ordinary.
Hip hop groupie mania, that is, male artists’ desire for
seemingly uncomplicated and submissive “groupie love,”
and women’s conspicuously pruned and preened eagerness
to be serviceable, replicates in some respects traditional gen-
Groupie Love and the Hip Hop Star / 88


--- PAGE 108 ---
der roles. Hip hop groupies trade on their bottoms, or less
pointedly, their femininity as measured by their sexual desir-
ability. Hip hop generation men’s masculinity and desirabil-
ity is weighted on material accoutrements as measured by a
“bling” lifestyle or a chart-topping record.
4 And also, the
bargain struck in hip hop groupie culture, though, stokes
a visceral misogyny informed by existing American gender
relations. Like racism, sexism and misogyny are not mere
aberrations in an otherwise healthy U.S. body politic; they
are thoroughly necessary to the functioning of our equality-
loving-but-hard-pressed-to-fully-realize democracy.
5 Sexism
and misogyny are grist for the patriarchal mill.
The scorn heaped upon groupies by hip hop stars is there-
fore tied to a keen awareness that the bargain is ﬂimﬂam,
just one in a series of stereotypical feminine betrayals that
reveal the artist’s “extraordinariness” as transient as the
groupie. In other words, the extraordinariness of the hip hop
star lasts about as long as it takes for the next someone fa-
mous to come along. As rapper Killer Mike insightfully puts
it: “[W]ith a groupie, it ain’t about you. It’s about her. She’s
just fulﬁlling her moment. You’re just a character in the
story. Tomorrow it’s gonna be Nelly and then it’ll be Young
Buck.”
6
Whether the groupie is an occasional or transient one
who procures intimacy as opportunities present themselves,
or a committed one who pursues with single-mindedness
certain hip hop artists, the cynicism inspired by groupies is
in truth the recognition that groupie mania is just as much
a hustle as the rap game, the basketball game, the strip
game, the Hollywood game, the academic game, and so
Groupie Love and the Hip Hop Star / 89


--- PAGE 109 ---
forth. Hip hop groupies are collectors of those perceived as
rich, famous, and powerful. The operative word here is
“perceived” because many hip hop stars have signed shoddy,
exploitive deals or are cash-poor because of consumption-
laden lifestyles. Hip hop stars may sex them but groupies
hustle and collect them
7 like baseball cards, trading up for
the next prized card. And with each card and trade, there is
always a story behind the acquisition. Hence, the rules of en-
gagement in the “pimps up, draws down”
8 bargain involves
sexing and kicking groupies unceremoniously to the curb
in order to avoid “catching feelings”; using protection be-
cause groupies get around; a rather homophobic/homoerotic
precaution regarding never kissing a groupie on the mouth
given the lore around their knee-bending proclivities (for
one could ﬁguratively be sucking another man’s penis); and
never parting with hard-earned dollars lest one be labeled
a “mark,” “busta,” or worse, a “Captain Save a Hoe”—
rapper E- 40’s panegyric to the golddigger’s ideal man. But
despite hip hop’s rules of engagement vis-à-vis groupies, the
reality suggests that hip hop stars are sparing with the truth
— at least according to the “Groupie Confessions” published
in Ozone magazine and Karrine “Superhead” Steffans’sCon-
fessions of a Video Vixen.
You see I had this brother who was mad at me
Some of y’all be foolin’ us
Big feet big hands just plain big
The sex ain’t worth a damn
We women wanna know these things
If y’all got the bat but not the swang.
— TLC, “Girl Talk,” 3D
Groupie Love and the Hip Hop Star / 90


--- PAGE 110 ---
When the “Groupie Confessions” appeared in Ozone maga-
zine, a kerfufﬂe quickly ensued. A relatively new addition
(May 2002) in a growing ﬁeld of southern-based independ-
ent hip hop magazines that include Tha Hole, Holla, Rude,
and Block2Block, Ozone magazine proclaims itself to be the
“Southern Voice of Hip-Hop Music.” While the Bronx may
be the birthplace of U.S. hip hop culture, Atlanta, Miami,
Memphis, New Orleans, and mid-southern cities such as
St. Louis and Nashville have nurtured the talents of artists
like Master P, Ludacris, OutKast, the Ying Yang Twins, Lil’
Jon, T.I., Young Buck, Jacki-O, Chingy, Nelly, and Trina.
Many of these artists have developed distinctive styles with
crunk, drawling inﬂections, and a southern lingua franca to
become some of the most heavily rotated artists on cable
network video programming and commercial radio. Atlanta
native T.I.’s Best Male Hip-Hop Artist win at the 2006 BET
Awards clearly signals the mercurial rise of the south.
Ozone also has the noteworthy distinction of having as its
publisher and editor-in-chief Julia Beverly, an entrepreneur-
ial young white woman. Inspired by The Source, Vibe, and
XXL, Beverly took her camera, dollars, and dreams and
developed Ozone.
9 Some higher-brow publications like The
New York Post have called the magazine “ghetto fried,” as
in steeped deep in ghetto culture. And Beverly’s editorial
vision for Ozone may drive some to curse the democratiza-
tion of publishing via inexpensive desktop systems; yet, the
service to the southern hip hop industry that the magazine
provides garnered the publication an Urban Magazine of
the Year award at the Southern Entertainment Awards in
Nashville in February 2005. The magazine is also rapidly
Groupie Love and the Hip Hop Star / 91


--- PAGE 111 ---
expanding—securing a contract with a national distributor
in February 2006.
The ﬁrst installment of the “Groupie Confessions” was
published in the magazine’s second annual sex issue. A stroke
of pure marketing genius, the buzz generated by the con-
fessions led to increased subscriptions, dozens of on-air
readings from Florida, where the magazine is based, to
Wendy Williams at WBLS in New York, articles in The
Philadelphia Daily News and The New York Post, thirty
thousand downloads from Ozone’s Web site, and the ire of
both Method Man’s wife as well as Jay-Z’s publicist.
10 In
an industry saturated with groupie tales, Beverly pursued
the “confessions of groupies” because she wanted to know
“what was in it for them.” As the Ozone editor-in-chief
contends, “The thing is none of the people we interviewed
would describe themselves as a ‘groupie.’ For a lot of people,
sex is power. Sex is a huge part of hip hop, but since it’s such
a male-dominated ﬁeld you are rarely hearing both sides of
the story. I wanted to get the women’s perspective.”
11
Though not especially methodical for those purists of
data collection, Beverly circulated her research interests in
hip hop quarters, or in hip hop vernacular, “put the word
out on the street” and set up a call-in system that blocked
numbers for the women to detail their most intimate inter-
ludes with hip hop stars. Beverly then sorted through the
stories selecting the most “credible” and “intriguing” (read:
salacious). Like a literary version of BET Uncut, some of the
interviews are graphic and read like the stuff in Bob Guc-
cionne’s Penthouse forums. As the editor notes, because the
interviews were anonymous, authenticating the groupie tales
Groupie Love and the Hip Hop Star / 92


--- PAGE 112 ---
was impossible. And yet one can never fully verify the truth-
fulness of such intimate matters without the highly unlikely
express corroboration of the hip hop star involved (think:
the patently false denials of DMX regarding paternity of two
children, despite DNA test conﬁrmation). And who, given
the unﬂattering details of some of the confessions, would
admit to such dismal sexual exploits? Like the messiness of
sorting through the “he did”/“she said, ‘No!’ ” of date or
acquaintance rape in the absence of physical evidence, credi-
bility and an admission of sexual contact by the alleged of-
fending party are vital. In the end, sides will be taken, with
most settling on some version of the cliché: “No one really
knows the truth but those two people.”
Intriguing still is that the anonymity of the interviews
obscures the race of the groupies. The method of collec-
tion, “putting the word out on the streets,” the equivalent
of what writer Zora Neale Hurston called the “black dis-
patch,” allows a bit of leeway in terms of inferring that the
serialized “Groupie Confessions” has netted more than one
black hip hop groupie. In fact, one woman self-identiﬁed as
white (May 2005) and only two women self-identiﬁed as
black; both admissions were in the context of revealing a ce-
lebrity’s predilection for white (Tyrese) and lighter-skinned
black women (Lil’ Wayne). Certainly one could infer that
even in the context of “groupie love” a hierarchy is present
—t hat “thinner, blonder, lighter” women are preferred.
12
Preference and predilections may have their place, but trysts
with groupies are more like “catch as catch can” affairs;
availability and willingness, whatever the color or race of
the woman, take precedence.
Groupie Love and the Hip Hop Star / 93


--- PAGE 113 ---
The truth is black hip hop groupies are a deliberately
secretive bunch, hence buttonholing them into face-to-face
interviews is nearly impossible. Even Julia Beverly had to
forgo her idea of the groupie story for the ﬁrst sex issue of
Ozone because no one would talk until she changed her
method of interviewing. And in a telephone conversation
with Des Barres about her forthcoming book, Let’s Spend
the Night Together: Backstage Secrets, Rock Muses, and
Super Groupies, in which she attempts to include hip hop
groupies or “modern girls,” as she calls them, she similarly
related hitting a near wall of silence. The exception was a
woman who told of her encounters with Dr. Dre, but no-
body was giving up information on hip hop’s honorary black
white boy, the elusive Eminem, despite rapper 50 Cent’s
reference to Eminem’s alter ego “Slim Shady” in “Groupie
Love.” The other adjustment Des Barres made to her second
project revolved around the book’s title. She “had to add
‘muses’ because unlike the classic groupies many of the mod-
ern girls don’t consider themselves groupies.”
13
Part of the hip hop groupie hustle is relative anonym-
ity (to all but the hip hop star circuit) and secrecy. Being
marked as a serial groupie who blabs incessantly about her
exploits would greatly diminish future opportunities for col-
lecting hip hop stars, particularly in the era of HIV/AIDS
where, according to the Center for Disease Control, hip hop
generation black women represent 67 percent of all new
HIV/AIDS cases.
14 The celebrity, albeit abased, associated
with groupies that began during the 1960s– 1970s, has not
carried over into the era of hip hop. Very few women today
would publicly claim the mantle of groupie as it is mired in
Groupie Love and the Hip Hop Star / 94


--- PAGE 114 ---
the freakiest of sexual innuendos and the worst stereotypes
of female manipulation and scheming, thanks in large part
to the scathing lyrical characterizations by hip hop artists.
While groupies of all ethnicities have always served as
payola for male accomplishments in various arenas—from
the sanctity of the church pulpit to the basketball courts—
their presence was always a shadowy one until they ex-
ploded on the rock scene. Des Barres’s generation of group-
ies beneﬁted from the interesting and propitious collision of
second-wave feminism and rock music, which created a
much-hyped scene for sexual experimentation, particularly
among (white) women. There is little to be gained by “com-
ing out” publicly as a black female hip hop generation
groupie. Black women have always been painted with the
broad brush of sexual accessibility and avarice. In effect, the
sexual freedom bestowed upon the radicals of the 1960s is
one that black women have been culturally and socially stig-
matized as already having and purposefully pursuing.
The exception to this anonymity, secrecy, and the gains to
be had is Karrine Steffans, whose Confessions of a Video
Vixen could have just as appropriately been titled Confes-
sions of a Hip Hop Groupie. As it stands, the current title
does a disservice to the many women who legitimately work
in the hip hop video industry with agency representation.
Steffans’s video vixen appearances were nothing short of
pick-up games—a means of short-term employment and ac-
cess to hip hop stars. Even Steffans earnestly acknowledges
in an interview with Essence’s Teresa Wilitz that the other
video models were “totally different from me. I was the only
person as far out as I was.”
15 The book’s title demonstrates,
Groupie Love and the Hip Hop Star / 95


--- PAGE 115 ---
as Ozone publisher Julia Beverly related, that even “group-
ies” don’t want to be identiﬁed as such. And the rancor, con-
tempt, and abuse to which Steffans has been subjected, from
blogs to interviews with Tyra Banks, the Queen of Dice, and
Slice and Mix-It Up, Wendy Williams, Miss Jones @ Hot 97,
and Star and Buc Wild at 105.1, all but assures that the
shroud of secrecy and virtual silence around hip hop groupie
mania will remain neatly in tact.
In the tradition of shock radio, the Miss Jones Show @
Hot 97 had already run into controversy with “USA for In-
donesia,” referred to popularly as the “Tsunami Song.” Sati-
rizing the crisis and its victims, the lyrics ran afoul of any
semblance of political correctness:
Knowing other kids
There was a time when the sun was shining bright
So I went down to the beach to catch me a tan
Then the next thing I knew a wave 20 feet high
Came and washed your country away
And all at once you could hear the screaming chinks
And no one was safe from the wave
There were Africans drowning
Little Chinamen swept away
You could hear God laughing, “Swim you bitches, swim!”
So now you’re screwed
It’s the Tsunami
You better run or kiss your ass away
Go ﬁnd your mommy I just saw go by
A tree went through her head
And now your children will be sold to child slavery.
With calls for the ﬁring or suspension of Jones and her co-
hosts as well as demands that sponsors pull advertisements,
Groupie Love and the Hip Hop Star / 96


--- PAGE 116 ---
the controversy eventually morphed into a discussion of
black xenophobia and anti-Asian racism. Squaring off with
Miss Info (DJ Minya Oh), the Asian American counterpart
on the morning show who found the song woefully short
of humor, Jones and crew were forced to donate a token
portion of their salaries to help the crisis victims. The song
also cost Emmis Communications, the show’s parent com-
pany, losses in advertising revenue and two employees.
While Jones and her crew claimed political correctness, their
Howard Stern antics were especially hard to swallow given
blacks’ own painful history of slavery, the undeniable exis-
tence of child sex slavery rings in Asia, and the race and
poverty-riddled after-effects of New Orleans’s Hurricane
Katrina.
On the heels of the “Tsunami Song” uproar, on July 7,
2005, Steffans appeared on Miss Jones’s Hot 97 show, in
an interview that careened out of control. Even for those
who absolutely cannot truck with Steffans’s “suck-and-tell”
memoir, the leering and jeering commentary appeared in-
tended to further grind Steffans into degraded oblivion. No
matter how one may view Steffans’s sexcapades, her book
resonates with a telling number of black women readers. As
a result, examining what led Steffans to live the groupie life
would have been perhaps a useful and instructive topic for
journalistic investigation.
But the Hot 97 show was anything but. In between Stef-
fans’s attempts to answer questions, the host interjected
barbs like, “This just in, more whoring,” and commentaries
about her “nice ass,” and the front ﬂap of the book’s dust
jacket where a come-hither photo of Steffans begs for elicit
Groupie Love and the Hip Hop Star / 97


--- PAGE 117 ---
virile responses to the contours of her female anatomy. To
Steffans’s reiteration that she is no longer in the groupie hus-
tle, the retort, “So I shouldn’t solicit you for sex today,” was
tossed out as an Iago-like aside. With each helping of “ho”
and “slut,” Steffans steadfastly continued to do what she
was ostensibly there to do—blithely hawk her book as a
therapeutic morality tale. In the midst of the interview, Stef-
fans abruptly exited with heels clacking in the background
only to return moments later (after all books need selling).
She was then ambushed by an on-air telephone call from
former “husband”/lover/pimp Kool G. Rap and his “wife”
Ma Barker. The Queens-bred “Kool Genius of Rap” Na-
thaniel Wilson had his heyday in the late 1980s as a member
of Marley Marl’s Juice Crew. By the mid- to late 1990s, his
three solo albums garnered neither critical nor commercial
success. Considered a revered “old schooler” by the time
Steffans encountered him, he allegedly Ike-Turnered her on a
basis regular and on general principle during their stormy
two-year relationship.
The violence-strewn state of hip hop generation inter-
personal relationships, embodied by the collision between
hip hop vixen Steffans and rapper Wilson and uncovered in
greater journalistic detail by Elizabeth Mendez Berry in a
Vibe article, “Love Hurts: Rap’s Black Eye,”
16 is sadly pub-
licly overshadowed by racier details of sex peddling and
purchasing. That Steffans had to cancel a book signing at
Hue-Man Bookstore and Café in Harlem because she feared
for her safety from people both unrelated and related to the
numerous stars she exposes provides more cud for us to
chew over. That she is somehow solely burdened with the
Groupie Love and the Hip Hop Star / 98


--- PAGE 118 ---
responsibility of destroying “happy homes” and devastating
“innocent children” rather than the men she pleasured reeks
of a double standard. Like black women victims of sexual
abuse who are called upon to keep silent about intraracial
sexual violence in black communities, Steffans is castigated
because she detailed the seedy and subpar sexcapades of the
hip hop industry: a “barking,” “growling” DMX; the pomp-
ous but average performance of Sean Combs, whose attor-
ney sent a letter to her publisher HarperCollins; the self-
serving Jay-Z, who asked her to recount her wretched his-
tory with Kool G. Rap, only to request fellatio but wisely
with a condom; the serial philanderer and sexually “messy”
(in Steffans’s words) Bobby Brown; the dwarﬁsh, very mar-
ried Ja Rule; and the experience of having to run Dr. Dre’s
resume and status “through [her] head” to become aroused.
A seemingly clearer-headed Steffans writes,
I was hanging out with hip hop’s elite and enjoying the best
restaurants, had access to any club or party and wore the
hottest fashions. . . . I became a hustler of sorts—bouncing
in and out of strip clubs and selling myself in every way. I
had gotten to a very desperate point where I could only have
sex if it was accompanied by perks. I expected and received
money from every man in my life, especially celebrities. I
used sex to keep them happy and when they were happy they
were generous. . . . Plus I’ll be honest. I was good at using
sex to get what I wanted and needed. That’s all I knew.
17
Steffans’s arsenal included sex, intimacy, and pleasure as pur-
chasable commodities; her forte was as a consummate hus-
tler and chameleon. She morphed into whatever version of
sex kitten those celebrities (and non-celebrities frequenting
Groupie Love and the Hip Hop Star / 99


--- PAGE 119 ---
the various strip clubs where she worked) required. Whether
she obliged sexual demands in ecstasy-laced stupors or al-
lowed herself to be loaned out by Irv Gotti, as sex purveyor
extraordinaire, everyone had to pay.
And when the payments stopped, when she hit a low point
of homelessness—living out of her car with her son—they
would pay some more, she decided, and this time with their
reputations to the purported tune of a $7.3 million book ad-
vance. As Steffans recalls during the Hot 97 interview:
I was everybody’s best thing until I had problems. When I hit
rock bottom. . . . Once I was homeless, the same person who
would have written me a $ 10,000 check before was like,
“No!” In my head, I was like, “Yeah. Okay. I got you. I’m
watching you. Don’t worry about it.” I just always felt like
one day all of this is going to make sense and you’re going to
be calling me. I’m getting calls now.
Indicative of our fascination with sex, celebrity, and hip
hop culture, Steffans’s alleged book deal exceeded that of
former President Bill Clinton, though we too chomped at
the bit anticipating his version of the Monica Lewinsky de-
bacle—an affair of “cigars are for pussies” and presidential
semen for blue Gap clothing store dresses. Hip hop rule-
breaker that she is, Steffans detailed her trysts for money,
and offered a “take that” to those who turned their backs
on her after years of slavish sexual accommodation—both
undeniable “no-no’s” in groupie culture. Hot 97 DJ Minya
Oh sums it up, “In rap there is an omertà, a code of silence.
You do your dirt, everyone knows you do your dirt, but no
one talks about it. [Karrine Steffans has] violated that code
and chosen to talk about everything.”
18
Groupie Love and the Hip Hop Star / 100


--- PAGE 120 ---
As with all tell-alls, there are bound to be those “inno-
cents” swept into the fray of conjecture. Two casualties of
the Confessions were rappers Method Man and Big Tigger,
former host of BET’s Rap City: The Bassment. Neither is
mentioned in Steffans’s book. Kool G. Rap’s latest paramour
Ma Barker had seemingly become a conﬁdant of Steffans.
During the Hot 97 free-for-all, Barker, hell bent on discredit-
ing Steffans, stated that Steffans told her she knew both rap-
pers intimately. Barker also played on-air a telephone mes-
sage left on her and Kool G. Rap’s voicemail by Steffans.
In the message, Steffans offers profuse “thank you’s” to the
pair for purchasing clothing for her son (Kool G. is the
child’s father). In Barker’s kitchen-sink drama, these “thank
you’s” were evidence of the hip hop vixen’s “false claims”
about her violence-ridden past with the rapper.
With his wife’s foot still deeply lodged in his behind over
revelations regarding his predilections for “spank[ing]” and
“hit[ting] it from the back while he pulls your hair”
19 a
mere nine months earlier in Ozone magazine’s November
2004 “Groupie Confessions,” Method Man too made an
impromptu appearance on the Miss Jones Show. He was
implicated by Barker as the father of a second child whose
existence Steffans herself declined to acknowledge, and as
“Papa,” the married, fatherly mystery man in her published
saga. An obviously pained Method Man—perhaps his wife’s
foot sunk several inches deeper into his backside—vehe-
mently denied any association with Steffans.
In a culture where masculinity is ﬁltered through a lens of
heterosexuality and homophobia, despite the presence of gay
rappers, despite the homoerotic nature of the male-bonding
Groupie Love and the Hip Hop Star / 101


--- PAGE 121 ---
that hip hop inspires, Tigger’s alleged participation in a ho-
mosexual tryst has eyes now cast askew at his involvement
in an issue that disproportionately plagues black communi-
ties and hip hop generationers in particular: HIV/AIDS pre-
vention. Aware that the stakes are quite high, Tigger went
on the offensive ﬁrmly maintaining his heterosexuality in
any and every venue available—Allhiphop.com, Ozone, and
the Miss Jones Show:
I am heterosexual. I love women. I have never engaged in
any homosexual activities, and I don’t like men. . . . There’s
nobody on this earth that could tell you that I’m even re-
motely homosexual. I was actually on Hot 97 this morning
and I challenged Ms. Jones or anybody else who wants to
challenge me to put up $ 100,000 against my $ 100,000 to
take a polygraph test. And when I win, the money is gonna
go towards my charity for HIV/AIDS prevention.
20
The terms “down-low” and “on the QT” seem to have no
place in Tigger’s vocabulary. But he nonetheless goes on to
explain his commendably responsible motivations for setting
up his Washington, D.C., charity. With “one and twenty
people in D.C. infected” and “ 25–30% of those infected”
(mostly men) unaware that they are carriers, Tigger’s social
outreach on this issue eclipses the efforts even of many black
churches in the D.C. metro area.
21
Interestingly, Tigger is described in Ozone as “the person
whose reputation has suffered the most,”22 as if being homo-
sexual is utterly damaging. But in hip hop culture it is. Fa-
thering children with other women while married, adultery,
“messy,” “growling,” “average” sex (everyone has an off
night, right?) are all considered “what men do.” However, in
Groupie Love and the Hip Hop Star / 102


--- PAGE 122 ---
the homophobic-laden worldview of hip hop culture, men
loving or even casually sexing (with a condom hopefully)
other men in the way that hip hop stars sex groupies is nei-
ther manly nor masculine. In the end, both Method Man and
Tigger suggested some variation of Snoop Dogg’s “Can You
Control Yo Hoe” to Kool G. Rap regarding Ma Barker’s
public histrionics, as this too is a testament of manliness.
But whether the “Groupie Confessions” and Karrine Stef-
fans’s Confessions are fanciful yarns or “confessions of dan-
gerous minds,” the airing of such prurience does give us
another side of the story—the groupies’ version—even if
it may be pure cock-and-bull. The “Groupie Confessions”
allows our hip hop fascinated, black-masculinity-obsessed
culture carnal knowledge of those celebrities. The groupies,
hitherto a behind-the-scenes lot, have publicly spun sexual
narratives that shred the ﬁnely cultivated hip hop image of
the cocksure black male. And so we bond, giggle, “ooh” and
“ah” over revelations of the tattooed, deft-ball-handling
Allen Iverson’s “littlest, ashiest dick”; of Jay-Z’s “boring”
but stereotype-conforming “humongous dick”; of Jadakiss’s
stereotype-defying “minute man” performance.
23 We are just
tickled by Nelly’s “little sausage link” and daring when en-
couraging the swallowing of his “pimp juice,” that precious
seminal liquor that would perhaps, in his mind, transform
the groupie into a “Positive Intellectual Motivated Person”
—a  P.I.M.P.
24 But at least Nelly seems to have taken a few
pages out of a “consensual sex” manual as well as notes
from a “how to” book on women and the much sought after
orgasm. The rapper has been known to sensitively inquire,
“Is it okay if I do this? Can I touch you there? . . . Do you
Groupie Love and the Hip Hop Star / 103


--- PAGE 123 ---
like this? . . . Are you gonna cum? How can I make you
cum?”25 It is of course the hip hop stars themselves who
have piqued our puerile interests in their bedroom gymnas-
tics, with all their bravado and swaggering maschismo about
pipe laying, “beating the pussy up,” and their mudslinging
about playin’ and pimpin’ hoochies, groupies, chickenheads,
and ho’s.
And even more mind-bending than the length, girth, and
bland performances of the churlish cabal of male hip hop
stars are the motivations articulated by the women in
“Groupie Confessions.” The sexcapades of groupies are
generally viewed through the prism of low self-esteem. Cer-
tainly Steffans, a survivor of gross parental neglect, rape,
and domestic violence, embraces this characterization writ
large. In the “Groupie Confessions,” the anonymous young
black women’s motives for their sexual choices are varied
and appear, on the surface, much more complicated. The
motivations are in fact strikingly similar to a 1998 scholarly
study in The Journal of Sport and Social Issues, “Groupies
and American Baseball,” which examined women’s motiva-
tions for pursuing ballplayers and the strategies they used to
get attention.
In the sports study, groupies were as integral to the base-
ball landscape, the authors note, as in hip hop culture. Un-
like rappers who trumpet their dalliances and disdain for
groupies under looping beats, baseball players generally shun
the topic publicly except for those rare exhibitionist, tell-all
sports autobiographies like Jim Bouton’s Ball Four (1971)
and Wilt Chamberlain’s View from Above (1991). The au-
thors conducted interviews with ﬁfteen baseball groupies.
Groupie Love and the Hip Hop Star / 104


--- PAGE 124 ---
The women pursued relationships for various reasons: “par-
tying” with the players, “the opportunity to act out sexual
fantasies in unusual or strange places,” “having a pro ball-
player would be something nice to look back on and to tell
her kids,” or for the adventure of it.
26 As one groupie from
the study waxed on in glowing terms:
These guys represent an adventure in a safe way because you
know who they are and you can go ﬁnd them if you need to.
Unlike just meeting a guy in a bar, a player is not going to be
a guy who is going to kill you. . . . Players come slightly rec-
ommended; you know who they are. Then there is the brag-
ging aspect—“Oh, I slept with so and so.”
27
We should note that the matter of safety is a relative
one. Though the talk of safe sex is now de rigueur, its wide-
spread practice is debatable given paternity suits, Super-
head’s ecstasy- and alcohol-laced tales, and Kobe Bryant’s
inauspicious unprotected hanky panky. The transmission of
the HIV/AIDS virus to Earvin “Magic” Johnson from mul-
tiple sex encounters with unknown women, as well as to
rapper Eazy-E, whose “never turn anything down but my
collar” sexual politics resulted in multiple “baby mammas”
and premature death from AIDS, should certainly give one
pause. As well, the “it ain’t no fun if the homies can’t have
none” mentality pervasive in the baseball study and in hip
hop groupie mania culture may lead some women into situa-
tions where consensual sex with a celebrity may result in
gang rape or sexual abuse (Ayanna Jackson and Tupac Sha-
kur and company).
Most women in the “Groupie Confessions” were clearly
not interested in long-term relationships but were involved
Groupie Love and the Hip Hop Star / 105


--- PAGE 125 ---
with various hip hop stars because they wanted to have sex
with a celebrity: “[I]f he ain’t got a hit song out, what is the
attraction? He just a regular nigga”; “It was more or less
just for amusement”
28; “I’m like a nigga: conquer and de-
stroy, and it’s a wrap.” 29 Some wanted bragging rights, as
one indicated, “[H]e was borderline famous so I ﬁgured I’d
have a story to tell. . . . I’m in the music business, so that’s
pretty much the reason I fucked Jay [Jay-Z]. Just to say that
I did.”
30 Many groupies who were asked insisted that a
woman shouldn’t be called a groupie “just because she
wants it.”
31
As opposed to the “fuck ’em and feed ’em beans” mantra
extolled in rap tales, some, including Steffans, received those
supposedly withheld perks such as money, diamonds, and
furs in exchange for their trysts, a night in a nice hotel and
breakfast in the morning. Others, like the young woman in-
volved with Lil’ Wayne, present another perspective:
We met after a concert, several years ago. . . . He asked if I
wanted to get on the bus with him. . . . I am a big fan of his.
That was my main reason for wanting to get on the bus. . . .
When me and him started fucking, that’s when he was with
Nivea. . . . But he’s kind of a ladies’ man about it. He wasn’t
trying to jump into it. He was a gentleman. He’s a real re-
spectful guy. . . . He got married, so I respect that. We talk
every now and then but we don’t sleep together anymore. . . .
No, I wouldn’t consider myself a groupie, because I wasn’t
doing it because of who he was. I was kinda into him as a
person. I acted the same with him as I would with a regular
person who’s not a rapper.
32
The relationship between Lil’ Wayne and the young woman
replicates the bargain of groupie mania as it falls within the
Groupie Love and the Hip Hop Star / 106


--- PAGE 126 ---
scope of traditional gender relations and beauty hierarchies
that still exist in black communities. The woman trades on
the “light-skin” and “long hair” that Lil’ Wayne prefers, and
he trades on his status as a hip hop star. On the one hand,
she rejects the tag “groupie” because she “wasn’t doing it
because of who he was.” Yet, she acknowledges that she was
a “big fan,” that being the motivating reason for boarding
his tour bus. The line between fan and groupie is not a
straight one. There is one common magnetic denominator
nonetheless: hip hop–star status.
In the end, it is all about that “superstar dick,” in the
crass words of Snoop Dogg, and this ultimately appears to
separate the worldly groupie from the fan who gets caught
up in a sexual situation (Desiree Washington) or casually
falls into one (the anonymous young woman with Lil’
Wayne), and the “golddigger” who is out to ensnare a celeb-
rity through marriage, pregnancy, or extortion on a trumped-
up rape charge (the August 1998 dismissal of fabricated
charges of rape, sodomy, and false imprisonment against
DMX by a stripper or the now-settled alleged 2005 shake-
down of Snoop Dogg by Kylie Bell).
Groupies can be counted on not to charge rape after con-
sensual sex unless they are mishandled (the Tupac Shakur
and Ayanna Jackson ﬁasco). Nonetheless, the cynicism and
misogyny inspired by the easy sex and the worldview that all
women are potential lawsuits waiting to happen has led to
the term “groupie” becoming a catchall for all women—
whether they are scandalous, predatory, of easy virtue, auto-
graph seekers, or hapless, adoring fans. That hip hop stars
make no distinction whatsoever between women who want
Groupie Love and the Hip Hop Star / 107


--- PAGE 127 ---
to bed them as part of their brush-with-fame hustle, those
who want to hustle them for material, marital, or mater-
nal gain, and those who simply want autographs, hems in
women’s sexual autonomy and bolsters gender roles that
better serve male interests—Pimps Up, Ho’s Down.
Contrasting the “Groupie Confessions” with the groupie
revelations in the baseball study, according to the authors,
baseball groupies were reluctant to talk openly about sex
except in the most general of terms. And this self-censorship
may be perhaps due to the interview structure and purpose:
face-to-face with researchers for a scholarly outlet versus
the anonymity provided by a telephone conversation for an
entertainment magazine. The interviewees in the “Groupie
Confessions” were shielded from judging eyes, even as they
were subjected to disapproving questions like “Did you feel
like a prostitute?” or “So what’s your background like, sex-
ually? I mean, some people might look at someone who
sleeps around or sleeps with famous people and assume that
they were raped, or abused, as a child.”
33
The women in both the sports study and the “Groupie
Confessions” rejected the moniker “groupie.” Indeed, “the
word put out on the street” was not an explicit call for
“groupies” but the even rawer call for “anyone who had
fucked a famous person.”
34 What is clear is that whether
the women in the “Groupie Confessions” were committed
or transient groupies who happily accepted the term (like
Des Barres), or were rather star-struck fans, giving way to a
fantasy by doing the deeds that groupies do (thus justiﬁably
rejecting such nomenclature), sexually assertive or adventur-
ous women who have, or have had, intimate relations with
Groupie Love and the Hip Hop Star / 108


--- PAGE 128 ---
hip hop stars became designated by the public as “group-
ies.” Case in point: Despite the women’s insistence that they
were not groupies, the serialized column is titled “Groupie
Confessions,” and the women are deemed those who fall
outside the boundaries of sexual propriety.
And yet, a perverse sort of agency appears to be at play
with respect to sexual freedom, identity, and choice, as in-
dicated by the women in the “Groupie Confessions.” This
sense of power is, of course, challenged from many direc-
tions, namely, by the labeling of the women as “groupies”
by (black male) hip hop stars, the magazine’s (white female)
editor, and us—the reading public. But while we may per-
ceive their choices as indicative of misguided sexual experi-
mentation, low self-esteem, or an effect of feminism gone
awry (it was Naomi Wolf after all who also suggested that
besides shunning mainstream beauty pressures we “should
be shameless. Be greedy. Pursue pleasure. . . . Tolerate other
women’s choices. Seek out sex we want.”
35), these young
women clearly see their dalliances as an intriguing variation
on the rights (and rites) of female sexual passage—a femi-
nine privilege. “I get shit done. A nigga I want, I get him
done”
36 is their mantra.
The sexual caprices of these women who “have fucked a
famous person” are integral to who they purport themselves
to be—self-assured women who have desires and who are
ﬁrmly in control of their sexuality. They are not “girls gone
wild,” but women who have game (“You gotta play their
game and let them think they playin’ you”
37)— game enough
to “conquer and destroy” a hip hop star for a night, several
months, or years. It’s a game that plays with socially scripted
Groupie Love and the Hip Hop Star / 109


--- PAGE 129 ---
gendered roles. There is celebrity worshipping and female
sexual accommodation in exchange for a story to tell where
the hip hop artist has a walk-on appearance. These women
do the picking and choosing of their male sexual partners.
And those partners, unlike the average joe, are importantly
famous, or at least “borderline.”
This exercising of sexual choice and opportunity stirs that
dense pot of misogyny that too frequently bubbles up and
splashes all over with crudeness into hip hop culture. These
freewheeling sexual practices are indeed individual choices
that are at once coupled with the hedonism that hip hop
has come to signify and also our larger American cultural
reﬂexes that celebrate capitalism, consumerism, and the
individual over the collective. “Famously fucked” women
dispense sexual favors in order to procure the capital and
currency represented by the fame, power, and riches of the
hip hop star; and that currency in its turn is consumed,
collected, and cosseted between thighs and lips. Sex and
sexual desirability become games of one-upmanship—men
pimping and playing women, women stepping up their
game to serve them up in kind. This is not a gender war,
battle, or even a skirmish—though many of the women use
terms involving warfare (“conquer and destroy”)—but sex
as sport, with the winners making off with ill-gotten booty
(literally).
But just who those winners are is unclear. Are they
women like Steffans who may proﬁt from airing their pri-
vate demons? Are they women who will have stories to tell
about their sexual exploits with famous people? While each
individual may stake out a claim of success, the public airing
Groupie Love and the Hip Hop Star / 110


--- PAGE 130 ---
of such “wins,” like the sexually racy, misogynist braggado-
cio of hip hop artists, amounts to losses for the next gen-
eration. The losers are the next generation of young black
girls (and boys) like those in the Center for AIDS Research
(CFAR) study who consume voraciously the sexual frivolity
propagated by hip hop culture and implied by groupie love.
The most vulnerable of these young girls are from poor,
urban environments, according to the Motivational Educa-
tional Entertainment (MEE) Report, This Is My Reality: The
Price of Sex. The report describes the current state of sexual
activities among black urban youth between the ages of thir-
teen and twenty as “transactional,” that is, “sex is some-
thing to be used and bartered.”
38 Moreover, while college-
educated, upwardly mobile black women are described by
The U.S. Multicultural Women Market report as more conﬁ-
dent and secure with themselves, the MEE report found that
poor and working-class hip hop generationers from the thir-
teen-to-twenty-year-old demographic are signiﬁcantly inﬂu-
enced as well by media—that they feel greatly devalued and
experience high levels of “internalized low self-esteem.”
39
In these scenarios, sex simultaneously becomes one way
to exert some semblance of control and power in relation-
ships, as well as being the primary vehicle through which
young women and girls experience devaluation. As the MEE
Report notes:
Males don’t particularly think it’s wrong to call a female a
“ho,” run a “train,” or “hit it and quit it.” It is not unheard
of for group sex (or gang rape) to occur, with a young female
as the victim. Males report various ways of disrespecting
and devaluing females, including running “trains” or “bust
Groupie Love and the Hip Hop Star / 111


--- PAGE 131 ---
outs” (group sex) on them, dogging them, and even handing
them over to their partners to “try out.” 40
And just one tragic consequence of the freewheeling new
gender politics in a multitude of others that involve teen
pregnancy, welfare and poverty, and self-esteem and feminin-
ity tied to cock teasing is that young black girls, along with
their thirteen-to-nineteen-year-old male counterparts, repre-
sent 65 percent of reported HIV/AIDS cases among youth,
despite being only 15 percent of the U.S. population.
41 This
is also despite the “Rap It Up” campaign launched by BET
as part of the kind of sex education needed to ensure safe
and emotionally healthy sex lives for young black girls and
women.
Owing principally to hip hop artists and now the women
themselves, the “black groupie” has moved from the shad-
owy sidelines to a full-blown presence with multiple voices
and a face (Steffans) in hip hop culture. The private ex-
changes between hip hop stars and groupies, while at the
bottom a transaction of sex for celebrity, receive a public
hearing via a black cultural tradition: call and response.
While hip hop artists rap about the groupie, the women
write and interview about them. The call curses and praises
those hallowed tools of sex and beauty in the groupie arse-
nal. The response details how those tools open the keystone
to celebrity, money, power, and perks. Whether she is silent
or answers the call, whether we can verify her existence or
she is merely an invention of a wanna-be hip hop player’s
rhapsodic rap of easy sex and scandalous schemers, the idea
of the groupie is a powerful trope in hip hop culture. She is a
Groupie Love and the Hip Hop Star / 112


--- PAGE 132 ---
metaphor for male sexual prowess, indeed, puffed-up black
masculinity—the stuff that has become the bedrock of com-
mercialized hip hop. She also represents the intensely trans-
actional nature of hip hop gender dynamics.
Groupie Love and the Hip Hop Star / 113


--- PAGE 133 ---



--- PAGE 134 ---
strip tails
Booty Clappin’, P-poppin’, Shake Dancing
Now pop that coochie you know the procedure
If you want this cash gotta make that ass shake
like a seizure
— Ludacris , “P-Poppin,” Chicken-N-Beer
The strippers like my music and they play my
music in a lot of the strip clubs. . . . They travel
and dance all over and they were taking my mu-
sic and performing in different strip clubs in other
cities. . . . they had something to do with my mu-
sic getting out there.
— Khia, Tampa, Florida, rapper1
A stripper’s story may end in any number of ways,
but the beginning rarely varies: Young woman
needs money. Young woman casts about wildly,
weighs options, and in some crazy moment, con-
siders stripping. Young woman measures poten-
tial worst-case scenario against potential pot of
cash. Young woman steels nerves and makes leap.
— Lily Burana , Strip City: A Stripper’s
Farewell Journey across America
agic City is a place that
effortlessly marries sexual fantasy and one-stop shopping for
hip hop record deals and video vixens. It is the hot spot
where aspiring rappers attempt to toss their latest studio
115


--- PAGE 135 ---
products into the hands of the likes of Jermaine Dupri, Exec-
utive Vice President of Urban Music at Virgin, rapper and
Disturbing Tha Peace (DTP) collective member Ludacris, or
Chairman and CEO of Island Def Jam L.A. Reid. It is also
the place where those moguls and artists test market music
before a highly discriminating group of dance music con-
noisseurs—black women in the adult entertainment industry
also known as strippers, exotic dancers, and shake dancers.
Located hooﬁng distance from both Spelman College for
women in Atlanta, Georgia, and the Greyhound bus station,
in the hopes perhaps of drawing recruits from both sites
with enticing offers of tuition and erectile assistance, Magic
City is usually brimming with high rollers, ballers, and a
parking lot jampacked with luxury vehicles and “hoopties”
alike. The club has helped ﬁll a niche left by the scandal-
ously drummed-out-of-business Gold Club. The Gold Club
was one of the most popular strip clubs in Atlanta. Fre-
quented by celebrities, athletes, and politicians, the Gold
Club put Atlanta on the map as “Southern Sex Central” de-
spite Georgia’s Bible Belt conservatism.
The hubbub surrounding the Gold Club is dutifully docu-
mented by hip hop generationer Jacklyn “Diva” Bush in her
tell-all memoir The Gold Club: The Jacklyn “Diva” Bush
Story: How I Went from the Gold Room to the Court
Room. Bush danced at the Gold Club from 1997 through
2000. Thanks to lax city and state ordinances regarding
serving alcohol in nude clubs, in its heyday, the Gold Club
netted annually one-ﬁfth of Atlanta’s then $ 100 million-a-
year sex industry. Indicted by the IRS and federal govern-
ment for using the club as a front for prostitution, money
Booty Clappin’, P-poppin’, Shake Dancing / 116


--- PAGE 136 ---
laundering, credit card fraud, and racketeering, Jacklyn Bush
is considered the black Heidi Fleiss of strip clubs, or, as she
writes vividly and with a bit of hyperbole of her Gold Club
days and of Atlanta’s sex entertainment industry, she was
“the Michael Jordan of the stripping industry”:
Some people say that I was the Michael Jordan of the strip-
ping industry. Well, maybe I was. . . . I started dancing in
Milwaukee at the age of 18 and ended in what was arguably
the most prestigious, high-dollar, high-class strip club in the
United States—the world famous Atlanta Gold Club. . . .
[Atlanta] is the city where the adult entertainment industry is
second only to Coca-Cola. . . . The Gold Club was a haven
for men of high means, high rollers, guys who thought noth-
ing of dropping a $ 4,000 tip. Women who thought nothing
of a lesbian sex show and two well-placed ﬁngers. GHB. Ec-
stasy. Cocaine. Chicks with kids and boyfriends at home.
College girls looking for an easy way to get through school.
2
Bush describes the highly charged atmosphere of the Gold
Club with its intermittent Vegas-style shows, S&M lesbian
intermissions, and VIP and Gold Rooms where all sorts of
activities from prostitution to Gold Club sundaes (a heady
combination of dancers, male clients, whipped cream, straw-
berries, chocolate syrup, and expensive champagne) were of-
fered. She also provides a glimpse into the lives of the club’s
workers—from single moms to college students. Unlike the
Gold Club, however, Magic City’s dancers and clientele are
predominantly black and its primary music format is bass-
heavy hip hop, reggae, and R&B.
Rappers give shout outs to strip clubs like Magic City and
Body Tap (Atlanta) and the Pink Slip (Brooklyn, Illinois) in
much of the same way they give props to their ’hoods
Booty Clappin’, P-poppin’, Shake Dancing / 117


--- PAGE 137 ---
(Cashville/Nashville, north Memphis, Brooklyn), designer
drugs and alcohol (‘X” and “Cris”), and criminal offenses
(“187”). In a January 4, 2004, interview with Dave DiMar-
tino at Yahoo! Music, Ludacris explains:
[I]f strip clubs have any inﬂuence into what I do, it’s only be-
cause Atlanta is the number-one strip club capital of the
world. And basically, you know, we ﬁnd ourselves going to
strip clubs in Atlanta all the time. What people don’t really
understand about the strip clubs in Atlanta is that it’s more
of a club atmosphere than it is just going to see naked ladies.
...  [I]t’s a place where so many music industry people come
together and make a lot of business moves. You see a lot of
artists and producers there. It’s just almost like a networking
facility, basically. You’re going there to see Jermaine Dupri,
or see L.A. Reid, because everyone is in there and it’s just a
lot of stars. You’d be surprised how many artists get on dif-
ferent songs just because they saw each other at a strip club
in Atlanta, Georgia.
In Ludacris’s hands, the strip club is rendered a more com-
plex space. It takes on a male boardroom atmosphere where
deals are brokered, video vixens scouted, invitations to ap-
pear on records are extended, and records are broken amid
bodies undulating on poles, buttocks shaking furiously, and
deep toe-touching bends.
***
Like Khia, whose regional hit “My Neck, My Back” was es-
sentially “broke” in the strip clubs by dancers, hip hop mo-
gul and Atlanta resident Dupri, whose latest video, “Gotta
Getcha,” featuring Janet Jackson and Nelly, is an ode to
male voyeurism at strip clubs and peep shows, candidly
Booty Clappin’, P-poppin’, Shake Dancing / 118


--- PAGE 138 ---
admits in an October 2004 interview with Vibe: “I test all
my records in the strip club. . . . If the girls really like to
dance off one of your records, nine times out of 10, it’s gon’
be a hit record.” In a VH 1 documentary on Janet Jackson,
producer Jimmy Jam revealed that street corner urban mu-
sic stores used to be the street-level source for testing and
breaking records in urban communities. If a song was blar-
ing from the store, a hit was generally assured. As with so
many other facets of hip hop culture that have challenged
and altered both the recording industry and listeners’ and
viewers’ tastes, the litmus test of a hip hop record’s probabil-
ity for success is now also tied to predominantly black strip
clubs—in effect, pornographic black female labor. Like hip
hop videos, the “hotness” of which is often measured by the
amount of female ﬂesh (predominantly black) and provoca-
tion offered—thus heavy rotation and an artist’s breakout—
the number of spins at a club and the dancers’ responses are
predictors of marketability.
Less costly than radio promotions, a mere ﬁve- to twenty-
dollar club admission fee and a tip out to the DJ can assure
at the very least a hearing among the most discerning of
dancers. Strip clubs are to hip hop what Zogby (polling) is to
politics—an indicator of what moves the crowd. The pole-
swinging acrobatics, booty droppin’, and p-poppin’ are just
as eagerly anticipated by networking artists and moguls for
the sexual titillation offered as for a surety of a record’s po-
tential debut and rotation on Billboard, 106 & Park, MTV,
and VH1. The sex work of dancers in strip clubs is moved to
the veritable hip hop marketplace. Power moves and bottom
lines have become decisively wedded to a booty clap.
Booty Clappin’, P-poppin’, Shake Dancing / 119


--- PAGE 139 ---
The celebration of strip club culture, booty music, and the
oft-bandied about moniker “Dirty South” in hip hop began
in the South in the late 1980s and early 1990s. Acts like 2
Live Crew with their strip club friendly ditties helped set the
stage for crunk, a southern offshoot of hip hop, which has
fused strip club culture with hip hop to create what some
critics dubiously refer to as “strip-hop.” As hip hop elbowed
its way into the mainstream, butt- and crotch-focused doc-
umentary ﬁlms like Shake Dance (2002) and the Method
Man–directed The Strip Game (2005), the hip hop infused
Strip Joint magazine, and artists like the Ying Yang Twins of
the Billboard chart–topping strip club warble “Wait (The
Whisper Song),” T-Pain’s “I’m N Luv (wit a Stripper),” and
Lil’ Jon have focused our collective attention more than ever
on strip clubs.
It is not that pop culture and strip clubs have been hith-
erto strange bedfellows. Rock bands and their music, from
Mötley Crüe’s “Girls, Girls, Girls” to Nine Inch Nails’s
“Closer” (a perennial favorite at the Gold Club with the line
“I want to fuck you like an animal”), have also famously
frequented and had their hearings on the strip club scene.
Their songs too permeated American households. That Nine
Inch Nails’s Trent Reznor would suggest in an April 1995
interview with Chris Heath, “I think my next album is going
to be called ‘Music for Titty Bars’” makes plain this not-so-
odd coupling. But the primary listening audiences for these
strip club ditties were whites. The global takeover of hip hop
and its race-transcending commercial marketability appeals
to a more highly diverse audience demographic.
As hip hop has taken over American popular culture,
Booty Clappin’, P-poppin’, Shake Dancing / 120


--- PAGE 140 ---
strip clubs too have gone mainstream. An article in USA
Today ballyhooed that “stripping . . . is now strutting into
the mainstream, propelled by pop culture and the loosening
of societal taboos.”
3 Black women actresses too have played
their fair share of strippers in popular mainstream movies
like Flashdance, starring the ethnically ambiguous Jennifer
Beals, Independence Day with Vivica A. Fox, and Halle
Berry in The Last Boy Scout. Lela Rochon co-starred with
the late Tupac Shakur in Gang-Related, while Gabrielle
Union did a strip tease in the DMX-vehicle Cradle to the
Grave. From Lisa Raye’s breakout role in The Player’s Club
to Paula Jai Parker’s ﬁery Lexus in Hustle & Flow to the
2005 BET Awards with Destiny’s Child simulating a lap
dance and young black girls “get(ting) low” at local talent
shows in Nashville, women working in the strip trade have
undeniably impacted (whether viewed negatively or posi-
tively) pop culture and gender politics in an unprecedented
way. As D-Roc, the other half of the Ying Yang pair appre-
ciatively remarked, “We’ve always been in every strip club in
the United States, period. . . . Now, they inviting our strip-
club music [thus the strip clubs and its gender dynamics]
into they [sic] homes. You put it together, and you got a nice
little chemistry there.”
4 Indeed, we are living in an era of
“stripper chic” as indicated by the popularity of Carmen
Electra’s Aerobic Striptease (2003), a series of striptease and
lap dance aerobic workouts, entering the mainstream ﬁtness
fray. And ingénues like “White Chocolate,” the half-Sicilian,
half-black dancer in rapper Nelly’s “Tip Drill,” have left in-
delible visual instructions for, among other things, the uses
of buttocks and credit cards.
Booty Clappin’, P-poppin’, Shake Dancing / 121


--- PAGE 141 ---
In further exploring the intricacies of the new black gen-
der politics, understanding the complex space of strip clubs
and its culture is central. Not only because there has been an
explosion, popularization, and mainstreaming of strip clubs
since the 1990s, not only because hip hop generation black
men frequent them in unprecedented numbers, and not only
because more hip hop generation black women seek employ-
ment in them, but also because the purely transactional na-
ture of the relationships in strip clubs (sexual fantasy for
money) run parallel to gendered relations outside the clubs,
that is, in hip hop generationers’ intimate relationships. Hip
hop generation men and women, at least in Atlanta and Las
Vegas, also see strip clubs as a space for dating and stimulat-
ing nightlife entertainment; not surprisingly, the strip club
then provides a model for interpersonal relationships. While
many men may view bringing dates to strip clubs as the
equivalent of bringing a sandwich to a picnic, we must ac-
knowledge that they are not alone: many heterosexual single
and married women want to go “where the boys are.” They
also want to vicariously experience the male freedom that
the unselfconsciously nude, money-maker-shaking women
exploit. As articles in USA Today and The Las Vegas Sunfur-
ther suggest: “It has become trendy for couples and women
to come.”
5
As discussed earlier, the Motivational Educational Enter-
tainment study, This Is My Reality, noted the increasingly
transactional nature of sex between urban, poor, hip hop
generationers between the ages of thirteen and twenty. Teen-
agers and younger adults clearly are not alone here. All rela-
tionships, of course, are at the most basic levels mediated by
Booty Clappin’, P-poppin’, Shake Dancing / 122


--- PAGE 142 ---
transactions and negotiations. But with more than a little
help from mainstream media, the transactional nature of re-
lationships between hip hop generation men and women is
now more than ever blatantly, undeniably, and unapologeti-
cally tied to sex for money and/or material goods. Accord-
ing to the study:
[S]ex is something to be used and bartered with to get the
right kind of car or clothes or be seen in the right places with
the right people. . . . Urban youth, bigger consumers of tele-
vision, music videos and movies than any other demographic
group, are exposed to negative, conﬂicting and often destruc-
tive messages about sex and sexuality at alarming levels. . . .
With their explicitly sexual lyrics and booty-shaking chore-
ography, rap and hip hop artists have taken the battle of the
sexes to a whole new level.
6
The conﬂuence of hip hop and strip club cultures then begs
for closer scrutiny. Just how do race, gender, sexuality, and
power operate in the strip trade? What are the experiences
of hip hop generation women in the strip trade? How has
hip hop provided a space for those experiences to be articu-
lated? And what could those experiences tell us about hip
hop generation gender politics?
***
The online Strip Club Directory and the Exotic Dancer Di-
rectory (renamed The Adult Nightclubs Guide ), the Bibles
of eye-candy enthusiasts and the go-to guides for women in-
terested in performing in the adult entertainment industry,
respectively, list over three thousand legal clubs worldwide
and over two thousand nude and topless clubs in the United
Booty Clappin’, P-poppin’, Shake Dancing / 123


--- PAGE 143 ---
States as of their 2006–2007 listings. However, the indus-
try’s trade association in America, ACE National (Associa-
tion of Club Executives National), puts that club ﬁgure at
over thirty-eight hundred with employees exceeding over ﬁve
hundred thousand people. BlackExoticDancers.com/black
stripclubs lists 210 predominantly black clubs—that is clubs
whose dancers are 90 percent black and Latina.
In a study published by the Woodhull Freedom Founda-
tion, Angelina Spencer, owner of the Penthouse Club in Cleve-
land, Ohio, and executive director of ACE National, notes:
In America, there is no business like “show it all business.”
Economic downturn or not, there is one market that remains
strong and sees regular growth year after year. . . . the “gen-
tlemen’s club” industry earns a respectable $ 15 billion share
of the $75 billion global adult entertainment market.
7
We shouldn’t, however, be totally taken aback. America has
long hungered for the sexually provocative; the only change
has been the form such titillation has taken. We can see the
roots of the stripping industry in burlesque, which began in
the American theater in the 1840s. Sexual double entendres
and scantily clad women would come to largely deﬁne the
genre by the 1920s.
8 Though men like the female-imperson-
ating Milton Berle also performed burlesque, women per-
forming slow striptease to a state of undress with a comic
shtick were the hallmark of burlesque entertainment in
America. Performers like Gyspy Rose Lee, Little Egpyt with
her bellydance (then considered scandalously provocative)
and Lili St. Cyr rose to stardom as club owners looked for
a way to bring in the crowds as live-theater attendance
Booty Clappin’, P-poppin’, Shake Dancing / 124


--- PAGE 144 ---
declined. Thus, g-strings and pasties were incorporated into
costuming to avoid indecency laws as well as to titillate.  A
combination of raw comedy, sex play, choreography, and
bump-and-grind music, old-style burlesque shows spoofed
classics like Ben Hur with ribald theatrics and saucy titles
such as Bend Her.
By the 1960s, old-style burlesque had practically van-
ished, but today, neo-burlesque is a thriving counter-cultural
movement in an era rife with booty clapping and lap danc-
ing. Troupes like the Harlem Shake Burlesque and shows or-
ganized by owner Katy K of Nashville, Tennessee’s Katy K
Ranch Dressing in the trendy 12th South neighborhood are
part of the burlesque revival.
This revival, however, has been far outpaced by the boom-
ing growth of the adult entertainment industry. Strip clubs,
go-go bars, shake bars, and gentlemen’s clubs have been rap-
idly expanding in the United States since the 1990s. Part of
this explosion is due to the trends of upscaling and main-
streaming. Middle-aged white (married) men have generally
been the primary patrons of sex shows, peep shows, and
the like. Demographic shifts have moved strip clubs from
the dark, sleazy back-alley fringes to Main Street, USA. The
launch of sex magnate Larry Flynt’s Hustler Gentlemen’s
Clubs as compared to his 1970s raunchy working-class road
house style clubs signals this trend.
At the same time, stripping has become a routine source
of nightlife entertainment for an ever-increasing cross-sec-
tion of American men (and women). Upscaling has had the
effect of transforming strip clubs into clean and safe havens
for sexual activities without sexual contact (in principle),
Booty Clappin’, P-poppin’, Shake Dancing / 125


--- PAGE 145 ---
particularly as fears about sexually transmitted diseases and
the HIV/AIDS epidemic spread in the mid- 1980s. Strip clubs
are now viewed as a safer outlet for sex than prostitution—a
criminalized sexual activity that was once closely associated
with clubs. As a result of these new realities then, stripping
no longer carries the social opprobrium it once did.
Stripping, it seems, is now nearly commonplace in Ameri-
can culture, as it has successfully reinvented itself through
marketing and the blurring of the mainstream’s once clear-
cut boundaries of propriety. Sociologist Kate Hausbeck, who
has studied the adult entertainment industry and stripping
from her privileged vantage point as a professor at the Uni-
versity of Nevada at Las Vegas, relates in an interview on
Minnesota Public Radio that strip clubs are becoming as
common as fast food restaurants. As Hausbeck suggests,
“When you watch Britney Spears in some of her videos . . .
it’s not terribly different than some of the performances
you’d see in strip clubs . . . the kind of sexuality that’s just so
blatantly open.”
9 The Mickey Mouse Club–turned–Strip
Club antics of Spears and her pop culture counterpart Chris-
tina Aguilera are also mulled over by Lily Burana, former
dancer, organizer of a union for dancers at Mitchell Brothers
O’Farrell Theater in San Francisco, and feminist author of
the memoir Strip City : “Your average teen star could go
right on a strip stage without changing clothes.”
10
Feminism has also played its role. On the one hand, the
spike in this form of sex tourism for American men can be
viewed as a negative response to more women entering the
workforce and changing gender roles in the family and in
dating rituals. The sex-positive feminism of the late 1980s as
Booty Clappin’, P-poppin’, Shake Dancing / 126


--- PAGE 146 ---
embodied by crossover entertainment icons like Madonna
and do-me feminist darling and patron saint of 1990s strip-
pers Camille Paglia certainly contributed to the lessening of
stripping’s stigma for women, predominantly white women.
Burana observes, “[F]eminism took a switch. It was no
longer women saying, ‘To be taken seriously, I need to be
asexual.’ Sexuality became more egalitarian.”
11
White women were not alone in their redeﬁnition of the
ways that the body could be used. Young black women have
been keenly aware of the sea change in sexuality; it would
be almost impossible, similarly, to ignore the gloriﬁcation of
strip clubs, so abundant in hip hop music, videos, movies,
and CD covers. As former 2 Live Crew frontman, Uncle
Luke relates,
Right here on South Beach, before [hip hop] you would’ve
seen black girls coming in from the ocean and they wouldn’t
have a bikini on. They’d have a towel all wrapped around
them. Traditionally black people are really conservative.
They’re more conservative than conservative whites are, in
my opinion. . . . With this whole tradition of sexuality [in hip
hop] most black people are nervous about that.
12
As we shall see, such developments in hip hop culture have
made exotic dancing an acceptable, lucrative, and even em-
powering employment opportunity. Both the blurring of the
lines between hip hop culture and strip culture and the per-
vasiveness of strip culture in hip hop encourages and rede-
ﬁnes the profession as acceptable in the same way that hip
hop embraced and attempted to redeﬁne “nigger” ( niggaz,
niggas) and complicate the word “bitch” ( beotch, beeyatch,
and its magnanimous extension by men to men). For Anna
Booty Clappin’, P-poppin’, Shake Dancing / 127


--- PAGE 147 ---
(not her real name), a veteran dancer of four years who
works at the popular Pink Slip in Brooklyn, Illinois, a nude
hotspot for local (Chingy) and visiting (T.I.) rap artists and
black men from all walks of life: “It’s just entertainment. It’s
like going to the theater or a movie. Just spiced up.”
13
We should not, however, believe that stripping is now free
of stigma. Even those hip hop celebrities who have done
their stints in strip clubs like rapper-actor Eve or the “Black
Marilyn Monroe,” sex siren Trina, offer almost apologetic
stories of errant youthful folly that portray good, short-
term, hardworking versus evil, fast and easy money, sex-
peddling dichotomies when speaking of themselves and the
strip trade. As Miami rapper Trina relates:
It was a topless bar. . . . I danced that night and I had like a
thousand dollars. It was really an ego thing. . . . I was like,
“I’mma [sic] take this money and I’m gonna pay for my real
estate school.” And I did it. The school was over the next
month and I was still dancing. It’s a form of evil temptation
because you are so used to the money that you ain’t thinking
about yourself and what you want to become and how much
more you can become.
14
It is more than a teensy bit ironic that the exacting scrutiny
Trina levels at stripping, selling sexual fantasy as a form of
entertainment, is the very same scrutiny directed at punanny
priestesses of hip hop like her. In later interviews, she does
moderate her criticisms of stripping, relating that, “[I]t’s
almost like the same thing, because its just entertainment.
You’re both out hustling, trying to get money. . . . I feel like
[stripping] should be something you do when you’re trying
to get your feet off the ground.”
15 For women, stripping is
Booty Clappin’, P-poppin’, Shake Dancing / 128


--- PAGE 148 ---
still “a steel yourself and make that leap” over a yawning
chasm, as Lily Burana makes clear. The current moment of
stripper chic has not bridged the divide between “us,” on
the supposed side of propriety, and “them,” those renegade
women outside its boundaries. The trends of mainstreaming
have also birthed a new archetypal stripper: one who shares
our cutthroat ambitions to succeed, who entrepreneurially
sells fantasies of herself. Yet, stigma persists.
The black exotic dancer faces judgment from not only
the American culture at large, but also within the industry.
As with so many industries being black comes with its own
unique set of difﬁculties. The Exotic World Burlesque Mu-
seum and Strip Tease Hall of Fame, in California, off Route
66, offers one small example. The museum houses memora-
bilia and artifacts such as playbills, photographs, and cos-
tumes of the women who brought to life “the bump and
grind Golden Age” (1900–1930) and beyond.
Josephine Baker, that high priestess of vaudeville and bur-
lesque who made her topless and banana-skirt debut in 1926
in the Folies-Bergères in Paris, is fêted in the the Burlesque
Hall of Fame. With the exceptions of Baker and the lesser-
known Charletta Bates, the Hall of Fame offers very little
else in the way of black women’s contribution to burlesque.
But there are of course numerous other black women who
constitute a lost, but vital, component of burlesque. Given
the de jure segregated racial politics in the United States,
shimmying black women like the Harlem Shakers, a revue
who performed burlesque in the 1950s, and countless other
nameless performers, toiled primarily within the segregated
worlds of black clubs or whites-only clubs that featured
Booty Clappin’, P-poppin’, Shake Dancing / 129


--- PAGE 149 ---
black performers, like the Cotton Club and Connie’s Inn in
Harlem during burlesque’s golden era.
Integration, as in other aspects of American life, has su-
perﬁcially democratized and diversiﬁed strip clubs. But de
facto segregation is still the principal modus operandi of the
strip trade. Despite stripping’s mainstream welcome, black
women still ﬁnd it difﬁcult to earn the same money as their
white dancer counterparts.
16 As former dancer Chris Bruck-
ert writes in Taking It Off, Putting It On: Women in the
Strip Trade:
The most exclusive clubs accept only the most conventionally
attractive strippers. Although managers are increasingly em-
bracing a more complex consideration of beauty that values
diversity, the standard continues to be the blond, tall, well-
endowed beauty with tan lines and without visible tattoos.
This idealized image of young white womanhood obviously
has particular implications for women of colour.
17
This may be slowly changing, though only on the surface.
As in other facets of a consumer-capitalist-driven market,
smart businesses recognize that diversity makes good busi-
ness sense. Jacklyn “Diva” Bush relates that part of the suc-
cess of the Gold Club was diversity: “Big breasts. A perky
butt. Blond hair. Red hair. Tall. Short. Exotic. Kinky. Sweet.
Any ﬂavor girl a guy could possibly dream up, we had. Bet-
ter than Baskin Robbins.”
18 Like most other businesses in
the United States, whether they are Fortune 500 or 100, or
white-owned and operated, servicing (as in clientele) and
employing (as in dancers) strip clubs, a smattering of women
from racial and ethnic backgrounds other than white adds
some variety to a club’s dancer line-up. But as with other
Booty Clappin’, P-poppin’, Shake Dancing / 130


--- PAGE 150 ---
corporate strategies that are careful to avoid the tipping
point where a white clientele would perceive a business as
too black, white strip club managers and owners are also
particularly mindful that too many black women might
draw larger black patronage, marking a club as black, and
thus inherently not upscale, and thus impacting bottom
lines. Notwithstanding the fact that many black strip clubs
advertise themselves as upscale, blackness in the strip trade
industry connotes lower class, rawness, danger—a real walk
on the wild side for the adventurous.
***
Not surprisinly, race and beauty hierarchies also prevail in
hip hop generation–frequented black clubs. The dancer-
interviewees in Shake Dance noted how differently black
men conducted themselves in predominantly white clubs and
with the white women dancers who occasionally danced at
black clubs like Magic City. As one dancer, Dawn “Camio”
Brown, explained:
Why do the black men feel like they can just let it all hang
out and act ignorant in a black club? They will go to a white
club, they act professional. . . . they talk about “the white
man keeping the black man down,” but you [black men] go
to a white club and spend all your money in a white club and
treat the white girls like “queens.”
In response to Camio’s frustration, Andra “Trouble” Wil-
liams continued:
I know when I worked in a white club and I danced for black
guys, they really act different when they are in a white club.
They don’t ask you to, “Bend over. Let me see it. Open it up.
Booty Clappin’, P-poppin’, Shake Dancing / 131


--- PAGE 151 ---
Do this. Do that. . . .” I know at Magic City when our white
girl gets on stage, brothers come from miles around, down
the street, around the corner. They be like, “Damn!” Like she
has something we don’t have.
Magic City’s management also practices their own version
of diversity politics by employing a few white women in
their dancer line-up, and, as it seems from Williams’s de-
scription, at great proﬁt. At play here, it seems, is the ex-
oticization of whiteness and the specter of the forbidden-
fruit syndrome. These women, in short, are put on a pedes-
tal. Though they are also stigmatized because of the job, the
behavior, respect, the “queenly” status conferred by black
men upon white women who strip at black and white clubs
seems vastly different than the experiences of black women
at black clubs.
That black men take a certain license with black women
at black clubs is clear from almost all the interviews with
these dancers. The dancers ﬁnd themselves treated as serv-
ice merchandise, ordered to bend over and provide spread
shots (glimpses of the vagina) while they shake and gyrate.
Whether they police themselves or sense themselves to be
under surveillance at predominantly white clubs, these same
black men, it seems, also check their raunchiness at the door
with both black and white dancers. And certainly Method
Man and his entourage comported themselves more cau-
tiously at the white clubs visited in the Strip Game docu-
mentary. After questioning black dancer after dancer about
feminine hygiene and vaginal odor, upon entering a white
establishment in Miami (Solid Gold), Method Man curses
that, “Those white strippers think their pussies don’t stink.”
Booty Clappin’, P-poppin’, Shake Dancing / 132


--- PAGE 152 ---
No questions about feminine hygiene are ventured though;
and hands were sat upon, folded, or at their sides. Whether
what lied between the white dancer’s legs was foul smelling
or not, these hip hop generation black men treated them in
the way they perceived the white dancers perceived them-
selves: as “unfunky.” What the white women had that the
black women didn’t was their whiteness and unfunkiness.
The implied funkiness of black women dancing in black
clubs then allows the men to “keep it real” and very street—
“let it all hang out,” as Camio suggested.
The mainstream strip trade favors not only an ideal-
ized youthful white femininity, but it also favors girl-next-
door names like Jennifer, Kate, or Heidi, as opposed to the
race- and (working-) class-laden names adopted by black
women, like Alexus, Tiarra, Precious, or Ebony. In the end,
white women who ﬁt the ideal and even those who fall a bit
short may fare better economically because they also have
ab roader array of employment opportunities (over three
thousand legal clubs). Anna’s one-week trial experience at
Larry Flynt’s Hustler Club in Washington Park, Illinois, con-
ﬁrms these dynamics:
You have to work too hard at the [white clubs] for your
money. Men who go to those clubs want to see white
women. White men who come to black clubs come to see
black women. I prefer working private parties and bachelor
parties. You get your fees upfront; the tips are extra [money].
The white girls have cars and apartments. Their tricks [pa-
trons] pay for all that. I want a hook-up like that.
The money to be made at clubs like the Pink Slip, Magic
City, the now-defunct Gold Club, and Hustler is not on the
Booty Clappin’, P-poppin’, Shake Dancing / 133


--- PAGE 153 ---
stage ﬂoor where one dollar bills are ubiquitous and women
must crawl around on all fours to gather them up, but with
table dances, lap dances, and private dances, and in the VIP
and champagne rooms. Women also work the private parties
to supplement their income. Some dancers prefer the safety
of clubs to private parties where the atmosphere has the po-
tential to become a bit more raucous. The clientele at Hus-
tler, an upscale nude club, attracts a predominantly white
male crowd with more disposable income than the average
male frequenting the Pink Slip. Thus many of the white
dancers at Hustler were able to purchase cars and apart-
ments from their work at the club. Indeed, dancers at up-
scale clubs can make upward of $ 100,000 annually.
19 Anna
coveted the independence and material goods that the higher
income allowed the white dancers, hence her reason for giv-
ing Hustler a whirl.
But Anna makes another point worthy of more consid-
eration. Upscaling and mainstreaming has not altered the
perception of stripping as not constituting “real work”—
though it is, and hard work at that. While women may enter
the exotic dancing profession relatively unskilled, women
who continue certainly have to acquire more than rudimen-
tary dancing skills in order to make money.
The cultivation of an outgoing personality, good conver-
sational and listening skills, the physical demands of ﬂoor
work and muscle strength needed to work the pole over the
course of a four- to eight-hour shift, and the mental labor
required to get into character in order to maximize earnings
are especially onerous. As if these requirements aren’t bur-
densome enough, the women expend a good deal of psycho-
Booty Clappin’, P-poppin’, Shake Dancing / 134


--- PAGE 154 ---
logical labor in order to treat each patron as special in hopes
of boosting earnings and cultivating potential regulars who
can come to represent a dancer’s bread and butter. There is
also the tension that comes with ﬂuctuating earnings not
necessarily tied to the dancer’s output but to the largesse of
customers. And ﬁnally, and perhaps the most noteworthy,
there are the endured insults and constant rejection (by cus-
tomers) that can potentially undermine the supposedly sexu-
ally liberating aspects of stripping in which dancers imagine
themselves as empowered, in control of male desire and their
own sexuality.
Dancers are also importantly self-employed workers with
no beneﬁts or legally enforceable contracts. Since a portion
of the dancer’s earnings are paid out to the management
(for the privilege of dancing at the club), the bartenders (for
supplying overpriced drinks to customers and dancers), and
the DJ (for maintaining the club atmosphere via music, hyp-
ing the dancers to potential clients, announcing house rules,
such as “no touching,” and plugging the VIP and cham-
pagne rooms which augment the dancer’s earnings), where a
dancer chooses (or is allowed) to work is often dependent on
a club’s house fees and payouts and whether those payouts
are based on ﬂat rates or percentages. The greater the earn-
ings potential the more amenable a dancer is likely to be in
terms of the payout structure.
At the Pink Slip, the fee to dance at the club per shift
is twenty dollars: ten to management, ﬁve to the bar, and
ﬁve to the DJ. Hustler is 30 percent of the dancer’s earnings
for the shift worked. Shaking her head in disgust, Anna
relates: “I made $ 475 one night [at Hustler]. They wanted
Booty Clappin’, P-poppin’, Shake Dancing / 135


--- PAGE 155 ---
30 percent. I was like, ‘Hell no!’ They told me I couldn’t
work there anymore. I was like ﬁne. But I walked out of
there with all my money. I don’t like clubs where you work
off percentages.” Anna worked harder for “her money” at
Hustler, earned less than the white dancers, and would have
paid more in fees, a whopping $ 142, as opposed to the $ 20
fee at the Pink Slip. While the money to be made at strip
clubs is accrued faster than at McDonald’s where the mini-
mum federal wage is $ 5.15 per hour, the work is much
harder and the skills level much higher. All of these job fac-
tors combine to make the “easy” and “fast” money associ-
ated with stripping hard-earned. And the fallout from the
stresses of stripping is varyingly described by Burana, Bush,
and Anna as “stripper damage,” “[turn]ing you out,” having
“an effect.”
20 This fallout is usually compensated for with
errant consumption.
Young black female strippers recognize that they are fur-
ther marginalized by the fact that their occupation is re-
garded socially as on the cusp of sexual and moral propriety.
Given the employment options in other low-skilled, margin-
alized, service-sector jobs, stripping pays better. Women strip
for a number of reasons—they like to dance; they enjoy the
attention and freedom from inhibitions about their bodies;
they enjoy the power; but most strip for the money. As Anna
insisted, “My other job pays the bills. I do this for extra
money.” The transactions in strip trade relationships provide
men with outlets for their fantasies and women with money;
but men are also paying the dancers to take a loss in social
standing (the “ho stigma”); that money in turn is used in our
capitalist-consumer-oriented culture to buy back that loss in
Booty Clappin’, P-poppin’, Shake Dancing / 136


--- PAGE 156 ---
standing—hence the stereotype of the status consumption
lifestyle of strippers—through clothes, cars, and so forth.
“Indulging,” as Burana writes, “has as much appeal as in-
vesting.”
21 And Karrine Steffans during her strip club days
indulged more than she invested, ending up homeless and
living with her son in her car, while Bush, who bought Prada
for herself and all things Barbie for her daughters, eventually
lost her home, an apartment, and even her dog, Chanel. But
of course, many dancers use that money to pay for school,
for transition to another life beyond the strip club, as Anna
said she was doing; she was saving for her three daughters’
education.
Strip clubs are not only racially stratiﬁed in terms of clien-
tele and dancers but are also class-ridden sex tourism sites.
Race, gender, and class collide in the sex entertainment in-
dustry in ways that ﬁnd the vast majority of black women,
mostly poor and working class like Anna, working in clubs
where payouts are lower, the payoff is lower, and extras (the
industry lingo for “extra-sexual” activities) are aggressively
sought in the clubs and at private parties. Indeed, the alleged
March 2006 racially motivated gang rape by white members
of Duke University’s lacrosse team of a young black coed
and single mother of two from North Carolina Central Uni-
versity who danced because of the strip trade’s promise of
ﬂexible hours and money attests to the pursuit of these
extra-sexual activities, the extra legal lengths some will go to
procure them, and the perceived legal repercussions to be
meted out because of the woman’s status as a stripper and a
black female.
***
Booty Clappin’, P-poppin’, Shake Dancing / 137


--- PAGE 157 ---
The girls on us so derrty who you rollin wit’
From Magic City to The Pink Slip in the Lou
Them chicks love the diamonds that I get from Rob Jewels
— Chingy, “Balla Baby,” Powerballin’
The mention of the Pink Slip elicits a range of reactions.
From a middle-aged, college-educated, business-owning, mar-
ried father of two who has patronized the club: “Raunchy.”
From a young, stylish black woman who has frequented
Nelly’s “White Parties” at Plush Night Club in St. Louis:
“Ghetto.” From a thirty-something corporate type: a smile
and a story about a male friend’s preferring the Slip’s real-
ness to Hustler’s Pledge-like polish on sex. From a regular
guest at Missouri’s various correctional facilities: “Thunder
cats, Rappers,” and words of caution, “Its rough. Go during
the day.” And from my father and stepmother: chuckles and
more stories, which led me to believe that the Pink Slip’s no-
toriety and offerings had indeed greatly impacted its across-
the-water neighbors—St. Louis—regardless of class.
The Pink Slip is located off a rural highway in Brooklyn,
Illinois, in a complex of ﬂesh-peddling storefronts. Despite
its Brooklyn, Illinois, location, everything east of St. Louis is
simply referred to as the Eastside, as in east of St. Louis.
Many St. Louisans cringe or bellow when those unfamiliar
with the topography confuse St. Louis’s Missouri location
with the impoverished east of the Mississippi river city in
Illinois. The dire poverty and disparities of East St. Louis
provided the fodder for Jonathan Kozol’s Savage Inequali-
ties: Children in America’s Schools, a deﬁnitive text on un-
equal access to quality education for our nation’s black and
poor. Ironically, even Publisher’s Weekly’s review of Kozol’s
Booty Clappin’, P-poppin’, Shake Dancing / 138


--- PAGE 158 ---
book situates East St. Louis in Missouri (which was proba-
bly much to the dismay of the St. Louis Superintendent of
Schools).
From its one-level white cinder block façade, an aura of
stab and jab admittedly wafts from the club. During my ﬁrst
in a series of visits to the club, the metal detectors at the en-
trance certainly gave me pause. And Anna, one of the danc-
ers, would call the family-run operation, “The gutter, gutter,
gutter.” Notwithstanding the cesspool descriptor, the club is
one of a few black strip clubs that is black-owned and oper-
ated and caters to a predominantly black clientele, though
the white male construction-worker sitting at “perv row,”
22
mere inches away from a dancer’s gyrating buttocks, was
not the least bit troubled by these demographics. Just as I
glided through the detectors, followed by my male compan-
ion, one of the manager’s joked with a twenty-something
black man behind me that his “wifey” (one of dancers to
whom he had obviously taken a fancy) wasn’t dancing today.
The club was much larger than it appeared from the out-
side. It had three stages—a main stage that was positioned
in front of the DJ booth but at some distance; the other
stages were off to the sides. Mirrors were strategically posi-
tioned on the walls closer to these stages. The lighting in the
club was deliberately muted. Around the various stages were
chair and table setups. The bar was off to the left-hand side.
The club’s VIP area with couches and a sports bar of sorts
were concealed behind the bar’s mirrors. Every inch of the
club was used to maximize the customer’s visual access to
the dancers. The ridiculously low cover charge ($ 3 during
the day, $ 5 at night) and the lack of a dress code assured
Booty Clappin’, P-poppin’, Shake Dancing / 139


--- PAGE 159 ---
a packed club. The bar, with absurdly pricey drinks and
at wo-drink minimum, did brisk sales even on slower day
shifts. The busiest and most raucous days at the club were
Thursday through Saturday evenings when the club had a
mix of younger and older clientele, with the younger far out-
numbering the older. The club had a steady stream of busi-
ness during the day with college students, older men, mar-
ried men who preferred the discretion offered by daytime
visits, and businessmen for lunch and after-work drinks.
At any given time during the day shift, which began at
noon when the club opened, there were roughly eight to ten
dancers working. While one dancer immediately smiled at
me when I entered the club, only Anna, who was unselfcon-
sciously bare breasted, was bold enough to approach the
bar. She was friendly and informed us that many of the
women were not yet comfortable with the idea of couples.
Despite male fantasies of ménage à trois, dancing for cou-
ples, or single women, implied that you were lesbian. Lesbi-
phobia was clearly at play; but lesbianism, as perceived by
some of the “straight” dancers, could also have a direct im-
pact on earnings. For them, the illusion of the dancer’s avail-
ability to men would be ironically stripped away. They
feared that they would be thought of as especially “freaky,”
and therefore subjected to heightened untoward male ad-
vances. Strip clubs, notwithstanding the fact that women are
the main attractions and are charged with managing the
space and boundaries, are decidedly male-centered erotic
spaces. When it became clear that we were not potential
“tricks,” but that I was interested in black women who
worked in the strip trade as part of a project, Anna settled
Booty Clappin’, P-poppin’, Shake Dancing / 140


--- PAGE 160 ---
into an easy conversation, answering my questions forth-
rightly as management moved about and the other dancers
looked on in curiosity.
Between stories of petty rivalries, stolen wardrobes, accu-
sations of poaching someone’s “trick,” drug and alcohol use
by dancers to self-medicate or loosen inhibitions, and covert
prostitution, she revealed that she preferred working the af-
ternoon shift with its preponderance of mature, discreet, and
oftentimes married men as opposed to the “disrespectful”
younger men who frequented the club during the evenings.
She was a mother of three. She worked the evening shift at a
“big box” retailer. The Slip was extra money. She liked to
read, naming a few popular ﬁction titles.
While most dancers refer to male patrons as “marks,” the
adoption of the word “trick,” a word usually relegated to
sex-trade work, reveals some overlap, not in practice as a
general rule, but certainly in theory, between the strip trade
and prostitution. The “disrespect” Anna abhorred by the
young black men was related to their lack of restraint and
their attempts to treat the dancers like “ho’s” and “tricks.”
The men assumed that because their bodies (or at least a look
and a lap dance) were purchasable, that the women were
sexually available. Jacklyn “Diva” Bush also wrote of this
slippage among customers even at the high-end Gold Club:
Most of the customers who came into the Gold Club came in
for conversation, for a little attention, then the other ten per-
cent were looking for a little action. . . . they get this thought
that since this is a strip club their mind ﬂips—no it’s a
whorehouse. They forget they’re in an adult entertainment
establishment and so they offer money for sex.
23
Booty Clappin’, P-poppin’, Shake Dancing / 141


--- PAGE 161 ---
Exotic dancers sell fantasies. A strip club dancer will be and
say whatever you want—for a price. Indeed, the dancer’s job
is to ﬁgure out what it is the customer wants and sell it to
him (or her). In some respects, she is the ultimate hustler,
trickster, and performance artist as she ﬁnagles the interplay
of female agency and faux passivity.
Though strip clubs are generally envisioned as places
where men can go to unwind with no fear of female rejection
or emotional investment, as the women are there uniquely to
service them, the gendered dynamics in strip clubs are more
intricate. The appropriation of “trick” and “tricking” from
prostitute vernacular to refer to their predominantly male
clientele is a psychologically protective gesture; it is an emo-
tional enabler to stripping for the women. It allows simul-
taneously a deliberate swipe at those male-cherished con-
cepts of manhood and masculinity and a counter to the “ho
stigma” attached to stripping. To be tricked by the trickster
is to be a mark, weak, in this case, having a weakness of
and for ﬂesh. And that weakness is exploited by women for
money. The “pimp-ho” nexus shifts in the strip club. In
principle, the prototypical male pimp is endowed with an
uncanny ability to smooth talk women (ho’s) into selling
their bodies for his proﬁt; he in turn offers protection. More-
over, the male pimp not only receives proﬁts from his stable
but oftentimes sex. In the culture of hip hop, the pimp is
gloriﬁed as a player of many women, a stud who sexes and
uses women emotionally and physically. In the strip club,
men become “ho’s” and the dancers become the “pimps,” as
they trick men out of the money they’ve labored for outside
the club, using a combination of smooth talk and exploita-
tion of male desire through fantasy. The men, pimped for
Booty Clappin’, P-poppin’, Shake Dancing / 142


--- PAGE 162 ---
their monies, receive ostensibly only the illusion of sex—in-
deed everything but.
***
As the strip club’s gender dynamics bleed over into hip hop
generationers’ everyday lives, they present another knotty
layer in black gender politics. Strip clubs have always been
on the scene. That a younger generation of black men have
the access, means, and desire to frequent them is a new phe-
nomenon—one part tied to wealth generation in the United
States, the other to our commodity culture in which the
most intimate of interpersonal relationships is rendered arti-
ﬁcial, public, and purchasable.
For young black women, the transactional nature of hip
hop generation strip trade relationships offers an alternative
model to the “more for women” power feminism deftly ar-
ticulated in Naomi Wolf’s 1993 manifesto, Fire with Fire:
The New Female Power and How to Use It.
24 These seem-
ingly empowering transactions appear to run roughshod over
the privileged status of black masculinity. Women purpose-
fully use what they have to get what they want—whether it
be sex, money, or some combination thereof—in the same
way that men use money for all and sundry deal brokering.
Inside and outside the strip clubs, hip hop generation men
are perceived as potential marks, tricks, and ho’s by hip
hop generation women—wanna-be players who can now be
just as easily played, sexed, and shook down for money as
long as the men are led to believe they can “hit it.” Young
women were once upon a time willing to give the “self-
help-return-to-a-pre-feminist-era” counsels of Ellen Fein and
Sherrie Schneider’s The Rules a try in order to gain respect,
Booty Clappin’, P-poppin’, Shake Dancing / 143


--- PAGE 163 ---
commitment, and hopefully marriage. From mundane tele-
phone etiquette (don’t call him and rarely return his calls
— Rule Five) to the intricacies of the mating/dating rituals,
The Rules dispense good old-fashioned “let the man take the
lead” (Rule Seventeen) advice. At the bottom, there is still a
battle of the sexes raging. But women are encouraged to re-
turn to coy and demure rules of engagement. This genera-
tion of women, perhaps a bit more mercenary, are also more
likely to have multiple sexual partners to complement their
multifaceted lives. They are practitioners of a swaggering
black female masculinity, hence not especially concerned
with such triﬂes—at least in the short run. They are the
“new niggaz.”
That sexism and misogyny are the sources of this recur-
ring gender trouble is undeniable. Hip hop generation young
women and girls appear to be rummaging around a junk-
yard of race and gender stereotypes for alternatives to sys-
tematic practices and biases in media, in their communities,
and in their relationships, which have devalued them and
shorn to scraps their selfhood. Sex becomes an easy standby,
a helpmate in the search for power for those who feel legiti-
mately disempowered.
More fascinating and disturbing still than hip hop genera-
tion men’s motivations for frequenting strip clubs and the
attendant merger of consumer capitalism, pop culture, and
sex, along with young black women’s own riffs on these new
genders scripts, is that hip hop’s most sexist and misogynist
inclinations in music videos, on DVDs ( Shake Dance and
The Strip Game ), and CDs have provided the only forum
for hip hop generation black women’s experiences in the sex
Booty Clappin’, P-poppin’, Shake Dancing / 144


--- PAGE 164 ---
entertainment industry to be publicly debated, scrutinized,
and endlessly parsed. Middle-class autobiographical strip
narratives on the order of Lily Burana’s Strip City, Elizabeth
Eaves’s Bare: On Women, Dancing, Sex, and Power, Dia-
mond’s A Stripper’s Tail: Confessions of a Las Vegas Strip-
per, Lauri Lewin’s Naked Is the Best Disguise: My Life as a
Stripper, Lacey Lane’s Confessions of a Stripper: Tales from
The VIP Room, and Heidi Mattson’s Ivy League Stripper
certainly reveal the beauty, gender, and class hierarchies and
racial demographics of clubs, the prevalence of covert prosti-
tution, and, more importantly, black women’s marginality in
our understanding of the strip trade. The sheer number of
books by white women, autobiographical and scholarly, on
stripping as opposed to the southern containment and mar-
ginalization of Jacklyn “Diva” Bush’s The Gold Room to
the Court Room —t o date the ﬁrst black woman’s insider’s
account of the inner workings of an exclusive gentlemen’s
club—highlight how hip hop generation black women’s ex-
periences in the strip trade can be glossed over and ignored
by mainstream publishers and in popular culture. Whereas
white women’s strip trade tales are pitched as “why good
girls from good families do nasty, naughty things” or as tales
of sexual liberation that border on thong-feminist tracts, the
glossing over of black women’s strip narratives effectively
renders such experiences pedestrian, mundane, and unmar-
ketable. And yet, black women’s bodies are ubiquitous—
from strip clubs to porn to hip hop videos; they have been
critical to popular culture’s promulgation of “stripper chic,”
and indeed hip hop culture in its latest permutation. But
black women’s voices and stories are not being heard. And
Booty Clappin’, P-poppin’, Shake Dancing / 145


--- PAGE 165 ---
what those voices and stories have to say about the state
of hip hop generation sexual politics is rendered inconse-
quential.
Operating perhaps with the assumption that there is no
readership for such work, The New York Times bestselling
debut of Karrine Steffans’s Confessions of a Video Vixen,
who stripped in between bedding hip hop stars, will hope-
fully disprove such erroneous bottom-line publishing theo-
ries. The experiences of Anna, Steffans, the women in the
ﬂawed Shake Dance and The Strip Game documentaries,
and Bush present black women’s lives and work in the strip
trade as varied, highly paradoxical, and as worthy of telling
as white women’s. If for no other reason than because hip
hop culture is literally “waist deep” in the strip trade, these
interviews, memoirs, and documentaries tell us a great deal
about the troubling gender-clotted state of hip hop genera-
tion relationships and the impact these issues can have on
black women’s lives inside and outside the sex work industry.
The rapid expansion and signiﬁcant revenue generation of
gentlemen’s clubs domestically exposes plainly the persistent
patriarchal desire for passive, sexually available women.
Young women who are not involved in the strip trade are
freighted with the “cater to you” expectations that are part
and parcel of strip club culture. Women in the strip trade
ﬁnd that the illusions they sell are conﬂated with the prac-
tices of the sex trade industry. These male-centric ideas and
expectations are nothing new. The melding of strip club cul-
ture with hip hop culture resuscitates these ideas and expec-
tations with new life, meanings, and socio-cultural outlets;
they inform part of the new gender politics. Young women’s
Booty Clappin’, P-poppin’, Shake Dancing / 146


--- PAGE 166 ---
push back against these dated concepts informs the other
part of the new gender politics. A reliably feminist resistance
to such sexist expectations by young women joins in tension
with the practice of black female masculinity where mim-
icry (of the worst of male behavior) and conformity (to the
stereotypes of female sexuality) masquerade as women’s lib-
eration. Like hip hop culture’s offering of sexual liberation
and expressivity to young black women, the “new niggaz”
pose is but a sow’s ear. It is a perversion of freedom, as it
draws its cache not from politics but from the wells patri-
archy has left exclusively to women: sex and beauty. On the
surface at least and perhaps individually, the ends, as the
cliché goes, seem to justify the means—female power seems
to be achieved. But sex and beauty as trade commodities are
depreciating assets. And for young black women as a group
what accrues are harrowing statistics on sexually transmit-
ted infections (STI), unwanted pregnancy, elective abortion
as birth control, poverty, and incarceration.
Booty Clappin’, P-poppin’, Shake Dancing / 147


--- PAGE 167 ---



--- PAGE 168 ---
149
coda
or a Few Last Words on Hip Hop and Feminism
I myself have never been able to ﬁgure out pre-
cisely what feminism is. I only know that people
call me a feminist whenever I express sentiments
that differentiate me from a doormat.
— Zadie Smith , On Beauty
his book has now come
full circle. Where we began with a discussion of hip hop and
feminism, it seems only appropriate to conclude where we
began, namely by revisiting these polemics surrounding fem-
inism—where it intersects and faces off with hip hop and
how young black women dicker with them both. While race
may still be the conundrum of American culture—how we
talk about it or not—feminism and hip hop are our culture’s
lightning rods for criticism, America’s whipping girl and boy
on issues from sexuality to declining family values. They
may make strange bedfellows. But bedmates they are.
Hip hop is an obvious land mine of contradictions that
we as women painstakingly negotiate and renegotiate. From
every angle covered in this book, the sexism and sexual
exploitation prevalent in hip hop culture continues to be
a needling source of annoyance, frustration, and resent-
ment. Eighteen-year-old college freshmen Sela
1 related in our


--- PAGE 169 ---
discussion of hip hop music and its by-product, the music
video:
Hip hop and sexuality go hand-in-hand now. Before it was
just hip hop. Now it’s hip hop and girls [video models] be-
cause you don’t see women [rappers]. . . . When I think
about rapping and the types of songs, I already know what
the video is going to be like. It’s all about videos because they
wouldn’t sell if they were just on the radio because their
lyrics suck! They really suck! . . . With videos now you know
what’s coming up next and you want to turn the channel.
But it catches you and you are just sitting there like, “I can-
not believe this!”
2
And Grace, her classmate at a small liberal arts college in
New York, adds, “They are starting to glorify the ‘pimp/ho.’
They get Bishop Don ‘Magic’ Juan out of Chicago [and]
bring him up in his lime-green gold and have him stand on
stage with a diamond cup. I mean what is that?! The whole
‘pimp/ho’ thing is really disturbing.” The Archbishop Don
“Magic” Juan, a former street hustler and pimp in Chicago,
has achieved cult-like status as the “original true player”
3 in
hip hop. He is author of Pimpnosis and From Pimpstick to
the Pulpit and has appeared in popular ﬁlms Starsky and
Hutch, S.W.A.T., Old School, and American Pimp, as well
as in music videos such as 50 Cent’s “P.I.M.P.” and Nelly’s
“Pimp Juice.” With a guest invitee list that rivals the BET,
MTV, VH 1, and Grammy music award shows, the Don
“Magic” Juan annually hosts “The Player’s Ball” in Chicago.
The ball was featured in the HBO special Pimps Up, Ho’s
Down.
From the young women’s perspective, hip hop culture
with respect to gender and representation is abysmal. De-
Coda / 150


--- PAGE 170 ---
spite the pimps up–ho’s down ethos represented by the
Bishop and vaunted in popular culture, hip hop remains so-
cially viable and relevant, if for but a few “conscious” rap-
pers. Twenty-one-year-old Lauryn, an aspiring law student,
suggests:
Hip hop has been deﬁnitely relevant. I don’t know that it has
been more political in my generation. It used to be more po-
litical; it used to be much more conscious. You have a strain
of conscious rappers like Nas or Mos Def or Jurassic Five
or Common. It [politically conscious rap] still exists, but be-
cause of capitalism it has become such a commercialized in-
dustry. The politics has been set aside for money-making.
4
Though the politics have been tempered by money, hip hop
is given a generational relevancy pass that is withheld from
feminism. Indeed, feminism has much work to do. As stated
in the book’s introductory chapter, every socio-cultural and
political phenomenon has its quasi-saints and wholesale sin-
ners. And thus, staggering stereotypes of feminism abound:
some due to various media and some kicked up in our very
own backyards.
The media-promulgated 1968 image of bra-burning, sup-
posedly man-hating women at the Miss America Pageant in
Atlantic City has been seared into the minds of American
women. Jennifer, a twenty-something college senior, spoke
about her experiences in a women’s studies course during
her ﬁrst year of college. She took the course because of her
growing interest in issues relating to women and was told
to “reject the penis.”
5 In mock ruefulness, she explained,
“I can’t.” Even black feminism seemed a risky prospect be-
cause of perceived indoctrination into, as Lauryn offered, “a
militant-no-men-type” movement.
Coda / 151


--- PAGE 171 ---
What feminism is and what feminists look like conformed
to all and sundry stereotypes. That is, until the fashionably
hip (“feminists are notoriously bad dressers, preferring Bir-
kenstocks”), witty (“feminists are serious with quite dour
personalities”), smart and professionally accomplished (this
is to be expected given feminists’ ambitious nature and singu-
lar focus on career), stunning (“feminists are not especially
attractive, eschewing all things associated with beauty”)
Joan Morgan arrived on the scene with a memoir. Morgan
seemed the perfect antidote to the sexist morass that has be-
come hip hop and young black women’s antifeminist resist-
ance. Her When Chickenheads Come Home to Roost: My
Life as a Hip-Hop Feminist embraces both the untidiness
of feminism and hip hop, opening a third space called hip
hop feminism, which has room for the sextuplets (Shawnna,
Trina, Lil’ Kim, Remy Ma, Jacki-O, Foxy Brown), Bitch
magazine, and so forth. The melding of two seemingly dis-
parate movements—one primarily cultural, the other polit-
ical—produces, as Morgan suggests, “a feminism brave
enough to fuck with the grays. . . . We need a feminism com-
mitted to ‘keeping it real’ . . . where truth is no longer black
and white but subtle, intriguing shades of gray.”
6
The linking of hip hop and feminism not only represents
the simultaneous generational relevancy of both, but has the
effect of offering hip hop the much-needed progressive gen-
der analysis it lacks and feminism the ground it is undeni-
ably losing. While various political pundits, news organiza-
tions, and even twenty- and thirty-something women like
those I spoke with have been sounding the death knell for
feminism, the Canadian-published magazine This with its
Coda / 152


--- PAGE 172 ---
2005 May–June article “Feminism for Sale” shouted it from
the rafters. According to Joseph Heath and Andrew Potter,
the authors of “Feminism for Sale: The Real Reason the
Women’s Movement Is Losing Momentum,”
There is widespread concern that ... much of the momentum
has been lost. One area where this shows up is in the unbend-
ing refusal by many . . . women to identify as feminists. . . .
[They] enjoy the beneﬁts that were won in the hard-fought
battles between the sexes, but won’t concede that the war
needed to be fought in the ﬁrst place. So despite the easy self-
conﬁdence with which these women are taking over universi-
ties and preparing to dominate the job market in the coming
decades, the old guard feels the war isn’t over [Heath and
Potter’s emphasis]. . . . But what if these young women have
legitimate concerns? When people say that they are not femi-
nist, even though they believe that men and women should
be equal, it implies within in their minds, feminism is some-
thing other than simply a belief in the fundamental equality
of men and women. The question therefore becomes, what is
this extra baggage that feminism has acquired?
7
Fair question. But the truth of the matter is that feminism
has not acquired extra baggage, at least none that cannot be
readily checked. The continued framing of women’s concerns
as “battles of the sexes” and “wars” in media, however, does
not appeal to women who are weary of battle. And as
women, speciﬁcally young black women, who highly value
media (television, telecommunications, Internet, and adver-
tising) according to a consumer proﬁle conducted by The
U.S. Multicultural Women Market, such continued framing
of feminism as antagonistic to men, as sex battles, or as gen-
der wars is particularly uninspiring and uninviting. As much
Coda / 153


--- PAGE 173 ---
as we are a “keep it real” generation, we are also a quintes-
sentially “no more drama” generation.
Though many of us have never engaged in protracted
struggles for equality or have been faced with the kinds of
disabling discrimination that has no legal recourse, we have
mothers, grandmothers, aunts, and others who have. Since
many hard-fought battles have been won, enough to not
substantially interfere with our access to goods and services,
we have come to feel it’s high time that someone enjoy those
beneﬁts. Why not us? And further, since part of the battles
and wars involve not just taking on racism and sexism at
large, but more speciﬁcally continuing black male chauvin-
ism in the face of the grimmest statistics about heterosexual
dating and marriage patterns, escalating black male incarcer-
ation rates, the HIV/AIDS pandemic, and racial disparities in
health care (namely prostate cancer prevention and detec-
tion), many of us have deduced that a commitment to femi-
nism or any kind of social justice movement calls for way
too much, as we like to say, “energy” and “negativity”—
drama.
At the bottom, feminism is not widely understood as a
movement to end sexism, racism, and/or male privilege, but
as predominantly and unalterably white and as a move to
unseat aspiring black men. For many feminism is the equiva-
lent of kicking a black man while he is down, kneeing him in
the groin to make him holler, “Uncle,” when we know full
well that that groin will more than likely be consumed by
prostate cancer because of unequal access to health care.
Such daunting complexities propel arguments regarding
feminism’s generational relevance. Yet it is precisely the lan-
Coda / 154


--- PAGE 174 ---
guage of feminism and the political gains made by feminists
that allowed young women like Kim Osorio and Michelle
Joyce to pursue legal recourse for gender discrimination and
sexual harassment during their tenure at The Source maga-
zine—even if many, feminist and not, question whether the
representation of women in The Source under Osorio’s stew-
ardship as editor-at-large helped foster the very environment
that both women protested.
Rather than speak of mergers, I, like the organizers of the
landmark 2005 “Hip Hop and Feminism” conference at the
University of Chicago, merely call for continued critical dia-
logue where the sorting of issues about race and class dis-
parities, gender inequalities and heterosexism, and consumer
culture can occur. I am not convinced that feminism is not
motivated by exacting self-examination and self-criticism.
Ia m convinced that hip hop culture is only beginning in
earnest this self-reﬂective process and feminism is crucial
to working through some of those contradictions. Besides,
given my past pick-up work, I think feminism mixes it up
rather well with the grays. That women, some of them femi-
nists, some not, challenge hip hop’s rap mavens to dialogue
about the sexist implications of their full-time work demon-
strates an openness to various shades of gray that border on
graphite. While I too concede that feminism must continue
to grapple with the grays that challenge us as women, I am,
by way of conclusion, not a hip hop feminist; I continue to
be a bit weary of identifying myself with, in the words of
social critic Mark Anthony Neal, “a dying musical genre.”
8
Ia m however a feminist writer of the hip hop generation
who recognizes that whatever we call ourselves—feminists,
Coda / 155


--- PAGE 175 ---
hip hop feminists, or not—hip hop intersects with gender in
ways that have us women renegotiating and debating the
veritable gray areas taken up in Pimps Up, Ho’s Down in-
volving female pleasure, an afﬁrming sexuality, beauty, and
women’s labor.
Coda / 156


--- PAGE 176 ---
notes
notes to the prologue
1. These dates are offered up in Bakari Kitwana’s The Hip-Hop
Generation: Young Blacks and the Crisis in African-American Culture
(New York: Basic Books, 2002).
notes to the introduction
1. Nielson Media Research, May 2004.
2. Bakari Kitwana’s The Hip-Hop Generation: Young Blacks and
the Crisis in African-American Culture(New York: Basic Books,2002);
also see Kitwana’s discussion of the “millennium generation” in Why
White Kids Love Hip-Hop (New York: Basic Books, 2005). Also see
Mark Anthony Neal’s Soul Babies: Black Popular Culture and the
Post-Soul Aesthetic (New York: Routledge, 2002); and Joan Morgan’s
When Chickenheads Come Home to Roost: My Life a a Hip-Hop
Feminist (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1998).
3. The ﬁrst convention mapped out a course of political action for
hip hop generationers that included a 5-Point National Hip-Hop Polit-
ical Agenda.
4. Marc Anthony Neal, “Foreword” in Open Mike: Reﬂections on
Philosophy, Race, Sex, Culture and Religion (New York: Basic Books,
2003), xiv.
5. “RIAA Consumer Proﬁle 2003,” Recording Industry Associa-
tion of America.
6. See Charisse Jones and Kumea Shorter-Gooden, Shifting: The
Double Lives of Black Women in America (New York: HarperCollins,
2003); Marita Golden, Don’t Play in the Sun: One Woman’s Journey
through the Color Complex (New York: Doubleday, 2004).
157


--- PAGE 177 ---
7. Vibe, November 2003, 66.
8. Motivational Educational Entertainment, This Is My Reality:
The Price of Sex, An Inside Look at Black Urban Youth Sexuality and
the Role of the Media, 2005, 26–27.
9. Julia Beverly, “Trick Daddy interview with Julia Beverly,”
Ozone, November 2005, 50.
10.A ll citations from author’s interview with ﬁlmmaker in 2005.
11. Erin Raber, “Hip-Hop Her: Women Take Over the Under-
ground Scene,” Curve Magazine, 10:5, August 2000, 20.
12. Joan Morgan, When Chickenheads Come Home to Roost, 58.
13. See McWhorter’s “How Hip-Hop Holds Blacks Back,” City
Journal, Summer 2003.
notes to chapter 1
1. See Serge R. Denisoff, Inside MTV (New Brunswick, NJ: Rut-
gers University Press, 1988); and E. Ann Kaplan, Rocking Around
the Clock : Music Television, Postmodernism, and Consumer Culture
(New York: Methuen, 1987).
2.G reg Tate, “Nigs R Us, or How Blackfolk Became Fetish Ob-
jects,” in Everything But the Burden: What White People Are Taking
from Black Culture (New York: Broadway Books, 2003), 7.
3. It is no coincidence that I deliberately selected movies, directors,
and ﬁlms that seem to resonate with the thug/gangsta creed of top-
shelf hip hop artists.
4. Johnnie L. Roberts, “Fine Tuning a New Act,” Newsweek, Feb-
ruary 7, 2005, 40.
5.A ll citations from author’s interview with the ﬁlmmaker in
2005.
6. Daniel R. Coleridge, “Top Model’s Yaya Stays Strong,” TV
Guide Insider Online, December 23, 2004.
7. Ruth La Ferla, “Generation E.A.: Ethnically Ambiguous” in
Fashion & Style Section, The New York Times, December 28, 2003, 1.
8. Rob Marriott, Vibe Hip-Hop Divas (New York: Three Rivers
Press, 2001), 134.
Notes to the Introduction / 158


--- PAGE 178 ---
9. Ibid., 136.
10. Ibid., 136.
11. Charisse Jones, “Black Women Make ‘Shifts’ to Succeed,” USA
Today, January 2, 2004, A13. A recent study of wage earnings among
college-educated women found however that black and Asian women
outearn their similarly educated white female counterparts ($ 41,100,
$43,700, and $37,800, respectively). Latino women with undergradu-
ate degrees earned $ 37,600. College-educated black men ($ 45,000)
earned less than white, Latino ($ 49,000), and Asian ($ 52,000) men.
All minority men earned signiﬁcantly less than white men, who took in
$66,000. See The Chronicle of Higher Education, Section: Govern-
ment & Politics, Volume 51:31, 2004, A22.
12.T arget Market News, “The Buying Power of Black America,”
2003.
13.V eronica MacDonald, “Ethnic Hair Care: Acquisitions Are
Changing the Market, But When It Comes to Product Development,
Moisturization Remains the Mantra,” Happi-Household & Personal
Products Industry, 39(4): 60(9), April 2002.
14. Allison Samuels with Mary Carmichael, “Smooth Operations,”
Newsweek, July 5, 2004, 48.
15. The U.S. Multicultural Women Market, July 2004.
16. Erica Kennedy, Bling! (New York: Miramax Books, 2004).
17.T elephone interview with Lewis in 2005.
18. Allison Samuels, “Time to Tell It Like It Is: Sisters Talk Frankly
about Black Men and White Colleagues, Money, Beauty—and the
Prospect of Having to Choose between Racial Disloyalty and Being
Alone,” Newsweek, March 3, 2003, 52.
19. Advertisement, XXL, June 2005, 121.
20. In Marshall Eakin’s Brazil: The Once and Future Country
(New York: St. Martin’s, 1997), 136–37.
21. Julia Chapin, “Beauty and the Beach,” Condé Nast Traveler,
May 2005, http://www.concierge.com/cntraveler/articles/detail?article
Id=6057.
22. Matt Barone, “Ja Rule: Rates the Hits,” AllHipHop.com, Oc-
tober 2004.
Notes to Chapter 1 / 159


--- PAGE 179 ---
23. Frantz Fanon, The Wretched of the Earth (New York: Grove,
1963), 153–54.
24. “Brazil Struggles to Curb Sex Tourism,” BBC News World Edi-
tion, December 2, 2004.
25. Norman Boucher, “Is There a Doctor on the Set?” Brown
Alumni Magazine, September–October 2004, 55.
26. Department of Commerce’s Consumer Expenditure Survey,
2003 and 2004.
27. Peter Wagner, “Opening Doors to Bahia,” Brazzil Online Mag-
azine, in Enterprise and Culture Section, April 2004.
28. ChgoBachelor31_4u, “Dos & Don’ts,” AfricanAmericanMen
BrazilianWomen@groups.msn.com, April 10, 2005, 8:45 a.m.
29. bgcaliber1, “Marrying a Brazilian Woman and Bringing Her
Back to the States,” AfricanAmericanMenBrazilianWomen@groups.msn
.com, March 14, 2005, 5:00 a.m.
30. Frantz Fanon, Black Skin, White Masks (New York: Grove,
1967), 177.
31. frihazeleyes30067, “I’d Like to Address Some Concerns,”
March 20, 2005, 9:24 p.m.
notes to chapter 2
1. See Mama Speciﬁc Productions, “Aishah Shahidah Simmons
NO! Interview,” http://www.msppress.com/afro_mama.html.
2.W ells also discussed the interracial sexual violence and lynching
directed at black women; but for most, “southern horrors” has come
to stand for white male–black female sexual violence and black male
lynching.
3. Katie Roiphe, The Morning After: Sex, Fear, and Feminism (Bos-
ton: Little, Brown, 1994), 6.
4.N ational Crime Victimization Survey 2004. Sexual assault in the
United States occurs every two and a half minutes.
5. Ibid.
6. See statistics from 1997 to 2002 from the U.S. Department of
Justice, Bureau of Justice, National Crime Victimization Survey, and
Notes to Chapter 1 / 160


--- PAGE 180 ---
the National Institute of Justice and Centers for Disease Control. Also
see Rape, Abuse and Incest National Network archives (RAINN). For
stats on white male rapists, see U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of
Justice Statistics, Sex Offences and Offenders, An Analysis of Data on
Rape and Sexual Assault, 1997, 24, 25, 34.
7. Jon Carmanica, “Seductive,” XXL, June 2005, 96.
8. Earl Simmons, also known as DMX, as told to Smokey D. Fon-
taine, E.A.R.L.: The Autobiography of DMX (New York: HarperCol-
lins, 2003), 79–80. Simmons also relates his ﬁrst sexual encounter,
which was more akin to sexual predation by an older woman.
9.R obin D. G. Kelley, Race Rebels: Culture, Politics, and the
Black Working Class (New York: Free Press, 1994), 218.
10.M iller-Young and I met at an Association for the Study of
the Worldwide African Diaspora in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in October
2005 where she was presenting her work on black women in the porn
industry and I was presenting a paper on beauty culture and African
American men’s sex tourism in Brazil.
11. Luther Campbell and John R. Miller, As Nasty as They Wanna
Be: The Uncensored Story of Luther Campbell of the 2 Live Crew
(Fort Lee, NJ: Barricade Books, 1992), 152–53, 157.
12. Ibid.
13.K imberlé Crenshaw, “Beyond Racism and Misogyny: Black
Feminism and 2 Live Crew,” Boston Review: A Political and Literary
Forum 16, December 1991, http://bostonreview.net/BR16.6/crenshaw
.html.
14.T upac Shakur, “Wonda Why They Call U Bitch,” All Eyez on
Me, 1996.
15.S ee Jim Derogatis, “R. Kelly Flouting His Foes,” Chicago Sun-
Times, October 1, 2004, 57, and Letter to Editor, “Sun-Times Not
Telling All about Kelly Critic,” Chicago Sun-Times, October 14, 2004,
56.
16. Mary Mitchell, “Underage Sex Is No Joke, Despite R. Kelly’s
Antics,” Chicago Sun-Times, October 3, 2004, 14.
17. See http://www.riaa.org (the Recording Industry Association of
America Web site).
Notes to Chapter 2 / 161


--- PAGE 181 ---
18. See the cover of “ XXL Presents Hip-Hop Soul Vol. 1,” XXL,
Spring 2004.
19. Cited from the article “Sisters Act,” The Village Voice, July 25,
1995, 15.
20. Deﬁnition from U.S. Department of Justice and Ofﬁce for Vic-
tims of Crime, Acts 1992, No. 617.
21. Saptosa Foster, “Behind the Walls,” XXL, November 2004,
126.
22. According to East Baton Rouge Prosecutor Sue Bernie. See
Marlene Naanes, “Rapper Mystikal Gets 6-Year Term: Musician Con-
victed of Sexual Battery,” Baton Rouge Advocate, January 16, 2004,
1B, 2B; Marlene Naanes, “Mystikal’s Sentencing Delayed over Objec-
tion of Video Viewing,” Baton Rouge Advocate, December 4, 2003,
7A; Marlene Naanes, “Mystikal, Two Bodyguards Plead Guilty to Sex
Charges,” Baton Rouge Advocate, June 27, 2003, 1B, 2B.
23. CNN Entertainment News, January 16, 2004; also see Marlene
Naanes, “Rapper Mystikal Gets 6-Year Term” and “Mystikal’s Sen-
tencing Delayed.”
24. Marlene Naanes, “Rapper Mystikal Gets 6-Year Term.”
25. Jamie Foster Brown, “Mystikal to Fans: I’ll Be Alright,” Sis-
ter2Sister, October 2003, 74.
26.B rown, “Mystikal,” 74.
27. Nekesa Mumbi Moody, “Jailed Lil’ Kim Casts Herself as Vic-
tim,” USA Today, September 22, 2005, http://www.usatoday.com/life/
people/2005-09-22-lil-kim_x.htm?csp=34.
28. See Nat Hentoff’s “The Public Rape of Catharine MacKin-
non,” The Village Voice, January 4, 1994, 16–17.
29.T anya Horeck, Public Rape: Representing Violation in Fiction
and Film (New York: Routledge, 2004), 3–4.
30. Saptosa Foster, “Behind the Wall,” XXL, November 2004,
126.
31. Letter of apology is part of The State of Colorado v. Kobe
Bean Bryant trial documents.
32. See pages 42–43 of trial transcripts, The State of Colorado v.
Kobe Bean Bryant.
Notes to Chapter 2 / 162


--- PAGE 182 ---
33. Interview with ﬁlmmaker in spring 2005 in Nashville, Tennes-
see.
34. Clip from Fallen Champ: The Untold Story of Mike Tyson,
NBC, February 12, 1993.
notes to chapter 3
1. See Karrine Steffans, Confessions of a Video Vixen (New York:
Amistad, 2005); also see XXL: Hip-Hop on a Higher Level, January–
February 2005.
2. Bebe Buell’s Rebel Heart: An American Rock and Roll Journey
was published in 2001 (New York: St. Martin’s Grifﬁn).
3. “Data Show Value of College Degree,” The Chronicle of Higher
Education, Section: Government & Politics, Volume51:31, 2004,A 22.
4. George Gmelch and Patricia San Antonio’s “Groupies and Amer-
ican Baseball,” Journal of Sport and Social Issues, 22:1, 1998, 32–45.
5. In Derrick Bell, Faces at the Bottom of the Well: The Perma-
nence of Racism (New York: Basic Books, 1993), he argues that white
racism is a permanent and necessary part of our society rather than an
aberrant excrescence.
6. Ozone Magazine Third Annual Sex Issue, November 2005, 61.
7. The authors of “Groupies and American Baseball” argue a simi-
lar point.
8. 213, “Groupie Luv,” The Hard Way, 2004.
9. Julia Beverly, “JB’s 2¢,” Ozone, February 2005, 11.
10. “Groupie Confessions, Volume 2,” Ozone, December–January
2005, 13.
11. Interview with Julia Beverly at Africasgateway.com, January 4,
2005.
12. Reference to Elizabeth Maguire’s interracial academic mystery
novel, Thinner, Blonder, Whiter(New York: Carroll & Graf, 2002).
13.T elephone conversation with Des Barres in fall 2005.
14. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), HIV/AIDS
among Women, 2004; CDC, HIV/AIDS among African Americans,
2005.
Notes to Chapter 3 / 163


--- PAGE 183 ---
15. Interview with Teresa Wilitz, “More Confessions of the Video
Vixen,” Essence, October 2005, 270.
16. Elizabeth Mendez Berry, “Love Hurts: Rap’s Black Eye,” Vibe,
March 2005, 162–68.
17. Karrine Steffans, Confessions of a Video Vixen, 109–10.
18. Lola Ogunnaike, “Turning the Tables on Rap’s Player List,”
The New York Times, July 3, 2005, 10.
19. “Groupie Confessions,” Ozone, November 2004, 21.
20. “Internet Goin’ Nuts,” Ozone, August 2005, A11.
21.M ichele Norris, “Washington, D.C., Battles AIDS Health Cri-
sis,” All Things Considered, February 7, 2006.
22. “Internet Goin’ Nuts,” A11.
23. “Groupie Confessions,” 20–21.
24. Nelly has a scholarship fund called P.I.M.P.
25. “Groupie Confessions, Volume 6,” Ozone, May 2005, 15.
26. Gmelch and San Antonio, “Groupies and American Baseball,”
37–39.
27. Ibid., 35.
28. “Groupie Confessions, Volume 2,” 13.
29. “Groupie Confessions, Volume 3,” Ozone, February 2005, 13.
30. “Groupie Confessions,” 20–21.
31. Ibid., 20.
32. “Groupie Confessions, Volume 7,” Ozone, August 2005, 13.
33. “Groupie Confessions,” 21.
34. Ibid., 20.
35.N aomi Wolf, The Beauty Myth: How Images of Beauty Are
Used Against Women (New York: Anchor, 1992), 291.
36. “Groupie Confessions, Volume 2,” 13.
37. Ibid., 13.
38. Motivational Educational Entertainment, This Is My Reality:
The Price of Sex, An Inside Look at Black Urban Youth Sexuality and
the Role of the Media, 2005, 26.
39. Ibid., 31.
40. Ibid., 31.
41. Meredith Davis, “Is AIDS Awareness a Paradox? Despite Pro-
Notes to Chapter 3 / 164


--- PAGE 184 ---
grams, Record Numbers of Blacks Are Infected or Dead,” Black Enter-
prise, June 2005, 46.
notes to chapter 4
1. Niki Turner, Sister2Sister, October 2002, 32.
2. Jacklyn “Diva” Bush, The Gold Club: The Jacklyn “Diva” Bush
Story, How I Went from the Gold Room to the Court Room (Los An-
geles: Milligan Books, 2003), 7.
3. Kitty Bean Yancey, “Stripping’s New Side,”USA Today,October
28, 2003, http://www.usatoday.com/life/2003-10-27-stripclubs_x.htm.
4. Jon Caramanica, “Seductive,” XXL, June 2005, 100.
5.Y ancey, “Stripping’s New Side”; Abigail Goldman, “Strip Clubs
Begin to See Other Beneﬁts of Women,” Las Vegas Sun, July 3, 2006,
http://www.lasvegassun.com/sunbin/sories/sun/ 2006/Jul/03/56667054
.html.
6. Motivational Educational Entertainment, This Is My Reality:
The Price of Sex, An Inside Look at Black Urban Youth Sexuality and
the Role of Media, 2005, 25, 39, 41.
7. Angelina Spencer, “The Erotic Economy,” Woodhull Freedom
Foundation and Federation, n.d., 1.
8. Robert Allen, Horrible Prettiness: Burlesque and American Cul-
ture (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1991); Alison
Kibler, Rank Ladies: Gender and Cultural Hierarchy in American
Vaudeville (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1999).
9. Dan Gunderson, “The Sex Industry Grows,” Minnesota Public
Radio, March 4, 2002.
10.Y ancey, “Stripping’s New Side.”
11. Ibid.
12. Julia Beverly Interview with Uncle Luke, Ozone, July 2006, 89.
13.F rom author’s interview with Anna at the Pink Slip in July
2005. All quotes attributed to Anna throughout this chapter are taken
from these interviews.
14. Niki Turner, “From Sister to Sister: Trina: The ‘Bad Girls,’ Part
I,” Sister2Sister, October 2002, 22.
Notes to Chapter 4 / 165


--- PAGE 185 ---
15. Ozone Magazine Third Annual Sex Issue, November 2005, 35.
16. Anna from the Pink Slip relates this information as well as
other dancers I interviewed at Magic City and The Pink Slip. See also
Chris Bruckert’s Taking It Off, Putting It On: Women in the Strip
Trade (Toronto: Women’s Press, 2002) and the documentary ﬁlms
Shake Dance (2002) and Strip Game (2005).
17.B ruckert, Taking It Off, 33–34.
18. Bush, The Gold Club, 11.
19. See Lily Burana, Strip City: A Stripper’s Farewell Journey
across America (New York: Miramax Books, 2001); Elisabeth Eaves,
Bare: The Naked Truth about Stripping (Emeryville, CA: Seal Press,
2004); and Strip Trade (2005).
20. Burana, Strip City, 219; Bush, The Gold Club, 62; July 2005
interview with Anna.
21. Burana, Strip City, 261.
22. Pervert’s row is in the front of the main stage.
23. Bush, The Gold Club, 90.
24.N aomi Wolf, Fire with Fire: The New Female Power and How
to Use It (New York: Ballantine Books, 1993), 138.
notes to chapter 5
1. The names of the college women interviewed have been changed.
2. Interview with the author, April 2004.
3. See the Archbishop’s Web site: http://www.thebishop.us.
4. Interview with author, April 2004.
5. Interview with author, April 2004.
6. Joan Morgan, When Chickenheads Come Home to Roost: My
Life as a Hip-Hop Feminist (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1998),
59, 62.
7. Joseph Heath and Andrew Potter, “Feminism for Sale,” This,
May–June 2005, 21.
8. Interview between Mark Anthony Neal and T. Denean Sharpley-
Whiting, “Hip Hop Not Your Pop’s Culture,” Duke Magazine 92:4,
July–August 2006, http://www.dukemagazine.duke.edu/dukemag/issues/
070806/hiphop1.html.
Notes to Chapter 4 / 166


--- PAGE 186 ---
index
167
2 Live Crew, xvi, 61–63, 120, 127
3D (TLC), 90
50 Cent, 24, 94, 150
106 & Park (TV show), 28, 119
Abercrombie and Fitch catalogs, 58
ACE National (Association of Club
Executives National), 124
The Adult Nightclubs Guide (on-
line directory), 123
Aerobic Striptease (music video),
121
African American men. See Black
men
African American Men & Brazilian
Women message board, 46, 49
African American women. See
Black women
African Americans. See Blacks
Against Our Will (Brownmiller),
55
Aguilera, Cristina, 126
“All About You” (Tupac Shakur),
23, 26
All the Women Are White, All the
Men Are Black, But Some of Us
Are Brave (Smith), xiv
AllHipHop.com, 43, 102
Almost Famous (ﬁlm), 86
American Sex Series (ﬁlm), 60
America’s Next Top Model(TV
show), xi, 28–29
Andrew, Tina, 17
AOL Black Voices (Web portal),
35
Appiah, Kwame Anthony, 31
Arie, India, 28
Artest, Ron, 71
The Artiﬁcial White Man (Crouch),
7–8
As Nasty as They Want to Be (2
Live Crew), 61–63
Ascriptive mulattas, 27–28, 32, 36
Avocet Travel and Entertainment,
46, 50
Bad Boy Entertainment, 88
Bailey, Moya, 20
Baker, Josephine, 129
Ball Four (Bouton), 104
“Balla Baby” (Chingy), 138
The Banger Sisters (ﬁlm), 86
Banks, Lloyd, “Groupie Love,” 15
Banks, Tyra, xi, 28, 29, 96
Bare: On Women, Dancing, Sex,
and Power (Eave), 145
Barnes, Dee, 59
Bates, Charletta, 129
Beals, Jennifer, 121
“Beautiful” (video), 40–42, 43, 51
Beauty culture, 27–49; in America,
30–31; ascriptive mulattas in,
27–28, 32, 36; beauty hierarchy,
35–36; “Black Is Beautiful,” 38;


--- PAGE 187 ---
Beauty culture (continued)
black men’s standard of beauty
for black women, 37–38; black
women’s beauty, 28–29; Brazil-
ian women, 39–49; desire for
the exotic, 37–39; ethnic ambi-
guity, 30–32; ethnic ambiguity
(Generation E.A.), 30–32, 35–
36, 37, 39; feminism, 152; Gen-
eration A.M., 36; Generation B.,
36; hip hop culture, 32–33, 36;
ideal of feminine beauty in hip
hop videos, 30, 37–39, 42; light-
skinned black women, 37; mu-
lattas, 39–44; plastic surgery,
34–35; “race” mixing, 30–31;
spending on personal care prod-
ucts, 34–35; whiteness in, 31
The Beauty Myth (Wolf), xi, 31–32
Beg for Mercy (G-Unit), 85
Bell, Kylie, 107
Ben Hur (ﬁlm), 125
Bend Hur (ﬁlm), 125
Berle, Milton, 124
Berman, Jay, 24–25
Berry, Elizabeth Mendez, “Love
Hurts: Rap’s Black Eye,” 98
Berry, Halle, 33, 121
“The Best of Both Worlds” (tour),
68
Best of Luke’s Freakshows(ﬁlm),
60
BET (Black Entertainment Televi-
sion) network: 106 & Park (TV
show), 28, 119; BET Uncut (TV
show), 3, 92; Caribbean
Rhythms (TV show), 24; lap
dance at 2005 Awards presenta-
tion, 121; market penetration, 3,
26; music videos on, 25, 26, 28;
Rap City (TV show), 28; “Rap It
Up” campaign, 112; rise of
Southern hip hop, 91
Beverly, Julia, 91–92, 96
Beyoncé (Beyoncé Knowles), 28, 37
“Beyond Racism and Misogyny:
Black Feminism and 2 Live
Crew” (Crenshaw), 63
Bgcaliber1, 47–48
Big Tigger, 101–103
Billboard (magazine), 119
“Bimbo eruptions,” paying for, 80
The Birth of a Nation (ﬁlm), 8,
30–31
“Bitch,” xvii–xviii, 127
Bitch (magazine), xvii–xviii, 152
“Bitches & Sistas” (Jay-Z), 85
Black Collegian (magazine), 66
Black-Eyed Peas, 7
“Black Is Beautiful,” 38
Black Lily Tour, 16
Black Macho and the Myth of the
Superwoman (Wallace), 66
“Black Marilyn Monroe,” 128
Black men: black masculinity, xvi,
51; black women, 59–60; Brazil,
44; Brazilian women, 46–49;
Bryant to, 80; “dicksmithing”
by, 88; earnings of college-
educated, 88; feminism, 154; of
the hip hop generation, 44, 51,
122, 143; “it ain’t no fun if my
homies can’t have none” mental-
ity, 79–80; “No!” to, 83; as
poster boys for sexual impropri-
ety, 70–71; standards of beauty
for black women, 37–38; strip
clubs, behavior in, 131–133,
141; West on, 59; white women,
38
Black Scholar (journal), 66
Black women: beauty of, 28–29;
Index / 168


--- PAGE 188 ---
black female masculinity, 144–
145, 147; black feminism, 151–
151; black lesbian hip hop art-
ists, 18–19; black men, 59–60;
black strippers/exotic dancers,
121, 129–131, 136, 145–146;
black women’s bodies in hip hop
culture, 63, 66; earnings, 33; 
education attainment, 34; gender
violence directed at, 81;
HIV/AIDS cases among, 94;
light-skinned black women, 37;
marriage rate, 34; “new niggaz,”
144–145, 147; “No!”, 67; non-
ethnically ambiguous black
women, 31–32; plastic surgery,
34–35; in professional/manage-
rial positions, 34; respectability,
65; responsibility for male sexual
impropriety, 82; sexual abuse of,
57; sexual assailability of, 67–
68; spending on personal care
products, 34; standards of
beauty for, 37–38; as strippers/
exotic dancers, 121, 129–131,
136, 145–146; young black
women (see Young black
women)
Black youth culture: attitude to-
ward lesbianism, 14; HIV/AIDS
cases, 112; prison culture and,
xvi; sexual activity in, 111–112,
122–123
BlackExoticDancers.com, 124
Blacks: black gender politics, 51,
122, 143; buying power, 44; call
and response tradition, 112;
HIV/AIDS prevention, 102; in-
come, 44; marketing of Brazil to,
45–46; racial defensiveness, 55;
respectability yoked to sexual
conservatism, 64–65, 127;
spending on travel, lodging,
transportation, 45–46
Bling! (Kennedy), 36
Block2Block (magazine), 91
Blow, Kurtis, 1
The Blueprint 2: The Gift & The
Curse (Jay-Z), 85
Boomerang (ﬁlm), 48
Born into the 90s (Kelly), 69
Bourland, J. David, 72, 76
Bouton, Jim, Ball Four, 104
Bowling for Columbine (ﬁlm), 56
Boyd, Todd, 80
Brawley, Tawana, 67
Brazil: black men, 44; marketing to
African Americans, 45–46; sex
tourism and prostitution, 44–45,
46–47, 50–51
Brazilian women, 39–49
Brazilmensclub.com, 46, 50
Brazzil Online Magazine, 46
Brown, Bobby, 99
Brown, Dawn “Camio,” 131, 133
Brown, James, “It’s a Man’s, Man’s
World,” 1
Brown, Jamie Foster, 73
“Brown Sugar” (Rolling Stones),
86
Brownmiller, Susan, Against Our
Will, 55
Bruckert, Chris, 129
Bryant, Kobe, 80–81, 105
Buckwild Bus Tour (ﬁlm), 60
Budden, Joe, 59
The Buggles, “Video Killed the 
Radio Star,” 25
Burana, Lily: Strip City: A Strip-
per’s Farewell Journey across
America, 115, 126, 145; on
stripping, 128–129, 136
Index / 169


--- PAGE 189 ---
Burks, Michelle “Micki,” 23–24,
26
Burns, Ken, 10
Bush, George W., 4
Bush, Jacklyn “Diva”: on cus-
tomers at strip clubs, 141; on di-
versity in strip clubs, 130; How I
Went from the Gold Room to
the Court Room (Bush), 116–
117, 145; lifestyle during strip
club days, 137; on stripping,
136, 146
Busta Rhymes, 6
The Buying Power of Black Amer-
ica (Target Market News), 44
Calhoun, Monica, 78
Campbell, Luther “Uncle Luke,”
60, 127
“Can You Control Yo Hoe”
(Snoop Dogg), 103
Caribbean Rhythms (TV show), 24
Carter, Regina, 10
Carter, Shawn “Jay-Z.” See Jay-Z
Center for AIDS Research (CFAR),
19, 26, 111
Center for Disease Control, 94
Chamberlain, Wilt, View from
Above, 104
Chapin, Julia, 40
Chappelle, Dave, 2
Chaucer, Geoffrey, 62
Check It, While I Wreck It
(Pough), 11
ChgoBachelor31_4u, 46–47, 50
Chicken-N-Beer (Ludacris), 14,
115
Chingy, 6, 91, 128, 138
The Chronic (Dr. Dre), ix, xi, 6
Ciara, 28
Clemente, Rosa, 20
Clinton, Bill, 100
“Closer” (Nine Inch Nails), 120
Cole, Johnetta, 20
Coleridge, Daniel, 29
The Color Purple (Walker), 66
Combs, Sean “Puffy,” 2, 45, 99
Common, 7, 151
Confessions of a Stripper: Tales
from the VIP Room (Lane), 145
Confessions of a Video Vixen (Stef-
fans), 90, 95–101, 103, 146
“Confessions” (Usher), 59
Congressional Black Caucus, 20,
70
Connie’s Inn (Harlem), 129
Consumer capitalism, hip hop 
and, 7
Cooper, Cynthia, 16
Cotton Club (Harlem), 129
Cradle to the Grave (ﬁlm), 121
Crenshaw, Kimberlé, 20, 63
Crouch, Stanley, 7–8
Crowe, Cameron, 86
Crunk, 120
The Culture of Fear (Glassner), 56
Curve (magazine), 17
D-Roc, 121
“Da Baddest Bitch.” See Trina
DaCosta Johnson, Yaya, 29–30,
31–32
Dandridge, Dorothy, 28
Dash, Damon, 45
Dash, Stacy, 33
Dauphin, Gary, xiv
Davis, Michaela Angela, 20
Def Comedy Jam (TV show), 2
Def Jam Records, 1, 88
DefCon3, 2
DeRogatis, Jim, 68–69
Des Barres, Pamela, 87, 94, 108
Index / 170


--- PAGE 190 ---
Destiny’s Child, 121
Devon, 86
Diamond, A Stripper’s Tail: Con-
fessions of a Las Vegas Stripper,
145
Diamond Princess (Trina), ix
Diary of a Pimp (ﬁlm), 60
Diaz, Martha, 20
Dickerson, John T., Jr., 83
Dietrich, Marlene, 18
DiMartino, Dave, 118
Dion, Celine, 70
Dirty South, 51, 71
Disturbing Tha Peace (DTP), 116
DJ Minya Oh, 97, 100
DJ Pam, 16
DJ Smurf, 60
DMX: Confessions of a Video
Vixen on, 99; Cradle to the
Grave, 121; dismissal of rape
charges against, 107; E.A.R.L.:
The Autobiography of DMX,
60; paternity suits against, 93;
“X Is Coming,” 59
Dr. Dre: Barnes and, 59; The
Chronic, ix, xi, 6; Confessions of
a Video Vixen on, 99; revela-
tions about, 94
“Dolly Dagger” (Hendrix), 86
Don “Magic” Juan, 150–151
Dude: We’re Going to Rio(Phar-
rell), 42–43, 51
Duke University lacrosse team, 137
Dupri, Jermaine, 116, 118–119
Dyson, Marcia, xi
Dyson, Michael Eric, x–xi
E-40, 90
E.A.R.L.: The Autobiography of
DMX (DMX), 60
Eastside Boyz, 60
Easy-Z, 105
Eave, Elizabeth, 145
Electra, Carmen, 121
Eminem, 94
Emmis Communications, 97
Essence (magazine): ads for plastic
surgery, 35; beauty editor, 35;
Crouch on, 8; founder, 46; Stef-
fans interview, 95; “Take Back
the Music” campaign, 11, 19, 20
Esterhaz, Joe, 77
Ethnic ambiguity (Generation E.A.)
in beauty culture, 30–32, 35–
36, 37, 39
Evans, Faith, 33
Eve, xvii, 128
Exotic Dancer Directory (online
directory), 123
Exotic World Burlesque Museum
and Strip Tease Hall of Fame,
129
Faber, Katelyn, 80–81
Fager, Lisa, 20
Fallen Champ: The Untold Story of
Mike Tyson (documentary ﬁlm),
81
Fanon, Frantz, 43, 44, 48
Farrakhan, Louis, 81, 83
Fein, Ellen, 143–144
Feminism: beauty culture, 152;
black feminism, 151–151; black
men, 154; as cultural lightning
rod, 149; decline/death of, 152–
153; fear-inciting in American
culture, 55–56; “feminist glama-
zons” of hip hop, xvii; genera-
tional relevancy, 151, 152, 154–
155; groupie culture, 109; hip
hop culture, xviii; hip hop femi-
nism/feminists, 152, 155–156;
Index / 171


--- PAGE 191 ---
Feminism (continued)
Lil’ Kim and, xviii; rape, 54; sex-
ual abuse, 55–56; sexuality,
126–127; stereotypes of, 151–
151; strip clubs, 126–127;
young black women, 153–154
“Feminism for Sale” (Heath and
Potter), 153
Fire with Fire (Wolf), 143
Flashdance (ﬁlm), 121
Fleiss, Heidi, 117
Flynt, Larry, 125
For Colored Girls Who Have Con-
sidered Suicide When the Rain-
bow Is Enuf (Shange), 66
Fox, Vivica A., 121
Foxy Brown, xi, xvii, 152
France, hip hop in, 10
From Pimpstick to the Pulpit (Don
“Magic” Juan), 150
G-Unit, 38, 60, 85
Game, Inc., 39
Gang-Related (ﬁlm), 121
Gangsta rap, xvi, 6
Garbo, Greta, 18
Garvey, Steve, 70–71
Gates, Henry Louis, 62
Gauguin, Paul, 44
Gay rappers, 101–102
Gender politics: black gender poli-
tics, 51, 122, 143; gender roles
in groupie culture, 88–89; hip
hop culture, 10–11, 13, 19–20,
61, 64, 74–75, 113; impact of
music video DVDs, 26–27; strip
clubs, 121–122, 146–147
“Generation E.A.: Ethnically Am-
biguous” (New York Times), 30,
32, 35–36, 37, 39
“Get Money” (Lil’ Kim), 15
Gidding, Paula, When I and Where
I Enter, xiv
“Girl Talk” (TLC), 90
“Girls, Girls, Girls” (Mötley Crüe),
120
Girls Gone Wild videos, 13, 38
Glassner, Barry, The Culture of
Fear, 56
“God Bless the Child” (song), 9
“Good Morning, Heartache”
(song), 9
Gordy, Cynthia, 20
“Gotta Getcha” (Dupri), 118–119
Gotti, Irv, 100
Gotti, John, 70
Grace (college freshman), 150
Grammy Awards (2002), 28
Grandmaster Flash & the Furious
Five, “The Message,” xvi
Grifﬁth, D. W., 8
“Groupie Confessions” series
(Ozone magazine), 90–93, 94,
101, 103–104, 105–106, 108–
109
Groupie culture, 85–113; associat-
ing with celebrities, 94–95;
avoidance of “catching feelings,”
90; black hip hop groupies, 94,
95, 112; bragging rights, 106;
call and response tradition
among blacks, 112; code of 
silence, 100; Confessions of a
Video Vixen, 90, 95–101, 103,
146; cynicism inspired by group-
ies, 89–90; “dicksmithing” by
black men, 88; feminism, 109;
ﬁlms about, 86–87; ﬁrst insider
account, 87; as a game, 109–
110; gang rape, 105; gender
roles, 88–89; “golddiggers” in,
107; “Groupie Confessions” 
Index / 172


--- PAGE 192 ---
series (Ozone magazine), 90–93,
94, 101, 103–104, 105–106,
108–109; “groupie,” deﬁnition
of, 86–87, 107–108; “groupie,”
self-deﬁnition as, 106–107, 108–
109; having sex with celebrities,
106; hierarchy based on skin
color, 93; hip hop groupies, ano-
nymity of, 94; hip hop groupies,
celebrities’ terms for, 87; hip hop
groupies, multiethnic base of,
86; hip hop groupies’ impor-
tance in hip hop culture, 13–14,
112–113; hip hop groupies’ rela-
tionship with hip hop celebrities,
87–90; “it ain’t no fun if my
homies can’t have none” mental-
ity, 105; kissing, 90; line be-
tween fans and groupies, 107;
“modern girls,” 94; “no-no’s”
of, 100; perks received by group-
ies, 106; rock-era groupies, 86–
87, 95; safe sex, 105; sex as a
sport, 110–111; sexual choice,
109–110; sexual frivolity, 111–
112; in sports/baseball, 104–
105, 108. See also “Video ho”;
“Video vixens”
“Groupie Love” (Banks), 15
“Groupie Love” (G-Unit), 85
Groupie Love (music video), 38, 60
“Groupies and American Baseball”
(Journal of Sport and Social Is-
sues), 104
GTOs, 87
Guillermoprieto, Alma, Samba,
39–40
Guy-Sheftall, Beverly, 20
Hamilton College, Russell Sim-
mons at, 1–4
Happy People/U Saved Me (Kelly),
69
Harding, C. B., 42
Harlem Shake Burlesque, 125
Harlem Shakers, 129
Harvard University, 10
Hathaway, Donnie, 24
Hathaway, Lahla, 24
Hausbeck, Kate, 126
Heath, Chris, 120
Heath, Joseph, 153
Hendrix, Jimi, 86
Hill, Lauryn, xvii, 6
Hine, Darlene Clark, 63
“Hip Hop and Feminism” confer-
ence (2005), 155
“Hip-Hop and Hot Sex” (VH 1
documentary), 12
Hip Hop Archives, 10
Hip hop culture: beauty culture,
32–33, 36; birthplace, 91;
“bitch” in, 127; “bitchy sextu-
plet” of, xvii, 152; black lesbian
hip hop artists, 18–19; black
women, young, 10–12, 13, 19,
32–33; black women’s bodies in,
63, 66; “bling” lifestyle, 89; CD
sales, 7; on college campuses, 6;
commercial success of, 11, 61,
113, 120, 150, 151; consumer
capitalism, 7; core consumers of,
19; Crouch on, 7–8; crunk, 120;
as a cultural force, 4; as cultural
lightning rod, 149; evolution as
a cultural phenomenon, 5–7; fe-
male fans, 8; feminism, xviii;
“feminist glamazons” of, xvii; in
France, 10; Gangsta rap, xvi, 6;
gay rappers, 101–102; gender
politics, 10–11, 13, 19–20, 61,
64, 74–75, 113; generational 
Index / 173


--- PAGE 193 ---
Hip hop culture (continued)
relevancy, 151, 152; governmen-
tal crackdown on, 74; groupies
(see Groupie culture); heterosex-
ism of, 14, 16; hip hop ﬁlm, 48;
homophobia, 16, 102–103; ideal
of feminine beauty in hip hop
videos, 30, 37–39, 42; images
in, importance of, 27; jazz and,
7, 9; lesbianism, 14–18; lesbi-
phobic lyrics, 18; lyrics, 150;
male domination of, 10, 36, 74,
92; Marsalis on, 9; masculinity,
measure of, 89; misogyny, 58–
59, 61, 66–67, 110, 111; na-
tional conventions, 7; “nigger”
in, 127; “original true player”
in, 150; “pimp-ho” nexus/ethos,
150–151; the “pimp-playa-
bitch-ho” nexus, xvii; popularity
as a musical genre, 7; pornogra-
phy, 60–61; public face/voice,
10; sexism, 58, 149; sexual ex-
pressivity, 65, 147; sexual frivol-
ity, 111; sexuality, 12–13; in the
South, 91, 120; stereotype of
sexual availability, 82; street cul-
ture/street justice, connection to,
75; strip clubs, 12, 119–120,
123, 127, 145, 146–147; trans-
actional nature of sex, 122–
123; violence, 58, 75; white
males, 19; women and, xvi,
xviii, 3–4
Hip Hop Divas (Vibe magazine),
11
Hip hop feminism/feminists, 152,
155–156
Hip hop ﬁlms, 48, 58
Hip hop generation: acquaintance
rape, 83; “Black Is Beautiful,”
38; black men of, 44, 51, 122,
143; deﬁnition, xv; HIV/AIDS
cases among, 94; HIV/AIDS pre-
vention, 102; HSAN and, 2; im-
portant issues to, 68; interpreta-
tion of sexual abuse, 58; inti-
mate relations, 122; media’s
inﬂuence on, 111; sexual abuse,
understanding of, 84; sexual in-
nuendo and, 65; social ills and
sexual contradictions con-
fronting, 5; strip clubs, 122
“Hip Hop Gets the Bruising It De-
serves” (Crouch), 8
Hip-Hop Honeys: Brazil Boom
Boom (porn collection), 39, 41,
45
Hip Hop Summit Action Network
(HSAN), 2
“Hip Hop Takes a Hit” (Crouch),
8
Hip hop videos. See Music video
DVDs
“Hip-Hop Videos and Sexploita-
tion on the Set” (VH 1 documen-
tary), 12
“Hip Hop’s Thugs Hit New Low”
(Crouch), 8
“Ho,” xv, xvii
The Hole, Holla, Rude (magazine),
91
Holiday, Billie, 9
“Holla, Holla” (Ja Rule), 43, 51
Homophobia: hip hop culture, 16,
102–103; national climate of,
16–17
“Honey Love” (Kelly), 69
hooks, bell, x–xi, xiv, 19–20
Hooters restaurant chain, 58
Horeck, Tanya, 75–76
Horne, Lena, 28
Index / 174


--- PAGE 194 ---
House Party (ﬁlm), 48
How I Went from the Gold Room
to the Court Room (Bush), 116–
117, 145
HSAN (Hip Hop Summit Action
Network), 2
Hudlin, Warrington, 48–49
Hue-Man Bookstore and Café
(Harlem), 98
Hughes, Vincent, 37
Hugo, Chad, 42
Hunt, Marsha, 86
Hunter, Paul, 25
Hurston, Zora Neale, 93
Hustle & Flow (ﬁlm), 121
“I Like the Way You Move” (Out-
Kast), 86
Ice Cube: NWA, 59; The Player’s
Club, 58, 77–79, 81, 121
Ice-T, 12
IFPI (International Federation of
Phonographic Industry), 24–25
“I’m N Luv (wit a Stripper)” (T-
Pain), 120
I’m With the Band: Confessions of
a Groupie (Des Barres), 87
Inca (Burks), 24
Independence Day (ﬁlm), 121
International Association of Jazz
Educators’ conference (2003), 9
Iola Leroy (Watkins), 30
Island Def Jam, 116
“It ain’t no fun if my homies can’t
have none” mentality, 79–80,
105
“It’s a Man’s, Man’s World”
(Brown), 1
Iverson, Allen, 103
Ivy League Stripper (Mattson), xii,
145
Ja Rule, 43, 51, 99
Jacki-O, xvii, 91, 152
Jackson, Ayanna, Tupac Shakur
and, 67, 79, 105, 107
Jackson, Janet, 118
Jackson, Michael, 71
Jackson, Stephen, 71
Jadakiss, 103
Jagger, Karis, 86
Jagger, Michael, 86
Jam, Jimmy, 119
Jay-Z (né Shawn Carter): “Bitches
& Sistas,” 85; The Blueprint 2:
The Gift & The Curse, 85; in
“Groupie Confessions,” 103; on
hip hop groupies, 88; Kelly and,
68; publicist, 92; reason for hav-
ing sex with, 106; Simmons
(Russell) and, 2
Jazz: in France, 10; hip hop and, 
7, 9; sacredness/legitimacy of, 
9–10
Jennifer (college senior), 151
Jive Records, 54
Johnson, Earvin “Magic,” 105
Johnson, Jack, 80
Jones, Edward P., 39
Jones, Kimberly. See Lil’ Kim
Jordan, Michael, 117
Journal of Sport and Social Issues,
104
Joyce, Michelle, 155
Juice Crew, 98
Jurassic Five, 151
Juzang, Ivan, xv
Katy K, 125
Kelly, R.: Born into the 90s, 69;
Happy People/U Saved Me, 69;
“Honey Love,” 69; Jay-Z and,
68; as poster boy/child for 
Index / 175


--- PAGE 195 ---
Kelly, R. (continued)
dysfunctional relationships be-
tween men and girls, 69, 70; “R.
Kelly Flouting His Foes” (DeRo-
gatis), 69; Robert R. Kelly v. The
State of Illinois, 58, 69; sexual
assault case against, 68–72, 81;
as “Teﬂon Don,” 70; TP3 Re-
loaded, 69; “Trapped in the
Closet,” 69; video recording his
sex acts, 53–54, 76, 77
Kelly, Robin D. G., 60
Kennedy, Erica, Bling!, 36
Key, Alicia, 28
Khia, 18, 115
Ki Toy, 85–86
Killer Mike, 89
Kool G. Rap (né Nathaniel Wil-
son), 98, 101, 103
Kozol, Jonathan, 138–139
Kweli, Talib, 7
La Rock, Scott, xv
Lady B., 5
Lane, Lacey, 145
Las Vegas Sun (newspaper), 122
The Last Boy Scout (ﬁlm), 121
Lauren (law student), 151
Lee, Gypsy Rose, 124
Lee, Spike, xiv, 15, 19
Lesbianism: black lesbian hip hop
artists, 18–19; black urban
youth’s attitude toward, 14; hip
hop culture, 14–18; lesbiphobic
lyrics in hip hop culture, 18; Mc-
Clodden on, 17–18; in She Hate
Me, 15; in the South, 17; strip
clubs, 116, 140
Let’s Spend the Night Together
(Des Barres), 94
Lewin, Lauri, Naked Is the Best
Disguise: My Life as a Stripper,
145
Lewinsky, Monica, 100
Lewis, Anita, 36–37
Lil’ Jon, 4, 60, 91
Lil’ Kim (né Kimberly Jones): in
“bitchy sextuplet” of hip hop,
xvii, 152; concerns with beauty,
33; cultural antipathy toward,
xi; feminism, xviii; as a “feminist
glamazon,” xvii; “Get Money,”
15; on her heterosexuality, 15;
Kimberly Jones on, xiii, 74;
nickname, xviii; taking one for
the hip hop team, 74
Lil’ Wayne, 93, 106–107
Liquid City (ﬁlm), 60
Little Egypt, 124
Little X, 25
LL Cool J, 1
Longing to Tell (Rose), 60, 84
Lopez, Jennifer, 37
Lorde, Audre, 7
Ludacris: Chicken-N-Beer, 14, 115;
“P-Poppin,” 115; Southern hip
hop, 91; “Splash Waterfalls,”
14; strip clubs, 116, 118
“Luv Bump” (Rouff Neck Sound
System), 23–24
Ma Barker, 98, 101, 103
Mac, Bernie, 78
MacKinnon, Catherine, 75, 82
Madonna, 127
Manliness (Mansﬁeld), 1
Mansﬁeld, Harvey, Manliness, 1
Marabella, Anthony, 73
Marks, Emmaretta, 86
Marley Marl, 98
Marsalis, Wynton, 7, 9
Masculinity: black female mas-
Index / 176


--- PAGE 196 ---
culinity, 144–145, 147; of black
men, xvi, 51; measure of in hip
hop culture, 89; prison culture
and, xvi
The Massacre (50 Cent), 24
Master P, 91
Mattson, Heidi, Ivy League Strip-
per, xii, 145
Mayo, Kierna, 20
MC Lyte, xvi
McClodden, Tiona, 16, 17–18, 26
McWhorter, John, 19
“Me So Horny” ( 2 Live Crew), 61
Media’s inﬂuence on: hip hop gen-
eration, 111; young black
women, 153
Medusa, 16, 17
Melle Mel, 5
“The Message” (Grandmaster
Flash & the Furious Five), xvi
Method Man: behavior in white vs.
black strip clubs, 132–133; Con-
fessions of a Video Vixen’seffect
on, 101–103; Steffans and, 101;
The Strip Game, 120; wife, 92
Michael “Mystikal” Tyler v. The
State of Louisiana, 58
Mike Gerard Tyson v. The State of
Indiana, 55
Millennium generation, 5
Miller-Young, Mireille, 61
The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill
(Hill), 6
Misogyny: hip hop culture, 58–59,
61, 66–67, 110, 111; in United
States, 89
Miss Info (DJ Minya Oh), 97
Miss Jones Show, 96–97, 101–102
Miss Money, 16
Missy Elliott, xvii, 18
Mitchell, Mary, 69–70, 71
Modeling profession: Afrocentric
appearance, 29; America’s Next
Top Model (TV show), xi, 28–
29; author’s involvement in, xi–
xiii; cultural antipathy toward,
xi; female models, xi–xii; models
appearing in music video DVDs,
26–27
Monie Love, xvi
Moore, Michael, Bowling for
Columbine, 56
Morgan, Joan, 19, 20, 152
Morgan, Marcyliena, 10
The Morning After (Roiphe), 55–
56, 57
Morrison, Toni, 10, 63, 64
Mos Def, 151
Motivational Educational Enter-
tainment: on hip hop’s core audi-
ence, 19; “Reaching the Hip-
Hop Generation,” xv; This Is
My Reality, 14, 60, 111–112,
122–123
Mötley Crüe, 120
MTV (Music Television): music
videos on, 25, 26, 28; record’s
potential debut/rotation on, 119
The Multicultural Economy 2004
(Selig Center for Economic
Growth), 44
Murder Inc., 17
Music video DVDs: on BET, 25,
26, 28; commercial success of
hip hop, 150; consumption of
and behavior, 26–27; directors
of, 25–26; ideal of beauty in,
30, 37–39, 42; impact on gender
politics, 26–27; models appear-
ing in, 26–27; on MTV, 25, 26,
28; popularity of cable televi-
sion, 25; sales of, 25; sexual 
Index / 177


--- PAGE 197 ---
Music video DVDs (continued)
violence, 81; testing “hotness”
of, 119; “video ho’s” in, 23, 24;
“video vixens,” xi–xii, 85–86
(see also Confessions of a Video
Vixen)
“My Neck, My Back” (Khia), 118
Mystikal: connection to street cul-
ture, 75; Liquid City, 60; Mi-
chael “Mystikal” Tyler v. The
State of Louisiana, 58; porno-
graphic videos of, 12; “Pussy
Crook,” 4; sexual assault case
against, 71–74, 81; video
recording his sex acts, 54, 76, 77
Nabokov, Vladimir, 70
Naked Is the Best Disguise: My
Life as a Stripper (Lewin), 145
“Nann-Nigga” (Trina), 15
Nas, 151
Nate Dogg, 23, 26
National Baptist Convention, 81
National Coalition of 100 Black
Women, 20
National Hip Hop conventions, 7
Neal, Marc Anthony, 7, 155
Nelly: “Gotta Getcha,” 118; in
“Groupie Confessions,” 103;
“Pimp Juice,” 150; Southern hip
hop, 91; “Tip Drill” ( see “Tip
Drill”); “White Parties,” 138
The Neptunes, 42
N.E.R.D., 12
New Line Cinema, 88
“New niggaz,” 144–145, 147
New York Post (newspaper), 91,
92
New York Ricans in the Hip-Hop
Zone (Rivera), 39
New York Times (newspaper):
“Generation E.A.: Ethnically
Ambiguous,” 30, 32, 35–36, 37,
39; hip hop and pornography, 60
Newsweek (magazine), 35, 37
Nicholson, John, 48–50
“Nigger,” 127
“Nigs R Us, or How Blackfolk Be-
came Fetish Objects” (Tate), 25
Nine Inch Nails, 120
Nivea, 106
NO! (documentary ﬁlm), 58, 81–
84
Notorious B.I.G., 33
NOW (National Organization for
Women), xiii
NPD Group, 7
“Nuthin’ But a G-Thang” (Snoop
Dogg), x
NWA, “One Less Bitch,” 59
O’Farrell Theater (San Francisco),
126–127
On Beauty (Smith), 149
“One Bad Sista” (Medusa), 17
“One Less Bitch” (NWA), 59
O’Neal, Jermaine, 71
O’Neal, Shaquille, 80
“Oops, Oh My!” (Tweet and
Missy Elliot), 18
The O’Reilly Factor(TV show), 58
Osorio, Kim, 155
OutKast, 86, 91
Ozone (magazine): Dirty South fea-
ture, 51; “Groupie Confessions”
series, 90–93, 94, 101, 103–
104, 105–106, 108–109; inspi-
rations for, 91; publisher and ed-
itor, 91
“P-Poppin” (Ludacris), 115
Packwood, Robert, 70
Index / 178


--- PAGE 198 ---
Paglia, Camille, 127
Painter, Nell, 63
Parker, Paula Jai, 121
Patterson, Tiffany, 27
Penthouse (magazine), 92
Pharrell, 40–43, 51
Phat Farm, 2
“Ph.D.,” xii
Philadelphia Business Journal, 37
Philadelphia Daily News (newspa-
per), 92
Pierce-Baker, Charlotte, 83
Pigford, Eva, 29
“P.I.M P.” (50 Cent), 150
“Pimp-ho” nexus/ethos in: hip hop
culture, 150–151; strip clubs,
142–143
“Pimp Juice” (Nelly), 150
“Pimp-playa-bitch-ho” nexus, xvii
Pimpnosis (Don “Magic” Juan),
150
Pimps, 142
Pimps Up, Ho’s Down(HBO spe-
cial), 150
Pinkett, Jada, 33
Playboy (magazine), 58
“The Player’s Ball,” 150
The Player’s Club(ﬁlm), 58, 77–
79, 81, 121
Plush Night Club (St. Louis), 138
The Porning Report (blog), 60
Pornography and hip hop culture,
60–61
Potter, Andrew, 153
Pough, Gwendolyn, Check It,
While I Wreck It, 11
Powell, Kevin, 28, 79
Powerballin’(Chingy), 138
Prison culture, black youth culture
and, xvi
Prostitution: sex tourism/prostitu-
tion in Brazil, 44–45, 46–47,
50–51; strip clubs, 126, 141–
142
Public Rape (Horeck), 75–76
Pump It Up (rap show), 59
“Pussy Crook” (Mystikal), 4
Q (magazine), 37
“Queen Bee.” See Lil’ Kim
Queen Latifah, xvi
Queen of Dice, 96
Queerstock festival, 16
“R. Kelly Flouting His Foes”
(DeRogatis), 69
Race, earnings and, 33 –34
Race and Mixed Race (Zack), 31
“Race” mixing and beauty, 30 –31
Rap City (TV show), 28, 101
Rape: acquaintance rape, 82, 83;
black-on-black rape, 53, 55; co-
ercion, 76, 81, 84; consent, 81,
84; cost to communities, 84;
date rape, 70; feminism, 54;
gang rape, 105; in groupie cul-
ture, 105; interracial rape, 57,
64; as “just deserts” for theft,
73; in The Player’s Club,58,
77–79, 81; politicization of, 54;
prison terms for, 57; sex trains
(gang rape), 59–60; sexual vio-
lence on ﬁlm, 75–76; in She’s
Gotta Have It, xiv; shield stat-
utes, 55; in Showgirls, 77; stran-
ger rape, 82; taping sex acts to
disprove false accusations, 76 –
77
Raye, Lisa, 121
“Reaching the Hip-Hop Genera-
tion” (Motivational Educational
Entertainment), xv
Index / 179


--- PAGE 199 ---
“The Real Roxanne,” xvi
Recording Industry Association of
America (RIAA), 7, 24–25
Reid, L.A., 116, 118
Remy Ma, xvii, xviii, 152
Reznor, Trent, 120
Richardson, Sally, 33
Rioexposed.com, 46
Rivera, Raquel, 20, 39
Robert R. Kelly v. The State of Illi-
nois, 58, 69
Roberts, Doria, 16
Robinson, Chris, 25, 42
Rochon, Lela, 121
Rockeymore, Maya, 20
Roiphe, Katie, The Morning After,
55–56, 57
Rolling Stone (magazine), 86
Rolling Stones, 86
Romano, Carlin, 75
Rose, Tricia, 20, 60
“Roxanne, Roxanne” (UTFO), xvi
Rubin, Rick, 1
Ruff Neck Sound System, 23, 24
The Rules (Fein and Schneider),
143–144
Run DMC, 1
Rush Communications, 1
Russell Simmons Music Group, 1
St. Cyr, Lili, 124
St. Lunatics, 26
Salt-N-Pepa, xvi
Samba (Guillermoprieto), 39–40
Sarah Lawrence College, 20
Savage Inequalities (Kozol), Jona-
than, 138–139
Scarface, xvi
Schneider, Sherrie, 143–144
Sela (college freshman), 23, 149–
150
Selig Center for Economic Growth,
44
“Selling Hot Pussy” (hooks), x–xi
Sexism: hip hop culture, 58, 149;
in United States, 89
Sexual abuse, 53–84; as an issue to
hip hop generation, 68; “bimbo
eruptions,” paying for, 80; black
men as poster boys for sexual
impropriety, 70–71; of black
women, 57; coercion, 76, 81,
84; feminism, 55–56; high-pro-
ﬁle cases, 58, 68–74; hip hop
ﬁlms, 58; hip hop generation’s
understanding of, 84; interpreta-
tion by hip hop generation, 58;
interracial abuse, 57, 64; “No!”,
67, 80–81, 83; percent unre-
ported, 57; rape (see Rape); sex-
ual assailability of black women,
67–68; sexual assault case
against Mystikal, 71–74; sexual
assault case against R. Kelly, 68–
72; sexual harassment, 70; sex-
ual violence on ﬁlm, 75–76; sta-
tistical likelihood in United
States, 57; stereotype of sexual
availability, 82; stopping it, 83–
84; women’s responsibility for
male sexual impropriety, 82
Sexual freedom, 65–66, 147
Sexuality: as arbiter of reality, 52;
feminism, 126–127; heterosex-
ism of hip hop culture, 14, 16;
hip hop culture and, 12–13;
young black women, 127
Shake Dance (documentary ﬁlm):
on black men in strip clubs, 131;
black women’s experiences in
sex entertainment industry, 144–
145; strip club culture, 120, 146
Index / 180


--- PAGE 200 ---
Shakespeare, William, 62
Shange, Ntozake, 64
Shangrilá (schooner), 51
Shante, Roxanne, xvi
Sharpton, Al, 67
Shawnna, xvii, 152
She Hate Me (ﬁlm), 15, 19
She’s Gotta Have It(ﬁlm), xiv
Showgirls (ﬁlm), 77–78
The Signifying Monkey (Gates), 62
Silverman, Craig, 80–81
Simmons, Aishah: on black-on-
black rape, 53; dialogue on hip
hop culture and gender, 19–20;
hip hop culture and, 16; NO!,
58, 81–84
Simmons, Joseph, 1
Simmons, Russell, at Hamilton
College, 1–4
Simpson, O. J., 4, 70, 80
Sir Mix A Lot, xvi
Siskel, Gene, 77
Sista Souljah, 7
Sistas ’N the City (animated ﬁlm),
17
Sister2Sister (magazine), 73
Slice and Mix-It Up, 96
Smith, Barbara, All the Women Are
White, All the Men Are Black,
But Some of Us Are Brave, xiv
Smith, Clarence, 46
Smith, Sidra, 16
Smith, William Kennedy, 70
Smith, Zadie, On Beauty, 149
Snoop Dogg: “Beautiful,” 40–42,
43, 51; Bell and, 107; Buckwild
Bus Tour,60; “Can You Control
Yo Hoe,” 103; Diary of a Pimp,
60; Girls Gone Wild videos, 38;
“Nuthin’ But a G-Thang,” x;
pornographic videos of, 12–13;
shakedown of, 107; Snoop’s
Doggystyle, 60
Snoop’s Doggystyle(adult ﬁlm),
13, 60
Solomon, Akiba, 20, 63
The Source (magazine), 91, 155
Spears, Britney, 70, 126
Spelman College, 8, 20, 116
Spencer, Angelina, 124
“Splash Waterfalls” (Ludacris), 14
Stanford University, 10
Star and Buc Wild, 96
The State of Colorado v. Kobe
Bean Bryant, 55, 58
Steffans, Karrine “Superhead”:
abuse hurled at, 96; airing pri-
vate demons, 110; Confessions
of a Video Vixen, 90, 95–101,
103, 146; as face of black group-
ies, 112; on herself, 95; lifestyle
during strip club days, 137; low
self-esteem, 104; Method Man
and, 101; perks received by, 106
Stern, Howard, 97
Stewart, Martha, 74
“Stick by Me” (Rouff Neck Sound
System), 23
“Strange Fruit” (song), 9
Strip City: A Stripper’s Farewell
Journey across America (Bu-
rana), 115, 126, 145
Strip Club Directory (online direc-
tory), 123
Strip clubs, 115–147; afternoon
shift, 141; in Atlanta, 116–117,
122; behavior of black men in,
131–133, 141; black clubs, 131,
139; black female masculinity,
144–145, 147; black gender pol-
itics, 143; Body Tap (Atlanta),
138; clientele, 122, 125; dancers
Index / 181


--- PAGE 201 ---
Strip clubs (continued)
in (see Strippers); dating, 122;
diversity in, 130–131; documen-
taries about, 120; evolution/his-
tory of, 124–126; feminism,
126–127; ﬁrst black woman’s in-
sider’s account, 145; gender poli-
tics, 121–122, 146–147; Gold
Club (Atlanta), 116–117, 120,
130, 133, 141; hip hop culture,
12, 119–120, 123, 127, 145,
146–147; hip hop generation,
122, 143; Hustler Gentlemen’s
Clubs, 125, 133–134, 135–136;
in Las Vegas, 122; lesbianism,
116, 140; Magic City (Atlanta),
115–116, 117, 131, 132, 133,
138; as model for interpersonal
relationships, 122; “new
niggaz,” 144–145, 147; number
of clubs, 123–124; number of
employees, 124; Penthouse Club
(Cleveland), 124; “pimp-ho”
nexus/ethos, 142–143; Pink Slip
(Brooklyn, Illinois), 117, 128,
133–134, 135–136, 138–141;
Plush Night Club (St. Louis),
138; prostitution, 126, 141–142;
racial stratiﬁcation in, 137; rock
music in, 120; segregation in,
130; as sex tourism sites, 137;
share of the adult entertainment
market, 124; shout outs, 117–
118; testing “hotness” of hip
hop records, 119; trade associa-
tion of, 124; transactional nature
of relationships in, 122, 143
The Strip Game (documentary
ﬁlm): behavior of black men in
strip clubs, 132; black women’s
experiences in sex entertainment
industry, 144–145; director, 120;
strip club culture, 120, 146
Strip Joint (magazine), 120
Strippers: Anna (pseudonym) on,
127–128, 133–134, 135–137,
139–141, 146; autobiographical
strip narratives, 145–146; black
strippers/exotic dancers, 121,
129–131, 136, 145–146; cul-
tural antipathy toward, xi; earn-
ings and payouts, 133–137;
funkiness of, 133; income differ-
entials, 133; lifestyle, 136–137;
in mainstream movies, 121; mo-
tivation behind, xi–xii; names
assumed by, 133; reasons for
stripping, 136–137; stigma,
128–129, 136, 142
A Stripper’s Tail: Confessions of a
Las Vegas Stripper (Diamond),
145
Surviving the Silence (Pierce-
Baker), 83, 84
Swoopes, Cheryl, 16
T-Pain, 120
Taking It Off, Putting It On:
Women in the Strip Trade
(Bruckert), 129
Taormino, Tristan, 15
Target Market News, 44
Tate, Greg, “Nigs R Us, or How
Blackfolk Became Fetish Ob-
jects,” 25
Taylor, Miki, 35
“That Beeyatch.” See Remy Ma
This Is My Reality (Motivational
Educational Entertainment), 14,
60, 111–112, 122–123
This (magazine), 152–153
Thomas, Clarence, 70
Index / 182


--- PAGE 202 ---
Thompson, Jim, 61
T.I., 42, 51, 91, 128
Till, Emmett, 55
Tillet, Salamishah, 20
Tillet, Scheherazade, 20
“Tip Drill” (Nelly): credit card
scene in video for, 4, 121; female
students’ reaction to, 3; sexual
violence against black women,
81; Spelman College protest
against, 8, 20
TLC, 90
Top Twenty (TV show), 28
TP3 Reloaded (Kelly), 69
“Trapped in the Closet” (Kelly), 69
Trick Daddy, 16
Trina: in “bitchy sextuplet” of hip
hop, xvii, 152; “Black Marilyn
Monroe,” 128; cultural antipa-
thy toward, xi; Diamond
Princess, ix; as a “feminist
glamazon,” xvii; on her bisexu-
ality, 15–16; “Nann-Nigga,” 15;
nickname, xviii; Southern hip
hop, 91; stripping by, 128
“Tsunami Song” (Miss Jones
Show), 96–97
Tucker, C. Delores, 11, 20, 67
Tupac Shakur: “All About You,”
23, 26; as date rapist, 70; failure
to intervene in sexual assault of
female companion, 79; Gang-
Related, 121; Jackson (Ayanna)
and, 67, 79, 105, 107; lyrics
about gang rape, 59; sex trains,
60; Tucker, letter to, 67; 
“Wonda Why They Call U
Bitch,” 67
Tweet, 18
Twista, 17
Tyler, Michael. See Mystikal
Tyrese, 93
Tyson, Mike, 67, 70, 81
Uncle Charlie Wilson, 40–42
Union, Gabrielle, 28, 121
U. S. Multicultural Women Mar-
ket, 34, 111, 153
United States: interpersonal rela-
tionships in, 143; misogyny in,
89; sexism in, 89; statistical like-
lihood of sexual abuse, 57
United States of Atlanta (Ying
Yang Twins), 60
UPN (United Paramount Network),
29
“USA for Indonesia” (Miss Jones
Show), 96–97
USA Today (newspaper), 121, 
122
Usher, “Confessions,” 59
Varig Airlines, 46, 50
Velez, Gloria, 43
Venni Vetti Vicci (Ja Rule), 43
VH1 (Video Hits I), 25, 26, 119
Vibe (magazine): Beverly and, 91;
Hip Hop Divas, 11; Khia inter-
view, 118–119; “Love Hurts:
Rap’s Black Eye,” 98; music
award for video vixens, 85–86;
Ozone and, 91
“Video ho,” 23, 24
“Video Killed the Radio Star” (The
Buggles), 25
“Video vixens,” xi–xii, 85–86. See
also Confessions of a Video
Vixen
View from Above (Chamberlain),
104
Violence Against Women Act
(1998), 54
Index / 183


--- PAGE 203 ---
Virgin Records, 116
Voerhoven, Paul, 77
Walker, Alice, 64, 66
Wallace, Michelle, Black Macho
and the Myth of the Super-
woman, 66
War on drugs, xvi
Washington, Desiree, 67, 107
Watkins, Frances Ellen Harper, Iola
Leroy, 30
Watkins, Gloria. see hooks, bell
Welbon, Yvonne, 16
Wells, Ida B., 55
West, Kanye, 4–5, 59–60
When Chickenheads Come Home
to Roost (Morgan), 152
When I and Where I Enter (Gid-
ding), xiv
“When Keeping It Real Goes
Wrong” (Chappelle skit), 2, 4
“The Whisper Song” (Ying Yang
Twins), 61, 120
White, Barry, 60
“White Chocolate,” 121
“White Parties” (Nelly), 138
Who’s Gonna Take the Weight
(Powell), 28
“Whose Pussy Is It?” (hooks), xiv
“Why You Wanna” (T.I.), 42, 51
Wilitz, Teresa, 95
Williams, Andra “Trouble,” 131–
132
Williams, Creg, 53
Williams, Hype, 25, 43
Williams, Wendy, 92, 96
Wilson, Nathaniel. See Kool G.
Rap
Winona, 86
Wolf, Naomi: The Beauty Myth,
xi, 31–32; Fire with Fire,
143; on pursuing pleasure, 
109
Women: actresses in music video
DVDs, 26–27; black women (see
Black women; Young black
women); buying power of multi-
cultural women, 34; earnings
and race, 33–34; groupies (see
Groupie culture); hip hop culture
and, xvi, xviiii, 3–4; strippers
(see Strippers). See also Feminism
“Wonda Why They Call U Bitch”
(Tupac), 67
Woodhull Freedom Foundation,
124
The Wretched of the Earth
(Fanon), 43
“X Is Coming” (DMX), 59
XXL (magazine): Beverly and, 91;
Brazilian women in, 39; DJ
Smurf interview, 60; “Eye
Candy” centerfolds, 38, 51;
Ozone and, 91; Spring 2004
cover, 70
Yahoo!Music, 118
YDG Tha Top Dawg, 23, 26
Ying Yang Twins: appearances in
strip clubs, 121; homecoming
performances, 6; Southern hip
hop, 91; United States of At-
lanta, 60; “The Whisper Song,”
61, 120
Young black women: feminism,
153–154; hip hop culture, 10–
12, 13, 19, 32–33; hypersexual-
ity and easy availability, 65;
“keep it real” generation, 154;
media’s inﬂuence on, 153; “no
more drama” generation, 154;
Index / 184


--- PAGE 204 ---
rape reporting by, 54; sexual
freedom, 65–66, 147; sexuality,
127
Young Buck, 26, 91
Zack, Naomi, Race and Mixed
Race, 31
Zappa, Frank, 87
Zook, Kristal Brent, xiii
Index / 185


--- PAGE 205 ---



--- PAGE 206 ---
about the author
T. Denean Sharpley-Whiting is a feminist writer and re-
searcher. She was named by cultural critic and scholar Mi-
chael Eric Dyson as a “rising star among black public intel-
lectuals.” A graduate of Brown University, Sharpley-Whiting
is Professor of African American and Diaspora Studies and
French at Vanderbilt University where she also directs the
Program in African American and Diaspora Studies and
serves as Director of the W. T. Bandy Center for Baudelaire
and Modern French Studies. She lectures widely in the
United States, Europe, and Africa. Author of four books, she
has also co-edited three volumes, including The Black Femi-
nist Reader.
187

