=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Omali Yeshitela-Stolen Black Labor The Political-Economy-of-Domestic-Colonialism.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 68
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:09:30.639222
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---



--- PAGE 3 ---
Chapter One 
Revolution in Political Economy: 
The Point of View of the Slave 
The history of the United States, and the entire history 
of capitalism, has its origins in the attack on Africa and the 
unprecedented theft of tens of millions of Africans. This 
study uncovers the concrete evidence of the amount of 
wealth stolen from African people by the ruling class of the 
U.S. over the last four centuries, amounting to a minimum of 
$4.1 trillion in stolen labor alone. 
When the merchants of the various small European 
principalities began taking Africans as slaves in the late 
1400's from the West Coast of Africa, states such as 
Songhay and Ethiopia far surpassed the organizational, 
cultural, and economic development of Europe. But the con­
tinued depopulation and dislocation of ever futher ex­
panses of Africa caused devastation of those societies and 
interrupted the history and the economic development of 
Africa. The procuring of slaves, which represented ready­
made capital, human capital for the production of Europe's 
first commodities on the agricultural labor camps of the 
"New World," allowed European and North American wealth 
to accumulate on unheard of scales and laid the basis for 
the establishment of modern industry, transportation, and a 
world economy. The slave trade and the slave colonies gave 
birth to the capitalist class-those who control the labor of 
masses of people through privately owning and controlling 
the factories, tools, and distribution system of a complex 
economy and in whose interest State power functions. In 
addition, it gave birth to the modern proletariat of the col­
onizing nations-those who are compelled to work in the 
factories of the capitalists in order to make a living. The 
existence of both classes in the imperialist center is contin­
gent on the enslavement of African people and the subse­
quent colonization of the rest of the world. 
The ruling class in the imperialist center has produced 
analyses, which are called political economy or simply 
economics, in order to explain the workings of the system of 
1


--- PAGE 4 ---
production and distribution under capitalism and to plan for 
their security and well-being. The North American left in the 
imperialist center, which has declared its role as leading the 
workers of U.S. society, both black and white, has failed to 
make an independent or revolutionary analysis. This left, 
which is in essence opportunist, represents a North 
American petty bourgeois interest and even contends for 
control of the product of exploitation of the African 
domestic colony and of other colonies around the world. For 
this reason, the reality of African history, of African strug­
gle, of African interests are left aside as pure abstraction. 
In U.S. bourgeois economics, the wealth stolen from 
African people is not mentioned at a" and the rise of 
capitalism and the amassing of tremendous wealth in the 
capitalist centers is ascribed to moral right, personal 
genius, and racial superiority. Fo"owing this lead, the left 
and working class of European and North American society 
have failed to come to terms with the real history of the 
world, the real basis of capitalist wealth. For this reason, 
the· North American working class has never raised itself 
beyond narrow contention with the ruling class over income 
levels, and indeed has come out in unity with the ruling 
class when contending against the revolutionary anti­
colonial struggles that challenge the basis of U.S. impe­
rialism. This narrow economism has rightly been called 
"imperialist economics" by Lenin. African workers in the 
U.S., on the other hand, because of our historical relation to 
the rise of capitalism, becaus~ of our structural position in 
the present society, because of our conscious determina­
tion to overthrow domestic colonialism, represent the 
leading force for revolution in the U.S. and are therefore 
objectively the leadership for the North American (white) 
working class. 
How does the political economy of African people, the 
world from the point of view of the slave, challenge and 
transform the dominant pOlitical economy advanced by the 
North American left? For Karl Marx, whose insight led to a 
brilliant summary of the class struggle of European society, 
the slave trade and the exploitation of Africa was the first 
cause, the basic primitive accumulation which led to the 
rise of the capitalist class in Europe. He said: 
2 
The discovery of gold and silver in America, the ex­
tirpation, enslavement, and entombment in mines of 
-
the aboriginal population, the beginning of the con­
quest and looting of the East Indies, the turning of 
Africa into a warren for the commercial hunting of 
black skins, signalized the rosy dawn of the era of 
capitalist production. These idyllic proceedings are the 
chief momentum of primitive accumulation, the 
necessary condition for capitalist production.' 
And: 
Direct slavery is just as much the pivot of 
bourgeois industry as machinery, credits, etc. Without 
slavery you have no cotton; without cotton you have no 
modern industry. It is slavery that has given the col­
onies their value; it is the colonies that have created 
world trade, and it is world trade that is the precon­
dition of large-scale industry. Thus slavery is an 
economic category of the greatest importance. 
Without slavery North America, the most prog'res­
sive of countries, would be transformed into a patriar­
chal country. Wipe out North America from the map of 
the world and you wi" have anarchy-the complete 
decay of modern commerce and civilization. Cause 
slavery to disappear and you wi" have wiped America 
off the map of nations. 2 
And: 
While the cotton industry introduced child slavery 
in England, it gave in the United States a stimulus to 
the transformation of the earlier, more or less patriar­
chal slavery, into a system of commercial exploitation. 
In fact, the veiled slavery of the wage earners in Europe 
needed, for its pedestal, slavery pure and simple in the 
New World. 3 
Even these truths as laid out by Karl Marx, the "father 
of scientific socialism," have been ignored by most subse­
quent MBfxists. The weakness of Marx' own perspective 
was that he was a European who wrote from the perspective 
and understanding of primitive accumulation of capital as it 
impacted on Europe's economy and consciousness. Marx 
used primitive accumulation, the wealth stolen from Africa, 
to explain European history, but demonstrated only passing 
interest in the actual process of African history and the rela­
tionship of African history and struggle to the development 
of capitalism. For Marx, the events transpiring in Africa and 
the African slave labor colonies were merely an abstraction. 
3


--- PAGE 5 ---
This is why he could describe capitalism as a progressive 
development in history; he would not have been able t? do 
so if he were writing from Angola or as an enslaved Afncan 
in South Carolina. 
The distortions and abstractions put forward by (white) 
North American and European political economists are 
based in their material stake in keeping the lid on the truth, 
on covering up the social and material debt owed to African 
people in order to keep it for themselves. Such abstractions 
have meant that these political economists have learned to 
live with the most outrageous inconsistencies and confu­
sion in their analysis and forced them to explain away 
statistics which stare them in the face. Before we can draw 
out the political economy of domestic colonialism, it i~ 
necessary to- examine these inconsistencies of the domi­
nant political economists in North American society. 
The point of view and perspective which guides this re­
evaluation of political economy is the point of view of the 
slave of the "human capital" which is the primitive accu­
mulation of capitalism. In the endless tomes on political 
economy to be found in the universities of North America, 
the slave labors in silence and in the background. But when 
the slave stanqs up and speaks, the whole foundation of 
imperialist economics collapses. African people have bee~ 
speaking and fighting against our conditions under capI­
talist exploitation for the last 400 years. In every stage of 
this struggle, the perspective of the slave destroyed utterly 
the legitimacy of the ruling class. Today, African people are 
in a position to destroy the power of that ruling class. The 
economic structure of the domestic African colony has 
changed from chattel slavery, to colonialism to primitive 
neo-colonialism. In this final form, the African population, 
which has moved away from a peasant economy to the 
point of being 94 percent proletarian today, is poised in the 
center of all the major U.S. cities and has produced a work­
ing class instrument, the African People's Socialist Party 
(APSP), to sum up the historical experience of African 
people and the necessary course for our liberation struggle. 
Because of the development of the African proletariat, 
because of the revolutionary victories in this era of the 
world-wide struggle against colonialism and neo-colonial­
ism, the domestic African colony has produced the leader­
ship and has been able to put forth an analysis which defies 
the opportunist political economists. Such analysis is 
4 
based on the practice and struggle of the domestic African 
colony for liberation. In the past ten years, the African Peo­
ple's Socialist Party has made giant strides in advancing 
the liberation struggle by moving forward the mass practice· 
and theoretical summation as the Black Liberation Struggle 
has moved to rebuild from under the military assault which 
reached a peak with the U.S. Government's Counter Intel­
ligence Program in the late 60's. 
. This work has exposed and defeated the various 
attempts by the white chauvinist left in the U.S. to take con­
trol of the future of black people and the metaphysical and 
despairing politics that have come forth from others in the 
form of "race politics." The African People's Socialist Party 
has provided clarity on the crucial question for revolution in 
the U.S., which is the relation of race to class, and has 
developed the understanding of domestic colonialism of 
African people in the U.S. in a way that corresponds to real­
ity, that firmly places the liberation struggle of African peo­
ple in the camp of all the colonized, neo-colonized, and 
dependent peoples around the world who are fighting for 
and winning liberation. We have done more than this, 
however, for we have taken the concept of primitive accu­
mulation of capital, which receives passing reference in the 
works of Marx, and proved that this was by no means a tem­
porary crime, simply giving capitalism its "start-up" injec­
tion. Instead we have shown that primitive accumulation 
was the very basis of profit in early capitalism. Moreover, we 
have shown that this exploitation of the primary producers, 
of the labor-intensive sector of the work force which is kept 
out of the high-paid manufacturing sector of the proletariat, 
has continued to be the very central factor of imperialist 
wealth today. 
This breakthrough in political economy, which has 
been foreshadowed in the leading analysis produced 
throughout African history, from Delaney's indictment of 
the slave system and exposure of the patronizing hypocrisy 
of the white liberals to DuBois' rewriting of the entire history 
of Africans in the U.S. and restoring the understanding of 
black leadership in the struggle against capitalism, could 
only be completed in the present era. This is the era when 
the peoples of the so-called lesser develop~d countr~e~ are 
seizing back our independence and defeating colOnialism, 
neo-colonialism, and economic dependency. We have pro­
duced political economy which explains our situation in the 
5


--- PAGE 6 ---
world, known as the Underdevelopment School of political 
Economy, which proves that the reason countries of Asia, 
Africa, and Latin America are poor is the bleeding of our 
economies by the wealthy capitalist centers which gain 
control over our resources and demolish our native produc­
tive capacity. Such reversal In the explanation of political 
economy is no mere abstract debate; It Is an essential ele­
ment of the development of revolutionary theory, leader­
ship, and programs. The underdevelopment perspective has 
guided many liberation struggles and is central, for 
Instance, In the policy and planning work of the Nicaraguan 
Institute for Agrarian Development led by FSLN Comman­
dante Jaime Wheelock. 
T<;>day, with the political economy of underdevelop-
ment widely accepted by all revolutionaries because of the 
ongoing victories of liberation struggles, with the deep 
crisis of U.S. imperialism caused by the loss of many of its 
external colonies, with the strategic location and develop­
ment of the African proletariat which is leading the national 
liberation struggle against domestic colonialism and 
against the power of capitalism, the political economy of 
African Internationalism developed by the African People's 
Socialist Party takes this analysis an important step further. 
While the Underdevelopment School shows how imperi­
alism In the 18th and 19th centuries destroyed the 
economies of many societies, African Internationalism 
goes back further and explains the very origin of capitalism 
In the theft of the people and other material resources of 
Africa. While the Underdevelopment School shows how 
capitalist countries bullied others with their tremendous 
wealth, African Internationalism shows how capitalist coun­
tries acquired that tremendous wealth. While the 
Underdevelopment School shows how much of capitalist 
profits come from Asia, Africa, and Latin America, African 
Internationalism shows how much of capitalist profit, 
masked as domestic production within the U.S., is actually 
the product of the special forms of exploitation of the 
domestic African colony. 
The African Internationalist political economy 
developed by the African People's Socialist Party and the 
demand for reparations from the U.S. government re~eals 
that capitalism did not have a benign period of European 
development followed by spilling over its borders to go 
around the world in search of profit. It shows that the exploi-
6 
tation of other peoples, the piracy and theft of wealth from 
the non-white world, was the essential component of 
capitalist profits in every period, from the first slave ship 
landing in Africa all the way up to the brutal exploitation of 
Africans in Brooklyn, New York today. It shows that the 
exploitation of African people, in Africa and dispersed 
throug~~ut the worl~, has been grossly underestimated by 
the political economists, bourgeois and "left" alike. It draws 
out the unity of interest and struggle of all African people as 
well as between African people and other colonized people 
throughout the world. In particular, African Internationalism 
develops the understanding put forward by Kwame 
Nkrumah concerning the nature of domestic colonialism 
when he said: "The African revolutionary struggle is not an 
isolated one. It not only forms part of the world socialist 
revolution, but must be seen in the context of Black Revolu­
tio~ as a whole. In the U.S.A., the Caribbean, and wherever 
Afncans are oppressed, liberation struggles are being 
fought. In these areas, the Black man is in a condition of 
domestic colonialism and suffers both on the grounds of 
class and of color."4 
The M~ican People's Socialist Party summarizes our 
und~rstandln~ of domestic colonialism in Point 3 of our 
BaSIC Party line, which reads: 
3. THE PARTICULAR CHARACTER OF THE AFRICAN 
LIBERATION MOVEMENT WITHIN THE U_S. IS A 
STRUGGLE AGAINST U.S. DOMESTIC COLONIALISM 
. Wlth!n current U.S. borders, the struggle fo; 
Afncan Liberation has a special character. It is a strug­
gle t~ free o~rselves from the terror, poverty, and op­
preSSion, whl?h are ca~sed by being ruled in a foreign 
lan~ b~ a foreign and allen power, the primary intent of 
which IS to exploit our labor power for the benefit of the 
U.S. capitalist system and at the expense of collective 
econo~ic and social development of our people. 
ThiS rule of our people by foreigners and aliens for 
the purpose of exploitation is colonialism, the most 
barba~lc form of economic relationship and govern­
ment In the world today. It is an economic and govern­
~ental form which denies the indisputable human 
nght of self-government. It is an economic and govern­
mental form which distorts social development and 
denies collective economic development through for-
7


--- PAGE 7 ---
cibly and arbitrarily molding our social and economic 
activity in a manner designed to perpetrate and serve 
the dominant U.S. capitalist economic and social 
system to which we are illegitimately tied, and from 
which we are irretrievably estranged. 
The colonial domination of our people is unusual 
and rare in history. It is not the same as the domination 
of our people as we know it in Africa, where foreigners 
came to our national homeland and through the use of 
terror imposed their will upon us on our own land. The 
colonial domination of our people within current U.S. 
borders is different; it is not settler-colonialism, which 
is colonialism that results from people leaving their 
own native land and setting up an oppressive foreign 
government which oppresses the traditional occu­
pants of the land in order to exploit them. 
U.S. colonialism for African people within current 
U.S. borders is domestic colonialism. 
As African people, forcibly transported to a 
foreign land by European settlers, also foreign to the 
land, it is our primary responsibility to struggle for the 
liberation of Africa, our national homeland, by waging 
a fierce battle within current U.S. borders against U.S. 
imperialism and for independence in our Iifetime.
5 
Clearly, the African Internationalist political economy 
reveals that any struggle of the North American working 
class that seeks to be anything more than bargaining over 
how to divide up the colonial booty must be tied in to sup­
port for the basic, fundamental, and leading force for revolu­
tion In the world, the struggle of African people for libera­
tion. For this reason, solidarity work which is principled and 
accountable to African leadership is the leading stand for 
North American revolutionaries to take. The research that 
has gone into this study is part of that solidarity work. The 
political analysis and principles were put forth by our Party 
in such central works of the black movement as The Strug­
gle For Bread, Peace and Black Power and Not One Step 
Backward. The work of uncovering North American history 
and the true economic history of U.S. society was taken on 
by solidarity workers as part of helping to build the Interna­
tional Tribunal on Reparations for Black People in the U.S. 
Just as the Und~rdevelopment School of political economy 
won adherents and researchers and activists within the 
European and North American left, the political economy of 
8 
African Internationalism is challenging North Americans to 
~hang.e all of their understandings. Just as African Interna­
tionalism challenges the very legitimacy of the U.S. State, it 
expos~s the ~any layers of opportunism and complicity in 
geno~lde which characterize the white left's ideology and 
practice. Before beginning the presentation of historical 
research on rep~rations owed, it is necessary to touch on 
some of the main elements of this opportunist ideology 
because its assumptions and even language have a grasp 
on the thinking of most any person who studies political 
economy. 
To begin with, we must go back to the essential 
outlines of political economy laid out by Karl Marx. 
Alth~ug~ Marx ~u!fered from Eurocentrism, he was quite 
precise In describing the workings of capitalism and the 
law~ ~f capitalist development.' H is General law of 
Capitalist ~cc.umulation is .central to an understanding of 
the contradiction of the capitalist system and how it will be 
overthrown. However, every Marxist since then has attemp­
ted to explain away this law for some very particular 
reasons. let us examine why. 
Marx showe~ that the history of class society in Europe 
went through various stages, that each historical stage cor­
responded to a basic "mode of production" which was 
defined by the way things were produced, the relations 
between classes of people, and the ongoing social strug­
gle~. He showed that broadly these stages could be de­
sCribed as communalism, slavery, feudalism, capitalism 
and communism. Marx showed how all wealth is the pro­
duct of I~bor, and if tremendous amounts of wealth are held 
by certain capitalists, it is only because they have been able 
to command the labor of millions of people. He showed that 
the huge machi~ery and factories controlled by the ruling 
class were nothing more than crystallized labor, accumu­
lated labor which is known as capital, and that this accumu­
lated capital gives the capitalist ever more power over the 
small producer and individual laborer who can never com­
pete in efficiency with the big capitalist. In Chapter 25 of 
Capital, then, Marx concludes: 
It follows, therefore, that in proportion as capital 
accuml:llates, the situation of the worker, be his pay­
me.nt high or low, must grow worse. Finally, the law 
which always holds the relative surplus population or 
9


--- PAGE 8 ---
Industrial reserve army In equilibrium with the extent 
and energy of accumulation rivets the worker to capital 
more firmly than the wedges of Vulcan held Pro­
metheus to the rock. It makes an accumulation of 
misery a necessary condition, corresponding to the 
accumulation of wealth. Accumulation of wealth at 
one pole Is, therefore, at the same time accumulation 
of misery, the torment of labor, slavery, ignorance, 
brutalization, and moral degradation at the opposite 
pole ... • 
This understanding drawn out by Marx has given our 
North American and European political economists no end 
of trouble, not because It was a "prediction that did not 
come true." On the contrary, since they refuse to under­
stand that capitalism operates In a world economy, they 
Insist on maintaining control of the struggle and of the 
future In the hands of white workers. But alas, they must 
confront the fact that the wages, the real wages and living 
conditions, of white workers have improved considerably 
over the course of the development of capitalism. Even 
though the working class of the world, the colonized and 
economically dependent peoples around the world and in 
the U.S., has suffered emlseration as the power of capital 
has advanced, these privileged leftists are at a loss to 
explain Marx' Law of Capitalist Accumulation because they 
Insist on maintaining that the leading force for revolution 
must be their so-called advanced working class, meaning 
that working class In Europe or the white workers in North 
America. This dogma flies In the face of the entire history of 
the last 400 years which has seen the rise of the slaves, the 
leadership of the most exploited, the humanity of those 
most brutalized. 
So how do our self-appointed leaders explain the situa­
tion? They either try to maintain that Marx didn't really 
mean It when he said that the development of capitalism 
would lead to Increasing emlseratlon of workers or, throw­
Ing caution to the wind, they try to declare that indeed the 
European and North American working class does experi­
ence Increasing misery. This second tact Is rarely attemp­
ted seriously, although It Is put forth in the vaguest, 
broadest, and most demogoglc forms, playing on the white 
nationalist prejudices and cynicism of the North American 
working class. Those who do try to come forth with 
10 
statistics to prove emiseration of the North American work­
ing class, such as Harry Braverman, can only manage to 
depress the appearance of the conditions of white workers 
by mixing in data on their wages with data for the black 
working class, thus ignoring that black people are unem­
ployed at a rate five times the rate for North American 
workers or that over three times the percentage of African 
people fall beneath the official poverty line. 
As for the former argument, that Marx didn't really 
mean it, the radical book shelves are full of them. A good 
example is Ernest Mandel, whose Marxist Economic Theory 
purports to explain the General Law in this manner: 
The growth in the productivity of lab<;>ur, which 
makes possible the growth of relative surplus value, 
implies the possibility of a slow rise in real wages, if 
the industrial reserve army is limited, on condition that 
the equivalent of these increased real wages is pro­
duced in an ever shorter period of time, i.e., that wages 
rise less quickly than productivity ... One can indeed 
observe in history that real wages are generally highest 
in the countries which have known for some time a 
substantial growth in the productivity of labor, as com­
pared with countries where this productivity has re­
mained stagnant for a long time or has risen only 
slowly.1 
What Mandel has done, with all his "ifs" and "on the 
condition" is explain away the rise in wages of white 
workers by claiming the chance population growth levels 
are the key factor, combined with rising productivity, or effi­
ciency of production, in the capitalist centers. He ignores, 
therefore, the very basic fact that productivity, based on 
improved machinery and techniques, is built on the backs of 
human labor-and as more and more labor is concentrated 
by the capitalists, it provides the capital for the develop­
ment of science, technology, and machinery. He has pro­
posed the rise of productivity somehow running ahead of 
the rise of wages for white workers. Off of what? The self­
generating growth of capital? It doesn't happen that way. 
Human labor from the colonies provides the capital for ad­
vanced production in the center. For white social 
chauvinists like Mandel, the problem with Latin America 
and the rest of the colonized and underdeveloped world is 
that they don't have enough capitalism, they don't have the 
11


--- PAGE 9 ---
II 
concentrated productivity that the coming of capitalism will 
afford. In this, he unites with imperialist development 
theorists from Walt Rostow to Ronald Reagan. As the 
African People's Socialist Party explained in The Burning 
Spear in January 1982 : 
The problem confronting African people, and all 
underdeveloped peoples, is not that we have not been 
drawn into the mainstream of capitalist "progress," 
but that we have. The mainstream of capitalist 
development is seen in the hunger and starvation of 
people on the great Continent of Africa and Asia, the 
violence in the lives of the peoples of Latin America, 
the wretchedness of our conditions here in the U.S. 
This is the mainstream of capitalism in the twentieth 
century-misery for the overwhelming majority of hu­
manity-the conditions of our life becoming ever more 
precarious as the crisis of imperialism deepens.8 
The point that all genuine revolutionaries recognize, 
then, is that the imperialist division of labor is central to the 
functioning of the capitalist system. As the Main Resolution 
of the First Congress of the African People's Socialist Party 
states, "the resources, the wealth, the near slave-labor of 
the vast majority of the peoples of the world have been the 
basis for the development, not only of the wealth of the 
white ruling class, but of the entire North American 
society."B Thus the stolen labor of African people, the 
destruction of local markets and the dumping of excess 
goods on African people, the enforced conditions which 
have always meant paying African workers below the value 
of our labor power, that is below the amount that is 
necessary in order to successfully survive and reproduce, 
constitute an ongoing condition of genocide, of increasing 
emiseration, of domestic colonialism. 
It is important to begin a review of the case for repara­
tions for African people in the U.S. with this exposure of the 
corrupt chauvinist politics of the white left which so often 
masks itself as "multinational." For it has been their access 
to resources which has allowed a hundred publications to 
flourish while the black movement was under the withering 
fire of State attack; it is their assumptions and arguments 
which fill the ears of any progressive-leaning person; it is 
their research which has served to obscure and distort the 
truth. And if this is not challenged, they will succeed in their 
12 
= 
bid to take over as the new ruling class when the decay of 
the pr~sent r~lers reaches a certain pOint, a new ruling class 
of white national socialism which will fight to hold the 
r~s?urces which h~ve been piled up in the centers of impe­
nall~m over centunes of piracy and exploitation, instead of 
moving forward to an equitable distribution of resources 
based on the needs of the peoples of the world the contri­
bution to this wealth by the people of the wO;,d, and the 
human understanding of justice based on genuine socialist 
internationalism: ~ould the white left attempt such a thing? 
LO.O~ at the prediction of another Marxist, John Eaton, of the 
Bntlsh Communist Party, in Political Economy: 
. The national product of capitalist Britain would 
clearly provi~e ~he starting pOint for the development 
~f a new socialist economy. It is, as it were, the base 
line from which the higher standards of material 
wealth available for everyone in a socialist SOCiety 
would be derived. 10 
. These seductive fantasies for the British workers 
Ig~or.e "the fact that the "national product of capitalist 
~ntaln ~as 4.50 years of slave trading and colonial exploita­
tion be~lnd It, without which Britain's wealth is incom­
prehen~lble. If Eaton regards this plundered wealth as 
something other than the natural right of the British people 
~e ce~tainly does not say so. In fact, the prospect of inherit­
Ing thiS vast wealth is what has drives these European and 
Nort~ Amer,ican leftists to obscure the history, to spin 
theones. w.hlch b~ar no relation to the concrete reality, to 
the ,statistical eVI.dence, or to history. This is the material 
baSIS of ~pportunlsm, an opportunism which has dominated 
the working class of the capitalist centers from the begin­
ning of capitalism. 
!he ~ampaign for Reparations Now is based on history 
tha~ IS w~ltten by the slave, on the clear light of African Inter­
nationalism which reveals the true material relations be­
tween clas~es and p~oples in today's world. The campaign 
for. reparations has fired the imagination and initiative of 
Afncan workers who understand its just truth, just as it has 
made many North American opportunists squirm with dis­
cO'!'fort since it is a demand which brings out the truth, 
which puts the leadership and power in the struggle back in 
the ha~ds of African people. It exposes the material reality 
of Afncan people and the righteousness of the African 
struggle for liberation. 
13


--- PAGE 10 ---
The information that has been gathered in the following 
. chapters does not require tortu~ed arg~ments to. explain 
away factors that just don't fit, to dl~tort reality. The 
statistics and testimonies show concluSively that the cap­
ture of African people and our enslavement i~ th~ We.stern 
hemisphere is central to the first profits of capitalism, In the 
beginnings of the banks, factories .. and the world economy. 
They show how the struggle of African people led to the col­
lapse of the slave system, yet the capitalists by then used 
their .concentrated wealth to transform the exploitation ~f 
Africans to domestic colonialism based on peasant labor 10 
the South while they extended the system of colonialism 
throughout the world. They show how the resistance of 
African people to these conditions again caused a collapse 
of the structures of exploitation, although African people 
were still not strategically placed to be able to overturn the 
whole capitalist system. They show how African people's 
material conditions since World War II have changed with 
the Increasing proletarianization of the African masses. 
Today this process of proletarianization has .not 
caused colonialism to wither away, as some of our Marxists 
suppose, but has Intensified the exploitation and the strug· 
gle for African liberation. The exploitation of African people 
has had certain fundamentally consistent elements from 
the beginning of primitive accumulation-being the basis of 
capitalist profits but kept out of the traditionally defined 
wage.labor and capital relations of production In the 
capitalist factories-but It has passed through stages until 
the African working class Is today poised on the edge of the 
most decisive struggle of the entire 400 years of colonial ter· 
ror, the struggle for Independence, socialism, and the over· 
turning of the entire imperialist system. 
14 
Chapter Two 
Chattel Slavery: Primitive 
Accumulation of Capitalism, 
1619 to 1865 
In the course of this chapter, the amount of reparations 
owed to African people by the U.S. government and ruling 
class due to the period of chattel slavery will be calculated. 
More importantly, the process of this calculation will reveal 
the nature of the slave system, the way that capitalism came 
into being, and the social struggle for freedom which African 
people carried out. 
Primitive Accumulation. From the time African people 
were first enslaved by the Portuguese in the 1490's and first 
brought to North America by the Dutch in 1619 until the end 
of chattel slavery in 1865, African people's labor was stolen 
to provide the primitive accumulation for capitalism. In the 
early sugar plantations of the Caribbean, the concentration 
camp labor colonies were infamous centers of extraction of 
wealth from the very bodies of African laborers. The essen­
tial law of profit which was exposed by Marx is that the 
capitalist pays the worker for his or her "labor power," that 
is, only so much as is necessary for the laborer to survive and 
reproduce him/herself through raising children for the future 
generation of laborers. The capitalist then works the laborer 
to a much greater degree than paying for the value of this 
labor power requires, and makes a profit by selling the com­
modities thus produced. Such a system, however, only oper­
ated after enough wealth had been accumulated to give the 
capitalist the power to control production by controlling the 
tools of advanced production, factories, and then only 
operated for white workers. 
But the primitive accumulation of capital, the amassing 
of wealth in the form of goods to sell and transportation 
means and factories, was based on a much more cruel sys­
tem, chattel slavery. In the slavery system, workers were not 
compelled to come work for the capitalist because he con-
15


--- PAGE 11 ---
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
III 
II 
II 
I 
I 
II 
I 
trolled great factories, known as the means of production. 
No, African workers were compelled to work for the primitive 
merchant capitalists because they used extreme force and 
violence, carried out a degree of kidnapping and human 
cruelty never before seen on the face of the earth. Moreover, 
African workers held as slaves were not at all paid the value 
of our labor power, but literally worked to death. The early 
European capitalists, after driving Native peoples 
(American Indians) off the land, did not even bother to 
recompense African laborers enough to come close to sur­
vival and reproduction levels, since they could be replaced 
by new importations of African people from the Continent. 
Life expectancy of an African worker who got to the Carib-
bean was no more than 5;...;,0,;"r ,;:,6-t...::.:..;;;.....:......-__ ==1IIII::'a;;:-~ 
For Britain in the 16th and 17th centuries, the slave 
trade and the sugar triangular trade was the basis for the 
concentration 0\ capital leading to the first factories and the 
beginnings of the modern capitalist system. By 1725, Britain 
had 163 ships in the slave trade and by 1750, 396 ships were 
taking Africans as slaves. 1 Why did the slave merchants set 
up plantation colonies in the Americas, which required a 
perilous and expensive ocean voyage, instead of setting up 
plantations right in Africa, only a few weeks journey down 
the coast from Europe? Because they could not penetrate 
the strong civilizations of Africa and were terrified to venture 
beyond the coast. In the Americas, they could not enslave 
the Native population because the Native people knew the 
land and could escape from bondage. But Native people 
16 
were decimated by diseases brought by Europeans and were 
not able to offer completely successful resistance to Euro­
pean coastal settlements. So the Europeans adapted the 
method of slowly bleeding Africa through taking cargoes of 
humans from the coast and setting them to work in an alien 
land. 
Bristol merchants derived profit from the slave trade 
which was invested in further ship-building. Liverpool con­
centrated its slave profits in 10 trading houses which were 
then responsible for the establishment of the industrial 
district of Lancaster, which led all of England in textile and 
shipbuilding in 1790. The history of England is comprised of 
the central dependence on the trade in African flesh for the 
primitive accumulation of capitalism. Indeed, European 
Wars in the 16th through 18th centuries were fought for con­
trol and supremacy of the slave trade. The Treaty of Asiento 
of 1713 established the British monopoly on the slave trade 
after they had established their naval superiority. Such 
British heroes as Sir Francis Drake were knighted because 
of their successful piracy and gangsterism in the struggles 
for the treasures of African production in the Caribbean. 
In speaking of the central role that Britain played in the 
slave trade and the consequent boom of British wealth and 
industry, we may call into question the humanistic boasts 
England has made in voluntarily abolishing the slave trade 
in the early 19th century. The reality is that Britain abolished 
the slave trade, and began patrolling the African coast, 
because they had already successfully populated their colo­
nies with African laborers. The British capitalists reasoned 
that if they could breed African slaves in the slave colonies, 
and stop the shipment of Africans from Africa, they would 
be depriving their competitors, the Spanish, Portuguese, 
and French, of acquiring this critical form of human capital 
to enrich their colonies. Indeed, during the entire early 
capitalist years, when commodity trading of agricultural 
goods was the leading economic enterprise, the critical ele­
ment was the control of African labor which produced this 
wealth. Britain abolished the slave trade to secure their 
economic advantage, and nothing more. 
In North America, the rising capitalist class profited off 
of the labor of Africans in the Caribbean, especially through 
their shipping centers of Boston and Baltimore which 
transported Caribbean products to North America. In addi­
tion, more and more African workers in North America itself 
; 
.. 
17


--- PAGE 12 ---
. ,,--------, 
, t -; 
r~~~ 
were set to growing commodities for export, beginning with 
tobacco, sugar, and rice and by the end of the 18th ce.ntury 
turning full force to massive cotton production. The dImen­
sions of this production were overwhelming to a European 
world which was just moving out of subsistence production, 
to a world that saw no large scale manufacture of factories, 
to a world that had not seen a global economy. The descrip­
tion of a European traveller upon first encountering the New 
Orleans levee in 1848 gives graphic clarity to this: 
It must be seen to be believed; and even then, it 
will require an active mind to comprehend acres of cot­
ton bales standing upon the levee, while miles of drays 
are constantly taking it off to the cotton presses, where 
the power of steam and screws are constantly being 
applied to compress the bales into a lesser bulk, at an 
almost inconceivable rate per day, while all around 
(bales) are piled up in miniature mountains, which 
other miles of drays are taking on shipboard, and yet 
seem unable to reduce in size or quantity, either here 
or upon the levee; for boats are constantly arriving, so 
piled up with cotton, that the lower tier of bales on 
deck are in the water; and as the boat is approaching, it 
looks like a huge raft of cotton bales, with the 
chimneys and steam pipe of an engine sticking up out 
of the center.2 
18 
2!W 
Was the slave system feudalism? Man,y North 
American political economists seek to prove a simplistic 
and schematic notion of the stages of social development 
by arguing that slavery was a feudal system. Using the 
Marxist precedents that show the ways that capitalism was 
a system that pulled together large productive enterprises 
and broke up the feudal subsistence farming of the Euro­
pean countryside, they argue that the conflict of the Civil 
War was one of the Northern capitalists seeking to break up 
the feudal Southern planter economy in order to spread 
capitalism to the whole country. Everyone from the Com· 
munisty Party-U.S.A. and the Socialist Workers Party to the 
social democratic Marxists such as Eugene Genovese 
depicts the conflict as between stagnant rural feudal 
economy and the progressive advancing Northern capitalist 
economy. These arguments are nothing but an apology for 
the complicity of all classes of North American society In 
the exploitation of African labor, since they Isolate the hor· 
rors of slavery to a condemnation of the slave owners and 
praise the capitalist class as the liberators of the slaves. 
This Is why the CP·USA named Its International Brigade 
sent to fight fascism In Spain as the Abraham Lincoln 
Brigade, to put forward the Northern capitalist Lincoln as a 
hero for American workers and to attempt to unite with 
other "progressive" and, "democratic" capitalists. 
In the real world, however, slavery was In no sense 
feudalism. In fact, slavery was the very essence of the 
capitalist system. The resistance of African people to 
slavery was at all times the stinging Indictment of the 
capitalist system as a whole while the left leaders of the 
North American working class were simply contending for 
their place In North American society. As the observation of 
the New Orleans levee graphically shows, slave labor was 
not a throwback to a mode of production of Europe of 1,000 
years earlier; rather It was the primary accumulation of 
wealth that provided the entire economic boom of early 
capitalism. As B.1. Koval pointed out In his study of slavery 
In Brazil: "Nascent capitalism In the leading countries of 
Western Europe shunned no means for Its own enrichment, 
not even those which would appear to be historically 
~efunct. Thus capital revived and Infused new life Into the 
institution of slavery."3 The slavery of capitalism only 
shares a common generic name with the slavery known In 
earlier periods of Europe and in other continents .where 
19


--- PAGE 13 ---
systems of labor obligations characterized mass econo­
mies. 
The first European capitalist production occurred in 
Venice in the 14th century after Crusaders plundered the 
Mid-east. But this line of primitive accumulation could not 
be maintained; the bleeding of the Mid-east could not be 
harnessed the way the slave colonies of America were. So 
capitalism died out in Venice. Chattel slavery could be 
started without the development of complex tools or fac­
tories, the traditionally defined "capital" which the 
capitalist controls in the economic hierarchy. Thus, the 
slave himself or herself represented ready-made capital, 
advan.ced means of production which could be procured by 
force of arms in Africa. 
Because slaves did not require complex tools for plan­
tation labor, the economy is known as a labor-intensive 
system. It was labor-intensive plantation farming which 
allowed the merchant class to concentrate the resources 
necessary for the first major long-term investments in the 
factory system. The slave labor system produced a tremen­
dous supply of commodities with very low technological 
Input. Under slave labor, wealth was not extracted at the 
level of consumption. That is, slaves were producers of 
goods for export, but were not used as a market for com­
modities as is the case with the industrial proletariat. 
Slave producers were a relatively constant element of 
production in that they were organized in plantations over 
long periods of time, not hired and fired according to the 
immediate tasks and competition between producers. 
Planters did not increase their profits through technical 
Innovation and changes in the labor force, but rather in­
creased production by intensification of labor, gang labor, 
and by migrating to new and richer soils. The only way that 
the labor force was characterized by some degree of mobil­
ity was when excess African workers were rented out by 
planters to other planters or nearby industrialists. The 
tremendous profits realized from slave labor, the increasing 
efficiency of huge gang labor plantations, and the mobility 
provided by the use of rental systems show that the slave 
system was not a stagnant and outmoded labor system as 
Genovese maintains, but rather a booming part of capital­
Ism. What brought the slave system to an end was not sim­
ply some internal weakness in the abstract of the planter 
economy or the opposition of the Northern capitalist, but 
20 
rather the resistance and rebellion of the Africans held in 
bondage. 
U.S. laws were used to enforce the slave system and 
the rule of private property. In the first place, slavery itself 
was legal, and for any African to resist that condition was a 
violation of the law. It was also illegal for Africans to learn 
to read and write, as today is still enforced by unofficial 
laws and practices. In Norfolk, Virginia in 1853, a Mrs. 
Douglas was arrested for teaching Africans to read. The 
judgement against her read: 
Upon an indictment found against you for assem­
bling with negroes to instruct them to read and write, 
and for associating with them in an unlawful assembly, 
you were found guilty ... The Court is not called upon to 
vindicate the policy of the law in question for, so long 
as it remains upon the statute book and unrepealed, 
public and private justice and morality require that it 
should be respected and sustained. There are persons, 
I believe, in our community, opposed to the policy of 
the law in question. They profess to believe that univer­
sal intellectual culture is necessary to religious in­
struction and education and that such culture is 
suitable to a state of slavery ... lt is not true that our 
slaves cannot be taught religious and moral duty, 
without being able to read the Bible and use the 
pen ... There might have been no occasion for such 
enactments in Virginia or elsewhere on the subject of 
negro education but as a matter of self defense 
against the schemes of Northern incendiaries and the 
outcry against holding our slaves in bondage ... They 
scattered far and near pocket handkerchiefs and other 
similar articles, with frightening engravings, and 
printed over with anti-slavery nonsense, with a view to 
wor" upon the feeling and ignorance of our negroes, 
who otherwise would have remained comfortable and 
happy ... 4 
Likewise, the Dred Scott decision rendered by the U.S. 
Supreme Court in 1857 extended the defense of slavery to 
the states which had formerly abolished that system. This 
deciSion maintained that Africans were not citizens of the 
U.S. and therefore not protected by the rights inscribed in 
the Constitution, that any slave brought North by his or her 
Owner remained a slave, and any slave who escaped to the 
21


--- PAGE 14 ---
North could be apprehended by federal or state authorities 
and returned to the owner. 
Wealth stolen from African people held as slaves in the 
U.S. and the rest of the diaspora was not a pre-capitalist 
anachronism, but instead was the essential factor in the ex­
plosive growth of capitalism on a world scale, in the 
enriching of European and North American societies, in 
developing the capacity of their petty rulers to dominate the 
people of the world because of their superior means of pro­
duction and war equipment. As sociologist Immanuel 
Wallerstein says, "Coerced and semi·coerced semi-wage 
labor is, and has been from the beginning of 'capitalism as a 
world system, a phenomenon of peripheral areas of the 
capitalist world economy, while contractual labor is con­
cen~ra~edJlargely but not exclusively) in core areas."5 
Calculating the stolen wealth. Before attempting a 
qualitative calculation of the amount of wealth stolen from 
African people, it is necessary to make an obvious but 
essential warning. These calculations measure stolen 
wealth, the wealth used by the capitalist class to assure its 
supreme power, but there can be no quantitative, monetary 
measure of the countless horrors attendant on the slave 
trade. There is no calculation here for massive murders, tor­
tures, brandings, rapes, castrations, tearing of children 
from their mothers, and destruction of unborn generations 
through genocide. When we draw out the reality of the slave 
trade and plantation labor, the moral and human revulsion 
at the scene defies all calculation. But calculate we must, 
22 
for in the face of the overwhelming terror and debasity that 
our inquiries uncover, we too often give up any attempt at 
measuring the real reason these horrors were committed 
and in the end actually underestimate the centrality And im­
portance of the slave trade to the rise of the capitalist class 
and the wealth which is the U.S. If we can show the slave 
trade to be the very foundation of the U.S. power, of the U.S. 
wealth, do we not call into question the very legitimacy of 
all present social institutions that exist in the United 
States? 
Captive African woman 
being branded while 
next generation of slave 
owners takes instruction 
.. 
The material base of society, the way wealth is produced 
and exchanged, gives rise to all social institutions, from the 
church to the schools to the government to the forms of 
cultural expression. Certainly the demonstration that 
African labor was the basis of the rise of capitalism has the 
most profound implications. Besides the fact that African 
science and culture had been critical to Europe's cultural 
awareness for the previous 2000 years and more, African 
wealth stolen in the form of the slave labor system was the 
economic base which supported all the institutions of Euro­
pean and North American society. From the robust 
bourgeois optimism of Beethoven symphonies to the explo­
Sion of urban architecture in the 19th century to the Protes­
tant Reformation and the bourgeois political reforms, every 
development described as "progressive" in the explosion of 
European and American wealth and power must be re-
23


--- PAGE 15 ---
I 
I I 
I 
I 
I 
defined as resting on the backs of African people whose 
labor made the wealth of this society. Needless to say, 
European and North American workers were forced to work 
in extremely brutal conditions, but it can be shown that the 
brutality of the slave system had no equal, and that this 
system extracted the greatest amount of wealth, the critical 
input of wealth that was the material base of capitalist 
society. And this material basis, this critical underpinning 
of the political economy of the capitalist world, continues to 
today, in an extended and sophisticated form under 
domestic colonialism within the U.S. and colonialism in its 
various forms throughout the world. 
By the 19th century, the planter class in the United 
States developed commodity farming for export to the 
highest level known in world history at the time. Plantations 
with hundreds of slaves and thousands of acres were not 
unknown. While some of the European settlers were sent off 
for subsistence farming as a way to remove dissident 
groups from Europe, the real value of the Americas to 
Europe and later to the rising U.S. capitalist class was the 
commodity farming. Before the U.S. revolution, African 
labor was used to send 100 million pounds of tobacco to 
Britain each year, providing more than 113 of U.S. exports, 
followed closely by rice. During the Revolution, Britain 
found a main tactic of disrupting the U.S. economy in driv­
ing away slaves from their plantations, and thus kidnapped 
30,000 slaves from South Carolina. With the defeat of Britain 
however, the U.S. capitalists were able to rebuild the com­
modity farming as well as increase.their trade, and thus pro­
fits with the West Indies ten-fold. 6 With the winning of the 
wa; for independence, the U.S. capitalist class embarked on 
an intensified commodity production drive and found the 
greatest profits in cotton, which could be efficiently pro­
cessed with the Cotton Gin after 1790. 
Attempting to measure the amount of wealth extracted 
from African labor brings up many difficulties. In political 
economy, the way data are treated and the conclusions 
reached depend on the questions asked. Unfortunately, the 
question of slavery and the exploitation of African labor has 
mainly been studied by North American academics, and the 
raging arguments have been between liberals and reaction­
aries. The reactionaries, such as Ulrich B. Phillips, argue 
that slavery was a civilizing influence on African "savages," 
that the plantation owners were losing money by keeping 
. slaves but carried them out of a sense of moral obligation 
The liberal.s, such as Alfred Conrad and John Meyer, carr; 
out extensive research to quantify the amount of profit that 
planters indeed did receive and argue that the planters 
,tought for their system because of economic self-interest. 
None of them, however, set out to determine the whole 
amo.unt ~f wealth taken from African labor since their point 
of view IS the debate among different classes of North 
American (white) society. 
The main error encountered in the various measure­
ments of the profitability of slavery to the planter class is 
that they obscure the wealth stolen from African people by 
failin~ to account for all of the surplus value they produced. 
What IS surplus value? When a worker is set to labor on raw 
materials or the soil, she or he produces value. What small 
amount is paid to the laborer for survival is only a part of the 
value thus produced, and the rest is surplus value to be 
used by the ruling class in any way it sees fit. The tremen­
dous surplus values created by the Africans held as slaves 
were divided between the planters and other non-producing 
classes, who got rich from no other source of wealth but the 
slaves. When you do find eviqence that some planters were 
~ot ~akin~ ~ good profit or were indeed going into debt, you 
find In their Journals long complaints against the banks and 
~ommodity traders who were subduing them through supe­
rior access to the world market which they could 
manipulate to their advantage. As the Vicksburg Daily Whig 
editorialized in 1865: 
. "By mere supineness, the people of the South have per­
~It~ed the Yankees to monopolize the carrying trade, with 
Its Immense profits. We have yielded to them the manufac­
turing business ... We have acquiesced in the claims of the 
Nor~h to do all the importing, and most of the exporting 
business, for the whole Union ... Meantime the South re­
mains passive-in a state of torpidity-maki'ng cotton bales 
for· the North to manufacture, and constantly exerting 
Ourselves to increase the production as much as possible."7 
It was these sectors, the commodity traders bankers 
and insurers, who were on the rise in the United States. Th~ 
early manufacturers and industrialists were able to invest in 
building of machinery directly from the profits of the com­
'modity trade-with the first factories often built by the com-
25


--- PAGE 16 ---
I 
I 
II 
I 
I I 
I I 
I 
I I 
i I 
modity traders themselves. These first factories were in­
volved with textile production and ship-building, that is, 
enterprises directly connected to the slave trade and slave 
labor. To the African held as slave, and to the African 
villages and cities robbed of their productive powers and 
their ability to develop in their own interests, it little mat­
tered whether the stolen wealth of their labor was taken by 
the planters or other parasite sectors along the line. 
Therefore, in addition to studying the statistics related to 
planters, we will attempt to assess the amount of wealth 
taken by the Northern capitalists from the labor of African 
people. 
In addition, the contribution of African labor is signifi­
cant for early non-agricultural enterprises. First of all, the 
productivity of the machinery, the ability of the machines to 
multiply the output of the laborer, was based on the wealth 
accumulated from the plantation labor that was then 
crystallized in the capital wielded by the factory owner. That 
is, the existence of a bale of cotton can be measured in 
social terms by calculating the amount of labor which has 
gone into producing that bale. The fact that labor has been 
expended to create that bale of cotton, or "worked up" in 
the bale, can be expressed in the term of crystallized labor. 
26 
This is what capital is. For example, the labor of one African 
held as slave in Mississippi in the 1850's would produce 8 
bales of cotton per year, each weighing 400 pounds. The 
planter and commodity traders became rich by selling the 
cotton at 12¢ to 15¢ a pound or up to $60 per bale. The eight 
bales of cotton which the African has brought Into ex­
istence through his/her labor have provided $480 for the 
planter and brokers. The cost of providing starvation sub­
Sistence to the slave was perhaps $20 per year, and perhaps 
another $60 would have to be expended for plantation 
maintenance per slave worked. So the capitalists would 
have cleared $400 on the labor of each African. The $400 
which was produced by the slave represents real social 
values, values which are contained in the cotton, values 
which represent the crystallized labor of the slave. 
And the social values created by African slave labor, the 
tremendous profits from plantation commodity farming, 
represented the greatest wealth of the early capitalist 
society, the place where fortunes were made and the critical 
point in the economy where capital was accumulated for In­
vestment in massive transportation and industrial enter­
prises. In order for the capitalist to make primitive factories 
and then more complex ones, he had to control ever greater 
amounts of crystallized labor, or capital, which we shall 
demonstrate was in the first place derived from African 
slave labor. So the multiplication of wealth, the ability of the 
capitalist to amass great amounts of crystallized labor and 
use it to command ever greater armies of labor, of North 
American wq,rkers as well as the ever-growing frontiers of 
colonial conquests, was a benefit which the capitalist got 
from the enslavement of African people. 
Secondly, about 5 percent of African people held as 
slaves were put to work in many non-agricultural enter­
prises; they worked in the textile factories of South 
Carolina, Florida, Alabama, MiSSissippi, and Georgia; in the 
saltworks of Clay County, Kentucky; in the iron and lead 
mi~es of Caldwell and Crittenden Counties; in mills, iron 
fUrnaces, tobacco factories; as dock workers in New 
Orleans, Savannah, Charleston, and Norfolk; in the building 
~rades erecting huge Southern buildings like those famous 
In Charleston and the wrought iron works of New Orleans; 
Cutting forests, quarrying marble; grading highways; mining 
Coal; digging canals; sawing lumber; bridging streams;8 
Crewing keel boats and river boats; loading and repairing 
27


--- PAGE 17 ---
II 
, I 
I I 
I 
, II 
II 
vessels; warehousing cargo; paving and cleaning streets; 
digging sewers and hauling garbage. 9 And on the planta­
tion, the labor of African people was used for more than 
commodity production. Slaves also cleared forests, im­
proved land, grew food crops, sewed, cared for North 
American children, cooked, and cleaned house for planters. 
On the plantation, an incredible 61 percent of the African 
population was part of the labor force, since slaves were ex­
pected to more than earn their keep by age 9 and were work­
ed until they died. 
/' ... *,,,, 
PROFITS ACCRUING TO PLANTERS. 
The possible ways of measuring this stolen wealth are 
many. To boil them down to two basic approaches: you can 
estimate the amount of wealth produced for the planters in 
each year of production for each slave and make a simple 
calculation to multiply out the amount of wealth produced 
by the population by the number of years of bondage (known 
as "quantification of labor units"). Or you can look at the 
overall figures for annual sales of the major commodities 
produced by slave labor, deduct an estimated amount of 
value added by management and transport functions not 
carried out by Africans, and get a rough idea of the amount 
28 
of wealth produced for the planters. Remember, however, 
that both of these calculations only give you the amount of 
we~lth produced for the planters. Later in the chapter, the 
estImate for the other recipients of slave surplus value will 
be made. \ 
Estimate through quantification of slave labor units. 
The estimation of the amount of labor extracted per 
African per year requires first the calculation of data from 
many sample plantation records in various parts of the 
country. The data from -the 19th century are most complete 
and will be used for the first calculation; then we can 
calculate back to the earlier two centuries based on an 
estimate of the proportion of wealth produced in those cen­
turies compared to the 19th. 
Estimates are made based on three kinds of data: the 
profitability of investment in slaves from the records of 
planters; direct division of cotton crop production by the 
number of slaves put to work on it; and records of rental of 
slaves by owners to other industrial and agricultural hiring 
agents. 
Profitability. The investment in slaves was the highest 
return investment available in the United States in the 19th 
century. While railroad investments yielded between 4 and 7 
percent return (that is, a $100 stock would be sold for $104 
to $107 in a year), the purchase of slaves returned wealth per 
year at between 5 percent to 9 percent to 14 percent 10 and 20 
percent and even higher.11 While the price of an African sold 
in~o slavery fluctuated throughout the century, as did the 
prrce of cotton, the differences through the century are 
more minor than those seen in the inflation explosion of the 
past few decades. The price of a "prime field hand"was an 
average of $700 in 1828, $1000 in 1839, $900 in 1848, $1200 in 
1853, and $1800 in 1860. The maintenance cost was in­
credibly low, about $20 per year for each African worker. 
This is because the planter maintained the African labor 
force at starvation level, giving back to the worker less than 
the value of his/her labor power, or the amount needed to 
survive and reproduce. Africans maintained small gardens, 
foraged illegally in the woods, and maintained an under­
ground economy in order to survive under such conditions. 
The starvation level of existence imposed on the enslaved 
Africans can be seen in the development of so-called soul 
food which included the intestines, feet, tails, and ears of 
pigs and the necks and feet of chickens. Averages determin-
29


--- PAGE 18 ---
I 
I I 
ed by Conrad and Meyer from information on profitability of 
slave labor yield an estimate of the extracted wealth, for the 
planter alone, of $117 to $252 per year from each African 
slave.12 
Division of Plantation Crop Profit by Slave Labor Force. 
Woodman makes sample calculations of the amount of 
profit produced per slave.13 In Issaquena County in 1860, an 
average of 8 bales of cotton was produced by each produc­
tive African, and that is without deducting house servants, 
blacksmiths, carpenters, etc. Each bale of cotton has 400 
Ibs. The profit.in 1860 was $350.00 per slave. Charles Snydor 
comes up with the figure of $11,000 profit produced by 30 
slaves, that is $366 per African laborer.14 Kenneth Stampp, 
in The Peculiar Institution, estimates $250 per year.15 Some 
of the higher figures may represent slightly inflated 
estimates because they are taken from the highly produc­
tive Southern plantations towards the end of the chattel 
slave era. Nevertheless, Mississippi and Louisiana planta­
tions, surpassed by the mammoth plantations of Texas, did 
account for a tremendous production of wealth in that 
period. 
Estimates from the Rental of Slaves. Slaves were rented 
out by owners just as mules or ploughs might be. This prac­
tice of rental, which was on the rise in the 1850's and 1860's, 
was a way that the planter class adapted to the demands of 
the economy and allowed them to make the labor force 
more mobile and applied where productivity was highest. 
Again, the average figures available on the rate of slave hire 
(paid to the owner) are $125 per year.16 Of course, this is the 
amount of money paid to the owner simply for the fact that 
he owns the African, but the renter also expects to get a 
return on the $125 spent in getting more wealth produced by 
the rented instrument. Using a conservative estimate on the 
amount 0' return expected on hired labor or rented farm 
animal as 100 percent (that is, the enterprise may expect to 
spend one third on hired labor, one third on raw materials, 
and keep one third as surplus value; so the labor rental and 
surplus value are equal quantities), then we may estimate 
the return on the labor of the African who is rented out as 
$250 total for the owner and renter. 
The estimated profit from women slaves was lower than 
for men when direct field labor is compared. But the estimate 
of their value was increased by the fact that they were 
30 
expected to also produce children, which increased the 
wealth of the owner. In this way, their values were equal. 
ized. 
From this information, it is safe to take a broad average 
of $250 per year as the amount of wealth produced by 
African labo~ers in the years 1790 to 1860. Combining this 
with population data17 on the African labor force we can 
generate the following table: ' 
Wealth Produced for the Planter Class by African Labor, 
1790·1860 
Census Population Siave.years Slave years in 
production, 
I.e. number of 
slaves working 
(61% of 
population) 
year In the 
decade 
1790 698,000 
1800 893,000 
1810 1,191,000 
1820 1,538,000 
1830 2,009,000 
1840 2,487,000 
1850 3,205,000 
1860* 3,954,000 
6,980,000 4,257,800 
8,930,000 5,447,300 
11,910,000 7,265,100 
15,380,000 9,381,800 
20,090,000 12,254,900 
24,870,000 15,170,700 
32,050,000 19,550,000 
3,954,000 2,411,900 
·only count 1 year as war broke out 
Amount of wealth 
produced (slave­
years In produc­
tion times $250 
wealth produced 
by each) 
$1,064,000,000 
1,362,000,000 
1,816,000,000 
2,346,000,000 
3,138,000,000 
3,793,000,000 
4,888,000,000 
602,000,000 
~d~ing up the right·hand column, then, we came up with 
$19 billion in wealth produced In this 70 year period In 1850 
dollars. ~hile the same detailed data are not available for 
the prevIous 150 years, It is possible to get a rough estimate 
by comparing the Gross National Product and the amount of 
commodity production In those years. The Income was less 
:~nce there were fewer Africans In the U.S. in the 1'7th and 
rly 18th century. But the major commodity crops tobacco 
rice, sugar, and indigo, were raised largely thro~gh Slav~ 
ab?r. We can safely add half again as much as the 1790.1860 
est!mate to come up with a total of $30 billion produced by 
Afflcan labor for the planter class during the period of chat-
31 
, ,.


--- PAGE 19 ---
tel slavery. This leaves out, of course, the central production 
• of wealth by Africans held captive in the Caribbean and 
Brazil and Central AmeriGa who were producing the riches of 
the sugar triangular trade and have been estimated by the 
people of the Caribbean as contributing $200 billion more, 
the bulk of it for Europe. 
The figure of $30 billion in 19th century dollars may not 
seem so impressive in today's gigantic capitalist market, 
where a national rail strike can cost $% billion per day. But 
this was in the era of early mercantile capitalism, when for­
tunes were counted in the hundreds of thousands of dollars, 
when the U.S. government budget was at its peak in the 
1850's only $70 million, and the total U.S. property was 
valued at $16 billion. This was $30 billion at a time when 
economic surplus was just beginning to be produced; $30 
billion off the sweat of African brows which far surpassed 
the surplus derived from any other venture at that time. 
Estimate of Values by Counting Up 
Crops Produced by African Labor. 
The estimate for wealth produced by African labor held 
in chattel slavery in the 19th century can be made by 
calculating the amount of income produced by cotton sales 
and deducting 4 percent (suggested by Alfred Conrad and 
John Meyer in The Economics of Slavery)l' as the amount 
accounted for in the price by transportation and manage­
ment values. The cotton crop sales for the years 1790-1860 
add up to $3.5 billion. The sales' of other crops grown by 
African people, rice, corn In Southern states, sugar, 
molasses, comes to about half that amount, or $1.6 billion, 
leading to a total production of these crops of $5.25 billion. 
While four percent must be deducted to account for trans­
portation costs, It Is also necessary to add In an equal 
amount for the labor values taken In other enterprises, as 
described on page 27. So this figure of $5.25 billion falls 
somewhat below the $19 billion calculated in the other 
method, but It compares well enough since It gives the 
same magnitude of an estimate. Some difference can be 
explained because the statistics of the era were not 
extremely accurate and many actual cotton sales were 
under-reported In order to avoid taxes and tarriffs, thus 
c_uslng the expected higher results on the labor unit 
estimate. 
This calculation, then, of $19 billion for 1790 to 1860 In 
32 
profits for the planters, cross-checks well with the estimate 
determined by Jim Marketti in the Review of Black Political 
Economy19 in which he calculated the amount of unpaid 
black equity, that is, the amount of built up human capital 
based on various estimates on the rate of return on the 
Investment in Africans as slaves. After a series of com­
plicated calculations, Marketti comes up with a figure of 
unpaid equity as between $7 billion and $40 billion in 1860 
dollars, for the period of 1790 to 1860. Thus our conclusion 
of $19 billion falls within Marketti's estimate. He also con­
cludes that if this figure is brought up to 1972 with com­
pounded interest, the amount owed to African people is up 
to $995 billion by 1972. Note, however, that Marketti repeats 
the error of other political economists in ignoring the 
amount of wealth that accrued to other non-productive 
dividers of African's surplus values. The following section, 
then, deals with this important sector. 
Surplus Value Extracted by Merchants and Bankers 
In proving the essential contribution of African labor to 
the primitive accumulation of capital, it is necessary to do 
more than understand the way that Southern planters 
became rich off of our labor. Africans did more than provide 
a genteel life for the self-styled bourbons. We must 
examine the way that the wealth produced by African labor 
was used by the Northern merchants in order to start up 
Industry and banking and the basic infrastructure of 
capitalism. So far, we have only looked at the profits accru­
ing to planters based on their record books. But let us look 
closer at the planter's annual records. He must review his 
Investment in raw materials (seeds, materials such as hoes 
and plows, land), the cost of maintaining his labor force (the 
cost of maintaining Africans held as slaves was kept at a 
bare minimum, no more than $20 per year), and the payment 
of Interest on the money borrowed for purchase of slaves, 
land, equipment, as well as commissions paid to brokers for 
the sale of the crop. This last category, however, is also an 
unproductive sector, it is payments to the sector of North­
ern merchants and capitalists. If this sector produces no 
wealth but becomes wealthy, the only source of their wealth 
Is ~he stolen labor of African people. The surplus values 
Which Africans are forced to produce are being divided 
between the planters and the merchants. Let us look at 
these various sectors of capitalists and what amount of 
33


--- PAGE 20 ---
surplus value they take. 
In the first place there was the factor. The factor was a 
business agent existing in Southern towns and cities who 
was responsible for selling the cotton or other crops for 
export. Factors also became intimate with all aspects of the 
planter's business, often loaning him money, making 
general purchases, and passing on business news. The 
commission charged by the factor, according to Harold 
Faulkner 20 was 1 to 2% percent. According to Woodman 21 
the higher percent was the more common. The factor, 
however, was small in the overall business world and Wood­
man asserts that: "In reality, the power behind King 
Cotton's rickety throne was located in New York and liver­
pool rather than in New Orleans, Mobile, Savannah, and 
Charleston. If the metaphor may be extended further, the 
factors were little more than royal retainers with no more 
power than the throne they served."22 In addition, the planter 
had to payout 2.5 to 4 percent for storage, weighing, and 
insurance. 
Next in line to take a cut of the values produced by 
African labor was the large commodity broker in the North­
ern cities and in Europe. Brokers evolved out of the occupa­
tion of auctioneers in selling the products of slave labor 
In early tobacco warehouses. When the initial stockbroker 
activity was started in New York with the Funding Act of 
1790, it was the auctioneers along with some merchants 
who were the first dealers in such paper.23 The entire com­
mercial boom of Europe was based on brokerage houses 
which speculated in buying and selling commodities from 
the American colonies. Vincent Nolte 24 describes in detail 
the International trade in cotton bales which was the life 
blood of such firms as Victor Elie Lefevre & Sons of Rouen, 
Barandon & Co. of London, Cropper in liverpool, and Hot­
tinger and Co. in Havre. These brokerage firms, as well as 
the thriving firms of New York and Boston, were the earliest 
merchants profiting off of the labor of African people and 
would be the primary investors in the rising banks and In­
dustries. These specuiators drove up the price of cotton, ex­
tracting another 10 percent of the value of the crop as sold 
by the planter, over and above the costs of shipping. 
After the brokers come the bankers. These are the 
capitalists who advanced the money for the purchase of 
land and slaves at an annual interest rate of 11.5 percent to 
18.5 percent, or taking another 3 percent of the amount the 
34 
crop sold for in an average year. The bankers got their start 
on investments made by merchants to support the extrac­
tion of commodities. This included the development of the 
west Indian trade with Boston and Baltimore which 
require~ banks to advance capital for shipping v~ntures. 
According to Nettels 25 the primary function of the banks 
was to fi~ance foreign and domestic trade with commodity 
crops, since most farms outside the plantation areas 
yielded only small surpluses. Woodman describes the way 
the banker and merchant worked together to take a greater 
cut of the surplus value produced by African labor: 
Cotton buyers brought still more paper into the 
market. As representatives of firms in the North or in 
Europe, buyers were given the right by the firm they 
represente.d to draw on them for funds in order to buy 
cotton. ThiS would bring in bills drawn on New York 
Boston, Philadelphia, Liverpool, London, and many 
other places which had to be sold for local currency 
that was then used to buy cotton. Resident cotton 
buyers carrying on business on their own accounts 
w?uld draw a bill on themselves, sell it to the bank, and 
With the proceeds buy cotton. After shipping the newly 
purchased cotton to a merchant in the North or in 
Europe, the buyer would then draw on the Northern or 
foreign merchant and use this bill to meet his original 
obligation. 28 
The combined impact of the Northern merchants 
brokers, and bankers on the South was immense and th~ 
planter~ complained bitterly that they were not abl~ to keep 
the entire surplus value of African labor for themselves. At a 
Sout.hern convention of planters in 1847, they issued a 
publiC statement that included the following: 
The northern merchant has come hither and bought 
(p~oduce) from the southern planter ... abating from the 
price all the expenses, direct and incidental of 
transportation. He has insured them in northern offices 
. and shipped them abroad in his own vessels-ex­
c~anged them at a small profit for foreign merchan­
dise-brought it home-paid one-fourth of its value to 
the government-added that amount and all the ex­
pens.es of !mportation, and fifteen to twenty percent 
for hiS profits, to the price, and exposed it for sale. The 
southern merchant has now gone to him-lingering 
35


--- PAGE 21 ---
the summer through with him at heav~ ex­
pense-bought a portion of these goods-reshipped 
them in northern vessels to southern ports-~dded 
twenty-five percent more to the price, to cover his ex­
penses and profits-and sold them to the southern 
planter. All the disbursements made in this process, 
save such as are made abroad, are made among nor­
thern men; all the profits, save the southern 
merchant's, are made by northern men; and ~he 
southern planter, who supplies nearly all tl ~ foreign 
goods of the country, gets his portion of them burden­
ed with every expense that the government, merchant, 
insurer, seaman, warfinger, drayman, ~oatman, and 
wagoner can pile upon them ... Every item In the endless 
catalogue of charges, except the government. ~ues, 
may be considered a voluntary tribute from th~ citizens 
of the South to their brethren of the North, for they 
would have all gone to our people, had we done our 
own exporting and importing,21 
We might add that the complaint of this idle class was 
not a cry for justice. The real cry for justice was ":,ade by the 
African laborers who were forced to make an Involuntary 
tribute to the entire capitalist class a.nd to t~e development 
of the entire U.S. North American society. This q~ote reveals 
however, the extent that Northern capitalists thrived off the 
trade in Southern commodities. The Northerners were able 
to use their monopolies in banking and con~entrat~d 
capital to force the planter to turn over a large portl~n of his 
profits to them. According to Paul Trescott,28 .banklng was 
based on income from commodity crops, and In fact .banks 
were booming in good agricultural years and bust In bad 
years. In 1820 the U.S. had 300 banks, in 1840 it had 1000 and 
1850 it had 2000. The Southern local banks ha~ been hurt by 
local bank failures during the 1830's, and relied more and 
more on national banks and Northern banks. By 1860, Arkan­
sas Mississippi, Florida, and Texas had no banks at all. In­
dee'd the debt that the Southern planters owed the Northern 
bank~rs was growing every year. By 1860, this. debt had 
reached 113 of a billion dollars an~ the .sece~slon ?f the 
South in 1861 led to 6,000 major finanCial failures In the 
North. 
Another way that capitalism exacted its tribute based on 
the surplus values created by African labor was through 
36 
taxes. Taxes on the sale of commodities were the main way 
that commercial taxes were collected by the state. This 
capital, in ~urn, was put in government bonds for the first na­
tional banks such as the Bank of the United States founded 
by Nicholas Biddle, which was based in the North but did 
most of its business in New Orleans and other Southern 
ports. Taxes made up the bulk of the government budgets of 
the South based on commodity trade, and in the federal 
budget they made up a smaller percent. Taxes and bonds 
were used to assemble capital for all public improvements, 
such as the paving of streets in New Orleans in 1822. This 
project was financed by a $300,000 loan from cotton broker 
Vincent Nolte which he paid, he says, in "solid, well­
secured planter's notes" and on which he charged the city 
98 percent interest over a ten year period. In other words, 
municipal improvements could only be made with the 
harneSSing of the basic wealth of SOCiety, the commodities 
produced by African labor.28 
Thus we have a situation in which the different sectors 
of the capitalist class who could bring together capital 
based on the labor of African people were Investing this 
capital in enterprises deSigned to increase their extraction 
of this wealth. Merchants and insurance companies in­
vested in the first corporations, and they were often aided 
by the state, which would act out of an awareness of the 
n.eeds of the entire capitalist class for transportation and 
ever larger machinery to increase production. likewise 
banks relied on state and merchant investment. How do we 
account for the rise of manufacture and industry? 
From the beginning of the United States, commodity 
production for export was the basis of the economy and 
there was no industry to speak of. Cotton was by far the 
greatest export of the United States in the period of chattel 
alavery. Industrial goods only accounted for 6 percent of 
exports in 1820 and 11 percent in 1860. By the 1850's and 
1860's, Africans held on plantations in the U.S. were produc­
Ing 85 percent of the world's cotton, and 80 percent of the 
U.S. crop was exported. Cotton was key to International 
commerce and to the beginnings of Industry in the U.S. Tex­
tl.le manufacturing was the "frontiering" edge of American 
Industrializatlon,30 the first factories to reach a size suffi­
cient to permit them to transcend the limitations of local 
'nd regional markets and reach an entire national 'and Inter­
,.tlonal market. 
", ~, 
37


--- PAGE 22 ---
In the 18th century, the U.S. government set up protec· 
tionist tariffs to support the production of textiles by p~,-:,er 
I ms in New England which could undersell British 
i~oports. Bank deposits, based on profits from cott?n 
trading, provided the greatest amount of ~oney for the in­
vestment in industrial equipment. By the ml~d~e of the. 19.th 
century, U.S. commercial banks were. shifting their in­
vestments from primarily funds for land ~mprov~ment, slave 
purchase, and agricultural supplies, to Indust~lal ventures. 
New England spindlage increased from 80,000 In 1811 to 1.3 
million in the early 1830's. The number of ~pindles d~u~led 
again in the next 20 years. By the 1850 s, a specl.allzed 
machinery industry had grown up in New England de~lcated 
to producing new equipment and desig~s for t~e te.xtlle fac­
tories. When the American protectionist legislation went 
into effect, the merchant capitalists of the North began to 
receive much greater incomes because they were spared 
the expenses of shipping their goods to England. The 
availability of this capital, accumulated surplus value fr~m 
African labor was the major stimulant to New England in­
dustry. By 1'860, the cotton goods industries. were the 
leading manufacturers in the United States, with 116,0~0 
employees and' a product valued at $107 million. Of this 
amount about half, $54.7 million, was the value added by 
the factories, and the rest was the value produced ~y 
African labor. Again, such manufacture was concentrat~d In 
the North. New Orleans, the 5th largest U.S. city at t~e. time, 
contained only ~ percent of the manufactu~ing, that IS It was 
below the top 15 U.S. cities in manufacturl~g. Ne,:" ~rleans 
was simply a center for commodity extraction shipping. 
It is important to note that the value of cotton goods so~d 
as commodities reflect the value, i.e. la~or, wor~e~ up In 
them during the entire process of production. But.lt IS clear 
that the Northern capitalist had the upper ha~d In that ~e 
controlled vast amounts of accumulated capital. For this 
reason, he could cut into part of the surplus value pro~uced 
by the African held as slave, even buying cott,on for his fac­
tories at a lower price so that he would reall~e part of the 
profit upon the sale of his textiles from the direct labor of 
African people. How, then, can we add up the amou~t of 
wealth which the northern capitalists took from the direct 
labor of African people? Of the cotton crop sent to market, 
the factor took 2% percent, the storage and insurance took 
4 percent, the brokers took 10 percent, the banks at least 3 
38 
-" percent, and the textile manufacturers perhaps another 5 
percent. Adding these up, we find that at least 24% percent 
of the cotton values produced by African labor were taken 
by the Northern capitalists. This at least equals the 5 to 20 
percent calculated as the amount of profit taken by 
Southern planters and probably far exceeds it . But to keep 
our estimate on the conservative side, we can conclude that 
the amount of profit derived from slave labor was equal for 
the Southern planter class and the Northern capitalists. For 
this reason, we must say that the $30 billion in profit for the 
planters is equalled by the $30 billion in profits for the 
Northern captalists, giving an estimate of wealth extracted 
from African people during the period of chattel slavery of 
$60 billion. 
This is $60 billion which simply abstracts the measure of 
built-up human labor, human labor which could have been 
used to build up the strength and culture of Africa. Walter 
Rodney and others have demonstrated the disastrous effect 
of the slave trade in dislocating tens of millions of Africans 
and devastating economies throughout the Continent. The 
developing history and struggles of the people of Africa was 
interrupted by the coming of the Europeans, and the 
centuries-long process of bleeding Africa began. If the Euro­
peans could not penetrate past the coast in 1490, and if 
African civilization far surpassed European civilization in 
1490, the constant drain on'Africa meant that by 1890 Africa 
was on its back, easy pickings for the European colonialists 
to enter and proclaim as their own. The labor, resources, 
technical knowledge, and culture of African people were 
carted off to enrich the European and North American ruling 
classes. This is why we say the underdevelopment of Africa 
was the condition for the development of Western society. 
While our history books taught us that Europe marched for­
ward to build modern society while Africa was a land of 
backward barbarians, the true history reveals that the Euro­
peans were the barbarians and the pirates. From the begin­
ning, the 'division and dispersal of African people has been 
tile technique that European and North American 
capitalists have used to amass huge fortunes from our 
labor. They dispersed our people around the world, but con­
centrated the wealth we produced in a few large financial 
centers. The struggle that African people have always car­
ried out is to re-concentrate our people into one African peo­
Ple and to disperse the wealth out of the imperialist centers 
39


--- PAGE 23 ---
by paying us back for the wealth we have produced and had 
ripped away from us. 
How great a percent of the North American economy 
was actually tied up In the slave labor plantation system? 
Comparing the profit the capitalist class derived from slave 
labor with the entire Gross National Product (GNP) of a sam­
ple year 1839 we see that approximately $540 million was 
profit fr~m sl~ve labor and the GNP was $1,540 million. This 
means that 35 percent of the Gross National Product was 
produced by African labor, while an untold amount of, the 
GNP which is counted as the labor. of North ~menc~n 
workers was in fact for those engaged In transforming, ship­
ping, and selling the products of that labor. 
In order to determine how much reparatio~s is owed. to 
African people solely from the profit taken dunng the penod 
of chattel slavery in the U.S., it is necessary to convert th~ 
$60 billion in profits in the previous centuries to the ~alue It 
would have in 1982 dollars. This is done by ,compan~g the 
costs of various necessities in different penods of history, 
which has generated the Consumer Price Index. The C?n­
sumer Price Index for 1967, then, gives an amount by ,:",hlch 
you can multiply any amount of money from any penod ?f 
history to determine the value the money would have In 
1967. Then new ratios are released every year to measure 
how much a dollar in 1967 would be worth today. Because ~f 
inflation under capitalism, then, the value of a dollar ~s 
always decreasing, and the ~umber. of dollars needed ~n 
1982 to buy :A pair of shoes IS co~slderably m~re than In 
1882. The rates of inflation are particularly high since ~orld 
War II, and for simplicity we have started the cal~ulatlon .of 
dollar values during the period of chattel slavery In the mid­
dle of the. 19th century instead of trying to calculate ,the 
dollar value conversion for each year. Roughly calculating, 
then we find that a dollar in the 19th century would be wO,rth 
10 d~lIars today. So the $60 billion in stolen wealth ~unng 
slavery must be valued as $600 billion today. That. IS ,the 
amount of crystallized labor, profits, that the ca~ltallsts 
took during the period of slavery. This does not even Include 
interest which could also be charged on a debt S? long over­
due. So at a minimum, $600 billion is awed to Afncan people 
for reparations for the period of slavery. 
Can there be any doubt of the central place that African 
40 
stolen labor played in the explosive growth of American and 
European capitalism? A contemporary economist, EN. 
Elliot of Augusta, Georgia, wrote in 1860: 
Slavery is not an isolated system but is so mingled 
with the business of the world that it derives facilities 
from the most innocent transaction. Capital and labor 
in Europe and America are largely employed in the 
manufacture of cotton. These goods, to a great extent, 
may be seen freighting every vessel from Christian 
nations that traverses the seas of the globe and fillinr 
the warehouses and shelves of the merchants over 
two-thirds of the world. By the industry, skill, and enter­
prise employed in the manufacture of cotton, mankind 
are better clothed; their comfort better promoted, 
general interest more highly stimulated, commerce 
more widely extended, and Civilization more rapidly ad­
vanced than in any preceding age.31 
Thus bragged the North American colonial apologist. A 
more accurate description of the relation of the slave trade 
and plantation labor to the growing world economy is pro­
vided by George Rawick: 
For the Europeans and the Americans, the slave 
trade provided a significant part of the basis for the 
original accumulation of the early stages of capitalist 
development and thus helped lay the foundation for 
nineteenth and twentieth century capitalism. In Africa, 
on the other hand, slavery actually helped prevent the 
accumulation of capital. 
Capitalism in Western Europe required that the 
peasants be thrown off the land by such processes as 
the English enclosure acts, which turned farms into 
sheep runs. It required that the surplus population be 
deported or enticed to the New World and such other 
outposts of European colonization as Australia. 
Thousands of the poor, the landless, and the criminal 
were shipped to North America or Australia as inden­
tured servants or convicts. 
Capitalism, moreover, required the capital ex­
tracted from slave labor on the plantations and in the 
mines of the New World. It demanded that the stock of 
capital gained in the slave trade and through the labor 
in mines and on plantations be taken back into the 
41


--- PAGE 24 ---
mother country and that, at a later stage, the surplus 
labor force be kept at home, cheapening the cost of 
labor.32 
And, as the African People's Socialist Party explains in 
The Struggle for Bread, Peace, and Black Power. 
The slave trade was the prime force which gave 
birth to the world economy and to the development of 
capitalism which in its present form we call impe­
rialism. Consequently, it is the responsibility of all gen­
uine socialist revolutionaries to have a deep, funda­
mental, historical analysis of the consequences of the 
slave trade, not only as it regards Africa but also as it 
regards the various and sundry struggles against capi­
talism throughout the world, for they are all confronted 
with contradictions which have their origins in the at­
tack on Africa, slavery, and the slave trade. 33 
For too long, the colonialist academics have clouded 
people's minds with the metaphysical and unscientific 
analyses known as "race politics." Race politics ascribes 
the contradictions in the world to difference in races, either 
through their cultural, biological, or psychological 
characteristics. Divorced from an understanding of the 
material underpinnings of society, race politics are shared 
by some African nationalists and such liberal North 
Americans as the Kennedy clan. Some of the people who ac­
cept these politics will explain that the Europeans 
assaulted Africa because of a basic biological flaw in their 
evolution; others will blame the Africans for having chiefs 
willing to sell their people into captivity, while all will agree 
that African slavery was caused by something other than 
the development of the capitalist system. We have 
demonstrated here that the kidnapping and placing to work 
of African people was central to the growth and develop­
ment of the wealth of u.S. society. The surplus values ob­
tained from the forced labor of African people made up for 
20 to 50 percent of the entire Gross National Product of the 
U.S. Not only that, but it amounted to freed up capital, 
capital that could be concentrated in the beginning in­
dustries which were destined to start a chain of develop­
ment and exploitation unheard of in human history. 
More crucial than the figure of $600 billion in debts owed 
from the period of chattel slavery, however, is the 
understanding that Western capitalism would not have even 
42 
gotten off the ground without this stolen wealth. Indeed, if 
Africa had been allowed to develop throughout the last four 
centuries, without the constant drain caused by the brutal 
depopulation of the slave traders on the coasts whose 
agents reached across the entire Continent in search of 
bOdies to sell, without the $60 billion in wealth produced off 
of African labor which went to enrich Boston and New York 
and London merchants and capitalists, without the tens of 
millions of premature and grisly deaths at the hands of the 
slave traders, there can be no doubt that we would not be to­
day inheriting the deep political contradictions of African 
oppression and underdevelopment that are seen from 
Alania to Oakland, California. The fundamental Marxist law 
of the accumulation of capital does not mean simply that 
the lot of workers got worse as capitalism developed. It can­
not even be explained by the more international perspective 
that the growth of colonialism and the international division 
of labor meant that the emiseration of the working class 
was "exported" to the colonies. Rather, the degradation and 
emiseration of labor was from the very first instance based 
on the development of a world economy, the colonization of 
African people first by kidnapping to the New World and 
then, additionally, on the Continent of Africa itself, and on 
the concentration of the stolen wealth of these colonial 
hostages into the first large scale capital enterprises. But 
the emiseration of labor for profit cannot be limited to 
narrowly-defined economics. It means the theft of resources; 
history, liberty, life, culture, traditions, family relations, and 
much more. No matter what further calculations and quan­
tifications can be made, it is clear that the African captivity 
during the rise of capitalism constitues the very foundation 
of the product of capitalism, and that this is owed to African 
people. 
Afterword to Chapter 2: Black Inventions 
American economic history is fraught with myths and 
distortions and capitalist assumptions about the causes 
and bases of the explosive growth of capitalism in the U.S. 
One of the major points reviewed in Western economic his­
tory is the series of inventions and technical improvements 
Which gave continual bursts to the productivity of labor in 
the U.S. and therefore to the ability of the capitalists to 
aCcumulate capital. This colonialist myth must be exposed. 
,rtf 
43


--- PAGE 25 ---
In the first place, group agricultural techniques wer~ 
highly developed in Africa, and the familiarity of the ~shantl 
and other African captives with this type of agriculture 
made them an essential labor force. Continual improve­
ments in agricultural techniques were, as has always been 
the case, developed by the laborers themselves in order to 
make their work easier, although these developments were 
inevitably taken over by the planter class in order to work 
the Africans harder and extract more profit. Besides all the 
agricultural techniques developed in cotton and tobacco 
farming, Africans were responsible for such inventions ~s: 
the corn planter, cotton planter, and corn harvesters, in­
vented by Henry Blair in the 1840's; the advanced methods 
of refining sugar and sugar beets, developed by N~rbert 
Rlilleux· the lubricating process required for all machmery, 
invented by Elijah McCoy; railroad air brakes, invented by 
Granville Woods; and many more. 
In addition even those inventions attributed to Euro­
pean and North' American technologists must be placed in 
the context of the prevailing slave economy. For the conc~n­
tration of resources which was providing capital for the first 
factories was also necessary in order to free up people to 
build universities to study in the schools, to establish the , . . 
techniques of modern science. The inventors and sCientists 
who provided the developments for the indus~rial revolut~on 
would have been occupied as peasants or artisans, working 
the majority of each day just to provide themselves with 
subsistence, if it had not been for the wealth extracted from 
Africans held as slaves. 
Certainly universities and learning had existed in 
earlier centuries, such as the world-famous university in 
Tlmbuktu the unsurpassed library of the ancient world at 
Alexandrl'a, and the smaller schools in Oxford and Paris. But 
the concentration of capital that was attendant upon the 
rise of the slave trade led to surpluses that provided an 
unprecedented growth of the universities, of gener~1 .lit­
eracy 'among the middle classes of Europe, of printing 
presses and extensive experimental projects designed to 
improve production growing up throughout Europe and the 
U.S. 
This is not just a general pOint. It can be demonstrated 
by such dramatic examples as the invention of the steam 
engine, which set the basis for the first factory s~stem ~nd 
extensive machinery manufacture. The man who IS credited 
44 
"I
f,,' 
" .~( 
, ,I' 
,~";"'X 
'with this invention, James Watt, lived off the proceeds from 
just one plantation in Jamaica. It was the labor of African 
people on this plantation which provided the surplus for 
Watt to carry out his experiments, to put his first attempted 
engines into production. In addition, Eli Whitney, who is 
generally credited with the invention of the cotton gin in 
1793 which revolutionized the cotton plantation economy by 
Increasing the amount of baleable cotton per laborer by ten 
times, was the son of a p'lanter. Whitney learned the science 
and mechanics he needed at Yale University, one of those 
Ivy League institutions established for the training of reli­
gious and scientific cadre for the Southern ruling class in 
the United States. 
Thus it can be seen that many of the techniques and 
even much of the humanistic social sciences of the West 
were taken from African culture, which was not just sharing 
useful information but being robbed of African identity, 
culture, and technique in order to enrich the life of the cap­
tors. And even those techniques and cultural advances of 
Europe and North America during the 17th and 18th cen­
turies which did not have direct links to Africa were based 
on the structure of the economy, which was based on stolen 
wealth from African people. 
The United States government has established exten­
sive precedent in law for the right of inventors of products 
who have been deprived of royalties from these inventions 
to sue for relief. For instance, Peter Roberts invented the 
"quick release" wrench in 1965 as an employee of Sears, 
which proceeded to sell 37 million of them and realized $172 
million in profit. The inventor sued because Sears had sim­
ply paid him a bonus for his inventions but no royalties. He 
asked for $19 million and received a judgement for $5 mil­
lion which Sears had to pay him in 1982. This and many 
other precedents may be advanced by Africans seeking 
reparations for stolen productivity and technological inno­
vations. 
45


--- PAGE 26 ---
Chapter Three 
The Rise of Colonialism: The 
African Domestic Colony, 
1865 to 1945 
After the Civil War and the end of chattel slavery, the 
form of exploitation of African people was transformed in 
certain fundamental ways. However, the basic relationship 
between African people and North American society 
remained constant. This chapter exposes those similarities 
and those differences in the course of determining the 
amount of reparations owed to African people for colonial 
theft from 1865 to 1945. 
While a particular type of slavery was overthrown by 
African people during the Civil War, the exploitation of 
black labor in the U.S. was continuous after the war. Slavery 
had been propping up capitalism for 300 years. It did not 
just happen for a brief period and then go away, leaving a 
domestic white capitalist economy. Moreover, the exploita­
tion of African people continued after official slavery was 
abolished, and in fact more efficient means of extraction of 
profits were devised. The wealth which the U.S. had amass­
ed during the period of slavery was used to subdue more 
and more of the world, putting peoples to work right in their 
own homelands for the service of the U.S. ruling class. 
While the capital intensive sector of the economy, where 
huge machinery and technical innovations were applied to 
production, was reserved for the North American pro­
letariat, the white working class, the real origin of the grow­
ing profits of capitalism was the ever-larger populations of 
peoples colonized by capitalism and forced to work at ever 
lower pay. This was the labor intensive sector of the world 
economy, whose labor was stolen at the expense of the 
dissolution and underdevelopment of their economies. 
The working class of the industrial centers never manag­
ed to grasp the importance of the world economy and failed 
to see beyond their own interest in improving their imme­
diate conditions or power. The left leaders, even the German 
47 
--"


--- PAGE 27 ---
Marxists who settled in the U.S., were not won to strong 
solidarity with the slave resistance, but only gave support to 
the extent that they could see some advantage to be gained 
from such support. Marx devised the term "wage slave" to 
dramatize the plight of the industrial proletariat under 
capitalism. But while the proletarian may be a wage slave, 
that Is held in a sort of slavery by the wages system, he/she , . 
existed side by side with real slavery, slaves In every sense 
of the word. If Marx was warning of the danger of European 
workers being reduced to the status of slaves, he was not 
placing a central emphasis on the actual slavery that ex­
isted. 
With the capitalists in the North raking in huge profits 
from the slave system, and the white working class pro­
viding outright hostility or at best some signs of weak sup­
port to the African freedom fight, how did the slave system 
come to an end? The capitalists did not just decide one day 
to free the slaves and tryout another form of exploitation. 
That is not how history unfolds. 
THE END OF CHATTEL SLAVERY 
Chattel slavery came to an end in the United States not 
because of the conflict between a Northern capitalist and a 
Southern feudalist class, not because of the moral crusade 
of white abolitionists, bu.t in the first place because of the 
very resistance of African people. Not Only, w~re t~e~e .exten­
sive slave rebellions such as Nat Turner s In Virginia, but 
the South was witnessing successful slave revolutions in 
the Caribbean and growing lines of communication and 
subversion between Africans on the islands and the 
Africans on the U.S. plantations. For a fictionalized account 
of this very real relation, see the 1850's novel by Martin 
Delaney, Blake. The planters were desperate to provide for 
their own security, which was one of the main motivations 
of the Louisiana Purchase. The planters hoped to extend the 
state power of slave-holders further west in order to close 
off any nearby frontier for escape and resistance by t~e 
slaves. They sought to disperse the African labor force In 
order to undermine the density of the African population 
and its significance for rebellion, and to weaken the lines of 
communication and rebellion. 
In addition, Africans were escaping from the plantations 
in greater numbers every year, aided by Africans in the 
North or fleeing all the way to Canada. The planters abso-
48 
required a closed border policy with the Northern 
states helping to enforce bondage laws, and the continual 
escapes and defiance of Africans kept up pressure for non­
i compliance with the slave-holders. The struggles in the 
,/supreme Court, such as the Dred Scott decision which 
;declared that Africans who escaped North were still the 
,rightful property of their former owners, and the struggle for 
!control of the Senate which led to bitter disputes as each 
',new state was admitted to the Union, were all centered 
'around the question of assuring the planter's security 
against es?apes and rebellions. 
" In this Situation, some Northern capitalists perceived 
;:that they could reach a new plateau of power if they allowed 
)'he African resistance to overturn the planter class and then 
/iiteplaced the increasingly restive Southern planters with 
;their own direct agents for the exploitation of African 
Workers. The Civil War did not really begin in 1861, since it 
had been raging in Kansas for 10 years with the heroic 
reSistance of African people and their supporters staging 
Pitched battles with the expansionist planter powers. The 
truth of this history will take much more space to draw out, 
but suffice it to say that we must insist that the initiative, 
the motive force in the challenge to the slave system came 
from African people ourselves, with various Northern 
49


--- PAGE 28 ---
I 
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
. I 
I I 
I I 
I I 
I I 
I 
classes lining up as temporary alli~s, rather than the other ~ ..' way around as it is usually described. any modern Indu~tnal. state in civilized lands. Out of 
When the Civil War did break out, it was the general that there has ans~n In the So~th an exploitation of 
strike of the Southern labor force, African workers, as well labo~ unpar~lIel~d In modern tlmes ... There began to 
as the decisive participation of Africans in Union military rise In Amenca In 1876 a new capi~alism and a new 
units and in local militias, which led to the defeat of the enslavement of ~abor. Home labor In cultured lands, 
slave-owner's government. For the most thorough docu- appeas~d and misled. by a b~lIot whose power the dic-
mentation of this process, see "The General Strike" in tato~shlP of vast ca~l~al stn~tly curtailed, was bribed 
Black Reconstruction In America by W.E.B. DuBois. 1 The ~y high wa.ge and political office to unite in an exploita-
revolutionary struggle of African people in the 1860's show- tlon of white, yellow~ brown, and black labor in lesser 
ed that we were able to destroy the functioning of the lands an~ "breeds without the law" ... Sons of ditch dig-
capitalist economy at the point that it immediately im- g~rs aspired to be spawn of bastard kings and thieving 
pacted on us, the slave labor plantations. But the real basis ansto~rats r~ther than of r~ugh-han~ed children of dirt 
by this time for capitalist State power was concentrated in andtoll. The.lmmense profit from this new exploitation 
the industrial North, and African people were far removed in and world-wide commerce enabled a guild of million-
consciousness and location from being prepared to strike at aires .to engage the greatest ~ngineers, the wisest men 
this ultimate form of the oppressor. Only now, with the pro- of ~Clence, as well as pay high wage to the more in-
letarianization of the African colony, with our concentration teillgent labor and at the, same time to have enough 
in the cities of the urban industrial areas of the U.S. does sur~lus to make more thorough the dictatorship of 
our anti-colonial struggle lead us to a direct confrontation ca~ltal over the state and over the popular vote, not on-
with capitalist power and pave the way for socialism. Iy In Europe and America but in Asia and Africa.
2 
The Northern capitalists, who had amassed the product The way that post-Civil War Black Power institutions 
of African labor in the great cities of the U.S., betrayed the were overthrown will be familiar to those who have watched 
black freedmen who were building up institutions of black the military defeat of the African anti-colonial struggle in 
power, education, farming, and government in the South the U.S. during the early 70's and the successive techniques 
immediately following the Civil War. By 1876, the used to reverse the gains won by the massive social strug-
capitalists' Republican Party struck a deal with the planter- gle of black people. The dominant sector of the U.S. white 
oriented Democratic Party to adapt a new system of ex- rulln.g class which had followed the armed might of black 
ploitation of African labor, to move from a system where 8Old~ers and the power of the general strike to defeat their 
capitalism extracts its wealt~ in the form of African slave aectlonal rivals, the. ~I~nter class, withdrew material sup-
labor to the system of extraction based on peasant labor. As port for the black militia and social reforms after the Civil 
before, this transformation was made to serve the dominant War and unleashed the armed white terror gangs of the Ku 
mode of production, the capitalist mode of production, but Klux Klan. They could do this because African people in the 
it evolved its own version of cruel exploitation for those held U.S. had. not been able to attack and destroy the basis of our 
in the periphery of the system, the profit-producing primary oppreSSion, the very system of capitalism and the U.S. State 
growers. W.E.B. DuBois describes the impact of this deal: Whi~h protected it. Instead, African people took the bour-
The bargain of 1876 was essentially an understand- geols state power apparatus, such as the legislatures of 
ing by which the Federal government ceased to sustain South Carolina and Georgia, and attempted to use them in 
the right to vote of half of the laboring population of the Interest of material security, bread, peace, and Black 
the South (i.e. black workers) and left capital as ro~er for the Af~ican population and for all peoples. But as 
represented by the old planter class, the new Northern enm was to pOint out 50 years later in reviewing the fail-
capitalist, and the capitalist that began to rise out of :es .Of democratic revolutions, it is not possible for the 
the poor whites, with a control of labor greater than in orklng class to. s~mply .take over the bourgeois state ap-paratus and use It In their own interest. Black Power in the 
50 51


--- PAGE 29 ---
Ii 
I 
1860's, as in the 1960's, shook the very foundation of the 
U.S. system but fell short of seizing state power, destroying 
the apparatus of bourgeois oppression, and establishing 
true people's power. 
Destruction of a Freedom school in Memphis 1866 
The white ruling class of the United States moved to 
smash Black Power and re-enslave Africans in a new and 
more sophisticated form of oppression. To justify this, they 
used the familiar charges of corruption and embezzlement 
of public funds against the African-run Southern legis­
latures. In an attempt to counter the chorus of slander and 
lies which the Northern capitalists were heaping on the 
short-lived structures of Black Power, South Carolina Freed­
man's Bureau officer and well-known "father of Black 
Nationalism," Martin Delaney, proposed in 1869 the 
establishment of a Black Historical Society, saying: 
We wish to put on record in an enduring form the 
truths regarding our struggle for freedom and thus 
preserve untarnished our glorious position and our 
heroic deeds. If we let the Yankees manufacture a 
history as they do wooden nutmegs, we shall have of 
the former about as good an article as they give us of 
the latter, and as much like the genuine. 3 
THE DEVELOPMENT OF COLONIALISM 
What was the form of exploitation of African people in 
the U.S. after Black Power was overthrown? After the Civil 
52 
'war. most Africans in the U.S. (over 90 percent) were still in 
'~the South, numbering over 4 million. This condition prevailed 
;'until the eve of World War II, when 3/4 of black people in the 
itJ.S. were still in the South. The key to the southern econ­
, omy was still agriculture, tended by African labor, with only 
6.7 percent of black people residing in Southern cities. The 
Federal Government Survey of 1865 showed, however, that 
'SO percent of the skilled labor in the South was carried out 
by African people, a condition which had prevailed because 
'Africans held as slaves provided the greatest profit margin 
before the Civil War. 
A mark of the economic transformation after the Civil 
(War, when official slavery was abolished, was what 19th 
'century bourgeois economist J.M. Cairnes called the "dual 
'labor market." The dual labor market, or non-competing 
labor groups, has been documented and studied by 
eco.nomists right up to today, even though its importance as 
an essential part of the proof of domestic colonialism has 
been ignored. This meant that the labor of African people 
was reserved for particular tasks, the lowest paid, most 
dangerous, most labor-intensive tasks of the economy. The 
enforcement of the dual labor market was carried out by 
white terror designed to punish black people who were "up­
pity" about demanding to be hired for skilled tasks, who 
presumed to take any part in the running of our own society. 
This was given official support by the disenfranchisement 
of black voters in the 1880's and 90's, a condition which 
existed openly until the Civil Rights Movement and which 
still persists today. 
, After the defeat cSf Black Power by 1876, most African 
"people were forced to work as share-croppers in Southern 
agriculture, though the dual labor market also assigned cer­
:tain other tasks well-known as "nigger work": house clean­
,Ing and toilet cleaning, hotel and restaurant servants, fer-
tilizer plants, cigar and tobacco plants, slaughterhouses 
and packing. lumber jobs, turpentine works, road and bridge 
,work. track laying, water transportation, laundry, dye works, 
. military ordinance handlers. 
During the first half century of colonialism, before black 
, resistance and international scrutiny forced the colonizers 
to adopt more subtle forms, the dual labor market was quite 
Officially inscribed in social and work laws. In Charleston, 
South Carolina, for example, the building tradesmen were 
divided into a white and a black local, both affiliated with 
WI" 
53


--- PAGE 30 ---
the same national union, with the pay scale for the Africans 
set lower than that for the whites. Certainly African access 
to different job categories shifted over the years, depending 
on the needs of capital. When the economy was booming 
and North American workers could occupy the higher'rungs 
of the economy, more and more semi-skilled and even 
skilled job categories opened up for Africans. When it con­
tracted, black workers were driven off the job. The 80 per­
cent of Southern skilled trades being held by blacks in 1865 
fell to 5 percent by 1890. During the depression of the 
1930's, black firemen working on the railroad line in the 
lower Mississippi Valley.were driven off their jobs by the 
white Brotherhood of Locomotive Firemen which unleashed 
a campaign of terror in which 10 black workers were killed, 
11 more wounded or shot at, and seven others flogged. In 
1940, the white unions in Tampa, Florida, maneuvered to 
move 500 African workers out of the shipbuilding yards.4 
The fact that job categories shifted does not deny the 
dual labor market but underlines its consistency, its adapt­
ability to the needs of capital, and the particular relation­
ship black workers have had to the U.S. economy. Because 
black and white workers are not competing for the same 
jobs. black unelTlployment does not drive down white wages 
(with black workers waiting to take the white job) but 
primarily serves to drive down black wages, just as we see 
in other colonies. And in the overall capitalist boom caused 
by colonialism, the material conditions of white workers are 
enhanced by the operation of this dual labor market. 
The implications of the dual labor market are profound. 
They demand that revolutionary or progressive political 
organizations in the U.S. call for the right of African workers 
to independel1ce and freedom from colonial conditions, and 
for North American (white) workers to recognize that the 
only road to socialism is by supporting the struggle of 
African people. The white left, however, attempts to pull 
African workers under their leadership and pretends that 
North Americans can be won to an integrationist stand by 
an appeal to their self-interest, claiming that their wages are 
rlriven down by discrimination and that they can expect 
wages to shoot up with the achievement of integration. Of 
course. any white worker knows better than this and will not 
be talked down to by the leftists who seek to describe reali­
ty out of their books instead of based on what is readily ap­
pa~ent. White workers know they get a better deal by being 
54 
the heart of imperialism, and narrow appeals to self­
{interest only result in trade unionism and increasing 
,national chauvinism among white workers. These workers 
can be won to supporting African liberation by pointing to 
the real costs of imperialism: violence, alienation, and the 
prospect of being killed defending the capitalist world 
system. The fact of the dual labor market is central to the 
U.S. economy and has been demonstrated over and over, 
but the leftists of the North American society especially 
seek to cover it over and hide its significance. 
The colonial condition of African people in the U.S. 
. required extensive planning and control systems from the 
U.S. State. The main system of control was the North 
American people themselves, who had been conditioned by 
centuries of practice to act as slave catchers and to par­
ticipate in the feast at the table of black bondage. North 
American internationalism, North American solidarity, 
whatever small glimmer it offers, has been a profound break 
from the mad history of the majority of North Americans and 
holds the only promise for a positive role being played by 
North American workers. Enforced through tt1e terrorism of 
the Klan, the State and local police, and federal agents, the 
domestic colonial system was institutionalized through 
education. In the latter part of the 19th century, conferences 
were held between white ruling class representatives of the 
North and South at such meetings as Capon Springs, the 
'trips of Robert Ogden to Hampton and Tuskegee, and the 
organizing of the Southern Education Board and the found­
ing of the General Education Board. The philosophy for 
Southern education that was decided upon was that higher 
education should be discouraged for the "child race," and 
Instead black workers must be trained to be humble, 
..,atient, and hardworking laborers whose ultimate destiny 
Would be determined by their white employers. Summing up 
the philosophy thus decreed by U.S. educators, W.E.B. 
DuBOis describes it as follows: 
White and Negro labor must, so far as possible, be 
taken out of active competition, by segregation in 
work: to the whites the bulk of well-paid skilled labor 
and management; to the Negro, farm labor, unskilled 
labor in industry and domestic service. Exceptions to 
this general pattern would occur especially in some 
sorts of skills like building and repairs; but in general 
the "white" and "Negro" job would be kept separate 
jln ----
55


--- PAGE 31 ---
I 
I 
I 
I 
II 
I 
and superlmposed. s 
This is the dual labor market. It meant that African peo­
ple in the United States comprised another country, the pro­
ducers of cash crops essential to industry, the labor inten­
sive peasant economy held within U.S. borders reflecting. 
the very same colonial process in the cotton fields of 
Georgia as in the cotton fields of Nigeria, India, or 
Guatemala. And as with all colonialism, the bleeding of 
African people for the enrichment of the center also meant 
the underdevelopment of the colonial subjects. African 
culture, African economic initiative, African survival itself 
was under constant assault. What was this peasant agri- . 
culture like and how did it come about? 
TENANT FARMING 
The South suffered an economic depression after the 
Civil War as a result of the dislocation and destruction of 
the war. The material infrastructure, mules, transportation, 
and tools were not irreparably damaged. The African labor 
however, declined .by 28 to 37 percent as a result of Africans 
refusing to take up work at age 9 and labor until death and 
as a result of African rural workers moving around to find 
better employment and in the guerrilla warfare which per­
sisted after 1865. While non-producing paraSite classes in 
the South continued to be non-producers, they were suffer­
ing loss of power and prerogatives. While the per capita 
income in 1859 was $89 in the South (primarily produced by 
Africans held as slaves), it dropped to $48 in 1869 and slowly 
rose to $57 in 1899.8 The war that raged in the South after the 
Civil War was between Africans seeking to keep a greater 
percent of the wealth they created and the North American 
capitalists who used military force to keep Africans disem­
powered. 
With the military defeat of Black Power in the South, 
black workers were driven off their communally held lands 
or small holdings which they had established after the war. 
The U.S. government represented the State power of the 
capitalist class. This government is established with the 
pretense of being above class allegiance, acting as the arbi­
ter between various classes through the courts and 
legislature. In fact, however, the laws are there to protect 
the rule of private property holders, and ultimately, the 
power of the State, based on the army and police, will be 
called in to enforce the supremacy of the bourgeoisie. 
56 
frican people, being colonized, have a different relation to 
. 'the State than North American workers. For in the United 
States, the armed force of the bourgeoisie will be 
sugmented whenever necessary by the arming of white 
workers, who are deputized throughout the South whenever 
the bourgeoisie perceives the need to attack African people, 
and who are being organized into vast informant networks 
under the guise of anti-crime neighborhood organizations. 
African man plowing by hand. 
',' After 1876, Africans in the South were obliged to work 
t6, land on the conditions set forth by those who held title 
a'rid with the backing of the courts and military forces. Old 
planters or new North American landowners were given the 
plantations back and Africans were only allowed to work 
S"'all plots of land as "share-croppers," people who did not 
. OWn title to the land but farmed a piece of the white man's 
land in return for paying him a portion, usually 113 to 1/2, of 
. the crop. 
Share-cropping has also been called "dept peonage" 
lince It is a method of holding the agricultural laborer on 
the land with the bare minimum of produce kept by the 
~rer for his/her own survival. This is a system of adapting 
57


--- PAGE 32 ---
feudal relations to the capitalist mode of production. The 
ffect was the same. It created a particular type of labor for 
:frican people in the South which was the most ~abor­
. t . e provided the most opportunities for extraction of 
mr:f~t:n'd allowed the white population to pros~er at ~he 
~x e~se of African labor. As proof of the la~or mtenslty, 
no~e that the value of implements a~d ~achmerr ~~8Uf~~ 
farms was $525 per farm in 1930, while It was on y 
black people's farms and $57 for black tenants .. In that ye~r, 
there were 10.4 white farmers for each truck m the whl~e 
countryside, while there were 79.7 black farmers per truck m 
the black rural areas.
7 
A leading African nationalist of the time, Henry Turner, 
describes through an interview with a bl~ck freed,:"anl th~ 
struggles over the control of the commodity producmg an 
in Georgia in 1872: . 
O. You say that colored men employed m 
that c~unty have not been able to get anything for 
58 
their labor. Why is that? 
A: During the year there is very . little ~~ney 
paid to them, and if they want to obtain provIsions 
or clothing they are given an order on ~ome store. 
At the end of the\ year these little ~IIIS are .col­
lected and however small a quantity of things 
have been taken, almost always the colored man 
is brought into debt. That is alleged as a reason 
why they should be bound to stay with their 
employers and work out what they say they owe 
them. 
0: A sort of practical peonage? 
A: Yes, sir. Whenever there is fear that the 
laborer will go to work with someone else the 
following year, he is apt to come out $25 to $30 in 
debt and his employer calls upon him to work it 
out. 
There was a bill introduced the other day to 
make it a penal offense for a laborer to break his 
contract. He reads the contract to the black man 
and, of course, reads iust what he pleases. When 
the black man takes it to somebody else and gets 
him to read it, it reads quite differently. Among 
other things, there is a provision in the contract 
that he must not go to any political gathering or 
meeting. If he does, he will lose $5 for every day 
that he is absent, and yet he is to receive only $50 
or $75 a year. Every day that he is sick, a dollar or 
a dollar and a half is to be deducted. The man may 
want to quit and work for some person else who 
will pay him better wages. 
0: The effect of the legislation would be to 
render the laborer practically a slave during the 
period of his contract? 
A: Or else he would be liable to punishment 
by imprisonment. 8 
Such practices were inscribed in the laws. After the 
Civil War, the ruling class moved immediately to secure the 
control of African labor, the key to their wealth. Such laws 
as the Black Codes of Mississippi passed in 1865 were at 
various times modified or changed, but the many ways the 
law work~ to protect the power of property continues to this 
day, in the contracts and leases and mortgages that 
Africans are forced to sign in order to eat, work, and have a 
place to sleep. The Black Codes state in part: 
Section 6 ... AII contracts for labor made with 
freedmen, free negroes, and mulattoes for a longer 
period than one month shall be in writing, and in 
duplicate, attested and read to said freedman, free 
negro, or mulatto by a beat, city, or county officer, or 
59


--- PAGE 33 ---
two disinterested white persons of the county in which 
the labor is to be performed, of which each party shall 
have one and said contracts shall be taken and held as 
entire contracts, and if the laborer shall quit the ser­
vice of the employer before the expiration of his terms 
of service, without good cause, he shall forfeit his 
wages for that year up to the time of quitting. 
Section 7 ... Every civil officer shall, and every per­
son may, arrest and carry back to his or her legal 
employer any freedman, free negro, or mulatto who 
shall have quit the service of his or her employer before 
the expiration of his or her term of service without 
good cause and said officer and person shall be enti· 
tied to receive for arresting and carrying back every 
deserting employee aforesaid the sum of five dollars, 
and ten cents per mile from the place of arrest to the 
place of delivery; and the same shall be paid by the 
employer, and held as a set-off for so much against the 
wages of said deserting employee ... 9 
Thus were all North Americans recognized by law as 
deputized to enforce the slave labor system under a new 
guise, and to help in the repression of African labor. The 
Mississippi Apprentice Law, which was also copied by other 
Southern states, essentially made all African youth liable to 
seizure and forced labor at the hands of the State, another 
violation of specific provisions of the Genocide Convention 
which prohibits taking children of a group. The law states in 
part: 
Section 1 ... lt shall be the duty of all sheriffs, 
justices of the peace, and other civil officers of the 
several counties in this State, to report to the probate 
courts of their respective counties semi-annually, at 
the January and July terms of said courts, all 
freedmen, free negroes, and mulattoes, under the age 
of eighteen, in their respective counties, beats, or 
districts, who are orphans or whose parent or parents 
have not the means or who refuse to provide for and 
support said minors; and thereupon it shall be the duty 
of said probate court to order the clerk of said court to 
apprentice said minors to some competent and 
suitable person, on such terms as the court may direct, 
having a particular care to the interest of said minor: 
Provided, that the former owner of said minors shall 
60 
have the preference when, in the opinion of the court, 
he or she shall be a suitable person for that purpose. 10 
In 1930, in the Southern share-crop economy, Africans 
were in a condition of peasantry which had extended since 
the Civil War and were required to maintain their own tools 
while having to turn over a percent of their crop to the land­
owner. In these key agricultural regions during the years 
1865 to 1945, more than half was planted in cotton. 11 On this 
land, only 13 percent of African farmers were land-owners 
as compared to 63 percent of white farmers in the South. 
The average acreage of black farms was 44.8 in 1920 which 
declined to 42.5 in 1930. For white farms in 1920, it was 165.7 
acres and rose to 176 acres in 1930.12 
Shocking as these differences are, however, it is worse. 
Most African farmers were tenant farmers and worked plots 
from 15 to 40 acres, with the average being 37 acres. Cash 
tenants made up 7 percent of African farmers (those who 
worked a white man's land and paid him a cash rental rate). 
Share tenants and share croppers made up 43 percent and 
wage laborers (migrant workers) made up 37 percent. Those 
who paid rent in kind usually had to turn over 113 to 1/2 of 
their crop. 
THE COUNTRY STORE 
Did the share-crop economy afford a means for the 
capitalists to wring even more wealth out of the labor of 
African people than slavery? The answer is yes. The slave 
economy had been adapted to the efficient production of 
commodity crops by the most cruel driving of African labor. 
The African-dominated South, however, did not provide a 
market for capitalist products and in fact was maintained by 
the planters as essentially self-sufficient. The system of 
share-cropping, however, was an advance over the slave 
system because it allowed the capitalists to exploit African 
labor both as producers and as a market. For this reason the 
actual rate of profit, and amount of wealth extracted from 
African labor, increased and African laborers continued to 
be paid below the amount they needed to survive. Now, in­
stead of the burden of buying seed, implements, and other 
supplies falling on the planter, it fell on the individual black 
Worker and at exorbitant rates. 
The small merchants who ran the general store 
represented either individual enterpreneurs or, quite often, 
61


--- PAGE 34 ---
the local land-owner himself. These merchants had a territo­
rial monopoly on the African's purchasing power, i.e. they 
were the only store around and the African worker lacked 
transportation to shop around, as well as suffering threats if 
he tried to make purchases outside of the local area. A 
traveller in 1875 decribes the country store: 
The planter keeps on the place a store at which 
renters may buy their supplies and where they get a 
moderate credit. He also keeps a cotton-gin and a 
grist-mill for the use of which he makes a charge; and 
he takes Gare to get his year's rent out of the first of the 
crop. In practice, furthermore, the planter finds it 
necessary to ride daily through the fields to see that 
the renters are at work and to aid them with his advice. 
During the winter, he hires them to chop wood for his 
own use and to split rails and keep up the fences.13 
We need not speculate on the kind of "advice" the land­
owner offered to the African workers. Suffice it to say that 
these observations reveal how the control of tools, of 
machinery, of land-rights, and of supplies was the method 
the ruling class used for the re-enslavement of African 
labor. 
The September 1980 issue of The Burning Spear, the 
political organ of the African People's Socialist Party, 
clearly demonstrates that the relationship of the landowner 
to black workers has not changed absolutely, even today. 
This issue of The Burning Spear described conditions in a 
black community in Gainesville, Florida where the Party 
was doing organizing work: 
62 
'GAINESVILLE, Fla.-Porter's Quarters is what 
it's called. It's one of the most impoverished and ex­
ploited black communities in Gainesville. It is also one 
of thtl oldest black communities in Gainesville. Most of 
the black people who live in Porter's Quarters live in lit­
tle wooden box-like shacks which are painted white 
and green this year. The houses are old, some have 
been gutted by fire, painted over and rented out again. 
Some do not have doors on the hinges and the doors 
must be propped up from the inside by tenants. 
'The wooden shacks in Porter's Quarters are 
owned by Gene Robinson, a white man who also owns 
Gene's Grocery Store in Porters. On the end of the 
month the black residents take their welfare checks 
and food stamps to Gene's where he takes out money 
for their rent and for what he says they owe him for 
food they've bought ,during the month. Some people 
get very little back from their welfare checks after 
Gene has finished with them; some get nothing at all. U 
The prices fixed at the stores were astronomically high 
especially through the credit system which was employed 
when African farmers could not supply the seeds, fertilizer, 
and food needed to get through to harvest time. Ransom 
and Sutch'5 estimate that the amount of interest on credit 
charged by the local merchant was 60 percent per year. 
While credit and interest has only recently been put forth as 
a middle-class privilege with the system of credit cards, it 
has for centuries been reserved for the colonized people in 
order to further the exploitation and theft of value. By com­
bining the labor of African people for production with the 
exploitation of African people as a captive colonial market, 
did the capitalists actually increase their rate of profit? Let 
business historian Harold Woodman describe a typical 
situation: 
As both landlord and furnishing merchant, the 
postwar planter was In a position to reap huge profits. 
A Mississippi planter boasted that when he rented his 
land to former slaves he was able to receive an annual 
Income from his land "amounting to nearly Its full 
value." In addition, he furnished renters supplies from 
his store, receiving a lien on their crops. "Now, my little 
piece here ain't more than a couple of hundred acres," 
he concluded, "but It's paying me more than double 
what It did when I 'worked' fifty 'nlggers' on It."'· 
Through these means, African workers continued to 
create raw materials (cotton) and finished products 
(railroads, meat, turpentine, etc.) while being forced to labor 
at bare subsistence levels. The values of these products 
represent wealth created by African labor, with only a small 
percent held back for survival and reproduction. Indeed, 
African workers were not paid even the value of their labor 
power. That Is, we were not paid enough to survive and 
reproduce. Just as during slavery, we were forced to main· 
taln small vegetable patches which were tended at night 
and by children In order to stave off starvation. This Is a cen· 
tral part of the operation of colonialist economics. 
Old all of these extra profits Just get sunk Into little 
83


--- PAGE 35 ---
country stores or isolated in the hands of the petty local 
landlords? Not at all, for the power of capital was concen­
trating the profits in the huge city banks and plowing them 
into ever larger factories and machinery. The capitalists pur­
chased Southern cotton at depressed prices and sold it at 
inflated prices, thus extracting part of the surplus value for 
themselves. Secondly, they were the real power behind the 
credit system of the Southern stores. Testifying before the 
U.S. Industrial Commission in 1899, planter and furnishing 
merchant P.H. Lovejoy reveals this fact: 
0: How do they (Southern farmers) get supplies? 
A: Through merchants. 
0: And the merchants? 
A: Through the Banks. 
0: And where do the local banks get their money? 
A: New YorkY 
And thirdly, the cotton that was not shipped to the 
massive mills of the North was processed in mills owned by 
Northern capitalists while Southern utilities and other 
works were tied into the giant North American corporations: 
Many of the largest mills are owned outside of the 
region. Other mills are only recent emigrants from 
Northern locations to the South ... The public utilities in 
the South are almost completely controlled by outside 
interests. All the major railroad systems are owned and 
controlled elsewhere. Most of the great electric hold­
Ing company system, whose operating companies fur­
nish the light, heat, and power for Southern homes and 
Industries, are directed, managed, and owned by out­
side interests. Likewise, the transmission and distribu­
tion of natural gas, one of the South's greatest assets, 
Is almost completely in the hands of remote financial 
institutions. The richest deposits of the iron ore, coal, 
and limestone that form the basis for the steel industry 
in Birmingham are owned or controlled outside of the 
region." 
When this report refers to ownership outside of the 
South, It clearly refers to the fact that the North American 
capitalist class, concentrated in Northern cities, controls 
the economy of the African dominated South. The colonial 
conditions of Africans in the U.S. are reinforced by this con­
stant extraction which leads to economic dependency and 
underdevelopment. 
64 
PRISONS 
African share-croppers and rural wage laborers were 
, subject to economic disaster when prices fluctuated or land 
was exhausted. Africans who attempted to leave the land 
they were on to find new sites of employment, however, 
. would lose their jobs and be black-balled by the land 
owners. In 1880, the land owners implemented a Wage Con­
tract for hired black hands which laid out the type, amount, 
and quality of work which must be performed; established a 
fine of 50 cents per day for absence from farm work; and 
ordered that workers could not leave the plantation without 
a pass.1S Africans who were caught off the plantations while 
looking for work were arrested as vagrants. If their former 
employer chose, he could pay the fine and require the 
African worker to payoff the debt through labor. Those not 
ransomed in this way were put to work on gang labor teams 
which again extracted their labor at a maximum rate pro­
viding only bare subsistence. In the South from 1880 to 
1940, many turpentine plants, mines, rice plantations, and 
road and levee works used prison gang labor, and this pro­
cess of involuntary servitude continues today. The 
genocidal Confederate general Nathan Forrest, infamous 
for the Fort Pillow massacre of African Union troops and 
one of the founders of the Ku Klux Klan, contracted for the 
labor of such a group of black prisoners in 1871 to build the 
Selma-Memphis road. The Memphis-Charleston Railroad 
was also built in this 
A NEW SYSTEM 
0" 
OO~]H~:m&~im ~~AW~llY 
IN GEORGIA~';;' 
Little girls a.nd boys under ten yean of 
a.re sent to chain-ga.ngs for thl"ee potato. 
singing Shoo-fly, with grea.t locks a.nd 
II~ 'Il'untul tlwir Ilc't'k!4; ('olorl'tl hognsly-wn\"'i!'h'tl womrD aDd 
nrc' kt uut fc)r te'n (,(,Ilt" ,)('r dalV to .10 onl-cioon work thai 
65


--- PAGE 36 ---
. In Georgia, as well as in other Southern states, many 
businesses were operated with African labor held in this 
type of legalized slavery. U.S. senators as well as governors 
made fortunes from such labor. Convict labor in the South 
means African labor. In 1880, Georgia had 1,071 Africans 
and only 115 North Americans serving prison time. Southern 
novelist George Cable describes the system: "Here may be 
seen a group of penal institutions, the worst in the country 
~y every evidence of their own setting forth: cruel, brutaliz­
Ing, deadly; chaining, flogging, shooting, drowning, killing 
by exhaustion and exposure."20 The fortune of Georgia 
Senato~ Joseph E .. Brown was made by his Dade County 
Coal Mines, for which he leased 300 convicts for 20 years 
from the state, paying only 7~ per day to the state. 21 
I' 
Prisoners cleanin! the streets for U.S. President Hayes 
The use of prisons and chain gangs to enforce the colo­
nial conditions of African people Is central to the transfor­
mation from the slave system to the system of colonialism. 
During the period of chattel slavery there were no Africans 
In prison, as these Institutions were used as a means of 
disciplining the white labor force while Africans were held 
under the armed control of the Individual planters. Indeed, 
during this period the U.S. Itself was clearly the prison for 
black people. With the abolition of Slavery, the 13th Amend­
ment to the Constitution Included the phrase that Involun­
tary servitude could be permitted for those held In prison. 
Immediately the prisons began to fill with Africans. Imme­
diately the organization of many Southern business enter­
prises, as well as the majority of Southern public works, was 
ee 
; ... _.",or,nent on convict labor. While African convicts did not 
... get paid, they continued to create values, to make products 
.of social use which were sold at a profit. Those who con­
trolled this labor and took the profits were the capitalists. 
.. So in reality, the South after the Civil War was extracting 
profits from African labor through control of a peasant 
economy as well as through a legalized and modernized 
system of Slavery, which was duly inscribed on the official 
laws of the land, from the 13th Amendment to the land and 
labor laws of the South. 
The Bureau of Labor Statistics in 1905 estimated that 
the market value of goods produced for capitalist markets 
through convict labor was $34 million, with $12 million of 
that being value added by the labor of the prisoners them­
selves. The labor thus extracted, and most of this was from 
African laborers in the South, was greatest because the 
compensation paid to the laborer did not consider tne 
amount needed to survive, much less to reproduce. Prison 
contractors estimated that in the South, one black man in 
prison will produce as much wealth as two or three on the 
outside. 22 Assuming that even as many as 1/3 of the 
prisoners were North American for these statistics, we 
could drop the estimate of value created exclusively by 
... African convict labor to $8 million per year. We would then 
conclude that roughly $600 million, or over half a billion 
dollars, was produced in this way between the Civil War and 
the Second World War. 
Prisons served a further function than the extraction of 
wealth, however, in representing, as always, official state 
terror against the African population. They operated at a 
profit for the capitalists and at the same time protected the 
fabulous profits being taken through the debt peonage 
system by providing an example and cruel social discipliner 
. for African rural workers. Besides the constant threat of offi­
Cial prison slavery and the widespread use of the death 
penalty, African workers faced the extra-legal but widely 
sanctioned terror of the lynch mob. Beginning with the 
defeat of Black Power in 1876, white Klan riders carried on a 
reign of terror similar in scale and horror to the pogroms of 
Czarist Russia and the ongoing genocidal wars against the 
Native people of the U.S. In the first two decades after the 
Ivil War, at least 10,000 Africans were killed in these 
attacks. From 1884 to 1900,2,500 Africans were lynched. In 
67


--- PAGE 37 ---
1900 more than 100 Africans were lynched by white ter­
rorists. By 1915, there had been 1,100 documented lynch­
ings in the 20th century. By 1919, the number had risen to 
1,300.23 
Social Services And Education 
While the merchants were gouging African workers for 
every penny that could be extracted, it was the State and 
federal government, representing the overall interests and 
strategy of the capitalist class, which conspired to keep 
Airican workers in the most underdeveloped position that 
colonialism could devise. Throughout the South, the black 
side of town was known as the side where streets weren't 
paved or lighted, garbage wasn't picked up, and medical 
care did not exist. 
The decisions referred to above in the development OT 
Southern education provide a good example. Schools are a 
key social service in increasing productivity of workers, rais­
ing the value of "human equity," and opening the door to 
better jobs. M. Kousser points out that Africans were receiv­
ing the beginnings of primary education after the Civil War 
under the Reconstruction programs.24 But by the end of the 
68 
19th century, when Africans were disenfranchised and re­
pressed by the government, Afric.an tax do~lars ~ere actu­
ally going to support the education of white children. As 
Claudia Goldin concludes, "The state, not the merchant, 
was the racist strong-arm of the people."25 
In 1898, Florida's per capita cost of education, that is 
the amount spent for each student, was $5.92 for whites and 
$2.27 for black children. In Mississippi, in 1900, the per 
capita expenditure was $22.25 for whites, $2 for Africans. 28 
Under this educational system, the capitalized value of ~h~ 
white labor force increased during the century after the CIvil 
War while it decreased for Africans. 
Summing It Up 
As we trace the history of the oppression of African 
people, we are exposing the underpinnings of the ?perati~n 
of capitalism. Clearly, the capitalists did not just Sit down In 
a room and decide how they would set up the slave system 
and then later they would transform it to modern colo­
nialism. It is the drive for profits, and the adaption of the 
system of production that offers the greatest immediate 
profit, that defines the capitalist history. In the 16th century, 
the merchants could not possibly conquer other peoples 
and force them to labor and extract resources for them. 
They did not have the power to set up such mo~ern c~lo­
nies. But they did come up with the system of kidnapping 
laborers to work in colonies headed by settlers from Europe. 
This was the first, primitive, form of European colonialism 
and gave birth to capitalism. 
When the Africans overthrew the system of slavery, the 
capitalist class groped for new relation~ ~nd ways of 
extracting wealth from Africans. By establishing a system 
of labor which tied the Africans to the land, forced us to 
extract cash crops from the land, and took these resour~es 
to the industrial center for transformation in the factories, 
the capitalists established modern colonialis~. Having 
achieved this development of technique, and ha~ln~ amass­
ed tremendous wealth for 300 years, the c~pl~allst class 
was prepared to extend the system of colonialism around 
the world. Only in the 19th century, and especially at the end 
of that century, were the capitalists of Europe and the U.S. 
able to spread their conquests to every corner of~he gl?be. 
As anticipated by the conditions in the domestic African 
colony, the colonial system was able to force laborers to 
69


--- PAGE 38 ---
work as peasants, slaves, and beasts of burden to provide 
raw materials to the foreign rulers. 
As we shall see in the next chapter, the domestic 
African colony exposes how capitalism is maturing to its 
outer limits. As the colonized African population is more 
and more proletarianized, pulled into manufacturing and 
distribution of goods, and moved out of the realm of simply 
providing raw materials for the North American working 
class to transform, the final decadence of the imperialist 
core is foreseen. More and more, the North American 
centers are closing down factories and moving them to the 
colonies. North American SOCiety is being prepared to limit 
its economic activity to service and clerical work. The 
domestic African colony is the proving ground for the pro­
letarianization of the colonial work force, a phenomenon 
which is accelerating throughout the world and is also the 
burning forefront of the clash of the colonized peopies of 
the world with U.S. imperialist power. 
From 1870 to 1890, the maturing of the colonial rela­
tionship of African people to the U.S. occurred through, first, 
the system of official apartheid and violence and, second, 
the complex mechanisms of economic control. This system 
of economic control meant that African people held the 
worst jobs and were forced to turn over what little income 
they did receive at exorbitant rates to the merchants and 
received virtually no social services or training. 
In The Review of Black Political Economy,27 Richard 
America estimates that African people have lost $15 to $20 
billion per year only through the mechanism of wage and 
salary discrimination in the 20th century. In factoring in the 
impact of prisons, of the gouging by merchants, and of lack 
of social services, we are safe to estimate the higher figure, 
$20 billion, for the years up to World War II and including at 
least the last third of the 19th century as well. Calculating 
75 years (1865-1940) at $20 billion per year gives $1500 
billion ($1 Y2 trillion) as the amount of stolen labor. With this 
rough estimate, we can conclude that the African domestic 
colony has been the greatest profit producer in the period of 
the rise of U.S. imperialism as compared to all its other colo­
nies and economic dependencies. This reveals, again, that 
U.S. capitalism was not a benign white system for a certain 
period of time and then went out into the world in search of 
profit. The primitive accumulation of capital off of African 
people continued to be an essential underpinning of the 
70 
capitalist system, and a prime source of profit, right on 
through into the 20th century. Some ways this profit was 
extracted changed in important ways, but its essential 
character, whether it is called primitive accumulation or 
colonialism, remained the same. 
The wealth taken from African people, combined with 
that extracted from other subject peoples, was the basis of 
the boom of American industrial capitalism. The myth of 
capitalist wealth being based on great inventions and 
business know-how is shattered when we see the increas­
ing exploitation of the peoples of the world and our increas­
ing underdevelopment and poverty, progressing apace with 
the expansion of the vast wealth of the capitalist center. 
Reparations of the $1 Y2 trillion for this period must be add­
ed to the reparations of $600 billion for the period of slavery, 
to give a total thus far of $2.1 trillion. 
71


--- PAGE 39 ---
Chapter Four 
Adapting Neo-Colonial 
Exploitation to the Domestic 
African Colony, 1945 to 1982 
THE NEW DEAL 
After the First World War, U.S. imperialism was riding 
high. The entire world had been divided among the 
capitalist nations, the U.S. had come out of the war as the 
rising power in the world and, except for the threat of 
socialism which had found a foothold in Russia, her power 
seemed secure. But by the early 1930's, imperialism was 
facing new challenges and was going through fundamental 
transformations. The transformations were accomplished 
through the crisis of the Great Depression. Bourgeois 
historians often describe this as a crisis which simply hap­
pened to capitalism and over which businessmen had no 
control. In fact, the Great Depression was caused by a deci­
sion by the major corporations that were not able to in­
crease profits sharply enough under the economic structure 
which had numerous small and medium sized enterprises 
each competing for survival, and which saw the whole 
agricultural sector operating through small family size 
farms. By precipitating a crisis in the stock market and com­
modity exchange market, these corporations created a 
situation in which thousands of bUSinesses were ruined, 
tens of thousands of farms were sold for bankruptcy, and 
millions of workers were dislocated. 
It was not all bad news for the capitalists, however, for 
this was the period in which a much greater concentration 
of capital was achieved, and with the ruin of lesser 
capitalists came the modernizing of the economy. The 
depression years were when the Empire State Building, the 
San Francisco Bay Bridge, the Golden Gate Bridge and 
many other mammoth construction projects were accom­
plished, when the irrigation of California's Central Valley 
and the establishment of the first giant agribusiness farms 
73


--- PAGE 40 ---
was completed, and when U.S. control of Latin America , 
much of Africa and the Pacific was consolidated. 
These were also the years in which colonized people all 
over the world were rejecting imperialist control and 
fighting for self-determination and independence. White 
workers in the capitalist centers were likewise disillusioned 
and in rebellion against the capitalist system. Clearly, the 
old form of colonialism was not going to survive. In 
response, U.S. planners and managers modernized their 
concept of economic and social planning. 
In economics, they turned to John Maynard Keynes, who 
adapted the scientific evaluation of the sources of wealth 
the workings of the market, and the material basis of cur: 
rency values which came from Marx, to bourgeois planning 
systems. The main impact of Keynesian economics was to 
assign the imperialist State a much greater role in manag­
ing the overall operation of capitalism and in controlling the 
economy through massive taxation and spending. On the 
social front, the U.S. government offered the North 
American workers a "New Deal" under Franklin Delano 
Roosevelt, a deaf which would be hard to turn down since it 
incorporated many of the demands which had dominated 
the trade unionist. working class struggle of North 
Americans for the previous 100 years: unemployment insur­
ance, minimum wage laws, and the right to organize trade 
~n~ons. In short, it was ~he institutionalization, through of­
fiCial government sanction, of the opportunism which had 
characterized the white left from the beginning and which 
marked the dismal failure of the Communist Party-U.S.A. in 
providing revolutionary leadership in the struggle for 
socialism. 
Where was the material support for this "new deal" to 
come from? Why didn't the old captains of industry at the 
turn of the century offer such a new deal instead of carrying 
out bloody strike-breaking attacks? Because what they 
couldn't do in 1916 they could do in 1936. By 1936, the struc­
tures of imperialism had succeeded in concentrating such a 
huge amount of capital in the imperialist center, had put to 
work and extracted vast tribute from such broad expanses 
of colonized people throughout the world, that they were in 
a position to make a settlement with the North American 
working class which was unprecedented. The New Deal for 
North American workers was based on the centuries of 
wealth ripped off from Afri,can people inside the U.S. and 
74 
from the growing expanse of colonies throughout the world. 
The North American left in the 1930's had mobilized and 
seized control over millions of African workers in the South 
and in Northern cities, only to use our impetus as a bargain­
" ing chip in their overall settlement with capitalism. This 
betrayal reconfirmed African people's understanding of our 
need for independent political action and organizing, and 
led to the tremendous Black Revolution in the decades after 
World War II 
While capitalism offered the New Deal to North 
American and European workers, what was capitalism's 
• ,plan for the colonies? The same scientific managers, the ex­
socialists and even current white socialists who helped 
strategize the survival of capitalism, came up with a sani­
Jized and streamlined version of colonialism. This new form, 
Which was 20 years in the constructing, was dubbed by 
'Kwame Nkrumah as neo-colonialism. It consisted of grant­
ing the colonies formal independence, setting up puppet 
ve comprador bourgeois classes whose existence 
nded on their successful delivery of local wealth and 
, ives to the imperialist sponsors, and building an economic 
ure which firmly shackled the material life of the colo-
75


--- PAGE 41 ---
nies to the demands of the colonial center. This kind of 
adaptation was necessary in the colonies, just as the end­
ing of chattel slavery was necessary in the previous period, 
because of the rising and resistance of the most oppressed 
themselves. The rise of the Garvey movement in the 1920's 
represented the stongest expression of this in the domestic 
African colony and among Africans all over the world. 
Garvey mobilized millions of Africans in the struggle for 
freedom and independence. In addition, these years saw the 
rise of the Pan-Africanist movement as well as the participa­
tion of black workers in such struggles as the Sharecrop­
pers Union tn the U.S. South. 
In responding to the crisis, however, capitalism man­
aged not only to survive but to devise means for extraction 
of more wealth, which is always necessary for the continu­
ing survival of capitalism. As Walter Rodney pOints out in 
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa, the economic relation 
to the colonies meant that the solution to the crisis in the 
capitalist centers was found by deepening the exploitation 
of the colonies through currency devaluations, speeding up 
the extraction of raw materials, and dropping the amount of 
money paid for exports from the colonies. 
For African people in the U.S., the rise of neo­
colonialism and the changes in the form of exploitation had 
its own particular character in the domestic colony. The first 
step of this transformation was to move more and more 
African peasants off the land and into the position of prole­
tarians, urban workers in the central section of most U.S. 
cities. This move did not mean abandonment of the dual 
labor market, as African workers came in to fill the lowest 
rungs of the industrial North. While the majority of African 
people remained in the South, the industrial boom of the 
Second World War caused the capitalists to call up increas· 
ing numbers to fill factory, hauling, and service jobs in the 
North. During the 1940's, 160,000 African people per year 
were relocated in the North by the needs of the capitalist 
market. In 1940, 77 percent of African people were in the 
South and 22 percent in the North, while in 1950, there were 
68 percent in the South and 32 percent in the North. By 1960, 
it was 60-40 and by 1969 it was 52-48.1 
The proletarianization of the African domestic colony is 
dramatically revealed by the movement to the industrialized 
North, but it is not simply a matter of geographical region as 
much as the location in the economic system that is impor-
76 
tant here. The movement to the cities, and movement from 
production of primary raw materials to manufacturing and 
servicing those materials in the later stages of commodity 
production, has continued dramatically in the last decades. 
Whereas in 1970 there were 7 major cities with a majority 
black population, by 1980 there were 17 cities in which 
Africans predominate. 
The second step in this transformation from domestic 
colony to primitive neo·colony has been the rise of the b.lack 
petty bourgeois leadership. Just as Britain groomed African 
and Indian leaders to take ,over nominal power under a false 
independence, U.S. capitalism began to put forth its 
crusading negro heroes who needed to win the support of 
the black masses and exact some concessions from the old 
colonial structures in order to move African workers into 
proletarian labor. Some may question if this is truly neo­
colonialism since these petty bourgeois leaders were not 
77


--- PAGE 42 ---
calling for even nominal independence the way the reform­
ists of the British colonies did. But it must be remembered 
that different colonial particularities called for different 
forms of neo-colonialism. If the British Foreign Office put 
forth a strategy of granting independence within a "com­
monwealth," the French and Portuguese did no such thing. 
Their mode of modernizing their colonies was to call for 
integration of the colonies into the motherland, thus declar­
ing Algeria and Indochina a part of "Greater France" and 
installing puppets such as the Emperor Bao Dai Who called 
for integrationism and sought to administer the colonies 
under such a system. Of course, even if France had suc­
ceeded in integrating its c,olonies, including placing repre­
sentatives of the subject peoples in the French parliament, 
they would continue economic extraction and exploitation 
at an increasingly efficient rate. 
Likewise, for the African domestic colony in the U.S. it 
was necessary for the ruling class to avoid open 
aCkn.owl~dgement of the colonial relation by even granting 
nommal mdependence. The black primitive petty bourgeois 
leaders were charged with the task of championing integra­
tion while proposing themselves as spokesmen for the 
o~pr~~sed African people'. In fact, among the black 
pnmltlve petty bourgeoisie there were contending factions. 
The most reactionary, such as Booker T. Washington, ad­
vocated a passive population primarily remaining in the 
South and were aligned with the reactionary North 
American bourgeoisie such as Teddy Roosevelt. The liberal 
primitive petty bourgeoisie, such as the National Associa­
ti~n for the Advancement of Colored People, were aligned 
with . and sponsored by the liberal North American 
bourgeOisie and encouraged aspirations among Africans to 
move North and seek new opportunities. As the New Deal 
rep~esented the ascendancy of the liberal bourgeoisie and 
their strategy, the NAACP and its offshoots such as the 
Urban League grew in influence and strength. 
We describe the structure which was constructed after 
the Second World War as "primitive" neo-colonialism in 
order to underline the fact that the domestic African colony 
did not have a truly developed national bourgeoisie, was 
never able to initiate any significant national economic ac­
tivity. The whole product of African labor continued to be 
funnelled into the coffers of the North American ruling 
class. Those few Africans who did rise to a so-called 
78 
bourgeois position were simply placed in charge of sections 
of North American corporations concerned with improving 
the penetration and extraction of wealth from the African 
community. The black petty bourgeoisie has its own distor­
tions in being entirely at the mercy of the North American 
ruling class and so has never even established itself as an 
independent petty bourgeois sector of any significant size. 
Therefore it is a primitive petty bourgeoisie, and the form of 
colonialism is primitive neo-colonialism. 
As Africans are concentrated in the cities, and the 
character of the cities decays from the robust centers of 
production during early colonialism to the desperate colo­
nial manufacturing centers of today, we find the concept of 
Free Enterprise Zones being put forward by the ruling class. 
These zones will be the cities themselves, and will mean 
that Africans in these cities will be obliged to work with sub­
survival pay rates, no job security, no safety regulations, no 
organization. With the movement of the black population to 
the cities and the movement of North Americans to the 
suburbs, the black primitive petty bourgeoisie is granted 
narrow control of city governments. Whereas there were 
only 4 black mayors of the 7 cities with black majority in 1970, 
by 1980 there were 17 major cities with a black majority and 
of these there were 13 headed by black mayors. But the 
nature of power has shifted. Where once the mayor was a 
powerful office and political machines in cities like Chicago 
were known as president-makers and breakers, now the city 
administration is reduced ion. 
. Philadelphia Mayor Wilson Goode 
represents neo-co/onialist leadership. 
7S


--- PAGE 43 ---
With the flight of North Americans from the cities, the tax 
base within the cities is reduced. While Africans physically 
occupy the cities, the ownership of the property remains in 
the hands of North Americans, outsiders, who determine 
the economic life. Therefore, the political control of the 
black primitive petty bourgeoisie is responsible to protect 
the rule of white property. The revolutionary anti-colonial 
struggle .of Africans increasingly turns to the struggle for 
community control, for African people to seize the property 
w~ occupy, to take the cities which we now are located in. 
With a population that is 94 percent working class, the 
struggle for community control by Africans in the U.S. is 
therefore also a struggle for worker's control. 
These two steps, then, the proletarianization of the 
African labor force and the establishment of a black 
primitive petty bourgeoisie, represent the beginnings in the 
.1940's of the primitive neo-colonialist form of exploitation. 
Just as under early colonialism, however, African people 
owned nothing of the means of production and were subject 
to the commands of the North American center. While many 
of the white colonialists of the left have been satisified to 
declare that colonialism once existed for African people but 
somehow withered away under the beneficent guidance of 
the imperialist ruling class, a look at the real world at the 
statis~ic~, at the conditions of colonial terror, will pr~ve that 
col~nlal.lsm, whil~ it has developed in important respects, 
retains Its essential character of being a labor-intensive ex-
tractive base for imperialist profits. ." 
In the proletarianization of the African domestic colo­
ny, we can also see how modern imperialism has created its 
own grave-diggers. Indeed, it may be instructive to note 
that, upon subjugating the African population, European 
and North American imperialjsm has. destroyed African 
devel~pment processes and forced African people through 
a serres of changes in the forms of exploitation which 
reflect, as a mirror image, the history of the deveiopment of 
European and North American society itself, from slavery to 
peasantry to proletariat. We shall see how this development 
of the forms of exploitation also has meant an increaSing 
degree of exploitation, that is, greater profits being derived 
from the labor of African people. With the proletarianization 
of the African colony, however, imperialism has placed our 
pe~p~e in the. position it did not occupy during the great 
uprrslngs against Slavery, for now we are placed in a,critical 
80 
position in North American cities as well as connected with 
world-wide forces in such a way that the struggle of African 
people for independence and socialism sees us poised to 
seize the very means of production, to destroy imperialism 
utterly. , 
The proletarianization of the African domestic colony 
has further implications, for it shows that once again the 
form of exploitation of African people anticipates the forms 
that will be adopted around the world and African resis­
tance shows the way to confront that explOitation. Just as 
slavery and the development of the domestic colony pre­
ceded extensive colonialism around the world, the maturing 
of the African domestic colony to the pOint that we are 94 
percent proletarian today has pOinted the way that the 
exploitation and resistance is developing around the world. 
In the first place, the conditions of Africans in the U.S. have 
shown the way imperialism uses massive unemployment in 
the periphery, in the colonial sector, in order to create a 
working class that is unattached and underpaid for what­
ever jobs are offered. The rate of unemployment of African 
people in the U.S. since the 1930's far surpasses unemploy­
ment rates of European and North American workers even in 
the cruelest periods of the existence of capitalism. Sec­
ondly, the development of the African proletariat has 
pOinted out a critical development of imperialism in its final, 
most decadent phase. Whereas early imperialism saw the 
extraction of raw materials from the colonies-cotton, cop­
per, bauxite, rubber, etc.-for the factories which were 
placed in the imperialist centers and employed skilled white 
workers, today manufacture itself is being exported. The 
growth of the working class in the colony does not mean it 
has ceased to be a colony, only that the capitalists, in their 
drive for profits, could not resist the option of establishing 
industry in the colonies. The "runaway shop" which fled 
North American unionized sectors of the U.S. and set up in 
African cities such as Birmingham or Houston, the free 
'enterprise zones where manufacture is going full steam in 
Taiwan, San Salvador, and Cape Town, are the wave of 
manufacture of the future. The white steel worker who was 
laid off in the recent economic crisis is not coming back, 
that job is gone. The prOjection for North American society 
is that 90 percent of the work force will be clerical by the 
1990's, that service jobs and the paper work of administer­
ing the empire will take up the focus of nearly all North 
81


--- PAGE 44 ---
Americans. 
The African domestic colony was well on its way to 
becoming proletarian in the 1950's while many external 
colonies, such as Guatemala, Thailand, or Zimbabwe were 
still largely populated by semi-peasant colonial subjects. 
As the imperialist economy moves from simply extracting 
raw materials to extracting and then manufacturing right in 
the colony, the forms of urban resistance will become the 
anti-colonial strategies of the 1980's. The imperialist dream 
for the year 2000, of a white center reposing on its riches 
while the colonized people of the world struggle to provide 
them with material comforts, will never come to pass. For 
the proletarianization of the colony, while inevitable in 
capitalism's drive for profits, is fatal to the survival of colo­
nialism. 
WAGE DIFFERENTIAL 
There are endless ways one might approach the prob­
lem of determining the amount of wealth stolen from 
African people under the neo-colonial structures of modern 
imperialism. The important thing is to demonstrate that 
there is a concrete, material difference between the condi­
tions of North American workers and those of African 
workers as well as showing the substantial colonial profits 
which are derived from that difference. While many of our 
Marxists today seek to obscure the distinction and include 
the exploitation of African workers in their overall statistics 
on working class exploitation, it was left to liberal 
sociologists who were making economic assessments of 
the nature of the crisis during the Civil Rights Movement to 
study the objective data on the components of the exploita­
tion of African people. 
This research confirmed that the economic basis of 
colonialism for African people had by no means disap­
peared. Such works as Poverty in a Rural Economy by A. 
Dale Tussing, Internal Labor Markets and Manpower 
Analysis by Peter Doeringer and Michael Piore, and The 
Economics of Poverty and Discrimination by Bradley 
Schiller confirm the observation by 19th century economist 
J.M. Cairnes on the existence of a "dual labor market." Or as 
Harold Baron and Bennet Hymer observe concerning 
Africans who have moved into the Northern proletarian jobs: 
Within this standard sector, Negro workers 
82 
are often segregated by firm and within firms by 
job classification or production unit. The size of 
this sector is generally determined by the extent 
to which past or present labor shortages have 
allowed the entry of Negro workers into areas 
where previously just whites were hired. Cur­
rently, approximately half the Negro labor force is 
in this category.2 
And referring to those Africans who have stayed in the tradi­
tional jobs besides tenant farming, they say: 
Workers in the surplus sector who have jobs 
occupy positions that are at the very bottom of 
the occupational ladder. These jobs are low pay­
ing, involve dirty and unsafe work, are often of 
short duration, and have little advancement 
potential. Many of these jobs are assigned to the 
Negro labor force only as the white labor force ad­
vances into higher occupations. Traditional 
Negro jobs like boot-blacks, car washers, 
busboys, washroom attendants, porters, and ser­
vants are positions that through custom have 
gradually formed an area of employment exclu­
sively for Negroes or other minority groups, 
regardless of employment conditions elsewhere 
in the labor market. (emphasis added)3 
This shows that while there is some overlap in job 
categories, for the most part African and North American 
workers occupy different jobs. While police terror, the move­
ment of African people into the worst run-down housing in 
urban areas, and massive unemployment all serve to con­
firm colonialism as the condition facing Africans in the U.S., 
the dual labor market is a critical demonstration of the 
material workings of colonialism. The proof of the dual 
labor market, however, only underlines the fact that colo-
. nialism exists in the U.S. and that it must be attacked as an 
overall system. To reduce the wage differential to a matter 
of discrimination on the job gives rise to schemes for wage 
equality struggles which fail to confront the entire colo-
nialist system, and end up reinforcing the neo-colonialist 
structures of the capitalist class. Therefore, the wage dif­
ferential must be reviewed as evidence of the degree of 
explOitation but not as an isolated problem which can be 
legislated away by a reformed capitalism. If capitalism has 
R3


--- PAGE 45 ---
shown anything, it is its tenacity and willingness to change 
forms only to, maintain colonial exploitation. 
The dual labor market, domestic colonialism, means 
that African people suffer tW0 to three times the poverty 
levels as the white population and the number of families 
considered below poverty level would be greatly increased if 
we rejected the unreal government cut-off level of $5,000 for 
a family of four. It means that African workers are 
unemployed at levels five times those of the North 
American community, which was 33 percent in the African 
community in 1966 when you count all those workers who 
had given up looking for work and has risen dramatically 
since then.4 It means that for.the 432 Small Business Admi­
nistration loans made between 1954 and 1963, 7 went to 
African people. It means that African people are given much 
lower training levels than North Americans, that you will see 
the upwardly mobile universities with a 2 percent African 
enrollment while the nearby community colleges are 80 per­
cent African-a condition that has not changed since the 
1960's-and in fact today there are more African people in 
prison than in college in the U.S. When African students go 
84 
out into the job market, and can only find work at the lowest 
rungs, even when it is so-called white collar work, their 
lifetime earnings will be considerably less. African workers 
with a high school education will make 60 percent of what a 
white worker with a high school education will make and 
African workers with a college degree make only 47 percent 
of whites with a college degree. Even more shocking, 
Africans with a college degree will be making less than 
whites with only an 8th grade education.5 
Domestic colonialism means that African workers do 
not draw the money necessary for survival and reproduction 
from the social security system. Sixty percent of black men 
with 25 years of working tenure draw less than $150 a month 
on retirement (compared with 30 percent of white workers 
with such a low draw). Most Africans work their whole life at 
low wages and are forced to retire because of ill health, 
therefore lowering benefits; then, many black workers con­
tinue working after retirement despite illness. As retired 
workers, Africans are under-represented in the ranks of 
those drawing social security pensions because they die at 
a younger age (facing an average life span 7 years shorter 
than North Americans). And because African workers hold 
more hazardous jobs, they are over-represented among 
workers who are disabled. Black children whose parents 
have died only draw 67 percent of what white children in the 
same circumstances get.6 
All of these statistics show the many costs to African 
workers of domestic colonialism and the dual labor market. 
These costs all mean greater profits derived by the 
capitalist class, profits that are essential to the smooth 
working of the metropolis. African people who have been 
taken off the land and proletarianized, in fact, produce more 
wealth for capitalism than they did under the stages of 
slawry/primitive accumulation and peasantry/early colo­
nialism. The African proletariat in the U.S. domestic colony 
is the source of huge profits and at a rate which is increas­
ing. Between 1975 and 1980, supposedly five good years in 
the U.S. business cycle, real income for white families 
gained some $1304 while black family real income declined 
by $128. The number of white families classified as poor 
was down by 2 percent while the number of black families 
falling into this category increased by 22 percent, while 
employment rates got worse for Africans in every category.7 
85


--- PAGE 46 ---
II 
I 1'1 
II· ~ I! I 
"1' I 
"I I 
'1:1
1 
i.I'il" I !,'i, 
Being poor is not just a statistic, it takes its toll in human suffering 
and lives 
Many aspects of the measure of the profits to 
capitalism are difficult to make. For example the 
"u~derground economy" that plays a huge role i~ the 
African colony-off the books cleaning jobs, under the 
table sales and services, etc- is all profitable and all 
86 
unreported in the official. statistics. We are forced to fall 
back on the most broad measure of at least the degree of 
wealth which is stolen from African labor through examin­
ing income differentials between the African and North 
American population. 
Income differentials do not measure the cause of 
poverty, do not consider if education discrimination, senior­
ity rules, hiring and firin9 practices, or other factors were 
the cause of the problem: Indeed, there are endless studies 
which seek to determine the contribution of these and other 
factors to the income differential for black workers. But 
these techniques for operating the colonial economic struc­
tures must not be put forward as the cause of the problem 
since we know the critical factor is colonialism which main­
tains control over African people through force and 
violence. As we explain in the Creed of the African People's 
Socialist Party (Our Basic Party Line): "This rule of our peo­
pIe by foreigners and aliens for the purpose of exploitation 
is colonialism, the most barbaric form of economic relation­
ship and government in the world today. It is an economic 
and governmental form which distorts social development 
and denies collective economic development through forci­
bly and arbitrarily molding our social and economic activity 
in a manner designed to perpetrate and serve the dominant 
U.S. capitalist economic and social system to which we are 
illegitimately tied and from which we are irretrievably 
estranged. " 
Nevertheless, income differentials can give a sense of 
the amount of wealth that has been stolen from African peo­
ple solely because we are African. During the period of 
African urbanization and proletarianization, the income of 
African people was only an average of 57 percent of the 
income of North Americans, that is 57 cents to every dollar 
earned by a white worker. This figure had a slight rise from 
1950 to 1973 (54 percent to 58 percent) but this could hardly 
be considered a trend, since in fact it had risen to 61 percent 
in the late 60's when the Black Power Movement was 
threatening U.S. power and demanded improvements which 
were temporarily made in certain wage sectors. But by the 
mid-70's, the figure had dropped again and has continued to 
decline until African people today suffer conditions that are 
not Significantly different than in the early 50's when the 
agitation for civil rights began. 
87


--- PAGE 47 ---
Year 
1950 
1955 
1960 
1965 
1969 
1970 
1971 
1972 
1973 
Median Family Income by Nationality inside the U.S.' 
Selected Years 1950·1973 
North 
American 
3,445 
4,605 
5,835 
6,251 
9,794 
10,236 
10,672 
11,549 
12,595 
African 
1,869 
2,549 
3,233 
3,994 
5,999 
6,279 
6,440 
6,864 
7,269 
Ratio of blacks 
and other races to 
whites percent 
54 
55 
55 
55 
61 
61 
60 
59 
58 
In making a concrete evaluation of the amount of 
wealth stolen from African people through colonial exploita· 
tion during the period of urbanization and proletarianiza· 
tion, we can make a more precise measure than we did by 
using Richard America's estimate of wealth stolen in in· 
come differences in the last chapter because in 1947, the 
U.S. first began to collect data on wage levels by nationality. 
By making some estimates for missing statistics and to in­
clude the years for which data are not yet reported, we can 
get a complete picture. By measuring the number of 
hcuseholds su rted b a worker and multiplying it by the 
88 
income differential, we can determine the gross difference 
in wages between the black and white population. This dif­
ference is then translated to 1982 dollars by use of the Con­
sumer Price Index (CPI). The following table, taken from 
Historical Statistics, U.S. Government Printing Office, 
Series G31·138 and G1-15, gives us an estimate of $1.474 
trillion in wage differential between 1947 and 1979 by add­
ing up the right hand column and converting to 1982 dollars: 
Chart of Income Differentials, 1947·1979 
YEAR DIFFERENCE 
1947 
1948 
1949 
1950 
1951 
1952 
1953 
1954 
1955 
1956 
1957 
1958 
1959 
1960 
1961 
1962 
1963 
1964 
1965 
1966 
1967 
1968 
1969 
1970 
1971 
1972 
.1973 
1974 
1975 
1976 
1977 
1978 
1979 
between black 
and white 
incomes (fam· 
ilies and indio 
viduals) in 
dollars. 
1597 
N.A. 
N.A. 
1704 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
2208 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
2594 
2433 
2627 
2813 
2797 
2721 
2920 
3034 
2919 
3109 
3459 
3418 
3524 
3965 
4199 
4272 
4389 
4818 
5333 
5470 
6234 
NUMBER of DIFFERENCE in 
black current dollars 
income (in thous.) 
units 
(in thous.) 
4091 
4294 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
5208 
5339 
5310 
5515 
5613 
5812 
5855 
6019 
6080 
6230 
6395 
6451 
6539 
6816 
6922 
7194 
7357 
7752 
8212 
8632 
8889 
9102 
9493 
9926 
10,222 
10,527 
6,533,500 
6,750,000(a) 
7,250,000(a) 
8,000,000(a) 
8,750,000(a) 
9,500,000(a) 
10,250,000(a) 
11,000,000(a) 
11,788,512 
12,000,000(a) 
13,000,000(a) 
14,000,000(a) 
15,076,328 
14,186,665 
15,811,913 
17,103,040 
17,425,310 
17,400,795 
14,529,858 
19,839,326 
19,895,904 
21,520,498 
24,884,046 
25,146,226 
27,318,000 
32,561,000 
36,246,000 
37,974,000 
39,949,000 
45,737,000 
52,935,000 
55,914,000 
65,625,000 
DIFFERENCE 
in constant 
1967 dollars 
(thous.) 
9,734,637 
9,382,000 
10,150,000 
11,120,000 
11,287,500 
11,970,000 
12,812,500 
13,640,000 
14,736,064 
14,760,000 
15,470,000 
16,100,000 
17,337,377 
16,030,921 
17,709,342 
18,813,344 
18,993,587 
18,792,858 
20,701,649 
20,236,112 
19,895,904 
20,444,473 
22,644,448 
21,625,754 
22,400,000 
25,723,000 
27,184,000 
25,822,000 
24,768,000 
26,527,000 
29,114,000 
28,516,000 
30,188,000 
89


--- PAGE 48 ---
By adding up the right column and converting to 1982 
dollars, we come up with a wage differential, $1,474 billion 
or $1.474 trillion. This must be interpolated in order to 
account for the amount of money stolen from 1945 to 1947 
and from 1979 to 1982. A very conservative estimate, 
therefore, of the wage differential for the whole period 1945 
to 1982 is $1,750 billion. 
Shortcomings of the Wage Differential Analysis 
We have used the wage differential to get a rough 
estimate of the extra profits from colonialism. The ex. 
amples above of social security discrimination, the under. 
ground economy, and many others show that it is a bare 
minimum. In addition, we must conclude that the wage dif. 
ferential is only one quantitative measure of the contradic. 
tion and should not be used to reinforce the standard white 
left demand for wage equality, for a mechanical campaign 
against the differential. But colonialism is a whole relation. 
ship, enforced by the armed might of the oppressor nation, 
which cannot be reduced to income discrimination. 
To show other ways that colonialism operates econ. 
omically, other ways that profits are extracted, we must 
briefly look at other areas of the colonial relationship. 
1) Dual Housing Market. African people are moved in and 
out of different neighborhoods at the wi" of the real estate 
capitalists and the city planners. Primarily, African workers 
Elderly woman (left) next to her box home-Miami, Florida 1983 
90 
are put in decaying neighborhoods and forced to pay top 
dollar to enter houses that have passed the peak time of 
their usefulness. In the urban areas today, even though 4.4 
million white people have left for the more secure suburbs 
between 1970 and 1978 and the black population increased 
by only 778,000, there are thousands of African people 
without homes (36,000 in New York alone) because realtors 
conspire to burn down whole neighborhoods. It has been 
estimated that, even though African people occupy the 
worst dwellings, we are forced to pay at least 10 percent 
extra over costs to white people for the privilege of living 
there.9 
2) Community Services. Black communities in the United 
States suffer from entirely different services. Garbage col· 
lection, utility services, street and sewerage quality are a" 
notoriously below the kind of services that are regularly 
expected in the North American community. 
3) Price Structures. The African community in urban 
centers of the U.S. represents a captive market very similar 
to the market monopolized by the Southern country store in 
the previous decades. This market is captive because 
African lack of mobility precludes "shopping around" and 
because the lack of resources means that African people 
are subject to the worst credit terms, terms that are 
especially designed to get maximum profits off the poor. 
Such studies as The Poor Pay More by David Caplovitz show 
that in African communities durable goods are sold with the 
highest markup and the lowest quality.10 Credit is advanced 
easily but repossession is a common sight in the commu· 
nity, taking back goods that have been 1f2 or 3;" paid for. 
Because of this, the Federal Trade Commission has had to 
estimate that African people pay 50 percent more for mer· 
chandise. l1 According to Knowles and Pres itt, it is a 52 per· 
cent premium. In food prices, Anthony Downs shows that 
black people get lower quality food and pay a higher price 
than in the North American community.12 In addition, the 
African community is filled with fast food stores and liquor 
st'Ores, with a higher proportion of sma" stores and worse 
quality in the chain store products offered. 
4) And More. African people receive completely different 
medical care, as shown by Victor Fuchs in Who Shall Live?13 
. and by the struggles of such groups as the Coalition to 
• Fight Infant Mortality which expose the scandalous infant 
. death rate as compared with that in the nearby white com· 
91


--- PAGE 49 ---
munity. Land loss through market and legal manipulation 
has been progressively developing in the 20th century for 
Africans. Prisons have continued to serve the primary func­
tion of terror, putting away the young, rebellious, and resis­
tant elements of the African community, in which one of 
every four black men will spend time during his life. Prisons 
also continue to operate many capitalist enterprises on in­
voluntary servitude labor, from furniture making to tanning 
leathe~ 
"Don't be shocked when I say I was in prison-you are still in 
prison! That's what America means-prison ... " Malcolm X 
92 
Conclusion 
Summary of Reparations Owed 
by the u.S. Government 
By adding even a small amount for the other ways that 
African people have been ripped off besides the wage dif­
ferential between 1945 and 1982, we can increase our 
estimate of what modern imperialism has stolen from $1.75 
trillion to $2 trillion between 1945 and 1982. Added to the 
previous totals, then, we arrive at a sum total of $4.1 trillion, 
4100 billion dollars, owed by the U.S. government and 
capitalist class for reparations to African people. 
The workings of capitalism have always required that 
African people be maintained in a subservient status, main­
tained outside the North American economy where skilled 
labor carries out the final tasks of production, the realm of 
the North American proletariat and capitalist. This subser­
vient status, which was extended to the whole world 100 
years ago, is the real basis for capitalist profits. African peo­
ple's oppression has changed forms over the years. The pro­
gression of this oppression shows that capitalism freely 
adapts every type of exploitation in order to amass capital; 
whether it bears resemblance to the historical periods of 
Slavery, peasantry, or wage labor, it is all part of the 
capitalist mode of production. Indeed, such adaptation is as 
much a part of the history of capitalism as is wage labor. 
In the first period, slave labor was utilized as the cen­
tral factor in the primitive accumulation of capitalism, free­
ing up $600 billion (1982 dollars) in profit for the capitalist 
class. In the second period, the rise of colonialism, African 
people were transformed to peasants. While peasant labor 
exploitation represented an advance over slave labor in the 
eyes of many, in fact it resulted in more efficient and 
thorough exploitation of African labor and thus greater pro­
fits being taken, a total of $1.5 trillion or $1500 billion from 
1865 to 1945. In the third period, with the development of 
primitive neo-colonialism, the African colony was trans­
formed to the point where today 94 percent of Africans in 
the U.S. are workers, with at least $2 trillion in colonial pro­
fits taken by the capitalist class in this brief period. This ex-
93


--- PAGE 50 ---
ploitation foretells the proletarianization of colonies 
throughout the world and the ultimate decadence of the im· 
perialist centers. When you break it down to the amount of 
wealth extracted per year, you may see even more 
dramatically how the exploitation rate of the African coLony 
has increased with the growth of capital. During slavery, the 
capitalists extracted about $2.5 billion (in 1982 dollars) per 
year; during early colonialism, this figure averages out 
much higher, to $20 billion per year extracted, or 8 times 
more than the previous period. And during modern primitive 
neo·colonialism, the capitalist class has extracted $54 
billion per year, or 2.7 times as much as the previous period 
and 22 times as much as during chattel slavery. This far sur· 
passes the rate of population growth, which has increased 
tenfold since the period of chattel slavery. 
The transformation of the last thirty years, however, and 
the formation of the African colony into a proletarian col· 
ony, has had two results. First, African labor is more effi· 
clently exploited and greate'r profits derived. Second, Afri· 
can proletarians have come forward as a class with the vi· 
sion and the capacity to once and for all overturn the cruel 
system of colonialism. The transformations of history, the 
continuing resistance of African people causing continual 
changes in the material reality, are fact. But primitive 
accumulation/colonialism/primary extraction persists. The 
terror persists, the dual labor market persists, the territorial 
monopoly on consumption persists-colonialism persists. 
African people have fought 400 years against these condi· 
tions and are now poised to take on the whole structure of 
exploitation, U.S. imperialism. 
In calling for reparations, in building the African Na· 
tional Reparations Organization and organizing for Bread, 
Peace, and Black Power, African people are building a 
massive struggle to win independence, to defeat imperio 
alism in its very belly. The attempts by some members of the 
North American left to declare cOlonialism over and call for 
African workers to fall in behind their leadership is a 
betrayal of internationalism and of the real struggle for 
socialism. An example is the attempts by the petty bour· 
geois parties to make the central response to the current im· 
perialist crisis a demand for jobs. They defend this tailing of 
the liberal bourgeoisie of the Democratic Party with the 
most simplistic economism. It is interesting that the North 
American leftists are now concerned about jobs when their 
94 
unemployment rate approaches 8 percent, while we have 
suffered twice that even in the best periods of capitalism. 
They want their jobs and privileges back, and call for full 
employment. African people know that this alone means 
nothing. Under slavery, we certainly had full employment, 
worked from age 8 to our deaths in our 40's and 50's. $4.1 
trillion reveals that the only just struggle is the anti·colonial 
struggle, the only demand for freedom must demand repara· 
tions. . 
Likewise, those North American leftists who came forth 
with a proposal for Africans to regroup in the South in the 
so·called Black Belt South are only trying to turn the clock 
of history backward. They seek to hook up with certain dis· 
satisfied petty bourgeois elements in the African communi· 
ty, the dissatisfaction of the uprooted peasant, the petty 
bourgeois longing for the past, not unlike the petty 
bourgeois revolution ism which Marx exposed in the ex· 
peasants of France. The call for reparations does not mean 
regrouping African people on the poor worked·out farm land 
of the South in an American version of the Bantustans. The 
U.S. African colony persists and has maintained its stra· 
tegic connections among African .peqple all over the world 
building the international African anti·colonial struggle. The 
African domestic colony has matured to a proletarian col· 
ony in a position to seize control of the cities and coun· 
tryside and the heart of the U.S. to demand the whole pay 
back. The African working class has produced the 
necessary forward motion and strategy in the proletarian 
leadership of the African People's Socialist Party, which is 
taking responsibility to lead the working class to smash 
entirely the system of colonialism, to throw out entirely the 
capitalist class from power. 
All of the petty bourgeois political schemes have in the 
center the so·called multi·national analysis, claiming that 
the whole working class, African and North American, is in· 
volved in a single contest with capitalism. Such an argu· 
ment is used.-to mask their attempt to place African people's 
struggle under the leadership of the white petty bour· 
geoisie. In all of these schemes, African people's condition 
is reduced to a matter of race, of some biological and non· 
political myths. This analysis is no different for the 
economist trade unionism of the North American left par· 
ties, the isolated revolution ism of the Black Belt South prac· 
titioners, and the liberal integrationism of the Democratic 
95


--- PAGE 51 ---
Party. They all defend colonialism. 
This study has undertaken to determine how much 
reparations is owed to African people by the U.S. govern­
ment and ruling class for 400 years of oppression. In expos­
ing this history, however, it has done much more. We have 
shown that the primitive accumulation of capital was a pro­
cess of theft from African people which began when the ear­
ly bourgeois merchants set up slave forts on the African 
. coast in the 15th century and which has continued to this 
very day, spreading around the world as the brutal system of 
imperialism. We have demonstrated that the wealth stolen 
from African people, and later from all colonized people, 
constitutes not a side contribution to capitalist profits but 
the very basis of capitalist wealth. We have reviewed the 
changes that have occurred in the form of exploitation of 
African people and how the resistance of African people 
has forced the oppressors to abandon each successive 
form of exploitation. And we have shown how the domestic 
African colony is now strategically located and self­
conscious to take on the task of overthrowing U.S. im­
perialism itself, to lead a struggle which will unite the ef­
forts of Africans allover the world and mobilize all pro­
gressive and revolutionary classes and nations whose in­
terest is in the overthrow of U.S. imperialism. 
By understanding the essential character and workings 
of colonialism, by understanding the position and mission 
of the African working class, our people are armed with the 
truth, which is critical for a successful, revolutionary strug­
gle. As Marx himself said, theory, when it grips the masses, 
is invincible. The demand for reparations, the campaign for 
$4.1 trillion in reparations as defined in this study, goes to 
the very heart of the contradiction, sums up the historical 
oppression of the African colony and the ways that this 
oppression has been the cornerstone of imperialist profits. 
Reparations is central to resolving the colonial oppression 
of African people and throwing down the capitalist class to 
their rightful place. The African People's Socialist Party and 
the African National Reparations Organization is now pro­
viding the programs and working class leadership for the 
anti-colonial struggle of black people in the U.S. which 
leads the entire struggle for socialism. 
96 
African People's Socialist Party led demonstration in Oakland, 
California, February 1983 
97


--- PAGE 52 ---
Appendix 
General Program of the 
African People's Socialist Party 
I. Basic Party Line 
"All our work Is guided by our understanding 
that our struggle for national liberation within U.S. 
borders Is an Integral part of the whole African 
Liberation Movement; that the African Liberation 
Movement Itself Is a part of the great conte.t 
between the ever·emerglng forces of International 
socialism and the dying, but not yet dead forces of 
Imperialism; that the particular character of the 
African Liberation Movement within the U.S. I. a 
struggle against U.S. domestic colonialism; that the 
destruction of colonialism, led by a conscious black 
revolutionary socialist party, will constitute the 
critical blow In the struggle for socialism within U.S. 
borders." 
-Chairman Omall Yeshlt.'a 
1. All Our Work Is Guided By Our Understanding That Our 
Struggle For National Liberation Within U.S. Borders Is An 
Integral Part of the Whole African Liberation Movement. 
The African Liberation Movement is one of the oldest 
liberation movements in the world. It began many centuries 
ago, when the first European businessman put his foot on 
the Continent of Africa and forced an African person to do 
something against her/his will. 
The centuries-old attack on Africa resulted in the con­
trol of African land, resources and people by foreigners and 
aliens, and the forced dispersal of millions of Africans to 
foreign lands throughout the world as slaves. 
The problems of African people today are related to the 
present under-population of Africa which is the result of the 
violent kidnapping of our people and the alien control of our 
land and resources. Our problems also stem from the geno­
cide and oppression we, the survivors of this kidnapping, 
have to endure in the various foreign lands we have been 
dumped in for the exploitation of our labor power. 
99


--- PAGE 53 ---
The struggle of black people within current U.S. borders 
is a struggle for national liberation, the liberation of our 
whole people; it is an integral part of the African Liberation 
Movement presently occurring on the Continent of Africa 
itself. 
The struggle for national liberation within current U.S. 
borders, therefore, does not have its origins in anything 
which occurred within the U.S., but is an integral part of the 
whole African Liberation Movement which began in Africa 
and was transported to various other sectors of the world, 
including the U.S. 
2. The African Liberation Movement Itself Is A Part Of The 
Great Contest Between the Ever·Emerging Forces of Inter· 
national Socialism And the Dying, But Not Yet Dead, Forces 
of Imperialism. 
The African Liberation Movement is not alone in its 
struggle against Western and U.S. imperialism. It is a part of 
the great movement that involves millions of people 
throughout Africa, ASia, Latin America, and the progressive 
forces within the Western imperialist countries themselves. 
This earth-shaking struggle against national oppres­
sion, subjugation, and economic and social injustices, is 
one which unites the overwhelming majority of the world's 
population against Western and U.S. imperialism, the 
oppression of nations by nations for the sake of profits by 
financial capital, the banks, and the giant blood sucking 
corporations which work in alliance with them, stretching 
from one end of the globe to the other. This struggle by the 
world's peoples against imperialism represents the greatest 
threat to production and rule for profit. Its success will bring 
forth a new day with a new economic and social order, one 
that will see the toiling masses of the world assume our 
rightful places as owners of the products of our labor and 
the collective determinants of our own fate and destiny. 
Such a struggle represents the ongoing process of the 
growing move by new historical forces to replace the out­
dated and repressive old historical forces. Such a struggle 
represents the great contest between the ever-emerging 
forces of international socialism and the dying, but not yet 
dead, forces of imperialism. 
3. The Particular Character of the African Liberation Move· 
ment Within the U.S. Is a Struggle Against U.S. Domestic 
Colonialism. 
100 
Within current U.S. borders, the struggle for African 
liberation has a special character. It is a struggle to free 
ourselves from the terror, poverty, and oppression, which 
are caused by being ruled in a foreign land by a foreign and 
alien power, the primary intent of which is to exploit our 
labor power for the benefit of the U.S. capitalist system and 
at the expense of collective economic and social develop­
ment of our people. 
This rule of our people by foreigners and aliens for the 
purpose of explOitation is colonialism, the most barbaric 
form of economic relationship and government in the world 
today. It is an economic and governmental form which 
denies the indisputable human right of self-government. It 
is an economic and governmental form which distorts so­
cial development and denies collective economic develop­
ment through forcibly and arbitrarily molding our social and 
economic activity in a manner designed to perpetrate and 
serve the dominant U.S. capitalist economic and social 
system to which we are illegitimately tied, and from which 
we are irretrievably estranged. 
The colonial domination of our people is unusual and 
rare in history. It is not the same as the domination of our 
people as we know it in Africa, where foreigners came to our 
national homeland and through the use of terror impos9d 
their will upon us on our own land. The colonial domination 
of our people within current U.S. borders is different; it is not 
settler-colonialism, which is colonialism that results from 
people leaving their own native land and setting up an 
oppressive foreign government which oppresses the tradi­
tional occupants of the land in order to exploit them. 
U.S. colonialism for African people within current U.S. 
borders is domestic colonialism. 
As African people, forcibly transported to a foreign land 
by European settlers, also foreign to the land, it is our 
primary responsibility to struggle for the liberation of Africa, 
our national homeland, by waging a fierce battle within cur­
~ent U.S. borders against U.S. imperialism and for indepen­
dence in our lifetime. 
4_ The Destruction of Colonialism, Led by a Conscious 
Black Revolutionary Socialist Party Will Constitute the Crlt· 
Ical Blow in the Struggle for Socialism Within U.S. Borde's. 
Many peoples within current U.S. borders are struggling 
against U.S. imperialism in various of its forms, the Native


--- PAGE 54 ---
People are also struggling against U.S. settler colonialism, 
for sovereignty, and for control of their land. The Chicanol 
Mexicano people are struggling against U.S. oppression of 
their people, as are the heroic Puerto Rican and other sub­
ject people. 
The U.S. North American (white) working class has a 
class contradiction with U.S. capitalism, and it is within its 
objective interests to join with the struggles of other subject 
peoples in the struggles against U.S. imperialism. 
The vast majority of the peoples within current U.S. 
borders who are exploited and oppressed by U.S. imperi­
alism are working peoples, the toiling masses who produce 
much of the value which constitutes U.S. wealth. 
However, the class struggle which unites us, the strug­
gle which stems from the contradictions caused by private 
ownership and socialized production, is not of equal signif­
icance to us all in all its aspects. While the primary con­
tradictions confronting the U.S. North American working 
class have their basis in the contradictory relations to the 
means of production, the primary contradiction confronting 
African people within the U.S. is a colonial contradiction, 
one which thrusts most of the various primitive class forma­
tions in objective contradiction to U.S. imperialism. 
Because of its settler-colonialist character, the primary 
responsibility of the North American working class, whose 
main contradiction with the U.S. capitalist-colonialist ruling 
class revolves around questions of class, is to build interna­
tiona,li working-class solidarity with the toiling subject and 
colonlzed peoples within current U.S. borders for the pur­
poseof resolving its colonial contradictions with them in its 
drive!to seize control of the means of production from its rul­
ing c'lass and build a socialist society. 
Socialism is an economic and social system which is 
superior to capitalism. It is a system which will ultimately 
lead to an end to war, the exploitation and oppression of 
humans by humans, national chauvinism, and the oppres­
sion of nations by nations. 
Socialism throughout the world is a necessary prere­
quisite to the end of national divisions; it offers humanity 
the possibility of a world community for the first time in 
history. 
Therefore, socialism is an economic and social system 
which is in the interest of all the toiling masses of the world, 
in Africa, and in the U.S. But just as the struqqles for na· 
102 
tional liberation throughout the world and Africa represent 
the sharpest, most decisive threat to imperialism interna­
tionally, the African-led struggle against domestic colo­
nialism within current U.S. borders, represents the death 
blow to U.S. imperialism. 
The U.S.-based struggle for national liberation, aiming 
its sharpest blows at the U.S. state apparatus, the institu­
tions of coercion which protect and promote the U.S. 
capitalist system, is like a time bomb implanted in the heart 
of a giant enraged and dying beast. 
A successful anti-colonial struggle for national libera­
tion by African people within current U.S. borders will have 
to necessarily smash the coercive state apparatus which is 
directly responsible for our subjugation and oppression, 
and which stands menacingly in the way of the ability of the 
toiling masses to seize control of the means of production 
and build socialism within current U.S. borders. 
Throughout our history as captives within current U.S. 
borders, African people have consistently resisted foreign 
domination, and our struggles have acted as catalysts for 
struggles for other peoples for progressive social change, 
and presented the U.S. government and the system it serves 
their greatest threat. 
. Because of the antagonistic and irreversible contradic­
tions African people have with U.S. imperialism within cur­
rent U.S. borders, and because of the great size of our popu­
lation, having resisted all forms of genocide, the U.S.-based 
African struggle to destroy colonialism, led by a conscious 
black revolutionary party such as the African People's 
Socialist Party, will constitute the critical blow in the strug­
gle for socialism within current U.S. borders. 
II. Fourteen Point Platform 
1. WE WANT PEACE, DIGNITY, AND THE RIGHT TO BUILD 
A PROSPEROUS LIFE THROUGH OUR OWN LABOR AND IN 
OUR OWN INTERESTS. 
We believe that the U.S. North American government 
and society were founded on the genocide of Native People, 
the theft of their land, and the forcible dispersal, enslave­
ment, and colonization of millions of African people. We 
believe that the present condition of existence for African 
people within current U.S. borders is colonialism, a condi­
tion of existence where a whole people is oppressivel)l dom-
103


--- PAGE 55 ---
inated by a foreign and alien state power for the purpose of 
economic exploitation and political advantage. We believe 
further that this colonial domination is the primary basis of 
the problems of African people within the U.S. and that we 
shall know neither peace, prosperity, nor human dignity until 
this colonialist domination is overthrown and the power over 
our lives rests in our own hands. 
2. WE WANT THE RIGHTS TO ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 
AND CREATIVE AND PRODUCTIVE EMPLOYMENT WHICH 
PROMOTE THE NEEDS AND WELL BEING OF OUR ENTIRE 
PEOPLE. 
We believe that colonialism is a blood sucking system 
which causes all economic development to benefit the colo­
nialist ruling class state and society at the expense of our 
colonized people. We also believe that the massive, habitual 
unemployment and underemployment of our people benefit 
the U.S. colonialist ruling class and capitalist system and 
that a struggle by African people for jobs must be combined 
with a struggle for socialism and independent economic 
development. 
3. WE WANT AN Ef:4D TO ALL LOCAL, STATE, FEDERAL, 
AND OTHER TAXATION OF BLACK PEOPLE BY THE U.S. 
GOVERNMENT AND ANY OF ITS AGENCIES. 
We believe that such taxation is illegitimate, that black 
people have no real or meaningful authority within the U.S. 
government, and that U.S. taxation of African people is 
therefore taxation without representation. We believe that in 
the absence of such real or meaningful authority we have 
nothing to say about how such monies are used, and that 
therefore the taxes taken from black people are often used 
against us and other oppressed and exploited peoples 
within the U.S. and around the world. 
We believe that the use of taxes extracted from the Afri­
can population to build more prisons to stuff us in and to hire 
more police to kill us with is criminal, as is the use of these 
taxes to hire soldiers to intimidate and plunder peoples 
oppressed by this same system internationally. We also 
believe African people must refuse to pay taxes to a govern­
ment which uses such taxes to prop up and support brutal 
dictators around the world who keep their own peoples op­
pressed and living in squalor in order to maintain U.S. and 
Western imperialist economic and political domination. 
104 
4. WE WANT THE RIGHT TO FREE SPEECH AND POLIT 
ICAL ASSOCIATION, A GUARANTEE OF THE RIGHT TO 
WORK FOR THE BETTERMENT AND EMANCIPATION OF 
BLACK PEOPLE WITHOUT FEAR OF POLITICAL IMPRISON 
MENT AND THE LOSS OF LIFE, LIMB, AND LIVELIHOOD. 
We believe that the liberation of African peop' 
throughout the world will come primarily as a result of 01." 
own efforts. We believe it is our duty to our mothers an:' 
fathers, our children and ourselves, to organize ourselves \ 
overcome our oppression. We believe that the rights t 
organize and speak out against our oppression are bas' 
human rights and that the U.S. government must discontim; 
its attempts to smash these rights and must discontinl 
criminal attacks on those African patriots who work for ttl 
betterment and emancipation of our people. 
5. WE WANT THE RIGHT TO INTERNATIONAL POLITICAL 
AND ECONOMIC ASSOCIATION WITH AFRICANS AND A" 
OTHER PEOPLES ANYWHERE ON THE FACE OF TH!~ 
EARTH. 
We believe that all black people are African people and 
are a part of a single national entity. We believe that the 
genuine freedom of African people everywhere is irreversibly 
linked to the creation of an independent, united, and socia;· 
ist Africa. We believe the struggle of African people withl;! 
the U.S. represents the U.S. front of the worldwide moverne n ~ 
of African people for African liberation, political indepen­
dence, and socialist democracy. We believe that the world 
wide struggle for Afric(1il liberation is in unity with the strUf! 
gles being waged bYi! iC majority of ti'e peoples of the: 
to end the oppression of nations by nations and to creat, 
new world, within which the toiling masses will end the sy~, 
tem of workers and bosses and slaves and masters and Wiil 
own and benefit from the means and products of our labor 
and will have pOlitical authority over our own lives. Wt.: 
believe that the natural, objective friends of our struggJe fo! 
African liberation, independence, and socialist democracy 
are all the tOiling masses of the world-the people of tile 
Middle East, the Asian and Latin American peasants and 
workers, the democratic forces throughout Eastern and 
Western Europe and the U.S., and the truly socialist states of 
the world, and that we must therefore have the absolute right 
to free political and economic international association. 
105


--- PAGE 56 ---
6. WE WANT THE IMMEDIATE AND UNCONDITIONAL RE· 
LEASE OF ALL BLACK PEOPLE WHO ARE PRESENTLY 
LOCKED DOWN IN U.S. PRISONS. 
We believe that all the African mel1 and women who are 
locked down in the U.S. concentration camps commonly 
known as prisons are there due to decisions, laws, and 
circumstances which were created by aliens and foreigners 
for their own benefit and as a means of genocidal colonialist 
control. We believe that these decisions, laws, and circum· 
stances were created and are enforced without our consent 
and are therefore illegitimate. We believe that the African 
men and women who are locked down in these concentra· 
tion camps are victims of U.S. colonialist ruling class justice 
which maintains our enslavement and terrorizes our people, 
and that they should therefore be released immediately to 
the just representatives of our struggle for liberation, inde· 
pendence, and socialist democracy. 
7. WE WANT COMPLETE AMNESTY FOR ALL AFRICAN 
POLITICAL PRISONERS AND PRISONERS OF WAR FROM 
U.S. PRISONS OR THEIR IMMEDIATE RELEASE TO ANY 
FRIENDLY COUNTRY WHICH WILL ACCEPT THEM AND 
GIVE THEM POLITICAL ASYLUM. 
We believe that U.S. prisons are also used as the illegit· 
Imate tool for torturing, murdering, and holding captive 
those courageous daughters and sons of Africa who through 
their patriotic deeds or spoken or written words in support of 
the cause of our liberation have become pOlitical prisoners 
and prisoners of war. We believe, along with the majority of 
the peoples of the world, that it is the duty of the colonized 
and enslaved to resist slavery and colonialism and to fight 
for socialism and those who do so are patriots and heroines 
and heroes and should be held in the highest esteem. 
8. WE WANT THE IMMEDIATE WITHDRAWAL OF THE U.S. 
POLICE FROM OUR OPPRESSED AND EXPLOITED COM· 
MUNITIES. 
We believe that the various U.S. police agencies which 
occupy our communities are arms of the U.S. colonialist 
state which is responsible for keeping our people enslaved 
and terrorized. We believe that the U.S. pOlice agencies do 
not serve us, but instead represent the first line of U.S. 
defense against the just struggle of our people for peace, 
dignity, and socialist democracy. Therefore, we believe the 
106 
U.S. pOlice is an illegitimate standing army, a colonial army 
in the African community and must withdraw immediately 
from our community, to be replaced by our liberation forces 
whose struggles in defense of our community and against 
our oppression demonstrate their loyalty to our community 
and their willingness to serve in its interest. 
9. WE WANT AN END TO THE POLITICAL AND SOCIAL 
OPPRESSION AND ECONOMIC EXPLOITATION OF AFRI· 
CAN WOMEN. 
We believe in the absolute, unequivocal, political, 
social, and economic equality of African women and men. 
We believe that a fundamental test of the progressive or 
revolutionary character of any organization, party, move· 
ment, or society is its commitment, confirmed in practice, to 
the destruction of the special oppression of women and the 
elevation of women to the rightful place as equal partners 
and leaders in the forward motion of the development of 
human society and as leaders, makers, and shapers of 
human history. 
10. WE WANT THE RIGHT TO BUILD AN AFRICAN 
PEOPLE'S LIBERATION ARMY. 
We believe that true freedom, although often taken 
away, can not be given to a people. We believe that African 
people are our own liberators, and that we have a right and 
obligation to build an African People's Liberation Army to de· 
fend our political gains, our freedom fighters and commun· 
ities, and to win our actual freedom from our oppressive 
colonial slave masters. We believe that neither meaningful 
freedom, nor guaranteed political and social gains, nor gen· 
uine liberation are possible without the assuring existence 
of an African People's Liberation Army. We believe further, 
that the only legitimate wars are wars of national liberation, 
and wars to oppose imperialist aggression, and that there· 
fore, the only legitimate military forces for black people to 
serve with are military forces which defend liberty and repel 
imperialist aggression. Such a force would be the African 
People's Liberation Army. 
11. WE WANT THE U.S. AND THE INTERNATIONAL EURO· 
PEAN RULING CLASS AND STATES TO REPAY AFRICA 
AND AFRICAN PEOPLE FOR THE CENTURIES OF GENO· 
CIDE, OPPRESSION, AND ENSLAVEMENT OF OUR PEO· 
PLE. 
107


--- PAGE 57 ---
We believe that U.S. and European civilization were born 
from, and are presently maintained by, the horrendous theft 
of human and material resources from Africa and its people. 
IJe also believe that this theft of human and material 
,esources is responsible for the present under population 
and underdevelopment of Africa and her people and the 
political servitude, material impoverishment, and cultural 
discontinuity and diSintegration of African people through­
Dut the world. We believe that Africa and African people are 
(jue reparations, just economic compensation, billions of 
dollars which must be paid to the Organization of African 
Unity or any other legitimate international organization of 
African people, for equitable distribution for the develop­
ment of Africa. We also believe that reparations must be 
distributed to the various independent African states disper­
sed throughout the world, and to the legitimate repre­
sentatives of African people forcibly dispersed throughout 
the world who have not yet won liberation. 
12. WE WANT AN END TO THE VICIOUS, SELF·SERVING 
U.S. AND WESTERN EUROPEAN POLITICAL, ECONOMIC, 
AND MILITARY INTERFERENCE IN THE AFFAIRS OF 
I'\FRICA AND AFRICAN PEOPLE THROUGHOUT THE 
WORLD. 
We believe that African people in Africa and elsewhere 
have a right and responsibility to solve our own problems, 
free from the unwanted, and self-serving interference of U.S. 
and Western imperialists. We believe that the U.S. and 
Western imperialist interference in the affairs of our people 
i~3 designed to maintain the continuation of the theft of our 
human and material resources and our oppression and 
impoverishment. 
We believe that African people must be free to organize 
and struggle for an end to colonialism and neo-colonialism 
without interference from U.S. and Western imperialism 
INhich supports neo-colonialism and colonialism in Africa, 
1he U.S. and elsewhere, and which has deposed progressive 
and revolutionary African leaders and replaced them with 
neo-colonialist stooges. 
13. WE WANT AN END TO U.S. COLONIAL DOMINATION 
OF AFRICAN PEOPLE WITHIN THE U.S. 
We 'believe that the primary struggle of African people 
·,,!thin the U.S. during this period is to throw off the alien U.S. 
:·:;ionial domination which is responsible for virtually every 
hardship imposed on black people by this government that is 
identifiable as a "black problem." 
We believe that our problems with education-from our 
inability to control our own schools and determine the 
education of our own children, to the inferior and racist 
quality of the education we do receive-are caused by colo­
nialism. We believe that our problems with health 
care-from the absence of black controlled and operated 
health clinics and institutions throughout our communities 
to the hazardous health conditions imposed on us ~y poverty 
and callous government decisions-are caused by colo­
nialism. 
We believe that our problems with housing-from the 
unavailability of decent and adequate housing for the major­
ity of our people, to the delapidated and vermin-Infested 
housing we are forced to live in-are caused by colonialism. 
We believe that our problems with food and clothing­
from the terrible quality and quantity which are imposed on 
us by blood sucking merchants, to our inablity to produce 
and distribute them for and among ourselves-are caused 
by colonialism, where our whole people is dominated and 
oppressed by a foreign and alien state power for the purpose 
of economic exploitaton and political advantage. 
14. WE WANT THE TOTAL LIBERATION AND UNIFICATION 
OF AFRICA UNDER AN ALL-AFRICAN SOCIALIST GOVERN· 
MENT. 
We believe that "the total liberation and the unification 
of Africa under an All-African socialist government must be 
the primary objective of all Black revolutionaries throughout 
the world. It is an objective which, when achieved, will bring 
about the fulfillment of the aspirations of Africans and peo­
ple of African descent everywhere. It will at the same time 
advance the triumph of the international socialist revolution, 
and the onward progress toward communism, under which 
every society is ordered on the principle of-from each 
according to his (her) ability, to each according to his (her) 
needs."-Kwame Nkrumah 
109


--- PAGE 58 ---
r 
t 
l 
Footnotes 
Chapter 1 
1 Karl Marx, Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, Vol.I, The 
Process of Capitalist Production, Frederick Engels, ed. (New 
York: International Publishers, 1979), p. 751. 
2 Karl Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy: A Reply to M. 
Proudhon's Philosophy of Poverty (New York: International 
Publishers), pp. 94-95. 
3 Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. I, p. 759. 
4 Kwame Nkrumah, Class Struggle in Africa (New York: Interna· 
tional Publishers, 1970), p.87. 
a The Burning Spear, the "Basic Party Line" is printed on p. 1 
of every issue. 
• Karl Marx, Capital (New York: Vintage Books, 1976), p. 799. 
7 Ernest Mandel, Marxist Economic Theory (New York: Monthly 
Review Press, 1968), p. 145. 
• The Burning Spear, January, 1982, p. 5. 
I African People's Socialist Party, A New Beginning: The Road 
to Black Freedom and Socialism (Oakland: Burning Spear 
Publications, 1982), p.29. 
10 John Eaton, Political Economy (New York: International 
Publishers, 1966), p.206. 
Chapter 2 
1 Wilson Williams, Africa and the Rise of Capitalism 
(Washington, D.C.: Howard University Press, 1938), p. 14. 
2 Harold Woodman, King Cotton and His Retainers (Lexington, 
KY: University of Kentucky Press, 1968), p. vii. 
3 B.1. Koval, "Colonial Plantation Slavery and Primary Capital 
Accumulation in Western Europe." (Moscow: 1970). 
4 Henry Steele Commager, ed., Documents of American History 
(New York: Meredith Corp., 1934), p. 328. 
5 Immanuel Wallerstein, "American Slavery and the Capitalist 
World Economy," American Journal of Sociology 81 (March 
1976): 1199. 
• Curtis Nettels, Economic History of the United States (New 
York: 1962), Vol. II: The Emergence of a National Economy, 
1775-1815, p.22ff. 
7 Woodman, op cit., p. 29. 
• Martin Ijere, Survey of Afro·American Experience in the U.S. 
Economy (New York: 1980). 
I Brian Main, "Toward the Measurement of Historic Debts," 
Review of Black Political Economy (Winter 1972), p.22. 
111 
i.iiiil lill


--- PAGE 59 ---
10 Harold Woodman, Slavery and the Southern Ecdnomy (New 
York: Harcourt, Brace and World, 1966), p.32. 
11 Ijere, op cit. 
12 Alfred Conrad and John Meyer, The Economics of Slavery 
(Chicago: 1958). 
13 Woodman, Slavery and the Southern Economy, op cit. 
U Charles Snydor, Slavery in Mississippi. 
15 Kenneth Stampp, The Peculiar Institution (New York: 1956). 
18 Robert Evans, Jr., "The Economics of American Negro Slavery, 
1830-1860," in Aspects of Labor Economics, a Conference of 
the University'S National Committee for Economic Research, 
Princeton University, 1962. 
17 Ibid. 
II Conrad and Meyer, op cit. 
II Jim Marketti, Review of Black Political Economy (Winter 1972). 
20 Harold Faulkner, American Economic History (New York: 
1960), p. 309. 
21 Woodman, King Cotton, op cit. 
22 Woodman, King Cotton, op cit., p. 130. 
23 Nettels, op cit., p.313. 
24 Vincent Nolte, Fifty Years in Both Hemispheres, 
Reminiscences of the Life of a Former Merchant (New York: 1854). 
2. Nettels, op cit., p. 302. 
21 Woodman, King Cotton, op cit., p. 120. 
27 Woodman, King Cotton, op cit., p. 140. 
21 Paul Trescott, Financing American Enterprise, The Story of 
Commercial Banking (New York: 1963). 
21 Nolte, op cit., p. 299. 
30 Faulkner, op cit., p. 164. 
31 E.N. Elliot, Cotton Is King (Augusta: Pritchart, Abbott & 
Loomis, 1860), p.56. 
32 George Rawick, The American Slave: A Composite 
Autobiography (Westport: Greenwood Publishing Co., 1972), p.122. 
II Omali Yeshitela, The Struggle For Bread, Peace and Black 
Power (Oakland: Burning Spear Publications, 1981), p. 25. 
Chapter 3 
1 W.E.B. DuBOis, Black Reconstruction in America, 1860-1880 
(Cleveland: The World Publishing Company, 1935), pp. 55-83. 
2 DuBOiS, op cit., pp. 632-634. 
3 Victor Ullman, Martin R. Delaney, The Beginnings of Black 
Nationalism (Boston: Beacon Press, 1971), p.404. 
4 Arthur Raper and Ira Reid, Sharecroppers All (Chapel Hill, N.C., 1941), p.96ft. 
• W.E.B. DuBOis, The Autobiography of W.E.B. DuBOis (New 
York: International Publishers, 1968), p. 231. 
112 
• S.L. Engerman, "The Economic Impact of the Civil War," 
Explorations in Entrepreneurial History (New York: 1966), 
p. 176 and 199. 
7 U.S. Department of Agriculture, "The Negro Farmer in the 
U.S.," 1933. 
• Dorothy Sterling, The Trouble They Seen, Black People Tell the 
Story of Reconstruction (Garden City: Doubleday & Co., 1976), p.266. 
I Com mager, op cit., p. 453. 
10 Ibid. 
11 R.L. Ransom and R. Sutch, One Kind of Freedom: The 
Economic Consequences of Emancipation (New York: 1977), 
p.157. 
12 U.S. Department of Agriculture, op cit. 
13 Woodman, King Cotton, op cit., p. 309. 
U The Burning Spear, September, 1980, p.5. 
11 Ransom and Sutch, op cit., p. 130. 
11 Woodman, King Cotton, op cit., p. 311. 
17 Woodman, King Cotton, op cit., p. 355. 
11 National Emergency Council, Report on Economic Conditions 
in the South, 1938, quoted in Raper and Reid, op cit., p. 148. 
11 Ijere, op cit., p. 40. 
20 C. Vann Woodward, Tom Watson, Agrarian Rebel (London: 
Oxford University Press, 1938), p. 106. 
21 Ibid. 
22 Journal of the International Mill, Mine and Smelters Union, 
1912, pp. 13-14. 
23 John Hope Franklin, From Slavery to Freedom, A History of 
Negro Americans (New York: 1967), p. 439. 
24 California Institute of Technology, "Progressivism for Middle 
Class Whites Only: the Distribution of Taxation and 
Expenditures for Education in North CarOlina, 1880-1910," 
Social Science Working Paper #177. 1977. 
25 Gary Walton and James Shepherd, ed., "Credit Merchandising 
in the New South," in Market Institutions and Economic Pro­
gress in the New South, 1865-1900. (New York: Shepherd, 
1977). 
28 Franklin, op cit., p. 387. 
27 Richard America, Review of Black Political Economy (Winter, 
1972). 
Chapter 4 
1 Miller and Herman, Rich Man, Poor Man (New York: 1971), 
p.62. 
2 Harold Baron and Bennett Hymer, "The Negro Worker in the 
Chicago Labor Market," from The Negro and the American 
Labor Movement (New York: 1968). 
3 Ibid. 
113


--- PAGE 60 ---
• John Kaln, Race and Poverty, The Economics of Discrimina­
tion (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 1969) quoting from 1967 Bureau of 
Labor Statistics. 
I Miller and Herman, op cit., p. 183. 
• Martha Ozawa, "Social Insurance and Redistribution," in Alvin 
Schoor, ed. Jubilee for Our Times (New York: 1977), 
pp. 141-142. . 
7 National Urban League, State of Black America, '1981. 
• Richard Perlman, The Economics of Poverty (New York: 1976), p.78. 
• Louis Knowles and K. Prewitt, ed., Institutional Racism in 
America (New Jersey: 1969), p. 25, confirmed by Tussing, op 
cit. 
10 David Caplovitz, The Poor Pay More (New York: 1963). 
11 Tussing, op cit. 
11 Anthony Downs, Who Are the Urban Poor? (New York: 
Committee for Economic Development, 1970). 
11 Victor Fuchs, Who Shall Live? (New York: 1974). • 
114 
r' 
" /' 
,'" 
Bibliography 
Chapter 1. Introduction. 
A. Phillip Randolph Institute. Freedom Budget. New York: 1966. 
Bracey, John, Meier, August, and Rudwlck, Elliott. Black 
Nationalism in America. Indianapolis: 1970. 
The Burning Spear (selected reprints). Black People and the U.S. 
Economy, Our Case for Reparations. Oakland, CA: Burning 
Spear Publications, 1982. 
The Burning Spear, various issues. Oakland, CA. 
'Commlttee in Solidarity with African Independence. Fundamental 
Problems and Essential Tasks for the North American Left In 
the 1980's, The Politics of Solidarity with Black Liberation In 
the U.S. Oakland, CA: Burning Spear Publications, 1982. 
Committee In Solidarity with African Independence. Stand on the 
Forward Side, Vol. 1, #1, Fall, 1982. Oakland, CA: Burning Spear 
Publications, 1982. 
Eaton, John. Political Economy. New York: International 
Publishers, 1966. 
Engels, Frederick. Review of Marx's Contribution to the Critique 
of Political Economy. Moscow: 1960. 
Granma. Sept. 27, 1981. Havana, Cuba. 
Lenin, V.1. Imperialism, the Highest State of Capital/sm. Peking: 
1970. 
Mandel, Ernest. Marxist Economic Theory. New York: Monthly 
Review Press, 1968. 
Marx, Karl. Capital. New York: 1976. 
Marx, Karl. Critique of the Gotha Program. New York: 1970. 
Marx, Karl & Engels, Frederick. Communist Manifesto. New York: 
1970. 
Marx, Karl and Engels, Frederick. German Ideology. New York: 
1970. 
Yeshltela, Omall. A New Beginning: The Road to Black Freedom 
and Social/sm. Oakland, CA: Burning Spear Publications, 1982. 
, Yeshltela, Omali. Not One Step Backward, The Black Liberation 
Movement from 1971 to 1982. Oakland, CA: Burning Spear 
Publications, 1982. 
Chapter 2. Chattel Slavery. Primitive 
Accumulation of Capitalism, 1819·1885. 
Aitkin, H., ed. Old Slavery Pay? Boston: 1971. 
115


--- PAGE 61 ---
America, Richard. "A New Rationale for Income Redistribution." 
Review of Black Political Economy (Winter 1972). 
Barzel, Y. "An Economic Analysis of Slavery." Journal of Law and 
Economics 20 (1977). 
Bennett, Norman, ed. New England Merchants in Africa 
1802-1865. Boston: 1965. 
Black Reparations Commission (pamphlet), P.O. Box 1397, 
Rockville, Md. 20850.1978. 
Brown, Robert. "The Economic Basis for Reparations to Black 
America." Review of Black Political Economy, Winter 1972, 
p.67. 
Buxton, T.F. The African Slave Trade and Its Remedy. London: 
1840. 
Callender, Guy, ed. Economic History of the United States, 
1765-1860. New York: 1909. 
Conrad, Alfred and Meyer, John. The Economics of Slavery. 
Chicago: 1958. 
David, P.A. "The Growth of Real Product in the United States 
before 1840: New Evidence, Controlled Conjectures." Journal 
of Economic History. 27 (1967). 
David, Gutman, Sutch, Temin, and Wright. Reckoning with 
Slavery, A Critical Study in the Quantitative History of 
American Negro Slavery. New York: 1976. 
Davis, L. "New England Textile Mills and the Capitalist Markets" 
In Coates, A.W., and Robertson, R.M. ed., Essays in American 
Economic History. New York: 1970. 
Donnan, Elizabeth. Documents Illustrative of the History of the 
Slave Trade. New York: 1930. 
DuBois, W.E.B. The World and Africa. New York: 1946. 
Dunn, Richard. Sugar and Slaves. 
Elkins, Stanley. Slavery. Chicago: 1959. 
Elliot, E.N. Cotton is King. Augusta, GA: 1860. 
Evans, Robert, Jr. "The Economics of Negro Slavery 1830·1860" 
In Aspects of Labor Economics, a Conference of the University 
National Committee for Economic Research. Princeton 
Unlv: 1962. 
Faulkner, Harold U. American Economic History. New York: 1960. 
Fogel, R.W. and Engerman, S.L. Time on the Cross. Boston: 1974. 
Foner, Laura and Genovese, Eugene, ed., Slavery in the New 
World. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: 1969. 
Forman, James. Black Manifesto at National Black Development 
Conference. April 26, 1969. 
Gallman, R.E. "Commodity Output, 1839·1899" in National Bureau 
of Economic Research. Studies in Income and Wealth. 
Princeton: 1960. 
116 
Gallman, R.E. "Gross National Product In the United States, 
1834·1909" In National Bureau of Economic Research. Studies 
in Income and Wealth. Princeton: 1960. 
Gallman, Robert. "Self-Sufficiency in the Cotton Economy of the 
Antebellum South." Agricultural History 44,1 (January, 1970), 
p.2. 
Gallman, R.E. and Anderson, R.V. "Slaves as Fixed Capital." 
Journal of American History. 64: 1977. 
Gates, Paul. The Farmer's Age: Agriculture, 1815-1860 New York: 
1960. 
Genovese, Eugene. The Political Economy of Slavery. New York: 
1965. 
Govan, Thomas. "Was Plantation Slavery Profitable?" Journal of 
Southern History. November, 1942.' 
Gunderson, G. "Southern Ante-bellum Income Reconsidered." 
Explorations in Economic History. 10: 1973. 
Gutman, Herbert. Slavery and the Numbers Game: A Critique of 
the Time on the Cross. Urbana, IL: 1975. 
Helper, H.R. The Impending Crisis of the South. New York: 1857. 
Hoskins, Halford L. European Imperialism in Africa. New York: 
1930. 
M. Knight, Franklin. Slave Society in Cuba During the 19th 
Century. Madison: 1970. 
Koval, B.1. "Colonial Planter Slavery and Primary Capital 
Accumulation in Western Europe." USSR: 1975. 
Kuznets, S. Capital in the American Economy: Its Formation and 
Financing. New York: 1961. 
Main, Brian. "Toward the Measurement of Historic Debts." 
Review of Black Political Economy, (Winter 72): p. 22. 
Marketti, Jim. "Black Equity in the Slave Industry." Review of 
Black Political Economy, (Winter, 1972). 
Marx, Karl and Engels, Frederick. The Civil War in the U.S. New 
York: 1937. 
McGouldrich, Paul. New England Textiles in 19th Century, Profits 
and Investments. Cambridge, Mass: 1968. 
Nettels, Curtis. The Emergence of a National Economy, 
1775-1~15. New York: 1962. 
Nolte, Vincent. 50 Years in Both Hemispheres. London: 1854. 
North, Douglass and Thomas, Robert, ed. Growth of the 
American Economy to 1860. Columbia, S.C.: 1968. 
Oliver, Roland and Fage, J.D. A Short History of Africa. 
Middlesex, England: 1962. 
Parker, Wm., Nelson ed. The Structure of the Cotton Economy of 
the Antebellum South. Washington, D.C.: 1970. 
Phillips, Ulrich B. The Slave Economy of the Old South. Baton 
Rouge, LA: 1968. 
117


--- PAGE 62 ---
Post, Charles. "American Road to Capitalism.:' New Left Review. 
133: May-June, 1982. 
Rawick, George. The American Slave: A Composite 
Autobiography. Vol 1, From Sunup to Sundown. Westport, 
Conn: Greenwood Publishing Company, 1972. 
Rodney, Walter. How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Washington, 
D.C.: 1972. 
Russel, Robert A. Economic Aspects of Southern Sectionalism 
1840-1861. New York: 1960. 
Schelber,Harry, Vatter, Harold, and Faulkner, U. American 
Economic History. New York: 1976. 
Shapiro, Seymour. Capital and Cotton. Ithaca, N.Y.: 1927. 
Sheridan., Richard. Sugar and Slavery, An Economic History of 
the BrItish West Indies, 1623-1775. Baltimore: Johns 
Hopkins Unlv. Press, 1973. 
Smelser, Nell J. Social Change in Industrial Revolution: An 
Application of Theory to British Cotton Industry. 
Chicago: 1959. 
Smith, Julia. Slavery and Plantation Growth in Antebellum 
Florida, 1821-1860. Gainesville, FL: 1973. 
Stampp, Kenneth. The Peculiar Institution. New York: 1956. 
Starobln, Robert. "The Economics of Industrial Slavery In the Old 
South." Business Historical Review. Vol XLIV #2 (Summer 1970) 
p.131. 
Sutch, R. "The Profitability of Antebellum Slavery, Revisited." 
Southern Economic Journal, Vol 31, #4 (April 1965). 
Taylor, George. The Transportation Revolution 1815-1860. 
New York: 1951. 
Trescott, Paul. Financing American Enterprise, The Story of 
Commercial Banking. 1963. 
Ullman, Victor. Martin Delaney: The Beginnings of Black 
Nationalism. Boston: Beacon Press, 1981. 
U.S. Bureau of the Census. "Colonial and Pre-Federal Statistics." 
In Historical Statistics of the United States. Washington: 1975. 
U.S. Bureau of the Census. "Cotton Production and Distribution." 
Washington, D.C.: 1840. 
U.S. Department of Agriculture. "The Negro Farmer In the U.S." 
Washington, D.C.: 1933. 
Wade, Richard. Slavery In the Cities: The South 1820-1860 New York: 1964. ,. 
Wadsworth, Alfred and Mann, Julia. The Cotton Trade and 
Industrial Lancashire, 1600-178D.Manchester: 1931. 
Wallerstein, Immanuel. "American Slavery and the Capitalist 
World Economy." American Journal of Sociology. March 1976, 
p.1179. 
Weinstein, Allen and Gatell, Frank. American Negro Slavery. 
London: 1968. 
118 
Wilburn, Jean Alexander. Biddle's Bank, The Crucial Years. New 
York: 1967. 
Williams, Eric. Capitalism and Slavery. Chapel Hill, N.C.: 1944. 
Williams, George. History of the Negro Race in America from 
1690 to 1880. New York: 1883. 
Williams, Wilson E. Africa and the Rise of Capitalism. 
Washington, D.C.: 1938. 
Woodman, Harold. King Cotton and His Retainers. Lexington, 
KY: University of Kentucky Press, 1968. 
Woodman, Harold. Slavery and the Southern Economy. N.Y.: 
Harcourt, Brace & World, 1966. 
Wright, Chester. Economic History of the U.S. New York: 1941. 
Wright, G. Political Economy of the Cotton South. New York: 1978. 
Zepp, T.M. "On Returns to Scale and Input Substitutability in 
Slave Agriculture." Explorations in Economic History. 13: 
1976. 
Chapter 3. 
The Rise of Colonialism. The Amount of Wealth Stolen by 
the U.S. Government from African People from 1865 to 
1945. 
Amerson, R.W. Economic Situation of Sharecroppers. Univer­
sity of California: 1942. 
Barnett, Ida B. Wells. On Lynchings: Southern Horrors. New York: 
1892. 
Brawley, B.J. A Short History of the American Negro. New York: 
1913. 
Brown, W.W. and Reynolds, M.O. "Debt Peonage Re-examined" 
Journal of Economic History. 33: 1973. 
Cairnes, J.M. Some Leading Principles of Political Economy 
Newly Expanded. New York: Harper and Brothers 1874. 
Com mager, Henry Steele, ed. Documents of American History. 
New York: Meredith Corp. 1934. 
Cornish, Dudley Taylor. The Sable Arm, Negro Troops in the Union 
Army. New York: 1956. 
DuBois, W.E.B. The Autobiography of W.E.B. DuBois. New York: 
1968. 
DuBois, W.E.B. Black Reconstruction in America. New York: 1935. 
DuBOiS, W.E.B. "The Negro Landholder of Georgia." Bulletin of 
The U.S. Department of Labor. 6: 1901. 
Edwards, T.J. "The Tenant System and Some Changes Since 
EmanCipation." Annals of the American Academy of Political 
Science. 49: 1913. 
Engerman, S.L. "The Economic Impact of the Civil War." Explora­
tions in Entrepreneurial History, Second Series 3: 1966. 
Foner, Philip, and Lewis, Ronald, ed. The Black Worker, A Docu­
mentary History. Philadelphia: 1978. 
119


--- PAGE 63 ---
Franklin, John Hope. From Slavery to Freedom, A History of 
Negro Americans. New York: 1967. 
Gordon, David. Theories of Poverty and Underemployment: 
Orthodox, Radical, afld Dual Labor Market Perspectives. 
Lexington, Mass: 1972. 
Greene, Lorenzo and Woodson, Carter. The Negro Wage Earner. 
Washington, D.C.: 1930. 
Higgs, R. "Race Tenure and Resource Allocation in Southern 
Agriculture, 1910." Journal of Economic History. 33: 1973. 
Higgs, R. "Racial Wage Differences in Agriculture: Evidence From 
North Carolina in 1887." Agricultural History. 52: 1978. 
Hudson, Hosea. Black Worker in the Deep South. New York: 
1972. 
IJere, Matin. Survey of Afro-American Experience in the U.S. 
Economy. New York: 1980. 
Kennedy, Stephen Joy. Profits and Losses in Textiles: Cotton 
Textile Financing Since the War. New York: 1936. 
Kirkland, Edward C. Industry Comes of Age, Business, Labor, and 
Public Policy: 1860-1897. New York: 1961. 
Marlier, Victor. "Union Colored Workers Given Raw Deal." United 
Mine Workers Journal. March 1927. 
Marshall, Ray. The Negro Worker. New York: 1967. 
O'Donnell, Cyril. Recent Trends in the Demand for American 
Cotton. Chicago: 1945. 
Pad more, George. Life and Struggle of Negro Toilers. London: 
1931. 
Ranson, R.L. and Sutch, R. "Debt Peonage in the Cotton South 
After the Civil War." Journal of Economic History. 32: 1972. 
Ransom, R.L. and Sutch, R. "The Ex-Slave In the Post-Bellum 
South: A Study of the Economic I~pact of Racism in a Market 
Environment." Journal of !conomlc History. 33: 1973. 
Ransom, Roger and Sutch, Richard. One Kind of Freedom: The 
Economic Consequences of Emancipation. New York: 1977. 
Raper, Arthur and Reid, Ira. National Emergency Council Report 
on the Economic Conditions in the South, 1938. 
Raper, Arthur and Reid, Ira. Sharecroppers All. Chapel Hill, N.C.: 
1941. 
Redkey, Edwin. Black Exodus, Black Nationalism and Back-to­
Africa Movements, 1890-1910. New Haven, Conn: 1969. 
Reid, J.D., Jr. "The Evaluation and Implications of Southern 
Tenancy." Agricultural History. 53: 1979. 
Reid, J.D., Jr. "Sharecropping Tenancy in American History." in 
Roumasset, J., ed. Risk and Uncertainty in Agriculture. 
Berkeley: 1981. 
Rosengarten, T. All God's Dangers; The Life of Nate Shaw. New 
York: 1975. 
120 
Seagrave, C.E. "The Southern Negro Agicultural Worker: 
1850-1870." (Dissertation) Stanford Univ: 1971. 
Shannon, Fred Albert. The Farmer's Last Frontier; Agriculture 
1860-1897. New York: 1945. 
Shlomowitz, R. "The Transition from Slave to Freedman Labor 
Arrangements in Southern Agriculture. 1865-1870." (Disserta­
tion) Univ. of Chicago: 1975. 
Southern Tenants Farmers Union Newsletter, 1939·1940. 
Sterling, Dorothy. the Trouble They Seen, Black People Tell the 
Story of Reconstruction. Garden City: Doubleday & Co., 1976. 
Stewart, Ethelbert. "Convict Labor." International Molders' 
Journal; 1906. 
U.S. Congress, Senate Committee on Agriculture and Forestry. 
"Present Conditions of Cotton-Growers of the United States 
Compared with Previous Years." Senate Report number 986, 
53rd Congress 3rd Session. Washington, D.C. 
Walton, Gary and Shepherd, James, ed. Market Institutions and 
Economic Progress in the New South, 1865-1900. New York: 
1981. 
Weiner, John. "Class Structure and Economic Development In 
the American South, 1865-1955." American Historical Review. 
84,4 (October 1974). 
Wharton, Vernon Lane. The Negro in Mississippi, 1865-1890. 
New York: 1947. 
Woodward, C. Vann. Tom Watson, Agrarian Rebel. London: 
Oxford University Press, 1938. 
Wynes Charles, ed. The Negro in the South Since 1865. Univer­
sity of Alabama: 1865. 
Chapter 4_ 
Adapting Neo-Colonlal Exploitation to the 
Domestic African Colony, 1945 to 1982_ 
Baron, Harold and Bennett, Hymer. "The Negro Worker In the 
Chicago Labor Market." In Jacobsen, Julius, ed. The Negro and 
the American Labor Movement. New York: 1968. 
Becker, Gary. The Economics of Discrimination. Chicago: 1957. 
Bittker, Boris. The Case for Black Reparations. New York: 1973. 
Braverman, Harry. "The Degradation of Work in the 20th 
Century." Monthly Review, May 1982. 
Caplovitz, David. The Poor Pay, More. New York: 1963. 
Downs, Anthony. Who Are the Urban Poor? New York: Commit· 
tee for Economic Development, 1970. 
Eisenstadt, Murray. The Negro in American Life. New York: 1968. 
Foner, Philip S. Organized Labor and the Black Worker 1619·1973. 
New York: 1975. 
121


--- PAGE 64 ---
, 
Franklin and Resnik. Political Economy of Racism. New York: 
1973. 
Kain, John, ed. Race and Poverty, The Economics of Discrimina­
tion. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: 1969. 
Knowles, louis and Prewitt, K. ed. Institutional Racism in 
America. New Jersey: 1969. 
Masters, Stanley. Black White Income Differentials. New York: 
1970. 
Miller, Herman P. Rich Man, Poor Man. New York: 1971. 
National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders Report. New 
York: 1968. 
National Urban league. State of Black America, 1980. 
Nkrumah, Kwame, Neo-Colonialism, The Last Stage of 
Imperialism. New York: 1966. 
O'Kreuger, Anne. "The Economics of Discrimination." Journal of 
Political Economy. 72: (October 1963). 
Perlman, Richard. The Economics of Poverty. New York: 1976. 
Perlo, Victor. The Economics of Racism, USA. New York: 1975. 
Schiller, Bradley. The Economics of Poverty and Discrimination. 
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: 1976. 
Sterling, Dorothy. The Trouble They Seen, Black People Tell the 
Story of Reconstruction. Garden City: Doubleday and Co., 
1976. 
Spero, Sterling and Harris. Denhard. The Black Worker, The 
Negro and The Labor Movement. New York: 1959. 
Thurow, lester C. Poverty and Discrimination. Washington, D.C.: 
1969. 
Tussing, A. Dale. Poverty in a Dual Economy. New York: 1975. 
United States Government Commerce Department. Survey of 
Current Business, Foreign Inv~stment. October 1980. 
Vatter. Harold and Palm, 'Thomas, ed. Economics of Black 
America. New York: 1972. 
Wade, Richard, ed. The Negro in American Life. Boston: 1965. 
122


--- PAGE 65 ---
124 
K COMMUNI 
aNTROL 
MfTTEE 
Biographical Note 
Omali Yeshitela (Joseph Waller) is the Chairman and co­
founder of the African People's Socialist Party as we" as the 
founder of the Party's main political organ, The Burning 
Spear newspaper. Chairman Yeshitela, 41, has dedicated the 
past 20 years of his life to the struggle of his people for inde­
pendence, liberation and socialism against the U.S. imperial­
ist system. Long based in the South, his strong and uncom­
promising leadership has taken the form of consistent and 
militant activism and agitation over the years on all of the 
many pressing issues facing black people in the U.S. today. 
Chairman Yeshitela has contributed profoundly to the 
theoretical development of the Black Liberation Movement 
in this country and around the world. He has developed the 
understanding that racism is the ideological expression of 
colonialism which is the major contradiction facing U.S. 
African people, and he has shed significant light on the role 
that capitalist primitive accumulation, slavery and colonial­
ism play in the present condition and tasks before African 
people everywhere and particularly In the U.S. Yeshltela has 
brought clarity to the relationship of black people to U.S. 
imperialism, as well as to the North American working class, 
and to the Native, Puerto Rican and other colonized popula­
tions inside this country. Most of his speeches and papers 
have been featured in The Burning Spear newspaper over the 
past thirteen years. 
A tireless internationalist, the Chairman has done much 
to bring about the revolutionary unity of African people 
around the world and has forged the bonds of International 
solidarity of African people to all of the world's oppressed, 
colonized, struggling peoples and underdeveloped and 
socialist nations. 
Rick Ayers and David Barber, research assistants, are 
members of the Committee In Solidarity With African Inde­
pendence, a North American solidarity organization which 
works directly under the leadership of the African People's 
Socialist Party to build material and political support 
among North Americans for the U.S. based African Indepen­
dence struggle. 
125


--- PAGE 66 ---
rJ 
I 
I 
I 
I About the 
African People's Socialist Party 
The African People's Socialist Party is the organization 
which initiated the work of the International Tribunal on 
Reparations for Black People in the U.S., which brought the 
history and conditions of black people before the world on 
November 13 and 14, 1982, with a demand for reparations 
amounting to $4.1 trillion dollars for unpaid and underpaid 
labor alone. Chairman Omali Yeshitela initiated the found­
ing of the African People's Socialist Party through a merger 
of three revolutionary and militant black organizations in 
1972. During its first decade of existence, the African Peo­
ple's Socialist Party has provided theoretical and practical 
leadership for the African Independence Movement In the 
U.S. Its work has led the movement from the near decima­
tion because of the U.S. government's counter-intelligence 
attacks (COINTElPRO) which were followed by an 
ideological assault by the North American petty bourgeois 
forces who proclaimed themselves as the left, to the current 
advanced ideological and political development, organiza­
tional strength and ability to call the International Tribunal 
and form a national mass organization, the African National 
Reparations Organization. 
Since its formation, the African People's Socialist Party 
has published The Burning Spear newspaper. Widely read 
nationally and internationally, The Burning Spear has long 
been the most consistent source of news and African Inter­
nationalist analysis available. Today The Burning Spear is 
the only regularly issued revolutionary black newspaper still 
published in the U.S. 
As the "Black Working Class Party With The Common 
Sense line" the African People's Socialist Party has consis­
tently attempted to build strong working relationships with 
sister revolutionary parties of national liberation struggles 
around the world. The African People's Socialist Party has 
always given unconditional support to national liberation 
struggles in Africa, ASia, latin America and wherever 
oppressed people are fighting the yoke of U.S. imperialism. 
Currently, the APSP has initiated a call for and is attempting 
127


--- PAGE 67 ---
to help build the African Socialist International which, in the 
heritage of Marcus Garvey, will bring together African peo­
ple dispersed throughout the world as part of the struggle 
for genuine independence, for African unity and for world 
socialism. 
128 
Also Available From 
Burning Spear Publications 
The Struggle For Bread, Peace and Black Power. Political 
Report to The First Congress of the African People's Social­
ist Party by Chairman Omali Yeshitela. Most up to date 
discussion of the APSP world view including the relation­
ship of the U.S.-based struggle to the African continent, 
APSP's line on the land question and the current situation as 
it relates to the tasks of the Party. 80 pp. $2.50 
A New Beginning: The Road to Black Freedom and 
Socialism. The Main Resolution, Constitution and Program 
adopted at the First Congress of the African People's 
Socialist Party. This popular newly-released book represents 
APSP's position on: Latin America and other countries strug­
gling for independence, Native people, the African Socialist 
International, the oppression of African women in the U.S.; 
and shows the significance of the U.S.-based African Inde­
pendence Movement in the world. 112 pp. $3.00 
Tactics and Strategy for Black Liberation in the U.S. By 
Omali Yeshitela for presentation at the 1977 Black Organ­
izers Conference. Outlines the 7-point strategy for African 
Independence by the African People's Socialist Party and 
guidelines for building organizations and political relation­
ships. 28 pp. $1.00 
Not One Step Backward! The Black Liberation Movement 
From 1971 to 1982. An historic anthology sums up a decade 
of political struggle and theoretical development of the 
Black Revolution with the most significant and popular arti­
cles, speeches and documents by Omali Yeshitela. 304 pp. 
$6.00 
Black People And The U.S. Economy-Our Case For Repara· 
tions. Articles from The Burning Spear outline our demand 
for reparations. Includes analysis of our poverty today in the 
context of history, welfare, unemployment, "Reaganism," 
129


--- PAGE 68 ---
history of the demand for reparations, working wage differ· 
ences, underdevelopment of Africans in the U.S. and in 
Africa. 96 pp. $4.00 
Reparations Now! Abbreviated Report From The Interna· 
tional Tribunal On Reparations For Black People In the U.S. 
Edited by Omali Yeshitela. Transcripts of presentations and 
testimony made at the World Tribunal. 144 pp. $4.00. 
The Burning Spear Newspaper. Monthly publication of the 
APSP. News and analysis of the African and all international 
struggles against imperialism. $Z50 per year monthly 
subscription, $25.00 sustainer. 
130 
Burning Spear Publications 
7622 MacArthur Blvd. 
Oakland, California 94605

