=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Organization-of-Afro-American-Unity-Minister-Malcolm-X-and-the-OAAU-Aims-and-Objectives-Multi-media.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 13
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:08:40.188032
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Minister Malcolm was assassinated before he was able to 
implement this program. In studying out of RBG you  will 
discover that our school aspires to be a 21st century 
carrying forward and modernized replication of the 
organization's program and action plan... 
Organization of Afro-American Unity 
 
MX and the OAAU Aims & Objectives


--- PAGE 2 ---
MX and the OAAU Aims & Objectives 
 
 
                                                                                      Page 2


--- PAGE 3 ---
MX and the OAAU Aims & Objectives 
 
 
                                                                                      Page 3 
RBG Taking the Torch: 
Media 
Icebreakers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RBG Blakademics: Minister Malcolm and the BPP Video Player 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MP3s, Click and 
Play/Download 
play Malcom X - Last 
Speech  
play MX Assasination  
play Ossie Davis-2-27-1965 
— Eulogy Malco…  
play Minister Malcolm X — 
Whites Disease  
play Malcolm X — Black 
Nationalism Can Set…  
play I'm A Field Negro  
play RBG Malcolm X Mix — 
No Sell Out  
play Malcolm X — Stop 
Singin' And Start Sw…  
play Malcolm X -Alex Haley 
Autobiogrphy …  
play Housing in Harlem  
play Minister Malcolm X — 
Racist-in-Reverse…


--- PAGE 4 ---
MX and the OAAU Aims & Objectives 
 
 
                                                                                      Page 4 
 
 
"Why re-invent the wheel if we really believe that Minister Malcolm X is our leader, 
teacher truth and light. Implementing his program is the true evidence of our 
loyalty.” 
 
 
THE PROGRAM 
 
Organization of Afro-American Unity  
Basic Unity Program Pledging unity... Promoting justice... 
Transcending compromise... 
We, Afro-Americans, people who originated in Africa and now 
reside in America, speak out against the slavery and oppression 
inflicted upon us by this racist power structure. We offer to down-
trodden Afro-American people courses of action that will conquer 
oppression, relieve suffering, and convert meaningless struggle 
into meaningful action.  
Confident that our purpose will be achieved, we Afro-Americans 
from all walks of life make the following known: 
 
Establishment 
Having stated our determination, confidence, and resolve, the Organization of Afro -
American Unity is hereby established on the 15th day of February, 1965, in the c ity of 
New York. 
Upon this establishment, we Afro -American people will launch a cultural revolution 
which will provide the means for restoring our identity that we might rejoin our brothers 
and sisters on the African continent, culturally, psychologically, economically, and share 
with them the sweet fruits of freedom from oppression and independence of racist 
governments.  
1. The Organization of Afro -American Unity welcomes all persons of African origin to 
come together and dedicate their ideas, skills, and  lives to free our people from 
oppression. 
2. Branches of the Organization of Afro-American Unity may be established by people of 
African descent wherever they may be and whatever their ideology, as long as they be 
descendants of Africa and dedicated to our one goal: freedom from oppression.  
Organization of Afro-American Unity


--- PAGE 5 ---
MX and the OAAU Aims & Objectives 
 
 
                                                                                      Page 5 
 
3. The basic program of the Organization of Afro-American Unity which is now being 
presented can and will be modified by the membership, taking into consideration 
national, regional, and local conditions that require flexible treatment. 
 
4. The Organization of Afro-American Unity encourages active participation of each 
member since we feel that each and every Afro-American has something to contribute to 
our freedom. Thus each member will be encouraged to participate in the committee of his 
or her choice. 
 
5. Understanding the differences that have been created amongst us by our oppressors 
in order to keep us divided, the Organization of Afro-American Unity strives to ignore or 
submerge these artificial divisions by focusing our activities and our loyalties upon our 
one goal: freedom from oppression. 
BASIC AIMS AND OBJECTIVES 
Self-Determination 
We assert that we Afro -Americans have the right to direct and control our lives, our 
history, and our future rather than to have our destinies determined by American 
racists... We are determined to rediscover the true African culture, which was crushed 
and hidden for over four hundred years in order to enslave us and keep us enslaved up 
to today...  We, Afro -Americans, enslaved, oppr essed, and denied by a society that 
proclaims itself the citadel of democracy, are determined to rediscover our history, 
promote the talents that are suppressed by our racist enslavers, renew the culture that 
was crushed by a slave government and thereby, to again become a free people. 
National Unity 
 
Sincerely believing that the future of Afro-Americans is dependent upon our ability to 
unite our ideas, skills, organizations, and institutions... 
We, the Organization of Afro-American Unity pledge to join hands and hearts with all 
people of African origin in a grand alliance by forgetting all the differences that the power 
structure has created to keep up divided and enslaved. We further pledge to strengthen 
our common bond and strive toward one goal: freedom from oppression.


--- PAGE 6 ---
MX and the OAAU Aims & Objectives 
 
 
                                                                                      Page 6 
THE BASIC UNITY PROGRAM 
The program of the Organization of Afro -American Unity shall evolve from five strategic 
points which are deemed basic and fundamental to our grand alliance. Through our 
committees we shall proceed in the following general areas: 
I. RESTORATION 
In order to enslave the African it was necessary for our enslavers to completely sever our 
communications with the African continent and the Africans that remained there. In order 
to free ourselves from the oppression of our  enslavers then, it is absolutely necessary 
for the Afro -American to restore communications with Africa.  The Organization of Afro -
American Unity will accomplish this goal by means of independent national and 
international newspapers, publishing ventures, p ersonal contacts, and other available 
communications media. 
We, Afro-Americans, must also communicate to one another the truths about American 
slavery and the terrible effects it has upon our people. We must study the modern 
system of slavery in order to free ourselves from it. We must search out all the bare and 
ugly facts without shame for we are still victims, still slaves, still oppressed. Our only 
shame is believing falsehood and not seeking the truth. 
We must learn all that we can about ourselves. W e will have to know the whole story of 
how we were kidnapped from Africa; how our ancestors were brutalized, dehumanized, 
and murdered; and how we continually kept in a state of slavery for the profit of a system 
conceived in slavery, built by slaves, and dedicated to keeping us enslaved in order to 
maintain itself. 
We must begin to reeducate ourselves and become alert listeners in order to learn as 
much as we can about the progress of our motherland; Africa. We must correct in our 
minds the distorted imag e that our enslaver has portrayed to us of Africa that he might 
discourage us from reestablishing communications with her and thus obtain freedom 
from oppression. 
II. REORIENTATION 
In order to keep the Afro-American enslaved, it was necessary to limit our thinking to the 
shores of America, to prevent us from identifying our problems with the problems of 
other peoples of African origin. This made us consider ourselves an isolated minority 
without allies anywhere.  The Organization of Afro -American Unity will  develop in the 
Afro-American people a keen awareness of our relationship with the world at large and 
clarify our roles, rights, and responsibilities as human beings. We can accomplish this 
goal by becoming well informed concerning world affairs and unders tanding that our 
struggle is part of a larger world struggle of oppressed peoples against all forms of 
oppression. We must change the thinking of the Afro -American by liberating our minds 
through the study of philosophies and psychologies, cultures and languages that did not 
come from our racist oppressors. Provisions are being made for the study of languages


--- PAGE 7 ---
MX and the OAAU Aims & Objectives 
 
 
                                                                                      Page 7 
such as Swahili, Hausa, and Arabic. These studies will give our people access to ideas 
and history of mankind at large and thus increase our mental scope. 
We can learn much about Africa by reading informative books and by listening to the 
experiences of those who have traveled there, but many of us can travel to the land of 
our choice and experience for ourselves. The Organization of Afro -American Unity will 
encourage the Afro -American to travel to Africa, the Caribbean, and to other places 
where our culture has not been completely crushed by brutality and ruthlessness. 
III. EDUCATION 
After enslaving us, the slave masters developed a racist educational  system which 
justified to its posterity the evil deeds that had been committed against the African 
people and their descendants. Too often the slave himself participates so completely in 
this system that he justifies having been enslaved and oppressed. 
The Organization of Afro -American Unity will devise original educational methods and 
procedures which will liberate the minds of our children from the vicious lies and 
distortions that are fed to us from the cradle to keep us mentally enslaved. We encourage 
Afro-Americans themselves to establish experimental institutes and educational 
workshops, liberation schools, and child-care centers in the Afro-American communities. 
We will influence the choice of textbooks and equipment used by our children in the 
public schools while at the same time encouraging qualified Afro-Americans to write and 
publish the textbooks needed to liberate our minds. Until we completely control our own 
educational institutions, we must supplement the formal training of our children  by 
educating them at home. 
IV. ECONOMIC SECURITY 
After the Emancipation Proclamation, when the system of slavery changed from chattel 
slavery to wage slavery, it was realized that the Afro -American constituted the largest 
homogeneous ethnic group with a common origin and common group experience in the 
United States and, if allowed to exercise economic or political freedom, would in a short 
period of time own this country. Therefore racists in this government developed 
techniques that would keep the Afro -American people economically dependent upon the 
slave masters, economically slaves, twentieth-century slaves.  
 
The Organization of Afro -American Unity will take measures to free our people from 
economic slavery. One way of accomplishing this will be to main tain a technician pool: 
that is, a bank of technicians. In the same manner that blood banks have been 
established to furnish blood to those who need it at the time it is needed, we must 
establish a technician bank. We must do this so that the newly indepen dent nations of 
Africa can turn to us who are their Afro -American brothers for the technicians they will 
need now and in the future. Thereby, we will be developing an open market for the many 
skills we possess and at the same time we will be supplying Africa with the skills she can 
best use. This project will therefore be one of mutual cooperation and mutual benefit.


--- PAGE 8 ---
MX and the OAAU Aims & Objectives 
 
 
                                                                                      Page 8 
V. SELF-DEFENSE 
In order to enslave a people and keep them subjugated, their right to self -defense must 
be denied. They must be constantly terrorized, brutalized, and murdered. These tactics of 
suppression have been developed to a new high by vicious racists whom the United 
States government seems unwilling or incapable of dealing with in terms of the law of 
this land. Before the e mancipation it was the Black man who suffered humiliation, 
torture, castration, and murder. Recently our women and children, more and more, are 
becoming the victims of savage racists whose appetite for blood increases daily and 
whose deeds of depravity see m to be openly encouraged by all law -enforcement 
agencies. Over five thousand Afro-Americans have been lynched since the Emancipation 
Proclamation and not one murderer has been brought to justice! 
The Organization of Afro -American Unity, being aware of the  increased violence being 
visited upon the Afro-American and of the open sanction of this violence and murder by 
the police departments throughout this country and the federal agencies, do affirm our 
right and obligation to defend ourselves in order to survive as a people. 
We encourage the Afro -Americans to defend themselves against the wanton attacks of 
racist aggressors whose sole aim is to deny us the guarantees of the United Nations 
Charter of Human Rights and of the Constitution of the United States. 
The Organization of Afro-American Unity will take those private steps that are necessary 
to insure the survival of the Afro -American people in the face of racist aggression and 
the defense of our women and children. We are within our rights to see to it that the Afro-
American people who fulfill their obligations to the United States government (we pay 
taxes and serve in the armed forces of this country like American citizens do) also exact 
from this government the obligations that it owes us as a people, or exact these 
obligations ourselves. Needless to say, among this number we include protection of 
certain inalienable rights such as life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. 
In areas where the United States government has shown itself unable and/or unwill ing to 
bring to justice the racist oppressors, murderers, who kill innocent children and adults, 
the Organization of Afro-American Unity advocates that the Afro-American people insure 
ourselves that justice is done, whatever the price and by any means necessary.


--- PAGE 9 ---
MX and the OAAU Aims & Objectives 
 
 
                                                                                      Page 9 
National Concerns 
GENERAL TERMINOLOGIES: 
We Afro-Americans feel receptive toward all peoples of goodwill. We are not opposed to 
multiethnic associations in any walk of life. In fact, we have had experiences which 
enable us to understand how unfortunate it is that human beings have been set apart or 
aside from each other because of characteristics known as "racial" characteristics. 
However, Afro-Americans did not create the prejudiced background and atmosphere in 
which we live. And we must fac e the facts. A "racial" society does exist in stark reality, 
and not with equality for Black people; so we who are nonwhite must meet the problems 
inherited from centuries of inequalities and deal with the present situations as rationally 
as we are able. 
The exclusive ethnic quality of our unity is necessary for self -preservation. We say this 
because our experiences backed up by history show that African culture and Afro -
American culture will not be accurately recognized and reported and cannot be 
respectably expressed nor be secure in its survival if we remain the divided, and 
therefore the helpless, victims of an oppressive society. 
We appreciate the fact that when the people involved have real equality and justice, 
ethnic intermingling can be beneficial to all. We must denounce, however, all people who 
are oppressive through their policies or actions and who are lacking in justice in their 
dealings with other people, whether the injustices proceed from power, class, or "race." 
We must be unified in order to be protected from abuse or misuse. 
We consider the word "integration" a misleading, false term. It carries with it certain 
implications to which Afro -Americans cannot subscribe. This terminology has been 
applied to the current regulation projects which a re supposedly "acceptable" to some 
classes of society. This very "acceptable" implies some inherent superiority or inferiority 
instead of acknowledging the true source of the inequalities involved. 
We have observed that the usage of the term "integration" was designated and promoted 
by those persons who expect to continue a (nicer) type of ethnic discrimination and who 
intend to maintain social and economic control of all human contacts by means of 
imagery, classifications, quotas, and manipulations based on color, national origin, or 
"racial" background and characteristics. 
Careful evaluation of recent experiences shows that "integration'' actually describes the 
process by which a white society is (remains) set in a position to use, whenever it 
chooses to use and however it chooses to use, the best talents of nonwhite people. This 
power-web continues to build a society wherein the best contributions of Afro -
Americans, in fact of all nonwhite people, would continue to be absorbed without note or 
exploited to benefit a fortunate few while the masses of both white and nonwhite people 
would remain unequal and unbenefited.


--- PAGE 10 ---
MX and the OAAU Aims & Objectives 
 
 
                                                                                      Page 10 
We are aware that many of us lack sufficient training and are deprived and unprepared as 
a result of oppression, discrimination, and the resul ting discouragement, despair, and 
resignation. But when we are not qualified, and where we are unprepared, we must help 
each other and work out plans for bettering our own conditions as Afro -Americans. Then 
our assertions toward full opportunity can be mad e on the basis of equality as opposed 
to the calculated tokens of "integration." Therefore, we must reject this term as one used 
by all persons who intend to mislead Afro -Americans. Another term, "negro," is 
erroneously used and is degrading in the eyes of  informed and self -respecting persons 
of African heritage. It denotes stereotyped and debased traits of character and classifies 
a whole segment of humanity on the basis of false information. From all intelligent 
viewpoints, it is a badge of slavery and he lps to prolong and perpetuate oppression and 
discrimination. 
Persons who recognize the emotional thrust and plain show of disrespect in the 
Southerner's use of "nigra" and the general use of "******" must also realize that all three 
words are essentially the same. The other two: "nigra" and "******" are blunt and 
undeceptive. The one representing respectability, "negro," is merely the Same substance 
in a polished package and spelled with a capital letter. This refinement is added so that a 
degrading termin ology can be legitimately used in general literature and "polite" 
conversation without embarrassment. 
The term "negro" developed from a word in the Spanish language which is actually an 
adjective (describing word) meaning "black," that is, the color black.  In plain English, if 
someone said or was called a "black" or a "dark," even a young child would very 
naturally question. "A black what?" or "A dark what?" because adjectives do not name, 
they describe. Please take note that in order to make use of this me chanism, a word was 
transferred from another language and deceptively changed in function from an adjective 
to a noun, which is a naming word. Its application in the nominative (naming) sense was 
intentionally used to portray persons in a position of objec ts or "things." It stamps the 
article as being "all alike and all the same." It denotes: a "darkie," a slave, a subhuman, 
an ex-slave, a "negro." 
Afro-Americans must reanalyze and particularly question our own use of this term, 
keeping in mind all the fac ts. In light of the historical meanings and current implications, 
all intelligent and informed Afro -Americans and Africans continue to reject its use in the 
noun form as well as a proper adjective. Its usage shall continue to be considered as 
unenlightened and objectionable or deliberately offensive whether in speech or writing. 
We accept the use of Afro -American, African, and Black man in reference to persons of 
African heritage. To every other part of mankind goes this measure of just respect. We 
do not desire more nor shall we accept less.


--- PAGE 11 ---
MX and the OAAU Aims & Objectives 
 
 
                                                                                      Page 11 
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS: 
Afro-Americans, like all other people, have human rights which are inalienable. This is, 
these human rights cannot be legally or justly transferred to another. Our human rights 
belong to us, as to all people, through God, not through the wishes nor according to the 
whims of other men. 
We must consider that fact and other reasons why a pro -damnation of "Emancipation" 
should not be revered as a document of liberation. Any previous acceptance of a nd faith 
in such a document was based on sentiment, not on reality. This is a serious matter 
which we Afro-Americans must continue to reevaluate. 
The original root -meaning of the word emancipation is: "To deliver up or make over as 
property by means of a formal act from a purchaser." We must take note and remember 
that human beings cannot be justly bought or sold nor can their human rights be legally 
or justly taken away. 
Slavery was, and still is, a criminal institution, that is: crime en masse. No matte r what 
form it takes: subtle rules and policies, apartheid, etc., slavery and oppression of human 
rights stand as major crimes against God and humanity. Therefore, to relegate or change 
the state of such criminal deeds by means of vague legislation and nob le euphemisms 
gives an honor to horrible commitments that is totally inappropriate. 
Full implications and concomitant harvests were generally misunderstood by our fore 
parents and are still misunderstood or avoided by some Afro-Americans today. However, 
the facts remain; and we, as enlightened Afro -Americans, will not praise and encourage 
any belief in "emancipation." Afro-Americans everywhere must realize that to retain faith 
in such an idea means acceptance of being property and, therefore, less than a h uman 
being. This matter is a crucial one that Afro-Americans must continue to reexamine. 
Worldwide Concerns 
The time is past due for us to internationalize the problems of Afro -Americans. We have 
been too slow in recognizing the link in the fate of Africans with the fate of Afro -
Americans. We have been too unknowing to understand and too misdirected to ask our 
African brothers and sisters to help us mend the chain of our heritage. 
Our African relatives who are in a majority in their own country have  found it very 
difficult to gain independence from a minority. It is that much more difficult for Afro -
Americans who are a minority away from the motherland and still oppressed by those 
who encourage the crushing of our African identity. 
We can appreciate the material progress and recognize the opportunities available in the 
highly industrialized and affluent American society. Yet, we who are nonwhite face daily 
miseries resulting directly or indirectly from a systematic discrimination against us 
because o f our God -given colors. These factors cause us to remember that our being 
born in America was an act of fate stemming from the separation of our fore parents from 
Africa; not by choice, but by force.


--- PAGE 12 ---
MX and the OAAU Aims & Objectives 
 
 
                                                                                      Page 12 
We have for many years been divided among ourselves thro ugh deceptions and 
misunderstandings created by our enslavers, but we do here and now express our 
desires and intent to draw closer and be restored in knowledge and spirit through 
renewed relations and kinships with the African peoples. We further realize that our 
human rights, so long suppressed, are the rights of all mankind everywhere. 
In light of all of our experiences and knowledge of the past, we, as Afro -Americans, 
declare recognition, sympathy, and admiration for all peoples and nations who are 
striving, as we are, toward self-realization and complete freedom from oppression! 
The civil rights bill is a similarly misleading, misinterpreted document of legislation. The 
premise of its design and application is not respectable in the eyes of men who 
recognize what personal freedom involves and entails. Afro -Americans must answer this 
question for themselves: What makes this special bill necessary. 
The only document that is in order and deserved with regard to the acts perpetuated 
through slavery and oppression prolonged to this day is a Declaration of Condemnation. 
And the only legislation worthy of consideration or endorsement by Afro -Americans, the 
victims of these tragic institutions, is a Proclamation of Restitution. We Afro -Americans 
must keep these facts ever in mind. 
We must continue to internationalize our philosophies and contacts toward assuming full 
human rights which include all the civil rights appertaining thereto. With complete 
understanding of our heritage as Afro-Americans, we must not do less.


--- PAGE 13 ---
MX and the OAAU Aims & Objectives 
 
 
                                                                                      Page 13 
Further Study and Research: 
RBG Worldwide Minister Malcolm X 
Classroom 
 Min. Malcolm X Classroom  
(Communiversity Members Only) 
 
The Malcolm X Project at Columbia University:  
 
Organization of Afro-American Unity 
 
 
RBG Blakademics Minister Malcolm X Studies 
Portal Guide

