=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: osmanahmedmosesandakhenaten-thesecrethistbookos-z1-131110104330-phpapp01.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 191
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:08:23.604710
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
MOSES
AND
AKHENATEN
The Secret History of Egypt
at the Time of the Exodus
A
HMED
 O
SMAN
Bear & Company
Rochester, Vermont


--- PAGE 3 ---
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
A 
NUMBER
 of people have given their help and support to the preparation of this book. I should like to
thank in particular Dr Eric Uphill, Honorary Research Fellow in Egyptology at University College,
London, for reading the manuscript and for his valuable advice and suggestions; the French
archaeologist Professor Jean Yoyotte for discussing the time of the Exodus and the location of Zarw;
the French archaeologist Professor Alain-Pierre Zivie for giving details of his recent discoveries, as
yet unpublished, in the tomb of Aper-El at Sakkara; Professor Younes A. Ekbatrik, the Egyptian
Cultural Counsellor in London, for arranging a discussion about the fortified city recently found at
Tell el-Heboua, East Kantarah, and its possible identification with Pi-Ramses; my friend Gerald
O’Farrel for his support; Cairo Museum and its director, Mohammed Mohsen, for providing, and
allowing the use of, many of the photographs to be found in this volume, and, finally, H. J. Weaver for
his assistance in editing the material and making it less complex than it might otherwise have been.


--- PAGE 4 ---
Map of Egypt during the time of the Empire, 16th – 12th centuries BC


--- PAGE 5 ---
The Ways of Horus, the ancient road (mentioned in the Bible) between Egypt and Palestine in
northern Sinai


--- PAGE 6 ---
Map indicating the artificial borders of the location hitherto accepted for Pi Ramses/Avaris.
As can be seen, there are no archaeological connections between the different ancient sites


--- PAGE 7 ---
CONTENTS
Acknowledgments
Preface
Introduction
Chronology of the Eighteenth and Nineteenth Dynasties
1   Bricks Without Straw
2   Was Moses a King?
3   The Israel Stela
4   Rebellion in Sinai
5   Sojourn – and the Mother of Moses
6   The Rightful Son and Heir
7   The Coregency Debate (I)
8   The Coregency Debate (II)
9   The Reign of Horemheb
10   A Chronology of Kings
11   The Birthplace of Akhenaten
12   Akhenaten: The Early Years
13   Horizon of the Aten
14   The Tomb of Akhenaten
15   The Fallen One of Amarna
16   Corridors of Power
17   The First Monotheist
18   The ‘Magic’ Rod of Moses
19   Who Was Who? – and the Death of Moses
Epilogue
APPENDICES
A   The Shasu Wars
B   The Amarna Rock Tombs of Huya and Meryre II
C   The 
Mos
 Case
D   Pi-Ramses and Zarw
E   The Body in Tomb No. 55
F   Some Further Evidence of Survival


--- PAGE 8 ---
G   The Hebrews
Index
Notes
Bibliography
About the Author
About Inner Traditions
Copyright


--- PAGE 9 ---
PREFACE
I 
CAME
 to London from Cairo a quarter of a century ago, intending to devote most of my time to trying
to establish links between the Bible and what we know, from a variety of sources, of Egyptian
history. The choice of London was dictated by the far superior research facilities to be found there.
Initially, while earning a living by teaching Arabic, I embarked on a course of intensive study. I
enrolled in the Egypt Exploration Society and spent six years familiarizing myself with the ancient
history of my country and mastering hieroglyphics. I also learned Hebrew and studied the Bible.
However, when I tried to put this knowledge to use I found myself facing the same problem that had
baffled scholars for more than a century – establishing a starting point by identifying a major biblical
figure as a major figure in Egyptian history. Who was Joseph, the Patriarch who brought the tribe of
Israel down to Egypt from Canaan? Who was the unnamed Pharaoh who appointed him as a senior
minister, the virtual ruler of the country in the king’s name? Who was Moses? If, as I believed, the
Old Testament was fundamentally a historical work, the characters who appear in its stories had to
match characters in Egyptian history.
It was another fifteen years before I stumbled upon the vital clue (in what seems in retrospect a
moment of inspiration) embedded in a biblical text so familiar that I found it hard to believe that its
significance had not struck me years earlier. The passage in question occurs in the Book of Genesis.
The brothers of the Patriarch Joseph, we are told, had sold him into slavery in Egypt where, as a
result of interpreting Pharaoh’s dream about the seven good years that would be followed by seven
lean years, he was appointed the king’s senior minister. The brothers later paid two visits to Egypt at
times of famine in Canaan. On the second occasion, Joseph revealed his identity to them, but told
them reassuringly that they should not blame themselves for having sold him into slavery because it
was not they who had sent him ‘hither, but God; and he hath made me a father to Pharaoh’ (Gen.
45:8).
A father to Pharaoh! I thought at once – and, as I have said, could not understand why I had not
made the connection before – of Yuya, minister to two rulers of the Eighteenth Dynasty. Although
Yuya was not apparently of royal blood, his tomb had been found in the Valley of the Kings in 1905.
Little attention was devoted to him because he was considered comparatively unimportant. Yet Yuya
is the 
only
 person in whose tomb the title 
it ntr n nb tawi
 – holy father of the Lord of the Two Lands,
Pharaoh’s formal title – has been found. It occurs once on one of his 
ushabti
 (royal funeral statuette
No. 51028 in the Cairo Museum catalogue) and more than twenty times on his funerary papyrus.
Could Joseph and Yuya be the same person? The case for this being so is argued in my first book,
Stranger in the Valley of the Kings.
 Once this link was established, all manner of things began to fall
into place:
•  It became possible to create matching chronologies from Abraham to Moses on the one hand, and
from Tuthmosis III, the sixth ruler of the Eighteenth Dynasty, to Seti I, the second ruler of the
Nineteenth Dynasty, on the other.
It also became clear that:
•  Of the three periods of time given in the Old Testament – four generations, 400 years and 430 years
– for the Israelite Sojourn in Egypt, four generations is correct, a view which Jewish scholars have
arrived at by another reckoning;


--- PAGE 10 ---
•  As it is known that the Israelites were in Egypt at the end of the Eighteenth Dynasty and beginning
of the Nineteenth, the Descent must have taken place more than two centuries later than most scholars
believed, which explains why their efforts to match biblical figures with Egyptian figures has been so
protracted; they focused their quest on the wrong era;
•  The four Amarna kings – Akhenaten, Semenkhkare, Tutankhamun and Aye – who ruled during a
tumultuous period of Egyptian history when an attempt was made to replace the country’s multitude of
ancient gods with a monotheistic God, were all descendants of Joseph the Patriarch;
•  The Exodus was preceded by the ending of Amarna rule by Horemheb, the last king of the
Eighteenth Dynasty.
This book is an attempt to take further the story told in 
Stranger in the Valley of the Kings
 by
demonstrating that Moses is to be regarded as the Pharaoh Akhenaten.


--- PAGE 11 ---
INTRODUCTION
I
N
 August 1799, while French troops were repairing fortifications to the north of Rasheed – on the left
bank of the Nile, thirty miles east of Alexandria – an officer engaged in demolishing an ancient wall
struck a black stone with his pick. The stone, thought to have formed part of a temple in earlier times,
proved to bear three inscriptions. At the top were fourteen lines of hieroglyphs; in the centre thirty-
two lines of demotic, the simplified form of Ancient Egyptian writing; and, at the bottom, fifty-four
lines of Greek. The Greek text was translated and published, but the real importance of the Rosetta
Stone, as it was called from the European name of the place where it was found, did not emerge until
1818. Then Thomas Young (1773–1829), a British physician, scientist and philologist, succeeded in
deciphering the name of Ptolemy in the hieroglyphic section and in assigning the correct phonetic
value to most of the hieroglyphs. Although the British scholar took the first steps, the final decoding of
the stone was done three years later by a brilliant young French philologist, François Champollion
(1790–1832).
With his new-found knowledge Champollion was able to translate some Egyptian texts that had
until that time been a complete mystery to historians. Among them were the cartouches of the king-list
on the walls of the Osiris temple at Abydos in Upper Egypt. The list, which included the names of the
kings of the Eighteenth Dynasty, made no mention of Akhenaten or the other three Amarna kings –
Semenkhkare, Tutankhamun and Aye – who followed him. In the circumstances it is not surprising that
when, in the middle of the last century, archaeologists came across the strangely-drawn figure of
Akhenaten in the ruins of Tell el-Amarna in Middle Egypt they were not sure initially what to make of
him. Some thought that, like Queen Hatshepsut, this newly – discovered Pharaoh was a woman who
disguised herself as a king. Further cause for conjecture arose from the fact that Akhenaten had
ascended to the throne as Amenhotep IV and later changed his name. Were they dealing with one
Pharaoh or two?
By the early years of this century, when the city of Amarna had been excavated and more was
known about Akhenaten and his family, he became a focus of interest for Egyptologists of the period,
who saw him as a visionary humanitarian as well as the first monotheist. Akhenaten was revealed as
a revolutionary king, who abolished the Ancient Egyptian religious system, with its many deities
represented by fetish or animal shapes. He replaced the old gods with a sole God, the Aten, who had
no image or form, a universal God not just for Egypt, but also for Kush (Nubia) in the south and Syria
in the north, a God for the whole world.
He was a poet who wrote the hymn to Aten that has a striking resemblance to Psalm 104 of the
Bible. He instructed his artists to express freely what they felt and saw, resulting in a new and simple
realistic art that was different in many respects from the traditional form of Egyptian artistic
expression. We were allowed to see the king as a human being with his wife and daughters, eating,
drinking and making offerings to the Aten. Nor was he like the military prototype of Pharaohs of the
Eighteenth Dynasty. Although the kings and princes of Western Asia tried hard to involve him in
recurrent wars, he refused to become a party to their disputes. It is no wonder that the early
Egyptologists of this century saw in him an expression of their own modern ideas.
‘The most remarkable of all the Pharaohs and the first individual in human history’ are the words
that James Henry Breasted, the American scholar, chose to describe him.
1
 It is a theme he returned to
and developed in a later book: ‘It is important to notice … that Akhenaten was a prophet … Like


--- PAGE 12 ---
Jesus, who, on the one hand drew his lessons from the lilies of the field, the fowls of the air or the
clouds of the sky, and, on the other hand, from the human society about him in stories like the Prodigal
Son, the Good Samaritan or the woman who lost her piece of money, so this revolutionary Egyptian
prophet drew his teachings from a contemplation both of nature and of human life …’
2
The same theme finds an echo in the work of Arthur Weigall, the British Egyptologist: ‘… at the
name of Akhenaten there emerges from the darkness a figure more clear than that of any other
Pharaoh, and with it there comes the singing of the birds, the voices of the children and the scent of
many flowers. For once we may look right into the mind of a King of Egypt and may see something of
its workings, and all that is there observed is worthy of admiration. Akhenaten has been called “the
first individual in human history”; but if he is thus the first historical figure whose personality is
known to us, he is also the first of all human founders of religious doctrines. Akhenaten may be
ranked in degree of time, and, in view of the new ground broken by him, perhaps in degree of genius,
as the world’s first idealist.’
3
For the Reverend James Baikie, another British Egyptologist, he was ‘… an idealist dreamer, who
actually believed that men were meant to live in truth and speak the truth.’
4
Not all scholars, however, took such an enthusiastic and flattering view of the first of the Amarna
kings. Some, like the British philologist Alan H. Gardiner, wrote of him that ‘the standing colossi
from his peristyle court at Karnak have a look of fanatical determination, such as his subsequent
history confirmed only too fatally’:
5
 John Pendlebury, who was involved in much of the early
exploration at Amarna, came to the conclusion: ‘His [Akhenaten’s] main preoccupation was with
religion. He and [Queen] Nefertiti became devotees of the Aten. Today we should call them religious
maniacs.’
6
The controversial nature of Akhenaten’s character and teachings eventually engaged the interest of
Sigmund Freud, the Jewish father of psychoanalysis, who introduced a new element into the debate as
Europe began its lurch towards war in the middle of the 1930s. In July 1934 Freud wrote the draft of
what would later become the first part of his book 
Moses and Monotheism.
 This introductory section
was published initially in the German magazine 
Imago
 in 1937 under the headline ‘Moses an
Egyptian’.
Freud demonstrated in this article that the name of the Jewish leader was not derived from
Hebrew, as had been thought up to that time, but had as its source an Egyptian word, 
mos,
 meaning a
child. He showed also that the story of the birth of Moses is a replica of other ancient myths about the
birth of some of the great heroes of history. Freud pointed out, however, that the myth of Moses’ birth
and exposure stands apart from those of other heroes and varies from them on one essential point. In
order to hide the fact that Moses was Egyptian, the myth of his birth has been reversed to make him
born to humble parents and succoured by the high-status family: ‘It is very different in the case of
Moses. Here the first family – usually so distinguished – is modest enough. He is a child of Jewish
Levites. But the second family – the humble one in which as a rule heroes are brought up – is
replaced by the royal house of Egypt. This divergence from the usual type has struck many research
workers as strange.’
Later in 1937 
Imago
 published a further article by Freud under the title ‘If Moses was an
Egyptian’. This dealt with the question of why the Jewish law-giver, if actually Egyptian, should have
passed on to his followers a monotheistic belief rather than the classical Ancient Egyptian plethora of
gods and images. At the same time, Freud found great similarity between the new religion that
Akhenaten had tried to impose on his country and the religious teaching attributed to Moses. For
example, he wrote: ‘The Jewish creed says: 
“Schema Yisrael Adonai Elohenu Adonai Echod”.’


--- PAGE 13 ---
(‘Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy God is one God’.) As the Hebrew letter 
d
 is a transliteration of the
Egyptian letter 
t
 and 
e
 becomes 
o
, he went on to explain that this sentence from the Jewish creed
could be translated: ‘Hear, O Israel, our God Aten is the only God.’
A short time after publication of these two articles, Freud was reported to be suffering from
cancer. Three months after the Germans invaded Austria, in June 1938, he left Vienna and sought
refuge in London where, feeling his end approaching, he decided that he wished to see the two
articles, plus a third section, written in Vienna but hitherto unpublished, make their appearance in the
form of a book in English. This, he felt, would provide a fitting climax to his distinguished life. His
intentions did not meet with the approval of a number of Jewish scholars, however: they felt that
some of his views, and, in particular, his claim in the unpublished third section that Moses had been
murdered by his own followers in protest against the harshness of his monotheistic beliefs, could only
add to the problems of the Jews, already facing a new and harsh Oppression by the Nazis. Professor
Abraham S. Yahuda, the American Jewish theologian and philologist, visited Freud at his new home
in Hampstead, London, and begged him not to publish his book, but Freud refused to be deterred and
Moses and Monotheism
 made its first appearance in March 1939. In his book Freud suggested that
one of Akhenaten’s high officials, probably called Tuthmose, was an adherent of the Aten religion.
After the death of the king, Tuthmose selected the Hebrew tribe, already living at Goshen in the
Eastern Delta, to be his chosen people, took them out of Egypt at the time of the Exodus and passed on
to them the tenets of Akhenaten’s religion.
Freud died at the age of 83, six months after his book was published. The outbreak of the Second
World War not only brought all excavations in Egypt to an end, but delayed response to the bombshell
that Freud had left behind. This was not too long in being remedied once the world returned to peace.
The new contestant to enter the lists was another Jewish psychoanalyst, Immanuel Velikovsky, who
had been born and educated in Russia in the early years of this century and had then emigrated to
Palestine before settling in the United States. In 1952 he published the first part of his book 
Ages in
Chaos,
 in which he tried to use some evidence of volcanic eruptions in Sinai to date the Jewish
Exodus from Egypt at the start of the Eighteenth Dynasty, two centuries before the reign of Akhenaten,
in order to place Moses at a distant point in history that 
preceded
 the Egyptian king. Not only that. In
a separate work, 
Oedipus and Akhenaten,
 he set out to show that Oedipus of this classic Greek myth
had an Egyptian historical origin and that Akhenaten was the Oedipus king who married his own
mother, Queen Tiye.
The work of Velikovsky may be said to have set the tone in the post-war years for assessments of
Akhenaten. Scholars have been on the whole at pains to destroy his flattering early image and to sever
any connection between him and the monotheism of Moses. One of the earliest to embark on this
crusade was Cyril Aldred, the Scottish Egyptologist. In his book about the first of the Amarna kings,
published in 1968, he tried to explain the absence of genitalia in a nude colossus of the king from
Karnak by the fact that Akhenaten must have been the victim of a distressing disease:
All the indications are that such peculiar physical characteristics were the result of a complaint known to physicians and
pathologists as Fröhlich’s Syndrome. Male patients with this disorder frequently exhibit a corpulence similar to Akhenaten’s.
The genitalia remain infantile and may be so embedded in fat as not to be visible. Adiposity may vary in degree, but there is a
typical feminine distribution of fat in the region of the breasts, abdomen, pubis, thighs and buttocks. The lower limbs, however,
are slender and the legs, for instance, resemble plus-fours … There is warrant for thinking that he suffered from Fröhlich’s
Syndrome and wished to have himself represented with all those deformities that distinguished his appearance from the rest of
humanity.
7
However, we do have conclusive evidence that Akhenaten had at least six daughters by Queen


--- PAGE 14 ---
Nefertiti. Aldred put forward an ingenious explanation for this apparent contradiction: ‘Until recently
it was possible to speculate that, though the daughters of Nefertiti are described as begotten of a king,
it is by no means certain that such a king was Akhenaten, particularly if Amenhotep III was still alive
two years after the youngest had been born. Though it may seem preposterous that Amenhotep III
should have undertaken the marital duties of a sterile coregent, in the milieu of divine kingship such
an enlargement of his responsibilities is not unthinkable.’
Later in the same book, however, he tells us that Akhenaten was not, after all, impotent. The author
contradicts his earlier speculation by suggesting that Akhenaten married his own eldest daughter,
Merytaten, and fathered a child by her: ‘On the death of Nefertiti, her place was taken by Merytaten
… It would appear that she was the mother of a Princess Merytaten-the-less, from a recently
published inscription from Hermopolis [The city across the river from Amarna where Ramses II had
used Amarna stones for his building], but it is impossible to say who the father was, though the
inference seems to be that it was Akhenaten.’
The author then goes on even to suggest that the king had a homosexual relationship with his
brother/coregent/son-in-law, Semenkhkare. Aldred’s attempt to destroy the earlier flattering image of
Akhenaten took him down a path that a number of other scholars proved only too happy to follow. The
most recent was Professor Donald Redford of Toronto University, an eminent scholar of both Old
Testament studies and Egyptology, who wrote in his book 
Akhenaten, the Heretic King,
 published in
1984:
The historical Akhenaten is markedly different from the figure popularists have created for us. Humanist he was not, and
certainly no humanitarian romantic. To make of him a tragic ‘Christ-like’ figure is a sheer falsehood. Nor is he the mentor of
Moses: a vast gulf is fixed between the rigid, coercive, rarified monotheism of the Pharaoh and Hebrew henotheism [belief in
one God without asserting that he is the only God] which in any case we see through the distorted prism of texts written seven
hundred years after Akhenaten’s death.
Redford summarizes his distaste for the king in the following words: ‘A man deemed ugly by the
accepted standards of the day, secluded in the palace in his minority, certainly close to his mother,
possibly ignored by his father, outshone by his brother and sisters, unsure of himself, Akhenaten
suffered the singular misfortune of acceding to the throne of Egypt and its empire.’ And then: ‘If the
king and his circle inspire me somewhat with contempt, it is apprehension I feel when I contemplate
his “religion”.’
8
The post-war attempt to crucify Akhenaten and discredit his religion has been unanimous in the
sense that any scholars who may hold less hostile views have maintained a suspicious silence. At the
root of the campaign of vilification lies a desire to enhance Moses and his monotheism by
discrediting Akhenaten, the Egyptian intruder, and the beliefs he attempted to introduce into his
country. Ironically, those scholars who have led this ruthless campaign chose the wrong target. In
attacking Akhenaten, they were, in fact, attacking their own hero – for, as Freud came so close to
demonstrating, Akhenaten and Moses were one and the same person.
Some of the arguments in support of this statement are of necessity long and complicated, and the
ordinary reader may find them difficult to follow and somewhat wearing. Where it seemed
appropriate I have therefore tried to summarize such arguments briefly, plus the conclusions to be
drawn from them, and, for those who wish more detail, given a fuller account in a series of
appendices.


--- PAGE 15 ---
CHRONOLOGY OF THE EIGHTEENTH DYNASTY
CHRONOLOGY OF THE NINETEENTH DYNASTY
Source: Alan H. Gardiner, 
Egypt of the Pharaohs
 (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1961)
These dates are given here to be helpful to the reader: the accuracy of some of them, and the question of whether there was a
coregency between any of the kings mentioned, will be argued later.


--- PAGE 16 ---
1
BRICKS WITHOUT STRAW
I
F
 M
OSES
 and the king Akhenaten were the same person, certain other things must follow. It is
necessary to demonstrate that they were born of the same parents in the same place at the same time;
that the monotheistic religion of Moses and the monotheistic religion of Akhenaten, which he tried to
impose upon Egypt, are similar; that, on falling from power in Year 17 of his reign, Akhenaten did not
meet his end but fled to Sinai, where subsequent traces of worship of his God, the Aten, are to be
found; that a number of other biblical characters can be identified with characters in Egyptian history;
and, finally, that a chronology can be established for the Sojourn of the Israelites in Egypt which
matches the chronology of the Pharaohs who ruled at the end of the Eighteenth Dynasty and the
beginning of the Nineteenth.
These, as will be seen, are complex matters. The evidence available is often contradictory and has
been interpreted – and often misinterpreted – in various ways. The length of the Sojourn, the length of
the reigns of various kings, whether or not Akhenaten had a coregency with his father, Amenhotep III,
the precise location of the frontier fortified city of Zarw, where I believe Moses/Akhenaten was born,
and various other matters have been the subject of protracted scholarly debate and disagreement. It
will therefore be necessary not merely to put forward the positive evidence that points to the truth, but
to expose the flaws in a variety of other theories that have been advanced.
The most detailed, but not the only, source we have for information about the life of Moses is the Old
Testament and, in particular, the Book of Exodus.
The Book of Exodus begins with a brief repetition of the account in Genesis of the Israelite
Descent into Egypt to join the Patriarch Joseph, who, having initially been sold into slavery by his
brothers, had risen to the role of the country’s vizier after interpreting Pharaoh’s dreams about the
seven good years that would be followed by seven lean years. As a result of occupying his high
position, Joseph was able to obtain permission for his father Jacob (Israel) and the tribe of Israel to
come down from Canaan and live in Egypt. In all, we are told, the number of Israelites, including
Joseph and his family, who settled in Egypt as a result of this arrangement totalled seventy, sixty-nine
of whom are named. The Israelites, who were shepherds, were not allowed to settle in Egypt proper,
however, because shepherds had been looked upon as ‘an abomination’ to Egyptians since the
century-long occupation and rule of the Eastern Delta by the pastoralist Hyksos that preceded the
foundation of the Eighteenth Dynasty. Instead they were given land at Goshen, in the same area to the
east of the Nile Delta, which by biblical tradition was remote from the seat of Pharaoh’s power.
The rest of the opening chapter of the Book of Exodus is taken up with a rather muddled summary
of the story that is to follow. Almost at the very beginning of the tale, which is clearly set in the
Eastern Delta, we are told that the Israelites had ‘waxed exceeding mighty; and the land was filled
with them’ (1:7). As the tribe of Israel consisted of only seventy men, women and children at the time
of their arrival in Egypt, this vast increase in numbers suggests that some years must have elapsed in
the interval, a view which appears to be confirmed by the next verse, with its reference to the king
‘which knew not Joseph’ (1:8): until the time of Horemheb, who finally ended the Amarna era, there
is no king of whom it can strictly be said that he did not know Joseph – whom I have identified as


--- PAGE 17 ---
Yuya
1
, vizier to Tuthmosis IV and his successor, Amenhotep III – since all the Amarna kings were
descended from Joseph. Next comes an account of the Oppression, whose motive, it is said, is that
‘when there falleth out any war, they join also unto our enemies, and fight against us ...’(1:10). The
Egyptians set the Israelites to the task of building the treasure cities of Pithom and Raamses and made
their lives ‘bitter with hard bondage, in morter, and in brick, and in all manner of service in the field’
(1:14). Then we encounter a contradiction. When the Israelites continued to multiply, the ruling
Pharaoh ordered that all male children born to them were to be killed. Yet we learn that at the time –
just when Moses is about to make his appearance in the story – the Israelites had only two midwives,
‘of which the name of the one was Shiphrah, and the name of the other Puah’. (1:15). This argues that
the incident must have taken place 
early
 in the Sojourn when two midwives were sufficient for the
needs of the Israelite women, and that, as Pharaoh was able to speak to the midwives in person, he
must have been resident at the time in the vicinity of Goshen where the Israelites had settled. The
midwives failed to carry out Pharaoh’s orders, whereupon he issued a further order that all male
children born to the Israelites in Egypt were to be cast into the river.
With the second chapter we come to the story of Moses – his birth, his slaying of an Egyptian
which caused him to flee from Egypt, his marriage and his eventual return to lead the Exodus –
recounted with a more satisfactory chronology. He was born, we are told, to a man of the house of
Levi and a daughter of Levi, whose name is given later as Jochebed. In face of the threat to all newly-
born male Israelite children, Jochebed kept her son in hiding for three months. Then, unable to
conceal him herself any longer, she hid him among the reeds along the banks of the Nile in a papyrus
basket coated with pitch and tar. Pharaoh’s daughter saw the basket when she went down to the river
to bathe and sent a slave girl to fetch it. When she opened the basket the baby was crying and she felt
sorry for him. ‘This is one of the Hebrew babies,’ she said.
The implication up to this point is that Moses was the first-born in his family. Here, however, we
learn that he already had an elder sister, Miriam, who had watched these events from a distance. She
now approached and said to Pharaoh’s daughter: ‘Shall I fetch one of the Hebrew women to nurse the
baby for you?’ When this suggestion proved acceptable, the sister summoned her mother, who agreed
to nurse her own baby in return for payment. Later, when the child grew older, she took him back to
Pharaoh’s daughter, who adopted him as her son and only now, we learn, gave him the name of
Moses, her choice (which will be the subject of analysis later) being explained by the laconic phrase
‘because I drew him out of the water’.
This familiar account of the birth of Moses has some curious aspects. It hardly seems logical that a
mother, anxious to preserve the life of her three-month-old son, would set him afloat on the Nile in
such a frail craft. Then, after the intervention of the princess, we have no further indication that,
having been returned to his mother, the child was still in danger of losing his life. Finally, the
explanation of his later being reared in the palace because the princess adopted him seems inherently
improbable as the customs of the time would not have allowed an unmarried princess to adopt a
child.
The Book of Exodus provides no details of the childhood of Moses. We next hear of him when he
was grown up. He went out one day to watch his own people at their forced labour, came across an
Egyptian beating a Hebrew, slew him and hid his body in the sand. On learning that news of the
episode had reached Pharaoh’s ears, Moses fled to Midian in Sinai to avoid execution. There, while
he was resting by a well, the seven daughters of a priest of Midian arrived on the scene to water their
father’s flock of sheep. Some shepherds appeared shortly afterwards and tried to drive the daughters
away, but Moses came to their rescue. On the girls’ return home, Reu’el, their father, asked them:


--- PAGE 18 ---
‘Why are you back so early today?’
They told him about the encounter with the shepherds. ‘But an Egyptian rescued us,’ they explained.
‘He even drew water for us and watered the flock.’
‘And where is he?’ their father asked. ‘Invite him to have something to eat.’ The invitation proved
to be the start of a protracted stay. Moses became a guest in the house of the priest, who gave him one
of his daughters, Zipporah, in marriage, and she bore Moses a son, whom he named Gershon.
Back in Egypt, after the passage of many years, a new Pharaoh had come to the throne, but the
miseries of the Israelites continued and God heard their cries for help. One day when Moses was out
tending the flock of his father-in-law – whose name is given at this point in the narrative as Jethro, not
Reu’el – he found himself with the sheep at Mount Horeb (Mount Sinai), the mountain of God, where
the Lord appeared to him in a bush that seemed to be burning but was not consumed by the flames.
Attracted by this curious phenomenon, Moses approached, whereupon the Lord said to him: ‘I am the
God of your father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob.’ (3:6) He then went
on: ‘I am sending you to the Pharaoh to bring my people, the Israelites, out of Egypt.’
Moses expressed doubts about his ability to carry out this task and asked: ‘If I go to the Israelites
and say the God of their forefathers has sent me to them, and they ask me his name, how shall I answer
them?’
The Lord replied: ‘I AM, that is who I am. Say that I AM has sent you to them … You must tell the
Israelites that it is Jehovah, the God of their forefathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, the
God of Jacob, who has sent you to them.’
Moses protested that the Israelites would never believe that the Lord had appeared to him. God
asked: ‘What have you in your hand?’
Moses answered: ‘A staff.’
The Lord told him to throw it down on to the ground, whereupon it turned into a snake. The Lord
said: ‘Put out your hand and seize it by the tail.’ Moses did as he was told and the snake was
transformed again into a staff.
The Lord then instructed him: ‘Put your hand inside the fold of your cloak.’ Moses again did as he
was told and, when he withdrew his hand, it was white with leprosy. The Lord told him to put his
hand inside his cloak a second time and, when he withdrew it, his hand was healthy again. Finally, the
Lord told him: ‘If they are not convinced by these two signs, fetch some water from the Nile and pour
it out on dry ground, and the water will turn to blood.’
Moses continued to protest: ‘Lord, I have never been eloquent. I am slow and hesitant of speech. O
Lord, please send someone else.’ As this was the first time that Moses was to address the Israelites,
it would appear that he was not sure he would be able to make them understand him.
The Lord’s reply makes it clear that, in addition to the sister we already know of, Moses had a
Levite brother who, in a subsequent passage, we are told was three years the elder: ‘What about your
brother, Aaron? He will do all the speaking. He is already on his way to meet you. You will speak to
him and put words in his mouth. He will be your mouthpiece.’ God also reassured Moses that his life
would not be in any danger if he returned to Egypt because ‘all those who wished to kill you are
dead’.
Moses ‘took his wife and sons’ – hitherto we had heard of only one son, Gershon – ‘and set them
upon an ass, and he returned to the land of Egypt: and Moses took the rod of God in his hand.’ (4:20)
In the course of the journey he met his brother Aaron. On arriving in Egypt they appeared together
before an assembly of the elders of Israel where Aaron gave an account of everything the Lord had
said to Moses. Moses and Aaron then went to Pharaoh – here again there is no indication that they had


--- PAGE 19 ---
to travel any distance – and asked permission to undertake a three-day trip into the wilderness to offer
a sacrifice to the Lord. Pharaoh refused their request. Instead, he ordered the Israelites’ overseers not
to provide them with any more straw for brickmaking: they were to gather their own, yet still produce
the same number of bricks. ‘They are a lazy people,’ said the king. ‘That is why they are clamouring
to go and offer a sacrifice to their God. Take no notice of a pack of lies.’
The Israelites blamed Moses and Aaron for their plight. Moses and Aaron, for their part, renewed
their pleas that the Israelites should be set free to worship their Lord, but Pharaoh remained obdurate.
God therefore kept his earlier promise that in these circumstances he would stretch out his hand and
‘smite the Egyptians’. He inflicted a series often plagues – blood, frogs, gnats, maggots, swarms of
flies, pestilence, boils, hail, locusts and darkness – upon the country. As a final punishment, God
assured Moses: ‘It is the Lord’s Passover. On that night I shall pass through the land of Egypt and kill
every first-born of man and beast.’ Before that night – the fourteenth of the month of Abib, which is to
be regarded as the first month of the Jewish Year – was over Pharaoh sent again for Moses and Aaron
and told them: ‘Be off. Leave my people, you and your Israelites. Go and worship the Lord, as you
ask.’
The Exodus began, from Rameses to Succoth, the next day, the fifteenth. Six hundred thousand men,
plus their dependants, are said to have left the country that had been their home for 430 years. From
Succoth the Israelites made their way to Eltham where they camped before setting off on their journey
across the wilderness to the Sea of Reeds.
Back in Egypt, Pharaoh had second thoughts about his decision to let his former unwilling slaves
depart and mounted an expedition with his chariots and troops to recapture them. They came upon the
Israelites on the shores of the Red Sea, apparently trapped between the water and the pursuing
Egyptians. Naturally terrified, they protested to Moses: ‘Did you bring us to the desert to die because
there were no graves in Egypt?’ However, Moses used his staff to create a path across the sea bed
with a wall of water on either side. When the Egyptians eventually set out in pursuit, the water flowed
back over them and they were drowned to a man. The Israelites were free – and Miriam, the sister of
Aaron, ‘took up her tambourine, and all the women did the same, dancing to the sound of tambourines,
while Miriam sang to them:
Sing to the Lord, for he has risen up in triumph,
The horse and his rider he has hurled into the sea.’
From the Red Sea, the Israelites made their way into the desert, where they journeyed for three
days without finding water, and when they did eventually locate some it was so bitter that they could
not drink it. They grumbled to Moses, asking: ‘What are we to drink?’ This grumbling, accompanied
at times by threats to choose a new leader who would take them back to Egypt, is a recurrent theme in
the rest of the Pentateuch, the first five books of the Old Testament.
In the third month after the Exodus, the wandering tribe reached Mount Horeb (Mount Sinai), the
mountain of God, where Moses received the Ten Commandments. The Israelites became impatient,
however, during his absence of forty days. Aaron collected everyone’s gold earrings, cast the metal
into a mould and made it into the image of a bull-calf. The next day the Israelites rose early, made
offerings at an altar in front of the golden calf and then sat down to eat and drink before giving
themselves up to revelry. When he returned and discovered what had happened, Moses was so angry
that he threw down the two tablets inscribed with the Lord’s teaching, shattering them, and destroyed
the golden calf in the fire. Then he asked: ‘Come here to me whoever is on the Lord’s side.’ It was
the Levites who rallied to him, and he said to them: ‘Each of you take his sword and go through the


--- PAGE 20 ---
camp from one end to the other, each killing his brother and friend and neighbour.’ The Levites
followed his orders and about three thousand of the idolators died that day.
After Moses had returned to the mountain of God, where he obtained two fresh tablets listing the
Lord’s teachings, he gave the Israelites instructions about the creation of a Tabernacle, the first
mobile Jewish temple. The Tabernacle, the Tent of the Presence, was set up, we are told, on the first
day of the first month of the second year.
In the middle of the Book of Exodus we are also given details about the family of Moses. It
provides us with the name of his second son, Eleazar; the names of the sons of Levi, the grandfather of
Moses (Gershon, Kohath and Merari); the names of the sons of Kohath (Amram, Izhar, Hebron and
Uzziel), and details of the marriage of Amram: ‘Amram married his father’s sister, Jochebed, and she
bore him Aaron and Moses.’
While the Book of Exodus is the main source, three other books of the Pentateuch – Numbers,
Leviticus and Deuteronomy – provide some additional facts about the wanderings of the Israelites
between their departure from Egypt and their arrival on the frontiers of the Promised Land, with
complaints about the leadership of Moses still a recurrent theme. The Book of Numbers tells us that
Moses sent one leader from each of the twelve ancestral tribes to explore the Promised Land of
Canaan. On their return they reported: ‘The land does flow with milk and honey – here is some of its
fruit – but the people who inhabit it are powerful, and their cities are fortified and very large.’
Caleb, one of the twelve in the advance party, argued: ‘Let us go up and conquer the country. We
are strong enough to do it.’ All but one of the others, however, protested: ‘We can’t attack those
people. They are stronger than we are. We felt no bigger than grasshoppers, and that is how we
looked to them.’ That night all the Israelites turned on Moses and Aaron and said to them: ‘Wouldn’t
it be better for us to return to Egypt?’ and among themselves suggested: ‘We should choose a new
leader and go back to Egypt.’
Caleb and Joshua, the other optimist, told them: ‘The land we explored is exceedingly good. If the
Lord is pleased with us, he will lead us there. Do not be afraid of the people of the land because the
Lord is with us.’ The Israelites thereupon threatened to stone them, with the result that as a
punishment the Lord condemned the whole generation, apart from the trusting Caleb and Joshua, to
spend forty years in the desert instead of entering the Promised Land.
Again, when the Israelites arrived in the Desert of Zin and settled for a time at Kadesh – where
Miriam, the prophetess sister of Aaron, died and was buried – there were more complaints about lack
of water. The Israelites quarrelled with Moses again, asking: ‘Why did you bring us to this desert for
us and our livestock to face death? Why did you bring us out of Egypt to this terrible place where
nothing will grow – neither corn nor figs, vines nor pomegranates? There is not even any water to
drink.’
It is then that Moses used his rod to smite the rock and bring forth water. It was called ‘the water of
Meribah’ – a location in the north-centre of Sinai, south of Canaan – and it was for this action, we
learn later, that the Lord punished Moses by not allowing him to cross into the Promised Land.
The Book of Numbers also tells us that the Tabernacle constructed by the Israelites faced to the
east, and that from Kadesh they made their way ultimately to a point near the frontier of Edom, in the
north-east of Sinai and to the south of the Dead Sea, where Aaron died on the top of Mount Hor. In
addition, both the Book of Numbers and the Book of Leviticus contain some references to leprosy. In
the Book of Numbers we learn that: ‘The Lord spoke to Moses and said: “Command the Israelites to
expel from the camp everyone who suffers from a malignant skin disease or a discharge, and
everyone ritually unclean from contact with a corpse …”’ We are given an account of an incident


--- PAGE 21 ---
when both Aaron and Miriam were critical of Moses for having taken as a second wife a Kushite
(Nubian or Ethiopian) woman. The Lord appeared and asked angrily: ‘How dare you speak against
my servant Moses? He alone of all my household is to be trusted.’ Then, when the Lord left, Miriam’s
skin was seen to be diseased and as white as snow. Leprosy and skin purification also form the
subject of three chapters (
13
–
15
) on purification and atonement in the preceding book, Leviticus,
which also indicates that it was the Israelite custom to pray twice a day, in the morning and the
evening.
Moses, after all his struggles, did not reach the Promised Land himself. When the Israelites were
camped on the banks of the Jordan, near Jericho and opposite Canaan, he learned, according to the
Book of Deuteronomy, that he was to be denied the opportunity to cross the river, no matter how hard
he pleaded:
I pray thee, let me go over, and see the good land that is beyond Jordan, that goodly mountain, and Lebanon. … the Lord said
… speak no more unto me of this matter … … thou shalt not go over this Jordan. (3:25–7)
Later in the Book of Deuteronomy we have an account of the actual death of Moses. The Lord said
to him: ‘Get thee up into this mountain Abarim, unto Mount Nebo, which is in the land of Moab’ – the
borders between Sinai and eastern Jordan – ‘that is over against Jericho; and behold the land of
Canaan, which I give unto the children of Israel for a possession … And die in the mount … Because
ye trespassed against me among the children of Israel at the waters of Meribah-Kadesh, in the
wilderness of Zin … thou shalt not go thither unto the land which I give the children of Israel.’
(32:49–52)
After admonishing and blessing his people, Moses left them with Joshua and climbed the mountain.
There, after viewing the Promised Land, he met his death – and was buried by the Lord in an
unmarked grave in the plains of Moab below.
The last mention of Moses in the Old Testament is as curious as some aspects of the story of his
birth. It occurs in the second Book of Kings, which gives an account of various rulers, more than five
centuries after the Exodus, some of whom tried to keep to the Lord’s teachings, some of whom did
not. Among the former, we are told, was Hezekiah:
And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, according to all that David his father did.
He removed the high places and brake the images, and cut down the groves; and brake in pieces the brazen serpent that
Moses had made: for unto those days the children of Israel did burn incense to it. (II Kings, 18:3–4)
The reference is particularly significant because a staff topped by a bronze serpent was the symbol
of Pharaoh’s authority.


--- PAGE 22 ---
2
WAS MOSES A KING?
A
PART
 from a rather muddled chronology at the start of the Book of Exodus, the story of Moses it tells
is quite straightforward. However, the picture changes when we examine other holy books and the
work of Manetho, the third century 
BC
 native Egyptian historian, which was subsequently transmitted
by the Jewish historian, Flavius Josephus.
While we know from the Old Testament that Moses was brought up in the royal palace, it does not
suggest that he ever succeeded to the throne. Yet the story of Moses in the Talmud – the compilation
of Hebrew laws and legends, dating from the early centuries 
AD
 and regarded as second only to the
Old Testament as an authoritative source of the early history of the Jews – contains some details not
to be found in the Bible and often parallels Manetho’s account of the Exodus, derived from Egyptian
folklore. One of the details is that Moses was a king.
According to the Talmud, which agrees that Moses was brought up in Pharaoh’s palace, he grew
into a handsome lad, dressed royally, was honoured by the people and seemed in all things of royal
lineage. However, at about the age of eighteen he was forced to flee from Egypt after, on a visit to
Goshen, he came across an Egyptian smiting one of his Israelite brethren and slew him.
The Talmud goes on to relate that, at about this time, there was a rebellion against the King of
Ethiopia. The king appointed a magician’s son named Bi’lam – one of Pharaoh’s advisers, who was
considered exceptionally wise but had fled to Ethiopia from his own country, Egypt – to be his
representative in his absence and marched at the head of a large army, which vanquished the rebels.
Bi’lam betrayed his trust, however, and, usurping the power he was supposed to protect, induced the
Ethiopians to appoint him in place of their absent king. He strengthened the walls of the capital, built
huge fortresses and dug ditches and pits between the city and the nearby river. On his return the
Ethiopian king was astonished to see all these fortifications, which he thought were defences against a
possible attack by an enemy. When he found that the gates of the city were actually closed against
him, he embarked on a war against the usurper, Bi’lam, that lasted nine years.
One of the soldiers who fought on the side of the king, according to the Talmud story, was Moses,
who, after fleeing from Egypt, had made his way not to Midian in Sinai, as the Old Testament says,
but to Ethiopia. He became a great favourite with the Ethiopian ruler and his companions with the
result that, when the king died, this inner circle appointed Moses as their new king and leader. Moses,
who, according to the Talmud, was made king ‘in the hundred and fifty-seventh year after Israel went
down into Egypt’, inspired the army with his courage and the city eventually fell to him. The account
goes on: ‘… Bi’lam escaped and fled back to Egypt, becoming one of the magicians mentioned in the
Scriptures. And the Ethiopians placed Moses upon their throne and set the crown of State upon his
head, and they gave him the widow of their king for a wife.’
Moses reigned ‘in justice and righteousness. But the Queen of Ethiopia, Adonith [Aten-it in
Egyptian], who wished her own son by the dead king to rule, said to the people: “Why should this
stranger continue to rule over you?” The people, however, would not vex Moses, whom they loved,
by such a proposition; but Moses resigned voluntarily the power which they had given him and
departed from their land. And the people of Ethiopia made him many rich presents, and dismissed him


--- PAGE 23 ---
with great honours.’
1
So, according to this tradition, which has survived in the Talmud, Moses was elevated to the post
of king for some time before eventually seeking the sanctuary of Sinai. Furthermore, where
Akhenaten, as we shall see, looked upon himself as the high priest of his God, the Talmud tells us that
‘Moses officiated as the high priest. He was also considered the King of Israel during the sojourn in
the desert.’ Where did the rabbis obtain the facts in the Talmud? They can hardly have invented them
and, indeed, had no reason to do so. Like the accounts of the historian Manetho, the Talmudic stories
contain many distortions and accretions arising from the fact that they were transmitted orally for a
long time before finally being set down in writing. Yet one can sense that behind the myths there must
have lain genuine historical events that had been suppressed from the official accounts of both Egypt
and Israel, but had survived in the memories of the generations.
The Talmud description of Moses as a ruler is also supported by a verse of the Koran where
Moses tells the Israelites after the Exodus that God has made of them kings:
Remember Moses said
To his people: ‘O my people!
Call in remembrance the favour
Of Allah unto you, when He
Produced prophets among you,
Made you kings, and gave
You what he had not given
To any other among the peoples …’ (Sura V, 20)
The reference here is not to two kings, but more than two, for Arabic has different plural forms for
dual and multiple, and it is difficult to see in the light of later evidence how this can be anything other
than a reference to the four Amarna kings.
The Koran also provides a different picture of Moses’ departure from the Ethiopian capital. Where
the Talmud indicates that it was a friendly farewell, the Koran suggests that it was an escape from a
threat to his life:
And there came a man,
Running, from the furthest end
Of the city. He said:
‘O Moses! the Chiefs
Are taking counsel together
About thee to slay thee:
So get thee away, for I
Do give thee sincere advice.’ (Sura XXVIII, 20)
The Talmud also provides a different reason for the attempt to kill Moses at birth. It was Moses
specifically who was to be murdered because he posed a threat to the throne of Egypt. Pharaoh,
according to the Talmud, had a dream in which he was sitting on the throne when he saw an old man
holding a large pair of scales. The old man placed the elders and princes of Egypt on one side of the
scales and a lamb on the other. The lamb proved to be heavier. The king asked his adviser Bi’lam the
significance of this strange dream. Bi’lam explained that a great evil would befall the country: ‘A son
will be born in Israel who will destroy Egypt.’
Reu’el the Midianite, who is described in the Old Testament as the father-in-law of Moses, enters
the scene here as another of the king’s counsellors, who advised him that he should not oppress the
Israelites, but allow them to leave for Canaan. This advice did not find favour with the king, who


--- PAGE 24 ---
responded by banishing Reu’el to his own country and accepting an alternative course of action
recommended by Bi’lam – that as a precautionary measure all boys born to the Hebrews should be
cast into the river.
Prior to this, coinciding with the accounts in the Bible, we are told that Amram had married
Jochebed, who bore him a daughter, Miriam, described in the Old Testament as ‘a prophetess’,
followed by a son, Aaron. Now we learn of a prophesy by Miriam that a second son would be born to
her parents and this son would ultimately deliver the Israelites from their Egyptian oppressors. When
the baby appeared as predicted, Jochebed hid the new-born infant in her home for three months, but a
strict search of the Israelites’ homes was carried out regularly and various ruses were employed to
discover any male children who had been concealed. One was for Egyptian women to bring their own
babies into houses in Goshen and make them cry, whereupon any Hebrew babies hidden on the
premises would start to cry as well and betray their place of concealment.
The birth of a male child to Jochebed came to light in this way, but she hid the baby in the reeds of
the Nile before Pharaoh’s officers arrived to take him away. There, as in the Old Testament, he was
rescued by a daughter of the king, Bathia – identified in a subsequent passage as the first-born of her
mother – who gave him the name of Moses, saying: ‘I have drawn him from the water.’ Moses
‘became even as a son to Bathia … as a child belonging rightly to the palace of the king’.
2
When Moses was about three years of age, the story goes on, in the course of a banquet at which
his family and princes of the realm were present, Pharaoh took Moses on his lap, whereupon the child
stretched out his hand, removed Pharaoh’s crown from his head and placed it on his own. The king
felt this action had some possibly sinister significance. ‘How shall this Hebrew boy be punished?’ he
asked.
Bi’lam confirmed the king’s suspicions. ‘Think not, because the child is young, that he did this
thing thoughtlessly,’ he said. ‘Remember, o king, the dream this servant read for thee, the dream of the
balances. The spirit of understanding is already implanted in this child, and to himself he takes thy
kingdom.’
The judges and wise men, including Jithro (Reu’el), the priest of Midian, assembled and Pharaoh
related what had happened and the interpretation Bi’lam had placed upon Moses’ action. Jithro, who
was anxious to save the child’s life, suggested: ‘If it be pleasing to the king, let two plates be placed
before the child, one containing fire, the other gold. If the child stretches forth his hand to grasp the
gold, we shall know him to be an understanding being, and consider that he acted towards thee
knowingly, deserving death. But if he grasps the fire, then let his life be spared.’ Two bowls were
brought, one containing gold, the other fire, and placed before the child, who put out his hand and
grasped the fire, which he put into his mouth, burning his tongue and becoming thereafter, as the Bible
says, ‘heavy of mouth and heavy of tongue’. However, his life was saved.
Manetho, a native Egyptian, was a contemporary of the first two Ptolemies, rulers at the start of the
Thirty-second and last Egyptian Dynasty early in the third century 
BC,
 and is said to have described
himself in a letter to Ptolemy II as ‘High Priest and scribe of the sacred shrines of Egypt, born at
Sebennytus and dwelling at Heliopolis’.
3
 He is one of the early Egyptians who wrote about his
country in Greek, assembling tales that he had found in the temple library, made up in part of ancient
stories that had initially been transmitted orally before being set down in writing.
Scholars disagree about how many books can actually be attributed to Manetho, but it is accepted
that he was the author of 
The History of Egypt
 (or 
Aegyptiaca
) in three volumes. The main difficulty
we face in trying to establish the contents of Manetho’s original work, however, is the fact that we do


--- PAGE 25 ---
not have direct access to it: the fragments available have all come to us via other authors. Quotations
from his work have been preserved mainly by the Jewish historian Flavius Josephus (
AD
 70); the
Christian chronographers Sextus Julius Africanus (3rd century 
AD
) and Eusebius (4th century 
AD);
 in
isolated passages in Plutarch and other Greek and Latin authors, and a later compiler called George
the Monk – an ‘attendant’, also known as Syncellus (
AD
 800), of Tarasius, Patriarch of
Constantinople – who contributed greatly to the transmission.
According to Josephus in his book 
Contra Apionem,
 Alexandria had become a main centre for the
Jews during the time of the Ptolemies. They enjoyed both Alexandrian citizenship and the city’s
‘finest residential quarter’ by the sea. The Alexandrian Jews were naturally interested in Manetho’s
account of their historic links with Egypt, although they found some aspects of it objectionable. His
original work therefore did not survive for long before being tampered with. The efforts of Jewish
apologists account for much of the subsequent corruption of Manetho’s text and the creation of what is
known as ‘Pseudo-Manethonian’ literature.
Although, as we shall see, Egypt tried to wipe out all trace of the four Amarna kings – Akhenaten,
Semenkhkare, Tutankhamun and Aye – by excising their names from king lists and monuments after the
fall of the Amarna regime, they are correctly named by Manetho as having ruled between the reigns of
Amenhotep III, Akhenaten’s father, and Horemheb, who is to be identified as the Pharaoh of the
Oppression. In addition, an epitome of Manetho’s history had already been made as early as
Ptolemaic times in the form of lists of dynasties accompanied by short notes on outstanding kings and
important events, including the defeat of the Hyksos invaders, followed by the founding of the
Eighteenth Dynasty and the Exodus. These versions of the epitome differ from one another, indicating
that some distortion has occurred in the process of transmitting and editing Manetho’s 
Aegyptiaca
itself. However, a number of points are worth making:
•  The list of Syncellus (according to Africanus) places the Exodus, when ‘Moses went forth from
Egypt’, in the reign of Amos (Ahmosis), founder of the Eighteenth Dynasty, who drove out the Hyksos
shepherds: this is an error arising from wrongly identifying, as Josephus did, the arrival of the
conquering Hyksos as the Descent into Egypt of the Israelites and the subsequent expulsion of the
Hyksos by Ahmosis as the Exodus;
•  The lists of Syncellus (according to Eusebius) and the version of Eusebius which was found
translated into Armenian place the Exodus of the Jews, with Moses at their head, more than two
centuries later in the reign of the king who succeeded Orus (Amenhotep III, 
c.
 1405–1367) – his son
and coregent Amenhotep IV (Akhenaten);
•  Syncellus (according to Africanus) also states that it was in the reign of Amos (Ahmosis), the first
king of the Eighteenth Dynasty, that Moses led the Exodus;
•  Syncellus (according to Eusebius) claims that it was ‘about’ the reign of a Pharaoh named
Achencherres (Amenhotep IV, who later became Akhenaten) – that ‘Moses led the Jews in their
march out of Egypt’;
•  The Armenian version of Eusebius similarly lists the reign of Achencheres (Akhenaten) as the time
‘when Moses became the leader of the Jews in their Exodus’.
Josephus made an error by identifying the arrival of the conquering Hyksos as the Descent into
Egypt of the Israelites and their subsequent expulsion by Ahmosis as the Exodus. What helped him to
make the mistake was his desire to show that the Israelites had left Egypt long before Amenhotep III


--- PAGE 26 ---
and the religious revolution that began in his reign. Josephus begins by saying that the Jews’
ancestors, whom he regarded as the Hyksos, ‘entered Egypt in their myriads and subdued the
inhabitants’.
4
 Later they were driven out of the country, occupied Judaea and founded Jerusalem. At
this point he complains that Manetho ‘took the liberty of introducing some incredible tales, wishing to
represent us [the Israelites] as mixed up with a crowd of Egyptian lepers and others who for various
maladies were condemned … to banishment from the country.’ (We should not take the descriptions
of the rebels as being literally lepers or suffering from other maladies, the sense here being that they
were impure because of their denial of Egyptian gods.) This sequence of events, says Josephus, is
linked with a king named Amenophis (Amenhotep III), whom Josephus – believing that the Jews
(Hyksos) had left Egypt centuries earlier – describes as ‘an imaginary person’. Josephus’ account
then goes on: ‘This king, he [Manetho] states, wishing to be granted … a vision of the gods,
communicated his desire to his namesake, Amenophis, son of Paapis [son of Habu], whose wisdom
and knowledge of the future were regarded as marks of divinity. This namesake replied that he would
be able to see the gods if he purged the entire country of lepers and other polluted persons, and sent
them to work on the stone quarries to the east of the Nile, segregated from the rest of the Egyptians.
They included, he adds, some of the learned priests, who were afflicted with leprosy. Then this wise
seer Amenophis was seized with a fear that he would draw down the wrath of the gods on himself
and the king if the violence done to these men were detected; and he added a prediction that the
polluted people would find certain allies who would become masters of Egypt for thirteen years …’
The adviser known as son of Habu started his career under Amenhotep III as an Inferior Royal
Scribe, was promoted to be a Superior Royal Scribe and finally reached the position of Minister of
all Public Works. He was also appointed as Steward of Sitamun, the sister Amenhotep III had
married in order to inherit the throne but failed to make his Great Royal Wife (queen). Son of Habu
lived to be at least eighty and the last date we have for him is the thirty-fourth year of Amenhotep III.
Later he became for the Egyptians a kind of saint whose cult was reported as late as Roman times.
Eventually, after the men in the stone quarries had spent many miserable years, the king heard their
pleas for less harsh treatment and gave them the abandoned city of the Hyksos, Avaris. There, having
at last a base of their own, they appointed as their leader one of the priests of Heliopolis (On), called
Osarseph, and undertook to obey all his orders. By his first law, Osarseph ordained that his followers
should not worship the gods of Egypt, nor abstain from the flesh of any of the animals held in special
reverence in the country. He also commanded that they should form an exclusive society, mixing only
with their own kind. Manetho’s account, as interpreted by Josephus, then goes on:
After laying down these and a multitude of other laws, absolutely opposed to Egyptian custom, he [Osarseph] ordered all hands
to repair the city walls and make ready for war with King Amenophis [Amenhotep III]. Then, in concert with other priests and
polluted persons like himself, he sent an emissary to the shepherds who had been expelled by Tethmosis [the Asiatic Hyksos,
who were expelled by Ahmosis] in the city of Jerusalem, setting out the position of himself and his outraged companions and
inviting them to join in a united expedition against Egypt. He undertook to escort them first to their ancestral home at Auaris
[Avaris], to provide abundant supplies for their multitudes, to fight for them when the moment came and, without difficulty, to
reduce the country to submission. The shepherds, delighted with the idea, all eagerly set off in a body numbering two hundred
thousand men …
In the face of this threatened invasion, Amenophis (Amenhotep III) ‘sent for the sacred animals
which are held in most reverence in the temples and instructed the priests in each district to conceal
the images of the gods as securely as possible.’ However, he did not do battle with the invaders, but
retreated to Ethiopia (Kush), ‘whose king was under obligation to him and at his service’. This king
made Amenophis welcome and provided accommodation and food for him and his followers for the


--- PAGE 27 ---
thirteen years of banishment that the son of Habu had predicted. Manetho’s account, according to
Josephus, then continues:
‘Meanwhile, the Solymites [who originated in Jerusalem] came down with the polluted Egyptians
and treated the inhabitants in so sacrilegious a manner that the regime of the shepherds seemed like a
golden age to those who now beheld the impieties of their present enemies. Not only did they set
cities and villages on fire, not only did they pillage the temples and mutilate the images of the gods,
but, not content with that, they habitually used the very sanctuaries as kitchens for roasting the
venerated sacred animals, forced the priests and prophets to slaughter them and cut their throats, and
then turned them out naked …’ Manetho adds that Amenophis subsequently advanced from Ethiopia
with a large army and his son, Rampses, at the head of another, and that the two attacked and defeated
the shepherds and their polluted allies, killing many of them and pursuing the remainder to the
frontiers of Syria.
Modern scholars have tended to accept the view that Manetho did not rely in his account of the
Israelites’ sojourn in Egypt entirely on Ancient Egyptian historical sources. Gardiner, for instance,
says in his book 
Egypt of the Pharaohs:
 ‘… the story of Amenhophis (Amenhotep III) and the lepers
quoted from him by Josephus … show that he made use not only of authentic records, but also of
popular romances devoid of historical value.’ He also makes the point a page earlier: ‘… Josephus’
excerpts from Manetho were introduced to support the latter’s belief that the biblical account of the
Exodus and the expulsion of the Hyksos under Tethmosis refer to one and the same historical event …
Admittedly the lengthy excerpts in question embody also several popular stories of the most fantastic
description, explicitly recognized as such by the Jewish historian.’
This view has been challenged recently, however, by Redford in 
Pharaonic King-Lists, Annals
and Day Books.
 After giving an account of the surviving library of the temple of Sobek in Fayum,
which dates from the first century 
BC
 to the fourth 
AD,
 has been brought to light over the last hundred
years and is currently in process of publication, he comments, in discussing some aspects of
Manetho’s work that is conventionally dismissed as ‘Pseudo-Manethonian’: ‘There is absolutely no
justification in … construing them as interpolations. Nor is it correct to imagine Manetho garnering
oral traditions and committing them to writing. He would have had no use for, and probably would
have despised, material circulating orally and not found formally represented by the temple scroll.
What he found in the temple library in the form of a duly authorized text he incorporated in his history;
and, conversely, we may with confidence postulate for the material in his history a written source
found in the temple library, and nothing more.’ Redford identified the source of Manetho’s Osarseph
story as the events of the Amarna religious revolution, first remembered orally and later set down in
writing.
Although the leader of the contaminated people was given as Osarseph by Manethos, other writers
have favoured the name of Moses. In his 
History of Egypt
 in five books, Apion himself – who lived
in the first half of the first century 
AD,
 was born in Upper Egypt, studied in Alexandria and taught
rhetoric in Rome under Tiberius, Caligula and Claudius – wrote in his third book, as quoted by
Josephus: ‘Moses, as I have heard from old people [the elders] in Egypt, was a native of Heliopolis
who, being pledged to the customs of his country, erected prayer-houses open to the air in various
precincts of the city, all facing eastwards, such being the orientation also of Heliopolis. In place of
obelisks he set up pillars, topped by human figures, beneath which was a model of a boat; and the
shadow cast on this basin by the boat described a circle corresponding to the course of the sun in the
heavens.’
5
Another Alexandrian author named Chaereman (1st century 
AD
 philosopher and librarian of


--- PAGE 28 ---
Alexandria, who afterwards became the tutor of Nero), also favoured Moses: ‘Moses and another
sacred scribe Joseph’,
6
 as did Lysimachus (Alexandrian writer of uncertain date, but later than the
2nd century 
BC),
 also quoted by Josephus.
7
There are a number of conflicts between these various accounts of the life of Moses, which one
would expect with stories passed on by word of mouth for centuries before they were finally written
down. We are, for instance, given two dates, more than two centuries apart, for the Exodus.
Furthermore, while the Talmud tells us that it was Moses who fled to Ethiopia, Manetho claims that it
was Amenhotep III, whom I look upon as having been Moses’ father. For the moment, however,
several points in these two opening chapters are worth emphasizing.
Both at the time of the birth of Moses and when he was seeking permission for the Israelites to
leave Egypt, the indications are that the ruling Pharaoh was in residence in the vicinity of Goshen,
where the Israelites had been allowed to settle … Moses, who is described as a native of Heliopolis,
where Akhenaten is thought to have spent much of his childhood, protested to the Lord that he would
have difficulty in communicating with the Israelites … the Exodus is linked in three cases with the
reign of Akhenaten … the name of the Egyptian queen who became the wife of Moses is given as
Adonith (Aten-it) and is clearly derived from the Aten, the one God whom Akhenaten attempted to
force upon the Egyptian people … Moses remained in Egyptian memory also by the name of
Osarseph, a priest of Heliopolis, which links him with vizier Joseph, the Patriarch who brought the
tribe of Israel down to Egypt, whom I have identified as Yuya, Akhenaten’s maternal grandfather
8
 …
Manetho’s identification of the reign of Amenhotep III – while the son of Habu was still alive, some
time before the king’s Year 34 – as the right time for the start of religious rebellion and the Jewish
Oppression is not built simply on popular tales of his time, but on old traditions, already set down in
writing, that he found in his temple library … it is clear from the biblical narrations that the
Oppression of the Israelites took two separate forms – the threat to the lives of Hebrew male children
and the use of the Israelites’ forced labour to build the cities of Pithom and Raamses, which, as we
shall see, followed a period of religious upheaval … Moses was not allowed to enter the Promised
Land for the alleged offence of striking a rock with his rod to obtain water for his followers.
On the subject of the Israelite occupation of the abandoned Hyksos city of Avaris, Redford has also
commented: ‘The occupation of a deserted area, set apart (though in the modified form of the story
replaced by Avaris) sounds like the hegira to Amarna’ – Akhenaten’s move from Thebes to his new
capital in the face of opposition to his religious ideas by nobles and priests of the State god Amun –
‘and the thirteen years of woe wrought by lepers and shepherds can only be the term of Akhenaten’s
stay in his new city. The figure of Osarseph/Moses is clearly modelled on the historic memory of
Akhenaten. He is credited with interdicting the worship of all the gods and, in Apion, of championing
a form of worship which used open-air temples oriented east, exactly like the Aten temples of
Amarna.’
9
What are the historical events that inspired these varied, and often contradictory, accounts – and at
what precise point in history did they take place?


--- PAGE 29 ---
3
THE ISRAEL STELA
A 
CHRONOLOGY
 for the life of Moses clearly depends upon establishing in the first place when the
Descent of the Israelites into Egypt took place and how long they remained there before the Exodus. It
is generally accepted that they were in the country at the end of the Eighteenth and start of the
Nineteenth Dynasties (
c
.1308 
BC),
 but when they arrived and departed have both been the subject of
considerable disagreement. The Old Testament is not very helpful in this matter. It does not give any
dates, or the names of any reigning monarch, referring to him only as ‘Pharaoh’, ‘King’ or ‘Pharaoh,
King of Egypt’. Nor does it tell us where the capital city of the Pharaoh in question was situated. It
also provides us with some conflicting statements about how long the Sojourn lasted:
And he said unto Abram, Know of a surety that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that is not theirs, and shall serve them;
and they shall afflict them four hundred years. (Genesis, 15:13)
But in the fourth generation they shall come hither again … (Genesis, 15:16)
Now the sojourning of the children of Israel, who dwelt in Egypt, was four hundred and thirty years.
And it came to pass at the end of the four hundred and thirty years, even the selfsame day it came to pass, that all the hosts
of the Lord went out from the land of Egypt. (Exodus, 12:40–41)
In addition, the Old Testament always provides us with the names of heads of tribes and the names
of their descendants who are important to the story that is being related. In the case of the Sojourn we
are given the names of four generations – Jacob’s (Israel’s) third son, Levi, and Levi’s son (Kohath),
grandson (Amram) and great-grandson (Moses).
If we examine Egyptian sources we find nothing that matches precisely the broad outline of the
biblical account of the Descent, Sojourn and Exodus. Yet this lack of precise evidence cannot be
taken as a reason to dismiss the account as a complete fabrication or to suppose a mythological origin
for these narrations. The Bible gives some inside details of life in Egypt during the Empire (the
Eighteenth and Nineteenth Dynasties) that in many cases have to be seen as originating as a result of
first-hand knowledge. These details cannot be regarded as a later colouring, as some scholars
maintain, for how could a Jewish priest and scribe like Ezra, returning to Jerusalem from the Exile in
Babylon in the fifth century 
BC,
 be expected to have inside details about life in Egypt during the
Empire eight centuries earlier? The only logical explanation is that the biblical accounts of the
Descent into Egypt and eventual Exodus have at their core real historical characters and events. It is
therefore a matter of seeking clues within the Old Testament that may help us to determine to which
period of Egyptian history these events belong.
The historical period we have to examine is a long one, ranging from the seventeenth century 
BC
until the thirteenth. In the seventeenth century 
BC
 Lower and Middle Egypt came under the control of
the invading Hyksos – Asiatic shepherd rulers, with some Semitic elements among their followers –
who set up their capital at Avaris in the Eastern Delta, where they ruled for just over a hundred years.
They were eventually defeated in battle and driven from the country by Ahmosis (
c
. 1575–1550),
founder of the Eighteenth Dynasty, which would develop into a golden age in the history of Ancient
Egypt and lasted until almost the end of the fourteenth century 
BC.
 During this period Thebes in Upper
Egypt became the capital and chief religious centre of the country, while the king’s main residence


--- PAGE 30 ---
was at Memphis in Lower Egypt. With the arrival of Ramses I, the first Pharaoh of the Nineteenth
Dynasty, Thebes retained its importance, but the king’s main residence moved to the old city of
Avaris, now rebuilt by the Israelites as Pi-Ramses and named after the Ramses kings of the dynasty. It
is also from this period that the whole of the Eastern Delta area named as Goshen in the Bible became
known as the Land of Ramses.
The name Ramses (spelled Rameses) is also found in the Pentateuch, but not as the name of a ruling
king. In Genesis, 47:11, it is given as the name of the land where the Israelites were allowed to settle
on their arrival in Egypt. As the Goshen area did not become known as the Land of Ramses until the
Nineteenth Dynasty, and nobody disputes that the Israelites arrived in Egypt at some time before this
era, it seems that the name Ramses is simply being used here as an equivalent of Goshen as it became
known as ‘the Land of Ramses’ at the time of the Exodus. The name Rameses occurs again in Exodus,
12:37, where it is described as the starting point of the Exodus. Further pointers to a northern
residence at the start of the Nineteenth Dynasty are provided by the accounts of the way Moses,
having returned to the Eastern Delta to rescue his people, was urged by the Lord to confront Pharaoh
in the morning when he went down to the banks of the Nile (Exodus, 7:15; 8:20).
It would seem that two reasonable deductions might be made from these brief summaries of the
biblical account of the Sojourn and what we know of the seat of power in ancient Egypt: firstly, that
as shepherds were looked upon already as ‘an abomination’ when the Israelites arrived in Egypt,
their appearance on the scene must have post-dated the Hyksos period, which was the root cause of
the anti-shepherd hostility; and, secondly, the fact that they were settled in Goshen, remote from the
seat of Pharaonic power, suggests that this seat must at the time have been at Thebes, some 400 miles
away in Upper Egypt, rather than Avaris, the Hyksos capital and capital of the land of Goshen in the
Eastern Delta.
However, with no archaeological evidence to help them, early Egyptologists were persuaded to
believe – correctly, as it happens – that the Exodus could not be assigned to an earlier time than the
Nineteenth Dynasty. It was when they attempted to decide in which reign of the Nineteenth Dynasty it
took place that they went astray. Two points misled them: firstly, the figure of 430 years, given in the
Old Testament as the duration of the Sojourn, which they appear to have accepted literally; and,
secondly, the statement by Flavius Josephus, the Jewish historian of the first century 
AD,
 which they
also seem not to have questioned, that the Israelite arrival took place during the period of Hyksos
rule. This view appeared to be justified by some elaborate mathematical guesswork, for if we add up
the figures in the Bible between the start of the Sojourn and the Exodus, and compare them with the
then accepted Egyptian dates, we arrive at the following totals:


--- PAGE 31 ---
The implication of these calculations is that Joseph must have arrived in Egypt as a slave, and been
imprisoned, in the very first year of Hyksos rule. Despite the inherent improbability of this having
happened, early Egyptologists, working forward from this date, came down firmly in favour of the
Exodus under Moses having taken place during the reign of Merenptah, the fourth ruler of the
Nineteenth Dynasty. Furthermore, as the Bible indicates that the Pharaoh of the Oppression, during
whose reign Moses fled to Sinai, died while Moses was still in exile, it followed that, if Merenptah
was the ruling king at the time of the Exodus, his predecessor, Ramses II, must have been king at the
time of the Oppression.
These assumptions were shattered in 1896 when the British Egyptologist W. M. Flinders Petrie
found a great granite stela in the funerary temple of Merenptah to the west of Thebes. The stela, which
had originally belonged to Amenhotep III and bore a text of his, had been later usurped by Merenptah,
who recorded on the other side what some scholars believed to be two separate military campaigns –
one his victory over Libyan invaders, the other an expedition into Palestine/Syria, matching the
biblical account of the pursuit of the Israelites by the Egyptians. The stela, now in the Cairo Museum,
has come to be known as the Israel Stela because it includes – in an epilogue to its main story – the
first, and only known, mention of Israel in an Egyptian text. As this stela is dated to Year 5 of
Merenptah’s reign and speaks of Israel as people already resident in Palestine, it upset completely the
accepted wisdom of Egyptologists of the time. Not only had the Israelites left Egypt proper by that
date, but, after spending a supposed forty years in the wilderness of Sinai, had made their way to
Palestine and had been there long enough to develop into a power that posed a threat impelling the
ruling Pharaoh to send troops to try to subdue them.
This caused the scholars of the time to adjust their position. Faced with the facts, and lacking any
alternative explanation, they decided that at least one of the figures in the biblical account of Exodus,
the forty years spent wandering in the wilderness, should not be taken literally. In addition they
became ready to disregard the two Pharaohs of the biblical account – one for the Oppression and the


--- PAGE 32 ---
other, his successor, for the time of Exodus – and came to the conclusion that Ramses II was the
Pharaoh of both events during his long reign of sixty-seven years. This belief has since become
widely accepted by the majority of both biblical scholars and Egyptologists, who have come to
regard it as unquestionable historical fact. However, the choice of Ramses II as the Pharaoh of the
Exodus assumes that the military confrontation between the people of Israel and Egyptian forces in
Palestine took place during the first five years of Merenptah, but careful examination of the Israel
Stela shows that this cannot have been the case.
In Year 5 of Merenptah’s reign, Egypt was invaded by a Libyan leader named Merey, who had
gathered to his banner a great army of Libyan tribes as well as five groups of ‘peoples of the sea’,
who are believed to have come from the Greek islands. They attacked the Western Delta. Memphis,
Heliopolis and other Lower Egyptian cities were forced to shut their gates against the invaders,
citizens were unable to cultivate their land in safety or move from town to town. On this occasion the
invaders were not merely looking for plunder, as had been the case with previous Libyan invasions,
for they brought their women, children and cattle with them, clearly intending permanent settlement.
On learning of this threat, Merenptah sent an army that met the invaders at a locality in the Western
Delta known as ‘The Fields Of Piyer’. After six hours of fierce fighting, Merey fled, leaving his
followers to their fate. The number of Libyans killed in the fighting is said to have been 6000 with a
further 9000 taken prisoner.
The section of the Israel Stela devoted to these events opens with the date: ‘Year 5, third month of
the third season (Spring), day 3’. This is followed by the titulary and epithets of Merenptah and, after
giving a general picture of Egypt after the Libyan invasion, the defeat of the enemy is described:
‘Their advanced guard abandoned their rear. Their legs did not stop, except to run. Their archers
abandoned their bows. The heart of their runners was weak from travelling. They untied their
waterskins … their packs were loosed and cast aside. The wretched enemy prince of Rebu [Libya]
was fled in the depth of the night, by himself. No feather was on his head’ – a sign of dishonour, as
Libyan warriors used to wear a feather in their head-dress – ‘his feet were unshod. The loaves for his
provision were seized; he had no water … to keep him alive. The face of his brother was fierce, to
slay him; among his commanders one fought his companion. Their tents were burned up, made ashes.
All his goods were food for the troops.’
3
Then come some narrative sections, giving an account of the defeat of the Libyans and the saving of
Memphis, which are followed by a religious composition in which the gods of Heliopolis praise
Merenptah for saving Memphis and Heliopolis. The last section depicts the Egyptians joyful after
their victory:
Jubilation has gone forth in the towns of Egypt. They talk about victories… One walks with unhindered stride on the way, for
there is no fear at all in the heart of the people. The forts are left to themselves, the wells [lie] open, accessible to the
messengers. The battlements of the wall are calm in the sun until their watchers may awake … The cattle of the field are left
as free to roam without herdsmen, [even] crossing the flood of the stream. There is no breaking out of a cry in the night: ‘Halt!
Behold, a comer comes with the speech of strangers!’ but one goes and comes with singing. There is no cry of people as
when there is mourning. Towns are settled anew again. He who ploughs his harvest will eat it. Re has turned himself [again]
to Egypt. He [the king] was born as the one destined to [be] her protector, the King of Upper and Lower Egypt: Ba-en-Re,
Meriamon; the son of Re: Merenptah Hotep-hir-Maat.
We have further accounts of the campaign against the Libyans in the war inscriptions of the Cairo
and Heliopolis Columns, the Karnak War Inscriptions, the Athribis Stela (also called the Kom el
Ahmar Stela), texts in which Merenptah has given accounts of the Libyan war in different parts of
Egypt, and the Nubian Stelae, found in Nubia at Amada, Toshka, Wadi es Seboua and Amara West.


--- PAGE 33 ---
With the exception of the Nubian Stelae, which describe a second war against the Nubians in Year 6
of Merenptah’s reign, the only hostilities mentioned are those against the Libyans twelve months
earlier.
What distinguishes the Israel Stela is that, unlike other texts, the account of the campaign against the
Libyans is followed by a separate concluding section of twelve lines (three on the original stela),
naming some foreign locations and peoples:
The princes are prostrate, saying ‘Mercy!’ (The word used here is the Canaanite 
shalam,
 meaning ‘peace’).
Not one raises head among the Nine Bows.
Desolation is for Tehenu; Hatti is pacified;
Plundered is the Canaan with every evil;
Carried off is Ashkelon; seized upon is Gezer;
Yanoam is made as that which does not exist;
Israel is laid waste, his seed is not;
Hurru is become a widow for Egypt!
All lands together, they are pacified;
Everyone who was restless, he has been bound by the King of Upper and Lower Egypt: Ba-en-Re Meriamon; the son of Re:
Merenptah Hotep-hir-Maat, given life like Re every day.
Various interpretations have been placed upon the Israel Stela. It has been described, because of
the poetic nature of its composition, as a hymn of victory. Some scholars have dismissed it as
unhistorical and being rather a poetic eulogy of a universally victorious Pharaoh, while others have
accepted that it provides a historical account of Merenptah’s wars and victories. Although the stela is
devoted almost entirely to the war against the invading Libyans, Libya (Tehenu) is also mentioned in
the twelve-line epilogue. The other foreign references featured are:
• Hatti, the land of the Hittites in Asia Minor, then extending to include northern Syria;
• Canaan, west and south Palestine, bordering Sinai in the south, the Dead Sea to the east and the
Mediterranean to the west;
• Ashkelon, a Canaanite port on the Mediterranean north of Gaza;
• Gezer, a Canaanite city west of Jerusalem:
• Yanoam, an important town of northern Palestine at the southern end of the Sea of Galilee;
• Israel: the sign used here does not indicate a land, but a people; and
• Hurru: although this word is sometimes used to indicate the whole land of Palestine/Syria, it could
also mean the land of the biblical Horites, north of Mount Seir at the foot of the Dead Sea.
Merenptah was already an old man of about sixty when he came to the throne. At the time Egypt
had enjoyed half a century of peace with Palestine/Syria since Merenptah’s father, Ramses II, had
concluded a treaty with the Hittites in Year 21 of his reign. No record of any major Egyptian conflict
in Asia has been found during the remainder of the reign of Ramses II, and it is hardly to be believed
that Merenptah, in the first five years of his reign and at his advanced age, fought these major wars
against the Hittites in northern Syria and in Palestine/Syria without leaving any record of it other than
the list of names in the epilogue to the Israel Stela.
This does not mean, however, that the epilogue is without historical value. We find no claim on the
part of the king that it was 
he
 who subdued these foreign peoples, no dates or other details of any
specific confrontation are to be found, only lasting peace. Yet, as the section implies, this peace had


--- PAGE 34 ---
been achieved only through the defeat of Egypt’s enemies in Asia. If Merenptah was not the king who
confronted and vanquished the Israelites and other peoples in Palestine/Syria, who did? To find the
answer we have to go back ninety years before Merenptah’s accession to the throne, back to the very
beginning of the Nineteenth Dynasty.


--- PAGE 35 ---
4
REBELLION IN SINAI
I
F,
 as is generally accepted, the Israelites were still in Egypt at the end of the Eighteenth and beginning
of the Nineteenth Dynasties, and if Egyptian troops set out in pursuit of them after the Exodus, as the
Old Testament tells us, we should expect to find some evidence of this campaign in Egyptian records.
When Ramses I, founder of the Nineteenth Dynasty, came to the throne towards the end of the
fourteenth century 
C,
 Egyptian influence in Asia had been weakened. The Hittite kingdom of central
Asia Minor, which had emerged as a new power under the rule of the energetic King Suppiluliuma,
had conquered first the city states of northern Syria, then Mitanni, Egypt’s northern ally, thus
threatening Egyptian control of central Canaan. Yet, despite this circumstance, the only stela of
Ramses I, found at Wadi Haifa in Nubia, makes no mention of any campaign in the north during his
short reign. A reference to ‘the captivity of his majesty’ is taken to imply a possible military
confrontation in Nubia.
Ramses I, already a very old man at the time of his accession, did not survive the end of his second
year on the throne and was succeeded by his son, Seti I – and it is here, and in the earlier part of the
reign of Seti’s son and successor, Ramses II, that we find details of campaigns that match both the
Exodus story and the Israel Stela.
At some point in Seti’s first regnal year, a messenger arrived with the news: ‘The Shasu enemies
are plotting rebellion. Their tribal leaders are gathered in one place, standing on the foothills of Khor
(a general term for Palestine and Syria), and they are engaged in turmoil and uproar. Each of them is
killing his fellow. They do not consider the laws of the palace.’
There is evidence that this campaign took place immediately after the death of Ramses I, before the
process of his mummification, which took seventy days, had been completed and before Seti I had
been crowned as the new Pharaoh: ‘The evidence … suggests that Seti had already returned from his
first campaign (against the Shasu) when he visited Thebes in his accession year, there to attend to the
burial of his predecessor and to initiate the benefactions in the Amun Temple which have been dated
to his first regnal year.’
1
 This reinforces the idea that Ramses I could have died while pursuing the
Israelites in Sinai. The name ‘Shasu’ was used by the Egyptians to designate the bedouin tribes of
Sinai, nomadic people who spoke a west-Semitic language, and to differentiate between them and the
Palestinians, whom they called ‘Aamu’. (Later on, in the early centuries 
AD,
 the word ‘Shasu’ became
the Coptic word 
shos,
 meaning shepherd.) The full account of this campaign against the Shasu, here
identified as a people by the determinative that can indicate either a people or a land, is found in Seti
I’s war reliefs which occupy the entire exterior of the northern wall of the great Hypostyle Hall in
Amun’s temple at Karnak (see 
Appendix A
(i): The Shasu Wars). The extreme point in the king’s first
war, shown on the bottom row of the eastern side of the wall and dated to his first year, is the capture
of the city of Pe-Kanan (Gaza).
The second and middle row of this eastern wall shows a further war of Seti I to the north. Shortly
after his coronation, Seti I set out again for western Asia. On this occasion the king marched with his
army up the Mediterranean coast until he reached a point in north Palestine on the same level as the
southern end of the Sea of Galilee, probably the city of Acco. He then divided his army into three


--- PAGE 36 ---
divisions which moved eastward in three different branches to the cities of Yanoam in the north,
Beth-Shan in the centre and Hammath in the south. The extreme end of this row shows the princes of
Canaan felling the cedars in the Lebanon for the sacred boat of Amun in Thebes where, in his yearly
festivals, the god was carried in a celebratory procession indicating the submission of the whole of
Canaan and the Phoenician coast to the Pharaoh.
The first row of scenes at the bottom of the western wall of the Karnak temple façade depicts a war
against the Hittites, who were at the time in northern Syria, where their strong centre was the city of
Kadesh on the Orontes river, but the Hittite power was not broken. Although here again we have no
date for the Hittite war, it is accepted that it could not have taken place in Year 1 of Seti I. The
second, middle row of this western wall deals with two separate wars Seti I fought against the
Libyans. No date is given, but they could have occurred any time after Year 1. The third, and top, row
is again lost apart from a scene on the right extremity representing the war with the Hittites at Kadesh.
Ramses II, who followed his father, Seti I, on the throne in the early part of the thirteenth century 
C,
spent the first decade fighting in Asia. His first campaign began in Year 4 when he swept through
Canaan and along the Phoenician coast, probably as far as Simyra, which had been under the control
of the kingdom of Amurru, to the east in northern Syria. He then attacked Amurru itself, which had an
allegiance with the Hittite king, Muwatallis.
In the spring of the following year Ramses II returned to Syria, this time to conquer Kadesh. After
fierce fighting, in which the king himself played a courageous role, he succeeded in defeating the
Hittites and capturing the city. His third Asiatic campaign took place in Year 8 of his reign. On this
occasion he had first to crush unrest in Galilee before embarking on other campaigns – recovery of
the area of Damascus, strengthening his hold upon the Phoenician coast lands and attacking the
Amurrite city of Dapur to the north of Kadesh. Two years later, in Year 10, the king engaged in a
second attack upon Dapur, which had rebelled: ‘Sometime in regnal Year 10, or shortly afterwards,
Ramses II appears to have left Egypt; perhaps at this time he conducted the campaigns into
Transjordan that are represented at the walls of Luxor since they do not fit into the accounts of his
earlier campaigns.’
2
Ramses II returned to Beth-Shan in Year 18, after which negotiations began between himself and
Hattusili III, the new King of the Hittites, that resulted ultimately in a treaty of peace and alliance
between them in Year 21. This treaty was later consolidated by a marriage between Ramses II and a
Hittite princess in his Year 34 and a second princess a decade later. Details of the treaty, known from
both Egyptian and Hittite sources, can be found in Appendix A(ii): The Hattusili Treaty, but the
subsequent situation that obtained between the two countries is summed up by Schmidt, an American
Egyptologist, in the following terms in his book 
Ramses II:
 ‘With Year 30 and the first Jubilee, a time
of peace and tranquility seems to have descended upon Egypt; from that year onward, there is no
reference to warfare or strife. Building activity seems to have become Ramses’s primary public
concern, and, as far as one can tell, the economy of the land prospered.’
Some of the wars conducted by Ramses II were a continuation of the campaigns against the Shasu
that had been initiated by his father, Seti I. There are several references to them, although no specific
dates are to be found, at Tanis, one of the Ramesside cities in the north-east of the Delta, south of
Lake Menzalah:
Obelisk V, W. Face:‘… who made a great slaughter in the land of the Shasu’; Obelisk IX, W. Face: ‘… who plunders the
Shasu-land’; Stela II: ‘… he has destroyed the inheritance of the Shasu-land and made them [the chiefs] bring their tribute to
Egypt for ever and ever’; Stela V: ‘… who made great slaughter in the land of the Shasu’; Stella [VIII], frag. 3:’… the Shasu,
taken off as c[aptives…]’; Stela IX, Face B, 3: ‘… who plundered the Shasu-land’.


--- PAGE 37 ---
We also find at Karnak, south of the Hittite treaty and Ascalon-scene, over a file of prisoners: ‘…
the Shasu whom His Majesty plundered’.
3
Where did these battles against the Shasu take place? Professor Kenneth A. Kitchen of Liverpool
University, citing various Egyptian sources, has concluded that Mount Seir formed part of the Shasu-
land and is to be equated with Edom of Genesis (36: 8–9). (See also Appendix A (iii): A Dissenting
Voice.) Of a number of other names mentioned he says that Bernard Grdseloff, the Polish
Egyptologist, has ‘aptly compared 
Rbn
 with the Laban of Deuteronomy, 1:1 (and Libnah of Numbers,
33:20–21) and 
Sm’t
 with the Shimea thites of I Chronicles, 2:55, all in the area of Seir/Edom, the
Negeb, or the Araba rift valley between them’, and concludes that the evidence ‘clearly suggests that
Ramses or troops of his raided the Negeb, the uplands of Seir or Edom, and perhaps part of the
intervening Araba rift valley … Thus we have evidence for the activity of Ramses II (or at least of his
forces) in both Edom and Moab (to the south and south-east of the Dead Sea).’
4
Dr Kitchen next proceeds to try to provide possible dates for the military confrontations between
Ramses II and the Shasu: ‘It is difficult to place these Transjordanian activities within the general
pattern of Ramses II’s Asiatic wars as at present known, and a summary must suffice. The first
campaign would be that of Year 4: the “middle” stele at Nahr el-Kelb, north of Beirut, gives this date
clearly. The second campaign – explicitly so-called – is that of Year 5 in Syria that ended in the
notorious battle of Kadesh. Then a campaign in Year 8 in Palestine, Syria and Phoenicia is
commemorated on the rear face of the pylon of the Ramasseum. Then comes the south stele of Ramses
II at Nahr el-Kelb, perhaps dated Year 10, indicating further activity in Phoenicia. At some time in
this general period belong the Syrian wars commemorated by the Karnak series of reliefs and related
scenes at Luxor, besides other traces. However, the Egyptians had also to deal with matters nearer
home, in Palestine. An undated scene at Karnak showing the submission of Ascalon is usually
ascribed to Ramses II. And in his Year 18 is dated a stele from Beth-Shan that records virtually no
concrete facts, but in itself may indicate activity in that region. This brings us to Year 21 and the
Hittite Treaty, after which dated records of warfare cease.
‘The foregoing picture may suggest that for his first ten years Ramses’s Asiatic activities were
concentrated on Syria and the Hittite problem. Perhaps this gave way to a stalemate ending in the
treaty of Year 21. In the meantime, in the Years 11–20, unrest had developed in Palestine (Ascalon
relief; Beth Shan stele, Job Stone)’ – inscribed stones of Ramses found in Syria/Palestine – ‘Perhaps
one may also place the Edomite and Moabite undertakings within this period.’
5
It would seem that all military confrontations in Asia came to an end for the Egyptians by Year 21
of Ramses II when the peace treaty was concluded with the Hittites. The wars with the Shasu must,
consequently, all have taken place before this date.
We therefore have the situation that, in the first year of Seti I, the Shasu were emerging from Sinai
and posing a threat to Canaan, Edom and Moab. Then, at the time of Ramses II, about two decades
later, they have left Sinai and are to be found in Edom and Moab. If we compare the sudden
appearance of the Shasu bedouin and their movements with the Israelite Exodus from Sinai we find
that they followed the very same route. Dr Kitchen, too, was struck by this fact: ‘For Old Testament
studies, the new information has some bearing on the date of the Hebrew conquest of central
Transjordan and their entry into W. Palestine, not to mention the date of the Exodus.’
6
And so to return to the epilogue of the Israel Stela …
The evidence available makes it clear that Merenptah had only peace in Asia during his reign.
There is no reference whatever to his having conducted any war in Palestine/Syria. It therefore seems
clear that the epilogue to the Israel Stela refers not to his own campaigns, but to the status quo he


--- PAGE 38 ---
inherited, the situation created by his grandfather, Seti I, and his father, Ramses II:
•  
Tehenu (Libya):
 Here Seti I’s wars are meant, as Merenptah’s own war with the invading Libyans
had been described in the Israel Stela and elsewhere.
•  
Hatti:
 The land of the Hittites. We saw how both Seti I and Ramses II fought the Hittites in northern
Syria until a peace treaty was ultimately agreed. There is no account of any war after that date.
•  
Canaan:
 The land of western Palestine, which also includes the cities of Ascalon and Gezer. It
was Seti I who regained this section in the Nineteenth Dynasty and Ramses II consolidated his
victory.
•  
Yanoam:
 To the south of the Sea of Galilee in north Palestine. It was captured by Seti I in his Year
1.
•  
Hurru:
 Whether it referred to Palestine/ Syria in general or the Horite land to the south of the Dead
Sea, both Seti I and Ramses II fought in these areas.
There is one other name in the epilogue – Israel. Yet there is no mention at all of the Shasu,
bedouin of Semitic origin, nomads with no fixed city or country, striking north from Sinai and
threatening Canaan, Edom and Moab. On the evidence the inescapable conclusions are that Merenptah
never fought Israel, but his father and grandfather did, and the terms Israelites and the Shasu are, in
this particular case, one and the same people. As Moses and the tribe of Israel united in Sinai with
some local Midianite elements, they were first identified as Shasu by Egyptian scribes. Later, when
the Israelite identity became clear – and now that they were no longer in Sinai, but had settled in
Palestine – the scribe of the Merenptah Stela was able to recognize them as such.
It is the preconceptions of the majority of scholars, Dr Kitchen among them, that have been the
basic barrier to acceptance of this historical truth. They have failed to take into consideration the
point made by Jean Yoyotte, one of the leading French Egyptologists of our time, that the ‘biblical
account of the Exodus, which was written much later by Hebrew scribes, contains literary
embellishments about miraculous events of the flight’.
7
 Thus they have sought evidence of great
catastrophes that befell Egypt and expected to find the names of Moses and Joshua in Egyptian texts.
More misleading, through misinterpretation of the Israel Stela and their belief that the Sojourn lasted
430 years, they have sought evidence of the Exodus into Sinai in the wrong eras, the reign of Ramses
II or of Merenptah.
As long ago as the early 1960s, however, Yoyotte, who had done a great deal of work in the Delta
and among the Ramesside remains, became one of the few to see through the ‘embellishments’ of the
biblical account and identify the historical core of the story – that the Shasu wars are the only
possible equivalent of the biblical story of the Exodus:
‘The persecution of the Jews was undoubtedly part of the Ramesside campaign against the Shasu
(bedouin) … The exact date of the Exodus is disputed. According to the Bible, the Jews toiled in a
town called Ramses, and a stele of the time of Merenptah, a son of Ramses II, speaks of the
“annihilation” of Israel. From this evidence it has been deduced that their persecutors were Ramses II
and Merenptah and that the Exodus took place under the latter in about 1200 
C.
 But the “Israel Stele”,
in fact, gives the impression that the Jews had already returned to Palestine by this time. Considering
biblical chronology and the results of excavations at Jericho, it.seems probable that their sufferings
took place at the time of Seti I …
‘The “Israel Stele” is a misleading name for a document consisting of twenty-eight lines, twenty-


--- PAGE 39 ---
five of which describe the triumph of the king over Libya. Mention is made of Palestine only in a
three-line epilogue in which the famous name Israel appears among others. As far as the Ramesside
government was concerned, the Exodus was merely a migration of bedouin labour, the Shasu among
others.’
8
As we said before, there are strong indications that the Exodus did not take place before the
Ramesside period of the Nineteenth Dynasty. However, as Seti I campaigned against Israel in north
Sinai and south Palestine immediately on succeeding to the throne, the Israelites must have left Egypt
proper during the short reign of his father, Ramses I.
This chronology would make sense in more ways than one in the light of the Book of Exodus. As
we shall see, before coming to the throne, Pa-Ramses (later Ramses I) had been appointed by
Horemheb as his vizier, Commander of the Troops, Overseer of Foreign Countries, Overseer of the
Fortress of Zarw, Master of the Horse. Ramses, himself said to have come from the Eastern Delta,
was therefore at that time the most powerful man in Egypt after Horemheb. If the Bible, which never
gives the name of the ruling Pharaoh, names the Eastern Delta city built by the harsh labour of the
Israelites as Ramses, the name must derive not from Pharaoh but from vizier Ramses, who personally
forced them to work. Then, while Moses was still hiding in Sinai, the Lord informed him that the King
of Egypt (Horemheb) had died. In this case, the king whom Moses met after his return must have been
a new king (Ramses I). Yet this new king could not have ruled for a long time as, after the different
punishments inflicted upon him for not allowing the Israelites to depart, that by their nature take one
full year as they are seasonal and follow the inundation of the Nile, they leave, he follows them and
dies.
The Bible does not state directly that the pursuing Pharaoh died in the waters although this is
implied:
And the waters returned, and covered the chariots, and the horsemen, and all the host of Pharaoh that came into the sea after
them; there remained not so much as one of them. (Exodus, 14:28)
The Koran, however, makes it clear that the pursuing Pharaoh, too, was drowned:
We took the Children
Of Israel across the sea:
Pharaoh and his hosts followed them
In insolence and spite.
At length, when overwhelmed
With the flood, he said:
‘I believe that there is no god
Except Him Whom the Children
Of Israel believe in: …’
(It was said to him) …
‘This day shall We save thee
9
In thy body, that thou
Mayest be a Sign to those
Who come after thee!
But verily, many among mankind
Are heedless of Our Signs!’(Sura X:90–92)
10
Ramses I is known to have ruled for less than two years. The biblical account of this part of the
Exodus story cannot therefore agree more precisely than it does with what we know of the history of
Ancient Egypt at this time. If Ramses I was the Pharaoh of the Exodus, Horemheb was the Pharaoh of


--- PAGE 40 ---
the Oppression. But how long had the Israelites been in Egypt when these events took place?


--- PAGE 41 ---
5
SOJOURN – AND THE MOTHER OF MOSES
C
ONTRADICTORY
 accounts in the Old Testament make it difficult to arrive at the precise date when the
Patriarch Joseph and the Israelites arrived in Egypt. As we saw earlier, we are offered a choice of
three periods for the Sojourn – 430 years, 400 years and four generations. In 
Stranger in the Valley
of the Kings
 I argued that the figure of 430 years was wrongly arrived at by the biblical editor in the
following way: firstly, he added up the four generations named in the Old Testament account of the
Descent into Egypt as if each new generation were born on the very day that his father died, having
lived for more than a century:
Then he deducted the years (fifty-seven) that Levi lived before the Descent – according to the Talmud
he lived eighty years after the Descent and died at the age of 137 – plus the forty years Moses is said
to have lived after the Exodus. This left him with his total of 430 years. This method of computation
is obviously unsound, and I have since been pleased to find that many biblical scholars agree with my
view that the figure of 430 years for the Sojourn is not to be taken literally – a variety of explanations
are put forward – while it is, surprisingly, the majority of Egyptologists who appear to look upon it as
a sacred figure not to be challenged.
One eminent biblical scholar who has commented on the length of the sojourn is the late Umberto
Cassuto, formerly Professor of Biblical Studies at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, who wrote:
‘… the numbers given in the Torah are mostly round or symbolic figures, and their purpose is to teach
us something by their harmonious character … these numbers are based on the sexagesimal system,
which occupied in the ancient East a place similar to that of the decimal system in our days.
‘The chronological unit in this system was a period of sixty years, which the Babylonians called a
šūš
.
 One 
šūš
 consisted of sixty years and two 
šūš
 of a hundred and twenty years – a phrase that is
used by Jews to this day. In order to convey that a given thing continued for a very long time, or
comprised a large number of units, a round figure signifying a big amount according to the
sexagesimal system was employed, for example, 600, 6000, 600,000 or 300, 3000 or 300,000 or 120,
360, 1200, 3600 and so forth. I further demonstrated there that, if it was desired to indicate a still
larger amount, these figures were supplemented by seven or a multiple of seven. The number 127, for
instance (Genesis, 23:1), was based on this system.’
1
 Elsewhere Professor Cassuto makes the point
that the figure forty, found frequently in the Bible, is similarly used as a kind of shorthand for a period
of time and is not to be taken literally.
He then goes on to try to harmonize the two Israelite traditions – that the Sojourn lasted 430 years
(six times sixty, plus seventy) and four generations. He cites as his four generations Levi, Kohath,


--- PAGE 42 ---
Amram and Aaron, who is said to have been the brother of Moses, and adds together the years they
are given in the Old Testament. This approach is permissible, he argues, because
a) Each generation endured the burden of exile throughout the times of its exile, and its distress was not diminished by the fact
that it was shared by another generation during a certain portion of that period; hence in computing the total length of exile
suffered, one is justified to some extent in reckoning the ordeal of each generation in its entirety,
b) A similar and parallel system was used in the chronological calculations of the Mesopotamians. In the Sumerian King List,
dynasties that were partly coeval, one reigning in one city and the other elsewhere, are recorded consecutively, and are
reckoned as if they ruled successively. Consequently, if we add up the years that these dynasties reigned, we shall arrive at a
total that is actually the sum of the periods of their kingship, although it will exceed the time that elapsed from the
commencement of the first dynasty to the end of the last.
Professor Cassuto then proceeds to make the following calculation:
Here he points out that ‘upon deducting from [this total] (in order to allow for the time that Levi and
Kohath dwelt in the land of Canaan before they emigrated to Egypt) one unit of time, to wit, sixty
years, we obtain exactly a period of 430 years, which is the number recorded in Exodus, 12:40.’ The
430 years are thus the total years of the four generations and are not to be taken as representing the
period of time that elapsed between the Israelites’ arrival in Egypt and their departure.
Only two Hebrew generations, Amram and Moses, were actually born in Egypt – Kohath arrived
with his father, Levi (Genesis, 46:11) – and, in working backwards from the reign of Ramses I, the
Pharaoh of the Exodus, to try to establish the time of the Descent, calculation depends upon the age
young Hebrew boys married at the time and had their first child. It seems reasonable to suggest that
the period in which the Descent took place should be sought within the range of some fifty to eighty
years earlier than the Exodus.
It may be helpful at this point to show how this chronology accords with that arrived at, through a
different approach, in 
Stranger in the Valley of the Kings,
 which sought to establish that Joseph the
Patriarch was the same person as Yuya – vizier, Master of the Horse and Deputy of the King in the
Chariotry to both Tuthmosis IV and Amenhotep III – whose mummy, despite the fact that he did not
appear to be of royal blood, was found in the Valley of the Kings in the early years of this century.
There I argued that Joseph/Yuya arrived in Egypt as a slave during the reign of Amenhotep II and,
after his spell of service in the household of Potiphar, captain of Pharaoh’s guard, followed by his
imprisonment on a false charge of adultery, was eventually released and appointed vizier by
Tuthmosis IV, who was a dreamer like Joseph himself. Once in office he brought the tribe of Israel
down from Canaan to join him in Egypt where they settled at Goshen in the Eastern Delta.
According to the Book of Genesis, the total number of Israelites who settled in Egypt was seventy.
Yet we are provided with only sixty-nine names – sixty-six who made the Descent, plus Joseph and
his two sons, Manasseh (Egyptian, Anen) and Ephraim (Egyptian, Aye). It is a reasonable deduction
that the seventieth member of the tribe of Israel was also already in Egypt. I believe that she was a
daughter of Joseph, Tiye. Why would her name be omitted? It may be because it is common in the


--- PAGE 43 ---
Bible not to mention the names of women unless they are particularly important to the story that is
being told. Alternatively, in the lingering bitterness surrounding the Exodus, her name may have been
suppressed centuries later by the biblical editor in order to conceal this historical link between the
royal house of Egypt and the tribe of Israel which would show that Moses, their greatest leader, was
of mixed Egyptian-Israelite origins.
The positions held by Joseph and his wife, who was the king’s ‘ornament’ (
khrt nsw
), a post which
might be said to combine the duties of a modern butler and lady-in-waiting, meant that both had to
live in the royal residence. It was thus that the young prince, Amenhotep, grew up with, and fell in
love with, Tiye. Then, after his father’s early death when the young prince was about twelve, he
married his sister, Sitamun, who was most probably an infant, in order to inherit the throne, but soon
afterwards also married Tiye and made her, rather than Sitamun, his Great Royal Wife (queen). The
evidence that Tiye was about eight at the time of the wedding indicates that Tuthmosis IV must have
appointed Joseph to his various positions, including vizier, early in his short eight-year reign.
Tiye, we know, was the mother of Akhenaten – but she must also have been the mother of Moses if
he and Akhenaten were the same person.
While the second chapter of the Book of Exodus describes the daughter of Pharaoh as being the royal
mother of Moses, the Koran claims that the mother was the queen, Pharaoh’s wife. It is strange that, as
both holy books must have had the same origin, whether God’s inspiration or a literary source, they
should not agree in this important matter, particularly when Egyptian custom would not have allowed
an unmarried princess to adopt a child. How then has the variation arisen?
There are two sources for the misunderstanding. In the first place, the scribe who wrote down the
Book of Exodus was faced with two traditions – that the mother of Moses was an Israelite and that
she was 
b-t Phar’a,
 literally ‘the house of Pharaoh’. Unaware, as she had already been omitted from
the Joseph story in the Book of Genesis, that Joseph had a daughter named Tiye, who became
Pharaoh’s wife, he resolved this initial difficulty by creating two mothers, one Hebrew, who gave
birth to Moses, and one royal, who adopted him and brought him up as her son. That he chose to
identify this adoptive mother as a princess rather than a queen has a philological explanation.
The word for ‘daughter’ and the word for ‘house’ were written identically 
b-t
 in early Hebrew and
open to misconstruction by anyone not familiar with Egyptian usage. To an Egyptian the word ‘house’
was also used – and, indeed, still is – to signify a wife: to a Hebrew it meant either ‘house’ in the
sense of a building or ‘household’. Later, both Hebrew and the language of Ancient Egypt, which had
no written vowels, began to use some consonants like 
y
 to indicate long vowels. Thus, for example,
we find a slightly different spelling of 
b-t Phar’a
 in the Book of Genesis account of events when
Jacob, the father of Joseph, died. Joseph, who wanted permission to take him back to Canaan for
burial, did not speak to the king directly but to 
b-y-t Phar’a,
 the Hebrew word signifying ‘the house
of Pharaoh’: ‘And when the days of his mourning were past, Joseph spake unto the house of Pharaoh,
saying, If now I have found grace in your eyes, speak, I pray you, in the ears of Pharaoh …’ (Genesis,
50:4). ‘Pharaoh’ itself means literally ‘the great house’. Thus 
b-y-t Phar’a
 signifies the ‘house of the
great house’, which in the Egyptian sense would mean the queen, whom in this case I regard as
Joseph’s own daughter, Tiye, whose intercession he sought in the matter of his father’s burial.
There is an example of similar usage earlier in the Book of Genesis when the brothers who had
earlier sold Joseph into slavery made their second trip to Egypt at a time of famine. On this occasion
Joseph revealed his true identity and was so moved that he ‘wept aloud: and the Egyptians and the
house of Pharaoh heard’ (Genesis, 45:2). This has been construed as meaning that Joseph’s weeping


--- PAGE 44 ---
was so loud that it was audible in the royal palace, but I interpret it as meaning that the queen, his
daughter, heard the news of his brothers’ arrival.
In this second example the word used is again 
b-y-t Phar’a.
 However, in the Book of Exodus,
where we have the story of Pharaoh’s daughter going down to bathe, finding the Hebrew child in the
rushes and later adopting him, the 
y
 is absent and we have simply 
b-t Phar’a.
 My suspicion was that
during the ninth century 
BC,
 the early stages of written Hebrew when the Old Testament was given
permanent form, all three words had been written in this way, referring in each instance to the ‘house
of Pharaoh’, the reigning queen, and the 
y
 in the two Genesis references had been added later, as
written Hebrew developed, because the scribe did not understand the special Egyptian usage of the
word ‘house’. This, while not easy to establish, proved to be the case.
The Hebrew Masoretic text we have now goes back only to around the tenth century 
AD
 and could
not throw any light on the matter. Nor could sections of the Old Testament found in the caves of
Qumran, near the Dead Sea, some of which belong to the second century 
BC.
 Confirmation was
eventually provided by the Moabite Stone. This black basalt inscribed stone was left by Mesha, King
of Moab, at Dhiban (biblical Dibon, to the east of the Dead Sea) to commemorate his revolt against
Israel and his subsequent rebuilding of many important towns (II Kings, 3:4–5). The stone was found
by the Revd F. Klein, a German missionary working with the Church Missionary Society, on 19
August 1868 and is now in the Louvre in Paris. The inscription refers to the triumph of ‘Mesha, ben
Chemosh, King of Moab’, whose father reigned over Moab for thirty years. He tells how he (Mesha)
threw off the yoke of Israel and honoured his god, Chemosh.
2
According to the American archaeologist James B. Pritchard, a professor at the University of
Pennsylvania: ‘The date of the Mesha Stone is fixed roughly by the reference to Mesha, King of
Moab, in II Kings, 3:4, after 849 
BC.
 However, since the contents of the stela point to a date toward
the end of the king’s reign, it seems probable that it should be placed between 840 and 820, perhaps
about 830 
BC
 in round numbers.’
3
 The text reads: ‘I [am] Mesha, son of Chemosh … King of Moab …
I said to all the people: “Let each of you make a cistern for himself in his house.”’
The inscription, written in the Semitic language used for writing at the time by the Jews of Israel,
confirms that the word for ‘house’ was then written simply 
b-t,
 without the insertion of ‘y’ and was
the same as the word for daughter. This is also true of the way it was written in the Phoenician
language.
4
When ‘house’ and ‘daughter’ were written identically there was no cause to differentiate between
them. The situation changed when development of the Hebrew language made it possible to alter the
spelling slightly to give two different words. The scribes then found themselves in a dilemma, based
on their ignorance of the fact the ‘house’ had the Egyptian meaning ‘wife’. It now becomes clear what
happened. If the word simply meant ‘house’ or ‘household’, it made sense that Joseph approached the
house of Pharaoh on the subject of his father’s funeral and that his weeping could be heard in the
king’s house, but it made no sense at all to suggest that the whole of the king’s household had come
‘down to wash herself at the river’ (Exodus, 2:5) or had become the mother to the child. The scribe
therefore decided in the Exodus reference to retain the alternative meaning of ‘daughter’ whereas it,
too, should have been changed to ‘house’, signifying the wife of Pharaoh, his queen.
There is a similar case of semantic confusion, cited by Professor Cassuto, with the source again the
Book of Exodus: ‘And Moses took his wife and sons, and set them upon an ass, and he returned to the
land of Egypt …’ (Exodus, 4:20). Professor Cassuto remarks: ‘The plural – sons – is somewhat
difficult, for till now only one son (Gershom) had been mentioned (Exodus, 2:22), and below, in
Exodus, 4:25, we find “her son”, in the singular, as though Moses and Zipporah had just one son.


--- PAGE 45 ---
Possibly the ancient spelling here was 
b n h,
 which could be read as either singular or plural, and the
singular was actually intended; when, however, the scribes introduced the present spelling they wrote
ba na w
 [his sons] (the Septuagint [the Greek version of the Old Testament], too, has the plural)
because they thought the two sons spoken of (later) in Exodus, 18:3–4 were already born.’
5
The royal mother of Moses was therefore the Queen of Egypt. But which queen? As we saw earlier
(
Chapter Two
), Manetho, the third century 
BC
 historian, identified the reign of Amenhotep III and
Queen Tiye – while son of Habu was still alive, some time before the king’s Year 34 – as the right
time for the religious rebellion that led to the persecution of Akhenaten’s followers, and Redford has
made the point that it is not built simply on popular tales and traditions of Manetho’s time, but on old
traditions, passed on orally at first, then set down in writing, that he found in his temple library.
If we compare in greater detail the Koran account (Sura XX:38–40 and Sura XXVIII:7–15) with the
biblical account (Exodus, 2:1–12) of Moses’ birth and eventual flight after the slaying incident, we
find the stories are fundamentally the same, yet also contain some interesting differences:


--- PAGE 46 ---
The significant differences in these accounts are:
• The Koran story does not give us the names of Moses’ parents;
• While the biblical story tells us that the rush basket was left by the river, the Koran refers to ‘the
water’, which could be a lake joined to the river;
• While Pharaoh’s daughter (or wife, as we saw before) is said by the Bible to have been the child’s
rescuer, it was ‘Pharaoh’s people’ according to the Koran;
• The biblical version says that Moses’ sister watches events while the child is in its basket, hidden
in the reeds outside Pharaoh’s palace, but this is not the case in the Koran; there it is only after the
child was in the possession of ‘Pharaoh’s people’ that his sister is asked by the mother, who must
have been in the vicinity at the time, to follow after him, which she does secretly, indicating that this
incident must have taken place in the palace itself;
• Pharaoh’s wife, who, according to the Koran, had nothing to do with the child until he had fallen
into the hands of ‘Pharaoh’s people’, then intervened to prevent them – probably the guards – from
killing him;
• Once the child was in the custody of ‘Pharaoh’s people’, we are told in the Koran that the child’s
mother became worried about what might happen to him. Why would she be worried unless she was
in a position to know what was going on inside the palace?
• The mother, according to the Koran, was about to reveal her hidden fears for the safety of the child.
This is the strongest indication so far that the child’s mother and Pharaoh’s wife were one and the
same person. After her intervention to prevent him from being killed, he was taken away from her.
She then became so worried that she was about to reveal that she was the mother of the baby, but
instead she sent the sister to find out what was happening inside the palace;
• Rather than killing the child, Moses’ sister, according to the Koran, succeeded in persuading


--- PAGE 47 ---
‘Pharaoh’s people’ to place him in the care of a family that would look after him. Here there is
another crucial point. Where the Bible indicates that the child was later returned to Pharaoh’s
daughter to be brought up by her, the Koran makes it clear that this event was the actual return of
Moses to his real mother;
• The Koran story states that Moses went out of the palace and ‘entered the city’, thus implying that
the palace was not far from the city, and use of the word ‘unnoticed’ here can only mean that he was
neither dressed in princely attire at the time, nor was he attended by guards;
• While the biblical account of the slaying incident describes the two men who were fighting as an
Egyptian and a Hebrew, the Koran version of the story makes them a follower of Moses’ religion and
an enemy, implying that at this stage, even before his flight to Sinai, Moses had a different religion
that had followers as well as enemies.


--- PAGE 48 ---
6
THE RIGHTFUL SON AND HEIR
I
F
 we assume for the moment what is as yet far from proved – that Moses and Akhenaten were the
same person – it is possible to assemble a brief outline of the historical facts behind the varied, and
at times extravagant, accounts of the life of the greatest Jewish hero that we find in the Old Testament
and other holy books, and to offer an explanation of why the world should have remembered him by
the name of Moses.
Moses, the second son of Amenhotep III and Queen Tiye, was born, I believe, at the frontier
fortified city of Zarw, probably in 1394 
BC
 (see also 
Chapter Eleven
). His elder brother, Tuthmosis,
had already disappeared mysteriously, and, in view of the threats that were about to be made to the
life of Moses, it seems more than likely that the disappearance of Tuthmosis was not the result of
natural causes. The reason for the king’s hostility to the young princes was the fact that Tiye, their
mother, was not the legitimate heiress. She could therefore not be accepted as the consort of the State
god Amun.
Furthermore, as she herself was of mixed Egyptian-Israelite blood, her children would not, by
Egyptian custom, be regarded as heirs to the throne. If her son acceded to the throne, this would be
regarded as forming a new dynasty of non-Egyptian, non-Amunite, part-Israelite kings over Egypt.
This is exactly the light in which the Amunite priests and nobles of Egypt, the watchdogs of old
traditions, regarded Akhenaten. It was not he who first rejected the position of son of Amun: it was
they, the Amunists, who refused to accept him as the legitimate heir to the throne.
Consequently, the king, motivated by the possible threat to the dynasty and confrontation with the
priesthood, instructed the midwives to kill Tiye’s child in secrecy if it proved to be a boy. The
Talmud story confirms that it was the survival of Moses that Pharaoh wanted to prevent, because,
once he knew that Moses had been born and survived, his attempt to kill all the male Israelite
children at birth was abandoned: ‘After Moses was placed in the Nile, they [Pharaoh’s astrologers]
told Pharaoh that the redeemer had already been cast into the water, whereupon Pharaoh rescinded
his decree that the male children should be put to death. Not only were all the future children saved,
but even the … children [who had already been] cast into the Nile with Moses.’
1
Zarw was largely surrounded by lakes and a branch of the Nile. On learning – perhaps from the
midwives – that her son’s life was in danger, Tiye sent Moses by water to the safe-keeping of her
Israelite relations at nearby Goshen. Yet the biblical story makes it clear that the king was still afraid
of Moses. Why should the mighty Pharaoh fear Moses if he was simply a child of the despised Asiatic
shepherds? In those circumstances, how could he have posed a threat to the Dynasty?
Moses spent most of his youth in the Eastern Delta where he absorbed the traditional Israelite
beliefs in a God without an image. It was not until he was a grown boy that he was finally allowed to
take up residence at Thebes, the capital city in Upper Egypt and the principal centre of worship of the
State god, Amun. By this time the health of his father had begun to deteriorate and Tiye’s power had
increased correspondingly. In order to ensure her son’s ultimate inheritance of the throne, she
therefore arranged for him to marry his half-sister Nefertiti – the daughter of Amenhotep III by 
his
sister, Sitamun, the legitimate heiress – and to be appointed his father’s coregent, with special


--- PAGE 49 ---
emphasis on Nefertiti’s role in order to placate the priests and nobles.
Moses, whose religious ideas were already well developed, offended the Amunite priesthood from
the start of the coregency by building temples to his monotheistic God, the Aten, at Karnak and Luxor.
In a climate becoming increasingly hostile, Tiye eventually persuaded him to leave Thebes and found
a new capital for himself at Tell el-Amarna, some 200 miles to the north, roughly halfway between
Thebes and the Eastern Delta. Moses named his new city Akhetaten – the city of the horizon of the
Aten – in honour of his new God.
It was during this period that the old king became concerned about the growing power of the
Israelites and sought advice about how to deal with them. But this cannot be simply because they had
grown in number and might side with his enemies: the growth in their numbers would simply have
provided him with more slaves to work for him and made him stronger in the face of foreign
aggressors. What we are dealing with is a religious revolution. The vast increase in the numbers of
the Israelites by this time was not simply a matter of their birth rate: the declaration by Moses that the
Aten, his God, was the only true God, had attracted many Egyptian adherents who, as a result of their
conversion to the new religion, became regarded as Israelites. Other evidence suggests that the
Israelites had also achieved political importance and high position in the land, with, according to
Manetho, priests and learned people in their ranks. At the same time, those of Moses’ followers who
did not follow him to Amarna were, according to Manetho, set to harsh work in the stone quarries.
At Amarna the monotheistic ideas of Moses underwent further development and, when he became
sole ruler on the death of his father, Amenhotep III, after the end of his Year 38 – Year 12 of Moses –
he shut down the temples of the ancient gods of Egypt, cut off all financial support for them and sent
the priests home. These actions caused so much bitter resentment that, in his Year 15, Moses was
forced to install his brother, Semenkhkare, as his coregent at Thebes. This action served only to delay
the eventual showdown. In his Year 17 Moses was warned by his uncle, Aye, the second son of the
Patriarch Joseph (Yuya), of a plot against his life, and he abdicated and fled to Sinai, taking with him
his pharaonic symbol of authority, the staff topped by a bronze serpent. Semenkhkare did not long
survive the departure of Moses – perhaps only a few days – and was replaced on the throne by
Moses’ son, the boy king Tutankhamun, who restored the old gods, but attempted a compromise by
allowing the Aten to be worshipped alongside them. Tutankhamun ruled for at least nine, and perhaps
ten, years and was succeeded by Aye, his great-uncle, who ruled for four years before the army
leader, Horemheb, brought the era of Amarna rule to an end.
The bitterness which divided the country at the time is indicated by the actions of Horemheb and
the Ramesside kings who followed him. The names of the Amarna kings were excised from king lists
and monuments in a studied campaign to try to remove all trace of them from Egypt’s memory, and it
was forbidden even to mention in conversation the name of Akhenaten. In addition, the Israelites were
put to the harsh work of building the treasure cities of Pithom and Raamses.
On the death of Horemheb, there was no legitimate Eighteenth Dynasty heir. Ramses, Horemheb’s
elderly vizier, took power as Ramses I, the first ruler of the Nineteenth Dynasty. On hearing of
Horemheb’s death, Moses returned from Sinai to challenge Ramses’ right to the throne. With him he
brought his sceptre of authority, the bronze serpent. The wise men of Egypt were assembled to decide
between the rival claimants to the throne, but, while they chose Moses as the rightful heir, Ramses
controlled the army, which was to prove the decisive factor in the power struggle. For a short time,
however, Moses did succeed in establishing his followers as a community in Zarw, which for the
Israelites may be likened to the Paris Commune briefly established in the French capital in 1871.
Then, having failed in his attempt to restore his former position as ruler, Moses eventually persuaded


--- PAGE 50 ---
Ramses I to allow him and the Israelites to leave the country.
How long was the Oppression? If the chronology in the Book of Exodus was correct, it would have
begun 
before
 Moses was born, lasted during the eighteen or twenty years he was growing up, and
continued during the years of his exile before his eventual return to lead the Exodus – a period of
several decades, which seems an unduly long time to build the two store cities. The Oppression story
in the Book of Exodus, in fact, links three separate events that happened at different periods – the first
the plan to murder the Israelite male children; the second related to the religious upheaval caused by
Akhenaten that was already in full flow at the time he was forced to build his new capital at Amarna
to avoid further confrontation with the Theban priests; the third the rigorous Oppression of the
Israelites by Horemheb after the final overthrow of Amarna rule.
It seems therefore that it was the scribes, working from what Cassuto has called ‘an epic poem
describing the enslavement of the Israelites in Egypt and their liberation’ – whether it was oral or
written, or partly oral and partly written, in Egyptian – who rearranged the chronology, especially in
the opening chapter of the Book of Exodus, which was regarded as an introduction to that book as
well as a link with the preceding Book of Genesis.
It is worth drawing attention at this stage to a few points in which this suggested outline of the
historical events that lie behind the story in the Book of Exodus agree with what we know of the life
of Akhenaten. As in the case of Moses, the childhood of Akhenaten is largely uncharted territory. Yet
as soon as he appears on the scene at Thebes he is already bubbling with different ideas about art and
rebellious ones about religion, suggesting that he must have been brought up in a manner that differed
from the traditional upbringing of a future king. He had evidently not had the normal sport and warfare
training common to his ancestors, nor does he seem to have known the sons of the Egyptian nobility,
who were customarily educated at Memphis with the royal princes. It is more likely, as his new
religion and rituals had many similarities with the solar worship which had developed in the lower
end of the Eastern Delta, that it was there that he lived and was educated. The threats to the life of
Moses in his early years also find an echo in Akhenaten’s later life. The strange epithet ‘Great in his
Duration’ (‘He who Lived Long’) that he applied to himself constantly has been interpreted by
Gardiner as an indication that, as a child, he was not expected to live long. In addition, it is curious
on two grounds that he allowed himself to be represented as an Osiris (god of the dead) in a large
number of colossal statues placed in the massive Aten temple he built at Karnak early in his reign.
Firstly, it was normally a dead king who was shown in this Osiride form, and, secondly, Akhenaten
did not believe in Osiris or his underworld. The only possible explanation is that he saw himself as
having escaped from death, supporting the idea that during his childhood his life, too, had been
threatened.
Yet if, in outlining the story of Moses we are also outlining the story of Akhenaten, why is it that
the world has remembered him as Moses rather than by the name under which he ruled Egypt, as
coregent and alone, for seventeen turbulent years?
The Name Moses
It seems that neither the Bible nor the Koran gives us the proper name of the leader of the Jewish
Exodus, but what on the evidence appears rather to be a codename.
In his last book, 
Moses and Monotheism,
 Sigmund Freud argued that Moses was an Egyptian, a
follower of Akhenaten, who later led the Jews out of Egypt. Freud was first persuaded to take this


--- PAGE 51 ---
view by the fact that Moses was itself an Egyptian name: ‘What first attracts our interest in the person
of Moses is his name, which is written 
Moshe
 in Hebrew. One may well ask: “Where does it come
from? What does it mean?”’
The answer to Freud’s question is found in Exodus, 2:10 when we are told how the mother-nurse
returns the child to his royal mother who adopted him and called him Moses because, she said, ‘I
drew him out of the water.’ For a Hebrew name, 
Moshe
 is a rare, even unique, formation. In fact, the
Hebrew word 
m sh a
 does not mean what the biblical editor would like us to believe. As a verb it
can mean either ‘to draw’ or ‘one who draws out’. In order to agree with the explanation given by the
biblical editor, the name should have been 
Moshui,
 ‘one who has been drawn out’.
There are other questions to be raised about this explanation of why the name was chosen. How,
for instance, can we expect the Egyptian royal mother to have sufficient knowledge of the Hebrew
language to be able to choose a special Hebrew name for the child? Then again, as we can see from
the case of the Patriarch Joseph, when Pharaoh appointed him as his vizier he bestowed on him an
Egyptian name to go with his new Egyptian identity. How could we expect that the royal mother of
Moses could still give her royal Egyptian son a Hebrew name at a time when the Israelites, in the
lingering aftermath of the invasion by the Hyksos shepherds, were still regarded as ‘an abomination’
by the majority of Egyptians?
In Ancient Egyptian, the word meaning a child or son consists of two consonants, 
m
 and 
s.
 If we
take away the two vowels 
o
 and 
e
 from Moshe we are left with only two consonants, 
m
 and 
sh.
 As the
Hebrew letter 
sh
 is the equivalent of the Egyptian 
s,
 it is easy to see that the Hebrew word came from
the Egyptian word. Short vowels, although always pronounced, were never written either in Hebrew
or Egyptian, and using long consonants for long vowels, as we saw earlier in examining the identity
of the royal mother of Moses, was a later development in both languages. A final point is that the 
s
 at
the end of the name Moses is drawn from the Greek translation of the biblical name.
As a large number of scholars have noted, 
mos
 was part of many compound Egyptian names such
as Ptah-mos and Tuth-mos, yet we also find some examples of the word 
mos
 used on its own as a
personal pronoun belonging to the New Kingdom, which started with the Eighteenth Dynasty.
2
After Akhenaten fell from power, the Egyptian authorities forbade any mention of his name.
Consequently, it seems to me that an alternative had to be found in order that his followers could refer
to him. Apart from that, Akhenaten’s name was part of his royal power while he was king, but once he
was no longer on the throne use of his royal names was forbidden to him, and he was referred to
officially in latter days as ‘The Fallen One of Akhetaten (Amarna)’ and ‘The Rebel of Akhetaten’.
Faced with the accusation that Akhenaten was not the real heir to the throne, I believe the Israelites
called him 
mos,
 the son, to indicate that he was the legitimate son of Amenhotep III and the rightful
heir to his father’s throne. We shall see how 
mos
 was used in a legal sense in a subsequent chapter
where a protracted land dispute has added to the confusion and debate about the length of the reign of
Horemheb, the Pharaoh of the Oppression.
Later, the biblical editor, who may not have had any knowledge of the original name of the greatest
Jewish leader, attempted to put forward a Hebrew explanation of the Egyptian word Moses in order
to sever any possible link between Moses and Egypt.


--- PAGE 52 ---
7
THE COREGENCY DEBATE (I)
I
F
 Moses was born in 1394 
BC,
 and if he was Akhenaten, according to the king-list of Gardiner (see p.
11) he would have been in his mid-forties when he fell from power in 1350 
BC,
 not an unreasonable
age. However, he would have been in his mid-eighties when he led the Exodus during the brief reign
of Ramses I at the start of the last decade of the century. This is clearly unlikely – but the whole
chronology changes into a more realistic one if it can be shown that the seventeen years Akhenaten
spent on the throne included twelve years as coregent with his father, and that Horemheb ruled for
less than half the twenty-seven or twenty-eight years assigned to him conventionally.
There is little dispute about the length of the reigns of the three Amarna kings who suceeded
Akhenaten. To take them in reverse order, the king before Horemheb, who brought the Amarna era to
an end, was Aye. The highest known regnal year for Aye, from the stele in the Louvre and the Berlin
Museum, is Year 4. Tutankhamun preceded Aye. In the tomb of Tutankhamun wine dockets dating
from Year 10 of his reign have been found, although it seems that he could have died early in this
year, signifying that he reigned for only nine complete years. Before Tutankhamun there was
Semenkhkare, who is known to have had a coregency period with 
his
 predecessor, Akhenaten.
At Amarna, Semenkhkare’s name appears on many small objects enclosed within a cartouche,
confirming his kingship, as well as on the wall of the tomb of Meryre II, High Priest of the Aten,
Superintendent of the King’s Harem, Royal Scribe and Steward, while in the North Palace
Akhenaten’s name is found in many examples, accompanied by the names of Semenkhkare and his
queen, who was Akhenaten’s eldest daughter Merytaten, the heiress. His praenomen (coronation
name) is Ankh-kheprw-re, meaning ‘Kheprw-re lives’, Kheprw-re being the praenomen of
Akhenaten. Some reliefs found at Amarna showed Akhenaten and Semenkhkare together as kings,
indicating that they ruled together. But did Semenkhkare rule alone for any period of time? From a
graffito in the tomb of Pere, a Theban nobleman, at Western Thebes, the last date – Year 3 – was
found and indicated that, at this point, Semenkhkare was sole ruler. The text does not mention
Akhenaten at all and here Semenkhkare seems to have begun to number his own years. We also have a
hieratic docket inscribed in Year 17 of Akhenaten, the last year of his reign, and later changed to
Year 1 of Tutankhaten (Tutankhamun). The only possible conclusion is that Semenkhkare became
coregent in Year 15 of Akhenaten and, after Akhenaten’s fall from power, Semenkhkare, who was
probably at Thebes at the time, became sole ruler for a few months, or maybe only days, before he
met his death and Tutankhaten (Tutankhamun) followed him on the throne.
The question of whether Akhenaten (Amenhotep IV) shared a coregency with his father, Amenhotep
III – important in trying to establish a precise chronology – is a vexed one. Many objects bearing the
name of Amenhotep III were found at Tell el-Amarna (Akhetaten), the new capital city built by
Akhenaten. This has led a large number of Egyptologists to believe that Amenhotep III was alive at
the time the new city was built and may even have visited it in person. Others, who did not agree with
this argument, have rejected entirely the notion of a coregency.
Both points of view have their distinguished supporters. Scholars who favour the coregency theory
include Petrie, Pendlebury, Fairman, Engelbach, Seele, Steindorff, Aldred and Giles: those who


--- PAGE 53 ---
dismiss it include Helck, Gardiner, Hayes, Campbell and Redford. The evidence that has been
adduced in the argument on both sides includes wine-jar dockets, reliefs, cult objects, cartouches,
temples, pylons, stelae, sarcophagi, statues, paintings, letters, praenomen, nomen (birth names) and
the length of kings’ reigns. Scholars who take the view that there was actually a coregency disagree
among themselves about how long it lasted, with the duration put at anything from two to twelve
years. In my view, the evidence pointing to a coregency of twelve years is overwhelming. However,
so many counterarguments have been put forward that it is, unfortunately, necessary to examine them
in some detail to demonstrate their flaws. In order not to weary the reader, I propose to deal here only
with some of the main points: a more detailed analysis can be found in Appendix B.
The Wine-jar Dockets of Amarna
If the notion that Horemheb had a long reign, which will be examined in 
Chapter Nine
, is dismissed,
the only king of the immediate period who ruled for more than twenty-eight years is Amenhotep III.
The implication is that the wine-jars found at Amarna, dated Year 28 and Year 30 (Years 1 and 3 of
Akhenaten), originated in Amenhotep III’s Malkata palace at Western Thebes and were brought to
Amarna by Akhenaten around the time that he began construction of his new capital and Amarna had
no vineyards of its own. As Amenhotep III reigned for a total of thirty-eight years and died at the
beginning of Year 39, this would argue a long coregency.
Amenhotep III’s Soleb Temple in Nubia
The temple, begun and almost completed in the last decade of Amenhotep III’s reign, possesses a few
scenes on the pylon that were executed by Akhenaten in the year following his father’s death.
Professor Donald Redford of Toronto University, the most recent scholar to argue against the
coregency theory, has dismissed all the scenes where Akhenaten or his name appears with his living
father as of late date, after the death of Amenhotep III, when Akhenaten completed the work on the
temple.
1
 He cites Joseph M. Janssen, the ‘scholar who has examined the [pylon] scenes most recently’
and whose ‘readings differ markedly from those of other scholars’ before him. Two of his eight
readings are of particular significance:
The cornice, according to Redford, is ‘the only portion of the pylon that can be attributed beyond
doubt to Akhenaten’. He agrees that Akhenaten’s work on the pylon did not take place before
Amenhotep III’s death and was carried out within the following twelve months. He does not explain,
however, the fact that, if there was no coregency, how is it that Scene 8 – the only original scene,
according to Redford – gives the new king’s name as Akhenaten, a name we know from a variety of


--- PAGE 54 ---
sources that he did not adopt until Year 5–6 of his reign? It must therefore follow that the first year
after Amenhotep III’s death occurred 
after
 Year 5 of his son.
It is also surprising that Redford did not choose to comment on Scene 2. Here we have an original
cartouche of Amenhotep (the original birth name of Akhenaten) in a scene that Redford agrees must
have been completed by Amenhotep III before his death. Later the new king destroyed this birth name
and imposed on it his new name, Akhenaten. The only possible explanation for this is that, while
Amenhotep III was alive and busy decorating the temple, his son’s name was still Amenhotep. By the
time the old king died, the young king’s name had already been changed, as we saw from Scene 8, and
while completing the unfinished scenes he also replaced his Amenhotep name with that of Akhenaten.
As Redford confirmed that the original Scene 2 was the work of Amenhotep III, this is again strong
evidence for a coregency.
A Rock Relief At Aswan
The relief shows two chief sculptors, Men and Bek, father and son, each adoring an image of the king
for whom he worked. Men bears the title ‘Chief Sculptor’ and ‘Overseer of Works in the Red
Mountain’ to Amenhotep III: Bek has identical titles appertaining to the reign of Akhenaten. The relief
was made during Akhenaten’s reign and use of the late form of the Aten’s name indicates that it cannot
be dated before at least the second half of Year 8. At this time the name of the Aten received a new
form to rid it of any therio-anthropomorphic or pantheistic ideas that may have clung to it. There is no
indication that either Amenhotep III or Men was dead, nor that Bek, the younger official, was giving
an account of his relations that justified mentioning his father’s job. The fact that each of them is
shown as holding an official position under a different king, with no indication whatever of any lapse
of time, is a strong indication that the kings were contemporary.
The Panehesy Stela
A stela found in the house of Panehesy, the Chief Servitor of the Aten, at Amarna shows Amenhotep
III with Queen Tiye, seated before a pile of offerings. As the Aten is shining over them in his later
form, it cannot date from earlier than the second half of Year 8 of Akhenaten. The king is shown here
in the realistic Amarna style with thick neck and bent head, indicating his age at the time. Neither in
the scene nor in the text is there any indication that the king was already dead. On the contrary, as the
queen is shown next to him – and she was still alive, with separate evidence that she visited Amarna
before Year 12 of her son’s reign – it would not have been possible for the artist to show her next to
her husband if he were already dead. Furthermore, the artistic nature of the Amarna style used here
gives a realistic portrayal of the couple in Amarna, under the Aten’s rays, and not an abstract or
idealized scene, drawn from memory, of a king who had died at Thebes a decade or so earlier.
Meketaten’s Sarcophagus
A fragment of the sarcophagus of Meketaten, Akhenaten’s second daughter, who died some time after
his Year 12 and was buried in her father’s royal tomb at Amarna, was found, with the praenomen of


--- PAGE 55 ---
Amenhotep III beside the praenomen of Akhenaten. In another book Redford reports the first
appearance of Akhenaten’s daughter in the decoration of one of Akhenaten’s temples at Karnak where
‘possibly no earlier than the fourth year of the reign … we first see two daughters toddling behind the
queen’.
2
If Amenhotep III was not alive in Year 4 of his son’s reign when Meketaten had been born, it
would not have been possible for his name to appear on his second granddaughter’s sarcophagus. Its
presence indicates that he was alive when the sarcophagus was made, although this could have been
at any time after the birth of the princess. Moreover, in this example the praenomen of Amenhotep III
have been spelt differently. Instead of using the figure of the goddess Maat in writing the middle part
of the word ‘Neb-Maat-Re’ – ‘Maat’ signifies ‘truth’ – Akhenaten spelt it phonetically, indicating an
advanced stage in his rejection of the old religions, which did not take place until after he had left
Thebes for his new capital, Amarna. The sarcophagus inscriptions cannot therefore be dated earlier
than that.
The Amarna Rock Tombs of Huya and Meryre II
A scene and inscription in the tomb of Huya, steward to Queen Tiye, at Amarna has been interpreted
as evidence that Amenhotep III was alive and in Amarna after the second half of Akhenaten’s Year 8.
The scene is drawn in two halves on the lintel of the doorway leading from the first hall of the tomb
into the inner rooms.
The scene on the left shows the household of Akhenaten (Akhenaten, Queen Nefertiti and their four
daughters), that on the right the household of Amenhotep III, Queen Tiye and the Princess Baketaten).
Howard Carter, the British archaeologist who discovered the tomb of Tutankhamun, saw the
juxtaposition of these two scenes as evidence that the old king was alive at Amarna: ‘This equipoise
of the two households not only confirms the coregency of the two kings, but gives reason to suppose
that Amenhotep III continued to live for at least a year or so after the birth of Akhenaten’s fourth
daughter, Neferneferuaten Tasheri.’
3
Redford, who does not agree with Carter, goes on to argue that, as Tiye is shown without her
husband on the outer (south) wall of the hall in question, Amenhotep III must have already been dead
when construction of the tomb began: ‘Presumably, if the decoration of the tomb kept pace with its
excavation, the scenes in the first hall showing Tiye alone would have been carved before the lintel
jambs.’
4
This is an over-simple approach. We have to examine the whole hall of Huya’s tomb, as well as
the neighbouring tomb of Meryre II, in order to establish which came before which of the tomb
scenes. The argument is a somewhat complex one, but from the nature of the scenes, the number of
princesses shown and their relative ages, it is possible to make the following deductions (see also
Appendix B):
• The South and North Walls, where four daughters of Akhenaten are depicted, plus Baketaten, the
daughter of Amenhotep III and Queen Tiye: Year 10;
• The East Wall, which does not show any of Akhenaten’s daughters but depicts Baketaten, looking
the same age as she is shown on the South and North Walls: Year 10;
• The West Wall is a unique scene showing celebrations that took place in Akhenaten’s Year 12 and


--- PAGE 56 ---
bears the date ‘Year 12, the second month of winter, the eighth day’.
This dating has a further significance in the coregency argument. The temple scene shown on the
East Wall shows a colonnade with a statue of a king and queen placed between each pair of columns.
The inscribed names are now only partially preserved, but it seemed certain to N. de G. Davies,
author of 
The Rock Tombs of El Amarna,
5
 that here we have Queen Tiye’s statue with alternating
statues of her husband, Amenhotep III, and her son, Akhenaten. While Akhenaten is given his two
names, Amenhotep III has only his praenomen, ‘King of the South and North and Lord of the Two
Lands, Neb-Maat-Re, given life’. This last epithet, ‘given life’, can appear only if the king was alive
at the time the statue was placed in position and the inscription made.
Inside the sanctuary of the temple, statues – Queen Tiye alternating again with her husband and son
– under the portico represent figures holding altars between their extended arms for the reception of
gifts. In the centre is a naos (inner sanctuary of the temple) standing free from the wall. It is set on a
platform to which three or four steps lead up. Here we see Queen Tiye drawn twice, standing on the
steps, once with her husband, once with her son, and Amenhotep III himself, depicted inside the
temple where the inscriptions have already made it clear that he was alive. A statue can sometimes be
a representation of a dead person, but here, because they are shown on the steps, they are living
persons.
Davies himself noted that it is not usual to erect statues on steps. Yet he refused to accept the clear
evidence of the East Wall that we are not looking here at depictions of statues, but of real figures: ‘
“Statues” I have said, but in truth there is nothing to prevent us from seeing in them four royal
personages, except for the difficulty of granting the existence of two kings together at this time.’
6
 He
also chose to disregard the fact that the characters depicted are shown, not within the naos, facing
outward, in a position of receiving offerings, which would have been the case if they were statues,
but on the steps facing the naos, offering gifts to the Aten, which indicates that the royal characters
were alive and worshipping.
As for Redford, he preferred to regard the old king as dead in the lintel scene and a statue on the
East Wall, avoiding a real examination of the scenes that would date the decorations correctly and
even relying on a misleading judgement by another scholar to obtain more support for his
preconceptions. He quotes
7
 the German scholar Alexander Scharff, who noted in his book 
Archiv für
Orientforschung
 that Amenhotep III’s accompanying jamb inscription to the lintel scene is not
followed by the epithet ‘given life’. Neither Scharff nor Redford seems to have examined the lintel
scene carefully, for at the bottom of Amenhotep III’s cartouche, which is shown behind his head, the
signs for ‘given life’ are clearly visible, just as they are on the East Wall.
The Age of Baketaten
Redford next takes issue with Frederick J. Giles, the Canadian Egyptologist, who argued that
Baketaten in the tomb scenes ‘could not be older than fourteen at the most. On the assumption that
Tiye married Amenhotep III in his second regnal year at the age of sixteen, Tiye would have given
birth to Baketaten if there were no coregency, in the last year or so of her husband, when she was
fifty-four. Since it is unlikely that Tiye was as young as sixteen at the time of her marriage, or as old
as fifty-four at the birth of Baketaten, the assumption of a coregency of about twelve years is almost
obligatory.’
8


--- PAGE 57 ---
Redford complains that Giles’s ‘entirely unwarranted manipulation of numbers and his assumptions
regarding Tiye’s age at various times in her life do not command the respect of the uncommitted
reader’.
9
 However, he is using the inability of an opponent to present his case to try to persuade us
that he has none.
Examination of the mummy of Amenhotep III suggests that he was about fifty when he died. As he
ruled for a full thirty-eight years and died at the start of the thirty-ninth, he could only have been
around twelve when he came to the throne and about fourteen when he married Tiye in or just before
his second regnal year. As Tiye was not the heiress, whom he had to marry irrespective of her age,
we should expect her to be younger than he, as this was the custom of the time, and it is thought that
she was only eight years of age at the time of the wedding. This would not have been unusual in that
era. The prophet Muhammad married a nine-year-old girl when he himself was fifty, and I think this
custom of marrying young girls who had not yet reached puberty accounts for the number of ‘barren’
women who later give birth to children in a variety of biblical stories.
How old was Baketaten in the tomb scenes? Carter has made the point: ‘Among many such scenes
in El Amarna private mortuary chapels depicting these children [Akhenaten’s] the relative age of each
child is shown by her height. Careful discrimination of that kind excludes the possibility of twin
births, and is therefore serviceable when estimating their ages. A reckoning such as the above cannot,
of course, be considered exact, but error cannot be more than say a year.’
10
In Huya’s tomb scenes Baketaten is shown consistently as being about the same age as Akhenaten’s
third daughter, Ankhsenpa-aten. Carter also noted the similarity in size of the two princesses:
‘Judging from the stature of Baketaten figured in this picture [the lintel scene], she was about the same
age as Ankhsenpa-aten.’
11
 Merytaten, the eldest daughter of Akhenaten, was born towards the end of
Year 1 of her father. The second daughter, Meketaten, was probably born in Year 3, as she appears as
a very young child the following year in the decoration of Akhenaten’s temple at Karnak. If we allow
two more years for her birth, the third daughter, Ankhsenpa-aten, would be born around Year 5 of her
father, thus making her five or six years of age when Huya’s tomb was decorated in Year 10. (She is
seen for the first time in Aye’s tomb, dated by Davies to Year 9 of her father’s reign, and was never
depicted with her parents at Thebes.)
If this explanation is accepted as corresponding more closely to the facts, Baketaten must also have
been five or six at that time. If there was no coregency between Akhenaten and his father, Baketaten
could not have been Amenhotep III’s daughter, being six years of age ten years after her father’s death
– yet the inscription in Huya’s tomb confirms that she was. Furthermore, the very name Baketaten
indicates that she was born during her brother’s reign when he started relating his own daughters’
names to the Aten. In this case Baketaten would have been born around Year 31 of Amenhotep III
when her mother, Queen Tiye, was around thirty-seven, a late, but not impossible, age for giving
birth.
Fragments from Amarna
Two objects bearing Amenhotep III’s name, found at Amarna, indicate he was at Amarna at the time.
The first is a fragment of a granite bowl with the late name of the Aten, the praenomen of Amenhotep
III and the phrase “in Akhetaten”; the second a fragment of a statue of a kneeling person holding an
offering slab. Between his outstretched hands is an inscription that includes the late Aten name,
followed by the praenomen of Amenhotep III. The Aten’s name is also found twice on the front edge


--- PAGE 58 ---
of the slab with Amenhotep III’s praenomen to the right and Akhenaten’s name to the left.
Redford rejects the possibility that Amenhotep III was either at Amarna or even alive at the time
these objects were inscribed, which should be, according to the late Aten name, some time after the
second half of Year 8. He writes: ‘The most these miserable fragments allow is a cautious suggestion,
and nothing more, that a cult of Amenhotep III continued after his death.’
12
What Redford is suggesting, without any supporting evidence whatever, is that, in the city of the
Aten, another god was worshipped by Akhenaten, a human god, his own father. Not only would the
monotheistic beliefs of the king not allow this; the idea of a king being worshipped during or after his
life is non-existent in the new city. No funerary temple has been found there for Akhenaten, who was
himself the one and only prophet of the new God. The simple explanation is that some time after the
latter half of Year 8 Amenhotep came down from Thebes to visit his son and coregent, during which
time these objects were made, indicating that both kings were worshipping the Aten. There are other
indications that Amenhotep III was converted to worship of the new god, although he continued to
worship the older gods as well.


--- PAGE 59 ---
8
THE COREGENCY DEBATE (II)
The Theban Tomb of Kheruef
A 
SCENE
 on the south side of the entrance corridor to the tomb of Kheruef, a high official of the
period, in Western Thebes shows Amenhotep IV (Akhenaten) offering libation to his father,
Amenhotep III, who stands, facing him, before Queen Tiye. Part of the accompanying inscription
found fallen nearby has the cartouches of both kings facing each other. Although this was sufficient for
H. W. Fairman, the British Egyptologist, to regard it as yet further evidence in support of a coregency,
Redford is not convinced and regards Amenhotep III as already dead at the time.
In every case where the two kings are shown together, opponents of the coregency try to persuade
us that either the elder king is dead or that what we are looking at is his statue. The argument at
Amarna is that, although Amenhotep III was depicted as being alive 
and
 at Amarna, this was purely
because he could not be represented as Osiris, the ancient god of the dead, who was banned from the
city of the Aten: now here, in the tomb of a Theban official, who is himself seen addressing a long
hymn to Osiris, when we find Amenhotep III depicted as a living king – and no traces of the phrase
‘true of voice’ that usually follows the cartouche of a deceased king – Redford argues that the libation
scene belongs to ‘the category of idealised portrayals. It is not a specific incident that is here being
recorded. Nor can one argue that just because Amenhotep III is shown receiving an offering and about
to eat – activities again reserved for the living – he must have been alive when the relief was carved.
…’
1
What Redford is, in fact, saying is that there is no evidence in this scene to indicate that Amenhotep
III was dead. However, as Redford is not prepared to agree that he was alive, he presents this new
explanation – although the old king is not represented here as dead, the representation took place, in a
formalized, stylized, abstract manner that has nothing to do with time, 
after
 he had died. This is
incorrect.
Almost all the royal scenes in Kheruef’s tomb are related to Amenhotep III’s 
sed
 festival
celebrations. This was a rejuvenation ritual and celebration that kings normally held for the first time
after ruling for thirty years, then in shorter intervals after that. Amenhotep III celebrated three such
jubilees in Years 30, 34 and 37, but Akhenaten is known to have celebrated two jubilees while still at
Thebes during his first five years. The Aten, his God, also celebrated, as kings did, many jubilees.
Here Amenhotep IV is presenting his father with libation on the same occasion. (See also Appendix B
(ii).)
The Meidum Graffito
A graffito from the pyramid temple of Meidum, in Middle Egypt and dating from the time of
Amenhotep III, persuaded Carter of the coregency between Akhenaten and his father: ‘The graffito
reads: “Year 30, under the majesty of the King Neb-maat-Re, son of Amun, resting in truth,


--- PAGE 60 ---
Amenhotep (III), prince of Thebes, lord of might, prince of joy, who loves him that hates injustice of
heart, placing the male offspring upon the seat of his father, and establishing his inheritance in the
land.” The “heir” referred to in this graffito can be no less than Amenhotep IV, who afterwards
assumed the name Akhenaten. There was probably some reason for establishing this young prince
upon the throne.’
2
As usual, Redford does not agree with this view. He argues that the ‘male offspring’ referred to is
not the king’s son: ‘The addition after the praenomen (coronation name) of ‘son of Amun’ is
especially significant. In formal inscriptions it is Amun who is spoken of as establishing the king on
his (i.e. Amun’s) throne … The inscription refers entirely to the king (Amenhotep III); it is he who is
called the “male”, and it is his own inheritance that is spoken of as being established. “His father” is
none other than Amun, the epithet “son of Amun” in the first line being possibly a semantic
antecedent.’
3
 The point the author is making is that, as Amenhotep III was celebrating his first jubilee
in Year 30, this inscription indicated the re-establishment of the king on his ancestral throne and the
reconfirmation of his inheritance. Yet if we look back at the text we find first that the date given
relates to the king himself, Amenhotep III, the son of Amun, and this is followed by three phrases:
1   Who loves (he, the king, loves) him that hates injustice of heart;
2   Placing (he, the king, who is placing) the male offspring (the heir) upon the seat of his father;
3   And establishing (he, the king, who is establishing) his (the heir’s) inheritance in the land.
Nobody can say that, just because the king is called the ‘son of Amun’ or the ‘son of Re’ or of any
other god, the statement that follows refers to the god rather than the king, and it is clear here that it is
the king who is the subject of all the subsequent verbs. Then again, jubilee celebrations did not
indicate inheritance, but rather rejuvenation of power.
To justify the use of the very strange epithet ‘who hates falsehood’ it is equally clear that the king
must have been referring to some kind of opposition to a decision of his. The injustice he implies
seems to be ‘not placing the heir upon his father’s seat’, but, by placing his son there, the king was
doing the just thing and securing the inheritance for him. Here Amenhotep III appears also to be
defending an action that had taken place prior to Year 30. The only reasonable explanation would be
that Amenhotep III felt that his son and heir, Amenhotep IV, whose mother, Tiye, had not been the
heiress, might be challenged over inheriting the throne after the old king died. He therefore decided,
while still alive, to appoint him as coregent to guarantee his inheritance. If a coregency of twelve
years is accepted, this must have started in Year 28, with the priests of Amun being the almost certain
source of protest. This protest could be the same as that mentioned on one of the border stelae at
Amarna where Akhenaten referred to some critical comments he had heard about himself before he
moved out of Thebes.
The king was regarded as the physical son of Amun. As Tiye was not the heiress when she and
Amenhotep III were married, she could not be regarded as the consort of Amun and her son,
Amenhotep IV, could not be considered the physical son of Amun. In the Eighteenth Dynasty that
meant he would not be accepted as the legal heir and king. This same situation faced an earlier
Pharaoh, Tuthmosis III, whose mother was not the heiress when she married. On that occasion an
adoption ritual took place at Karnak where the image of Amun, carried by the priests, chose
Tuthmosis III as Amun’s son. Once Amenhotep IV had been rejected by the priests, he in turn rejected
Amun, chose Aten as his father, first forced Amun out of his supreme position, then destroyed all the
other gods, eventually establishing Aten as the only legitimate God of whom Akhenaten was the son.


--- PAGE 61 ---
The real sense of Amenhotep III’s statement in the Meidum graffito cannot be understood other than
against this background.
The Tushratta Letters
After Akhenaten became the sole ruler of Egypt, Tushratta, King of Mitanni, wrote to him expressing
the hope that they would enjoy the same friendship that had existed between him and Akhenaten’s
father, Amenhotep III. On its arrival the letter (No. EA27) was dated by an Egyptian hieratic docket
which reads: ‘[Year?]2, first month of Winter, [day … ], when one (the king) was in the southern city
(Thebes) …; copy of the Naharin (Mitanni) letter which the messenger Pirizzi and the messenger
[Puipri] brought.’
The German philologist Adolf Erman was the first to translate this docket. As the edge of the tablet
was broken and he found tiny traces of ink ahead of the ‘2’, Erman decided that it was possible to
restore the date to ‘[Yearl]2’ If this restoration was accepted, the letter, thought to have been the first
sent to Akhenaten by the Mitannian king after his father’s death, could be regarded as confirmation of
a coregency of twelve years. However, another German philologist, J. A. Knudzton, contradicted
Erman’s restoration and preferred the reading ‘[Year]2’. Scholars have been divided since the start
of the century over which restoration is correct, although Redford has admitted: ‘Actually, on the
evidence of the traces alone, both readings can be maintained.’
4
 It has been argued by opponents of a
coregency that, from the presence of Akhenaten at Thebes, to which the letter was addressed, it must
have arrived during his first five years, when he was resident there before moving to Amarna, while
supporters of a coregency make the point that he was already living in Amarna and had simply
travelled to Thebes to attend his father’s funeral. Redford has summarized the situation in the
following terms:
‘The letter to which this docket is appended, EA27, was written shortly after Amenhotep III’s
death … Consequently the letter is rightly understood to be the first written by Tushratta to Akhenaten
after the latter’s entry upon sole rule. The allusion [in it] to “the great feast for mourning” shows that
the funeral rites for Amenhotep III were either still in progress or had just been concluded. Now there
are but two possible restorations of the date, Year 2 or Year 12. No other … If Year 2 is restored,
only a very short coregency amounting to but a few months at the most is possible. If Year 12 is
restored, a coregency of not less than eleven years is as good as proved.’
5
 We therefore have to seek
elsewhere for evidence that might point to the correct dating of the letter.
Redford has made the point: ‘Between the death of Amenhotep III and the writing of [letter] EA27
there occurred a short but well-attested exchange of letters between Tushratta and Tiye.’
6
 This is not
strictly accurate. In all, four letters from Tushratta form part of the coregency debate, but only one
was addressed to Tiye: Akhenaten was the recipient of the other three. The letters are numbered from
EA26 to EA29, but their contents indicate that they did not arrive in the order their numbering might
suggest.
Redford, Gardiner and other scholars believe that letter No. EA26, addressed to the queen, was the
first to arrive. The text begins: ‘To Tiye, the Queen of Egypt …’ and goes on to make it clear that,
before the sending of this letter, a Mitannian messenger named Giliya must have happened to be in
Egypt at the time of Amenhotep III’s death and Tiye had taken advantage of the fact to send back with
him news of her bereavement as well as asking Tushratta to be as friendly with her son as he had
been with her husband. Tushratta then goes on to complain: ‘The present, which your husband


--- PAGE 62 ---
commanded to be brought, you have not sent me; and gold statues … Now, however, Napkhuriya
(Akhenaten), your [son] … has made (them) of wood.’
7
The fact that Akhenaten had made wooden statues instead of the promised gold ones and sent them
to Mitanni, where they had arrived before Tushratta’s letter to Tiye was written, suggests that some
time had elapsed between the death of Amenhotep III and the despatch of the letter of protest to the
queen.
The first letter to Akhenaten (No. EA27) also dwells upon the gold issue. After mentioning the
arrival from Egypt of a king’s messenger named Khamashshi, seeking Tushratta’s friendship, the
Mittanian king complains: ‘Your father … wrote … in his letter, at the time when Mani (the Egyptian
messenger) brought the price for a wife (Tushratta’s daughter, Tadukhipa)’ that he had promised
Tushratta two gold images, much other gold, lapis lazuli and ‘implements without number’.
Tushratta’s messengers had actually seen the promised gifts ‘with their own eyes’. Yet, he protests,
on a return visit Mani has brought wooden images, not gold ones. The letter makes the point that, if
Akhenaten has any doubts aboud the truth concerning the promised gold, he should ‘ask his mother’,
8
suggesting that it is Tiye rather than the young king who is 
au fait
 with the arrangements made by her
late husband.
The remaining two letters from Tushratta to Akhenaten are Nos. EA28 and EA29. Redford believes
that they are numbered in the order in which they arrived, but, because of the nature of their tone and
contents, I believe the reverse to be the case.
Letter No. EA29, which I regard as the second from Tushratta to Akhenaten, delves even more
deeply into the history of the friendly relationships between the two royal families in order to
persuade the new king to continue them and to send the promised gold. He is also invited again to
seek confirmation from his mother that Tushratta is speaking the truth: ‘… the images [of gold] … for
which I made request you have not given me … my messengers for four years … The images which I
requested from your father, give; and now [when I have sent] my messengers for the second time [if
he] does not prepare and give [them], he will grieve my heart … Your mother Tiye knows all about
these things, and (therefore) ask your mother Tiye … [Now my brother said:] “Giliya ought to return
to him. Because I should otherwise grieve my brother’s heart, I will send Giliya back.” [However, I
said]: “Inasmuch as I have sent back quickly my brother’s messengers, so let my brother always my
messengers [send back quickly]”… gives me word and sends Mani to me, then I will … Giliya, with
friendly intentions, to my brother.’
9
From this letter it is clear that the messenger Mani is in Egypt because Tushratta is asking for him
to be despatched with the gold. In letter No. EA28, however, we learn that Mani is not only in
Mitanni, but being held hostage against the return of two of Tushratta’s messengers. After the usual
initial friendly formalities, Tushratta comes straight to the point: ‘Pirizzi and Puipri, my messengers, I
sent them to my brother at the beginning of his reign, and ordered them to express sorrow very
strongly. And then I sent them again. And this message, on the former occasion, I gave to my brother:
Mani, the messenger of my brother, I will retain until my brother sends my messenger, and until he
arrives… Now, however, my brother has in general not allowed them to go has retained them very
much indeed.’
10
 The earlier letter containing ‘this message’ is missing. We therefore have no means
of knowing what might have been the reason for Mani’s third journey to Mitanni, but it was probably
part of the ordinary exchange of messages between monarchs.
Much new information is revealed in letter No. EA28. Tushratta is no longer asking for gold or
gold statues: he just wants the return of his two messengers, Pirizzi and Puipri. We also learn that they
made two trips to Egypt – the first to ‘express sorrow’ at the death of Amenhotep III, the second when


--- PAGE 63 ---
they brought the first letter we have to Akhenaten from Tushratta in Year 2 or Year 12 – and they have
been detained ‘very much indeed’ by the time letter EA28 was written. The unfriendly tone of this
letter, the presence of Mani in Mitanni and the fact that Tushratta seems to have lost all hope of
obtaining gold, which he no longer mentions, makes it more probable that this, rather than letter
EA29, was the last to Akhenaten from the Mitannian king.
From these communications we can establish the following chronology of events:
At the time Amenhotep III died, he had been arranging his presents for Tushratta, including two
golden statues. Giliya, the Mitannian messenger, was in Egypt, probably waiting to take the gifts back
to his master. These plans fell through on the death of Amenhotep III. Instead, Giliya left for home to
inform Tushratta of his friend’s death and carrying a message from Queen Tiye, expressing the hope
that the Mitannian friendship would continue in the reign of her son, the new king. Either at the same
time as Giliya’s journey home or shortly afterwards, Akhenaten sent Khamashshi with a letter to
Tushratta also asking for the Mitannian king’s friendship.
After this initial exchange of messages, Tushratta sent two messengers, Pirizzi and Puipri, to attend
the funeral rites of Amenhotep III. While they were still in Egypt, or not long after they had returned
home, Akhenaten despatched 
his
 messenger, Mani, with two wooden statues instead of the gold ones
Tushratta had been promised by Amenhotep III. A disappointed Tushratta sent Pirizzi and Puipri back
to Egypt with two letters, one to Akhenaten (No. EA27), dated by the Egyptian docket as arriving in
Year 2 or Year 12, first month of Winter, and complaining about the wooden statues: the second (No.
EA26) to Queen Tiye, asking her to inform her son of the friendly relationship between the Mitannian
king and his father and asking her to try to persuade him to send the gold. Akhenaten for his part
decided to keep the two Mitannian messengers in Egypt.
Tushratta sent another messenger with a letter (No. EA29) asking again for the gold, complaining
about the detention of his two messengers and requesting the Egyptian king to send Mani to him.
Akhenaten must have agreed to this request and sent Mani with a letter to Tushratta as we find him in
Mitanni in what I believe to be the third letter to Akhenaten (No. EA28), in which Tushratta states that
Mani is being held hostage against the release of Pirizzi and Puipri.
Therefore, contrary to what Redford would have us believe, the funerary rites of Amenhotep III
were neither still in progress, nor had just ended, when Letter No. EA27, the first to Akhenaten,
arrived; they had ended much earlier. Pirizzi and Puipri had attended the funeral rites, returned home
and were on their second visit when they brought this letter. As Akhenaten’s celebration of his sole
reign took place in the second month of Winter of his Year 12, their return would have taken place
some days before this occasion if the reading for No. EA27 was Year 12.
Nor was Tushratta’s letter to Queen Tiye sent before that first letter from the Mitannian king to
Akhenaten: Akhenaten had already sent two messengers – Khamashshi and Mani, with the wooden
statues – to Tushratta before the first surviving letter to him, No. EA27, was brought, together with
Tiye’s letter. It is also clear that, as Mani was not in Mitanni when letter No. EA29 was written, yet
we find him detained there as a hostage in letter No. EA28, these two letters must have been written
in the reverse order to which they are numbered. Nor does the mention in letter No. EA29 of a four-
year delay mean, as Redford understood, that the Mitannian ambassadors were detained in Egypt for
that period: it is a reference to the fact that the Mitannian king had been trying for four years, without
success, to obtain the gold that Amenhotep III had promised.
A more relevant point to the coregency argument, however, is the fact that we know from the
evidence of the remains of the Malkata palace complex of Amenhotep III at Western Thebes that
Akhenaten resided there before Year 30 of his father. Now, at the end of his father’s reign at the start


--- PAGE 64 ---
of his Year 39, how is it that the Crown Prince appears to be entirely unaware of the details of his
father’s relationship with Tushratta? Ask your mother, Tushratta keeps saying: Tiye knows all the
details. Why would Akhenaten have no knowledge of the gold statues which, we know from
Tushratta’s letters, the Mitannian king’s messengers had seen with their own eyes? The only
explanation is that Akhenaten was totally in the dark about these events because he was not at Thebes
when they took place. We know that from Year 4 of his reign Akhenaten, to avoid confrontation with
the hostile Amun priesthood at Thebes, started to build his new city at Amarna and resided there in
part until Year 8, when he made it his permanent home. If, as all the other evidence indicates, the
coregency started in Year 28 of his father, then from Amenhotep III’s Year 32 – shortly after the
correspondence with Tushratta began – Akhenaten, having started to build his new capital, distanced
himself increasingly, then finally, from the governing of Egypt and from its foreign affairs.
Thus all the implications support the reading of Year 12 rather than Year 2 for the arrival of letter
No. EA27 of Tushratta to Akhenaten, who was staying at the time at Thebes before he moved,
probably followed by the two Mitannian messengers, to Amarna to celebrate the assumption of his
sole rule in Egypt. As the second-last letter we have from Tushratta to Akhenaten speaks of a four-
year period during which he had been trying unsuccessfully to obtain the promised gold, this would
agree with the chronology if the coregency is established as having lasted until Year 12 of
Akhenaten’s reign and was then followed by a period of five years during which he ruled alone.
The Tomb of Aper-el
After this chapter had been written, it was announced that the tomb of Aper-el, vizier to Akhenaten,
had been discovered, almost intact, at Sakkara by the French archaeologist Alain-Pierre Zivie. The
discovery, sixty feet beneath the sand, is the climax to ten years’ work and of great significance. The
tomb makes it clear that Aper-el, a figure previously unknown in Egyptian history, had been a high
priest of the Aten before he became Akhenaten’s vizier. Zivie was also able to retrieve from the tomb
three skeletons and many pieces of funerary furniture. The latter include a box given to Aper-el by
Amenhotep III and Queen Tiye. Amenhotep III’s cartouche and his praenomen, Neb-Maat-Re, were
found in two other cases in the tomb.
This is the most significent archaeological evidence yet unearthed to point to a coregency between
Amenhotep III and his son, Akhenaten. The main points are: (1) Akhenaten would not have had a
vizier unless he was ruling, (2) his father would not have three mentions in the tomb by his
praenomen, Neb-Maat-Re, unless he was still alive 
after
 his son, initially known as Amenhotep IV,
had changed his name to Akhenaten in honour of the monotheistic God he had introduced in Egypt.
As I said earlier, a more detailed discussion of many of these points is to be found in Appendix B,
together with a rather complex argument involving another tomb – that of Ramose, mayor of Thebes
and vizier of Upper Egypt. For the moment this somewhat protracted analysis of the pros and cons of
a coregency can best be ended with the words of the American Egyptologist, William C. Hayes: ‘As
it now appears that Akhenaten was elevated to the throne as coregent in or about Year 28 of
Amenhotep III and transferred his residence to Tell el-Amarna in or about Year 33, this means that
the bulk of dated inscriptions from the palace at Thebes are contemporary with those found at
Amarna. We can, indeed, establish a close correspondence in date, year by year, between the two
groups of inscriptions, based on the equations: Year 28 of Amenhotep III = Year 1 of Amenhotep IV,


--- PAGE 65 ---
Year 33 of Amenhotep III = Year 6 of Akhenaten, Year 38 of Amenhotep III = Year 11 of Amenhotep
IV (Akhenaten), etc.’
11
 Amenhotep III died in his Year 39, his son’s Year 12.


--- PAGE 66 ---
9
THE REIGN OF HOREMHEB
A
S
 we saw before, Ramses I, already an old man when he came to the throne, did not reign for long.
Manetho is quoted by Josephus as attributing one year and four months to the length of Ramses I’s
rule. The last year we have for him is Year 2, which comes from a stela found at Wadi Haifa in
Nubia. He may not have survived to the end of that year, however, as the name of his son, Seti I, is
found at the foot of the stela, indicating that it could be he who erected it after Ramses I’s death.
It is when we come to examine the reign of Ramses I’s predecessor, Horemheb, the Pharaoh of the
Oppression, that we find ourselves facing considerable difficulties, summarized by Professor J. R.
Harris, the British Egyptologist, in the following terms: ‘Only three regnal years of Horemheb have
survived intact in contemporary inscriptions – Year 1 in the temple of Ptah (the god of Memphis) at
Karnak, Year 3 in the Theban tomb of Neferhotep (one of the nobles), and Year 8 in a graffito in the
tomb of Tuthmosis IV. A further date is partially preserved on a fragmentary stele and could be 5 or 7
… and Year 7 is later attested from two Ramesside ostraca, the year in each case being of
Horemheb’s actual reign. Beyond this there is uncertainty. The Manethonian tradition is clearly
corrupt, but may conceal an original total of 12 years 3 months.’
1
The uncertainty is such that estimates of the length of Horemheb’s reign range from as low as eight
years to as high as fifty-nine:
• Support for the above Manethonian tradition is provided by two large storage vessels, which bear
hieratic dockets and were discovered in fairly recent times in Horemheb’s Sakkara tomb. One of them
is dated to ‘Year 13, third month of Inundation’ and is said to have contained ‘very good quality wine
from the vineyard of the estate of Horemheb, beloved of Amun … in the house of Amun’.
2
• A graffito from Madinet Habu at Western Thebes, given a date Year 27, has been interpreted
variously as a) a visit by Horemheb to King Aye’s mortuary temple, which Horemheb is known to
have usurped, b) the date of Horemheb’s death, c) a visit to Horemheb’s tomb by Ramses II in Year
27 of his reign. The text goes: ‘Regnal Year 27, first month of Shomu, day 9: the day on which
Horemheb … who loves Amun and hates his enemies … entered …’
3
 The controversy centres upon
two words at the end of the first line, which have been read either to mean ‘the day of entry which
Horemheb made’ or ‘the day of entering the domain of Horemheb’. Those who prefer the first
rendering assume that it refers to a visit by Horemheb to the mortuary temple: those who prefer the
second a visit by Ramses II in his Year 27 to Aye’s temple that had been taken over and extended by
Horemheb. The second reading was preferred by Fairman as it is supported by the first copy of the
text printed from the original.
4
 The style of writing also fits the Ramesside period quite well.
• Two fragmentary wine-jar dockets were found by British archaeologists, working at the site of Tell
el-Amarna, the new capital which the Pharaoh Akhenaten built for himself and named Akhetaten.
They bear only the dates Year 28 and Year 30. Although they most probably belonged to Amenhotep
III, some scholars have argued that they might possibly have belonged to Horemheb. It is true that
Horemheb’s name has been found in Amarna, a city abandoned even before he came to the throne, but
there is no reason to suggest that it was used as a place of residence for Horemheb or any of his


--- PAGE 67 ---
officials, for otherwise we should have found more examples dating from different years of his reign
as well as some archaeological remains.
A similar wine-jar label dated Year 31 was also found in the tomb of Tutankhamun, who had
already been dead and buried for four years when Horemheb’s reign began. In this case clearly the
date could refer only to Amenhotep III.
• Year 59 in relation to Horemheb was found towards the end of the last century in the inscriptions of
a tomb at Sakkara, the burial place for Memphis from the time of Ramses II. The tomb belongs to a
scribe of Ptah named Khayri and the inscriptions give an account of a legal dispute about ownership
of a piece of land that lasted over a long period of time during reigns of different kings of the
Eighteenth and Nineteenth Dynasties.
Scholars faced with this figure of Year 59 looked upon it as too long for Horemheb’s reign for a
variety of reasons. He is known, before coming to the throne, to have been a high official during the
nine years of Tutankhamun as well as the four years of Aye; he has not left much in the way of
monuments other than those usurped from his predecessors or rebuilt using their materials; nor do we
have any information about military activity by Horemheb in Asia that one would expect to be a
feature of such an extended reign. In spite of these circumstances, scholars, without any supporting
evidence, assumed that the reigns of the four Amarna kings – Akhenaten, Semenkhkare, Tutankhamun
and Aye – had been added to those of Horemheb: ‘It has been widely accepted that this is an
inclusive date incorporating the reigns of Horemheb’s four predecessors … some 32 years in all, thus
implying a minimum of 26/27. Neither the actual reading nor the broad conclusion is to be challenged,
though 
it should be emphasized that no other example of an inclusive date is known
 (my italics). It
is evident that the existence of the Amarna kings was ignored officially in the Nineteenth Dynasty (or
at least under Seti I and Ramses II), but there is no indication that it was common practice to assign
their regnal years to Horemheb.’
5
It is true that Akhenaten and the three Amarna kings who succeeded him were omitted from the king
lists of the time, and Akhenaten himself has been referred to as ‘the rebel’ or ‘the fallen one of
Akhetaten’, but a date found on a fragmentary papyrus of the Nineteenth Dynasty, now in the British
Museum, mentions ‘Year 9 of the rebel’ and, according to Gardiner ‘the reference must surely be to
the reign of Akhenaten’,
6
 indicating that the lengths of the Amarna kings’ reigns were not, in fact,
added to those of Horemheb.
The basic cause of the confusion that has arisen over the reference to Horemheb’s Year 59 at
Sakkara are two. Firstly, Egyptologists took it out of context and did not relate it to the rest of the
information given in the Sakkara tomb inscriptions, which are not presented in strict chronological
order; secondly, there is a missing word between Year 59 and the name of the king, which could
radically affect the meaning that the scribe of the text intended to convey.
The inscriptions, which begin on the north wall of the tomb, relate to a piece of cultivated land,
measuring thirteen arourae (about three hectares) and situated on the west bank of the Nile,
somewhere to the south of Memphis. The land was given as a reward by Ahmosis (
c.
 1575–1550 
BC),
the first king of the Eighteenth Dynasty, to a shipmaster named Neshi. It passed down from generation
to generation and became known eventually as ‘the village of Neshi’.
7
 Two centuries later, some time
before Horemheb came to the throne, the heirs of Neshi consisted of six brothers and sisters who
owned the land between them, with one of the sisters, named Urnero, appointed trustee over them.
This trusteeship was subsequently disputed in the reign of Horemheb by another sister, Takharu. The
tomb inscriptions, to place them in strict chronological order, recall:


--- PAGE 68 ---
1  An examination of witnesses (see also Appendix C), who gave evidence about events long before
the reign of Horemheb, going back to the time of Akhenaten, who was not referred to by name but as
‘the fallen one of Akhetaten’, his capital city. At the end of these proceedings it was decided that the
land which was the subject of dispute should be divided between the six heirs, with each one given
his or her individual share.
2  Urnero was married to a man named Prehotep, by whom she had a son, Huy. Huy, who had been
working in the land of Neshi since the reign of the king who preceded Horemheb, undertook
cultivation of his mother’s holding after the land had been divided among the Neshi heirs. The name
of the king who preceded Horemheb has been lost from the inscriptions apart from the initial letter,
‘A’, but it can only have been Aye. Prehotep subsequently married another woman by whom he had a
second son, Tjaui, and later, after Horemheb had ascended to the throne, Prehotep took steps to
register the land of his first wife in the name of Tjaui, the son by his second marriage. This illegal
transaction eventually became the subject of further litigation some years later in the reign of Ramses
II, the third king of the Nineteenth Dynasty, when Huy died. His son, Khayri, tried to take over
cultivation of the land, but found himself challenged by Tjaui’s grandson, Khay.
3  It was the mother of Khayri who began legal proceedings in Year 14-plus – the number of months
is missing – of Ramses II to establish his ownership of the land, arguing that he was the descendant of
Neshi through his grandmother, Urnero. In the tomb account of the events that followed Khayri is
referred to by name only once and is elsewhere called 
mos
 (the son and heir), to indicate his claim as
the rightful inheritor.
4  In Year 18, Khay (the defendant in this action) went to court and presented the registration records
showing that the land had been registered in his grandfather’s name. He claimed, in addition, that
Huy, the plaintiff’s father, had merely been employed to work on it. The tomb account explains:
‘Khay complained in the great court in Year 18. The priest of the (litter), Amenemope, who was the
officer of the great court, was caused to come together with him, bringing a false land register in his
hand. [Accordingly], I (Khayri) ceased to be the child of Neshi.’
8
5  The plaintiff 
mos
 and his mother then appealed to the vizier in Heliopolis against the court’s
decision. The vizier ordered the land registers from Pi-Ramses, the residence of Nineteenth Dynasty
kings in the Eastern Delta, and showed the mother of 
mos
 that they did not include her son’s name.
‘You are not in the documents,’ they were told. However, after further protests by the plaintiff that he
was indeed 
mos,
 the legal son and heir, the vizier instructed the court at Memphis to hear local
witnesses to see whether the plaintiff could support his claim.
In the subsequent testimony the word 
mos
 is again used, but in this case to establish that Huy, the
father of the plaintiff, was the rightful heir of Neshi, the original owner of the land. The long tomb list
of witnesses, for instance, begins with the testimony of the goatherd Mesman, who swore: ‘[As Amun
endures and as the ruler endures], I shall speak truthfully to the Pharaoh … I shall not speak falsely,
and if I speak falsely cut off [my nose and my ears]; [let me (be banished) to Kush]. As to the scribe
Huy, child of Urnero, it is said that he is the child (
mos
) of Neshi … ’
After hearing these and other witnesses
9
 the court decided that Khayri 
(mos)
 was, in fact, the
rightful heir as a result of his descent from Urnero, his grandmother, and his father, Huy. The tomb
inscriptions record: ‘They gave me land, thirteen arourae, and land was given to the heirs before the
notables of the town,’ said the descendant 
mos
 at the successful conclusion of his case.
10
 A copy of
the court’s findings was placed in the Hall of Judgement, accompanied by a list of the judges who had


--- PAGE 69 ---
made them.
The above account is given in chronological order. This, however, was not the method followed by
the scribe invited by the tomb owner, who became known by the name of 
Mos
 after the case, to relate
this somewhat complex story in his tomb. It is important to remember here that we are not dealing
with a high official, employing an official scribe to provide an autobiographical account of his life,
but with a private citizen employing a freelance scribe – and, on the evidence, one with not very tidy
thinking processes – to record events that were significant in the citizen’s own life.
The tomb inscriptions flit from one period to another. They begin by stating that the litigation over
ownership of the land began in the reign of Ramses II. Then the scribe moved back to the time of
Horemheb and the conflict between Urnero and Takharu that ended with division of the Neshi land
between the six heirs. Having dealt with this aspect of the story, he moved forward again to the time
of Ramses II, giving Year 14-plus as the date when Huy died and his son, Khayri, was not allowed to
possess and work the land that had been worked by his father. From this point he largely followed
events in their chronological order until he came to the Memphis court’s decision to return ownership
of the disputed land to Khayri. The court’s decision is followed by a list of judges, then the phrase
that has created all the confusion: ‘Before the court this day, year 59 [ .?. ] under the majesty of the
king of Upper and Lower Egypt Djeserkheprure-Setepenre, [son of Re], Horemheb-Meiamon.’
11
Finally, the scribe ends his account by taking us right back to the examination made by the priest Aniy
at the time in the reign of Horemheb when the dispute broke out between the plaintiffs grandmother,
Urnero, and her sister, Takharu.
The above date, Year 59, comes at the end of the court’s ruling, before the beginning of the
examination of witnesses at the time of Horemheb. It seems to be some kind of a flashback to the
original dispute between Urnero and Takharu. However, some scholars have been confused into
accepting Year 59 as an actual date in the reign of Horemheb because they took the view that it
relates to the text which follows it. Yet, even if the scribe chose to give the Memphis evidence and
the list of judges 
after
 the actual decision of the court, the opening phrase ‘Before the court this day
…’ at the end of this muddled section suggests that the date applies to the court’s decision. Certainly
one would expect a date referring to the successful conclusion of the case rather than events that were
the subject of a different court hearing three generations earlier.
The question therefore remains: in what sense was the scribe linking two separate disputes – one in
the reign of Horemheb, the other brought to a successful conclusion in the reign of Ramses II? The
missing word that was placed originally between ‘Year 59’ and ‘Horemheb’ would certainly have
changed the meaning of the phrase in question. Although this can only be conjecture, it seems
reasonable to suggest that the scribe may have been indicating the time that had elapsed between the
original dispute, involving Urnero and Takharu, and the end of the 
mos
-Khay dispute over the same
piece of land. In this case, the inscription, sandwiched between accounts of two separate court
actions, that has caused all the confusion may have read: ‘Before the court this day, Year 59 [since]
under the majesty of the king of Upper and Lower Egypt Djeserkheprure-Setepenre [son of Re],
Horemheb-Meiamon’ and then sketched in the distant origins of the dispute with a copy of the
examination made by the priest Aniy at the time of Urnero and Takharu.
The 
mos
 inscriptions cannot be used, as we have seen, to prove that Horemheb had a long reign.
Nor is there any justification, without any evidence, for saying that the total years of the four Amarna
kings – Akhenaten, Semenkhkare, Tutankhamun and Aye – were added to the length of Horemheb’s
reign. It is not only pure supposition, but a course of action for which we find no other example in the
history of Ancient Egypt and a course that is contradicted by the British Museum papyrus that


--- PAGE 70 ---
mentions ‘Year 9 of the rebel’, a clear reference to Akhenaten. We have no record of any major
military conflict by Horemheb in Asia when we know for certain from other sources that the situation
created by the emergent Hittite power there called for urgent action. Nor has Horemheb left any major
monuments – as one would expect if he had a long reign – other than the Amarna constructions he
usurped, dismantled and re-used.
In the same 
mos
 text that refers to Akhenaten we find, as we have seen, the initial ‘A’ of another
Amarna king, who must certainly have been Aye. Is it likely that the same scribe who identified these
kings would ignore the length of their reigns in the very same text? In any case, it was the names of the
Amarna kings that were banned from mention, not the length of their reigns.
In the circumstances, as Year 13 is the last sure date that we have for Horemheb and it agrees with
Manetho’s account, this should be regarded as being around the time that he died, already an old man
who had been a general in the army as long ago as the start of Tutankhamun’s reign twenty-six years
earlier.
Acceptance of this date, and of a coregency between Amenhotep III and his son Akhenaten, also
helps to throw some light on the obscure origins of Horemheb. A stela of Neby, the official of
Tuthmosis IV, now in the Leiden Museum, is divided into three registers. The top register shows
Neby, ‘Troop Commander of Zarw’ and his wife, and the central one depicts two offering scenes.
The right-hand scene shows a figure identified as ‘his son Horemheb’ making libation offering to
Neby, ‘Troop Commander and Mayor of Zarw’, and his wife.
12
As Horemheb was a rare name at the time, Wolfgang Helck, the German philologist, suggested that
the young figure shown on the stela was none other than the future king. The close relationship
between Horemheb and the Ramesside kings who followed him and founded the Nineteenth Dynasty
point to the likelihood of this identification’s being accurate. It was Horemheb who appointed both
Pa-Ramses (later Ramses I, first ruler of the Nineteenth Dynasty) and his son Seti (who succeeded his
father as Seti I) as ‘Troop Commander and Mayor of Zarw’. The connection between the god Seth
and Horemheb, Ramses I and Seti I has also been proven by the remains of a sanctuary found at the
Eastern Delta site of Tell el-Dab’a, dedicated to ‘Sutekh (Seth), great of might’ and bearing the names
of King Horemheb.
13
 Seti, while still Mayor of Zarw, was also the priest of Seth.
Helck’s suggestion was rejected, however, mainly because it was thought that, if Horemheb had
been born so early, there was no coregency and he had a long reign, he would have had to be more
than a hundred years old when he died. There is a possibility that Neby died at some time during the
reign of Amenhotep III. The stela would not have been made until after his death and as his son,
Horemheb, is not given a title in the stela he must have been very young at the time. Now, if we
accept Year 13 of his reign as the year in which Horemheb died and a coregency of eleven years
between Amenhotep III and his son, Akhenaten, it means that Horemheb, even if born in the first year
of Amenhotep III, would have been only seventy – a possible age – at the time of his death.


--- PAGE 71 ---
10
A CHRONOLOGY OF KINGS
T
HERE
 is little dispute about the reign of Amenhotep III’s father and predecessor, Tuthmosis IV. Here
the archaeological evidence agrees with Manetho that his reign lasted eight years. We are therefore
now in a position to present a chronology, working backwards, for the three-quarters of a century or
so that preceded the Israelite Exodus:
When did these kings actually reign? A convenient starting point in trying to answer this question is
the reign of Tuthmosis IV’s grandfather, Tuthmosis III, which is accepted as having lasted fifty-four
years. However, two possible dates have been suggested for his accession. Those scholars who
allotted a long reign to Horemheb and refused to accept the existence of a coregency between
Akhenaten and his father favour 1504 
BC
 while supporters of a short reign and a coregency prefer
1490 
BC,
 which, because of the arguments put forward in the three preceding chapters, I, too, prefer.
Although the reign of his successor, Amenhotep II, has also been the subject of argument, the
twenty-three years accepted by Gardiner seems on the bulk of the evidence available to be nearest to
the truth. Amenhotep was succeeded in turn by his son, Tuthmosis IV, whose length of reign, together
with those of Amenhotep III, the four Amarna kings, Horemheb and Ramses I, are given in reverse
order in the table above. How long his son, Seti I, sat on the throne has been the subject of
considerable controversy, with estimates of the length of his reign ranging from as high as fifty-nine
years to as low as eleven. We are on safer ground, however, with his successor, Ramses II, who is
known to have ruled for sixty-seven years, although here again two dates have been put forward for
his accession, 1304 
BC
 and 1290 
BC.
 I prefer 1304 
BC,
 the date favoured by supporters of a short reign
for Horemheb and an Amarna coregency. If we subtract 1304 
BC
 from 1490 
BC
 we are left with a total
of 186 years to be allotted between eleven kings as follows:


--- PAGE 72 ---
Subtracting this total of 157 years from the 186 years to be allotted between these kings, we are left
with twenty-nine years for the reign of Seti I.
The reason for the confusion surrounding the length of time he sat on the throne lies in the
conflicting evidence available and, in some cases, the way it has been interpreted. Although the
highest surviving date of Seti is Year 11, Manetho gave Seti a long reign (fifty-one years according to
Africanus, fifty-five according to Eusebius and fifty-nine years according to Josephus). These dates
were brought into question by a figure in the Karnak scene depicting Seti’s campaign against the
Shasu in his Year 1. The figure, which bore the name Ramses, was identified as the future king,
Ramses II, shown here sufficiently grown-up to take part in his father’s battles. Clearly, if this was
the case and Seti had a long reign, Ramses II would have been well over a hundred years old when he
died after his own sixty-seven years on the throne.
The impossibility of this prompted Gaston Maspero, the French Egyptologist, to shorten Seti’s
reign considerably: ‘I had first supposed his reign to have been a long one, merely on the evidence
afforded by Manetho’s lists, but the presence of Ramses II as a stripling, in the campaign of Seti’s
first year, forces us to limit its duration to fifteen or twenty years at most, possibly to only twelve to
fifteen.’
1
James Henry Breasted, the American Egyptologist, took a different view. He began by pointing out
that Ramses appears at Karnak ‘in a scene of the Libyan war, without a date, far from the scenes of
the Shasu war of Year 1, on the other side of the door. This appearance of Ramses with his father was
therefore not necessarily in his father’s first year, as has been so often assumed.’ He then goes on to
say: ‘Furthermore, a close examination of the accompanying figures will show, first, that this scene is
no proof that Ramses ever appeared in battle with his father at all, and, second, that Ramses was not
the first heir to Seti’s throne.’ He bases his argument on the fact that a second prince, described as
‘first king’s son, of his body’ – the name that follows is missing – is shown in the scene. ‘ … The
historical conclusion here is important: the “first king’s son” of Seti I was not his successor, Ramses;
that is, that Ramses II had an older brother, who did not reach the throne.’
2
Breasted then went on to argue that the figure of the king’s first-born son was not in the scene when
it was completed, but was added by the elder prince at a later date. It was also clear that, at a later
date still, probably after his elder brother’s death and he had become the heir, Ramses chiselled out
his brother’s figure and the accompanying inscriptions and inserted his own figure ‘for his own figure
is not original in the scene’.
3


--- PAGE 73 ---
The highest date we have for Seti is Year 11, on a stela from Gebel Barakal in Nubia. This has
been taken as his last year. Yet, in the light of the available evidence, the arithmetic doesn’t work,
whether one starts with the childhood of Ramses III and works forward or with his death and works
backward. The essential facts are:
•  Ramses has himself recorded the story of his childhood and accession in a narrative to be found in
Seti I’s temple of Abydos, and the account is confirmed by other evidence: ‘From the time I was in
the egg (a baby) … the great ones sniffed the earth before me; when I attained to the rank of the eldest
son and heir upon the throne … I dealt with affairs, I commanded as chief the foot-soldiers and
chariots. My father having appeared before the people, when I was but a very little boy in his arms,
said to me: ‘I shall have him crowned king, that I may see him in all his splendour while I am still on
this earth!’ … “Place the diadem upon his head,” said he.’
4
In many other inscriptions Ramses stresses that he was a mere child, not a young man of fighting
age, while his father ruled the country.
•  The precise identity of the heir whose inscription Prince Ramses usurped has since been
established as someone named Mehy. He appears to have taken part in all of Seti I’s campaigns, from
the first against the Shasu, and to have enjoyed a favourable position, at least up to the king’s Year 8
when his wars in western Asia came to an end. Moreover, as Seti’s war reliefs were carved on the
exterior of the northern wall of the Hypostyle Hall at Karnak some time after these wars had come to
an end, it suggests that Mehy was regarded as Seti’s heir up to that time. Yet, as Mehy himself was
not included in these scenes originally and he is known to have inserted his figure at a later date, this
could take us even to Seti I’s Year 10.
The Abydos story tells us that Prince Ramses was about ten years of age when his father took the
unusual step of appointing him as ‘eldest son’ and heir to the throne. This cannot have happened
earlier than at least Year 9 when Mehy seems to have been regarded as heir to the throne.
•  It is generally accepted, from examination of his mummy, that Ramses II was about ninety-four
when he died, having ruled for sixty-seven years. This would point to his having come to the throne at
the age of twenty-seven. If his father had ruled for only eleven years, Prince Ramses could not have
been a child, as he claims, in the early stages of his father’s rule and would have reached his tenth
year before his father came to the throne.
•  Seti gave his son wives, beautiful ‘as are those of his palace’, plus three of his heiress sisters,
which – in the light of the above evidence of the time he was appointed ‘eldest son’ and heir to the
throne – indicates that Seti ruled long after his Year 9 or 10.
•  Later, Prince Ramses became an army commander and is thought to have been in charge of a
campaign in the south at the time his father died.
Some further light is thrown on the length of Seti’s reign by the career of a man named Bekenkhons,
who, as a youth, worked for eleven years as an ‘overseer of the training-stable’ for Seti I before
joining the priesthood. On his statue, now in Munich, he gives details of his priestly career, which
lasted seventy years, during the last twenty-seven of which he was the High Priest of Amun. The
statue was dedicated in the reign of Seti’s son, Ramses II, while Bekenkhons was still alive.
From another source we know that Bekenkhons’ successor as High Priest of Amun was a man
named Rome-Roy, who also served under Ramses II. As we know that Ramses II ruled for sixty-
seven years, even if we make the unrealistic assumptions that Bekenkhons died and was succeeded by


--- PAGE 74 ---
Rome-Roy in the very last year of Ramses II’s reign, the former’s priestly career must have started no
later than three years before Seti’s death. Adding on the eleven years he served in the training-stable,
and making another assumption, that he joined the king’s service in Seti’s Year 1, means that Seti’s
reign must have lasted at least fifteen years – and, on the balance of probabilities, even longer.
Another argument against a short reign is the fact that Seti I’s mummy convinced Maspero that he
was well over sixty when he died, which means, if he ruled for only eleven years, that he was well
over fifty when he came to the throne. It is difficult to match such an advanced age with the figure of
the mighty warrior who fought the Shasu in Sinai immediately after his accession and then proceeded
to head further campaigns in south and north Palestine, Lebanon, Syria and Libya. Nor can we believe
that, had he been that old when he came to the throne, his heir had not yet been born.
The amount of construction work in which he was involved is another indication of a substantial
reign. Only Pharaohs who ruled for a considerable time – Tuthmosis III, Amenhotep III and Ramses
II, for example – were able to leave great buildings. Seti I completed a funerary temple that had been
started by his father, Ramses I, at Kurnah in Western Thebes. Although the pylon of the temple, which
he dedicated to the cult of himself and his father, is no longer to be found, the façade, with lotus-bud
columns, is still in perfect shape, together with a number of the chambers in front of the sanctuary.
The decoration is very carefully executed.
At Abydos, the centre of worship of Osiris, god of the dead, Seti built a great and beautiful temple
which Maspero describes in the following terms: ‘The building material mainly employed here was
the white limestone of Turah, but of a most beautiful quality, which lent itself to the execution of bas-
reliefs of great delicacy, perhaps the finest in Ancient Egypt … When the decoration of the temple
was complete, Seti regarded the building as too small for its divine inmate, and accordingly added to
it a new wing, which he built along the whole length of the southern wall; but he was unable to finish
it completely .. .’
5
Another great architectural work, started by Seti and completed by his son, Ramses II, is the
Hypostyle Hall at Karnak, described by Maspero as ‘this almost superhuman undertaking’: ‘The hall
measures 162 feet in length, by 325 in breadth. A row of 12 columns, the largest ever placed inside a
building, runs up the centre, having capitals in the form of inverted bells. One hundred and twenty-
two columns with lotus-form capitals fill the aisles, in rows of nine each. The roof of the central bay
is 74 feet above the ground, and the cornice of the two towers rises 63 feet higher … The size is
immense, and we realise its immensity more fully as we search our memory in vain to find anything
with which to compare it.’
6
All of this great building work must have required a great deal of time in planning, the cutting and
transportation of stone, and painting and decorating to a perfect finish, certainly longer than eleven
years, particularly when Seti I was engaged in his many wars during the early part of his reign.
A further pointer to a substantial reign is the fact that evidence from the south shows that, while
Seti ruled Egypt, there were two viceroys for Kush, Amenemopet, son of Paser I, and Yuni.
7
 This is
unlikely to have been the case had Seti ruled for only eleven years.
If the arguments in favour of a reign of twenty-nine years for Seti I are accepted, this would mean
that he was born in Year 2 of his father, which seems possible from the above evidence.
We are now in a position to construct a chronology for the period that concerns us:


--- PAGE 75 ---
On the basis of this chronology of Egyptian history and the chronology of the Sojourn set out in an
earlier chapter, we can make the following deductions:
• Akhenaten was born in Year 11 or 12 of his father, 1394 
BC;
• Akhenaten fell from power and fled to Sinai in 1361 
BC
 at the age of thirty-four or thirty-five;
• If Akhenaten was Moses, he was around sixty when he returned to Egypt and led the Exodus in the
reign of Ramses I.
Whether or not Akhenaten lost his life at the time he fell from power, which has been widely
assumed, will be argued in a later chapter.


--- PAGE 76 ---
11
THE BIRTHPLACE OF AKHENATEN
I
F
 Moses and Akhenaten are the same person, they must have been born at the same place at the same
time.
From Old Testament and Egyptian sources we have mention of six Eastern Delta cities:
•  
Avaris,
 the old Hyksos capital, dating from more than two centuries earlier;
•  
Zarw-kha,
 the city of Queen Tiye, mentioned in the pleasure-lake scarab of Year 11 of her
husband, Amenhotep III
;
•  
Zarw
 or 
Zalw (Sile
 of the Greeks), the frontier fortified city, mentioned in texts starting from the
Eighteenth Dynasty, whose precise whereabouts in the fourteenth nome is known;
•  
Pi-Ramses,
 the Eastern Delta residence of Pharaohs of the Nineteenth and Twentieth Dynasties,
known as ‘House of Ramses, Beloved of Amun, Great of Victories’;
•  
Raamses,
 the city built by the Israelites’ forced labour;
•  
Rameses
 (the same place as Raamses), where the Exodus began.
There is now general agreement among scholars that Pi-Ramses was situated on the site of the
former Hyksos capital, Avaris, and that it was the same city as Raamses, the city built by the
Israelites’ harsh labour, and Rameses, named in the Old Testament as the starting point of the Exodus.
The two questions at issue, therefore, are: are Pi-Ramses/Avaris to be found in the same location as
Zarw? Was Zarw also Tiye’s city, Zarw-kha? The answers to these questions are critical because of
what we know of the birth of Moses and Akhenaten.
On their arrival in Egypt the Israelites settled at Goshen in the Eastern Delta, near to the known
position of Zarw. As there is no evidence that they ever migrated to another part of the country, this
must have been the area that provides the background for the Book of Exodus account of the birth of
Moses. It is also implicit in the story that the ruling Pharaoh of the time had a residence nearby: he
was in a position to give orders in person to the midwives to kill the child born to the Israelite
woman if it proved to be a boy, and, according to the Book of Exodus, the sister of Moses was able to
watch what happened when ‘the daughter of Pharaoh came down to wash herself at the river’ and
noticed the basket containing Moses hidden among the reeds on the bank of the Nile. Later, when
Moses and his brother Aaron had a series of meetings with Pharaoh there is no indication that they
had to travel any distance for these meetings to take place.
In the case of Akhenaten, the pleasure lake scarab, dated to Year 11 (1394 
BC
) of his father,
Amenhotep III, plus other evidence, points to his birth having taken place at Zarw-kha. Six versions
have been found of the scarab, issued to commemorate the creation of a pleasure lake for the king’s
Great Royal Wife, Tiye. Although there are some minor differences, they all agree on the main points
of the text, which runs as follows:
Year 11, third month of Inundation (first season), day 1, under the majesty of Horus… mighty of valour, who smites the
Asiatics, King of Upper and Lower Egypt, Neb-Maat-Re, Son of Re Amenhotep Ruler of Thebes, who is given life, and the


--- PAGE 77 ---
Great Royal Wife Tiye, who liveth. His Majesty commanded the making of a lake for the Great King’s Wife Tiye, who liveth,
in her city of Zarw-kha. Its length 3700 cubits, its breadth 700 cubits. [One of the scarabs, a copy of which is kept at the
Vatican, gives the breadth as 600 cubits, and also mentions the names of the queen’s parents, Yuya and Tuya, indicating that
they were still alive at the time.] His Majesty celebrated the feast of the opening of the lake in the third month of the first
season, day 16, when His Majesty sailed thereon in the royal barge 
Aten Gleams.
1
In my previous book
2
 I argued that Pi-Ramses, Avaris and Zarw-kha were all to be found at one
location – the frontier fortified city of Zarw, to the east of modern Kantarah, which is to the south of
Port Said on the Suez Canal. To recapitulate what I believe to have been the correct sequence of
events …
Here the kings of the Twelfth Dynasty are known to have built a fortified city (20th century 
BC
.)
The autobiography of Sinuhi, a court official who fled from Egypt to Palestine during the last days of
Amenemhat I, the first king of the Twelfth Dynasty (1970 
BC),
 mentions his passing the border fortress,
which at that time bore the name ‘Ways of Horus’. The border city was rebuilt and refortified by the
Asiatic Hyksos rulers who took control of Egypt for just over a century from the mid-seventeenth
century 
BC.
 During this period it became known as Avaris. Later, when the kings of the Eighteenth
Dynasty expelled the Hyksos, they in turn rebuilt the city with new fortifications, it was given the new
name of Zarw and it became the main outpost on the Asiatic frontier, the point at which Egyptian
armies began and ended their campaigns against Palestine/Syria.
During the time of Tuthmosis IV (1413–1405 
BC),
 his queen had an estate and residence within
Zarw. Subsequently, Amenhotep III, the son of Tuthmosis IV, gave this royal residence, Zarw-kha,
within the walls of Zarw, to his wife, Queen Tiye, as a present. I explained this event as stemming
from the king’s desire to allow Tiye to have a summer residence in the area of nearby Goshen in the
Eastern Delta where her father’s Israelite family had been allowed to settle. (I regard Yuya, Queen
Tiye’s father, as being the Patriarch Joseph, of the coat of many colours, who brought the tribe of
Israel from Canaan to dwell in Egypt.)
Later still, after the fall of the Amarna kings, who were descendants of both Amenhotep III and
Yuya, Horemheb, the king who succeeded them, deprived the Israelites of their special position at
Goshen and turned their city of Zarw into a prison. There he appointed Pa-Ramses and his son, Seti,
as viziers and mayors of Zarw as well as commanders of the fortress and its troops. Pa-Ramses, the
new mayor of the city, forced the Israelites into harsh labour, building for him what the Book of
Exodus describes as a ‘store city’ within the walls of Zarw. Pa-Ramses followed Horemheb on the
throne as Ramses I in 1335 
BC,
 establishing the Nineteenth Dynasty, and it was during his brief reign,
lasting little more than a year, that Moses led the Israelites out of the Eastern Delta into Sinai.
At the time he came to the throne, Ramses I already had his residence at Zarw, being the city’s
mayor. His son, Seti I, and the latter’s son, Ramses II, later established a new royal residence at Zarw
that became known as Pi-Ramses and was used as the Delta capital of the Ramesside kings of the
Nineteenth and Twentieth Dynasties for about two centuries. The kings of the Twenty-first Dynasty
established a new residence at Tanis, south of Lake Menzalah, and made use in its construction of
many monuments and much stone from Pi-Ramses, which misled later scribes into the erroneous
belief that Pi-Ramses and Tanis were identical locations.
The whole issue of whether or not Pi-Ramses/Avaris and Zarw are to be found at the same location
has been clouded by the fact that, while we know the precise location of Zarw, scholars have in the
course of this century canvassed the claims of no fewer than six other sites in the Eastern Delta, in
addition to Tanis, as the location of Pi-Ramses/Avaris, and two alternative sites – one at Thebes, the
other in Middle Egypt – as the site of Tiye’s city. The Delta sites have been advanced even if they


--- PAGE 78 ---
failed to yield the required archaeological evidence, were in the wrong nome and, in some cases, did
not exist at the relevant time. Each was abandoned in turn to be replaced by a seventh site,
Qantir/Tell el-Dab’a. Investigations at Tell el-Dab’a, just over a mile south of Qantir (one of the sites
suggested earlier, and now revived), were begun by the University of Vienna and the Austrian
Archaeological Institute in 1966 and are still continuing.
This location has achieved considerable acceptance as the site of Pi-Ramses/Avaris since Manfred
Bietak, the Austrian Egyptologist in charge of the excavations, gave an interim report on the
expedition’s findings in 1979. Yet this site, too, does not withstand close scrutiny any more than the
previous six in the Eastern Delta that had been put forward. Recent archaeological discoveries in the
Kantarah area make it unnecessary to argue at this point the objections to the Qantir/Tell el-Dab’a
location, which can be found in Appendix D: instead I am concentrating here on some of the mass of
evidence that Pi-Ramses/Avaris is to be found on the same site as Zarw. From written sources we
know that:
•  Pi-Ramses was situated in a fertile wine-producing area and lay in the centre of a great vineyard:
Zarw was in a wine-producing area, which is supported by two pieces of evidence. Remains of wine
jars, sent from Zarw by its then mayor Djehutymes for celebrations of Amenhotep III’s first jubilee in
his Year 30, were found in the Malkata palace complex at Western Thebes,
3
 and a wine jar from the
house of Aten at Zarw, belonging to his Year 5, was found in the tomb of Tutankhamun;
•  Pi-Ramses was ‘the forefront of every foreign land, the end of Egypt’, located ‘between Palestine
and Egypt’:
4
 Zarw had an identical location, at the starting point of the ‘road of Horus’, leading to
Palestine;
•  Pi-Ramses could be reached by water from Memphis: Zarw could be reached by water from
Memphis;
•  Pi-Ramses was connected by water with the fortress of Zarw and the Waters of Shi-hor (north and
north-west of Zarw), which fits exactly what we know of the Ramesside Delta residence;
•  Pi-Ramses was supplied with papyrus by the Waters of Pa-Twfy, ‘The Sea Of Reeds’, which has
been identified with Lake Ballah, to the south of Zarw;
•  Pi-Ramses’ boundaries were marked by some of its chief temples, with Seth the main deity
worshipped there: ‘Its western part is the house of Amun, its southern part the house of Seth, Astarte
is in its Orient, and Buto in its northern part’:
5
 Seth was also the main deity worshipped at Zarw;
•  An indication that Pi-Ramses was built originally as a royal residence within the walls of Zarw is
to be found in the name Pi-Ramses itself. Instead of a usual determinative for a city, a cross inside a
circle, we have a sign for a house, Pi 
(Pr)
 preceding the name. This term 
Pr
 is usually applied either
to a temple area, a religious area or a walled area containing a royal palace as well as a temple and
other administrative buildings.
•  Pi-Ramses was located in the fourteenth Egyptian nome and to the east of the Pelusiac branch of the
Nile Delta: so was Zarw;
•  Pi-Ramses had strong military fortifications, and, according to Manetho, as quoted by Josephus,
Avaris, which was on the same site, was very favourably situated, well-fortified and in a strategic
military position: this was equally true of Zarw.


--- PAGE 79 ---
Abundant evidence exists to confirm that Pi-Ramses was heavily fortified. A stela at Abu Simbel
of the thirty-fifth year of Ramses II has the god Ptah telling the king: ‘I have made for thee a noble
Residence in order to strengthen the boundary of the Two Lands, House of Ramses, Beloved of
Amun,’ thus confirming that the residence was both fortified and near the borders. Gardiner has
pointed out that the special epithets attached to the city’s name indicate its location near the border:
‘… two epithets [are] frequently … added to the cartouche and its adjuncts; these, according to the
habit of Egyptian names, express the precise aspect in which the king appears in the particular
locality that they designate, and are the real distinguishing marks by which that locality could be
differentiated from others owing their names to the same king. The original name of the city in its
complete form was … The House of Ramses, Beloved of Amun, Great of Victories, and the boastful
addition here made to the royal nomen conveys a significant hint as to the position of the city near the
military road to Asia.’
6
Another indication that Pi-Ramses was designated as being a ‘mighty place’ is provided in Ramses
II’s inscription at his father’s temple in Abydos, while 
Papyrus Anastasi III
 describes Pi-Ramses as
being ‘the marshalling place of thy [Pharaoh’s] cavalry, the rallying point of thy soldiers, the
harbourage of thy ships’ troops …’
All the sources we have about Avaris confirm – as one would expect if it is the same place – that,
like Pi-Ramses, it was a fortified city. The Egyptian name of Avaris consists of two elements, 
hwt-
w’ret,
 which are followed by a determinative, not of a city but of a walled area. The first element,
hwt,
 indicates a settlement surrounded by a high brick wall, the second element, 
w’ret,
 as Alan
Gardiner has explained, signifies a ‘desert strip’. So the very name of the city indicates that it was
both fortified and near the desert border, just as Zarw was. This was precisely what one would
expect in the case of Asiatic invaders in order both to protect themselves against the natives and be
near their escape road to Asia. The account of Manetho, as quoted by Josephus, agrees with this
understanding: ‘In the Saite [Sethroite fourteenth nome], he [the Hyksos ruler] founded a city very
favourably situated on the east of the Bubastite branch of the Nile [the north section of the Pelusiac],
and called Avaris after an ancient religious tradition. This place he rebuilt and fortified with massive
walls, planting a garrison … to guard the frontier. Here he would come in summertime, partly to train
them carefully in manoeuvres and to strike terror into foreign tribes … ‘
7
 This also agrees with the
description of Avaris as a walled settlement in the Kamose Stela, which gives an account of
campaigns against the Hyksos invaders by the brother of King Ahmosis, founder of the Eighteenth
Dynasty, and the autobiography of Ahmose, a naval officer, who also took part in the war of
liberation and describes in his tomb at el-Kab in Nubia how ‘they [the Egyptian army] sat down [in
siege] before the town of Avaris’.
8
•  Pi-Ramses was also called ‘The Dwelling of the Lion’: Zarw agrees with descriptions of Pi-
Ramses in the fact that it is connected both with Horus and the lion: according to the text in 
Papyrus
Anastasi,
9
 Horus took the form of a lion at Zarw and a seated lion forms the second part of the city’s
name;
•  Exodus 13:17 indicates that the city of Ramses was near ‘the way of the land of the Philistines’,
known from Egyptian sources as the ‘road of Horus’, leading from Zarw to Gaza;
•  The triumphal 
Poem of Pe-natour,
 recording the victories of Ramses II in his Year 5, and a letter
describing the delivery of some stele identify Pi-Ramses and Zarw as being in the same vicinity, and
the account of Seti I’s return from his Year 1 campaign against the Shasu in Sinai indicated that the


--- PAGE 80 ---
royal family had a residence in the area from the early days of the Nineteenth Dynasty;
•  A reference was made in 
Papyrus Anastasi
 (vol. 24, pp. 7, 8) to ‘the fortress of Ramses, which is
in Zarw’, indicating that the fortress of Zarw was sometimes referred to as ‘the fortress of Ramses,
myr Amun
’: this could also have been the case regarding the city;
•  A channel through the Isthmus of Kantarah was first noticed by Napoleon’s French expedition of
1798–1801. This channel was called the ‘separating water’ 
(ta-dynt
 in Egyptian), and is the canal
represented on Seti I’s war inscriptions in the Hypostyle Hall at Karnak. It connected Shi-Hor to the
north and north-west with the Waters of Pa-Twfy in the south, and separated Zarw from the Eastern
Delta. Access to the fortress was provided by a bridge, which became the origin of the modern name,
Kantarah (bridge).
This mass of circumstantial evidence, which is by no means exhaustive, served to persuade some
scholars that Avaris, Pi-Ramses and Zarw occupied one and the same location: ‘Dr Gardiner has told
us that Ramses, the capital, and Avaris are the same place. The question is therefore: where was
Avaris? I have no hesitation in agreeing with M. (Jean) Clédat, (the French Egyptologist), that it was
the region and the city called Zarw, the present Kantarah, and its neighbourhood.’
10
 Yet very few
accepted this identification when it was first put forward by Clédat in 1922.
11
Basically it was the lack of archaeological evidence that caused the failure of scholars to give
proper attention to Clédat’s views for, although he was correct in identifying Pi-Ramses/Avaris and
Zarw as occupying the same location in the Kantarah area, he was wrong in identifying the precise
spot as Tell Abu-Seifah, just over a mile south-east of modern Kantarah, where only monuments of a
late Graeco-Roman period were discovered. This error stemmed fundamentally from the assumption
that the starting point of the ancient ‘road of Horus’ was the same as that of the modern road leading
from the Kantarah area to Gaza.
The fact that the ancient ‘road of Horus’ began elsewhere became clear when Mohammad Abdel
Maqsoud, a senior excavations officer with the Egyptian Antiquity Organization, began to supervise
diggings at Tell Heboua, some two-and-a-half miles 
north-east
 of Kantarah, three years ago. From
the war reliefs of Seti I at Karnak we know the names of different guarded military posts between
Zarw and Gaza, the first of which, from the Egyptian side, is called the ‘Dwelling of the Lion’. After
two seasons of excavation, Maqsoud gave an account of his findings to members of the Fifth
International Congress of Egyptology in Cairo in November 1988, concluding his speech with the
words: ‘It is possible now to identify the fortress of Tell Heboua with the “Dwelling of the Lion”
depicted in the reliefs of Seti I at Karnak.’
Maqsoud released some details of his findings at the end of the third season, and on reading them in
an Egyptian newspaper in April 1989 I realized that, without being aware of it, he had found the
location of Pi-Ramses/Avaris/Zarw, a view which was published by the 
Sunday Times
 of London a
month later and has since become the subject of discussion by Egyptologists all over the world. What,
in fact, had Maqsoud discovered?
The site of Tell Heboua proved to be near the ancient Pelusiac branch of the Nile, between two
lakes – north and south – on the western side of which are indications of an ancient canal, and it is at
the start of what has now been established as the ‘road of Horus’. Remains of massive fortifying
walls, more than thirteen feet wide, enclose a square area of some 190,000 square yards. Inside the
walls are the remains of at least two ancient towns – one Hyksos, the other dating from the Eighteenth
Dynasty – with houses, streets, storehouses, bread and clay ovens, and burials of two different kinds


--- PAGE 81 ---
on two levels. Maqsoud also found four identical stelae of Nehesy, the king of the weak Thirteenth
Dynasty, two of which bear his cartouche. It was Nehesy 
(c.
 1715 
BC
) who re-established Seth as the
main deity of the fourteenth nome. Seth had earlier been discredited as a result of development of the
myth that he had been responsible for the assassination of the good god Osiris. There was also a
fragment of an architrave, belonging to a temple, with a cartouche of Seti I.
Although much of the site has not yet been excavated, scarabs and other small items found there
point to the existence of temples and palaces. Skeletal remains of children also make it clear that this
was not simply a fortress but also a non-military settlement during both the Hyksos and Empire
periods. In addition, Maqsoud even found remains of an Asiatic community that had occupied the site
before construction of the fortifying walls in the Hyksos period, indicating that the site had been
occupied by a Canaanite community during the Thirteenth Dynasty which preceded Hyksos rule in the
Eastern Delta.
The most important evidence, however, is provided by the fortifications themselves. This is the
only fortified city ever to have been found in the Eastern Delta. Moreover, it has at least three
different walls at three levels, confirming what we know from literary sources of Pi-
Ramses/Avaris/Zarw.
Dr Eric Uphill, Hon. Research Fellow of Egyptology at University College, London, has accepted
in a discussion at the Egyptian Cultural Centre that the city at Tell Heboua could be identified with
Zarw, and even Maqsoud himself has changed the subject of the PhD thesis he is preparing at Lille
University in France from having found the ‘Dwelling of the Lion’, accepting that what he has actually
found is the fortified city of Zarw. I think that before long others will come to the same conclusion
regarding the remains of the upper strata.
The next question that will have to be faced is: what about the fortified Hyksos city beneath Zarw?
The textual information we have not only informs us that Avaris was fortified, but that it was the 
only
fortified Hyksos city in Egypt – and none of the other locations suggested hitherto for the Hyksos
capital so far reveals any kind of fortifications.
Archaeological work in Syria/Palestine has brought to light a number of Hyksos cities, all of which
were almost identical. They featured a characteristic system of fortification whose most dominant
feature was the use of glacis, a steeply-sloping inner wall of plastered limestone, encircling the sides
of an ancient mound on which the city was built; a heavy retaining wall of battered stone at the foot of
the inner wall, and a large city wall around the summit. In defence of the site of Qantir/Tell el-Dab’a
being the location of Pi-Ramses, it has been suggested that the lack of massive walls and
fortifications, which are essential evidence for such an identification, is to be explained by the fact
that they were long ago washed away by the waters of the Nile: yet, if this were the case, one is
entitled to ask how ordinary houses, much less strongly built, have managed to survive in the same
layers and under the same conditions?
In the meantime, as the walled city of Zarw found by Maqsoud lies on top of a mound, it seems
likely that the walls of Avaris lie beneath it; and Dr Ali Hassan, the head of the Egyptian Antiquity
Organization, has admitted: ‘The remains found beneath the city are the first Hyksos remains to be
found in Sinai and raise a new doubt regarding the position – now generally accepted as Tell el-
Dab’a – of the Hyksos capital in Egypt.’ As there is complete agreement among scholars that the
finding of Avaris would also mean having located Pi-Ramses, I do not think we are too far from
establishing the truth now that both of those cities are located at Tell Heboua, particularly when the
site yields further evidence in the planned fourth season of excavation.


--- PAGE 82 ---
Tiye’s City
As the final part of the word Zarw-kha has the determinative of a city – a circle including a cross –
some early Egyptologists, such as Petrie, Maspero and Clédat, having removed this final part of the
name, identified Tiye’s city, Zarw-kha, with the border fortress and city of Zarw.
12
 In addition, Clédat
demonstrated
13
 that Lake Ballah, to the south of Kantarah, is the pleasure lake mentioned in the
scarab. As Zarw was the frontier city on the road to Asia, the use of the epithet ‘who smites the
Asiatics’ in the scarab again points to Zarw as the location of Tiye’s city. More recently, however,
two alternative sites – distant from the frontier – have been canvassed as Tiye’s city (see 
Appendix
D
).


--- PAGE 83 ---
12
AKHENATEN: THE EARLY YEARS
T
HE
 early marriage between Amenhotep III and Tiye, the parents of Akhenaten, is attested by an issue
of scarabs dated to Year 2 of his reign. Although we know of female descendants of this marriage, not
much evidence survives about the birth and childhood of Amenhotep IV (Akhenaten). It seems,
however, that he had an elder brother, Tuthmosis, who died before Akhenaten was born. Tuthmosis,
we know, was being educated and trained at Memphis and held the title of the High Priest of Ptah, as
did most heirs-apparent during the Eighteenth Dynasty, but then he disappeared suddenly from the
scene.
Some additional light was cast on the youth of Akhenaten as a result of excavations on the site of
Amenhotep III’s royal palace complex at Malkata in Western Thebes by the discovery of hundreds of
small inscribed fragments of great historical importance. Here it becomes evident that the Middle
Palace of the complex was probably built for Akhenaten while he was still a prince and, as ‘Regnal
Year 
V
 occurs in the inscriptions, that he continued to live there during the early Theban years of the
coregency with his father. The earliest dating for Amenhotep III is not earlier than Year 8, which
indicates that Year 1 could not relate to him. The only mention of Akhenaten before his accession to
the throne was found in Malkata in the form of an undated wine-jar seal with the inscription ‘… (of)
the estate of the true King’s Son, Amenhotep (Akhenaten)’. The use of the expression ‘true son’
indicates an early challenge to the prince’s right to inherit the throne and that the coregency had not
yet started. This therefore dates the wine-jar seal to some time between Year 20 of Amenhotep III,
who spent most of his time in Memphis until then, and the start of the coregency in Year 28. It also
suggests that at around this time Akhenaten was old enough to have his own establishment. It is, in
fact, thought that he was in his mid-teens when the coregency started: ‘His [Akhenaten’s] brother,
who ordinarily would have inherited the throne, had died in infancy, and Amenhotep IV was made
coregent with his father … He was perhaps sixteen years at the time.’
1
Deducting sixteen years from the start of the coregency with his father, we come to Year 12 of
Amenhotep III as the year of his birth. Furthermore, two commemorative scarabs issued by
Amenhotep III point to the possible place of his birth. The first, dated to Year 10, relates ‘a miracle,
brought to His Majesty, the daughter of the prince of Nahrin [Mitanni], Sutarna [Tushratta’s father],
Gilukhipa and persons of her harem, 317 women’.
The last issue of these commemorative scarabs is the pleasure lake scarab, dated to Year 11 and,
as we saw earlier, recording ‘… under the majesty of … Amenhotep III, given life; and the Great
King’s Wife Tiye, in her city of Zarw-kha … His Majesty celebrated the feast of the lake, in the third
month of the first season, day 16, when His Majesty sailed thereon in the royal barge 
Aten Gleams.’
It seems that, after his first year with the Mitannian princess, Amenhotep III went back to Queen
Tiye for a kind of second honeymoon in her Eastern Delta city of Zarw – the ‘end of Egypt’, where
the desert and the road to Gaza began, and close to Goshen where the Israelites had settled – which
must have become the summer residence for the royal family, as it became again during the
Ramesside rule of the Nineteenth and Twentieth Dynasties. The Egyptians had three seasons,
Inundation, Winter and Gathering, each of four months, with the year beginning in mid-July. The


--- PAGE 84 ---
middle of the third month would therefore have been around 1 October. Thus it is possible that
Akhenaten was born in 1394 
BC,
 either towards the mid-July end of Year 11 or around the beginning
of year 12.
Zarw had been rebuilt during the Eighteenth Dynasty as a conveniently situated military post for
operations in Asia. It also seems that the harem of Tuthmosis IV, Amenhotep III’s father, had a
residence at Zarw as inscriptions of Neby, the city’s vizier at the time, found at Sarabit el Khadim in
Sinai, give his titles not only as ‘Mayor of Zarw’ and ‘Troop Commander’, but as ‘Steward of the
Harem of the Royal Wife’. If the queen in question was Mutimuya, Amenhotep’s mother, this could
imply that even Amenhotep III must have spent some time during his childhood in this Eastern Delta
residence of his mother, especially at the height of summer when the Delta was cooler than Lower
and Middle Egypt.
Akhenaten was born in an era of peace and prosperity for Egypt. A combination of diplomacy,
judicious marriages and equally judicious use of gold had secured a balance of power, at least
temporarily, between Egypt and the neighbouring Hurrian State of Mitanni, the Hittites, the Assyrians
and Babylonians; Palestine and Syria, conquered by Tuthmosis III in the middle of the fifteenth
century 
BC,
 posed no threat; the southern frontier had been secured up to and beyond the Nile’s Fourth
Cataract. Luxuries from the Levant and the Aegean world poured into the country on a greater scale
than ever before, more land was brought under cultivation, art flourished, prosperous State officials
and priests enjoyed the pleasures of new town houses and country villas with large estates. How the
common people fared is less clear, but they must have benefited from the general prosperity and the
State projects that offered alternative employment during the long summer droughts.
Throughout the country, new temples were founded, old ones restored. One of the biggest temporal
projects was Amenhotep III’s splendid palace, the Malkata, in western Thebes, opposite modern
Luxor, with an imposing mortuary temple beside it for the god Amun-Re. Thebes was also the seat of
the State god, Amun-Re. While ancient cults of other gods continued to flourish locally, the cult of
Amun-Re had received, and continued to receive, such favourable royal treatment – generous
endowment for the great temple of Karnak at Thebes, munificent gifts of land and gold – that it had
become virtually an arm of the State executive. Yet there was already a hint in the air of the enormous
religious upheaval that lay ahead.
During the reign of Amenhotep II, the king’s grandfather, and Tuthmosis IV, his father, a gradual but
growing fusion had taken place between the cult of Amun, the patron god of the Eighteenth Dynasty,
and the cult of Re, the sun-god, whose foremost centre of worship was far to the north at On
(Heliopolis), north of modern Cairo and close to the important administrative and military capital of
Memphis. Re was looked upon as the lord of the universe, the giver of all life, and the king ruled
according to Re’s divine plan by virtue of being his son. On an increasing scale during this period
hymns and prayers to Re as the giver of life began to appear on a variety of monuments, including
stelae and tomb doors. As a rule the name of the sun-god was given in the form common in
Heliopolis, Re-Harakhti (Horus of the Horizon).
At a royal as well as a religious level a change took place during this period that must have seemed
as strange to those aware of it as some of the wilder claims of today’s ardent feminists. The name of
Queen Tiye, unlike that of earlier queens, is placed regularly in a cartouche, a distinction previously
limited to the ruling monarch, and is also included in royal titularies. Furthermore, she is represented
as being of equivalent stature to the king.
As with Moses, we know very little of Akhenaten’s early years beyond the fact that he had an
extremely close relationship with his mother, Queen Tiye, who seems to have been his only


--- PAGE 85 ---
confidante at this stage of his life. There is no evidence that he spent his early days at Memphis,
where his father had his main residence at the time and where the heirs apparent were normally
trained and educated with the sons of the nobles. His appearance at Thebes does not seem to have
occurred until Year 20 of his father, Amenhotep III, when the evidence of the wine-jar seal has been
interpreted as ‘the true king’s son, Amenhotep’, indicates that he had a palace there. William C.
Hayes, the American Egyptologist, comments on this inscription: ‘The King’s son, Amenhotep,
referred to here was in all probability the future king Amenhotep IV before his elevation to the
coregency, which is thought to have taken place in or about Year 28 of Amenhotep III.’
2
It is from his behaviour and the kind of knowledge he seemed to have acquired at the time of his
ultimate appearance at Thebes that we have to guess at where Akhenaten most probably passed the
greater part of his childhood. His appearance does not suggest that he had any physical training,
contrary to the custom among Eighteenth Dynasty kings, and he is never shown hunting lions or other
wild animals. Nor is he depicted smiting an enemy or leading his army in combat. On the other hand
he does not seem to have had the respect for Egyptian deities or customs evinced by other kings.
As many elements of Akhenaten’s new religion had their origin in the solar worship of Heliopolis,
this points to his having had some training and education at this city, especially as Anen, the brother
of Queen Tiye, was a high priest of Re, probably at Heliopolis. Yet his developed views about the
Aten when he was still a young man suggest that he must have been involved in his early years in a
monotheistic cult of the Aten at Zarw, his mother’s city, which – if his life in early childhood, like
that of Moses, had been under threat – would have been the safest place to conceal him.
A significant pointer to the existence of such a cult there even before the birth of Akhenaten is the
fact that the vessel used by Amenhotep III when he sailed on the pleasure lake was named 
Aten
Gleams.
 We also have evidence that the Aten temples which Akhenaten built at both Karnak and
Luxor at the beginning of his coregency were not the first Aten temples in Egypt, and, again
significantly, the very first shrine appears to have been in the city of Zarw. Another of the titles of
Neby, the mayor of Zarw during the time of Tuthmosis IV, was 
imyr hnt,
 and, as the word 
hnt
 has
been interpreted as meaning ‘lake’ or ‘lake area’, Gun Björkman, the Swedish Egyptologist, has taken
this title to indicate Neby’s control over the lake area of Zarw: ‘This seems to agree very well with
what can be concluded from the monuments of Neby. Considering the nature of Zarw and its
neighbourhood, it also seems suitable that Neby should have the designation discussed.’ Björkman
also gave a footnote reference on the same page. ‘Professor Yoyotte has drawn my attention to a
photograph in the Archives P. Lacau (Photo A III, 63, F6) of a 
talalat,
 i.e. a small block from the time
of Akhenaten (these are the stones that Akhenaten used in the building of his Theban temples),
showing a procession of bowing officials. The accompanying inscriptions describe Neby as “The
Overseer of the Foremost Water in the 
hnt
 of the Temple of Aten”.’
3
As this scene and inscription indicate a Temple of Aten already in existence at the time Akhenaten
was constructing his first Aten temple at Karnak, it must have existed in the Zarw lake area of the
Eastern Delta – what the Bible calls ‘the land of Goshen’ – before his rule began. In addition, we
have the text on a wine-jar, placed in the tomb of Tutankhamun at the time of his death, that reads:
‘Year 5. Sweet wine of the House-of-Aten [from] Zarw. Chief vintner Penamun.’
4
Therefore, even before Akhenaten built his first temple for his new God and right up to at least the
time of Year 5 of Tutankhamun, Zarw had a temple to the Aten. If Akhenaten was born there, for
which there are strong supporting indications … if his absence from Thebes and Memphis during his
early years can be explained by the fact that, during this period of his life, he was living at Zarw, the
city of his mother, whose Asiatic relatives had settled in the vicinity … and if the first temple for the


--- PAGE 86 ---
Aten in Egypt was at Zarw, then the inescapable conclusion has to be that he must have received his
first inspirations regarding his new God and his new religion while he was at Zarw. This would
explain the fact that his new religious ideas – including the Israelite idea of a God without an image –
were already to a large extent developed when he came to the throne at Thebes as coregent. It is also
worth noting that the name of the chief vintner, Penamun, resembles an Egyptianized form of
Benjamin, and the vintner could have been a descendant of that tribe.
The section that follows immediately matches, in greater detail, the outline of the story of Moses
given in 
Chapter Six
 and is repeated here to save the reader from having to refer back to it.
As her son reached his mid-teens, Tiye took the precaution of ensuring his right to the throne by
marrying him to his half-sister, Neferneferuaten Nefertiti, daughter of Amenhotep III and 
his
 sister,
Sitamun, and therefore the rightful heiress, whom the young prince succeeded in converting to his new
religion. It has been suggested that because of her name, which can be translated as ‘the beautiful one
who is come’, Nefertiti may have been the Mitannian princess Tadukhipa. Such a marriage would
have been contrary to royal practice in Egypt at the time, however, since the new king established his
right to the throne by marrying the royal heiress. Furthermore, the fact that Horemheb, the last ruler of
the Eighteenth Dynasty, is generally believed to have established his right to the throne by marrying
Nefertiti’s sister, Mutnezmat, indicates that Nefertiti herself must at this earlier stage have been the
heiress daughter of Amenhotep III.
As a further step towards ensuring that her son’s right to the throne should be unassailable, Tiye
subsequently persuaded Amenhotep III, whose health began to weaken as the years went by, to
appoint him as his coregent at Thebes, but, in order to gain the acceptance of the priesthood, the stress
in making the appointment was placed during the first Theban years upon the role of Nefertiti, the
heiress.
On his accession to the throne as coregent, Akhenaten took the names Nefer-khepru-re Waenre
Amenhotep – that is, Amenhotep IV – and from his very first year provoked the priests by his
aggressive attitude. He had barely assumed his new position when he used some of the wealth
amassed by his father to build at Thebes a large new temple to the Aten – a God for the world, not
just for Egyptians – within the precincts of the existing Amun-Re temples at Karnak. This was
followed by a second temple at Luxor. He snubbed the traditional priests by not inviting them to any
of the festivities in the early part of his coregency and, in his fourth year, when he celebrated his 
sed
festival or jubilee – usually, but not necessarily, a rejuvenation celebration that marked Year 30 of a
monarch’s reign – he banned all deities but his own God from the occasion. Twelve months later he
made a further break with tradition by changing his name to Akhenaten in honour of his new deity.
To the resentful Egyptian establishment the Aten was seen as a challenger who would replace the
powerful State god Amun and not come under his domination. In the tense climate that prevailed, Tiye
arranged a compromise by persuading her son to leave Thebes and establish a new capital in Middle
Egypt, on the east bank of the Nile, some two hundred miles to the north of Thebes.


--- PAGE 87 ---
13
HORIZON OF THE ATEN
T
HE
 climate of hostility that surrounded Akhenaten all his life – and one may wonder what could have
been the causes were they not ethnic and religious – had surfaced as early as two years after his
appointment as coregent. The Memphite inscription of his father’s Year 30, as we saw in an earlier
chapter, had sought to defend his action in ‘placing the male offspring [the heir] upon the throne’,
suggesting that there had been opposition – undoubtedly from the Amun priesthood and the nobility –
to his action in securing the inheritance for his son.
Further evidence of such opposition is found in the proclamation of Akhenaten on the boundary
stelae, fixed before the start of the building of his new city of Amarna in his Year 4. Here he refers to
what appears to be open opposition he had faced prior to that date: ‘For, as Father Hor-Aten liveth,
… priests [?] more evil are they than those things which I heard unto Year 4, [more evil are they] than
[those things] which I have heard in year … more evil are they than those things which King …
[heard], more evil are they than those things which Menkheperure (Tuthmosis IV) heard.’
1
Akhenaten is referring to hostile comments he heard about himself prior to Year 4. Not only that:
two kings who preceded him had been subject to similar verbal criticism. The missing name here can
only be that of his father, Amenhotep III, whose Memphite inscription, referred to above, points to
opposition over the steps he took to ensure Akhenaten’s succession. But why should Tuthmosis IV
have encountered similar hostility from the Establishment? We have no evidence on this point. I have
argued in 
Stranger in the Valley of the Kings,
 however, that it was Tuthmosis IV who appointed
Joseph (Yuya) as one of his ministers and the Old Testament indicates that, at the time, he was
dissatisfied with his usual advisers, for which the Book of Genesis blames their failure to interpret
Pharaoh’s dream about the seven good years that would be followed by seven lean years: ‘And it
came to pass in the morning that his spirit was troubled; and he sent and called for all the magicians
of Egypt, and all the wise men thereof; and Pharaoh told them his dream; but there was none that
could interpret them unto Pharaoh’ (Genesis, 41:8).
It would appear a reasonable deduction that priestly opposition to the king’s behaviour went back
to the time of Tuthmosis IV’s appointment as his vizier of Joseph, one of the hated shepherds.
Although the young Akhenaten would have known of the hostile comments directed at his father, he
could have heard about criticisms of his grandfather, Tuthmosis IV, only through having been told
about them, possibly by Yuya, his maternal grandfather, still alive when Akhenaten was born.
The criticisms levelled at Akhenaten himself included, according to other inscriptions on the
boundary stelae at Amarna, the land the king had chosen for the building of a house for the Aten at
Karnak: ‘Behold Pharaoh … found that it belonged not to a god, it belonged not to a goddess, it
belonged not to a prince, it belonged not to a princess … [There is no right for] any man to act as
owner of it.’
2
 The implication is that, as he made in Karnak and Luxor temples for his God, isolating
the priests from running or taking part in any of the ceremonies of worship, they must have sought to
remind him that the temples of Karnak and Luxor belonged to Amun and other traditional gods of
Egypt and that he had no right to introduce there another God who would exclude their authority.
The building of his new city lasted from Akhenaten’s Year 4 to Year 8, but he and his family and


--- PAGE 88 ---
officials began to live there from Year 6. A fine city it was. At this point the cliffs of the high desert
recede from the river, leaving a great semi-circle about eight miles long and three miles broad. The
clean yellow sand slopes gently down to the river.
The modern name of the site of Akhenaten’s city is Tell el-Amarna. In his book 
Tell el-Amarna,
published in 1894, Petrie wrote: ‘The name … seems to be a European concoction. The northern
village is known as Et Till – perhaps a form of Et Tell, the common name for a heap of ruins. The
Beni Amran have given their name to the neighbourhood … But no such name as Tell el-Amarna is
used by the natives and I retain it only as a convention …’
It was here that Akhenaten built his new capital, Akhetaten, The Horizon (or resting place) of the
Aten, where he and his followers could be free to worship their monotheistic God. Huge boundary
stelae, marking the limits of the city and recording the story of its foundation, were carved in the
surrounding cliffs. The first of them date from about the fourth year of the coregency when Akhenaten
had decided upon the site. A later set date from the sixth year and define both the city on the east bank
and a large area of agricultural land on the bank opposite, apparently with a view to making the new
capital self-supporting if it ever came under siege. The stela proclamation runs:
As my father the Aten lives, I shall make Akhetaten for the Aten my father in this place. I shall not make him Akhetaten south
of it, north of it, west of it or east of it. And Akhetaten extends from the southern stela as far as the northern stela, measured
between stela and stela on the eastern mountain, likewise from the south-west stela to the north-west stela on the western
mountain of Akhetaten. And the area between these four stelae is Akhetaten itself; it belongs to Aten my father; mountains,
deserts, meadows, islands, high ground and low ground, land, water, villages, men, beasts and all things which the Aten my
father shall bring into existence eternally forever. I shall not forget this oath which I have made to the Aten my father eternally
forever.
A reiteration of his vows, made to his new capital, was added in his eighth year, which is thought the
most likely time that the king, Queen Nefertiti and their six daughters – Merytaten, Meketaten,
Ankhesenpa-aten, Neferneferuaten the younger, Neferneferure and Setepenre, all born before Year 9
of the king’s reign – took up residence.
Akhetaten was a capital city possessed of both dignity and architectural harmony. Its main streets
ran parallel to the Nile with the most important of them, known even today as 
Sikket es-Sultan,
 the
King’s Way, connecting all the city’s most prominent buildings, including the King’s House where
Pharaoh and his family lived their private family life. Its plan was similar to that of a high official’s
villa, but on a grander scale and surrounded by a spacious garden. To the south of the house was the
king’s private Temple to the Aten. The Great Temple of the Aten, a huge building constructed on an
east-west axis, lay less than a quarter of a mile to the north along the King’s Way. It was entered
through a pylon from the highway and a second entrance gave access to a hypostyle hall called The
House of Rejoicing of the Aten. Six rectangular courts, known as Gem-Aten, lay along a processional
way and were filled with tables for offerings to the Aten. At the eastern end of the enclosure there
was a sanctuary equipped with a great altar and more offering tables. Abreast the northern wall of the
enclosure lay the pavilion where a great reception for foreign princes bearing tribute was held in
Year 12, thought probably to have been the high point of Akhenaten’s reign. The house of the high
priest Panehesy lay outside the enclosure’s south-east corner.
It was not just the form of worship that was new in Akhetaten. Queen Nefertiti, like her mother-in-
law Queen Tiye, enjoyed a prominence that had not existed in the past. On one of his new city’s
boundary stelae her husband had her described flatteringly as: ‘Fair of Face, Joyous with the Double
Plume, Mistress of Happiness, Endowed with Favour, at hearing whose voice one rejoices, Lady of
Grace, Great of Love, whose disposition cheers the Lord of the Two Lands.’ The king gave tombs,


--- PAGE 89 ---
gouged out of the face of surrounding cliffs, to those nobles who had rallied to him. In the reliefs
which the nobles had carved for themselves in these tombs – showing Akhenaten with his queen and
family dispensing honours and largesse, worshipping in the temple, driving in his chariot, dining and
drinking – Nefertiti is depicted as having equal stature with the king and her names are enclosed in a
cartouche.
Throughout this period changes took place in the nature of Akhenaten’s belief. As we saw earlier,
when he was shown in his Year 1 worshipping at the quarry of Gebel Silsila in Nubia, he called
himself the ‘first prophet’ of ‘Re-Harakhti, Rejoicing-in-the Horizon, in his name the light (Shu)
which is in the Aten’. Soon afterwards the name of the Aten was placed inside two cartouches so as
to be represented as a ruling king. At this early stage the God was represented as a human shape,
either with the head of a falcon surmounted with the sun disc or as a winged disc. These early
representations were made in the conventional artistic style of the Egypt of the time.
Between the king’s Year 4 and Year 5 a new style of art started to appear, part of it realistic, part
distinguished by an exaggeration of expression. There was also a new representation of the God. A
disc at the top of royal scenes extended its rays towards the king and queen, and the rays end in their
hands, which sometimes hold the Ankh, the Egyptian symbol of life, to the noses of the king and
queen, a privilege which only they enjoy. The disc and its rays are not to be seen, for example, in
scenes showing officials in the doorways of their tombs, reciting the famous hymns to Aten found
inscribed on Aye’s tomb. The king and his queen are the major figures in the Aten cult: it is their
colossal statues that surround the open courts of the temples, which contained no images of the gods
although the walls were probably covered with scenes depicting the worship of the Aten. Pharaoh
was Aten’s channel of communication and only he had the power to interpret the divine will. In the
longer hymn to Aten, thought to have been composed by the king himself, a long poetic passage
credits Aten with the creation of all the phenomena of the universe and asserts that all creatures exist
only by virtue of the sun’s rising and infusing them with life each morning.
In Year 6 the Aten was given a new epithet, ‘Celebrator of Jubilees’, jubilees which coincided,
significantly, with those of the king. Then, towards the end of Year 9 the name of the Aten received its
new form to rid it of any therio-anthropomorphic and panetheistic ideas that may have clung to it. The
falcon symbol that had been used to spell the word ‘Re-Harakhti’ was changed to abstract signs
giving an equivalent ‘Re, Ruler of the Horizon’ while a phrase in the second cartouche was also
altered, ridding it of the word for light, ‘Shu’, which was also a representation of the old Egyptian
god of the void. This was replaced by other signs. The new form of the God’s name read: ‘Re, the
living Ruler of the Horizon, in his name (aspect) of the light which is in the Aten’.
No evidence of burial, or even of sarcophagi, have been found in any of the nobles’ tombs and their
main interest remains in the vivid picture they give – in a manner previously unknown in Egypt – of
life in the new city and of the intimate family life of Pharaoh himself. Pendlebury, who worked at the
site in the 1930s, later had this to say, in his book 
Tell el-Amarna,
 published in 1935, of the tomb
paintings and sketches: ‘Carelessly and hastily carved as many of them are, the new spirit of realism
is strikingly evident. The incidental groups of spectators are so alive, the princesses turn to one
another with their bouquets so naturally. Almost more important, however, are the religious texts from
which we can read the hymns to the sun written by Akhenaten and giving the theology and philosophy
of the new religion.’
The ruling Pharaoh was regarded as being head of the priesthood, head of the army and head of the
administration of the Two Lands of Egypt. By rejecting the gods of Egypt, Akhenaten ceased to be
head of the priesthood and the temples of Egypt were no longer under his control. He also had no


--- PAGE 90 ---
control over the running of the country while his father was still alive. But, from the time he moved to
Amarna, Akhenaten relied completely on the army’s support for protection and, possibly, as a future
safeguard against the confrontation that would be inevitable once his father died and he became sole
ruler.
Alan R. Schulman, the American Egyptologist, was able to demonstrate that although, because of
his physical weakness, Akhenaten alone of the Tuthmosside House is not represented as an active
participant in horsemanship, archery and seamanship – in which his forebears excelled – he seems to
have been at pains to emphasize his military authority. In the vast majority of the representations, he is
shown wearing either the Blue Crown or the short Nubian wig, both belonging to the king’s military
head-dress, rather than the traditional ceremonial crowns of Lower and Upper Egypt. Akhenaten’s use
of these two types of headgear on almost every possible public and private occasion may then have
been intended to identify him constantly in the minds of his people as a military leader: ‘Scenes of
soldiers and military activity abound in both the private and royal art of Amarna. If we may take the
reliefs from the tombs of the nobles at face value, then the city was virtually an armed camp.
Everywhere we see parades and processions of soldiers, infantry and chariotry with their massed
standards. There are soldiers under arms standing guard in front of the palaces, the temples and in the
watchtowers that bordered the city, scenes of troops, unarmed or equipped with staves, carrying out
combat exercises in the presence of the king.’
3
The military garrison of Amarna had detachments of foreign auxiliaries in addition to Egyptian
units. Schulman goes on to say: ‘Just as Amarna had its own military garrison which stood ready to
enforce the will of the king, so the other cities of Egypt must also have had their garrisons and the
army, loyal to the throne, carried out its will. That the army was so loyal to the throne and to the
dynasty was almost assured by the person of its commander, the god’s-father Aye, who somehow was
related to the royal family. Though he does not give them great prominence in his inscriptions as a
private individual, Aye held posts among the highest in the infantry and the chariotry, posts also held
by Yuya, the father of Queen Tiye and possibly also the father of Aye.’
4
 (The precise relationship of
the four Amarna kings will be discussed later.)
It was again the loyalty of the army, controlled by Aye, that kept Akhenaten in power in the uneasy
years that followed his coming to the throne as sole ruler in his Year 12 upon the death of his father.
By that time Akhenaten had developed his monotheistic ideas to a great extent. If the Aten was the
only God, Akhenaten, as his sole son and prophet, could not allow other gods to be worshipped at the
same time in his dominion. As a response to his rejection by the Amun priests as a legitimate ruler, he
had already snubbed Amun and abolished his name from the walls and inscriptions of temples and
tombs. Now he took his ideas to their logical conclusion by abolishing worship of any gods
throughout Egypt except the Aten. During the Amarna rule of Akhenaten his subjects were totally
committed by the king to the worship of a monotheistic God, although at this time only the Levites
among the Hebrews were involved in his new religion.
5
 Akhenaten closed all the temples, except
those of Aten, dispersed the priests and gave orders that the names of other deities should be
expunged from monuments and temple inscriptions throughout the country. Units were despatched to
excise the names of the ancient gods wherever they were found written or engraved, a course that can
only have created mounting new opposition to his already rejected authority:
‘The persecution of first Amun and then the other gods, which must have been exceedingly hateful
to the majority of the Egyptians, would certainly also be hateful to the individual members of the
army. This persecution, which entailed the closing of the temples, the despatch of artisans who
entered everywhere to hack out his name from inscriptions, the presumed banishment of the clergy, the


--- PAGE 91 ---
excommunication of his very name, could not have been carried out without the army’s active support.
Granting the fact that the theoretical fiction of the divine kingship was accepted by the mass of the
Egyptian people, it is, nevertheless, hardly credible that they would just sit by and acquiesce silently
to the persecution of Amun. Some strong backing had to support the royal dicta. Each time a squad of
workmen entered a temple or tomb to destroy the name of Amun, it must have been supported by a
squad of soldiers who came to see that the royal decree was carried out without opposition.
Ultimately the harshness of the persecution must have had a certain reaction even upon the soldiers
who, themselves, certainly had been raised in the old beliefs, and rather than risk a wholesale
defection and perhaps even a civil war, the army, through the agency of Aye, probably put pressure
upon Akhenaten, not only to cease the persecution, but to compromise with the old order by the
elevation of Semenkhkare to the coregency.’
6
 In fact, when even this compromise failed, the clamour
grew, as we shall see, for the king’s abdication.
More information about the extent to which Akhenaten went in trying to eliminate the old forms of
worship, as well as the consequent sense of complete loss felt by Egyptians, can be gathered from
Tutankhamun’s Restoration Stela, which he erected in the Temple of Amun at Karnak and which was
later usurped by Horemheb: ‘… The good ruler, performing benefactions for his father (Amun) and
all the gods, for he has made what was ruined to endure as a monument for the ages of eternity …
Now when his majesty appeared as king, the temples of the gods and goddesses from Elephantine
[down] to marshes of the Delta [had … and] gone to pieces. Their shrines had become desolate, had
become mounds overgrown with [weeds]. Their sanctuaries were as if they had never been. Their
halls were footpaths. The land was topsy-turvy, and the gods turned their backs upon this land. If [the
army was] sent to Djahi (Palestine-Syria) to extend the frontiers of Egypt, no success of theirs came
at all. If one prayed to a god to seek counsel from him, he would never come [at all]. If one made
supplication to a goddess similarly, she would never come at all.’
7
It is certain that it was the strength of opposition to Akhenaten’s religious reforms, and his own
unwillingness to change his attitude, that forced him to appoint Semenkhkare as his coregent around
Year 15 after giving him his eldest daughter, Merytaten, as his wife. The precise identity of
Semenkhkare has been the subject of considerable scholarly debate. Suffice to say for the moment that
it has been suggested that he might have been the son of Amenhotep III or of Akhenaten himself. They
are shown together on some monuments and inscriptions have been found, including some on the
pleasure pavilion at the south of Amarna, the Maruaten, in which the name of Nefertiti had been
erased and the name of Merytaten inscribed in its place. One curious feature of the period is that,
soon after his accession, Semenkhkare was given Nefertiti’s official name – Neferneferuaten, beloved
of Waenre (Akhenaten).
Initially, Semenkhkare and his queen lived with Akhenaten in the royal palace at Amarna. In face of
the continuing hostility throughout the country, however, Semenkhkare left Amarna for Thebes where
he reversed the trend of the religious revolution, at least in the capital, by establishing a temple to
Amun, an action by his coregent and son-in-law that indicates the extent to which Akhenaten was
isolated in his attempt to force his religious ideas upon his country. A hieratic document found in the
Theban tomb of Pere, the Theban nobleman, indicates that the Amun temple existed in Year 3 of
Semenkhkare and that the young king was in the old capital at the time.
At around the time that Semenkhkare became coregent, Nefertiti also disappeared mysteriously
from the palace. There is no evidence that she was buried in the royal tomb to suggest, as some
scholars believe, that she must have died around that time. On the contrary, there 
is
 evidence that she
lived for a period after that date in the North City of Amarna where Tutankhamun was also resident


--- PAGE 92 ---
and where objects inscribed with the queen’s name have been found. This suggests that she may have
disagreed with her husband over his religious policy on the grounds that it endangered the whole
dynasty and wished him to agree to a compromise that would allow the old gods to be worshipped
alongside the Aten. If this is the correct interpretation, her views proved to be right. In his Year 17
Akhenaten suddenly disappeared, followed shortly afterwards – perhaps only a few days afterwards
– by the equally sudden death of Semenkhkare, both of them to be succeeded by the boy prince,
Tutankhamun, after his marriage to Akhenaten’s third daughter, Ankhsenpa-aten. The parentage of
Tutankhamun will be discussed in 
Chapter Fourteen
. (Akhenaten’s second daughter had already died
– around Year 12 of her father – and been buried in the royal tomb at Amarna. No trace of her
remains have been found, but that may be because her mummy was transferred to Thebes after
Amarna was abandoned.)
There remains one further important question to be asked about Akhenaten: did his life as well as
his reign come to an end when he fell from power?


--- PAGE 93 ---
14
THE TOMB OF AKHENATEN
A
LTHOUGH
 not a shred of evidence has been found to confirm the date of Akhenaten’s death,
Egyptologists have assumed that it must have taken place at the end of his reign in his Year 17. There
is evidence, however, indicating that – as in the Talmud account of the reign of Moses as a king in
Nubia (Ethiopia) – he simply fell from power in the course of this year, but did not die. This evidence
comes from archaeological, philological and historical sources.
The Archaeological Evidence
The Royal Tomb of Akhenaten was desecrated originally in the wave of anti-Amarna feeling that
followed his disappearance from the scene and the subsequent brief reigns of Tutankhamun and Aye.
Later, it was further plundered by local inhabitants before it was first discovered officially by the
Italian archaeologist Alessandro Barsanti in December 1891 during an expedition carried out on
behalf of the Egyptian Service des Antiquités.
The Amarna city of Akhenaten was built halfway between Luxor and Cairo where the high barren
plateau stretching 200 miles from the Red Sea recedes, leaving a crescent-shaped plain to the east of
the Nile, about eight miles long and three broad. Three main valleys break into the rocks to the east of
Amarna. The north and south valleys were used for the tombs of Amarna nobles and officials, the
middle valley, Wadi Abu Hassan el-Bahri, for Akhenaten’s tomb. It was dug inside the rocks of a
small side valley that branches out from the north side of the main valley.
DESCRIPTION OF THE TOMB
The entrance of the tomb is cut into the floor of the Royal Valley with the doorway facing roughly
east.
1
 Then there is a smooth, inclined plane for the lowering of the sarcophagus with, on each side, a
flight of steps descending to the entrance. This leads to a sloping corridor, neither decorated nor
inscribed.
At the end of the corridor is another flight of steps that leads to a platform giving abruptly on to a
shaft some ten feet deep. In the wall opposite the shaft is the doorway of the royal burial chamber,
some thirty-two feet square. The left third of the room is taken up by a dais and two columns that
support the roof while the remaining two-thirds on the right has an emplacement, raised half an inch
or so above the floor, for the sarcophagus. All the walls of the royal chamber had been smoothly
plastered for the artists to do their work, but Akhenaten’s enemies, determined to destroy all traces of
him, made sure that there is nothing left of whatever scenes or inscriptions the walls may once have
borne.
If we go back to the corridor at the top of the stairs we find an opening on the right-hand side, near
the royal chamber, leading to three rooms, two of which were used for the burial of Akhenaten’s
second daughter, Meketaten, who died some time after his Year 12. Mourning scenes for the princess


--- PAGE 94 ---
decorate the walls. A short way along the corridor is another doorway leading to six unfinished
rooms that could have been intended for the other members of the royal family. So, in fact, we first
have the entrance, then the corridor off which are found the six unfinished rooms, then the Meketaten
suite before the steps leading to the royal chamber area.
EXCAVATING THE TOMB
Barsanti’s main objective on his first visit at the end of 1891 and another eight months later was to
clear the tomb, whose entrance was blocked by debris. Once that had been done it seems he gave
most of his attention to the royal burial chamber. However, his second visit yielded some fragmentary
ushabti
 (small funerary statues normally placed in a tomb 
before
 the owner’s death) of Akhenaten
and one small stela, in good condition, that had apparently escaped the attention of previous tomb
plunderers.
More than a year passed before the arrival in January 1894 of a third expedition, led by Urbain
Bouriant, director of the Mission Archéologique Française. Bouriant’s team concentrated largely on
making a plan and section of the tomb and recording the inscriptions and reliefs in all of the rooms
apart from the badly damaged royal burial chamber. Then followed a long gap before the Egypt
Exploration Society – the first British organization to be invited to carry out work on behalf of the
Service des Antiquités – was asked to re-examine the tomb as well as excavating the area outside it.
Pendlebury, the director of the expedition, which began work on 18 December 1931, wrote later:
‘Outside the tomb was a large dump, some seventy metres long and varying from five to ten metres
broad. The depth was, in places, as much as four metres. The dump consisted of three layers. Above
lay the debris thrown out of the tomb by Barsanti; below this came the deposit left by the original
desecrators of the tomb, while at the bottom was a layer of chips from the cutting of the tomb itself.’
It took more than three weeks to make a thorough examination of the dump. Three days after
Christmas excavation was also begun in the shaft of the tomb. The result was that from both the dump
and the shaft came many more fragments of the sarcophagi and some broken 
ushabti
 figures. The
expedition also found part of Akhenaten’s alabaster canopic chest, a box with four compartments,
used to hold the four canopic jars. These jars, made of pottery or stone with a head for a stopper,
were used in the course of mummification to keep the viscera of the dead after they had been removed
from the body, but no fragments of the jars themselves were found.
After the departure of the Egypt Exploration Society team the site continued to be the focus of
attention for local predators. Robbers broke into the tomb and made off with a large number of
fragments of the plaster reliefs that adorned the walls of the Meketaten rooms. In May of that year,
therefore, the Service des Antiquités organized a sondage (excavation) that produced another dozen
ushabti
 fragments.
Part of the attraction of the area for the predators lay in persistent rumours that it contained yet
another tomb, so far undiscovered. This resulted in the mounting of another expedition – by an Egypt
Exploration Society team led by Pendlebury and his wife – to prove or disprove the rumour. The
result of six weeks’ work was a blank, and Pendlebury wrote in his subsequent report: ‘All we can
say for certain is that the cutting of the tomb began later than Year 6 of Akhenaten’s reign, since the
ostracon … found in one of the dumps of chips bore that date, a conclusion to which we should have
been forced in any case since the city itself was not founded until that year. Since many of the
fragments, both of the canopic chest and of the sarcophagi were found in the shaft inside the tomb, it is


--- PAGE 95 ---
probable that they were broken up 
in situ.’
 In addition to searching unsuccessfully for a second tomb,
the Pendlebury team made a plan of the Royal Tomb, photographed the walls and copied all the wall-
scenes and inscriptions. Once this work was completed the tomb was sealed off from the attentions of
further predators by closing the entrance with a wall containing a steel door.
More recently, in 1974, the Egypt Exploration Society published the first part of an account by
Geoffrey T. Martin, Professor of Egyptology at University College, London, with details of the small
items that were found during the different stages of excavation at Akhenaten’s tomb.
2
Out of the many small sarcophagi fragments, which are no more than a few centimetres each, it was
possible to reconstruct one sarcophagus of pink, grey and white granite. It is too large to have been
Meketaten’s. On the other hand, as Nefertiti is shown at each corner of the sarcophagus in place of the
four protecting goddesses – Isis, Nephthys, Neith and Silket – it could not have belonged to the queen
herself. It is safe in this case to attribute the reconstructed sarcophagus to Akhenaten.
The remaining sarcophagi fragments proved to have come from:
a)  the reconstructed sarcophagus of Akhenaten;
b)  the lid of Akhenaten’s sarcophagus;
c)  the sarcophagus of Meketaten;
d)  the lid of Meketaten’s sarcophagus.
3
The great size of Akhenaten’s sarcophagus indicates that this was the outermost of a series of
coffins that would protect the royal mummy (the mummies of both Yuya and Tutankhamun were
enclosed in three coffins). Nevertheless, no remains of other coffins were found, nor any remains of
the usual shrine or canopy that were part of the normal burial furniture, thus raising the possibility that
Akhenaten was never buried in this tomb. What reinforces this idea is the fact that, although the
evidence indicates that Akhenaten’s enemies smashed everything in the tomb, no matter how large or
solid, into small pieces after the end of the Amarna regime, the fragmented funerary remains found in
the tomb could not be considered sufficient in quantity to indicate the burial of Akhenaten and his
daughter Meketaten – or for that matter burial of the king alone. Apart from the absence of the
additional coffins there was no trace of other items – chariots, chairs, boxes, magic bricks and
amulets – that were normally buried in royal tombs only 
after
 the king’s death. The sole remains that
can be said with certainty to have belonged to Akhenaten are the sarcophagus lid, the 
ushabti
 and the
canopic chest, all objects that were normally placed in the tomb 
earlier
 than the time of actual death.
Martin, one of the few scholars who believes that Akhenaten was actually buried in his tomb, tries
to justify this view by arguing: ‘Possibly the mummy of Meketaten, together with the funerary
trappings – which probably would not have been extensive – were transferred to Thebes after the
abandonment of el-Amarna.’
4
 Although evidence from the tomb confirms that Meketaten was
originally buried there during her father’s reign, there is nothing to indicate that these funerary objects
were removed to any other place, and Martin, who took no part in any of the excavations at
Akhenaten’s tomb, gives us no reason for suggesting the possibility that they were.
It is possible, of course, to suggest, even if supporting evidence is lacking, that it was considered
unsafe to leave Meketaten unguarded in the Royal Tomb once Amarna was abandoned about Year 4
of Tutankhamun. But if, as Martin suggests, Akhenaten was buried there as well, why would they
move the princess and leave the king? Then there is the difficulty of the absence of funerary objects
that would in the normal course of events have been placed in the tomb 
after
 the king’s death. Martin
attempts to deal with this point, again without putting forward any evidence, by suggesting that there
was a second exodus of objects from the tomb: ‘Most of the valuable items were doubtless carried
off by the despoilers … This is unlikely to have taken place in the reigns of Tutankhamun or Aye, who


--- PAGE 96 ---
were closely linked to Akhenaten’s family by marriage. The spoliation was probably ordered under
Horemheb or conceivably later, in the Ramesside period.’
5
 However, the archaeological evidence
not only does not support Martin’s theory: it contradicts it.
After his first season of excavation at the tomb in 1931, Pendlebury made the important
observation: ‘In view … of the demonstration that the so-called body of Akhenaten found in the cache
of Tiye at Thebes’ – he was referring to Tomb No. 55, discussed below – ‘is in reality not his at all,
it was imperative to try and collect all the evidence as to whether Akhenaten was ever buried at el-
Amarna, and, if so, whether in the Royal Tomb or elsewhere.’
6
After giving a short account of what was found in the tomb, he went on to say: ‘From both dump
and shaft came many more fragments from the sarcophagi, similar to those already in Cairo Museum,
as well as broken shawabti-figures 
(ushabti).
 In addition there were found parts of Akhenaten’s
magnificent alabaster canopic chest, with protecting vultures at the corners, together with pieces of
the lids capped with the king’s head. The chest gives evidence of never having been used, for it is
quite unstained by the black resinous substance seen in those of Amenhotep II and Tutankhamun, and
is additionally interesting in that it is inscribed with the early form of the Aten name, while the
sarcophagi all have the later.’
Pendlebury is here remarking that as the burial rituals required some parts of the funerary furniture,
including the canopic chest, to be anointed by a black liquid, and he was unable to see any traces of
such staining on the fragments he found, he concluded that the tomb had never been used. This would
mean that Akhenaten was never buried in his Amarna tomb. This view was supported by the fact that
no trace was found of any fragments of the canopic jars themselves, usually placed in position at the
time of burial. This idea is further reinforced by the use of the early Aten name, which suggests that
the canopic chest was made and placed in position very early in the king’s reign, before Year 9 when
Aten received his new name.
Pendlebury’s conclusions were later confirmed by the Egyptian archaeologist Muhammad Hamza,
who in 1939 was able to restore Akhenaten’s canopic chest from the fragments found by Pendlebury:
‘As the box is quite unstained by the black resinous unguents to which those of Amenhotep II,
Tutankhamun and Horemheb were subjected, it seems probable that it has never been used for the
king’s viscera.’
7
As a result of the archaeological evidence presented by Pendlebury and Hamza, most Egyptologists
accepted the conclusion that Akhenaten could not have been buried in his Amarna tomb, but still
believed that he died in his Year 17, the year he fell from power. Some, like Gardiner, took the view
that he had never been buried at all and his ‘body had been torn to pieces and thrown to the dogs’:
others, like Weigall and Aldred, thought that he must have been buried at Thebes, in Tomb No. 55, or
somewhere else. Only Martin was not convinced: ‘Akhenaten was buried in the Royal Tomb in or
shortly after Year 17.’
8
Where did he obtain this information? The only actual date found in the tomb, as remarked by
Pendlebury, was Year 6. Then, as the late name of the Aten was found on the reconstructed
sarcophagus and other objects, we can draw the deduction that some work in the tomb was carried
out after Year 9. Furthermore, as Meketaten died some time after Year 12, probably in Year 14, her
burial could have taken place then. But which evidence found in the Royal Tomb provided Martin
with his Year 17 and persuaded him, against the evidence, that Akhenaten had been buried there?
He makes the point: ‘The suggestion that the canopic chest was never used is open to serious
question.’
9
 What are his grounds for taking this view? ‘The absence of bitumin or resin in the canopic
chest from the Royal Tomb has been alluded to by several writers, and the assumption made that the


--- PAGE 97 ---
chest was never used, and that Akhenaten was therefore never buried in the tomb prepared for him.’
10
He then goes on to put forward three arguments in support of his view.
1  ‘The actual canopic coffins or jars which would have contained the viscera have not been found.
These were presumably of a precious material, and were placed inside the cylindrical compartments
of the canopic chest, as in the Tutankhamun examples.’
Thus the first of Martin’s ‘serious questions’, being used to confirm Akhenaten’s burial in the
Royal Tomb, turns out to be a serious point of evidence that he was not buried there at all. The four
jars in which the viscera of the dead were placed have separate names: Imset, for the liver, Hapi
(lungs), Duamutif (stomach) and Qebehs (intestines). These organs were removed in the first stages of
mummification and brought to the tomb with the funerary procession at the time of burial. The absence
of these jars from Akhenaten’s tomb, far from proving that he was buried there, as Martin would have
us believe, is strong evidence that he was not.
Furthermore, as those responsible for the tomb’s mutilation in ancient times were not thieves, but
political enemies who wanted to ensure the complete destruction of Akhenaten by removing his name,
image and memory – and thus ensuring his spiritual death – they would not have removed the canopic
jars from the tomb because they were precious in terms of value: rather would they have destroyed
the jars and their contents for vengeance 
in situ,
 as they did with all the other tomb objects they found.
They would not have risked the possibility of any part of him surviving for the sake of the value of the
containers. The four vases were usually covered with tops that were decorated with the head of the
dead king and the vases themselves were usually inscribed with his name and other personal details.
To preserve his image or his name, according to ancient Egyptian beliefs, was to allow the spiritual
part of him to live. Therefore, by removing his image, his name or any objects belonging to him, his
enemies believed they were condemning him to eternal death.
2  ‘It cannot automatically be assumed that the ritual feature of pouring bitumin or resin over or in the
canopic jars was a regular feature of the funerary rites of the Amarna royal family.’
This second ‘serious question’ is an assumption, not supported by any evidence. Martin is saying:
what if Akhenaten didn’t follow the usual ritual? Yet we know that his successor, Tutankhamun, did,
and, if Akhenaten had died in his Year 17, Tutankhamun would have been responsible for his burial.
Martin is here putting forward a possibility, then using what is only a possibility to support his view.
This line of argument is invalid. To suggest a possibility either requires supporting evidence or a
situation where the possibility makes sense of other evidence. Neither of these conditions exists in
this, the second of Martin’s ‘serious questions’. Yet he asks us to accept it as a reason for rejecting
what the majority of scholars have regarded as solid archaeological testimony.
In addition, the evidence from the Royal Tomb and from Amarna as a whole confirms that
Akhenaten rejected the old customs and rituals only when they had polytheistic implications that
contradicted his monotheism: ‘In the Aten period, great as was the spiritual reform which Akhenaten
imposed upon his subjects, the outer forms prevailing in earlier ages could not be discarded; the
king’s own sepulchre at el-Amarna still contained 
ushabti-
figures though no longer bearing the time-
honoured summons to field-labourers to till the fields as substitutes for their lord, and there exist
large scarabs of the period which no longer appeal for mercy in the weighing of the heart before
Osiris.’
11
Why should Akhenaten have rejected the ritual of anointing the canopic chest and other funerary
objects with bitumin or resin when this normal practice did not contradict his religious beliefs in any


--- PAGE 98 ---
way? This is what Martin did not attempt to explain.
3  ‘The canopic chest, as it now exists, is largely a skilful reconstruction in plaster.’
In his third ‘serious objection’, as he regarded it, Martin complains that too few of the original
fragments were used in the reconstructed chest for the stains to be seen and even some of those are
covered with plaster. This leads him to argue: ‘It follows that any conclusion drawn from the absence
of resin or bitumin in these compartments or on the canopic chest must be tentative in the extreme.
There is no certain evidence to prove that the chest was never used.’
Both Pendlebury and Hamza, who saw all the found parts of the canopic chest before it was
plastered and reconstructed, confirmed that it was not stained with resin or bitumen. Yet Martin,
without himself having any first-hand knowledge of the chest fragments, and without putting forward
reasons why the two earlier archaeologists were either misled by the evidence or themselves gave a
misleading account of it, wants us to reject their conclusion. Then, if he were able – which he was not
– to make us suspect the accuracy of the earlier conclusion, the best he could have hoped for is to be
able to say: ‘There is no certain evidence to prove that the chest was never used.’ However, he goes
further than that and states confidently: ‘There can no longer be any room for doubt that Akhenaten
was buried there [in the Royal Tomb].’
12
From the following details of the fragments that were used in the reconstruction of the canopic
chest given by Martin himself,
13
 we can see that they were more than enough to show whether it was
stained or not: ‘Canopic chest of Akhenaten, with separate cover … Reconstructed in 1939 by M.
Hamza from various fragments, with the missing portions supplied in plaster … Height of chest
76.5cm. Height of lid (front) max. 22cm. Height of lid (back) 18cm. Width (front) 60cm. Depth 60cm.
Height of supporting falcons at the corners (including disk) 47.3 cm. Height of base and frieze of tyet
and djed amulets [sacred ritual objects related to the dead] 23cm. Height of large cartouches 14.2cm.
Height of inscription around lid 5.5cm., measured from the bottom of the lid to the border
immediately above the cartouches.
‘In the reconstructed canopic chest, the front and both sides of the cover each have 26 cartouches,
the back 29. The surviving inscriptions, which are all incised, consist of the early “didactic” names
of the Aten. None survives on the front or on the left side of the cover …
‘The canopic chest conforms in most particulars to the other extant royal canopic chests of the
Eighteenth Dynasty, which appear to have been used only for Pharaohs and not for their consorts or
families. In the reconstruction the following original material is incorporated:
Front:
1  On the left side, a fragment of the feathering of the upper part of the falcon’s wing;
2  A fragment from the point where the wings of the two falcons meet;
3  Lower part of the tail of the right falcon and the tips of the wings of the left falcon;
4  Part of the base with frieze of tyet and djed.
Back:
5  Fragments of the feathering of the wings of the left falcon, and part of the tips of the wing of the
right falcon;
6  Fragments of the base, including the upper border and tyet and djed elements.
Left side:
7  Fragments of the rim and much of the base, including the upper border and tyet and djed elements.


--- PAGE 99 ---
Right side:
8  Part of the base of the cartouche on the right side;
9  Tail and part of the feathering of the left falcon;
10  Part of the claw and shen amulet (for protection of the dead) of the right falcon;
11  Fragments of the base, including the upper border and tyet and djed elements.
Cover:
Largely reconstructed in plaster, presumably over wood.’
As we can see from Martin’s own account, enough original fragments were found of the canopic
chest, and have been used in the reconstructed chest in Cairo Museum, to be able to judge whether it
was anointed with resin or bitumen or not. And as both Pendlebury and Hamza have confirmed the
complete absence of such stains, I do not take Martin’s unsupported ‘serious questions’ seriously.
WHOSE BODY IN THE VALLEY OF THE KINGS?
In January 1907 a small tomb – now known as Tomb No. 55 – with only one burial chamber was
found in the Valley of the Kings. The tomb is one of only three discovered closed in the Valley, with
both mummy and funerary furniture inside, the other two being that of Yuya and his wife Tuya, which
first came to light in 1905, followed by Tutankhamun’s in 1922. The excavation was sponsored by the
rich, retired American lawyer and amateur archaeologist Theodore M. Davis, who employed the
British archaeologist Edward R. Ayrton to conduct the digging under the supervision of Arthur
Weigall, another Briton, appointed two years earlier to the post of Inspector-General of the
Antiquities of Upper Egypt.
Although numerous fragments of small clay seals were found with the cartouche of Neb-kheprw-re
(Tutankhamun) used only during the Pharoah’s lifetime, it seems that the tomb had been re-entered at a
later date as the outer door had been sealed with the same style of seal (a jackal above nine foreign
prisoners) used to close the tomb of Tutankhamun.
The tomb is near the entry of the inner Valley, close to the site where the tomb of Tutankhamun was
subsequently found. It consists of a small, rock-cut chamber approached by a sloping passage, and
does not seem to have been intended originally for a royal burial. The burial also appeared to have
been carried out in haste, with a minimum of equipment. What made the situation worse in trying to
establish ownership of the tomb was the fact that it had deteriorated as a result of a great deal of
rainwater dripping into it through a fissure in the rock.
The debate about ownership of the tomb has rumbled on for the greater part of this century and still
surfaces from time to time. Initially it was thought that the decayed mummy was that of Queen Tiye,
then that of Akhenaten. This, allied to an apparently nude statue of the king at Karnak – one of four
colossi – which showed him seemingly deformed and without genitalia, led to elaborate pathological
attempts to try to discover what disease he suffered from. At the end of the day this proved to be
something of a storm in a canopic jar: it was demonstrated eventually that the mummy was not that of
Akhenaten, but of his coregent, Semenkhkare, and, in addition, that the seemingly nude colossus at
Karnak was actually an unfinished statue, awaiting, like the completed three, the addition of a kilt. It
is worth examining this debate, however, because it indicates the lengths to which some of those who
do not find Akhenaten to their taste are prepared to go to try to discredit him (see 
Appendix E
). The
contents of Tomb No. 55, which have prompted a protracted debate over the original ownership of


--- PAGE 100 ---
the tomb, and some of the items found in the tomb of Tutankhamun, provide further evidence that
Akhenaten’s life did not end when he fell from power, but in order not to weary the reader at this
point I have put them in Appendix F. Here it is perhaps worth making the point briefly that some
magical bricks of Akhenaten, essential for his burial, were found in Tomb No. 55, whose incumbent
has been established as Semenkhkare – indicating that Akhenaten himself did not need them.
THE AMARNA FAMILY
Both Professor D. E. Derry, then Professor of Anatomy in the Faculty of Medicine at Cairo
University, who restored the skull of the occupant of Tomb No. 55 and concluded that the remains
were those of a man no more than twenty-three or, at most, twenty-four years of age at the time of
death, and Professor R. G. Harrison, the late Derby Professor of Anatomy at the University of
Liverpool, who confirmed Derry’s conclusion that the remains were those of Semenkhkare (see
Appendix E
), found a striking similarity between the facial characteristics of Semenkhkare’s skeleton
and the artistic impressions we have of Akhenaten, suggesting that they must have been brothers or
close relatives. Grafton Elliot Smith, at the time Professor of Anatomy at Cairo Medical School, also
found similarity between Semenkhkare’s remains and the mummies of both Amenhotep III and Yuya,
sufficient to make him a descendant of both. As Queen Tiye was Yuya’s daughter, this suggests that
Semenkhkare could have been a son of Amenhotep III and Queen Tiye, a full brother of Akhenaten. At
the same time he could also have been the son of Akhenaten, who was a descendant of both
Amenhotep III and Queen Tiye. However, as Harrison’s examination proved that he died in his
twentieth year, and that was Year 17 of Akhenaten’s reign, this would mean that he was born about
three years before Akhenaten came to the throne as coregent. As we know that Akhenaten was not
married until around the time the coregency started, this rules out the possibility that Semenkhkare
was his son, and it is most likely that he was Akhenaten’s full brother.
As for Tutankhamun, who certainly belonged to the same family, he was about nine or ten years of
age when he succeeded Akhenaten on the king’s fall from power and the sudden death of
Semenkhkare. This means that he was born during Year 7 of Akhenaten, which was Year 34 of
Amenhotep III. As we saw earlier, Baketaten, the youngest of Queen Tiye’s daughters, was probably
born in Year 4 of Akhenaten, Year 31 of Amenhotep III. In Year 7 of her son, Akhenaten, Queen Tiye
was about forty years of age and Amenhotep III about forty-five, in both cases a possible age for them
to produce a son. Yet it is more likely that Tutankhamun was the son of Akhenaten and Nefertiti.
In Tutankhamun’s tomb a figure of a recumbent jackal was found upon a shrine containing pieces of
jewellery. The figure, which had been carved from wood, was overlaid with a thin layer of plaster
and painted with black resin. The body of the jackal was covered almost completely with linen
draperies, one of which proved to be a shirt dated to Year 7 of Akhenaten, the same year that
Tutankhamun was born.
14
 This dated Akhenaten shirt was surely used for Tutankhamun at the time of
his birth, strongly indicating the parental relationship and the place of birth as Amarna. His original
name at the time of his birth, Tutankhaten, also suggests that he was born at Amarna. In addition, there
is evidence that, while still a prince, he lived at the northern Amarna palace, the very same place
where Queen Nefertiti lived during the last years of Akhenaten’s reign. Why would he have lived at
Amarna with Queen Nefertiti if he were the son of Queen Tiye?
It is true that he describes Amenhotep III as his ‘father’ on a statue of a lion, now in the British
Museum, and that a small golden statue of Amenhotep III as well as some of Queen Tiye’s hair, in a


--- PAGE 101 ---
small coffin, were found in Tutankhamun’s tomb, but it was customary among Egyptians, as with the
Hebrews, to use the word ‘father’ as a synonym for ‘ancestor’, and if Queen Tiye were
Tutankhamun’s grandmother, it would be normal to find some of her belongings as well as Amenhotep
III’s in his tomb.
What is the correct sequence of events? It would seem that the political struggle must have reached
a point where the old priesthood and some factions of the army were in open revolt against
Akhenaten’s regime as a result of his attempt to impose his new God on his people. Aye, who was
responsible for the army and must have been the most powerful man in Egypt at the time, either
convinced, or even forced, Akhenaten to abdicate in order to save the Amarna Dynasty, and replaced
him with Semenkhkare. It seems that, shortly after the fall of Akhenaten, Semenkhkare died suddenly
at Thebes, most probably from unnatural causes because he was not regarded as a suitable
replacement for Akhenaten.
While the country was still in turmoil it was not possible to bury Semenkhkare in the proper way –
especially as it seems that his death occurred at Thebes – using his own funerary equipment which
had been prepared for him (and some of which was later used by Tutankhamun). Aye therefore had to
do the best he could with whatever material was available. He buried Semenkhkare secretly, and in a
hurry, using some objects meant to be used by Akhenaten, who had already fled from Amarna.
The presence of a shrine of Queen Tiye’s in the tomb (see 
Appendix F
) is not easy to explain, but it
is possible that she was either still alive or, as Weigall thought, had died and been buried in the same
tomb prior to the death of Semenkhkare, in which case her mummy and most of her objects would
have been moved away when the time came to bury the young coregent. It is also clear that, as
Tutankhamun’s priests would not have erased Akhenaten’s name from the shrine and coffin, the tomb
was re-entered later, probably during the reign of Horemheb when the campaign was mounted to try
to wipe out all traces of the Akhenaten regime from Egypt’s memory.


--- PAGE 102 ---
15
THE FALLEN ONE OF AMARNA
I
T
 is now generally accepted that Akhenaten ruled for only seventeen years, although there is no
evidence pointing to which month of this final year his rule ended. However, although he was no
longer on the throne, did his followers believe that he was still alive – and would perhaps return one
day to take power again?
The Philological Evidence
The main reason for accepting Year 17 as Akhenaten’s last in power is that a docket, No. 279, found
by excavators at Amarna, bears two different dates – Year 17 and Year 1. This was explained by
Fairman in the following terms: ‘It records, therefore, the first year of an unnamed king which
followed the seventeenth year of another unnamed king. There cannot be any doubt that the latter was
Akhenaten. Year 1 can hardly have been that of Semenkhkare since … his Year 1 was probably Year
15 of Akhenaten. Thus the docket must be assigned to the first year of Tutankhamun.’
1
Fairman dismissed the possibility that these two dates might be construed as pointing to a
coregency between Akhenaten and Tutankhamun: ‘This docket does not contain a double-dating since
“Year 1” is written over “Year 17”.’ Yet a few pages earlier Fairman had given us a different
account of how the dates were written: ‘ “Year 1” is written partly over an earlier “Year 17”. And if
the copy of the text on the docket was correctly produced (No. 279 in plate 
XCV
), then the second date
is written neither completely over nor partly over the earlier date, but underneath it.’
2
This is the first time, as far as I am aware, that a king placed his own date on the same text as that
of a predecessor after the latter’s rule had come to an end. However, as no other evidence was found
to support a coregency between Akhenaten and Tutankhamun, Fairman’s explanation was taken for
granted. Yet, in the light of Egyptian custom, the evidence of docket No. 279 is confusing. Egyptians
calculated the years of each king separately and, if there was no coregency, the first year of the new
king began only after the last year of his predecessor. How, therefore, is it that Akhenaten’s Year 17
was also regarded as Year 1 of Tutankhamun unless there was a coregency?
No attempt was made to erase or cross out the earlier date before the later one was written. For
this there can be only one convincing explanation. When we say that Akhenaten abdicated his power,
we use a modern term expressing a modern practice. However, Egyptian Pharaohs did not gain power
from the people or the parliament, but from the gods. From the time of his birth the king was regarded
as the son of Amun-Re and destined to rule, and on being crowned he took possession of his
inheritance, the lands given to him by the gods, and retained possession until the day he died. As long
as he was alive Pharaoh was regarded as being the lawful ruler of his lands, even if he was weak and
had no authority.
The abdication of Akhenaten must have been the first in Egyptian history. It is true that Aye and his
army stopped him from exercising his power, but he was still regarded as the legitimate ruler.
Semenkhkare was not accepted by Egyptians as a successor and was most probably assassinated at


--- PAGE 103 ---
Thebes a few days after Akhenaten gave up his throne. When Tutankhamun became ruler, he was still
called Tutankhaten, and as his Year 1 – although not as coregent – started while Akhenaten was still
regarded as the legitimate ruler, in a way he took his authority from the old king until such time as he
abandoned his allegiance to the Aten.
Akhenaten had ruled in the name of the Aten, whom he regarded as his father, having rejected, and
been rejected by, Amun. The only legal way the new young king was able to establish himself on the
throne was to renounce the course of action taken by his predecessor. In his Year 4, therefore, he
rejected the Aten and returned to being the son of Amun. The Amun priesthood accepted this return in
a new crowning celebration. Thus, at this point the Aten had no power in Egypt, no land to give. It
was only then, as we shall see later, that Akhenaten, who was still alive, stopped being king and
Tutankhamun became regarded as the sole heir of the god Amun.
TESTIMONY OF SURVIVAL?
Another hieratic docket found at Amarna recorded another date that has been the subject of long
arguments and has even resulted in a charge of dishonesty being levelled at certain scholars. The
essence of the dispute is whether this docket refers to Year 11 of Akhenaten or – despite the fact that
we know he ruled for only seventeen years – to Year 21.
A facsimile of this docket, made and published by Battiscombe Gunn, the British archaeologist,
3
persuaded the American scholar Keith C. Seele to believe that ‘the hieratic date is certainly “Year
21” ’.
4
 He even went as far as to accuse British scholars of avoiding the evidence intentionally:
‘While the actual fate of Akhenaten is unknown, it is evidence that he must have disappeared in his
twenty-first year on the throne or even later. Some Egyptologists, including the Egypt Exploration
Society’s excavators at Amarna, allow him but seventeen years.’
5
 As many scholars all over the
world became convinced by Seele’s arguments, Fairman, who had been one of the society’s
excavators at Amarna, felt he had to rally to their defence: ‘It seems appropriate to state the true
position and at the same time vindicate those members of the Egypt Exploration Society’s expeditions
at Amarna who have been quite unjustly accused of dishonesty.’
6
Although Fairman has to be regarded as one of the most trusted British Egyptologists of this
century, the way he tried to dispose of Seele’s opposition makes it clear why Seele had grounds for
feeling suspicious: ‘Year 21 occurs “certainly”, according to Seele, on a hieratic docket published by
Gunn. Seele has not seen this docket, but he is quite satisfied to reject Gunn’s reading on the evidence
of the published facsimile. The first comment that occurs to one is that no one knowing the very high
standards set and maintained by Gunn can believe that he would have advocated a reading he knew to
be false simply to support a theory.’
7


--- PAGE 104 ---
This statuette of Akhenaten and Nefertiti, now in the Louvre in Paris, offers a more realistic view of the King and Queen than do
the exaggerated representations of other, more romantic styles of Amarna art. No physical defect mars Akhenaten’s appearance.
Yuya’s mummy, found in his small tomb in the Valley of the Kings in 1905, now lies inside his coffin in the Cairo Museum. I have
been able to identify this minister of both Tuthmose IV and Amenhotep III as the Patriarch Joseph of the coat of many colours, who
brought the Israelite family into Egypt. His importance was enhanced when Amenhotep III married his daughter Tiye and made her
the Queen of Egypt.


--- PAGE 105 ---
Akhenaten and Nefertiti make an offering to Aten. The royal family worshipped in the open. This scene, which was found in the
Amarna house of Panehesy, the Chief Servitor of the Aten, portrays the latest symbol of the Aten, the disc at the top, sending its
rays over the members of the royal family. These rays are directed at the key of life, held in front of their eyes. The name of the
God (the same as that of the King) appears inside a cartouche.
This mummy of a woman, found in 1898 with other members of the royal family in the tomb of Amenhotep II in the Valley of the
Kings, has now been identified as Queen Tiye.


--- PAGE 106 ---
Queen Tiye, daughter of Yuya/Joseph, wife of Amenhotep III and mother of Akhenaten. This small head of Tiye was found by
Petrie, the father of modern archaeology, in the cave temple of Sarabit el Khadim in Sinai. The presence of the head of
Akhenaten’s mother in this remote area is one of the indications that the young king himself could have been living there for some
time after he had been forced to abdicate the throne.
Aye (right) and Tiy. Tiy, Nefertiti’s childhood nurse, also nursed Akhenaten during his childhood. She was married to Aye, second
son of Yuya and brother of Queen Tiye. As the strongest military figure in Egypt, Aye protected Akhenaten’s rule and helped him
during his religious revolution. Aye himself became the fourth and last of the Amarna kings when he sat on the throne after
Tutankhamun’s death.
Akhenaten and Semenkhkare. This sculptor’s model found at Amarna is another indication of a co-regency, this time between
Akhenaten on the left and his brother Semenkhkare on the right. Semenkhkare died shortly after Akhenaten’s fall from power, and
it was Tutankhamun, the latter’s son, who followed him on to the throne.


--- PAGE 107 ---
Akhenaten, Nefertiti and three of their children. This stela in Cairo Museum shows the royal family in kissing and relaxing mood,
something that was never allowed to be shown in Egypt either before or after the Amarna rule. Scenes showing different aspects of
the life of the royal family took the place of the old deities of the dead on the tomb walls of the Amarna nobles.
The Israel Stela. This stela of Merenptah, Ramses II’s son and successor, contains the only mention of Israel in ancient Egyptian
sources. Although the stela was made in Merenptah’s fifth year to commemorate his victory over invading Libyan tribes, the fact
that the text concludes with the mention of some already subdued nations in western Asia (including the Israeli people) has misled
some scholars into believing that this king was the Pharaoh of the Exodus who followed the Israelites into Canaan.


--- PAGE 108 ---
Akhenaten’s Osiride statues. These statues are two of the four colossal figures that were made to stand at the entrance of the
temple Akhenaten built for his God inside the Karnak complex. They are now in Cairo Museum. In three of the statues the King is
shown wearing a kilt, while the fourth, which has larger lower parts, has no kilt. This persuaded some scholars to claim that
Akhenaten lacked any signs of genitalia. This proved to be an incorrect assumption; the statue is in fact unfinished, and the lower
part would have been cut back later to make the kilt.
Amenhotep III and Queen Tiye. This stela was found in the house of Panehesy at Amarna. The fact that Amenhotep III is
represented in a clearly realistic style at Amarna indicates that the old King was living at the time and confirms the existence of a
co-regency between him and his son Akhenaten. Neither the scene nor the text indicates that Amenhotep III was dead at the time.
The stela is now in the British Museum.


--- PAGE 109 ---
This unfinished statue of Akhenaten kissing one of his daughters was also found at Amarna. Again this was claimed by some
scholars as evidence of Akhenaten’s homosexuality; without any justification they stated that the younger figure represented
Semenkhkare, the King’s brother and son-in-law.
This figure of the guardian of the dead, Anubis, was found in the tomb of Tutankhamun. The jackal was sitting on a shrine
containing pieces of jewellery. A linen shirt covering Anubis was dated in year 7 of Akhenaten, the birth year of Tutankhamun. The
dating of Tutankhamun’s birth in this manner indicated that Akhenaten was his father.
This was Fairman’s first attempt to avoid the facts, for, contrary to what he said, Gunn translated
the date as ‘Year 11’ only because of the belief that Akhenaten ruled for seventeen years. He even
stated this reason himself: ‘In the absence of other evidence as to the reign extending beyond Year 17,


--- PAGE 110 ---
no one will want to read the dating of I, plate lxiii, as “Year 21”.’
8
The hieratic sign for the figure ten is an upside-down ‘V’ and for ‘twenty’ two upside-down ‘Vs’
one above the other. The hieratic docket, as can be seen from the facsimile published by Gunn, shows
a complete ‘
’ with the remains of another ‘
’ above it, which convinced Seele, correctly, that the
date should be read as ‘Year 21’. But Fairman disregards that, and Gunn’s statement that he read the
sign as ‘Year 11’ only because Akhenaten’s reign was thought to have lasted only seventeen years in
all, and goes on: ‘In editing the inscriptions for 
City of Akhenaten,
 III, Jaroslav 
Ĉ
erný, the Polish
Egyptologist, and I had hoped to include some detailed and critical study of Amarna hieratic. In
preparation for this, in 1937–39 
Ĉ
erný studied all the Amarna dockets he could find at the British
Museum, the Ashmolean Museum and University College, London, in addition to several hundreds
that I handed over to him. It is important to note that it was 
Ĉ
erný’s invariable method never to use or
refer to any previous publication when copying and his work on the dockets ceased before he could
attempt identification. His notebooks were handed over to me and I worked through them
methodically, identifying all that in part or whole had previously been published. In the course of this
work I discovered that the docket published by Gunn was in the British Museum (BM55640) and that
Ĉ
erný had unhesitatingly transcribed the date as (eleven) without a single query or note.
‘
Ĉ
erný was unaware of the identification of this docket until after the publication of Seele’s article
when I informed him of the facts and asked him to re-examine BM55640. 
Ĉ
erný not only did so, but
called in Edwards and James (of the British Museum) and they all three declared that the reading was
“Year 11”. 
Ĉ
erný reported to me at the time that the docket had faded seriously, but that the hieratic
sign bore no resemblance to the normal form of (twenty) and was certainly in his opinion (ten): he
thought that perhaps either a piece of ink had flaked off, or that a piece of ink had fallen on the end of
the sign, but the condition of the docket did not permit him to decide which. I have since examined the
docket myself, and I have nothing to add to 
Ĉ
erný’s statement. In short, there is no evidence of a
regnal Year 21.’
9
So, although in referring to 
Ĉ
erný’s statement, Fairman admits that ‘the docket had faded seriously’
between 1937–9, when 
Ĉ
erný made his copy, and 1955 when, after Seele’s article, he re-examined
the docket, Fairman does not even publish a new facsimile to enable us to compare it with the earlier
one made by Gunn in 1923. As if trying to avoid committing himself, he calls many other witnesses, in
a way asking us to trust a group of wise men rather than giving us the evidence so that we can decide
for ourselves. We have not even been told whether Fairman and his witnesses accept Gunn’s
facsimile, which was the basis for Seele’s comments.
Even some of those who have changed their minds, such as Redford, and come round to accepting
‘Year 11’ as the correct reading, have proved not to be really convinced by Fairman’s argument: ‘…
those who have only Gunn’s facsimile before them will be forced to admit that the prima-facie
probability lies with the reading “21”. If the present writer returns to the reading “regnal Year 11”, it
is solely because of an awareness of the increasing weight of the 
argumentum e silentio:
 if
Akhenaten did attain a twenty-first year it is inconceivable that Years 18, 19 and 20 should be
entirely absent from the Amarna dockets, especially in view of the large number of dockets dated to
Year 17 and before.’
10
But is this true? Were there no other records for these years? According to Fairman himself,
Bennett, a member of the Egyptian Exploration Society team that worked at Amarna during the years
1930–31, was able to read the date ‘Year 18’ on one of the ostraca he was responsible for copying.
However, Fairman took the view: ‘Bennett’s ostracon of Year 18 … may be dismissed as being


--- PAGE 111 ---
untrustworthy, and without value.’
11
 Then Fairman declares, on the following page of the same book,
that ‘the ostracon was not kept, but according to a rough facsimile this reading is certainly wrong’.
This is even more serious, for Fairman is not telling us that the disputed ostracon was lost: he is
saying that it was ‘not kept’, that it was thrown away. One would have expected that, as this ostracon
gives an anomalous reading, it would have been guarded carefully for further examination. Instead,
we now have only Fairman’s judgement to rely on for whether Bennett’s reading was right or wrong.
No wonder Seele was convinced of a deliberate attempt by some scholars to discard any evidence
that did not agree with their preconceived ideas.
However, there is still other evidence to indicate that Year 17 was not the end of the Akhenaten
story. Derry has made the point: ‘Akhenaten is known … to have reigned for at least seventeen years,
a period which has been extended to the nineteenth year by Pendlebury’s recent discovery at el-
Amarna of a monument bearing that date and with the further possibility that this may be lengthened to
the twentieth year. Mr Pendlebury has very courteously permitted us to make use of these hitherto
unpublished facts.’
12
 Pendlebury died a few years later without publishing the source of his
information and, as with Bennett’s ostracon, Pendlebury’s monument cannot be found anywhere.
In the course of his article on the correct date of Gunn’s facsimile of the disputed hieratic docket as
being ‘Year 21’, Seele gave a list of four scholars who believed that Akhenaten’s reign lasted for
eighteen years and one, Derry, who favoured nineteen. However, as long as nobody is able to
discredit Gunn’s original facsimile, Year 21 has to remain a certainty. As we said before, this does
not mean, though, that Akhenaten actually reigned for twenty-one years.
If my hypothesis is correct, he abandoned Amarna and fled to Sinai. However, as long as
Tutankhaten continued to reside at Amarna and as long as the Aten was regarded as the God of the
throne, who owned the land of Egypt, Akhenaten, his son, was still looked upon as the legitimate
Pharaoh. Therefore his followers kept up the practice of using a date relating to him as if he were still
in power. It was only when Tutankhamun left Amarna, which soon became an abandoned city, for
Thebes and Memphis in his Year 4 – Year 21 of Akhenaten – that this practice came to an end.
Those Egyptologists who had all the evidence indicating that Akhenaten ruled until only his Year
17 were confused to find further evidence of later dates for him, and had even to dispose of the
evidence rather than be embarrassed by a contradiction they were unable to explain. It is true that
Akhenaten ruled only until his Year 17, but it is also true that he was still regarded as the legitimate
ruler until the change of the supreme god in Year 4 of Tutankhamun, Year 21 of Akhenaten. After that
he had no legal status and, as we shall see, had to try to prove that he was the heir of his father,
Amenhotep III, when he returned later to try to reclaim his throne.
SEMENKHKARE’S NAME AND EPITHETS
It is now generally accepted that Semenkhkare was appointed as coregent by Akhenaten in his Year
15. Yet we do not have any firm proof that Semenkhkare started numbering his own regnal years from
that date as we do not have a Year 1 or Year 2 that can be said with certainty to have belonged to
him. It seems that the years after his appointment continued to be dated according to Akhenaten’s old
system as Year 16 and Year 17. Nevertheless we have one case of a Year 3, found on a graffito at the
tomb of Pere, a Theban nobleman: ‘Year 3, third month of Inundation, day 10. The King of Upper and
Lower Egypt, Lord of the Two Lands, Ankh-khepru-re beloved of [Nefer-khepru-re?], the son of Re
Neferneferuaten beloved of Waen[re?].’
13


--- PAGE 112 ---
This graffito is simply dated to Year 3 of Semenkhkare: no date of Akhenaten can be found on it.
This is strong evidence that Semenkhkare was a sole ruler at the time the graffito was made. Yet, as
we saw before, Tutankhamun’s reign started during Year 17, the last year in which Akhenaten held
authority. When, therefore, did Semenkhkare rule? The only acceptable explanation, as we saw
before, is that he must have ruled for only a very short time, died and was followed in the same year
by Tutankhamun. In this case, according to those who claim that the end of Akhenaten’s rule coincided
with his death in his Year 17, he would already have been dead when the graffito from Year 3 of
Semenkhkare was made. Yet the epithets of Semenkhkare that indicate Akhenaten’s affection towards
him, which the young king had always used in his inscriptions and refer to the living Akhenaten, are
also to be found in the Theban graffito, a fact that can be interpreted as meaning that, although his rule
had ended, Akhenaten was still alive at that time. Redford confirms this understanding of the
situation: ‘ “Beloved of Nefer-Kheprure” and “beloved of Wa-enre”, note that the praenomen of
Semenkhkare, Ankh-Kheprure, i.e. “Kheprure (Akhenaten) lives”, may indicate that at the time it was
formulated Akhenaten was still alive.’
14
THE FALLEN ONE OF AMARNA
No record has reached us about Akhenaten after the end of his rule. Tutankhamun left Amarna for
Thebes and Memphis in his Year 4 and, at the same time, changed his own name and that of his queen,
substituting ‘amun’ for ‘aten’. A compromise was also reached by means of which all the ancient
temples were reopened and worship of the old gods of Egypt restored, but worship of the Aten was
not banned: the Aten was now regarded as just one god among many. No damage was done to
Akhenaten’s name, objects or memory until the end of the reign of King Aye, the last of the Amarna
kings, who followed Tutankhamun. However, with the accession of Horemheb and the Ramesside
kings who succeeded him, all standing monuments of Amarna were pulled down and worship of the
Aten was forbidden. Horemheb and his followers also ensured that all memory of Akhenaten was
wiped out of Egypt’s official records, even to having his name and those of the three Amarna kings
who succeeded him erased from the official king lists. Nevertheless, private texts referring to events
that had taken place during Akhenaten’s reign, while not mentioning him by name, used synonyms. A
papyrus in the Berlin Museum, dating most probably from the time of the Nineteenth Dynasty, contains
remains of a letter that gives the date of someone’s death during the period of Akhenaten’s rule in the
following form: ‘… he died in Year 9 of the rebel.’
15
 As well as avoiding mention of his name, this
text shows us that he was regarded as an outlaw by the Ramessides, which would justify all the
vengeful actions they were taking against his memory.
In a legal text from the tomb of Mos, which we discussed earlier, in referring to events that had
taken place during Akhenaten’s reign, some of the witnesses used another expression – 
Pa-kherw-n
Akhetaten.
16
 This phrase was translated early in this century by Gardiner as ‘the enemy of Akhetaten
(Amarna)’, a translation which the majority of scholars have since taken for granted to be correct.
This is not the case if one breaks the phrase down into its constituents: 
Pa
 is the Egyptian definite
article; 
kherw
 means literally ‘fallen’, and the 
n
 represents the preposition ‘of’. Although enemies of
Egypt were described as having fallen, the word itself, which is derived from the verb ‘to fall’,
means ‘the fallen’ and could not mean ‘enemy’. Even the little figure of a fallen person that comes
after the word as a determinative confirms the ‘fallen’ sense. Furthermore, we could understand if
Akhenaten was called the enemy of Amun or Thebes, but how would it be possible even for his


--- PAGE 113 ---
opponents to call him ‘the enemy of Akhetaten (Amarna)’, the new capital city which he himself
established? In an introduction to a book published twenty years ago, Harry S. Smith, Professor of
Egyptology at University College London, translated this phrase correctly as ‘the fallen one of
Akhetaten’.
17
When we look at both of the labels applied to Akhenaten, it is clear that they are not merely
pejorative, but describe him as he was seen by the following generation, a rebel who fell from
power. The meaning is here clear, the implication being that, as in the Talmud story of Moses
becoming King of Ethiopia (see 
Chapter Two
), he had to abdicate in favour of the queen’s son, who
can only be Tutankhamun, son of Nefertiti.


--- PAGE 114 ---
16
CORRIDORS OF POWER
A 
VARIETY
 of historical evidence also points to the fact that Akhenaten survived his fall from power.
Manetho’s King List
Although the memory of Akhenaten and his three successors was suppressed completely and the
official king lists excluded them, placing Horemheb’s name immediately after that of Amenhotep III,
in Manetho’s king list of the Eighteenth Dynasty, as it has reached us through other authors, the four
kings are mentioned. It seems that, despite the official hostility at the time, folklore tales, transmitted
from generation to generation, kept alive the memory of the Amarna kings until, some time before the
third century 
BC,
 the story of Egypt’s history at this time was put down in writing. Of course, much
confusion and distortion has affected the story in the process, and surviving Amarna monuments, such
as its rock tombs and the quarry inscriptions, must have also been read and interpreted by the priests
and scribes and helped in the rewriting of the story. In Manetho’s king list we find four names
inserted between Amenhotep III and Horemheb:
Achencheres
Rathosis
Achencheres
Achencheres
The German philologist Wolfgang Helck was able to show
1
 that Achencheres was a confused
derivation of Akhenaten’s name, while Rathosis is believed to be a confused form of Tutankhamun’s
nomen. Why would Egyptian memory give to three of these four Amarna kings one name, that of
Akhenaten? The only possible conclusion is that this was the result of two contradictory pieces of
evidence: a) four different kings ruled between Amenhotep III and Horemheb, b) Akhenaten lived
during the reign of the four Amarna kings and this whole period was regarded in their memory as
being his own rule.
The Power Struggle
At least two events early in Akhenaten’s coregency with his father indicated strong opposition to his
rule. The graffito of Amenhotep III’s Year 30 from the pyramid temple of Meidum, which would be
Year 3 of Akhenaten, pointed to a rejection by some powerful factions of the king’s decision to cause
‘the male to sit upon the seat of his father’. Again, the border stela inscription of Amarna shows that,
before deciding to leave Thebes and build his new city, Akhenaten had encountered some strong
opposition and been the subject of verbal criticism. Certainly, he would not have left the dynasty’s
capital without having been forced to do so.
A final confrontation between the throne and the priesthood was postponed simply because, after


--- PAGE 115 ---
he departed from Thebes, he had nothing at all to do with the running of the country, which was left to
his father, Amenhotep III. Another important factor was the complete reliance of Akhenaten on the
armed forces for support. If we may take the reliefs from the tombs of the nobles at face value, then
the city was virtually an armed camp. Everywhere we see processions and parades of soldiers,
infantry and chariotry with their massed standards. Palaces, temples and the city borders seem to have
been constantly guarded.
Akhenaten’s man in the army, as we saw earlier, was Aye, his maternal uncle, the husband of Tiy,
his and Nefertiti’s nurse. As a result of this relationship, he could be regarded, according to ancient
traditions, as a father figure. Aye was certainly the power behind Akhenaten’s throne from the time of
the death of Amenhotep III. Aye’s origins, like those of Yuya, his father, were military. His extremely
high ranks in both arms of the service, the infantry and the chariotry, show that he was in control of
the army, without whose loyalty and support Akhenaten could have been overthrown in his first year
as sole regent. After the beginning of the Eighteenth Dynasty, which was founded after the defeat and
expulsion of the Hyksos invaders from the Eastern Delta, Egyptian Pharaohs had followed them into
western Asia, forming the first empire of the ancient world that extended from the borders of Asia
Minor and northern Iraq in the north up to a few miles north of Khartoum in the south. Egypt now had
for the first time a regular army of full-time professional fighters, organized in local divisions. The
victorious fighters shared war spoils as well as being rewarded by the king with gold, slaves and
land. The army officers grew into a new aristocracy that, thanks to Akhenaten’s policy, became
deeply involved in politics towards the end of the dynasty, as a result of which the two last kings of
the Eighteenth Dynasty, Aye and Horemheb, as well as the two first kings of the Nineteenth, Ramses I
and Seti I, came from the army and had no relationship with either the original Tuthmosside house or
the priesthood.
On the other hand, as the victorious kings of the Eighteenth Dynasty came from Thebes which in the
sixteenth century 
BC
 had consisted of a few scattered small towns, it had by now grown into a vast
cosmopolitan city, the capital of the empire. Abundant spoils of war came to Thebes and its gods,
especially to Amun, the chief Theban deity, who now achieved great authority, particularly when he
was associated with Re, the old Heliopolitan god, as Amun-Re, king of the gods. Many new temples
were built and that at Karnak, main centre of Amun, grew into a gigantic construction, the largest
temple ever built, with large areas of agricultural land and thousands of slaves allocated to it. The
priests, and those of Amun in particular, became increasingly powerful from the time of Tuthmosis III.
This king was not the son of the queen, although he was the king’s son. So, in order to have him
accepted as his heir, his father arranged a ceremony in Karnak where the image of Amun, carried by
the god’s priests, chose young Tuthmosis to be the son of Amun, a kind of adoption by the god which
ensured his right to the throne. Tuthmosis III turned out to be the mightiest of all Egyptian Pharaohs,
ruling for fifty-four years and fighting many wars in Asia to consolidate the empire.
In return for their co-operation in establishing his right to the throne, Tuthmosis III showed his
gratitude to Amun’s priests by giving them more power and wealth. As the king was the head of both
the army and the temple, Egyptian Pharaohs exercised a balancing policy between the military and
priestly powers. Although it is true that Pharaoh was regarded as a son of the god and, as such, had to
be obeyed without question, he himself was also expected to abide by the country’s old beliefs and
traditions. Not only did Akhenaten reject this concept of kingship: he was no longer the son of any
Egyptian god. The Aten was never worshipped as a god in Egypt before the Amarna religious
revolution, which has to be regarded as having its origins in the time Yuya became associated with
the royal family during the reign of Tuthmosis IV. Thus Akhenaten came to be regarded as a rebel, an


--- PAGE 116 ---
outlaw, and without the support of Aye and his army he would have been disposed of as soon as his
father, and protector, died.
But, as we saw earlier, unlimited loyalty from the army could not reasonably be expected. After
all, the officers and soldiers themselves believed in the gods whose images the king ordered them to
destroy, they worshipped in the temples which they were ordered to close. A conflict arose. Aye, still
the strongest man in Egypt, realized the danger – the whole Amarna family and their followers, as
well as the worship of the Aten, was under threat – and that compromise was the wisest course to
follow. However, Akhenaten’s belief in one God was too deep for him to accept a return to any of the
former ways. Aye therefore advised him that, in his own interests, he should abdicate in favour of the
young Tutankhamun and flee the country. After his departure, Aye, as Tutankhamun’s adviser, allowed
the old temples to be reopened and the ancient gods of Egypt to be worshipped again alongside
worship of the Aten, a compromise that increased his own power, as it enabled him to pose as the
saviour of both army and temple.
The climate of the country remained uneasy, but Aye’s own position as the most powerful man in
Egypt was sufficiently secure for him to appoint himself king after the death of Tutankhamun – which,
as Harrison found a fracture in the bones at the back of his neck, could have been the result of
assassination. In these circumstances, it is impossible to imagine, as some scholars have fancied, that
Aye, Akhenaten’s most potent supporter, would have permitted a 
coup d’état
 against the king, or, for
that matter, that either the king or Tutankhamun would have survived such an event: rather the
departure of Akhenaten should be seen as a political compromise that allowed Amarna rule to
continue.
It was only on the death of Aye himself that Horemheb, another powerful military figure, emerged
to take power on behalf of the dissident Establishment and to start the campaign of destruction
designed to remove all trace of Amarna rule from Egyptian history.


--- PAGE 117 ---
17
THE FIRST MONOTHEIST
S
INCE
 Freud first showed the similarity between the religions of Moses and Akhenaten fifty years ago
in his book 
Moses and Monotheism,
 there has been endless argument about the identity of the first
monotheist. As we saw in the introduction to this book, attempts have been made to place the Jewish
Exodus long before the Amarna period, thus ensuring the honour for Moses. Then, when this approach
failed and all the evidence pointed to the Exodus having taken place 
after
 the Amarna reigns, the
focal points of attack became the discrediting of Akhenaten himself and efforts to demonstrate that the
beliefs he introduced into Egypt were not monotheistic at all.
The holy books establish Moses as the first monotheist although, while the Hebrew patriarchs
believed in one God, they accepted that other peoples had other gods to worship, as in the case of
Laban (Genesis, 31:43–55). Yet, from historical sources, Akhenaten is the first person we know of to
introduce worship of one God. An examination of their respective religious beliefs makes it clear that
Moses and Akhenaten should not be looked upon, as has been largely the case, as rivals but as the
same person.
Akhenaten’s God
The early representations of Akhenaten’s God showed the deity as of human shape with the head of a
falcon, surmounted by a solar disc. Towards the end of his Year 2 or early in his Year 3 an important
development took place in this representation. The human figure disappeared and in its place a golden
disc was shown at the top of the scene with extended rays that came down over the members of the
royal family as well as the temple, altar and palace. These rays ended in hands that held the symbols
of ‘life’ and ‘power’. To indicate the kingly status of Akhenaten’s God, an uraeus (cobra) hung from
the disc in the same way as an uraeus adorned the brow of the king. At the same time the name and
epithet of the God was placed inside two cartouches, matching the manner in which the ruling king’s
name was written.
The God introduced by Moses to Israel is often spoken of and addressed as a ‘king’ (Isaiah, 41:21;
44:6; 52:7) and the so-called 
Enthronement Psalms of Jehovah
 (Psalms 47:93; 96–9) emphasize this
kingly idea of the Lord. Yet the attribution of kingship to Jehovah was certainly foreign to Israelite
thought at the time of the Exodus.
Akhenaten seems to have drawn on the traditional worship of the solar god of Heliopolis in many
ways. The early name for Akhenaten’s God was the same as the name of the Heliopolitan god Re-
Harakhti (Horus of the horizon). Furthermore, the name given by the king to his early Karnak temple,
ben-ben
 (obelisk), was the same as that of the Heliopolitan temples where the 
ben-ben
 (a small
pyramid on a square base) was a characteristic of the solar temples. Meryre II, the high priest of
Akhenaten’s God, the Aten, was also given the same title – ‘greatest of seers’ – as the high priest of
Heliopolis.
From the inscriptions both at the Karnak temple and at the rock tombs of Amarna, especially that of


--- PAGE 118 ---
Aye, we can see how Akhenaten regarded his God:
‘The living Aten, there is none other than He’;
‘Who Himself gave birth to Himself’;
‘He who decrees life, the Lord of sunbeams’;
‘The world came forth from Thy (Aten) hand’;
‘Thou createst the earth when Thou were afar, namely men, cattle, all flocks, and everything on earth
which moves with legs, or which is up above flying with wings. The foreign countries of Syria
(north) and Kush (south), and the land of Egypt, Thou placest every man in his place, and makest their
food. Everyone has his food, and his lifetime is reckoned; and similarly their languages are wholly
separate in form. For their colours are different, for Thou hast made foreign peoples different’;
‘Thou … creator of months and maker of days, and reckoner of hours’.
We find echoes of these attributes in the God of Moses. He was:
a sole God
Hear, O Israel: The Lord our God is one Lord. (Deuteronomy, 6:4)
Thou shalt have no other gods before me. (Exodus, 20:3)
without a cult image
Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth
beneath, or that is in the water under the earth. (Exodus, 20:4)
the creator of the world
In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth. (Genesis, 1:1)
the king of the world
The Lord shall reign for ever and ever. (Exodus, 15:18)
the father
And thou shalt say unto Pharaoh, Thus saith the Lord, Israel is my son, even my firstborn. (Exodus, 4:22)
Temple and Worship
The way the patriarchs who preceded Moses worshipped their God was by building an altar of stone
at the spot where the Lord had spoken to them:
And the Lord appeared unto Abram, and said, Unto thy seed will I give this land; and there builded he an altar unto the Lord,
who appeared unto him. (Genesis, 12:7)
And he erected there an altar, and called it El-elohe-Israel. (Genesis, 33:20)
They made offerings of drink and oil:
And Jacob set up a pillar in the place where he talked with him, even a pillar of stone: and he poured a drink offering thereon,
and oil thereon. (Genesis, 35:14)


--- PAGE 119 ---
And they also offered sacrifices:
Then Jacob offered sacrifice upon the mount, and called his brethren to eat bread: and they did eat bread, and tarried all night
in the mount. (Genesis, 31:54)
And Israel took his journey with all that he had, and came to Beer-sheba, and offered sacrifices unto the God of his father
Isaac. (Genesis, 46:1)
Moses was the first person to introduce a temple into Israelite worship when he created the
tabernacle in Sinai. It is true that the Canaanites did build their own kind of stone temples in
Palestine, and even in some locations in the Eastern Delta during the Hyksos period, but we have no
evidence that the Israelites had, or made use of, any such construction before the time of Moses. For
his part, Akhenaten adapted the Heliopolitan solar form of the Egyptian temple – the same form used
by Moses in the desert – to be used as the place of worship for his new religion.
Accordingly, there was no Israelite priesthood before the time of Moses. It was he who arranged
the priesthood in two main levels, the high priest and the ordinary priests, and instructed them on
what garments to wear, how to be purified and anointed and how to go about fulfilling the duties of
their office. Ritual and worship at the newly-established Israelite tabernacle were similar to those
introduced by Akhenaten, who instructed his followers to sacrifice the sacred Egyptian animals for
his new God, again echoing an incident that we find in the story of Moses:
And Moses said, It is not meet so to do; for we shall sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians to the Lord our God: lo, shall
we sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians before their eyes, and will they not stone us? (Exodus, 8:26)
Moses also introduced the ark, the receptacle in the temple in which the Pentateuch scrolls were to
be kept (Exodus, 25:10). The ark is regarded as being the holiest part of the Jewish temple after the
Pentateuch itself. This again was an Egyptian practice, as Akhenaten adopted the Egyptian holy boat,
usually kept in the temple where it was used to carry the deity during processions.
Jehovah, Adonai and Aten
Before the time of Moses, the patriarchs identified their God in a variety of terms, all of which were
names of ancient Canaanite deities, such as:
El: (Genesis, 33:20);
El ‘Elyon (The Most High): (Psalms, 73:11);
El ‘Olam (The Everlasting God): (Genesis, 21:33);
El Shaddai (God Almighty): (Genesis, 17:1);
El Ro-i (The God Who Sees Me, or The God Of Vision): (Exodus, 6:3);
Elohim: Elohim, the plural of Eloho, meaning ‘a god’ and thought to be a lengthened form of ‘El’,
is used in the Bible more than two thousand times and is usually replaced in English by the word
‘God’, but it is also used for pagan gods and goddesses (Exodus, 12:12 and I Kings, 11:5).
Jehovah: This, the personal name of the God of Israel, is written in Hebrew with four consonants,
YHWH, which is understood to mean ‘I am’ and is referred to as the ‘Tetragrammaton’. Like Elohim,
this name occurs frequently in the Bible and is usually replaced in English by the word ‘Lord’.
Adonai (My Lord): The Hebrew word ‘Adonai’ is also usually rendered in English as ‘Lord’. It is
used in the Bible to refer to human beings (‘The man, who is the lord of the land …’, Genesis,
42:30’) as well as God. We also find the combined form ‘Adonai Jehovah’ (My Lord Jehovah):


--- PAGE 120 ---
And Abram said, Lord God, what wilt thou give me…? (Genesis, 15:2)
And he said, Lord God, whereby shall I know that I shall inherit it? (Genesis, 15:8)
O Lord God, thou hast begun to shew thy servant thy greatness, and thy mighty hand … (Deuteronomy, 3:24)
The ‘ai’ can be removed from the word ‘Adonai’ as it is a Hebrew pronoun meaning ‘my’ or
‘mine’ and signifying possession. We are then left with ‘Adon’ (Lord) which, as correctly noted by
Freud, is the Hebrew word for the Egyptian ‘Aten’ as the Egyptian ‘t’ becomes ‘d’ in Hebrew and the
vowel ‘e’ becomes an ‘o’. The name of the God of Moses, Adon, is therefore in the above references
the same as the name of the God of Akhenaten, Aten.
What of Jehovah? The Book of Exodus account of the argument that took place in Sinai between
Moses and his God over the question of his return to Egypt to rescue the Israelites does not make any
real sense unless Moses and Akhenaten were one and the same person. When his new religion was
rejected, Akhenaten fled to Sinai, leaving the throne to his son, Tutankhamun, who was followed by
Aye, then Horemheb. When Horemheb died, there was no Tuthmosside heir to the Eighteenth Dynasty
apart from Akhenaten himself in desert exile. Pa-Ramses, Horemheb’s vizier, commander of the army
and mayor of Zarw in the Eastern Delta – where he resided and where the Israelites and Egyptian
followers of Akhenaten had been imprisoned – prepared to proclaim himself the new King of Egypt
as Ramses I.
Having been rejected by the majority of Egyptians, Akhenaten now decided to choose the Israelites
as his own people. However, when the Lord urges him in the Book of Exodus story to challenge the
new Pharaoh, it becomes clear that his main concern is not confrontation with Ramses I but how he is
to succeed in obtaining the support of the Israelites. His first problem is that he does not speak their
language sufficiently well:
And Moses said unto the Lord, O my Lord, I am not eloquent … I am slow of speech and of a slow tongue. (Exodus, 4:10)
For this reason, Aaron, the Israelite feeding brother of his early childhood (see page 182), had to
be enlisted as his spokesman:
And the anger of the Lord was kindled against Moses, and he said, Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother? I know that he can
speak well … (Exodus, 4:14)
The second problem facing Akhenaten in enlisting the support of the Israelites was to establish a
relationship between his God and the God of the Israelites’ ancestors. Both Gods were the same in
the sense that, unlike the ancient gods of Egypt, they had no image. The question of God’s name,
however, seems to have been a matter of compromise, giving rise to two strange passages in the Book
of Exodus. The first arises when Moses asks which name he should use:
And Moses said unto God, Behold when I come unto the children of Israel, and shall say unto them, The God of your fathers
hath sent me unto you; and they shall say to me, What is his name? what shall I say unto them?
And God said unto Moses, I AM THAT I AM: and he said, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM (i.e.
Jehovah) hath sent me unto you. (Exodus, 3:13–14)
The second passage, in which God informs Moses that he never appeared to the patriarchs under
the name Jehovah, is even stranger in the light of the fact that we encounter this name in several
chapters of the preceding Book of Genesis:
And I appeared unto Abraham, and unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, by the name of God Almighty, but by my name JE-HO-VAH
was I not known to them. (Exodus, 6:3)


--- PAGE 121 ---
It seems that Akhenaten would not reject the name of his God, the Aten, simply to secure the
support of the Israelites. Therefore a compromise had to be reached. Its nature was that, while the
Hebrew word ‘YHWH’ could be written, it could not be read aloud but had to be pronounced as
‘Adonai’. Nobody knows when this Jewish practice started although I believe it dates from the time
of Moses. Nor has any convincing explanation ever been put forward for the interdict. To say that a
ban on uttering God’s personal name was intended as a sign of respect is contradicted by the fact that
all the other names given to the Israelite God before the time of Moses, as well as Adonai, are spoken
aloud by the Jews. In fact, as Freud has noted, the God of Akhenaten is the same as the God of Moses,
as can be clearly seen from the way the verse from Deuteronomy cited at the beginning of this chapter
is written in Hebrew:
Shema Yisrael YaHWaH Elohina YaHWaH Ekhod.
That is:
Hear, O Israel, Jehovah our God is the only God.
However, according to this ancient tradition, when read aloud by Jewish believers, it becomes:
Shema Yisrael: Adonai Elohina Adonai Ekhod
This confirms that a compromise was reached in Sinai under which the old personal name of God,
Jehovah, before the time of Moses would never be pronounced again and should in every case be
replaced by Adonai, the name of the God of Akhenaten.
The Evidence of Sinai
We know from the biblical story that Moses fled to Sinai after killing the Egyptian – after falling from
power according to the Talmud – and lived there until his return after the Pharaoh of the Oppression
had died. What about Akhenaten? Although we do not have conclusive evidence that Akhenaten
followed a similar course, there are many indications that point to this being the case.
In the early years of this century, Flinders Petrie led an expedition into Sinai where he recorded
what he was able to find of ancient inscriptions. The resulting evidence showed that the Egyptians
had sent expeditions to the mountains of Sinai since early dynastic times, mainly for the purpose of
mining turquoise.
Sinai is in the form of a triangle with its apex to the south between the two arms of the Red Sea, the
Gulf of Suez and the Gulf of Aqaba. At its northern base runs the road from Egypt to Asia, from
Kantarah to Gaza along the Mediterranean coastline. To the south of this low northern land is a lofty
limestone plateau, crossed by only a few narrow passes. The southern triangle, between the two arms
of the Red Sea, is a mountain mass including Mount Sinai or Mount Horeb (modern name, Gebel
Musa, which means the Mount of Moses). En route from the Eastern Delta through the valleys, before
arriving at Mount Sinai we come to another important site, Sarabit el-Khadim, a mountain area with
many turquoise mines.
On the high peak of Sarabit, 2600 feet above sea level, a shrine was constructed, originally in a
cave, although by the time of the New Kingdom it had been extended outside and reached a total
length of 230 feet. This temple was dedicated to Hathor, the local deity. Petrie found fragments of a
limestone stela at Sarabit, made by Ramses I. Although the stela is not actually dated, this poses no
problem as Ramses I ruled for little more than a year. What is surprising about the stela is that in its
inscription Ramses I describes himself as ‘the ruler of all that the Aten embraces’.
1
 Of this
unexpected reappearance of the fallen Aten, Petrie commented: ‘To find the Aten mentioned thus after


--- PAGE 122 ---
the ruthless Amunism of Horemheb is remarkable. Hitherto the latest mention of it was under King
Aye.’
2
The name of the Aten had been missing for thirteen years during the reign of Horemheb: now in the
time of his successor, Ramses I, the hated God has reappeared, not in Egypt proper but in Sinai. The
stela made more than a quarter of a century after Akhenaten’s fall from power, also features the
Amarna realistic style: ‘The portion which is preserved of the figure [Ramses I’s figure at the top of
the stela] is carefully wrought, and in the dress resembles the work of Akhenaten.’
3
This was not the only surprising discovery. At the temple Petrie found the dark green head,
executed in the Amarna style, of a statuette of Queen Tiye, Akhenaten’s mother. The complete
statuette must have been about a foot high. Why should it be at Sarabit? ‘It is strange that this remotest
settlement of Egypt has preserved her portrait for us, unmistakably named by her cartouche in the
midst of the crown,’ Petrie remarked. ‘The haughty dignity of the face is blended with a fascinating
directness and personal appeal. The delicacy of the surfaces round the eye and over the cheek shows
the greatest delicacy in handling. The curiously drawn-down lips with their fullness and yet delicacy,
their disdain without malice, are evidently modelled in all truth from the life.’
4
Petrie was also able to find evidence indicating that the rituals performed in the temple at Sarabit
were of Semitic nature:
• The Offering of Burnt Sacrifices: He found a bed of clean white ash under a considerable portion of
the temple, amounting to more than fifty tons, which he took to represent the remains of burnt
sacrifices over a long period.
5
 This practice is known from the Bible to have been Israelite.
• The Dedication of Conical Stones: Two cones of sandstone, alike in shape and size, were found in
the temple. Stones of this type were used in certain forms of Syrian ritual and are not to be found in
Egypt.
• An Elaborate Ceremony of Ablutions: At Sarabit there were three rectangular tanks and a circular
basin, placed to be used at four different stages of entering the temple. This makes it clear that
ablutions played a great role in the form of worship at Sarabit as they do in both Judaism and Islam.
6
• The Practice of Visiting Sacred Places for the Purpose of Obtaining Oracular Dreams and the
Setting Up of Memorial Stones at the Spot Where the Dream Occurred: Scattered over the area
around the temple Petrie came across many slabs of sandstone, set upright. The slabs ranged in height
from a few inches to a couple of feet, propped up by other stones if necessary to make them stand on
end. Similar piled stones were found around Mount Sinai, indicating that both areas were regarded as
sacred places. This archaeological find agrees with what we find in the Bible:
And he (the Lord) said, Draw not nigh hither: put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy
ground. (Exodus, 3:5)
Petrie noted that this piling of stones is part of a well-known system of sacred stones, set upright in
adoration, that is not Egyptian, and for him the only explanation for this ritual would be the custom of
sleeping at or near a sacred place in order to obtain some vision from the deity, which he compared
with what the patriarch Jacob is said to have done:
7
And Jacob went out from Beersheba, and went toward Haran.
And he lighted upon a certain place, and tarried there all night, because the sun was set; and he took of the stones of that
place, and put them for his pillows, and lay down in that place to sleep.
And he dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of it reached to heaven: and behold the angels of God


--- PAGE 123 ---
ascending and descending on it. (Genesis, 28:10–12)
If Akhenaten lived at the Sarabit temple for twenty-five years, although he would not have changed
any of his original beliefs it is easy to envisage his adopting some of the local Semitic rituals that did
not conflict with them. But why Sinai – why would he choose Sinai for his place of refuge in exile?
Although Sinai was regarded as part of Egypt from the early days of Egyptian history, no army
garrison was stationed there. Nor did it have a resident governor. Instead, during the Eighteenth and
Nineteenth Dynasties the area was placed under the control of two officials, the Royal Messenger in
All Foreign Lands and the Royal Chancellor.
Neby, the Troop Commander and Mayor of Zarw, was also the Royal Messenger in All Foreign
Lands. Zarw was Tiye’s city, where the Israelites lived until their Exodus, and there are also
indications that Zarw remained faithful to the Aten during the reigns of Tutankhamun and Aye. It was
only when Horemheb appointed Pa-Ramses (later Ramses I) to the posts previously held by Neby that
the climate changed. At least until that time, therefore, Akhenaten could count on being able to live in
peace in his chosen refuge.
Nor was he under any threat from the Royal Chancellor, who was responsible for the mining
expeditions sent to Sarabit. We know from inscriptions found in Sinai and other sources that, up to the
time of Amenhotep III, the treasury was placed in the hands of one family, that of Pa-Nehas, for three
generations. Akhenaten himself also appointed Panahesy, a descendant of Pa-Nehas, as his chancellor
and Chief Servitor of the Aten in his temple at Amarna as well as the Servitor of the King in the
temple. Thus the family of Pa-Nehas was not only involved in Akhenaten’s government, but in his
worship. It would therefore have been normal for them to suggest Sarabit as a place of exile where
they would have been able to give him support.
Although there is as yet no complete proof, it is easy to see that, in the prevailing circumstances,
Sarabit offered the best, if not the only, location for Akhenaten’s exile – a holy place, close to another
holy place, Mount Sinai, away from Egyptian control, where he could meditate and develop his
religious ideas until, when Horemheb’s death brought the Eighteenth Dynasty to an end, he came back
to try to reclaim his throne.
The Ten Commandments
The Ten Commandments given by the Lord God of Moses to the Israelites in Sinai are clearly in an
Egyptian tradition and would seem to have common roots with the Egyptian 
Book of the Dead.
Egyptians believed that, after their death, they faced a trial in the underworld before Osiris and his
forty-two judges in the Hall of Judgement. Spell 125 of the 
Book of the Dead
 contains a Negative
Confession that the dead person has to recite on this occasion, containing such assurances as:
I have done no falsehood,
I have not robbed,
I have not stolen,
I have not killed men,
I have not told lies.
The Ten Commandments are a kind of positive form of this Egyptian Negative Confession:
Thou shalt not kill,
Thou shalt not steal,


--- PAGE 124 ---
Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour.
It therefore seems likely that Akhenaten, who did not believe in Osiris or his underworld, turned
the moral code according to which the Egyptians believed their dead would be judged into an
imperative code of behaviour for his followers in this life.


--- PAGE 125 ---
18
THE ‘MAGIC’ ROD OF MOSES
S
OME
 of the most fascinating sections of the biblical story of Moses are those dealing with the
magical power of his rod. When the Lord asked Moses to leave Sinai and return to Egypt in order to
liberate the Israelites, Moses was not sure that they would either listen to him or believe in him:
And Moses answered and said, But, behold, they will not believe me, nor hearken unto my voice: for they will say, The Lord
hath not appeared unto thee. (Exodus, 4:1)
We are then told that the Lord gave Moses three magical signs that would confirm his identity as
the messenger of God:
1   The rod he was carrying became a snake and was then restored to its former state (4:2–4);
2   His hand became leprous (white as snow) and then was healed again (4:6–7); and
3   He was promised that, if he poured the water of the Nile on the ground, it would turn to blood
(4:9).
Magic implies the existence of a realm of power that transcends Nature and the deities. It is an
attempt to influence events by occult means and is therefore in complete contrast with the
monotheistic religion of both Moses and Akhenaten.
Ancient man believed that he was able to influence the mysterious forces surrounding him by means
of magical rituals or utterances. This was true of Egyptians, who had special priests to practise these
arts. They believed they could achieve their desired end by such means. Magic was employed
particularly to protect the dead on their journey through the underworld, and to ensure their return for
a second life.
The Bible, on the other hand, opposes all kinds of magic. Any belief in its efficacy is seen as
contradicting the Israelite belief in the exclusive and supreme rule of one God, whose will cannot be
influenced by human means. The subsequent confrontation between Moses and the Egyptian magicians
and sorcerers, described in 
chapter seven
 of the Book of Exodus, explained as miracles in the case of
Moses and magic in the case of the Egyptians, is not really convincing as both sides were said to have
employed the same methods.
We know also that Akhenaten rejected all kinds of magic. Even the practices, dear to the Egyptians,
relating to the spells of the 
Book of the Dead,
 that guaranteed a safe journey through the underworld,
as well as the trial of the deceased before Osiris, the dead king of the dead, and his tribunal found no
place in Akhenaten’s religion. Osiris and other gods of the underworld were completely ignored by
him and his followers. How, then, can we explain how Moses/ Akhenaten, the first prophet of
monotheism, turned to magic in order to confirm that he was the true messenger of the Lord?
When we examine the acts said to have been performed by Moses to establish his identity we find
that they are largely related to some old Egyptian rituals that kings used to perform in their 
sed
festivals for the purpose of rejuvenating their power. The biblical account reads as follows:
And Moses and Aaron went in unto Pharaoh, and they did so as the Lord had commanded: and Aaron cast down his rod
before Pharaoh, and before his servants, and it became a serpent.
Then Pharaoh also called the wise men and the sorcerers: now the magicians of Egypt, they also did in like manner with


--- PAGE 126 ---
their enchantments.
For they cast down every man his rod, and they became serpents: but Aaron’s rod swallowed up their rods.
And he hardened Pharaoh’s heart, that he hearkened not unto them; as the Lord had said. (Exodus, 7:10–13)
The first thing we notice here is that, whereas earlier in the Book of Exodus Moses was instructed
to perform three different signs, here we have an account of only one – and that it was performed not
by Moses, but by Aaron.
The Koran gives a slightly different account of this confrontation, an account which contains more
significant details than are to be found in the Bible and is in closer agreement with the earlier details
in the Book of Exodus:
Moses said: ‘O Pharaoh!
I am an apostle from
The Lord of the Worlds, –
‘One for whom it is right
To say nothing but truth
About Allah. Now have I
Come unto you (people), from
Your Lord with a clear (Sign)
So let the Children of Israel
Depart along with me.’
(Pharaoh) said: ‘If indeed
Thou hast come with a Sign,
Show it forth, –
If thou tellest the truth.’
Then (Moses) threw his rod,
And behold! it was
A serpent, plain (for all to see)!
And he drew out his hand
And behold! it was white
To all beholders!
Said the Chiefs of the people
To Pharaoh: ‘This is indeed
A sorcerer well-versed.
‘His plan is to get you out
Of your land: then
What is it ye counsel?’
They said: ‘Keep him
And his brother in suspense
(For a while); and send
To the cities men to collect –
‘And bring up to thee
All (our) sorcerers well-versed.’
So there came
The sorcerers to Pharaoh:
They said, ‘Of course
We shall have a (suitable)
Reward if we win!


--- PAGE 127 ---
He said: ‘Yea, (and more), –
For ye shall in that case
Be (raised to posts)
Nearest (to my person).’
They said: ‘O Moses
Wilt thou throw (first),
Or shall we have
The (first) throw?’
Said Moses: ‘Throw ye (first).’
So when they threw,
They bewitched the eyes
Of the people, and struck
Terror into them: for they
Showed a great (feat of) magic.
He put it into Moses’s mind
By inspiration: ‘Throw (now)
Thy rod’: and behold!
It swallows up straightaway
All the falsehoods
Which they fake.
Thus truth was confirmed,
And all that they did
Was made of no effect.
So the (great ones) were vanquished
There and then, and were
Made to look small.
But the sorcerers fell down
Prostrate in adoration,
Saying: ‘We believe
In the Lord of the Worlds, –
‘The Lord of Moses and Aaron.’
Said Pharaoh: ‘Believe ye
In Him before I give
You permission? Surely
This is a trick which ye
Have planned in the City
To drive out its people:
But soon shall ye know
(The consequences).
‘Be sure I will cut off
Your hands and your feet
On opposite sides, and I
Will cause you all
To die on the cross.’ (Sura VII, 104–24)
This section of the Koran presents the confrontation in such a precise way that one wonders if some
of the details were left out of the biblical account deliberately. Here Moses sounds less like a
magician, more like someone who presents evidence of his authority that convinces the wise men of


--- PAGE 128 ---
Egypt, who throw themselves at his feet and thus earn the punishment of Pharaoh. One can only
suspect that the biblical editor exercised care to avoid any Egyptian involvement with the Israelite
Exodus, even to the extent of replacing Moses by Aaron in the performance of the rituals.
The Koran also mentions the white hand ritual as having been performed by Moses in front of
Pharaoh. As for the promise that the Nile would turn red, this should be seen as indicating the time of
the year. During the season of Inundation, the Nile waters become reddish, and, if these events took
place in the Eastern Delta, this would suggest the late days of summer, by which time this change of
colour would have begun to affect the lower reaches of the river.
And what of the ‘magic’ rod of Moses? We know from Egyptian sources that kings used to have a
collection of rods representing different aspects of their authority. One of the sceptres of the king’s
power was a rod in the shape of a serpent either made of, or covered with, brass. Now, the Hebrew
word used in the Bible to indicate the rod of Moses is 
nahash,
 which has the meanings of both
‘serpent’ and ‘brass’. The Haggadah, the legendary part of the Talmud, confirms the royal character
of Moses’s rod: ‘The rod which Moses used … was shaped and engraved in the image of a sceptre.’
During their 
sed
 festivals, celebrated by Egyptian kings, including Akhenaten, to rejuvenate their
power, it was the custom to take part in rituals that included both the ‘serpent rod’ and ‘hand’ rituals
performed by Moses. In the tomb of Kheruef, one of Queen Tiye’s stewards, a throne scene shows the
queen with her husband, Amenhotep III. Under the dais of the throne we see Kheruef and other
officials, each holding something that he is about to hand to the king so that he can use it during the
sed
 festival celebrations of his Year 30. In one scene, Kheruef is followed by eight palace officials,
the first of whom is wearing an apron. He puts his right arm across his chest and his hand over his left
shoulder while he holds his forearm with the left hand. The fourth of these officials holds a bundle of
clothes in his right hand and a curved sceptre with serpent’s head in his left.
1
So, in the course of their 
sed
 festival celebrations, Egyptian kings performed rituals that
corresponded to the ‘serpent rod’ and ‘hand’ rituals performed by Moses – and, in performing them,
Moses was not using magic but seeking to establish his royal authority.
I think the correct interpretation of these accounts is that, when Akhenaten was forced to abdicate,
he must have taken his royal sceptre to Sinai with him. On the death of Horemheb, the last king of the
Eighteenth Dynasty, about a quarter of a century later, he must have seen an opportunity to restore
himself to the throne. No heir to the Tuthmosside kings existed and it was Pa-Ramses, commander of
Horemheb’s army and governor of Zarw, who had laid claim to the throne. Akhenaten returned to
Egypt and the wise men were gathered in order to decide between him and Pa-Ramses. Once they
saw the sceptre of royal authority and Akhenaten had performed the 
sed
 festival rituals – secret from
ordinary citizens – the wise men bowed the knee in front of him, confirming that his was the superior
right to the throne, but Pa-Ramses used his army to crush the rebels. Moses was allowed to leave
again for Sinai, however, accompanied by the Israelites, his mother’s relatives, and the few Egyptians
who had been converted to the new religion that he had attempted to force upon Egypt a quarter of a
century earlier. In Sinai the followers of Akhenaten were joined subsequently by some bedouin tribes
(the Shasu), who are to be identified as the Midianites of the Bible.
No magic was performed, or intended, by Moses. The true explanation of the biblical story could
only be that it was relating the political challenge for power in a mythological way – and all the
plagues of which we read were natural, seasonal events in Egypt in the course of every year.


--- PAGE 129 ---
19
WHO WAS WHO? – AND THE DEATH OF MOSES
I
F
 Moses and Akhenaten were the same person, it must be possible to match some biblical characters
with characters we know of in Egyptian history. We can best begin with Jochebed, the daughter of
Levi, who is described in the Book of Exodus as Moses’ nurse. She is, I think, to be identified as Tiy,
the wife of Aye, last of the Amarna kings.
The American scholar Keith C. Seele has noted the special importance attached to Aye’s wife at
his Amarna tomb: ‘The tomb of Aye and Tiy at Amarna is the only one in which both husband and
wife are depicted with so nearly equal prominence. This exceptional treatment of the wife suggests
the possibility that Aye owed his favour at court to her, or even that she was his superior in rank and
family.’
1
What strikes us first is that Tiy seems to have been named after Queen Tiye. We know from the
Amarna tomb that she was ‘nurse and tutress of the queen’, Nefertiti. She was also, as Baikie noted:
‘The great nurse, nourisher of the god (king), adorner of the king (Akhenaten).’
2
Scholars have long debated the identity of Queen Nefertiti’s parents. As we saw earlier, some have
suggested that she was Tadukhipa, the daughter the Mitannian king Tushratta sent to Amenhotep III as
a bride towards the end of his days, and that she could then have married his son, Akhenaten, instead:
others that she was, in fact, Aye’s daughter by an earlier wife who had died. Neither of these
hypotheses has any grounds for support. Akhenaten, himself rejected on account of the non-royal
origins of his mother, would not have married someone other than the heiress, the eldest daughter of
Amenhotep III, and he had, in any case, married Nefertiti in his Year 28, eight years before the arrival
of Tadukhipa in Egypt. Nor can Nefertiti have been Queen Tiye’s daughter, otherwise she would not
have been the heiress.
Seele has argued that, as Nefertiti became ‘Great Royal Wife of the King’, it is probable that she
was a princess of royal blood.
3
 In addition, Ray Winfield Smith, reporting on the reconstruction work
of the temple project of Akhenaten at Karnak, makes the point: ‘An astonishing emphasis on Nefertiti
is demonstrated by the frequency of her name in the cartouches on offering tables, as contrasted with
the relatively few cartouches of Amenhotep IV. The queen’s name alone occurs sixty-seven times,
whereas only thirteen tables carry both names, and a mere three show only the king’s name.’
4
 He goes
on to discuss the appearance of statues of the king and queen on offering tables that appear on the
talalat,
 the small stones used in building Akhenaten’s Karnak temple and later re-used by Horemheb
after the temple’s destruction: ‘There are sixty-three Nefertiti statues and thirty-eight Amenhotep IV
statues, with eleven unidentified. Significant is not only the preponderance of Nefertiti, but even more
important the extraordinary domination of the larger offering tables by Nefertiti statues. It will be
noticed that all of the five identified statues of the large size (72cm) are of Nefertiti.’
5
The greater importance attached to Nefertiti than even the king himself in the first years of their
marriage makes it more possible to agree with Seele’s theory that she must have been a daughter of
Amenhotep III, not by Tiye but by one of his other wives. As Horemheb later married Nefertiti’s
sister Mutnezmet, to strengthen his claim to the throne, this reinforces the view that Nefertiti’s mother
was Sitamun, Amenhotep III’s sister and wife, who, from the traditional point of view, would have


--- PAGE 130 ---
been regarded as the real Queen of Egypt, being the heiress daughter of Tuthmosis IV.
Tiy, then, was Nefertiti’s nurse and also nursed her half-brother, Akhenaten, and Seele goes on to
explain: ‘It would be especially understandable if, as I have indicated, Nefertiti was the daughter of
Amenhotep III. In that case, Nefertiti and her half-brother, Akhenaten, perhaps from childhood
destined to be her husband, would have grown from infancy to maturity in close association with both
Tiy and Aye. Egyptian history presents repeated precedents for the reward of royal nurses and their
families at the hands of Pharaoh.’
6
 Seele also indicates that the nurse of Nefertiti and Akhenaten must
have had another child of her own: ‘The Egyptian word for “nurse” employed in her title almost
certainly means that Tiy was the actual nurse – the wet-nurse – of Nefertiti during her babyhood. If
this interpretation be correct, it is evident that Tiy had been the mother of a child – presumably the
child also of Aye – and thus became available as the nurse of the princess, Nefertiti.’
7
Even today, bedouin children thus nursed by a woman call her ‘mother’, the same name that they
use for their real mother. The naming of Akhenaten’s nurse after his real mother, Tiye, confirms the
relationship, and at the Amarna tomb of Aye and Tiy the king is seen bestowing honour on his nurse
as well as on her husband.
If Nefertiti were the eldest daughter, she could have been a few years older than Akhenaten, which
would explain why she is more prominent in the scenes of the king’s Karnak temple. Although we do
not know for certain whether the child Tiy nursed at the same time as Nefertiti was a boy or a girl, if
the other elements of the biblical story can be identified from Egyptian evidence, then it must have
been Aaron, about three years before the birth of Akhenaten. Thus Nefertiti would stand for the
biblical character of Miriam, while the nurse’s real son, Aaron, was simply what the bedouin call ‘a
feeding brother’ to Moses.
Such a relationship would explain the strange way he is introduced in the Book of Exodus, for,
after the birth of Moses is reported in the second chapter, a long time elapses before we hear of
Aaron. He makes his appearance in the story only after Moses had grown to manhood, fled to Sinai
and is resisting the Lord’s orders to return to Egypt to rescue the Israelites, pleading that he is ‘slow
of speech, and of a slow tongue’. It is only then that we learn of Aaron, and in a very strange way,
when the Lord asks: ‘Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother? I know that he can speak well.’ (Exodus,
4:10, 14)
8
The Koran also confirms that Moses and Aaron were related only through the feeding-mother
relationship. When Moses comes back from the Mount to find the Israelites worshipping a golden
calf, he becomes very angry, so he:
Seized his brother by (the hair
Of) his head and dragged him
to him. Aaron said
“Son of my mother!” … (Sura VII:150)
In Manetho’s account, it was Amenhotep III who fled to Ethiopia (Nubia): in the Talmud it was
Moses. The strange name given to Moses’ queen, Aten-it, relates her to Akhenaten’s God. No doubt
what is meant by the Talmud reference to Ethiopia, which is described as being a city, is the Amarna
location, and the queen’s desire to place her son on the throne instead of Moses could represent
Tutankhamun replacing his father, Akhenaten, whose policies had placed the whole dynasty in the
possible danger of being overthrown.
One can even see the character of Aye as the man who, according to the Koran, advised the king to


--- PAGE 131 ---
leave the city as the chiefs (nobles) were plotting to kill him.
And there came a man,
Running, from the furthest end
Of the City. He said:
‘O Moses! the Chiefs
Are taking counsel together
About thee to slay thee:
So get thee away, for I
Do give thee sincere advice.’ (Sura XXVIII, 20)
The only clue to the historical source of the account of how Moses slew an Egyptian would appear to
lie in the Amarna Tablets, the foreign archives of the Eighteenth Dynasty, which were found by a
peasant woman in the ruins of Akhenaten’s capital in 1887 and, unfortunately, suffered considerable
damage before they reached a dealer in antiquities and their importance was realized.
Among them is a letter, sent to Akhenaten by Abd-Khiba, King of Jerusalem, in which the king
accuses him of allowing the Hebrews in Egypt to kill two Egyptian officials without being punished
for their crime: ‘… the Khabiru (Hebrews) are seizing the towns of the king … Turbazu has been
slain in the very gate of Zilu (Zarw), yet the king holds back … Yaptih-Hadad has been slain in the
very gate of Zilu, yet the king holds back.’
9
Much argument has surrounded the question of whether the word 
Khabiru,
 used in the Amarna
letter, is to be equated with the biblical word for ‘Hebrew’. The various points of view can be found
summarized in a useful research by the biblical scholar H. H. Rowley.
10
 (For my own conclusions –
that the term indicated a social class rather than a people – see 
Appendix G
.)
Part of Josephus’ account of events in Egypt makes two points: ‘This king, he [Manetho] states,
wishing to be granted … a vision of the gods, communicated his desire to his namesake, Amenophis,
son of Paapis [son of Habu], whose wisdom and knowledge of the future were regarded as marks of
divinity. This namesake replied that he would be able to see the gods if he purged the entire country
of lepers and other polluted persons, and sent them to work on the stone quarries to the east of the
Nile, segregated from the rest of the Egyptians. They included, he adds, some of the learned priests,
who were afflicted with leprosy.’
The points in question may have their historical inspiration in the fact that:
1   Moses/Akhenaten preached about a God who, unlike the ancient gods of Egypt, had no visible
image;
2   When Akhenaten was persuaded to leave Thebes for his new capital at Amarna, those of his
followers who stayed behind were sent to work in the stone quarries.
Manetho’s account also describes how Amenophis (Amenhotep III) subsequently advanced from
Ethiopia with a large army and his son, Rampses, at the head of another, and that the two attacked and
defeated the shepherds and their polluted allies, killing many of them and pursuing the remainder to
the frontiers of Syria.
This is an allusion to Ramses I, during whose brief reign the Exodus took place.
Analysis of the origins of the tribe of Israel and of the Levites would need a book in itself. Here it is
worth making a few points briefly.
Contrary to the general view, the name Amarna does not derive from a Muslim Arab tribe which


--- PAGE 132 ---
settled in the area later. No evidence of such an event exists. The name derives from the name in the
second cartouche of Akhenaten’s god – 
Im-r-n.
 Amram, or Imran, was the name given in the Bible to
Moses’ father and it is the name Akhenaten gave to his ‘father’, the Aten.
Across the river from Amarna there is the modern city of Mal-lawi (Mallevi), which means
literally ‘The City of the Levites’. This could be explained by the fact that the Levites, who held
priestly positions with Moses, held the same positions with Akhenaten at Amarna. For example,
Meryre II was the High Priest of the Aten at his Amarna temple:
11
 the Hebrew equivalent of this name
is Merari, who is described (Genesis, 46:11) as one of the sons of Levi. Similarly, Panehesy was the
Chief Servitor of the Aten at Akhenaten’s temple:
12
 the Hebrew equivalent of this name is Phinehas,
the son of Eleazar and grandson of Aaron (Exodus, 6:25) in whose family the priesthood was to
remain:
Wherefore say, Behold, I give unto him (Phinehas) my covenant of peace.
And he shall have it, and his seed after him, even the covenant of an everlasting priesthood; because he was zealous for his
God, and made an atonement for the children of Israel. (Numbers, 25:12–13)
It is therefore a possibility that we are dealing here with the same people who served Akhenaten at
Amarna and then followed him to Sinai after his fall from power.
Discovery late in 1989 of the tomb, almost intact, of Aper-el, the hitherto unknown vizier to
Akhenaten, also provides a semantic link between the Israelites and the Amarna regime.
Similar names are known to have existed in Egypt at this time, but never in the case of high
officials. The name ‘Aper’ corresponds to the Egyptian word for ‘Hebrew’, which meant to ancient
Egyptians a nomad, and the final ‘el’ is the short form of ‘Elohim’, one of the words used in the Bible
as the name of ‘the Lord’.
The fact that Akhenaten’s vizier was a Hebrew worshipper of El confirms the link between the
king and the Israelites living in Egypt at the time. Furthermore, the fact that Queen Tiye was
associated with her husband, Amenhotep III, in donating a box to the funerary furniture of Aper-el
(see 
Chapter 8
) indicates the possibility that the vizier was a relation of the queen’s, most probably
through her Israelite father, Yuya (Joseph).
The Death of Moses
The account in the Old Testament of the failure of Moses to reach the Promised Land, his death and
his burial in an unmarked grave is another curious episode.
We are told initially, as we saw earlier, that, when his followers complained of thirst, Moses used
his rod to smite a rock and bring forth water. It was called ‘the water of Meribah’ – a location in the
north-centre of Sinai, south of Canaan – and it was for this action, although there is no indication that
Moses had done anything forbidden to him, that he was denied his reward. When the Israelites were
camped on the banks of the Jordan, near Jericho and opposite Canaan, he learned, according to the
Book of Deuteronomy, that he was to be denied the opportunity to cross the river, no matter how hard
he pleaded:
I pray thee, let me go over, and see the good land that is beyond Jordan, that goodly mountain, and Lebanon.
… the Lord said … speak no more unto me of this matter …
… thou shalt not go over this Jordan. (Deuteronomy, 3:25–7)


--- PAGE 133 ---
Later in the Book of Deuteronomy we have an account of the actual death of Moses. The Lord said
to him: ‘Get thee up into this mountain Abarim, unto Mount Nebo, which is in the land of Moab’ – the
borders between Sinai and eastern Jordan – ‘that is over against Jericho; and behold the land of
Canaan, which I give unto the children of Israel for a possession: And die in the mount … Because ye
trespassed against me among the children of Israel at the waters of Meribah-Kadesh, in the
wilderness of Zin … thou shalt not go thither unto the land which I give the children of Israel.’
(32:49–52)
After admonishing and blessing his people, Moses left them with Joshua and climbed the mountain.
There, after viewing the Promised Land, he met his death – and was buried by the Lord in an
unmarked grave in the plains of Moab below.
In contrast to this straightforward story, Talmudic sources have a rich collection of contradictory
accounts of the manner of Moses’ death. A reference to a confrontation between him and the ‘Angel of
Death’ on the Mount before he died, with an indication of a struggle between the two, has persuaded
some biblical scholars that Moses was killed. Sigmund Freud interpreted this suspicion in his book
Moses and Monotheism
 to mean that Moses had been killed by his own followers for being too rigid
in his views. I do not think this is an accurate interpretation of what happened.
The key, it seems to me, lies in the reason given why Moses was not allowed to enter Canaan, the
Promised Land. According to the Book of Exodus, the reason is that Moses struck a rock with his rod
to obtain water for his thirsty followers. This is not really convincing. Why should this practical
action be the cause of punishment? It is not as if there is any suggestion that he had been forbidden to
indulge in such conduct.
However, when we look back at the wars of Seti I, the second king of the Nineteenth Dynasty,
against the Shasu we find that the first confrontation took place in the vicinity of one of the Egyptian
fortresses on the route between Zarw and Gaza. Such fortresses were built in areas that had wells. It
would therefore seem to be a more likely explanation – even if it can be only supposition – that
Moses, under pressure from his thirsty followers, entered one or more of these fortresses and
obtained water by using his royal sceptre. Intrusions of this type would have been reported by the
Egyptian guards to their superiors at Zarw, resulting in Seti I sallying forth to put a stop to the unrest
that the Shasu were causing among the Sinai settlements. After the initial battle, Seti I, as we saw
earlier, chased the Shasu, identified as the Israelites, into northern Sinai – and, if these Talmudic
references to the death of Moses are correct, it must have been there that Moses died, out of sight of
his followers, most probably at the hand of Seti I.
This would explain how a new version of the Osiris-Horus myth came into existence from the time
of the Nineteenth Dynasty. Osiris, the King of Egypt, was said to have had to leave the country for a
long time. On his eventual return he was assassinated by Set, who had usurped the throne, but Horus,
the son of Osiris, confronted Set at Zarw and slew him. According to my interpretation of events, it
was in fact ‘Set’ who slew ‘Horus’; but their roles were later reversed by those who wished to
believe in an eternal life for Horus. This new myth developed to the point where Osiris/Horus
became the principal god worshipped in Egypt in later times while Set was looked upon as the evil
one.
This myth could have been a popular reflection of a real historical event – a confrontation between
Moses and Seti I on top of the mountain in Moab.


--- PAGE 134 ---
EPILOGUE
L
ACK
 of historical evidence to support the stories we find in the Old Testament has resulted broadly
in three schools of thought.
Some people accept these accounts of miracles and abnormal happenings unquestioningly, although
they demand rational or scientific explanations for the events they encounter in their everyday lives;
some dismiss the Old Testament as a work of imagination, purely mythological, with no historical
value; some have tried to marry these two schools of thought by setting a number of the better-known
biblical tales against a historical background, although this must be regarded simply as story-telling,
not serious historical research.
My own view has long been that the Old Testament is a historical work whose stories, recounted in
language that frequently strikes our sophisticated ears as extravagant, became distorted and
exaggerated during the many centuries when they were transmitted by word of mouth, and suffered
further at the hands of various editors. It is difficult to imagine how all these biblical tales became
etched so deeply in human memory if they did not have a basis in reality.
This is not to say that there are not genuine miracles in the Old Testament. There is no need to
question the fact that, if he had a message for Moses, the Lord attracted his attention by means of a
bush that appeared to be burning (radiant light is a recurrent feature in accounts of Marian apparitions
in our own age, such as those at Lourdes). Yet to many modern minds the popular image of Moses as
some kind of super-magician with a rod that could turn into a snake and part the waters of the Red Sea
is an impediment to belief.
I hope that my work, in providing a link between biblical and known historical events and putting
forward rational explanations for many of the seemingly mystifying events we find described in the
Old Testament, will serve to overcome such doubts and objections. In the case of this particular
book, it will enable Moses, the great law-giver who delivered the Ten Commandments, to be studied
from two sources – the Bible and Egyptian history. In addition, it points the way to the identification
of other biblical figures and, by fixing the date of the Exodus, makes it possible to establish when and
how the Israelite entry into Canaan took place, as well as other events that have long been the subject
of debate and argument.


--- PAGE 135 ---
APPENDICES


--- PAGE 136 ---
APPENDIX A
(i) The Shasu Wars
O
N
 the east side of the northern wall of the great Hypostyle Hall in Amun’s temple at Karnak we find
two series of scenes distributed symmetrically on either side of the entrance to the temple. The action
of the scenes converges towards the door at the centre, near which the god Amun stands to welcome
the victorious Seti I. At the two extreme ends, far from the doorway, we find depicted the battles that
took place in distant lands, and as we move towards the door we are shown the capture of war
prisoners, followed by the arrival back in Egypt, the presentation of captives and spoils to Amun,
culminating in the slaying of prisoners as sacrifices to the god. The scenes are arranged in three
horizontal rows, each showing a different war.
The first chronologically, the bottom row of the east wall, is a representation of the war against the
Shasu. After setting out on the route from Zarw to Gaza – known in the Bible as ‘the way of the land
of the Philistines’ (Exodus, 13:17) – and passing the fortified water stations, ‘pushing along this road
in the Negeb the king scatters the Shasu, who from time to time gather in sufficient numbers to meet
him. One of these actions is depicted in this relief as taking place on the desert road.
1
 … Over the
battle scene stands the inscription: “The Good God, Sun of Egypt, Moon of all land, Montu (the
Theban god of war) in the foreign countries: irresistible, mighty-hearted like Baal (an Asiatic god, the
counterpart of the Egyptian Seth), there is none that approaches him on the day of drawing up the
battle-line … The rebels, they know not how they shall (flee); the vanquished of the Shasu (becoming
like) that which exist not.”
2
 In his campaign it seems that Seti I pursued the Shasu into the northern
Sinai area and Edom, which includes ‘the waters of Meribah’, as well as Moab – the borders
between Sinai and Canaan/Jordan – before returning to continue his march along the northern Sinai
road between Zarw and Gaza until he reached Canaan itself. Just across the Egyptian border he
arrived at a fortified town whose name is given as Pe-Kanan (the Canaan), which, according to
Gardiner, is the city of Gaza.
3
In another scene we find the following inscription over the defeated Shasu: ‘Year 1. King of Upper
and Lower Egypt, Menmare (Seti I). The destruction which the mighty sword of Pharaoh … made
among the vanquished of the Shasu from the fortress of Tharu (Zarw) to Pe-kanan, when His Majesty
marched against them like a fierce-eyed lion, making them carcasses in their valleys, overturned in
their blood like those that exist not. Everyone that escapes his fingers says: “His might towards
distant countries is the might of his father, Amun, who hath assigned to him victorious valour in the
countries.” ’
4
In addition to those Shasu he had already slaughtered in battle, Seti brought many bedouin
prisoners back to Egypt, tied to his chariot, to be sacrificed. The scene showing the king being
welcomed back on his arrival at Zarw has an inscription that provides the reason for Pharaoh’s
campaign against the Shasu: ‘One came to say to His Majesty: “The foe belonging to the Shasu are
plotting rebellion. Their tribal chiefs are gathered in one place, waiting on the mountain ranges of
Kharu.”
5
 … Now as the good god (Pharaoh), he exults at undertaking combat; he delights at an attack
on him; his heart is satisfied at the sight of blood. He cuts off the heads of the perverse of heart. He
loves an instant of trampling more than a day of jubilation. His Majesty kills them at one time, and


--- PAGE 137 ---
leaves no heirs among them. He who is spared by his hand is a living prisoner, carried off to Egypt.’
6
The king, as can be seen from the following scenes, then proceeded with his Shasu prisoners to the
temple of Amun at Karnak. Over them we find: ‘Captives which His Majesty carried off from the
Shasu, whom His Majesty himself overthrew, in Year 1.’
7
 Then comes the depiction of the final act –
the sacrifice by Seti I personally of his Shasu captives at the feet of the Theban god Amun.
(ii) The Hattusili Peace Treaty
Year 21, first month of Winter, day 21, under the majesty of the King of Upper and Lower Egypt
Usimare Setpenre, son of Re, Ramses-mi-Amun, granted life eternally and forever, beloved of Amun-
Re, Harakhti, Ptah South-of-His-Wall, lord of Onkhtowe, Mut lady of Ishru and Khns-Neferhotpe,
being arisen upon the Horus-throne of the Living like his father Harakhti eternally and evermore.
On this day, when His Majesty was at the town of Pi-Ramses-mi-Amun doing the pleasure of his
father Amun-Re, Harakhti, Atum lord-of-the-two-lands-of-Heliopolis, Amun-of-Ramses-mi-Amun,
Ptah of Ramses-mi-Amun and Setekh great-of-valour, son of Nut, according as they give to him an
infinity of 
sed
 festivals and an eternity of peaceful years, all lands and all hill countries being
prostrate under his sandals; there came the king’s messenger … the messenger of Hatti (the land of the
Hittites) … carrying [the tablet of silver which?] the great chief of Hatti, Hattusili [caused] to be
brought to Pharaoh in order to beg pe[ace from the Majesty of Usimare] Setpenre …
The treaty which the great prince of Hatti, Hattusili, the strong, son of Mursili, the great chief of
Hatti, the strong, the son of Suppi[luliuma, the great chief of Hatti, the str]ong, made upon a tablet of
silver for Usimare … : the good treaty of peace and brotherhood, giving peace … forever. But
hereafter, beginning from this day, the great chief of Hatti, is [in?] a treaty for making permanent the
policy which … so as not to permit hostilities to be made between them forever. And the children of
the children [of] the great chief of Hatti shall be [?] in brotherhood and at peace with the children of
Ramses-mi-Amun, the great ruler of Egypt; they being in our policy of brotherhood and our policy [of
peace]. [And the land of Egypt?] with the land Hatti [shall be?] at peace and in brotherhood like us
forever; and hostilities shall not be made between them forever.
1
(iii) A Dissenting Voice
In discussing where the battles of Ramses II against the Shasu took place Dr Kenneth A. Kitchen of
Liverpool University says: ‘The area in question is indicated by two or three other sources … One is
Obelisk I at Tanis: “Terrible and raging lion who despoils the Shasu-land, who plunders the mountain
of Seir with his valiant arm.” Here, Shasu is by parallelism equated with Mount Seir, “which is
Edom” (cf. Genesis, 36: 8, 9). The second source is a topographical list of Ramses II at Amara West
in which the words 
t ŠSW
 Shasu-land, are qualified by each one in turn of the six names 
S’r, Rbn,
Pysps, Yhw, Šm′t
 and 
Wrbr.
 Thus Seir is classed as being at least part of the Shasu-land along with
the rest. Of the other names, Bernard Grdseloff, the Polish Egyptologist, has aptly compared 
Rbn
 with
the Laban of Deuteronomy, 1:1 (and Libnah of Numbers, 33: 20, 21) and 
Šm′t
 with the Shimeathites of
I Chronicles, 2:55, all in the area of Seir/Edom, the Negeb, or the Araba rift valley between them.
Thirdly one may cite a stela of Ramses II from Gebel Shaluf.
‘On the right edge (among other things) Anath says to the king: “[I] give to thee [the] Shasu-land


--- PAGE 138 ---
…” while line two on the front of the stela surely must be read: 
“
ḥ
k dw [n] s[′r
 … 
]
, i.e. who
plundered the mountain [of] Se[′ir].” Again, Shasu and Seir go together. This evidence clearly
suggests that Ramses or troops of his raided the Negeb, the uplands of Seir or Edom, and perhaps part
of the intervening Araba rift valley … Thus we have evidence for the activity of Ramses II (or at least
of his forces) in both Edom and Moab.’
1
After dealing with possible dates for the confrontation between Ramses II and the Shasu, Dr
Kitchen makes the following comment on the latter’s sudden appearance on the scene with the
beginning of the Nineteenth Dynasty: ‘It is significant that, after the mentions of Shutu in the nineteenth
century 
BC
 (six centuries earlier), no more clear Egyptian reference to southern Transjordan occurs
before the reign of Seti I.’
2
We therefore have the situation, as we saw earlier, that, in the first year of Seti I, the Shasu were
emerging from Sinai and posing a threat to Canaan, Edom and Moab. Then, at the time of Ramses II,
about two decades later, they have left Sinai and are to be found in Edom and Moab. If we compare
the sudden appearance of the Shasu bedouin and their movements with the Israelite Exodus from Sinai
we find that they followed the very same route. Dr Kitchen, too, was struck by this fact: ‘For Old
Testament studies, the new information has some bearing on the date of the Hebrew conquest of
central Transjordan and their entry into W. Palestine, not to mention the date of the Exodus.’
3
Nevertheless, after showing that both movements were similar, Dr Kitchen rejected the possibility
that they might be identical: ‘Now it would be highly unrealistic to have Ramses’s forces invading the
region of Dibon, north of the Arnon [in the land of Moab], once the Hebrews under Moses and Joshua
had taken over this area.’ What made Dr Kitchen believe that this would be unrealistic? ‘Otherwise,
one might expect a mention of “Israel” in the same class of records of Ramses II that mention “Seir”
and “Moab” before its known occurrence on Merenptah’s famous Israel stela.’
4
Although he saw the close similarity between Shasu movements and the emigration of the Israelite
tribes from Sinai to Palestine as recorded in the Bible, Dr Kitchen failed to recognize that these were
the very same people. This was a consequence of his preconceptions about when and how the Exodus
took place. His acceptance of 430 years as the length of the Sojourn, as well as the idea that the
Israelites should have their separate geographical land of Israel once they had crossed the border,
prevented him from grasping the historical reality to which his own translations pointed.


--- PAGE 139 ---
APPENDIX B
(i) The Amarna Rock Tombs of Huya and Meryre II
P
ROFESSOR
 Redford, who does not agree that a scene and inscription in the tomb of Huya, steward to
Queen Tiye, at Amarna is evidence that Amenhotep III was alive and in Amarna after the second half
of Akhenaten’s Year 8, quotes Norman de Garis Davies, whose book 
The Rock Tombs of El Amarna
was published by the Egypt Exploration Society of London in 1905, as having also rejected this scene
as evidence of a coregency. This is not strictly accurate. Davies preferred not to accept the idea for
three reasons – the fact that Tiye and Baketaten are shown separated from Amen-hotep III; the fact that
the uplifted hands of Tiye and Baketaten imply an unusual measure of reverence, suggesting that the
king was dead; and the fact that Akhenaten’s name precedes that of his father in the accompanying
inscription on the jamb of the door. Davies commented: ‘But for this and the difficulty of reconciling
the situation with other records, this equipoise of the two royal households would have suggested a
coregency of the two kings even at this late date in Akhenaten’s reign.’
1
The points raised by Davies are not, in fact, serious objections to a coregency. There are two
explanations for the form the scenes take, one historical, the other artistic. Huya was Queen Tiye’s
steward, appointed to his position by her son, Akhenaten, and had no direct relationship with her
husband, Amenhotep III. If Tiye was shown sitting by her husband she would have been a minor
character, in his shadow, as Nefertiti is shown in the shadow of Akhenaten: by separating her from
her husband, Huya gave his mistress enhanced importance. The artistic explanation is that in Egyptian
tombs and temples we usually find two similar scenes or inscriptions, coming from left and right to
meet in the jamb or centre of the door. In the Huya scenes, three female attendants have been added to
the Amenhotep III scene to make up for the fact that there is-only one princess depicted, not four, and
the uplifted hands of Tiye and Baketaten balance the gestures of Akhenaten’s two elder daughters in
the opposite scene, where they are shown waving their fans towards their parents. There is nothing in
the scene depicting Amenhotep III, who sits under the rays of the Aten, waving a hand to his family, to
suggest that he was dead at the time.
As for the inscription, although he was ill in his latter years, Amenhotep III remained the senior
partner in the coregency until the day he died. In the normal course of events, one would expect his
name to precede that of his coregent son – but not at Akhetaten. Here, in the domain of the Aten, the
name of the Aten’s only son and prophet, Akhenaten, had to come first.
Redford goes on to argue, as we saw earlier, that, as Tiye is shown alone on the outer wall of the
hall in question, Amenhotep III must have already been dead when construction of the tomb began:
‘Presumably, if the decoration of the tomb kept pace with its excavation, the scenes in the first hall
showing Tiye alone would have been carved before the lintel jambs.’
2
 A detailed analysis of the
whole hall of Huya’s tomb, as well as the neighbouring tomb of Meryre II, makes it clear, however,
that the walls were not decorated in the order that Redford assumes, and, in addition, that their
decoration provides further evidence pointing to a coregency of twelve years.
South Wall: This is the wall near the entrance to the first hall. On the right of the door is a banquet
scene featuring Tiye, entitled ‘King’s mother, Great King’s Wife’; Akhenaten, Nefertiti and two of
their daughters (only the name of the eldest, Merytaten is found); and Tiye’s daughter, Baketaten,


--- PAGE 140 ---
identified by the inscription ‘the King’s daugher, begotten and beloved by him, Baketaten’. This is the
first time the princess was depicted. The rays of the Aten extend from the top centre of the scene. To
the left of the doorway we find a scene of an evening entertainment which has the same shape and
includes the same characters except in the case of Nefertiti’s two daughters, who seem here to be a
younger couple. The rays of the Aten are missing from this evening scene and have been replaced by
cartouches of the God and the king.
East Wall: Here there is a picture of Tiye visiting an Aten temple called ‘the Sunshade’, which can
either be part of the main temple of the Aten or a separate temple built specially for her visit. Inside
the temple, Akhenaten is seen holding his mother’s hand and leading her affectionately towards an
interior building. Aten shines on the royal pair as well as on the building towards which they are
proceeding. They are preceded by Huya and followed by the young princess, Baketaten, who holds
three gifts for the altar and has two nurses to watch over her.
West Wall: This features a unique scene bearing the following inscription: ‘Year 12, the second
month of Winter, day 8. Life to the Father, the double Ruler, Re-Aten, who gives life for ever and
ever! The King of South and North Neferkheprure and the Queen Nefertiti, living for ever and ever,
made a public appearance on the great palanquin of gold to receive the tribute of Kharu
(Palestine/Syria) and Kush (Nubia), the West and the East; all the countries collected (gathered) at
one time, and the islands in the heart of the sea, bringing offerings to the King (when he was) on the
great throne of Akhenaten for receiving the imposts of every land, granting them the breath of life.’
3
Akhenaten and Nefertiti are depicted, borne in the State palanquin on the shoulders of a dozen
carriers. At least four of their daughters follow behind the chair. At its side walk officials, servants
and military personnel. Davies noted that in Huya’s tomb and a later version of the same day’s events
in the neighbouring tomb of Meryre II some of the troops carried a hooked staff and commented: ‘As
the curved staff is a Bedawi weapon, according to Wilson (Sir J. Gardiner Wilson, an early British
Egyptologist of the last century), we probably have here the troops who have escorted the embassies
into Egypt.’
4
 What Davies meant was that these bedouin troops, whom Akhenaten had entrusted with
the task of guarding his guests and him personally, could have come from the desert borders of the
Eastern Delta and Sinai – that is, the Shasu.
While Huya’s tomb shows only the procession on the occasion of the Tribute of the Nations, the
next stage of the celebrations, after the royal family, including all six princesses, had arrived at the
open pavilion, is depicted on the East Wall of Meryre II’s tomb – with an inscription that suggests a
different reason for the gathering. The inscription reads: ‘Year [12, second month of the winter
season, day 8] of the King of Upper and Lower Egypt… Akhenaten, great in his duration, and the
great wife of the King, his beloved, Nefertiti, living for ever and ever. His Majesty appeared on the
throne of the Divine and Sovereign Father, the Aten, who lives on Truth, and the chiefs of all lands
brought the tribute.’
5
 The implication of the Meryre II inscription, which has a bearing on whether or
not there was a coregency, is that the chiefs of all the lands brought their tribute because Akhenaten
had inherited the throne as sole ruler. But to return to the tomb of Huya …
North Wall: On either side of the lintel scenes described earlier are two almost identical scenes,
representing Huya’s appointment to his offices. To the left of the hall doorway, which leads to the
inner tomb, we see Akhenaten and Nefertiti leaning from the decorated loggia of the palace to present
collars of gold to Huya, who stands below them. Behind the royal pair are two of their younger
daughters and nurses, watching the event. To the right of the doorway we have the king and queen


--- PAGE 141 ---
again with their two elder daughters. Thus, as in the case of the opposite wall, near the entrance, we
have four princesses represented, the younger two to the left, the elder two on the right. As in the
former scene, Huya stands below the king and is shown with his neck laden with gold collars and
both arms covered to the elbow with gold armbands. A further scene below contains a tiny picture
showing a sculptor – ‘the overseer of sculptors of the great royal wife Tiye, Auta’ – at work in his
studio, putting the final touches to a statue of Baketaten, the daughter of his mistress, who is
represented as a young girl.
The only dated scene is on the West Wall, depicting the celebrations of Year 12, although the
appearance in this tomb of only the late form of the Aten’s name suggests that the tomb should be
dated after the second half of Year 8. However, there are other means by which we can arrive at
approximate dates. Four daughters are shown on the South and North Walls of the hall to Huya’s
tomb: six daughters are shown in the Year 12 celebrations depicted on the East Wall of Meryre II’s
neighbouring tomb. It is therefore safe to say that, because of the presence of the two additional
princesses in the latter tomb, the West Wall of Huya’s hall, showing the same scenes of celebration,
must have been decorated at least two years after the South and North Walls, which would date them
to about Year 10. The East Wall does not show any of Akhenaten’s daughters, but Baketaten, the
daughter of Amenhotep III and Queen Tiye, is depicted, looking the same age as on the South and
North Walls. It is therefore reasonable to deduce that this wall, too, was decorated around Year 10 of
Akhenaten with the celebratory scenes on the West Wall following two years or so later.
(ii) The Tomb of Kheruef
Three main points can be made about the tomb of Kheruef:
•  Much of it is unfinished.
•  It has suffered damage in three stages. Initially, as Kheruef seems to have fallen from grace while
still working on his tomb, scenes and inscriptions were erased by his enemies, ‘who chiselled out his
figures and the figures of the high officials (or perhaps members of his family) who were
accompanying him. They chiselled out also the texts referring to his activities or biography and in
most cases his names and titles … intending to wipe out all memory of him.
‘The second mutilation is more important for us because it was made by the agents of Amenhotep
IV, in all probability at the beginning 
of
 his movement before it became extreme. The walls of the
tomb are covered with prayers to the different deities, but none of these has been touched except
Amun. The cartouches of Amen-hotep III and Amenhotep IV both contained the word “Amun”, but it
was never removed, although the agents chiselled out carefully the name of the same deity in an
adjacent line. Another word was chiselled out carefully wherever it occurred … the word “gods”,
which for the worshippers of the Aten was a symbol for polytheism.’
1
A third type of destruction is evident, as noted by Labib Habachi,
2
 where the figures of Amenhotep
IV were also erased, which in this case has to be the work of his enemies from Horemheb to the
Ramesside kings of the Nineteenth Dynasty. The fact that the tomb was not completed and that the first
mutilation did not come from Akhenaten’s followers indicates that Kheruef fell from favour while the
old king was still alive and then, at a later stage, came Akhenaten’s followers to erase Amun’s name.
•  The tomb provides us with two dates. One scene in the first court depicts Kheruef offering gifts to


--- PAGE 142 ---
Amenhotep III and Queen Tiye on the occasion of the Pharaoh’s first jubilee in Year 30: another
shows him performing a similar task in Year 36 on the occasion of the king’s third and last jubilee.
The work in the first court is, however, unfinished.
Who was Kheruef? The main source of information about his titles and positions is the tomb, in
which we find him described as ‘Hereditary Prince and Governor’, ‘Royal Scribe’ and ‘Steward of
the great royal wife Tiye’. Nothing in the tomb relates him directly or indirectly to Akhenaten: he is
the Steward of Tiye, appointed to this position by her husband, Amenhotep III. The fact that
Akhenaten is shown in this tomb with his father therefore has to be explained away by those who do
not accept a coregency. The course they have chosen, without the slightest shred of evidence, is to
claim that, after the death of Amenhotep III, Kheruef was appointed by the new king to continue for a
while in his post.
As we have seen, the only two dates we have in this tomb are Year 30 and Year 36. Thus we can
safely assume that decoration of the tomb started some time after Year 30. But when did it cease?
Redford himself has noted: ‘This enormous hypogeum (underground chamber) displays decoration on
only a few walls, and there is good evidence that the work had halted abruptly, perhaps on the fall
from favour or the death of Kheruef.’
3
 It is clear that the façade area – the corridor with the libation
scene and the lintel of the doorway, where there is a further cartouche of Akhenaten, who is also
depicted in scenes with his mother, Queen Tiye – is virtually complete, the exception being the North
Wall which has red lines intended to guide the artist in his work. If, as Redford and other opponents
of the coregency claim, work on the tomb stopped after Amenhotep III’s death, during the sole rule of
his son, how does one explain that it is the son’s scenes that are virtually complete while those
belonging to his father were still unfinished?
The only reasonable conclusion is that Amenhotep IV was shown in Kheruef’s tomb, adoring his
father on the occasion of the old king’s first jubilee in Year 30. Kheruef continued to work for Queen
Tiye until just after Year 36 when he fell from favour and was dismissed from office. His enemies
then tried to wipe out all traces of him and, not much later, the Atenists also destroyed the name of the
god Amun. What confirms this as the correct sequence of events is the fact that, as we saw earlier,
Akhenaten did appoint another official, Huya, to take the place of Kheruef. If the coregency between
the two kings lasted for twelve years, then Year 37 of Amenhotep III, when Kheruef fell from favour,
coincided with Year 10 of Akhenaten, in which year, as we saw from Huya’s tomb, Akhenaten
appointed this official to the post of steward to Queen Tiye.
(iii) The Year of Tribute
Aldred has argued that the celebrations of Akhenaten’s Year 12, represented in the Amarna tombs of
Huya and Meryre II, show the king receiving gifts on his accession to sole rule.
1
 This seems likely.
There was no war campaign in foreign countries that would account for such tribute and, if it were
simply the regular yearly tribute, it is difficult to imagine all the foreign nations involved gathering in
Amarna at the same time. Furthermore, this is the only time such an event is to be found depicted in
the Amarna tombs. Redford is justified, however, in rejecting Aldred’s attempt to generalize the
conclusion so as to imply that all such tribute scenes in Eighteenth Dynasty tombs must be taken to
represent a coronation celebration, or that this event in Amarna coincided with the appointing of new
officials or their reappointment.


--- PAGE 143 ---
(iv) The Tomb of Ramose
Here Amenhotep IV appears in a tomb that belongs to the reign of his father, Amenhotep III, whose
name is found in the tomb. Ramose was mayor of Thebes and a vizier of Upper Egypt. Aldred
accepted the Ramose tomb as evidence of a coregency: Redford does not. In other cases where the
two kings are represented together in tombs, he has argued that Amenhotep III should be regarded as
already dead: here he accepts that he is mentioned as alive, but takes the view that Amenhotep IV was
not represented in the tomb until 
after
 the old king’s death. Redford makes the point that one of
Ramose’s relatives and a Minister of Recruitment for Amenhotep III – the son of Habu whose name
was also Amenhotep – is shown among the dead in a scene on the East Wall of the transverse hall. As
he and some of the others depicted in this necropolis scene are known to have died before and around
Year 34 of Amenhotep III, Redford rightly says the scene cannot be dated earlier than that year, but he
goes on to argue that decoration of the whole tomb did not start before that date: ‘Ramose must have
survived the thirty-fourth year of his sovereign, and in all probability a decade more … the tomb
presents a strong case against any coregency of Amenhotep III with Akhenaten.’ This view cannot,
however, be supported by the evidence.
Ramose’s positions as mayor and vizier are known from his tomb. In addition, he had his name
inscribed on the rocks of Sehel and Bigeh in the region of the First Cataract in Upper Egypt, the
southern limit of his jurisdiction. There he paid reverence to the cartouches of Amenhotep III and the
local gods. This, then, establishes that he had been appointed to his position by Amenhotep III. The
inscription is not dated, which means we do not know when he was appointed, but Aldred has
pointed out that dockets found at the remains of the Malkata palace complex of Amenhotep III at
Western Thebes showed that the vizier Ramose donated four jars of ale for the first jubilee of the king
in his Year 30.
1
 It must therefore have been around Year 30 that Ramose’s tomb was started because
it was mainly the king’s high officials who donated gifts on these occasions.
Both sides of the entrance to the tomb are decorated with the usual scenes of sacrifice to the solar
deities and gods of burial. In one scene on the East Wall, in which Ramose is accompanied by
officials, the text reads: ‘The making of an oblation of all things good and pure [to] Amun-Re, king of
the gods, [to] Re-Harakhti, [to] Atum, to Khepera … [Ramose … says “I give praise to Re-Harakhti]
when he dawns, that he may cause me to be among his followers and that my soul may rest in the
evening boat day by day.’ ” In a sub-scene three men singers are chanting: ‘The two lands of Horus
acclaim Amun on the great throne when he shines forth as Amun-Re … May he prolong the years of
Neb-Maat-Re (Amen-hotep III), to whom life is given … O mayor-vizier Ramose. Thy lord, Amun-
Re rewards thee in thy abode of the living. All the gods of the west rejoice because of thee, in that
thou makest a ritual offering to Amun-Re-Harakhti; to Atum, lord of On (Heliopolis) … to Osiris-
Khentiamenti; to Hat-Hor, regent of the necropolis; to Anubis… and to all the gods of the
underworld.’ As we can see, the name of Amenhotep III is mentioned in this section, Amun is still
king of the gods, many of whose names occur, but at the same time special importance is given to Re-
Harakhti, the name Akhenaten bestowed on his God in the very early days.
The East Wall also bears the necropolis scene, featuring son of Habu. Although Amenhotep III is
not mentioned specifically, it is evident that he was still the king as all the other figures depicted in
the scene are royal officials who died before him, but the inscriptions introduce a new, and strange,
expression in a quotation attributed to Ramose: ‘I had a serviceable spirit, doing justice 
for the king
of my time.
 I was rewarded for it by my god (the king).’ Another scene on this wall represents the
meal-of-the-dead rites, as well as the ceremony of using sacred oils and ointments, and Osiris – one


--- PAGE 144 ---
of the gods abolished by Akhenaten – and the Osiris Ramose (the dead Ramose) are the subject of the
inscriptions.
The upper half of the South Wall is taken up by funeral scenes, in which Ramose is shown as
already dead. On the West Wall, following the Theban custom of showing the reigning king on both
sides of the inner doorway, we have a king shown. The cartouche on one side, bearing the nomen of
the king, is erased, but his praenomen (or coronation name), Amenhotep, is well preserved. It is
followed by Akhenaten’s epithet, ‘great in his duration’, confirming that it is Amenhotep IV who is
here represented as the reigning king. The young king is shown in the old artistic style and looks
exactly like his father in face and form.
There are, in addition, two figures of Ramose. The first shows him carrying a stout staff,
terminating in the crowned ram’s head of Amun, and the text reads: ‘Said by the mayor-vizier
Ramose: “For thy 
ka
 (soul), a bouquet of thy father [Amun Re, Lord] of the Thrones of Egypt,
President of Karnak. May he praise thee … May he overthrow thy enemies … while thou art firmly
established on the throne of Horus.” ‘ The king’s enemies mentioned here would normally have been
foreigners who attacked the borders of the country, but Akhenaten is known not to have fought a war,
especially in his early years. As the reference here is followed by the wish that the king should be
established on the throne, the enemies in this case could only have been those who opposed his
appointment as king.
The text of Ramose’s speech accompanying the second figure reads: Tor thy 
ka,
 a bouquet of thy
father, the living Re-Harakhti, who rejoices on the horizon … the brightness of which is Aten.’ The
style of the work as well as the representation of the new God, ‘Re-Harakhti … the brightness of
which is Aten’, indicates a very early period in Akhenaten’s reign. The disc of the sun is shown in its
early form while Amun is still represented as the king’s father, ‘Lord of the Thrones of Egypt’. The
early period is also confirmed by the absence of Queen Nefertiti, who is always seen later
accompanying her husband.
Davies describes, however, the dramatic change in style when Amenhotep IV is depicted on the
opposite side of the doorway: ‘The contrast which this wall presents to that on the other side of the
doorway is an epitome of the most striking episode in Egyptian history, when the seemingly
indissoluble continuity of Egyptian traditions was broken through with a suddenness which better
knowledge of the movements of thought and political outlook might discount, but which none the less
gives a fully revolutionary character to the change. Three or four years seem to have sufficed to bring
into outward being that for which one would have proposed a century of preparation at least.’
The author goes on to describe the scene: ‘Physiognomies, pose, royal dress, palace, architecture,
foreigners, wear unfamiliar modes; even the sun-disk with its guardian cobra has a different angle of
appearance. Nor is the change superficial. The attitude of the king to supernatural powers has altered;
the sun reaches down to earth and temple insignia have disappeared. His relations to his people, too,
are more intimate; he no longer sits on the throne like an imposing automaton. The place and manner
of his appearance are different, and every figure and group in front of him has acquired greater
vitality. Dignity and decorative symbolism may be diminished, but they have been broken down by a
new sensitiveness and warmth of feeling … Egypt had awaked one morning, it would seem, to find
the gods in full retreat, the sun shining, the king at the palace window, and the populace dancing in the
streets … The Aten had been “found”.’
2
Amenhotep IV and Queen Nefertiti are shown, for the first time, in what later became known as the
Amarna style of art, appearing in the window of the palace that seems to have been the young king’s
building in his father’s Malkata complex. The sun disc, with extended rays ending in hands, the new


--- PAGE 145 ---
symbol of the Aten, shines from the top centre of the picture, presenting the key of life to the nostrils
of the royal pair. The Aten names, like those of a king, are placed within two cartouches and, added
to the God’s cartouches, is a royal salute: ‘May Aten live, rich in festival periods, lord of heaven and
earth, within Gem-pa-aten in the temple of Aten.’ This indicates that the Aten temple at Luxor had
already been built and the king’s 
sed
 festival celebrated. All the cartouches of the king, queen and the
Aten, except that including the name Amenhotep, have been largely defaced in the aftermath of the fall
of Amarna, and the faces of the royal pair have been chipped off. The text gives the king’s speech to
Ramose, who stands beneath the window: ‘[Said by] the king of Upper Egypt, living on truth …
Amenhotep … to … the mayor-vizier Ramose: “… the matters I put in thy charge … which I have
commanded. All that existed … the kings since the time of the God.”’
To which Ramose replies: ‘May [the] Aten [do] according to that which thou hast commanded …
thy monuments shall be as lasting as heaven and thy life as long as (that of) Aten in it. May thy
monuments increase like the increase of heaven. Thou art unique … The mountains present to thee
what they have kept hidden; for thy loud voice gains on their hearts even as thy loud voice gains on
the hearts of men; they obey thee even as men obey.’
3
The upper half of the wall depicts Ramose being honoured by the king in a series of scenes, one of
which shows him loaded with so many collars of gold beads that his neck cannot accommodate all of
them. Other than in the name of Amenhotep, the word ‘Amun’ does not appear on this wall.
Nothing remains of the tomb façade except a scrap of Ramose’s figure at the foot of the left jamb.
However, on the thickness of the rock frontage of the tomb Ramose is shown ‘entering (the tomb) with
the favours of the good god (the king, Amenhotep III or Amenhotep IV?) to rest in …’ and small
fragments have been found bearing the inscriptions ‘… appearing as truth’ … and again the curious
expression ‘the king of my time’.
4
The burial section of the tomb is not inscribed, but the internal side of the door is decorated in fine
relief. On one side Ramose offers separate prayers, one to the king and the second to the gods of the
underworld. The prayer to the king reads: ‘I come in peace to my tomb with the favour of the good
god (the king, Amenhotep III or Amenhotep IV?). I did what was approved by the king of my time (?),
for I neither minimized the substance of what he enjoined, nor did I commit any offence against the
people in order that I might rest in my sepulchre on the great right-hand (the western part) of Thebes.’
Although the Ramose tomb is not dated, the available evidence enables us to arrive at four dates,
two for Amenhotep III and two for his son, Amenhotep IV. As Ramose had already been appointed to
his posts as mayor and vizier before Year 30 of this king, we should expect work to have started on
his tomb around that time, and as son of Habu is shown, already dead, in one of the scenes, and he
died around Year 34, this scene has to be dated not long after that year of the old king.
In the case of Amenhotep IV, the scenes on either side of the doorway leading to the inner burial
section are distinctly different in style and can be dated to different periods of his reign.
The first scene represents the king in the old style. Early in his reign Akhenaten was shown, in the
sandstone quarry at Gebel Silsilah in Nubia, worshipping Amun-Re. The inscription below records
his quarrying of sandstone for the ‘great ben-ben (temple) of Harakhti at Karnak’. The king describes
himself as ‘first prophet of Re-Harakhti’. It is clear that this inscription at Silsilah refers to the Re-
Harakhti temple at Karnak and, as the panel also shows Amen-hotep IV worshipping Amun, it can
hardly be dated to later than his first or second year because the Re-Harakhti temple was begun very
early in his reign.
The second scene, on the opposite side of the doorway, is in the new Amarna art style, the first
time we find it in a tomb before the Amarna rock tombs, dated to Year 8 or Year 9 of Akhenaten. The


--- PAGE 146 ---
new symbol of the Aten has already appeared; the God is now named Aten instead of Re-Harakhti,
and he is placed in two cartouches. No mention is made in this scene of Amun. Akhenaten’s temple at
Karnak is referred to. There is also a reference to Akhenaten’s jubilee, celebrated in his Year 4.
Such a presentation would not have been possible before Amen-hotep IV’s very last days at
Thebes, a short time before, in the eighth month of Year 6, he notified his change of name from
Amenhotep IV to Akhenaten on a boundary stela at Amarna. This scene should therefore be assigned
to his late Year 5 or early Year 6.
Some further light on the dating of the Ramose’s tomb can be derived from considering who
donated it. Although it is true that Amenhotep III appointed Ramose to his posts as mayor and vizier,
it seems to me for several reasons to have been Amenhotep IV who gave Ramose his tomb:
•  Amenhotep III’s name appears only once, near the entrance of the tomb, using his praenomen, Neb-
Maat-Re, in a prayer of Ramose to Amun-Re that he ‘may prolong the years of Neb-Maat-Re’. This
suggests that this king was already suffering from some illness which, from a letter by Tushratta and
Ushter’s arrival in Egypt, could be dated about Year 36 (see 
Chapter Eight
);
•  In contrast, it is Amenhotep IV who is shown in the special position on either side of the inner
doorway that was used during the Eighteenth Dynasty for scenes of the ruling king”: had the old king
been the donor of the tomb, Ramose would have shown him on at least one side of the doorway;
•  The strange – and, as far as I know, unique – reference to a sovereign by an official as ‘the king of
my time’ can possibly be better understood if interpreted as meaning ‘my master’, who gave me my
tomb and ordered me to carry out some work for him, and does seem to mean Akhenaten rather than
his father. Although it was Amenhotep III who appointed him to the posts of mayor and vizier,
Ramose was responsible for some construction work on Akhenaten’s temples at Karnak and Luxor;
•  The fact that Ramose apologizes for carrying out the orders of ‘the king of my time’ suggests
something unusual about both the king and the nature of the orders, which can only be a reference to
Akhenaten. Ramose tries to deny that he obeyed the king’s orders simply in order to obtain his tomb at
Western Thebes. This protest would not have been necessary had Amenhotep III been the donor of the
tomb;
•  The fragment found at the façade bore the text ‘… appearing as (in) truth’, which is an epithet of
Akhenaten’s.
It was Akhenaten, then, who gave Ramose his tomb and that is why he is represented in it, as well
as his father. In fact we see the young king rewarding the vizier with too much gold for fulfilling his
orders, which appear to relate to the construction of his new temples for Re-Harakhti at Karnak and
for the Aten at Luxor.
The association of Amun-Re with Re-Harakhti in this tomb represents a very early stage of
Akhenaten’s inscriptions as Re-Harakhti was the name he gave his God initially. In almost every
scene, whether near the entrance or inside, Re-Harakhti is associated with Amun whenever the latter
god appears. This is true of what Redford chooses to describe as the early scenes – those near the
entrance, followed by the funeral scenes – as well as the last ones. The association of Amun and
Harakhti, in fact, represents the association of Amenhotep III and his son in a coregency.
Ramose, contrary to common belief among scholars, was never converted to Atenism. He is never
shown worshipping Akhenaten’s God. All the usual gods are represented in his tomb, even in the very
last scene on the reverse of the doorway into the inner burial section. This has to be regarded as later


--- PAGE 147 ---
than the Amarna-style scenes as it is always the most remote scene, sometimes including the latest
information about the dead man, added after his death. Yet here he still has the same loyalty to the
other gods and sticks to the old style, indicating that the tomb was completed after Akhenaten had
already left Thebes. Ramose himself did not follow Akhenaten to Amarna, but remained in Thebes as
Amenhotep III’s mayor and vizier until the time of his own or the old king’s death.
(v) The Tushratta Letters
Tushratta first appeared on the scene before the dispatch of the four letters that form part of the
coregency debate. He sent a letter to Amenhotep III telling him that, despite an internal power
struggle, he had succeeded in securing the throne after the death of his father, Shutarna. He reminded
Pharaoh of the friendly relations between him and Shutarna and also took the opportunity to make the
point that his sister, Gilukhipa, was one of Pharaoh’s wives. In addition, he mentioned an attack on
his country by the Hittites, whom he had destroyed completely. Out of the resulting bounty, he
enclosed a present for Amenhotep III. This letter is not dated, but it is thought to have arrived about
Year 30 of Amenhotep III.
The second letter we have from him indicates that Amenhotep III wished to increase the
relationship between the two families by also marrying Tushratta’s daughter, Tadukhipa. Tushratta
then sent a messenger to Egypt with a third letter, demanding gold in return for his daughter’s hand in
marriage. This matter appears to have been resolved amicably as a fourth letter seems to have arrived
at the same time as the bride-to-be, Tadukhipa. Finally, before Amenhotep III’s death, came a fifth
letter, dated by an Egyptian docket to ‘Year 36, fourth month of Winter’, which was accompanied by
an image of the Mitannian goddess Ishtar. The implication is that Amenhotep III was already ill and it
was hoped that Ishtar might cure him. However, Mitannian magic does not appear to have worked and
the king became less and less active until his eventual death early in his Year 39.
After that date came the four letters – one addressed to Queen Tiye, the other three to Akhenaten –
which form part of the coregency debate. A fuller account of their contents follows in the order in
which I believe they arrived.
No. EA27 (addressed to Akhenaten): This first letter to Akhenaten dwells upon the gold issue. The
Mitannian king complains: ‘Your father … wrote … in his letter, at the time when Mani (the Egyptian
messenger) brought the price for a wife …: These implements, which I now send you, are (still)
nothing … when my brother gives the wife, whom I desire, and they bring her to me, so that I see her,
then I will send you ten times more than these. And golden images … an image for me and a second
one as image for Tadukhipa, my daughter, I desired from your father …
‘Your father said: “… I will give you also lapis lazuli, and very much other gold besides (and)
implements without number, I will give you together with the images.” And the gold for the images,
my messengers … have seen with their own eyes. Your father also had the images cast in the presence
of my messengers and made them complete, and full weight… And he showed very much other gold,
without measure, which he was about to send me, and spoke to my messenger saying: “Behold the
images and behold very much gold and implements without number, which I am about to send to my
brother, and look upon it with your own eyes.” And my messengers saw it with their own eyes. And
now, my brother, you did not send (these) … images … but you have sent some that were made of
wood with Mani.’
1


--- PAGE 148 ---
The letter makes the point that, if Akhenaten has any doubts about the truth concerning the promised
gold, he should ‘ask his mother’.
No. EA26 (addressed to the queen): The text begins: ‘To Tiye, the Queen of Egypt… Tushratta, King
of Mitanni. May it be well with you; may it be well with your son; may it be well with Tadukhipa [my
daughter], your bride.’
2
 Subsequently, Tushratta goes on to complain: ‘The present, which your
husband commanded to be brought, you have not sent me; and gold statues … Now, however,
Napkhuriya (Akhenaten), your [son] … has made (them) of wood.’
3
No. EA29 (addressed to Akhenaten): After delving even more deeply into the history of the friendly
relations between the two royal families in order to persuade the new king to continue them and to
send the promised gold, the letter invites him again to seek confirmation from his mother that
Tushratta is speaking the truth: ‘From the days of my youth, Nimmuriya (Amenhotep III), your father,
wrote to me of friendship … Tiye, the distinguished wife of Nimmuriya, the loved one, your mother,
she knows them all. Ask Tiye, your mother … And when Nimmuriya, your father, sent to me and
wanted my daughter, I would not consent to give her … And I sent Khamashshi, my brother’s
messenger, to Nimmuriya, to pay the dowry, inside three months … And finally, I gave my daughter.
And when he brought her and Nimmuriya, your father, saw her … he rejoiced very greatly … Tiye,
your mother, knows what I said, and Tiye, your mother, ask her if among the words which I said there
was one that was not true … therefore I made request for images … and Nimmuriya said to my
messenger: “Behold, the golden images altogether, which my brother requests.” … And when my
brother Nimmuriya died … I wept on that day (when the messenger came with the news); I remained
sitting, food and drink I did not enjoy that day, and I mourned …
‘When Napkhuriya (Akhenaten), the distinguished son of Nimmu-riya by his distinguished wife
Tiye, entered upon his reign I spoke saying: “Nimmuriya is not dead.” … [Now my brother] when he
formerly wrote to me, at the time when he sent Giliya back (with the news of Amenhotep III’s death
and a letter from Tiye) … he sent Mani, my brother sent only wooden (statues), but gold [he did not
send] … Pirizzi and Puipri I sent to express sympathy (they brought the letter dated Year 2 or Year
12: see 
Chapter Eight
) … Now the word, which your mother had said to Giliya, [I heard and
therefore] … and the images [of gold] … for which I made request you have not given me … my
messengers for four years …
‘The images which I requested from your father, give; and now [when I have sent] my messengers
for the second time [if he] does not prepare and give [them], he will grieve my heart … Your mother
Tiye knows all about these things, and (therefore) ask your mother Tiye … [Now my brother said:]
“Giliya ought to return to him. Because I should otherwise grieve my brother’s heart, I will send
Giliya back.” [However, I said]: “Inasmuch as I have sent back quickly my brother’s messengers, so
let my brother always my messengers [send back quickly] … gives me word and sends Mani to me,
then I will … Giliya, with friendly intentions, to my brother.’
4
From this letter it is clear that the messenger Mani is in Egypt because Tushratta is asking for him
to be despatched with the gold. In Letter No. EA28, however, we learn that he is not only in Mitanni,
but being held hostage against the return of two of Tushratta’s messengers. After the usual initial
friendly formalities, Tushratta comes straight to the point: ‘Pirizzi and Puipri, my messengers, I sent
them to my brother at the beginning of his reign, and ordered them to express sorrow very strongly.
And then I sent them again. And this message, on the former occasion, I gave to my brother:’ – this
letter is now missing – ‘Mani, the messenger of my brother, I will retain until my brother sends my


--- PAGE 149 ---
messenger, and until he arrives… Now, however, my brother has in general not allowed them to go
and has retained them very much indeed.’
5


--- PAGE 150 ---
APPENDIX C
The 
Mos
 Case
T
O
 start at the very beginning of the 
Mos
 action, the tomb inscriptions begin: ‘Copy of the
examination [made by] the priest of the [litter] Aniy who was an officer of the court, of the Hunpet of
the shipmaster Neshi [which was in the] village of Neshi, as follows:
‘“I arrived at the village of Neshi, the place where the lands are and of which the citizeness
Ur[nero] and the citizeness Takharu spoke. They assembled the heirs of [Neshi] together with the
notables of the town … ” ’
1
It was, as we saw in 
Chapter Nine
, the mother of Khayri who began legal proceedings in Year 14-
plus – the number of months is missing – of Ramses II to establish her son’s ownership of the land,
arguing that he was the descendant of Neshi through his grandmother, Urnero. In the tomb account of
the events that followed Khayri is referred to by name only once and is elsewhere called 
mos
 (the son
and heir), to indicate his claim as the rightful inheritor: ‘Then Nubnofret, my 
(Mos’
s
)
 mother, came to
cultivate the share of Neshi, my father.
2
 [But] one prevented the cultivation of it. She complained
against the trustee Khay (the defendant). One [caused them to appear before] the [vizier] (in)
Heliopolis in Year 14-plus of king [Usermre-Setepenre] Ramses Meiamun, given life.’
3
In the latter stages of the action the word 
mos
 is again used, but in this case to establish that Huy,
the father of the plaintiff, was the rightful heir of Neshi, the original owner of the land. After the
goatherd Mesman came:
Papa, priest of the temple of Ptah: ‘I knew … [the scribe Huy], the child (
mos
) of Urnero [who]
cultivated this land [year] by year. He having been engaged in cultivating it while saying: “I am the
child (
mos
) of Urnero, daughter of Neshi.” ’
[Hori], bee-keeper of the Treasury of Pharaoh: ‘[As to the scribe Huy], (he was the) child (
mos
) of
Urnero, and as to Urnero (she was the) daughter of Neshi.’
Nebnufer, chief of the stable: ‘As to the scribe Huy, he used [to cultivate his lands year] by year.
He acted according to all his desire(s). They carried in for him the crops of the fields year by year.
He used to dispute with the citizeness Takharu (his mother’s sister), mother of the soldier Sementawi,
and then he disputed with Sementawi her son so that [the land] should be given [to] Huy and they
were confirmed.’
Citizeness Tentpaihay: ‘As Amun endures, and as the ruler endures, if I speak falsely, let me be
(banished) to the back of the house. As to [the scribe Huy] (he is) the child [
mos
] of Urnero, and as to
Urnero, (she is) the daughter of Neshi.’


--- PAGE 151 ---
APPENDIX D
Pi-Ramses and Zarw
T
HE
 recent archaeological discoveries at Kantarah (see 
Chapter Eleven
) have made it unnecessary to
argue in as much detail as I had earlier envisaged that this was the area where Pi-Ramses, the city of
the Exodus, was to be found on the site of the Hyksos capital Avaris, and the fortified city of Zarw.
However, some further evidence that led me to this conclusion may be of interest to the reader.
(i) The City of Pi-Ramses
Pi-Ramses was the Eastern Delta residence and capital of kings of the Nineteenth, Twentieth and
early Twenty-first Dynasties until, during the Twenty-first Dynasty, a new capital was established at
Tanis, south of Lake Menzalah in the northern part of the Delta. One reason why the precise location
of Pi-Ramses has been the subject of considerable debate and disagreement is that it appears to have
been constructed at an existing site: another that Ramses II, the third king of the Nineteenth Dynasty
who gave the city its name, ruled for sixty-seven years and left many constructions all over the
Eastern Delta.
Texts of the Ramesside period speak frequently of a location called 
Pi-Ramses myr Amun,
 House
of Ramses, Beloved of Amun. We learn, for example, from his triumphal poem known as the 
Poem of
Pe-natour,
 mentioned briefly in 
Chapter Eleven
, that when, in the summer of his Year 5, Ramses II
set out on his first Asiatic campaign he ‘passed the fortress of Zarw’ and it seems that he remained for
some time in a location beyond the fortress. The text then proceeds to say that ‘His Majesty being in
[the town of] Ramses, Beloved of Amun’ started his march on Palestine from this point. This text
indicates that the Ramses residence not only lay beyond the fortress of Zarw, but at the start of the
‘road of Horus’ that leads to Gaza.
1
 What confirms this location is the fact that, on his return from this
campaign, the first place mentioned was the ‘House of Ramses, Beloved of Amun Great of Victories’.
It was only when proceeding from Egypt to Palestine that he had to pass the fortress of Zarw before
reaching his Eastern Delta residence.
Dr Kitchen of Liverpool University is one of a number of scholars who does not accept this
interpretation. Instead he regards the ‘town of Ramses, Beloved of Amun’ as being a different city
that Ramses II built in Phoenicia, to the south of Syria. This view is based upon the fact that in the text
there are five missing squares, followed by the Egyptian word for ‘cedar’. The text then goes on to
tell us that the king ‘proceeded northward and arrived at the upland of Kadesh (in Syria)’. It is this
juxtaposition of ‘cedar’ and Kadesh that has led such scholars to believe that the reference is to a city
in Phoenicia.
Gardiner rejected this view, however, as there is no evidence from any other source that points to
the existence of such a Ramses city in Phoenicia.
2
 Then, as the extant text mentions only two points –
the starting point, ‘the town of Ramses’, and the arrival point, Kadesh – it seems curious that he
jumped from the fortress of Zarw to a city in Phoenicia without any explanatory reason.
In fact, the mention of ‘cedar’ cannot be taken as evidence of a Phoenician location for the Ramses
city. In the Kamose Stela, the king, after arriving at the Hyksos capital, Avaris, on his war of
liberation, talks of ‘ships of fresh cedar’ as well as ‘all the good products of Retenu (Palestine)’


--- PAGE 152 ---
which he captured in war from the Avaris (Zarw) area.
3
A further point is that mention in the text of 
passing
 the fortress of Zarw may have contributed to
misunderstanding of its precise location. It is clear from the positions held by all the known mayors of
Zarw that it consisted of two entities – a fortress and a city. Their relationship is made clear in Seti
I’s reliefs at Karnak. The fortress was situated on either side of the canal linking the Waters of Horus
with the Sea of Reeds; the city lay beyond it to the east, at the start of the ‘road of Horus’ leading to
Palestine. Anyone coming from Egypt and wishing to reach Sinai had therefore to enter the western
part of the fortress, cross to the eastern part – where Pi-Ramses was built – by the bridge (
kantarah
)
that linked the two sections, and then pass through the city of Zarw.
Another text found in a papyrus known as 
Anastasi V
 mentions a letter, also touched on briefly in
Chapter Eleven
, sent by two army officers to the Royal Butler in which they describe how they were
despatched from the palace where Pharaoh was in residence – Memphis, perhaps – to deliver three
stelae to Pi-Ramses. They report how they reached Zarw by boat and are about to unload their
vessels at ‘The Dwelling of Ramses, Beloved of Amun’, from which point they will have to drag the
stelae to their final destination.
4
 This text appears to agree with the 
Poem of Pe-natour
 in placing Pi-
Ramses in the vicinity of Zarw, but beyond it from the Egyptian side.
It was also at Zarw that Seti I, the second king of the Nineteenth Dynasty, was welcomed – as can
be seen from his Karnak records – by high priests and officials on his return from his first-year
campaign against the Shasu in Sinai and Southern Palestine. This indicates that the royal family must
have had a residence in this area from the early days of the Nineteenth Dynasty. The implication, as
they had no means of knowing precisely when Seti I would return from his campaign, is that the high
priests and officials who greeted him were residing in Zarw at the time of his arrival. As for Seti
himself, both he and his father had been Mayors of Zarw and Commanders of its Troops during the
reign of Horemheb and it is a logical deduction that he had had a residence there since that time.
This is by no means the end of the evidence linking Zarw with Pi-Ramses. In 1886, Francis
Griffith, the English Egyptologist, found part of an obelisk at Kantarah bearing the names of Ramses I,
Seti I and Ramses II. Clédat later discovered the missing portion of the obelisk and recognized
correctly that it came from Zarw. Griffith also found at this location a base for an image, dedicated by
Ramses I. Both the obelisk and the image base mentioned the god ‘Horus of Mesen’ (Seth), often
referred to as the god of the Eastern Delta’s fourteenth nome.
Although from an early time in Egyptian history Seth was regarded as a god of Upper Egypt, he
was also associated with the area of the Eastern Delta at the frontier, near the start of the Sinai desert
and the road to Asia. It is even thought the whole of the fourteenth nome, the north-eastern area of the
Delta between Kantarah and the ancient Pelusiac branch of the Nile, was named Sethroite after him.
From the end of the Sixth Dynasty, during the twenty-second century 
BC,
 Seth, as mentioned earlier,
became discredited as a result of the development of the myth that he had been responsible for the
assassination of the good god Osiris: he became associated with Evil and is the source of the later
name Satan. However, after another four centuries, as we saw in 
Chapter Eleven
, Nehesy, a king of
the weak Thirteenth Dynasty, re-established the worship of ‘Seth, Lord of Avaris’ as the chief deity
of the fourteenth nome. According to Manfred Bietak, the Austrian Egyptologist: ‘Nehesy 
(c.
 1715 
BC
)
is known from several monuments as the first king with the title: Beloved of Seth, Lord of Avaris.
This Seth later became the principal god of the Hyksos, but was clearly established in Avaris by the
local dynasty before the rise of the Hyksos rule.’
5
An obelisk of this Nehesy was found in Tanis, but must have been brought there from its original
location as it was not 
in situ.
 John van Seters, the American Egyptologist who researched the origins


--- PAGE 153 ---
of the Hyksos, tried to identify the obelisk’s origin from its text: ‘On one fragment … were traces of a
dedication by the “eldest royal son, Nehesy, beloved of Seth, Lord of Rakhit” and on another fragment
the inscription “beloved of Hershef (Arsaphes)”. There is a degree of uncertainty about the location
of the place name Rakhit, which means “gateway of the cultivated fields”. The gateway referred to
would then be the region of Sile (Zarw), where the cultivated area meets the desert.’
6
It is clear that Nehesy established Seth, Lord of Avaris, in the same location as that of Zarw.
Further confirmation of this is provided by the 400-year stela, the most important evidence regarding
the continuity of worship of the god Seth at Avaris and Pi-Ramses for four centuries. Although the
stela was actually found at Tanis, which became the new capital towards the end of the Twenty-first
Dynasty and is one of the other sites suggested as the location of Pi-Ramses, it was not 
in situ,
 and
Jean Clédat, the French Egyptologist, believed that it must have been moved there from Zarw
because, although it was made during the reign of Ramses II, it includes a commemoration of an event
– the four centuries of worship of Seth – that took place at Zarw during the reign of Horemheb when
his grandfather, Ramses I, and father, Seti I, were both Mayors of Zarw and Commanders of the
fortress: ‘Now there came the Hereditary Prince; Mayor of the City and Vizier; Fan-Bearer on the
Right Hand of the King, Troop Commander; Overseer of Foreign Countries; Overseer of the Fortress
of Sile (Zarw); … Seti, the triumphant, the son of the Hereditary Prince; Mayor of the City and Vizier;
Troop Commander; Overseer of Foreign Countries; Overseer of the Fortress of Sile; Royal Scribe;
and Master of Horse …’
7
The celebration of Seth’s worship at Zarw is a further pointer to the fortified city having occupied
the same site as Pi-Ramses and Avaris, and the fact that both these high officials of Horemheb, who
became the first two kings of the Nineteenth Dynasty, had all their titles relating them to Zarw, and to
nowhere else, is a further implication that they must have had a residence at Zarw during their
vizierates. It is this residence that is most likely to have been rebuilt to become what was later called
Pi-Ramses.
(ii) The Fortified City of Zarw
The first mention we find of Zarw dates from the campaign by Ahmosis I that resulted in the defeat of
the Hyksos and the establishing of the Eighteenth Dynasty: ‘The war against the Hyksos may have
lasted longer than is usually reckoned … The fall of Avaris is usually put early in the reign of
Ahmosis I. Yet the neglected colophon (written section) on the 
Rhind Mathematical Papyrus
 tells of
fighting in the eleventh year of an un-named king. Since the main text on the papyrus is dated to the
thirty-third year of Apophis, whom Kamose (the brother and predecessor of Ahmosis I) opposed, this
can only be… a successor … On the twentieth of the first month (of Year 11) “the Southerner”
invested the frontier fortress of Zarw, near modern Kantarah, and entered it a few days later …’
1
This account makes it clear that Zarw and Avaris occupied the same site. From this point,
however, the name Avaris disappears from the scene and the next mention is of Zarw, which occurs
more than a century later, during the reign of Tuthmosis III and at the time of the first Asiatic
campaign that followed the death of Queen Hatshepsut: ‘Year 22, month four in Peret, day 25 …
Zarw, the first victorious expedition …’
Then we have the evidence of the Tuthmosis IV stela, found at Serabet El-Khadim in Sinai, which
makes it clear that Neby, his Mayor of Zarw, was also ‘Royal Messenger in all countries, Steward of
the Harem of the Royal Wife’, indicating that Tuthmosis IV’s queen, Mutimuya, the mother of


--- PAGE 154 ---
Amenhotep III, must have had an estate or residence at Zarw. Björkman, commenting on Neby’s titles,
wrote: ‘ … the constellation of titles … might be interpreted as a vague indication of the existence of
a harem of the Queen in Zarw, supervised by the local mayor, Neby.’
2
 There is reference to another
‘Mayor of Zarw’ on jar seals found in the Malkata complex at Thebes in the reign of Amenhotep III,
who ultimately made a present of the city to his wife, Queen Tiye. We still have the name as late as
the Greek Ptolemaic period, when it was called Sile.
(iii) The Case Against Qantir/Tell el-Dab′a
Manfred Bietak, the Austrian archaeologist in charge of the exca-vations at Tell el-Dab′a and Qantir,
which are just over a mile apart, gave an interim report in 1979 on the expedition’s findings.
1
To the north of Tell el-Dab′a there is a natural lake basin while old survey maps, partly confirmed
by the ground survey, show traces of a feeder-channel from the direction of the former Pelusiac
branch of the Nile and a drain-channel flowing from the lake towards the larger Bahr el-Baqar
drainage system. North and east of the lake remains were found of the Middle Kingdom (the Eleventh
and Twelfth Dynasties, 
c.
 1991–1785 
BC
) and the Second Intermediate Period that followed,
including the weak Thirteenth and Seventeenth Dynasties 
(c.
 1785–1575 
BC),
 at which time the
Asiatics infiltrated the Eastern Delta and began the era of Hyksos rule there that lasted just over a
century until they were vanquished in battle by Ahmosis, founder of the Eighteenth Dynasty 
(c.
 1575
BC).
 Among other finds in this new area were the lintel of a house belonging to vizier Paser of Ramses
II and, almost two miles to the east of Tell el-Dab′a, an old well bearing the same king’s name.
In all, eleven strata were found. The remains at the very bottom belonged to the earliest settlement,
starting some time before 1750 
BC,
 and the latest an early Ptolemaic settlement of a limited area,
dated to the third century 
BC.
 The strata covering the Hyksos period (E3-1 and D3-2) are
characterized by increasing density of occupation. The remains of two Canaanite temples were found,
dating from 
c.
 1690–1660 
BC
 and 1660–1630 
BC
 respectively, and there was evidence that from about
1630–1610 
BC
 to 1610–1590 
BC
 the settlement began to develop its own Asiatic cultural line, distinct
from Syria and Palestine. The site was largely abandoned after the Hyksos period, but occupied again
towards the end of the Eighteenth Dynasty, the time of Horemheb. Remains of a temple were found,
including a lintel of a sanctuary dedicated to ‘Seth, great of might’ and bearing the name of
Horemheb.
Bietak encapsulated the expedition’s conclusions in the following words: ‘To summarise briefly,
apart from the later remains there is evidence, extending through a series of strata, of a huge town site
of an Asiatic (Canaanite) community of the Syro-Palestiniân Middle Bronze Age Culture IIA and B in
the north-eastern Nile Delta from the time of the Thirteenth Dynasty until the beginning of the
Eighteenth Dynasty. Although several other sites of this culture have been discovered and identified
since the beginning of our excavations, Tell el-Dab’a is the largest and most impressive of all the
sites, and, by its fine stratigraphie series and abundant excavated material, the most representative.’
2
He went on to say: ‘The temples of stratum E3–2 are Canaanite, and the size of the main sacred
area excavated thus far shows that we have here, at the beginning of the Second Intermediate Period,
the most important city-state of the Syro-Palestinian Middle Bronze Age Culture in the eastern Nile
delta. It is not difficult to deduce, therefore, that this Asiatic community, after it had had time to
establish itself in the eastern Nile delta, must have been responsible for the Hyksos rule in Egypt …
‘After a break in occupation we have evidence of a pre-planned town of the Ramesside Period


--- PAGE 155 ---
covering four to five square kilometres (some 250 acres).’
In this final statement, Bietak is not commenting on the results of the excavations at Tell el-Dab′a,
but has introduced the remains at Qantir, just over a mile to the north, without any justification beyond
the proximity of the two locations. And what conclusion did he come to about the implications of the
expedition’s findings? ‘All the evidence taken together – the cultural and the stratigraphic – would fit
well with the identification of the site on the one hand with the capital of the Hyksos, Avaris, and on
the other with the delta residence of the Ramessides, Pi-Ramses, as already maintained by M. Hamza,
W. C. Hayes, L. Habachi and John van Seters.’
3
In fact, in the light of what is known about Pi-Ramses, rather than confirming the Tell el-Dab′a site
as that of Pi-Ramses/Avaris, the results obtained by the Austrian expedition make such a conclusion
impossible:
•  Pi-Ramses/Avaris, according to the Nineteenth Dynasty texts we examined earlier, lay in the
vicinity of, and beyond, Zarw. Zarw was a frontier fortress, the forefront of every foreign land, the
end of Egypt, located between Palestine and Egypt. This description cannot be applied to Tell el-
Dab′a which, while beside the Nile and in the Eastern Delta, was situated some thirty miles inland
from the ‘end of Egypt’;
•  Pi-Ramses lay in the centre of a great vineyard. There is nothing in the evidence found at Tell el-
Dab′a to confirm, or even indicate, that it was a wine-producing area. The five ostraca of wine jars
found at nearby Qantir were said to have come from the west of Pi-Ramses. This location was not
identified, however, and could therefore well have been in another area. Moreover, the stela of
Kamose, brother of Ahmosis, who drove out the Hyksos, makes it clear that Avaris, their capital, was
in a wine-producing area because one of the threats contained in the stela is that, when Avaris has
been taken, ‘I shall drink of the wine of your vineyard, which the Asiatics I captured press out for
me.’
The existence of vineyards at Pi-Ramses is also confirmed by the 
Papyrus Anastasi,
 and remains
of wine jars, originating from Zarw, that were found in the Malkata palace as well as in
Tutankhamun’s tomb, confirm that Zarw was also a wine-producing area. We know from other
sources that, in addition, the area west of Alexandria as well as Memphis and Fayyum were wine-
producing areas, but there is none to indicate that either Qantir or Tell el-Dab′a were;
•  Pi-Ramses could be reached by water from Memphis. This is equally true of Tell el-Dab′a.
However, we have the story about the three stele sent from the place where Pharaoh was in residence
– Memphis, probably – that had to be unloaded at the ‘Dwelling of Ramses, Beloved of Amun’ after
passing through the fortress of Zarw. Bietak suggests
4
 that, after arriving at Zarw, the stele were taken
by water to Pi-Ramses, which is for him Qantir/Tell el-Dab’a. This does not make sense. In the first
place, the letter to the Royal Butler speaks of the stele being unloaded 
after
 the vessel had passed
Zarw and then being dragged into position; secondly, if they had been en route from Memphis to
Qantir/Tell el-Dab′a, why would they first be transported to Zarw on the frontier, some thirty miles to
the east, and then brought back? Any vessel proceeding from Memphis to Zarw along the former
Pelusiac branch of the Nile would have had to pass Qantir/Tell el-Dab’a. Why continue the voyage to
Zarw when, if Qantir/Tell el-Dab’a was the ultimate destination, it would have been simpler to leave
the river and use the canal that connected it with the harbour lake to the north of Tell el-Dab′a?;
•  Pi-Ramses was connected by water with the fortress of Zarw and with the Waters of Shi-hor (north
and north-west of Zarw) and the Waters of Pa-Twfy, that supplied it with papyrus and has been


--- PAGE 156 ---
identified as Lake Ballah, to the south of Zarw, and as the pleasure lake mentioned in Amenhotep III’s
scarab. In the sense that Qantir/Tell el-Dab’a had a harbour linked by canal to the Nile, it is possible
to say that it was also linked by water with the Waters of Shi-hor and the Waters of Pa-Twfy. This
link is a tenuous one, however: one might equally well argue that Qantir/Tell el-Dab′a was linked by
water with Thebes, some 400 miles away, or any other locality on the eight branches of the Nile at
that time. The logical inference from the mention of the two places being linked by water is that they
were close together, as one might say that the Isle of Wight is linked by water with the coast of
Hampshire, the nearest point on the British mainland.
All three locations – the fortress of Zarw, the Waters of Shi-hor (described in the Bible as marking
the frontier of Egypt) and the Waters of Pa-Twfy – may be said therefore to be linked with other
places in Egypt by water, but they do form part of the Zarw area itself;
•  Seth was the main god of Pi-Ramses/Avaris. Although temples of Seth were found at Tell el-Dab′a
in the areas dating from the Middle Kingdom and the time of Horemheb, no mention of him has been
found in the areas dating from either the Hyksos or Ramesside periods. As for Qantir, although Seth
was one of the gods worshipped there, the main deity was certainly Amun, according to the
discoveries of the Egyptian archaeologist Muhammad Hamza. In 1928 Hamza unearthed a large
number of faience tiles that came from a Ramesside palace in the Qantir area. The palace had been
built by Seti I and enlarged by Ramses II. Hamza also found at a little distance to the north a faience
factory, including around 800 moulds with different names and titles. The palace remains, including
the workshop area, are in excess of 300 square yards. Two statues of Ramses II were found at Qantir.
The temple area, which might have included more than one temple, is roughly 600 square yards, and a
number of doors of private houses were also discovered.
Yet neither the name of Pi-Ramses nor any of the main deities we know to have been worshipped
there were found at Qantir, even on the 800 different moulds. In fact a completely different epithet
was found on some of them, ‘in the land of Amun’, on which Hamza commented: ‘Qantir was
considered indeed the land of Amun. Under Ramses III, this god was worshipped at Qantir with the
peculiar title “He who hears the one who is far away”. ‘
5
 It is true to say that Amun, in addition to
Seth, was included among the main gods in the Ramses city, but there he had a different epithet –
‘Amun of Ramses, Beloved of Amun’ – that has never been found in the Qantir area.
We have no archaeological evidence as yet about the identity of the main god worshipped at Zarw
and shall have to await the results of the current excavation by the Egyptian Organization of Antiquity;
•  Pi-Ramses/Avaris were situated in the fourteenth Egyptian nome. This is also true of Qantir/Tell
el-Dab′a and Zarw. It is now accepted by all scholars that Zarw was the capital of that nome. Yet, if
Pi-Ramses was the capital of the entire Empire, how could it be less important than Zarw in its own
nome?
•  One essential point about Pi-Ramses/Avaris is that they were both military fortified areas. Each
had a fortress that was rebuilt at least three times – by the kings of the Middle Kingdom, rebuilt by the
Hyksos and later refortified by the kings of the Eighteenth Dynasty. Although we know from
Manetho’s writings; the stela of Kamose, brother of Ahmosis I, who defeated the Hyksos, and the
autobiography of Ahmose, one of the king’s naval officers in the campaign, that Avaris was mainly a
fortified area, no remains of fortifications of any kind were found in the Hyksos section of the
excavations at Tell el-Dab′a. Nor do we find any real remains of Ramesside fortifications at Qantir;
•  Pi-Ramses/Avaris were also called the ‘Dwelling of the Lion’. As no textual evidence has been


--- PAGE 157 ---
obtained from either Qantir or Tell el-Dab′a we have no indication from there about this matter, but
we know from the very way Zarw was written that a seated lion formed part of its name. Furthermore,
according to the mythological account of the struggle between Horus of Edfu, the son of Osiris, and
Seth, the brother of Osiris who murdered him and took his throne, which appeared in writing during
the Ramesside period, it took place at Zarw where Horus took the form of a lion.
As for the suggestion that two neighbouring locations – Tell el-Dab′a, which Bietak takes as
Avaris, and Qantir, just over a mile distant, which he takes to represent the Ramesside residence –
formed part of the same site, we have no archaeological evidence to support this assumption, no
ancient connecting road, no walls enclosing both locations or, as in the case of Akhenaten’s pre-
planned new capital at Amarna, no boundary stelae. We are asked to take Bietak’s word for it. The
area that separates the two locations has yielded nothing to suggest that they formed one ancient site.
In addition, we know that the Ramessides built their residence on the existing site of Avaris, whereas
the site of Qantir had not previously been used.
We also know that the siege of Avaris conducted by Ahmosis lasted for many months. The reason
was that he could not assault it on foot, but had to approach by water. In the case of Zarw, the Waters
of Shi-hor covered the approaches to the north and west, the Waters of Pa-Twfy protected the south,
and a canal, crossed by a guarded bridge, connected the two waters, closing off the west side
completely. To the east lay the Sinai desert. That is why Ahmosis’ siege lasted so long. In the case of
Qantir and Tell el-Dab′a, however, both locations were easily accessible by land from almost any
direction, as well as lacking the heavy fortifications to resist an attack.
Furthermore, the Tell el-Dab′a excavations have revealed no settlement in the area from the end of
the Hyksos rule to the time of Horemheb. If Pi-Ramses is to be regarded as the Ramses of the Old
Testament, the city rebuilt by the Israelites – who arrived in Egypt in the reign of Amenhotep III and
settled in the very Pi-Ramses area – the lack of any trace of their existence at Tell el-Dab’a is yet
another indication that this cannot have been the site of Pi-Ramses. In any case, as I believe the
Israelites had already left Egypt proper for Sinai during the second year of Ramses I, the city of
Ramses must have started before that date.
(iv) A Theban Site for Tiye’s City
One scholar who has championed a site for Zarw-kha, Tiye’s city, distant from the Eastern Delta is
Georg Steindorff, the German Egyptologist, who suggested that the pleasure lake referred to in the
scarab was actually the lake known today as Birket Hapu, which was dug to the south-east of
Amenhotep III’s Malkata royal compound at Western Thebes, where it served as a palace harbour
connected to the Nile. Steindorff was led to this view because the Malkata complex was known as
‘The House of Neb-Maat-Re Aten Gleams’, which repeats the name of the vessel in the pleasure lake
scarab. However, scholars have not been happy with this theory for a variety of reasons:
1  None of the many inscriptions found that bear the name Malkata mentions Zarw-kha or relates
Malkata to Queen Tiye;
2  The dimensions of Birket Hapu are 2750 by 1080 yards, about four times the size of the pleasure
lake, and there is no evidence that Birket Hapu was enlarged after its original construction;
3  While the Malkata remains prove that the king was there from his early years – Year 8 has been
found – the majority of the buildings in the Malkata compound, which would have been accompanied
by the construction of the lake, do not seem to have been built before the beginning of Amenhotep’s


--- PAGE 158 ---
third decade, contradicting the scarab date of Year 11 ;
4  As the scarab lake covers an area of about 720, 000 square yards, it would not have been possible
to complete it in fifteen days unless it involved digging a short canal to fill an existing depression
with the waters of the Nile: a much bigger, artificial lake like Birket Hapu must have taken far longer
to create.
(v) A Middle-Egypt Site for Tiye’s City
More recently, the fact that a similar name to Zarw-kha – Darwha – has been found on two papyri of
the Twentieth Dynasty led Yoyotte to suggest
1
 the possibility of identifying Tiye’s city with the
location mentioned in these Ramesside texts – the vicinity of the city of Akhmim in Middle Egypt. As
some of the titles held by Yuya and Tuya, the parents of Queen Tiye, indicate that they held positions
in Akhmim, it has been thought by many scholars that this must have been their city of origin. On the
other hand, while it is possible that Tuya could have come from Akhmim, Yuya has been suspected of
being of non-Egyptian origin (and I have argued that he was actually Joseph, the Israelite Patriarch).
But even if, as Yoyotte suggests, Tiye was born in Akhmim, this does not make it her city in the
sense that she owned it, which is the implication of the scarab text. Furthermore, Yoyotte places
Tiye’s city as being in the 
vicinity
 of Akhmim, in which case, on the basis of Yoyotte’s own
argument, ‘her city’ cannot have even been the city of her birth, but another city which she acquired
later, and the scarab reference cannot relate to Akhmim. Nor is Akhmim called Zarw-kha in any text.
Finally, as the location suggested by Yoyotte comes from a Twentieth Dynasty text, this could have
been a new place that did not exist at the time of the Eighteenth Dynasty two centuries earlier.
Yoyotte has put forward this alternative siting for Tiye’s city because he objects to the
identification of the border city of Zarw on mainly philological grounds, his reason being that the
name Zarw-kha is spelt in the scarab with different hieroglyphic signs from those we find in other
texts:
If we take away the two final signs, as they are not to be regarded as letters but determinatives
indicating a city, we are left with five letters. And if we take off the final letter ‘kha’, 
 as it is not to
be regarded as part of the name but merely as indicating that the name belongs to a city, we are left
with four signs on the scarab. 
 Henri Naville, the Swiss Egyptologist, has been able to show
that the first sign in Zarw, 
 is the equivalent of the Hebrew letter 
sadhê,
 the Arabic 
çade,
 the same
as the other hieroglyphic first letter appearing in the other texts 
.
2
 (The fact that there is no
matching letter either in Greek or Western languages explains why different readings – Thel, Sile and
Djarw as well as Zarw – occur.) In a private discussion Yoyotte agreed that Naville’s interpretation
of the first sign on the scarab was correct. He also has no quarrel with the final hieroglyph, 
 which
can be interpreted as either ‘w’ or ‘u’. It is the symbols in between which persuaded him that we are
dealing with two different cities, not one.


--- PAGE 159 ---
On the scarab we have 
 – that is, the Hebrew and Arabic ′
ayin,
 plus ‘r’ – while in other texts
we simply have a seated lion 
. However, the distinction is more apparent than real. Naville was
also able to show that it was the practice sometimes to use the seated lion, for which the Ancient
Egyptian word was ‘′r’ as an alternative method of expressing the two consonants, ′
ayin,
 plus ‘r’:
‘The reading of the lion is ′r; we have a considerable number of examples of it.’ He went on to cite
various words sometimes spelt one way, sometimes the other: ‘Therefore in the name 
, Zarw,
we find according to the usual transcription of Egyptian into Hebrew, 
ע
 
צ
ç′ and 
ר
r.’
3
This would read Ça′rw. In addition, Naville noted that 
‘ayin’
 in Egyptian is not always used as a
consonant and cannot consequently be noted as an essential part of the name.
4
 There is therefore no
philological justification for suggesting that because the name Zarw is written one way on the scarab
and with simply the seated lion in other texts, we are dealing with two different cities.


--- PAGE 160 ---
APPENDIX E
The Body In Tomb No. 55
T
HE
 rather confused evidence about the identity of the body in Tomb No. 55 suggests that the last days
of the joint reigns of Akhenaten and Semenkhkare coincided with a time of internal turbulence in the
affairs of Egypt.
Contents of the Tomb
Inside the tomb the remains of a large wooden gilded shrine were found, with inscriptions indicating
that it was dedicated by Akhenaten to the burial of his mother, Queen Tiye. In addition, the names of
Tiye and her husband, Amenhotep III, occurred on various small objects. Another part of the chamber
yielded a coffin, with inscriptions including the titles and cartouches of Akhenaten. Inside the coffin
was a mummy and, nearby, there were four canopic jars. Four magic bricks, to protect the deceased
in the underworld, were also found 
in situ,
 inscribed with the name of Akhenaten.
According to Weigall,
1
 the entrance of the tomb showed the remains of at least two closures. There
was part of an original wall of rough limestone blocks, cemented on the outside, and above the ruins
of this there was a second, more loosely constructed, wall. The second wall had been partly pulled
down and had not been built again. On fragments of the cement, impressions of the necropolis seal, a
jackal crouching over nine captives, were found, and fragments of small clay sealings, inscribed with
the name ‘Neb-kheprw-re’ (Tutankhamun), were also discovered, scattered in the rubbish. All the
antiquities recovered from this tomb are now in the Cairo Museum except a few objects, including
one of the four canopic jars, which were given to Davis, the American sponsor of the excavation, and
are now in the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York.
The Mummy
As a result of Queen Tiye’s name being found on the shrine as well as on other funerary objects,
Davis concluded that the tomb and the mummy it contained were hers. The coffin had originally lain
upon a bier, but, when the wood rotted away because of the damp, the coffin collapsed and the
mummy partly projected from under the lid. The flesh of the mummy had consequently also rotted
away, leaving the skeleton as the only bodily remains.
When he had opened the tomb, Davis called two medical men (a Dr Pollock of Luxor and ‘a
prominent American obstetrician’) to examine the skeleton. They agreed with him that it belonged to a
woman, thus reinforcing his belief that the remains were those of Queen Tiye. Later, Davis was
disappointed, and even personally upset, when the remains were examined by Grafton Elliot Smith, at
the time Professor of Anatomy in Cairo Medical School, who concluded that the skeleton was that of
a man and, influenced by the other opinions at the time regarding the ownership of the mummy,
announced that he did not think ‘there can be any serious doubt that these are really the remains of
Khouniatonou (Akhenaten)’.
2
Smith also concluded that the remains belonged to a man who was about twenty-five or twenty-six


--- PAGE 161 ---
years of age at the time of his death. Akhenaten is known to have ruled for at least seventeen years,
had been married either on coming to the throne or shortly before, with his first daughter Merytaten
being born either late in his first year or during his second year. Consequently, Egyptologists believed
that he could not have been less than thirty (thirty-three according to our conclusions) at the time of
his assumed death. Nevertheless, even this did not seem to cause Smith to change his mind: ‘If, with
such clear archaeological evidence to indicate that these are the remains of Khouniatonou, the
historian can produce irrefutable facts showing that the heretic king must have been twenty-seven, or
even thirty, years of age, I would be prepared to admit that the weight of the anatomical evidence in
opposition to the admission of that fact is too slight to be considered absolutely prohibitive.’
3
 This
view was held for a long time and supported by some Egyptologists, especially Weigall and Aldred.
In his report Smith also indicated that the skeletal remains from Tomb No. 55 had some features
similar to those of two of Akhenaten’s ancestors. He found that ‘the configuration of the upper part of
the face, including the forehead, was identical with that of Yuya, Akhenaten’s maternal grandfather’,
while ‘a curious and unusual bony ridge passing from the nasal spine to the alveolar point in his skull
occurs also as a peculiarity of the skull of Amenhotep III (Akhenaten’s father), also in the molar
teeth.’ In addition he noted: ‘The general structure of the face, and especially the jaw, is exactly that
portrayed in the statues of Akhenaten. These physical features prove pretty conclusively that the
mummy is that of a male member of the royal family who had in his veins the blood of both Yuya and
Amenhotep III.’
4
More than a decade passed. Then Smith, seemingly still convinced that the remains found in Tomb
No. 55 were those of Akhenaten, tried to overcome Egyptologists’ objections regarding the
contradiction between the anatomical evidence relating to the mummy’s age with their demand for an
age of at least thirty years for Akhenaten when he fell from power in his Year 17. He wrote: ‘In
considering this difficult problem I naturally turned to consider those pathological conditions which
might cause delay in the union of the epiphyses (the growing ends of shafts of long bones). Of these,
the most likely seemed to be the syndrome described by Fröhlich in 1900, now known as dystrophia
adiposogenitalis. In patients presenting this condition cases have been recorded in which the bones at
thirty-six years of age revealed the condition which in the normal individual they show at twenty-two
or twenty-three, so this suggested the possibility of bringing the anatomical evidence into harmony
with the historical data. In support of this solution there are the very peculiar anatomical features of
Akhenaten when alive, which have been made familiar to us by a large series of contemporary
portraits. Forty years ago archaeologists were puzzled by the pictures of this Pharaoh, and it was
suggested that he was a woman masquerading as a man. In the light of our present knowledge,
however, they seem to be quite distinctive of Fröhlich’s Syndrome and afford valuable support to the
suggestion that this was the real cause for the delay in the fusion of the epiphyses. In addition to this,
the skull – both the brain case and the face – reveals certain important peculiarities. There is a slight
degree of hydrocephalus (water on the brain) such as is often associated with Fröhlich’s Syndrome
and also an over-growth of the mandible, such as may result from interference with pituitary.’
5
One wonders what anatomists three thousand years from now might identify as the abnormality
suffered by some of the models who posed for Picasso’s paintings? Smith may have been misled by
the fact that the Amarna revolution produced two distinct kinds of art: while one was naturalistic,
representing an image as near to its original as possible, as for instance the limestone dyad of
Akhenaten and Nefertiti in the Louvre; the second school was romantic, giving an exaggerated form of
its models, the best example of this being the four Osirian colossi of Akhenaten found at Karnak. To
take this representation, which is almost a caricature, as representing the form of the original is not


--- PAGE 162 ---
fair, particularly when Smith had the skeleton, although damaged, at his laboratory to examine at
leisure. No doubt his complete pre-conviction that these bones belong to Akhenaten helped to make
him err in his judgement.
Shortly afterwards, another examination of the remains was carried out by D. E. Derry, Professor
of Anatomy in the Faculty of Medicine at Cairo University. Derry, whose examination included
restoring the skull, rejected Smith’s conclusions: ‘A complete reexamination of the question of the
age of the bones was then instituted. In the first place it was found that the conformation of the skull
does not support the statement that the person to whom it belonged suffered from hydrocephalus. The
skull is undoubtedly of an unusual shape, but the type was not uncommon in the Old Empire,
particularly in members of the royal families … It appears, as will be shown later, in the head of
King Tutankhamun. It belongs to a type known to anthropologists as platycephalic, in which the skull
is flattened from above downwards and correspondingly widened. It is indeed the very reverse of the
shape produced by hydrocephalus.’
6
 Derry’s final conclusion was that the remains were those of a
man no more than twenty-three, or at the most, twenty-four years of age when he died.
Derry also made the point: ‘During the unwrapping of the mummy of Tutankhamun the writer
noticed that the head of the king resembled that of the so-called Akhenaten skeleton. When the head
was measured, in so far as that was possible under the circumstances, it was found that the diameters
of the two skulls approximated closely. This is all the more remarkable when we remember that the
shape of the so-called Akhenaten skull is unusual and that in width it exceeded any skull ever
measured by the writer in Egypt. Such a likeness to his supposed father-in-law in the man who had
married Akhenaten’s daughter could only mean some blood relationship and therefore it was
concluded that Tutankhamun must have been a son of Akhenaten, probably by another wife.’
7
The age of the skeleton at the time of death, plus the facts that the tomb of Tutankhamun had already
been found and that Reginald Engelbach, one of Derry’s early students, had been trying to argue that
the coffin found in Tomb No. 55 belonged to Semenkhkare, persuaded Derry to accept this viewpoint
and he concluded: ‘We are compelled to accept the remarkable likeness of the two skulls as
indicating a common origin and that in all probability Semenkhkare and Tutankhamun were brothers.
It is hardly necessary to point out that the similarity in the heads of the two men, who married sisters,
renders the theory of hydrocephalus even more untenable, and particularly so unless we accept the
suggestion that they themselves were brothers or at least closely related.’
8
Nevertheless, this conclusion was not accepted by Aldred: ‘We may here limit comment upon
Derry’s report to two observations. Firstly, his definition of the hydrocephalus as causing only a
ballooning of the skull requires some qualification. Secondly, it is not wholly unexpected that two
contemporary male members of the royal house such as Tutankhamun and the occupant of the coffin,
who would almost certainly have had several progenitors in common, could have had similar skull
measurements. But if the profiles of the two heads are superimposed upon each other and orientated
in the same plane, it will be seen how sharply they also differ. The skull is a distortion of the mummy-
head with its prognathous profile, over-grown mandible and prominent supraorbital (above the eye
socket) ridges.
‘However, let us approach the problem from another direction. In the early years of his reign,
probably in Year 2, Amenhotep IV (Akhenaten) built the Aten temple at Karnak from which have
come the remarkable colossi figures now in the Cairo Museum, (J.E. Nos. 49528–9 and 55938). The
last of these, which has been aptly described by Pendlebury as “a wonderful pathological study”,
shows the young king apparently entirely naked without any signs of genitalia …
‘In the past, one of the difficulties in the way of a more precise identification of Akhenaten’s


--- PAGE 163 ---
pathology both from the bones believed to be his [by Aldred, of course] and from the extravagant
representations at Karnak and el-Amarna, has been the impossibility of his being an endocrinopath [a
sufferer from disorder of the endocrine glands, which secrete into the blood hormones that have a
particular effect on other organs or parts of the body] and also the father of at least six daughters. This
is, however, a contradiction that will have to be faced unflinchingly, and, if it should ever be proved
conclusively that he suffered from a chronic endocrine disorder, some other candidate will have to be
sought as the father of Nefertiti’s children. The full significance of Akhenaten’s ostentatious parade of
his domestic life will also have to be properly assessed. All such speculation, however, had better be
left until a more thorough examination of the bones has been fully reported.’
9
In order to challenge Derry’s conclusions, Aldred ‘referred the whole question of the pathology of
Akhenaten as represented in these and other sculptures to Dr A. T. Sandison, Senior Lecturer in
Pathology in the University of Glasgow and Honorary Consultant Pathologist to the Western
Infirmary, Glasgow’, and was ‘greatly indebted to him for his expert comments’. Sandison was
asked:
a)  If the monuments, especially the Karnak Colossi, show that Akhenaten was abnormal, and, if so,
what was the probable nature of his disease;
b)  If the skeletal remains, as examined and described by Elliot Smith and Derry, show that the
subject was likely to be abnormal, and, if so, what was the probable nature of the disease; and
c)  If the answers to questions (a) and (b) could be ‘reconciled’.
Sandison did not disappoint Aldred: ‘The evidence of the monuments strongly suggests that
Akhenaten suffered from an endocrine abnormality presenting hypogonadism [deficiency of one of the
sexual glands] and adiposity, and with residual evidence of an earlier phase of hyperpituitarism
[over-function of the pituitary gland in the brain, resulting in gigantism] manifested by cranial and
facial changes. The skeletal remains found in Valley Tomb No. 55 have not been described or
illustrated as fully as is desirable. Nevertheless, the pelvic abnormality and facial and cranial
structure support a diagnosis of hypogonadism and pituitary cranial dysplasia [abnormal development
or growth]. Pending fuller publication, the two groups of phenomena those derived from study of the
monuments and those derived from study of the remains seem to be reconcilable. This gives
considerable support to the view, long held, that the alleged remains of Akhenaten from Valley Tomb
No. 55 are indeed those of that Pharaoh. One consequence which must receive consideration,
however, is the virtual certainty that Akhenaten was incapable of procreation at the time of death and
for many years previously. It is, however not inconceivable that during an earlier period of
hyperpituitarism, e.g. shortly after puberty, his potency and fertility might not have been grossly
impaired.’
Fairman reacted with an article in the same issue of the 
Journal of Egyptian Archaeology:
 ‘In
view of the amount of prejudice and contradictory statements provoked by the skeleton found in the
coffin it would be the height of folly for one like myself, who has no medical competence, to argue on
anatomical matters. It is useless even for a medical man, in the present circumstances, to argue on the
sole evidence of the published descriptions, measurements and photographs of the body, and there is
a most pressing need for a new and exhaustive anatomical and pathological examination of the body,
using anthropometric and radiographic techniques.’
10
The latest examination, which started in 1963 under the supervision of R. G. Harrison, the late
Derby Professor of Anatomy at the University of Liverpool, confirmed Derry’s conclusion that the
remains were those of Semenkhkare. He further decided that the skeleton belonged to a man about 5ft
7in in height whose death occurred in his twentieth year.
11
 Harrison also confirmed Derry’s


--- PAGE 164 ---
conclusions regarding the similarity in facial appearance with Tutankhamun.
12
Not only did the result of Harrison’s re-examination disappoint Aldred’s expectations by proving
that the remains could not have belonged to Akhenaten: Harrison also concluded: ‘It is possible to be
certain that there is no evidence of hydrocephalus in the skull of these remains … The presence of a
pituitary tumour may also be excluded … The bodily physique and proportions are also within
normal limits and unlike those which occur in established endocrinopathies.’
Regarding Aldred’s above-mentioned statement that ‘if the profiles of the two heads [that of the
skeleton and Tutankhamun’s] are superimposed upon each other … it will be seen how sharply they
also differ’, Harrison stated: ‘When photographs of the vertex of the two skulls are compared, there is
a similarity in their shape, both skulls being brachycephalic. Not only are the measurements of the
skull vaults similar, but there is also a close correspondence in the width between the angles of the
mandibles.’
13
As for the attempts by Aldred and Sandison to diagnose Akhenaten’s anatomical physique from his
portraits, Harrison said: ‘In a scholarly but purely theoretical treatise, they make extensive
conclusions in trying to see in the strange artistic Amarna representation of Akhenaten a
representation of a case of Fröhlich’s Syndrome (dystropia adiposogenitalis). They make extensive
conclusions based only on already published opinions, theories and dates, and an examination of the
Akhenaten monuments. These monuments depict a king with an elongated face, prominent and pointed
chin, large full lips, coarse nose, wide pelvis, prominent abdomen, buttocks, thighs and breasts. The
thighs are large, but the lower legs and arms are slim, and the hands and fingers not excessively large.
‘Aldred and Sandison regard these changes in the trunk and limbs as feminisation, occasioned by a
disorder of the pituitary gland. They hypothesise a transitory phase of pituitary hyperfunction going on
to hypofunction: in the hyperfunctional phase acromegaloid changes were manifested in the skull
(found in Tomb No. 55) and soft tissues in the face. They do not imply that Akhenaten was a true
acromegalic (sufferer from gigantism), however, since there is no enlargement of the extremities or
gigantism. They also consider that the changes in the trunk and limbs of the Akhenaten monuments are
consistent with those occurring in dystrophia adiposogenitalis. From the published evidence of the
remains (found in Tomb No. 55), they concluded that the findings go some way to sustain a
provisional diagnosis of pituitary cranial dysplasia, and that they are reconcilable with the evidence
they have deduced from the monuments of Akhenaten.’
14
While agreeing with Aldred and Sandison that the monuments display an interesting physique, and
that certain interpretations may be made from it, Harrison pointed out; ‘It is important to ascertain
whether his monuments depict a true likeness. Even if this is so, only limited and qualified clinical
interpretations are admissable.’
15
Nor does the archaeological evidence agree with Aldred’s assumption regarding Akhenaten’s
representation. His argument has focused on one of the four Osiride statues of Akhenaten, made
during the early years of his reign when he was still at Thebes, to be placed at the entrance of the
temple he was building at Karnak for his new God. Although in three of these statues the king is
wearing a kind of kilt, the fourth, which has larger lower parts, has no kilt. Aldred has argued that the
king is shown here in the nude, without genitalia, indicating a true physical state. However, Julia
Samson of University College London, found evidence to contradict Aldred’s explanation in ‘the
actual method used for carving the kilt, which settles the long controversy as to how it could have
been added to the king’s nude statue from Karnak. The belt is made by cutting back the surface of the
abdomen to leave a ridge, and the linen folds of the kilt are then carved over the hips, curving up to
the belt buckle. On the one unfinished colossal statue of Akhenaten found in Karnak, the only one that


--- PAGE 165 ---
is nude, his kilt would have been added in this way, because the stone is already recessed around the
Aten plaques at the waist and would have been further cut back, as on the finished colossi, to make
the ridge for the belt.
‘There would have been (then) no necessity for further delineation of the king’s figure, about which
there has been so much conjecture … This underlines the fallibility of theories about his physical
build and condition being based on unfinished statues. Rather than the son of the sun choosing to be
represented as unable to father his children, the probability is that the one nude, unfinished statue was
never raised to a standing position. It is unlikely that the Amun priests left in Thebes after the royal
removal to Akhetaten (Amarna) would have exerted every effort to finish the Aten temple and, if
Nefertiti’s daughters were the children of someone else and not Akhenaten, it is inexplicable why a
son was not introduced into the royal household as an heir.’
16


--- PAGE 166 ---
APPENDIX F
Some Further Evidence Of Survival
(i) The Shrine
A 
LARGE
 wooden shrine of gesso (gypsum) and gilt, like those surrounding the sarcophagus of
Tutankhamun, was discovered, dismantled, in Tomb No. 55. The sides, one of which was found in the
corridor, had been taken to pieces as if an attempt had been made, then abandoned, to move the shrine
out of the tomb. The shrine is decorated with reliefs showing Queen Tiye and her son, Akhenaten,
making offerings to the Aten. The engraved copper tangs (handles) give the names and titles of the
queen and the inscription states that the shrine was made for Queen Tiye by her son, whose own
cartouche and figure have been carefully erased. There is no doubt or disagreement that this shrine
belonged to Queen Tiye.
(ii) The Small Objects
A number of small objects, mostly toilet articles and the like, were found among the Tomb No. 55
debris. Some of these objects are inscribed with the name of Queen Tiye or her husband, Amenhotep
III, making it likely that most, if not all, of these small objects belonged originally to the queen.
(iii) The Coffin
The coffin in Tomb No. 55 was made of wood, covered completely with gold leaf and inlaid with
semi-precious stones. It resembles closely the second of the three coffins of Tutankhamun. However,
instead of the head of the coffin wearing the usual royal head-dress, this one has a Nubian wig.
Originally the coffin had been laid over a bier, but, as this had rotted away, the coffin collapsed and
the mummy jerked partly out of the lid. The coffin is inscribed with a now damaged text that includes
titles and cartouches of Akhenaten, which have been erased.
Much of the speculation and disagreement about the identity of the original owner of the coffin has
arisen from the excised cartouches and titles of Akhenaten, evidence that the text on the coffin has
been adapted to suit the present occupant, Semenkhkare, and a possibility that the royal emblem, the
uraeus, was placed later on the coffin’s forehead. The differing views on the matter are:
•  Georges Daressy, the French Egyptologist, concluded that the coffin had been made originally for a
woman whom he believed to be Queen Tiye;
•  Weigall thought, because of Akhenaten’s cartouches, that the coffin belonged to him;
•  Engelbach, about a quarter of a century later, tried to prove that the coffin belonged originally to
Semenkhkare, dated from a time before he became coregent and was then changed to indicate his
royal status;
•  Gardiner argued in 1957 on philological grounds that the original owner of the tomb was Akhenaten


--- PAGE 167 ---
himself;
•  Aldred and Fairman put forward the view in the 1960s that the coffin had been made originally for
Akhenaten’s eldest daughter, Merytaten, then adapted for her husband, Semenkhkare.
Inside the coffin, sheets of gold, which had apparently formed the lining, lay over the mummy. A
pectoral sheet of gold had been placed on the mummy’s head, similar to the one discovered on the
body of Tutankhamun. A necklace and a piece of gold, each inscribed with the early name of the Aten,
used before Year 9 of Akhenaten’s reign, were found among the debris. According to both Weigall
and Smith, the mummy was also enclosed in bandages inscribed with Akhenaten’s name, but these
were later lost in Smith’s laboratory.
Although the Aldred-Fairman suggestion regarding the original owner of the coffin seems on
balance to be more probable, there is no certain evidence to support any of the above-mentioned
conclusions.
(iv) Canopic Jars
Four canopic jars were found near the coffin. They contained black material consisting of a hard,
compact, pitch-like mass surrounding a well-defined central zone of different material, brown in
colour and of a friable nature. This core was made up of nitrogenous material containing a small
proportion of fatty matter, thus being the remains of viscera.
The lids of these jars were carved with heads wearing a wig. As the heads did not have beards it
was thought that the jars had been made originally for a woman. It was also thought that the uraeus
coils, the royal sign, were cut into the striations of the wigs later, indicating that this woman was not
royal. As the texts that had been incised on the body of the jars have been ground away, this confirms
that the original owner was different from the one who eventually used them. A. Lucas, a chemist,
was able to prove that the inside of the jars indicates that the jars were used only once.
1
Although some scholars have suggested that the jars belonged originally to Akhenaten, this seems
unlikely as his name did not figure on the jars, which had been used only once, plus the fact that, had
they been his, only his cartouches would have been erased from the text, as in the case of the shrine
and coffin. Furthermore, the fact that the pattern of the wig used for these jars is very similar to that
appearing on the coffin found in the same tomb suggests that both the jars and the coffin were made
originally for the same woman, in this case Merytaten, Akhenaten’s eldest daughter, before she was
married to Semenkhkare and became a queen.
(v) Magical Bricks
Four bricks of dried, gritty mud were found 
in situ
, distributed around the tomb. Although they have
suffered, like everything else in the tomb, from the effects of damp, Akhenaten’s name could be read
on at least two of the bricks, whose function was to protect the dead person from intruders. The four
bricks form a complete set, each having to be placed in a certain position in relation to the mummy in
order to fulfil its protective function.
That these magical bricks belonged originally to Akhenaten is not the subject of dispute, and the
fact that they were found 
in situ
 in Tomb No. 55 was one of the strong points that led Aldred and


--- PAGE 168 ---
others to believe that the remains in the coffin were his. However, the skeletal remains have since
been shown to be those of Semenkhkare. Why, then, was no attempt made either to erase Akhenaten’s
name or adapt the text to suit Semenkhkare? It is now agreed that Akhenaten’s reign ended a few
months, if not a few days, before the death of Semenkhkare. In this case, had Akhenaten’s reign ended
with his death, his funerary arrangements, which would have taken seventy days, might not even have
ended when the arrangements for Semenkhkare’s burial began. How then does one explain that
Akhenaten’s original magical bricks, which formed an essential part of the funerary rituals, were
found 
in situ
 in Semenkhkare’s tomb? The only possible conclusion is that they were not needed by
Akhenaten who, although he had fallen from power before Semenkhkare’s death, was himself still
alive.
Fairman was opposed to using the evidence of Akhenaten’s magical bricks to prove that the
remains found in Tomb No. 55 were those of the king. He therefore tried to weaken this conclusion by
suggesting that, although they had been made originally for Akhenaten early in his reign, the king
could have changed his mind later and rejected this traditional practice as a result of the development
of his religious ideas: ‘For the testimony of the magical bricks to be incontrovertible two things are
necessary: it must first be proved that the use of such magical bricks was still retained in the funerary
practices of the end of the Amarna Period; and it must also be proved that the texts themselves are
such as could reasonably be expected to have been employed when the Aten cult was fully
developed.’
2
Fairman is not justified in these objections. First of all, Semenkhkare’s burial 
was
 an ‘end of the
Amarna period’ burial, the only one we have. If Akhenaten had died when he fell from power in his
Year 17, it would have been Tutankhaten’s responsibility to bury him, just as it was his responsibility
to bury Semenkhkare. This is confirmed by the remains of the young king’s seal found in Tomb No.
55. At the time, and up to his Year 4, he was still called Tutankhaten and his capital and residence
were at Amarna. There is no evidence that the old Egyptian gods, especially those usually associated
with the underworld, were represented in Tomb No. 55. At this early stage of his rule Tutankhamun
would have followed the same burial procedure with Akhenaten as he did with Semenkhkare.
Then again, if Akhenaten, having originally ordered the magical bricks to be made, later changed
his mind, he would not have left the bricks forgotten in the stores. He would either have ordered any
changes he thought necessary to be made or even have ordered their destruction if his developed
religious beliefs caused him to reject their use. This was the course he followed in changing his own
name from Amenhotep IV to Akhenaten and erasing the name of Amun in his father’s name. He would
not have left his name on objects that offended his monotheistic belief, for it was the Egyptian creed
that, as long as an inscription existed in the wrong form, the wrong beliefs lived.
(vi) Tutankharnun’s Tomb
Some funerary objects – small items, such as statuettes and bracelets – made originally for
Akhenaten, but evidently never used for any burial of his, were found in the tomb of Tutankhamun,
who was not buried until nine years after the end of Akhenaten’s rule. A list of these objects was
given by Martin.
3
 The numbers cited referred to objects as they appear in 
A Handlist to Howard
Carter’s Catalogue of Objects in Tutankhamun’s Tomb
, compiled by Helen Murray and Mary
Nuttall of the Griffith Institute, Oxford, and published in 1963: ‘Those connected with Akhenaten
appear to be nos. 54ee, 54ff, 54vv, 256 4t, 261a, 281a, 291a, 300a, 596a, 620(40) and an


--- PAGE 169 ---
unnumbered sealing. Cf. also objects of Akhenaten, Semenkhkare or Merytaten nos. 1k, 46gg, 48h, 79
+ 147, 101s, 256a, 256b(4), 261(1), 262, 405, 448, 620(13), 620(41), 620(42) and unnumbered gold
sequins.’
Thus not only does the evidence from the royal tomb at Amarna prove that Akhenaten was never
buried there: at Thebes, where it was thought that he was either buried originally in Tomb No. 55 or
that his mummy was moved there from Amarna, it is now accepted that the skeleton in Tomb No. 55 is
that of Semenkhkare, not Akhenaten. Then, as some original, essential parts of the funerary equipment
of Akhenaten were found 
in situ
 in Tomb No. 55 they could not have been used for Akhenaten,
reinforcing the belief that he was still alive at the time of Semenkhkare’s burial.


--- PAGE 170 ---
APPENDIX G
The Hebrews
T
HE
 word for Hebrew in the Hebrew language of the Bible is 
‘Ibri.
 Scholars have differed about its
specific meaning, but the most common view is that the word is related to the Hebrew preposition
‘ibr
 meaning ‘across’ and that it was modified to describe Abraham, the founder of the tribe of Israel,
and his descendants because of their migration from Ur in Mesopotamia across the river Euphrates to
the land of Palestine-Jordan.
The expression ‘Hebrew’ is used in the Pentateuch (the first five books of the Old Testament) as a
name for the Israelites to differentiate between them and Egyptians and Philistines. Therefore, as the
word 
Khabiru,
 which occurs frequently in Amarna letters, has been shown by many scholars to be
similar to the word for ‘Hebrew’ 
(‘Ibri),
 there has been an attempt to identify the people referred to
in these letters with the Israelites. A number of factors have served to confuse the issue, however:
•  Many Amarna letters sent from the Palestinian city States to Amenhotep III, Akhenaten and
Tutankhamun indicate that they had encountered a great deal of trouble in their territories as a result
of people sometimes called 
Khabiru and
 sometimes referred to as 
Sa-Gaz.
 (There is considerable
evidence to support the belief that both peoples were associated);
•  It is clear from the letters that these people were composed of small groups, acting simultaneously
in different parts of Palestine, north as well as south, and not a united group under one leadership;
•  At the time these letters were sent to Amenhotep III, Akhenaten and Tutankhamun, in the fifteenth
and fourteenth centuries 
BC,
 the Israelites were still in Egypt, according to most scholars, whether we
believe in an Exodus during the reign of Ramses I or Ramses II;
•  There are references to 
′Peru
 (the way Egyptian texts represent the word ‘Hebrew’) being in Egypt
from the time of Amenhotep III during the second half of the fifteenth century 
BC,
 right through the
Amarna period and as late as the time of Ramses IV, a little before the middle of the twelfth century
BC,
 long after the Exodus, whichever date we accept for it;
•  From Egyptian sources we find the word 
‘Peru
 used to indicate labourers working for the State at
heavy manual labour in connection with building operations of the kings, especially the quarrying and
transportation of stone;
•  The Babylonian texts, known as the Nuzu Texts, use the word 
Khabiru
 to indicate a class of slaves
and, as with the Egyptian word 
‘Peru,
 the word appears to indicate a social class of hard labourers
rather than an ethnic group;
•  The Bible does not refer to the Israelites as ‘Hebrews’ after the Exodus and during the entry into
Canaan with Joshua.
The conclusion is obvious. The word ‘Hebrew’ was used to designate a particular social class –
either disorganized groups of wandering slaves or labourers in the Palestine city States, who were
quite distinct from the Hebrews in Egypt, or the Israelites in Egypt, who were known as Hebrews
while they were engaged in harsh labour. However, this term was no longer applied to them once they
had been freed by Moses and were looked upon as a nation. Thus, as the term ‘Hebrew’ denoted a
social class rather than a people, not all Hebrews can be regarded as Israelites although the Israelites


--- PAGE 171 ---
were classed as Hebrews while they laboured at building the treasure cities of Pithom and Raamses.
The implication of the King of Jerusalem’s letter (see 
Chapter 19
) is that the two Egyptian officials
murdered by the Hebrews at Zarw may have been among the supervisors of their work, and it is
possible that these very incidents – or something similar – could have been responsible for bringing
to a head the anti-Akhenaten movement in the army that eventually caused his downfall and flight to
Sinai.


--- PAGE 172 ---
INDEX
Aamu (Palestinians), 43
Aaron (Moses’ brother): as Moses’ spokesman, 16–17, 167, 182; makes golden calf, 18; Israelite hostility to, 19; death, 20; born, 25; age,
52; meets Pharaoh, 107; magic rod, 175, 177–8; nursed by Tiy, 182
Abd-Khiba, King of Jerusalem, 183, 247
Abraham, 2, 246
Abu Simbel, 111
Abydos, 4, 102–4, 111
Acco, 43
Achencheres, 157–8
Adon, Adonai (God), 166–9
Adonith (Aten-it), Queen of Ethiopia, 23, 32, 183
Africanus, Sextus Julius, 27, 101
Ahmose (naval officer), 112, 227
Ahmosis I (Amos), Pharaoh, 27, 30, 35, 93, 112, 221–2, 227
Akhenaten (
formerly
 Amenhotep IV), Pharaoh: as descendant of Joseph, 2, 53, 54; identified as Moses, 3, 7, 65, 106, 162, 167; Tell el-
Amarna figure, 4–5; character, 5–6; monotheism and worship of Aten, 5, 7–8, 32–3, 88, 121, 123, 130, 160, 162–73; Karnak colossi of,
6, 8, 145, 234, 236, 239; supposed Fröhlich’s Syndrome, 8–9, 233–4, 238; children, 9, 126; historical hostility to, 10, 124–5; as high
priest, 23; name excised, 27, 64, 67, 92, 157, 202–3, 241; reign, 28, 92, 96, 99–100, 105, 148, 151–3; rejected by Amunites, 62;
marriage, 62, 122, 180–1; life, 65; epithet, 65; coregency, 68–89, 97–8, 118, 122–3, 158, 198–9, 204; name, 68–9, 71, 88, 122–3, 210,
244; and father’s death, 70–1; adopts Aten as ‘father’, 82, 126–9, 149, 199; letters from Tushratta, 82–8, 212–14; age, 105; birth, 106–
7, 118–19, 121; youth, 117–23; representations of, 129; religious reforms, 130–2; disappearance, 132–3, 150, 154; tomb desecrated,
134–5, 140–1, 147, 155; tomb described, 135; burial, mummy and pathology of, 135–47, 231–8; supposed coregency with
Tutankhamun, 148–9; abdication, 147–50, 155–6; survival, 157–61, 240–5; seen as rebel, 160; and worship, 162–6; in exile, 167, 169–
70, 172, 179, 247; joins Israelites, 167–8; and Ten Commandments, 173; rejects magic, 175; royal sceptre, 179; on Amarna rock tombs,
198–202; and Kheruef tomb, 202–4; on Ramose tomb, 204–11; and Hebrews, 246; 
see also
 Moses
Akhetaten (city), 62, 91, 126, 156, 239
Akhmim (city), 229
Aldred, Cyril, 8–9, 69, 140, 204–5, 233, 235–9, 241–3
Alexandria, 27
Amarna (city): and Moses’ monotheism, 63; as capital, 64; inscriptions at, 68, 89, 91; Akhenaten builds, 64, 87, 124–7, 134, 158; tombs
and monuments, 73–7, 79, 81, 134–47, 157, 180, 198–211; Akhenaten moves to, 129, 239; garrison, 129–30, 158; Maruaten (pavilion),
132; tablets, 183; name, 184; 
see also
 Tomb 55
Amenemhat I, Pharaoh, 108
Amenemope, 94
Amenemopet, 105
Amenhotep II, Pharaoh, 100, 105, 119, 139
Amenhotep III (Amenophis; Neb-Maat-Re): as father of Nefertiti’s children, 9; coregency with Akhenaten, 12, 69–89, 97–8, 118, 122,
158, 198–9, 204; and Joseph, 13, 54; reign, 27–8, 32, 99–100, 104, 105, 120, 153, 157–8; marriage to Sitamun, 29, 54, 118; and Israelite
invasion, 30, 184; flight to Ethiopia, 32, 183; stela, 37; marriage to Tiye, 54, 57, 117; as father of Akhenaten/Moses, 61, 146; death, 63,
70–1, 82–9; on stelae and reliefs, 72–3, 77, 79–80, 88, 198–9; age at death, 76; and Tushratta, 82–7, 118, 211–14; and Horemheb, 91;
Luxor temple, 104; and Zarw-kha, 106, 108, 222; and Akhenaten’s youth, 117–20; at Zarw, 119; building, 119; hostility to, 124;
mummy, 145, 233; and paternity of Tutankhamun, 146–7; represented on Amarna tombs, 178, 203–6, 208–10; as father of Nefertiti,
181; at Amarna, 198; burial, 231, 240; and Hebrews, 246–7
Amenhotep IV 
see
 Akhenaten
Amenhotep, son of Habu, 29–30, 32, 57, 205–6, 209
Amenophis, son of Paapis, son of Habu, 29, 184
Amram, 19, 25, 35, 51–3
Amun (deity): temples, 43, 159; as State and patron god, 62, 80–2, 119, 123; persecuted, 130–2; Tutankhamun readopts, 149–50; and
sacrifice of Shasu captives, 194; represented on Amarna tombs, 207, 209; dominance, 226
Amun-Re (deity), 119–20, 123, 205–6, 210–11
Amunites, 61–2, 87, 160
Amurru, 44
Anastasi Papyri,
 112, 219, 224


--- PAGE 173 ---
Anen (brother of Tiye), 120
Aniy (priest), 95–6, 215
Ankhsenpa-aten, 76, 126, 132
Aper-el (vizier), 88,. 185
Apion: 
History of Egypt
, 31, 33
Apophis, 221
Araba rift valley, 45
Archiv für Orientforschung,
 75
Ascalon, 46–7
Ashkelon, 40–1
Aswan: rock relief, 71–2
Aten, the (deity): and monotheism of Akhenaten/Moses, 5–8, 12, 32, 62–3, 123, 126, 130, 162–73; on Amarna fragments and tombs, 77,
199–201, 208; Akhenaten adopts as ‘father’, 82, 126, 149, 199; cult of, 121, 127–8, 160; temples, 121, 123, 126–7; and Akhenaten’s
tomb, 139–40, 143; and fall of Akhenaten, 155; attributes, 162–5; and Adon, 167; Ramses I adopts, 170
Aten Gleams
 (ship), 107, 118, 121
Aten-it 
see
 Adonith
Athribis Stela (Kom el Ahmar Stela), 40
Avaris (city; rebuilt as Pi-Ramses): Israelites occupy, 29, 33; as Hyksos capital, 35–6; location, 106–7, 109, 110–15, 217–30; and god
Seth, 220; 
see also
 Pi-Ramses
Aye, Pharaoh: descended from Joseph, 2; name excised, 27, 92; warns Moses, 63, 183; reign, 63, 68, 92–3, 96–7, 99–100, 105, 134, 155,
160, 167; tomb, 76, 91, 128, 163, 180, 182; as military commander, 130–1, 147, 158–60; and abdication of Akhenaten, 147, 149; power
and support for Akhenaten, 158–60; death, 161
Ayrton, Edward R., 144
Baikie, Rev. James, 6, 180
Baketaten, Princess, 73–5, 77, 146, 198–9, 202
Ballah, Lake, 110, 116, 225
Barsanti, Alessandro, 134–6
Bathia, Princess, 25
Beisan (Beth-Shan; N. Palestine), 43–4, 46
Bek (sculptor), 71
Bennett, 152–3
Beth-Shan 
see
 Beisan
Bible, Holy: opposes magic, 175; 
see also
 individual books
Bietak, Manfred, 109, 220, 222–3, 225, 227
Bigeh (Upper Egypt), 205
Bi’lan, 22–3, 25–6
Birket Hapu (lake), 228
Björkman, Gun, 121, 222
Book of the Dead,
 172–3, 175
Bouriant, Urbain, 136
Breasted, James Henry, 5, 101–2
Cairo Column, 40
Caleb, 19
Campbell, 69
Canaan: as Promised Land, 19, 21, 33, 186; in Israel Stela, 40–1, 47; Seti I’s campaign against, 42–4, 47, 194
Carter, Howard, 73, 76, 80, 244
Cassuto, Umberto, 52–3, 57, 64
Č
erný, Jaroslav, 151–2
Chaereman, 32
Champollion, François, 4
City of Akhenaten
 III, 151
Clédat, Jean, 113, 116, 219–20
Dapur (city), 44
Daressy, Georges, 241
Darwha, 229


--- PAGE 174 ---
Davies, Norman de Garis: 
The Rock Temples of El Amarna,
 74–6, 198, 200, 207
Davis, Theodore M., 144, 232
Derry, D. E., 145, 153, 234–7
Deuteronomy, Book of, 19–20, 186
Dhiban (Dibon), 56
Djehutymes, 109
Dynasties: Eighteenth, chronology, 11, 37, 157; Nineteenth, chronology, 11, 36–7
Edom, 45–6, 196–7
Egypt: Libyans invade, 38–40; army, 159
Egypt Exploration Society, 136–7, 150
Eleazar (Moses’ son), 19
el-Kab (Nubia), 112
Elohim (El; God), 166, 185
Engelbach, Reginald, 69, 235, 241
Ephraim: identified as Aye, 54
Erman, Adolf, 82
Ethiopia (Nubia), 22–3, 32, 183
Et Till (village), 125
Eusebius, 27–8, 101
Exodus, Book of: as source for life of Moses, 12–21, 22, 36, 58–60, 65, 107, 167; and chronology, 49; on Moses’ mother, 55–7; on
Oppression, 64; on city of Ramses, 112; and name Jehovah, 168; and magic rod, 175
Ezra, 35
Fairman, H. W., 69, 79, 91, 148, 150–2, 237, 241–4
Fayyum, 224
Fields of Piyer, The, 39
Freud, Sigmund, 6–8, 10, 66, 162, 167–8, 187
Fröhlich’s Syndrome, 8–9, 233–4, 238
Gardiner, Alan H.: on Karnak colossi, 6; on Manetho, 30; on Moses’ epithet, 65; King list, 68; opposes coregency theory, 69; on
Tushratta letters, 83; on Akhenaten’s reign, 92; on Amenhotep II, 100; on Pi-Ramses, 111, 218; on non-burial of Akhenaten, 139; on
fall of Akhenaten, 155; identifies Gaza, 194; on Akhenaten’s tomb, 241; 
Egypt of the Pharaohs,
 30
Gaza, 43, 194
Gebel Barakal (Nubia), 101–2
Gebel Shahuf, 196
Gebel Silsila (Nubia), 127
Genesis, Book of, 54–5, 64, 125, 162
George the Monk (Syncellus) of Tarasius, Patriarch of Constantinople, 27–8
Gershon (Moses’ son), 15–16
Gezer, 40–1, 147
Giles, Frederick J., 69, 75
Giliya (messenger), 83–6, 214
Gilukhipa, 118, 212
Goshen, 13–14, 22, 35–6, 54, 108
Grdseloff, Bernard, 45, 196
Griffith, Francis, 219
Gunn, Battiscombe, 150–3
Habachi, Labib, 202, 224
Habu, son of 
see
 Amenhotep, son of Habu
Haggadah, The (Talmud), 178
Hammath (city), 43
Hamza, Muhammad, 139, 142, 144, 224, 226
Harris, J. R., 90
Harrison, R. G., 145–6, 160, 237–9
Hassan, Ali, 115
Hathor (deity), 169


--- PAGE 175 ---
Hatshepsut, Queen, 5, 222
Hatti, 40, 47, 195
Hattusili III, Hittite King, 44
Hattusili Peace Treaty, 195
Hayes, William C., 69, 88, 224
Hebrews: as term, 246–7
Helck, Wolfgang, 69, 97, 157
Heliopolis (On), 31–2, 38–9, 119–20, 163
Heliopolis Column, 40
Hezekiah, 21
Hittites, 41, 42, 44–7, 96
Horeb, Mount (Mount Sinai), 18
Horemheb, Pharaoh: reign, 3, 11, 13, 63–4, 67–8, 70, 90–100, 103, 105, 157–8, 167; as Oppressor of Israelites, 27, 50, 108; appoints Pa-
Ramses, 49, 172; death, 49, 63, 172, 179; age at death, 98; marriage, 122, 181; burial, 139; suppresses Aten cult, 155, 161, 170, 181;
and Zarw, 219, 221; and Tell el-Dab’a, 223
Horus (deity), 187, 227
Horus, road of, 112–14, 218–19
Hurru, 40–1, 47
Huy, 93–5, 215–16
Huya: tomb, 73–7, 198–202, 204; appointment, 204
Hyksos (shepherds): invade and occupy Eastern Delta, 13, 36–7, 66, 220; defeated, 27, 35, 112, 159, 221–2, 227; Josephus on, 28, 31; at
Avaris, 29, 35–6, 108
Imago
 (journal), 6–7
International Congress of Egyptology, 5th, Cairo, 1988, 113
Isaiah, Book of, 163
Israel Stela, 37–41, 42, 47–8, 197
Israelites: Descent and Sojourn in Egypt, 13, 51–4; Oppression in Egypt, 13–15, 64; Exodus, 15–19, 108; as Shasu, 47, 197; as threat to
Pharaoh, 63; worship, 163–5; Akhenaten joins, 167; origins, 184; and Hebrews, 246–7
Jacob (father of Joseph), 13, 55, 171
Janssen, Joseph M., 70
Jehovah (deity), 163, 166–9
Jethro (Moses’ father-in-law), 15
Jithro 
see
 Reu’el
Job Stone, 46
Jochebed (mother of Moses), 14, 19, 25, 180
Joseph, Patriarch: Yuya identified with, 2, 13, 32, 53, 108, 229; descendants, 3; career, 13; imprisoned, 37; arrival in Egypt, 51, 54;
father’s death, 55, 57; meets brothers, 55; Egyptian name, 66; Tuthmosis IV appoints, 124–5
Josephus, Flavius, 22, 27–31, 36, 90, 101, 111, 184
Joshua, 19, 186
Kadesh (city), 19–20, 43–4, 218; Battle of, 46
Kamose, 221
Kamose Stela, 112, 218, 224–5
Kantarah, 109, 112–13, 219
Karnak: colossi of Akhenaten at, 6, 8, 145, 234, 236, 239; Amun’s temple reliefs, 43–4, 46, 76, 101, 131, 159; Meketaten depicted at, 72;
temple of Ptah, 90; Hypostyle Hall, 102, 104, 112, 193; Aten temple, 121, 123, 125, 181, 236; and Zarw, 218
Karnak War Inscriptions, 40
Khabiru
 (
Sa-Gaz
), 183, 246–7
Khamashshi (messenger), 84, 86, 213
Khay, 93–4, 96
Khayri, 92–5, 215
Kheruef (steward): tomb, 79–80, 178, 202–4
Kings, Second Book of, 21
Kitchen, Kenneth A., 45–8, 196–7, 218
Klein, Rev. F., 56
Knudzton, J. A., 82


--- PAGE 176 ---
Kohath (son of Levi), 35, 51–3
Koran: on Moses, 24, 54, 58–60; on drowning of Pharaoh, 49; on Moses’ magic rod, 175–8; on Aaron, 182; on Aye, 183
Kurnah (Western Thebes), 103
Kush, 105
Laban, 45, 162, 196
Levi (grandfather of Moses), 19, 35, 51–3
Levites, 130, 184–5
Leviticus, Book of, 19–20
Libnah, 45
Libya (or Tehenu): invades Egypt, 38–40, 44, 47–9
Lucas, A., 242
Luxor, 44, 46, 104; Aten temple, 121, 123, 125
Lysimachus, 32
Maat (goddess), 73
Madinet Habu (Western Thebes), 91
magic, 174–5
Malkata palace (Western Thebes), 87, 110, 117, 119, 222, 224, 228
Mallevi (Mal-lawi), 184
Manasseh (Anen; Joseph’s son), 54
Manetho (historian), 22–3, 26–32, 57–8, 63, 90, 97, 99–101, 110–11, 157, 184, 227; 
History of Egypt
 (
Aegytica
)
,
 26
Mani (messenger), 84–7, 214
Maqsoud, Mohammed Abdel, 113–15
Martin, Geoffrey T., 137–8, 140–4, 244
Maspero, Gaston, 101, 103–4, 116
Mehy, 102
Meidum, 80–2, 158
Meketaten (Akhenaten’s daughter), 72, 76, 126, 132, 135–7, 140
Memphis, 38–9, 91, 124, 219, 224–5
Men (sculptor), 71
Merari, 184
Merenptah Stela, 48
Merenptah, Pharaoh, 37–41, 47–8, 197
Merey (Libyan leader), 38–9
Meribah (Sinai), 20, 186
Meryre II: tomb, 68, 74, 198–202, 204; as high priest of Aten, 163, 185
Merytaten (Akhenaten’s daughter), 9, 69, 76, 126, 131, 232; tomb, 241, 243
Merytaten-the-less, Princess (daughter and granddaughter of Akhenaten), 9
Mesha, King of Moab, 56
Mesman (goatherd), 94
Midian and Midianites, 15, 47, 179
Miriam (elder sister of Moses), 14, 18–20, 25, 182
Mitanni, 42, 82–7, 212, 214; 
see also
 Tushratta
Moab, 46, 186, 188, 194, 196–7
Moabite Stone, 56
Mos
 case, 155, 215–16
Moses: identified as Pharaoh Akhenaten, 3, 7, 65, 106, 162, 167; Freud on, 6–7, 10, 66, 162, 167–8, 187: Old Testament account of, 12–
21, 22, 35, 58–60; takes second wife, 20; death and burial, 20–1, 186–8; fails to enter Promised Land, 20–1, 33, 186–7; Talmud
account of, 22–4, 134, 156, 183; with Pharaoh as child, 25–6; unites with Midianites, 47; return to Egypt, 49, 54; age, 51–3; as son of
Amenhotep III and Tiye, 54, 60–2, 182; childhood at Goshen, 62; monotheism and worship, 62–3, 162, 164–7; name, 65–7; birth, 68,
106–7; and name of God, 167–9; flight to Sinai, 169; magic rod, 174–9, 186–7; relations with Aaron, 182; 
see also
 Akhenaten
Muhammed the Prophet, 76
Murray, Helen, 245
Mutimuya, Queen, 119, 222
Mutnezmat, Queen, 122, 181
Muwatallis, Hittite King, 44


--- PAGE 177 ---
Nahr el-Kelb Stela, 46
Napoleon I (Bonaparte), Emperor of France, 112
Naville, Henri, 230
Nebnufer, 216
Neby, mayor of Zarw, 97, 118, 121, 172, 222
Neferhotep, 90
Neferkheprure, 200
Neferneferuaten 
see
 Nefertiti
Neferneferuaten Tasheri, 73, 126
Neferneferure, 126
Nefertiti, Queen of Akhenaten: as devotee of Aten, 6; children, 9, 236, 239; marriage, 62, 122, 180–1; at Amarna, 126, 132; status, 127,
181; disappears, 132; tomb representations of, 137, 234; and Tutankhamun, 146; parents, 180–1; depicted and named on Karnak
temple, 181; nursed by Tiy, 182; as Miriam, 182; on Amarna rock tombs, 199–201, 207–8
Negeb, 196
Nehesy, Pharaoh, 114, 220
Neshi (shipmaster), 93–5, 215–16
Nubian Stelae, 40, 42
Nubnofret, 215
numbers (figures): and Jewish chronology, 52
Numbers, Book of, 19–20
Nuttall, Mary, 245
Nuzu Texts, 247
Oedipus, 8
Old Testament: history and myth in, 189–90; 
see also
 individual books
Osarseph (priest of Heliopolis), 29, 31–3
Osiris (god), 65, 79, 114, 172–3, 175, 187, 220, 227
Osman, Ahmed: 
Stranger in the Valley of the
 
Kings,
 51, 53, 124
Pah-Nehas, 172
Panehesy, 72, 127, 172, 185
Papa (priest), 215
Pa-Ramses 
see
 Ramses I, Pharaoh Paser (vizier), 222
Paser I, 105
Pa-Twfy, Waters of, 110, 112–13, 225, 227
Pe-Kanan (Gaza), 43, 194
Penamun (vintner), 121–2
Pendlebury, John: on Akhenaten, 6, 69; excavates Akhenaten’s tomb, 136–40, 142, 144, 153; on Karnak colossus, 236; 
Tell el-Amarna,
128
Pere (nobleman), 69, 132, 154
Petrie, W. M. Flinders, 37, 69, 116, 169–71; 
Tell el-Amarna,
 125
Phinehas (son of Eleazar), 185
Pi-Ramses, 94, 106–7, 109–15, 217–21, 224–7, 228; 
see also
 Avaris
Pirizzi (messenger), 82, 85–6, 214
Pithom (city), 13, 32, 34
Piyer, The Fields of 
see
 Fields of Piyer, The
Plutarch, 27
Poem of Pe-natour,
 112, 217
Pollock, Dr, 232
Potiphar, 53
Prehotep, 93
Pritchard, James B., 56
Psalms, Book of, 163
Ptolemy II, Pharaoh, 26
Puah (midwife), 14
Puipri (messenger), 82, 85–6, 214
Qantir, 109, 115, 222–8


--- PAGE 178 ---
Qumran, 56
Raamses (city), 13, 32, 64, 106
Rakhit, 220
Ramasseum, 46
Rameses (Ramses; place), 36, 48–9, 112, 228
Ramose, mayor of Thebes, 88, 204–11
Rampses, 30, 184
Ramses I, Pharaoh (
formerly
 Pa-Ramses): at Thebes, 35; reign, 37, 42, 49–50, 64, 90, 99–100, 105, 167, 169, 179, 184; Horemheb
appoints, 97, 108, 172; building, 104, 226; Zarw residence, 110, 219, 221; military background, 159; Sarabit stela, 169–70
Ramses II, Pharaoh: builds Hermopolis, 9; as Pharaoh of Oppression, 37–8, 247; treaty with Hittites, 41; campaigns, 42, 44–8, 112, 196–
7; marriages, 45; visit to Horemheb’s tomb, 101; and Khayri court case, 94–6, 215; reign, 100–5; building 104; age, 104; at Zarw, 109,
111, 217–18; and city of Pi-Ramses, 217–20, 222, 226
Ramses III, Pharaoh, 226
Ramses IV, Pharaoh, 247
Rathosis, 157–8
Rbn,
 45, 196
Re (deity), 119–20, 200; 
see also
 Amun-Re
Re-Harakhti (Horus of the Horizon), 120, 127–8, 163, 195, 206–7, 209, 211
Red Sea: Israelites cross, 17–18, 49
Redford, Donald: on Jewish settlement of desert area, 33; on Akhenaten’s rebellion, 58; opposes coregency theory, 69, 75, 77, 79–80; on
Soleb Temple, 70–1; on Meketaten, 72; on Amarna rock tombs, 75, 77, 198–9, 20–5; on Tushratta letters, 82–3, 86–7; on Akhenaten’s
reign, 152, 154; 
Akhenaten, the Heretic King,
 9–10; 
Pharaonic King-Lists,
 31
Reu’el (Jithro; Midianite), 15, 25–6
Rhind Mathematical Papyrus,
 221
rod, ‘magic’, 174–9
Rosetta Stone, 4
Rowley, H. H., 183–4
Sa-Gaz see Khabiru
Sakkara, 88, 90–2
Samson, Julia, 239
Sandison, A. T., 236, 238–9
Sarabit el Khadim, 118, 169–72
Scharff, Alexander, 75
Schmidt, John D., 44–5
Schulman, Alan R., 129
sed
 festival, 178–9
Seele, Keith C., 69, 150–3, 180–1
Sehel (Upper Egypt), 205
Seir, Mount, 45, 196
Semenkhkare, Pharaoh: descended from Joseph, 2; name excised, 27, 92; installed as coregent, 63, 68–9, 131–2, 154; reign, 92, 96, 99–
100, 105, 147, 148–9, 154; 231; name and epithets, 132, 154; and religion, 132; death, 132, 146–7, 149; mummy, 145, 235, 237, 243;
relationship to Akhenaten, 145–6, 235; burial and tomb, 241, 244–5
Sementawi, 216
Setepenre (Akhenaten’s daughter), 126
Seters, John van 
see
 van Seters, John
Seth (deity), 110, 114, 187–8, 219–21, 223, 225–7
Seti I, Pharaoh: reign, 2, 37, 100–5; campaigns against Shasu, 42–5, 47, 49, 103, 112, 187, 193–4, 196, 219; and Wadi Haifa stela, 90;
appointed by Horemheb, 97, 108; temples and reliefs, 102–4, 111, 113–14, 218; military background, 159; and death of Moses, 187–8;
at Zarw, 219, 221
Shasu (tribes): wars with Egyptians, 42–9, 101, 103, 112, 179, 187, 193–4, 196–7, 219; as Akhenaten’s troops, 200
Shi-hor, Waters of, 110, 225, 227
Shimeathites, 45, 196
Shiprah (midwife), 14
Shutarna (father of Tushratta), 118, 212
Sikket es-Sultan, 126
Simyra, 44


--- PAGE 179 ---
Sinai, 169, 171–2, 179, 197
Sinai, Mount, 171–2; 
see also
 Horeb, Mount
Sinuhi, 108
Sitamun, 29, 54, 62, 181
Smith, Grafton Elliot, 145, 232–1, 236, 242
Smith, Harry S., 156
Smith, Ray Winfield, 181
Sm’t,
 45, 196
Sobek temple (Fayum), 31
Soleb temple (Nubia), 70–1
Steindorff, George, 69, 228
Succoth, 17
Suppiluliuma, Hittite King, 42
šūš
 (sixty-year period), 52
Sutarna (Tushratta’s father) 
see
 Shutarna
Syncellus 
see
 George the Monk
Tabernacle: constructed, 18, 20
Tadukhipa, Princess, 84, 122, 180–1, 212
Takharu, 93, 95–6, 215–16
Talmud, 22–4, 32, 134, 156, 169, 183, 186
Tanis (city), 45, 109, 196, 217, 220
Tehenu 
see
 Libya
Tell Abu-Seifah, 113
Tell el-Amarna, 4, 62, 69, 88, 91, 125–6; 
see also
 Amarna
Tell el-Dab’a, 97, 109, 115, 222–8
Tell Heboua, 113–15
Ten Commandments, 18, 172–3
Tentpaihay, 216
Thebes: as capital, 35–6, 159; Moses at, 62, 65; Semenkhkare’s coregency at, 63; tombs, 79; Akhenaten at, 83, 120, 122; inscriptions, 89;
Tiye and, 109; temple of Amun, 132, 159; Akhenaten leaves, 158; Ramose at, 210–11; as site of Zarw-kha, 228; 
see also
 Malkata
palace
Tiy (wife of Aye), 158, 180–2
Tiye, Queen: as mother of Akhenaten/Moses, 8, 54–5, 57, 61–2, 81, 146, 182; marriage, 54, 117; on Penehesy stela, 72; and Amarna rock
tombs, 73–4, 198–201; and Baketaten, 75, 77; age, 76–7; on Theban tombs, 79, 139; status, 79, 81–2, 120, 127, 198; correspondence
with Tushratta, 83–7, 212–14; gift to Aper-el, 88, 185; and Zarw-kha, 106–8, 116, 118, 172, 222, 228; as daughter of Yuya (Joseph),
107–8, 130, 185; relations with Akhenaten, 120, 122–3; mummy and burial, 144, 147, 231–2, 232, 240–1; and parentage of
Tutankhamun, 146–7; Sarabit statuette, 170; on Kheruef tomb, 178, 203–4; and Nefertiti, 180–2
Tjaui, 93
Tomb 55 (Amarna), 231–45
Tushratta, King of Mitanni, 82–8, 118, 180, 211–14
Tutankhamun (
formerly
 Tutankhaten), Pharaoh: decended from Joseph, 2; name excised, 27, 92; succeeds to throne, 63, 146, 149, 183;
reign, 68–9, 92, 96, 99–100, 105, 132, 134, 153–4; tomb, 91, 144–6, 224, 240–1, 244–5; and Aten cult, 121; Restoration stela, 131;
marriage, 132; burial, 137, 139, 141, 241–2; and Amarna tombs, 144; parentage, 146, 234; coregency, 148–9; readopts Amun, 149–50,
155; at Amarna, 153, 155; changes name, 155; death, 160; skull, 234–5, 237–8; and burial of Akhenaten, 244; and Hebrews, 246
Tuthmose, 8
Tuthmosis (Moses’ brother), 61, 117
Tuthmosis III, Pharaoh, 2, 82, 99–100, 104, 105, 119, 159–60, 221
Tuthmosis IV, Pharaoh: and Joseph, 13, 53, 124–5; tomb, 90; reign, 99–100, 105, 108, 119, 167; harem at Zarw, 118, 222; and hostility to
Aten, 124–5; and religious revolution, 160
Tuya (mother of Tiye), 107, 144, 229
Uphill, Eric, 114–15
Urnero, 93–6, 215–16
Usimare Setpenre, 195
van Seters, John, 220, 224
Velikovsky, Immanuel, 8


--- PAGE 180 ---
Wadi Abu Hassan el-Bahri, 134
Wadi Haifa (Nubia), 42, 90
Weigall, Arthur, 6, 140, 144, 147, 231, 233, 241–2
Wilson, Sir J. Gardiner, 200
Yahuda, Abraham S., 7
Yanoam, 40–1, 43, 47
Young, Thomas, 4
Yoyotte, Jean, 48, 121, 229–30
Yuni, 105
Yuya: identified with Joseph, 2, 13, 32, 53, 108, 229; as father of Tiye, 107–8, 130, 185; posts, 130, 229; mummy and tomb, 137, 144–5,
233; military origins, 158; and religious revolution, 160
Zarw (Zalw; Sile; city): location, 12, 106–16, 217–30; as birthplace of Moses, 61–2; Israelites at, 64; Amenhotep III at, 118; shrine of
Aten, 121, 172; Akhenaten at, 121–2; and Seti I’s campaigns, 187; name and writing of, 230
Zarw-kha, 106–7, 116, 228–9
Zin, Desert of, 19
Zipporah (Moses’ wife), 15, 57
Zivie, Alain-Pierre, 88


--- PAGE 181 ---
NOTES
B
IBLICAL
 quotations are from either the Authorized Version or the New English Bible.
Further details of works cited below will be found in the Bibliography, pp. 253–5.
INTRODUCTION
  
1
      Breasted, 
A History of Egypt,
 p. 355.
  
2
      Breasted, 
The Dawn of Conscience,
 p. 296.
  
3
      Weigall, 
The Life and Times of Akhenaten,
 p. 2.
  
4
      Baikie, 
The Amarna Age,
 p. 234.
  
5
      Gardiner, 
Egypt of the Pharaohs,
 p. 214.
  
6
      Pendlebury, 
Tell el-Amarna,
 p. 15.
  
7
      Aldred, 
Akhenaten,
 pp. 101–4.
  
8
      Redford, 
Akhenaten, the Heretic King,
 pp.232–5.
  1      BRICKS WITHOUT STRAW
  
1
      Osman, 
Stranger in the Valley of the Kings.
  2      WAS MOSES A KING?
  
1
      Polano, 
Selections from the Talmud,
 p. 132.
  
2
      
Ibid.,
 p. 126
  
3
      Waddell, 
Manetho.
  
4
      Josephus, 
Against Apion.
  
5
      
Against Apion III,
 p. 295.
  
6
      
Against Apion I,
 p. 281.
  
7
      
Ibid.,
 p. 287.
  
8
      Osman, 
Stranger in the Valley of the Kings.
  
9
      Redford, 
Pharaonic King-Lists,
 p. 293.
  3      THE ISRAEL STELA
  
1
      Aldred, 
Akhenaten and Nefertiti,
 p. 8. Gardiner, who unlike Aldred does not believe in a coregency during the Amarna period,
here gives a figure of 267 years.
  
2
      
Ibid.
 Aldred also disagrees with Gardiner about the length of the reign of Seti I.
  
3
      Pritchard, 
Ancient Near Eastern Texts,
 pp.377–8.
  4      REBELLION IN SINAI
  
1
      Murnane, 
The Road to Kadesh,
 p. 144.
  
2
      Schmidt, 
Ramses II,
 p. 180.
  
3
      Kitchen, ‘Asiatic Wars of Ramses II’, p. 66.
  
4
      
Ibid.
  
5
      
Ibid.,
 p. 68.
  
6
      
Ibid.,
 p. 70.
  
7
      Posener, 
A Dictionary of Egyptian Civilisation,
 p. 83.
  
8
      
Ibid.,
 pp.82, 83.
  
9
      This has been interpreted as meaning that the king’s body was recovered and buried.
10
      Ali, 
The Meaning of the Glorious Qu’ran.
  5      SOJOURN – AND THE MOTHER OF MOSES
  
1
      Cassuto, 
A Commentary on the Book of Exodus,
 p. 86.
  
2
      
The Illustrated Bible Dictionary,
 Part 2, p. 1016.
  
3
      Pritchard, 
Ancient Near Eastern Texts,
 p. 320.


--- PAGE 182 ---
4
      Brown, 
Hebrew and English Lexicon,
 p. 108.
  
5
      Cassuto, 
Commentary,
 p. 54.
  6      THE RIGHTFUL SON AND HEIR
  
1
      
Exodus Rabbah I,
 p. 24.
  
2
      Ranke, 
Die ägyptischen Personennamen,
 p. 164.
  7      THE COREGENCY DEBATE (I)
  
1
      Redford, 
History and Chronology,
 pp.86–169.
  
2
      Redford, 
Akhenaten, the Heretic King,
 p. 79.
  
3
      Carter, 
The Tomb of Tutankhamen,
 p. 5.
  
4
      Redford, 
History and Chronology,
 p. 109.
  
5
      Davies, 
The Rock Tombs of el-Amarna,
 Part III, p. 21.
  
6
      
Ibid.,
 p. 23.
  
7
      Redford, 
History and Chronology,
 p. 107.
  
8
      
Ibid.
  
9
      
Ibid.,
 p. 108.
10
      Carter, 
The Tomb of Tutankhamen,
 p. 14.
11
      
Ibid., p. 6.
12
      Redford, 
History and Chronology,
 pp.111–12.
  8      THE COREGENCY DEBATE (II)
  
1
      Redford, 
History and Chronology,
 p. 115.
  
2
      Carter, 
The Tomb of Tutankhamen,
 vol. III, p. 3.
  
3
      Redford, 
History and Chronology,
 p. 119.
  
4
      
Ibid.,
 p. 144.
  
5
      
Ibid.,
 p. 145.
  
6
      
Ibid.,
 p. 168.
  
7
      
Ibid.,
 p. 69.
  
8
      
Ibid.,
 pp. 71–2.
  
9
      
Ibid.,
 p. 51.
10
      
Ibid.,
 p. 79.
11
      Hayes, ‘Inscriptions from the Palace of Amenhotep III’, pp. 36–7.
  9      THE REIGN OF HOREMHEB
  
1
      Harris, ‘How Long Was the Reign of Horemheb’, p. 95.
  
2
      Martin, ‘Excavations at the Memphite Tomb of Horemheb’, p. 15.
  
3
      Redford,’Chronology of the Egyptian Eighteenth Dynasty’, p. 123.
  
4
      Peet, 
The City of Akhenaten,
 Vol. III, pp. 157–8.
  
5
      Harris, ‘How Long Was the Reign of Horemheb’, p. 96.
  
6
      Gardiner, ‘A Later Allusion to Akhenaten’, p. 124.
  
7
      Gaballa, 
The Memphite Tomb Chapel of Mose,
 p. 25.
  
8
      
Ibid.,
 p. 23.
  
9
      
Ibid.,
 pp.23, 24.
10
      
Ibid.,
 p. 23.
11
      
Ibid.,
 pp. 24–5.
12
      Björkman, ‘Neby, the Mayor of Tjaru’, pp. 43–51.
13
      Bietak, ‘Avaris and Piramses’, p. 270.
10      A CHRONOLOGY OF KINGS
  
1
      Maspero, 
The Struggle of the Nations,
 p. 387.
  
2
      Breasted, 
Ancient Records of Egypt,
 pp. 59–60.
  
3
      
Ibid.,
 p. 60.
  
4
      Maspero, 
The Struggle of the Nations,
 p. 386.
  
5
      
Ibid.,
 p. 380.


--- PAGE 183 ---
6
      
Ibid.,
 p. 379.
  
7
      Reisner, ‘The Viceroys of Ethiopia’, p. 28.
11      THE BIRTHPLACE OF AKHENATEN
  
1
      Breasted, 
Ancient Records of Egypt,
 vol. 3, p. 349; also Yoyotte, 
Le Bassin de Djârouka, Kêmi,
 vol. 15, p. 23.
  
2
      Osman, 
Stranger in the Valley of the Kings,
 p. 107.
  
3
      Hayes, ‘Inscriptions’, p. 101.
  
4
      
Papyrus Anastasi
 III.
  
5
      
Ibid.,
 IV.
  
6
      Gardiner, ‘The Delta Residence of the Ramessides’, p. 136.
  
7
      Waddell, 
Manetho,
 p. 83.
  
8
      Gunn & Gardiner, ‘New Renderings of Egyptian Texts’, p. 49.
  
9
      Gardiner, ‘Delta Residence’, p. 185.
10
      Naville, ‘The Geography of the Exodus’, p. 22.
11
      Clédat, ‘Le Site d’Avaris’, pp. 185–201.
12
      Although the cross inside the circle is not found in all cases, this may be the result of weathering or error by the. scribe.
13
      Clédat, ‘Notes sur l’Isthme de Suez’, p. 58.
12      AKHENATEN: THE EARLY YEARS
  
1
      Harris & Weeks, 
X-Raying the Pharaohs,
 p. 144.
  
2
      Hayes, ‘Inscriptions’, p. 159.
  
3
      Björkman, ‘Neby, the Mayor of Tjaru’, p. 51.
  
4
      
Č
erný, 
Hieratic Inscriptions from the Tomb of Tutankhamun,
 p. 2.
13      HORIZON OF THE ATEN
  
1
      Davies, 
The Rock Tombs of el-Amarna,
 Part V, p. 30.
  
2
      
Ibid.,
 p. 29.
  
3
      Schulman, ‘Military Background of the Amarna Period’, p. 52.
  
4
      
Ibid.,
 p. 66.
  
5
      This will be the subject of a separate work, but the similarity of the names of the Aten priests and those of the followers of Moses
is dealt with briefly in Chapter Nineteen.
  
6
      Schulman, ‘Military Background’, p. 67.
  
7
      Pritchard, 
Ancient Near Eastern Texts,
 p. 251.
14      THE TOMB OF AKHENATEN
  
1
      Martin, 
The Royal Tomb at el-Amarna,
 Part 1.
  
2
      
Ibid.,
 p. 104.
  
3
      
Ibid.,
 p. 30.
  
4
      
Ibid.,
 p. 105.
  
5
      
Ibid.,
 p. 106.
  
6
      Pendlebury, ‘Clearance of the Royal Tomb at el-Amarna’, pp. 123–4.
  
7
      Hamza, ‘The Alabaster Canopic Box of Akhenaten’, p. 537.
  
8
      Martin, 
The Royal Tomb,
 p. 105.
  
9
      
Ibid.,
 p. 106.
10
      
Ibid.,
 pp. 31–2.
11
      Gardiner, ‘The So-Called Tomb of Queen Tiye’, p. 19.
12
      Martin, 
The Royal Tomb,
 pp. 105–6.
13
      
Ibid.,
 pp. 30–1.
14
      Edwards, 
Tutankhamun,
 p. 153.
15      THE FALLEN ONE OF AMARNA
  
1
      Gunn, 
The City of Akhenaten,
 Part III, vol. 1, p. 159.
  
2
      
Ibid.,
 p. 152.
  
3
      
Ibid.,
 I, pl. lxiii.
  
4
      Seele, ‘King Aye and the Close of the Amarna Age’, p. 175.


--- PAGE 184 ---
5
      
Ibid.
  
6
      Fairman, ‘The Supposed Year 21 of Akhenaten’, p. 108.
  
7
      
Ibid.
  
8
      Gunn, 
The City of Akhenaten,
 Part I, p. 165.
  
9
      Fairman, ‘Supposed Year 21’, p. 108.
10
      Fairman, ‘The Chronology of the Eighteenth Dynasty’, p. 121.
11
      Frankfort & Pendlebury, 
The City of Akhenaten,
 Part II, p. 103.
12
      Derry, ‘Skeleton Hitherto Believed to be that of King Akhenaten’, p. 115.
13
      Gardiner, ‘Graffito from the Tomb of Pere’, p. 10.
14
      Redford,’Chronology of the Eighteenth Dynasty’, p. 177.
15
      Gardiner, ‘A Later Allusion to Akhenaten’, p. 124.
16
      Gaballa, 
The Memphite Tomb of Mose,
 pl. lxiii.
17
      Samson, 
Amarna, City of Akhenaten and Nefertiti,
 p. 1.
16      CORRIDORS OF POWER
  
1
      Helck, 
Untersuchungen zu Manetho und den ägyptischen Königslisten,
 p. 41.
17      THE FIRST MONOTHEIST
  
1
      Kitchen, 
Ramesside Inscriptions,
 Part I, p. 1.
  
2
      Petrie, 
Researches in Sinai,
 p. 127.
  
3
      
Ibid.
  
4
      
Ibid.,
 p. 126.
  
5
      
Č
erný, 
The Inscriptions of Sinai,
 Part II, p. 45.
  
6
      
Ibid.,
 p. 
47.
  
7
      Petrie, 
Researches in Sinai,
 p. 68.
18      THE ‘MAGIC’ ROD OF MOSES
  
1
      Fakhry, ‘The Tomb of Kheruef at Thebes’, p. 485.
19      WHO WAS WHO? – AND THE DEATH OF MOSES
  
1
      Seele, ‘King Aye’, p. 70.
  
2
      Baikie, 
The Amarna Age,
 p. 241.
  
3
      Seele, ‘King Aye’, pp. 168–80.
  
4
      Smith, 
The Akhenaten Temple Project,
 p. 22.
  
5
      
Ibid.,
 p. 27.
  
6
      Seele, ‘King Aye’, pp. 168–80.
  
7
      
Ibid.,
 p. 170.
  
8
      According to the Elohistic source of the Pentateuch, Moses and Aaron were of the tribe of Joseph. However, this source uses
‘Levite’ to indicate not a member of a clan, but a man specially eligible for the priesthood (
The Jewish Encyclopaedia,
 New
York and London, 1904, p. 20).
  
9
      Albright, ‘The Town of Sell’, pp. 6–8.
10
      Rowley, 
From Joseph to Joshua.
11
      Davies, 
The Rock Tombs of el-Amarna,
 vol. I.
12
      
Ibid.
APPENDIX A
  
(i)     The Shasu Wars
  
1
      Breasted, 
Ancient Records of Egypt,
 vol. III, p. 45.
  
2
      
Ibid.,
 p. 46.
  
3
      Gardiner, 
Egypt of the Pharaohs,
 p. 253.
  
4
      Breasted, 
Ancient Records,
 vol. III, p. 47.
  
5
      Kharu can mean either the people of Palestine/Syria or the land of the Horites, south of the Dead Sea: here it indicates the
territory of Canaan.
  
6
      Pritchard, 
Ancient Near Eastern Texts,
 p. 254.
  
7
      
Ibid.


--- PAGE 185 ---
(ii)     The Hattusili Peace Treaty
  
1
      Langdon & Gardiner, ‘Treaty … Between … Hattusili … and … Ramses II’, pp. 185–7.
(iii)    A Dissenting Voice
  
1
      Kitchen, ‘Asiatic Wars of Ramses II’, p. 66.
  
2
      
Ibid.,
 p. 69.
  
3
      
Ibid.,
 p. 70.
  
4
      
Ibid.
APPENDIX B
  
(i)    The Amarna Rock Tombs of Huya and Meryre II
  
1
      Davies, 
The Rock Tombs of el-Amarna,
 Part III, p. 16.
  
2
      Redford, 
History and Chronology,
 p. 109.
  
3
      Davies, 
Rock Tombs,
 Part III, p. 9.
  
4
      
Ibid.,
 Part II, p. 42.
  
5
      
Ibid.,
 p. 38.
(ii)     The Tomb of Kheruef
  
1
      Fakhry, ‘Tomb of Kheruef at Thebes’, p. 457.
  
2
      Habachi, ‘Clearance of the Tomb of Kheruef, p. 348.
  
3
      Redford, 
History and Chronology,
 p. 117.
(iii)    The Year of Tribute
  
1
      Aldred, ‘Year Twelve at el-Amarna’, p. 114.
(iv)    The Tomb of Ramose
  
1
      Aldred, ‘Two Theban Notables’, p. 117.
  
2
      Davies, 
The Tomb of the Vizier Ramose,
 pp. 30–1.
  
3
      
Ibid
., p. 33.
  
4
      
Ibid.,
 p. 37.
(v)     The Tushratta Letters
  
1
      Redford, 
History and Chronology,
 pp. 71–2.
  
2
      Winckler, 
Tell el-Amarna Letters,
 p. 67.
  
3
      Redford, 
History and Chronology,
 p. 69.
  
4
      
Ibid.,
 p. 52.
  
5
      
Ibid
., p. 79.
APPENDIX C 
The Mos Case
  
1
      Gaballa, 
The Memphite Tomb Chapel of Mose,
 p. 25.
  
2
      ‘Father’ is used here in the sense of ‘forefather’.
  
3
      Gaballa, p. 23.
APPENDIX D 
Pi-Ramses and Zarw
  
(i)     The City of Pi-Ramses
  
1
      Gardiner, ‘Delta Residence’, p. 178.
  
2
      
Ibid.,
 p. 180.
  
3
      Habachi, ‘Preliminary Report’, p. 201.
  
4
      Gardiner, ‘Delta Residence’, p. 132.
  
5
      Bietak, ‘Avaris and Piramses’, p. 255.
  
6
      van Seters, 
The Hyksos,
 p. 101.
  
7
      Pritchard, 
Ancient Near Eastern Texts,
 p. 253.
(ii)     The Fortified City of Zarw
  
1
      Nims, 
Thebes of the Pharaohs,
 p. 199.
  
2
      Björkman, ‘Neby, the Mayor of Zarw’, p. 50.


--- PAGE 186 ---
(iii)    The Case Against Qantir/Tell el-Dab’a
  
1
      Bietak, ‘Avaris and Piramses, pp. 225–90.
  
2
      
Ibid.,
 p. 271.
  
3
      
Ibid.,
 p. 273.
  
4
      
Ibid.,
 p. 289.
  
5
      Hamza, ‘Ramses’s Palace at Qantir’, p. 59.
 
(v)      A Middle-Egypt Site for Tiye’s City
  
1
      Yoyotte, 
La Bassin de Djârouka, Kêmi,
 pp. 23–33.
  
2
      Naville, ‘The Geography of the Exodus’, p. 22.
  
3
      
Ibid.,
 p. 24.
  
4
      
Ibid.,
 p. 23.
APPENDIX E 
The Body in Tomb No. 55
  
1
      Weigall, ‘The Mummy of Akhenaten’, p. 197.
  
2
      Smith, 
The Royal Mummies,
 p. 52.
  
3
      
Ibid.
  
4
      
Ibid
.
  
5
      
Cambridge University Medical Society Magazine,
 Issue No. 4, 1926, pp. 34–9.
  
6
      Derry, ‘Skeleton hitherto Believed to be that of King Akhenaten’, pp. 115–19.
  
7
      
Ibid.
  
8
      
Ibid
.
  
9
      Aldred, ‘The Tomb of Akhenaten at Thebes’, p. 51.
10
      Fairman, ‘Once Again the so-called Coffin of Akhenaten’, p. 39.
11
      Harrison, ‘Anatomical Examination of the Remains Purported to be Akhenaten’, p. 111.
12
      
Ibid.,
 p. 114.
13
      
Ibid.
14
      
Ibid.,
 p. 97.
15
      
Ibid.
16
      Samson, 
Armana, City of Akhenaten and Nefertiti,
 pp. 23–4.
APPENDIX F 
Some Further Evidence of Survival
  
1
      Lucas, ‘The Canopic Vases from the Tomb of Queen Tiye’, pp. 120–2.
  
2
      Fairman, ‘Once Again … ‘, p. 37.
  
3
      Martin, 
The Royal Tomb at el-Amarna,
 p. 1.


--- PAGE 187 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Albright, W. F., ‘The Town of Sell (Zarw) in the Amarna Tablets’, 
Journal of Egyptian Archaeology,
 vol. 10, 1924
Aldred, Cyril, 
Akhenaten,
 Abacus, London, 1968
Akhenaten and Nefertiti,
 Thames & Hudson, London, 1973
‘The Tomb of Akhenaten at Thebes’, 
Journal of Egyptian Archaeology,
 vol. 47, 1961
‘Two Theban Notables during the Later Reign of Amenophis III’, 
Journal of Near Eastern Studies,
 vol. 18, 1959
‘Year Twelve at el-Amarna’, 
Journal of Egyptian Archaeology,
 vol. 43, 1957
Ali, Abdullah Yusuf, 
The Meaning of the Glorious Qu’ran,
 Nadim, London, 1975
Baikie, James, 
The Amarna Age,
 A. & C. Black, London, 1926
Bietak, Manfred, ‘Avaris and Piramses Archaeological Exploration in the Eastern Delta’, 
Proceedings of the British Academy,
 vol. 65,
1979
Björkman, Gun, ‘Neby, the Mayor of Tjaru (Zarw) in the Reign of Tuthmose IV’, 
Journal of the American Research Center in Egypt,
vol. 10, 1974
Breasted, James Henry, 
Ancient Records of Egypt,
 Chicago, 1906
The Dawn of Conscience,
 Charles Scribner’s Sons, New York, 1933
A History of Egypt,
 Charles Scribner’s Sons, New York, 1905, 1909; Hodder & Stoughton, London, 1924
Brown, Francis, 
Hebrew and English Lexicon of the Old Testament,
 based on the lexicon of William Gesenius (tr. Edward Robinson),
Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1906
Carter, Howard, 
The Tomb of Tutankhamen,
 Cassell, London, 1933
Cassuto, U., 
A Commentary on the Book of Exodus
 (tr. Israel Abrahams), Hebrew University, Jerusalem, 1961
Č
erný, Jaroslav, 
Hieratic Inscriptions from the Tomb of Tutankhamun,
 Griffith Institute, Oxford, 1965
(ed.) 
The Inscriptions of Sinai,
 Egypt Exploration Society, London, 1955
Clédat, Jean, ‘Notes sur l’isthme de Suez’, 
Bulletin de l’Institut Français d’Archéologie Orientale,
 vol. 23, 1924
‘Le Site d’Avaris’, 
Recueil d’études égyptologiques dédiées à la mémoire de Jean-François Champollion,
 Champion, Paris, 1922
David, N. de G., 
The Rock Tombs of el-Amarna,
 Egypt Exploration Society, London, Part I 1903, Part III 1905, Part V 1908
The Tomb of the Vizier Ramose,
 Egypt Exploration Society, London, 1941
Derry, D. E., ‘Note on the Skeleton hitherto Believed to be that of King Akhenaten’, 
Annales du Service des Antiquités de l’Égypte,
vol. 31, 1931
Edwards, L. E. S., 
Tutankhamun,
 Victor Gollancz, London, 1979
Fairman, H. W., ‘The Chronology of the Eighteenth Dynasty’, 
Journal of Near Eastern Studies,
 vol. 25, 1966
‘Once Again the so-called Coffin of Akhenaten’, 
Journal of Egyptian Archaeology,
 vol. 47, 1961
‘The Supposed Year 21 of Akhenaten’, 
Journal of Egyptian Archaeology,
 vol. 46, 1960
Fakhry, Ahmed, ‘A Note on the Tomb of Kheruef at Thebes’, 
Annales du Service des Antiquités d’Egypte,
 vol. 42, 1943
Frankfort, H., and John Pendlebury, 
The City of Akhenaten,
 London, 1933
Freud, Sigmund, 
Moses and Monotheism,
 London, 1939
Gaballa, G. A., 
The Memphite Tomb Chapel of Mose,
 Aris & Phillips, Warminster, 1977
Gardiner, Alan H., ‘The Delta Residence of the Ramessides’, 
Journal of Egyptian Archaeology,
 vol. 5, 1918
Egypt of the Pharaohs,
 Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1961
‘The Graffito from the Tomb of Pere’, 
Journal of Egyptian Archaeology,
 vol. 14, 1928
‘A Later Allusion to Akhenaten’, 
Journal of Egyptian Archaeology,
 vol. 24, 1938
‘The So-Called Tomb of Queen Tiye’, 
Journal of Egyptian Archaeology,
 vol. 43, 1957
Gunn, Battiscombe, 
The City of Akhenaten,
 Egypt Exploration Society, London, 1923
Gunn, Battiscombe, and Gardiner, Alan H., ‘New Renderings of Egyptian Texts’, 
Journal of Egyptian Archaeology,
 vol. 5, 1918
Habachi, Labib, ‘Clearance of the Tomb of Kheruef at Thebes’, 
Annales du Service des Antiquités de l’Egypte,
 vol. 55, 1956
‘Preliminary Report on the Kamose Stele’, 
Annales du Service des Antiquités de l’Égypte,
 vol. 53, 1956
Hamza, Muhammad, ‘The Alabaster Canopic Box of Akhenaten’, 
Annales du Service des Antiquités de l’Egypte,
 vol. 40, 1940
‘Ramses’s Palace at Qantir’, 
Annales du Service des Antiquités de l’Égypte,
 vol. 30, 1930
Harris, James E., and Weeks, R., 
X-Raying the Pharaohs,
 Charles Scribner’s Sons, New York, 1973
Harris, J. R., ‘How Long Was the Reign of Horemheb’, 
Journal of Egyptian Archaeology,
 vol. 54, p. 95
Harrison, R. G., ‘An Anatomical Examination of the Pharaonic Remains Purported to be Akhenaten’, 
Journal of Egyptian
Archaeology,
 vol. 52, 1966
Hayes, William C, ‘Inscriptions from the Palace of Amenhotep III, 
Journal of Near Eastern Studies,
 vol. 10, 1951
Helck, Wolfgang, 
Untersuchungen zu Manetho und den ägyptischen Königslisten,
 Berlin, 1956
The Illustrated Bible Dictionary,
 Inter-Varsity Press, Sydney and Auckland, 1980


--- PAGE 188 ---
Josephus, Flavius, 
Against Apion
 (tr. H. St J. Thackeray), Heinemann, London, 1926
Kitchen, K. A., ‘Asiatic Wars of Ramses II’, 
Journal of Egyptian Archaeology,
 vol. 50, 1964
Ramesside Inscriptions,
 B. H. Blackwell, Oxford, 1975
Langdon, S. (with Alan H. Gardiner), ‘The Treaty of Alliance Between Hattusili, King of the Hittites, and the Pharaoh Ramses II of
Egypt’, 
Journal of Egyptian Archaeology,
 vol. 6, 1920
Lucas, A., ‘The Canopic Vases from the Tomb of Queen Tiye’, 
Annales du Service des Antiquités de l’Égypt,
 vol. 31, 1931
Martin, Geoffrey T., ‘Excavations at the Memphite Tomb of Horemheb’, 
Journal of Egyptian Archaeology,
 vol. 65, 1979
The Royal Tomb at el-Amarna,
 Egypt Exploration Society, London, 1974
Maspero, Gaston, 
The Struggle of the Nations,
 SPCK, London, 1896
Murnane, William J., 
The Road to Kadesh,
 The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago, Chicago, 1985
Naville, Henri, ‘The Geography of the Exodus’, 
Journal of Egyptian Archaeology,
 vol. 10, 1924
Nims, Charles F., 
Thebes of the Pharaohs,
 Elek, London, 1965
Osman, Ahmed, 
Stranger in the Valley of the Kings,
 Souvenir Press, London, 1987
Peet, T. E., 
The City of Akhenaten,
 Egypt Exploration Society, London, vol. III, 1951
Pendlebury, John, ‘Report on the Clearance of the Royal Tomb at el-Amarna’, 
Annales du Service des Antiquités de l’Egypte,
 vol. 3,
1931
Tell el-Amarna,
 Lovat, Dickson & Thompson, London, 1935
Petrie, W. M. Flinders, 
Researches in Sinai,
 John Murray, London, 1906
Polano, H., 
Selections from the Talmud,
 Frederick Warne, London, 1894
Posener, George (with Serge Sauneron and Jean Yoyotte), 
A Dictionary of Egyptian Civilisation,
 Methuen, London, 1962
Pritchard, James B. (ed.), 
Ancient Near Eastern Texts
 (tr. John A. Wilson), Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 3rd edn, 1969
Ranke, Hermann, 
Die ägyptischen Personennamen,
 Münster, 1902
Redford, Donald B., 
Akhenaten, the Heretic King,
 Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1984
History and Chronology of the Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt,
 University of Toronto Press, Toronto, 1977
‘On the Chronology of the Egyptian Eighteenth Dynasty’, 
Journal of Near Eastern Studies,
 vol. 25, 1966
Pharaonic King-Lists, Annals and Day-Books,
 Benben Publications, Mississanga, Ontario, 1986
Reisner, George A., ‘The Viceroys of Ethiopia’, 
Journal of Egyptian Archaeology,
 vol. 6, 1920
Rowley, H. H., 
From Joseph to Joshua,
 British Academy, London, 1950
Samson, Julia, 
Amarna, City of Akhenaten and Nefertiti,
 Aris & Phillips, Warminster, 1978
Scharf, Alexander, 
Archiv für Orientforschung,
 Vienna, 1935
Schmidt, John D., 
Ramses II,
 Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore and London, 1973
Schulman, Alan R., ‘Military Background of the Amarna Period’, 
Journal of the American Research Center in Egypt,
 vol. 3, 1964
Seele, Keith C, ‘King Aye and the Close of the Amarna Age’, 
Journal of Near Eastern Studies,
 vol. 14, 1955
Smith, E. G., 
The Royal Mummies,
 Cairo, 1912
Smith, Ray W., 
The Akhenaten Temple Project,
 University Museum, University of Pennsylvania, 1976
van Seters, John, 
The Hyksos,
 Yale University Press, New Haven and London, 1966
Waddell, W. G., 
Manetho,
 Harvard University Press, 1940
Weigall, Arthur, 
The Life and Times of Akhenaten,
 Thornton Butterworth, London, 1910, 1923
‘The Mummy of Akhenaten’, 
Journal of Egyptian Archaeology,
 vol. 43, 1957/8
Winckler, Hugh, 
Tell el-Amarna Letters,
 Reuther & Reichard, Berlin; Luzac, London, 1896
Yoyotte, Jean, 
Le Bassin de Djârouka, Kêmi,
 vol. 15, Geuthner, Paris, 1959


--- PAGE 189 ---
About the Author
Ahmed Osman was born in Cairo in 1934 and is the author of 
The Hebrew Pharaohs of Egypt,
Moses and Akhenaten,
 and 
Jesus in the House of the Pharaohs
. He lives in England.


--- PAGE 190 ---
About Inner Traditions 
•
 Bear & Company
Founded in 1975, Inner Traditions is a leading publisher of books on indigenous cultures, perennial
philosophy, visionary art, spiritual traditions of the East and West, sexuality, holistic health and
healing, self-development, as well as recordings of ethnic music and accompaniments for meditation.
In July 2000, Bear & Company joined with Inner Traditions and moved from Santa Fe, New
Mexico, where it was founded in 1980, to Rochester, Vermont. Together Inner Traditions 
•
 Bear &
Company have eleven imprints: Inner Traditions, Bear & Company, Healing Arts Press, Destiny
Books, Park Street Press, Bindu Books, Bear Cub Books, Destiny Recordings, Destiny Audio
Editions, Inner Traditions en Español, and Inner Traditions India.
For more information or to browse through our more than one thousand titles in print, visit
www.InnerTraditions.com
.


--- PAGE 191 ---
www.InnerTraditions.com
Bear & Company is a division of Inner Traditions International
Copyright © 1990, 2002 by Ahmed Osman
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including
photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Osman, Ahmed, 1934 –
Moses and Akhenaten : the secret history of Egypt at the time of the Exodus / Ahmed Osman.
p. cm.
Originally published: London : Grafton Books, 1990.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ebook ISBN 978-1-59143-884-7
print ISBN 978-159143004-9
1. Akhenaten, King of Egypt. 2. Moses (Biblical leader) 3. Egypt—History—Eighteenth dynasty, ca 1570–1320 B.C. 4. Exodus,
The. I. Title.
DT87.4 O86 2002
932’.014—dc21
2002033264

