=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Patricia Hill Collins~ Black Femenist.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 354
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:10:44.526065
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
“The book argues convincingly that black feminists be given, in the words immor-
talized by Aretha Franklin, a little more R-E-S-P-E-C-T.... Those with an appetite for
scholarese will find the book delicious.”
— Black Enterprise
“With the publication of Black Feminist Thought, black feminism has moved to a 
new level. Collins’ work sets a standard for the discussion of black women’s lives,
experiences, and thought that demands rigorous attention to the complexity of
these experiences and an exploration of a multiplicity of responses.”
—Women’s Review of Books
“Patricia Hill Collins’ new work [is] a marvelous and engaging account of the social
construction of black feminist thought. Historically grounded, making excellent use
of oral history , interviews, music, poetry , fiction, and scholarly literature, Hill pro-
poses to illuminate black women’s standpoint. . . . Those already familiar with black
women’s history and literature will find this book a rich and satisfying analysis.
Those who are not well acquainted with this body of work will find Collins’ book
an accessible and absorbing first encounter with excerpts from many works, inviting
fuller engagement. As an overview, this book would make an excellent text in
women’s studies, ethnic studies, and African-American studies courses, especially at
the upper-division and graduate levels. As a meditation on the deeper implications
of feminist epistemology and sociological practice, Patricia Hill Collins has given us
a particular gift.”
—Signs
“Patricia Hill Collins has done the impossible. She has written a book on black 
feminist thought that combines the theory with the most immediate in feminist
practice. Collins’ book is a must for any feminist’s library .”
—Rosemarie Tong
“Finding her own voice and sharing with us the voices of other African-American
women, Collins brilliantly explicates our unique standpoint. As a black feminist,
Collins traverses both old and new territories. She explores the familiar themes of
oppression, family , work, and activism and also examines new areas of cultural
images and sexual politics. Collins gently challenges white feminist dominance of
feminist theory and nurtures an appreciation for diversity in positions reflecting dif-
ferent race, class, and gender junctures. Her work is an example of how academics
can make their work accessible to the wider public.”
—Elizabeth Higginbotham, Professor of Sociology , University of Delaware, and 
co-editor of Women and Work: Exploring Race, Ethnicity, and Class (Volume 6)
Praise for the first edition of
Black Feminist Thought


--- PAGE 3 ---



--- PAGE 4 ---
BLACK 
FEMINIST
T
HOUGHT 
Knowledge, 
Consciousness,
and the
Politics of
Empowerment
Patricia Hill Collins
Routledge
New York and London
REVISED TENTH ANNIVERSARY EDITION
Second Edition


--- PAGE 5 ---
Published in 2000 by
Routledge
29 West 35th Street
New York, NY 10001
Published in Great Britain by
Routledge
11 New Fetter Lane
London EC4P 4EE
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2002.
Copyright © 2000 by Routledge
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced 
or utilized in any form or by any electronic, mechanical or other means,
now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and 
recording or in any information storage or retrieval system, without 
permission in writing from the publishers.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Collins, Patricia Hill, 1948–
Black feminist thought : knowledge, consciousness, and the
politics of empowerment / Patricia Hill Collins. — 2nd ed.
p. cm. — ( Perspectives on gender)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-415-92483-9 (hb). — ISBN 0-415-92484-7 (pb)
1. Feminism—United St ates. 2. Afro-American women. 3. United
States—Race relations. I.Title    II. Series: Perspectives on
gender (New York, N.Y.)
HQ1426.C633   1999
305.42'01—dc21  99–29144
CIP 
ISBN 0-203-90005-7 Master e-book ISBN
ISBN 0-203-90009-X (Glassbook Format)


--- PAGE 6 ---
Preface to First Edition   vi
Preface to Second Edition   x
Acknowledgments   xiv
Part 1:
The Social Construction of
Black Feminist Thought
1.The Politics of Black Feminist Thought   1
2. Distinguishing Features of Black Feminist Thought   21
Part 2:
Core Themes in
Black Feminist Thought
3. Work, Family , and Black Women’ s Oppression   45
4. Mammies, Matriarchs, and Other Controlling Images   69 
5.The Power of Self-Definition   97
6.The Sexual Politics of Black Womanhood   123
7. Black Women’s Love Relationships   149
8. Black Women and Motherhood   173
9. Rethinking Black Women’s Activism   201
Part 3:
Black Feminism, Knowledge, 
and Power
10. U.S. Black Feminism in Transnational Context   227
11. Black Feminist Epistemology   251
12.Toward a Politics of Empowerment   273
Notes   291
Glossary   298
References   302
Index   326
CONTENTS


--- PAGE 7 ---
When I was five years old, I was cho- 
sen to play Spring in my preschool pageant. Sitting on my throne, I proudly
presided over a court of children portraying birds, flowers, and the other, “lesser”
seasons. Being surrounded by children like myself—the daughters and sons of
laborers, domestic workers, secretaries, and factory workers—affirmed who I
was. When my turn came to speak, I delivered my few lines masterfully , with
great enthusiasm and energy . I loved my part because I was Spring, the season of
new life and hope. All of the grown-ups told me how vital my part was and con-
gratulated me on how well I had done.Their words and hugs made me feel that
I was important and that what I thought, and felt, and accomplished mattered.
As my world expanded, I learned that not everyone agreed with them.
Beginning in adolescence, I was increasingly the “first,” or “one of the few,” or
the “only” African-American and/or woman and/or working-class person in my
schools, communities, and work settings. I saw nothing wrong with being who
I was, but apparently many others did. My world grew larger, but I felt I was
growing smaller. I tried to disappear into myself in order to deflect the painful,
daily assaults designed to teach me that being an African-American, working-
class woman made me lesser than those who were not. And as I felt smaller, I
became quieter and eventually was virtually silenced.
This book reflects one stage in my ongoing struggle to regain my voice. Over
the years I have tried to replace the external definitions of my life forwarded by
dominant groups with my own self-defined viewpoint. But while my personal
odyssey forms the catalyst for this volume, I now know that my experiences are
far from unique. Like African-American women, many others who occupy soci-
etally denigrated categories have been similarly silenced. So the voice that I now
seek is both individual and collective, personal and political, one reflecting the
intersection of my unique biography with the larger meaning of my historical
times.
I share this part of the context that stimulated this book because that context
influenced my choices concerning the volume itself. First, I was committed to
making this book intellectually rigorous, well researched, and accessible to more
Preface 
to
First 
Edition


--- PAGE 8 ---
than the select few fortunate enough to receive elite educations. I could not write
a book about Black women’s ideas that the vast majority of African-American
women could not read and understand. Theory of all types is often presented as
being so abstract that it can be appreciated only by a select few. Though often
highly satisfying to academics, this definition excludes those who do not speak
the language of elites and thus reinforces social relations of domination. Educated
elites typically claim that only they are qualified to produce theory and believe
that only they can interpret not only their own but everyone else’s experiences.
Moreover, educated elites often use this belief to uphold their own privilege.
I felt that it was important to examine the complexity of ideas that exist in
both scholarly and everyday life and present those ideas in a way that made them
not less powerful or rigorous but accessible. Approaching theory in this way
challenges both the ideas of educated elites and the role of theory in sustaining
hierarchies of privilege. The resulting volume is theoretical in that it reflects
diverse theoretical traditions such as Afrocentric philosophy , feminist theory ,
Marxist social thought, the sociology of knowledge, critical theory , and post-
modernism; and yet the standard vocabulary of these traditions, citations of their
major works and key proponents, and these terms themselves rarely appear in the
text.To me the ideas themselves are important, not the labels we attach to them.
Second, I place Black women’s experiences and ideas at the center of analy-
sis. For those accustomed to having subordinate groups such as African-American
women frame our ideas in ways that are convenient for the more powerful, this
centrality can be unsettling. For example, White, middle-class, feminist readers
will find few references to so-called White feminist thought. I have deliberately
chosen not to begin with feminist tenets developed from the experiences of
White, middle-class, Western women and then insert the ideas and experiences
of African-American women. While I am quite familiar with a range of histori-
cal and contemporary White feminist theorists and certainly value their contri-
butions to our understanding of gender, this is not a book about what Black
women think of White feminist ideas or how Black women’s ideas compare with
those of prominent White feminist theorists. I take a similar stance regarding
Marxist social theory and Afrocentric thought. In order to capture the intercon-
nections of race, gender, and social class in Black women’s lives and their effect
on Black feminist thought, I explicitly rejected grounding my analysis in any sin-
gle theoretical tradition.
Oppressed groups are frequently placed in the situation of being listened to
only if we frame our ideas in the language that is familiar to and comfortable for
a dominant group.This requirement often changes the meaning of our ideas and
works to elevate the ideas of dominant groups. In this volume, by placing
African-American women’s ideas in the center of analysis, I not only privilege
those ideas but encourage White feminists, African-American men, and all oth-
ers to investigate the similarities and differences among their own standpoints
and those of African-American women.
viiPREFACE TO FIRST EDITION


--- PAGE 9 ---
Third, I deliberately include numerous quotations from a range of African-
American women thinkers, some well known and others rarely heard from.
Explicitly grounding my analysis in multiple voices highlights the diversity , rich-
ness, and power of Black women’s ideas as part of a long-standing African-
American women’s intellectual community . Moreover, this approach counteracts
the tendency of mainstream scholarship to canonize a few Black women as
spokespersons for the group and then refuse to listen to any but these select few.
While it is certainly appealing to receive recognition for one’s accomplishments,
my experiences as the “first,” “one of the few,” and the “only” have shown me
how effective selecting a few and using them to control the many can be in sti-
fling subordinate groups. Assuming that only a few exceptional Black women
have been able to do theory homogenizes African-American women and silences
the majority . In contrast, I maintain that theory and intellectual creativity are not
the province of a select few but instead emanate from a range of people.
Fourth, I used a distinctive methodology in preparing this manuscript which
illustrates how thought and action can work together in generating theory . Much
of my formal academic training has been designed to show me that I must alien-
ate myself from my communities, my family , and even my own self in order to
produce credible intellectual work. Instead of viewing the everyday as a negative
influence on my theorizing, I tried to see how the everyday actions and ideas of
the Black women in my life reflected the theoretical issues I claimed were so
important to them. Lacking grants, fellowships, release time, or other benefits
that allow scholars to remove themselves from everyday life and contemplate its
contours and meaning, I wrote this book while fully immersed in ordinary activ-
ities that brought me into contact with a variety of African-American women.
Through caring for my daughter, mentoring Black women undergraduates,
assisting a Brownie troop, and engaging in other “unscholarly” activities, I
reassessed my relationships with a range of African-American women and their
relationships with one another.Theory allowed me to see all of these associations
with fresh eyes, while concrete experiences challenged the worldviews offered
by theory . During this period of self-reflection, work on this manuscript inched
along, and I produced little “theory .” But without this involvement in the every-
day , the theory in this volume would have been greatly impoverished.
Fifth, in order to demonstrate the existence  and authenticity of Black femi-
nist thought, I present it as being coherent and basically complete. This portray-
al is in contrast to my actual view that theory is rarely this smoothly construct-
ed. Most theories are characterized by internal instability , are contested, and are
divided by competing emphases and interests.When I considered that Black fem-
inist thought is currently embedded in a larger political and intellectual context
that challenges its very right to exist, I decided not to stress the contradictions,
frictions, and inconsistencies of Black feminist thought. Instead I present Black
feminist thought as overly coherent, but I do so because I suspect that this
approach is more appropriate for this historical moment. I hope to see other vol-
viii BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 10 ---
umes emerge which will be more willing to present Black feminist thought as a
shifting mosaic of competing ideas and interests. I have focused on the pieces of
the mosaic—perhaps others will emphasize the disjunctures distinguishing the
pieces of the mosaic from one another.
Finally , writing this book has convinced me of the need to reconcile subjec-
tivity and objectivity in producing scholarship. Initially I found the movement
between my training as an “objective” social scientist and my daily experiences
as an African-American woman jarring. But reconciling what we have been
trained to see as opposites, a reconciliation signaled by my inserting myself in
the text by using “I,” “we,” and “our” instead of the more distancing terms
“they” and “one,” was freeing for me. I discovered that the both/and   concep-
tual stance of Black feminist thought allowed me to be both objective and sub-
jective, to possess both an Afrocentric and a feminist conciousness, and to be
both a respectable scholar and an acceptable mother.
When I began this book, I had to overcome my reluctance concerning com-
mitting my ideas to paper. “How can I as one person speak for such a large and
complex group as African-American women?” I asked myself. The answer is that
I cannot and should not because each of us must learn to speak for herself. In the
course of writing the book I came to see my work as being part of a larger
process, as one voice in a dialogue among people who have been silenced. I
know that I will never again possess the curious coexistence of naiveté and
unshakable confidence that I had when I portrayed Spring. But I hope to recap-
ture those elements of the voice of Spring that were honest, genuine, and
empowering. More important, my hope is that others who were formerly and are
currently silenced will find their voices. I, for one, certainly want to hear what
they have to say .
ixPREFACE TO FIRST EDITION


--- PAGE 11 ---
I initially wrote Black Feminist
Thought in order to help empower African-American women. I knew that when
an individual Black woman’s consciousness concerning how she understands
her everyday life undergoes change, she can become empowered. Such con-
sciousness may stimulate her to embark on a path of personal freedom, even if
it exists initially primarily in her own mind. If she is lucky enough to meet oth-
ers who are undergoing similar journeys, she and they can change the world
around them. If ideas, knowledge, and consciousness can have such an impact
on individual Black women, what effect might they have on Black women as a
group? I suspected that African-American women had created a collective
knowledge that served a similar purpose in fostering Black women’s empower-
ment. Black Feminist Thought aimed to document the existence of such knowl-
edge and sketch out its contours.
My goal of examining how knowledge can foster African-American
women’s empowerment remains intact. What has changed, however, is my
understanding of the meaning of empowerment and of the process needed for it
to happen. I now recognize that empowerment for African-American women
will never occur in a context characterized by oppression and social injustice. A
group can gain power in such situations by dominating others, but this is not the
type of empowerment that I found within Black women’s thinking. Reading
Black women’s intellectual work, I have come to see how it is possible to be both
centered in one’s own experiences and engaged in coalitions with others. In this
sense, Black feminist thought works on behalf of Black women, but does so in
conjunction with other similar social justice projects.
My deepening understanding of empowerment stimulated more complex
arguments of several ideas introduced in the first edition. For one, throughout
this revision, I emphasize Black feminist thought’s purpose, namely , fostering
both Black women’s empowerment and conditions of social justice. Both of these
themes were in the first edition, but neither was as fully developed as they are
here.This enhanced emphasis on empowerment and social justice permeates the
revised volume and is especially evident in Chapter 2. There I replace my efforts
Preface 
to
Second
Edition


--- PAGE 12 ---
to “define” Black feminist thought with a discussion that identifies its distin-
guishing features.This shift allowed me to emphasize particular dimensions that
characterize Black feminist thought but are not unique to it. It also created space
for other groups engaged in similar social justice projects to recognize dimen-
sions of their own thought and practice. I tried to reject the binary thinking that
frames so many Western definitions, including my earlier ones of Black feminist
thought and of Black feminist epistemology . Rather than drawing a firm line
around Black feminist thought that aims to classify entities as either being Black
feminist or not, I aimed for more fluidity without sacrificing logical rigor.
My analysis of oppression is also more complex in this edition, in part
because neither empowerment nor social justice can be achieved without some
sense of what one is trying to change. Whereas both editions rely on a paradigm
of intersecting oppressions to analyze Black women’s experiences, this edition
provides a more comprehensive treatment. Race, class, and gender studies were
being established when I wrote the first edition. Just as this area of inquiry has
greatly expanded since that writing, so has my treatment of this framework. For
example, in this edition, I broaden my analysis beyond race, class, and gender
and include sexuality as a form of oppression. Issues of social class and culture
also receive a more complex analysis in this edition. The first edition was espe-
cially concerned with issues of Black culture yet said less about social class.
Culture and class were both there, but not in the balance that characterizes this
edition. My arguments have not substantially changed, but I think they are more
effectively developed.
In this edition, I also place greater emphasis on the connections between
knowledge and power relations. I have always seen organic links between Black
feminism as a social justice project and Black feminist thought as its intellectual
center. Stated differently , the relationship between African-American women’s
activism and Black feminist thought as an intellectual and political philosophy
integral to that endeavor for me are inextricably linked.These links continue, but
as social conditions change, these ties must be rethought.
Rethinking empowerment also led me to incorporate new themes in this
edition. For example, this volume says much more about nation as a form of
oppression. Incorporating ideas about nation allowed me to introduce a transna-
tional, global dimension. Whereas the discussion here of transnational politics
and the global economy remains preliminary , I felt that it was important to
include it. U.S. Black women must continue to struggle for our empowerment,
but at the same time, we must recognize that U.S. Black feminism participates in
a larger context of struggling for social justice that transcends U.S. borders. In
particular, U.S. Black feminism should see commonalities that join women of
African descent as well as differences that emerge from our diverse national his-
tories.Whereas this edition remains centered on U.S. Black women, it raises ques-
tions concerning African-American women’s positionality within a global Black
feminism.
xiPREFACE TO SECOND EDITION


--- PAGE 13 ---
Providing more complex analyses of these themes required trying to retain
the main arguments of the first edition while changing their time-bounded
expression. Just as political and intellectual contexts change, so does the language
used to describe them. Some changes in terminology reflect benign shifts in
usage. Others signal more deep-seated political issues. The cases that are most
interesting occur when the same language continues to be used, whereas the
meaning attached to it changes. This type of shift certainly affected the term
Afrocentrism,a term that I used in the first edition. As understood in the 1970s and
1980s, Afrocentrism referred to African influences on African-American culture,
consciousness, behavior, and social organization. Despite considerable diversity
among thinkers who embraced this paradigm, Afrocentric analyses typically
claimed that people of African descent have created and re-created a valuable sys-
tem of ideas, social practices, and cultures that have been essential to Black survival.
In the 1990s, however, news media and some segments of U.S. higher education
attacked the term as well as all who used it. Effectively discrediting it, as of this
writing, the term Afrocentrism refers to the ideas of a small group of Black
Studies professionals with whom I have major areas of disagreeement, primarily
concerning the treatment of gender and sexuality . For me, the main ideas of
Afrocentrism, broadly defined, continue to have merit, but the term itself is too
value laden to be useful. Readers familiar with the first edition may notice that I
have retained the main ideas of a broadly defined Afrocentrism, but have substi-
tuted other terms.
Providing more complex analyses while trying to retain the main arguments
of the first edition led me to modify the overall organization of the volume. In
order to strengthen my analyses, I moved blocks of text and even some chapters,
all the while being careful to omit very little from the first edition. For example,
because of the developments in the field of sexuality , I expanded the two chap-
ters dealing with the sexual politics of Black womanhood and moved them ear-
lier in the volume.This new placement allowed me to strengthen ideas about sex-
uality in the remainder of the volume. Similarly , I moved much of the material
in the final chapter of the first edition into earlier chapters. In its place, here I
present a new chapter on the politics of empowerment that provides a new cap-
stone for the entire book. Readers familiar with the first edition will find that the
three chapters in Part III have been most affected by this reorganization of text.
These changes in Part III, however, enabled me to present a more theoretically
rich analysis of the connections between knowledge and power than that pro-
vided in the first edition. Overall, the arguments from the first edition are here
as well, but may appear in new and unexpected places.
I have learned much from revising the first edition of Black Feminist Thought.
In particular, the subjective experience of writing the first edition in the mid-
1980s and revising it now has been markedly different. I can remember how dif-
ficult it was for me to write the first edition.Then my concerns centered on com-
ing to voice, especially carving out the intellectual and political space that would
xii BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 14 ---
enable me to be heard. As the preface to the first edition points out, I saw my
individual struggles as emblematic of Black women’s collective struggles to claim
a similar intellectual and political space. The events surrounding the publication
of the first edition certainly involved considerable struggle. One month before
Black Feminist Thought was to be released, the entire staff that had worked on it
was summarily fired, victims of a corporate takeover. We were all in shock.
During its first year with its new publisher, the book received little promotion.
Despite its media invisibility ,Black Feminist Thought quickly exhausted its initial
print run. I was despondent. I had worked so hard, and it all seemed to have been
taken away so quickly . Fortunately , during that awful year before the book was
sold yet again to its current publisher, Black Feminist Thought’s readers kept it
alive. People shared copies, Xeroxed chapters, and engaged in effective word-of-
mouth advertising.To this day , I remain deeply grateful to all of the readers of the
first edition because without them, this book would have disappeared.
I am in another place now. I remain less preoccupied with coming to voice
because I know how quickly voice can be taken away . My concern now lies in
finding effective ways to use the voice that I have claimed while I have it. Just as
I confront new challenges, new challenges also face U.S. Black women and Black
feminist thought as our self-defined knowledge. Because Black feminist thought
is created under greatly changed conditions, I worry about its future. However,
as long as Black feminist thought, or whatever terms we choose in the future to
name this intellectual work, remains dedicated to fostering both Black women’s
empowerment and broader social justice, I plan on using my voice to support it.
I recognize that the struggle for justice is larger than any one group, individual,
or social movement. It certainly transcends any one book, including my own. For
me, social injustice is a collective problem that requires a collective solution.
When it comes to my work, the only thing that is essential is that it contribute
toward this end.
xiiiPREFACE TO SECOND EDITION


--- PAGE 15 ---
Writing this book was a collaborative effort, and I would like to thank those most
essential to its completion. For the three years that it took me to write the first edi-
tion, my husband, Roger L. Collins, and daughter, Valerie L. Collins, lived with my
uncertainty and struggles. During that time we all ate far too much fast food and cer-
tainly did not reside in a spotless house. But despite this book—or perhaps because
of it—we are a stronger family .
I also wish to thank those individuals who could not be with me while I pro-
duced this volume but whose contributions are reflected on every page. I drew much
of my inspiration from the many Black women who have touched my life. They
include my aunts, Mildred Walker, Marjorie Edwards, and Bertha Henry; teachers,
friends, and othermothers who helped me along the way , Pauli Murray , Consuelo,
Eloise “Muff” Smith, and Deborah Lewis; and countless Black women ancestors, both
famous and anonymous, whose struggles created the foundation that nurtured me. I
especially acknowledge the spirit of my mother, Eunice Randolph Hill. Often when I
became discouraged, I thought of her and told myself that if she could persist despite
the obstacles that she faced, then so could I. One great regret of my life is that my
mother and my daughter will never meet. I hope these pages will bring them closer
together.
Many of my colleagues listened to partially articulated ideas, read earlier drafts of
chapters, and generally offered the encouragement and intellectual stimulation that
enabled me to remain critical my own work yet persevere. Special thanks to Margaret
L. Andersen, Elsa Barkley Brown, Lynn Weber Cannon, Bonnie Thornton Dill, Cheryl
Townsend Gilkes, Evelyn Nakano Glenn, Sandra Harding, Deborah K. King, and
Maxine Baca Zinn for their enthusiastic support. I am especially indebted to the
Center for Research on Women at Memphis State Univerity for providing resources,
ideas, and overall assistance.Also, I am deeply grateful to Elizabeth Higginbotham and
Rosemarie Tong for reading this manuscript in its entirety and offering helpful sug-
gestions.
I have many people to thank for permission to reproduce copyright materals.
Earlier versions of Chapters 2 and 10 appeared in Signs 14 (4), Summer 1989, pp.
Acknowledgments


--- PAGE 16 ---
745–73, and Social Problems33 (6), Oct./Dec., 1986, pp. S14–S32. I also thank June
Jordan and South End Press for On Call, 1985, and Marilyn Richardson and Indiana
University Press for Maria W . Stewart, America’s First Black Women Political Writer,
edited by Marilyn Richardson, 1987. This book takes materials from Drylongso, 
A Self-Portrait of Black America,by John Langston Gwaltney , copyright 1980 by John
Langston Gwaltney , reprinted by permission of Random House, Inc.; “Strange
Fruit,” by Lewis Allan, copyright 1939, Edward B. Marks Music Company , copy-
right renewed, used by permission, all rights reserved; and “Respect,” lyrics and
music by Otis Redding, copyright 1965 and 1967 by Irving Music, Inc. (BMI), inter-
national copyright secured, all rights reserved.
One special person participated in virtually every phase of the first edition of this
project. As a research assistant, she prepared literature reviews, read and commented
on chapter drafts, and skillfully located even the most obscure materials. Her contri-
butions often surpassed the scholarly—she provided child care so I could work and
even fed my family’s cats. During our many long conversations, she patiently listened
to my ideas, bravely shared parts of her life that profoundly influenced my thinking,
and in many unspoken ways told me on a daily basis how important it was that I keep
going. Special thanks therefore go out to Patrice L. Dickerson, an emerging Black fem-
inist intellectual, a future colleague, and always a solid sister-friend.
For the institutional support that I needed to work on this second edition, I thank
Joseph Caruso, Dean of the College of Arts and Sciences at the University of
Cincinnati, John Brackett, Head of the Department of African-American Studies, and
Robin Sheets, Director of the Women’s Studies Program.The Charles Phelps Taft fund
at the University of Cincinnati also made an important contribution to this project.
The research budget that accompanied my being named Charles Phelps Taft Professor
of Sociology funded part of the expenses incurred in final manuscript preparation.
My students at the University of Cincinnati were also important in helping me
complete this project. The undergraduate majors in the Department of African-
American Studies proved to be invaluable in helping me clarify arguments concern-
ing power that became important in the second edition. I also thank the graduate stu-
dents in Women’s Studies who enrolled in my graduate seminars “Black Feminism:
Issues and Challenges” and “Black Women and the Politics of Sexuality .”The students
in these courses greatly enriched my understanding of issues of global feminism and
of the significance of sexuality . Special thanks goes out to Amber Green, my research
assistant for the year. We were both under considerable stress, but we both made it
through the year.
The staff at Routledge has been wonderful. Heidi Freund, my editor at
Routledge, who politely yet persistently kept asking me to do this revision until I
finally agreed to do it, deserves special credit. Also, I thank Shea Settimi, Anthony
Mancini, and other members of the staff at Routledge for making the production
process so positive for me. I also thank Norma McLemore for meticulous copyedit-
ing of the manuscript. As any writer knows, a good copyeditor is important.
Finally , I remain grateful for the numerous invitations that I have received over
xvACKNOWLEDGMENTS


--- PAGE 17 ---
the years to lecture on college campuses and at professional meetings. These trips
enabled me to work through the ideas in the second edition with diverse audiences.
Whereas the list of colleagues and new friends that I met during these visits is too
long to list, I appreciate all of the ideas that people shared with me. I especially thank
the students, parents, poets, high school teachers, activists, and ministers whom I met
on my trips.The conversations that I was able to have with you proved to be invalu-
able. I thank you all, and hope that you each see a bit of yourselves in these pages.
xvi BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 18 ---
In 183 1 Maria W . Stewart asked,“How
long shall the fair daughters of Africa be compelled to bury their minds and tal-
ents beneath a load of iron pots and kettles?” Orphaned at age five, bound out to
a clergyman’s family as a domestic servant, Stewart struggled to gather isolated
fragments of an education when and where she could. As the first American
woman to lecture in public on political issues and to leave copies of her texts, this
early U.S. Black woman intellectual foreshadowed a variety of themes taken up by
her Black feminist successors (Richardson 1987).
Maria Stewart challenged African-American women to reject the negative
images of Black womanhood so prominent in her times, pointing out that race,
gender, and class oppression were the fundamental causes of Black women’s
poverty. In an 1833 speech she proclaimed, “Like King Solomon, who put 
neither nail nor hammer to the temple, yet received the praise; so also have the
white Americans gained themselves a name . . . while in reality we have been their
principal foundation and support.” Stewart objected to the injustice of this situa-
tion: “We have pursued the shadow, they have obtained the substance; we have
performed the labor, they have received the profits; we have planted the vines, they
have eaten the fruits of them” (Richardson 1987, 59).
Maria Stewart was not content to point out the source of Black women’s
oppression. She urged Black women to forge self-definitions of self-reliance and
independence. “It is useless for us any longer to sit with our hands folded,
reproaching the whites; for that will never elevate us,” she exhorted. “Possess 
the spirit of independence....P ossess the spirit of men, bold and enterprising,
fearless and undaunted” (p. 53). To Stewart, the power of self-definition was
essential, for Black women’s survival was at stake. “Sue for your rights and priv-
ileges. Know the reason you cannot attain them. Weary them with your impor-
tunities.You can but die if you make the attempt; and we shall certainly die if you
do not” (p. 38).
1
THE
POLITICS
OF
BLACK 
FEMINIST
THOUGHT 
1
Part 1:
The Social Construction of
Black Feminist Thought


--- PAGE 19 ---
Stewart also challenged Black women to use their special roles as mothers to
forge powerful mechanisms of political action. “O, ye mothers, what a responsi-
bility rests on you!” Stewart preached. “You have souls committed to your
c h a r g e ....I t  i s  y o u  t h a t  must create in the minds of your little girls and boys a
thirst for knowledge, the love of virtue, . . . and the cultivation of a pure heart.”
Stewart recognized the magnitude of the task at hand. “Do not say you cannot
make any thing of your children; but say ...w e  w i l l  t r y ”( p .35).
Maria Stewart was one of the first U.S. Black feminists to champion the util-
ity of Black women’s relationships with one another in providing a community
for Black women’s activism and self-determination. “Shall it any longer be said of
the daughters of Africa, they have no ambition, they have no force?” she ques-
tioned. “By no means. Let every female heart become united, and let us raise a
fund ourselves; and at the end of one year and a half, we might be able to lay the
corner stone for the building of a High School, that the higher branches of knowl-
edge might be enjoyed by us” (p. 37). Stewart saw the potential for Black women’s
activism as educators. She advised, “Turn your attention to knowledge and
improvement; for knowledge is power” (p. 41).
Though she said little in her speeches about the sexual politics of her time,
her advice to African-American women suggests that she was painfully aware of
the sexual abuse visited upon Black women. She continued to “plead the cause of
virtue and the pure principles of morality” (p. 31) for Black women.And to those
Whites who thought that Black women were inherently inferior, Stewart offered
a biting response: “Our souls are fired with the same love of liberty and inde-
pendence with which your souls are fired. . . . [T]oo much of your blood flows
in our veins, too much of your color in our skins, for us not to possess your spir-
its” (p. 40).
Despite Maria Stewart’s intellectual prowess, the ideas of this extraordinary
woman come to us only in scattered fragments that not only suggest her bril-
liance but speak tellingly of the fate of countless Black women intellectuals. Many
Maria Stewarts exist, African-American women whose minds and talents have
been suppressed by the pots and kettles symbolic of Black women’s subordina-
tion (Guy-Sheftall 1986).
1 Far too many African-American women intellectuals
have labored in isolation and obscurity and, like Zora Neale Hurston, lie buried
in unmarked graves.
Some have been more fortunate, for they have become known to us, largely
through the efforts of contemporary Black women scholars (Hine et al. 1993;
Guy-Sheftall 1995b). Like Alice Walker, these scholars sense that “a people do not
throw their geniuses away” and that “if they are thrown away , it is our duty as
artists, scholars, and witnesses for the future to collect them again for the sake of
our children,...i f  necessary , bone by bone” (Walker 1983, 92).
This painstaking process of collecting the ideas and actions of “thrown
away” Black women like Maria Stewart has revealed one important discovery .
Black women intellectuals have laid a vital analytical foundation for a distinctive
2 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 20 ---
standpoint on self, community , and society and, in doing so, created a multifac-
eted,African-American women’s intellectual tradition.While clear discontinuities
in this tradition exist—times when Black women’s voices were strong, and oth-
ers when assuming a more muted tone was essential—one striking dimension of
the ideas of Maria W . Stewart and her successors is the thematic consistency of
their work.
If such a rich intellectual tradition exists, why has it remained virtually invis-
ible until now. In 1905 Fannie Barrier Williams lamented, “The colored girl . . .
is not known and hence not believed in; she belongs to a race that is best desig-
nated by the term ‘problem,’ and she lives beneath the shadow of that problem
which envelops and obscures her” (Williams 1987, 150). Why are African-
American women and our ideas not known and not believed in?
The shadow obscuring this complex Black women’s intellectual tradition is
neither accidental nor benign. Suppressing the knowledge produced by any
oppressed group makes it easier for dominant groups to rule because the seem-
ing absence of  dissent suggests that subordinate groups willingly collaborate in
their own victimization (Scott 1985). Maintaining the invisibility of Black
women and our ideas not only in the United States, but in Africa, the Caribbean,
South America, Europe, and other places where Black women now live, has been
critical in maintaining social inequalities. Black women engaged in reclaiming
and constructing Black women’s knowledges often point to the politics of sup-
pression that affect their projects. For example, several authors in Heidi Mirza’s
(1997) edited volume on Black British feminism identify their invisibility and
silencing in the contemporary United Kingdom. Similarly , South African busi-
nesswoman Danisa Baloyi describes her astonishment at the invisibility of
African women in U.S. scholarship: “As a student doing research in the United
States, I was amazed by the [small] amount of information on Black South
African women, and shocked that only a minuscule amount was actually writ-
ten by Black women themselves” (Baloyi 1995, 41).
Despite this suppression, U.S. Black women have managed to do intellectual
work, and to have our ideas matter. Sojourner Truth, Anna Julia Cooper, Ida B.
Wells-Barnett, Mary McLeod Bethune,Toni Morrison, Barbara Smith, and count-
less others have consistently struggled to make themselves heard. African women
writers such as Ama Ata Aidoo, Buchi Emecheta, and Ellen Kuzwayo have used
their voices to raise important issues that affect Black African women (James
1990). Like the work of Maria W . Stewart and that of Black women transnation-
ally , African-American women’s intellectual work has aimed to foster Black
women’s activism.
This dialectic of oppression and activism, the tension between the suppres-
sion of African-American women’s ideas and our intellectual activism in the face
of that suppression, constitutes the politics of U.S. Black feminist thought. More
important, understanding this dialectical relationship is critical in assessing how
U.S. Black feminist thought—its core themes, epistemological significance, and
3THE POLITICS OF BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 21 ---
connections to domestic and transnational Black feminist practice—is fundamen-
tally embedded in a political context that has challenged its very right to exist.
The Suppression of Black Feminist Thought
The vast majority of African-American women were brought to the United
States to work as slaves in a situation of oppression. Oppression describes any
unjust situation where, systematically and over a long period of time, one group
denies another group access to the resources of society . Race, class, gender, sex-
uality , nation, age, and ethnicity among others constitute major forms of
oppression in the United States. However, the convergence of race, class, and
gender oppression characteristic of U.S. slavery shaped all subsequent relation-
ships that women of African descent had within Black American families and
communities, with employers, and among one another. It also created the polit-
ical context for Black women’s intellectual work.
African-American women’s oppression has encompassed three interdepen-
dent dimensions. First, the exploitation of Black women’s labor essential to U.S.
capitalism—the “iron pots and kettles” symbolizing Black women’s long-stand-
ing ghettoization in service occupations—represents the economic dimension of
oppression (Davis 1981; Marable 1983; Jones 1985; Amott and Matthaei 1991).
Survival for most African-American women has been such an all-consuming
activity that most have had few opportunities to do intellectual work as it has
been traditionally defined. The drudgery of enslaved African-American women’s
work and the grinding poverty of “free” wage labor in the rural South tellingly
illustrate the high costs Black women have paid for survival. The millions of
impoverished African-American women ghettoized in Philadelphia,
Birmingham, Oakland, Detroit, and other U.S. inner cities demonstrate the con-
tinuation of these earlier forms of Black women’s economic exploitation (Brewer
1993; Omolade 1994).
Second, the political dimension of oppression has denied African-American
women the rights and privileges routinely extended to White male citizens
(Burnham 1987; Scales-Trent 1989; Berry 1994). Forbidding Black women to
vote, excluding African-Americans and women from public office, and with-
holding equitable treatment in the criminal justice system all substantiate the
political subordination of Black women. Educational institutions have also fos-
tered this pattern of disenfranchisement. Past practices such as denying literacy
to slaves and relegating Black women to underfunded, segregated Southern
schools worked to ensure that a quality education for Black women remained the
exception rather than the rule (Mullings 1997). The large numbers of young
Black women in inner cities and impoverished rural areas who continue to leave
school before attaining full literacy represent the continued efficacy of the polit-
ical dimension of Black women’s oppression.
4 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 22 ---
Finally , controlling images applied to Black women that originated during
the slave era attest to the ideological dimension of U.S. Black women’s oppres-
sion (King 1973; D. White 1985; Carby 1987; Morton 1991). Ideology refers
to the body of ideas reflecting the interests of a group of people. Within U.S.
culture, racist and sexist ideologies permeate the social structure to such a
degree that they become hegemonic, namely , seen as natural, normal, and
inevitable. In this context, certain assumed qualities that are attached to Black
women are used to justify oppression. From the mammies, jezebels, and
breeder women of slavery to the smiling Aunt Jemimas on pancake mix boxes,
ubiquitous Black prostitutes, and ever-present welfare mothers of contempo-
rary popular culture, negative stereotypes applied to African-American women
have been fundamental to Black women’s oppression.
Taken together, the supposedly seamless web of economy , polity , and ideol-
ogy function as a highly effective system of social control designed to keep
African-American women in an assigned, subordinate place.This larger system of
oppression works to suppress the ideas of Black women intellectuals and to pro-
tect elite White male interests and worldviews. Denying African-American
women the credentials to become literate certainly excluded most African-
American women from positions as scholars, teachers, authors, poets, and crit-
ics. Moreover, while Black women historians, writers, and social scientists have
long existed, until recently these women have not held leadership positions in
universities, professional associations, publishing concerns, broadcast media, and
other social institutions of knowledge validation. Black women’s exclusion from
positions of power within mainstream institutions has led to the elevation of elite
White male ideas and interests and the corresponding suppression of Black
women’s ideas and interests in traditional scholarship (Higginbotham 1989;
Morton 1991; Collins 1998a, 95–123). Moreover, this historical exclusion means
that stereotypical images of Black women permeate popular culture and public
policy (Wallace 1990; Lubiano 1992; Jewell 1993).
U.S. and European women’s studies have challenged the seemingly hege-
monic ideas of elite White men. Ironically , Western feminisms have also sup-
pressed Black women’s ideas (duCille 1996, 81–119). Even though Black women
intellectuals have long expressed a distinctive African-influenced and feminist
sensibility about how race and class intersect in structuring gender, historically
we have not been full participants in White feminist organizations (Giddings
1984; Zinn et al. 1986; Caraway 1991). As a result, African-American, Latino,
Native American, and Asian-American women have criticized Western feminisms
for being racist and overly concerned with White, middle-class women’s issues
(Moraga and Anzaldua 1981; Smith 1982a; Dill 1983; Davis 1989).
Traditionally , many U.S. White feminist scholars have resisted having Black
women as full colleagues. Moreover, this historical suppression of Black women’s
ideas has had a pronounced influence on feminist theory . One pattern of sup-
pression is that of omission.Theories advanced as being universally applicable to
5THE POLITICS OF BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 23 ---
women as a group upon closer examination appear greatly limited by the White,
middle-class, and Western origins of their proponents. For example, Nancy
Chodorow’s (1978) work on sex role socialization and Carol Gilligan’s (1982)
study of the moral development of women both rely heavily on White, middle-
class samples. While these two classics made key contributions to feminist theory ,
they simultaneously promoted the notion of a generic woman who is White and
middle class. The absence of Black feminist ideas from these and other studies
placed them in a much more tenuous position to challenge the hegemony of
mainstream scholarship on behalf of all women.
Another pattern of suppression lies in paying lip service to the need for
diversity , but changing little about one’s own practice. Currently , some U.S.White
women who possess great competence in researching a range of issues acknowl-
edge the need for diversity , yet omit women of color from their work. These
women claim that they are unqualified to understand or even speak of “Black
women’s experiences” because they themselves are not Black. Others include a
few safe, “hand-picked” Black women’s voices to avoid criticisms that they are
racist. Both examples reflect a basic unwillingness by many U.S. White feminists
to alter the paradigms that guide their work.
A more recent pattern of suppression involves incorporating, changing, and
thereby depoliticizing Black feminist ideas. The growing popularity of post-
modernism in U.S. higher education in the 1990s, especially within literary crit-
icism and cultural studies, fosters a climate where symbolic inclusion often sub-
stitutes for bona fide substantive changes. Because interest in Black women’s
work has reached occult status, suggests Ann duCille (1996), it “increasingly
marginalizes both the black women critics and scholars who excavated the fields
in question and their black feminist ‘daughters’ who would further develop
those fields” (p. 87). Black feminist critic Barbara Christian (1994), a pioneer
in creating Black women’s studies in the U.S. academy , queries whether Black
feminism can survive the pernicious politics of resegregation. In discussing  the
politics of a new multiculturalism, Black feminist critic Hazel Carby (1992)
expresses dismay at the growing situation of symbolic inclusion, in which the
texts of Black women writers are welcome in the multicultural classroom while
actual Black women are not.
Not all White Western feminists participate in these diverse patterns of sup-
pression. Some do try to build coalitions across racial and other markers of dif-
ference, often with noteworthy results. Works by Elizabeth Spelman (1988),
Sandra Harding (1986, 1998), Margaret Andersen (1991), Peggy McIntosh
(1988), Mab Segrest (1994), Anne Fausto-Sterling (1995), and other individual
U.S. White feminist thinkers reflect sincere efforts to develop a multiracial,
diverse feminism. However, despite their efforts, these concerns linger on.
Like feminist scholarship, the diverse strands of African-American social and
political thought have also challenged mainstream scholarship. However, Black
social and political thought has been limited by both the reformist postures
6 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 24 ---
toward change assumed by many U.S. Black intellectuals (Cruse 1967; West
1977–78) and the secondary status afforded the ideas and experiences of African-
American women. Adhering to a male-defined ethos that far too often equates
racial progress with the acquisition of an ill-defined manhood has left much U.S.
Black thought with a prominent masculinist bias.
In this case the patterns of suppressing Black women’s ideas have been sim-
ilar yet different.Though Black women have played little or no part in dominant
academic discourse and White feminist arenas, we have long been included in the
organizational structures of Black civil society . U.S. Black women’s acceptance of
subordinate roles in Black organizations does not mean that we wield little
authority or that we experience patriarchy in the same way as do White women
in White organizations (Evans 1979; Gilkes 1985). But with the exception of
Black women’s organizations, male-run organizations have historically either not
stressed Black women’s issues (Beale 1970; Marable 1983), or have done so
under duress. For example, Black feminist activist Pauli Murray (1970) found
that from its founding in 1916 to 1970, the Journal of Negro History published
only five articles devoted exclusively to Black women. Evelyn Brooks
Higginbotham’s (1993) historical monograph on Black women in Black Baptist
churches records African-American women’s struggles to raise issues that con-
cerned women. Even progressive Black organizations have not been immune
from gender discrimination. Civil rights activist Ella Baker’s experiences in the
Southern Christian Leadership Conference illustrate one form that suppressing
Black women’s ideas and talents can take. Ms. Baker virtually ran the entire orga-
nization, yet had to defer to the decision-making authority of the exclusively
male leadership group (Cantarow 1980). Civil rights activist Septima Clark
describes similar experiences: “I found all over the South that whatever the man
said had to be right. They had the whole say . The woman couldn’t say a thing”
(C. Brown 1986, 79). Radical African-American women also can find themselves
deferring to male authority . In her autobiography , Elaine Brown (1992), a par-
ticipant and subsequent leader of the 1960s radical organization the Black
Panther Party for Self-Defense, discusses the sexism expressed by Panther men.
Overall, even though Black women intellectuals have asserted their right to speak
both as African-Americans and as women, historically these women have not
held top leadership positions in Black organizations and have frequently strug-
gled within them to express Black feminist ideas (Giddings 1984).
Much contemporary U.S. Black feminist thought reflects Black women’s
increasing willingness to oppose gender inequality within Black civil society .
Septima Clark describes this transformation:
I used to feel that women couldn’t speak up, because when district meet-
ings were being held at my home . . . I didn’t feel as if I could tell them
what I had in mind . . . But later on, I found out that women had a lot to
say , and what they had to say was really worthwhile....S o  w e  started talk-
ing, and have been talking quite a bit since that time. (C. Brown 1986, 82)
7THE POLITICS OF BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 25 ---
African-American women intellectuals have been “talking quite a bit” since
1970 and have insisted that the masculinist bias in Black social and political
thought, the racist bias in feminist theory , and the heterosexist bias in both be
corrected (see, e.g., Bambara 1970; Dill 1979; Jordan 1981; Combahee River
Collective 1982; Lorde 1984).
Within Black civil society , the increasing visibility of Black women’s ideas
did not go unopposed. The virulent reaction to earlier Black women’s writings
by some Black men, such as Robert Staples’s (1979) analysis of Ntozake Shange’s
(1975) choreopoem, For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide,and Michele
Wallace’s (1978) controversial volume, Black Macho and the Myth of the
Superwoman, illustrates the difficulty of challenging the masculinist bias in Black
social and political thought. Alice Walker encountered similarly hostile reactions
to her publication of The Color Purple. In describing the response of African-
American men to the outpouring of publications by Black women writers in the
1970s and 1980s, Calvin Hernton offers an incisive criticism of the seeming
tenacity of a masculinist bias:
The telling thing about the hostile attitude of black men toward black
women writers is that they interpret the new thrust of the women as
being “counter-productive” to the historical goal of the Black struggle.
Revealingly , while black men have achieved outstanding recognition
throughout the history of black writing, black women have not accused
the men of collaborating with the enemy and setting back the progress of
the race. (1985, 5)
Not all Black male reaction during this period was hostile. For example,
Manning Marable (1983) devotes an entire chapter in How Capitalism
Underdeveloped Black America to how sexism has been a primary deterrent 
to Black community development. Following Marable’s lead, work by Haki
Madhubuti (1990), Cornel West (1993), Michael Awkward (1996), Michael
Dyson (1996), and others suggests that some U.S. Black male thinkers have
taken Black feminist thought seriously . Despite the diverse ideological perspec-
tives expressed by these writers, each seemingly recognizes the importance of
Black women’s ideas.
Black Feminist Thought as Critical Social Theory
Even if they appear to be otherwise, situations such as the suppression of Black
women’s ideas within traditional scholarship and the struggles within the cri-
tiques of that established knowledge are inherently unstable. Conditions in the
wider political economy simultaneously shape Black women’s subordination
and foster activism. On some level, people who are oppressed usually know it.
For African-American women, the knowledge gained at intersecting oppres-
sions of race, class, and gender provides the stimulus for crafting and passing
8 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 26 ---
on the subjugated knowledge2 of  Black women’s critical social theory (Collins
1998a, 3–10).
As an historically oppressed group, U.S. Black women have produced social
thought designed to oppose oppression. Not only does the form assumed by this
thought diverge from standard academic theory—it can take the form of poetry ,
music, essays, and the like—but the purpose of Black women’s collective thought
is distinctly different. Social theories emerging from and/or on behalf of U.S.
Black women and other historically oppressed groups aim to find ways to escape
from, survive in, and/or oppose prevailing social and economic injustice. In the
United States, for example, African-American social and political thought ana-
lyzes institutionalized racism, not to help it work more efficiently , but to resist it.
Feminism advocates women’s emancipation and empowerment, Marxist social
thought aims for a more equitable society , while queer theory opposes hetero-
sexism. Beyond U.S. borders, many women from oppressed groups also struggle
to understand new forms of injustice. In a transnational, postcolonial context,
women within new and often Black-run nation-states in the Caribbean, Africa,
and Asia struggle with new meanings attached to ethnicity , citizenship status, and
religion. In increasingly multicultural European nation-states, women migrants
from former colonies encounter new forms of subjugation (Yuval-Davis 1997).
Social theories expressed by women emerging from these diverse groups typi-
cally do not arise from the rarefied atmosphere of their imaginations. Instead,
social theories reflect women’s efforts to come to terms with lived experiences
within intersecting oppressions of race, class, gender, sexuality , ethnicity , nation,
and religion (see, e.g., Alexander and Mohanty 1997; Mirza 1997).
Black feminist thought, U.S. Black women’s critical social theory , reflects sim-
ilar power relationships. For African-American women, critical social theory
encompasses bodies of knowledge and sets of institutional practices that actively
grapple with the central questions facing U.S. Black women as a collectivity . The
need for such thought arises because African-American women as a group remain
oppressed within a U.S. context characterized by injustice. This neither means
that all African-American women within that group are oppressed in the same
way , nor that some U.S. Black women do not suppress others. Black feminist
thought’s identity as a “critical” social theory lies in its commitment to justice,
both for U.S. Black women as a collectivity and for that of other similarly
oppressed groups.
Historically , two factors stimulated U.S. Black women’s critical social theory .
For one, prior to World War II, racial segregation in urban housing became so
entrenched that the majority of African-American women lived in self-contained
Black neighborhoods where their children attended overwhelmingly Black
schools, and where they themselves belonged to all-Black churches and similar
community organizations. Despite the fact that ghettoization was designed to
foster the political control and economic exploitation of Black Americans
(Squires 1994), these all-Black neighborhoods simultaneously provided a sepa-
9THE POLITICS OF BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 27 ---
rate space where African-American women and men could use African-derived
ideas to craft distinctive oppositional knowledges designed to resist racial
oppression.
Every social group has a constantly evolving worldview that it uses to order
and evaluate its own experiences (Sobel 1979). For African-Americans this
worldview originated in the cosmologies of diverse West African ethnic groups
(Diop 1974). By retaining and reworking significant elements of these West
African cultures, communities of enslaved Africans offered their members expla-
nations for slavery alternative to those advanced by slave owners (Gutman 1976;
Webber 1978; Sobel 1979).These African-derived ideas also laid the foundation
for the rules of a distinctive Black American civil society . Later on, confining
African-Americans to all-Black areas in the rural South and Northern urban ghettos
fostered the solidification of a distinctive ethos in Black civil society regarding
language (Smitherman 1977), religion (Sobel 1979; Paris 1995), family structure
(Sudarkasa 1981b), and community politics (Brown 1994). While essential to
the survival of U.S. Blacks as a group and expressed differently by individual
African-Americans, these knowledges remained simultaneously hidden from and
suppressed by Whites. Black oppositional knowledges existed to resist injustice,
but they also remained subjugated.
As mothers, othermothers, teachers, and churchwomen in essentially all-
Black rural communities and urban neighborhoods, U.S. Black women partici-
pated in constructing and reconstructing these oppositional knowledges. Through
the lived experiences gained within their extended families and communities,
individual African-American women fashioned their own ideas about the mean-
ing of Black womanhood. When these ideas found collective expression, Black
women’s self-definitions enabled them to refashion African-influenced concep-
tions of self and community . These self-definitions of Black womanhood were
designed to resist the negative controlling images of Black womanhood advanced
by Whites as well as the discriminatory social practices that these controlling
images supported. In all, Black women’s participation in crafting a constantly
changing African-American culture fostered distinctively Black and women-
centered worldviews.
Another factor that stimulated U.S. Black women’s critical social theory lay in
the common experiences they gained from their jobs. Prior to World War II, U.S.
Black women worked primarily in two occupations—agriculture and domestic
work. Their ghettoization in domestic work sparked an important contradiction.
Domestic work fostered U.S. Black women’s economic exploitation, yet it simul-
taneously created the conditions for distinctively Black and female forms of resis-
tance. Domestic work allowed African-American women to see White elites, both
actual and aspiring, from perspectives largely obscured from Black men and from
these groups themselves. In their White “families,” Black women not only per-
formed domestic duties but frequently formed strong ties with the children they
nurtured, and with the employers themselves. On one level this insider relation-
10 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 28 ---
ship was satisfying to all concerned. Accounts of Black domestic workers stress
the sense of self-affirmation the women experienced at seeing racist ideology
demystified. But on another level these Black women knew that they could never
belong to their White “families.”They were economically exploited workers and
thus would remain outsiders. The result was being placed in a curious outsider-
within social location (Collins 1986b), a peculiar marginality that stimulated 
a distinctive Black women’s perspective on a variety of themes (see, e.g.,
Childress 1986).
Taken together, Black women’s participation in constructing African-
American culture in all-Black settings and the distinctive perspectives gained
from their outsider-within placement in domestic work provide the material
backdrop for a unique Black women’s standpoint. When armed with cultural
beliefs honed in Black civil society , many Black women who found themselves
doing domestic work often developed distinct views of the contradictions
between the dominant group’s actions and ideologies. Moreover, they often
shared their ideas with other African-American women. Nancy White, a Black
inner-city resident, explores the connection between experience and beliefs:
Now, I understand all these things from living. But you can’t lay up on
these flowery beds of ease and think that you are running your life, too.
Some women, white women, can run their husband’s lives for a while, but
most of them have to . . . see what he tells them there is to see. If he tells
them that they ain’t seeing what they know they are seeing, then they have
to just go on like it wasn’t there! (in Gwaltney 1980, 148)
Not only does this passage speak to the power of the dominant group to sup-
press the knowledge produced by subordinate groups, but it illustrates how
being in outsider-within locations can foster new angles of vision on oppres-
sion. Ms.White’s Blackness makes her a perpetual outsider. She could never be a
White middle-class woman lying on a “flowery bed of ease.” But her work of
caring for White women allowed her an insider’s view of some of the contra-
dictions between White women thinking that they are running their lives and
the patriarchal power and authority in their  households.
Practices such as these, whether experienced oneself or learned by listening
to African-American women who have had them, have encouraged many U.S.
Black women to question the contradictions between dominant ideologies of
American womanhood and U.S. Black women’s devalued status. If women are
allegedly passive and fragile, then why are Black women treated as “mules” and
assigned heavy cleaning chores? If good mothers are supposed to stay at home
with their children, then why are U.S. Black women on public assistance forced
to find jobs and leave their children in day care? If women’s highest calling is to
become mothers, then why are Black teen mothers pressured to use Norplant and
Depo Provera? In the absence of a viable Black feminism that investigates how
intersecting oppressions of race, gender, and class foster these contradictions,
11THE POLITICS OF BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 29 ---
the angle of vision created by being deemed devalued workers and failed moth-
ers could easily be turned inward, leading to internalized oppression. But the
legacy of struggle among U.S. Black women suggests that a collectively shared,
Black women’s oppositional knowledge has long existed.This collective wisdom
in turn has spurred U.S. Black women to generate a more specialized knowledge,
namely , Black feminist thought as critical social theory . Just as fighting injustice
lay at the heart of U.S. Black women’s experiences, so did analyzing and creating
imaginative responses to injustice characterize the core of Black feminist
thought.
Historically , while they often disagreed on its expression—some U.S. Black
women were profoundly reformist while more radical thinkers bordered on the
revolutionary—African-American women intellectuals who were nurtured in
social conditions of racial segregation strove to develop Black feminist thought as
critical social theory . Regardless of social class and other differences among U.S.
Black women, all were in some way affected by intersecting oppressions of race,
gender, and class. The economic, political, and ideological dimensions of U.S.
Black women’s oppression suppressed the intellectual production of individual
Black feminist thinkers. At the same time, these same social conditions simulta-
neously stimulated distinctive patterns of U.S. Black women’s activism that also
influenced and was influenced by individual Black women thinkers. Thus, the
dialectic of oppression and activism characterizing  U.S. Black women’s experi-
ences with intersecting oppressions also influenced the ideas and actions of Black
women intellectuals.
The exclusion of Black women’s ideas from mainstream academic discourse
and the curious placement of African-American women intellectuals in feminist
thinking, Black social and political theories, and in other important thought such
as U.S. labor studies has meant that U.S. Black women intellectuals have found
themselves in outsider-within positions in many academic endeavors (Hull et al.
1982; Christian 1989). The assumptions on which full group membership are
based—Whiteness for feminist thought, maleness for Black social and political
thought, and the combination for mainstream scholarship—all negate Black
women’s realities. Prevented from becoming full insiders in any of these areas of
inquiry , Black women remained in outsider-within locations, individuals whose
marginality provided a distinctive angle of vision on these intellectual and polit-
ical entities.
Alice Walker’s work exemplifies these fundamental influences within Black
women’s intellectual traditions. Walker describes how her outsider-within loca-
tion influenced her thinking: “I believe . . . that it was from this period—from
my solitary , lonely position, the position of an outcast—that I began really to 
see people and things, really to notice relationships” (Walker 1983, 244).
Walker realizes that “the gift of loneliness is sometimes a radical vision of soci-
ety or one’s people that has not previously been taken into account” (p. 264).
And yet marginality is not the only influence on her work. By reclaiming the
12 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 30 ---
works of Zora Neale Hurston and in other ways placing Black women’s experi-
ences and culture at the center of her work, she draws on alternative Black 
feminist worldviews.
Developing Black Feminist Thought
Starting from the assumption that African-American women have created inde-
pendent, oppositional yet subjugated knowledges concerning our own subordi-
nation, contemporary U.S. Black women intellectuals are engaged in the struggle
to reconceptualize all dimensions of the dialectic of oppression and activism as
it applies to African-American women. Central to this enterprise is reclaiming
Black feminist intellectual traditions (see, e.g., Harley and Terborg-Penn 1978;
Hull et al. 1982; James and Busia 1993; and Guy-Sheftall 1995a, 1995b).
For many U.S. Black women intellectuals, this task of reclaiming Black
women’s subjugated knowledge takes on special meaning. Knowing that the
minds and talents of our grandmothers, mothers, and sisters have been sup-
pressed stimulates many contributions to the growing field of Black women’s
studies (Hull et al. 1982). Alice Walker describes how this sense of purpose
affects her work: “In my own work I write not only what I want to read—under-
standing fully and indelibly that if I don’t do it no one else is so vitally inter-
ested, or capable of doing it to my satisfaction—I write all the things I should
have been able to read ” (Walker 1983, 13).
Reclaiming Black women’s ideas involves discovering, reinterpreting, and,
in many cases, analyzing for the first time the works of individual U.S. Black
women thinkers who were so extraordinary that they did manage to have their
ideas preserved. In some cases this process involves locating unrecognized 
and unheralded works, scattered and long out of print. Marilyn Richardson’s
(1987) painstaking editing of the writings and speeches of Maria Stewart, and
Mary Helen Washington’s (1975, 1980, 1987) collections of Black women’s
writings typify this process. Similarly , Alice Walker’s (1979a) efforts to have 
Zora Neale Hurston’s unmarked grave recognized parallel her intellectual quest
to honor Hurston’s important contributions to Black feminist literary traditions.
Reclaiming Black women’s ideas also involves discovering, reinterpreting,
and analyzing the ideas of subgroups within the larger collectivity of U.S. Black
women who have been silenced. For example, burgeoning scholarship by and
about Black lesbians reveals a diverse and complex history . Gloria Hull’s (1984)
careful compilation of the journals of Black feminist intellectual Alice Dunbar-
Nelson illustrates the difficulties of being closeted yet still making major contri-
butions to African-American social and political thought. Audre Lorde’s (1982)
autobiography ,Zami, provides a book-length treatment of Black lesbian com-
munities in New York. Similarly , Kennedy and Davis’s (1994) history of the for-
13THE POLITICS OF BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 31 ---
mation of lesbian communities in 1940s and 1950s Buffalo, New York, strives to
understand how racial segregation influenced constructions of lesbian identities.
Reinterpreting existing works through new theoretical frameworks is another
dimension of  developing Black feminist thought. In Black feminist literary crit-
icism, this process is exemplified by Barbara Christian’s (1985) landmark volume
on Black women writers, Mary Helen Washington’s (1987) reassessment of
anger and voice in Maud Martha, a much-neglected work by novelist and poet
Gwendolyn Brooks, and Hazel Carby’s (1987) use of the lens of race, class, and
gender to reinterpret the works of nineteenth-century Black women novelists.
Within Black feminist historiography the tremendous strides that have been
made in U.S. Black women’s history are evident in Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham’s
(1989) analysis of the emerging concepts and paradigms in Black women’s his-
tory , her study of women in the Black Baptist Church (1993), Stephanie Shaw’s
(1996) study of Black professional women workers during the Jim Crow era, and
the landmark volume Black Women in the United States: An Historical Encyclopedia
(Hine et al. 1993).
Developing Black feminist thought also involves searching for its expression
in alternative institutional locations and among women who are not commonly
perceived as intellectuals. As defined in this volume, Black women intellectuals
are neither all academics nor found primarily in the Black middle class. Instead,
all U.S. Black women who somehow contribute to Black feminist thought as crit-
ical social theory are deemed to be “intellectuals.”They may be highly educated.
Many are not. For example, nineteenth-century Black feminist activist Sojourner
Truth is not typically seen as an intellectual.
3 Because she could neither read nor
write, much of what we know about her has been recorded by other people. One
of her most famous speeches, that delivered at the 1851 women’s  rights con-
vention in Akron, Ohio, comes to us in a report written by a feminist abolition-
ist some time after the event itself (Painter 1993). We do not know what Truth
actually said, only what the recorder claims that she said. Despite this limitation,
in that speech Truth reportedly provides an incisive analysis of the definition of
the term woman forwarded in the mid-1800s:
That man over there says women need to be helped into carriages, and 
lifted over ditches, and to have the best place everywhere. Nobody ever
helps me into carriages, or over mud puddles, or gives me any best place!
And ain’t I a woman? Look at me! Look at my arm! I have ploughed, and
planted, and gathered into barns, and no man could head me! And ain’t I
a woman? I could work as much and eat as much as a man—when I could
get it—and bear the lash as well! And ain’t I a woman? I have borne thir-
teen children, and seen them most all sold off to slavery , and when I cried
out with my mother’s grief, none but Jesus heard me! And ain’t I a
woman? (Loewenberg and Bogin 1976, 235)
By using the contradictions between her life as an African-American woman
and the qualities ascribed to women, Sojourner Truth exposes the concept of
14 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 32 ---
woman as being culturally constructed. Her life as a second-class citizen has been
filled with hard physical labor, with no assistance from men. Her question, “and
ain’t I a woman?” points to the contradictions inherent in blanket use of the term
woman. For those who question Truth’s femininity , she invokes her status as a
mother of thirteen children, all sold off into slavery , and asks again, “and ain’t I
a woman?” Rather than accepting the existing assumptions about what a woman
is and then trying to prove that she fit the standards, Truth challenged the very
standards themselves. Her actions demonstrate the process of deconstruction—
namely , exposing a concept as ideological or culturally constructed rather than 
as natural or a simple reflection of reality (Collins 1998a, 137–45). By decon-
structing the concept woman,Truth proved herself to be a formidable intellectual.
And yet Truth was a former slave who never learned to read or write.
Examining the contributions of women like Sojourner Truth suggests that
the concept of intellectual must itself be deconstructed. Not all Black women
intellectuals are educated. Not all Black women intellectuals work in academia.
Furthermore, not all highly educated Black women, especially those who are
employed in U.S. colleges and universities, are automatically intellectuals. U.S.
Black women intellectuals are not a female segment of William E. B. DuBois’s
notion of the “talented tenth.” One is neither born an intellectual nor does one
become one by earning a degree. Rather, doing intellectual work of the sort envi-
sioned within Black feminism requires a process of self-conscious struggle on
behalf of Black women, regardless of the actual social location where that work
occurs.
These are not idle concerns within new power relations that have greatly
altered the fabric of U.S. and Black civil society . Race, class, and gender still con-
stitute intersecting oppressions, but the ways in which they are now organized
to produce social injustice differ from prior eras. Just as theories, epistemologies,
and facts produced by any group of individuals represent the standpoints and
interests of their creators, the very definition of who is legitimated to do intel-
lectual work is not only politically contested, but is changing (Mannheim 1936;
Gramsci 1971). Reclaiming Black feminist intellectual traditions involves much
more than developing Black feminist analyses using standard epistemological cri-
teria. It also involves challenging the very terms of intellectual discourse itself.
Assuming new angles of vision on which U.S. Black women are, in fact,
intellectuals, and on their seeming dedication to contributing to Black feminist
thought raises new questions about the production of this oppositional knowl-
edge. Historically , much of the Black women’s intellectual tradition occurred in
institutional locations other than the academy . For example, the music of work-
ing-class Black women blues singers of the 1920 and 1930s is often seen as one
important site outside academia for this intellectual tradition (Davis 1998).
Whereas Ann duCille (1993) quite rightly warns us about viewing Black
women’s blues through rose-colored glasses, the fact remains that far more Black
women listened to Bessie Smith and Ma Rainey than were able to read Nella
15THE POLITICS OF BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 33 ---
Larsen or Jessie Fauset. Despite impressive educational achievements that have
allowed many U.S. Black women to procure jobs in higher education and the
media, this may continue to be the case. For example, Imani Perry (1995) sug-
gests that the music of Black women hip-hop artists serves as a new site of Black
women’s intellectual production. Again, despite the fact that hip-hop contains
diverse and contradictory components (Rose 1994) and that popularity alone is
insufficient to confer the title “intellectual,” many more Black women listen to
Queen Latifah and Salt ‘N’ Pepa than read literature by Alice Walker and Toni
Morrison.
Because clarifying Black women’s experiences and ideas lies at the core of
Black feminist thought, interpreting them requires collaborative leadership
among those who participate in the diverse forms that Black women’s commu-
nities now take. This requires acknowledging not only how African-American
women outside of academia have long functioned as intellectuals by represent-
ing the interests of Black women as a group, but how this continues to be the
case. For example, rap singer Sister Souljah’s music as well as her autobiography
No Disrespect (1994) certainly can be seen as contributing to Black feminist
thought as critical social theory . Despite her uncritical acceptance of a masculin-
ist Black nationalist ideology , Souljah is deeply concerned with issues of Black
women’s oppression, and offers an important perspective on contemporary
urban culture. Yet while young Black women listened to Souljah’s music and
thought about her ideas, Souljah’s work has been dismissed within feminist 
classrooms in academia as being “nonfeminist.”Without tapping these nontradi-
tional sources, much of the Black women’s intellectual tradition would remain
“not known and hence not believed in” (Williams 1987, 150).
At the same time, many Black women academics struggle to find ways to do
intellectual work that challenges injustice.They know that being an academic and
an intellectual are not necessarily the same thing. Since the 1960s, U.S. Black
women have entered faculty positions in higher education in small but unprece-
dented numbers. These women confront a peculiar dilemma. On the one hand,
acquiring the prestige enjoyed by their colleagues often required unquestioned
acceptance of academic norms. On the other hand, many of these same norms
remain wedded to notions of Black and female inferiority . Finding ways to tem-
per critical responses to academia without unduly jeopardizing their careers con-
stitutes a new challenge for Black women who aim to be intellectuals within
academia, especially intellectuals engaged in developing Black feminist thought
(Collins 1998a, 95–123).
Surviving these challenges requires new ways of doing Black feminist intel-
lectual work. Developing Black feminist thought as critical social theory involves
including the ideas of Black women not previously considered intellectuals—
many of whom may be working-class women with jobs outside academia—as
well as those ideas emanating from more formal, legitimated scholarship. The
ideas we share with one another as mothers in extended families, as othermoth-
16 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 34 ---
ers in Black communities, as members of Black churches, and as teachers to the
Black community’s children have formed one pivotal area where African-
American women have hammered out a multifaceted Black women’s standpoint.
Musicians, vocalists, poets, writers, and other artists constitute another group
from which Black women intellectuals have emerged. Building on African-influ-
enced oral traditions, musicians in particular have enjoyed close association with
the larger community of African-American women constituting their audience.
Through their words and actions, grassroots political activists also contribute to
Black women’s intellectual traditions. Producing intellectual work is generally not
attributed to Black women artists and political activists. Especially in elite insti-
tutions of higher education, such women are typically viewed as objects of study ,
a classification that creates a false dichotomy between scholarship and activism,
between thinking and doing. In contrast, examining the ideas and actions of
these excluded groups in a way that views them as subjects reveals a world in
which behavior is a statement of philosophy and in which a vibrant, both/and,
scholar/activist tradition remains intact.
Objectives of the Volume
African-American women’s social location as a collectivity has fostered distinc-
tive albeit heterogeneous Black feminist intellectual traditions that, for conve-
nience in this volume, I call Black feminist thought . Investigations of four basic
components of Black feminist thought—its thematic content, its interpretive
frameworks, its epistemological approaches, and its significance for empower-
ment—constitute the core of this volume. All four components have been
shaped by U.S. Black women’s placement in a political context that is undergo-
ing considerable change. Thus, Black feminist thought’s core themes, interpre-
tive frameworks, epistemological stances, and insights concerning empower-
ment will reflect and aim to shape specific political contexts confronting
African-American women as a group.
In this volume, I aim to describe, analyze, explain the significance of, and
contribute to the development of Black feminist thought as critical social theory .
In addressing this general goal, I have several specific objectives. First, I summa-
rize selected core themes in Black feminist thought by surveying their historical
and contemporary expression. Drawing primarily on the works of African-
American women scholars and on the thought produced by a wide range of
Black women intellectuals, I explore several core themes that preoccupy Black
women thinkers. The vast majority of thinkers discussed in the text are, to the
best of my knowledge, U.S. Black women. I cite a range of Black women thinkers
not because I think U.S. Black women have a monopoly on the ideas presented
but because I aim to demonstrate the range and depth of thinkers who exist in
U.S. Black civil society . Placing the ideas of ordinary African-American women as
17THE POLITICS OF BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 35 ---
well as those of better-known Black women intellectuals at the center of analysis
produces a new angle of vision on Black women’s concerns. At the same time,
Black feminist thought cannot be developed in isolation from the thought and
actions of other groups. Thus, I also include the ideas of diverse thinkers who
make important contributions to developing Black feminist thought. Black
women must be in charge of Black feminist thought, but being in charge does
not mean that others are excluded.
Using and furthering an interpretive framework or paradigm that has come
to be known as race, class, and gender studies constitute a second objective of
Black Feminist Thought. Rejecting additive models of oppression, race, class, and
gender studies have progressed considerably since the 1980s.
4 During that
decade, African-American women scholar-activists, among others, called for a
new approach to analyzing Black women’s experiences. Claiming that such expe-
riences were shaped not just by race, but by gender, social class, and sexuality ,
works such as Women, Race and Class by Angela Davis (1981), “A Black 
Feminist Statement” drafted by the Combahee River Collective (1982),and Audre
Lorde’s (1984) classic volume Sister Outsider stand as groundbreaking works 
that explored interconnections among systems of oppression. Subsequent work
aimed to describe different dimensions of this interconnected relationship with
terms such as intersectionality (Crenshaw 1991) and matrix of domination. In this
volume, I use and distinguish between both terms in examining how oppression
affects Black women. Intersectionality refers to particular forms of intersecting
oppressions, for example, intersections of race and gender, or of sexuality and
nation. Intersectional paradigms remind us that oppression cannot be reduced 
to one fundamental type, and that oppressions work together in producing injus-
tice. In contrast, the matrix of domination refers to how these intersecting
oppressions are actually organized. Regardless of the particular intersections
involved, structural, disciplinary , hegemonic, and interpersonal domains of power
reappear across quite different forms of oppression.
My third objective is to develop an epistemological framework that can be
used both to assess existing Black feminist thought and to clarify some of the
underlying assumptions that impede its development.This issue of epistemology
raises some difficult questions. I see the need to define the boundaries that delin-
eate Black feminist thought from other arenas of intellectual inquiry . What crite-
ria, if any , can be applied to ideas to determine whether they are in fact Black and
feminist? What essential features does Black feminist thought share with other
critical social theories, particularly Western feminist theory , Afrocentric theory ,
Marxist analyses, and postmodernism? Do African-American women implicitly
rely on alternative standards for determining whether ideas are true? Traditional
epistemological assumptions concerning how we arrive at “truth” simply are not
sufficient to the task of furthering Black feminist thought. In the same way that
concepts such as woman and intellectual must be challenged, the process by
which we arrive at truth merits comparable scrutiny . While I provide a book-
18 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 36 ---
length treatment of these theoretical concerns in Fighting Words: Black Women
and the Search for Justice, here I focus on the distinguishing features of a Black
feminist epistemology .
I aim to use this same epistemological framework throughout the volume.
Alice Walker describes this process as one whereby “to write the books one wants
to read is both to point the direction of vision and, at the same time, to follow
it” (1983, 8). This was a very difficult process for me, one requiring that I not
only develop standards and guidelines for assessing U.S. Black feminist thought
but that I then apply those same standards and guidelines to my own work while
I was creating it. For example, in Chapters 2 and 10 I argue that Black women
intellectuals best contribute to a Black women’s group standpoint by using their
experiences as situated knowers.To adhere to this epistemological tenet required
that, when appropriate, I reject the pronouns “they” and “their” when describ-
ing U.S. Black women and our ideas and replace these terms with the terms “we,”
“us,” and “our.” Using the distancing terms “they” and “their” when describing
my own group and our experiences might enhance both my credentials as a
scholar and the credibility of my arguments in some academic settings. But by
taking this epistemological stance that reflects my disciplinary training as a soci-
ologist, I invoke standards of certifying truth about which I remain ambivalent.
In contrast, by identifying my position as a participant in and observer of
Black women’s communities, I run the risk of being discredited as being too sub-
jective and hence less scholarly . But by being an advocate for my material, I val-
idate epistemological tenets that I claim are fundamental for Black feminist
thought, namely , to equip people to resist oppression and to inspire them to do
it (Collins 1998a, 196–200). To me, the suppression of Black women’s intellec-
tual traditions has made this process of feeling one’s way an unavoidable episte-
mological stance for Black women intellectuals. As Walker points out, “she must
be her own model as well as the artist attending, creating, learning from, realiz-
ing the model, which is to say , herself” (1983, 8).
Finally , I aim to further Black feminist thought’s contributions to empower-
ing African-American women. Empowerment remains an illusive construct and
developing a Black feminist politics of empowerment requires specifying the
domains of power that constrain Black women, as well as how such domination
can be resisted. Ideally , Black feminist thought contributes ideas and analytical
frameworks toward this end. Moreover, it is important to remember that Black
women’s full empowerment can occur only within a transnational context of
social justice. While focused on U.S. Black women, U.S. Black feminism consti-
tutes one of many historically specific social justice projects dedicated to foster-
ing the empowerment of groups within an overarching context of justice. In this
sense, Black feminist thought constitutes one part of a much larger social justice
project that goes far beyond the experiences of African-American women.
19THE POLITICS OF BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 37 ---



--- PAGE 38 ---
I am a product of an intellectual tradition which until twenty-five years ago did
not exist within the academy . Like patchwork in a quilt, it is a tradition gathered
from meaningful bits and pieces. My tradition has no name, because it embraces
more than womanism, Blackness, or African studies, although those terms will do
for now. —Barbara Omolade 1994, ix
It seems I am running out of words these days. I feel as if I am on a linguistic tread-
mill that has gradually but unmistakably increased its speed, so that no word I use
to positively describe myself or my scholarly projects lasts for more than five sec-
onds. I can no longer justify my presence in academia, for example, with words
that exist in the English language. The moment I find some symbol of my presence
in the rarefied halls of elite institutions, it gets stolen, co-opted, filled with negative
meaning. —Patricia Williams 1995, 27
U.S. Black women’s struggles on this 
“linguistic treadmill” to name this tradition with “no name” reveal the difficul-
ties of making do with “terms [that] will do for now.” Widely used yet increas-
ingly difficult to define, U.S. Black feminist thought encompasses diverse and
often contradictory meanings. Despite the fact that U.S. Black women, in partic-
ular, have expended considerable energy on naming Black women’s knowledge,
definitional tensions not only persist but encounter changing political climates
riddled with new obstacles. When the very vocabulary used to describe Black
feminist thought comes under attack, Black women’s self-definitions become
even more difficult to achieve. For example, despite continued acceptance
among many African-Americans of  Afrocentrism as a term referencing tradi-
tions of  Black consciousness and racial solidarity , academics and media pundits
maligned the term in the 1980s and 1990s. Similarly , the pejorative meanings
increasingly attached to the term feminist seem designed to discredit a move-
2
DISTINGUISHING
FEATURES
OF
BLACK 
FEMINIST
THOUGHT 
2


--- PAGE 39 ---
ment dedicated to women’s empowerment. Even the term Black fell victim to
the deconstructive moment, with a growing number of “Black” intellectuals
who do “race” scholarship questioning the very terms used to describe both
themselves and their political struggles (see, e.g., Gilroy 1993). Collectively ,
these developments produced a greatly changed political and intellectual context
for defining Black feminist thought.
Despite these difficulties, finding some sort of common ground for thinking
through the boundaries of Black feminist thought remains important because, as
U.S. Black feminist activist Pearl Cleage reminds us, “we have to see clearly that
we are a unique group, set undeniably apart because of race and sex with a
unique set of challenges” (Cleage 1993, 55). Rather than developing definitions
and arguing over naming practices—for example, whether this thought should
be called Black feminism, womanism, Afrocentric feminism, Africana woman-
ism, and the like—a more useful approach lies in revisiting the reasons why
Black feminist thought exists at all. Exploring six distinguishing features that
characterize Black feminist thought may provide the common ground that is so
sorely needed both among African-American women, and between African-
American women and all others whose collective knowledge or thought has a
similar purpose. Black feminist thought’s distinguishing features need not be
unique and may share much with other bodies of knowledge. Rather, it is the
convergence of these distinguishing features that gives U.S. Black feminist thought
its distinctive contours.
Why U.S. Black Feminist Thought?
Black feminism remains important because U.S. Black women constitute an
oppressed group. As a collectivity , U.S. Black women participate in a dialectical
relationship linking African-American women’s oppression and activism.
Dialectical relationships of this sort mean that two parties are opposed and
opposite. As long as Black women’s subordination within intersecting oppres-
sions of race, class, gender, sexuality , and nation persists, Black feminism as an
activist response to that oppression will remain needed.
In a similar fashion, the overarching purpose of U.S. Black feminist thought
is also to resist oppression, both its practices and the ideas that justify it. If inter-
secting oppressions did not exist, Black feminist thought and similar opposi-
tional knowledges would be unnecessary . As a critical social theory , Black femi-
nist thought aims to empower African-American women within the context of
social injustice sustained by intersecting oppressions. Since Black women cannot
be fully empowered unless intersecting oppressions themselves are eliminated,
Black feminist thought supports broad principles of social justice that transcend
U.S. Black women’s particular needs.
Because so much of U.S. Black feminism has been filtered through the prism
22 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 40 ---
of the U.S. context, its contours have been greatly affected by the specificity of
American multiculturalism (Takaki 1993). In particular, U.S. Black feminist
thought and practice respond to a fundamental contradiction of U.S. society . On
the one hand, democratic promises of individual freedom, equality under the
law, and social justice are made to all American citizens. Yet on the other hand,
the reality of differential group treatment based on race, class, gender, sexuality ,
and citizenship status persists. Groups organized around race, class, and gender
in and of themselves are not inherently a problem. However, when African-
Americans, poor people, women, and other groups discriminated against see lit-
tle hope for group-based advancement, this situation constitutes social injustice.
Within this overarching contradiction, U.S. Black women encounter a dis-
tinctive set of social practices that accompany our particular history within a
unique matrix of domination characterized by intersecting oppressions. Race is
far from being the only significant marker of group difference—class, gender,
sexuality , religion, and citizenship status all matter greatly in the United States
(Andersen and Collins 1998). Yet for African-American women, the effects of
institutionalized racism remain visible and palpable. Moreover, the institutional-
ized racism that African-American women encounter relies heavily on racial seg-
regation and accompanying discriminatory practices designed to deny U.S. Blacks
equitable treatment. Despite important strides to desegregate U.S. society since
1970, racial segregation remains deeply entrenched in housing, schooling, and
employment (Massey and Denton 1993). For many African-American women,
racism is not something that exists in the distance.We encounter racism in every-
day situations in workplaces, stores, schools, housing, and daily social interaction
(St. Jean and Feagin 1998). Most Black women do not have the opportunity to
befriend White women and men as neighbors, nor do their children attend
school with White children. Racial segregation remains a fundamental feature of
the U.S. social landscape, leaving many African-Americans with the belief that
“the more things change, the more they stay the same” (Collins 1998a, 11–43).
Overlaying these persisting inequalities is a rhetoric of color blindness designed
to render these social inequalities invisible. In a context where many believe that
to talk of race fosters racism, equality allegedly lies in treating everyone the same.
Yet as Kimberle Crenshaw (1997) points out, “it is fairly obvious that treating
different things the same can generate as much inequality as treating the same
things differently” (p. 285).
Although racial segregation is now organized differently than in prior eras
(Collins 1998a, 11–43), being Black and female in the United States continues
to expose African-American women to certain common experiences. U.S. Black
women’s similar work and family experiences as well as our participation in
diverse expressions of African-American culture mean that, overall, U.S. Black
women as a group live in a different world from that of people who are not Black
and female. For individual women, the particular experiences that accrue to liv-
ing as a Black woman in the United States can stimulate a distinctive conscious-
23DISTINGUISHING FEATURES OF BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 41 ---
ness concerning our own experiences and society overall. Many African-
American women grasp this connection between what one does and how one
thinks. Hannah Nelson, an elderly Black domestic worker, discusses how work
shapes the perspectives of African-American and White women: “Since I have to
work, I don’t really have to worry about most of the things that most of the white
women I have worked for are worrying about.And if these women did their own
work, they would think just like I do—about this, anyway” (Gwaltney 1980, 4).
Ruth Shays, a Black inner-city resident, points out how variations in men’s and
women’s experiences lead to differences in perspective. “The mind of the man
and the mind of the woman is the same” she notes, “but this business of living
makes women use their minds in ways that men don’t even have to think about”
(Gwaltney 1980, 33).
A recognition of this connection between experience and consciousness that
shapes the everyday lives of individual African-American women often pervades
the works of Black women activists and scholars. In her autobiography , Ida B.
Wells-Barnett describes how the lynching of her friends had such an impact 
on her worldview that she subsequently devoted much of her life to the anti-
lynching cause (Duster 1970). Sociologist Joyce Ladner’s discomfort with the
disparity between the teachings of mainstream scholarship and her experiences
as a young Black woman in the South led her to write T omorrow’s T omorrow
(1972), a groundbreaking study of Black female adolescence. Similarly , the trans-
formed consciousness experienced by Janie, the light-skinned heroine of Zora
Neale Hurston’s (1937) classic Their Eyes Were Watching God, from obedient
granddaughter and wife to a self-defined African-American woman, can be
directly traced to her experiences with each of her three husbands. In one scene
Janie’s second husband, angry because she served him a dinner of scorched rice,
underdone fish, and soggy bread, hits her.That incident stimulates Janie to stand
“where he left her for unmeasured time” and think. And in her thinking “her
image of Jody tumbled down and shattered.... [S]he had an inside and an out-
side now and suddenly she knew how not to mix them” (p. 63).
Overall, these ties between what one does and what one thinks illustrated by
individual Black women can also characterize Black women’s experiences and
ideas as a group. Historically , racial segregation in housing, education, and
employment fostered group commonalities that encouraged the formation of a
group-based, collective standpoint.
1 For example, the heavy concentration of U.S.
Black women in domestic work coupled with racial segregation in housing and
schools meant that U.S. Black women had common organizational networks that
enabled them to share experiences and construct a collective body of wisdom.
This collective wisdom on how to survive as U.S. Black women constituted a dis-
tinctive Black women’s standpoint on gender-specific patterns of racial segrega-
tion and its accompanying economic penalties.
The presence of  Black women’s collective wisdom challenges two prevail-
ing interpretations of the consciousness of oppressed groups. One approach
24 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 42 ---
claims that subordinate groups identify with the powerful and have no valid
independent interpretation of their own oppression. The second assumes the
oppressed are less human than their rulers, and are therefore less capable of inter-
preting their own experiences (Rollins 1985; Scott 1985). Both approaches see
any independent consciousness expressed by African-American women and
other oppressed groups as being either not of our own making or inferior to that
of dominant groups. More importantly , both explanations suggest that the
alleged lack of political activism on the part of oppressed groups stems from our
flawed consciousness of our own subordination.
2
Historically , Black women’s group location in intersecting oppressions pro-
duced commonalities among individual African-American women. At the same
time, while common experiences may predispose Black women to develop a dis-
tinctive group consciousness, they guarantee neither that such a consciousness
will develop among all women nor that it will be articulated as such by the
group. As historical conditions change, so do the links among the types of expe-
riences Black women will have and any ensuing group consciousness concerning
those experiences. Because group standpoints are situated in, reflect, and help
shape unjust power relations, standpoints are not static (Collins 1998a, 201–28).
Thus, common challenges may foster similar angles of vision leading to a group
knowledge or standpoint among African-American women. Or they may not.
Diverse Responses to Common Challenges
within Black Feminism 
A second distinguishing feature of U.S. Black feminist thought emerges from a
tension linking experiences and ideas. On the one hand, all African-American
women face similar challenges that result from living in a society that histori-
cally and routinely derogates women of African descent. Despite the fact that
U.S. Black women face common challenges, this neither means that individual
African-American women have all had the same experiences nor that we agree
on the significance of our varying experiences.Thus, on the other hand, despite
the common challenges confronting U.S. Black women as a group, diverse
responses to these core themes characterize U.S. Black women’s group knowl-
edge or standpoint.
Despite differences of age, sexual orientation, social class, region, and reli-
gion, U.S. Black women encounter societal practices that restrict us to inferior
housing, neighborhoods, schools, jobs, and public treatment and hide this dif-
ferential consideration behind an array of common beliefs about Black women’s
intelligence, work habits, and sexuality . These common challenges in turn result
in recurring patterns of experiences for individual group members. For example,
African-American women from quite diverse backgrounds report similar treat-
ment in stores. Not every individual Black woman consumer need experience
25DISTINGUISHING FEATURES OF BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 43 ---
being followed in a store as a potential shoplifter, ignored while others are 
waited on first, or seated near restaurant kitchens and rest rooms, for African-
American women as a collectivity to recognize that differential group treatment
is operating.
Since standpoints refer to group knowledge, recurring patterns of differen-
tial treatment such as these suggest that certain themes will characterize U.S.
Black women’s group knowledge or standpoint. For example, one core theme
concerns multifaceted legacies of struggle, especially in response to forms of vio-
lence that accompany intersecting oppressions (Collins 1998d). Katie Cannon
observes, “[T]hroughout the history of the United States, the interrelationship of
white supremacy and male superiority has characterized the Black woman’s real-
ity as a situation of struggle—a struggle to survive in two contradictory worlds
simultaneously , one white, privileged, and oppressive, the other black, exploited,
and oppressed” (1985, 30). Black women’s vulnerability to assaults in the work-
place, on the street, at home, and in media representations has been one factor
fostering this legacy of struggle.
Despite differences created by historical era, age, social class, sexual orienta-
tion, skin color, or ethnicity , the legacy of struggle against the violence that per-
meates U.S. social structures is a common thread binding African-American
women. Anna Julia Cooper, an educated, nineteenth-century Black woman intel-
lectual, describes Black women’s vulnerability to sexual violence:
I would beg . . . to add my plea for the Colored Girls of the South:—that
large, bright, promising fatally beautiful class . . . so full of promise and
possibilities, yet so sure of destruction; often without a father to whom
they dare apply the loving term, often without a stronger brother to
espouse their cause and defend their honor with his life’s blood; in the
midst of pitfalls and snares, waylaid by the lower classes of white men,
with no shelter, no protection. (Cooper 1892, 240)
Yet during this period Cooper and other middle-class U.S. Black women built a
powerful club movement and numerous community organizations (Giddings
1984, 1988; Gilkes 1985).
Stating that a legacy of struggle exists does not mean that all U.S. Black
women share its benefits or even recognize it. For example, for African-American
girls, age often offers little protection from assaults. Far too many young Black
girls inhabit hazardous and hostile environments (Carroll 1997). In 1975 I
received an essay titled “My World” from Sandra, a sixth-grade student who was a
resident of one of the most dangerous public housing projects in Boston. Sandra
wrote, “My world is full of people getting rape. People shooting on another. Kids
and grownups fighting over girlsfriends. And people without jobs who can’t
afford to get a education so they can get a job . . . winos on the streets raping and
killing little girls.” Her words poignantly express a growing Black feminist sensi-
bility that she may be victimized by racism, misogyny , and poverty . They reveal
her awareness that she is vulnerable to rape as a form of sexual violence. Despite
26 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 44 ---
her feelings about her neighborhood, Sandra not only walked the streets daily but
managed safely to deliver three siblings to school. In doing so she participated in
a Black women’s legacy of struggle. Sandra prevailed, but at a cost. Unlike Sandra,
others simply quit.
This legacy of struggle constitutes one of several core themes of a Black
women’s standpoint. Efforts to reclaim U.S. Black women’s intellectual traditions
have revealed Black women’s long-standing attention to additional core themes
first recorded by Maria W . Stewart (Richardson 1987). Stewart’s perspective on
intersecting oppressions, her call for replacing derogated images of Black wom-
anhood with self-defined images, her belief in Black women’s activism as moth-
ers, teachers, and Black community leaders, and her sensitivity to sexual politics
are all core themes advanced by a variety of Black feminist intellectuals.
Despite the common challenges confronting African-American women as a
group, individual Black women neither have identical experiences nor interpret
experiences in a similar fashion.The existence of core themes does not mean that
African-American women respond to these themes in the same way . Differences
among individual Black women produce different patterns of experiential
knowledge that in turn shape individual reactions to the core themes. For exam-
ple, when faced with controlling images of Black women as being ugly and
unfeminine, some women—such as Sojourner Truth—demand, “Ain’t I a
woman?” By deconstructing the conceptual apparatus of the dominant group,
they challenge notions of Barbie-doll femininity premised on middle-class White
women’s experiences (duCille 1996, 8–59). In contrast, other women internal-
ize the controlling images and come to believe that they are the stereotypes
(Brown-Collins and Sussewell 1986). Still others aim to transgress the bound-
aries that frame the images themselves. Jaminica, a 14-year-old Black girl,
describes her strategies: “Unless you want to get into a big activist battle, you
accept the stereotypes given to you and just try and reshape them along the way .
So in a way , this gives me a lot of freedom. I can’t be looked at any worse in soci-
ety than I already am—black and female is pretty high on the list of things not
to be” (Carroll 1997, 94–95).
Many factors explain these diverse responses. For example, although all
African-American women encounter institutionalized racism, social class differ-
ences among African-American women influence patterns of racism in housing,
education, and employment. Middle-class Blacks are more likely to encounter a
pernicious form of racism that has left many angry and disappointed (Cose
1993; Feagin and Sikes 1994). A young manager who graduated with honors
from the University of Maryland describes the specific form racism can take 
for middle-class Blacks. Before she flew to Cleveland to explain a marketing plan
for her company , her manager made her go over it three or four times in front
of him so that she would not forget her marketing plan. Then he explained how
to check luggage at an airport and how to reclaim it. “I just sat at lunch listening
to this man talking to me like I was a monkey who could remember but couldn’t
27DISTINGUISHING FEATURES OF BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 45 ---
think,” she recalled. When she had had enough, “I asked him if he wanted to tie
my money up in a handkerchief and put a note on me saying that I was an
employee of this company . In case I got lost I would be picked up by Traveler’s
Aid, and Traveler’s Aid would send me back” (Davis and Watson 1985, 86). Most
middle-class Black women do not encounter such blatant incidents, but many
working-class Blacks do. Historically , working-class Blacks have struggled with
forms of institutionalized racism directly organized by White institutions and by
forms mediated by some segments of the Black middle class.Thus, while it shares
much with middle-class Black women, the legacy of struggle by working-class
Blacks (Kelley 1994) and by working-class Black women in particular will
express a distinctive character (Fordham 1993).
Sexuality signals another important factor that influences African-American
women’s varying responses to common challenges. Black lesbians have identified
heterosexism as a form of oppression and the issues they face living in homo-
phobic communities as shaping their interpretations of everyday events
(Shockley 1974; Lorde 1982, 1984; Clarke et al. 1983; Barbara Smith 1983,
1998; Williams 1997). Beverly Smith describes how being a lesbian affected her
perceptions of the wedding of one of her closest friends: “God, I wish I had one
friend here. Someone who knew me and would understand how I feel. I am mas-
querading as a nice, straight, middle-class Black ‘girl’ ” (1983, 172). While the
majority of those attending the wedding saw only a festive event, Beverly Smith
felt that her friend was being sent into a form of bondage. In a similar fashion,
varying ethnic and citizenship statuses within the U.S. nation-state as well also
shape differences among Black women in the United States. For example, Black
Puerto Ricans constitute a group that combines categories of race, nationality ,
and ethnicity in distinctive ways. Black Puerto Rican women thus must negotiate
a distinctive set of experiences that accrue to being racially Black, holding a spe-
cial form of American citizenship, and being ethnically Latino.
Given how these factors influence diverse response to common challenges,
it is important to stress that no homogeneous Black woman’sstandpoint exists.
There is no essential or archetypal Black woman whose experiences stand as 
normal, normative, and thereby authentic. An essentialist understanding of a
Black woman’s standpoint suppresses differences among Black women in search
of an elusive group unity . Instead, it may be more accurate to say that a Black
women’scollective standpoint does exist, one characterized by the tensions that
accrue to different responses to common challenges. Because it both recognizes
and aims to incorporate heterogeneity in crafting Black women’s oppositional
knowledge, this Black women’s standpoint eschews essentialism in favor of
democracy . Since Black feminist thought both arises within and aims to articu-
late a Black women’sgroup standpoint regarding experiences associated with
intersecting oppressions, stressing this group standpoint’s heterogeneous com-
position is significant.
Moreover, in thinking through the contours of a Black women’s standpoint,
28 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 46 ---
it is equally important to recognize that U.S. Black women also encounter the
same challenges (and correspondingly different expressions) as women of
African descent within a Black diasporic context. This context in turn is situated
within a transnational, global context. The term diaspora describes the experi-
ences of people who, through slavery , colonialism, imperialism, and migration,
have been forced to leave their native lands (Funani 1998, 417). For U.S. Black
women and other people of African descent, a diasporic framework suggests a
dispersal from Africa to societies in the Caribbean, South America, North
America, and Europe. Understandings of African-American womanhood thus
reflect a distinctive pattern of dispersal associated with forced immigration to the
United States and subsequent enslavement (Pala 1995). Since a diasporic frame-
work is not normative, it should not be used to assess the authenticity of people
of African descent in reference to an assumed African norm. Rather, Black dias-
poric frameworks center analyses of Black women within the context of common
challenges experienced transnationally .
The version of Black feminism that U.S. Black women have developed cer-
tainly must be understood in the context of U.S. nation-state politics. At the same
time, U.S. Black feminism as a social justice project shares much with comparable
social justice projects advanced not only by other U.S. racial/ethnic groups (see,
e.g.,Takaki 1993), but by women of African descent across quite diverse societies.
In the context of an “intercontinental Black women’s consciousness movement”
(McLaughlin 1995, 73), women of African descent are dispersed globally , yet the
issues we face may be similar.Transnationally , women encounter recurring social
issues such as poverty , violence, reproductive concerns, lack of education, sex
work, and susceptibility to disease ( Rights of Women 1998). Placing African-
American women’s experiences, thought, and practice in a transnational, Black
diasporic context reveals these and other commonalities of women of African
descent while specifying what is particular to African-American women.
Black Feminist Practice and Black 
Feminist Thought 
A third distinguishing feature of Black feminist thought concerns the connec-
tions between U.S. Black women’s experiences as a heterogeneous collectivity
and any ensuing group knowledge or standpoint. One key reason that stand-
points of oppressed groups are suppressed is that self-defined standpoints can
stimulate resistance. Annie Adams, a Southern Black woman, describes how she
became involved in civil rights activities:
When I first went into the mill we had segregated water fountains ....
Same thing about the toilets. I had to clean the toilets for the inspection
room and then, when I got ready to go to the bathroom, I had to go all
29DISTINGUISHING FEATURES OF BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 47 ---
the way to the bottom of the stairs to the cellar. So I asked my boss man,
“what’s the difference? If I can go in there and clean them toilets, why
can’t I use them?” Finally , I started to use that toilet. I decided I wasn’t
going to walk a mile to go to the bathroom. (Byerly 1986, 134)
In this case Ms. Adams found the “boss man’s” point of view inadequate, devel-
oped one of her own, and acted on it. On the individual level, her actions illus-
trate the connections among lived experiences with oppression, developing
one’s own point of view concerning those experiences, and the acts of resistance
that can follow. A similar relationship characterizes African-American women’s
group knowledge. U.S. Black women’s collective historical experiences with
oppression may stimulate a self-defined Black women’s standpoint that in turn
can foster Black women’s activism.
As members of an oppressed group, U.S. Black women have generated alter-
native practices  and knowledges that have been designed to foster U.S. Black
women’s group empowerment. In contrast to the dialectical relationship linking
oppression and activism, a dialogical relationship characterizes Black women’s
collective experiences and group knowledge. On both the individual and the
group level, a dialogical relationship suggests that changes in thinking may be
accompanied by changed actions and that altered experiences may in turn stim-
ulate a changed consciousness. For U.S. Black women as a collectivity , the strug-
gle for a self-defined Black feminism occurs through an ongoing dialogue
whereby action and thought inform one another.
U.S. Black feminism itself illustrates this dialogical relationship. On the one
hand, there is U.S. Black feminist practice that emerges in the context of lived
experience. When organized and visible, such practice has taken the form of
overtly Black feminist social movements dedicated to the empowerment of U.S.
Black women.Two especially prominent moments characterize Black feminism’s
visibility . Providing many of the guiding ideas for today , the first occurred at the
turn of the century via the Black women’s club movement. The second or mod-
ern Black feminist movement was stimulated by the antiracist and women’s social
justice movements of the 1960s and 1970s and continues to the present.
However, these periods of overt political activism where African-American
women lobbied in our own behalf  remain unusual. They appear to be unusual
when juxtaposed to more typical patterns of quiescence regarding Black
women’s advocacy .
Given the history of U.S. racial segregation, Black feminist activism demon-
strates distinctive patterns. Because African-Americans have long been relegated
to racially segregated environments, U.S. Black feminist practice has often
occurred within a context of Black community development efforts and other
Black nationalist-inspired projects. Black nationalism emerges in conjunction
with racial segregation—U.S. Blacks living in a racially integrated society would
most likely see less need for Black nationalism. As a political philosophy , Black
nationalism is based on the belief that Black people constitute a people or
30 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 48 ---
“nation” with a common history and destiny . Black solidarity , the belief that
Blacks have common interests and should support one another, has long perme-
ated Black women’s political philosophy . Thus, Black women’s path to a “femi-
nist” consciousness often occurs within the context of antiracist social justice
projects, many of them influenced by Black nationalist ideologies. In describing
how this phenomenon affects Black women in global context, Andree Nicola
McLaughlin contends, “[A]mong activist Black women, it is generally recognized
that nationalist struggle provides a rich arena for developing a woman’s con-
sciousness” (McLaughlin 1995, 80).To look for Black feminism by searching for
U.S. Black women who self-identify as “Black feminists” misses the complexity
of how Black feminist practice actually operates (Collins 1993a).
Similar views have been expressed about the feminism of women in Africa.
When a colleague asked Obioma Nnaemeka to describe African feminists’ defin-
ition of African feminism, her off-the-cuff response was telling: “[T]he majority
of African women are not hung up on ‘articulating their feminism’; they just 
do it.” In Nnaemeka’s view, “It is what they do and how they do it that provide
the ‘framework’; the ‘framework’ is not carried to the theater of action as a defi-
nitional tool.... Attempts to mold ‘African feminism’ into an easily digestible
ball of pointed yam not only raise definitional questions but create difficulties for
drawing organizational parameters and unpacking complex modes of engage-
ment” (Nnaemeka 1998a, 5). Here Nnaemeka provides a compelling argument
concerning the interconnectedness of experiences and ideas, one that differs
markedly from accepted models of how one defines social justice movements.
Her model references the dialogical relationship, and points to a different way of
thinking about Black feminist thought as knowledge. Specifically , Black feminist
practice requires Black feminist thought, and vice versa.
When it comes to the dialogical relationship within U.S. Black feminism, on
the other hand, there is U.S. Black feminist thought as a critical social theory .
Critical social theory constitutes theorizing about the social in defense of eco-
nomic and social justice. As critical social theory , Black feminist thought encom-
passes bodies of knowledge and sets of institutional practices that actively grap-
ple with the central questions facing U.S. Black women as a group. Such theory
recognizes that U.S. Black women constitute one group among many that are dif-
ferently placed within situations of injustice. What makes critical social theory
“critical” is its commitment to justice, for one’s own group and for other groups.
Within these parameters, knowledge for knowledge’s sake is not enough—
Black feminist thought must both be tied to Black women’s lived experiences and
aim to better those experiences in some fashion. When such thought is suffi-
ciently grounded in Black feminist practice, it reflects this dialogical relationship.
Black feminist thought encompasses general knowledge that helps U.S. Black
women survive in, cope with, and resist our differential treatment. It also
includes more specialized knowledge that investigates the specific themes and
challenges of any given period of time. Conversely , when U.S. Black women can-
31DISTINGUISHING FEATURES OF BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 49 ---
not see the connections among themes that permeate Black feminist thought and
those that influence Black women’s everyday lives, it is appropriate to question
the strength of this dialogical relationship. Moreover, it is also reasonable to ques-
tion the validity of that particular expression of Black feminist thought. For
example, during slavery , a special theme within Black feminist thought was how
the institutionalized rape of enslaved Black women operated as a mechanism of
social control. During the period when Black women worked primarily in agri-
culture and service, countering the sexual harassment of live-in domestic work-
ers gained special importance. Clear connections could be drawn between the
content and purpose of Black feminist thought and important issues in Black
women’s lives.
The potential significance of Black feminist thought goes far beyond demon-
strating that African-American women can be theorists. Like Black feminist prac-
tice, which it reflects and which it seeks to foster, Black feminist thought can cre-
ate collective identity among African-American women about the dimensions 
of a Black women’s standpoint. Through the process of rearticulation, Black 
feminist thought can offer African-American women a different view of our-
selves and our worlds (Omi and Winant 1994, 99). By taking the core themes of
a Black women’s standpoint and infusing them with new meaning, Black femi-
nist thought can stimulate a new consciousness that utilizes Black women’s
everyday , taken-for-granted knowledge. Rather than raising consciousness, Black
feminist thought affirms, rearticulates, and provides a vehicle for expressing in
public a consciousness that quite often already exists. More important, this
rearticulated consciousness aims to empower African-American women and
stimulate resistance.
Sheila Radford-Hill stresses the importance of rearticulation as an essential
ingredient of an empowering Black feminist theory in her essay “Considering
Feminism as a Model for Social Change.” In evaluating whether Black women
should espouse feminist programs, Radford-Hill suggests, “[T]he essential issue
that black women must confront when assessing a feminist position is as follows:
If I, as a black woman, ‘become a feminist,’ what basic tools will I gain to resist
my individual and group oppression?” (1986, 160). For Radford-Hill, the rele-
vance of feminism as a vehicle for social change must be assessed in terms of its
“ability to factor black women and other women of color into alternative con-
ceptions of power and the consequences of its use” (p. 160).Thus Black feminist
thought as critical social theory aims to aid African-American women’s struggles
against intersecting oppressions.
At first glance, these connections between Black feminist practice and Black
feminist thought might suggest that only African-American women can partici-
pate in the production of Black feminist thought and that only Black women’s
experiences can form the content of that thought. But this model of Black femi-
nism is undermined as a critical perspective by being dependent on those who
are biologically Black and female. Exclusionary definitions of Black feminism
32 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 50 ---
which confine “black feminist criticism to black women critics of black women
artists depicting black women” (Carby 1987, 9) are inadequate because they are
inherently separatist. Instead, the connections here aim for autonomy . Given this
need for self-definition and autonomy—an important objective of “an intellec-
tual tradition which until twenty-five years ago did not exist within the acade-
my” (Omolade 1994, ix)—what is the significance of Black women intellectuals
within Black feminist thought?
Dialogical Practices and Black Women Intellectuals
A fourth distinguishing feature of Black feminist thought concerns the essen-
tial contributions of African-American women intellectuals. The existence of 
a Black women’s standpoint does not mean that African-American women, aca-
demic or otherwise, appreciate its content, see its significance, or recognize 
its potential as a catalyst for social change. One key task for Black women 
intellectuals of diverse ages, social classes, educational backgrounds, and occu-
pations consists of asking the right questions and investigating all dimensions of
a Black women’s standpoint with and for African-American women. Historically ,
Black women intellectuals stood in a special relationship to the larger commu-
nity of African-American women, a relationship that framed Black feminist
thought’s contours as critical social theory .Whether this relationship will persist
depends, ironically , on Black women intellectuals’ ability to analyze their own
social locations.
Very different kinds of “thought” and “theories” emerge when abstract
thought is joined with pragmatic action. Denied positions as scholars and writ-
ers which allow us to emphasize purely theoretical concerns, the work of most
Black women intellectuals has been influenced by the merger of action and the-
ory . The activities of nineteenth-century educated Black women intellectuals such
as Anna J. Cooper, Frances Ellen Watkins Harper, Ida B. Wells-Barnett, and Mary
Church Terrell exemplify this tradition of merging intellectual work and activism.
These women both analyzed the intersecting oppressions that circumscribed
Black women’s lives and worked for social justice.The Black women’s club move-
ment they created was both an activist and an intellectual endeavor.Working-class
Black women also engaged in a parallel joining of ideas and activism. But because
they were denied formal educations, the form of their activism as well as the con-
tent of the ideas they developed differed from those of middle-class Black
women.The live performances of classic Black women blues singers in the 1920s
can be seen as one important arena where working-class women gathered and
shared ideas especially germane to them (Davis 1998).
Many contemporary Black women intellectuals continue to draw on this tra-
dition of using everyday actions and experiences in our theoretical work. Black
feminist historian Elsa Barkley Brown describes the importance her mother’s
33DISTINGUISHING FEATURES OF BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 51 ---
ideas played in the scholarship she eventually produced on African-American
washerwomen. Initially Brown used the lens provided by her training as a histo-
rian and saw her sample group as devalued service workers. But over time she
came to understand washerwomen as entrepreneurs. By taking the laundry to
whoever had the largest kitchen, they created a community and a culture among
themselves. In explaining the shift of vision that enabled her to reassess this por-
tion of Black women’s history , Brown notes, “It was my mother who taught me
how to ask the right questions—and all of us who try to do this thing called
scholarship on a regular basis are fully aware that asking the right questions is
the most important part of the process” (1986, 14).
This special relationship of Black women intellectuals to the community of
African-American women parallels the existence of two interrelated levels of
knowledge (Berger and Luckmann 1966). The commonplace, taken-for-granted
knowledge shared by African-American women growing from our everyday
thoughts and actions constitutes a first and most fundamental level of knowl-
edge. The ideas that Black women share with one another on an informal, daily
basis about topics such as how to style our hair, characteristics of “good” Black
men, strategies for dealing with White folks, and skills of how to “get over” pro-
vide the foundations for this taken-for-granted knowledge.
Experts or specialists who participate in and emerge from a group produce
a second, more specialized type of knowledge. Whether working-class or mid-
dle-class, educated or not, famous or everyday , the range of Black women intel-
lectuals discussed in Chapter 1 are examples of these specialists. Their theories
that facilitate the expression of a Black women’s standpoint form the specialized
knowledge of Black feminist thought. The two types of knowledge are interde-
pendent. While Black feminist thought articulates the often taken-for-granted
knowledge shared by African-American women as a group, the consciousness of
Black women may be transformed by such thought. Many Black women blues
singers have long sung about taken-for-granted situations that affect U.S. Black
women.Through their music, they not only depict Black women’s realities, they
aim to shape them.
Because they have had greater opportunities to achieve literacy , middle-class
Black women have also had greater access to the resources to engage in Black
feminist scholarship. Education need not mean alienation from this dialogical
relationship. The actions of educated Black women within the Black women’s
club movement typify this special relationship between one segment of Black
women intellectuals and the wider community of African-American women:
It is important to recognize that black women like Frances Harper, Anna
Julia Cooper, and Ida B. Wells were not isolated figures of intellectual
genius; they were shaped by and helped to shape a wider movement of
Afro-American women. This is not to claim that they were representative
of all black women; they and their counterparts formed an educated, intel-
lectual elite, but an elite that tried to develop a cultural and historical per-
34 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 52 ---
spective that was organic to the wider condition of black womanhood.
(Carby 1987, 115)
The work of these women is important because it illustrates a tradition of join-
ing scholarship and activism. Because they often lived in the same neighbor-
hoods as working-class Blacks, turn-of-the-century club women lived in a Black
civil society where this dialogical relationship was easier to establish. They saw
the problems. They participated in social institutions that encouraged solutions.
They fostered the development of a “cultural and historical perspective that was
organic to the wider condition of black womanhood.” Contemporary Black
women intellectuals face similar challenges of fostering dialogues, but do so
under greatly changed social conditions. Whereas racial segregation was
designed to keep U.S. Blacks oppressed, it fostered a form of racial solidarity that
flourished in all-Black neighborhoods. In contrast, now that Blacks live in eco-
nomically heterogeneous neighborhoods, achieving the same racial solidarity
raises new challenges.
Black women intellectuals are central to Black feminist thought for several
reasons. First, our experiences as African-American women provide us with a
unique angle of vision concerning Black womanhood unavailable to other
groups, should we choose to embrace it. It is more likely for Black women, as
members of an oppressed group, to have critical insights into the condition of
our oppression than it is for those who live outside those structures. One of the
characters in Frances Ellen Watkins Harper’s 1892 novel,Iola Leroy, expresses this
belief in the special vision of those who have experienced oppression:
Miss Leroy , out of the race must come its own thinkers and writers.
Authors belonging to the white race have written good books, for which
I am deeply grateful, but it seems to be almost impossible for a white man
to put himself completely in our place. No man can feel the iron which
enters another man’s soul. (Carby 1987, 62)
Only African-American women occupy this center and can “feel the iron” that
enters Black women’s souls, because while U.S. Black women’s experiences
resemble others, such experiences remain unique. The importance of Black
women’s leadership in producing Black feminist thought does not mean that
others cannot participate. It does mean that the primary responsibility for defin-
ing one’s own reality lies with the people who live that reality , who actually have
those experiences.
Second, Black women intellectuals both inside and outside the academy are
less likely to walk away from Black women’s struggles when the obstacles seem
overwhelming or when the rewards for staying diminish. In discussing Black
women’s involvement in the feminist movement, Sheila Radford-Hill stresses the
significance of taking actions in one’s own behalf:
Black women now realize that part of the problem within the movement
was our insistence that white women do for/with us what we must do
35DISTINGUISHING FEATURES OF BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 53 ---
for/with ourselves: namely , frame our own social action around our own
agenda for change....C r itical to this discussion is the right to organize
on one’s own behalf....C r iticism by black feminists must reaffirm this
principle. (1986, 162)
For most U.S. Black women, engaging in Black feminist research and scholarship
is not a passing fad—these issues affect both contemporary daily life and inter-
generational realities.
Third, Black women intellectuals from all walks of life must aggressively
push the theme of self-definition because speaking for oneself and crafting one’s
own agenda is essential to empowerment. As Black feminist sociologist Deborah
K. King succinctly states, “Black feminism asserts self-determination as essential”
(1988, 72). Black feminist thought cannot challenge intersecting oppressions
without empowering African-American women. Because self-definition is key to
individual and group empowerment, ceding the power of self-definition to other
groups, no matter how well-meaning or supportive of Black women they may
be, in essence replicates existing power hierarchies. As Patrice L. Dickerson con-
tends, “A person comes into being and knows herself by her achievements, and
through her efforts to become and know herself, she achieves” (personal corre-
spondence 1988). Like Dickerson, individual African-American women have
long displayed varying types of consciousness regarding our shared angle of
vision. When these individual expressions of consciousness are articulated,
argued through, contested, and aggregated in ways that reflect the heterogeneity
of Black womanhood, a collective group consciousness dedicated to resisting
oppression becomes possible. Black women’s ability to forge these individual,
often unarticulated, yet potentially powerful expressions of everyday conscious-
ness into an articulated, self-defined, collective standpoint is key to Black
women’s survival. As Audre Lorde points out, “It is axiomatic that if we do not
define ourselves for ourselves, we will be defined by others—for their use and to
our detriment” (1984, 45).
Fourth, Black women intellectuals are central in the production of Black fem-
inist thought because we alone can foster the group autonomy that fosters effec-
tive coalitions with other groups. Recall that Black women intellectuals need not
be middle-class, educated, middle-aged, or recognized as such by academia or
other establishments. Black women intellectuals constitute a highly diverse
group. Rather than assuming that Black women intellectuals constitute a Black
female version of William E. B. DuBois’s Talented Tenth—a common mispercep-
tion advanced by some elitist academics who apparently have difficulty imagin-
ing everyday Black women as bona fide intellectuals (see, e.g., Gilroy 1993, 53)—
the type of intellectual leadership envisioned here requires collaboration among
diverse Black women to think through what would constitute Black women’s
autonomy . Moreover, although Black feminist thought originates within Black
women’s communities, it cannot flourish isolated from the experiences and ideas
of other groups. Black women intellectuals must find ways to place our own het-
36 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 54 ---
erogeneous experiences and consciousness at the center of any serious efforts to
develop Black feminist thought without having our thought become separatist
and exclusionary .
This autonomy is quite distinct from separatist positions whereby Black
women withdraw from other groups and engage in exclusionary politics. In her
introduction to Home Girls, A Black Feminist Anthology, Barbara Smith describes
this difference: “Autonomy and separatism are fundamentally different. Whereas
autonomy comes from a position of strength, separatism comes from a position
of fear. When we’re truly autonomous we can deal with other kinds of people, a
multiplicity of issues, and with difference, because we have formed a solid base
of strength” (1983, xl). As mothers, college presidents, grassroots activists,
teachers, musicians, and corporate executives, Black women intellectuals who
contribute to articulating an autonomous, self-defined standpoint are in a posi-
tion to examine the usefulness of coalitions with other groups, both scholarly
and activist, in order to develop new models for social change. Autonomy to
develop a self-defined, independent analysis means neither that Black feminist
thought has relevance only for African-American women nor that we must con-
fine ourselves to analyzing our own experiences. As Sonia Sanchez points out,
“I’ve always known that if you write from a black experience, you’re writing
from a universal experience as well. ...I  k n o w  y o u  don’t have to whitewash
yourself to be universal” ( Tate 1983, 142).
By advocating, refining, and disseminating Black feminist thought, individ-
uals from other groups who are engaged in similar social justice projects—Black
men, African women,White men, Latinas,White women, and members of other
U.S. racial/ethnic groups, for example—can identify points of connection that
further social justice projects.Very often, however, engaging in the type of coali-
tion envisioned here requires that individuals become “traitors” to the privileges
that their race, class, gender, sexuality , or citizenship status provide them. For
example, in Memoir of a Race Traitor,Mab Segrest (1994) writes of how coming
to terms with her lesbian identity spurred her recognition of how her Whiteness
gave her unearned privileges. Unlike most U.S.White women, Segrest turned her
back on this privilege, embraced her new identity as a “race traitor,” and came
to see her role as confronting social injustice.
3 Similarly , sociologist Joe Feagin’s
antiracist scholarship exemplifies a similar rejection of the unearned privileges of
Whiteness. Feagin chooses to use benefits that may accrue to him as a White male
to engage in collaborative scholarship with Black men (Feagin and Sikes 1994)
and with Black women (St. Jean and Feagin 1998).While many might see Segrest
and Feagin as “race traitors,” their intellectual work illustrates how coalition
building that advances Black feminist thought might operate.
Just as African-American women who aim to advance Black feminism as a
social justice project can support other social justice projects—U.S. Black women
who are respectful of the importance of Latina autonomy to Latina social justice
projects can study , learn from, research, and teach about Latinas if they do so in
37DISTINGUISHING FEATURES OF BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 55 ---
non-exploitative ways—so can others approach Black feminist thought in a sim-
ilar fashion. Thus, U.S. Black feminist thought fully actualized is a collaborative
enterprise. It must be open to coalition building with individuals engaged in
similar social justice projects.
Coalition building such as this requires simultaneous if not prior dialogues
among Black women intellectuals and within the larger African-American
women’s community . Exploring the common themes of a Black women’s stand-
point is an important first step. Moreover, finding ways of handling internal dis-
sent is especially important for building Black women’s intellectual communities.
Evelynn Hammonds describes how maintaining a united front for Whites stifles
her thinking: “What I need to do is challenge my thinking, to grow. On white
publications sometimes I feel like I’m holding up the banner of black woman-
hood. And that doesn’t allow me to be as critical as I would like to be” (in Clarke
et al. 1983, 104). Cheryl Clarke observes that she has two dialogues: one with
the public and the private ones in which she feels free to criticize the work of
other Black women. Clarke states that the private dialogues “have changed my
life, have shaped the way I feel ...h a v e  m attered to me” (p. 103).
Coalition building also requires dialogues with groups engaged in similar
social justice projects. Black women intellectuals can use our outsider-within
location in building effective coalitions and stimulating dialogue with others
who are similarly located. Barbara Smith suggests that Black women develop dia-
logues from a “commitment to principled coalitions, based not upon expediency ,
but upon our actual need for each other” (1983, xxxiii). Dialogues among and
coalitions with a range of groups, each with its own distinctive set of experiences
and specialized thought embedded in those experiences, form the larger, more
general terrain of intellectual and political discourse necessary for furthering
Black feminism. Through dialogues exploring how domination is maintained
and changed, parallels between Black women’s experiences and those of other
groups become the focus of investigation.
Dialogues associated with ethical, principled coalition building create possi-
bilities for new versions of truth. Alice Walker’s answer to the question of what
she felt were the major differences between the literature of African-Americans
and Whites offers a provocative glimpse of the types of truths that might emerge
through epistemologies that embrace dialogues and coalition building. Walker
did not spend much time considering this question, since it was not the differ-
ence between them that interested her, but, rather, the way Black writers and
White writers seemed to be writing one immense story , with different parts of
the story coming from a multitude of different perspectives. In a conversation
with her mother, Walker refines this epistemological vision: “I believe that the
truth about any subject only comes when all sides of the story are put together,
and all their different meanings make one new one. Each writer writes the miss-
ing parts to the other writer’s story . And the whole story is what I’m after”
(1983, 49). Her mother’s response to Walker’s vision of the possibilities of dia-
38 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 56 ---
logues and coalitions hints at the difficulty of sustaining such dialogues across
differences in power: “ ‘Well, I doubt if you can ever get the true missing parts
of anything away from the white folks,’ my mother says softly , so as not to offend
the waitress who is mopping up a nearby table; ‘they’ve sat on the truth so long
by now they’ve mashed the life out of it’ ” (1983, 49).
Black Feminism as Dynamic and Changing
A fifth distinguishing feature of U.S. Black feminist thought concerns the signif-
icance of change. In order for Black feminist thought to operate effectively with-
in Black feminism as a social justice project, both must remain dynamic. Neither
Black feminist thought as a critical social theory nor Black feminist practice can
be static; as social conditions change, so must the knowledge and practices
designed to resist them. For example, stressing the importance of Black women’s
centrality to Black feminist thought does not mean that all African-American
women desire, are positioned, or are qualified to exert this type of intellectual
leadership. Under current conditions, some Black women thinkers have lost
contact with Black feminist practice. Conversely , the changed social conditions
under which U.S. Black women now come to womanhood—class-segregated
neighborhoods, some integrated, far more not—place Black women of different
social classes in entirely new relationships with one another.
African-American women as a group may have experiences that provide us
with a unique angle of vision. But expressing a collective, self-defined Black fem-
inist consciousness is problematic precisely because dominant groups have a
vested interest in suppressing such thought. As Hannah Nelson notes, “I have
grown to womanhood in a world where the saner you are, the madder you are
made to appear” (Gwaltney 1980, 7). Ms. Nelson realizes that those who control
school curricula, television programs, government statistics, and the press typi-
cally prevail in establishing their viewpoint as superior to others.
An oppressed group’s experiences may put its members in a position to see
things differently , but their lack of control over the ideological apparatuses of
society makes expressing a self-defined standpoint more difficult. Elderly domes-
tic worker Rosa Wakefield assesses how the standpoints of the powerful and those
who serve them diverge:
If you eats these dinners and don’t cook ‘em, if you wears these clothes
and don’t buy or iron them, then you might start thinking that the good
fairy or some spirit did all that. . . . Black folks don’t have no time to be
thinking like that. . .. But when you don’t have anything else to do, you
can think like that. It’s bad for your mind, though. (Gwaltney 1980, 88)
Ms. Wakefield has a self-defined perspective growing from her experiences that
enables her to reject standpoints advanced by  more powerful groups. And yet
ideas like hers are typically suppressed by dominant groups. Groups unequal in
39DISTINGUISHING FEATURES OF BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 57 ---
power are correspondingly unequal in their ability to make their standpoint
known to themselves and others.
The changing social conditions that confront African-American women
stimulate the need for new Black feminist analyses of the common differences
that characterize U.S. Black womanhood. Some Black women thinkers are already
engaged in this process. Take, for example, Barbara Omolade’s (1994) insightful
analysis of Black women’s historical and contemporary participation in mammy
work. Most can understand mammy work’s historical context, one where Black
women were confined to domestic service, with Aunt Jemima created as a con-
trolling image designed to hide Black women’s exploitation. Understanding the
limitations of domestic service, much of Black women’s progress in the labor
market has been measured by the move out of domestic service. Currently , few
U.S. Black women work in domestic service in private homes. Instead, a good
deal of this work in private homes is now done by undocumented immigrant
women of color who lack U.S. citizenship; their exploitation resembles that long
visited upon African-American women (Chang 1994). But, as Omolade points
out, these changes do not mean that U.S. Black women have escaped mammy
work. Even though few Aunt Jemimas exist today , and those that do have been
cosmetically altered, leading to the impression that mammy work has disap-
peared, Omolade reminds us that mammy work has assumed new forms.Within
each segment of the labor market—the low-paid jobs at fast-food establishments,
nursing homes, day-care centers, and dry cleaners that characterize the secondary
sector, the secretaries and clerical workers of the primary lower tier sector, or the
teachers, social workers, nurses, and administrators of the primary upper tier sec-
tor—U.S. Black women still do a remarkable share of the emotional nurturing
and cleaning up after other people, often for lower pay . In this context, the task
for contemporary Black feminist thought lies in explicating these changing rela-
tionships and developing analyses of how these commonalities are experienced
differently .
The changing conditions of Black women’s work overall has important 
implications for Black women’s intellectual work. Historically , the suppression of
Black feminist thought has meant that Black women intellectuals have tradition-
ally relied on alternative institutional locations to produce specialized knowledge
about a Black women’s standpoint. Many Black women scholars, writers, and
artists have worked either alone, as was the case with Maria W . Stewart, or within
African-American community organizations, the case for Black women in the
club movement and in Black churches. The grudging incorporation of work on
Black women into curricular offerings of historically White colleges and universi-
ties, coupled with the creation of a critical mass of African-American women 
writers such as Toni Morrison, Alice Walker, and Gloria Naylor within these 
institutional locations, means that Black women intellectuals can now find
employment within academia. Black women’s history and Black feminist literary
criticism constitute two focal points of this renaissance in Black women’s intel-
40 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 58 ---
lectual work (Carby 1987). Moreover, U.S. Black women’s access to the media
remains unprecedented, as talk show hostess Oprah Winfrey’s long-running 
television show and forays into film production suggest.
The visibility provided U.S. Black women and our ideas via these new insti-
tutional locations has been immense. However, one danger facing African-
American women intellectuals working in these new locations concerns the
potential isolation of individual thinkers from Black women’s collective experi-
ences—lack of access to other U.S. Black women and to Black women’s commu-
nities. Another is the pressure to separate thought from action—particularly
political activism—that typically accompanies training in standard academic 
disciplines or participating in allegedly neutral spheres like the “free” press. Yet 
another involves the inability of some Black women “superstars” to critique the
terms of their own participation in these new relations. Blinded by their self-pro-
claimed Black feminist diva aspirations, they feel that they owe no one, especially
other Black women. Instead, they become trapped within their own impover-
ished Black feminist universes. Despite these dangers, these new institutional
locations provide a multitude of opportunities for enhancing Black feminist
thought’s visibility . In this new context, the challenge lies in remaining dynamic,
all the while keeping in mind that a moving target is more difficult to hit.
U.S. Black Feminism and Other Social 
Justice Projects
A final distinguishing feature of Black feminist thought concerns its relationship
to other projects for social justice. A broad range of African-American women
intellectuals have advanced the view that Black women’s struggles are part of a
wider struggle for human dignity , empowerment, and social justice. In an 1893
speech to women, Anna Julia Cooper cogently expressed this  worldview:
We take our stand on the solidarity of humanity , the oneness of life, and
the unnaturalness and injustice of all special favoritisms, whether of sex,
race, country , or condition. . . . The colored woman feels that woman’s
cause is one and universal; and that . . . not till race, color, sex, and con-
dition are seen as accidents, and not the substance of life; not till the uni-
versal title of humanity to life, liberty , and the pursuit of happiness is con-
ceded to be inalienable to all; not till then is woman’s lesson taught and
woman’s cause won—not the white woman’s nor the black woman’s, not
the red woman’s but the cause of every man and of every woman who has
writhed silently under a mighty wrong. (Loewenberg and Bogin 1976,
330–31)
Like Cooper, many African-American women intellectuals embrace this per-
spective regardless of particular political solutions we propose, our educational
backgrounds, our fields of study , or our historical periods.Whether we advocate
41DISTINGUISHING FEATURES OF BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 59 ---
working through autonomous Black women’s organizations, becoming part of
women’s organizations, running for political office, or supporting Black com-
munity institutions, African-American women intellectuals repeatedly identify
political actions such as these as a means for human empowerment rather than
ends in and of themselves. Thus one important guiding principle of Black fem-
inism is a recurring humanist vision (Steady 1981, 1987).
4
Alice Walker’s preference for the term womanist addresses this notion of the
solidarity of humanity . ”Womanist is to feminist as purple is to lavender,” she
writes. To Walker, one is “womanist” when one is “committed to the survival and
wholeness of entire people, male and female.” A womanist is “not a separatist,
except periodically for health” and is “traditionally universalist, as is ‘Mama, why
are we brown, pink, and yellow, and our cousins are white, beige, and black?’Ans.:
‘Well, you know the colored race is just like a flower garden, with every color
flower represented’ ” (1983, xi). By redefining all people as “people of color,”
Walker universalizes what are typically seen as individual struggles while simul-
taneously allowing space for autonomous movements of self-determination.
5
In assessing the sexism of the Black nationalist movement of the 1960s,
lawyer Pauli Murray identifies the dangers inherent in separatism as opposed to
autonomy , and also echoes Cooper’s concern with the solidarity of humanity:
The lesson of history that all human rights are indivisible and that the fail-
ure to adhere to this principle jeopardizes the rights of all is particularly
applicable here. A built-in hazard of an aggressive ethnocentric movement
which disregards the interests of other disadvantaged groups is that it will
become parochial and ultimately self-defeating in the face of hostile reac-
tions, dwindling allies, and mounting frustrations....O n l y  a  b road move-
ment for human rights can prevent the Black Revolution from becoming
isolated and can insure ultimate success. (Murray 1970, 102)
Without a commitment to human solidarity and social justice, suggests Murray ,
any political movement—whether Black nationalist, feminist, or anti-elitist—
may be doomed to ultimate failure.
Former congresswoman Shirley Chisholm also points to the need for self-
conscious struggle against the stereotypes that support social injustice. In “work-
ing toward our own freedom, we can help others work free from the traps of
their stereotypes,” she notes. “In the end, antiblack, antifemale, and all forms of
discrimination are equivalent to the same thing—antihumanism .... W e  m u s t
reject not only the stereotypes that others have of us but also those we have of
ourselves and others” (1970, 181).
This humanist orientation within U.S. Black feminism also resembles similar
stances taken with Black diasporic feminisms. Ama Ata Aidoo, a former minister
of education in Ghana and author of novels, poetry , and short stories, describes
the inclusive nature of her political philosophy:
42 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 60 ---
When people ask me rather bluntly every now and then whether I am a
feminist, I not only answer yes, but I go on to insist that every woman and
every man should be a feminist—especially if they believe that Africans
should take charge of African land, African wealth, African lives, and the
burden of African development. It is not possible to advocate indepen-
dence for the African continent without also believing that African women
must have the best that the environment can offer. For some of us, this is
the crucial element in our feminism. (Aidoo 1998, 39)
Aidoo recognizes that neither African nor U.S. Black women nor any other group
will ever be empowered in situations of social injustice. Social justice projects
are not either/or endeavors where one can say , “We have our movement and you
have yours—our movements have nothing to do with one another.” Instead,
such projects counsel, “We have our movement, and we support yours.” In a
context of intersecting oppressions, Black feminism requires searching for jus-
tice not only for U.S. Black women, but for everyone.
The words and actions of these diverse Black women intellectuals may
address markedly different audiences.Yet in their commitment to Black women’s
empowerment within a context of social justice, they advance the strikingly sim-
ilar theme of the oneness of all human life. Perhaps the most succinct version of
the humanist vision in U.S. Black feminist thought is offered by Fannie Lou
Hamer, the daughter of sharecroppers and a Mississippi civil rights activist.While
sitting on her porch, Ms. Hamer observed, “Ain’ no such thing as I can hate any-
body and hope to see God’s face” (Jordan 1981,xi).
43DISTINGUISHING FEATURES OF BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 61 ---



--- PAGE 62 ---
Honey , de white man is the de ruler of everything as fur as Ah been able tuh find
out. Maybe it’s some place way off in de ocean where de black man is in power, but
we don’t know nothin’ but what we see. So de white man throw down de load and
tell de nigger man tuh pick it up. He pick it up because he have to, but he don’t
tote it. He hand it to his womenfolks. De nigger woman is de mule uh de world so
fur as Ah can see. —Zora Neale Hurston 1937, 16
With these words Nanny , an elderly
African-American woman in Zora Neale Hurston’s Their Eyes Were Watching God,
explains Black women’s “place” to her young, impressionable granddaughter.
Nanny knows that being treated as “mules uh de world” lies at the heart of 
Black women’s oppression.Thus, one core theme in U.S. Black feminist thought
consists of analyzing Black women’s work, especially Black women’s labor 
market victimization as “mules.” As dehumanized objects, mules are living
machines and can be treated as part of the scenery . Fully human women are less
easily exploited. As mill worker Corine Cannon observes, “Your work, and this
goes for white people and black, is what you are . . . your work is your life”
(Byerly 1986, 156).
In general, Black feminist analyses of Black women’s work emphasize two
themes. On the one hand, much scholarship investigates how Black women’s
paid work is organized within intersecting oppressions of race, class, and gender.
Documenting Black women’s labor market status in order to see the general pat-
terns of race and gender inequality is one primary area of analysis
(Higginbotham 1983; Jones 1985; Amott and Matthaei 1991). This research is
supplemented by studies of Black women’s work during specific historical eras,
such as slavery (Jones 1985; D. White 1985) and the urbanizing South (Clark-
Lewis 1985), and their positions in specific occupational niches, primarily
3
WORK,
FAMILY,
AND
BLACK 
WOMEN’S
OPPRESSION 
3
Part 2:
Core Themes in
Black Feminist Thought


--- PAGE 63 ---
domestic work (Dill 1980, 1988a; Rollins 1985), in unions (Sacks 1988), and 
in the professions (Moses 1989; Essed 1991; Higginbotham 1994). Within 
Black feminist-influenced scholarship, African-American women are often pre-
sented as constrained but empowered figures, even in extremely difficult labor
market settings (Terborg-Penn 1985). Studying the conditions of Black women’s
employment, especially racial discrimination at work, also provides new knowl-
edge on the significance of Black women’s work (St. Jean and Feagin 1998,
40–72). Despite the scholarship’s insights concerning Black women’s resilience,
Black feminist-influenced scholarship points out that for far too many U.S. Black
women, Maria Stewart’s claim that “let our girls possess whatever amiable quali-
ties of soul they may . . . it is impossible for scarce an individual of them to rise
above the condition of servants” (Richardson 1987, 46) remains true (Omolade
1994). U.S. Black women may have migrated out of domestic service in private
homes, but as their overrepresentation as nursing home assistants, day-care aides,
dry-cleaning workers, and fast-food employees suggests, African-American women
engaged in low-paid service work is far from a thing of the past.
A less developed but equally important theme concerns how Black women’s
unpaid family labor is simultaneously confining and empowering for Black
women. In particular, research on U.S. Black women’s unpaid labor within
extended families remains less fully developed in Black feminist thought than
does that on Black women’s paid work. By emphasizing African-American
women’s contributions to their families’ well-being, such as keeping families
together and teaching children survival skills (Martin and Martin 1978; Davis
1981), such scholarship suggests that Black women see the unpaid work that 
they do for their families more as a form of resistance to oppression than as a
form of exploitation by men. Despite these views, investigating how Black
women’s unpaid labor is exploited within African-American family networks, for
example, by boyfriends, relatives, and even government-supported social policies,
remains a neglected topic. In the context of Black family studies that either casti-
gate Black mothers or glorify them, the theme of how hard Black women work is
often overlooked.
When combined, Black feminist-inspired analyses of paid and unpaid work
performed both in the labor market and in families stimulate a better appreciation
of the powerful and complex interplay that shapes Black women’s position as “de
mule uh de world.”They also promise to shed light on ongoing debates concern-
ing connections between work and family .
Family and Work: Challenging the Definitions
When Dan Quayle, then U.S. vice president, used the term family values near the
end of a speech at a political fund-raiser in 1992, he apparently touched a
national nerve. Following Quayle’s speech, close to 300 articles with “family
46 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 64 ---
values” in their titles appeared in the popular press. Despite the range of polit-
ical perspectives expressed on family values, one thing remained clear: Family
values, however defined, seemed important to national well-being, and Quayle
had tapped much deeper feelings about the significance of ideas about family if
not actual families themselves in the United States.
Dan Quayle’s and similar understandings of family depend heavily on who
controls the definitions. And the definitions advanced by elite groups in the
United States uniformly work to the detriment of African-American women.
Situated in the center of family values debates is an imagined traditional family
ideal. Formed through a combination of marital and blood ties, “normal” fami-
lies should consist of heterosexual, racially homogeneous couples who produce
their own biological children. Such families should have a specific authority
structure, namely , a father-head earning an adequate family wage, a stay-at-home
wife and mother, and children. Idealizing the traditional family as a private haven
from a public world, family is seen as being held together through primary emo-
tional bonds of love and caring. Assuming a relatively fixed sexual division of
labor, wherein women’s roles are defined as primarily in the home with men’s
in the public world of work, the traditional family ideal also assumes the separa-
tion of work and family . Defined as a natural or biological arrangement based on
heterosexual attraction, instead this monolithic family type is actually supported
by government policy . It is organized not around a biological core, but a state-
sanctioned, heterosexual marriage that confers legitimacy not only on the fami-
ly structure itself but on children born in this family (Andersen 1991; Thorne
1992). In general, everything the imagined traditional family ideal is thought to
be, African-American families are not.
1
Two elements of the traditional family ideal are especially problematic for
African-American women. First, the assumed split between the “public” sphere
of paid employment and the “private” sphere of unpaid family responsibilities
has never worked for U.S. Black women. Under slavery , U.S. Black women worked
without pay in the allegedly public sphere of Southern agriculture and had their
family privacy routinely violated. Second, the public/private binary separating
the family households from the paid labor market is fundamental in explaining
U.S. gender ideology . If one assumes that real men work and real women take
care of families, then African-Americans suffer from deficient ideas concerning
gender. In particular, Black women become less “feminine,” because they work
outside the home, work for pay and thus compete with men, and their work
takes them away from their children.
Framed through this prism of an imagined traditional family ideal, U.S. Black
women’s experiences and those of other women of color are typically deemed
deficient (Higginbotham 1983; Glenn 1985; Mullings 1997). Rather than trying
to explain why Black women’s work and family patterns deviate from the seem-
ing normality of the traditional family ideal, a more fruitful approach lies in
challenging the very constructs of work and family themselves (Collins 1998b).
47WORK, FAMILY, AND BLACK WOMEN’S OPPRESSION


--- PAGE 65 ---
Understandings of work, like understandings of family , vary greatly depend-
ing on who controls the definitions. In the following discussion of the distinc-
tion between work and measures of self, May Madison, a participant in John
Gwaltney’s study of inner-city African-Americans, alludes to the difference
between work as an instrumental activity and work as something for self:
One very important difference between white people and black people is
that white people think you are your work....N o w ,a  b l a c k  person has
more sense than that because he knows that what I am doing doesn’t have
anything to do with what I want to do or what I do when I am doing for
myself. Now, black people think that my work is just what I have to do to
get what I want. (Gwaltney 1980, 174)
Ms. Madison’s perspective criticizes definitions of work that grant White men
more status and human worth because they are employed in better-paid occu-
pations. She recognizes that work is a contested construct and that evaluating
individual worth by the type of work performed is a questionable practice in
systems based on race and gender inequality .
Work might be better conceptualized by examining the range of work that
African-American women actually perform. Work as alienated labor can be eco-
nomically exploitative, physically demanding, and intellectually deadening—the
type of work long associated with Black women’s status as “mule.” Alienated
labor can be paid—the case of Black women in domestic service, those Black
women working as dishwashers, dry-cleaning assistants, cooks, and health-care
assistants, as well as some professional Black women engaged in corporate
mammy work; or it can be unpaid, as with the seemingly never-ending chores
of many Black grandmothers and Black single mothers. But work can also be
empowering and creative, even if it is physically challenging and appears to be
demeaning. Exploitative wages that Black women were allowed to keep and use
for their own benefit or labor done out of love for the members of one’s family
can represent such work. Again, this type of work can be either paid or unpaid.
What is the connection between U.S. Black women’s work both in the labor
market and in African-American family networks? Addressing this question for
four key historical periods in Black political economy uses this broader under-
standing of Black women’s work to further Black feminist analyses of U.S. Black
women’s oppression.
The Process of Enslavement
Historically African-American families have been economically exploited and
politically disenfranchised within the U.S. political economy (Berry 1994).This
neither means that all African-Americans have been poor, nor that most are
today . But diversity among U.S. Blacks in the historical and contemporary con-
tours of intersecting oppressions of race and class does not erase the funda-
48 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 66 ---
mental relationship of injustice. This unjust context has affected U.S. Blacks as a
group and thus provides a framework for understanding Black women’s work
experiences both in kin networks and in the labor market (Mullings 1997,
20–51).
During the shift to industrialization in the early nineteenth century , White
immigrants, landowners, and Whites of all social classes and citizenship cate-
gories had the legal right to maintain families and, if needed, to work for pay . In
contrast, the majority of African-Americans were enslaved. They had great diffi-
culty maintaining families and family privacy in public spheres that granted them
no citizenship rights. Enslaved Africans were property (Burnham 1987), and one
way that many resisted the dehumanizing effects of slavery was by re-creating
African notions of family as extended kin units (Webber 1978; Sobel 1979).
Bloodlines carefully monitored in West African societies were replaced by a
notion of “blood” whereby enslaved Africans drew upon notions of family to
redefine themselves as part of a Black community consisting of their enslaved
“brothers” and “sisters” (Gutman 1976).This slave community stood in opposi-
tion to a White male–controlled public sphere of the capitalist political economy .
In this way , the line separating enslaved African women and men from White
women and men stimulated the creation of an important yet subjugated Black
civil society (Brown 1994). This racial divide served as a more accurate marker
delineating public and private spheres for African-Americans than that separating
Black households from the Black community overall.
Prior to U.S. enslavement and African colonization, women in African soci-
eties apparently combined work and family without seeing much conflict
between the two. In West African societies, women’s fundamental family respon-
sibilities revolved around motherhood, and they routinely combined child care
with their contributions to precapitalist political economies. In agricultural soci-
eties dependent on female farmers, children accompanied their mothers to the
fields. Women entrepreneurs took their children with them when conducting
business in the marketplace. When old enough, children contributed to family-
based production by caring for siblings, running errands, and generally helping
out. Working did not detract from West African women’s mothering. Instead,
being economically productive and contributing to the family-based economy
was an integral part of motherhood (Sudarkasa 1981a).This does not mean that
male domination was absent from such societies (see, e.g., Imam et al. 1997),
only that women’s activities with work and family differed from those they
encountered under slavery .
For African women enslaved in the United States, these basic ideas concern-
ing work, family , and motherhood were retained, yet changed by two funda-
mental demands of enslavement. First, whereas African women worked on behalf
of their families and children, enslaved African-American women’s labor bene-
fited their owners. Second, the nature of work performed was altered. Women
did not retain authority over their time, technology , workmates, or type or
49WORK, FAMILY, AND BLACK WOMEN’S OPPRESSION


--- PAGE 67 ---
amount of work they performed. In essence, their forced incorporation into a
capitalist political economy as slaves meant that West African women became eco-
nomically exploited, politically powerless units of labor.
Gender roles were similarly shaped under slavery . Black women generally
performed the same work as men. This enabled them to recraft West African tra-
ditions whereby women were not limited to devalued family labor (Jones 1985;
D. White 1985). However, unlike African precolonial political economies, where
women’s labor benefited their lineage group and their children, under slavery
neither men nor women got to keep what they produced. Under U.S. capitalism,
slavery also established the racial division of labor whereby African-Americans
were relegated to dirty , manual, nonintellectual jobs. Despite slavery’s burdens,
African-Americans did not perceive work as the problem but, rather, the
exploitation inherent in the work they performed. A saying among enslaved
Africans, “It’s a poor dog that won’t wag its own tail,” alludes to popular per-
ceptions among Blacks that Whites were lazy and did not value work as much as
African-Americans themselves.
Black women’s work affected the organization of child care. Perceptions of
motherhood as an unpaid occupation in the home comparable to paid male
occupations in the public sector advanced by the traditional family ideal never
became widespread among the majority of African-American women (Mullings
1997). By denying enslaved African women marriage, citizenship, and even
humanity , slavery provided no social context for issues of privatized motherhood
as a stay-at-home occupation. Instead, communal child-care arrangements sub-
stituted for individualized maternal care—a few women were responsible for
caring for all children too young to work, and women as a group felt account-
able for one another’s children (D. White 1985).
African-American women’s experiences as mothers have been shaped by the
dominant group’s efforts to harness Black women’s sexuality and fertility to a
system of capitalist exploitation. Efforts to control U.S. Black women’s reproduc-
tion were important to the maintenance of the race, class, and gender inequality
characterizing the slave order in at least three ways. First, the biological notions
of race underpinning the racial subordination of the slave system required so-
called racial purity in order to be effective. Since children followed the condition
of their mothers, children born of enslaved Black women were slaves. Forbidding
Black men to have sexual relations with White women of any social class reduced
the possibility that children of African descent would be born to White mothers.
Any children born of such liaisons must be seen as being the product of rape.
Motherhood and racism were symbolically intertwined, with controlling the sex-
uality and fertility of both African-American and White women essential in
reproducing racialized notions of American womanhood (King 1973).
Second, motherhood as an institution occupies a special place in transmit-
ting values to children about their proper place. On the one hand, a mother can
foster her children’s oppression if she teaches them to believe in their own infe-
50 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 68 ---
riority . On the other hand, the relationship between mothers and children can
serve as a private sphere in which cultures of resistance and everyday forms of
resistance are learned (Scott 1985). When Black slave mothers taught their chil-
dren to trust their own self-definitions and value themselves, they offered a pow-
erful tool for resisting oppression.
Finally , controlling Black women’s reproduction was essential to the creation
and perpetuation of capitalist class relations. Slavery benefited certain segments
of the U.S. population by economically exploiting others. As Black feminist intel-
lectual Frances Ellen Watkins Harper argued, “How can we pamper our appetites
upon luxuries drawn from reluctant fingers. Oh, could slavery exist long if it did
not sit on a commercial throne?” (Sterling 1984, 160). Under such a system in
which the control of property is fundamental, enslaved African women were
valuable commodities (Williams 1991). Slaveowners controlled Black women’s
labor and commodified Black women’s bodies as units of capital. Moreover, as
mothers, Black women’s fertility produced the children who increased their
owner’s property and labor force (Davis 1981; Burnham 1987).
Efforts to control Black women’s sexuality were tied directly to slave owners’
efforts to increase the number of children their female slaves produced. Historian
Deborah Gray White (1985) writes, “Slave masters wanted adolescent girls to
have children, and to this end they practiced a passive, though insidious kind of
breeding” (p. 98). Techniques such as assigning pregnant women lighter work-
loads, giving pregnant women more attention and rations, and rewarding prolific
women with bonuses were all used to increase Black women’s reproduction.
Punitive measures were also used. Infertile women could expect to be treated
“like barren sows and be passed from one unsuspecting buyer to the next” (D.
White 1985, 101).
The relative security that often accompanied motherhood served to reinforce
its importance. Childbearing was a way for enslaved Black women to anchor
themselves in a place for an extended period and maintain enduring relation-
ships with husbands, family , and friends. Given the short life expectancy of slave
women—33.6 years—and the high mortality rates of Black children—from
1850 to 1860 fewer than two of three Black children survived to the age of 10—
enslaved women’s ability to bear many healthy children was often the critical ele-
ment in the length and stability of slave marriages (Giddings 1984). Similarly , the
refusal of women to bear children and cases of Black infanticide can be inter-
preted as acts of resistance (Hine and Wittenstein 1981).
Deborah Gray White contends that slaveholders’ efforts to increase fertility
encouraged Black women to elevate motherhood over marriage. At the same
time, it paralleled African-derived cultural patterns where women were expected
to provide for their children:
Relationships between mother and child . . . superseded those between
husband and wife. Slaveholder practice encouraged the primacy of the
mother-child relationship, and in the mores of the slave community
51WORK, FAMILY, AND BLACK WOMEN’S OPPRESSION


--- PAGE 69 ---
motherhood ranked above marriage. . . . Women in their roles as mothers
were the central figures in the nuclear slave family . (1985, 159)
Black women’s centrality in Black family networks should not be confused with
matriarchal or female-dominated family units (Collins 1989; Dickerson 1995b).
Matriarchy theses assume that someone must “rule” in order for households to
function effectively . Neither Black men nor Black women ruled Black family net-
works (Davis 1981; Burnham 1987). Rather, African-American men’s and
women’s positions within slave political economies made it unlikely that either
patriarchal or matriarchal domination could take root.
The Transition to “Free” Labor
For African-Americans the period between emancipation and subsequent migra-
tions to southern and northern cities was characterized by two distinct models
of community . Each offered a different version of the connections between work
and family . The model of community advanced by dominant White society
reflected capitalist market economies of competitive, industrial, and monopoly
capitalism (Amott and Matthaei 1991). Firmly rooted in an exchange-based
marketplace with its accompanying assumptions of rational economic decision
making and White male control of the marketplace, this model of community
stressed the rights of individuals to make decisions in their own self-interest,
regardless of the impact on the larger society . Composed of a collection of
unequal individuals who compete for greater shares of money as the medium
of exchange, this model of community legitimates relations of domination
either by denying they exist or by treating them as inevitable (Hartsock 1983b).
Under slavery , African-Americans paradoxically were well integrated within,
yet excluded from, the economic and political benefits of the market economy
and its version of community . Slave notions of Black community , while African-
influenced, were also supported by the common conditions of exclusion from
the market economy . Upon emancipation, Blacks became wage laborers and were
thrust into these exchange relationships in which individual gain was placed
ahead of collective good. Anna Julia Cooper describes this larger setting as the
Accumulative Period, and challenged its basic assumptions about community
and women’s role in it:
At the most trying time of what we have called the Accumulative Period,
when internecine war, originated through man’s love of gain and his
determination to subordinate national interests and black men’s rights
alike to the considerations of personal profit and loss, was drenching our
country with its own best blood, who shall recount the name and fame of
the women on both sides of the senseless strife? (Cooper 1892, 128)
Cooper’s ideas are key in that they not only link racism, economic exploitation
52 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 70 ---
after emancipation, and the violence needed to maintain both, but they clearly
label the public sphere and its community as a male-defined arena. By asking,
“Who shall recount the name and fame of the women?” she questions the role
of gender in structuring women’s subordination generally , and Black women’s
work and family roles in particular.
During this period, revitalized political and economic oppression of African-
Americans in the South influenced U.S. Blacks’ actions and ideas about family
and community . Racial segregation became legally entrenched during this peri-
od (Berry 1994). Within Black civil society , notions of interpersonal relations
forged during slavery endured—such as equating family with extended family , of
treating community as family , and of seeing dealings with Whites as elements of
public discourse and dealings with Blacks as part of family business (Brown
1994). In a climate of state-sanctioned racial violence, Black solidarity became
highly important and worked to suppress bona fida differences among U.S.
Blacks. As a result, African-American definitions of community emerged that dif-
fered from public, market-driven, exchange-based community models.Whether
adhered to as a remnant of the African past or responding to the exigencies of
political and economic disenfranchisement in the post–Reconstruction South,
Black communities as places of collective effort and will stood in contrast to the
public, market-driven, exchange-based dominant political economy in which
they were situated.
For African-American women the issue was less one of achieving economic
parity with their Black male counterparts and more one of securing an adequate
overall family income. Denying U.S. Black men a family wage meant that Black
women continued working for pay . Motherhood as a privatized, female “occu-
pation” never predominated in Black civil society because no social class foun-
dation could be had to support it (Dill 1988b). Communal child care within
extended families continued (Martin and Martin 1978; Jones 1985). Beginning
with the landmark Plessy v. Ferguson Supreme Court decision, the legalization of
racial segregation in housing, education, employment, and public accommoda-
tions erected rigid boundaries between African-Americans and White Americans.
At the same time, the more fluid boundaries characterizing the relationships
among households, Black family networks, and Black community organizations
such as Black churches persisted. Within African-American communities social
class–specific gender ideology developed during this period (Higginbotham 1989,
1993).
For at least 75 years after emancipation, the vast majority of Black families
remained in the South (Jones 1985). Black women workers were confined to two
major occupations. The majority of Black women worked in the fields, with the
male head of the extended family unit receiving any wages earned by the family
unit. Such work was hard, exhausting, and represented little change from the
work done by enslaved African-American women. Sara Brooks began full-time
work in the fields at age 11 and remembers, “We never was lazy cause we used
53WORK, FAMILY, AND BLACK WOMEN’S OPPRESSION


--- PAGE 71 ---
to really work. We used to work like mens. Oh, fight sometime, fuss sometime,
but worked on” (Simonsen 1986, 39).
Domestic work constituted the other primary occupation for Black women’s
wage labor. Seeing such work as inevitable, families tried to prepare young Black
girls. An 87-year-old North Carolina woman remembers her training: “No girl I
know wasn’t trained for work out by ten. You washed, watched, and whipped
somebody the day you stopped crawling. From the time a girl can stand, she’s
being made to work” (Clark-Lewis 1985, 7). Such work was low paid and
exposed Black girls and women to the constant threat of sexual harassment. One
African-American woman describes the lack of protection for Black women
domestic workers in the South: “I remember ...I  lost my place because I refused
to let the madam’s husband kiss me.... When my husband went to the man who
had insulted me, the man cursed him, and slapped him, and—had him arrest-
ed!” (Lerner 1972, 155–56). Even though she testified in court, her husband was
fined $25 and was told by the presiding judge, “This court will never take the
word of a nigger against the word of a white man” (p. 156).
The sexual harassment of African-American women by White men con-
tributed to images of Black women as fair game for all men.The difficulty of the
environment prompted one Southern Black women to remonstrate:
We poor colored women wage-earners in the South are fighting a terrible
battle....O n  the one hand, we are assailed by white men, and on the
other hand, we are assailed by black men, who should be our natural pro-
tectors; and, whether in the cook kitchen, at the washtub, over the sewing
machine, behind the baby carriage, or at the ironing board, we are little
more than pack horses, beasts of burden, slaves! (Lerner 1972, 157)
African-American women who were the wives and daughters of able-bodied
men often withdrew from both field labor and domestic service in order to con-
centrate on domestic duties in their own homes. In doing so they were “severely
criticized by whites for removing themselves from field labor because they were
seen to be aspiring to a model of womanhood that was inappropriate to them”
(Dill 1988b, 422). Black women wanted to withdraw from the labor force, not
to mimic middle-class White women’s domesticity but, rather, to strengthen the
political and economic position of their families. Their actions can be seen as a
sustained effort to remove themselves from the exploited labor force in order 
to return the value of their labor to their families and to find relief from the 
sexual harassment they endured in domestic service. While many women tried
to leave the paid labor force, the limited opportunities available to African-
American men made it virtually impossible for the majority of Black families 
to survive on Black male wages alone. Even though she was offered work only
as a maid, Elsa Barkley Brown’s college-educated mother was fortunate. From
Brown’s perspective, her mother’s “decision to be a wife and mother first in a
world which defined Black women in so many other ways, the decision to make
54 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 72 ---
her family the most important priority , was an act of resistance” (1986, 11). Far
too many Black women could not make this choice—they continued to work
for pay , and their work profoundly affected African-American family life, com-
munities, and the women themselves (Jones 1985).
Urbanization and Domestic Work
Black women’s move to Southern and Northern cities in the early 1900s con-
tinued virtually unabated until after World War II (Marks 1989). Migration stim-
ulated substantial shifts in Black women’s labor market activities, especially
those of working-class women, as well as changes in African-American family
patterns and community organization. While racial segregation in housing sep-
arated African-American from White Americans, gender relations within Black
civil society separated men from women. Male space included the streets, bar-
ber shops, and pool halls; female arenas consisted of households and churches.
“Women, who blurred the physical boundaries of gender, did so at the jeopardy
of respectability within their communities” (Higginbotham 1989, 59). Moreover,
class differences among U.S. Blacks existed, but were masked by the force of
racial segregation. The vast majority of U.S. Blacks were poor or working class.
During this period, historical employment patterns persisted whereby
African-American men were able to locate higher-paying yet less secure work
while Black women found lower-paying, more plentiful work. For example,
Black men employed in low-skilled manufacturing occupations typically
received wages higher than the wages earned by their wives working in
domestic service. But because Black men competed directly with White male
workers, they were more vulnerable to layoffs. Although Black men made
higher wages when they found work, few guarantees existed that their wages
were consistently available to their families. In contrast, Black women received
substantially lower wages in domestic work, but could count on receiving
them. This classic pattern of exploitation, differentiated by gender, has often
been misrepresented in arguments suggesting that Black women or Black men
have a labor market “advantage” over the other. What these approaches fail to
realize is that both African-American women and men were  disadvantaged in
urban labor markets, with gender differences structuring distinctive patterns
of economic vulnerability in employment.
Black women migrants encountered urban labor markets segmented along
lines of race and gender (Amott and Matthaei 1991). For the vast majority of
African-American women, urbanization meant migration out of agricultural
work and into domestic work.
One benefit of urbanization was that it allowed
Black domestic workers to shift the conditions of their work from those of live-
in servant to day work. A common migration pattern was for Black girls to train
for domestic work in the South by doing chores and taking care of siblings.
55WORK, FAMILY, AND BLACK WOMEN’S OPPRESSION


--- PAGE 73 ---
Around age 10, they went to Northern cities to assist working relatives (Clark-
Lewis 1985). At first girls might take care of their relatives’ children. They even-
tually—often after years of search—found employment in day work. Moving to
a larger marketplace where domestics could leave employers when demands
were inappropriate allowed African-American women to make the transition
from live-in to day work. One 83-year-old respondent in Elizabeth Clark-Lewis’s
study recounts how she viewed this shift as a move toward better working con-
ditions: “The living-in jobs just kept you running; never stopped. Day or night
you’d be getting something for somebody . You’d serve them. It was never a
minute’s peace.... But when I went out days on my jobs, I’d get my work done
and be gone. I guess that’s it.This work had a end” (Clark-Lewis 1985, 1).
While an improvement, the shift to day work maintained some of the more
negative features of the employer/employee relationship. Despite their removal
from the particular form control took in the South, domestic workers in
Northern cities were economically exploited even under the best of circum-
stances.At its worst, domestic work approximated conditions the women had left
behind in the South. Florence Rice describes how the 1930s New York City
“Bronx slave market” operated, where women stood in an assigned spot and
waited for employers to drive by and offer them day work: “I always remember
my domestic days. Some of the women, when they didn’t want to pay , they’d
accuse you of stealing....I t  w a s  l i k e  intimidation” (Lerner 1972, 275).Although
sexual harassment was less pervasive, it too remained a problem. Ms. Rice
remembers a male employer who “picked me up and said his wife was ill and
then when I got there his wife wasn’t there and he wanted to have an affair”
(p. 275).
Judith Rollins (1985) contends that what makes domestic work more “pro-
foundly exploitative than other comparable occupations” is the precise element
that makes it unique: the personal relationship between employer and employee.
Rollins reports that employers do not rank work performance as their highest
priority in evaluating domestic workers. Rather, the “personality of the worker
and the kinds of relationships employers were able to establish with them were
as or more important considerations” (p. 156).
Deference mattered, and those women who were submissive or who suc-
cessfully played the role of obedient servant were more highly valued by their
employers, regardless of the quality of the work performed. When domestic
worker Hannah Nelson reports, “Most people who have worked in service have
to learn to talk at great length about nothing,” she identifies the roles domestics
must play in order to satisfy their employers’ perceptions of a good Black domes-
tic. She continues, “I never have been very good at that, so I don’t speak, nor-
mally.... Some people I have worked for think I am slow-witted because I talk
very little on the job” (Gwaltney 1980, 6).
Employers used a variety of means to structure domestic work’s power rela-
tionship and solicit the deference they so desired.Techniques of linguistic defer-
56 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 74 ---
ence included addressing domestics by their first names, calling them “girls,” and
requiring that the domestic call the employer “ma’am.” Employers routinely
questioned domestics about their lifestyle, questions they would hesitate to ask
members of their own social circle. Gifts of used clothing and other household
items highlighted the economic inequality separating domestic and employer.
Employers used domestics as confidantes, another behavior that reinforced the
notion that domestics were outsiders (Rollins 1985).
Physical markers reinforced the deference relationship. One technique was to
require that domestics wear uniforms. One respondent in Clark-Lewis’s study
explains why her employers liked uniforms: “Them uniforms just seemed to
make them know you was theirs. Some say you wore them to show different jobs
you was doing. This in grey , other serving in black. But mostly them things just
showed you was always at they beck and call. Really that’s all them things
means!” (Clark-Lewis 1985, 16). The use of space was also a major device in
structuring deference behaviors. Domestics were confined to one area of the
house, usually the kitchen, and were expected to make themselves invisible when
in other areas of the house. Judith Rollins recounts her reactions to being objec-
tified in this fashion, to being treated as invisible while her employers had a con-
versation around her:
It was this aspect of servitude I found to be one of the strongest affronts
to my dignity as a human being. To Mrs. Thomas and her son, I became
invisible; their conversation was private with me, the black servant, in the
room as it would have been with no one in the room. . . . These gestures
of ignoring my presence were not, I think, intended as insults; they were
expressions of the employer’s ability to annihilate the humanness and
even, at times, the very existence of me, a servant and a black woman.
(Rollins 1985, 209)
Some African-American women were fortunate enough to locate work in
manufacturing. In the South, Black women entered tobacco factories, cotton
mills, and flour manufacturing. Some of the dirtiest jobs in these industries were
offered to African-American women. In the cotton mills Black women were
employed as common laborers in the yards, as waste gatherers, and as scrubbers
of machinery (Glenn 1985). With Northern migration, some Black women
entered factory employment, primarily in steam laundries and the rest in
unmechanized jobs as sweepers, cleaners, and ragpickers. Regardless of their
location, African-American women faced discrimination (Terborg-Penn 1985).
For example, Luanna Cooper, an employee for the Winston Leaf Tobacco 
Storage company , describes her reactions to the effort to organize segregated
unions in her plant: “They’re trying to have jimcrow unions. But I’m telling you
jimcrow unions aren’t good.They wanted me to join. I told them:‘I get jimcrow
free. I won’t pay for that’ ” (Lerner 1972, 268).
The shift to day work among domestic workers and the incorporation of
57WORK, FAMILY, AND BLACK WOMEN’S OPPRESSION


--- PAGE 75 ---
some Black women into the manufacturing sector paralleled changes in African-
American family and community structures. Even though the hours were long and
the pay low in the occupations where Black women remained concentrated, they
did have more time to devote to their families and communities than that avail-
able to live-in domestic workers. During the first wave of urbanization, African-
Americans re-created the types of communities they had known in their Southern
rural communities (Gutman 1976). Racial segregation in housing and employ-
ment meant that African-Americans continued to live in self-contained commu-
nities even after migration to Northern cities. As a result, the public/private split
separating Black communities from what were frequently hostile White neigh-
borhoods remained a salient feature framing Black women’s work and family rela-
tionships, especially among working-class women.The cooperative networks that
these women created under slavery and that they sustained in the rural South often
endured. Black women domestic workers who rode buses together shared vital
information essential to their survival. On occasion, they attempted unionization
(Terborg-Penn 1985). Neighbors took care of one another’s children, and churches
typically formed the core of many Black women’s community activities (Clark-
Lewis 1985; Dill 1988a)
Black Women’s Work and the Post–World War II Political
Economy
As long as African-Americans lived in self-contained albeit racially segregated
urban neighborhoods, Black community institutions aided U.S. Blacks in
responding to changes in wider society . After 1945, a changing global economy
in conjunction with the emergence of a new postcolonial, transnational context
fostered significant shifts in Black civil society . Globally , numerous groups
waged successful anticolonial struggles that resulted in new nation-states in
Africa and Asia.Within the United States, the Black activism of the 1950s–1970s
stimulated the dismantling of de jure and de facto racial segregation. When
combined, these international and domestic political shifts greatly affected the
relationship between work and family for African-American women.
The post–World War II period reflects several contradictions. On the one
hand, the period has been marked by substantial gains in formal political rights
for U.S. Blacks as a collectivity . From the end of the war to the mid-1970s, U.S.
Blacks acquired unprecedented access to education, housing, and jobs long
denied under legal segregation. From the founding of the National Association
for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) in 1910 to the passage of the
landmark Civil Rights Act in 1964 and the Voting Rights Act in 1965, U.S. Blacks
pursued a policy of gaining civil rights and equal treatment in housing, schools,
jobs, and public accommodation.This changed political climate led to Black civil
society’s becoming more stratified by social class.
2 The sizable working class that
58 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 76 ---
had long formed the core of Black civil society expanded upward. From this
working-class “center,” many Blacks experienced social mobility into the fledg-
ling Black middle class.
On the other hand, it became increasingly clear that many problems that U.S.
Blacks faced were not due solely to racial discrimination. While many African-
Americans benefited from the changed legislative climate, many others did not.
Class factors were equally important. Many Blacks endured downward social
mobility from the working-class center. The downwardly mobile—those who
lost their jobs and failed to find new ones—joined a growing population of poor
Blacks that had been on the bottom all along.This growing group on the bottom,
often referred to as the “Black underclass,” was not the cause of Black economic
disadvantage but, instead, constituted one outcome.
During this period, Black civil society underwent considerable change, much
of it influenced by gender-specific patterns of Black incorporation in an increas-
ingly global political economy (Brewer 1993; Squires 1994; Wilson 1996). In
general, work for Black men in manufacturing disappeared. Black women could
find work, but it was often part time, low paid, and lacking in security and ben-
efits (Wilson 1996). Moreover, the introduction of crack cocaine in urban Black
neighborhoods in the early 1980s incorporated men and women into the infor-
mal economy in gender-specific ways. Drugs became a major employer of young
Black men, and young Black women looked to these men for financial assistance.
Many young U.S. Blacks grew up in communities that were markedly differ-
ent than those prior to the 1980s. Extended family networks weakened (see, e.g.,
Kaplan 1997), and while U.S. Blacks became more class stratified, the racial seg-
regation in housing that fosters inequities of education and employment also
persisted (Massey and Denton 1993). Many young Black men came to see their
futures only in terms of being rap stars, basketball players, or drug dealers. Many
young Black women saw few options other than motherhood. Overall, young
Black men and women could not see the optimism of the diverse antiracist social
justice projects of the 1950s and 1960s but instead encountered the pessimism
of shrinking opportunities. Ostensibly the beneficiaries of the previous genera-
tion’s Black activism, they learned to live with new forms of control introduced
by an expanding criminal justice system (Davis 1997) and a punitive social wel-
fare bureaucracy (Brewer 1994). For many young U.S. Black men and women,
access to African-American intellectual and political traditions, feminist and oth-
erwise, remained elusive. Instead, they found themselves living in impoverished
economic and intellectual environments.
Several factors stimulated these and other dramatic changes in Black civil
society that in turn have affected African-American women’s work and family
experiences. At the center of these changes is a restructured global political econ-
omy . Job export to nonunionized American and foreign markets, job de-skilling,
the shift from manufacturing to service occupations, and job creation in subur-
ban communities all allow firms to find cheaper substitutes for Black American
59WORK, FAMILY, AND BLACK WOMEN’S OPPRESSION


--- PAGE 77 ---
labor (Wilson 1987, 1996). As Black feminist sociologist Rose Brewer points out,
“Capitalist firms do not have to depend upon black labor, either male or female.
Low-wage, low-cost labor can be found all over the world” (Brewer 1993, 19).
Moreover, legal victories did not mean that all segments of U.S. society were will-
ing to enforce antidiscrimination legislation. Beginning in the 1980s, and
throughout the 1990s, conservative politicians advanced a series of racial projects
designed to limit if not eliminate the social gains of the 1960s (Omi and Winant
1994). White backlash also emerged as a formidable factor, some of it crystalliz-
ing in the growth of new White supremacist organizations (Daniels 1997; Ferber
1998).When combined with deeply entrenched patterns of racial segregation in
housing that reflect an “American apartheid” (Massey and Denton 1993), wors-
ening and chronic unemployment in many Black urban neighborhoods persisted.
Overall, Black political activism of the 1950s and 1960s in the context of a
changing global political economy fostered the emergence of a comfortable yet
vulnerable new Black middle class. It also led to the growth of a reorganized
Black working class segmented by its ability to find steady , well-paid work.
Just Holding On: Working-Class Black Women
A crucial factor in contemporary African-American civil society is not sim-
ply Black men’s marginalization from work but changes affecting Black women’s
paid and unpaid work (Brewer 1993). Two major changes affect U.S. Black
women’s paid labor. The first is Black women’s movement from domestic service
to industrial and clerical work.The second is Black women’s integration into the
international division of labor in low-paid service work, which does not provide
sufficient income to support a family . When combined, these two factors seg-
ment Black working-class women into two subgroups. African-American women
holding good jobs in industry and the government sector constitute the core of
the Black working class. Black women who can find only low-paid, intermittent
service work become part of the working poor, that segment of the Black work-
ing class most likely to end up in poverty . Both groups work, and the nature of
the jobs they hold determines their work and family experiences.
More Black feminist–influenced studies that examine how intersections of
race and gender influence the work experiences of working-class Black women
are sorely needed. In this regard, Rose Brewer’s (1993) analysis of Black women’s
participation in Southern textile industries illustrates how examining Black
women’s participation in one industry reveals how U.S. Black women have been
affected by global economic restructuring. Barbara Omolade (1994) points to a
framework of new relationships among African-American women, one that she
calls a “three-tiered Black female work site: Black female professionals who super-
vise Black female clerks who then serve Black female clients” (p. 62). Black work-
ing-class women “clerks” sandwiched between the professionals and their clients
may find themselves subject to deference relationships reminiscent of Judith
60 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 78 ---
Rollins’s (1985) study of Black domestic workers. Yet these relationships among
U.S. Black women across social class differences break entirely new ground.
Consider Alice Walker’s experiences when trying to visit Dessie Woods, a Black
woman incarcerated in the Georgia penal system for defending herself against a
White rapist. Walker describes her arrival at the prison, where she was turned
away , not by White male guards, but by a Black woman very much like herself:
We look at each other hard. And I “recognize” her, too. She is very black
and her neck is stiff and her countenance has been softened by the blows.
All day long, while her children are supported by earnings here, she sits
isolated in this tiny glass entranceway , surrounded by white people who
have hired her, as they always have, to do their dirty work for them. It is
no accident that she is in this prison, too. (Walker 1988, 23)
Barbara Omolade advances a similar argument: “Unlike the slave plantation,
which brought different kinds of workers together in an oppositional commu-
nity of resistance, today’s triple-tiered, Black female work site does not foster
community” (1994, 63).
The disappearance of well-paid manufacturing jobs for Black working-class
men suggests that young African-American women view the dual-income, work-
ing-class family as a hoped-for, albeit difficult-to-achieve, option. The alternative
open to past generations of Blacks—intact marriages based on reasonably steady ,
adequately paid jobs for Black men and reliable yet lesser-paid jobs for Black
women—is less available in the advanced capitalist welfare state. Black working-
class women, especially those employed in the government sector as clerical
workers, are more likely to find steady employment. But the income of Black
working-class wives cannot compensate for the loss of Black men’s incomes.
Despite expressing support for dominant “family values” ideology , Black working-
class women may find themselves as single mothers. Aggravated by Black men’s
inability to find well-paid work, rates of separation and divorce have increased.
More significantly , many young Black women do not marry in the first place. For
many Black working-class families, the economic vulnerability of Black men is
one fundamental factor spurring increasing poverty among Black working-class
women (Burnham 1985).
Despite its size and significance, the Black working class has been rendered
mostly invisible within contemporary U.S. Black feminist thought. While many
factors stimulate this outcome, Rose Brewer points to one important definitional
concern: “Although there has been an assault on the Black working class, there is
still a working class. It is conflated with the working poor. It is highly exploited
and has experienced heavy assaults on its wage. It is a class which is often poor
and female” (Brewer 1993, 25).
The New Working Poor: Black Single Mothers
Black women who work yet remain poor form an important segment of the
61WORK, FAMILY, AND BLACK WOMEN’S OPPRESSION


--- PAGE 79 ---
Black working class. Labor market trends as well as changes in federal policies
toward the poor have left this group economically marginalized (Zinn 1989).
Ironically , gender differences in the jobs held by working-poor Black women and
men are becoming less pronounced. On average, approximately one-third of
Black women and men who find employment work in jobs characterized by low
wages, job instability , and poor working conditions. These jobs are growing
rapidly , spurred by the increasing need for cooks, waitresses, waiters, laundry
workers, health aides, and domestic servants to service the needs of affluent mid-
dle-class families. While plentiful, these jobs are mostly in neighborhoods far
from the inner-city communities where poor Black women live. Moreover, few
of these jobs offer the wages, stability , or advancement potential of disappearing
manufacturing jobs.
The work performed by employed poor Black women resembles duties long
associated with  domestic service. During prior eras, domestic service was con-
fined to private households. In contrast, contemporary cooking, cleaning, nurs-
ing, and child care have been routinized and decentralized in an array of fast-
food restaurants, cleaning services, day-care centers, and service establishments.
Black women perform similar work, but in different settings. The location may
have changed, but the work has not. Moreover, the treatment of Black women
resembles the interpersonal relations of domination reminiscent of domestic
work. Mabel Lincoln, an inner-city resident, describes how the world looks to her
as a working woman:
If you are a woman slinging somebody else’s hash and busting somebody
else’s suds or doing whatsoever you might do to keep yourself from being
a tramp or a willing slave, you will be called out of your name and asked
out of your clothes. In this world most people will take whatever they
think you can give. It don’t matter whether they want it or not, whether
they need it or not, or how wrong it is for them to ask for it. (Gwaltney
1980, 68)
Many Black women turn to the informal labor market and to government trans-
fer payments to avoid being called out of their names and asked out of their
clothes. Many Black women over age 16 are not employed, in many cases
because they cannot find jobs, because they are in school, have children to care
for, are retired, or are in poor health. A considerable proportion support them-
selves through varying combinations of low-wage jobs and government trans-
fer payments.
The employment vulnerability of working-class African-Americans in the
post–World War II political economy , the relative employment equality of poor
Black women and men, and the gender-specific patterns of dependence on the
informal economy all have substantial implications for U.S. Black women who
find themselves among the working poor. One effect has been the growth of
families maintained by Black single mothers. As the testimonies of numerous
62 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 80 ---
African-Americans raised by their mothers suggest, such families are not inher-
ently a problem. Rather, the alarming trend is the persistent poverty of African-
American women and children living in such households (Dickerson 1995a).
The increase in unmarried Black adolescent parents is only one indication of
the effects that changes in the broader political economy are having on work and
family patterns not just of poor Black women but of many other segments of the
U.S. population. Rates of adolescent pregnancy are actually decreasingamong young
Black women. The real change has been a parallel decrease in marital rates of
Black adolescents, a decision linked directly to how Black teens perceive oppor-
tunities to support and sustain independent households. A sizable proportion of
families maintained by Black single women are created by unmarried adolescent
mothers.This decline in marital rates, a post–World War II trend that accelerated
after 1960, is part of changes in African-American community structures overall
(Wilson 1987). The communal child-care networks of the slave era,the extended
family arrangements of the rural South, and the cooperative family networks of
prior eras of Black urban migration have eroded. These shifts portend major
problems for African-American women and point to a continuation of Black
women’s oppression, but structured through new institutional arrangements.
The effects of these changes are convincingly demonstrated in Ladner and
Gourdine’s (1984) replication study of T omorrow’s T omorrow,Joyce Ladner’s
(1972) study of Black female adolescents. The earlier investigation examined
poor Black teenage girls’ values toward motherhood and Black womanhood. The
girls in the original study encountered the common experiences of urban pover-
ty—they became mothers quite young, lived in substandard housing, attended
inferior schools, and generally had to grow up quickly in order to survive. But
despite the harshness of their environments, the girls in the earlier sample still
“had high hopes and dreams that their futures would be positive and productive”
(Ladner and Gourdine 1984, 24).
The findings from the replication study are quite different. Ladner and
Gourdine maintain that “the assessments the teenagers and their mothers made
of the socioeconomic conditions and their futures are harsher and bleaker than a
similar population a generation ago” (p. 24). In talking with young grandmoth-
ers, all of whom looked older than they were even though the majority were in
their 30s and the youngest was age 29, Ladner and Gourdine found that all
became single parents through divorce or had never married. The strong Black
grandmothers of prior generations were not in evidence. Instead, Ladner and
Gourdine found that these young grandmothers complained about their own
unmet emotional and social needs. They appeared to feel “powerless in coping
with the demands made by their children. They comment frequently that their
children show them no respect, do not listen to their advice, and place little value
on their role as parents” (p. 23).
Sociologist Elaine Bell Kaplan’s important (1997) study of 32 teen mothers
and adult women who were once teen mothers reports similar findings. By the
63WORK, FAMILY, AND BLACK WOMEN’S OPPRESSION


--- PAGE 81 ---
1980s, reports Kaplan, so many young Black girls were “pushing strollers around
inner-city neighborhoods that they became an integral part of both the reality
and the myth concerning the sexuality of Black underclass culture” (p. xx).
Kaplan describes a threadbare, overstretched Black extended family system where
Black mothers could not support the emotional needs of their daughters. In the
absence of support, teenagers got pregnant and decided to keep their babies. Just
at a point in life when young Black girls most needed affection, many felt
unloved by their mothers, ignored by their schools, and rejected by their fathers
and boyfriends. The girls’ mothers had their own needs. Often in poor health,
anxious, distracted, and generally worn down by the struggle to raise their fam-
ilies in harsh urban neighborhoods, mothers routinely saw their daughters’ preg-
nancies as one more responsibility for them to bear.
Middle-Class Black Women
Increased access to managerial and professional positions enabled sizable
numbers of African-American women to move into the middle class in the
post–World War II political economy . Members of the new middle class work for
corporations and in the government sector, just as blue-collar workers do, and
may earn generous incomes and enjoy substantial prestige. This new Black mid-
dle class occupies a contradictory location in the American political economy . As
is the case for their White counterparts, being middle class requires U.S. Black
professionals and managers to enter into specific social relations with owners of
capital and with workers. In particular, the middle class dominates labor and is
itself subordinate to capital. It is this simultaneous dominance and subordination
that puts it in the “middle” (Vanneman and Cannon 1987, 57). Like owners, it
exercises economic control. Professionals and managers also exercise political
controls over the conditions of their own work and that of workers. Finally ,
members of the new middle class exercise ideological control of knowledge:
They are the planners of work and framers of society’s ideas.
On all three dimensions of middle-class power—economic, political, and
ideological—the Black middle class differs from its White counterpart. Persistent
racial discrimination means that Black middle-class women and men are less eco-
nomically secure than White middle-class individuals (Oliver and Shapiro 1995).
Members of the Black middle class, most of whom became middle class through
social mobility from working-class origins, may express more ambivalence con-
cerning their function as controllers of working-class employees, especially
working-class Blacks. While some aspire to manage working-class Blacks, others
aim to liberate them from racial oppression and poverty , while still others aim to
distance themselves from Black working-class concerns. Similarly , though many
middle-class Blacks defend dominant group ideologies, others challenge race,
gender, and class ideologies and practices.
Black feminist theorist Barbara Omolade’s (1994) three-tiered Black female
64 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 82 ---
work site not only explores the needs of the clerks and clients, it points to the
new demands placed on Black women professionals. According to Omolade,
these women’s work involves a new version of “mammification,” one where the
legacy of Black women’s work in domestic service weaves itself into the very fab-
ric of professional Black women’s jobs. Elizabeth Higginbotham (1994) notes
that Black women professionals are disproportionately employed in the govern-
ment sector, making them especially vulnerable to political changes such as gov-
ernment downsizing of the 1980s and 1990s. Moreover, within this sector, their
work can resemble that of “modern mammies,” namely , the care of the personal
needs of the destitute and the weak in public institutions. Black women profes-
sionals are expected to fix systems which are in crisis due to underfunding, infra-
structure deterioration, and demoralized staffs. As Barbara Omolade (1994)
points out, “New mammies, especially those educated after the civil rights move-
ment era, have a hard time pointing to the source of their alienation and depres-
sion or clearly identifying with a base and constituency within the Black com-
munity . Black professional women are often in high-visibility positions which
require them to serve white superiors while quieting the natives” (p. 55).
Elaine Kaplan found the Black professional women she interviewed who
worked with Black adolescent mothers expressed ambivalence about their jobs.
By the time Kaplan finished her fieldwork at one counseling center, most of the
White staff had left, and it was being run by a predominantly Black staff. Kaplan’s
description of the reactions of the Black staff  to their new status echoes
Omolade’s arguments about mammification:
The Black staff also wanted to leave but felt they would have difficulty
finding other jobs to match their skills and expertise, a problem they
attributed to racist White employers. Several Black women were promoted
at the Center as a result of the turnover.The newly promoted women also
feared the neighborhood, but for them the central issue was one of being
disadvantaged while at the same time having to work with the disadvan-
taged. (Kaplan 1997, 154) 
When the traditional gender differences in Black employment patterns are com-
bined with the economic, political, and ideological vulnerability of the Black
middle class caused by race, some interesting patterns emerge for African-
American women. Black women and men alike are more vulnerable than Whites
to being excluded from professional and managerial occupations. Fewer Black
men have such positions, but those who do have them are in higher-paying,
higher-status jobs. Greater numbers of Black women than men work in profes-
sional and managerial positions, but theirs are lower-paying, lower-status jobs.
For Black women, most of whom are not born into the Black middle class
but who have recently arrived in it through social class mobility , dealing with the
demands of work and family as well as those of Black civil society can be unset-
tling (Dumas 1980; Higginbotham and Weber 1992). Consider the case of
65WORK, FAMILY, AND BLACK WOMEN’S OPPRESSION


--- PAGE 83 ---
Leanita McClain, an African-American woman journalist raised in segregated
Chicago public housing who eventually became a feature writer for a major
Chicago newspaper (McClaurin-Allen 1989). In a widely cited piece titled “The
Middle-Class Black’s Burden,” Ms. McClain laments, “I am not comfortably mid-
dle class; I am uncomfortably middle class. I have made it, but where?” (1986,
13). A substantial source of Ms. McClain’s frustration stemmed from her mar-
ginal status in a range of settings. She notes, “My life abounds in incongruities.
. . . Sometimes when I wait at the bus stop with my attaché case, I meet my aunt
getting off the bus with other cleaning ladies on their way to do my neighbor’s
floors” (p. 13). No wonder Ms. McClain felt compelled to say , “I am a member
of the black middle class who has had it with being patted on the head by white
hands and slapped in the face by black hands for my success” (p. 12).
U.S. Black professional women report increasing difficulty in finding mid-
dle-class Black men interested in marrying them. The smaller number of Black
men than Black women in professional and managerial positions represents 
one important issue facing Black heterosexual women who want to marry Black
men. Given that separated and divorced Black women professionals are much less
likely to remarry than their White counterparts, higher rates of separation and
divorce may become a special problem for married Black women professionals.
When faced with the prospect of never getting married to a professional Black
man, whether by choice or by default, many professional Black women simply
go it alone.
Black Feminist Questions
In prior eras, African-American women’s relegation to agricultural and
domestic work more uniformly structured Black women’s oppression as “mules
uh de world.” At the turn of the twenty-first century , work still matters, but is
organized via social class formations that often place working-class and middle-
class women in new, uncharted territories. Black women’s ability to  cooperate
across class lines for collective empowerment is not new, but the ways in which
those class lines have been redrawn within a global political economy is. All
African-American women encounter the common theme of having our work and
family experiences shaped by intersecting oppressions of  race, gender, and class.
But this commonality is experienced differently by working-class women such as
Mabel Lincoln and by middle-class women such as Leanita McClain.
Large numbers of U.S. Black women in the working poor are employed as
cooks, laundry workers, nursing home aides, and child-care workers. These
women serve not only U.S.Whites, but more affluent U.S. Blacks, other people of
color, and recent immigrants. Dependent on public services of all sorts—public
schools for their children, health-care clinics for their checkups, buses and other
public transportation to get them to work, and social welfare bureaucracies to fill
in the gap between paychecks and monthly bills—these women can encounter
66 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 84 ---
Black middle-class teachers, nurses, bus drivers, and social workers who are as
troublesome to them as White ones. Far too many Black single mothers living in
inner-city neighborhoods remain isolated and encounter middle-class Black
women primarily as police officers, social workers, teachers, or on television.
How will these working-class Black women, many of whom feel stuck in the
working poor, view their more privileged sisters?
Middle-class women face a distinctive set of challenges in thinking through
this new social context so profoundly restructured by class. In prior eras the pre-
carious political and social position of the small numbers of middle-class Black
women encouraged them to work on behalf of “race uplift” and fostered Black
solidarity among all African-American women. But contemporary middle-class
Black women seem to have a choice. Will they continue to value Black solidarity
with their working-class sisters, even if creating that solidarity might place them
at odds with their proscribed “mammification” duties? Or will they see their
newly acquired positions as theirs alone and thus perpetuate working-class Black
women’s subordination? 
There has never been a uniformity of experience among African-American
women, a situation that is more noticeable today . What remains as a challenge to
Black feminist thinkers, working-class and middle-class alike, is to analyze how
these new structures of oppression differentially affect Black women. If this does
not occur, some U.S. Black women may in fact become instrumental in fostering
other Black women’s oppression.
WORK, FAMILY, AND BLACK WOMEN’S OPPRESSION 67


--- PAGE 85 ---



--- PAGE 86 ---
Called Matriarch, Emasculator and Hot Momma. Sometimes Sister, Pretty Baby ,
Auntie, Mammy and Girl. Called Unwed Mother, Welfare Recipient and Inner City
Consumer. The Black American Woman has had to admit that while nobody knew
the troubles she saw, everybody , his brother and his dog, felt qualified to explain
her, even to herself. —Trudier Harris 1982, 4
Intersecting oppressions of race, class,
gender, and sexuality could not continue without powerful ideological justifica-
tions for their existence. As Cheryl Gilkes contends, “Black women's assertive-
ness and their use of every expression of racism to launch multiple assaults
against the entire fabric of inequality have been a consistent, multifaceted threat
to the status quo. As punishment, Black women have been assaulted with a vari-
ety of negative images” (1983a, 294). Portraying African-American women as
stereotypical mammies, matriarchs, welfare recipients, and hot mommas helps
justify U.S. Black women’s oppression. Challenging these controlling images has
long been a core theme in Black feminist thought.
As part of a generalized ideology of domination, stereotypical images of
Black womanhood take on special meaning. Because the authority to define soci-
etal values is a major instrument of power, elite groups, in exercising power,
manipulate ideas about Black womanhood. They do so by exploiting already
existing symbols, or creating new ones. Hazel Carby suggests that the objective
of stereotypes is “not to reflect or represent a reality but to function as a disguise,
or mystification, of objective social relations” (1987, 22). These controlling
images are designed to make racism, sexism, poverty , and other forms of social
injustice appear to be natural, normal, and inevitable parts of everyday life.
Even when the initial conditions that foster controlling images disappear,
such images prove remarkably tenacious because they not only subjugate U.S.
Black women but are key in maintaining intersecting oppressions (Mullings
4
MAMMIES,
MATRIARCHS,
AND
OTHER 
CONTROLLING
IMAGES 
4


--- PAGE 87 ---
1997, 109–30).African-American women’s status  as outsiders becomes the point
from which other groups define their normality . Ruth Shays, a Black inner-city
resident, describes how the standpoint of a subordinate group is discredited: “It
will not kill people to hear the truth, but they don’t like it and they would much
rather hear it from one of their own than from a stranger. Now, to white people
your colored person is always a stranger. Not only that, we are supposed to be
dumb strangers, so we can’t tell them anything!” (Gwaltney 1980, 29). As the
“Others” of society who can never really belong, strangers threaten the moral
and social order. But they are simultaneously essential for its survival because
those individuals who stand at the margins of society clarify its boundaries.
African-American women, by not belonging, emphasize the significance of
belonging.
The Objectification of Black Women 
as the Other
Black feminist critic Barbara Christian asserts that in the United States, “the
enslaved African woman became the basis for the definition of our society’s
Other” (1985, 160).Maintaining images of U.S. Black women as the Other pro-
vides ideological justification for race, gender, and class oppression.
Certain
basic ideas crosscut these and other forms of oppression. One such idea is binary
thinking that categorizes people, things, and ideas in terms of their difference
from one another (Keller 1985, 8). For example, each term in the binaries
white/black, male/female, reason/emotion, culture/nature, fact/opinion,
mind/body , and subject/object gains meaning only in relation to its counterpart
(Halpin 1989).
Another basic idea concerns how binary thinking shapes understandings of
human difference. In such thinking, difference is defined in oppositional terms.
One part is not simply different from its counterpart; it is inherently opposed to
its “other.” Whites and Blacks, males and females, thought and feeling are not
complementary counterparts—they are fundamentally different entities related
only through their definition as opposites. Feeling cannot be incorporated into
thought or even function in conjunction with it because in binary oppositional
thinking, feeling retards thought and values obscure facts.
Objectification is central to this process of oppositional difference. In binary
thinking, one element is objectified as the Other, and is viewed as an object to be
manipulated and controlled. Social theorist Dona Richards (1980) suggests that
Western thought requires objectification, a process she describes as the “separa-
tion of the ‘knowing self’ from the ‘known object’ ” (p. 72). Intense objectifica-
tion is a “prerequisite for the despiritualization of the universe,” Richards writes,
“and through it the Western cosmos was made ready for ever increasing materi-
alization” (p. 72). A Marxist assessment of the culture/nature binary argues that
70 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 88 ---
history can be seen as that in which human beings constantly objectify the nat-
ural world in order to control and exploit it (Brittan and Maynard 1984, 198).
Culture is defined as the opposite of an objectified nature. If undomesticated, this
wild and primitive nature might destroy more civilized culture.
1 Feminist schol-
arship points to the identification of women with nature as being central to
women’s subsequent objectification and conquest by men (McClintock 1995).
Black studies scholarship and postcolonial theory both suggest that defining peo-
ple of color as less human, animalistic, or more “natural” denies African and
Asian people’s subjectivity and supports the political economy of domination
that characterized slavery , colonialism, and neocolonialism (Torgovnick 1990;
Chow 1993,27–54; Said 1993;Bannerji 1995, 55–95).
Domination always involves attempts to objectify the subordinate group. “As
subjects, people have the right to define their own reality , establish their own
identities, name their history ,” asserts bell hooks (1989,42). “As objects, one’s
reality is defined by others, one’s identity created by others, one’s history named
only in ways that define one’s relationship to those who are subject” (p. 42).The
treatment afforded U.S. Black women domestic workers exemplifies the many
forms that objectification can take. Making Black women work as if they were
animals or “mules uh de world” represents one form of objectification.
Deference rituals such as calling Black domestic workers “girls” enable employ-
ers to treat their employees like children, as less capable human beings.
Objectification can be so severe that the Other simply disappears, as was the case
when Judith Rollins’s employer treated her as if she were invisible.
Finally , because oppositional binaries rarely represent different but equal
relationships, they are inherently unstable. Tension may be temporarily relieved
by subordinating one half of the binary to the other. Thus Whites rule Blacks,
men dominate women, reason is thought superior to emotion in ascertaining
truth, facts supersede opinion in evaluating knowledge, and subjects rule objects.
The foundations of intersecting oppressions become grounded in interdepen-
dent concepts of binary thinking, oppositional difference, objectification, and
social hierarchy . With domination based on difference forming an essential
underpinning for this entire system of thought, these concepts invariably imply
relationships of superiority and inferiority , hierarchical bonds that mesh with
political economies of race, gender, and class oppression.
African-American women occupy a position whereby the inferior half of a
series of these binaries converge, and this placement has been central to our sub-
ordination. The allegedly emotional, passionate nature of Black women has long
been used to justify Black women’s sexual exploitation. Similarly , restricting Black
women’s literacy , then claiming that we lack the facts for sound judgment, relegates
African-American women to the inferior side of the fact/opinion binary . Denying
Black women status as fully human subjects by treating us as the objectified Other
within multiple binaries demonstrates the power that binary thinking, oppositional
difference, and objectification wield within intersecting oppressions.
71MAMMIES, MATRIARCHS, AND OTHER CONTROLLING IMAGES


--- PAGE 89 ---
Despite its seeming permanence, this way of thinking, by fostering injustice,
can also stimulate resistance. For example, U.S. Black women have long recog-
nized the fundamental injustice of a system that routinely and from one genera-
tion to the next relegates U.S. Black women to the bottom of the social hierarchy .
When faced with this structural injustice targeted toward the group, many Black
women have insisted on our right to define our own reality , establish our own
identities, and name our history . One significant contribution of work on domes-
tic workers is that it documents Black women’s everyday resistance to this
attempted objectification.
Analyzing the particular controlling images applied to African-American
women reveals the specific contours of Black women’s objectification as well as
the ways in which oppressions of race, gender, sexuality , and class intersect.
Moreover, since the images themselves are dynamic and changing, each provides
a starting point for examining new forms of control that emerge in a transna-
tional context, one where selling images has increased in importance in the global
marketplace.
Controlling Images and Black Women’s 
Oppression
“Black women emerged from slavery firmly enshrined in the consciousness of
white America as ‘Mammy’ and the ‘bad black woman,’ ” contends Cheryl Gilkes
(1983a, 294). The dominant ideology of the slave era fostered the creation of
several interrelated, socially constructed controlling images of Black woman-
hood, each reflecting the dominant group’s interest in maintaining Black
women’s subordination. Moreover, since Black and White women were both
important to slavery’s continuation, controlling images of Black womanhood
also functioned to mask social relations that affected all women.
According to the cult of true womanhood that accompanied the traditional
family ideal, “true” women possessed four cardinal virtues: piety , purity , sub-
missiveness, and domesticity . Propertied White women and those of the emerg-
ing middle class were encouraged to aspire to these virtues. African-American
women encountered a different set of controlling images.
The first controlling image applied to U.S. Black women is that of the
mammy—the faithful, obedient domestic servant. Created to justify the eco-
nomic exploitation of house slaves and sustained to explain Black women’s
long-standing restriction to domestic service, the mammy image represents the
normative yardstick used to evaluate all Black women’s behavior. By loving, nur-
turing, and caring for her White children and “family” better than her own, the
mammy symbolizes the dominant group’s perceptions of the ideal Black female
relationship to elite White male power. Even though she may be well loved and
may wield considerable authority in her White “family ,” the mammy still knows
72 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 90 ---
her “place” as obedient servant. She has accepted her subordination.
Black women intellectuals have aggressively criticized the image of African-
American women as contented mammies. Literary critic Trudier Harris’s (1982)
volume From Mammies to Militants: Domestics in Black American Literature inves-
tigates prominent differences in how Black women have been portrayed by oth-
ers in literature and how they portray themselves. In her work on the difficulties
faced by Black women leaders, Rhetaugh Dumas ( 1980) describes how Black
women executives are hampered by being treated as mammies and penalized if
they do not appear warm and nurturing. Striking a similar chord, Barbara
Omolade’s (1994) description of the “mammification” of Black professional
women also takes aim at the imagined Black woman mammy . But despite these
works, the mammy image lives on in scholarly and popular culture.Audre Lorde’s
account of a shopping trip offers a powerful example of its tenacity: “I wheel my
two-year-old daughter in a shopping cart through a supermarket in . . . 1967, and
a little white girl riding past in her mother’s cart calls out excitedly , ‘Oh look,
Mommy , a baby maid!’ ” (1984, 126).
2
The mammy image is central to intersecting oppressions of race, gender, sex-
uality , and class. Regarding racial oppression, controlling images like the mammy
aim to influence Black maternal behavior. As the members of African-American
families who are most familiar with the skills needed for Black accommodation,
Black mothers are encouraged to transmit to their own children the deference
behavior that many are forced to exhibit in their mammified jobs. By teaching
Black children their assigned place in White power structures, Black women who
internalize the mammy image potentially become effective conduits for perpet-
uating racial oppression. Ideas about mammy buttress racial hierarchies in other
ways. Employing Black women in mammified occupations supports the racial
superiority of White employers, encouraging middle-class White women in par-
ticular to identify more closely with the racial and class privilege afforded their
fathers, husbands, and sons. In a climate where, as Patricia Williams (1995) puts
it, “those blacks who do indeed rise into the middle class end up being figured
only as those who were given whatever they enjoy , and the black ‘underclass’
becomes those whose sole life activity is taking ” (p. 61), no wonder that work-
ing-class Whites expect Black women to exhibit deferential behavior, and deeply
resent those who do not. Mammy is the public face that Whites expect Black
women to assume for them.
The mammy image also serves a symbolic function in maintaining oppres-
sions of gender and sexuality . Black feminist critic Barbara Christian argues that
images of Black womanhood serve as a reservoir for the fears of Western culture,
“a dumping ground for those female functions a basically Puritan society could
not confront” ( 1985, 2). Juxtaposed against images of White women, the
mammy image as the Other symbolizes the oppositional difference of mind/body
and culture/nature thought to distinguish Black women from everyone else.
Christian comments on the mammy’s gender significance: “All the functions of
73MAMMIES, MATRIARCHS, AND OTHER CONTROLLING IMAGES


--- PAGE 91 ---
mammy are magnificently physical.They involve the body as sensuous, as funky ,
the part of woman that white southern America was profoundly afraid of.
Mammy , then, harmless in her position of slave, unable because of her all-giving
nature to do harm, is needed as an image, a surrogate to contain all those fears
of the physical female” (1985, 2).The mammy image buttresses the ideology of
the cult of true womanhood, one in which sexuality and fertility are severed.
“Good” White mothers are expected to deny their female sexuality . In contrast,
the mammy image is one of an asexual woman, a surrogate mother in blackface
whose historical devotion to her White family is now giving way to new expec-
tations. Contemporary mammies should be completely committed to their jobs.
No matter how loved they were by their White “families,” Black women
domestic workers remained poor because they were economically exploited
workers in a capitalist political economy . The restructured post–World War II
economy , in which African-American women moved from service in private
homes to jobs in the low-paid service sector and to jobs in clerical work and
mammified professions, has produced similar yet differently organized econom-
ic exploitation. Historically , many White families in both the middle class and
working class were able to maintain their class position because they used Black
women domestic workers as a source of cheap labor (Rollins 1985; Byerly 1986).
The mammy image was designed to mask this economic exploitation of social
class (King 1973). Currently , while the mammy image becomes more muted as
Black women move into better jobs, the basic economic exploitation where U.S.
Black women either make less for the same work or work twice as hard for the
same pay persists. U.S. Black women and African-American communities pay a
price for this exploitation. Removing Black women’s labor from African-
American families and exploiting it denies Black extended family units the ben-
efits of both decent wages and Black women’s emotional labor in their homes.
Moreover, as the attention to issues of stress in Black feminist analyses of U.S.
Black women’s health suggest, participating in this chronically undercompensated
and unrecognized labor takes its toll (White 1994, 11–14).
For reasons of economic survival, U.S. Black women may play the mammy
role in paid work settings. But within African-American families and neighbor-
hoods these same women often teach their own children something quite dif-
ferent. Bonnie Thornton Dill’s (1980) work on child-rearing patterns among Black
domestics shows that while the participants in her study showed deference
behavior at work, they discouraged their children from believing that they should
be deferential to Whites and encouraged their children to avoid domestic work.
Barbara Christian’s analysis of the mammy in Black slave narratives reveals that,
“unlike the white southern image of mammy , she is cunning, prone to poison-
ing her master, and not at all content with her lot” (1985, 5).
The fact that the mammy image by itself cannot control Black women’s
behavior is tied to the creation of the second controlling image of Black wom-
anhood. Though a more recent phenomenon, the image of the Black matriarch
74 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 92 ---
fulfills similar functions in explaining Black women’s placement in intersecting
oppressions. Ironically , Black scholars such as William E. B. DuBois (1969) and E.
Franklin Frazier (1948) described the connections among higher rates of female-
headed households in African-American communities, the importance that
women assume in Black family networks, and the persistence of Black poverty .
However, neither scholar interpreted Black women’s centrality in Black families
as a cause of African-American social class status. Both saw so-called matriarchal
families as an outcome of racial oppression and poverty . During the eras when
DuBois and Frazier wrote, the political disenfranchisement and economic
exploitation of African-Americans was so entrenched that control over Black
women could be maintained without the matriarchal stereotype. But what began
as a muted theme in the works of these earlier African-American scholars grew
into a full-blown racialized image in the 1960s, a time of significant political and
economic mobility for African-Americans. Racialization involves attaching racial
meaning to a previously racially unclassified relationship, social practice, or
group (Omi and Winant 1994). Prior to the 1960s, Black communities contained
higher percentages of families maintained by single mothers than White ones,
but an ideology that racialized female-headedness as one important cause of
Black poverty had not emerged. Interestingly , the insertion of the Black matri-
archy thesis into discussions of Black poverty came in the midst of considerable
Black activism. Moreover, the public depiction of U.S. Black women as unfemi-
nine matriarchs came at precisely the same moment that the women’s movement
advanced its critique of U.S. patriarchy (Gilkes 1983a, 296).
While the mammy typifies the Black mother figure in White homes, the
matriarch symbolizes the mother figure in Black homes. Just as the mammy rep-
resents the “good” Black mother, the matriarch symbolizes the “bad” Black
mother. Introduced and widely circulated via a government report titled The
Negro Family: The Case for National Action,the Black matriarchy thesis argued that
African-American women who failed to fulfill their traditional “womanly” duties
at home contributed to social problems in Black civil society (Moynihan 1965).
Spending too much time away from home, these working mothers ostensibly
could not properly supervise their children and thus were a major contributing
factor to their children’s failure at school. As overly aggressive, unfeminine
women, Black matriarchs allegedly emasculated their lovers and husbands.These
men, understandably , either deserted their partners or refused to marry the
mothers of their children. From the dominant group’s perspective, the matriarch
represented a failed mammy , a negative stigma to be applied to African-American
women who dared reject the image of the submissive, hardworking servant.
Black women intellectuals who study African-American families and Black
motherhood typically report finding few matriarchs and even fewer mammies
(Myers 1980; Sudarkasa 1981b; Dill 1988b). Instead they portray African-
American mothers as complex individuals who often show tremendous strength
under adverse conditions, or who become beaten down by the incessant
75MAMMIES, MATRIARCHS, AND OTHER CONTROLLING IMAGES


--- PAGE 93 ---
demands of providing for their families. In A Raisin in the Sun, the first play pre-
sented on Broadway written by a Black woman, Lorraine Hansberry (1959)
examines the struggles of widow Lena Younger to actualize her dream of pur-
chasing a home for her family . In Brown Girl, Brownstones, novelist Paule Marshall
(1959) presents Mrs. Boyce, a Black mother negotiating a series of relationships
with her husband, her daughters, the women in her community , and the work
she must perform outside her home. Ann Allen Shockley’s Loving Her (1974)
depicts the struggle of a lesbian mother trying to balance her needs for self-actu-
alization with the pressures of child-rearing in a homophobic community .
Like these fictional analyses, Black women’s scholarship on Black single
mothers also challenges the matriarchy thesis, but finds far fewer Lena Youngers
or Mrs. Boyces (Ladner 1972; Brewer 1988; Jarrett 1994; Dickerson 1995a;
Kaplan 1997). In her study of Black teenage mothers, Elaine Bell Kaplan (1997)
learned that the reactions of mothers to their teenaged daughters’ pregnancies
were far from the image of the superstrong Black mother. Mothers in the new
working poor felt their pregnant teenage daughters had failed them. Until their
daughters’ pregnancies, these mothers hoped that their daughters would do bet-
ter with their lives. The mothers who came from humble beginnings and who
had worked hard to achieve a modicum of middle-class respectability felt cheated
when their daughters became pregnant. Among both groups of mothers, adjust-
ing to their daughters’ pregnancies brought on much hardship.
Like the mammy , the image of the matriarch is central to intersecting oppres-
sions of class, gender, and race.While at first glance the matriarch may appear far
removed from issues in U.S. capitalist development, this image is actually impor-
tant in explaining the persistence of Black social class outcomes. Assuming that
Black poverty in the United States is passed on intergenerationally via the values
that parents teach their children, dominant ideology suggests that Black children
lack the attention and care allegedly lavished on White, middle-class children.
This alleged cultural deficiency seriously retards Black children’s achievement.
Such a view diverts attention from political and economic inequalities that
increasingly characterize global capitalism. It also suggests that anyone can rise
from poverty if he or she only received good values at home. Inferior housing,
underfunded schools, employment discrimination, and consumer racism all but
disappear from Black women’s lives. In this sanitized view of American society ,
those African-Americans who remain poor cause their own victimization. In this
context, portraying African-American women as matriarchs allows White men
and women to blame Black women for their children’s failures in school and
with the law, as well as Black children’s subsequent poverty . Using images of bad
Black mothers to explain Black economic disadvantage links gender ideology to
explanations for extreme distributions of wealth that characterize American cap-
italism.
One source of the matriarch’s failure is her inability to model appropriate
gender behavior. Thus, labeling Black women unfeminine and too strong works
76 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 94 ---
to undercut U.S. Black women’s assertiveness. Many U.S. Black women who find
themselves maintaining families by themselves often feel that they have done
something wrong. If only they were not so strong, some reason, they might have
found a male partner, or their sons would not have had so much trouble with the
law.This belief masks the culpability of the U.S. criminal justice system, described
by Angela Davis (1997) as an “out of control punishment industry” that locks up
a disproportionate number of U.S. Blacks. African-Americans are almost eight
times more likely to be imprisoned than Whites (p. 267), a social policy that
leaves far fewer men for Black women to marry than the proportion of White
men available to White women. Moreover, not only does the image of the Black
matriarch seek to regulate Black women’s behavior, it also seems designed to
influence White women’s gendered identities. In the post–World War II era,
increasing numbers of White women entered the labor market, limited their fer-
tility , and generally challenged their proscribed roles as subordinate helpmates in
their families and workplaces. In this context, the image of the Black matriarch
serves as a powerful symbol for both Black and White women of what can go
wrong if White patriarchal power is challenged. Aggressive, assertive women are
penalized—they are abandoned by their men, end up impoverished, and are stig-
matized as being unfeminine. The matriarch or overly strong Black woman has
also been used to influence Black men’s understandings of Black masculinity .
Many Black men reject Black women as marital partners, claiming that Black
women are less desirable than White ones because we are too assertive.
The image of the matriarch also supports racial oppression. Much social sci-
ence research implicitly uses gender relations in African-American communities
as one seeming measure of Black cultural disadvantage. For example, the
Moynihan Report (1965) contends that slavery destroyed Black families by cre-
ating reversed roles for men and women. Black family structures are seen as
being deviant because they challenge the patriarchal assumptions underpinning
the traditional family ideal. Moreover, the absence of Black patriarchy is used as
evidence for Black cultural inferiority (Collins 1989). Under scientific racism,
Blacks have been construed as inferior, and their inferiority has been attributed
either to biological causes or cultural differences.Thus, locating the source of cul-
tural difference in flawed gender relations provides a powerful foundation for
U.S. racism. Black women’s failure to conform to the cult of true womanhood can
then be identified as one fundamental source of Black cultural deficiency .
Advancing ideas about Black cultural disadvantage via the matriarchal image
worked to counter efforts by African-Americans who identified political and
social policies as one important source of Black economic disadvantage. The
image of Black women as dangerous, deviant, castrating mothers divided the
Black community at a critical period in the Black liberation struggle. Such images
fostered a similar reaction within women’s political activism and created a wider
gap between the worlds of Black and White women at an equally critical period
in women’s history (Gilkes 1983a).
77MAMMIES, MATRIARCHS, AND OTHER CONTROLLING IMAGES


--- PAGE 95 ---
Taken together, images of the mammy and the matriarch place African-
American women in an untenable position. For Black women workers in service
occupations requiring long hours and/or substantial emotional labor, becoming
the ideal mammy means precious time and energy spent away from husbands
and children. But being employed when Black men have difficulty finding steady
work exposes African-American women to the charge that Black women emas-
culate Black men by failing to be submissive, dependent, “feminine” women.
This image ignores gender-specific patterns of incorporation into the capitalist
economy , where Black men have greater difficulty finding work but make 
higher wages when they do work, and Black women find work with greater 
ease yet earn much less. Moreover, Black women’s financial contributions to
Black family well-being have been cited as evidence supporting the matriarchy
thesis (Moynihan 1965). Many Black women are the sole support of their fami-
lies, and labeling these women “matriarchs” erodes their self-confidence and
ability to confront oppression. In essence, African-American women who must
work encounter pressures to be submissive mammies in one setting, then are
stigmatized again as matriarchs for being strong figures in their own homes.
A third, externally defined, controlling image of Black womanhood—that of
the welfare mother—appears tied to working-class Black women’s increasing
access to U.S. welfare state entitlements. At its core, the image of the welfare
mother constitutes a class-specific, controlling image developed for poor, work-
ing-class Black women who make use of  social welfare benefits to which they
are entitled by law. As long as poor Black women were denied social welfare ben-
efits, there was no need for this stereotype. But when U.S. Black women gained
more political power and demanded equity in access to state services, the need
arose for this controlling image.
Essentially an updated version of the breeder woman image created during
slavery , this image provides an ideological justification for efforts to harness Black
women’s fertility to the needs of a changing political economy . During slavery
the breeder woman image portrayed Black women as more suitable for having
children than White women. By claiming that Black women were able to produce
children as easily as animals, this image provided justification for interference in
enslaved Africans’ reproductive lives. Slave owners wanted enslaved Africans to
“breed” because every slave child born represented a valuable unit of property ,
another unit of labor, and, if female, the prospects for more slaves. The control-
ling image of the breeder woman served to justify slave owners’ intrusion into
Black women’s decisions about fertility (King 1973; Davis 1981; D.White 1985).
In the post–World War II political economy , African-Americans struggled for
and gained rights denied them in former historical periods (Squires 1994).
Contrary to popular belief, U.S. Black women were not “given” unearned entitle-
ments, but instead had to struggle for rights routinely offered to other American
citizens (Amott 1990; Quadagno 1994).African-Americans successfully acquired
basic political and economic protections from a greatly expanded social welfare
78 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 96 ---
state, particularly Social Security , unemployment compensation, school feeding
programs, fellowships and loans for higher education, affirmative action, voting
rights, antidiscrimination legislation, child welfare programs, and the minimum
wage. Despite sustained opposition by Republican administrations in the 1980s,
these social welfare programs allowed many African-Americans to reject the sub-
sistence-level, exploitative jobs held by their parents and grandparents. However,
these Black citizenship rights came at a time of shrinking economic opportuni-
ties in U.S. manufacturing and agriculture. Job export, de-skilling, and increased
use of illegal immigrants have all been used to replace the cheap, docile labor
force that U.S. Blacks used to be (Nash and Fernandez-Kelly 1983; Brewer 1993;
Squires 1994). Until the mid-1990s, the large numbers of undereducated,
unemployed African-Americans ghettoized in U.S. inner cities, most of whom
were women and children, could not be forced to work.This surplus population
no longer represented cheap labor but instead, from the perspective of elites, sig-
nified a costly threat to political and economic stability . African-American men
increasingly became targeted by a growing punishment industry (Davis 1997).
In the absence of legitimate jobs, many men worked in the informal sector, serv-
ing as low-level employees of a growing, global drug industry that introduced
crack cocaine into U.S. Black neighborhoods in the 1980s. For many , becoming
entangled with the punishment industry was one cost of doing business.
Controlling Black women’s fertility in this political and economic context
became important to elite groups. The image of the welfare mother fulfills this
function by labeling as unnecessary and even dangerous to the values of the
country the fertility of women who are not White and middle class. A closer look
at this controlling image reveals that it shares some important features with its
mammy and matriarch counterparts. Like the matriarch, the welfare mother is
labeled a bad mother. But unlike the matriarch, she is not too aggressive—on the
contrary , she is not aggressive enough. While the matriarch’s unavailability con-
tributed to her children’s poor socialization, the welfare mother’s accessibility is
deemed the problem. She is portrayed as being content to sit around and collect
welfare, shunning work and passing on her bad values to her offspring. The
image of the welfare mother represents another failed mammy , one who is
unwilling to become “de mule uh de world.”
The image of the welfare mother provides ideological justifications for inter-
secting oppressions of race, gender, and class. African-Americans can be racially
stereotyped as being lazy by blaming Black welfare mothers for failing to pass on
the work ethic. Moreover, the welfare mother has no male authority figure to
assist her.Typically portrayed as an unwed mother, she violates one cardinal tenet
of White, male-dominated ideology: She is a woman alone. As a result, her treat-
ment reinforces the dominant gender ideology positing that a woman’s true
worth and financial security should occur through heterosexual marriage. Finally ,
on average, in the post–World War II political economy , one of every three
African-American families has been officially classified as poor. With such high
79MAMMIES, MATRIARCHS, AND OTHER CONTROLLING IMAGES


--- PAGE 97 ---
levels of Black poverty , welfare state policies supporting poor Black mothers and
their children have become increasingly expensive. Creating the controlling
image of the welfare mother and stigmatizing her as the cause of her own poverty
and that of African-American communities shifts the angle of vision away from
structural sources of poverty and blames the victims themselves.The image of the
welfare mother thus provides ideological justification for the dominant group’s
interest in limiting the fertility of Black mothers who are seen as producing too
many economically unproductive children (Davis 1981).
With the election of the Reagan administration in 1980, the stigmatized wel-
fare mother evolved into the more pernicious image of the welfare queen
(Lubiano 1992). To mask the effects of cuts in government spending on social
welfare programs that fed children, housed working families, assisted cities in
maintaining roads, bridges, and basic infrastructure, and supported other basic
public services, media images increasingly identified and blamed Black women
for the deterioration of U.S. interests. Thus, poor Black women simultaneously
become symbols of what was deemed wrong with America and targets of social
policies designed to shrink the government sector. Wahneema Lubiano describes
how the image of the welfare queen links Black women with seeming declines
in the quality of life:
“Welfare queen” is a phrase that describes economic dependency—the
lack of a job and/or income (which equal degeneracy in the Calvinist
United States); the presence of a child or children with no father and/or
husband (moral deviance); and, finally , a charge on the collective U.S. trea-
sury—a human debit. The cumulative totality , circulation, and effect of
these meanings in a time of scarce resources among the working class and
the lower middle class is devastatingly intense. The welfare queen repre-
sents moral aberration and an economic drain, but the figure’s problem-
atic status becomes all the more threatening once responsibility for the
destruction of the American way of life is attributed to it. (Lubiano 1992,
337–38)
In contrast to the welfare mother who draws upon the moral capital attached to
American motherhood, the welfare queen constitutes a highly materialistic,
domineering, and manless working-class Black woman. Relying on the public
dole, Black welfare queens are content to take the hard-earned money of tax-
paying Americans and remain married to the state. Thus, the welfare queen
image signals efforts to use the situation of working-class Black women as a sign
of the deterioration of the state.
During this same period, the welfare queen was joined by another similar
yet class-specific image, that of the “Black lady” (Lubiano 1992). Because the
Black lady refers to middle-class professional Black women who represent a
modern version of the politics of respectability advanced by the club women
(Shaw 1996), this image may not appear to be a controlling image, merely a
benign one. These are the women who stayed in school, worked hard, and have
80 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 98 ---
achieved much.Yet the image of the Black lady builds upon prior images of Black
womanhood in many ways. For one thing, this image seems to be yet another
version of the modern mammy , namely , the hardworking Black woman profes-
sional who works twice as hard as everyone else.The image of the Black lady also
resembles aspects of the matriarchy thesis—Black ladies have jobs that are so all-
consuming that they have no time for men or have forgotten how to treat them.
Because they so routinely compete with men and are successful at it, they
become less feminine. Highly educated Black ladies are deemed to be too
assertive—that’s why they cannot get men to marry them.
Upon first glance, Black ladies also seem far removed from charges of
unearned dependency on the state that are so often leveled at working-class U.S.
Black women via the welfare queen image. Yet here, too, parallels abound. Via
affirmative action, Black ladies allegedly take jobs that should go to more worthy
Whites, especially U.S. White men. Given a political climate in the 1980s and
1990s that reinterpreted antidiscrimination and affirmative action programs as
examples of  an unfair “reverse racism,” no matter how highly educated or
demonstrably competent Black ladies may be, their accomplishments remain
questionable. Moreover, many Black men erroneously believe that Black ladies are
taking jobs reserved for them. In their eyes, being Black, female, and seemingly
less threatening to Whites advantages Black ladies.Wahneema Lubiano points out
how images of the welfare queen and the Black lady evolved in tandem with per-
sistent efforts to cut social welfare spending for working-class Blacks and limit
affirmative action opportunities for middle-class Blacks: “Whether by virtue of
not achieving and thus passing on bad culture as welfare mothers, or by virtue
of managing to achieve middle-class success . . . black women are responsible for
the disadvantaged status of African Americans” (Lubiano 1992, 335).Thus, when
taken together, the welfare queen and the Black lady constitute class-specific ver-
sions of a matriarchy thesis whose fundamental purpose is to discredit Black
women’s full exercise of citizenship rights. These interconnected images leave
U.S. Black women between a rock and a hard place.
A final controlling image—the jezebel, whore, or “hoochie”—is central in
this nexus of controlling images of Black womanhood. Because efforts to control
Black women’s sexuality lie at the heart of Black women’s oppression, historical
jezebels and contemporary “hoochies” represent a deviant Black female sexuality .
The image of jezebel originated under slavery when Black women were por-
trayed as being, to use Jewelle Gomez’s words, “sexually aggressive wet nurses”
(Clarke et al. 1983, 99). Jezebel’s function was to relegate all Black women to the
category of sexually aggressive women, thus providing a powerful rationale for
the widespread sexual assaults by White men typically reported by Black slave
women (Davis 1981; D. White 1985). Jezebel served yet another function. If
Black slave women could be portrayed as having excessive sexual appetites, then
increased fertility should be the expected outcome. By suppressing the nurturing
that African-American women might give their own children which would
81MAMMIES, MATRIARCHS, AND OTHER CONTROLLING IMAGES


--- PAGE 99 ---
strengthen Black family networks, and by forcing Black women to work in the
field, “wet nurse” White children, and emotionally nurture their White owners,
slave owners effectively tied the controlling images of jezebel and mammy to the
economic exploitation inherent in the institution of slavery .
Rooted in the historical legacy of jezebel, the contemporary “hoochie”
seems to be cut from an entirely different cloth. For one, whereas images of Black
women as sexually aggressive certainly pervade popular culture overall, the image
of the hoochie seems to have permeated everyday Black culture in entirely new
ways. For example, 2 Live Crew’s song “Hoochie Mama” takes Black women
bashing to new heights. In this song, the group opens with the rallying cry “big
booty hoes hop wit it!” and proceeds to list characteristics of the “hoodrat
hoochie mama.” The singers are quite clear about the use of such women: “I
don’t need no confrontation,” they sing. “All I want is an ejaculation cos I 
like them ghetto hoochies.” The misogyny in “Hoochie Mama” makes prior por-
trayals of jezebel seem tame. For example, 2 Live Crew’s remedy for “lyin” shows
their disdain for women: “Keep runnin ya mouth and I’ma stick my dick in it,”
they threaten. And for those listeners who remain confused about the difference
between good and bad women, 2 Live Crew is willing to help out:
Mama just don’t understand 
why I love your hoochie ass
Sex is what I need you for 
I gotta good girl but I need a whore
In the United States, guarantees of free speech allow 2 Live Crew and similar
groups to speak their minds about “hoochies” and anything else that will make
them money .The issue here lies in African-American acceptance of such images.
African-American men and women alike routinely do not challenge these and
other portrayals of Black women as “hoochies” within Black popular culture. For
example, despite the offensive nature of much of 2 Live Crew’s music, some
Blacks argued that such views, while unfortunate, had long been expressed in
Black culture (Crenshaw 1993). Not only does such acceptance mask how such
images provide financial benefits to both 2 Live Crew and White-controlled
media, such tacit acceptance validates this image. The more it circulates among
U.S. Blacks, the more credence it is given. The “hoochie” image certainly seems
to have taken on a life of its own. For example, an informal poll of my friends,
students, and colleagues revealed a complex taxonomy of “hoochies.” Most
agreed that one category consisted of “plain hoochies” or sexually assertive
women who can be found across social classes.Women who wear sleazy clothes
to clubs and dance in a “slutty” fashion constitute “club hoochies.” These
women aim to attract men with money for a one-night stand. In contrast, the
ambition of “gold-digging hoochies” lies in establishing a long-term relation-
ship with a man with money .These gold-digging hoochies often aim to snare a
highly paid athlete and can do so by becoming pregnant. Finally , there is the
82 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 100 ---
“hoochie-mama” popularized by 2 Live Crew, an image that links the hoochie
image to poverty .As 2 Live Crew points out, the “hoochie mama” is a “hoodrat,”
a “ghetto hoochie” whose main purpose is to provide them sexual favors. The
fact that she is also a “mama” speaks to the numbers of Black women in poverty
who are single parents whose exchange of sexual favors for money is motivated
by their children’s economic needs.
Within assumptions that normalize heterosexuality , the historical jezebel and
her modern “hoochie” counterpart mark a series of boundaries. Heterosexuality
itself is constructed via binary thinking that juxtaposes male and female sexuality ,
with male and female gender roles pivoting on perceptions of appropriate male
and female sexual expression. Men are active, and women should be passive. In
the context of U.S. society , these become racialized—White men are active, and
White women should be passive. Black people and other racialized groups simul-
taneously stand outside these definitions of normality and mark their bound-
aries. In this context of a gender-specific, White, heterosexual normality , the
jezebel or hoochie becomes a racialized, gendered symbol of deviant female sex-
uality . Normal female heterosexuality is expressed via the cult of true White
womanhood, whereas deviant female heterosexuality is typified by the “hot
mommas” of Black womanhood.
Within intersecting oppressions, Black women’s allegedly deviant sexuality
becomes constructed around jezebel’s sexual desires. Jezebel may be a “pretty
baby ,” but her actions as a “hot momma” indicate that she just can’t get enough.
Because jezebel or the hoochie is constructed as a woman whose sexual appetites
are at best inappropriate and, at worst, insatiable, it becomes a short step to imag-
ine her as a “freak.” And if she is a freak, her sexual partners become similarly
stigmatized. For example, the hypermasculinity often attributed to Black men
reflects beliefs about Black men’s excessive sexual appetite. Ironically , jezebel’s
excessive sexual appetite masculinizes her because she desires sex just as a man
does. Moreover, jezebel can also be masculinized and once again deemed
“freaky” if she desires sex with other women. 2 Live Crew had little difficulty
making this conceptual leap when they sing: “Freaky shit is what I like and I love
to see two bitches dyke.” In a context where feminine women are those who
remain submissive yet appropriately flirtatious toward men, women whose sex-
ual aggression resembles that of men become stigmatized.
When it comes to women’s sexuality , the controlling image of jezebel and
her hoochie counterpart constitute one side of  the normal/deviant binary . But
broadening this binary thinking that underpins intersecting oppressions of race,
class, gender, and sexuality reveals that heterosexuality is juxtaposed to homo-
sexuality as its oppositional, different, and inferior “other.” Within this wider
oppositional difference, jezebel becomes the freak on the border demarking het-
erosexuality from homosexuality . Her insatiable sexual desire helps define the
boundaries of normal sexuality . Just across the border stand lesbian, bisexual, and
transgendered women who are deemed deviant in large part because of their
83MAMMIES, MATRIARCHS, AND OTHER CONTROLLING IMAGES


--- PAGE 101 ---
choices of sexual partners. As a sexual freak, jezebel has one foot over the line.
On this border, the hoochie participates in a cluster of “deviant female sexuali-
ties,” some associated with the materialistic ambitions where she sells sex for
money , others associated with so-called deviant sexual practices such as sleeping
with other women, and still others attached to “freaky” sexual practices such as
engaging in oral and anal sex.
Images of sexuality associated with jezebel and the hoochie not only mark
the boundaries of deviant sexualities, they weave throughout prevailing concep-
tualizations of the mammy , matriarch, and the Janus-faced welfare queen/Black
lady . Connecting all is the common theme of Black women’s sexuality . Each
image transmits distinctive messages about the proper links among female sexu-
ality , desired levels of fertility for working-class and middle-class Black women,
and U.S. Black women’s placement in social class and citizenship hierarchies. For
example, the mammy , one of two somewhat positive figures, is a desexed indi-
vidual. The mammy is typically portrayed as overweight, dark, and with charac-
teristically African features—in brief, as an unsuitable sexual partner for White
men. She is asexual and therefore is free to become a surrogate mother to the
children she acquired not through her own sexuality .The mammy represents the
clearest example of the split between sexuality and motherhood present in
Eurocentric masculinist thought. In contrast, both the matriarch and the welfare
mother are sexual beings. But their sexuality is linked to their fertility , and this
link forms one fundamental reason they are negative images.The matriarch rep-
resents the sexually aggressive woman, one who emasculates Black men because
she will not permit them to assume roles as Black patriarchs. She refuses to be
passive and thus is stigmatized. Similarly , the welfare mother represents a woman
of low morals and uncontrolled sexuality , factors identified as the cause of her
impoverished state. In both cases Black female control over sexuality and fertility
is conceptualized as antithetical to elite White male interests.The Black lady com-
pletes the circle. Like mammy , her hard-earned, middle-class respectability is
grounded in her seeming asexuality .Yet fertility is an issue here as well. Despite
the fact that the middle-class Black lady is the woman deemed best suited to have
children, in actuality , she remains the least likely to do so. She is told that she can
reproduce, but no one except her is especially disturbed if she does not.
Taken together, these prevailing images of Black womanhood represent elite
White male interests in defining Black women’s sexuality and fertility . Moreover,
by meshing smoothly with intersecting oppressions of race, class, gender, and
sexuality , they help justify the social practices that characterize the  matrix of
domination in the United States.
84 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 102 ---
Controlling Images and Social Institutions
Schools, the news media, and government agencies constitute important sites
for reproducing these controlling images. Whereas schools and the scholarship
produced and disseminated by their faculty historically have played an important
part in generating these controlling images (Morton 1991), their current signif-
icance in reproducing these images is less often noted. Take, for example, how
social science research on Black women’s sexuality has been influenced by
assumptions of the jezebel.Two topics, both deemed as social problems, take the
lion’s share—Black women’s sexuality appears within AIDS research and within
scholarship on adolescent pregnancy . Both reference two types of allegedly
deviant sexuality with an eye toward altering Black women’s behavior. In AIDS
research, the focus is on risky sexual practices that might expose women, their
unborn children, and their partners to HIV infection. Prostitutes and other sex
workers are of special concern.The underlying reason for studying Black adoles-
cent sexuality may lie in helping the girls, but an equally plausible stimulus lies
in desires to get these girls off the public dole.Their sexuality is not that of risky
sexual practices, but sexuality outside the confines of marriage. Embedding
research on Black women’s sexuality within social problems frameworks thus
fosters its portrayal as a social problem.
The growing influence of television, radio, movies, videos, CDs, and the
Internet constitute new ways of circulating controlling images. Popular culture
has become increasingly important in promoting these images, especially with
new global technologies that allow U.S. popular culture to be exported through-
out the world. Within this new corporate structure, the misogyny in some
strands of Black hip-hop music becomes especially troubling. Much of this music
is produced by a Black culture industry in which African-American artists have lit-
tle say in production. On the one hand, Black rap music can be seen as a creative
response to racism by Black urban youth who have been written off  by U.S. soci-
ety (Rose 1994; Kelley 1997, 43–77). On the other hand, images of Black
women as sexually available hoochies persist in Black music videos. As “freaks,”
U.S. Black women can now be seen “poppin’ that coochie”—yet another term by
2 Live Crew that describes butt shaking—in global context.
Government agencies also play a part in legitimating these controlling
images. Because legislative bodies and, in the case of 2 Live Crew’s obscenity trial
(see, e.g., Crenshaw 1993), courts determine which narratives are legitimated
and which remain censured, government agencies decide which official inter-
pretations of social reality prevail (Van Dijk 1993).The inordinate attention paid
to Black adolescent pregnancy and parenting in scholarly research and 
the kinds of public policy initiatives that target Black girls illustrate the signifi-
cance of government support for controlling images. Because assumptions of
sexual hedonism are routinely applied to Black urban girls, they are more likely
85MAMMIES, MATRIARCHS, AND OTHER CONTROLLING IMAGES


--- PAGE 103 ---
to be offered coercive birth control measures, such as Norplant and Depo Provera
than their White, suburban, middle-class counterparts (Roberts 1997).
Confronting the controlling images forwarded by institutions external to
African-American communities remains essential. But such efforts should not
obscure the equally important issue of examining how African-American insti-
tutions also perpetuate these same controlling images.Although it may be painful
to examine—especially in the context of a racially charged society always vigi-
lant for signs of  Black disunity—the question of how the organizations of Black
civil society reproduce controlling images of Black womanhood and fail to take
a stand against images developed elsewhere is equally important.
Since 1970, U.S. Black women have become increasingly vocal in criticizing
sexism in Black civil society (Wallace 1978; E.F. White 1984; Cleage 1993;
Crenshaw 1993). For example, Black feminist Pauline Terrelonge confronts the
issue of the Black community’s role in the subordination of African-American
women by asking, “If there is much in the objective condition of black women
that warrants the development of a black feminist consciousness, why have so
many black women failed to recognize the patterns of sexism that directly
impinge on their everyday lives?” (1984, 562). To answer this question,
Terrelonge contends that a common view is that African-Americans have with-
stood the long line of abuses perpetuated against us mainly because of Black
women’s “fortitude, inner wisdom, and sheer ability to survive.” Connected to
this emphasis on the strength of Black women is the related argument that
African-American women play critical roles in keeping Black families together
and in supporting Black men.These activities have been important in preventing
the potential annihilation of African-Americans as a “race.” As a result, “many
blacks regard the role of uniting all blacks to be the primary duty of the black
woman, one that should supersede all other roles that she might want to per-
form, and certainly one that is essentially incompatible with her own individual
liberation” (p. 557).
This analysis shifts our understanding of Black community organizations.
Rather than seeing family , church, and Black civic organizations through a race-
only lens of resisting racism, such institutions may be better understood as com-
plex sites where dominant ideologies are simultaneously resisted and repro-
duced. Black community organizations can oppose racial oppression yet perpet-
uate gender oppression, can challenge class exploitation yet foster heterosexism.
One might ask where within Black civil society African-American women can
openly challenge the hoochie image and other equally controlling images.
Institutions controlled by African-Americans can be seen as contradictory sites
where Black women learn skills of independence and self-reliance that enable
African-American families, churches, and civic organizations to endure. But these
same institutions may also be places where Black women learn to subordinate
our interests as women to the allegedly greater good of the larger African-
American community .
86 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 104 ---
Take, for example, historically Black colleges and universities. In their goal of
dispelling the myths about African-American women and making Black women
acceptable to wider society , some historically Black colleges may also foster Black
women’s subordination. In Meridian Alice Walker describes an elite college for
Black women where “most of the students—timid, imitative, bright enough but
never daring, were being ushered nearer to Ladyhood every day” (1976, 39).
Confined to campus, Meridian, the heroine, had to leave to find the ordinary
Black people who exhibited all of the qualities that her elite institution wished
to eliminate. Walker’s description of the fence surrounding the campus symbol-
izes how stultifying the cult of true womanhood was for Black students. But it
also describes the problems that African-American institutions create for Black
women when they embrace externally defined controlling images:
The fence that surrounded the campus was hardly noticeable from the
street and appeared, from the outside, to be more of an attempt at orna-
mentation than an effort to contain or exclude. Only the students who
lived on campus learned, often painfully , that the beauty of a fence is no
guarantee that it will not keep one penned in as securely as one that is
ugly . (Walker 1976, 41)
Jacquelyn Grant (1982) identifies the church as one key institution whose cen-
trality to Black community development may have come at the expense of many
of the African-American women who constitute the bulk of its membership.
Grant asserts, “it is often said that women are the ‘backbone’ of the church. On
the surface, this may appear to be a compliment. . . . It has become apparent to
me that most of the ministers who use this term are referring to location rather
than function. What they really mean is that women are in the ‘background’
and should be kept there” (1982, 141). At the same time, Black churches 
have clearly been highly significant in Black political struggle, with U.S. Black
women central to those efforts. Historically , Black women’s participation in
Black Baptist and other Black churches suggests that Black women have been 
the backbone yet have resisted staying totally in the “background” (Gilkes
1985; Higginbotham 1993). One wonders, however, if contemporary Black
churches are equipped to grapple with the new questions raised by the global
circulation of the hoochie and comparable images. Denouncing “hoochies” and
all they represent from the pulpit with a cautionary warning “don’t be one”
simply is not enough.
African-American families form another contradictory location where the
controlling images of Black womanhood become negotiated. Middle-class White
feminists seemingly have had few qualms in criticizing how their families per-
petuate women’s subordination (see, for example, Chodorow 1978). Until recently ,
however, because Black families have been so pathologized by the traditional
family ideal, Black women have been reluctant to analyze in public the potential
culpability of families in Black women’s oppression. Black women thinkers have
87MAMMIES, MATRIARCHS, AND OTHER CONTROLLING IMAGES


--- PAGE 105 ---
been more uniformly positive when describing Black families, and much more
reluctant to criticize Black family organization than their White counterparts. As
a result, Black studies emphasizes material that, although it quite rightly demon-
strates the strengths of U.S. Black families in a context of intersecting oppres-
sions, skims over problems (see, e.g., Billingsley 1992). But this emphasis on
strengths has often come at a cost, and that cost has far too often been paid by
African-American women. Thus, within Black feminist scholarship, we are finally
hearing not only the long-hidden stories of those strong Black women (Joseph
1981; Collins 1987), but those of women whose gendered family responsibili-
ties cause them trouble (Ritchie 1996; Kaplan 1997).
Some Black feminist activists claim that relegating Black women to more
submissive, supporting roles in African-American organizations has been an
obstacle to Black political empowerment. Black nationalist philosophies, in par-
ticular, have come under attack for their ideas about Black women’s place in
political struggle (White 1990; Lubiano 1997; Williams 1997; Collins 1998a,
155–86). In describing the 1960s nationalist movement, Pauli Murray contends
that many Black men misinterpreted Black women’s qualities of self-reliance and
independence by tacitly accepting the matriarchy thesis. Such a stance was and is
highly problematic for Black women. Murray observes, “The black militant’s cry
for the retrieval of black manhood suggests an acceptance of this stereotype, an
association of masculinity with male dominance and a tendency to treat the val-
ues of self-reliance and independence as purely masculine traits” (1970, 89).
Echoing Murray , Sheila Radford-Hill (1986) sees Black women’s subordination
in African-American institutions as a continuing concern. For Radford-Hill the
erosion of Black women’s traditional power bases in African-American commu-
nities which followed nationalist movements is problematic in that “Black macho
constituted a betrayal by black men; a psychosexual rejection of black women
experienced as the capstone to our fall from cultural power ....W ithout the
power to influence the purpose and direction of our collective experience, with-
out the power to influence our culture from within, we are increasingly immo-
bilized” (p. 168).
Color, Hair Texture, and Standards of Beauty
Like everyone else, African-American women come to understand the work-
ings of intersecting oppressions without obvious teaching or conscious learning.
The controlling images of Black women are not simply grafted onto existing
social institutions but are so pervasive that even though the images themselves
change in the popular imagination, Black women’s portrayal as the Other per-
sists. Particular meanings, stereotypes, and myths can change, but the overall
ideology of domination itself seems to be an enduring feature of intersecting
oppressions (Omi and Winant 1994).
88 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 106 ---
African-American women encounter this ideology through a range of
unquestioned daily experiences. But when the contradictions between Black
women’s self-definitions and everyday treatment are heightened, controlling
images become increasingly visible. Karen Russell, the daughter of basketball
great Bill Russell, describes how racial stereotypes affect her:
How am I supposed to react to well-meaning, good, liberal white people
who say things like: “You know, Karen, I don’t understand what all the
fuss is about.You’re one of my good friends, and I never think of you as
black.” Implicit in such a remark is, “I think of you as white,” or perhaps
just, “I don’t think of your race at all.” (Russell 1987, 22)
Ms. Russell was perceptive enough to see that remarks intended to compliment
her actually insulted African-Americans. As the Others, U.S. Blacks are assigned
all of the negative characteristics opposite and inferior to those reserved for
Whites. By claiming that Ms. Russell is not really “black,” her friends uninten-
tionally validate this system of racial meanings and encourage her to internalize
those images.
Although most Black women typically resist being objectified as the Other,
these controlling images remain powerful influences on our relationships with
Whites, Black men, other racial/ethnic groups, and one another. Dealing with
prevailing standards of beauty—particularly skin color, facial features, and hair
texture—is one specific example of how controlling images derogate African-
American women. A children’s rhyme often sung in Black communities pro-
claims:
Now, if you’re white you’re all right,
If you’re brown, stick around,
But if you’re black, Git back! Git back! Git back!
Prevailing standards of beauty claim that no matter how intelligent, educated, or
“beautiful” a Black woman may be, those Black women whose features and skin
color are most African must “git back.” Within the binary thinking that under-
pins intersecting oppressions, blue-eyed, blond, thin White women could not be
considered beautiful without the Other—Black women with African features of
dark skin, broad noses, full lips, and kinky hair.
Race, gender, and sexuality converge on this issue of evaluating beauty . Black
men’s blackness penalizes them. But because they are not women, valuations of
their self-worth do not depend as heavily on their physical attractiveness. In con-
trast, part of the objectification of all women lies in evaluating how they look.
Within binary thinking, White and Black women as collectivities represent two
opposing poles, with Latinas, Asian-American women, and Native American
women jockeying for positions in between. Judging White women by their phys-
ical appearance and attractiveness to men objectifies them. But their White skin
and straight hair simultaneously privilege them in a system that elevates white-
ness over blackness. In contrast, African-American women experience the pain of
89MAMMIES, MATRIARCHS, AND OTHER CONTROLLING IMAGES


--- PAGE 107 ---
never being able to live up to prevailing standards of beauty—standards used by
White men, White women, Black men, and, most painfully , one another.
Regardless of any individual woman’s subjective reality , this is the system of ideas
that she encounters. Because controlling images are hegemonic and taken for
granted, they become virtually impossible to escape.
In her Preface to Skin Deep: Women Writing on Color, Culture and Identity, edi-
tor Elena Featherstone suggests that contrary to popular belief, “issues of race and
color are not as simple as Black and white—or Red,Yellow, or Brown and white”
(1994, vi). Featherstone is right, and volumes such as hers remain necessary .Yet
at the same time, colorism in the U.S. context operates the way that it does
because it is deeply embedded in a distinctly American form of racism ground-
ed in Black/White oppositional differences. Other groups “of color” must nego-
tiate the meanings attached to their “color.” All must position themselves within
a continually renegotiated color hierarchy where, because they define the top and
the bottom, the meanings attached to Whiteness and Blackness change much less
than we think. Linked in symbiotic relationship, White and Black gain meaning
only in relation to one another. However well-meaning conversations among
“women of color” concerning the meaning of color in the United States may be,
such conversations require an analysis of how institutionalized racism produces
color hierarchies among U.S. women.Without this attention to domination, such
conversations can work to flatten bona fide differences in power among White
women, Latinas, Asian-American women, Native women, and Black women.
Even  Featherstone recognizes the fact of Blackness, by pointing out, “color is the
ultimate test of ‘American-ness,’ and black is the most un-American color of all”
(1994, iii).
Since U.S. Black women have been most uniformly harmed by the colorism
that is a by-product of U.S. racism, it is important to explore how prevailing stan-
dards of beauty affect U.S. Black women’s treatment in everyday life. The long-
standing attention of musicians, writers, and artists to this theme reveals African-
American women’s conflicted feelings concerning skin color, hair texture, and
standards of beauty . In her autobiography , Maya Angelou records her painful real-
ization that the only way she could become truly beautiful was to become white:
Wouldn’t they be surprised when one day I woke out of my black ugly
dream, and my real hair, which was long and blond, would take the place
of the kinky mass that Momma wouldn’t let me straighten? . . . Then they
would understand why I had never picked up a Southern accent, or spoke
the common slang, and why I had to be forced to eat pigs’ tails and snouts.
Because I was really white and because a cruel fairy stepmother ...h a d
turned me into a too-big Negro girl, with nappy black hair. (Angelou 1969, 2)
Gwendolyn Brooks also explores the meaning of skin color and hair texture for
U.S. Black women. During Brooks’s childhood, having African features was so
universally denigrated that she writes, “when I was a child, it did not occur to
90 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 108 ---
me even once, that the black in which I was encased . . . would be considered,
one day , beautiful” (Brooks 1972,37). Early on, Brooks learned that a clear peck-
ing order existed among African-Americans, one based on one’s closeness to
Whiteness. As a member of the “Lesser Blacks,” those furthest from White,
Brooks saw firsthand the difference in treatment of her group and that of the
“Brights”:
One of the first “world” truths revealed to me when I at last became a
member of SCHOOL was that, to be socially successful, a little girl must
be Bright (of skin). It was better if your hair was curly , too—or at least
Good Grade (Good Grade implied, usually , no involvement with the Hot
Comb)—but Bright you marvelously needed to be. (1972, 37)
This division of African-Americans into two categories—the “Brights” and the
“Lesser Blacks”—affects dark-skinned and light-skinned women differently .
Darker women face being judged inferior and receiving the treatment afforded
“too-big Negro girls with nappy hair.” Institutions controlled by Whites clearly
show a preference for lighter-skinned Blacks, discriminating against darker ones
or against any African-Americans who appear to reject White images of beauty .
Sonia Sanchez reports, “Sisters tell me . . . that when they go out for jobs they
straighten their hair because if they go in with their hair natural or braided, they
probably won’t get the job” (Tate 1983, 141).
Sometimes the pain most deeply felt is the pain that Black women inflict on
one another. Marita Golden’s mother told her not to play in the sun because “you
gonna have to get a light husband anyway , for the sake of your children” (1983,
24). In Color, a short film exploring the impact of skin color on Black women’s
lives, the dark-skinned character’s mother tries to get her to sit still for the hot
comb, asking “don’t you want your hair flowing like your friend Rebecca’s?”We
see the sadness of a young Black girl sitting in a kitchen, holding her ears so they
won’t get burned by the hot comb that will straighten her hair. Her mother can-
not make her beautiful, only “presentable” for church. Marita Golden’s descrip-
tion of a Black beauty salon depicts the internalized oppression that some
African-American women feel about African features:
Between customers, twirling in her chair, white-stockinged legs crossed,
my beautician lamented to the hairdresser in the next stall, “I sure hope
that Gloria Johnson don’t come in here asking for me today . I swear ’fore
God her hair is this long.” She snapped her fingers to indicate the length.
Contempt riding her words, she lit a cigarette and fini shed, “Barely
enough to wash, let alone press and curl.” (Golden 1983, 25)
African-American women who are members of the “Brights” fare little better,
for they too receive special treatment because of their skin color and hair tex-
ture. Harriet Jacobs, an enslaved light-skinned woman, was sexually harassed
because of her looks. Her straight hair and fair skin, her appearance as a dusky
White woman, made her physically attractive to White men. But the fact that she
91MAMMIES, MATRIARCHS, AND OTHER CONTROLLING IMAGES


--- PAGE 109 ---
was Black made her available to White men as no group of White women had
been. In describing this situation, Jacobs notes, “if God has bestowed beauty
upon her, it will prove her greatest curse. That which commands admiration 
in the white woman only hastens the degradation of the female slave”
(Washington 1987, 17).
This different valuation and treatment of dark-skinned and light-skinned
Black women influences the relationships among African-American women.Toni
Morrison’s (1970) novel The Bluest Eye explores this theme of the tension that
can exist among Black women grappling with the meaning of prevailing stan-
dards of beauty . Frieda, a dark-skinned, “ordinary” Black girl, struggles with the
meaning of these standards. She wonders why adults always got so upset when
she rejected the White dolls they gave her and why light-skinned Maureen Peal,
a child her own age whose two braids hung like “lynch-ropes down her back,”
got the love and attention of teachers, adults, and Black boys alike. Morrison
explores Frieda’s attempt not to blame Maureen for the benefits her light skin and
long hair afforded her as part of Frieda’s growing realization that the “Thing” to
fear was not Maureen herself but the “Thing” that made Maureen beautiful.
Gwendolyn Brooks (1953) captures the anger and frustration experienced
by dark-skinned women in dealing with the differential treatment they and their
lighter-skinned sisters receive. In her novel Maud Martha, the dark-skinned hero-
ine ponders actions she could take against a red-headed Black woman whom her
husband found so attractive. “I could,” considered Maud Martha, “go over there
and scratch her upsweep down. I could spit on her back. I could scream. ‘Listen,’
I could scream, ‘I’m making a baby for this man and I mean to do it in peace.’ ”
(Washington 1987, 422). But Maud Martha rejects these actions, reasoning, “If
the root was sour what business did she have up there hacking at a leaf?”
This “sour root” also creates issues in relationships between African-
American women and men. Maude Martha explains:
It’s my color that makes him mad. I try to shut my eyes to that, but it’s no
good.What I am inside, what is really me, he likes okay . But he keeps look-
ing at my color, which is like a wall. He has to jump over it in order to
meet and touch what I’ve got for him. He has to jump away up high in
order to see it. He gets awful tired of all that jumping. (Washington 1987,
421)
Her husband’s attraction to light-skinned women hurt Maude Martha because
his inability to “jump away up high” over the wall of color limited his ability to
see her for who she truly was.
92 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 110 ---
Black Women’s Reactions to Controlling Images
In Their Eyes Were Watching God,Nanny eloquently expresses her perspective on
Black womanhood: “Ah was born back in slavery so it wasn’t for me to fulfill
my dream of whut a woman oughta be and do. But nothing can’t stop you from
wishin! You can’t beat nobody down so low till you can rob ‘em of they will. Ah
didn’t want to be used for a work-ox and a brood-sow and Ah didn’t want mah
daughter used dat way neither” (Hurston 1937, 17). Like many Afr ican-
American women, she resisted the controlling images of “work-ox” and
“brood-sow,” but her status as a slave prevented her fulfilling her “dreams of
whut a woman oughta be and do.” She saw the constraints on her own life but
managed to keep the will to resist alive. Moreover, she tried to pass on that vision
of freedom from controlling images to her granddaughter.
Given the ubiquitous nature of controlling images, it should not be surpris-
ing that exploring how Black women construct social realities is a recurring
theme in Black feminist thought. Overall, despite the pervasiveness of controlling
images, African-American women as a group have resisted these ideological jus-
tifications for our oppression (Holloway 1995).Unlike White women who “face
the pitfall of being seduced into joining the oppressor under the pretense of shar-
ing power,” and for whom “there is a wider range of pretended choices and
rewards for identifying with patriarchal power and its tools,” Black women are
offered fewer possibilities (Lorde 1984, 117–18). In this context, individual
women and subgroups of women within the larger collectivity of U.S. Black
women have demonstrated diverse reactions to their treatment. Understanding
the contours of this heterogeneity generally , and how U.S. Black women can be
better equipped to resist this negative treatment, constitutes one important task
for U.S. Black feminist thought.
Historically , literature by U.S. Black women writers provides one comprehen-
sive view of Black women’s struggles to form positive self-definitions in the face
of derogated images of Black womanhood. Portraying the range of ways that
African-American women experience internalized oppression has been a promi-
nent theme in Black women’s writing. Mary Helen Washington’s (1982) discus-
sion of the theme of the suspended woman in Black women’s literature describes
one dimension of Black women’s internalized oppression. Pain, violence, and
death form the essential content of these women’s lives. They are suspended in
time and place; their life choices are so severely limited that the women them-
selves are often destroyed. Pecola Breedlove, an unloved, “ugly” 11-year-old Black
girl in Toni Morrison’s novel The Bluest Eye (1970), internalizes the negative
images of African-American women and believes that the absence of blue eyes is
central to her “ugliness.” Pecola cannot value her Blackness—she longs to be
White so that she can escape the pain of being Black, female, poor, and a child.
Her mother, Pauline Breedlove, typifies the internalization of the mammy image.
Pauline Breedlove neglects her own children, preferring to lavish her concern and
93MAMMIES, MATRIARCHS, AND OTHER CONTROLLING IMAGES


--- PAGE 111 ---
attention on the White charges in her care. Only by accepting this subordinate role
to White children could she, as a poor Black woman, see a positive place for herself.
U.S. Black women writers have chronicled other forms of Black women’s
attempts to escape from a world predicated upon derogated images of Black
womanhood. Fictional African-American women characters use drugs, alcohol,
excessive religion, and even retreat into madness in an attempt to create other
worlds apart from the ones that produced such painful Black female realities.
Pauline Breedlove in The Bluest Eye and Mrs. Hill in Meridian (Walker 1976) both
demonstrate an attachment to religion that allows them to ignore their daughters.
Eva Medina in Gayl Jones’s Eva’s Man(1976), Merle Kibona in Paule Marshall’s
The Chosen Place, the Timeless People (1969), and Velma Henry in Toni Cade
Bambara’s The Salt Eaters (1980) all experience madness as an escape from pain.
Denial is another characteristic response to the controlling images of Black
womanhood and their accompanying conditions. By claiming that they are not
like the rest, some African-American women reject connections to other Black
women and demand special treatment for themselves. Mary Helen Washington
(1982) refers to these characters as assimilated women. They are more aware of
their condition than are suspended women, but despite their greater potential for
shaping their lives, they still feel thwarted because they see themselves as mis-
placed by time and circumstances. Light-skinned, middle-class Cleo, a key figure
in Dorothy West’s novel The Living Is Easy (1948), typifies this response. In one
scene strong-willed Cleo hustles her daughter past a playground filled with the
children of newly arrived Southern Blacks, observing that “she wouldn’t want
her child to go to school with those niggers.” Cleo clings to her social class posi-
tion, one that she sees as separating her from other African-Americans, and tries
to muffle the negative status attached to her Blackness by emphasizing her supe-
rior class position. Even though Cleo is more acceptable to the White world, the
price she pays for her acceptance is the negation of her racial identity and sepa-
ration from the sustenance that such an identity might offer.
U.S. Black women writers not only portray the range of responses that indi-
vidual African-American women express concerning their objectification as the
Other: they also document the process of personal growth toward positive self-
definitions.The personal growth experienced by Renay , the heroine in Ann Allen
Shockley’s Loving Her (1974), illustrates the process of rejecting externally
defined controlling images of Black womanhood. Shockley initially presents
Renay as a suspended woman who is trapped in a heterosexual marriage to an
abusive husband and who tries to deny her feelings for other women. Renay
retreats into music and alcohol as temporary spaces where she can escape having
her difference—in this case, her Blackness and lesbianism—judged as inferior
and deviant. After taking a White woman lover, Renay is initially quite happy , but
she grows to realize that she has replaced one set of controlling images—namely ,
those she experienced with her abusive husband—with another. She leaves her
lover to pursue her own self-definition. By the novel’s end Renay has begun to
94 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 112 ---
resist all external definitions of herself that stem from controlling images applied
to Blacks, women, and lesbians.
Renay’s experiences typify how Black women writers explore the theme of
Black women’s resistance to these controlling images, a resistance typified by the
emergent woman in Black women’s literature. Sherley Anne Williams’s novel
Dessa Rose (1986) describes a Black slave woman’s emerging sense of power after
she participates in a slave revolt, runs away , and eventually secures her own free-
dom. Dorine Davis, the heroine in Rosa Guy’s A Measure of Time (1983), is raped
at age 10 by her White employer, subsequently sleeps with men for money , yet
retains a core of resistance. Bad things happen to Dorine, but Guy does not por-
tray Dorine as a victim. In The Bluest Eye (1970), Toni Morrison presents the
character of Claudia, a 10-year-old Black girl who, to the chagrin of grown-ups,
destroys White dolls by tearing off their heads and who refuses to share her class-
mates’ admiration of light-skinned, long-haired Maureen Peal. Claudia’s growing
awareness of the “Thing that made her [Maureen Peal] beautiful and us ugly” and
her rejection of that Thing—racist images of Black women—represents yet
another reaction to negative images of Black womanhood. Like Merle Kibona in
Paule Marshall’s The Timeless Place, the Chosen People, Vyry in Margaret Walker’s
Jubilee (1966), Janie Crawford in Zora Neale Hurston’s Their Eyes Were Watching
God (1937), or Meridian in Alice Walker’s Meridian (1976), Claudia represents a
young version of emergent Black women carving out new definitions of Black
womanhood.
Independent Black women heroines populate U.S. Black women’s fiction of
the 1990s. Many of these Black female fictional characters express varying
dimensions of the emergent woman thesis. Just as social class differences have
become more prominent in Black women’s controlling images overall, images of
emergent women in Black women’s literature also reflect social class diversity .
Working-class women become emergent women by overcoming an array of
hardships, many of them financial, that aim to keep them down. In Barbara
Neely’s novel Blanche on the Lam (1992) Blanche evades the law by hiding out
as a domestic worker for a rich White family . Another working-class heroine is
Valerie Wilson’s fictional detective Tamara Hale. A single mother of a teenage son,
Hale juggles issues of financial well-being and raising her son in the Newark
metropolitan area. Interestingly , in both Neely and Wilson’s fiction, working-class
women spend little time bemoaning their unmarried, uncoupled status. Neither
fictional heroine agonizes over the absence of a Black male husband or lover in
their lives. In contrast, middle-class Black women become emergent women by
changing their expectations about their femininity and Black men’s expectations.
Terry McMillan’s two volumes,Waiting to Exhale (1992) and How Stella Got Her
Groove Back (1996), can be read as companion pieces that advise Black middle-
class women how to emerge. In Waiting to Exhale, four Black women friends
struggle with issues of having satisfying relationships with Black men. By the end
of the book, two of the women have found meaningful relationships with men.
95MAMMIES, MATRIARCHS, AND OTHER CONTROLLING IMAGES


--- PAGE 113 ---
More importantly , what they have all learned is that their friendship with one
another is as important as their ties to men. In MacMillan’s subsequent volume,
Stella, a Black single mother who is a highly paid, successful professional, takes
a trip to Jamaica by herself and meets Winston, a much younger man. By the end
of the volume, Stella has shed the limitations of distinctly American controlling
images, and decides that true love transcends differences of age and nationality .
Whereas racism, sexism, and class exploitation do not preoccupy the emergent
women created by Neely , Wilson, and McMillan, the social contexts in which
these authors embed their characters are clearly structured by these oppressions.
The many documentaries and feature films where Black women appear as
central characters constitute another arena where emergent Black women appear.
Not only could Black women read about emergent Black women in Terry
MacMillan’s fiction, audiences could view images of Black women trying to
“exhale” and “get their grove” on the big screen.This theme of U.S. Black women
coming to know themselves, and often doing so in company of other Black
women, wove throughout a cluster of films whose subject matter differed dra-
matically . Feature films made by Black women directors, such as Julie Dash’s
Daughters of Dust, Michelle Parkerson’s Gotta Make That Journey: Sweet Honey in
the Rock, and Ayoka Chenzira’s Alma’s Rainbow all illustrate the value Black
women filmmakers place on Black women’s emerging self-definitions.
Emergent women may have only recently made their appearance in Black
women’s fiction and film, but such women have long populated everyday lived
experience. In her autobiography , Lorene Carey , a working-class African-American
woman who helped desegregate a prestigious New England boarding school, tells
of what happens when everyday Black women decide to “turn it out”:
My mother, and her mother, who had worked in a factory , and her moth-
er, who had cleaned apartments in Manhattan, had been studying these
people all their lives.... And I had studied them. I had studied my moth-
er as she turned out elementary schools and department stores. I always
saw it coming. Some white department-store manager would look at my
mother and see no more than a modestly dressed young black woman
making a tiresome complaint. He’d use that tone of voice they used when
they had important work elsewhere. Uh-oh. Then he’d dismiss her with
his eyes. I’d feel her body stiffen next to me, and I’d know that he’ d set
her off. And then it began in earnest, the turning out. She never moved
back. It didn’t matter how many people were in line ....T u r ning out, I
learned, was not a matter of style; cold indignation worked as well as hot
fury . Turning out had to do with will (Carey 1991, 58–59).
Emergent women have found that one way of surviving the everyday disrespect
and outright assaults that accompany controlling images is to “turn it out.”This
is the moment when silence becomes speech, when stillness becomes action. As
Karla Holloway says, “no one wins in that situation, but usually we feel better”
(1995, 31).
96 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 114 ---
“In order to survive, those of us for
whom oppression is as American as apple pie have always had to be watchers,”
asserts Black feminist poet Audre Lorde (1984, 114).This “watching” generates a
dual consciousness in African-American women, one in which Black women
“become familiar with the language and manners of the oppressor, even some-
times adopting them for some illusion of protection” (p. 114), while hiding a
self-defined standpoint from the prying eyes of dominant groups. Ella Surrey , an
elderly Black woman domestic, eloquently summarizes the energy needed to
maintain independent self-definitions: “We have always been the best actors in
the world. ...I  think that we are much more clever than they are because we
know that we have to play the game.We've always had to live two lives—one for
them and one for ourselves” (Gwaltney 1980, 238, 240).
1
Behind the mask of behavioral conformity imposed on African-American
women, acts of resistance, both organized and anonymous, have long existed
(Davis 1981, 1989; Terborg-Penn 1986; Hine 1989; Barnett 1993). Despite the
strains connected with domestic work, Judith Rollins ( 1985) asserts that the
domestic workers she interviewed appeared to have retained a “remarkable sense
of self-worth. ” They “skillfully deflect these psychological attacks on their per-
sonhood, their adulthood, their dignity , these attempts to lure them into accept-
ing employers’ definitions of them as inferior” (p. 212). Bonnie Thornton Dill
(1988a) found that the domestic workers in her study refused to let their
employers push them around. As one respondent declared: “When I went out to
work ...m y  mother told me,‘Don’t let anybody take advantage of you. Speak up
for your rights, but do the work right. If they don’t give you your rights, you
demand that they treat you right. And if they don’t, then you quit’ ” (p. 41).
Jacqueline Bobo ( 1995) reports that the U.S. Black women in her study who
viewed the film The Color Purple were not passive consumers of controlling
images of Black womanhood. Instead, these women crafted identities designed
5
THE
POWER
OF
SELF-
DEFINITION 
5


--- PAGE 115 ---
to empower them. In 1905, a period of heightened racial repression, educator
Fannie Barrier Williams viewed the African-American woman not as a defense-
less victim but as a strong-willed resister: “As meanly as she is thought of, hindered
as she is in all directions, she is always doing something of merit and credit that
is not expected of her” (Williams 1987, 151). Williams saw the Black woman as
“irrepressible. She is insulted, but she holds up her head; she is scorned, but she
proudly demands respect. . . . The most interesting girl of this country is the 
colored girl” (p. 151).
Resisting by doing something that “is not expected” could not have occurred
without Black women’s long-standing rejection of mammies, matriarchs, and
other controlling images. When combined, these individual acts of resistance
suggest that a distinctive, collective Black women’s consciousness exists. Such a
consciousness was present in Maria Stewart’s 1831 speech advising the “daugh-
ters of Africa” to “Awake! Arise! No longer sleep nor slumber, but distinguish
yourselves. Show forth to the world that ye are endowed with noble and exalted
faculties” (Richardson 1987, 30). Such a consciousness is present in the world-
view of Johnny Mae Fields, a mill worker from North Carolina possessing few
opportunities to resist. Ms. Fields wryly announces, “If they tell me something
and I know I ain’t going to do it, I don’t tell them. I just go on and don’t do it”
(Byerly 1986, 141).
Silence is not to be interpreted as submission in this collective, self-defined
Black women’s consciousness. In 1925 author Marita Bonner cogently described
how consciousness remained the one sphere of freedom available to her in the
stifling confines of both her Black middle-class world and a racist White society:
So—being a woman—you can wait.You must sit quietly without a chip.
Not sodden—and weighted as if your feet were cast in the iron of your
soul. Not wasting strength in enervating gestures as if two hundred years
of bonds and whips had really tricked you into nervous uncertainty . But
quiet; quiet. Like Buddha—who brown like I am—sat entirely at ease,
entirely sure of himself; motionless and knowing ....M o t ionless on the
outside. But inside? (Bonner 1987, 7)
U.S. Black women intellectuals have long explored this private, hidden space of
Black women’s consciousness, the “inside” ideas that allow Black women to
cope with and, in many cases, transcend the confines of intersecting oppressions
of race, class, gender, and sexuality . How have African-American women as a
group found the strength to oppose our objectification as “de mule uh de
world”? How do we account for the voices of resistance of Audre Lorde, Ella
Surrey , Maria Stewart, Fannie Barrier Williams, and Marita Bonner? What foun-
dation sustained Sojourner Truth so that she could ask, “Ain’t I a woman?” The
voices of these African-American women are not those of victims but of sur-
vivors. Their ideas and actions suggest that not only does a self-defined, group-
derived Black women’s standpoint exist, but that its presence has been essential
to U.S. Black women’s survival.
98 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 116 ---
“A system of oppression,” claims Black feminist activist Pauli Murray , “draws
much of its strength from the acquiescence of its victims, who have accepted the
dominant image of themselves and are paralyzed by a sense of helplessness”
(1987, 106). U.S.Black women’s ideas and actions force a rethinking of the con-
cept of hegemony , the notion that Black women’s objectification as the Other is
so complete that we become willing participants in our own oppression. Most
African-American women simply do not define themselves as mammies, matri-
archs, welfare mothers, mules, or sexually denigrated women. The matrix of
domination in which these controlling images are embedded is much less cohe-
sive or uniform than imagined.
African-American women encounter these controlling images, not as disem-
bodied symbolic messages but as ideas designed to provide meaning in our daily
lives (Scott 1985). Black women’s work and family experiences create the con-
ditions whereby the contradictions between everyday experiences and the con-
trolling images of Black womanhood become visible. Seeing the contradictions
in the ideologies opens them up for demystification. Just as Sojourner Truth
deconstructed the term woman by using her own lived experiences to challenge
it, so in a variety of ways do everyday African-American women do the same
thing. That fewer Maria Stewarts, Sojourner Truths, Ella Surreys, or Johnny Mae
Fieldses are heard from may be less a statement about the existence of Black
women’s ideas than it is a reflection of the suppression of their ideas. As Nancy
White, an inner-city resident points out, “I like to say what I think. But I don’t
do that much because most people don’t care what I think” (Gwaltney 1980,
156). Like Marita Bonner, far too many Black women remain motionless on the
outside ...b u t  inside?
Finding a Voice: Coming to Terms with Contradictions
“To be able to use the range of one’s voice, to attempt to express the totality of
self, is a recurring struggle in the tradition of [Black women] writers,” maintains
Black feminist literary critic Barbara Christian (1985, 172). African-American
women have certainly expressed our individual voices. U.S. Black women have
been described as generally outspoken and self-assertive speakers, a conse-
quence of expectations that men and women both participate in Black civil soci-
ety . But despite this tradition, the overarching theme of finding a voice to
express a collective, self-defined Black women’s standpoint remains a core
theme in Black feminist thought.
Why this theme of self-definition should preoccupy African-American
women is not surprising. Black women’s lives are a series of negotiations that aim
to reconcile the contradictions separating our own internally defined images of
self as African-American women with our objectification as the Other.The strug-
gle of living two lives, one for “them and one for ourselves” (Gwaltney 1980,
99THE POWER OF SELF-DEFINITION


--- PAGE 117 ---
240) creates a peculiar tension to construct independent self-definitions within a
context where Black womanhood remains routinely derogated. As Karla Holloway
points out, “the reality of racism and sexism means that we must configure our
private realities to include an awareness of what our public image might mean to
others.This is not paranoia. It is preparedness” (Holloway 1995, 36).
Much of the best of Black feminist thought reflects this effort to find a col-
lective, self-defined voice and express a fully articulated womanist standpoint
(Collins 1998, 61–65). Audre Lorde observes that “within this country where
racial difference creates a constant, if unspoken, distortion of vision, Black
women have on the one hand always been highly visible, and so, on the other
hand, have been rendered invisible through the depersonalization of racism”
(1984, 42). Lorde also points out that the “visibility which makes us most vul-
nerable”—that which accompanies being Black—“is also the source of our
greatest strength” (p. 42). The category of “Black woman” makes all U.S. Black
women especially visible and open to the objectification of Black women as a cat-
egory .This group treatment potentially renders each individual African-American
woman invisible as fully human. But paradoxically , being treated as an invisible
Other places U.S. Black women in an outsider-within position that has stimulated
creativity in many .
For individual women, resolving contradictions of this magnitude takes 
considerable inner strength. In describing the development of her own racial
identity , Pauli Murray remembers: “My own self-esteem was elusive and difficult
to sustain. I was not entirely free from the prevalent idea that I must prove myself
worthy of the rights that white individuals took for granted. This psychological
conditioning along with fear had reduced my capacity for resistance to racial
injustice” (1987, 106). Murray’s quest was for constructed knowledge (Belenky
et al. 1986), a type of knowledge essential to resolving contradictions. To learn
to speak in a “unique and authentic voice, women must ‘jump outside’ the
frames and systems authorities provide and create their own frame” (p. 134).
Unlike the controlling images developed for middle-class White women, the
controlling images applied to Black women are so uniformly negative that they
almost necessitate resistance. For U.S. Black women, constructed knowledge of
self emerges from the struggle to replace controlling images with self-defined
knowledge deemed personally important, usually knowledge essential to Black
women’s survival.
2
Safe Spaces and Coming to Voice
While domination may be inevitable as a social fact, it is unlikely to be hege-
monic as an ideology within social spaces where Black women speak freely .This
realm of relatively safe discourse, however narrow, is a necessary condition for
Black women’s resistance. Extended families, churches, and African-American
100 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 118 ---
community organizations are important locations where safe discourse poten-
tially can occur. Sondra O’Neale describes the workings of these Black women’s
spaces: “Beyond the mask, in the ghetto of the black women’s community , in
her family , and, more important, in her psyche, is and has always been another
world, a world in which she functions—sometimes in sorrow but more often
in genuine joy . . .—by doing the things that ‘normal’ black women do” (1986,
139). These spaces are not only safe—they form prime locations for resisting
objectification as the Other. In these spaces Black women “observe the feminine
images of the ‘larger’ culture, realize that these models are at best unsuitable and
at worst destructive to them, and go about the business of fashioning themselves
after the prevalent, historical black female role models in their own community”
(O’Neale 1986, 139). By advancing Black women’s empowerment through self-
definition, these safe spaces help Black women resist the dominant ideology
promulgated not only outside Black civil society but within African-American
institutions.
These institutional sites where Black women construct independent self-def-
initions reflect the dialectical nature of oppression and activism. Schools, print
and broadcast media, government agencies, and other institutions in the infor-
mation business reproduce the controlling images of Black womanhood. In
response, African-American women have traditionally used family networks and
Black community institutions as sites for countering these images. On the one
hand, these Black community institutions have been vitally important in devel-
oping strategies of resistance. In the context of deep-seated U.S. racial segregation
that persisted through the 1960s, the vast majority of U.S. Black women lacked
access to other forms of political organization.
On the other hand, many of these same institutions of Black civil society
have also perpetuated racist, sexist, elitist, and homophobic ideologies.This same
period of desegregation of U.S. society overall spurred a parallel desegregation
within Black civil society where women, working-class folks, lesbians, gays,
bisexuals and transgendered individuals, and other formerly subjugated subpop-
ulations within Black civil society began to speak out.
As a result of this changing political context, the resulting reality is much
more complex than one of an all-powerful White majority objectifying Black
women with a unified U.S. Black community staunchly challenging these external
assaults. No uniform, homogeneous culture of resistance ever existed among U.S.
Blacks, and such a culture does not exist now. One can say , however,
that U.S. Blacks have shared a common political agenda and culture, one that has
been differently experienced and expressed by U.S. Blacks as a heterogeneous
collectivity . Historically , survival depended on sticking together and in many
ways aiming to minimize differences among African-Americans. More recently ,
in a changing political economy where survival for many U.S. Blacks seems less
of an issue, space to express these differences now exists. Black feminism itself
has been central in creating that space, in large part, via Black women’s claims for
101THE POWER OF SELF-DEFINITION


--- PAGE 119 ---
self-definition. Overall, African-American women find ourselves in a web of
crosscutting relationships, each presenting varying combinations of controlling
images and Black women’s self-definitions.
Thus, the historical complexity of these institutional arrangements of racial
segregation and heterogeneous Black community politics profoundly affected
Black women’s consciousness and its articulation in a self-defined standpoint.
Given this context, what have been some important safe spaces where Black
women’s consciousness has been nurtured? Where have individual African-
American women spoken freely in contributing to a collective, self-defined
standpoint? Moreover, how “safe” are these spaces now? 
Black Women’s Relationships with One Another
Traditionally , U.S. Black women’s efforts to construct individual and collec-
tive voices have occurred in at least three safe spaces. One location involves Black
women’s relationships with one another. In some cases, such as friendships and
family interactions, these relationships are informal, private dealings among
individuals. In others, as was the case during slavery (D. White 1985), in Black
churches (Gilkes 1985; Higginbotham 1993), or in Black women’s organizations
(Giddings 1988; Cole 1993; Guy-Sheftall 1993), more formal organizational ties
have nurtured powerful Black women’s communities. As mothers, daughters, sis-
ters, and friends to one another, many African-American women affirm one
another (Myers 1980).
The mother/daughter relationship is one fundamental relationship among
Black women. Countless Black mothers have empowered their daughters by pass-
ing on the everyday knowledge essential to survival as African-American women
(Joseph 1981; Collins 1987). Black daughters identify the profound influence
that their mothers have had upon their lives (Bell-Scott et al. 1991). Mothers and
mother figures emerge as central figures in autobiographies such as Maya
Angelou’s I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings(1969), Bebe Moore Campbell’s Sweet
Summer (1989), Mamie Garvin Fields and Karen Fields’s Lemon Swamp and
Other Places (1983), and Elaine Brown’s A T aste of Power (1992). Alice Walker
attributes the trust she has in herself to her mother. In describing this relation-
ship, Mary Helen Washington points out that Walker “never doubted her powers
of judgment because her mother assumed that they were sound; she never ques-
tioned her right to follow her intellectual bent, because her mother implicitly
entitled her to it” (Washington 1984, 145). By giving her daughter a library
card, Walker’s mother showed she knew the value of a free mind.
In the comfort of daily conversations, through serious conversation and
humor, African-American women as sisters and friends affirm one another’s
humanity , specialness, and right to exist. Black women’s fiction, such as Toni
Cade Bambara’s short story “The Johnson Girls” (1981) and Toni Morrison’s nov-
102 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 120 ---
els Sula (1974), The Bluest Eye (1970), and Beloved (1987), as well as Terry
McMillan’s blockbuster novel Waiting to Exhale(1992), is one important location
where Black women’s friendships are taken seriously . In a dialogue with four
other Black women, Evelynn Hammonds describes this special relationship that
Black women can have with one another: “I think most of the time you have to
be there to experience it. When I am with other black women I always laugh. I
think our humor comes from a shared recognition of who we all are in the
world” (Clarke et al. 1983, 114).
This shared recognition often operates among African-American women
who do not know one another but who see the need to value Black womanhood.
Marita Golden describes her efforts in 1968 to attend a college which was “nes-
tled . . . in the comfortable upper reaches of northwest Washington, surrounded
by . . . the manicured, sprawling lawns of the city’s upper class.” To enter this
world, Golden caught the bus downtown with “black women domestic workers
who rode to the end of the line to clean house for young and middle-aged white
matrons.” Golden describes her fellow travelers’ reaction to her acquiring a col-
lege education:
They gazed proudly at me, nodding at the books in my lap....I  accepted
their encouragement and hated America for never allowing them to be
selfish or greedy , to feel the steel-hard bite of ambition. . . .They had par-
layed their anger, brilliantly shaped it into a soft armor of survival. The
spirit of those women sat with me in every class I took. (Golden 1983, 21)
My decision to pursue my doctorate was stimulated by a similar experience. In
1978 I offered a seminar as part of a national summer institute for teachers and
other school personnel. After my Chicago workshop, an older Black woman par-
ticipant whispered to me, “Honey , I’m real proud of you. Some folks don’t want
to see you up there [in the front of the classroom], but you belong there.
Go back to school and get your Ph.D., and then they won’t be able to tell you
nothing!” To this day , I thank her and try to do the same for others. In talking
with other African-American women, I have discovered that many of us have
had similar experiences.
This issue of Black women being the ones who really listen to one another
is significant, particularly given the importance of voice in Black women’s lives.
Identifying the value of Black women’s friendships, Karla Holloway describes
how the women in her book club supported one another: “The events we shared
among ourselves all had a similar trigger—it was when someone, a child’s school
principal or teacher, a store clerk, medical personnel, had treated us as if we had
no sense of our own, no ability to filter through whatever nonsense they were
feeding us, or no earned, adult power to make choices in our children’s lives”
(Holloway 1995, 31). These women described cathartic moments when, in cre-
ative ways, they responded to these assaults by “turning it out.” Each knew that
only another Black woman could fully understand how it felt to be treated that
103THE POWER OF SELF-DEFINITION


--- PAGE 121 ---
way and to respond in kind.
Audre Lorde describes the importance that the expression of individual
voice within collective context of Black women’s communities can have for self-
affirmation: “Of course I am afraid, because the transformation of silence into
language and action is an act of self-revelation, and that always seems fraught
with danger” (1984, 42). One can write for a nameless, faceless audience, but the
act of using one’s voice requires a listener and thus establishes a connection. For
African-American women the listener most able to pierce the invisibility created
by Black women’s objectification is another Black woman.This process of trusting
one another can seem dangerous because only Black women know what it means
to be Black women. But if we will not listen to one another, then who will?
Black women writers have led the way in recognizing the importance of
Black women’s relationships with one another. Mary Helen Washington points
out that one distinguishing feature of Black women’s literature is that it is about
African-American women. Women talk to one another, and “their friendships
with other women—mothers, sisters, grandmothers, friends, lovers—are vital to
their growth and well-being” (1987, xxi). The significance placed on relation-
ships among Black women transcends U.S. Black women’s writings. For example,
Ghanian author Ama Ata Aidoo’s novel Changes (1991) uses the friendship
between two African professional women to explore the challenges facing pro-
fessional women in contemporary African societies. Within U.S. Black women’s
fiction, this emphasis on Black women’s relationships has been so striking that
novelist Gayl Jones suggests that women writers select different themes from
those of their male counterparts. In the work of many Black male writers, the sig-
nificant relationships are those that involve confrontation with individuals out-
side the family and community . But among Black women writers, relationships
within family and community , between men and women, and among women are
treated as complex and significant (Tate 1983, 92).
U.S. Black women writers and filmmakers have explored many themes affect-
ing Black women’s relationships. One concerns the difficulties that African-
American women can have in affirming one another in a society that derogates
Black women as a group. Albeit for different reasons, the inability of mothers to
help their daughters come to understandings of Black womanhood characterize
mother-daughter relationships in Toni Morrison’s novel The Bluest Eye and in the
film Just Another Girl on the IRT . Another theme concerns how Black women’s
relationships can support and renew. Relationships such as those between Celie
and Shug in Alice Walker’s novel The Color Purple, among sisters in the film Soul
Food, among the four women in Waiting to Exhale , and among women in an
extended family in the film Daughters of Dust all provide cases where Black
women helped one another grow in some fashion. Another theme involves how
relationships among Black women can control and repress. Audre Lorde’s rela-
tionship with her mother in her autobiography Zami (1982) and Black adoles-
cent Alma’s relationship with her overbearing mother in the film Alma’s Rainbow
104 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 122 ---
both illustrate ways in which Black women with some sort of power, in these
examples that of the authority of motherhood, can suppress other women.
Perhaps Ntozake Shange best summarizes the importance that Black women can
have for one another in resisting oppressive conditions. Shange gives the follow-
ing reason for why she writes: “When I die, I will not be guilty of having left a
generation of girls behind thinking that anyone can tend to their emotional
health other than themselves” (in Tate 1983, 162).
The Black Women’s Blues Tradition
African-American music as art has provided a second location where Black
women have come to voice (Jackson 1981). “Art is special because of its ability
to influence feelings as well as knowledge,” suggests Angela Davis (1989, 200).
Davis contends that the dominant group failed to grasp the social function of
music in general and particularly the central role music played in all aspects of
life in West African society . As a result, “Black people were able to create with
their music an aesthetic community of resistance, which in turn encouraged and
nurtured a political community of active struggle for freedom” (1989, 201).
Spirituals, blues, jazz, rhythm and blues, and progressive hip-hop all form part
of a “continuum of struggle which is at once aesthetic and political” (p. 201).
African-derived communication patterns maintain the integrity of the indi-
vidual and his or her personal voice, but do so in the context of group activity
(Smitherman 1977; Kochman 1981; Asante 1987; Cannon 1988). In music one
effect of this oral mode of discourse is that individuality , rather than being stifled
by group activity or being equated with specialization, actually flourishes in a
group context (Sidran 1971).
3 “There’s something about music that is so pene-
trating that your soul gets the message. No matter what trouble comes to a person,
music can help him face it,” claims Mahalia Jackson (1985, 454). “A song must
do something for me as well as for the people that hear it. I can’t sing a song that
doesn’t have a message. If it doesn’t have the strength it can’t lift you” (p. 446).
The blues tradition is an essential part of African-American music.
4 Blues
singer Alberta Hunter explains the importance of the blues as a way of dealing
with pain: “To me, the blues are almost religious . . . almost sacred—when we
sing the blues, we’re singing out of our own hearts . . . our feelings” (Harrison
1978, 63). Black people’s ability to cope with and even transcend trouble with-
out ignoring it means that it will not destroy us (Cone 1972).
Traditionally , blues assumed a similar function in African-American oral cul-
ture to that played by print media for White, visually based culture. Blues was not
just entertainment—it was a way of solidifying community and commenting on
the social fabric of working-class Black life in America. Sherley Anne Williams
contends that “the blues records of each decade explain something about the
philosophical basis of our lives as black people. If we don’t understand that as so-
105THE POWER OF SELF-DEFINITION


--- PAGE 123 ---
called intellectuals, then we don’t really understand anything about ourselves”
(in Tate 1983, 208). For African-American women, blues seemed to be every-
where. Mahalia Jackson describes its pervasiveness during her childhood in New
Orleans: “The famous white singers like Caruso—you might hear them when
you went by a white folk’s house, but in a colored house you heard blues. You
couldn’t help but hear blues—all through the thin partitions of the houses—
through the open windows—up and down the street in the colored neighbor-
hoods—everybody played it real loud” (1985, 447).
Black women have been central in maintaining, transforming, and re-creating
the blues traditions of African-American culture (Harrison 1978, 1988; Russell
1982; Davis 1998). Michele Russell asserts, “Blues, first and last, are a familiar
idiom for Black women, even a staple of life” (1982, 130). Blues has occupied a
special place in Black women’s music as a site of the expression of Black women’s
self-definitions.The blues singer strives to create an atmosphere in which analysis
can take place, and yet this atmosphere is intensely personal and individualistic.
When Black women sing the blues, we sing our own personalized, individualis-
tic blues while simultaneously expressing the collective blues of African-
American women.
Michele Russell’s (1982) analysis of five Black women blues singers’ music
demonstrates how the texts of blues singers can be seen as expressions of a Black
women’s standpoint. Russell claims that the works of Bessie Smith, Bessie
Jackson, Billie Holiday , Nina Simone, and Esther Phillips help Black women “own
their past, present, and future.” To Russell, these women are primary because “the
content of their message, combined with the form of their delivery , make them
so” (p. 130).
The music of the classic blues singers of the 1920s—almost exclusively
women—marks the early written record of this dimension of U.S. Black oral cul-
ture. The songs themselves were originally sung in small communities, where
boundaries distinguishing singer from audience, call from response, and thought
from action were fluid and permeable. Despite the control of White-run record
companies, these records were made exclusively for the “race market” of African-
Americans and thus targeted Black consumers. Because literacy was not possible for
large numbers of Black women, these recordings represented the first permanent
documents exploring a working-class Black women’s standpoint that until then
had been accessible to Black women in local settings. The songs can be seen as
poetry , as expressions of ordinary Black women rearticulated through Black oral
traditions.
The lyrics sung by many of the Black women blues singers challenge the
externally defined controlling images used to justify Black women’s objectifica-
tion as the Other.The songs of Ma Rainey , dubbed “Queen of the Blues” and the
first major female blues singer to be extensively recorded, validate Black feminist
intellectual traditions expressed by working-class Black women. In contrast to the
ingenues of most White popular music of the same period, Ma Rainey and her
106 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 124 ---
contemporaries sing of mature, sexual women. For example, Sara Martin’s “Mean
Tight Mama” rejects the cult of true womanhood and its confining images of
beauty:
Now my hair is nappy and I don’t wear no clothes of silk
Now my hair is nappy and I don’t wear no clothes of silk
But the cow that’s black and ugly has often got the sweetest milk.
(Harrison 1978, 69)
Bessie Smith’s “Get It, Bring It, and Put It Right Here”—like the words of Maria
Stewart—advises Black women to possess the spirit of independence. She sings
of her man:
I’ve had a man for fifteen years, give him his room and his board
Once he was like a Cadillac, now he’s like an old worn-out Ford.
He never brought me a lousy dime, and put it in my hand
Oh, there’ll be some changes from now on, according to my plan.
He’s got to get it, bring it, and put it right here
Or else he’s gonna keep it out there.
If he must steal it, beg it, or borrow it somewhere
Long as he gets it, I don’t care.
(Russell 1982, 133)
Sometimes the texts of Black women blues singers take overtly political forms.
Billie Holiday recorded “Strange Fruit” in 1939 at the end of a decade rife with
racial unrest:
Southern trees bear a strange fruit, blood on the leaves and blood at the
root
Black body swinging in the Southern breeze, strange fruit hanging from
the poplar trees.
Pastoral scene of the gallant South, the bulging eyes and the twisted
mouth,
Scent of magnolia sweet and fresh, and the sudden smell of burning
flesh!
Here is a fruit for the crows to pluck, for the rain to gather, for the wind
to suck, for the sun to rot, for a tree to drop,
Here is a strange and bitter crop.
(Billie Holiday Anthology 1976, 111)
Through her powerful rendition of these lyrics, Billie Holiday demonstrated a
direct connection to the antilynching political activism of Ida B. Wells-Barnett
and other better-known Black feminists. Holiday’s music reaches from the past
to express themes that shed light on the present.
Despite the contributions of Black women’s blues as one location where
ordinary Black women found voice, Ann duCille (1993) cautions against a trend
in contemporary Black cultural criticism of viewing the blues through idealized
lenses. DuCille contends that while Black blues queens like Bessie Smith and Ma
107THE POWER OF SELF-DEFINITION


--- PAGE 125 ---
Rainey sang of sex and sexuality with a startling frankness for their times, they
rarely could do so on their own terms. Despite the fact that at the peak of the clas-
sic blues era hundreds of women had the opportunity to record their work, they
did so for White-male-controlled record companies. At the same time, middle-
class Blacks who were engaged in a cultural Renaissance during the 1920s typi-
cally saw such music as antithetical to the aims of their cultural movement. Black
women’s blues was often designated as “low” culture (Davis 1998, xii–xiii).
Thus, while it appears that the Black women blues singers of the 1920s sang
freely of sexually explicit themes, they did so in a complicated context of race,
class, and gender politics.
Moreover, duCille points out that identifying the blues as the “authentic”
location for Black women’s voice splits Black experience into two seemingly
opposed groups, middle-class Black women “literati” and working-class Black
women blues singers. Deeming the blues singers to be more “authentic” rele-
gates Black women writers, and those who study them, to the category of a less
authentic Blackness. DuCille explores how the fiction of two middle-class Black
women writers, Jessie Fauset and Nella Lawson, offered a more complex critique
of society than that forwarded by the blues singers. DuCille’s argument is not
with the singers themselves, but primarily with how such seemingly safe spaces
of Black women’s blues are viewed within contemporary Black cultural criticism.
However, keeping her caveats in mind, it is important to remember that despite
their contemporary appropriations, for the vast majority of Black working-class
women, Black women’s blues spaces have long been important and remain so
today (Davis 1998). Where else could working-class Black women say in public
the things they had long shared among one another in private? 
The Voices of Black Women Writers
During the summer of 1944, recent law school graduate Pauli Murray
returned to her California apartment and found the following anonymous note
from the “South Crocker Street Property Owner’s Association” tacked to her
door: “We . . . wish to inform you the flat you now occupy . . . is restricted to
the white or Caucasian race only ....W e  intend to uphold these restrictions,
therefore we ask that you vacate the above mentioned flat . . . within seven days”
(1987, 253). Murray’s response was to write. She remembers: “I was learning
that creative expression is an integral part of the equipment needed in the ser-
vice of a compelling cause; it is another form of activism.Words poured from my
typewriter” (p. 255).
Though a Black women’s written tradition existed (Christian 1985; Carby
1987), it was available primarily to educated women. Denied the literacy that
enabled them to read books and novels, as well as the time to do so, working-
class Black women struggled to find a public voice. Hence the significance of  the
blues and other dimensions of Black oral traditions in their lives. In this class-seg-
108 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 126 ---
mented context, finding Black women’s writing that transcends these divisions
among written and oral traditions is noteworthy . In this regard, because it fits
neither solely within the Black women’s blues tradition nor within equally
important traditions of Black women’s writers, the work of Alice Childress
(1956) remains exemplary . Childress created the character of Mildred, a fictional
working-class, Black woman domestic worker. Through short monologues to 
her friend Marge, Mildred, a domestic worker, speaks out on a range of topics.
Mildred’s 62 monologues, each two or three pages in length, constitute provoca-
tive statements of Childress’s Black feminist theory (Harris 1986). Take, for
example, Mildred’s rendition to Marge of what she said to her boss in response
to hearing herself described to her boss’s luncheon friends as a quasi-family
member:
I am not just like one of the family at all! The family eats in the dining
room and I eat in the kitchen.Your mama borrows your lace tablecloth for
her company and your son entertains his friends in your parlour, your
daughter takes her afternoon nap on the living room couch and the puppy
sleeps on your satin spread . . . so you can see I am not just like one of the
family . (Childress 1956, 2).
In this passage, Childress creates a fictional version of what many Black women
domestic workers have wanted to say at one time or another. She also advances
a biting critique of how the mammy image has been used to justify Black
women’s bad treatment.
Foreshadowing Barbara Neely’s creation of the character of Blanche,
Mildred’s ideas certainly ring true. But Childress’s Mildred also illustrates a cre-
ative use of Black women’s writing that is targeted not just to educated Black
women, but to a wider Black women’s community .The character of Mildred first
appeared in a series of conversations that were originally published in Paul
Robeson’s newspaper,Freedom, under the title “Conversations from Life.” They
continued in the Baltimore Afro-American as “Here’s Mildred.” Since many of
Childress’s readers were themselves domestic workers, Mildred’s bold assertions
resonated with the silenced voices of many of these readers. Moreover, Mildred’s
identity as a Black working-class domestic and the form of publication of these
fictionalized accounts illustrates an increasingly rare practice in Black intellectual
production—a Black author writing to an African-American, working-class
audience, using a medium controlled by Black people (Harris 1986).
5
Since the 1970s, increased literacy among African-Americans has provided
new opportunities for U.S. Black women to expand the use of scholarship and lit-
erature into more visible institutional sites of resistance. A community of Black
women writers has emerged since 1970, one in which African-American women
engage in dialogue among one another in order to explore formerly taboo sub-
jects. Black feminist literary criticism has documented the intellectual and per-
sonal space created for African-American women in this emerging body of ideas
109THE POWER OF SELF-DEFINITION


--- PAGE 127 ---
(Washington 1980, 1982;Tate 1983; Evans 1984; Christian 1985; O’Neale 1986).
Especially noteworthy are the ways in which many Black women writers build
on former themes and approaches of the Black women’s blues tradition
(Williams 1979) and of earlier Black women writers (Cannon 1988).
How “Safe” Are Safe Spaces?
Historically , safe spaces were “safe” because they represented places where
Black women could freely examine issues that concerned us. By definition, such
spaces become less “safe” if shared with those who were not Black and female.
Black women’s safe spaces were never meant to be a way of life. Instead, they
constitute one mechanism among many designed to foster Black women’s
empowerment and enhance our ability to participate in social justice projects. As
strategies, safe spaces rely on exclusionary practices, but their overall purpose
most certainly aims for a more inclusionary , just society . As the work of Black
women blues singers and Black women writers suggests, many of the ideas gen-
erated in such spaces found a welcome reception outside Black women’s com-
munities. But how could Black women generate these understandings of Black
women’s realities without first talking to one another? 
Since the 1970s, U.S. Black women have been unevenly incorporated into
schools, jobs, neighborhoods, and other U.S. social institutions that historically
have excluded us. As a result, African-American women have become more 
class stratified than at any period in the past. In these newly desegregated set-
tings, one new challenge consists of  building “safe spaces” that do not become
stigmatized as “separatist.” U.S. Black women who find ourselves integrating cor-
porations and colleges encounter new forms of racism and sexism that require
equally innovative responses. A new rhetoric of color-blindness that reproduces
social inequalities by treating people the same (Crenshaw 1997) makes it more
difficult to maintain safe spaces at all. Any group that organizes around its own
self-interests runs the risk of being labeled “separatist,” “essentialist,” and anti-
democratic.This protracted attack on so-called identity politics works to suppress
historically oppressed groups that aim to craft independent political agendas
around identities of race, gender, class, and/or sexuality .
Within this climate, African-American women are increasingly asked why
we want to “separate” ourselves from Black men and why feminism cannot speak
for all women, including us. In essence, these queries challenge the need for dis-
tinctive Black women’s communities as political entities. Black women’s organi-
zations devoted to cooking, nails, where to find a good baby-sitter, and other
apolitical topics garner little attention. But how do Black women as a collectivity
resist intersecting oppressions as they affect us without organizing as a group?
How do U.S. Black women identify the specific issues associated with controlling
images of Black womanhood without safe spaces where we can talk freely? 
110 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 128 ---
One reason that safe spaces are so threatening to those who feel excluded,
and so routinely castigated by them, is that safe spaces are free of surveillance by
more powerful groups. Such spaces simultaneously remove Black women from
surveillance and foster the conditions for Black women’s independent self-defin-
itions. When institutionalized, these self-definitions become foundational to
politicized Black feminist standpoints.Thus, much more is at stake here than the
simple expression of voice.
A broader climate that aims to suppress political speech among African-
American women, among others, has affected the organization of historically
safe spaces within Black civil society . Relationships among Black women, within
families, and within Black community organizations all must contend with the
new realities and rhetoric that characterize an unfulfilled racial and gender
desegregation in the context of increasingly antagonistic class relationships.
The blues tradition in Black women’s music also remains under assault 
under these new social conditions. Traditionally , Black women blues singers 
drew upon traditions of struggle in order to produce “progressive art.” Such 
art was emancipatory because it fused thought, feeling, and action and helped
Black women among others to see their world differently and act to change 
it. More recently , commodification of the blues and its transformation into 
marketable crossover music have virtually stripped it of its close ties to African-
American oral traditions. Considerable controversy surrounds the issue of how to
assess the diverse genres of contemporary Black music. As Angela Davis observes,
“Some of the superstars of popular-musical culture today are unquestionably
musical geniuses, but they have distorted the Black music tradition by brilliantly
developing its form while ignoring its content of struggle and freedom” (1989,
208). Black literary critic Sondra O’Neale suggests that similar processes of
depoliticization may be affecting Black women’s writing. “Where are the Angela
Davises, Ida B. Wellses, and Daisy Bateses of black feminist literature?” she asks
(1986, 144).
Contemporary African-American musicians, writers, cultural critics, and
intellectuals function in a dramatically different political economy than that of
any prior generation. It remains to be seen whether the specialized thought gen-
erated by contemporary Black feminist thinkers in very different institutional
locations is capable of creating safe spaces that will carry African-American
women even further.
Consciousness as a Sphere of Freedom
Traditionally , when taken together, Black women’s relationships with one another,
the Black women’s blues tradition, and the work of Black women writers pro-
vided the context for crafting alternatives to prevailing images of Black woman-
hood. These sites offered safe spaces that nurtured the everyday and specialized
111THE POWER OF SELF-DEFINITION


--- PAGE 129 ---
thought of African-American women. In them Black women intellectuals could
construct ideas and experiences that infused daily life with new meaning.These
new meanings offered African-American women potentially powerful tools to
resist the controlling images of Black womanhood. Far from being a secondary
concern in bringing about social change, challenging controlling images and
replacing them with a Black women’s standpoint constituted an essential com-
ponent in resisting intersecting oppressions (Thompson-Cager 1989). What
have been some of the important ideas that developed in these safe spaces?
Moreover, how useful are these ideas in responding to the greatly changed social
context that confronts U.S. Black women?
The Importance of Self-Definition
“Black groups digging on white philosophies ought to consider the source.
Know who’s playing the music before you dance,” cautions poet Nikki Giovanni
(1971, 126). Her advice is especially germane for African-American women.
Giovanni suggests: “We Black women are the single group in the West intact. And
anybody can see we’re pretty shaky . We are . . . the only group that derives its
identity from itself. I think it’s been rather unconscious but we measure ourselves
by ourselves, and I think that’s a practice we can ill afford to lose”(197 1,144).When
Black women’s very survival is at stake, creating independent self-definitions
becomes essential to that survival.
The issue of the journey from internalized oppression to the “free mind” of
a self-defined, womanist consciousness has been a prominent theme in the works
of U.S. Black women writers. Author Alexis DeVeaux notes that there is a “great
exploration of the self in women’s work. It’s the self in relationship with an inti-
mate other, with the community , the nation and the world” (in Tate 1983, 54).
Far from being a narcissistic or trivial concern, this placement of self at the cen-
ter of analysis is critical for understanding a host of other relationships. DeVeaux
continues, “you have to understand what your place as an individual is and the
place of the person who is close to you. You have to understand the space
between you before you can understand more complex or larger groups” (p. 54).
Black women have also stressed the importance of self-definition as part of
the journey from victimization to a free mind in their blues. Sherley Anne
Williams’s analysis of the affirmation of self in the blues make a critical contri-
bution in understanding the blues as a Black women’s text. In discussing the
blues roots of Black literature,Williams notes, “The assertion of individuality and
the implied assertion—as action, not mere verbal statement—of self is an impor-
tant dimension of the blues” (1979, 130).
The assertion of self usually comes at the end of a song, after the description
or analysis of the troublesome situation.This affirmation of self is often the only
solution to that problem or situation. Nina Simone’s (1985) classic blues song
“Four Women” illustrates this use of the blues to affirm self. Simone sings of
112 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 130 ---
three Black women whose experiences typify controlling images: Aunt Sarah, the
mule, whose back is bent from a lifetime of hard work; Sweet Thing, the Black
prostitute who will belong to anyone who has money to buy; and Saphronia, the
mulatto whose Black mother was raped late one night. Simone explores Black
women’s objectification as the Other by invoking the pain these three women
actually feel. But Peaches, the fourth woman, is an especially powerful figure,
because Peaches is angry . “I’m awfully bitter these days,” Peaches cries out,
“because my parents were slaves.” These words and the feelings they invoke
demonstrate her growing awareness and self-definition of the situation she
encountered.They offer to the listener not sadness and remorse, but an anger that
leads to action.This is the type of individuality Williams means—not that of talk
but self-definitions that foster action.
While the theme of the journey also appears in the work of Black men,
African-American women writers and musicians explore this journey toward
freedom in ways that are characteristically female (Thompson-Cager 1989).
Black women’s journeys, though at times embracing political and social issues,
basically take personal and psychological forms and rarely reflect the freedom of
movement of Black men who hop “trains,” “hit the road,” or in other ways phys-
ically travel in order to find that elusive sphere of freedom from racial oppres-
sion. Instead, Black women’s journeys often involve “the transformation of
silence into language and action” (Lorde 1984, 40). Typically tied to children
and/or community , fictional Black women characters, especially those created
prior to the 1990s, search for self-definition within close geographical bound-
aries. Even though physical limitations confine the Black heroine’s quest to a spe-
cific area, “forming complex personal relationships adds depth to her identity
quest in lieu of geographical breadth” (Tate 1983, xxi). In their search for self-
definition and the power of a free mind, Black heroines may remain “motionless
on the outside ...b u t  inside?”
Given the physical limitations on Black women’s mobility , the conceptual-
ization of self that has been part of Black women’s self-definitions is distinctive.
Self is not defined as the increased autonomy gained by separating oneself from
others. Instead, self is found in the context of family and community—as Paule
Marshall describes it, “the ability to recognize one’s continuity with the larger
community” (Washington 1984, 159). By being accountable to others, African-
American women develop more fully human, less objectified selves. Sonia
Sanchez points to this version of self by stating, “We must move past always
focusing on the ‘personal self’ because there’s a larger self.There’s a ‘self’ of black
people” (Tate 1983, 134). Rather than defining self in opposition to others, the
connectedness among individuals provides Black women deeper, more mean-
ingful self-definitions.
6
This journey toward self-definition has political significance. As Mary Helen
Washington observes, Black women who struggle to “forge an identity larger
than the one society would force upon them ...a r e  a w a r e  and conscious, and
that very consciousness is potent” (1980, xv). Identity is not the goal but rather
113THE POWER OF SELF-DEFINITION


--- PAGE 131 ---
the point of departure in the process of self-definition. In this process Black
women journey toward an understanding of how our personal lives have been
fundamentally shaped by intersecting oppressions of race, gender, sexuality , and
class. Peaches’s statement, “I’m awfully bitter these days because my parents were
slaves,” illustrates this transformation.
This particular expression of the journey toward self-definition offers a power-
ful challenge to the externally defined, controlling images of African-American
women. Replacing negative images with positive ones can be equally problematic if
the function of stereotypes as controlling images remains unrecognized. John
Gwaltney’s (1980) interview with Nancy White, a 73-year-old Black woman, sug-
gests that ordinary Black women can be acutely aware of the power of these con-
trolling images. To Nancy White the difference between the controlling images
applied to African-American and White women is one  of degree, not of kind:
My mother used to say that the black woman is the white man’s mule and
the white woman is his dog. Now, she said that to say this: we do the heavy
work and get beat whether we do it well or not. But the white woman is
closer to the master and he pats them on the head and lets them sleep in
the house, but he ain’t gon’ treat neither one like he was dealing with a
person. (p. 148)
Although both groups are objectified, albeit in different ways, the images func-
tion to dehumanize and control both groups. Seen in this light, it makes little
sense in the long run for Black women to exchange one set of controlling
images for another even if positive stereotypes bring better treatment in the
short run.
The insistence on Black women’s self-definitions reframes the entire dia-
logue from one of protesting the technical accuracy of an image—namely , refut-
ing the Black matriarchy thesis—to one stressing the power dynamics underly-
ing the very process of definition itself. By insisting on self-definition, Black
women question not only what has been said about African-American women
but the credibility and the intentions of those possessing the power to define.
When Black women define ourselves, we clearly reject the assumption that those
in positions granting them the authority to interpret our reality are entitled to do
so. Regardless of the actual content of Black women’s self-definitions, the act of
insisting on Black female self-definition validates Black women’s power as
human subjects.
Self-Valuation and Respect
Self-definition speaks to the power dynamics involved in rejecting externally
defined, controlling images of Black womanhood. In contrast, the theme of Black
women’s self-valuation addresses the actual content of these self-definitions. Many
of the controlling images applied to African-American women are actually dis-
114 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 132 ---
torted renderings of those aspects of our behavior that threaten existing power
arrangements (Gilkes 1983a; D. White 1985). For example, strong mothers are
threatening because they contradict prevailing definitions of femininity . To
ridicule strong, assertive Black mothers by labeling them matriarchs reflects an
effort to control a dimension of Black women’s behavior that threatens the status
quo. African-American women who value those aspects of Black womanhood that
are stereotyped, ridiculed, and maligned in scholarship and the popular media
challenge some of the basic ideas inherent in an ideology of domination.
The emphasis that Black feminist thinkers have placed on respect illustrates
the significance of self-valuation. In a society in which no one is obligated to
respect African-American women, we have long admonished one another to have
self-respect and to demand the respect of others. Black women’s voices from a
variety of sources reflect this demand for respect. Katie G. Cannon (1988) sug-
gests that Black womanist ethics embraces three basic dimensions: “invisible dig-
nity ,” “quiet grace,” and “unstated courage,” all qualities essential for self-valua-
tion and self-respect. Black feminist critic Claudia Tate (1983) reports that the
issue of self-esteem is so primary in the writing of Black women that it deserves
special attention.Tate claims that what the writers seem to be saying is, “Women
must assume responsibility for strengthening their self-esteem by learning to
love and appreciate themselves” (p. xxiii). Her analysis is certainly borne out in
Alice Walker’s comments to an audience of women. Walker cautioned, “Please
remember, especially in these times of group-think and the right-on chorus, that
no person is your friend (or kin) who demands your silence, or denies your
right to grow and be perceived as fully blossomed as you were intended. Or who
belittles in any fashion the gifts you labor so to bring into the world” (Walker
1983, 36). The right to be Black and female and respected pervades everyday
conversations among African-American women. In describing the importance
self-respect has for her, elderly domestic worker Sara Brooks notes, “I may not
have as much as you, I may not have the education you got, but still, if I conduct
myself as a decent person, I’m just as good as anybody” (Simonsen 1986, 132).
Respect from others—especially from Black men—has been a recurring theme
in Black women’s writing. In describing the things a woman wants out of life,
middle-class Marita Bonner lists “a career as fixed and as calmly brilliant as the
North Star.The one real thing that money buys.Time.... And of course, a husband
you can look up to without looking down on yourself” (Bonner 1987, 3).
Black women’s belief in respect also emerges in the works of a variety of Black
women blues singers. One of the best-known popular statements of Black women’s
demand for self-respect and the respect of others is found in Aretha Franklin’s
(1967) rendition of the Otis Redding song “Respect.” Aretha sings to her man:
What you want? Baby I got it.
What you need? You know I got it.
All I’m asking for is a little respect when you come home.
Even though the lyrics can be sung by anyone, they take on special meaning
115THE POWER OF SELF-DEFINITION


--- PAGE 133 ---
when sung by Aretha in the way that she sings them. On one level the song func-
tions as a metaphor for the condition of African-Americans in a racist society .
But Aretha’s being a Black woman enables the song to tap a deeper meaning.
Within the blues tradition, the listening audience of African-American women
assumes “we” Black women, even though Aretha as the blues singer sings “I.”
Sherley Anne Williams describes the power of Aretha’s blues: “Aretha was right
on time, but there was also something about the way Aretha characterized
respect as something given with force and great effort and cost. And when she
even went so far as to spell the word ‘respect,’ we just knew that this sister was-
n’t playing around about getting Respect and keeping it” (Williams 1979, 124).
June Jordan suggests that this emphasis on respect is tied to a distinctive
Black feminist politic. For Jordan, a “morally defensible Black feminism” is veri-
fied in the ways U.S. Black women present ourselves to others, and in the ways
Black women treat people different from ourselves. While self-respect is essen-
tial, respect for others is key . “As a Black feminist,” claims Jordan, “I cannot be
expected to respect what somebody else calls self-love if that concept of self-love
requires my suicide to any degree” (1981, 144).
Self-Reliance and Independence
In her 1831 essay Black feminist thinker Maria Stewart not only encouraged
Black women’s self-definition and self-valuations but linked Black women’s self-
reliance with issues of survival:
We have never had an opportunity of displaying our talents; therefore the
world thinks we know nothing....P ossess the spirit of independence.The
Americans do, and why should not you? Possess the spirit of men, bold
and enterprising, fearless and undaunted: Sue for your rights and privi-
leges.... Y o u  can but die if you make the attempt; and we shall certainly
die if you do not. (Richardson 1987, 38)
Whether by choice or circumstance, African-American women have “possessed
the spirit of independence,” have been self-reliant, and have encouraged one
another to value this vision of womanhood that clearly challenges prevailing
notions of femininity (Steady 1987). These beliefs have found wide support
among African-American women. For example, when asked what they admired
about their mothers, the women in Gloria Joseph’s (1981) study of Black moth-
er/daughter relationships recounted their mothers’ independence and ability to
provide in the face of difficulties. Participants in Lena Wright Myers’s (1980)
study of Black women’s coping skills respected women who were resourceful and
self-reliant. Black women’s autobiographies, such as Shirley Chisholm’s Unbought
and Unbossed (1970) and Maya Angelou’s I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings
(1969), typify Black women’s self-valuation of self-reliance. As elderly domestic
worker Nancy White cogently explains, “Most black women can be their own
116 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 134 ---
boss, so that’s what they be” (Gwaltney 1980, 149).
The works of prominent Black women blues singers also counsel the impor-
tance of self-reliance and independence for African-American women. In her
classic ballad “God Bless the Child That Got His Own,” Billie Holiday sings:
The strong gets more, while the weak ones fade,
Empty pockets don’t ever make the grade;
Mama may have, Papa may have,
But God bless the child that got his own! 
(Billie Holiday Anthology 1976, 12)
In this mournful song Billie Holiday offers an insightful analysis of the need for
autonomy and self-reliance. “Money , you got lots of friends, crowdin’ ’round
the door,” she proclaims. But “when you’re gone and spendin’ ends they don’t
come no more.” In these passages Holiday admonishes Black women to become
financially independent because having one’s “own” allows women to choose
their relationships.
The linking of economic self-sufficiency as one critical dimension of self-
reliance with the demand for respect permeates Black feminist thought. For
example, in “Respect” when Aretha sings, “Your kisses sweeter than honey , but
guess what, so is my money ,” she demands respect on the basis of her economic
self-reliance. Perhaps this connection between respect, self-reliance, and assertive-
ness is best summarized by Nancy White, who declares, “There is a very few
black women that their husbands can pocketbook to death because we can do 
for ourselves and will do so in a minute!” (Gwaltney 1980, 149).
Self, Change, and Personal Empowerment
“The master’s tools will never dismantle the master’s house.They may allow
us temporarily to beat him at his own game, but they will never enable us to
bring about genuine change” (Lorde 1984, 112). In this passage Audre Lorde
explores how independent self-definitions empower Black women to bring
about social change. By struggling for self-defined womanist perspectives  that
reject the “master’s” images, African-American women change ourselves. A crit-
ical mass of individuals with a changed consciousness can in turn foster Black
women’s collective empowerment. A changed consciousness encourages people
to change the conditions of their lives.
Nikki Giovanni illuminates these connections among self, change, and per-
sonal empowerment. She admonishes that people are rarely powerless, no mat-
ter how stringent the restrictions on our lives: “We’ve got to live in the real
world. If we don’t like the world we’re living in, change it. And if we can’t
change it, we change ourselves. We can do something” (in Tate 1983, 68).
Giovanni recognizes that effective change occurs through action. The multiple
strategies of resistance that Black women have employed, such as withdrawing
117THE POWER OF SELF-DEFINITION


--- PAGE 135 ---
from postemancipation agricultural work in order to return their labor to their
families, ostensibly conforming to the deference rituals of domestic work,
protesting male bias in African-American organizations, or creating the progres-
sive art of Black women’s blues all represent actions designed to bring about
change. Here is the connected self and the individual empowerment that comes
from change in the context of community .
But change can also occur in the private, personal space of an individual
woman’s consciousness. Equally fundamental, this type of change is also person-
ally empowering.Any individual Black woman who is forced to remain “motion-
less on the outside,” can develop the “inside” of a changed consciousness as a
sphere of freedom. Becoming personally empowered through self-knowledge,
even within conditions that severely limit one’s ability to act, is essential. In Black
women’s literature
this type of change . . . occurs because the heroine recognizes, and more
importantly respects her inability to alter a situation. . . . This is not to
imply that she is completely circumscribed by her limitations. On the con-
trary , she learns to exceed former boundaries but only as a direct result of
knowing where they lie. In this regard, she teaches her readers a great deal
about constructing a meaningful life in the midst of chaos and contin-
gencies, armed with nothing more than her intellect and emotions. (Tate
1983, xxiv)
In this passage Claudia Tate demonstrates the significance of rearticulation,
namely , redefining social realities by combining familiar ideas in new ways
(Omi and Winant 1994, 163). But rearticulation does not mean reconciling
womanist ethics with typically opposed Eurocentric masculinist ones. Instead, as
Chezia Thompson-Cager contends, rearticulation “confronts them in the tradi-
tion of ‘naming as power’ by revealing them very carefully” (1989, 590).
Naming daily life by applying language to everyday experience infuses it with
the new meaning of a womanist consciousness. Naming  becomes a way of tran-
scending the limitations of intersecting oppressions.
Black women’s literature contains many examples of how individual Black
women become personally empowered by a changed consciousness. Barbara
Christian maintains that the heroines of 1940s Black women’s literature, such as
Lutie Johnson in Ann Petry’s The Street (1946) and Cleo Judson in Dorothy West’s
The Living Is Easy (1948), are defeated not only by social reality but by their
“lack of self-knowledge.” In contrast, the heroines from the 1950s to the present
represent a significant shift toward self-knowledge as a sphere of freedom.
Christian dates the shift from Gwendolyn Brooks’s Maud Martha (1953) and
claims, “Because Maud Martha constructs her own standards, she manages to
transform that ‘little life’ into so much more despite the limits set on her.... [She]
emerges neither crushed nor triumphant” (1985, 176).
According to many African-American women writers, no matter how
118 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 136 ---
oppressed an individual woman may be, the power to save the self lies within the
self. Other Black women may assist a Black woman in this journey toward per-
sonal empowerment, but the ultimate responsibility for self-definitions and self-
valuations lies within the individual woman herself. An individual woman may
use multiple strategies in her quest for the constructed knowledge of an inde-
pendent voice. Like Celie in Alice Walker’s The Color Purple, some women write
themselves free. Sexually , physically , and emotionally abused, Celie writes letters
to God when no one else will listen. The act of acquiring a voice through writ-
ing, of breaking silence with language, eventually moves her to the action of talk-
ing with others. Other women talk themselves free. In Their Eyes Were Watching
God, Janie tells her story to a good friend, a prime example of the rearticulation
process essential for Black feminist thought (Hurston 1937). Ntozake Shange’s
For Colored Girls (1975) also captures this journey toward self-definition, self-
valuation, and an empowered self. At the end of the play the women gather
around one woman who speaks of the pain she experienced at seeing her chil-
dren killed. They listen until she says, “I found God in myself and I loved her
fiercely .” These words, expressing her ability to define herself as worthwhile,
draw them together. They touch one another as part of a Black women’s com-
munity that heals the member in pain, but only after she has taken the first step
of wanting to be healed, of wanting to make the journey toward finding the
voice of empowerment.
Does Black Women’s Consciousness Still Matter?
Despite the persistence of these four ideas about consciousness—the
importance of self-definition, the significance of self-valuation and respect,
the necessity of self-reliance and independence, and the centrality of a
changed self to personal empowerment—these themes do not find a promi-
nent place in much U.S. Black feminist thought within academia. Sadly , Black
women intellectuals in the academy find themselves pressured to write for
academic audiences, most of which remain resistant to including U.S. Black
women as students, faculty , and administrators. However interested highly
educated, middle-class, White male and female academic audiences may be in
Black women’s intellectual production, their concerns differ markedly from
those of the majority of U.S. Black women.
Despite this context, many Black women intellectuals within academia still
explore this theme of consciousness, but do so in new and often highly impor-
tant ways.Take, for example, criminologist Beth Richie’s (1996) book Compelled
to Crime: The Gender Entrapment of Battered Black Women . Through interviews
with women who were being detained in jail, Richie advances the innovative
thesis that those Black women who had been self-reliant and independent as
children and thus imagined themselves as strong Black women were more likely
to be battered than those who did not. Upon first glance, this is a curious com-
119THE POWER OF SELF-DEFINITION


--- PAGE 137 ---
bination—the more self-reliant simultaneously value themselves less. Richie’s
explanation is revealing.The strong Black women saw themselves as personal fail-
ures if they sought help. In contrast, those women who did not carry the burden
of this seemingly positive image of Black womanhood found it easier to ask for
help. Richie’s study points to the significance of external definitions of all types.
By attending to heterogeneity among Black women, her work creates space for
new self-valuations to appear that need not be attached to images of strong Black
women.
The increased scholarly attention to Black adolescent girls should reveal new
reactions to intersecting oppressions among a population that has come of age
under new social conditions. Within this tradition, Sugar in the Raw (1997),
Rebecca Carroll’s 15 published interviews from more than 50 that she conducted
among U.S. Black girls provides a glimpse into the consciousness of contempo-
rary Black girls. Despite elements of Black popular culture that bombard them
with images of sexualized women and the plethora of “hoochies” populating
music videos, many of the girls display an impressive maturity . Take, for exam-
ple, 18-year-old Kristen’s reflections on her struggles for self-valuation brought
on by her crush on a Black boy who seemed unaware that she existed:
It was obvious and evident that most if not all of the black boys in my
school wanted nothing to do with black girls, which was sort of trauma-
tizing. You can’t really come away from an experience like that without
feeling like there is something wrong with you. In the final analysis, I
ended up feeling that there was something wrong with him, but it was
hell getting there. (Carroll 1997, 131–32)
The increased attention in Black feminist-influenced scholarship paid to Black
women’s pain in abusive relationships of all sorts, and to the special concerns of
Black adolescent girls both seem designed to create new intellectual and politi-
cal space for the “hellish” journeys that many Black women still encounter. At
least at this historic moment, the need to put up a united front seems less
important than exploring the various ways that individual Black women are per-
sonally empowered and disempowered, even within allegedly safe spaces.
Consciousness still matters, but it becomes one that acknowledges the com-
plexities of crosscutting relations of race, gender, class, and sexuality .
Weaving throughout these historic and contemporary efforts at self-defini-
tion is the quest to move from silence to language to individual and group action.
In this quest, persistence is a fundamental requirement for this journey . Black
women’s persistence is fostered by the strong belief that to be Black and female
is valuable and worthy of respect. In the song “A Change Is Gonna Come,” Aretha
Franklin (1967) expresses this feeling of enduring despite the odds. She sings
that there were times that she thought that she would not last for long. She sings
of how it has been an “uphill journey all the way” to find the strength to carry
on. But despite the difficulties, Aretha “knows” that “a change is gonna come.”
120 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 138 ---
Whether individual struggles to develop a changed consciousness or the
group persistence needed to transform social institutions, actions that bring
about changes empower African-American women. By persisting in the journey
toward self-definition, as individuals, we are changed. When linked to group
action, our individual struggles gain new meaning. Because our actions as indi-
viduals change the world from one in which we merely exist to one over which
we have some control, they enable us to see everyday life as being in process and
therefore amenable to change. Perhaps that is why so many African-American
women have managed to persist and “make a way out of no way .” Perhaps they
knew the power of self-definition.
121THE POWER OF SELF-DEFINITION


--- PAGE 139 ---



--- PAGE 140 ---
Even I found it almost impossible to let her say what had happened to her as she
perceived it . . . And why? Because once you strip away the lie that rape is pleasant,
that children are not permanently damaged by sexual pain, that violence done to
them is washed away by fear, silence, and time, you are left with the positive horror
of the lives of thousands of children . . . who have been sexually abused and who
have never been permitted their own language to tell about it.
—Alice Walker 1988, 57
InThe Color PurpleAlice Walker creates 
the character of Celie, a Black adolescent girl who is sexually abused by her step-
father. Writing letters to God and forming supportive relationships with other
Black women help Celie find her own voice, and her voice enables her to tran-
scend the fear and silence of her childhood. By creating Celie and giving her the
language to tell of her sexual abuse,Walker adds Celie’s voice to muted yet grow-
ing discussions of the sexual politics of Black womanhood. But when it comes to
other important issues concerning Black women’s sexuality , U.S. Black women
have found it almost impossible to say what has happened.
As Evelynn Hammonds points out, “Black women’s sexuality is often
described in metaphors of speechlessness, space, or vision; as a ‘void’ or empty
space that is simultaneously ever-visible (exposed) and invisible, where black
women’s bodies are already colonized” (1997, 171). In response to this portrayal,
Black women have been silent. One important factor that contributes to these
long-standing silences both among African-American women and within Black
feminist thought lies in Black women’s lack of access to positions of power in
U.S. social institutions. Those who control the schools, news media, churches,
and government suppress Black women’s collective voice. Dominant groups are
the ones who construct Black women as “the embodiment of sex and the atten-
6
THE
SEXUAL
POLITICS
OF 
BLACK
WOMANHOOD 
6


--- PAGE 141 ---
dant invisibility of black women as the unvoiced, unseen—everything that is not
white” (Hammonds 1997, 171).
Critical scholarship also has approached Black women’s sexuality through its
own set of assumptions.Within U.S. Black intellectual communities generally and
Black studies scholarship in particular, Black women’s sexuality is either ignored
or included primarily in relation to African-American men’s issues. In Black crit-
ical contexts where Black women struggle to get gender oppression recognized
as important, theoretical analyses of Black sexuality remain sparse (Collins
1993b; 1998a, 155–83). Women’s studies scholarship demonstrates a predilec-
tion for placing Black women in comparative frameworks. Interested in building
coalitions among women across differences of race, theorists typically add Black
women into preexisting feminist frameworks, often to illustrate how Black
women “have it worse.” Everyone has spoken for Black women, making it diffi-
cult for us to speak for ourselves.
But suppression does not fully explain African-American women’s persistent
silences about sexuality . U.S. Black women have been discouraged from analyzing
and speaking out about a host of topics. Why does this one remain so difficult?
In response, Paula Giddings identifies another important factor, namely , the “last
taboo” of disclosing “not only a gender but a sexual discourse, unmediated by
the question of racism” (Giddings 1992, 442).Within this taboo, to talk of White
racist constructions of Black women’s sexuality is acceptable. But developing
analyses of sexuality that implicate Black men is not —it violates norms of racial
solidarity that counsel Black women always to put our own needs second. Even
within these racial boundaries, some topics are more acceptable than others—
White men’s rape of Black women during slavery can be discussed whereas Black
men’s rape of Black women today cannot. In her essay “Remembering Anita Hill
and Clarence Thomas: What Really Happened When One Black Woman Spoke
Out,” Nellie McKay explains why Black women have remained silent concerning
issues of sexuality:
In all of their lives in America ...b l a c k  w o m e n  h a v e  felt torn between the
loyalties that bind them to race on one hand, and sex on the other.
Choosing one or the other, of course, means taking sides against the self,
yet they have almost always chosen race over the other: a sacrifice of their
self-hood as women and of full humanity , in favor of the race (McKay
1992, 277–78).
“Taking sides against the self” requires that certain elements of Black women’s
sexuality can be examined, namely , those that do not challenge a race discourse
that historically has privileged the experiences of African-American men. The
cost is that other elements remain off-limits. Rape, incest, misogyny in Black
cultural practices, and other painful topics that might implicate Black men
remain taboo.
Yet another factor influencing Black women’s silences concerns the potential
benefits of remaining silent. For example, during the early-twentieth-century
124 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 142 ---
club movement, White women were much more successful in advancing analy-
ses of intraracial gender relations and sexuality than were Black women. In a con-
text of virulent racism, public disclosure could leave Black men and women vul-
nerable to increased sexual violence at the hands of White men. White women
who forwarded a gendered analysis faced no such fears. In situations such as
these, where regulating Black women’s bodies benefited systems of race, class,
and gender alike, protecting the safe spaces for Black women’s self-definitions
often required public silences about seemingly provocative topics. This secrecy
was especially important within a U.S. culture that routinely accused Black
women of being sexually immoral, promiscuous jezebels. In a climate where
one’s sexuality is on public display , holding fast to privacy and trying to shut the
closet door becomes paramount. Hine refers to this strategy as a culture of dis-
semblance, one where Black women appeared to outgoing and public, while
using this facade to hide a secret world within. As Hine suggests, “only with
secrecy , thus achieving a self-imposed invisibility , could ordinary black women
accrue the psychic space and harness the resources needed to hold their own in
the often one-sided and mismatched resistance struggle” (Hine 1995, 382). In
contexts of violence where internal self-censorship was seen as protection,
silence made sense.
The convergence of all of these factors—the suppression of Black women’s
voice by dominant groups, Black women’s struggles to work within the confines
of norms of racial solidarity , and the seeming protections offered by a culture of
dissemblance—influences yet another factor shaping patterns of silence. In gen-
eral, U.S. Black women have been reluctant to acknowledge the valuable contri-
butions of Black lesbian feminist theory in reconceptualizing Black women’s sex-
uality . Since the early 1980s, Black lesbian theorists and activists have identified
homophobia and the toll it takes on African-American women as an important
topic for Black feminist thought. “The oppression that affects Black gay people,
female and male, is pervasive, constant, and not abstract. Some of us die from it,”
argues Barbara Smith (1983, xlvii). Despite the increasing visibility of Black les-
bians as parents (Lorde 1984, 72–80; Williams 1997), as academics (Davenport
1996), as activists (Gomez and Smith 1994), within lesbian history (Kennedy
and Davis 1993, 113–31), and who have publicly come out (Moore 1997),
African-Americans have tried to ignore homosexuality generally and have avoided
serious analysis of homophobia within African-American communities.
In this context, Black lesbian theorizing about sexuality has been marginal-
ized, albeit in different ways, both within Black intellectual communities and
women’s studies scholarship. As a result, Black feminist thought has not yet taken
full advantage of this important source of Black feminist theory . As a group, het-
erosexual African-American women have been strangely silent on the issue of
Black lesbianism. Barbara Smith suggests one compelling reason: “Heterosexual
privilege is usually the only privilege that Black women have. None of us have
racial or sexual privilege, almost none of us have class privilege, maintaining
125THE SEXUAL POLITICS OF BLACK WOMANHOOD


--- PAGE 143 ---
‘straightness’ is our last resort” (1982b, 171). In the same way that White femi-
nists identify with their victimization as women yet ignore the privilege that
racism grants them, and that Black men decry racism yet see sexism as being less
objectionable, heterosexual African-American women may perceive their own
race and gender oppression yet victimize lesbians, gays, and bisexuals. Barbara
Smith raises a critical point that can best be seen through the outsider-within
standpoint available to Black lesbians—namely , that intersecting oppressions of
sexuality , race, gender, and class produce neither absolute oppressors nor pure
victims.
The widely publicized 1992 Supreme Court Justice confirmation hearings of
Clarence Thomas shattered this multifaceted silence. During the hearings, Anita
Hill, a lawyer and former employee of Thomas during his years of heading up
the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, accused Thomas of sexually
harassing her. For days, the U.S. public remained riveted to their television sets,
listening to the details of Hill’s accusations concerning Thomas’s alleged abuse of
power, and Thomas’s ingenious rebuttals.The hearings were remarkable in sever-
al ways—their highly public, televised format, the similar race/class back-
grounds and politically conservative ideologies shared by Thomas and Hill, and
the public disclosure of sexually explicit material. By putting questions of race,
gender, class, and sexuality on public display , the hearings served as a powerful
catalyst to break long-standing silences.
The reactions to the hearings highlighted significant differences among
White women and Black men that left African-American women scrambling to
find ways to avoid “taking sides against the self” (Crenshaw 1992). White
American women routinely viewed the hearings as a landmark event that placed
the largely hidden issue of sexual harassment on the national agenda. Seeing a
shared sisterhood around issues of sexual harassment in the workplace, they
regarded Anita Hill’s race as of little concern. Instead, her Blackness operated as
an unearned bonus—it buttressed claims that regardless of skin color and other
markers of difference, all women needed to rally together to fight sexual harass-
ment. In contrast, U.S. Blacks viewed the event through the lens of racial solidarity
whereby Hill’s testimony violated Black “family secrets” about abusive Black
men. For many African-American men and women, the integrity of Hill’s claim
became erased by her transgression of airing “dirty laundry” in public. Even if
Thomas was a sexual harasser, some argued, out of solidarity with Black men Hill
should have kept her mouth shut. Cultural critic Lisa Jones describes a common
reaction: “What happened to Hill sent a more forceful message than her face on
the tube: Speaking out doesn’t pay .A harassed woman is still a double victim, and
a vocal, critical black woman is still a traitor to the race” (Jones 1994, 120).
African-American women found themselves caught in the middle, with
issues of sexuality on public display . For many , Anita Hill’s dilemma had a famil-
iar ring. For one, images of a row of affluent White men sitting in judgment of
both Anita Hill’s and Clarence Thomas’s sexual narratives smacked of pervasive
126 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 144 ---
silencing by dominant groups. Throwing in her lot with White women seemed
foolish, because discourses of gender had long ignored the special circumstances
of Black women. Because she had to live with the consequences of sexual harass-
ment, the code of silence mandated by racial solidarity also had not served Anita
Hill well. No place appeared to exist for Anita Hill’s story , because long-standing
silences on Black women’s sexuality had failed to provide one.
Much has been written about the 1992 hearings, much of it by U.S. Black
women (see, e.g., Morrison 1992; Smitherman 1995). Within this discourse lies
a new readiness to explore how social constructions of Black women’s sexuali-
ties must become more central to Black feminist thought. Following patterns
established by Black feminist-influenced studies of work, family , controlling
images, and other core themes of Black feminism, much of this work contextu-
alizes analyses of Black women’s sexualities within structural power relations.
Treating race, class, gender, and sexuality less as personal attributes and more as
systems of domination in which individuals construct unique identities, Black
feminist analyses routinely identify multiple oppressions as important to the
study of Black women’s sexualities. For example, Black feminist thinkers have
investigated how rape as a specific form of sexual violence is embedded in inter-
secting oppressions of race, gender, and class (Davis 1978, 1981, 1989;
Crenshaw 1991). Reproductive rights issues such as access to information on
sexuality and birth control, the struggles for abortion rights, and patterns of
forced sterilization require attention to how nation-state policies affect U.S. Black
women (Davis 1981; Roberts 1997; Collins 1999b). Black lesbians’ work on
homophobia investigates how heterosexism’s impact on African-American
women remains embedded in larger social structures (Lorde 1982, 1984; C.
Clarke 1983; Shockley 1983; Barbara Smith 1983, 1998b).This contextualization
in power relations generates a particular kind of social constructionist argument,
one that views Black women’s sexualities as being constructed within an histor-
ically specific matrix of domination characterized by intersecting oppressions. In
understanding these Black feminist contextualizations, it may be more appropri-
ate to speak of the sexual politics of Black womanhood, namely , how sexuality and
power become linked in constructing Black women’s sexualities.
Black Women, Intersecting Oppressions, 
and Sexual Politics
Due in large part to the politicized nature of definitions themselves, questions
of sexuality and the sexual politics in which they participate raise special con-
cerns.What is sexuality? What is power? Both of these questions generate wide-
spread debate. Moreover, analyzing questions of sexuality and power within an
interpretive framework that takes intersecting oppressions into account can
appear to be a daunting task.
127THE SEXUAL POLITICS OF BLACK WOMANHOOD


--- PAGE 145 ---
Whereas sexuality is part of intersecting oppressions, the ways in which it
can be conceptualized differ. Sexuality can be analyzed as a freestanding system
of oppression similar to oppressions of race, class, and gender. This approach
views heterosexism as a system of power that victimizes Black women in partic-
ular ways. Within heterosexism as a system of oppression, African-American
women find that their distinctive group placement within hierarchies of race,
class, and gender shape the experiences of Black women as a collectivity as well
as the sexual histories of individual Black women.
A second approach examines how sexualities  become manipulated within
class, race, nation, and gender as distinctive systems of oppression and draw
upon heterosexist assumptions to do so. Regulating Black women’s sexualities
emerges as a distinctive feature of social class exploitation, of  institutionalized
racism, of  U.S. nation-state policies, and of gender oppression. In essence, this
approach suggests that both the sexual meanings assigned to Black women’s bod-
ies as well as the social practices justified by sexual ideologies reappears across
seemingly separate systems of oppression.
Yet another approach views sexuality as a specific site of intersectionality
where intersecting oppressions meet. Studying Black women’s sexualities reveals
how sexuality constitutes one important site where heterosexism, class, race,
nation, and gender as systems of oppression converge. For Black women, ceding
control over self-definitions of Black women’s sexualities upholds multiple
oppressions. This is because all systems of oppression rely on harnessing the
power of the erotic. In contrast, when self-defined by Black women ourselves,
Black women’s sexualities can become an important place of resistance. Just as
harnessing the power of the erotic is important for domination, reclaiming and
self-defining that same eroticism may constitute one path toward Black women’s
empowerment.
Heterosexism as a System of Power
One important outcome of social movements advanced by lesbians, gays,
bisexuals, and transgendered individuals has been the recognition of heterosex-
ism as a system of power. In essence, the political and intellectual space carved
out by these movements challenged the assumed normality of heterosexuality
(Jackson 1996; Richardson 1996). These challenges fostered a shift from seeing
sexuality as residing in individual biological makeup, to analyzing heterosexism
as a system of power. Similar to oppressions of race or gender that mark bodies
with social meanings, heterosexism marks bodies with sexual meanings. Within
this logic, heterosexism can be defined as the belief in the inherent superiority of
one form of sexual expression over another and thereby the right to dominate.
When it comes to thinking about Black women’s sexualities, what is needed
is a framework that not only analyzes heterosexism as a system of oppression, but
128 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 146 ---
also conceptualizes its links to race, class, and gender as comparable systems of
oppression. Such a framework might emphasize two interdependent dimensions
of heterosexism, namely , its symbolic and structural dimensions. The symbolic
dimension refers to the sexual meanings used to represent and evaluate Black
women’s sexualities. For example, via the “hoochie” image, Black women’s sex-
ualities are seen as unnatural, dirty , sick, and sinful. In contrast, the structural
dimension encompasses how social institutions are organized to reproduce het-
erosexism, primarily through laws and social customs. For example, refusing to
prosecute Black women’s rapists because the women are viewed as sexual
“freaks” constitutes a social practice that reinforces and shapes these symbolic
structures. While analytically distinct, in actuality , these two dimensions work
together.
In the United States, assumptions of heterosexuality operate as a hegemonic
or taken-for-granted ideology—to be heterosexual is considered normal, to be
anything else is to become suspect. The system of sexual meanings associated
with heterosexism becomes normalized to such a degree that they are often
unquestioned. For example, the use of the term sexuality itself references hetero-
sexuality as normal, natural, and normative.
The ideological dimension of heterosexism is embedded in binary thinking
that deems heterosexuality as normal and other sexualities as deviant. Such think-
ing divides sexuality into two categories, namely , “normal” and “deviant” sexu-
ality , and has great implications for understanding Black women’s sexualities.
Within assumptions of normalized heterosexuality , two important categories of
“deviant” sexuality emerge. First,African or Black sexuality becomes constructed
as an abnormal or pathologized heterosexuality . Long-standing ideas concerning
the excessive sexual appetite of people of African descent conjured up in White
imaginations generate gender-specific controlling images of the Black male rapist
and the Black female jezebel, and they also rely on myths of Black hypersexuali-
ty . Within assumptions of normalized heterosexuality , regardless of individual
behavior, being White marks the normal category of heterosexuality . In contrast,
being Black signals the wild, out-of-control hyperheterosexuality of excessive
sexual appetite.
Within assumptions of normalized heterosexuality ,homosexuality emerges as
a second important category of “deviant” sexuality . In this case, homosexuality
constitutes an abnormal sexuality that becomes pathologized as heterosexuality’s
opposite. Whereas the problem of African or Black sexual deviancy is thought to
lie in Black hyperheterosexuality , the problem of homosexuality lies not in an
excess of heterosexual desire, but in the seeming absence of it. Women who lack
interest in men as sexual partners become pathologized as “frigid” if they claim
heterosexuality and stigmatized as lesbians if they do not.
Under Eurocentric ideologies, normalized heterosexuality thus becomes
constructed in contrast to two allegedly deviant sexualities, namely , those attrib-
uted to people of African descent and those applied to lesbians and gays, among
129THE SEXUAL POLITICS OF BLACK WOMANHOOD


--- PAGE 147 ---
others. The binary fundamental to heterosexism, namely , that dividing alleged
normal sexuality from its deviant other dovetails with binaries that underlie
other systems of oppression. The important binaries introduced in Chapter 3’s
discussion of Black women’s objectification—white/black, male/female, rea-
son/emotion, and mind/body—now become joined by a series of sexual
binaries: madonna/whore, real woman/dyke, real man/faggot, and stud/sissy .
These sexual binaries in turn receive justification via medical theories (nor-
mal/sick), religious beliefs (saved/sinner), and state regulation (legal/illegal).
All of this influences the actual system of sexual regulation in the United
States, where ideas about normalized heterosexuality permeate a range of
social institutions. Despite the similarities that characterize constructions of
African/Black sexuality and homosexuality , these sexualities differ in their
characteristic modes of regulation. Black people experience a highly visible sex-
ualized racism, one where the visibility of Black bodies themselves reinscribes
the hypervisibility of Black men and women’s alleged sexual deviancy . Because
U.S. understandings of race rely on biological categories that, while renegoti-
ated, cannot be changed—skin color is permanent—Black hypersexuality is
conceptualized as being intergenerational and resistant to change.
The seeming intractability of the stigma of Blackness in turn shapes possi-
ble responses to this socially constructed yet highly visible deviancy .
1 Because
biological traits are conceptualized as permanent, reformist strategies are
unlikely to work. In this context, containment strategies of all sorts rise in
importance. For example, racial segregation in housing, schools, employment,
and public facilities not only benefit some groups of Whites economically—
they also keep allegedly hypersexual Blacks separated from Whites. Maintaining
physical distance need not be the sole strategy . Blacks have long worked in close
proximity to Whites, but Blacks and Whites alike were discouraged from see-
ing one another as friends, neighbors, lovers, and, most important, legal sexual
partners. In a context where Black bodies signal sexual deviancy , laws against
intermarriage and other components of racial segregation ensured that the
deviancy could be simultaneously exploited yet contained.
Because the nature of the threat is deemed different, forms of control for
lesbians, gays, and other sexually stigmatized groups differ from those of sexu-
alized racism. Homophobia flourishes in a context where the invisibility of the
alleged deviancy is perceived to be the problem. Whereas the fears associated
with racism lie in ideas projected upon highly visible, objectified Black bodies,
the fears underlying homophobia emerge from the understanding that anyone
could be gay or lesbian. Reminiscent of the proximate racism of anti-Semitism,
one where, for example, Nazi scientists spent considerable time trying to find
ways to identify Jewishness, homophobia constitutes a proximate fear that any-
one could at any time reveal himself or herself as gay or lesbian.
The panoply of responses to the alleged deviancy of homosexuality also
match the nature of the perceived threat. Containment also operates, but dif-
130 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 148 ---
ferently . For example, the medical profession has been assigned the reformist
strategy of counseling gays and lesbians to better cope with normalized hetero-
sexuality . Hate crimes punish individuals, but such crimes make an example of a
visible homosexuality in order to drive the rest back into the closet. Recognizing
that homosexuality most likely cannot be eliminated, the intended effect is to
remove it from public and thereby legitimated space. Laws forbidding gay and
lesbian marriages coupled with resistance to gays and lesbians having and raising
children seem designed to stop the “spread” of homosexuality . Within this logic
of the proximate threat, efforts to keep gays, lesbians, and other sexual minori-
ties “in the closet” and “hidden” seem designed to contain the threat within.
Making heterosexism as a system of oppression more central to thinking
through Black women’s sexualities suggests two significant features. First, differ-
ent groups remain differentially placed within heterosexism as an overarching
structure of power. As I discuss later in this chapter and the next, African-
American women’s group history becomes crafted in the context of the speci-
ficity of the U.S. matrix of domination. Black women’s particular group history
within heterosexism intersects with that of other groups. For example, construc-
tions of Black male and female sexuality are linked—they are similar yet differ-
ent. Similarly , middle-class White women’s sexuality could not be constructed as
it is without corresponding controlling images applied to U.S. Black women.
Moreover, this collective U.S. Black women’s history does not eliminate further
specification of group histories within the larger collectivity of African-American
women, e.g., Black lesbians, adolescent Black women, older Black women, Black
women who must rely on social welfare programs, and so on. Instead, it speci-
fies the contours of sexual meanings that have been attributed to Black women.
Considerable diversity exists among U.S. Black women as to how the symbolic
and structural dimensions of heterosexism will be experienced and responded to.
A second significant feature concerns the space created for Black women’s
individual agency . Because African-American women express a range of sexuali-
ties, including celibate, heterosexual, lesbian, and bisexual, with varying forms
of sexual expression changing throughout an individual’s life course, Black
women’s self-definitions become essential. It is important to stress that both the
symbolic and structural dimensions of heterosexism are always contested.
Individual African-American women construct sexual meanings and practices
within this overarching structure of heterosexual power relations.Thus, the indi-
vidual agency of any one U.S. Black woman emerges in the context of larger insti-
tutional structures and particular group histories that affect many others. For
individual Black women, the struggle lies in rejecting externally defined ideas
and practices, and claiming the erotic as a mechanism for empowerment.
131THE SEXUAL POLITICS OF BLACK WOMANHOOD


--- PAGE 149 ---
Sexuality within Distinctive Systems of Class, 
Race, Gender, and Nation
Analyzing how heterosexism as a system of oppression victimizes Black
women constitutes one major approach to examining sexuality . A second
approach explores how sexualities constructed in conjunction with an unques-
tioned heterosexism become manipulated within class, race, gender, and nation
as distinctive systems of oppression. For example, the controlling image of
jezebel reappears across several systems of oppression. For class oppression, the
jezebel image fosters the sexual exploitation of Black women’s bodies through
prostitution. The jezebel image reinforces racial oppression by justifying sexual
assaults against Black women. Gender ideology also draws upon the jezebel
image—a devalued jezebel makes pure White womanhood possible. Overseeing
these relationships are nation-state policies that because they implicitly see Black
women as jezebels, deny Black women equal treatment under the law. Unmarried
Black mothers have struggled to gain social welfare benefits long available to
White women (Amott 1990), Black adolescents are more likely than White
women to receive Norplant and other contraceptive methods that assume they
cannot control their sexual libidos (Roberts 1997, 104–49), and as Anita Hill
found out, Black women’s claims of being sexually harassed and raped are often
discounted. Thus, each system has a vested inter est in regulating sexuality and
relies on symbolic and structural practices to do so.
Examining how regulating Black women’s sexuality functions to support
each system constitutes one way of investigating these relationships. Controlling
Black women’s bodies has been especially important for capitalist class relations
in the United States. When it comes to U.S. Black women’s experiences, two fea-
tures of capitalism remain noteworthy . First, Black women’s bodies have been
objectified and commodified under U.S. capitalist class relations.The objectifica-
tion of Black women discussed in Chapter 4 and the subsequent commodifica-
tion of those objectified bodies are closely linked—objectifying Black women’s
bodies turns them into commodities that can be sold or exchanged on the open
market. Commodified bodies of all sorts become markers of status within class
hierarchies that rely on race and gender. For example, healthy White babies are
hot commodities in the U.S. adoption market, while healthy Black babies often
languish in foster care. A second feature of U.S. capitalist class relations concerns
how Black women’s bodies have been exploited. Via mechanisms such as
employment discrimination, maintaining images of Black women that construct
them as mules or objects of pleasure, and encouraging or discouraging Black
women’s reproduction via state intervention, Black women’s labor, sexuality , and
fertility all have been exploited.
Not only are commodification and exploitation linked, patterns of exploit-
ing Black women’s sexuality have taken many forms. In some cases, the entire
body itself became commodified. For example, slave auctions brokered the com-
132 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 150 ---
modified bodies of both Black women and men—bodies could be bought and
sold on the open market. In other cases, parts of the body could be commodified
and sold for profitability . Barbara Omolade introduces this notion of specialized
commodification where “every part of the black woman” was used by the White
master. “To him she was a fragmented commodity whose feelings and choices
were rarely considered: her head and her heart were separated from her back and
her hands and divided from her womb and vagina” (Omolade 1994, 7). Black
women’s sexuality could be reduced to gaining control over an objectified vagi-
na that could then be commodified and sold.The long-standing interest in Black
women’s genitalia within Western science seems apt here in that reducing Black
women to commodified genitalia and vaginas effectively treats Black women as
potential prostitutes. Similarly , current portrayals of Black women in popular cul-
ture—reducing Black women to butts—works to reinscribe these commodified
body parts. Commodifying and exploiting Black women’s wombs may be next.
When a California judge rejected African-American Anna Johnson’s claim that the
White baby she had carried in her womb entitled her to some rights of mother-
hood, the message seemed clear—storage lockers and wombs constitute rental
property (Hartouni 1997).
Regulating Black women’s sexuality has certainly been significant within
racist discourse and practice. In the United States, because race has been con-
structed as a biological category that is rooted in the body , controlling Black sex-
uality has long been important in preserving racial boundaries. U.S. notions of
racial purity , such as the rule claiming that one drop of Black “blood “ deter-
mines racial identity , required strict control over the sexuality and subsequent
fertility of Black women, White women, and Black men. Although explicitly a
means to prevent Blacks and Whites from associating in public accommodations,
racial segregation in the South rested upon a deep-seated fear that “social mixing
would lead to sexual mixing” (d’Emilio and Freedman 1988, 106).These mech-
anisms of control affected diverse population groups differently . Affluent White
men typically enjoyed access to the bodies of all women and removed other men
from sexual competition. The creation of a class of “angry White men” in the
aftermath of social reforms of the 1960s and 1970s reflects, in part, the deterio-
ration of White supremacist practices that gave White men such power (Ferber
1998). Wealthy White women were valued for a premarital virginity that when
“lost” in the context of heterosexual marriage, ensured that all children would
be biologically “White.” Regardless of social class, Whites were encouraged to
fear racial amalgamation, believing that it would debase them to the status of
other races (d’Emilio and Freedman 1988, 86). In this context, Black men were
constructed as sexually violent beasts, a view that not only justified their perse-
cution by the state (Berry 1994), but was used to deny them access to White
women’s bodies. Black women’s sexuality found no protections.Thus, notions of
White supremacy relied on a notion of racial difference where “difference would
be largely based on perceptions of sexual difference, and . . . the foundation of
133THE SEXUAL POLITICS OF BLACK WOMANHOOD


--- PAGE 151 ---
sexual difference lay in attitudes about black women” (Giddings 1995, 417).
Regulating Black women’s sexuality also constituted a part of gender oppres-
sion. Dividing women into two categories—the asexual, moral women to be
protected by marriage and their sexual, immoral counterparts—served as a gen-
der template for constructing ideas about masculinity and femininity . The major
archetypal symbols of women in Western thought construct women’s sexuality
via a tightly interwoven series of binaries. Collectively , these binaries create a sex-
ual hierarchy with approved sexual expression installed at the top and forbidden
sexualities relegated to the bottom. Assumptions of normal and deviant sexuality
work to label women as good girls or bad girls, resulting in two categories 
of female sexuality .Virgins are the women who remain celibate before marriage,
and who gain license to engage in heterosexual sexual practices after marriage.
In contrast, whores are the unmarried women who are willingly “screwed.”
Whether a woman is an actual virgin or not is of lesser concern than whether she
can socially construct herself as a “good” girl within this logic. Racializing this
gender ideology by assigning all Black women, regardless of actual behavior, to
the category of “bad” girls simplifies the management of this system.
It is important to remember that what appear to be natural and normal ideas
and practices concerning sexuality are in fact carefully manufactured and pro-
moted by schools, organized religions, the news media, and, most importantly ,
government policies.The local, state, and federal branches of the U.S. government
may appear to be removed from issues of sexuality , but via their taxation, social
welfare, and other policies, the U.S. nation-state in effect regulates which sexual-
ities are deemed legitimate and which are not. For example, U.S. nation-state
policies shape understandings of which citizens shall be afforded privacy .
Affluent families living in suburban gated communities are provided with far
more privacy and government protection than are poor families who live in
urban public housing, where police intrude on family privacy more often than
they protect it. In a similar fashion, Black women’s sexuality has been constructed
by law as public property—Black women have no rights of privacy that Whites
must observe.As Barbara Omolade suggests, “White men used their power in the
public sphere to construct a private sphere that would meet their needs and their
desire for black women, which if publicly admitted would have undermined the
false construct of race they needed to maintain public power. Therefore, the his-
tory of black women in America reflects the juncture where the private and pub-
lic spheres and personal and political oppression meet” (Omolade 1994, 17).
Regulating Black Women’s Bodies
Sexuality can be conceptualized as a freestanding system of oppression similar
to oppressions of race, class, nation, and gender, as well as part of each of these
distinctive systems of oppression. A third approach views sexuality as one
134 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 152 ---
important social location that joins these distinctive systems of oppression.This
conceptualization views sexuality as conceptual glue that binds intersecting
oppressions together. Stated differently , intersecting oppressions share certain
core features. Manipulating and regulating the sexualities of diverse groups con-
stitutes one such shared feature or site of intersectionality .
In this context, investigating efforts to regulate Black women’s bodies can
illuminate the larger question of how sexuality operates as a site of intersection-
ality . Within this larger endeavor, Black women’s experiences with pornography ,
prostitution, and rape constitute specific cases of how more powerful groups
have aimed to regulate Black women’s bodies. These cases emphasize the con-
nections between sexual ideologies developed to justify actual social practices
and the use of force to maintain the social order. As such, these themes provide
a useful lens for examining how intersecting oppressions rely on sexuality to
mutually construct one another.
Pornography and Black Women’s Bodies
For centuries the black woman has served as the primary pornographic
“outlet” for White men in Europe and America.We need only think of the
black women used as breeders, raped for the pleasure and profit of their
owners. We need only think of the license the “master” of the slave
women enjoyed. But, most telling of all, we need only study the old slave
societies of the South to note the sadistic treatment—at the hands of white
“gentlemen”—of “beautiful young quadroons and octoroons” who
became increasingly (and were deliberately bred to become) indistin-
guishable from white women, and were the more highly prized as slave
mistresses because of this. (Walker 1981, 42)
Alice Walker’s description of the rape of enslaved African women for the “plea-
sure and profit of their owners” encapsulates several elements of contemporary
pornography . First, Black women were used as sex objects for the pleasure of
White men. This objectification of African-American women parallels the por-
trayal of women in pornography as sex objects whose sexuality is available for
men (McNall 1983). Exploiting Black women as breeders objectified them as
less than human because only animals can be bred against their will. In con-
temporary pornography women are objectified through being portrayed as
pieces of meat, as sexual animals awaiting conquest. Second, African-American
women were raped, a form of sexual violence. Violence is typically an implicit
or explicit theme in pornography . Moreover, the rape of Black women linked
sexuality and violence, another characteristic feature of pornography (Eisenstein
1983).Third, rape and other forms of sexual violence act to strip victims of their
will to resist and make them passive and submissive to the will of the rapist.
Female passivity , the fact that women have things done to them, is a theme
135THE SEXUAL POLITICS OF BLACK WOMANHOOD


--- PAGE 153 ---
repeated over and over in contemporary pornography (McNall 1983). Fourth,
the profitability of Black women’s sexual exploitation for White “gentlemen”
parallels pornography’s financially lucrative benefits for pornographers (Dines
1998). Finally , the actual breeding of “quadroons and octoroons” not only rein-
forces the themes of Black women’s passivity , objectification, and malleability to
male control but reveals pornography’s grounding in racism and sexism. The
fates of both Black and White women were intertwined in this breeding process.
The ideal African-American woman as a pornographic object was indistinguish-
able from a White woman and thus resembled the images of beauty , asexuality ,
and chastity forced on White women. But inside was a highly sexual whore, a
“slave mistress” ready to cater to her owner’s pleasure.
2
Contemporary pornography consists of a series of icons or representations
that focus the viewer’s attention on the relationship between the portrayed indi-
vidual and the general qualities ascribed to that class of individuals. Pornographic
images are iconographic in that they represent realities in a manner determined
by the historical position of the observers and by their relationship to their own
time and to the history of the conventions which they employ (Gilman 1985).
The treatment of Black women’s bodies in nineteenth-century Europe and the
United States may be the foundation upon which contemporary pornography as
the representation of women’s objectification, domination, and control is based.
Icons about the sexuality of Black women’s bodies emerged in these contexts.
Moreover, as race and gender-specific representations, these icons have implica-
tions for the treatment of both African-American and White women in contem-
porary pornography .
I suggest that African-American women were not included in pornography
as an afterthought but instead form a key pillar on which contemporary pornog-
raphy itself rests. As Alice Walker points out, “The more ancient roots of modern
pornography are to be found in the almost always pornographic treatment 
of black women who, from the moment they entered slavery . . . were subjected
to rape as the ‘logical’ convergence of sex and violence. Conquest, in short”
(1981, 42).
One key feature about the treatment of Black women in the nineteenth cen-
tury was how their bodies were objects of display . In the antebellum American
South, White men did not have to look at pornographic pictures of women
because they could become voyeurs of Black women on the auction block. A
chilling example of this objectification of the Black female body is provided by
the exhibition, in early-nineteenth-century Europe, of Sarah Bartmann, the so-
called Hottentot Venus. Her display formed one of the original icons for Black
female sexuality . An African women, Sarah Bartmann was often exhibited at fash-
ionable parties in Paris, generally wearing little clothing, to provide entertain-
ment. To her audience she represented deviant sexuality . At the time European
audiences thought that Africans had deviant sexual practices and searched for
physiological differences, such as enlarged penises and malformed female geni-
136 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 154 ---
talia, as indications of this deviant sexuality . Sarah Bartmann’s exhibition stimu-
lated these racist and sexist beliefs. After her death in 1815, she was dissected,
with her genitalia and buttocks placed on display  (Gilman 1985).
Sander Gilman explains the impact that Sarah Bartmann’s exhibition had on
Victorian audiences:
It is important to note that Sarah Bartmann was exhibited not to show her
genitalia—but rather to present another anomaly which the European
audience ...f ound riveting. This was the steatopygia, or protruding but-
tocks, the other physical characteristic of the Hottentot female which cap-
tured the eye of early European travelers.... The figure of Sarah Bartmann
was reduced to her sexual parts. The audience which had paid to see her
buttocks and had fantasized about the uniqueness of her genitalia when
she was alive could, after her death and dissection, examine both. (1985,
213)
In this passage Gilman unwittingly describes how Bartmann was used as a
pornographic object similar to how women are represented in contemporary
pornography . She was reduced to her sexual parts, and these parts came to rep-
resent a dominant icon applied to Black women throughout the nineteenth cen-
tury . Moreover, the fact that Sarah Bartmann was both African and a woman
underscores the importance of gender in maintaining notions of racial purity . In
this case Bartmann symbolized Blacks as a “race.” Her display also served to but-
tress notions of European nations as “civilized” as opposed to the backward
colonies that were incapable of development (Fausto-Sterling 1995). In the cre-
ation of the icon applied to Black women, notions of gender, race, nation, and
sexuality were linked in overarching structures of political domination and eco-
nomic exploitation.
The pornographic treatment of the bodies of enslaved African women and of
women like Sarah Bartmann has since developed into a full-scale industry .Within
pornography , all women are objectified differently by racial/ethnic category .
Contemporary portrayals of Black women in pornography represent the contin-
uation of the historical treatment of their actual bodies (Forna 1992). African-
American women are usually depicted in a situation of bondage and slavery , typ-
ically in a submissive posture, and often with two White men. A study of fifty-
four videos found that Black women more often were portrayed as being sub-
jected to aggressive acts and as submitting after initial resistance to a sexual
encounter. Compared with White women, Black women were shown perform-
ing fellatio on their knees more often (Cowan and Campbell 1994). Russell
(1993, 45–49) reports that Black women are equated with snakes, as engaging
in sex with animals, as incestuous, and as lovers of rape, especially by White men.
As Bell observes, these settings remind us of  “the trappings of slavery: chains,
whips, neck braces, wrist clasps” (1987, 59).White women and women of color
have different pornographic images applied to them.The image of Black women
137THE SEXUAL POLITICS OF BLACK WOMANHOOD


--- PAGE 155 ---
in pornography is almost consistently one featuring them breaking from chains.
The image of Asian women in pornography is almost consistently one of being
tortured (Bell 1987, 161).
The pornographic treatment of Black women’s bodies challenges prevailing
assumptions that since images of White women prevail in pornography , racism
has been grafted onto pornography . African-American women’s experiences sug-
gest that Black women were not added into a preexisting pornography , but rather
that pornography itself must be reconceptualized as a shift from the objectifica-
tion of Black women’s bodies in order to dominate and exploit them, to one of
media representations of all women that perform the same purpose. Notions of
biological determinism claiming that people of African descent and women pos-
sess immutable biological characteristics marking their inferiority to elite White
men lie at the heart of both racism and sexism (Halpin 1989; Fausto-Sterling
1992). In pornography these racist and sexist beliefs are sexualized. Moreover,
African-American women’s pornographic treatment has not been timeless and
universal but emerged in conjunction with European colonization and American
slavery (Torgovnick 1990; McClintock 1995). The profitability of pornography
thus serves capitalist class relations.
This linking of views of the body , social constructions of race and gender,
pornography’s profitability , and conceptualizations of sexuality that inform Black
women’s treatment as pornographic objects promises to have significant impli-
cations for how we assess contemporary pornography . Pornography’s signifi-
cance as a site of intersecting oppressions promises new insights toward under-
standing social injustice.
Investigating racial patterns in pornography offers one route for such an
analysis. Black women have often claimed that images of White women’s sexual-
ity were intertwined with the controlling image of the sexually derogated Black
woman: “In the United States, the fear and fascination of female sexuality was
projected onto black women; the passionless lady arose in symbiosis with the
primitively sexual slave” (Hall 1983, 333). Comparable linkages exist in pornog-
raphy (Gardner 1980). Alice Walker provides a fictional account of a Black man’s
growing awareness of the different ways that African-American and White
women are objectified in pornography: “What he has refused to see—because 
to see it would reveal yet another area in which he is unable to protect or
defend black women—is that where white women are depicted in pornography
as ‘objects,’ black women are depicted as animals. Where white women are
depicted as human bodies if not beings, black women are depicted as shit”
(Walker 1981, 52).
Walker’s distinction between “objects” and “animals” is crucial in untan-
gling gender, race, and class dynamics in pornography . Within the mind/body ,
culture/nature, male/female binaries in Western social thought, objects occupy
an uncertain interim position.As objects,White women become creations of cul-
ture—in this case, the mind of White men—using the materials of nature—in
138 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 156 ---
this case, uncontrolled female sexuality . In contrast, as animals, Black women
receive no such redeeming dose of culture and remain open to the type of
exploitation visited on nature overall. Black women’s portrayal in pornography as
caged, chained, and naked creatures who possess “panther-like,” savage, and
exotic sexual qualities (Forna 1992) reinforces this theme of Black women’s
“wildness” as symbolic of an unbridled female sexuality . In a context where
Whiteness as symbolic of both civilization and culture is used to separate objects
from animals, racial difference constructed on the bedrock of sexuality becomes
the distinguishing feature in determining the type of objectification women will
encounter.
While the sexual and racial dimensions of being treated like an animal are
important, the economic foundation underlying this treatment is critical. Under
capitalist class relations, animals can be worked, sold, killed, and consumed, all
for profit. As “mules,” African-American women become susceptible to such
treatment. The political economy of pornography meshes with this overarching
value system that objectifies, commodifies, and markets products, ideas, images,
and actual people. Pornography is pivotal in mediating contradictions in changing
societies (McNall 1983). It is no accident that racist biology , religious justifica-
tions for slavery and women’s subordination, and other explanations for nine-
teenth-century racism and sexism arose during a period of profound political
and economic change. Symbolic means of domination become particularly
important in mediating contradictions in changing political economies. The
exhibition of Sarah Bartmann and Black women on the auction block were not
benign intellectual exercises—these practices defended real material and political
interests. Current transformations in international capitalism require similar 
ideological justifications. Contemporary pornography meshes with late-twentieth-
century global transformations of postcolonialism in a fashion reminiscent of
global changes associated with nineteenth-century colonialism (Dines 1998).
Publicly exhibiting Black women may have been central to objectifying
Black women as animals and to creating the icon of Black women as animals.Yi-
Fu Tuan (1984) offers an innovative argument about similarities in efforts to
control nature—especially plant life—the domestication of animals, and the
domination of certain groups of humans.Tuan suggests that displaying humans
alongside animals implies that such humans are more like monkeys and bears
than they are like “normal” people. This same juxtaposition leads spectators to
view the captive animals in a special way . Animals acquire definitions of being
like humans, only more openly carnal and sexual, an aspect of animals that
forms a major source of attraction for visitors to modern zoos. In discussing the
popularity of monkeys in zoos,Tuan notes: “Some visitors are especially attract-
ed by the easy sexual behavior of the monkeys. Voyeurism is forbidden except
when applied to subhumans” (1984, 82).Tuan’s analysis suggests that the pub-
lic display of Sarah Bartmann and of the countless enslaved African women on
the auction blocks of the antebellum American South—especially in proximity
139THE SEXUAL POLITICS OF BLACK WOMANHOOD


--- PAGE 157 ---
to animals—fostered their image as animalistic.
This linking of Black women and animals is evident in nineteenth-century
scientific literature.The equation of women, Blacks, and animals is revealed in the
following description of an African woman published in an 1878 anthropology text:
She had a way of pouting her lips exactly like what we have observed in
the orangutan. Her movements had something abrupt and fantastical
about them, reminding one of those of the ape. Her ear was like that of
m a n y  a p e s ....These are animal characters. I have never seen a human head
more like an ape than that of this woman. (Halpin 1989, 287)
In a climate such as this, it is not surprising that one prominent European physi-
cian even stated that Black women’s “animal-like sexual appetite went so far as
to lead black women to copulate with apes” (Gilman 1985, 212). Late-twentieth-
century science has had difficulty shedding itself of these deep-seated beliefs.
The association of Africa, animals, and seemingly deviant sexualities within AIDS
discourse speaks to the persistence of these ideas (Hammonds 1986; Watney
1990). As Paula Giddings suggests, the fact that “respectable journals would
make connections between green monkeys and African women, for example, or
trace the origin of AIDS to African prostitutes—the polluted sexual organs of
black women—reveals our continued vulnerability to racist ideology”
(Giddings 1992, 458).
The treatment of all women in contemporary pornography has strong ties to
the portrayal of Black women as animals. In pornography women become non-
people and are often represented as the sum of their fragmented body parts. Scott
McNall observes:
This fragmentation of women relates to the predominance of rear-entry
position photographs.... All of these kinds of photographs reduce the
woman to her reproductive system, and, furthermore, make her open,
willing, and available—not in control. . . .The other thing rear-entry posi-
tion photographs tell us about women is that they are animals. They are
animals because they are the same as dogs—bitches in heat who can’t
control themselves. (McNall 1983, 197–98)
This linking of animals and women within pornography becomes feasible when
grounded in the earlier debasement of Black women as animals.
Developing a comprehensive analysis of Black women’s placement in
pornography and of pornography itself as a site of intersecting oppressions offers
possibilities for change. Those Black feminist intellectuals investigating sexual
politics imply that the situation is much more complicated than that advanced
within Western feminism in which “men oppress women” because they are men.
Such approaches implicitly assume biologically deterministic views of gender
and sexuality and offer few possibilities for change. In contrast, the willingness
of Black feminist analyses of sexual politics to embrace intersectional paradigms
provides space for human agency . Women are not hard-wired as victims of
140 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 158 ---
pornography , nor are men destined uncritically to consume it. In the short story
“Coming Apart,” Alice Walker describes one Black man’s growing realization that
his enjoyment of pornography , whether of White women as “objects” or Black
women as “animals,” degraded him:
He begins to feel sick. For he realizes that he has bought some of the
advertisements about women, black and white. And further, inevitably , he
has bought the advertisements about himself. In pornography the black
man is portrayed as being capable of fucking anything . . . even a piece of
shit. He is defined solely by the size, readiness and unselectivity of his
cock. (Walker 1981, 52)
Walker conceptualizes pornography as a mechanism within intersecting oppres-
sions that entraps everyone. But by exploring an African-American man’sstruggle
to understand his participation in pornography , Walker suggests that a changed
consciousness is essential to social change. If Black men can understand how
pornography affects them, then other groups enmeshed in the same system are
equally capable of similar shifts in consciousness and action.
Because pornography as a way of thinking is so deeply ingrained in Western
culture, it is difficult to achieve this changed consciousness and action. Reacting
to the same catalyst of the Anita Hill hearings, Black feminist theorist Patricia
Williams was intrigued by Clarence Thomas’s claims that he admired Malcolm X.
A friend’s comment that Malcolm X wasn’t just a role model but had become the
“ultimate pornographic object” sent Williams to the library in search of work on
pornography . Her subsequent description of pornography shows it to be a way
of thinking that, she argues, has no necessary connection to sex. Williams came
to see pornography as “a habit of thinking” that replays relationships of domi-
nance and submission. For Williams, pornography:
permits the imagination of the voyeur to indulge in auto-sensation that
obliterates the subjectivity of the observed. A habit of thinking that allows
that self-generated sensation to substitute for interaction with a whole
other human being, to substitute for listening or conversing or caring . . .
the object is pacified, a malleable “thing” upon which to project.
(Williams 1995, 123)
Sadly , this “way of thinking” persists even among self-proclaimed progressive
thinkers. I have seen three public uses of Sarah Bartmann’s image. The first was
by a White feminist scholar who refused to show the images without adequately
preparing her audience. She knew that graphic images of Black women’s objec-
tification and debasement, whether on the auction block as the object of a
voyeuristic nineteenth-century science, or within contemporary pornography ,
would be upsetting to some audience members. Initially , I found her concern
admirable yet overly cautious. Then I saw the reactions of young Black women
who saw images of Sarah Bartmann for the first time. Even though the speaker
tried to prepare them, these young women cried.They saw and felt the connec-
141THE SEXUAL POLITICS OF BLACK WOMANHOOD


--- PAGE 159 ---
tions among the women exhibited on the auction block, the voyeuristic treat-
ment of Sarah Bartmann, the depiction of Black women in pornography , and
their own daily experiences of being under sexual surveillance. I quickly
changed my opinion of my colleague’s concern—she was right.
The remaining two uses of Sarah Bartmann’s image illustrate the contradic-
tions and ironies in contemporary scholarship. A prominent White male scholar
who has done much to challenge scientific racism apparently felt few qualms at
using a slide of Sarah Bartmann as part of his PowerPoint presentation. Leaving
her image on screen for several minutes with a panel of speakers that included
Black women seated on stage in front of the slide, this scholar told jokes about
the seeming sexual interests of the White voyeurs of the nineteenth century . He
seemed incapable of grasping how his own twentieth-century use of this image,
as well as his invitation that audience members become voyeurs along with him,
reinscribed Sarah Bartmann as an “object ....a  malleable ‘thing’ ” upon which
he projected his own agenda.When I questioned him about his pornographic use
of the slide, his response was telling. Just as pornographers hide behind the pro-
tections of “free speech,” so did this prominent scholar. He defended his “right”
to use public domain material any way he saw fit, even if it routinely offended
Black women and contributed to their continued objectification.
The final use illustrates yet another limitation of failing to see pornography
via the lens of intersecting oppressions. In this case, I attended a conference on
race and ethnicity where a prominent Black male scholar presented his analysis
of the significance of the changing size of Black bodies portrayed in racist
iconography . Once again, the slide show began, and there she was again. Sarah
Bartmann’s body appeared on the screen, not to provide a humorous interlude,
but as the body chosen to represent the nineteenth-century “raced” body . Again,
the audience was allowed a lengthy , voyeuristic peek at Bartmann, all the while
listening to how this particular “raced” body illustrated my colleague’s latest
insight about body size. Despite the fact that we stared at a half-naked Black
woman, he made no mention of gender, let alone how this particular “raced” and
“gendered” body has been central to the pornographic treatment of Black
women.As much as I hated to violate the unspoken norm of racial solidarity , dur-
ing the discussion period, I questioned these omissions. After a brief and disap-
proving silence, he dismissed my question. In a derisive tone suggesting that I
had somehow missed the profundity of his argument, this arrogant individual
replied, “I’m concerned about race here, not gender!”
Sadly , both my White male colleague and his Black male counterpart had
apparently developed “habits of thinking” that allowed them to use their imagi-
nations “to indulge in auto-sensation that obliterates the subjectivity of the
observed.” Certainly Black women’s subjectivity , both Sarah Bartmann’s and my
own, were obliterated by how these two men used her image. Instead, I was
invited to objectify myself in order to develop the objectivity that would allow
me to participate in her objectification. I could become either a laughing voyeur
142 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 160 ---
of Bartmann’s debasement or a voyeur of her “raced” yet ungendered body , but
a voyeur all the same. Apparently , among some thinkers, some habits of thinking
are extremely hard to break.
Prostitution and the Exploitation of 
Black Women’s Bodies
In T o Be Young, Gifted and Black,Lorraine Hansberry creates three characters:
a young domestic worker; a chic, professional, middle-aged woman; and a mother
in her thirties. Each speaks a variant of the following:
In these streets out there, any little white boy from Long Island 
or Westchester sees me and leans out of his car and yells—“Hey there,
hot chocolate! Say there, Jezebel! Hey you—‘Hundred Dollar Misunder-
standing’! YOU! Bet you know where there’s a good time tonight . . .”
Follow me sometimes and see if I lie. I can be coming from eight hours
on an assembly line or fourteen hours in Mrs. Halsey’s kitchen. I can be all
filled up that day with three hundred years of rage so that my eyes are
flashing and my flesh is trembling—and the white boys in the streets, they
look at me and think of sex. They look at me and that’s all they think. . . .
Baby , you could be Jesus in drag—but if you’re brown they’re sure you’re
selling! (Hansberry 1969, 98)
Like the characters in Hansberry’s fiction, all Black women are affected by
the widespread controlling image that African-American women are sexually
promiscuous. The pervasiveness of this image is vividly recounted in Black
activist lawyer Pauli Murray’s description of an incident she experienced while
defending two women from Spanish Harlem who had been arrested for prosti-
tution: “The first witness, a white man from New Jersey , testified on the details
of the sexual transaction and his payment of money . When asked to identify the
woman with whom he had engaged in sexual intercourse, he unhesitatingly
pointed directly at me, seated beside my two clients at the defense table!”
(Murray 1987, 274). Murray’s clients were nonetheless convicted.
Not just White men, but Black men have been involved in finding ways to
profit from Black women’s bodies. During an interview with Brother Marquis
from the group 2 Live Crew, Black cultural critic Lisa Jones realizes that “hoochie
mama” and other songs by this group actually constitute “soft porn.” Jones’s
interview with Brother Marquis reveals the important links among pornography ,
the marketing of Black women’s images, and the exploitation of Black women’s
bodies. In defending the misogynist lyrics of 2 Live Crew’s music, Brother
Marquis states:
I’m not gonna try to disrespect you and call you all those names like I do
on those records. I would never do that to a young lady , especially a sister.
I’m degrading you to try to get me some money.... And besides, you let
143THE SEXUAL POLITICS OF BLACK WOMANHOOD


--- PAGE 161 ---
me do that.You got pimps out here who are making you sell your body .
Just let me talk about you for a little while, you know what I’m saying?
And make me a little money . (Jones 1994, 243)
Brother’s Marquis’s explanation displays familiar rationalizations. He divided
women into two categories of good girls and “hoochies.” In his mind, if Black
women are devalued within prostitution already , what harm can it do to talk
about debasing Black women, especially if he can profit from such talk?
Within Brother Marquis’s logic, images of Black women as jezebels and
“hoochies” do little harm.Yet this controlling image has been vital in justifying
the negative treatment that Black women encounter with intersecting oppres-
sions. Exploring how the image of the African-American woman as prostitute has
been used by selected systems of oppression illustrates how sexuality links the
three systems. But Black women’s treatment also demonstrates how prostitution
operates as a site of intersectionality .
Yi-Fu Tuan (1984) suggests that power as domination involves reducing
humans to animate nature in order to exploit them economically or to treat them
condescendingly as pets. Domination may be either cruel and exploitative with
no affection or may be exploitative yet coexist with affection. The former pro-
duces the victim—in this case, the Black woman as “mule” whose labor has been
exploited. In contrast, the combination of dominance and affection produces the
pet, the individual who is subordinate and whose survival depends on the whims
of the more powerful.The “beautiful young quadroons and octoroons” described
by Alice Walker were bred to be pets—enslaved Black mistresses whose existence
required that they retain the affection of their owners. The treatment afforded
these women illustrates a process that affects all African-American women: their
portrayal as actual or potential victims and pets of elite White males.
3
African-American women simultaneously embody the coexistence of the
victim and the pet, with survival often linked to the ability to be appropriately
subordinate. Black women’s experiences as unpaid and paid workers demonstrate
the harsh lives victims are forced to lead. While the life of the victim is difficult,
pets experience a distinctive form of exploitation. Zora Neale Hurston’s 1943
essay , “The ‘Pet’ Negro System,” speaks contemptuously of this ostensibly benign
situation that combines domination with affection. Writing in a Black oratorical
style, Hurston notes, “Brother and Sisters, I take my text this morning from the
Book of Dixie....N o w  i t  s a y s  h e r e ,‘And every white man shall be allowed to pet
himself a Negro. Yea, he shall take a black man unto himself to pet and cherish,
and this same Negro shall be perfect in his sight’ ” (Walker 1979a, 156). Pets are
treated as exceptions and live with the constant threat that they will no longer be
“perfect in his sight,” that their owners will tire of them and relegate them to the
unenviable role of victim.
Prostitution represents the fusion of exploitation for an economic purpose—
namely , the commodification of Black women’s sexuality—with the demeaning
treatment afforded pets. Sex becomes commodified not merely in the sense that
144 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 162 ---
it can be purchased—the dimension of economic exploitation—but also in the
sense that one is dealing with a totally alienated being who is separated from and
who seemingly does not control her body: the dimension of power as domina-
tion (McNall 1983). Commodified sex can then be appropriated by the power-
ful. When the “white boys from Long Island” look at Black women and all they
think about is sex, they believe that they can appropriate Black women’s bodies.
When they yell, “Bet you know where there’s a good time tonight,” they expect
commodified sex with Black women as “animals” to be better than sex with
White women as “objects.” Both pornography and prostitution commodify sex-
uality and imply to the “white boys” that all African-American women can be
bought.
Prostitution under European and American capitalism thus exists within a
complex web of political and economic relationships. Gilman’s (1985) analysis
of the exhibition of Sarah Bartmann as the “Hottentot Venus” suggests another
intriguing connection between race, gender, and sexuality in nineteenth-century
Europe—the linking of the icon of the Black woman with the icon of the White
prostitute.While the Hottentot woman stood for the essence of Africans as a race,
the White prostitute symbolized the sexualized woman.The prostitute represented
the embodiment of sexuality and all that European society associated with it:
disease as well as passion. As Gilman points out, “It is this uncleanliness, this dis-
ease, which forms the final link between two images of women, the black and
the prostitute. Just as the genitalia of the Hottentot were perceived as parallel to
the diseased genitalia of the prostitute, so . . . the power of the idea of corruption
links both images” (1985, 237). These connections between the icons of Black
women and White prostitutes demonstrate the interdependence of race, gender,
and sexuality in shaping European understandings of social class.
In the American antebellum South both of these images were fused in the
forced prostitution of enslaved African women.The prostitution of Black women
allowed White women to be the opposite; Black “whores” make White “virgins”
possible. This race/gender nexus fostered a situation whereby White men could
then differentiate between the sexualized woman-as-body who is dominated and
“screwed” and the asexual woman-as-pure-spirit who is idealized and brought
home to mother (Hoch 1979, 70).The sexually denigrated woman, whether she
was made a victim through her rape or a pet through her seduction, could be
used as the yardstick against which the cult of true womanhood was measured.
Moreover, this entire situation was profitable.
The image of the lesbian can also be linked with that of the prostitute and
with images of Black women as the embodiment of the Black “race.” Christian
notes that Black women writers broadened the physical image of lesbians: “The
stereotypical body type of a black lesbian was that she looked mannish ;...s h e
was not so much a woman as much as she was a defective man, a description that
has sometimes been applied to any Negroid-looking or uppity-acting black
woman” (1985, 191). Note Christian’s analysis of the links among gender, race,
145THE SEXUAL POLITICS OF BLACK WOMANHOOD


--- PAGE 163 ---
and sexuality . Lesbianism, an allegedly deviant sexual practice, becomes linked to
biological markers of race and looking “mannish.”These links also reinforce con-
structions of Black women’s sexualities as deviant—the co-joining of Black het-
erosexual women’s sexual deviancy as lying in their excess sexual appetite with
the perceived deviancy of Black lesbians as lying in their rejection of what makes
women feminine, namely , heterosexual contact with men.
Rape and Sexual Violence
Force was important in creating African-American women’s centrality to
American images of the sexualized woman and in shaping their experiences with
both pornography and prostitution. Black women did not willingly submit to
their exhibition on Southern auction blocks—they were forced to do so. Enslaved
African women could not choose whether to work—they were beaten and often
killed if they refused. Black domestics who resisted the sexual advances of their
employers often found themselves looking for work where none was to be
found. Both the reality and the threat of violence have acted as a form of social
control for African-American women (Collins 1998d).
Rape has been one fundamental tool of sexual violence directed against
African-American women. Challenging the pervasiveness of Black women’s rape
and sexual extortion by White men has long formed a prominent theme in Black
women’s writings. Autobiographies such as Maya Angelou’s I Know Why the
Caged Bird Sings (1970) and Harriet Jacobs’s “The Perils of a Slave Woman’s Life”
(1860/1987) from Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl record examples of actual
and threatened sexual assault.The effects of rape on African-American women is
a prominent theme in Black women’s fiction. Gayl Jones’s Corregidora (1975) and
Rosa Guy’s A Measure of Time (1983) both explore interracial rape of Black
women. Toni Morrison’s The Bluest Eye (1970), Alice Walker’s The Color Purple
(1982), and Gloria Naylor’s The Women of Brewster Place(1980) all examine rape
within African-American families and communities. Elizabeth Clark-Lewis’s
(1985) study of domestic workers found that mothers, aunts, and community
othermothers warned young Black women about the threat of rape. One respon-
dent in Clark-Lewis’s study , an 87-year-old North Carolina Black domestic worker,
remembers, “nobody was sent out before you was told to be careful of the
white man or his sons” (Clark-Lewis 1985, 15).
Rape and other acts of overt violence that Black women have experienced,
such as physical assault during slavery , domestic abuse, incest, and sexual extor-
tion, accompany Black women’s subordination in intersecting oppressions. These
violent acts are the visible dimensions of a more generalized, routinized system of
oppression. Violence against Black women tends to be legitimated and therefore
condoned while the same acts visited on other groups may remain nonlegitimated
and non-excusable. Historically , this violence has garnered the backing and
146 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 164 ---
control of the state (James 1996). Specific acts of sexual violence visited on
African-American women reflect a broader process by which violence is socially
constructed in a race- and gender-specific manner.Thus Black women, Black men,
and White women experience distinctive forms of sexual violence.As Angela Davis
points out, “It would be a mistake to regard the institutionalized pattern of rape
during slavery as an expression of white men’s sexual urges ....R a p e  w a s  a
weapon of domination, a weapon of repression, whose covert goal was to extin-
guish slave women’s will to resist, and in the process, to demoralize their men”
(1981, 23).
Angela Davis’s work (1978, 1981, 1989) illustrates this effort to conceptu-
alize sexual violence against African-American women as a site of intersecting
oppressions. Davis suggests that depicting African-American men as sexually
charged beasts who desired White women created the myth of the Black rapist.
Lynching emerged as the specific form of sexual violence visited on Black men,
with the myth of the Black rapist as its ideological justification. The significance
of this myth is that it “has been methodically conjured up when recurrent
waves of violence and terror against the black community required a convinc-
ing explanation” (Davis 1978, 25). Black women experienced a parallel form of
race- and gender-specific sexual violence. Treating African-American women as
pornographic objects and portraying them as sexualized animals, as prostitutes,
created the controlling image of jezebel. Rape became the specific act of sexual
violence forced on Black women, with the myth of the Black prostitute as its ide-
ological justification.
Lynching and rape, two race/gender-specific forms of sexual violence,
merged with their ideological justifications of the rapist and prostitute in order to
provide an effective system of social control over African-Americans. Davis asserts
that the controlling image of Black men as rapists has always “strengthened its
inseparable companion: the image of the black woman as chronically promiscu-
ous. And with good reason, for once the notion is accepted that black men harbor
irresistible, animal-like sexual urges, the entire race is invested with bestiality”
(1978, 27). A race of “animals” can be treated as such—as victims or pets. “The
mythical rapist implies the mythical whore—and a race of rapists and whores
deserves punishment and nothing more” (Davis 1978, 28).
Black women continue to deal with this legacy of the sexual violence visited
on African-Americans generally and with our history as collective rape victims.
One effect lies in the treatment of rape victims. Such women are twice victim-
ized, first by the actual rape, in this case the collective rape under slavery . But they
are victimized again by family members, community residents, and social insti-
tutions such as criminal justice systems which somehow believe that rape victims
are responsible for their own victimization. Even though current statistics indi-
cate that Black women are more likely to be victimized than White women, Black
women are less likely to report their rapes, less likely to have their cases come to
147THE SEXUAL POLITICS OF BLACK WOMANHOOD


--- PAGE 165 ---
trial, less likely to have their trials result in convictions, and, most disturbing, less
likely to seek counseling and other support services.
Another effect of this legacy of sexual violence concerns the significance of
Black women’s continued silences concerning rape. But Black women’s silence
about rape obscures an important issue: Most Black women are raped by Black
men. While the historical legacy of the triad of pornography , prostitution, and
the institutionalized rape of Black women may have created the larger social 
context within which all African-Americans reside, the unfortunate current real-
ity is that many Black men have internalized the controlling images applied 
to Black women. Like Brother Marquis, they feel that if they as individuals do 
not rape women, they contribute little to the overall cultural climate that condones
sexual violence.These beliefs allow them to ignore Black women’s rape by other
Black men, their own culpability in fostering Black women’s objectification as
pornographic objects, and, in some cases, their own behavior as rapists. For
example, Black women and men often disagree as to whether Nola Darling,
the sexually liberated heroine in Spike Lee’s acclaimed film She’s Gotta Have It,
was raped. Men disbelieve Nola’s protestations and see her protest as serving to
heighten the sexual pleasure of her male partner. In contrast, many women see
her reaction as typical for those of a rape victim. Recognizing that it is useless to
protest, Nola Darling submits. Was Nola Darling raped? Do the sexual politcs of
Black womanhood that construct jezebels and “hoochies” have any grounding in
reality? The answers to both questions may lie in who has the power to define.
148 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 166 ---
In Toni Morrison’s Beloved (1987),
Sethe tells her friend Paul D how she felt after escaping from slavery:
It was a kind of selfishness I never knew nothing about before. It felt good.
Good and right. I was big, Paul D, and deep and wide and when I stretched
out my arms all my children could get in between. I was that wide. Look
like I loved em more after I got here. Or maybe I couldn’t love em proper
in Kentucky because they wasn’t mine to love. But when I got here, when
I jumped down off that wagon—there wasn’t nobody in the world I
couldn’t love if I wanted to.You know what I mean? (Morrison 1987, 162)
By distorting Sethe’s ability to love her children “proper,” slavery annexed
Sethe’s power as energy for its own ends. Her words touch a deep chord in Paul
D, for he too remembers how slavery felt. His unspoken response to Sethe
expresses the mechanisms used by systems of domination such as slavery in har-
nessing potential sources of power in a subordinated group:
So you protected yourself and loved small. Picked the tiniest stars out of
the sky to own; lay down with head twisted in order to see the loved one
over the rim of the trench before you slept. Stole shy glances at her
between the trees at chain-up. Grass blades, salamanders, spiders, wood-
peckers, beetles, a kingdom of ants. Anything bigger wouldn’t do. A
woman, a child, a brother—a big love like that would split you wide open
in Alfred, Georgia. He knew exactly what she meant: to get to a place
where you could love anything you chose—not to need permission for
desire—well, now, that was freedom. (Morrison 1987, 162)
Sethe and Paul D’s words suggest that in order to perpetuate itself, slavery cor-
rupts and distorts those sources of power within oppressed groups that provide
energy for change. To them, freedom from slavery meant not only the absence
of capricious masters and endless work but regaining the power to “love any-
7
BLACK 
WOMEN’S 
LOVE
RELATIONSHIPS 
7


--- PAGE 167 ---
thing you chose.” Both Sethe and Paul D understood how slavery inhibited their
ability to have “a big love,” whether for children, for friends, for each other, or
for principles such as justice. Both saw that systems of oppression often succeed
because they control the “permission for desire”—in other words, they harness
the power of deep feelings to the exigencies of domination.
This type of power that flows from “a big love” flies in the face of Western
epistemologies that often see emotions and rationality as different and compet-
ing concerns (Collins 1998a, 243–45). Described by Black feminist poet Audre
Lorde (1984) as the power of the erotic, deep feelings that arouse people to
action constitute an important source of power. In her groundbreaking essay ,
“Uses of the Erotic: The Erotic as Power,” Audre Lorde explores this fundamen-
tal link between deep feelings and power and provides a road map for an oppo-
sitional sexual politics:
There are many kinds of power, used and unused, acknowledged or oth-
erwise. The erotic is a resource within each of us that lies in a deeply
female and spiritual plane, firmly rooted in the power of our unexpressed
or unrecognized feeling. In order to perpetuate itself, every oppression
must corrupt or distort those various sources of power within the culture
of the oppressed that can provide energy for change. For women, this has
meant a suppression of the erotic as a considered source of power and
information in our lives. (Lorde 1984, 53)
For Lorde sexuality is a component of the erotic as a source of power in women.
Lorde’s notion is one of power as energy , as something people possess that must
be annexed in order for larger systems of oppression to function.
1
Lorde suggests that this erotic power resides in women, but men too can
experience these deep feelings. Divergent expressions of deep feelings  may lie
less in biologically based gender differences than in social structures that associ-
ate this type of passion with femininity and weakness. Sadly , within capitalist
marketplace relations, this erotic power is so often sexualized that not only is it
routinely misunderstood, but the strength of deeply felt love is even feared.
African-American women’s experiences with pornography , prostitution, and
rape demonstrate how erotic power becomes commodified and exploited by
social institutions. Equally important is how Black women hold fast to this source
of individual empowerment and use it in crafting fully human love relationships.
When people “protect themselves and love small” by seeing certain groups of
people as worthy of love and deeming others less deserving, potential sources of
power as energy that can flow from love relationships are attenuated. But when
people reject the world offered by  intersecting oppressions, the power as energy
that can flow from a range of love relationships becomes possible.
All love relationships potentially tap the energy associated with deep feel-
ings, but not all love relationships are the same. Such relationships can be
arranged on a continuum from caring yet asexual love relationships, to sexual-
150 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 168 ---
ized love relationships—those where deep feelings find sexual expression—to
those that reflect the “just sex” commodity relations of the capitalist marketplace.
This chapter examines selected Black women’s love relationships that tap
deep feelings, whether or not they find sexual expression. The deep love that
African-American women feel for our parents, children, and siblings constitute
spiritual, deeply felt love relationships that are not considered sexual. Conversely ,
love relationships that encompass sexual expression constitute sexualized love
relationships. Loving friendships of all sorts remain arrayed in between, with
some of the most contested relationships occurring when people do not know
where to draw the sexual line. In some cases, sexuality itself clouds the bound-
aries. For example, for many heterosexual Black men and Black women, domi-
nant constructions of Black male and Black female sexuality often limit the abil-
ity to form nonsexualized, loving friendships. In other cases, loving a forbidden
other becomes the source of contention. Love across the color line, where indi-
viduals of different “races” fall in love, or across social class categories muddy the
waters between asexual friendships and sexualized love relationships. In still
other cases, the fear lies in loving too deeply elements of oneself found in the
other. As Black lesbians point out, much homophobia expressed by heterosexual
African-American women stems from the fear that their love of Black women
might find sexual expression.
The intersecting oppressions that produce systems of domination such as
slavery aim to thwart the power as energy available to subordinate groups. The
sexual politics that constrains Black womanhood constitutes an effective system of
domination because it intrudes on people’s daily lives at the point of conscious-
ness. Exactly how do the sexual politics of Black womanhood influence Black
women’s interpersonal love relationships? More important, how might an
increased understanding of these relationships enable African-American women
to tap sources of power as energy and thus become more empowered?
Black Women, Black Men, and the 
Love and Trouble Tradition
In her groundbreaking essay , “On the Issue of Roles,” Toni Cade Bambara
remarks, “Now it doesn’t take any particular expertise to observe that one of the
most characteristic features of our community is the antagonism between our
men and our women” (Bambara 1970a, 106). Exploring the tensions between
African-American men and women has been a long-standing theme in U.S.
Black feminist thought. In an 1833 speech, Maria Stewart boldly challenged
what she saw as Black men’s lackluster response to racism: “Talk, without effort,
is nothing; you are abundantly capable, gentlemen, of making yourselves men
of distinction; and this gross neglect, on your part, causes my blood to boil
within me” (Richardson 1987, 58). Ma Rainey , Bessie Smith, and other classic
151BLACK WOMEN’S LOVE RELATIONSHIPS


--- PAGE 169 ---
Black women blues singers offer rich advice to Black women on how to deal
with unfaithful and unreliable men (Harrison 1978, 1988; Russell 1982; Davis
1998). More recently , Black women’s troubles with Black men have generated
anger and, from that anger, self-reflection: “We have been and are angry some-
times,” suggests Bonnie Daniels, “not for what men have done, but for what
we’ve allowed ourselves to become, again and again in my past, in my mother’s
past, in my centuries of womanhood passed over, for the ‘sake’ of men, whose
manhood we’ve helped undermine” (1979, 62).
Juxtaposed against this tradition of trouble is another long-standing
theme—namely , the great love Black women feel for Black men. African-
American slave narratives contain countless examples of newly emancipated
Black women who spent years trying to locate their lost children, spouses, fathers,
and other male loved ones (Gutman 1976). Black women writers express love
for their sons and fears about their futures (Angelou 1969; Golden 1995). Love
poems written to Black men permeate Black women’s poetry . Black women’s
music is similarly replete with songs about sexualized love. Whether the playful
voice of Alberta Hunter proclaiming that her “man is a handy man,” the mourn-
ful cries of Billie Holiday singing “My Man,” the sadness Nina Simone evokes in
“I Loves You Porgy” at being forced to leave her man, or the powerful voice of
Jennifer Holliday , who cries out, “You’re gonna love me,” Black vocalists 
identify Black women’s relationships with Black men as a source of strength, sup-
port, and sustenance (Harrison 1978, 1988; Russell 1982). As U.S. Black 
feminists point out, many Black women reject feminism because they see it as
being antifamily and against Black men.They do not want to give up men—they
want Black men to change. Black activist Fannie Lou Hamer succinctly captures
what a good love relationship between a Black woman and man can be: “You
know, I’m not hung up on this about liberating myself from the black man, I’m
not going to try that thing. I got a black husband, six feet three, two hundred and
forty pounds, with a 14 shoe, that I don’t want to be liberated from” (Lerner
1972, 612).
African-American women have long commented on this “love and trouble”
tradition in Black women’s relationships with Black men. Novelist Gayl Jones
explains: “The relationships between the men and the women I’m dealing with
are blues relationships. So they’re out of a tradition of ‘love and trouble.’. . . Blues
talks about the simultaneity of good and bad, as feeling, as something felt. . . .
Blues acknowledges all different kinds of feelings at once” (Harper 1979, 360).
Both the tensions between African-American women and men and the strong
attachment that we feel for one another represent  a rejection of binary thinking
and an acceptance of the both/and conceptual stance in Black feminist thought.
Understanding this love and trouble tradition requires assessing the influ-
ence of heterosexist, Eurocentric gender ideology—particularly ideas about men
and women advanced by the traditional family ideal—on African-American
women and men. Definitions of appropriate gender behavior for Black women,
152 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 170 ---
Black men, and members of other racial/ethnic groups not only affect social
institutions such as schools and labor markets, they also shape daily interactions.
Analyses claiming that African-Americans would be just like Whites if offered
comparable opportunities implicitly support prevailing sexual politics. Such
thinking offers hegemonic gender ideologies of White masculinity and White
femininity as models for African-Americans to emulate. Similarly , those pro-
claiming that Black men experience a more severe form of racial oppression than
Black women routinely counsel African-American women to subjugate our needs
to those of Black men (see, e.g., Staples 1979). However, advising Black women
to unquestioningly support sexual harassment, domestic violence, and other
forms of sexism done by U.S. Black men buttresses a form of sexual politics that
differently controls everyone. As Audre Lorde queries, “If society ascribes roles to
black men which they are not allowed to fulfill, is it black women who must
bend and alter our lives to compensate, or is it society that needs changing?”
(1984, 61). Bonnie Daniels provides an answer: “I’ve learned . . . that being less
than what I am capable of being to boost someone else’s ego does not help either
of us for real” (1979, 61).
Black women intellectuals directly challenge not only the derogation of
African-American women within prevailing sexual politics—for example, the
controlling images of mammy , the matriarch, the welfare mother, and the
jezebel—but often base this rejection on a more general critique of Eurocentric
heterosexism itself. Sojourner Truth’s 1851 query , “I could work as much and eat
as much as a man—when I could get it—and bear the lash as well! And ain’t I a
woman?” confronts the premises of the cult of true womanhood that “real”
women were fragile and ornamental. Toni Cade Bambara contends that
Eurocentric understandings of gender derived from White, middle-class experi-
ence are not only troublesome for African-Americans but damaging: “I have
always, I think, opposed the stereotypical definitions of ‘masculine’ and ‘femi-
nine,’. . . because I always found the either/or implicit in those definitions anti-
thetical to what I was all about—and what revolution for self is all about—the
whole person” (Bambara 1970a, 101).
As many U.S. Black feminist activists point out, the sexual politics of Black
womanhood limits the development of transformative social justice projects
within Black civil society . Black activist Frances Beale identifies the negative
effects that sexism within the Black community had on Black political activism
in the 1960s:
Unfortunately , there seems to be some confusion in the Movement today
as to who has been oppressing whom. Since the advent of Black power,
the Black male has exerted a more prominent leadership role in our strug-
gle for justice in this country . He sees the system for what it really is for
the most part, but where he rejects its values and mores on many issues,
when it comes to women, he seems to take his guidelines from the pages
of the Ladies’ Home Journal. (Beale 1970, 92)
153BLACK WOMEN’S LOVE RELATIONSHIPS


--- PAGE 171 ---
Mainstream social science also seems overly preoccupied with Black men’s
issues. Sociologist William Julius Wilson’s (1987; 1996) groundbreaking work
on joblessness and poverty among U.S. Blacks pays more attention to men’s
issues than women’s. From Black conservatism to Black nationalism, regardless
of Black political perspective, an implicit male bias persists. The inordinate
emphasis placed on providing more Black male role models for Black boys in
contemporary Black political theory and practice often occurs by neglecting the
needs of girls. This masculinist bias spurred two Black feminist thinkers to
observe: “The struggle is defined as one to reclaim and redefine Black manhood.
Ironically , this is also the point at which the politics and positions of some cul-
tural nationalists, liberals and right-wing conservatives seem to converge”
(Ransby and Matthews, 1993, 60).
While some African-American women criticize the sexual politics that
accompanies intersecting oppressions, even fewer have directly challenged Black
men who accept prevailing notions of both Black and White masculinity
(Wallace 1978). Until the watershed event of Anita Hill’s 1992 public testimony
against Clarence Thomas, the blues tradition provided the most consistent and
long-standing text of Black women who demand that Black men “change their
ways.” Both then and now, songs often encourage Black men to define new types
of relationships. In “Do Right Woman—Do Right Man,” when Aretha Franklin
(1967) sings that a woman is only human and is not a plaything but is flesh and
blood just like a man, she echoes Sojourner Truth’s claim that women and men
are equally human. Aretha sings about knowing that she’s living in a “man’s
world” but she encourages her man not to “prove” that he’s a man by using or
abusing her. As long as she and her man are together, she wants him to show
some “respect” for her. Her position is clear—if he wants a “do right, all night
woman,” he’s got to be a “do right, all night man.” Aretha challenges African-
American men to reject the prevailing sexual politics that posit “it’s a man’s
world” in order to be a “do right man.” By showing Black women respect and
being an “all night” man—one who is faithful, financially reliable, and sexually
expressive—Black men can have a relationship with a “do right woman.”
Within the corpus of their works, some Black women hip-hop artists echo
Aretha’s challenge. In her song “Unity ,” Queen Latifah asks for a man who knows
how to respect a woman. For those who need more details, Salt ‘n’ Pepa’s anthem
“Whatta Man” on Very Necessary (1993) identifies the qualities of a “mighty
good man.” Recognizing that “good men are hard to find,” the song aspires to
“give respect to the men who made a difference.” The list of qualities is clear.
A good man is one who makes a woman laugh, does not run around with other
women, has a good body , is a good lover, can hold a decent conversation,
and “spends time with his kids when he can.” He always has his woman’s “back”
when she needs him, and he’s “never disrespectful ’cause his momma taught
him that.”
Many Black men have not taken kindly to these requests. Black men’s
154 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 172 ---
response to the publications of Black women writers illustrate these reactions.
Apparently forgetting the norms of racial solidarity that they long expected Black
women to show for Black men’s achievements, many men resented the success
of Black women’s writers. Explaining this situation, Black literary critic Calvin
Hernton describes how this antagonistic posture stems from Black men’s accep-
tance of prevailing sexual politics:
Too often Black men have a philosophy of manhood that relegates women
to the back burner.Therefore it is perceived as an offense for black women
to struggle on their own, let alone achieve something independently .
Thus, no matter how original, beautiful, and formidable the works of
black women writers might be, black men become “offended” if such
works bear the slightest criticism of them, or if the women receive recog-
nition from other women, especially from the white literary establish-
ment. They do not behave as though something of value has been added
to the annals of black literature. Rather, they behave as though something
has been subtracted, not only from the literature, but from the entire race,
and specifically , from them. (Hernton 1985, 6)
Whereas some men merely grumble at no longer having their perceived needs
always come first, other men interpret Black women’s success as a direct attack
on them. If the sexual politics that foster these reactions remain unexamined, as
Lisa Jones succinctly states, the potential damage done to both Black women and
Black men is great: “Between rappers turning ‘ho’ into a national chant and [the
movie Waiting to] Exhale telling African Americans that our real problem is the
shortage of brothers who are both well hung and well paid, I’m getting to think
that all we can offer each other as black women and men is genitalia and the
paycheck” (Jones 1994, 267).
Avoiding being reduced to the “genitalia and the paycheck” requires devel-
oping a comprehensive analysis of how prevailing sexual politics influences Black
heterosexual love relationships. In developing this analysis, however, it is equally
important to keep in mind the analytical distinction between the interpersonal
domain of power where men and women as individuals interact, and how broader
overarching structures of power operate to encourage these individual outcomes.
For example, womanist thinker Geneva Smitherman maintains this distinction
when pressed to describe some Black men’s treatment of Black women. In
responding to claims that Black men are sexist, she contends, “This is not to
argue that Black men don’t display sexist attitudes. Of course. Such attitudes are
in the very fiber of American society; they have infected us all—including
women. However, the practice of patriarchy , the subordination of women—and
men—requires power, on a grand scale, and control over the nation’s institutions.
Sorry , but the Brothers ain’t there” (Smitherman 1996, 105). Black men may not
be in corporate boardrooms, and thus cannot be blamed for actions aimed at
protecting the privileges associated with White masculinity (Ferber 1998). But at
155BLACK WOMEN’S LOVE RELATIONSHIPS


--- PAGE 173 ---
the same time the “Brothers” most certainly are in Black women’s homes. They
can be held accountable, no matter how badly treated they may be under racial
oppression, for how they treat Black women, children, and each other.
The antagonism that many African-American women and men feel and
express toward one another reflects the contradictions characterizing Black mas-
culinity and Black femininity within prevailing U.S. sexual politics. Racialized
heterosexism objectifies both Black men and Black women.Thus, when African-
American men see Black women as little more than mammies, matriarchs, or
“hoochies,” or even if they insist on placing African-American women on the
same queenly pedestal reserved for White women, they objectify not only Black
women but themselves (Gardner 1980). Conversely , when Black women demand
of their partners, “Show me the money ,” they not only reduce Black men to a
measure of their financial worth, but reinscribe controlling images of themselves
as materialistic “bitches.” The challenge lies in disrupting Eurocentric scripts of
Black masculinity and Black femininity , not just to receive better treatment for
oneself, but to undermine and change prevailing sexual politics.
In her article “Sensuous Sapphires: A Study of the Social Construction of
Black Female Sexuality ,” Annecka Marshall (1994) explores how Black women
perceived the controlling images applied to them and how they negotiated those
images in shaping their sexual selves.The women in her study saw the limitations
of Eurocentric scripts of Black femininity concerning sexuality , and reported
diverse strategies in dealing with them. While some women reject all of the
stereotypes, they see no way of avoiding them. Some feel that they must choose
between being seen as asexual mothers or hypersexual whores. Others recognize
the power that being seen as “sensuous sapphires” has in how others see them,
and try to exempt themselves from the category . By claiming that it’s the other
Black women who are “sapphires,” not them, they may receive individual relief,
but they leave the images themselves intact. Marshall also reports a range of cop-
ing strategies where women aim to challenge the very foundations of the images
themselves.
Until recently , many heterosexual Black men have remained either unable to
challenge controlling images of Black masculinity or have been unwilling to try .
2
Sadly , believing in dominant notions of Black masculinity and Black femininity ,
they engage in controlling behaviors that often go unrecognized as such. U.S.
Black men encounter contradictory expectations concerning Black manhood. On
the one hand, Black men have been constructed as sexually violent rapists, as
brutes, and as irresponsible boys who fail to marry the mothers of their children
and financially support their children. Whereas Black men under slavery knew
that they were not these things, their powerlessness denied them the trappings of
manhood as defined by White propertied men. Emancipation brought with it
Black male outrage at the treatment of Black women under slavery . A good deal
of Black male energy went into protecting Black women from both economic
and sexual exploitation. Given this history , efforts by Black men to protect Black
156 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 174 ---
women become valued. Many Black women want protection. Sonsyrea Tate, who
was raised within the Nation of Islam, ultimately rejected the strict gender norms
that routinely elevated boys above girls. But Tate also describes how protected she
felt within the Nation: “While I was growing up, the Fruit of Islam, the security
unit of the Nation of Islam, had made me, a small black child, feel safer than I
felt at any other time in America” (Tate 1997, 4–5).
Barbara Omolade argues that “protecting black women was the most signif-
icant measure of black manhood and the central aspect of black male patriarchy”
(1994, 13). If Omolade is correct, then this important choice to protect Black
women, for many men, became harnessed to ideologies of Black masculinity in
such a way that Black manhood became dependent on Black women’s willing-
ness to accept protection. Within this version of masculinity , a slippery slope
emerges between protecting Black women and controlling them. This control is
often masked, all in defense of widespread beliefs that Black men must be in
charge in order to regain their lost manhood. As Paula Giddings points out, “It is
men, not women, who control the sociosexual and professional relationships in
the black community . Among other notions that must be dispensed with is the
weak male/strong female patriarchal paradigm that clouds so much of our think-
ing about ourselves” (Giddings 1992, 463).
This general climate fosters a situation where some Black women feel that
they must subordinate their needs to those of Black men in order to help Black
men regain and retain their manhood.Yet at the same time, Black women’s daily
struggles for survival encourage patterns of self-reliance and self-valuation that
benefit not just Black women, but men and children as well. As Barbara Omolade
points out, “A black woman could not be completely controlled and defined by
her own men, for she had already learned to manage and resist the advances of
white men” (1994, 16). Tensions characterizing Black women’s necessary self-
reliance joined with our bona fide need for protection, as well as those charac-
terizing Black men’s desire to protect Black women juxtaposed to their admira-
tion and resentment of Black women’s assertiveness and independence, result in
a complicated love and trouble tradition.
Failure to challenge an overall climate that not only defines Black masculin-
ity in terms of Black men’s ability to “own” and “control” their women, and
Black femininity in terms of Black women’s ability to help U.S. Black men feel
like men, can foster African-American women’s abuse. Black men who feel that
they cannot be men unless they are in charge can be highly threatened by
assertive Black women, especially those in their own households. In The Color
Purple, Alice Walker’s portrayal of Mister, a Black man who abuses his wife, Celie,
explores the coexistence of love and trouble in African-American communities
generally , and in Black men specifically:
At the root of the denial of easily observable and heavily documented sex-
ist brutality in the black community—the assertion that black men don’t
act like Mister, and if they do, they’re justified by the pressure they’re
157BLACK WOMEN’S LOVE RELATIONSHIPS


--- PAGE 175 ---
under as black men in a white society—is our deep, painful refusal to
accept the fact that we are not only descendants of slaves, but we are also
the descendants of slave owners. And that just as we have had to struggle
to rid ourselves of slavish behaviors we must as ruthlessly eradicate any
desire to be mistress or “master.” (1989, 80)
Those Black men who wish to become “master” by fulfilling traditional defini-
tions of masculinity—White, prosperous, and in charge—and who are blocked
from doing so can become dangerous to those closest to them (Asbury 1987).
Rethinking relationships such as these has garnered increasing attention in
Black feminist thought (E.White 1985). Refusing to reduce Black men’s abuse to
individualistic, psychological flaws, Black feminist analyses are characterized by
careful attention to how intersecting oppressions of race, gender, class, and sex-
uality provide the backdrop for Black heterosexual love relationships (White
1985). Angela Davis contends, “We cannot grasp the true nature of sexual assault
without situating it within its larger sociopolitical context” (1989, 37). Author
Gayl Jones concurs: “It’s important for me to clarify ...r e l ationships in situation,
rather than to have some theory of the way men are with women” (Harper 1979,
356). In Toni Morrison’s The Bluest Eye (1970), Pecola Breedlove is a study in
emotional abuse. Morrison portrays the internalized oppression that can affect a
child who experiences daily assaults on her sense of self. Pecola’s family is the
immediate source of her pain, but Morrison also exposes the role of the larger
community in condoning Pecola’s victimization. In her choreopoem For Colored
Girls Who Have Considered Suicide, Ntozake Shange (1975) creates the character
Beau Willie Brown, a man who abuses his lover, Crystal, and who kills their two
young children. Rather than blaming Beau Willie Brown as the source of Crystal’s
oppression, Shange considers how the situation of “no air”—in this case, the lack
of opportunities for both individuals—stifles the humanity of both Crystal and
Beau Willie Brown.
Investigating the problems caused by abusive Black men often exposes Black
women intellectuals to criticism. Alice Walker’s treatment of male violence in
works such as The Third Life of Grange Copeland (1970) and The Color Purple
(1982) attracted censure. Even though Ntozake Shange’s choreopoem is about
Black women, one criticism leveled at her work is its purportedly negative por-
trayal of Black men (Staples 1979). Particularly troubling to some critics is the
depiction of Beau Willie Brown. In an interview, Claudia Tate asked Ntozake
Shange, “Why did you have to tell about Beau Willie Brown?” In this question
Tate invokes the bond of family secrecy that often pervades dysfunctional fami-
lies because she wants to know why Shange violated the African-American com-
munity’s collective family “secret.” Shange’s answer is revealing: “I refuse to be a
part of this conspiracy of silence. I will not do it. So that’s why I wrote about Beau
Willie Brown. I’m tired of living lies” (Tate 1983, 158–59).
This “conspiracy of silence” about Black men’s physical and emotional abuse
of Black women parallels Black women’s silences about the politics of sexuality
158 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 176 ---
in general. Both silences stem from a larger system of legitimated, routinized vio-
lence targeted toward Black women and, via silence, both work to reinscribe
social hierarchies (Richie 1996; Collins 1998d). Because hegemonic ideologies
make everyday violence against Black women appear so routine, some women
perceive neither themselves nor those around them as victims. Sara Brooks’s hus-
band first assaulted her when she was pregnant, once threw her out of a window,
and often called her his “Goddam knock box.” Despite his excessive violence, she
considered his behavior routine: “If I tried to talk to him he’d hit me so hard with
his hands till I’d see stars. Slap me, and what he slap me for, I don’t know....M y
husband would slap me and then go off to his woman’s house.That’s the way life
was” (Simonsen 1986, 162). Ostensibly positive images of Black women make
some women more likely to accept domestic violence as routine (E. White
1985). Many African-American women have had to exhibit independence and
self-reliance to ensure their own survival and that of their loved ones. But this
image of the self-reliant Black woman can be troublesome for women in violent
relationships. When an abused woman like Sara Brooks believes that “strength
and independence are expected of her, she may be more reluctant to call atten-
tion to her situation, feeling that she should be able to handle it on her own; she
may deny the seriousness of her situation” (Asbury 1987, 101).
Abused women, particularly those bearing the invisible scars of emotional
abuse, are often silenced by the image of the “superstrong” Black woman  (Richie
1996). But according to Audre Lorde, sexual violence against Black women is “a
disease striking the heart of Black nationhood, and silence will not make it dis-
appear” (1984, 120).To Lorde, such violence is exacerbated by racism and pow-
erlessness such that “violence against Black women and children often becomes
a standard within our communities, one by which manliness can be measured.
But these woman-hating acts are rarely discussed as crimes against Black women”
(p. 120). By making visible the pain the survivors feel, Black feminist intellectu-
als like Alice Walker, Audre Lorde, and Ntozake Shange challenge the alleged
“rationality” of this particular system of control and rearticulate it as violence.
One of the best Black feminist analyses of domestic violence is found in Zora
Neale Hurston’s Their Eyes Were Watching God (1937). In the following passage
Hurston recounts how Tea Cake responded to a threat that another man would
win the affections of Janie:
Before the week was over he had whipped Janie. Not because her behav-
ior justified his jealousy , but it relieved that awful fear inside him. Being
able to whip her reassured him in possession. “Tea Cake, you sho is a lucky
man,” Sop-de-Bottom told him. “Uh person can see every place you hit
her. Ah bet she never raised her hand tuh hit yuh back, neither.Take some
uh dese ol’ rusty black women and dey would fight yuh all night long and
next day nobody couldn’t tell you ever hit ‘em....L a w d !  wouldn’t Ah love
tuh whip uh tender woman lak Janie! Ah bet she don’t even holler. She jus’
cries, eh Tea Cake?” (Hurston 1937, 121)
159BLACK WOMEN’S LOVE RELATIONSHIPS


--- PAGE 177 ---
Hurston’s work can be read as a Black feminist analysis of the sexualized vio-
lence that many Black women encounter in their deepest love relationships. Tea
Cake and Sop-de-Bottom see women as commodities, property that they can
whip to “reassure their possession.” Janie is not a person; she is objectified as
something owned by Tea Cake. Even if a man loves a woman, as is clearly the
case of Tea Cake and Janie, the threat of competition from another male is
enough to develop an “awful fear” that Janie will choose another man and thus
deem him less manly than his competitors. Whipping Janie reassured Tea Cake
that she was his. The conversation between the two men is also revealing. Images
of color and beauty pervade their conversation. Sop-de-Bottom is envious
because he can “see every place” that Tea Cake hit her and that she was passive
and did not resist like the rest of the “rusty black women.”Tea Cake and Sop-de-
Bottom have accepted Eurocentric gender ideology concerning masculinity and
femininity and have used force to maintain it. Furthermore, Janie’s transgres-
sion was the potential to become unfaithful, the possibility to be sexually
promiscuous, to become a whore. Finally , the violence occurs in an intimate
relationship where love is present. This incident shows the process by which
power as domination—in this case gender oppression structured through
Eurocentric gender ideology and class oppression reflected in the objectifica-
tion and commodification of Janie—has managed to annex the basic power of
the erotic in Janie and Tea Cake’s relationship. Tea Cake does not want to beat
Janie, but he does because he feels, not thinks, he must.
3 Their relationship rep-
resents the linking of sexuality and power, the potential for domination with-
in sexualized love relationships, and the potential for using the erotic, their love
for each other, as a catalyst for change.
Black Women Alone
Many Black women want loving sexual relationships with Black men, but
instead end up alone. Black men may be the closest to Black women, and thus
receive the lion’s share of the blame for all the daily ways that Black women are
caused to feel less worthy , yet this societal judgment and rejection of Black
women permeates the entire culture. As Karla Holloway points out, “the tragic
loneliness black women consistently face as we stand before judgmental oth-
ers—sometimes white, but sometimes black; sometimes male, but sometimes
female—demands that we have some wisdom, experience, and some passion
with which to combat this abuse” (1995, 38). For African-American women,
rejection by Whites is one thing—rejection by Black men is entirely another. In
coping with the loneliness of not finding Black male partners, “wisdom, expe-
rience, and some passion” become important weapons.
This aloneness, the sense that one is at the bottom of the scale of desirability ,
fosters divergent reactions among African-American women. Many continue to
160 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 178 ---
express hope that one day they will be married to a good Black man and go on
with their lives. Some pour their energies into Black motherhood, a respected
and important part of Black civil society . Black single mothers are not as looked
down upon in Black civil society , because most African-American women know
that Black men are hard to find. The intensity of their ties with their children
meshes with long-standing belief systems that value motherhood. However,
despite the importance of this choice, for many , it can substitute for the lack of
steady , sexualized love relationships in their lives.The character of Gloria in Terry
McMillan’s Waiting to Exhale (1992) typifies this choice of giving up hope that
one will ever be lovable enough to find Salt ‘n’ Pepa’s (1993) “mighty good
man.” Gloria pours all of her energies into raising her son. She cooks for him,
gains weight, and never dates for fear of compromising the respectability she has
carved out within the stigma attached to unmarried Black mothers. Yet Gloria
confronts a crisis when her son becomes sexually active and is old enough to
leave home. He is becoming a man and can no longer be “her man.” MacMillan
provides a storybook resolution to Gloria’s situation. A widower moves in across
the street, becomes captivated with Gloria, and helps her learn to love herself as
a sexual being. Real life is rarely this forgiving.
Dealing with the reality that Black men reject them leads other Black women
to become devoted to careers. Eventually , these women become the middle-class,
respectable, often childless Black ladies that Wahneema Lubiano (1992) argues
Anita Hill symbolizes. Despite the often remarkable achievement of middle-class
Black women, the pain many experience on the way to middle-class respectability ,
while masked by achievement, is no less real. Gloria Wade-Gayles describes the
anger and frustration of the Black women college students in her classes when
they realize the breadth of rejection. Many of her students spend all four years of
their college lives without a single romantic relationship, Wade-Gayles observes.
Conversations about this loneliness reveal the anger, sadness, and sorrow that
many young Black women feel when living through rejection of this magnitude.
In a nutshell, Black men pick non-Black women over them, and for many , it
hurts. Wade-Gayles reaches back into her own experiences to try to understand
this situation: “The pain we experience as black teenagers follows many of us
into adulthood, and, if we are professional black women, it follows with a
vengeance. As a colleague in an eastern school explained our situation, ‘Black
men don’t want us as mates because we are independent; white men, because we
are black’” (Wade-Gayles 1996, 106) 
In this context, heterosexual Black women become competitors, most search-
ing for the elusive Black male, with many resenting the White women who naively
claim them.These efforts to grapple with societal rejection that emerge from these
sexual politics cut across age and class.As Wade-Gayles points out, “Teenagers know
about athletes and entertainers; we know about politicians and scholars. Teenagers
see faces; we see symbols that, in our opinion, spin the image of white women to
the rhythm of symphonic chords” (Wade-Gayles 1996, 106–107).
161BLACK WOMEN’S LOVE RELATIONSHIPS


--- PAGE 179 ---
In this context of what is perceived as widespread rejection by Black men,
often in favor of White women, African-American women’s relationships with
Whites take on a certain intensity . On the one hand, antagonism can characterize
relationships between Black and White women, especially those who appear
blissfully unaware of the sexual politics that privileges White skin. Despite claims
of shared sisterhood, heterosexual women remain competitors in a competition
that many White women do not even know they have entered. “White men use
different forms of enforcing oppression of white women and of women of
Color,” argues Chicana scholar Aida Hurtado. “As a consequence, these groups of
women have different political responses and skills, and at times these differences
cause the two groups to clash” (1989, 843). On the other hand, given the cul-
pability of White men in creating and maintaining these sexual politics, Black
women remain reluctant to love White men. Constrained by social norms that
deem us unworthy of White men and norms of Black civil society that identify
Black women who cross the color line as traitors to the race, many Black women
remain alone.
This speaks to the double standard within Black civil society concerning
interracial, heterosexual love relationships. For Black women the historical rela-
tionship with White men has been one of legal but not sexual rejection:
Propertied White men have exploited, objectified, and refused to marry  African-
American women and have held out trappings of power to their poorer brothers
who endorse this ideology . The relationships between Black women and White
men have long been constrained by the legacy of Black women’s sexual abuse by
White men and the unresolved tensions this creates. Traditionally , freedom for
Black women has meant freedom from White men, not the freedom to choose
White men as lovers and friends. Black women who have willingly chosen White
male friends and lovers have been severely chastised in African-American com-
munities for selling out the “race.” Or they are accused of being like prostitutes,
demeaning themselves by willingly using White men for their own financial or
social gain.
Given the history of sexual abuse of Black women by White men, individual
Black women who choose White partners become reminders of a difficult history
for Black women as a collectivity . Such individual liaisons aggravate a collective
sore spot because they recall historical master/slave relationships. Any sexual
encounters between two parties where one has so much control over the other
could never be fully consensual, even if the slave appeared to agree. Structural
power differences of this magnitude limit the subordinate’s power to give free
consent or refusal. Controlling images such as jezebel are created to mask just this
power differential and provide the illusion of consent. At the same time, even
under slavery , to characterize interracial sex purely in terms of the victimization
of Black women would be a distortion, because such depictions strip Black
women of agency . Many Black women successfully resisted sexual assault while
others cut bargains with their masters. More difficult to deal with, however, is the
162 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 180 ---
fact that even within these power differentials, genuine affection characterized
some sexual relationships between Black women and White men (d’Emilio and
Freedman 1988, 100–104).
This history of sexual abuse contributes to a contemporary double standard
where Black women who date and marry White men are often accused of losing
their Black identity . Within this context, Black women who do engage in rela-
tionships with White men encounter Black community norms that question their
commitment to Blackness. A 20-year-old student participant in Annecka
Marshall’s (1994) study of how British Black women construct sexuality
describes her own experiences with “mixed race” relationships as positive. But
she also recognizes the double standard that is often applied to crossing the color
line: “It’s more acceptable in the Black community for Black men to go out with
white women than for Black women to go out with white men. It’s all about con-
trol and power. A Black man is seen as the one who controls the relationship and
so his ‘race’ isn’t being downtrodden and trampled. But if a Black women does
the same thing she is being submissive” (p. 119).
Relationships among U.S. Black women and U.S. White women demonstrate
a similar complexity . Because White men have not married Black women, in large
part due to laws against miscegenation designed to render the children of unions
between White men and Black women propertyless (d’Emilio and Freedman
1988, 106), few delusions of enjoying the privileges attached to White male
power have existed among Black women. In contrast, White women have been
offered a share of White male power, but at the cost of participating in their own
subordination. “Sometimes I really feel more sorrier for the white woman than
I feel for ourselves because she been caught up in this thing, caught up feeling
very special,” observes Fannie Lou Hamer (Lerner 1972, 610).Thus even though
“white women, as a group, are subordinated through seduction, women of
Color, as a group, through rejection” (Hurtado 1989, 844), many White women
appear unwilling to relinquish the benefits they accrue. This is the view of Tina,
a Black woman in Minneapolis, whose White coworker routinely shared the
details of her many sexual liaisons with Black men. Unconvinced that her
coworker could be so ignorant of Black women’s issues in finding men to date
and marry , Tina rejected the view that White women are “racial innocents.” She
asked, “What stake would she have in dismantling a pecking order of femininity
that puts her at the top?” (Jones 1994, 255).
This historical legacy of rejection and seduction frames relationships
between Black and White women. Black women often express anger and bitter-
ness against White women for their history of excusing the transgressions of
their sons, husbands, and fathers. In her diary a slaveholder described White
women’s widespread predilection to ignore White men’s actions:
Under slavery , we live surrounded by prostitutes .... Who thinks any
worse of a negro or mulatto woman for being a thing we can’t name? God
forgive us, but ours is a monstrous system. . . . Like the patriarchs of old,
163BLACK WOMEN’S LOVE RELATIONSHIPS


--- PAGE 181 ---
our men live all in one house with their wives and their concubines; and
the mulattoes one sees in every family partly resemble the white children.
Any lady is ready to tell you who is the father of all the mulatto children
in everybody’s household but her own. Those, she seems to think drop
from the clouds. (Lerner 1972, 51)
If White women under slavery could ignore transgressions of this magnitude,
contemporary White women can more easily do the same.
For many African-American women, far too few White women are willing
to acknowledge—let alone challenge—the actions of White men because they
have benefited from them. Fannie Lou Hamer analyzes White women’s culpabil-
ity in Black women’s subordination: “You’ve been caught up in this thing
because, you know, you worked my grandmother, and after that you worked my
mother, and then finally you got hold of me. And you really thought ...y o u
thought that you was more because you was a woman, and especially a white
woman, you had this kind of angel feeling that you were untouchable” (Lerner
1972, 610). White women’s inability to acknowledge how racism privileges
them reflects the relationship that they have to White male power. “I think whites
are carefully taught not to recognize white privilege,” argues feminist scholar
Peggy McIntosh, “just as males are taught not to recognize male privilege”
(1988, 1). McIntosh describes her own struggles with learning to see how she
had been privileged: “I have come to see white privilege as an invisible package
of unearned assets which I can count on cashing in each day , but about which I
was ‘meant’ to remain oblivious” (p. 1).
One manifestation of White women’s privilege is the seeming naiveté many
heterosexual White women have concerning how Black women perceive White
women’s sexualized love relationships with Black men. In Dessa Rose, Nathan,
a Black slave, and Rufel, a White woman on whose land they both live, have 
sexual relations. Even though Dessa, a Black woman, is not romantically attracted
to Nathan, she deeply resents his behavior:
White folks had taken everything in the world from me except my baby
and my life and they had tried to take them. And to see him, who had
helped to save me, had friended with me through so much of it, laying
up, wallowing in what had hurt me so—I didn’t feel that nothing I could
say would tell him what that pain was like. And I didn’t feel like it was on
me to splain why he shouldn’t be messing with no white woman; I
thought it was on him to say why he was doing it. (Williams 1986, 186)
Like many African-American women, Dessa sees Black male admiration for
White women as a rejection of her. She asks, “Had he really wanted me to be
like Mistress, I wondered, like Miz Ruint, that doughy skin and slippery hair?
Was that what they wanted?” (Williams 1986, 199).
The numbers of U.S. Black men who “want” White women has risen since
the 1960s, in the context of two developments. For one, the elimination of de
164 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 182 ---
jure (but not de facto) racial segregation has brought Blacks and Whites in close
contact in schools and job sites, often as equals. In particular, the laws against
miscegenation that forbade interracial marriage passed by Southern states during
the 1860s were abolished. When it comes to Black men and White women, legal-
ly at least, the Driving Miss Daisy days are done. At the same time, changes in sex-
ual attitudes challenged long-standing arrangements where, according to Paula
Giddings, “sex was the principle around which wholesale segregation and dis-
crimination was organized with the ultimate objective of preventing intermar-
riage. The sexual revolution . . . separated sexuality from reproduction, and so
diluted the ideas about purity—moral, racial, and physical” (Giddings 1995,
424). These changing social conditions allowed Black male desire for White
women as well as White female desire for Black men to be expressed without the
censure afforded Nathan and Rufel’s relationship.
The birth of biracial or mixed-race children speaks to the reality of these
sexualized love relationships between Black men and White women. Historically ,
mixed-race children were accepted into a segregated Black civil society because
everyone knew that such children should not be held accountable for the cir-
cumstances of their conception and birth. More often though, biracial and
mixed-race children were the offspring of Black mothers and, as such, partici-
pated in Black civil society much as their mothers did. Currently , however, the
birth of biracial and mixed-race children to so many White mothers raises new
questions for African-American women. Even in the face of rejection by Black
men that leaves so many without partners, ironically , Black women remain called
upon to accept and love the mixed-race children born to their brothers, friends,
and relatives. By being the Black mothers that these children do not have, these
women are expected to help raise biracial children who at the same time often
represent tangible reminders of their own rejection.
Currently , much more is known about how White women negotiate these
new relationships with their biracial children than we do about either Black
men’s participation in being a parent to these children or the Black women who
are so often called upon to help White mothers raise them. What does appear in
accounts of children are reports of how important their Black relatives can be in
helping them understand and cope with racism (see, e.g., Jones 1994).
Biracial Black women who recognize these contradictions struggle with this
situation. On the one hand, the biracial girlchild’s White mother positions her
closer to Whiteness, and this physical beauty often makes her more attractive to
many Black men. But on the other, she joins the ranks of Black women and thus
inherits the history of rejection. In her essay titled “Mamas White,” Lisa Jones
describes her reactions to seeing White female and Black male couples and thus
taps some of the complexities that accompany these new relationships: “Clearly
I was saying that these duos tangle up my emotions; I look at them as a child of
an interracial marriage, but also as a black woman who has witnessed the mar-
ket value put on white femininity” (Jones 1994, 30). Rejecting yet another form
165BLACK WOMEN’S LOVE RELATIONSHIPS


--- PAGE 183 ---
of seduction, the seeming benefits of a mixed-race identity as a haven within a
society that derogates Blackness, Jones recognizes the difficulties if not impossi-
bility of stepping outside racial categories by pretending that they simply don’t
apply . Putting brackets around the term “Black woman” and pointing out its
socially constructed nature does not erase the fact of living as a Black woman and
all that entails. By simultaneously problematizing and accepting these relation-
ships, Jones points the way toward a new analysis.
No matter how much in love Black men and White women may be, such
couples will continue to attract Black women’s attention. Gloria Wade-Gayles
describes the power that the reality of these couples has for many African-
American women:
We see them, and we feel abandoned.We feel abandoned because we have
been abandoned in so many ways, by so many people, and for so many
centuries.We are the group of women furthest removed from the concept
of beauty and femininity which invades every spot on the planet, and, as
a result, we are taught not to like ourselves, or, as my student said, not to
believe that we can ever do enough or be enough to be loved and desired.
The truth is we experience a pain unique to us as a group when black men
marry white women and even when they don’t. It is a pain our mothers
knew and their mothers before them. A pain passed on from generation
to generation because the circumstances that create the pain have
remained unchanged (Wade-Gayles 1996, 110).
Moving through this pain requires more than blaming White women for
allegedly taking Black men, or Black men for rejecting us. It demands changing
the “circumstances that create the pain.”
Black Women and Erotic Autonomy
Changing the circumstances that create the pain requires developing an analysis
of Black women’s deep love relationships of all sorts. As Evelynn Hammonds
points out, “mirroring as a way of negating a legacy of silence needs to be
explored in much greater depth than it has been to date by black feminist the-
orists” (1997, 179). Karla Holloway suggests that one important first step occurs
at an “essential moment when black women must acknowledge the powerful
impact of our physical appearance. How we look is a factor in what happens to
us” (1995, 36). Holloway argues that via constructions of Black women’s sexu-
ality , systems of oppression hold up distorted mirrors of a “public image”
through which Black women learn to view ourselves. Holloway counsels Black
women to disable “mirrored reflection of a prejudicial gaze” via a “reflexive, self-
mediated vision of our bodies” (45). When Black women learn to hold up new
“mirrors” to one another that enable us to see and love one another for who we
really are, new possibilities for empowerment via deep love can emerge.
166 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 184 ---
Theoretically , this sounds good, but practically , Black women learning to 
provide mirrors for one another that enable us to love one another comes face to 
face with the possible eroticization of such love. When it comes to issues of sex-
uality , mirroring reveals how the sharing required to support and love one another
can find erotic expression. If sexuality constitutes a dimension of expressed love,
then, for many Black women, loving Black women means loving them sexually .
This recognition that loving oneself and loving Black women may find erotic or
sexual expression can be threatening. The stigmatization of lesbian relationships
seems designed to contain this threat.
In this sense, Black lesbian relationships are not only threatening to inter-
secting systems of oppression, they can be highly threatening to heterosexual
African-American women’s already assaulted sense of self. Certainly the homo-
phobia expressed by many Black heterosexual women is influenced, in part, by
accepting societal beliefs about lesbians. For Black women who have already been
labeled the Other by virtue of race and gender, the threat of being labeled a les-
bian can have a chilling effect on Black women’s ideas and on our relationships
with one another. In speculating about why so many competent Black women
writers and reviewers have avoided examining lesbianism, Ann Allen Shockley
suggests that “the fear of being labeled a Lesbian, whether they were one or not”
(1983, 84), has been a major deterrent.
The issues, however, may go much deeper. “I think the reason that Black
women are so homophobic,” suggests Barbara Smith, “is that attraction-repul-
sion thing.They have to speak out vociferously against lesbianism because if they
don’t they may have to deal with their own deep feelings for women” (Smith and
Smith 1981, 124). Shockley agrees: “Most black women feared and abhorred
Lesbians more than rape—perhaps because of the fear bred from their deep
inward potentiality for Lesbianism” (1974, 31–32). In the same sense that men
who accept Eurocentric notions of masculinity fear and deny the dimensions of
themselves that they associate with femininity—for example, interpreting male
expressiveness as being weak and unmanly (Hoch 1979)—avowedly hetero-
sexual Black women may suppress their own strong feelings for other Black
women for fear of being stigmatized as lesbians. Similarly , in the way that male
domination of women embodies men’s fears about their own masculinity ,
Black heterosexual women’s treatment of Black lesbians reflects fears that all
African-American women are essentially the same. Yet, as Audre Lorde points
out, “in the same way that the existence of the self-defined Black woman is no
threat to the self-defined Black man, the Black lesbian is an emotional threat only
to those Black women whose feelings of kinship and love for other Black women
are problematic in some way” (1984, 49).
Black lesbian relationships pose little threat to “self-defined” Black men and
women secure in their sexualities. But loving relationships among Black women
do pose a tremendous threat to systems of intersecting oppressions. How dare
these women love one another in a context that deems Black women as a collec-
167BLACK WOMEN’S LOVE RELATIONSHIPS


--- PAGE 185 ---
tivity so unlovable and devalued? The treatment of Black lesbians reveals how the
sexual expression of all Black women becomes regulated within intersecting sys-
tems of oppression. As a specific site of intersectionality , Black lesbian relation-
ships constitute relationships among the ultimate Other. Black lesbians are not
White, male, or heterosexual and generally are not affluent. As such they repre-
sent the antithesis of Audre Lorde’s “mythical norm” and become the standard by
which other groups measure their own so-called normality and self-worth.
Sexual politics functions smoothly only if sexual nonconformity is kept invisible
or is punished if it becomes visible. “By being sexually independent of men, les-
bians, by their very existence, call into question society’s definition of woman at
its deepest level,” observes Barbara Christian (1985, 199). Visible Black lesbians
challenge the mythical norm that the best people are White, male, rich, and het-
erosexual. In doing so lesbians generate anxiety , discomfort, and a challenge to
the dominant group’s control of power and sexuality on the interpersonal level
(Vance 1984).
For African-American women, taking seriously the idea of generating loving
“mirrors” for one another requires taking on all of the “isms” that keep Black
women down, including heterosexism. It means moving beyond the stigmatiza-
tion of Black heterosexual women as jezebels—the sexual deviants inside an
assumed heterosexuality—and of Black lesbians, whose homosexuality labels
them sexual deviants outside heterosexuality . In crafting such an argument,
Evelynn Hammonds is one of many who argues for a “different level of engage-
ment between black heterosexual and black lesbian women as the basis for the
development of a black feminist praxis that articulates the ways in which invisi-
bility , otherness, and stigma are produced and re-produced on black women’s
bodies” (Hammonds 1997, 181–82). Examining these connections in order to
explore what M. Jacqui Alexander (1997) describes as erotic autonomy may pro-
vide space to think and do something new.
Alexander suggests that women’s sexual agency or erotic autonomy has been
threatening to a series of social institutions. In particular, the prostitute and the
lesbian have historically functioned as the major symbols of threat. Both sets of
women reject the heterosexual nuclear family upon which so many social insti-
tutions rely for meaning. As a result, “the categories lesbian and prostitute now
function together . . . as outlaw, operating outside the boundaries of law and,
therefore, poised to be disciplined and punished within it” (Alexander 1997,
65). Alexander examines how this erotic autonomy becomes suppressed within
the Bahamian state. Yet her arguments contain important insights for U.S. Black
women where the need exists to develop an erotic autonomy that does three
things.
First, it must help U.S. Black women reject the dual stigma applied to Black
heterosexual women as “hoochies” and to Black lesbians as sexual deviants.
Recognizing how heterosexual and lesbian sexualities are both stigmatized with-
in an overarching heterosexism and how this dual stigmatization has long been
168 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 186 ---
important in shoring up intersecting oppressions should help identify practices
within Black civil society that are harmful to Black women as a collectivity .
Evelynn Hammonds suggests that within the historical legacy of silences con-
cerning Black women’s sexuality , certain expressions of Black female sexuality
will be rendered as dangerous, for individuals and for the group. Within this
logic, a culture of dissemblance that counsels a self-imposed silence concerning
Black women’s sexuality makes it acceptable for some heterosexual Black women
to cast both openly sensual heterosexual Black women and Black lesbians as 
“traitors” to the race.This censure operates in much the same way as Anita Hill’s
testimony against Clarence Thomas did.The continuation of a culture of dissem-
blance explains why Black heterosexual women who take control of their sexu-
ality in public are often censured. When they sing of Black women’s sensuality
and erotic desires in public, the Black blues women of the 1920s and hip-hop
group Salt ‘N’ Pepa’s music both become cast as inappropriate public expressions
of Black female sexuality . This culture of dissemblance might also explain why
Black lesbians, “whose ‘deviant’ sexuality is framed within an already existing
deviant sexuality—have been wary of embracing the status of ‘traitor,’ and the
potential loss of community such an embrace engenders” (Hammonds 1997,
181).
A second component of moving toward erotic autonomy involves redefining
beauty in ways that include Black women. New understandings of beauty would
necessarily alter the types of mirrors held up to Black women to judge Black
women’s beauty . Redefining beauty requires learning to see African-American
women who have Black African features as being capable of beauty . Proclaiming
Black women “beautiful” and White women “ugly” merely replaces one set of
controlling images with another and fails to challenge Eurocentric masculinist
aesthetics. This is simply binary thinking in reverse: In order for one individual
to be judged beautiful, another individual—the Other—must be deemed ugly .
Dessa Rose’s view of Miz Ruint as having “doughy skin and slippery hair” illus-
trates one Black woman’s attempt to protect herself from a derogated Blackness
by reversing the categories of beauty . Creating an alternative Black feminist aes-
thetic involves, instead, rejecting binary thinking altogether.
In this endeavor, African-American women can draw on African-derived aes-
thetics (Gayle 1971; Walton 1971) that potentially free women from standards
of ornamental beauty .
4 Though such aesthetics are present in music (Sidran
1971; Cone 1972), dance (Asante 1990), and language (Smitherman 1977;
Kochman 1981), quilt making offers a suggestive model for a Black feminist aes-
thetic that might move Black women and others toward erotic autonomy .
African-American women quilt makers do not seem interested in a uniform
color scheme but use several methods of playing with colors to create unpre-
dictability and movement (Wahlman and Scully 1983 in Brown 1989, 922). For
example, a strong color may be juxtaposed with another strong color, or with a
weak one. Contrast is used to structure or organize. Overall, the symmetry in
169BLACK WOMEN’S LOVE RELATIONSHIPS


--- PAGE 187 ---
African-American quilts does not come from uniformity as it does in Euro-
American quilts. Rather, symmetry comes through diversity . Nikki Giovanni
points out that quilts are traditionally formed from scraps. “Quilters teach there
is no such thing as waste,” she observes, “only that for which we currently see
no purpose” (1988, 89).
This dual emphasis on beauty occurring via individual uniqueness juxta-
posed in a community setting and on the importance of creating functional
beauty from the scraps of everyday life offers a powerful alternative to
Eurocentric aesthetics. African-derived notions of diversity in community and
functional beauty potentially heal many of the binaries that underlie Western
social thought. From African-influenced perspectives, women’s beauty is not
based solely on physical criteria because mind, spirit, and body are not concep-
tualized as separate, oppositional spheres. Instead, all are central in aesthetic
assessments of individuals and their creations. Beauty is functional in that it has
no meaning independent of the group. Deviating from the group “norm” is not
rewarded as “beauty .” Instead, participating in the group and being a function-
ing individual who strives for harmony is key to assessing an individual’s beauty
(Asante 1987). Moreover, participation is not based on conformity but instead is
seen as individual uniqueness that enhances the overall “beauty” of the group.
With such criteria, no individual is inherently beautiful because beauty is not a
state of being. Instead beauty is a state of becoming. Just as all African-American
women as well as all humans become capable of beauty , all can move toward
erotic autonomy .
A final component of developing African-American women’s erotic autono-
my requires finding ways to stress that African-American women learn to see
expressing love for one another as fundamental to resisting oppression. This
component politicizes love and reclaims it from the individualized and trivialized
place that it now occupies. Self-defined and publicly expressed Black women’s
love relationships, whether such relationships find sexual expression or not, con-
stitute resistance. If members of the group on the bottom love one another and
affirm one another’s worth, then the entire system that assigns that group to the
bottom becomes suspect.
Many Black women understand the power that maternal love has had in
empowering them as individuals. Yet this power of deep love remains circum-
scribed in biological motherhood, biological sisterhood, sorority ties, and 
other similar socially approved relationships. As the next two chapters 
explore, this legitimated maternal love has spurred many Black women into 
more activist arenas and can be seen as an important dimension of U.S. Black
feminism. Broadening the spectrum of Black women’s loving relationships 
with one another, including those that find sexual expression, may move Black
womanhood closer to reclaiming the power of deep love.
170 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 188 ---
Love and Empowerment
“In order to perpetuate itself, every oppression must corrupt or distort those
various sources of power within the culture of the oppressed that can provide
energy for change” (Lorde 1984, 53). The ability of social practices such as
pornography , prostitution, and rape to distort the private domain of Black
women’s love relationships with Black men, with Whites, and with one anoth-
er typifies this process.The parallels between distortions of deep human feelings
in racial oppression and of the distortions of the erotic in sexual oppression are
striking. Analysts of the interpersonal dynamics of racism point out that Whites
fear in Blacks those qualities they project onto Blacks that they most fear in
themselves. By labeling Blacks as sexually animalistic and by dominating Blacks,
Whites aim to repress these dimensions of their own inner being. When men
dominate women and accuse them of being sexually passive, the act of domi-
nation, from pressured sexual intercourse to rape, reduces male anxiety about
male impotence, the ultimate sexual passivity (Hoch 1979). Similarly , the sup-
pression of gays and lesbians symbolizes the repression of strong feelings for
members of one’s own gender, feelings U.S. culture has sexualized and stigma-
tized within heterosexism.All of these emotions—the fact that Whites know that
Blacks are human, the fact that men love women, and the fact that women have
deep feelings for one another—must be distorted on the emotional level of the
erotic in order for oppressive systems to endure. Sexuality in the individual,
interpersonal domain of power becomes annexed by intersecting oppressions in
the structural domain of power in order to ensure the smooth operation of
domination.
Recognizing that corrupting and distorting basic feelings human beings have
for one another lies at the heart of multiple systems of oppression opens up new
possibilities for transformation and change. June Jordan (1981) explores this
connection between embracing feeling and human empowerment: “As I think
about anyone or any thing—whether history or literature or my father or polit-
ical organizations or a poem or a film—as I seek to evaluate the potentiality , the
life-supportive commitment/possibilities of anyone or any thing, the decisive
question is, always, where is the love? ” (p. 141).
Jordan’s question touches a deep nerve in African-American social and ethi-
cal thought. In her work Black Womanist Ethics,Katie G. Cannon (1988) suggests
that love, community , and justice are deeply intertwined in African-American
ethics. Cannon examines the work of two prominent Black male theorists—
Howard Thurman and Martin Luther King, Jr.—and concludes that their ideas
represent core values from which Black women draw strength. According to
Thurman, love is the basis of community , and community is the arena for moral
agency . Only love of self, love between individuals, and love of God can shape,
empower, and sustain social change. Martin Luther King, Jr., gives greater signif-
icance in his ethics to the relationship of love and justice, suggesting that love is
171BLACK WOMEN’S LOVE RELATIONSHIPS


--- PAGE 189 ---
active, dynamic, and determined and generates the motive and drive for justice.
For both Thurman and King, everything moves toward community and the
expression of love within the context of community . It is this version of love and
community , argues Cannon, that stimulates a distinctive Black womanist ethics.
For June Jordan love begins with self-love and self-respect, actions that pro-
pel African-American women toward the self-determination and political
activism essential for social justice. By grappling with this simple yet profound
question, “Where is the love?” Black women resist multiple types of oppression.
This question encourages all groups embedded in systems of domination to
move toward a place where, as Toni Morrison’s Paul D expresses it, “You could
love anything you chose—not to need permission for desire—well, now, that
was freedom” (1987, 162).
172 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 190 ---
Just yesterday I stood for a few minutes at the top of the stairs leading to a white
doctor’s office in a white neighborhood. I watched one Black woman after another
trudge to the corner, where she then waited to catch the bus home. These were
Black women still cleaning somebody else’s house or Black women still caring for
somebody else’s sick or elderly , before they came back to the frequently thankless
chores of their own loneliness, their own families. And I felt angry and I felt
ashamed. And I felt, once again, the kindling heat of my hope that we, the daugh-
ters of these Black women, will honor their sacrifice by giving them thanks. We 
will undertake, with pride, every transcendent dream of freedom made possible by
the humility of their love. —June Jordan 1985, 105
June Jordan’s words poignantly express
the need for African-American women to honor our mothers’ sacrifices by
developing self-defined analyses of Black motherhood. Until the growth of
modern Black feminism in the 1970s, analyses of Black motherhood were largely
the province of men, both White and Black, and male perspectives on Black
mothers prevailed. Black mothers were accused of failing to discipline their chil-
dren, of emasculating their sons, of defeminizing their daughters, and of retard-
ing their children’s academic achievement (Moynihan 1965). Citing high rates
of divorce, female-headed households, and out-of-wedlock births, prevailing
scholarship claimed that African-American mothers wielded unnatural power in
allegedly deteriorating family structures (Zinn 1989; Dickerson 1995b). The
African-American mothers observed by Jordan vanished from these accounts.
Feminist work on motherhood from the 1970s and 1980s produced a lim-
ited critique of these views. Reflecting White, middle-class women’s angles of
vision, feminist analyses typically lacked an adequate race and class analysis
8
BLACK
WOMEN 
AND
MOTHERHOOD 
8


--- PAGE 191 ---
(Collins 1994). Dedicated to demystifying the traditional family ideal, much
work from this period confronted prevailing analyses of White, middle-class
women’s experiences as mothers. Such critiques remained less successful at chal-
lenging the controlling images let alone the practices they defended aimed at
African-American women. Recognizing that much feminist scholarship from this
period failed to include Black mothers “still cleaning somebody else’s house or . .
. caring for somebody else’s sick or elderly ,” subsequent feminist scholarship by
U.S. White women explicitly aimed to address differences among women based
on race, class, sexuality , and citizenship status (Andersen 1991; Coontz 1992;
Thorne 1992).
Ideas about Black motherhood emanating from African-American commu-
nities have been quite different. Historically , the concept of motherhood has been
of central importance in the philosophies of people of African descent. In many
African-American communities so much sanctification surrounds Black mother-
hood that “the idea that mothers should live lives of sacrifice has come to be seen
as the norm” (Christian 1985, 234). In the context of this historical significance,
many African-American thinkers tend to glorify Black motherhood. They refuse
to acknowledge the issues faced by Black mothers who “came back to the fre-
quently thankless chores of their own loneliness, their own families.”This moth-
er glorification is especially prominent in the works of U.S. Black men who rou-
tinely praise Black mothers, especially their own. However, by claiming that Black
women are richly endowed with devotion, self-sacrifice, and unconditional
love—the attributes associated with archetypal motherhood—U.S. Black men
inadvertently foster a different albeit seemingly positive image for Black women.
The controlling image of the “superstrong Black mother” praises Black women’s
resiliency in a society that routinely paints us as bad mothers. Yet, in order to
remain on their pedestal, these same superstrong Black mothers must continue
to place their needs behind those of everyone else, especially their sons. Even
Black-nationalist-inspired critical social theory finds it difficult to move beyond
images of strong Black mothers working on behalf of the new Black nation.
Within Afrocentrism, for example, images persist of “authentic” Black women
who hold fast to traditional African-derived values in the context of U.S. racism
(Collins 1998a, 167–74).
Stepping out of the realm of Black discourse reveals that far too many Black
men who praise their own mothers feel less accountable to the mothers of their
daughters and sons. They allow their wives and girlfriends to support the grow-
ing numbers of African-American children living in poverty (Nightingale 1993,
16–22). Despite the alarming deterioration of economic and social supports for
U.S. Black mothers, large numbers of young men hold fast to myths of Black 
male hypersexuality and encourage their unmarried teenage girlfriends to give 
birth to children whose futures are at risk (Ladner 1972; Ladner and Gourdine
1984). Even when they are aware of the poverty and struggles these women face,
many Black men cannot get beyond powerful controlling images of matriarchs
174 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 192 ---
and superstrong Black mothers. As Michele Wallace points out, many African-
American men fail to see the very real costs of mothering to African-American
women:
I remember once I was watching a news show with a black male friend of
mine who had a Ph.D. in psychology and was the director of an out-
patient clinic.We were looking at some footage of a black woman....S h e
was in bed wrapped in blankets, her numerous small, poorly clothed chil-
dren huddled around her. Her apartment looked rat-infested, cramped,
and dirty . She had not, she said, had heat and hot water for days. My
friend, a solid member of the middle class now but surely no stranger to
poverty in his childhood, felt obliged to comment . . . “That’s a strong sis-
ter,” as he bowed his head in reverence. (1978, 108–109)
In this overall context, the patterns of emphasis and omission characterizing
Black feminist analyses of motherhood are not particularly surprising. Several
factors within Black civil society contribute to these patterns. One reflects the
self-imposed restrictions that accompany norms of racial solidarity . In a context
of institutionalized racism where African-Americans have long aimed to present
a united front to Whites, many U.S. Blacks learn to police one another (Lubiano
1997). Internal dissent is especially frowned upon when it comes to mother-
hood, the seeming core of family , culture, and community . Another factor con-
cerns African-American women’s reluctance to challenge African-American men
in public . The vehement attacks sustained by Michele Wallace, Alice Walker,
Ntozake Shange, and other Black feminist scholars accused of attacking Black
men served as a lesson to others that speaking out can bring painful censure
(see, for example, Staples 1979). As Anita Hill found out, whether true or not,
criticisms aimed at a Black man in public are frowned upon by many African-
Americans. For many U.S. Black women, much silence emanates from efforts to
support Black men’s well-intentioned efforts to defend and protect Black wom-
anhood. Glorifying the strong Black mother represents Black men’s attempts to
replace negative White male interpretations with positive Black male ones.
Another set of factors influencing Black women’s relative silences concerns
the perceived Whiteness of U.S. feminism. Unfortunately , while feminism
remains one of the few discourses advancing important analyses of motherhood,
the combination of its perceived Whiteness and antifamily politics limits its
effectiveness. In the context of a racially segregated society where White women
historically and currently benefit from Black women’s subordination, African-
American women who remain suspicious of feminism are being neither unrea-
sonable nor demonstrating a lack of feminist consciousness. Moreover, when
combined with the perception of feminism as being antifamily and, by implica-
tion, antimotherhood, U.S. Black women’s collective reluctance to advance criti-
cal analyses of Black motherhood becomes even more understandable.
No matter how sincere, externally defined definitions of Black woman-
175BLACK WOMEN AND MOTHERHOOD


--- PAGE 193 ---
hood—even those offered by sympathetic African-American men or well-mean-
ing White feminists—are bound to come with their own set of problems. In the
case of Black motherhood, the problems have been a stifling of dialogue among
African-American women and the perpetuation of troublesome, controlling
images, both negative and positive. As Renita Weems observes: “We have simply
sat and nodded while others talked about the magnificent women who bore and
raised them and who, along with God, made a way out of no way ....W e  p a i d
to hear them lecture about the invincible strength and genius of the Black moth-
er, knowing full well that the image can be as bogus as the one of the happy
slave” (1984, 27). In general, African-American women need a revitalized Black
feminist analysis of motherhood that debunks the image of “happy slave,”
whether the White-male-created “matriarch” or the Black-male-perpetuated
“superstrong Black mother.”
A Black Women’s Standpoint on Mothering
The institution of Black motherhood consists of a series of constantly renegoti-
ated relationships that African-American women experience with one another,
with Black children, with the larger African-American community , and with self.
These relationships occur in specific locations such as the individual households
that make up African-American extended family networks, as well as in Black
community institutions (Martin and Martin 1978; Sudarkasa 1981b). Moreover,
just as U.S. Black women’s work and family experiences varied during the tran-
sition from slavery to the post–World War II political economy , how Black
women define, value, and shape Black motherhood as an institution shows com-
parable diversity .
Black motherhood as an institution is both dynamic and dialectical. Ongoing
tensions characterize efforts to mold the institution of Black motherhood to ben-
efit intersecting oppressions of race, gender, class, sexuality , and nation and
efforts by African-American women to define and value our own experiences
with motherhood.The controlling images of the mammy , the matriarch, and the
welfare mother and the practices they justify are designed to oppress. In the con-
text of a sexual politics that aims to control Black women’s sexuality and fertility ,
African-American women struggle to be good mothers. In contrast, motherhood
can serve as a site where Black women express and learn the power of self-defi-
nition, the importance of valuing and respecting ourselves, the necessity of self-
reliance and independence, and a belief in Black women’s empowerment. These
tensions foster a continuum of responses. Some women view motherhood as a
truly burdensome condition that stifles their creativity , exploits their labor, and
makes them partners in their own oppression. Others see motherhood as pro-
viding a base for self-actualization, status in the Black community , and a catalyst
for social activism.These alleged contradictions can exist side by side in African-
176 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 194 ---
American communities and families and even within individual women.
Embedded in these changing relationships are five enduring themes that
have characterized and, for many African-American women, continue to charac-
terize a Black women’s standpoint on Black motherhood. For any given histori-
cal moment, the particular form that Black women’s relationships with one
another, children, community , and self actually take depends on how this dialec-
tical relationship between the severity of oppression facing African-American
women and our actions in resisting that oppression is expressed. Despite the
shared thematic content of this Black women’s standpoint, considerable hetero-
geneity concerning its expression has always existed. It is in many ways easier to
see the contours of a Black women’s standpoint on motherhood in the
pre–World War II era.The five enduring themes described below emerged in the
context of and were sustained by specific social conditions associated with
slavery , Southern rural life, and class-stratified, racially segregated neighbor-
hoods of earlier periods of urban Black migration. These conditions fostered
the appearance of a distinctive Black women’s standpoint on mothering and
gave clear reasons for its continuation. In contrast, because African-American
family organization and Black civil society have both been markedly reorga-
nized since World War II, one must question in what form and even whether
these themes endure.
Rather than viewing the themes as “normative” and then evaluating how
contemporary African-American women do not measure up to some sort of
“essentialist” Black women’s standpoint, a better use of these themes views them
as culturally specific, resilient lifelines that can be continually refashioned in
response to changing contexts. Just as culture itself is dynamic and changing, the
enduring themes characterizing a Black women’s standpoint become shaped in
dialogue with actual social practices. Stated differently , these themes encompass
a complex network of ideas and social practices engaged in dialogue with one
another. Within this context, U.S. Black women’s agency becomes important in
determining what a Black women’s standpoint on motherhood will be, which
themes characterizing this standpoint will endure, and whether new, culturally
specific, resilient lifelines must be created to ensure collective survival. In some
cases, a lifeline may form the foundation for new ways of dealing with social
problems of special concern to African-Americans. U.S. Black working mothers’
needs for child care, the chronically poor education offered to Black children in
underfunded, inner-city public schools, the disproportionate numbers of young
Black men who have arrest records or are incarcerated, and the large numbers of
African-American children currently in government-run foster care all constitute
new versions of some old problems of special concern to African-American
women. One might ask in what ways the enduring themes may be reconstructed
to respond to these types of social concerns. Alternately , some themes may
prove more beneficial in grappling with these issues, and other themes may have
outlived their usefulness.Viewing the enduring themes in this fashion tests them
177BLACK WOMEN AND MOTHERHOOD


--- PAGE 195 ---
against the challenges of actual social conditions. Moreover, because this
approach remains grounded in Black women’s agency , it emphasizes the signifi-
cance of Black women’s ideas and actions in using this standpoint to meet the
specific political, economic, and social challenges of today .
Bloodmothers, Othermothers, and 
Women-Centered Networks
In many African-American communities, fluid and changing boundaries often
distinguish biological mothers from other women who care for children.
Biological mothers, or bloodmothers, are expected to care for their children. But
African and African-American communities have also recognized that vesting
one person with full responsibility for mothering a child may not be wise or
possible. As a result, othermothers—women who assist bloodmothers by shar-
ing mothering responsibilities—traditionally have been central to the institution
of Black motherhood (Troester 1984).
The centrality of women in African-American extended families reflects both
a continuation of  African-derived cultural sensibilities and functional adapta-
tions to intersecting oppressions of race, gender, class, and nation (Tanner 1974;
Stack 1974; Martin and Martin 1978; Sudarkasa 1981b; Reagon 1987).Women’s
centrality is characterized less by the absence of husbands and fathers than by the
significance of women. Though men may be physically present or have well-
defined and culturally significant roles in the extended family , the kin unit tends
to be woman-centered. Bebe Moore Campbell’s (1989) parents separated when
she was small. Even though she spent the school year in the North Philadelphia
household maintained by her grandmother and mother, Campbell’s father
assumed an important role in her life. “My father took care of me,” Campbell
remembers. “Our separation didn’t stunt me or condemn me to a lesser human-
ity . His absence never made me a fatherless child. I’m not fatherless now” (p.
271). In woman-centered kin units such as Campbell’s—whether a mother-child
household unit, a married couple household, or a larger unit extending over sev-
eral households—the centrality of mothers is not predicated on male powerless-
ness (Tanner 1974, 133).
Organized, resilient, women-centered networks of bloodmothers and other-
mothers are key in understanding this centrality . Grandmothers, sisters, aunts, or
cousins act as othermothers by taking on child-care responsibilities for one
another’s children. Historically , when needed, temporary child-care arrange-
ments often turned into long-term care or informal adoption (Stack 1974;
Gutman 1976).These practices continue in the face of changing social pressures.
Andrea Hunter’s (1997) research on Black grandmothers explores how Black
parents rely on grandmothers for parenting support. This traditional source of
support became even more needed in the 1980s and 1990s, when increasing
numbers of Black mothers saw their teenage children fall victim to drugs and the
178 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 196 ---
crime associated with it. Many witnessed their sons killed or incarcerated, while
their daughters became addicts. In many cases, these young men and women left
behind children, who often ended up in foster care. Other children did not, pri-
marily because their grandmothers took responsibility for raising them, often
under less than optimal conditions.
In many African-American communities these women-centered networks of
community-based child care have extended beyond the boundaries of biologi-
cally related individuals to include “fictive kin” (Stack 1974). Civil rights activist
Ella Baker describes how informal adoption by othermothers functioned in the
rural Southern community of her childhood:
My aunt who had thirteen children of her own raised three more. She had
become a midwife, and a child was born who was covered with sores.
Nobody was particularly wanting the child, so she took the child and
raised him . . . and another mother decided she didn’t want to be both-
ered with two children. So my aunt took one and raised him ...t h e y  w e r e
part of the family . (Cantarow 1980, 59)
Stanlie James recounts how othermother traditions work with notions of fictive
kin within her own extended family . James notes that the death of her grand-
mother in 1988 reunited her family , described as a host of biological and fictive
kin. James’s rendition of how one female family member helped James’s nine-
year-old daughter deal with the loss of her great-grandmother illustrates the
interactions among women-centered extended kin networks, fictive kin, and
othermother traditions. The woman who helped James’s daughter was not 
a blood relative but had been “othermothered” by James’s grandmother and 
was a full member of the extended family . James’s grandmother believed 
that because all children must be fed, clothed, and educated, if their biological
parents could not discharge these obligations, then some other member of 
the community should accept that responsibility . As James points out, “This 
fictive kin who stepped in to counsel my daughter was upholding a family tra-
dition that had been modeled by my grandmother some fifty years before”
(James 1993, 44).
Even when relationships are not between kin or fictive kin,African-American
community norms traditionally were such that neighbors cared for one another’s
children. Sara Brooks, a Southern domestic worker, describes the importance that
the community-based child care a neighbor offered her daughter had for her:
“She kept Vivian and she didn’t charge me nothin either.You see, people used to
look after each other, but now its not that way . I reckon its because we all was
poor, and I guess they put theirself in the place of the person that they was
helpin’ ” (Simonsen 1986, 181). Brooks’s experiences demonstrate how the
African-American cultural value placed on cooperative child care traditionally
found institutional support in the adverse conditions under which so many Black
women mothered.
179BLACK WOMEN AND MOTHERHOOD


--- PAGE 197 ---
Othermothers can be key not only in supporting children but also in help-
ing bloodmothers who, for whatever reason, lack the preparation or desire for
motherhood. In confronting racial oppression, maintaining community-based
child care and respecting othermothers who assume child-care responsibilities
can serve a critical function in African-American communities. Children
orphaned by sale or death of their parents under slavery , children conceived
through rape, children of young mothers, children born into extreme poverty or
to alcoholic or drug-addicted mothers, or children who for other reasons cannot
remain with their bloodmothers have all been supported by othermothers, who,
like Ella Baker’s aunt, take in additional children even when they have enough of
their own.
Young women are often carefully groomed at an early age to become other-
mothers. As a 10-year-old, Ella Baker learned to be an othermother by caring for
the children of a widowed neighbor: “Mama would say , ‘You must take the
clothes to Mr. Powell’s house, and give so-and-so a bath.’The children were run-
ning wild. . . .The kids . . . would take off across the field.We’d chase them down,
and bring them back, and put ‘em in the tub, and wash ‘em off, and change
clothes, and carry the dirty ones home, and wash them. Those kind of things
were routine” (Cantarow 1980, 59).
Many Black men also value community-based child care but historically have
exercised these values to a lesser extent. During slavery , for example, Black chil-
dren under age 10 experienced little division of labor. They were dressed alike
and performed similar tasks. If the activities of work and play are any indication
of the degree of gender role differentiation that existed among slave children,
“then young girls probably grew up minimizing the difference between the sexes
while learning far more about the differences between the races” (D. White
1985, 94). Because they are often left in charge of younger siblings, many young
Black men learn how to care for children. Geoffrey Canada (1995) recounts how
he had to learn how to fight in his urban neighborhood.The climate of violence
that he and his two brothers encountered mandated developing caretaking skills,
especially since his single mother had to work and could not offer them the pro-
tection that they needed. Thus, differences among Black men and women in
behaviors concerning children may have more to do with male labor force pat-
terns and similar factors. As Ella Baker observes, “My father took care of people
t o o ,b u t  ...m y  f ather had to work” (Cantarow 1980, 60).
Historically , within Black diasporic societies, community-based child care
and the relationships among bloodmothers and othermothers in women-cen-
tered networks have taken diverse institutional forms. In some polygynous West
African societies, the children of the same father but different mothers referred
to one another as brothers and sisters. While a strong bond existed between the
biological mother and her child—one so strong that, among the Ashanti for
example, “to show disrespect towards one’s mother is tantamount to sacrilege”
(Fortes 1950, 263)—children could be disciplined by any of their “mothers.”
180 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 198 ---
Cross-culturally , the high status given to othermothers and the cooperative nature
of child-care arrangements among bloodmothers and othermothers in Caribbean
and other Black diasporic societies gives credence to the importance that people
of African descent place on mothering (Sudarkasa 1981a).
Although the political economy of slavery brought profound changes to
Africans enslaved in the United States, beliefs in the importance of motherhood
and the value of cooperative approaches to child care continued. During slavery ,
while older women served as nurses and midwives, their most common occu-
pation was caring for the children of parents who worked (D. White 1985).
Informal adoption of orphaned children reinforced the importance of social
motherhood in African-American communities (Gutman 1976).The relationship
between bloodmothers and othermothers also survived the transition from a
slave economy to post-emancipation Southern rural agriculture. Children in
Southern rural communities were not solely the responsibility of their biological
mothers. Aunts, grandmothers, and others who had time to supervise children
served as othermothers (Dougherty 1978). The significant status that women
enjoyed in family networks and in African-American communities continued to
be linked to their bloodmother and othermother activities.
In the 1980s, the entire community structure of bloodmothers and other-
mothers came under assault. Racial desegregation as well as the emergence of
class-stratified Black neighborhoods greatly altered the fabric of Black civil soci-
ety . African-Americans of diverse social classes found themselves in new residen-
tial, school, and work settings that tested this enduring theme of bloodmothers,
othermothers, and woman-centered networks. In many inner-city , working-class
neighborhoods, the very fabric of African-American community life eroded
when crack cocaine flooded the streets. African-American children and youth
often formed the casualties of this expanding market for drugs, from the increas-
ing numbers of Black children in foster care (Nightingale 1993), to children
threatened by violence (Canada 1995), to those killed. Residents of Central
Harlem interviewed by anthropologist Leith Mullings repeatedly expressed con-
cern about losing the community’s children, leading Mullings to observe, “The
depth of worry about children growing up in these conditions is difficult to con-
vey” (Mullings 1997, 93). Given this situation, it is remarkable that even in the
most troubled communities, remnants of the othermother tradition endure. Bebe
Moore Campbell’s 1950s North Philadelphia neighborhood underwent startling
changes in the 1980s. Increases in child abuse and parental neglect left many
children without care. But some residents, such as Miss Nee, continued the oth-
ermother tradition. After raising her younger brothers and sisters and five chil-
dren of her own, Miss Nee cared for three additional children whose families fell
apart. Moreover, on any given night Miss Nee’s house may have been filled by up
to a dozen children because she had a reputation for never turning away a needy
child (“Children of the Underclass” 1989).
Black middle-class women and their families found challenges from another
181BLACK WOMEN AND MOTHERHOOD


--- PAGE 199 ---
direction. In some fundamental ways, moving into the middle class means adopt-
ing the values and lifestyles of White middle-class families. While the traditional
family ideal is not the norm, the relative isolation of such families from others is
noteworthy . U.S. middle-class family life is based on privatization—buying a big
house so that one need not cooperate with one’s neighbors, or even see them.
American middle-class families participate in the privatization of everything,
from schools and  health care, to for-fee health clubs and private automobiles.
Working-class African-Americans who experience social mobility thus may
encounter a distinctly different value system. Not only are woman-centered 
networks of bloodmothers and othermothers much more difficult to sustain
structurally—class-stratified residential and employment patterns mean that
middle-class Black women often see working-class and poor Black women only
as their employees or clients—such ideas are often anathema to the ethos of
achievement. From the security firms that find ways to monitor nannies, to the
gated-communities of suburbia, purchasing services appears to be the hallmark
of American middle-class existence. In this context, stopping to help others to
whom one is not related and doing it for free can be seen as rejecting the basic
values of the capitalist market economy .
In this context, these relationships among bloodmothers and othermothers
and the persistence of woman-centered networks may have greater theoretical
importance than currently recognized.The traditional family ideal assigns moth-
ers full responsibility for children and evaluates their performance based on their
ability to procure the benefits of a nuclear family household. Within this capital-
ist marketplace model, those women who “catch” legal husbands, who live in
single-family homes, who can afford private school and music lessons for their
children, are deemed better mothers than those who do not. In this context,
those African-American women who continue community-based child care chal-
lenge one fundamental assumption underlying the capitalist system itself: that
children are “private property” and can be disposed of as such. Under the prop-
erty model that accompanies the traditional family ideal, parents may not literally
assert that their children are pieces of property , but their parenting may reflect
assumptions analogous to those they make in connection with property . For
example, the exclusive parental “right” to discipline children as parents see fit,
even if discipline borders on abuse, parallels the widespread assumption that
property owners may dispose of their property without consulting members of
the larger community .
By seeing the larger community as responsible for children and by giving
othermothers and other nonparents “rights” in child rearing, those African-
Americans who endorse these values challenge prevailing capitalist property
relations. In Harlem, for example, Black women are increasingly the breadwin-
ners in their families, and rates of households maintained by single mothers
remain high.These families are clearly under stress, yet to see the household for-
mation itself as an indication of decline in Black family organization misreads a
182 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 200 ---
more complex situation. Leith Mullings suggests that many of these households
participate in fluid, familylike networks that have different purposes. Women
activate some networks for socialization, reproduction, and consumption, and
others for emotional support, economic cooperation, and sexuality .The networks
may overlap, but they are not coterminous (Mullings 1997, 74).
The resiliency of women-centered family networks and their willingness to
take responsibility for Black children illustrates how African-influenced under-
standings of family have been continually reworked to help African-Americans 
as a collectivity cope with and resist oppression. Moreover, these understandings
of woman-centered kin networks become critical in understanding broader
African-American understandings of community . At the same time, the erosion
of such networks in the face of the changing institutional fabric of Black civil
society points to the need either to refashion these networks or develop some
other way of supporting Black children. For far too many African-American chil-
dren, assuming that a grandmother or “fictive kin” will care for them is no
longer a reality .
Mothers, Daughters, and Socialization 
for Survival
U.S. Black mothers of daughters face a troubling dilemma. On one hand, to
ensure their daughters’ physical survival, mothers must teach them to fit into
the sexual politics of Black womanhood. For example, as a young girl, Black
activist Ann Moody questioned why she was paid so little for the domestic work
she began at age nine, why Black women domestics were sexually harassed by
their White male employers, and why Whites had so much more than Blacks.
But her mother refused to answer her questions and actually chastised her for
questioning the system and stepping out of her “place” (Moody 1968). Like Ann
Moody , Black daughters learn to expect to work, to strive for an education so they
can support themselves, and to anticipate carrying heavy responsibilities in their
families and communities because these skills are essential to their own survival
and those for whom they will eventually be responsible (Ladner 1972; Joseph
1981). New Yorker Michele Wallace recounts: “I can’t remember when I first
learned that my family expected me to work, to be able to take care of myself
when I grew up....I t  had been drilled into me that the best and only sure sup-
port was self-support” (1978, 89–90). Mothers also know that if their daugh-
ters uncritically accept the glorified “mammy work” and sexual politics offered
Black women, they can become willing participants in their own subordination.
Mothers may have ensured their daughters’ physical survival, but at the high cost
of their emotional destruction.
On the other hand, Black daughters with strong self-definitions and self-val-
uations who offer serious challenges to oppressive situations may not physically
183BLACK WOMEN AND MOTHERHOOD


--- PAGE 201 ---
survive. When Ann Moody became active in the early 1960s in sit-ins and voter
registration activities, her mother first begged her not to participate and then told
her not to come home because she feared the Whites in Moody’s hometown
would kill her. Despite the dangers, mothers routinely encourage Black daughters
to develop skills to confront oppressive conditions. Learning that they will work
and that education is a vehicle for advancement can also be seen as ways of
enhancing positive self-definitions and self-valuations in Black girls. Emotional
strength is essential, but not at the cost of physical survival.
Historian Elsa Barkley Brown describes this delicate balance Black mothers
negotiate by pointing out that her mother’s behavior demonstrated the “need to
teach me to live my life one way and, at the same time, to provide all the tools I
would need to live it quite differently” (1989, 929). Black daughters must learn
how to survive the sexual politics of intersecting oppressions while rejecting and
transcending these same power relations. In order to develop these skills in their
daughters, mothers demonstrate varying combinations of behaviors devoted to
ensuring their daughters’ survival—such as providing them with basic necessi-
ties and protecting them in dangerous environments—to helping their daughters
go further than mothers themselves were allowed to go (Joseph 1981, 1984).
They remain simultaneously visionary about what is possible, yet pragmatic
about what it might take to get there (James and Busia 1993).
This visionary pragmatism of many U.S. Black mothers may grow from the
nature of work women have done to ensure Black children’s survival.Their work
experiences provide many Black women with a unique angle of vision, a partic-
ular perspective on the world to be passed on to their  daughters. As is the case
for women in Black diaspora societies, African-American women have long inte-
grated economic self-reliance and mothering. In contrast to the cult of true wom-
anhood associated with the traditional family ideal, in which paid work is
defined as being in opposition to and incompatible with motherhood, work for
Black women has been an important and valued dimension of motherhood. Sara
Brooks describes the powerful connections that economic self-reliance and
mothering had in her childhood: “When I was about nine I was nursin my sis-
ter Sally—I’m about seven or eight years older than Sally . And when I would put
her to sleep, instead of me goin somewhere and sit down and play , I’d get my lit-
tle old hoe and get out there and work right in the field around the house” (in
Simonsen 1986, 86).
Mothers who are domestic workers or who work in proximity to Whites
may experience a unique relationship with the dominant group. For example,
African-American women domestics are exposed to all the intimate details of the
lives of their White employers. Working for Whites offers domestic workers a
view from the inside and exposes them to ideas and resources that might aid in
their children’s upward mobility . In some cases domestic workers form close,
long-lasting relationships with their employers. But domestic workers also
encounter some of the harshest exploitation confronting U.S. racial/ethnic
184 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 202 ---
women.The work is low paid, has few benefits, and exposes women to the threat
and reality of sexual harassment. Black domestics could see the dangers awaiting
their daughters.
Willi Coleman’s mother used a Saturday-night hair-combing ritual to impart
her views on domestic work to her daughters:
Except for special occasions mama came home from work early on
Saturdays. She spent six days a week mopping, waxing and dusting other
women’s houses and keeping out of reach of other women’s husbands.
Saturday nights were reserved for “taking care of them girls” hair and the
telling of stories. Some of which included a recitation of what she had
endured and how she had triumphed over “folks that were lower than
dirt” and “no-good snakes in the grass.” She combed, patted, twisted and
talked, saying things which would have embarrassed or shamed her at
other times. (Coleman 1987, 34)
Bonnie Thornton Dill’s (1980) study of the child-rearing goals of domestic
workers illustrates how many African-American women see their work as both
contributing to their children’s survival and instilling values that will encourage
their children to reject their “place” and strive for more. Providing a better
chance for their children was a dominant theme among Black women. Domestic
workers described themselves as “struggling to give their children the skills and
training they did not have; and as praying that opportunities which had not been
open to them would be open to their children” (p. 110). But the women also
realized that although they wanted to communicate the value of their work as
part of the ethics of caring and personal accountability , the work itself was unde-
sirable. Bebe Moore Campbell’s (1989) grandmother and college-educated
mother stressed the importance of education. Campbell remembers, “[They]
wanted me to Be Somebody , to be the second generation to live out my life as
far away from a mop and scrub brush and Miss Ann’s floors as possible” (p. 83).
Understanding this goal of balancing the need for the physical survival of
their daughters with the vision of encouraging them to transcend the boundaries
of the sexual politics of Black womanhood explains many apparent contradic-
tions in Black mother-daughter relationships. U.S. Black mothers are often
described as strong disciplinarians and overly protective; yet these same women
manage to raise daughters who are self-reliant and assertive. To explain this
apparent contradiction, Gloria Wade-Gayles suggests that Black mothers
do not socialize their daughters to be “passive” or “irrational.” Quite the
contrary , they socialize their daughters to be independent, strong and self-
confident. Black mothers are suffocatingly protective and domineering
precisely because they are determined to mold their daughters into whole
and self-actualizing persons in a society that devalues Black women.
(1984, 12)
African-American mothers place a strong emphasis on protection, either by try-
185BLACK WOMEN AND MOTHERHOOD


--- PAGE 203 ---
ing to shield their daughters as long as possible from the penalties attached to
their derogated status or by teaching them skills of independence and self-
reliance so that they will be able to protect themselves. Consider the following
verse from a traditional blues song:
I ain’t good lookin’ and ain’t got waist-long hair
I say I ain’t good lookin’ and ain’t got waist-long hair
But my mama gave me something that’ll take me anywhere.
(Washington 1984, 144)
Unlike White women, symbolized by “good looks” and “waist-long hair,” Black
women have been denied male protection. Under such conditions Black mothers
aim to teach their daughters skills that will “take them anywhere.”
Black women’s autobiographies and fiction can be read as texts revealing the
multiple ways that African-American mothers aim to shield their daughters from
the demands of being Black women in U.S. sexual politics. Michele Wallace
describes her growing understanding of how her mother viewed raising Black
daughters in Harlem: “My mother has since explained to me that since it was
obvious her attempt to protect me was going to prove a failure, she was deter-
mined to make me realize that as a black girl in white America I was going to
find it an uphill climb to keep myself together” (1978, 98). In discussing the
mother-daughter relationship in Paule Marshall’s Brown Girl, Brownstones,Rosalie
Troester catalogs the ways mothers have aimed to protect their daughters and the
impact this may have on relationships themselves:
Black mothers, particularly those with strong ties to their community ,
sometimes build high banks around their young daughters, isolating them
from the dangers of the larger world until they are old and strong enough
to function as autonomous women. Often these dikes are religious, but
sometimes they are built with education, family , or the restrictions of a
close-knit and homogeneous community.... This isolation causes the cur-
rents between Black mothers and daughters to run deep and the relation-
ship to be fraught with an emotional intensity often missing from the
lives of women with more freedom. (1984, 13)
Michele Wallace’s mother built banks around her headstrong adolescent daugh-
ter by institutionalizing her in a Catholic home for troubled girls. Wallace went
willingly: “I thought at the time that I would rather live in hell than be with my
mother” (1978, 98). But years later Wallace’s evaluation of her mother’s deci-
sion changed: “Now that I know my mother better, I know that her sense of
powerlessness made it all the more essential to her that she take radical action”
(p. 98).
African-American mothers often try to protect their daughters from the dan-
gers that lie ahead by offering them a sense of their own unique self-worth.
Many contemporary Black women writers report the experience of being singled
out, of being given at an early age a sense of specialness that encouraged them to
186 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 204 ---
develop their talents. My own mother marched me to the public library at age
five, helped me get my first library card, and told me that I could do anything if
I learned how to read. In discussing the works of Paule Marshall, Dorothy West,
and Alice Walker, Mary Helen Washington observes that all three writers make
special claims about the roles their mothers played in the development of their
creativity: “The bond with their mothers is such a fundamental and powerful
source that the term ‘mothering the mind’ might have been coined specifically
to define their experiences as writers” (1984, 144).
Black women’s efforts to provide a physical and psychic base for their chil-
dren can affect mothering styles and the emotional intensity of Black mother-
daughter relationships. As Gloria Wade-Gayles points out, “Mothers in Black
women’s fiction are strong and devoted . . . they are rarely affectionate” (1984,
10). For example, in Toni Morrison’s Sula (1974), Eva Peace’s husband ran off,
leaving her with three small children and no money . Despite her feelings, “the
demands of feeding her three children were so acute she had to postpone her
anger for two years until she had both the time and energy for it” (p. 32). Later
in the novel, Eva’s daughter Hannah asks, “Mamma, did you ever love us?”
(p. 67). Eva angrily replies, “What you talkin’ bout did I love you girl I stayed
alive for you” (p. 69). For far too many Black mothers, the demands of provid-
ing for children in intersecting oppressions are sometimes so demanding that
they have neither the time nor the patience for affection. And yet most Black
daughters love and admire their mothers and are convinced that their mothers
truly love them (Joseph 1981).
Elaine Bell Kaplan’s (1997) study of Black teenage pregnancy reveals much
about the mothering styles and emotional intensity of Black mother-daughter
relationships. Kaplan points out that the sociological literature makes two
assumptions about Black teenage mothers and their mothers: first, that adult
Black women are supportive of their daughter’s pregnancies and encourage them
to keep and raise the babies; and second, that this attitude is linked to the exis-
tence of an extended kin network. Kaplan’s research refutes both assumptions.
Teen mothers often defied their mothers’ demands that they have abortions, and
conflicts between the teen mothers and their mothers grew more intense after
the birth of the babies. Many of the teen mothers said that their mothers “were
tremendously angry at them and never forgave them” (Kaplan 1997, 52). The
majority of the teen mothers in Kaplan’s study who had left or were leaving their
mothers’ homes did so because of continual fights over their pregnancies. All of
the adult mothers worked hard to support them, and were deeply disappointed
with their daughters, but for different reasons. Lower-income mothers felt their
pregnant daughters had failed them. Until the pregnancy , this group had hoped
their daughters would do better with their lives than they had. Middle-income
mothers felt cheated. They had worked hard, and their daughters had thrown it
all away .
Black daughters raised by mothers grappling with hostile environments have
187BLACK WOMEN AND MOTHERHOOD


--- PAGE 205 ---
to come to terms with their feelings about the difference between the idealized
versions of maternal love extant in popular culture, whether the stay-at-home
Mom of the traditional family ideas or the superstrong Black mother, and the
often troubled mothers in their lives. For a daughter, growing up means devel-
oping a better understanding that even though she may desire more affection and
greater freedom, her mother’s physical care and protection are acts of maternal
love. Ann Moody describes her growing awareness of the cost her mother paid as
a domestic worker who was a single mother of three.Watching her mother sleep
after the birth of another child, Moody remembers:
For a long time I stood there looking at her. I didn’t want to wake her up.
I wanted to enjoy and preserve that calm, peaceful look on her face, I
wanted to think she would always be that happy .... Adline and Junior
were too young to feel the things I felt and know the things I knew about
Mama.They couldn’t remember when she and Daddy separated.They had
never heard her cry at night as I had or worked and helped as I had done
when we were starving. (1968, 57)
Moody initially sees her mother as a strict disciplinarian, a woman who tries to
protect her daughter by withholding information. But as Moody matures and
better understands the domains of power in her community , her ideas change.
On one occasion Moody left school early the day after a Black family had been
brutally murdered by local Whites. Moody’s description of her mother’s reaction
reflects her deepening understanding: “When I walked in the house Mama didn’t
even ask me why I came home. She just looked at me. And for the first time I
realized she understood what was going on within me or was trying to anyway”
(1968, 136).
Another example of a daughter’s efforts to understand her mother is offered
in Renita Weems’s account of coming to grips with maternal desertion. In the fol-
lowing passage Weems struggles with the difference between the stereotypical
image of the superstrong Black mother and her own alcoholic mother’s decision
to leave her children: “My mother loved us. I must believe that. She worked all
day in a department store bakery to buy shoes and school tablets, came home to
curse out neighbors who wrongly accused her children of any impropriety
(which in an apartment complex usually meant stealing), and kept her house
cleaner than most sober women” (1984, 26). Weems concludes that her mother
loved her because she provided for her to the best of her ability .
Othermothers often help to defuse the emotional intensity of relationships
between bloodmothers and their daughters. In recounting how she dealt with the
intensity of her relationship with her mother, Weems describes the women
teachers, neighbors, friends, and othermothers she turned to—women who, she
observes, “did not have the onus of providing for me, and so had the luxury of
talking to me” (1984, 27). Cheryl West’s household included her brother, her
lesbian mother, and Jan, her mother’s lover. Jan became an othermother to West:
“Yellow-colored, rotund and short in stature, Jan was like a second mother ....
188 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 206 ---
Jan braided my hair in the morning, mother worked two jobs and tucked me in
at night. Loving, gentle, and fastidious in the domestic arena, Jan could be a rigid
disciplinarian....T o  the outside world . . . she was my ‘aunt’ who happened to
live with us. But she was much more involved and nurturing than any of my ‘real’
aunts” (1987, 43). This may be changing. The pregnant teenagers in Elaine Bell
Kaplan’s study had few women teachers, neighbors, or Jans in their lives.They felt
the full force of the erosion of woman-centered kin networks. Perceiving their
bloodmothers as unsupportive during a crucial time in their lives, only four of
the thirty-two teen mothers in Kaplan’s study said they could rely on other fam-
ily members for support. Instead, more than three-quarters said they counted on
friends (Kaplan 1997, 59).
June Jordan offers an eloquent analysis of one daughter’s realization of the
high personal cost African-American women can pay in providing for their chil-
dren. In the following passage Jordan offers a powerful testament of how she
came to see that her mother’s work was an act of love:
As a child I noticed the sadness of my mother as she sat alone in the
kitchen at night.... Her woman’s work never won permanent victories of
any kind. It never enlarged the universe of her imagination or her power
to influence what happened beyond the front door of our house. Her
woman’s work never tickled her to laugh or shout or dance. But she did
raise me to respect her way of offering love and to believe that hard work
is often the irreducible factor for survival, not something to avoid. Her
woman’s work produced a reliable home base where I could pursue the
privileges of books and music. Her woman’s work invented the potential
for a completely different kind of work for us, the next generation of
Black women: huge, rewarding hard work demanded by the huge, new
ambitions that her perfect confidence in us engendered. (1985, 105)
Community Othermothers and Political Activism
U.S. Black women’s experiences as othermothers provide a foundation for con-
ceptualizing Black women’s political activism. Experiences both of being nur-
tured as children and being held responsible for siblings and fictive kin within
kin networks can stimulate a more generalized ethic of caring and personal
accountability among African-American women. These women not only feel
accountable to their own kin, they experience a bond with all of the Black com-
munity’s children. In her study of Black professional women workers during the
Jim Crow era, historian Stephanie J. Shaw’s What a Woman Ought to Be and to Do
describes this bond as reflecting an ethic of socially responsible indivi dualism.
Within this ethic, families and community mentors imbued the highly edu-
cated Black women in her study with a determination to use their education in
a socially responsible way . Consequently , “these women became not simply
189BLACK WOMEN AND MOTHERHOOD


--- PAGE 207 ---
schoolteachers, nurses, social workers, and librarians; they became . . . political
and social leaders” (Shaw 1996, 2).
Because factors such as social class differences among African-Americans,
region of the country , and the degree of racial discrimination in housing, educa-
tion, jobs, and public services all  influence Black community organization, oth-
ermother traditions characterizing Black women’s community work have taken
various forms. One concerns how these ideas impact daily interaction among
Black women, children, and youth. Historically , this notion of Black women as
community othermothers for all Black children often allowed African-American
women to treat biologically unrelated children as if they were members of their
own families. For example, sociologist Karen Fields describes how her grand-
mother, Mamie Garvin Fields, draws on her power as a community othermoth-
er when dealing with unfamiliar children: “She will say to a child on the street
who looks up to no good, picking out a name at random, ‘Aren’t you Miz
Pinckney’s boy?’ in that same reproving tone. If the reply is, ‘No, ma’am,my
mother is Miz Gadsden,’ whatever threat there was dissipates” (Fields and Fields
1983, xvii).
The use of family language in referring to members of the African-American
community also illustrates the socially responsible individualism of Black
women’s community work. In the following passage, Mamie Garvin Fields
describes how she became active in surveying substandard housing conditions
among African-Americans in Charleston. Note her explanation of why she uses
family language:
I was one of the volunteers they got to make a survey of the places where
we were paying extortious rents for indescribable property . I said “we,”
although it wasn’t Bob and me. We had our own home, and so did many
of the Federated Women. Yet we still felt like it really was “we” living in
those terrible places, and it was up to us to do something about them.
(Fields and Fields 1983, 195)
Black women frequently use family language to describe Black children. In
recounting her increasingly successful efforts to teach a boy who had given
other teachers problems, my daughter’s kindergarten teacher stated, “You know
how it can be—the majority of children in the learning disabled classes are our
children. I know he didn’t belong there, so I volunteered to take him.” In their
statements both women use family language to describe the ties that bind them
as Black women to their responsibilities as members of African-American com-
munities.
Black women writers also explore this theme of African-American community
othermothers who, via their socially responsible individualism, engage in Black
women’s community work. One of the earliest examples is found in Frances Ellen
Watkins Harper’s 1892 novel,Iola Leroy. By rejecting an opportunity to marry a
prestigious physician and disassociate herself from the Black community , nearly
White Iola, the main character, chooses instead to serve the African-American
190 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 208 ---
community . Similarly , in Alice Walker’s Meridian (1976), the main character
rejects the controlling image of the “happy slave, ” the self-sacrificing Black moth-
er, and chooses to become a community othermother. Giving up her biological
child to the care of an othermother, Meridian gets an education, works in the
civil rights movement, and eventually takes on responsibility for the children of
a small Southern town. She engages in a “quest that will take her beyond the soci-
ety’s narrow meaning of the word mother as a physical state and expand its mean-
ing to those who create, nurture, and save life in social and psychological as well
as physical terms” (Christian 1985, 242).
Studying Black women leaders in a Northern, urban community , sociologist
Cheryl Gilkes (1980, 1983b) suggests that community othermother relation-
ships can be key in stimulating Black women’s decisions to become social activists.
Gilkes asserts that many of the Black women community activists in her study
became involved in community organizing in response to the needs of their own
children and of those in their neighborhoods.The following comment is typical
of how many of the Black women in Gilkes’s study relate to Black children:
“There were alot of summer programs springing up for kids, but they were
exclusive . . . and I found that most of our kids were excluded” (1980, 219).
Nancy Naples’s (1991, 1996) work on what she labels activist mothering by Black
and Latina women in low-income urban neighborhoods identifies a similar ideology .
Like the women in Gilkes’s studies, the women in Naples’s study also entered com-
munity politics in direct response to the needs of their children. But their very
definitions of good mothering went beyond a simple measure of caring for their
own biological children. Instead, they saw good mothering as comprising all
actions, including social activism, that addressed the needs of their children and
community (Naples 1996, 230). For Black women in both studies, what began
as the daily expression of their obligations to their children and as community
othermothers often developed into full-fledged actions as community leaders.
This community othermother tradition also explains the “mothering the
mind” relationships that can develop between African-American women teach-
ers and their Black female and male students. Unlike the traditional mentoring so
widely reported in educational literature, this relationship goes far beyond that
of providing students with either technical skills or a network of academic and
professional contacts. Gloria Wade-Gayles describes this special bond that she cul-
tivates with her students at Spelman College: “I was like a plant from which one
takes cuttings. A piece for this one. A piece for that one.... Although there were
times when I could feel the blade, I did not regret the cuttings.They strengthened
my roots” (Wade-Gayles 1996, 32–33). Like the mother-daughter relationship,
this “mothering the mind” among Black women seeks to move toward the mutu-
ality of a shared sisterhood that binds African-American women as community
othermothers.
Community othermothers have made important contributions in building a
different type of community in often hostile political and economic surround-
191BLACK WOMEN AND MOTHERHOOD


--- PAGE 209 ---
ings (Reagon 1987). Community othermothers’ participation in activist mother-
ing demonstrates a clear rejection of separateness and individual interest as the
basis of either community organization or individual self-actualization. Instead,
the connectedness with others and common interest expressed by community
othermothers model a very different value system, one whereby ethics of caring
and personal accountability move communities forward.
Motherhood as a Symbol of Power
Motherhood—whether bloodmother, othermother, or community othermoth-
er—can be invoked as a symbol of power by African-American women engaged
in Black women’s community work. Certainly much of Black women’s status
within women-centered kin networks stems from their important contributions
as bloodmothers and othermothers. Moreover, much of U.S. Black women’s sta-
tus in African-American communities stems from their activist mothering as
community othermothers. Some of the most highly respected Black women in
working-class Black neighborhoods are those who demonstrate an ethic of com-
munity service.
Black communities and neighborhoods have long had women who served as
community othermothers. The existence of this tradition among middle-class
Black women has been recognized and studied via attention to middle-class Black
women’s political traditions (see, e.g., Giddings 1988; Higginbotham 1993;
Shaw 1996). However, the community othermother traditions of working-class
and poor Black women such as those examined by Nancy Naples (1991, 1996)
remain underemphasized within U.S. Black feminism. Instead, those community
othermothers who do receive well-deserved recognition do so in large part
because of the confluence of unusual circumstances and their individual charac-
teristics.We know of Fannie Lou Hamer because she was both so exceptional and
her actions on behalf of African-Americans occurred during an historic era that
granted her media visibility . In contrast, most community othermothers simply
work on behalf of the children, women, and men of their communities with lit-
tle fanfare or recognition.While efforts on behalf of Black children often may cat-
alyze their actions, working on behalf of the community means addressing the
multifaceted issues within it. These women often remain nameless in scholarly
texts, yet everyone in their neighborhoods knows their names.
Black women’s involvement in community work forms one important basis
for power within Black civil society . This is the type of power many African-
Americans have in mind when they describe the “strong Black women” they
hope will revitalize contemporary Black neighborhoods. Community other-
mothers work on behalf of the Black community by expressing ethics of caring
and personal accountability . Such power is transformative in that Black women’s
relationships with children and other vulnerable community members are not
192 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 210 ---
intended to dominate or control. Rather, their purpose is to bring people along,
to—in the words of late-nineteenth-century Black feminists—“uplift the race” so
that vulnerable members of the community will be able to attain the self-reliance
and independence essential for resistance.
When older African-American women invoke their power as community
othermothers, the results can be quite striking. Sociologist Charles Johnson
(1934/1979) describes the behavior of an elderly Black woman at a church ser-
vice in rural 1930s Alabama. Even though she was not on the program, the
woman stood up to speak. The master of ceremonies rang for her to sit down,
but she refused to do so, saying, “I am the mother of this church, and I will say
what I please” (p. 172). The master of ceremonies offered the following expla-
nation to the congregation as to why he let the woman continue: “Brothers, I
know you all honor Sister Moore. Course our time is short but she has acted as a
mother to me....A n y  time old folks get up I give way to them” (p. 173).
The activist mothering of Black women’s community work (see, e.g, Naples
1991, 1996) and the power it often engenders remain misunderstood. Often
called “maternal politics” within North American and European-influenced fem-
inisms, patterns of Black women’s political activism associated with community
othermother traditions as well as the power and recognition offered such women
by African-Americans become derogated. Take for example, Julia Wells’s argu-
ments in an article titled “Maternal Politics in Organizing Black South African
Women.” According to Wells, maternal politics refers to “political movements
which are rooted in women’s defense of their roles as mothers and protectors of
their children” (Wells 1998, 251). Citing as examples the cases of the South
African women’s antipass campaigns of the 1960s and mothers of the Plaza de
Mayo in Argentina starting in 1979,Wells suggests that such movements develop
because many women view their maternal roles as the driving force behind pub-
lic political actions. Wells then distinguishes between “maternal politics” and
“feminism.” I cite Wells at length because her ideas succinctly state beliefs that
are more diffusely held.
Maternal politics are clearly not to be confused with feminism. Women
swept up in mother-centered movements are not fighting for their own
personal rights as women but for their custodial rights as mothers. Since
concepts of the sanctity of motherhood are so deeply entrenched in the
social fabric of most societies, this strategy often proves effective where
other attempts to generate social change fail. So potent has been the tradi-
tional discourse on motherhood that husbands, families, and government
officials all tend to acknowledge and respect the heartrending claims of
mothers, giving women an unusual amount of political space in which to
organize. Significant allies are easily won over, strengthening the political
clout of such movements. Nevertheless, these movements must be recog-
nized as limited in scope, duration, and success in achieving their goals and,
above all, should not be mistaken for political maturity . (Wells 1998, 253)
193BLACK WOMEN AND MOTHERHOOD


--- PAGE 211 ---
This type of thinking sets up a hierarchy of feminisms, assigns the type engaged
in by U.S. Black women and women in Africa (see, e.g., Iweriebor 1998) a sec-
ondary status, and fails to recognize motherhood as a symbol of power. Instead,
the activist mothering associated with Black women’s community work
becomes portrayed as a “politically immature” vehicle claimed by women who
fail to develop a so-called radical analysis of the family as the site of oppression
similar to that advanced within Western feminism.
Feminist claims that “maternal politics” represents an immature form of
political activism certainly raise questions for motherhood as a symbol of power
in African-American communities. Black women’s community work can be
understood via maternal rhetoric as a static system of ideas that can be evaluated
using some externally derived allegedly feminist criteria. But another approach
views Black women’s understandings of motherhood as a symbol of power and
the activist mothering it might engender as an enduring theme that politicizes
Black women. Viewing motherhood as a symbol of power can catalyze Black
women to take actions that they otherwise might not have considered. For exam-
ple, when Mamie Till Bradley’s 14-year-old son, Emmett Till, was brutally mur-
dered in Mississippi in the summer of 1955, Ms. Bradley found herself in the
center of a national controversy . This 33-year-old Chicago resident “wanted the
whole world to see” what had happened to her son (Feldstein 1994). “She insist-
ed that his battered body appear in an open casket at the funeral.” Similarly , a
Black mother approached me after a talk I gave at a Detroit-area college.With her
two children in tow, a boy age ten, and a girl age five, she described the chal-
lenges of leaving a marriage and moving back to Detroit as a single parent.
Describing the limitations of her children’s new school, this mother shared the
horrible story of how a classmate had held a gun to her son’s head. Despite this
situation, this woman said that she was not moving—she would stay and fight.
Certainly her actions can be seen as fighting for her own children. But she clear-
ly understood that motherhood could be a symbol of power in that setting.
Motherhood politicized her.
Not just Black women but those who care about Black women can also
access the potential power associated with activist mothering. Writer Lisa Jones
describes the politicization of her White mother as she came to understand the
obstacles confronting her mixed-race, Black daughter: “Motherhood has been
more than a domestic chore or emotional bond for my mother. It’s a political
vocation—one she’s taken seriously enough to go up against the world for”
(Jones 1994, 34). Studies of White mothers of mixed-race children confirm this
phenomenon of White mothers becoming politicized in fighting the battles con-
fronting their Black children. Raising their Black children in racist environments
fosters new views of motherhood for many of these women. This is an entirely
different understanding of political activism and empowerment than fighting on
one’s own behalf. To label this type of socially responsible individualism as
“politically immature” seems especially misguided.
194 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 212 ---
The View from the Inside: The Personal 
Meaning of Mothering 
Within African-American communities, women’s innovative and practical
approaches to mothering under oppressive conditions often bring  recognition
and foster their empowerment. But this situation should not obscure the costs
of motherhood to many U.S. Black women. Black motherhood is a fundamental-
ly
contradictory institution. African-American communities value motherhood,
but Black mothers’ ability to cope with intersecting oppressions of race, class,
gender, sexuality , and nation should not be confused with transcending the
injustices characterizing these oppressions. Black motherhood can be reward-
ing, but it can also extract high personal costs.The range of Black women’s reac-
tions to motherhood and the ambivalence that many Black women feel about
mothering reflect motherhood’s contradictory nature.
Certain dimensions of motherhood advanced both via the traditional family
ideal and via  Black community expectations are clearly problematic for Black
women. Coping with unwanted pregnancies and being unable to care for one’s
children is oppressive. Sara Brooks remembers, “I had babies one after another
because I never knew how to avoid having babies and I didn’t ask nobody , so I
didn’t know nothin. . . . After I separated from my husband, I still didn’t know
nothin, so there come Vivian” (Simonsen 1986, 174). Brooks became pregnant
again even though she was unmarried and had three children from her marriage
whom she could not support. Brooks describes the strain placed on Black women
who must mother under oppressive conditions: “I hated it. . . . I didn’t want no
other baby . I couldn’t hardly take care of myself, and I had other kids I’da loved
to have taken care of, and I couldn’t do that” (p. 177). Like Brooks, many Black
women have children they really do not want.When combined with Black com-
munity values claiming that good Black women always want their children,
ignorance about reproductive issues leaves many Black women with unplanned
pregnancies and the long-term responsibilities of parenting.
Ann Moody’s mother also did not celebrate her repeated pregnancies. Moody
remembers her mother’s feelings when her mother started “getting fat” and her
boyfriend stopped coming by: “Again Mama started crying every night. . . .When
I heard Mama crying at night, I felt so bad. She wouldn’t cry until we were all in
bed and she thought we were sleeping. Every night I would lie awake for hours
listening to her sobbing quietly in her pillow. The bigger she got the more she
cried, and I did too” (Moody 1968, 46). To her children, Moody’s mother may
have appeared to be the stereotypical strong Black mother, but Ann Moody was
able to see the cost her mother paid for living with this controlling image.
Dealing with an unwanted pregnancy can have tragic consequences. All Sara
Brooks could think about was “doing away with this baby .” She self-medicated
herself and almost died. But she was luckier than her mother. As Brooks recalls,
195BLACK WOMEN AND MOTHERHOOD


--- PAGE 213 ---
“My momma, she got pregnant too close behind me—it was an unwanted preg-
nancy—and so she taken turpentine and she taken too much, I guess, and she
died. She bled to death and died” (Simonsen 1986, 160). She was not alone.
Prior to the 1973 Roe v. WadeU.S. Supreme Court decision that a woman’s right
to personal privacy gave her the right to decide whether or not to have an abor-
tion, large numbers of women who died from illegal abortions were Black. In
New York, for example, during the several years preceding the decriminalization
of abortions, 80 percent of the women who died from illegal abortions were
Black or Puerto Rican (Davis 1981).
Strong pronatalist values in African-American communities often vest adult
status on women who become biological mothers. For many , becoming a bio-
logical mother is often seen as a significant first step toward womanhood. Annie
Amiker, an elderly Black woman, describes the situation in the rural Mississippi
of her childhood.When asked if there were many girls with out-of-wedlock chil-
dren, she replied, “There was some but not many—not many because when you
run upon a girl who had a child the other girls wouldn’t have nothing to do with
her . . . she was counted as a grown person so she wasn’t counted among the
young people” (Parker 1979, 268). Joyce Ladner describes how this link between
adult status and motherhood operates in low-income urban communities: “If
there was one common standard for becoming a woman that was accepted by
the majority of the people in the community , it was the time when girls gave
birth to their first child. This line of demarcation was extremely clear and sepa-
rated the girls from the women” (1972, 212).
Despite high personal costs, Ann Moody’s mother, Sara Brooks, and an over-
whelming majority of unmarried Black adolescent mothers choose to keep their
children. In part, this may reflect strong pronatalist values. However, Black
women’s willingness to sacrifice for their children may stem from a deep-seated
but largely unstated reliance on motherhood in the absence of committed love
relationships with Black men. In a harsh environment where sexual politics leaves
far too many U.S. Black women alone, children provide solace and love.
The pain of knowing what lies ahead for Black children while feeling pow-
erless to protect them is another problematic dimension of Black mothering.
Michele Wallace remembers, “I can understand why my mother felt desperate.
No one else thought it would be particularly horrible if I got pregnant or got
married before I had grown up, if I never completed college. I was a black girl”
(1978, 98). In a 1904 letter, a Black mother in the South wrote to a national
magazine:
I dread to see my children grow. I know not their fate. Where the white
girl has one temptation, mine will have many . Where the white boy has
every opportunity and protection, mine will have few opportunities and
no protection. It does not matter how good or wise my children may be,
they are colored. When I have said that, all is said. Everything is forgiven
196 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 214 ---
in the South but color. (Lerner 1972, 158)
Protecting Black children remains a primary concern of African-American
mothers. Black children are at risk for higher infant mortality , poor nutrition,
inferior housing, environmental pollutants, AIDS, and a host of other social
problems. Because it can strike at random, violence is of special concern to Black
mothers. Anthropologist Leith Mullings reports that women in Harlem spend an
“extraordinary amount of time escorting children, limiting their movement,
and trying by any means to keep them away from the violence of the streets”
(Mullings 1997, 93). Such women organize building-by-building and block-
by-block struggles to rid their neighborhoods of drug dealers. Because drug-
related income may be the primary source of income for many low-income
families, these mothers’ efforts are often unsuccessful. But still they try . One
mother expresses this general concern for Black children:
I turn my eyes on the little children, and keep on praying that one of them
will grow up at the right second, when the schoolteachers have time to
say hello and give him the lessons he needs, and when they get rid of the
building here and let us have a place you can breathe in and not get bit-
ten all the time, and when the men can find work—because they can’thave
children, and so they have to drink or get on drugs to find some happy
moments, and some hope about things. (Lerner 1972, 315)
To this mother, even though her children are her hope, the conditions under
which she must mother are intolerable.
Black mothers also pay the cost of giving up their own dreams of achieving
full creative ability . “When,” Alice Walker asks, “did my overworked mother have
time to know or care about feeding the creative spirit?” (1983, 239). Historically ,
much of that creativity could be expressed through music, much of it within
Black churches. Many Black women blues singers, poets, and artists manage to
incorporate their art into their daily responsibilities as bloodmothers and other-
mothers. But for far too many African-American women who are weighed down
by the incessant responsibilities of mothering others, that creative spark never
finds full expression.
Harriet Jacobs’s autobiography gives a clear example of one mother’s denial
of her own self-actualization and illustrates the costs paid by Black mothers who
assume the heavy responsibilities inherent in their bloodmother and othermother
relationships. Jacobs desperately wanted to escape slavery but explains how hav-
ing children created a particular dilemma:
I could have made my escape alone; but it was more for my helpless chil-
dren than for myself that I longed for freedom. Though the boon would
have been precious to me, above all price, I would not have taken it at the
expense of leaving them in slavery . Every trial I endured, every sacrifice I
made for their sakes, drew them closer to my heart, and gave me fresh
courage. (1860/1987, 59)
197BLACK WOMEN AND MOTHERHOOD


--- PAGE 215 ---
Black mothers like those of Ann Moody and June Jordan and women like Harriet
Jacobs and Sara Brooks are examples of women who gave up their freedom for
the sake of their children. Community othermothers like Mamie Fields and Miss
Nee pay a similar cost, not for the sake of their own biological children but for
the Black community’s children.
Despite the obstacles and costs, motherhood remains a symbol of hope for
many of even the poorest Black women. One anonymous mother describes how
she feels about her children:
To me, having a baby inside me is the only time I’m really alive. I know I
can make something, do something, no matter what color my skin is, and
what names people call me .... Y o u  can see the little one grow and get
larger and start doing things, and you feel there must be some hope, some
chance that things will get better; because there it is, right before you, a
r e a l ,l i v e ,g r o w i n g  b a b y ....The baby is a good sign, or at least he’s some
sign. If we didn’t have that, what would be the difference from death?
(Lerner 1972, 314)
Given the harshness of this mother’s environment, her children offer hope.They
are all she has.
Mothering is an empowering experience for many African-American
women. Gwendolyn Brooks (1953) explores this issue of reproductive power in
her novel Maud Martha. Maud Martha is virtually silent until she gives birth to
her daughter, when “pregnancy and the birth of a child connect Maud to some
power in herself, some power to speak, to be heard, to articulate feelings”
(Washington 1987, 395). Her child serves as a catalyst for her movement into
self-definition, self-valuation, and individual empowerment. Marita Golden
describes a similar experience that illustrates how the special relationship
between mother and child can foster a changed definition of self and an accom-
panying empowerment:
Now I belonged to me. No parents or husband claiming me.... There was
only my child who consumed and replenished me ...m y  son’s love was
unconditional and, as such, gave me more freedom than any love I had
k n o w n ....I  a t  last accepted mama as my name. Realized that it did not
melt down any other designations. Discovered that it expanded them—
and me. (1983, 240–41)
This special relationship that Black mothers have with their children can also
foster a creativity , a mothering of the mind and soul, for all involved. It is this
gift that Alice Walker alludes to when she notes, “And so our mothers and grand-
mothers have, more often than not anonymously , handed on the creative spark,
the seed of the flower they themselves never hoped to see” (1983, 240).
But what cannot be overlooked in work emphasizing mothers’ influences on
their children is how Black children affirm their mothers and how important that
affirmation can be in a society plagued by the sexual politics of Black woman-
198 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 216 ---
hood. In her essay “One Child of One’s Own,”Alice Walker offers a vision of what
African-American mother-child relationships can be:
It is not my child who tells me: I have no femaleness white women must
affirm. Not my child who says: I have no rights black men must respect.
It is not my child who has purged my face from history and herstory , and
left mystory just that, a mystery; my child loves my face and would have
it on every page, if she could, as I have loved my own parents’ faces above
all others....W e  a r e  together, my child and I. Mother and child, yes, but
sisters really , against whatever denies us all that we are. (Walker 1979b, 75)
199BLACK WOMEN AND MOTHERHOOD


--- PAGE 217 ---



--- PAGE 218 ---
The way I looked at it, a white person might be judgin me, but I’m judgin them,
too. If they seem as if they was scornful of a colored person, at the same time that
they was scornful of me, I’m the same way about them . . . if my place ain’t good
enough for you—[if] I ain’t good enough to drink out of a glass that you got
because I’m black, I don’t want to do it. —Sara Brooks, in Simonsen 1986, 199
Sara Brooks is not typically seen as a
political activist. Her long hours as a domestic worker left her little time to par-
ticipate in unions, community groups, demonstrations, or other forms of orga-
nized political activity . Her lifelong struggle was not for political causes but to
garner sufficient resources to reunite her children and provide a home for them.
To outsiders Sara Brooks may appear to be an exploited domestic worker vic-
timized by the racial politics of an unfair labor market and the sexual politics of
having too many children. But when she states, “If they was scornful of me, I’m
the same way about them,” she taps a powerful yet overlooked part of U.S. Black
women’s activism. She has not only survived her experiences with intersecting
oppressions, but she clearly rejects their ideological justifications. “If my place
ain’t good enough for you—[if] I ain’t good enough to drink out of a glass that
you got because I’m black, I don’t want to do it,” she proclaims. Self-defini-
tion, self-valuation, and movement toward self-reliance inform her worldview,
beliefs that stem from her struggles to survive.
To Sara Brooks survival is a form of resistance, and her struggles to provide
for the survival of her children represent the foundations of Black women’s
activism. Historically African-Americans’ resistance to racial and class oppression
could not have occurred without an accompanying struggle for group survival.
Sara Brooks’s contributions in caring for her children and in rejecting the con-
9
RETHINKING
BLACK 
WOMEN’S
ACTIVISM 
9


--- PAGE 219 ---
trolling images of herself as mammy or mule represent the unacknowledged
yet essential actions taken by countless U.S. Black women to ensure this group
survival. Without this important part of Black women’s activism, struggles to
transform U.S. educational, economic, and political institutions could not have
been sustained.Yet popular perspectives on Black political activism often fail to
see how struggles for group survival are just as important as confrontations
with institutional power.
Prevailing definitions of political activism and resistance misunderstand
the meaning of these concepts in Black women’s lives. Social science research
typically focuses on public, official, visible political activity even though unof-
ficial, private, and seemingly invisible spheres of social life and organization
may be equally important. For example, some approaches to social class 
see labor unions and political parties—two modes of political activism domi-
nated by White males—as fundamental mechanisms for working-class
activism (Vanneman and Cannon 1987). African-American women have been
excluded from both of these arenas, leaving these approaches bereft of a the-
oretical analysis of Black women’s social class protest. Such approaches
assess Black women’s absence from both positions of formal authority and
the membership rosters of political organizations as indicating low levels of 
Black women’s activism. These definitional limitations also influence analyses 
of Black women’s actions in resistance str uggles. For example, historian
Rosalyn Terborg-Penn defines resistance as “women’s involvement in the orga-
nized struggle against slavery , peonage, and imperialism. Strategies included
open and guerrilla warfare, maroonage, slave revolts, and peasant revolts”
(1986, 190).Terborg-Penn uncovers important and much-needed information
about these specific types of Black women’s resistance. But the limits of her
definition lead her to overlook less visible but equally important forms of Black
women’s political activity within African-American communities.
Different understandings of political activism and resistance pervade Black
women’s studies scholarship. On one hand, research on African-American
women stresses the ways in which Black women experience the injustices asso-
ciated with intersecting oppressions of race, class, gender, sexuality , and nation
(Beale 1970; Davis 1981; Dill 1983).This work provides a more nuanced view
of how Black women’s treatment is important to distinctive systems of oppres-
sion as well as their intersection. For example, constructions of Black women’s
sexuality are important to maintaining distinctions between normal and
deviant sexualities associated with heterosexism; to structuring capitalist com-
modity relations that sell Black women’s bodies on the open market; to repro-
ducing notions of racial purity required for biological racism; to installing
racialized gender hierarchies that distinguish between good girls and bad girls;
and to understanding U.S. nation-state policies that legitimate these arrange-
ments.Thus, analyzing the sexual politics of Black womanhood that character-
izes Black women’s placement in intersecting oppressions sheds light on the
202 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 220 ---
more general process of how power as domination is organized and operates.
On the other hand, Black women’s studies scholarship simultaneously
explores Black women’s strength and resiliency in the face of hardship and
despair, features thought to characterize Black women’s resistance to this mul-
tifaceted oppression (Davis 1981, 1989; Steady 1981;Terborg-Penn 1986). Black
feminist works portray African-American women as individuals and as a group
struggling toward empowerment within an overarching matrix of domination.
If power as domination is organized and operates via intersecting oppressions,
then resistance must show comparable complexity .
Domination encompasses structural, disciplinary , hegemonic, and inter-
personal domains of power (see Chapter 12). These domains constitute specific
sites where oppressions of race, class, gender, sexuality , and nation mutually
construct one another. Understanding the complexity of Black women’s
activism requires understanding not only the need to address more than one
form of oppression, but the significance of how singular and multiple forms
of oppression are organized.To focus on the structural domain of power whose
social institutions deny Black women education, jobs, and income, without
attending to how ideas about Black womanhood advanced within the hege-
monic domain of power justify this treatment misses the complexity of U.S.
power relations. To emphasize keeping Black women under surveillance and
similar techniques of control associated with the disciplinary domain of power
without recognizing their effect on Black women’s everyday interpersonal rela-
tionships also limits our understanding of power.
Because the structural, disciplinary , hegemonic, and interpersonal domains
of power work together to produce particular patterns of domination, Black
women’s activism demonstrates a comparable complexity . It may be more use-
ful to assess Black women’s activism less by the ideological content of individ-
ual Black women’s belief systems—whether they hold conservative, reformist,
progressive, or radical ideologies based on some predetermined criteria—and
more by Black women’s collective actions within everyday life that challenge
domination in these multifaceted domains. For example, a Black mother who
may be unable to articulate her political ideology but who on a daily basis con-
tests school policies harmful to her children may be more an “activist” than the
most highly educated Black feminist who, while she can manipulate feminist,
nationalist, postmodern, and other ideologies, produces no tangible political
changes in anyone’s life but her own. Rather than reducing Black women’s
activism to some “essentialist” core of “authentic” Black women’s activism
originating in Black feminist imaginations, this approach creates space for
diverse African-American women to see how their current or potential every-
day activities participate in Black women’s activism.
203RETHINKING BLACK WOMEN’S ACTIVISM


--- PAGE 221 ---
Conceptualizing Black Women’s Activism
Whether as individuals or as members of organized groups, U.S. Black
women’s activism has occurred in two primary dimensions.The first, struggles
for group survival, consist of actions taken to create Black female spheres of
influence within existing social structures. This dimension may not directly
challenge oppressive structures because, in many cases, direct confrontation is
neither preferred nor possible. Instead, women craft Black female spheres of
influence that resist oppressive structures by undermining them. Struggles for
group survival require institutions that equip Blacks to struggle. Recognizing
that the path to individual and collective empowerment lies in the power of a
free mind, these spheres of influence often rely on crafting independent and
oppositional identities for African-American women. As such, they embrace a
form of identity politics, a worldview that sees lived Black experiences as impor-
tant to creating a critical Black consciousness and crafting political strategies.
The second dimension of Black women’s activism consists of struggles for
institutional transformation—namely , those efforts to change discriminatory
policies and procedures of government, schools, the workplace, the media,
stores, and other social institutions. Whether expressed by individuals or via
organized groups, all actions that directly challenge the legal and customary
rules governing African-American women’s subordination constitute part of
the struggle for institutional transformation. Participating in civil rights orga-
nizations, labor unions, feminist groups, boycotts, and revolts exemplify this
dimension of Black women’s activism. Because struggles for institutional trans-
formation are rarely successful without allies, this dimension of Black women’s
activism relies on coalition-building strategies. For example, Black feminism as
a social justice project has long supported or in many cases engaged in coali-
tions with other movements for social justice. Whereas the identity politics of
the struggle for group survival references the distinctiveness of U.S. Black
women’s particular encounters with social injustice, the coalition politics asso-
ciated with struggles for institutional transformation link Black women’s issues
with broader social agendas.
While conceptually distinct, these two dimensions of U.S. Black women’s
activism are actually interdependent (see, e.g., Avery 1994). For example, stud-
ies of Black domestic workers reveal that they often draw on both dimensions
while appearing to be doing neither (Rollins 1985; Dill 1988a). The vast
majority of  Black women domestic workers neither organized for better work-
ing conditions nor confronted their employers by demanding better pay—
actions representing the struggle for institutional transformation—because
they needed their jobs. Ensuring their families’ survival came first. Rather, Black
domestic workers found other ways to resist.
Many women superficially adhere to the prevailing rules and thus appear
to be endorsing them. Black women domestic workers report that they are
204 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 222 ---
often called by their White employers to play roles as deferent, contented ser-
vants grateful for handouts of old clothes in place of decent wages. But these
women simultaneously resist these ongoing attempts to dehumanize them.The
childlike, obedient servants they pretend to be masks a very different analysis
and worldview. The women share stories of acting grateful for the handouts
given them by their employers while throwing the things away as soon as they
leave their jobs (Rollins 1985). They tell of deliberately altering their physical
appearance to look worse than normal. One woman actually reports conceal-
ing her children’s college attendance from her employer in order not to appear
out of her “place.” But had these women fully accepted their “place,” they
would not encourage their children to attend college, they would not improve
their physical appearance when out of view of their employers, and they would
be truly grateful to receive handouts instead of raises.The Black female sphere
of influence created in this case was Black women’s refusal to relinquish con-
trol over their self-definitions. While they pretend to be mules and mammies
and thus appear to conform to institutional rules, they resist by creating their
own self-definitions and self-valuations in the safe spaces they create among
one another.
Sustaining an independent consciousness as a sphere of freedom enables
African-American women to engage in additional forms of resistance. Bonnie
Thornton Dill recounts numerous stories of how Black domestic workers
undermine the rules governing their employment by creating Black female
spheres of influence and control over the conditions of their work. The fol-
lowing case reveals one woman’s strategies in resisting her employer’s attempts
to supervise her work too closely:
She [the employer] told me what she wanted done and then she said,
“My girl always scrubs the floor.” Well, I noticed down in the basement
that she had a mop, and she had taken the mop and hid it. So I cleaned
the whole house and everything, but I didn’t mop the floors. And when I
got ready to go, I took the bucket, the brush, and the knee-pad and set
them in the corner.When she came in she was very pleased.... She went
into the kitchen and she looked and she said, “But you didn’t scrub the
floor.” She had a daughter who was ten years old, and I know I’m not
her girl, I’m just the lady who came to do the day’s work. So I said,
“Well, you said your girl cleans the floor, and I’m not your girl . . . and
I don’t scrub floors on my hands and knees.” “Well,” she said, “tomor-
row I’ll go out and buy a mop.” So, I got my coat on and I said, “Why
don’t you just let me go down in the basement and bring the mop up?”
(Dill 1988a, 40)
This domestic worker avoided direct actions to change the rules. She did not
form a union, confront her employer about the power inequities involved in
calling her “girl” and asking her to scrub floors on her knees when a mop was
available, or engage in other forms of overt political resistance.Yet even though
205RETHINKING BLACK WOMEN’S ACTIVISM


--- PAGE 223 ---
her actions were constrained by the need to ensure her family’s economic sur-
vival, she did challenge the rules that governed her work. Her participation in
a Black female sphere of influence gave her different tools to resist, and she
stimulated institutional transformation by undermining the rules governing
her work.
Black women’s community work, with its duality of internal and external
efforts, also incorporates these interdependent dimensions of Black women’s
activism. Dodson and Gilkes (1987) contend that Black women’s centrality in
African-American families and communities reflects the both/and conceptual
orientation of Black feminist epistemology . Curiously , Black women’s actions to
maintain community integrity through the struggle for group survival is
simultaneously conservative and radical. Bernice Johnson Reagon (1987) views
Black women who worked for Black community development as “cultural
workers,” women who thwarted European and White American efforts to
eliminate African-derived cultural frameworks.The survival of certain African-
influenced ideas and practices was not an accident but instead resulted from
“continual resistance” whereby the women in particular “took it upon them-
selves to preserve certain customs” (Thiam 1978, 123). Algerian feminist Awa
Thiam asserts, “In refusing to allow Black African civilization to be destroyed,
our mothers were revolutionary .Yet some people describe this attitude as con-
servative” (1978, 123). In the context of the proximate racism associated with
U.S. institutionalized racism—settings where Whites directly rule Blacks—
efforts to preserve “Blackness” become highly significant.This everyday racism
is so routinized that it is often taken for granted by both U.S. Blacks and Whites
(Essed 1991). Yet its purpose is to destroy not just actions that resist, but the
very ideas that might stimulate such resistance. Moreover, an emphasis on con-
serving African-derived ideas and practices as a form of resistance is not con-
fined to U.S. Black women’s activism. Kenyan thinker Acola Pala describes sim-
ilar resistance traditions in Black diasporic locations: “Travelling in the
Americas, the Caribbean and the African continent itself, one is struck by the
effect of post-colonial economic and cultural conditions that have attempted to
dehumanize and destroy the social and economic bases of Black society . Yet
paradoxically , the trauma of subjugation has not led to total despair. Instead it
has produced an insistent interrogation and resistance by Black people all over
the world” (Pala 1995, 9).
By conserving and re-creating African-influenced cultural production, U.S.
Black women participate in this larger “interrogation and resistance” effort.
This dimension of activism undermines oppressive institutions by rejecting the
anti-Black and antifemale ideologies they promulgate. In the context of U.S.
race relations organized via deeply entrenched racial segregation, having access
to a Black women’s standpoint, especially one dedicated to reproducing
African-influenced, gender-specific resistance traditions, is essential. The Black
feminist consciousness nurtured and articulated in this safe space may be all
206 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 224 ---
that stands between many U.S. Black women and internalized oppression. For
example, the domestic workers in Judith Rollins’s (1985) study retain their
sense of self-worth by adhering to an alternative value system that “measures
an individual’s worth less by material success than by ‘the kind of person you
are.’ ” These women judge themselves “by the quality of one’s interpersonal
relationships and by one’s standing in the community” (1985, 212).This eth-
ical system is what gives domestics the strength to accept what is beneficial to
them in their employers’ treatment while not being profoundly damaged by
the negative controlling images on which such treatment is based (Cannon
1988). The presence of an alternative, African-influenced value system allows
Black women to live with the contradictions inherent in viewing themselves as
worthwhile individuals in a devalued occupation.
At the same time that African-American women engage in cultural main-
tenance within Black civil society that, via its conservation of African-influ-
enced ideas and practices, lays the foundation for political activism of diverse
ideological persuasions, Black women’s political struggles to transform racist
and sexist institutions represent a more overtly radical political thrust. “Any
description of the roles of Black women in their communities ...m ust incor-
porate an understanding of this seeming contradiction,” suggest Dodson and
Gilkes (1987, 82). Black women cannot be content with merely nurturing
their families and communities because the welfare of those families and com-
munities is profoundly affected by the injustices that characterize U.S. political,
economic, and social institutions. Because African-American women and men
must function in schools and labor markets controlled by unsympathetic offi-
cials, Black women often find themselves working for institutional transfor-
mation. Katie Murray , a sheet-metal worker, only wanted to earn a decent wage
so that she could be economically self-reliant. But she found herself increas-
ingly described as a troublemaker because she refused to ignore an incident in
which her White coworkers were invited to attend a three-day workshop with
pay while she was never included: “It’s sad; we’re all out there workin’ together,
payin’ our union dues just like the whites are except they haven’t asked a black
person to go. And whenever I bring up something like this, they say I’m trying
to cause trouble. But it is not that I wanna cause trouble. It’s just that I wanna
be treated equally” (Schroedel 1985, 137).
These dual dimensions of Black women’s activism offer a new model for
examining African-American political activism overall. Philosophies of Black
nationalism and racial integration, typically seen as opposing ideological posi-
tions in Black social and political thought (Cruse 1967), resemble struggles for
group survival and institutional transformation. Just as struggles for group sur-
vival and institutional transformation might better be viewed as complemen-
tary and essential parts of the same process, so might broader Black political
philosophies.
These dual dimensions of Black women’s activism illustrate the necessity
207RETHINKING BLACK WOMEN’S ACTIVISM


--- PAGE 225 ---
of both types of political action in bringing about social change. In a 1981
speech at a women’s music festival, Bernice Johnson Reagon, a longtime
activist in the Black civil rights and women’s movements and a founding mem-
ber of the musical group Sweet Honey in the Rock, describes the necessity of
linking struggles for group survival with those of  institutional transformation.
Reagon compared building community institutions with being in a barred
room offering nurturance and a safe space: “That space while it lasts should be
a nurturing space where you sift out what people are saying about you and
decide who you really are . . . in that little barred room where you check every-
body at the door, you act out community . You pretend that your room is a
world” (Reagon 1983, 358). But while the barred room of community is nec-
essary and often may be the only form of resistance available, it cannot be suf-
ficient to bring about fundamental social change. Reagon continues:
The problem with the experiment is that there ain’t nobody in there but
folk like you. ...N o w  t h a t ’ s  n ationalism . . . it’s nurturing, but it is also
nationalism. At a certain stage nationalism is crucial to a people if you
are going to ever impact as a group in your own interest. Nationalism
at another point becomes reactionary because it is totally inadequate for
surviving in the world with many peoples. (Reagon 1983, 358)
To Reagon struggles for group survival are designed to foster autonomy , not
separatism. Moreover, this autonomy provides the foundation for the princi-
pled coalitions with other groups that are essential for institutional transfor-
mation.
This approach to Black women’s activism is also distinctive in challenging
some fundamental gendered assumptions that underlie both Black nationalism
and racial integration. Within U.S. Black politics, both ideologies advance
beliefs concerning what constitutes gender-appropriate political behavior for
African-American women and men. Within Black organizations espousing
Black nationalist ideologies, women are often associated with the private sphere
of family and community—conceptualized as a Black nation within a nation—
with men expected to defend this Black community within the public sphere
of U.S. social institutions (Collins 1998a, 155–83). Similarly , until recently ,
Black women participants in civil rights organizations routinely did not serve
as leaders and spokespersons. In both cases, gender-specific norms associate
Black men’s political activism with public sphere actions outside the organiza-
tion itself and Black women’s activism with private sphere activities within the
organization.These assumptions replicate prevailing beliefs that routinely grant
the public-sphere activities of men more credence than the private-sphere
activities of women. They also limit organizational efficacy in confronting
social injustice.
An alternative view centered in Black women’s lived experiences reveals
the significance of motherwork (Collins 1994). In general, the combination of
208 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 226 ---
mobility among Black and White neighborhoods as culturally distinct entities,
the type of work Black women performed in both settings, and the meaning
attached to Black women’s labor in both settings converged to produce a dis-
tinctive sensibility concerning political activism. Often called “maternal poli-
tics” and misunderstood within that framework (see, e.g., Wells 1998), Black
women’s motherwork reflects how political consciousness can emerge within
everyday lived experience. In this case, Black women’s participation in a con-
stellation of mothering activities, collectively called motherwork, often fos-
tered a distinctive political sensibility .
1 Viewing Black women as activists in
both struggles for group survival and for institutional transformations not only
challenges gender-specific assumptions of Black political theory and practice,
it simultaneously questions basic definitions of public, private, and political.
Struggles for Group Survival
The external constraints of racism, sexism, and poverty have been so severe
that, like Sara Brooks, the majority of African-American women have found it
difficult to participate in organized political activities. Possessing neither the
opportunity nor the resources to confront oppressive institutions directly , the
majority of U.S. Black women have engaged in struggles for group survival.
This neither means that Black women eschew more visible forms of political
protest, nor that community development activities constitute gender-appro-
priate terrain for Black women’s activism. Instead, strategies of everyday resis-
tance have largely consisted of trying to create spheres of influence, authority ,
and power within institutions that traditionally have allowed African-Americans
and women little formal authority or real power.
Ranging from the private, individual actions of Black mothers within their
homes to the more organized group behavior of Black churchwomen and
sorority sisters, Black women use a variety of strategies to undermine oppres-
sive institutions (Steady 1981; Bush 1986; Fox-Genovese 1986). As blood-
mothers and othermothers in women-centered family networks, women are
vital to African-derived cultural production. Like Sara Brooks, many Black
women confined to underpaid, demanding, menial jobs resist passing on to
their children externally defined images of Black women as mules, mammies,
matriarchs, and jezebels. Rather, they use their families as effective Black female
spheres of influence to foster their children’s self-valuation and self-reliance
(Dill 1980). In some cases Black women’s centrality in Black family networks
leads them to exert their political power through existing family structures
without appearing to do so. Anna Julia Cooper (1892) reported that even
though nineteenth-century Black women were disenfranchised, they were not
without political influence: “It is notorious that ignorant black women in the
South have actually left their husband’s homes and repudiated their support for
209RETHINKING BLACK WOMEN’S ACTIVISM


--- PAGE 227 ---
what was understood by the wife to be race disloyalty , or ‘voting away ,’ as she
expresses it, the privileges of herself and little ones” (p. 139).
Traditionally women’s activism within Black families meshed smoothly
with activism as community othermothers in the wider Black community as
“family .” In both meanings of family , African-American women worked to cre-
ate Black female spheres of influence, authority , and power that produced a
worldview markedly different from that advanced by the dominant group.
Within African-American communities Black women’s activities as cultural
workers are empowering (Reagon 1987). “The power of black women was the
power to make culture, to transmit folkways, norms, and customs, as well as to
build shared ways of seeing the world that insured our survival,” observes
Sheila Radford-Hill. “This power . . . was neither economic nor political; nor
did it translate into female dominance” (1986, 168).This culture was essential
to the struggle for group survival.
Examining one specific version of the community othermother role—
namely , Black women’s support for education—illustrates this important
dimension of Black women’s political activism. Education has long served as 
a powerful symbol for the important connections among self, change, and
empowerment in African-American communities (Lerner 1972, 83–149;
Webber 1978; Davis 1981; Neverdon-Morton 1989). The commitment to the
value of education by prominent Black women such as Anna Julia Cooper,
whose 1892 book, A Voice from the South, championed the cause of Black
women’s education; Mary McLeod Bethune, the founder of a college; Nannie
Burroughs, a vigorous campaigner for Black women’s education; and Johnetta
Cole, the first Black woman president of Spelman College, goes far beyond the
themes of gaining the technical skills essential to African-American employa-
bility , or mastering the social skills required for White acceptance (Barnett
1978). In describing the purpose of the education offered at the Institute for
Colored Youth, a school founded to educate the children of emancipated
African-Americans, principal Fanny Jackson Coppin was “not interested in pro-
ducing ‘mere scholars’ at the Institute, but rather students who would be com-
mitted to race ‘uplift’ ”(Perkins 1982, 190). Like their anonymous slave fore-
mothers, these women saw the activist potential of education and skillfully
used this Black female sphere of influence to foster a definition of education as
a cornerstone of Black community development.
African-American women have long realized that ignorance doomed Black
people to powerlessness. Under slavery it was illegal to teach African-
Americans to read and write. Mastering these skills was an expression of polit-
ical activism not because education allowed slaves to become better slaves but
because it offered skills essential in challenging the very tenets of slavery itself.
One elderly ex-slave recalls the importance that reading held for enslaved
African-Americans:
210 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 228 ---
I couldn’t read, but my uncle could. I was a waiting-maid, an’ used to
help missis to dress in the morning. If massa wanted to tell her some-
thing he didn’t want me to know, he used to spell it out. I could remem-
ber the letters, an’ as soon as I got away I ran to uncle an’ spelled them
over to him, an’ he told me what they meant. (Lerner 1972, 29–30)
When she became a mother, this anonymous African-American woman
encouraged her children to become educated, and they were among the first
to enter freedman’s schools during the Civil War. Holding high expectations
for her children, she was heard to comment about her son in particular, “Why ,
if I had his chance, do you think I would not learn!” For this mother educa-
tion was clearly a powerful tool for liberation. Denied the opportunity to read
and write, this Black woman resisted by remembering the letters and asking
her uncle what they meant. She thus appeared to be conforming to the rules
of slavery—she remained illiterate—while rejecting the rules themselves. Not
only did this mother resist slavery in this way , she passed on her conceptions
of resistance to her children through her role as educator.
Many Black mothers continue to take their roles as educators seriously .
After an evening talk that I gave at a Detroit college with a high enrollment of
Black women adult learners, one woman approached me with a question. She
wanted to know if I planned to write some of the ideas in Black Feminist
Thought in a format suitable for teenage girls. Even though she worked a full-
time job, this mother had decided to return to school after her husband left her
with eight children in her care. As she described it, her children wanted to
know what she was learning in school, and when they asked, “What you read-
ing Mamma?” she would stop and read to them from her college assignments.
When her two teenage daughters saw her reading Black Feminist Thought, they
asked about it. She translated the ideas for them, but wished for something
similar that she could place directly into their hands. The actions taken by this
mother are certainly exceptional, but her belief in education as a tool of
empowerment is not. She saw her education not as a commodity only for her-
self, but as an entity to be shared.
The activities of prominent Black female educators rest on the foundation
established by the collective actions of Black women like anonymous slave
mothers and the mother from Detroit. It is no accident that many well-known
U.S. Black women activists were either teachers or somehow involved in strug-
gling for educational opportunities for African-Americans of both sexes
(Perkins 1983; Neverdon-Morton 1989). Prior to the civil rights gains of the
1960s, limited professional opportunities pushed Black women together and
fostered a sense of collective vision. The power and status earned from
women’s roles as cultural workers served to reinforce the importance of Black
women’s roles as educators. Black men and women who were perceived by the
community as leaders of the struggle for group survival were described as
“educators.” Working for race uplift and education became intertwined.
211RETHINKING BLACK WOMEN’S ACTIVISM


--- PAGE 229 ---
This belief in education for race uplift and in the special role of Black
women in this struggle continued well into the twentieth century . In a 1938
article in the Journal of Negro History, Mary McLeod Bethune argued, “If our
people are to fight their way up and out of bondage we must arm them with
the sword and the shield . . . of pride—belief in themselves and their possibil-
ities, based upon a sure knowledge of the achievements of the past” (Lerner
1972, 544). More recently that belief and pride have come through the strug-
gle to secure our own educations. Struggles around educational issues have
politicized Black women. A 23-year-old Black woman participant in the 1982
struggle for better education at the predominantly Black and female Medgar
Evers College at the City College of New York taps this meaning of education
in what was formerly called race uplift but what came to be known in the
1960s as Black community development:
I learned so much—more than I could ever learn in the classroom! I
learned that there’s a whole lot more than getting a degree and getting
ahead financially . You must do so with principle and dignity . You can’t
just sit back and watch all the atrocious things continue to happen, take
your little class notes, read your books, and do nothing to change con-
ditions. (Nicola-McLaughlin and Chandler 1988, 195)
Traditionally , being a teacher in segregated Black communities meant the kind
of visibility that emerged as community leadership (Neverdon-Morton 1989).
In describing her role as a teacher, Fanny Jackson Coppin observed how she
had always taught two schools—the students of the Institute and the Black
community (Perkins 1982, 190). Black women used their classrooms and sta-
tus as educators to promote African-American community development. In
comparing the letters of Black and White women applying to missionary
societies to become teachers in the South after the Civil War, historian Linda
Perkins (1983) uncovered some significant differences. Overwhelmingly sin-
gle, upper- and middle-class, unemployed, and educated in New England
colleges and at Oberlin, White women wrote of the “deep need to escape
idleness and boredom” brought on by their placement in the cult of true
womanhood. In contrast, the Black women who applied were employed and
financially supported families, and their letters consistently reflected themes
of duty and race uplift. While White women working in the South generally
did so for two to three years, Black women expressed the desire to “devote
their entire lives to their work.” Perkins points out that most did. Formally
educated Black women teachers in early-twentieth-century Washington, D.C.,
also believed that they had a special responsibility to their respective commu-
nities which they alone could fulfill (Harley 1982). Such women “often saw
themselves more as ‘uplifters’ than as working women.. . . Educating the chil-
dren of poor unlettered blacks was considered part of their moral and social
obligations as educated women” (Harley 1982, 257). In describing the work
212 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 230 ---
of one of her teachers who expressed this type of political leadership, Alice
Walker notes, “mostly she taught by the courage of her own life, which to me
is the highest form of teaching” (1983, 38).
Black women’s activities in churches have also been profoundly influenced
by similar ideas concerning education, motherwork, and political activism.
Dodson and Gilkes (1987) suggest, “If any one ministry could be identified
as central to the black sacred cosmos of the twentieth century , it would be
education. . . . Black people . . . defined education of the oppressed and the
oppressors as central tasks of Christian mission” (p. 84). Black churches have
supported a variety of social, economic, political, and ethical actions essential
to Black community development (Sobel 1979; Mitchell and Lewter 1986).
While men dominate positions of formal authority in church hierarchies,
women make up a large percentage of the congregations, hold positions of
authority , and generally exert an important influence on African-American
church communities across denominations (Dodson and Gilkes 1987).The sit-
uation is far more complex than that proposed by traditional models arguing
that female “followers” obey the orders of male “leaders.” Rather, men and
women appear to exert different types of leadership within Black church com-
munities.
“It was biblical faith grounded in the prophetic tradition,” declares Katie
Cannon, that helped Black women “devise strategies and tactics to make Black
people less susceptible to the indignities and proscriptions of an oppressive
white social order” (1985, 35). Cheryl Gilkes’s (1985) work on the turn-of-
the-century Sanctified Church describes how African-American women used
this prophetic tradition to create and maintain a sophisticated sisterhood.
Gilkes contends that “women’s concentration in educational roles . . . was not
simply a form of female segregation: instead it was the basis for alternative
structures of authority , career pathways, and spheres of influence” (1985,
689). During a time when dominant society derogated African-American
women, Black women in the Sanctified Church referred to one another as
“saints.” In doing this they clearly rejected their societally defined “place” in
favor of creating their own self-definitions. Their emphasis on biblical author-
ity made learning “the Word” an important means for living a sanctified life
and offered a powerful rationale for getting an education. During a time when
educated African-American women were scarce, the women in the largely
working-class congregations encouraged one another to become educated. As
fund-raisers women made essential economic contributions to Sanctified
churches. Strong Women’s Departments retained control over the disbursement
and allocation of their funds. The women “believed in economic cooperation
with men, not in economic dependence on them” (Gilkes 1985, 690). By giv-
ing advice to their younger “sisters,” older women taught less experienced
women the skills necessary for their survival as African-American women.
Sisterhood did not occur at the expense of Black men or children. Rather, it
213RETHINKING BLACK WOMEN’S ACTIVISM


--- PAGE 231 ---
meshed with the needs of these groups so that the church practiced unity with-
out uniformity .
A similar perspective on the importance of education, sisterhood, self-def-
initions, self-valuations, and economic self-reliance permeated other Black
women’s organizations. Through advocacy and education the turn-of-the-cen-
tury Black women’s club movement aimed to address a broad spectrum of
Black women’s issues (Neverdon-Morton 1989). The original departments
of the National Association of Colored Women, the first national organiza-
tion of Black women’s organizations, included the following units: Woman
Suffrage, Patriotism, Education, Conditions in Rural Life, Music, Literature and
Art, Gainful Occupation and Business, Better Railroad Conditions, Mothers
Meetings and Night Schools, Public Speaking, and Child Welfare (Lerner 1972,
445). Black sororities also listed as part of their mission attending to the spe-
cial needs of Black women as a key part of the struggle for group survival
(Giddings 1988).
Not all African-American women were welcomed as equal participants in
middle-class Black women’s organizations. While working on behalf of all
Black women, members of the Black Women’s Club Movement did not work
with them as equals. The general thinking among many middle-class reform-
ers “was that most uneducated, unskilled women were in need of social and
moral uplift and, therefore, lacked the refinement . . . to join in the uplift
process, at least as members of their organizations” (Harley 1982, 258). Early-
twentieth-century Black churches were key locations where Black women who
were less educated and less financially secure than the better-educated teachers
who populated Black women’s organizations could exert leadership. Working-
class and poor Black women took up membership in church women’s groups,
female auxiliaries to fraternal orders, and benevolent societies.These organiza-
tions generally required less affluent lifestyles and less active public roles and
had more practical benefits for their members than did predominantly middle-
class reform organizations (Harley 1982).
Despite social class differences among Black women, this tradition of
becoming educated for Black community development has permeated U.S.
Black women’s activism. One study of 25 Black women community leaders
found that they rejected limited definitions of education. In assessing their own
educational experiences, these Black women were highly critical of the functions
of higher education as an agency of socialization into a White middle-class
worldview.They perceived higher education in White-controlled institutions as
a “form of pacification and mystification,” education that “teaches you not to
fight.”These women rejected this form of education in favor of “focused edu-
cations” within the same White institutions that would allow them to continue
the tradition of Black women working for race uplift (Gilkes 1983b).
Depending on their social class backgrounds, these women followed dif-
ferent routes to acquiring a focused education. For middle-class women social
responsibility was stressed by their parents. These women were taught to
214 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 232 ---
adhere to the long tradition of educated Black women working on behalf of
the race. In contrast, working-class women went to school for the credentials
and information they felt they needed for specific community problems. One
respondent from a working-class background recounts her reasons for return-
ing to school:
I heard people talking about how black parents were apathetic and I
never believed that black parents were apathetic....P a r ents had always
had the feeling, and I was under the same impression until I became
involved with the teachers, that teachers were always right because we
(black people) always have this great respect for education....I  f elt even
though I worked with a parents’ group that because I wasn’t a teacher
no one took my words very seriously . And I decided that I was going to
become a teacher, not to work in the classroom, but to work with par-
ents. (Gilkes 1983b, 121)
This woman’s focused education empowered her by granting her the creden-
tials she felt she needed to organize parents. Her education was designed to
further African-Americans as a group, not solely for her own personal devel-
opment.
In still other cases, Black nationalist ideology stimulates a focused educa-
tion that enables working class Black women to work as social activists. Despite
being widely overlooked in Black feminist scholarship, the Garvey Movement
remains the largest mass movement of U.S. Blacks. A large part of the member-
ship was working-class and, as work on Amy Jacques Garvey suggests (Adler
1992), Black women who were influenced by Garvey’s Black nationalism saw
their contributions as women as vitally important to Black community devel-
opment. The long and highly distinguished career of Elma Lewis, founder of
the Boston-based Elma Lewis School of Fine Arts and the National Center of
Afro-American Artists, illustrates the convergence of themes that distinguish
Black women’s struggles for group survival.The daughter of West Indian immi-
grants, her father a day laborer, and her mother a domestic worker, Lewis
learned from them the value of education, the arts, and Marcus Garvey . Taking
Garvey’s philosophy , “Up you mighty people, you can what you will,” to heart,
Elma Lewis began her school in 1950 with $300, two used pianos, two used
folding tables, and two used chairs. As Ms. Lewis recalls, it never occurred to
her that the school might not succeed because she believed in the creed that
she instills in her school’s pupils, “Glory in yourself. Anything is possible.”
Over the years, thousands of children have studied classical ballet, theater,
voice, and African dance at the center. Although she was 77 years old in 1998,
Ms. Lewis still presided over the 29th season of “Black Nativity ,” the Langston
Hughes gospel play that celebrates Black culture. Ms. Lewis is a cultural work-
er of the kind described by Bernice Johnson Reagon (1987). Her socially
responsible individualism grounded in education, culture, and Marcus Garvey
215RETHINKING BLACK WOMEN’S ACTIVISM


--- PAGE 233 ---
allows her to persist. She notes, “We’re always looking at what’s lost. I have to
look at what I have and where I can go” (Rimer 1998, A16).
Acquiring a focused education demonstrates the significance of self,
change, and empowerment for Black women. A 38-year-old mother of five
who participated in the struggle at Medgar Evers College describes the impor-
tance the struggle for an education had for her: “More than anything, I learned
that I am a powerful person! You see, it’s important to realize that no matter
what your age or what you’ve been through, each person can make a contribu-
tion to changing the conditions of our people” (Nicola-McLaughlin and
Chandler 1988, 194). Perhaps Black women’s empowerment through education
is best summarized by another participant in that same political movement. She
asserts, “I was basically a shy and reserved person prior to the struggle at
Medgar, but I found my voice—and I used it! Now, I will never lose my voice
again!” (Nicola-McLaughlin and Chandler 1988, 195).
Struggles for Institutional Transformation
Actions taken to eliminate discrimination in housing, employment, education,
public accommodations, and political representation represent activism aimed
at changing the rules that circumscribe African-American women’s lives.
Traditionally ,Black women have either been excluded from or assigned subor-
dinate roles within civil rights, women’s, labor, or other organizations devoted
to institutional transformation (Terborg-Penn 1985; Davis 1981). For example,
the male leadership of Black civil rights organizations found it difficult to see
Black women as leaders in the civil rights movement (Barnett 1993). U.S.
women’s organizations also relegated African-American women to subordinate
positions (Caraway 1991). Even radical Black organizations such as the Black
Panther Party found it difficult to shake notions that women were unsuitable
for leadership (Brown 1992). Patterns of U.S. Black women’s activism thus
reflect less about Black women’s preferred political choices and more about
existing opportunities.
Depending on historical time and place, African-American women
employed a range of strategies in challenging the rules governing our subor-
dination. In many cases Black women practiced individual protest against
unfair rules and practices. Ruth Powell had her first encounter with Jim Crow
in Washington, D.C.’s drugstore cafeterias when she was a law student at
Howard University in the 1940s. The experience was devastating: “I sat there
for about ten minutes watching the waitresses whizzing back and forth in front
of me, when suddenly the awful truth dawned and I realized what was hap-
pening” (Murray 1987, 205). She left the store. She knew that “I, alone, couldn’t
do anything concrete to revolutionize conditions,” but she also believed “I had
to do something to preserve what remained of my self-respect” (p. 205). Ruth
216 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 234 ---
Powell’s “something” evolved into a one-woman campaign. She would enter
cafeterias, politely ask for service, and, when refused, sit quietly , sometimes 
for hours at a time. During her sit-ins she would pick out a waiter and stare at
him for perhaps an hour or more. “Whether I was finally served or not was
unimportant,” Powell explained. “What I believed was that all these little bits
of agitation would go toward that vital ...a w a kening process” (p. 205).
Powell’s stance represents action taken to get the rules themselves changed.
Black women have also protested by working within formal organizations and
groups. Many African-American women’s organizations that actively engaged
in the struggle for group survival were tireless lobbyists for legal reforms. Black
women have also seen the need for principled coalitions with groups affected
by similar issues. The contributions of countless Black female rank-and-file
activists in civil rights, feminist, and labor movements reflect strategies
designed to change the rules of the system by working within reformist orga-
nizations (Giddings 1984). During the 1970s and 1980s, even though Black
women remained underrepresented in elected public office relative to their
proportion of the population, Black women made greater gains than White
women in election to mayoral, state legislative, and congressional office (Darcy
and Hadley 1988). Still other cases involve African-American women’s involve-
ment in violent resistance against slavery and other forms of political and legal
oppression (Terborg-Penn 1986).
Being one of the few groups negatively affected by multiple forms of
oppression, African-American women have been in a better position to see
their interrelationships.Thus the diverse strategies employed in the struggle for
institutional transformation have been paralleled by a similar diversity in the
types of rules Black women have challenged. Black women have had an endur-
ing interest not just in resisting racist and sexist laws and customs, but in
changing a broad segment of the rules shaping American society . For example,
despite the fact that Black women do not readily identify themselves as femi-
nists, high levels of support for feminist issues exist among African-American
women (King 1988).
Although African-American women may implicitly support a humanist
vision for institutional transformation, Black women’s political strategies 
may not explicitly address this vision. Many women begin their political
activism as advocates for African-Americans, the poor, or, less frequently ,
women. But over time Black women activists come to see oppressions as inter-
connected and the need for broad-based political action. Rather than joining a
range of organizations, each devoted to single-purpose issues, many Black
women activists either start new organizations or work to transform the insti-
tutions in which they are situated. For example, Black women in the civil rights
movement initially joined to address racial inequality but found themselves
protesting gender inequality as well (Evans 1979). Faye Wattleton’s astute lead-
ership of Planned Parenthood, Gloria Scott’s resourceful actions to make the
217RETHINKING BLACK WOMEN’S ACTIVISM


--- PAGE 235 ---
Girl Scouts of America more racially and economically inclusive, and 
Marian Wright Edelman’s judicious leadership of the Children’s Defense Fund
all appear to tie these women to single-issue causes that are not race specific.
But closer examination reveals that even though these women do not project
themselves as being advocates for Black women, their organizational actions
directly benefit Black women. Where many just talk about resistance, they
deliver tangible results.
Black Women’s Leadership and Institutional
Transformation
U.S. Black women’s long-standing participation in organized political activities
fosters a rethinking of the ways in which many Black women conceptualize
and use power. Black women’s use of power seems to grow from distinctive
conceptions of how people become empowered, how power can be structured
and shared in organizational settings, and how organizations would look if
people were to be fully empowered within them. Examining Black women’s
leadership in organizations whose mission is institutional change offers a route
to examining these larger questions.
African-American women have been active in movements for Black civil
rights such as the abolitionist movement, the antilynching struggles in the
early twentieth century , and the more recent civil rights movement in the South
(Giddings 1984). While Black women in such organizations rarely worked
exclusively on behalf of Black women, the types of issues they championed and
the ways in which they operated within these organizations suggest that they
brought an understanding of Black women’s concerns to their political
activism.
Black women’s organizational style within predominantly Black organiza-
tions reveals much about how many U.S. Black women exercise power.
Understandings of empowerment gained as community othermothers and
cultural workers shape Black women’s political activities. Drawing on the
model of education as empowerment, many Black women routinely reject
models of authority based on unjust hierarchies. For example, Black activist
Septima Clark disagreed with the style of leadership in the Southern Christian
Leadership Conference during the civil rights movement. Ms. Clark said, “You
can work behind the scenes all you want. . . . But don’t come forth and try to
lead. That’s not the kind of thing they [Black men] want” (Brown 1986, 77).
Ms. Clark tried to influence the male-dominated organization: “I sent a letter
to Dr. King asking him not to lead all the marches himself, but instead to devel-
op leaders who could lead their own marches. Dr. King read that letter before
the staff. It just tickled them; they just laughed” (p. 77).
African-American women like Septima Clark carried distinctive notions of
218 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 236 ---
leadership and empowerment into the Black civil rights struggle, ideas whereby ,
according to Nikki Giovanni, “the purpose of any leadership is to build more
leadership. The purpose of being a spokesperson is to speak until the people
gain a voice” (1988, 135). Septima Clark’s explanation of why she wished
to develop a broad base of community leaders illustrates how the commitment
to education as an empowering tool can operate in Black women’s political
activism: “I thought that you develop leaders as you go along, and as you
develop these people let them show forth their development by leading” (p. 77).
Black women’s style of activism also reflects a belief that teaching people
how to be self-reliant fosters more empowerment than teaching them how to
follow. Black civil rights activist Ella Baker, a major figure in the Southern
Christian Leadership Conference who worked closely with students, recounts
how she nurtured the empowerment of student civil rights workers: “I never
intervened between the struggles if I could avoid it. Most of the youngsters had
been trained to believe in or to follow adults if they could. I felt they ought to
have a chance to learn to think things through and to make the decisions”
(Cantarow 1980, 87). Drawing on both the community othermother model of
relationships and education as a tool of empowerment, Ms. Baker did inter-
vene, but only if she felt that the students were in danger. Her model of “par-
ticipatory democracy” emerges from these understandings of empowerment
(Mueller 1990).
“We must strive to ‘lift as we climb.’ . . . We must climb in such a way as
to guarantee that all our sisters, regardless of social class, and indeed all of our
brothers climb with us. This must be the essential dynamic of our quest for
power,” counsels Angela Davis (1989,5).The models of leadership offered by both
Septima Clark and Ella Baker speak to a distinctively Black female mode of polit-
ical activism. Both women clearly could have been leaders in the traditional
sense of being figureheads with formal authority . But studying their actual
behavior reveals that they both wielded considerable power within their orga-
nizations which grew from their perspective on social change.
2
The strategies employed by many African-American women within labor
organizations reinforces this theme that traditional sources of Black women’s
empowerment influence Black women’s organizational behavior. One intrigu-
ing case study of a protracted and eventually successful effort to organize sec-
retaries at a hospital in a small Southern city illustrates how Black women draw
on prevailing African-American understandings of family and community
(Sacks 1984, 1988).
3 Community and kin ties drew Black women together
across the hospital’s bureaucratic units. These workplace networks in turn
became the basis for organizing. People in the networks shared a family idiom
by celebrating one another’s family and life-cycle events and referring to them-
selves as “family .”
Certain women in these overlapping community and workplace networks
became “centerwomen.” The skills centerwomen gained from their centrality
219RETHINKING BLACK WOMEN’S ACTIVISM


--- PAGE 237 ---
in women-centered family networks enabled them to keep people together,
ensure that obligations were fulfilled, and maintain group consensus. In the
union-organizing drive, Black women’s motherwork proved to be fundamen-
tal to this particular effort at institutional transformation (Collins 1994). The
drive was successful because of the existence of two equally important dimen-
sions of leadership: that offered by spokespersons who engaged in direct nego-
tiations with management, and that provided by centerpersons who fostered
group solidarity among the workers. While men and women are capable of
exercising both types, in this particular case the functions were divided by gen-
der. Men were spokespersons and women were centerpersons. Despite the suc-
cess of this case of community organizing, its assumptions of complementarity
remain questionable. Complementarity in and of itself need not result in
inequality . However, as Leith Mullings points out, “assumptions about inferi-
ority and superiority are usually implicit in frameworks of complementarity
that operate within the context of a hierarchical society” (Mullings 1997, 139).
Research on Black women community leaders reinforces this notion that
Black women work for institutional transformation in characteristic ways
(Gilkes 1983b, 1988). In one study , Black women leaders used their positions
as heads of social service agencies to change the rules by which those agencies
operated. One agency director commented, “You will never eliminate discrim-
ination through complaints.... The thing that you’ve got to do is to get into
those institutions and work from top to bottom: how they set policies; who’s
setting policies; why this is the policy” (1983b, 129). Even though their agen-
cies were funded and controlled by Whites, in the same way that Black women
domestic workers used their positions to deliver material goods and skills to
their children, these women used their institutions to empower African-
Americans. They “saw the black community as a group of relatives and other
friends whose interests should be advanced and promoted at all times, under
all conditions, and by almost any means” (1983b, 117).
These women’s work for institutional transformation often put their jobs
in jeopardy . Because the work, and not the particular job, was their focus, they
moved on when organizational limits combined with turning points in their
self-development. By defining their jobs as institutional transformation versus
trying to fit into the existing system, they gained a degree of “spiritual inde-
pendence.”Acquiring a focused education by moving through jobs enabled the
women to see the bigger picture obscured by working only within one setting.
By fostering African-American autonomy through their institutions, these
women expanded their web of affiliations to make alliances with one another.
Despite ideological differences, the women participating in this web of com-
munity workers sat on one another’s boards and generally helped to further the
distinctive goals of their individual organizations. Gilkes assesses this strategic
placement on agency boards:
220 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 238 ---
The affiliations are reflections of the locations and types of problems in
the community . Although a community worker may have a well-articu-
lated political ideology , her affiliations are not always a reflection of her
choice between sides of an ideological debate such as integration versus
separatism or radical political strategies versus traditional party politics.
The women’s affiliations with white-controlled institutions are a reflec-
tion of where they feel Black folks need to be in order to exert some
control over their lives and futures. (Gilkes 1988, 68)
Nancy Naples’s (1991, 1996) research on activist mothering traditions among
Black and Puerto Rican women in low-income urban neighborhoods provides
another angle of vision on how U.S. Black women work for institutional trans-
formation. Whereas prevailing academic approaches fragment social life by
separating paid work from social reproduction, activism from mothering, and
family from community , the ideas and actions of Black women community
workers challenge these arrangements. Many of the women initially became
involved in community politics because of their children. But their subsequent
political involvement grew beyond their own individual families as they saw
how their personal troubles were politically constituted. Naples describes how
one Black single mother became politicized. Lack of heat, water leaks, and
mice and rats roaming her apartment all contributed to her determination to
fight against poor housing. Sadly , her son’s death from pneumonia served as a
powerful catalyst:
What had happened is wrong! All the little babies that were born that
year died that winter in those houses, except one little boy . And we took
the babies to Metropolitan Hospital, and they bathed the babies in alco-
hol and gave them some aspirin and told us to take them home. And 
I started fighting them, the Health Department, and others, to get heat
in the house, and other things like that. I knew that it didn’t have to be
like that.There’s no reason that my children or anybody else’s had to live
like that. So when my kids started school I tried to organize the parents.
(Naples 1996, 231)
Both African-American women and men have been workers for Black com-
munity development. Although neither Gilkes nor Naples takes this position,
their work suggests that Black women community workers are more likely
than men to maintain strategic affiliations with individuals and groups
engaged in similar social justice projects. The community leader engaged in
working for better housing in Harlem certainly has a vested interest in devel-
oping as broad based a constituency as possible. In the immediacy of provid-
ing services for Black children, especially given the immediate risk to many ,
ideological squabbles over the relative merits of racial integration or Black
nationalism seem unimportant. This does not mean that Black women lack
ideology but, rather, that our experiences as mothers, centerwomen, and com-
221RETHINKING BLACK WOMEN’S ACTIVISM


--- PAGE 239 ---
munity othermothers foster a distinctive form of political activism based on
negotiation and a higher degree of attention to context (Gilligan 1982;
Belenky et al. 1986).
Black Women’s Activism Revisited
As long as social justice remains elusive for African-American women, it is
likely to evade U.S. society overall. Therefore, the need for Black women’s
activism most likely will persist. But while the dialectical relationship linking
oppression and activism remains, the changing organization of intersecting
oppressions as well as the contours of activism required for resistance demand
a dynamic Black women’s activism and an equally vigorous U.S. Black feminism.
Different historical eras provide new challenges and opportunities for U.S.
Black women’s activism.With hindsight, the connections between the shape of
Black women’s activism during prior periods and the particular challenges of
those eras seem fairly straightforward:The “race uplift” ideology of Black club
women targeted the installation of racial segregation during the Jim Crow era,
whereas the demonstrations during the civil rights era aimed to breathe life
into newly passed laws that outlawed this segregation. Historical analysis is
always valuable, yet looking ahead remains more difficult. As Tiffany , an 11-
year-old Black girl from Birmingham, Alabama, puts it, “I’m not as concerned
with black history as I am with black present” (Carroll 1997, 137).
The litany of social problems that now face far too many U.S. Black
women—poverty , violence, poor living conditions, inadequate health care, and
reproductive concerns—are well known. These same issues also confront
women of African descent transnationally (Aina 1998). Many of the causes of
these social problems are also known—the growth of the global economy has
produced gender-specific forms of integration into the workforce; an increas-
ingly effective global media that, via its routine circulation of updated control-
ling images of Black women, reinscribes long-standing notions of Black
women’s sexuality; deeply entrenched racial segregation in housing, schooling,
and employment that gives Black women’s poverty a particularly harsh expres-
sion; and the emergence of a conservative political climate in the United States
seemingly dedicated to limiting the protections of the social welfare state.
Despite the unique form that these social problems now assume in the United
States, they resemble those confronted by African-American women in earlier
periods as well as those currently faced by women of African descent transna-
tionally . In this context, both dimensions of Black women’s activism are needed
yet both must also be reconfigured in new ways. Presenting either struggles for
group survival or struggles for institutional transformation as being more fun-
damental than the other seems shortsighted.
Take, for example, struggles for group survival. The type of self-defined,
222 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 240 ---
Black-oriented community politics that has long sustained African-Americans
has come under attack. Since African-American women have long engaged in
motherwork designed to build strong Black identities capable of withstanding
the assaults of White supremacist rhetoric and practice, abandoning identity
politics of this sort may work against group survival. As critical legal theorist
Patricia Williams points out, “Whereas segregation and group exclusion were
once thought of as the stigma of inferiority , now it is the very identification of
blacks and other racial minorities as groups that is stigmatizing—despite the
fact that the project is inclusion” (1995, 103). Williams recounts her stint on 
an admissions committee that received applications from Blacks with phrases
such as “Don’t admit me if you have to lower your standards” on their appli-
cations. This shift from claiming group membership and using it as a political
force for social justice to seeing one’s group membership as a permanent 
stigma that retards achieving it seemed lost on the applicants. They seemed
unable to counter long-standing racist logic that argues that the inclusion of 
Blacks means that the system has been undermined, and the exclusion of Blacks
means that it is still fair.
The challenges for U.S. Black women across diverse social classes consists
of revitalizing institutions of Black civil society so that they can counter situa-
tions such as these. If African-Americans ourselves cannot identify with
Blackness, then why would anyone else value it? If U.S. Black women cannot
put ourselves in the center of our own intellectual and political work and claim
identities as Black women, then who else will? It appears that increasing num-
bers of Blacks are unprepared politically to recognize and deal with new forms
that racism, sexism, and other kinds of oppression now take. Pearl Cleage
describes the type of socialization she had as a child that allowed her to con-
front institutionalized racism. “I had an oppressed person’s most potent
weapons: information, analysis and positive group identity ,” claims Cleage
(1993, 31). The collective efforts of Black women ranging from well-known
clubwomen to anonymous Black mothers provided these weapons for Black
children. Now, however, large numbers of Black children remain warehoused
in inner-city schools, sadly , many of them taught by Black teachers who have
little institutional memory of this type of activism. Gaining access to this
dimension of Black women’s activism is not likely to improve without some
sort of intervention. More than 70 percent of Black college students attend pre-
dominantly White institutions, and, unlike the community leaders in Cheryl
Gilkes’s studies, many fail to see the importance of gaining focused educations
for either group survival or institutional transformation.
Struggles for institutional transformation also remain needed. The legisla-
tive victories of the 1960s provided a new floor for struggle—they did not sig-
nal an end to institutionalized racism and sexism as so many people believe. In
a provocative article titled “White Men Can’t Count,” Patricia Williams observes,
“There is simply no data anywhere to show that minorities or women have
223RETHINKING BLACK WOMEN’S ACTIVISM


--- PAGE 241 ---
taken over any part of any given institution in America” (Williams 1995, 98).
Despite our repeated stigmatization, U.S. Black women do not control military
weaponry , industries, colleges and universities, banks, government agencies, and
media empires. African-Americans still struggle to acquire positions of power.
Both U.S. institutions and Black civil society are organized quite differently
now, in large part because of domestic and global political changes that legally
desegregated America and decolonized the globe, as well as economic changes
that fostered an interdependent, global economy .The effects of these factors on
Black civil society have been mixed and fostered the emergence of new prob-
lems. For one, the magnitude of drugs, violence, and Black street children left
to raise themselves threaten to erode the social fabric not only of Black neigh-
borhoods, but of the United States overall. How much more land can suburbs
and exurbs safely pave over to build affluent White neighborhoods far from 
the inner city without huge environmental costs? For another, misogynist
strains within Black popular culture have revitalized a masculinist politics that
far too often demeans Black women. The work of some Afrocentric scholars,
the lyrics of 2 Live Crew and similar male rappers, and the symbolic portrayal
of Malcolm X as a “redemptive Black patriarch” (Ransby and Matthews 1993,
57) all can be seen as evidence for the increasing intolerance Black women
confront within Black civil society . Yet another issue concerns the growing
numbers of mixed-race children who seek new guidelines of how to negotiate
Black political identities. Prior eras granted mulattos and light-skinned Blacks
special favors, suggesting that a similar fate may await mixed-race and biracial
children. Attending to the political well-being of these children raises entirely
new issues for Black women. In large part, these are the children of White
mothers, and their understandings of Blackness reflect the range of their White
mothers’ willingness to embrace social and political Blackness. Lisa Jones, a
Black woman raised by her White mother, puts her finger on the political prob-
lem: “One thing I’m clear on: If we can’t find a way to make multiethnic stand
for antiracism, then I’ll pass on it” (Jones 1994, 203).
These issues do not erase the need for Black women’s organizations that
build on the base of the activist mothering of Black women’s community 
work. Such work does not explicitly advocate for Black women but instead sees
Black women’s advancement occurring in the context of community . As a
result, this politicized motherwork is alternately seen as being a “conservative”
example of “women’s work” or, at best, as a less-developed form of feminism.
4
However, Black women’s struggles for group survival as well as those dedicat-
ed to institutional transformation are just as needed now as in the past.
Nothing in either struggle precludes individual Black women or groups of
African-American women from engaging in coalitions with other groups.This
is not an exclusionary identity politics, merely a Black-women-centered one.
The humanist vision in Black feminist thought has deep historical roots in
the political activism of African-American women such as Sara Brooks, anony-
224 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 242 ---
mous slave mothers, turn-of-the-century Black women educators, countless
Ruth Powells, the centerwomen in the hospital union, the community women
workers in Gilkes’s study , and the Black and Latina community activists in Nancy
Naples’s work. These Black women activists generally transcended their differ-
ences in order to create a powerful Black women’s activist tradition. It remains
to be seen whether African-American women’s responses to contemporary chal-
lenges will follow their lead and create new ways to “lift as we climb.”
225RETHINKING BLACK WOMEN’S ACTIVISM


--- PAGE 243 ---



--- PAGE 244 ---
Black women scholars and professionals cannot afford to ignore the straits of our
sisters who are acquainted with the immediacy of oppression in a way many of us
are not.The process of empowerment cannot be simplistically defined in accordance
with our own particular class interests. We must learn to lift as we climb.
—Angela Davis 1989, 9
Within U.S. Black feminism,race, class 
gender, and sexuality constitute mutually constructing systems of oppression
(Davis 1981; Smith 1983;Lorde 1984; Crenshaw 1991).Intersectional paradigms
make two important contributions to understanding the connections between
knowledge and empowerment. For one, they stimulate new interpretations of
African-American women’s experiences. Much of the work on U.S. Black
women reported in earlier chapters relies on intersectional paradigms of some
sort. For example, African-American women’s confinement to domestic work
revealed how race and gender influenced Black women’s social class experi-
ences. Similarly , the sexual politics of Black womanhood that shaped Black
women’s experiences with pornography , prostitution, and rape relied upon
racist, sexist, and heterosexist ideologies to construct Black women’s sexualities
as deviant. Not only do intersectional paradigms prove useful in explaining U.S.
Black women’s experiences, such paradigms suggest that intersecting oppres-
sions also shape the experiences of other groups as well. Puerto Ricans, U.S.
White men,Asian American gays and lesbians, U.S.White women, and other his-
torically identifiable groups all have distinctive histories that reflect their unique
placement in intersecting oppressions (Andersen and Collins 1998).
Intersectional paradigms make a second important contribution to untan-
gling the relationships between knowledge and empowerment—they shed new
light on how domination is organized. The term matrix of domination describes
10
U.S.
BLACK
FEMINISM
IN 
TRANSNATIONAL 
CONTEXT
10
Part 3:
Black Feminism, Knowledge,
and Power


--- PAGE 245 ---
this overall social organization within which intersecting oppressions originate,
develop, and are contained. In the United States, such domination has occurred
through schools, housing, employment, government, and other social institutions
that regulate the actual patterns of intersecting oppressions that Black women
encounter. Just as intersecting oppressions take on historically specific forms that
change in response to human actions—racial segregation persists, but not in the
forms that it took in prior historical eras—so the shape of domination itself
changes.
As the particular form assumed by intersecting oppressions in one social
location, any matrix of domination can be seen as an historically specific organi-
zation of power in which social groups are embedded and which they aim to
influence.When Maria Stewart asked, “How long shall the fair daughters of Africa
be compelled to bury their minds and talents beneath a load of iron pots and ket-
tles?” (Richardson 1987), her query focused on the dialectical relationship link-
ing oppression and activism for one period of time, the early 1800s, and in one
social location, the United States. When Angela Davis counsels that privileged
Black women not “ignore the straits of our sisters who are acquainted with the
immediacy of oppression in a way many of us are not,” she stresses the need for
new ways of conceptualizing oppression and activism that take class differences
of a global matrix of domination into account. All contexts of domination incor-
porate some combination of intersecting oppressions, and considerable variabil-
ity exists from one matrix of domination to the next as to how oppression and
activism will be organized. For example, as Senegalese feminists (Imam et al.
1997), Black American feminists (Guy-Sheftall 1995b), and Black British femi-
nists (Mirza 1997) all point out, social institutions in Senegal, the United States,
and the United Kingdom reflect intersecting oppressions of race, class, gender, and
sexuality . Yet social relations within these three nation-states differ: Domination
is structured differently in Senegal, the United States, and the United Kingdom.
Thus, regardless of how any given matrix is actually organized either across time
or from society to society , the concept of a matrix of domination encapsulates the
universality of intersecting oppressions as organized through diverse local realities.
Placing U.S. Black women’s experiences in the center of analysis without
privileging those experiences shows how intersectional paradigms can be 
especially important for rethinking the particular matrix of domination that
characterizes U.S. society . Claims that systems of race, social class, gender, and
sexuality form mutually constructing features of social organization foster a basic
rethinking of  U.S. social institutions. For example, using intersecting paradigms
to investigate U.S. Black women’s experiences challenges deeply held beliefs that
work and family constitute separate spheres of social organization. Since U.S.
Black women’s experiences have never fit the logic of work in the public sphere
juxtaposed to family obligations in the private sphere, these categories lose
meaning. As the persistent racial discrimination in schooling, housing, jobs, and
public services indicates, Black women’s experiences certainly challenge U.S. class
228 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 246 ---
ideologies claiming that individual merit is all that matters in determining social
rewards.The sexual politics of Black womanhood reveals the fallacy of assuming
that gender affects all women in the same way—race and class matter greatly . U.S.
Black women’s activism, especially its dual commitment to struggles for group
survival and to institutional transformation, suggests that understandings of the
political should be rethought.Thus, by using intersectional paradigms to explain
both the U.S. matrix of domination and Black women’s individual and collective
agency within it, Black feminist thought helps reconceptualize social relations of
domination and resistance.
Nation and Nationalism
Despite these contributions, U.S. Black feminist thought must continue to develop
even more complex analyses of intersecting oppressions—how such oppres-
sions are organized, their effect on group composition and history , their influ-
ence on individual consciousness, and, most importantly , collective strategies of
resistance. Moving from race, class, and gender to generate analyses that include
heterosexism as a system of oppression certainly constitutes a step in the right
direction. But U.S. Black feminism will remain hindered in its goal of fostering
Black women’s empowerment in a context of social justice unless it incorporates
more comprehensive analyses of how nation can constitute another form of
oppression (Anthias and Yuval-Davis 1992;Yuval-Davis 1997).
Race, class, gender, and sexuality all remain closely intertwined with nation.
In exploring these connections, it is important to distinguish among the terms
nation, nation-state, and nationalism.These terms are often used interchangeably ,
but they refer to different things. A nation consists of a collection of people who
have come to believe that they have been shaped by a common past and are des-
tined to share a common future.That belief is usually nurtured by common cul-
tural characteristics, such as language and customs; a well-defined geographic
territory; the belief in a common history or origin; the belief that closer ties exist
among members of the nation than with outsiders; a sense of difference from
groups around them; and a shared hostility toward outsider groups.Nationalismis
a political ideology that is expressed by any group that self-defines as a distinctive
people or nation. Nationalist ideologies strive to foster beliefs and practices which
permit a people or nation to control its own destiny .When any one group acquires
sufficient state power that allows it to realize its goals, it controls a nation-state.
In the United States, because affluent White men control government and
industry , public policies usually benefit this group. In other words, despite the
U.S. Constitution’s stated commitment to equality of all American citizens, his-
torically , the differential treatment of U.S. Blacks, women, the working class, and
other subordinated groups meant that the United States operated as a nation-state
that disproportionately benefited affluent White men. Because this group con-
229U.S. BLACK FEMINISM IN TRANSNATIONAL CONTEXT


--- PAGE 247 ---
trols schools, the news media, and other social institutions that legitimate what
counts as truth, it possesses the authority to obscure its own power and to rede-
fine its own special interests as being national interests. In response to this situ-
ation, U.S. Blacks, Chicanos, Puerto Ricans, Native Americans, and other similar
groups have often themselves embraced nationalist ideologies. Because such ide-
ologies stress solidarity and resistance, such ideologies have effectively been used
in challenging U.S. state policies.
Women are important within nationalist philosophies, whether the national-
ism is forwarded by dominant groups who wield nation-state power, or by sub-
ordinated groups who use nationalist ideologies to challenge their oppression.
Groups on both sides of state power view the women in their group in particular
ways. Because women are capable of becoming mothers, women are central to
three elements in nationalist thinking, namely , issues of sexuality and fertility , of
motherhood, and of being symbols of the nation (Yuval-Davis 1997). In the
United States, all women experience the peculiar situation of being responsible for
reproducing the nation-state’s population, passing on an American national cul-
ture, and accepting the role of being inscribed with that same national culture. But
within the U.S. matrix of domination, this entire process is racialized, is organized
in class-specific ways, and has varying impact on women of diverse sexualities.
Women are differentially evaluated based on their perceived value to give birth to
the right kind of children, pass on appropriate American family values, and
become worthy symbols of the nation. Black women, White women, Latinas,
Native American women, and Asian American women all occupy different posi-
tions within gender, class, race, and nation as intersecting systems of power.
Because American citizenship is so often taken for granted among U.S. Black
women, we often have difficulty seeing not only how deeply nationalistic U.S.
society actually is, but how its nationalisms affect us. African-American women
encounter differential treatment based on our perceived value as giving birth to
the wrong race of children, as unable to socialize them properly because we bring
them into bad family structures, and as unworthy symbols for U.S. patriotism.This
treatment is based, in part, on ideologies that view U.S. Black women as the Other,
the mammies, matriarchs, welfare mothers, and jezebels who mark the bound-
aries of normality for American women overall. African-American women and
many others typically have difficulty seeing the assumptions that underlie this sit-
uation because American nation-state policies obscure how American national
interests in actuality are special interests.These same assumptions also limit under-
standing of how U.S. nationalism operates globally . In this context, working exclu-
sively within prevailing nationalistic assumptions fosters views of the U.S. matrix
of domination where the effects of nationalism become difficult to see, let alone
resist, because they seem so everyday and taken for granted.
One important assumption that affects African-American women is how ideas
about family influence understandings of American national identity . Just as 
ideas about sexuality permeate multiple systems of oppression (see Chapter 
230 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 248 ---
6), ideas about family perform a similar function (Collins 1998c).
Similarly , ideas about motherhood become especially important to American
national identity . Whereas all women are assigned the duty of reproducing the
national group’s population, and of passing on a national culture while simulta-
neously being inscribed with that same national culture, in the United States,
these ideas about race, class, motherhood, and citizenship influence public poli-
cies. For example, U.S. population policies broadly defined aim to discourage
Black women from having children, claiming that Black women make poor
mothers and that their children end up receiving handouts from the state
(Roberts 1997). In contrast, middle-class White women are encouraged to
increase their fertility , and are assisted by a dazzling array of new reproductive
technologies in the quest for the healthy White baby (Hartouni 1997).Working-
class White women are encouraged to deliver healthy White babies, but place
them for adoption with more worthy middle-class families (Collins 1999a).The
fertility of undocumented women of color is seen as a threat to the nation-state,
especially if such women’s children gain citizenship and apply for public services
(Chang 1994). Women thus emerge as being much more important to U.S.
nation-state policies than is popularly believed.
Despite the contributions of incorporating ideas about motherhood and
nation within U.S. Black feminist thought, the emphasis remains on U.S. domes-
tic policies. U.S. Black feminist thought contains considerable work that assesses
how U.S. educational, employment, taxation, and social welfare policies affect
African-American women’s lives.This is important scholarship, yet in the absence
of studies that examine U.S. Black women in a global context, such work can fos-
ter the assumption that U.S. foreign policy is not important for African-American
women. Stopping analysis at the U.S. border thus functions to contain U.S. Black
feminist thought to Black women’s interactions with groups that are already in
the United States—Black men, White women, other racial/ethnic populations—
groups that already hold American citizenship or that aspire to attain it.
Shifting to a global analysis not only reveals new dimensions of U.S. Black
women’s experiences in the particular matrix of domination that characterizes
U.S. society , but it also illuminates how a transnational matrix of domination pre-
sents certain challenges for women of African descent. Intersecting oppressions
do not stop at U.S. borders. Intersecting oppressions of race, class, gender, sexu-
ality , and nation constitute global phenomena that have a particular organization
in the United States. Nested within this U.S. version are distinctive group histo-
ries characterized by a unique combination of factors. U.S. Black women’s expe-
riences constitute one such group history that can be seen in the context of the
particular social movements within the United States, the domestic policies of
varying levels of U.S. government, and a global matrix of domination affecting
women of African descent in general. Black women in Nigeria, Trinidad and
Tobago, the United Kingdom, Botswana, Brazil, and other nation-states are sim-
ilarly located. They encounter the contours of local social movements, the poli-
231U.S. BLACK FEMINISM IN TRANSNATIONAL CONTEXT


--- PAGE 249 ---
cies of their nation-states, and the same global matrix of domination in which
U.S. Black women are situated. All of these groups of women thus are positioned
with situations of domination that are characterized by intersecting oppressions,
yet their angle of vision on domination will vary greatly .
Shifting to a transnational context also brings women’s rights activities to the
forefront of discussion (Lindsey 1980). In a transnational context, women in
African, Latin American, and Asian nations have not sat idly by , waiting for mid-
dle-class, White women from North American and Western European nation-
states to tell them what to do. Instead, using the United Nations as a vehicle,
women from quite diverse backgrounds have identified gender oppression as a
major theme affecting women transnationally (see, e.g., Rights of Women 1998).
These women are not just “theorizing” about oppression; their theory emerges
from within the practical terrain of activism.
Within this broad transnational context, women of African descent have a
distinctive, shared legacy that in turn is part of a global women’s movement. At
the same time, due to the peculiar combination of the legacy of African cultures,
a history of racial oppressions organized via slavery , colonialism, and imperial-
ism, and an emerging global racism that, assisted by modern technology , moves
across national borders with dizzying speed, women of African descent
encounter particular issues. For example, just as African-American women con-
stitute one of the poorest groups within the United States, so do Black women in
Brazil. Similarly , in the context of global women’s poverty , women in Africa
remain among the poorest. In this sense, women of African descent share much
with women’s rights struggles globally , but do so through particular Black dias-
poric experiences characterized by substantial heterogeneity .
Despite the national barriers that separate women of African descent, Black
women’s experiences demonstrate marked similarities that “illustrate how the
persistence of the legacy of colonialism with its racial/ethnic, sexist and class
biases has resulted in a system of ‘global gendered apartheid’—a global eco-
nomic system characterized by the exploitation of the labour of women of colour
everywhere” (Antrobus 1995, 55). In this context, as social theorist Obioma
Nnaemeka points out, “as people of African descent, our attention should not be
solely on how blacks in Africa and those in the African Diaspora are related with
each another, but also on how they relate to each other” (1998b, 377). One task,
then, lies in stimulating dialogue across the very real limitations of national
boundaries, to develop new ways of relating to one another, in order to unpack
the interconnectedness of Black women’s experiences.
Black Women in Transnational Context
In 1981, U.S. Black feminist theorist Barbara Smith identified her definition of
what it meant to be radical: “What I really feel is radical is trying to make coali-
232 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 250 ---
tions with people who are different from you. I feel it is radical to be dealing
with race and sex and class and sexual identity all at one time. I think that is really
radical because it has never been done before” (Smith and Smith 1981, 126).
Whereas U.S. Black feminism has traveled some distance toward Smith’s vision
of radicalism, coalitions among U.S. Black women and among women of African
descent differentially placed in “gendered global apartheid” face some tough
questions. Such coalitions must attend not only to different histories, they must
be aware of the varying strengths and limitations that groups bring to social jus-
tice efforts. Women of African descent thus remain differentially placed within
an overarching matrix of “global gendered apartheid” organized via a plethora
of distinct nation-state politics.As a result, dialogues among Black women across
national boundaries remain difficult. But they are necessary because they
promise to shed light on current issues within U.S. Black feminism that now
appear to be “American” yet may be better understood in transnational context.
Placing African-American women’s experiences in a transnational context
simultaneously provides a new angle of vision on U.S. Black feminism as a social
justice project and decenters the White/Black binary that has long plagued U.S.
feminism. Within the U.S. White/Black framework, U.S. Black feminism can be
seen only as a derivative movement. African-American women who self-define
as Black feminists can be accused of being “White” identified, as if no indepen-
dent Black feminist consciousness is possible. Refracted through the lens of U.S.
race relations that sees Blacks as sidekicks, followers, and dependent beings,
this interpretation has surface validity . Within assumptions that one need not
consider anything outside U.S. national borders, these Black/White dialogues
become intensified and can work to drown out other issues. When these debates
are taken to their logical extreme, U.S. feminism can become one huge discus-
sion about identity—as Black and White women, why can’t we get along? 
Placing U.S. Black women’s experiences in a transnational context shifts this
understanding of U.S. Black feminism. Instead of being White feminism in black-
face, the core themes of U.S. Black feminism resemble similar issues raised by
women of African descent elsewhere. Issues that are of great concern to U.S. Black
women explored in earlier chapters—work and family , negative controlling
images, struggles for self-definition in cultural contexts that deny Black women
agency , sexual politics that make Black women vulnerable to sex work, rape, and
media objectification, and understandings of motherwork within Black women’s
politics—find different meanings in a transnational context. As Andree Nicola
McLaughlin points out, “The proliferation of Black women’s organizations in the
last decade signals a global phenomenon. Such organized political activity on the
part of self-identified ‘Black women’ reflects a burgeoning, intercontinental Black
women’s consciousness movement” (1995, 73). Rather than being a White-identi-
fied anomaly within U.S. Black community development efforts, U.S. Black feminism
can better be seen as part of an “intercontinental Black women’s consciousness
movement” that addresses the common concerns of women of African descent.
233U.S. BLACK FEMINISM IN TRANSNATIONAL CONTEXT


--- PAGE 251 ---
If common concerns link women of African descent transnationally , why
don’t more U.S. Black women see them? Certainly U.S. school curricula dedi-
cated to glorifying American history and culture as well as a U.S. media that
substitute news entertainment for serious coverage of global issues leave all U.S.
citizens, including African-American women, ignorant of major world issues.
But another important factor concerns U.S. Black women’s relationships with two
groups most closely aligned with African-American women’s interests. Via their
control over U.S. feminism and Black intellectual discourse, respectively , White
American women and Black American men constitute two groups with which
and through which African-American women construct U.S. Black feminism.
Both groups may be well meaning, and in fact may express deep-seated concern
for Black women’s issues. But both groups find it difficult to get out of the way
and encourage a fully articulated, Black feminist agenda where Black women are
in charge.
Some strands of White Western feminism have been tireless in raising
women’s issues in defense of women who remain suppressed and therefore
unable to speak for themselves. This is important work and often leads to valu-
able coalitions among First and Third World women. Yet the kinds of coalitions
among groups such as these can become problematic. Because the groups remain
so unequal in power, this inequality can foster a pseudo-maternalism  among
White women reminiscent of how U.S. middle-class social workers approached
working-class, immigrant women in prior eras. The much-bandied-about accu-
sation of racism in the women’s movement may be much less about the racial
attitudes of individual White women than it is about the unwillingness or inabil-
ity of some Western White feminists to share power. These conflicts remain
muted when the power differences among women are vast—the case when  the
interests of poor, rural, non-American Black women are championed by Western
feminists. Yet when the power differentials shrink—the case of Black American
and White American women who are seemingly equal under U.S. law—relation-
ships become much more contentious.
U.S. Black men exercise a different kind of control. Here discourses of Black
nationalism with their implicit counsel of a racial solidarity built on unques-
tioned support of African-American men stifles dialogue. Whereas the majority of
African-Americans would most likely not identify themselves as “Black national-
ists,” most do ascribe to many of the basic tenets of Black nationalist–influenced
ideologies that counsel Black self-determination (Franklin 1992). The historical
viciousness and deeply entrenched nature of White supremacy in the United
States makes this a rational response. Blacks may be the ones who are accused of
“holding” onto race, but it is White Americans who move out of neighborhoods
when Blacks move in.White Americans are the ones who want affirmative action
programs in higher education dismantled, even if such efforts effectively bar
African-American access to elite colleges. It is White Americans whose failure to
234 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 252 ---
vote for Black candidates forces civil rights organizations to remain embroiled in
legal battles to find ways of ensuring Black representation under the rubric of
American democracy . In this context, Black nationalism is not irrational—it has
been essential for Black progress. However, despite their contributions, not all
Black nationalisms are the same. But they do seem to share one common feature,
namely , a norm of racial solidarity based on Black women’s unquestioned sup-
port of Black men without extracting a similar commitment on the part of Black
men to Black women. In contrast to White women’s maternalism, U.S. Black
women are encouraged to embrace a Black paternalism, one where Black men
reclaim their manhood because Black women “let them be men.”
Not only are both of these political responses unacceptable, the energy
required to deal with both White women and Black men leaves little left over to
engage in dialogue with other groups, both within the United States and transna-
tionally . But a U.S. Black feminism that does not do so runs the risk of quickly
running out of steam. It is important to remember that just as African-American
women are neither African nor American, neither is U.S. Black feminism. Instead,
it occupies its own space that reflects the privileges of U.S. citizenship juxtaposed
to the second-class nature of that citizenship. However, while U.S. Black feminism
occupies this location between Americaness—the struggles with White feminists
and with Black men—and women of African descent globally , the lion’s share of
its attention has been directed at American groups. As a result, U.S. Black femi-
nism has been preoccupied with responding to the issues raised by American
groups. The task now lies in fleshing out dialogues and coalitions with Black
women who live elsewhere in the Black diaspora, keeping in mind that inter-
secting oppressions have left a path of common challenges that are differently
organized and resisted.
In the context of a global gendered apartheid, women of African descent
share many qualities. One concerns the similarities that characterize contempo-
rary Black women’s organizing, much of which has been influenced by Black
nationalist ideologies. In the post–World War II era of national independence 
and liberation movements in Africa, Asia, Latin America, and the Pacific, Black
women actively participated in these anticolonialist and antiracist struggles,
many of which relied on nationalist philosophies. In the global context of
antiracist struggles, Black women have participated in activist struggles of all
sorts (Terborg-Penn 1986). Many Black-run nation-states of the postcolonial era
could not have been formed without women’s efforts. For example, Black women
were prominent in protracted anticolonial struggles against the Portuguese in
both Mozambique and Angola. Black South African women have long engaged in
political activism, much of it confrontational, that resulted in the successful over-
throw of apartheid. Whereas other anticolonial efforts were more peaceful, they
nonetheless relied on Black women’s actions. Within the United States, Black
women’s participation in civil rights and Black power movements of the 1950s
235U.S. BLACK FEMINISM IN TRANSNATIONAL CONTEXT


--- PAGE 253 ---
and 1960s reflected similar patterns (Crawford et al. 1990). In the U.S. context,
the goal was not to form an independent nation-state, but rather to reform the
existing one. U.S. political institutions required transformation so that rights of
American citizenship would be fully extended to Black women and other histor-
ically disenfranchised groups.
These initial emphases on anticolonialist and antiracist agendas have since
given way to new sets of issues. In particular, this transnational Black women’s
consciousness movement remains focused on how Black women’s poverty
becomes reorganized in conjunction with new institutional power arrangements
of neocolonialism (the transnational context) and racial resegregation (the U.S.
context). For example, African women have engaged in diverse types of libera-
tion struggles, many of which brought new constitutional guarantees and legal
freedoms ensuring women’s rights. Women in South Africa, for example, now
enjoy some of the most comprehensive constitutional protections anywhere.Yet
despite these protracted anticolonial struggles, women in South Africa remain
disproportionately poor and often have difficulty exercising the rights that they
have earned. Similarly , African-American women who participated in the civil
rights and Black power movements stimulated newfound political protections for
all U.S. Black women, with many developing a Black feminist consciousness in
the process. Despite the legal protections provided under these new political
arrangements, Black women in both South Africa and the United States remain
disproportionately poor.
Placing U.S. Black feminism within the context of global gendered apartheid
provides new insights into U.S. Black feminist practices and thought. Expanding
the process of self-definition described in Chapter 5 beyond individual and
group identity for African-American women suggests that the transnational con-
text would greatly aid U.S. Black women’s struggles for group survival and insti-
tutional transformation. Self-defined Black diasporic feminisms require links
among U.S. Black feminism and feminisms expressed by women of African
descent as well as ties with transnational women’s rights activism.
Developing this Black diasporic perspective among African-American
women can be more difficult than one thinks, especially given the limited con-
tact with Black women from the United Kingdom, Senegal, Brazil, and other
nation-states, as well as the historically insular view of the world that permeates
U.S. society . The absence of strong transnational organizations among Black
women means that this type of Black feminist agenda is at its early stages. For
example, in her arguments that this Black diasporic feminism be called Africana
womanism, Clenora Hudson-Weems (1998) rejects both African feminism and
Black feminism by asserting that both terms remain aligned with White, middle-
class feminism. White women remain at the center, she suggests, even in global
discussions of Black women’s concerns. In response, Obioma Nnaemeka places
the blame not on the rhetorical strategies of naming, but on the actual politics
that limit Black women’s ability to generate such an agenda:
236 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 254 ---
One can argue that the deficiency of African feminism and Black feminism
respectively in addressing the full range of black women’s experience aris-
es more from their relationship one to the other than their relationship to
white, middle-class feminism. (Nnaemeka 1998a, 21)
Despite these difficulties, it is important to investigate the potential and actual
connections among U.S. Black feminism, African feminisms, and other femi-
nisms advanced by women of African descent. Since this is obviously a very large
task, one way of approaching it lies in examining selected challenges that have
been identified by women of African descent transnationally . Stated differently ,
despite differences in how Black women encounter and respond to these com-
mon challenges, certain themes serve as a common agenda that characterizes
Black women’s concerns.
Unfortunately , the many structural barriers that impede Black women’s
access to education, housing, employment, and health care make it difficult for
many to express self-defined women’s agendas. In this regard, films made by
women of African descent remain important. For example, Femmes Aux Yeux
Ouverts (Women with Open Eyes),a 1994 documentary from Togo, remains exem-
plary in how it highlights the sophisticated political analyses and actions taken
by African women themselves. In this film, Togolese women speak of how their
eyes had formerly been closed but how their political consciousness as women
is changing. Similarly ,Everyone’s Child,a 1996 film made in Zimbabwe, examines
the devastating effects of AIDS on one African adolescent girl. As one of four sib-
lings orphaned by losing her mother to AIDS, the girl tries to hold the family
together. Out of desperation, she is forced into sex work until family members
recognize that she and other children in her situation belong to everyone. The
strength of Femmes Aux Yeux Ouverts, Everyone’s Child,and similar film projects lies
in their ability to transcend the limits of literacy . The issues raised by both films
speak not just to and for many African women, they also raise issues familiar to
U.S. Black women as well.
More common, however, is a pattern where women of African descent
throughout the diaspora often begin defining our feminism in opposition to that
advanced by middle-class, White Western women.This approach reproduces yet
another binary , yet gathering together these dissident statements can also help
identify points of convergence. At the 1992 conference on Women in Africa and
African Development held in Nigeria, Olabisi Aina, a Nigerian social scientist,
shared her thoughts on what she perceived as being the differences distinguish-
ing African women’s feminism from that of the West:
The African woman today is concerned not only with overcoming the
problems of foreign domination/rule, but also with the specific, immedi-
ate needs of surviving famine, hunger, drought, disease, and war. To be
empowered, African women, unlike their Western sisters, are struggling
not just to attain political power but also to be empowered by gaining
237U.S. BLACK FEMINISM IN TRANSNATIONAL CONTEXT


--- PAGE 255 ---
access to a good education and the professions, among other things. Many
of the issues which are of concern to the African feminist are often left out
of the Western feminist agenda. (Aina 1998, 75)
Whereas Olabisi Aina cannot speak for all women in a nation-state as large as
Nigeria, let alone a continent as large and diverse as Africa, her effort to identify
some defining features of a common agenda of African women provides a start-
ing point for discussion. In many ways, she describes the types of struggles that
preoccupy African-American women. For example, U.S. Black women are also
engaged in overcoming problems of foreign rule and war, but the “foreigners”
in the U.S. context are the police.This issue of misuse of police authority against
African-Americans, especially against Black men, reemerges as an important
concern of U.S. Black women (Davis 1997). The women interviewed by Leith
Mullings (1997) who feared for their children’s lives in Harlem certainly feel as
though they live in a war zone. U.S. Black women’s citizenship status that pro-
vides a safety net of social services is designed to protect African-American
women from the “immediate needs of surviving famine [and] hunger.”There is
no famine, but as the growing numbers of families who visit soup kitchens sug-
gest, there may be hunger. Efforts to dismantle the social welfare state whose
purpose has been to provide food, housing, education, and health care for those
who could not afford these services preoccupy Black feminist agendas (Lubiano
1992; Brewer 1994). Disease is also a factor, with African-American women’s
health identified as an important issue among Black women activists (White
1994). Aina’s list can be used to compare the situation of African-American
women with Nigerian women, but this is not its best use. Instead, her com-
ments provide a useful starting point for developing an intercontinental Black
women’s consciousness that identifies how women of African descent encounter
different configurations of common challenges such as these.
Common Differences
Positioning African-American women within a transnational context suggests
that U.S. Black women occupy a both/and status regarding U.S. feminism, Black
diasporic feminisms, and transnational women’s rights activism. On some
dimensions, U.S. Black feminism resembles that of women within and from
Black diasporic societies, while on other dimensions, it remains distinctively
American. Collectively , these common areas of concern link the feminisms of
women of African descent within a broader transnational context. They also 
provide a useful starting point for examining the common differences that char-
acterize an intercontinental Black women’s consciousness movement, one
responding to intersecting oppressions that are differently organized via a global 
matrix of domination.
On the one hand, intersections of race and gender that frame the category
238 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 256 ---
“Black women” generate a shared set of challenges for all women of African
descent, however differentially placed in other social hierarchies we may be. For
example, not all Black women are poor, but Black women as a collectivity remain
disproportionately poor. On the other hand, differences among Black women
reflecting our diverse histories suggest that experiences with poverty will be 
far more complex than currently imagined. African-American women may be
disproportionately poor, but Black women’s poverty in the United States is orga-
nized differently from that confronting women of African descent transnationally .
Despite the similarity of concerns, Black women in Africa, the Caribbean, South
America, Canada, and other places experience these concerns differently and, as
a result, organize in response to them differently .
Transnationally , women’s advocates have aimed to use existing human rights
laws to develop a women’s rights agenda. In a workbook designed to be used by
women of varying levels of literacy , the International Women’s Tribune Centre
identifies six areas of human rights laws that can be used to protect women’s
rights: women and education; women and employment; women and marriage;
women refugees; sexual exploitation and trafficking; and women and torture
(Rights of Women1998, 19–54).They then move on to redefine women’s human
rights as encompassing six areas of concern: violence against women; housing,
land and property; reproductive rights; environmental rights; women with dis-
abilities; and sexual orientation rights (55–76). Even a cursory glance at this list
reveals that these issues deemed important for women are also significant for
women of African descent.What is also noteworthy is how and why some issues
receive greater attention within U.S. Black feminism, while others remain muted
or even invisible.A fully developed analysis of all six areas of human rights as well
as the six areas of women’s rights is beyond the scope of this chapter. However,
a brief discussion of two issues sheds light on how exploring patterns of com-
mon differences among women of African descent might benefit a transnational
Black women’s consciousness movement.
Black Women’s Poverty
Understandings of Black women’s poverty illustrate these interconnections of
race, gender, class, and nation. Whereas Black women’s poverty takes similar
forms globally and ultimately stems from a common source, the specific causes of
U.S. Black women’s poverty and that of women of African descent who are citizens
of other nation-states or who are in the United States but lack American citizen-
ship demonstrate how issues of national citizenship and nation-state policies
matter. For one, the interconnections of U.S. domestic and foreign policy con-
tribute differently to Black women’s poverty . Especially critical of the “develop-
ment” model imposed upon the Third World, Canadian feminist Angela Miles
claims that categories such as development obscure some important linkages
239U.S. BLACK FEMINISM IN TRANSNATIONAL CONTEXT


--- PAGE 257 ---
among women in First World countries and those in Third World countries. As
Miles points out:
In the process it is becoming clear that what we call “development issues”
in the “third world,” such as housing, education, health, child care, and
poverty , are called “social issues” in the “first world.” These are not qual-
itatively different phenomena as “development” definitions imply , but
shared political issues that constitute a potential basis for common politi-
cal struggle. Global feminisms are the result of this common struggle
grounded in diverse local realities. (Miles 1998, 169)
U.S. foreign and domestic policies of the 1980s illustrate how the interconnec-
tions between “development issues” and “social issues” represent two sides of
the same coin. On the one hand, Black women in so-called developing areas of
Africa, Latin America, and the Caribbean point to the effects of structural adjust-
ment policies as a major cause of the growing poverty among Black women.
Introduced in the 1980s to alleviate the debt crisis of Third World nation-states,
these policies fostered cuts in public services and subsidies to basic goods (food
and fuel); increases in the price of transportation, housing, water, electricity , and
medicines; privatization of government assets; and trade liberalization and
devaluation of the currency . In this sense, these policies can be seen as deeply
“raced” because these restrictions were targeted toward people of color.
Structural adjustment policies had two main objectives that in turn had a
special impact on women. First, via cuts in government expenditures on social
services, these policies aimed to reduce consumption.These actions jeopardized
jobs in sectors in which women predominate and assumed that women would
fill the gaps created by these cuts. Second, the policies aimed to increase pro-
duction. Based on assumptions about a ready supply of cheap female labor, the
policies incorporated women into capitalist market relations in especially
exploitative ways. Both of these objectives devalue women’s work in the house-
hold as well as in the labor force (Antrobus 1995). In this regard, policies of
structural adjustment are deeply gendered, based as they are on an assumption
that justifies exploitation of women’s time and labor, both in the household and
in the workplace.
The consequences of structural adjustment policies have been devastating.
For entire populations, they have led to increasing unemployment, poverty ,
social disintegration, and violence. The poor have suffered the most—and poor
women, children, and elderly more than anyone else (Antrobus 1995, 57).
These policies relied upon media images designed to mask the culpability of
policymakers whose decisions brought about such results. One such image was
the portrayal of Black women’s poverty in fatalistic terms that suggested the
problem was so immense that very little could be done to remedy it. African
feminist Ama Ada Aidoo decries the ways in which African women’s poverty is
portrayed in the media:
240 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 258 ---
The image of the African woman in the mind of the world has been set:
she is breeding too many children she cannot take care of, and for whom
she should not expect other people to pick up the tab. She is hungry , and
so are her children. In fact, it has become a cliché of Western photojour-
nalism that the African woman is old beyond her years; she is half-naked;
her drooped and withered breasts are well exposed; there are flies buzzing
around the faces of her children; and she has a permanent begging bowl
in her hand. (Aidoo 1998, 39)
This image constructs African women either as too far gone to be worthy of aid
or as passive recipients of government handouts. Significantly , the one area of
agency allowed Black women lies in their sexuality and reproductive capaci-
ties—if African women are in fact “breeding too many children,” then it is per-
fectly acceptable for Western nation-states to refuse to “pick up the tab.”
Aidoo’s description might seem uncomfortably familiar to African-American
women, for despite its culturally specific content—poor U.S. Black women are
rarely portrayed as “half-naked” with “flies buzzing around the faces of her chil-
dren”—they have been depicted in a similar fashion. During the same period
when Black women in “developing” nations castigated structural adjustment
policies, U.S. Black feminists blamed the social policies of the Reagan adminis-
tration as a major factor in fostering African-American women’s poverty (Brewer
1994). Domestic social welfare policies of the 1980s and into the 1990s painted
African-American women as unworthy citizens and stripped them of entitle-
ments by blaming African-American women for creating both their own pover-
ty and that of African-Americans (Collins 1989).
Reminiscent of Aidoo’s African woman with a “permanent begging bowl in
her hand,” U.S. Black women’s depiction as “welfare queens” served a similar
purpose (Lubiano 1992). In both cases, the poverty of Black children was traced
back to the sexuality and reproductive capacities of their mothers. But whereas
African women’s poverty was deemed permanent and thus unresponsive to aid,
African-American women were deemed unworthy recipients of aid that main-
tained their status as permanent beggars. In both cases, the best action was to let
them starve.
Black Women and Mother-Child Families
Another important and related issue that links the feminisms of women of
African descent concerns how to be effective mothers, especially in the context
of changing work and family responsibilities. U.S. Black women’s motherwork,
particularly efforts to successfully combine bloodmother, othermother, and
community othermother responsibilities with the need to generate independent
income, resonates with similar struggles engaged in by women transnationally .
More important, issues of motherhood, work, and family responsibilities
241U.S. BLACK FEMINISM IN TRANSNATIONAL CONTEXT


--- PAGE 259 ---
remain closely bundled in explaining Black women’s poverty globally .
Describing the poverty of women in the Caribbean, Peggy Antrobus points to
the significance that low-paid and unpaid work has in influencing Black
women’s economic position:
Women’s poverty has its foundation in the fact that much of the work of
women in the household, in subsistence agriculture and in the communi-
ty is either unwaged or poorly paid for . . . the large amount of unwaged
work that working-class or poor women do condemns them to a cycle of
poverty , be it in rural or urban areas. One cannot understand poverty and
exploitation without considering the impact of women’s unwaged work
on the economic system. (Antrobus 1995, 56)
Antrobus’s observations resonate with earlier discussions of how U.S. Black
women challenge prevailing U.S. understandings of income-generating work,
unpaid family labor, and Black women’s motherwork. Black women’s poverty
across diverse societies remains associated with their responsibility for children,
often without sufficient male support.
One outcome of Black women’s efforts to negotiate work, family , and moth-
erhood is the emergence of Black mother-child families as a growing global phe-
nomenon. Situating mother-child families in the context of the global political
economy highlights the significance of  advanced capitalism for understanding
mother-child families in transnational context (Mencher and Okongwu 1993).
In particular, important connections characterize the stage of capitalist develop-
ment encountered by any group of people and the patterns of family organiza-
tion that emerge within that group. Massive global economic restructuring since
World War II suggests that shifting patterns of industrial development, their
accompanying race- and gender-segmented labor markets, and associated out-
comes such as migration, urbanization, and ghettoization all affect families.This
literature has been used to examine issues of African-American political econo-
my overall (see, e.g., Squires 1994), yet, despite its significance, it remains
underutilized in regard to distinctive patterns of U.S. Black family organization.
Historically higher rates of U.S. Black mother-child families and the accelerated
increase of African-American mother-child families in the 1960s and 1970s may
be better explained by attending to industrial and labor market patterns than to
attributes of Black culture (Billingsley 1992).
Placing mother-child families maintained by Black women in African,
Caribbean, Latin America, North American, and European nation-states in the
context of global capitalist development demonstrates that this household for-
mation emerges within groups that face similar political and economic chal-
lenges (Mencher and Okongwu 1993). One such challenge concerns how to
adapt to the race- and gender-segmented labor markets that result from agribusi-
ness, industrial flight, mechanization, and other workplace changes. The effects
of diverse industrial patterns on household and family organization in the
242 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 260 ---
Caribbean provides one view of how the intersections of race and class foster
specific patterns of family organization (see, e.g., Momsen 1993). In these cases,
the industrial mix characterizing an island’s employment base produces gender-
segmented labor markets. For example, in locales characterized by heavy indus-
tries that rely on male labor (e.g., oil refineries), rates of female-headedness are
likely to be lower than in places whose industrial base relies more heavily on
female labor (e.g., the garment industry).When men cannot get jobs and women
can, men migrate, leaving their wives, girlfriends, and children behind.
Gender-specific patterns of migration arise in response to the creation
and/or flight of economic opportunities in home communities. Moreover,
industrial policy works with national policies concerning immigration.Work and
family patterns among Mexican men and women who migrated to Mexican/U.S.
border towns in the early 1980s reveal the complex ways in which industrial and
immigration policies foster female-headed family households. One striking fea-
ture of this migration stream is that families migrated as units when they could
no longer subsist within the capitalist market economies that incorporated their
villages. While family groups migrated as units, employers on the Mexican side
of the border hired women but not men. As a result, women and children
remained in Mexico while men migrated into the United States in search of
work. Over time, many men failed to return to their families left at the borders,
leaving an increase in mother-child families in towns housing these border
industries. In this case, employment policies on both sides of the Mexican/U.S.
border fostered the emergence of female-headed households among a popula-
tion previously lacking this form of family organization (Fernandez-Kelly 1983).
In some cases, national policies are overtly tied to the industrial policies that
in turn stimulate increasing numbers of single mothers. Patterns of household
formation under apartheid among Black South Africans are revealing in this
regard. South African labor policies prior to apartheid’s formal end in 1990 rou-
tinely fostered family dissolution (Martin 1984). Men and women were explic-
itly recruited to race- and gender-segmented labor markets that relied on their
separation for profitability . For example, men in mining were expected to leave
their wives and children and live in dormitories. The pass laws that proved so
unpopular with Black South Africans emerged in part to regulate where male
workers could work and live. In contrast, women were either left behind in the
so-called homelands or forced to migrate to cities in search of domestic work to
supplement inadequate male incomes. Neglected in this harsh system of labor
regulation were Black South African children. Often they were forced to live ille-
gally with their mothers in cities, were left in the “homelands,” or were in other
ways legally separated from their mothers (Kuzwayo 1985).
These combinations of economic opportunity and gender-specific responsi-
bilities for Black women often result in recurring patterns of poverty that bear
remarkable similarity from one culture to the next. Peggy Antrobus describes the
cycle of poverty as it operates in Caribbean settings:
243U.S. BLACK FEMINISM IN TRANSNATIONAL CONTEXT


--- PAGE 261 ---
The majority of the poor are women.While many of them have large fam-
ilies, they are not poor because they have many children. In fact, the reverse
is true.They may have many children because they are poor, which means
they have very limited options in terms of education, training and
employment, and see children as a source of wealth, perhaps the only
source of affirmation. For many , the cycle starts with early motherhood,
while they are still at school. With the failure of the baby’s father to sup-
port their child, the women often turn for support to other men, who
leave her with yet more children. And so the cycle is repeated. Serial mat-
ing in the Caribbean has to be seen as a survival strategy . We have to thus
consider women’s poverty in the context of massive unemployment and
the inability of many men to support their children. (Antrobus 1995, 56)
Descriptions of Black male-female relationships in many U.S. inner cities bear
close resemblance to Antrobus’s rendition of Caribbean societies. For example,
rates of infant mortality in some Black inner-city neighborhoods match those of
developing countries. In this regard, poor U.S. Black women, especially those in
inner-city neighborhoods, may share more with women in the Caribbean and
other Third World nations than with middle-class White and Black women in the
United States (Brewer 1995).
These cases of how mother-child families respond to the race- and gender-
segmented labor markets created by advanced, global capitalist development sug-
gest that these factors may be more important in explaining family household
structures in African-American communities than has commonly been believed to
be the case (Collins 1997). The rapid increase in U.S. Black mother-child families
in the 1960s and 1970s reflects industrial policies, labor market reorganization,
and government policies (Brewer 1988, 1994). William Julius Wilson’s (1987,
1996) work remains exemplary in linking patterns of family organization to the
changing contours of economic opportunities in Black urban neighborhoods.
Whereas Wilson has been criticized for his seeming neglect of contemporary
institutionalized racism, his work highlights how growing joblessness among
Black men in the 1960s and 1970s correlates with (but does not necessarily
cause) increasing rates of African-American mother-child families. His work 
documents how the emergence of mother-child families among working- class
African-Americans can be attributed in part to a changing political economy that
disadvantaged U.S. Blacks. Whereas Wilson assumes a background of capitalist
development and encourages greater attention to its effects, Rose Brewer (1995)
criticizes capitalist development itself. Claiming that U.S. Black workers and fami-
lies are at the center of a global economic restructuring process that has race- and
gender-specific dimensions, Brewer points out, “There is not enough money 
in central cities to sustain either growth or two-parent family formation (1995,
p. 167).”
Overall, the status of mother-child families in inner-city neighborhoods can
be seen as an advanced case of what happens when male joblessness within an
244 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 262 ---
urban context becomes coupled with the absence of social welfare state supports
or—the case for African-Americans—declining social welfare state supports.The
myriad of social problems associated with Black women’s poverty and Black
women’s responsibilities in caring for children—violence, drugs, adolescent
pregnancy , and school dropout rates—transcend the U.S. context. Instead, U.S.
Black women’s experiences are an American version of an important transna-
tional phenomenon.
Groups, Coalitions, and Transversal Politics
The complexities of African-American women’s group experiences challenge
simple hierarchies that routinely label affluent White men as global oppressors,
poor Black women as powerless victims, with other groups arrayed in between.
Instead, race, gender, class, citizenship status, sexuality , and age shape any
group’s social location in the transnational matrix of domination. These loca-
tions in turn frame group participation in a wide range of activities. Because
groups occupying different positions display varying expressions of power, they
have distinctive patterns of participation in shaping domination and resistance.
Coming to terms with these diverse group histories provides a new foundation
for developing a transversal politics.
Originally coined by Italian feminists, transversal politics emphasizes coali-
tion building that takes into account the specific positions of “political actors.”
As Nira Yuval-Davis describes it, “Transversal dialogue should be based on the
principles of rooting and shifting—that is, being centered in one’s own experi-
ence while being empathetic to the differential positioning of the partners in 
the dialogue . . . the boundaries of the dialogue would be determined by the
message rather than its messengers” (1997, 88).Within this framework, African-
American women and other comparable groups constitute “political actors” or
“messengers” aiming to craft a Black feminist “message.”Within the assumptions
of transversalism, participants bring with them a “rooting” in their own partic-
ular group histories, but at the same time realize that in order to engage in 
dialogue across multiple markers of difference, they must “shift” from their own
centers.
1
This recognition of how the experiences of Black women in Africa, the
Caribbean, the United States, Europe, and Latin America demonstrate common
differences generates several important issues concerning the contours and
potential effectiveness of transversal politics. First, transversal politics requires a
basic rethinking of cognitive frameworks used to understand the world and to
change it.Transversal politics requires rejecting the binary thinking that has been
so central to oppressions of race, class, gender, sexuality , and nation. Under such
models, one must be one thing or the other—Black women are poor either
because they are Black or because they are women. One is either a racist or an
245U.S. BLACK FEMINISM IN TRANSNATIONAL CONTEXT


--- PAGE 263 ---
antiracist individual, a sexist person or not, an oppressor group or oppressed one.
In contrast, transversal politics requires both/and thinking. In such frameworks,
all individuals and groups possess varying amounts of penalty and privilege in
one historically created system. Within U.S. history , for example, White women
have been penalized by their gender but privileged by their race and citizenship
status. Similarly , Black heterosexual women have been penalized by both race and
gender yet privileged by their sexuality and citizenship status. In a transnational
context, U.S. Black women are privileged by their citizenship yet disadvantaged
by their gender. Depending on the context, individuals and groups may be alter-
nately oppressors in some settings, oppressed in others, or simultaneously
oppressing and oppressed in still others.
A second and related issue associated with transversal politics concerns def-
initions of how social groups are organized and maintained. Long-standing
views of group organization see groups as fixed, unchanging, and with clear-cut
boundaries. In contrast, the view advanced here retains historically constructed
groups, but perceives these groups as being much more fluid. U.S. Black women’s
experiences illustrate this fluidity . Just as each individual African-American
woman has a unique biography that reflects her experiences within intersecting
oppressions, the experiences of U.S. Black women as a collectivity reflect a simi-
lar process.
2 Group boundaries are not fixed. Within the U.S. context, this more
fluid notion of groups suggests that African-American women as a collectivity
encounter a particular configuration of race, class, and gender politics that, while
overlapping with those of some groups, resembling those of others, and differ-
ing from still others, remains distinctive to Black women. U.S. Black women’s
placement in a transnational context suggests a similar set of relationships.Thus,
as an historically identifiable population, U.S. Black women are simultaneously
privileged and penalized within a matrix of domination. Within any matrix of
domination characterized by intersecting oppressions, any specific social location
where such systems meet or intersect generates distinctive group histories.
A third requirement of transversal politics concerns the internal dynamics of
groups. For U.S. Black women, engaging in processes of group self-definition
requires confronting the entire constellation of our history , not just a selective
reading of it. Via these internal dialogues, African-American women potentially
take one important step toward transversal politics. These private conversations
required for group self-definitions can be affirming. For example, the safe spaces
that African-American women carve out for self-definitions has been designed
to protect Black women from external assaults. The mirrors that Black women
hold up to one another in such spaces can be affirming. But the existence of
these spaces does not mean that ugliness does not occur in safe spaces. As Black
lesbians point out, safe spaces are safer for some than for others.
Moreover, what quickly becomes apparent is that these internal processes of
self-definition cannot continue indefinitely without engaging in relationships
with other groups. Since groups are not hermetically sealed entities, coming to
246 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 264 ---
terms with a particular group history leads to the realization that groups can nei-
ther define themselves in isolation nor resist social injustice on their own.At best,
each group possesses a partial perspective on its own experiences and on those
of other groups. The critical self-reflection and community organizing accom-
plished via coming to terms with one’s own group history builds the foundation
for effective coalition. For example, it’s not enough to see that “Nigerian and U.S.
Black women have been victimized” and to build an alliance solely on the founda-
tion of shared victimization. The reality is that while Black women’s victimization
in these two settings may be similar, it is not the same. Instead, coalitions are
built via recognition of one’s own group position and seeing how the social loca-
tion of groups has been constructed in conjunction with one another. Empathy ,
not sympathy , becomes the basis of coalition.
This recognition stimulates a fourth issue associated with transversal politics,
namely , recognizing that group histories are relational. It is important to remem-
ber that U.S. Black women’s group history remains interdependent with those of
other groups—patterns characterizing one group’s experiences are intimately
linked to those of other groups. For example, in the U.S. context, the social con-
struction of U.S. White womanhood as pure, fragile, and in need of protection
from the assaults of “violent” African-American men required the use of differ-
ential patterns of institutionalized sexual violence against both African-American
women and men. The transnational context reveals similar contradictions. U.S.
Black women may encounter state violence within the United States, but U.S.
nation-state foreign policies inflict comparable violence upon women outside
U.S. borders. Both domestically and transnationally , through threats of violence
or actual violence, groups actively police each other to ensure that domination is
maintained.
Examining these interdependent group histories often reveals painful con-
tradictions. It becomes more difficult, for example, for U.S. White women to
retain moral credibility as survivors of sexual violence without simultaneously
condemning the benefits that accompany racial violence enacted on their behalf.
Similarly , claims by some African-American men that racial oppression is more
fundamental than gender oppression sound hollow in a context of shirked
responsibility for their violence against African-American women. Both cases
reflect how White women and African-American men both experience the vic-
timization that can serve as a foundation for building empathy with other
groups, and bear some responsibility for systemic violence targeted to other
groups. These examples suggest that moral positions as survivors of one expres-
sion of systemic violence become eroded in the absence of accepting responsi-
bility for other expressions of systemic violence.
This recognition of relational group histories leads to a fifth issue associated
with transversal politics, namely , the acknowledgment that coalitions with some
groups are not possible.This is because while group experiences are interdepen-
dent, they are not equivalent. Even though, for example, U.S. White men and
247U.S. BLACK FEMINISM IN TRANSNATIONAL CONTEXT


--- PAGE 265 ---
African-American women both have group histories that reflect patterns of priv-
ilege and oppression, these groups are far from equal in the transnational matrix
of domination. Instead, each group reflects a distinctive constellation of victim-
ization, access to positions of authority , unearned benefits, and traditions of
resistance. While the histories of both groups reflect all dimensions, the patterns
within each group will differ based on the overall placement of the group in rela-
tion to other race/gender groups, as well as variations within the group stem-
ming from class, citizenship status, sexuality , and age.
In this sense, the histories of U.S. White men and African-American women
are linked, socially construct each other, share certain features, but are not equiv-
alent.White men clearly have power over African-American women, but the rela-
tionship between the groups is more complex than a simple hierarchy of White
male privilege that victimizes African-American women. The relationship
between the two groups is certainly this, but it is much more than simply this.
Because of this complexity , coalitions with some groups of White men are nec-
essary for some issues, but virtually impossible on others. Women of African
descent from and within Black diasporic societies share comparable crosscutting
relationships. In this model, there are no absolute oppressors or victims. Instead,
historically constructed categories create intersecting and crosscutting group his-
tories that provide changing patterns of group participation in domination and
resistance to it.
This non-equivalency fosters a final important dimension of transversal pol-
itics—the dynamic nature of coalitions. Coalitions ebb and flow based on the
perceived saliency of issues to group members. This non-equivalency of group
experience means that groups find some oppressions more salient than others.
Patterns of common differences among U.S. Black women and women within
and from Black diasporic societies speak to the saliency of one form of oppres-
sion over another across different social settings. Race, class, and gender repre-
sent the three axes of oppression that African-American women routinely iden-
tify as being most important to them. But these systems and the economic, polit-
ical, and ideological conditions that support them may not be seen as the most
fundamental oppressions by women of African descent transnationally . This is
one important feature of the matrix of domination—whereas all systems operate
in framing the experiences of Black women transnationally , different configura-
tions of such systems have saliency for Black women differently placed within
them.
Overall, Black feminist knowledge and the transversal politics that might
guide Black women’s activism share important features. Both rely on paradigms
of intersectionality to conceptualize intersecting oppressions and group behav-
ior in resisting them. Both are collaboratively constructed, making it virtually
impossible to extract either from actual power relations. Both exhibit moments
of collaboration and confrontation necessary for constructing knowledge and
building coalitions. Despite the tensions between sameness (race/gender inter-
248 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 266 ---
sections) and difference (class, citizenship, sexuality , and age) that distinguish
the experiences of Black women in the Caribbean, the United States, Africa,
Latin America, and Europe, it is important to recognize that women of African
descent remain differentially placed within an overarching transnational context
characterized by a global gendered apartheid. As a result, dialogues among
African-American women and other historically identifiable oppressed groups
should benefit from the multiple angles of vision that accompany multiple
group standpoints. These dialogues not only promise to shed light on current
issues within U.S. Black feminism, they potentially inform new directions for
transversal politics.
249U.S. BLACK FEMINISM IN TRANSNATIONAL CONTEXT


--- PAGE 267 ---



--- PAGE 268 ---
A small girl and her mother passed a statue depicting a European man who had bare-
handedly subdued a ferocious lion.The little girl stopped, looked puzzled and asked,
“Mama, something’s wrong with that statue. Everybody knows that a man can’t
whip a lion.” “But darling,” her mother replied, “you must remember that the man
made the statue.” —As told by Katie G. Cannon
As critical social theory , U.S. Black
feminist thought reflects the interests and standpoint of its creators. Tracing the
origin and diffusion of Black feminist thought or any comparable body of spe-
cialized knowledge reveals its affinity to the power of the group that created it
(Mannheim 1936). Because elite White men control Western structures of
knowledge validation, their interests pervade the themes, paradigms, and epis-
temologies of traditional scholarship.As a result, U.S. Black women’s experiences
as well as those of women of African descent transnationally have been routinely
distorted within or excluded from what counts as knowledge.
U.S. Black feminist thought as specialized thought reflects the distinctive
themes of African-American women’s experiences. Black feminist thought’s core
themes of work, family , sexual politics, motherhood, and political activism  rely on
paradigms that emphasize the importance of intersecting oppressions in shaping
the U.S. matrix of domination. But expressing these themes and paradigms has
not been easy because Black women have had to struggle against White male
interpretations of the world.
In this context, Black feminist thought can best be viewed as subjugated
knowledge. Traditionally , the suppression of Black women’s ideas within White-
male-controlled social institutions led African-American women to use music,
literature, daily conversations, and everyday behavior as important locations for
11
BLACK 
FEMINIST
EPISTEMOLOGY 
11


--- PAGE 269 ---
constructing a Black feminist consciousness. More recently , higher education and
the news media have emerged as increasingly important sites for Black feminist
intellectual activity .Within these new social locations, Black feminist thought has
often become highly visible, yet curiously , despite this visibility , it has become
differently subjugated (Collins 1998a, 32–43).
Investigating the subjugated knowledge of subordinate groups—in this case
a Black women’s standpoint and Black feminist thought—requires more ingenu-
ity than that needed to examine the standpoints and thought of dominant
groups. I found my training as a social scientist inadequate to the task of study-
ing the subjugated knowledge of a Black women’s standpoint. This is because
subordinate groups have long had to use alternative ways to create independent
self-definitions and self-valuations and to rearticulate them through our own
specialists. Like other subordinate groups, African-American women not only
have developed a distinctive Black women’s standpoint, but have done so by
using alternative ways of producing and validating knowledge.
Epistemology constitutes an overarching theory of knowledge (Harding
1987). It investigates the standards used to assess knowledge or why we believe
what we believe to be true. Far from being the apolitical study of truth, episte-
mology points to the ways in which power relations shape who is believed and
why . For example, various descendants of Sally Hemmings, a Black woman
owned by Thomas Jefferson, claimed repeatedly that Jefferson fathered her chil-
dren. These accounts forwarded by Jefferson’s African-American descendants
were ignored in favor of accounts advanced by his White progeny . Hemmings’s
descendants were routinely disbelieved until their knowledge claims were vali-
dated by DNA testing.
Distinguishing among epistemologies, paradigms, and methodologies can
prove to be useful in understanding the significance of competing epistemolo-
gies (Harding 1987). In contrast to epistemologies, paradigms encompass
interpretive frameworks such as intersectionality that are used to explain social
phenomena.
1 Methodology refers to the broad principles of how to conduct
research and how interpretive paradigms are to be applied. 2 The level of episte-
mology is important because it determines which questions merit investigation,
which interpretive frameworks will be used to analyze findings, and to what use
any ensuing knowledge will be put.
In producing the specialized knowledge of U.S. Black feminist thought, Black
women intellectuals often encounter two distinct epistemologies: one represent-
ing elite White male interests and the other expressing Black feminist concerns.
Whereas many variations of these epistemologies exist, it is possible to distill
some of their distinguishing features that transcend differences among the para-
digms within them. Epistemological choices about whom to trust, what to
believe, and why something is true are not benign academic issues. Instead, these
concerns tap the fundamental question of which versions of truth will prevail.
252 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 270 ---
Eurocentric Knowledge Validation Processes and U.S.
Power Relations
In the United States, the social institutions that legitimate knowledge as well as
the Western or Eurocentric epistemologies that they uphold constitute two inter-
related parts of the dominant knowledge validation processes. In general, schol-
ars, publishers, and other experts represent specific interests and credentialing
processes, and their knowledge claims must satisfy the political and epistemo-
logical criteria of the contexts in which they reside (Kuhn 1962; Mulkay 1979).
Because this enterprise is controlled by elite White men, knowledge validation
processes reflect this group’s interests.
3 Although designed to represent and pro-
tect the interests of powerful White men, neither schools, government, the
media and other social institutions that house these processes nor the actual
epistemologies that they promote need be managed by White men themselves.
White women, African-American men and women, and other people of color
may be enlisted to enforce these connections between power relations and what
counts as truth. Moreover, not all White men accept these power relations that
privilege Eurocentrism. Some have revolted and subverted social institutions and
the ideas they promote.
Two political criteria influence knowledge validation processes. First, knowl-
edge claims are evaluated by a group of experts whose members bring with them
a host of sedimented experiences that reflect their group location in intersecting
oppressions. No scholar can avoid cultural ideas and his or her placement in
intersecting oppressions of race, gender, class, sexuality , and nation. In the United
States, this means that a scholar making a knowledge claim typically must con-
vince a scholarly community controlled by elite White avowedly heterosexual
men holding U.S. citizenship that a given claim is justified. Second, each com-
munity of experts must maintain its credibility as defined by the larger popula-
tion in which it is situated and from which it draws its basic, taken-for-granted
knowledge. This means that scholarly communities that challenge basic beliefs
held in U.S. culture at large will be deemed less credible than those that support
popular ideas. For example, if scholarly communities stray too far from widely
held beliefs about Black womanhood, they run the risk of  being discredited.
When elite White men or any other overly homogeneous group dominates
knowledge validation processes, both of these political criteria can work to sup-
press Black feminist thought. Given that the general U.S. culture shaping the
taken-for-granted knowledge of the community of experts is permeated by
widespread notions of Black female inferiority , new knowledge claims that seem
to violate this fundamental assumption are likely to be viewed as anomalies
(Kuhn 1962). Moreover, specialized thought challenging notions of Black female
inferiority is unlikely to be generated from within White-male-controlled acad-
emic settings because both the kinds of questions  asked and the answers to them
253BLACK FEMINIST EPISTEMOLOGY


--- PAGE 271 ---
would necessarily reflect a basic lack of familiarity with Black women’s realities.
Even those who think they are familiar can reproduce stereotypes. Believing that
they are already knowledgeable, many scholars staunchly defend controlling
images of U.S. Black women as mammies, matriarchs, and jezebels, and allow
these commonsense beliefs to permeate their scholarship.
The experiences of African-American women scholars illustrate how indi-
viduals who wish to rearticulate a Black women’s standpoint through Black fem-
inist thought can be suppressed by prevailing knowledge validation processes.
Exclusion from basic literacy , quality educational experiences, and faculty and
administrative positions has limited U.S. Black women’s access to influential aca-
demic positions (Zinn et al. 1986; Moses 1989). Black women have long pro-
duced knowledge claims that contested those advanced by elite White men. But
because Black women have been denied positions of authority , they often relied
on alternative knowledge validation processes to generate competing knowledge
claims. As a consequence, academic disciplines typically rejected such claims.
Moreover, any credentials controlled by White male academicians could then be
denied to Black women who used alternative standards on the grounds that Black
women’s work did not constitute credible research.
Black women with academic credentials who seek to exert the authority that
our status grants us to propose new knowledge claims about African-American
women face pressures to use our authority to help legitimate a system that deval-
ues and excludes the majority of Black women. When an outsider group—in 
this case, African-American women—recognizes that the insider group—
namely , elite White men—requires special privileges from the larger society ,
those in power must find ways of keeping the outsiders out and at the same time
having them acknowledge the legitimacy of this procedure. Accepting a few
“safe” outsiders addresses this legitimation problem (Berger and Luckmann
1966). One way of excluding the majority of Black women from the knowledge
validation process is to permit a few Black women to acquire positions of author-
ity in institutions that legitimate knowledge, and to encourage us to work within
the taken-for-granted assumptions of Black female inferiority shared by the
scholarly community and the culture at large. Those Black women who accept
these assumptions are likely to be rewarded by their institutions.Those challeng-
ing the assumptions can be placed under surveillance and run the risk of being
ostracized.
African-American women academicians who persist in trying to rearticulate
a Black women’s standpoint also face potential rejection of our knowledge claims
on epistemological grounds. Just as the material realities of powerful and domi-
nated groups produce separate standpoints, these groups may also deploy dis-
tinctive epistemologies or theories of knowledge. Black women scholars may
know that something is true—at least, by standards widely accepted among
African-American women—but be unwilling or unable to legitimate our claims
using prevailing scholarly norms. For any discourse, new knowledge claims must
254 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 272 ---
be consistent with an existing body of knowledge that the group controlling the
interpretive context accepts as true. Take, for example, the differences between
how U.S. Black women interpret their experiences as single mothers and how
prevailing social science research analyzes the same reality .Whereas Black women
stress their struggles with job discrimination, inadequate child support, inferior
housing, and street violence, far too much social science research seems mes-
merized by images of lazy “welfare queens” content to stay on the dole. The
methods used to validate knowledge claims must also be acceptable to the group
controlling the knowledge validation process. Individual African-American
women’s narratives about being single mothers are often rendered invisible in
quantitative research methodologies that erase individuality in favor of proving
patterns of welfare abuse. Thus, one important issue facing Black women intel-
lectuals is the question of what constitutes adequate justification that a given
knowledge claim, such as a fact or theory , is true. Just as Hemmings’s descendants
were routinely disbelieved, so are many Black women not seen as credible wit-
nesses for our own experiences. In this climate, Black women academics who
choose to believe other Black women can become suspect.
Criteria for methodological adequacy associated with positivism illustrate
the standards that Black women scholars, especially those in the social sciences,
would have to satisfy in legitimating Black feminist thought. Though I describe
Western or Eurocentric epistemologies as a single cluster, many interpretive
frameworks or paradigms are subsumed under this category . Moreover, my focus
on positivism should be interpreted neither to mean that all dimensions of pos-
itivism are inherently problematic for Black women nor that nonpositivist frame-
works are better.
Positivist approaches aim to create scientific descriptions of reality by produc-
ing objective generalizations. Because researchers have widely differing values,
experiences, and emotions, genuine science is thought to be unattainable unless
all human characteristics except rationality are eliminated from the research
process. By following strict methodological rules, scientists aim to distance
themselves from the values, vested interests, and emotions generated by their
class, race, sex, or unique situation. By decontextualizing themselves, they
allegedly become detached observers and manipulators of nature (Jaggar 1983;
Harding 1986).
Several requirements typify positivist methodological approaches. First,
research methods generally require a distancing of the researcher from her or his
“object” of study by defining the researcher as a “subject” with full human sub-
jectivity and by objectifying the “object” of study (Keller 1985; Asante 1987). A
second requirement is the absence of emotions from the research process (Jaggar
1983).Third, ethics and values are deemed inappropriate in the research process,
either as the reason for scientific inquiry or as part of the research process itself
(Richards 1980). Finally , adversarial debates, whether written or oral, become
the preferred method of ascertaining truth: The arguments that can withstand the
255BLACK FEMINIST EPISTEMOLOGY


--- PAGE 273 ---
greatest assault and survive intact become the strongest truths (Moulton 1983).
Such criteria ask African-American women to objectify ourselves, devalue
our emotional life, displace our motivations for furthering knowledge about
Black women, and confront in an adversarial relationship those with more social,
economic, and professional power. On the one hand, it seems unlikely that Black
women would rely exclusively on positivist paradigms in rearticulating a Black
women’s standpoint. For example, Black women’s experiences in sociology illus-
trate diverse responses to encountering an entrenched positivism. Given Black
women’s long-standing exclusion from sociology prior to 1970, the sociological
knowledge about race and gender produced during their absence, and the sym-
bolic importance of Black women’s absence to sociological self-definitions as a
science,African-American women acting as agents of knowledge faced a complex
situation. In order to refute the history of Black women’s unsuitability for sci-
ence, they had to invoke the tools of sociology by using positivistic frameworks
to demonstrate their capability as scientists. However, they simultaneously needed
to challenge the same structure that granted them legitimacy . Their responses to
this dilemma reflect the strategic use of the tools of positivism when needed,
coupled with overt challenges to positivism when that seemed feasible (Collins
1998a, 95–123).
On the other hand, many Black women have had access to another episte-
mology that encompasses standards for assessing truth that are widely accepted
among African-American women. An experiential, material base underlies a
Black feminist epistemology , namely , collective experiences and accompanying
worldviews that U.S. Black women sustained based on our particular history (see
Chapter 3).The historical conditions of Black women’s work, both in Black civil
society and in paid employment, fostered a series of experiences that when
shared and passed on become the collective wisdom of a Black women’s stand-
point. Moreover, a set of principles for assessing knowledge claims may be avail-
able to those having these shared experiences. These principles pass into a more
general Black women’s wisdom and, further, into what I call here a Black femi-
nist epistemology .
This alternative epistemology uses different standards that are consistent
with Black women’s criteria for substantiated knowledge and with our criteria
for methodological adequacy . Certainly this alternative Black feminist episte-
mology has been devalued by dominant knowledge validation processes and may
not be claimed by many African-American women. But if such an epistemology
exists, what are its contours? Moreover, what are its actual and potential contri-
butions to Black feminist thought?
256 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 274 ---
Lived Experience as a Criterion of Meaning
“My aunt used to say ,‘A heap see, but a few know,’” remembers Carolyn Chase, a
3 1-year-old inner-city Black woman (Gwaltney 1980, 83).This saying depicts two
types of knowing—knowledge and wisdom—and taps the first dimension of
Black feminist epistemology . Living life as Black women requires wisdom
because knowledge about the dynamics of intersecting oppressions has been
essential to U.S. Black women’s survival. African-American women give such
wisdom high credence in assessing knowledge.
Allusions to these two types of knowing pervade the words of a range of
African-American women. Zilpha Elaw, a preacher of the mid-1800s, explains
the tenacity of racism: “The pride of a white skin is a bauble of great value with
many in some parts of the United States, who readily sacrifice their intelligence
to their prejudices, and possess more knowledge than wisdom” (Andrews 1986,
85). In describing differences separating African-American and White women,
Nancy White invokes a similar rule: “When you come right down to it, white
women just think they are free. Black women know they ain’t free” (Gwaltney
1980, 147). Geneva Smitherman, a college professor specializing in African-
American linguistics, suggests, “From a black perspective, written documents are
limited in what they can teach about life and survival in the world. Blacks are
quick to ridicule ‘educated fools,’. . . they have ‘book learning’ but no ‘mother
wit,’ knowledge, but not wisdom” (Smitherman 1977, 76). Mabel Lincoln elo-
quently summarizes the distinction between knowledge and wisdom: “To black
people like me, a fool is funny—you know, people who love to break bad, peo-
ple you can’t tell anything to, folks that would take a shotgun to a roach”
(Gwaltney 1980, 68).
African-American women need wisdom to know how to deal with the
“educated fools” who would “take a shotgun to a roach.” As members of a sub-
ordinate group, Black women cannot afford to be fools of any type, for our
objectification as the Other denies us the protections that White skin, maleness,
and wealth confer.This distinction between knowledge and wisdom, and the use
of experience as the cutting edge dividing them, has been key to Black women’s
survival. In the context of  intersecting oppressions, the distinction is essential.
Knowledge without wisdom is adequate for the powerful, but wisdom is essen-
tial to the survival of the subordinate.
For most African-American women those individuals who have lived
through the experiences about which they claim to be experts are more believ-
able and credible than those who have merely read or thought about such expe-
riences. Thus lived experience as a criterion for credibility frequently is invoked
by U.S. Black women when making knowledge claims. For instance, Hannah
Nelson describes the importance that personal experience has for her: “Our
speech is most directly personal, and every black person assumes that every other
black person has a right to a personal opinion. In speaking of grave matters, your
257BLACK FEMINIST EPISTEMOLOGY


--- PAGE 275 ---
personal experience is considered very good evidence. With us, distant statistics
are certainly not as important as the actual experience of a sober person”
(Gwaltney 1980, 7). Similarly , Ruth Shays uses her lived experiences to challenge
the idea that formal education is the only route to knowledge: “I am the kind of
person who doesn’t have a lot of education, but both my mother and my father
had good common sense. Now, I think that’s all you need. I might not know how
to use thirty-four words where three would do, but that does not mean that I
don’t know what I’m talking about. . . . I know what I’m talking about because
I’m talking about myself. I’m talking about what I have lived” (Gwaltney 1980,
27, 33). Implicit in Ms. Shays’s self-assessment is a critique of the type of knowl-
edge that obscures the truth, the “thirty-four words” that cover up a truth that
can be expressed in three.
Even after substantial mastery of dominant epistemologies, many Black
women scholars invoke our own lived experiences and those of other African-
American women in selecting topics for investigation and methodologies used.
For example, Elsa Barkley Brown (1986) subtitles her essay on Black women’s
history “How My Mother Taught Me to Be an Historian in spite of My Academic
Training.” Similarly , Joyce Ladner (1972) maintains that growing up as a Black
woman in the South gave her special insights in conducting her study of Black
adolescent women.
Experience as a criterion of meaning with practical images as its symbolic
vehicles is a fundamental epistemological tenet in African-American thought sys-
tems (Mitchell and Lewter 1986). “Look at my arm!” Sojourner Truth pro-
claimed: “I have ploughed, and planted, and gathered into barns, and no man
could head me! And ain’t I a woman?” (Loewenberg and Bogin 1976, 235). By
invoking examples from her own life to symbolize new meanings,Truth decon-
structed the prevailing notions of woman. Stories, narratives, and Bible principles
are selected for their applicability to the lived experiences of African-Americans
and become symbolic representations of a whole wealth of experience. Bible
tales are often told for the wisdom they express about everyday life, so their inter-
pretation involves no need for scientific historical verification. The narrative
method requires that the story be told, not torn apart in analysis, and trusted as
core belief, not “admired as science” (Mitchell and Lewter 1986, 8).
June Jordan’s essay about her mother’s suicide illustrates the multiple levels
of meaning that can occur when lived experience becomes valued as a criterion
of meaning. Jordan describes her mother, a woman who literally died trying to
stand up, and the effect her mother’s death had on her own work:
I think all of this is really about women and work. Certainly this is all
about me as a woman and my life work. I mean I am not sure my moth-
er’s suicide was something extraordinary . Perhaps most women must deal
with a similar inheritance, the legacy of a woman whose death you can-
not possibly pinpoint because she died so many , many times and because,
even before she became your mother, the life of that woman was taken....
258 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 276 ---
I came too late to help my mother to her feet. By way of everlasting thanks
to all of the women who have helped me to stay alive I am working never
to be late again. (Jordan 1985, 26)
While Jordan has knowledge about the concrete act of her mother’s death, she
also strives for wisdom concerning the meaning of that death.
Some feminist scholars claim that women as a group are more likely than
men to use lived experiences in assessing knowledge claims. For example, a sub-
stantial number of the 135 women in a study of women’s cognitive development
were “connected knowers” and were drawn to the sort of knowledge that
emerges from firsthand observation (Belenky et al. 1986). Such women felt that
because knowledge comes from experience, the best way of understanding
another person’s ideas was to develop empathy and share the experiences that led
the person to form those ideas. In explaining these patterns, some feminist the-
orists suggest that women are socialized in complex relational nexuses where
contextual rules versus abstract principles govern behavior (Chodorow 1978;
Gilligan 1982). This socialization process is thought to stimulate characteristic
ways of knowing (Hartsock 1983a; Belenky et al. 1986).These theorists suggest
that women are more likely to experience two modes of knowing: one located
in the body and the space it occupies and the other passing beyond it. Through
multiple forms of mothering, women mediate these two modes and use the lived
experiences of their daily lives to assess more abstract knowledge claims (D.
Smith 1987). These forms of knowledge allow for subjectivity between the
knower and the known, rest in the women themselves (not in higher authori-
ties), and are experienced directly in the world (not through abstractions).
African-American women’s lives remain structured at the convergence of
several factors: Black community organizations reflecting principles of African-
influenced belief systems; activist mothering traditions that stimulate politicized
understandings of Black women’s motherwork; and a social class system that rel-
egates Black women as workers to the bottom of the social hierarchy . Amanda
King, a young African-American mother whose experiences illustrate this con-
vergence, describes how she used lived experience to assess the abstract and
points out how difficult mediating these two modes of knowing can be:
The leaders of the ROC [a labor union] lost their jobs too, but it just
seemed like they were used to losing their jobs.... This was like a lifelong
thing for them, to get out there and protest. They were like, what do you
call them—intellectuals .... Y o u  got the ones that go to the university that
are supposed to make all the speeches, they’re the ones that are supposed
to lead, you know, put this little revolution together, and then you got the
little ones . . . that go to the factory everyday , they be the ones that have to
fight. I had a child and I thought I don’t have the time to be running
around with these people....I  mean I understand some of that stuff they
were talking about, like the bourgeoisie, the rich and the poor and all that,
but I had surviving on my mind for me and my kid. (Byerly 1986, 198)
259BLACK FEMINIST EPISTEMOLOGY


--- PAGE 277 ---
For Ms. King abstract ideals of class solidarity were mediated by her lived expe-
riences as a mother and the connectedness it involved.
In traditional African-American communities Black women find consider-
able institutional support for valuing lived experience. Black women’s centrality
in families, churches, and other community organizations allows us to share with
younger, less experienced sisters our concrete knowledge of what it takes to be
self-defined Black women. “Sisterhood is not new to Black women,” asserts
Bonnie Thornton Dill, but “while Black women have fostered and encouraged sis-
terhood, we have not used it as the anvil to forge our political identities” (1983,
134). Though not expressed in explicitly political terms, this relationship of sis-
terhood among Black women can be seen as a model for a series of relationships
African-American women have with one another (Gilkes 1985; Giddings 1988).
Given that Black churches and families are often woman-centered, African-
influenced institutions, African-American women traditionally have found con-
siderable institutional support for this dimension of Black feminist epistemology .
While White women may value lived experience, it is questionable whether com-
parable support comes from White families—particularly middle-class families
where privatization is so highly valued—and other social institutions controlled
by Whites that advance similar values. Similarly , while Black men participate in
the institutions of Black civil society , they cannot take part in Black women’s sis-
terhood. In terms of Black women’s relationships with one another, African-
American women may find it easier than others to recognize connectedness as a
primary way of knowing, simply because we have more opportunities to do so
and must rely upon it more heavily than others.
The Use of Dialogue in Assessing 
Knowledge Claims
“Dialogue implies talk between two subjects, not the speech of subject and
object. It is a humanizing speech, one that challenges and resists domination,”
asserts bell hooks (1989, 131). For Black women new knowledge claims are
rarely worked out in isolation from other individuals and are usually developed
through dialogues with other members of a community . A primary epistemo-
logical assumption underlying the use of dialogue in assessing knowledge
claims is that connectedness rather than separation is an essential component of
the knowledge validation process (Belenky et al. 1986, 18).
This belief in connectedness and the use of dialogue as one of its criteria for
methodological adequacy has African roots. Whereas women typically remain
subordinated to men within traditional African societies, these same societies
have at the same time embraced holistic worldviews that seek harmony . “One
must understand that to become human, to realize the promise of becoming
human, is the only important task of the person,” posits Molefi Asante (1987,
260 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 278 ---
185). People become more human and empowered primarily in the context of
a community , and only when they “become seekers of the type of connections,
interactions, and meetings that lead to harmony” (p. 185). The power of the
word generally , and dialogues specifically , allows this to happen.
Not to be confused with adversarial debate, the use of dialogue has deep
roots in African-based oral traditions and in African-American culture (Sidran
1971; Smitherman 1977; Kochman 1981). Ruth Shays describes the importance
of dialogue in the knowledge validation process of enslaved African-Americans:
They would find a lie if it took them a year.... The foreparents found the
truth because they listened and they made people tell their part many
times. Most often you can hear a lie.... Those old people was everywhere
and knew the truth of many disputes.They believed that a liar should suf-
fer the pain of his lies, and they had all kinds of ways of bringing liars to
judgment. (Gwaltney 1980, 32)
The widespread use of the call-and-response discourse mode among African-
Americans illustrates the importance placed on dialogue. Composed of sponta-
neous verbal and nonverbal interaction between speaker and listener in which
all of the speaker’s statements, or “calls,” are punctuated by expressions, or
“responses,” from the listener, this Black discourse mode pervades African-
American culture. The fundamental requirement of this interactive network is
active participation of all individuals (Smitherman 1977, 108). For ideas to be
tested and validated, everyone in the group must participate.To refuse to join in,
especially if one really disagrees with what has been said, is seen as “cheating”
(Kochman 1981, 28).
June Jordan’s analysis of Black English points to the significance of this
dimension of an alternative epistemology:
Our language is a system constructed by people constantly needing to
insist that we exist.... Our language devolves from a culture that abhors
all abstraction, or anything tending to obscure or delete the fact of the
human being who is here and now/the truth of the person who is speak-
ing or listening. Consequently ,there is no passive voice construction possible
in Black English. For example, you cannot say , “Black English is being elim-
inated.”You must say , instead, “White people eliminating Black English.”
The assumption of the presence of life governs all of Black English . . .
every sentence assumes the living and active participation of at least two
human beings, the speaker and the listener. (Jordan 1985, 129)
Many Black women intellectuals invoke the relationships and connectedness
provided by use of dialogue. When asked why she chose the themes she did,
novelist Gayl Jones replied: “I was . . . interested . . . in oral traditions of story-
telling—Afro-American and others, in which there is always the consciousness
and importance of the hearer” (Tate 1983, 91). In describing the difference in
the way male and female writers select significant events and relationships, Jones
261BLACK FEMINIST EPISTEMOLOGY


--- PAGE 279 ---
says “With many women writers, relationships within family , community ,
between men and women, and among women—from slave narratives by black
women writers on—are treated as complex and significant relationships, where-
as with many men the significant relationships are those that involve confronta-
tions—relationships outside the family and community” (in Tate 1983, 92).
Alice Walker’s reaction to Zora Neale Hurston’s book Mules and Men is another
example of the use of dialogue in assessing knowledge claims. In Mules and Men
Hurston chose not to become a detached observer of the stories and folktales
she collected but instead, through extensive dialogues with the people in the
communities she studied, placed herself in the center of her analysis. Using a
similar process, Walker tests the truth of Hurston’s knowledge claims:
When I read Mules and Men I was delighted. Here was this perfect book!
The “perfection” of which I immediately tested on my relatives, who are
such typical Black Americans they are useful for every sort of political, cul-
tural, or economic survey .Very regular people from the South, rapidly for-
getting their Southern cultural inheritance in the suburbs and ghettos of
Boston and New York, they sat around reading the book themselves, lis-
tening to me read the book, listening to each other read the book, and a
kind of paradise was regained. (Walker 1977, xii)
Black women’s centrality in families, churches, and other community organiza-
tions provides African-American women with a high degree of support for
invoking dialogue as a dimension of Black feminist epistemology . However,
when African-American women use dialogues in assessing knowledge claims,
we might be invoking ways of knowing that are also more likely to be used 
by women. Feminist scholars contend that men and women are socialized to
seek different types of autonomy—the former based on separation, the latter
seeking connectedness—and that this variation in types of autonomy parallels
the characteristic differences between how men and women understand ideas
and experiences (Chodorow 1978; Keller 1985; Belenky et al. 1986). For
instance, in contrast to the visual metaphors (such as equating knowledge with
illumination, knowing with seeing, and truth with light) that scientists and
philosophers typically use, women tend to ground their epistemological
premises in metaphors suggesting finding a voice, speaking, and listening
(Belenky et al. 1986).
The Ethics of Caring
“Ole white preachers used to talk wid dey tongues widdout sayin’ nothin’, but
Jesus told us slaves to talk wid our hearts” (Webber 1978, 127).These words of
an ex-slave suggest that ideas cannot be divorced from the individuals who cre-
ate and share them.This theme of talking with the heart taps the ethic of caring,
another dimension of an alternative epistemology used by African-American
262 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 280 ---
women. Just as the ex-slave used the wisdom in his heart to reject the ideas of
the preachers who talked “wid dey tongues widdout sayin’ nothin’,” the ethic
of caring suggests that personal expressiveness, emotions, and empathy are cen-
tral to the knowledge validation process.
One of three interrelated components of the ethic of caring is the emphasis
placed on individual uniqueness. Rooted in a tradition of African humanism,
each individual is thought to be a unique expression of a common spirit, power,
or energy inherent in all life.
4 When Alice Walker “never doubted her powers of
judgment because her mother assumed they were sound,” she invokes the sense
of individual uniqueness taught to her by her mother (Washington 1984, 145).
The polyrhythms in African-American music, in which no one main beat subor-
dinates the others, is paralleled by the theme of individual expression in Black
women’s quilting. Black women quilters place strong color and patterns next to
one another and see the individual differences not as detracting from each piece
but as enriching the whole quilt (Brown 1989).This belief in individual unique-
ness is illustrated by the value placed on personal expressiveness in African-
American communities (Smitherman 1977; Kochman 1981; Mitchell and Lewter
1986). Johnetta Ray , an inner-city resident, describes this African-influenced
emphasis on individual uniqueness: “No matter how hard we try , I don’t think
black people will ever develop much of a herd instinct. We are profound indi-
vidualists with a passion for self-expression” (Gwaltney 1980, 228).
A second component of the ethic of caring concerns the appropriateness of
emotions in dialogues. Emotion indicates that a speaker believes in the validity of
an argument. Consider Ntozake Shange’s description of one of the goals of her
work: “Our [Western] society allows people to be absolutely neurotic and totally
out of touch with their feelings and everyone else’s feelings, and yet be very
respectable. This, to me, is a travesty.... I’m trying to change the idea of seeing
emotions and intellect as distinct faculties” (Tate 1983, 156).The Black women’s
blues tradition’s history of personal expressiveness heals this binary that separates
emotion from intellect. For example, in her rendition of “Strange Fruit,” Billie
Holiday’s lyrics blend seamlessly with the emotion of her delivery to render a
trenchant social commentary on Southern lynching. Without emotion, Aretha
Franklin’s (1967) cry for “respect” would be virtually meaningless.
A third component of the ethic of caring involves developing the capacity for
empathy . Harriet Jones, a 16-year-old Black woman, explains to her interviewer
why she chose to open up to him: “Some things in my life are so hard for me to
bear, and it makes me feel better to know that you feel sorry about those things
and would change them if you could” (Gwaltney 1980, 11). Without her belief
in his empathy , she found it difficult to talk. Black women writers often explore
the growth of empathy as part of an ethic of caring. For example, the growing
respect that the Black slave woman Dessa and the White woman Rufel gain for
each other in Sherley Anne Williams’s Dessa Rose stems from their increased
understanding of each other’s positions. After watching Rufel fight off the
263BLACK FEMINIST EPISTEMOLOGY


--- PAGE 281 ---
advances of a White man, Dessa lay awake thinking: “The white woman was sub-
ject to the same ravisment as me; this the thought that kept me awake. I hadn’t
knowed white mens could use a white woman like that, just take her by force
same as they could with us” (1986, 220). As a result of her newfound empathy ,
Dessa observed, “It was like we had a secret between us” (p. 220).
These components of the ethic of caring—the value placed on individual
expressiveness, the appropriateness of emotions, and the capacity for empathy—
reappear in varying combinations throughout Black civil society . One of the best
examples of the interactive nature of the importance of dialogue and the ethic of
caring in assessing knowledge claims occurs in the use of the call-and-response
discourse mode in many Black church services. In such services both the minis-
ter and the congregation routinely use voice rhythm and vocal inflection to con-
vey meaning. The sound of what is being said is just as important as the words
themselves in what is, in a sense, a dialogue of reason and emotion. As a result it
is nearly impossible to filter out the strictly linguistic-cognitive abstract meaning
from the sociocultural psychoemotive meaning (Smitherman 1977, 135, 137).
While the ideas presented by a speaker must have validity (i.e., agree with the
general body of knowledge shared by the Black congregation), the group also
appraises the way knowledge claims are presented.
The emphasis placed on expressiveness and emotion in African-American
communities bears marked resemblance to feminist perspectives on the impor-
tance of personality in connected knowing. Belenky et al. (1986) point out that
two contrasting orientations characterize knowing: one of separation based on
impersonal procedures for establishing truth, and the other of connection in
which truth emerges through care. While these ways of knowing are not gender
specific, disproportionate numbers of women rely on connected knowing.
Separate knowers try to subtract the personality of an individual from his or her
ideas because they see personality as biasing those ideas. In contrast, connected
knowers see personality as adding to an individual’s ideas and feel that the
personality of each group member enriches a group’s understanding. The sig-
nificance of individual uniqueness, personal expressiveness, and empathy in
African-American communities thus resembles the importance that some
feminist analyses place on women’s “inner voice” (Belenky et al. 1986).
The convergence of African-influenced and feminist principles in the ethic
of caring seems particularly acute. White women may have access to women’s
experiences that encourage emotion and expressiveness, but few White-con-
trolled U.S. social  institutions except the family validate this way of knowing. In
contrast, Black women have long had the support of the Black church, an insti-
tution with deep roots in the African past and a philosophy that accepts and
encourages expressiveness and an ethic of caring. Black men share in this Black
cultural tradition. But they must resolve the contradictions that confront them in
redefining Black masculinity in the face of abstract, unemotional notions of mas-
culinity imposed on them (Hoch 1979).Thus, the differences distinguishing U.S.
264 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 282 ---
Black women from other groups, even those close to them, lies less in Black
women’s race or gender identity than in access to social institutions that support
an ethic of caring in their lives.
The Ethic of Personal Accountability
An ethic of personal accountability also characterizes Black feminist epistemology .
Not only must individuals develop their knowledge claims through dialogue and
present them in a style proving their concern for their ideas, but people are
expected to be accountable for their knowledge claims. Zilpha Elaw’s description
of slavery reflects this notion that every idea has an owner and that the owner’s
identity matters: “Oh, the abominations of slavery! ...E v e r y  case of slavery , how-
ever lenient its inflictions and mitigated its atrocities, indicates an oppressor, the
oppressed, and oppression” (Andrews 1986, 98). For Elaw abstract definitions of
slavery mesh with the personal identities of slavery’s perpetrators and its victims.
African-Americans consider it essential for individuals to have definite positions
on issues and assume full responsibility for arguing their validity (Kochman 1981).
Assessments of an individual’s knowledge claims simultaneously evaluate an
individual’s character, values, and ethics. Within this logic, many African-
Americans reject prevailing beliefs that probing into an individual’s personal
viewpoint is outside the boundaries of discussion. Rather, all views expressed and
actions taken are thought to derive from a central set of core beliefs that cannot
be other than personal (Kochman 1981, 23). “Does Aretha really believe that
Black women should get ‘respect,’ or is she just mouthing the words?” is a valid
question in Black feminist epistemology . Knowledge claims made by individuals
respected for their moral and ethical connections to their ideas will carry more
weight than those offered by less respected figures.
An example drawn from an undergraduate class session where the students
were all Black women illustrates the uniqueness of this portion of the knowledge
validation process. During one class discussion I asked the students to evaluate a
prominent Black male scholar’s analysis of Black feminism. Instead of removing
the scholar from his context in order to dissect the rationality of his thesis, my
students demanded facts about the author’s personal biography . They were espe-
cially interested in specific details of his life, such as his relationships with Black
women, his marital status, and his social class background. By requesting data on
dimensions of his personal life routinely excluded in positivist approaches to
knowledge validation, they invoked lived experience as a criterion of meaning.
They used this information to assess whether he really cared about his topic and
drew on this ethic of caring in advancing their knowledge claims about his work.
Furthermore, they refused to evaluate the rationality of his written ideas without
some indication of his personal credibility as an ethical human being.The entire
exchange could only have occurred as a dialogue among members of a group
265BLACK FEMINIST EPISTEMOLOGY


--- PAGE 283 ---
that had established a solid enough community to employ an alternative episte-
mology in assessing knowledge claims.
Traditional Black church services also illustrate the interactive nature of all
four dimensions of this alternative epistemology . The services represent more
than dialogues between the rationality used in examining biblical texts and sto-
ries and the emotion inherent in the use of reason for this purpose. The reason
such dialogues exist is to examine lived experiences for the presence of an ethic
of caring. Neither emotion nor ethics is subordinated to reason. Instead, emo-
tion, ethics, and reason are used as interconnected, essential components in
assessing knowledge claims. In this alternative epistemology , values lie at the
heart of the knowledge validation process such that inquiry always has an ethi-
cal aim. Moreover, when these four dimensions become politicized and attached
to a social justice project, they can form a framework for Black feminist thought
and practice.
Black Women as Agents of Knowledge
Social movements of the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s stimulated a greatly changed
intellectual and political climate in the United States. Compared to the past,
many more U.S. Black women became legitimated agents of knowledge. No
longer passive objects of knowledge manipulated within prevailing knowledge
validation processes, African-American women aimed to speak for ourselves.
African-American women in the academy and other positions of authority
who aim to advance Black feminist thought now encounter the often conflicting
epistemological standards of three key groups. First, Black feminist thought must
be validated by ordinary African-American women who, in the words of Hannah
Nelson, grow to womanhood “in a world where the saner you are, the madder
you are made to appear” (Gwaltney 1980, 7). To be credible in the eyes of this
group, Black feminist intellectuals must be personal advocates for their material,
be accountable for the consequences of their work, have lived or experienced
their material in some fashion, and be willing to engage in dialogues about their
findings with ordinary , everyday people.
Historically , living life as an African-American woman facilitated this endeav-
or because knowledge validation processes controlled in part or in full by Black
women occurred in particular organizational settings. When Black women were
in charge of our own self-definitions, these four dimensions of Black feminist
epistemology—lived experience as a criterion of meaning, the use of dialogue,
the ethic of personal accountability , and the ethic of caring—came to the fore-
front. When the core themes and interpretive frameworks of Black women’s
knowledge were informed by Black feminist epistemology , a rich tradition of
Black feminist thought ensued.
Traditionally women engaged in this overarching intellectual and political
266 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 284 ---
project were blues singers, poets, autobiographers, storytellers, and orators.They
became Black feminist intellectuals both by doing intellectual work and by being
validated as such by everyday Black women. Black women in academia could not
openly join their ranks without incurring a serious penalty . In racially segregated
environments that routinely excluded the majority of African-American women,
only a select few were able to defy prevailing norms and explicitly embrace Black
feminist epistemology . Zora Neale Hurston was one such figure. Consider Alice
Walker’s description of  Hurston:
In my mind, Zora Neale Hurston, Billie Holiday , and Bessie Smith form a
sort of unholy trinity . Zora belongs in the tradition of black women singers,
rather than among “the literati.”. . . Like Billie and Bessie she followed her
own road, believed in her own gods, pursued her own dreams, and
refused to separate herself from “common” people. (Walker 1977,
xvii–xviii)
For her time, Zora Neale Hurston remains an exception, for prior to 1950, few
African-American women earned advanced degrees, and most of those who did
complied with prevailing knowledge validation processes.
The community of Black women scholars constitutes a second constituency
whose epistemological standards must be met. As the number of Black women
academics grows, this heterogeneous collectivity shares a similar social location
in higher education, yet finds a new challenge in building group solidarities
across differences. African-American women scholars place varying amounts of
importance on furthering Black feminist scholarship. However, despite this new-
found diversity , since more African-American women earn advanced degrees, the
range of Black feminist scholarship has expanded. Historically , African-American
women may have brought sensibilities gained from Black feminist epistemology
to their scholarship. But gaining legitimacy often came with the cost of rejecting
such an epistemology . Studying Black women’s lives at all placed many careers at
risk. More recently , increasing numbers of African-American women scholars
have chosen to study Black women’s experiences, and to do so by relying on ele-
ments of Black feminist epistemology in framing their work. For example,Valerie
Lee’s (1996) study of African-American midwives in the South deploys an inno-
vative merger of Black women’s fiction, ethnographic method, and personal nar-
rative, to good effect.
A third group whose epistemological standards must be met consists of
dominant groups who still control schools, graduate programs, tenure process-
es, publication outlets, and other mechanisms that legitimate knowledge.
African-American women academics who aim to advance Black feminist thought
typically must use dominant Eurocentric epistemologies for this group. The dif-
ficulties these Black women now face lie less in demonstrating that they could
master White male epistemologies than in resisting the hegemonic nature of
these patterns of thought in order to see, value, and use existing alternative Black
267BLACK FEMINIST EPISTEMOLOGY


--- PAGE 285 ---
feminist ways of knowing. For Black women who are agents of knowledge with-
in academia, the marginality that accompanies outsider-within status can be the
source of both frustration and creativity . In an attempt to minimize the differ-
ences between the cultural context of African-American communities and the
expectations of mainstream social institutions, some women dichotomize their
behavior and become two different people. Over time, the strain of doing this
can be enormous. Others reject Black women’s accumulated wisdom and work
against their own best interests by enforcing the dominant group’s specialized
thought. Still others manage to inhabit both contexts but do so critically , using
perspectives gained from their outsider-within social locations as a source of
insights and ideas. But while such women can make substantial contributions as
agents of knowledge, they rarely do so without substantial personal cost.
“Eventually it comes to you,” observes Lorraine Hansberry , “the thing that makes
you exceptional, if you are at all, is inevitably that which must also make you
lonely” (1969, 148).
Just as migrating between Black and White families raised special issues for
Black women domestic workers, moving among different and competing inter-
pretive communities raises similar epistemological concerns for Black feminist
thinkers. The dilemma facing Black women scholars, in particular, engaged in
creating Black feminist thought illustrates difficulties that can accompany grap-
pling with multiple interpretive communities. A knowledge claim that meets the
criteria of adequacy for one group and thus is judged to be acceptable may not
be translatable into the terms of a different group. Using the example of Black
English, June Jordan illustrates the difficulty of moving among epistemologies:
You cannot “translate” instances of Standard English preoccupied with
abstraction or with nothing/nobody evidently alive into Black English.
That would warp the language into uses antithetical to the guiding per-
spective of its community of users. Rather you must first change those
Standard English sentences, themselves, into ideas consistent with the per-
son-centered assumptions of Black English. (Jordan 1985, 130)
Although both worldviews share a common vocabulary , the ideas themselves
defy direct translation.
Once Black women scholars face the notion that on certain dimensions of a
Black women’s standpoint, it may be fruitless to try to translate into other frame-
works truths validated by  Black feminist epistemology , then other choices
emerge. Rather than trying to uncover universal knowledge claims that can with-
stand the translation from one epistemology to another (initially , at least), Black
women intellectuals might find efforts to rearticulate a Black women’s standpoint
especially fruitful. Rearticulating a Black women’s standpoint refashions the par-
ticular and reveals the more universal human dimensions of Black women’s
everyday lives. “I date all my work,” notes Nikki Giovanni, “because I think poetry ,
or any writing, is but a reflection of the moment. The universal comes from the
268 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 286 ---
particular” (1988, 57). Lorraine Hansberry expresses a similar idea: “I believe
that one of the most sound ideas in dramatic writing is that in order to create the
universal, you must pay very great attention to the specific. Universality , I think,
emerges from the truthful identity of what is” (1969, 128).
Toward Truth
The existence of Black feminist thought suggests another path to the universal
truths that might accompany the “truthful identity of what is.” In this volume I
place Black women’s subjectivity in the center of analysis and examine the inter-
dependence of the everyday , taken-for-granted knowledge shared by African-
American women as a group, the more specialized knowledge produced by
Black women intellectuals, and the social conditions shaping both types of
thought. This approach allows me to describe the creative tension linking how
social conditions influenced a Black women’s standpoint and how the power of
the ideas themselves gave many African-American women the strength to shape
those same social conditions. I approach Black feminist thought as situated in a
context of domination and not as a system of ideas divorced from political and
economic reality . Moreover, I present Black feminist thought as subjugated
knowledge in that African-American women have long struggled to find alter-
native locations and epistemologies for validating our own self-definitions. In
brief, I examined the situated, subjugated standpoint of African-American
women in order to understand Black feminist thought as a partial perspective on
domination.
Because U.S. Black women have access to the experiences that accrue to being
both Black and female, an alternative epistemology used to rearticulate a Black
women’s standpoint should reflect the convergence of both sets of experiences.
Race and gender may be analytically distinct, but in Black women’s everyday
lives, they work together. The search for the distinguishing features of an alter-
native epistemology used by African-American women reveals that some ideas
that Africanist scholars identify as characteristically “Black” often bear remarkable
resemblance to similar ideas claimed by feminist scholars as characteristically
“female.” This similarity suggests that the actual contours of intersecting oppres-
sions can vary dramatically and yet generate some uniformity in the epistemolo-
gies used by subordinate groups. Just as U.S. Black women and African women
encountered diverse patterns of intersecting oppressions yet generated similar
agendas concerning what mattered in their feminisms, a similar process may be
at work regarding the epistemologies of oppressed groups.Thus the significance
of a Black feminist epistemology may lie in its ability to enrich our understand-
ing of how subordinate groups create knowledge that fosters both their empow-
erment and social justice.
This approach to Black feminist thought allows African-American women to
269BLACK FEMINIST EPISTEMOLOGY


--- PAGE 287 ---
explore the epistemological implications of transversal politics.. Eventually this
approach may get us to a point at which, claims Elsa Barkley Brown, “all people
can learn to center in another experience, validate it, and judge it by its own stan-
dards without need of comparison or need to adopt that framework as their
own” (1989, 922). In such politics, “one has no need to ‘decenter’ anyone in
order to center someone else; one has only to constantly , appropriately ,‘pivot the
center’ ” (p. 922).
Rather than emphasizing how a Black women’s standpoint and its accompa-
nying epistemology differ from those of White women, Black men, and other
collectivities, Black women’s experiences serve as one specific social location for
examining points of connection among multiple epistemologies. Viewing Black
feminist epistemology in this way challenges additive analyses of oppression
claiming that Black women have a more accurate view of oppression than do
other groups. Such approaches suggest that oppression can be quantified and
compared and that adding layers of oppression produces a potentially clearer
standpoint (Spelman 1988). One implication of some uses of standpoint theory
is that the more subordinated the group, the purer the vision available to them.
This is an outcome of the origins of standpoint approaches in Marxist social the-
ory , itself reflecting the binary thinking of its Western origins. Ironically , by quan-
tifying and ranking human oppressions, standpoint theorists invoke criteria for
methodological adequacy that resemble those of positivism.Although it is tempt-
ing to claim that Black women are more oppressed than everyone else and there-
fore have the best standpoint from which to understand the mechanisms,
processes, and effects of oppression, this is not the case.
Instead, those ideas that are validated as true by African-American women,
African-American men, Latina lesbians, Asian-American women, Puerto Rican
men, and other groups with distinctive standpoints, with each group using the
epistemological approaches growing from its unique standpoint, become the
most “objective” truths. Each group speaks from its own standpoint and shares
its own partial, situated knowledge. But because each group perceives its own
truth as partial, its knowledge is unfinished. Each group becomes better able to
consider other groups’ standpoints without relinquishing the uniqueness of its
own standpoint or suppressing other groups’ partial perspectives. “What is
always needed in the appreciation of art, or life,” maintains Alice Walker, “is the
larger perspective. Connections made, or at least attempted, where none existed
before, the straining to encompass in one’s glance at the varied world the com-
mon thread, the unifying theme through immense diversity” (1983, 5).
Partiality , and not universality , is the condition of being heard; individuals and
groups forwarding knowledge claims without owning their position are deemed
less credible than those who do.
Alternative knowledge claims in and of themselves are rarely threatening to
conventional knowledge. Such claims are routinely ignored, discredited, or sim-
ply absorbed and marginalized in existing paradigms. Much more threatening is
270 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 288 ---
the challenge that alternative epistemologies offer to the basic process used by
the powerful to legitimate knowledge claims that in turn justify their right to
rule. If the epistemology used to validate knowledge comes into question, then
all prior knowledge claims validated under the dominant model become suspect.
Alternative epistemologies challenge all certified knowledge and open up the
question of whether what has been taken to be true can stand the test of alter-
native ways of validating truth. The existence of a self-defined Black women’s
standpoint using Black feminist epistemology calls into question the content of
what currently passes as truth and simultaneously challenges the process of arriv-
ing at that truth.
271BLACK FEMINIST EPISTEMOLOGY


--- PAGE 289 ---



--- PAGE 290 ---
To make a difference in the lives of Brazilian Black women, we have more to 
do than just hope for a better future ....W h a t  w e  h a v e  t o  d o  i s  t o  o rganize, and to
never stop questioning. What we have to do, as always, is plenty of work.
— Sueli Carneiro 1995, 17
Brazilian feminist Sueli Carneiro’s 
words identify the work facing Black Brazilian women in fostering their own
empowerment. Because U.S. Black feminism participates in this larger social jus-
tice project of Black diasporic feminisms, it too must “never stop questioning”
social injustices. Within this larger endeavor, U.S. Black feminist thought can
make a special contribution. By stressing how African-American women must
become self-defined and self-determining within intersecting oppressions,
Black feminist thought emphasizes the importance of knowledge for empower-
ment. Ideas matter, but doing “plenty of work” may matter even more.
Historically , U.S. Black women’s activism demonstrates that becoming empow-
ered requires more than changing the consciousness of individual Black women
via Black community development strategies. Empowerment also requires trans-
forming unjust social institutions that African-Americans encounter from one
generation to the next.
As Chapters 10 and 11 suggest, Black feminist thought offers two important
contributions concerning the significance of knowledge for a politics of empow-
erment. First, Black feminist thought fosters a fundamental paradigmatic shift in
how we think about unjust power relations. By embracing a paradigm of inter-
secting oppressions of race, class, gender, sexuality , and nation, as well as Black
women’s individual and collective agency within them, Black feminist thought
reconceptualizes the social relations of domination and resistance. Second, Black
feminist thought addresses ongoing epistemological debates concerning the
power dynamics that underlie what counts as knowledge. Offering U.S. Black
12
TOWARD
A
POLITICS 
OF
EMPOWERMENT 
12


--- PAGE 291 ---
women new knowledge about our own experiences can be empowering. But
activating epistemologies that criticize prevailing knowledge and that enable us
to define our own realities on our own terms has far greater implications.
Despite their significance, these contributions can serve only as guidelines
because what works in one setting may not work in others. Chapter 2’s discus-
sion of the distinguishing features of Black feminist thought provides directions
for Black feminist activism. However, if U.S. Black feminist thought is to reach its
full potential, especially in its efforts to contribute to an “intercontinental Black
women’s consciousness movement” (McLaughlin 1995, 73), then U.S. Black
feminist thought must redefine power and empowerment. This can be a daunt-
ing task because power defies simple explanations. But how does one develop a
politics of empowerment without understanding how power is organized and
operates? 
Thus far, this volume has synthesized two main approaches to power. One
way of approaching power concerns the dialectical relationship linking oppres-
sion and activism, where groups with greater power oppress those with lesser
amounts. Rather than seeing social change or lack of it as preordained and out-
side the realm of human action, the notion of a dialectical relationship suggests
that change results from human agency . Because African-American women
remain relegated to the bottom of the social hierarchy from one generation to
the next, U.S. Black women have a vested interest in opposing oppression.This is
not an intellectual issue for most African-American women—it is a lived reality .
As long as Black women’s oppression persists, so will the need for Black women’s
activism. Moreover, dialectical analyses of power point out that when it comes to
social injustice, groups have competing interests that often generate conflict.
Even when groups understand the need for the type of transversal politics dis-
cussed in Chapter 10, they often find themselves on opposite sides of social
issues. Oppression and resistance remain intricately linked such that the shape of
one influences that of the other. At the same time, this relationship is far more
complex than a simple model of permanent oppressors and perpetual victims.
Another way of approaching power views it not as something that groups
possess, but as an intangible entity that circulates within a particular matrix of
domination and to which individuals stand in varying relationships. These
approaches emphasize how individual subjectivity frames human actions within
a matrix of domination. U.S. Black women’s efforts to grapple with the effects of
domination in everyday life are evident in our creation of safe spaces that enable
us to resist oppression, and in our struggles to form fully human love relations
with one another, and with children, fathers, and brothers, as well as with indi-
viduals who do not see Black women as worthwhile. Oppression is not simply
understood in the mind—it is felt in the body in myriad ways. Moreover, because
oppression is constantly changing, different aspects of an individual U.S. Black
woman’s self-definitions intermingle and become more salient: Her gender may
be more prominent when she becomes a mother, her race when she searches for
274 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 292 ---
housing, her social class when she applies for credit, her sexual orientation when
she is walking with her lover, and her citizenship status when she applies for a
job. In all of these contexts, her position in relation to and within intersecting
oppressions shifts.
As each individual African-American woman changes her ideas and actions,
so does the overall shape of power itself change. In the absence of Black femi-
nist thought and other comparable oppositional knowledges, these micro-
changes may remain invisible to individual women.Yet collectively , they can have
a profound impact. When my mother taught me to read, took me to the public
library when I was five, and told me that if I learned to read, I could experience
a form of freedom, neither she nor I saw the magnitude of that one action in my
life and the lives that my work has subsequently touched. As people push against,
step away from, and shift the terms of their participation in power relations, the
shape of power relations changes for everyone. Like individual subjectivity , resis-
tance strategies and power are always multiple and in constant states of change.
Together, these two approaches to power point to two important uses of
knowledge for African-American women and other social groups engaged in
social justice projects. Dialectical approaches emphasize the significance of
knowledge in developing self-defined, group-based standpoints that, in turn, can
foster the type of group solidarity necessary for resisting oppressions. In contrast,
subjectivity approaches emphasize how domination and resistance shape and are
shaped by individual agency . Issues of consciousness link the two. In the former,
group-based consciousness emerges through developing oppositional knowl-
edges such as Black feminist thought. In the latter, individual self-definitions and
behaviors shift in tandem with a changed consciousness concerning everyday
lived experience. Black feminist thought encompasses both meanings of con-
sciousness—neither is sufficient without the other.Together, both approaches to
power also highlight the significance of multiplicity in shaping consciousness.
For example, viewing domination itself as encompassing intersecting oppres-
sions of race, class, gender, sexuality , and nation points to the significance of
these oppressions in shaping the overall organization of a particular matrix of
domination. Similarly , personal identities constructed around individual under-
standings of race, class, gender, sexuality , and nation define each individual’s
unique biography .
Both of these approaches remain theoretically useful because they each pro-
vide partial and different perspectives on empowerment. Unfortunately , these
two views are often presented as competing rather than potentially complementary
approaches.As a result, each provides a useful starting point for thinking through
African-American women’s empowerment in the context of constantly changing
power relations, but neither is sufficient. Black feminism and other social justice
projects require a language of power that is grounded within yet transcends these
approaches. Social justice projects need a common, functional vocabulary that
furthers their understanding of the politics of empowerment.
275TOWARD A POLITICS OF EMPOWERMENT


--- PAGE 293 ---
Thus far, using African-American women’s experiences as a lens, this volume
has examined race, gender, class, sexuality , and nation as forms of oppression that
work together in distinctive ways to produce a distinctive U.S. matrix of domi-
nation. But earlier chapters have said much less about how these and other
oppressions are organized. In response, this chapter sketches out a preliminary
vocabulary of power and empowerment that emerges from these seemingly
competing approaches to power. Whether viewed through the lens of a single
system of power, or through that of intersecting oppressions, any particular
matrix of domination is organized via four interrelated domains of power,
namely , the structural, disciplinary , hegemonic, and interpersonal domains. Each
domain serves a particular purpose.The structural domain organizes oppression,
whereas the disciplinary domain manages it. The hegemonic domain justifies
oppression, and the interpersonal domain influences everyday lived experience
and the individual consciousness that ensues.
It is important to remember that although the following argument is devel-
oped from the standpoint of U.S. Black women, its significance is much greater.
Recall that Black feminist thought views Black women’s struggles as part of a
wider struggle for human dignity and social justice. When coupled with the
Black feminist epistemological tenet that dialogue remain central to assessing
knowledge claims, the domains-of-power argument presented here should serve
to stimulate dialogues about empowerment.
In the United States the particular contours of each domain of power illus-
trates how intersecting oppressions of race, class, gender, sexuality , and nation are
organized in unique ways. Black women are incorporated in each domain of
power in particular ways that while exhibiting patterns of common differences
with women of African descent transnationally , remain quintessentially
American. For example, the structural domain regulates citizenship rights, and
much of African-American women’s struggles have centered on gaining rights
routinely granted to other American citizens. U.S. Black women have long recog-
nized that the absence of usable citizenship rights limited Black women’s ability
to oppose the mammy , matriarch, jezebel and other controlling images routinely
advanced within the hegemonic domain. Citizenship rights enable African-
American women to pursue focused educations and challenge these portrayals of
U.S. Black women. These moves toward empowerment are important, yet they
remain dependent on ideas about American citizenship and therefore American
national identity .
At the same time, as individuals and as part of groups who oppose U.S. social
injustices,African-American women’s resistance strategies reflect their placement
both within each domain and within the U.S. matrix of domination. For exam-
ple, through its reliance on rules, the disciplinary domain manages domination.
African-American women rule breakers and rule benders and, upon occasion,
Black women who capture positions of authority so that they can change the
rules themselves become empowered within the disciplinary domain. Thus, U.S.
276 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 294 ---
Black women’s experiences and ideas illustrate how these four domains of power
shape domination. But they also illustrate how these same domains have been
and can be used as sites of Black women’s empowerment.
Structural Domain of Power
The structural domain of power encompasses how social institutions are orga-
nized to reproduce Black women’s subordination over time. One characteristic
feature of this domain is its emphasis on large-scale, interlocking social institu-
tions. An impressive array of U.S. social institutions lies at the heart of the struc-
tural domain of power. Historically , in the United States, the policies and proce-
dures of the U.S. legal system, labor markets, schools, the housing industry , bank-
ing, insurance, the news media, and other social institutions as interdependent
entities have worked to disadvantage African-American women. For example,
Black women’s long-standing exclusion from the best jobs, schools, health care,
and housing illustrates the broad array of social policies designed to exclude
Black women from full citizenship rights.
These interlocking social institutions have relied on multiple forms of segre-
gation—by race, class, and gender—to produce these unjust results. For African-
American women, racial segregation has been paramount. Racial segregation
rested on the “separate but equal” doctrine established under the 1896 ruling of
Plessy v. Ferguson where the Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of segre-
gation of groups. This ruling paved the way for a rhetoric of color-blindness
(Crenshaw 1997). Under the “separate but equal” doctrine, Blacks and Whites as
groups could be segregated as long as the law was color-blind in affording each
group equal treatment. Despite the supposed formal equality promised by “sep-
arate but equal,” subsequent treatment certainly was separate, but it was anything
but equal. As a result, policies and procedures with housing, education, industry ,
government, the media, and other major social institutions have worked together
to exclude Black women from exercising full citizenship rights. Whether this
social exclusion has taken the form of relegating Black women to inner-city
neighborhoods poorly served by social services, to poorly funded and racially
segregated public schools, or to a narrow cluster of jobs in the labor market, the
intent was to exclude.
Within the structural domain of power, empowerment cannot accrue to
individuals and groups without transforming U.S. social institutions that foster
this exclusion. Because this domain is large-scale, systemwide, and has operated
over a long period of time via interconnected social institutions, segregation of
this magnitude cannot be changed overnight. Structural forms of injustice that
permeate the entire society yield only grudgingly to change. Since they do so in
part when confronted with wide-scale social movements, wars, and revolutions
that threaten the social order overall, African-American women’s rights have not
277TOWARD A POLITICS OF EMPOWERMENT


--- PAGE 295 ---
been gained solely by gradual reformism. A civil war preceded the abolition of
slavery when all efforts to negotiate a settlement failed. Southern states routinely
ignored the citizenship rights of Blacks, and even when confronted with the
1954 Brown v. Board of Education Supreme Court decision that outlawed racial
segregation, many dug in their heels and refused to uphold the law. Massive
demonstrations, media exposure, and federal troops all were deployed to imple-
ment this fundamental policy change. The reemergence of White supremacist
organizations in the 1990s, many of which recirculate troubling racist ideologies
of prior eras, speaks to the deep-seated resentment attached to Black women,
among others, working toward a more just U.S. society . Events such as these indi-
cate how deeply woven into the very fabric of American society ideas about Black
women’s subordination appear to be.
In the United States, visible social protest of this magnitude, while often
required to bring about change, remains more the exception than the rule. For
U.S. Black women, social change has more often been gradual and reformist,
punctuated by episodes of systemwide upheaval. Trying to change the policies
and procedures themselves, typically through social reforms, constitutes an
important cluster of strategies within the structural domain. Because the U.S.
context contains a commitment to reformist change by changing the laws, Black
women have used the legal system in their struggles for structural transforma-
tion. African-American women have aimed to challenge the laws that legitimate
racial segregation. As Chapter 9’s discussion of Black women’s activism suggests,
African-American women have used various strategies to get laws changed.
Grassroots organizations, forming national advocacy organizations, and event-
specific social protest such as boycotts and sit-ins have all been used, yet chang-
ing the laws and the terms of their implementation have formed the focus of
change. Even the development of parallel social institutions such as Black church-
es and schools have aimed to prepare African-Americans for full participation in
U.S. society when the laws were changed.
African-American women have experienced considerable success not only in
getting laws changed, but in stimulating government action to redress past
wrongs. The Voting Rights Act of 1964, the Civil Rights Act of 1965, and other
important federal, state, and local legislation have outlawed discrimination by
race, sex, national origin, age, or disability status. This changed legal climate
granted African-American women some protection from the widespread dis-
crimination that we faced in the past. At the same time, class-action lawsuits
against discriminatory housing, educational, and employment policies have
resulted in tangible benefits for many Black women.
While necessary , these legal victories may not be enough. Ironically , the same
laws designed to protect African-American women from social exclusion have
increasingly become used against Black women. In describing new models for
equal treatment under the law, Black feminist legal scholar Kimberle Crenshaw
argues that the rhetoric of color-blindness was not unseated by the 1954 Brown
278 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 296 ---
v. Board of Education ruling. Instead, the rhetoric of color-blindness was refor-
mulated to refer to the equal treatment of individuals by not discriminating
among them. Under this new rhetoric of color-blindness, equality meant treat-
ing all individuals the same, regardless of differences they brought with them
due to the effects of past discrimination or even discrimination in other venues.
“Having determined, then, that everyone was equal in the sense that everyone
had a skin color,” observes Crenshaw, “symmetrical treatment was satisfied by a
general rule that nobody’s skin color should be taken into account in govern-
mental decision-making” (Crenshaw 1997, 284). Within this logic, the path to
equality lies in ignoring race, gender, and other markers of historical discrimi-
nation that might account for any differences that individuals bring to schools
and the workplace.
As a new rule that maintains long-standing hierarchies of race, class, and
gender while appearing to provide equal treatment, this rhetoric of color-blind-
ness  has had some noteworthy effects. For one, observes Black feminist legal
scholar Patricia Williams (1995), it fosters a certain kind of race thinking among
Whites: Because the legal system has now formally equalized individual access to
housing, schooling, and jobs, any unequal group results, such as those that char-
acterize gaps between Blacks and Whites, must somehow lie within the individ-
uals themselves or their culture.
When joined to its twin of gender neutrality , one claiming that no signifi-
cant differences distinguish men from women, the rhetoric of color-blindness
works to unseat one important strategy of Black women’s resistance within the
structural domain. Black women who make claims of discrimination and who
demand that policies and procedures may not be as fair as they seem can more
easily be dismissed as complainers who want special, unearned favors. Moreover,
within a rhetoric of color-blindness that defends the theme of no inherent dif-
ferences among races, or of gender-neutrality that claims no differences among
genders, it becomes difficult to talk of racial and gender differences that stem
from discriminatory treatment. The assumption is that the U.S. matrix of domi-
nation now provides equal treatment because where it once overtly discriminated
by race and gender, it now seemingly ignores  them. Beliefs such as these thus
allow Whites and men to support a host of punitive policies that reinscribe social
heirarchies of race and gender. In her discussion of how racism now relies on
encoded language Angela Davis identifies how this rhetoric of color-blindness
can operate as a form of “camouflaged racism”:
Because race is ostracized from some of the most impassioned political
debates of this period, their racialized character becomes increasingly dif-
ficult to identify , especially by those who are unable—or do not want—
to decipher the encoded language. This means that hidden racist argu-
ments can be mobilized readily across racial boundaries and political
alignments. Political positions once easily defined as conservative, liberal,
and sometimes even radical therefore have a tendency to lose their dis-
279TOWARD A POLITICS OF EMPOWERMENT


--- PAGE 297 ---
tinctiveness in the face of the seductions of this camouflaged racism
(Davis 1997, 264).
Americans can talk of “street crime” and “welfare mothers,” all the while claim-
ing that they are not discussing race at all. Despite the new challenges raised by
the rhetoric of color-blindness and gender neutrality , it is important to remem-
ber that legal strategies have yielded and most probably will continue to produce
victories for African-American women. Historically , much of Black women’s
resistance to the policies and procedures of the structural domain of power
occurred outside powerful social institutions. Currently , however, African-
American women are more often included in these same social institutions that
long excluded us. Increasing numbers of African-American women have gained
access to higher education, now hold good jobs, and might be considered mid-
dle-class if not elite. These women often occupy positions of authority inside
schools, corporations, and government agencies. Achieving these results
required changing U.S. laws.
On the one hand, this new inclusion provides new opportunities to work for
equitable policies and procedures. Many of the women described in this volume
who advance Black feminist thought do so from jobs held as bankers, college
professors, corporate executives, news producers, teachers, social workers, physi-
cians, and managers. Unlike Black women from prior eras who were confined to
either agricultural or domestic work, these women hold positions of authority
within major social institutions. On the other hand, this same inclusion raises
new questions, primarily because the organizations they struggled so long to
enter can look entirely different once they get inside.
The Disciplinary Domain of Power
Ordering schools, industries, hospitals, banks, and realtors to stop discriminat-
ing against Black women does not mean that these and other social institutions
will comply . Laws may change, but the organizations that they regulate rarely
change as rapidly . In the post–World War II period, African-American women
have gotten good jobs and achieved other positions of authority in organizations
that formerly excluded them outright. As these women gained new angles of
vision on the many ways that organizations discriminate, organizations searched
for new ways to suppress Black women. If you can no longer keep Black women
outside, then how can they best be regulated once they are inside?
As a way of ruling that relies on bureaucratic hierarchies and techniques of
surveillance, the disciplinary domain manages power relations. It does so not
through social policies that are explicitly racist or sexist, but through the ways in
which organizations are run (Foucault 1979).The disciplinary domain of power
has increased in importance with the growing significance of bureaucracy as a
mode of modern social organization. Bureaucracy , in turn, has become impor-
280 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 298 ---
tant in controlling populations, especially across race, gender, and other markers
of difference. As an increasingly prevalent feature of modern, transnational social
organization—capitalist and socialist countries alike depend on bureaucracies—
this style of organization becomes highly efficient in both reproducing inter-
secting oppressions and in masking their effects. Bureaucracies, regardless of the
policies they promote, remain dedicated to disciplining and controlling their
workforces and clientele. Whether the inner-city public schools that many Black
girls attend, the low-paid jobs in the rapidly growing service sector that young
Black women are increasingly forced to take, the culture of the social welfare
bureaucracy that makes Black mothers and children wait for hours, or the “mam-
mified” work assigned to Black women professionals, the goal is the same—cre-
ating quiet, orderly , docile, and disciplined populations of Black women.
In this bureaucratic context, surveillance has emerged as an important fea-
ture of the disciplinary domain of power. There is a marked difference between
merely looking at Black women and keeping them under surveillance. Whether
the treatment of Black women on the auction block, the voyeuristic treatment of
Sarah Bartmann, or the portrayal of Black women within contemporary pornog-
raphy , objectifying Black women’s bodies has meant that members from more
powerful groups have all felt entitled to watch Black women. Surveillance now
constitutes a major mechanism of bureaucratic control. For example, within pris-
ons, guards watch Black female inmates; within businesses, middle managers
supervise Black women clerical staff; and within universities, professors train
“their” Black female graduate students within academic “disciplines.” The fact
that prison guards, middle managers, and professors might themselves be Black
women remains less important than the purpose of this surveillance. Ironically ,
Black women prison guards, middle managers, and professors may themselves be
watched by wardens, business executives, and university deans. In these settings,
discipline is ensured by keeping Black women as a mutually policing subordinate
population under surveillance.
When it comes to the disciplinary domain of power, resistance from inside
bureaucracies constitutes the overarching strategy . Ironically , just as organizations
may keep Black women under surveillance, these same Black women have the
capacity to keep organizations themselves under surveillance. On the one hand,
Black women’s success in gaining positions of authority has produced new
opportunities to use bureaucratic resources toward humanistic ends.This insider
resistance tries to capture positions of authority within social institutions in
order to ensure that existing rules will be fairly administered and, if need be, to
change existing policies. Once inside, many Black women realize much more
than getting hired is required to bring about change. Black women find them-
selves searching for innovative ways to foster bureaucratic change (see, e.g., Guy-
Sheftall 1993). An African-American colleague of mine once referred to this
process as one of viewing her university as an egg and her job as one of “work-
ing the cracks.” From a distance, each egg appears to be smooth and seamless,
281TOWARD A POLITICS OF EMPOWERMENT


--- PAGE 299 ---
but, upon closer inspection, each egg’s distinctive patterns of almost invisible
cracks become visible. Her insider administrative position granted her a view of
higher education not as a well-oiled bureaucracy that was impervious to change,
but at a series of cracks and fissures that represented organizational weaknesses.
As she described it, she was committed to “working the cracks” and changing
her workplace by persistent use of her insider knowledge concerning its pressure
points. Once inside, many Black women do make a difference in how bureau-
cracies operate. Without much fanfare, they push for policy changes that move
their organizations closer to basic fairness. Rarely mentioning words such as
“racism,” “sexism,” “discrimination,” and the like, they find innovative ways to
work the system so that it will become more fair.
On the other hand, capturing positions of authority can foster new and
unanticipated forms of disciplinary control.With dismay , many Black women  in
the United States come to recognize that, whether intentional or not, different
sets of rules may be applied to them that distinguish them from their counter-
parts.Whereas their diplomas and prior training may qualify them on paper, they
may be treated as second-class citizens. U.S. Black women’s reactions to these new
forms of disciplinary control typically reflect comparable heterogeneity . In this
sense, the experiences of former generations of Black women domestic workers
provide a template for analyzing the reactions of Black women who now deseg-
regate a variety of bureaucracies. The existence of a collective wisdom available
to domestic workers did not negate the heterogeneous responses they had to
their jobs. Within the group, many individual responses emerged, most shaped
by the actual working conditions that individual women encountered. The
relations within bureaucracies are much the same—how African-American
women choose to deal with the changing forms of disciplinary power seems
more the issue than the codification of this domain of power in large, impersonal
bureaucracies.
U.S. Black feminism in the academy offers a provocative case of these cross-
cutting relationships. Unlike Black diasporic feminisms where much of Black
women’s thought emerges in relation to women’s activism (see, e.g.,Femmes Aux
Yeux Ouverts 1994), a good deal of U.S. Black feminist thought must adhere to
the disciplinary procedures of the academy . Elevating Black feminist thought to
the level of theory and devaluing Black women’s activism as less theoretical are
strategies that aim to contain them both. Moreover, such actions  place U.S. Black
feminist thought in the academy under surveillance.
Disciplinary pressures may explain, in part, the mismatch between issues that
often most interest U.S. Black women academics and those of pressing concern
to large numbers of African-American women. Ordinary , everyday women are
often accused of either being “afraid” of feminism or being so downtrodden by
daily obligations and the whims of their men that they cannot think about their
own subordination. But another interpretation points to the lack of attention
given within academic Black feminism to issues that affect African-American
282 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 300 ---
women’s lives. Many African-American women may reject Black feminism
because they cannot see clear connections between elite Black feminism’s claims
to be a progressive discourse and the actual conditions in their lives. For exam-
ple, the entrenched patterns of poverty and its accompanying violence that affect
so many African-American women’s lives suggest that gendered analyses of Black
political economy become more prominent in U.S. Black feminist thought. Such
analyses should have implications for public policy , as well as what types of
actions for community development are required to position U.S. Blacks to
address poverty . Despite the presence of such themes in the scholarship of some
U.S. Black feminists (see, e.g., Davis 1981; Brewer 1993, 1994; Mullings 1997),
these thinkers typically remain unrecognized within the academy as “symbolic”
of Black feminism. For example, the 30-year span of Angela Davis’s intellectual
work clearly demonstrates her leadership in shaping U.S. Black feminist thought.
Yet Davis is less often described as a “Black feminist” than as a socialist. Davis may
be deeply committed to Black feminist politics, but she may not be the kind of
“Black feminist” that U.S. higher education wants.
Given the power of surveillance in the disciplinary domain, it is unrealistic
to expect that any essentially radical Black feminist thought will emanate from
within the academy , especially in times when marketplace ideologies have
become so prominent. Black feminist academics who wrap themselves in the flag
of radicalism, feminist or otherwise, and use their self-proclaimed radical iden-
tity to push for promotion to full professor are simply deluding themselves.
Marketplace ideologies increasingly affect all aspects of life, including actual peo-
ple and ideas about people in outsider-within locations. The numbers of U.S.
Black women employed by the academy , whether they recognize their outsider-
within locations or not, expand and shrink not just in relation to political advo-
cacy by African-American women and other similarly disadvantaged groups, but
in response to perceived marketplace needs. If an organization perceives that it
needs outsiders within, it buys them.
In this context, Black feminist thought in the academy is likely to become
less focused on its own activist agenda and more on surviving and perhaps tran-
scending academic politics. Thus, it is much more reasonable to investigate the
ways in which Black feminist thought uses its placement in the academy to fos-
ter social justice and the ways in which its use and placement reinscribes exist-
ing social hierarchies.
The Hegemonic Domain of Power
Tactics within the disciplinary domain of power can be only so effective. U.S.
Black women’s success in gaining and exercising citizenship rights means that
new ways must be found to involve  African-American women in supporting the
very system that fosters their own subordination and that of many other groups.
283TOWARD A POLITICS OF EMPOWERMENT


--- PAGE 301 ---
Because the hegemonic domain of power deals with ideology , culture, and con-
sciousness, it becomes important in addressing this need.The structural and dis-
ciplinary domains of power operate through systemwide social policies managed
primarily by bureaucracies. In contrast, the hegemonic domain of power aims to
justify practices in these domains of power. By manipulating ideology and cul-
ture, the hegemonic domain acts as a link between social institutions (structural
domain), their organizational practices (disciplinary domain), and the level of
everyday social interaction (interpersonal domain).
To maintain their power, dominant groups create and maintain a popular
system of “commonsense” ideas that support their right to rule. In the United
States, hegemonic ideologies concerning race, class, gender, sexuality , and nation
are often so pervasive that it is difficult to conceptualize alternatives to them, let
alone ways of resisting the social practices that they justify . For example, despite
scant empirical research, beliefs about Black women’s sexuality remain deeply
held and widespread. Moreover, the sexual politics of Black womanhood reveals
how important the controlling images applied to Black women’s sexuality have
been to the effective operation of domination overall.
School curricula, religious teachings, community cultures, and family histo-
ries have long been important social locations for manufacturing ideologies
needed to maintain oppression. However, an increasingly important dimension
of why hegemonic ideologies concerning race, class, gender, sexuality , and nation
remain so deeply entrenched lies, in part, in the growing sophistication of mass
media in regulating intersecting oppressions. It is one thing to encounter school
curricula that routinely exclude Black women as bona fide subjects of study; reli-
gious teachings that preach equality yet are often used to justify Black women’s
submission to all men; Black community ideologies that counsel Black women
to be more “feminine” so that Black men can reclaim their masculinity; and fam-
ily histories that cover up patterns of physical and emotional abuse that blame
Black women for their own victimization. It is quite another to see images of U.S.
Black women as “hoochies” broadcast globally in seemingly infinite variation.
In the United States, one would think that the combination of a better-edu-
cated public and scholarship designed to shatter old myths would effectively
challenge hegemonic ideologies. As the resurgence of White supremacist organi-
zations with staunch beliefs about Black intellectual and moral inferiority sug-
gest, this has not been the case. Instead, old ideas become recycled in new forms.
Yesterday’s welfare mother splits into social-class-specific images of the welfare
queen and the Black lady .Yesterday’s jezebel becomes today’s “hoochie.”
Racist and sexist ideologies, if they are disbelieved, lose their impact. Thus,
an important feature of the hegemonic domain of power lies in the need to con-
tinually refashion images in order to solicit support for the U.S. matrix of domi-
nation. Not just elite group support, but the endorsement of subordinated
groups is needed for hegemonic ideologies to function smoothly . Realizing that
Black feminist demands for social justice threaten existing power hierarchies,
284 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 302 ---
organizations must find ways of appearing to include African-American
women—reversing historical patterns of social exclusion associated with institu-
tional discrimination—while disempowering us. Ideas become critical within
this effort to absorb and weaken Black women’s resistance. Regardless of their
placement in social hierarchies, other groups also encounter these pressures. For
example, White women are told that they become “race traitors” if they date
Black men, a stigma that in effect asks them to calculate whether the gain of an
interracial relationship is worth the loss of White privilege. Similarly , in the cur-
rent reorganization of U.S. racial ideologies where Vietnamese, Cambodians, and
other recent Asian immigrant groups jockey to find a racial identity between the
fixed points of Blackness and Whiteness, Asians are encouraged to derogate
Blacks. Taking one’s place at the top of the “minority” ladder certainly provides
better treatment than that dished out to the Blacks and Native Americans who
are relegated to the bottom. Yet until the category of “Whiteness” is expanded
to reclassify Asians as “White,” becoming a “model minority” remains a hollow
victory .
The significance of  the hegemonic domain of power lies in its ability to
shape consciousness via the manipulation of ideas, images, symbols, and ideolo-
gies. As Black women’s struggles for self-definition suggest, in contexts such as
these where ideas matter, reclaiming the “power of a free mind” constitutes an
important area of resistance. Reversing this process whereby intersecting oppres-
sions harness various dimensions of individual subjectivity for their own ends
becomes a central purpose of resistance. Thus, the hegemonic domain becomes
a critical site for not just fending off hegemonic ideas from dominant culture,
but in crafting counter-hegemonic knowledge that fosters changed con-
sciousness. Regardless of the actual social locations where this process
occurs—families, community settings, schools, religious institutions, or mass
media institu tions—the power of reclaiming these spaces for “thinking and
doing not what is expected of us” constitutes an important dimension of Black
women’s empowerment.
By emphasizing the power of self-definition and the necessity of a free
mind, Black feminist thought speaks to the importance that African-American
women thinkers place on consciousness as a sphere of freedom. Rather than
viewing consciousness as a fixed entity , a more useful approach sees it as contin-
ually evolving and negotiated. A dynamic consciousness is vital to both individ-
ual and group agency . Based on their personal histories, individuals experience
and resist domination differently . Each individual has a unique and continually
evolving personal biography made up of concrete experiences, values, motiva-
tions, and emotions. No two individuals occupy the same social space; thus no
two biographies are identical. Human ties can be freeing and empowering, as is
the case with many Black women’s heterosexual love relationships or in the
power of motherhood in African-American families and communities. Human
ties can also be confining and oppressive, as in cases of domestic violence or
285TOWARD A POLITICS OF EMPOWERMENT


--- PAGE 303 ---
struggles to sustain mother-child families in inner-city neighborhoods.The same
situation can look quite different depending on the consciousness one brings to
interpret it.
The cultural context formed by those experiences and ideas that are shared
with other members of a group or community give meaning to individual
biographies. Each individual biography is rooted in several overlapping cultural
contexts—for example, groups defined by race, social class, age, gender, religion,
and sexual orientation. The most cohesive cultural contexts are those with iden-
tifiable histories, geographic locations, and social institutions. Some can be so
tightly interwoven that they appear to be one cultural context, the situation of
traditional societies with customs that are carried on across generations, or that
of protracted racial segregation in the United States where Blacks saw a unity of
interests that necessarily suppressed internal differences within the category
“Black.” Moreover, cultural contexts contribute, among other things, the con-
cepts used in thinking and acting.
Subjugated knowledges, such as U.S. Black women’s thought, develop in cul-
tural contexts controlled by oppressed groups. Dominant groups aim to replace
subjugated knowledge with their own specialized thought because they realize
that gaining control over this dimension of subordinate groups’ lives simplifies
control. While efforts to influence this dimension of an oppressed group’s expe-
riences can be partially successful, this level is more difficult to control than
dominant groups would have us believe. For example, adhering to externally
derived standards of beauty leads many African-American women to dislike their
skin color or hair texture. Similarly , internalizing prevailing gender ideology
leads some Black men to abuse Black women. These are cases of the successful
infusion of dominant ideologies into the everyday cultural context of African-
Americans. But the long-standing existence of Black women’s resistance tradi-
tions as expressed through Black women’s relationships with one another, the
Black women’s blues tradition, and the voices of contemporary African-American
women writers all attest to the difficulty of eliminating the cultural context as a
fundamental site of resistance.
In their efforts to rearticulate the standpoint of African-American women as
a group, Black feminist thinkers potentially offer individual African-American
women the conceptual tools to resist oppression. Empowerment in this context
is twofold. Gaining the critical consciousness to unpack hegemonic ideologies is
empowering. Coming to recognize that one need not believe everything one is
told and taught is freeing for many Black women. But while criticizing hege-
monic ideologies remains necessary , such critiques are basically reactive (Collins
1998a, 187–96).Thus, the second dimension of empowerment within the hege-
monic domain of power consists of constructing new knowledge. In this regard,
the core themes, interpretive frameworks, and epistemological approaches of
Black feminist thought can be highly empowering because they provide alterna-
tives to the way things are supposed to be.
286 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 304 ---
Interpersonal Domain of Power
African-American women have been victimized by intersecting oppressions. But
portraying U.S. Black women solely as passive, unfortunate recipients of  abuse
stifles notions that Black women can actively work to change our circumstances
and bring about changes in our lives. Similarly , presenting African-American
women solely as heroic figures who easily engage in resisting oppression on all
fronts minimizes the very real costs of oppression and can foster the perception
that Black women need no help because we can “take it.”
Domination operates by seducing, pressuring, or forcing African-American
women, members of subordinated groups, and all individuals to replace indi-
vidual and cultural ways of knowing with the dominant group’s specialized
thought—hegemonic ideologies that, in turn, justify practices of other domains
of power. As a result, suggests Audre Lorde, “the true focus of revolutionary
change is never merely the oppressive situations which we seek to escape, but
that piece of the oppressor which is planted deep within each of us” (1984,
123). Or as Toni Cade Bambara succinctly states, “Revolution begins with the self,
in the self” (1970a, 109).
Lorde and Bambara’s suppositions raise an important issue for Black women
and for all others working for social justice. Although most individuals have lit-
tle difficulty identifying their own victimization within some major system of
oppression—whether it be by race, social class, religion, physical ability , sexual
orientation, ethnicity , age or gender—they typically fail to see how their
thoughts and actions uphold someone else’s subordination.Thus White feminists
routinely point with confidence to their oppression as women but resist seeing
how much their White skin privileges them. African-Americans who possess elo-
quent analyses of racism often persist in viewing poor White men as symbols of
White power. The radical left fares little better. “If only people of color and
women could see their true class interests,” they argue, “class solidarity would
eliminate racism and sexism.” In essence, each group identifies the oppression
with which it feels most comfortable as being fundamental and classifies all oth-
ers as being of lesser importance. Oppression is filled with such contradictions
because these approaches fail to recognize that a matrix of domination contains
few pure victims or oppressors. Each individual derives varying amounts of
penalty and privilege from the multiple systems of oppression which frame
everyone’s lives.
Individual biographies are situated within all domains of power and reflect
their interconnections and contradictions. Whereas the structural domain of
power organizes the macro-level of social organization with the disciplinary
domain managing its operations, the interpersonal domain functions through
routinized, day-to-day practices of how people treat one another (e.g., micro-
level of social organization). Such practices are systematic, recurrent, and so
familiar that they often go unnoticed. Because the interpersonal domain stresses
287TOWARD A POLITICS OF EMPOWERMENT


--- PAGE 305 ---
the everyday , resistance strategies within this domain can take as many forms as
there are individuals. When I ask my students for examples of how they respond
to everyday racism, sexism, or other unfair treatment, the range of strategies they
give surprises me. One Black woman student described how, when she is fol-
lowed in a store, she fills her shopping cart to the brim with goods and then
leaves it at the front, stopping by the service desk to complain about their sur-
veillance policy .Two students, one African-American and the other White, told of
how they switched names on their respective papers when they suspected that
the Black student’s lower grades reflected the professor’s prejudice. To their cha-
grin, when the switched papers were returned to them, the Black student got her
same old “C” whereas the White student received her “A,” even though they had
submitted each other’s work! Coalition strategies such as these become especial-
ly important in integrated social settings where differential treatment is hard to
detect.
When you look for it, people who are actively engaged in changing the
terms of their everyday relationships with one another surface in surprising
places. Certainly this book has shared many examples of prominent African-
American women who try to change the ways in which they live their everyday
lives. What remains less visible, however, are the myriad ways in which ordinary
individuals from all walks of life work for social justice in small yet highly sig-
nificant ways. One of my favorite examples concerns an invitation that my
daughter received to visit a kindergarten playmate’s house. Her classmate was a
blue-eyed, blonde boy who was well mannered and friendly to her and me.
However, because I did not know his parents very well, I wondered what type of
reception our daughter would receive in his home. Ironically , my concerns were
reduced when I saw the toy that his mother allowed him to bring to school.There
was this little boy , blue-eyes, blond hair and all, carrying a Black, bald, male
Cabbage Patch doll to school. This was not his only toy , but the fact that this toy
was included in the repertoire of this small child’s imagination astounded me.
With this one, small act, this mother took a stand against racism, sexism, and het-
erosexism in a way that took courage for this region of the United States.To this
day , I do not know why she did it. Her intentionality was far less important than
the unspoken actions that she took. I share this story not to encourage people to
give dolls to little blonde boys, unless, of course, they really wish to do so, but
rather to illustrate one of many unobtrusive yet creative ways that all sorts of
ordinary people work to change the world around them.
The Politics of Empowerment
Rethinking Black feminism as a social justice project involves developing a com-
plex notion of empowerment. Shifting the analysis to investigating how the
matrix of domination is structured along certain axes—race, gender, class, sexu-
288 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 306 ---
ality , and nation—as well as how it operates through interconnected domains of
power—structural, interpersonal, disciplinary , and hegemonic—reveals that the
dialectical relationship linking oppression and activism is far more complex than
simple models of oppressors and oppressed would suggest. This inclusive per-
spective enables African-American women to avoid labeling one form of oppres-
sion as more important than others, or one expression of activism as more rad-
ical than another. It also creates conceptual space to identify some new linkages.
Just as oppression is complex, so must resistance aimed at fostering empower-
ment demonstrate a similar complexity .
When it comes to power, the challenges raised by the synergistic relation-
ship among domains of power generate new opportunities and constraints for
African-American women who now desegregate schools and workplaces, as well
as those who do not. On the one hand, entering places that denied access to our
mothers provides new opportunities for fostering social justice. Depending on
the setting, using the insights gained via outsider-within status can be a stimulus
to creativity that helps both African-American women and our new organiza-
tional homes. On the other hand, the commodification of outsider-within status
whereby African-American women’s value to an organization lies solely in our
ability to market a seemingly permanent marginal status can suppress Black
women’s empowerment. Being a permanent outsider within can never lead to
power because the category , by definition, requires marginality . Each individual
must find her own way , recognizing that her personal biography , while unique,
is never as unique as she thinks.
When it comes to knowledge, Black women’s empowerment involves reject-
ing the dimensions of knowledge that perpetuate objectification, commodifica-
tion, and exploitation. African-American women and others like us become
empowered when we understand and use those dimensions of our individual,
group, and formal educational ways of knowing that foster our humanity . When
Black women value our self-definitions, participate in Black women’s domestic
and transnational activist traditions, view the skills gained in schools as part of a
focused education for Black community development, and invoke Black feminist
epistemologies as central to our worldviews, we empower ourselves. C. Wright
Mills’s (1959) concept of the “sociological imagination” identifies its task and its
promise as a way of knowing that enables individuals to grasp the relations
between history and biography within society . Resembling the holistic episte-
mology required by Black feminism, using one’s point of view to engage the
sociological imagination can empower the individual. “My fullest concentration
of energy is available to me,” Audre Lorde maintains, “only when I integrate all
the parts of who I am, openly , allowing power from particular sources of my liv-
ing to flow back and forth freely through all my different selves, without the
restriction of externally imposed definition” (1984, 120–21). Developing a
Black women’s standpoint to engage a collective Black feminist imagination can
empower the group.
289TOWARD A POLITICS OF EMPOWERMENT


--- PAGE 307 ---
Black women’s empowerment involves revitalizing U.S. Black feminism as a
social justice project organized around the dual goals of empowering African-
American women and fostering social justice in a transnational context. Black
feminist thought’s emphasis on the ongoing interplay between Black women’s
oppression and Black women’s activism presents the matrix of domination and its
interrelated domains of power as responsive to human agency . Such thought
views the world as a dynamic place where the goal is not merely to survive 
or to fit in or to cope; rather, it becomes a place where we feel ownership and 
accountability . The existence of Black feminist thought suggests that there is always
choice, and power to act, no matter how bleak the situation may appear to be.
Viewing the world as one in the making raises the issue of individual responsibil-
ity for bringing about change. It also shows that while individual empowerment
is key , only collective action can effectively generate the lasting institutionaltrans-
formation required for social justice.
In 1831 Maria Stewart asked, “How long shall the fair daughters of Africa be
compelled to bury their minds and talents beneath a load of iron pots and ket-
tles?” (Richardson 1987, 38). Stewart’s response speaks eloquently to the con-
nections between knowledge, consciousness, and the politics of empowerment:
Until union, knowledge and love begin to flow among us. How long shall
a mean set of men flatter us with their smiles, and enrich themselves with
our hard earnings; their wives’ fingers sparkling with rings, and they
themselves laughing at our folly? Until we begin to promote and patron-
ize each other....D o  y o u  ask, what can we do? Unite and build a store
of your own. . . . Do you ask where is the money? We have spent more
than enough for nonsense, to do what building we should want.
(Richardson 1987, 38)
290 BLACK FEMINIST THOUGHT


--- PAGE 308 ---
Chapter 1
1. Numerous Black women intellectuals have explored the core themes first articulated by
Maria W . Stewart (see Hull et al. 1982). Sharon Harley and Rosalyn Terborg-Penn’s (1978)
groundbreaking collection of essays on Black women’s history foreshadowed volumes on
Black women’s history such as those by Giddings (1984), and D. White (1985) and the
important historical encyclopedia by Hine et al. (1993). A similar explosion in Black
women’s literary criticism has occurred, as evidenced by the publication of book-length
studies of Black women writers such as those by Barbara Christian (1985), Hazel Carby
(1987), and Ann duCille (1996).
2. My use of the term subjugated knowledge differs somewhat from Michel Foucault’s
(1980a) definition. According to Foucault, subjugated knowledges are “those blocs of
historical knowledge which were present but disguised,” namely , “a whole set of knowl-
edges that have been disqualified as inadequate to their task or insufficiently elaborated:
naive knowledges, located low down on the hierarchy , beneath the required level of cog-
nition or scientificity” (p. 82). I suggest that Black feminist thought is not a “naive
knowledge” but has been made to appear so by those controlling knowledge validation
procedures. Moreover, Foucault argues that subjugated knowledge is “a particular, local,
regional knowledge, a differential knowledge incapable of unanimity and which owes
its force only to the harshness with which it is opposed by everything surrounding it”
(p. 82). The component of Black feminist thought that analyzes Black women’s oppres-
sion partially fits this definition, but the long-standing, independent, African-derived
influences within Black women’s thought are omitted from Foucault’s analysis.
3. Sojourner Truth’s actions exemplify Antonio Gramsci’s (1971) contention that every
social group creates one or more “strata of intellectuals which give it homogeneity and
an awareness of its own function not only in the economic but also in the social and polit-
ical fields” (p. 5). Academics are the intellectuals trained to represent the interests of
groups in power. In contrast, “organic” intellectuals depend on common sense and rep-
resent the interests of their own group. Sojourner Truth typifies an “organic” or everyday
intellectual, but she may not be certified as such by the dominant group because her intel-
lectual activity threatens the prevailing social order.The outsider-within position of Black
women academics encourages us to draw on the traditions of both our discipline of training
and our experiences as Black women but to participate fully in neither (Collins 1986b).
Notes


--- PAGE 309 ---
4. Elizabeth Spelman (1988) rejects additive approaches to conceptualizing oppression
that treat the oppression of a Black woman in a sexist and racist society as if it were a
further burden than her oppression in a sexist but nonracist society , when, in fact, it is a
different burden. Similarly , Brittan and Maynard (1984) argue that separate oppressions
cannot be merged under one “grand theory of oppression.” Omi and Winant (1986)
warn against the tendency to subsume one type of oppression under another—for
example, of seeing everything as stemming from class structure. For an incisive discus-
sion of multiple jeopardy as an alternative model, see King (1988). The field of inter-
sectionality developed considerably in the 1990s. For edited volumes using the frame of
race, class, and gender studies, see Andersen and Collins (1998). For a useful analysis of
the literature on intersecting oppressions, see Anthias and Yuval-Davis (1992).
Chapter 2
1. For discussions of the concept of standpoint, see Hartsock (1983a, 1983b), Jaggar
(1983), and Smith (1987). Even though I use standpoint epistemologies as an organiz-
ing concept in this volume, they remain controversial. For a helpful critique of standpoint
epistemologies, see Harding (1986). See my extended discussion of standpoint theory
(Collins 1998a, 201–28). Canadian sociologist Dorothy Smith (1987) also views
women’s lived, everyday world as stimulating theory . But the everyday she examines is
individual, a situation reflecting in part the isolation of White, middle-class women.
In contrast, I contend that the collective values in U.S. Black neighborhoods, when 
combined with the working-class experiences of the majority of Black women, histori-
cally provided collective as well as individual everyday worlds. Thus, U.S. Black culture
continually created via lived Black experience with racial segregation provided a social
context for the emergence of a Black women’s standpoint.Whereas the contexts in which
this collective standpoint developed are changing, the purpose or need for it has not.
2. Scott (1985) defines consciousness as the symbols, norms, and ideological forms peo-
ple create to give meaning to their acts. For de Lauretis (1986), consciousness is a process,
a “particular configuration of subjectivity . . . produced at the intersection of meaning
with experience.... Consciousness is grounded in personal history , and self and identity
are understood within particular cultural contexts. Consciousness . . . is never fixed, never
attained once and for all, because discursive boundaries change with historical condi-
tions” (p. 8). It is important to distinguish between individual and group consciousness.
3. Certainly middle-class White women and all others who both recognize the signifi-
cance of members of oppressed groups speaking for themselves and who share in Black
feminist thought’s overall mission can support Black feminist thought’s development.
Examples of such work already exists, much of it making important contributions to
Black feminist thought. Many White women academics in the United States have done
important scholarship on Black women. For example, historian Jacqueline Jones’s (1985)
history of Black women and work, Nancie Caraway’s (1991) analysis of U.S. feminism,
Nancy Naples’s (1991, 1996) work on activist Black motherhood, biologist Anne Fausto-
Sterling’s (1995) analysis of the use of the Hottentot Venus, and scholarship on the social
construction of Whiteness by Jessie Daniels (1997) and Abby Ferber (1998) all make sig-
nificant contributions to Black feminist thought. What distinguishes their work is a basic
understanding of the distinguishing features of Black feminism.They see the connections
between knowledge and power, between the power to define knowledge and intersecting
oppressions.These connections are not peripheral to their work. Instead, they are central.
4. My use of the term humanist grows from an African-derived historical context distinct
from that criticized by Western feminists. I use the term to tap an African-centered
humanism as cited by West (1977–78) and Asante (1987) and as part of Black theological
292 NOTES


--- PAGE 310 ---
traditions (Mitchell and Lewter 1986; Cannon 1988). For discussions of African-
American spirituality , see Richards (1990) and Paris (1995).
5. Walker’s use of the term womanism contains contradictions that in turn influence vary-
ing approaches to Black feminism. For a discussion of Walker’s use, see Collins (1998a,
61–65).
Chapter 3
1. By dislodging beliefs in the naturalness or normality of any one family form, feminist
scholarship analyzes the centrality of specific notions of family to gender oppression
(Andersen 1991;Thorne 1992).As Stephanie Coontz (1992) reports, this traditional fam-
ily ideal never existed, even during the 1950s, which is often assumed to be the era of its
realization. Coontz’s analysis of the historical origins of each segment of the ideal pro-
vides a concise overview of how the values characterizing the traditional family ideal
emerged in specific historical circumstances. Feminist anthropologists also challenge the
traditional family ideal by demonstrating that the nuclear, heterosexual married couple
form in the United States is neither “natural,” universal, nor normative cross-culturally
(Collier et al. 1989). Recent family scholarship suggests that large numbers of American
families never experienced the traditional family ideal, and those who may have once
achieved this form are now abandoning it (Coontz 1992).
2. The definition of social class that I use in this section derives from class conflict mod-
els, especially those based in labor market segmentation theory (Vanneman and Cannon
1987).
Chapter 4
1. Dona Richards (1980) offers an insightful analysis of the relationship between
Christianity’s contributions to an ideology of domination and the culture/nature binary .
She notes that European Christianity is predicated on a worldview that sustains the
exploitation of nature: “Christian thought provides a view of man, nature, and the uni-
verse which supports not only the ascendancy of science, but of the technical order, indi-
vidualism, and relentless progress. Emphasis within this worldview is placed on human-
ity’s dominance over all other beings, which become ‘objects’ in an ‘objectified’ uni-
verse. There is no emphasis on an awe-inspiring God or cosmos. Being ‘made in God’s
image,’ given the European ethos, translates into ‘actingas God,’ recreating the universe.
Humanity is separated from nature” (p. 69). For works exploring the connections
among Western thought, colonialism, and capitalism, see works by Marianna Torgovnick
(1990), Rey Chow (1993), Edward Said (1993), and Anne McClintock (1995).
2. Brittan and Maynard (1984) note that ideology (1) is common sense and obvious; (2)
appears natural, inevitable, and universal; (3) shapes lived experience and behavior; (4)
is sedimented in people’s consciousness; and (5) consists of a system of ideas embedded
in the social system as a whole. This example captures all dimensions of how racism and
sexism function ideologically . The status of Black woman as servant is so “common sense”
that even a child knows it. That the child saw a Black female child as a baby maid speaks
to the naturalization dimension and to the persistence of controlling images in individ-
ual consciousness and the social system overall.
Chapter 5
1. The theme of double consciousness has a long history in U.S. Black Studies.The prox-
imate character of U.S. race relations where Blacks have routinely encountered Whites as
subordinates has stimulated this theme. For a discussion of this theme, see Paul Gilroy’s
293NOTES


--- PAGE 311 ---
(1993) analysis of William E.B. Du Bois. Interestingly , in his discussion of the first edition
of Black Feminist Thought, Gilroy expresses surprise that I did not mention Du Bois, leav-
ing Gilroy under the erroneous impression that I was unaware of Du Bois’s significance
for double consciousness.
2. Belenky et al. (1986) suggest that achieving constructed knowledge requires self-
reflection about and distancing from familiar situations, whether psychological and/or
physical. For Black women intellectuals, being outsiders within may provide the distance
from and angle of vision on the familiar that can be used to “find a voice” or create con-
structed knowledge. Belenky et al. describe this process as affecting individuals. I suggest
that a similar argument can be applied to Black women as a group. They also report that
women repeatedly use the metaphor of voice to depict their intellectual and ethical devel-
opment: “The tendency for women to ground their epistemological premises in metaphors
suggesting speaking and listening is at odds with the visual metaphors (such as equating
knowledge with illumination, knowing with seeing, and truth with light) that scientists
and philosophers most often use to express their sense of mind” (p. 16). This emphasis
on voice in women’s culture parallels the importance of oral communication in African-
American culture (Sidran 1971; Smitherman 1977). When applied to Black women’s
intellectual traditions, this metaphor of finding a voice remains useful in many settings.
However, as a metaphor for Black women’s empowerment, it remains flawed. I discuss
this contradiction at length in Fighting Words (Collins 1998a, 44-76).
3. Sidran (1971) suggests that to get one’s own “sound” or voice is a key part of vocal-
ized Black music. Black theologian James Cone has also written about Black music as car-
rier of the values of African-American culture. Cone notes that Black music is “unity
music. It unites the joy and the sorrow, the love and the hate, the hope and the despair of
black people....B l a c k  music is unifying because it confronts the individual with the truth
of black existence and affirms that black being is possible only in a communal context.
Black music is functional. Its purposes and aims are directly related to the consciousness
of the black community” (1972, 5). Note the both/and orientation of Cone’s description,
an analysis rejecting the binary thinking of Western societies.
4. Black women have participated in all forms of Black music but have been especially
central in vocal music such as spirituals, gospel, and the blues (Jackson 1981). I focus on
the blues because of its association with the Black women’s secular tradition and because
of the attention it has garnered within Black feminist analysis (see, e.g., Davis 1998).
Though a more recent phenomenon, gospel music is also “a Black feminine musical tra-
dition” (Jackson 1981). With roots in the urban Black folk church, the text of gospel
songs could also be examined.
5. Unfortunately , Alice Childress is one of many African-American women writers whose
work remains unrecognized. Born in South Carolina in 1920, the great-granddaughter of
a slave, Childress not only wrote books and short stories, but was active in New York 
Black theater. Although Mildred’s conversations were first issued in book form in 1956 
by a small publisher, this important collection of  Alice Childress’s work was virtually
neglected for two decades. In 1986, literary critic Trudier Harris examined the collection
and was able to have it reissued under the title Like One of the Family, also the title of the
first piece in the volume.
6. U.S. Black scholarship has examined this conceptualization of the self in African and
African-American communities. See Smitherman (1977), Asante (1987), and Brown
(1989). For feminist analyses of women’s development of self as a distinctive process, see
especially Evelyn Keller’s (1985) discussion of dynamic autonomy and how it relates to
relationships of domination. A fascinating discussion of the fragmented self can be found
in Gloria Wekker’s (1997) analysis of Afro-Surinamese women’s agency .
294 NOTES


--- PAGE 312 ---
Chapter 6
1. The perceived deviancy of sexual outlaws has been addressed in characteristic ways: if
possible, fix it (the reformist posture); if it cannot be fixed, at least contain it so that dis-
ease will not infect the so-called healthy population (ghettoization, segregation); and if
reform and elimination fail, then eliminate it by stamping out the deviant practices if not
the actual people themselves (the genocidal impulse).
2. Offering a similar argument about the relationship between race and masculinity , Paul
Hoch (1979) suggests that the ideal White man is a hero who upholds honor. But inside
lurks a “Black beast” of violence and sexuality , traits that the White hero deflects onto men
of color.
3. Any group can be made into pets. Consider Tuan’s (1984) discussion of the role that
young Black boys played as exotic ornaments for wealthy White women from the 1500s
to the early 1800s in England. Unlike other male servants, the boys were the favorite
attendants of noble ladies and gained entry into their mistresses’ drawing rooms, bed-
chambers, and theater boxes. Boys were often given fancy collars with padlocks to wear.
“As they did with their pet dogs and monkeys, the ladies grew genuinely fond of their
black boys” (p. 142). In addition, Nancy White’s analysis in Chapter 5 of the differences
between how White and Black women are treated by White men uses this victim/pet
metaphor (Gwaltney 1980, 148).
Chapter 7
1. French philosopher Michel Foucault makes a similar point: “I believe that the politi-
cal significance of the problem of sex is due to the fact that sex is located at the point of
intersection of the discipline of the body and the control of the population” (1980b,
125). The erotic is something felt, a power than is embodied. Controlling sexuality har-
nesses that power for the needs of larger, hierarchical systems by controlling the body and
hence the population.
2. There is a growing body of work in which Black men analyze Black masculinity (see,
e.g., Awkward 1996; Dyson 1996). Because much of this work has been advanced by or
about Black gay men, it has been slow to be taken up by Black heterosexual men. For an
important Black feminist analysis of how Black masculinity has been shaped by intersect-
ing oppressions of class, race, and gender, see Barbara Omolade’s (1994) essay “Hearts of
Darkness,” especially pp. 12–15.
3. Michel Foucault refers to this phenomenon as a “network or circuit of bio-power, or
somato-power, which acts as the formative matrix of sexuality itself” (1980a, 186). To
Foucault, “Power relations can materially penetrate the body in depth, without depend-
ing even on the mediation of the subject’s own representations. If power takes hold on
the body , this isn’t through its having first to be interiorized in people’s consciousness”
(p. 186). This particular dimension of power as domination is extremely effective pre-
cisely because it is felt and not conceptualized.
4. Studies of African art and culture indicate that behavior, individuals, and creations
deemed “beautiful” from an African-centered perspective are valued for qualities other
than their appearance and their value in an exchange-based marketplace (Gayle 1971;
Asante 1990). For example, the Yoruba assess everything aesthetically , from the taste of
food and the qualities of dress to the deportment of a woman or man. Beauty is seen in
the mean—in something not too tall or short, not too beautiful (overly handsome peo-
ple turn out to be skeletons in disguise in many folktales) or too ugly . Moreover, the
Yoruba appreciate freshness and improvisation in the arts (Thompson 1983).
295NOTES


--- PAGE 313 ---
Chapter 9
1. Black women’s motherwork contains economic significance, social functions, and
political meaning. First, since Black women’s paid employment was often essential for
their families’ survival, their identities as paid workers and mothers contradicted the
assumed distinctions between work and family so central to definitions of masculinity
and femininity . Next, because even though they worked hard both at home and on their
jobs these women still remained poor, Black women saw U.S. social class hierarchies from
the bottom up. Finally , the different political interpretations attached to motherwork
within Black civil society , in particular community othermothering traditions that elevat-
ed motherhood as a symbol of power, potentially politicized Black women’s motherwork.
2. Another suggested source of Black women’s power within African-American commu-
nities concerns Black women’s authority as spiritual leaders. Rosalyn Terborg-Penn
(1986) suggests that in cases in which women lead community resistance movements,
respected older women often became leaders. These women were revered generally
because of “supernatural or spiritual powers, which their followers believed were strong
enough to combat the oppressive forces against which their society was struggling”
(1986, 190).
3. Karen Sacks’s case study describes an atypical case of Black women’s experiences in
unions. For many years Black women have participated in and organized a variety of labor
actions designed to improve working conditions, wages, and occupational mobility . But
the segregation of Black women in private domestic work which left them largely outside
of industry , the occupational discrimination within industry , and prejudice within the
unions themselves all worked to shape Black women’s behavior as unionists (Terborg-
Penn 1985).
4. African feminist Obioma Nnaemeka’s argument that African women consistently reject
radical feminism’s views on motherhood can just as easily be applied to African-American
women. Distinguishing among different strands of feminism based in part on their 
views on motherhood, Nnaemeka contends, “African feminism neither demotes/
abandons motherhood nor dismisses maternal politics as non-feminist or unfeminist poli-
tics” (Nnaemeka 1998a, 6). In brief, while African-American women may reject a feminism
that seems antimotherhood, developing a Black women’s standpoint on motherwork
within the larger context of Black feminism as a social justice project might receive a
markedly different reception.
Chapter 10
1. I apply this concept of transversal politics to groups organized around historically con-
structed identities, in this case the identity of “Black woman.” Groups, however, need not
be formed around identity categories. The local group history can just as easily be con-
structed around an issue or an “affinity .”Thus, the model of transversal politics advanced
here concerns coalitions of all sorts, and can accommodate the contradictions that seem-
ingly distinguish identity politics and affinity politics.
2. For a discussion of the similarities and differences of using the individual and the
group as levels of analysis, see Collins (1998a), especially pages 203–11.
Chapter 11
1. Many scholars view positivism and postmodernism, for example, as competing epis-
temologies, each with their own theories of what counts as truth and why . In contrast,
I view positivism and postmodernism as yet another binary whose opposition to 
each other unifies them within an overarching Western epistemology (Collins
1998a, 126–37). The prior discussion of intersecting oppressions of race, class, gender,
296 NOTES


--- PAGE 314 ---
sexuality , and nation aims to sketch out an alternative paradigm that, as I discuss later 
in this chapter, may constitute an important part of Black feminist epistemology .
2. For example, qualitative and quantitative methodologies represent two important
methodological approaches that are often associated with Western humanities and the sci-
ences respectively . A particular methodology may become identified with an epistemologi-
cal approach and its interpretive frameworks.Whereas methodology refers to a broader the-
ory of how to do research, nothing in a research methodology is inherently White or Black,
male or female. Certain methodologies can become coded as “white” and/or “male” and
thus work to disadvantage Black women (Collins 1998a, 101–105). Particular techniques
used in the course of research, for example, interviewing and survey analysis, constitute
research methods or specific tools that need not be attached to any particular group's inter-
ests. Whereas patterns of using specific techniques may vary among groups— White men
may work with large-scale data sets whereas Black women may rely more on one-on-one
interviewing—methods can be used for a variety of purposes.
3. Sandra Harding provides a useful definition of Eurocentrism that parallels my use here
(Harding 1998, 12–15). Western or Eurocentric social and political thought contains
three interrelated approaches to ascertaining “truth” that are routinely portrayed as com-
peting epistemologies. The first, reflected in positivist science, has long claimed that
absolute truths exist and that the task of scholarship is to develop objective, unbiased tools
of science to measure these truths. But many social theories have challenged the concepts
and epistemology of this version of science as representing the vested interests of elite
White men and therefore as being less valid when applied to experiences of other groups
and, more recently , to White male recounting of their own exploits.The second approach,
earlier versions of standpoint theories that were themselves rooted in a Marxist posi-
tivism, essentially reversed positivist science's assumptions concerning whose truth
would prevail. These approaches suggest that the oppressed allegedly have a clearer view
of “truth” than their oppressors because they lack the blinders created by the dominant
group's ideology . But this version of standpoint theory basically duplicates the positivist
belief in one “true” interpretation of reality and, like positivist science, comes with its
own set of problems. Postmodernism, the third approach, has been forwarded as the
antithesis of and inevitable outcome of rejecting a positivist science. Within postmodern
logic, groups themselves become suspect as well as any specialized thought. In extreme
postmodern discourse, each group's thought is equally valid. No group can claim to have
a better interpretation of the “truth” than another. In a sense, postmodernism represents
the opposite of scientific ideologies of objectivity (Collins 1998a, 124–154).
4. In discussing the West African Sacred Cosmos, Mechal Sobel notes that Nyam, a root
word in many West African languages, connotes an enduring spirit, power, or energy pos-
sessed by all life. Despite the pervasiveness of this important concept in African human-
ism (see Jahn 1961, for example), its definition remains elusive. Sobel observes, “Every
individual analyzing the various Sacred Cosmos of West Africans has recognized the real-
ity of this force, but no one has yet adequately translated this concept into Western terms”
(1979, 13). For comprehensive discussions of African spirituality , see Richards (1990)
and Paris (1995). Many African-American theologians, especially women, use this
African-derived notion of spirituality to guide their work. For work within womanist tra-
ditions, see that done by Grant (1989) and Sanders (1995).
297NOTES


--- PAGE 315 ---
agency: an individual or social group’s will to be self-defining and self-
determining.
binary thinking: a way of conceptualizing realities that divides concepts into
two, mutually exclusive categories, e.g., white/black, man/woman, rea-
son/emotion, and  heterosexual/homosexual.
Black community: a set of institutions, communication networks, and prac-
tices that help African-Americans respond to social, economic, and political
challenges confronting them. Also known as the Black public sphere or
Black civil society .
Black nationalism: a political philosophy based on the belief that Black peo-
ple constitute a people or nation with a common history and destiny .
capitalism: an economic system based on the private ownership of the
means of production. Capitalism is typically characterized by extreme dis-
tributions of wealth and large differences between the rich and the poor.
commodification: in capitalist political economies, land, products, services,
and ideas are assigned economic values and are bought and sold in market-
places as commodities.
critical social theory: bodies of knowledge and sets of institutional practices
that actively grapple with the central questions facing groups of people.
These groups are differently placed in specific political, social, and historic
contexts characterized by injustice. What makes critical social theory “criti-
cal” is its commitment to justice, for one’s own group and/or for that of
other groups.
disciplinary domain of power: a way of ruling that relies on bureaucratic
hierarchies and techniques of surveillance.
epistemology: standards used to assess knowledge or why we believe what
we believe to be true.
Glossary


--- PAGE 316 ---
essentialism: belief that individuals or groups have inherent, unchanging
characteristics rooted in biology or a self-contained culture that explain
their status. When linked to oppressions of race, gender, and sexuality ,
binary thinking constructs “essential” group differences.
Eurocentrism: an ideology that presents the ideas and experiences of Whites
as normal, normative, and ideal. Also known as white racism or white
supremacy .
hegemonic domain of power: a form or mode of social organization that uses
ideas and ideology to absorb and thereby depoliticize oppressed groups’
dissent. Alternatively , the diffusion of power throughout the social system
where multiple groups police one another and suppress one another’s 
dissent.
identity politics: a way of knowing that sees lived experiences as important
to creating knowledge and crafting group-based political strategies. Also, a
form of political resistance where an oppressed group rejects its devalued
status.
ideology: a body of ideas reflecting the interests of a particular social group.
Scientific racism and sexism constitute ideologies that support domination.
Black nationalism and feminism constitute counter-ideologies that oppose
such domination.
interpersonal domain of power: discriminatory practices of everyday lived
experience that because they are so routine typically go unnoticed or
remain unidentified. Strategies of everyday racism and everyday resistance
occur in this domain.
intersectionality: analysis claiming that systems of race, social class, gender,
sexuality , ethnicity , nation, and age form mutually constructing features of
social organization, which shape Black women’s experiences and, in turn,
are shaped by Black women.
matrix of domination: the overall organization of hierarchical power rela-
tions for any society . Any specific matrix of domination has (1) a particular
arrangement of intersecting systems of oppression, e.g., race, social class,
gender, sexuality , citizenship status, ethnicity and age; and (2)  a particular
organization of its domains of power, e.g., structural, disciplinary , hege-
monic, and interpersonal.
oppositional knowledge: a type of knowledge developed by , for, and/or in
defense of an oppressed group’s interests. Ideally , it fosters the group’s self-
definition and self-determination.
oppression: an unjust situation where, systematically and over a long period
of time, one group denies another group access to the resources of society .
Race, gender, class, sexuality , nation, age, and ethnicity constitute major
forms of oppression.
299GLOSSARY


--- PAGE 317 ---
outsider-within locations: social locations or border spaces marking the
boundaries between groups of unequal power. Individuals acquire identi-
ties as “outsiders within” by their placement in these social locations.
paradigm: an interpretive framework used to explain social phenomena.
public and private spheres: two areas of social organization with the public
sphere of work and government typically juxtaposed to the private sphere
of home and family .
racial segregation: a constellation of policies that separate groups by race
based on the belief that proximity to the group deemed to be inferior will
harm the allegedly superior group. Though currently forbidden by law in
the United States, racially segregated neighborhoods, schools, occupational
categories, and access to public facilities persist.
racial solidarity: the belief that members of a racial group have common
interests and should support one another above the interests of members
of other racial groups.
racism: a system of unequal power and privilege where humans are divided
into groups or “races” with social rewards unevenly distributed to groups
based on their racial classification. Variations of racism include institution-
alized racism, scientific racism, and everyday racism. In the United States,
racial segregation constitutes a fundamental principle of how racism is
organized.
rhetoric of color-blindness: a view of the world that resists talking of race
because to do so is believed to perpetuate racism.
scientific racism: a specific body of knowledge about Blacks, Asians, Native
Americans, Whites, and Latinos produced within biology , anthropology ,
psychology , sociology , and other academic disciplines. Scientific racism was
designed to prove the inferiority of people of color.
self-definition: the power to name one’s own reality .
self-determination: the power to decide one’s own destiny .
social class: in its most general sense, social groups differentiated from one
another by economic status, cultural forms, practices, or ways of life. Social
class refers to a group of people who share a common placement in a
political economy .
social justice project: an organized, long-term effort to eliminate oppression
and empower individuals and groups within a just society .
standpoint theory: a social theory arguing that group location in hierarchical
power relations produces common challenges for individuals in those
groups. Moreover, shared experiences can foster similar angles of vision
leading to group knowledge or standpoint deemed essential for informed
political action.
300 GLOSSARY


--- PAGE 318 ---
structural domain of power: a constellation of organized practices in employ-
ment, government, education, law, business, and housing that work to
maintain an unequal and unjust distribution of social resources. Unlike bias
and prejudice, which are characteristics of individuals, the structural domain
of power operates through the laws and policies of social institutions.
subjugated knowledge: the secret knowledges generated by oppressed groups.
Such knowledge typically remains hidden because revealing it weakens its
purpose of assisting them in dealing with oppression. Subjugated knowl-
edges that aim to resist oppression constitute oppositional knowledges.
transnationalism: a view of the world that sees certain interests as going
beyond the borders of individual nation-states. Whereas internationalism
emphasizes the relationship among nation-states, transnationalism takes 
a global perspective.
301GLOSSARY


--- PAGE 319 ---
Adler, Karen S. 1992. “ ‘Always Leading Our Men in Service and Sacrifice’: Amy
Jacques Garvey , Feminist Black Nationalist.”Gender and Society 6 (3): 346–75.
Aidoo, Ama Ata. 1991.Changes: A Love Story. New York: Feminist Press.
———. 1998. “The African Woman Today .” In Sisterhood, Feminisms, and Power:
From Africa to the Diaspora, ed. Obioma Nnaemeka, 39–50. Trenton, NJ: Africa
World Press.
Aina, Olabisi. 1998. “African Women at the Grassroots: The Silent Partners of the
Women’s Movement.”In Sisterhood, Feminisms, and Power: From Africa to the
Diaspora, ed. Obioma Nnaemeka, 65–88. Trenton, NJ:Africa World Press.
Alexander, M. Jacqui. “Erotic Autonomy as a Politics of Decolonization: An Anatomy
of Feminist and State Practice in the Bahamas Tourist Industry .” In Feminist
Genealogies, Colonial Legacies, Democratic Futures, ed. M. Jacqui Alexander and
Chandra Talpade Mohanty , 63–100. New York: Routledge.
———, and Chandra Talpade Mohanty , eds. 1997. Feminist Genealogies, Colonial
Legacies, Democratic Futures. New York: Routledge.
Alma’s Rainbow. 1994. Written and directed by Ayoka Chenzira. Crossgrain Pictures.
Amott, Teresa L. 1990. “Black Women and AFDC: Making Entitlement Out of
Necessity .” In Women, the State, and Welfare,ed. Linda Gordon, 280–98. Madison:
University of Wisconsin Press.
———, and Julie Matthaei. 1991. Race, Gender, and Work: A Multicultural Economic
History of Women in the United States. Boston: South End Press.
Andersen, Margaret L. 1991. “Feminism and the American Family Ideal.” Journal of
Comparative Family Studies 22 (2) Summer: 235–46.
———, and Patricia Hill Collins, eds. 1998. Race, Class, and Gender: An Anthology,
Third Edition. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Press.
Andrews, William L. 1986.Sisters of the Spirit: Three Black Women’s Autobiographies of
the Nineteenth Century. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Angelou, Maya. 1969. I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings. New York: Bantam.
Anthias, Floya, and Nira Yuval-Davis. 1992.Racialized Boundaries: Race, Nation,
References


--- PAGE 320 ---
303REFERENCES
Gender, Colour and Class in the Anti-Racist Struggle. New York: Routledge.
Antrobus, Peggy . 1995. “Women in the Caribbean: The Quadruple Burden of
Gender, Race, Class and Imperialism.” In Connecting Across Cultures and Continents:
Black Women Speak Out on Identity, Race and Development, ed. Achola O. Pala, 53–60.
New York: United Nations Development Fund for Women.
Asante, Kariamu W . 1990. “Commonalities in African Dance: An Aesthetic
Foundation.” In African Culture: The Rhythms of Unity, ed. Molefi Asante and
Kariamu W . Asante, 71–82. Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press.
Asante, Molefi Kete. 1987. The Afrocentric Idea. Philadelphia: Temple University
Press.
Asbury , Jo-Ellen. 1987. “African-American Women in Violent Relationships: An
Exploration of Cultural Differences.” In Violence in the Black Family: Correlates and
Consequences, ed. Robert L. Hampton, 89–105. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.
Avery , Byliye Y. 1994. “Breathing Life into Ourselves: The Evolution of the National
Black Women’s Health Project.” In The Black Women’s Health Book: Speaking for
Ourselves, ed. Evelyn C. White, 4–10. Seattle: Seal Press.
Awkward, Michael. 1996. “A Black Man’s Place(s) in Black Feminist Criticism.” In
Representing Black Men, ed. Marcellus Blount and George P . Cunningham, 3–26. New
York: Routledge.
Baloyi, Danisa E. 1995. “Apartheid and Identity: Black Women in South Africa.” In
Connecting Across Cultures and Continents: Black Women Speak Out on Identity, Race
and Development, ed. Achola O. Pala, 39–46. New York: United Nations Development
Fund for Women.
(Bambara), Toni Cade. 1970a. “On the Issue of Roles.” In The Black Woman: An
Anthology, ed. Toni Cade (Bambara), 101–10. New York: Signet.
———, ed. 1970b. The Black Woman: An Anthology. New York: Signet.
———. 1980. The Salt Eaters. New York:Vintage.
———. 1981. Gorilla, My Love. New York:Vintage.
Bannerji, Himani. 1995. Thinking Through: Essays on Feminism, Marxism, and
Anti–Racism. Toronto: Women’s Press.
Barnett, Bernice McNair. 1993. “Invisible Southern Black Women Leaders in the Civil
Rights Movement: The Triple Constraints of Gender, Race, and Class.”Gender and
Society 7 (2): 162– 82.
Beale, Frances. 1970. “Double Jeopardy: To Be Black and Female.” In The Black
Woman: An Anthology, ed. Toni Cade (Bambara), 90–100. New York: Signet.
Belenky , Mary Field, Blythe McVicker Clinchy , Nancy Rule Goldberger, and Jill
Mattuck Tarule. 1986.Women’s Ways of Knowing. New York: Basic Books.
Bell, Laurie, ed. 1987. Good Girls/Bad Girls: Feminists and Sex Trade Workers Face to
Face. Toronto: Seal Press.
Bell-Scott, Patricia, Beverly Guy-Sheftall, Jacqueline Jones Royster, Janet Sims-Wood,
Miriam DeCosta-Willis, and Lucie Fultz, eds. 1991. Double Stitch: Black Women Write
About Mothers and Daughters. Boston: Beacon.
Berger, Peter L., and Thomas Luckmann. 1966.The Social Construction of Reality.
New York: Doubleday .


--- PAGE 321 ---
304 REFERENCES
Berry , Mary Frances. [1971] 1994.Black Resistance, White Law: A History of
Constitutional Racism in America. New York: Penguin.
Billie Holiday Anthology/Lady Sings the Blues. 1976. Ojai, CA: Creative Concepts
Publishing.
Billingsley , Andrew. 1992.Black Families in White America. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice Hall.
Bobo, Jacqueline. 1995. Black Women as Cultural Readers. New York: Columbia
University Press.
Bonner, Marita O. 1987. “On Being Young—A Woman—and Colored.” In Frye Street
and Environs: The Collected Works of Marita Bonner, ed. Joyce Flynn and Joyce
Occomy Stricklin, 3–8. Boston: Beacon.
Brewer, Rose. 1988. “Black Women in Poverty: Some Comments on Female-Headed
Families.” Signs 13(2): 331–39.
———. 1993. “Theorizing Race, Class and Gender: The New Scholarship of Black
Feminist Intellectuals and Black Women’s Labor.” In Theorizing Black Feminisms: The
Visionary Pragmatism of Black Women, ed. Stanlie M. James and Abena P .A. Busia,
13–30. New York: Routledge.
———. 1994. “Race, Class, Gender and US State Welfare Policy: The Nexus of
Inequality for African American Families.” In Color, Class and Country: Experiences of
Gender, ed. Gay Young and Bette J. Dickerson, 115–27. London: Zed Books.
———. 1995. “Gender, Poverty , Culture, and Economy: Theorizing Female-Led
Families.” In African American Single Mothers: Understanding Their Lives and Families,
ed. Bette Dickerson, 146–63. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Brittan, Arthur, and Mary Maynard. 1984.Sexism, Racism and Oppression.N e w  Y o r k :
Basil Blackwell.
Brooks, Gwendolyn. 1953. Maud Martha. Boston: Atlantic Press.
———. 1972. Report from Part One: The Autobiography of Gwendolyn Brooks. Detroit:
Broadside Press.
Brown, Cynthia Stokes, ed. 1986. Ready from Within: Septima Clark and the Civil
Rights Movement. Navarro, CA: Wild Trees Press.
Brown, Elaine. 1992. A T aste of Power: A Black Woman’s Story. New York: Pantheon.
Brown, Elsa Barkley . 1986.Hearing Our Mothers’ Lives. Atlanta: Fifteenth Anniversary
of African-American and African Studies, Emory University (unpublished).
———. 1989. “African-American Women’s Quilting: A Framework for
Conceptualizing and Teaching African-American Women’s History .”Signs 14 (4):
921–29.
———. 1994. “Negotiating and Transforming the Public Sphere: African American
Political Life in the Transition from Slavery to Freedom.”Public Culture 7 (1):
107–46.
Brown-Collins, Alice, and Deborah Ridley Sussewell. 1986. “The Afro-American
Woman’s Emerging Selves.”Journal of Black Psychology 13 (1): 1–11.
Burnham, Linda. 1985. “Has Poverty Been Feminized in Black America?” Black
Scholar 16 (2): 14–24.
Burnham, Margaret A. 1987. “An Impossible Marriage: Slave Law and Family Law.”
Law and Inequality 5: 187–225.


--- PAGE 322 ---
Byerly ,Victoria. 1986.Hard Times Cotton Mills Girls. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press.
Campbell, Bebe Moore. 1989. Sweet Summer: Growing Up with and without My Dad.
New York: Putnam.
Canada, Geoffrey . 1995.Fist Stick Knife Gun: A Personal History of Violence in
America. Boston: Beacon.
Cannon, Katie G. 1985. “The Emergence of a Black Feminist Consciousness.” In
Feminist Interpretations of the Bible, ed. Letty M. Russell, 30–40. Philadelphia:
Westminster Press.
———. 1988. Black Womanist Ethics. Atlanta: Scholars Press.
Cantarow, Ellen. 1980.Moving the Mountain: Women Working for Social Change. Old
Westbury , NY: Feminist Press.
Caraway , Nancie. 1991.Segregated Sisterhood: Racism and the Politics of American
Feminism. Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press.
Carby , Hazel. 1987.Reconstructing Womanhood: The Emergence of the Afro-American
Woman Novelist. New York: Oxford University Press.
———. 1992. “The Multicultural Wars.” In Black Popular Culture, ed. Michele
Wallace and Gina Dent, 187–199. Seattle: Bay Press.
Carneiro, Sueli. 1995. “Defining Black Feminism.” In Connecting Across Cultures and
Continents: Black Women Speak Out on Identity, Race and Development, ed. Achola O.
Pala, 11–18. New York: United Nations Development Fund for Women.
Carroll, Rebecca. 1997. Sugar in the Raw: Voices of Young Black Girls in America.N e w
York: Crown Trade.
Cary , Lorene. 1991.Black Ice. New York: Knopf.
Chang, Grace. 1994. “Undocumented Latinas: The New ‘Employable Mothers.’ ” In
Mothering: Ideology, Experience, and Agency, ed. Evelyn Nakano Glenn, Grace Chang,
and Linda Rennie Forcey , 259–86. New York: Routledge.
“Children of the Underclass.” 1989. Newsweek. September 11, 16–27.
Childress, Alice. [1956] 1986. Like One of the Family: Conversations from a Domestic’s
Life. Boston: Beacon.
Chisholm, Shirley . 1970.Unbought and Unbossed. New York: Avon.
Chodorow, Nancy . 1978.The Reproduction of Mothering. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Chow, Rey . 1993.Writing Diaspora: T actics of Intervention in Contemporary Cultural
Studies. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Christian, Barbara. 1985. Black Feminist Criticism, Perspectives on Black Women
Writers. New York: Pergamon.
———. 1989. “But Who Do You Really Belong to—Black Studies or Women’s
Studies?” Women’s Studies17 (1–2): 17–23.
———. 1994. “Diminishing Returns: Can Black Feminism(s) Survive the
Academy?” In Multiculturalism: A Critical Reader, ed. David Theo Goldberg, 168–79.
Cambridge: Basil Blackwell.
Clarke, Cheryl. 1983. “The Failure to Transform: Homophobia in the Black
305REFERENCES


--- PAGE 323 ---
306 REFERENCES
Community .” In Home Girls: A Black Feminist Anthology, ed. Barbara Smith,
197–208. New York: Kitchen Table Press.
———, Jewell L. Gomez, Evelyn Hammonds, Bonnie Johnson, and Linda Powell.
1983. “Conversations and Questions: Black Women on Black Women Writers.”
Conditions: Nine 3 (3): 88–137.
Clark-Lewis, Elizabeth. 1985. “This Work Had a’ End”: The Transition from Live–In to
Day Work. Southern Women: The Intersection of Race, Class and Gender. Working
Paper #2. Memphis, TN: Center for Research on Women, Memphis State University .
Cleage, Pearl. 1993. Deals With the Devil and Other Reasons to Riot.N e w  Y o r k :
Ballantine.
Cole, Johnetta B. 1993. Conversations: Straight T alk with America’s Sister President.
New York: Anchor.
Coleman, Willi. 1987. “Closets and Keepsakes.”Sage: A Scholarly Journal on Black
Women 4 (2): 34–35.
Collier, Jane, Michelle Z. Rosaldo, and Sylvia Yanagisko. 1992. “Is There a Family?
New Anthropological Views.” In Rethinking the Family: Some Feminist Questions,
Second Edition ed. Barrie Thorne and Marilyn Yalom, 31–48. Boston: Northeastern
University Press.
Collins, Patricia Hill.1986. “Learning from the Outsider Within: The Sociological
Significance of Black Feminist Thought.” Social Problems 33 (6): 14–32.
———. 1989. “A Comparison of Two Works on Black Family Life.” Signs 14 (4):
875–84.
———. 1993a. “Black Feminism in the Twentieth Century .” In Black Women in the
United States: An Historical Encyclopedia, ed. Darlene Clark Hine, Elsa Barkley Brown,
and Rosalyn Terborg-Penn, 418–25. New York: Carlson.
———. 1993b. “It’s in Our Hands: Breaking the Silence on Gender in African-
American Studies.” In Understanding Curriculum as Racial T ext,ed. Willian F. Pinar
and Louis Castenall, 127– 41. Albany: SUNY Press.
———. 1994. “Shifting the Center: Race, Class, and Feminist Theorizing about
Motherhood.” In Mothering: Ideology, Experience and Agency, ed. Evelyn Nakano
Glenn, Grace Chang, and Linda Forcey , 45–65. New York: Routledge.
———. 1997. “African-American Women and Economic Justice: A Preliminary
Analysis of Wealth, Family and Black Social Class.”University of Cincinnati Law
Review 65 (2): 825–52.
———. 1998a. Fighting Words: Black Women and the Search for Justice. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.
———. 1998b. “Intersections of Race, Class, Gender, and Nation: Some
Implications for Black Family Studies.” Journal of Comparative Family Studies 29 (1):
27–36.
———. 1998c. “It’s All In the Family: Intersections of Gender, Race, and Nation.”
Hypatia 13 (3): 62– 82.
———. 1998d. “The Tie That Binds: Race, Gender and U.S.Violence.” Ethnic and
Racial Studies 21 (5): 918–38.
———. 1999a. “Producing the Mothers of the Nation: Race, Class and


--- PAGE 324 ---
Contemporary U.S. Population Policies.” Forthcoming in Women, Citizenship and
Difference, ed. Nira Yuval-Davis. London: Zed Books.
———. 1999b. “Will the ‘Real’ Mother Please Stand Up?: The Logic of Eugenics and
American National Family Planning.” In Revisioning Women, Health and Healing:
Feminist, Cultural, and T echnoscience Perspectives,ed. Adele Clarke and Virginia Olesen,
266-82. New York: Routledge.
Color. 1983. Produced and directed by Warrington Hudlin, written and coproduced
by Denise Oliver. New York: Black Filmmaker’s Foundation.
The Combahee River Collective. 1982. “A Black Feminist Statement.” In But Some of
Us Are Brave, ed. Gloria T. Hull, Patricia Bell Scott, and Barbara Smith, 13–22. Old
Westbury , NY: Feminist Press.
Cone, James H. 1972. The Spirituals and the Blues: An Interpretation. New York:
Seabury Press.
Coontz, Stephanie. 1992. The Way We Never Were: American Families and the
Nostalgia Trap. New York: Basic Books.
Cooper, Anna Julia. 1892.A Voice from the South; By a Black Woman of the South.
Xenia, OH: Aldine.
Cose, Ellis. 1993. The Rage of the Privileged Class. New York: HarperCollins.
Cowan, Gloria, and Robin R. Campbell. 1994. “Racism and Sexism in Interracial
Pornography .Psychology of Women Quarterly 18: 323–38.
———, Jacqueline Anne Rouse, and Barbara Woods, eds. 1990. Women in the Civil
Rights Movement: Trailblazers and T orchbearers, 1941–1965.Bloomington: Indiana
University Press.
Crenshaw, Kimberle Williams. 1991. “Mapping the Margins: Intersectionality ,
Identity Politics, and Violence Against Women of Color.”Stanford Law Review 43
(6): 1241–99.
———. 1992. “Whose Story Is It Anyway? Feminist and Antiracist Appropriations of
Anita Hill.” In Race-ing Justice, En-Gendering Power, ed. Toni Morrison, 402–40.
New York: Pantheon.
———. 1993. “Beyond Racism and Misogyny: Black Feminism and 2 Live Crew.” In
Words That Wound: Critical Race Theory, Assaultive Speech, and the First Amendment,
ed. Mari J. Matsuda, Charles R. Lawrence III, Richard Delgado, and Kimberle
Crenshaw, 111–32. Boulder: Westview.
———. 1997. “Color Blindness, History , and the Law.” In The House That Race
Built, ed. Wahneema Lubiano, 280–88. New York: Pantheon.
Cruse, Harold. 1967. The Crisis of the Negro Intellectual. New York: William Morrow.
Daniels, Bonnie. 1979. “For Colored Girls . . . A Catharsis.”Black Scholar 10(8–9):
61–62.
Daniels, Jessie. 1997. White Lies. New York: Routledge.
Darcy , R., and Charles D. Hadley . 1988. “Black Women in Politics: The Puzzle of
Success.” Social Science Quarterly 69(3): 629–45.
Daughters of Dust. [1991] 1992. Directed by Julie Dash. American Playhouse and
Geeche Gild Productions.
307REFERENCES


--- PAGE 325 ---
Davenport, Doris. 1996. “Black Lesbians in Academia:Visible Invisibility .” In The
New Lesbian Studies: Into the Twenty-First Century,ed. Bonnie Zimmerman and Toni
A.H. McNaron. New York: Feminist Press.
Davis, Angela Y. [1971] 1995. “Reflections on the Black Woman’s Role in the
Community of Slaves.” In Words of Fire: An Anthology of African American Feminist
Thought, ed. Beverly Guy-Sheftall, 200–18. New York: New Press.
———. 1978. “Rape, Racism and the Capitalist Setting.” Black Scholar 9(7): 24–30.
———. 1981. Women, Race and Class. New York: Random House.
———. 1989. Women, Culture, and Politics. New York: Random House.
———. 1997. “Race and Criminalization: Black Americans and the Punishment
Industry .” In The House That Race Built, ed. Wahneema Lubiano, 264–79. New York:
Pantheon.
———. 1998. Blues Legacies and Black Feminism. New York:Vintage.
Davis, George, and Glegg Watson. 1985.Black Life in Corporate America.N e w  Y o r k :
Anchor.
d’ Emilio, John, and Estelle Freedman. 1988. “Race and Sexuality .” In Intimate
Matters: A History of Sexuality in America, 85–108. New York: Harper and Row.
de Lauretis, Teresa. 1986. “Feminist Studies/Critical Studies: Issues, Terms, and
Contexts.” In Feminist Studies/Critical Studies, ed. Teresa de Lauretis, 1–19.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Dickerson, Bette J., ed. 1995a. African American Single Mothers: Understanding Their
Lives and Families. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
———. 1995b. “Introduction.” In African American Single Mothers: Understanding
Their Lives and Families, ed. B.J. Dickerson, ix–xxx. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Dill, Bonnie Thornton. 1979. “The Dialectics of Black Womanhood.”Signs 4 (3):
543–55.
———. 1980. “ ‘The Means to Put My Children Through’: Child-Rearing Goals and
Strategies among Black Female Domestic Servants.” In The Black Woman, ed. La
Frances Rodgers-Rose, 107–23. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
———. 1983. “Race, Class, and Gender: Prospects for an All-Inclusive Sisterhood.”
Feminist Studies 9 (1): 131–50.
———. 1988a. “ ‘Making Your Job Good Yourself’: Domestic Service and the
Construction of Personal Dignity .” In Women and the Politics of Empowerment, ed.
Ann Bookman and Sandra Morgen, 33–52. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
———. 1988b. “Our Mothers’ Grief: Racial Ethnic Women and the Maintenance of
Families.” Journal of Family History 13 (4): 415–31.
Dines, Gail. 1998. Pornography: The Production and Consumption of Inequality. New
York: Routledge.
Diop, Cheikh. 1974. The African Origin of Civilization: Myth or Reality? New York: L.
Hill.
Dodson, Jualyne E., and Cheryl Townsend Gilkes. 1987. “Something Within: Social
Change and Collective Endurance in the Sacred World of Black Christian Women.” In
Women and Religion in America, Volume 3: 1900–1968, ed. Rosemary Reuther and R.
Keller, 80–130. New York: Harper and Row.
308 REFERENCES


--- PAGE 326 ---
309REFERENCES
Dougherty , Molly C. 1978.Becoming a Woman in Rural Black Culture.N e w  Y o r k :
Holt, Rinchart and Winston.
Du Bois, William E. B. 1969.The Negro American Family. New York: Negro
Universities Press.
duCille, Ann. 1993. “Blue Notes on Black Sexuality: Sex and the Texts of the Twenties
and Thirties.” In  American Sexual Politics: Sex, Gender, and Race Since the Civil War,
ed. John C. Fout and Maura Shaw Tantillo, 193–219. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
———. 1996. Skin Trade. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Dumas, Rhetaugh Graves. 1980. “Dilemmas of Black Females in Leadership.” In The
Black Woman, ed. La Frances Rodgers-Rose, 203–15. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Duster, Alfreda M., ed. 1970.Crusade for Justice: The Autobiography of Ida B. Wells.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Dyson, Michael Eric. 1996. Race Rules: Navigating the Color Line. New York:Vintage.
Eisenstein, Hester. 1983.Contemporary Feminist Thought. Boston: G. K. Hall.
Essed, Philomena. 1991. Understanding Everyday Racism: An Interdisciplinary Theory.
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Evans, Sara. 1979. Personal Politics. New York:Vintage.
Everyone’s Child. 1996. Directed by Tsitsi Dangarembga. Produced by Media for
Development Trust, Zimbabwe. San Francisco: Resolution Inc. / California Newsreel.
Fausto-Sterling, Anne. 1992.Myths of Gender: Biological Theories about Women and
Men, 2d ed. New York: Basic Books.
———. 1995. “Gender, Race and Nation: The Comparative Anatomy of ‘Hottentot’
Women in Europe, 1815–1817.” In Deviant Bodies: Critical Perspectives on Difference
in Science and Popular Culture, ed. Jennifer Terry and Jacqueline Urla, 19–48.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Feagin, Joe R., and Melvin P . Sikes. 1994.Living with Racism: The Black Middle-Class
Experience. Boston: Beacon.
Featherstone, Elena, ed. 1994. Skin Deep: Women Writing on Color, Culture and
Identity. Freedom, CA: The Crossing Press.
Feldstein, Ruth. 1994. “ ‘I Wanted the Whole World to See’: Race, Gender, and
Constructions of Motherhood in the Death of Emmett Till.” In Not June Cleaver, ed.
Joanne Meyerowitz, 263–303. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Femmes Aux Yeux Ouverts (Women with Open Eyes). 1994. Directed by Anne-Laura
Folly . Togo. San Francisco: Resolution Inc. / California Newsreel.
Ferber, Abby . 1998.White Man Falling: Race, Gender, and White Supremacy. Lantham,
MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Fernandez-Kelly , Maria Patricia. 1983. “Mexican Border Immigration, Female Labor
Force Participation, and Migration.” In Women, Men, and the International Division of
Labor, ed. June Nash and Maria Fernandez-Kelly , 205–23. Albany: State University of
New York Press.
Fields, Mamie Garvin, and Karen Fields. 1983. Lemon Swamp and Other Places: A
Carolina Memoir. New York: Free Press.


--- PAGE 327 ---
Fordham, Signithia. 1993. “ ‘Those Loud Black Girls’: (Black) Women, Silence, and
Gender ‘Passing’ in the Academy .”Anthropology and Education Quarterly 24 (1):
3–32.
Forna, Aminatta. 1992. “Pornography and Racism: Sexualizing Oppression and
Inciting Hatred.” In Pornography: Women, Violence, and Civil Liberties, ed. Catherine
Itzin, 102–12. New York: Oxford University Press.
Fortes, Meyer. 1950. “Kinship and Marriage among the Ashanti.” In African Systems
of Kinship and Marriage, ed. A. R. Radcliffe-Brown and Daryll Forde, 252–84. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Foucault, Michel. 1979. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. New York:
Schocken.
———. 1980a. Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews and Other Writings 1972–1977,
ed. Colin Gordon. New York: Pantheon.
———. 1980b. The History of Sexuality Vol. I: An Introduction. Translated by Robert
Hurley . New York:Vintage.
Franklin, Aretha. 1967. I Never Loved a Man the Way I Love You. Atlantic Recording
Corp.
Franklin,V . P . 1992.Black Self-Determination: A Cultural History of African-American
Resistance. Chicago: Lawrence Hill Books.
Frazier, E. Franklin. 1948.The Negro Family in the United States. New York: Dryden.
Funami, Lumka. 1998. “The Nigerian Conference Revisited.” In Sisterhood,
Feminisms, and Power: From Africa to the Diaspora, ed. Obioma Nnaemeka, 411–17.
Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press.
Gardner, Tracey A. 1980. “Racism and Pornography in the Women’s Movement.” In
T ake Back the Night: Women on Pornography,ed. Laura Lederer, 105–14. New York:
William Morrow.
Gayle, Addison, ed. 1971.The Black Aesthetic. Garden City , NY: Doubleday .
Giddings, Paula. 1984. When and Where I Enter . . . The Impact of Black Women on
Race and Sex in America. New York: William Morrow.
———. 1988. In Search of Sisterhood: Delta Sigma Theta and the Challenge of the
Black Sorority Movement. New York: William Morrow.
———. 1992. “The Last Taboo.” In Race-ing Justice, En-gendering Power, ed. Toni
Morrison, 441–65. New York: Pantheon.
Gilkes, Cheryl Townsend. 1980. “ ‘Holding Back the Ocean with a Broom’: Black
Women and Community Work.” In The Black Woman, ed. La Frances Rodgers-Rose,
217–32. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
———. 1983a. “From Slavery to Social Welfare: Racism and the Control of Black
Women.” In Class, Race, and Sex: The Dynamics of Control, ed. Amy Swerdlow and
Hanna Lessinger, 288–300. Boston: G. K. Hall.
———. 1983b. “Going Up for the Oppressed: The Career Mobility of Black Women
Community Workers.”Journal of Social Issues 39 (3): 115–39.
———. 1985. “ ‘Together and in Harness’: Women’s Traditions in the Sanctified
Church.” Signs 10 (4): 678–99.
Gilligan, Carol. 1982. In a Different Voice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
310 REFERENCES


--- PAGE 328 ---
311REFERENCES
Gilman, Sander L. 1985. “Black Bodies, White Bodies: Toward an Iconography of
Female Sexuality in Late Nineteenth-Century Art, Medicine, and Literature.” Critical
Inquiry 12 (1): 205–43.
Gilroy , Paul. 1993.The Black Atlantic: Modernity and Double Consciousness.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Giovanni, Nikki. 1971. Gemini. New York: Penguin.
———. 1988. Sacred Cows . . . and Other Edibles. New York: Quill/William Morrow.
Glenn, Evelyn Nakano. 1985. “Racial Ethnic Women’s Labor: The Intersection of
Race, Gender and Class Oppression.” Review of Radical Political Economics 17(3):
86–108.
Golden, Marita. 1983. Migrations of the Heart. New York: Ballantine.
———. 1995. Saving Our Sons: Raising Black Children in a Turbulent World.N e w
York: Anchor.
Gomez, Jewell, and Barbara Smith. 1994. “Taking the Home Out of Homophobia:
Black Lesbian Health.” In The Black Women’s Health Book: Speaking for Ourselves, ed.
Evelyn C. White, 198–213. Seattle: Seal Press.
Gramsci, Antonio. 1971.Selections from the Prison Notebooks. London: Lawrence and
Wishart.
Grant, Jacquelyn. 1982. “Black Women and the Church.” In But Some of Us Are
Brave, ed. Gloria T. Hull, Patricia Bell Scott, and Barbara Smith, 141–52. Old
Westbury , NY: Feminist Press.
———. 1989. White Women’s Christ and Black Women’s Jesus: Feminist Christology
and Womanist Response. Atlanta: Scholars Press.
Gregory , Steven. 1994. “Race, Identity and Political Activism: The Shifting Contours
of the African American Public Sphere.” Public Culture 7 (1): 147–64.
Gutman, Herbert. 1976. The Black Family in Slavery and Freedom, 1750–1925. New
York: Random House.
Guy , Rosa. 1983.A Measure of Time. New York: Bantam.
Guy–Sheftall, Beverly . 1986. “Remembering Sojourner Truth: On Black Feminism.”
Catalyst (Fall): 54–57.
———. 1993. “A Black Feminist Perspective on Transforming the Academy: The
Case of Spelman College.” In Theorizing Black Feminisms: The Visionary Pragmatism
of Black Women, ed. Stanlie M. James and Abena P . A. Busia, 77–89. New York:
Routledge.
———. 1995a. “The Evolution of Feminist Consciousness among African American
Women.” In Words of Fire: An Anthology of African American Feminist Thought, ed.
Beverly Guy-Sheftall, 1–22. New York: New Press.
———. 1995b, ed. Words of Fire: An Anthology of African American Feminist Thought.
New York: New Press.
Gwaltney , John Langston. 1980.Drylongso, A Self–Portrait of Black America.N e w
York:Vintage.
Hall, Jacqueline Dowd. 1983. “The Mind That Burns in Each Body: Women, Rape,
and Racial Violence.” In Powers of Desire: The Politics of Sexuality, ed. Ann Snitow,
Christine Stansell, and Sharon Thompson, 329–49. New York: Monthly Review Press.


--- PAGE 329 ---
Halpin, Zuleyma Tang. 1989. “Scientific Objectivity and the Concept of ‘The Other.’ ”
Women’s Studies International Forum12 (3): 285–94.
Hammonds, Evelynn M. 1997. “Toward a Genealogy of Black Female Sexuality: The
Problematic of Silence.” In Feminist Genealogies, Colonial Legacies, Democratic Futures,
ed. M. Jacqui Alexander and Chandra Talpade Mohanty , 170–81. New York:
Routledge.
Hansberry , Lorraine. 1959.A Raisin in the Sun. New York: Signet.
———. 1969. T o Be Young, Gifted and Black. New York: Signet.
Harding, Sandra. 1986. The Science Question in Feminism. Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University Press.
———. 1987. “Introduction: Is There a Feminist Method?” In Feminism and
Methodology, ed. Sandra Harding, 1–14. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
———. 1998. Is Science Multicultural? Postcolonialisms, Feminisms, and Epistemologies.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Harley , Sharon. 1982. “Beyond the Classroom: The Organizational Lives of Black
Female Educators in the District of Columbia, 1890–1930. Journal of Negro
Education 51(3): 254–65.
———, and Rosalyn Terborg-Penn, eds. 1978. The Afro-American Woman: Struggles
and Images. Port Washington, NY: Kennikat Press.
Harper, Michael S. 1979. “Gayl Jones: An Interview.” In Chant of Saints: A Gathering
of Afro-American Literature, Art, and Scholarship, ed. Michael S. Harper and Robert B.
Stepto, 352–75. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Harris, Trudier. 1982.From Mammies to Militants: Domestics in Black American
Literature. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
———. 1986. “Introduction.” In Like One of the Family: Conversations from a
Domestic’s Life,by Alice Childress, xi–xxxviii. Boston: Beacon.
Harrison, Daphne Duval. 1978. “Black Women in the Blues Tradition.” In The Afro-
American Woman: Struggles and Images, ed. Sharon Harley and Rosalyn Terborg-Penn,
58–73. Port Washington, NY: Kennikat Press.
———. 1988. Black Pearls: Blues Queens of the 1920s. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers
University Press.
Hartouni,Valerie. 1997. “Breached Birth: Anna Johnson and the Reproduction of
Raced Bodies.” In Cultural Conceptions: On Reproductive T echnologies and the
Remaking of Life, 85–98. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Hartsock, Nancy M. 1983a. “The Feminist Standpoint: Developing the Ground for a
Specifically Feminist Historical Materialism.” In Discovering Reality, ed. Sandra
Harding and Merrill B. Hintikka, 283–310. Boston: D. Reidel.
———. 1983b. Money, Sex and Power. Boston: Northeastern University Press.
Hernton, Calvin. 1985. “The Sexual Mountain and Black Women Writers.”Black
Scholar 16(4): 2–11.
Higginbotham, Elizabeth. 1983. “Laid Bare by the System: Work and Survival for
Black and Hispanic Women.” In Class, Race, and Sex: The Dynamics of Control, ed.
Amy Smerdlow and Hanna Lessinger, 200–15. Boston: G. K. Hall.
———. 1994. “Black Professional Women: Job Ceilings and Employment Sectors.”
312 REFERENCES


--- PAGE 330 ---
In Women of Color in U.S. Society, ed. Maxine Baca Zinn and Bonnie Thornton Dill,
113–31. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
———, and Lynn Weber. 1992. “Moving Up with Kin and Community: Upward
Social Mobility for Black and White Women.”Gender and Society 6 (3): 416–40.
Higginbotham, Evelyn Brooks. 1989. “Beyond the Sound of Silence: Afro–American
Women in History .”Gender and History 1 (1): 50–67.
———. 1993. Righteous Discontent: The Women’s Movement in the Black Baptist
Church, 1880–1920. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Hine, Darlene Clark. 1989. “Rape and the Inner Lives of Black Women in the Middle
West: Preliminary Thoughts on the Culture of Dissemblance.”Signs 14 (4): 912–20.
———. 1995. “For Pleasure, Profit, and Power: The Sexual Exploitation of Black
Women.” In African American Women Speak Out on Anita Hill–Clarence Thomas, ed.
Geneva Smitherman, 168–77. Detroit: Wayne State University Press.
———, and Kate Wittenstein. 1981. “Female Slave Resistance: The Economics of
Sex.” In The Black Woman Cross-Culturally,ed. Filomina Chioma Steady , 289–300.
Cambridge, MA: Schenkman.
———, Elsa Barkley Brown, and Rosalyn Terborg-Penn, eds. 1993. Black Women in
America: An Historical Encyclopedia. New York: Carlson.
Hoch, Paul. 1979. White Hero Black Beast: Racism, Sexism and the Mask of
Masculinity. London: Pluto Press.
Holloway , Karla. 1995. “The Body Politic.” In Codes of Conduct: Race, Ethics, and the
Color of Our Character, 15–71. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.
hooks, bell. 1989. T alking Back: Thinking Feminist, Thinking Black. Boston: South
End Press.
Hudson-Weems, Clenora. 1998. “Africana Womanism.” In Sisterhood, Feminisms, and
Power: From Africa to the Diaspora, ed. Obioma Nnaemeka, 149–62. Trenton, NJ:
Africa World Press.
Hull, Gloria T., ed. 1984.Give Us Each Day: The Diary of Alice Dunbar-Nelson.N e w
York: W . W . Norton.
———, Patricia Bell Scott, and Barbara Smith, eds. 1982. But Some of Us Are Brave.
Old Westbury , NY: Feminist Press.
Hunter, Andrea. 1997. “Counting on Grandmothers: Black Mothers’ and Fathers’
Reliance on Grandmothers for Parenting Support.” Journal of Family Issues 18 (3):
251–69.
Hurston, Zora Neale. [1937] 1969. Their Eyes Were Watching God. Greenwich, CT:
Fawcett.
Hurtado, Aida. 1989. “Relating to Privilege: Seduction and Rejection in the
Subordination of White Women and Women of Color.”Signs 14 (4): 833–55.
Imam, Ayesha, Amina Mama, and Fatou Sow, eds. 1997.Engendering African Social
Sciences. Dakar, Senegal: Council for the Development of Economic and Social
Research.
Irele, Abiola. 1983. “Introduction.” In African Philosophy, Myth and Reality, by Paulin
J. Houtondji, 7–32. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Iweriebor, Ifeyinwa. 1998. “Carrying the Baton: Personal Perspectives on the Modern
313REFERENCES


--- PAGE 331 ---
Women’s Movement in Nigeria.” In Sisterhood, Feminisms, and Power: From Africa to
the Diaspora, ed. Obioma Nnaemeka, 297–321. Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press.
Jackson, Irene V . 1981. “Black Women and Music: From Africa to the New World.” In
The Black Woman Cross-Culturally,ed. Filomina Chioma Steady , 383–401.
Cambridge, MA: Schenkman.
Jackson, Mahalia. 1985. “Singing of Good Tidings and Freedom.” In Afro-American
Religious History, ed. Milton C. Sernett, 446–57. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Jackson, Stevi. 1996. “Heterosexuality and Feminist Theory .” In Theorising
Heterosexuality, ed. Diane Richardson, 21–38. Philadelphia: Open University Press.
Jacobs, Harriet. [1860] 1987. “The Perils of a Slave Woman’s Life.” In Invented Lives:
Narratives of Black Women 1860–1960, ed. Mary Helen Washington, 16–67. Garden
City , NY: Anchor.
Jaggar, Alison M. 1983.Feminist Politics and Human Nature. Totawa, NJ: Rowman &
Allanheld.
Jahn, Janheinz. 1961. Muntu: An Outline of Neo-African Culture. London: Faber and
Faber.
James, Adeola. 1990. In Their Own Voices: African Women Writers T alk. Portsmouth,
NH: Heinemann.
James, Joy . 1996.Resisting State Violence: Radicalism, Gender, and Race in U.S.
Culture. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
James, Stanlie. 1993. “Mothering: A Possible Black Feminist Link to Social
Transformation?” In Theorizing Black Feminisms: The Visionary Pragmatism of Black
Women, ed. Stanlie James and Abena Busia, 44–54. New York: Routledge.
———, and  Abena Busia, eds. 1993. Theorizing Black Feminisms: The Visionary
Pragmatism of Black Women. New York: Routledge.
Jarrett, Robin. 1994. “Living Poor: Family Life Among Single Parent, African
American Women.”Social Problems 41 (February): 30–49.
Jewell, K. Sue. 1993. From Mammy to Miss America and Beyond: Cultural Images and
the Shaping of U.S. Social Policy. New York: Routledge.
Johnson, Charles S. [1934] 1979. Shadow of the Plantation. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Jones, Gayl. 1975. Corregidora. New York: Bantam.
———. 1976. Eva’s Man. Boston: Beacon.
Jones, Jacqueline. 1985. Labor of Love, Labor of Sorrow: Black Women, Work, and the
Family from Slavery to the Present. New York: Basic Books.
Jones, Lisa. 1994. Bulletproof Diva: T ales of Race, Sex, and Hair. New York: Anchor.
Jordan, June. 1981. Civil Wars. Boston: Beacon.
———. 1985. On Call. Boston: South End Press.
Joseph, Gloria. 1981. “Black Mothers and Daughters: Their Roles and Functions in
American Society .” In Common Differences, ed. Gloria Joseph and Jill Lewis, 75–126.
Garden City , NY: Anchor.
———. 1984. “Black Mothers and Daughters: Traditional and New Perspectives.”
Sage: A Scholarly Journal on Black Women 1 (2): 17–21.
314 REFERENCES


--- PAGE 332 ---
Just Another Girl on the IRT. 1992. Directed by Leslie Harris. Truth 24 FPS and
Miramax Films.
Kaplan, Elaine Bell. 1997. Not Our Kind of Girl: Unraveling the Myths of Black T eenage
Motherhood. Berkeley , CA: University of California Press.
Keller, Evelyn Fox. 1985.Reflections on Gender and Science. New Haven, CT:Yale
University Press.
Kelley , Robin D. G. 1994.Race Rebels: Culture, Politics, and the Black Working Class.
New York: Free Press.
———. 1997. Yo Mama’s Disfunktional: Fighting the Culture Wars in Urban America.
Boston: Beacon.
Kennedy , Elizabeth Lapovsky , and Madeline Davis. 1994.Boots of Leather, Slippers of
Gold: The History of a Lesbian Community. New York: Penguin.
King, Deborah K. 1988. “Multiple Jeopardy , Multiple Consciousness: The Context of
a Black Feminist Ideology .”Signs 14 (1): 42–72.
King, Mae. 1973. “The Politics of Sexual Stereotypes.”Black Scholar 4 (6–7): 12–23.
Kochman, Thomas. 1981.Black and White Styles in Conflict. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Kuhn, Thomas. 1962.The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. 2d ed. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Kuzwayo, Ellen. 1985.Call Me Woman. San Francisco: Spinster’s Ink Press.
Ladner, Joyce. 1972.T omorrow’s T omorrow. Garden City , NY: Doubleday .
———. 1986. “Black Women Face the 21st Century: Major Issues and Problems.”
Black Scholar 17 (5): 12–19.
———, and Ruby Morton Gourdine. 1984. “Intergenerational Teenage
Motherhood: Some Preliminary Findings.” Sage: A Scholarly Journal on Black Women
1 (2): 22–24.
Lee,Valerie. 1996. Granny Midwives and Black Women Writers: Double-Dutched
Readings. New York: Routledge.
Lerner, Gerda, ed. 1972.Black Women in White America: A Documentary History.N e w
York:Vintage.
Lindsay , Beverly , ed. 1980.Comparative Perspectives of Third World Women: The Impact
of Race, Sex, and Class. New York: Praeger.
Loewenberg, Bert J., and Ruth Bogin, eds. 1976.Black Women in Nineteenth-Century
American Life. University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press.
Lorde, Audre. 1982. Zami,A New Spelling of My Name. Trumansberg, NY: Crossing
Press.
———. 1984. Sister Outsider. Trumansberg, NY: Crossing Press.
Lubiano, Wahneema. 1992. “Black Ladies, Welfare Queens, and State Minstrels:
Ideological War by Narrative Means.” In Race-ing Justice, En-Gendering Power, ed.
Toni Morrison, 323–63. New York: Pantheon.
———. 1997. “Black Nationalism and Black Common Sense: Policing Ourselves.”
In The House That Race Built: Black Americans, U.S. T errain,ed. Wahneema Lubiano,
232–52. New York: Pantheon.
315REFERENCES


--- PAGE 333 ---
MacMillan, Terry . 1992.Waiting to Exhale. New York:Viking.
———. 1996. How Stella Got Her Groove Back. New York:Viking.
Madhubuti, Haki R, ed. 1990. Confusion by Any Other Name: Essays Exploring the
Negative Impact of the Blackman’s Guide to Understanding the Blackwoman. Chicago:
Third World Press.
Mannheim, Karl. 1936. Ideology and Utopia. New York: Harcourt, Brace & World.
Marable, Manning. 1983. “Grounding with My Sisters: Patriarchy and the
Exploitation of Black Women.” In How Capitalism Underdeveloped Black America,
69–104. Boston: South End Press.
Marks, Carole. 1989. Farewell, We’re Good and Gone: The Great Black Migration.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Marshall, Annecka. 1994. “Sensuous Sapphires: A Study of the Social Construction of
Black Female Sexuality .” In Researching Women’s Lives from a Feminist Perspective,ed.
Mary Maynard and June Purvis, 106–24. London: Taylor and Francis.
Marshall, Paule. 1959. Brown Girl, Brownstones. New York: Avon.
———. 1969. The Chosen Place, the Timeless People. New York:Vintage.
Martin, Elmer, and Joanne Mitchell Martin. 1978. The Black Extended Family.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Martin, William G. 1984. “Beyond the Peasant to Proletarian Debate: African
Household Formation in South Africa.” In Households and the World-Economy, ed.
Joan Smith, Immanuel Wallerstein and Hans-Deiter Evers, 151–67. Beverly Hills, CA:
Sage.
Massey , Douglas S., and Nancy A. Denton. 1993.American Apartheid: Segregation and
the Making of the Underclass. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
McClaurin-Allen, Irma. 1989. “Incongruities: Dissonance and Contradiction in the
Life of a Black Middle-Class Woman.” Amherst: University of Massachusetts,
Department of Anthropology .
McClintock, Anne. 1995. Imperial Leather: Race, Gender and Sexuality in the Colonial
Conquest. New York: Routledge.
McIntosh, Peggy . 1988.White Privilege and Male Privilege: A Personal Account of
Coming to See Correspondences through Work in Women’s Studies. Working Paper No.
189. Wellesley , MA: Center for Research on Women, Wellesley College.
McKay , Nellie. 1992. “Remembering Anita Hill and Clarence Thomas: What Really
Happened When One Black Woman Spoke Out.” In Race-ing Justice, En-gendering
Power, ed. Toni Morrison, 269–89. New York: Pantheon.
———, Patricia Hill Collins, Mae Henderson, and June Jordan. 1991. “The State of
the Art.”Women’s Review of Books8 (February): 23–26.
McLaughlin, Andree Nicola. 1995. “The Impact of the Black Consciousness and
Women’s Movements on Black Women’s Identity: Intercontinental Empowerment.”
In Connecting Across Cultures and Continents: Black Women Speak Out on Identity, Race
and Development, ed. Achola O. Pala, 71–84. New York: United Nations Development
Fund for Women.
McNall, Scott G. 1983. “Pornography: The Structure of Domination and the Mode of
Reproduction.” In Current Perspectives in Social Theory, Volume 4,ed. Scott McNall,
181–203. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
316 REFERENCES


--- PAGE 334 ---
317REFERENCES
Mencher, Joan P ,. and Anne Okongwu. 1993. “Introduction.” In Where Did All the
Men Go? Female-Headed / Female-Supported Households in Cross-Cultural
Perspective, ed. J. P . Mencher and A. Okongwu, 1–11. Boulder: Westview Press.
Miles, Angela. 1998. “North American Feminisms/Global Feminisms: Contradictory
or Complementary?” In Sisterhood, Feminisms, and Power: From Africa to the Diaspora,
ed. Obioma Nnaemeka, 163–82. Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press.
Mills, C. Wright. 1959.The Sociological Imagination. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Mirza, Heidi Safia, ed. 1997. Black British Feminism: A Reader. New York: Routledge.
Mitchell, Henry H., and Nicholas Cooper Lewter. 1986. Soul Theology: The Heart of
American Black Culture. San Francisco: Harper and Row.
Momsen, Janet H., ed. 1993. Women and Change in the Caribbean: A Pan Caribbean
Perspective. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Moody , Ann. 1968.Coming of Age in Mississippi. New York: Dell.
Moore, Lisa C., ed. 1997. Does Your Mama Know? An Anthology of Black Lesbian
Coming Out Stories. Decatur: Red Bone Press.
Moraga, Cherrie, and Gloria Anzaldua, eds. 1981. This Bridge Called My Back:
Writings by Radical Women of Color. Watertown, MA: Persephone Press.
Morrison, Toni. 1970.The Bluest Eye. New York: Pocket Books.
———. 1974. Sula. New York: Random House.
———. 1987. Beloved. New York: Random House.
———, ed. 1992. Race-ing Justice, En-Gendering Power. New York: Pantheon.
Morton, Patricia. 1991. Disfigured Images: The Historical Assault on Afro–American
Women. New York: Praeger.
Moses,Yolanda T. 1989.Black Women in Academe: Issues and Strategies. Project on the
Status  and Education of Women. Washington, D.C.: American Association of
American Colleges.
Moulton, Janice. 1983. “A Paradigm of Philosophy: The Adversary Method.” In
Discovering Reality, ed. Sandra Harding and Merrill B. Hintikka, 149–64. Boston: D.
Reidel.
Moynihan, Daniel Patrick. 1965. The Negro Family: The Case for National Action.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
Mueller, Carol. 1990. “Ella Baker and the Origins of `Participatory Democracy .’ ” In
Women in the Civil Rights Movement: Trailblazers and T orchbearers, 1941–1965,ed.
Vicki L. Crawford, Jacqueline Anne Rouse, and Barbara Woods, 51–70. Bloomington:
Indiana University Press.
Mulkay , Michael. 1979.Science and the Sociology of Knowledge . Boston: Unwin
Hyman.
Mullings, Leith. 1997. On Our Own T erms: Race, Class, and Gender in the Lives of
African American Women. New York: Routledge.
Murray , Pauli. 1970. “The Liberation of Black Women.” In Voices of the New
Feminism, ed. Mary Lou Thompson, 87–102. Boston: Beacon.
———. 1987. Song in a Weary Throat: An American Pilgrimage. New York: Harper
and Row.


--- PAGE 335 ---
Myers, Lena Wright. 1980. Black Women: Do They Cope Better? Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall.
Naples, Nancy A. 1991. “ ‘Just What Needed to Be Done’: The Political Practice of
Women Community Workers in Low-Income Neighborhoods.”Gender and Society 5
(4): 478–94.
———. 1996. “Activist Mothering: Cross-Generational Continuity in the
Community Work of Women from Low-Income Urban Neighborhoods.” In Race,
Class, and Gender: Common Bonds, Different Voices, ed. Esther Ngan-Ling Chow,
Doris Wilkinson, and Maxine Baca Zinn, 223–45. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Nash, June, and Maria Patricia Fernandez-Kelly , eds. 1983.Women, Men and the
International Division of Labor. Albany: State University of New York.
Naylor, Gloria. 1980.The Women of Brewster Place. New York: Penguin.
———. 1988. Mama Day. New York:Vintage.
Neely , Barbara. 1992.Blanche on the Lam. New York: Penguin.
Neverdon-Morton, Cynthia. 1989. Afro-American Women of the South and the
Advancement of the Race, 1895–1925. Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press.
Nicola-McLaughlin, Andree, and Zula Chandler. 1988. “Urban Politics in the Higher
Education of Black Women: A Case Study .” In Women and the Politics of Empowerment,
ed. Ann Bookman and Sandra Morgen, 180–201. Philadelphia: Temple University
Press.
Nightingale, Carl Husemoller. 1993. On the Edge: A History of Poor Black Children
and Their American Dreams. New York: Basic Books.
Nnaemeka, Obioma. 1998a. “Introduction: Reading the Rainbow.” In Sisterhood,
Feminisms, and Power: From Africa to the Diaspora, ed. Obioma Nnaemeka, 1–38.
Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press.
———. 1998b. “This Women’s Studies Business: Beyond Politics and History .” In
Sisterhood, Feminisms, and Power: From Africa to the Diaspora, ed. Obioma Nnaemeka,
351–86. Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press.
Oliver, Melvin L., and Thomas M. Shapiro. 1995.Black Wealth/ White Wealth: A New
Perspective on Racial Inequality. New York: Routledge.
Omi, Michael, and Howard Winant. 1994.Racial Formation in the United States: From
the 1960s to the 1990s, Second Edition . New York: Routledge.
Omolade, Barbara. 1994. The Rising Song of African American Women. New York:
Routledge.
O’Neale, Sondra. 1986. “Inhibiting Midwives, Usurping Creators: The Struggling
Emergence of Black Women in American Fiction.” In Feminist Studies/Critical Studies,
ed. Teresa de Lauretis, 139–56. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Oppong, Christine. 1982. “Family Structure and Women’s Reproductive and
Productive Roles: Some Conceptual and Methodological Issues.” In Women’s Roles
and Population Trends in the Third World,ed. Richard Anker, Mayra Buvinic, and
Nadia H.Youssef, 133–50. London: Croom Helm.
Page, Clarence, ed. 1986.A Foot in Each World: Essays and Articles by Leanita
McClain. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
Painter, Nell. 1993. “Sojourner Truth.” In Black Women in the United States: An
318 REFERENCES


--- PAGE 336 ---
Historical Encyclopedia, ed. Darlene Clark Hine, Elsa Barkley Brown, and Rosalyn
Terborg-Penn, 1172–76. New York: Carlson.
Pala, Achola O. 1995. “Introduction.”In Connecting Across Cultures and Continents:
Black Women Speak Out on Identity, Race and Development, ed. Achola O. Pala, 3–10.
New York: United Nations Development Fund for Women.
Paris, Peter J. 1995. The Spirituality of African Peoples: The Search for a Common
Moral Discourse. Minneapolis: Fortress.
Parker, Bettye J. 1979. “Mississippi Mothers: Roots.” In Sturdy Black Bridges, ed.
Rosann Bell, Bettye Parker, and Beverly Guy-Sheftall, 263–81. Garden City , NY:
Anchor.
Perkins, Linda M. 1982. “Heed Life’s Demands: The Educational Philosophy of Fanny
Jackson Coppin.” Journal of Negro Education 51 (3): 181–90.
———. 1983. “The Impact of the ‘Cult of True Womanhood’ on the Education of
Black Women.”Journal of Social Issues 39 (3): 17–28.
Perry , Imani. 1995. “It’s My Thang and I’ll Swing It the Way That I Feel!” In Gender,
Race and Class in Media, ed. Gail Dines and Jean Humez, 524–30. Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.
Petry , Ann. 1946.The Street. Boston: Beacon.
Quadagno, Jill. 1994. The Color of Welfare: How Racism Undermined the War on
Poverty. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Radford-Hill, Sheila. 1986. “Considering Feminism as a Model for Social Change.”
In Feminist Studies/Critical Studies, ed. Teresa de Lauretis, 157–72. Bloomington:
Indiana University Press.
Ransby , Barbara, and Tracye Matthews. 1993. “Black Popular Culture and the
Transcendence of Patriarchial Illusions.” Race and Class 35 (1): 57–68.
Rapp, Rayna. 1982. “Family and Class in Contemporary America: Notes toward an
Understanding of Ideology .” In Rethinking the Family, ed. Barrie Thorne and Marilyn
Yalom, 168–87. New York: Longman.
Reagon, Bernice Johnson. 1983. “Coalition Politics: Turning the Century .” In Home
Girls—A Black Feminist Anthology , ed. Barbara Smith, 356–68. New York: Kitchen
Table Press.
———. 1987. “African Diaspora Women: The Making of Cultural Workers.” In
Women in Africa and the African Diaspora, ed. Rosalyn Terborg-Penn, Sharon Harley ,
and Andrea Benton Rushing, 167–80. Washington, D.C.: Howard University Press.
Richards, Dona. 1980. “European Mythology: The Ideology of ‘Progress.’ ” In
Contemporary Black Thought, ed. Molefi Kete Asante and Abdulai S.Vandi, 59–79.
Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
———. 1990. “The Implications of African–American Spirituality .” In African
Culture: The Rhythms of Unity, ed. Molefi Kete Asante and Kariamu Welsh Asante,
207–31. Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press.
Richardson, Diane. 1996. “Heterosexuality and Social Theory .” In Theorising
Heterosexuality, ed. Diane Richardson, 1–20. Philadelphia: Open University Press.
Richardson, Marilyn, ed. 1987. Maria W . Stewart, America’s First Black Woman
Political Writer. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
319REFERENCES


--- PAGE 337 ---
320 REFERENCES
Richie, Beth E. 1996. Compelled to Crime: The Gender Entrapment of Battered Black
Women. New York: Routledge.
Rights of Women: A Guide to the Most Important United Nations Treaties on Women’s
Human Rights. 1998. New York: International Women’s Tribune Centre.
Rimer, Sara. 1998. “An Arts Leader for Whom ‘Anything Is Possible.’ ”New York
Times, December 28, A16.
Roberts, Dorothy . 1997.Killing the Black Body: Race, Reproduction, and the
Meaning of Liberty. New York: Pantheon.
Rodríguez, Clara E. 1994. “Challenging Racial Hegemony: Puerto Ricans in the
United States.” In Race, ed. Steven Gregory and Roger Sanjek, 131–75. New
Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Rollins, Judith. 1985. Between Women, Domestics and Their Employers. Philadelphia:
Temple University Press.
Rose, Tricia. 1994.Black Noise: Rap Music and Black Culture in Contemporary
America. Hanover, NH: Wesleyan University Press.
Russell, Diane E. H. 1993. Against Pornography: The Evidence of Harm. Berkeley:
Russell Publications.
Russell, Karen K. 1987. “Growing Up with Privilege and Prejudice.” New York
Times Magazine, June 14, 22–28.
Russell, Michele. 1982. “Slave Codes and Liner Notes.” In But Some of Us Are
Brave, ed. Gloria T. Hull, Patricia Bell Scott, and Barbara Smith, 129–40. Old
Westbury , NY: Feminist Press.
Sacks, Karen Brodkin. 1984. “Computers, Ward Secretaries, and a Walkout in a
Southern Hospital.” In My Troubles Are Going to Have Trouble with Me,ed. Karen
Sacks and Dorothy Remy , 173–90. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
———. 1988. “Gender and Grassroots Leadership.” In Women and the Politics of
Empowerment, ed. Ann Bookman and Sandra Morgen, 77–94. Philadelphia: Temple
University Press.
Said, Edward W . 1993.Culture and Imperialism. New York: Knopf.
Salt ’n Pepa. 1993.Very Necessary. New York: London Records.
Sanders, Cheryl J. 1995. Empowerment Ethics for a Liberated People: A Path to
African American Social Transformation. Minneapolis: Fortress.
Scales-Trent, Judy . 1989. “Black Women and the Constitution: Finding Our Place,
Asserting Our Rights.” Harvard Civil Rights – Civil Liberties Law Review 24
(Winter): 9–43.
Schroedel, Jean Reith. 1985. Alone in a Crowd: Women in the Trades T ell Their
Stories. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Scott, James C. 1985. Weapons of the Weak: Everyday Forms of Peasant Resistance.
New Haven, CT:Yale University Press.
Segrest, Mab. 1994. Memoir of a Race Traitor. Boston: South End Press.
Shange, Ntozake. 1975. For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide/When the
Rainbow Is Enuf. New York: Macmillan.
Shaw, Stephanie J. 1996.What a Woman Ought to Be and to Do: Black Professional
Women Workers During the Jim Crow Era. Chicago: University of Chicago.


--- PAGE 338 ---
321REFERENCES
She’s Gotta Have It. 1986. Directed by Spike Lee. 40 Acres and a Mule Filmworks.
Shockley , Ann Allen. 1974.Loving Her. Tallahassee, FL: Naiad Press.
———. 1983. “The Black Lesbian in American Literature: An Overview.” In Home
Girls: A Black Feminist Anthology, ed. Barbara Smith, 83–93. New York: Kitchen Table
Press.
Sidran, Ben. 1971. Black T alk. New York: Da Capo Press.
Simone, Nina. 1985. Backlash. Portugal: Movieplay Portuguesa Recording.
Simonsen, Thordis, ed. 1986.You May Plow Here: The Narrative of Sara Brooks.N e w
York: Touchstone.
Smith, Barbara. 1982a. “Racism and Women’s Studies.” In But Some of Us Are Brave,
ed. Gloria T. Hull, Patricia Bell Scott, and Barbara Smith, 48–51. Old Westbury , NY:
Feminist Press.
———. 1982b. “Toward a Black Feminist Criticism.” In But Some of Us Are Brave,
ed. Gloria T. Hull, Patricia Bell Scott, and Barbara Smith, 157–75. Old Westbury , NY:
Feminist Press.
———. 1983. “Introduction.” In Home Girls: A Black Feminist Anthology, ed. Barbara
Smith, xix–lvi. New York: Kitchen Table Press.
———. 1998. The Truth That Never Hurts: Writings on Race, Gender, and Freedom.
New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.
———, and Beverly Smith. 1981. “Across the Kitchen Table: A Sister-to-Sister
Dialogue.” In This Bridge Called My Back: Writings by Radical Women of Color, ed.
Cherrie Moraga and Gloria Anzaldua, 113–27. Watertown, MA: Persephone Press.
Smith, Beverly . 1983. “The Wedding.” In Home Girls: A Black Feminist Anthology, ed.
Barbara Smith, 171–76. New York: Kitchen Table Press.
Smith, Dorothy . 1987.The Everyday World as Problematic. Boston: Northeastern
University Press.
Smitherman, Geneva. 1977. T alkin and T estifyin: The Language of Black America.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
———, ed. 1995. African American Women Speak Out on Anita Hill and Clarence
Thomas. Detroit: Wayne State University Press.
———. 1996. “A Womanist Looks at the Million Man March.” In Million Man
March / Day of Absence, ed. Haki R. Madhubuti and Maulana Karenga, 104–107.
Chicago: Third World Press.
Sobel, Mechal. 1979. Trabelin’ On: The Slave Journey to an Afro-Baptist Faith.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Soul Food. 1997. Directed by George Tillman. Edmonds Entertainment and Fo 2000
Pictures.
Souljah, Sister. 1994.No Disrespect. New York: Random House.
Spelman, Elizabeth V . 1988.Inessential Woman: Problems of Exclusion in Feminist
Thought. Boston: Beacon.
Squires, Gregory D. 1994. Capital and Communities in Black and White: The
Intersections of Race, Class, and Uneven Development. Albany: State University of New
York Press.


--- PAGE 339 ---
Stack, Carol D. 1974. All Our Kin: Strategies for Survival in a Black Community .N e w
York: Harper and Row.
Staples, Robert. 1979. “The Myth of Black Macho: A Response to Angry Black
Feminists.”Black Scholar 10 (6): 24–33.
Steady , Filomina Chioma. 1981. “The Black Woman Cross-Culturally: An Overview.”
In The Black Woman Cross-Culturally,ed. Filomina Chioma Steady , 7–42. Cambridge,
MA: Schenkman.
———. 1987. “African Feminism: A Worldwide Perspective.” In Women in Africa
and the African Diaspora, ed. Rosalyn Terborg-Penn, Sharon Harley , and Andrea
Benton Rushing, 3–24. Washington, D.C.: Howard University Press.
Sterling, Dorothy , ed. 1984.We Are Your Sisters: Black Women in the Nineteenth
Century. New York: W . W . Norton.
St. Jean,Yanick, and Joe R. Feagin. 1998. Double Burden: Black Women and Everyday
Racism. Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe.
Sudarkasa, Niara. 1981a. “Female Employment and Family Organization in West
Africa.” In The Black Woman Cross-Culturally,ed. Filomina Chioma Steady , 49–64.
Cambridge, MA: Schenkman.
———. 1981b. “Interpreting the African Heritage in Afro-American Family
Organization.” In Black Families, ed. Harriette Pipes McAdoo, 37–53. Beverly Hills,
CA: Sage.
Sweet Honey in the Rock. 1985. Feel Something Drawing Me On. Chicago: Flying
Fish Records.
Takagi, Dana Y. 1996. “Maiden Voyage: Excursion into Sexuality and Identity Politics
in Asian America.” In Asian American Sexualities: Dimensions of the Gay and Lesbian
Experience, ed. Russell Leong, 21–35. New York: Routledge.
Takaki, Ronald. 1993. A Different Mirror: A History of Multicultural America. Boston:
Little, Brown.
Tanner, Nancy . 1974. “Matrifocality in Indonesia and Africa and among Black
Americans.” In Woman, Culture, and Society, ed. Michelle Z. Rosaldo and Louise
Lamphere, 129–56. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Tate, Claudia, ed. 1983.Black Women Writers at Work. New York: Continuum
Publishing.
Tate, Sonsyrea. 1997.Little X: Growing Up in the Nation of Islam. San Francisco:
HarperSanFrancisco.
Terborg-Penn, Rosalyn. 1985. “Survival Strategies among African–American Women
Workers: Continuing Process.” In Women, Work and Protest: A Century of U.S.
Women’s Labor History, ed. Ruth Milkman, 139–55. Boston: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
———. 1986. “Black Women in Resistance: A Cross-Cultural Perspective.” In
Resistance: Studies in African, Caribbean and Afro-American History, ed. Gary Y.
Okhiro, 188–209. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press.
Terrelonge, Pauline. 1984. “Feminist Consciousness and Black Women.” In Women: A
Feminist Perspective, 3d ed., ed. Jo Freeman, 557–67. Palo Alto, CA: Mayfield.
Thiam, Awa. 1978.Black Sisters, Speak Out. Feminism and Oppression in Black Africa.
London: Pluto Press.
322 REFERENCES


--- PAGE 340 ---
323REFERENCES
Thompson, Robert Farris. 1983. Flash of the Spirit: African and Afro-American Art
and Philosophy. New York:Vintage.
Thompson-Cager, Chezia. 1989. “Ntozake Shange’s Sassafras, Cypress and Indigo:
Resistance and Mythical Women of Power.”NWSA Journal 1 (4): 589–601.
Thorne, Barrie. 1992. “Feminism and the Family: Two Decades of Thought.” In
Rethinking the Family: Some Feminist Questions, ed. Barrie Thorne and Marilyn Yalom,
3–30. Boston: Northeastern University Press.
Torgovnick, Marianna. 1990.Gone Primitive: Savage Intellects, Modern Lives. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Troester, Rosalie Riegle. 1984. “Turbulence and Tenderness: Mothers, Daughters, and
‘Othermothers’ in Paule Marshall’s Brown Girl, Brownstones.” Sage: A Scholarly
Journal on Black Women 1 (2): 13–16.
Tuan,Yi–Fu. 1984. Dominance and Affection: The Making of Pets. New Haven, CT:Yale
University Press.
2 Live Crew. 1995. “Hoochie Mama.” Friday Original Soundtrack: Priority Records.
Van Dijk, Teun A. 1993.Elite Discourse and Racism. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Vanneman, Reeve, and Lynn Weber Cannon. 1987.The American Perception of Class.
Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Wade-Gayles, Gloria. 1984. “The Truths of Our Mother’s Lives: Mother-Daughter
Relationships in Black Women’s Fiction.”Sage: A Scholarly Journal on Black Women 1
(2): 8–12.
———. 1996. Rooted Against the Wind. Boston: Beacon.
Wahlman, Maude Southwell, and John Scully . 1983. “Aesthetic Principles of Afro-
American Quilts.” In Afro-American Folk Arts and Crafts, ed. William Ferris, 79–97.
Boston: G. K. Hall.
Walker, Alice. 1970.The Third Life of Grange Copeland. New York: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich.
———. 1976. Meridian. New York: Pocket Books.
———. 1977. “Zora Neale Hurston: A Cautionary Tale and a Partisan View.”
Foreword to Zora Neale Hurston: A Literary Biography, by Robert Hemenway , xi–xviii.
Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
———, ed. 1979a. I Love Myself When I Am Laughing, And Then Again When I Am
Looking Mean and Impressive: A Zora Neale Hurston Reader. Old Westbury , NY:
Feminist Press.
———. 1979b. “One Child of One’s Own: A Meaningful Digression Within the
Work(s).”Ms 8 (August): 47–50, 72–75.
———. 1981. “Coming Apart.” In You Can’t Keep a Good Woman Down, 41–53.
New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
———. 1982. The Color Purple. New York: Washington Square Press.
———. 1983. In Search of Our Mother’s Gardens. New York: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich.
———. 1988. Living by the Word. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Walker, Margaret. 1966.Jubilee. New York: Bantam.


--- PAGE 341 ---
Wallace, Michele. 1978.Black Macho and the Myth of the Superwoman . New York:
Dial Press.
———. 1990. Invisibility Blues: From Pop to Theory. New York:Verso.
Walton, Ortiz M. 1971. “Comparative Analysis of the African and Western
Aesthetics.” In The Black Aesthetic, ed. Addison Gayle, 154–64. Garden City , NY:
Doubleday .
Washington, Mary Helen, ed. 1975. Black-Eyed Susans: Classic Stories by and about
Black Women. Garden City , NY: Anchor.
———, ed. 1980. Midnight Birds. Garden City , NY: Anchor.
———. 1982. “Teaching Black-Eyed Susans: An Approach to the Study of Black
Women Writers.” In But Some of Us Are Brave, ed. Gloria T. Hull, Patricia Bell Scott,
and Barbara Smith, 208–17. Old Westbury , NY: Feminist Press.
———. 1984. “I Sign My Mother’s Name: Alice Walker, Dorothy West and Paule
Marshall.” In Mothering the Mind: Twelve Studies of Writers and Their Silent Partners,
ed. Ruth Perry and Martine Watson Broronley , 143–63. New York: Holmes & Meier.
———, ed. 1987. Invented Lives: Narratives of Black Women 1860–1960. Garden
City , NY: Anchor.
Wattleton, Faye. 1996.Life On the Line. New York: Ballantine.
Webber, Thomas L. 1978.Deep Like the Rivers. New York: W . W . Norton.
Weems, Renita. 1984. “ ‘Hush. Mama’s Gotta Go Bye Bye’: A Personal Narrative.”
Sage: A Scholarly Journal on Black Women 1 (2): 25–28.
Wekker, Gloria. 1997. “One Finger Does Not Drink Okra Soup: Afro-Surinamese
Women and Critical Agency .” In Feminist Genealogies, Colonial Legacies, Democratic
Futures, ed. M. Jacqui Alexander and Chandra Talpade Mohanty , 330–52. New York:
Routledge.
Wells, Julia. 1998. “Maternal Politics in Organizing Black South African Women: The
Historical Lessons.” In Sisterhood, Feminisms, and Power: From Africa to the Diaspora,
ed. Obioma Nnaemeka, 251–62. Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press.
West, Cheryl. 1987. “Lesbian Daughter.”Sage: A Scholarly Journal on Black Women
4(2): 42–44.
West, Cornel. 1977–78. “Philosophy and the Afro-American Experience.”
Philosophical Forum 9 (2–3): 117–48.
———. 1993. Race Matters. Boston: Beacon.
West, Dorothy . 1948.The Living Is Easy. New York: Arno Press/New York Times.
White, Deborah Gray . 1985.Ar’n’t I a Woman? Female Slaves in the Plantation South.
New York: W . W . Norton.
White, E. Frances. 1984. “Listening to the Voices of Black Feminism.”Radical
America 18 (2–3): 7–25.
———. 1990. “Africa on My Mind: Gender, Counter Discourse and African-
American Nationalism.” Journal of Women’s History2 (Spring): 73–97.
White, Evelyn. 1985. Chain Chain Change. For Black Women Dealing with Physical
and Emotional Abuse. Seattle: Seal Press.
324 REFERENCES


--- PAGE 342 ---
———, ed. 1994. The Black Women’s Health Book: Speaking for Ourselves. Seattle: Seal
Press.
Williams, Fannie Barrier. 1987. “The Colored Girl.” In Invented Lives: Narratives of
Black Women 1860–1960, ed. Mary Helen Washington, 150–59. Garden City , NY:
Anchor.
Williams, Patricia J. 1991. The Alchemy of Race and Rights: Diary of a Law Professor .
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
———. 1995. The Rooster’s Egg: On the Persistence of Prejudice. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Williams, Rhonda. 1997. “Living at the Crossroads: Explorations in Race,
Nationality , Sexuality , and Gender.” In The House That Race Built: Black Americans,
U.S. T errain, ed. Wahneema Lubiano, 136–56. New York: Pantheon.
Williams, Sherley A. 1979. “The Blues Roots of Afro-American Poetry .” In Chant of
Saints: A Gathering of Afro-American Literature, Art and Scholarship, ed. Michael S.
Harper and Robert B. Steptoe, 123–35. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
———. 1986. Dessa Rose. New York: William Morrow.
Williams, Shirley . 1990. “Some Implications of Womanist Theory .” In Reading Black,
Reading Feminist: A Critical Anthology, ed. Henry Louis Gates, 68–75. New York:
Meridian.
———. 1992. “Two Words on Music: Black Community .” In Black Popular Culture,
ed. Michele Wallace and Gina Dent, 164–72. Seattle: Bay Press.
Wilson, William Julius. 1987.The Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner City, the Underclass,
and Public Policy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
———. 1996. When Work Disappears: The World of the New Urban Poor.N e w  Y o r k :
Vintage.
Yuval-Davis, Nira. 1997.Gender and Nation. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Zinn, Maxine Baca. 1989. “Family , Race, and Poverty in the Eighties.”Signs 14(4):
856–74.
———, Lynn Weber Cannon, Elizabeth Higginbotham, and Bonnie Thornton Dill.
1986. “The Costs of Exclusionary Practices in Women’s Studies.”Signs 11 (2):
290–303.
325REFERENCES


--- PAGE 343 ---
abortion, 195–96
abuse:
battering, 119–20, 158–59;
emotional, 158;
sexual, 123
academy , Black women in, 12, 16–17,
103, 253–56, 267–69, 280–83
activism:
broad-based, 217–18;
complexity of, 203–4;
creating Black female spheres as,
204–16, 220–21;
demands of, 222–25;
education as, 210–16;
institutional transformation as, 204–5,
207, 216–22, 278–79;
as motherhood, 189–195, 208–9,
221–22, 224–25;
as survival, 201–2, 209–16
Adams, Annie, 29–30
affiliations, strategic, 220-21
affirmative action, dismantling of, 234–35
Africana womanism, 236
African-derived ideas:
aesthetic, 168–69;
on cosmology , 10;
on dialog, 260–61;
of family , 49–52, 180–81;
humanist, 263–65;
of motherhood, 174;
in music, 105;
in oral culture, 17, 261;
as resistance, 206–16
African feminists, 3, 31, 193–94, 232,
235-37 
Afrocentrism:
as term, 21;
as theory , 18;
on women, 224
Aidoo, Ama Ata, 3, 42–43, 104, 240–41
AIDS, 85, 197, 237
Aina, Olabisi, 237–38
Alexander, M. Jacqui, 168
aloneness, 160–61
Andersen, Margaret, 6
Angelou, Maya, 90, 102, 116, 146
“animal” image, 138–41, 147, 171
Antrobus, Peggy , 242–44
Ashanti, the, 180
Asian immigrant groups, 286
Aunt Jemima image, 5, 40
autobiography , 96, 102, 116–17, 146
autonomy , gendered, 262
Awkward, Michael, 8
Baker, Ella, 7, 179, 180, 219
Baltimore Afro-American, 109
Bambara,Toni Cade, 94, 102–3
Bartmann, Sarah, 136–37, 139, 141–43,
145, 281
Beale, Frances, 153–54
beauty , standards of, 88–96, 168–69
Beloved (Morrison), 149–50
Bethune, Mary McLeod, 3, 210, 212
Index


--- PAGE 344 ---
327INDEX
Bible tales, 258
binary thinking, 70–72, 130, 245–46
Black English, 261–62, 268–69
“Black Feminist Statement, A” (Combahee
River Collective), 18
Black feminist thought:
development of, 13–17
imagination in, 289–90
as justice project, 37–38, 41–43;
and practice, 29–39;
rationale for, 22–33;
as resistance, 19, 22–25;
as social theory , 32–33, 251–53;
as subjugated knowledge, 251–71;
suppression of, 3–8;
as tradition, 1–3;
in transnational context, 227–49
“Black lady” image, 80–81, 84, 161
Black Macho and the Myth of the
Superwoman(Wallace), 8
Black men:
and children, 174–76, 178, 180;
and emotion, 264–65;
incarceration of, 77, 179;
love and, 151–60;
and matriarch image, 77, 78, 88,
174–76;
reaction to Black feminism, 8, 88,
175, 247;
rape by , 147;
sexuality of, 124–27, 133–34;
under slavery , 49–52, 156;
women’s support for, 86–87;
and work, 53–56, 78
“Black Nativity” (Hughes), 215
Black Panther Party for Self-Defense, 7,
216
Black Womanist Ethics(Cannon), 171–72
Black Women in the United States: An
Historical Encylopedia,1 4
Blanche on the Lam(Neely), 95
“blood,” notion of, 49
Bluest Eye,The (Morrison), 92–95, 103,
104, 146, 158
blues tradition, the, 15–16, 33, 105–9,
111–17, 151–52, 154, 186
bodies, regulating of, 132–48
Bonner, Marita, 98
Bradley , Mamie Till, 194
“breeder” image, 5, 78–79
Brewer, Rose, 60, 244
“Bronx slave market,” 56
Brooks, Gwendolyn, 14, 90–91, 118, 198
Brooks, Sara, 179, 194–95, 224
Brother Marquis, 143–44
Brown, Elaine, 7, 102
Brown, Elsa Barkley , 33, 54–55
Brown Girl, Brownstones(Marshall), 76,
186
Brown v. Board of Education, 278–79
bureaucracies, women in, 280–83
Burroughs, Nannie, 210
call-and-response discourse mode, 261
Campbell, Bebe Moore, 102, 178, 181
Cannon, Katie G., 171, 251
capitalism:
bodies under, 202–3;
children under, 182–83;
and fertility , 50;
mother-child families under, 242–44;
and pornography , 138–40
Carby , Hazel, 6, 14
C a r e y ,L o r e n e ,9 6
caring, ethics of, 262–66
Carniero, Sueli, 273
Carroll, Rebecca, 120
Changes (Aidoo), 104
children:
under capitalism, 182–83;
communal care of, 53–54, 58, 178–83;
men and, 174–76;
mixed race, 165–66, 224
Childress, Alice, 109
Chisholm, Shirley , 116
Chodorow, Nancy , 6
Chosen Place, the Timeless People, The
(Marshall), 94
Christian, Barbara, 6, 14, 145-46
church, the:
epistemology in, 264–66;
motherwork in, 213;
sexism in, 86–87;
women’s role in, 40, 58, 209;
as women’s space, 213–14
citizenship:
as privilege, 246–47;
as right, 277–78
Civil Rights Act of 1964, 58, 278
civil rights movement:
gender discrimination in, 7–8, 58–60;
women’s leadership in, 216–222


--- PAGE 345 ---
328 INDEX
civil society , Black:
African ideas in, 10;
class in, 58–67;
desegregation of, 101;
dialogical practices in, 35, 260–62;
ethics of caring, 264;
gendered spaces in, 55;
othermothers in, 192–94;
women’s role in, 7–8, 86–87, 99–100,
153–54, 224
Clark, Septima, 7, 218–19
class, social:
activism across, 12;
and education, 214–15;
and fertility , 231;
and gender ideology , 53–54;
and images, 74;
and motherhood, 181–82;
in music, 106–9;
recent stratification in, 58–67
coalition building, 37–38, 41–43, 234,
245–49
Cole, Johnetta, 210
Coleman, Willi, 185
collectivity , 17, 30-32, 36, 246
colleges, historically Black, 87
color-blindness, rhetoric of, 279–80
Color Purple, The(Walker), 8, 104, 119,
123, 146, 157–58
Combahee River Collective, 18
“Coming Apart” (Walker), 141;
community;
definitions of, 53–54;
of women, 110–11
Compelled to Crime: The Gender Entrapment
of Battered Black Women(Richie),
119–20 
“connected knowers,” women as, 259
consciousness:
as space of safety , 98–99, 111–21;
as sphere of freedom, 285–86
“Considering Feminism as a Model for
Social Change” (Radford-Hill), 32
Cooper, Anna Julia, 3, 26, 33, 41, 52–53,
209–10
Coppin, Fanny Jackson, 210, 212
Corregidora(Jones), 146
crack cocaine, 79, 178
creativity , 187, 289
Crenshaw, Kimberle, 278–79
“cultural workers,” 206–7, 218
culture:
vs. nature, 70–71;
and power, 284–86
Dash, Julie, 96, 104
daughters, women’s relation to, 76,
183–89, 211
Daughters of the Dust(Dash), 96, 104
Davis, Angela, 18, 147, 227, 279–80
definition:
external, 120;
and identity , 265;
problems of, 21–22, 127–28
Dessa Rose (Williams), 95, 164, 263–64
determinism, biological, 140–41
dialectic of oppression and activism, 3,
12, 22, 101, 290
dialogical practices, 30–39, 260–62
diasporic experience, 29, 206, 227–49,
273, 282
Dill, Bonnie Thornton, 205
disciplinary domain, the, 280–83
domesticity , White models of, 54–55
domestic workers:
deference rituals of, 56–57, 63, 71, 74;
as entrepreneurs, 34;
as mothers, 184–85;
new immigrants as, 40, 79;
as outsiders-within, 10–11, 72–73,
184–85;
resistance by , 204–5;
sexual harrassment of, 54, 56, 146;
urbanization and, 55–58
drugs, 79, 178–81
duCille, Ann, 6, 107–8
Dunbar-Nelson, Alice, 13
Dyson, Michael, 8
Edelman, Marian Wright, 218
education as activism, 210–16
Elaw, Zilpha, 257, 265
elected officials, women as, 217
Emecheta, Buchi, 3
empathy , 263–64
empowerment:
as elusive, 19;
and knowledge, 227–28, 273–74,
286–87;
and love, 171–72;
personal, 117–19;
politics of, 273–90


--- PAGE 346 ---
329INDEX
epistemology:
assumptions in, 18–19, 251–52;
Black feminist, 256–71;
experiential, 255–60;
expression and, 264–65;
vs. methodology , 252–53
erotic power, 150–51 166–70
ethics:
of accountability , 265–66;
African-American, 171–72;
of caring, 262–66;
womanist, 115, 171
Eurocentric thought, 253–56, 267
Eva’s Man (Jones), 94
experiences as criteria of meaning,
255–60, 265–66 
expressiveness, 264–65
family:
and class, 59–67;
extended, 53–54, 59, 101, 176,
178–83;
idealized images of, 47, 151–52;
under slavery , 50–52;
and stereotypes, 87–88;
women’s centrality in, 75, 178, 262;
and work, 46–48, 66
family wage, 53–56, 61
Feagin, Joe, 37
Featherstone, Elena, 90
femininity , White-defined, 27, 75–78,
156–58
feminists, White:
coalition with, 6;
racism of, 5–7, 234;
theory of, 18
fertility , 11–12, 50, 84, 230–31
Fields, Karen, 102
Fields, Mamie Garvin, 102, 190
films by black women, 91, 96, 104, 237
For Colored Girls Who Have Considered
Suicide (Shange), 8, 119, 158
“Four Women” (Simone), 112–13
Franklin, Aretha, 115–17, 120–21, 154,
263
“freak” image, 83–84
freedman’s schools, 211
From Mammies to Militants: Domestics in
Black American Literature(Harris), 73
Garvey , Amy Jacques, 215
Garvey Movement, 215–16
“gendered global apartheid,” 233,
235–36, 239
Gilkes, Cheryl, 191, 213–14, 220–21
Gilligan, Carol, 6
Gilman, Sander, 137
Giovanni, Nikki, 117–18
girls:
as mothers, 76;
sexuality of, 85–86;
studies of, 63–64, 85–86, 120
globalization, economic, 58–60, 76, 79,
222, 242–45
Golden, Maritas, 91, 103, 198
grandmothers, role of, 178–81
Guy , Rosa, 95, 146
hair texture, 89–90
Hamer, Fannie Lou, 43, 192
Hansberry , Lorraine, 76
Harding, Sandra, 6
Harper, Frances Ellen Watkins, 33, 35,
190–91
Harris,Trudier, 69, 73
hegemony:
as domain of power, 283–86;
of racism, 5
Hemmings, Sally , 252, 255
“Here’s Mildred” (Childress), 109
Hernton, Calvin, 8, 155
heterosexism, 125–32, 156, 171
Higginbotham, Evelyn Brooks, 7, 14
Hill, Anita, 124, 126–27, 132, 154
hip hop music, 16, 82–83, 85–86, 154,
155, 168
Holiday , Billie, 107, 117, 263–64
Holloway , Karla 166
Home Girls, A Black Feminist Anthology
(Smith), 37
homophobia, 130–31, 167
“hoochie” image, 81–83, 120, 143–44
“Hoochie Mama” (2 Live Crew), 82–83
Hottentot Venus (See, Bartmann, Sarah)
How Capitalism Undeveloped Black America
(Marable), 8
How Stella Got Her Groove Back
(McMillan), 95
Hudson-Weems, Clenora, 236
Hughes, Langston, 215
human rights law, 239


--- PAGE 347 ---
330 INDEX
189
King, Amanda, 259–60
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 171–72, 218
knowledge:
assessing claims in, 255–62;
and empowerment, 227–28, 273–74;
Eurocentric, 251–56, 267;
gained through oppression, 8–9, 11,
13–17, 255–56;
levels of, 34;
naming of, 21–22;
self-defined, 100;
situated, 19, 255;
subjugated, 251–71
Kuzwayo, Ellen, 3
Ladner, Joyce, 24, 63
leadership, 216–222
Lee, Spike, 148
legal system, struggle in, 278–79
Lemon Swamp and Other Places
(Fields/Fields), 102
lesbians, Black:
images of, 145–46;
oppression of, 28;
relationships of, 167–69;
scholarship by , 13–14;
theory by 125–27
Lewis, Elma, 215
literacy , 4, 34–35, 187, 210–11, 237, 254
literary criticism, 40–41, 71
literature by Black women, 76, 92–96,
102–5, 108–11, 116–19, 146–48,
157–58, 187, 190–91
Living is Easy, The(West), 94, 118
love and trouble tradition, 151–60
Loving Her(Shockley), 76, 94
Lorde, Audre, 13, 18, 73, 104–5, 117,
150, 159
Lubiano, Wahneema, 80, 81
lynching, 147
McIntosh, Peggy , 6
McKay , Nellie, 124
McLain, Leanita, 66
McMillan,Terry , 95–96, 103, 104, 161
McNall, Scott, 140
Madhubuti, Haki, 8
Madison, May , 48
Malcolm X, 141, 224
“Mamas White” (Jones), 165–66
Hurston, Zora Neale, 2, 13, 24, 45,
144–45, 159 262, 267
I Know why the Caged Bird Sings(Angelou),
102, 116, 146,
images, controlling, 5, 69–96, 283–84
imagination, collective, 289–290
incarceration, 77, 79, 177, 179, 281
Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl (Jacobs),
146
individual vs. group:
experience of, 24–25, 28–29;
rights of, 279–80
informal labor market, 62, 79
institutional transformation, 204–5, 207,
216–22
integration, racial, 207–8
intellectuals, Black women as:
history of, 1–4, 15;
not defined by education, 14–17,
33–34;
oral culture and, 17;
practice of, 33–39
interpersonal domain of power, 287–90
intersecting oppressions:
and class, 66–67;
and images, 73, 76;
and power, 274;
and self-definition, 273;
and sexuality , 127–48;
and theory , 8–12, 18, 270;
in transnational context, 227–32,
245–49;
and work, 45–46
Iola Leroy(Harper), 35, 190–91
Jacobs, Harriet, 92, 146, 197–98
James, Stanlie, 179
jezebel image, 5, 81–82, 85–86, 129, 144,
148
job export, 79
Johnson, Anna, 133
“Johnson Girls,The” (Bambara), 103
Jones, Gayl, 94, 146
Jones, Lisa, 143–44, 165–66
Jordan, June, 116, 171–73, 189, 258–59,
261, 268
journey theme, 113
Jubilee (Walker), 95
Kaplan, Elaine Bell, 63–64, 65, 76, 187,


--- PAGE 348 ---
331INDEX
“mule” image, 45, 48, 71, 144
Mules and Men(Hurston), 262
multiculturalism, 23
Murray , Katie, 207
Murray , Pauli, 42, 88, 108
music, 15–16, 82–86, 105–9, 111–17,
151–52, 154, 263–64
Naples, Nancy , 191, 221
National Association for the Advancement
of Colored  People, 58
National Center of Afro-American Artists,
216
nationalism, Black:
and education, 215;
in global context, 30–31;
and integration, 207–8;
sexism in, 42, 88;
in transnational context, 229–32;
women and, 207–9, 215–16
nation as oppressive construct, 229–30,
247
Nation of Islam, 157
Naylor, Gloria, 146
Negro Family, The: The Case for National
Action,7 5
neocolonialism, 236
Nnaemeka, Obioma, 31, 236–37
No Disrespect(Sister Souljah), 16
normal/deviant binary , 83–84
Norplant, 11, 132
obediant servant role, 56
objectification, 70–72, 99–100, 104, 130,
138–39, 255–56
Omolade, Barbara, 21, 40, 60–61, 64–65
“One Child of One’s Own” (Walker), 198
one drop rule, 133
oral culture, 17, 261
Other, the 70–72
othermothers, 178–83, 189–95, 209,
218, 241–42
outsider-within status, 11–13, 38, 72–74,
184–85, 286, 289
Pala, Acola, 206
paradigm vs. epistemology , 252–53
patriarchy:
Black, absence of, 77;
raced experience of, 7
Perkins, Linda, 212
“mammy” image, 5, 40, 65, 72–74, 76,
78, 84
Marable, Manning, 8
marriage, 51, 61, 66, 77
Marshall, Annecka, 156
Marshall, Paule, 76, 94, 186
Martin, Sara, 107
Marxism, 9, 18, 270
“Maternal Politics in Organizing Black
South African Women” (Wells),
193–94
“matriarch” image, 74–78, 84
matrix of domination, 18, 227–28, 245,
274–76, 287
Maud Martha (Brooks), 14, 92–93, 118,
198
Measure of Time, A(Guy), 95, 146
Medgar Evers College struggle
media, access to, 41
Memoir of a Race Traitor(Segrest), 37
Meridian (Walker), 87, 94, 95, 191
methodology , 252–53
middle class, 27–28, 58–60, 65–66, 192
“Middle-Class Black’s Burden,The”
(McLain), 66
migration, 9, 29, 243
Miles, Angela, 239–40
Mills, C. Wright, 289
“mirrors,” new, 166–69, 246
Mirza, Heidi, 3
miscegenation laws, 163
Moody , Ann, 183–84, 188, 194
Morrison,Toni, 3, 92–95, 103, 146,
149-50, 158, 187
mother-child families, 239–45
motherhood:
as activism, 189–95, 208–9, 221–22,
224–25;
Black feminist analysis of, 176–83;
controlling images of, 74–75, 174–76;
as community task, 178–83;
cost of, 188–89;
and daughters, 76, 183–89, 211;
in global context, 239– 45;
meaning of, 195–99;
single women and, 61–64, 67, 76–77;
and sexuality , 83–84;
in slavery and after, 49–54, 74–75;
White women and, 173-74
motherwork, 208–9, 213, 220, 222–23,
241–42


--- PAGE 349 ---
332 INDEX
scientific, 77; 142;
sexualized, 130;
in women’s movement, 234
Radford-Hill, Sheila, 32, 35–36, 88
radicalism:
on left, 287;
vs. reformism, 12, 274–76;
in transnational context, 232–38
Rainey , Ma, 15, 106–8
Raisin in the Sun, A(Hansberry), 76
rape, 26–27, 32, 124, 135–36, 146-48
Reagan administration, 80, 241
Reagon, Bernice Johnson, 206, 208
rearticulation, 32
relationships:
among Black women, 102–5, 170;
interracial, 162–66;
love in, 149–72;
and power, 274, 288
“Remembering Anita Hill and Clarence
Thomas” (McKay), 124
resegregation, 236
resistance, 202–25, 274, 287
revolution, 287
“Respect” (Redding), 115–17
Richardson, Marilyn, 13
Richie, Beth, 119–20
Roe v. Wade, 196
Rollins, Judith, 57
Russell, Karen, 89
Russell, Michele, 106
safe spaces, creation of, 98–102, 110–11,
246
“saints,” women’s self-definition as,
213–14
Salt Eaters, The(Bambara), 94
Salt ‘N’ Pepa, 16, 154, 161
Sanctified Church, 213–14
Sandra (sixth-grader), 26–27
Scott, Gloria, 217–18
segregation:
Black space within, 9–10, 58;
family under, 53–54, 59, 181;
and feminist activism, 30–31;
motherwork vs., 222–23;
oppression under, 4–5;
persistence of, 23, 59–60, 236,
277–78;
sexuality under, 165
Segrest, Mab, 6, 37  
“‘Pet’ Negro System,The” (Hurston),
144–45
Petry , Ann, 118
Plessy v. Ferguson, 53, 277
popular culture, controlling images in,
69–96
pornography , 135–44, 281
positivism, 255–56, 265–66
postmodernism, 6, 18, 203
pots and kettles, symbolic, 1, 2, 4, 290
poverty , 26–27, 59–64, 76, 79–80, 83,
239–41, 286
Powell, Ruth, 217–18
power:
approaches to, 274–76;
in coalitions, 248–49;
culture and, 284–86;
domains of, 203, 276–90;
and epistemology , 253–56;
erotic 150;
historic spheres of, 228–29;
and knowledge, 273–74;
language of, 275–77;
motherhood as, 192–94;
and social theory , 9;
in women’s movement, 234
privatization, 260
pronatalist values, 196
prostitute image, 5, 85
prostitution, 143–46
public assistance, 11
public/private boundary , blurred, 47–52,
134, 208–9
Puerto Ricans, Black, 28
Quayle, Dan, 46–47
Queen Latifah, 16, 154
queer theory , 9
quilt makers, 168–69, 263
race uplift tradition, 211–12, 222
racism:
biological, 202;
camouflaged, 279–80;
demystified, 11;
hegemonic, 5;
images produced by , 69–96;
institutional, 23;
and middle-class Blacks, 27–28;
and pornography , 135–44;
routinized, 206, 288;


--- PAGE 350 ---
333INDEX
motherhood in, 181;
and public/private boundary , 47–52;
rape under, 32, 91–92, 135–38;
reproduction under, 78–79;
resistance to, 217;
shaping of relationships by , 4
Smith, Barbara, 3, 232–33
Smith, Bessie, 15, 107–8
Smith, Beverly , 28
social organization, spheres of, 228–29,
277–78, 280–83, 287–88
social science research, biases of, 85–86,
255–56
“sociological imagination,” 289–90
solidarity , racial, 31, 101, 123, 142,
234–35
South Africa, 3, 193–94, 235–36, 243
Southern Christian Leadership Conference,
7, 218–19
Spelman, Elizabeth, 6
spheres of influence, Black Female,
204–16, 220–21
standpoint theory , 24–25, 269–71
Staples, Robert, 8
Sterling, Ann Fausto, 6
stereotypes, internal, 27
Stewart, Maria W ., 1–3, 13, 27, 40, 116,
290
storytelling, 258–59, 261–62
Street, The(Petry), 118
structural adjustment policies, 240
Sugar in the Raw(Carroll), 120
Sula (Morrison), 103, 187
“superstars,” diva aspirations of, 41
“superstrong Black mother” image,
174–75
surveillance, bureaucratic, 280–83
Sweet Summer(Campbell), 102
symbolic inclusion, 6
2 Live Crew, 82–83, 85, 143–44
“talented tenth,” 15, 36
T aste of Power, A(Brown), 102
Tate, Claudia, 116, 118, 158
teachers, historic role of, 211–16,
267–69
Terrell, Mary Church, 33
Terrelonge, Pauline, 86
Their Eyes Were Watching God(Hurston),
24, 45, 93, 95, 119, 159–60
theory , merger with action, 33–39
self-definition:
and African ideas, 10;
in church, 213–14;
difficulty of, 21–22;
importance of, 112–13;
in literature, 92–96, 102–5, 108–11,
116–19;
as resistance, 97–101;
and respect, 114–17;
and sexuality , 131;
and silence, 125;
under slavery , 51;
of truth, 269–71;
transnational, 246–47
“Sensuous Sapphires:
A Study of the Social Construction of
Black Female Sexuality”(Marshall),156
separatism:
accusations of, 110–11;
vs. autonomy , 37
service occupations:
ghettoization in, 4;
and poverty , 60, 62–64
sexuality:
controlling images of, 81–86, 129–30,
lesbian, 28, 125–27;
and  nationalism, 230–31;
in oppression systems, 123–48, 230;
research on, 85–86;
under segregation, 165;
in slave order, 50–51, 81;
in theory , 18
Shange, Ntozake, 8, 119, 158
Shaw, Stephanie, 14, 189
Shays, Ruth, 261
She’s Gotta Have It(Lee), 148
Shockley , Ann Allen, 76, 94
silence, 98, 123–27, 158–59, 168
Simone, Nina, 112–13
Sister Outsider(Lorde), 18
“sister” role, 49, 102–5
Sister Souljah, 16
skin color, 89–93, 126
Skin Deep: Women Writing on Color, Culture,
and Identity(Featherstone), 90
slavery:
African culture under, 10, 49–52, 261;
gender relations and, 77–78;
images of women produced by , 5, 74,
145;
literacy under, 210–11;


--- PAGE 351 ---
334 INDEX
Thomas, Clarence, 124, 126–27, 141
Till, Emmett, 194
T o Be Young, Gifted and Black(Hansberry),
143
T omorrow’s T omorrow(Ladner), 24, 63
transnational contexts:
absence of organizations in, 236–37;
and activism, 3;
diasporic experience in, 29, 227–49;
nationalism in, 31, 229–32;
politics in, 245–49;
postcolonial, 58, 235–36;
rights activities in, 232;
and social theories, 9, 227–29
transversal politics, 245–49, 270
triple-tiered, black-female work site,
60–61, 63–64
truth:
and multiple perspectives, 38;
self-defined, 269–71
Truth, Sojourner, 3, 14–15, 99, 258
Tuan,Yi-Fu, 139–40, 144
“underclass, Black,” 59,62–64
“Unity” (Latifah), 154
urbanization, 55–58
“Use of the Erotic:The Erotic as Power”
(Lorde), 150
voice, finding, 99–102
Voice from the South, A(Cooper), 210
Voting Rights Act of 1965, 58, 278
voyeuristic mindset, 141–43
Wade-Gayles, Gloria, 166, 185
Waiting to Exhale(McMillan), 95–96,
103, 104, 161
Wakefield, Rosa, 39–40
Walker, Alice:
on class, 61;
and Hurston, 13, 262, 267;
on Ladyhood, 87;
male reactions to, 8;
on motherhood, 191, 197–98;
on outsider-within, 12–13;
on pornography , 141;
on rape, 135;
on truth, 38–39;
on womanist term, 42 
Walker, Margaret, 95
Wallace, Michele, 8, 175, 186
Washington, Mary Helen 13, 14, 93, 94
“watching” role, 97–98
Wattleton, Faye, 217–18
Weems, Renita, 188
“welfare queen” image, 5, 78–81, 84,
241, 255
Wells, Julia, 193–94
Wells-Barnett, Ida B., 3, 24, 33
West, Cheryl, 188–89
West, Cornel, 8
West, Dorothy , 94, 118
What a Woman Ought to Be and Do
(Shaw), 189
“Whatta Man” (Salt ‘N’ Pepa), 154, 161
White, Deborah Gray , 51–52
White, Nancy , 11, 114
White men:
coalition with, 248;
control of knowledge structures, 251-57
“White Men Can’t Count” (Williams),
223–24
Whiteness, 37, 285
White skin privilege, 89–90, 162,164, 257
White women:
different experience of patriarchy , 7;
as employers, 56–57, 63, 71;
and fertility , 231;
and motherhood, 173–74;
relations with Black Women, 163–65;
under slavery , 50–51, 163–64;
and virgin image, 132–34, 145
Williams, Patricia, 21, 223–24, 279
Williams, Sherley Anne, 95, 164, 263–64
Wilson, William Julius, 244
Winfrey , Oprah, 40
wisdom, 256–58
womanhood, dominant ideologies of, 11,
72–74, 77
womanist term, 42
Women, Race and Class(Davis), 18
women’s club movement, 26, 30, 33–35,
40, 214–15
Women’s Tribune Centre, 239
Woods, Dessie, 61
work:
changing conditions of, 40–41, 52–53,
57–58;
gendered wages in, 53–56, 65, 78,
242–43;
in global economy , 240–45;
and intersecting oppressions, 45–46;
and knowledge, 256–60;


--- PAGE 352 ---
in manufacturing, 57–62, 79;
paid vs. unpaid, 46–48;
and poverty , 60–64;
professional, 64–67
working class, 59–64, 78–81, 106–7
worldview, African-American, 10
Zami (Lorde), 13, 104–5
335INDEX


--- PAGE 353 ---



--- PAGE 354 ---


