=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: patrice lumumba exemplry life.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 45
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:10:40.500571
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Google Translate
http://translate.google.com/...us.archive.org%2F7%2Fitems%2FLhistoireDeLaVieDePatriceEmeryLumumba%2FLumumba.pdf[8/14/2011 11:55:56 AM]
 
Translate from: Detect language Translate into: English
 
Page 1
Lumumba, the story of an exemplary life
14/01/2000
Lumumba, who wrested independence but stayed only two
and a half months at the head of Congo, has become a great revolutionary, the
national hero of the Congolese people. Why him? Because it was the
first to understand that the only force capable of achieving
complete independence was that of the great mass of the exploited and
opprimés.Né July 2, 1925 in the country, Katako-Kombe, he
also lived in Kisangani and Kinshasa: he knew the masses of its
people. The story of the heroic struggle of Lumumba is very
known by the Congolese youth. And for good reason: Mobutu, who ruled
the Congo from September 14, 1960, was primarily responsible
the murder of one who was the true father of the Congolese nation.
Here we trace the history of Lumumba from October 10, 1958, date


--- PAGE 2 ---
Google Translate
http://translate.google.com/...us.archive.org%2F7%2Fitems%2FLhistoireDeLaVieDePatriceEmeryLumumba%2FLumumba.pdf[8/14/2011 11:55:56 AM]
the foundation of the Congolese National Movement, until January 17
1961, when he was murdered in Katanga.  We also publish the texts
key produced by Patrice-Emery Lumumba.En following the history of
Lumumba and reading his policy statements, the reader meditate without
often doubt the current political situation. Laurent-Désiré Kabila
not only the continuation of the work of Lumumba, he braved already
died fighting for the cause Lumumbist during this crucial year
1960. Today, the enemies of Lumumba, and they are still there
attacking Kabila with tactics that are little different from
those they used in the months that followed independence.
Colony, a prison for the Congolese
-------------------------------------------------- ----------------------
Page 2
After the period of terror and destruction that characterized the
Mobutism, some are Belgian colonization as a "period
Dior ". Wrongly. The Congo was conquered by King Leopold II by fire and blood.
The colonial power was absolute power and tyranny, based on the
violence and weapons.  Workers were fully exploited for
the colonial capitalist enterprises make fabulous profits.
The conquest: "No prisoners, that the dead"
From 1887 to 1893, Isidore Tobback was the main representative of the State of
Congo Bas-Congo. Here's quíil said in a letter "in March 1888.
For a month, I marched and fought with fifty men, day and
night. Conquered villages were looted and completely destroyed.  I just
to tell the assault and capture of one village to be told
all. So I'll tell you the decision of the village of Kimbanza.  A
collective burst of my second group spreads fear and death in
ranks of the natives threw down their arms to escape more quickly and


--- PAGE 3 ---
Google Translate
http://translate.google.com/...us.archive.org%2F7%2Fitems%2FLhistoireDeLaVieDePatriceEmeryLumumba%2FLumumba.pdf[8/14/2011 11:55:56 AM]
probably because they know that I shoot all those weapons in
hand. Three prisoners were armed lorsquíils were arrested.  Five
minutes later they were killed by firing squad. All the food,
vegetables, chickens, goats were washed away and we left
village in the light of the huts on fire.  So goes the African war. "...
"April 26, 1891. I faced the natives in the vicinity of
the mouth of Lomani. ... I killed eighty people and is much
injured. No quarter, so no prisoners. "
(Excerpt from "ED Morel tegen Leopold II of Kongostaat,  AM
Delathuye ", EPO, 1985, p.11)
A personal dictatorship
Leopold II, King of the Belgians and King of the Congo Free State, wrote on 3
June 1906: "The Congo has been and could be a personal work. But it
is no better right than the right of the author on his own
work, the fruit of his labor.  My rights to the Congo are undivided, they
are the product of my pain and my expenses.  The mode of exercise
public power in the Congo can be noted that the author of the state.
It is he who has legally sovereign, and must necessarily
continue to have one, in the interests of Belgium, all he has
established in Congo. "Mobutu dictatorship was imitating personal
Leopold II, King of the Belgians.
Fully exploited
Page 3
The labor of blacks has been put at the disposal of large
societies through violence and coercion exercised by colonial líEtat.  The
Compagnie du Katanga has received full ownership díun territory díune
area six times that of Belgium.  King Leopold II and a
handful of big capitalists in 1900 founded the Special Committee of
Katanga (CSK) that gets the right díadministrer most of
Katanga, DIY and DIY receive líimpôt organize a police force.


--- PAGE 4 ---
Google Translate
http://translate.google.com/...us.archive.org%2F7%2Fitems%2FLhistoireDeLaVieDePatriceEmeryLumumba%2FLumumba.pdf[8/14/2011 11:55:56 AM]
The CSK is the largest shareholder of líUnion Mining in 1906.  This
company has become one of the largest capitalist
Belgium. In 1924, the deputy governor Moulaert, estimates the annual cost
Mining worker díun líUnion between 8,000 and 9,000 francs, while quíil
reported in 50,000. When the capitalist pays a franc is líouvrier
heavily exploited, the capitalist pockets 6 francs and do nothing.
In the colony, 25,000 white workers earn as much as 1.2 million
black employees.
In September 1925, a regional trustee Kwilu wrote eThe
territorial administrators know how abuses are
Every day more and leave the people no respite, no
freedom. Perhaps we can forgive the servant of feeling invaded
díamertume because the villages are empty at his approach as
líarrivée díun merchant díesclaves.í During the suppression of the revolt
People between the Kwilu and Lutshima in 1931, 4,000 villagers were
massacred. Díenquêter charge on the causes of the revolt, the
Jungers official wrote: EON can say that almost all
cutters fruits are left for Leverville under duress or by
their leaders medalists either directly by the officials and employees of
service territory. How could it be otherwise?  It Niester not a colon
who admit that the natives, while very little about their
missing from their village to go to work five or six days running
the village, leaving six months for their wives and children,
to live in conditions that are abominables.í LíUnion
Mining was founded in 1906 with 10 million Belgian francs.  Between
1950 and 1959, she made a net profit of 31 billion francs.  In 1959
it dominates the Katanga secession organize it in 1960.
Catholic doctrine: the ideological weapon of colonialism
One of the pioneers of military conquest of the Congo, the commander
Michaux said in 1910: "The missionaries are the natural educators
Page 4


--- PAGE 5 ---
Google Translate
http://translate.google.com/...us.archive.org%2F7%2Fitems%2FLhistoireDeLaVieDePatriceEmeryLumumba%2FLumumba.pdf[8/14/2011 11:55:56 AM]
savages. The missionaries will only become our colony
one day extension of the Motherland. "(1)
The President of the CSC, the Belgian Christian trade union, said Henri Pauwels
in 1949 the Catholic doctrine of the settlement to the workers.  Here's what
official text. "We are talking first of the general funds of the right to
colonization. The data is first conquest. In general,
natives have been disenfranchised by the unilateral will of the
colonial power. See the reasons were given for
justify such expropriations. These include acts of violence
committed by natives against those who wanted to establish himself in their
country, their crimes against nature, and their opposition to the prediction of
the Gospel. All these reasons are essentially good to justify
the armed intervention of the countries who feel aggrieved in their rights or
present themselves as the defenders of natural law and divine.  Humanity
can not tolerate that, through ignorance, laziness or neglect,
natural resources that God gave the world to meet the
human needs remain fallow. When territories are poorly managed
by their rightful owners, the other countries who are injured as a result,
have the right to take the place of poor managers and operating
property. It is legitimate that people are forced to settle under the
coercion if necessary, to collaborate in the | CARRYING civilizing they will
beneficiaries. The | CARRYING educator who is for the colonizing nation is
very heavy and expensive. No nation would bear the burden
if there was no profit. Requiring compensation
fair for the services performed as part of the | CARRYING
colonizing makes sense. What about colonized peoples who, through the
Trust that they have benefited, have acquired the capacity to govern
themselves? Can they claim their independence?  A real
contract was concluded between the motherland and the colony.  It would be unfair
one party is deprived of the fruits of a legitimate | CARRYING civilizing
long-term. The national consciousness of a people is submitted,
Indeed, along with separatist aspirations. The homeland must
therefore ensure defuse these aspirations by making timely
necessary concessions. "(2) That the terms in which the Catholic Church
circumstances which for three centuries the slave trade, justified the
colonial rule.
1) Why and how we should settle, Michaux, Brussels, 1910,
pp. 196-197, 2) "Unionism and the colony" by Henri Pauwels, city
The money in the PSC-CVP, Ludo Martens, EPO, pp. 91-94.


--- PAGE 6 ---
Google Translate
http://translate.google.com/...us.archive.org%2F7%2Fitems%2FLhistoireDeLaVieDePatriceEmeryLumumba%2FLumumba.pdf[8/14/2011 11:55:56 AM]
The Story of an exemplary life (I)
Page 5
Learning a revolutionary nationalist
-------------------------------------------------- ----------------------
The driving force behind the struggle for the independence of Congo was established
by workers and the unemployed in cities and peasants in the villages.
They had carried the weight of oppression and exploitation
colonial. In the late fifties, they require a change
radical. They are aware of the current that is sweeping anti-colonialist
Africa since the liberation of China in 1949 and since the beginning of the
independence war in Algeria.
At that time, modern Congolese leaders, the "advanced" are
almost all conciliatory toward the settlers. Lumumba himself wrote
yet in 1956:
"The essential desire of the Congolese elite is to be the 'Belgians' and have
entitled to the same ease and the same rights. "(1) In 1956 still, and Ileo
Ngalula publish the "Manifesto of the African Consciousness."  Both
Men are closely linked to the Catholic Church was the first institution
colonial to prepare the transition to neo-colonialism.  Belgium
beginning to understand that to maintain its economic dominance
and policy on the Congo, must now rely on the Congolese
devoted to Belgian interests.  The manifesto says: "Our desire is that
the emancipation of the Congo is realized in the order and tranquility.  The
Europeans must understand that our legitimate desire
Empowerment is not directed against them. We plan to create a
organization will be legally and in full conformity with the laws. "(2)
October 10, 1958, Ileo, Ngalula, and Lumumba founded the Adoula
Congolese National Movement. It is a party that wants fair vis-à-vis


--- PAGE 7 ---
Google Translate
http://translate.google.com/...us.archive.org%2F7%2Fitems%2FLhistoireDeLaVieDePatriceEmeryLumumba%2FLumumba.pdf[8/14/2011 11:55:56 AM]
Belgium and Congolese groups close to the current Catholic
Liberal and Social Democratic Belgian.
The birth of a revolutionary
From 5 to 13 December 1958, held in Accra, Ghana's capital, a
Pan African Conference history. Ghana, under the direction of
Kwame Nkrumah, was the first black African country to break the chains
of colonialism. It was March 6, 1957. In Accra, Lumumba meets the
African leaders the most experienced and most radical of which
Nkrumah, who became his spiritual father. Lumumba said in Accra "
Despite the boundaries that separate us, we have the same consciousness,
Page 6
the same concerns to make the continent a continent free
happy, free from any colonial rule. We are pleased
to note that this conference has set a goal: the fight against
all internal and external factors that constitute an obstacle to
the emancipation of our country and the unification of Africa.  Among these
factors include colonialism, imperialism, tribalism and
religious separatism, all of which constitutes a serious obstacle to
the emergence of an African society harmonious and fraternal.  "(3) In Accra
Lumumba has ceased to be an "evolved" to become an African nationalist
radical.
On December 28, 58, holds its first meeting Lumumba Policy
Victory Square in Matonge, Kinshasa, in front of over 10,000
people. This is the first time feel the energy boiling Lumumba
mass and an understanding that mass is only one force
capable of achieving the ideal of total independence. But his
companions, Ileo Adoula, Kalonji and Ngalula, do not see it that
ear. They believe that Lumumba became a "dangerous demagogue"
Shortly after this meeting, Lumumba said, "You are all asleep.
You think that independence will be offered on a silver platter,
but it will struggle to get it and I am determined to fight for


--- PAGE 8 ---
Google Translate
http://translate.google.com/...us.archive.org%2F7%2Fitems%2FLhistoireDeLaVieDePatriceEmeryLumumba%2FLumumba.pdf[8/14/2011 11:55:56 AM]
tear our independence. "(4)
The massacres of 4-5 January 1959
January 4, the ABAKO Kasavubu announced a meeting place of the
Victory. It is essential to exceed the success obtained Lumumba,
a week earlier. The ABAKO Lumumba considered as a "
abroad "in the Province of Congo Central!
The ABAKO was the party of Bakongo tribalist and had the advantage of operating
in the most developed and best known of Congo's capital
and its surroundings. The masses of Bas-Congo and Kinshasa were very
revolted against colonial domination.  But this turned ABAKO
Tribal revolt towards objectives.
But the meeting is prohibited by the administration and the case turns
insurgency. The Police Force massacre 300 Congolese, mostly
workers, the unemployed and "irregular", came to Kinshasa without
authorization. Tens of thousands of Congolese have taken part in "
riots ", that is to say open combat for independence. The
colonizer then expels thousands of irregulars to their village
of origin. There, these young rebels tell of mass dared
Page 7
attack the colonialists. In all the villages of Bas-Congo, Kwilu
Kwango and the masses begin to rise, following the example of
heroic fighters of January 4.
Following the "riots" of January 4, Kasavubu was arrested and imprisoned.
But the Belgian government, frightened by the revolutionary struggle, decides
quickly to change tactics. Knowing the weakness of the parties
nationalists, the colonial administration to take short-giving
independence within a short time.  Thus, Belgium will ensure that the
Congo "independent" is ruled by his friends and followers.  The 13


--- PAGE 9 ---
Google Translate
http://translate.google.com/...us.archive.org%2F7%2Fitems%2FLhistoireDeLaVieDePatriceEmeryLumumba%2FLumumba.pdf[8/14/2011 11:55:56 AM]
January 1959, King Baudouin said: "Our resolution is now
lead the Congolese people to independence. "
March 13, Minister Van Hemelryck Kasavubu is free and sends it
Belgium. Van Hemelrijck says Kasavubu agreed with the new
defined policy on January 13.  Kasavubu said: "We ask the
Congolese people to remain calm, to forget the past and prepare for the future
in the spirit of the new policy that led to the Congo
independence. "(5)
The colonial administration had already concluded that the ABAKO,
tribal parties and separatist, could be "tamed."  April 21, facing the
radicalism of the masses that sweeps all the colonial institutions,
Administrator Saintraint indicates a new track: "The situation
General is critical and, in some ways dramatic.
The Authority rejected, can no longer afford to run the country nor to
maintain order. The ABAKO has a detailed plan for establishment of a
new administration. It is better that it proceeds rapidly to
replacement. "(6)
Driven by his tribal spirit, the ABAKO turns his back on the fight
to move towards anti-colonial struggle for "independence" of its
province. On June 21, 1959, Kasavubu requires "the creation of a State
autonomous Republic of Congo Central, whose chairman will be elected by
natives of the Republic. "(7) Thus, many Congolese
born in other provinces are "foreigners" in the capital
their country.
"A pre-revolutionary period"
Page 8
On 1 July 1959, Lumumba is a meeting in front 1,500 people.  It


--- PAGE 10 ---
Google Translate
http://translate.google.com/...us.archive.org%2F7%2Fitems%2FLhistoireDeLaVieDePatriceEmeryLumumba%2FLumumba.pdf[8/14/2011 11:55:56 AM]
began his speech by asking "five minutes of silence in
memory of the Congolese victims of colonialism fell on January 4. "
"It's provocative" claims a senior Belgian.  "This
man is a dangerous demagogue, "say, July 17, 1959, Ileo
Ngalula, Adoula and Kalonji, the leaders "respectable" of the MNC.  (8) They
exclude the MNCS Lumumba Lumumba on which excludes all those "advanced
"Favorable to the maintenance of external domination. This is the first
split in the ranks of "advanced" nationalists: the Lumumbist
want total independence based on the masses,
opportunistic want to "reform" the economic and political system
colonial.
After the split, Victor Nendaka was appointed vice president of MNC-
Lumumba, Jean-Pierre Finant becomes the third person of the party and
a certain Joseph Mobutu became friends with Lumumba
In fact, the "riots" of January 4, have attracted the masses on all
Congolese territory. Throughout the year 1959, campaigns
disobedience to the colonial authorities develop.  There are
frequent confrontations between police and people who
refuses to pay taxes.  Blood flows in Matadi, Mbanza Ngungu
Luozi, Lukula, Jadotville. On August 59, Deputy Governor General Schöller
speaks of "fanatical mass" that is "state of open rebellion."  (9) "
In Lower and Middle Congo, is in pre-
revolutionary. We risk being drawn into a war-like
Algeria. "(10)
The masses, which requires total independence and a radical change
their situation, a growing part of the "advanced" on the left.  They
consist mainly in the Lumumba and the MNC Party
African solidarity and Mulele Gizenga.  They understand that the essence of
colonialism and economic domination as the basis of misfortunes
Congo is the thirst for the benefit of big capitalists.
The "Party of the Negroes Paid"
On the other side, the colonial administration now puts everything in
to create and support parties willing to accept an independent
pure form. There is the National Party of Progress, the PNP Bolyai
Dericoyard and Delvaux, the Congolese National Movement-K, the MNC-K
Kalonji and Ileo, the Confederation of Associations of tribal Katanga,


--- PAGE 11 ---
Google Translate
http://translate.google.com/...us.archive.org%2F7%2Fitems%2FLhistoireDeLaVieDePatriceEmeryLumumba%2FLumumba.pdf[8/14/2011 11:55:56 AM]
Page 9
CONACAT of Tshombe and Munongo, the Party of National Unity, the
PUNA of Bolikango; Bakongo Association, and the ABAKO Kasavubu
Kisolokela and the Union of Mongo, the UNIMO of Bomboko.
In fact, most of the "advanced" are beginning to fear the
radicalism of the masses: they want to "live like white people" and have
be achieved by leaving intact the economic structures of the regime
colonial.
Minister Van der Meersch Ganshof later stated: "
The administration was based on the PNP high hopes.  But the MNC-L
had, in the person of Lumumba, an asset greater than the
PNP. Lumumba was the only one to be proactive. "(11)
Colonialism and "free elections"
End of 1959, Belgium still wants to unilaterally determine
conditions of independence that nothing fundamental will change.
It rejects the claim of the nationalist parties of a conference or
the terms of the immediate independence would be decided in common
agreement between the parties and the Belgian Congo.  And think of Belgium
"Free elections" can give legitimacy to its plots
neocolonial.
On October 7, 1959, the colonial administration announced elections
communal in December. She believes that at this level, the forces pro-
colonialists, including traditional leaders, will win the election.
At the Congress of the MNC-L, held from 23 to 29 October 1959, Lumumba
demand immediate independence and decided to boycott the elections.
When the administration wants to stop Lumumba, clashes between
masses nationalists and gendarmerie are 20 dead.  Governor
Kisangani, Mr. Leroy said, "Lumumba provoked riots
prevent the elections. He received a foreign technical lessons
revolutionary. "(12) Lumumba was imprisoned on October 31.


--- PAGE 12 ---
Google Translate
http://translate.google.com/...us.archive.org%2F7%2Fitems%2FLhistoireDeLaVieDePatriceEmeryLumumba%2FLumumba.pdf[8/14/2011 11:55:56 AM]
Lumumba, who won an unexpected election
In a social climate that is deteriorating rapidly, a Round Table
held in Brussels from January 20 to February 20, 1960.  Under pressure
Congolese delegates, Belgium must release Lumumba happens to the
Round table will be a triumph.  The date of independence is set
June 30.
Page 10
The national elections held May 22, 1960. Belgium is
convinced that the victory of the pro-imperialist parties is ensured through
support of the colonial state, the financial assistance of large companies
Belgian, and with the support of the powerful Catholic Church.
Yet the PNP, the "Party Paid Negroes," as they say in
the time, loses the election, despite the tremendous resources at his
available, despite the virulent campaign of the Catholic Church against the
nationalists.
Nationalists needed hands down.  The MNC-L gets 35 seats in the
House and PSA, with 13 seats, becoming the largest party in the
Province of Leopoldville (Congo Central Kwilu, Kwango and May Lake
Ndombe). No one expected what ABAKO, party renamed
Kinshasa, can be defeated in "his" province by the PSA, the party
the most radical nationalist. The CEREA of Kashamura, with 10 seats, and
Balubakat of the Sendwe with seven, joined the coalition MNC-L and PSA.
The last plot of the colonizer
After the elections, the colonial power continues to plot against
nationalists.


--- PAGE 13 ---
Google Translate
http://translate.google.com/...us.archive.org%2F7%2Fitems%2FLhistoireDeLaVieDePatriceEmeryLumumba%2FLumumba.pdf[8/14/2011 11:55:56 AM]
It commits the ABAKO to develop an anti-nationalist coalition.
June 17, it loads Kasavubu to form the first government
Congolese. Relying primarily on the PNP, the MNC-Kalonji, and
ABAKO of the proposed government Kasavubu does not include
member of the MNC-Lumumba or the PSA-Gizenga!
But did not find majority support for this plot, Belgium
resigned that Lumumba formed the government.  And doubles
efforts to break Lumumba and the nationalist parties.
(1) Congo, land of opportunity, p.29, (2) Chronicle Foreign Policy, vol.
XII, No. 4-6, July-November  1960, p.443-445, (3) The Political Thought of
Lumumba, pl 1-12, (4) Pierre De Vos, Life and Death of Lumumba, p.78-79;
(5) Congo, 1959, p.71-72, (6) 60 Congo, I, p.144, (7) Congo, 1959, p.  81 85;
(8) De Vos, p.138-140, (9) Congo, 1959, p.100; (10) De Vos, p.146, (11)
Congo May-June 1960, p.80, (12) De Vos, p.154;
The Master, the servant and patriot
Page 11
-------------------------------------------------- ----------------------
June 30, 1960 is a special day not only
for the history of Congo, but for the entire history of Africa.  Never
confrontation between the oppressor and the oppressed has been expressed with such
force. Never has an African summarized in so few words for 80 years
terror, exploitation and humiliation. You have to read three speeches
delivered this memorable day.  Three, in fact. As between the Master and
Patriot slipped the man. We must read these words, since
lackey, there are always. And since the Patriots who want to follow the
way of Lumumba are becoming more numerous.
The Master
The King Baudouin: "Not as a conqueror, but of civilization"


--- PAGE 14 ---
Google Translate
http://translate.google.com/...us.archive.org%2F7%2Fitems%2FLhistoireDeLaVieDePatriceEmeryLumumba%2FLumumba.pdf[8/14/2011 11:55:56 AM]
The independence of the Congo is the culmination of the work designed
by the genius of King Leopold II. For 80 years, Belgium has sent
your soil the best of his son, first to deliver the Congo Basin
of the odious slave trade, and then to bring each other
ethnic groups, once enemies.
When Leopold II began the great work being now
coronation, it did not appear to you as a conqueror but
civilization.
Do not compromise the future by hasty reforms, and not replace
agencies not only gives you the Belgium, as you are not
some can do better.
Do not be afraid to turn to us.  We are ready to stay
your side to help you our advice,
Africa and Europe complement each other. I hope that the
Congolese people retain and develop the heritage values
spiritual, moral and religious that we share.
The Lackey
Kasavubu "roots that Christian civilization has advanced in
we "
Sire, Excellencies, My dear compatriots,
Page 12
The dawn of independence rises on a country whose structure
economy is remarkable, well-balanced and well unified.  But
the unfinished state of national consciousness among the population has
raised some alarm that I want to dispel today by reminding
all the progress that has already been acomplis in this area and who are the


--- PAGE 15 ---
Google Translate
http://translate.google.com/...us.archive.org%2F7%2Fitems%2FLhistoireDeLaVieDePatriceEmeryLumumba%2FLumumba.pdf[8/14/2011 11:55:56 AM]
surest guarantee of remaining steps to go.
Belgium had the wisdom not to oppose the tide of history
and perceiving the greatness of the ideal of freedom that animates all hearts
Congolese, she was able to skip the country from the domination
foreign independence.
We will develop across the country that the assimilation of
eighty years of contact with the West brought us good: the
language, law, and finally above the crop.  The contact with civilization
Christian roots and that this civilization has advanced in us
allow the old blood revived to give our events
cultural originality and brilliance all individuals.
Sire, the presence of your Majesty Augustus is a bright and
further evidence of your concern for these populations that
you have loved and protected. They are happy to say
today both their gratitude for the blessings that you and
Your predecessors have provided them and their joy for the
understanding where you met their aspirations.
The Patriot
Lumumba: "Proud of that struggle which was blood, tears and fire.
"
Congolese and Congolese, Freedom fighters now victorious
I salute you on behalf of the Congolese government.
To all of you, our friends who have worked tirelessly with us, I
asked to do this June 30, 1960 shows a date that you
keep indelibly engraved in your hearts, a date which you
proud to teach your children the meaning.
The Congo's independence, no Congolese worthy of the name can not
never forget that the fight it was conquered, a struggle
every day, an ardent and idealistic fight, a struggle in which we


--- PAGE 16 ---
Google Translate
http://translate.google.com/...us.archive.org%2F7%2Fitems%2FLhistoireDeLaVieDePatriceEmeryLumumba%2FLumumba.pdf[8/14/2011 11:55:56 AM]
Page 13
have spared neither our forces or our hardships, nor our suffering or
our blood.
This struggle, which was in tears, fire and blood, we are proud
depths of ourselves, for it was a noble and just struggle,
struggle necessary to end the humiliating slavery which we
was imposed by force.
It was our lot in 80 years of colonial rule, our wounds are too
fresh and too painful still for us to chase them
our memory because we had the exhausting work required
exchange for salaries which did not permit us to eat our fill,
or clothe ourselves, or to house ourselves decently, or to raise our children as
loved ones.
We have known ironies, insults, blows that we had
experience morning, noon and night because we were "niggers."
We experienced the terrible suffering of relegated to opinions
political or religious beliefs; exiles in their own country, their fate
was really worse than death itself.
We have known that there were in the cities of beautiful homes
for whites and crumbling huts for blacks,
Who will forget the last shootings where many of our brothers perished, the cells
which were brutally thrown those who did not want to submit to
regime of injustice, oppression and exploitation.
We who have suffered in our body and our heart
colonial oppression, we tell you out loud: this is
now finished.
Republic of Congo was proclaimed and our beloved country is
now in the hands of his own children.
Together, my brothers, my sisters, we will begin a new
struggle, a sublime struggle that will lead our country to peace, prosperity and
to greatness.


--- PAGE 17 ---
Google Translate
http://translate.google.com/...us.archive.org%2F7%2Fitems%2FLhistoireDeLaVieDePatriceEmeryLumumba%2FLumumba.pdf[8/14/2011 11:55:56 AM]
We will jointly establish social justice and ensure that everyone
receive fair rmunération of his work.
Page 14
We will show the world what the black man can do when
works in freedom, and we will make the Congo the center of
radiation from the whole of Africa.
We will ensure that the lands of our country benefit
true to his children.
We will review all laws of the past and make new ones that
are just and noble.
And for all this, dear compatriots, we can be sure that
count not only on our strengths and our enormous wealth
huge, but on the assistance of many foreign countries which we
accept the collaboration whenever it is not fair and
seek not to impose a policy of any kind.
Thus, my new Congo government will create will be a country
rich, free and prosperous.
I ask you all to forget the tribal disputes which we deplete
and may make us despised abroad.
I ask you all not to shrink from any sacrifice to ensure
the success of our great company.
The Congo's independence marks a decisive step towards the release of any
Africa.
Our strong government - national - People, will be the salvation of this country.


--- PAGE 18 ---
Google Translate
http://translate.google.com/...us.archive.org%2F7%2Fitems%2FLhistoireDeLaVieDePatriceEmeryLumumba%2FLumumba.pdf[8/14/2011 11:55:56 AM]
I call on all Congolese citizens, men, women and children to
resolutely to work, to create a national economy
prosperous devote our economic independence.
Tribute to national freedom fighters!
Long live independence and African unity!
Long live the independent and sovereign Congo!
(From 
May to June, 1960 Congo, Ganshof Van der Meersch, pp. 235-244)
The Histo ire of an exemplary life (II)
Page 15
Defend the independence against the Belgian and American aggression
-------------------------------------------------- ----------------------
As head of the first government free of Congo, Lumumba
proudly proclaims the independence of the Congo, June 30, 1960!  But
wanting to achieve national unity around his Nationalist government,
Lumumba asked its members to offer the post of president
Kasavubu, his main opponent. Then Lumumba accepts
Ministers who are hostile, as Bomboko and Delvaux.
The future will show him that it is dangerous to make too broad alliances
when you do not have a sufficient basis.
The fifth Independence Day, July 5, Belgium causes
disturbances in the Force Publique. That day, at 8:00 am, Lt.
General Janssens, who still commands the army, written on a table in
Headquarters: "Before independence = after independence."  Then,
be used to send a letter to Lumumba, Prime Minister of a country
sovereign, to give "a last and solemn warning."  And


--- PAGE 19 ---
Google Translate
http://translate.google.com/...us.archive.org%2F7%2Fitems%2FLhistoireDeLaVieDePatriceEmeryLumumba%2FLumumba.pdf[8/14/2011 11:55:56 AM]
denounces "the statement June 30, 1960 (that) surprised the framework and
Troop "(1).
In fact, Janssens causes soldiers Congolese National Army
to obtain a pretext for military intervention.  The bourgeoisie
Belgium prepares for several months.
July 8, Belgian troops leave Brussels to take up and Kitona
Kamina.
July 10, they operate in Lubumbashi where they disarm
Nationalist soldiers. Bomboko and Delvaux, two ministers
Lumumba government who are among the main agents of
colonizer, appeal to the Belgian forces to maintain order.
Tshombe and the front anti-nationalist
July 11, Tshombe, on the instructions of the Union Miniere, proclaims
Katanga's independence and called on the Belgian troops.  On the same day
Lumumba asked the UN help to end the aggression Belgium.
The next day, anti-Lumumba hysteria reached its height in Belgium.  The
Libre Belgique newspaper close to the government, writes: "Several
Page 16
Lumumbist ministers behaved like savages primary and
fools like creatures Communists. "(2)
July 13, the Congolese government says that a "state of war
between the Congo and Belgium "and decided the severance of relations
diplomatic ties with Belgium. The Security Council adopts a
resolution on military assistance to Congo.
The aggression against the Belgian Congo is the proportion of an occupation
military.


--- PAGE 20 ---
Google Translate
http://translate.google.com/...us.archive.org%2F7%2Fitems%2FLhistoireDeLaVieDePatriceEmeryLumumba%2FLumumba.pdf[8/14/2011 11:55:56 AM]
The Belgian Minister of Defence, Gillon said in parliament that
Belgian army intervened in 23 cities in the Congo.  "All
Belgian Congo forces engaged amounted to about 10,000 men.  "
(3)
July 17, Lumumba wrote to Ralph Bunche, Representative of the Secretary-
general, require rapid intervention of the UN.  His message: "
Put out the Belgian troops of aggression, if not I'll have to do
appeal to the USSR to end the aggression. "
On July 24, 1960, Tshombe is opposed to sending troops to the UN
Katanga and asks Belgium to maintain its armed forces.  It
call Kasavubu and Ileo to create a confederation of states
Congo. In order to break the Nationalist central government, all
agents of neocolonialism agree to claim the "
Federalism. "It's a simple tactic to destroy the forces
patriotic. Once the central revolutionary broken, "
Federalists "become advocates of a central pro-imperialist
strong. Soon Tshombe, Ileo Kasavubu Bolikango, Kalonji support all
fascist central government of Mobutu.
American control
Belgium intends to maintain control of neo-colonial
on "his" Congo. By militarily occupying the Katanga, it created a
base for the reconquest of the whole Congo. But the old judge evil Belgium
changes. The United States has become the superpower
imperialist world. They want their "fair share" of wealth
Congolese.
Of course, the United States supported Belgium in its war against
Lumumba. Thus, July 30, 1960, the U.S. State Department
Page 17


--- PAGE 21 ---
Google Translate
http://translate.google.com/...us.archive.org%2F7%2Fitems%2FLhistoireDeLaVieDePatriceEmeryLumumba%2FLumumba.pdf[8/14/2011 11:55:56 AM]
said: "Belgium has the right to send troops to Congo
protect human lives in danger. "Moreover, in the coming months,
the United States will send three teams of killers to eliminate Kinshasa
Lumumba. In one such attempt, an officer must enter in
Lumumba, seeking an opportunity to go to the bathroom and
to a product containing a deadly virus on your toothbrush!  (4)
Belgium wants to regain the military from the Congo Katanga
while the United States relies primarily on the reactionary
Kinshasa - the Mobutu and Kasavubu Adoula - to get "their share"
Congo. The United States uses the UN troops, called by
Lumumba to hunt the perpetrators Belgian!  - To impose their
domination from Kinshasa.
The United Nations' aversion to Lumumba "
The Congo became independent in one month, and all parties pro-
unite to overthrow the imperialist government of Lumumba.
Thus, 7 August, the Central Committee of the ABAKO vote a motion of no confidence
against Lumumba government and calls for the creation of a
Confederation of the Congo. The next day the Puna of Bolikango
seeking independence for the province of Ecuador.  And one day later
Albert Kalonji declares the independence of the state mining Kasai!  This is
an alliance between Kasavubu Bolikango, Kalinji Tshombe and cons
Lumumba's government.
The UN is to say the United States, trying to reconcile all these forces
anti-nationalist. August 12, Hammarskjöld to arrive in Lubumbashi
negotiate with Tshombe.
August 14, the Swedish General von Horn, Commander of
UN arrives in Kinshasa. Reactionary officers in the pay of the CIA, he
wrote six years later in his memoirs: "It was not to conceal that
all of us, beginning with Dag Hammarskjöld, we fed a
deep distrust and dislike of Lumumba. "" I personally
fed a high regard for Mobutu.  Unlike
Lumumba, it seemed genuine patriot who did not lose his
time playing with communist theories. "(5)
The Catholic Church goes to war


--- PAGE 22 ---
Google Translate
http://translate.google.com/...us.archive.org%2F7%2Fitems%2FLhistoireDeLaVieDePatriceEmeryLumumba%2FLumumba.pdf[8/14/2011 11:55:56 AM]
Page 18
The Catholic Church is the main force in the fight against Lumumba.
July 17 already Malula Bishops wrote in a letter:
"When a country freedom of the press no longer exists, we no longer speak of
democracy but dictatorship. But the dictatorship leads to slavery. "(6)
Just like his masters in Belgium, the colonial press defends Malula
and "democracy" colonial and anticolonial accuses the government
to practice the dictatorship and slavery!  Malula alluded to the newspaper
Catholic E Africa, with its Ileo and Bolikango
Board of Directors. July 18, the paper suggests "the possibility of
the establishment of communism in the Congo as a result of policy
Lumumba. "(7) The Catholic union, the CSC, also plays a large
role in the fight against the Nationalist government. He writes that by
lack of Lumumba, "the Congo is committed to the path of misery" and
makes the nationalist government responsible for "closing
businesses, increased unemployment and rising prices. "(8)
Through its control over education, the Catholic Church can control
the spirit of the Congolese. It is therefore understandable why, August 16, 1960,
Lumumba made the proposal to nationalize the University of Lovanium.  Five
days later, as a draft governmental program, it
wrote: "Education should be a 'scientific quality' and to inculcate
A national ideal '. The government wants primary education for all and
the free education at all levels. "This statement
War in ideological power of the Catholic Church.
Then Lumumba drives the base of the colonial power, the power
Economic: "The country's economic expansion requires an industry
significant transformation. The government will take as a criterion
greatest social benefit and combine the inputs from the private sector,
opportunities in the public sector and domestic economic effort.  Its
concern will be looking particularly to rural areas. "(9)
1) Congo, 60, I 0.373-374, 2) Heinz and Donnay, p.30, 3) Congo, 1960, II,


--- PAGE 23 ---
Google Translate
http://translate.google.com/...us.archive.org%2F7%2Fitems%2FLhistoireDeLaVieDePatriceEmeryLumumba%2FLumumba.pdf[8/14/2011 11:55:56 AM]
p.515, 4) The plots of the CIA, The Church Committee, éd.Stock,
1976, p.140, 5) von Horn, Karl: Soldier of Peace, ed.  Presses de la Cité,
Paris, 1966, p.194 and 228; 6) E-Africa, July 19, 60, p. 1, 7)
Congo, 1960, II, p.685; 8) 1960 Congo, II, p.681; 9) 1960, II, 580 and 696.
The famous words of Patrice Lumumba (I)
-------------------------------------------------- ----------------------
Page 19
In the heat of the struggle to forge a conviction Lumumba anti-
imperialist
"Africa is overwhelmingly committed to his release in a struggle
no thank you against colonialism and imperialism.  The Congo can not be
considered a colony or settlement of operations and
independence is a prerequisite for peace.  The objective of
Congolese National Movement is to unite and organize the masses
Congolese in the fight to improve their lot, the liquidation of
colonial regime and the exploitation of man by man. "
Speech Accra, 5-14 December 1958
"In Katanga, the settlers are a few who say, 'This country is
independent and all its riches will serve this great nation, the
nation of Negroes. No, he must become a state Katanga
independent '. So tomorrow is the big capitalism will
Africans dominate economically. We will redouble our efforts
that this independence is real, that this independence
benefits people, to improve the living conditions of
populations. "
(The political thought of Patrice Lumumba, Presence Africaine, Paris.
Texts collected by Jean Van Lierde, p.141)


--- PAGE 24 ---
Google Translate
http://translate.google.com/...us.archive.org%2F7%2Fitems%2FLhistoireDeLaVieDePatriceEmeryLumumba%2FLumumba.pdf[8/14/2011 11:55:56 AM]
"Imperialism is the economic dominance"
"Political independence was won, we now want
economic independence. National wealth is ours.
Political independence is won, we now want
economic independence. National wealth is ours "
(The political thought of Lumumba, p.298)
"I assure you that with our faith, our energy, our
national pride, the Congo is a country in five years strongly
developed. It is not by begging for money that we will
develop the country. But by working ourselves through our own
hands, by our efforts. The only motto for now: the progress
economy. The gift is not appreciated. Independence gift, this
independence is not good. Independence won is the true
independence. "
Page 20
(Congo 1960, 2, pp.202)
"The Belgian Central Bank has captured not only our
money, but also of our gold reserves.  The government has
to announce that, if within 15 days, the Belgian government does
not restored them, we confiscate all property belonging to
Belgians. The people waiting for happiness, improving its conditions
life. For us, there is no independence as we do not have a
successful national economy to meet the conditions of our
brothers ".
(Annals of Parliament, the Senate of Congo, September 1960! P.14-15, 21)
"Westerners know that with this government, they can not


--- PAGE 25 ---
Google Translate
http://translate.google.com/...us.archive.org%2F7%2Fitems%2FLhistoireDeLaVieDePatriceEmeryLumumba%2FLumumba.pdf[8/14/2011 11:55:56 AM]
have any control over the economy of our country.  We must
control our economy to the National Bank, the Otraco to REGIDESO.
In every large company should be a government commissioner
with full political power to lead. "
(The political thought of Lumumba, p.360)
"They use puppets and spies"
"A most Belgians, we have our confidence, believing they
were sincere to continue with us.  Now we have kept
spies. Day by day we discover the plot against the nation.  The
Belgium now becomes a submarine.  They act in
backstage. They established a spy network. "
(The political thought of Lumumba, p.305)
"We have never seen in the history of colonization in Africa, a nation
which betrays a manner as scandalous vis-à-vis a people who
always lived with her. And it is thanks to the Belgian Congo is the
it is today. For her, it is not human lives
count is the UM is the money of the Congo compent.
Westerners wanted our government to be in the pay of
imperialists. Treaties have been proposed. I decided not to
sign these agreements, because they mean nothing more than domination
Congo's economic financial groups in Belgium.
Page 21
As we are a nationalist government, which is limited
the interests of the country, those who covet our wealth trying to
cause anarchy, and finally mount the population against us and
bring down our government.  They used the puppets


--- PAGE 26 ---
Google Translate
http://translate.google.com/...us.archive.org%2F7%2Fitems%2FLhistoireDeLaVieDePatriceEmeryLumumba%2FLumumba.pdf[8/14/2011 11:55:56 AM]
not hesitate to blindly sign any agreement to place the
Congo under foreign rule. That is the truth. "
(Lumumba's political thought, pp. 286)
Of U.S. imperialism and the UN
"The United States! This country agrees that Belgium maintains its bases
Congo, because it has economic interests.  Since
Belgians can not stay, they rely on their allies in the UN for
relay. I propose the immediate return of UN forces, it is true
they just operate in accordance with arrangements made with the
Belgium. "
"Some wanted to use the UN, ostensibly to put the Congo under the
international status. The Congo will never become a colony of the United Nations and
will never be a country under UN trusteeship.  And we give up any
UN assistance. Those who believed still to enter Congo
under the guise of the UN will no longer enter.  The doors of the Congo
tightly closed operators and researchers of gold. "
"We want the UN to withdraw from the Congo all the white troops. The
African troops that have been made available to the UN are
sufficient. I denounced the maneuvers, which consisted of passing
Katanga that troops of Sweden. "
(The political thought of Lumumba, p.232, 287-288, 306-307)
The Story of an exemplary life (III)
Two coups to remove one man
-------------------------------------------------- ----------------------
We are now in late August 1960 and Lumumba more
membership of the masses. The people understand that the Katanga and
Kasai are held by the Belgian army in order to continue the
abhorred colonial system. The people realize that the troops of


--- PAGE 27 ---
Google Translate
http://translate.google.com/...us.archive.org%2F7%2Fitems%2FLhistoireDeLaVieDePatriceEmeryLumumba%2FLumumba.pdf[8/14/2011 11:55:56 AM]
Page 22
the UN, to the Americans, far from supporting the government
nationalist Lumumba, plotting with his enemies.
All anti-nationalist forces feel the need to strengthen their
alliance.
On August 20, 1960, a delegation of the Youth ABAKO, the Puna
of Bolikango and MNC-Kalonji is received by Tshombe in Lubumbashi.
In Brazzaville, emissaries of ABAKO are in constant contact with
President Foulbert Youlou and with French secret agents.  The 21
August, Vice President of ABAKO, Moanda, said: "We must rid
Lumumba's Congo by legal or illegal means. "(1)
But August 27, 1960, the rise of nationalist revolutionary forces
happen. The troops are Bakwanga Lumumba, the capital of
pseudo-state of South Kasai. On other fronts, too, the nationalist army
advance to Katanga.
Lumumba's government receives support from more and more net
by States and African nationalist socialist states.  The 3
September, The Soviet Union puts Ilyushin 15 aircraft and 100 trucks
available Lumumba government to transport its
troops. The fight to defend the independence of the Congo against the
plots of Belgian and American imperialism reached its climax.
Lumumba now has the power to remove the two creations
Belgian colonialists: the state "independent" Katanga, where the imperialists
Belgian count to keep control of copper, cobalt and uranium, and
the state "independent" South Kasai, where the thieves want to keep the Belgian
control over the diamond The imperialists must now play all
for the whole.
The coup Kasavubu
Support from both the United States as Belgium and France
Kasavubu said Sept. 5: "Lumumba has betrayed the task it was
entrusted, he throws the country into a terrible civil war, I felt it necessary
to revoke immediately the government. "(2)


--- PAGE 28 ---
Google Translate
http://translate.google.com/...us.archive.org%2F7%2Fitems%2FLhistoireDeLaVieDePatriceEmeryLumumba%2FLumumba.pdf[8/14/2011 11:55:56 AM]
An hour and a half later, Lumumba reacts on the radio station
National: "Kasavubu publicly betrayed the nation. He wants to destroy the
Nationalist government has fought hard against the
Belgian attackers, against the enemies of our national independence. "
Page 23
The next day the government takes a decision Lumumba
history: "The ministers, meeting in an extraordinary council, state
ousted the head of state. "(3)
The same day, Mr. Ileo orders, on the instructions of Kasavubu
the arrest of Lumumba. The same Ileo form a government which
find the main agents of neocolonialism: Bomboko, Adoula,
Bolikango, Kalonji, Dericoyard, Kisolokela and Delvaux. (4) Ileo Human
the Catholic Church, says of the short period of government
Lumumba: "They were two months of anguish, anxiety and misery."
(5)
Meanwhile, the Technical Mission sent a Belgian Lumumbashi
report in Brussels: "The dismissal of Lumumba has strengthened leadership
Tshombe that holds as an advocate for the political reconstruction of
the former Belgian Congo on a confederal basis.  Successful
Katanga experience likely will cause the reconstruction
Congo from Lubumbashi. "(6) is a good summary of the policy
Belgian neocolonial: from the state secessionist Katanga, regain
throughout the Congo.
But soon, it goes wrong for politicians pro-imperialist.  6 and
September 8, the chamber supports Kasavubu against Lumumba by 60
votes against 19 and the Senate followed suit by 41 votes for, 2 against and 7
abstentions. September 13, Chambers met full vote
power to the government Lumumba. (7)
The same day, Lumumba is strengthening its control over the army by appointing


--- PAGE 29 ---
Google Translate
http://translate.google.com/...us.archive.org%2F7%2Fitems%2FLhistoireDeLaVieDePatriceEmeryLumumba%2FLumumba.pdf[8/14/2011 11:55:56 AM]
Mpolo Lieutenant-General.
September 14, desperate, Kasavubu Mobutu responded by pointing
as commander in chief of the army. (8) Thus a Kasavubu
open the way to Mobutu's dictatorship.
The coup Mobutu
Indeed, just hours later at 20:30, Mobutu executes its
coup. He says the "neutralization" of politicians and said: "It
is not a coup but a simple peaceful revolution. "(9)
With these words What began 37 years of dictatorship and
destruction. Mobutu closes embassies Socialist Union
Soviet and Czechoslovakia. Then he calls "the withdrawal of troops
Ghana and Guinea because of their direct support of Lumumba. "
Page 24
Thus, from the beginning, Mobutu, a CIA agent, the fight against countries
Socialists and nationalists against the African countries.
Mobutu establishes the College of Commissioners General.  Bomboko is
President, Ndele, Vice President, Ferdinand Kazadi, the Minister of
Defense Lihau and Tshisekedi, Minister and Deputy Minister of Justice.  This
College is officially installed Kasavubu, acting as head
State and accomplice of the coup Mobutu.
Lumumba responded on September 15 in the morning by saying, "Colonel
Mobutu has been corrupted by imperialists to play a coup
against the legal government and popular. People, you are witnesses
eye of these maneuvers tending to fall the Congo, land of our
ancestors, under the control of an international organization. "(10)
This is the turning point in history Congolese: the coup Mobutu, this 14
September 1960, places the Congo for 37 years, under the joint dictatorship
U.S. imperialism and Belgium.


--- PAGE 30 ---
Google Translate
http://translate.google.com/...us.archive.org%2F7%2Fitems%2FLhistoireDeLaVieDePatriceEmeryLumumba%2FLumumba.pdf[8/14/2011 11:55:56 AM]
The large black middle class took power
Most intellectuals before 1960, the "advanced", see above
independence as a way to get rich, to get to "live
as whites. "They do not challenge capitalism in the Congo or the
imperialist domination, which is the guarantee of its continuation.  They are
not challenge the colonial state apparatus, this machine
of oppression against the Congolese masses.  In fact, they want
simply "take over" this oppressive state and use it to enrich themselves.
After independence, neo-colonial state was formed where the
large black middle class.
Before independence, some "advanced" are already openly pro-
Belgian and pro-imperialist, men like Bomboko, Edindali,
Lopes, Delvaux and Tshombe. They are found in parts of
collaboration as the PNP and CONACAT.
The "advanced" that created the nationalist parties had already divided
before independence. Those who want only "reform" the system
Existing moved closer to "pro-Belgian."  These Ileo, Kalonji,
Ngalula and Adoula that had shattered the MNC and also of the ABAKO
Kasavubu.
Page 25
But once in government, the radical nationalist parties broke out
turn. Mobutu was the secretary of Lumumba.  In making his move
state, it is supported by the vice president of MNC-L, Nendaka, it
appointed head of security. The Minister and eight members of Songolo
MNC-L also support Mobutu. (11)
After Mobutu's coup, an alliance was formed between these three
groups of "sophisticated". Together they form the upper middle class


--- PAGE 31 ---
Google Translate
http://translate.google.com/...us.archive.org%2F7%2Fitems%2FLhistoireDeLaVieDePatriceEmeryLumumba%2FLumumba.pdf[8/14/2011 11:55:56 AM]
Congolese closely tied to U.S. imperialism and Belgium.
Between September 1960 and November 1965, will play different characters
the lead at different times - Kasavubu, Ileo, Bomboko, Adoula,
Tshombe and Mobutu - but all represent the same class, the vast
Congolese bourgeois, and all are linked to the same master, imperialism
U.S. and Belgium.
1) 1960 Congo, II, p.672, 2) Congo, 1960, II, p.818, 3) Congo, 1960, II,
p.820 and p.823, 4) and Donnay Heinz: The fifty days of
Lumumba, ed. CRISP, 1966, p.33; Congo, II, p.855 5) Congo, 1960, II,
p.853; 6) Congo, 1960, II, p.963, 7) Congo, 1960, II, p.850 and 861; 8)
Chronicle, XII, Issue 4-6 ‰, p.949; 9) Congo, 1960, II, p.869; 10) Congo, 1960,
II, p.870; 11) Congo, 1960, II, p.997.
The famous words of Patrice Lumumba (II)
-------------------------------------------------- ----------------------
During the struggle for independence, and during his two months and
Half the government, Lumumba was a man alone, surrounded by a
handful of comrades. He did not have a strong organization
behind him, he did not have time to give a political consciousness in
oppressed people. How then to explain the extraordinary impact his
of great political stature? Lumumba managed to give a
expression in the radicalism of the masses that were urban and village
overcome because of the oppression, exploitation and humiliation
colonial. It is this essential point have always forget those who abuse
Lumumba's name "for positions" and to "eat their
round. "
With the mass struggle against the colonial
April 22, 1959. "The mass is much more revolutionary than us.
When we are with weight is the same mass that we
grows, it would go much faster than us. "
Page 26


--- PAGE 32 ---
Google Translate
http://translate.google.com/...us.archive.org%2F7%2Fitems%2FLhistoireDeLaVieDePatriceEmeryLumumba%2FLumumba.pdf[8/14/2011 11:55:56 AM]
((The political thought of Lumumba, p.45)
August 13, 1959. A Belgian parliamentary delegation met Mr. Mabe
Sabit, who presents himself as 'the leader of the Arabized'.  Sabiti said: "
Lumumba goes especially from the workers, because they form the
mass ".
(Minutes of official talks. Senate. 1959, p.264)
June 1960. Soon independence. Who will minister, who has a position,
who has power? Lumumba did not rely on "those above" on
the colonizers. It does not seek his own interest in selling
powerful. It can not be corrupted by the powers
imperialists. He vowed to stay on the side of the people.
"I is not my personal interest but only the interest
higher in the country. The Belgian government wants to withdraw from the scene
Congolese politics but intends to reclaim the management of the Congo
hands of leaders with all its sympathies.  I have no sympathy
Belgian government, any more than that of other official circles.  I
am considered a dangerous man because I refuse to
bribes. I can tell you that if I had agreed to "play the game"
as have some Congolese leaders opportunistic, I would
now supported by Belgium and considered his greatest
friend. We want to create a puppet government but also fears
the popular reaction. At the rate we are going, there will not be any
change in this country at the time of independence and the Congolese
will feel to be duped. We will have a backlash, and then
that leaders will be satisfied with a few portfolios that Belgium
they will be assigned, it will be the people who will make his revolution. "
(Why Not, June 1960 pp.)
"Ministers must eat with the people."
"National wealth belongs to us. We, the ministers, we
in rural areas will, we will till the land to show
the country how we make our cooperative.  We do not want
never deceive the people and the people know very well that since we
have no power minister has been paid.  We eat with the
people, we do not need money (press conference on August 9,
quoted in "Congo 1960", 2, pp 593-594)


--- PAGE 33 ---
Google Translate
http://translate.google.com/...us.archive.org%2F7%2Fitems%2FLhistoireDeLaVieDePatriceEmeryLumumba%2FLumumba.pdf[8/14/2011 11:55:56 AM]
Page 27
"Ministers must live with the people. We must not pass
the eyes of the people as replacements for the colonialists.
(Annals of the House of Representatives of the Republic of Congo.
1960, 12, Meeting of July 15, 1960 p.15)
"We want a true independence."
"We will put all our employees to work after the departure of
Belgian troops. Everyone will work with modest salaries.  And I
assure you, with our faith, our strength, our pride
Nationally, the Congo will be in five years a highly developed country.  This
is not begging for money that we will developer the country.
But by working ourselves with our own hands, by our efforts
(E) the only motto for now: the economic progress, everyone
at work, mobilize all the youth, our women, all
energies of the country. The gift is not n'aprrécie. Independence
gift, it's not a good independence. The conquered indépendaance
is the true independence. "(press conference on August 9, quoted in
"Congo 1960, 2, pp 593-594)
"The Belgian Central Bank has captured not only our money,
but also of our gold reserves ..; The government has NNOUNCEMENT
that if within 15 days did the Belgian Gouvernemnt restored
not, we will confiscate all property belonging to Belgians.  The people
waiting for happiness, improving their living conditions.  For us, there
no independence as we do not have a national economy
prosp "re to meet the conditions of our fr" res. "(Annals
Parliamentarians. Senate of the Republic of Congo. 1960, September 8 pp
14-15)
The story of an exemplary life (IV)


--- PAGE 34 ---
Google Translate
http://translate.google.com/...us.archive.org%2F7%2Fitems%2FLhistoireDeLaVieDePatriceEmeryLumumba%2FLumumba.pdf[8/14/2011 11:55:56 AM]
-------------------------------------------------- ----------------------
What is anti in the Congo?
The smoke screen that hides the worst crimes
Thus, September 19, Mobutu and his place Bomboko Commissioners
general at the head of Congo. These Commissioners are the mortal enemies
Congolese nationalists, whom they accuse of being "communists".
Why such an accusation?
Page 28
The reason is simple: their masters, the U.S. imperialists and
Belgian fear above all the Communists, these men and women
that m "NEET consistently fighting against exploitation
capitalism. And the imperialists know that the Congolese nationalists
can be found in the socialist countries of powerful allies.  Here
Therefore, Sept. 19, the Commissioners read a proclamation
drafted in consultation with Mobutu himself, "Colonel Joseph
Mobutu is now the man who has delivered us from colonialism
Communist and Marxist-Leninist imperialism.  Thanks to the army
Congolese national, we will not a slave to another.  "
(Congo 60, II, p.871)
The anti-communist ideological weapon of colonization
Since the beginning of colonization, was the anti-gun
ideological most powerful of all anti-Congolese forces.  The
colonizers and the Catholic Church has never allowed the writings
Marxist pen "trent in the colony. By resorting to lies
disgusting, the colonialists describe communism as the works from the
devil. And in 1960, they published cartoons of Lumumba represented
as the devil.


--- PAGE 35 ---
Google Translate
http://translate.google.com/...us.archive.org%2F7%2Fitems%2FLhistoireDeLaVieDePatriceEmeryLumumba%2FLumumba.pdf[8/14/2011 11:55:56 AM]
In fact, anti is a smokescreen. The real objective
is this: the big capitalists want to safeguard their interests
economic, they want to continue to maximize the wealth
Congo and the workforce of its workers and peasants.
Natural allies
Page 29


--- PAGE 36 ---
In the early sixties, how African states who want to
real independence, Nkrumah as Ghana and Guinea in
Sekou Toure, can they succeed? They need allies and friends to
quickly develop their own economies, to shield their
Economics at the stranglehold of imperialist powers. Countries
Communists are their natural allies. For Two Reasons.
First, the communist countries have themselves suffered terribly
imperialist aggression. In 1917-1920, Soviet Russia has experienced
the aggression of imperialist countries and 9 it lost 10 million dead
because of war and famine. Then the Nazi aggression in 1941 -
1944 cost 23 million Soviet people died. China, for
She has been the dominance of Western colonialists and, over the
years 20, 30 and 40, his fate was worse than Africa! Assaulted
Page 29
by Japanese imperialism and U.S. imperialism, China
counted more than 10 million deaths.
Then, the Communist countries want to build an economy
independent and for that they must escape the domination
political and economic imperialism. To progress in this
way, they have an interest in supporting all countries, too, want to
avoid the domination of these imperialists.
"Fighting colonialism and communist terrorism"
Now let us see things on the side of the imperialists. To maintain
Google Translate
11:55:56 AM]
their domination of the Congo, they must break the alliance between the Congo and
the African nationalists such as Ghana and Guinea. They must
also block any rapprochement between the Congo and
communists.
This is exactly what their primary agent, Mobutu. He said
AD 's the coup: "As Czechoslovakia and the Soviet Union, the
Ghana and Guinea were distributing weapons in the city of Kinshasa. "(1)
These accusations are clearly false, but Mobutu and his masters
CIA must believe the Congolese people as Ghana and
Czechoslovakia are "terrorist states". And they support
Congolese terrorists, that is to say, Patrice Lumumba and his companions in
Indeed, Mobutu claimed that Maurice Emmanuel and Mpolo Nzuzi, two
fid employees "of the Lumumba, organize" training camps
terrorist "and direct" a terrorist group, Youth Lumumba. "(2)
Mobutu, Tshombe and Kasavubu, these agents of imperialism that exploits
Congo for 80 years, to believe that it is Ghana and China
want to "conquer and dominate" the Congo. It's ridiculous, completely "false ment,
but it serves to divert attention from the real exploiters and
rulers who bleed the Congolese people to white!
The crime of Ghana and China is to wish the success of
Congolese experience. On July 23, 1960, Theodore Bengil's friend
Pierre Mulele, assists in Beijing at a gathering of 10,000
people who "provide the support the Chinese people to the people's struggle
Congolese independence "(3)
Neither the West nor the East?
Page 30
At the time, all agents of imperialism claim "denounce any
colonialism wherever it comes from, that of the East as well as that of
Google Translate
11:55:56 AM]
West. "(4) We find this same phrase in the mouth of Malula of


--- PAGE 37 ---
Mobutu or Bomboko. All of them believe that the Congolese people
formal independence, granted by Belgium, means a
real independence, total. In fact, this false independence
opens the continuation of the economic and political domination of
the West by other methods. Those who are true agents of
West, shouting that any relationship with the East a crime. Those who want
perpetuation of imperialist domination, to believe that the only Allied
a possible independent Congo, the Communist countries, want
dominate and tyrannize the country. The anti-blocking the way to a
international political alliances can facilitate independence
political and economic. The anti Congo binds hand and foot
related to its worst exploiters of the worst murderers, imperialists
American, French and Belgian. The people will suffer
catastrophic for 37 years.
1) Pierre Houart: The Communist penetration in the Congo, ed. CDI, Brussels,
1960, p. 95, 2) ibid, p.94-95, 3) Houart, p. 51, 4) Houart, Africa for three
faces, ed. CDI, Brussels, 1961, p.189.
Famous words of Patrice Lumumba (III)
-------------------------------------------------- ----------------------
The former pacifist, took up arms
Like all young people of his generation, Lumumba undergoes washing
brains in colonial schools. Religion is used to teach
submission. The Church, which helped the troops of Leopold II to conquer the
Congo by fire and blood, preaching non-violence for blacks.
Lumumba was educated in pacifism and acceptance of colonialism.
The genius of Lumumba spoke in his love of the masses
oppressed, in his thirst for justice for the poor and in deep
honesty. These qualities enabled him to get rid of all
misconceptions, inculcated by colonial education. Lumumba criticized
radically his own ideas, becoming, step by step, in the
fire fighting, a true nationalist and revolutionary. It is an example
Congolese youth of today.
Dare to think, dare to fight
Google Translate
11:55:56 AM]
Page 31
About independence, Lumumba also said this in 1956:
"Some whites, tr" s disreputable, who abuse the credulity
Blacks still not grown, instigate them to claim
immediate independence. They even suggest that self-
not be achieved without bloodshed, that all countries
Western had to obtain their independence, fighting, and that
Congolese should do the same if they want to break free of the Belgians.
Sad mentality! We must reject these ideas wherever they come from. The
Congo gets its independence with dignity and not in barbarism.
It would commit an act of the utmost barbarity, banditry that
to sacrifice human lives, our family members who we are
expensive for the thirst for independence. "(The Congo, land of opportunity, is it
threatened?, Patrice Lumumba, pp.162-163)
Three years is enough for the world view of Lumumba
profoundly changed. It pierces the falsity, hypocrisy and
interested in colonial propaganda. In December 1958, Lumumba
Accra expresses its solidarity with the armed struggle in Algeria,
Cameroon, Kenya, South Africa, Rhodesia, Angola and
Mozambique.
Two weeks after his return from Accra, the insurgency took place from January 4
1959 in Kinshasa. Three hundred Congolese were killed by the army. Lumumba


--- PAGE 38 ---
is firmly defending the poor who dared rise up against the
colonizer.
At the Congress of the MNC-L in Kisangani, October 28, 1959, the
nationalists attack police station, killing 20 people. These days,
Lumumba tells people not to have fear of the guns
the enemy.
"Walk, do not be afraid! We ask if we die
future to keep our children properly. We will die for
you and we do not fear. The Belgians came with their big
gear, with soldiers armed with rifles to kill us if we say
that we want our independence. "" They, they have guns,
Google Translate
11:55:56 AM]
We have our hands. I ask you: do you
Afraid? Our hands will suffice! "
(The political thought of Lumumba, pp.108-111)
A people's war against the Belgian occupation
Page 32
When the days following independence, he was faced with the triple
aggression of the Belgian army, gendarmes and Tshombe's mercenaries
and UN troops, Lumumba agrees without hesitation in the way
the patriotic armed struggle.
Lumumba is based primarily on the people to fight
aggressors and their lackeys, Tshombe and Kalonji. On July 20, 1960, he launched
a call on the radio: "We prefer to die for our freedom rather than
still live in slavery. All the forces of this country are
mobilized to save the honor of defending the homeland and courageously
independence. "
(The political thought of Lumumba, pp.252)
Lumumba strongly supports the true people's war that
peasants and workers engaged in the North Katanga against the troops
Belgian gendarmes and thsombistes. The young Laurent Kabila travels the
region, from village to village. It is already a recognized leader and popular
the Patriotic Resistance Army.
An official of Gecamines said: "The 3,000 workers
obey all the slogans of Balubakat. The whole country is Balubakat
and the people here have only one God, Lumumba. "
(Katanga, challenge the world, P. Davister, Brussels, 1960, p.160)
Google Translate
11:55:56 AM]
A supporter Belgian Tshombe demonstrates the extent of the fighting:
"In December 1960 it was estimated that about 7000 the number of rebels
killed since the start of operations of reprisals from the army Katanga
in North Katanga. Normally, multiply that number by 2,
3, 10. Entire villages were razed and automatic weapons
literally mowed down whole ranks of youth. "(ibid., p.161)
Rely on the patriotic elements of the army
To fight against aggression, Lumumba also mobilizes the elements
nationalist ANC. He focused his best troops for a
operation against the secessionists in Katanga and South Kasai.
On orders from the Americans, Mobutu stopped the victorious offensive. Its
hand man, Francis Monheim, admits: "Colonel Mobutu
ordered his troops to return to Kinshasa. Lumumba's summons
Chief of Staff. 'I am the Minister of National Defence', he told Mobutu
Page 33
'And I am not aware of anything. You, you are just a colonel and
you order the cease-fire without consulting your commander


--- PAGE 39 ---
Chief, General Lundula '. "
(Mobutu, the man alone, F. Monheim, Brussels, 1974, p.115)
Revolutionary War to free the Katanga and Kasai
September 5, Kasavubu is a coup and dissolved the government
Lumumba. It requires that the ANC soldiers lay down their arms.
Lumumba denounced this betrayal.
"Mr. Kasavubu accuses the Government to throw the country into a
atrocious civil war, while the Government only defend
country against the brutal aggression, triggered in respect of the Republic
Belgian troops. Kasavubu asked the national army to stop
Google Translate
11:55:56 AM]
fratricidal struggles. The whole nation knows that the Congolese soldiers,
wanting to defend the homeland, have only safeguard territorial integrity
National. The troops of the National Army will have engaged in any
fratricidal struggle. The Government and the Congolese people make their
tribute to the patriotism and heroism with which they defended
the nation against aggression and against the rebel movement
peddled across the country by the imperialists and their Belgian allies.
Mr. Kasavubu request to the national army to disarm.
The Government sees this statement intends to Mr.
Kasavubu to military occupation of the Congo by troops
Foreign. He wants to ban and the National Army troops to enter
Katanga in order to free their oppressed brothers and enslaved by
Belgians and their front man, Tshombe. "
"For Kasavubu, the fact of wanting to integrate the Katanga to free our
brothers, is an atrocious war, because he has contacts with
Tshombe. The victory of the Central Government in Katanga is a
victory over imperialism. The Abako arranged for dispatch
emissaries in Katanga. It was a delegation of
Member Abako, the Puna and MNC-Kalonji. Complicity
Abako is evident in the Katanga. "
Lumumba's political thought, pp.332, Annals of the House of
Congo, 1960 September 7, p.20)
To Kisangani to lead the war of liberation
Page 34
November 27, Lumumba left his home to join Kisangani
to lead the loyalist troops. He believes that the Nationalist Army
can take Kinshasa from Kenge and Bolobo.
During his time in Manga, November 30, all men
rush, sword in hand. Lumumba improvise a speech: "Brothers,
Google Translate
11:55:56 AM]
your weapons are useless now, but please take care. It Will
fight for freedom. The colonialists did not want to give it to us
peacefully, we will conquer, weapons in hand. "
(Patrice Lumumba and the African Freedom, L. Volodin, Moscow, nd, p.114)
Lumumba's arrival in Kisangani will be the detonator of a war
revolution to free the Congo of all foreign occupation. The
Commander of UN troops, Karl von Horn, notes: "To speak
frankly the whole country could be put to fire and sword, if Lumumba
had arrived in Kisangani. "
On 1 December, the soldiers of Mobutu and Lumumba catch deliver
Then Tshombe.
Knowing he will die, Lumumba in his last letter launches a final
call for the armed liberation struggle, "I know and feel the bottom of MySelf
that sooner or later my people will get rid of all enemies


--- PAGE 40 ---
interior and exterior, it will rise as one man to say
non-degrading and shameful colonialism and regain their dignity
under a pure sun. "
It was after this call that three years later, in the first
weeks of 1964, the Congolese people rose as one man
to fight under the leadership of Pierre Mulele and the National Council of
Release.
(The political thought of Lumumba, p. 390)
The story of an exemplary life (V)
-------------------------------------------------- ----------------------
A war of liberation from Kisangani
October 9, Lumumba, which is protected by the soldiers of the Ghanaian
Friend Nkrumah, made an exit in the city where he speaks in several places
before an enthusiastic audience. Bomboko's furious and shouted: "The ANC is
Google Translate
11:55:56 AM]
Page 35
ready to fight against the UN troops to stop Lumumba. "
Two hundred soldiers of Mobutu, Lumumba sent to arrest, are
repelled by the Ghanaian soldiers. (2)
For a month, Lumumba remain confined to his residence.
During this period, in Kisangani that things are moving. By the mid-October,
this city is a growing bitter struggle between supporters
Lumumba and Mobutu. October 11, Jean-Pierre Finant,
President of the Government and close companion of Lumumba, is
stopped. It will be massacred at Bakwanga by bands Kalinji. In his
sides, Joseph Mbuyi will have his eyes gouged out and body pierced by
bayonets. But on Nov. 23, soldiers loyal to
Lumumba definitely hunt Mobutu's soldiers in Kisangani.
Gizenga, located in the city since November 14, preparing for the arrival of
Lumumba. (3)
By November 17, Lumumba received a letter from Kisangani. She says
the soldiers of the ANC from within the country itself are very favorable. If
Lumumba arrived in Kisangani, Congo's whole situation can change.
A military operation from Kenge in Kwilu and Bolobo in May
Ndombe all exchange will lead to the release of Kinshasa.
Lumumba decided to go east. (4)
The arrest of Lumumba by Mobutu
On the night of November 27, Lumumba left Kinshasa by car. Its
Kenge convoy passes by and comes to Masi-Manimba the next day at 19:00.
The CIA immediately mobilized his men to trust among the
UN troops and those of Mobutu. A CIA cable dated 28 November
said: "The station is working with the Congolese government to block
roads to prevent leakage of Lumumba. "(5)
Karl von Horn also contributed to "recover" Lumumba. In his
Memories, the commander of UN troops, welcomed the arrest
Lumumba: "Frankly speaking, the country would have been fired and
blood if Lumumba had arrived in Kisangani. "(6)
Google Translate
11:55:56 AM]
Lumumba through the Kwilu through Bulungu and Mangai. Then, the
located Brabanter, Port Franqui, Mweka and Lodi. In the latter
locality, December 1 at 23:00, the river passes Lumumba in Sankuru
Page 36
canoe with Pierre Mulele of Lubumbashi and Mathias Valentin
Kemishanga.
A little later, the ferry reaches the other shore and a group of soldiers


--- PAGE 41 ---
dismount. Lumumba, alone, moves to discuss with them.
After much haggling, he was arrested and taken to the Port Franqui 2
December morning. Mulele succeed in Kisangani.
On instructions of Mobutu, the chief detective, Nendaka, ordered
Pongo de Lumumba back in Kinshasa. That evening at 5:00 p.m., a DC-3 Air
Congo, Lumumba back in Ndjili. It is tied up and thrown on a truck bound
military and taken to Camp Binza before Mobutu. "Colonel
Mobutu, his arms crossed, looked calmly hit his soldiers and
shake and pull the prisoner by the hair. "(7)
Lumumba was beaten with extreme violence, soldiers burned him
beard. On the morning of 3, there is imprisoned at Camp Hardy Thysville (8).
Lumumba-attack against the
December 7, Kasavubu welcomes the capture of its main
opponent: "I am surprised by the importance attached to the arrest of
Lumumba by a number of delegations and Afro-Asian esteuropéennes;
In fact, Lumumba is within the scope of a warrant
arrest since September. He was guilty of the offenses
following breaches of the state and organization of gangs
hostile in order to bring devastation and massacre. "
Kasavubu added to Kisangani, where the prevailing Lumumba People
know "terrorism, torture and suppression of freedom
Google Translate
11:55:56 AM]
Individual. "(9)
But in reality, the power in Kisangani Lumumbist consolidates and
extends. December 12, Gizenga said that Kisangani is now the
head of the legal government and the provisional capital of the Republic. "
(10)
Two weeks later, Lumumba came to power in Bukavu
capital of Kivu. On 1 January 1961, Pongo, the man who stopped
Lumumba, fails miserably in its attempt to occupy Bukavu. It
was taken prisoner. Kashamura form a government Lumumba
Bukavu.
Page 37
January 9, Congolese troops loyal to Lumumba and directed by
Lundula, free Manono. The armed struggle for the liberation of Katanga
grows.
The rise of popular revolutionary struggle certainly lead
victory if Lumumba released, could get to his head.
January 13, at the instigation of Mulele and activists of PSA and
MNC-L, a mutiny broke out Thysville to release Lumumba.
The CIA wants the death of Lumumba
The CIA understood that it is urgent to assassinate Lumumba if it is
save the imperialist domination of the Congo.
Since October, the CIA continues a steady line: use its agents
Congolese to eliminate Lumumba. Hedgman, the head of CIA station
Kinshasa, then cabled: "Station strongly urged Congolese leaders
stop Lumumba, Lumumba think will continue to be threats to
stability Congo to disposal of the scene. "(11) January 13,
Google Translate
11:55:56 AM]
after the mutiny that nearly free Lumumba, Hedgman sends another
message to the CIA director: "The combination of talents
Lumumba as a demagogue, his ability to use groups
propaganda almost certainly would ensure a victory Lumumba
in parliament. Refusal to take drastic action now
lead the policy of the United States in the Congo to defeat. "(12)


--- PAGE 42 ---
Here we have the final decision by the CIA for the elimination of Lumumba.
At that time, the CIA is in constant contact with Mobutu, Kasavubu
Tshombe, Munongo, Nendaka, Kazadi, Adoula and all who are involved
the decision to send Lumumba to the slaughter of Lubumbashi.
January 14 already, the safety of Nendaka sent a telegram to
Lubumbashi: "College can be general commissioners emphasize to
obtain agreement to transfer Lumumba to Katanga province. "Two
Commissioners, and Ferdinand Kazadi Mukamba Jonas, are responsible
accompany the prisoner on the plane.
The assassination of January 17, 1961
January 17 at 16:45, three black men, blindfolded and hands tied
behind his back, out of 4 DC that has just landed in Luano, Lubumbashi.
These Lumumba, and Mpolo Okito. They are immediately surrounded
Page 38
by Katanga gendarmes supervised by Belgian officers. Munongo
attended the scene. Lumumba and his two companions were killed on
evening.
The Western intelligence services and their henchmen are
immediately aware of the death of Lumumba. January 19, already
Congolese officers, assisted by the military adviser to Mobutu, the
Marlière Belgian Colonel, arrived in Lubumbashi to talk with Tshombe
a military cooperation agreement Kinshasa-Lubumbashi and a
single command. Nendaka arrived a few days later. All
Google Translate
11:55:56 AM]
defenders of imperialism include the announcement of the death of
Lumumba will cause a revolution in the country. They want
time to prepare to confront it. They know that Kasavubu, Mobutu
Bomboko in Kinshasa and will need military aid to Tshombe
Lubumbashi and Kalonji to Babwanga to fight resurgence of
Nationalist People's Revolution.
It was not until February 13 announcement that Munongo to the international press
Lumumba's death "killed by villagers in a small village near
Kolwezi. "In the text he read, there is this sentence:" We are accused of
have them murdered. My answer: Prove it! "(13)
"We will follow the example of Lumumba"
The next day in Cairo, Pierre Mulele made a statement on behalf of
legitimate government: "The Congolese Patriots committed today
follow the example of Lumumba and fight until the release
Total country to be conducted under the guidance of the legal government
Congolese. The murder of Lumumba was prepared and executed by the
Belgian colonialists and their henchmen Congo. Mr. Hammarskjöld
among those responsible for the death of the former Congolese Prime Minister.
The Secretary General of the UN is the instrument of policy
the U.S. administration. The government will take Kisangani
necessary action against the Belgian colonialists and their allies and
against all those directly or indirectly responsible for the death of
Lumumba and his two companions. "(14)
1) Heinz and Donnay, p.36, 2) ibid, p.38, 3) Congo, 60, II, p.997-8, 1042;
4) Heinz and Donnay, p.17, 5) the plots of the CIA, p.152, 6) von
Horn, p. 236, 7) AP, in Heinz and Donnay, p.64; 8) ibid, p.69; 9) Congo,
60, II, pp.1060-61, 10) ibid, p.1041; 11) Conspiracies, p.142; 12) ibid,
p.152-153, 13) Congo, 1961, p.665; 14) African Mail, 13 March 1964
p.5.
Page 39
Google Translate
11:55:56 AM]


--- PAGE 43 ---
The famous words of Patrice Lumumba (IV)
-------------------------------------------------- ----------------------
Since the first days of independence, all "advanced" that had
sold to the colonizer, led campaigns to destroy the
Nationalist government. Often associated with Catholic circles, they
the full support of the Belgian bourgeoisie and its various organizations.
Thus, late July 1960, the union of Christian Bolikango, UTC, publishes a
statement complaining that "Congo is committed towards
misery. "The union makes pro-colonialist responsible for Lumumba
plant closings, price increases, the increase in the
unemployment.
Cool Gust, president of the union sponsoring the Belgian Christian UTC
August 15, 1960 said: "The liberty of persons, freedom
of association, freedom of association are threatened in Congo. The problem
as it stands today, August 15, 1960, is no longer a question of
relations between the Congo and Belgium, but a struggle between freedom and
dictatorship. "(Aktiviteitenverslag 1960, Money in the PSC-CVP, Ludo
Martens, EPO, Antwerp, p.94)
Lumumba understands that these conspiracies are run by the
Belgium, who uses his henchmen, the Malula, Ileo, Bolikango,
Tsombé, Kalonji, Boboliko.
The people must defend itself against its enemies
Lumumba said that a patriotic government should have the courage to
fight against the enemies of the people against the enemies of independence.
"It's the people, through its central government, will fight against
bad propaganda against the enemies of freedom, against the
enemies of the homeland against traitors. Were distributed throughout the city of
Leo thousands of seditious pamphlets that came straight from Brussels.
They were transported on aircraft Sabena, in cases with
the word 'Journals'. One of the leaflets said, "Congolese Lumumba will
sell your wives to Russia '. Another tract, Lingala text: 'I made
pact with the devil, too bad for the Congolese. " The Belgians can not
more distributed their own leaflets today, and it is blacks who
destroy the Congo, for receiving 500 francs. If this is your brother, your
son who sells our country, working with the enemy, you're at
people to be judge, to stop this rogue, this employee, this traitor. "" We
Google Translate
11:55:56 AM]
Page 40
have decided to regulate the freedom of the press. No one can
say that the African Courier is a journal belonging to one
Congolese. Who among you know that the Courier Africa is a
organ of the Christian union of Belgium? It is a body
propaganda against our people? We decided to regulate all
those newspapers that are against the nation. These are all environments
Catholics who live their propaganda in their newspapers
cause all the evil we know. Should we
allow this state of affairs? While we take steps to make
release, they call it the dictatorship "(Thought, pp.311-312)
On the misuse of religion
"The bishops abandon their mission of evangelization to interfere
in the affairs of state. Missions abandon their mission to
a campaign of obstruction against the state. Day after day,
we see ourselves insulted through their press. They have caused serious
endangering the security of the state, they have committed serious crimes. "(The
Thought, p. 289)
"These anti-nationals, already in the pay of the colonialists, receive money


--- PAGE 44 ---
colonialists, and with the money they write dirt. Today,
movements, so-called Catholic family movement, will
to attack the government on behalf of the leagues, YCW, the
Catholic groups. They want to destroy the Congolese nation, we
will no longer tolerate this. It is the separation of church and state. Our
Government will never interfere in the affairs of the Church. "(The
thought, p.290)
"The government can not tolerate in any way that interferes with the
Affairs of the State We do nothing but watch the interest of the people and
not the interest of the financial community or the Church of this or that we do
not want us to do what we do in the Congo to Belgium, the dictatorship
of the Church on the government. And it's a Catholic government, the
Google Translate
11:55:56 AM]
Catholic circles are those who, in a systematic way, during 80
years delayed the political emancipation of the Congo. These are the people who
said that we should not bring politics in the Congo because "
policy will allow them to see clearly. "And it is these same media
Catholic and religious, even recently, during the campaign
election, preached against the nationalists. "(Thought, p.290)
"He just had to recite the catechism that you colonial
bless. The fact that a Congolese have expressed his idea: "It is a
Page 41
anti-White, is a bad religion "Ban! That's what they want
do today to show the world that we are
Communists. "(Thought, p.296)
"We will proceed with the mental decolonization because indoctrinated
false people for 80 years. With our brains, our hands,
we will develop the Congo. "(Thought, p. 300)
About communism and imperialism
"In Africa, all that is progressive, everything that tends to progress is
communication skills, destructive. Always make bows
and accept whatever offer the colonialists. We are
just honest men and our only objective was: to liberate our
country, build a free and independent nation. "(The political thought of
Lumumba, p.272)
"We talk about communism. You know, my dear friends, some
play the game of the imperialists? During the election campaign, the
Catholic missions had printed leaflets they
distributed and preached everywhere, even in the churches not to vote
Lumumba, not to vote Kashamura. Do the people has
listened? "(Thought, p. 342)
Google Translate
11:55:56 AM]
"The imperialists say they are against communism, they are
against the Soviet Union and when we ask them to help, they we
reject it and prefer to give Tshombe and all those who make
All these maneuvers their speeches in which I am tax
communist, where it is claimed that I intended to do one of Congo
Soviet Union, are actually written by the Belgians and the French. "(The
thought, pp.344-345)
"The Soviet Union is a people like any other nation. Questions
ideology does not interest us. Our policy of positive neutrality
We recommend to deal with any nation that has noble intentions
and would not come home in order to establish another
domination. "(Thought, p.281)
"When our brothers were fighting everywhere, it was the Russians that we


--- PAGE 45 ---
instigating to claim independence? Which has operated for 80
years, is not the imperialists? They consider the Congo, with its
wealth, as their national reserves. "(Thought, p.366)
Page 42
"In Africa, those who are progressive, those who are for the
people and against the imperialists, they are communists, they are
agents of Moscow! But all that is in favor of the imperialists, the
who goes wherever the money, put it in his pocket for him and his
family is an exemplary man, the imperialists will praise the
bless. That is the truth, my friends. "(Thought, p.367)

