=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Patrice-Lumumba-and-the-Congolese-Struggle-for-Independence-A-RBG-Study-Booklet.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 25
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:10:27.323925
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Patrice Lumumba and the Congolese 
Struggle for Independence 
You Tube Videos


--- PAGE 2 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                            August, 2010 
 
 Page 2 
 
 
 
 
Hot Linked TOC 
Patrice Emery Lumumba ....................................................................................................................... 3 
Historical Biography ................................................................................................................................ 3 
Lumumba's Last Letter .......................................................................................................................... 6 
Written to His Wife Just Before His Death ....................................................................................... 6 
Patrice Lumumba The First Prime Minister of the Congo (Zaire)  On June 30, 1960, 
Independence Day .................................................................................................................................. 7 
Who Killed Lumumba? ......................................................................................................................... 10 
New Data on Murder of Lumumba ................................................................................................... 14 
Patrice Lumumba Photo Gallery ....................................................................................................... 21 
http://www.africawithin.com/lumumba/patrice_lumumba.htm .................................................. 21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Document designed by RBG Street Scholar for sharing, study and download


--- PAGE 3 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                            August, 2010 
 
 Page 3 
Patrice Emery Lumumba 
Historical Biography  
 
 Patrice Emery Lumumba 
b. July 2, 1925, Onalua, Belgian Congo [now Congo 
(Kinshasa)] 
d. January 1961, Katanga province 
 
African nationalist leader, the first prime minister of 
the Democratic Republic of the Con go (June -
September 1960). Forced out of office during a 
political crisis, he was assassinated a short time 
later. 
 
Lumumba was born in the village of Onalua in Kasai 
province, Belgian Congo. He was a member of the 
small Batetela tribe, a fact that was to b ecome 
significant in his later political life. His two principal 
rivals, Moise Tshombe, who led the breakaway of 
the Katanga province, and Joseph Kasavubu, who 
later became the nation's president, both came from 
large, powerful tribes from which they deriv ed their 
major support, giving their political movements a 
regional character. In contrast, Lumumba's 
movement emphasized its all-Congolese nature. 
 
After attending a Protestant mission school, Lumumba went to work in Kindu -Port-Empain, 
where he became act ive in the club of the évolués (educated Africans). He began to write 
essays and poems for Congolese journals. Lumumba next moved to Léopoldville (now 
Kinshasa) to become a postal clerk and went on to become an accountant in the post office in 
Stanleyville (now Kisangani). There he continued to contribute to the Congolese press. 
 
In 1955 Lumumba became regional president of a purely Congolese trade union of government 
employees that was not affiliated, as were other unions, to either of the two Belgian trad e-union 
federations (socialist and Roman Catholic). He also became active in the Belgian Liberal Party 
in the Congo. Although conservative in many ways, the party was not linked to either of the 
trade-union federations, which were hostile to it. In 1956 Lu mumba was invited with others to 
make a study tour of Belgium under the auspices of the Minister of Colonies. On his return he 
was arrested on a charge of embezzlement from the post office. He was convicted and 
condemned one year later, after various reduc tions of sentence, to 12 months' imprisonment 
and a fine. 
 
When Lumumba got out of prison, he grew even more active in politics. In October 1958 he 
founded the Congolese National Movement (Mouvement National Congolais; MNC), the first 
nationwide Congolese political party. In December he attended the first All -African People's 
Conference in Accra, Ghana, where he met nationalists from across the African continent and 
was made a member of the permanent organization set up by the conference. His outlook and 
terminology, inspired by pan-African goals, now took on the tenor of militant nationalism.


--- PAGE 4 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                            August, 2010 
 
 Page 4 
In 1959 the Belgian government announced a program intended to lead in five years to 
independence, starting with local elections in December 1959. The nationalists re garded this 
program as a scheme to install puppets before independence and announced a boycott of the 
elections. The Belgian authorities responded with repression. On October 30 there was a clash 
in Stanleyville that resulted in 30 deaths. Lumumba was impr isoned on a charge of inciting to 
riot. 
 
The MNC decided to shift 
tactics, entered the elections, 
and won a sweeping victory in 
Stanleyville (90 percent of the 
votes). In January 1960 the 
Belgian government convened 
a Round Table Conference in 
Brussels of  all Congolese 
parties to discuss political 
change, but the MNC refused to 
participate without Lumumba. 
Lumumba was thereupon 
released from prison and flown 
to Brussels. The conference 
agreed on a date for 
independence, June 30, with 
national elections in May. 
Although there was a 
multiplicity of parties, the MNC 
came out far ahead in the 
elections, and Lumumba 
emerged as the leading 
nationalist politician of the 
Congo. Maneuvers to prevent 
his assumption of authority 
failed, and he was asked to 
form the first government, which 
he succeeded in doing on June 
23, 1960. 
 
A few days after independence, 
some units of the army rebelled, 
largely because of objections to 
their Belgian commander. In the 
confusion, the mineral -rich province of Katanga proclaimed seces sion. Belgium sent in troops, 
ostensibly to protect Belgian nationals in the disorder. But the Belgian troops landed principally 
in Katanga, where they sustained the secessionist regime of Moise Tshombe. 
 
The Congo appealed to the United Nations to expel t he Belgians and help them restore internal 
order. As prime minister, Lumumba did what little he could to redress the situation. His army 
was an uncertain instrument of power, his civilian administration untrained and untried; the 
United Nations forces (who se presence he had requested) were condescending and assertive, 
and the political alliances underlying his regime very shaky. The Belgian troops did not 
evacuate, and the Katanga secession continued.


--- PAGE 5 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                            August, 2010 
 
 Page 5 
 
Since the United Nations forces refused to help suppres s the Katangese revolt, Lumumba 
appealed to the Soviet Union for planes to assist in transporting his troops to Katanga. He 
asked the independent African states to meet in Léopoldville in August to unite their efforts 
behind him. His moves alarmed many, pa rticularly the Western powers and the supporters of 
President Kasavubu, who pursued a moderate course in the coalition government and favoured 
some local autonomy in the provinces. 
 
On September 5 President Kasavubu dismissed Lumumba. The legalities of the  move were 
immediately contested by Lumumba. There were thus two groups now claiming to be the legal 
central government. On September 14 power was seized by the Congolese army leader Colonel 
Joseph Mobutu (president of Zaire as Mobutu Sese Seko), who later  reached a working 
agreement with Kasavubu. In October the General Assembly of the United Nations recognized 
the credentials of Kasavubu's government. The independent African states split sharply over the 
issue. 
 
In November Lumumba sought to travel from L eopoldville, where the United Nations had 
provided him with provisory protection, to Stanleyville, where his supporters had control. With 
the active complicity of foreign intelligence sources, Joseph Mobutu sent his soldiers after 
Lumumba. He was caught af ter several days of pursuit and spent three months in prison, while 
his adversaries were trying in vain to consolidate their power. Finally, aware that an imprisoned 
Lumumba was more dangerous than a dead Prime Minister, he was delivered on January 17, 
1961, to the Katanga secessionist regime, where he was executed the same night of his arrival, 
along with his comrades Mpolo and Okito. His death caused a national scandal throughout the 
world, and, retrospectively, Mobutu proclaimed him a "national hero." 
 
The reasons that Lumumba provoked such intense emotion are not immediately evident. His 
viewpoint was not exceptional. He was for a unitary Congo and against division of the country 
along tribal or regional lines. Like many other African leaders, he support ed pan-Africanism and 
the liberation of colonial territories. He proclaimed his regime one of "positive neutralism," which 
he defined as a return to African values and rejection of any imported ideology, including that of 
the Soviet Union. 
 
Lumumba was, ho wever, a man of strong character who intended to pursue his policies, 
regardless of the enemies he made within his country or abroad. The Congo, furthermore, was 
a key area in terms of the geopolitics of Africa, and because of its wealth, its size, and its  
contiguity to white -dominated southern Africa, Lumumba's opponents had reason to fear the 
consequences of a radical or radicalized Congo regime. Moreover, in the context of the Cold 
War, the Soviet Union's support for Lumumba appeared at the time as a thr eat to many in the 
West. 
 
{Text, edited from Encyclopedia Britannica} 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Back to Top


--- PAGE 6 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                            August, 2010 
 
 Page 6 
 
Lumumba's Last Letter 
Written to His Wife Just Before His Death 
 
 
Patrice Lumumba under arrest 
 in December 1960 
  
 
My dear companion, 
I write you these words without knowing  if they will reach 
you, when they will reach you, or if I will still be living when 
you read them. All during the length of my fight for the 
independence of my country, I have never doubted for a 
single instant the final triumph of the sacred cause to 
which my companions and myself have consecrated our 
lives. But what we wish for our country, its right to an 
honorable life, to a spotless dignity, to an independence 
without restrictions, Belgian colonialism and its Western 
allies-who have found direct and i ndirect support, 
deliberate and not deliberate among certain high officials 
of the United Nations, this organization in which we placed 
all our confidence when we called for their assistance -
have not wished it. 
They have corrupted certain of our fellow cou ntrymen, 
they have contributed to distorting the truth and our 
enemies, that they will rise up like a single person to say 
no to a degrading and shameful colonialism and to reassume their dignity under a pure sun. 
We are not alone. Africa, Asia, and free a nd liberated people from every corner of the world will 
always be found at the side of the Congolese. They will not abandon the light until the day 
comes when there are no more colonizers and their mercenaries in our country. To my children 
whom I leave and whom perhaps I will see no more, I wish that they be told that the future of the 
Congo is beautiful and that it expects for each Congolese, to accomplish the sacred task of 
reconstruction of our independence and our sovereignty; for without dignity there  is no liberty, 
without justice there is no dignity, and without independence there are no free men. 
No brutality, mistreatment, or torture has ever forced me to ask for grace, for I prefer to die with 
my head high, my faith steadfast, and my confidence pr ofound in the destiny of my country, 
rather than to live in submission and scorn of sacred principles. History will one day have its 
say, but it will not be the history that Brussels, Paris, Washington or the United Nations will 
teach, but that which they will teach in the countries emancipated from colonialism and its 
puppets. Africa will write its own history, and it will be, to the north and to the south of the 
Sahara, a history of glory and dignity. 
Do not weep for me, my dear companion. I know that my country, which suffers so much, will 
know how to defend its independence and its liberty. Long live the Congo! Long live Africa! 
Patrice 
 
 
 
 
 
Back to Top


--- PAGE 7 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                            August, 2010 
 
 Page 7 
 
Patrice Lumumba 
The First Prime Minister of the Congo (Zaire)  
On June 30, 1960, Independence Day 
Men and women of the Congo,  
Victorious fighters for independence, today 
victorious, I greet you in the name of the 
Congolese Government. All of you, my friends, 
who have fought tirelessly at our sides, I ask you 
to make this June 30, 1960, an illustrious date 
that you  will keep indelibly engraved in your 
hearts, a date of significance of which you will 
teach to your children, so that they will make 
known to their sons and to their grandchildren the 
glorious history of our fight for liberty. 
For this independence of the  Congo, even as it is 
celebrated today with Belgium, a friendly country 
with whom we deal as equal to equal, no 
Congolese worthy of the name will ever be able to 
forget that is was by fighting that it has been won 
[applause], a day -to-day fight, an ardent and 
idealistic fight, a fight in which we were spared 
neither privation nor suffering, and for which we 
gave our strength and our blood.  
We are proud of this struggle, of tears, of fire, and of blood, to the depths of our being, for it was 
a noble and just struggle, and indispensable to put an end to the humiliating slavery which was 
imposed upon us by force.  
This was our fate for eighty years of a colonial regime; our wounds are too fresh and too painful 
still for us to drive them from our memory. We hav e known harassing work, exacted in 
exchange for salaries which did not permit us to eat enough to drive away hunger, or to clothe 
ourselves, or to house ourselves decently, or to raise our children as creatures dear to us.  
We have known ironies, insults, blows that we endured morning, noon, and evening, because 
we are Negroes. Who will forget that to a black one said "tu", certainly not as to a friend, but 
because the more honorable "vous" was reserved for whites alone?  
We have seen our lands seized in the name of allegedly legal laws which in fact recognized only 
that might is right.  
We have seen that the law was not the same for a white and for a black, accommodating for the 
first, cruel and inhuman for the other.  
We have witnessed atrocious sufferings  of those condemned for their political opinions or 
religious beliefs; exiled in their own country, their fate truly worse than death itself.


--- PAGE 8 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                            August, 2010 
 
 Page 8 
We have seen that in the towns there were magnificent houses for the whites and crumbling 
shanties for the blacks , that a black was not admitted in the motion -picture houses, in the 
restaurants, in the stores of the Europeans; that a black traveled in the holds, at the feet of the 
whites in their luxury cabins.  
Who will ever forget the massacres where so many of our brothers perished, the cells into which 
those who refused to submit to a regime of oppression and exploitation were thrown [applause]?  
All that, my brothers, we have endured.  
But we, whom the vote of your elected representatives have given the right to direct our dear 
country, we who have suffered in our body and in our heart from colonial oppression, we tell you 
very loud, all that is henceforth ended.  
The Republic of the Congo has been proclaimed, and our country is now in the hands of its own 
children.  
Together, my brothers, my sisters, we are going to begin a new struggle, a sublime struggle, 
which will lead our country to peace, prosperity, and greatness.  
Together, we are going to establish social justice and make sure everyone has just 
remuneration for his labor [applause].  
We are going to show the world what the black man can do when he works in freedom, and we 
are going to make of the Congo the center of the sun's radiance for all of Africa.  
We are going to keep watch over the lands of our cou ntry so that they truly profit her children. 
We are going to restore ancient laws and make new ones which will be just and noble.  
We are going to put an end to suppression of free thought and see to it that all our citizens enjoy 
to the full the fundamental liberties foreseen in the Declaration of the Rights of Man [applause].  
We are going to do away with all discrimination of every variety and assure for each and all the 
position to which human dignity, work, and dedication entitles him.  
We are going to rule not by the peace of guns and bayonets but by a peace of the heart and the 
will [applause].  
And for all that, dear fellow countrymen, be sure that we will count not only on our enormous 
strength and immense riches but on the assistance of numerous fo reign countries whose 
collaboration we will accept if it is offered freely and with no attempt to impose on us an alien 
culture of no matter what nature [applause].  
In this domain, Belgium, at last accepting the flow of history, has not tried to oppose ou r 
independence and is ready to give us their aid and their friendship, and a treaty has just been 
signed between our two countries, equal and independent. On our side, while we stay vigilant, 
we shall respect our obligations, given freely.


--- PAGE 9 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                            August, 2010 
 
 Page 9 
Thus, in the interior and the exterior, the new Congo, our dear Republic that my government will 
create, will be a rich, free, and prosperous country. But so that we will reach this aim without 
delay, I ask all of you, legislators and citizens, to help me with all your strength.  
I ask all of you to forget your tribal quarrels. They exhaust us. They risk making us despised 
abroad.  
I ask the parliamentary minority to help my Government through a constructive opposition and 
to limit themselves strictly to legal and democratic channels.  
I ask all of you not to shrink before any sacrifice in order to achieve the success of our huge 
undertaking.  
In conclusion, I ask you unconditionally to respect the life and the property of your fellow citizens 
and of foreigners living in our country. If the conduct of these foreigners leaves something to be 
desired, our justice will be prompt in expelling them from the territory of the Republic; if, on the 
contrary, their conduct is good, they must be left in peace, for they also are workin g for our 
country's prosperity.  
The Congo's independence marks a decisive step towards the liberation of the entire African 
continent [applause].  
Sire, Excellencies, Mesdames, Messieurs, my dear fellow countrymen, my brothers of race, my 
brothers of stru ggle-- this is what I wanted to tell you in the name of the Government on this 
magnificent day of our complete independence.  
Our government, strong, national, popular, will be the health of our country.  
I call on all Congolese citizens, men, women and ch ildren, to set themselves resolutely to the 
task of creating a prosperous national economy which will assure our economic independence.  
Glory to the fighters for national liberation!  
Long live independence and African unity!  
Long live the independent and sovereign Congo!  
[applause, long and loud] 
 
 
 
 
 
Back to Top


--- PAGE 10 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                            August, 2010 
 
 Page 10 
 
Who Killed Lumumba? 
  
Saturday, 21 October, 2000 
 On 17th January 1961 Patrice Lumumba, first and only elected Prime Minister of Congo, was 
murdered. The circ umstances of his death remained a mystery, the identity of his killers 
unknown. 
Now, forty years later, fresh scrutiny of documents held in government vaults and the testimony 
of those who were there at the time reveal a story of international intrigue and betrayal.  
In 1956 Lumumba was a post office clerk; four years later he would be prime minister. In 
between he had been an "evolue" - one of Congo's tiny black middle class, a beer salesman 
and a prisoner, twice - once for embezzlement, though he claimed his motivation was political, 
and once for his political activities and inciting unrest.  
Perhaps it was prison that radicalized him. By 1958 he had co -founded a political party, the 
National Congolese Movement, the MNC.  
According to Jean Van Lierde, then a young Belgian radical who had befriended Lumumba, the 
MNC was distinctively pan-Africanist.  
"Lumumba was the only Congolese leader who rose above ethnic difficulties and tribal 
preoccupations that killed all the other parties."  
It was as leader of the  MNC that Lumumba emerged as Congo's first prime minister after 
elections in June 1960.  
At the Independence Day celebrations of June 30th Belgium's hostility to Lumumba deepened. 
Excluded from the official programme, Lumumba was advised by Van Lierde to g et up and 
 
 Lumumba's murder 
provoked world 
outrage


--- PAGE 11 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                            August, 2010 
 
 Page 11 
make an impromptu speech. He did, passionately denouncing the harsh brutalities and 
indignities suffered by the Congolese under Belgian colonial rule. 
Diplomacy it was not.  
"The king was very angry. The Belgians wanted nothing to do with him 
after that. People say it was this speech that brought his end," says Van 
Lierde.  
The road to independence was rocky. Within days the army mutinied. 
Worse followed.  
The mineral-rich Katanga province in the south declared independence. 
Its leader, Moise Tchombe, a longtime enemy of Lumumba, was known 
close to the Belgian industrial companies which mined the copper, gold 
and uranium whose wealth had flowed back to Brussels for decades. 
Without Katanga Congo's was an impoverished economy.  
The researcher and historian, Ludo de Witte, who has scrutinized 
documents held in the Brussels' archives for forty years, says the Belgian 
government was secretly protecting its interests and directing Katanga's 
secession from behind the scenes.  
"The documents are very clear. All those officers and functionaries were following orders from 
the Belgian government, and following Belgian policy,"  
Lumumba demanded that Belgian troops withdraw - they didn't. He expelled Bel gian diplomats 
and called on the United Nations to defend the newly -independent state. He hinted that it might 
be necessary to ask the Soviet Union to assist unilaterally. That set alarm bells ringing in the 
West.  
A mutinational UN peacekeeping force was deployed.  
"It is on record in UN reports that Belgian civilian personnel made it 
impossible for the UN civilian experts to work properly", says Brigadier 
Indarjit Rikye, the Secretary-General's military representative in Congo.  
Lumumba was frustrated. Finally he accepted a consignment of Soviet 
transport planes, military trucks and, it was suspected, guns. The 
American ambassador in Leopoldville began referring to the prime 
minister as "Lumumbavitch".  
Sixty-seven days after he came to power, Patrice Lumumba was 
sacked by state president Joseph Kasavubu. Lumumba, in turn, tried 
to sack Kasavubu. It was stalemate.  
Lumumba was placed under informal house arrest at the prime 
minister's residence.  
On Octob er 6th, the Belgian Minister for African Affairs, Count 
d'Aspremont Lynden, sent a cable to Katanga's capital, Elizabethville, 
stating clearly that policy was now directed at the "definitive 
elimination" of Patrice Lumumba.  
In London's Whitehall, analysts  at the British Foreign Office were considering reports from the 
UK's ambassador in Leopoldville. One desk man, later to become head of the internal security 
service MI5, opined I see only two possible solutions to the problem. The first is the simple one 
of ensuring Lumumba's removal from the scene by killing him. This should, in fact, solve the 
problem."  
Larry Devlin, the CIA station chief in Leopoldville received orders from Washington to await the 
arrival of "Joe from Paris".  
"I recognised him as he w alked towards my car, but when he told me what they wanted done I 
was totally, totally taken aback", says Devlin now. "Joe from Paris" was better known as the 
CIA's chief technical officer, Dr Sidney Gottlieb. He had brought with him a special tube of 
poisoned toothpaste. Devlin's job was to get the toothpaste into Lumumba's bathroom.  
 
Jean Van Leirde, 
friend and advisor to 
Patrice Lumumba 
 
Brigadier Inda Jit 
Rikhye, knew of the 
conspiracy


--- PAGE 12 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                            August, 2010 
 
 Page 12 
"It would put the man away", recalls Devlin, who was aghast at the plan. "I had never suggested 
assassination, nor did I believe that it was advisable," he says now. The toot hpaste never made 
it into Lumumba's bathroom. "I threw it in the Congo River when its usefulness had expired."  
Devlin says he suspected, but didn't know for sure, that the order to assassinate Lumumba 
must have come from President Eisenhower himself. In A ugust this year, however, Devlin's 
suspicion was confirmed officially by Washington - the order had come from the President.  
Lumumba now made perhaps the worst decision of his life. He decided to escape. Smuggled 
out of his residence at night in a visitin g diplomat's car he began a long journey towards 
Stanleyville. Mobutu's troops were in hot pursuit. Finally trapped on the banks of the impassable 
Sankuru River, he was captured by soldiers loyal to Colonel Mobutu.  
He appealed to local UN troops to save h im. The UN refused on direct orders from 
headquarters in New York. He was flown first to Leopoldville, where he appeared beaten and 
humiliated before journalists and diplomats.  
"He was chained in the back of a truck. He was bleeding, his hair was 
disheveled, he'd lost his glasses", says Rikhye. "But we could not 
intervene."  
Further humiliation followed at Mobutu's villa, where delighted young 
soldiers whooped with joy as they beat the elected prime minister in full 
view of television cameras. Lumumba was dispatched first to Thysville 
military barracks, one hundred miles from Leopoldville.  
The Belgians demanded a more decisive ending - they wanted 
Lumumba delivered into the hands of his most sworn enemy, President 
Tschombe of Katanga. On January 15th 1961, the Belgian Minister for 
African Affairs wrote to his apparatchiks in Elizabthville instructing 
them to inform Tschombe that he must accept Lumumba without delay. 
It was in effect a death warrant. After a moment's hesitation Tschombe 
agreed.  
Lumumba was beaten again on the flight to Elizabethville on January 
17th. He was seized by Katangese soldiers commanded by Belgians 
and driven to Villa Brouwe. He was guarded and brutalize d still further 
by both Belgian and Katangese troops while President Tschombe and his cabinet decided what 
to do with him.  
That same night it is said Lumumba was bundled into another convoy that headed into the bush. 
It drew up beside a large tree. Three firing squads had been assembled, commanded by a 
Belgian. Another Belgian had overall command of the execution site. Lumumba and two other 
comrades from the government were lined up against a large tree. President Tschombe and two 
other ministers were present for the executions, which took place one at a time.  
The following day Katang'as interior minister called a senior Belgian policeman to his office with 
orders to conceal the killings. "He said 'You destroy them, you make them disappear. How you 
do it d oesn't interest me," says Gerard Soerte. Soete and a companion exhumed the bodies 
from shallow graves, hacked them into pieces and dissolved them in acid from the Belgian -run 
mines nearby.  
"We were there for two days," says Soete. "We did things an animal  wouldn't do. That's why we 
were drunk. Stone drunk." When they ran out of acid, they made a fire for the last remains. 
When they had finished, there was no trace of human remains.  
Nothing was said for three weeks - though rumour spread quickly. When Lumumba's death was 
formally announced on Katangese radio, it was accompanied by an elaborately implausible 
cover involving an escape and murder by enraged villagers. No-one believed it.  
The research by Ludo de Witte and the recent testimony from witnesses an d accessories have 
caused soul -searching in Brussels. The Belgian Parliament has opened a Commission of 
Inquiry into the events of forty years ago.  
 
Gerard Soete, 
Comissioner of the 
Katangese Police, 
disposed of the 
evidence.


--- PAGE 13 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                            August, 2010 
 
 Page 13 
"It is time to address our history," says Geert Versnick, the MP who chairs the commission 
which has alread y begun taking evidence. "If there was wrong -doing in some of our former 
colonies, especially in the case of Mr Lumumba, then we should address our history."  
 
 
The Commission's report is expected early next year.  
Caroline Pare's Story  
 During the making of this film, producer Caroline Pare had her passport taken by soldiers and 
was held prisoner for three days before being thrown out of the country. Below is her own 
account of what happened.  
Working in Kinshasa, capital of the Congo, is not your traditi onal journalistic experience. In the 
first place I was not being granted a visa. Despite my pleading urgency, I never did get one from 
the recently closed down Knightsbridge embassy. In the end I traveled via Kenya where I picked 
one up in a morning.  
Luckily I had arranged for my driver-cum-fixer, Roger, to meet me and as soon as he arrived the 
whole nightmarish experience changed. He whisked me off to his broken down car and returned 
to the fray. He emerged fifteen minutes later having dropped US$50. I th ought it was a bargain! 
I won't dwell on the drive into town which ended in a smashed windscreen, my briefcase strap 
tying down the bonnet and a push start. But we eventually arrived at the hotel.  
My first assignment was to get the precious foreign journalist accreditation. I was told the office I 
needed was on the 8th floor but I was to get out at the 10th as the lift could not stop at 8. The 
doors opened to pitch black. I stumbled around feeling my way along manky walls to the 
stairwell and eventually spotted light as I emerged on the 8th floor.  
The place seemed deserted and reminded me of the film Barton Fink but when I knocked on 
door 825 I was called in. The window was shattered and the ministry official sat behind an 
empty desk in front of which, placed on the floor, were two car seats for visitors to sit in.  
It was to be a long process to get the accreditation - three days in fact - but I eventually got the 
precious piece of paper and began work. I was making a documentary about the killing of the 
first Prime Minister of the Congo, Patrice Lumumba, in 1961. Today Congo is in the throes of 
civil war but I assumed this 40 year old story would be straightforward to make. My first visit was 
to a man called Jonas Mukamba. He and some thugs were rumoured t o have beaten Patrice 
Lumumba nearly to death on an aeroplane back in 1961 and I wondered if he wanted to talk 
about it.  
The driver pulled up outside and took my business card to the gateman. At that very moment 
the car doors were flung opened and soldier s pushed in beside me, AK47s and all. We were 
force to drive into the compound and the large gates slammed behind us.  
Passport, mobile phones and car keys were taken. Nothing was said. We waited. Myself, my 
taxi driver (poor man) and my fixer. Two or thre e hours later our interrogators came. Who they 
were we never knew. Mine was charming, spoke immaculate French and wore spotless civilian 
clothes. He asked an odd list of questions about my family then as he left he reassuringly 
advised us to be a little patient as we would have to wait a few minutes more.  
 He was being economical with the truth. We were kept at Mukamba's house for the next three 
days. We were never told why we were there or if or when we were going to be released.  
 I ranted and raved at t he soldiers as our first day turned into night. But when, at around 
midnight, there were sounds of someone being beaten up by the soldiers in the compound and 
Mukamba's daughter came rushing into the house crying I bit my tongue. I only pleaded for our 
guards to get us some food as none of us had eaten, or drunk, all day. They eventually agreed 
but having no vehicle themselves they decided that Pierre, the taxi driver could drive them to the 
Grand Hotel and buy some for us.


--- PAGE 14 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                            August, 2010 
 
 Page 14 
I scratched the number of the Br itish Consul on a piece of paper and whispered to Pierre that if 
he could he should pass it to the hotel staff. He turned out to be a hero and despite having two 
soldiers guarding him managed to pass the note.  
The days dragged by. There was nothing to do.  I spent my time talking to Camille, my 
Congolese fixer, about today's war, independent Congo's short and turbulent history and the 
failings of the international community.  
Our story ends happily. We were released in the middle of the night in a bizarre c eremony 
involving a lot of besuited men in a gloomy foreign Ministry room.  
We were handed over from Military Intelligence to the Interior Ministry, to the Foreign Office and 
finally to the British consul on the understanding that she put me on the first p lane out of there 
the next morning.  
It was only after my release that I discovered that Jonas Mukamba had been arrested the day 
before our arrival on suspicion of plotting a coup d'etat. Plotting with the rebels supported by 
Uganda.  
I was very sorry to l eave Kinshasa. It may be a mad kind of place but it is also the most 
interesting. It's the American Wild West in the twenty first century.  
Reporter: David Akerman  
Producer: Caroline Pare  
Series Producer: Farah Durrani  
Editor: Fiona Murch 
 
 
 
 
 
New Data on Murder of Lumumba 
Summary Contents: 
This posting contains an article 
written by Stephen Weissman 
for the Sunday Washington 
Post of July 21, 2002 revealing 
new data from classified 
documents on the U.S. role in 
the murder of Patrice 
Lumumba in 1961. I t also 
contains a link and brief 
excerpts from the extensive 
Belgian parliamentary report 
which led to an official Belgian apology, in February 
this year, for Belgian complicity in Lumumba's death. The Belgian parliamentary report was 
prompted by a book first published in 1999, "The Assassination of Lumumba," by journalist Ludo 
de Witte. The book concentrated on Belgian complicity, and gave the impression of exonerating 
the U.S. of direct involvement. In the introduction to the English translation of the bo ok, 
however, de Witte stressed the joint responsibility of the U.S. as well.  
Weissman's article, referring to new evidence, calls for U.S. honesty about the past as well as 
U.S. action to make reparation for the damage caused by its earlier actions in the Congo.  
Back to Top


--- PAGE 15 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                            August, 2010 
 
 Page 15 
Another posting sent out today has updates on the latest developments 
in the current Congo peace process.  
In a related development, World Bank President James Wolfensohn, 
visiting Kinshasa in mid -July, announced that the World Bank was 
considering cancelling more than 80 per cent of the debt owed by the 
country to the World Bank. The cancellation should take effect in early 
2003, he told reporters.  
 
 
Opening the Secret Files on Lumumba's Murder 
By Stephen R. Weissman 
Washington Post, July 21, 2002  
Reposted by permission of the author. Dr. Weissman was staff director of the U.S. House of 
Representatives subcommittee on Africa from 1986 to 1991. He has done extensive research 
on U.S. policy in the Congo as well as other African countries.  
In his latest film, "Minority Report," director Steven Spielberg portrays a policy of "preemptive 
action" gone wild in the year 2054. But we don't have to peer into the future to see what harm 
faulty intelligence and the loss of our moral compass can do. U.S. po licies during the Cold War 
furnish many tragic examples. One was U.S. complicity in the overthrow and murder of 
Congolese Prime Minister Patrice Lumumba.


--- PAGE 16 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                            August, 2010 
 
 Page 16 
Forty-one years ago, Lumumba, the only leader ever democratically elected in Congo, was 
delivered to his enemies, tortured and summarily executed. Since then, his country has been 
looted by the U.S. -supported regime of Mobutu Sese Seko and wracked by regional and civil 
war.  
The conventional explanation of Lumumba's death has been that he was murdered by 
Congolese rivals after earlier U.S. attempts to kill him, including a plot to inject toxins into his 
food or toothpaste, failed. In 1975, the U.S. Senate's "Church Committee" probed CIA 
assassination plots and concluded there was "no evidence of CIA involv ement in bringing about 
the death of Lumumba."  
Not so. I have obtained classified U.S. government documents, including a chronology of covert 
actions approved by a National Security Council (NSC) subgroup, that reveal U.S. involvement 
in -- and significant responsibility for -- the death of Lumumba, who was mistakenly seen by the 
Eisenhower administration as an African Fidel Castro. The documents show that the key 
Congolese leaders who brought about Lumumba's downfall were players in "Project Wizard," a 
CIA covert action program. Hundreds of thousands of dollars and military equipment were 
channeled to these officials, who informed their CIA paymasters three days in advance of their 
plan to send Lumumba into the clutches of his worst enemies. Other new deta ils: The U.S. 
authorized payments to then -President Joseph Kasavubu four days before he ousted 
Lumumba, furnished Army strongman Mobutu with money and arms to fight pro -Lumumba 
forces, helped select and finance an anti -Lumumba government, and barely three weeks after 
his death authorized new funds for the people who arranged Lumumba's murder.  
Moreover, these documents show that the plans and payments were approved by the highest 
levels of the Eisenhower administration, either the NSC or its "Special Group, " consisting of the 
national security adviser, CIA director, undersecretary of state for political affairs, and deputy 
defense secretary.  
These facts are four decades old, but are worth unearthing for two reasons. First, Congo 
(known for years as Zaire) is still struggling to establish democracy and stability. By facing up to 
its past role in undermining Congo's fledgling democracy, the United States might yet contribute 
to Congo's future. Second, the U.S. performance in Congo is relevant to our struggle a gainst 
terrorism. It shows what can happen when, in the quest for national security, we abandon the 
democratic principles and rule of law we are fighting to defend.  
In February, Belgium, the former colonial power in Congo, issued a thousand -page report th at 
acknowledged "an irrefutable portion of responsibility in the events that led to the death of 
Lumumba." Unlike Belgium, the United States has admitted no such moral responsibility. Over 
the years, scholars (including myself) and journalists have written that American policy played a 
major role in the ouster and assassination of Lumumba. But the full story remained hidden in 
U.S. documents, which, like those I have examined, are still classified despite the end of the 
Cold War, the end of the Mobutu regime and Belgium's confession.  
Here's what they tell us that, until now, we didn't know, or didn't know for certain:  
* In August 1960, the CIA established Project Wizard. Congo had been independent only a 
month, and Lumumba, a passionate nationalist, had be come prime minister, with a plurality of 
seats in the parliament. But U.S. presidential candidate John F. Kennedy was vowing to meet


--- PAGE 17 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                            August, 2010 
 
 Page 17 
"the communist challenge" and Eisenhower's NSC was worried that Lumumba would tilt toward 
the Soviets.  
The U.S. documents show that over the next few months, the CIA worked with and made 
payments to eight top Congolese -- including President Kasavubu, Mobutu (then army chief of 
staff), Foreign Minister Justin Bomboko, top finance aide Albert Ndele, Senate President Joseph 
Ileo and labor leader Cyrille Adoula -- who all played roles in Lumumba's downfall.  
The CIA joined Belgium in a plan, detailed in the Belgian report, for Ileo and Adoula to engineer 
a no -confidence vote in Lumumba's government, which would be followed by uni on-led 
demonstrations, the resignations of cabinet ministers (organized by Ndele) and Kasavubu's 
dismissal of Lumumba.  
* On Sept. 1, the NSC's Special Group authorized CIA payments to Kasavubu, the U.S. 
documents say. On Sept. 5, Kasavubu fired Lumumba in a decree of dubious legality. However, 
Kasavubu and his new prime minister, Ileo, proved lethargic over the following week as 
Lumumba rallied supporters. So Mobutu seized power on Sept. 14. He kept Kasavubu as 
president and established a temporary "Colleg e of Commissioners" to replace the disbanded 
government.  
* The CIA financed the College and influenced the selection of commissioners. The College was 
dominated by two Project Wizard participants: Bomboko, its president, and Ndele, its vice -
president. Another CIA ally, Lumumba party dissident Victor Nendaka, was appointed chief of 
the security police.  
* On Oct. 27, the NSC Special Group approved $250,000 for the CIA to win parliamentary 
support for a Mobutu government. However, when legislators balked at approving any prime 
minister other than Lumumba, the parliament remained closed. The CIA money went to Mobutu 
personally and the commissioners.  
* On Nov. 20, the Special Group authorized the CIA to provide arms, ammunition, sabotage 
materials and training to Mobutu's military in the event it had to resist pro-Lumumba forces.  
The full extent of what one U.S. document calls the "intimate" relationship between the CIA and 
Congolese leaders was absent from the Church Committee report. The only covert action (apart 
from the assassination plots) the committee discussed was the August 1960 effort to promote 
labor opposition and a no-confidence vote in the Senate.  
How did Lumumba die?  
After being ousted Sept. 5, Lumumba rallied support in parliament and the inte rnational 
community. When Mobutu took over, U.N. troops protected Lumumba, but soon confined him to 
his residence. Lumumba escaped on Nov. 27. Days later he was captured by Mobutu's troops, 
beaten and arrested.  
What happened next is clearer thanks to the Belgian report and the classified U.S. documents. 
As early as Christmas Eve 1960, College of Commissioners' president Bomboko offered to hand 
Lumumba over to two secessionist leaders who had vowed to kill him. One declined and nothing 
happened until mid-January 1961, when the central government's political and military position


--- PAGE 18 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                            August, 2010 
 
 Page 18 
deteriorated and troops guarding Lumumba (then jailed on a military base near the capital) 
mutinied. CIA and other Western officials feared a Lumumba comeback.  
On Jan. 14, the commi ssioners asked Kasavubu to move Lumumba to a "surer place." There 
was "no doubt," the Belgian inquiry concluded, that Mobutu agreed. Kasavubu told security chief 
Nendaka to transfer Lumumba to one of the secessionist strongholds. On Jan. 17, Nendaka 
sent Lumumba to the Katanga region. That night, Lumumba and two colleagues were tortured 
and executed in the presence of members of the Katangan government. No official 
announcement was made for four weeks.  
What did the U.S. government tell its Congolese clients during the last three days of Lumumba's 
life? The Church Committee reported that a Congolese "government leader" advised the CIA's 
Congo station chief, Larry Devlin, on Jan. 14 that Lumumba was to be sent to "the home 
territory" of his "sworn enemy." Yet , according to the Church Committee and declassified 
documents, neither the CIA nor the U.S. embassy tried to save the former prime minister.  
The CIA may not have exercised robotic control over its covert political action agents, but the 
failure of Devlin or the U.S. embassy to question the plans for Lumumba could only be seen by 
the Congolese as consent. After all, secret CIA programs had enabled this group to achieve 
political power, and the CIA had worked from August through November 1960 to assassinate  or 
abduct Lumumba.  
Here, the classified U.S. chronology provides an important postscript. On Feb. 11, 1961, with 
U.S. reports from Congo strongly indicating Lumumba was dead, the Special Group authorized 
$500,000 for political action, troop payments and military equipment, largely to the people who 
had arranged Lumumba's murder.  
Devlin has sought to distance himself from Lumumba's death. While the CIA was in close 
contact with the Congolese officials involved, Devlin told the Church Committee that those 
officials "were not acting under CIA instructions if and when they did this." In a recent phone 
conversation with Devlin, I posed the issue of U.S. responsibility for Lumumba's death. He 
acknowledged that, "It was important to [these] cooperating leaders w hat the U.S. government 
thought." But he said he did "not recall" receiving advance word of Lumumba's transfer. Devlin 
added that even if he had objected, "That would not have stopped them from doing it."  
By evading its share of moral responsibility for L umumba's fate, the United States blurs African 
and American history and sidesteps the need to make reparation for yesterday's misdeeds 
through today's policy. In 1997, after the Mobutu regime fell, the Congolese democratic 
opposition pleaded in vain for Am erican and international support. Since then, as many as 3 
million lives have been lost as a result of civil and regional war. The United States has not 
supported a strong U.N. peacekeeping force or fostered a democratic transition. The collapse in 
late April 2002 of negotiations between Congolese factions threatens to reignite the smoldering 
conflict or ratify the partition of the country.  
Our government's actions four decades ago in Congo also have special meaning after the 
tragedy of Sept. 11. They warn  that even as we justly defend our land and our people against 
terrorists, we must avoid the excessive fear and zeal that lead to destructive intervention 
betraying our most fundamental principles.


--- PAGE 19 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                            August, 2010 
 
 Page 19 
 
Parliamentary Committee of enquiry in charge of deter mining the exact circumstances of the 
assassination of Patrice Lumumba and the possible involvement of Belgian politicians  
[brief excerpts from conclusions]  
The full 1,000 page report of the committee is available in French and Flemish at: 
http://www.lachambre.be/commissions/LMB/indexF.html and 
http://www.lachambre.be/commissions/LMB/indexN.html  
Links to a summary, introduction, and conclusions in English, can be found here.  
THE CONCLUSIONS OF THE ENQUIRY COMMITTEE  
December 2001  
I. THE FIGHT AGAINST LUMUMBA  
1. Political Elimination  
Lumumba was and remains a striking yet controversial personality. He was called a Satan by 
some, and honoured as a true people's hero by others. The latter mythologized Lumumba after 
his death. Indeed, it is a fact that he was the first democratic ally elected Prime Minister of the 
Congo. ...  
Between 10 and 14 July, following the beginning of the Belgian military intervention and the 
interruption of diplomatic relations, there was a spiral of mutual accusations, leading to a 
complete split. During that period, the Belgian government - convinced of the fact that it no 
longer had to consider the Lumumba government - attempted to influence the creation of a new 
Congolese government. ... In order to finance the policy against the Lumumba government, the  
Belgian government appealed to so -called secret funds, only some of which were approved by 
Parliament. ...  
The Belgian action is only one element in a wider group of opposition forces. Crucial to the final 
fall of Lumumba was the split between the Congol ese Prime Minister and the UN Secretary 
General Hammarskj”ld, because it forced Lumumba on the one hand to (openly) ask for the 
support of the Soviet Union and on the other hand encouraged the United States (behind the 
scenes) to organise active opposition  against Lumumba (with the first plans of physical 
elimination). ...  
The activities of the Commission have been aimed at detecting possible Belgian responsibilities 
in the murder of Patrice Lumumba. But it is clear that a Belgian, or even an American action had 
little or no chance of success without the existence of internal opposition within the Congo itself. 
... different factors, domestic as well as foreign, can be shown to have contributed to the 
deposition of Prime Minister Lumumba on 5 September 1960 . After 5 September, there was a 
period of great confusion. ...


--- PAGE 20 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                            August, 2010 
 
 Page 20 
During this period, the Belgian government was especially concerned about the actions of 
Lumumba. After having given its support to the deposition of Prime Minister Lumumba, it was 
eager to p revent him from returning to power and this was a real possibility. ... When, finally, 
Mobutu took action to arrest Lumumba on 10 October, which he had always refused to do until 
that time, it was in exchange for a Belgian promise to provide technical and military support to 
the Arm‚e Nationale Congolaise (ANC). The Belgian government was opposed to all possible 
forms of reconciliation, direct or indirect, between the Congolese leaders. The expression 
"‚limination d‚finitive" by Minister d'Aspremont Lynden on 6 October 1960 - in a telex to the 
ambassador Rothschild in Elisabethstad - should be seen from this perspective.  
Conclusion:  
With regard to the exact circumstances of the murder of Patrice Lumumba: after a thorough 
analysis, it is highly probable tha t Lumumba was executed in the jungle on 17 January 1961 
between 9.40 pm and 9.43 pm, within 5 hours after his arrival in Katanga (for a more detailed 
description, the commission refers to the experts' report). Regarding the possible involvement of 
Belgian politicians: The transfer of Lumumba to Katanga was organised by the Congolese 
authorities in Leopoldstad, supported by Belgian government authorities, especially the 
Ministers of Foreign and African Affairs and their colleagues.  
Belgian advisors in Leopo ldstad collaborated with the organisation of the transfer. No single 
document, of which the commission is aware, indicates that the Belgian government or a 
member thereof gave the order to physically eliminate Lumumba. The investigation does not 
show that the Belgian authorities premeditated the murder of Lumumba when it attempted to 
transfer him to Katanga. It is very clear, though, that the physical safety of Lumumba was of no 
concern to the Belgian government. It deemed the safety of Lumumba less importa nt than other 
interests. By not considering the possible risks of the transfer, not asking guarantees for his 
physical safety or insisting on humane treatment and a trial, the Belgian government and 
especially the Minister of African Affairs showed a lack of forethought and a lack of respect for 
the constitutional state.  
After hearing about the events of 17 January, the government, or at least certain members of it, 
acted irresponsibly by opting to spread lies to the public and all its allies. This attitud e inevitably 
raised doubts about the role of the Belgian authorities. Considering the preceding, the current 
norms regarding public morality and, without considering the personal and moral considerations 
of that time, the commission concludes that certain members of the Belgian government and 
other Belgian participants were morally responsible for the circumstances leading to the death 
of Lumumba. 
 
 
 
 
Back to Top


--- PAGE 21 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                            August, 2010 
 
 Page 21 
Patrice Lumumba Photo Gallery 
http://www.africawithin.com/lumumba/patrice_lumumba.htm


--- PAGE 22 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                            August, 2010 
 
 Page 22


--- PAGE 23 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                            August, 2010 
 
 Page 23 
   
   
     
 
 
 
 
Back to Top


--- PAGE 24 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                            August, 2010 
 
 Page 24 
CLICK TO EXPAND


--- PAGE 25 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                            August, 2010 
 
 Page 25 
Sources: 
 
 Speeches and writings by and about Patrice Lumumba at Marxists.org  
 Virtual Memorial to Patrice Lumumba at Find-A-grave  
 SpyCast - 1 December 2007: On Assignment to Congo-Peter chats with Larry 
Devlin, the CIA’s legendary station chief in Congo during the 1960s. Larry reflects on 
his reasons for joining the CIA, the political situation in Congo at the time, and the 
face-off with the Soviets in the Third World. He also discusses his response to the 
controversial directive from headquarters to have Congo’s Prime Minister Patrice 
Lumumba killed.  
 Africa Within A rich source of information on Lumumba, including a reprint of 
Stephen R. Weissman's 21 July 2002 article from the Washington Post, "Opening 
the Secret Files on Lumumba's Murder," detailing declassified documents on the 
CIA's role in Lumumba's murder and the overthrow by Mobutu.  
 BBC Lumumba apology: Congo's mixed feelings  
 Mysteries of History Lumumba assassination  
 Lumumba and the Congo Documentary of Lumumba's life and work in the Congo  
 BBC An "On this day" text. It features an audio clip of a BBC correspondent on 
Lumumba's death.  
 Belgian Parliament The findings of the Belgian Commission of 2001 investigating 
Belgian involvement in the death of Lumumba. Documents at the bottom of the page 
are in English.  
 Belgian Commission's Conclusion A particular document from the previous link  
 D'Lynn Waldron Dr. D'Lynn Waldron's extensive archive of articles, photographs, 
and documents from her days as a foreign press correspondent in Lumumba's 1960 
Congo  
 Mysteries of History Lumumba assassination  
 CIA plans included the assassination of Patrice Lumumba, report from the 
Washington Post by Karen DeYoung and Walter Pincus  
 David Akerman (2000-10-21). "Who Killed Lumumba?". BBC. 
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/programmes/correspondent/974745.stm. Retrieved 2007-
12-01.  
 Harry Gilroy (1960-07-01). "Lumumba Assails Colonialism as Congo Is Freed". New 
York Times. http://partners.nytimes.com/library/world/africa/600701lumumba.html. 
Retrieved 2007-12-01.  
 "The Bad Dream". Time Magazine. 1961-01-20. 
http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,871970,00.html. Retrieved 2007-
12-01. 
Back to Top

