=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Plants-of-the-Gods-Their-Sacred-Healing-and-Hallucinogenic-Powers.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 209
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:10:16.012372
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
PLANTS OF THE GODS
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 3 ---
• ••••
••
• • •
••
A
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 4 ---
Richard Evans Schultes
Albert Hofmann
Christian Rätsch
PLANTS OF THE GODS
Their Sacred, Healing,
and Hallucinogenic Powers
"The more you go inside the world of Teonanacati, the more things are seen.
And you also see our past and our future, which are there together as a single thing already achieved,
already happened:...Isaw stolen horses and buried cities, the existence of which was unknown,
and they are going to be brought to light. Millions of things I saw and knew. I knew and saw God:
an immense clock that ticks, the spheres that go slowly around, and inside the stars, the earth,
the entire universe, the day and the night, the cry and the smile, the happiness and the pain.
He who knows to the end the secret of Teonanacati can even see that infinite clockwork."
—Maria Sabina
A
HealingArts Press
Rochester, Vermont
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 5 ---
Caution: This book is not intended as a guide to the use of
hallucinogenic plants. Its purpose is to offer scientific, his-
torical, and cultural documentation concerning a group of
plants that are or have been of importance to many societies.
Ingestion of some of these plants or plant products may be
dangerous. The remedies, approaches, and techniques de-
scribed herein are meant to supplement, and not be a sub-
stitute for, professional medical care or treatment. They
should not be used to treat a serious ailment without prior
consultation with a qualified healthcare professional.
Healing Arts Press
One Park Street
Rochester, Vermont 05767
www.lnnerTraditions.com
First published by Healing Arts Press in 1992
A production of EMB-Service for Publishers,
Lucerne, Switzerland
Copyright © 1998 (updated version) EMB-Service for
Publishers, Lucerne, Switzerland
English translation second edition Copyright © 2001
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced
or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or me-
chanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any infor-
mation storage and retrieval system, without permission in
writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Schultes, Richard Evans.
Plants of the gods : their sacred, healing, and hallucino-
genic powers I Richard Evans Schultes, Albert Hofmann,
Christian Rbtsch.—2nd ed.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references
ISBN 0—89281—979—0
1. Hallucinogenic plants. 2. Hallucinogenic plants—Uti-
lization. 3. Ethnobotany. I. Hofmann, Albert, 1906- II.
Rätsch, Christian, 1957- Ill. Title
QK99.A1 S39 2001
394.1'4—dc2l2001004425
1098765432
Healing Arts Press is a division of Inner Traditions
International
Picture on title page: Mayanstone" from
El Salvador, late formative period (300c.—&. D. 200);
height 13 ¼in. (33.5cm).
Original concept and design: Emil M. BOhrer, Franz Gisler,
Joan Halifax, and Robert Tobler
New material translated by: Annabel Lee and
Michael Beasley
Composition: SatzWeise, FOhren, Germany
PhotolithographY: Pesavento AG, Zurich, Switzerland
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 6 ---
CONTENTS
7 PREFACE
9 INTRODUCTION
10 WHAT ARE PLANT
HALLUCINOGENS?
THE PLANT KINGDOM
PHYTOCHEMICAL
RESEARCH ON SACRED
PLANTS
26 GEOGRAPHY OF USAGE AND
BOTANICAL RANGE
PLANT LEXICON
WHO USES HALLUCINOGENIC
PLANTS?
OVERVIEW OF PLANT USE
THE MOST IMPORTANT
HALLUCINOGENIC PLANTS
82 MAINSTAY OF THE HEAVENS
Amanita (Fly Agaric)
86 THE HEXING HERBS
Atropa (Deadly Nightshade)
Hyoscyamus albus (Yellow Henbane)
Hyoscyamus niger (Black Henbane)
Mandragora (Mandrake)
92 THE NECTAR OF DELIGHT
Cannabis (Hemp, Marijuana,
Hashish)
102 ST. ANTHONY'S FIRE
Claviceps (Ergot)
106 HOLY FLOWER OF THE
NORTH STAR
Datura innoxia (Toloache)
Datura metel (Datura)
Datura stramoniuna (Thorn Apple)
112 GUIDE TO THE ANCESTORS
Tabernanthe (Iboga)
116 BEANS OF THE HEKULA
SPIRIT
Anadenanth era peregrina (Yopo)
120 SEEDS OF CIVILIZATION
Anadenanthera colubrina (CebIl)
124 THE MAGIC DRINK OF THE
AMAZON
Banisteriopsis (Ayahuasca)
Psychotria (Chacruna)
Peganurn (Syrian Rue)
Tetrapteris (Yage)
137 AYAHUASCA ANALOGS
140 TRUMPETS OF THE ANGELS
Brugmansia (Golden Angel's Trumpet)
Brugmansia (Blood-Red Angel's
Trumpet)
144 THE TRACKS OF THE LITTLE
DEER
Lophophora (Peyote)
156 LITTLE FLOWERS OF THE
GODS
Conocybe
Panaeolus cyanescens (Blue Meanies)
Panaeolus sphinctrinus (Hoop-
petticoat)
Panaeolus subbalteatus (Dark-rimmed
Mottlegill)
Psilocybe cubensis (San Isidro)
Psilocybe cyanescens (Wavy Cap)
Psilocybe mexicana (Teonanácatl)
Psilocybe semilanceata (Liberty Cap)
164 DIVINER'S SAGE
Salvia divinoru,n
166 CACTUS OF THE FOUR WINDS
Trichocereus (San Pedro)
170 VINES OF THE SERPENT
Ipomoea (Morning Glory)
Thrbina (Ololiugui)
176 SEMEN OF THE SUN
Virola (Epená)
182 GATEWAY TO DREAMTIME
Duboisia (Pituri Bush)
184 CHEMICAL STRUCTURES OF
HALLUCINOGENS
188 USES OF HALLUCINOGENS
IN MEDICINE
196 EPILOGUE
198 PICTURE CREDITS
199 BIBLIOGRAPHY
199 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
204 INDEX
The dreaming smoker stretched out
comfortably on his chaise enjoys visions
induced by Hashish. This engraving is
from M. von Schwind's Album of Etch-
ings, published in 1843.
Page 4 left: The witches of medieval
Europe induced inebriation with a great
variety of brews, most of which had at
least one of the Nightshades as a
psychoactive constituent. During their
intoxications, they engaged in many
aspects of hexing, both malevolent and
benevolent. This illustration, a woodcut,
published in 1459, portrays two witches
calling for rain and thunder, possibly
during a dry spell, and preparing a brew
to help them achieve this goal.
16
20
31
62
65
81
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 7 ---
For the Huichol Indians of Mexico, the Peyote cactus (Lophophora williams/i)
(see page 7) is not a plant but a god, a gift from the Earth Goddess to hu-
mans to assist them in attaining a connection to her in themystical realms.
The Huichol celebrate a great Peyote festival every year (be/ow), at which all
members of the tribe partake in eating the freshly harvested Peyote cactus.
A
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 8 ---
PREFACE
The earliest forms of life on Earth were plants. Re-
markably preserved plant fossils have recently
been discovered dating back 3.2billionyears.
These early plants provided the foundation for
the development of all later forms of plants and
indeed of animals, including that most recent of
creatures, the human being. The green plant cover
of the earth has a marvelous relationship with the
sun: chlorophyll-bearing plants absorb solar rays
and synthesize organic compounds, the building
materials for both plant and animal organisms. In
vegetable matter, solar energy is stored in the form
of chemical energy, source of all life processes.
Thus the Plant Kingdom provides not only body-
building foods and calories but also vitamins es-
sential for metabolic regulation. Plants also yield
active principles employed as medicines. The inti-
mate relationship between the human and plant
world is easily discerned, but the production of
substances profoundly affecting the mind and
spirit is often not so easily recognized. These are
the plants that make up the substance of Plants of
the Gods, focusing attention on the origin of their
use and the effect that they havehad on man's de-
velopment. Plants that alter the normal functions
of the mind and body have always been considered
by peoples in nonindustrial societies as sacred, and
the hallucinogens have been "plants of the gods"
par excellence.
7
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 9 ---
"In consciousness dwells the wondrous,
with it man attains the realm beyond the material,
and the Peyote tells us,
where to find it."
—Antonin Artaud, The Thrahl4mars (1947)
The shamans of the Huichol Indians use the sacred Peyote cactus so that
they may attain a visionary state of consciousness in the alternate reality
which is causal to occurrences in mundane reality; what affects the former
8
will change the latter. The shaman in the middle of the yarn painting is
depicted with a skull because he is a "dead man" and thus has the ability to
travel into the nether realms.
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 10 ---
INTRODUCTION
The use of hallucinogenic or consciousness-
expanding plants has been a part of human experi-
ence for many millennia, yet modern Western so-
cieties have only recently become aware of the
significance that these plants have had in shaping
the history of primitive and even of advanced cul-
tures. In fact, the past thirty years have witnessed
a vertiginous growth of interest in the use and
possible value of hallucinogens in our own mod-
ern, industrialized, and urbanized society.
Hallucinogenic plants are complex chemical
factories. Their full potential as aids to human
needs is not yet fully recognized. Some plants
contain chemical compounds capable of inducing
altered perceptions, such as visual, auditory, tac-
tile, olfactory, and gustatory hallucinations, or
causing artificial psychoses that, without any
doubt, have been known and employed in human
experience since earliest man's experimentation
with his ambient vegetation. The amazing effects
of these mind-altering plants are frequently in-
explicable and indeed uncanny.
Little wonder, then, that they have long played
an important role in the religious rites of early ci-
vilizations and are still held in veneration and awe
as sacred elements by certain peoples who have
continued to live in archaic cultures, bound to an-
cient traditions and ways of life. How could man
in archaic societies better contact the spirit world
than through the use of plants with psychic effects
enabling the partaker to communicate with super-
natural realms? What more direct method than to
permit man to free himself from the prosaic con-
fines of this earthly existence and to enable him to
enter temporarily the fascinating worlds of inde-
scribably ethereal wonder opened to him, even
though fleetingly, by hallucinogens?
Hallucinogenic plants are strange, mystical,
confounding. Why? Because they are only now
beginning to be the subject of truly scientific
study. The results of these investigations will, most
assuredly, increase interest in the technical impor-
tance of the study of these biodynamic plants. For
man's mind, as well as his body and the organs of
the body, need curative and corrective agents.
Are these nonaddictive drugs of interest as
"mind-expanding agents," as media for attaining
"the mystic experience," or as agents to be em-
ployed merely as aids in hedonistic adventure?
There is, however, another aspect that engages the
scientist's attention: Can a thorough understand-
ing of the use and chemical composition of these
drugs not lead to the discovery of new pharmaceu-
tical tools for psychiatric treatment or experimen-
tation? The central nervous system is a most com-
pleft organ, and psychiatry has not advanced so
rapidly as many other fields of medicine, mainly
because it has not had adequate tools. Some of
these mind-altering plants and their active chemi-
cal principles may indeed have far-reaching posi-
tive effects when they are fully understood.
An educated public must be an integral part in
such development of scientific knowledge, espe-
cially in so controversial a field as hallucinogenic
drugs. It is for this reason that we offer the present
volume—directed neither to the scientists who are
deeply involved in research in this field nor to the
casual reader, but to the concerned public. It is our
belief that scientists—for the sake of humanity
itself and its advancement—must make technical
knowledge available to those able to take advan-
tage of its presentation. It is in this spirit that we
wrote Plants of the Gods, hoping that it may, in
one way or another, further the practical interests
of mankind.
Richard Evans Schultes
Albert Hofmann
THE REVISION
When the book Plants of the Gods first appeared in
1979, it was a milestone in ethnobotany and ethno-
pharmacology. The book inspired and influenced
many young researchers around the world and en-
couraged them to continue in their own work. Be-
cause of this there have been some new discoveries
about the plants of the gods. Many questions about
the activity and constituents of psychedelic plants
have been clarified. I have tried to incorporate the
new information in a way that preservesthe origi-
nal character of the book and reflects the current
state of knowledge. I hope that the plants of the
gods retain their valuable position in our world
and that they reach the many people upon whom
the sacredness of nature is dependent.
Christian Rätsch
9
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 11 ---
Many plants are toxic. It is no accident that the
etymological origin of the word toxic stems di-
rectly from the Greek word(toxileon),
for "bow," referring to the use of arrow poisons.
Medicinal plants are useful in curing or alleviat-
ing man's illnesses because they are toxic. The
popular interpretation tends to accept the term
toxic as implying poisoning with fatal results.
Yet, as Paracelsus wrote in the sixteenth century:
"In all things there is a poison, and there is noth-
ing without a poison. It depends only upon the
dose whether something is poison or not."
The difference among a poison, a medicine, and
a narcotic is only one of dosage. Digitalis, for ex-
ample, in proper doses represents one of our most
efficacious and widely prescribed cardiac medi-
cines, yet in higher doses it is a deadly poison.
We all realize the meaning of the term intoxica-
tion, but it is popularly applied primarily to the
toxic effects from overindulgence in alcohol. In
reality, however, any toxic substance may intoxi-
cate. Webster defines toxic as "Of, pertaining to,
or caused by poison." It might be more specific to
state that a toxic substance is a plant or animal
substance or chemical ingested for other than
purely nutritional purposes and which has a no-
ticeable biodynamic effect on the body. We realize
that this is a broad definition—a definition that
would include such constituents as caffeine: while
employed in its usual form as a stimulant, caffeine
does not evoke truly toxic symptoms, but in high
doses it is a very definite and dangerous poison.
Hallucinogens must be classed as toxic. They
induce unmistakable intoxications. They are like-
wise, in the broad sense of the term, narcotics. The
term narcotic, coming from the Greek
(narkoyn), to benumb, etymologically refers toa
substance that, however stimulating itmay be in
one or more phases of its activity, terminates its
effects with a depressive state on the centralner-
vous system. Under this broad definition, alcohol
and tobacco are narcotics. The stimulants suchas
caffeine do not fall under the definition of narco-
tic, since in normal doses, they do not induce a
terminal depression, though they are psychoac-
tive. English has no term that, like the German
Genufirnittel ("medium of enjoyment"), includes
both narcotics and stimulants.
But the term narcotic has popularly been inter-
10
Datura has long been connected to the
worship of Shiva, the Indian god asso-
ciated with the creative and destructive
aspects of the universe. In this extraor-
dinary bronze sculpture from South-
east India of the eleventh or twelfth
century, Shiva dances the Anandatãn-
dava, the seventh and last of his
dances, which combines all inflections
of his character. Under his left foot,
Shiva crushes the demon Apasmãra-
purusa, who is the personification of
ignorance. In Shiva's upper right hand,
he holds a tiny drum that symbolizes
Time by the rhythm of his cosmic
dance in the field of Life and Creation.
His lower right hand is in the abhaya-
mudrã, expressing Shiva's quality of
safeguarding the universe. In his upper
left hand, he holds a flame that burns
the veil of illusion. His lower left hand is
held in the gajahasta and points to his
raised left foot, which is free in space
and symbolizes spiritual liberation.
Shiva's hair is bound with a band, and
two serpents hold a skull as a central
ornament, thus showing Shiva's de-
structive aspects of Time and Death.
On the right is a Datura flower. Gar-
lands of Datura blossoms are woven
among the locks of his whirling hair.
WHAT ARE PLANT
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 12 ---
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 13 ---
Below: This painting by the Peruvian shaman Pablo Amaringo depicts the
creation of the drink Ayahuasca, the most important medicine of the Amazo-
nian Indians. The magical drink has powerful visionary properties, which re-
veal to the participant a glimpse of "true reality," the fantastic realm of visions.
preted as referring to dangerously addictive agents,
such as opium and its derivatives (morphine, co-
deine, heroin) and cocaine. In the United Statesa
substance must be included in the Harrison Nárco-
tic Act to be considered legally a narcotic: thus
Marijuana is not legally a narcotic, although it is a
controlled substance.
Hallucinogens are, broadly speaking, all narco-
tics, even though none is known to be addictive or
to have narcotic effects.
There are many kinds of hallucinations: the
most common and popularly recognized is the vi-
sual hallucination, often in colors. But all senses
maybe subject to hallucinations: auditory, tactile,
olfactory, and gustatory hallucinations can occur.
Frequently a single hallucinatory plant—as in the
case of Peyote or Marijuana—may induce several
12
Page 13 top: The hallucinogenic use of Hemp (Cannabis) can be traced far
back into history. It is possible that the ingestion of this plant was responsible
for the wild dances of the Mongolian shaman.
different hallucinations. Hallucinogens may like-
wise cause artificial psychoses—the basis of one of
the numerous terms for this class of active agents:
psychotominietic ("inducing psychotic states").
Modern brain research has shown, however, that
hallucinogens trigger brain activity entirely differ-
ent from that apparent with true psychoses.
Modern studies have demonstrated such a com-
plexity of psychophysiological effects that the
term hallucinogen does not always cover the
whole range of reactions. Therefore, a bewilder-
ing nomenclature has arisen. None of the terms,
however, fully describes all known effects. The
terms include entheogens, deliriants, delusiono-
gens,eidetics, hallucinogens, rnisperceptinogens,
mysticomimetics, phanerothymes, phantasticants,
psych otica, psychoticants, psycho gens, psychosomi-
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 14 ---
metics, psycho clyslep tics, psychotaraxics, psych oto-
gens, psychotomimetics, schizogens, and psych ecle-
lics,among other epithets. In Europe, they are fre-
quently called phantastica. The most common
name in the United States—psychedelics—is ety-
mologically unsound and has acquired other
meanings in the drug subculture.
The truth is that no one term adequately delimits
such a varied group of psychoactive plants. The
German toxicologist Louis Lewin, who first used
the term phantastica, admitted that it "does not
cover all that I should wish it to convey." The word
hallucinogen is easy to pronounce and to under-
stand, yet not all of the plants induce true halluci-
nations. Psychotomimetic, while often employed,
is not accepted by many specialists because not all
the plants in this group cause psychotic-like states.
But since these two terms—hallucinogen and psy-
chotomimetic—are easily understood and widely
used, we shall employ them in this book.
Among the many definitions that have been of-
fered, that of Hoffer and Osmond is broad enough
to be widely accepted: ccHallucinogens are. ..che-
micals which, in non-toxic doses, produce changes
in perception, in thought and in mood, but which
seldom produce mental confusion, memory loss or
disorientation for person, place and time.'
Basing his classification of psychoactive drugs
on the older arrangements of Lewin,Albert Hof-
mann divides them into analgesics andeuphorics
(Opium, Coca), sedatives and tranquilizers (Re-
serpine), hypnotics (Kava-kava), and hallucino-
gens or psychedelics (Peyote, Marijuana,etc.).
Most of these groups modify only the mood,
13
Below right: In India the flowers of the potent hallucinogenic Thorn Apple
(Datura metel) are brought as an offering to the Hindu god Shiva. They are
also ritually smoked.
Below left: Henbane (Hyoscyarnus albus) is one of the most important hallu-
cinogenic plants of Europe. It was used for oracles and ritually burned in
ancient Greece.
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 15 ---
Below: Maria Sabina reverently ingests the niños santos, holy children," as
she lovingly refers to the visionary and healing Magic Mushrooms.
eitherstimulating or calming it. But the last group
produces deep changes in the sphere of experience,
in perception of reality, in space and time, and in
consciousness of self. Depersonalization may oc-
cur. Without loss of consciousness,the subject en-
ters a dream world that often appears morereal
than the normal world. Colors are frequently ex-
perienced in indescribable brilliance; objects may
lose their symbolic character, standing detached
and assuming increased significance since they
seem to possess their ownexistence.
The psychic changes and unusual states of con-
sciousness induced by hallucinogens are so far re-
moved from similarity with ordinary life that it is
scarcely possible to describe them in the language
of daily living. A person under the effects of a hal-
lucinogen forsakes his familiar world and operates
under other standards, in strange dimensions and
in a different time.
While most hallucinogens are of plant origin, a
few are derived from the Animal Kingdom (toads,
14
Page 15:The Mazatec shaman Maria Sabina incenses sacred mushrooms
prior to their ingestion during the healing ceremony of the ye/ada.
frogs,fish) and some are synthetic (LSD, TMA,
DOB). Their use goes back so far into prehistory
that it has been postulated that perhaps the whole
idea of the deity could have arisen as a result of the
otherworldly effects of these agents.
Indigenous cultures usually have no concept of
physically or organically induced sickness or
death: both result from interference from the spir-
it world. Therefore, hallucinogens, which permit
the native healer and sometimes even the patient
to communicate with the spirit world, often be-
come greater medicines—the medicines par excel-
lence—of the native pharmacopoeia. They assume
far more exalted roles than do the medicines or
palliatives with direct physical action on the body.
Little by little, they became the firm basis for
"medical" practices of most, if not all, aboriginal
societies.
Hallucinogenic plants owe their activity to a
limited number of types of chemical substances
acting in a specific way upon a definite part of
the central nervous system. The hallucinogenic
state is usually short-lived, lasting only until the
causative principle is metabolized or excreted
from the body. There would seem to be a differ-
ence between what we might call true hallucina-
tions (visions) and what perhaps could be de-
scribed as pseudo-hallucinations. Conditions for
all practical purposes apparently very similar to
hallucinations may be induced by many highly
toxic plants which so upset the normal metabo-
lism that an abnormal mental condition may de-
velop. A number of the plants (for example, Salvia
divinorum) experimented with by members of the
so-called drug subculture and which were consid-
ered as newly discovered hallucinogens by their
users belong to this category as well. Pseudo-
hallucinogenic conditions may be induced with-
out the ingestion of toxic plants or substances;
high fevers are known to cause such reactions.
Fanatics of the Middle Ages who went without
food or water over long periods finally induced
such alterations in normal metabolism that they
did actually experience visions and hear voices
through pseudo-hallucinogens.
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 16 ---
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 17 ---
THE PLANT KINGDOM
Before the eighteenth century; there was really no
logical or widely accepted classification or naming
of plants. They were known in Europe by the ver-
nacular names current in the various countries and
were referred totechnically in Latin by cumber-
some descriptivephrases, often several words long.
The invention of printing and movable type in
the middle of the 1400s stimulated the production
of herbals—that is, botanical books—mainly on
medicinal plants. The so-called Age of Herbals,
from about 1470 to 1670, led to the freeing of bot-
any and medicinefrom the ancient concepts of
Dioscorides and other classical naturalists that
shaped Europe for some sixteen centuries. These
two centuries saw more progress inbotany than
had taken place during the previous millennium
and a half.
Yet it was not until the eighteenth century that
Carolus Linnaeus, or Carl von Linné, a Swedish
naturalist-physician and professor at the Univer-
sity of Uppsala, offered the first comprehensive
and scientific system of classification and nomen-
clature for plants in his monumental, 1,200-page
book Species Plantarum, published in 1753.
Linnaeus grouped plants according to his "sex-
ual system"—a simple system of twenty-four
classes based primarily on the number and charac-
teristics of the stamens. He gave each plant a gen-
eric and a specific name, resulting in a binomial
nomenclature. Although other botanists had used
binomials, Linnaeus was the first to employ the
system consistently. While his sexual classifica-
tion—highly artificial and inadequate from the
point of view of an evolutionary understanding
of the Plant Kingdom (which was to come la-
ter)—is no longer followed, his binomial nomen-
clature is now universally accepted, and botanists
have agreed on the year 1753 as the starting point
of current nomenclature.
Believing that he had classified most of the
world's flora in 1753, Linnaeus calculated the size
of the Plant Kingdom as 10,000 or fewer species.
But Linnaeus's work and the influence of his
many students had stimulated interest in the flora
of the new lands that were being opened to colo-
nization and exploration. Consequently, nearly a
century later, in 1847, the British botanist John
Lindley increased the estimate to nearly 100,000
species in 8,900 genera.
Hallucinogenic species occur among the highest-evolved
flowering plants (angiosperms) and in the division fungi of
the simpler plants. Angiosperms are subdivided into mono-
cots (one seed leaf) and dicots (two seed leaves).
Sweet Flag, Hemp (Marijuana), and Deadly Nightshade
(above, right) as well as Fly Agaric (below, right) are repre-
sentative psychoactive species.
16Halrcap Moss
Pr,!,,,trirh, rn rnrnrn, nfl
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 18 ---
Spermatophytes are the seed plants, subdivided into
cone-bearers (gymnosperms) and flowering plants
(angiosperms).
Seaweeds
Algae
Dicots (flowering plants with two seed leaves) are separated into
Archichlamydeae (petals absent or separate) and Metachlamy-
deae (petals joined).
Mushrooms and molds (fungi), seaweeds (algae), mosses
and liverworts (bryophytes), and ferns (pteridophytes) are
simpler plants.
17
White Hne
Pinus strobus
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 19 ---
Below: A flower and leaves of the hallucinogenic Datura innoxia, which be-
longs to one of the most highly evolved families of the flowering plants.
Page 19 left: This fossil of blue-green algae (Co/len/a) is approximately 2.3
billion years old and is one of the earliest known specimens of life on Earth.
Page 19 right A fossilized algae colony from the Cambrian period in Bolivia
demonstrates that life-forms can be successfully preserved over billions of
years.
Even though modern botany is only two centu-
ries old, estimates have greatly increased. They
vary from some 280,000 to 700,000 species, the
higher figures being generally accepted by bota-
nists whose research is centered in the still only
superficially explored tropical regions.
Modern specialists estimate the fungi at be-
tween 30,000 and 100,000 species. The great var-
iance is due partly to lack of comprehensivestu-
dies of many groups and partlyto inadequate
means of defining some of the unicellular mem-
bers. One contemporary mycologist, realizing
that the fungi are very sparsely collected in the
tropics, where they abound,suggests that the total
figure might reach 200,000.
All of the algae are aquatic,more than half being
marine. This most varied group of plants isnow be-
lieved to comprise from 19,000to 32,000 species.
Algae have been found in pre-Cambrian fossils dat-
ing from one to more than three billionyears of age.
These procaryotic blue-green algae (Collenia)re-
present the oldest known form of life on Earth.
18
Lichens—a curious group of plants comprising
a symbiotic union of an alga and a fungus—num-
ber from 16,000 to 20,000 species in 450 genera.
The bryophytes comprise two groups: mosses
and liverworts. They are primarily tropical, and
many new species are to be expected from the tro-
pics with increased field investigations. That they
are not an economic group may be in part respon-
sible for our lack of understanding of their extent.
Present calculations assign 12,000 to 15,000 spe-
cies to the pteridophytes: the ferns and their allies.
An ancient group of plants, it is best represented
today in tropical regions. The seed-bearing plants,
or spermatophytes, clearly dominate the land
flora of the present time. The gymnosperms, or
cone-bearing plants, constitute a small group of
some 675 species; dating back into the Carbonifer-
ous Age, this group is apparently dying out.
The principal group of plants today—the plants
that dominate the earth's flora and which have di-
versified into the greatest number of species and
which, in the popular mind, comprise the world's
flora—are the angiosperms. Angiosperms are seed
plants in which the seed is covered or protected by
ovarian tissue, in contrast to the gymnosperms,
which have naked seeds. They are commonly
called flowering plants. Economically the most
important group of plants today, they have domi-
nated the several terrestrial environments of the
earth. Consequently, they may have a right to be
known as the "most important" plants.
Estimates of their extent vary. Most botanists
hold that there are 200,000 to 250,000 species in
300 families. Other estimates, probably more rea-
listic, calculate 500,000 species.
There ar.e two major groups of angiosperms: the
monocotyledons, plants with one seed leaf; and
those with usually two seed leaves. The monoco-
tyledons are usually credited with one quarter of
the total.
Some sections of the Plant Kingdom are of
great importance from the point of view of biody-
namic species with compounds of significance to
medicinal or hallucinogenic activity.
The fungi are of increasing interest: almost all
antibiotics in wide use are derived from fungi.
They are also employed in the pharmaceutical in-
dustry in the synthesis of steroids and for other
purposes. Hallucinogenic compounds may be
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 20 ---
widespread in the fungi, but those that have been
of importance in human affairs belong to the asco-
mycetes (Ergot) and the basidiomycetes (various
mushrooms and puffballs). The importance of
fungi as sources of aflotoxins of foods has only
recently been recognized.
Algae and lichens, interestingly, have as yet not
yielded any species reported as hallucinogens. An
impressive number of new biodynamic com-
pounds, some of possible medical value, have al-
ready been isolated from algae. Recent research
has heightened the promise of isolation of active
principles from lichens: they have yielded a large
number of bacteria-inhibiting compounds and
have been shown to be rich in chemovars. There
are persistent reports of hallucinogenic lichens em-
ployed in northwesternmost North America, but
asyet no identifiablespecimens orreliable
information has been forthcoming. In South Amer-
ica, a lichen (Dictyonerna) is used as a psychoactive.
Thebryophyteshavebeen phytochemically
neglected; the few that have been studied have gi-
ven little hope as sources of biodynamic com-
pounds. Similarly, in ethnomedicine, the mosses
and liverworts seem to have been ignored.
Some ferns appear to be bioactive and psy-
choactive. However, phytochemical investigation
has been far from exhaustive. Very recent investi-
gations have indicated a hitherto unsuspected
wealth of biodynamic compounds of potential in-
terest to medicine and commerce; sesquiterpinoid
lactones, ecdyosones, alkaloids, and cyanogenic
glycosides. A recent survey for antibacterial activ-
ity of extracts from 44 Trinidadian ferns indicated
the surprising fact that 77 percent were positive.
No hallucinogenic constituents have yet been dis-
covered in laboratory research or by indigenous
societies, although several ferns are employed in
South America asadditives to hallucinogenic
drinks (Ayahuasca).
Of the spermatophytes, the gymnosperms exhi-
bit few biodynamic elements. They are known
primarily as the source of the sympathomimetic
alkaloid ephedrine and the very toxic taxine.
Many are of economic importance as sources of
resins and timber. This group of seed plants is rich
also in physiologically active stilbines and other
compounds that act as protective agents against
heartwood decay (essential oils).
From many points of view, the angiosperms are
the important plants: as the dominant and most
numerous group and as the elements basic to
man's social and material evolution. They repre-
sent the source of most of our medicines of vegetal
origin; most toxic species are angiospermous; and
almost all hallucinogens used by man, as well as
other narcotics, belong to this group. It is easy to
understand why angiosperms have been chemi-
cally more assiduously studied; but what is not
fully recognized is the fact that the angiosperms
themselves have been merely superficially exam-
ined. It is clear that the Plant Kingdom represents
an only partially studied emporium of biodyna-
mic principles. Each species is a veritable chemical
factory. Although indigenous societies have dis-
covered many medicinal, toxic, and narcotic prop-
erties in their ambient vegetation, there is no rea-
son to presume that their experimentation has
brought to light all the psychoactive principles
hidden in these plants.
Undoubtedly new hallucinogens are lurking in
the Plant Kingdom and, in them, possible consti-
tuents of extreme interest to modern medical
practice.
19
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 21 ---
PHYTOCHEMICAL
RESEARCH ON
SACRED PLANTS
Plants of the gods interest various disciplines: eth-
nology, religious studies, history, and folklore.
The two major scientific disciplines that concern
themselves with these plants, however, are botany
and chemistry. This chapter describes the work of
chemists who analyze the constituents of plants
used in religious rites and in the magic of medicine
men and discusses the potentialbenefits from
such research.
The botanist must establish the identity of
plants that in the past were used as sacred drugs
or which are still employed for that purpose to-
day. The next step to be explored by scientists is:
What constituents—which of the substances in
those plants—actually produce the effects that
have led to their use in religious rites and magic?
What the chemist is looking for is the active prin-
ciple, the quintessence or quinta essentia, as Para-
celsuscalled theactive compounds in plant
drugs.
Among the many hundreds of different sub-
stances that make up the chemical composition of
a plant, only one or two (occasionally up to half a
dozen) compounds are responsible for its psy-
choactive effects. The proportion by weight of
these active principles is usually only a fraction
of 1 percent, and frequently even of one part per
thousand of the plant. The main constituents of
fresh plants, usually more than 90 percent by
weight, are cellulose (which provides the support-
ing structure) and water (as the solvent and trans-
port medium for plant nutrients and metabolic
products). Carbohydrates (such as starch and var-
ious sugars), proteins, fats, mineral salts, and pig-
ments make up several more percent of the plant.
Together with these normal components, they
constitute practically the whole plant, and they
are common to all higher plants. Substances with
unusual physiological and psychic effects are
found only in certain special plants. These sub-
stances as a rule have very different chemical
structures from those of the usual vegetal consti-
tuents and common metabolic products.
It is not known what function these special sub-
stances may have in the life of the plant. Various
theories have been offered. Most psychoactive
principles in these sacred plants contain nitrogen,
and it has therefore been suggested that they may
be waste products of metabolism—like uric acid
20
in animal organisms—their purpose being the
elimination of excess nitrogen. If this theory were
true, one would expect all plants to contain such
nitrogenous constituents: that is not the case.
Many of the psychoactive compounds are toxic if
taken in large doses, and it has therefore been sug-
gested that they serve to protect the plants from
animals. But this theory likewise is hardly convin-
cing, because many poisonous plants are in fact
eaten by animals that are immune to the toxic con-
stituents.
It remains, therefore, one of the unsolved rid-
dles of nature why certain plants produce sub-
stances with specific effects on the mental and
emotional functions of man, on his sense of per-
ception, and actually on his state of consciousness.
Phytochemists have the important and fascinat-
ing task of separating the active principles from
the rest of the plant materials and of producing
them in pure form. Once active principles are thus
available, it is possible to analyze them to deter-
mine the elements of which they are composed;
the relative proportions of carbon, hydrogen,
oxygen, nitrogen, etc.; and to establish the mole-
cular structure in which these elements are ar-
ranged. The next step is the synthesis of the active
principle: that is, to make it in the test tube quite
independently of the plant.
With pure compounds—whether isolated from
the plant or synthetically produced—exact phar-
macological assays and chemical tests can be
made. This is not possible with whole plants be-
cause of the varying content of the active princi-
pies and interference from other constituents.
The first psychoactive principle to be produced
in pure form from a plant was morphine, an alka-
loid present in the opium poppy. It was first iso-
lated by the pharmacist Friedrich Sertürner in
1806. This new compound was named for the
Greek god of sleep, Morpheus, because of its
sleep-inducing properties. Since then, enormous
strides have been made in developing more effi-
cient methods for the separation and purification
of active principles, with the most important tech-
niques evolving only during the last decades.
These include the techniques of chromatography:
methods of separation based on the fact that
different substances adhere in varying degrees on
absorbent materials or are more or less readily
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 22 ---
CO
—I,
Un
C.
I-.
CO
0
CD'
—
o 0:—
—-t
Cl)
U)
CD
C-
0 C
C
CD
0
C000
00o
0
Cl)
CCD
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 23 ---
taken up in solvents that do not mix. The methods
used in qualitative analysis and to establish the
chemical structure of compounds have also under-
gone fundamental changes in recent years. For-
merly, several generations of chemists would be
needed to elucidate the complex structures of nat-
ural compounds. Today, it takes just a few weeks
or even only days to determine them with the
techniques of spectroanalysis and X-ray analysis.
At the same time, improved methods of chemical
synthesis have been developed. The great ad-
vances made in the field of chemistry, and the effi-
cient methods now available to plant chemists,
have in recent years made it possible to gain
appreciable knowledge of the chemistry of active
principles found in psychoactive plants.
The contribution made by chemists to the
study of sacred plant drugs may be illustrated
with the example of the Magic Mushrooms of
Mexico. Ethnologists had found Indian tribes in
the southern parts of Mexico using mushrooms in
their religious ceremonies. Mycologists identified
the mushrooms used in these rituals. Chemical
analyses showed clearly which species were psy-
choactive. Albert Hofmann tested one species of
mushroom on himself; he discovered that it was
psychoactive, that it could be grown under la-
boratory conditions, and he was able to isolate
two active compounds. The purity and chemical
homogeneity of a compound can be demonstra-
ted by its ability to crystallize, unless ofcourse it
be a liquid. The two hallucinogenic principles
now known as psilocybine and psilocine, found
in the Mexican Magic Mushroom Psilocybe mex-
icana, were obtained in the form of colorlesscrys-
tals.
Similarly, the active principle of the Mexican
cactus L op hop ho ra williamsii, mescaline, had been
22
Some psychoactive compounds are also produced by animals. The Colorado
River toad (Bufo a/va rius) secretes considerable amounts of 5-MeO-DMT.
isolatedin pure form and crystallized as a salt with
hydrochloric acid.
With the active principles of the mushrooms
available in pure form, it became possible to ex-
tend research into various fields, such as psychia-
try, with useful results.
By determining the presence or absence of psi-
locybine and psilocine, an objective method was
now available for distinguishing true hallucino-
genic mushrooms from false ones.
The chemical structure of the hallucinogenic
principles of the mushrooms was determined (see
structural formulas in the next chapter), and it was
found that these compounds were closely related
chemically to substances (serotonin) occurring
naturally in the brain that play a major role in the
regulation of psychic functions.
As the pure compounds can be given in exact
doses, their pharmacological actions could now
be studied under reproducible conditions in ani-
mal experiments, and the spectrum of their psy-
chotropic actions in man determined. This was
not possible with the original mushrooms, be-
cause their content of active principles tends to
vary, between 0.1 and 0.6 percent of the dry
weight of the plant tissue. The greater part of this
content is psilocybine, with psilocine present usu-
ally only in traces. The median effective dose for
humans is 8 to 16 milligrams of psilocybine or
psilocine. Instead of swallowing 2 grams of the
dried mushrooms, which have a rather unpleasant
taste, one merely needs to take about 0.008 gram
of psilocybine to experience the hallucinogenic ef-
fects, which generally last for several hours.
Once the active principles were available in
pure form, it was possible to study their use and
effectiveapplication in medicine. They were
found to be particularly useful in experimental
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 24 ---
Mescaline—HCIPsilocybine
(mescaline-hydrochloride, crystallized from alcohol)(crystallized from methanol)
psychiatry,as valuable aids to psychoanalysis and
psychotherapy.
One might think that with the isolation, struc-
tural analysis, and synthesis of psilocybine and
psilocine, the mushrooms of Mexico had lost their
magic. Substances that because of their effects on
the mind had led Indians to believe for thousands
of years that a god dwelt in those mushrooms can
now be synthetically produced in the chemist's
retort. It should be remembered, however, that
scientific investigation has merely shown that the
magic properties of the mushrooms are the prop-
erties of two crystalline compounds. Their effect
on the human mind is just as inexplicable, and just
as magical, as that of the mushrooms themselves.
This also holds true for the isolated and purified
active principles of other plants of the gods.
Psilocine
(crystallized from methanol)
Many alkaloids crystallize poorly as free bases. They will separate as a crys-
tallized salt, however, when neutralized with a suitable acid, either by cooling
the saturated solution or by evaporation of the solvent. Crystallization of sub-
stances from solutions is carried out mainly fpr purification, since by-products
remain in the solvent.
As each substance has its own specific crystalline form, this form serves for
identification and characterization of a substance. A modern method for the
elucidation of chemical constitutions is the X-ray structure analysis. For the
application of this method, alkaloids and other substances must be available
in crystallized form.
23
/
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 25 ---
"The largest river in the world
runs through the largest forest ...Bylittle and little,
I began to comprehend
that in a forest which is practically unlimited—
near three millions of square miles
clad with trees and little else but trees,
and where the natives
think no more of destroying the noblest trees,
when they stand in their way, than we the vilest weed,
a single tree cut down
makes no greater a gap, and is no more missed,
than when one pulls up a stalk of groundsel
or a poppy in an English cornfield."
—Richard Spruce
Be/ow: The photograph depicts an aerial view of the Kuluene River, the southernmost tributary
of the Xingü River, a main affluent of the Amazon.
Right: "There were enormous trees, crowned with magnificent foliage, decked with fantastic
parasites, and hung over with lianas, which varied in thickness from slender threads to huge
python-like masses, were now round, now flattened, now knotted and now twisted with the
regularity of a cable. Intermixed with the trees, and often equal to them in altitude, grew noble
palms; while other and far lovelier species of the same family, their ringed stems sometimes
scarcely exceeding a finger's thickness, but bearing plume-like fronds and pendulous bunches
of black or red berries, quite like those of their loftier allies, formed, along with shrubs and
arbüscles of many types, a bushy undergrowth, not visually very dense or difficult to penetrate
It is worthy to be noted that the loftiest forest is generally the easiest to traverse; the lianas
and parasites. .. being in great part too high to be much in the way. .
—Richard
24
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 26 ---
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 27 ---
GEOGRAPHY OF
USAGE AND
BOTANICAL RANGE
Many more hallucinogenic plants exist than those
that man has put to use. Of the probable half-
million species in the world's flora, only about
one thousand areknown to be employed for their
hallucinogenic properties. Few areas of the globe
lack at least one hallucinogen of significance in the
culture of the inhabitants.
Despite its size and extremely varied vegeta-
tion, Africa appears to be poor in hallucinogenic
plants. The most famous, of course, is Iboga, a
root of the Dogbane family employed in Gabon
and parts of the Congo in the Bwiti cult. The
Bushmen of Botswana slice the bulb of Kwashi
of the Amaryllis family and rub it over scarifica-
tions on the head, allowing the active principles in
the juice to enter the bloodstream. Kanna is a
mysterious hallucinogen, probably no longer
used: thechewed the plant material
from two species of the Ice Plant family that in-
duced gaiety, laughter, and visions. In scattered
regions, relatives of Thorn Apple and Henbane
were used for their intoxicating properties.
In Eurasia there are many plants employed for
their hallucinatory effects. Most significant, it is
the home of Hemp, today the most widespread
of all narcotics: as Marijuana, Maconha, Daggha,
Ganja, Charas, etc., the drug and its use have
spread nearly throughout the world.
The most spectacular Eurasiatic hallucinogen is
the Fly Agaric, a mushroom consumed by scat-
tered tribesmen in Siberia and possibly the sacred
god-narcotic Soma of ancient India.
Datura was employed over wide areas of Asia.
In Southeast Asia, especially in Papua New Gui-
nea, sundry poorly understood hallucinogens are
used. The rhizome of Maraba, a member of the
Ginger family, is believed to be eaten in New Gui-
nea. In Papua, natives ingest a mixture of leaves of
Ereriba of the Arum family and bark of a large tree,
Agara, to produce a sleep during which visions oc-
cur. Nutmeg may once have been taken inIndia
and Indonesia for its narcotic effects. Tribesmen
in Turkestan drink an intoxicating tea made from
the dried leaves of a shrubby mint, Lagochilus.
The heyday of the use of hallucinogens in Eur-
ope occurred in ancient times, when they were
used almost exclusively in witchcraft and divina-
tion. The major plants involved—Thorn Apple,
Mandrake, Henbane, Belladonna—belong to the
26
Nightshade family. The fungus Ergot, a parasite
on rye, frequently poisoned entire regions if acci-
dentally milled into the flour. Such attacks led
hundreds of citizens to go mad and suffer hallu-
cinations, often causing permanent insanity, gang-
rene, or death. This plague was known as St.
Anthony's fire. Although Ergot was apparently
never purposefully used in medieval Europe as a
hallucinogen, there are suggestions that the Eleu-
sinian mysteries of ancient Greece were associated
with this fungal genus.
The famous and widely employed Kava-kava is
not a hallucinogen but has been classified as a
hypnotic narcotic.
It is in the New World that the number and
cultural significance of hallucinogenic plants are
overwhelming, dominating every phase of life
among the aboriginal peoples.
There were some hallucinogenic species in the
West Indies. In fact, the early indigenous popula-
tions used mainly the snuff known as Cohoba;
and it is believed that this custom was imported
by Indians invading the Caribbean Islands from
the Orinoco regions of South America.
Similarly, North America (north of Mexico) is
quite poor in hallucinogens. Various species of
Datura were employed rather widely, but most in-
tensely in the Southwest. The Indians of the region
of Texas and adjacent areas used the Red Bean or
Mescal Bean as the basis of a vision-seeking cere-
mony. In northern Canada, Indians chewed the
roots of Sweet Flag as medicine and supposedly
also for the hallucinogenic effects.
Mexico represents without a doubt the world's
richest area in diversity and use of hallucinogens
in aboriginal societies—a phenomenon difficult
to understand in view of the comparatively mod-
est number of species comprising the flora of the
country. Without any question the Peyote cactus
isthemost importantsacredhallucinogen,
although other cactus species are still used in
northern Mexico as minor hallucinogens for spe-
cial magico-religious purposes. Of almost equal
religious importance in early Mexico and surviv-
ing until today in religious rituals are mush-
rooms, known to the Aztecs as Teonanácatl. At
least twenty-four species of these fungi are em-
ployed at the present time in southern Mexico.
Ololiuqui, the seeds of Morning Glories, repre-
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 28 ---
Top: At the Shiva Temple of Pashupatinath near Kathmandu, Nepal, Indian
yogis smoke Marijuana in preparation for the arduous body practice and
meditation.
sents another hallucinogen of great importance
in Aztec religion and is still employed in south-
ern Mexico. There are many hallucinogens of
secondary importance: Toloache and other spe-
cies of the Datura group; the Mescal Bean or
Frijolillo in the north; Pipiltzintzintli of the
Aztecs; the diviner's sage now known as Hierba
de la Pastora; Genista among the Yaqui Indi-
ans; Piule, Sinicuichi, Zacatechichi, the puffballs
Below: Visions revealed by hallucinogens can be subsequentlyprocessed
and rendered artistically. In this way the experience is carried into andcon-
nected with everyday life. (Hallucigenia by Christian Rätsch, watercolor, circa
1993)
known by the Mixtecs as Gi'-i-Wa; and many
others.
South America ranks a close second to Mexico
in the number, variety, and deep magico-religious
significance of hallucinogens. The Andean cul-
tures had half a dozen species of Brugmansias,
known as Borrachero, Campanilla, Floripondio,
Huanto, Haucacachu, Maicoa, Toe, Tongo, etc.
In Peru and Bolivia a columnar cactus called San
Pedro or Aguacolla is the basis of the drink
ci,nora,usedin a vision-seeking ceremony. Ma-
puche Indian witch doctors (who are mostly
female) of Chile formerly employed a hallucino-
genic tree of the Nightshade family—Latué or
Arbol de los Brujos. Research has indicated the
use in various parts of the Andes ofthe rare shrub
Taique (Desfontainia), theShanshi,
and the fruits of Hierba Loca and Taglli, both of
the Heath family. Most recently, a type of Petunia
has been reported as an intoxicant used in Ecua-
dor. In the Orinoco and parts of the Amazon, a
powerful snuff called Yopo or Niopo is made
from the toasted seeds of a tree of the legume
27
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 29 ---
•NATIVE USE OF MAJOR I
HALLUCINOGENS
Notwithstanding the greater age of cultures and the
widespread use of hallucinogens in the Eastern••--
Hemisphere, the number of species so used is far
the Western Hemisphere. Anthropologists
have e plained this disparity on cultural
There does not,to be a significant
difference between the two hemispheres in the num
ber of plants possessing hallucinogenic pnriciples
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 30 ---
There are few cultures in the Western Hemisphere that
did not value at least one hallucinogenic plant in
magico-religious ceremonies. Many cultures had
several. In addition to hallucinogens, a number of
otherwise psychoactive plants shared the honors:
Tobacco, Coca, Guayusa, Yoco, Guarancá. Some of
these—especially Tobacco and Coca—rose to exalted
positions in the sacred native pharmacopoeias. These
major hallucinogens are culturally significant in the
areas indicated by the symbols.
e
Hyoscyamusspp.
Amanita muscaria
Atropa belladonna
Cannabis sativa
CIa viceps purpurea
Daturaspp.
Tabernanthe iboga0
Anadenanthera peregrina4'
Anadenanthera colubrina4,
q3Q Banistenopsis caapi
4,
Brugmansiaspp.
Lophophora williamsii0
Psilocybespp
Turbina corymbosa et lpomoea viofacea
4'
Virolaspp
Duboisia spp.
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 31 ---
Right: Shamans remain the guardians of wisdom concerning the magical ef-
fects of the psychoactive plants. This photograph was taken at the holy
mountain Kalinchok (4,000 m) in the Himalayas of Nepal.
family.The Indians of northern Argentina take a
snuff—CebIl or Vilica—prepared from seeds of a
species closely related to Yopo. Perhaps the most
important lowland hallucinogen in South America
is Ayahuasca, Caapi, Natema, Pindé, or Yajé. Em-
ployed ceremonially in the western Amazon and
in several localities on the Pacific coastal areas of
Colombia and Ecuador, it is made basically from
several species of lianas of the Malpighia family.
Brunfelsia, a member of the Nightshade family,
known widely in the westernmost Amazon as
Chiricaspi, is taken for hallucinatory purposes.
There are more plants utilized as hallucinogens
in the New World than in the Old. Nearly 130
species are known to be used in the Western
Hemisphere, whereas in the Eastern Hemisphere
the number reaches roughly 50. Botanists have no
reason to presume that the flora of the New World
is richer or poorer than that of the Old in plants
with hallucinogenic properties.
30
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 32 ---
PLANT LEXICON
The plant lexicon includes basic de-
scriptions, primarily botanical in
nature, of ninety-seven plants that
are known to have a hallucinogenic
or psychoactive effect.
Emphasis is given to plants that
are known from the literature, field
experience, and/or laboratory evi-
dence to have definite psychoactive
effects. Some species that are re-
ported to have "narcotic" or "intox-
icating" uses are included as well.
The plants are arranged alphabe-
tically according to the Latin name
of the genus. This order has been
followed in view of the many differ-
ent vernacular names in the great
variety of native languages. If a par-
ticular name is not listed, it may be
sought in the index of vernacular
names on pages 32—33 or at the end
of the book where these epithets are
cross-referenced.
Inasmuch as this volume is writ-
ten for the general reader, the bota-
nical descriptions are intentionally
brief, stressing the obvious and most
easily visible characteristics of the
plant. Whenever space permits, ad-
ditional information of historical,
ethnological, phytochemical, and,
very occasionally, psychopharma-
cological interest is added. In this
way, an attempt has been made in
this introductory lexicon to give as
broad an interdisciplinary view as
possible. The illustrations in the lex-
icon are of two kinds: some of them
arewatercolors made whenever
possible from living plant material
or herbarium specimens. Most are
direct reproductions of color photo-
graphs. A number of the plants de-
picted here are illustrated for the
first time.
The purpose of the lexicon is
manifestly to help guide the reader
more easilyintothe admittedly
complex array of facts and stories
that comprise only a small fraction
of the extensive knowledge from
many fields concerning these plants
that native peoples around the world
have considered plants of the gods.
The botanical investigation of medicinal
plants has, over the years, become
more and more exact and sophisticated.
In 1543, the writer of one of the most
beautifully illustrated herbals, Leonard
Fuchs, presented this accurate sketch
of Datura stramonium, the Thorn Apple
(left).Somethree hundred years later,
Kohler, in his Medizinal Pflanzen, pub-
lished a more detailed pharmacognostic
rendering of this very important thera-
peutic plant (center). In the 125 years
since the establishment of Linnaeus's
herbarium and the binomial system of
nomenclature, our herbaria have greatly
enhanced the understanding of the
morphological variation of vegetal
species through the collection of dried
specimens around the world. The third
illustration depicts a typical herbarium
specimen of the Thorn Apple repre-
senting the kind of material that now
authenticates botanical identification.
Modern technology (for example, the
electron-scanning microscope) is mak-
ing available morphological details,
such as the leaf surface hairs of the
Thorn Apple, which provide greater ac-
curacy in the work of plant identification.
31
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 33 ---
Index and Key
to the PlantLexicon
Ninety-sevenhallucinogenic plants are illu-Acacia1El Ahijado21
strated and described on the following pagesAgara35El Macho21
(34—60).Aguacolla94El Nene21
The lexicon is in alphabetical order by genusAjuca56Epená96
name. Each text in the lexicon includes the fol-Angel's Trumpet11, 12Ereriba39
lowing information in its heading:Arbol de Campanilla42Ergot20
• Genus, author, and, in brackets, thenumber ofArbol de los Brujos47Esakuna25
species known to exist in the genus.Axocatzin86False Peyote7
• Botanical name of the species shown. TheAyahuasca9, 93Fang-K'uei72
species known to contain hallucinogenicAztec Dream Grass16Flag Root2
properties orto be used as hallucinogens willBadoh95Floripondio11, 12
be found in the reference section "Overview ofBadoh Negro43Fly Agaric3
Plant Use," pages 65—80, which is organizedBakana24, 84Frijoles88
by common name. This reference section!Belladonna8Galanga45
chart provides the botanical names of theBhang17Ganja17
plants and describes the history, ethnography,Biak—Biak57Genista26
context, purpose of usage, and preparation,Black Henbane41GigantOn94
as well as chemical components and effects.Blood-Red Angel's Trumpet12Gi'-i-Sa-Wa52
•Plant family.Blue Meanies63Gi'-i-Wa52
• Reference number.Blue Water Lily60Golden Angel's Trumpet11
• Geographical distribution of the genus.Borrachero11, 12, 30, 42Hashish17
Common names are listed here below with theBovista52Hawaiian Wood Rose6
number designating each plant's location in theBrunfelsia13Hemp17
lexicon.Caapi9, 93Henbane40,41
Caapi-Pinima93Hierba de Ia Pastora82
Cahua80Hierba de Ia Virgen82
Calamus2Hierba Loca70
Cawe62Hikuli24
Cebil4Hikuli51
Cebolleta61Hikuli Mulato33
Chacruna80Hikuli Rosapara33
Chacruna Bush80Hikuli Rosapara53
Chalice Vine87Hikuli Sunamé7
Channa83Hikuri53
Charas17Hikuri32
Chautle7Hikuri Orchid61
Chichipe86Hongo de San Isidro76
Chilicote34Hoop-petticoat64
Chiricaspi13Huacacachu11,12
Chiric-Sanango13Huanto11,12
Cohoba5Huedhued70
Coleus21Huelpatl87
Colorines34,88Huilca14
Common Reed74Iboga90
Conocybe22Jambur63
Copelandia63Jimsonweed29
Coral Bean88Jurema Tree56
Coral Tree34Kanna83
Cowhage58Kieli87
Cumala Tree96Kieri87
Dacha48Kit17
Dagga17Koribo92
Dama da Noite19Kougued83
Dark-rimmed Mottlegill65Kratom57
Datura28Kuma Mushroom10
Deadly Nightshade8Kwashi66
Diviner's Sage82Lady of the Night19
Dog Grass16Latué47
Dutra28Latuy30
32
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 34 ---
Lemongrass
Liberty Cap
Lion's Tail
Mace
Maconha
Magic Mushroom
Maicoa
Maiden's Acacia
Malva Colorada
Mammillaria
Manaka
Mandrake
Maraba
Marijuana
Marijuanillo
Mashihiri
MatwO
Mescal
Mescal Bean
Mescal Button
Morning Glory
Nightshade
Ninfa
Nonda
Nutmeg
Nyakwana
Ololiuqui
Paguando
Painted Nettle
Paiqul
Petunia
Peyote Cactus
Peyote Cimarrdn
Peyote de San Pedro
Peyotillo
Pincushion Cactus
Pipiltzintzintli
Pitallito Cactus
Pituri
Pituri Bush
Piule
Poison Bush
Pokeberry
Quetzalaxcchiacatl
Rape dos Indios
Red Bean
Red Canary Grass
Reed Grass
Saguaro
Sanango
San Isidro
San Pedro Cactus
Scopolia
Screw Pine
Shang-la
Shanin
Shanshi
She-to
Siberian Lion's Tail
25Siberian Motherwort
79Sinicuichi
48Straw Flower
59Sweet Calomel
19Sweet Flag
76, 79Syrian Rue
11. 12Tabaco del Diablo
1Tabernaemontana
86TagIli
53Taique
13Takini
54TaMa
45Tamu
17Tecomaxochitl
49Teonanàcatl
44Tepescohuite
14ThIe-pelakano
88Thorn Apple
88Tlililtzin
51Toe
43Toloache
85Toloatzin
60Tonga
10To-shka
59Totubjansush
96Tsuwiri
95Tupa
42Turkestan Mint
21Tzompar.quahuitl
19VilIca
71Voacanga
51Wavy Cap
7Wichowaka
53Wichuri
69Wichuriki
24, 53Wild Dagga
82Wood Rose
32Xtabentum
31Yahutli
31Yajé
43,81Yakee
31Yellow Henbane
75Yopo
60YUn-shih
55Zacatechichi
88
73
73
18
89
76
94
85
67
75
71
23
64
49
49
36
37
2
2
68
50
89
70
30
38
17
22
87
78
56
16
29
43
11
27
27
11,12
64
42
7
50
46
34
4
97
77
62
24
53
48
6
95
91
9
96
40A South American Indian harvests aeven millennia. The Indians caution
plant of the gods, a Blood-Red An-against the thoughtless use of this
isgel's Trumpet (Brugmansia sangui-plant, which causes such strong
16flea). This alkaloid-rich plant hashallucinations and delirium that only
been cultivated and used for psy-experienced shamans can use it for
choactive purposes for centuries ordivination and healing.
33
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 35 ---
ACACIA Mill.
Acacia maidenii F von Muell.
Maiden's Acacia
Acorus calamus L.
Sweet Flag
Araceae (Arum Family)
Temperate and warm zones
2of both hemispheres
AMANITA L.
Amanita muscaria (L. ex Fr.) Pers.
Fly Agaric
Amanitaceae
Europe, Africa, Asia,
3Americas
ANADENANTHERA Speg.
Ariadenanthera colubruna
(Vellozo) Brennan
Cebil, Villca
Leguminosae (Pea Family)
Northwest Argentina
4
The genus Acacia is widely dis-
tributed throughout the tropical
and subtropical regions of the
world. It encompasses for the
most part medium-sized trees
with pinnate, occasionally
smooth leaves. The flowers
grow in clusters and the fruit is
pea-like. Many acacias are a
traditional additive to psycho-
active products, such as betel,
beer, balché, pituri, and pulque.
Some of the species are suited
for the preparation of Ayahuas-
ca analogs. Numerous Austra-
lian species (A. maidenii,
A. phlebophylla, A. simplicifolia)
contain higher concentrations of
DMT in their bark and, leaves.
Acacia maidenii, a beautiful
erect tree with a silvery splen-
dor, contains different trypta-
mines. The bark contains
0.36% DMT. The leaves are
usable as a DMT-delivering
component of Ayahuasca ana-
logs. These acacias are easy to
cultivate in temperate climates
such as in California and south-
ern Europe.
Some evidence, although weak
and indirect, suggests that the
Cree Indians of northwestern
Canada may occasionally chew
the rootstalk of Sweet Flag for its
psychoactive effects.
Sweet Flag is a semiaquatic
herb with a long, aromatic,
creeping rootstock producing
shoots of erect, linear, swordlike
leaves up to 6ft (2m) in length.
The tiny flowers are borne on a
solid, lateral, greenish yellow
spadix. The rootstalk or rhizome
contains an essential oil re-
sponsible for the plant's medic-
inal value.
It has been suggested that the
active principles are a-asarone
andThere is a struc-
tural resemblance between
asarone and mescaline, a psy-
choactive alkaloid. No evidence
has ever been produced, how-
ever, that asarone can be asso-
ciated with psychotomimetic
activity.
Amanita muscaria is a beautiful
mushroom growing in thin for-
ests usually under birches, firs,
and young pines. It may attain a
height of 8—9 in. (20—23cm).
The somewhat viscid, ovate,
hemispheric, and finally almost
flat cap measures 3—8 in. (8—
20 cm) when mature. There are
three varieties: one with a blood-
red cap with white warts found in
the Old World and northwestern
North America; a yellow or or-
ange type with yellowish warts
common in eastern and central
North America; and a white
variety that is found in Idaho.
The cylindrical stem, which has
a bulbous base, is white, ½—i in.
(1—3 cm) thick, with a conspicu-
ous cream-white ring covered
basically with encircling scales.
The white valve adheres to the
base of the stem. The gills vary
from white to cream color or
even lemon yellow.
This mushroom, perhaps
man's oldest hallucinogen, has
been identified with Soma of
ancient India.
This tree grows 9—50ft (3—18m)
and has an almost black bark
often adorned with conical
thorns. The leaves are finely lo-
cular and reach up to 1 ft (30 cm)
long. The yellowish white flow-
ers are round. The leathery dark
brown fruit pods grow to 1 ft
(35 cm) long and contain very
flat red-brown seeds ½ to 1 in.
(1—2 cm) wide, with rounded to
right angles.
The seeds have been used as
a hallucinogen by the Indians of
the southern region of the An-
des for approximately 4,500
years. They are either worked
into a snuff powder, smoked, or
used as an additive for beer.
Primarily they are used in
shamanism.
The seeds of the CebIl or Vill-
ca contain tryptamines, espe-
cially bufotenine.
Leguminosae (Pea Family)
Australia
34
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 36 ---
ANADENANTHERA Speg.(2)ARGYREIA Lour.(90)ARIOCARPUS Scheidw.(6)
nadenanthera peregrina (L.) Speg.
LegumiflOSae (Pea Family)
Tropical zones of South
5America, West Indies
Anadenanthera pore grina is a
mimosa-like tree, mainly of open
grasslands, attaining a height of
65ft (20m) and with a trunk 2ft
(60 cm) in diameter. The black-
ish bark is coarsely armed with
conical mucronate projections.
The leaves have from 15 to 30
pairs of pinnae with many very
small hairy leaflets. Many min-
ute white flowers in spherical
heads arranged in terminal or
axillary clusters comprise the
inflorescence. Flat, thin, glossy
black, roundish seeds occur in
rough, woody pods, from 3 to 10
in a pod.
A potent hallucinogenic snuff
is made from the beans of Ana-
denanthera peregrina in the Or-
inoco basin, where it is called
Yopo. Its former shamanic and
ritual use in the West Indies, un-
der the name Cohoba, was re-
ported as early as 1496. Sadly,
this use has disappeared due to
the exploitation of the native
people.
The tree native to the edges of
the large forested areas of
Guyana is still used by different
tribes, primarily the Yanomano
and Waika, for the production of
Epená. The shamanic snuff is
made from cultivated trees in
addition to other substances
and plant ashes. The seeds
contain mostly N,N-Dimethyl-
tryptamine (DMT) as well as
5-MeO-DMT and other trypta-
mines. The shaman of the rain
forest people of the Orinoco re-
gion (for example, the Piaroa)
cultivate this tree which is not
native to that area. That way
they secure their snuff supplies.
Argyreia nervosa (Burman f.) Bojer,
Hawaiian Wood Rose
Convovulaceae
(Morning Glory Family)
India, Southeast Asia,
6Hawaii
The mature stems of this vigor-
ously growing twining bindweed
climb up to 3Oft (lOm) high and
carry a latexlike milk. The
stemmed, heart-shaped leaves
are finely haired and have a
silvery appearance due to a
dense white down that covers
the young stems and the leaf
undersides. The funnel-shaped
flowers are violet or lavender
and are carried in the leaf axis.
Their sepals are finely haired.
The round fruit are berrylike and
contain smooth brown seeds. In
each seed capsule there are 1—
4 seeds.
The plant originates in India,
where it has been used medic-
inally since ancient times. A tra-
ditional use as an entheogen
has not yet been discovered.
Phytochemical research is to
thank for the awareness of its
potent psychedelic constitution.
The seeds contain 0.3% Ergot
alkaloids (ergine and lysergic-
acid-am ides). Most psycho-
nauts describe LSD-like effects
after taking 4—8 seeds.
Ariocarpus retusus Scheidw.
False Peyote
Cactaceae (Cactus Family)
Mexico, Texas
These plants are small, grayish
green to purplish gray or brown-
ish cactuses, 4—6in. (10—15 cm)
in diameter. They hardly appear
above the ground. Often called
Living Rocks, they can easily be
mistaken for rocks in the stony
desert where they grow. Their
horny or fleshy, umbricated,
three-angled tubercles are
characteristic of the genus.
Dense masses of hair often fill
the areoles. The flowers vary
from white to pink and purplish
and measure approximately
21/4 in. (6 cm) long and up to
1½ in. (4cm) wide when fully
open.
Indians in northern and cen-
tral Mexico consider A. fissura-
tus and A. retusus as "false
These species of cactus, re-
lated to Lophophora, are typical
desert plants, growing preferen-
tially in the open sun in sandy or
rocky stretches.
Several psychoactive pheny-
lethylamine alkaloids have been
isolated from A. fissuratus and
A. retusus.
35
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 37 ---
ATROPA L.
Atropa belladonna L.
Deadly Nightshade
(4)
Solanaceae
(Nightshade Family)
Europe, North Africa, Asia
This much-branched perennial
herb up to 3ft (90 cm) tall may be
glabrous or pubescent-glandu-
lar. The ovate leaves attain a
length of 8in. (20cm). The soli-
tary, drooping, bell-shaped,
brown-purple flowers, approxi-
mately 11/s in. (3 cm) long, pro-
duce shiny black berries 1 ½—
1½ in. (3—4 cm) in diameter. All
parts of the plant contain potent
alkaloids. It grows in thickets
and woods on lime soils and is
naturalized especially near old
buildings and hedges.
It is believed that Belladonna
figured as an important ingredi-
ent in many of the witches'
brews of antiquity. There are, of
course, numerous records of
accidental and purposeful poi-
soning associated with the
Deadly Nightshade.
This plant played a major role
in the war of the Scots under
Duncan I against the Norwegian
king Sven Canute about A.D.
1035. The Scots destroyed the
Scandinavian army
by sending them food and beer
to which "Sleepy Nightshade"
had been added.
36
The main psychoactive con-
stituent is atropine but lesser
amounts of scopolamine and
trace amounts of minor tropane
alkaloids are also present. The
total alkaloid content in the
leaves is 0.4%, in the roots
0.5%, and in the seeds 0.8%.
In addition to the usual Bella-
donna there is a rare, yellow
blooming variety (var. Iutea) as
well as lithe known related kinds.
The Indian Belladonna (Atropa
acuminata Royle ex Lindl.) is
cultivated for pharmaceutical
purposes because of its high
content of scopolamine. In Asia
the Caucasian Belladonna
(Atropa caucasia Kreyer) and
the Turkmenish Belladonna
(Atropa komaro vii Blin. et Shal)
are found. Belladonna is still
cultivated for the pharmaceuti-
cal production of atropine.
BANISTERIO PS IS
C.B. Robinson et Small
(20—30)
Banisteriopsis caapi (Spruce ex Gri-
seb.) Morton, Ayahuasca
Malpighiaceae
(Malpighia Family)
Tropical zones of northern
9South America, West Indies
These giant forest lianas are the
basis of an important hallucino-
genic drink (Ayahuasca) ritually
consumed in the western half of
the Amazon Valley and by iso-
lated tribes on the Pacific slopes
of the Colombian and Ecuador-
ean Andes. The bark of Banis-
teriopsis caapi and B. inebrians,
prepared in cold water or after
long boiling, may be taken alone,
but various plant additives—
especially the leaves of Diplop-
tens cabrerana, known as Oco-
Yajé, and of Psychotria viridis—
are often used to alter the effects
of the hallucinogenic drink.
Both species are lianas with
smooth, brown bark and dark
green, chartaceous, ovate-lan-
ceolate leaves up to about 7 in.
(18 cm) in length, 2—3 in. (5—
8cm) wide. The inflorescence is
many-flowered. The small f low-
ers are pink or rose-colored. The
fruit is a samara with wings
about 1% in. (3.5 cm) long.
B. inebrians differs from B. caa-
pun its thicker ovate, more at-
tenuate leaves and in the shape
of the samara wings. The liana
contains MAO inhibitors.
BOLETUS Dill. ex Fr.
Boletus manicus Helm
Kuma Mushroom
Boletaceae
Cosmopolitan
10
(225)
Several species of Boletus are
involved in the curious "mush-
room madness" of the Kuma of
New Guinea. Boletus reayi, one
of these, is characterized by a
hemispherical, strong brownish
red cap that is cream-yellow at
the periphery; it measures from
3/4to 1½ in. (2 to 4cm) in dia-
meter. The flesh of the cap is
lemon-colored. The stipe varies
from orange at the top, to a
marbled green and gray-rose in
the middle, to a green at the
base. The spores, which are
elongated ellipsoidal, have a
yellow membrane but are olive-
colored within.
B. manicus is a well-known
species that, as its name im-
plies, has somewhat toxic prop-
erties, (mania = insanity). Hallu-
cinogenic properties have not
yet been proven.
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 38 ---
BRUGMANSIA Pers.(9—10)
Brugmansia sanguThea
(lRuiz et Pavón) D. Don
Blood-Red Angel's Trumpet
Solanaceae
(Nightshade Family)
South America,
1 2 Colombia to Chile
BRUNFELSIA L.(40)
Brun fe/s/a grand/flora D. Don
Brunfelsia
Solanaceae
(Nightshade Family)
Tropical zones of northern
1 3 South America, West Indies
Closely related to Datura, the
species of BrugmansIa are ar-
borescent, and it is suspected
that they are all cultigens un-
known in the wild. Biologically
very complex, all species ap-
pear to have been used as hal-
lucinogens for millennia. Brug-
mans/a suaveolens and
B. Insignis occur in warmer
parts of South America, espe-
cially in the western Amazonia,
where they are employed alone
or mixed with other plants,
usually under the name Too.
Most of the species, however,
prefer the cool, wet highlands
above 6,000 ft. (1,830 m). The
most widespread species in the
Andes is Brugmansia aurea,
with both yellow and, more com-
monly, white flower forms. In the
horticultural literature it has fre-
quently been misidentified as
Brugmansia (or Datura) arbor-
ea, which is in reality a much
less common plant. Brugmansia
aurea is a shrub or small tree up
to 30ft (9m) tall with oblong-el-
liptic, often minutely hairy
leaves, the blade measuring 4—
16 in. (10—40cm) long, 2—6½ in.
(5—16cm) wide, borne on a pe-
tiole up to 5in. (13cm) long. The
flowers are nodding, not wholly
pendulous, usually 7—9 in. (18—
23 cm) long and very fragrant,
especially in the evening. The
trumpet-shaped corolla flaring
broadly at the mouth is white or
golden yellow, its slender basal
part completely enclosed by the
calyx, its teeth 1in. (4—
6cm) long, recurving. The elon-
gate-ovoid, smooth, green fruit,
which is variable in size, re-
mains fleshy, never becoming
hard or woolly. The angular,
blackish or brownish seeds are
relatively large, measuring
about ½by%in. (l2by9mm).
In addition to their use as hallu-
cinogens, all species have
played major roles as medicines
for a large spectrum of ills,
especially in the treatment of
rheumatic pains. They contain
potent hallucinogenic tropane
alkaloids.
This perennial Brugmansia is
heavily branched and reaches 6—
16 ft (2—Sm), developing a very
woody trunk. The gray-green
leaves are furry and roughly ser-
rated at the edge. The Blood-Red
Angel's Trumpet does not emit
scents in the night. Usually the
flowers are green at the base,
yellow in the middle, and have a
red edge around the top. There
are also green-red, pure yellow,
yellow-red, and almost comple-
tely red varieties. The smooth
oval fruits are bulbous in the cen-
ter and pointed at the ends and
are usually partially protected by
the dried calyx. In Colombia this
powerful shaman plant was ri-
tually used in the cult of the sun of
pre-Columbian times. The plant
is still used as a hallucinogen by
the shamans and Curanderos of
Ecuador and Peru.
The entire plant contains tro-
pane alkaloids. The flowers
contain essentially atropine and
only traces of scopolamine
(hyoscine). In the seeds ap-
proximately 0.17% total
alkaloids are present; of those,
78% are scopolamine.
Several species of Brun fe/s/a
have medicinal and psycho-
active roles in the Colombian,
Ecuadorean, and Peruvian
Amazon as well as in Guyana.
Scopoletine has been found in
Brun fe/s/a, but this compound is
not known to be psychoactive.
B. chiricaspi and B. grand/-
flora are shrubs or small trees
reaching a height of about loft
(3m). The oblong or lanceolate
leaves, measuring 21/2_12 in.
long (6—30 cm), are scattered
along the branchlets. The f low-
ers have a tubular corolla, longer
than the bell-shaped calyx and
measuring about 4—4¾ in. (10—
12 cm) across, blue to violet,
fading with age to white. B. chir-
icaspi differs from B. grand/flora
in having much larger leaves,
longer leaf stalks, a few-f low-
ered inflorescence, and de-
flexed corolla lobes. B. chiricas-
p/ occurs in the west Amazonia
of Colombia, Ecuador, and
Peru. B. grand/flora is wide-
ranging in western South Amer-
ica from Venezuela to Bolivia.
Brun fe/s/as serve as Ayahuasca
additives.
37
BRUGMANSIA Pers.(7—8)
Brugmansia aurea Lagerh.
Golden Angel's Trumpet
Solanaceae
(Nightshade Family)
Western South America
11
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 39 ---
Cacalia cordifolia L. f ii.
Matwü
Compositae (Sunflower Family)
East Asia, North America,
14 Mexico
Caesalpinia sepiaria Roxb.
Yün-Shih
Calea zacatechichi Schlecht.
Dog Grass
Cannabis sativa L.
Hemp
Cannabaceae (Hemp Family)
Warm-temperate zones,
1 7 worldwide
A small shrubby climber,
Cacalia cordifolia has dusty-
puberulent, six-angled stems.
The leaves are thin, ovate, and
basally cordate, 1 ½—3½ in. (4—
9cm) long. The flowering head
is subsessile or pedicellate,
about %in. (1cm) long.
This and several other spe-
cies of Cacalia have been re-
ferred to in parts of northern
Mexico as Peyote and may pos-
sibly have once been employed
for hallucinatory purposes. In
Mexico Cacalia cordifolla is a
presumed aphrodisiac and cure
for sterility. An alkaloid has been
reported from the plant, but
there is no evidence of a chemi-
cal constituent with psycho-
active properties.
This little researched plant is
apparently often confused with
Calea zacatechichi.
Caesalpinia sepiaria or Yün-
Shih, a shrubby vine with retro-
rsely hooked spines, is reput-
edly used as a hallucinogen in
China. The roots, flowers, and
seeds also have value in folk
medicine.
The earliest Chinese herbal—
Pen-ts'-ao-ching——stated that
the "flowers could enable one to
see spirits and, when taken in
excess, cause one to stagger
madly?' If consumed over a long
period, they produce levitation
and "communication with the
spirits?'
This plant is an extensive
climber with pinnate leaves 9—
15 in. (23—38cm) long and
linear-oblong leaflets in 8—12
pairs. The large, erect, un-
branched showy racemes, 21 in.
(53 cm) long, bear canary yellow
flowers. The smooth, elongate-
ovoid, pointed fruit has 4 to 8
ovoid, brown- and black-mottled
seeds, % in. (1 cm) long. An al-
kaloid of unknown structure has
been reported from Caesalpinia
sepiaria.
Known in Mexico as Zacatechi-
chi ("bitter grass"), this incon-
spicuous shrub, occurring from
Mexico to Costa Rica, has been
important in folk medicine. It has
also been valued as an
insecticide.
Recent reports suggest that
the Chontal Indians of Oaxaca
take a tea of the crushed, dried
leaves as a hallucinogen. Be-
lieving in visions seen in
dreams, Chontal medicine men,
who assert that Zacatechichi
clarifies the senses, call the
plant ThIe-pelakano, or "leaf of
god?'
Calea zacatechichi is a heav-
ily branching shrub with
triangular-ovate, coarsely
toothed leavesin. (2—
6.5 cm) long. The inflorescence
is densely many-flowered
(usually about 12).
No constituent with hallucina-
tory properties has as yet been
isolated from C. zacatechichi.
The plant contains germacra-
nolides. The subtile psychoac-
tive effect can be described as
dreamlike.
Cannabis sativa has become
very polymorphic, but it is
usually a rank, robust, erect,
loosely branched annual herb,
sometimes attaining a height of
l8ft (5.4m). The sexes are nor-
mally on separate plants, the
staminate weaker and dying
after shedding pollen, the pistil-
late stockier and more foliose.
The membranaceous leaves are
digitate, with 3 to 15 (usually 7
to 9) linear-lanceolate, serrated
segments commonly 2¼—4 in.
(6—10cm) wide. The flowers are
borne in axillary or terminal
branches, dark green, yellow-
green, or brownish purple. The
fruit is an ovoid, slightly com-
pressed, often brownish akene
covered by a persistent calyx,
enveloped by an enlarged bract,
usually lacking a strong marbled
pattern; it is firmly attached to
the ètalk without a definite ar-
ticulation. The seed is ovoid,
mostly ½ by 1/6 in. (4 by 2 mm).
Cannabis indica is pyramidal
or conical in form and under 4—
5ft (120—150cm) in height.
Cannabis ruderalis is small
and is never cultivated.
CACALIAL.(50)CAESALPINIAL.(100)CALEAL.(95)CANNABISL.(3)
Leguminosae (Pea Family)
Tropical and warm zones of
1 5 both hemispheres
Compositae (Sunflower Family)
Tropical zones of northern
1 6 South America, Mexico
38
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 40 ---
CARNEGIEA Britt. et Rose(1)CESTRUM L. (160)CLAVICEPS Tulasne(6)COLEUS Lour.(150)
Carnegiea giganfea (Engeim.) Britt.
at Rose
Saguaro
Cactaceae (Cactus Family)
Southwestern North
1 8 America, northern Mexico
This largest of the columnar
cactus plants, Saguaro, reach-
ing a height of some 40ft (12m),
is a candelabra-branched "tree."
The many-ribbed stems and
branches attain a diameter of 1—
2½ ft (30—75 cm). The spines
near the top of the plant are yel-
low-brown. Measuring 4—5 in.
(10—13cm) in length, the white,
funnel-shaped flowers open
during the day. The fruit, red or
purple, is an ovoid or ellipsoid
I
berry splitting down the side into
two or three sections and mea-
suring 2½—3½ in. (6—9cm) long.
The numerous small seeds are
black and shining.
Although there are no reports
of the Saguaro as a hallucino-
gen, the plant does contain
pharmacologically active alka-
loids capable of psychoactivity.
Carnegine, 5-hydroxycarne-
gine, and norcarnegine, plus
trace amounts of 3-methoxytyr-
amine and arizonine (a tetrahy-
droquinoline base), have been
isolated from Saguaro.
The native people make a
wine from the pressed fruit.
Cestrum parqui LHérit.
Lady of the Night
Solanaceae
(Nightshade Family)
Chile
19
Cestrum parqui has been used
medicinally and ritually for sha-
manic healing since pre-
Columbian times by the Ma-
puche in southern Chile. The
plant has the power to withstand
attacks of sorcery or black ma-
gic. The dried leaves of Cestrum
parqui are smoked.
The shrub grows to 5ft (1.5 m)
and has small, lanceolate matte
green leaves. The bell-shaped
yellow flowers have five pointy
petals. They hang from the stem
in clusters. The flowers bloom in
Chile between October and No-
vember and release a powerful,
heady aroma. The plant has
small oval berries that are a
shiny black color.
Cestrum parqui contains so-
lasonine, a glycoside steroid-al-
kaloid, as well as solasonidine
and a bitter alkaloid (Farquin's
formula C21 H39N03), which has
a similar action to strychnine or
atropine.
Claviceps purpurea (Fr.)
Tulasne
Ergot
Clavicipitaceae
Temperate zones of Europe,
20 northern Africa, Asia,
North America
/
Ergot is a fungal disease of cer-
tain grasses and sedges, pri-
marily of rye. Meaning "spur,"
Ergot refers to the sclerotium or
fruiting body of an ascomycete
or sac fungus. The spur is a
purplish or black, curved, club-
shaped growth ½—2½ in. (1—
6cm) long, which parasitically
replaces the endosperm of the
kernel. The fungus produces
psychoactive and toxic alka-
loids.
There are two distinct periods
in the life cycle of this fungus: an
active and a dormant stage. The
Ergot or spur represents the
dormant stage. When the spur
falls to the ground, the Ergot
sprouts globular heads called
ascocarps from which grow
asci, each with threadlike as-
cospores that are disseminated
when the asci rupture.
In the Middle Ages and earlier
in Europe, especially where rye
was used in bread-making,
whole areas frequently were
poisoned, suffering plagues of
ergotism, when fungus-infected
rye kernels were milled into
flour.
Coleus blumei Benth.
Painted Nettle
Labiatae (Mint Family)
Tropical and warm zones of
21Europe, Africa, Asia
Two species of Coleus have sig-
nificance in Mexico. Related to
Salvia divinorum is La Hembra
("the woman"); C. pumi/us is El
Macho ("the man"); and two
forms of C. blumei are El Nene
("the child") and El Ahijado ("the
godson"). C. b/umei attains a
height of 3ft (1 m) and has
ovate, marginally toothed leaves
up to 6in. (15 cm) in length; the
bottom surface is finely hairy,
the upper surface usually with
large dark red blotches. The
more or less bell-shaped blue or
purplish flowers, measuring
about ½ in. (1 cm) long, are
borne in long lax, whorled
racemes up to 12 in. (30 cm) in
length.
Recently, salvinorine-like sub-
stances (diterpene) were dis-
covered. The chemical structure
has not yet been determined, It
is possible that by drying or
burning the diterpene, its che-
mical structure is modified into
potent material. The chemistry
and pharmacology must be re-
searched further.
39
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 41 ---
CONOCYBE(40)
Conocybe sillgineoides Heim
Conocybe
Agaricaceae (Bolbitiaceae)
(Agaric Family)
Cosmopolitan
22
Conocybe siligineoides has
been reported as one of the
sacred intoxicating mushrooms
of Mexico. Psilocybine has not
as yet been isolated from this
species, but Conocybe
cyanopus of the United States
has been shown to contain this
psychoactive alkaloid.
This beautiful mushroom, up
to about 3m. (8 cm) tall, living on
rotting wood, has a cap up to
1 in. (2.5 cm) in diameter that is
fawn-orange-red, with a deeper
orange at the center. The gills
are saffron-colored or brownish
orange with chrome yellow
spores.
Many species of the genus
Conocybe contain psilocybine,
are psychoactive, and are used
ritually. Recently a rudimentary
cult around Tamu (a Conocybe
species, "Mushroom of Aware-
ness") has been discovered.
Conocybe siligeneoides is an
obscure mushroom which has
not been found or analyzed
again since its first description.
CORIARIA L.(15)
Coriara thymifolia HBK ex Wilid.
Shanshi
In the highest Andes from Co-
lombia to Chile, Coriaria thymi-
folia adorns the highways with
its frondlike leaves. It has been
feared in the Andean countries
as a plant toxic to browsing ani-
mals. Human deaths have sup-
posedly followed ingestion of the
fruit. Reports from Ecuador,
nevertheless, suggest that the
fruit (shanshi) may be eaten to
induce an intoxication charac-
terized by sensations of soaring
through the air.
Coriaria thymifolla is a shrub
usually up to 6ft (1.8m) tall. The
leaves are oblong-ovate, 1/2_
3/4 in. (1—2cm) in length, borne
on slender, arching lateral
branches. The small, dark pur-
ple flowers occur densely on
long drooping racemes. The
round purplish black fruit is
composed of five to eight com-
pressed fleshy parts, or carpels.
The whole shrub has a fernlike
appearance.
No psychoactive properties
have been isolated yet.
CORYPHANTHA
(Engelm.) Lem.
Coryphantha compacta
(Engelm.) Britt. et Rose
Pincushion Cactus
Cactaceae (Cactus Family)
Southwestern North
24 America, Mexico, Cuba
A small, solitary, globular but
somewhat flattened, spiny cac-
tus up to 3¼ in. (8 cm) in dia-
meter, Coryphantha compacta
grows in dry hilly and mountai-
nous regions. It is hardly visible
in the sandy soil where it occurs.
The radial spines are whitish,
in. (1—2 cm) in length; the
central spines are usually ab-
sent. The crowded tubercles are
arranged in 13 rows. Arising
from the center of the crown
either singly or in pairs, the yel-
low flowers measure up to 1 in.
(2.5 cm) in length. The Tarahu-
mara of northern Mexico con-
sider Coryphantha compacta a
kind of Peyote. The plant, called
Bakana, is taken by shamans
and is respected and feared. It is
used as a substitute for Peyote.
Coryphantha palmerii has
likewise been reported as a hal-
lucinogen in Mexico. Various al-
kaloids, including the psychoac-
tive phenylethylammnes, have
been isolated from several
species of Coryphantha: horde-
nine, calipammne, and macro-
merine.
CYMBOPOGON Sprengel(60)
Gym bopogon densifiorus Stapf
Lemongrass
Gramineae (Grass Family)
Warm zones of Africa and
25 Asia
Native medicine men in Tanza-
nia smoke the flowers of Cym-
bopogon densiflorus alone or
with tobacco to cause dreams
that they believe foretell the fu-
ture. The leaves and rhizomes,
pleasantly aromatic of citron,
are locally used as a tonic and
styptic.
This perennial grass has
stout, erect culms with linear to
linear-lanceolate leaves, basally
wide and rounded and tapering
to a fine point, 1ft. (30 cm) in
length and 1/2_i in. (1—2 .5cm) in
width. The flowering spikes are
slender, olive green to brownish.
This species grows in Gabon,
the Congo, and Malawi.
Little is known about the psy-
choactive properties of the
grass. The genus Cymbopogon
is rich in essential oils, and ster-
oidal substances have been
found in some species.
(64)
Coriariaceae (Coriaria Family)
Southern Europe, northern
23 Africa, Asia; New Zealand;
Mexico to Chile
40
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 42 ---
CYTISUSL.(30)
I
DATURAL.(14—16)DATURAL.(14—16)DATURAL.(14—16)
Cytisus canariensis (L.) 0. Kuntze
Genista
Rarely are foreign plants incor-
porated in ceremonial use in
aboriginal American societies.
Native to the Canary Islands,
Genista was introduced into
Mexico from the Old World,
where it has no record of use as
a hallucinogen. It apparently has
acquired magical use among
the YaquI Indians of northern
Mexico, where medicine men
value the seed as a
hallucinogen.
A coarse, evergreen, much-
branched shrub up to 6ft (1.8 m)
tall, Cytisus canariensis bears
leaves with obovate or oblong,
hairy leaflets ¼—½ in. (.5—1 cm)
long. The fragrant, bright yellow
flowers, in terminal, many-flow-
ered, dense racemes, measure
about ½in. (1 cm) in length. The
pods are hairy,in. (1—
2cm) long.
Cytisus is rich in the lupine al-
kaloid cytisine, which is com-
mon in the Leguminosae. Cy-
stifle has similar properties as
nicotine. For this reason, plants
that contain cystine are often
smoked as a substitute for
Tobacco.
Datura innoxia Mill. (D. meteloides)
Toloache
Solanaceae
(Nightshade Family)
Tropical and warm-
27 temperature zones of both
hemispheres
The most extensive use of Da-
tura centers in Mexico and the
American Southwest, where the
most important psychoactive
species seems to be Datura in-
noxia. This is the famous To-
loache of Mexico, one of the
plants of the gods among the
Aztecs and other Indians. The
modern Tarahumara of Mexico
add the roots, seeds, and leaves
of D. innoxia to tesquino, a cere-
monial drink prepared from
maize. Mexican Indians believe
that, unlike Peyote, Toloache is
inhabited by a malevolent spirit.
Datura innoxia is a herbac-
eous perennial up to 3ft (1 m)
tall, grayish because of fine
hairs on the foliage; the leaves,
unequally ovate, repand or sub-
entire, measure up to 2 or 2¼ in.
(5 cm) in length. The erect,
sweet-scented flowers, 5½—9 in.
(14—23cm) long, are white with
a 10-pointed corolla. The pen-
dant fruit is nearly globose, 2 in.
(5 cm) in diameter, covered with
sharp spines.
Datura mete! L.
Datura
Solanaceae
(Nightshade Family)
Tropical and warm-
28 temperate zones of Asia
and Africa
In the Old World, the most cul-
turally important species of Da-
tura for medicinal and hallucino-
genic use is D. mete!.
Datura mete!, native probably
to the mountainous regions of
Pakistan or Afghanistan west-
ward, is a spreading herb,
sometimes becoming shrubby,
3—6ft (1—2m) tall. The triangu-
lar-ovate, sinuate, and deeply
toothed leaves measure 5½—
8½ in. (1 4-22 cm) long, 3—
4¼ in. (8—11 cm) wide. The soli-
tary flowers, which may be pur-
ple, yellowish, or white, are tub-
ular, funnel- or trumpet-shaped,
almost circular when expanded,
may attain a length of 6½ in.
(17 cm). The drooping, round
fruit, up to 2¼ in. (6cm) in dia-
meter, is conspicuously tuber-
culate or muricate, opening to
expose flat, light brown seeds.
The flowers are primarily violet
and grow at an angle or upright
to the sky.
All types of Datura contain the
hallucinogenic tropane alkaloids
scopolamine, hyosyamine and
someatropine.
Datura stramonium L.
Thorn Apple
Solanaceae
(Nightshade Family)
Tropical and moderate zones
29 of both hemispheres
This annual herb grows to about
4ft (1.2 m) and has many-forked
branches and branched, leafless
stems. The rich green leaves are
coarsely serrated. The funnel-
shaped flowers are 5-pointed,
stand erect, and open upward.
The common variety carries
white flowers that at 2—3 in. (6—
9cm) long are among the smal-
lest of the Datura species. The
tatula variety has smaller violet
flowers. The green egg-shaped
fruit is covered with thorns and
stands erect. The flat, liver-
shaped seeds are black.
The origins of this powerful
hallucinogenic species of Thorn
Apple is uncertain and its bota-
nical history ardently argued
over. Some authors suggest that
Datura stramonium is an ancient
species that originates in the re-
gion of the Caspian Sea. Others
believe that Mexico or North
America is the original habitat.
Today the herb is found
throughout North, Central, and
South America; North Africa;
Central and Southern Europe; in
the near East; and in the
Himalayas.
41
Leguminosae (Pea Family)
Southern Europe, northern
26 Africa, western Asia; Canary
Islands, Mexico
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 43 ---
DESFONTAINIA R. et P.
Desfontainia spinosa ft et P.
Taique
(1—3)
Desfontainiaceae
Highlands of Central
30 America and South America
One of the least-known Andean
plants, Desfontainia spinosa is
sometimes assigned to a differ-
ent family: Logan iaceae or P0-
taliaceae. Botanists are not in
agreement as to the number of
species in the genus.
Des fontainia spinosa, a beau-
tiful shrub 1—6ft (3Ocm-1.8m) in
height, has glossy green leaves,
resembling those of Christmas
holly, and tubular red flowers
with a yellow tip. The berry is
white or greenish yellow, gb-
bose, with many lustrous seeds.
It has been reported as a hallu-
cinogen from Chile and south-
ern Colombia. In Chile it is
known as Taique, in Colombia
as Borrachero ("intoxicator").
Colombian shamans of the
Kamsá tribe take a tea of the
leaves to diagnose disease or
"to dream." Some medicine men
assert that they "go crazy" under
its influence. Nothing is as yet
known of the chemical constitu-
ents of Des fontainia.
In southern Chile Des fontai-
nia is used for shamanic pur-
poses similar to Latua pubiflora.
42
DUBOISIA R. Br.
Duboisia hop wood/i F. v. Muell.
Pituri Bush
Solanaceae
(Nightshade Family)
Central Australia
(3)
The branched evergreen shrub
with woody stems grows to ap-
proximately 6—9ft(2.5—3m).Its
wood has a yellow color and a
distinct scent of vanilla. The green
leaves are lanceolate, with a con-
tinuous margin tapered at the pe-
tiole and are 4—5 in. long (12—
15cm). The flowers are white, oc-
casionally with rose speckles, and
bell-shaped (to 7mm long) and
hang in clusters off the tips of the
branches. The fruit is a black ber-
ry with numerous tiny seeds.
The psychoactive Pituri has
been hedonistically and ritually
used by the Aborigines since their
settlement of Australia. The
leaves are gathered in August
when the plants are in flower.
They are hung up to dry or roasted
over afire. They are either chewed
as Pituri or smoked in cigarettes
rolled with alkaline substances.
Duboisia hopwoodii contains
a variety of powerful and stimu-
lating but toxic alkaloids: pitur-
indubosine, D-nor-nicotine,
and nicotine. The hallucinogenic
tropane alkaloids hyoscyamine
and scopolamine have been
discovered in the roots.
ECHINOCEREUS Engelm.(75)
Echinocereus triglochidiatus En-
gelm.
Pitallito Cactus
Cactaceae (Cactus Family)
Southwestern North
32 America, Mexico
The Tarahumara Indians of Chi-
huahua consider two species as
false Peyotes or Hikuri of the
mountainous areas. They are
not so strong as Ariocarpus,
Coryphantha, Epithelantha,
Mammillaria, or Lophophora.
Echinocereus salmdyckianus is
a low, caespitose cactus with
decumbent, yellow-green stems
in. (2—4cm) in diameter.
The ribs number 7 to9. The 8 or
9 radial spines are yellow, ½ in.
(1 cm) long, central spine soli-
tary and longer than radials. The
orange-colored flowers mea-
sure 31/4—4in. (8—10cm) long
and have oblanceolate to
spathulate perianth segments.
This species is native to Chi-
huahua and Durango in Mexico.
Echinocereus triglochidiatus dif-
fers in having deep green stems,
fewer radial spines, which turn
grayish with age, and scarlet
flowers 2—2¾ in. (5—7 cm) long.
A tryptamine derivative has
been reported from Echinocer-
eus triglochidiatus (3-hydroxy-4-
methoxyphenethylamine).
EPITHELANTHA Weber
ex Britt. et Rose
(3)
Epithelantha micromeris (Engelm.)
Weber ex Britt. et Rose
Hikuli Mulato
Cactaceae (Cactus Family)
Southwestern North
33 America, Mexico
This spiny cactus, one of the so-
called false Peyotes of the Tara-
humara Indians of Chihuahua,
has acidic, edible fruit called Chi-
litos. Medicine men take Hikuli
Mulato to make their sight clearer
and to permit them to commune
with sorcerers. It is taken by run-
ners as a stimulant and "protec-
tor," and the Indians believe that it
prolongs life. It is reportedly able
to drive evil people to insanity or
throw them from cliffs.
Alkaloids and triterpenes have
been reported from Epithelantha
micromeris. This very small,
globular cactus grows to a dia-
meter of 2½ in. (6 cm). The low
tubercles, 1A6 in. (2mm) long, are
arranged in many spirals. The
numerous white spines almost
hide the tubercles. The lower ra-
dial spines measure 1A6 in.
(2 mm) long, the upper about
% in. (1 cm). The small flowers,
which arise from the center of the
plant in a tuft of wool and spines,
are whitish to pink, ¼ in. (5mm)
broad. The clavate fruit,in.
(9—13mm) long, bears rather
large, shining black seeds, 1A6 in.
(2mm) across.
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 44 ---
ERYTHRINA L.
Erythrina americana Mill.
Coral Tree
Leguminosae (Pea Family)
Tropical and warm zones of
34 both hemispheres
Tzompanquahuitl of the ancient
Aztecs may have been from the
many species in the genus Ery-
thrina, the seeds of which are
believed to have been employed
as a medicine and hallucinogen.
In Guatemala the beans are
employed in divination.
The beans of Erythrinaflabel-
I/form/sconstitute a Tarahumara
Indian medicinal plant of many
varied uses, which may have
been utilized as a hallucinogen.
Erythrina flabe//iformis is a
shrub or small tree with spiny
branches. The leaflets are 21/2_
3½ in. (3—6cm) long, usually
broader than long. The densely
many-flowered racemes bear
red flowers 1 1/5_21/2 in. (3—6 cm)
long. Sometimes attaining a
length of 1 ft (30 cm), the pods,
shallowly constricted between
the seeds, contain from two to
many dark red beans. This spe-
cies is common in the hot, dry
regions of northern and central
Mexico and the American
Southwest.
GALBULIMIMA F. M. Bailey
Galbulimima beigraveana
(F. v. Muell.) Sprague
Agara
Himantandraceae
Northeast Australia,
35 Malaysia
Natives in Fapua boil the bark
and leaves of this tree with a
species of Homa/omena to pre-
pare a tea that causes an intox-
ication leading to a deep slum-
ber, during which visions are
experienced.
This tree of northeastern
Australia, Papua, and Molucca
is unbuttressed, attaining a
height of 9Oft (27m). The highly
aromatic, gray brownish, scaly
bark measures ½in. (1 cm) in
thickness. The elliptic, entire
leaves are a glossy, metallic
green above, brown beneath,
and are normally 41/2—6in. (11—
15cm) long andin. (5—
7cm) wide. Lacking sepals and
petals but with many conspicu-
ous stamens, the flowers have a
pale yellow or brownish yellow
hue with a rusty brown calyx.
The ellipsoidal or globose fruit is
fleshy-fibrous, reddish, ¾ in.
(2 cm) in diameter.
Although 28 alkaloids have
been isolated from Galbulimima
beigraveana, a psychoactive
principle has not yet been found
in the plant.
HEIMIA Link et Otto
Heimia salicifolia
(H.B.K.) Link et Otto
Sinicuichi
Lythraceae (Loosestrife Family)
Southern North America to
36 Argentina, West Indies
This genus has three very simi-
lar species, and all play impor-
tant roles in folk medicine. Sev-
eral vernacular names reported
from Brazil seem to indicate
knowledge of psychoactivity,
e.g., Abre-o-sol ("sun-opener')
and Herva da Vida ("herb of
life").
Sinicuichi (Helm/a
is 2—6ft (6Ocm-1.8m) tall with
lanceolate leaves ¾_31/2 in. (2—
9cm) long. The yellow flowers
are borne singly in the leaf axils;
the persistent bell-shaped calyx
develops long hornlike appen-
dages. The shrub grows abun-
dantly in moist places and along
streams in the highlands.
In the Mexican highlands, the
leaves of H. salicifolia are
slightly wilted, crushed in water,
and the preparation is then al-
lowed to ferment into an intoxi-
cating drink. Although it is be-
lieved that excessive use of
Sinicuichi may be physically
harmful, there are usually no
uncomfortable aftereffects. This
plant contains quinolizidine al-
kaloids (lythrine, cryogenine, ly-
foline, nesidine).
HELICHRYSUM Mill
Helichrysum (L) Moench.
Straw Flower
Compositae (Suntlower Family)
Europe, Africa, Asia,
37 Australia
Two species are used by witch
doctors in Zululand "for inhaling
to induce trances." It is pre-
sumed that the plants are
smoked for these effects.
He/ichrysum foetidum is a tall,
erect, branching herb 10—l2in.
(25—30 cm) in height. It is slightly
woody near the base and is very
strongly scented. The lanceo-
late or lanceolate-ovate, basally
lobed, entire leaves, measuring
up to 3½ in. (9 cm) long and
¾ in. (2 cm) wide, basally en-
clasp the stem; they are gray-
woolly beneath and glandular
above. The flowers occur in
loose, terminal, corymbose
clusters of several stalked
heads ¾—1½ in. (2—4cm) in dia-
meter, subtended by cream-co-
lored or golden yellow bracts.
These species of Hel/chrysum
are some of the plants known in
English as Everlasting.
Coumarine and diterpenes
have been reported from the
genus, but no constituents with
hallucinogenic properties have
been isolated.
43
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 45 ---
HELICOSTYLIS Trécul
Helicostylis pedunculata
Benoist
Takini
Moraceae (Mulberry Family)
Central America, tropical
38 zones of South America
HOMALOMENA Schott
Homalomena lauterbachii Engi.
Ereriba
Araceae (Arum Family)
South America, tropical
39 zones of Asia
HYOSCYAMUS L.
Hyoscyamus albus L.
Yellow Henbane
Solanaceae
(Nightshade Family)
Mediterranean, Near East
40
HYOSCYAMUS L.
Hyoscyamus niger L.
Black Henbane
Solanaceae
(Nightshade Family)
Europe, northern Africa,
41southwestern and central
Asia
Takini is a sacred tree of the Gui-
anas. From the red "sap" of the
bark a mildly poisonous intoxi-
cant is prepared. Extracts from
the inner bark of two trees elicit
central nervous system depres-
sant effects similar to those pro-
duced by Cannabis sativa. The
two species responsible for this
hallucinogen are H. pedunculata
and H. tomentosa.
These two species of trees are
similar. Both are cylindrical or
very slightly buttressed forest
giants 75 ft (23 m) tall with grayish
brown bark; the latex is pale yel-
low or cream-colored. The leath-
ery lanceolate-elliptic leaves at-
tain a length of 7 in. (18cm) and a
width of 3 in. (8cm). The fleshy,
pistillate flowers are borne in gb-
bose cauliflorous heads.
Very little is known about these
trees and they are rarely studied.
The hallucinogen could theoreti-
cally originate from either of the
related genera Brosimum or Pir-
atinera. Extracts from the inner
bark of both trees have been
pharmacologically studied; they
have a softening or dampening
effect, similar to Cannabis sativa.
44
In Papua New Guinea the na-
tives are said to eat the leaves of
a species of Homalomena with
the leaves and bark of Galbuli-
mima beigraveana to induce a
violent condition ending in slum-
ber, during which visions are ex-
perienced. The rhizomes have a
number of uses in folk medicine,
especially for the treatment of
skin problems. In Malaya an un-
specified part of a species was
an ingredient of an arrow
poison.
The species of Homalomena
are small or large herbs with
pleasantly aromatic rhizomes.
The leaves are oblong-
lanceolate or cordate-ovate,
borne on very short stems,
rarely exceeding 6 in. (15cm) in
length. The spathe usually per-
sists in fruit. The male and fe-
male portions of the spadix are
proximate. The small berries are
few or many-seeded.
The chemistry of this group of
plants has not yet disclosed any
hallucinogenic principle.
Although the herb has erect
stems, it often appears bushy. It
grows to approximately 8—12 in.
(40—50cm) high. The light green
stems and serrated leaves, as
well as the funnel-shaped f low-
ers and fruits, are all pileous.
The herb blooms from January
to July. The color of the flowers
is light yellow with deep violet on
the interior. The seeds have a
whitish or ocher color, occasion-
ally a gray color.
This henbane was the most
widely used magical herb and
medicinal plant. The hallucino-
gen was an important medium in
antiquity, used to promote a
trance and taken by oracles and
divinitory women. In the ancient
earth oracle of Gaia, it is the
"dragon's herb?' The goddess of
the witches, Hecate, uses "crazy-
maker" in the Kobch oracle. Late
antiquity gives us "Zeus's Beans"
in the oracle of Zeus-Am mon and
the Roman god Jupiter. In the
Delphi oracles of Apollo, who is
the God of "prophetic insanity," it
is known as "Apollo's Plant?'
The entire plant contains the
tropane alkaloids hyoscyamine
and scopolamine.
Henbane is a coarse annual or
biennial, viscid, hairy, strong-
smelling herb up to about 30 in.
(76 cm) tall. The leaves are en-
tire or occasionally have a few
large teeth, ovate, 6—8 in. (15—
20 cm) long, the lower cauline
amplexicaul leaves being oblong
and smaller. The flowers, yellow
or greenish yellow veined with
purple, attain a length of about
1½ in. (4cm) and are borne in
two ranks in a scorpioid cyme.
The fruit is a many-seeded cap-
sule enclosed in the persistent
calyx with its five triangular
points becoming rigid. The
seeds release a powerful and
distinctive odor when squeezed.
In antiquity and the Middle
Ages, Hyoscyamus niger was
employed in Europe as an im-
portant ingredient of the witches'
brews and ointments.. It not only
reduced pain but also induced
oblivion.
The active principles in this
solanaceous genus are tropane
alkaloids, especially scopola-
mine. Scopolamine is a potent
hallucinogenic agent.
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 46 ---
0CHROMA Benth,(24)IPOMOEA L.(500)JUSTICIA L.(350)
:chroma fuchsioides (Benth.) Miers
Solanaceae
(Nightshade Family)
Tropical and subtropical
42 zones of South America
the Kamsá Indians of
the Colombian Andes, I. fuch-
sb/des is taken by shamans for
difficult diagnoses.
The intoxication is not plea-
sant, leaving aftereffects for
several days. The shrub is va-
lued also as a medicine for
treating difficulties with digestion
or bowel function, and to aid in
cases of difficult childbirth.
lochroma fuchsboides, a
shrub or small tree 1O—l5ft (3—
4.5 m) tall, but sometimes larger,
occurs in the Colombian and
Ecuadorean Andes at about
7,000ff (2,200m) altitude. The
branches are reddish brown,
and the leaves, obovate-oblong,
measure 4—6in. (10—15cm) in
length. The clustered tubular or
bell-shaped flowers are red, 1—
1½ in. (2.5—4cm) long. The red
Ifruit is an ovoid or pyriform berry
about ¾ in. (2 cm) in diameter,
partially enclosed in a persistent
calyx.
The plant contains
withanolide.
lpomoea violacea L.
Morning Glory
Convolvulaceae
(Morning Glory Family)
Mexico to South America
43
In Oaxaca, in southern Mexico,
the seeds of this vine are es-
teemed as one of the principal
hallucinogens for use in divina-
tion as well as magico-religious
and curing rituals. The Chinan-
tec and Mazatec Indians call the
seeds Piule; the Zapotecs, Ba-
doh Negro. In pre-Conquest
days, the Aztecs knew them as
Tlililtzin and employed them in
the same way as Ololiuqul, the
seeds of another Morning Glory,
Turbina corymbosa.
lpomoea vbolacea, known
also as I. rubrocaerulea, is an
annual vine with entire, ovate,
deeply cordate leaves 21/2—4in.
(6—10cm) long, ¾—3m. (2—8cm)
wide. The inflorescence is three-
or four-flowered. The flowers
vary from white to red, purple,
blue or violet-blue, and measure
2—2¾ in. (5—7cm) wide at the
mouth of the trumpet-shaped,
corolla tube, 2—2¾ in. (5—7 cm)
long. The ovoid fruit, about ½ in.
(1 cm) in length, bears elongate,
angular black seeds.
This variable species ranges
through western and southern
Mexico and Guatemala and in
the West Indies. It can be found
as well in tropical South Ameri-
ca. It is well known in horticul-
Just/cia pectora/isJacq. var.
stenophy/la Leonard
Mashihiri
Acanthaceae (Acanthus Family)
Tropical and warm zones of
44 Central and South America
Justicia pectoral/s var. steno-
phylla differs from the wide-
spread j. pectoral/s mainly in its
smaller stature and its very nar-
rowly lanceolate leaves and
shorter inflorescence. It is an
herb up to 1 ft (30 cm) tall, with
erect or ascending stems,
sometimes rooting at the lower
nodes. The internodes are
short, usually less than ¾ in.
(2 cm) long. The numerous
leaves measure normally ¾—
2¼ in. (2—5 cm) long, %—l in. (1—
2cm) wide. The dense inflores-
cence, covered with glandular
hairs, may reach a length of 4in.
(10cm) but is usually much
shorter. The inconspicuous
flowers, about ¼ in. (5mm) long,
are white or violet, frequently
purple-spotted. The fruit, ¼ in.
(5mm) long, bears flat, reddish
brown seeds.
Chemical examination of Jus-
t/c/a has been inconclusive.
Preliminary indications that the
leaves of J. pectoral/s var. ste-
nophy/la contain tryptamifleS
(DMT) need confirmation. The
dried herb contains coumarin.
45
ture.
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 47 ---
KAEMPFERIA L.
Kaempferia galanga L.
Galanga
Kaempferia galanga isused as
a hallucinogen in New Guinea.
Throughout the range of this
species, the highly aromatic rhi-
zome is valued as a spice to fla-
vor rice, and also in folk medi-
cine as an expectorant and
carminative as well as an aph-
rod isiac. A tea of the leaves is
employed for sore throat, swel-
lings, rheumatism, and eye in-
fections. In Malaysia, the plant
was added to the arrow poison
prepared from Antiaris toxicaria.
This short-stemmed herb has
flat-spreading, green, round
leaves measuring 3—6 in. (8—
15 cm) across. The white flow-
ers (with a purple spot on the
lip), which are fugacious, appear
singly in the center of the plant
and attain approximately 1 in.
(2.5 cm) in breadth.
Beyond the high content of
essential oil in the rhizome, little
is known of the chemistry of the
plant. Psychoactive activity
might possibly be due to consti-
tuents of the essential oils.
LAGOCHILUS Bunge
Lagochilus inebrians Bunge
Turkestan Mint
Labiatae (Mint Family)
Central Asia
46
On the dry steppes of Turkestan,
the Tajik, Tatar, Turkoman, and
Uzbek tribesmen have used a
tea made from the toasted
leaves of the mint Lagochilus in-
ebrians as an intoxicant. The
leaves are frequently mixed with
stems, fruiting tops, and flowers,
and honey and sugar may occa-
sionally be added to lessen the
intense bitterness of the drink.
This plant has been well stu-
died from the pharmacological
point of view in Russia. It is re-
commended for its antihemor-
rhagic and hemostatic effects to
reduce permeability of blood
vessels and as an aid in blood
coagulation. It has also been
considered helpful in treating
certain allergies and skin pro-
blems. It has sedative
properties.
Phytochemical studies have
shown the presence of a crys-
talline compound called lagochi-
line—a diterpene of the grinde-
ian type.
This compound is not known to
be hallucinogenic.
LATUA Phil.
Latua pubiflora (Griseb.) Baill.
Solanaceae
(Nightshade Family)
Chile
47
Latua, 6—30ft (2—9m) tall, has
one or more main trunks. The
bark is reddish to grayish brown.
The spiny branches, rigid and
1 in. (2.5 cm) long, arise in the
leaf axils. The narrow elliptic
leaves, dark to light green
above, paler beneath, are mar-
ginally entire or serrate and
measure 13/8—l¾in. (3½—
4½ cm) by %—1½ in. (1.5—4cm).
The flowers have a persistent,
bell-shaped, green to purplish
calyx and a larger, magenta to
red-violet, urceolate corolla 1 s/a—
1½ in. (3.5—4cm) long, ½ in.
(1 cm) wide at the mouth. The
fruit is a globose berry about
1 in. (2.5 cm) in diameter, with
numerous kidney-shaped
seeds.
The leaves and fruit of L. pub-
iflora contain 0.18% hyoscya-
mine and atropine and 0.08%
scopolamine. -
LEONOTIS (pers.) R. Br.
Leonotis leonurus (L.) R. Br.
Lion's Tail
Labiatae (Mint Family)
48
South Africa
This South African shrub has
orange-colored flowers and is
reported to be "hallucinogenic?'
In Africa it is called Dacha, Dag-
gha, or Wild Dagga, which
means "wild hemp?' The Hotten-
tots and the Bush people smoke
the buds and the leaves as a
narcotic. It is possible that this
plant is one of the narcotic
plants called Kanna (compare to
Sceletium tortuosum). The resi-
nous leaves, or the resin ex-
tracted from the leaves, are
smoked alone or mixed with to-
bacco. Chemical studies are
lacking.
In California the plant has
been grown and tested, reveal-
ing a bitter-tasting smoke and a
lightly psychoactive effect that is
reminiscent of both Cannabis
and Datura. In eastern South
Africa, the closely related Leo-
notis ovata is reportedly used for
the same purpose.
Zingiberaceae (Ginger Family)
Tropical zones of Africa,
45 southeastern Asia
46
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 48 ---
Leonurus sibiricus L.
Siberian Motherwort
Family)
Siberia to East Asia, Central
49 aid South America
(fiaturalized)
This herb grows erect and tall,
reaching over 6ft (2m) often on
a single stem. It has maxilliform
branches and finely serrated,
dark green leaves. The violet
flowers appear on the ends of
each stem and the inflorescence
can be long and attractive.
The Siberian Motherwort is
mentioned in the ancient Chi-
nese Shih Ching (the Book of
Songs, written approximately
1000—500 B. c.), where it is
called t'uei. Later it was occa-
sionally praised as a medicinal
plant in old Chinese herbals.
The dried leaves, harvested
from the flowering plant, are
smoked as marijuana substitute
in Central and South America
(1—2g per cigarette).
In the plant, 0.1% of the flavo-
noid glycoside rutin has been
ascertained. Of particular inter-
est with regard to the psych oac-
tive properties was the discov-
ery of three new diterpenes:
leosibiricine, leosibirine, and the
isomers isoleosibiricine in
essential oil.
Lobelia tupa L.
Tabaco del Diablo
Campanulaceae (Lobeliaceae)
(Harebell Family)
Tropical and warm zones
50
This beautiful, red- or red-pur-
ple-flowered, 6—9ft (2—3m) high
polymorphic Lobelia is well re-
cognized as toxic in the Andes
of southern Peru and northern
Chile, where it is called Tupa or
Tabaco del Diablo ("devil's to-
bacco"). It flourishes in dry soil,
and its stems and roots have a
white latex that irritates the skin.
The luxuriant foliage clothes
nearly the whole length of the
plant with grayish green, elliptic,
often minutely hairy leaves 4—
9in. (10—23cm) long. 1¼—31/4in.
(3—8 cm) wide. Carmine red or
purple, the flowers, 1½ in. (4cm)
in length, are borne densely on a
stalk 14 in. (36 cm) long. The
corolla is decurved, sometimes
recurved with the lobes united at
the apex.
Tupa leaves contain the pi-
peridine alkaloid lobeline, a re-
spiratory stimulant, as well as
the diketo- and dihydroxy-deri-
vatives lobelamidine and nor-b-
bedamidine. These constituents
are not known to possess hallu-
cinogenic properties. Neverthe-
less, the smoked leaves have a
psychoactive effect.
LOPHOPHORA Coult.
Lophophora williams/i (Lem.) Coult.
Peyote
Cactaceae (Cactus Family)
Mexico, Texas
51
Two species of Lophophora are
recognized: they differ morpho-
logically and chemically.
Both species of Lophophora
are small, spineless gray-green
or bluish green top-shaped
plants. The succulent chloro-
phyll-bearing head or crown
measures up to 3¾ in. (8 cm) in
diameter and is radially divided
in from 5 to 13 rounded ribs.
Each tubercle bears a small, flat
areole from the top of which
arises a tuft of hairs ¾ in. (2cm)
long. The whitish or pinkish
campanulate, usually solitary,
in. (1 .5—2.5cm) long flow-
ers are borne in the umbilicate
center of the crown.
The Indians cut off the crown
and dry it for ingestion as a hal-
lucinogen. This dry, diskllke
head is known as the Mescal
Button or Peyote Button.
Lophophora williams/i is
usually blue-green with from 5 to
13 ribs and normally straight
furrows. It has up to 30 alka-
loids—primarily Mescaline—as
well as further psychoactive
phenylethylamines and isoqui-
nolines. L. diffusa has a gray-
green, sometimes even a rather
yellowish green crown with in-
definite ribs and sinuate furrows.
The flowers are usually much
larger than in L. williams/i. The
chemical constitution is much
simpler.
Both species of Lophophora
inhabit the driest and stoniest of
desert regions, usually on cal-
careous soil. When the crown is
removed, the plant will often
grow new crowns and thus
Peyotes with multiple heads are
commonly seen. The hallucino-
genic effects of Peyote are
strong, with kaleidoscopic, richly
colored visions. The other
senses—hearing, feeling,
taste—can also be affected.
There are reportedly two stages
in the intoxication. At first, a per-
iod of contentment and sensitiv-
ity occurs. The second phase
brings great calm and muscular
sluggishness, with a shift in at-
tention from external stimuli to
introspection and meditation.
47
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 49 ---
LYCOPERDON L.(50—100)MAMMILLARIA Haw.(150—200)MANDRAGORA L.(6)
Lycoperdon mixtecorum Heim
Lycoperdon marginatum Vitt.
Bovista
Lycoperdaceae
(Club Moss Family)
Temperate zones of Mexico
52
In northern Mexico, among the
Tarahumara of Chihuahua, a
species of Lycoperdon, known
as Kalamoto, is taken by sor-
cerers to enable them to ap-
proach people without being de-
tected and to make people sick.
In southern Mexico, the Mixtecs
of Oaxaca employ two species
to induce a condition of half-
sleep, during which it is said that
voices and echoes can be
heard.
Lycoperdon mixtecorum,
known only from Oaxaca, is
small, attaining a diameter of no
more than 1¼ in. (3cm). Itis
subglobose, somewhat flat-
tened, abruptly constricted into
a peduncle scarcely ½ in.
(3 mm) long. The exterior sur-
face is densely cobbled-pustuli-
form and light tan in color. The
interior substance is straw co-
lored.
The spherical spores, brown-
ish tawny with a subtle tinge of
violet, measure up toThis
terrestrial species grows in light
forest and in pastures.
Psychoactive constituents
have not yet been isolated.
48
Mammillaria spp.
Pincushion Cactus
Cactaceae (Cactus Family)
Southwestern North
53 America, Central America
Among the most important
"false Peyotes" of the Tarahu-
mara Indians are several spe-
cies of Mammillaria, all of them
round and stout-spined plants.
N-methyl-3,4-dimethoxy-phe-
nylethylamine has been isolated
from M. heyderii, a species do-
selyrelatedtoM. craigii.Horde-
nine is present in many species.
Mammillaria crai,gii is globose
but apically somewhat flattened
with conical, angled tubercles
about ½1n. (1 cm) long and axils
and areoles at first woolly; the
central spines are about ¼ in.
(5 mm) long. The rose-colored
flower attains a length of % in.
(1.5cm). M. grahamii may be
globose or cylindric, 2½ in.
(6cm) in diameter with small tu-
bercles and naked axils; the
central spines are 3/4 in. (2 cm) or
less in length. The flowers,
which attain a length of 1 in.
(2.5 cm), have violet or purplish
segments, sometimes with
white margins.
Mandragora officinarum L.
Mandrake
Solanaceae
(Nightshade Family)
Southern Europe, northern
54 Africa, western Asia to
Himalayas
Probably no plant has had a
more fantastic history than the
Mandrake. As a magical plant
and hallucinogen, its extraordin-
ary place in European folklore
can nowhere be equaled.
Known for its toxic and real and
presumed medicinal properties,
Mandrake commanded the fear
and respect of Europeans
throughout the Middle Ages and
earlier. Its folk uses and attri-
butes were inextricably bound
up with the Doctrine of Signa-
tures, because of its anthropo-
morphic root.
While there are six species of
Mandragora, it is M. officinarum
of Europe and the Near East
that has played the most impor-
tant role as a hallucinogen in
magic and witchcraft. It is a
stemless perennial herb up to
1 ft (30 cm) high, with a thick,
usually forking root and large,
stalked, wrinkled, ovate leaves,
marginally entire or toothed and
measuring upto 11 in. (28cm) in
length. The whitish green, pur-
plish, or bluish bell-shaped flow-
ers, 1¼ in. (3cm) in length, are
borne in clusters among the
tufted leaves. The globose or
ovoid, succulent yellow berry
has a delightful fragrance.
The total content of tropane
alkaloids in the root is 0.4%.
The principal alkaloids are
hyoscyamine and scopolamine,
but atropine, cuscohygrine, or
mandragorine is also present.
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 50 ---
MAQUIIRA AubI.
Maquira sclerophylla (Ducke) C. C.
Berg
Rape dos Indios
Moraceae (Mulberry Family)
Tropical zones of South
55 America
MIMOSAL.
Mimosa hostilis (Mart.) Benth. (Mi-
mosa tenuiflora)
Jurema Tree
Leguminosae (Pea Family)
Mexico and Brazil
56
In the Pariana region of the Bra-
zilian Amazon, the Indians for-
merly prepared a potent halluci-
nogenic snuff that, although no
longer prepared and used, is
known as Rape dos Indios ("In-
dian snuff"). It is believed
have been made from the fruit of
an enormous forest tree, Ma-
quira scierophylla (known also
as Olmedioperebea sciero-
phylla).
Maquira scierophylla attains a
height of 75—lOOft (23—30m).
The latex is white. Very thick and
heavy, the ovate or oblong-
ovate, marginally inrolled leaves
are 8—12 in. (20—30cm) long, 3—
6½ in. (8—16cm) wide. The male
flowering heads are globose, up
to about ½ in. (1 cm) in dia-
meter; the female inflores-
cences are borne in the leaf ax-
Is and have one or rarely two
flowers. The drupe or fruit, cin-
namon-colored and fragrant, is
globose,in. (2—2.5 cm) in
diameter. The tree contains
cardiac glycosides.
In the dry caatingas of eastern
Brazil, this busy, sparsely spiny
treelet flourishes abundantly.
The spines are basally swollen,
½in. (3mm) long. Its finely pin-
nate leaves are 1½—i ¾ in. (3—
5cm) long. The flowers, which
occur in loosely cylindrical
spikes, are white and fragrant.
The legume or pod, about 1—
1¼ in. (2.5—3 cm) long, breaks
into 4—6 sections. An alkaloid
was isolated from the root of this
treelet and called nigerine. It
was later shown to be identical
with the hallucinogenic
N, N-dimethyltryptamine.
Several species of Mimosa
are called Jurema in eastern
Brazil. M. hostilis is often known
as Jurema Prêta ("black jure-
ma"). It is identical to the Mexi-
can Tepescohuite (M. tenui-
flora). The related M. verrucosa,
from the bark of which a stupe-
facient is said to be derived, is
frequently called Jurema Branca
("white jurema").
The tropical tree or shrub grows
in marshy areas. Often it grows
only to 6—9ft (3—4m) high, oc-
casionally to 36—42 ft (12—16m).
It has an erect stem with forked
branches that grow obliquely
upward. The green oval leaves
(8—12cm) are very broad and
become narrower toward the tip,
which is pointed. The flowers
are deep yellow and hang in
globular clusters. The seeds are
winged.
The dried leaves are smoked,
chewed, or worked into an ex-
tract called Kratom or Mambog.
The psychoactive properties
of kratom are paradoxical. Per-
sonal research, the descriptions
of it in the literature, as well as
the pharmacological character-
istics of the material have re-
vealed kratom to be simulta-
neously stimulating like cocaine
and soothing like morphine. The
stimulating effects begin within 5
to 10 minutes of chewing the
fresh leaves.
As early as the 19th century
the use of Kratom as an opium
substitute and a curative for
opium addiction was reported.
There are numerous indole al-
kaloids present in the plant. The
primary constituent is mitragy-
nine, which is apparently easily
tolerated and shows barely any
toxicity even in high doses.
MITRAGYNA Korth.
Mitragyna speciosa Korthals
Kratom
Rubiaceae (Madder Family)
Southeast Asia (Thailand,
57 northern Malay Peninsula to
Borneo, New Guinea)
49
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 51 ---
Mucuna pruriens (L.) DC.
Cowhage
Leguminosae (Pea Family)
Tropical and warm zones of
58 both hemispheres
MYRISTICA Gronov.
Myristica fragrans Houtt.
Nutmeg
Myristicaceae (Nutmeg Family)
Tropical and warm zones of
59 Europe, Africa, Asia
NYMPF-IAEA L.
Nymp/iaea amp/a (Salisb.)DC.
Water Lily
Nymphaeaceae
(Water Lily Family)
Temperate and warm zones
60 of both hemispheres
ONCIDIUM Sw.
Oncidium cebolleta (Jacq.) Sw.
Hikuri Orchid
Orchidaceae (Orchid Family)
Central America, South
61America, Florida
Mucuna pruriens has not been
reported as a hallucinogen, but
the plant has been chemically
shown to be rich in psychoactive
constituents (DMT, 5-MeO-DMT).
This stout, scandent herb,
with acute angulate stems, has
three-foliolate leaves. The leaf-
lets, oblong or ovate, are den-
sely hairy on both surfaces. The
dark purple or bluish flowers, ¾—
11/4 in. (2—3cm) long, are borne
in short hanging racemes. The
pods, with long, stiff, stinging
hairs, measure about 1 ½—3½ in.
(4—9cm) long, ½ in. (1cm) thick.
The total indole alkylamine
content was studied from the
point of view of its hallucino-
genic activity. It was found that
marked behavioral changes oc-
curred that could be equated
with hallucinogenic activity. It is
possible that Indian peoples
may have discovered and uti-
lized some of these psychoac-
tive properties of M. pruriens.
The powdered seeds are con-
sidered aphrodisiac in India.
The seeds contain DMTand are
used as an Ayahuasca analog
today.
50
Nutmeg and mace can, in large
doses, induce an intoxication
characterized by space and time
distortion, a feeling of detach-
ment from reality, and visual and
auditory hallucinations. Fre-
quently with unpleasant effects
such as severe headache, dizzi-
ness, nausea, tachycardia, nut-
meg intoxication is variable.
Myristica fragrans is a hand-
some tree, unknown in a truly
wild state, but widely cultivated
for nutmeg, from the seed, and
for mace, from the red aril sur-
rounding the seed. The two
spices have different tastes
because of differing concentra-
tions of components of their
essential oils. The aromatic
fraction of oil of nutmeg is made
up of nine components belong-
ing to the groups terpenes and
aromatic ethers. The major
component—myristicine—is a
terpene, but its biological activity
is believed to be that of an
irritant.
The psychotropic activity is
thought to be due primarily to
aromatic ethers (myristicine and
others).
There is evidence that Nym-
phaea may have been employed
as a hallucinogen in both the Old
and New Worlds. The isolation
of the psychoactive apomor-
phine has offered chemical sup-
port to this speculation. Nucifer-
me and nornuciferine are also
isolated from N. amp/a.
Nymphaea amp/a has thickish
dentate leaves, purple beneath,
measuring 5½—il in. (14—
28 cm) across. The beautiful,
showy white flowers, with 30—
190 yellow stamens, become 3—
51/4 in. (7—13 cm) across at ma-
turity. The Egyptian native
N. caeru/ea's oval, peltate
leaves, irregularly dentate,
measure 5—6in. (1 2—15cm) in
diameter and are green-purple
blotched beneath. The light blue
flowers, dull white in the center,
open three days in the mid-
morning; they measure 3—6 in.
(7.5—15cm) across; the petals,
acute-lanceolate, number 14 to
20, while the stamens number
50 or more.
Oncidium cebo//eta is an epi-
phytic orchid that grows on
steep, stone cliffs and trees in
the Tarahumara Indian country
of Mexico. It is employed as a
temporary surrogate of Peyote
or Hikuri (Lophophora wi//lam-
sii). Little is known, however, of
its use.
The tropical orchid is widely
distributed in the New World.
The pseudo-bulbs appear as lit-
tle more than a swelling at the
base of the fleshy, erect, round
leaves, grayish green, often
spotted with purple. The flower-
ing spike, often arching, has a
green stalk with purplish or pur-
ple-brown spots. The flowers
have brownish yellow sepals
and petals spotted with dark
brown blotches. The three-lobed
lip, 3/4 in. (2cm) long by 11/8 in.
(3 cm) across the mid-lobe, is
bright yellow with reddish brown
marks.
An alkaloid has been reported
from Oncidium cebol/eta.
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 52 ---
PACHYCEREUS (A. Berger)
Britt. et Rose
Pachycereus pecten-aboriginum
(Engelm.) Britt. et Rose
Cawe
Cactaceae (Cactus Family)
Mexico
62
PANAEOLUS (Fr.)
Panaeolus cyanescens Berk. et Br.
Blue Meanies
Coprinaceae
Warm zones of both
63 hemispheres
PANAEOLUS (Fr.)
Quélet
Panaeolus sphinctrinus (Fr.) Qublet
Hoop-petticoat
Coprinaceae
Cosmopolitan
64
A plant of many uses among the
Indians, this tall, treelike colum-
nar cactus, arising from a 6ff
(1.8 m) trunk, attains a height of
35ff (10.5m). The short spines
are characteristicafy gray with
black tips. The 2—3 in. (5—8 cm)
flowers are purplish in the out-
ermost petals, white in the inner
parts. The fruit, globose and
measuring 21/2—3in. (6—8cm) in
diameter, is densely covered
with yellow wool and long yellow
bristles.
The Tarahumara, who know
the plant as Cawe and Wicho-
waka, take a drink made from
the juice of the young branches
as a narcotic. It causes dizzi-
ness and visual hallucinations.
The term Wichowaka also
means "insanity" in the Tarahu-
mara language. There are a
number of purely medicinal uses
of this cactus. Recent studies
have isolated 4-hydroxy-
3-methoxyphenylethylamine
and 4-tetrahydroisoquinoline
alkaloids from this plant.
Panaeolus cyanescens is a
small, fleshy or nearly membra-
naceous, campanulate mush-
room. The slender stipe is fra-
gile and the lamellae are
variegated, with metuloid co-
lored, pointed cystidia on the
sides. The spores are black. The
fruiting bodies take on bluish
flecks with age or after bruising.
The islanders of Bali pick
Panaeolus cyanescens from
cow and water buffalo dung and
ingest them for celebrations and
artistic inspiration. The mush-
room is also sold as a hallucirio-
gen to strangers as they pass
through on their travels.
Although this mushroom is
primarily tropical, the discovery
that it contains psilocybine was
made with material collected in a
garden in France. Up to 1.2% of
psilocine and 0.6% of psilocy-
bine has been found in this
species.
One of the sacred hallucinogenic
mushrooms employed in divina-
tion and other magic ceremonies
in northeastern Oaxaca, Mexico,
among the Mazatec and Chi-
nantec Indians is this member of
the small genus Panaeolus. It is
known in Mazatec as 1-ha-na-
sa, She-to, and To-shka. She-to
means "pasture mushroom" and
To-shka, "intoxicating mush-
room." While not so important as
the several species of Psilocybe
and Stropharia, P sphinctrinus
is on occasion used by certain
shamans. This and other spe-
cies of Panaeolus have been re-
ported to contain the hallucino-
genic alkaloid psilocybine.
Growing on cow dung in for-
ests, open fields, and along
roads, P sphinctrinus is a deli-
cate yellowish brown mushroom
up to 4in. (10 cm) in height. It
has an ovoid-campanulate, ob-
tusely pointed, tan-gray cap up
to 1¼ in. (3cm) in diameter. The
stipe is dark grayish. The dark
brownish black gills bear black,
lemon-shaped spores that vary
in size; they can measure 12 to
15 by 7.5 to 8.311.
The flesh is thin, in color simi-
lar to the surface, with scarcely
any bdor. Several investigators
have at times argued that
P sphinctrinus is not among the
hallucinogenic mushrooms
used by shamans in Indian
communities of Oaxaca, but this
view is contradicted by ample
evidence. Its use by Oaxacan
Indians along with so many
other mushroom species de-
monstrates the tendency among
shamans to use a surprisingly
wide range of different mush-
rooms, depending on season,
weather variation, and specific
usage. Investigators now be-
lieve that there may be more
species and genera of mush-
rooms in use among Mexican
Indian populations than those
now known.
In European Panaeolus
sphinctrinus no psilocybine has
been detected. Neither have
psychoactive effects been de-
termined in human pharmacolo-
gical experiments. It is possible
that chemically different types
exist.
51
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 53 ---
Quélet
Panaeo/us subbalteatus Berk. et
Broome
Dark-rimmed Mottlegill
Coprinaceae
Eurasia, North and Central
65 America
The Dark-rimmed Mottlegill is
widely distributed throughout
Europe. It grows in dung-ferti-
lized, grassy earth, in particular
in horse pastures and in con-
junction with horse manure. The
cap isin. (2—6 cm) wide
and somewhat smooth. This
mushroom spreads rapidly. It is
at first damp brown and grows
drier toward the middle, so that
the edge often appears markedly
darker. The red-brown lamellae
are curved and eventually be-
come black due to the spores.
There is no information
passed on about a traditional
use of this mushroom. It is pos-
sible that it was an ingredient in
the mead or beer of the Ger-
mans. Nevertheless, this mush-
room has a symbiotic relation-
ship with the horse, the sacred
animal of the German god of
ecstasy, Wodan.
The fruiting body contains 0.7%
psilocybine as well as 0.46%
baeocystine, a fair amount of ser-
otonine and also
tophane, but no psilocine. Activity
is experienced with 1 .5g dried
mushroom; 2.7g are visionary.
52
Pancratium trianthum Herbert
Kwashi
Many of the 15 species of this
plant are potent cardiac poi-
sons; others are emetics; one is
said to cause death by paralysis
of the central nervous system.
P trianthum is reputedly one of
the most toxic species.
Little is known of the use of
Pancratium trianthum. In Dobe,
Botswana, the Bushmen report-
edly value the plant as a halluci-
nogen, rubbing the sliced bulb
over cuts made in the scalp. In
tropical west Africa, P trianthum
seems to be religiously important.
The species of Pancratium
have tunicated bulbs and linear
leaves, mostly appearing with
the flowers. The white or green-
ish white flowers, borne in an
umbel terminating in an erect,
solid, stout scape, have a
funnel-shaped perianth with a
long tube and narrow segments.
The stamens, located at the
throat of the perianth, are joined
together at the base into a kind
of cup. The seeds are angled
and black.
In the bulb of P trianthum the
alkaloids lycorine and hordenine
have been detected.
Pandanussp.
Screw Pine
Pandanaceae
(Screwpine Family)
Tropical and warm zones of
67 Europe, Africa, Asia
Natives of New Guinea employ
the fruit of a species of Panda-
nusfor hallucinogenic purposes,
but little is known of this use.
Dimethyltryptamine has been
isolated and identified in Panda-
nus nuts. Pandanus is a very
large genus of the Old World
tropics. It is dioecious, treelike,
sometimes climbing, with pro-
minent flying-buttress- or stiltlike
roots. The leaves of some spe-
cies attain a length of 15 ft
(4.5 m) and are used for matting:
they are commonly long, stiff,
swordlike, armed with prickles,
hooked forward and backward.
The naked flowers occur in large
heads enclosed in spathes. The
aggregate fruit or syncarpium, is
a large, heavy, hard, composite
ball-like, orconelike mass com-
prising the union of the angled,
easily detachable carpels. Most
species of Pandanus occur
along the seacoast or in salt
marshes. The fruits of some
species are used as food in
Southeast Asia.
The Syrian Rue is an herb native
to desert areas. It is a bushy
shrub attaining a height of 3ft
(1 m). The leaves are cut into
narrowly linear segments, and
the small white flowers occur in
the axils of branches. The gb-
bose, deeply lobed fruit contains
many flat, angled seeds of a
brown color, bitter taste, and
narcotic odor. The plant pos-
sesses psychoactive principles:
t3-carboline alkaloids—harmine,
harmaline, tetrahydroharmine—
and related bases known to oc-
cur in at least eight families of
higher plants. These constitu-
ents are found in Peganum har-
ma/a in the seeds.
The high esteem that P har-
ma/a enjoys in folk medicine
wherever the plant occurs may
indicate a former semisacred
use as a hallucinogen in native
religion and magic. It has
recently been postulated that
P harma/a may have been the
source of Soma or Huoma of the
ancient peoples of Persia and
India.
PANAEOLUS (Fr.)(20—60)
I
PANCRATIUM L.(15)
I
PANDANUS L. fil.(600)
I
PEGANUM L.(6)
Amaryllidaceae
(Amaryllis Family)
Tropical and warm zones of
66 Africa and Asia
Peganum harmala L.
Syrian Rue
Zygophyllaceae
(Caltrop Family)
Western Asia to northern In-
68 dia; Mongolia, Manchuria
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 54 ---
PELECYPHORA Ehrenb.(2)
Pelecyphora aselliformis Ehrenb.
Peyotillo
Cactaceae (Cactus Family)
Mexico
69
There are suspicions that this
round cactus may be valued in
Mexico as a "false Peyote" It is
locally known as Peyote and
Peyotillo.
A beautiful cactus, P aselli-
formis is a solitary, gray-green,
tufted, cylindric-conical plant 1—
2½ in. (2.5—6.5 cm), although
rarely up to4in. (10cm) india-
meter. The laterally flattened tu-
bercles are spiraled, not ar-
ranged on ribs, and bear very
small, scalelike, pectinate
spines. The apical bell-shaped
flowers measure up to 1¼ in.
(3 cm) in width; the outer seg-
ments are white, the inner red-
violet.
Recent investigations have
indicated the presence of alka-
loids, mescaline among others.
When consumed, the cactus
has a similar effect to Peyote.
PERNETTYA(20)
Gaud.-Beaup.
Pernettya furens (Hook. ex DC.)
Klotzch
Hierba Loca
Ericaceae (Heath Family)
Mexico to the Andes; Gala-
70 pagos and Falkiand Islands;
New Zealand
Numerous reports indicate that
Pernettya is intoxicating. The
fruit of P furens, the Huedhued
or Hierba Loca of Chile, causes
mental confusion, madness,
and even permanent insanity.
The effects of the intoxication
are said to be similar to those
caused by Datura. TaglIi, or
P parvifolia, has toxic fruit cap-
able, when ingested, of inducing
hallucinations as well as other
psychic and motor alterations.
It has been suggested that
Pernettya was employed by
aboriginal peoples as a magico-
religious hallucinogen.
These two species of Pernet-
tya are small, sprawling to sub-
erect shrubs with densely leafy
branches. The flowers are white
to rose-tinted. The berrylike fruit
is white to purple.
PETUNIA Juss.(40)
Petunia violacea Lindl.
Shanin
Solanaceae
(Nightshade Family)
Warm zones of North
71America, South America
A recent report from highland
Ecuador has indicated that a
species of Petunia is valued as a
hallucinogen. It is called Shanin
in Ecuador. Which group of In-
dians employs it, what species,
and how it is prepared for use
are not known. It is said to in-
duce a feeling of levitation or of
soaring through the air, a typical
characteristic of many kinds of
hallucinogenic intoxications.
Most of the cultivated types of
Petunia are hybrids derived from
the purple-flowered Petunia vio-
lacea and the white Petunia ax-
illaris. These species are native
to southern South America.
Phytochemical studies of the
horticulturally important genus
Petunia are lacking, but as a so-
lanaceous group allied to Nicoti-
ana—the tobaccos—it may well
contain biologically active
principles.
PEUCEDANUM L.(125)
Peucedanum japonicum Thunb.
Fang-K'uei
Umbelliferae (Parsley Family)
Temperate zones of Europe,
72 southern Africa, Asia
Peucedanumjaponicum is a
stout perennial, blue-green herb
with-thick roots and short rhi-
zomes. The solid, fibrous stems
attain a length of 20—40 in. (0.5—
1 m). The thick leaves are 8—
24 in. (20—61 cm) long, twice or
thrice ternate with obovate-
cuneate leaflets 1¼—2½ in. (3—
6cm) long. The flowers are
borne in umbellate clusters. The
10 to 20 rays are ¾—1¼ in. (2—
3cm) long. The ellipsoid fruit is
minutely hairy, 11/2—2in. (3.5—
5cm) long. This plant is com-
mon on sandy places near sea-
shores.
The root of Fang-K'uei is em-
ployed medicinally in China as
an eliminative, diuretic, tussic,
and sedative. Although thought
to be rather deleterious, it may,
with prolonged use, have tonic
effects.
Alkaloidal constituents have
been reported from Peuceda-
num. Coumarin and furocou-
mann are widespread in the
genus and occur in Pjaponi-
cum.
53
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 55 ---
PHALARIS L.
Phalaris arundinacea L.
Red Canary Grass
Graminaea (Grass Family)
Cosmopolitan
73
PHRAGMITES Adans.
Phragmites australis (Cay.) Trin. ex
Steud.
Common Reed
Gramineae (Grass Family)
Cosmopolitan
74
PHYTOLACCA L.
Phytolacca acinosa Roxb.
Phytolaccaceae
Tropical and warm zones of
75 both hemispheres
PSILOCYBE (Fr.) Quélet
Psilocybe cubensis (Earle) Sing.
San Isidro
Strophariaceae
Nearly cosmopolitan in the
76 tropics
This perennial grass has grayish
green stalks that grow to 6ff (2 m)
and can be split lengthwise. The
long, broad leaves have rough
edges. The pan ole can take on a
light green or red-violet colora-
tion. The calyx holds one flower.
The Red Canary Grass was
known already in antiquity. Thus
far, no traditional use of Phalaris
arundinacea as a psychoactive
substance is known.
The psychoactive constitu-
ents of Phalaris were first no-
ticed by a phytochemical study
on grasses done for agricultural
purposes. It is possible that in
the past few years "cellar sha-
mans" might have been experi-
menting with a possible psy-
choactive use for the grass in
Ayahuasca analogs and DM1
extracts.
The entire grass contains in-
dole alkaloids, which are highly
variable according to their spe-
cies, tribe, position, and harvest.
In most, DMT, MMT, and 5-
MeO-DMTare to be found. The
grass can also contain high
concentrations of gramine, an
extremely toxic alkaloid.
54
The Common Reed, the largest
grass in Central Europe, often
grows in harbors. It has a thick,
many-branched rhizome. The
stalks are 3—9ft (1—3m) high; the
leaves have rough edges and
grow upto 16—20 in. (40—50cm)
long andin. (1—2 cm) wide.
The very long pan ide, 6—16 in.
(15—40cm) long, has many dark
purple flowers. It flowers from
July to September. Seeds mature
in winter, at which point the leaves
drop and the panicle turns white.
The Common Reed had many
uses in ancient Egypt, particu-
larly as fibrous material. Tradi-
tional use for psychoactive pur-
poses has been documented,
only as a fermented ingredient in
a beerlike drink.
The rootstalk contains DMT,
5-MeO-DMT, bufotenine, and
gram me. Reports concerning
psychoactive properties are pri-
marily from experiences with an
Ayahuasca analog made from an
extract of the roots, lemon juice,
and the seeds of Peganum har-
ma/a. Unpleasant side effects
such as nausea, vomiting, and
diarrhea have been described.
Phytolacca acinosa is a glab-
rous perennial with robust,
branching green stems up to 3ff
(91 cm) in length. The elliptic
leaves average about 4% in.
(12 cm) long. The white flowers,
about % in. (1 cm) in diameter,
are borne on densely flowered
racemes4in. (10cm) in length.
The purple-black, berrylike fruit
bears small black kidney-
shaped seeds ½ in. (3 mm) long.
A well-known Phytolacca in
China, Shang-lu exists in two
forms: one with white flowers
and a white root and one with
red flowers and a purplish root.
The latter type is considered to
be highly toxic, although the for-
mer is cultivated as a food. The
flowers—Ch'ang-hau'—are es-
teemed for treating apoplexy.
The root is so poisonous that it is
normally used only externally.
Phytolacca acinosa is high in
saponines and the sap of the
fresh leaves has been reported
to have antiviral properties.
This mushroom, known in Oax-
aca as Hongo de San Isidro, is
an important hallucinogen,
although it should be noted that
not all shamans will use it. The
Mazatec name is Di-shi-tjo-le-
rra-ja ("divine mushroom of
manure").
The mushroom may attain a
height of 1%—3m. (4—8cm), very
rarely up to 5% in. (15cm). The
cap, usually %—2in. (2—5cm) in
diameter (rarely larger), is conic-
campanulate, at first especially
papillose, then becoming con-
vex to plane. It is golden yellow,
pale tan to whitish near the mar-
gin; in age or upon injury, it may
become cyanaceous. The stipe
is hollow, usually thickened at
the base, white but yellowing or
becoming ashy red, and
strongly lined. The gills vary
from whitish to deep gray-violet
or purple-brown. The ellipsoid
spores are purple-brown.
The active principle in Psilo-
cybe cubensis is psilocybine.
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 56 ---
Psilocybe cyanescens is rela-
tively easy to identify by its wavy
brown capin. (2—4cm)
wide. It doesn't live on dung, but
on decaying plants, coniferous
mulch, and humus-rich earth. In
older mushroom guides it is of-
ten called Hyphaloma cyanes-
cens. It is very closely related to
the species Psiocybe azures-
cens and Psiocybe bohemica,
both also very powerful
hallucinogens.
A traditional or shamanic use
of this highly potent Psilocybe
has not yet been documented.
Today, Psilocybe cyanescens
is used in Central Europe and
North America in neo-pagan
rituals. In addition, cultivated
mushrooms that have a very
high concentration of psilocy-
bine are eaten. Visionary doses
are 1 g of the dried mushroom,
which contains approximately
1 % tryptamine (psilocybine,
psilocine, and baeocystine).
P mexicana grows at altitudes
of 4,500—5,500ft (1,375—
1,675 m), especially in lime-
stone regions, isolated or very
sparsely in moss along trails, in
wet meadows and fields, and in
oak and pine forests. One of the
smallest of the hallucinogenic
species, it attains a height of 1—
(rarely) 4in. (2.5—10cm). The
conic campanulate or frequently
hemispherical cap, ¼—1½ in.
(1—3cm) in diameter, is a weak
straw color or greenish straw
color (sometimes even brownish
red) when living, drying to a
greenish tan or deep yellow; it
has brown striations, and the
terminal nipple is often reddish.
The flesh of the cap turns bluish
on bruising. The hollow stipe is
yellow to yellowish pink, red-
brown near the base. The
spores are deep sepia to dark
purple-brown.
Psi/ocybe semilanceata is the
most common and widespread
mushroom in the Psilocybe
genus. The Liberty Cap prefers
to grow in fields with old manure
piles and on grassy, fertile mea-
dows. Its cap,in. (1—2.5cm)
wide, is conical and often
peaked. It usually feels damp and
slimy. The "head skin" is easy to
peel off. The small lamels are ol-
ive to red-brown; the spores are
dark brown or purple-brown.
P semi/anceata contains high
concentrations of psilocybine
(0.97% up to 1.34%), some psi-
locine, and less baeocystine
(0.33%). This species is one of
the most potent Psiocybe
mushrooms.
Toward the end of the Middle
Ages in Spain, P semilanceata
was probably used as a halluci-
nogen by women who were ac-
cused of being witches. Alleg-
edly the nomads of the Alps
named P semilanceata the
"dream mushroom" and tradi-
tionally used it as a psycho-
active substance. Today this
mushroom is ritually taken in
certain circles.
The evergreen shrub can grow
into a small tree with a woody
trunk, but usually remains at a
height of 6—9ft (2—3m). Its
whorled leaves are long and
narrow with a color ranging from
light green to dark green and a
shiny top side. The flowers have
greenish white petals on long
stalks. The red fruit is a berry
that contains numerous small
long oval seeds, about 1 in.
(4 mm) long.
The leaves must be gathered
in the morning. They are used
either fresh or dried in the pro-
duction of Ayahuasca. Today
they are also used as an Aya-
huasca analog.
The leaves contain 0.1—
0.61 % DMT, as well as traces of
similar alkaloids (MMT, MTHC);
most of the leaves contain
around 0.3% DMT.
pSILOCYBE (Fr.) Quélet(180)PSILOCYBE (Fr.) Quelet(180)PSILOCYBE (Fr.) Quélet(180)PSYCHOTRIA L.(1200—1400)
Psi/ocybe cyanescens WakefieldPsi/ocybe mexicana Helm
emend. KriegelsteinerTeonanácatl
Navy Cap
StrophariaceaeStrophariaceae
North America,Nearly cosmopolitan
77 Central Europe78
Psilocybe semilanceata (Fr.) QuéletPsychotria viridis Ruiz et Pavdn
Liberty CapChacruna
StrophariaceaeRubiaceae (Madder Family)
Cosmopolitan,Amazonia—from Colombia
79 except Mexico80 to Bolivia and eastern Brazil
Many species of Psilocybe are
employed in southern Mexico as
sacred mushrooms, P mexica-
na being one of the most widely
used.
..''
•—.,)__'_•
55
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 57 ---
RHYNCI-IOSIA Lour.
Rhynchosia phaseoloides DC.
Piule
Leguminosae (Pea Family)
Tropical and warm zones of
81both hemispheres
SALVIA L. (700)
Salvia divinorum Epi. et
Játiva-M.
Diviner's Sage
Labiatae (Mint Family)
Oaxaca, Mexico
82
SCELETIUM
Sceletium tortuosum L.
Kougued
Aizoaceae (Carpetweed Family)
South Africa
83
SCIRPUS L.
Scirpus atrovirens WilId.
Bakana
Cyperaceae (Sedge Family)
Cosmopolitan
The beautiful red and black
beans of several species of
Rhynchosia may have been em-
ployed in ancient Mexico as a
hallucinogenic. Paintings of
these seeds on frescoes dated
A.D.300—400 at Tepantitla sug-
gest former use as a sacred
plant.
These two species are simi-
lar—scandent vines with flowers
in long racemes. The flowers of
R. longeracernosa are yellow;
the seeds are mottled light and
dark brown. R. pyramidalls has
greenish flowers and handsome
half-red, half-black seeds.
Chemical studies of Rhynch-
osia are still preliminary and in-
decisive. An alkaloid with cur-
are-like activity has been
reported from one species.
Early pharmacological experi-
ments with an extract of R. pha-
seoloides produced a kind of
semi-narcosis in frogs.
In Oaxaca, Mexico, the Mazatec
Indians cultivate Salvia divinor-
urn for the leaves, which are
crushed on a metate, diluted in
water, and drunk or chewed
fresh for their hallucinogenic
properties in divinatory rituals.
The plant, known as Hierba de
Ia Pastora ("herb of the shep-
herdess") or Hierba de Ia Virgen
('herb of the Virgin"), is culti-
vated in plots hidden away in
forests far from homes and
roads.
Salvia divinorum is a peren-
nial herb 3ft (1 m) tall or more,
with ovate leaves up to 6 in.
(15cm) and finely dentate along
the margin. The bluish flowers,
borne in panicles up to 16 in.
(41 cm) in length, are approxi-
mately5/8in. (15mm) long.
It has been suggested that the
narcotic Pipiltzintzintli of the an-
cient Aztecs was Salvia divinor-
urn, but at present the plant
seems to be used only by the
Mazatecs. The plant contains the
potent compound salvinorin A.
Over two centuries ago, Dutch
explorers reported that the Hot-
tentots of South Africa chewed
the root of a plant known as
Kanna or Channa as a vision-in-
ducing hallucinogen. This com-
mon name is today applied to
several species of Sceletium
that have alkaloids—mesembr-
me and mesembrenine—with
sedative, cocainelike activities
capable of inducing torpor.
Sceletium expansurn is a
shrub up to 12in. (30cm) tall with
fleshy, smooth stems and pros-
trate, spreading branches. The
lanceolate-oblong entire,
smooth, unequal leaves, mea-
suring 1½ in. (4cm) long, ½in.
(1cm) wide, are ofafresh green
color and very glossy. Borne on
solitary branches in groups of
one to five, the white or dull yel-
low flowers are 1 ½—2 in. (4—
5cm) across. The fruit is angular.
Both S. expansurn and S. for-
tuosum were formerly Mesem-
bryanthemum.
One of the most powerful herbs
of the Tarahumara of Mexico is
apparently a species of Scirpus.
Tarahumara Indians fear to cul-
tivate Bakana lest they become
insane. Some medicine men
carry Bakana to relieve pain.
The tuberous underground part
is believed to cure insanity, and
the whole plant is a protector of
those suffering from mental ills.
The intoxication that it induces
enables Indians to travel far and
wide, talk with dead ancestors,
and see brilliantly colored
visions.
Alkaloids have been reported
from Scirpus as well as from the
related genus Cyperus.
The species of Scfrpus may
be annuals or perennials and
are usually grasslike herbs with
few- to many-flowered spikelets
that are solitary or in terminal
clusters. The fruit is a three-
angled akene with or without a
beak. They grow in many habi-
tats but seem to prefer wet soil
or bogs.
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 58 ---
SCOPOLIA
Jacq Corr. Link
Scopolia carniolica Jacques
Scopolia
Solanaceae
(Nightshade Family)
Alps, Carpathian Mountains,
85 Caucasus Mountains,
Lithuania, Latvia, and
Ukraine
This herbaceous annual often
grows 1—3ft (30—80cm). The
dull green leaves are longish,
pointed, and slightly pileous.
The fleshy root is tapered. The
small, bell-shaped flowers are
violet to light yellow and hang
down individually from the ra-
chis and look similar to the flow-
ers of henbane (Hyoscyamus
albus). It flowers April to June.
The fruit develops a capsule
with doubled dividing wall and
many small seeds.
In Slovenia, Scopolia was
possibly used for the prepara-
tion of witches' salves. In East
Prussia, the root was used as a
native narcotic, beer additive,
and aphrodisiac. Women alleg-
edly used it to seduce young
men into being willing lovers.
The whole plant contains
coumarins (scopoline, scopole-
tine) as well as hallucinogenic
alkaloids (hyoscyamine,
scopolamine) and chlorogenic
acid. Today the plant is grown for
the industrial harvest of
L-hyoscyamine and atropine.
SIDA L.(200)
Sida acuta Burm.
Axocatzin
Malvaceae (Mallow Family)
Warm zones of both hemi-
86 spheres
These two species are herbs or
shrubs often up to 9ft (2.7m) in
height, found in hot lowlands.
The stiff branches are employed
in making rough brooms. The
eaves, lanceolate to obovoid
and measuring about 1 in.
(2.5cm) wide and upto 4in.
(10cm) long, are beaten in
water to produce a soothing
lather for making skin tender.
The flowers vary from yellow to
white.
Sida acuta and S. rhombifolia
are said to be smoked as a sti-
mulant and substitute for Mari-
juana along the Gulf coastal re-
gions of Mexico. Ephedrine is
found in the roots of these spe-
cies of Sida. The dried herb
smells distinctly like coumarine.
A luxuriant climbing bush with
showy flowers resembling those
of Brugmansia, Solandra is va-
lued for its hallucinogenic pur-
poses in Mexico. A tea made
from the juice of the branches of
S. brevicalyx and of S. guerrer-
ensis is known to have strong
intoxicant properties. Mentioned
by Hernández as Tecomaxochitl
or Huelpatl of the Aztecs,
S. guerrerensis is used as an in-
toxicant in Guerrero.
These two species of So/an-
dra are showy, erect, or rather
scandent shrubs with thick ellip-
tic leaves up to about 7in.
(18 cm) in length and with large,
cream-colored or yellow, fra-
grant, funnel-form flowers, up to
10 in. (25cm) in length and
opening wide at maturity.
The genus Solandra, as
would be expected in view of its
close relationship to Datura,
contains tropane alkaloids:
hyoscyamine, scopolamine,
nortropine, tropine, cuscohy-
grine, and other bases have
been reported.
The beautiful red beans of this
shrub were once used as a hal-
lucinbgen in North America.
Sophora secundif/ora seeds
contain the highly toxic alkaloid
cytisine, belonging pharmacolo-
gically to the same group as ni-
cotine. It causes nausea, con-
vulsions, and eventually, in high
doses, death through respira-
tory failure. Truly hallucinogenic
activity is unknown for cytisine,
but it is probable that the power-
ful intoxication causes, through
a kind of delirium, conditions
that can induce a visionary
trance.
Sophora secundif/ora is a
shrub or small tree up to 35ff
(10.5m) in height. The ever-
green leaves have 7 to 11 glossy
leaflets. The fragrant, violet-blue
flowers, borne in drooping ra-
cemes about 4in. (10cm) long,
measure up to 1¼ in. (3cm) in
length. The hard, woody pod,
constricted between each seed,
bears two to eight bright red
beans.
(3-5)SOLANDRASw.(10—12)
Solandra grandif/ora Sw.
Chalice Vine
Solanaceae
(Nightshade Family)
Tropical zones of South
87 America, Mexico
SOPHORA L.(50)
Sophora secundif/ora (Ort.) Lag. ex
DC.
Mescal Bean
Leguminosae (Pea Family)
Southwestern North
88 America, Mexico
57
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 59 ---
Tabernaemontana spp.
Sanango
Apocynaceae (Dogbane Family)
Tropical zones of both
89 hemispheres
Most species of Tabernaemon-
tana are bushy shrubs, climbers,
or small trees. The leaves are
evergreen, lanceolate, often
with a leathery top side. The
flowers consist of five pointed
petals that mostly grow in clus-
ters out of the calyx. The two
symmetrical fruits are divided
and marked with fairly visible
veins. Because of this, they are
easily confused with the testes
of a mammal.
In the Amazon, the Sanango
(Tabernaemontana sananho R.
et P.) is considered a panacea.
The leaves, roots, and the latex-
rich bark are used in folk medi-
cine. The tree grows as tall as
l5ft (5m). The leaves are used
as a psychoactive additive to
Ayahuasca. It is used in combi-
nation with Virola in the produc-
tion of an orally effective halluci-
nogen. In the Amazon, Sanango
is also considered a "memory
plant." Ayahuasca is enhanced
with it in order that the visions
can be better recalled.
Phytochemical research has
recently been done on the
genus. Indole alkaloids are the
primary constituent, in some
even ibogaine and voacangine
have been ascertained. For this
reason, this species is of parti-
cular interest for the discovery
of new psychoactive plants. A
few of the species (Tabernae-
montana coffeoides Bojer ox
DC., Tabernaemontana crassa
Benth.) have already revealed
psychoactive properties and
uses.
Taberrianthe iboga Baill.
Iboga
Apocynaceae (Dogbane Family)
Tropical zones of western
90 Africa
Ta be rnanthe iboga is a shrub 3—
4½ ft (1—1.5 m) tall, found in the
undergrowth of tropical forests
but often cultivated in native
dooryards. The shrub has co-
pious white, vile-smelling latex.
The ovate leaves, usually 3½—
4in. (9—10 cm) long, about
11/4 in. (3cm) wide (but occa-
sionally up to 8½ by 2¾ in. or 22
by 7 cm), are yellowish green
beneath. The tiny yellowish,
pinkish, or white- and pink-
spotted flowers, which grow in
groups of5to 12, have acra-
teriform corolla (a long, slender
tube abruptly flaring at the
mouth) with twistGd lobes ¾ in.
(1 cm) long. The ovoid, pointed
yellow-orange fruits occur in
pairs and become as large as
olives.
Chemical studies on Taber-
nanthe iboga have shown at
least a dozen indole alkaloids,
the most active being ibogaine,
the effects of which, in toxic
doses, lead to extraordinary
visions; an overdose, to paraly-
sis and death.
TAGETES L.(50)
Tagetes lucida Cay.
Yauhtli
Compositae (Sunflower Family)
Warm zones of the Americas
91mostly Mexico
The Huichol of Mexico induce
visions by smoking a mixture of
Nicotiana rustica and Tagetes
lucida. They frequently drink a
fermented beer from maize
along with the smoking in order
"to produce clearer visions."
Tagetes lucida is occasionally
smoked alone.
Tagetes lucida is a strongly
scented perennial herb up to
1½ ft (46 cm) tall. The opposite
leaves are ovate-lanceolate,
toothed, and punctated with oil
glands. The flowering heads are
produced in dense terminal
clusters ½ in. (1 cm) in diameter,
usually yellow to yellow-orange.
This species is native to Mexico,
where it is very abundant in the
states of Nayarit and Jalisco. No
alkaloids have been isolated
from Tagetes, but the genus is
rich in essential oils and thio-
phene derivatives; /-inositol,
saponines, tannins, coumarine
derivatives, and cyanogenic gly-
cosides have been reported.
TABERNAEMONTANA L.(120)TABERNANTHE Baill.(2—7)
58
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 60 ---
TANAECIUM Sw.(7)
nocturnum (Barb.-Rodr.)
3ur. et K. Schum.
Koribo
Bignoniaceae (Bignonia Family)
Tropical zones of Central
92 America and South America,
West Indies
Tanaecium nocturnum is a
much-branched climber with
broadly elliptic leaves 5½ in.
(1 3.5 cm) long, 4in. (10cm)
wide. The white flowers, 6½ in.
(16.5cm) long, are tubular,
borne in five- to eight-flowered
racemes 3m. (8 cm) long, aris-
ing from the stem. The stem,
when cut, emits an odor of al-
mond oil.
The Paumari, who live on the
Rio Purus, create a ritual snuff
that they call koribo-na fun/out of
the leaves. The shamans sniff it
when they are dealing with diffi-
cult cases—for example, in or-
der to extract a magical object
out of the body of the sick per-
son. They also sniff it during a
ritual for protection of children,
during which they fall into a
trance. The snuff is used only by
the men. This species is said to
be prized as an aphrodisiac by
Indians of the Colombian
Chocó.
Saponines and tannins have
been found in Tanaecium. The
leaves contain prussic acid and
cyanoglycosides, which disinte-
grate when roasted.
It is uncertain as to whether
the toxin's waste products con-
tribute to the psychoactive effect
of T nocturnum. It is not yet
known if there are other active
compounds in the leaves or
other parts of the plant. It is
possible that this plant contains
substances of unknown chemi-
cal structure and pharmacologi-
cal effect.
TETRAPTERIS Cay.(80)
Tetrapteris methystica R. E. Schult.
Caapi-pinima
Malpighiaceae (Malpighia Family)
Tropical zones of South
93 America, Mexico,
West Indies
The nomadic Makü Indians of
the Rio Tikié in the northwestern
most Amazonas of Brazil pre-
pare a hallucinogenic drink, a
sort of Ayahuasca or Caapi,
from the bark of Tetrapteris
methystica. Reports of the ef-
fects of the drug would suggest
that (3-carboline alkaloids are
present.
Tetrapteris methystica (T mu-
cronata) is a scandent bush with
black bark. The leaves are char-
aceous, ovate,in. (6—
8.5cm) long, 1—2in. (2.5—5cm)
wide, bright green above, ashy
green beneath. The inflores-
cence is few-flowered, shorter
than the leaves. The sepals are
thick, hairy without, ovate-Ian-
ceolate, with eight black oval-
shaped glands; the petals,
spreading, membranaceous,
yellow with red or brown in the
center, elongate-orbicular, ½ in.
(1 cm) long, 1/16 in. (2mm) wide.
The fruit, or samara, is ovoid, ¼
by½by1A6in. (4by4by2mm),
with brownish wings about ½ by
Yl6in. (loby2mm).
TRICHOCEREUS (A. Berger)
Riccob.
Trichocereus pachanoi
Britt. et Rose
San Pedro Cactus
Cactaceae (Cactus Family)
Temperate and warm zones
94 of South America
This cactus is a branched, often
spineless, columnar plant 9—
20ft (2.75—6m) in height. The
branches, which have 6 to 8 ribs,
are glaucous when young, dark
green in age. The pointed buds
open at night to produce very
large, 7½—9¼ in. (19—24 cm),
funnel-shaped, fragrant flowers
with the inner segments white,
the outer segments brownish
red, and long, greenish stamen
filaments. The fruit, as well as
the scales on the floral tube,
have long black hairs.
Trichocereus pachanoi is rich
in mescaline: 2% of the dried
material or 0.12% of the fresh
material. Other alkaloids have
been reported from the plant:
3,4-dimethoxyphenylethyla-
mine, 3-methoxy-tyramine, and
traces of other bases.
Trichocereus pachanoi (Echi-
nopsis pachanoi) occurs in the
central Andes between 6,000
and 9,000ft(1,830—2,750m),
particularly in Ecuador and
northern Peru.
59
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 61 ---
TURBINA Rat.(10)VIROLAAUbI.(60)VOACANGA(10—20)
Turbina corymbosa (L.) Raf.
Ololiuqui
Convolvulaceae
(Morning Glory Family)
Tropical zones of the
95 Americas, mostly Mexico
and Cuba
The seeds of Turbina corymbo-
sa, better known as Rivea cor-
ymbosa, are valued as one of
the major sacred hallucinogens
of numerous Indian groups in
southern Mexico. Their use
goes back to early periods.
Known as Ololiuqui, they were
important in Aztec ceremonies
as an intoxicant with reputedly
analgesic properties.
Turbina corymbosa is a large
woody vine with heart-shaped
leaves 2—3½ in. (5—9cm) long
andin. (2 .5—4.5cm) wide.
The cymes are many-flowered.
The bell-shaped corollas, 3/4_
1½ in. (2—4cm) long, are white
with greenish stripes. The fruit is
dry, indehiscent, ellipsoidal with
persistent, enlarged sepals, and
bears a single hard, roundish,
brown, minutely hairy seed
about 1/s in. (3 mm) in diameter.
The seeds contain lysergic acid
amide, analogous to LSD.
Classification of genera in
the Morning Glory family or
Convolvulaceae has always
been difficult. This species has
at one time or another been
assigned to the genera Convol-
vu/us, Ipomoea, Legendrea,
Rivea, and Turbina. Most che-
mical and ethnobotanical stu-
dies have been reported under
the name Rivea corymbosa,
but recent critical evaluation in-
dicates that the most appropri-
ate binomial is Turbina
corymbosa.
V/rota theiodora (Spr.) Warb.
Cumala Tree
Myristicaceae (Nutmeg Family)
Tropical zones of Central
96 America and South America
Most, if not all, species of Virola
have a copious red 'resin" in the
inner bark. The resin from a
number of species is prepared
as a hallucinogenic snuff or
small pellets.
Probably the most important
species is Viro/a theiodora, a
slender tree 25-75 ft (7.5—23 m)
in height, native to the forests of
the western Amazon basin. The
cylindrical trunk, 1½ft(46cm) in
diameter, has a characteristic
smooth bark that is brown
mottled with gray patches. The
leaves (with a tea-like fragrance
when dried) are oblong or
broadly ovate, 31,4.13 in (9—
33cm) long, 1½—4½ in. (4—
11 cm) wide. The male inflores-
cences are many-flowered,
usually brown- or gold-hairy,
shorter than the leaves; the very
small flowers, borne singly or in
clusters of 2 to 10, are strongly
pungent. The fruit is subglobose,
3/$_3/4 in. (1—2cm) by ¼—% in.(.5—
1.5cm); the seed is covered for
half its length by a membranac-
eous, orange-red aril.
The resin of the Virola con-
tains DMTand 5-MeO-DMT.
Voacanga spp.
Voacanga
Apocynaceae (Dogbane Family)
Tropical Africa
97
The Voacanga genus has re-
ceived little research. The spe-
cies are similar to one another.
Theymultiple-branched,
evergreen shrubs or small trees.
The flowers are mostly yellow or
white with five united petals.
There are two symmetrical
fruits. Latex runs in the bark.
The bark and seeds of the
African Voacanga africana
Stapf. contain upto 10% indole
alkaloids of the iboga type (voa-
camine is the primary alkaloid,
ibogaine) and should be simu-
lating and hallucinogenic. In
West Africa the bark is used as a
hunting poison, stimulant, and
potent aphrodisiac. Supposedly
the seeds are used by African
magicians in order to produce
visions.
The seeds of the Voacanga
grandiflora (Miq.) Rolfe are used
by magicians in West Africa for
visionary purposes. Unfortu-
nately the details are not yet un-
covered, as the knowledge of
the magicians is a closely
guarded secret.
60
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 62 ---
4
f/
— _5-- -'
-
-I 41
--
-k
I
- I- —
-
11
—::/£
-
-
V41-'/1
-I
&
/1
a'
/
a --
-a
—s--L---
I
4
I-
•/
F-
—V
/V
-
*4
-
,,,,_r•'
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 63 ---
WHO USES
HALLUCINOGENIC
PLANTS?
Notwithstanding the recent upsurge in the use of
psychoactive plants in modern Western societies,
the thrust of this book emphasizes almost exclu-
sively the employment of hallucinogens among
aboriginal peoples who have restricted the use of
these plants mostly to magic, medical, or religious
purposes. The outstanding difference between the
use of hallucinogens in our culture and their use in
preindustrial societies is precisely the difference in
the belief concerning their purpose and origin: all
aboriginal societies have considered—and still
do—that these plants are the gifts of the gods, if
not the gods themselves. It is obvious that our cul-
ture does not view hallucinogenic plants in this
light.
There are many examples—and more will be
discussed in the following pages—of plants that
are sacred and even severed as gods. Soma, the an-
cient god-narcotic of India, may be the most out-
standing example. Most hallucinogens are holy
mediators between man and the supernatural, but
Soma was deified. So holy was Soma that it has
been suggested that even the idea of deity may
have arisen from experiences with its unearthly
effects. The sacred Mexican mushrooms have a
long history that is closely linked to shamanism
and religion. The Aztecs called them Teonanácatl
("divine flesh"), and they were ceremonially in-
gested. Highland Maya cultures in Guatemala
apparently had, more than three thousand years
ago, a sophisticated religion utilizing mushrooms.
Probably the most famous sacred hallucinogen of
the New World, however,isPeyote, which,
among the Huichol of Mexico, is identified with
the deer (their sacred animal) and maize (their
sacred vegetal staff of life). The first Peyote-
collecting expedition was led by Tatewari, the
original shaman, and subsequent annual trips to '
collectthe plant are holy pilgrimages to Wirikuta,
original paradisiacal home of the ancestors. In
62
Page 61:The Fly Agaric is used for shamanic purposes worldwide. It has
even been linked to the ancient Indian Soma.
SouthAmerica, Ayahuasca reveals the real world,
while daily living is an illusion. Ayahuasca means
"tendril of the soul" in Kechwa and comes from
the frequent experience that the soul separates
from the body during the intoxication, commun-
ing with the ancestors and forces of the spirit
world. The drinking of Caapi is a return "to the
maternal womb, to the source and origin of all
things," and participants see "all the tribal divi-
nities, the creation of the universe, the first human
beings and animals and even the establishment of
the social order" (Reichel-Dolmatoff).
It is not always the shaman or medicine man
who administers these sacred plants. The general
population—usually the adult male portion—
often shares in the use of hallucinogens. Under
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 64 ---
Above: The symbols in Huichol mythology are vividly depicted in their popular
sacred art. The beauty of the forms has as a basis the ceremonial use of
Peyote. The yarn painting above, like an Aztec Codex, is a chronicle of the
creation of the world. The gods emerged from the Underworld to Mother
Earth. This was possible because Kauyumari, Our Elder Brother Deer, found
the nierika, or portway. The nierika of Kauyumari (top center) unifies the spirit
of all things and all worlds. Through it all life came into being.
Below Kauyumari's nierika, Our Mother Eagle (center) lowers her head to
listen to Kauyumari, who sits on a rock, bottom right. His sacred words travel
down a thread to a prayer bowl and are transformed into life energy, depicted
as a white blossom.
Above Kauyumari, the Spirit of Rain, a serpent, gives life to the gods. Tatewari,
first shaman and Spirit of Fire (top center right), is bending down toward Kauyu-
marl listening to his chant. Both are connected to a medicine basket (center
right), which binds them together as shamanic allies. Our Father Sun, seen op-
posite Tatewari on the left, is connected with the Spirit of Dawn, the orange figure
below. The Sun and Spirit of Dawn are both found in Wirlkuta, the Sacred Land of
Peyote. Also in Wirikuta is Kauyumari's nierika and the temple of Elder Brother
Deer Tail. The temple is the black field, lower center. Deer Tail, with red antlers, is
seen with his human manifestation above him. Behind Deer Tail is Our Mother
the Sea. A crane brings her a prayer gourd containing the words of Kauyumari.
Blue Deer (left center) enlivens all sacred offerings. A stream of energy goes from
him toourMother Sea's prayergourd; he also offers his blood to the growing corn,
the staff of life germinating below him. Above Blue Deer is the First Man, who
invented cultivation. First Man faces a sacrificed sheep.
Page 62: This early-sixteenth-century Aztec statue of Xochipilli, the ecstatic
Prince of Flowers, was unearthed in Tlamanalco on the slopes of the volcano
Popocatepetl. The stylized glyphs depict various hallucinogenic plants. From
left to right, the glyphs represent: mushroom cap; tendril of the Morning Glory;
flower of Tobacco; flower of the sacred Morning Glory; bud of Sinicuiche; and,
on the pedestal, stylized caps of Psilocybe aztecOrum.
63
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 65 ---
these circumstances, however, use is often strictly
controlled by taboos or ceremonial circumscrip-
tions. In almost all instances, in both the Old and
the New World, the use of hallucinogenic drugs is
restricted to adult males. There are, however,
striking exceptions. Among the Koryak of Siberia,
Anianita may be used by both sexes. In southern
Mexico, the sacred mushrooms can be taken by
both men and women; in fact, the shaman is usual-
ly a woman. Similarly, in the Old World, Iboga
may be taken by any adult, male or female. While
purely speculative, there may be a basic reason for
the exclusion of women from ingesting narcotic
preparations. Many hallucinogens are possibly
sufficiently toxic to have abortifacient effects.
Since women in aboriginal societies are frequently
pregnant during most of their childbearing years,
the fundamental reason may be purely an insur-
64
or communicants alone
imbibe or ingest flex drinks,
Datura infusions, Tobacco,...
Peyote cactus, Ololiuqui seeds, mushrooms,
narcotic Mint leaves or Ayahuasca
the ethnographic principle is the same.
These plants contain spirit power."
—Weston La Barre
ance against abortions—even though this reason
has been forgotten.
Sometimes hallucinogens are administered to
children. Among the JIvaro, Brugmansia may be
given to boys, who are then admonished by the
ancestors during the intoxication. Frequently,
the first use of a hallucinogen occurs in puberty
rituals.
There is hardly an aboriginal culture without at
least one psychoactive plant: even Tobacco and
Coca may, in large doses, be employed for the in-
duction of visions. An example is the smoking of
Tobacco among the Warao of Venezuela, who use
it to induce a trancelike state accompanied by
what, for all practical purposes, are visions.
Although the New World has many more spe-
cies of plants purposefully employed as hallucino-
gens than does the Old World, both hemispheres
have very limited areas where at least one halluci-
nogen is not known or used. So far as we know,
the Inuit have only one psychoactive plant; the
Polynesian Islanders of the Pacific had Kava-kava
(Piper niethysticum), but they seem never to have
had a true hallucinogen in use: Kava-kava is
classed as a hypnotic.
Africa has been poorly studied from the point
of view of drug plants, and may have hallucino-
genic species that have not yet been introduced
to the scientific world. It is, however, possible to
assert that there are few parts of the continent
where at least one such plant is not now utilized
or was not employed at some time in the past.
Asia, a vast continent, has produced relatively
few major hallucinogenic varieties but their use
has been widespread and extremely significant
from a cultural point of view; furthermore, the
use of them is extremely ancient. Numerous
sources describe the use of hallucinogenic and
other intoxicating plants in ancient Europe. Many
researchers see the roots of culture, shamanism,
and religion in the use of psychoactive or halluci-
nogenic plants.
"Whether shaman alone,
or shaman and communicants,
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 66 ---
OVERVIEW OF
PLANT USE
Two points stand out in clear relief in
this tabular summary of material set
forth in greater detail in other sections
of the book. It is obvious that: (1) the
sources of information are interdisci-
plinary in nature; and (2) there is urgent
need for deeper studies in view of the
sparsity or vagueness of knowledge in
so many cases.
That progress in future studies will be
made only when they are based on inte-
gration of data, from sundry fields—.
anthropology, botany, chemistry, history,
NOTES OF A BOTANIST
ON
StINGNV, IRON OF rRAYtL ON lilt AMAZON ANN1,1*.
ITS10101 1ANIFI, 111K TNONINOT.iS, Nil''iFi,ItO.
l'Arr,o, cosiqi *11.?.SCIIIOM.I,"Al.LNCA.
310 ?1NTNON, *0 *L'SI '10 11,0 COlON.
ACTS OF'Flit ONINCINO. ALONG TN, 2.31
rot]VON 010$ OF IRKAlOES OF'
tElls010 tCV*O1)K OlD III?..
'hoRn OF Till.
D,',Ioo11111 '(tORN
'...RICHARD SPRUCE, Pn.D,
101*00010L'OMIEN$IDSr
ALEREI)RUSSEL
$lCiCltAl'lhICflINTE000CTION
1INTROIT, LEN 0011 01! Il.Ll'Sfl*IlOkS
OFtEN
oroilVlll.l M51—rol. I
MACO1.fI.1..\\ AND CO, I.INIlTll3L
NT. 01*01150 010101,LONDON
150$
medicine,mythology, pharmacology,
philology, religion, and so on—should
be obvious. And wise handling of such a
wealth of information calls for patience
and breadth of understanding. One of
the first steps in this direction must be
presentation of such diverse material in
easily assimilated outline form—an end
that we have tried to accomplish in this
overview.
It is man living in so-called archaic so-
cieties and intimately familiar with his
ambient vegetation who has discovered
the hallucinogens and bent them to his
use. The relentless march of civilization
is ever increasing in speed and intensity,
reaching even the most remote and hid-
den peoples. Acculturation inevitably
spells the doom of native lore and leads
to the disappearance of knowledge built
up through the ages. It is, therefore,
urgent that we step up the tempo of
research before this knowledge will for-
ever be entombed with the culture that
gave it birth.
Accurate botanical identification of
the source plant is basic to a sound un-
derstanding of hallucinogens. We do not
always have this knowledge. Ideally,
botanical determination of a product
should be made on the basis of a voucher
specimen: only in this way canexactness
be ensured. It is sometimes necessary to
base an identification on a common
name or on a description, in which case
there always may exist some doubt as to
its accuracy. It is equally essential that
chemicalinvestigationsbefounded
upon properly vouchered material. Bril-
liant phytochemical work too often is
worthless simply because grave doubts
about the identity of the original vegetal
material cannot be dispelled.
Similar deficiencies in other aspects
of our knowledge of hallucinogens and
their use hamper our understanding.
The full cultural significance of mind-
altering plants may not be appreciated.
It is only in very recent years that an-
thropologists have begun to compre-
hend the deep and all-encompassing
role that hallucinogens play in the his-
tory, mythology, and philosophy of
aboriginal societies. In time as this un-
derstanding is appreciated, anthropol-
ogy will advance in its explanation of
many basic elements of human culture.
The material presented in this book is
of necessity concentrated in detail. It
may also at times be diffuse. Realizing
the desirability occasionally of having a
quick means of consultation, we have
striven to assemble the essential facts
and present them in skeletal form in this
Overview of Plant Use.
Key symbols designating plant types in
Overview of Plants Use
XEROPHYTES AND
SUCCULENTS
LIANAS
VINESAND TWINERS
GRASSESANDSEDGES
HERBS
LILY-LIKEPLANTS
FUNGI
ORCHIDS
SHRUBS
TREES
AQUATIC PLANTS
Left: The English botanist Richard
Spruce spent fourteen years in field
research in South America during the
1800's. An insatiable plant-explorer, he
might be called the prototype of ethno-
botanists of tropical America. His
studies laid the foundation of research
on the hallucinogens Yopo and Caapi—
research still in progress.
Page 64: Theculture of Colombia
(from 1200 to 1600) has yielded many
enigmatic gold pectorals with mush-
roomlike representations. They may
imply the existence of a cult using these
intoxicating fungi, species of which
occur in the area. Many of the pectorals
have winglike structures, possibly
signifying magic flight, a frequent char-
acteristic of hallucinogenic intoxication.
65
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 67 ---
REF
NUMBER
COMMON
NAME
TYPE OF
PLANT
BOTANICAL
NAME
USAGE:
HISTORYAND ETI-INOGRAPHY
AgaraGalbulimima beigraveana (F. Muell.) SpragueNatives in Papua
II
Angel's Trumpets
Floripondio
Brugmansia arborea (L.) Lagerh.;
B. aurea Lagerh.; B. x insignis (Barb.-Rodr.)
Brugmansia are employed in the warmer parts of South
America, especially in the western Amazon, under the
1 2
Borrachero
Huacacachu
Lockwood ex R. E. Schult.;
B. Sanguiflea (R. et P.) Don;
name of Toe.
Also used by the Mapuche Indians of Chile, the Chib-
HuantoB. suaveolens (H. et B. ex WilId.)cha of Colombia, and known to Peruvian Indians as
MaicoaBercht. et Presl.;Huacacachu.
ToeB. versicolor Lagerh.;
TongaB. vulcanicola (A. S. Barclay) R. E. Schult.
(see also pages 140—143)
Ayahuasca
Caapi
Banisteriopsis caapi (Spruce ex Griseb.) Morton;
B. inebrians Morton; B. rusbyana (Ndz.) Morton;
Used in the western half of the Amazon Valley and by
isolated tribes on the Pacific slopes of the Colombian
YajéDiplopterys cabrerana (Cuatr.) B. Gatesand Ecuadorean Andes.
(see also pages 124—139)
A')Badoh Negro
piule
Ipomoea violacea L.Oaxaca, southern Mexico.
Known to the Aztecs as Tlililtzin and employed in
Tlililtzinthe same way as Ololiuqui, Ipomoea is called Piule by
(see also pages 170—175)the Chinantec and Mazatec, and Badoh Negro by the
Zapotec.
2 ABakana
Hikuli
Coryphantha compacta (Engelm.)
Britt. et Rose; C. app.
The Tarahumara Indians of Mexico consider C. corn-
pacta (Wichuri, also referred to as Bakana or Bakana-
Wichuriwa) a kind of Peyote or Hikuli (see Peyote).
o A0'1
BakanaScirpus sp.A species of Scirpus is apparently one of the most
powerful herbs of the Tarahumara Indians of Mexico.
The Indians fear the plant because of possible
insanity.
6V
Blue Water Lily
Ninfa
Nymphaea amp/a (Solisb.) DC.;
N. caerulea Say,
Water Lilies enjoyed an exceptionally prominent place in
the mythology and art of Minoan and dynastic Egyptian
Quetzalaxochiacatlcultures, in India and China, as well as in the Mayan
world from the Middle Classical period until the inception
of the Mexican period.
Among Old and New World similarities is the relation
of N. amp/a to the toad, itself associated with hallucino-
genic agents, and the relation of the plant to death.
Caapi-Pinima
Caapi (see Ayahuasca)
Tetrapteris methyst/ca R. E. Schul.;
T mucronata Cay,
Caapi-Pinima is employed by the nomadic Makü Indians
of the Rio Tikié in the northwestern Amazon of Brazil.
.
They call it Caapi, the same as Banister/opals. Several
writers have mentioned "more than one kind" of Caapi in
the Rio Vaupés area of Brazil and adjacent Colombia.
6 2
Cawe
Wichowaka
Pachycereus pecten-aboriginum (Engeim.)
Britt. et Rose
Employed by the Tarahumara Indians of Mexico, Wicho-
waka means "insanity" in the local language.
ACebil
VilIca
Anadenanthera colubrina (VeIl.) Brenan;
A. colubrina (Veil.) Brenan var.
A. peregrina is used today by tribes of the Orinoco basin
(Yopo) and was first reported in 1946. No longer used in
5
Yopo
(see also pages 116—119)
Cebl/ (Griseb.) Altschul;
A. peregrina (L.) Speg.;
A. peregrina (L.) Speg. var. fa/cata (Benth.)
Altschul
the West Indies.
Indians of Argentina (VilIca or Huilca) and southern
Peru (Cebul) are believed to have employed A. co/ubrina
in precolonial times.
i'j I
Cebolleta
'*'
Onc/dium cebo//eta (Jacq.) Sw.It is suspected that the Tarahumara of Mexico make use
of this orchid.
8V
Chacruna
Chacruna Bush
Psychotria v/rid/s Ruiz et PavónUsed for ages in the Amazon region as a significant in-
gredient of Ayahuasca.
Cahua
66
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 68 ---
USAGE:
CONTEXTAND PURPOSE
PREPARATIONCHEMICAL COMPONENTS
AND EFFECTS
Hallucinogenic intoxicationThe bark and leaves of this tree are boiled with a spe-Although 28 alkaloids have been isolated, a psychoac-
cies of Homalomena to prepare a tea.tive principle has not yet been found.
Visions of men and animals to be killed are experi-
enced.
The Indians of Sibundoy use Brugmansia for magico-The drug is usually taken in the form of powderedAll species of Brugmansia are chemically similar, with
medicinal purposes, the Mapuche as medicine forseeds added to fermented drinks, or as a tea made ofscopolamine as their principal psychoactive constitu-
recalcitrant children,the leaves.ent. Content of lesser alkaloids is also similar.
The Chibcha formerly gave fermented Chicha withA dangerous hallucinogen, Brugmansia brings on an
Brugmansia seeds to wives and slaves of dead chief-intoxication often so violent that physical restraint is
tains to induce a stupor before they were buried alivenecessary before the onset of a deep stupor, during
.vith their husbands or masters,which visions are experienced.
Indians in Peru still believe that Brugmansia permits
them to communicate with ancestors and that it can
reveal treasures preserved in graves.
Usually drunk in religious ceremonies.The bark, prepared in cold or boiling water, may beThe hallucinogenic activity is primarily due to harmine,
In the famous Tukanoan YuruparI ceremony in Co-taken alone or with additives—especially the leaves ofthe major 3-carboline alkaloid in the plants.
lombia—an adolescent initiation ritual for boys. TheB. rusbyana (Diplopterys cabrerana) and of PsychotriaEffects of taking the bitter and nauseating drink
Jivaro believe that Ayahuasca makes possible corn-v/rid/s—which alter the effects.range from pleasant intoxication with no hangover to
munication with ancestors and that, under its influ-The bark can also be chewed. Recent evidence fromviolent reactions with sickening aftereffects. Usually,
ence, a man's soul may leave the body and wanderthe northwestern Amazon suggests that the plants arevisual hallucinations in color occur. The intoxication
free,also used in the form of a snuff.ends with a deep sleep and dreams.
In southern Mexico, this vine is respected as one ofA drink is prepared from about a thimbleful of theThe alkaloid content is five times that of Turbina
the principal hallucinogens for use in divination,crushed seeds.corymbosa; accordingly natives use fewer seeds. The
magico-religious, and curing rituals,same alkaloids are found in other Morning Glories but
usage is restricted to Mexico. (See Ololiuqui.)
Medicinal purposes.The aboveground Teuile ("meat" of the cactus) is eatenVarious alkaloids, including phenylethylarnines, have
Taken by shamans as a potent medicine and greatlyfresh or dried. Eight to twelve cactus "tops" are anbeen isolated from Coryphantha, a promising genus for
feared and respected by the Indians.adequate dose.future studies.
Scirpus plays an important role in folk medicineThe tuberous roots of Scirpus are often collected fromAlkaloids have been reported from Scirpus and related
snd as a hallucinogen; it must be treated with greatfaraway places.sedges. The Indians believe that they can travel to dis-
'everence.tant places, talk with their ancestors, and have colored
visions.
There exist numerous interesting parallels betweenDried flowers and buds of Nymphaea amp/a areThe alkaloids apomorphine, nuciferine, and nornuci-
the ritualistic (shamanic) significance of Nymphaea insmoked. The rhizomes are eaten raw or cooked. Theferine, isolated from the rhizomes of N. amp/a, may be
the Old and the New Worlds, suggesting that Nym-buds of N. caeru/a are used to make a tea,responsible for the psychotropic activity.
phaea may have been used as a narcotic, possibly a
hallucinogen.
N. amp/a has recently been reported to be used in
Mexico as a recreational drug with "powerful halluci-
natory effects."
Hallucinogenic intoxication.A drink is prepared from the bark of T methystica in
cold water. The infusion is yellowish, unlike the brown-
ish color of the beverage prepared from Banisteriopsis.
It has not been possible as yet to carry out chemical
examination of T met hystica, but reports of the effects
of the drug would suggest that the same or similar
j3-carboiine alkaloids are present as in Banisteriopsis.
There are several purely medicinal uses of thisA hallucinogenic drink is prepared from the juice of the4-hydroxy-3-methoxyphenylethylamine and four tetra-
cactus,young branches of P pecten-aboriginum.hydroisoquinolirie alkaloids have been isolated.
It causes dizziness and visual hallucinations.
Now smoked as a hallucinogenic intoxicant by IndiansThe snuff is prepared from the beans, which areTryptamine derivatives and j3-carbolines.
n northern Argentina.usually moistened, rolled into a paste, and dried by
toasting.
When pulverized to a gray-green powder, it is mixed
with an alkaline plant ash or snail shell lime.
A twitching of the muscles, slight convulsions, and
lack of muscular coordination followed by nausea,
visual hallucinations, and disturbed sleep. Macropsia.
Reportedly used as a hallucinogen, 0. cebo/leta isUnknown.An alkaloid has been reported from 0. cebol/eta.
employed as a temporary surrogate for Peyote.
This bush has great cultural significance as a DMT-Fresh or dried leaves are mixed with vines or the huskThe leaves contain 0.1 % to 0.61 % N,N,-DMT, as well
providing ingredient of the hallucinogen Ayahuasca,of Banisteriopsis caapi and cooked. The preparation isas traces of other alkaloids.
which has a central place in the shamanic tradition ofdrunk as Ayahuasca (Caapi, Yagd,).
;he Amazon.
67
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 69 ---
REF
NUMBER
COMMON
NAME
TYPE OF
PLANT
BOTANICAL
NAME
USAGE:
HISTORYAND ETHNOGRAPHY
3I
Chiricaspi
Chiric-Sanango
Brunfelsia chiricaspi Plowman;
B. grandifloraD.Don;
Brunfelsia is known as Borrachero ('the intoxicator") to
Colombian Indians, and as Chiricaspi (cold tree") in
ManakaB. grandffloraD.Don subsp. schultesii Plowmanwesternmost Amazonia (Colombia, Ecuador, and Peru).
3 AColorines
Chilicote
Erythrina americanaMill.;
E. coraioides Moc. et Sesse ex DC.;
The beans of various species are frequently sold with
those of Sophora secundfflora (Mescal Beans) in
TzompanquahuitlE. flabelliformis KearneyMexico. They are used as amulets or charms.
7 A'+
Common ReedPhragmites australia (Cay.) Trinius ex SteudelUsed for medicinal purposes since ancient times. Psy-
choactive use is a recent phenomenon.
Copelandia
Jambur
Panaeolus cyanescens Berk. et Br.;
Copelandia cyanescens (Berk. et Br.) Singer
Cultivated on cow and buffalo dung in Bali.
5 00
CowhageMucuna pruriens(L.) DC.India. Used in Ayurvedic medicine. The seeds are used
worldwide as charms or amulets.
I
Dams da Noite
(Lady of the Night)
Cestrum Iaevigatum Schlecht;
CestrumparquiL'Herit.
Coastal regions of southern Brazil, southern Chile.
Palqui
Maconha
2 0Datura
Dutra
Datura metelL.D. metelis mentioned as a hallucinogenic plant in early
Sanskrit and Chinese writings.
(see also pages 106—111)Known as a drug to the Arabian physician Avicenna in
.the eleventh century.
Employed today especially in India, Pakistan, and Af-
ghanistan.
D. ferox, a related Old World species, plays a minor
role.
8
Deadly Nightshade
Belladonna
Atropa belladonna L.Europe, Near East.
Deadly Nightshade figured as an important ingredient in
(see also pages 86—91)many of the witches' brews of the Middle Ages.
Atropa played a prominent role in the mythology of
most European peoples.
2
El Nene
El Ahijado
Coleus blumei Benth.; C. pumilus BlancoNative to the Philippine Islands, two species of this plant
have acquired significance similar to Salvia in southern
El MachoMexico among the Mazatec Indians.
'v'-'
Epená
Nyakwana
Virola calophylla Warb.;
V calophylloidea Markgr.;
In Brazil, Colombia, Venezuela and Peru a number of
species of Virola are used, the most important of which
YakeeV elongata (Spr. ex Benth.) Warb.;appears to be V theiodora.
(see also pages 176-181)V theiodora (Spr.) Warb.The hallucinogenic snuff has various names depend-
ing on the locality or tribe, with the most commonly re-
cognized terms being Paricá, Epená, and Nyakwana in
Brazil, Yakee and Yato in Colombia.
EreribaHomalomena sp.The natives of Papua are reported to use Horiialomena.
2
ErgotC/avjceps purpurea (Fr.) TulasneIt has recently been convincingly argued that Ergot
'-'(see also pages 102—105)played a role in the Eleusinian mysteries of ancient
Greece.
When accidentally ground up with rye flour during the
Middle Ages, Ergot (which grows primarily as a fungal
disease on rye) poisoned whole districts with ergotism.
These mass poisonings became known as St. Antho-
ny's fire.
68
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 70 ---
USAGE:
CONTEXTAND PURPOSE
PREPARATIONCHEMICAL COMPONENTS
AND EFFECTS
n Amazonian folk medicine, Brunfelsia plays a majorThe Kofán of Colombia and Ecuador and the Jivaro ofScopoletine has been found in Brunfelsia, but this
magico-religious role.Ecuador add Brunfelsia to Yajé, prepared basicallycompound is not known to be psychoactive.
Used as an additive to the hallucinogenic drink Yalefrom Banisteriopsis (see Ayahuasca). It heightens theA sensation of chills follows ingestion, an effect that
(see Ayahuasca).hallucinogenic effects,has given rise to the name Chiricaspitree").
The plant may once have been used by the Tarahu-The red beans are often mixed with the similar ones ofSome species of Erythrina contain alkaloids of the er-
mara, who value the beans medicinally.Sophora secundiflora.ythran type, producing effects similar to those of curare
or cytisine.
Used today as a DMT-delivering agent for AyahuascaTwenty to 50g of roots are boiled with 3g of seeds fromThe roots contain the psychedelic or vision-inducing
analogs.Peganum harmala and the preparation is consumed as
a drink,
alkaloid N, N-DMT, 5-MEO-DMT, Bufotenin, and the
toxin gramine.
Used in native festivals in Bali and reportedly sold toThe mushrooms are eaten fresh or dried.Up to 1.2% of psilocine and 0.6% of psilocybine have
loreign visitors as a hallucinogen,been found in C. cyanescens, which is the highest
content of these alkaloids found in hallucinogenic
mushrooms.
Indian peoples may have utilized the psychoactivePowdered seeds. Source of DM1 for AyahuascaAlthough Mucuna has not been reported as a halluci-
properties.analogs.nogen, it is rich in psychoactive alkaloids (such as
Mucuna is considered an aphrodisiac in India.DMT) capable of inducing behavioral changes equita-
ble with hallucinogenic activity.
The Mapuche of southern Chile smoke Palqui.The leaves are smoked as a substitute for Marijuana.The unripened fruit, leaves, and flowers contain sapo-
nines that are not known to be hallucinogenic.
Used as an aphrodisiac in the East Indies.Powdered seeds added to wine.See Toloache.
Valuable drug.The seeds are added to alcoholic drinks, to Canna-
Ceremonial intoxication and recreation.bis cigarettes or tobacco, and occasionally to the betel
chew mixture.
Witches' brews; the sabbat.The entire plant contains psychoactive constituents.The plant contains alkaloids, capable of inducing hal-
Today, A. belladonna is an important source forlucinations. The main psZchoactive constituent is
medicinal drugs.hyoscyamine, but lesser amounts of scopolamine and
trace amounts of minor tropane alkaloids are also
present.
Having magico-religious significance, Coleus is usedThe leaves are chewed fresh or the plants are ground,No hallucinogenic principle has yet been discovered in
as a divinatory plant.then diluted with water for drinking,the 150 known Coleus species.
Epená or Nyakwana may be snuffed ceremonially bySome Indians scrape the inner layer of the bark and dryTryptamine and 13-carboline alkaloids, 5-methoxydi-
all adult males, occasionally even without any ritualthe shavings over a fire. When pulverized, powderedmethyltryptamine and dimethyltryptamine (DMT),
connection. The medicine men use the drug in diag-leaves of Just ic/a, the ashes of Amasita, the bark ofbeing the main constituents, are responsible for the
nosis and treatment of illnesses.Elizabetha princeps may be added.hallucinogenic activity. Effects of the intoxication vary.
The use of Yakee or Paricá is restricted to shamans.Other Indians fell the tree, collect the resin, boil it to a
paste, sun-dry the paste, crush and sift it. Ashes of sev-
eral barks and the leaf powder of Justicia may be added.
A further method is to knead the inner shavings of
freshly stripped bark and to squeeze out the resin and
boil it to a paste, which is sun-dried and prepared into
snuff with ashes added.
A group of Makü Indians in the Colombian Vaupés
ingest the unprepared resin as it is collected from the
bark.
They usually include initial excitability, setting in within
several minutes from the first snuffing. Then follows
numbness of the limbs, twitching of the facial muscles,
inability to coordinate muscular activity, nausea, visual
hallucinations, and finally, a deep, disturbed sleep.
Plants are used in traditional medicine and to createThe leaves are eaten with the leaves and bark of Gal-Little is known still of the constituents of this genus.
hallucinogenic dreams.bulimima be/graveana (see Agara).Violent derangement is followed by slumber with
visions.
It appears that Ergot has never been utilized pur-Used for psychoactive purposes. Taken as a cold-Ergoline alkaloids, mainly derivatives of lysergic acid,
posefully as a hallucinogen in medieval Europe.water infusion. Dosage is difficult to determine and canare the pharmacologically active constituents of Ergot.
Employed extensively as a medicine by midwives inbe dangerous!Ergot alkaloids or derivatives of them are the basis of
cases of difficult childbirth during the Middle Ages,important medicines used today in obstetrics, internal
Ergot induced contractions of involuntary musclesmedicine, and psychiatry. The most potent hallucino-
and was a strong vasoconstrictor.gen, lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), is a synthetic
derivative of Ergot.
69
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 71 ---
REF
NUMBER
COMMON
NAME
TYPE OF
PLANT
BOTANICAL
NAME
USAGE:
HISTORYAND ETF-INOGRAPI-IY
25
EsakunaCymbopogon densfflorus StapfUsed by medicine men in Tanzania.
72
Fang-K'ueiPeucedanumjaponicum Thunb.China
Fly Agaric
(see also pages 82—85)
Amanita muscaria (L. ex Fr.) Pers.Finno-Ugrian peoples in eastern and western Siberia.
Several groups of Athabaskan peoples of North
America. A. muscaria could very well be the mysterious
god-narcotic Soma of ancient India, taken by the
A5
Galanga
Maraba
Kaempferia galanga L.There are vague reports that Galanga is employed as a
hallucinogen in New Guinea.
2V
GenistaCyt/sus canariensjs (L.) 0. KuntzeAlthough native to the Canary Islands, Genista was in-
corporated in aboriginal American societies.
Genista has apparently acquired an important role
among the Yaqui Indians of Mexico.
5 2
Gi'-i-Wa
Gi'-i-Sa-Wa
Lycoperdon marginatum Vitt.;
L. mixtecorum Helm
In southern Mexico, the Mixtec of Oaxaca employ two
species to induce a condition of half-sleep. There seems
to be no ceremony connected with the use.
In northern Mexico, among the Tarahumara of Chi-
huahua, a species of Lycoperdon, known as Kalamota,
is employed.
A''J
1-lenbane
(see also
Hyoscyamus nigerL.; H. a/bus L.During the Middle Ages, Henbane was an ingredient of
the witches' brews and ointments.
A .1
'+ I
In ancient Greece and Rome, reports of "magic
drinks" indicate that Henbane frequently served as an
ingredient. It has been suggested that the priestesses
Delphi prophesied under the influence of Henbane.
8 2
Hierba de Ia Pastora
Hierba de Ia Virgen
Salvia div/forum EpI. et Jativa-M.Used by the Mazatec Indians of Mexico as a substitute
for psychoactive mushrooms, S. divinorum ("of the dlvi-
Pipiltzintzintliners") is called "herb of the shepherdess:' It is commonly
believed to be the narcotic Pipiltzintzintli of the Aztec
Indians.
3 3
Hikuli Mulato
Hikuli Rosapara
Epithelantha micromeris (Engelm.)
Weber ex Britt. et Rose
One of the "false Peyotes" of the Tarahumara Indians of
Chihuahua and the Huichol of northern Mexico.
7
Hikuli Sunamé
Chautle
Ariocarpus fissuratus Schumann;
A. retusus Scheidw.
The Tarahumara Indians in northern and central Mexico
assert that A. fissuratus is stronger than Peyote (Lo-
Peyote CimarrOnphophora).
TsuwiriHuichol Indians of Mexico.
'-"
Iboga
(see also pages 112—115)
Tabernanthe iboga Baill.In Gabon and the Congo, the cult surrounding Iboga
provides the natives with the strongest single force
against the missionary spread of Christianity and Islam
in this region.
56
Jurema
Ajuca
Mimosa host//is (Mart.) Benth.;
M. verrucosa Benth. = Mimosa tenu/f/ora
Valued in eastern Brazil, where several tribes in Pernam-
buco use the plant in ceremonials; also employed by var-
Tepescohuite(WilId.) Poir.bus now extinct tribes of the same area.
Over two centuries ago, Dutch explorers reported that
the Hottentots of South Africa employed the root of a
plant known as Channa or Kanna.
83
KannaMesembryanthemum expansum L.;
M. tortuosum L. = Sceletium tortuosum (L.)
N.E.Br.
70
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 72 ---
Iboga is known to be used as a hallucinogen in magico-
religious context, especially the Bwiti cult, and serves
to seek information from ancestors and the spirit world,
hence 'a coming to terms with death." Moreover, intox-
ication is practiced in the initiation ceremonies.
The drug also has the reputation of a powerful
stimulant and aphrodisiac.
The hallucinogenic use of Mimosa hostilis in ceremo-
nies seems to have nearly disappeared today. Em-
ployed in connection with warfare.
Probably once used as a vision-inducing hallucino-
gen.
The root of Fang-K'uei is employed medicinally in
China.
Fresh or dried roots are eaten pure, or added to palm
wine. Roughly log of dried root powder induces a
psychedelic effect.
The root of Mimosa hostilis was the source of a "mira-
culous drink," known locally as Ajuca or Vinho de Jure-
ma.
In the hinterlands of South Africa, the roots and leaves
are still smoked.
Apparently, the leaves are sometimes dried after
fermentation and chewed as an inebriant.
CHEMICAL COMPONENTS
AND EFFECTS
It is not known to which compound the alleged halluci-
nogenic activity has to be attributed.
Alkaloidal constituents have been reported from Peu-
cedanum, but whether or not they are of hallucinogenic
types is not known. Coumarins and furocoumarins are
widespread in the genus; both occur in P japonicum.
Iboga contains at least a dozen indole alkaloids, ibo-
game being the most important. Ibogaine is a strong
psychic stimulant that in high doses produces also
hallucinogenic effects.
One active alkaloid identical with the hallucinogenic N,
N-dimethyl-tryptamine has been isolated.
The common name is today applied toseveral species
of Sceletium and Mesembfyaflttlemum thathave alka-
loids — mesembrine and mesembrenine—with sedative
activities capable of inducing torpor.
Kanna produces a strong intoxication.
71
USAGE:
CONTEXTAND PURPOSE
PREPARATION
Employed to cause dreams in order to foretell the fu-
ture.
Folk medicine.
Smoking of the flowers, either alone or with tobacco.
Shamanistic inebriation.One or several mushrooms are taken sun-dried orIbotenic acid, Muscimole, Muscazone.
Religious significance; healing ceremonies.slowly toasted over a fire. They may also be drunk asEuphoria, colored visions, macropsia; on occasion
Religious ceremonies,an extract in water or reindeer milk or with the juice of
Vaccinium oliginorum or Epilobium angustifolium. Ri-
tualistic drinking of the urine of intoxicated individuals
in Siberia also occurs.
religious fervor and deep sleep may occur.
Hallucinogenic intoxication (?),folk medicine, aphro-The highly aromatic rhizome is valued locally as aBeyond the high content of essential oil (to which hal-
disiac.condiment; a tea from the leaves is employed in folk
medicine,
lucinogenic activity might be due) in the rhizome of this
relative of Ginger, little is known of the chemistry.
Ceremonial use in Native American tribes.The seeds are valued by Yaqul medicine men.Cytisus is rich in the lupine alkaloid cytisine.
Employed especially by the medicine men as a hal-Hallucinogenic activity has not been reported
lucinogen in magic ceremonies.cytisine, but it is known to be toxic.
Used as auditory hallucinogen.The fungi are eaten.There is as yet no phytochemical basis to explain the
Taken by sorcerers to enable them to approachpsychotropic effects.
people without being detected and to make people
sick.
Witches' brews; magic infusions.The dried herb is smoked as a cigarette or smoked in aThe active principles in this solanaceous genus are
Induces a clairvoyant trance.smokehouse. The seeds are mainly smoked. The
seeds are used as a substitute for hops in making beer.
Dosage varies from person to person.
tropane alkaloids, especially hyoscyaminescopo-
lamine, the latter being mainly responsible for the
hallucinogenic effects.
In Oaxaca, Mexico, the Mazatec Indians cultivateThe leaves are chewed fresh or crushed on a metate,The main active ingredient, salvinorin A, can bring
S. divinorum for its hallucinogenic properties in divi-then diluted with water and filtered for a drink,about extreme hallucinations when inhaled in amounts
natory rituals,of 250 to 500 mcg.
It is apparently used when Teonanácatl or Ololiuqui
seeds are rare.
Medicine men take Hikuli Mulato to make their sightCactus flesh is eaten fresh or dried.Alkaloids and triterpenes have been reported.
clearer and permit them to commune with sorcerers, ItThis cactus is reportedly able to drive evil people
is taken by runners as a stimulant and "protector" andinsanity and throw them from cliffs.
the Indians believe that it prolongs life.
Valuing it in witchcraft, the Tarahumara believe thatConsumed either fresh or crushed in water.Several phenylethylamine alkaloids have been
thieves are powerless to steal when this cactus callsisolated.
its soldiers to its aid.
The Huichol consider Ariocarpusto be evil, insisting
that it may cause permanent insanity.
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 73 ---
Tanaecium nocturnum (Barb.-Rodr.)
Bur. et K. Schum.
Employed by the Karitiana Indians of the Rio Madeira in
Amazonian Brazil.
5 7
Kratom
Biak-Biak
Mitragyna speciosa KorthalsIn the 19th century, Kratom was known as an opium
substitute in Thailand and Malaysia.
QU
KwashiPancratium fr/ant hum HerbertKwashi is employed by the Bushmen in Dobe,
Botswana.
A 7
1
LatCie
Arbol de los Brujos
Latua pub/flora (Griseb.) Baill.Formerly used by the Mapuche Indian shamans of
Valdivia, Chile.
I
Liberty CapPsilocybe semi/anceata (Fries) QueletIt is possible that this fungus has been used for psycho-
active purposes in Central Europe for about 12,000
years. Earlier, it was used as a hallucinogen by the Alpen
nomads and has also been used in European witchcraft.
A 8Lion's Tail
Wild Dagga'
Leon/f/s leonurus (L.) R. Br.This herb has been used as a narcotic in southern Africa
since ancient times.
Dacha
i'
Maiden's AcaciaAcacia maidenii F. von Muell.;
A. phiebophylla F. von Muell.;
A. simplicifolia Druce
Many Acacias are used in traditional medicine. The
psychoactive use of Acacia, Which contains DMT, is very
recent and has been developed especially in Australia
and California.
8 6
Malva Colorada
Chichibe
Sida acuta Burm.; S. rhomb/folia L.Sida acuta and Sida rhomb/folia are said to be smoked
along the Gulf Coast of Mexico.
Axocatzin
5 AMandrake
(see also pages 86—91)
Mandragora off/cinarum L.Mandrake has a complex history in the Old World.
The root of Mandrake can be likened to the human
form, hence its magic.
7I
Marijuana
Bhang
Cannabis sat/va L.; C. md/ca Lam.In India, use of Cannabis has had religious significance.
Specimens nearly 4,000 years old have turned up in an
CharasEgyptian site.
DaggaIn ancient Thebes, the plant was made into a drink with
Ganjaopium-like effects.
HashishThe Scythians, who threw Hemp seeds and leaves on
Hemphot stones in steam baths to produce an intoxicating
Kifsmoke, grew the plant along the Volga 3,000 years ago.
Ta MaChinese tradition puts the use of the plant back 4,800
(see also pages 92—101).years.
Indian medical writing, compiled before 1000 B.C., re-
ports therapeutic uses of Cannabis.
The Greek physician Galen wrote, about A.o.160, that
general use of Cannabis in cakes produced intoxication.
In 13th-century Asia Minor, organized murderers,
rewarded with Hashish, were known as hash/shins, from
which may come the term assassin in European
languages.
MashihiriJust/cia pectoral/s Jacq. var.
stenophylla Leonard
The Waiká and other Indians of the uppermost Orinoco
and the adjacent parts of northwestern Brazil cultivate
Just/cia.
72
REFCOMMONTYPE OFBOTANICALUSAGE:
NUMBERNAMEPLANTNAMEHISTORYAND ETHNOGRAPHY
8 7
KielifKieriSolandra brev/calyxStandl.;Mentioned by Hernández as Tecomaxochiti or Hueipatl
HueipatlS. guerrerensis Martinezof the Aztec Indians.
TecomaxochitiIn the mythology and symbolism of the Mexican Hui-
chol and other tribes, several species of Solandra are
important.
92
Koribo
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 74 ---
Cannabis has a long history of use in folk medicine
and as a psychoactive substance.
It is the source of fiber, an edible fruit, an industrial
oil, a medicine, and an intoxicant.
Use of Cannabis has grown in popularity in the past
40 years as the plant has spread to nearly all parts of
the globe. Increase in the plant's use as an inebriant in
Western countries, especially in urban centers, has
led to major problems and dilemmas for European
and American authorities. There is a sharp division of
opinion as to whether the widespread use of Canna-
bis is a vice that must be stamped out or is an innoc-
uous habit that should be permitted legally. The sub-
ject is debated hotly, usually with limited knowledge.
Extracts from the husk and leaves of A. maidenii, the
bark of A. simplicifolia, or the leaves of A. phiebophylla
are combined with the seeds from Peganum harmala.
Methods of consuming Cannabis vary. In the New
World, Marijuana (Maconha in Brazil) is smoked—the
dried, crushed flowering tips or leaves are often mixed
with tobacco or other herbs in cigarettes. Hashish, the
resin from the female plant, is eaten or smoked, often
in water pipes, by millions in Muslim countries of
northern Africa and western Asia. In Afghanistan and
Pakistan, the resin is commonly smoked. East Indians
regularly employ three preparations: Bhang consists of
plants that are gathered green, dried and made into a
drink with water or milk or into a candy (majun) with
sugar and spices; Charas normally smoked or eaten
with spices, is pure resin; Ganja, usually smoked with
tobacco, consists of resin-rich dried tops from the
female plant.
Many varieties of Acacia contain the psychedelic sub-
stance, DMT. The bark of A. maideniicontains 0.36%
DMT; the leaves of A. phiebophylla contain 0.3% DMT.
The bark of A. simplicifolia can contain up to 3.6% al-
kaloids, of which DMTaccounts for roughly one third.
The psychoactive principles—cannabinOtic com-
pounds—are found in greatest concentration in a resin
produced most abundantly in the region of the pistillate
inflorescence. A fresh plant yields mainly cannabidiolic
acids, precursors of the tetrahydrocannabinOls and re-
lated constituents, such as cannabinol and cannabi-
diol. The main effects are attributable to
tetrahydrocannabinol.
The principal effect is euphoria. Everything from a
mild sense of ease to hallucinations, from feelings of
exaltation and inner joy to depression and anxiety have
been reported. The drug's activities beyond the central
nervous system seem to be secondary. Theyconsist of
a rise in pulse rate and blood pressure,tremor, vertigo,
difficulty in muscular coordination, increasedtactile
sensitivity, and dilation of the pupils.
The natives mix Justicia leaves with the snuff pre-
pared from Virola (see Epena) to "make the snuff
smell better'
The leaves are dried and pulverized.Tryptamines have been suspected fromseveral spe-
cies of Justicia.
73
USAGE:
CONTEXTAND PURPOSE
PREPARATIONCHEMICAL COMPONENTS
AND EFFECTS
The Huichol worship and fear Solandra as a god-nar-
cotic, Kieli, a powerful aid in sorcery. Realizing the
close relationship of Solandra, Datura, and Brugman-
sia, the Huichol sometimes combine their use: they
distinguish between Datura inoxia or Kielitsa ("bad
Kieli") and the real Kieli or Solandra.
S. guerrerensis is known to be employed as an
intoxicant in the state of Guerrero.
A tea made from the juice of the branches of both spe-
des is known to be employed as an intoxicant.
The genus Solandra, closely related to Datura, con-
tains hyoscyamine, scopolamine, nortropine, tropine,
scopine, cuscohygrine, and other tropane alkaloids
with strong hallucinogenic effects.
Folk medicine.
This species is said to be praised as an aphrodisiac
by Indians of the Colombian ChocO.
A tea is made of the leaves of this liana and those of an
unidentified plant as a remedy for diarrhea.
Reports from botanical collectors of the odor of T noc-
turnum suggest that cyanogenesis occurs in this spe-
des. Saponines and tannins have been isolated.
In Southeast Asia, the leaves are chewed or smoked
for use as a stimulant or a narcotic,
Fresh leaves are chewed, dried, and smoked, or taken
internally as atea or extract. The leaves are sometimes
used together with Betel.
The entire plant contains alkaloids, of which Mitragy-
nine is the main active ingredient. Mitragynine, which is
chemically similar to yohimbine and psilocybine, is a
very powerful psychoactive substance.
Reportedly used as a hallucinogen and in folk medi-
cine.
ReligiousimportanceassumedintropicalWestAftica.
The bulbs are cut in two and rubbed over incisions on
the scalp. This custom most closely approaches the
Western habit of injecting medicine.
Many of the 15 species contain very toxic alkaloids.
The toxic state may be accompanied by hallucinogenic
symptoms.
is a virulent poison once used to induce delir-
lum, hallucinations, and even permanent insanity,
Dosages were a secret closely guarded. The fresh fruit
was preferentially employed.
The leaves and fruit contain 0.15% hyoscyamine and
0.08% of scopolamine, responsible for hallucinogenic
activity.
This mushroom has been used worldwide for its hal-
lucinogenic and vision-inducing qualities,
Eaten fresh or dried. Thirty fresh mushrooms or
roughly 3g of dried mushrooms is a sufficient psyche-
delic dose.
Contains high concentrations of psilocybin, and some
psilocine and baeocystine (the total alkaloid concen-
tration is roughly 1 % of the dried mass). This is a
potent hallucinogen.
The Hottentots and bush people smoke the plant as a
narcotic or as a substitute for Cannabis.
The dried buds and leaves are smoked either alone or
mixed with tobacco.
There have been no chemical studies to date.
Acacia resin is used in conjunction with Pituri by the
Australian Aborigines. Today, various varieties of
Acacia are used as DMT sources and also in the pre-
paration of Ayahuasca analogs for hallucinogenic
experiences.
Employed as a stimulant and substitute for Marijuana.Smoking.Ephedrine, which induces a mild stimulating effect, has
been reported from these species of Sida.
Used as a panacea, Mandrake played an extraordin-There existed various precautions in pulling the rootTropane alkaloids with hyoscyamine as the main con-
ary role as a magic plant and hallucinogen in Eur-from the earth because the plant's unearthly shrieksstituent besides scopolamine, atropine, mandragorine,
The total opean folklore. An active hallucinogenic ingredient ofcould drive collectors mad.and others are the psychoactive
is 0.4%. the witches' brews, Mandrake was probably the mostcontent of tropane alkaloids
potent admixture.
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 75 ---
REF.
NUMBER
COMMON
NAME
TYPE OF
PLANT
BOTANICAL
NAME
USAGE:
HISTORYAND ETHNOGRAPHY
•4 AMatwO
Huilca
Cacalia cordifolla L. f ii.Mexico
88
Mescal Bean
Coral Bean
Colorines
Frijoles
Red Bean
Sophora secundiflora (On.) Lag. ex DC.Use of Mescal Bean goes far back into prehistory in the
Rio Grande basin, where they have had ritual uses for at
least 9,000 years.
The Arapaho and Iowa tribes in the United States
were using the beans as early as 1820.
At least a dozen tribes of Indians in northern Mexico
and southern Texas practiced a vision-seeking dance.
00
NightshadeScopolia carniolica JacquesProbably used as an ingredien.t of witches' salves and
ointments; used in Eastern Europe as a substitute for
Mandrake; also used as an intoxicating ingredient in
beer.
I U
NondaBoletus kumeus Helm; B. manicus Helm;
B. nigroviolaceus Helm; B. reayi Heim
New Guinea
5 9
Nutmeg
Mace
Myristica fragrans Houtt.Known as "narcotic fruit" in ancient Indian writings.
Occasionally used as a surrogate for Hashish in
Egypt.
Unknown in classical Greece and Rome, Nutmeg was
introduced to Europe in the first century A. 0. by the
Arabs, who employed it ass medicine.
Nutmeg poisoning was common in the Middle Ages,
and during the 19th century in England and America.
9 5
Ololiuqui
Badoh
Xtabentum
(see also pages 170—1 75)
,
Turbina corymbosa (L.) Raf.
[= Rivea corymbosa]
The seeds of this Morning Glory, formerly known as
Rivea corymbosa, are valued as one of the major sacred
hallucinogens of numerous Indian groups in southern
Mexico. Their use goes back to early periods, and they
were important in Aztec ceremonies as an intoxicant
and as a magic potion with reputedly analgesic
properties.
A 2Paguando
Borrachero
Totubjansush
Arbol de Campanilla
Iochroma fuchsioides MiersUsed by the Indians of the Sibundoy Valley of southern
Colombia and the Kamsá of the southern Andes of
Colombia.
5 1Peyote
Hikuli
Mescal Button
(see also pages 144—155)
Lophophora diffusa (Croizat) Bravo;
L. williamsii (Lem.) Coult.
Spanish chronicles described use of Peyote by the Az-
tec Indians. Lophophora is valued today by the Tarahu-
mara, Huichol, and other Mexican Indians as well as by
members of the Native American Church in the United
States and western Canada.
PeyotilloPelecyphora aselliformis Ehrenb.There are suspicions that this round cactus may be
valued in Mexico as a "false Peyote:'
3 2
Pitallito
Hikuri
Echinocereus salmdyckianus Scheer;
E. triglochidiatus Engelm.
The Tarahumara Indians of Chihuahua consider both
species as "false Peyotes."
3 -1
Pituni
Pituri Bush
Poison Bush
Duboisia hopwoodii F. con Muell.Pituni leaves have been used for at least 40,000 years in
Australian rituals and are used for both medicinal and
pleasurable purposes.
8 1
'
PiuleRhynchosja longeracemosa Mart. et Gal.;
R. phaseoloides; R. pyramidalis (Lam.) Urb.
The red/black beans of several species of Rhynchosia
may have been employed in ancient Mexico as a
hallucinogen.
Rape dos IndiosMaquira sclerophylla (Ducke) C. C. BergIndians of the Pariana region of the Brazilian Amazon
formerly used Maquira, but encroaching civilization has
ended this custom.
74
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 76 ---
USAGE:
CONTEXTAND PURPOSE
PREPARATIONCHEMICAL COMPONENTS
AND EFFECTS
Presumed aphrodisiac and cure for sterility.The dried herb is smoked.One alkaloid has been reported.
No evidence of hallucinogenic properties.
The arrival of the Peyote cult, centering on Lopho-A drink was prepared from the red beans ofThe seeds contain the highly toxic alkaloid cytisine,
phora, a safer hallucinogen, led the natives to aban-S. secundiflora.which pharmacologically belongs to the same group as
don the Red Bean Dance, which had made use of thenicotine. Hallucinogenic activityfrom cyti-
beans as an oracular, divinatory, and hallucinogenicsine, but the powerful intoxication may cause a kind of
medium.delirium comparable to a visionary trance.
In high doses, respiratory failure may lead to death.
Pituri has been of central importance in Australian
Aboriginal society as a substance for social enjoy-
ment, a shamanic magic drug, and a valuable good forchewed.
trade. Pituri is chewed for its narcotic effects, as a
stimulant to dreams and visions, and simply to be
enjoyed.
Hallucinogenic intoxication (?)
The leaves contain various psychoactive alkaloids
(piturine, nicotine, nornicotine, anabasine, and others).
The roots also contain nornicotine and scopolamine.
The chewed leaves can act as a narcotic, stimulant, or
hallucinogen.
Chemical studies of Rhynchosia are still indecisive. An
alkaloid with curare-like activity has been reported
from one species. Pharmacological experiments with
R. phaseoloides produced a kind of seminarcoSis in
frogs.
Used as an aphrodisiac and psychoactive love potionThe roots are used as an ingredient in beer. The dried
in Lithuania and Latvia.herb can be smoked alone or mixed with other herbs.
The whole plant contains strong hallucinogenic tro-
panalkaloids, especially hyoscyamine and scopola-
mine. Also contains scopoletine.
Several species of Boletus are involved in the re-
portedmadness" of the Kuma.
The dried, ground fruit is eaten.Active principles unknown.
The most notable use of Nutmeg is found in Western
society, especially among prisoners deprived of other
drugs.
At least one teaspoon is used when taken orally or
snuffed for narcotic purposes, although usually much
more is required to bring on full intoxication. Nutmeg is
on occasion added to the betel chew.
The main active ingredient of nutmeg's essential oils is
myristicine; safrol and eugenol are also present.
In high doses extremely toxic and dangerous, the
components of Nutmeg oil so upset normal body func-
tions that they evoke a deliriuth comparable to halluci-
nations, usually accompanied by severe headache,
dizziness, nausea, etc.
At the present time the small round seeds are utilized
in divination and witchcraft by Chinantec, Mazatec,
Mixtec, Zapotec, and others and, as has recently
been stated,in almost all villages of Oaxaca
one finds seeds still serving the natives as an ever-
present help in time of trouble!'
The seeds, which must be collected by the person who
is to be treated, are ground by a virgin on a metate,
water is added, and then the drink is filtered. The
patient drinks it at night in a quiet, secluded place.
Ergoline alkaloids were found to be the psychoactive
principles, lysergic acid amide and lysergic acid hydro-
xyethylamide, closely related to the potent hallucino-
gen LSD, being the most important constituents.
According to shamans, the aftereffects are so strong
that the plant is used for divination, prophecy, and di-
agnosis of disease only when other medicines" are
unavailable, or for especially difficult cases.
The fresh bark is rasped from the stem and boiled with
an equal amount of leaves, usually a handful. The re-
suiting tea, when cooled, is drunk with no admixture.
The dose is said to be one to three cupfuls of a strong
decoction over a three-hour period,
Although chemical investigation of this genus has not
been carried out, it belongs to the Nightshade family,
well recognized for its hallucinogenic effects.
The intoxication is not pleasant, having after effects
of several days.
Mythological and religious significance; healing cere-
monies.
In the United States, use of Peyote is avision-quest
ritual with a combination of Christian and Native ele-
ments and high moral principles.
The cactus may be eaten raw, dried, or made into a
mash or a tea.
From 4 to 30 tops are consumed during the
ceremony.
Contains up to 30 alkaloids of the phenylethylamine
and tetrahydroisoquinoline type. The main constituent
responsible for the hallucinogenic activity is trimethox-
yphenylethylamine, named mescaline.
Hallucinations are characterized by colored visions.
The cactus is used in northern Mexico as Peyote
(Lophophora williams/i).
Cactus flesh is eaten fresh or dried.Recent investigations have indicated the presence of
alkaloids.
The Tarahumara sing to Pitallito during collection and
say it has "high mental qualities!'
Cactus flesh is eaten fresh or dried.A tryptamine derivative has been reported from
E. trig/ochid/atus.
The fermented leaves are mixed with alkaline plant
ashes and other resins (such as Acacia resin) and
The snuff was taken during tribal ceremonials.
The seeds are referred to by Indians of Oaxaca by the
same name used for the hallucinogenic seeds of
Morning Glory (Turbina corymbosa).
The method of preparation from the dried fruit is ap-
parently remembered only by the very old.
No chemical studies have been carried out on
M. scierophylla.
75
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 77 ---
REFCOMMON
NUMBERNAME
73
Reed Grass
TYPE OFBOTANICAL
PLANTNAME
Phalaris arundinacea L.
USAGE:
HISTORYAND ETHNOGRAPHY
Although Reed Grass was familiar to writers of antiquity,
its psychoactive use is very recent.
Southwestern United States and Mexico. Although there
are apparently no ethnological reports of Saguaro as a
hallucinogen, the plant is an important medicine among
the Indians.
There are many varieties of the genus Ta be rnaemon-
tana in Africa and South America. Especially in Africa,
some varieties seem to have been used for a long time in
shamanic or traditional medicine practices.
18
SaguaroCarnegiea gigan tea (Engelm.) Britt. et Rose
89
Sanango
Tabernaemontana
Tabernaemonfana coffeojdes Bojer ex DC.;
T crassa Bentham; T dichotoma Roxburgh;
T pandacaqui Poir.
[= Ervatamia pandacaqui (Poir.) Pichonj
ASan PedroTrichocereus pachanoi Britt. et RoseUsed by the natives of South America, especially in the
Aguacolla[=Andes of Peru, Ecuador, and Bolivia.
Gigantón
(see also pages 166—169)
67
ScrewPinePandanussp.NewGuinea
Shang-laPhytolacca acinosa Roxb.China
ShaninPetunia violacea Lindi.A recent report from highland Ecuador has indicated
Petunia-that a species of Petunia is valued as a hallucinogen.
23
ShanshiCoriaria thymifolia HBK. ox Wilid.Peasants in Ecuador.
ASiberian Lion's TailLeonurus sibiricus L.The Siberian Motherwort has been used medicinally
Marijuanillofrom the very beginning of Chinese medicine. Since the
Siberian Motherwortplant was transplanted to the Americas, it has been used
as a substitute for Marijuana.
SinicuichiHeimia salicifolia (H BK) Link et OttoAlthough all three species of Heimia are important in
Mexican folk medicine, mainly H. sa/icifolia has been
valued for its hallucinogenic properties.
Straw FlowerHelichrysum foetidum (L.) Moench;Zululand, South Africa.
H. stenopterum DC.
2
Sweet FlagAcorus calamus L.Cree Indians of northwest Canada.
Flag Root
Sweet Calomel
Calamus
Syrian RuePeganum harmala L.P harmala is valued today from Asia Minor across to
India with extraordinary esteem, suggesting former
religious use as a hallucinogen.
TagiliPernettya furens (Hook. ex DC.) Klotzch;P furens is called Hierba Loca in Chile ("maddening
'-'Hierba LocaP parvifolla Benthamplant"), while P parvifolia is known as TagIli in Ecuador.
Huedhued
TaiqueDesfontainia spinosa ft et P.Reported as a hallucinogen from Chile (Taique) and
Borracherosouthern Colombia (Borrachero = "intoxicant").
Latuy
76
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 78 ---
USAGE:
CONTEXTANDPURPOSE
Mexican natives report that Sinicuichi possesses
supernatural virtues, but the plant does not appear to
be taken ritually or ceremonially.
Some natives assert that it helps them clearly to
recall happenings of long ago—even prenatal events.
Known to be employed as a hallucinogen, it has been
suggested that Pernetlya has played a role in magico-
religious ceremonies in South America—a still unpro-
ven claim.
Medicine men of the Kamsá tribe drink a tea from the
leaves for the purpose of diagnosing disease or when
they "want to dream'
In the Mexican highlands the leaves of H. salicifolia are
slightly wilted, crushed in water, and then allowed to
ferment into an intoxicating drink.
Alkaloids of the quinolizidine type have been isolated,
among them cryogenine (vertine), to which the psy-
chotropic activity may be attributed.
The beverage induces giddiness, a darkening of the
surroundings, shrinkage of the world around, and a
pleasant drowsiness. Auditory hallucinations may oc-
cur with voices and distorted sounds that seem to
come from far away.
The plant possesses undoubted hallucinogenicprinci-
ples: f3-carboline alkaloids—harmine, harmaline, tetra-
hydroharmine, and related bases known to occur in at
least eight families of higher plants. Theseconstituents
are found in the seeds.
The chemistry of the toxic fruits of both P furensand
P parvifolia, which cause mental confusionand even
insanity, is not yet elucidated.
Nothing is as yet known of the chemistry ofD. spinOSa.
Visions are experienced and some of themedicine
men assert that they temporarily "gocrazy" under its
influence.
PREPARATIONCHEMICAL COMPONENTS
AND EFFECTS
In connection with research on the so-called Aya-
huasca analogs, a species of Reed Grass has been
discovered that has a high DMT content and can be
used psychoactively.
An extract is made from the leaves. In combination with
Peganum harmala, it has visionary effects, and can be
drunk as a substitute for Ayahuasca.
This grass contains many indole alkaloids, especially
N,N-DMT,5-MeO-DMT,MMTand [sometimes] grarnine.
DMTand 5-MeO-DMT have very strong psychedelic
effects, while gramine is very toxic.
The Sen Indians of Sonora consider Saguaro effica-
cious against rheumatism.
The fruit of Carnegiea is valued as food and in wine-
making.
The plant contains pharmacologically active alkaloids
capable of psychoactivity. Carnegine, 5-hydroxycarne-
gine, aRd norcarnegine, plus trace amounts of 3-meth-
oxytyramine and the new alkaloid arizonine (a tetrahy-
droquinoline base), have been isolated.
Tabernaemor,tana crassa is used in West Africa as a
narcotic in traditional medicine. T dichotoma is used
for its psychoactive effects in India and Sri Lanka.
The seeds of T dichotoma are used as a hallucinogen.
Unfortunately, very little is known about this interesting
genus.
Most varieties contain ibogaine-lilce alkaloids (such as
voacangine), which have very strong hallucinogenic
and vision-inducing effects.
Hallucinogenic intoxication.
The use of I pachanoi appears to be primarily for
divination, diagnosis of disease, and to make oneself
owner of another's identity.
Short pieces of the stem are sliced and boiled in water
for several hours. Several other plants, Brugmansia,
Pernettya, and Lycopodium, for example, are some-
times added.
T pachanoiis rich in mescaline: 2% of dried material
(or 0.12% of fresh material).
A species of Pandanus is said to be used for halluci-
nogenic purposes, while others are known to be Va-
lued in folk medicine, in magic, and for ceremonial
purposes.
It has recentlyreported that natives of New
Guinea employ the fruit of a species of Pandanus.
Dimethyltryptamine (DMT) has been detected in an al-
kaloid extract. Eating substantial amounts of the nuts is
said to cause an "outbreak of irrational behavior"
known as Karuka madness among local people.
Shang-la is a well-known medicinal plant in China. It
was reportedly used by sorcerers, who valued its hal-
lucinogenic effects.
The flowers and roots enter Chinese medicine: the for-
mer for treating apoplexy, the latter for external use
only.
P acinosa has a high concentration of saponines.
The toxicity and hallucinogenic effects of Shang-la
are commonly mentioned in Chinese herbals.
Taken by the Indians of Ecuador to induce a sensation
of flight.
The dried herb is smoked.Phytochemical studies of Petunia are lacking.
The plant is said to induce a feeling of flying.
Recent reports suggest that the fruit may purposefully
be eaten to induce intoxication.
The fruit is eaten.The chemistry is still poorly known.
Levitation or sensations of soaring through the air.
This herb is smoked in Brazil and Chiapas as a sub-
stitute for Cannabis.
The flowering herb is dried and smoked alone or mixed
with other plants. One to 2g of the dried plant is an
effective dose.
Contains alkaloids, flavonglycosides, diterpenes, and
an essential oil. The psychoactive effects may beattri-
butable to the diterpenes (leosibiricine, leosibirine, and
isoleosibirine).
These herbs are used by native doctors 'for inhaling to
induce trances:'
The dried herb is smoked.Coumarins and diterpenes are reported, but no consti-
tuents with hallucinogenic properties have been
isolated.
Antifatigue medicine; also used against toothache,Chewing of the rootstalk.The active principles are a-asarone and 3-asarone.
In large doses, visual hallucinations and other ef-headache, and asthma.fects similar to those of LSD may occur.Hallucinogenic intoxication (uncertain)
Syrian Rue has many uses in folk medicine, as well as The dried seedsconstitute the Indian drug Harmal.
being valued as an aphrodisiac. Often used as
incense.
Eating of the fruit.
Tea made from the leaves or fruit.
77
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 79 ---
IZacatechichi
I
Thie-Pelakano
Aztec Dream Grass
REF
NUMBER
COMMON
NAME
TYPE OF
PLANT
BOTANICAL
NAME
USAGE:
HISTORYANDETHNOGRApHY
38
TakiniHelicostylls pedunculata Benoist;
H. tomentosa (P. et E.) Macbride
In the Gulanas, Takini is a sacred tree.
22
Teonanácatl
Tamu
Conocybe siligineoides Heim;
Panaeolus Sphinctrinus (Fr.) Quelet;
Mushroom worship seems to be rooted in centuries of
native Indian tradition of Middle America.
64
Hongo de San Isidro
She-to
Psilocybe acutissima Heim;
P aztecorum Helm; P caerulescens Murr.;
The Aztec Indians called the sacred mushrooms Teo-
nanácatl; the Mazatec and Chinantec in northeastern
76
To-shka
(see also pages 156163)
P caerUlescens Murr. var. albida Helm;
P caerulescens Murr. var. mazatecorum Heim;
P caerulescens Murr. var. nigripes Helm;
Oaxaca, Mexico, refer to Panaeo/us sphinctrinus as
T-ha-na-sa, To-shka ("intoxicating mushroom"), and
She-to ("pasture mushrooms"). While in Oaxaca Psilo-
78P caeru/escens Murr. var. ombrop/i//a Heim;
P mexicana Helm; P mixaeensis Helm;
P semperviva Helm et Cailleux;
P wassoniiHeim;
P yungensis Singer; P zapotecorum Heim;
Psilocybe cubensis Earle
cybe cubensis is named Hongo de San Isidro, in the
Mazatec language it is called Di-shi-tjo-le-rra-ja ("divine
mushroom of manure").
2
Thorn Apple
Jimsonweed
Datura stramonium L.Reportedly employed by the Algonquin and others.
Ingredient of the witches' brews of medieval Europe.
(see also pages 106—111)Used in both the Old and New World, the geographic
origin of Jimsonweed is uncertain.
2
Toloache
Toloatzin
Datura innoxia Mill.;
D. disco/or Bernh. ex Tromms.;
Known also as D. met eloides, D. innoxia is used in Mex-
ico and the American Southwest.
(see also pages 106—111)D. kymatocarpa A. S. Barclay;
D. pruinosa Greenm.;
D. quercifolia HBK;
D. reburra A. S. Barclay;
D. sframonium L.;
D. wrightii Regel.
5r%
Tupa
Tabaco del Diablo
Lobe/ia tupa L.Recognizing L. tupa as toxic, the Mapuche Indians of
Chile value the leaves for their intoxicating properties.
Other Andean Indians take it as an emetic and
purgative.
ATurkestan MintLagochi/us inebrians BungeThe Tajik, Tatar, Turkoman, and Uzbek tribesman on the
dry steppes of Turkestan have for centuries prepared a
tea made from L. inebrians.
n7
VoacangaVoacanga africana Stapf;
V bracteata Stapf;
V dregei E. Mey. V grandiflora (Miq.) Rolfe.
In Africa, a number of varieties of the genus Voacanga
have been used as hallucinogens, aphrodisiacs, and
medicines.
5 0Wichuriki
Hikuli Rosapara
Mammil/aria craigii Lindsay;
M. graham/iEngelm.;
The Tarahumara Indians of Mexico value several spe-
cies of Mamm/Ilaria among the most important "false
HikuriM. sen//is (Lodd.) WeberPeyotes.'
Peyote de San Pedro
Mammillaria
Wood RoseArgyreia nervosa (Burman f.) BojerThe Wood Rose has been used since ancient times in
Hawaiian Wood RoseAyurvedic medicine. A traditional use as a hallucinogen
has been discovered in Nepal.
I
YauhtliTagetes lucida Cay.Tagetes is used by the Huichol of Mexico and valued
ceremonially fdr its hallucinatory effects.
1 5
YOn-ShihCaesa!pinia sepia na Roxb.
[= C. decapetala (Roth) Alstonj
China; used medicinally in Tibet and Nepal.
Ca/ea zacatechichj Schlecht.
78
Seems to be used only by the Chontal Indians of Oaxa-
Ca, even though it ranges from Mexico to Costa Rica.
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 80 ---
USAGE:PREPARATIONCHEMICAL COMPONENTS
CONTEXTAND PURPOSEAND EFFECTS
Little is known of the use.A mildly poisonous intoxicant is prepared from the redNo specific hallucinogenic constituents have been
"sap" of the bark,identified. Extracts from the inner bark of both species
have pharmacologically been shown to elicit depres-
sant effects similar to those produced by Marijuana.
Mythological and sacramental use.Personal preference, purpose of use, and seasonalThe indolic alkaloids psilocybine and psilocine are the
Employed today in divination and healing ceremo-availability determine the kinds of mushrooms used bymain hallucinogenic principles of the sacred mush-
nies.different shamans. P mexicana, one of the most widelyrooms. The content varies from species to species be-
Contacts with Christianity or modern ideas do notused, may perhaps be considered the most typicaltween 0.2 and 0.6% of psilocybine and small amounts
seem to have influenced the deep spirit of reverencesacred mushroom.of psilocine in dried mushroom material. The mush-
characteristic of the mushroom ritual.Anywhere from 2 to 30 mushrooms (depending onrooms cause both visual and auditory hallucinations,
It has been suggested that Psilocybe species maythe type used) are eaten during a typical ceremony.with the dreamlike state becoming reality.
be employed for hallucinogenic inebriation also by theThey may be consumed either fresh or ground and
Yurimagua Indians of Amazonian Peru.made into an infusion.
Initiation rites.The roots of the Thorn Apple may have been used inSee Toloache.
Ingredient of the witches' brews.theAlgonquin drink wysoccan.
D. innoxia was employed medicinally and as a sacredThe Tarahumara add D. innoxia to their maize beer andAll species of the genus Datura are chemically similar
hallucinogen by the Aztec and other Indians. The Zuniuse the roots, seeds, and leaves,with the active principles tropane alkaloids, especially
Indians value the plant as an analgesic and as aThe Zuni chew the roots and put powder preparedhyoscyamine and scopolamine, the latter being the
poultice to cure wounds and bruises. Toloache is saidfrom them into the eyes.main component.
to be the exclusive property of the rain priests. ValuedAmong the Yokut Indians, the seeds are said to be
in initiation rituals,taken only once during a man's lifetime.
Hallucinogenic intoxication; folk medicine.Smoking of the leaves and taken internally.Tupa leaves contain the piperidine alkaloid lobeline, a
respiratory stimulant, as well as the diketo- and dihy-
droxy-derivatives lobelamidine and nor-lobelamidine,
which are not known to.be hallucinogenic.
Hallucinogenic intoxication.The leaves are toasted to produce a tea. Drying and
storage increases the aromatic fragrance. Stems,
fruiting tops, and flowers may be added.
The presence of a crystalline compound called ago-
chiline—a diterpene of the grindelian type—is known.
This compound is not known to be hallucinogenic.
The seeds of various Voacanga varieties are taken byThe seeds or the bark of various Voacanga varietiesMany varieties of Voacanga contain psychoactive in-
African magic men to create visual hallucinations,can be taken.dole alkaloids, especially voacangine and voccamine,
both of which are chemically related to ibogaine.
Used as a visual hallucinogen.M. craig/i is split open, sometimes roasted, and theN-methyl-3, 4-di-methoxyphenylethylamifle has been
M. graham/i is taken by shamans in special cere-central tissue is used. The top of the plant, divested ofisolated from M. heyderii, a close relative to M. craig/i.
monies,its spines, is the most powerful part; the fruit and upper
part of M. graham/i are said to have similar effects,
Deep sleep, during which a person is said to travel
great distances, and brilliant colors characterize the
intoxication.
In Ayurvedic medicine, Wood Rose is used ass tonicThe seeds are ground and mixed with water. Four to 8The seeds contain 0.3% ergot alkaloids (especially
and as an aphrodisiac, and it is also used to increaseseeds (approximately 2g) are sufficient for a mediumchanoclavin-l, also ergine (LSA), ergonovine, and iso-
intelligence and to slow down the aging process. To-psychoactive dose.lysergic acid amide,
day, the seeds are of interest in Western society for
their psychoactive properties.
Used to induce or enhance visions.T lucida is occasionally smoked alone but is some-
times mixed with tobacco (N/cot/aria rust/ca).
No alkaloids have been isolated from Tagetes, but
the genus is rich in essential oils and thiophene
derivatives.
If consumed over a long period, the flowers are said toRoots, flowers, and seeds.An unknown alkaloid has been reported.
induce levitation and "communication with the Spirits?'The earliest Chinese herbal stated: the "flowers en-
Folk medicine,able one to see spirits and cause one to stagger
madly?'
Used in folk medicine, especially as an aperitif, a feb-Tea is made of the crushed dried leaves and used as aThere is an as yet unidentified alkaloid. Also contains
rifuge, and an astringent for treating diarrhea. Thehallucinogen. After drinking Zacatechichi, the Indianssesquiterpene-lactone.
Chontal take Zacatechichi to clarify the senses,recline quietly to smoke a cigarette of the dried leaves.Restful and drowsy condition during which the In-
dians say that one's own heart and pulse can be felt.
79
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 81 ---
1T
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 82 ---
THE MOST IMPORTANT
HALLUCINOGENIC PLANTS
Of the ninety-seven hallucinogens in
the lexicon, the most important are dis-
cussed in detail in the ensuing chapters.
Several reasons underlie our selection.
Most of these plants are or have been
so culturally and materially important
in aboriginal societies that they cannot
be overlooked. A few are of special bo-
tanical or chemical interest. Others are
of great antiquity. Still others have re-
cently been discovered or identified.
And the use of one has spread through-
out the modern world and is now of vi-
tal importance.
Anianita muscaria (Fly Agaric), one
of the oldest hallucinogens, is employed
in both hemispheres and is biochemi-
cally significant, since its active princi-
ple isatypically excreted unmetabo-
lized.
The use of Peyote (Lophophora wil-
liamsii),of great antiquity, has now
spread from its original Mexican home-
land to Texas in the United States,
where it is the basis of a new Indian re-
ligion. Its main psychoactive alkaloid,
mescaline, is utilized in psychiatry.
The religious use of mushrooms—
known as Teonanácatl—in Mexico and
Guatemala is ancient and was firmly es-
tablished among the Aztec Indians at the
time of the Conquest. Their psychoac-
tive constituents are novel structures
not known in any other plants.
Of similar importance, and as an-
cient, are the seeds of several Morning
Glories. Their use has persisted until
the present in southern Mexico. Of
great chemo-taxonomic interest, their
psychoactive constituents are found on-
ly in an unrelated group of fungi, con-
taining Ergot, which may have been
hallucinogenically important in ancient
Greece.
Deadly Nightshade, Henbane, and
Mandrake were the main ingredients of
the witches' brews of medieval Europe,
where they long exerted a great cultural
and historical influence.
In both hemispheres, Datura played
highly significant roles in native cul-
tures. The related Brugniansia isstill
employed as one of the principal hallu-
cinogens in South America.
Archaeology indicates that the South
American cactus Trichocereus pachanoi
has a long history, although it has only
recently been identified as a principal
hallucinogen of the central Andes.
The most significant African halluci-
nogen is Iboga, employed in initiation
rituals and to communicate with ances-
tors. Spreading today in Gabon and the
Congo, it is a unifying culture trait de-
terring the intrusion of foreign customs
from Western society.
The intoxicating drink prepared from
Banisteriopsis holds a place of cultural
primacy throughout the western Ama-
zon. Known in Peru as Ayahuasca
of the soul"), it allows the soul to
leave the body and wander freely, com-
municating with the spirit world. Its
psychoactive principles are 13-carbolines
and tryptamines.
Three snuffs are of importance in cer-
tain South American cultures. One, in
the western Amazon, is prepared from
a resin like liquid produced in the bark
of several species of Virola. The others,
made from the beans of a species of
Anadenanth era and used in the Orino-
co, adjacent Amazon, and Argentina,
was formerly also valued in the West In-
dies. Both snuffs play significant roles in
the life of many Indian groups and are
of chemical interest, since their active
principles are tryptamines.
Pituri is the most important psycho-
active substance in Australia. Cannabis,
an ancient Asiatic hallucinogen, is now
used in nearly all parts of the world. An
understanding of its roles in primitive
societies may help elucidate its popular-
ity in Western culture. Some of the fifty
chemical structures found in Cannabis
are medically promising.
A long chapter could well be written
about any of the more than ninety spe-
cies which have been enumerated in the
plant lexicon. But in the interest of
space, the following have been treated
in greater detail for the reasons out-
lined.
The Greek lecythus isa sacramental
vessel filled with fragrant oils and placed
next to a death bed or grave. On this
lecythus (450—425 B. c.), a crowned
Triptolemus holds the Eleusinian grain, a
grass probably infected with Ergot; while
Demeter or Persephone pours a sacred
libation, prepared presumably from the
infected grain. The two figures are sepa-
rated by the staff of Triptolemus and uni-
ted into one field by the grain and poured
libation.
Page 80: Mandrake (Mandragora offici-
narum), "the man-like plant," has a
complex history of usage. In Europe, it
was employed as a stupefacient in
addition to being one of the strongest
ingredients added to the brews con-
cocted by witches of the Middle Ages.
The root of the Mandrake was likened to
the form of a man or woman, and ac-
cording to superstition, if the plant were
pulled from the earth, its shrieks could
drive the collectors mad. This image of
Mandragora was engraved by the well-
known artist MatthSus Merian in the
early eighteenth century.
81
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 83 ---
AMANITA
Fly Agaric
(The number refers to the "Plant Lexi-
con'; the common name refers to the
reference chart "Overview of Plant
Use")
MAINSTAY OF THE HEAVENS
Page 83 top: Cliff drawing of a shaman
in the Altai mountains of Asia.
Page 83 right: Fly Agaric (Amanita
muscaria) is found around the world and
is associated nearly everywhere with
fairy worlds, alternative realities, and
shamanic practices.
Siberian shamans use elaborate sym-
bolic costumes and decorated drums in
their ceremonies. The left figure is a
shaman from Krasnojarsk District; at
right, the Kamtchatka District.
Soma, the god-narcotic of ancient India,
attained an exalted place in magico-
religious ceremonies of the Aryans,
who 3,500 years ago swept down from
the north into the Indus Valley, bringing
with them the cult of Soma. These early
invaders of India worshiped the holy in-
ebriant and drank an extract of it in their
most sacred rites. Whereas most halluci-
nogenic plants were considered merely
as sacred mediators, Soma became a god
in its own right. An ancient Indian tra-
dition recorded in the Rig-Veda asserts
that "Parjanya, the god of thunder, was
the father of Soma" (Indra).
"Enter into the heart of Indra, receptacle
of Soma, like rivers into the ocean, thou
who pleasestMitra,Varuna,Vaya,
mainstay of heaven!...Fatherof the
gods, progenitor of the moving force,
mainstay of the sky, foundation of the
earth."
Of the more than 1,000 holy hymns in
the Rig-Veda, 120 are devoted exclu-
sively to Soma, and references to this
getal sacrament run through many of the
other hymns. The cult was suppressed,
and the original holy plant was forgot-
ten; other plant surrogates—with little
or no psychoactivity—were substituted.
Yet the identity of Soma remained one
of the enigmas of ethnobotany for two
thousand years. Only in 1968 did the in-
terdisciplinary research of Gordon Was-
son provide persuasive evidence that the
sacred narcotic was a mushroom, Ama-
nita muscaria, the Fly Agaric. Amanita
niuscaria may be the oldest of the hallu-
cinogens and perhaps was once the most
widely used.
The curious hallucinogenic use of
Amanita muscaria has been documen-
ted since 1730. It was then that a Swed-
ish military officer, a prisoner of war in
Siberia for twelve years, reported that
primitive tribesmen there employed the
Fly Agaric as a shamanistic inebriant.
The custom persisted among scattered
groups of Finno-Ugrian peoples of Si-
beria.Traditionssuggestthatother
groups in this vast northern region also
used the mushroom.
A Koryak legend tells us that the cul-
ture hero, Big Raven, caught a whale
but was unable to put such a heavy ani-
mal back into the sea. The god Vahiyi-
nm(Existence) told him to eat wapaq
spiritstogetthestrengththat he
needed. Vahiyinin spat upon the earth,
and little white plants—the wapaq spir-
its—appeared: they had red hats and
Vahiyinin's spittle congealed as white
flecks. When he had eaten wapaq, Big
Raven became exceedingly strong, and
he pleaded: "0 wapaq, grow forever on
earth." Whereupon he commanded his
people to learn what wapaq could teach
them. Wapaq is the Fly Agaric, a gift di-
rectly from Vahiyinin.
These Siberian mushroom users had
no other intoxicants, until the Russians
introduced alcohol. They driedthe
mushrooms in the sun and ingested
them either alone or as an extract in
water, reindeer milk, or the juice of sev-
eral sweet plants. When the mushroom
was swallowed as a solid, it was first
moistened in the mouth, or a woman
rolled it in her mouth into a moistened
pellet for the men to swallow. The
ceremonial use of the Fly Agaric de-
veloped a ritualistic practice of urine-
drinking, since these tribesmen learned
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 84 ---
that the psychoactive piinciples of the
mushroom passthroughthebody
unmetabolized, or in the form of still
active metabolites—most unusual for
hallucinogenic compounds inplants.
An early account, referring to the Kor-
yak, reported that "they pour water on
some of the mushrooms and boil them.
They then drink the liquor, which intox-
icates them; the poorer sort, who cannot
afford to lay in a store of the mush-
rooms, post themselves on these occá-
sions round the huts of the rich and
watch the opportunity of the guests
coming down to make water and then
hold a wooden bowl to receive the urine,
which they drink off greedily, as having
still some virtue of the mushroom in it,
and by this way, they also get drunk."
The Rig-Veda definitely refers to urine-
drinking in the Soma ritual: "The swol-
len men piss the flowing Soma. The
lords, with fullbladders, piss Soma
quick with movement." The priests im-
personating Indra and Vayu, having
drunk Soma in milk, urinate Soma. In
the Vedic poems, urine is not offensive
but is an ennobling metaphor to describe
rain: the blessings of rain are likened to
showers of urine, and the clouds fertilize
the earth with their urine.
A traveler among the Koryak in the
early twentieth century offered one of
the few descriptions of intoxication in
aboriginal use of the mushroom. He
wrote that the "Fly Agaric produces in-
toxication, hallucinations, and delirium.
Light forms of intoxication are accom-
panied by a certain degree of animation
and some spontaneity of movements.
Many shamans, previous to their sé-
ances, eat Fly Agaric to get into ecstatic
states ...Understrong intoxication, the
senses become deranged, surrounding
objects appear either very large or very
small, hallucinations set in, spontaneous
movements and convulsions. So far as I
could observe, attacks of great anima-
tion alternate with moments of deep de-
pression. The person intoxicated by Fly
Agaric sits quietly rocking from side to
side, even taking part in conversations
with his family. Suddenly, his eyes dilate,
he begins to gesticulate convulsively,
The active principle of Amanita muscaria was thought once, a century ago,to
have been muscarine when Schmiedeberg and Koppe isolatedthis sub-
stance. This belief has been proved erroneous. Recently Eugsterin Switzer-
land and Takemoto in Japan isolated ibotenic acid and the alkaloidmuscimole
as being responsible for the Fly Agaric's psychotropiceffects. The mushroom
is taken usually dried. The drying process induces thechemical transforma-
tion of ibotenic acid to muscimole, the most active constituent.
83
The Chemistry of Fly Agaric
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 85 ---
Right: The Fly Agaric is often and falsely
feared as being a poisonous mush-
room; nevertheless, it is gladly used for
luck-bringing candy.
Above left: To bring good luck into the
coming year, fireworks in the shape of
Fly Agaric are set off on New Year's Eve.
Above right: The results of smoking Fly
Agaric are depicted in the German chil-
dren's book Mecki and the Dwarves.
Below right: It is possible that Fly Agaric
is identical to the Vedic wonder-drug
Soma. Today Ephedra (Ephedra ger-
ardiana) is called somalata, "soma
plant." In Nepal Ephedra is not halluci-
nogenic or psychedelic but is a very
strong stimulant.
84
converses with persons whom he imagi-
nes he sees, sings and dances. Then an
interval of rest sets in again.'"
The Fly Agaric was apparently em-
ployed hallucinogenically in Mesoa-
merica. It occurs naturally in highland
areas in southern Mexico and Guatema-
la. The Maya of highland Guatemala,
for example, recognize Amanita mus-
caria as having special properties, for
they callitKakuljá-ikox ("lightning
mushroom"), relating it to one of the
gods, Rajaw Kakuljá or Lord of Light-
ning. It is this god who directs the oper-
ating of chacs, dwarf rain-bringers now
usually known by their Christian desig-
nation, angelitos. The Quiche name of
the Amanita muscaria, Kaquljá, refers
to its legendary origin, whereas the term
Itzelo-cox refers to its sacred power as
"evil or diabolical mushroom." Thun-
der and lightning have widely and
anciently been associated with mush-
rooms, in both hemispheres, especially
with Amanita muscaria. "In any event,
the Quiche-Maya... areevidently well
aware the Amanita nzuscariaisno
ordinary mushroom but relates to the
supernatural."
The firstsettlers of the Americas
came from Asia, slowly crossing the
region of the Bering Strait. Anthropol-
ogists have found many Asia-related or
remnant culture traits that persist in the
Americas. Recent discoveries have un-
covered vestiges of the magico-reli-
gious importance of the Fly Agaric that
have indeed survived in North Ameri-
can cultures. Indications of undoubted
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 86 ---
hallucinogenic use of the Fly Agaric
have been discovered among the Do-
grib Athabascan peoples, who live on
theMackenzie Mountainrangein
northwestern Canada. Here Ainanita
muscaria is employed as a sacrament in
shamanism. A young neophyte repor-
ted that whatever the shaman had done
to him, "he had snatched me. I had no
volition, I had no power of my own. I
didn't eat, didn't sleep, I didn't think—
I wasn't in my body any longer." After
a later séance, he wrote: "Cleansed and
ripe for vision, I rise, a bursting ball of
seeds in space...Ihave sung the note
that shatters structure. And the note
that shatters chaos, and been bloody
I have been with the dead and at-
tempted the labyrinth." His first mush-
room experience represented dismem-
berment; his second, meeting with the
spirit.
More recently, the religious use of
Amanita muscaria as a sacred hallucino-
gen has been discovered in an ancient an-
nual ceremony practiced by the Ojibwa
Indians or Ahnishinaubeg who live on
Lake Superior in Michigan. The mush-
room is known in the Ojibwa language
as Oshtimisk Wajashkwedo ("Red-top
mushroom").
Left: A Kamtchatka shaman implores
the Fly Agaric, her ritual substance, to
assist her in traveling to other realms.
Above right: The Spirit of the Fly Agaric
in Japan is the long-nosed, red-faced
Tengu. Whoever eats Beni-Tengu-Dake
(Red Tengu mushroom) will encounter
the lively entity.
Below left: The myth of Soma still lives
on. Here it is the name of a bar in a
luxury hotel in Delhi.
85
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 87 ---
ATROPA
° Deadly Nightshade
AHYOSCYAMUS ALBUS
Yellow Henbane
A i HYOSCYAMUSNIGER
Black Henbane
MANDRAGORA
Mandrake
THE HEXING HERBS
Above left: The yellow blossom of the
rare variety of Atropa belladonna var.
lutea. The yellow Deadly Nightshade
is regarded as particularly potent for
magic and witchcraft.
Above right: The bell-shaped flowers of
the Deadly Nightshade clearly show its
membership in the Nightshade family.
Page 87 above left: The flowers of the
Mandrake (Mandragora officinarum)
are rarely seen, as they bloom very
briefly and then quickly vanish.
Page B7above right:The flowers of the
Black Henbane (Hyoscyamus niger)
have a characteristic coloring and an
unforgettable pattern on the petals. In
earlier times, it was thought to be the
eye of the devil.
86
Since antiquity several members of the
Nightshade family have been asso-
ciated with witchcraft in Europe. These
plants enable witches to perform feats
of occult wonder and prophecy, to hex
through hallucinogenic communication
with the supernatural and transport
themselves to far-off places for the
practice of their nefarious skills. These
inebriating plants were mainly Hen-
bane, Hyoscyamus albus and H. niger;
Belladonna, Atropa belladonna; and
Mandrake, Mandragoraofficinarum.
All four species have long histories of
use as hallucinogens and magic plants
connectedwithsorcery,witchcraft,
and superstition. The extraordinaryre-
putation of these plants is due primar-
ily to the bizarre psychoactivity that
they possess. Their similarity in effects
is the result of similarity in chemical
constitution.
These four solanaceous plants contain
relatively high concentrations of tropane
alkaloids, primarily atropine, hyoscya-
mine, and scopolamine; other bases are
found in trace amounts. It is apparently
scopolamine, not atropine or hyoscya-
mine, that produces the hallucinogenic
effects. It inducesan intoxication fol-
lowed by narcosis in which hallucina-
tions occur during the transition state
between consciousness and sleep.
Atropine has served chemistsas a
model for the synthesis of several hallu-
cinogenic compounds. Their effects—
and those of scopolamine—differ from
those of the usual natural hallucinogens:
they are extremely toxic; and theuser
remembers nothing experienced during
the intoxication, losing all sense ofrea-
lity and falling into a deep sleep likean
alcoholic delirium.
Hyoscyamus has been known and
feared from earliest classical periods,
when it was recognized that therewere
several kinds and that the black variety
was the most potent, capable of causing
insanity. The ancient Egyptiansrecor-
ded their knowledge of Henbane in the
Ebers Papyrus, written in 1500B.C.
Homerdescribed magic drinks with ef-
fects indicative of Henbaneas a major
ingredient. In ancient Greece it served
as a poison, to mimic insanity, and to
enable man to prophesy. It has been
suggested that the priestesses at the
Oracle of Delphi made their prophetic
utterances while intoxicated with the
smoke from Henbane seeds. In the
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 88 ---
thirteenth century, Bishop Albcrtus the
Great reported that Henbane was em-
ployed by necromancers to conjure up
demons.
From earliest times, the painkilling
properties of Henbane have been recog-
nized, and it has been employed to re-
lieve the suffering of those sentenced to
torture and death. Its great advantage
lies in its ability not only to allay pain
but also to induce a state of complete
oblivion.
Henbane is best known as an ingredi-
ent of the so-called "witch's salve."
When young people were to be in-
ducted into membership in groups dedi-
cated to witchcraft, for example, they
were often given a drink of Henbane so
that they could easily be persuaded to
engage in the sabbat rituals preparatory
to the acceptance officially of a place in
witchcraft circles.
Those experiencing intoxication with
Henbane feel a pressure in the head, a
sensation as if someone were closing the
eyelids by force; sight becomes unclear,
objects are distorted in shape, and the
most unusual visual hallucinations are
induced. Gustatory and olfactory hal-
lucinations frequently accompany the
The Chemistry of Deadly Nightshade, Henbane, and Mandrake
three solanaceous plants Atropa, Hyoscyamus, and Mandragoracontain
the same active principles: primarily the alkaloids hyoscyamine, atropine,and
scopolamine. The difference is only one of relative concentration. Belladonna
contains little scopolamine, but this alkaloid is the main component ofMan-
drake and especially of Henbane.
The alkaloids are found in the entire plant, with the highest concentrationin
the seeds and roots. The hallucinogenic effects are due essentially to scopo-
lamine. Atropine and hyosyamine are less active under these circumstances.
Left: According to this illustration from
the Juliana Codex, the Greek herbalist
Dioscorides received the Mandrake
plant from Heuresis, goddess of discov-
ery, illustrating the belief thatthis medi-
cine was a plant of the gods.
87
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 89 ---
"The Mandrake is the 'Tree of Knowledge'
and the burning love ignited by its pleasure
is the origin of the human race."
—Hugo Rahner
Greek Myths in Christian Meaning (1957)
Above: The ancient goddess of witches,
Hecate, lords over the psychoactive and
magical herbs, particularly those in the
Nightshade family. In this colored print
by William Blake, she is depicted with
her shamanic animals.
Page 89 below right: The design for the
cover of a book about medicinal plants
depicts the anthropomorphic Mandrake.
88
intoxication. Eventually sleep, disturbed
by dreams and hallucinations, ends the
inebriation.
Other species of Hyoscyamus have si-
milar properties andare occasionally
used in similar ways. Indian Henbane
or Egyptian Henbane, or H. muticus,
occurring from the deserts of Egypt east
to Afghanistan and India, is employed
in India as an intoxicant, the dried leaves
being smoked. The Bedouins particu-
larly employ this intoxicantto become
drunk, and in some parts of Asia and
Africa it is smoked with Cannabisas an
inebriant.
Belladonna or Deadly Nightshade is
native to Europe but isnow sponta-
neous as an escape from cultivation in
the United States and India. Its generic
name, Atropa, comes from the Greek
Fate Atropos, the inflexibleone who
cuts the thread of life. The specific
epithet, meaning "beautiful lady,"re-
calls the use of sap of the plantto dilate
the pupils of the eyes among the fine la-
dies of Italy who believed that the drea-
my, intoxicated stare thus produced was
the height of fetching beauty. Manyver-
nacular names of the plant referto its
intoxicating properties: Sorcerer's Cher-
ry, Witch's Berry, Devil's Herb, Mur-
derer's Berry, Dwaleberry (dwale in
English deriving from the Scandinavian
root meaning "trance").
The maenads of the orgies of Diony-
sus in Greek mythology dilated their
eyes and threw themselves into the arms
of male worshipers of this godor, with
"flaming eyes," they fellupon men to
tear them apart and eat them. The wine
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 90 ---
Left: The magical conjuration of the
Mandrake is a durable theme in Eur-
opean literature and art history. Here
is a scene from a modern comic,
Gaza.
Be/ow right: Witches" persecuted
during the Inquisition were often ac-
cused of using hallucinogenic plants of
the Nightshade family, in particular,
Henbane and Mandrake. For this
many were tortured, murdered, and
burned.
of Bacchanals was possibly adulterated
with juice of the Nightshade. Another
belief from classical times maintained
that Roman priests drank Belladonna
before their supplications to the god-
dess of war for victory.
It was during the early Modern period,
however, that Belladonna assumed its
greatest importance in witchcraft and
magic. It was one of the primary ingredi-
ents of the brews and ointments em-
ployed by witches and sorcerers. One
such potent mixture, containing Bella-
donna, Henbane, Mandrake, and the fat
of a stillborn child, was rubbed over the
skin or inserted into the vagina for ab-
sorption. The familiar witch's broom-
stick goes far back in European magic
beliefs. An investigation into witchcraft
in 1324reportedthat "in rifleing the
89
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 91 ---
Top: Amphibians, especially frogs
(which often produce poisons in their
bodies), have always been connected
with witchcraft and magic in the Old as
well as the New World. These animals
were occasionally added to potent
witches' brews in Europe. They have
also figured significantly in certain New
World cultures in connection with hallu-
cinogenic activities.
Above left: The delightfully scented fruit
of the Mandrake (Mandragora officinar-
urn) are also called Apples of Love and
are identical to the golden apples of
Aphrodite.
Above middle: The ripe black berries of
the Deadly Nightshade (Atropa bella-
donna).
Above right: White or yellow Henbane
(Hyoscyamus albus) was consecrated
to the god of oracles, Apollo.
90
closet of the ladie, they found a Pipe of
ointment, wherewith shegreaseda
staffe, upon which she ambled and gal-
loped through thick and thin, when and
in what manner she listed." Later, in the
fifteenth cenulry a similar account sta-
ted: "But the vulgar believe and the
witches confess, that on certain days
and nights they anoint a staff and ride
on it to the appointed place or anoint
themselves under the arms and in other
hairy places and sometimes carry charms
under the hair." Porta, a contemporary
of Galileo, wrote in 1589 that under the
effects of a potion of these solanaceous
plants a "man would seem sometimes to
be changed into a fish; and flinging out
his arms, would swim on the ground;
sometimes he would seem to skip up
and then to dive down again. Another
would believe himself turned into a
goose and would eat grass, and beat the
ground with his teeth like a goose; now
and then sing and...claphis wings."
Mandrake became famous in magic
and witchcraft because of its powerful
narcotic effects and the bizarre form of
its root. It would be difficultto find a
better example of the application of the
philosophy of the Doctrine of Signa-
tures. For the root of this herbaceous
perennial, unassuming in its growth ap-
pearance, is so twisted and branched
that it occasionally resembles the human
body. This extraordinary resemblance
led early to the belief that it exercised
great supernatural powers over the hu-
man body and mind, even though actu-
ally its chemical composition gave it no
greater psychoactivity than some other
solanaceous species.
From earliest times, curious beliefs
about the need to exercise great care in
harvesting the root grew up. Theo-
phrastus in the third centuryc.wrote
that collectors of medicinal plants drew
circles around Mandrake, and they cut
off the top part of the root while facing
west; the remainder of the root was
gathered after the collectors had per-
formed certain dances and recited spe-
cial formulas. Two centuries earlier, the
Greek Pythagoras had described Man-
drake root as an anthropomorph, or
tiny human being. In Roman times that
magic began extensively to be associ-
ated with the psychoactive properties
of the plant. In the first century A. D.,
Josephus Flavius wrote that there grew
a plant in the Dead Sea area that glowed
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 92 ---
red at night and that it was difficult to
approach the plant, which hid when a
man drew near it; but it could be tamed
ifurine and menstrual blood were
sprinkled on it. It was physically dan-
gerous to pull the plant from the earth,
but a dog, tied to the root, was em-
ployed to extract the root, after which,
according to belief, the animal usually
died. The myths surrounding Mandrake
grew, until it was said that the plant hid
by day but shone like a star at night, and
that when being pulled from the ground
the plant let out such unearthly shrieks
that whoever heard the noise might die.
Eventually, only black dogs—a color
denotingevil and death—were em-
ployed. Early Christians believed that
the Mandrake root was originally cre-
ated by God as an experiment before
he created man in the Garden of Eden.
When, later in the Dark Ages, Man-
drake began to be cultivated in central
Europe, it was thought that the plant
would grow only under gallows where
urine or semen from the condemned
man fell—hence the common German
names meaning "gallows man" and
"dragon doll."
The apogee of Mandrake's fame seems
to have occurred in the late sixteenth
century. At this time, the herbalists be-
gan to doubt many of the tales associated
with the plant. As early as 1526 the Eng-
lish herbalist Turner had denied that all
Mandrake roots had a human form and
protested against the beliefs connected
with its anthropomorphism. Another
English herbalist, Gerard, for example,
wrote in 1597: "All which dreams and
old wives tales you shall henceforth cast
out of your books and memory; know-
ing this, that they are all and everie part
of them false and most untrue. For I my
selfe and my servants also have diggri
up, planted and replanted very mail',
But many superstitions surroundiii-;
Mandrake persisted in European full
lore even into the nineteenth century.
Above left: In the Temple of Apollo at
Delphi, the "navel of the world," the Sibyl
and prophetess informed the Pythia of
her oracle after she had inhaled the
smoke of Henbane.
Above middle: The root of the Mandrake
(Mandragora officinarum).
Above right: The Ginseng's (Panax gin-
seng) root is not only similar to the
Mandrake, but in Korea, Ginseng root is
also attributed with secret and magical
powers.
Belowleft:The sun and oracle god
Apollo at a libation in front of a raven.
(Discovered at Delphi).
91
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 93 ---
17 CANNABr
Hemp
Marijuano
Hashish
Tradition in India maintains that the
gods sent man the Hemp plant so that
he might attain delight and courage,
and have heightened sexualdesires.
When nectar or Amrita dropped down
from heaven, Cannabis sprouted from
it. Another story tells how, when the
gods, helped by demons, churned the
milk ocean to obtain Amrita, one of the
resulting nectars was Cannabis. It was
consecrated to Shiva and was Indra's fa-
vorite drink. After the churning of the
"seeds," consumed by man for food;
for its narcotic properties; and thera-
peutically to treat a wide spectrum of
illsin folk medicine and in modern
pharmacopoeias.
Mainly because of its various uses,
Cannabis has been taken to many re-
gions around the world. Unusual things
happen to plants after long association
with man and agriculture. They are
grown in new and strange environ-
ments and often have opportunities to
Above right: Mnstirline plant of a Hemp
cross-breed (Cannabis indica x sat/va).
92
ocean, demons attempted to gain con-
trol of Amrita, but the gods were able
to prevent this seizure, giving Cannabis
the name Vijaya ("victory") to com-
memorate their success. Ever since, this
plant of the gods has been held in India
to bestow supernatural powers on its
users.
The partnership of Cannabis and man
has existed now probably for ten thou-
sand years—since the discovery of agri-
culture in the Old World. One of our
oldest cultivars, Cannabis has beena
five-purpose plant: asa source of hem-
pen fibers; for its oil; for its akenes or
hybridize that are not offered in their
native habitats. They escape from culti-
vation and frequently become aggres-
sive weeds. They may be changed
through human selection for character-
isticsassociated with aspecific use.
Many cultivated plants are so changed
from their ancestral types that it is not
possible to unravel their evolutionary
history. Such is not the case, however,
with Cannabis. Yet despite its long his-
tory as a major crop plant, Cannabis is
still characterized more by what is not
known about its biology than by what
is known.
THE NECTAR OF DELIGHT
Above left: Wild Inmp plants (Cannabis
md/ca) with spinolid white flowers in
the Langtang unii of the Himalayas
(Nepal).
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 94 ---
Below left: The blue-skinned Hindu god Shiva takes great pleasure in Hemp.
Because of this, it is a sacred plant of the gods and is used for rituals and
Tantric practices.
Right: The long-haired Sadhus or "holy men" of India devote their lives to the
god Shiva. They have no property and practice yoga and meditation. In ad-
dition they often smoke a large amount of charas (handmade hash) and
ganja (Marijuana) sometimes mixed with Datura leaves and other psychoac-
The botanical classification of Canna-
bis has long been uncertain. Botanists
have not agreed on the family to which
Cannabis belongs: early investigators
put it in the Nettle family (Urticaceae);
later it was accommodated in the Fig fa-
mily (Moraceae); the general trend today
is to assign it to a special family, Canna-
baceae, in which only Cannabis and Hu-
mulus, the genus of Hops, are members.
There has even been disagreement as to
how many species of Cannabis exist:
tive plants (Sadhu at a Shiva temple, Pashupatinath, Kathmandu Valley,
Nepal).
Bottom right: Cannabis is consumed in many countries, usually illegally. It is
often smoked in hand-rolled cigarettes. There are countless products for the
consumption of marijuana for everyone from beginners to the specialists—for
instance, large-format rolling papers, preferably out of Hemp. Also shown here
are a metal cigarette box and lighter.
whether the genus comprises one highly
variable species or several distinct spe-
cies. Evidence now strongly indicates
that three species can be recognized:
C. indica,C. ruderalis, and C. sativa.
These species are distinguished by dif-
ferent growth habits, characters of the
akenes, and especially by major differ-
ences in structure of the wood. Although
all species possess cannabinols, there
may possibly be significant chemicaldif-
ferences, but the evidence is not yet
available.
The Indian vedas sang of Cannabis as
one of the divine nectars, able to give
93
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 95 ---
Above: In Africa Hemp is smoked for
medicinal and pleasurable purposes, as
this wood carving shows.
Top:Thecharacteristic Hemp leaf
(Cannabis indica) was formerly a sym-
bol of the subculture and rebellion. To-
day, it has become a symbol of ecologi-
cal awareness.
94
man anything from good health and
long life to visions of the gods. The
Zend-Avesta of 600 B. C. mentions an in-
toxicating resin, and the Assyrians used
Cannabis as an incense as early as the
ninth century B. C.
Inscriptions from the Chou dynasty
in China, dated 700—500 B.C., have a
"negative" connotation that accompa-
nies the ancient character for Cannabis,
Ma, implying its stupefying properties.
Since this idea obviously predated writ-
ing, the Pen Tsao Ching, written in A. D.
100 but going back to a legendary em-
peror, Shen-Nung, 2000 B. C., maybe ta-
ken as evidence that the Chinese knew
and probably used the psychoactive
properties at very early dates. It was
said that Ma-fen ("Hemp fruit") "if ta-
ken to excess, will produce hallucina-
tions [literally, "seeing devils"]. If taken
over a long term, it makes one commu-
nicate with spirits and lightens one's
body." A Taoist priest wrote in the fifth
century B. c. that Cannabis was em-
ployed by "necromancers, in combina-
tion with Ginseng, to set forward time
and reveal future events." In these early
periods, use of Cannabis as a hallucino-
gen was undoubtedly associated with
Chinese shamanism, but by the time of
European contact 1,500 years later, sha-
manism had fallen into decline, and the
use of the plant for inebriation seems to
have ceased and been forgotten.Its
value in China then was primarily as a
fiber source. There was, however, a con-
tinuous record of Hemp cultivation in
China from Neolithic times, and it has
been suggested that Cannabis may have
originated in China, not in central Asia.
About 500 B. C. the Greek writer Her-
odotus described a marvelous steam
bath of the Scythians, aggressive horse-
men who swept out of the Trans-
caucasus eastward and westward. He
:1.-
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 96 ---
reported that "they make a booth by
fixing in the ground three sticks inclined
toward one another, and stretching
around them woollen pelts which they
arrange so as to fit as close as possible:
inside the booth a dish is placed upon
the ground into which they put a num-
ber of red hot stones and then add some
Hemp seed...immediatelyit smokes
and gives out such a vapor as no Grecian
vapor bath can exceed; the Scyths, de-
lighted, shout for joy..." Onlyrecent-
ly, archaeologists have excavated frozen
Scythian tombs in central Asia, dated
between 500 and 300 B.C., and have
found tripods and pelts, braziers, and
charcoal with remainsof Cannabis
leaves and fruit. It has generally been
accepted that Cannabis originated in
centralAsiaandthatitwasthe
Scythians who spread the plant west-
ward to Europe.
While the Greeks and Romans may
not generally. have taken Cannabis for
inebriation, they were aware of the psy-
choactive effects of the drug. Democri—
tus reported that it was occasionally
drunk with wine and myrrh to produce
visionary states, and Galen, about A. D.
200,wrotethat it was sometimes cus-
tomary to give Hemp to guests to pro-
mote hilarity and enjoyment.
Cannabis arrived in Europe from the
north. The Roman writer Lucilius men-
tioned it in 120 B. C. Pliny the Elder out-
lined the preparation and grades of
hempen fibers in the first century A. D.,
and hempen rope was found in a Roman
sitein England dated A.D. 140—180.
Whether or not the Vikings used Hemp
rope is not known, but palynological
evidence indicates that Hemp cultiva-
tion had a tremendous increment in
England from the early Anglo-Saxon
periodtolateSaxon and Norman
times—from 400 to 1100.
Henry VIII fostered the cultivation
of Hemp in England. The maritime su-
premacy of England during Elizabethan
times greatly increased the demand.
Hemp cultivation began in the British
colonies in the New World: first in Ca-
nada in 1606, then in Virginia in 1611;
the Pilgrims took the crop to New Eng-
landin1632.In pre-Revolutionary
North America, Hemp was employed
even for making work clothes.
Hemp was introduced quite indepen-
dently into Spanish colonies in South
America: Chile, 1545; Peru, 1554.
There is no doubt that hempen fiber
production represents an early use of
Cannabis, but perhaps consumption of
its edible akenes as food predated the
discovery of the useful fiber. These
akenes are very nutritious, and it is dif-
ficult to imagine that early man, con-
stantly searching for food, would have
missed this opportunity. Archaeological
finds of Hemp akenes in Germany, da-
ted at 500 B. C., indicate the nutritional
use of these plant products. From early
times to the present, Hemp akenes have
been used as food in eastern Europe,
and in the United States as a major in-
gredient of bird food.
The folk-medicinal value of Hemp—
frequently indistinguishable from its
psychoactive properties—may even be
its earliest role as an economic plant.
The earliest record of the medicinal use
of the plant is that of the Chinese em-
peror-herbalist Shen-Nung who, five
thousandyearsago,recommended
Cannabis for malaria, ben-ben, consti-
pation, rheumatic pains, absent-mind-
edness, and female disorders. Hoa-Glio,
another ancient Chinese herbalist, re-
commended a mixture of Hemp resin
and wine as an analgesic during surgery.
It was in ancient India that this "gift
of the gods" found excessive use in folk
medicine. It was believed to quicken
the mind, prolong life, improve judg-
ment, lower fevers, induce sleep, cure
dysentery. Because of its psychoactive
properties it was more highly valued
than medicines with only physical ac-
tivity. Several systems of Indian medi-
cine esteemed Cannabis. The medical
workstates that it cured le-
prosy. The Bharaprakasha, of about
A.D. 1600, described itas antiphleg-
matic, digestive, bile affecting, pungent,
and astringent, prescribing it to stimu-
late the appetite, improve digestion, and
better the voice. The spectrum of med-
icinal uses in India covered control of
Top: Feminine flower of industrial Hemp
(Cannabis sativa).
Above: The Chinese emperor Shen-
Nung is said to have discovered the
medicinal properties of many plants. His
pharmacopoeia, believed to have been
first compiled in 2737 B.C., notes that
Cannabis sativa has both male and fe-
male plants.
95
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 97 ---
Right: There are countless strains of Hemp that contain barely any THC, the
intoxicating and euphoric constituent. These species are used in the produc-
tion of fiber, but are not suited for personal consumption, as the warning sign
in the botanical gardens in Bern, Switzerland, states: "This industrial Hemp is
useless for the production of drugs because of its lack of active properties."
Bottom: Feminine plants of flowering industrial hemp (Cannabis sativa).
dandruff and relief of headache, mania,
insomnia, venereal disease, whooping
cough, earache, and tuberculosis!
The fame of Cannabis as a medicine
spread with the plant. In parts of Africa,
it was valued in treating dysentery, ma-
laria, anthrax, and fevers. Even today
the Hottentots and Mfengu claim its ef-
ficacy in treating snakebites, and Sotho
women induce partial stupefaction by
smoking Hemp before childbirth.
Cannabis was highly valued in medi-
cine, and its therapeutic uses can be
traced back to early classical physicians
Dioscorides and Galen. Medieval herb-
alists distinguished "manured hempe"
(cultivated)from"bastardhempe"
(weedy),recommendingthelatter
"against nodes and wennes and other
hard tumors," the former for a host of
uses from curing cough to jaundice.
They cautioned, however, that in excess
it might cause sterility, that "it drieth up
the seeds of generation" in men "and
the milke of women's breasts." An inter-
esting use in the sixteenth century—
source of the name Angler's Weed in
England—was locally important: "pou-
red into the holes of earthwormes [it]
will draw them forth and...fishermen
and anglers have used this feate to baite
their hooks."
The value of Cannabis in folk medi-
cine has clearly been closely tied with
its euphoric and psychoactive proper-
ties; knowledge of these effects may be
as old as its use as a source of fiber.
Primitive man, trying all sorts of plant
96
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 98 ---
materials as food, must have known the
ecstaticeuphoria-inducingeffectsof
Hemp, an intoxication introducing him
to an otherworldly plane leading to re-
ligious beliefs. Thus the plant early was
viewed as a special gift of the gods, a
sacred medium for communion with
the spirit world.
Although Cannabis today is the most
widely employed psychoactivesub-
stance, its use purely as a narcotic, ex-
cept in Asia, appears not to be ancient.
In classical times its euphoric properties
were, however, recognized. In Thebes,
Hemp was made into a drink said to
have opium-like properties. Galen re-
ported that cakes with Hemp, if eaten
to excess, were intoxicating. The use as
an inebriant seems to have been spread
east and west by barbarian hordes of
central Asia, especially the Scythians,
who had a profound cultural influence
on early Greece and eastern Europe.
And knowledge of the psychoactive ef-
fects of Hemp goes far back in Indian
history, as indicated by the deep mytho-
logical and spiritual beliefs about the
plant. One preparation, Bhang, was so
sacred that it was thought to defer evil,
bring luck, and cleanse man of sin.
Those treading upon the leaves of this
holy plant would suffer harm or disas-
ter, and sacred oaths were sealed over
Hemp. The favorite drink of Indra,
god of the firmament, was made from
Cannabis, and the Hindu god Shiva
commanded that the word Ghangi be
chanted repeatedly in hymns during
sowing, weeding, and harvesting of
the holy plant. Knowledge and use of
the intoxicating properties eventually
spread to Asia Minor. Hemp was em-
ployed as an incense in Assyria in the
first millennium B.C., suggestingits use
as an inebriant. While there is no direct
mention of Hemp in the Bible, several
obscure passages may refer tangentially
to theeffectsof Cannabis resin or
Hashish.
It is perhaps in the Himalayas of In-
dia and the Tibetan plateau that Canna-
bis preparations assumed their greatest
importance in religious contexts. Bhang
is a mild preparation: dried leaves or
flowering shootsare pounded with
spices into a paste and consumed as
candy—known as maa-jun—or in tea
form. Ganja is made from the resin-rich
dried pistillate flowering tops of culti-
vated plants that are pressed into a
compacted mass and kept under pres-
sure for several days to induce chemical
changes; most Ganja is smoked, often
with Tobacco or Datura. Charas con-
sists of the resin itself, a brownish mass
that is employed generally in smoking
mixtures.
The Tibetans considered Cannabis
sacred. A Mahayana Buddhist tradition
maintains that during the six steps of as-
ceticism leading to his enlightenment,
Buddha lived on one Hemp seed a day.
He is often depicted with "Soma leaves"
in his begging bowl and the mysterious
god-narcotic Soma hasoccasionally
been identified with Hemp. In Tantric
Top left: In northern India the Hemp
leaves are soaked in water, shredded,
and then roiled into balls. These are
sold as "Bhang" on the market (display
in the Governmental Ganja Shop Om
Varnasi, Benares).
Top right: The Bhang balls are either
sucked on or mixed into a drink with
milk, yogurt, and water.
Page 97above left: The Cora Indians of
the Sierra Madre Occidental of Mexico
smoke Cannabis in the course of their
sacred ceremonies. Rarely is an intro-
duced foreign plant adopted and used in
indigenous religious ceremonies, but it
seems that the Cora of Mexico and the
Cuna of Panama have taken up the ri-
tual smoking of Cannabis, notwith-
standing the fact that, in both areas, it
was brought in by the early Europeans.
Page 97 above right: These three
photographs show the germinating
Hemp plant. The rounded leaves are
cotyledons or seed-leaves. The first real
leaves are always simple, not segmen-
ted as are the mature leaves.
Page 96 middle (4 Photos): The use of
Cannabis by peoples ot both the Old
World and the New is widespread. In the
Old World (left to right) Cannabis is
being smoked by a Kung woman from
South Africa, a Pygmy from the Congo,
a traveler in Kashmir, and North African
Hashish smokers.
97
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 99 ---
The Chemistry of Marijuana
Whereas the psychoactive principles of most hallucinogenic plants are alka-
loids, the active constituents of Cannabis are non-nitrogenous and occur in a
resinous oil. The psychoactive properties are due to cannabinoids, of which
the most effective is tetrahydrocannabinol, or THC—chemically:
transtetrahydrocannabinol. The highest concentration is found in the resin of
the unfertilized pistillate inflorescence. Even though less potent, the dried
leaves are also employed for their psychoactive effects.
Following the elucidation of the chemical structure (see molecular model
on page 184), it has recently been possible to synthesize THC.
Psychoactive Plants that are used as a Marijuana Substitute
Botanical Name
Aichornea floribunda
Argemone mexicana
Artemisia mexicana
Calea zacatechichi
Canavalia maritima
Catharanthus roseus
Cecropia mexicana
Cestrum Iaevigatum
Cestrum parqui
Cymbopogon dens iflorus
Helichrysum foetidurn
Helichrysum stenopterum
Hieracium piocella
Leonotis leonurus
Leonurus sibiricus
Nepeta cataria
Piper auritum
Sceletium tortuosum
Sida acuta
Sida rhombifolla
Turnera diffusa
Zornia diphylla
Zornia latifolla
98
Common Name
Niando
Prickly Poppy
Mexican Mugwort
Dog Grass
Sea Bean
Madagascar Periwinkle
Chancarro
Lady of the Night
Palqui
Lemongrass
Everlasting
Everlasting
Hawkweed
Wild Dagga
Siberian Motherwort
Catnip
Root Beer Plant
Kougued
Common Wireweed
Escobilla
Damiana
Maconha Brava
Maconha Brava
Part of Plant Used
Roots
Leaves
Herbage
Herbage
Leaves
Leaves
Leaves
Leaves
Leaves
Flower extract
Herbage
Herbage
Herbage
Herbage
Herbage
Herbage
Leaves
Herbage, Roots
Herbage
Herbage
Herbage
Leaves
Dried leaves
Buddhism of the Himalayas of Tibet,
Cannabis plays a very significant role
in the meditative ritual used to facilitate
deep meditation and heighten aware-
ness. Both medicinal and recreational
secular use of Hemp islikewise so
common now in this region that the
plant is taken for granted as an every-
day necessity.
Folklore maintains that the use of
Hemp was introduced to Persia by an
Indian pilgrim during thereign of
Khursu (A.D. 53 1—579), but it is known
that the Assyrians used Hemp as an in-
cense during the first millennium B. C.
Although at first prohibited among Isla-
mic peoples, Hashish spread widely
west throughout Asia Minor. In 1378,
authoritiestriedtoextirpate Hemp
from Arabian territory by the imposi-
tion of harsh punishments.
Cannabis extended early and widely
from Asia Minor into Africa, partly
under the pressure of Islamic influ-
ence, but the use of Hemp transcends
Islamic areas. It is widely believed that
Hemp was introduced also with slaves
from Malaya. Commonly known in
Africa as Kif or Dagga, the plant has
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 100 ---
"Hemp is the 'giver of joy,' 'heaven's pilot,' 'the heavenly guide,'
'the heaven of the poor man,' 'the soother of sorrows.'
No god, no man is as good as the religious hemp drinker."
—Hemp Drug
Commission Report (1884)
entered into archaic native cultures in
social and religious contexts. The Hot-
tentots, Bushmen, and Kaffirsused
Hemp for centuries as a medicine and
as an intoxicant. In an ancienttribal
ceremony in the Zambesi Valley,parti-
cipants inhaled vapors from a pile of
smoldering Hemp; later,reed tubes
and pipes were employed, and the
plant material was burned on an altar.
The Kasai tribes of the Congo have
revived an old Riamba cult in which
Hemp, replacing ancient fetishes and
symbols, was elevated toa god—a
protector against physical and spiritual
harm. Treaties are sealed with puffs of
smoke from calabash pipes. Hemp-
smoking and Hashish-snuffingcults
existin many parts •ofeast Africa,
especially near Lake Victoria.
Hemp has spread to many areas of the
New World, but with few exceptions
the plant has not penetrated signifi-
cantly into many Native American reli-
gious beliefs and ceremonies. There are,
however, exceptions, such asits use
under the name Rosa Maria, by the Te-
pecano Indians ofnorthwest Mexico,
who occasionally employ Hemp when
Peyote is not available. It has recently
been learned that Indians in the Mexi-
can states of Veracruz,Hidalgo, and
Puebla practice a communal curing ce-
remony with a plant called Santa Rosa,
identified as Cannabis sativa, which is
considered both a plant and a sacred in-
tercessor with the Virgin. Althoughthe
ceremony is based mainly onChristian
elements, the plant is worshiped as an
Earth deity and is thought to be alive
and to represent a part of the heart of
God. The participants in this cult be-
lieve that the plant can be dangerous
and that it can assume the form of a
man's soul, make him ill, enrage him,
and even cause death.
Sixty years ago, when Mexican la-
borers introduced the smoking of Mar-
ijuana to the United States, it spread
across the South, and by the 1920sits
use was established in NewOrleans,
confined primarily among the poor and
minority groups. The continued spread
of the custom in the United States and
Europe has resulted in a still unresolved
controversy.
Cannabis sativa was officially in the
U.S. Pharmacopoeia until 1937, recom-
Above left: In C. sativa, well-developed
hairs of glandular and non-glandular
kinds are shown in various stages of
development.
Top right: Different types of glandular
hairs of Cannabis. The capitate gland
with a prominent pseudo-stalk on the
surface of the anther wall that faces the
center of the flower.
Bottom right: Bulbous gland from adax-
ial leaf surface. The stalk and head are
made up of two cells each. The tip of the
gland possesses a small, disk-shaped
region below which resin accumulates
in the extended membrane.
Page 98: Above, Cannabis saliva is
being harvested for Hemp at the turn
of the century. This species attains a
height of 18 feet (6m). Below, an extre-
mely potent Hashish is produced from
Cannabis indica, a low, pyramidal,
densely branched species, as shown
above growing wild near Kandahar,
Afghanistan.
99
Scanning Electron Microscopy
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 101 ---
Top: Drawing by W. Miller. Copyright
1978 The New YorkerMagazine, Inc.
'Hey, what is this stuff?Itmakes every-
thing I think seem profound."
Below: Gustave Doré's painting 'Com-
position of the Death of Gerard de Ner-
val," for which he may have used Can-
nabis and Opium for inspiration. The
contemporary American cartoon shows
in a humorous way the resurrection of
this belief.
100
•
'I
.
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 102 ---
mended for a wide variety of disorders,
especially as a mild sedative. It is no
longer an official drug, although re-
search in the medical potential of some
of the cannabinolic constituents or their
semi-synthetic analogs is at present very
active, particularly in relation to the side
effects of cancer therapy.
The psychoactive effects of Cannabis
preparations vary widely, depending on
dosage, the preparation and the type of
plant used, the method of administra-
tion, the personality of the user, and
thesocial and cultural background.
Perhaps the most frequent characteris-
tic is a dreamy state. Long forgotten
events are often recalled and thoughts
occur in unrelated sequences. Percep-
tion of time, and occasionally of space,
is altered. Visual and auditory halluci-
nations sometimes follow the use of
large doses. Euphoria, excitement, in-
ner happiness—often with hilarity and
laughter—are typical. In some cases, a
final mood of depression may be ex-
perienced.
Above: Marijuana is made from the
dried and slightly fermented blossoms
of the feminine Kemp plant.
Left:InLewis Carroll's Alice in Wonder-
land, the encounter between Alice and
the languorous caterpillar is as follows:
"She stretched herself up on tiptoe, and
peeped over the edge of the mushroom,
and her eyes immediately met those of
a large blue caterpillar that was sitting
on the top, with its arms folded, quietly
smoking a long hookah, and taking not
the slightest notice of her or anything
"Thismarvelous experience often
occurs as if it were the effect of a
superior and invisible power acting
on the person from without...
This delightful and singular state
gives no advance warning.
It is as unexpected as a ghost,
an intermittent haunting
from which we must draw,
if we are wise,
the certainly of a better existence.
This acuteness of thought,
this enthusiasm of the senses and
the spirit must have appeared to
man through the ages
as the first blessing."
—Charles Baudelaire
Les Paradis Artificiels
Above: In the nineteenth century, a se-
lect group of European artists and wri-
ters turned to psychoactive agents in an
attempt to achieve what has come to be
regarded as "mind-expansion" or "mind-
Many people, such as the
French poet Baudelaire (below), be-
lieved that creative ability could be
greatly enhanced by the use of Canna-
bis. In fact, Baudelaire wrote vivid de-
scriptions of his personal experiences
under the influence of Cannabis.
101
I
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 103 ---
CLAVICEPS
ErgotST. ANTHONY'S FIRE
Above: While Ergot infects a number of
different grasses, it is best known as a
parasite on the inflorescence of rye.
Page 103 top: The Ergot of rye are con-
siderably bigger than those of the Pas-
palum grass.
Page 103 left: Fruiting bodies of C/a vi-
ceps purpurea. The specific name of
this fungus means purple," a color that
in antiquity was linked with powers of
the underworld.
Page 103 right: When grain is infected
by Ergot, long black growths appear on
the heads, called sclerotium.
102
"The ancient testimony about Eleusis is
unanimous and unambiguous. Eleusis
was the supreme experience in an initia-
te's life. It was both physical and mysti-
cal: trembling, vertigo, cold sweat, and
then a sight that made all previous see-
ing seem like blindness, a sense of awe
and wonder at a brilliance that caused a
profound silence, since what had just
been seen and felt could never be com-
municated; words were unequal to the
task. These symptoms are unmistakably
the experience induced by a hallucino-
gen. Greeks, and indeed some of the
most famous and intelligent among
them, could experience and enter fully
into, such irrationality.
"Eleusis was different from the con-
vivial inebriation of friends...Intheir
various ways, other Greek cults too
enacted aspects of the ancient commu-
nion practiced between gods and men,
between the living and the dead, but it
was at Eleusis alone that the experi-
ence occurred with overwhelming fin-
ality...
"For close on to two thousand years,
a few of the ancient Greeks passed
each year through the portals of Eleu-
sis. There they celebrated the divine
gift to mankind of the cultivated grain,
and they were also initiated into the
awesome powers of the nether world
through the purple dark of the grain's
sibling-.
Thusin an interdisciplinary study
based on three different approaches,
ethnomycology, classical studies, and
chemistry, the secret rites of ancient
Greece, which have remained a puzzle
for four thousand years, are associated
with intoxication caused by the fungus
Claviceps, which grows parasitically on
certain cereals.
It is now believed that the intoxicant
underlying the ecstasy experienced in
the mysteries was induced by Claviceps
paspali,and possibly otherspecies,
growing on various Loliums and other
cereal grasses native to Greece. The bio-
dynamical principles characteristic of
the well-known Ergot, or Clavicepspur-
pkrea, have been isolated from some of
the other species of this fungal parasite.
The reasons for considering the Eleusian
mysteries to be associated with the use
of Claviceps are long and complex, but
the arguments are most convincing and
apparentlyfromseveraldisciplines
sound. Basically, it has now been shown
that several species of Claviceps can in-
fect a number of wild grasses in Greece.
By far the most important species of
Claviceps is C. purpurea, the Ergot of
rye (Secale cereale). This hard, brown
or purplish black sclerotium of a fungus
originating in the caryopsis of rye is
exceedingly common in Europe. The
native nomenclature of Claviceps pur-
purea is indeed complex. Ergot, the
French word for "spur" of a cock, now
generally employed in numerous lan-
guages, was first applied to the fungus
in a region not far from Paris. There
are, however, two dozen other words
for the sclerotium in French; sixty-two
vernacular names in German, Mutter-
korn being the most commonly used.
There are twenty-one in Dutch, fifteen
in the Scandinavian languages, fourteen
in Italian, and seven in English in addi-
tion to the borrowed word Ergot. This
proliferation of vernacular terminology
indicates the importance of the fungus
in European countries.
Although its medicinal use was un-
known in classical times, it was early re-
cognized as a poison. As far back as 600
B.C., theAssyrians called the spurlike
growth or Ergot a "noxious pustule in
the ear of the grain." The sacred books
of the Parsees (about 350 B.C.) reported:
"Among the evil things created by An-
gro Maynes are noxious grasses that
cause pregnant women to drop the
womb and die in childbed." Although
theancient Greeks apparently em-
ployed the fungus in their religious ri-
tuals, they did not eat rye because of
the"black malodorous produce of
Thrace and Macedonia." Rye was not
introduced into classical Europe until
the beginning of the Christian era, so
Ergot poisoning did not enter into Ro-
man pharmaceutical literature.
The earliest undoubted reports of Er-
got poisoning appeared during the Mid-
dle Ages, when bizarre epidemics broke
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 104 ---
(
and hallucinations were common symp-
toms of the intoxication, which was fre-
quently fatal. An early European visita-
tion of ergotism described it as "a great
plague of swollen blisters {that] con-
sumed the people by a loathsome rot."
Abortions of women were general dur-
ing these attacks. The "Holy Fire" was
always characterized by a feeling of
burning in the feet and hands.
St. Anthony, after whom the "fire"
was named, lived as a religious hermit
in Egypt; he died at the age of 105 in
A.D. 356. He is the protecting saint
againstfire,epilepsy, and infection.
DuringtheCrusades,theknights
brought back his remains to Dauphiné,
in France, for burial. It was here in Dau-
phiné that the earliest recognized plague
of "Holy Fire" occurred in 1039. A
wealthy citizen, Gaston, and his son
were among the afflicted, and Gaston
The active ingredients in Ergot are indole alkaloids, all derived from the same
basic compound, lysergic acid. The most important alkaloids in Ergot of rye
are ergotamine and ergotoxine, in which lysergic acid is connected with a
peptide radical consisting of three amino acids. These alkaloids and their
derivatives have various medicinal uses.
toxic doses they cause gangrene because of their vasoconstricting
properties. Ergot from wild grasses, however, contains essentially simple
lysergic acid amides, ergine, and lysergic acid-hydroxyethylamide (found
only in traces in Ergot of rye). These psychotropic alkaloids may have played
a role in the convulsive form of ergotism. They occur as the main active
principles in the Mexican Morning Glory Ololiuqui (Turbina corymbosa) [see
page 187 for the molecular model of the chemical structure] and other Bind-
weeds (Ipomoea violacea, Argyreia nervosa).
103
out in various parts of Europe, taking
thousands of lives and causing untold
agony and suffering. These epidemics
manifested themselves in two forms:
those with nervous convulsions and epi-
leptic symptoms; those with gangrene,
mummifications,atrophy, and occa-
sional ioss of extremities—noses, ear-
lobes, fingers, toes, and feet. Delirium
4.
The Chemistry of Ergot
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 105 ---
T1'uI'iIt is possible that the alkaloid-rich
DI the Paspalum grass was used
Secret ingredient in Kykeon, the
InhliqIory drink of Eleusis.
left: The goddess Demeter with
of grain and opium pods in her
it
right: The Plutonluon of Eleusis.
105bottom: One of the rare out-
breriks of ergotism in England attacked
One tomily in Wattisham in 1762. So
Liftirtualwas this plague that it has been
meit lorialized with a plaque in the parish
10-4
promised to give all his wealth to aid
other victims if St. Anthony would cure
him and his son. Thus it was that in this
French town a hospital to care for suf-
ferers was founded and the Order of St.
Anthony was also established.
A pilgrimage to shrines consecrated
to St. Anthony was believed to cure
the disease. But a change in diet—bread
free of Ergot—may have had a benefi-
cial effect. It was not until 1676—some
five hundred years after the height of St.
Anthony's fire—that the real cause of
ergotism was discovered, whereupon
measures of control were set up. Millers
in the Middle Ages frequently kept
clean rye flour for the affluent, selling
flour made from "spurred rye"—that
infected with Ergot—to poorer custo-
mers. Once the cause was known, vigi-
lance in the mills quickly reduced the
epidemics of St. Anthony's fire.
Even today, however, there are occa-
sional outbreaks of epidemics in which
whole villages are affected. The most
notorious recent attacks have occurred
in France and Belgium in 1953 and in
the Ukraine and Ireland in 1929. There
are suggestions that the alleged out-
breaks of witchcraft in colonial New
England, especially in Salem, Massachu-
setts, may have been due to Ergot poi-
soning.
European midwives had long known
that Ergot could aid in cases of difficult
childbirth and had used the fungus for
that purpose. Chemicals isolated from
Ergot are still official drugs to induce
contraction of involuntary muscles in
stubborn childbirth. The earliest medi-
cal report of the obstetric value of Ergot
was published in 1582 by Lonicer of
Frankfurt, whostatedthatErgot-
parasitized rye is of sovereign efficiency
in pregnancy pains. Although widely
employed by midwives, Ergot was first
employed by a physician when Des-
granges of Lyons experimented with it
and published his observations in 1818.
The Swiss botanist Bauhin described
Ergot in 1595, and his son later pro-
duced the first illustration of Ergot in
1658. In 1676, the French physician-
botanist Dodart added much scientific
knowledge to the story of Ergot. He ad-
vised the French Academy that the only
way to control plagues of ergotism was
to sift the rye to extract the Ergot spores
from it. But even as late as 1750, bota-
nistsstill were uncertain how Ergot
grew and why it was toxic. In 1711 and
again in 1761, learned botanists accepted
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 106 ---
the view that the black spur was formed
by the germinating embryo, which cau-
sed a hypertrophied growth in place of
a normal caryopsis. Only in 1764 did
the German botanist von Münchhausen
declare that Ergot was a fungal infec-
tion, but his opinion was not accepted
until the famous botanist A. P. de Can-
dolle proved it in 1815. A widely ac-
claimed report of Ergot efficacy was
published by Dr. John Stearns in 1808.
A few years later, a Massachusetts doc-
tor, Prescott, gave a dissertation on the
"natural history and medicinal effects"
of Ergot, which, when published in
1813, called the attention of medical
science in the New World to the re-
Fim.. Tnhrpl;onLo
tInaitsTarifh.,
01loft the
,it U nn uot tod br
A\ui atof(1aIerecotd
In theFlubs
markable propertiesof thefungus.
From that time on, Ergot was increas-
ingly employed in medicine, although it
was not- accepted in the Pharmacopoeia
until 1836.
It was not, however, until the 1920s
that the active principles of Claviceps
purpurea were known: ergotamine in
1921; ergonovine in 1935. Subsequently,
a number of other related alkaloids have
been discovered in the plant. Even
though this dangerous infection of rye
never had a major magico-religious role
in European culture, it did earn a special
place as a plant having connections with
spiritual forces—a kind of malevolent
plant of the gods.
-
-
•-
-
--
sn-Urfnd,e
-
-ba
-
Above left: Persephone, the Queen of
the Dead, making an offering of shafts
ofis enthroned beside her hus-
band, Hades, Lord of the Underworld.
Originally a goddess associated with
grain, she was abducted to the Under-
world by Hades, and her return from the
realm of the dead was connected with
symbolic rebirth experiences in the
Eleusinian mysteries, where the wor-
shipers believed that the restoration of
the goddess to the upper world ensured
the faithful a resurrection. It is possible
that these amazing events in Perse-
phone's life might have been linked with
intoxication from Ergot, since Greek
sophistication in the chemical proper-
ties of plants was well developed.
Above right: The title page of a German
book from 1771, Ergot: An Alleged
Cause of the So-called St. Anthony's
Fire.
VGfl-
—
-)
105
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 107 ---
27DATURAINNOXIA
'Toloache
DATURAMETEL
Datura
2nDATURA STRAMONIUM
Thorn Apple
HOLY FLOWER
OF THE NORTH STAR
Above left: The Datura stramonium var.
tatula is the most common in the Hima-
layas. It is easily recognized by the
violet color of the flower.
Above right: The sacred Thorn Apple
(Datura metel) is often found in the
Himalayas on altars to the gods of the
mountains (photo taken in Tukche,
Nepal).
Below right: A yellow-flowered Datura
metelin full bloom.
106
A beautiful Zuñi Indian legend tells of
the divine origin of Aneglakya, Datura
innoxia, their most sacred plant:
the olden time a boy and a girl,
brother and sister (the boy's name was
A'neglakya and the girl's name A'negla-
kyatsi'tsa), lived in the interior of the
earth, but they often came to the outer
world and walked about a great deal,
observing closely everything they saw
and heard and repeating all to their
mother. This constant talking did not
please the Divine Ones (twin sons of
the Sun Father). On meeting the boy
and the girl the Divine Ones asked,
'How are you?' and the brother and sis-
ter answered, 'We are happy.' (Some-
times A'neglakya and A'neglakyatsi'tsa
appeared on Earth as old people.) They
told the Divine Ones how they could
make one sleep and see ghosts, and
how they could make one walk abouta
little and see one who had committed
theft. After this meeting the Divine
Ones concluded that A'neglakya and
A'neglakyatsi'tsa knew too much and
that they should be banished for all time
from this world; so the Divine Ones
caused the brother and sister to disap-
pear into the earth forever. Flowers
sprang up at the spot where the two des-
cended—flowers exactly like those that
they wore on each side of their heads
when visiting the earth. The Divine
Ones called the plant 'a'neglakya' after
the boy's name. The original plant has
many children scattered over the earth;
some of the blossoms are tinged with
yellow, some with blue, some with red,
some are all white—the colors belong-
ing to the four cardinal points."
This and related species of Datura
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 108 ---
The various species of Daturacontainthe same major alkaloids as related
solanaceous plants (Angel's Trumpet, Belladonna, Henbane, and Mandrake)
hyoscyamine and, in greatest concentration, scopolamine. Meteloidine is a
characteristic secondary alkaloid of D. meteL
have long been employed as sacred hal-
lucinogens, especially in Mexico and the
American Southwest, and have played
major rolesin native medicine and
magico-religious rites. Their undoubted
danger as potent narcotics, however, has
never been challenged, even from ear-
liest times.
In the Old World,has had a
long history as a medicine and sacred
hallucinogen, although the genus has
apparently never enjoyed the ceremo-
nial role that it has had in the New
World. Early Sanskrit and Chinese
writings mention Datura metei. It was
undoubtedly this species that the Ara-
bian doctor Avicenna reported in the
eleventh century under the name Jouz-
rnathal ("metel nut"); this report was
repeated in Dioscorides' writings. The
name metel is taken from this Arabic
term, while the generic epithet Datura
was adapted to Latin by Linnaeus from
the Sanskrit Dhatura. In China, the
plant was considered sacred: when Bud-
dha was preaching, heaven sprinkled the
plant with dew or raindrops. A Taoist
legend maintains that Datura metel is
one of the circumpolar stars and that
envoys to earth from this star carry a
flower of the plant in their hand. Several
species of Datura were introduced into
China from India between the Sung and
Ming dynasties—that is, between A. D.
960 and 1644—so they were not re-
corded in earlier herbals. The herbalist
Li Shih-chen reported the medicinal
uses of one of the species known as
Man-t'o-lo in 1596: the flowers and
seeds were employed to treat eruptions
on the face, and the plant was prescribed
internally for colds, nervous disorders,
and other problems. It was taken to-
gether with Cannabis in wine as an an-
esthesia for minor surgical operations.
Its narcotic properties were known to
the Chinese, for Li Shih-chen person-
ally experimented on himself and wrote:
"According to traditions, it is alleged
that when the flowers are picked for
use with wine while one is laughing,
the wine will cause one to produce
laughing movements; and when the
flowers are picked while one is dancing,
the wine will cause one to produce dan-
cing movements. [I have found out] that
Above left: The hanging fruit of Datura
innoxia. The seeds that are chewed by
shamans to induce a clairvoyant trance
are clearly visible.
Above middle: Many species of Datura
have played a vital medicinal and ineb-
riant role in Mexico since early times.
This page from the "Badianus Manu-
scripr' (Codex Berberini Latina 241,
Folio 29) depicts two species of Datura
and describes their therapeutic uses.
This document of 1542 is the first herbal
to be written in the New World.
Above right: A Datura flower is left as an
offering on a Shiva Lingam at Pashupa-
tinath (Nepal).
107
The Chemistryof Datura
Top: Traditional depiction of the Thorn
Apple on a Tibetan medicinal painting.
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 109 ---
Right: The typical fruit of the Datura
mete!. In India it is given to the god
Shiva as an offering.
4
.4
Below: It was believed that when Bud-
dha preached, dew or raindrops fell
from heaven on Datura. This bronze
shrine from the Sui period of China de-
picts Amitabha Buddha seated under
the jeweled trees of Paradise.
such movements will be produced when
one becomes half-drunk with the wine
and someone else laughsor dances to
induce these actions."
In India, it was called tuft of Shiva, the
god of destruction. Dancing girlssome-
times drugged wine with its seeds, and
whoever drank of the potion, appearing
in possession of his senses,gave answers
to questions, although he had no control
of his will, was ignorant of whom hewas
addressing, and lost allmemory of what
he did when the intoxicationwore off.
For this reason, many Indians called the
plant "drunkard," "madman," "decei-
ver,"and "foolmaker." The British
traveler Hardwicke found this plant
common in mountain villages in India
in 1796 and reported thatan infusion of
the seeds was used to increase the intox-
ication from alcoholic drinks. During
the Sanskritic period, Indian medicine
108
valued Datura metel for treating mental
disorders, various fevers, tumors, breast
inflammations, skin diseases, and. diar-
rhea.
In other parts of Asia, D. metelwas
valued and similarly employed in native
medicine and as an intoxicant. Evento-
day, seeds or powdered leaves of this
plant are often mixed with Cannabisor
Tobacco and smoked in Indochina. In
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 110 ---
1578, its use as an aphrodisiac in the
East Indies was reported. From earliest
classical times, the dangers of Datura
were recognized. The English herbalist
Gerard believed that Datura was the
Hippomanes thattheGreek writer
Theocritus mentioned as driving horses
mad.
Datura stranzonium var. ferox,aspe-
cies now widely distributed in the war-
mer parts of both hemispheres, has uses
almost identical with those of D. metel.
Itis employed especially in parts of
Africa. In Tanzania,itisadded to
Pombe, a kind of beer, for its inebriating
to induce visual hallucinations but also
for a great variety of medicinal uses,
especially when applied to the body to
relieve rheumatic pains and to reduce
swellings.
Writing shortly after the conquest of
Mexico, Hernández mentioned its med-
icinal value but warned that excessive
use would drive patients to madness
with "various and vain imaginations."
Neither its magico-religious nor its ther-
apeutic use has diminished in Mexico.
Among the Yaqui, for example, it is ta-
ken by women to lessen the pain of
childbirth. It is considered so powerful
that it can be handled only by "someone
of authority." One ethnobotanist wrote:
"My collecting these plants was often
accompanied with warningsthatI
would go crazy and die because I was
mistreating them. Some Indians refused
to talk to me for several days afterward."
Page 108 bottom right: The opening
blossom of a Datura innoxia. The
Mayans call it xtohk'uh, 'toward the
gods:' and still use it for shamanic pur-
poses such as divination and medicinal
healing.
Above left: A Datura fruit has been left
as an offering at the image of Nandi,
Shiva's sacred steer.
effects. A common medical use in Africa
is smoking the leaves to relieve asthma
and pulmonary problems.
In the New World, the Mexicans call
Datura Toloache, a modern version of
the ancient Aztec Toloatzin (that is,
"inclined head," in reference to its nod-
ding fruit). It was also known in the
Nahuatl languageasTolohuaxihuitl
and Tlapatl. It was employed not only
Toloache is rather widely added to mes-
cal, a distilled liquor from A gave, or to
Tesguino, a fermented maize drink, as an
added intoxicant—"as a catalyst and to
induce a good feeling and visions."
Some Mexicans prepare a fatty ointment
containing seeds and leaves of Toloache,
which is rubbed over the abdomen to in-
duce visual hallucinations.
Among the Indians of the Southwest,
PERFUME
CHAM Ico
Bottom left: In northern India Datura
fruit is threaded into garlands and
offered to the Hindu god Shiva.
Bottom right: The Curanderos (local
healers) of northern Peru enjoy using a
perfume that is named Chamico (Thorn
Apple).
109
14
-V
I,
•Jt
J
La ünicisofucidnConocidopar ioniribusumazanicus
del Alto Ucayeli. El perfume CHAMICO te di enenqia
pare hacer el amer coonlas vases gamma 5 omarlar a
a persona qué gammas. Quieres sir sensual?Cain -
pertwne.
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 111 ---
Top left: The thorn-protected fruit of a
rare species of Thorn Apple.
Bottom left: The blossoms of the Thorn
Apple (Datura stramonium) open in the
evening, exude a delightful scent
throughout the night, and fade in the
morning.
Right: A purple variety of the Datura
mete!, better known as Datura fastuosa.
In particular, this plant is used in Africa
as an inebriant in initiation rites.
"Iate the thorn apple leaves
And the leaves made me
dizzy.
I ate the thorn apple, leaves
And the leaves made iiae
dizzy.
I ate the thorn apple flowers
And the drink made me
stagger.
The hunter's bow remaining
He overtook and killed me.
Cut and threw my horns
away,
The hunter, reed remaining.
He overtook and killed me
Cut and threw my feet away.
Now the flies become crazy
And drop with flapping
wings.
No drunken butterflies sit
With opening and shutting
wings."
—F. Russel
Pima hunting song
110
D. innoxia has assumed extraordinary
importance as a sacred element and is
the most widely used plant to induce
hallucinations. The Zuñis believe that
the plant belongs to the Rain Priest
Fraternity and rain priests alone may
collect its roots. These priests put the
powdered root into their eyes to com-
mune with the Feathered Kingdom at
night, and they chew the roots to ask
the dead to intercede with the spirits
for rain. These priests further use D. in-
noxia for its analgesic effects, to deaden
pain during simple operations, bone-
setting, and cleaning ulcerated wounds.
The Yokut, who call the plant Tanayin,
take the drug only during the spring,
since it is considered to be poisonous in
the summer; it is given to adolescent
boys and girls only once in a lifetime to
ensure a good and a long life.
Boys and girls of the Tubatulobal
tribe drink Datura after puberty to
"obtain life," and adults use it to obtain
visions. The roots are macerated and
soaked in water for ten hours; after
drinking large amounts of this liquor,
the youths fall into a stupor accompa-
nied by hallucinations that may last up
to twenty-four hours. If an animal—an
eagle, a hawk, for example—is seen dur-
ing the visions, it becomes the child's
"pet" or spiritual mascot for life:if
"life" is seen, the child acquires a ghost.
The ghost is the ideal object to appear,
since it cannot die. Children never may
kill the animal "pet" that they see in
their Datura vision, for these "pets"
may visit during serious illness and ef-
fect a cure.
The Yuman tribes believe that the re-
action of braves under the influence of
Toloache may foretelltheirfuture.
These people use the plant to gain oc-
cult power. If birds sing to a man in a
Datura trance, he acquires the power
to cure.
The Navajo take Datura for its vi-
sionary properties, valuing it for diag-
nosis, healing, and purely intoxicating
use. Navajo use is magic-oriented. Vi-
sions induced by this drug are especially
valued, since they reveal certain animals
possessing special significance. Upon
learning from these visions the cause of
a disease, a chant may be prescribed. If a
man be repulsed in love by a girl, he
seeks revenge by putting her saliva or
dust from her moccasins on a Datura,
then the singing of a chant will immedi-
ately drive the girl mad.
Datura stramonium is now believed
to be native to eastern America, where
the Algonquins and other tribes may
have employed it as a ceremonial hallu-
cinogen. Indians of Virginia used a toxic
medicine called wysoccan in initiatory
rites: the Huskanawing ceremony. The
active ingredient was probably Datura
stramonium. Youths were confined for
long periods, given "no other substance
but the infusion or decoction of some
poisonous,intoxicatingroots"and
"they became stark, staring mad, in
which raving condition they were kept
eighteen or twenty days." During the
ordeal, they "unlive their former lives"
and begin manhood by losing all mem-
ory of ever having been boys.
There is in Mexico a curious species
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 112 ---
Right: A magician of Kuma in northeast
Africa leads entranced women in a ritual
dance. The substance that they ingest con-
sists of a secret mixture of many different
plants, most ot which are unknown. Evi-
dence suggests that Datura is among them.
The women are possessed by the spirits
who use them as their medium.
Left: The illustration from the early
writings of Sahagun, the Spanish friar
who wrote shortly after the conquest
of Mexico, pictures the utilization of
an infusion of Datura to relieve
rheumatism. This use is still found
recommended in modern
pharmacopoeias.
of Datura, so distinct that a separate
section of the genus has been set up for
its classification. It is D.a
fleshy plant with thick, forking stems
of bogs, or growing in water. Known as
Torna Loco ("maddening plant"), it is
powerfully narcotic. In ancient Mexico,
it was considered "sister of Ololiuqui"
and was held in great veneration. Little
is known concerning its use today for
hallucinogenic purposes.
The effects of all species are similar,
since their constituents are so much
alike. Physiological activity begins with
a feeling of lassitude and progresses into
a period of hallucinations followed by
deep sleep and loss of consciousness. In
excessive doses, death or permanent in-
sanity may occur. So potent is the psy-
choactivity of all species of Datura that
it is patently clear why peoples in indi-
genous cultures around the world have
classed them as plants of the gods.
111
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 113 ---
TABERNANTHE
'7V IbogaGUIDE TO THE ANCESTORS
Page 113 top: Dried Iboga roots.
Page 113 middle left: Old wooden fetish
objects of the Fang, who were once
associated with an Iboga cult.
Page 113 middle right The conspicu-
ous bright yellow fruits of the lboga.
"Zame ye Mebege [the last of the crea-
tor gods] gave us Eboka. One day. ..he
saw... the Pygmy Bitamu, high in an
Atanga tree, gathering its fruit. He made
him fall. He died, and Zame brought his
spirit to him. Zame cut off the little fin-
gers and the little toes of the cadaver of
the Pygmy and planted them in various
parts of the forest. They grew into the
Eboka bush."
open the head," thus inducing a contact
with the ancestors through collapse and
hallucinations."
The drug has far-reaching social in-
fluence. According to the natives, the
initiate cannot enter the cult until he
has seen Bwiti, and the only way to see
Bwiti is to eat Iboga. The complex cere-
monies and tribal dances associated
with consumption of Iboga vary greatly
Left: The roots of the Iboga bush are ri-
tually eaten by the Bwiti cult in order to
call forth the ancestors.
Right: Iboga, necessary for rituals, is
grown at the temple of the Bwiti cult.
112
One of the few members of the Apo-
cynaceae utilized as a hallucinogen, this
shrub attains a height of 4 to 6 feet (1.5—
2m). Its yellowish root is the active part
of the plant, containing the psychoac-
tive alkaloids. The root bark is rasped
and eaten directly as raspings or as a
powder or is drunk as an infusion.
Iboga is basic to the Bwiti cult and
other secret societies in Gabon and
Zaire. The drug is taken in two ways:
regularly in limited doses before and in
the early part of the ceremonies, fol-
lowed after midnight by asmaller
dose; and once or twice during the in-
itiation to the cult in excessive doses of
one to three basketfuls over an eight-
to twenty-four-hour period, to CCbreak
from locality to locality. Iboga enters
also other aspects of Bwiti's control of
events. Sorcerers take the drug to seek
information from the spirit world, and
leaders of the cult may consume Iboga
for a full day before asking advice from
ancestors.
Iboga is intimately associated with
death: the plant is frequently anthropo-
morphized as a supernatural being, a
"generic ancestor," which can so highly
value or despise an individual that it can
carry him away to the realm of the dead.
There are sometimes deaths from the
excessive doses taken during initiations,
but the intoxication usually so interferes
with motor activity that the initiates
must sitgazing intently into space,
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 114 ---
eventually collapsing and having to be
carried to a special house or forest hide-
out. During this almost comatose peri-
od, the "shadow" (soul) leaves the body
to wander with the ancestors in the land
of the dead. The banzie (angels)—the
initiates—relate their visions as follows:
"A dead relative came to me in my sleep
and told me to eat it"; "I was sick and
was counseled to eat Iboga to cure
myself";wanted to know God—to
know things of the dead and the land
beyond"; "I walked or flew over a long,
multicolored road or over many rivers
which led me to my ancestors, who then
took me to the great gods."
Iboga may act as a powerful stimu-
lant, enabling the partaker to maintain
extraordinary physical exertion without
fatigue over a long period. The body
may feel lighter, and levitation—afeel-
ing of floating—is often experienced.
Spectrums or rainbowlike effects are
seen in surrounding objects, indications
to the banzie that the initiate is ap-
proaching the realms of the ancestors
and of the gods. Time perception is al-
tered; time is lengthened, and initiates
As with other hallucinogens, especially Teonanácatl (Psilocybe spp.) and
Ololiuqui, the active principles of Tabernanthe iboga belong to the large class
of indole alkaloids. Ibogaine, which can be produced synthetically, is the main
alkaloid of T iboga. Its hallucinogenic effects are accompanied by strong sti-
mulation of the central nervous system.
Iboga roots contain an alkaloid known as ibogaine. This substance was first
introduced in the 1 960s by the Chilean psychiatrist Claudio Naranjo as a
"fantasy-enhancing drug" for psychotherapy. Today, ibogaine is in the spot-
light of neuropsychological research, which has shown that the alkaloid can
ease drug addiction (to such drugs as heroin and cocaine) andmake way for
a cure. lbogaine calms the motor activity that is present whenunder the influ-
ence of an opiate. The chiropractor Karl Naeher says that"lbogaine, when
taken in one high dose by an opiate addict, drastically reduces withdrawal
symptoms and, at the same time, causes a 'trip' that reveals such deep in-
sights into the personal causes of the addiction that the majority of those who
undergo this type of therapy can go for months without a relapse. But several
additional sessions are required before a lasting stabilization is evident?'
Research into the potential use of ibogaine as a treatment for substance
abuse is being carried out by Deborah Mash and her team in Miami.
113
The Chemistry of Iboga
Addiction Therapy with Ibogaine
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 115 ---
/ 'age 115 top:Theseeds of the Iboga
bush can germinate only under particu-
l:tr conditions. They themselves contain
rio active compounds.
Page 115 right: Music plays a central
role in the Bwiti cult. The harp player
not only allows the strings to resonate,
but also sings liturgies in which the
cosmology and woridview of the tribe
are expressed.
Topleft:The typical leaves of the Iboga
bush.
Thp right: A herbarium specimen of
Tabernanthe iboga in a comparative
botanical collection.
Above left and right: During the initiation
riler of the Bwiti cult, the novices ingest
extremely high doses of the Iboga root
in order to attain contact with the an-
cestors during the powerful ritual.
114
feel that their spiritual trip has taken
many hours or even days. The body is
seen as detached: one user reported,
"Here I am, and there is my body going
through its action." Large doses induce
auditory, olfactory, and gustatory syn-
esthesia. Mood may vary greatly from
fear to euphoria.
An Englishman writing on Gabon
mentioned "Eroga" under "fetish plants"
as early as 1819. Describing itas a
"favoritebut violentmedicine," he
undoubtedly saw it powdered and as-
sumed thatitrepresented a charred
fungus. French and Belgian explorers
encountered this remarkable drug and
the cults using it a little over a century
ago. They stated that the drug greatly
increased muscular strength and endur-
ance and that it had aphrodisiac proper-
ties. An early report, in 1864, insisted
that Iboga is not toxic except in high
doses, that "warriors and hunters use it
constantly to keep themselves awake
during night watches.. ." Inthe 1880s,
the Germans metitin Cameroon
(northern Gabon), and in 1898 it was
reported that the root had an "exciting
effect on the nervoussystem so that its
useis highly valued on long, tiring
marches, on lengthycanoe voyages,
and on difficult night watches."
The earliest report of its hallucino-
genic effects dates from 1903, with the
description of the experiences ofan in-
itiate under high dosage of the drug:
"Soon all his sinews stretch out inan
extraordinaryfashion. An epileptic
madness seizes him, during which,un-
conscious, he mouths words which,
when heard by the initiated ones, have
a prophetic meaning and prove that the
fetish has entered him."
Other plantsof reputed narcotic
properties are involved in the Iboga
cults, sometimes used alone, sometimes
as admixtures with Tabernanthe iboga
itself. Cannabis sativa—known as Yarna
or Beyama—may often be smoked fol-
lowing ingestion of small doses of Ibo-
ga. In Gabon, Cannabis resin may on
occasion be eaten with Iboga. Alan, the
euphorbiaceous Aichornea floribz4nda,
is often consumed in large amounts to
help produce the collapse experienced
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 116 ---
in Bwiti initiations; in southern Gabon,
it is mixed with Iboga. Another euphor-
biaceous plant—Ayan-beyem or Elaeo-
phorbiabe taken dur-
ing Bwiti initiations, when Alan is slow
to take effect; the latex is applied di-
rectly to the eyes with a parrot feather,
affecting the optical nerve and inducing
visions.
The Bwiti cult has been growing in
numberofconvertsandinsocial
strength, not waning, in recent decades.
It represents a strong native element in a
changing society being rapidly engulfed
in foreign cultural influences. They con-
sider that the drug and its associated
cults enable them more easily to resist
the vertiginous transition from the indi-
vidualism of traditional tribal life to the
collectivism and loss of identity in the
encroaching Westerncivilization.It
may well offer the strongest single force
against the missionary spread of Chris-
tianity and Islam, since it unifies many
of the once hostile, warring tribes in re-
sistance to European innovations. As
one initiate stated: "Catholicism and
Protestantism is not our religion. I am
riot happy in the mission churches."
The cultural importance of the drug is
everywhere seen. The name Iboga is
used for the whole Bwiti cult; ndzi-
ebolea ("eater of Iboga") means a mem-
ber of the cult; nyiba-eboka signifies the
religion surrounding the narcotic plant.
Iboga in every sense of the term is in-
deed a plant of the gods. It appears to be
here to stay in the native cultures of
west-central Africa.
1./
/
I
115
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 117 ---
In the beginning, the Sun created various
beings to serve as intermediaries between
Him and Earth. He created hallucino-
genic snuff powder so that man could
contact supernatural beings. The Sun
had kept this powder in His navel, but
the Daughter of the Sun found it. Thus
it became available to man—a vegetal
product acquired directly from the gods.
As far back as 1496, an early Spanish
report mentioned that the Taino of His-
paniola inhaled a powder called Cohoba
to communicate with the spirit world. It
was so strong that those who took it lost
consciousness; when the stupefying ac-
tion began to wane, the arms and legs
became loose and the head nodded, and
almost immediately they believed that
they saw the room turn upside-down so
that men were walking with their heads
downward. Mainly because of the dis-
appearance of aboriginal peoples in the
West Indies, this snuff is no longer em-
ployed anywhere in the Antilles.
In1916,ethnobotanicalresearch
established the identity of this Coho-
ba—quite generally until then thought
to have been a very potent kind of To-
bacco snuff—with the hallucinogenic
snuff of the Orinoco called Yopo and
derived from the beansof Anade-
better known in the
literature as Piptaa!enia peregrina. The
center of use of this snuff is and prob-
ably always has been the Orinoco. The
West Indian tribes are thought to have
been, in the main, invaders from north-
ern South America. It is very probable
that the custom of snuffing the drug,as
well as the tree itself, was introduced by
invaders from the Orinoco area.
It is now suspected that Yopo was
used much more widely in earlier peri-
ods. There isevidence that in pre-
Hispanic times, this snuff was used by
Chibchan tribes from the Colombian
Andes east across the Ilanos, or plains,
to the upper Orinoco.
In 1560 a missionary in the Colom-
bian lianos wrote that the Indians along
the Rio Guaviare "are accustomed to
take Yopa and Tobacco, and the former
is a seed or pip of a tree...theybecome
ANADENANTHERA
'-'PEREGRINA
Yopo
BEANS OF THE HEKULA SPIRIT
I—•g-
i
Left: The beans of the Yopo Tree (Ana-
denanthera peregrina) are used by
many Indians as a shamanic snuff
(specimen collected in Guyana).
Right: Baron Alexander von Humboldt
and his co-collector Aimé Bonpland
carefully explored the flora of the Orino-
co River, the frontier between Colombia
and Venezuela, and while there they
encountered the preparation and use of
Yopo snuff in 1801.
116
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 118 ---
Below left:The finely pinnate leaves of
the Yopo tree are important for identit I-
cation, but contain no active properties.
Right: In the open grasslands, or cam-
poe, of the northern Amazon of Brazil,
Anadenanthera grows profusely. The
tree bears long pods with usually six to
twelve seeds, which are the source of
the hallucinogenic snuff.
Below right: Over 125 years ago, the
English explorer Richard Spruce col-
lected on the Orinoco these artifacts
associated with the preparation and
use of Yopo snuff. They are still pre-
served in the museum at the Royal
Botanic Gardens, Kew.
Tobacco...goingout of their minds,
and then the devil speaks to them
Jopa is a tree with small pods like those
of vetches, and the seeds inside are simi-
lar but smaller." Yopo was so important
in pre-Conquest Colombia that Indians
of the highlands, where the tree will not
grow, traded the drug up from the tro-
picallowlands:the Muiscaofthe
Colombian Andes, according to an
early Spanish historian, used the snuff:
"Jop: herb of divination, used by the
mojas or sun-priests in Tunja and Bogo-
tá." The Muisca "will not travel nor
wage war nor do any other thing of im-
portance without learning beforehand
what will be the outcome, or this they
try to ascertain with two herbs which
they consume, called Yop and Osca. .
Yoposnuff may sometimes, as among
the Guahibo, be taken daily as a stimu-
lant. But it is more commonly employed
by payés (shamans) to induce trances
and visions and communicate with the
117
drowsy while the devil, in their dreams,
shows them all the vanities and corrup-
tions he wishes them to see and which
they take to be true revelations in which
they believe, even if told they will die.
This habit of taking Yopa and Tobacco
is general in the New Kingdom." An-
other chronicler wrote in 1599: "They
chew Hayo or Coca and Jopa and
The Chemistry of Yopo
The active principles of Anadenanthera peregrina belong to both open-
chained and ringed tryptamine derivatives and, therefore, to the important
class of iridole alkaloids. Tryptamine is also the basic compound of the amino
acid tryptophane, widely distributed in the Animal Kingdom. Dimethyltrypta-
mine (DMT) and 5-hydroxydimethyltryptamine (bufotenine) are representa-
tives of the open-chained Anadenanthera tryptamines. Bufotenine has also
been found in the skin secretion of a toad (Bufo sp.)—hence its name. Ringed
tryptamine derivatives found in Anadenanthera are 2-methyl- and 1 ,2-di-
methyl-6-methoxytetrahydro-13-carboline.
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 119 ---
Photo sequence pages 118—19:
Undoubtedly the most intenseof
Yopo snuff prepared from Anade-
nanthera peregrina is found among the
various groups of Waikh living in
southernmost Venezuela and adjacent
parts of northernmost Brazil. These
peoples consume enormous amounts
of the hallucinogenic powder, blowing it
forcefully into the nostrils through long
tubes made from the stems of
maranthaceous plants.
Before snuffing Yopo, the Waiká sha-
mans gather and chant, invoking the
Hekula spirits with whom they will be
communicating during the ensuing
intoxication.
The snuff acts rapidly, causing first a
profuse flow of mucus from the nasal
passages and occasionally a notable
quivering of the muscles, especially in
the arms, and a contorted expression
on the face.
This period quickly gives way to one
in which the shamans begin to prance,
gesticulating and shrieking violently,
calling on the Hekula.
The expenditure of energy lasts from
half an hour to an hour; eventually, fully
spent, they fall into a trancelike stupor,
during which visions are experienced.
118
Hekula spirits; to prophesy or divine; to
protect the tribe against epidemics of
sickness; to make hunters and even their
dogs more alert. There has been a long
and complicated confusion between the
hallucinogenicsnuffpreparedfrom
Anadenanthera and that from Virola
and other plants. Consequently, the nu-
merous distribution maps in anthropo-
logicalliteratureshowing immense
areas of South American using Anade—
nanthera-derived snuff must be used
with due caution.
In 1741, the Jesuit missionary Gumil-
Ia, who wrote extensively on the geo-
graphy of the Orinoco, described the
use of Yopo by the Otomac: "They have
another abominable habit of intoxicat-
ing themselves through the nostrils with
certain malignant powders which they
call Yupa which quite takes away their
reason, and they will furiously take up
arms. .." Followinga description of the
preparation of the snuff and a custom of
adding lime from snail shells, he re-
ported that "before a battle, they would
throw themselves into a frenzy with
Yupa, wound themselves and, full of
blood and rage, go forth to battle like
rabid jaguars."
The first scientific report of Yopo was
made by the explorer Baron von Hum-
boldt, who botanically identified the
source and reported that the Maypure
Indians of the Orinoco, where he wit-
nessed the preparation of the drug in
Drawings right (pages 118—19):
Countless artifacts related to the ritual
use of snuff have been discovered in
archaeological digs in the Caribbean
and in South America (for example,
Haiti, Costa Rica, Colombia, and
Brazil).
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 120 ---
1801, broke the long pods, moistened
them, and allowed them to ferment;
when they turned black, the softened
beans were kneaded into cakes with cas-
sava flour and lime from snails. These
cakes were crushedto• make snuff.
Humboldt, quite erroneously, believed
that "it is not to be believed that the
pods are the chief cause of the. ..effects
of the snuff...Theseeffects are due to
the freshly calcined lime."
Later, Spruce offered an extremely
detailed report on the preparation and
use of Yopo among the Guahibo of the
Orinoco. He collected a complete set of
ethnographic material connected with
the substance, and seeds that he col-
lected for chemical study in 1851 were
chemically analyzed only in 1977.
"A wandering horde of Guahibo In-
dians... wasencamped on the savannas
of Maypures, and on a visit to their
camp I saw an old man grinding Niopo
seeds, and purchased of him his appara-
tus for making and taking the snuff..
The seeds, being first roasted, are pow-
dered on a wooden platter. ..Itis held
on the knees by a broad thin handle,
which is grasped in the left hand, while
the fingers of thç right hold a small spa-
tula or pestle...withwhich the seeds
are crushed ...Thesnuff is kept in a
mull made of a bit of the leg-bone of
the jaguar...Fortaking the snuff, they
use an apparatus made of the leg bones
of herons or other long-shanked birds
put together in the shape of the letter Y
A contemporary observer described
the effects of Yopo snuffing as follows:
"His eyes started from his head, his
mouth contracted, his limbs trembled.
It was fearful to see him. He was ob-
liged to sit down or he would have fall-
en. He was drunk but only for about
five minutes; he was then gayer."
There is appreciable variation from
tribe to tribe and from one area to an-
other in the preparation of Yopo. The
seeds are usually toasted and pulver-
ized. Lime from snails or the ashes of
certain plants are normally added, but
some Indians use the snuff without this
alkaline admixture. It appears that other
plant admixtures are never employed
with Anadenanthera snuff.
Anadenanthera peregrina occurs na-
turally and sometimes apparently culti-
vated in the plains or grassland areas of
the Orinoco basin of Colombia and Ve-
nezuela, in light forests in southern
British Guyana, and in the Rio Branco
area of the northern Amazonia of Bra-
zil. It may occur also in isolated savanna
areas in the Rio Medeira region. When it
is found elsewhere, it may probably
have been introduced by Indians. There
is evidence that, a century ago, it was
cultivated in more localities outside of
its natural range than at present.
ee_e Ge
eee
o0><
a
00
00
119
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 121 ---
A ANADENANTHERA
Cebfl
SEEDS OF CIVILIZATION
Above from left to right: The Mataco use
a decoction of fresh (still green) Cebit
pods as a head wash for headaches.
Cebit, the "Seeds of Civilization"
(seeds of the Anadenanthera colubri-
na). Bufotenine is the main active con-
stituent.
The ripe seed pods of the Cebit tree
(Anadenanthera colubrina var. cebil)
collect underneath the leaf canopy.
The knotty bark of the Argentinian Cebit
tree (Anadenanthera colubrina bvar.
cebil.
Page 121:The Cebit tree (Anade-
nanthera colubrina var. cebil) with ripe
seed pods.
In the Atacama Desert of northern
Chile there is an oasis called San Pedro
de Atacama. The art historian andar-
chaeologist C. Manuel Torres excavated
and studied over six hundred prehisto-
ric graves there. The results were aston-
ishing. Nearly every interredperson
was accompanied for the last journey
by numerous tools dedicated to the ri-
tual sniffing of Cebli.
The name CebIl designatesa tree
(Anadenantheraas well as
its seeds, which can induce a strongpsy-
choactive effect.
In the Puna region of northwest Ar-
gentinaistheoldestarchaeological
proof of the ritual or shamanicuse of
CebIl. They have been smoked there
for over 4,500years.Numerous ceramic
pipes have been discovered in certain
caves of this region. Occasionally the
bowls of the pipe still contain Cebil
seeds. The psychoactive use seems in
particular to have influenced the culture
of Tiahuanaco (literally, "City of the
Gods"). The Tiahuanaco culture is the
"mother" of Andean civilizations. All
subsequent high cultures of the region
have been influenced by it.
Many examples of pre-Columbian
snuff paraphernalia (snuff tablets, snuff
pipes) displaying the iconography of the
Tiahuanaco culture have been found in
Puna and the Atacama Desert. Theyap-
pear to be significantly inspired by the
visions of the CebIl seeds.
The use of CebIl as a snuff powder in
the southern Andean regionisfirst
mentioned in1580 by the Spanish
chronicler Cristobal de Albornoz in his
work Relacion. A psychoactive sub-
stance cited in sources from colonial
times called Vilica is possibly identical
to CebIl.
The shamans of the Wichi (Mataco
Indians) of northwest Argentina still
use a snuff made of CebIl today. The
shamans of the Mataco smoke the
dried or roasted seeds, preferably ina
pipe or rolled in a cigarette. The CebIl
seeds are for them a means toenter
and influence another reality. CebIl is,
in a manner of speaking, a gateway to
a visionary world; this is how the sha-
man Fortunato RuIz expresses it. He
smokes the seeds with tobacco and Ar-
omo—just ashis ancestors did five
thousand years ago. This makes the
The Chemistry of Anadenanthera colubrIna
Some varietiesofCebli seed contain exclusively bufotenin (C12H160N2)as
thepsychoactive ingredient. Intestsofotherseeds, 5-MeO-MMT, DM1,DMT-
N-oxide, bufotenin, and5-OH-DMT-N-oxidewerefound. Old testsofthe
seedscontained 15 mg/g of bufotenin.
In the dried seeds from the trees of northeast Argentina (Salta),there has
been found mostly bufotenin (more than 4%), anda related substance (per-
haps serotonin), but otherwiseno other tryptamines or alkaloids. In tests of
other seeds taken from the garden ofa Mataco shaman, 12% bufotenin con-
tent was found. The ripe pods of the fruit alsocontain some bufotenin.
120
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 122 ---
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 123 ---
northwest of Argentina the place with
the longest uninterrupted ritualistic or
shamanic useof psychoactivesub-
stances in the world.
As some Matacos have converted to
Christianity in recent years, they have
come to identify CebIl with the biblical
Tree of Knowledge. But they do not see
CebIl as a "forbidden fruit"; rather, they
see it as the fruit of a holy tree, which is
used by shamans for healing.
The hallucinations triggered by CebIl
seem to have been very influential in
the iconography of the so-called Tia-
huanaco Style. The iconography of ar-
tist ChavIn de Huantar is full of similar
motifs: intertwined snakes coming out
of the head of the oracle god are clearly
Cebil hallucinations.
The vision-inducing effects of CebIl
snuff last for roughly twenty minutes
andincludestronghallucinations,
which are often only black and white,
and seldom in color. They are not (or
are only very rarely) geometric in nat-
ure, but are strongly flowing and "de-
centralized." They are very reminiscent
of the images produced by the pre-
Columbian Tiahuanaco culture.
CebIl seeds also have psychoactive ef-
fects if they are smoked. The effects are
very strong for about thirty minutes and
then fade away. The effects begin with a
feeling of heaviness in the body. After
five to ten minutes, visual hallucinations
begin with the eyes closed, often featur-
ing worm- and snakelike images flowing
into one another. Sometimes geometric,
symmetrical, or crystallographic hallu-
cinations can occur, but very seldom are
there any strong visions of a realistic
nature (such as the experience of flying,
traveling in another world, transforming
into an animal, contact with helping
spirits, and so on).
Below:The German artist Nana Nauwald de-
picted her experience with Cebli seeds in a
painting in 1996. The picture bears the title
"Nothing is separate from me" and shows the
typical "worm-like" visions.
Right: Recently it was reported that the Mataco
in northern Argentina smoke and sniff Anade-
nanthera colubrina. With this, the Spaniards'
assumption, that the snuffs CebIl and VilIca are
made from this plant, is confirmed.
What Was Vilica?
In the colonial literature of New Spain, there are. numerous references to the
psychoactive use of certain seeds or fruits that were known variously as
Huilca, Huillca, Vilca, Vilcas, Vilica, Wil'ka, Willca, or Wilika. The ethnohistori-
cally documented vu/ca (fruit) is today known as the seed of Anadenanthera
colubrina. Villca was of great ritual and religious significance in Peru in the
time before the arrival of the Spaniards, and was known to the Incan high
priests and soothsayers (umu) as Viica or V/I/ca camayo. A holy Indian relic
(huaca) was known as Villca or Vi/cacona and an especially holy mountain is
known as Villca Coto. On the peak of Villca Coto, it is said that a couple of
humans saved themselves during the primeval deluge.
Vilica seeds had a ceremonial significance for the Incas as a psychoactive
subsitute for beer. The "juice" of Villca was added to a fermented corn bev-
erage and taken by the soothsayer, who would then be able to look into the
future.
Villca was also the name for enemas, which were used for medicinal or
shamanic purposes.
122
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 124 ---
Far left: Pre-Columbian snuff tools from
a grave at San Pedro de Atacama.
Left: Pre-Columbian snuff vessel made
from a carved bone (San Pedro de
Atacama, Chile).
Above: The northwest Argentinian
region of Puna is the area in which the
longest continued use of visionary and
shamanic plants can be proved. In this
region the CebIl seeds have been
smoked or sniffed for 4,500 years for
healing ceremonies.
Left: The painting (oil on canvas, 1996)
by the Columbian-American artist
Donna Torres shows the study of an
ethnobotaniSt who is researching
Anadenanthera colubrina.
123
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 125 ---
BANISTERIOPSIS
Ayahuasca
PSYCHOTRIA
Chacruna
60PEGANUM
Syrian Rue
TETRAFTERIS
THE MAGIC DRINK
OF THE AMAZON
124
There is a magic intoxicant in northwes-
ternmost South America that the In-
dians believe can free the soui from
corporeal confinement, allowing it to
wander free and return to the bodyat
will. The soul, thus untrammeled, liber-
atesits owner from the realitiesof
everyday life and introduces him to
wondrous realms of what he considers
reality and permits him to communicate
with his ancestors. The Quechuaterm
for this inebriating drink—Ayahuasca
("vine of the soul")—refers to this free-
ing of the spirit. The plants involvedare
truly plants of the gods, for theirpower
is laid to supernatural forces residing in
their tissues, and theywere divine gifts
to the earliest Indians on earth.
Ayahuasca has many nativenames:
Caapi,Dápa,Mihi,Kahf,Natema,
Pindé, Yajé. The drink, employed for
prophecy, divination, sorcery, and med-
ical purposes, is so deeply rooted inna-
tive mythology and philosophy that
there can be no doubt of itsgreat age as
a part of aboriginal life.
Two closely related species of the
malpighiaceous genus Banisteriopsis—
B. caapi and B. inebrians—are the most
important plants used in preparing Aya-
huasca. But other speciesare apparently
used locally on occasion: B. quitensis;
Mascagnia glandulifera, M. psilophylla
var. antifebrilis; Tetrapteris rnethystica
and T mucronata. All of these plants
are large forest lianas of the same family.
Banisteriopsis caapi and B. inebriansare
frequently cultivated in orderto have a
supply close at hand foruse.
Many plants of diverse familiesare of-
ten added to the basic drink to alter the
intoxicatingeffects. The most com-
monly used admixturesare leaves of
Dzplopterys cabrerana and of the rubiac-
eous Psychotria carthaginensis or P vir-
idis. Other known psychoactive plants,
such as Brugmansia suaveolens, Brun-
felsia chiricaspi, and B. grandij7ora,may
also be added. Among themany plants
employedareTobacco;Malouetia
tamaquarina and a species of Tabernae-
montana of the Apocynaceae; the acan-
thaceousTeliostachya lanceolatavar.
c-rispa or Toe negra; Calathea veitchiana
of the Maranthaceae; the amaranthac-
eous Alternanthera lehmannii and a spe-
cies of Iresine; several ferns including
Lygodium venustum and Lomariopsis
japurensis; Pbrygylanthus eugenioicles
of the Misteltoe family; the American
Basil Ocirnum micra nthum;a species of
the sedge genus Cyperus; several cacti
including species of Opuntia and Epi-
piJylluni;and members of the families
Clusiaceae and Guttiferae.
The natives often have specialnames
for diverse "kinds" of Ayahuasca, al-
though the botanist frequently finds
them all representative of thesame spe-
cies. It is usually difficult to understand
the aboriginal method of classification;
some may be age forms; others may come
from different parts of the liana; still
others may be ecological forms growing
under varying conditions of soil, shade,
moisture, and so on. The natives assert
that these "kinds" have a variety of ef-
fects, and it is conceivable that theymay
actually have different chemicalcompo-
sitions. This possibility is one of the least
investigated yet most significant aspects
in the study of Ayahuasca.
Among the Tukano of the Colombia
Vaupés, for example, six "kinds" of
Ayahuasca or Kahi are recognized. Bo-
tanical identification has notyet been
possible in all cases, but the "kinds"
have definite native names. Kahi-riáma,
the strongest, produces auditory hallu-
cinations and announces future events.
It is said to cause death if improperly
employed. The second strongest, Me-
né-kahI-má, reputedly causes visions of
green snakes. The bark is used, and it is
also said to cause death, unlesscau-
tiously taken. These two "kinds"may
not belong to Banisteriopsis or even to
the family Malpighiaceae.
The third in strength is called Suána-
KahI-má ("KahI of the red jaguar"),
producingvisionsinred.KahI-vaI
Bucura-rijomá ("KahI of the monkey
head") causes monkeys to hallucinate
and howl. The weakest of the hallucino-
genic "kinds" of KahI or
has little effect but is used in the drink
to help theAll of these
"kinds" are referable probably to Banis-
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 126 ---
V
Top: The Chacruna shrub (Psychotria
viridis) is the second most important
ingredient in the Ayahuasca drink.
Above right: The shoots of the Aya-
huasca liana.
Left: A Shipibo Indian with an
Ayahuasca hana that he has cultivated
in his garden.
Page 124 above: The Ayahuasca liana
(Banisteriopsis caapi) is a powerful and
vigorously growing tropical vine.
Page 124 below: The pieces of
branch are the base of the Ayahuasca
preparation.
125
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 127 ---
"Ayahuasca, medicine, enrapture me fully!
Help me by opening your beautiful world to me!
You also are created by the god who created man!
Reveal to me completely your medicine worlds. I shall heal the sick bodies:
These sick children and this sick woman shall I heal by making everything good!"
—Ayahuasca Song of the Shipibo
Above left: The British plant explorer
Spruce collected the first botanical spe-
cimens of Banisteriopsis caapiin 1851.
He sent material from the same plant for
chemical analysis. The material was lo-
cated in the Museum at the Royal Bota-
nic Gardens at Kew in 1969.
Above right: Among the Kofán of Co-
lombia and Ecuador, special medicine
men prepare Curare and Yajé. There is
an association between these two plant
products, and Yajé is taken before hunt-
ing in the belief that the visions will re-
veal the hiding places of the animals to
besought.
Far right: To make Ayahuasca or Caapi,
the freshly stripped bark must be vigor-
ously pounded before being boiled in
water or kneaded thoroughly in cold
water.
Page 127 left: The numerous Tukanoan
tribes of the Vaupés River basin in Co-
lombia and Brazil practice a male-
oriented ancestor ceremony. The
Yurupari dance, in which Caapi is a
major element, enables the participants
to communicate with spirits of the dead.
Page 127 right: Line dancing with intri-
cate steps and gourd rattles accompa-
nying chants is typical of Barasana
ceremonies in which Caapi is taken,
Piraparanb River.
126
teriopsis caapi. KahI-somomá or KahI-
uco ("KahI that makes you vomit"), a
shrub, the leaves of which are added to
the drink, an emetic agent, is undoubt-
edlycabrerana, the same
plant known among the western Tu-
kanoan Siona of the Colombian Putu-
mayo as Oco-yajé.
Although not so famous as Peyote or
the sacred Mexican mushrooms, Aya-
huasca has received popular attention
because of news articles extolling the
so-called telepathic powers of the drink.
In fact, in the chemical investigation of
Banisteriopsis, the first alkaloid isolated
was named telepathine.
The hallucinogen may be prepared in
diverse ways. Usually, bark is scraped
from freshly harvested pieces of the
stem. In the western areas, the bark is
boiled for several hours, and the bitter,
thick liquid is taken in small doses. In
other localities, the bark is pulverized
and then kneaded in cold water; much
larger doses must be taken, since it is
less concentrated.
The effects of the drink vary accord-
ing to the method of preparation, the
setting in which it is taken, the amount
ingested, the number and kinds of ad-
mixtures, and the purposes for which it
is used, as well as the ceremonial control
exercised by the shaman.
Ingestion of Ayahuasca usually in-
duces nausea, dizziness, vomiting, and
leads to either a euphoric or an aggressive
state. Frequently the Indian sees over-
powering attacks of huge snakes or ja-
guars. These animals often humiliate him
because he is a mere man. The repetitive-
ness with which snakes and jaguars occur
in Ayahuasca visions has intrigued psy-
chologists. It is understandable that these
animals play such a role, since they are the
only beings respected and feared by the
Indians of the tropical forest; because of
their power and stealth, they have as-
sumed a place of primacy in aboriginal
religious beliefs. In many tribes, the sha-
man becomes a feline during the intoxica-
tion, exercising his powers as a wild cat.
Yekwana medicine men mimic the roars
of jaguars. Tukano Ayahuasca-takers
may experience nightmares of jaguar jaws
swallowing them or huge snakes ap-
proaching and coiling about their bodies.
Snakes in bright colors climb up and
down the house posts. Shamans of the
Conibo-Shipibotribeacquiregreat
snakes as personal possessions to defend
themselves in supernatural battles against
other powerful shamans.
The drug may be the shaman's tool to
diagnose illness or to ward off impend-
ing disaster, to guess the wiles of an en-
emy, to prophesy the future. But it is
more than the shaman's tool. It enters
into almost all aspects of the life of the
people who use it, to an extent equaled
by hardly any other hallucinogen. Par-
takers, shamans or not, see all the gods,
the first human beings, and animals, and
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 128 ---
come to understand the establishment
of their social order.
Ayahuasca is, above all, a medicine—
the great medicine. The Ayahuasca lea-
der among the Campa of Peru is a reli-
gious practitioner who, following a
strict apprenticeship, maintains and in-
creases his shamanistic power through
the use of Tobacco and Ayahuasca.
The Campa shaman under Ayahuasca
acquires an eerie, distant voice and a
quivering jaw that indicates the arrival
of good spirits who, splendidly clad,
sing and dance before him; the sha-
man's singing is merely his own voice
echoing their song. During the singing,
his soul may travel far and wide—a
phenomenon not interfering with per-
formance of the ceremony nor with
the shaman's ability to communicate
the wishes of the spirits to participants.
Among the Tukano, the partaker of
the drug feels himself pulled along by
powerful winds that the leading shaman
explains as a trip to the Milky Way, the
first stop on the way to heaven. Simi-
larly, the Ecuadorean Zaparo experience
a sensation of being lifted into the air.
The souls of Peruvian Conibo-Shipibo
shamans fly about in the form of a bird;
or shamans may travel in a supernatural
canoe manned by demons to reconquer
lost or stolen souls.
The effects of the drink are greatly al-
tered when leaves of Diploterys cabrer-
ana or of Psychotria are added. The
Banisteriopsis spp.
Koch/a scoparia (L.) SCHRAD.
Passiflora involucrata
Passiflora spp.
Peganum harmala L.
Strychnos usambarensis GILG
Tribulus terrestris L.
Harmine
Harmine, Harmane
13-Carboline
Harmine, Harmane, etc.
Harmine, Tetrahydroharmine,
Dihydroharmaline, Harmane, Isohar-
mine, Tetrahydroharmol, Harmalol,
Harmol, Norharmine,
Harmaline
Harmane
Harmine, among others
The Chemistry of Ayahuasca
In the belief that they were new discoveries, the first alkaloids isolated from
Banisteriopsis were called telepathine and banisterine. Further chemical in-
vestigations revealed that these preparations were identical with the alkaloid
harmine, previously isolated from Syrian Rue, Peganumharmala.Further-
more, the secondary alkaloids of Paganum, harmaline and tetrahydrohar-
mine, also occur in Banisteriopsis. The active principles are indole alkaloids
found in several other hallucinogenic plants.
The drink made from Ayahuasca is a unique pharmacological combination
of Banisteriopsis caapi, a lana that contains harmaline, and Chacruna (Psy-
chotria viridia) leaves, which contain DMT. Harmaline is an MAO inhibitor; it
reduces the body's production and distribution of monoamine oxidase (MAO).
MAO normally breaks down the vision-inducing ingredient DMT before it can
cross the blood-brain barrier into the central nervous system. Only with this
combination of ingredients can the drink have its consciousness-expanding
effects and trigger visions.
Plants Containing the MAO-Inhibiting f3-Carboline Alkaloids:
127
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 129 ---
"Practically all decorative
elements... aresaid.
tobe derived from
hallucinatory imagery.
The most outstanding
examples are the paintings
executed on the front walls of
the malocas...sometimes.
representing the Lord of
Game Animals..
Whenasked about these
paintings, the Indians simply
reply: 'This is whatwe see
when we drink Yajé..
—G.Reichej-Dolmatoff
128
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 130 ---
tryptamines in these additives are be-
lieved to be inactive when taken orally,
unless monoamine oxidase inhibitors
are present. The harmine and its deriva-
tives in B.caapiarid B.inebriansare in-
hibitors of this kind, potentiating the
tryptamines. Both types of alkaloids,
however, are hallucinogenic.
Length and vividness of the visual hal-
lucinations are notably enhanced when
these additives are present. Whereas
visions with the basic drink are seen
usually in blue, purple, or gray, those
induced when the tryptaminic additives
are used may be brightly colored in reds
and yellows.
The Ayahuasca intoxication may be a
very intense experience with visions of
light setting in with the eyes closed after
a period of giddiness, nervousness, pro-
fuse sweating, and sometimes nausea. A
period of lassitude initiates the play of
colors—at first white, then mainly a hazy,
smoky blue that later increases in inten-
sity;eventually sleep,interrupted by
dreams and occasional feverishness, takes
over. Serious diarrhea, which continues
after the intoxication, is the uncomforta-
ble effect most frequently experienced.
With the tryptaminic additives, many of
these effects are intensified, but trembling
and convulsive shaking, mydriasis, and
increase of pulse rate are also noted.
Frequently, a show of recklessness, some-
times even aggressiveness, marks ad-
vanced states of the inebriation.
The famous YuruparI ceremony of the
Tukanoans is an ancestor-communication
ritual, the basis of a man's tribal society
and an adolescent male initiation rite. Its
sacred bark trumpet, which calls the Yur-
uparI spirit, is taboo to the sight of wo-
men; it symbolizes the forces to whom
the ceremony is holy, favorably influen-
cing fertility spirits, effecting cures of pre-
valent illnesses, and improving the male
prestige and power over women. The
YuruparI ceremony is now little practiced.
One of the most detailed reports of a re-
cent dance describes it as follows:
"A deep booming of drums from
within the maloca heralded the app ear-
ance of the mystic YuruparI horns. With
only very slight urging from one of the
older men, all females from babes in arms
to withered, toothless hags betook them-
selves to the fringing forest, to hear only
from afar the deep, mysterious notes of
the trumpets, sight of which is believed
to spell certain death for any woman
Payés shamans and older men are not
above aiding the workings of the mys-
tery by the judicious administration of
poison to any overcurious female.
"Four pairs of horns had been taken
from places of concealment, and the
players now ranged themselves in a
rough semi-circle, producing the first
deep, lugubrious notes
"Many of the older men had mean-
while opened their tangatara boxes of
ceremonial feathers and were selecting
with great care brilliant feather ruffs,
which were bound to the mid-section
of the longer horns.
"Four oldsters, with perfect rhythm
and dramatic timing, paraded through
the maloca, blowing the newly decorated
horns, advancing and retreating with
short dancing steps. At intervals, a couple
danced out of the door, their horns raised
high, and returned after a brief turn, the
expanding and contracting feather ruffs
producing a beautiful burst of translu-
cent color against the stronger light.
Younger men were beginning the first of
the savage whippings, and the master of
ceremonies appeared with the red, cur-
iously• shaped clay jar containing the
powerful narcotic drink called Caapi.
The thick, brown, bitter liquid was
served in pairs of tiny round gourds;
many drinkers promptly vomited...
"Whipping proceeded by pairs. The
first lashes were applied to the legs and
ankles, the whip flung far back in a de-
liberately calculated dramatic gesture;
the blows resounded like pistol shots.
Places were immediately exchanged.
Soon the whips were being freely ap-
plied, and all the younger men were
laced with bloody welts on all parts of
the body. Tiny lads not more than six or
seven years old would catch up the
abandoned whips,merrilyimitating
their elders. Gradually the volume of
sound diminished, until only two lone
performers remained, enchanted with
Top: Many species of Passion flower
(Passiflora spp.) contain the active sub-
stances harmine and harmaline.
Above right: Syrian Rue (Peganum
harmala) with fruit capsules.
Page 128 above: The mural in the
Cuzco Airport (Peru) reveals the
visionary world of Ayahuasca.
Page 128 below: Shipibo Indians in
traditional costumes decorated with
Ayahuasca patterns (Yarinacocha,
Peru).
129
3.
p.
.'',.'
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 131 ---
Left: A beer mug of the Conibo-Shipibo
Indians that has been completely
painted with the Ayahuasca pattern.
Right: Shipibo women communally
paint a ceramic with Ayahuasca pat-
terns.
130
their art, bowing, advancing, and re-
treating, with great delicacy and grace
in the center of the maloca. About a
dozen of the older men were outfitting
themselves with their finest diadems of
resplendent guacamayo feathers,tall,
feathery egret plumes, oval pieces of
the russet skin of the howler monkey,
armadillo-hide disks, prized loops of
monkey-hair cord, precious quartzite
cylinders, and jaguar-tooth belts. Be-
decked with these triumphs of savage
art, the men formed a swaying, dancing
semi-circle, each with his right hand
resting on his neighbor's shoulder, all
shifting and stamping in slow unison.
Leading the group was the ancient payé,
blowing Tobacco smoke in benediction
on his companions from the huge cigar
in its engraved ceremonial fork, while
his long, polished rattle-lance vibrated
constantly. The familiar, dignified Ca-
chirI ceremonial chant was intoned by
the group; their deep voices rose and
fell,mingling withthemysterious
booming tones of the YuruparI horns."
The Tukano believe that when, at the
time of creation, humans arrived to po-
pulate the Vaupés region, many extraor-
dinary happenings took place. People
had to endure hardship before settling
the new regions. Hideous snakes and
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 132 ---
dangerous fish lived in the rivers; there
were spirits with cannibalistic procliv-
ities; and the Tukano received in trepida-
tion the basic elements of their culture.
There lived among these early Tukano
a woman—the first woman of crea-
tion—who "drowned" men in visions.
Tukanoans believe that during coitus, a
man "drowns"—the equivalent of see-
ing visions. The first woman found
the sensual, to a mystical union with the
mythic era, the intrauterine stage, is the
ultimate goal, attained by a mere hand-
ful but coveted by all."
All or much of Indian art, it has been
proposed, is based on visionary experi-
ence. Colors, similarly, are symbolically
significant: yellow or off-white has a
seminal concept, indicating solar fertili-
zation; red—color of the uterus, fire,
Above: Many species of the genus Ba-
nisteriopsis, like this B. muricata from
southern Mexico, are rich in MAO-
inhibitingBecause of this,
they are particularly suited in the
preparation of Ayahuasca analogs.
herself with child. The Sun-father had
impregnated her through the eye. She
gave birth to a child who became Caapi,
the narcotic plant. The child was born
during a brilliant flash of light. The wo-
man—Yajé-----cut the umbilical cord and,
rubbing the child with magical plants,
shaped its body. The Caapi-child lived
to be an old man zealously guarding his
hallucinogenic powers. From this aged
child, owner of Caapi or the sexual act,
the Tukanoan men received semen. For
the Indians, wrote Gerardo Reichel-
Dolmatoff, "the hallucinatory experi-
ence is essentially a sexual one ...to
make it sublime, to pass from the erotic,
heat—symbolizesfemalefecundity;
blue represents thought through To-
bacco smoke. These colors accompany
Ayahuasca intoxications and have pre-
cise interpretations. Many of the com-
plicated rock engravings in the river
valleysoftheVaupésregionare
undoubtedly based upon drugex-
periences.Likewise,the stereotyped
paintings on the bark wall of Tukanoan
communal housesrepresentthemes
from Ayahuasca hallucinations.
Pictures and decorations on pots,
houses, basketry, and other household
objectsfallinto two categories: ab-
stractdesign and figurativemotifs.
Above left: A Shipibo woman paints
a piece of fabric with her traditional
Ayahuasca pattern.
Above right: The jungle pharmacy of the
Shipibo Indians. Countless medicinal
plants are taken with Ayahuasca, which
strengthen the effects.
131
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 133 ---
"The caji plants
(Ayahuasca) reveal them-
selves to the experiencer,
it grows, becomes green,
blooms, and ultimately
vanishes. The moment of
the blossoming is valued
as the apex
of the experience."
—Florian Deltgen (1993)
Above: A Barasana Indian traces in
sand near his maloca patterns seen
during the course of Caapi intoxication.
It has been suggested that many of the
design motifs induced by Caapi are, on
the one hand, culture-bound and, on the
other hand, controlled by specific bio-
chemical effects of the active principles
in the plant.
132
The Indians know the difference be-
tween the two and say that it is due to
Caapi intoxication. "Someone watching
a man at work or finding a drawing
would say: 'This is what one sees after
three cups of Yajé,' occasionally speci-
fying the kind of plant that had been
used and thus giving an indication of
the nature of the narcotic effects they
attributedtodifferent concoctions,"
speculated G. Reichel-Dolmatoff.
It would seem that such an important
drug would have attracted the attention
of Europeans at a very early date. Such
was not the case. In 1851, however, the
English botanist Spruce, who was col-
lecting among Tukanoan tribes in the
Rio Vaupés region of Brazil, met with
Caapi and sent material for chemical
study to England. Three years later, he
observed Caapi use again among the
GuahiboIndiansalongtheupper
Orinoco. Later, he encountered Aya-
huasca among the Zaparo of Ecuador
and identified it as the same hallucino-
gen as Caapi.
"In the course of the night," Spruce
wrote of Caapi, "the young men par-
took of Caapi five or six times, in the
intervals between the dances; but only
a few of them at a time, and a very few
drank of it twice. The cup-bearer—who
must be a man, for no woman can touch
or taste Caapi—starts at a short run
from the opposite end of the house,
with a small calabash containing about
a teacupful of Caapi in each hand, mut-
tering 'Mo-mo-mo-mo-mo' as heruns,
and gradually sinking down until at last
his chin nearly touches his knees, when
he reaches out one of his cups to the
man who stands ready to receive it
In two minutes or less after drinking it,
the effects begin to be apparent. The
dian turns deadly pale, trembles in
every limb, and horror is in his aspect.
Suddenly contrary symptoms succeed;
he bursts into perspiration andseems
possessed with recklessfury,seizes
whatever arms areat hand...and
rushes to the door, while he inflicts vio-
lent blows on the ground and door-
posts, calling out all the while: 'Thus
would I do to mine enemy [naming
him by name] were this he!' In about
ten minutes, the excitement has passed
off, and the Indian grows calm butap-
pears exhausted."
Since Spruce's time, this drug has
been mentioned often by many travelers
and explorers, but little has been accom-
plished until recently.. In fact, it was not
until 1969 that, chemical analysis of
Spruce's material, collected for such ex-
amination in 1851, was carried out.
Much remains to be learned about
Ayahuasca, Caapi, Yajé. There is little
timebeforeincreasingacculturation
and even extinction of whole tribes will
make itforever impossible to learn
about these age-old beliefs anduses.
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 134 ---
Left: This beautiful engraving on a gran-
ite rock at Nyl on the lower Piraparaná
River in Colombia is obviously ancient.
The rapids at this point on the river are
at the earth's equator, a zone vertically
related to the rising and setting constel-
lations. It has been suggested that this
turbulent area of the river was the place
where the Sun Father married Earth
Mpther to create the first Tukanoans.
The Indians interpret the triangular face
as a vagina and the stylized human
figure as a winged phallus.
Above: The talented Peruvian artist
Yando, the son of an Ayahuasquero
from Pucallpa, drew this Ayahuasca vi-
sion. Notice that the complexities of the
hallucinations are treated in an imagery
in which microscopic and macroscopic
dimensions are skillfully blended.
133
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 135 ---
Rig/il. hungcultivated Chacruna
(Psyc/ii'!ria viridis).
A selection of plants used in the preparation of the Ayahuasca drinkto give it its desired
healing powers or specific qualities:
Ayahuma
Batsikawa
Cabalonga
Catahua
Cat's claw
Chiricaspi
Cuchura-caspi
Cumala
Guatillo
Guayusa
Hiporuru
Kana
Kapok tree
Lupuna
Pfaffia
Pichana
Pin pin
Pulma
Rami
Remo caspi
Sanango
Sucuba
Tobacco
Euphorbia sp.
Capsicum frutescens
Erythrina spp.
Brugmansia spp.
Couroupita guianensis
Psychotria sp.
Thevetia sp.
Hura crepitans
Uncaria tomentosa
Brunfelsia spp.
Malouetia tamaquarina
Virola spp.
Iochroma fuchsioides
flex guayusa
Aichornea castanaefolia
Sabicea amazonensis
Ce/ba pentandra
Chorisia insignis
Pfaffia iresinoides
Ocimum micranthum
Cyperus sp.
Calathea veitchiana
Lygodium venustum
Pitheceiobjum /aetum
Tabernaemontana sananho
Himatanthus sucuuba
Nicotiana rustica
for better singing
tonic
purgative
to treat delusions,
illnesses caused by magic arrows
(chonteado),
and enchantment
strengthens the body
for cooling and reduction of visions
protects against spirits
purgative
strengthens;
used to treat allergies,
kidney problems, stomach ulcer,
venereal disease
for fever, rheumatism, and arthritis
to enable a better diagnosis
strengthens the vision
strengthens the vision
for purification and treatment
of vomiting
to treat diarrhea
"sweetens" the Ayahuasca drink
diarrhea, intestinal problems
to treat intestinal problems
sexual weakness
fever
fright; promotes spiritual
development; for abortions
to stimulate visions
to strengthen the Ayahuasca drink
strengthens the Ayahuasca drink
poor memory;
for spiritual development;
arthritis, rheumatism
to extract magic arrows
for poisoning
strengthens the vision
Ayahuasca Ingredients
Ai curo
AjI
Amacisa
Angel's Trumpet
Ahiove:. Farmers toii;jcco (Nicotiana
,n,lica)isone of tin most important
plants inAmerica.
/ IThe fruit of;pecies of Theve-
tocalledCabalong,,blancais added to
,.vthuasca to protoct lie drinker from
licious spirits.
ToeIpomoea carnea
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 136 ---
1: The Chiricaspi bush (Brunfelsia
grand/flora spp. schultesii) is an impor-
tant shaman plant in the northern
regions of South America.
2: Cat's Claw (Uncaria tomentosa) is
one of the important medicinal plants for
treating chronic illnesses among the
Peruvian Indians.
7
3: For many Indians, the Kapok tree
(Ce/ba pentandra) is the world tree.
4: The bindweed Ipomea carnea con-
tains potent psychoactive alkaloids and
is used in the Peruvian Amazon basin
as an ingredient in Ayahuasca.
5: The Sanango leaves (Ta be rnaemon-
lana sananho) strengthen the memory.
6:The Palo de Borracho "tree of drun-
kenness" (Choris/a insignis) is a world
tree in the cosmology of the shaman. Its
astringent bark is added to Ayahuasca.
7: A leaf cutting from Psychotria v/rid/s
(gro'Nn in California).
135
1
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 137 ---
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 138 ---
AYAHUASCA ANALOGS
The pharmacological agent that has
been identified in Ayahuasca can be imi-
tated in plants with similar active ingre-
dientsDMT/5-
MeO-DMT). Nontraditional combina-
tions of plants with these ingredients are
today known as "Ayahuasca analogs"
or Anahuasca. Combinations made of
the isolated of synthesized ingredients
are called "pharmahuasca."
Jonathan Ott, a chemist specializing
in natural substances, writes: "Psycho-
nautic pharmahuasca research is so dis-
tant from the scientific mainstream that
it took nearly three decades of no one
supporting, or independent scientists
doing 'underground' research before
the enzyme inhibitor theory of Aya-
huasca pharmacology was put to the
test.Paradoxically, this research can
rightfully claim that is stands exactly in
the center of the research on the bio-
chemistry of consciousness and the ge-
netics of pathological brain functions!
Ayahuasca research is not just on
the vertex of neuro-scientific research,
but itis possible that the reversible
MAO-inhibiting effects of Ayahuasca
could present a practical, less toxic alter-
native to the harmful substances that are
finding medical uses!"
The value of these Ayahuasca analogs
lies in the entheogenic effects that lead
to a deeper spiritual ecology and an
all-encompassing mystical insight. Aya-
huasca and its analogs bring about—but
only with the right dosage—a shamanic
ecstasy:
"Shamanic ecstasy is the trueancient
religion, of which modern churches are
merely pale imitations. Our ancestors
discovered in many places, and at many
times, that suffering humanity could
find in ecstatic entheogenic experiences
the reconciliation between the cultiva-
ted intelligence that separates each hu-
man being from other creatures and
even from other humans, and the wild,
untamed, magnificent animal physical-
ity that we all possess...Itis not
necessary to have faith because the ec-
static experience in and of itself gives
one the belief in the true unity and in-
tegrity of the universe, and in ourselves
as an integral part of the whole. Ecstatic
experience is what reveals to us the
sublime grandeur of our universe and
the fluctuating, shimmering alchemical
wonder that constitutes our everyday
consciousness.Entheogenssuchas
Ayahuasca could be the appropriate
medicine for hypermaterialistic human-
ity on the threshold of the new millen-
nium, where it will be decided if our
way will be continuing to grow and
progress or if we will be destroyed in a
massive biological holocaust unparal-
leled by anything that has happened in
our realm in the last 65 million years
The entheogenic reformationisour
greatest hope for healing our dear
Mother Gaia, becauseitisbringing
about a true religious revival that will
help to bring in the new millennium."
All formulas for Ayahuasca analogs
must contain an MAO inhibitor and a
DMT supplier.
Until now, most experiments have
been with Banisteriopsis caapi, Banister-
iopsis spp., and Peganum harmala. But
there are other MAO inhibitors in nat-
ure, such as caltrop (Tribulus terrestris).
Preferred DMT suppliers include Psy-
chotria viridis and Mimosa tenuijiora,
although there are numerous other pos-
sibilities (see tables).
Page 136: The German artist Nana
Nauwald renders her Ayahuasca
visions in this painting, allowing the
viewer a glimpse into the alternate
reality?'
Above: Many species of the North
American plant genus Desmodium
contain the potent substance DMT in
their root bark, making them suited in
the preparation of drinks similar to
Ayahuasca.
Above: The seeds of the Mimosa scab-
re/Ia contain DMTand are usable in the
preparation of Ayahuasca analogs.
137
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 139 ---
I: The leaf of the extremely rare Acacia
phiebophylla is rich with DMT. It grows
Only on one mountain in Australia.
2: The Australian native Acacia maiden/i
contains a high concentration of DMT in
its bark.
3: The seeds of the South American
tree Dictyloma incanescens. This tree
contains ample amounts of 5-MeO-
DMT.
4: The seeds of the tropical Mucuna
pruriens are preferred by the traditional
people to make jewehy In addition they
contain high concentrations of DMTand
5-MeO-DMT.
5: A species of the DMT-containing
genus Desmodium.
6: The Turkey Red variety of the grass
P/ia/ar/s arundinacea contains liberal
amounts of DMT.
7: The root bark of the Mexican Mimosa
tenuiflora (Mimosa host/I/is) is full of
psychoactive alkaloids. The dried root
bark contains about 1 % DMT. It is
well suited for the production of an
Ayahuasca analog.
138
Ayahuasca Analogs: Plants that contain DM1
Plant FamilyDrugTryptamine
Arundo donaxL.RhizomeDMT
Pha/aris arundinacea L.Grass, rootDM1
Phalaris tuberosa L. (Italian strain)LeavesDMT
Phragmites australis (Cay.) TR. et ST.RhizomeDM1, 5-MeO-DMT
Leguminosae (Fabaceae)
Acacia maideniiF.v. Muell.
Acacia phiebophylla F.v. Muell.
Acacia simpilcifolia Druce
Anadenanthera peregrina (L.) Spag.
Desmanthus illinoensis (Michx.) Macm.
Desmodium pulchellum Benth. ex. Bak.
Desmodiuni spp.
Lespedeza capitata Michx.
Mimosa scabrella Benth.
Mimosa tenuiflora (Wild.) Poir.
Mucuna pruriens DC.
Bark
Leaves
Leaves, bark
Bark
Root-bark
Root bark
0.36% DMT
0.3% DMT
0.81 % DMT
DM1, 5-MeO-DMT
up to 0.34%DM1
DM1
DMT
DM1
Root bark0.57—1 % DM1
SeedsDMT, 5-MeO-DMT
Malpighiaceae
Diplopterys cabrerana (Cuatr.) GatesLeavesDM1, 5-MeO-DMT
Myristicaceae
Virola sebifera Aub.BarkDMT
Virola theiodora (Spruce ex Benth.) Warb.Flowers0.44% DM1
Virola spp.Bark, resinDMT, 5-MeO-DMT
Rubiaceae
Psychotria poeppigiana MUELL. -ARG.LeavesDM1
Psychotria viridis R. et RLeavesDMT
Rutaceae
Dictyoloma incanescens DCBark0.04% 5-MeO-DMT
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 140 ---
Ayahuasca Churches
In addition to the true shamanic use of Aya-
huasca, recently various syncretic churches
have been established that also use Aya-
huasca as part of their religious rituals. The
Santo Daime cult as well as the Ayahuasca
church, União do Vegatal, hold regular
meetings in which the members—the great
majority of whom are mestizos from the low-
er classes—drink Ayahuasca together and
sing pious songs. Led by a priest, the group
travels to the spirits of the trees as well as to
the Christian holy spirits. Many cult mem-
bers discover a new meaning to life and find
healing for the soul. For the members of
these Brazilian churches, which have also
made headway in Europe, the use of this
magic potion is just as legal as it is for the
shamans of the jungle.
Santo Daime, the ritual drink of a cult, and
hoasca, the sacrament of another church,
are both made according to an original
Indian recipe in which the Banisteriopsis
caapi vine and the leaves of the charcruna
shrub (Psychotria viridis) are boiled to make
an extremely psychedelic mixture.
The Santo Daime cult also has mission-
aries active in Europe, and this Brazilian
group has been especially successful in
Germany and the Netherlands. In Amster-
dam, they have their own church. Also in
the Netherlands, the potential use of Aya-
huasca to treat addictions is being tested.
7
This Ayahuasca analog is known among people knowledgeable in the field as
a preparation that is the most psychoactive and easiest to tolerate.Per per-
son, prepare:
3g Peganum harmala, finely ground
9g root husk of Mimosa tenuiflora
Lemon or lime juice
The ground seeds of Syrian Rue (Peganum harmala) are soaked in water and
swallowed or taken in a gelatin capsule. Fifteen minutes later, drink the boiled
mixture of lemon or lime juice and Mimosa husk.
After 45 to 60 minutes—often after brief nausea or vomiting—the visions
begin. They often take the form of fireworks or kaleidoscope-like designs,
flashing colors, fantastic mandalas, or travels to another world. The effects
are equal to the effects of the Ayahuasca preparations fromthe Amazon.
Juremahuasca or Mimohuasca
139
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 141 ---
BRUGMANSIA AUREA
Golden Angel's Trumpet
2BRUGMANSIASANGUINEA
Blood-Red Angel's Trumpet
TRUMPETS OF THE ANGELS
1: The shamanic use of the gold-yellow
flowering Brugmansia occurs primarily
in Colombia and northern Peru.
2: The flowers and leaves are used by
many Indian shamans for medicinal
purposes.
3: The ripe fruit of the Brugmansia
sanguinea. This Angel's Trumpet puts
out far more fruit than does any other
species.
4: The flower of Brugmansia sanguinea.
140
The Guambjano of southern Colombia
say of Brugmansia vulcanicola: "H
pleasant is the perfume of the long,
bell-like flowers of the Yas,as one in-
hales it in the afternoon...Butthe tree
has a spirit in the form ofan eagle which
has been seen tocome flying through
the air and thento disappear ...The
spirit is so evil that ifa weak person sta-
tions himself at the foot of thetree, he
will forget everything,...feelingup in
the air as if on wings of the spirit of the
Yas...Ifa girl...sitsresting in the
tree's shade, she will dream aboutmen
of the Paez tribe, and latera figure will
be left in her womb which will be borne
six months later in the form of pipsor
seeds of the tree."
The species of Brugmansiaare native
to South America. Brugmansia in the
past has usually been considered tore-
present a section of the genus Datura.
Thorough studies of the biologyof
these plants have shown that theyde-
serve to be classified in a distinct genus.
The behavior of the species—as wellas
their location—indicates longassocia-
tion with man.
The hallucinogenicuse of Brugman-
sia may have come from knowledge of
the closely related Datura, knowledge
that proto-Indian Mongoloids brought
to the New World in late Paleolithjc
and Mesolithic times. As they migrated
southward, they encountered otherspe-
cies of Datura, especially in Mexico,
and bent them to shamanicuse. Upon
arriving in the Andes of South America,
they recognized the resemblance ofthe
Brugmansias to Datura and found their
psychoactive propertiesvery similar. At
any rate, everything about the use of
Brugmansia bespeaks great antiquity.
Littleis known, however, ofpre-
Conquest use of Brugmansia. There
are, nevertheless, scattered references
tothesehallucinogens. The French
scientist de Ia Condamine mentioned
its use among the Omagua of theRio
Marañon. The explorersvon Humboldt
and Bonpiand remarkedon Tonga, the
red-flowered B. sanguinea,as a sacred
plant of the priests in the Temple of the
Sun at Sogamoza in Colombia.
Brugniansia arborea, B.aurea, and
B. san guinea usually occur abovean al-
titude of six thousand feet. The seedsare
widely employed asan additive to chi-
cha. The crushed leaves and flowersare
prepared in hot or coldwater to be ta-
ken as a tea. Leavescan be mixed with
an infusion of Tobacco. Some Indians
may scrape off the soft green bark of
the stems and soak it inwater for use.
The Brugmansia intoxicationvaries
but is always characterized bya violent
phase. There is probablyno more suc-
cinct description than that of JohannJ. Tschudi in 1846, whosaw the effects in
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 142 ---
Peru. The native "fell into a heavy stu-
por, his eyes vacantly fixed on the
ground, his mouth convulsively closed,
and his nostrils dilated. In the course of
a quarter of an hour, his eyes began to
roll, foam issued from his mouth, and
his whole body was agitated by frightful
convulsions. After these violent symp-
toms had passed, a profound sleep of
several hours' duration followed, and
when the subject had recovered, he re-
lated the particulars of his visit with his
forefathers."
At Tunja, among the Muisca, accord-
ing to a report in 1589, a "dead chief was
accompanied to the tomb by his women
and slaves, who were buried in different
layers of earth...ofwhich none was
without gold. And so that the women
and poor slaves should not fear their
death before they saw the awful tomb,
the nobles gave them things to drink of
inebriating Tobacco and other leaves of
the tree we call Borrachero, all mixed in
their usual drink, so that of their senses
none is left to foresee the harm soon to
befall them." The species employed
were undoubtedly Brugmansia aurea
and B. sanguinea.
Among the JIvaro, recalcitrant chil-
dren are given a drink of B. scinguinea
with parched maize; when intoxicated,
the children are lectured so that the spir-
its of the ancestors may admonish them.
In the Chocó, Brugmansia seeds put
into magic chicha beer were thought to
produce in children an excitement dur-
ing which they could discover gold.
Indians in Peru still call Brugmansia
san guinea by the name Huaca or Hua-
cachaca ("plant of the tomb") from the
belief that it reveals treasures anciently
buried in graves.
In the warmer parts of the western
Amazon, Brugmansia suaveolens, B. ver-
sicolor, and B. x insignis are employed as
hallucinogens or as an admixture with
Ayahuasca.
Perhaps no locality can equal the Val-
ley of Sibundoy in the Andes of Colom-
bia for Brugmansia use. The Kamsá and
Ingano Indians use several species and a
number of local cultivars as hallucino-
gens. The Indians of thisregion, espe-
ciallyshamans,haveadeveloped
knowledge of the effects of these plants
and grow them as private possessions.
Usually the property of specific sha-
mans, these cultivars have native na-
mes. The leaves of Buyés (B. aurea) are
employed mainly to relieve rheuma-
tism, an effective medicine with its high
concentrationoftropanealkaloids.
Biangan was employed formerly by
hunters: the leaves and flowers were
mixed with dogs' food to enable them
to find more game. The tongue-shaped
leaf of Amarón is valued as a suppurant
and in treating rheumatism. The rarest
Above: The seeds of Brugmansia sua-
veolens are used in Peru as an intoxi-
cating additive to corn beer. They are
taken by the shamans in higher doses
and often produce a delirium that can
last for days with the most powerful of
hallucinations.
Below: The Blood-Red Angel's Trumpet
is often planted in sacred places and
cemeteries. Here is a large plant grow-
ing with an image of the Madonna in
southern Chile.
The Chemistry of Brugmansia
The solanaceous Brugmansia arborea, B. aurea, B. sanguinea, B. suaveo-
lens, and B. versicolor contain the same tropane alkaloids as the Daturas:
scopolamine, hyoscyamine, atrbpine, and the various secondary alkaloids of
the tropane group, such as norscopolamine, aposcopolamine, meteloidine,
etc. Scopolamine, responsible for the hallucinogenic effects, is always found
in the largest quantity. The leaves and stems of B. aurea, for example, with a
total alkaloid of 0.3 percent, contain 80 percent scopolamine, which is also
the main alkaloid in the roots of Brugmansia.
141
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 143 ---
Right: The Valley of Sibundoy in south-
ern Colombia is a location of intensive
use of Brugmansia. One of the most
renowned medicine men of the Kamsá
tribe is Salvador Chindoy. Here he is
pictured in his ceremonial garb at the
beginning of a Brugmansia-induced
intoxication for purposes of divination.
Left:Ayoung Kamsá Indian boy of
Sibundoy, Colombia, holds a flower and
leaves of CulebraBorracheraprior to
brewing a tea for the purpose of intoxi-
cation in preparation for learning the
secrets of use of hallucinogens in magic
and medicine.
142
cultivar is Salamán, with bizarrely atro-
phied leaves; itis employed both in
treating rheumatism and as a hallucino-
gen. The extreme in aberration is found
in Quinde and Munchira: these two are
used as hallucinogens but also in the
treatment of rheumatism and as emetics,
carminatives, vermifuges, and suppur-
ants; Munchira likewise is employed to
treat erysipelas. Quinde isthe most
widely employed cultivar in Sibundoy;
Munchira the most toxic. The rare
Dientes and Ochre find their most im-
portant use in the treatment of rheu-
matic pains.
"A spirit so evil, our grandparents tell
us, was in these trees with flowers like
long bells, which give off their sweet
perfume in the afternoon, that they
were the food of those Indians at whose
name people trembled: fierce Pijaos."
Culebra borracheroisthought by
some botanists to be one of those mon-
strous cultivars. More potent than any
of the cultivars of Brugmansia, it is used
hallucinogenically for the most difficult
cases of divination and as an effective
medicine for rheumatic orarthritic
pains.
The cultivars Quinde and Munchira
are most frequently used for their psy-
choactiveeffects. The juiceofthe
crushed leaves or flowers is drunk either
alone in a cold-water preparation or
with aguardiente (an alcoholic distillate
of sugar). In Sibundoy only shamans
usually take Brugmansia. Most shamans
"see" fearful visions of jaguars and
poisonous snakes. Symptoms and un-
pleasantaftereffectsprobablyhave
contributed to the limitation of Brug-
mansia as a hallucinogen.
The JIvaro believe that normal life is
an illusion, that the true powers behind
daily life are supernatural. The shaman,
with his potent hallucinogenic plants,
can cross over into the world of ethere-
al wonder and deal with the forces of
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 144 ---
evil. A JIvaro boy at the age of six must
acquire an external soul, an
waleani, the vision-producing soul that
can allow him to communicate with an-
cestors. To get his arutam the boy and
his father make a pilgrimage to a sacred
waterfall, bathing, fasting, and drinking
Tobacco water. Maikoa or Brugmansia
juice may also be taken to effect contact
with the supernatural during which the
boy's arutam appears as jaguars and
anacondas and enters his body.
The JIvaro frequently take Natema
(Ayahuasca) or Banisteriopsis to acquire
the arutam, since it is a strong intoxi-
cant, but Brugniansia must be used if
Natema is not successful. Maikoa intox-
ication, the JIvaro assert, may cause
insanity.
From all viewpoints, species of Brug-
mansia have had a difficult time of it in
spite of their great beauty. They are
plants of the gods, but not the agreeable
gifts of the gods, like Peyote, the mush-
rooms, Ayahuasca. Their powerful and
wholly unpleasant effects, leading to
periods of violence and even temporary
insanity, together with their sickening
aftereffects, have conspired to put them
in a place of second category. They are
plants of the gods, true, but the gods do
not always strive to make life easy for
man—so they gave man the Brugman-
sias, to which he must on occasion re-
pair. The evil eagle hovers over man,
and his Borrachero is an ever-present
reminder that it is not always easy to
attain an audience with the gods.
Right: The beautiful flowers of the An-
gel's Trumpet inspired the Symbolists
(fabric printed after a design by
Alphonse Mucha, Paris 1896; original is
in the Wurttemburg State Museum,
Stuttgart, Germany).
Loft: This drawing by a Guambiano In-
dian of the southern Andes of Colombia
depicts a native woman under a Borra-
chero tree, Brugmansia vulcanicola.
The portrayal of an eagle associated
with an evil spirit indicates the danger-
ous toxicity of this tree, which causes a
person tarrying under it to become for-
getful and to feel as if he were flying.
143
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 145 ---
LOPHOPHORA
PeyoteTHE TRACKS OF THE LITTLE DEER
Page 145 top: The Peyote crowns take
on many different forms, depending on
age and growing conditions.
Page 145 be/ow: A group of large
Peyote cacti in their native habitat of
southern Texas.
Ever since the arrival of the first Euro-
peans in the New World, Peyote has
provoked controversy, suppression, and
persecution. Condemned by the Span-
ish conquerors for its "satanic trickery,"
and attacked again and again by local
governments and religious groups, the
plant has nevertheless continued to play
a major sacramental role among the In-
dians of Mexico, while its use has spread
to the northern tribes in the United
States in the last hundred years. The
persistence and, growth o.f the Peyote
cult constitute a fascinating chapter in
the history of the New World—and a
challenge to the anthropologists and
psychologists, botanists and pharmaco-
logists who continue to study the plant
lished in native religions, and their ef-
forts to stamp out this practice drove it
into hiding in the hills, where its sacra-
mental use has persisted to the present
time.
How old is the Peyote cult? An early
Spanish chronicler, Fray Bernardino de
Sahagün, estimated on the basis of sev-
eral historical events recorded in Indian
chronology that Peyote was known to
the Chichimeca and Toltecatleast
1,890 years before the arrival of the Eur-
opeans. This calculation would give the
"divine plant" of Mexico an economic
history extending over a period of some
two millennia. Then Carl Lumholtz, the
Danish ethnologist who did pioneer
work among the Indians of Chihuahua,
Right:A Huichol yarn painting shows
the nurturing and fertile gifts of the
Peyote cactus.
144
and its constituents in connection with
human affairs.
We might logically call this needle-
less Mexican cactus the prototype of
the New World hallucinogens. It was
one of the first to be discovered by Eu-
ropeans and was unquestionably the
most spectacular vision-inducing plant
encountered by the Spanish conquer-
ors. They found Peyote firmly estab-
Left: The flowering Peyote cactus
(Lophophora
I
suggested that the Peyote cult is far old-
en He showed that a symbol employed
in the Tarahumara Indian Peyote cere-
mony appeared in ancient ritualistic car-
vings preserved in Mesoamerican lava
rocks. More recently,archaeological
discoveries in dry caves and rock shel-
ters in Texas have yielded specimens of
Peyote. These specimens, found in a
context suggesting ceremonial use, mdi-
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 146 ---
cate that its use is more than seven thou-
sand years old.
The earliest European records con-
cerning this sacred cactus are those of
Sahagün, who lived from 1499 to 1590
and who dedicated most of his adult life
to the Indians of Mexico. His precise,
firsthand observations were not pub-
lisheduntilthenineteenthcentury.
Consequently, credit for the earliest
published account must go to Juan
Cardenas, whose observations on the
marvelous secrets of the Indies were
published as early as 1591.
Sahagiin's writingsare among the
most important of all the early chroni-
clers. He described Peyote use among
the Chichimeca, of the primitive desert
plateau of the north, recording for pos-
terity: "There is another herb like tunas
[Opuntia spp.] of the earth. It is called
peiotl. It is white. It is found in the
north country. Those who eat or drink
it see visions either frightful or laugh-
able. This intoxication lasts two or three
days and then ceases. It is a common
food of the Chichimeca, for it sustains
them and gives them courage to fight
and not feel fear nor hunger nor thirst.
And they say that it protects them from
all danger."
It is not known whether or not the
Chichimeca were the first Indians to
discover the psychoactive properties of
Peyote. Some students believe that the
Tarahumara Indians, living where Pe-
yote grew, were the first to discover its
use and that it spread from them to the
Cora, the Huichol, and other tribes.
Since the plant grows in many scattered
localities in Mexico, it seems probable
that its intoxicating properties were in-
dependently discovered by a number of
tribes.
Several seventeenth-century Spanish
Jesuits testified that the Mexican In-
dians used Peyote medicinally and cere-
monially for many ills and that when
intoxicated with the cactus they saw
"horrible visions." Padre Andrea Perez
de Ribas, a seventeenth-century Jesuit
who spent sixteen years in Sinaloa, re-
ported that Peyote was usually drunk
but that its use, even medicinally, was
The active principle of Lophophora williamsii, the first hallucinogenic plant to
be chemically analyzed, was already identified at the end of thenineteenth
century as a crystallized alkaloid (see page 23). Because the driedcacti from
which the alkaloid was extracted are called mescal buttons, it wasnamed
mescaline. In addition to mescaline, responsible for the visual hallucinogenic
effects, several related alkaloids have been isolated from Peyote andrelated
cacti.
When the chemical structure of mescaline was determined, itcould be
produced synthetically. The chemistry is relatively simple:3,4,5,-trimethoxy-
phenylethylamine. The model of this structure is shown on page 186.
Mescaline is chemically related to the neurotransmitter noradrenaline(nor-
epinephrine), a brain hormone, also shown here. The active doseof mesca-
line is 0.5—0.8 gram when applied orally.
145
The Chemistry of Peyote
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 147 ---
Right: An old and very large Peyote
cactus that is addressed as "Grand-
father" by the Indians. Notice the young
crowns.
146
forbidden and punished, since itwas
connected with "heathen rituals and
superstitions"to contactevilspirits
through "diabolic fantasies."
The first full description of the living
cactus was offered by Dr. Francisco
Hernández, who as personal physician
of King Philip II of Spainwas sent to
study Aztec medicine. In his ethnobo-
tanical study of New Spain, Dr. Her-
nández described. peyotl,as the plant
was called in the Nahuati language of.
the Aztecs: "The root is of nearly med-
ium size, sending forthno branches or
leaves above the ground, but witha
certain woolliness adhering to iton ac-
count of which it could not aptly be
figured by me. Bothmen and women
are said to be harmed by it. It appears
to be of a sweetish taste and moder-
ately hot. Ground up and appliedto
painful joints, it is said to give relief.
Wonderful properties are attributedto
this root, if any faithcan be given to
what is commonly saidamong them
on this point. It causes those devouring
it to be able to foresee andto predict
things..
Inthe latter part of the seventeenth
century, a Spanish missionary in Na-
yarit recorded the earliest account ofa
Peyote ritual, Of the Cora tribe, here-
ported: "Close to the musicianwas
seated the leader of the singing, whose
business it was to mark time. Each had
his assistants to take his place when he
should become fatigued. Nearbywas
placed a tray filled with Peyote, which
is a diabolical root that is groundup
and drunk by them so that theymay
not become weakened by the exhaust-
ing effects of so long a function, which
they begin by forming as largea circle
of men and women as couldoccupy
the space that had been swept off for
this purpose. One after the other, they
went dancing in a ring or marking time
with their feet, keeping in the middle
the musician and choir-master whom
they invited, and singing in thesame
unmusical tune that he set them. They
woulddanceallnight,fromfive
o'clock in the evening toseven o'clock
in the morning, without stoppingnor
leaving the circle. When the dancewas
ended, all stood who could hold them-
selves on their feet; for the majority,
from the Peyote and wine which they
Left: Followingvisions received during
the Peyote ritual, the Huichol bring
beaded "Peyote snakes" decorated with
designs of the Peyote to remote moun-
tamshrines of Earth Mother as an
offering of gratitude.
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 148 ---
"In consciousness dwells the wondrous,
with it man attains the realm beyond the material,
and the Peyote tells us,
where to find it."
—Antonin Artaud, The Tarahzimars (1947)
drank, were unabletoutilizetheir
legs."
The ceremony among the Cora, Hui-
chol, and Tarahumara Indians has prob-
ably changed little in content over the
centuries: it still consists, in great part,
of dancing.
The modern Huichol Peyote ritual
isthe closest to the pre-Columbian
Mexicanceremonies.Sahagdn'sde-
scription of the Teochichimeca ritual
could very well be a description of
the contemporary Huichol ceremony,
forthese Indiansstillassemble to-
getherinthedesertthree hundred
miles northeast of their homeland in
the Sierra Madres of western Mexico,
still sing all night, all day, still weep
exceedingly, and still so esteemPeyote
above any other psychotropic plant
that the sacred mushrooms, Morning
Glories, Datura, and other indigenous
hallucinogensareconsignedtothe
realm of sorcerers.
Most of the early records in Mexico
were left by missionaries who opposed
the use of Peyote in religious practice.
To them Peyote had no place in Chris-
tianity because of its pagan associations.
Since the Spanish ecclesiastics were in-
tolerant of any cult but their own, fierce
persecution resulted. But the Indians
were reluctant to give up their Peyote
cults established on centuries of tradi-
tion.
The suppression of Peyote, however,
went to great lengths. For example, a
priest near San Antonio, Texas, pub-
lisheda manual in 1760 containing
questions to be asked of converts. In-
cluded were the following: "Have you
eaten the flesh of man? Have you ea-
ten Peyote?" Another priest, Padre
Nicolas de Leon, similarly examined
potential converts: "Art thou a sooth-
sayer? Dost thou foretell events by
reading omens, interpreting dreams or
bytracingcirclesandfigureson
water? Dost thou garnish with flower
garlands the places where idolsare
kept? Dost thou suck the blood of
others? Dost thou wander about at
night,calling upon demons to help
thee? Hast thou drunk Peyote or given
it to others to drink, in order to dis-
cover secrets or to discover where sto-
len or lost articles were?"
During the last decade of the nine-
teenth century, the explorer Carl Lum-
holtz observed the use of Peyote among
the Indians of the Sierra Madre Occi-
dental of Mexico, primarily the Huichol
and Tarahumara, and he reported on the
Peyote ceremony and on various kinds
of cacti employed with Lophophora
williamsii or in its stead.
Above: Different cacti that are known in
Mexico as Peyote, Hikuli, Peyotillo, or
False Peyote. They primarily contain
the substance mescaline and other
psychoactive alkaloids.
Above left: Ariocarpus retusus
Above right: Astrophyton asterias
Below left: Aztekium riterll
Below right: Ariocarpus fissuratus
Left: The earliest known botanical illus-
tration of Lophophora williamsii, pub-
lished in 1847. It has been found in
archaeological sites more than seven
thousand years of age. It was probably
the first and most spectacular vision-
inducing plant encountered by the
Spanish conquerors of Mexico.
147
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 149 ---
"You see how it is when we walk for the Peyote.
How we go, not eating, not drinking, with much will.
All of one heart. How one goes being Huichol.
That is our unity. That is whatwe must defend."
—Ramón Medina Silva
Left: InHuichol geography, Wirikuta, the
place of the ancestor-gods, is the local-
ity of the origin of the sacred life of the
tribe. Peyote grows here and is col-
lected on the annual pilgrimages made
by small groups of devout Huichols. The
trip to Wirikuta is long and arduous, with
the pilgrims traveling as Ancient Ones.
Like the gods, they refrain from food,
sex, and sleep during this extraordinary
trip. When they first enter the domain of
their Paradise, the mara'akame Ramón
Medina Silva gestures toward Kau-
kayari (power spots) that once were
the living forms of the gods.
148
However, no anthropologist ever par-
ticipated in or observed a Peyote hunt
until the 1960s, when anthropologists
and a Mexican writer were permitted
by Huichols to accompany several pil-
grimages. Once a year, the Huichols
make a sacred trip to gather Hikuri, as
the sacred cactus is called. The trek is
led by an experienced mara'akameor
shaman, who is in contact with Tatewari
(Our grandfather-fire). Tatewari is the
oldest Huichol god, also knownas Hi-
kuri, the Peyote-god. He is personified
with Peyote plants on his hands and
feet, and he interprets all the deities to
the modern shamans, often through vi-
sions,sometimesindirectlythrough
Kauyumari (the Sacred Deer Person
and culture hero). Tatewari led the first
Peyote pilgrimage far from the present
area inhabited by the nine thousand
Huichols into Wirikuta, an ancestral re-
gion where Peyote abounds. Guided by
the shaman, the participants, usually ten
to fifteen in number, take on the iden-
tity of deified ancestors as they follow
Tatewarj "to find their life."
The Peyote hunt is literallya hunt. Pil-
grims carry Tobacco gourds, a necessity
for the journey's ritual. Water gourdsare
often taken to transport water back
home from Wirikuta. Often the only
food taken for the stay in Wirikuta is
corn tortillas. The pilgrims, however,
eat Peyote while in Wirikuta. They must
travel great distances. Today, much of
the trek is done by car, but formerly the
Indians walked some two hundred
miles.
The preparation for gathering Peyote
involves ritual confession and purifica-
tion. Public recitation of all sexual en-
counters must be made, but no show of
shame, resentment, or jealousy, norany
expression of hostility, occurs. For each
offense, the shaman makes a knot ina
string that, at the end of the ritual, is
burned. Following the confession, the
group, preparing to set out for Wirikuta—
an area located in San LuIs PotosI—
must be cleansed before journeying to
paradise.
Upon arriving within sight of the
sacred mountains of Wirikuta, the pil-
grims are ritually washed and pray for
rain and fertility. Amid the praying and
chanting of the shaman, the dangerous
crossing into the Otherworld begins.
This passage has two stages: first, the
Gateway of the Clashing Clouds, and
second, the opening of the Clouds.
These do not represent actual localities
but exist only in the "geography of the
mind"; to the participants the passing
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 150 ---
/
Right: A Peyote hunter spreads out his harvest at
home.
Left: The baskets carried to Wirikuta contain only a few
personal and ceremonial objects. On the return trip they
are filled with the Peyote buttons collected on the pil-
grimage. The Huichol say that Peyote is "very delicate,"
so the heavily laden baskets are carefully transported
back to the Sierras in order to avoid bruising the cactus.
Leaning against the basket is a Huichol violin, used to
provide music for the Peyote dancing.
Below right: Huichol Indians returning from a
pilgrimage.
Below left: A Peyote hunter with a basketful of Peyote
cacti.
from one to the other is an event filled
with emotion.
Upon arrival at the place where the
Peyote is to be hunted, the shaman be-
gins ceremonial practices, telling stories
from the ancient Peyote tradition and
invoking protection for the events to
come. Those on their first pilgrimage
are blindfolded, and the participants
are led by the shaman to the "cosmic
threshold," which only he can see. All
celebrants stop, light candles, and mur-
mur prayers, while the shaman, imbued
with supernatural forces, chants.
Finally, Peyote is found. The shaman
.,-.
4:-j.
has seen the deer tracks. He draws his
arrow and shoots the cactus. The pil-
grims make offerings to this first Hi-
kuri. More Peyote is sought, basketfuls
of the plant eventually being collected.
On the following day, more Peyote is
collected, some of which is to be shared
with those who remain at home. The
rest is to be sold to the Cora andTara-
humara Indians, who use Peyote hut do
not have a quest.
The ceremony of distributhig To-
bacco is then carried out. Arro'.vs are
placed pointing to the four paints of
the compass; at midnight a firebuilt.
Page 148 right: Each pilgrim has
brought offerings to Peyote. After these
gifts are carefully displayed, the pilgrims
raise candles in the direction of the as-
cending sun. They weep and pray that
the gods accept their offering, while
Aamón (second from right) fervently
chants.
149
..c___$.
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 151 ---
Page 151 left The Huichol "trinity" of
deer, maize, and Peyote is a hypersym-
bolic complex, a concept harkening
back to the time of creation. This para-
disiacal era antedates the separation of
plants from animals, with Peyote repre-
senting the trans-temporal link with the
supernatural. On the annual Peyote
hunt of the Huichol, the pilgrims shoot
the first found Peyote with an arrow and
that special Peyote is likened to a dying
deer and accorded particular chants;
offerings of maize seeds are likewise
made.
Page 151 right: The Yaqui Indians of
northern Mexico symbolize the Peyote
cactus as a buck, as in this wood
carving.
Above: "It is one, it isa unity; it is our-
selves:' These words of Huichol
mara'akame Ramón Medina Silva de-
scribe the mystical rapport unfolding
among communicants in the Peyote
ceremonies that is such an important
dimension in the lives of these people.
In this yarn painting, six peyoteros and
the shaman (on top) achieve that unity
in a field of fire. In the center of the
peyoteros is Tatewari, the First Sha-
man, as a five-plumed fire.
150
Right A Huichol sacrificial bowl deco-
rated with Peyote designs.
AccordingtotheHuichol, Tobacco
belongs tofire.
The shaman prays, placing the offer-
ing of Tobacco before the fire, touching
it with feathers, then distributing itto
each pilgrim, who puts it into his gourd,
symbolizing the birth of Tobacco.
The Huichol Peyote hunt is seen as a
return to Wirikuta or Paradise, the arche-
typal beginning and end of a mythical
past. A modern Huichol mara'akame
expressed it as follows: "'One day all
will be as you have seen it there, in Wir-
ikuta. The First People will come back.
The fields will be pure and crystalline,
all this is not clear to me, but in five
more years I will know it, through more
revelations. The world will end, and the
unity will be here again. But only for
pure Huichol."
Among the Tarahumara, the Peyote
cult is less important. Many buy their
supplies of the cactus, usually from
Huichol. Although the twotribeslive
several hundred miles apart and are not
closely related, they share the same
name for Peyote—Hikuri—and the
two cults have many points of resem-
blance.
The Tarahumara Peyote dancemay
be held at any time during the year for
health, tribal prosperity, or for simple
worship. It is sometimes incorporated
into other establishedfestivals. The
principal part of the ceremony consists
of dances and prayers followed bya day
of feasting. It is held in a clearedarea,
neatly swept. Oak and pine logsare
dragged in for a fire and oriented inan
east-west direction. The Tarahumara
name for the dance means '"moving
about the fire," and except for Peyote
itself, the fire is the most important ele-
ment.
The leader has several women assis-
tants who prepare the Hikuri plants
for use, grinding the fresh caction a
metate, being careful not to lose one
drop of the resulting liquid. An assis-
tant catches all liquid in a gourd, even
the water used to wash the metate.
The leader sits west of the fire, anda
cross may be erected opposite hini. In
front of the leader, a small hole is dug
into which he may spit. A Peyote may
be set before him on its sideor in-
serted into a root-shaped hole bored
in the ground. He inverts half a gourd
over the Peyote, turning it to scratch a
circle in the earth around the cactus.
Removing the gourd temporarily, he
draws a cross in the dust to represent
the world, thereupon replacingthe
gourd. This apparatus serves as a reso-
nator for the rasping stick: Peyote is
set under the resonator, since it enjoys
the sound.
Incense from burning copal is then
offered to the cross. After facing east,
kneeling, and crossing themselves, the
leader's assistants are given deer-hoof
rattles or bellsto shake during the
dance.
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 152 ---
The ground-up Peyote is kept in a pot
or crock near the cross and is served in a
gourd by an assistant: he makes three
rounds of the fire if carrying the gourd
to the leader, one if carrying it to an or-
dinary participant. All the songs praise
Peyote for its protection of the tribe and
for its "beautiful intoxication."
Healing ceremonies are often carried
out like the Huichol's.
The Tarahumara leader cures at day-
break. The first terminates dancing by
giving three raps. He rises, accompanied
by a young assistant, and, circling the
patio, he touches every forehead with
water. He touches the patient thrice,
and placing his stick to the patient's
head, he raps three times. The dust pro-
duced by the rapping, even though infi-
nitesimal, is a powerful health- and life-
giver and is saved for medicinal use.
The final ritual sends Peyote home.
The leader reaches toward the rising
sun and raps thrice. "In the early morn-
ing, Hikuli had come from San Ignacio
and from Satapolio riding on beautiful
green doves, to feast with the Tarahu-
mara at the end of the dance when the
people sacrifice food and eat and drink.
Having bestowed his blessings, Hikuli
forms himself into a ball and flies to his
shelter at the time."
Peyote is employed as a religious sa-
crament among more than forty Amer-
ican Indian tribes in many parts of the
United States and western Canada. Be-
cause of its wide use, Peyote early at-
tracted the attention of scientists and
151
Be/ow: The Huichol shaman Ramón Medina Silva
silently awaits his Peyote visions. Wrapped in his blan-
ket, gazing into the ceremonial fire, he sits motionless
for many hours as he receives messages from the
gods. He said of the Peyote pilgrimage: "Our sym-
bols—the deer, the Peyote, the maize of five colors—
all, all that you have seen, there in Wirikuta, when we
go to hunt the Peyote—these are beautiful. They are
beautiful because they are right' (From Barbara
Myerhoff, Peyote Hunt)
legislators and engendered heated and,
unfortunately, often irresponsible op-
position to its free use in American In-
dian ceremonies.
It was the Kiowa and Comanche In-
dians, apparently, who in visits to a na-
tive group in northern Mexico first
learned of this sacred American plant.
Indians in the United States had been
restricted to reservations by the last half
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 153 ---
Right: The red Mescal beans (Sophora
secundiflora).
1111
V
q
111111111
Above left: The roadman in the Native
American Church officiates at the
Peyote meeting as a representative of
the Great Spirit. It is his duty to show the
'Peyote road" to the participants. The
roadman in Stephen Mopope's painting
holds traditional ceremonial objects as-
sociated with the religion: the fan, staff,
and rattle. On his cheek is painted the
crown of a Peyote plant. In the center
picture, also by Mopope, chanting parti-
cipants sit inside the sacred tepee, in
the middle of which is Father Fire and
the crescent moon altar. Above the te-
pee is the Peyote water drum. The
photograph on the far right depicts the
Sioux medicine man Henry Crow Dog
chanting at a Peyote meeting on the
Rosebud Reservation.
Above middle: Also by Mopope. This
shows the participant who sits singing in
the interior of his sacred tipi. In the mid-
dle is Father Fire and the sickle shaped
altar. Above the tipi is the water con-
tainer.
Above right: Sioux Medicine Man Henry
Crow Dog at a Peyote Gathering on the
Rosebud reservation.
152
of the nineteenth century, and much of
their cultural heritage was disintegrat-
ing and disappearing. Faced with this
disastrous inevitability, a number of In-
dian leaders, especially from tribes relo-
cated in Oklahoma, began actively to
spread a new kind of Peyote cult adap-
ted to the needs of the more advanced
Indian groups of the United States.
The Kiowa and Comanche were ap-
parently the most active proponents of
the new religion. Today it is the Kiowa-
Comanche type of Peyote ceremony
that, with slight modifications, prevails
north of the Mexican border. This cere-
mony, to judge from the rapid spread of
the new Peyote religion, must haveap-
pealed strongly to the Plains tribes and
later to other groups.
Success in spreading the new Peyote
cult resulted in strong opposition to its
practice from missionary and local gov-
ernmental groups. The ferocity of this
opposition often led local governments
to enact repressive legislation, in spite of
overwhelming scientific opinion that
Indians should be permitted touse
Peyote in religious practices. In an at-
tempt to protect their rights to free reli-
gious activity, American Indiansorga-
nized the Peyote cult intoa legally
recognized religious group, the Native
American Church. This religiousmove-
ment, unknown in the United States
before 1885, numbered 13,300 members
in 1922. In 1993 there were at least
300,000 members among seventy differ-
ent tribes.
Indians of the United States, living far
from the natural area of Peyote,must
use the dried top of the cactus, the so-
called mescal button, legally acquired
by either collection or purchase and dis-
tribution through the U.S. postalser-
vices. Some American Indians still send
pilgrims to gather the cactus in the
fields, following the custom of Mexican
Indians, but most tribal groups in the
United States must procure theirsup-
plies by purchase and mail.
A member may hold a meeting ingra-
titude for the recovery of health, the
safe return from a voyage, or thesuccess
of a Peyote pilgrimage; it may be heldto
celebrate the birth of a baby, toname a
child, on the first four birthdays ofa
child, for doctoring, or even for general
thanksgiving.
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 154 ---
The Kickapoo hold a Peyote service
for the dead, and the body of the de-
ceased is brought into the ceremonial
tepee. The Kiowa may have five services
atEaster,fouratChristmasand
Thanksgiving, sixat the New Year.
Especially among the Kiowa, meetings
are held only on Saturday night. Any-
one who is a member of the Peyotecult
may be a leader or "roadman."There
are certain taboos that the roadman,
and sometimes all participants, must
observe. The older men refrain from
eating salt the day before and after a
meeting, and they may not bathe for
several days following a Peyote service.
There seem to be no sexual taboos, as in
the Mexican tribes, and the ceremony is
free of licentiousness. Women are ad-
mitted to meetings to eat Peyote and to
pray, but they do not usually participate
in the singing and drumming. After the
age of ten, children may attend meet-
ings, but do not take part until they are
adults.
Peyote ceremonies differ from tribe
to tribe. The typical Plains Indian ser-
vice takes place usually in a tepee erected
over a carefully made altar of earth or
clay; the tepee is taken down as soon as
the all-night ceremony is over. Some
tribes hold the ceremony in a wooden
round-house with a permanent altar of
cement inside, and the Osage and Qua-
paw Indiansoften haveelectrically
lighted round-houses.
The Father Peyote (a large "mescal
button" or dried top of the Peyote
plant) is placed on a cross or rosette of
sage leaves at the center of the altar.This
crescentLshaped altar, symbol of the
spirit of Peyote, is never taken from the
altar during the ceremony. As soon as
the Father Peyote has been put in place,
all talking stops, and all eyes are direc-
ted toward the altar.
Tobacco and corn shucks or black-
jack oak leaves are passed around the
circle of worshipers, each making a ci-
garette for use during the leader's op en-
ing prayer.
The next procedure involves purifica-
tion of the bag of mescal buttons in ce-
dar incense. Following this blessing, the
roadman takes four mescal buttons
from the bag, which is then passed
around in a clockwise direction, each
worshiper taking four. More Peyote
Left: The Peyote rattle is an important
instrument for the Peyote ceremony of
the Native American Church.
Aboveright: The photograph portrays
the roadman's feathered staff of author-
ity: two smoking sticks for lighting the
ritual cigarettes, one of which indicates
in the combination of the thunderbird
and the cross the melding of Christian
and Native elements; corn shucks for
cigarettes; a drumstick; several gourd
rattles; two Mescal bean necklaces,
part of the roadman's dress; a bundle of
sagebrush; Peyote buttons; a Peyote
ceremony necktie; a black "Peyote
cloth," an eagle wing-bone flute and
a small pile of "cedar' needles for
incensing.
153
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 155 ---
Above:A Huichol shaman
(mara'akame) sings with his assistants
in front of the temple in which the Peyote
ceremony will take place.
Page 155 top: The ground Peyote is
mixed with water and given to the parti-
cipants at the intoxicating ceremony.
154
may be called for at any time during the
ceremony, the amount consumed being
left to personal discretion. Somepeyo-
tists eat up to thirty-six buttons a night,
and some boast of having ingested up-
wards of fifty. An average amount is
probably about twelve.
Singing starts with the roadman, the
initial song always being the same, sung
or chanted in a high nasal tone. Trans-
lated, the song means: "May the gods
bless me, help me, and give me power
and understanding."
Sometimes, the roadman may be
asked to treat a patient. This procedure
varies in form. The curing ritual is al-
most always simple, consisting of pray-
ing and frequent use of the sign of the
cross.
Peyote eaten in ceremony has as-
sumed the role of a sacrament in part
because of its biological activity: the
sense of well-being that it induces and
the psychological effects (the chief of
which is the kaleidoscopic play of richly
colored visions) often experienced by
those who indulge in itsuse. Peyote is
considered sacred by Native Americans,
a divine "messenger" enabling the indi-
vidual to communicate with God with-
out the medium of a priest. It is an
earthly representative of God to many
peyotists. "God told the Delawares to
do good even before He sent Christ to
the whites who killed Him...," anIn-
dian explained to an anthropologist.
"God made Peyote. It is His power. It
is the power of Jesus. Jesus came after-
wards on this earth, after Peyote
God (through Peyote) told the Dela-
wares the same things that Jesus told
the whites."
Correlated with its use as a religious
sacrament isits presumed value as a
medicine. Some Indians claim that if
Peyote is used correctly, all other medi-
cines are superfluous. Its supposed cura-
tive properties are responsible probably
more than any other attribute for the ra-
pid diffusion of the Peyote cult in the
United States.
The Peyote religionisa medico-
religiouscult. In considering Native
American medicines, one must always
Top left: The Peyote Goddess, or Earth
Mother, of the Huichol in a modern de-
piction. Her dress is decorated with
symbols of the sacred cactus. The
Peyote is her gift to humans in order that
they may enter into contact with her. By
knowing her, man learns to respect and
honor the earth and use her wisely.
Top right: A Huichol man with the small
Peyote garden he has planted in his vil-
lage and which he lovingly cares for.
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 156 ---
i,-..
bear in mind the difference between
the aboriginal concept of a medicinal
agent and that of our modern Western
medicine. Indigenous societies, in gen-
eral, cannot conceive of natural death
or illness but believe that they are due
to supernatural interference. There are
two types of "medicines": those with
purely physical effects (that is, to re-
lieve toothache or digestive upsets);
and the medicines, par excellence, that
put the medicine man into communica-
tion, through a variety of visions, with
the malevolent spirits that cause illness
and death.
The factors responsible for the rapid
growth and tenacity of the Peyote re-
ligion in the United States are many
and interrelated. Among the most ob-
vious, however, and those most often
cited, are: the ease of legally obtaining
supplies of the hallucinogen; lack of
federal restraint; cessation of intertri-
bal warfare; reservation life with con-
sequentintermarriageandpeaceful
exchange of social and religious ideas;
ease of transportation and postal com-
munication; and the general attitude of
resignation toward encroaching Wes-
tern culture.
In the year 1995 the use of peyote by
membersoftheNativeAmerican
Church was made legal by Bill Clinton!
Above: A modern Peyote bird of the
Navajo.
Left: A Peyote fan (Navajo) made from
peacock feathers is used by the Indians
to induce visions.
155
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 157 ---
"There is a world beyond ours, a world
that is far away, nearby, and invisible.
And there is where God lives, where
the dead live, the spirits and the saints,
a world where everything has already
happened and everything is known.
That world talks. It has a language of
its own. I report what it says. The sacred
mushroom takes me by the hand and
brings me to the world where every-
thing is known. It is they, the sacred
mushrooms, that speak in a way I can
understand. I ask them and they answer
me. When I return from the trip that I
have taken with them, I tell what they
have told me and what they have shown
me."
Thus does the famous Mazatec sha-
man Maria Sabina reverently describe
the god-given powers of the intoxicat-
ing mushrooms that she uses in her
ceremony, which has come down from
ages past.
Few plants of the gods have ever been
held in greater reverence than the sacred
mushrooms of Mexico. So hallowed
were these fungi that the Aztecs called
them Teonanácatl ("divine flesh") and
used them only in the most holy of their
ceremonies. Even though,asfungi,
mushrooms do not blossom, the Aztecs
referred to them as "flower," and the In-
dians who still use them in religious ri-
tuals have endearing terms for them,
such as "little flowers."
When the Spaniards conquered Mex-
ico, they. were aghast to find the natives
worshiping their deities with the help of
inebriating plants: Peyotl, Ololiuqui,
Teonanácatl. The mushrooms were es-
pecially offensive to the European ec-
clesiastical authorities, and they set out
to eradicate their use in religious prac-
tices.
"They possessed another method of
intoxication, which sharpenedtheir
cruelty; for if they used certain small
toadstools...theywould see a thou-
sand visions and especially snakes
They called these mushrooms in their
languagewhich means
'God's flesh,' or of the Devil whom they
worshiped, and in this wise with that
bitter victual by their cruel God were
they houseled."
In 1656,aguide for missionaries ar-
gued against Indian idolatries, including
mushroom ingestion, and recommen-
ded their extirpation. Not only do re-
ports condemn Teonanácatl, but actual
illustrations also denounce it. One de-
picts the devil enticing an Indian to eat
the fungus; another has the devil per-
forming a dance upon a mushroom.
"But before explaining this [idola-
try]," one of the clerics said, "I wish to
explain the nature of the said mush-
rooms [that] were small and yellowish,
and to collect them the priests and old
men, appointed as ministers for these
impostures, went to the hills and re-
mained almost the whole night in sermo-
nizing and in superstitious praying. At
dawn, when a certain little breeze which
they know begins to blow, they would
gather them, attributing to them deity.
When they are eaten or drunk, they in-
toxicate, depriving those who partake of
them of their senses and making them
believe a thousand absurdities."
1.Psilocybe mexicana
2.Psilocybe somperviva
3.Psilocybe yungensis
F
4.Psilocybe caerulescens var. mazatecorum
5.Psilocybe caerulescens var. nigripes
LITTLE FLOWERS OF THE GODS22CONOCYBE
PANAEOLUS CYANESCENS
'" BlueMeanies
PANAEOLUS SPHINCTRINUS
Hoop-petticoat
PANAEOLUS SUBBALTEATUS
Us.) Dark-rimmed Mottlegill
PSILOCYBE CUBENSIS
IU San Isidro
PSILOCYBE CYANESCENS
''WavyCap
PSILOCYBE MEXICANA
° Teonanácatl
PSILOCYBE SEMILANCEATA
Liberty Cap
Above: One of the largest fruiting bodies
of Psiocybeazurescens everfound.
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 158 ---
Dr. Francisco Hernández, personal
physician to the king of Spain, wrote
that three kinds of intoxicating mush-
rooms were worshiped. After describ-
ingalethalspecies, he statedthat
"others when eaten cause not death but
madness that on occasion is lasting, of
which the symptom is a kind of uncon-
trolled laughter. Usually called teyhuin-
tli, these are deep yellow, acrid and of a
not displeasing freshness. There are
others again which, without inducing
laughter, bring before the eyes all kinds
of visions, such as wars and the likeness
of demons. Yet others are there not less
desired by princes for their fiestas and
banquets, of great price. With night-
long vigils are they sought, awesome
and terrifying. This kind is tawny and
somewhat acrid."
Forfourcenturiesnothing was
known of the mushroom cult; and it
was even doubted that mushrooms were
used hallucinogenically in ceremony.
The Church fathers had done such a
successful job of driving the cult into
hiding through persecution that no
anthropologist or botanist had ever un-
covered the religious use of these mush-
rooms until this century.
In 1916 an American botanist finally
proposed a "solution" to the identifica-
tion of Teonanácatl, concluding that
Teonanácatl and the Peyote were the
same drug. Motivated by distrust of the
chroniclers and Indians, he intimated
that the natives, to protect Peyote, were
indicating mushrooms to the authori-
ties. He argued that the dried, brownish,
disklike crown of Peyote resembles a
Below: In 1979 the largest and most potent mushroom
in the Psilocybe genus was found in Astoria, Oregon.
Psilocybe azurescens contains the highest concentra-
tion of psilocybine of all mushrooms.
6.Psilocybe cubensis
7.Psilocybe wassonhi
8.Psiocybe hoogshagenll
9.Psiocybe siligineoides
10.Panaeolus sphinctrinus
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 159 ---
Be/ow: In Europe and North America
there are countless modern artifacts
that reflect the contemporary mush-
room cult.
Above: Mushrooms with psychoactive
properties are found around the world.
In many places T-shirts with mushroom
motifs are available for the traveling
mushroom lover. Embroidery from
Kathmandu, Nepal.
Above right: The Psiocybe pel/iculosa
is a relatively weak moderately active
mushroom from the Pacific North West.
158
dried mushroom—so remarkably that it
will even deceive a mycologist. It was
not until the 1930s that an understand-
ing of the role of hallucinogenic mush-
rooms in Mexico and a knowledge of
their botanical identification and chemi-
calcompositionstartedto become
available. In the late 1930s the first two
of the many species of sacred Mexican
mushrooms were collected and asso-
ciated with a modern mushroom cere-
mony. Subsequent field research has
resulted in the discovery of some two
dozen species. The most important be-
long to the genus Psilocybe, twelve of
which have been reported, not includ-
ing Strop haria cubensis, sometimes con-
sidered a Psilocybe. The most important
species appear to be Psilocybe mexicana,
P. cub ensis, and P caerulescens.
These various mushrooms are now
known to be employed in divinatory
and religious rites among the Mazatec,
Chinantec,Chatino, Mixe, Zapotec,
and Mixtec of Oaxaca; the Nahua and
possibly the Otomi of Puebla; and the
Tarascans of Michoacan. The present
center of intensive use of the sacred
mushrooms is among the Mazatec.
Mushrooms vary in abundance from
year to year and at different seasons.
There may be years when one or more
species are rare or absent—they vary
in their distribution and are not ubi-
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 160 ---
quitous.Furthermore,each shaman
has his own favorite mushrooms and
may forgo others; Maria Sabina, for
example, will not use Psilocybe cuben-
sis. And certain mushrooms are used
for specific purposes. This means that
each ethnobotanicalexpedition may
not expect to find the same assortment
of species employed at one time, even
in the same locality and by the same
people.
Chemical studies have indicated that
psilocybine and, to a lesser extent, psi-
locine are present in many of the species
of the several genera associated with the
Mexican ceremony. In fact, these com-
pounds have been isolated from many
species of Psilocybe and other genera in
widely separated parts of the world,
although the evidence available suggests
that only in Mexico are psilocybine-
containing mushrooms at present uti-
lized in native ceremonies.
The modern mushroom ceremony is
an all-night seance that may include a
curing ritual. Chants accompany the
main part of the ceremony. The intoxi-
cation is characterized by fantastically
colored visions in kaleidoscopic move-
ment and sometimes by auditory hallu-
cinations, and the partaker loses himself
in unearthly flights of fancy.
The mushrooms are collected in the
forests at the time of the new moon by
a virgin girl, then taken to a church to
remain briefly on the altar. They are
never sold in the marketplace. The Ma-
zatec call the mushrooms Nti-si-tho, in
which "Nd" is a particle of reverence
and endearment; the rest of the name
means "that which springs forth." A
Mazatec explained this thought poeti-
cally: "The little mushroom comes of it-
self, no one knows whence, like the
wind that comes we know not whence
nor why."
The male or female shaman chants for
hours, with frequent clapping or percus-
sive slaps on the thighs in rhythm with
thechant.Maria Sabina'schanting,
which has been recorded, studied, and
translated, in great part proclaims hum-
bly her qualifications to cure and to inter-
pret divine power through the mush-
The Chemistry of Teonanácatl
"Woman who thunders am I, woman
who sounds am I.
Spiderwoman am I,hummingbird
woman am I...
Eagle woman am I, important eagle
woman am I.
Whirling woman of the whirlwind
am I, woman of a sacred, enchanted
place am I,-
Womanof the shooting stars am I."
R. Gordon Wasson, the first non-
Indian fully to witness the Mazatec
Left: The sixteenth-century Spanish
friar Bernardino de SahagCin
denounced the Aztec's sacramental
use of Teonanácatl, the "wondrous
mushroom." This drawing, which
appears infamous chronicle,
Codex Florentino, depicts a demonlike
spirit over crudely drawn mushrooms.
Teonanácatl, the sacred mushrooms of Mexico, owe their hallucinogenic ef-
fects to two alkaloids known as psilocybine and psilocine.
The main component, psilocybine, is the phosphoric acid ester of psilocine,
which occurs usually only in trace elements. Psilocybine and psilocine, being
tryptamine derivatives, belong to the class of indole alkaloids. Their crystals
are shown on page 23; their chemical structure on page 186. The chemical
relationship of these hallucinogens to the physiological compound serotonine
is especially significant. Serotonine, the molecular model of which is shown
on page 187, is a neurotransmitter and, therefore, important in the biochem-
istry of psychic functions. Both psilocybine and psilocine can be produced
synthetically. The active dose in man is 6—12mg. Twenty to 30mg induce
strong visions.
rooms. Excerpts from her chant, all in
the beautiful tonal Mazatec language,
give an idea of her many "qualifications."
Above left; In Mexico an unusual saint
named El Niño is worshiped in the
Catholic Church. The Mexican Indians
understand him as an embodiment of
the sacred mushroom, which they also
call Niño. (Altar in San Cristóbal de Las
Casas, Chiapas)
Above right: The tropical Magic Mush-
room Psiocybe cubensis (Stropharia
cubensis) was first gathered in Cuba
and mycologically ascertained, It grows
in all tropical zones, preferring cow
manure.
159
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 161 ---
In 1958, the famous Mazatec shaman
Maria Sabina performed a Velada (night
vigil) on behalf of a seventeen-year-old
youth, Pefecto José Garcia, who was
seriously ill.
Left to right: Pefecto awaits the com-
mencement of the Velada.
Pefecto stands up at the beginning of
the ceremony, and Maria Sabina turns
her head to gaze at him.
The shaman has incensed pairs of
sacred mushrooms and hands Pefecto
the intoxicating plant for ingestion.
Pefecto has heard the unfavorable
diagnosis, which Maria Sabina has
learned through the help of the mush-
rooms—that there is no hope for his
recovery. Re collapses in terror and
despair.
The shaman and her daughter, adverse
diagnosis notwithstanding, continue to
chant, hoping for more insight—even
though she has learned that Pefecto's
soul has been irrevocably lost.
160
ceremony, wrote the following under-
standing thoughts about this use of the
mushrooms:
"Here let me say a word about the
nature of the psychic disturbance that
the eating of the mushroom causes. This
disturbance is wholly different from the
effect of alcohol, as different as night
from day. We are entering upon a dis-
cussion in which the vocabulary of the
English language, of any European lan-
guage, is seriously deficient.
"There are no apt words in it to char-
acterize one's state when one is, shall we
say, 'bemushroomed.' For hundreds,
even thousands,of years, we have
thought about these things in terms of
alcohol, and we now have to break the
bounds imposed on us by our alcoholic
obsession. We are all, willy-nilly, con-
fined within the prison walls ofour
everyday vocabulary. With skill in our
choice of words, we may stretch ac-
cepted meanings to cover slightly new
feelings and thoughts, but when a state
of mind is utterly distinct, wholly novel,
then all our old words fail. How do you
tell a man who has been born blind what
seeing is like? In the present case this is
an especially apt analogy, because su-
perficiallythebemushroomed man
shows a few of the objective symptoms
of one who is intoxicated, drunk. Now
virtually all the words describing the
state of drunkenness, from 'intoxicated'
(whichliterallymeans'poisoned')
through the scores of current vulgar-
isms, are contemptuous, belittling,pe-
jorative. How curious it is that modern
civilized man finds surcease from care in
a drug for which he seems to have no
respect! If we use by analogy the terms
suitable for alcohol, we prejudice the
mushroom, and since there are few
among us who have been bemush-
roomed, there is danger that the experi-
ence will not be fairly judged. What we
need is a vocabulary to describe all the
modalities of a divine inebriant..
Uponreceiving six pairs of mush-
rooms in the ceremony, Wasson ate
them. He experienced the sensation of
his soul being removed from his body
and floating in space. He saw "geometric
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 162 ---
patterns,angular,inrichestcolors,
which grew into architectural struc-
tures, the stonework in brilliant colors,
gold and onyx and ebony, extending
beyond the reach of sight, in vistas mea-
surelesstoman. Thearchitectural
visions seemed to be oriented, seemed
to belong to the...architecturede-
scribed by the visionaries of the Bible."
In the faint moonlight, "the bouquet on
the table assumed the dimensions and
shape of an imperial conveyance, a tri-
umphant car, drawn by ...creatures
known only to mythology."
Mushrooms have apparently been
ceremonially employed in Mesoamerica
for many centuries. Several early sources
have suggested that Mayan languages in
Guatemala had mushrooms named for
the underworld. Miniature mushroom
stones, 2,200 years of age, have been
found in archaeological sites near Gua-
temala City, and it has been postulated
that stone mushroom effigies buried
with a Mayan dignitary suggested a
connection with the Nine Lords of the
Xibalba, described in the sacred book
Popol Vuh. Actually, more than two
hundred mushroom stone effigies have
been discovered, the oldest dating from
the first millennium B.c.Although the
majority are Guatemalan, some have
been unearthed in El Salvador and Hon-
duras and others as far north as Vera-
cruz and Guerrero in Mexico. It is now
clear that whatever the use of these
"mushroom stones," they indicate the
great antiquity of a sophisticated sacred
use of hallucinogenic mushrooms.
A superb statue of Xochipilli, Aztec
Prince of Flowers, from the early six-
teenth century, was recently discovered
on the slopes of the volcano Mt.Popo-
catepetl (see illustration, p. 62). His face
is in ecstasy, as though seeing visions in
an intoxication;his headisslightly
tilted, as though hearing voices. His
body is engraved with stylized flowers
that have been identified as sacred, most
of them inebriating, plants. The pedestal
on which he sits isdecorated with a de-
sign representing cross-sections of the
caps of Psilocybe aztecorum, ahalluci-
nogenic mushroom known only from
"The niños santos (Psilo-
cybe mexicana) heal.
They lower fevers, cure
colds, and give freedom
from toothaches. They
pull the evil spirits out of
the body or free the spirit
of the sick."
—Maria Sabina
161
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 163 ---
Right: A celebrant depicted in the
sixteenth-century MagliabecChiaflO
Codexis ingesting a pair of hallucino-
genic mushrooms during a sacred rite.
Behind him is the Lord of the Under-
world, Mictlantlcuhtli. The three jade
green mushrooms in front of the cele-
brant undoubtedly were painted in this
color to indicate their great value as
sacred objects.
Above: Albert Hofmann visited the sha-
man Maria Sabina in 1962 and took
many portraits of her.
Page 163: The sincerity and absolute
faith in the revelatory power of the
mushrooms is evident in these photo-
graphs of Maria Sabina, who, during the
nightlong chanting and clapping cere-
mony, feels herself fully in contact with
the other world, which the mushrooms
have allowed her to visit.
162
this volcano. Thus Xochipilli undoubt-
edly represents not simply the Prince of
Flowers but more specifically the Prince
of Inebriating Flowers, including the
mushrooms that,in Nahuatl poetry;
were called "flowers" and "flowers that
intoxicate."
Have psilocybine-containing mush-
rooms ever been employed as magico-
religioushallucinogensinthe New
World? The answer is probably yes.
A species of Psilocybe and possibly
also Panaeolus are used today near the
classicMaya ceremonialcenterof
Palenque, and hallucinogenic mush-
rooms have been reported in use along
the border between Chiapas in Mexico
and Guatemala. Whether these mod-
ern mushroom practices in the Maya
region representvestigesof former
use or have been recently introduced
from Oaxaca it is not possible as yet
to say.
Nevertheless, evidence is now accu-
mulating to indicate that a mushroom
cult flourished in prehistoric times—
from 100 B.C. to about A.D. 300—400 in
northwestern Mexico: in Colima, Jalis-
co, and Nayarit. Funerary effigies, with
two "horns" protruding from the head,
are believed to represent male and fe-
male "deities" or priests associated with
mushrooms. Traditions among contem-
porary Huichol Indians in Jalisco also
suggest the former religious use of these
fungi "in ancient times."
What about South America, where
these psychoactive mushrooms abound?
There is no evidence of such use today,
but indications of their apparent former
employment are many. The Yurimagua
Indians of the Peruvian Amazon were
reported in the late seventeenth and
early eighteenth centuries to be drinking
a potently inebriating beverage made
from a "tree fungus." The Jesuit report
stated that the Indians "mix mushrooms
that grow on fallen trees with a kind of
reddish film that is found usually at-
tached to rotting trunks. This film is
very hot to the taste. No person who
drinks this brew fails to fall under its ef-
fects after three draughts of it, since it is
so strong, or more correctly, so toxic." It
has been suggested that the tree mush-
room might have been the psychoactive
Psilocybe yungensis, which occurs in this
region.
In Colombia, many anthropomor-
phic gold pectorals with two domelike
ornaments on the head have been found.
They are in the so-called Darien style,
and the majority of them have been un-
earthed in the Sing area of northwestern
Colombia and in the Calima region on
the Pacific coast. For lack of a better
term, they have been called "telephone-
bellgods,"sincethe hollow semi-
spherical ornaments resemble the bells
of old-fashioned telephones. It has been
suggested that they represent mush-
room effigies. The discovery of similar
artifacts in Panama and Costa Rica and
one in Yucatan might be interpreted to
suggest a prehistoric continuum of a
sacred mushroom cult from Mexico to
South America.
Farther to the south in South America,
thereisarchaeological evidence that
may suggest the religious importance
of mushrooms. Moche effigy stirrup
vessels from Peru, for example, have
mushroomlike cephalic ornaments.
While the archaeological evidence is
convincing, the almost complete lack of
reference in colonial literature to such
use of mushrooms, and the absence of
any known modern hallucinogenic use
of mushrooms among aboriginal groups
of South America, gives cause for cau-
tion in the interpretation of what other-
wise might easily be interpretedas
ancient mushroom effigies from south
of Panama. If, however, it becomes evi-
dent that the various archaeological
artifacts from South America men-
tioned above do represent hallucino-
genic mushrooms, then the area for
their significance in America will be
greatly amplified.
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 164 ---
"I take the 'little one who springs up out of the earth'
(Psilocybe caerulescens) and Isee God.
I see him springing up
out of the earth."
—Maria Sabina
-4
163
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 165 ---
02
SALVIADIVINORUM
oHierbade Ia PastoraDIVINER'S SAGE
Page 165 top left: Painted nettle is used
by the Mazatecs as a replacement for
Salvia divinorum.
Page 165 top right: Coleus pumilus is
considered by the Mazatecs to be re-
lated to Salvia divinorum.
Page 165 middle: Salvia divinorum in
the Mexican rain forest.
164
pastora (leaf of the shepherd) or pas-
tora, in rituals associated with divina-
tion or healing, generally as a substitute
for the otherwise preferred psychoac-
tive mushrooms. Maria Sabina remar-
ked: "When I am in the time that there
are no mushrooms and want to heal
someone who is sick, then I must fall
back on the leaves of pastora. When
you grind them up and eat them, they
work just like the niños. But, of course,
pastora has nowhere near as much po-
wer as the mushrooms."
The ritual use is remarkably similar to
the use of mushrooms. Salvinia divi-
norurn rituals take place at night in
complete darkness and stillness. Either
the healer is alone with the patient or
there are also other patients and possi-
bly some healthy participants present.
Before the shaman chews and sucks on
the leaves, they are held over some
burningCopalincense,and some
prayers are said to consecrate the leaves.
After chewing the leaves, the partici-
pants lie down and remain as still and
silentaspossible.Salvia ritualslast
barely longer than one to two hours, as
the effects of the leaves last a signifi-
cantly shorter time than those of mush-
rooms. If the visions are strong enough,
the healer finds the cause of the illness,
or some other problem. He or she gives
the patient appropriate advice and ends
the meeting.
Salvia divinoruni, which is also known
as Aztec sage, is native to the Mazatec
areas of the Sierra Madre Oriental in
the Mexican state of Oaxaca. It grows
naturally in tropical rain forests in an
altitude of three hundred to eighteen
hundred meters. Salvia divinoruni, be-
cause of its limited geographic habitat,
belongs to the rarest of psychoactive
Right: Salvia diviriorum is easy toCloselyassociatedwith theIndian
recognize byitssquarestem.mushroomcults is the use of another
psychoactive plant, Hierba de la Pastora
Below:Apaste madeof thefresh leavesSalviadivinorum). Itis not entirely
ofSalvia divinorum is chewed slowly,clear ifitwas used in thepre—Spanish
times.Itis possible that it was the
Pipiltzintzintli of the Aztecs.
The male or female shamans of the
Mazatecs of Oaxaca use Salvia divinor-
urn, which is also known as hoja de la
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 166 ---
plants, but is cultivated by plant lovers
all over the world. This reproduction is
achieved with cuttings.
The Mazatecs take thirteen pairs of
fresh leaves (twenty-six leavesalto-
gether) and twist them into a kind of ci-
gar or chaw, which is put into the mouth
and sucked or chewed. The juice is not
swallowed, but the active ingredients
are absorbed through the mucous mem-
branes in the side of the mouth. For one
of these cigars, it takes at least six fresh
leaves, but one can use eight or ten
leaves for a stronger effect. The effects
with the chewing method begin in al-
most exactly ten minutes and last ap-
proximately forty-five minutes.
The dried leaves can also be smoked.
With this method, half of a fairly large
leaf (two or three deep inhalations) in-
duces a strong psychoactive reaction.
Generally, one or two leaves are smoked.
Most people who have smoked,
chewed, or taken a tincture of Salvia di-
vinorum report very bizarre, unusual
psychoactive effects, which are not very
comparable with euphoric or psychede-
lic substances. There is often perceived
to be a "bending" of space; and a feeling
df swaying or out-of-body experiences
is also typical.
In the traditional taxonomy of the
Mazatecs, Salvia divinorum is related
to two forms of labiates. Salvia is known
as the "mother" (la hembra), Coleuspu-
milus is considered to be the "father" (el
macho), and Coleus blumei is known as
el nene (the child) and el ahiajado, the
godchild. The fresh leaves are used just
as those of Salvia divinorum—that is,
they are chewed like chewing tobacco.
This connection gives the Coleus the re-
putation of being psychoactive plants.The leaves contain the neocerodan-diterpenes salvinorin A andsalvinorin B
(also known as divinorin A and divinorin B), as well as two other,similar sub-
stances that have not yet been precisely identified. Themain ingredient is
salvinorin A (chemical formula: C23H2805), which has extremeconscious-
ness-altering effects with amounts as small as 150—500mg.Salvinorin is not
an alkaloid. It was first described by Ortega et al. bythe name of salvinorin
(1982). Later, Valdes et al. described it under the name of divinorinA (1984).
The neurochemistry of salvinorin is still an unsolved puzzle. Theingredients
have not bound to any receptors in any receptor tests (theNovaScreen meth-
od). The plant also contains loliolid.
165
What Was Pipiltzintzintli?
The ancient Aztecs knew and used a plant called Pipiltzintzintli (the purest
little prince) very similarly to the use of Psilocybe mexicana in entheogenic
rituals. There are masculine and feminine forms of this plant, macho and
hembra. in the National Archives in Mexico City, there are Inquisition files
from the years 1696, 1698, and 1706 that mention Pipiltzintzin and hint at its
intoxicating effects. Various authors have taken this to be Salvia divinorum.
The Chemistry of Salvia divinorum
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 167 ---
flA TRICHOCEREUS
San PedroCACTUS OF THE FOURWINDS
Above left: Pieces of San Pedro piled up
for sale in the "witches' market" in
Chiclayo in northern Peru.
Above right: The fast-growing San
Pedro cactus develops few, if any,
thorns when cultivated.
166
""San Pedro hasa special symbolism in
curanderismo [folk healing] fora rea-
son: San Pedro is always in tune with
•..thepowers of animals, of strong per-
sonages or beings, of serious beings, of
beings that have supernaturalpower. .
TheSan Pedro cactus, Trichocereus
pachanoi, represents undoubtedlyone
of the most ancient of the magic plants
of South America. The oldest archaeo-
logical evidence,a ChavIn stone carving
in a temple in northern Peru,goes back
to 1300 B.C. Almost equally old textiles
from ChavIn depict thecactus with ja-
guar and hummingbird figures. Peru-
vian ceramics made between 1000 and
700 B.C. show the plant in association
with the deer; and others, several hun-
dred years later, have thecactus with
the jaguar and stylized spirals illustrat-
ing the hallucinogenic experiences in-
duced by the plant. On the southern
coast of Peru, large ceramic urns of the
Nazca culture, dated 100B. C.—A.D. 500,
depict San Pedro.
The use of Trichocereuswas wide-
spread in Peru when the Spanishar-
rived. One ecclesiasticalreport said that
shamans ""drinka beverage they call
Achuma which isa water they make
from the sap ofsome thick and smooth
cacti.. ." and""as it is very strong, after
they drink it they remain withoutjudg-
ment and deprived of their senses, and
they see visions that the devilrepresents
to them. .." Aswith Peyote in Mexico,
the Roman Church foughtagainst the
San Pedro cactus: ""This is the plantwith
which the devil deceived the Indians...
in their paganism, using it for theirlies
and superstitions...thosewho drink
lose consciousness and remainasif
dead; and it haseven been seen that
some have died because of the great fri-
gidity to the brain. Transportedby the
drink, the Indians dreameda thousand
absurdities and believed themas if they
were true. .
Themodern use of the San Pedrocac-
tus, along the coastal regions of Peru
and in the Andes of Peru and Bolivia,
has been greatly affected byChristian
influence—influenceseven in the name
applied to the plant, originatingpossi-
bly in the Christian belief thatSt. Peter
holds the keys to heaven. But theoverall
context of the moon-oriented ritualsur-
rounding its use indicates that it istruly
an amalgan of pagan and Christian ele-
ments.
San Pedro is now employedto cure
sickness, including alcoholism andin-
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 168 ---
The Chemistry of San Pedro
Trichocereus contains as its main alkaloid mescaline, responsible for the vi-
sual hallucinogenic effects. From dried specimens of San Pedro, 2 percent
mescaline has been isolated. In addition, hordenine has also been detected.
sanity,for divination, to undo love
witchcraft, to counter all kinds of sor-
cery, and to ensure success in personal
ventures. It is only one—but the princi-
pal one—of many "magical" plants
known to and used by shamans and col-
lected near sacred lagoons high in the
Andes.
At these lagoons, shamans go annu-
ally for purification and to visit special
individuals,expertsinsorcery and
"owners" of divine plants capable of
awaking, with San Pedro, supernatural
spiritual powers. Even the sick exert
themselves to make pilgrimages to these
remote holy places. It is thought that
the penitent may undergo a metamor-
phosis in these lagoons and that the
plants, especially San Pedro, from these
areas possess extraordinarily powerful
properties to cure illness and to influ-
ence witchcraft.
Shamans specify four "kinds" of the
cactus, distinguished by the number of
ribs: those with four ribs are rare and
considered to be the most potent, with
very special supernatural powers, since
the four ribs represent the "four winds"
and the "four roads."
The cactus is known in northern coast-
al Peru as San Pedro, in the northern
Top: The San Pedro cactus
(Trichocereus pachanol).
Above left: The flowers of San Pedro
remain closed during the daytime.
Above right: In the early evening the
large flowers of the San Pedro blossom
in sumptuous splendor.
Far left: A species from the Trichocer-
eus genus that has not yet been
botanically categorized. It grows in
northwestern Argentina, where it is also
called San Pedro and used psycho-
actively.
167
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 169 ---
Top left: A ceramic pot from the ChimO
culture, A.D.1200.The owl-faced
female depicted on this vessel is prob-
ably an herbalist and shaman; she holds
Huachuma (Trichocereus). Even today
in native markets, the women who sell
the hallucinogenicare usually
both herbalists and shamans, and
according to native beliefs, the owl is
associated with these women.
Top right: There are many herbs called
"conduro' that belong to different gen-
era (for example, Lycopodium) and are
traditionally used as ingredients in the
San Pedro drink.
Middle: A north Peruvian curandero
(healer) sets up his 'mesa" for the San
Pedro ritual on the banks of Shimbe
Lake.
Below right: The mesa is surrounded by
magical staves. They are either from
pre-Columbian graves or modern repli-
cas made from the Amazonian Chonta
Palm.
168
Andean area as Huachuma, and in Boli-
via as Achuma; the Bolivian term c/rn-
marse ("to get drunk") is derived from
Achuma. Aguacolla and Gigantón are its
Ecuadorean names.
The stems of the cactus, normally
purchased in the market, are sliced like
bread and boiled for up to seven hours
in water. After the drinking of San Ped-
ro, other medicinal herbs, the help of
which is frequently sought, begin to talk
to the shaman, activating his own "inner
power." San Pedro may be taken alone,
but often other plants, separately boi-
led, are added and the drink is then
called Cimora. Among the numerous
plant additives employed are the An-
dean cactus Neoraimondia macrostibas,
a species of the amaranthaceous Iresine,
the euphorbiaceous Pedilanthus tithy-
maloides, and Isotoma Ion giflora of the
Campanulaceae. All of these plants, ex-
ceptIresine, may have biodynamic
principles. Iresine has the reputation of
curing "insanity." Brugmansia aurea
and B. san guinea, two potent hallucino-
gens in their own right, are frequently
added.
Only in recent years has San Pedro
been correctly identified. In early che-
mical and psychiatric studies in Peru,
the cactus was misidentified as Opuntia
cylindrica. Only recently have studies
indicated the great significance of the
vegetal additives, an investigation that
deserves more attention. On occasion,
magic demands that other additives be
employed; powdered bones andceme-
tery dust are commonly used to ensure
the effectiveness of the brew. As one ob-
server has stated: San Pedro is "the cat-
alystthatactivatesallthe complex
forces at work in a folk healing session,
especially the visionary and divinatory
powers" of the shaman, who can make
himself the owner of another man's
identity. But the magic of San Pedro
goes far beyond curing and divination,
for it is believed to guard houses likea
dog, whistling in an unearthly fashion
and forcing intruders to flee in terror.
The principal effects of Trichocereus
pachanoi have been described bya sha-
man: "...thedrug first produces
drowsiness or a dreamy state anda feel-
ing of lethargy...aslight dizziness
then a great 'vision,' a clearing of all the
faculties...Itproduces a light numb-
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 170 ---
ness in the body and afterward a tran-
quillity. And then comes detachment, a
type of visual force ...inclusiveof all
the senses...includingthe sixth sense,
the telepathic sense of transmitting one-
self across time and matter...likea
kind of removal of one's thought to a
distant dimension."
"Four-ribbed cacti... areconsidered
to be very rare and very lucky... to
have special properties
because they correspond
to the 'four winds' and the 'four
roads,
supernatural powers associated with
the cardinal points
—Douglas Sharon
During the ritual, participants are
"set free from matter" and engage in
flight through cosmic regions. It was
probably shamans who used the San
Pedro cactus that a Spanish officer in
Cuzco, Peru, described in the sixteenth
century: "Among the Indians, there
was another class of wizards, permitted
by the Incas to a certain degree, who
are like sorcerers. They take the form
they want and go along distance
through the air in a short time; and
they see what is happening, they speak
with the devil, who answers them in
certain stones or in other things that
they venerate..."Ecstaticmagical
flight is still characteristic of the con-
temporary San Pedro ceremony: "San
Pedro is an aid which one uses to ren-
der the spirit more pleasant, more man-
ageable...Oneis transported across
time, matter, and distance in a rapid
and safe fashion ..
The shaman may take the drug him-
self or give it only to the patient, or both
may take it. The aim of this shamanic
curing ritualisto make the patient
"bloom" during the night ceremony, to
make his subconscious "open like a
flower," even like the night-blooming
Trichocereus itself. Patients sometimes
are contemplative and calm, sometimes
break into dancing or even throw them-
selves writhing on the ground.
As with so many other hallucinogens,
here is a plant given by the gods to man
to help him experience an ecstasy—
separation of the soul from the body—
"in a very tenuous, simple fashion and
almost instantaneously." This ecstasy
provides preparations for the sacred
flight that enables man to experience
mediation between his mortal existence
and the supernatural forces—an activity
establishing direct contact through this
plant of the gods.
Top left: Harvested and stored pieces
of San Pedro continue living and often
begin growing again after months, even
years.
Top right: The Wolf's Milk plant (Pedi-
lanthus tithymaloides) is sometimes
added to the San Pedro drink in order to
strengthen its effects. Sometimes is has
been said that Pedilanthus is hallucino-
genic, but this has not been proved.
Above: The view of the mesa gives a
clear impression of the syncretic cos-
mology of the modern healer. Gods and
deities from different cultures lay next to
snail shells, archaeological objects, and
perfume bottles.
169
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 171 ---
IPOMOEA
Morning Glory
05TURBINA
"Ololiuqui
VINES OF THE SERPENT
Top right: Flying Saucers are a favorite
cultivated strain of the enchanting
Morning Glory, lpomoea violacea.
Above: An early painting of Ololiuqui
from Sahagün's Historia de las Cosas
qe Nueva España, written in the second
half of the sixteenth century, clearly de-
picts the plant as a Morning Glory.
170
Four centuries ago, a Spanish mission-
ary in Mexico wrote: "Ololiuqui. ..de-
prives all who use it of their reason
The natives communicate in this way
with the devil, for they usually talk
when they become intoxicated with
Ololiuqui, and they are deceived by var-
ious hallucinations which they attribute
to the deity which they say resides in
the seeds..
Arecent report indicates that Ololiu-
qui has not lost its association with the
deity in Oaxaca: "Throughout these re-
ferences we see two cultures in a duel to
death [the Spanish and the Indians]
[with] the tenacity and wiles of the In-
dians defending their cherished Ololiu-
qui. The Indians seem to have won out.
Today in almost all the villages of Oax-
aca one finds the seeds still serving the
natives as an ever present help in time of
trouble." As with the sacred mush-
rooms, the use of the hallucinogenic
Morning Glories, so significant in the
life of pre-Hispanic Mexico, hid in the
hinterlands until the present century.
A Spanish report written shortly after
the Conquest stated that the Aztecs have
"an herb called coatl-xoxo uhqui [green
snake], and it bears a seed called Ololiu—
qui." An early drawing depicts it as a
Morning Glory with congested fruits,
cordate leaves, a tuberous root, and a
twining habit. In 1651, the physician of
the king of Spain, Francisco Hernández,
identified Ololiuqui as a Morning Glory
and professionally reported: "Ololiu-
qui, which some call Coaxihuitl or snake
plant, is a twining herb with thin, green,
cordate leaves;slender, green, terete
stems; and long, white flowers. The seed
is round and very much like coriander,
whence the name [in Nahuatl, the term
Ololiuqui means 'round thing'] of the
plant. The roots are fibrous and slender.
The plant is hot in the fourth degree. It
cures syphilis and mitigates pain which
is caused by chills. It relieves flatulency
and removes tumors. If mixed with a lit-
tle resin, it banishes chills and stimulates
and aids in a remarkable degree in cases
of dislocations, fractures, and pelvic
troubles in women. The seed has some
medicinal use. If pulverized or taken in
a decoction Or used as a poultice on the
head or forehead with milk and chili, it is
said to cure eye troubles. When drunk, it
acts as an aphrodisiac. It has a sharp taste
and is very hot. Formerly, when the
priests wanted to commune with their
gods and to receive a message from
them, they ate this plant to induce a de-
lirium. A thousand visions and satanic
hallucinations appeared to them. In its
manner of action, this plant can be com-
pared with Solanum maniacumof
Top left The Ololiuqui vine Turbina
corymbosa.
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 172 ---
Dioscorides. It grows in warm places in
the fields."
Other early references stated that
"Ololiuqui is a kind of seed like the len-
til...producedby a species of ivy...;
when it is drunk, this seed deprives of
his senses him who has taken it, for it is
very powerful" and that "it will not be
wrong to refrain from telling where it
groes, for it matters little that this plant
be here described or the Spaniards be
made acquainted with it." Another wri-
ter marveled: "Itis remarkable how
much faith these natives have in the
seed, for... they consult it as an oracle
to learn many things. ..especiallythose
beyond the power of the human
mind to penetrate...Theyconsult it
through one of their deceiving doctors,
someof whom practiceOloliuqui
drinking as a profession ...Ifa doctor
who does not drink Ololiuqui wishes to
free a patient of some trouble, he advises
the patient himself to partake ...The
doctor appoints the day and hour when
the drink must be taken and establishes
the reason for the patient's drinking it.
Finally, the one drinking Ololiuqui
must seclude himself in his room. ..No
one must enter during his divination...
He...believesthe Ololiuqui...is
revealing what he wants to know. When
the delirium is passed, the doctor comes
out of seclusion reciting a thousand
Above left: The very woody trunk of the
Ololiuqui vine.
Above right: The capsules and seeds of
Ipomoea violacea are characteristic.
Below: The European bindweed
Convolvulus tricolor also contains
psychoactive alkaloids, although there
is no knowledge of any traditional use.
The Chemistry of the
Lysergic acid alkaloids are the hallucinogenic compounds of Ololiuqul. They
are indole alkaloids that have also been isolated from Ergot. Lysergic acid
amide, also known as ergine, and lysergic acid hydroxyethylamide are the
main components of the alkaloid mixture in Ololiuqui. Their molecular ar-
rangement is shown on page 187. The tryptamine radical in the ring structure
of lysergic acid establishes its relationship with these ergoline alkaloids as
well as with the active principles of Psilocybe and of the brain hormone ser-
otonine.
LSD, lysergic acid diethylamide, a semi-synthetic compound, is the most
potent hallucinogen known today. It differs from lysergic acid amide only by
replacement of two hydrogen atoms for two ethyl groups (p. 187). The active
principle of Ololiuqui (hallucinogenic dose 2—5mg), however, is about 100
times less potent than LSD (hallucinogenic dose 0.05 mg).
171
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 173 ---
Above: An ancient Indian Mother God-
dess and her priestly attendants with a
highly stylized vine of Ololiuqui, in one
of the murals from Teotihuacán, Mexico,
dated about A. D. 500. Hallucinogenic
nectar appears to flow from the blos-
soms of the plant, and disembodied
eyes" and birds are other stylistic fea-
tures associated with hallucinogenic
intoxication.
172
fabrications...thuskeeping the patient
deceived." The confession of an Aztec
penitent illustrates the Ololiuqui asso-
ciation with witchcraft: "I have believed
in dreams, in magic herbs, in Peyote, in
Ololiuqui, in the owi..
TheAztecs prepared a salve that they
employed in making sacrifices: "They
took poisonous insects...burnedthem
and beat the ashes together with the
foot of the ocoti,Tobacco,Ololiuqui
and some live insects. They presented
this diabolical mixture to their gods
and rubbed their bodies with it. When
thus anointed, they became fearless to
every danger." Another reference as-
serted that "they place the mixture be-
fore their gods, saying that it is the food
of the gods...andwith it they become
witch-doctors and commune with the
devil."
In 1916, an American botanist sus-
pected erroneously that Ololiuqui was
a species of Datura.Hisreasons were
several: Datura; was a well-known in-
toxicant; its flower resembled a Morn-
ing Glory; no psychoactive principle
was known from the Morning Glory
family; the symptoms of Ololiuqui in-
toxication resembled those caused by
Datura; and "a knowledge of botany
has been attributed to the Aztecs which
they were far from possessing.-.The
botanical knowledge of the early Span-
Right: In South America the bindweed
Ipomoea carnea is used as an inebriant.
It also has the psychoactive alkaloid
ergotine.
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 174 ---
Left: The Morning Glory Ipomoea viola-
cea as a wildflower in southern Mexico.
ish writers... wasperhaps not muchAbove:Depiction ofMorning Glories
more extensive." This misidentificationand visionary eyes on an ancient Indian
waswidely accepted.wall painting in Tepantitla (Teotihuacán).
Only in 1939 was identifiable mate-
rialof Turbina coryrr.zbosacollectedLeft:Xtabentun, "theJewel Cordial"asit
among the Chinantec and Zapotec ofis called, is made out of honey from the
Oaxaca, where it was cultivated for hal-
Ololiuqui flower.
lucinogenic use. The Chinantec name
A-mu-kia means "medicine for divina-
tion." Thirteen seeds are usually ground
up and drunk with water or in an alco-
holic beverage. Intoxication rapidly be-
gins and leads to visual hallucinations.
There may be an intervening stage of
giddiness, followed by lassitude, eu-
phoria, and drowsiness and a somnam-
bulistic narcosis. The Indian may be
173
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 175 ---
174
dimly aware of what is going on and is
susceptible to suggestions. The visions
are often grotesque, portraying people
or events. The natives say that the intox-
ication lasts three hours and seldom has
unpleasant aftereffects. Ololiuqui is ta-
ken at night and, in contrast to Peyote
and the mushrooms, is administered toa
single individual alone in a quiet,se-
cluded place.
The use of seeds of Turbina corymbo-
sa has been recorded for the Chinantec,
Mazatec, and others in Oaxaca. They
are known in Oaxaca as Piule, although
each tribe has its own name for the
seeds.
The name Ololiuqui seems to have
been applied to several plants by the
Aztecs, but only one was psychoactive.
Of one, an early report states: "There is
an herb called Ololiuqui or Xixicamatic
which has leaves like miltomate [Physa-
us sp.] and thin, yellow flowers. The
root is round and as large as a cabbage."
This plant could not be Turbina corym-
bosa, but its identity remains a mystery.
The third Ololiuqui, also called Hu-
eyytzontecon, was used medicinally as a
purgative,acharacteristic suggesting
the Morning Glory family, but the plant
is not convolvulaceous.
Another Morning Glory, Ipomoea
violacea, was valued as a sacred halluci-
nogen among the Aztecs, who called
the seeds Tlitliltzin, from the Nahuati
term for "black" with a reverential suf-
fix. The seeds of this Morning Glory
areelongate,angular,andblack,
whereas those of Turbina corymbosa
are round and brown. One ancient re-
portmentionsboth,assertingthat
Peyote, Ololiuqui, and Tlitliltzin are
all psychoactive. Ipomoea violacea is
used especiallyinthe Zapotec and
Chatin area of Oaxaca, where itis
known as Badoh Negro or, in Zapotec,
Badungás. In some Zapotec villages
both Turbina coryn'zbosa and Iponioea
violacea are known; in others, only the
latter is used. The black seeds are often
Below: A Zapotec shaman in San Bar-
tolo Yautepec, Mexico, preparing an in-
fusion of seeds of Ipomoca violacea.
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 176 ---
called macho ("male") and men take
them; the brown seeds, called hembra
("female"),are ingested by women.
The black seeds are more potent than
the brown, according to the Indians,
an assertion borne out by chemical stu-
dies. The dose is frequently seven or a
multiple of seven; at other times, the
familiar thirteen is the dose.
As with Turbina, Badoh Negro seeds
are ground and placed in a gourd with
water. The solid particles are strained
out, and the liquid is drunk. Revelations
of the cause of illness or divinations are
provided during the intoxication by
"intermediaries"—the fantastical badu-
win, or two little girls in white who ap-
pear during the séance.
A recent report of the use of seeds of
Ipomoea violacea among the Zapotec
indicates that Badoh Negro is indeed a
significant element in the life of these
Indians: "...Divinationabout recovery
in sickness is also practiced by means of
a plant which is described as a narcotic.
This plant... growsin the yard...ofa
family who sells its leaves and seeds
to administer to patients...Thepa-
tient, who must be alone with the curer
if not in a solitary place where he cannot
hear even a cock's crow, falls into a sleep
during which the little ones, male and
female, the plant children [baclor], come
and talk. These plant spirits will also
give information about lost objects."
The modern ritual with Morning Glory
seeds now has incorporated Christian
elements. Some of the names—Semilla
de la Virgen ("seed of the Virgin") and
Hierba Maria ("Mary's herb ")—show
union of the Christian with the pagan,
and clearly an indication that Turbina
corymbosa and Ipomoea violacea are
considered gifts from the gods.
Top: Leftare the ocher-colored, some-
what round seeds of Turbina corym-
bosa. On the right are the black, angular
seeds of the Ipomoea violacea.
Above: The shaman administers the in-
fusion to a patient, assisted by a young
girl. The brew must be taken at night in a
secluded and quiet place. The patient's
problems will be diagnosed by the sha-
man from interpretation of what he says
while under the influence of the plants.
175
Page 174 top: The Cuban stamp on the
left of Turbina corymbosa was issued at
Christmastime. T corymbosa is very
abundant in the western part of the
island and flowers in December. The
Hungarian stamp on the right indicates
the horticultural importance of lpomoea
violacea and its varieties.
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 177 ---
VIROLA
EpenáSEMEN OF THE SUN
Above: The seeds of Virola surinamen-
sis, called Ucuba, are used ethnome-
dicinally.
Below right: The most important spe-
cies of Virola in hallucinogenic prepara-
tions is V theiodora, of the north-
western Amazon. Virola is an American
genus related to the Old World genus of
the Nutmeg. The tiny flowers of Virola
have a highly pungent fragrance.
176
At the beginning of time, Father Sun
practiced incest with his daughter, who
acquired Viho by scratching her father's
penis. Thus the Tukano received this
sacred snuff from the sun's semen, and
since it is still hallowed, it is kept in con-
tainers called muhipu-nuri, or "penis of
the sun." This hallucinogen enables the
Tukano to consult the spirit world, espe-
cially Viho-mahse, the "snuff-person,"
who, from his dwelling in the Milky
Way, tends all human affairs. Shamans
may not contact other spiritual forces
directly but only through the good
graces of Viho-mahse. Consequently,
the snuff represents one of the most
important tools of the payé or shamans.
Although the sixty species of Virola
are spread throughout tropical forests
of the New World and psychoactive
principles have been found in at least a
dozen species, it is only in the western
Amazon and adjacent parts of the On-
noco basin that this genus has been used
as the source of a sacred inebriant.
The species most important as sour-
ces of the intoxicating snuff are V Ca-
lophylla,V calophylloidea, V elongata,
and V theiodora, the last being without
doubt the most frequently employed.
Yet locally, V rufula, V cuspidata, and
other species may supply the drug.
There are Indians—the primitive noma-
dic Makü of the Rio Piraparaná of Co-
lombia, for example—who ingest the
red "bark-resin" directly, with no pre-
paration, using V elongata. Other tri-
bes, especially the Bora and Witoto,
swallow pellets made from the paste of
the "resin," valuing for this purpose
V peruviana, V surinamensis, V theio-
dora, and possibly V loretensia. There
is vague evidence that shamans in Vene-
zuela may smoke the bark of V sebifera
"at dances when curing fevers" or that
they may boil the barkand drink the
liquor "to drive away evil spirits."
"Sometimes when they travel or go
hunting, they say:
'I must carry my Epená against those
spirits,
so that they do not persecute us.'
They take Epená in the night
if they hear the noises of those spirits
of the forest.
They inhale it to drive them away
—Ettore Biocca
Although the mythological signifi-
cance and magico-religious use of Epe-
ná snuff is indicative of a great age, the
drug was not known until very recently.
Perspicacious plant-explorer though
he was, Spruce failed to discover this
fundamental psychoactive use of Virola,
notwithstanding his special study of the
group that resulted in the discovery of a
number of species new to science. The
earliest reference to this hallucinogen
dates from the beginning of this cen-
tury, when a German ethnologist re-
ported on the Yekwana of the upper
Orinoco area.
It was not, however, until 1938 and
1939 that the botanical association of
Virola with the snuff was made. The
Brazilian botanist Ducke reported that
the leaves of V theiodora and V cuspi-
data represented the source. The leaves,
of course, are never used, but this report
first focused attention on Virola, which,
until then, had never been suspected asa
hallucinogen.
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 178 ---
The first detailed description and spe-
cific identification of the drug, however,
was published in 1954 when its prepara-
tion and use among medicine men of
Colombian Indians was described. Ta-
ken mainly by shamans among the Bar-
asana,Makuna, Tukano,Kabuyaré,
Kuripako, Puinave, and other tribes in
eastern Colombia, the drug was em-
ployed ritualistically for diagnosis and
treatment of disease, prophecy, divina-
tion, and other magico-religious pur-
poses. At that time, V calophylla and
V calophylloiclea were indicated as the
species most valued, but later work in
Brazil and elsewhere has established
the primacy of V theiodora.
Recent field studies have shown that
the psychoactive snuff is used among
many Indian groups in Amazonian Co-
lombia, the uppermost Orinoco basin
of Colombia and Venezuela, the Rio
Negro, and other areas of the western
Amazon of Brazil. The southernmost
locality of its known use is among the
Paumaré Indians of the Rio Purds in
the southwestern Amazon of Brazil.
The snuff is apparently most highly
prized and most deeply involved in
aboriginal life among the sundry Indian
tribes collectively called Waiká in the
upper Orinoco of Venezuela and the
northern affluents of the Rio Negro of
Brazil.These groupsarevariously
named, but are most commonly known
to anthropologistsasthe Kirishaná,
Shirianá, Karauetaré, Karimé, Parahuré,
Surará, Pakidái, and Yanomamo. They
generally refer to the snuff as Epená,
Ebena, Nyakwana, or some variant of
these terms. In northwestern Brazil, this
snuff and others are often generically
known as Paricá.
Unlike the Colombian Indians, among
whom the use of the snuff is usually re-
stricted to shamans, these tribes may of-
ten take the drug in daily life. All male
members of the group above the ages of
thirteen or fourteen may participate.
The hallucinogen isoften snuffed in
frighteningly excessive amounts and, in
at least one annual ceremony, constantly
over a two- or three-day period.
The powder is prepared in a variety
of ways. Among the Colombian In-
dians, the bark is stripped from the trees
in the early morning and the soft inner
layers are scraped. The shavings are
kneaded in cold water for twenty min-
utes. The brownish liquid is then fil-
tered and boiled down to a thick syrup
that, when dried,ispulverized and
mixed with ashes of the bark of a wild
cacao tree.
The various groups of Waiká have sev-
eralother methodsof preparation.
Those living in the Orinoco area fre-
quently rasp the cambial layer of the
bark and trunk and gently dry the
ings over a fire so that they may be stored
for future use. When a supply of the drug
is needed, the shavings are wetted and
boiled for half an hour or more, the re-
sulting liquid being reduced to a syrup
that, after drying, is ground to a powder
and finely sifted. This dust is then mixed
with equal amounts of a powder pre-
pared from the dried, aromatic leaves of
Above left: Leaf, flowers, and young fruit
of the rain forest tree Virola calophylla.
Above right: A branch of Virola theio-
dora with flowers.
177
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 179 ---
• -:
...•.;4-.
-
:4
I
Once a year, Waiká Indians in north-
eastern Brazil come together from miles
around for an endocannibalistic cere-
mony for which a huge quantity of Virola
snuff is made and consumed. The
ceremony held in typical round houses
commemorates the dead of the pre-
vious year.
178
a small plant, Justicia pectoralis var. ste-
nophylla, cultivated for this purpose. Fi-
nally, a third ingredient is added: the
ashes of the bark of an Ama or Amasita,
a beautiful and rare leguminous tree, Eli-
zabetha princeps. The hard outer bark,
cut into small pieces, is placed in glowing
embers, then removed and allowed to
smolder to ashes.
In more eastern areas of Waiká coun-
try in Brazil, the preparation of the
snuff takes place mainly in the forest.
Trees are felled and long strips of bark
are peeled from the trunk. A copious
flow of liquid that rapidly turns a blood
red accumulates on the inner surface of
the bark. After gently heating the strips,
the shaman gathers the "resin" into an
earthenware pot that is set on the fire.
When the pot of red liquid is reduced
to a thick syrup, it is sun-dried, crystal-
lizing into a beautiful amber-red- solid
that is meticulously ground to an extre-
mely fine dustlike consistency. This
powder—Nyakwana snuff—maybe
employed directly, but usually the pul-
verized leaves of Justicia are added "to
make it smell better."
The Bora, Muinane, and Witoto In-
dians of Amazonian Colombia and ad-
jacent Peru use Virola not asa snuff,
but by oral administration. They ingest
small pellets or pills made from there-
sin to induce an intoxication during
which the medicine men communicate
with the "little people." These Indians
utilizeseveralspecies:V theioa!ora,
V pavonis, and V elongata, as well as
possibly V surinanzensis andloreten—
sis. The Bora of Peru indicate that they
have used a related myristicaceousge-
nus, Iryanthera mac-rophylla,asthe
source of a narcotic paste for making
the pellets.
The Witoto of Colombia completely
decorticate the trunk of a Virola tree.
The shiny cambial layer on the inner
surface of the bark and adhering to the
bare trunk is rasped off with the back
of a machete, and the raspings arecare-
fully collected in a gourd. This material
gradually darkens to a brownish red.
The still moist raspings are kneaded,
squeezed repeatedly, and pressedover
a wicker sieve. The liquid that oozes
through, primarily of cambialsap, has
a light "coffee and milk" hue. Without
furtherpreparation,thisliquidis
quickly boiled, possibly to inactivate
enzymes that might destroy the active
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 180 ---
Waikb Indians consume incredible
amounts of Virola powder, using large
snuffing tubes made of the stems of
maranthaceous plants. The tubes are
filled with three to six teaspoonfuls of
snuff for each inhalation.
After a stage of hyperactivity and stimulation dur-
ing which the participants who have inhaled the
snuff engage the hekula spirits, a period of dis-
turbed sornnolescence sets in during which night-
marish visual hallucinations continue (left).
Waiká shamans frequently employ Virola snuff
or Epená in ritual curing (below left). The intricate
relationship between magico-religious and "med-
icinal" practices of these peoples makes it difficult
to distinguish the boundaries of the supernatural
and the pragmatic. In fact, the Indian himself does
not make a distinction between these two areas.
Application of the snuff is a vigorous
process, the powder being blown far
into the nostrils and sinuses. It causes
an immediate lacrimation and excessive
discharge of mucus from the nose.
principles, and is then allowed to sim-
mer, with frequent stirring, untilits
volume isreduced. When the liquid
finally becomes pasty,the vesselis
taken from the fire, and the paste is
rolled into pellets for immediate use.
These pellets may keep their potency,
according to the natives, for about two
months.
When the pellets are not for imme-
diate consumption, they are usually
coated with a "salt," as the natives says
prepared from any of numerous plants.
The "salt" is always made by the same
process. The plantmaterialisfirst
burned and the ashes are placed in a
crude funnel made of leaves or bark.
Water seeps slowly through the ashes,
dripping out through a hole at the bot-
tom to be collected beneath. The filtrate
is then boiled down until a gray-white
residue or "salt" remains. The pellets of
sticky resin are rolled in this powder.
There is apparently a large assortment
of plants employed forthis"salt,"
which the Witoto call Le-sa. The le-
cythidaceous Gustavia poeppigiana is a
common source of the ashes for the fil-
tration. In the same family, the bark of
the huge tree Eschweiiera itayensis is
lued. An unidentified tree of this family,
known to the natives as Cha-pe--na, is
used. The woody stump of a species of
Carludovica or Sphaeradenia of the Cy-
clanthaceae is reduced to ashes for this
purpose. The leaves and fragrant inflor-
escence of the aroid Spathiphyllum can-
naefoliwin give an ash that leaches out a
high-quality "salt." The bark of a wild
species of Theobroma, or several small
palms, probably species of Geonoma
and Bactris, are similarly used.
The Bora of Peru strip pieces of
bark, only from the lower four to
eightft (1.5—2.5m) of the trunk. The
TheChemistry of Epená
A Mahekototen shaman (above) strug-
gling against death, an ever-present
threat. The Waiká believe that commu-
nication with the spirit world occurring
during Virola intoxication enables the
shaman to stave off death, which they
explain as the result of the activity of
malevolent spirits.
The chemical analysis of various Virola snuffs revealed about a half-dozen
closely related indole alkaloids belonging to the simple, open-chained or
closed-ring tryptamine derivatives with asystem. The
main constituents of these snuffs are 5-methoxy-N,N-dimethyltryptamine
and Dimethyltryptamine.monomethyt-
tryptamine, and 2-methyl- and 1
line usually occur only in trace amounts. The alkaloid mixtures are almost
identical to those isolated from the Anadenanthera snuff powders.
179
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 181 ---
hard,brittleouter layer of barkis
chipped off, leaving only the softer in-
ner phloem. This layer quickly turns
brown from congealed oxidized "resin"
and is vigorously poundedon a log
with a mallet until it is shredded. These
shredded sections are soaked in water
with occasional kneading for halfan
hour or more, when the pot is brought
to a vigorous boil for another half hour.
The bark material, squeezed dry,is
then removed, and the remaining liquid
is boiled with constant stirring until
only a thick paste remains. Small pel]ets
for ingestion are then made from this
paste.
Fewer plants are used by the Bora for
preparing the "salt" for coating the pel-
lets: the leaves and stump ofa species of
a palm of the genus
Scheclea.
The hallucinogenic principlesappear
to be present mainly in the almost col-
orless exudate from the inner surface of
the bark, which appearsas soon as the
bark is stripped from the tree. Thisre-
sinlike substance quickly turns reddish
in a typical oxidase-type reaction and
then darkens, drying toa hard, glossy
mass: In specimens dried for chemical
study, it appears as a sticky, dark reddish
brown gummy material. This material
in many species contains tryptamines
and other indolic hallucinogens. Obser-
vation of the process indicates that the
reason for scraping the surface of the
bark is to obtain all traces of the cambial
layer that adhere to it. The drug ispre-
pared from the cambialsap, which is
quickly boiled, causing coagulation of
protein and possibly polysaccharides,
and then simmered slowly to reduce
the volume to near dryness.
The whole process resembles that
"This is a magical snuff..preparedfrom the bark of a certaintree .
thesorcerer blows a little ...througha reed. ..intothe air.
Next he snuffs, whilst...heabsorbs the powder
into each nostril successively..
immediatelythe witch doctor begins singing and yelling wildly
all the while pitching the upper part of his body
backwards and forwards."
—Thcodor Koch-Griinberg (1923)
180
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 182 ---
used for isolation of natural products
from the cambium of other trees, con-
iferine from gymnosperms, for exam-
ple, except that ethyl alcohol or acetone
is now used, rather than heat, to de-
stroy enzyme activity, which might
otherwise act adversely on the desired
product.
The "resin" of Virola plays an impor-
tant role in everyday native medicine:
several species are valued as antifungal
medicines. The resin is spread over in-
fected areas of the skin to cure ringworm
and similar dermatological problems of
fungal origin that are so prevalent in the
humid tropical rain forests. Only certain
species are chosen for this therapeutic
use—and the choice seems not to have
any relationship tothe hallucinogenic
properties of the species.
Indians who are familiar with Virola
trees from the pointof view of their
hallucinogenic potency exhibit uncanny
knowledge of different "kinds "—which
to a botanist appear to be indistinguish-
able as to species. Before stripping the
bark from a trunk, they are able to pre-
dict how long the exudate will take to
turn red, whether it will be mild or
peppery to the tongue when tasted,
how long itwill retainits potency
when made into snuff, and many other
hidden characteristics. Whether these
subtle differences are due to age of the
tree, season of the year, ecological si-
tuations, conditions of flowering or
fruiting,or other environmental or
physiological factors it is at present im-
possible to say—but there is no doubt
about the Indian's expertness in recog-
nizing these differences, for which he
often has a terminology, so significant
in his hallucinogenic and medicinal use
of the trees.
Page 180 left, top to bottom: The Waiká
carefully pick over the leaves of Justicia
before drying them as an additive to the
Virola snuff.
One method of preparing Virola snuff
starts with the accumulation of the red,
resinlike liquid on the inner bark and its
solidification by heat (as shown in the
photograph of a Waiká Indian).
A Witoto Indian beats the syrup left
after boiling down Virola resin.
Page 180 middle and right: Justicia
leaves are highly aromatic when dried
and are, on occasion, added to Virola
snuff. They may, however, also be the
source of a hallucinogenic snuff.
Among the Waikb, the invariable ashes
mixed with Virola powder come from the
burning of the bark of a beautiful but rare
tree, Eliza bet ha princeps.
Above left: Indians under Virola intoxi-
cation characteristically have faraway,
dreamlike expressions that are, of
course, due to the active principles of
the drug, but which the natives believe
are associated with the temporary ab-
sence of the shamans' souls as they
travel to distant places. The chants dur-
ing the incessant dancing performed by
shamans may at times reflect conver-
sations with spirit forces. This transpor-
tation of the soul to other realms repre-
sents to the Waikb one of the most
significant values of the effects of this
hallucinogen.
Above right: The leaves of Justicia pec-
toralis var. stenophylla are an important
ingredient in the snuff that is made from
the Virola.
181
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 183 ---
DUBOISIA
Pituri BushGATEWAY TO DREAMTIME
182
The psychoactive use of Pituri is prob-
ably the longest continuoususe of a
psychoactive substance in the history
of humanity. The Australian Aborigines
have the longest continuous culture of
the world. The ancestors of today's
Aborigines chewed Pituri 40,000 to
60,000 years ago.
Pituri refers in the broadest sense to all
plants or plant materials with additional
ingredients that are used for hedonistic
or magical purposes by the Australian
Aborigines. Generally, the term Pituri
refers to a plant from the nightshade
family, Duboisia hopwoodii.
Usually, the Pituri leaves are mixed
with alkaline plant ashes and chewed
like chewing tobacco. Pituriremoves
hunger and thirst and induces intense
dreams, which is probably why the
Aborigines use Pituri asa magic sub-
stance. In the Aboriginal magic, enter-
ing the dream state, the transcendent
Above: Pituri bushes are represented by
the gray dots on this painting by Abori-
ginal artist Walangari Karntawarra Ja-
kamarra (detail from oil painting, 1994).
Below: The trunk of the Pituri bush.
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 184 ---
The Chemistry of Pituri
Duboisia hopwoodil contains various strongly stimulating but also toxic alka-
loids (piturin, D-nor-nicotine andD-nor-nicotine seems to be the
main active substance, and myosimin, N-formylnornicotine, cotinin, N-acetyl-
nornicotine, anabasine, anabatin, anatalline, and bipyridyl are also present.
The hallucinogenic tropanalkaloid hyoscyamine has been discovered in the
roots, as well as traces of scopalamine, nicotine, nornicotine, metanicotine,
myosmine, and N-formylnornicotine. Duboisia myoporoides contains large
quantities of scopolamine.
Plants Whose Ashes Are Added to Pituri
Protaceae
Grevillea striata R. BR. (Ijinyja)
Mimosaceae (Leguminosae)
Acacia aneura F. Muell. ex Benth. (Mulga)
Acacia coriacea DC. (Awintha)
Acacia kempeana F. Muell. (Witchitty bush)
Acacia lingulata A. Cunn. ex. Benth.
Acacia pruinocarpa
Acacia sailcina Lindley
Caesalpiniaceae (Leguminosae)
Cassiaspp.
Rhamnaceae
Venti/ago viminalls Hook. (Atnyira)
Myrtaceae
Eucalyptus microtheca F. Muell. (Angkirra)
Eucalyptus spp. (Gums)
Eucalyptussp. (Red gum)
Melaleuca sp.
primal condition of being is an essential
concept. This dream state is an altered
state of consciousness.
Inthisdreamstate,allmagical
processes and acts affect the "normal
consciousness." It seems as if there are
various types of Pituri for various uses
and each of these varieties is linked with
various songs, totems, and appropriate
"dream songs" or "songlines." There
are some songlines that are sung as
"Pituri-songs." Pituri has a connection
to the place that it grows. There is even
a Pituri clan. Pituri carries with it the
"dream of the place" where it grows
and can instill it into humans.
The Pituri bush (Duboisia hopwoo-
dii) was described by the German-
AustralianbotanistFerdinandJ. H.
von Muller(1825—1896). The plants, as
well as the dried or fermented leaves,
play a significant role in the domestic
economy as a valuable good for barter.
Although Duboisia hopwoodii is wide-
spread in Australia, some areas are bet-
ter for collection and harvesting than
others. The leaves are filled with the
power of the land in which they grow.
Before the Aborigines had contact with
Europeans, there was a far-reaching
trading system in the central desert,
which gave rise to the so-called Pituri
roads and paths.
Various additives are mixed with the
dried or fermented leaves and chewed.
One will use plant ashes, another uses
animal hair to hold the material to-
gether: plant fibers, yellow ochre, euca-
lyptus resin, and, most recently, sugar.
The effects of the various Pituri pre-
parationsdiffer markedly. Some are
arousing, while others are weak stimu-
lants; some are euphoric, while others
can induce visions.
Top: The Pituri bush.
Middle:The fermented Pituri leaves.
Bottom: The Goodenia is a Pituri repla-
cement for the leaves of Duboisia
hopwoodii Plants of the genus Goode-
nia are ethnobotanically significant
medicinal and nutritional plants for the
Aborigines.
183
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 185 ---
CHEMICAL STRUCTURES OF HALLUCINOGENS
Chemical determination of the molecular struc-
ture of the hallucinogenic principles in sacred
plants has led to remarkable results.
Almost all plant hallucinogens contain the ele-
ment nitrogen and therefore belong to the large
class of chemical compounds known as alkaloids.
The term alkaloid is used by chemists for the ni-
trogenous metabolic products of plants that have
alkaline properties and are therefore "alkali-like"
(alkaloid). Among the more important plants with
psychoactive properties, only Hemp and Salvia
184
divinoruin are the most significant examples that
do not contain nitrogen. The main active principle
of Cannabisistetrahydrocannabinol (THC),
while the main active principle of Salvia divinor-
urn is salvinorin.
The principal plant hallucinogens are closely
Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)
related in their chemical structure to hormones
present in the brain—that is,to physiological
agents that play a role in the biochemistry of men-
tal functions.
The active principle in the Peyote cactus is the
alkaloid mescaline, a compound closely related
to the brain-hormone norepinephrine (noradre-
naline). Norepinephrine belongs to the group
of physiological agents known as neurotransmit-
ters because they function in the chemical trans-
mission of impulses between neurons (nerve
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 186 ---
The molecular models of hallucinogens on pages 186—87 show the che-
mical elements of which these substances consist and the manner in
which the atoms of these elements are related to one another in the
molecules. The black balls mean carbon atoms, the white hydrogen, the
red oxygen, the green nitrogen, and the yellow ball in the psilocybine
molecule indicates a phosphoric atom. There is, in fact, no space be-
tween atoms connected with each other; they touch. Moreover, atoms of
various elements are of different sizes. Only the especially small size of
the hydrogen atoms has been indicated in these models.
It is hardly possible to imagine the real dimension of atoms and
molecules: 0.1 mg (a tenth of a thousandth of a gram) of a hallucinogen,
barely visible, consists of about 2 x 1017 (= 200,000,000,000,000,000)
molecules.
cells).Mescaline and- norepinephrine have the
same basic chemical structure.Both are deri-
vatives of a substance known to chemists as
phenylethylamine. Another derivative of pheny-
lethylamine is the essential amino acid phenyla-
Recent studies show differences in the internal structure of wood between
Cannabis sativa (far left) and C. indica. As shown in these microscopic cross-
sections, one of the most significant differences is the usually single condu-
cive vessels in the former species as contrasted with the consistently grouped
vessels in the latter.
THC, found only in Cannabis, is concentrated in the resin and is absent
from the woody tissue, which for this reason is specifically exempted from
control in American Cannabis legislation.
lanine,which is widely distributed in the human
organism.
The models of mescaline and noradrenaline
molecules on page 186 clearly show the close re-
lationship in chemical structure of these two
agents.
Psilocybine and psilocine, the active principles
of Teonanácatl, the hallucinogenic Mexican mush-
rooms, are derived from the same basic compound
as the brain hormone serotonine: tryptamine.
Tryptamine also is the basic compound of an es-
sential amino acid, which is tryptophane. The re-
lationship can be clearly seen in the molecular
models shown on page 186.
There is another Mexican sacred plant, Ololiu-
qui (Morning Glory), the hallucinogenic princi-
ples of which are derivatives of tryptamine. In
this case, tryptamine is incorporated in a complex
ring structure that has been called ergolin. The
molecular models on page 187 show the structur-
al relationship between lysergic acid amide and
lysergic acid hydroxyethylamide (the two prin-
cipal active constituents of Ololiuqui), the
rotransmitter serotonine, and psilocybine and
psilocine.
That the important plant hallucinogens and the
brain hormones serotonine and noradrenaline
have the same basic structure cannot be due to
mere chance. This astoundingrelationship may
explain the psychotropic potency of these halluci-
nogens. Having the same basic structure,these
hallucinogens may act at the same sites in the ner-
vous system as theabove-mentioned brain hor-
mones, like similar keys fittingthe same lock. As
a result, the psychophysiologicalfunctions asso-
ciated with those brain sites are altered, sup-
pressed, stimulated, or otherwise modified.
The ability of hallucinogens to produce changes
in brain function is due not only to their having a
particular chemical composition, but also to the
peculiar spatial arrangement of the atoms in their
molecules. This can be seen very clearly in the case
of the most powerful hallucinogen known today,
lysergic acid diethylamide. LSD may be regarded
as a chemicallymodified form of an active princi-
ple in Ololiuqui. The only difference between the
semi-synthetic drug lysergic acid diethylamide
and the natural Ololiuqui hallucinogen lysergic
acid amide is that two hydrogen atoms of the
185
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 187 ---
amide have been replaced in the diethylamide by
two ethyl groups. With LSD, a dose of 0.05 milli-
gram will produce a deep hallucinogenic intoxica-
tion of some hours' duration. With iso-LSD,
which differs from LSD only in the spatialar-
rangement of the atoms, ten times that dose has
no effect whatsoever.
The molecular models of LSD and iso-LSDon
page 187 show that, while the atoms are linked to
each other in the same way, their spatialarrange-
ment is different.
Molecules differing only in spatialarrangement
are known as stereQisomers. Stereoisomers can
exist only with molecules that are asymmetrical
in structure, and one of the theoretically possible
spatial arrangements is in generalmore active.
Next to chemical composition, spatial configura-
tion plays the most crucial role in determiningnot
only hallucinogenic but also general pharmacolo-
gical activity.
186
Peyotl (Lophophora williamsii)-I'-
Psilocine
(hallucinogenic principle of TeonanLcatl)
4'
Psilocybine
(hallucinogenic principle of Teonanácatl)
Noradrenaline
(a brain hormone)
Mescaline
(vision-causing hallucinogenic principle of
Peyote)
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 188 ---
Dr. Albert Hofmann, born 1906, discoverer of
LSD and the hallucinogenic principles of Teona-
nácatl and of Ololiuqui, is shown here with the
molecular model of LSD in his pharmaceutic-
chemical research laboratory, Sandoz, Basel,
Switzerland, 1943.
Page 186: The comparison between Mescaline
and Noradrenaline and between Psilocybine and
Psilocine with Serotonine shows the relationship
in the chemical structure between the hallucino-
gens and brain hormones.
The close chemical relationship between the
active principles of Ololiuqui and LSD, the most
potent hallucinogen known today, is evident
when comparing the molecular models of Lyser-
gic Acid Amide and Lysergic Acid Hydroxyethy-
lamide with Lysergic Acid Diethylamide.
The active properties of hallucinogens are due
not only to their composition with certain atoms;
the spatial arrangement of the atoms in the
molecule is equally important in determining
the hallucinogenic effects. As an example, LSD
and iso-LSD (at right) consist of the same ele-
ments, but they differ in the spatial arrangement
of the diethylamide group. In comparison to
LSD, iso-LSD is practically without hallucino-
genic effect.
LSD
(semi-synthetic hallucinogen)
iso-LSD
(semi-synthetic compound)
Lysergic acid amideLysergic Acid Hydroxyethylamide
(hallucinogenic principle of(hallucinogenic principle of
Ololiuqui)Ololiuqui)
4
Serotonine
(a brain hormone)
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 189 ---
USES OF HALLUCINOGENS IN MEDICINE
The use of pure hallucinogenic compouiids in
medicine has the same basis as the use of the
source plantsin magico-religious ceremonies.
The effects in both cases consist of profound psy-
chic alterations in the experience of reality. Not
only is perception of the outside world affected,
but perception of the subject's own personality is
also transformed. The changes in sensory experi-
ence of the outside world are due to a shift in sen-
sitivity of the sense organs. Sensory perception,
particularly with regard to vision and hearing, is
stimulated by hallucinogens. These changes in
self-awareness indicate the profound influence of
the drugs, which affect the very core of our being:
consciousness.
Our experience of reality is incomprehensible
188
without a subject, an ego, that perceives this rea-
lity. The subjective experience of so-called objec-
tive reality is the result of interactions between
external sensory signals, mediated by the sense or-
gans, and the ego, which brings this information
to the level of conscious awareness. In this situa-
tion, one can think of the external world as a sen-
der of information or signals and the deep selfas a
receiver. The translator in this case is theego. In
the absence of one of these—either the senderor
the receiver—reality does not exist. There isno
music on the radio, and the screen is blank. Ifwe
adhere to this concept of reality as the product of
the interaction between sender and receiver, the
perception of a different reality under the influ-
ence of hallucinogens may be explained by the
fact that the brain, which is the site of conscious-
ness, undergoes dramatic biochemical changes.
The receiver is thus set for wavelengths other than
those associated with normal, everyday reality.
From this perspective, the subjective experience
of reality is infinite, depending on the capacity of
thereceiver, which can begreatly changed
through biochemical modification of the brain
field.
In general, we experience life from a rather lim-
ited point of view. This is the so-called normal
state.through hallucinogens theper-
ception of reality can be strongly changed andex-
panded. These different aspects or levels ofone
and the same reality are not mutually exclusive.
They form an all-encompassing, timeless,trans-
cendental reality.
The possibility of changing the wavelength
setting on the "ego receiver," and, with this,to
produce changes in the awareness of reality,con-
stitutes the real significance of hallucinogens. This
ability to create new and different images of the
world is why hallucinogenic plantswere, and still
are, regarded as sacred.
What is the essential, characteristic difference
between everyday reality and the imagesseen
during hallucinogenic inebriation?In normal
states of consciousness—in everyday reality—
ego and outside world are separated; one stands
face to face with the outside world; it has become
an object. Under the influence of hallucinogens,
the borderline between the experiencingego and
the outside world disappears or becomes blurred,
D.fl.
DISSERTA'J'IO.ACALEMICA,
Si TENS.
•.
•.
•
..4
EX•PPRIENT. FACULT. MEDICtE
INJLLTJSTRI
:...
.VO?)ILISS!MO.:Jj:Y.EXPERJZtV.T1SSIMO,
DN.11CAROW
AURATO. DE
M:T1s
rr BOTAN.I'ROFESSORO,r:O&n.
ACM:..UPEAL.
MONSPEL.
ET•.
'--
OLAYCS . REINFI
AUDITORTO,
ILii. M.
UPSALI..
/..
/
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 190 ---
Page 188: The first treatise on inebriants is apparently the doctoral thesis of
Alander, a student of Linnaeus, who is the father of modern botany. This
thesis, defended in 1762 at Uppsala, was a mixture of scientific and pseudo-
scientific information. An observer present at the thesis defense may have
doodled these profiles, possibly depicting the academic examiners.
dependingon the degree of inebriation. Afeed-
back mechanism is set up between receiver and
sender. Part of the ego reaches out to the external
world, into the objects around us; they begin to
come to life, acquiring a deeper anddifferent
meaning. This may be a joyful experience or a
demonic one, involving the loss of the trusted
ego. The new egofeels linked in bliss with out-
side objects in a special way and also with other
human beings. The experience of deep communi-
cation with the outside world may even culmi-
nate in the sensationof being at one with the
whole of creation.
This state of cosmic consciousness that under
favorable circumstances may be attained with hal-
lucinogens is related to the spontaneousreligious
Below: Visionary experiences produced by hallucinogens are a source of in-
spiration for painters. These two watercolors by Christian Rätsch emerged
after taking LSD and show the mystical character of the experience.
ecstasyknown as the unio mystica or, in the ex--
perienceof Eastern religious life, as samadhi or
satori. In both of these states, a reality is experi-
enced that is illuminated by that transcendental
reality in which creation and ego, sender and re-
ceiver, are One.
The changes in consciousness and perception
that may be experimentally produced with hallu-
cinogens have found a number of different appli-
cations in medicine. The pure substances most
commonly used in this field are mescaline, psi-
locybine, and LSD. Recent research has been
concerned mainly with the most powerful halluci-
nogen known so far, LSD, asubstance that is a
chemically modified form of the active principle
in Ololiuqui.
189
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 191 ---
Below left: LSD is usually distributed on printed and perforated paper. The
designs often have mystical references and use icons of Eastern religions.
Inpsychoanalysis, breaking the habitual ex-
perience of the world can help patients caught
in an ego-centered problem cycle to escape from
their fixation and isolation. With the I-Thou
barrier relaxed or even removed under the influ-
ence of a hallucinogen, better contact may be
established with the psychiatrist, and the patient
may become more open to psychotherapeutic
suggestion.
Hallucinogenic stimulation also often causes
forgotten or repressed past experiences to be
clearly recalled. It can be of crucial importance in
psychotherapy to bring back to conscious aware-
ness events that led to a psychological distur-
bance. Numerous reports have been publishedon
how the influence of hallucinogens used during
190
Below right and page 191: These drawings were done in 1972. The two on top
(p. 191) were done before and after the LSD session. The three drawings
below (pp. 190—191) were done before, during, and after the session with the
same hallucinogen.
psychoanalysisrevived memories of past events,
even those from very early childhood. This is not
the usual form of remembering, but involves actu-
ally going through the experience again: it isnot
reminiscence but réviviscence, as the Frenchpsy-
chiatrist Jean Delay put it.
The hallucinogen does not in itself effecta
cure but rather plays the role of a medicinal aid
to be used in the total context of psychoanalysis
or psychotherapy, to make these more effective
and to reduce the period of treatment required.
There are two different ways of using it for this
purpose.
One method, developed in European hospitals,
is known as psycholysis. It consists of giving med-
ium doses of the hallucinogen on a number of
successive occasions at specific intervals. The
patient's experiences under the influence of the
hallucinogen are discussed in a group session that
follows and areexpressed through painting,
drawing, and the like. The term psycholysis was
invented by Ronald A. Sandison, an Englishpsy-
chotherapist of the Jungian school. The "-lysis"
component indicates the dissolving of psychologi-
cal tensions and conflicts.
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 192 ---
The second method is the one generally pre-
ferred in the United States. After intensive psycho-
logical preparation appropriate to each indivi-
dual, the patient is given a single very high dose
of the hallucinogen. This "psychedelic therapy" is
intended to produce a mystic, religious state of
ecstasy that should provide a starting point for
restructuring the patient's personality. The term
psychedelic means "mind manifesting." It was
coined by the psychiatrist Humphrey Osmond.
The use of hallucinogens as an aid to psycho-
analysis and psychotherapy is based on effects
that are the opposite of those psychotropic drugs
known as tranquilizers. These drugs tend rather to
suppress the patient's problems and conflicts,
making them appear less serious and no longer so
important, whereas the hallucinogens bring con-
flicts to the surface and make them more intense,
so that they may be moreclearly recognizable and
open to psychotherapy.
Hallucinogenic drugs, as an adjunct to psycho-
analysis and psychotherapy, are still the subject of
dispute in medical circles. However, this applies
also to other techniques, such as electroshock, in-
sulin treatment, and psychosurgery all of which
carry far greater danger than the use of hallucino-
gens, which, in expert hands, may be regarded as
virtually without risk.
Some psychiatrists hold the view that the faster
retrieval of forgotten or repressed traumatic ex-
periences frequently seen with these drugs and
the shorter period of treatment are not advanta-
geous. They believe that this method does not al-
low sufficient time for the full psychotherapeutic
utilization and integration of the material made
conscious, and that the beneficial effects are of
shorter duration than if traumatic experiences are
brought back to conscious awareness more gradu-
ally and dealt with in stages.
Psycholysis and psychedelic therapy both re-
quire very careful preparation of the patient be-
the hallucinogen is given. If there is to be a
really positive gain from the experience, patients
must not be frightened bythe unusual effects
produced by the drug. Careful selection of pa-
tients to be treated is also important, for not
191
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 193 ---
L
I
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 194 ---
Page 192: In the 1 960s, many artists in the United States and Europe ex-
perimented with hallucinogens in order to enhance the creative process. The
painting on the left is an example of this genre.
everytype of psychic disorderresponds equally
well to this form of therapy. To be successful,
therefore,hallucinogen-assisted psychoanalysis
or psychotherapy requiresspecial knowledge
and experience.
One of the most important aspects of the clin-
ical training of a psychotherapist working with
Below: Only a few artists are capable of expressing the visionary realms while
directly under the influence of hallucinogens. The two paintings by Fred
Weictmann were executed while under the influence of Psilocybe
cyanescens. Both are acrylic on marbled paper.
Left: Slipping and Sliding I (There exists another painting from the same day.)
Right: The Garden of Pan
couldbe considered a "model of psychosis," but
major differences have in fact been found between
psychotic states and hallucinogenic inebriation.
However, hallucinogenic intoxication can serve
as a model for studying the biochemical and elec-
trophysiological changes that occur with abnor-
mal mental states.
hallucinogens is self-experimentation with these
substances. Through these experiences, therapists
can gain direct knowledgeof the worlds that their
patients enter and, thereby, have much greater un-
derstanding of the dynamics of the unconscious.
Hallucinogens may also be used in experimen-
tal studies to determine the nature of mental dis-
orders. Certain abnormal mental states produced
by hallucinogens in normal subjects are, in some
respects, similar to the symptomsof schizophre-
nia and other mentalAt one time it was
even thoughtthat hallucinogenic intoxication
One area where the medical use ofhallucino-
gens, and particularly LSD,touches on serious
ethical questions is in the care of the dying. Doc-
tors in American hospitalsobserved that the very
severe pain suffered by cancerpatients, which no
longer responded to conventionalpainkillers,
could be partly or completely relievedby LSD.
This action is probably not analgesic inthe usual
sense. What is thought tohappen is that the per-
ception of pain disappears; underthe influence of
the drug, the patient's mind becomesseparated
from his body to such an extent thatphysical pain
193
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 195 ---
Below: During visionary experiences, many people see spirals, whirlpools,
and milky ways. The artist Nana Nauwald depicted such an experience in her
painting The Middle Is Everywhere.
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 196 ---
no longer reaches it. If the use of hallucinogens in
this type of case is to be effective, it is again abso-
lutely necessary to prepare the patient mentally
and to explain the kind of experience and the
changes that he may undergo. Great benefit
derives also from guiding the patient's thoughts
toward religious aspects, which can be done by a
clergyman or by a psychotherapist. There have
been numerous reports of how dying individuals,
free from pain in LSD ecstasy, have come to per-
ceive the meaning of life and death, and have died
in peace, reconciled to their fate and free from
fear.
The medical use of hallucinogenic drugs differs
from the shamanistic use of hallucinogenic sacred
plants by medicine men and healer-priests in that
the latter usually themselves eat the plant, or drink
Below left: The painting Spirit and Matter Are Indivisible documents a recur-
ring hallucinogen-influenced experience.
Below right: Many people recognize the Will to Live when they have tasted the
plants of the gods. Nana Nauwald expresses this artistically.
a decoction made from it; whereas in conventional
medicine, the hallucinogenic substance is given
only to the patient. In both instances, however,
the same psychological effects are utilized, for
the same drug actions that serve as an aid to psy-
choanalysis and psychotherapy also give the sha-
man unusual powers of divination and healing.
They consist of the loosening or even dissolution
of the I-Thou barrier, with the result that objec-
tive everyday consciousness dissolves into the
mystic experience of One-ness.
195
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 197 ---
EPILOGUE
One of the leading lights of the interdisciplinary
investigations of hallucinogens was Louis Lewin,
the famous Berlin toxicologist. More than a half a
century ago, he captured the all-pervading signi-
ficance of hallucinogens to the cultural evolution
of the human race when he wrote in his book
Phantastica:
"From the beginning of our knowledge of man,
we find him consuming substances of no nutritive
value but taken for the sole purpose of producing
for a certain time a feeling of contentment, ease,
and comfort...
"Their potential energy has covered the whole
earth and established communication between
various races, in spite of dividing mountains and
sundering seas. These substances have formed a
bond of union between men of opposite hemi-
spheres, the uncivilized and the civilized; they
have forced passages which, once open, proved of
use for other purposes: they produced in ancient
races characteristics which have endured to the
present day, evidencing the marvelous degree of
intercourse that existed between different people
just as certainly and as exactly as a chemist can
judge the relations of two substances by their
reactions. Hundreds or thousands of years were
necessary to establish contact between whole
nations by these means...
"The motives for the occasional or habitual use
of these drugs are of greater interest than collec-
tion of facts concerning them. Here all kinds of
human contrasts meet: barbarism and civilization,
with all their various degrees of material posses-
sions, social status, knowledge, belief, age and
gifts of body, mind, and soul.
"On this plane meet artisan and sybarite, ruler
and subject; the savage from some distant island
or from the Kalahari Desert associates with poet,
philosophers, scientists, misanthropes, and phi-
lanthropists; the man of peace rubs shoulders with
the man of war, the devotee with the atheist.
"The physical impulses which bring under their
spell such diverse classes of mankind must beex-
traordinary and far-reaching. Many haveex-
pressed opinions about them, but have probed
and understood their intrinsic properties, and
fewer still perceived the inner-most significance
and the motives for the use of substances in which
such energies are stored."
196
Above: In Huichol, the term nierika refers to a portway between so-called
ordinary and non-ordinary realities. It isa passageway and, at the same time,
a barrier between worlds. Nierika, a decorated ceremonial disk, is also said to
mean "mirror" as well as "face of the deity." This nierika shows the four cardi-
nal directions and the sacred center. The coordinating axis is placed in a field
of fire.
Severalearly scientific investigators can be
credited with beginning the interdisciplinaryre-
search on hallucinogenic plants and psychoactive
substances. In 1855, Ernst Freiherr von Bibra
published Die narleotischen Genussmittel und
der Mensch, in which he considered someseven-
teen psychoactive plants. He urged chemists to
study diligently an area so promising andso full
of enigmas. Mordecai Cooke, a British mycolo-
gist, published a number of specialized paperson
fungi. His only popular, nontechnical publica-
tion, The Seven Sisters of Sleep, was an interdisci-
plinary study of psychoactive plants, published
in 1860.
Half a century after von Bibra's work andun-
doubtedly sparked by it,another outstanding
book appeared. Carl Hartwich's extensive Die
menschlichen Genzissmittel, published in 1911,
considered at length and with an interdisciplinary
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 198 ---
emphasis about thirty psychoactive plants, and he
mentioned a number of others in passing. Point-
ing out that von Bibra's pioneering book was da-
ted, that chemical and botanical research on these
curiously active plants had scarcely begun in 1855,
he optimistically maintained that by 1911, such
studies were either well under way or had already
been completed.
Thirteen years later, in 1924, perhaps the most
influential figure in psychopharmacology, Louis
Lewin, published his Phantastica, a book of
traordinary interdisciplinary depth. It presented
a total story of some twenty-eight plants and a
few synthetic compounds that are used around
the world for their stimulating or inebriating ef-
fects, emphasizing their importance to scientific
research, especially in the fields of botany, eth-
nobotany, chemistry, pharmacology, medicine,
psychology, and psychiatry, as well as to ethnol-
ogy, history, and sociology. Lewin wrote that
"the contents of this book will provide a start-
ing point from which original research in the
above-mentioned departments of science maybe
pursued."
From the 1930s to today, interdisciplinary ac-
tivity in psychopharmacology, botany, and an-
thropology began uninterruptedly to increase.
Many amplifications and clarifications of older
knowledge have been made and new discoveries
in sundry fields have followed one another in
close succession. In spite of the pharmaceutical,
phytochemical, and ethnobotanical advances that
have been made in the past 150 years, there still
remains a tremendous amount of work to be done
on these "plants of the gods."
LOUIS LEWIN
1850—1929
197
ERNST FREIHERR VON BIBRA
1806—1878
CARL HARTWICH
1851—1917
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 199 ---
PHOTO CREDITS
Arnau, F., Rauschgift, Lucerne 1967: 101 below right
A-Z Botanical Coil., London: 17 above left
Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, Vatican City (Codex
Barberini Lat. 241 fol. 29r): 111 left
BibliotecaMediceaLaurenziana,Florence:159
above (Photo: Dr. G. B. Pineider)
Biblioteca Nazionale Centrale di Firenze, Florence:
162 above (Photo: G. Sansoni)
Biedermann, H.,Lexikon der Felsblldkunst, Graz
1976: 83 above
Bildarchiv Bucher, Lucerne: 17 below right
Biocca, E., Yanoàma, Ban 1965 (Photo: Padre L.
Cocco): 178 middle, 178/179, 179 middle, right,
181 left
Black Star, New York: 96 middle, left and right (Photo
C. Henning)
Bouvier, N., Cologny-Geneve: 82
Brill, D., College Park, Georgia: 168 above left
Carroll, L., Alice's Adventures in Wonderland, New
York 1946:101 below left
Coleman Collection, Uxbridge: 17 above, center left
Curtis Botanical Magazine, vol. III, third series, Lon-
don 1847:147 below
Editions Delcourt, Paris: 89 above left
EMB Archives, Lucerne: 5. 13 above, centerright, 28/
29, 36 (9, 10), 38 (14,15), 40 (22, 25 below), 43
(35), 44 (38, 39), 46 (46) and below, 48 (52, 53)
and below, 49 (55, 56), 53 (70, 72) and below, 56
(84) and below, 58(89,90), 59(93), 60(96), 62, 88,
118, 119, 122 above, 132, 133 right, 145 above,
177,187 above
Emboden, W., California State University, Northridge:
95 right
Erdoes, R., New York and Santa Fe: 152 right
ETH-Bibliothek, Zurich: 197 center left
Forman, W., Archive, London: 62 right
Fröh!ich, A., Lucerne: 186 above
Fuchs, L., New Kreuterbuch, Base! 1543: 31 left
Furst, P. T., New York State University, Albany, New
York: 172 below
Goodman, Mill Valley, California: 96 center left
Halifax Collection, Ojai, California: 150 below, 190/
191 middle, 191 above, 196
Harvard Botanical Museum, Cambridge, Mass.: 31
center left, 98 above, 152 left, 153 above right, 170
below, 185 above, 197 above
Hernández de Alba, G., Nuestra Gente Namuy Mis-
ag, Bogota: 143 left
Hofmann, Dr. A., Burg. L.: 23, 162 left
Holford, M., Loughton: 105 below
Holmstedt, B., Karolinska Institute, Stockholm: 197
below
Hunt Institute for Botanical Documentation, Carnegie-
Mellon University, Pittsburgh: 188
198
Kaufmann, P. B., Department of Botany, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor: 99
Kobel, H., Sandoz Research Laboratories, Basel: 103
below right
Koch-Grunberg, 1., Zwei Jahre unter den Indianern,
Berlin, 1910: 127 left
Köhler, Medizinal-Pflanzenatlas, vol. I, Gera-Unterm-
haus 1887:21 below, 31 center left
Krippner, S., San Francisco: 192
Leuenberger, H., Yverdon: 111 right
Lyckner, K.-Ch., Hamburg: 110 above left
Moreau de Tours, J., Du Hachisch et de
Mentale, Paris 1845: 100 below
Museo del Oro, Bogota: 64
Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, Gift of Mrs. W. Scott
Fritz: 108 left
Museum of the American Indian, Heye Foundation,
New York: 152 middle
Museum Rietberg, Zurich: 2 (Photo: Kammerer/
Wolfsberger),10/11 Sammlung von der Heydt
(Photo: Wettstein & Kauf)
Myerhoff, B., Los Angeles: 148, 149 above left, 151
below
Nauwald, N., Sudergellersen: 194, 195
Negrin, J., Mexico: 63 (Photo: L. P. Baker))
New Yorker; New York: 100 top
Osterreichische Nationalbibliothek, Vienna (Codex
Vindobonensis S. N. 2644—Tacuinum Sanitatis in
Medicina—Folio 40): 87 below
Ott, J., Xalapa: 56 (82)
Parker, A.: Yale University, New Haven: 97 below left
Pelt, J. M., Drogues etplantes magiques, Paris 1971:
151above left
Perret, J., Lucerne: 184—187 (models by Dr. A. Hof-
mann)
Petersen, W.: Mecki bel den 7 Zwergen, KbIn (© for
the Mecki-character: Diehl-FiIm, Munich): 84 center
right
Photoarchiv Emil Schulthess Erben, Zurich: 24
Radio Times Hulton Picture Library, London: 4
R&tsch, C., Hamburg: 7, 8, 13 center, right, 17 below,
center left, 18, 19,21 above, 22, 24/25, 27, 30, 34,
35, 36, 37 (8), 38 (16, 17), 39, 40, (23, 24), 42, 43
(34,36, 37), 44(40,41), 45,46(45,47,48), 47,48
(53), 49(57), 50,51,52,53, (69, 71), 54,55(77,78,
80),56 (81, 83), 57, 58 (91), 59 (92, 94), 60 (95,
97), 83 below, 84 above, center left, below, 85
above right, below, 86, 97 above left, above right,
89 below, 90 below, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95 above, 96
above, below, 97, above left, above right,101
above, 102, 103 above right, below right, 104, 105
right, 106, 107 above, below left, below right, 108
above right, below, 109, 110 below left, right, 112,
113 above below left, 114 above, 115 above, 117
left, above left, 120, 121, 122 below, 123, 124,
125, 128, 129, 130, 131, 134, 135, 136, 137, 138,
139, 140, 141, 142 right, 144, 145 below, 146, 147
above, 150 above, 151 above right, 152 above, 153
above left, 154 above left, 155 below, 156 above,
157 above, 158, 159 below, 164, 165, 166, 167,
168 above right, middle, below, 169, 170 above left,
below, 172 above, 173, 175 above, 176 left, 181
right, 182, 189, 190 left
Rauh, Prof., Dr. W., Institut fur Systematische Bota-
nik und Pflanzengeographie der Universität Hei-
delberg: 16 above right, middle, below, 17 mid-
dle, 60
Roger Viollet, Paris: 116 right
Royal Botanical Gardens, Kew. 117 below right, 126
left, 197 center right
B. de, Historia General de las Cosas de
NuevaEspana, Mexico 1829: 107 below middle
Salzman, E.: Denver, Colorado: 85 above left
Samorini, G.: Dozza: 112 right, 113 below right, 114
below, 115 below
Scala, Florence: 105 left
Schaefer, S. B.: McAllen, Texas: 6, 149 above right,
middle, 154 above right, below, 155 above
Schmid, X.: Wetzikon: 55 (79)
Schultes, R. E., Harvard Botanical Museum, Cam-
bridge, Mass.: 98 below, 117 above right, 126 mid-
dle, right, 127 right, 133 left, 142, 178
Schuster,M.,Basel: 118 above left,119 above
middle
Science Photo Library, London (Long Ashton Re-
search Station, University of Bristol): 31 right
Sharma, G., University of Tennessee, Martin: 98 cen-
ter right
Sinsemilla: Manjuana Flowers © Copyright 1976, Ri-
chardson, Woods and Bogart. Permission granted
by: And/Or Press, Inc., P0 Box 2246, Berkeley, CA
94702: 97 below right
Smith, E. W., Cambridge, Mass.: 156/1 57 below, 171
above right, 176 right
Starnets, P Olympia: 158 right
Tobler, R., Lucerne: 16 above left, 81
Topham, J., Picture Library, Edenbridge: 17 above
right, 90 above
Valentini, M. B., Viridarium reformatum, seu regnum
vegeta bile, Frankfurt a. Main 1719: 80
Wasson, R. G., Harvard Botanical Museum, Cam-
bridge, Mass.: 14. 15 (Photo A. B. Richardson),
174 below, 175 below (Photo: C. Bartolo)
Weidmann, F., Munich: 193
Zentralbibliothek Zurich (Ms. F23, p. 399): 89 above
right
Zerries, 0., Munich: 118 below right, 118/119, 119
above right
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 200 ---
ACKNOWLED GMENTS
Should this book succeed in giving its readers a better
understanding of the role of hallucinogenic plants in
the cultural development of man through the centu-
ries, we must thank the patience and friendliness of
shamans and other native peoples with whom we
have had the happy opportunity of working.
The debt that we owe for the faithful cooperation
and encouragement of our many professional collea-
gues over the years can be neither easily nor ade-
quately put into words, but nonetheless it is deeply
appreciated.
To the sundry scientific institutions and many
libraries that have freely and fully helped us in so
many ways, both before and during the preparation of
the book, we express our heartfelt thanks. Without
this support, the book never could have been born in
its present form.
The generosity of the many individuals and institu-
tions that have made available, often at great expense
of time and research, the extensive illustrative mate-
rial for this volume—much of it hitherto unpublished—
has heartened us during the frequent frustrations that
we have met in our efforts to produce a book con-
ceived with a fresh and forward-looking overview of
one of the fundamental elements of human culture—
the hallucinogens.
Christian Râtsch thanks Claudia MUller-Ebeling,
Nana Nauwald, Stacy Schaefer, Arno Adelaars, Felix
Hasler, Jonathan Ott, Giorgio Samorini, and Paul
Stamets for comments on the revision.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Aaronson, Bernard & Humphrey Osmond (ed.)
1970 Psychedelics. New York: Anchor Books.
Adovasio, J. M. & G. F. Fry
1976 "Prehistoric Psychotropic Drug Use in North-
eastern Mexico and Trans-Pecos Texas" Economic
Botany 30: 94-96.
Agurell, S.
1969 "Cactaceae Alkaloids. I." Lloyd/a 32: 206—216.
Aiston, Georg
1937 The Aboriginal Narcotic Pitcheri" Oceania
7(3): 372—377.
Aliotta, Giovanni, Danielle Piomelli, & Antonio Pollio
1994 "Le piante narcotiche e psicotrope in Plinio e
Dioscoride" Anna/i del Musei Civic! de Revereto
9(1993): 99—114.
Alvear, Silvio Luis Haro
1971 Shamanismo y farmacopea en €1 re/no de
Quito. Quito, Instituto Ecuatoriana de Ciencias
Naturales (ContribuciOn 75).
Andritzky, Walter
1989 Schaman/smus und rituel/es He/len im A/ten
Peru (2 volumes). Berlin: Clemens Zerling.
1989 "Ethnopsychologische Betrachtung des Hell-
rituals mit Ayahuasca (Banisteriopsis caapi) unter
besonderer Berucksichtigung der Piros (Ostperu)"
Anthropos 84: 177—201.
1989 "Sociopsychotherapeutic Functions of Aya-
huasca Healing in Amazonia" Journal of Psycho-
actIve Drugs 21(1): 77—89.
1995 "Sakrale Heilpflanze, Kreativitãt und Kultur:
indigene Malerei, Gold- und Keramikkunst in Peru
und Kolumbien" Curare 18(2): 373—393.
Arenas, Pastor
1992 "El 'cebil' o el 'árbol de Ia ciencia del bien y del
mal" Parodiana7(1—2): 101—114.
Arévalo Valera, Guillermo
1994 Medicina /ndIgena Ship/bo-Con/bo: Las plan-
las medic/na/es y su beneficio en Ia salud. Lima:
Edición Aidesep.
Baer, Gerhard
1969 "Eine Ayahuasca-Sitzung unter den Piro (Ost-
Peru)" Bulletin de Ia Société Suisse des Amer/can-
isles 33: 5—8.
1987 "Peruanische ayahuasca-Sitzungen' in:
A. Dittrich & Ch. Scharfetter (ed.), Ethno-
psychotherapie, 5. 70—80, Stuttgart: Enke.
Barrau, Jacques
1958 "Nouvelles observations au sujet des plantes
hallucingenes d'usage autochtone en Nouvelle-
Guinee" Journal d'Agr/culture Tropicale et de Bota-
nique Appliquee 5: 377—378.
1962 "Observations et travaux récents sur lea ye-
getaux hallucinogenes de Ia Nouvelle-Guinée"
Journal d'Agr/cu/ture Tropicale et de Botanique Ap-
pliquee 9: 245—249.
Bauer, Wolfgang, Edzard Klapp & Alexandra Rosen-
bohm
1991 Der F/iegenpilz: E/n kulturhistor/sches Mu-
seum. Cologne: Wienand-Verlag.
Beringer, Kurt
1927 Der Meska//nrausch. Berlin: Springer (reprint
1969).
Bianchi, Antonio & Giorgio Samorini
1993 "Plants in Association with Ayahuasca" Jahr-
buch für Ethnomed/zin und BewuBtseinsforschung
2: 21—42, Berlin: VWB.
Bibra, Baron Ernst von
1995 P/ant Intoxicants: A Class/c Text on the Use of
Mind-Altering P/ants. Technical notes by Jonathan
Ott. Healing Arts Press: Rochester, VT. Originally
published as Die Narcot/sche GenuBmittel und der
Mensch. Verlag von Wilhelm Schmid, 1885.
Bisset, N. G.
1 985a "Phytochemistry and Pharmacology of Voa-
canga Species" Agricultural University Wagen/ngen
Papers 85(3): 81—114.
1 985b "Uses of Voacanga Species" Agricultural
UniversIty Wageningen Papers 85(3): 115-122.
Blätter, Andrea
1995 "Die Funktionen des Drogengebrauchs und
ihre kulturspezifische Nutzung" Curare 18(2): 279—
290.
1996 "Drogen im prakolurnbischen Nordamerika"
Jahrbuch für Ethnomedizin und Be-
wu!3tse/nsforschung 4 (1995): 163-183.
Bogers, Hans, Stephen Snelders & Hans Plomp
1994 De Psychedel/sche (R)evolutie. Amsterdam:
Bres.
Bové, Frank James
1970 The Story of Ergot. Basel, New York:
S. Karger.
Boyd, Carolyn E. & J. Philip Dering
1996 "Medicinal and Hallucinogenic Plants Identi-
fied in the Sediments and Pictographs of the Low-
er Pecos, Texas Archaic" Antiquity 70 (268): 256—
275
Brags, D. L. & J. L. McLaughlin
1969 "Cactus Alkaloids. V: Isolation of Hordenine
and N-Methyltyramine from Ariocarpus retusus"
P/a nta Med/ca 17: 87.
Brau, Jean-Louis
1969 Vom Haschisch zum LSD. Frankfurt/M.: Insel.
Bunge, A.
1847 "Beitrage zur Kenntnis der Flora Rul3lands
und der Steppen Zentral-Asiens" Mom. Say El r.
Petersb. 7: 438.
Bye, Robert A.
1979 "Hallucinogenic Plants of the Tarahumara"
Journal of Ethnopharmaco/ogy 1: 23—48.
Callaway, James
1995 "Some Chemistry and Pharmacology of Aya-
huasca" Jahrbuch für Ethnomodizin und BewuBt-
seinsforschung3(1994): 295—298, Berlin: VWB.
1995 "Pharmahuasca and Contemporary Ethno-
Curare 18(2): 395—398.
Campbell, T. N.
1958 "Origin of the Mescal Bean Cult" American
Anthropologist 60:156-160.
Camporesi, Piero
1990 Das Brot der Träume. Frankfurt/New York:
Campus.
Carstairs, G. M.
1954 "Daru and Bhang: Cultural Factors in the
Choice of Intoxicants" Quarterly Journal for the
Study of Alcohol 15: 220—237.
Chao, Jew-Ming & Ara H. Der Marderosian
1973 "Ergoline Alkaloidal Constituents of
Hawaiian Baby Wood Rose, Argyre/a nervosa
(Burm.f.) Bojer" Journal of Pharmaceutical
Sciences 62(4): 588—591.
Cooke, Mordecai C.
1989 The Seven Sisters of Sleep. Lincoln, MA:
Quarterman PubI. (reprint 1860).
Cooper, J. M.
1949 "Stimulants and Narcotics" in: J. H. Stewart
(ed.), Handbook of South American Indians, Bur
Am. Ethno/. Bull. 143(5): 525—558.
Cordy-Collins, Alana
1982 "PsychoactiVe Painted Peruvian Plants: The
Shamanism Textile" Journal of Ethnobio/ogy2(2):
14.4—153.
Davis, Wade
1996 One River: Explorations and Discoveries in
the Amazon Rain Forest. New York: Simon &
Schuster.
De Smet, Peter A. G. M. & Laurent Rivier
1987 "Intoxicating Paricá Seeds of the Brazilian
Maué Indians" Economic Botany4l (1): 12—16.
DeKorne, Jim
1995 Psychedel/scher Neo-Schamanismus. Löhr-
bach: Werner Pieper's MedienXperimente (Edition
Rauschkunde).
Deltgen, Florian
1993 Ge/enkte Ekstase: Die halluzinogene Dmge
CajIderYebámasa-/ndianer. Stuttgart: Franz Stei-
ner Verlag (Acta Humboldtiana 14).
199
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 201 ---
Descola, Philippe
1996 The Spears of Twilight: Life and Death in the
Amazon Jungle. London: HarperCollins.
Devereux, Paul
1992 Shamanism and the Mystery Lines: Ley
Lines, Spirit Paths, Shape-Shifting & Out-of-Body
Travel. London, New York, Toronto, Sydney: Quan-
tum.
1997 The Long Trip:APrehistoryof Psychedelia.
New York: Penguin/Arkana.
Diaz, José Luis
1979 "Ethnopharmacology and Taxonomy of Mexi-
can Psychodysleptic Plants" Journal of Psychede-
lic Drugs 11(1—2): 71—101.
DieckhOfer, K., Th. Vogel, & J. Meyer-Lindenberg
1971 "Datura Stramonium als Rauschmittel" Der
Nervenarzt 42(8): 431—437.
Dittrich, Adolf
1996 Atiologie-unabhàngige Strukturen veränder-
ter WachbewuI3tseinszustllnde. Second edition,
Berlin: VWB.
Dobkin de IRios, Marlene
1972 Visionary Vine: Hallucinogenic Healing in the
Peruvian Amazon. San Francisco: Chandler.
1984 Hallucinogens: Cross-Cultural Perspectives.
Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
1992 Amazon Healer: The Life and Times of an
Urban Shaman. Bridport, Dorset: Prism Press.
Drury, Nevill
1989 Vision Quest. Bridport, Dorset: Prism Press.
1991 The Visionary Human. Shaftesbury, Dorset:
Element Books.
1996 Shamanism. Shaftesbury, Dorset: Element.
Duke, James A. & Rodolfo Vasquez
1994 Amazonian Ethnobotanical Dictionary Boca
Raton, FL: CRC Press.
DuToit, Brian M.
1977 Drugs, Rituals and Altered States of Con-
sciousness. Rotterdam: Balkerna.
Efron, Daniel H., Bo Holmstedt, & Nathan S. Kline
(ed.)
1967 Ethnopharmacologic Search for Psychoactive
Drugs. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
Health, Education, and Welfare.
Emboden, William A.
1976 "Plant Hypnotics Among the North American
Indians" in: Wayland D. Hand (ed), American Folk
Medicine: A Symposium, S. 159—167, Berkeley:
University of California Press.
1979 Narcotic Plants (revised edition). New York:
Macmillan.
Escohotado, Antonio
1990 Historia de las drogas (3 vols.). Madrid:
Alianza Editorial.
Eugster, Conrad Hans
1967 Uber den Fllegenpliz. Zurich: Natur-
forschende Gesellschaft (Neujahrsblatt).
1968 "Wirkstoffe aus dem Fliegenpilz" Die Natur-
wissenschaften 55(7): 305—313.
Fadiman, James
1965 "Genista canariensis: A Minor Psychedelic"
Economic Botany 19: 383—384.
Farnsworth, Norman Ft.
1968 "Hallucinogenic Plants" Science 162:
1086—1092.
1972 "Psychotomimetic and Related Higher Plants"
Journal of Psychedelic Drugs 5(1): 67—74.
1974 "Psychotomimetic Plants. II" Journal of Psy-
chedelic Drugs 6(1): 83—84.
Fericgla, Josep M.
1994 (ed), Plantas, Chamanismo y Estados de
Consciencia. Barcelona: Los Libros de Ia Liebre de
Marzo (Colleccibn Cogniciones).
Fernández Distel, Alicia A.
1980 "Hallazgo de pipas en complejos precerámi-
cos del borde de a Puna Jujena
(Republics Argentina) y el empleo de alucinOgenos
por parte de las mismas cultura" Estudios Arqueo-
ldgicos 5: 55—79, Universidad de Chile.
Festi, Francesco
1985 Funghi aliucinogeni: Aspetti psichofisiologici
e storici. Rovereto: Musei Civici dl Rovereto
(LXXXVI Pubblicazione).
1995 "Le erbe del diavolo. 2: Botanica, chimicae
farmacologia" Altrove 2: 117—145.
1996 "Scopolia carniolica Jacq." Eleusis 5: 34—45.
200
Festi, Franceso & Giovanni Aliotta
1990 "Piante psicotrope spontanee 0 coltivate in
Italia" Annali dei Musel Civici di Rovereto 5 (1989):
135-1 66.
Festi, Francesco & Giorgio Samorini
1994 "Alcaloidi indolici psicoattivi nel generi
Phalaris e Arundo (Graminaceae): Una rassegna"
Annali del Museldi Rove reto 9 (1993): 239—
288.
Fields, F. Herbert
1968 "Rivea corymbosa: Notes on Some Zapote-
can Customs" Economic Botany 23:206-209.
Fitzgerald, J. S. & A. A. Sioumis
1965 "Alkaloids of the Australian Leguminosae V:
The Occurrence of Methylated Tryptamines in Aca-
cia maidenliF Muell." Australian Journal of Chemis-
tryl8: 433—434.
Flury, Lllzaro
1958 "El Caá-pi y el Hataj, dos poderosos ilusió-
genoa indigenas" America Indigena 18(4): 293—
298.
Forte, Robert (ed.)
1997 Entheogens and the Future of Religion. San
Francisco: Council on Spiritual Practices/Promind
Services (Sebastopol).
Friedberg, C.
1965 "Des Banisteriopsis utilisés comme drogue en
Amerique du Sud" JournalTropicale
et de Botanique Appliquee 12: 1—139.
FOhner, Hermann
1919 "Scopoliawurzel ala Gift und Heilmittel bei Li-
tauen und Letten" Therapeutische Monatshefte 33:
221—227.
1925 "Solanazeen ala Berauschungsmittel: Eine
historisch-ethnologische Studie" Archly für experi-
mentelle Pathologie und Pharmakologie 111:
281—294.
1943 Medizinische Toxikologie. Leipzig: Georg
Thieme.
Furst, PeterT.
1971 "Ariocarpus retusus, the 'False Peyote' of
Huichol Tradition" Economic Botany 25: 182—187.
1972 (ed), Flesh of the Gods. New York: Praeger.
1974 "Hallucinogens in Pre-Columbian Art" in Mary
Elizabeth King & Idris R. TraylorJr. (ed.), Art and En-
vironmentin Native America, The Museum of Texas
Tech, Texas Tech University (Lubbock), Special Pub-
lication no. 7.
1976 Hallucinogens and Culture. Novato, CA:
Chandler & Sharp.
1986 Mushrooms: Psychedelic Fungi. New York:
Chelsea House Publishers. [updated edition 1992]
1990"Schamanische Ekstaae und botanische Hallu-
zinogene: Phantasie und Realitllt" in: G. Guntern
(ed.), DerGesang des Schamanen, 5. 211—243,
Brig: ISO-Stiftung.
1996 "Shamanism, Transformation, and Olmec Art"
in: The Olmec World: Ritual and Rulers hip, 5. 69—
81, The Art Museum, Princeton University/New
York: Harry N. Abrams.
Garcia, L. L., L. L. Cosme, H. R. Peralta, et al.
1973 "Phytochemical Investigation of Coleus Blu-
mel. I. Preliminary Studies of the Leaves" Philippine
Joumal of Science 102:1.
Gartz, Jochen
1986 "Quantitative Bestimmung der Indolderivate
von Psliocybe semlianceata (Fr.) Kumm' Biochem.
Physiol. Pflanzen 181:117—124.
1989 "Analyse der Indolderivate in Fruchtkorpern
und Mycelien von Panaeolus subbafteatus (Berk. &
Br.) Sacc." Biochemie und Physiologie der Pflanzen
184:171—178.
1993 Narrenschwllmme: Psychot rope Plize in
Europa. Genf/Neu-Allschwil: Editions Heuwinkel,
1996 Magic Mushrooms Around the World. Los An-
geles: Lis Publications.
Garza, Mercedes de Ia
1990 Suenos y alucinaciOn en el mundo náhuatl y
maya. Mexico, D.F.: UNAM.
Gelpke, Rudolf
1995 Vom Rausch im Orient und Okzident (Second
edition). With a new epilogue by Michael Klett.
Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta.
Geachwinde, Thomas
1990 Rauschdrogen: Markiformen und Wirkungs-
weisen. Berlin etc.: Springer.
Giese, Claudius Cristobal
1989 "Curenderos": Traditionelie Heller in Nord
Peru (Küste und Hochland). Hohenschllftlarn:
Klaus Renner Verlag.
Golowin, Sergius
1971 "Psychedelische Volkskunde" Antaios 12:
590—604.
1973 Die Magie der verbotenen Mllrchen. Gif ken-
dod: Merlin.
Gonçalves de Lima, Oswaldo
1946 "Observaçbes sbbre 0 'vinho da Jurema' utili-
zado pelos indios Pancurü de TacaratO (Pernam-
buco)" Arquivos do Instituto de Pesquisas Agrono-
micas 4: 45—80.
Grinspoon, Lester & James B. Bakalar
1981 Psychedelic Drugs Reconsidered. New York:
Basic Books.
1983 (eds.), Psychedelic Reflections. New York:
Human Sciences Press.
Grob, Charles S. et al.
1996 "Human Psychopharmacology of Hoasca,a
Plant Hallucinogen in Ritual Context in Brazil" The
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 181(2):
86—94.
Grof, Stanislav
1975 Realms of the Human Unconscious: Obser-
vations from LSD Research. New York: Viking
Press.
Grof, Stanislav and Joan Halifax.
1977 The Human Encounter with Death. New York:
E. P. Dutton.
Guerra, Francisco
1967 "Mexican Phantastica: A Study of the Early
Ethnobotanical Sources on Hallucinogenic Drugs"
British Journal of Addiction 62: 171—187.
1971 The Pre-Columbian Mind. London:
Seminar Press.
Guzmán, Gaston
1983 The Genus Psilocybe. Vaduz, Liechtenstein:
Beihefte zur Nova Hedwigia, Nr. 74
Halifax, Joan (ed.)
1979 Shamanic Voices: A Survey of Visionary Nar-
ratives. New York: E. P Dutton
1981 Die andere Wirklichkeit der Schamanen.
Bern, Munich: 0. W. Barth/Scherz.
Hansen, Harold A.
1978 TheGarden. Foreword by Richard
Evans Schultes. Santa Cruz: Unity Press-Michael
Kesend. Originally published as Heksens Urtegard.
Laurens Bogtrykkeri, Tender, Denmark, 1976.
Harner, Michael (ed.)
1973 Hallucinogens and Shamanism. London: Ox-
ford University Press.
Hartwich, Carl
1911 Die menschlichen Genuf3mittel. Leipzig:
Tauchnitz.
Heffern, Richard
1974 Secrets of Mind-Altering Plants of Mexico.
New York: Pyramid.
Heim, Roger
1963 Les champignons toxiques et haliucinogenes.
Paris: N. Boubée & Cie.
1966 (et al.) 'Nouvelles investigations sur lea
champignons hallucinogenes" Archives du Mu-
séum National d'Histoire Naturelle, (1965—1966).
Helm, Roger & R. Gordon Wasson
1958 "Lea champignons haflucinogenes du Mexi-
que" Archives du Museum National d'Histoire Nat-
urelle, Septième Série, Tome VI, Paris.
Heinrich, Clark
1998 Die Magie derPlize. Munich: Diederichs.
Heiser, Charles B.
1987 The Fascinating World of the Nightshades.
New York: Dover.
Höhle, Sigi, Claudia Muller-Ebeling, Christian Ràtsch,
& Ossi Urchs
1986 Rausch und Erkenntnis. Munich: Knaur.
Hotter, Abraham & Humphry Osmond
1967 The Haliucinogens. New York and London:
Academic Press.
Hofmann, Albert
1960 "Die psychotropen Wirkstoffe der mexika-
nischen Zauberplize" Chimia 14:309-318.
1961 "Die Wirkstofte der mexikanischen Zauber-
droge Ololiuqui" Planta Medica 9: 354—367.
1964 Die Mutterkorn-Alkaloide. Stuttgart: Enke.
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 202 ---
1968 "Psychotomimetic Agents" in: A. Burger (ed),
Chemical Constitution and Pharmacodynamic Ac-
tion, S. 169—235, New York: M. Dekker.
1980 LSD, My Problem Child. Translated by Jo-
nathan Ott. New York: McGraw-Hill. Originally pub-
lished as LSD: mein Sorgenkind. Stuttgart: Klett-
Cotta, 1979.
1987 "Pilzliche Halluzinogene vom Mutterkorn bis
zu den mexikanischen Zauberpllzen" Der Cham-
pignon 310: 22—28.
1989Outlook. Atlanta: Humanics New
Age. Originally published as Einsichten/Ausblick-
en. Basel: Sphinx Verlag, 1986.
1996 Lob des Schauens. Privately printed (limited
edition of 150 copies).
Hofmann, Albert, Roger Helm, & Hans Tscherter
1963 "Presence de Ia psilocybine dana une
espece européenne d'Agaric, le Psilocybe semi-
lanceata Fr. Note (*) de MM:' in: Comptes rendus
des seances de l'Académie des Sciences (Paris),
t. 257: 10—12.
Huxley, Aldous
1954 The Doors of Perception. New York: Harper &
Bros.
1956 Heaven and Hell. New York: Harper & Bros.
1999 Moksha. Preface by Albert Hofmann.
Edited by Michael Horowitz and Cynthia Palmer.
Introduction by Alexander Shulgin. Rochester, VT:
Park Street Press.
Illius, Bruno
1991 Ani Shinan: Schamanismus bel den Shipibo-
Conibo (Ost-Peru). Münster, Hamburg: Lit Verlag
(Ethnologische Studien Vol. 12).
Jam, S. K., V. Ranjan, E. L. S. Sikarwar, & A. Saklani
1994 "Botanical Distribution of Psychoactive Plants
in India" Ethnobotany6: 65—75.
Jansen, Karl L. R. & Cohn J. Prast
1988 "Ethnopharmacology of Kratom and the Mi-
tragyna Alkaloids" Journal of Ethnopharmacology
23: 115—119.
Johnston, James E
1855 The Chemistry of Common Life. Vol. II: The
Narcotics We Indulge /n. New York: D. Appleton &
Co.
1869 DieChemie des taglichen Lebens (2Bde.).
Berlin.
Johnston, T. H. & J. B. Clelland
1933 "The History of the Aborigine Narcotic, Pituri"
Oceania 4(2): 201—223, 268,289.
Joralemon, Donald & Douglas Sharon
1993 Sorcery and Shamanism: Curanderos and
Clients in Northern Peru. Salt Lake City: University
of Utah Press.
Joyce, C. R. B. & S. H. Curry
1970 The Botany and Chemistry of Cannabis. Lon-
don: Churchill.
Junger, Ernst
1980Annäherungen-Drogenund Rausch. Frank-
furtlusw.:UlIstein.
Kaiweit, Holger
1984Traumzeitund innerer Raum: Die Welt der
Schamanen. Bernetc.: Scherz.
KlOver, Heinrich
1969 Mescaland Mechanisms of Hallucinations.
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Koch-Grunberg, Theodor
1921ZweiJahre bei den Indianern Nordwest-Bra-
siliens. Stuttgart: Strecker & Schrbder
1923VomRoraima zum Orinoco. Stuttgart:
Kotschenreuther,Helimut
1978 Das Reich der Drogen und Gifte. FrankfurtlM.
etc.: Ullstein.
Kraepelin, Emil
1882 Uber die Beeinflussung einfacherpsycholo-
gischer Vorgange durch einige Arzneimittel. Jena.
LaBarre, Weston
1970"Old and New World Narcotics" Economic
Botany 24(1): 73—80.
1979 "Shamanic Origins of Religion and Medicine"
Journal of Psychedelic Drugs 11(1—2): 7—11.
1979 The Peyote Cult (5th edition). Norman: Uni-
versity of Oklahoma Press.
Langdon,E. Jean Matteson & Gerhard Baer (ed.)
1992Portals of Power: Shamanism in South
America. Albuquerque:University of New Mexico
Press.
Larris, S.
1980ForbydeHallucinogener? Forbyd Naturen at
Gro! Nimtoffe:ForlagetIndkebstryk.
Leuenberger, Hans
1969Zauberdrogen:Reisen ins Weltall der Seele.
Stuttgart: Henry Goverts Verlag.
Leuner, Hanscarl
1981Halluzinogene.Bern etc.: Huber.
1996Psychotherapieund religioses Erleben. Ber-
lin: VWB.
Lewin,Louis
1997Banisteria caapi, emneues Rauschgift und
Heilmittel. Berlin:VWB (reprint from 1929).
1998Phantastica: A Classic Survey on the Use and
Abuse of Mind-Altering Plants. Rochester, VT: Park
Street Press. Originally published as Phantastica-
Die Betäubenden und erregenden Genul3mittel.
Für Artzte und Nichtärzte. Berlin: Georg Stilke
Verlag, 1924.
Lewis-Williams, J. D. & T. A. Dowson
1988 "The Signs of All Times: Entoptic
Phenomena in Upper PaleohithicCurrent
Anthropology 29(2): 201—245.
1993 "On Vision and Power in the Neolithic: Evi-
dence from the Decorated Monuments" Current
Anthropology 34(1): 55—65.
Liggenstorfer, Roger & Christian Rätsch (eds.)
1996MariaSabina-Botin der heiigen Pllze: Vom
traditionellen Schamanentum zur welt we iten Pilz-
Solothurn:Nachtschatten Verlag.
Li,Hui-Lin
1975 "Hallucinogenic Plants in Chinese
Herbals" Botanical Museum Leaflets 25(6):
161—181.
Lin,Geraline C. & Richard A. Glennon (ed.)
1994 Hallucinogens: An Update. Rockvihle, MD:
National Institute on Drug Abuse.
Lipp, FrankJ.
1991 The Mixe of Oaxaca: Religion, Ritual, and
Healing. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Lockwood, Tommie E.
1979 "The Ethnobotany of Brugmansia" Journal of
Ethnopharmacology 1: 147—164.
Luna, Luia Eduardo
1984 "The Concept of Plants as Teachers Among
Four Meatizo Shamans of Iquitos, Northeast Peru"
Journal of Ethnopharmacology 11(2): 135-156.
1986 Vegetalismo: Shamanism Among the Mestizo
Population of the Peruvian Amazon. Stockholm:
Almqvist & Wiskell International (Acta Universitatis
StockholmieflsiS, Stockholm Studies in Compara-
tive Religion 27).
1991 "Plant Spirits in Ayahuasca Visions by
Peruvian Painter Pablo Amaringo: An Iconographic
Analysis" Integration 1: 18—29.
Luna, Luis Eduardo & Pablo Amaringo
1991 Ayahuasca Visions. Berkeley: North
Atlantic Books.
McKenna, Dennis J. & G. H. N. Towers
1985 "On the Comparative Ethnopharmacology of
Malpighiaceous and Myristicaceous Hallucino-
gens" Journal of Psychoactive Drugs 17(1): 35—39.
McKenna, Dennis J., G. H. N. Towers, & F. Abbott
1994 "Monoamine Oxydase Inhibitors in South
American Hallucinogenic Plants: Tryptamine and 3-
Carboline Constituents of Ayahuasca" Journal of
EthnopharmacolOgyl0: 195—223and 12:179—211.
McKenna, Terence
1991 TheArchaic Revival. SanFrancisco: Harper.
1992'Tryptamine Hallucinogens and Conscious-
ness" Jahrbuch für Ethnomedizin und Be-
wuf3tseinsforschung 1:133-148, Berlin: VWB.
1992 Food of the Gods: The Search for the Original
Tree of Knowledge: A Radical History of Plants,
Drugs and Human Evolution. New York: Bantam
Books.
1994 TrueHallucinations: Being an Account of the
Extraordinary Adventures in the Devil'à
Paradise. London: Rider.
Mantegazza, Paolo
1871Quadridella natura umana: Feste ed eb-
brezze (2 volumes). Mailand: Brigola.
1887Leestasi umane. Mailand: Dumolard.
Marzahn, Christian
1994BeneTibi-Uber Genufl und Geist. Bremen:
Edition Temmen.
Marzell, Heinrich
1964Zauberpflanzen-Hexentrãnke.Stuttgart:
Kosmos.
Mata,Rachel & Jerry L. McLaughlin
1982 "Cactus Alkaloids. 50: A Comprehensive Tab-
ular Summary" RevistaLatinoamerica de Quimica
12:95—117.
Metzner,Ralph
1994The Well of Remembrance: Rediscovering the
Earth Wisdom Myths of Northern Europe. Appendix
'TheMead of Inspiration and Magical Plants of the
Ancient Germans" by Christian Rätsch. Boston:
Shambhala.
Møller, Knud 0.
1951 Rauschgifteund GenuIlmittel. Basel:Benno
Schwabe.
Moreau de Tours, J. J.
1973 Hashishand Mental/I/ness. NewYork: Raven
Press.
Muller, G. K. & Jochen Gartz
1986 "Psilocybecyanescens-eine weiterehalluzi-
nogene Kahlkopfart in der DDR" Mykologisches
Mitteilungsblatt 29:33—35.
MOller-Eberling,Claudia &Christian Rätsch
1986 Iso/densLiebestrank. Munich:Kindler.
Muller-Ebeling,Claudia, Christian Rätsch, & Wolf-
Dieter Storl
1998 Hexenmedizin.Aarau:AT Verlag.
MunizagaA., Carlos
1960 "Uso actual de miyaya(Datura stramonium)
porlos araucanos de Chiles" Journalde Ia Société
des Américanistes 52: 4—43.
Myerhoff,Barbara G.
1974 PeyoteHunt: The Sacred Journey of the Hui-
chol Indians. Ithaca:Cornell, University Press.
Nadler, KurtH.
1991Drogen:Rauschgift und Medizin. Munich:
Ouintessenz.
Naranjo, Plutarco
1969 "Etnofarmacologia de has plantaspsicotropi-
casde America" Terapia24:5—63.
1983 Ayahuasca:Etnomedicina y mitologia. Ouito:
Ediciones Libri Mundi.
Negrin, J.
1975 TheHuichol Creation of the World. Sacra-
mento, CA: Crocker Art Gallery.
Neuwinger, Hans Dieter
1994 AfrikanischeArzneipflanzen und Jagdgifte.
Stuttgart:WVG.
Ortega, A., J. F. Blount, & Ft S. Merchant
1982 "Salvinorin, a New Trans-Neoclerodafle Di-
terpene from Salviadivinorum (Labiatae)"J.Chem.
Soc., PerkinTrans. I: 2505—2508.
Ortiz de Montellano,Bernard R.
1981 "Entheogens: The Interaction ofBiology and
Culture"Reviews of Anthropology 8(4): 339—365.
Osmond, Humphrey
1955 "Ololiuhqui: The Ancient Aztec Narcotic" Jour-
nal of Mental Science 101:526—537.
Ott,Jonathan
1979 Hallucinogenic Plants of North America. (re-
vised edition) Berkeley: Wingbow press.
1985ChocolateAddict. Vashon,WA: Natural Pro-
ducts Co.
1993Pharmacotheon Entheogenic Drugs, Their
Plant Sources and History Kennewick, WA: Natural
ProductsCo.
1995 AyahuascaAnalogues: Pangoean Entheo-
gens. Kennewick, WA: Natural Products Co.
1995"AyahuasCaand Ayahuasca Analogues: Pan-
GaeanEntheogens for the New Millennium" Jahr-
buch für EthnomediZin und Bewufltsemnsforschung
3(1994):285—293.
1995Phytochemistry
andHuman Pharmacology" Integration5:73—97.
1995 "EthnopharmacognOSy and Human Pharma-
cology of Salviadivinorum and Salvinorin A" Curare
18(1):103—129.
1995 TheAge of Entheogens & The Angels' Dic-
tionary Kennewick, WA: Natural Products Co.
1996"Salviadivinorum Ephinget Játiva (Foglie della
Pastora/Leaves of the Shepherdess)" Eleusis4:
31—39.
1996"Entheogens II: On Entheology and Entheo-
botany" Journal of Psychoactive Drugs 28(2): 205—
209.
201
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 203 ---
Ott, Jonathan & Jeremy Bigwood (ed.)
1978 Teonanácatl: Hallucinogenic Mushrooms of
North America. Seattle: Madrona.
Pagani, Silvio
1993 Funghetti. Torino: Nautilus.
Pelletier, S. W.
1970 Chemistry of Alkaloids. New York: Van
Nostrand Reinhold.
Pelt, Jean-Marie
1983 Drogues etplantes magiques. Paris: Fayard.
Pendell, Dale
—1995 PharmaklPoeia: Plant Powers, Poisons, and
He,bcraft. San Francisco: Mercury House.
Perez de Barradas, José
1957 Plantas magicas americanas. Madrid: Inst.
'Bernardino de Sahagün.'
Perrine, Daniel M.
1996 The Chemistry of Mind-Altering Drugs: His-
tory Pharmacology and Cultural Context. Wa-
shington, DC: American Chemical Society.
Peterson, Nicolas
1979 "Aboriginal Uses of Australian Solanaceae"
in: J. G. Hawkes et al. (eds.), The Biology and Tax-
onomyoftheSolanaceae, 171—189, London etc.:
Academic Press.
Pinkley, Homer V.
1969 "Etymology of Psychotria in View of a New
Use of the Genus" Rhodora 71: 535—540.
Plotkin, MarkJ.
1994 Der Schatz der Wayana: Abe nteuer bei den
Schamanen im Amazonas—Regenwald. Bern, Mu-
nich, Vienna: Scherz Verlag.
Plowman, Timothy, Lars Olot Gyllenhaal, & Jan Erik
Lindgren
1971 "Latua pubiflora-Magic Plant from Southern
Chile" Botanical Museum Leaflets 23(2): 61—92.
Polia Meconi, Mario
1988 Las lagunas de los encantos: medicina tradi-
cional andina del Peru septentrional. Piura: Central
Peruana de Servicios-CEPESERJCIub Grau de
Piura.
Pope, Harrison G., Jr.
1969 "Ta be rnanthe iboga: An African Narcotic Plant
of Social Importance" Economic Botany23: 174—
184.
Prance, Ghillian T.
1970 "Notes on the Use of Plant Hallucinogens in
Amazonian Brazil" Economic Botany 24: 62—68.
1972 "Ethnobotanical Notes from Amazonian Bra-
zil" Economic Botany 26: 221—237.
Prance, Ghillian T., David G. Campbell, & Bruce W.
Nelson
1977 'The Ethnobotany of the Paumari Indians"
Economic Botany3l: 129—139.
Prance, G. T. & A. E. Prance
1970 "Hallucinations in Amazonia" Garden Journal
20:102—107.
Preussel, Ulrike & Hans-Georg
1997 Engelstrompeten: Brugmansia und Datura.
Stuttgart: Ulmer.
Quezada, Noemi
1989 Amor y magia amorosa entre los aztecas.
Mexico: UNAM.
Rätsch, Christian
1988 Lexikon derZauberpflanzen aus ethnolo-
gischerSicht. Graz: ADEVA.
1991 Von den Wurze/n der Kultur: Die Pflanzen der
Propheten. Basel: Sphinx.
1991 lndianische Heilkräuter(2 revised edition).
Munich: Diederichs.
1992 The Dictionary of Sacred and Magical Plants.
Santa Barbara etc.: ABC-CIio.
1992 The Dictionary of Sacred and Magical Plants.
Bridport, England: Prism Press. Originally pub-
lished as Lexikon derZauberpflanzen aus ethnolo-
gischerSicftt. Graz: ADEVA, 1988.
1994 "Die Pflanzen der blOhenden Träume: Tran-
cedrogen mexikanischer Schamanen" Curare
17(2): 277—314.
1995 Heilkráuter derAntike in Agypten, Griechen-
land undRom. Munich: Diederichs Verlag (DG).
1996 Urbock-Bier jenseits von Hopfen und MaIz:
Von den Zaubertränken derGOtterzu den psyche-
delischen Bieren derZukunft. Aarau, Stuttgart: AT
Verlag.
1997 Enzyklopfldie derpsychoaktiven Pflanzen.
202
Aarau: AT Verlag.
1997 Plants of Love:Aphrodisiacs in History anda
Guide to Their identification. Foreword by Albert
Hofmann, Berkeley: Ten Speed Press. Originally
published as Pflanzen der Liebe. Bern: Hallwag,
1990. Second and subsequent editions published
by AT Verlag, Aarau, Switzerland.
1998 Enzykloplldie derpsychoaktiven Pflanzen.
Aarau: AT Verlag . English-language edition, Ency-
clopedia of Psychoactive Plants, to be published in
2003 by Inner Traditions, Rochester, Vermont.
Raffauf, Robert F
1970 A Handbook of Alkaloids and Alkaloid-con-
taining Plants. New York: Wiley-Interscience.
Reichel-Dolmatoff, Gerardo
1971 Amazonian Cosmos: The Sexual and Reli-
gious Symbolism of the Tukano Indians. Chicago
and London: The University of Chicago Press.
1975 The Shaman and the Jaguar: A Study of Nar-
cotic Drugs Among the Indians of Colombia. Phila-
delphia: Temple University Press.
1978 Beyond the Milky Way: Hallucinatory Imagery
of the Tukano Indians. Los Angeles: UCLA Latin
American Center Publications.
1985 Basketry as Metaphor: Arts and Crafts of the
Desana Indians of the Northwest Amazon. Los An-
geles Museum of Cultural History.
1987 Shamanism andArt of the Eastern Tukanoan
Indians. Leiden: BrilI.
1996 The Forest Within: The Worid-Viewof the
Tukano Amazonian Indians. Totnes, Devon: Green
Books.
1996 Das schamanische Universum:
mus, Bewufltseins und Okologie in Südamerika.
Munich: Diederichs.
Reko, Bias Pablo
1996 On Aztec Botanical Names. Translated, edi-
ted and commented by Jonathan Ott. Berlin: VWB.
Reko, Victor A.
1938 Mag/sche Gifte: Rausch- und Beta ubungs-
mittelderneuen Welt(second edition). Stuttgart:
Enke (Reprint Berlin: EXpress Edition 1987, VWB
1996).
Richardson, P. Mick
1992 Flowering Plants: Magic in Bloom (updated
edition). New York, Philadelphia: Chelsea House
PubI.
Ripinsky-Naxon, Michael
1989 "Hallucinogens, Shamanism, and the Cultural
Process" Anthropos84: 219—224.
1993 The Nature of Shamanism: Substance and
Function of a Religious Metaphoc Albany: State
University of New York Press.
1996 "Psychoactivity and Shamanic States of
Consciousness" Jahrbuch für Ethnomedizin und
BewuBtseinsforschung 4 (1995): 35—43, Berlin:
VWB.
Rivier, Laurent & Jan-Erik Lindgren
1972 " 'Ayahuasca,' the South American Hallucino-
genic Drink: An Ethnobotanical and Chemical In-
vestigation" Economic Botany26: 101—129.
Rampp, Hermann
1950 ChemischeZaubertränke (5th edition). Stutt-
gart: Kosmos-Franckh'sche.
Rosenbohm, Alexandra
1991 Halluzinogene Drogen im Schamanismus.
Berlin: Reimer.
Roth, Lutz, Max Daunderer, & Kurt Kormann
1994 Giftpflanzen-Pflanzengifte (4. edition).
Munich: Ecomed.
Rouhier, Alexandre
1927 Le plante qui tallies yeux émerveillés-le
Peyotl. Paris: Gaston Doin.
1996 Die Heilsehen hervorrufenden Pflanzen.
Berlin: VWB (Reprint from 1927).
Ruck, Carl A. P et al.
1979 "Entheogens" Journal of Psychedelic Drugs
11(1—2): 145-1 46.
Rudgley, Richard
1994 Essential Substances: A Cultural History of
Intoxicants in Society Foreword by William Embo-
den. New York, Tokyo, London: Kodansha Intérna-
tional.
1995 'The Archaic Use of Hallucinogens in Europe:
An Archaeology of Altered States" Addiction 90:
163—164.
Safford, William E.
1916 "Identity of Cohoba, the Narcotic Snuff of An-
cient Haiti" Journal of the Washington Academy of
Sciences 6: 547—562.
1917 "Narcotic Plants and Stimulants of the Ancient
Americans" Annual Report of the Smithsonian In-
stitution for 1g16: 387—424.
1921 "Syncopsis of the Genus Datura" Journal of
the Washington Academy of Sciences 11(8): 173—
189.
1922 "Daturas of the Old World and New" Annual
Report of the Smithsonian Institution for 1920:537—
567.
Salzman, Emanuel, Jason Salzman, Joanne Salz-
man, & Gary Lincoff
1996 "In Search of Mukhomo, the Mushroom of
Immortality"Drum 41: 36—47.
Samorini, Giorgio
1995 Gil allucinogeni nel mito: Racconti sull'origine
delie piante psicoattive. Turin: Nautilus.
Schaefer, Stacy & Peter 1. Furst (ed.)
1996 People of the Peyote: Huichol Indian History
Religion, & Survival. Albuquerque: University of
New Mexico Press.
Schenk, Gustav
1948 Schatten derNacht. Hanover: Sponholtz.
1954 Das Buch der Gifte. Berlin: Safari.
Schleiffer, Hedwig (ed.)
1973 Narcotic Plants of the New World Indians: An
Anthology of Texts from the 16th Century to Date.
New York: Hafner Press (Macmillan).
1979 Narcotic Plants of the Old World: An Antho-
logy of Texts from Ancient Times to the Present.
Monticello, NY: Lubrecht & Cramer.
Scholz, Dieter & Dagmar Eigner
1983 "Zur Kenntnis der natürlichen Halluzinogene"
Pharmazie in unsererzeit 12(3): 74—79.
Schuldes, Bert Marco
1995 Psychoaktive Pflanzen. 2. verbesserte und
ergAnzte Auflage. Lbhrbach: MedienXperimente &
Solothurn: Nachtschatten Verlag.
Schultes, Richard E.
1941 A Contribution to Our Knowledge of Hives
corymbosa: The Narcotic Oloiluqui of the Aztecs.
Cambridge, MA: Botanical Museum of Harvard
University.
1954 "A New Narcotic Snuff from the Northwest
Amazon" Botanical Museum Leaflets 16(9): 241—
260.
1963 "Hallucinogenic Plants of the New World" The
Harvard Review 1(4): 18—32.
1965 "Emhalbes Jahrhunderf Ethnobotanik amen-
kanischer Halluzinogene" Plants Medica 13:125—
157.
1966 'The Search for New Natural Hallucinogens"
Lloydia 29(4): 293—308.
1967 'The Botanical Origins of South American
Snuffs" in Daniel H. Efron (ed), Ethnopharmacolo-
gical Search for Psychoactive Drugs, S. 291—306,
Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
1969 "Hallucinogens of Plant Origin" Science 163:
245—254.
1970 'The Botanical and Chemical Distribution of
Hallucinogens" Annual Review of Plant Physiology
21: 571—594.
1970 'The Plant Kingdom and Hallucinogens"
Bulletin on Narcotics 22(1): 25-51.
1972 'The Utilization of Hallucinogens in Primitive
Societies-Use, Misuse or Abuse?" in: W. Keup (ed),
Drug Abuse: Current Concepts and Research,
5. 17—26, Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas.
1976 Hallucinogenic Plants. Racine, WI: Western.
1977 "Mexico and Colombia: Two Major Centres of
Aboriginal Use of Hallucinogens" Journal of Psyche-
delic Drugs 9(2): 173-176.
1979 "Hallucinogenic Plants: Their Earliest Botani-
cal Descriptions" Journal of Psychedelic Drugs
11(1—2): 13—24.
1984 "Fifteen Years of Study of Psychoaktive
Snuffs of South America: 1967—1982, a Review"
Journal of Ethnopharmacology 11(1): 17—32.
1988 Where the Gods Reign: Plants and Peoples of
the Colombian Amazon. Oracle, AZ: Synergetic
Press.
1995 "Antiquity of the Use of New World Hallucino-
gens" Integration 5: 9-18.
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 204 ---
Schultes, Richard E. & Norman H. Farnsworth
1982 "Ethnomedical, Botanical and Phytochemical
Aspects of Natural Hallucinogens" Botanical Mu-
seum Leaflets 28(2): 123—214.
Schultes, Richard E. & Albert Hot mann
1980 The Botany and Chemistry of Hallucinogens.
Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas.
Schultes, Richard Evans & Bo Holmstedt
1968 "De Plantis Toxicariis e Mundo Novo Tropicale
Commentationes II: The Vegetable Ingredients of
the Myristicaceous Snuffs of the Northwest Ama-
zon" Rhodora70: 113—160.
Schultes, Richard Evans & Robert F. Raffauf
1990 The Healing Forest: Medicinal and Toxic
Plants of the NorthwestAmazonia. Portland, OR:
Dioscorides Press.
1992 Vine of the Soul: Medicine Men, Their Plants
and Rituals/n the Colombian Amazonia. Oracle,
AZ: Synergetic Press.
Schultes, Richard E. & Sin von Reis (Ed.)
1995 Ethnobotany: Evolution of a Discipline. Port-
land, OR: Dioscorides Press.
Schurz, Josef
1969 Vom Biisenkrautzum LSD. Stuttgart: Kosmos.
Schwamm, Brigitte
1988 Atropa belladonna: Elne ant/ke Heilpflanze im
modernen Arzneischatz. Stuttgart: Deutscher
Apotheker Verlag.
Sharon, Douglas
1978 Wizard of the Four Winds: AStory
New York: The Free Press.
Shawcross, W. E.
1983 "Recreational Use of Ergoline Alkaloids from
Argyreia nervosa" Journal of Psychoactive Drugs
15(4): 251—259.
Shellard, E. J.
1974 'The Alkaloids of Mitragyna with Special Re-
ference to Those of M. speciosa, Kortft" Bulletin of
Narcotics 26: 41—54.
Sherratt, Andrew
1991 "Sacred and Profane Substances: The Ritual
Use of Narcotics in Later Neolithic Europe" in: Paul
Garwood et al. (ed.), Sacred and Profane, 50—64,
Oxford University Committee for Archaeology,
Monograph No. 32.
Shulgin, Alexander T.
1992 Controlled Substances: Chemical & Legal
Guide to Federal Drug Laws (second edition). Ber-
keley: Ronin.
Shulgin, Alexander T. & Claudio Naranjo
1967 "The Chemistry and Psychopharmacology of
Nutmeg and of Several Related Phenylisopropyla-
mines" in: D. Efron (ed.), Ethnopharmacologic
Search for Psychoactive Drugs, 5. 202—214, Wa-
shington, DC: U.S. Dept. of Health, Education, and
Welfare.
Shulgin, Alexander & Ann Shulgin
1991 PIHKAL: A Chemical Love Story Berkeley:
Transform Press.
1997 T!HKAL. Berkeley: Transform
Press.
Siebert, Daniel J.
1994 "Salvia divinorum and Salvinorin A: New
Pharmacologic Findings" Journal of Ethnopharma-
cology43: 53—56.
Siegel, Ronald K.
1992 Fire in the Brain: Clinical Tales of Hallucina-
tion. New York: Dutton.
Siegel, Ronald K. & Louise J. West (ed.)
1975 Hallucinations. New York etc.: John Wiley &
Co.
Silva, M. & P. Mancinell.
1959 "Chemical Study of Cestrum parqui" Boletin
de Ia Sociedad Chilena de Quimica 9: 49—50.
Slotkin, J. S.
1956 The Peyote Religion: A Study in Indian- White
Relations. Glencoe, IL: The Free Press.
Spitta, Heinrich
1892 Die Schlaf- und Traumzustände der mens-
chlichen Seele mit besonderer Berucksichtigung
ihres Verhã!tnisses zu den psychischen Alienatio-
nen. Zweite stark vermehrte Auflage. Freiburg i. B.:
J. C. B. Mohr (first edition 1877).
Spruce, Richard
1970 Notes of a Botanist on the Amazon & Andes.
New foreword by R. E. Schultes. New York: John-
son Reprint Corporation (reprint from 1908).
Stafford, Peter
1992 Psychedelics Encyclopedia (3. revised edi-
tion). Berkeley: Ronin.
Stamets, Paul
1978 Psiocybe Mushrooms & Their Allies. Seattle:
Homestead.
1996 Psiocybin Mushrooms of the World. Berke-
ley: Ten Speed Press.
Storl, Wolf-Dieter
1988 Feuer und Asche-Dunkel und Licht: Shiva-
Urbild des Menschen. Freiburg i. B.: Bauer.
1993 Von Heilkrilutern und Pflanzengottheiten.
Braunschweig: Aurum.
1997 Pflanzendevas-Die Göttin und ihre Pflanze-
nengel. Aarau: AT Verlag.
Suwanlert, S.
1975 "A Study of Kratom Eaters in Thailand" Bulle-
tin of Narcotics 27: 21—27.
Taylor, Norman
1966 Narcotics:Dangerous Gifts. New
York: Laurel Edition. Originally published as Flight
from Reality New York: Duell, Sloan and Pearce,
1949.
Torres, Constantino Manuel
1987 The lconography of South Amer/can Snuff
Trays and Related Paraphernalia. GOteborg: Etno-
logiska Studier 37.
Torres, Constantino Manuel, David B. Repke, Kelvin
Chan, Dennis McKenna, Agustin Llagostera, &
Richard Evans Schultes
1991 'Snuff Powders from Pre-Hispanic San Pedro
de Atacarna: Chemical and Contextual Analysis"
Current Anthropology 32(5): 640—649.
Turner, D. M.
1996 Salvinorin: The Psychedelic Essence of
Salvia divinorum. San Francisco: Panther Press.
Der psychodelische Reise führer Solothurn:
Nachtschatten Verlag.
Uscátegui M., Nestor
1959 'The Present Distribution of Narcotics and
Stimulants Amongst the Indian Tribes of Colombia"
Botanical Museum Leaflets 18(6): 273—304.
Valdes, Leander J.,II.
1994 "Salvia divinorum and the Unique Diterpene
Hallucinogen, Salvinorin (Divinorin) A" Journal of
Psychoactive Drugs 26(3): 277—283.
Valdes, Leander 1, José L. Diaz, & Ara G. Paul
1983 "Ethnopharmacology of ska Maria Pastors
(Salvia divinorum Epling and Játiva-M.)" Journal of
Ethnopharmacology 7: 287—312.
Van Beek, T. A. et al.
1984 "Tabernaemontana (Apocynaceae): A Review
of Its Taxonomy, Phytochemistry, Ethnobotany and
Pharmacology" Journal of EthnopharmacolOgy 10:
1—156.
Villavicencio, M.
1858 Geograffa de Ia repüblica del Ecuador New
York: R. Craigshead.
Volger, Gisela (ed.)
1981 Bausch und Real/tat (2 volumes). Cologne:
Rautenstrauch-Joest Museum.
Von Reis Altschul, Sin
1972 The Genus Anadenanthera in Amer/nd/an
Cultures. Cambridge: Botanical Museum, Harvard
University.
Vries, Herman de
1989 Natural Relations. Nurnberg: Verlag für mod-
erne Kunst.
Wagner, Hildebert
1970 Rauschgift-DrOgen (second edition). Berlin
etc.: Springer.
Wassel, G. M., S. M. El-Difrawy, & A. A. Saeed
1985 "Alkaloids from the Rhizomes of Phragmites
australis CAV." Scientia Pharmaceutica 53: 169—
170.
Wassén, S. Henry & Bo Holmstedt
1963 'The Use of Paricá: An Ethnological and
Pharmacological Review" Ethnos 28(1): 5—45.
Wasson, R. Gordon
1957 "Seeking the Magic Mushroom" Life (13 May
1957) 42(19): 100ff.
1958'The Divine Mushroom: Primitive Religion
and Hallucinatory Agents" Proc. Am. Phil. Soc.
102: 221—223.
1961 'The Hallucinogenic Fungi of Mexico: An In-
quiry into the Origins of the Religious Idea Among
Primitive Peoples" Botanical Museum Leaflets, Har-
vard University 19(7): 137—162.1965]
1962 "A New Mexican Psychotropic Drug from the
Mint Family" Botanical Museum Leaflets 20(3): 77—
84.
1963 'The Hallucinogenic Mushrooms of Mexico
and Psilocybin: A Bibliography" Botanical Museum
Leaflets, Harvard University 20(2a): 25—73c. [sec-
ond printing, with corrections and addenda]
1968 Soma-Divine Mushroom of Immortality New
York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
1971 'Ololiuqui and the Other Hallucinogens of
Mexico" in: Homenaje a Roberto J. Welt lanei 329—
348, Mexico: UNAM.
1973 "The Role of 'Flowers' in Nahuatl Culture: A
Suggested Interpretation" Botanical Museum Leaf-
lets 23(8): 305—324.
1973 "Mushrooms in Japanese Culture" The
Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan (Third
Series) 11:5-25.
1980 The Wondrous Mushroom: Mycolatry in
Mesoamerica. New York: McGraw-Hill.
1986 "Persephone's Quest" in: R. G. Wasson et al.,
Quest: Entheogens and the Origins
of Reilgion, 5. 17—81, New Haven and London: Yale
University Press.
Wasson, Ft. Gordon, George and Florence Cowan, &
Willard Rhodes
1974 Maria Sabina and Her Mazatec Mushroom
Velada. New York and London: Harcourt Brace Jo-
vanovich.
Wasson, R. Gordon, Albert Hofmann, & Carl A. P.
Ruck
1978 The Road to Eleusis: Unveiling the Secret of
the Mysteries.York: Harcourt Brace Jovano-
vich.
Wasson, R. Gordon & Valentina P. Wasson
1957 Mushrooms, Russia, and History New York:
Pantheon Books.
Watson, Pamela
1983 This Precious Foliage: A Study of the Abori-
ginal Psychoactive Drug P/furl. Sydney: University
of Sydney Press (Oceania Monograph, 26).
Watson, P. L., 0. Luanratana, & W. J. Griffin
1983 'The Ethnopharmacology of Pituri" Journal of
Efhnopharmacology8(3): 303-311.
Weil, Andrew
1980 The Marriage of the Sun and Moon: A Quest
for Unity in Consciousness. Boston: Houghton-Mif-
fun.
1998 Natural Mind: An Investigation of Drugs &
Higher Consciousness. Revised edition. Boston:
Houghton-Mifflin.
Weil, Andrew & Winifred Rosen
1983 Chocolate to Morphen: Understanding Mind-
Active Drugs. Boston: Houghton-Mifflin.
Wilbert, Johannes
1987 Tobacco and Shamanism in South America.
New Haven and London: Yale University Press.
Winkelman, Michael & Walter Andritzky (ed.)
1996 Sakrale Heilpflanzen, BewuBtsein und Hei-
lung: Transkulturelle und Interdiszipilnare Perspek-
tivenlJahrbuch für Transkulturel!e Medizin und Psy-
chotherapie 6 (1995), Berlin: VWB.
Zimmer, Heinnich
1984 lndische Myt hen und Symbole. Cologne: Die-
denichs.
203
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 205 ---
Index
(prepared by
Christian Rãtsch)
Italicsof numbers refer to cap-
lions.
1 ,2-dimethyl-6-methoxytetra-
hydro4l-carboline 117, 179
2-methyl-6-methoxytetrahy-
dro-fI-carboline 117, 179
3,4-dimethoxyphenylethyla-
mine 59
3-hydroxy-4-methoxyphe-
nethylamine 42
3-methoxy-tyramine 39, 59, 77
4-hydroxy-3-methoxypheny-
lethylamine 51, 67, 69
4-tetrahydroisoquinoline alka-
loids 51
5-hydroxydimethyltryptamine
117
5-hydroxy-tryptophane 52
5-hydroxycarnegine 39, 77
5-MeO-DMT 22, 35, 50, 54,
60, 69, 77, 137, 138, 138
5-MeO-MMT 120
5-methoxy(—N,N)-dimethyl-
tryptamine 69, 179
5-OH-DMT-N-oxide 120
6-methoxy-N,N-dimethyltryp-
tamine 179
a-asarone 34, 77
A-mu-k/a 173
Aborigines 42, 73, 75, 182,
183, 183
Acacia 34. 72
Acacia resin 73, 75
Acacias 72, 73, 75
Acacia aneura 183
Acacia coriacea 183
Acacia kempeana 183
Acacia lingulata 183
Acacia maidenll34, 72, 73,
138, 138
Acacia phlebophyl/a 34, 67,
72, 73, 138
Acacia pruinocarpa 183
Acacia sal/c/na 183
Acacia simplicifo/la 34, 72, 73,
138
Accultaration 65
Achuma 166, 168
Acorus 34
Acorus calamus 16, 34, 76
Afghanistan 41, 68, 73, 88, 99
Aflotoxins 19
Africa 26, 34, 39, 40, 41, 46,
49, 50, 52, 60, 64, 73, 76,
78, 88, 94, 96, 97, 98, 99,
109, 110, 111, 115
Agara 26,43, 66, 69
Agave 109
Age of Herbals 16
Agriculture 20
Aguacolla 27, 30, 76, 168
Aguardiente 143
Ahijado 39
Ahnishinaubeg 85
Ahriman 102
Ai curo 134
Au 134
Ajuca 70, 71
AjUwri-kahi-má 126
Alan 114
Alander 189
Albertus the Great 87
Albornoz, Cristobal de 120
Alcohol 10, 23,82, 160
Alcoholic drinks 69
A/cornea castanaefo//a 134
A/cornea floribunda 98, 114
Algae 17, 18, 19
Algonquin 78, 79, 110
Alice in Wonderland 101
204
Alkaline plant ash(es) 67, 75,
182, 183
Alkaloid(s) 23, 34, 38, 39, 40,
42, 43, 47, 50, 52, 53, 54,
56, 59, 67, 69, 71, 73, 75,
77,79, 105, 120, 184
Allergies 46
Alpen nomads 72
Altai 82
Alternanthera lehman/i 124
Ama 178
Amacisa 134
Amanita 34, 64, 82—85
Aman/ta muscaria 17, 29, 34,
70,81,82—85, 82
Amaringo, Pablo 12
Amaryllis family 26
Amasita 69, 178
Amazon 24, 30,36,49, 59, 60,
81, 117,124—135,139,141,
162, 176, 177, 178
Amazon Valley 66
Amazonia 12, 37, 55, 58, 68,
119,139
Amazonian Brazil 72, 74, 177
Amazonian folk medicine 69
Amazonian Peru 79
America(s) 20, 34, 74, 76, 84,
110,144,162
American basil 124
American Southwest 78, 107
Amitabha Buddha 108
Amphibians 90
Amrita 92
Amsterdam 139
Amulets 68, 90
Anabasine 75, 179, 183
Anabatin 183
Anadenanthera34, 81, 116—
119, 117,179
Anadenanthera colubrina 29,
34, 66, 120, 122, 123
Anadenanthera colubrina var.
Ceb1166, 120—1 23, 120
Anadenanthera peregrina 29,
35,66,116—119, 116—118,
138
Anadenanthera peregrina var.
fa/cata 66
Anahuasca 137
Analgesics 13
Anandatandava 10
Anatalline 183
Ancestor-communication ritual
112—115,129
Ancestors67, 112—115
AndeanIndians 78
Andes 30, 33, 34, 40, 42, 45,
53, 59, 66, 74,76,81, 116,
117,140,141,142,143,
143, 168
Andromedotoxin 53
Aneglakya 106
Anesthetic 107
Anger's trumpet(s) 66, 107,
134, 140—143
Angelitos 84
Angiosperms 16, 17, 18
Angler's Weed 96
Anglo-Saxon period 95
Angro Maynes 102
Animal Kingdom 14,117
Ant/ar/s tox/caria 46
Antibiotics 19
Antiquity 26, 36, 44, 48, 66, 76
Antilles 116
Anxiety 73
Apasmärapurusa 10
Aperitif 79
Aphrodisiac 46, 57, 60, 69, 71,
73, 75, 77, 78, 79, 109, 170
Aphrodite 90
Apollo 44, 90
Apollo's plant 44
Apollo's temple 91
Apomorphine 50, 67
Aposcopolamine 141
Apples of Love 90
Aquatic plants 65
Arabian physician 68
Arabian territory 98
Arabs 74
Arapaho 74
Arbol de Campanhlla 74
Arbol de los Brujos 27, 30, 72
Archichlamydeae 17
Argemone mex/cana 98
Argentina 30, 43, 66, 67, 81,
120, 122, 167
Argyre/a 35-
Argyreia nervosa 35, 78, 103
Ar/ocarpus 35, 42, 71
Ar/ocarpus f/ssuratus 35, 70,
147
Ariocarpusretusus35, 70, 147
Arizonine 39, 77
Aromo 122
Arrow poisons 10
Artaud, Antonin 8, 147
Artemis/a ludoviciana 153
Artemisia mexicana 98
Arum family 26
Arundo donax 138
Arutam wakani 143
Aryans 70, 82
Asarones 34
Asia 26, 34, 36, 39, 40, 41, 44,
49, 50, 52, 53, 64, 82, 82,
84, 88, 95, 108
Asia Minor 72, 76, 97, 98
Assassin 72
Assyrians 94, 98, 99, 102
Astoria 157
Astrophyton aster/as 147
Atacama 120, 123
Atanga tree 112
Athabaskan peoples 70
Atropa 36, 86—91
Atropa belladonna 17; 29, 36,
68,69,86—91,86,90
Atropa beliadonna var. lutea
36, 86
Atropa caucasia 36
Atropa komarovli 36
Atropine 36, 37, 39, 41,46, 48,
73, 86, 87, 141
Atropos 88
Auditory hallucinations 77, 79
Australia 26,34,42,43,72, 74,
81, 138,183
Avicenna68, 107
Axocatzin 57, 72
Ayahuasca 12, 19, 30, 36, 55,
59, 62, 63, 64, 66, 67, 69,
81, 124—135, 124—137; 139,
141,143
Ayahuasca additive(s) 37, 58,
124, 134, 138
Ayahuasca analogs 34, 54, 55,
69, 73, 77, 131, 137—1 39
AyahuascaChurches 139
Ayahuasca patterns 129,130,
131
Ayahuasca vine 36, /25
Ayahuasca Vision(s) 133, 137
Ayahuasquero 133
Ayahuma 134
Ayan-beyem 115
AyurVedic medicine 68, 78, 79
Aztec Codex 63
Aztec Dream Grass 78
Aztec(s) 26, 27,41, 43,45, 56,
60, 62, 63, 66, 70, 72, 74,
78, 79, 81, 109,146,156,
159, 164, 165,170, 172,
173, 174
Aztec Sage 164
Aztekium r/ter// 147
jI-asarone 77
alkaloids 52, 59,
67, 69, 77, 127
13-carbolines 67, 81, 127, 131
13-phenethylamine 40, 57
Bacchanals 89
Bactr/s species179
BadianusManuscipt 107
Badoh74
BadohNegro 45, 66, 175
Baeocystine 52, 55, 73
Bakana40, 56, 66
Bakanawa 66
Balche'34
Bali51,68,69
Banisterine127
Banister/opsis (app.) 36, 67, 69,
81,124—135,137, 137,143
Banister/opals caap/29, 36,66,
124,125,126,129,137,139
Banister/opalsinebrians 36,
66, 124, 129
Banister/opsismuricata 131
Banisteriopsis qu/tensis 124
Banister/opalsrusbyana 66,67
Banzie 113
Barasana 132,177,177
Batsikawa134
Baudelaire, Charles 101, 101
Bauhin104
Bedouins88
Beer7l,74,75, 109,122,130,
141
Belgian 114
Belgium 104
Belladonna 26, 68, 88, 107
Benares97
Beni-Tengu-Dake 85
Ben-ben 95
Bering Strait 84
Bern 96
Betel 73
Betel chew mixture 69
Beyama 114
Bhang72, 73, 97
Bharaorakasha 95
Biak-Biak 72
Biangan141
Bible97, 161
Bibra, Ernst Freiherr Von 196,
197, 197
Big Raven 82
Bindweed(s) 103, 135, 171
Biocca, Ettore 176
Bipyridyl 183
Black Henbane 44
Blake, William 88
Blood-red Angel's Trumpet 33,
37, 140—143, 140
Blue Meanies 51, 146-1 63
Blue Water Lily 66
Bogota 117
Bo/etus 36,75
Bo/etuskumeus 74
Boletusmanicus 36,74
Bo/etusnirgoviolaceus 74
Boletusreayi 36,74
Bolivia18, 76,166, 168
Bonplant,Aimé140
Bora 176, 178, 179, 180
Borrachero27, 66, 68, 74, 76,
124, 143, 143
Botswana 26, 72
Bovista 48
Brazil 66, 68, 70, 72, 73, 77,
117,118,119,139,177,
178, 178
British Guyana 119
Brugmansia (app.)29,37,64,
67,73,77,81,124,140-143
Brugmansiaarborea 66,140,
141
Brugmansiaaurea 37,66,
140-1 43
Brugmansiaxinsignia66,141
Brugmansiasanguinea 33,37,
66, 140—143
Brugmansiasuaveolens 66,
124, 141
Brugmansiaversico/or 66,141
Brugmansiavu/can/cola 66,
140, 143
Brunfelsia 30, 37, 68, 69, 124
Brunfelsia chiricaspi 37,68,
124
Brunfe/s/a grandiflora 37,68,
124
Brunfe/s/a grand/flora sap.
schu/tesli68,135
Bryophyta 16
Buddha 97, 107, 108
Buddhism 97, 98
Bufo a/var/us 22
Bufotenine 69, 120, 120
Bush people 73
Bushmen 26, 72, 99
Buyés 141
Bwiti cult 26,71, 112—115,
112—1 15
Caapi 30, 66, 62, 67, 124, 126
Caapi-Pinima 59, 66
Cabalonga134
Cabalongablanca 134
Cacalia 38
Cacaliacordifolia 38,74
Cacao tree 177
Cachiri131
Cactus 67, 71, 75, 124
Caesalpinia 38
decapetala 78
Caesafpiniasep/aria 38,78
Cahua 66
Caji 132
Calamus76
Calathea veitch/ana 124
Calea38
Ca/eszacatech/chi 38, 78, 98
California72
Calimaregion 162
Caltrop 137
Cameroon 114
Camps 127
Campanilla 26
Canada26, 74,76,85, 151
CanaryIslands 70
Canava//a mar/tima 98
Cannabidiolicacids 73
Cannabinol(s) 93
Cannabinotic compounds 73
Cannabis 12,38,72,73,81,
98, 92—1 01, 92—101,107,
108, 184, 185
Cannabis cakes 72
Cannabis cigarettes 69
Cannabis/nd/ca 72,92,92—
101,185
Cannabis md/ca x sat/va 92
Cannabis ruderalis 93
Cannabis sat/va 17; 29, 38, 72,
114, 185
Cannabis substitute 77
CaribbeanIslands 26
v/ca 179,180
Carnegia39,77
Carnegiagigantea 76
Carnegine77
Carroll, Lewis 101
Cassiaspp. 183
Cat's claw 134, 135
Catahua 134
Catharanthus roseus 98
CatholicChurch 159
Catholicism115
Catnip 98
Cawe5l,66
Caza 89
CeblI 30, 34,66, 120—123, 120
Ceboletta 66
Cecropia mexicans 98
Ce/ba pentandra 135
Ceremonialintoxication 69
Cestrum39
Cestrum /aevigatum 68,98
Cestrumparqui3g, 68,98
Cha-pe-na 179
Chancarro98
Chacruna 55,66,124-135, 134
Chacruna Bush 66, 139
Chacs 84
Chalice Vine 57
Chamico 109
Channa7O
Chanoclavin-l79
Charas 26, 72, 73
Charms 68
Chatin area 174
Chatino 158
Chautle 70
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 206 ---
Chavin de Huantar 122, 166Costa Rica 78, 118, 162Diagnosis 69, 75, 77, 177Epithelantha micromeris 42, 70Golden Angel's Trumpet 37,
Chiapas 77, 159, 162Cotinin 183Diarrhea 73,79Ereriba 26,44, 68140—143
Chibcha 66, 67, 116Coumarines 71, 77Dicotyledoneae 17Ergine (LSA) 79, 103, 171Goodenia 183
Chicha 67, 140, 141Cowhage 68Dictyloma incanescenS 138,Ergoline alkaloids 69, 171Gramine 69,77
Chichibe72Cree Indians 76138Ergonovine79, 105Gramineae 138
Chichimeca 144, 145Crow Dog, Henry 152Dictyonema 19Ergot 26, 39, 68, 69, 102—105,Grasses 65
Chiclayo 166Crusades 103Dietnes 142171Greece 13,26,68,70,74,81,
Chihuahua 70, 74, 144Cryogenine 77Digitalis 10Ergot alkaloids 69, 10386, 97, 102
Childbirth 96, 104Cuba 40, 60, 159, 175Dihydroharmine 127Ergotamine 105Greek physician 72, 95
Chile 66,68,69,72,76,78,95,Culebra borrachero 142Dimethyltryptamine 69, 77,Ergotine 172Grevillea striata 183
123, 141Cumala (Tree) 60, 134117, 179Ergotism 68, 103Guaianas 78
Chilicote 68Cuna 97Dionysus 88ErgotoXifle 103Guahibo 117, 119
ChimO culture 168Curanderismo 166Dioscorides 16,87,96,107,171Eroga 114Guambiano 140, 143
China 66, 70, 71, 76, 77,78,Curandero 109, 168Diplopterys cabrerana 66, 67,Ervatamia pandacaqui76Guaraná 29
94, 107, 108Curare 69, 126124, 126, 129, 138Erythran type alkaloids 69Guatemala 62,81,84, 161, 162
Chinantec 66, 75, 78, 158,Curare-like activity 75Diterpenes 77Erythrina42, 69Guatillo 134
173, 174Cuscohygrine 73Divination 75,77, 109, 124,Erythrina americana 42, 68Guayusa 29, 134
Chindoy, Salvador 142Cuzco 129, 169142, 164, 171, 175, 177Erythrina coralloides 68Guerrero 73
Chinese medicine 76, 77'Cyanogenesis 73Divinatory plant 69Erythrina flabelliformis 42, 68Gulf Coast of Mexico 72
Chinese shamanism 94Cymbopogon 40Diviner's sage 27, 56, 164—165Esakuna 70Gumilla 118
Chinese writings 68, 72, 79,Cymbopogon densiflorus 40,Divinorin A, B 165Eschwei!era itayensis 171Gums 183
94, 10770, 98DMT 67, 69, 72,73,77, 117,Escobilla 98Gustavia poeppigiana 179
Chiric-Sanango 68Cyperus 124120, 127, 137, 137, 138, 138Essential oil(s) 19, 34, 40,46,Guttiferae 124
Chiricaspi 30, 68, 69, 134, 135Cytisine 69,71,75DMT-N-oxide 12047,57,58,71,75,77Guyana 116
Chocb 141Cytisus4l,71DOB14Eucalyptus microthecal83Gymnospermae 17,181
Chonta Palm 168Cytisus canariensis 41, 70Dobe 72Eucalyptus app. 183Hades 105
Chontal Indians 78, 79Dodart 104Eugenol 75Haiti 118
Chorisia insignis 135binol 73, 98Dog Grass 38Eugster 83Hallucinations 12, 69, 71, 73,
Chou dynasty 94D-nbr-nicotine 183Dogbane family 26Euphoria 71, 10175, 86, 88, 103, 112, 141
Christian holy spirits 139Dacha 72Dogrib Athabascan peoples 85Euphorics 13Hallucinogen(s) 10-14, 28, 62,
Christianity 70, 79, 115, 122,Daggha 26Doré, Gustave 100Europe 13, 13, 26, 64, 68, 69,64, 67, 69, 70, 71,73, 74,
147Dagga 72, 98Dryopteris filix-mas 1672,74, 81,88, 139, 158, 19375,76,77,78,79,94, 102,
Chuchu-caspi 134Dama da Noite 68Duboisia 42, 182—183European folklore 73107, 140, 141, 142, 142,
Cigars 165Damiana 98Duboisia hopwoodii42, 74,European peoples 68147, 176, 196
Cigarette 71, 73, 79, 93Dápa 124182—183, 183Everlasting 98Hallucinogen-asSisted psy-
Cimora 168Dark Ages 91Duboisia myoporoides 183Fabaceae 138choanalysis 193
Claviceps 39, 102—105, 102—Dark-rimmed Mottlegill 52,Duboisia app. 29False peyote 35, 70, 74, 78Hallucinogenic dreams 69
105156—163Dog Grass 98Fang 112Hallucinogenic drugs 191, 195
ClavicepspaspalilO2Datura 10,26,27,41,64,68,Dragon doll 91Fang-K'uei 53, 70,71Hallucinogenic effects 73,75,
ClavicepS purpurea 29, 39, 68,73, 79, 81, 93, 97, 106—111,Dreamtime 182—183Farmer's tobacco 13477, 78
102—105, 102—1 05140, 141, 147, 172Ducke 176Febrifuge 79Hallucinogenic intoxication 67,
Clinton, Bill 155Datura ceratoca u/a 111Dutch 70, 102Fermented drink 6771, 75, 77,79, 193
Clusiaceae 124Datura discolor 78Dutra 68Fern 16Hallucinogenic mushrooms 69
Coatl-xoxo uhqui 170Datura fastuosa 110Dwale 88Fetish plants 114Hallucinogenic smoke 72
Coaxihuitl 170Datura ferox68, (109)Dwaleberry 88Fig family 93Hardwicke 108
Coca 13,29,64, 117Datura innoxia 18,41,73,78,Eagle 63, 110Finno-Ugrian peoples 70,82Harmal77
Cocaine 12,11379, 106—111Earth Goddess 6, 63Fish 14Harmalol 127
Codeine 12Datura kymatocarpa 78Earth Mother 133, 146, 154Flag Root 76Harmahne 77, 127, 129, 137
CodexBerberiniLatina 241, 107Datura mete! 13, 41, 68, 106-East Indies 69, 109Flavonglycosides 77Harmane 127
CodexFlorentino 159111, 106Eastern Europe74Floripondio27, 66Harmine77, 127, 129,137
Cohoba 26, 116Datura meteloides 78Eastern Hemisphere 28, 30Fly Agaric 16, 17, 26, 34, 62,Harrison Narcotic Act 12
Cold tree 68, 69Datura pruinosa 78Ebena 17770, 81Hartwich, Carl 196, 197
Coleus 39, 69Datura reburra 78Ebers Papyrus 86Flying Saucers 170Hashish 5,72,74, 92—1 01
Coleus blumei 39, 68, 165Datura app. 29, 106—111Eboka 112Folk medicine 71, 73, 76, 77,Hashish-snuffing cults 99
Coleus pumllus39, 68, 164,165Datura stramonium 31, 41, 78,Echinocereus 4279Hash/shins 72
Colima 162106—111Echinocereus salmdyckianusFrance 103Hawaiian Wood Rose 35, 78
Collenia 18, 18Datura stramonium var. ferox42, 74French 102, 114Hawk 110
Colombia 30, 65, 67, 68, 69,109Echinocereus triglochidiatusFrench Academy 104Hawkweed 98
74, 76, 116, 116, 117, 118,Datura stramonium var. tatula42,74, 75Frijoles 74Hayo 117
119, 126, 133, 140, 140,106Echinopsis pachanol 76Frijolillo 27Heath family 27
141, 142,162,176,177,178Datura wrightii78Ecuador 27, 30, 68, 69,76,77,Frogs 14, 90Hecate 88
Colombian ChocS 73Dauphiné 103126Fuchs, Leonard 31Heimia 43
Colombian Indiana 68De Candolle, A. P. 105Ecuador/an Andes 66, 76Fungi 18, 65, 65, 71, 156, 196Heimia salicifolia 43, 76,77
Colombian Vaupés 69, 124Dead Sea 90Egypt 54, 74, 88, 103Furocoumarinea 71Heimia species 76
Colorado RiverToad 22Deadly Nightshade 16, 17,36,Egyptian culture 66,86Gabon 26,70,81, 112—115Hekula 116—119, 118, 179
Colorines 68, 7468, 81, 86—91Egyptian Henbane 88Galanga 46, 70Helichrysum 43
Comanche 151, 152Death 75Egyptian sites 72Galbulimima 43Helichrysum foetidum43, 76,
Common Reed 54, 68Deer 63, 144-1 55Eidetics 12Galbulimima belgraveana 43,98
Common Wireweed 98Delaware 154El Ahijado 68, 16566, 69Helichrysum stenopterum 76,
Conduro 168Delay, Jean 190El Macho 68, 164Galen 72,95,9698
Congo 26, 70, 81, 97, 99Delhi 85El Nene 68, 165Galileo 90HelicostyliS 44
Conibo-Shipibo 126, 129, 130Deliranta 12El Nino 159Gallows man 91Heilcostylis pedunczilata 44,
Conocybe 40, 156-163Delirium 73, 75, 86, 103Elaeophorbia drupifera 115Ganja 26, 72,73, 9778
Conocybe siigineoides 40, 78Delphi 70, 86, 91Eleusia 102, 104Ganoderma lucidum 17Helicostylis tomentosa 44, 78
Convolvulus tricolor 171Deltgen, Florian 132Eleusinian mysteries 68,81,102Garden of Eden 91Hemp 12, 16, 17, 26, 38, 72,
Cooke, Mordecai 196, 197Delusionogens 12Elizabetha princeps 69, 178,Gaston 10392—101, 92—10 1, 184
Copal 150, 164Demeter 81, 104181Geniata 27, 41, 70Henbane 13, 26,70, 81, 86—
Copelandia 68Depression 73Enema 122Genullmittel 1091, 86, 107
Cope/and/a cyanescens 68, 69Desfontapia 42England 74, 95, 96, 104Gerard 91, 109Henry VIII 95
Cora Indiana 97, 145, 146,Desfontainia spinosa 27, 42,Entheogens 12German(s) 102, 114Herb of the Shepherdess 70
147, 14976,77Epená 68, 69, 73, 176—181Germany 95, 139, 143Herbs 65,75
Coral Bean 74Desgranges of Lyons 104Ephedra 84Ghangi 97HernándeZ, Dr. FranciscO 72,
Coral Tree 43Desmanthus illinoensis 138Ephedra gerardiana 84Gi'-i-Sa-Wa 70109, 146, 157, 170
Coriaria 40Desmodium 137, 138Ephedrine 19, 73Gi'-i-Wa 27, 70Herodotua 94
Coriaria thymifolia 40, 76Desmodium pulchellum 138Epilepsy 103Gigantón 76, 168Heroin 12, 113
Coryphanta 40, 67Desmodium app. 138Epilobium angustifolium 71Ginger 71Heuresia 87
Coryphanta compacta 40, 66Devil'S Herb 88Epinephrine 145Ginger family 26Hexing Herbs 86—91
Coryphanta pa!merii4ODhatura 107Epiphyllum 124Ginseng 91, 94Hidalgo 99
Coryphanta app. 66Di-shi-tjo-le-rra-Ja 78Epithelantha 42God-narcotic 73HieraciUm pilosella 98
205
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 207 ---
Hierba de Ia Pastora 27, 70,
164—i 65
Hierba de Ia Virgen 70
Hierba Loca 27, 53, 76
Hierba Maria 175
Highland Maya 62
Hikuli 66, 70, 74, 151
Hikuli Mulato 42, 70, 71
Hikuli Rosapara 70, 78
Hikuli Sunamé 70
Hlkuri 74,78, 148, 150
Hikuri Orchid 50
Himalayas 30, 98, 97, 106
Hindu 13, 93, 97
Hiporuru 134
Hippornanes 109
Hispaniola 116
Hoa-Glio 95
Hoasca 139
Hofferl3
Hofmann, Albert 13,22, 162,
187
Hoja de Ia pastors 164
Holy Fire 103
Homalomena lauterbachil 44
Hornalomena sp. 44, 67, 68
Homer 86
Hongo de San Isidro 78, 156
Hoop-petticoat 51, 1S6—163
Hops 71,93
Hottentots 26, 70, 96, 99
Huaca 141
Huacacachu 27, 66
Huacachaca 141
Huachuma 168, 168
Huanto 27, 66
Huedhued 76
Hueipatl 72
I-tueyytzontecon 174
Huichol 6,8,62, 63,70,71,72,
73, 74,78, 144, 145, 146,
147, 148,149, 150,
150,151, 151, 154,162, 196
Huilca 66, 74, 122
Humbold, Baron Alexander
von 116,118,119,140
Hummingbird 166
Humulus 93
Hungarian stamp 175
Huskanawing ceremony 110
Hyoscyamine 69, 71, 73, 75,
79, 86
Hyoscyamus 44, 86—91
Hyoscyamus albus 13, 44, 70,
86—91
Hyoscyamus niger44, 70, 86—
91,86
Hyoscyamus app. 29,86—91
Hypnotics 13
lboga58, 64, 70, 71,81,112—
115, 112—115
Iboga cult 112
lbogaine7l,79,113
Ibogaine-like alkaloids 77
Ibotenicacid 71, 83
Ice Plant family 26
//exdrinks 64
Incense 150
India 26,62, 66,68,69, 70,72,
82, 88, 92, 95, 97, 97 107,
108, 108, 109
Indian Henbane 88
Indian peoples 69
Indian writings 74, 98
Indians 66,67,69,72, 73,74,79
Indochina 108
Indole alkaloids 71, 77, 79,
103,113
Indolic alkaloids 79
Indonesia 26
Indra 82, 83, 92
Indus Valley 82
Inebriation 88
Ingano Indians 141
Initiation ritual 67, 71,79,81,
110, 110
Insanity 73, 77, 86,168
Inspiration 100
Intoxicant 73, 74, 76, 79
206
Intoxicating 31
Intoxicating drink 77
Intoxication 10, 67, 69, 71,72,
75, 77,79,108,112,145,
172,174
Intoxicator68
lochroma 45
Iochroma fuchsioides 45,74
Iowatribes 74
Ipomoea45, 170—175, 170—175
Ipornoea carnea 134, 135, 172
Ipomoea rubrocaerulea 45
Ipornoeaviolacea 29, 45,66,
103,170—175, 170—175
Ireland 104
Iresine 124,168
Iryantheramacrophylla 178
Iso-lysergic acid amide (iso-
LSD) 79, 186, 187
Isoharmine 127
Isoleosibirine 77
Isotoma long/flora 168
Islam70, 98, 115
Jaguar(s) 119,126,130,142
Jalisco 162
Jambur 68
Japan 83, 85
Jesuit(s) 145, 162
Jesus 154
Jibaro 64, 69, 141, 142, 143
Jimsonweed 78
Jopa117
JosephusFlavius 90
Jouzmathal 107
Juliana Codex 87
Jungianschooll9o
Jurema 70
Jurema Tree 49
Juremahuasca 139
Just ic/a 45,69, 72, 73, 181
Justicia pectoral/s var.steno-
phylla45,72,178, 181
Kabuyare177
Kaemferia46
Kaempferia galanga 46,70
Kaffirs99
Kahi 124, 126
Kakuljá-ikox 84
Kalahari desert 196
Kalamota 70
Kalinchok 30
Kamsá74, 77,141, 142
tKamtchatka85
Kana 134
Kandahar99
Kanna 26, 70, 71
Kapoktree134, 135
Karauetaré 177
Karimé 177
Karitiana Indians 72
Karuka madness 77
Kasai 99
Kashmir 97
Kathmandu 93, 158
Kauyumari 63, 148
Kava-kava13, 26, 64
Kechwa 62
Khursu98
Kickapoo 153
Kieli72, 73
Kielitsa 73
Kieri 72
Kit72, 98
Kiowa151,152,153
Kirishaná 177
Koch-GrOnberg, Theodor 180
Koch/a scoparia 127
Koffln 126
Korea91
Koribo 59, 72
Koryak 64, 82, 83
Kougoed56, 98
KrasnojarskDistrict 82
Kratom 49, 72
Kuluene River 24
Kuma7S, 111
Kuma Mushroom 36
Kung 97
Kuripako 177
Kwashi 26, 52, 72
Kykeon 104
La Barre, Weston 64
Lady of the Night 39, 68, 98
Lagochiline 79
Lagochilus 26, 46
Lagochilus inebrians26, 46, 78
Lake Victoria 99
Latua 46
Latua pub/flora 46,72
LatUe27,46, 72, 73
Latuy 76
Latvia 75
Le-sa 179
Lecythus 81
Leguminosae 138
Lemon139
Lemongrass40, 98
Leon, Padre Nicolas de 147
Leonotis 47
Leonotis leonurus 47,72, 98
Leonurus47
Leonurus sibir/cus 47,76, 98
Leosibiricine77
Leosibirine 77
Lespedeza capitals 138
Levitation 77
Lewin, Louis 13, 196, 197, 197
Li Shih-chen 107
Lianas 65
Lichens 18, 19
Libation 91
Liberty Cap(s) 55, 72, 156—
163
Li//urn cand/durn 16
Lily-like plants 65
Lindley, John 16
Linnaeus, Carolus 16, 107, 189
LinnO, Carl von 16
Lion's Tail 46, 72
Liquor 109
Lithuania 75
Llanos 116
Lobelamidine 79
Lobelia 47
Lobelia tupa 47,78
Lobeline79
Lolium 102
Lornar/opsisjapurensis 124
Lonicerof Frankfurt 104
Lophophora47,70,74, 75,
144—155
Lophophora diffusa 47,74
Lophophorawil//amsii 6,22,
29,47, 74, 75, 144—155, 186
Love potion 75
LSA 79
LSD 14,69,75,77, 171, 185,
186,187,189,189, 190,193
LSD ecstasy 195
Lucillus 95
Lumholtz, Carl 144, 147
Lupuna 134
Lycoperdon48
Lycoperdonmarginaturn 48,70
Lycoperdonmixtecorurn 48, 70
Lycoperdonsp.70
Lycopodiurn77,168
Lygod/urn venustum 124
Lysergicacid 69,103,171
Lysergic acid amide 75, 103,
171,185, 187
Lysergic acid diethylamide
(LSD) 69, 171. 187
Lysergic acid hydroxyethy!a-
mide75, 103,171,185, 187
Ma94
Ma-fen94
Maa-jun 97
Mace 74
Macedonia 102
Mackenzie Mountains 85
Maconha 26, 68, 73
Maconha Brava 98
Macropsia 67, 71, 133
Madagascar Periwinkle 98
Madonna Lily 16
Maenads 88
Magic ceremonies 71, 72
Magic infusions 71
Magic Mushrooms 14,22, 159
Magic plant 73
Magic potion 74
Magliabecchiano Codex 162
Mahayana 97
Mahekototen shaman 179
Maicoa 27, 66
Maikoa 143
Maiden's Acacia 34, 72
Maize beer79, 109,122,141,
141, 150
Majun 73
MakQIndians 66. 69, 176
Makuna 177
Malaria 95
Malaya 98
Malaysia 72
Malva Colorada 72
Maloca 130, 132
Malouetia tamaquar/na 124
Malpighia family 30
Malpighiaceae138
Mammillaria 48, 78
Mamm/llar/a craig/i 48,78, 79
Mammillariagraharni/48, 78,79
Mammillariaheyder/i48, 79
Mammilarias/nil/s 78
Man-to-b107
Manaka 68
Mandragora48,81,86-91
Mandragora offic/narurn 48,
72, 81,86—91
Mandragorine 73
Mandrake 26, 48, 72, 73, 74,
81, 81,86,86-91,87,88,
89, 90, 91, 107
Mandrake root 91
MAO inhibitor 127, 131, 137
Mapuche27, 66, 69, 72, 78
Maquira4g, 74
Maquirasclerophylla 49,74,
75
Mara'akame 148, 148,150,
150, 154
Maraba26, 70
Maria Sabina 14,156-163
Marijuana12, 13, 17,72,73,
79, 92—1 01
Marijuana substitute 69, 73,
76, 98
Marijuanillo 76
Mascagan/a glandu/ifera 124
Mascaganiapsiophylla var.
ant/febrilis124
Mash, Deborah 113
Mashihiri45, 72
Massachusetts 104, 105
Mataco Indians 120, 122, 122
MatwCi 38,74
Maya66, 109,162
MaypureIndians 118, 119
Mazatec(s)14,66,68,70,71,
75,78, 156-1 63, 164, 164,
165,174
Meckiand the Dwarfes 84
Medina Silva, Ramón 148,
148, 149, 150k 151
Melaleuca sp.183
Méne-kahi-mfl 124
Merian,Matthflus 81
Mesa168
Mescal Bean 26, 27, 57, 68,
74, 152
Mescal Button 74
Mescaline 22, 23, 75, 77, 145,
167, 185, 186, 187, 189
Mesembrenine71
Mesembrine 71
Mesembryanthenurn 71
Mesembryanthenumexpan-
sum 70
Mesembryanthenumtortuo-
sum 70
Mesoamerica 84, 161
Mesolithic140
Mestizos139
Metachlamydeae17
Metanicotine 183
Metate 71, 75,150
Metel nut 107
Meteloidine 107, 141
MexicanIndians 74
Mexican Mugwort 98
Mexico 6,22, 26, 27, 62, 64,
66, 68, 70, 71, 72, 74, 78,
81,97,99,107,107,109,
110,111,111,144,145,
147, 147,150,151,156,
158, 159, 159,162,166,
172,173, 174
MexicoCity 165
Mfeng96
Miamill3
Michigan 85
Michoacan 158
Mictlantlcuhtli 162
Middle Ages 14, 68, 69, 70,74,
81, 102, 104
Middle America 78
Midwives 69
Mihi 124
MilkyWay 176
Miltomate174
Mimohuasca139
Mimosa49
Mimosahost/l/s49, 70,71, 138
Mimosa scabrella 137, 138
Mimosatenu/fiora 49,70, 137,
138, 138,139
Mimosaverrucosa 70
Ming dynasty 107
Minoan culture 66
Mint 64
Misperceptinogens 12
Mistletoefamily 124
Mitra 82
Mitragyna 49
Mitragynaspeciosa 49,72
Mitragynine 73
Mixe158
Mixtec(s)27, 70, 75, 158
MMT77
Moche162
Mojas 117
Mongolian shamans 12
Mongoloids140
Monocotyledonea16
Monomethylthryptamine 179
Mopope, Stepehn 152
Moraceae93
Morning Glory 26, 45, 63,74,
75, 81,103,147,170-175,
170—175,185
Morpheus2o
Morphine12, 20, 21
Mother Gala 173
Mucha, Alphonse 143
Mucuna5o, 69
Mucunaprur/ens 50,68, 138,
138
MQIler, Ferdinand J.H. von 183
Münchhausen 105
Muhipu-nuri 176
Muinane 178
Muisca117, 141
Munchira 142
Murderer's Berry 88
Muscarine 83
Muscazone71
Muscimole7l, 83
Mushroom madness 75
Mushroom cap 63
Mushroom stones 161
Mushrooms 14, 17, 23, 62, 69,
70, 71, 73,78,79,81, 156—
163,164, 174
Muslim73
Mutterkorn102
Myosmine 183
Myristica 50
Myristicafragrans 50,74
Myristicaceae50, 138
Myristicine 50, 75
Mysticomimetics 12
Mythology 63, 68,72,88, 124
N-acethylnornicotine183
N-formylnornicotine 183
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 208 ---
N-methyl-3,4-di-methoxyphe-Oklahoma 152Persephone 81, 105Protestantism 115Red Canary Grass 54
nylethylamine 79Old World 30, 64, 67, 68, 72,Persia 98Pseudo-hallucinationS 14Red Tengu mushroom 85
N,N-dimethyltryptamine 7178, 90, 92, 97, 107,176Peru 66, 67, 68, 76, 81, 95,Psilocine 23, 23, 69, 73, 79,Reed Grass 76, 77
N,N-DMT 67, 69, 71, 77Ololiuqui 26, 60, 64,66,71,74,109, 122, 127, 129, 140,159, 185, 186, 187Reichel-Dolmatoff, Gerardo
Naeher, Karl 113103,111,156,170—175,141, 162,166, 166,167,Psilocybe 54, 55,156—163,62,126,131, 132
Nahua 158170—175,185, 187,189169, 178171Reindeer milk 71,82
Nahuatl 109, 146, 162, 170,Omagua 140Peruvian Amazon 135, 162,Psilocybe acutissima78Remo caspi 134
174Oncidium 50178Psiocybe aztecorum 63,78Reserpine 13
Nandi 109Oncidium ceboletta 50, 66, 67Peruvian Indians 66, 67, 135Psiocybe azurenscens 156,Resin 69, 75, 176, 178, 181
Naranjo, Claudio 113Opiate addict 113Peruvian shaman 12157Rheumatism 77
Narcosis 174Opium (poppy) 12, 13, 20, 21,Petunia 27, 53, 76, 77Psilocybe caerulescens 78,Rhizomes 67
Narcotic(s) 10, 26, 31, 72, 73,100, 104Petunia violacea 53, 76163Rhynchosia 56, 75
75, 107Opium substitute 72Peucedanum 53, 71Psilocybecaeru/escensvar.Rhynchosia longeracemosa
Narcotic fruit 74Opium-like effects 72Peucedanumjaponicum 53,albida 7874
Natema 30, 124, 143Opuntia 124, 14570, 71Psilocybe caerulescens var.Rhynchosia phaseoloides 56,
Native American Church 74,Oracle of Delphi 86, 91Peyote 6, 8, 12, 13, 26, 47, 62,mazatecorum 78, 15674, 75
152, 152, 153, 155Orchid, orchids 65, 6663, 64, 66, 70,74, 75, 81,Psiocybe caerulescens var.Rhynchosia pyramidal/s 74
Native American tribes 71Oregon 15799,143,144—155,157,166,n/gripes 78, 156Riamba cult 99
Nauwald, Nana 122,137, 194,Orgies 88172, 174, 184, 186Psilocybe caerulescens var.Ribas, Padre Andrea Perez de
195Orinoco 26, 27, 72, 81, 116,Peyote bird 155ombroph/la 78145
Navajo 110, 155118. 119, 176, 177Peyote Cimarrón 70Psilocybe cubensis 54, 78,Rig-Veda' 82, 83
Nayarit 146, 162Orinoco basin 66, 119, 176,Peyote cult 63, 75, 144156-163, 157, 159Rio Branco 119
Nazca culture 166177
.Peyote de San Pedro 78Psilocybe cyanescens 55,Rio Grande 74
Ndzi-eboka 115Ortega 165Peyote fan 155156-1 63Rio Madeira 72, 119
Near East 68Osage 153Peyote festival 6Psilocybe hoogshageni/ 157Rio Marahon 140
Necromancers 87, 94Osca 117Peyote surrogate 67,70, 147Psilocybe mex/cana 22, 55,Rio Negro 177
Neocerdan-diterpenes 165Oshtimisk Wajashkwedo 85Peyotillo 53, 74, 14778, 79, 156-163, 156Rio Purüs 177
Neolithic 94Osmond, Humphrey 13, 191Peyotl 146, 156, 186Psilocybe mixaeensis 78Rio Tikié 66
Neoraimondia macrostibasOtomac 118Pfaffla 134Psilocybe pell/culosa 158Rio Vaupés 66, 126
168Otomi 158Pfaffla iresinoides 134Psilocybe semilanceata 55,72Ritualistic significance 67
Nepal 27, 30, 78, 84, 93, 106,Out-of-body experiences 165Phalaris 54Psilocybe semperviva 78, 156R/vea corymbosa 74
107, 158PachycereuS 51Phalaris arundinacea 54, 76,Psiocybe sil/gineoides 157Roman priests 89
Nepeta cataria 98Pachycereus pecten-aborigi-138, 138Psilocybe species (= spp.) 29,Romans 95
Nerval, Gerard de 100num 51, 66Phalaris tuberosa 138, 13879, 156-163Rome 70, 74
Netherlands 139Pacific 64, 162Phanerothymes 12Psilocybe wassonii78, 157Root Beer Plant 98
Nettle family 93Pacific North West 158Phantastica 13, 196, 197Psi/ocybe yungensis 78, 156,Rosa Maria 99
New England 95, 104Paéz 140Phantasticants 12162Rosa spinosiss/ma 17
New Guinea 26, 70, 74, 76, 77Paguando 45, 74Pharmahuasca 137Psilocybe zapotecorum 78Rosebud Reservation 152
New Orleans 99Painted Nettle 39, 164Phenethylamine(s) 67, 71, 75Psilocybin(e) 23, 23, 69, 73,Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew
New Spain 122,146Pakidái 177Phenylalanine 18579, 157,159, 185, 186, 187,117, 126
New World 26, 30, 62, 64, 66,Pakistan 68,73Phenylethylamin(s) 185189Rubiaceae 138
67, 73,78, 90,99, 105, 107,Paleolithic 140Philip II of Spain 146Psychedelic dose 73Ruiz, Fortunato 120
107, 109, 144, 176Palm wine 71Philippine Islands 68Psychedelic therapy 191Russel, F. 110
New Years's Eve 84, 153Palo de borracho 135Phragmites austral/s68, 138Psychedelic(s) 13, 191Russians 82
Niando 98Palqui 68, 69,98Phrygylanthus eugeno/desPsychoanalysis 191Rutaceae 138
N/cot lana rust/ca 79, 134, 134Panacea 73124Psychodysleptics 13Rye 68, 102, 102
Nicotiana fabacum 17Panaeolus 51,52, 156—1 63Physa/is sp. 174Psychogens 12Sabbat 69
Nicotine 75, 183Panaeolus cyanescens 68Phytolacca 54Psycholyws 190, 191Sacred mushroom(s) 14,78,
Nierika 63, 196Panaeolus sph/nctrinus 51, 78,Phytolacca acinosa 54, 76, 77Psychoses 1279, 147, 159
Nightshade 74,89156—163, 157Pichana 134Psychosomimetics 12Sacred tree 78
Nightshade family 26, 27, 30,Panaeolus subbalteafus 52,Pijaos 142Psychotaraxics 13Sadhu 93
75, 86, 88, 89156-163Pima 110Psychotica 12Sat rol 75
Nightshades 5Panama 97, 162Pincushion Cactus 40, 48Psychoticants 12Saguaro 39, 76, 77
Ninfa 66Panax ginseng 91Pindé 30, 124Psychotomimetic(s) 12, 13SahagUn, Fray Bernardino de
Niños (santos) 14, 161, 164Pancratium 52Pinus strobus 17Psychotria 55, 124—135111, 144, 145, 147, 159, 170
Niopo 27, 119Pancratium trianthum 52, 72Piper aur/tum 98Psychotr/a carthag/nens/s 124Salamén 142
Nonda 74Pandanus sp. 52, 76, 77Piper methyst/cum 64Psychotr/a poeppig/ana 138Salem 104
Nor-lobelamidine 79Papaversomniferum 21Pipiltzin 165Psychotr/a vir/dis 55, 66, 67,Salta 120
Noradrenaline 145, 184, 186,Papua 26, 66, 68Pipiltzintzintli 27, 70, 164—165124—135, 134, 135, 137,Salves 74
187Paracelsus 10, 20Piptaden/a peregr/na 116138, 139Salvia 56, 68, 164—165
Norcarnegine 77Parahuré 177Piraparaná 133, 176Pteridophyta 16Salvia d/vinorum 14, 56, 70,
Norepinephrine 184, 185Pariana region 74Pin pin 134Pucallpa 13371, 164—165, 164—165, 184
Norharmine 127Paricé 68, 69, 177Pitallito (cactus) 42, 74, 75Puebla 99, 158Salvinorin A 71, 165
Norman times 95Paris 102Pituri 73, 74, 75, 81, 182—183Puff balls 27Salvinorin B 165
Nornicotine75, 183Parjanya82Pituri Bush 42, 74,182—183,Puinave 177Samadhi 189
Nornuciferine 67Parsees 102182, 183Pulma 134San Antonio 147
Norscopolamine 141Pashupatinath 27, 93, 107Piturin(e) 75, 183Puna region 120, 123San Bartolo Yautepec 174
Nortropine 73Paspalum grass 104Piule 27, 56, 66,74, 174Putumayo 126San Critobal de Las Casas 159
North Africa 97Pass/flora involucrata 127Plains tribes 152Pygmy 97, 112San Isidro 54, 156—1 63
North America 26, 70, 84, 95,Pass/flora spp. 127, 129Plant Kindom 16-19Pythagoras 90San Luis Potosi 148
158Passionf lower 129Pliny the Elder 95Pythia 91San Pedro (cactus) 27, 59, 76,
Nti-si-tho 159Paste 67, 69,178Plutoniuon 104Quapaw Indians 153166-1 69, 166—1 69
Nuciferine 67Paumaré Indians 177Poison 73, 86Quechua 124Sananco 134, 135
Nutmeg 26, 50, 74,75, 176Pastora 164Poison Bush 74Quetzalaxochiacatl 66Sanango 58,76
Nyakwana68, 69, 177,178Paye(s) 117,176Pokeberrys4Quiche-(Maya)84Sandison, Ronald A. 190
Nyl 133Ped//anthus t/thyma/oides 168,Polynesian Islanders 64Quinde 142Sandoz 187
Nyiba-eboka 115169Polyporales 17Quinolizidine type alkaloids 77Sanskrit 68, 107, 108
Nymphaea 50, 67Peganum 52, 124, 137—139Polytrichum commune 16Quinta essentia 20Santo Daime 139
Nymphaea arnpla 50, 66, 67Peganum harms/a 52, 69, 73,Pombe 109Ratsch, Christian 27, 189Saponines 69, 73, 77
Nymphaeacaerulea50, 6676,77,124,127, 129,137,Popocatepetl 63,161Rahner, Hugo 88Satori 189
Oaxaca 66, 70, 75, 78, 158,139Popol Vuh 161Rain priests 79, 110Saxon times 95
162, 164, 170, 173, 174Pelecyphora 53Poppy 20, 21,24Rajaw Kakuljá 84Scandinavia 88, 102
Obstetrics 69Pelecyphora asefilformis 53,Ports 90Rami 134Sceletium 56, 71
Ochre 14274Prescott 105Rape dos Indios 49,74Sce/etium expansum56
Ocimum micranthum 124Pen Tsao Ching 94Prickly Poppy 98Rasping stick 150Scelet/um tortuosum 56, 70,
Oco-yajé 126Pernambuco 70Prisoners 75Raven 9198
Ocotl 172Pernetlya 53, 77Prophecy 75, 124, 177Recreation 69Sc/rpus atrovirens 56
Ointments 70Pernettya furens 53, 76, 77Prophesy 86Red Bean 26, 74, 75Scirpus sp. 56, 66, 67
Ojibwa 85Pernetfya parvifolia 53, 76, 77Protector 71Red Bean Dance 75Screw Pine 52, 76
207
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor


--- PAGE 209 ---
Scopine 73
Scopolamine 67, 69, 71, 73,
75, 79, 86, 87, 107, 141,
183
Scopoletine 69, 75
Scopolia 57
Scopolia carniollca 57, 74
Scotch Rose 17
Scythians 72, 94, 95, 97
Sea Bean 98
Seaweeds 17
Secale cereale 102
Sedatives 13
Sedges 65
Semilla de Ia Virgen 175
SeminarcosiS 75
Sen Indians 77
Serotonin(e) 22, 120, 159,
171, 185, 187
SertOrner, Friedrich 20
Sesquiterpene-lactone 79
Shaman(s) 8, 30, 62, 67, 69,
72, 75, 82, 82, 120, 126,
134, 139, 142, 148, 149,
156, 164, 168, 175, 176,
178
Shamanic medicine 76, 117
Shamanic significance 67, 71
Shamanism 64, 85
Shang-la 76, 77
Shanin 53, 76
Shanshi 27, 40, 76
Sharon, Douglas 169
She-to 78
Scheelea 180
Shen-Nung 94, 95, 95
Shimbe Lake 168
Shipibo Indians 125, 126,
129, 130, 131
Shirianá 177
Shiva 10, 13,92, 93, 97,
108, 108, 109
Shiva Lingam 107
Shrubs 65
Siberia 26, 64, 70, 71, 82
Siberian Lion's Tail 76
Siberian Motherwort 47, 76,
98
Sibundoy Valley 67, 74, 141,
142, 142
Sibyl 91
Sierra Madre Occidental 97,
147
Sierra Madre Oriental 164
Sida 57, 72, 73
Sida acute 57, 72, 98
Sida rhombifolia 57, 72, 98
Sinaloa 145
Sinicuiche 27, 43, 63, 76, 77
SinO culture 65
Siona 126
Sioux medicine man 152
Srnokehaouse 71
Snail shell lime 67, 118, 119
Snuff(s) 27,67,68,73,75,81,
116—119, 116,120—123,
176—181
Sogamoza 140
Solanaceous 71
Solandra 72, 73
Solandra brevicalyx 72
Solandra guerrerensis 72, 73
Solanum maniacum 170
Soma 62, 62, 70, 82—85, 97
Somalata 84
Sonora 77
Soothsayer 122
Sophora secundiflora 68, 69,
74, 75, 152
Sorcerers7l,77, 112,147
Cherry 88
Sorcery 73, 124
Sotho 96
South Africa 70,71,72,76, 97
South America 19, 26, 27, 30,
62, 65, 66, 76. 77, 81, 95,
118, 118, 134, 135, 140,
162, 166, 172
South American Indian 33
208
Southeast Asia 26, 73
Southwest 26, 109
Spain 157
Spaniards 156, 171
Spanish cronicles 74, 144,
173
Spathiphyllum canaefolium
179
Species Plantarum 16
Spermatophyta 17
Sphaeradenia 179
Spruce, Richard 24, 24, 65,
117,119, 126,132,176
SriLanka 77
St.Anthony 103, 104
St. Anthony's fire 26, 68, 102—
105
St. Peter 166
Stearns, John 105
Stimulant 71, 73, 75, 79
Straw Flower 43, 76
Stopharia cubensis 158, 159
Strychnos usambarensis 127
Stupor 67, 141
Succulents 65
Sucuba 134
Sui period 108
Sun Father 63, 106,117,131,
133, 176
Sun God 91
Sung dynasty 107
Surarfl 177
Sushrata 95
Sweet Calomel 76
Sweet Flag 16, 26, 34, 76
Switzerland 96
Syrian Rue 52, 76, 77,124,
127, 129, 139
Syphilis 170
TaMa72
Tabaco del Diablo 47, 78
Tabernaemontana 58, 76
Tabernaemontana coffeoides
58, 76
Ta be rnaemontana crassa 58,
76, 77
Tabernaemontana dichotoma
76, 77
Tabernaemontana pandaca-
qui76
Ta be rnaemontana sananho
58, 134, 135
Ta be rnaemontana spp. 58
Tabernanthe 58, 112—115
Tabernanthe iboga 29, 58, 70,
112—115, 112—115
Tagetes 58, 78, 79
Tagetes lucida 58, 78, 79
TagIli 27, 76
Iamb 116
Taique 27, 42, 76
Tajik tribesmen 78
Takemoto 83
Takini 44, 78
Tamu 78
Tanaecium 59
Tanaecium nocturnum 59, 72,
73
Tanayin 110
Tannins 73
Tanzania 70, 109
Tantric practices 93, 97
Taoist 94, 107
Tarahumara 8, 66, 69, 70, 71,
74,75,78,79, 144, 147,
149, 150, 151
Tarascans 158
Tatar 78
Tatewari 62, 148, 150
Taxine 19
Telepathine 126, 127
Teliostachya lanceolata var.
crispa 124
Tengu 85
Teochichimeca ritual 147
Teonanácatl 55, 62,71,78,.
81, 156—163, 185, 186,
187
Teotihuacán172,173
Tepantitla 173
Tepecano Indians 99
Tepescohuite 70
Tesguino 109
Tetrahydrocannabinol 184,
184
Tetrahydroharmine 77, 127
Terahydroharmol 127
Tetrahydroisoquinoline alka-
loids 67, 75, 77
Tetrapteris 59, 124—135
Tetra pier/s methystica 59,66,
67, 124
Telra p/er/s mucronata 66,124
Teuile 67
Teunamacatlth156
Teyhuintli 157
Texas74, 81,144, 144,147
Tha-na-sa78
Thallophyta 17
THC 96,98, 184, 184, 185
Thailand 72
Thebes 72, 97
Theobroma 179
Theocritus 109
Thiophenederivatives 79
ThIe-Pelakano 78
Thorn Apple 13, 26, 31, 41,
79, 106—111, 109
Thornapple 78
Thrace 102
Tiahuanaco 120, 122
Tibet 78, 97, 98
Tlamanalco 63
Tlapatl
Tlililtzin 66, 174
TMA 14
To-shka78
Toad(s) 14,66
Tobacco 10, 17,29,63,64,
69,73, 79, 97, 108, 116,
117,120,124,127,
130,134,134,140,143,
148,149,150,153,165,
172, 182
Toe 27, 66
Toe negra 124
Toloache27, 41, 69,78, 79,
106-111
Toloatzin78, 109
Tolohuaxihuitl 109
Toltecs 144
Tonga66,140
Tongo 27
Tonic79
TornaLoco 111
Torres,C. Manuel 120
Torres, Donna 123
Totubjansush 74
Toxicon 10
Trance, claivoyant 71
Trance, visionary 75
Trance(s) 77, 88
Tranquilizers 13, 191
Tree of Knowledge 88, 122
Trees 65
Tribu/us terrestris 127,137
Trichocereus 59, 166-169
Trichocereuspachanoi 59,76,
77,81, 166—169, 166—169
Trimethoxyphenylethylamine
75
Trinidadianferns 19
Triptolemus 81
Triterpenes 71
Tropine 73
Tropane alkaloids 69, 71, 73,
75,79, 141
Tryptaminederivatives 67, 75,
159,179, 185
Tryptamine(s)73, 81, 117,
120,129,138,171,180
Tryptophane117,185
Tschudi,Johann J. 140
Tsuwiri 70
Tubatulobal tribe 110
Tukano(an) Indians 67, 124,
126,127,131, 133,176,
177
Tukche 106
Tunas145
Tunja117, 141
Tupa78
Turbina60, 170—175, 170—
175
Turbina corymbosa 29, 60,
74,75, 170-1 75, 170—175
Turkestan26, 78
TurkestanMint 46, 78
Turkoman tribesmen 78
Turkey Red variety 138
Turner 91
Turnera diffusa 98
Twiners65
Tzompanquahuitl 68
Ucuba176
U.S. Pharmacopoeia 99
Ukraine 104
Umu 122
Uncaria fomentosa 134,135
Uniäodo Vegetal 139
Uniomystica 189
United Staates 13, 74, 75, 99,
144,151,152,154,155,
191,193
Uppsalal6,189
Urticaceae 93
Usbek tribesmen 78
Vaccin/um ol/ginorum 71
Vahiyinmn82
Valdes165
Valdivia72
Varanasi97
Varuna82
Vasoconstrictor69
Vaupés 131
Vaya(Vayu) 82, 83
Velada14, 160
Venezuela64, 68, 118,119,
176, 177
Vent//agovim/na/is 183
Veracruz99
Vertine 77
Viho-mahse 176
Vikings 95
Villca3O, 34, 66,120,122,
122
VilIca camayo 122
VilIca Coto 122
Vineof the Soul 124
Vines 65
Vinhode Jurema 71
Virginia 95, 110
Virola (spp.)29,60,73, 81,
138, 176-1 81
V/rotaca/ophylla 68, 176,177,
177
V/role ca/ophy/loidea 68, 176,
177
V/rotacusp/data 176
Viro/aelongata68,176,178
Virolaloretensis 176,178
V/rolepavonis 178
Virola peruvians 176
Virolarufula 176
Virolasebifera 138, 176
V/role surimanensis 176, 176,
178
V/rolethe/odors 60,68, 138,
176,176, 177, 178
Vision-inducing quality 73, 77
Vision-seeking dance 74
Vision-quest 75
Visions 14,26,27, 64, 67, 69,
71, 75, 77, 79, 109, 110,
122,122,148,159
Voacanga 60, 78, 79
Voacangaafricans 78
Voacangabra cteata 78
Voacangadregei78
Voacanga grand/flora 60,78
Voacangaspp.60
Voacangine 77, 79
Voccamine 79
Waiká72, 118,177,178, 179,
181
Walangari Karntawarra Jaka-
marra 182
Wapaq 82
Warao64
Wasson, B. Gordon 82, 159
Water Lilies 50, 66
Wattisham 104
Wavy Cap 55
Weidmann, Fred 193
West Africa 77
West Indies 66, 116
Western Hemipshere 28, 29,
30
Western society 62, 75, 79,
81,115
Whale 82
White Pine 17
Wichi 120
Wichowaka 66
Wichuri 66
Wichuriki 78
Wild Dagga 72, 98
WilIca 122
Wine69, 108
Winemaking77
Wirikuta62, 148, 148,150,
151
Witch(es) 89
Witch's Berry 88
Witchcraft 71, 7289
Witches market 166
Witches' brews 68,69, 70,71,
73, 78, 79, 86—91
Witches' ointments 74
Witches' salves 74
Witoto 176, 178
Wolf's Milk plant 169
Wood Rose 78, 79
World tree 135
Wysoccan 79, 110
Xerophytes 65
Xibalba 161
Xing024
Xixicamatic 174
Xochipilli 63, 161
Xtabentum74, 173
Xtohk'uh 109
Yage67,124—135
Yajé 30,66,69, 124—1 35
Yakee 68, 69
Yams 114
Yando 133
Yanomamo177
YaqulIndians 27, 70,71, 109,
150
Yarinacocha 129
Yas140
Yato68
Yauhtli 58, 78
Yekwana 126, 176
Yellow Henbae 44
Yoco 29
Yogis27
Yogurt 97
Yohimbine 73
Yokut Indians 79, 110
Yop117
Yopa 116
Ybpb27, 30, 35, 65,66,116—
119
Yucatan 162
Yumantribes 110
Yupa118
YurimaguaIndians 79, 162
Yurupari ceremony 67, 129,
131
Yün-Shih78
Zacatechichi 27, 78, 79
Zaire112
ZambesiValley 99
ZameyeMebege 112
Zapbtec 66, 75, 173, 174,
174, 175
Zaparo 129
Tend-Avesta94
Zornia diphylla 98
Zornialet/to/ia 98
Zululand76
Zuni Indians (= Zuñi) 79, 106,
110
PDF compression, OCR, web-optimization with CVISION's PdfCompressor

