=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Political-Prisoners-Prisons-And-Black-Liberation-By-Dr-Angela-Y-Davis.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 14
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:10:14.178162
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
RBG STREET SCHOLARS THINK TANK                                                                                                                DECEMBER, 2009 
1  
 
 
 
http://www.historyisaweapon.com/defcon1/davispoprprblli.html 
 
 
 
 
 
Despite a long history of exalted appeals to man’s inherent right to resistance, there has 
seldom been agreement on how to relate in practice to unjust immoral laws and the 
oppressive social order from which they emanate. The conservative, who does not 
dispute the validity of revolutions deeply buried in history, invokes visions of impending 
anarchy in order to legitimize his demand for absolute obedience. Law and order, with 
the major emphasis on order, is his watchword. The liberal articulates his sensitivity to 
certain of society’s intolerable details, but will almost never prescribe methods of


--- PAGE 2 ---
RBG STREET SCHOLARS THINK TANK                                                                                                                DECEMBER, 2009 
2  
 
resistance that exceed the limits of legality — redress through electoral channels is the 
liberal’s panacea. 
 
In the heat of our pursuit of fundamental human rights, black people have been 
continually cautioned to be patient. We are advised that as long as we remain faithful to 
the existing democratic order, the glorious moment will eventually a rrive when we will 
come into our own as full-fledged human beings. 
 
But having been taught by bitter experience, we know that there is a glaring incongruity 
between democracy and the capitalist economy which is the source of our ills. 
Regardless of all rhe toric to the contrary, the people are not the ultimate matrix of the 
laws and the system which govern them — certainly not black people and other 
nationally oppressed people, but not even the mass of whites. The people do not 
exercise decisive control over the determining factors of their lives. 
 
Officials assertions that meaningful dissent is always welcome, provided it falls within 
the boundaries of legality, are frequently a smokescreen obscuring the invitation to 
acquiesce in oppression. Slavery may hav e been unrighteous, the constitutional 
precision for the enslavement of blacks may have been unjust, but conditions were not 
to be considered so bearable (especially since they were profitable to a small circle) as 
to justify escape and other acts proscrib ed by law. This was the import of the fugitive 
slave laws. 
 
Needless to say, the history of the Unites States has been marred from its inception by 
an enormous quantity of unjust laws, far too many expressly bolstering the oppression 
of black people. Parti cularized reflections of existing social inequities, these law have 
repeatedly born witness to the exploitative and racist core of the society itself. For 
blacks, Chicanos, for all nationally oppressed people, the problem of opposing unjust 
laws and the so cial conditions which nourish their growth, has always had immediate 
practical implications. Our very survival has frequently been a direct function of our skill 
in forging effective channels of resistance. In resisting we have societies been 
compelled to openly violate those laws which directly or indirectly buttress our 
oppression. But even containing our resistance within the orbit of legality, we have been 
labels criminals and have been methodically persecuted by a racist legal apparatus. 
 
Under the rut hless conditions of slavery, the underground railroad provided the 
framework for extra -legal anti-slavery activity pursued by vast numbers of people, both 
black and white. Its functioning was in flagrant violations of the fugitive slave law; those 
who were apprehended were subjected to sever penalties. Of the innumerable recorded 
attempts to rescue fugitive slaves from the clutches of slave catchers, one of the most 
striking in the case of Anthony Burns, a slave from Virginia, captured in Boston in 1853. 
A team of his supporters, in attempting to rescue him by force during the course of his 
trial, engaged the police in a fierce courtroom battle. During the gun fight, a prominent 
Abolitionist, Thomas Wentworth Higginson, was wounded. Although the rescuers wer e 
unsuccessful in their efforts, the impact of this incident "…did more to crystallize 
Northern sentiment against slavery than any other except the exploit of John Brown, ‘


--- PAGE 3 ---
RBG STREET SCHOLARS THINK TANK                                                                                                                DECEMBER, 2009 
3  
 
and this was the last time a fugitive slave was taken from Boston. It took 22 compa nies 
of state militia, four platoons of marines, a battalion of United States artillerymen, and 
the city’s police force … to ensure the performance of this shameful act, the cost of 
which, the Federal government alone, came to forty thousand dollars.’" 
 
Throughout the era of slavery, blacks, as well as progressive whites, repeatedly 
discovered that their commitment to the anti -slavery cause frequently entailed the overt 
violation of the laws of the land. Even as slavery faded away into a more subtle yet 
equally pernicious apparatus to dominate black people, "illegal" resistance was still on 
the agenda. After the Civil War, Black Codes, successors to the old Slave Codes, 
legalized convict labor, prohibited social intercourse between blacks and whites, gave 
white employers an excessive degree of control over the private lives of black workers, 
and generally codified racism and terror. Naturally, numerous individual as well as 
collective acts of resistance prevailed. On many occasions, blacks formed armed teams 
to protect themselves form while terrorists who were, in turn, protected by law 
enforcement agencies, if not actually identified with them. 
 
By the second decade of the twentieth century, the mass movement, beaded by Marcus 
Garvey, proclaimed in its Declar ation of Rights that black people should not hesitate to 
disobey all discriminatory laws. Moreover, the Declaration announced, they should 
utilize all means available to them, legal or illegal, to defend themselves from legalized 
terror as well as Ku Klux Klan violence. During the era of intense activity around civil 
rights issues, systematic disobedience of oppressive laws was a primary tactic. The sit -
ins were organized transgressions of racist legislation. 
 
All these historical instances involving the ov ert violation of the laws of the land 
converge around an unmistakable common denominator. At stake has been the 
collective welfare and survival of a people. There is a distinct and qualitative difference 
between one breaking a law for one’s own individual self-interest and violating it in the 
interests of a class of people whose oppression is expressed either directly or indirectly 
through that particular law. The former might be called criminal (though in many 
instances he is a victim), but the latter, as a reformist or revolutionary, is interested in 
universal social change. Captured, he or she is a political prisoner. 
 
The political prisoner’s words or deed have in one from or another embodied political 
protests against the established order and have cons equently brought him into acute 
conflict with the state. In light of the political content of his act, the "crime" (which may or 
may not have been committed) assumes a minor importance. In this country, however, 
where the special category of political pris oners is not officially acknowledged, the 
political prisoner inevitably stands trial for a specific criminal offense, not for a political 
act. Often the so -called crime does not even have a nominal existence. As in the 1914 
murder frame -up of the IWW organ izer, Joe Hill, it is a blatant fabrication, a mere 
excuse for silencing a militant crusader against oppression. In all instances, however, 
the political prisoner has violated the unwritten law which prohibits disturbances and 
upheavals in the status quo o f exploitation and racism.. This unwritten law has been


--- PAGE 4 ---
RBG STREET SCHOLARS THINK TANK                                                                                                                DECEMBER, 2009 
4  
 
contested by actually and explicitly breaking a law or by utilizing constitutionally 
protected channels to educate, agitate, and organize masses to resist. 
 
A deep -seated ambivalence has always charac terized the official response to the 
political prisoner. Charged and tried for the criminal act, his guilt is always political in 
nature. This ambivalence is perhaps best captured by Judge Webster Thayer’s 
comment upon sentencing Bartolomero Vanzetti to fifteen years for an attempted payroll 
robbery: "This man, although he may not have actually committed the crime attributed to 
him, is nevertheless morally culpable, because he is an enemy of our existing 
institutions." (The very same judge incidentally, sen tences Sacco and Vanzetti to death 
for a robbery and murder of which they were manifestly innocent). It is not surprising 
that Nazi Germany’s foremost constitutional lawyers, Carl Schmitt, advanced the theory 
which generalized thus a priori culpability. A thief, for example, was not necessarily one 
who had committed an overt act of theft, but rather one whose character renders him a 
thief (wer nach seinem wesen win Dieb ist). [President Richard] Nixon’s and [FBI 
Director] J. Edgar Hoover’s pronouncements le ad on to believe that they would readily 
accept Schmitt’s fascist legal theory. Anyone who seeks to overthrow oppressive 
institutions, whether or not he has engaged in an overt act, is a priori a criminal who 
must be buried away in one of America’s dungeons. 
 
Even in all of Martin Luther King’s numerous arrests, he was not so much charged with 
the nominal crimes of trespassing, and disturbance of the peace, as with being enemy 
of he southern society, an inveterate foe of racism. When Robert Williams was acc used 
of kidnapping, this charge never managed to conceal his real offense — the advocacy 
of black people’s incontestable right to bear arms in their own defense. 
 
The offense of the political prisoner is political boldness, the persistent challenging — 
legally or extra -legally — of fundamental social wrongs fostered and reinforced by the 
state. The political prisoner has opposed unjust laws and exploitative, racist social 
conditions in general, with the ultimate aim of transforming these laws and this society 
into an order harmonious with the material and spiritual needs and interests of the vast 
majority of its members. 
 
Nat Turner and John Brown were political pris oners in their time. The acts for which 
they were charged and subsequently hanged, were the practical extensions of their 
profound commitment to the abolition of slavery. They fearlessly bore the responsibility 
for their actions. The significance of their executions and the accompanying widespread 
repression did not lie so much in the fact that they were being punished for specific 
crimes, nor even in the effort to use their punishment as an implicit threat to deter others 
from similar armed acts of resista nce. These executions, and the surrounding 
repression of slaves, were intended to terrorize the anti-slavery movement in general; to 
discourage and diminish both legal and illegal forms of abolitionist activity. As usual, the 
effect of repression was misca lculated and in both instances, anti -slavery activity was 
accelerated and intensified as a result.


--- PAGE 5 ---
RBG STREET SCHOLARS THINK TANK                                                                                                                DECEMBER, 2009 
5  
 
Nat Turner and John Brown can be viewed as examples of the political prisoner who 
has actually committed an act which is defined by the state as "criminal".  They killed 
and were consequently tried for murder. But did they commit murder? This raises the 
question of whether American revolutionaries had murdered the British in their struggle 
for liberation. Nat Turner and his followers killed some sixty -five whi te people, yet 
shortly before the revolt had begun, Nat is reputed to have said to the other rebelling 
slaves: "Remember that ours is not war for robbery nor to satisfy our passions, it is a 
struggle for freedom. Ours must be deeds and not words", 
 
The very institutions which condemned Nat Turner and reduced his struggle for freedom 
to a simpler criminal case of murder, owed their existence to the decision, made a half -
century earlier, to take up arms against the British oppressor. 
 
The battle for the liqui dation of slavery had no legitimate existence in the eyes of the 
government and therefore the special quality of deeds carried out in the interests of 
freedom was deliberately ignored. There were no political prisoners, there were only 
criminals; just as the movement out of which these deeds flowed was largely considered 
criminal. 
 
Likewise, the significance of activities which are pursued in the interests of liberation 
today is minimized not so much because officials are unable to see the collective surge 
against oppression, but because they have consciously set out to subvert such 
movements. In the Spring of 1970, Los Angeles Panthers took up arms to defend 
themselves from an assault initiated by the local police force on their office and on their 
persons. They were charged with criminal assault. If one believed the official 
propaganda, they were bandits and rogues who pathologically found pleasure in 
attacking policemen. It was not mentioned that their community activities — educational 
work, services such  as free breakfast and free medical programs — which had 
legitimized them in the black community, were the immediate reason for which the wrath 
of the police had fallen upon them. In defending themselves from the attack waged by 
some 600 policemen (there w ere only eleven Panthers in the office) they were 
defending not only their lives, but even more important their accomplishments in the 
black community surrounding them, and in the boarded thrust for black liberation. 
Whenever blacks in struggle have recour se to self -defense, particular armed self -
defense, it is twisted and distorted on official levels and ultimately rendered 
synonymous with criminal aggression. On the other hand, when policemen are clearly 
indulging in acts of criminal aggression, officially they are defending themselves through 
"justifiable assault" or "justifiable homicide". 
 
The ideological acrobatics characteristics of official attempts to explain away the 
existence of the political prisoner do not end with the equation of the individual  political 
act with the individual criminal act. The political act is defined as criminal in order to 
discredit radical and revolutionary movements. A political event is reduced to a criminal 
event in order to affirm the absolute invulnerability of the exi sting order. In a revealing 
contradiction, the court resisted the description of the New York Panther 21 trial as


--- PAGE 6 ---
RBG STREET SCHOLARS THINK TANK                                                                                                                DECEMBER, 2009 
6  
 
"political", yet the prosecutor entered as evidence of criminal intent, literature which 
represented, so he purported, the political ideology of the Black Panther Party. 
 
The legal apparatus designates the black liberation fighter a criminal, prompting Nixon, 
(Vice President Spiro) Agnew, (California Governor Ronald) Reagan et al. to process to 
mystify with their demagogy millions of Americans w hose senses have been dulled and 
whose critical powers have been eroded by the continual onslaught of racist ideology. 
 
As the black liberation movement and other progressive struggles increase in 
magnitude and intensity, the judicial system and its extens ion, the penal system, 
consequently become key weapons in the state’s fight to preserve the existing 
conditions of class domination, therefore racism, poverty and war. 
 
In 1951, W.E.B. Du Bois, as Chairman of the Peace Information Center, was indicted by 
the federal government for "failure to register as an agent of a foreign principal". In 
assessing this ordeal, which occurred in the ninth decade of his life, he turned his 
attention to the inhabitants of the nation’s jails and prisons: 
 
What turns me cold in all this experience is the certainty that thousands of innocent 
victims are in jail today because they had neither money nor friends to help them. The 
eyes of the world were on our trial despite the desperate efforts of press and radio to 
suppress the f acts and cloud the real issues; the courage and money of friends and of 
strangers who dared stand for a principle freed me; but God only knows how many who 
were as innocent as I and my colleagues are today in hell. They daily stagger out of 
prison doors em bittered, vengeful, hopeless, ruined. And of this army of the wronged, 
the proportion of Negroes is frightful. We protect and defend sensational cases where 
Negroes are involved. But the great mass of arrested or accused black folk have no 
defense. There i s desperate need of nationwide organizations to oppose this national 
racket of railroading to jails and chain gangs the poor, friendless and black. 
 
Almost two decades passed before the realization attained by Du Bois on the occasion 
of his own encounter with the judicial system achieved extensive acceptance. A number 
of factors have combined to transform the penal system into a prominent terrain of 
struggle, both for the captives inside and the masses outside. The impact of large 
numbers of political priso ners both on prison populations and on the mass movement 
has been decisive. The vast majority of political prisoners have not allowed the fact of 
imprisonment to curtail their educational, agitational, and organizing activities, which 
they continue behind prison walls. And in the course of developing mass movements 
around political prisoners, a great deal of attention has inevitably been focused on the 
institutions in which they are imprisoned. Furthermore the political receptivity of 
prisoners — especially black and brown captives — has been increased and sharpened 
by the surge of aggressive political activity rising out of black, Chicano, and other 
oppressed communities. Finally, a major catalyst for intensified political action in and 
around prisons has emerged out of the transformation of convicts, originally found guilty 
of criminal offenses, into exemplary political militants. Their patient educational efforts in 
the realm of exposing the specific oppressive structures of the penal system in their


--- PAGE 7 ---
RBG STREET SCHOLARS THINK TANK                                                                                                                DECEMBER, 2009 
7  
 
relation to the larger oppression of the social system have had a profound effect on their 
fellow captives. 
 
The prison is a key component of state’s coercive apparatus, the overriding function of 
which is to ensure social control. They etymology of the term "p enitentiary" furnishes a 
clue to the controlling idea behind the "prison system" at its inception. The penitentiary 
was projected as the locale for doing penitence for an offense against society, the 
physical and spiritual purging of proclivities to challe nge rules and regulations which 
command total obedience. While cloaking itself with the bourgeois aura of universality 
— imprisonment was supposed to cut across all class lines, as crimes were to be 
defined by the act, not the perpetrator — the prison has actually operated as an 
instrument of class domination, a means of prohibiting the have -nots from encroaching 
upon the haves. 
 
The occurrence of crime is inevitable in a society in which wealth is unequally 
distributed, as one of the constant reminders tha t society’s productive forces are being 
channeled in the wrong direction. The majority of criminal offenses bear a direct 
relationship to property. Contained in the very concept of property, crimes are profound 
but suppressed social needs which express the mselves in anti -social modes of action. 
Spontaneously produced by a capitalist organization of society, this type of crime is at 
once a protest against society and a desire to partake of its exploitative content. It 
challenges the symptoms of capitalism, but not its essence. 
 
Some Marxists in recent years have tended to banish "criminals" and the 
lumpenproletariat as a whole from the arena of revolutionary struggle. Apart from the 
absence of any link binding the criminal to the means of production, underlying this 
exclusion has  been the assumption that individuals who have recourse to anti -social 
acts are incapable of developing the discipline and collective orientation required by 
revolutionary struggle. 
 
With the declassed character of lumpenproletarians in mind, Marx had stat ed that they 
are as capable of "the most heroic deeds and the most exalted sacrifices, as of the 
basest banditry and the dirties corruption". He emphasized the fact that the provisional 
government’s mobile guards under the Paris Commune — some 24,000 troops — were 
largely formed out of young lumpenproletarians from fifteen to twenty years of age. Too 
many Marxists have been inclined to overvalue the second part of Marx’s observation 
— that the lumpenproletariat is capable of the basest banditry and the dirt iest corruption 
— while minimizing or indeed totally disregarding his first remark, applauding the 
lumpen for their heroic deeds and exalted sacrifices. 
 
Especially today when so many black, Chicano, and Puerto Rican men and women are 
jobless as a consequence of the internal dynamic of the capitalist system, the role of the 
unemployed, which includes the lumpenproletariat in revolutionary struggle, must be 
given serious thought. Increased unemployment, particularly for the nationally 
oppressed, will continue to be an inevitable by-product of technological development. At 
least 30 percent of black youth are presently without jobs. (In 1997, over 30 percent of


--- PAGE 8 ---
RBG STREET SCHOLARS THINK TANK                                                                                                                DECEMBER, 2009 
8  
 
black men were in prison, on probation or on parole.) In the context of class exploitation 
and national oppression it should be clear that numerous individuals are compelled to 
resort to criminal acts, not as a result of conscious choice — implying other alternatives 
— but because society has objectively reduced their possibilities of subsistence and 
survival to this level. This recognition should signal the urgent need to organize the 
unemployed and lumpenproletariat, as indeed the Black Panther Party as well as 
activists in prison have already begun to do. 
 
In evaluating the susceptibility of the black a nd brown unemployed to organizing efforts, 
the peculiar historical features of the US, specifically racism and national oppression, 
must be taken into account. There already exists in the black and brown communities, 
the lumpenproletariat included, a long tradition of collective resistance to national 
oppression. 
 
Moreover, in assessing the revolutionary potential of prisoners in America as a group, it 
should be borne in mind that not all prisoners have actually committed crimes. The built-
in racism of the judicial system expresses itself, as Du Bois has suggested, in the 
railroading of countless innocent blacks and other national minorities into the country’s 
coercive institutions. 
 
One must also appreciate the effects of disproportionately long prison term s on black 
and brown inmates. The typical criminal mentality sees imprisonment as a calculated 
risk for a particular criminal act. One’s prison term is more or less rationally predictable. 
The function of racism in the judicial -penal complex is to shatter that predictability. The 
black burglar, anticipating a two -to four -year term, may end up doing ten to fifteen 
years, while the white burglar leaves after two years. 
 
Within the contained, coercive universe of the prison, the captive is confronted with the 
realities of racism, not simply as individual acts dictated by attitudinal bias; rather he is 
compelled to come to grips with racism as an institutional phenomenon collectively 
experienced by the victims. The disproportionate representation of the black an d brown 
communities, the manifest racism of parole boards, the intense brutality inherent in the 
relationship between prison guards and black and brown inmates — all this and more 
causes the prisoner to be confronted daily, hourly, with the concentrated sy stematic 
existence of racism. 
 
For the innocent prisoner, the process of radicalization should come easy; for the 
"guilty" victim, the insight into the nature of racism as it manifests itself in the judicial -
penal complex can lead to a questioning of his o wn past criminal activity and a re -
evaluation of the methods he has used to survive in a racist and exploitative society. 
Needless to say, this process is not automatic, it does not occur spontaneously. The 
persistent educational work carried out by the pr ison’s political activists plays a key role 
in developing the political potential of captive men and women. 
 
Prisoners — especially blacks, Chicanos and Puerto Ricans — are increasingly 
advancing the proposition that they are political prisoners. They cont end that they are


--- PAGE 9 ---
RBG STREET SCHOLARS THINK TANK                                                                                                                DECEMBER, 2009 
9  
 
political prisoners in the sense that they are largely the victims of an oppressive politico -
economic order, swiftly becoming conscious of the causes underlying their victimization. 
The Folsom Prisoners’ Manifesto of Demands and Anti-Oppression Platform attests to a 
lucid understanding of the structures of oppression within the prison — structures which 
contradict even the avowed function of the penal institution: "The program we are 
submitted to, under the ridiculous title of rehabilitati on, is relative to the ancient stupidity 
of pouring water on the drowning man, in as much as we are treated for our hostilities 
by our program administrators with their hostility for medication." The Manifesto also 
reflects an awareness that the severe soc ial crisis taking place in this country, 
predicated in part on the ever -increasing mass consciousness of deepening social 
contradictions, is forcing the political function of the prisons to surface in all its brutality. 
Their contention that prisons are be ing transformed into the "fascist concentration 
camps of modern America," should not be taken lightly, although it would be erroneous 
as well as defeatist in a practical sense, to maintain that fascism has irremediably 
established itself. 
 
The point is thi s, and this is the truth which is apparent in the Manifesto: the ruling 
circles of America are expanding and intensifying repressive measures designed to nip 
revolutionary movements in the bud as well as to curtail radical -democratic tendencies, 
such as the movement to end the war in Indochina. The government is not hesitating to 
utilize an entire network of fascist tactics, including the monitoring of congressman’s 
telephone calls, a system of "preventive fascism", as Marcuse has termed it, in which 
the ro le of the judicial -penal systems looms large. The sharp edge of political 
repression, cutting through the heightened militancy of the masses, and bringing 
growing numbers of activists behind prison walls, must necessarily pour over into the 
contained world of the prison where it understandably acquires far more ruthless forms. 
 
It is a relatively easy matter to persecute the captive whose life is already dominated by 
a network of authoritarian mechanisms. This is especially facilitated by the 
indeterminate sentence policies of many states, for politically conscious prisoners will 
incur inordinately long sentences on the original conviction. According to Louis S. 
Nelson, warden of the San Quentin Prison, "if the prisons of California become known 
as schools for violent revolution, the Adult Authority would be remiss in their duty not to 
keep the inmates longer" (San Francisco Chronicle, May 2, 1971). Where this is 
deemed inadequate, authorities have recourse to the whole spectrum of brutal corporal 
punishment, including out and out murder. At San Quentin, Fred Billingslea was 
teargassed to death in February 1970. W. L. Nolen, Alvin Miller, and Cleveland Edwards 
were assassinated by a prison guard in January 1970, at Soledad Prison. Unusual and 
inexplicable "sui cides" have occurred with incredible regularity in jails and prisons 
throughout the country. 
 
It should be self -evident that the frame -up becomes a powerful weapon within the 
spectrum of prison repression, particularly because of the availability of inform ers, the 
broken prisoners who will do anything for a price. The Soledad Brothers and the 
Soledad Three are leading examples of frame -up victims. Both cases involve militant 
activists who have been charged with killing Soledad prison guards. In both cases,


--- PAGE 10 ---
RBG STREET SCHOLARS THINK TANK                                                                                                                DECEMBER, 2009 
10  
 
widespread support has been kindled within the California prison system. They have 
served as occasions to link the immediate needs of the black community with a forceful 
fight to break the fascist stronghold in the prisons and therefore to abolish the pris on 
system in its present form. 
 
Racist oppression invades the lives of black people on an infinite variety of levels. 
Blacks are imprisoned in a world where our labor and toil hardly allow us to eke out a 
decent existence, if we are able to find jobs at al l. When the economy begins to falter, 
we are forever the first victims, always the most deeply wounded. When the economy is 
on its feet, we continue to live in a depressed state. Unemployment is generally twice as 
high in the ghettos as it is in the countr y as a whole and even higher among black 
women and youth. The unemployment rate among black youth has presently 
skyrocketed to 30 percent. If one -third of America’s white youths were without a means 
of livelihood, we would either be in the thick of revolut ion or else under the iron rule of 
fascism. Substandard schools, medical care hardly fit for animals, over -priced, 
dilapidated housing, a welfare system based on a policy of skimpy concessions, 
designed to degrade and divide (and even this may soon be canc eled) — this is only 
the beginning of the list of props in the overall scenery of oppression which, for the 
mass of blacks, is the universe. 
 
In black communities, wherever they are located, there exists an ever -present reminder 
that our universe must rema in stable in its drabness, its poverty, its brutality. From 
Birmingham to Harlem to Watts, black ghettos are occupied, patrolled and often 
attacked by massive deployments of police. The police, domestic caretakers of 
violence, are the oppressor’s emissarie s, charged with the task of containing us within 
the boundaries of our oppression. 
 
The announced function of the police, "to protect and serve the people," becomes the 
grotesque caricature of protecting and preserving the interests of our oppressors and 
serving us nothing but injustice. They are there to intimidate blacks, to persuade us with 
their violence that we are powerless to alter the conditions of our lives. Arrests are 
frequently based on whims. Bullets from their guns murder human beings with lit tle or 
no pretext, aside from the universal intimidation they are charged with carrying out. 
Protection for drug-pushers, and Mafia-style exploiters, support for the most reactionary 
ideological elements of the black community (especially those who cry out  for more 
police), are among the many functions of forces of law and order. They encircle the 
community with a shield of violence, too often forcing the natural aggression of the black 
community inwards. Fanon’s analysis of the role of colonial police is a n appropriate 
description of the function of the police in America’s ghettos. 
 
It goes without saying that the police would be unable to set into motion their racist 
machinery were they not sanctioned and supported by the judicial system. The courts 
not only consistently abstain from prosecuting criminal behavior on the part of the 
police, but they convict, on the basis of biased police testimony, countless black men 
and women. Court -appointed attorneys, acting in the twisted interests of overcrowded 
courts, convince 85 percent of the defendants to plead guilty. Even the manifestly


--- PAGE 11 ---
RBG STREET SCHOLARS THINK TANK                                                                                                                DECEMBER, 2009 
11  
 
innocent are advised to cop a plea so that the lengthy and expensive process of jury 
trials is avoided. This is the structure of the apparatus which summarily railroads black 
people into jails and prisons. (During my imprisonment in the New York Women’s 
House of Detention, I encountered numerous cases involving innocent black women 
who had been advised to plead guilty. One sister had entered her white landlord’s 
apartment for the purpose of paying rent. He attempted to rape her and in the course of 
the ensuin g struggle, a lit candle toppled over, burning a tablecloth. The landlord 
ordered her arrested for arson. Following the advice of her court -appointed attorney, 
she entered a guilty plea, having been deceived by the attorney’s insistence that the 
court would be more lenient. The sister was sentenced to three years.) 
 
The vicious circle linking poverty, police courts, and prison is an integral element of 
ghetto existence. Unlike the mass of whites, the path which leads to jails and prisons is 
deeply rooted in  the imposed patterns of black existence. For this very reason, an 
almost instinctive affinity binds the mass of black people to the political prisoners. The 
vast majority of blacks harbor a deep hatred of the police and are not deluded by official 
proclamations of justice through the courts. 
 
For the black individual, contact with the law -enforcement-judicial-penal network, 
directly or through relatives and friends, is inevitable because he or she is black. For the 
activist become political prisoner, the c ontact has occurred because he has lodged a 
protest, in one form or another, against the conditions which nail blacks to this orbit of 
oppression. 
 
Historically, black people as a group have exhibited a greater potential for resistance 
than any other part of the population. The iron -clad rule over our communities, the 
institutional practice of genocide, the ideology of racism have performed a strictly 
political as well as an economic function. The capitalists have not only extracted super 
profits from the u nderpaid labor of over 15 percent of the American population with the 
aid of a superstructure of terror. This terror and more subtle forms of racism have 
further served to thwart the flowering of a resistance — even a revolution that would 
spread to the working class as a whole. 
 
In the interests of the capitalist class, the consent to racism and terror has been 
demagogically elicited from the white population, workers included, in order to more 
efficiently stave off resistance. Today, Nixon, [Attorney Gene ral John] Mitchell and J. 
Edgar Hoover are desperately attempting to persuade the population that dissidents, 
particularly blacks, Chicanos, Puerto Ricans, must be punished fro being members of 
revolutionary organizations; for advocating the overthrow of t he government; for 
agitating and educating in the streets and behind prison walls. The political function of 
racist domination is surfacing with accelerated intensity. Whites who have professed 
their solidarity with the black liberation movement and have m oved in a distinctly 
revolutionary direction find themselves targets of the same repression. Even the anti -
war movement, rapidly exhibiting an anti -imperialist consciousness, is falling victim to 
government repression.


--- PAGE 12 ---
RBG STREET SCHOLARS THINK TANK                                                                                                                DECEMBER, 2009 
12  
 
Black people are rushing full speed ahead towards an understanding of the 
circumstances that give rise to exaggerated forms of political repression and thus an 
overabundance of political prisoners. This understanding is being forged out of the raw 
material of their own immediate experiences with racism. Hence, the black masses are 
growing conscious of their responsibility to defend those who are being persecuted for 
attempting to bring about the alleviation of the most injurious immediate problems facing 
black communities and ultimately to br ing about total liberation through armed 
revolution, if it must come to this. 
 
The black liberation movement is presently at a critical juncture. Fascist methods of 
repression threaten to physically decapitate and obliterate the movement. More subtle, 
yet no less dangerous ideological tendencies from within threaten to isolate the black 
movement and diminish its revolutionary impact. Both menaces must be counteracted in 
order to ensure our survival. Revolutionary blacks must spearhead and provide 
leadership for a broad anti-fascist movement. 
 
Fascism is a process, its growth and development are cancerous in nature. While today, 
the threat of fascism may be primarily restricted to the use of the law -enforcement-
judicial-penal apparatus to arrest the overt and  latent revolutionary trends among 
nationally oppressed people, tomorrow it may attack the working class en masse and 
eventually even moderate democrats. Even in this period, however, the cancer has 
already commenced to spread. In addition to the prison ar my of thousands and 
thousands of nameless Third World victims of political revenge, there are increasing 
numbers of white political prisoners — draft resisters, anti -war activists such as the 
Harrisburg Eight, men and women who have involved themselves on all levels of 
revolutionary activity. 
 
Among the further symptoms of the fascist threat are official efforts to curtail the power 
of organized labor, such as the attack on the manifestly conservative construction 
workers and the trends towards reduced welf are aid. Moreover, court decisions and 
repressive legislation augmenting police powers — such as the Washington no -knock 
law, permitting police to enter private dwellings without warning, and Nixon’s "Crime Bill" 
in general — can eventually be used against  any citizen. Indeed congressmen are 
already protesting the use of police -state wire -tapping to survey their activities. The 
fascist content of the ruthless aggression in Indo-China should be self-evident. 
 
One of the fundamental historical lessons to be learned from past failures to prevent the 
rise of fascism is the decisive and indispensable character of the fight against fascism in 
its incipient phases. Once allowed to conquer ground, its growth is facilitated in 
geometric proportion. Although the most unbridled expressions of the fascist menace 
are still tied to the racist domination of blacks, Chicanos, Puerto Ricans, Indians, it lurks 
under the surface wherever there is potential resistance to the power of monopoly 
capital, the parasitic interests whi ch control this society. Potentially it can profoundly 
worsen the conditions of existence for the average American citizen. Consequently, the 
masses of people in this country have a real, direct, and material stake in the struggle to


--- PAGE 13 ---
RBG STREET SCHOLARS THINK TANK                                                                                                                DECEMBER, 2009 
13  
 
free political prisoners, the struggle to abolish the prison system in its present form, the 
struggle against all dimensions of racism. 
 
No one should fail to take heed of Georgi Dimitrov’s warning: "Whoever does not fight 
the growth of fascism at these preparatory stages is no t in a position to prevent the 
victory of fascism, but, on the contrary, facilitates that victory" (Report to the VIIth 
Congress of the Communist International, 1935). The only effective guarantee against 
the victory of fascism is an indivisible mass movem ent which refuses to conduct 
business as usual as long as repression rages on. It is only natural that blacks and 
other Third World peoples must lead this movement, for we are the first and most 
deeply injured victims of fascism. But it must embrace all po tential victims and most 
important, all working -class people, for the key to the triumph of fascism is its 
ideological victory over the entire working class. Given the eruption of a severe 
economic crisis, the door to such an ideological victory can be ope ned by the active 
approval or passive toleration of racism. It is essential that white workers become 
conscious that historically through their acquiescence in the capitalist -inspired 
oppression of blacks they have only rendered themselves more vulnerable to attack. 
 
The pivotal struggle which must be waged in the ranks of the working class is 
consequently the open, unreserved battle against entrenched racism. The whit worker 
must become conscious of the threads which bind him to a James Johnson, a black 
auto worker, member of UAW, and a political prisoner presently facing charges for the 
killings of two foremen and a job setter. The merciless proliferation of the power of 
monopoly capital may ultimately push him inexorably down the very same path of 
desperation. No potential victim [of the fascist terror] should be without the knowledge 
that the greatest menace to racism and fascism is unity! 
 
MARIN COUNTY JAIL 
 
May, 1971 
 
 
LINKS: 
 Film clip, Davis speaking at Florida A&M University’s Black History Month convocation, 
1979 
 Davis quotations gathered by Black History Daily 
 A PBS interview 
 Round table discussion on "Resisting the Prison Industrial Complex, with Davis as a 
guest 
 New York Times archive of Davis-related articles 
 Time chat-room users interview with Davis on "Attacking the 'Prison Industrial Complex." 
1998 
 Harvard Gazette article, March 13, 2003 
 Davis timeline at UCLA 
 Audio recording of Davis at a Practical Activism Conference in Santa Cruz in 2007 
 Guardian interview with Davis, November 8, 2007 
 Davis entry in the Encyclopedia of Alabama


--- PAGE 14 ---
RBG STREET SCHOLARS THINK TANK                                                                                                                DECEMBER, 2009 
14

