=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Prince-Hall-Masonry-Overview-2006-Jenkyns-phm.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 72
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:10:59.158842
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
An overview of
Prince Hall Freemasonry
1784 - present
An overview prepared in June 2000 (and updated in June 2006) by
S. Michael Jenkyns
2 Westfield Cres.,
Nepean, ON K2G 0T5
Canada
A research paper for
Colonel By Council, No. 217, AMD of Canada


--- PAGE 2 ---



--- PAGE 3 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
PRINCE HALL FREEMASONRY
PREFACE
Until 2005, F reemasons i n O ntario were of ten rem inded to be v ery c areful when v isiting other
jurisdictions regarding the presence of Prince Hall Freemasons. During the 1990's Ontario Lodges were
discouraged from visiting their sister Lodges in Quebec and any attendance was usually on a personal, rather
than official, basis. Little information was given out by t he Grand Lodge of  Ancient Free and Acc epted
Masons of Canada in the Province of Ontario regarding these Prince Hall Freemasons which may, in some
respects, encourage (rather than discourage) research into the matter. There is little available from the
Grand Lodge Lending Library in Hamilton. In 1963 (the last year for which the author was been able to secure
some secondary information from Prince Hall sources) there were forty-six Prince Hall Grand Lodges with
a membership of 565,000 plus members.
At the Annual Communication of July 22-23, 2005 of the Grand Lodge A.F. & A.M. of Canada in the
Province of Ontario the Grand Master, M. W. Bro. Donald H. Mumby addressed the Assembly with these
words:
“Throughout the past two years M. W. Bro. J. Halstead, Grand Master of Prince Hall Free and
Accepted Mas ons i n the P rovince of  O ntario and j urisdictions, and I hav e been in regul ar
communication. Through him an invitation was extended to all Prince Hall Masons to attend the
June 25, 2005, picnic hosted by 7 Toronto Districts in celebration of our sesquicentennial. This
picnic replaced, for this year only, the brotherhood Barbecue usually held in Windsor. I am pleased
to note that not only was the picnic a success, but a goodly number of Prince Hall Brethren were
present.
     I am  now pleased to report that, effective immediately, full right of reciprocal visitation with
Prince Hall  Free and Accepted Masons within this jurisdiction is authorized. This move has been
fully endorsed by the Grand Master of Prince Hall Free and Accepted Masons in the Province of
Ontario and jurisdictions.
     A committee composed of an equal number of members from the Grand Lodge of Canada in
the Province of Ontario and the Grand Lodge of Prince Hall Free and Accepted Masons in the
Province of Ontario and jurisdictions will be established to explore future paths that may be taken.”
At the time I began my research into Prince Hall Freemasonry I had set out to answer the vexing
question “Why are we discouraged from association with such a large body of men who appear to profess
a belief in the same principles, share the same ritual and aspire to a better world by ‘m aking good men
better’?”
I now have a better understanding of the development of Prince Hall Freemasonry and I hope that
this paper will contribute to the understanding of others. Certainly in the history of the world it i s time to
reinforce the similarities and to be mutually supportive in the pursuit of that betterment of civilization that
forms the quest for the “search for inner truth” that is a basis for Freemasonry around the world.


--- PAGE 4 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry


--- PAGE 5 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
TABLE OF CONTENTS


--- PAGE 6 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry


--- PAGE 7 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
  Some of the best known American Masonic researchers, such as William H. Grimshaw (Past Grand1
Master of the District of Colombia) and Albert Mackey, to name two, have perpetuated the errors regarding the life
and times of Prince Hall. Taylor appears to have accepted Grimshaw’s account of Prince Hall’s personal and
Masonic life.
  Joseph A. Walkes, Jr., Black Square & Compass: 200 Years of Prince Hall Freemasonry, © 1979, Macoy2
Publishing & Masonic Supply, Co. Inc., Richmond, Virginia 23228, ISBN 0-88053-061-8, L.C.C. 79-11235 2.
  The meeting was held in St. Cathari nes, Ontario in August 1959.3
1
WHO WAS PRINCE HALL?
There are certainly disagreements about who Prince Hall, or P. Hall, was, and at various times the
records of Massachusetts and the Continental Army refer to at least three Prince Hall’s and one Primus Hall.
These were all different men, born at different times, who worked in different occupations, married different
wives at different times, and died in different places at different times.
There is disagreement regarding the origins and birth date of Prince Hall. Fred C. Taylor  in his paper1
on Prince Hall Freemasonry notes that Prince Hall was born a freeman at Bridgetown, Barbados, British
West Indies on September 12, 1748, but that his obituary notice in 1807 lists his age as 72 (which would give
a year of birth of 1735). Taylor writes that Hall’s father was an Englishman, Thomas Prince Hall, a leather
worker by trade. His mother was a (free born) coloured woman of French extraction. Little is known of his
parents except that they were in humble circumstances and had a reputation for piety, sobriety and industry,
which qualities were passed to their son.
Joseph A. Walkes, Jr., in his Black Square & Compass: 200 Years of Prince Hall Freemasonry , has2
undertaken extensive research into the origins of Prince Hall Freemasonry and its spread across the Western
Hemisphere. Walkes concludes, very emphatically, that Prince Hall was born in 1737 or 1738. This is borne
out, in part, by the death notices appearing in Boston newspapers published on Monday, December 7, 1807,
regarding the death of the (reportedly) 72 year old Prince Hall. It is not at all clear precisely where he was
born. 
The 104th Annual  Com munication Booklet of  F. and A. M. (P .H.A.)  notes that Prince Hall was3
apprenticed to a leather worker at the age of twelve, and that he made rapid progress. Taylor notes that at
the age of seventeen Prince Hall worked his passage to Boston in a sailing ship, arriving there in March 1765
although this is not proven and generally found to be an unaccepted assumption regarding his place of birth
and arrival in the T hirteen Colonies, never mind the belief that “He immediately set to work as a leather
merchant and his thrifty nature permitted him, at the age of twenty-five (1773), to acquire real estate and the
right to vote” or that “He was also an earnest student of the bible and became a Methodist Minister, his first
church being located in Cambridge, Massachusetts”, both statement having appeared at various times in
research papers dealing with Prince Hall.
Walkes notes that from about 1749 until 1770, Prince Hall was a servant in the family of William
Hall, a respected citizen and property owner of Boston, who died in Boston on August 16, 1771, aged 75
years. He also records that on November 2, 1763, Prince Hall married Sarah, the first of three wives, the
event being recorded in the Book of Marriages as: “Prince. neg. svt. William Hall & Sarah. neg. svt. Francis
Ritchie.” Sarah died three years later and her headstone was engraved: “Here lies ye Body of Sarah Ritchery
Wife of Prince Hall died Feb. the 26  1769 aged 24 years.” th


--- PAGE 8 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
2
In 1770 William Hall released Prince Hall and set him free. Prince Hall thereupon, according to
Walkes, went to Gloucester, Massachusetts, where he married Flora Gibbs. The Register shows “Prince Hall
of Boston and Flora (Gibbs) of  Gloucester Married by Rev . Sam uel Chandler, August 22, 1770”.  Legal
records show that on December 12, 1771, Prince Hall and his wife Flora, filed a writ for damages against
Francis Norw ood, T ide-Waiter of  G loucester, w ith the S heriff of Es sex County  f or £10-00-00. I n the
document Prince Hall described himself as “a free Negro of Boston, Leather-dresser”.
Although Walkes notes that “from 1771 to 1776 there is a blank”, in 1775 a Prince Hall (possibly the
one we are interested in) applied to Hancock and Warren, of the Committee of Safety, to enlist slaves in the
Colonies into the Revolutionary forces to fight against the British. The use of slaves in this fashion was
rejected. P rince H all, h owever, f ormed a  c ommittee o f coloured f reemen c onsisting o f C yrus J onbus;
Benaton Slinger; Thomas Sanderson; Prince Taylor; Boston Smith; Peter Best; and others; and waiting of
General George Washington, offering to enlist in the Patriot Army. Taylor states that Prince Hall enlisted in
the Revolutionary Army on April 20, 1778 although the Annual Communication Booklet shows he entered
to Army in February 1776, joining Captain Dillingham’s Company, and that the name “Prince Hall” appears
on the Continental Muster Rolls. 
Prince Hall’s activities in the Army are unwritten. He was active in business and political life, his
name appears in local newspapers and council records. A bill for £ 1-19-0, dated April 24, 1777, was charged
by P rince Hall to Col. Craft’s Regiment of Artillery for “5 drumheads delivered at sundry times”. He was
assessed for poll taxes and real estate taxes in Boston in 1780, 1784, 1786, 1787 as “Negro Grand Master
to the Lodge”; in 1788 as “Freemason”; and 1789, 1790, 1791, 1798, 1800, 1801 and 1803 as “Worshipful
Grand Master”. As the tax lists were used as voting lists they indicate his eligibility to vote in Boston.
Taylor notes that after the war Prince Hall married Phoebe Baker, and they lived on Philip Street,
Boston until Prince Hall’s death.  Walkes, on the other hand, notes that “On June 28, 1804, Prince Hall
married Zilpha (or Zilpoy) Johnson. After his death her name is shown as Silva and she was appointed
adminstratrix of his estate . . .”.
Prince Hall died in Boston on December 4, 1807. A notice of his death was carried in six Boston
newspapers. All the newspapers agree that he was 72 years of age at the time of his death, that he was
Master of African Lodge, and that a Masonic ceremony was held. Walkes notes that the death notices do
not tell where the remains were interred although Taylor says he was buried with masonic honours at Coppis
Hill Cem etery (also known as Copp’s Burying Ground), Boston. W alkes notes that his f irst wife, Sarah
Ritchery, who died on February 26, 1769, is located in the Copp’s Hill burying ground and on the reverse of
her gravestone an epitaph to Prince Hall was added, probably long after his death:
“Here lies ye body of
Prince Hall
First Grand Master of the
Colored Grand Lodge of
Masons in Mass.
Died Dec. 7, 1807”


--- PAGE 9 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
  “Medfiled” is probably a misspelled name and should more likely be “Medfield”.4
3
THREE PRINCE HALLS and PRIMUS HALL
Records of the Continental Army exist for three men from Massachusetts bearing the name “Prince
Hall”: one from Dartmouth and two from Medford. The first is shown on a list of men under the command
of Captain Benjamin Dillingham, whose company had been raised in late 1775 and early 1776. The second
is shown as a member of Captain Brook’s Company, Colonel Thatcher’s Regiment, in the spring and summer
of 1778. The third “Prince Hall” is on a list of men from Medford (also written as Medfiled ) for Captain Allen’s4
Company, Colonel Bailey’s Regiment. It is not clear whether these individuals were coloured or not as this
information was not recorded. It is also not clear that the Prince Hall who was Master of African Lodge was
any of  these individuals. W alkes has probed dee ply into the com position of Medf ord and i dentified the
number of white and coloured inhabitants and those of the latter who were classified as slaves in 1754 and
“free blacks” in 1764 (when Massachusetts law freed all slaves).
There is also confusion between Prince Hall and Primus Hall, a Revolutionary War hero.
But, as W alkes poi nts out, i t m atters l ittle whether P rince Hal l of  Af rican Lod ge fought f or t he
Continental Army or whether he provided support for it as a merchant and tradesman. It did nothing to limit
his efforts for Freemasonry.


--- PAGE 10 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
  W. Bro. Ray Sheppard, P.M. of Lod ge Glittering Star, No. 322 IC, has an extensive collection of5
information on Military Lodges and occasionally publishes these.
4
MASONIC CAREER of PRINCE HALL
Taylor says that Prince Hall began his masonic career in March 1775 [March 6, 1775 is the precise
date given by W. Bro. R. Sheppard , along with the cost of initiation of two shillings and sixpence British5
money] when he “. . . . and fourteen other coloured men received their masonic degrees in “Military Lodge
No. 441” working under the registry of the Grand Lodge of Ireland and attached to an English Regiment then
stationed i n Bo ston (W alkes no tes tha t the  Regiment w as ga rrisoned at Ca stle W illiams, no w Fort
Independence, Boston Harbour) and of which Sergeant J. B. Batt was the Worshipful Master”. 
As noted in the attached summary of Lodge No. 441 IC, this Lodge was formed in the 38th Regiment
of Foot in 1765, and in 1775 the WM was Sergeant John Batt whose military career (from Regimental Muster
Rolls held at PRO, Kew, London) show that he was discharged from the 38th Foot on February 3, 1777 and
enlisted on February 20, 1778 in Colonel David Henley’s (or Henly’s) Regiment (an American unit) at Boston,
deserting that Regiment on June 10, 1778.
Warrant No. 441 I C was surrendered to the G rand Lodge of Ireland in 1840 although it was not
removed from the printed report of Lodges until 1885. It is also interesting to note that the Regiment had
been stationed in the West Indies in the period 1706-1765 and it is probable that many negroes had been
recruited into its ranks during this time. Irish military Lodges were permitted to take in civilian initiates only
if there was no civilian Irish Lodge in the area near to the military Lodge, which was the case in Boston in
1775. Until 1815 there was no “English” rule in this regard until the new Constitutions were issued following
the unification of Antients’ and Modern’s Grand Lodges.
W. Bro. Ray Sheppard notes that the 38th Foot was absent from Boston between 1781 and 1784,
when it was based in New York City. Lodge 441 IC went with the Regiment to New York and was a founder
Lodge of the Antients Provincial Grand Lodge there on January 23, 1781. The Regiment returned to Boston
in 1784 on the cessation of hostilities en route out of the United States to the West Indies and Europe. It left
its resident black brethren (the fifteen who had been initiated in 1775) a permit to meet as a Masonic Lodge,
attend Church services as such, and to bury their dead according to masonic tradition, but not to take in
initiates or confer degrees. It is not at all clear whether the “permit” was issued when the Regiment and its
Lodge went to New York City, or whether it occurred when the Regiment left the United States at the end
of the American Revolution and it is probably not an important consideration. As Taylor notes, this practice
was in accordance with masonic custom of the times. It was also understood that a Lodge formed in this
manner was considered to be temporary until it was able to gain regular sanction and recognition from a
recognized masonic authority - of which there were only three: the Grand Lodges of England, Ireland and
Scotland and their various Provincial Grand Lodges - and often this took several years to accomplish. This
practice was more generally followed by transient military lodges than by civilian ones although there was
no prohibition on the practice.


--- PAGE 11 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
5
PROCEDURE IN THE FORMATION OF EARLY LODGES
Taylor provides an interesting insight into the custom of forming Lodges in those far-off colonial
times. “First, the inherent right of Masons to meet and form a lodge at pleasure asserting the validity of this
custom under the s anction of immemorial usage. Second, the practice of private lodges licensing other
lodges was still in common and respectable usage. And, third, by warrant or charter from a Grand Lodge.
This (latter) method began gaining general approval and later became the accepted method among English-
speaking masons.” It must be remembered that in Prince Hall’s day Grand Lodge discipline and authority
had not been fully established and much of “Ancient law and custom” still prevailed which, judged by present
day standards, would make early American masonry look exceedingly irregular. 
A good example of the inherent right to meet without any so-called Warrant is St. John’s Lodge, No.
1 of Philadelphia, which met from before 1730 and which did not request formal recognition by a “Grand
Lodge” until 1734 when Benjamin Franklin (having been elected Grand Master of Pennsylvania) wrote to
Henry Price, Provincial Grand Master of North America, located in Boston, requesting recognition of the
lodge. There is no copy of the actual reply in existence but the records of the Grand Lodge of Massachusetts
demonstrate that the request was approved and First Lodge in Pennsylvania was “regularized”.
A good example of “private lodges licensing other lodges” is the traditional military lodge practice.
A good example in addition to African Lodge No. 1, is to be found at Albany, New York, where Lodge No.
74 IC, in the Second Battalion, 1st Royals (First Regiment of Foot Guards), issued a duplicate Warrant for
the civilians it left behind in 1758 when the Regiment was transferred to duty elsewhere during the French
and In dian W ars. It  is interesting th at in thi s case th e copy of W arrant giv en to the  ci vilian m embers
permitted them “to set (i.e. sit) and act during our absence, or until they, by our assistance, can procure a
separate W arrant for themselves from the Grand Lodge in I reland” (Italics by t he author). The Lodge at
Albany continued working until February 21, 1765, when it received recognition from the Moderns Provincial
Grand Lodge of New York in the form of Warrant No. 1 (PRNY(M) or local).


--- PAGE 12 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
  The Coloured Man in Freemasonry, by V. W . Bro. J. Lawrence Runnalls, P.G.S. (Ontario), May 6, 1964,6
Vol. 2, Paper 77, Canadian Masonic Research Association, published by The Heritage Lodge, No. 730, A.F.&A.M.,
G.R.C., 1986.
  Runnalls notes that Petitions dated March 2 and June 30, 1784 were sent to the Moderns Grand Lodge.7
6
AFRICAN LODGE, No. 459 ER(M)
After the departure of Lodge No. 441 IC, the Boston members had no masonic home. Thus they met
as a group of Masons on July 3, 1776 and formed their own Lodge under the name “African Lodge, No. 1”.
J. Lawrence Runnalls  notes that “Official recognition of the legitimacy of this Lodge was almost immediately6
made by John Rowe of Boston who was the Provincial Grand Master over North America where no other
Provincial was appointed . . . .Rowe issued a “permet” authorizing the Lodge to appear publicly as a Masonic
body in procession on St. John’s Day and to bury its dead. In essence this was a valid Charter.” It is probable
that Rowe was simply recognizing the right of military Lodge No. 441 IC, to issue the copy of their Charter
with its limitations to the civilian members who were residents of Boston and who remained behind after the
Regiment left.
In order to clothe African Lodge with the fullest masonic powers and regularity Prince Hall and the
members despatched a “prayer of Petition” dated March 6, 1784, to the Grand Lodge a t L ondon ( the
“Moderns” Grand Lodge) . On September 29, 1784, Warrant No. 459 ER  was issued for African Lodge,7
signed by the Deputy Grand Master, R. Holt, and the Grand Secretary, William White, under the authority
of the Grand Master, the Duke of Cumberland. The Charter (now held by the Prince Hall Grand Lodge F. &
A. M. of Massachusetts) gave African Lodge full authority to make masons and constitute Lodges any place
in North America. This was the first Charter or Warrant to be received in Boston from the Moderns Grand
Lodge for either white or coloured lodges.
The Warrant arrived in Boston on April 29, 1787, being delivered by Captain James Scott, brother-in-
law of John Hancock and master of the Neptune. African Lodge, No. 459 ER, was constituted on May 6,
1787, i n the G olden Fl eece T avern at No.  20 W ater St reet, Boston. ( The del ay i n tr ansmission of  t he
Warrant was likely occasioned by the Rev olutionary War.) A transcript of the Warrant is on the f ollowing
page.
Transcript of the Charter of African Lodge, No. 459 ER(M)
TO ALL AND EVERY
Our Right worshipful and loving brethren: We, Thomas Howard, Earl of Effingham Lord
Howard; etc.; Acting Grand Master, under the authority of His Royal Highness, Henry Frederick, Duke
of Cumberland, etc.; Grand Master of the Most Ancient and Honourable Society of Free and Accepted
Masons, send Greeting:
Know ye that we, at the humble petition of our Right Trusty and well beloved brethren, Prince
Hall; Boston Smith; Thomas Sanderson; and several other brethren residing in Boston, New England,
and North America do hereby constitute the said brethren into a regular Lodge of Free and Accepted
Masons, under the title or denomination for the African Lodge, to be opened in Boston, aforesaid and
do further; at their said petition and of the great confidence reposed in every one of the said above
named brethren hereby appoint the said Prince Hall to be Master; Boston Smith, Senior Warden; and
Thomas Sanderson, Junior Warden for the opening of said Lodge, and for such further time only as
shall be thought by the brethren thereof, it being our will that this, our appointment of the above


--- PAGE 13 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
7
officers, shall in no wise affect any further election of officers, of said Lodge as shall be consistent
with the Grand Laws of the society, contained in the Book of Constitutions; and we hereby will, and
require of you, the said Prince Hall; to take special care that all and every, the said brethren are to
have been regularly made Masons and that they do observe, perform, and ke ep all the rules and
others contained in the Book of Constitutions; and further, that you do from time to time cause to be
entered in a book kept for that purpose, an account of your proceedings in the Lodge, together with
all such Rules, Orders and Regulations as shall be made for the good government of the same that
in no wise you omit once in every year to send to us for our predecessors, Grand Masters, or Royland
Holt, Esq., our D eputy Grand Master for the time being an account of your said proce edings and
copies of all such Rules, Orders and Regulations as shall be made as aforesaid, together with the
list of t he members of t he Lodge, and su ch sum of m oney as may suit the circumstances of the
Lodge and reasonably be expected toward the Grand Charity.
Moreover, we will, and require of you; the said Prince Hall, as soon as conveniently may be,
to send an account in writing of what may be done by virtue of these presents.
Given at London under our hand and seal of Masonry, (SEAL) this 29th day of September,
A. L. 5784 A.D. 1784 by the Grand Master’s command.
R. HOLT,
Attest:-William White, Grand Secretary. Deputy Grand Master.
[Source: Runnals, The Coloured Man in Freemasonry, p. 11.]
For its time, African Lodge grew steadily. Runnalls notes that a list of Members of the Lodge dated
May 18, 1787, shows 18 masters, 4 “crafts” and 11 entered apprentices. Twenty-three of the names on the
list are not those of the original fifteen who had been initiated in Lodge 441 IC. Walkes notes (on page 24)
that in a letter dated June 4, 1789, from Prince Hall to R. Holt, Deputy Grand Master of the Grand Lodge of
England (the Moderns) he listed two members initiated since August 1788: John Bean and “John Marrant,
a Black Minister from home, but last from Branchtown, Nova Scotia.”
John Lane, in his Masonic Records (2nd Edition, 1895) notes an entry for African Lodge as follows:
“African Lodge. Boston, Massachusetts, U.S. of America 1784. (G.L. Warrant) 29 Sept. 1784. 459 1792 -
370. Last payment 1797. Erased in 1813.” By the time of the union of the Antients and Moderns, in 1813,
African Lodge was erased from the Register for failing to have provided returns required to Grand Lodge.
However it is to be emphasized that this was not an abnormal erasure - there were several hundreds of both
Antient and Modern lodges which were similarly erased for the same reason. The reverse situation is also
true - where Lodges and Prov incial Grand Masters were kept on the rolls for many years after they had
expired (or di ed). This situation was not peculiar to England, but is also reflected in the Regi sters of the
Grand Lodges of Ireland and Scotland.
W. Bro. Alan Tibbetts, in his March 1998 paper, Prince Hall Freemasonry in Canada, attributes the
lack of communication with London with the death of  Prince Hall. He also notes that at the Union of the
Antients and Moderns in 1813, the majority of Lodges struck off the new United Grand Lodge register were
American Lodges which had formed their own Grand Lodges and owed no allegiance across the Atlantic.
The consequence of this situation - dropped from the English register and not being accepted by the local
Grand Lod ge of  Mas sachusetts - w as t hat A frican Lodge w as cut  adri ft f rom “m ainstream” (or  w hite)
Freemasonry. In spite of this Tibbetts notes that “. . . . from 1807 to 1824 there is evidence of 142 meetings
being held and 80 new members being initiated”.


--- PAGE 14 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
8
SOME MEMBERS OF AFRICAN LODGE No. 459 ER(M)
Not all the original members of African Lodge are know n from lists sent to the M oderns’ Grand
Lodge, but many are, and include:
Prince Hall Founder of African Lodge No. 459 ER(M), Boston.
John Bean Received into African Lodge No. 459 ER(M), Boston, between August 1788 and
June 4, 1789.
John Marrant Received into African Lodge No. 459 ER(M), Boston, between August 1788 and
June 4, 1 789. Bo rn New York City, Ju ne 15, 1 765, ta ken by his m other to  St.
Augustine by his mother for schooling. Became an itinerant preacher among the
Indian tribes in and around New York State. Joined the English forces as a sailor,
serving for six years and eleven months, partly of which was on board the Princess
Amelia du ring which ti me h e p articipated i n th e engagement of  Do gger Bank,
August 5, 1781. Ordained in London on May 15, 1787 and returned to America.
Joined African Lodge and preached a sermon to the Lodge on June 24, 1789. On
February 5, 1790 he sailed for London where he died in 1791. He was interred in
the Burial Grounds on Church Street, Islington.
Prince Saunders Received into African Lodge No. 459 ER(M), Boston, in 1809. Studied at Dartmouth
and became a teacher in the African School in Boston. Travelled to England with
appropriate introductions as “. . . a delegate of the Masonic Lodge of Africans, who
held their Charter from England . .  . .” and m et the Grand Master (the Duke of
Sussex, Grand Master of the Moderns). After his return to America he became a
member of the African Lodge of Philadelphia, a lay reader in St. Thomas Episcopal
Church and was the founder (and active member) of the Belles Lettres Society of
Boston. Travelled to England in 1812/13, met Wilberforce (the Prime Minister) who
sent Saunders to Haiti to organize an education system and whose leader, Emperor
Christophe returned him eventually to England as the Emperor’s Envoy. Returned
to Haiti and became Attorney General. He died in Port au Prince in 1839.
Richard Allen Probably received into African Lodge No. 459 ER(M), Boston, date unknown. Born
in Philadelphia and s old as a s lave to a f armer in Dov er, Delaware. Bec ame a
religious worked and converted many, including his owner, who later freed him. In
1784 he was accepted by th e Methodist Conference as a “ minister of promise”.
Founder (1787) and first Bishop (1816) of the African Methodist Episcopal Church
in Philadelphia. Ordained a Deacon in 1799 and an Elder in 1816. 
Absalom Jones Probably received into African Lodge No. 459 ER(M), Boston, date unknown. First
Master of African Lodge of Pennsylvania and First Grand Master of the Prince Hall
Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania. Born a slave in Sussex, Delaware, on November 6,
1746; bro ught to Ph iladelphia b y his  m aster w ho op ened a s tore i n 1 762. He
learned to read and write and, by 1766, attended night school. Secured the release
of his wife to f ree status in 1770, and hi s own release in 1784. By  1787 h e had
become one of the substantial coloured citizens of Philadelphia and a leader among
the coloured members of St. George’s Methodist Episcopal Church. Ordained a
reader of divine service and a Deacon by Bishop White in August 1795. In 1804 he
became the first ordained coloured Episcopal priest in the United States. Founder


--- PAGE 15 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
9
of St. Thomas Episcopal Church, Philadelphia.
James Forten Probably received into African Lodge No. 459 ER(M), Boston, date unknown and
probably a member of  Af rican Lodge of  Pennsylvania At the age of 14, J ames
Forten sailed with Louis Decatur on the Royal Louis as a powder-boy during the
Revolutionary War. He was captured and offered a chance to go to England but
refused. He invented a dev ice t hat ai ded i n cont rolling s ails and be came a
millionaire, employing about 50 Negro and White workers in sail making factory. He
financially supported the abolitionist cause and became President of Philadelphia’s
Moral reform Society and helped recruit 2,500 Negroes to defend the city during the
War of 1812.


--- PAGE 16 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
10
AFRICAN GRAND LODGE OF NOR TH AMERICA FORMED
In 1791, Prince Hall, as Master of African Lodge No. 459 ER(M), Boston, called a general assembly
of the three coloured Lodges then in existence—African Lodge, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Hiram Lodge,
Providence, Rhode Island; and Af rican Lodge, Boston, Massachusetts, to es tablish a Grand Lodge. He
followed the prevailing masonic custom of having at least three Lodges joining together to form a Grand
Lodge. On June 24, 1791 the African Grand Lodge of North America was formed and constituted at Boston.
Prince Hall was elected as Grand Master, holding the chair until his death in 1807. On the web site for Prince
Hall Freemasonry in the Uni ted States it is reported that “Prince Hall was appointed a Provincial Grand
Master in 1791 by HRH the Prince of Wales.” It is unclear which event occurred first.
Under the authority of  the Constitutions of the new Af rican Grand Lodge, updated and rev ised
Charters were granted to:
C African Lodge, No. 2, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, on March 22, 1797; and
C Hiram Lodge, No. 3, Providence, Rhode Island, on March 23, 1797.
Both these Lodges acted, in turn, as Mother Lodges and issued Charters to other Negro Lodges throughout
the United States until the reorganization of 1808.


--- PAGE 17 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
  Quotation provided by R. W. Bro. W allace McLeod of the Grand Lodge of Canada in the Province of8
Ontario.
11
RELATIONS WITH THE GRAND LODGE OF MASSACHUSETTS
S. Brent Morris notes: “In 1792 when the Grand Lodge of Massachusetts was formed, African Lodge
did not join but remained attached to England. This could be due to loyalty to the premier Grand Lodge or
to racism from the newly formed Grand Lodge. However, the Grand Lodge of Massachusetts also didn’t
recognize St. Andrews Lodge which had a Scottish Charter” (italics by the author). There is no evidence on
either side that African Lodge was even invited to participate in the events leading up to the creation of the
Grand Lodge of Massachusetts. John Eliot, Grand Chaplain of the Grand Lodge of Massachusetts, wrote in
1785 that  “.  .  .  white m asons [ who are] n ot [any] more skilled . .  .  t han thei r bl ack bret hren, will not
acknowledge them . . . . The truth is that they are ashamed on being on a equality with blacks.”8
As noted of pages 104 and 105 of Stalwart Builders, The Grand Lodge of Masons in Massachusetts:
1733-1970, t he i ssue of  Pr ince Hal l F reemasonry w as f ormally rai sed w ith the G rand Lodge  of
Massachusetts at the Quarterly Communication of September 9, 1816 when: “A Communication was made
by R.  W . Henry F owle stating that  he had  been inf ormed by s everal m embers of  t he G rand Lodge of
Pennsylvania, that they understood, that the Grand Lodge of Massachusetts, had Charter’d a Lodge of Black
Masons, & that they hold communication with them, & sanction their proceedings - therefore, Voted, that a
committee be appointed to take said communication into consideration and report thereon.” (1815-1825 p.
58). It was not until June 9, 1817 that the Grand Lodge of Massachusetts advised Pennsylvania that “. . . .
they have never granted a Charter, to Black Masons . . . . That they have never heard of a Black Mason’s
requesting to v isit a Lodge under thi s jurisdiction . . . . That they have never countenanced the v isits of
Masons to the African Lodge . . . . They have been informed however that prompted by Curiosity several
reputable Masons have visited the African Lodge and examined their Charter, records and mode of working,
and from them they learn that their Charter was obtained from the Grand Lodge of England, about the close
of the Revolution . . . . The Grand Lodge of Massachusetts know nothing more of the African Lodge . . . .”.
The a uthor o f Stalwart Bu ilders t hen notes  in parentheses t hat “ (The Engl ish chart er m entioned w as
cancelled by t he Grand Lodge of England in 1813). T his would seem to be i ts own commentary on t he
attitude of regular Freemasonry to the Black Masonry of that day.”


--- PAGE 18 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
12
AFRICAN GRAND LODGE BECOMES PRINCE HALL GRAND LODGE
On June 24, 1808, Nero Prince, Deputy Grand Master of the African Grand Lodge of North America
called an assembly of the three lodges at Boston to elect a new Grand Master and to act on a resolution to
change the name of the Grand Lodge to “Prince Hall Grand Lodge F. & A. M. of Massachusetts” as a tribute
to their first Grand Master who had died the previous year. Nero Prince was elected Grand Master and the
name change w as unani mously approv ed. Runnal ls notes  t hat t he Pr ince Hal l G rand Lodge  w as not
organized with any pres cribed terr itorial j urisdiction as i s usual and that  t his would later be v iewed as
violating the doctrine of “exclusive territorial jurisdiction”.
As Taylor notes, since its f ormation, the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of  Massachusetts has had a
continuous existence. It has met regularly in convention, published its proceedings, chartered new Lodges
in a regular manner, enforced Masonic Discipline and maintained fraternal relations with other Grand Lodges.
In short, it has exercised all the prerogatives and privileges inherent in a Grand Lodge.


--- PAGE 19 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
  Such an effort to create a “Supreme” Grand Lodge had already been tried at the close of the Revolution9
with Massachusetts Masons asking George Washington to preside as “Supreme” Grand Master over such a
gathering. Needless to say, other Grand Lodges resisted the concept.
  Stalwart Builders, p. 190-191.10
13
GROWTH OF PRINCE HALL FREEMASONRY
United States
Growth across the United States has not been without problems for Prince Hall Freemasons. Walkes
notes that the growth of coloured people in the US reflects the growth of a small group of  free men and
women of colour in an atmosphere of slavery based on colour. The history of coloured people in the US
shows their strong efforts towards education, opposition to slavery and slave stealing and selling, and a rise
of race c onsciousness and l eadership. These ef forts hav e not onl y adv anced this group of  people, but
provided untold benefits to the country at large.
A “growth spurt” to Prince Hall Freemasonry was felt about 1810 with the formation of Union Lodge
No. 2 (Pennsylvania); in 1811 with Laurel Lodge No. 5 (New York); in 1814 with Phoenix Lodge No. 6 (New
York); and in 1812 with Boyer Lodge No. 1 (New York). Then in 1815, in Philadelphia, the four Pennsylvania
Lodges left the Massachusetts Jurisdiction and formed what they termed “First African Independent Grand
Lodge F. & A. M.” While there was again continued growth, it was not until 1845 that the third African Grand
Lodge was started—in the S tate of  New York . G rowth m ay hav e been too rapi d to ensur e that  a hi gh
standard of work was followed and in the two year period from 1845 to 1847 some Lodges broke away or
were expelled by t he “regular” African Grand Lodges. In 1847 the National Compact Grand Lodge was
formed to reunite black Masonry but it e xacerbated the problems and splits already at work, by trying to
become a supreme Grand Lodge over all the other African Grand Lodges . The difficulties would persist until9
1875 when the National Compact was finally dissolved.
During 1867-8, eight “coloured men” received their degrees in St. Andrews Lodge in Boston. In 1871
St. Andrew s approv ed a recom mendation “t o the f avourable cons ideration of  t he G rand Lodge  of
Massachusetts” of the Petition of seven coloured brethren, “all initiated , passed and raised in the Lodge of
St. Andrew, to form a new Lodge to be called Thistle Lodge.” In the Minutes of the Lodge of St. Andrew dated
October 15, 1870, the Lodge was advised that the Grand Master had confirmed that a Dispensation to form
a coloured Lodge in Boston would be approved. At the Annual Communication of December 13, 1871, “The
Grand Master presented the application of Alfred R. Lewis and seven others of Boston for a Dispensation
for a new Lodge to be called Thistle Lodge, and stated that the circumstances of this Petition were such that
he desired to take the advice of the Grand Lodge upon the propriety of granting the same. R. W. Sereno D.
Nickerson moved that the petition, not being in proper form, the petitioners had leave to withdraw . . . .”.10
Lawrence Runnalls notes that one of the early coloured members of St. Andrews Lodge, Boston was
Joshua B. Smith, who was raised i n 1867 and affiliated with A delphi Lodge, S outh B oston. He was a
renowned caterer, became Warden of the Lodge, a Royal Arch Mason, Knight Templar and 33° Scottish Rite
Mason. For the 1873-4 term he represented the City of Cambridge in the Massachusetts Legislature.
At the Masonic Congress held in Paris in 1855, an American Mason made a Motion to the effect that
European Lodges should deny admission to coloured masons out of deference to American feeling on the
subject. The Motion was rejected partly on the grounds of attempting to dictate masonic and social customs


--- PAGE 20 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
  On the Register of the Grand Lodge of New Jersey.11
14
and also because the German and French Grand Lodges recognized the coloured Grand Lodge of Haiti
whose delegate had a seat in the Congress. Over time the various Prince Hall Grand Lodges in the United
States would seek, and usually receive, recognition from many of the European Grand Lodges including
England, Ireland, Scotland, France, Germany, Italy, to name a few.
Lawrence Runnalls notes that many Lodges welcomed coloured brethren and initiates into their
ranks, including Alpha Lodge, No. 116, GRNJ  which had been established in 1871. As soon as the Warrant11
was issued (the Petition having been signed by ten white men) twelve coloured men and one white m en
Petitioned for initiation and all but one were admitted. The first initiate, Bro. Abram T. Cooke (a coloured
man) became WM in 1878. Since 1929 Runnalls reports that the Lodge has been exclusively composed of
coloured brethren.
The earliest State Grand Lodge of Prince Hall Freemasonry was formed on March 14, 1845, in New
York State by Boyer Lodge, No. 1 (P.H.); Celestial Lodge, No. 2 (P.H.), New York City; Rising Sun Lodge,
No. 3 (P.H.), Brooklyn and Hiram Lodge, No. 4 (P.H.), New York City. The original name of the Grand Lodge
was “Boyer Grand Lodge of the State of New York”, but it was changed in 1944 to Prince Hall Grand Lodge
of the State of New York. Taylor notes that this is the first and only legally constituted Masonic jurisdiction
of coloured masons in the State of New York, and it is the only one that traces its descent directly f rom
African Lodge, No. 459 ER(M), of 1787.
At the commencement of the American Civil War, President Abraham Lincoln was reluctant to use
Negroes in the military, but by the close of 1862, the military situation was discouraging for the northern
States. In late 1862, Governor John Albion Andrew of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, in one of his
frequent visits with his personal friend, Andrew Hayden, Grand Master of the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of
Massachusetts, di scussed the di fficulties f acing the Nort h i n the w ar and recei ved encouragem ent f or
Negroes to support these efforts. Eventually Governor Andrew was given authority by the Secretary of War
to seek Black volunteers to fill the 54th Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry Regiment, many of the volunteers
coming from states other than Massachusetts. Governor Andrew was strongly supported by a number of
eminent Prince Hall Masons, including Grand Master Hayden, Bro. Martin Delany (a PM of St. Cyprian Lodge
No. 13, Pittsburgh, and who became the first black Major in the US Army), Bro. John Mercer Langston (of
St. Mark’s Lodge No. 7, Columbus, Ohio and later a Congressman). It is not surprising that the first Prince
Hall Masonic Lodge attached to any military unit was located in the 54th Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry
Regiment although very little information about this (and other Prince Hall Lodges in military units) has ever
been made available.
After the Civil War the National Grand Lodge or Compact of Prince Hall Grand Lodges established
regulations for the formation of Lodges in military units which are similar in many respects to those followed
by the Irish, Scottish and English Grand Lodges. These include (1) the commanding officer of the unit
requesting a Charter must approve the formation of the Lodge; (2) only the members of the military unit
could be enrolled and initiated; (3) when outside its approving Grand Authority, the Lodge must conduct itself
appropriately to the authorities in whose Jurisdiction it is working; and (4) when the military unit is disbanded
the Charter must be returned “safe and sound” to the issuing authority.
It was not until a conference of Prince Hall Grand Masters held at Hot Springs, Arkansas, in January
1944, that a resolution was approved that all coloured Grand Lodges change their corporate title to read
“Prince Hall Grand Lodge F. & A. M. of the State of ----------”.
By 1964, according to Lawrence Runnalls, there were 38 Prince Hall Grand Lodges in the United


--- PAGE 21 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
  The Grand Lodge of Nova Scotia was formed when the Scottish Lodges in that Province undertook to12
form themselves into a Grand Lodge. English Lodges abstained from any involvement or transfer of allegiance until
United Grand Lodge recognized the new Grand Lodge.
15
States and ad ditional ones i n Canada  and Li beria, W est A frica. The l argest was Mi ssissippi with 586
subordinate Lodges and the smallest was Rhode Island with five.
Scotland
Early in the twentieth century, Waverley Lodge, No. 597 SC, Edinburgh, Scotland, admitted ten
coloured brethren. Al l received the ir degrees in May and June 1904. T hey were not Scotti sh but were
members of a travelling theatrical company who wished to join the Craft: six were from New York and one
each from Illinois, Alabama, Indiana, and Ontario. There have been no Prince Hall Lodges, as such, formed
within Scotland.
Canada
Lawrence Runnalls notes that in Nova Scotia, five coloured men joined Royal Sussex Lodge, No.
704 ER (now No. 6, GRNS), Halifax in 1855. They applied for a Dispensation to form a new Lodge to be
called “Union” (to honour the Union of the Antients and Moderns Grand Lodges in 1813) and one was issued
in 1855 by Alexander Keith. On December 3, 1856, Warrant No. 993 was issued by United Grand Lodge.
With the English renumbering of 1863, Warrant No. 693 was issued for the Lodge. Union Lodge never joined
the (third) Provincial Grand Lodge of Nova Scotia (1829-66) when it was formed, although it worked in amity
with it and participated in a number of activities. When United Grand Lodge withdrew its objections to the
Grand Lodge of Nova Scotia in 1868/9 , Union Lodge joined the new organization. When new Warrants12
were issued based on seniority of origin, the Lodge became Union Lodge, No. 18 GRNS. This Lodge is listed
in the Nova Scotia Gazetteer of 1870-71 as working in Halifax. Runnalls notes that due to irregularities in
accepting coloured candidates regardless of their place of residence (a Canadian province, in the United
States or t he W est Indies) and carel ess record keeping, the Warrant was forfeited in 1916. M ost of the
members were given clear Demits and permitted to join other Lodges.
In Canada there has been a close network of coloured masonic lodges covering the country. In
Canada there is no colour bar, but even here there is a reluctance by many to recognize and interact with
Prince Hall Freemasons. 
Alan Tibbetts credits the “underground railroad”, working in the period 1833-1860’s and resulting in
the transport of thousands of American negroes fleeing slavery into Canada, as having a great impact on
the beginnings of Prince Hall Freemasonry in this country, particularly Ontario. Thus it was that, outside the
Maritimes, Prince Hall Freemasonry m ade its debut i n 1851 when T. C. Harnley was deputized by t he
National Com pact Grand Lodge of  New Jersey (PHM) to erect Lodges in the P rovince of  Canada (i .e.
Ontario and Quebec). The first Lodge organized was Mount Olive, No. 1, Hamilton, under authority of a
Charter dated December 27, 1852, (still active as of 1965); followed by Victoria, No. 2, St. Catharines (June
7, 1853; later lapsed) and Olive Branch, No. 3, Windsor (October 1854; which also lapsed). On August 25,
1856, in Hamilton (less than a year after the formation of the Grand Lodge of Ancient Free and Accepted
Masons of Canada and thirteen months before the formation of the parallel Ancient Grand Lodge of Free
and Accepted Masons of Canada) these three Prince Hall Lodges were organized into the Widow’s Son


--- PAGE 22 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
  One of the reasons that the Grand Lodge A. F. & A. M. of Canada in the Province of Ontario will not13
change its name to the Grand Lodge A. F. & A. M. of Ontario (or the Province of Ontario) is that the latter name has
been adopted twice by schismatic Lodges in the Province and it is not considered appropriate to use the name.
Also, from a political perspective, it was formed as the Grand Lodge at a tim e when the political entity “Canada”
referred to the Provinces of Canada East and Canada West, and is, therefore, entirely appropriate and a very real
matter. The fact that, in 1867, the Dominion of Canada was formed, of which the new Provinces of Quebec and
Ontario were a part, does not change the reality of 1855.
16
Grand Lodge of the Province of Canada with Benjamin F. Stewart, Deputy Grand Master of the National
Compact G rand Lodge  of  New Jers ey as  t he f irst G rand Mas ter a nd Joseph F.  O ’Banyoun as G rand
Secretary. As Alan Tibbetts remarks “Curiously there was no representative of the GL of New Jersey, but
the Grand Master of the New York National Compact Grand Lodge Paul Drayton and his Grand Secretary
John Isaacs officiated at the consecration.” He also notes that it was a refusal to accept blacks into Ontario
Lodges that had led to the formation of a parallel organization for themselves.
Between 1856 and 1866 there were two Grand Masters: the first Grand Master was Joseph Adams
of Hamilton and the second was Thomas Kinnard. Walkes notes that there are no surviving records, copies
of Warrants, or minutes of meetings, covering the first ten years of the Widow’s Son Grand Lodge of the
Province of Canada, although in 1866 it was resolved to print the minutes in a book of Proceedings. In 1866
Bro. Rev. Benjamin Stewart became the third Grand Master when Bro. Kinnard returned to the United States
at the end of the Civil War. By 1866 there were six Lodges in the Jurisdiction: Mount Olive No. 1 (Hamilton);
Victoria No. 2 (St. Catharines); Shaftesbury No. 6 (London, 1861); Kinnard No. 7 (Ingersoll, 1865); Lincoln
No. 8 (Amherstburg, 1864); and North American No. 9 (Windsor, 1863). Three Lodges had closed: Olive
Branch No. 3, Windsor (which had moved to Hamilton and closed); King Hiram No. 4, Toronto; and Prince
Hall No. 5, Chatham. The last had failed because the American National Compact Grand Master had denied
the legitimacy of the Widow’s Son Grand Lodge of the Province of Canada and created much turmoil in the
new organization, especially so close to a growing American area. 
Growth from 1867 onwards was seen: St. John’s No. 9 PHNewYork was formed at Chatham probably
in 1869 and by 1870 North American No. 9 (at Windsor) requested a new number as “11” to avoid confusion
with St. John’s. In the late 1860’s Mt. Carmel No. 10 (Buxton); Mt. Moriah No. 11 (Dresden); Salem No. 12
(Windsor); Meridien Sun No. 13 (Toronto) and Progress No. 12 (Hamilton); were established. However, the
proliferation of Lodges holding warrants from the National Compact Grand Lodges of New Jersey, New York
and Michigan created confusion and did not strengthen the growth of Prince Hall Freemasonry in Ontario.
Following the formation of the Dominion of Canada on July 1, 1867, and the creation of separate
provinces for Ontario and Quebec, a reorganization of Prince Hall Freemasonry was undertaken. On October
22, 1872, a meeting of all Prince Hall Lodges in the Province was called and attended by representatives
from 10 Lodges holding their authorities from three Jurisdictions. The fifty delegates dissolved the Widow’s
Son Grand Lodge of the Province of Canada and formed the Grand Lodge of Free and Accepted Masons
of the Province of Ontario, electing the Rev. Benjamin Stewart as first Grand Master. Three District Deputy
Grand Masters were elected for new Districts—West, Central and East. The Grand Master of Ohio, Bro.
William Boyd installed all the officers. All Ontario Lodges surrendered their Warrants and received new ones.
A further name change occurred in 1919 when it became “The Most Worshipful Prince Hall Grand Lodge
F. and A. M. (P.H.M.) of the Province of Ontario” . 13
By 1874, Br o. Benjamin Stewart retired as Grand Master, Prince Hall Royal Arch Masonry was
officially formed, and a Committee of Foreign Correspondence made its first report regarding recognition
and non-recognition of the new Grand Lodge. But general economic downturns and a smallpox epidemic
took their toll on Ontario Prince Hall Freemasonry and by 1890 only three Lodges were active at G rand
Lodge: Mt. Olive No. 1; St. John’s No. 9 and North American No. 11. Some strengthening occurred that year


--- PAGE 23 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
17
when the Grand Chaplain of United Grand Lodge visited as a demonstration that England recognized this
Grand Lodge as a legitimate one. But by 1900 there w ere still only five active Lodges: Mt. Olive No. 1;
Lincoln No. 8; St. John’s No. 9; North American No. 11 and Corinthian No. 16 (a new Lodge in Toronto).
In 1 900 t he Gr and L odge o f Fr ee a nd A ccepted M asons ( P.H.M.) o f t he P rovince o f On tario
requested recogni tion f rom t he G rand Lo dge of Ancient F ree and Acc epted M asons of  Canada in t he
Province of Ontario and was refused. Rev. James C. Richards of Chatham was elected for the first of 25
years as Grand Master.
The celebration of the first 50 years of Prince Hall Freemasonry in Ontario in 1906 was marred by
a scathing attack on the f raternity. The Prince Hall Grand Secretary had written to hi s counterpart in the
Grand Lodge A. F. & A. M. of Canada in the Province of Ontario, to again request recognition, and had been
informed th at Pr ince H all Freemasonry was “c landestine”—not o nly n ot re gular o r le gitimate, b ut w ith
implications of dishonesty and subversion. Charges and countercharges ensued with the result that Masons
in both organizations were expelled or resigned in anger and frustration. In spite of the adversity (or perhaps
because of i t) Prince Hall Freemasonry continued to grow: by 1914 there was a new Lodge in Toronto
(Eureka No. 20) and the first Lodge in Winnipeg was formed (Regent No. 5, PHM Minnesota).
A further name change occurred in 1919 when the Grand Lodge became “The Most Worshipful
Prince Hall Grand Lodge F. & A. M. of Ontario”. 
The period of the Depression, World War II and the immediate post-war economic expansion saw
black Freemasonry in decline and expansion, much the same as white Freemasonry in Ontario. Expansion
to Quebec was not achieved until the mid fifties with the formation of Mt. Moriah No. 24, Montreal. This
necessitated a change in title of the Jurisdiction to the “Grand Lodge Prince Hall Affiliation F. & A. M. of
Ontario and Jurisdiction” so as to include the Quebec brethren in the title.
As of the early 1980’s there were fourteen Prince Hall Lodges holding allegiance to the Grand Lodge
Prince Hall Affiliation F. & A. M. of Ontario and Jurisdiction, the largest number ever to operate at any one
time, including:
C Mount Olive, No. 1, Hamilton;
C American Star, No. 4, Windsor;
C Lincoln, No. 8, Amherstburg;
C St. John’s, No. 9, Chatham (the only one to have worked continuously since its formation in 1866);
C Eureka, No. 20, Toronto;
C Scenic City, No. 22, Owen Sound;
C Mount Moriah, No. 24, Montreal;
C Shaftesbury, No. 25, London;
C Solomon, No. 26, Ottawa;
C Utopia, No. 27, Mississauga;


--- PAGE 24 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
18
C St. Andrew’s No. 28, Toronto;
C Elim, No. 29, Scarborough;
C King David, No. 30, Montreal; and 
C Maple Leaf, No. 31, Montreal.
A further four other Canadian Negro Lodges were working as of 1965: Alta, No. 21 (Runnalls fails
to mention location) and Victoria and Resolution, No. 16, New Westminster (both holding authority under the
jurisdiction of the Grand Lodge of Washington); Regent, No. 5, Winnipeg (under Mi nnesota); and Mount
Messiah, No. 87, Halifax (under New York).


--- PAGE 25 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
19
RECOGNITION OF PRINCE HALL FREEMASONRY BY THE
GRAND LODGE OF CANADA IN THE PROVINCE OF ONTARIO
Formally, the issue of Prince Hall masonry appears to have been first raised at the Grand Lodge A.
F. & A. M. of Canada in the Province of Ontario in 1899 when the Grand Lodge of Washington recognized
the Grand Lodge of Prince Hall Masons of the State of Washington, and supported a request for recognition
by other Grand Lodges. Opposition to recognition is recorded as having arisen not  because Prince Hall
Masons were col oured people, but  f rom t he f act t hat recogni tion v iolated t he (Am erican) Landm ark of
“Exclusive Jurisdiction” in that it was considered as flagrantly violating the territoriality of the Grand Lodge
of Washington. This would appear to be pretty thin ice for such a position on two points. Firstly, the United
Grand Lodge has never appeared to be bound by exclusive jurisdiction in many parts of the globe, even
today. Secondly, if two organizations like the Grand Lodge of the State of Washington and the Prince Hall
Grand Lodge of the State of Washington mutually agree to co-exist in the same geopolitical area, this should
be accepted by those outside the area. Such was not the case and in July 1899 the G rand Lodge  of
Washington withdrew requests it had made for the recognition of the Grand Lodge of Prince Hall Masons -
after 17 Grand Lodges had broken off fraternal relations with the Grand Lodge of Washington.
There were four other arguments against recognition of Prince Hall Lodges which were made then,
and even as late as the 1990’s, and which can be considered spurious, including (1) the original initiations
were not proper [they were legitimate and had taken place in a properly Warranted Lodge holding an Irish
Warrant and this legitimacy was recognized when the Moderns Grand Lodge issued its Warrant]; (2) the
Lodge was struck from the rolls of the new United Grand Lodge [many lodges went dormant for varying
periods of  t ime and w ere of ten res tarted as  i f t hey had conti nued w orking and were not c onsidered
illegitimate so long as the Warrant had never been surrendered and secondly, it took England fifty years to
re-register and s ort out t he existence of all its Lodges following the 1813 unif ication]; (3) A frican Lodge
formed other Lodges [true, it followed tried and true masonic practice of its day, none of its Lodges were
formed with less than the required number of qualified masons as petitioners]; and (4) African Lodge formed
a Grand Lodge [true, the first Prince Hall Grand Lodge was not formed until after there were the minimum
three lodges in existence to create it, which was, and still is, the usual procedure].
The issue would lie in darkness for ninety-three years, until the Conference of Grand and District
Grand Lodges of Canada, held at Winnipeg on March 21, 1992, unanimously recommended the acceptance
of Prince Hall Grand Lodges as approved by the Conference of Prince Hall Grand Lodges as being regular
Masonic Grand Lodges. A f ew weeks later M. W. Bro. Norman E. B yrne formed a special Committee to
report to Grand Lodge. At the Annual Communication of 1992 this Committee recommended that:
“ The Grand Lodge A. F. & A. M. of Canada in the Province of Ontario hereby acknowledges
the legitimacy or origin of the Masonic Grand Lodges of the Prince Hall Affiliation (specifically
those that are approved by the Conference of Prince Hall Grand Lodges), and wishes to go on the
record as recognizing the contribution that Prince Hall Masons have made to the quality of life in
the world at large, and particularly in this country. (This resolution refers only to historical matters,
and does not authorize intervisitation). It is recommended further that this Grand Lodge continue
to pursue a maintenance of this relationship.”
Up to 1997/8, 36 major Grand Lodges had recognized legitimate Prince Hall Grand Lodges and their
member l odges and ha d perm itted i ntervisitation, i ncluding 26 i n the Uni ted St ates (A laska, Ar izona,
California, Col orado, Connect icut, H awaii, I daho, I llinois, Kans as, Mai ne, M assachusetts, Mi chigan,
Minnesota, Nebraska, New Hampshire, New Mexico, North Dakota, Ohio, Oregon, Pennsylvania, South


--- PAGE 26 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
20
Dakota, Utah, Vermont, Washington, Wisconsin and Wyoming), England, Ireland and Queensland. Across
Canada, recognition had been given by t he Grand Lodges of Alberta, British Columbia, Manitoba, New
Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island, Quebec and Saskatchewan, leaving Ontario and the newly
formed Grand Lodge of Newfoundland “outside the pale”.
In 1994 the Grand Lodge of Canada in the Province of Ontario decided (informally) that visitations
to Lodges, Districts and th e Grand Lodge of  Quebec would not be al lowed in either direction, and t hat
visitations on an individual basis only would be permitted. WHY? Because the G rand Lodge of Quebec
(along with a large number of other masonic jurisdictions, had given formal recognition to the Grand Lodge
of Prince H all M asons.) To day, o f c ourse, ma sonic in tercourse h as b een r einstated a nd is  p ermitted,
although it is not actively encouraged.
The June 1999 Grand Lodge Bulletin of the Grand Lodge of Alberta (Vol. 64, No. 6) contains a
summary of the 17th Annual Conference of Grand Lodges of Canada. Part of the summary reads: “. . . . A
round table discussion took place on the matter of Prince Hall Masonry and the recognition of these Lodges
in various Jurisdictions. It became apparent t hat the incorporation document of each G rand Lodge was
unique to their own area and while some claimed authority over certain geographical parts of the country,
others simply made reference to the jurisdiction over Masons who were members of a specific Grand Lodge.
Within Prince Hall Masonry itself there are those jurisdictions who do not recognize other Prince Hall Lodges.
The consensus was that the matter receive ongoing attention with open dialogue to help resolve t he
complexity of the various issues” (italics by the author).
In the evolution of societies change may come in a cataclysmic explosion such as the atomic bomb
on Hiroshima and Nagasaki which changed forever the form of dictatorial-monarchical government in Japan,
or in a much longer gentle evolution. But survival of all species depends to a great extent on the ability to
adapt and accept change. It has been no different for Freemasonry in Ontario.
At the Annual Communication of July 22-23, 2005 of the Grand Lodge A.F. & A.M. of Canada in the
Province of Ontario the Grand Master, M. W. Bro. Donald H. Mumby addressed the Assembly with these
words:
“Throughout the past two years M. W. Bro. J. Halstead, Grand Master of Prince Hall Free and
Accepted Mas ons i n the P rovince of  O ntario and j urisdictions, and I hav e been in regul ar
communication. Through him an invitation was extended to all Prince Hall Masons to attend the
June 25, 2005, picnic hosted by 7 Toronto Districts in celebration of our sesquicentennial. This
picnic replaced, for this year only, the brotherhood Barbecue usually held in Windsor. I am pleased
to note that not only was the picnic a success, but a goodly number of Prince Hall Brethren were
present.
     I a m now pleased to report that, effective immediately, full right of reciprocal visitation with
Prince Hall  Free and Accepted Masons within this jurisdiction is authorized. This move has been
fully endorsed by the Grand Master of Prince Hall Free and Accepted Masons in the Province of
Ontario and jurisdictions.
     A committee composed of an equal number of members from the Grand Lodge of Canada in
the Province of Ontario and the Grand Lodge of Prince Hall Free and Accepted Masons in the
Province of Ontario and jurisdictions will be established to explore future paths that may be taken.”


--- PAGE 27 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
21
SOURCES
Prince Hall Freemasonry, by Fred C. Taylor, 633 North Oak St., Buffalo 3, New York, October 1963.
Prince Hall Masonry - Ontario 1852-1933, by Arlie C. Robbins, July 1980, Copyright 303361, File
211891.
The High Degrees in the United States 1730-1830, S. Brent Morris, FPS, BF, in the 1998 Blue Friar
Lecture as published in The Philalethes, Vol LI, Number 2, April 1998.
Thomas Carri ck m anuscript ent itled “The Constit utions of  St . John’s Lodge” , reprinted by t he
Masonic Book Club in 1994. 
Masonic Records, by John Lane, 2nd Edition, 1895, London, publisher unknown.
Stalwart Builders, The Grand Lodge of M assachusetts 1733-1970, by M . W . Bro. Rev . Thomas
Sherrard Roy, Published by the Masonic Education and Charity Trust, 1971.
The Coloured Man in Freemasonry, by V. W. Bro. J. Lawrence Runnalls, P.G.S. (Ontario), May 6,
1964, Vol. 2, Paper 77, Canadian Masonic Research Association, published by The Heritage Lodge,
No. 730, A.F.&A.M., G.R.C., 1986.
Prince Hall Masonry in Canada, presentation notes by W. Bro. Alan Tibbetts, March 3, 1998.
Prince Hall Grand Lodges, by John Wheatley, Article in Freemasonry Today, Autumn 1999, Issue
10, published by Freemasonry Today Limited, 87 Guildhall Street, Bury St. Edmonds, Suffolk IP33
1PU, UK.
Black Squ are & Co mpass: 20 0 Ye ars of Pri nce Ha ll Freema sonry, b y Joseph A. W alkes, Jr .,
published  by Macoy Publishing & Masonic Supply Co. Inc., Richmond, Virginia 23228, 1979, ISBN
0-88053-061-8, L.C. Catalogue Card No. 79-112352.
Prince Hall: Myths, Legends and Facts, Compiled by Aubrey Brown, MPS, Kevin Gembarosky, MPS,
David Gray, MPS and Nel son King, FPS, as published in The Philalethes, Vol LIII, Num ber 5,
October 2000.
Irish Masonic Records by Philip Crossle, 1979, published in manuscript form by the Grand Lodge
of Ireland.
R. W . Bro. Keit h Cochrane, CD-ROM (June  2000 and Fall  2001) Update of Crossle’s Mas onic
Records.
The Master-Mason-At-Arms, A Short Study of Freemasonry in the Armed Forces, Bro. Frederick
Smyth in his  Prestonian Lecture for 1990 as reprinted in the Transactions of the Quatuor Coronati
Lodge.
Some Notes on Irish Military Warrants, by V.W. Bro. R. E. Parkinson, as printed in The Lodge of
Research, No. C.C., Ireland, Transactions For the Years 1949-1957.
History of the Grand Lodge of Free and Accepted Masons of Ireland, Vol. I, 1925.


--- PAGE 28 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
22
The Poor Common Soldier, A Study of Irish Ambulatory Warrants, by Bro. John Heron Lepper, as
printed in the Transactions of Quatuor Coronati Lodge, 1925.
History of Freemasonry, by Robert Freke Gould, 3rd Edition, 1886.
The Master-Mason-At-Arms, A Short Study of Freemasonry in the Armed Forces, Bro. Frederick
Smyth, Prestonian Lecture for 1990, as reprinted in the Transactions of Quatuor Coronati Lodge,
1990, London.
Masonic Records 1717-1894, by John Lane, 2nd Edition, London, 1895.
Flags of Masonry in the line Regiments of the British Army, by W. Bro. Ray Sheppard, P.M. 322 I.C.,
September 2002, notes on Lodges in the 38th Foot.


--- PAGE 29 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
23
HISTORIES OF PRINCE HALL LODGES
The following section contains information on Prince Hall Lodges. These are organized by Country
(although only a start has been made on Canada and the United States) and by Province or State. T he
Lodges are listed in order of the date of their formation and such information as is available from published
material is used. No importance has been attached to the re-use of numbers for Lodges, and care must be
exercised by the reader to distinguish between the same number being used by different Jurisdictions, and
the re-use of the numbers by one (or another Jurisdiction).
There is no known central location from which to obtain information on Lodge histories and the notes
assembled here will be updated over time as new information comes to light.


--- PAGE 30 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
24


--- PAGE 31 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
  Sergeant John Batt had an interesting career. According to W. Bro. Ray Sheppard, the Regimental14
Muster Rolls (held at the PRO, Kew, London) indicate that Batt was d ischarged on February 3, 1777, that he
enlisted on February 20, 1778 into Henley’s Regiment (an American unit) at Boston, and then deserted the
Regiment on June 10, 1778.
  The total number of newly initiated African-Americans is 15 as shown by S. Brent Morris, FPS, BF, in15
the 1998 Blue Friar Lecture The High Degrees in the United States 1730-1830, as published in The Philalethes, Vol
LI, Number 2, April 1998. Morris does not show the date of initiation.
  W. Bro. Ray Sheppard indicates that the initiations were performed in 1778.16
  John Lane, in his Masonic Records, notes that in the 1792 Moderns’ renumbering the Lodge became17
No. 370. He also notes: “Last Payment 1797. Erased 1813.”
  Morris notes: “In 1792 when the Grand Lodge of Massachusetts was formed, African Lodge did not join18
but remained attached to England. This could be  due to loyalty to the premier Grand Lodge or to racism from the
newly formed Grand Lodge. However, the Grand Lodge of Massachusetts also didn’t recognize St. Andrew’s Lodge
which had a Scottish Charter” (italics by the present author). Morris goes no to say that “There is evidence that
25
REF: I62 Lodge No. 441 IC, in the 38th Regiment of Foot, New York City  1765-1840
[now part of The Staffordshire Regiment (The Prince of Wales’s)]
The Grand Lodge of Ireland issued Warrant No. 441 on July 4, 1765 to hold a Lodge in the 38th
Regiment of Foot. R. W. Bro. Keith Cochrane, in his CD-ROM Update (June 2000 and Fall 2001) of V. W.
Bro. Philip Crossle’s Irish Masonic Records, 1973, notes that in Volume 1 of the Grand Lodge Registers, only
three members of the Lodge were registered: Math. Tucker, Master; and Wm. Murray and Thos. Matthews,
Wardens.
In 1 775, th e R egiment, a ccompanied b y its  L odge, e ventually f ound its elf a s o ne o f th e u nits
assigned to General Gage’s army quartered in Boston. Sergeant John Batt  of the 38th Regiment of Foot14
was Master of Lodge No. 441 IC at this time (1775). In keeping with the tradition of admitting civilians, John
Batt, of the Lodge, initiated Prince Hall and 13  other American Negroes on March 6, 1775  at a cost of 2/615 16
(two shillings and sixpence, British money) each. 
On departure from Boston in 1781, the 38th Regiment was assigned to New York City and Lodge
No. 441 IC went with it. This Lodge was one of the founding Lodges of the Provincial Grand Lodge of New
York which was formed on January 23, 1781 and Grand Officers elected and appointed; the Senior Grand
Warden was Br o. Jo hn Stu dholme Br ownrigg of Lodge No. 4 41 and also a m ember of th e 38th Fo ot.
Recognition was requested from the Antients Grand Lodge and a Warrant for the Provincial Grand Lodge
was issued on September 23, 1781. Lodge No. 441 is recorded as being present at the inauguration meeting
of the Antients Provincial Grand Lodge of New York in December 1782, and at a subsequent meeting held
on October 1783. At  this latter meeting Bro. Brownrigg resigned his p osition as Senior Grand W arden
(although unstated, this was probably due to the imminent departure of the 38th Foot (and all other British
army units) from the United States.
The Regiment was returned to Boston on the cessation of hostilities and when it was organizing to
leave the Boston area in 1784, it left its resident black brethren with a permit which allowed them to hold
meetings, walk on St. John’s Day, and to bury their dead, but not to take in initiates or award degrees. As
the 38th Regiment  would not return to Boston, Prince Hall subsequently made application for a Warrant to
the Moderns Grand Lodge which issued Warrant No. 459  on September 20, 1784, for African Lodge with17
Prince Hall as the first Master. The Warrant was not received in Boston until April 29, 1787. This Lodge was
not recognized by white Masonry in the United States  and it began to issue charters to other stationary18


--- PAGE 32 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
white Masons visited African Lodge and that England relied on Prince Hall for information on Boston Lodges. In any
event African Lodge continued its separate existence until 1813 when it and all other English-chartered American
Lodges were erased from the rolls of the newly formed United Grand Lodge of England. Then in 1827 officers of
African Lodge declared themselves independent and constituted themselves as a Grand Lodge. From these origins
grew the large, parallel Masonic organization known today as “Prince Hall Masonry”” (page 37).
26
lodges in black communities and to travelling black lodges; becoming known around the world as Prince Hall
Masonry. J ohn L ane, i n h is Masonic R ecords  (2nd E dition, 1 895), n otes t hat i n t he 1 792 M oderns’
renumbering the Lodge became No. 370 ER(M). Lane also notes: “Last payment 1797. Erased 1813.” By
the time of union of the Antients and Moderns, in 1813, African Lodge, No. 459 ER(M), was erased for failing
to have provided the returns required to Grand Lodge. 
When the 38th Regiment withdrew from the United States, taking the Lodge with it, it was assigned
to Nova Scotia until 1788 and then on to the West Indies and Europe. Grand Lodge records indicate that a
duplicate Warrant was issued on August 6, 1795 “the original having been captured by French in Jan. 1795.
Lodge reopened at St. Pierre, Martinique, 8th Nov. 1796, the former registry, with chest, warrant and jewels
having b een c aptured b y t he e nemy at H elvoet-Sluys in  J anuary 1 795”. B ro. Fr ederick S myth in  h is
Prestonian Lecture f or 1990 enti tled The Master-Mason-At-Arms, A S hort Study of Freemasonry in the
Armed Forces, refers to the campaign in which the Warrant was lost to the French as the Flanders campaign
of 1794 to 1795. According to Cochrane the Duplicate Warrant was issued to: L. Borland (#52 on the Lodge
Register), Thos. Bigger (#53), Wm. Darrell (#54), Jno. Wilshire (#55) and Geo. Pigott (#56). Cochrane notes
that a further 47 brethren (bringing the Lodge total to 50) were registered with Grand Lodge up to June 24,
1786.
Robert Freke Gould in his History of Freemasonry notes: “The Regiment proceeded to St. Lucia and
Saints, 1797; Ireland, 1802; Capetown, 1806; Buenos Ayres and Montevideo, 1806-7; and after a period of
home service, the Lodge, which was closed in 1811, reopened, November 17, 1819, at Capetown, when a
letter - dated April 5 of the same year - was read from the Grand Lodge of Ireland, of which the following is
an extract: - “The Union of Antients and Moderns in England had no particular effect in this country, as we
never had any Lodges but Ancient, neither have we adopted any of their new ceremonies”.” Cochrane notes
that Volume 3 of the Grand Lodge Registers shows that Warrant No. 441 in the 38th Foot was revived on
August 6, 1795 when a total of eight members were registered, including: John L. Borland, Thos. Bigger and
Wm. Barrell, but with no indication of Master of Wardens.
W. Bro. Ray Sheppard, in his notes on Lodges in the 54th Foot, writes that Captain William Rea of
the 54th was WM of Lodge No. 441 IC around the time of Waterloo (June 1815).
Grand Lodge records note that Warrant No. 441 was cancelled on August 7, 1817, and was revived
on April 1, 1819. The Lodge accompanied its Regiment to South Africa in the 1820’s and it was brought up
before the United Grand Lodge on charges of unmasonic conduct by Orthes Lodge, No. 689 ER, in the 6th
Regiment of Foot, for initiating, passing and raising a member of the 6th Regiment of Foot. Orthes Lodge’s
letter dated November 18, 1822, appears to have gone unanswered by United Grand Lodge. Gould notes
that the working of the Royal Arch degree was resumed on November 14, 1822, when a letter, dated May
15, 1820, from the Irish Deputy Grand Secretary was read, of which the following passage is recorded in the
Lodge minutes: “There is not any warrant issued by the Grand Lodge of Ireland other than that you hold; it
has therefore always been the practice of Irish Lodges to confer the Higher Degrees under that authority”.
The names of the members of the degree are headed, “Roll of Excellent-Super-Excellent Royal Arch Masons
of Lodge No. 441”. 
The Lodge was opened in Berhampore, India, in 1822, but closed in 1823, with (Cochrane notes)
a total of 59 brethren registered up to July 5, 1823. The Warrant was revived again and the Lodge opened
on March 2, 1840, i n Limerick. Cochrane notes that Volume 3 of  the Grand Lodge Register shows three
members registered for this revival: Wm. Fred. Vernon (Lodge No. 55 IC, a civilian Lodge in Dublin), Michael
Dolan (No.  328 SC in the 94th Foot, 1830-1860 ) and G eorge Peol  (No.  473 IC,  a ci vilian Lodg e at
Enniskillen, Co. Fermanagh) but with no indication as to Master or Wardens. The Warrant was returned on


--- PAGE 33 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
27
August 6, 1840, however, “in obedience to the orders of Sir Edward Blakeney, commanding the forces in
Ireland”. In 1842 Grand Lodge indicated (it is not clear whether orally or in writing, probably the latter) to the
Regiment, then in Corfu, that the Warrant was available to its members when they desired. Later the same
year it was returned to the Regiment, although it does not ap pear to have been used. This is interesting
because Cochrane reports that Grand Lodge shows a further eight brethren were registered as belonging to
Lodge No. 441 (all showing other Lodge numbers) up to November 2, 1859. W. Bro. Ray Sheppard, in his
notes on Lodges in the 38th Foot, writes that the Warrant was not removed from the Printed Report until
1885.
V.W. Bro. R. E. Parki nson, in his paper Some Notes on Irish Military Warrants, notes that “names
registered and Return of Officers till 1857”. The Warrant was kept on the roll and finally removed from the
printed Report of 1885. Gould includes the following entry under a list entitled “Existing British Field Lodges,
1886” - “38th Ft., 441, I., 1765”, thus indicating that the Lodge was still working in 1886, although it is likely
that he was looking at a list dating from 1884 or earlier.
V. W. Bro. Philip Crossle, in his Irish Masonic Records, notes that after Warrant No. 441 was struck
off the rolls in 1860 (Cochrane does not list a final date of cancellation), the number “441” was used for a
Warrant issued to hold a Lodge at Belfast. No date of  issue or being struck off the rolls is included in the
entry. Cochrane s hows t his i ssue as  bei ng m ade on June 7, 1918,  t o hol d T . W . B raithwaite Lodge ,
Freemasons Hall, Arthur Square, Belfast, and that the Lodge is still “Current” in 2001.
An enqui ry was di rected to t he G rand Lodge of  I reland earl y i n 2000 regarding the l ocation of
Warrant No. 441, and to obtain a photocopy if the Warrant was available. Grand Lodge responded in a letter
dated March 3, 2000, i ndicating that there was no copy or ori ginal in the Archives. The letter notes that
“Warrant No. 441 in the 38  Foot, was revived in March 1840 but only 3 names are entered at this time.th
There are no f urther nam es registered between 1840 and 1 857 and then there are a f ew m ore nam es
registered in the period 1857 - 1861. After that there is nothing.” Cochrane’s last note on the Lodge indicates
that a transcript of the Minutes covering the period 1796 to 1821 is held at Grand Lodge and that the original
is in the care of the Officers’ Mess, 1st Battalion, South Staffordshire Regiment.
[Sources: (1) Irish Masonic Records by Philip Crossle, 1979, published in manuscript form by the Grand
Lodge of Ireland. (2) R. W. Bro. Keith Cochrane, CD-ROM (June 2000 and Fall 2001) Update of Crossle’s
Masonic Records. (3) The Master-Mason-At-Arms, A Short Study of Freemasonry in the Armed Forces, Bro.
Frederick Smyth in his  Prestonian Lecture for 1990 as reprinted in the Transactions of the Quatuor Coronati
Lodge. (4) Some Notes on Irish Military Warrants, by V.W. Bro. R. E. Parkinson, as printed in The Lodge of
Research, No. C.C., Ireland, Transactions For the Years 1949-1957. (5)  History of the Grand Lodge of Free
and Accepted Masons of Ireland, Vol. I, 1925. (6) The Poor Common Soldier, A Study of Irish Ambulatory
Warrants, by Bro. John Heron Lepper, as printed in the Transactions of Quatuor Coronati Lodge, 1925. (7)
History of Freemasonry, by Robert Freke Gould, 3rd Edition, 1886. (8) The Master-Mason-At-Arms, A Short
Study of Freemasonry in the Armed Forces, Bro. Frederick Smyth, Prestonian Lecture for 1990, as reprinted
in the Transactions of Quatuor Coronati Lodge, 1990, London. (9) Masonic Records 1717-1894, by John
Lane, 2nd Edition, London, 1895. (10) Flags of Masonry in the line Regiments of the British Army, by W. Bro.
Ray Sheppard, P.M. 322 I.C., September 2002, notes on Lodges in the 38th Foot.]


--- PAGE 34 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
28


--- PAGE 35 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
  This is an unofficial abbreviation to indicate the Grand Lodge of Prince Hall Free and Accepted Masons19
in the Province of Ontario and jurisdictions.
29
CANADA
ONTARIO AND QUEBEC
(“Province of Canada”)
Mount Olive, P.H. Lodge, No. 1 GLPHOnt   ????-present19
Mount Olive P.H. Lodge, No. 1 WSGL, Hamilton  1856-????
Mount Olive P.H. Lodge, No. 1 PHNJ, Hamilton  1852-1856
In 1851, T. C. Harnley was deputized by the National Compact Grand Lodge of New Jersey (P.H.M.)
To erect Lodges in the Province of Canada (i.e. Ontario and Quebec). The first Lodge to be organized was
Mount Olive Lodge at Hamilton, whose Charter was dated December 27, 1852, and numbered “1” on the
Register of New Jersey. On August 25, 1856 (shortly after the formation of the Grand Lodge of Canada and
the Ancient Grand Lodge of Canada in 1855), Mount Olive No. 1, Victoria No. 2 and O live Branch No. 3,
organized and formed the Widow’s Son Grand Lodge of the Province of Canada. It is probable that a new
Warrant as No. 1 was issued.
Mount Olive No. 1 was an active Lodge, but it was only one of three (the others being St. John’s No.
9, PHNY and North American No. 11, WSGL) which participated in the Annual Communication of 1890. The
Lodge was working in 1900.
The Lodge is reported to be working as of the 1990’s.
Victoria P.H. Lodge, No. 2 WSGL, St. Catharines  1856-????
Victoria P.H. Lodge, No. 2 PHNJ, St. Catharines  1853-1856
In 1851, T. C. Harnley was deputized by the National Compact Grand Lodge of New Jersey (P.H.M.)
To erect Lodges in the Province of Canada (i.e. Ontario and Quebec). The second Lodge to be organized
was Victoria Lodge at St. Catharines, whose Charter was dated June 7, 1853, and numbered “2” on the
Register of New Jersey. On August 25, 1856 (shortly after the formation of the Grand Lodge of Canada and
the Ancient Grand Lodge of Canada in 1855), Mount Olive No. 1, Victoria No. 2 and O live Branch No. 3,
organized and formed the Widow’s Son Grand Lodge of the Province of Canada. It is probable that a new
Warrant as No. 2 was issued.
The Lodge is now defunct.
Olive Branch P.H. Lodge, No. 3 WSGL, Windsor  1856-pre 1866
Olive Branch P.H. Lodge, No. 3 PHNJ, Windsor   1854-1856
In 1851, T. C. Harnley was deputized by the National Compact Grand Lodge of New Jersey (P.H.M.)
To erect Lodges in the Province of Canada (i.e. Ontario and Quebec). The third Lodge to be organized was
Olive Branch Lodge at Windsor, whose Charter was dated sometime in October 1854, and numbered “3” on
the Register of New Jersey. On August 25, 1856 (shortly after the formation of the Grand Lodge of Canada


--- PAGE 36 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
30
and the Ancient Grand Lodge of Canada in 1855), Mount Olive No. 1, Victoria No. 2 and Olive Branch No.
3, organized and formed the Widow’s Son Grand Lodge of the Province of Canada. It is probable that a new
Warrant as No. 1 was issued.  It would appear that this Lodge had lapsed before 1866.
King Hiram P. H. Lodge, No. 4 WSGL, Toronto  ????-pre 1866
Sometime between the formation of the Widows Son Grand Lodge in 1856 and 1866, King Hiram
Lodge No. 4 was formed at Toronto and lapsed. The Lodge was not working by 1900.
American Star P.H. Lodge, No. 4 GLPHOnt, Windsor  ????-present
It is not clear when, or by whom, American Star Lodge at Windsor received Warrant No. 4. The
Lodge is reported to be working as of the 1990’s.
Prince Hall P. H. Lodge, No. 5 WSGL, Chatham  ????-pre 1866
Sometime between the formation of the Widows Son Grand Lodge in 1856 and 1866, Prince Hall
Lodge No. 5 was formed at Chatham and lapsed. The failure occurred in part because the American National
Compact Grand Master had denied t he legitimacy of the W idow’s Son G rand Lodge of the Province of
Canada which created much turmoil, especially in a Lodge so close to the American border.
Shaftesbury P.H. Lodge, No. 6 WSGL, London  1861-????
In 1861 the W idows Son G rand Lodge of  t he Prov ince of  Canada iss ued Charter No.  6 f or
Shaftesbury Lodge at London. The Lodge was not working by 1900.
Kinnard P.H. Lodge, No. 7 WSGL, Ingersoll  1865-????
In 1865 the Widows Son Grand Lodge of the Province of Canada issued Charter No. 7 for Kinnard
Lodge at Ingersoll. The Lodge was not working by 1900.
North State P.H. Lodge, No. 7 WSGL, Windsor  ????-????
It is not clear when the Widow’s Son Grand Lodge of the Province of Canada issued Charter No. 7
for North State Lodge at Windsor. The Lodge is now defunct.


--- PAGE 37 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
31
Lincoln P.H. Lodge, No. 8 GLPHOnt
Lincoln P.H. Lodge, No. 8 WSGL, Amherstburg  1864-????
In 1864 the Widows Son Grand Lodge of the Province of Canada issued Charter No. 8 for Lincoln
Lodge at Amherstburg. The Lodge was working in 1900.
The Lodge is reported to be working as of the 1990’s.
St. John’s P.H. Lodge, No. 9 GLPHOnt, Chatham  ????-????
St. John’s P.H. Lodge, No. 9 PHNY, Chatham  1869?-????
In 1869 the National Compact Grand Lodge of New York issued Warrant No. 9 for St. John’s Lodge
at Chatham, Ontario. North American Lodge N o. 9, W SGL, at W indsor (formed 1863) requested a ne w
Warrant, number “11” in 1870 to avoid confusion with St. John’s.
St. John’s No. 9 was an active Lodge, but it was only one of three (the others being Mount Olive No.
1 and North American No. 11) which participated in the Annual Communication of 1890 of the Widow’s Son
Grand Lodge of the Province of Canada. The Lodge was working in 1900.
The Lodge is reported to be working as of the 1990’s.
Mount Carmel P.H. Lodge, No. 10 WSGL, Buxton  ????-????
In the late 1860’s the Widows Son Grand Lodge of the Province of Canada issued Charter No. 10
for Mount Carmel Lodge at Buxton. The Lodge is now defunct.
Mount Moriah P.H. Lodge, No. 11 WSGL, Dryden  ????-pre 1870?
In the late 1860’s the Widows Son Grand Lodge of the Province of Canada issued Charter No. 11
for Mount Moriah Lodge at Dryden. It is probable that this Lodge had expired by 1870 when North American
Lodge No. 9 traded in its Charter for No. 11 to avoid confusion with St. John’s Lodge, No. 9 PHNY, Chatham,
as it is unlikely that North American would continue to confuse the issue by taking No. 11 if it was in use. The
Lodge is now defunct.
North American, No. 11 WSGL, Windsor  1870-????
North American, No. 9 WSGL, Windsor  1863-1870
In 1863 the Widows Son Grand Lodge of the Province of Canada issued Charter No. 9 for North
American Lodge at Windsor. By 1870, given the conflict in identification with St. John’s P.H. Lodge, No. 9,
PHNY, Chatham, North American requested a new Charter carrying the number “11” which was issued on
surrender of the earlier “9”.
North American No. 11 was an active Lodge, but it was only one of three (the others being Mount
Olive No. 1 and St . John’s No. 9, PHNY) which participated in the Annual Communication of 1890. The
Lodge was working in 1900.


--- PAGE 38 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
32
Salem P.H. Lodge, No. 12 WSGL, Windsor  ????-????
In the late 1860’s the Widows Son Grand Lodge of the Province of Canada issued Charter No. 12
for Salem Lodge at Windsor. It is probable that this Lodge had a v ery short life as the number “12” was
reissued very soon afterwards for Progress Lodge in Hamilton.
Progress P.H. Lodge, No. 12 WSGL, Hamilton  ????-????
In the late 1860’s the Widows Son Grand Lodge of the Province of Canada issued a new Charter
No. 12 for Progress Lodge at Hamilton. The Lodge is now defunct.
Meridien Sun P.H. Lodge, No. 13 WSGL, Toronto  ????-????
In the late 1860’s the Widows Son Grand Lodge of the Province of Canada issued Charter No. 13
for Meridien Sun Lodge at Toronto. The Lodge is now defunct.
P.H. Lodge, No. 13, location unknown  ????-????
No information available.
P.H. Lodge, No. 14, location unknown  ????-????
No information available.
P.H. Lodge, No. 15, location unknown  ????-????
No information available.
Corinthian P.H. Lodge, No. 16 WSGL, Toronto  ????-????
It is not clear when the Widows Son Grand Lodge of the Province of Canada issued Charter No. 16
for Corinthian Lodge at Toronto. The Lodge was working in 1900 but is now defunct.
Central, No. 18 GLPHOnt, Harrow  ????-????
No information available.


--- PAGE 39 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
33
Eureka P.H. Lodge, No. 20 GLPHOnt, Toronto  ????-present
It is not clear when the Widows Son Grand Lodge of the Province of Canada issued Charter No. 20
for Eureka Lodge at Toronto. The Lodge was working in 1990.
St. Luke’s No. 21 GLPHOnt, St. Catharines  ????-????
No information available.
Scenic City P.H. Lodge, No. 22 GLPHOnt, Owen Sound  ????-present
It is not clear when the Widows Son Grand Lodge of the Province of Canada issued Charter No. 22
for Scenic City Lodge at Owen Sound. The Lodge was working in 1990.
Mount Moriah P.H. Lodge, No. 24 GLPHOnt, Montreal  ????-present
It is not clear when the Widows Son Grand Lodge of the Province of Canada issued Charter No. 24
for Mount Moriah Lodge at Montreal. The Lodge was working in 1990.
Shaftesbury P.H. Lodge, No. 25 GLPHOnt, London  ????-present
It is not clear when the Widows Son Grand Lodge of the Province of Canada issued Charter No. 25
for Shaftesbury Lodge at London. The Lodge was working in 1990.
Solomon P.H. Lodge, No. 26 GLPHOnt, Ottawa  ????-present
It is not clear when the Widows Son Grand Lodge of the Province of Canada issued Charter No. 26
for Solomon Lodge at Ottawa. The Lodge was working in 1990.
Utopia P.H. Lodge, No. 27 GLPHOnt, Mississauga  ????-present
It is not clear when the Widows Son Grand Lodge of the Province of Canada issued Charter No. 27
for Utopia Lodge at Mississauga. The Lodge was working in 1990.
St. Andrew’s P.H. Lodge, No. 28 GLPHOnt, Toronto  ????-present
It is not clear when the Widows Son Grand Lodge of the Province of Canada issued Charter No. 28


--- PAGE 40 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
34
for St. Andrew’s Lodge at Toronto. The Lodge was working in 1990.
Elim P.H. Lodge, No. 29 GLPHOnt, Scarborough  ????-present
It is not clear when the Widows Son Grand Lodge of the Province of Canada issued Charter No. 29
for Elim Lodge at Scarborough. The Lodge was working in 1990.
King David P.H. Lodge, No. 30 GLPHOnt, Montreal  ????-present
It is not clear when the Widows Son Grand Lodge of the Province of Canada issued Charter No. 30
for King David Lodge at Montreal. The Lodge was working in 1990.
Maple Leaf P.H. Lodge, No. 31 GLPHOnt, Montreal  ????-present
It is not clear when the Widows Son Grand Lodge of the Province of Canada issued Charter No. 31
for Maple Leaf Lodge at Montreal. The Lodge was working in 1990.


--- PAGE 41 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
35
CANADA
NOVA SCOTIA
Union Lodge, No. 18, GRNS, Halifax  1869-1916
Union Lodge, No. 693, ER, Halifax  1863-1869
Union Lodge, No. 993, ER, Halifax  1856-1863
Union Lodge, UD, ER, Halifax  1855-1856
Lawrence Runnalls notes that In Nova Scotia, five coloured men joined Royal Sussex Lodge, No.
704 ER (now No. 6, GRNS), Halifax in 1855. In 1856 they applied for and received, a Dispensation to form
a new Lodge to be called “Union” (to honour the Union of the Antients and Moderns Grand Lodges in 1813).
A Dispensation to form the Lodge was issued in 1855 by Alexander Keith. On December 3, 1856, Warrant
No. 993 was issued by United Grand Lodge. With the English renumbering of 1863, Warrant No. 693 was
issued for the Lodge. 
Union Lodge never joined the (third) Provincial Grand Lodge of Nova Scotia (1829-66) when it was
formed, although it worked in amity with it and participated in a number of activities.
When United Grand Lodge withdrew its objections to the Grand Lodge of Nova Scotia in 1868/9
Union Lodge joined the new organization. When new Warrants were issued based on seniority of origin, the
Lodge became Union Lodge, No. 18 GRNS. This Lodge is listed in the Nova Scotia Gazetteer of 1870-71
as working in Halifax. 
Runnalls notes that due to irregularities in accepting coloured candidates regardless of their place
of residence (a Canadian province, in the United States or the West Indies) and careless record keeping,
the Warrant was forfeited in 1916. Most of the members were given clear Demits and permitted to join other
Lodges. 
About 1932 a move to restore the Lodge met with no success. By 1945, with three members of the
original Lodge still i n good standing, Runnal ls notes anot her att empt t o rev ive a col oured Lodg e was
undertaken and which would result in the formation of Equity Lodge, No. 106, GRNS, Halifax in 1948.
Mount Messiah P.H. Lodge, No. 87 PHNY, Halifax  ????-????
J. Lawrence Runnalls lists Mount Messiah Lodge, working under Charter No. 87 from the National
Compact Grand Lodge of New York, as still working in 1965.


--- PAGE 42 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
36


--- PAGE 43 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
37
CANADA
MANITOBA
Regent P.H. Lodge, No. 5 PHMinnesota, Winnipeg   ????-present
J. Lawrence Runnalls lists Regent Lodge, working under Charter No. 5 from the Prince Hall Grand
Lodge of Minnesota, as still working in 1965.


--- PAGE 44 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
38


--- PAGE 45 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
39
CANADA
ALBERTA
Alta P.H. Lodge, No. 21, PHWashington, location unknown  ????-present
J. Lawrence Runnalls lists Alta Lodge, working under Charter No. 21 from the Prince Hall Grand
Lodge of the State of Washington, as still working in 1965.


--- PAGE 46 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
40


--- PAGE 47 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
41
CANADA
BRITISH COLUMBIA
Victoria and Resolution P.H. Lodge, No. 16, PHWashington, New Westminster, BC  ????-present
J. Lawrence Runnalls lists Victoria and Resolution Lodge, working under Charter No. 16 from the
Prince Hall Grand Lodge of the State of Washington, as still working in 1965.


--- PAGE 48 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
42


--- PAGE 49 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
  Stalwart Builders, The Grand Lodge of Massachusett s 1733-1970, by M. W. Bro. Rev. Thomas20
Sherrard Roy, Published by the Masonic Education and Charity Trust, 1971, p. 187.
43
UNITED STATES
MASSACHUSETTS
Prince Hal l G rand Lodges hav e ev olved and grown f rom t he f irst P rince Hall G rand Lodge of
Massachusetts and now can be found in almost every state of the Union. In addition, many of the District
Prince Hall Grand Lodges in the Caribbean, take their authority from Massachusetts, including Bahamas and
Trinidad and Tobago. The Lodges of the latter country form the Eighth Masonic District of Massachusetts.
African Lodge, No. 459 ER(M), Boston, Massachusetts  ????
Prince Hall Lodge in Boston, PH, Boston, Mass.  ????-????
In the review of the history of the Grand Lodge of Massachusetts over the period 1733-1970 , it is20
noted that at the Annual Communication of December 9, 1868 “A petition signed by Lewis Hayden, and
several others, claiming to be Ancient, Free and Accepted Masons, and asking to be recognized as such was
received, read and referred to a committee” (1865-1869 p. 259). The report of the committee was received
by Grand Lodge on December 8, 1869 which covered the origin and growth of Prince Hall Freemasonry from
its beginning as African Lodge and noted that the individuals signing the Petition were not from the three
Lodges represented in Boston, New Bedford and Springfield. The committee concluded “Lodges professing
to be Masonic existing in this Commonwealth without the sanction of this Grand Lodge, are irregular and
spurious, and the members of them are of course denied Masonic intercourse with members of regular
Lodges, and they and t heir members, i ncluding the peti tioners, are not r ecognized by t he Craf t. O ur
Constitutions m ake no di stinction o n account  of  t he col our of  pers ons w ho des ire t he bene fits of
Freemasonry, and there are no rules or regulations, whereby the petitioners if “worthy and well qualified,”
are excluded from our fraternity, if they seek admission through duly organized Lodges” (1865-1869, p. 454f).
The masons then wrote to the Moderns’ Grand Lodge and received a Warrant as African Lodge, No.
459, Boston, Mass. Neither the Warrant nor the Book of Constitutions authorized the Lodge to establish other
Lodges but it did so in the period from its formation until the 1830's when African Lodge was disbanded.
African Lodge, No. 459B ER(M), Philadelphia, Pennsylvania  ????-????
This Lodge was started by the Members of African Lodge, No. 459 ER(M), Boston, Massachusetts
and apparently given Warrant 459(B). In this case the “(B)” was assigned by the Lodge in Boston and likely
not recognized by London as this action was contrary to the English Constitution at the time.
African Lodge, No. 459(B) was instrumental in forming the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania,
in 1815.


--- PAGE 50 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
  Stalwart Builders, The Grand Lodge of Massachusett s 1733-1970, by M. W. Bro. Rev. Thomas21
Sherrard Roy, Published by the Masonic Education and Charity Trust, 1971, p. 187.
  Stalwart Builders, The Grand Lodge of Massachusett s 1733-1970, by M. W. Bro. Rev. Thomas22
Sherrard Roy, Published by the Masonic Education and Charity Trust, 1971, p. 187.
44
Prince Hall Lodge in New Bedford, PH, New Bedford, Mass.  ????-????
In the review of the history of the Grand Lodge of Massachusetts over the period 1733-1970 , it is21
noted that at the Annual Communication of December 9, 1868 “A  petition signed by Lewis Hayden, and
several others, claiming to be Ancient, Free and Accepted Masons, and asking to be recognized as such was
received, read and referred to a committee” (1865-1869 p. 259). The report of the committee was received
by Grand Lodge on December 8, 1869 which covered the origin and growth of Prince Hall Freemasonry from
its beginning as African Lodge and noted that the individuals signing the Petition were not from the three
Lodges represented in Boston, New Bedford and Springfield. The committee concluded “Lodges professing
to be Masonic existing in this Commonwealth without the sanction of this Grand Lodge, are irregular and
spurious, and the m embers of them are of  course denied Masonic intercourse with members of regular
Lodges, and they and t heir m embers, i ncluding the peti tioners, are not r ecognized by t he Craft. O ur
Constitutions m ake no di stinction on a ccount of  t he col our of  pers ons w ho desi re t he bene fits of
Freemasonry, and there are no rules or regulations, whereby the petitioners if “worthy and well qualified,”
are excluded from our fraternity, if they seek admission through duly organized Lodges” (1865-1869, p. 454f).
Prince Hall Lodge in Springfield, PH, Springfield, Mass.  ????-????
In the review of the history of the Grand Lodge of Massachusetts over the period 1733-1970 , it is22
noted that at the Annual Communication of December 9, 1868 “A petition signed by Lewis Hayden, and
several others, claiming to be Ancient, Free and Accepted Masons, and asking to be recognized as such was
received, read and referred to a committee” (1865-1869 p. 259). The report of the committee was received
by Grand Lodge on December 8, 1869 which covered the origin and growth of Prince Hall Freemasonry from
its beginning as African Lodge and noted that the individuals signing the Petition were not from the three
Lodges represented in Boston, New Bedford and Springfield. The committee concluded “Lodges professing
to be Masonic existing in this Commonwealth without the sanction of this Grand Lodge, are irregular and
spurious, and the m embers of them are of course denied Masonic intercourse with members of regular
Lodges, and they and t heir m embers, i ncluding the peti tioners, are not r ecognized by t he Craf t. O ur
Constitutions m ake no di stinction on a ccount of  t he col our of  pers ons w ho desi re t he bene fits of
Freemasonry, and there are no rules or regulations, whereby the petitioners if “worthy and well qualified,”
are excluded from our fraternity, if they seek admission through duly organized Lodges” (1865-1869, p. 454f).
Military Lodge, number unknown, PHMass, in the 54th Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry Regiment 1862/3-
1865
The 54th Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry Regiment was raised in 1863 with Black volunteers from
Massachusetts and other northern States. First Sergeant William H. Gray, organized the establishment of
a Prince Hall Masonic Lodge in the Regiment and was the first WM. Little is known about the Lodge or its
members. Sergeant Gray was 38 years old when the Lodge w as formed, and i s shown in the records as
having enlisted at Bedford, Massachusetts on February 14, 1863 and was mustered out on August 20, 1865.


--- PAGE 51 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
45
The only record of Sergeant Gray having furlough during his military service was on September 22, 1863,
when he is known to have travelled from New York to Bedford, Massachusetts, and probably picked up the
Lodge Charter at that time.
By 1865 the 54th Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry Regiment and its Prince Hall Lodge was in
Charleston, S outh Carol ina, and in Augus t l eft t he ci ty t o be m ustered out (di sbanded). At  t his t ime,
according to Walkes’s Black Square & Compass (p. 39) the Lodge numbered about 25 to 30 members,
including: Sergeant Gray of Company C, WM of the Lodge; Sergeant (later Lieutenant) Peter Vogelsang (a
Quartermaster Officer from New York City, wounded on July 16, 1863 at James Island, S.C., (re)mustered
into service on February 27, 1865 as a Major in the United States Coloured Troops and was on detached
service to the Freedman Bureau in South Carolina, died April 4, 1887 in New York City); Sergeant Alexander
Johnson (Company F, from Elmira, New York) and Sergeant Hemingway.
The coloured members of this Lodge, as well as the white Freemasons in the Regiment and who
were not members of the Lodge, probably knew Dr. Albert Gallatin Mackey, the author of, among others,
Jurisprudence of Masonry, and the Encyclopedia of Freemasonry, who lived at Charleston, and who sought
assistance from the northern soldiers to fight fires in Charleston which had resulted from the constant shelling
by Union troops during an attack on the city.
It is believed that when the Regiment was disbanded, the Charter was returned to the Prince Hall
Grand Lodge of Massachusetts. 
Cosmopolitan Lodge, No. 21, PHMass, Trinidad and Tobago  ????-????
Cosmopolitan Lodge was the first Prince Hall Lodge established in Trinidad and Tobago. As of June
2000 there are three other Lodges and the four constitute the Eight Masonic District of the Prince Hall Grand
Lodge of Massachusetts.


--- PAGE 52 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
46


--- PAGE 53 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
47
UNITED STATES
MISSISSIPPI
Although racial prejudice is not an acceptable behaviour in Freemasonry and its appendant bodies,
the history of race prejudice in Mississippi from before the Civil War has entered into the Craft. The size of
coloured population, compared to whites, was disproportionate and by 1860 there were 353,849 Caucasians
and 437,404 Blacks of whom fewer than 1,00 were free. By 1867 there were 46,636 registered White voters
and 60,137 registered Bla ck v oters; a nd by 1867 m any of th e Black population were being elected to
positions of influence. In 1870, the Grand Master of the Grand Lodge of Mississippi (Caucasian), addressing
Grand Lodge said “Negroes are not Masons, but by the laws of Congress, they are voters.” The Grand Lodge
then voted that “the testimony of a Negro - formerly a slave could not be received into a Lodge trial.”. This
was also the peri od which saw the rise of the “Knights of the Invisible Empire” as the Klu Klux Klan was
known, an organization formed by a f ormer Confederate Officer, and a Freemason belonging to a Lodge
under the Grand Lodge of Mississippi (Caucasian).
The Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Mississippi was formed in 1875 and Most Worship Brother Thomas
W. Stringer was elected as the first Grand Master, holding that position until his death on August 23, 1893.
He had be en District Deputy Grand Master under th e Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania for the
territory “west of Pittsburgh” and had authorized the formation of a number of Lodges - Stringer Lodge No.
22 PHP enna, V icksburg; St ringer Lodge , New  O rleans (now No. 3,  PHLoui siana). T his G rand Lodge
eventually adopted the name of “Most Worshipful Stringer Grand Lodge F. & A. M. Prince Hall Affiliated”.


--- PAGE 54 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
48


--- PAGE 55 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
49
UNITED STATES
MISSOURI
According to Joseph W alkes, Jr., in Black Square & Co mpass, the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of
Missouri was formed after the Civil War, on December 20, 1866, by a number of Prince Hall Lodges owning
their original allegiance to the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Ohio. 
Two of the earliest Charters issued by the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of the State of Missouri were for
military Lodges serving in Arizona Territory. This Grand Lodge is recognized as being the “Mother” Grand
Lodge of the four Black military units then authorized by Congress - the 9th and 10th Cavalry and the 24th
and 25th Regiments of Infantry. In addition, the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Missouri established military
Lodges attached to units serving in Cuba and the Philippines. The Jurisdiction would grow over the years
until, by 1912, the three military Lodges in Manila (2) and Hawaii (1) would make up the 20th Masonic District
of the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Missouri.
By Christmas, 1917, the Grand Lodge would have a total of 350 m ilitary Masons working under
Missouri Charters spread across the United States and overseas. By the late 1930’s, the number of Military
Lodges working under Missouri Charters had reduced to four - John M. Mc Carthy Lodge No. 52; Malta
Military Lodge No. 138; Tyre Military Lodge No. 143; and Joppa Military Lodge No. 150. No further data is
given as of the date of publication of Black Square & Compass: 200 Years of Prince Hall Freemasonry.
Missouri would not limit the formation of new Lodges to the State only, and over time would Charter
Lodges in Memphis, Chattanooga, Knoxville and Brownville, Tennessee; Selma, Alabama; Little Rock and
Helena, Arkansas; Keokuk, Muscatine and Des Moines, Iowa; and St. Paul, Minnesota. Its contact and
fraternal rel ations with other G rand Lodges around the w orld was growing to i nclude En gland, I reland,
Scotland, Prussia, Berlin, France and Italy.
The information in this section is sequential by number of the Lodge and , secondarily by date of
formation which is, in many cases, regrettably unknown. As Walkes notes, “The Grand Lodge often re-used
the numbers which had been assigned to def unct Lodges sometimes creating problems of identification.
Such is the case of Eureka Military Lodge No. 135 at Fort Robinson, Nebraska, chartered between 1901 and
1903; while in 1912 another Lodge, oriental, would also be numbered 135 and stationed in Manila.”
Lodge No. 1, PHMissouri, St. Louis, Missouri  ????-present
Lodge No. 10, PHOhio, St. Louis, Missouri  ????-????
No information available.
H. R. Revels Lodge, U.D., PHMissouri, Natchez, Mississippi  1871-
A Dispensation was given for 17 Prince Hall Masons in Natchez, Mississippi, to form H. R. Revels
Lodge. The name was chosen to honour Senator Hiram Rhodes Revels of Mississippi, who was a Prince Hall
Freemason. The formation of this Lodge was met with antipathy and anti-Black sentiments by the Whites
in Natchez which deliberately and perversely distorted the facts of the Lodge’s formation and the authority
of the Grand Master of Missouri. After several exchanges of correspondence with the media of the day, the


--- PAGE 56 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
50
Grand Master ignored the issue. The Lodge, however, appears to have continued working.
Eureka Military Lodge, No. 135 PHMissouri, in the 10th United States Cavalry  1888?-????
The Proceedings of the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Missouri for 1888 note the issue of Warrant No.
135, to hold Eureka Military Lodge in the 10th United States Cavalry. No copy of the Warrant is known to
exist and the precise date of its issue is unknown. Members of the Lodge were taken from both the 10th
Cavalry and the 24th Infantry Regiment which were serving together at the time the Lodge was formed, at
Fort Apache, Arizona Territory.
In 1889 the military resources of Fort Apache were increase with the addition of A Tr oop, 10th
Cavalry and which was accompanied by Baldwin Lodge, No. 16 PHTexas. Relations between the two Lodges
appear to have been friendly and amicable, but members did not move between the two. On November 5,
1891, Bro. Charles H. Chinn of Eureka No. 135 (who had been SW in 1885) demitted and joined Baldwin
No. 16 (where he would later become Lodge Secretary). The first recorded death among the members of
the two Lodges was recorded on February 5, 1895, with the passing of Bro. James A. Brown (Treasurer of
Baldwin  No. 16).
It is probable that this Eureka Lodge, No.  135 (es t. 1888) w as def unct by t he beginning of the
twentieth century.
Walkes, in Black Square & Compass refers to the dedication of Minnachuduza Lodge, established
by the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Missouri, by members of Eureka Lodge as follows: “Missouri chartered
Minnachuduza Military Lodge, U.D. at Niobrora, Nebraska on May 27, 1906. It was organized with its officers
and eleven others. The dedication of the Lodge was performed  by the Master, Wardens and members of
Military Lodge No. 135.” I have left this reference here although it obviously refers to a new Eureka Military
Lodge, No. 135, chartered between 1901 and 1903.
Adventure Lodge, No. 136 PHMissouri, in the in the 9th United States Cavalry  1900?-????
The Proceedings of the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Missouri for 1900 note the issue of Warrant No.
136, to hold Adventure Lodge in Troo ps H an d L, of the 9th United States Cavalry, then serving at Fort
Wingate, New Mexico.
It is not clear that the necessary paperwork for the formation of the Lodge was completed as the
Regiment was ordered to China and there is no further mention of the Lodge in the documents and minutes
of Grand Lodge.
Eureka Military Lodge, No. 135 PHMissouri, in the 10th Cavalry  1901/3-1916
Joseph Walkes, Jr., notes in his book, Black Square & Compass, “The Grand Lodge often re-used
the numbers which had been assigned to def unct Lodges sometimes creating problems of identification.
Such is the case of Eureka Military Lodge No. 135 at Fort Robinson, Nebraska, chartered between 1901 and
1903; while in 1912 another Lodge, Oriental, would also be numbered 135 and stationed in Manila.”
Walkes also refers to the dedication of Minnachuduza Lodge, established by the Prince Hall Grand
Lodge of Missouri, by m embers of Eureka Lodge as follows: “Missouri chartered  Minna chuduza Military
Lodge, U.D. at Niobrora, Nebraska on May 27, 1906. It was organized with its officers and eleven others.
The dedication of the Lodge was performed  by the Master, Wardens and members of Military Lodge No.
135.”


--- PAGE 57 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
51
By 1916, Eureka Military Lodge was stationed at Fort Huachuca, Arizona. For reasons which are not
stated by Walkes, the Lodge “. . . . was reorganized, renamed and renumbered . . . . thus (becoming) Malta
Lodge No. 138 . . . .”.
Gillespie Lodge, No. 140 PHMissouri, in the in the 25th Infantry Regiment and the 9th United States Cavalry
????-????
Walkes, in Black Square & Compass refers to this as the third military Lodge established by the
Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Missouri. No date is listed. The Lodge is described as “. . . . at one time . . .
attached to the 25th Infantry at Fort Missoula, Montana. It was later recognized and attached to Troop K, 9th
Cavalry at Fort Du Chesne, Utah”. No further information is provided.
Joppa (Military) Lodge, No. 150 PHMissouri, possibly in the 9th United States Cavalry  ????-????
Walkes, in Black Square & Compass refers to this milit ary Lodge established by the Prince Hall
Grand Lodge of Missouri. No date i s listed. He writes: “The one Lodge of which photographs have been
found with the members in full Masonic regalia was Joppa No. 150 attached also to the 9th Cavalry. It was
at one time at Fort Walla Walla, Washington, Fort Riley, Kansas and the Philippines. The photographs are
historic as they are the only known photographs of their kind in existence.”
Military Lodge, No. 152 PHMissouri, possibly in the 9th United States Cavalry  ????-????
Walkes, in Black Square & Compass refers to this as the fourth military Lodge (following Gillespie
Lodge) established by the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Missouri. No date is listed. The Lodge is described
as “. . . . at one time also located at Fort Du Chesne and was transferred to Fort Grant, Arizona and later
moving to Fort Robinson, Nebraska. There is a possibility that it was likewise attached to the 9th Cavalry;
however, information on the exact military unit is unavailable.”
Military Lodge, No. 153 PHMissouri, in the 9th United States Cavalry  ????-????
Walkes, in Black Square & Co mpass ref ers to this Lodge as the f ifth military Lodge (following
Gillespie No. 140 and Military No. 152) established by the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Missouri. No date is
listed. Th e L odge is  d escribed a s f ollows: “M issouri chartered o rganized a t Fo rt Gr ant (A rizona). I ts
membership was composed of Troopers from Hqs, A, B, and M Troop, of the 9th Cavalry.”
Minnachuduza Military Lodge, UD PHMissouri, military unit unknown  1906-????
Walkes, in Black Square & Compass refers to this Lodge, established by the Prince Hall Grand
Lodge of Missouri as follows: “Missouri chartered  Minnachuduza Military Lodge, U.D. at Niobrora, Nebraska
on May 27, 1906. I t was organized with its officers and eleven others. The dedication of the Lodge was
performed  by the Master, Wardens and members of Military Lodge No. 135.”


--- PAGE 58 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
52
Manila Military Lodge, No. 63, PHMissouri, military unit unknown  1906-????
Walkes, in Black Square & Compass refers to this Lodge, established by the P rince Hall Grand
Lodge of Missouri as follows: “. . . . the District Deputy Grand Master, Bro. W. H. Loving, organized Manila
Military Lodge No. 63, March 5, 1906, it being recorded as the second military Lodge in Manila.”
John M. McCarthy Lodge, No. 50, PHMissouri, 25th Infantry Regiment  1912-????
Walkes, in Black Square & Compass refers to this Lodge, established by the P rince Hall Grand
Lodge of Missouri as follows: “John M. McCarthy Lodge No. 50 chartered six years later (than Manila Military
No. 63) at Schofield Barracks in Honolulu, Hawaii and attached to the 25th Infantry . . . .”.
Malta Military Lodge, No. 138 PHMissouri, in the 10th Cavalry  1916-????
Joseph Walkes, Jr., notes in his book, Black Square & Compass, that by 1916, Eureka Military Lodge
No. 135 (established 1901/3 and the second bearing the same name and number) was stationed at Fo rt
Huachuca, Arizona. For reasons which are not stated by Walkes, the Lodge “. . . . was reorganized, renamed
and renumbered . . . . thus (becoming) Malta Lodge No. 138 . . . .”. A copy of Warrant No. 138 is reproduced
in Black Square & Compass, and is transcribed below as it one of the few documents available regarding
Missouri Military Lodges.
TO ALL WHOM IT MAY CONCERN
THE M. W. GRAND LODGE OF MISSOURI & ITS JURISDICTION, GREETING:
SEAL
WISDOM, STRENGTH, FRATERNITY
Know Ye, That by virtue of the power and authority in me vested, we do hereby constitute and appoint
our worthy and well beloved brethren Eugene Frierson, W orshipful Master, James F. Hendricks, Senior Warden, and
Clifford A. Sandridge, Junior Warden of a Lodge to be called Malta Military No. 138 to be holden in the 10  United Statesth
Cavalry U. S. Ar my. And we do further authorize and empower our said trusty and well-beloved brethren, Eugene
Frierson, James F. Henderson and Clifford A. Sandridge to ADMIT, ENTER, PASS AND RAISE FREEMASONS, according
to the most ancient and honorable custom of the Royal Craft in all ages and nations throughout the known world,
and not contrarywise: and we do further empower and appoint the said Eugene Frierson, James F. Henderson and Clifford
A. Sandridge , and their successors, to hear and determine all and singular matters and things relating to the Craft
within the jurisdiction of the said Lodge, with the assistance of the members of sai d Lodge. And lastly we do
hereby authorize and empower our said trusty and well-beloved brethren, Eugene Frierson, James F. Henderson and Clifford
A. Sa ndridge to install their successors , (being first duly elected and chosen) to whom they shall deliver this
Warrant, and to invest them with all the powers and dignities to their offices respectively belonging, and such
successors, &c., &c. Such installation to be upon or near St. John the Baptist’s day, during the continuance of
this Lodge, forever.
PROVIDED ALWAYS, That the said named brethren, and their successors, pay due respect to this
Most Worshipful Grand Lodge and the ordinances thereof; otherwise this Warrant to be of no
force or effect.
GIVEN in open Grand Lodge, under the hands of our Most Worshipful Grand Officers,
    SEAL and the Seal of our Grand Lodge, at Carson City, Missouri this Eleventh day


--- PAGE 59 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
53
    SEAL of August A.L. 59___, A.D. 19 ___. Nelson C. Crewe       G. M.
    SEAL Richard H. Young   D. G. M.
    SEAL Attest: Wm. Green   S. G. W.
Geo. W. Love, Grand Sect’y Crittenden E. Clark   J. G. W.
H. H. Walker        G. T.
A Demit exists and is displayed in Black Square & Compass, dated October 1929, indicating that
Malta Military Lodge was working at that date.
Tyre Military Lodge, No. 143, PHMissouri, in the 25th Infantry Regiment  1919-????
Joseph W alkes, Jr., notes in h is book, Black Square & Co mpass, that “The last Military Lodge
recorded by Missouri, was chartered in 1919 at Columbus, New Mexico, being Tyre Military Lodge No. 143,
attached to the 25th Infantry.


--- PAGE 60 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
54


--- PAGE 61 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
55
UNITED STATES
NEW YORK
The Prince Hall Grand Lodge F. & A. M. of the State of New York is located at 454 West 155th St.,
New York City. It owns its own Grand Lodge Temple and two pieces of property adjoining the Temple. They
also own and operate a 964 acre “Recreation Centre” at Roscoe, New York, in the Catskill Mountains. As
of 1963 there were 64 coloured Lodges in the State. Eleven lodges own their own Temples with others under
construction.
Boyer Lodge, No. 1 (P.H.), New York 1812-present
The first coloured Lodge in New York State was Boyer Lodge, No. 1. It was Constituted on February
16, 1812. Within fourteen years it had such a large and widespread membership that further Lodges were
warranted, and Boyer Lodge supported the establishment of Celestial Lodge, No. 2, New York City; Rising
Sun Lodge, No. 3, Brooklyn and Hiram Lodge, No. 4, New York City. On March 14, 1845, B oyer Lodge
convened an assembly of New York’s Prince Hall Lodges and formed Boyer Grand Lodge of the State of
New York.
New York Prince Hall Freemasons follow standard masonic ritual and bodies - Scottish Rite, Shrine,
Eastern Star.
Celestial Lodge, No. 2 (P.H.), New York City
This was the second coloured Lodge formed in New York State and was established from the original
Boyer No. 1. On March 14, 1845, Celestial Lodge supported the establishment of the Boyer Grand Lodge
of the State of New York.
Rising Sun Lodge, No. 3 (P.H.), Brooklyn, NY
This was the third coloured Lodge formed in New York State and was established from the original
Boyer No. 1. On March 14, 1845, Rising Sun Lodge supported the establishment of the Boyer Grand Lodge
of the State of New York.
Hiram Lodge, No. 4 (P.H.), New York City
This was the fourth coloured Lodge formed in New York State and was established from the original
Boyer No. 1. On March 14, 1845, Hiram Lodge supported the establishment of the Boyer Grand Lodge of
the State of New York.


--- PAGE 62 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
56
Phoenix Lodge, No. 1 PHNY, in the 29th Regiment Connecticut Coloured Infantry  1864-1865
The Secretary of War authorized the formation of the 29th Regiment Connecticut Coloured Infantry
in early 1863 and the first recruit was enlisted on August 11, 1863. Most of the men came to the Regiment
at it s r endezv ous in New H aven, C onnecticut, b etween S eptember a nd D ecember 1 863 a nd t he f ull
enlistment was not ac hieved until early 1864, w ith the Regi ment being mustered into the United States
service on March 8, 1864.
There were Prince Hall Masons in the Regiment and they agreed to Petition the Prince Hall Grand
Lodge of New York for a Charter for Phoenix Lodge. On March 18, 1864, David Gordon, Grand Master of
the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of the State of New York, signed a Regimental Warrant for the Phoenix Lodge
No. 1, naming Alex. H. (Alexander Herritage) Newton as WM, John Andrews as SW and Richard Giles as
JW, of which a Transcript is included on the following page. Newton had joined the Regiment on March 8,
1864, was appointed as a Commissary Sergeant on October 31, 1864 and was mustered out on October 24,
1865. It is not known where or when he received his degrees in Freemasonry, but he was an active Mason
and is listed on the roll of Rising Sun Lodge, Number 1, Camden, New Jersey. He was Grand Chaplain of
the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of New Jersey and Representative of the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Colorado.
He was a Royal Arch Mason and a Knight Templar as well as becoming a 33° Scottish Rite Mason. John A.
Andrews was a Pri vate in  Com pany D, he had enlisted on Decem ber 16, 1863, joined the Regiment on
March 8, 1864, and was also mustered out  on October 24, 1865. Richard Giles was a Corporal in Company
H, he enlisted on December 31, 1863 and was later assigned to the Regiment.
By the time the Warrant was signed on March 18, 1864, the Regiment was already enroute to South
Carolina, having broken camp at New Haven on March 8, 1864, and headed for Annapolis, Maryland. After
8 to 10 days here, the Regiment moved on to Hilton Head, South Carolina. It would thus appear that this
Warrant (like that of the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Massachusetts) signed to hold a Lodge in a Military
Regiment, was sent onwards to the location of the Regiment at Charleston, South Carolina.
R E G I M E N T A L   W A R R A N T
To all whom it may concern:
WISDOM, STRENGTH AND STABILITY
I, David G ordon, Most W orshipful Gr and Master for  the State of N ew York an d Masonic Juri sdiction
thereunto belonging, and National Masonic Union.
Having received a petition from the members of the 29th United States Coloured Troops, praying for
a Charter, to empower them to meet as a L odge of Freemasons in said Regiment, to work according to the
ancient Constitution, laws and usages of Freemasonry, according to the ancient York Rite, and they, the said
members of the above named Regiment, having to m y satisfaction been well recommended.
I do, by virtue of the power in me vested, grant this as their Lawful Warrant, so long as they, the said
members, shall conform to all the laws and usages of the Order, empowering them to work in their Regiment
and nowhere else, and in no manner whatever to interfere with the rights of any e stablished Lodge or Grand
Lodge.
Furthermore, I do appoint our worthy and beloved brother Alex H. Newton to be the Worshipful Master,
John Andrews, Senior Warden, and Robert Giles Junior Warden of said Lodge, to be called and known by the name
and title of
P H O E N I X   L O D G E   NO.   1
And I do furthermore authorise and empower our said worthy and beloved brethren, to admit and make
Free Masons, accordi ng to the most ancient and honorable custom  of the  royal craf t, so long as the above
named Regiment shall remain together as such, and not longer, and on the return of the Regiment, this warrant
shall be deposited with the most worshipful Grand Master for the State of New York.
Now, Brethren, we do command you, and your successors in office, to make regular quarterly returns
to the Grand Master of all work done, with your tax and assessments for the same.


--- PAGE 63 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
57
Now, by the grace of God, I David Gordon Most Worshipful Grand Master
for the State of New York, and Masonic jurisdiction thereunto belonging, do, by the
power and authority to me committed, sign this warrant and cause the great seal of
the Most Worshipful Grand Lodge to be here affixed this 18  day of March A.D. 1864,th
A.L. 5964.
Attest
David Gordon M. W. G. M.
Samuel J. Soottren M. W. G. S. Pro. Tem.
The Regiment fought at Petersburg, Virginia (August 12 - September 24, 1864); Chapin’s Farm,
Virginia (September 29, 1864); Richmond, Virginia (September 29 - October 1, 1864); Darby Town Road,
Virginia (October 13, 1864); and Kell House, Virginia (October 27 - 28, 1864). It was later assigned to Texas
for service on the Mexican border, arriving at Brazo de Santiago, Texas, on July 3, 1865 and then on to
Brownville. It arrived back at Hartford, Connecticut, on November 24, 1865, the men were paid off and the
Regiment was disbanded.
The Warrant was surrendered to the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of the State of New York which still
holds it in their archives.
St. John’s Lodge, No. 9, PHNY, Chatham, Ontario  1869?-????
In 1869 the National Compact Grand Lodge of New York issued Warrant No. 9 for St. John’s Lodge
at Chatham, Ontario. North American Lodge No. 9, W SGL, at W indsor (formed 1863) requested a ne w
Warrant, number “11” in 1870 to avoid confusion with St. John’s.
St. John’s No. 9 was an active Lodge, but it was only one of three (the others being Mount Olive No.
1 and North American No. 11) which participated in the Annual Communication of 1890 of the Widow’s Son
Grand Lodge of the Province of Canada. The Lodge was working in 1900.
The Lodge is reported to be working as of the 1990’s.
Downshire (or Progress) Lodge, No. 12 PHNY, New York City  1870-1871
Walkes, in his Black Square & Compass, notes that on February 3, 1870, Warrant No. 12 was issued
by the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of New York, to a group of “Hebrews of German extraction” who were living
in the city. The only American born Black member was Bro. Albert Wilson, the Lodge Secretary (and also
remarked to be the Secretary of the Prince Hall Grand Lodge). The name of the Lodge is recorded as being
“Downshire” and also “Progress” at various times. Between February and December 1870 the Lodge held
twelve regular meetings. The Warrant was recalled when a number of the Lodge members left the United
States at the outbreak of the Franco-Prussian War and the few remaining members joined Lodges holding
their authority under the Grand Lodge of the State of New York. The Proceedings of the Prince Hall Grand
Lodge notes: “Progress Lodge No. 12, New York City, changed to Shakespeare Lodge No. 750 under the
jurisdiction of the New York Grand Lodge (white).”
At the time of its expiry i n early 1871, the L odge recorded 25 m embers on the roll which were
reported to the Prince Hall Grand Lodge, including: Abraham Levy; Dramin Jones; Abram Newfeldt; Tobias
Cohen; Herman Holzwasser; David Cerciwitz; Jacob Goldfarb; Henry Rosenthal; Marcus Rosenthal; Zundel
Hebstein; Morris Isaacs; Max Levy; Abraham Newmark; Samuel Lener; J ohn Delvert; Simon Goldstein;
Solomon Goldstein; Morris Goldstein; Henry Levy; Julius Cohn; Sol. Alexander; Moritz Brookman; Meyer


--- PAGE 64 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
58
Rosenthal; Osaac Wasseioug; and John Brown. It is interesting to note that this list does not include the
name of Albert Wilson, the Negro member who had helped form the Lodge. The report of the Prince Hall
Grand Lodge for September 1, 1871, provides some additional information on the working of the Lodge and
is quote verbatim from Black Square & Compass:
“Twelve (12) regular communications, three (3) initiations, two (2) crafting - one raised. Rejected
one (1) - Mr. Nathan Israel. Reinstated two (2) Bros. Sol. Goldstein and John Cooper. Affiliated one
(1) Bro. John Bowles, initiated Bros. Aaron Oppenheim, William Rosenthal, Jacob Levy, Buried
one (1) Samuel Laner.”
It is interesting that the Bro. John Cooper mentioned as reinstated is not on the list of members, neither are
the affiliated member Bro. John Bowles, nor t he initiates Bros. Oppenheim, Rosenthal or Lev y, nor t he
deceased member, Bro. Laner.
St. John’s Lodge, No. 16 (P.H.), Buffalo, NY
No information available.
Paramount Lodge, No. 73 (P.H.), Buffalo, NY
No information available.
Ionic Lodge, No. 88 (P.H.), Buffalo, NY
No information available.


--- PAGE 65 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
59
UNITED STATES
PENNSYLVANIA
African Lodge, No. 459B ER(M), Philadelphia, Pennsylvania  ????
African Lodge, No. 459 ER(M), Boston, Massachusetts granted a Warrant to a new Negro Lodge in
Philadelphia even though it was contrary to the terms of its English (Moderns) Warrant. This new Lodge was
instrumental in forming the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania in 1815.


--- PAGE 66 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
60


--- PAGE 67 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
61
UNITED STATES
RHODE ISLAND
Hiram Lodge, unnumbered, Providence, Rhode Island  ????
African Lodge, No. 459 ER(M), Boston, Massachusetts granted a Warrant to a new Negro Lodge in
Providence, Rhode Island even though it was contrary to the terms of its English (Moderns) Warrant.


--- PAGE 68 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
62


--- PAGE 69 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
63
UNITED STATES
SOUTH CAROLINA
While details are not clear, the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of South Carolina was formed no later than
October 1868, from a number of Prince H all Lodges in the State. The precise number is unclear, but it
appears that Hayden Lodge No. 8 (PHMass) was the eldest Lodge in the new organization and that Phoenix
Lodge No. 1, PHNY was the second. According to the records of the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Missouri
for 1871, there were a total of six “subordinate” Lodges in South Carolina (a reference to the fact that the
Lodges were subordinate to the new Grand Lodge).
Hayden Lodge, No. 8 PHMass, Charleston S.C. 1865-1868
Joseph Walkes, in Black Square & Compass notes that Grand Master Lewis Hayden, in his address
before the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Massachusetts, on December 27, 1865 advised that h e h ad
authorized the issue of Warrant No. 8 to Hayden Lodge in Charleston. It is interesting that other sources cite
the origin of this Lodge as being under the authority of the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of New Jersey, but this
has been proven incorrect.
Walkes, in his Black Square & Compass, argues a strong case that Hayden Lodge No. 8 was formed
by the members of the Prince Hall Lodge in the 54th Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry Regiment just prior
to the Regiment leaving Charleston as well as Prince Hall Masons in the 54th’s sister Regiment, the 55th
Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry. The Charter Master of Hayden Lodge was First Sergeant William H. Gray.
By October 1868, Hayden Lodge and “other Lodges” had formed the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of
South Carolina.


--- PAGE 70 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
64


--- PAGE 71 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
65
UNITED STATES
TEXAS
After Texas joined the Uni ted States of  Am erica, the 9th and 10th Regi ments of  Unites States
Cavalry were assigned to provide policing and protection in the western areas of the States, including along
the Texas-Mexico border.
Baldwin Lodge, No. 16 PHTexas, in the 10th Cavalry  1883-
Camp Rice, initially a railway construction camp, became home for A Troop, 10th Cavalry, in 1882.
The base camp for Regiment was located at Fort Davis, Texas. Dispensation for Baldwin Lodge in the 10th
Cavalry was given in 1883 by the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Texas. The Lodge was apparently named after
T. A. Baldwin, a white Captain and Commanding Officer of a Troop of Cavalry who became a Brigadier-
General and Commanding Officer of the 10th Cavalry.
By the spring of 1885 the Regiment, along with Baldwin Lodge No. 16, was moved into the military
department of Arizona where it was aligned against the Apache nation. By 1887 the Regiment and the Lodge
were located at Fort Verde, Arizona Territory - the Lodge by now numbering 13 members. By 1888 the Lodge
had 16 members including four Past masters. Bro. Benj. F. Potts, Past Master, was commissioned as District
Deputy Grand Master of District 6 of Texas (which covered all of Arizona). 
In 1889 Baldwin Lodge  w as rem oved to F ort Apache w here i t f ound Eureka Lod ge, No. 135
PFMissouri, which had been Chartered for both a Troop within the 10th Cavalry and also the 24th Infantry
Regiment. Relations between the two Lodges appear to have been friendly and amicable, but members did
move between the two. On November 5, 1891, Bro. Charles H. Chinn of Eureka No. 135 (who had been SW
in 1885) demitted and joined Baldwin No. 16 (where he would later become Lodge Secretary). The first
recorded death among the members of the two Lodges was recorded on February 5, 1895, with the passing
of Bro. James A. Brown (Treasurer of Baldwin  No. 16).
Troops of the 10th Cavalry were moved around the western plains areas. Documents of the Prince
Hall Grand Lodge of Texas notes the movement of Troop A and Baldwin Lodge to Fort Leavenworth, Kansas
(1893-4), Fort Assiniboine, Choteau County, and finally to Montana (1895-7). By 1897 Baldwin Lodge had
ceased to exist.


--- PAGE 72 ---
Prince Hall Freemasonry
66

