=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Principles-of-Ancient-African-Constitution-Law.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 6
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:11:10.172366
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Page 1 of 6 
  
  
PRINCIPLES OF ANCIENT AFRICAN CONSTITUTION LAW AND  
THE FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS OF AFRICAN PEOPLE 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Destruction of Black Civilization, by Dr. Chancellor Williams (pp. 181-186) 
 (Drawn from African Traditional Constitutional and Customary Laws. 
Different versions and modifications of the same laws occ urred in 
different societies. ) 
I. The People are the first and final source of all power. 
II. The rights of the community of people are, and of right 
ought to be, superior to those of any individual, including 
Chiefs and Kings (a) The Will of the People is the supreme 
law; (b) Chiefs and Kings are under the law, not above it. 
III. Kings, Chiefs and Elders are leaders, not rulers. They are the elected 
representatives of the people and the instruments for executing their will. 
IV. Government and people are one and the same. 
V. The family is recognized as the primary social, judicial, economic and political 
unity in the society; the family council may function as a court empowered to try 
all internal (non -serious) matters involving only membe rs of the Extended Family 
Group 
VI. The Elder of each Extended Family or Clan is its chosen  representative on the 
Council. 
VII. Decisions in council are made by the Elders. The Chief or King must remain 
silent. Even when the Council’s decision is announced, it is through a Speaker 
(Linguist). Decrees or laws are issued in the same manner to assure that the voice 
of the Chief or King is the “voice of the people.” (This is an example of a provision 
that had wide variations. ) 
PRINCIPLES OF ANCIENT AFRICAN CONSTITUTION LAW 
AND 
THE FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS OF AFRICAN PEOPLE


--- PAGE 2 ---
Page 2 of 6 
  
  
PRINCIPLES OF ANCIENT AFRICAN CONSTITUTION LAW AND  
THE FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS OF AFRICAN PEOPLE 
VIII. The land belongs to no one. It is God’s gift to mankind for use and as a 
sacred heritage, transmitted by our forefathers as a bond between the living and 
the dead, to be held in trust by each generation for the unborn who will follow, a nd 
thus to the last generation. 
IX. Each family, therefore, has a right to land, free of c harge, sufficient in acreage 
for its economic well -being; for the right to the opportunity and means to make a 
living is the right to live. 
(a) The land, accordingly, cannot be sold or given away. 
(b) The land may be held for life and passed on to the fam ily’s heirs, and so on 
forever. 
(c) The Chief is the Custodian of all land, the principal duty being to assure fa ir 
distribution and actual use. 
X. All moneys, gifts, taxes and other forms of donations to Chief or King still 
belong to the people for relief or aid to individuals in times of need. 
XI. Every member of the state has a right of appeal from a lower to higher courts. 
(In some states appeals could be taken even from the King’s Court t o the “Mother 
of the Nation. ”) 
(a) The procedure was from the Chief’s Village Court to the District Court, to the 
Provincial Court, to the King’s Court. 
(b) Such appeals were allowed in serious or major crimes only (thos e affecting the 
whole society). 
XII. Fines for offenses against an individual went to the victims, not the court. 
(a) Part of the money receive from the loser was returned to him as an expression 
of goodwill and desire for renewal of friendship. 
(b) Another part was given as a fee to the trial court as an appreciation of justice. 
XIII. “Royalty” in African terms means Royal Worth, the highest in character, 
wisdom, sense of justice and courage.


--- PAGE 3 ---
Page 3 of 6 
  
  
PRINCIPLES OF ANCIENT AFRICAN CONSTITUTION LAW AND  
THE FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS OF AFRICAN PEOPLE 
(a) He who founded the nation by uniting many as one must be the real leader, 
guide and servant of his people. 
(b) The peopl e, in honor of the founder of the nation, thereafter will elect Chiefs 
from the founder’s family (lineage) if the heirs meet the original test that reflected 
the Founder’s character, whose spirit was supposed to be inherited. 
XIV. The trouble of one is th e trouble of all. No one may go in want while others 
have anything to give. All are brothers and sisters. Each is his “ Brothers’ or 
sisters’ keeper.” 
XV. Age grades, sets, and classes are social, economic, pol itical and military 
systems for 
(1) basic and advanced traditional education (formal); 
(2) individual and group responsibility roles 
(3) police and military training; 
(4) division of labor; 
(5) rites of passage and social activates. 
In chiefless societies the age grades are the organs of social,  economic and 
political action. 
XVI. Bride Price or Bride Wealth is the gift that signifies mutual acceptance on the 
part of both families and is intended as a mainly security bond which may b e 
returned in part if the wife turns out to be worthless or utterly unsatisfactory. 
(Bride Wealth tended to stabilize the institution of marriage . This was not “wife -
buying. ”) 
XVII. The community as a whole is conceived of as One party, opposition being 
conducted by leaders various factions. 
(1) Factions of opposition are usually formed by the different age-groups: 
(2) Debates may go on indefinitely or until a consensus is reached.


--- PAGE 4 ---
Page 4 of 6 
  
  
PRINCIPLES OF ANCIENT AFRICAN CONSTITUTION LAW AND  
THE FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS OF AFRICAN PEOPLE 
(3) Once a consensus is reached, and the community’s will determined, a ll open 
opposition to the common will must cease. 
(4) Those who opposition is so serious that they are unwilling to accept the new 
law may “splinter off”’ either individually or in groups under a leader (to form a 
new state or the nucleus for it). 
XVIII. In warfare the object is not to kill the enemy, but to overcome him with fear, 
if possible, such as screaming war cries, loud noise, hideously masked faces, etc. 
Where killing is unavoidable it must be kept at a minimum. In case of defeat there 
must be some kind of ruse to enable the enemy to retire in honor. 
XIX. The African religion, not being a creed or “articles of faith,” but an actual 
way of thinking and living, is reflected in all institutions and is, therefore, of the 
greatest constitutional significance. 
(a) Politically, the role of the Chief as High Priest who presents the prayers of the 
people to his and their ancestors in Heaven is the real source of his inf luence, 
political or otherwise. 
(b) Socially, the “rites of passage,” songs, and the dances (to drive away evil, 
etc.), as well as the purification and sacrificial rites for the a tonement of sins—are 
important. 
XX. Since religious and moral law must prevail and the race survive, a man may 
have more than one wife; for he is forbidden to sl eep or cohabit with his wife 
either during the nine months of pregnancy or during the suckling period of one or 
two years thereafter. 
(1) The wife may not prepare meals for the husband or family during the menstrual 
period. 
(2) The husband is strictly forbidden to have any kind of relationship with the one 
wife during the set period that belongs to another wife. 
XXI. The supreme command of the fighting forces is under the Council, not the 
King. If the King becomes the Comman der-in-Chief, it is through election by the 
Council because of his qualification as a general or field commander. This


--- PAGE 5 ---
Page 5 of 6 
  
  
PRINCIPLES OF ANCIENT AFRICAN CONSTITUTION LAW AND  
THE FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS OF AFRICAN PEOPLE 
position ends with the war and the armed forces returned to former status under 
the Council or, more directly under the respective Paramo unt chiefs. There were 
no standing armies 
 
THE FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS OF THE AFRICAN PEOPLE 
The following is a representative number of human rights, also drawn from 
customary laws or tradition constitutions: 
Every member of the community had- 
(1) The right to equal protection of the law. 
(2) The right to a home. 
(3) The right to land sufficient for earning livelihood for oneself and family. 
(4) The right to aid in times of trouble. 
(5) The right to petition for redress of grievances. 
(6) The right to criticize and condemn any acts by the au thorities or proposed new 
laws. 
(Opposition groups, in some areas called “The Young men,” were recognized by 
law.) 
(7) The right to reject the community’s final decision on any m atter and to 
withdraw from the community unmolested—the right of rebellion and withdrawal. 
(8) The right to a fair trail. There must be no punishment greater than the offense, 
or fines beyond ability to pay. This latter is determined by income and status of  the 
individual and his family. 
(9) The right to indemnity for injuries or loss caused by others. 
(10) The right to family or community care in cases of sickness or accidents.


--- PAGE 6 ---
Page 6 of 6 
  
  
PRINCIPLES OF ANCIENT AFRICAN CONSTITUTION LAW AND  
THE FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS OF AFRICAN PEOPLE 
(11) The rights to special aid from the Chief in circumsta nces beyond a family’s 
ability. 
(12) The right to a general education covering morals and good manners, fami ly 
rights and responsibilities and boundaries, farming and marketing, rapid mental 
calculation, and family, clan tribal, and state histories. 
(13) The right to apprentice training for a useful vocation. 
(14) The right to an inheritance as defined by custom. 
(15) The right to develop one’s ability and exercise any developed skills. 
(16) The right to protect one’s family and kinsmen, even by violent means if such 
becomes necessary and can be justified. 
(17) The right to the protection of moral law in res pect to wife and children —a 
right which not evens the king may violate. 
(18) The Right of a man, even a slave, to rise to occupy the highest position in the 
sate if he has the requisite ability and character. 
(19) The right to protection and treatment as a guest in enemy territory once one is 
within the gates of the enemy’s village, town or city. 
(20) And the right to an equal share in all benefits from common community 
undertakings if one has contributed to the fullest extent of his ability, no matter 
who or how many were able to contribute more. 
These constitutional principles and practices were held on to and carried by the 
migrating Blacks to every part of the African continent. This fact is one of the most 
remarkable parts of the black man’s story —most remarkable because even those 
societies that sank to barbarism held on the fundamentals age after age as though 
they were clutching the last threads of life itself. Even in Egypt, where the Asian 
and European impact was greatest, African constitutional ism could not be 
completely blotted out.

