=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Project Paperclip.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 18
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:10:39.557718
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
1
Project Paperclip
“This is absolutely intolerable,” Josef Stalin complained to one of his rocket 
experts, Lieutenant G. A. Tokaty.  “We defeated the Nazi armies; we occupied Berlin and 
Peenemünde; but the Americans got the rocket engineers.” (Swenson, Grimwood, and 
Alexander).
Stalin had every right to be angry.  In its haste to gather all of the scientific 
advancements and secrets developed by Nazi Germany, the United States cut corners and 
formed secret organizations, often partaking in some rather dubious acts.  One of these 
plans was entitled Project Paperclip, a plot by the American government to bring many of 
the leading and renowned scientists and engineers from Nazi Germany to America.  This 
project has been shrouded in secrecy for many years; it has only recently come to light. 
Therefore, the history of this project is not widely known to the American public.  It is 
important that we look at this history and the effects that Project Paperclip has made on 
our future.  By examining how this project came to be, it can seen why the American 
government thought that stealing German scientists and information was important to the 
war effort and see a few of the technological advances that came about because of their 
decisions.
The United States began to make plans to steal Nazi Germany’s technological 
secrets even before the war had ended.  In fact, this drastic push to gain theses secrets 
was a reaction to America’s intense involvement in the Pacific Theatre.  Seeing that 
European Theatre was quickly drawing to a close, the United States also wanted to 
conclude the war with Japan, assuming taking Germany’s secrets would assist them in 
this goal.  They also hoped to take away the might of Germany.  By stealing many of the


--- PAGE 2 ---
2
Nazi’s scientists and other intellectuals, Germany would not be able to rearm itself and a 
possible World War III could be prevented (Hunt, “Secret” 9).
Realizing that living on a different continent than Germany might pose a slight 
problem, the Americans decided to join forces with the British, sharing secrets, 
manpower, and money (Beyerchen).  John Gimbel, a noted researcher on Project 
Paperclip says: 
In their campaign to defeat Germany, the British and 
Americans created a number of special intelligence 
organizations and units whose function was to identify, 
secure, guard, and exploit “valuable and special 
information, including documents, equipment and persons.” 
(Gimbel).
One of these organizations was FIAT, or the Field Information Agency, Technical, 
created by American Major General Kenneth W. D. Strong (Beyerchen).  Strong saw the 
need to organize and create different types of information-acquisition teams.  Therefore, 
he created two different teams, the T-Forces and the CIOS (Gimbel).  The T-Forces were 
special military units whose objectives were to secure and guard intelligence and 
counterintelligence targets for exploitation by other teams (Gimbel).  The CIOS, or the 
Combined Intelligence Objectives Subcommittee, was in charge of finding the 
aforementioned targets and arranging for them to be exploited by FIAT (Gimbel).  
In order to find excellent targets who might know important information, CIOS 
consisted of engineers, physicists, mathematicians, and chemists “borrowed” from 
various positions in Washington, universities, and industrial organizations (Gimbel). 
They had three objectives: first, to find out what the Germans knew about weapons, fuel, 
rockets, engines, communications, etc. that might help the Allies, second, to gather 
information which might shorten the war with Japan, and third, to locate, detain, and


--- PAGE 3 ---
3
possibly intern German personnel to obtain information and to stop it from going 
somewhere dangerous, such as Egypt, Spain, or many Latin American countries 
(Gimbel).  Scientists, technicians, and engineers who were of particular interest were put 
onto a list, named “The Black List” (Gimbel).
One of the most important teams sent in to do this task was code-named “Alsos.” 
Led by American Lieutenant Colonel Boris Pash, and assisted by chief scientist Samuel 
Goudsmit, the Alsos team went into Nazi territory to find out about Hitler’s atomic bomb 
project.  It was believed at the time that Hitler was very close to creating the world’s first 
atomic bomb.  The Americans wanted this information not only to stop Hitler from using 
the bomb, but also to create the technology for themselves.  However, upon finding the 
men with the proper expertise in the subject, the Americans found that the Germans were 
in fact about two years behind the American atomic bomb project.  What they did 
discover, though, was the German expertise in biological and chemical warfare.  A few of 
the men found by the Alsos team were the first scientists and researchers drafted into 
what would eventually become Project Paperclip (Hunt, “Secret” 11).
Due to increased interest, civilian teams also joined forces with the military to 
create the Joint Intelligence Objectives Committee (JIOC) (Walker, Lester).  The main 
function of the JIOC was to collect physical information before it was destroyed.  They 
had their work cut out for them.  Many German scientists were unwilling to merely give 
their secrets away, either due to orders from and love of the Reich, or because of their 
dislike of the actions of the Allied troops.  These scientists destroyed damning equipment 
and data, or hid it in various secret locations, such as caves, hidden safes, or mineshafts. 
Often, the information was covered by containers full of liquid oxygen that would


--- PAGE 4 ---
4
immediately destroy the evidence if handled poorly (Walker).  Many secret caches were 
accidentally destroyed by the Allied forces attempting to recover information and some 
may still remain hidden even today.
After Germany surrendered and the country began to be carved up between 
Russia, America, France, and Britain, the United States began to show a concentrated 
focus on obtaining important German scientists instead of their information and research, 
as did Stalin and Russia.  In June 1945, the precursor to Project Paperclip, named Project 
Overcast, was instituted by the Americans (Beyerchen).  Project Overcast basically stated 
that the CIOS should use “The Black List” to take all possible prospects and to transport 
them out of the other three sectors, especially the Russian sector, and to settle them into 
the American sector for possible relocation to America in the future.  They were 
particularly interested in getting these scientists away from the Russians due to 
threatening comments made by Stalin.  Stalin had said that he wanted to create a “trans-
Atlantic rocket” and to use them as “an effective straight jacket for that noisy shopkeeper 
Harry Truman” (Swenson, Grimwood, and Alexander).  
Another early phase of the project was code-named “Safehaven.”  This was set up 
to insure that interesting scientists did not flee to other countries, particularly Latin 
America, where they could not be exploited by Americans (Hunt, “Secret” 9).  America 
even made deals with certain Latin American nations and pressured others to deport these 
Germans back to Germany where the Americans would have access to them (Hunt, 
“Secret” 145).
At first, America was not very successful.  Many scientists instead went to work 
for Britain or Russia, who offered them a better salary, work, and living conditions


--- PAGE 5 ---
5
(Swenson, Grimwood, and Alexander).  However, America managed to convince many to 
move to the American sector of Germany with the promise of good salaries and 
protection for them and their families (Gimbel).  They were told they could take whatever 
fit into two suitcases and a backpack and to make sure that they brought their science 
materials (Gimbel).  Some of these scientists were relocated to an internment camp near 
Frankfurt, called “Dustbin” (Beyerchen).  By doing this, America alienated their British 
ally.  Instead of sharing information and people as they had previously done, they began 
to steal important people from the British sector (Beyerchen).  
Life for these scientists was not all as they have been expecting.  Many of these 
people never received the compensation they had been promised by the Americans. 
Instead of the large homes they had left behind, the researchers and the people they 
brought with them were forced to live in small apartments or in abandoned schools that 
had been taken over by the Americans.  Here, they were interrogated and forgotten about 
(Gimbel).  Few of these scientists, technicians, and engineers were recruited into Project 
Paperclip and taken to America, as had been promised to them earlier.  Many of these 
people simply had to go back to what remained of their homes once the Americans 
decided that they were no longer of worth.
The original idea behind Project Paperclip never actually included relocation of 
scientists to the United States.  Instead, American personnel were charged with earning 
the trust of important German scientists, and failing that, to steal their information.  The 
War Department was afraid that Hitler was close to being able to create an atomic bomb, 
which they knew he would not hesitate to use against the Allied forces (Hunt, “Secret” 9). 
The politicians in Washington were regretting their decision to allow Germany to rearm


--- PAGE 6 ---
6
themselves at all and were hoping that by stealing German research, they could take away 
Hitler’s military power and end the war, thus correcting their mistake (Hunt, “Secret” 9).
However, when this plan was lain out to then president Franklin Roosevelt, the 
project looked to be in serious trouble.  OSS chief William Donovan suggested to 
Roosevelt that some of the double agents they had hired, including many SS officers and 
German intelligence agents be offered special privileges once the war was over.  One of 
these privileges was, in Donovan’s words, “permission for entry into the United States 
after the war, the placing of their earnings on deposit in an American bank and the like.” 
(Hunt, “Secret” 9-10).  Donovan needed presidential approval for the plan.  Roosevelt 
was not a fan of the idea.  He quickly sent Donovan an angry answer, clearly stating his 
opinions on the project:
I do not believe that we should offer any guarantees of 
protection in the post-hostilities period to Germans who are 
working for your organization.  I think that the carrying out 
of any such guarantees would be difficult and probably be 
widely misunderstood both in this country and abroad.  We 
may expect that the number of Germans who are anxious to 
save their skins and property will rapidly increase.  Among 
them may be some who should properly be tried for war 
crimes or at least arrested for active participation in Nazi 
activities.  Even with the necessary controls you mention I 
am not prepared to authorize the giving of guarantees 
(Hunt, “Secret” 10).
Roosevelt’s reply did not stop the Americans in Germany from making 
unsanctioned deals and promises to the personnel they wished to recruit.  As early as 
1944, some important scientists were anticipating eventual relocation to the United States 
(Hunt, “Secret” 11).  Roosevelt’s death, Harry Truman’s acquisition to the presidency, 
and the increasing acknowledgment of German scientists that the war was lost breathed 
new life and interest in Project Paperclip.


--- PAGE 7 ---
7
After months of deliberation by the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Gimbel), Project 
Paperclip was authorized by President Harry Truman in August of 1945 (Walker, 
Andrew).  This operation was a refinement of the previous Project Overcast, but this time 
relocated those members of the research teams who were of particular interest to the 
United States to America for short term consulting jobs.  However, Truman said that 
anyone found “to have been a member of the Nazi Party and more than a nominal 
participant in its activities, or an active supporter of Nazism militarism” (Walker, 
Andrew) should be excluded.  Personal files on all of the scientists were collected; 
intelligence officers working hard to determine each person’s involvement in the Nazi 
party.  If these scientists passed the test, they could be admitted to the United States and 
even possibly offered citizenship.  It is believed that the name “Paperclip” was created 
due to the fact that the files of the scientists who were to be drafted into Project Paperclip 
were paper-clipped to immigration forms.
However, many Americans opposed this idea.  Still reeling from the war, America 
was full of anti-Nazi sentiment and rumors that the government was going to offer well 
paying jobs and citizenship to these ex-Nazis did not sit well with them.  Many important 
military and technological leaders argued that, “‘Great Britain, France, and the USSR will 
proceed unilaterally’ to exploit Germans for civil purposes whether or not the US did so” 
(Gimbel).  There was particular unrest within Washington.  A Pentagon general 
recognized the need for selling Project Paperclip to the American public, saying, “We’ve 
got to discourage people from thinking that this is a grand opportunity to sign some of the 
Germans permanently and take them into the Army Air Forces and make them American


--- PAGE 8 ---
8
citizens” (Lasby, 72-3).  Major General Hugh Knerr, the commander of the U.S. Air 
Force in Europe also argued for Project Paperclip, saying:
Occupation of German scientific and industrial 
establishments has revealed the fact that we have been 
alarmingly backward in many fields of research.  If we do 
not take the opportunity to seize the apparatus and the 
brains that developed it and put the combination back to 
work promptly, we will remain several years behind while 
we attempt to cover a field already exploited. (Walker, 
Andrew).
The Joint Chiefs of Staff deliberated some more, deciding to bring a total of three 
hundred and fifty German rocket scientists and engineers over to America (Gimbel). 
However, as members of the CIOS began to trickle back to Washington after their time in 
Germany, they brought back with them even more names, concerned that many of the 
forgotten scientists, engineers, and technicians would be picked up by the British, French, 
and especially, the Russians (Gimbel).  The Joint Chiefs of Staff convened together once 
again, this time meeting with the State War-Navy Coordinating Committee (SWNCC) to 
approve more names for Project Paperclip (Gimbel).  On the eighteenth of November, 
1945, a few of the first selected group arrived in the United States. (Walker, Andrew). 
The small group of seven men landed in Boston, headed by their leader, Wernher von 
Braun, all having signed a six-month contract with the Army (Lasby, 88).  Meanwhile, on 
the nineteenth of February, 1946, the Joint Chiefs of Staff and SWNCC agreed to bring 
about one thousand more German and Austrian scientists and technicians over to 
America, giving them the chance to gain U.S. citizenship upon completion of a good job 
(Gimbel).
Because this relocation was supposedly top secret, it is not really known exactly 
how many people officially came over due to Project Paperclip, even though most of the


--- PAGE 9 ---
9
records have been declassified due to the Nazi War Crimes Disclosure Act (“Records”). 
Some speculate it was only five hundred, others say sixteen hundred, while others said it 
was over three thousand.  The actual number is difficult to determine.  When the United 
States decided to bring over three hundred and fifty scientists, they were not taking into 
account the number of dependants who also came over.  The most important of the 
scientists were allowed to bring over their families, and sometimes even their secretaries 
and their secretaries’ families (Gimbel).  
However, it is relatively simple to track the most famous of these scientists, 
engineers, and technicians and see what they have accomplished.   The most well-known 
of these names include Wernher von Braun, Arthur Rudolph, and Walter Paul Emil 
Schreiber, although many others were also quite famous.  The importance of these 
individuals to American technology can be seen by examining what they accomplished in 
their lifetimes.
Wernher von Braun was a leading rocket scientist by the time the war ended.  V on 
Braun had created the Aggregate 4 (A-4) missile in 1942.  This missile was admired by 
Hitler himself, who renamed the missile the V-2 (“Reach for the Stars”), or the 
Vergeltungswaffe zwei (Swenson, Grimwood, and Alexander).  Hitler was so impressed 
with the weapon that he set up an impossible production schedule for them, trying to have 
as many made as possible before the end of the war.  Hitler was planning on using the 
missile to decimate Britain’s major cities (“Reach for the Stars”).  V on Braun and the 
company he worked for, Peenemünde, fell hopelessly behind due to the unreasonably 
high demand.  As the technical director of Peenemünde, von Braun was afraid that he 
would be held personally responsible for the failure to produce enough missiles (“Reach


--- PAGE 10 ---
10
for the Stars”).  Fortunately for von Braun, the war was beginning to end and many 
Germans were becoming aware of the fact that they were soon going to be defeated. 
After being given orders from Heinrich Himmler to desert the Peenemünde facility, von 
Braun met with his team and together they decided to surrender themselves to either the 
Americans or the British.  They had heard various tales from refugees about the brutality 
of the Russians and decided that they would fare better with the other two countries 
(Lasby, 34).  The team hid various plans and weapon samples in a cave and headed 
toward an Allied encampment.  Somewhere along the way, the team decided to surrender 
themselves only to the Americans instead of to the British.  V on Braun later described 
what made them come to that decision: “We despised the French, we were mortally afraid 
of the Soviets, we did not believe the British could afford us, so that left the Americans” 
(Lasby, 125).  
When the Americans found that the nearly complete Peenemünde team was 
willing to defect to their side, they immediately started to milk all of the possible 
information that they could out of them.  The Americans entered the Peenemünde facility 
shortly before the Russians did, quickly shipping much of the information and about one 
hundred complete V-2 rockets back to America (“Aftermath”).  V on Braun and a few 
select members of his team were the first German scientists to be inducted into Project 
Paperclip.  The Americans wanted to split up his Peenemünde team, but von Braun 
fought hard to keep them together, saying that they would be more productive in the end 
because they were used to working as a collective (Lasby, 124).  
As with many of the German scientists involved in Project Paperclip, there were 
some who opposed bringing von Braun to America.  He had been a member of numerous


--- PAGE 11 ---
11
Nazi organizations and was even a ranking member of the SS.  V on Braun had also 
designed the missiles which had destroyed Britain, leading to a lot of prejudice against 
him.  His personal intelligence file said that he was a “security risk” (Walker, Andrew). 
However, his file was “cleaned” and rewritten, with less emphasis on his Nazi activities 
and more emphasis on what he could do for America.  With this new file, he was 
welcomed to America with open arms.
V on Braun’s team, now called the “von Braun Rocket Team,” consisted of Drs. 
William Mrazek, Walter Haeussermann, Ernst Stuhlinger, Eberhard Rees, Hans E. 
Hollmann, Herbert Wagner, and Robert Lusser.  Together these men made a lasting 
impression on American technology, working closely with the Air Force and with NASA 
(“German Rocket Scientists”).  They were influential in creating such things as the first 
U.S. orbiting satellite, the Juno; the Pioneer 4, the first U.S. lunar probe; the Apollo 8, 
which put the first U.S. astronaut into space; the Apollo 11, which put the first man on the 
moon; the Lunar Roving Vehicle, the first vehicle to travel on the moon; and the Skylab, 
the first U.S. space station (“German Rocket Scientists”).  Together with his fellow 
scientist and friend, Dr. Krafft Ehricke, von Braun wrote a book entitled The Mars 
Project in which they described how man could travel to Mars.  They argued that it could 
be done by a type of ferry system, which later led to the creation of the modern space 
station (“German Rocket Scientists”).
 
Dr. Arthur Rudolph was another famous scientist and a member of the von Braun 
Rocket Team (“German Rocket Scientists”).  He had been another V-2 project engineer 
(“Records”), but had worked as the chief director of Nordhausen, where the V-2s were


--- PAGE 12 ---
12
produced (Walker, Andrew).  He became the NASA project director for Saturn V , the 
moon rocket used to send the Apollo projects to the moon (Hunt, “Arthur”).  
However, Rudolph is probably more well known for the scandal that erupted 
years later, when his activities at Nordhausen and the neighboring prison camp Dora were 
finally discovered.  It was revealed by the Department of Justice (“Records”) that some 
twenty thousand workers from Dora had died while working at Nordhausen (Walker, 
Andrew).  The prisoners had been starved, beaten, hung, and shot, essentially used as 
cheap slave labor to build the missiles (Hunt, “Arthur”).  As described by Colonel James 
L. Collins, the leader of the infantry unit that entered Dora, “They [the prisoners] had 
been starved to death.  Their arms were just little sticks, their legs had practically no flesh 
on them at all.” (Hunt, “Secret” 17-8).  By this time this connection was made, Rudolph 
had become a U.S. citizen with a good life in America.  Rather than fight various legal 
battles to clear his spotted past, he renounced his citizenship, going back to live in 
Germany in 1984 (“Records).
Another controversial scientist was Dr. Walter Paul Emil Schreiber (“Echoes from 
Nürnberg”).  He was a Wehrmacht major general in charge of Sanitary Division of the 
Military Medical Academy and a prominent member of the Reich Research Council 
(Hunt, “Secret” 151-2).  The Russians, recognizing his worth, quickly snagged him 
before the Americans could.  The Russians, in addition to gaining his knowledge, had 
used him as a witness against Herman Göring (“Echoes from Nürnberg”), a move which 
surprised the Americans.  When the Americans tried to take the supposedly under arrest 
Schreiber at Nürnberg for interrogation and trial proceedings, the Russians quickly took 
the scientist back to the Russian sector.  U. S. Prosecutor Alexander Handy was told that


--- PAGE 13 ---
13
the Americans could not have Schreiber: “I was unofficially informed that he was 
working on some ‘hot’ assignment for the Russians and that they required his services 
without interruption.” (Hunt, “Secret” 152).  Schreiber stayed in the Russian sector of 
Germany for another two years before finally escaping into the American sector of Berlin 
(“Echoes from Nürnberg”)  The United States contracted him for six months to be a 
consultant to the U.S. Air Force in the vaguely named “Global Preventive Medicine” 
Division (“Echoes from Nürnberg”).  
In 1952, a newspaper column appeared which ruined the public’s opinion already 
low opinion of Schreiber (“Records”).  Even before this column, there had been many 
rumors floating around that Schreiber’s past was not as clean as the government claimed. 
Various investigators and media members complained that such a controversial figure 
was should not even be allowed in the United States, let alone employed by its 
government.  Victims of his torture came forward, testifying of the gruesome “tests” they 
had been forced to endure (Hunt, “Secret” 153-4).
Schreiber had worked closely with many high ranking officials who were 
performing medical experiments on prisoners in concentration camps in Auschwitz 
(“Records”).  They had been testing the effects of cold water on the body and if they were 
able to freeze people and bring them back to life (“Records”).  This research was being 
done by the Germans to see if they could rescue their pilots.  They hoped to stop losing 
their pilots by being able to resuscitate those who were shot down or forced to bail in the 
freezing Atlantic Ocean.  Other tests endured by victims, such as those at Ravensbrueck 
concentration camp, dealt with chemical and bone experimentation.  Women had their 
legs cut open and deliberately infected with gangrene so that a bone transplant had to be


--- PAGE 14 ---
14
performed.  If these women survived the experiment and subsequent transplant, in 
addition to having extreme mental scarring from the experience, they then became 
crippled for life (Hunt, “Secret” 153).
While the United States seemed not to tie Schreiber to the experiments 
themselves, they seemed to be fully aware of the accusations.  Schreiber himself 
definitely knew about them and never denied what was said about him.  The Air Force 
immediately refused to renew his contract when the heat was put on them by the media 
and the American people (“Echoes from Nürnberg”).  When asked what he was doing for 
the Air Force, two official conflicting statements were released: that he was working on 
unclassified matters, and also that it was confidential and could not be discussed 
(“Echoes from Nürnberg”).  It was also stated that the Air Force had no idea of 
Schreiber’s possible past.  When it looked that prosecution was inevitable for Schreiber 
for abetting and possibly performing inhuman experiments on human subjects (“Echoes 
from Nürnberg”), he quickly escaped to Argentina, never returning to the United States 
(“Records”).  
Besides these three men, von Braun, Rudolph, and Schreiber, numerous other 
scientists, technicians, and engineers came over to America from 1945 to 1950 (“German 
Rocket Scientists”).  The ten most famous atomic scientists of the time, including Nobel 
Prize winners Otto Hahn, Werner Heisenberg, and Max von Laue came to America in 
1945 (“German Rocket Scientists”).  Drs. Woldemar V oigt, Alexander Lippisch, Hans 
Multhopp, and Richard V ogt all designed aircraft and bombers, working for such 
companies as Boeing, Bell, and Martin (“German Rocket Scientists”).  Anton Flettner 
produced mass production helicopters, with a special easy to fly twin intermeshing rotor


--- PAGE 15 ---
15
system.  Dr. Adolph Busemann built supersonic wind tunnels (“German Rocket 
Scientists”).  Kurt Debus and Herbert Wagner designed guided missiles (Hunt, “Secret” 
6) and rocket launchers along with Willy Fielder.  In addition, Fielder also developed the 
idea for submarine launched ballistic missiles, named Polaris and Poseidon, while 
attending a conference with a friend from the Navy (“German Rocket Scientists”). 
Gerhard Neumann developed gas turbine engines after being hired by GE, working his 
way up to become a CEO.  His catchphrase was “full speed or bust” (“German Rocket 
Scientists”).  Hubertus Strughold, the “father or space medicine,” designed NASA’s on-
board life-support systems (“German Rocket Scientists”).  
Other scientists worked on developing, improving, and discovering nerve gas, 
hardened armor, guided missiles, stealth technology, etc.; the list goes on (Walker, 
Andrew).  They elaborated on most of the American technology of the time, perfecting 
such things as gyroscopic controls, parachutes for rocket recovery, and moveable 
deflector vanes in the exhaust of rockets (Swenson, Grimwood, and Alexander).  Modern 
day cruise missiles are still based on the V-1 created by Wernher von Braun (Walker, 
Andrew).  Scramjets on NASA’s X-43 hypersonic aircraft are still based on a design 
invented by early German jet pioneers (Walker, Andrew).  It is probable that due to these 
scientists, Americans increased what they were capable of tenfold.
Despite its rather shady beginnings, Project Paperclip was overall rather 
successful for the Americans.  It brought to America many leading and important 
scientists who helped to further advance the American technological scene.  By learning 
about the early history of this secret operation and the circumstances surrounding it, we 
can better realize the impacts that Project Paperclip had on the war effort.  Not only did


--- PAGE 16 ---
16
the project bring important German scientists to America so as not to allow other 
countries to have their intelligence, but they also helped further American technology, an 
impact felt even today.


--- PAGE 17 ---
17
Bibliography
“Aftermath: Operation Paperclip.”  Making the Modern World: Science in war.  2004. 
The Science Museum. 
http://www.makingthemodernworld.com/stories/defiant_modernism/01.ST.03/?
scene=10; Internet; accessed 29 March 2008.
“Echoes from Nürnberg.”  Time.  10 March 1952.  CNN. 
http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,822226,00.html; Internet; 
accessed 5 April 2008.
“German Rocket Scientists.”  Scientists & Friends.  2007.  Scientists and Friends. 
http://www.scientistsandfriends.com/index.html; Internet; accessed 5 April 2008.
“Reach for the Stars.”  Time.  17 February 1958.  CNN. 
http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,862899-1,00.html; Internet; 
accessed 29 March 2008.
“Records of the Office of the Secretary of Defense (Record Group 330).”  Interagency 
Working Group (IWG).  The National Archives. 
http://www.archives.gov/iwg/declassified-records/rg-330-defense-secretary/; 
Internet, accessed 26 March 2008.
Beyerchen, Alan.  “German Scientists and Research Institutions in Allied Occupation 
Policy.”  Autumn 1982.  History of Education Quarterly, V ol. 22, No. 3 Special 
Issue: Educational Policy and Reform in Modern Germany. 
http://www.jstor.org/stable/367770; Internet; accessed 29 March 2008.
Gimbel, John.  “U.S. Policy and German Scientists: The Early Cold War.”  1986. 
Political Science Quarterly.  http://www.jstor.org/stable/2151624; Internet; 
accessed 29 March 2008.
Hunt, Linda.  “Arthur Rudolph of Dora and Nasa.”  NASA and Nazis. 
http://cndyorks.gn.apc.org/yspace/articles/nazis.htm; Internet; accessed 29 March 
2008.
Hunt, Linda.  Secret Agenda: The United States Government, Nazi Scientists, and Project 
Paperclip, 1945 to 1990.  New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1991.
Lasby, Clarence G.  Project Paperclip.  New York: Atheneum, 1971.
Swenson, Loyd S. Jr. and James M. Grimwood and Charles C. Alexander.  “The Highway 
to Space.”  This New Ocean: A History of Project Mercury.  1989.  National 
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). 
http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/SP-4201/ch1-3.htm; Internet; accessed 
5 April 2008.


--- PAGE 18 ---
18
Walker, Andrew.  “Project Paperclip: Dark Side of the Moon.”  BBC News.  21 November 
2005.  BBC.  http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/magazine/4443934.stm; Internet; 
accessed 29 March 2008.
Walker, C. Lester.  “Secrets By the Thousands.”  Harpes Magazine.  October 1946. 
http://www.scientistsandfriends.com/files/secrets.doc; Internet; accessed 5 April 
2008.

