=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Rastafari From Outcasts to Culture Bearers.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 209
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:09:50.911952
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
Rastafari


--- PAGE 3 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 4 ---
Rastafari
FromOutcasts to Culture Bearers
Ennis Barrington Edmonds
2003


--- PAGE 5 ---
198 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10016
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford
It furthers the University's objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
and education by publishing worldwide in
Oxford New York
Auckland Bangkok Buenos Aires Cape Town Chennai
Dar es Salaam Delhi Hong Kong Istanbul Karachi Kolkata
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Mumbai Nairobi
São Paulo Shanghai Taipei Tokyo Toronto
Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University Press
in the UK and in certain other countries
Copyright © 2003 by Ennis Barrington Edmonds
The moral rights of the authors have been asserted
Database right Oxford University Press (maker)
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press,
or as expressly permitted by law, or under terms agreed with the appropriate
reprographics rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction
outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights Department,
Oxford University Press, at the address above
You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Edmonds, Ennis Barrington.
Rastafari : from outcasts to culture bearers / Ennis Barrington Edmonds.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-19-513376-5
1. Rastafari movement. 2. Jamaica—Religious life and customs. I. Title.
BL2532.R37 E36 2002
299′.676—dc21 2002074897


--- PAGE 6 ---
To Donnaree,my wife, and Donnisa,my daughter,
the two persons aroundwhom my life revolves;
and to the ancestorswhose struggles have enabled us
to surviveand thrive
v


--- PAGE 7 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 8 ---
Foreword
One of the most useful things about Ennis Edmonds'sRastafari: From Outcasts to Culture Bearersis that it correctlytraces
the connection between the emergence of Rastafarianism and the history of resistance and black consciousness that
has been part of the Jamaican experience for years. The truth is that there has always been a committed Jamaican
counter- culture that celebrates and sees redemption in Africa and rejects the European values that have oppressed a
society. But prior to the advent of popular culture and especially the music recording business in the late twentieth
century, its apparatus of cultural formation was controlled fully by the elite who, to a large extent, ran the educational
apparatus and the economic system. But much of the country was beginning to question in earnest the structure of
colonial society by the early 1930s. The emergence of Rasta during that period corresponds with so much that was
happening around the world. Rastas could tell that social unrest in Jamaica was going to lead to a movement away
from colonial rule and, having heard Marcus Garvey speak of the importance of Africa to black people in the New
World, found in his remarkable success as a leader of thousands in the United States quite an amazing thing. Those
whowouldpresage thearrivalof Rastafarianism also witnessed and read about thedramaticstruggleof Emperor Haile
Selassie to remove the Italians from his homeland of Ethiopia, which became theﬁrst African nation to effectively
oust, by force, a colonial power. These were monumental times, and these men, fullysteeped in the apocalyptic visions
of the world, saw something important in all of these happenings.
I grew up in Jamaica at a time whenRastas were stillregarded as useless, lazy, half-insane, ganja-smokingilliterateswho
were of no value to society. Teachers, students, ofﬁce workers, and anyone of social importance could not grow locks,
and families would go into mourning when their sons would start sprouting them. I heard the term“black heart man”
used again and again as a means of expressing fear or ridicule of the Rastafarian. And this was in the early
1970s—after Bob Marley's emergence as an international


--- PAGE 9 ---
star, afterSelassie's arrival in Jamaica, and after so much had been written about theimportance of Rastafarianism. The
problem was that Rasta was counter to the strong Christian structure that dominated and continues to dominate
Jamaican life and was seenﬁrst as heretical and misguided before its powerful social and political ideas were fully
appreciated. Most important, however, was the Rastafarian insistence that Africa was the promised land and that
Jamaicans should look to Africa for their model of value rather than to Europe, which was seen as foolish and a
painful reminder of slavery and oppression. Rasta was an offense to those who wanted to deny the African part of
their heritage. And the truth is also that in Jamaica at that time the privileging of lighter-skinned people was standard
practice. Rastas were confronting so many of these long-held notions and so were bound to face a great deal of
resistance.
What Edmonds manages to do here is offer us a way to appreciate the importance of Rastafarianism as a religious
phenomenon that is consistent with much of what happens when religious groups and movements grow and develop.
Indeed, there is a remarkable logic to the development of Rasta that deﬁes the notion that it is a movement of the
insaneand themisguided. Giventheway in whichRastafarianism has arrived in theworld,itis usefulwhensomeoneis
able to help us understand its origins and propose how we can then comprehend how it functions in the world today.
Again and again, I encounter students who are interested in reggae music and the music of Bob Marley, but they
remain deeply puzzled by Rastafarianism because of its seemingly peculiar tenets of faith. Some of the oddities that
would seem to suggest that Rastafarianism is an absurd religion include:
1. Rastafarianism has been around for only about seventy years. Yet in that time it has gained inexplicable fame
around the world, boasting converts from all races and nationalities.
2. Adherents of the faith appear to be relativelysmall in number. One study suggests that less than one percent of
Jamaicans describe themselves as Rastafarians. Yet the average non-Jamaican assumes that Rastafarianism is the
national religion of Jamaica.
3. Rastas believe that Selassie is the returned messiah, that he is Jah, or God. They believed this fully prior to his
passing in 1975 and after. Many believe that Selassie was a dictator and a cruel leader. That he is regarded as
God incarnate seems patently absurd.
4. It is not clear whether Selassie believed himself to be a God.
5. For Rastas, marijuana, which is illegal in Jamaica, is a sacrament for worship.
6. Rastas regard western society as part of Babylon—a system and a place that is the enemy of the blacks of the
world.
viii
FOREWORD


--- PAGE 10 ---
7. There is still no organized set of doctrines and teachings that constitute Rastafarianism, and no organized
Rastafarian church, temple, or worship space exists.
8. There are numerous sects and groupings of Rastafarians, each holding to its own belief system and structure.
9. Rastafarianism is a deeply patriarchal religion that remains completely behoven to the Bible.
10. For the Rasta, the land mass of Africa, one of the poorest continents on earth, is the promised land.
11. Finally, Rastas seem to harbor a great deal of anger against white people, and yet the religion is accepted and
popular among some white people.
Most non-Rastafarians tend to be puzzled by the movement. And yet there is little question that it has come to deﬁne
Jamaican culture in ways that few people can understand. The value of examining the history of Rastafarianism and
placing it in the larger context of social, political, and religious resistance to colonial hegemony cannot be
underestimated.
What we discover in this book is that there is nothing absurd or farfetched or insane about Rastafarianism. Its
formation is part of the genius of an anticolonial intelligence married to a strong nationalist sensibility. What is clear is
that Rastafarianism is one of the most complexand insightful reactions to colonialism and the oppression of blacks
that has emerged in the last hundred years.
Rastafari: From Outcasts to Culture Bearershelps us to make sense of Rastafarianism's strange oddities that have puzzled
many. Most important, the book helps us to understand this religion as one that patterns the emergence of religions in
so many other cultures. There is an immense social and cultural logicto the emergence of Rastafarianism, even as it is,
like all other religions, shaped by mystery and pure faith. This work helps us to understand the complexand
sometimes elusive truth of how religions grow and sustain themselves, but Edmonds realizes that models that have
been used to explain other religious phenomenon don't always apply comfortably to the peculiar developments of
Rastafarianism. For instance, very few modern religions have assumed such a signiﬁcant place in the mainstream of
popular culture through the use of music. Marley is not seen as a religiousﬁgure; rather he is seen as a rock star, a pop
hero, an icon. And yet his faith is at the core of his music. Rastafarians have dubbed Marley the psalmist and prophet
of the movement. This is a crucial part of the wonderful complexity of the Rastafarian movement.
Jamaica owes a great debt to the men who formed the Rastafarian movement in the 1930s. Rastafarianism has served
as a lightning rod of discussion about race, identity, and the history of oppression that has
FOREWORD ix


--- PAGE 11 ---
been part of the Jamaican society for centuries. If Jamaicans have rejected in part the denial of their African heritage,
Rastafarianism is the reason. If Jamaican churches have come to reexamine the extent of their relevance to the real
experience of the poor, black members of their congregations, they owe a great debt to Rastafarianism for reminding
them of the cultural history of race in religion. If Jamaicans have evolved a language that is willing to see in itself a
quality of resistance and creativity that challenges the control of the colonial structure, it owes much of this to the
music of the Rastafarians and to the way that it has transformed the way Jamaicans view themselves in the world.
These are all some of the ideas that Edmonds helps us to appreciate in this book.
Kwame Dawes
University of South Carolina
x
FOREWORD


--- PAGE 12 ---
Acknowledgments
As the raising of a child depends on the efforts of many in the community, so the writing of a book depends on the
input and support of many people in the life of the author. For this reason, I wish to express my appreciation and
gratitude to all who have contributed to my intellectual growth and the undertaking of this project. First, I
acknowledge those teachers who, over the years, have been my role models, mentors, and inspiration: Dulcie Roach
from Hopewell Primary School, St. Elizabeth, Jamaica; Elaine Bortner and Philip Hirai from Jamaica Wesleyan Bible
College, Savanna-la-mar, Jamaica; and Roger Ringerberg, Jamaica Theological Seminary, Kingston, Jamaica. Second,
thanks to my professors and advisors at Drew University, Karen Brown, Jonathan Reader, and Roger Shinn, whose
advice and insights have helped to shape the focus and hone the arguments of this book. Third, the research for this
book was facilitated by Barry Chevannes, who directed me to resources and provided critique of my approach; Samuel
Vassel, who was not only my intellectual sounding board but also the most avid supporter throughout the entire
project; and Charlene Adams, my research assistant in 2001, who read the manuscript and suggested many editorial
changes. Finally, thanks to my wife, Donnaree, for her support and inspiration, especially when I despaired about ever
bringing this book to fruition.


--- PAGE 13 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 14 ---
Contents
Introduction 3
1. Charisma, Routinization, and Rastafari 7
2. Dread Uprising: The Emergence of Rastafari 29
3. Babylon and Dread Revitalization 41
4. The Ethos of Rastafari: Structure, Ideology, and Ritual 67
5. “Coming in from the Cold”: Rastafari and the Wider Society 79
6. Rastafari Rules: Bearers of Jamaican Popular Culture 97
7. Summary and Conclusions 117
Appendix: A Review of the Literature on Rastafari 127
Notes 141
Selected Bibliography 171
Index 185


--- PAGE 15 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 16 ---
Rastafari


--- PAGE 17 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 18 ---
Introduction
Since its emergence among the poor in Jamaica in the early 1930s, the Rastafarian movement has progressed from
being an obscure group of protesting outcasts in theghettos of West Kingston to being a movementﬁrmly entrenched
in Jamaican society.1 From Jamaica, the movement has spread around the world,especiallyamong oppressed peopleof
African origin.2 Beyond people of African descent, Rastafari has been embraced by persons from numerous other
ethnic groups around the world, especially by those who perceive themselves as suffering some form of oppression
and marginalization. Furthermore, the Rastafarian movement has made itself felt across the globe through the
inﬂuence it has exerted on popular music and fashion (clothing, hairstyles, personal accessories, and so on). Against
this background, this study seeks to investigate how the movement has made the transition from obscurity to
popularity; how Rastas, much maligned, persecuted, and repressed because of their perceived threat to Jamaican
society, have gained a place at thetable of acceptability;and how, starting out as denigrated outcasts, theyhaveover the
last forty years of the twentieth century become the dominant force in the evolution of popular culture in Jamaica.
In this book, I will analyze the factors responsible for the entrenchment of Rastafari in Jamaican society. My use of
entrenchment
3 is synonymous withroutinization,4 a term used by MaxWeber to signify the process by which an emergent
charismatic movement institutionalizes itself and secures a permanent existence.5 Both terms will be used to refer to
the process whereby a nascent movement becomes established and embedded in the social and cultural fabric of a
society.
Weber maintains that for any movement to continue to exist beyond the initial period of the charismatic eruption that
brought it into being, it must be routinized. Although the Rastafarian movement has been in existence since the early
1930s, scholars have been rather hesitant in afﬁrming its routinization. Leonard Barrett, theﬁrst widely recognized
authority on the movement, contends that there is“ambivalent routinization.”
6 However,


--- PAGE 19 ---
he neither indicates what necessitates the use of the termambivalent nor explains what it signiﬁes. Jack Anthony
Johnson-Hill, by viewing the essence of Rastafari as an experience of liminality—that is, a threshold experience of
leaving“Babylon” but not yet arriving in the“promised land”—has eliminated the possibility of routinization.7 Neville
G. Callam argues that the movementhas gained a kind of“functional” routinization, partly through its ability to adapt
itself to“contextual exigencies” and partly because of the accommodating strategies used by the established order to
defuse the Rastafarian threat to its stability.8 Callam starts in the right direction but ends his discussion by interpreting
the Rastafarian movement in terms of Troeltsch's church-sect typology, and thus he concludes that the Rastafarian
emphases on individualism, sojourning, and repatriation militate against the emergence of formal organizational
structures and, by implication, genuine routinization.
9
These scholars have failed to afﬁrm the routinization of Rastafari primarily because they have uncritically accepted the
idea that the development of formal organizational structures (whether rational-legal or traditional) is the only
indicator of the routinization of new movements. In contrast, this interpretive study unequivocally asserts the
routinizationof themovement.Of course theuse of Weber's theory of routinization is somewhat problematic,because
Rastafari lacks the institutional structures that Weber posits as the evidence of routinization. However, I am afﬁrming
that, even without these structures, Rastafari has carved out a niche for itself and has become embedded in the social
and cultural fabric of Jamaican society; it thus ought to be considered entrenched or routinized.
My thesis is that the entrenchment of Rastafari in Jamaica is made evident by three factors: (1) the internal
development of the movement, (2) the gradual rapprochement between the movement and the wider society, and (3)
the impact of Rastafari on the evolution of Jamaica's indigenous popular culture. The internal development includes
the emergence of a network of“houses” and “mansions” as the collectiveunits of the movement,
10 of a world view or
ideology encoded in a varietyof symbols, and of collectiveritual activities, whichinitiateand conﬁrm individuals in the
principles of Rastafari. With regard to the rapprochement between Rastafari and the rest of the society, the attitudes of
the wider society toward Rastas have gone through several phases, from outright repression, to efforts of
accommodation, to the cooptation of Rasta symbols and music by political campaigns of the 1970s, to the
“coronation” of Bob Marley as a culture hero in the late 1970s, andﬁnally to the culture tourism of the 1980s and
1990s. Rastas' inﬂuence on Jamaica's indigenous culture is quite pervasive, especially in popular parlance, the visual
arts, tourist art, and the performing arts. However, their most celebrated contribution
4
INTRODUCTION


--- PAGE 20 ---
is to the development of reggae music, which Jamaicans regard as their cultural contribution to the world. Later I will
return to these issues and will demonstrate how they contribute to the routinization of Rastafari in Jamaica.
The nature of this book dictates a heavy reliance on documentary analysis. My focus is interpretation not ethnography.
Therefore, I have not sought to generate primary data on the movement but to analyze and re-analyze the growing
body of scholarly and popular literature on the movement, including sociological and anthropological studies,
biographies, monographs, dissertations, published and unpublished essays, and periodical articles. Archival sources,
such as newspaper reports, policy statements, pamphlets, and organization manuals have also provided useful
information.
Chapter 1 reviews and reﬁnes Weber's theory of charisma and routinization, using insights from a number of social
movement scholars. Though this book focuses on routinization, it is necessary to locate routinization and its twin
concept, charisma, in the wider context of Weber's view of social change.
11
In chapter 2, I identify the economic, political, and cultural deprivation of the poor in Jamaica as the sociohistorical
context that precipitated the emergence of the Rastafarian movement. I demonstrate that the African and Afro-
Christian religions, Ethiopianism, and Garveyism are the sources that shaped the Rastafarian ideology, its posture of
resistance, and some of its practices and beliefs. I also trace the career of Leonard Howell, the charismatic personality
who exerted the most inﬂuence on the movement in its formative stages.
Chapter 3 looks at the Rastafarian view of Babylonand the Rastafarian development of a distinctculture as a response
to life on the underside of a society shaped by the history of plantation slavery and organized around European-
derived values and institutions. The chapter points out that the Rastafarian response to the oppression and alienation
of the Jamaican situation is in essence an attempt to create a cultural alternative based on the re-appropriation of an
African identity. I include this chapter for two reasons. First, it highlights what I consider the essence of Rastafari: the
rejection of Babylon and the re-appropriation of Africa. More important for this study, it contrasts the Rastafarian
rejection of Jamaica as Babylon with the fact that the movement has become entrenched in that very society.
Chapters 4, 5, and 6 present the evidence for the entrenchment of the Rastafarian movement in Jamaican society. In
these chapters, I spell out the factors I have identiﬁed as responsible for the routinization of Rastafari, namely, the
development of a distinct Rastafarian ethos uniting all
INTRODUCTION 5


--- PAGE 21 ---
Rastas, the gradual rapprochement between Rastas and the rest of the society, and the impact of Rastafarian creativity
on cultural formation in Jamaica.
Chapter 7 summarizes myﬁndings, makes some observations on their implications for the theory of charisma and
routinization, and discusses the future of the Rastafarian movement.
6 INTRODUCTION


--- PAGE 22 ---
1 Charisma, Routinization, and Rastafari
In this chapter, I analyze and critique Weber's theory of charisma and routinization in order to develop a revised
version of this theory, which will be particularly applicable to an analysis of the entrenchment of Rastafari in Jamaican
society. I begin by placing the theory of charisma and routinization in the wider context of Weber's work and proceed
to discuss and critique Weber's treatment of charisma and routinization. In this critique, I draw on insights from social
movement theorists while focusing on issues that have particular relevance to the phenomenon of Rastafari. Finally, I
conclude by outlining my revisions to Weber's theory in order to render it more applicable to the phenomenon I am
analyzing.
Charismaand Routinizationin the Contextof Weber'sWork
Weber's theory of charisma and routinization must be placed within the broader context of his work. At the most
general level, the theory of charisma and routinization is related to Weber's concern with the role of ideas as social
forces, that inﬂuence the social actions of individuals and groups. At an intermediate level, his theory of charisma and
routinization forms part of the theory of social change implicit in his work. At the most immediate level, it is one
element in his theory of legitimate domination. Therefore, I will discuss how charisma and routinization relate to ideas
as social forces, to rationalization, and to legitimate domination, before outlining Weber's theory of charisma and
routinization.
Charismaand Ideasas Social Forces
As in much of Weber's work, his theory of charisma and its routinization is in conversation with Karl Marx. While
Marxsees all of social life, and hence all social change, as emanating from and shaped by the economic


--- PAGE 23 ---
substructure of the society, Weber contends that ideas and the human actors who conceive and countenance them are
often independent variables shaping cultural and social change. As sociologist Lewis Coser observes,“He [Weber]
attempted to show that the relations between systems of ideas and social structures were multiform and varied
and that causal connections went in both directions, rather than from infrastructure to super- structure alone.”
1 In
The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, Weber makes this point quite explicitly.2 He demonstrates that a group
of people armed with a set of ideas and ideals went about organizing their lives according to those ideas and ideals.
As a result, they ended up changing the nature of the capitalist economic endeavor by injecting it with an
eminentlycalculatingspirit. This calculating spirithas become thedistinctivefeature of Western capitalism and Western
societies in general.The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism is part of a series of cross-cultural studies, which
speciﬁcally investigate the relationships between religious ideas and economic lifein the West, ancientIsrael, India, and
China.
3 Weber's argument throughout is that the character of each religious system affected its approach to rational
economic activities.
While the conversation with Marxis rather ex plicit inThe Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, the conversation is
only implicitin Weber's discussion of charisma and its routinization. What is obvious, however, is that the charismatic
leader is a person who emerges with essentially new ideas and who, by propagating those ideas, is able to reorient
people's approach to the problems they face or the things they consider signiﬁcant. If the charismatic leader succeeds
in gaining a following, and if the charismatic community succeeds in routinizing, then the emergent forces, originally
linked to charisma, are likely to havelong-term consequences for thedirectionof cultural and socialformation. Seen in
the light of Weber's overall concern with ideas as social forces, his theory of charisma and routinization is yet another
argument for the role of ideas as effective instruments of social change.
4
Charismaand Rationalization
Although Weber's work has no speciﬁc or systematic treatment of the subject of social change, there is an implicit
theory of social change in his treatment of rationalization and charisma. Rationalization, or rationality, is the master
concept that runs as a unifying theme through all of Weber's work. As Talcott Parsons observes in the introduction to
The Sociology of Religion, rationalization is the process through which cultures create their religious cosmologies and
address the problem of meaning.
5 Accordingly, Weber is supremely concerned with how human beings, as purposeful
social
8 RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 24 ---
actors, create, maintain, and change their cosmologies as well as their concrete situations. The centrality of
rationalization in Weber's sociology reﬂects his fundamental assumption that human beings are purposeful social
actors. That is, their actions are driven by certain motives or motivationsand are geared toward certain ends, whether
ideal or material.
6 Hence, Weber's generic meaning ofrational (rationalization, rationality) must be understood in terms
of the purposes thattheactors havein mind. For example, theactions of rain dancers are rational to theextentthatthe
participants believe that their dancing is the efﬁcient means of producing rain. Although their belief may not
correspond with the facts as we understand them from a modern, scientiﬁc point of view, their actions are rational in
as much as they are geared toward certain goals. Therefore, Weber argues that even in the most primitive situation,
“religiously and magically motivated behavior is relatively rational,” in that the behavior is purposively geared to the
addressing of existential needs, especially economic survival and the problem of meaning.
7
Inmodern Western societies, however, rationalization or rationalityhas become embedded in bureaucracy, which seeks
to employ“the most technically efﬁcient strategy for attaining goals.”8 In The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism,
Weber explores the distinctive characteristic of rationalization in the West and argues that it has its roots in Puritan
Protestant theology and practices. He seeks to demonstrate that capitalism in the West is characterized by rational
calculation, which matches means with ends. This rationalization grew out of the Calvinist-Puritan ethos in which
believers systematized their behavior in order to bring glory to God and to prove their election by Him through
success in a worldly vocation. These believers saw material success as a sign of their election and proof that they were
glorifying God in their calling. Therefore, they set about their worldly business in a systematic manner, using the most
efﬁcient means to achieve success as indexed by the accumulation of material resources.
9 Although largely detached
from its religious roots, this calculating spirit has become entrenched in the West andﬁnds its purest manifestation in
bureaucracy, which is a typeof organization based on rationally developedand clearly expressed rules, characterized by
clearlydeﬁned hierarchical relationshipsand speciﬁc responsibilities, and geared toward theattainmentof speciﬁc goals
by the most efﬁcient means available.
Whether in societies of ancientantiquityor in modern Western societies, as human knowledge increases, rationalization
adjusts and matches means to the desired ends, effecting a process of social change generated by rationalization that is
gradual and incremental.
10 For example, as scientiﬁc knowledge increases in industrial societies, there is a gradual
increase
CHARISMA, ROUTINIZATION, AND RASTAFARI 9


--- PAGE 25 ---
in technological innovationsand an attendant increase in the efﬁciency with which problems are solved and goods and
services are produced.
The other force generating social change in Weber's scheme is charisma. Borrowing the concept of charisma from the
New Testament, where it simply means“gift of grace,” or the possession of divine powers, Weber gives it a much
wider sociological application.11 For him, charisma refers to an extraordinary quality, often claimed and considered to
be of divine or supernatural origin, whichenables some social actors to secure thedevotionand commitmentof others
to the causes they espouse.
12 An individual possessing this quality, prototypically the prophet,“takes the responsibility
for announcing abreak in the established normative order”13 and calls people to a commitment to a new world view, a
new standard of behavior, or the undertaking of certain new endeavors.14 The person declaring this break and calling
for this new commitment legitimates such action by claiming to stand in special relationship to the divine and to have
received special gifts or revelations.
15
Because of charisma's radical departure from the normative order, Weber regards it as“the great revolutionary force.
”16 Being bound neither by past traditions nor by the present legal or rational structures of society, charisma is indeed
revolutionary. The bearer of charisma“preaches, creates and demandsnew obligations—most typically, by virtue of
revelation, oracle, inspiration, or by his own will, which are recognized by the members of the religious, military, or
party group because it [sic] comes from such a source.”
17 Charismatic personalities are therefore innovators and agents
of social change, not by making some technical adjustments or further systematizations of the prevailingideas, but by
espousing new ideas, making new demands, and creating new visions for potential followers.
That rationalization and charisma should embody Weber's view of social change is somewhat paradoxicaland may lead
to the accusation that Weber is somewhat contradictory. The source of the alleged contradiction lies in the fact that
Weber claims that charisma is irrational and anti- rational, the opposite of rationalization or rationality.
18 However,
Weberis wellaware of the potential contradictionand points out in whatsense each is revolutionary. The revolutionary
force of rationalization, he says,“works fromwithout: by altering the situation of life and hence its problems,ﬁnally in
this way changing men's attitudes toward them; or it intellectualizes the individual.”
19 Weber continues in another
context:
As we have seen, bureaucratic rationalization, too, often has been a major revolutionary force with regard to
tradition. But it revolutionizes withtechnical means, in principle, as does every economic reorganization,
10
RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 26 ---
“from without”:I t ﬁrst changes the material and social order, and through them the people, by changing the
conditions of adaptation, and perhaps the opportunities for adaptation, through a rational determination of means
and ends.20
On the other hand, charisma produces change by effecting“subjective or internal reorientation,” which may then
produce “a radical alteration of the central attitudes and directions of actions with a completely new orientation of all
attitudes toward the different problems of the world.”21 Thus, charisma and rationalization do not really conﬂict. On
the contrary, Weber's treatment suggests that ongoing change is only possible as the processes of rationalization and
charismatic eruption operate in dynamic tension. Thoroughgoing rationalization, which Weber believes has become
characteristic of Western society, will solidify into an iron cage, which robs people of their intuition, creativity, and
freedom;
22 and charismatic eruption, without routinization (a rationalizing process), will be an eminently transitory
phenomenon having no lasting effect on social change.23 Therefore, according to Weber, the evolutionof cultural and
social systems turns on two foci: gradual adjustments of the means that people use to achieve the ends they desire and
the sudden eruption of essentially new forces embodied in and expressed by individuals who claim special gifts or
special revelation.
Charismaand LegitimateDomination
The other context in which Weber's treatment of charisma belongs is his sociology of domination. Weber deﬁnes
domination as the likelihood that the commands given by a person, or groups of persons, will be obeyed by those to
whom the commands are given.24 Having noticed that the domination of some by others is a universal phenomenon,
Weber raises the question of what disposes some people to obey others. In answering this question, he notes that
people obey others for different reasons. Some people's acceptance of the authority of others is simply a matter of
custom, habit, or self-interest. They obey because that is what they have always done or because they derive some
economic, political, or ideal beneﬁts from submitting to the authority of others.
25 Others obey because those in power
have an administrative apparatus that threatens non- compliance with some form of punishment, including the
withholding of resources and privileges or the use of physical force.
26 Weber argues that no system of domination is
satisﬁed to have compliance based only on habit, self-interest, or threat of punishment.“Every system,” he says,
“attempts
CHARISMA, ROUTINIZATION, AND RASTAFARI 11


--- PAGE 27 ---
to establish and cultivatethebelief in its legitimacy.”27 Wherever thisattempt succeeds, compliance is a result of a belief
that those commanding obedience have a legitimate basis to do so. Weber calls thislegitimate domination, or authority,
and he identiﬁes three types of such domination: traditional, based on accumulated customs; rational-legal, based on
standards arrived at by accepted procedures; and charismatic, based on personal appeal.
Traditional domination is believed to be legitimate because it is based on the acceptance of the cumulative beliefs and
customs that have accrued and precedents that have been established in a particular culture. Patriarchal households
and patrimonial estates provide the best examples of social systems where the exerciseof authority invokes this type of
legitimacy.
28 Domination or the exercise of authority may also be justiﬁed because it is based on accepted rules and
procedures, which have been legally constituted and instituted and which stipulate that certain persons holding certain
positions have the right to exerciseauthority over others. This type of domination is called rational-legal authority, and
ﬁnds its highest expression in the bureaucracies of the Western world.
29 The third type of domination eschews both
legal and traditional norms and procedures andﬁnds legitimacy in the belief that those demanding compliance with
their commands are endowed with extraordinary qualities and exceptional powers (qualities and powers not accessible
to ordinary persons), which predestine them to lead others.
30 This is charismatic authority, and it is characteristic of
leaders who do not attain their positions on the bases of age-old traditions or by procedures rationally arrived at and
legally instituted, but on the basis of their claims to special powers, inspiration, or revelations.
In periods of relativestability, the transfer of power from one individual to another takes place according to normative
procedures, whether they have been arrived at traditionally or rationally. However, societal stress, institutional crises,
and social conﬂicts may lead to the weakening, if not the demise, of traditional and rational-legal authority and to the
emergence of charismatic leadership. Conversely, because of the unstable nature of charisma, it tends to remain the
basis of authority only for brief periods, after which it is replaced by traditional or rational-legal structures.
The Meaningof Charismaand Routinization
Having established the relationship of charisma and routinization to Weber's broader concerns, I will proceed to
outline Weber's theory of charisma and routinization in more detail. According to Weber, in its purest form, charisma
is
12
RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 28 ---
a certain quality of an individual personality by virtue of which he is considered extraordinary and treated as
endowed with supernatural, superhuman, or at least speciﬁcally exceptional powers and qualities.31
What is obvious is that, while legal and traditional authorities are based on established norms, which give leaders the
right to demand certain courses of action from their followers, the authority of charismatic leaders is based solely on
theforce of their personalitiesand on their abilityto attract a following and to evokeloyalty. Speaking of the manner in
which prophets become leaders, Weber says,“They do not receive their mission from any human agency, but seize it,
as it were.”
32 Weber claims that charisma, in its purest and most potent form,“transforms all values and breaks all
traditional and rational norms,”33 and it“overturns all[established] notions of sanctity” and propriety.34 In other words,
since authority is vested in the individual whose right to rule is legitimated by charisma, the norms of the external or
established order do not hold sway over such an individual. Followers or potential followers are likewise called to
march to a different drumbeat—the one sounded by the charismatic leader.
The genius of charismatic leaders is their ability to embody and articulate a certain mission with which others identify
and to which they commit themselves.
35 The identiﬁcation of groups of people with the message of charismatic
personages is necessary for the formation of charismatic communities. Otherwise, those claiming charismatic qualities
will remain isolated individuals and are likely to be regarded as eccentric.
Because charismatic leadership is dependent on its recognition by followers, leaders are frequently called upon to
validate their possession of charisma by the demonstration of “magical powers, revelations, heroism or other
extraordinary gifts.”
36 To maintain recognition of their charismatic qualities, charismatic leaders must continue to
furnish proofs and achieve successes that are of some beneﬁt (psychological, political, or economic) to their followers.
Otherwise, their ability to command awe and devotion will wane and eventually disappear.37
This leads to the question of the milieu and conditions that are likely to generate a charismatic eruption. Weber makes
only brief references to the sociohistorical conditions favoring the emergence of charismatic leadership, and in each
case, he characterizes those conditions as extraordinary. He notes,“All extraordinary needs, i.e., those whichtranscend
the sphere of everyday economic routines, have always been satisﬁed in an entirely heterogenous manner: on a
charismatic basis.”
38 From this, he extrapolates that charismatic leaders are persons outside the routine power structure,
who emerge as“‘ natural’ leaders in moments of distress—whether
CHARISMA, ROUTINIZATION, AND RASTAFARI 13


--- PAGE 29 ---
psychic, physical, economic, ethical, religious, or political.”39 In another reference he asserts that charisma“arises out
of the anxiety and enthusiasm of an extraordinary situation.”40 In yet another reference, Weber postulates,“The
charisma of theheroor themagician is immediatelyactivated whenever an extraordinary eventoccurs: a major hunting
expedition, a drought or some other danger precipitated by the wrath of the demons and especially a military threat.”41
These references reveal Weber's image of charismaticﬁgures as those leaders who are able to summon the willof their
followers to deal with societal exigencies not amenable to the solutions proposed by the normative order. These
leaders emerge “during times of crisis, when traditional ways of doing things seem inappropriate, outmoded and
inadequate tothe problems confronting people.”
42 Therefore, in its essence, charismaticauthorityis innovative because
it calls would-befollowers to new ideological orientations and practices and seeks to effect changes in the social order.
For Weber, thecharismaticeruption is by its nature unstableand temporary. Charisma, in its purest form, only existsat
the moment of its initial emergence. In Weber's words,“It cannot remain stable, but becomes either traditionalized or
rationalized or a combination of both.”43 So Weber argues that, for the charismatic eruption to have perpetual
existence, it has to become transformed and routinized in line with the material and ideal interests of the charismatic
community.
44
While material or ideal interests are the internal or social-psychological motivations for the routinization of the
charismatic community, there are objective factors pressing the demand for routinization. Weber identiﬁes these
factors as the problem of successionat the passing of theoriginal charismaticleader, the problem of economic support
(the pressure to secure a more regularized and rational source ofﬁnancial support than free- will gifts), and the
problem of administration (the need to establish formal procedures for recruiting new members and to foster
relationships and exercise authority by some means other than personal appeal).
45
There are three distinct emphases in Weber's discussion of the routinization of charisma. Theﬁrst involves the
formation and perpetuation of a group, society, or movement based on the initial charismatic impetus. The second is
concerned with how authority is gained and legitimated in the movement after the passing of the charismatic
personage. The third deals with how the ideas or message born in the charismatic eruption may become embedded in
the social fabric of the society. Weber explains theﬁrst two in some detail, but merely hints at the third.
In Weber'sﬁrst emphasis, routinization refers to the process by which a charismatic eruption becomes a social or
religious movement and gains a
14
RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 30 ---
state of permanence and a recognizable place in the life of the society.46 A routinized movement is therefore one that
has gained regular and predictable modes of existence, rather than an existence that is dependent on the personal
dictates of a charismatic leader. At this point, Weber's discussion of routinization is primarily devoted to the
institutionalization of the initial charismatic experience. He emphasizes the fact that the community that gathered
around a charismatic leader is later transformed into a state, church, sect, academy, school, party, newspaper, or
periodical.
47 This means that the informal personal relationships, that usually characterize a charismatic community are
transformed into an organizational hierarchy in which there are formal rules that govern relationships and the exercise
of authority. Also, this typically means that the charismatic message, which is usually freely uttered by the charismatic
leader under the claim of inspiration or revelation,becomes solidiﬁed into“dogma, doctrine, theory, reglement, law or
petriﬁed tradition.”
48
Weber's second emphasis is on how successive leaders are chosen and how their authority is legitimated. With the
passing of charismatic leaders, the members of the movements founded on the leaders' personal appeal must decide
who are going to become the new leaders and how they are going to be chosen. According to Weber, this may be
decided in one of several ways: (1) by appointment on the basis of established criteria of charismatic qualities, (2) by
appointment through the use of oracles, (3) by designation of a successor by the original charismatic leader, (4) by
appointment by the administrativestaff or electionby the community, (5) by succession according to heredity, or (6) by
achievement of the qualiﬁcations of leadership through ordination or education.
49 The end result is that the authority
of successive leaders is legitimated, not by virtue of their extraordinary gifts or special relationships to God, but by
some secondary agents, either their predecessors or those they wish to lead, or by some established procedures.
Though second- and third-generation leaders have the right to exercise authority—and some have almost total
authorityover their followers—their authority is notbased on pure charisma but on“depersonalized charisma.”
50 That
is, theright to exerciseauthorityoverothers does notinhere in thespecial qualities of these leaders or in their callingby
God, but in the position they occupy in a traditional or rational organization.
51 Depersonalized charisma can take at
least three forms. It may become transferable, as in“lineage charisma,” where leadership resides in a family and is
transferred from one member to another according to established traditions. It may be acquired, usually through
education or training. Or it may become attached to an ofﬁce, which one comes to occupy through appointment or
ordination.
Weber's third emphasis is often missed by his interpreters. This emphasis
CHARISMA, ROUTINIZATION, AND RASTAFARI 15


--- PAGE 31 ---
involves essential elements of the charismatic ethos becoming incorporated into the social fabric of the society. Weber
argues that all or some elements of the charismatic ethos may penetrate existing structures and become“fused with
them in the most diverse forms, so that it [trans- formed charisma] becomes a mere component of a concrete
historical structure. In this case it is often transformed beyond recognition, and identiﬁable only on an analytical level.
”
52 In this case, charisma does not become transformed into an organized institution, but the ideas, concerns, and
practices of the charismatic community become diffused in or assimilated by the wider society, thereby exerting
inﬂuence on the society in a manner similar to how the Protestant ethic became a pervasive and vital element of
Western capitalism. This aspect of routinization remains undeveloped in Weber's discussion, but it is of particular
importance to this study.
ACritique of Weber'sTheory
Weber's theory of charisma and routinization has been subjected to much criticism, especially from subsequent social
movement theorists. In this section, I maintain that while these criticisms identify weaknesses in Weber's theory, they
do not constitute an invalidation of the theory as a whole. My focus is on several issues: the social location of the
charismatic leader, the sociohistorical preconditions favoring charismatic eruption, the elements (or sources) that
converge to give form to the charismatic message, and the nature and substance of the routinization process.
The Social Locationof Charismatic Leaders
Some scholars have taken Weber to task for characterizing charismatic leaders as emerging from and operating outside
of theroutinestructures of their societies. Theodore Long, for instance, argues thatcharismaticeruptioncan take place
within relativelyordinary situations and that the charismatic personality can arise from within the establishment or the
routine structures of the society.
53 Peter Berger also challenges the notion that the charismatic personality has to be
from outside the power structure, arguing that the Old Testament prophets were professionals within the cultic
institutions of Israel.
54
Although there is some validity to these criticisms, they are not as weighty as theyﬁrst appear. First, not all so-called
prophets represent Weber's ideal-typical charismatic personality. Berger himself makes reference to Weber's distinction
between prophets who are religious functionaries
16
RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 32 ---
within the cultus and prophets who are driven by a sense of divine mission.55 Weber, therefore, recognizes that some
so-called prophets routinely function as diviners, healers, and counselors. Such were many of the court prophets of
Israel. But the prophets who are the ideal-typical bearers of charisma do not function according to preestablished
codes. Their activities are determined by their sense of mission, which is given to them not by the cultus but by divine
revelation. In the Old Testament, therefore, Amos, who disclaimed any link to the religious institutions of Israel,
represents the genuine charismatic type, not the diviners connected to the cultus nor the court prophets who were the
king's political and military counselors.
56
Second, Weber is aware that someone within routine structures may indeed become the bearer of charisma and initiate
charismatic activities within those structures or become antagonistic to those structures. Writing about political party
bureaucracies, he states:
In normal times such a bureaucratic apparatus, more or less consistently developed, controls the party's course,
including the vitally important nomination of candidates. However, in times of great public excitement, charismatic
leaders may emerge evenin solidly bureaucratized parties, as was demonstrated by Roosevelt'scampaign in 1912. If
thereis a “hero,” he will endeavor to break the technician's hold over the party by imposing plebiscitary designation
and possiblybychangingthewholemachinery ofnomination. Such an eruptionof charisma, of course, always faces
the resistance of the normally predominant pros, especially the bosses who control andﬁnance the party and
maintain routine operations.
57
Therefore, a court prophet can conceivably become a genuine charismatic prophet upon receiving new revelations or
upon having an encounter with the divine. Isaiah is an example of such a case. Prior to his visionary encounter with
God (Isa. 6), he was apparently a counselor at the king's court. Thereafter, he became Yahweh's mouthpiece and
crusaded against the decadence of his society.
Notwithstanding the possibility of the emergence of charismatic activities within routine structures, by their very
natureroutinestructures are less fertile ground for such activities and are, therefore, less amenable to theemergenceof
charismatic inﬂuences. The sector of society that beneﬁts the least from the routine structures, especially during
periods of stress and social unrest, tends to be the most fruitful ground for charismatic eruptions. Weber's studies, as
well as the history of charismatic religious and political activities, show that the charismatic leaders who have effected
the most enduring changes have usually been marginal to and operated outside of the normative institutions of their
societies and the status
CHARISMA, ROUTINIZATION, AND RASTAFARI 17


--- PAGE 33 ---
quos of their times (for example, Jesus, Mohammed, Gandhi, Buddha, Martin Luther King, Jr., and Elijah
Muhammad).
SociohistoricalConditionsand the Eruptionof Charisma
Weber provides substantial treatment of the meaning of charisma, the personal qualities of the bearer of charisma, and
the character of the charismatic community. However, beyond stating that the conditions are extraordinary, he
uncharacteristically provides no analytic treatment of the objective factors favoring the emergence of charismatic
movements. Subsequent social movement theorists have sought to provide more deﬁnitive answers to the question of
why social movements emerge. The scholarly efforts to date may be subsumed under four theories: relative
deprivation, mass society, structural strain, and resource mobilization.
Much has been written about these theories, and an extensive analysis of each is not possible in this context.
58
Therefore, I present here only what each theory considers to be the critical factors that facilitate the rise of social
movements. According to relative deprivation theory, the primary impetus for the rise of social movements is
discontent, which emanates from the perception by a group of people that they have been barred from the resources
they deserve.
59 For mass society theory, the threats of insigniﬁcance and anonymity that people feel in complex
societies drive them to form social movements as the means of establishing identity and belongingness.60 Structural
strain theory sees a convergence of severalobjective conditions as responsible for the emergenceof social movements:
(1) structural conduciveness, that is, highly differentiated institutions, signiﬁcant conﬂict of interests, and signiﬁcant
social problems, (2) the experience of“strain” by a group (or groups) of people as a result of economic, political,
ecological, or demographic factors, (3) the emergence of generalized beliefs, which explain the causes, consequences
and solutions to thestrain being experienced, (4) certainprecipitatingfactors, or eventsthatset offcollective action, (5)
mobilization for action, that is, activities aimed at securing support and following, and (6) the absence of stiﬂing social
control.
61 Claiming that discontent and strain are inherent in all societies, the resource mobilization theory contends
that the critical factor affecting the emergence of social movements is the availability of the resources, human and
material, necessary to sustain the new movement.
62
I will not review the individual strengths and weaknesses of these theories in this context, but I will make three broad
observations about how these theories relate to Weber's view of the emergence of charisma. First, these theories, with
the exception of the structural strain theory, run the
18
RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 34 ---
risk of reductionism. By seeking to identify the one factor critical to the origin of social movements, they fall into the
trap of monocausality. Because of the complexnature of social phenomena, the isolation of a singlecausal factor for a
particular social movement is difﬁcult, if not impossible. It is therefore even more difﬁcult to identify one factor as
decisive in the emergence of all social movements. The origins of social movements are likely to be explained more
adequately by theories that recognize that several factors usually converge to give rise to new movements and that in
oneinstancea particular set of factorsmay bemoredecisive,whilein anotherinstance, a differentset of factors may be
more critical. This leads to my second observation.
Some theories focus on social-psychological factors as decisive and causative in the emergence of social movements
(relative deprivation and mass society), while others focus more on social-structural factors (re- source mobilization
and structural strain). However, they all recognize that both social-structural and social-psychological factors are
involved in theemergence of social movements.
63 For example,James C. Davies, who is a proponentof thetheory that
movements for revolutionary change originate in the discontent that people feel, points out that the feeling of
discontent is often generated byﬂuctuations in individuals' economic or political fortunes, or by the fact that their
possessions and positions do not match those of their reference groups.
64 Mass society theorists admit that it is the
complexities of modern society that generate in people the feeling of insigniﬁcance, which drives them to create
organizations as shields against the loss of personal identity. Structural strain theoreticians, while proposing a
convergence of several“objective” factors, recognize that some factors are structural (structural conduciveness) and
others are social-psychological (generalized perception of the causes, consequences, and potential solutions of the
particular strain in the society). The resource mobilization theory argues for the availability of material and human
resources as the critical elements in the rise of successful social movements. However, it is almost self-evident that
resources by themselves do not produce a movement. These resources must be utilized by human actors with
psychological motivations.
The recognition of both social-psychological and social-structural factors in the emergence of social movements to
some degree reafﬁrms Weber's basic thesis. He contends that a charismatic movement typically arises in“unusual,
especially political or economic situations, or from extraordinary psychic, particularly religious states, or from both
together. It arises from collective excitement produced by extraordinary events and from surrender to heroism of any
kind.”
65 Although Weber does not elaborate on these brief remarks, they clearly reveal his awareness that
CHARISMA, ROUTINIZATION, AND RASTAFARI 19


--- PAGE 35 ---
both social-structural and social-psychological factors contribute to the emergence of charismatic movements. Thus I
conclude that these theories, instead of refuting Weber's conclusions concerning theorigins of charismatic movements,
only make distinct a number of factors already implied by Weber.
Third, these theories seek to make pronouncements concerning all types of social movements. Thus, they are
concerned with a wide range of phenomena of which charismatic movements form a subcategory. This is particularly
true of the discussion of social movements in Western industrial societies. A signiﬁcant number of these movements
are pressure groups with a limited number of objectives vis-à-vis the established authority.
66 In other words, the
objective of these groups is to get the government (or other established authorities) to address their particular
concerns. They do not declare the established social order illegitimate and seek to replace it with their own ideal, and
therefore, they are not charismatic movements in the sense that Weber indicated. Furthermore, from their inception,
they are organized in a manner that Weber would call rational-legal. Because of the latitude of these theories, their
conclusions are only applicable to charismatic social movements at the most general level. They do not address the
origin or character of charismatic movements with any speciﬁcity.
Having made these observations, I would like to suggest that Ann Ruth Willner's theoretical construction of the
preconditions necessary for the emergence of charismatic political activities is more compelling, because it makes up
for the shortcomings of these theories. It sets out to elaborate and to make more precise Weber's rather ambiguous
statements concerning the conditions necessary for the emergence of charismatic leaders. It does this while refusing to
fall into reductionism. Moreover, it combines social-structural (political and economic), social-psychological, and
personal factors in the explanation of the rise of charismatic movements.
Drawing on a diversityof charismatic politicalmovements (Gandhi's in India, Sukarno's in Indonesia, and Nkrumah's
in Ghana), Willner describes the conditions in which the charismatic phenomenon is likely to appear as“some
convergence of social and psychological needs of people and of the situations of institutional failure in which theyﬁnd
themselves.”
67 Three sets of conditions usually converge to constitute what Willner calls the“frustration-eruption
formula” necessary for the emergence of charismatic leadership. Theﬁrst set of conditions is latent, which refer to a
state of imbalance and instability in the social order, which may manifest itself in intergroup conﬂicts and in the
marginalization of certain groups in the society. The second set is precipitant situations, which refer to events or crises
that are likely to intensify instability, conﬂicts, and marginalization. The
20
RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 36 ---
third set is perceptual reactions, which have to do with the cognitive and emotional manner in which people perceive
and experience the latent conditions and the precipitant situations.68
Willner is quick to point out, however, that these objective conditions and the perceptions that people bring to them
do not by themselves lead inevitably to the generation of charismatic leadership as Weber seems to indicate in his
statement“The charisma of the hero or the magician is immediatelyactivated wheneveran extraordinary eventoccurs.
”
69 Shenotes thatextreme deprivation and situations of alienationmay existfor a long time without theemergenceof a
charismatic leader, even when there are many aspirants for leadership positions.70 The extraordinary (to use Weber's
term) situation or“situation of acute social crisis” must converge with the emergence of charismatic personalitieswho
are able to creatively embody and articulate the grievances, feelings, and expectations of those for whom they will
become leaders.
71 Willner argues that the charismatic personalities may be instrumental in creating the conditions
necessary for their own emergence as charismatic leaders. They often deﬁne the situation and raise to consciousness
the dire realities of alienation and deprivation.For example, she argues that many Indians, Indonesians, and Ghanians
were not aware of how dismal their situations were until Gandhi, Sukarno, and Nkrumah, respectively, articulated the
social, political, and economic contradictions under which they lived.
72
Other scholars concur with Willner on this point. Curlew O. Thomas and Barbara Boston-Thomas demonstrate that
for a long time blacks in the United States faced “widespread psychological insecurity,” extensive political and
economic deprivation, and institutional failure to deal with the society's underlying racism. However, it was only as
these conditions were combined with the charismatic leadership of W. D. Fard and Elijah Muhammad that the Nation
of Islam emerged in the 1930s.
73 Similarly, Robert Alun Jones and Robert M. Anservitz argue that the rise of Saint-
Simonism in France in the 1820s was due to the convergence between the social dislocation of the French Jews after
the Bourbon Restoration (1815) and the charismatic appeal and message of Saint-Simon.
74
Therefore, the eruption of the distinctly charismatic phenomenon most typically occurs when and where there is a
convergence of a societalcrisis withcharismaticleadership. The societal crisis may be precipitatedbysocial,political, or
economic deprivation, public disorder, or feelings of alienation and discontent. The charismatic leader's blend of
personal style and message must appropriately embody and express the deeply felt needs of those caught in the throes
of tension-ﬁlled sociohistorical circumstances. Furthermore, the would-becharismatic leader must be able to articulate
an attractive alternative vision that purports to remedy the existing crisis.
75
CHARISMA, ROUTINIZATION, AND RASTAFARI 21


--- PAGE 37 ---
Sourcesof the CharismaticMessage
Weber's treatment of charisma leaves one with the impression that the substance—the ideological content and the
social posture—of the charismatic eruption emerges exnihilo. In characterizing Weber's view of charisma, Jones and
Anservitz say that“charisma thus represents the sudden eruption of quitenew forces, often linked to quite new ideas.”76
Weber's emphasis on the newness of these forces and ideas is probably an attempt to escape Marx's reductionism,
which contends that all ideas are products or reﬂections of the economic substructure. Weber wishes to establish that
ideas (especially religious ideas) do have a life of their own and cannot always be explained in reference to the
economic substructures.
However, though there is always a certain novelty to the charismatic message, further examination will reveal that
elements of this message are often distilled from ideas that have had currency in some elements of the society. Several
scholars writing from within the Weberian traditionﬁll out Weber's theory on this point. Anthony Wallace discusses
the role of charismatic leaders in the“mazeway reformulation,” which is characteristic of revitalization movements,
and comes to this conclusion:
Whether the movement is religious or secular, the reformulation of the mazeway generally seems to depend on a
restructuring of elements and subsystems which have already attained currency in society and may even be in use,
and which are known to the person who is to become prophet or leader.
77
In analyzing the charismatic message of Saint-Simon, Jones and Anservitz come to a similar conclusion. They point
out that Saint-Simon's“New Christianity,” drew heavily on two sources: the Christian notion that all persons should
loveone another and the“Jewish hopefor the coming of a Messianic Era.”
78 In fact, Saint-Simonism indicates that the
appeal of the charismatic message is derived not only from the fact that it addresses the existential circumstances of a
certaincross section of thesociety, but also from its abilityto givefresh expression to ideas already extant in this sector
of society. More speciﬁcally, Saint-Simonism was attractive to the French Jews not only because it promised them
freedom from discrimination, but also because it gave expression to their already existing belief in industrial and
commercial activities as the means to higher status and to their belief in the coming of a messianic era.
79
In the same vein, Ann Ruth Willner and Dorothy Willner indicate that part of the appeal of charismatic leaders comes
from their ability to associate themselves with the traditions of a certain group of people:
22
RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 38 ---
Speciﬁc to thecharismaticleader, according to our theory, is therole of mythsin validatinghis authority. His appeal,
therefore, can best be understood by reference to the body of myths in a given culture that his strategy taps and
manipulates, and the actions and values associated with and sanctioned by these myths. In brief, the charismatic
leader is charismatic, because, in the breakdown of other means of legitimizing authority, he is able to evoke and
associate with himself the sacred symbols of the culture.
80
Richard H. Dekmejian and Margaret J. Wyszomirski express a similar point of view:“The revolutionary nature of the
message does not preclude the selective incorporation of certain of the prevailing values and symbols. In this sense
there is continuity between old and new: the leader selectively invokes history, myths and past heroes to reinforce the
sanctity of his mission.”
81
Whether they are embodied in symbols, myths, folklore, history, or even a certain attitude toward the society, extant
ideas often become sources from which the charismatic personalities distill their message. As we will see in the case of
Rastafari, these sources are to be found in the traditions and attitudes of mind that oppressed Jamaicans developed
over centuries of exploitation and deprivation. The ability of Rastafari to survive without a centralized organization,
therefore, is best explained by the fact that it draws on ideas and attitudes that were long prevalent among the lower
classes in Jamaica. Thus, without formal organizational structures and rationalized strategies, Rastafari has been able to
tap into the predisposition of many in the society.
Routinizationof Charisma
Weber's treatment of routinization presents a charismatic movement with two options: institutionalization or demise.
In other words, the charismatic movement must take on a formal institutional structure, whether rational or
traditional, and must accommodate itself to the routines of life in the society, or it will face extinction. Mayer N. Zald
and Roberta Ash argue that Weber's limitation of the alternatives to either demise or institutionalization is constrictive
and becomes a kind of “iron law.”
82 They point out that in addition to or in place of institutionalization and
accommodation, there are various other transformations that are possible. These include “coalitions with other
organizations, organizational disappearances, factional splits, increased rather than decreased radicalism, and the
like.”
83 The kind of transformation that is experienced, according to Zald and Ash, depends on several factors: the
character of the movement (inclusive or exclusive), its ability to sustain a support
CHARISMA, ROUTINIZATION, AND RASTAFARI 23


--- PAGE 39 ---
base, its ability to maintain and achieve its goals, its ability to develop stable leadership, and the changing conditions
and sentiments within the society at large.84
Strictly speaking, Zald and Ash are dealingspeciﬁcallywith social movementorganizations (SMOs) and not with social
movements per se. Social movement organizations are not coterminous with social movements. SMOs are usually
created within social movements and are usually in the forefront in espousing the ideas and pursuing the goals of the
social movements. However, social movements generally embrace many adherents who have no organizational links to
the SMOs.
85 In consequence, the insights of Zald and Ash are speciﬁcally applicable to the fate of SMOs, the very
existence of whichWeber and others view as indicativeof the beginning of the routinization process.86 However, some
of Zald and Ash's insights are modiﬁcations of Weber's view of routinization. Particularly relevant is their postulation
that the fate of a social movement depends to some extent on the vicissitudes of its relationship with the wider society,
and that the character of the movement affects its chances of survival and the nature of its organizational structure. I
concur withZald and Ash on thispoint, but wouldadd thatthefateof a newmovement,and particularly a charismatic
movement, is also linked to the ability of its ideas and practices to became absorbed into the mainstream of the life of
the society in which it emerges and operates.
For Weber, thefactors inﬂuencingtheroutinization ofcharismaticmovementsare the problemsof succession,support
(economic),and organization. While these problems constitute theinternal factorscontributingto routinization, Weber
fails to acknowledge that there are also external factors. Also critical for the survival or demise of a new movementare
the vicissitudes of its relationship with the wider society, particularly the manner in which the guardians of the status
quo respond to the movement and the quality and intensity of the public sentiments that the movement elicits. That
Weber pays no attention to these factors in discussing the routinization of charisma is rather surprising. Since charisma
representsan eruptionof “new” forces thatdirectlyor indirectlychallenge thelegitimacy of theestablished order, some
form of reactionor response from the established order is to expected.The nature of the reaction, as wellas the ability
of thenewmovementtodeal withit, will toa large extentdeterminethesurvivabilityof themovement.
87 Hence,tothe
problems ofsuccession,support, and organization must be added the problem of dealingwith theresponse or reaction
of the wider society.
As one of the indices of routinization, Weber identiﬁes the development or adoption of hierarchical/bureaucratic
structures. However, the Rastafarian movement demonstrates that these structures are not the
24
RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 40 ---
only means available. The preference shown by Weberian scholars to look for rational, bureaucratic institutions as the
indexfor routinization probably belies their uncritical acceptance of the modernization paradigm —secular
rationalization—which purports to explain social change in the modern world. But as Paget Henry points outs,
while the modernization paradigm may be used to explain social and cultural changes in modern industrial societies,
many changes in societies peripheral to the industrial world occur through the manipulation of symbolic structures.
88 I
will add to Henry's observation that movements for social change in these societies are often not united by a
bureaucratic structure or centralized organization, but by what I call a shared ideological-symbolic-ritual ethos. The
research of Barry Chevannes concerning the relationship between Afro-Christian religions and Rastafari bears out this
point. He ﬁnds that the unifying element in Rastafari, as in the Afro-Christian traditions, is not a centralized
organization but“a fairly uniform system of beliefs,” shared symbols, and symbolic actions.
89
Furthermore, instead of becoming institutionalized as a rational-legal bureaucracy or traditional organization, as
Weber's theory emphasizes, a charismatic movement may become a diffused social/cultural force. Jones and
Anservitz, in theirstudy of Saint-Simonism in nineteenth-century France, conclude that while Saint-Simonism failed to
achieve continuity as an identiﬁable social movement,Saint-Simonist ideas of progress through scientiﬁc and industrial
innovations became the impetus for many early French industrialists. Such ventures as the building of the Suez Canal,
the building of the French railway, and the creation ofﬁnancial institutions were all undertaken under the inﬂuence of
ideas postulated by Saint- Simon.
90 The point is that the ideas of a charismatic personalitybecame a signiﬁcant force in
the social/cultural development of modern French society.
Theodore Long points to the effect of charismatic movements on what he calls“culture formation.” Long illustrates
this by drawing on Weber's study of prophecy in ancient Israel. He calls attention to the fact that while the prophetic
movement did not result in a permanent religious/social organization, the ideas of the prophets became formative in
the development of Israelite/Jewish culture in the post-exilic era:
The pre-exilic prophets had created the resource for culture-building in their call to maintain the covenant with
God. Though it had fallen mostly on deaf ears before, that proclamation planted the cultural seed that was
cultivated in captivity and grew to sustain a nation which otherwise would not have been. Only after the prophets
are gone do the effects of their prophecy become manifest in the“ . . . subjective or internal
CHARISMA, ROUTINIZATION, AND RASTAFARI 25


--- PAGE 41 ---
alterationof thecentralsystem of attitudes and directions of actionwitha completely neworientationof all attitudes
toward the different problems and structures of the world.”91
Long goes on to point out that charismatic activities may not lead to the creation of a new movement;rather the long-
term outcome of these activities“may center on culture as much or more than on social organization,” and the
outcome “will depend on historical and situational factors operating at the time, as well as the emergent trajectory of
and response to the prophetic effort itself.”
92
The impact of the charismatic ethos and ideas as cultural forces falls within the ambit of Weber's theory. As already
mentioned, one of his overriding theoretical concerns is how ideas have a lifeof theirown and how theymay inﬂuence
social and cultural changes. The reason he does not pursue this possibility in his discussion of routinization in this
context, I believe, is due to the fact that he is focusing on the legitimation of authority. Therefore, his treatment of
routinization is understandably focused on what happens in the authority structure of the new movement to change
the mode of legitimation from charismatic to traditional or rational-legal, and not on how the movement affects the
society as a whole.However,the idea of routinization as cultural formationis of particular importance for the study of
Rastafari. While there are questions concerning whether or not Rastafari constitutes a cohesive movement, there is no
denying that for the last forty years of the twentieth century Rastafari was the most dominant force inﬂuencing the
development of popular culture in Jamaica.
Conclusion
One of Weber's enduring contributions to the study of sociology is his development and use of ideal types as tools to
be employed in the quest for the interpretive understanding of social phenomena. Charisma and routinization are two
types that have signiﬁcant heuristic value. Despite the various criticisms of Weber's theory, charisma as a concept does
identify a type of authority that is distinct from rational-legal and traditional authorities. Furthermore, routinization is
an appropriate conceptualization of the process by which new movements assure their perpetuity and become
entrenched in society.
I must point out that Weber does not conceive ideal types as static entities, which never change once they are
constructed. With the growth in knowledge and understanding of the facts, ideal types may be modiﬁed,
26
RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 42 ---
corrected, elaborated, or abandoned. Inthecase of Weber's theory of charisma and routinization, thevarious criticisms
reveal that it is a tool that needs to be sharpened or improved, not abandoned. Berger's categorization of his own
criticisms of Weber is quite applicable to the criticisms raised earlier: “They do not invalidate the ideal-typical
construction of charismatic authority as against traditional and legal-rational authority. More importantly, these
modiﬁcations in no way weaken Weber's sociological elaboration of the process of routinization of charisma.”
93 Ia m
therefore embracing Weber's concepts of charisma and routinization, while proposing several revisions in his overall
theory.
First, the fundamental assumption that seems to inform Weber's theory is that leaders and leadership are the most
signiﬁcant variables producing social change. Therefore, his theory of charisma and routinization focuses primarily on
leaders and leadership in the creation and maintenance of new social movements. I contend that leaders are but one
variable in the complexsocial and historical contex ts that produce charismatic movements. As Willner's research on
charismatic leadership demonstrates, the rise of charismaticmovements is linked to a combination of social and
historical factors, including latent conditions (social stress, instability, rivalry, and conﬂict), perceptual reactions
(emotional and cognitive responses) to those conditions, precipitant situations (which heighten stress and instability
and trigger collective action), and persuasive leadership (which embodies the people's feelings, invokes their traditions,
and addresses their aspirations).
Second, leaders and the institutions they forge constitute only one of the factors that may facilitate the entrenchment
and perpetuity of these movements. The routinization of a new movement is not bound exclusively or necessarily to
the development of hierarchical leadership and administrative structures. In addition to leadership/administrative
structures, routinization is affected by how the rank andﬁle of the movement relates to the ideas, symbols, and rituals
that constitute the ethos of the movement. Furthermore, the new movement exists within the context of a wider
society, which may facilitate or hinder its development. Therefore, any theory of routinization must take into
consideration the dynamics of the movement's relationship with the wider society, especially its relationship with the
guardians of the establishment. In the same vein, the ability of the new movement to engage and shape the culture
within whichit exists is a key factor determining whether the movementwill establish itself permanently in the society.
As Long and Jones and Anservitz indicate, theentrenchmentof a charismaticmovementmay notbe in theinstitutions
it creates and perpetuates, but in its inﬂuence on culture formation.
CHARISMA, ROUTINIZATION, AND RASTAFARI 27


--- PAGE 43 ---
This leads to my third modiﬁcation of Weber's theory. In Weber's theory, the end product of routinization is either an
organization with a rational-legal leadership structure or one with a traditional structure. As my analysis of the
Rastafarian movement will show, a movement may develop a reticulate or weblike structure without recourse to a
centralized or hierarchical organization.
With the above modiﬁcations in mind, I now turn to my analysis of the emergence and entrenchment of Rastafari in
Jamaica.
28
RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 44 ---
2 Dread Uprising
The Emergence of Rastafari
In the previous chapter,I maintained thatWeber's theory of charisma is in need of some modiﬁcations. I indicated that
thetheory should givemore precisionto thecombination of sociohistoricalfactors that are likely to facilitate therise of
charismatic leaders. I also contended that the charismatic message, though new in some respects, draws from and
synthesizes ideas that already have currency in some element of the society. With these modiﬁcations, Weber's theory
of charisma is a relevant tool for the analysis of the emergence of Rastafari. Here I want to set out the socio-historical
context in which the movement emerged, the sources from which it drew, and the charismatic personality most
responsible for its emergence.
SociohistoricalContext
Both MaxWeber and Ann Ruth Willner place the charismatic eruption within the social contex t of stress or distress.
This is particularly true of the Rastafarian movement. The latent conditions out of which the Rastafarian movement
emerged were the economic deprivation, political disfranchisement, and cultural alienation that prevailedamong Afro-
Jamaicans in the 1920s and 1930s. The precipitant situations were aggravation of the hardship faced by the poor as a
result of taxincreases in an economy ravaged by theworldwide depression (1920s and 1930s) and the rekindling of the
hope of liberationoccasioned by the crowning of Haile Selassie as emperor of Ethiopia in 1930. The perceptionof life
in Jamaica as a“Babylonian,” or exile experience, and of Haile Selassie as the messiah/liberator of the African people
constituted the perceptual reaction. Thus the Rastafarian movement emerged among the poor (both urban and rural)
in Jamaica in the early 1930s as a response to both the social realities in Jamaica and the crowning of Haile Selassie in
Ethiopia.
Economic deprivation occurred in the context of the colonial plantation


--- PAGE 45 ---
system. Of course during slavery the masses had no control over their economic output. They were property used at
their masters' will to maximize their proﬁts. While emancipation (1834–1838) changed the status of former slaves, it
did not substantially improve their economic conditions, and both the British and the local colonial authorities sought
tokeep the plantationssystem intact afteremancipation.Land policies sought tokeep theformer slaves attachedtothe
plantationsby placing certainrestrictions on land ownership. Immigrationpoliciesled to theimportation of indentured
workers from India and Africa in order to depress the wages that the former slaves could demand. Nonetheless, many
former slaves gained access to land with the aid of the nonconformist churches (Baptist, Moravian, and Methodist) or
by squatting on marginal and government lands. On these lands, the former slaves developed into the Jamaican
peasantry in the decades following emancipation.
The latenineteenthcentury saw a revivalof the plantationsystem through theinfusionof British and American capital.
The revival of agri-business led to the concentration of land in the hands of a few, as government-owned lands were
reclaimed from squatters and sold to business interests. Lands formerly considered marginal for agricultural use were
now utilized to produce bananas and coffee. As a result, the peasantry that had emerged after emancipation became
increasingly landless and“agroproletariat,”
1 having to sell their labor for the meager wages offered by big estates
(mostly sugar and banana farms). Furthermore, the expulsion of squatters from government lands in the rural areas
led to an urban explosion as many moved to the city in search of work. As usual, urbanization was accompanied by
massive levels of unemployment and sprawling slums. As already mentioned, taxincreases and the depression of the
1920s and 1930s greatly aggravated this already pauperizing situation.
2
In addition to their economic marginalization, the masses of the poor were all but excluded from the political process.
At the time of the emergence of Rastafari, Jamaica was under Crown Colony rule, a form of direct rule by Britain,
which had been imposed after the 1865 Morant Bay Rebellion. Prior to 1865, the country was ruled by an assembly
whose members were elected by and from the land-owning class. Even the local ruling class willingly gave up its
relative autonomy for fear that emerging “colored” (persons of mixed race, usually from black and white
miscegenation) and black middle classes would become enfranchised and would dominate the political process. The
peasant rebellion in Morant Bay generated even greater fear of the black majority.
Under theCrown Colony statutes, executiveand legislativepowers were vested in thegovernor, who was appointedby
the British Crown, and in the Crown Council, the majority of whose members were appointed
30
RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 46 ---
by thegovernor. Additional members were elected from thelocalland-owning class. The political system was therefore
responsible to the British government and not to the people it governed. Thus the government was not sensitive nor
responsive to the needs of the people, and the people had no legal means of inﬂuencing the political system. Universal
adult suffrage was not granted in Jamaica until 1944. This came as a result of the agitation for political representation
and self-government, which began in the late nineteenth century and escalated in the 1930s.
3
The cultural alienation that existed (and still continues at some levels) in Jamaican society is best illustrated by the
tension between what RexNettleford calls “the melody of Europe, and the rhythm of Africa.”
4 According to
Nettleford, although the Jamaican populace is mostly of African descent and tends to act according to the rhythms
(modes of being and acting) of their African heritage, the peopleﬁnd themselves in a situation where African cultural
mores and expressions are deﬁned as crude and uncultured, and European values and mores are deﬁned as civilized
and desirable. What is patent in this cultural situation is the imposition of the European ideology of white supremacy
upon Afro-Jamaicans. University of the West Indies social scientist Aggrey Brown refers to this situation as“cultural
invasion.” He writes, “The invaders penetrate the cultural context of another group in disrespect of the latter's
potentialities; they impose their own view of the world upon those they invade and inhibit the creativity of the invaded
by curbing their expression.”
5
Leahcim Semaj, an adherentof Rastafari and a social scientist, refers to theimpositionof European valueson theblack
masses in Jamaica as“cultural imperialism.” Cultural imperialism occurs when one group imposes its deﬁnition of
reality, via “theories, concepts and ideas—meta-physics, epistemology, ethics and even aesthetics—on another.”
6
According to Semaj, cultural imperialism in Jamaica was even more effective than physical and economic oppression.
While these overt forms of oppression met constant resistance, there was widespread acceptance of the ideas that
associate whiteness with beauty, goodness, and God and that associate blackness with ugliness, evil, and the devil.
Even the black intelligentsia, Semaj points out, accepted European cultural values and found themselves aping
European aesthetics in music, the visual and performing arts, and grooming. The end result was an endemic lack of
self-knowledge and healthy self-identity among Afro-Jamaicans.
7 Thus the context in which Rastafari emerged and to
which it responded was the denigration of African cultural heritage, values, and forms and the imposition of cultural
values, associated with Great Britain.
These economic, political, and cultural conditions culminated in a period of unrest in the 1920s and 1930s and drew
three clear-cut reactions
EMERGENCE OF RASTAFARI 31


--- PAGE 47 ---
from the Jamaican populace. Theﬁrst reaction highlighted mainly the interests of the working class, culminated in the
strikes and mass demonstrations of 1938, and crystallized into the trade union movement. The second reaction
reﬂected the desire of the middle class to control the political institutions of the country, found expression in the
agitation for universal adult suffrage and internal self-government, and culminated in the political independence of
Jamaica in 1962. The third reaction brought to the fore the frustration and disillusionment of the unemployed and
underemployed.Grounded in the history of folk resistance to the imposition of European values on the black masses,
this reactionarticulated a profound rejectionof Jamaica as the place to achievehuman fulﬁllment, while embracing the
lure of Africa as the paradisiacal homeland. Rastafari is the embodiment of this third reaction.
Historical Roots
According to Willner, the eventprecipitating the emergence of charismatic activities involves a crisis that heightens the
tensions already rife in the society. She seems to think that the event that acts as a catalyst for the charismatic eruption
is usually negative. However, although the hardships of the 1920s and 1930s were indeed part of the precipitant
situations, the crowning of Ras Tafari (his original name) as Haile Selassie, emperor of Ethiopia, was the main catalytic
event that called the Rastafarian movement into existence. To understand why the crowning of Haile Selassie took on
such signiﬁcance, we have to recognize that Rastafari has its historical roots within the liberative struggles of the
African diaspora, and that those who founded the movement regarded Selassie as the one who would bring these
struggles to fruition. In Jamaica, this tradition of struggle is best exempliﬁed by the radicalism of African and Afro-
Christian faiths, by the ideology of Ethiopianism, and by Garveyism, all of which fed the Rastafarian movement and
shaped its essential posture as well as many elements of its beliefs.
African and Afro-Christian faiths have a consistent tradition of what musician Bob Marley calls“resisting against the
system.”
8 At theideational/spirituallevel,thisresistance was evidentin their maintenance of an African-oriented world
view, one that deﬁned the social realities in ways other than those provided by their European masters. In this respect,
African religion with its myths, values, and rituals formed the basis for identity and meaning in an otherwise alienating
situation. But beyond giving the slaves and former slaves a sense of identity, their African religion provided them with
an ideological platform from which to launch their
32
RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 48 ---
resistance against their white masters. For example, from the point of view of the slaves in Jamaica, slavery was an evil
that had its origin in the sorcery of the whitemasters. Thus“myalism,” which has its roots in African religions, became
an instrument for counteracting the sorcery of the slave masters.9 Myalism is often confused with or subsumed under
“obeah” because it is an art of dealing with the spirit world. However, in the strictest sense, myal is really the opposite
of obeah. While obeah is the art of putting hexes on people, usually with an evil intent, myalism is the art of removing
hexesor making people immune to them. The slaves believed that slavery was some kind of hex that their masters had
placed on them. By their myal art, they sought to break that hex.
Even when Africans converted to Christianity, the elements of Christianity to which they showed the greatest afﬁnity
were those that reinforced their Afrocentric world view, informed their struggle for liberation, and promised them
eventual freedom from and redress of the evil perpetrated against them by the colonial system. Thus weﬁnd in Afro-
Christian religions a preoccupation with baptism, belief in spirits (angels, demons, and the spirits of the dead),
messianic eschatology, and biblical apocalypticism.
10
At the sociopolitical level, African and Afro-Christian religions were the milieu in which uprisings against slavery and
colonialism were fomented. The religious beliefs of the slaves often inspired violent insurgence. For example, myalism
seems to have been at the heart of the Tacky Rebellion (1760), one of the most violent slave insurrections in Jamaica's
plantationhistory. It was carried out by slaves who believedthatthe potions they receivedfrom Tacky, their leader, had
made them immune to the white men's weapons.
11 The 1831 rebellion, aimed at destroyingthe plantation owners and
securing freedom for the slaves, was inspired and orchestrated by Sam Sharpe, who was a“daddy,”12 or priest, in the
slave religion and at the same time a deacon in the Baptist church. In addition, Paul Bogle, another deacon in the
Baptistchurch, incited and led theMorantBay Rebellion of 1865. The nexus between religion and resistance continued
with Alexander Bedward, who lived in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, and who was one of the most
colorfulﬁgures in thisAfro-Christian tradition. He labeledthewhiteoppressors as evil and called for people of African
descent to rise up and crush this evil. Because of his agitationagainst the Jamaican establishment in the early twentieth
century, he was arrested and jailed for treason.
Though Rastafari rejects certain elements of African an d Afro-Christian religions, Rastafarian Afrocentricity,
messianism, predilection for biblical apocalypticism, and militancy are all inﬂuenced by the tradition of resistance in the
African and Afro-Christian religions. Furthermore, Rastas frequently
EMERGENCE OF RASTAFARI 33


--- PAGE 49 ---
invoke the examples of Sharpe and Bogle in their struggle against European domination.
The most cursory reading of the literature on Rastafari or the most passing personal acquaintance with the movement
willrevealthatEthiopialooms large in itsphilosophy. But Rastafari did notcreate its Ethiopianism exnihilo. Rastafari's
Ethiopianism has been shaped by ideas that existed in the African diaspora for at least two hundred years prior to the
advent of Rastafari. Historically, Ethiopianism conﬂates Ethiopia with Africa (using the appellationEthiopia to mean
Africa in general).
13 This identiﬁcationis supported by a 1542 map takenfrom theGeographia of Claudius and edited by
Sebastian Muenster. On this map, the wordAETHIOPIA is inscribed across the land mass we now know as Africa.
Hamharich is the name given to the area that is roughly equivalent to present-day Ethiopia.14
Ethiopianism in the African diaspora has long celebrated the greatness of Ethiopia/Africa. Ethiopia, with its long
history and religious tradition, came to represent the pride of Africa and Africans everywhere.
15 Thus H. Easton and J.
C. Pennington in their writings extolled and celebrated the greatness of ancient Ethiopia.16 Behind the back-to-Africa
movements of the nineteenth century and behind the emergence of black churches with a conscious emphasis on
Ethiopia/Africa in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries was this tradition of extolling the greatness of Ethiopia/
Africa.
17 Edward Wilmot Blyden, an early Pan-Africanist and a fervent proponent of“back to Africa,” claimed that in
the glories of the African past Ethiopia represented the zenith of learning and civilization.18 This tradition was of
course fed by the Sheba legend, which traced Ethiopia's religion and monarchy to Menelik, who is believed to have
been born to Solomon and the queen of Sheba.
19
In addition to the identiﬁcation of Ethiopia with Africa and the celebration of the greatness of Ethiopia, Ethiopianism
espoused a vision of African liberation and a future Ethiopian empire.20 In this respect, Psalm 68:31,“Princes shall
come out of Egypt; Ethiopia shall soon stretch out her hands unto God,” was interpreted as a prophecy of African
redemption. Casely Hayford, author of Ethiopia Unbounded , held out hope of an “African racial redemption.”
Furthermore, Hayford referred to Edward Wilmot Blyden, who repatriated to Liberia and became a distinguished
professor and statesman, as“God descended upon the earth to teach the Ethiopians anew the way of life.”
21
Explicit Ethiopianism in Jamaica had its beginning in the eighteenth century with George Liele, a former slave from
the United States who introduced the Baptist faith to Jamaica.
22 Liele's sermons, which highlighted the African and
Ethiopian elements in the Bible, usually began with the
34 RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 50 ---
call, “Arise ye sons of Ethiopia.”23 Liele and his colleague, Moses Baker, attracted a large following and established
what is known as the Native Baptist church. The arrival of British Baptist missionaries was an attempt to dispel the
“confusion” of the Native Baptists concerning the essence of Christianity.24 Obviously, what disturbed the British
Baptist missionaries was the unabashed emphasis on Ethiopia and Africa and on salvation as sociopolitical liberation.
Despitethe efforts of the missionaries, Ethiopianismﬂourished, and before long some Jamaicans began claiming to be
Ethiopians, some even tracing their lineage to Ethiopian royalty.
25 By the early twentieth century, there was a
groundswell of preoccupation with Ethiopia among Jamaicans of African descent.26 The signiﬁcance of George Liele
and the Native Baptist movement is that they blended Afrocentricity, biblical messianism, and apocalypticism with
Ethiopianism to create a liberative vision among Jamaicans of African descent.
In Marcus Garvey and the international grassroots movement he founded, all of the elements of Ethiopianism
converged. For Garvey, Ethiopia is either interchangeable with or representative of Africa. Nowhere is this more
evident than in the anthem of the Universal Negro Improvement Association (UNIA), which is entitled,“Ethiopia,
Thou Land of Our Fathers.”
27 To counter the ideology of white racism, Garvey pointed to the history of the great
civilizations in Africa. He recalled a time when“Egypt, Ethiopia and Timbuctoo towered in their civilization, towered
above Europe, towered above Asia. When Europe was inhabited by a race of cannibals, a race of savages, naked men,
heathens and pagans, Africa was peopled with a race of cultured black men.”
28
Garvey's aim was the creation of a new“Africa for the Africans—this is, that the Negro people of the world should
concentrate upon theobject of buildingfor themselvesa great nation in Africa.”29 This projectof rebuilding Africa was
foretold, Garvey believed, in the words of the psalmist:“Princes shall come out of Egypt; Ethiopia shall soon stretch
out her hands unto God.”30 Garvey's own longing was for the day when the people of the African diaspora could“lay
down our burden and rest our weary backs and feet by the banks of the Niger and sing our songs and chant our
hymns to the God of Ethiopia.”
31
As Dale Bisnauth points out, the early leaders of the Rastafarian movement, by their acquaintance with Pan-Africanist
movements in general and Garveyism in particular, must have been cognizant of the ideas of Ethiopianism.
32 Arguing
that Ethiopianism permeated all movements for liberation of the African diaspora, Robert Hill concludes,“The origin
of Rastafari is bound up. . . with the identiﬁcation which blacks have consistently made with Ethiopia by virtue of its
Biblical symbolism.”33
That Rastafari has its roots in the Afrocentric movements that preceded
EMERGENCE OF RASTAFARI 35


--- PAGE 51 ---
it is underscored by the fact that the nascent movement drew its leadership and following mostly from former
Garveyitesor from those who were in some way inﬂuenced byGarveyism. The Rastas regard Garvey as a prophetand
cite his supposed prediction regarding the crowning of a king in Africa as proof of Haile Selassie's divinity.34 That the
crowning of Selassie drove theﬁrst confessors of Selassie's divinity to their Bibles further underscores Rastafari's links
with its predecessors. The purpose for searching the Bible was to see if they couldﬁnd any evidence that Selassie was
the fulﬁllment of a prophecy concerning their liberation. As it turned out, the title taken by Haile Selassie at his
coronationseems almost calculated to encourage them toﬁnd proof of his messianic identity. Part of his titlewas“Ras
Tafari, son of Ras Makonem of Harar, King of Ethiopia, Haile Selassie,35 King of Kings, Lord of Lords, Conquering
Lion of the Tribe of Judah.”36 Several biblical texts (Rev. 5:2–5; 19:16; and 1 Tim. 4:13–14 are examples) about the
“king of kings, lord of lords” and the“lion of the tribe of Judah” proved to those steeped in biblicism and“proof
texting” that Haile Selassie was indeed the messiah prophesied in the Bible and hoped for in the African diaspora.
Against this background of messianic eschatology, biblical apocalypticism, and the tradition of Ethiopianism, it
becomes quite understandable why the crowning of Emperor Haile Selassie took on the signiﬁcance it did among a
certain group of Jamaicans. The genius of the early exponents of Rastafari was their ability to combine Ethiopianism
with biblical apocalypticism and messianic eschatology to identify Selassie as the messiah, who would effect the
liberation of Africans everywhere and recreate the glorious African/Ethiopian past. Dale Bisnauth's observation is to
the point:“The Rastafarians used their spiritual genius to translate the dreams of Garvey and the Pan-Africanists into
the messianic and millenarian terms of the Bible.”
37
Charismatic Personality
Establishing the charismatic personalities behind the emergence of the Rastafarian movement is complicated by the
fact that little is known of most of the early exponents. The situation is further complicated by the fact that from the
beginning the movement was never united under the leadership of a single person or group of persons who were
acting in concert. Severalpeople, seemingly without previous contact witheach other, began to proclaim Selassie as the
divine messianic liberator of the African race between 1930 and 1933.
38 The only explanations for such a convergence
of ideas are the common sources that they share in the Afro-Christian
36 RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 52 ---
and Ethiopianist traditions and the prevailing,heightened sense of Africa and African liberation brought about by the
Garvey movement. The most famous of these exponents include Leonard Howell, Joseph Nathaniel Hibbert, Henry
Archibald Dunkley, and Robert Hinds.
39
Though all of these men seemed to have come to the convictionof Selassie's divinityindependently, Howellappears to
have been theﬁrst to introduce the idea to the public. He soon catapulted himself to a place of prominence by the
effectiveness of his preaching in attracting followers and by his penchant for drawing the attention of the civil
authorities. From the records that we have of him and his activities, Howell clearly cast himself in the role of a
charismatic messenger of God (Selassie) and even claimed to be divine himself. His followers clearly perceived him to
be an extraordinary leader, who deserved their loyalty.
Before proﬁling Howell as a charismatic leader, I would like to outline his activities brieﬂy, since he was the most
signiﬁcant personality in theﬁrst thirty years of the Rastafarian movement.From 1933 to 1940 Howellexpounded the
doctrines of Rastafari between Kingston and St. Thomas. Robert Hill describes Howell during this time as the
“catalytic agent in igniting the radical millenarian consciousness that based itself on the doctrine of the divine kingship
of Ethiopia's Ras Tafari.”
40 During this time, Howell, through the use of “powerful propaganda and personal
charisma,” secured a following much larger than any other exponent of Rastafari.41 Howell's message, especially in St.
Thomas, was revolutionary in its import. To his followers, he advocated hatred of and violence against thewhiteruling
class as revenge for their years of oppressing black people. He declared the African race superior to the white race. He
admonished his followers to withdraw allegiance from the British Crown, to be loyal only to Haile Selassie, the
supreme being and the only true ruler of the African race, and to prepare for repatriation to their African homeland.
42
To buttress his doctrineof repatriation, in December 1933, he sold picture postcards of Emperor Haile Selassie, which
were supposed to be passports to Ethiopia.
43 The colonial authorities, recognizing the inﬂammatory nature and
revolutionary potential of Howell's message, arrested and convicted him on a charge of sedition. He was sentenced to
a two-year prison term.
After his release from prison, Howell formed the Ethiopian Salvation Society, supposedly a branch of a society of the
same name in the United States. He purchased “Pinnacle”—an abandoned colonial estate in Sligoville, St.
Catherine—on behalf of the society. In 1940 he established a Rastafarian commune at Pinnacle with a group of his
followers, variouslyestimated to number betweenﬁve hundred and twothousand.
44 The commune supported itself by
growing local food crops and growing and trading ganja (marijuana).
EMERGENCE OF RASTAFARI 37


--- PAGE 53 ---
Howell exercised autocratic leadership over this commune and kept it isolated from the rest of Jamaican society.
Although his purpose seems to have been to escape the gaze and pressure of the establishment, he soon drew its
attention because of repeated reports that Rastas were harassing the peasant farmers who lived in the environs of
Pinnacle. In 1941, the police raided the commune and arrested and charged a number of its members with
perpetrating violence against their neighbors and with producing and selling ganja. Howell, who atﬁrst eluded the
police by allegedly miraculous means, was eventually arrested on a charge of assault and sent to jail for another two
years.
45
Howell returned to the commune in 1943, and from then to 1954, he administered the commune with even stricter
security, the main components of which were his“belocksed” guardsmen and a breed of vicious watchdogs. The
approaches to the commune were manned by these guardsmen and dogs, and the presence of strangers was signaled
by the sounding of gongs.
46 Because of the alleged persistence of the harassment and intimidation of the people in the
neighborhood by members of the commune and because of the colonial government's paranoia concerning the
commune becoming a guerrilla training camp, the police again raided Pinnacle in 1954. This time, they demolished the
buildings in the commune and scattered its members, a signiﬁcant number of whom ended up in the slums of
Kingston.
47 Howell was again arrested, but this time he was acquitted on appeal. However, this event marked the end
of his tenure as the“leading light” in the Rastafarian movement.48 In 1960 he was interned in a mental hospital, and
after his release, he lived in relative obscurity until his death in 1981.49
During his period of prominence, Howell exhibited many of the characteristics that Weber associates with the
charismatic persona. He was at the forefront of a movement that rejected the legitimacy of the Jamaican colonial
system and called for allegiance to a new authority, namely, Haile Selassie. In this way, Howell became a prophetic
voice, articulating the new doctrine of Selassie's divinity, declaring the certain downfall of the colonial establishment,
and inspiring hope of repatriation to Ethiopia/ Africa.
50 In his prophetic role, Howell directly projected himself as the
emissary of Emperor Haile Selassie, the divine king and the latest manifestation of God on earth.51 According to an
account by one of his early followers, Howell portrayed himself as the Christ, sent from his father, Haile Selassie. The
same follower quoted Howell as saying:
I am the Ambassador of Ethiopia, Addis Ababa is the capital, it's where I am from. My father sent me to
promulgate his work. Don't be afraid, I am here and shall be with you forever. . . . I am the same Jesus Christ
38
RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 54 ---
that was cruciﬁed. I was buried but not dead, the breath of life is mine. I am the giver of life through my father.52
Howell also presented himself as—and was believed by his followers to be—a man of extraordinary or divine
endowments, including healing and prophetic powers.53 Even those who knew him before his assumption of the role
of ambassador of Selassie held similar views of him. An ofﬁcial of the Universal Negro Improvement Association, Z.
Munro Scarlett, who was acquainted with Howell when he lived in New York, described him as a mystic, that is, a
person who is in touch with or can manipulate the spirit world. Hope L. Howell claimed that his brother Leonard P.
Howell was a healer (in the Jamaican myal/balmyard tradition) who helped many people while he was living in New
York.
54 One of his early followers, Jephet Wilson, described Howell as a prophet who possessed secret powers and
who brought the“light” of Rastafari.55
To enhance his image as a specially endowed prophet, Howell assumed a“ritual personality” named Gangunguru
Maragh,56 withGangunguru meaning“teacher of famed wisdom” and Maragh meaning“king.” At Pinnacle this titlewas
used in its abbreviated form,“Gong.”57 The obvious claim is that Howell was the enlightened one and the bearer of
enlightenment to his followers.
True to Weber's portrayal of the charismatic leader, Howell was able to elicittotal devotionfrom his followers. Robert
Hillhighlights thefactthatpeople were willingto dispose of their possessions and part withfamilies and friends to join
him at Pinnacle. At Pinnacle everyone gave unwavering allegiance to the Gong, whose words carried the force of law.
They even accorded him ritual devotion, as shown by the appearance of his name in Rastafarian songs. This devotion
was so great that he was regarded as Christ reincarnated.
58
Howell clearly qualiﬁes as a charismaticﬁgure who was able to embody and articulate the feelings and hopes of those
who were caught in the throes of social stress and who was able to secure the allegiance of a signiﬁcant following for
more than twenty years. The loss of his status as a charismatic leader may have been brought about by three factors.
The ﬁrst tworelate to Weber's idea that the maintenance of charismatic status depends on the abilityof the charismatic
personality to deliver on his promises. Howell obviously failed to effect the return to Africa, which was part of his
message from the beginning and for which he sold picture postcards of Haile Selassie (as supposed passports) as early
as 1933. And despite his claim of divine powers, Howell was unable to protect himself and his followers from the
wrath of the civil authorities. Repeated raids, arrests, beatings, and imprisonments eventually eroded belief in his
extraordinary
EMERGENCE OF RASTAFARI 39


--- PAGE 55 ---
qualities. The third factor was inﬁghting among the Rastas concerning certain practices, especially spiritual divination
(which was apparently practiced by Howell). The most outspoken opposition to divination came from young Rastas
who belonged to a group called the House of Youth Black Faith, which emerged in 1949. Those opposed to this
practice seemed to have held sway, and dabbling with spirits in any form became taboo in the movement. This, in
effect, constituted a rejectionof Howell and may help to explain his downfall as the foremost leader in the movement.
59
Summary
In this chapter, I have pointed to those sociohistorical conditions to which Rastafari is a response. The movement
emerged as a response to economic, political, and cultural subjugation, as well as to the perception of Haile Selassie as
the messianic liberator longed for in the African diaspora. Here we have an example of the frustration-eruption
formula that Willner describes as the necessary precondition for charismatic eruption. In this chapter, I also
highlighted the fact that Rastafari draws from sources that have deep roots in black resistance in general and in
Jamaica's African and Afro-Christian religions in particular. This illustrates my contention that charismatic messages
do not usually emerge exnihilo from the minds of charismatic leaders. Indeed, they usually have a novel combination
of ideas, but they are frequently synthesizing ideas already current in some sector of the society, and this is one of the
reasons charismatic leaders are able to secure a following. Their ideas resonate with some people in the society.
Rastafarian Afrocentricity was adopted and adapted from ideas long circulated in Jamaica concerning the role of
Ethiopia in the history of Africa and in the future of Africans in the diaspora. Finally, I have outlined the career and
characteristics of the most distinguished leader of the movement in its nascent stages. Howell clearly matches Weber's
image of the prophet who“takes the responsibilityfor announcing abreak with the established normative order”
60 and
for calling people to espouse a new view of the world, to adopt new values, and to embrace a new lifestyle.
40 RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 56 ---
3 Babylon and Dread Revitalization
Part of the impetus for social change inherent in charisma comes from its antiestablishment nature. As was noted in
chapter 1, charisma and the movementit spawns generally refuse to accept the legitimacy of the status quo. In Weber's
words, charisma“transforms all values,... breaks all traditional and rational norms,” and “overturns all notions of
sanctity.”
1 Anthony Wallace expresses a similar point of view concerning the antiestablishment nature of charisma in
his theory of revitalization. He deﬁnes a revitalization movement“as a deliberate, organized, conscious effort by
members of society to construct a more satisfying culture.”2 The need for revitalization or cultural innovation arises
when members of the society as a whole, or subgroups within that society, perceive the normative order as no longer
capable of satisfying their needs or as inimical to their well-being.
3
Both Weber and Wallace, therefore, highlighthow the rejection of the status quo and the attempt to create a new social
reality are characteristic of charismatic movements. When the interpretation of the signiﬁcance of Rastafari is
approached from this perspective, it becomes quite clear that the movement is a conscious attempt to deal with the
historical experience of colonialism and its contemporary legacies. From this perspective, Rastafari represents an
attempt of the African soul to free itself from the alienating fetters of colonial domination and exploitation and to
recreate itself in the image of Africa.
In the light of the foregoing discussion, this chapter focuses on the Rastas' ideological assault on the culture and
institutions that have dominated the people of the African diaspora since the Middle Passage.
4 In this respect, I discuss
Rastafari's portrayal ofBabylon, the term the movement uses to express the conviction that the social, political, and
economic institutionsthat have shaped their historical and day-to-day experiences are evil and must be overcome. This
chapter also focuses on the Rastas' attempts to create an alternative culture to overcometheir sense of alienation. I will
outline elements crucial to the Rastafarian project to


--- PAGE 57 ---
construct a new reality, the creation of a distinct Rastafarian culture or way of life as part of an attempt to put distance
between Rastas and Babylon.
“BeatingDown Babylon”: Ideological Delegitimation
Rastafari isﬁrst and foremost a response totheBabylonianconditions oftheJamaicansocietyand, byextension, of the
whole Western world. The Rastafarian phenomenon was forged in the crucibleof oppression that started in plantation
slavery and that has persisted in post-emancipation and postcolonial Jamaica. The manner in which some experienced
and perceived the realities of the colonial society called forth the response and shaped the perspective of Rastafari.
Every belief that has been espoused, from the divinity of Haile Selassie to the precepts ofital (organic, natural, vital)
living, and every ritual that has developed, from Nyabinghi drumming to the sacramental use of ganja (marijuana),
constitute an attempt to escape from or deal with the realityof oppression in Babylon. The centrality of the concept of
Babylon to Rastafari cannot be overstated, since it highlights the Rastafarian perception of the context of their
suffering and struggle. Escaping, overcoming, or“beating down Babylon” is paramount on the agenda of Rastafari.
Ernest Cashmore, discussing the Rastafarian movement in terms of the social construction of reality theory of Peter
Berger and Thomas Luckmann, maintains that the construction of the Rastafarian social reality begins with the
delegitimation of the status quo,
5 or the assigning of a negative status to the establishment in which the African
diaspora has lived since its deportation from Africa:
The appeal of the Rastafarian theory lay in the range of effects imputed to a single malevolent cause—Babylon.
This was the source of all evil in the world and its destruction would presage the start of what Rastas called“the
new age,” the entry into Zion.6
Cashmore goes on to point out that Rastas interpret the whole history of contact with white people“in terms of a
systematic denial of freedom, material and cognitive, and every event in the development of colonialism was a recycle
of the same pattern.”
7 Thus “the mechanics of colonialism” worked to suppress“the black man's realization of his
own gifts and capacities.”8
Echoing Cashmore, Patrick Taylor describes Rastafari as a“symbolic system which constructs patterns of meaning
and brings order to the contradictions
42 RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 58 ---
of social reality.”9 The social reality that the Rastas see as needing ordering is the colonial history and its legacy, which
have denied the Africans in the diaspora their dignity. As part of the effort to construct new“patterns of meaning” to
bring coherence to their existence, they have unleashed an ideological assault on the Jamaican and Western
establishment by dubbing it“Babylon.”
The Backgroundand Signicationof Babylon
The term Babylon is loaded with biblical signiﬁcance. It has its origin with Babel, the world'sﬁrst city, according to
Genesis 11. The Bible intimates that egomania and the desire for cultural homogeneity led Babel's leaders to embark
on a project to build a tower that would reach up to heaven. According to Rastafarian interpretation, the effort to
reach up to heaven was born from a desire to topple God from a position of lordship over the world. Because of this
attempt to build a monument to themselves, the inhabitants of Babel were thrown into linguistic confusion and
dispersed geographically.
The city-state was later revived and became Babylon of Mesopotamia, a world power that dominated the Near East.
On one of its military campaigns, it ransacked Jerusalem, killing many Hebrews and taking many others into captivity.
This inaugurated the Babylonian exile of the Jewish people. In Daniel's apocalyptic vision, Babylon appears as the
“Great Beast” and as the head of the great statue, which is destroyed by a stone cut out of the mountain.
10 With
reference to Babylon of Mesopotamia, the Bible again focuses on the egomania of its leaders, exempliﬁed by
Nebuchadnezzar's golden image of himself, which he required all of his subjects to worship. Furthermore, the Bible
points to“violence, sexual and moral degeneracy” as characteristic of the Babylonian civilization.
11
The New Testament invokes the imagery of Babylon to describe the Roman Empire because of its opposition to the
early church and its persecution of Christians and Jews. In other words, the writer of Revelation sees in the Roman
state the spirit of selﬁshness and opposition to God and his people that was displayed by the city of Babel and by the
ancient Babylonian civilization.
12
Rastas may differ concerning many of their beliefs, including the divinity of Selassie and repatriation, but all agree on
the Babylonian nature of life in the West. The experience of forced captivity in the West paralleled the Babylonian
experience of the ancient Hebrews, and the constant subjugation recalled the Roman iron rule over its empire. Hence,
Rastas ﬁnd the spirit of Babylon alive in the twentieth and twenty-ﬁrst centuries
BABYLON AND DREAD REVITALIZATION 43


--- PAGE 59 ---
and operative in and through the ideology and institutions of the West in general and of Jamaica in particular. The
Rastafarian choice of Babylon as the symbolic designation of the forces that seek to dehumanize them is, in effect, an
attempt to neutralize those forces. As already stated, the use of the termBabylon constitutes a symbolic delegitimation
of those values and institutions that historically have exercised control over the masses of the African diaspora.
According to John Paul Homiak, who researched the role of eldership in the Nyabinghi Order,
13 Babylon is
a term of varying levels of concreteness and speciﬁcity; historically, the predecessors of the Romans and the entire
white European colonial world; presently, the entire post-colonial western power structure and its supporting
ideology and political apparatus; the oppressive condition of“exile” in the Black diaspora; the cosmic domain
presided over by the pope of Rome and his Anglo-European political cohorts; the source of death-dealing and
destructive spiritual power.
14
As indicated by Homiak's deﬁnition, the termBabylon has several levelsof application. The most immediate referent is
the gut-wrenching experiences of suffering, hardship, and estrangement faced by the underside of Jamaican society. It
is not only the pain of economic hardship, but a sense of not belonging, of cultural alienation. It is a feeling of
uprootedness and of being“out of whack” with one's environment. This sense of beingin exilerecalls and parallels the
experience of theforced deportationof theancientHebrews under theBabylonian worldpower. Reggae musician Bob
Andy expresses this feeling of exile when he sings, “I've got to go back home; This couldn't be my home.”
15
Rastafarian intellectual Dennis Forsythe sums up this aspect of the Babylonian experience:
The Rastafarian imagery of Babylon is theﬁrst-person, gut-level experiences of alienation and frustration under
slavery, colonialism and their legacies. It is not an imposed concept, but one that has grown out of the gut feelings
and experiences of“souls on ice,” and of dismembered beings. Babylon is the psychic image sustained by real life
experiences, busted hopes, broken dreams, the blues of broken homes and of disjointed tribes of people trapped by
history. It is an image ofﬁre and blood, of being on the edge, in limbo, in the wilderness, in concrete jungles....I t
is a desolation in which man feels disjointed and out of line with the plans of creation.
16
Reggae's most famous superstar, Bob Marley, echoes Forsythe's feeling of alienation in evenmore terse language:“I've
been down on the rock so, I
44 RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 60 ---
seem to wear a permanent screw.”17 Obviously, the contortion of the visage manifests the contortion of an alienated
spirit.
At the sociopolitical level,Babylon is primarily used in reference to ideological and structural components of Jamaica's
social system, which metes out privileges to some and exploitation to others. In this respect, Babylonis the complex of
economic, political, religious, and educational institutions and values that evolved from the colonial experiment. The
church and the police get honorable mention. The church is labeled an arm of the Babylon system because of its
ideological justiﬁcation of the status quo and its brainwashing of the populace. The police are considered Babylon's
agents, because through their use of force, they maintain the pattern of oppression and inequity in the society.
Rastas understand that Jamaica is but a part of an international colonial/imperialist complex. Hence the designation
Babylon is extended to the Anglo-American alliance, which has received the beneﬁts of colonialism and international
capitalism.
18 These two power centers, through their domination of international politics and their exploitative
relationship with the rest of the world, demonstrate that they are the successors to the ancient Babylonians and
Romans. Babylon is, therefore,“the whole complexof institutions which conspire to keep the black man enslaved in
the Western world and which attempt to subjugate coloured [sic] people throughout the world.”
19
Globally, Babylon is that worldlystate of affairs in which the struggle for power and money takes precedence over the
cultivation of human freedom and the concern for human dignity. Rastas include in this state of affairs not only the
West, led by the Anglo-American alliance, but also the former Soviet bloc and the politically powerful Catholic church
presided over by the pope. Many Rastas believe that the political leaders of the world derive their authority from the
pope, and they cite the frequent visits of world leaders to the Vatican as evidence for their position.
20
At the highest level of generality, Babylon is the forces of evil arrayed against God and the righteous (Selassie, Rastas,
and the poor). The forces of evil, however, are not metaphysical entities, but human attitudes and activities that are out
of touch with the divine, natural order. Any human activity that is inimical to harmonious human relationships is a
reﬂectionof Babylonian values. This includes nuclear proliferation and theoverexploitation of natural resources, which
threaten human existence and the continued viability of the world's ecosystems. In this context, Babylon is not a
speciﬁc localityor a speciﬁc socialsystem, but any“system of thought and behavior” or any“general cultural pattern in
which menﬁnd themselves trapped” and out of touch with Jah (God or Haile Selassie) and the reality of Rastafari.
21
BABYLON AND DREAD REVITALIZATION 45


--- PAGE 61 ---
Featuresof the BabylonSystem
Since Rastas do not have ofﬁcial theologians or social theorists to codify and systematize their beliefs, there is a lack of
systemic treatment of the Rastas' point of view on any subject. This is particularly true of their treatment of Babylon.
However, in their limited writings and particularly in their poetry and reggae lyrics, their evocative images address
various aspects of Babylonian reality.
HISTORICAL ATROCITY Rastas can recite almost ad inﬁnitum the historical atrocities of Babylon, from its days as a
Middle Eastern world power to its contemporary Euro-American manifestation. As the conqueror of the ancient
world, Babylon wreaked havoc on Jerusalem and deported the ancient Hebrews (who the Rastafarians believe to have
been black people) to Mesopotamia. The Roman Empire, a later incarnation of Babylon, made incursions into Africa,
conquered the African queen Dido, fought Hannibal, andsacked Carthage. Rome, the Beast of Revelation, persecuted
Christians and executedJews. In more recent history, Mussolini, the Roman, invaded Ethiopia with the blessing of the
pope.
22 The implication of the Catholic church in the invasion of Ethiopia and its role in the enslavement of Africans
in the Americas gives rise to the Rastafarian view of the church as an institution of oppression for black people.
Most painful for Rastas is the Middle Passage and the subsequent suffering in modern Babylon. In“Redemption
Song,” Bob Marley describes the experience of enslavement as Africans being stolen by pirates and sold to merchant
ships, which transported them to America, where they have struggled every day to survive in the crucible of
oppression.23 The manner in which Rastas speak of the Middle Passage and the slave experience reveals that they still
bear the psychic scars of those experiences. They seem to reach back across the years to feel the pain and indignity of
everything that befell their forebears, and thus, theyare able to speak of such experiences in theﬁrst person, as though
they underwent them personally. In“Slave Driver,” Bob Marley gives evidence of such a psychic scar by speaking of
his blood running cold at the memory of them slave driver's whip and the squalor and stench of the holds of the
slave.
24 Burning Spear, another Rastafarian reggae singer, echoes the same theme in a passion-ﬁlled tone, whenhe asks
his audience repeatedly,“Do you remember the days of slavery?”25
Babylon's predilection for atrocity remains unabated into the twentieth century, exempliﬁed by the millions killed in
two world wars, the Holocaust, Soviet labor camps, the killingﬁelds of Vietnam, the Gulf War, apartheid in South
Africa, and“ethnic cleansing” in Africa and the Baltic.What is more, the evil powers of the world continue to increase
their capacity
46 RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 62 ---
for monstrosity, especially in the proliferation of nuclear arms and precision instruments of mass destruction. Bob
Marley clearly expresses the Rastafarian foreboding about the twentieth century's predilection for violence. In
“Survival,” he lashes out against the use of science and technology to perfect instruments of death, to threaten human
well-being, and to create and spread fear everywhere.
26
At a more personal and immediate level, Babylon continues its atrocity in the brutal treatment of those who threaten
or are perceived as threatening the system. State oppression of grassroots movements for social and political change is
the most egregious form of this barbarity. Rastas have personally experienced this oppression at the hands of police
both in Jamaica and abroad. Rastas often refer to the police simply as“Babylon,” or describe them as“dressed in
uniforms of brutality.”
27 As Cashmore observes,“The police more than any other group personiﬁed the Rastafarian
conception of evil. They were the living proof that Babylon was alive, active and waiting for any opportunity to
suppress them; they constitute the empirical referents to the Babylon conspiracy theory.”
28 This conception was
formed in the crucible of repeated persecution, intimidation, and harassment of Rastas by the Jamaican police.
Sometimes, police brutality was in response to the slightest provocation from Rastas, and at other times, it was at the
whim or caprice of police ofﬁcers. The police, as Babylon's frontline agents, are responsible for defending and
protecting the system. Along with their brutality, the police and the entire judicial system use trickery and cunning to
keep the black masses in their places. As front-liners, the police are mere puppetsin the hands of the custodians of the
system. Cashmore quotes a young English Rasta as saying,“Them just respond to the needs of Babylon, wearing‘the
badge of brutality.’”
29
ECONOMIC RAPACITY Exploitation is written large in the economic history of Jamaica. It began with the Spanish
colonists and continued with the British, whose plantation economies were fueled by slave labor. Emancipation from
slavery did nothing for the economic empowerment of the black masses, who were either still tied to the plantation as
cheap laborers or left to eke out a living on the marginal lands not consideredﬁt for plantation use. In the twentieth
century, the Jamaican economy was dominated by British and American capital in agriculture, light manufacturing,
mining, and tourism. The availability of cheap labor was always at the forefront of making Jamaica attractive for
investors.
Rastas' critique of theJamaicaneconomic system, and capitalism in general, is directedat thefact thatit is based on the
ethic of proﬁteering and exploitation. The Rastafarian view is succinctly expressed in two of Marley's most powerful
images. One refers to the Jamaican and capitalist
BABYLON AND DREAD REVITALIZATION 47


--- PAGE 63 ---
economic state of affairs as“Pimper's Paradise.”30 The point is clear. Here is an economic system that justiﬁes the
proﬁting of some at the expense of others. The prostitutes—those who labor in the enterprises of others—sell
themselvesnotso much for theirown proﬁt, but for the proﬁt of their pimps, those who control theeconomicsystem.
The other image is that of a blood-sucking vampire extracting the life forces from its victims.31 By describing the
Babylon system as a vampire, Marley highlights the predatory nature of Babylon's economic system and its deadly
effects on the poor. Changing metaphors but addressing the same theme, Marley portrays the guardians of Babylon's
economy as greedy landowners who expropriate all the produce of their tenants while treating them with disdain.
32
Again, Marley's message is clear. The economic philosophy and institutions of Babylonsanctionthe exploitation of the
poor and justify the avarice and proﬁting of the well-to-do.
Rastas argue that exploitation destroys any sense of communality. Economic activities in Babylon become a struggle
for the survival of theﬁttest, a struggle in which people trample one another to get ahead. Bob Marley gently laments
over such behavior by likening it to a race in which rats trample each other to get ahead.
33 The competitive and
exploitative nature of Babylon's economy has led many Rastas, especially in the early days of the movement, to refuse
to work for any Babylonian enterprise, choosing instead to hustle, to work at subsistence farming, or to establish self-
help ventures.
MENTAL SLAVERY According to Rastas, the educational and religious institutions of Babylon specialize in
obfuscating the truth and teaching the people“misphilosophy.” Thus Rastas are ﬁrmly convinced that Babylon's
education is contrived to brainwash black people. In the words of one Rasta,“What is taught is untrue, immoral and
indoctrination.”34 Bob Marley concurs by calling Babylon's education a brainwashing exercise designed to create
ignorance and alienation.35 The end result of Babylon's education is the“whitewashing” of the African mind, stripping
it of its African vibrations (de-Africanization), and inculcating European values, perspectives, and tastes
(Europeanization).
36 Walter Rodney claims,“The brainwashing process was so stupendous that it has convinced. . .
many black people of their inferiority.”37 For this reason, many early Rastas were reluctant to send their children to
school, and when they did, some children were rejected or subjected to abuse on account of their dread-locks (the
distinctive Rastafarian hairstyle consisting of uncombed hair, which is then twisted or matted).
38
Rastas have taken a posture of resistance against Babylonian education
48 RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 64 ---
because of its evil intent and its dehumanizing effects. Rastafarian poet, Bongo Jerry pleads for an end to the“double
meaning” and “crossword speaking” of the English Language, which lead not only to linguistic confusion but also to
cultural alienation.39 Bob Marley is even more blunt in his expression of resistance to Babylonian education. Declaring
that he is resolute in not changing who he is and that the cultural oppression has gone on far too long, he calls on his
listeners to stage a rebellion in order to secure and ensure cultural freedom.40
The church joins the school in enslaving the people mentally by teaching them to be patriotic and by engaging in
philosophical trickery to provide rationalizations for the Babylon system. The church teaches the people to bear their
suffering bravely because they have“a pie in the sky when they die,” instead of telling them the truth about the forces
that conspire to oppress them, thus preparing them to take their liberation into their own hands.
41 This conviction led
Marley to declare his feelings about“bombing a church,” because of the lying preacher.42
When Babylon's educational and religious institutions are not busy enslaving the poor, they are busy training those
who, under the guise of middle-class respectability, engage in socially predatory behaviors. Bob Marley speaks of how
these institutions teach deception and train“thieves and murderers,”
43 Rastas are not impressed with the aura of
respectability that seems to surround the educated in Jamaican society. Instead, they are likely to see, under the facade
of respectability, con artists who are“slicker” than Anancy, the scheming trickster of Jamaican folklore.
POLITICAL TRICKERY This leads me to the Rastafarian view of politics, which they refer to as “polytricks” or
“politricks”:
“Politricks” refers to the Rastafarian perspective on the tricky, deceptive nature of Babylon's political activity. Since
Babylonians deal in politricks, they only pretend to be a government which is representative of the people.44
This quote captures the essence of the Rastafarian perception of politics. It is not the art of statecraft, but the art of
deception, machination, and manipulation. It was from this perspective that a Rasta said,“As far as I am concerned,
politics is not the black man's lot, but the white man's plot.”
45 Politics, therefore, is but the unending scheming of the
powerful to maintain their positionsof privilege and to keep the populace in its place. Mikey Smith, a Rastafarian poet,
expresses the conviction that politicians engage in deceiving the populace with“lies and secrecy” to further
BABYLON AND DREAD REVITALIZATION 49


--- PAGE 65 ---
theiroppression and exploitationof the poor.46 Bob Marley agrees with this portrayal of politicians, by describing them
as con artists who use bribery to further their causes.47
Since their intention is to deceive, politicians are mired in hypocrisy described by Mikey Smith as“full of complexity
an[d] folly formalities like demockroicy.”48 The politicians must project the image of being public servants. But in
reality, their goal is personal proﬁt and self-aggrandizement. Thus their civil ceremonies are masquerades—“folly
formalities”—and their claim to govern by democratic principles is a sham,“de mockroicy” (a mockery of the people).
Politicians are therefore accomplished con artists who continually deceive the people while exploiting them.
Beyond being deceptive, Babylon polytricks is divisive. Marley's“Ambush in the Night” describes how the oppressors
employ bribery and the instigation of intercommunity conﬂicts as elements in their political strategy.49 Part of
Babylon's strategy of domination is to sow seeds of discord among the poor and powerless (“divide-and-rule”). By
setting them against one another, Babylon creates a situation where the dominated lack unity to undertake any
collectiveaction to change their situation and to challenge Babylon's power structure. Rastas haveﬁrsthand experience
of this divide-and-rule strategy, because they have seen Jamaican ghetto youths drafted into political factionalism.
Instead of uniting toﬁght their common enemy, for meager handouts theyﬁght and gun down one another in the
name of allegiancetopolitical parties. That is whymost Rastas take a stanceof nonparticipationin the political process.
Politics in their estimation is mired in craftiness and corruption, deceit and division.
This analysis of the Rastafarian view of Babylon must be considered heuristic, because the Rastas see Babylon not so
much as an assemblage of distinct institutions but as a tightly knit system in which each institution intertwines and
interlocks with all of the others. That is why in“Crazy Baldhead,” Bob Marley can address the penal system, the
economy, politics, and education—all in conjunction with one another. All of these institutions are contrived and
controlled by “those crazy baldheads,” people who are without Rastafarian consciousness and who are agents or
instruments of Babylon's schemes.
The Demiseof Babylon
Babylon is the“primary symbol for the interpretation and assessment of the colonial establishment.”50 The import of
this symbol lies in the fact that in one word, Rastas have effectivelyrelegated the Jamaican establishment to the realm
of evil, extending to it the same fate that befell ancient Babylon.
51 But Rastas are not only concerned with analyzing
and describing
50 RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 66 ---
Babylon, they want to destroy it or at least escape from it. Bob Marley's “Crazy Baldhead” is therefore not
a dispassionate analysis of Babylon institutions, but a revolutionary call to“chase those crazy baldheads out of the
town.”52 Nor is Marley's“Babylon System” a detached portrayal of its economic system; it is a call to“rebel, rebel,
rebel now.”53
Rastas regard themselves as the agents of Babylon's destruction and reggae music as their primary weapon. Since
reggae music is seen as a potent instrument for“chanting down” or “beating down Babylon,” reggae musicians and
lyricists are regarded as the avant-garde in the struggle against Babylon. As an anti-Babylon musical weapon, reggae
has a threefold signiﬁcance. First, reggae is the medium through which the people are restored to self-awareness. This
is accomplished by telling them the truth about their African roots and African identity, so that they do not have to
chase after European trappings and a Western lifestyle in order to achieve a sense of dignity. Second, reggae is the
medium through which the people learn the truth about the system under which they live. The reggae lyricists
constantly portray the oppressive, deceptive, and divisive nature of Babylon. Third, reggae is the medium through
which the poor express their frustrations with and grievances against the political and cultural guardians of Jamaican
societyand through whichtheyexpress “their demand for change and theneed for a newordering of society.”
54 Rastas
and other reggae musicians are the self-appointed voice of the people, the ones who make known their causes to the
Babylonian powers. As Linden F. Lewis observes, reggae is the Rastafarian vehicle for“political, cultural, moral and
religious purposes and protests.”
55 As such, reggae has a particular attraction for blacks, who experience economic
exploitation, political marginalization, and racial discrimination in their various societies. Reggae therefore sets the
stage for a departure from the Babylonian lifestyle and the eventual demolition of the Babylonian system.
In addition to their belief in the power of reggae to beat down Babylon, Rastas also believe that the demise of Babylon
will come about by self-destruction. I Jabulani Tafari puts it pointedly:
Jamaica and the so-called West Indies are part of a white Western Civilization of corruption, which through the
soon to be resurrected European-based Roman Empire, represents the iniquitous Mystery, Babylon of antiquity
and promotes its decadent devil-devised doctrine to the detriment of deluded mankind and which sinful shitsem
[system] will therefore be destroyed in a predestined apocalyptic judgement of volcanic eruptions, earthquakes,
lightening bolts, brimstone, molten lava, thunder, plagues, hurricanes, drought, famine, tidal waves, hail and heat
waves . . . in short by what could be described as a supernaturally controlled ecological backlash.
56
BABYLON AND DREAD REVITALIZATION 51


--- PAGE 67 ---
Thus the cataclysmic destruction of Babylon will come by its own hands. Its predatory and exploitative relationship
withthe environment willeventuallyprecipitate an ecological backlash. Furthermore, Babylon's refusal to livenaturally
and its commitment to artiﬁciality are out of step with the divine principle manifested in nature, and hence it must
ultimately self-destruct.
One of the indicators of Babylon's impending doom is that it has no more power over Rastas. Rastas have made the
mental and cultural break with Babylon and are in the process of recreating and revitalizing themselves. This is
reﬂected in the Rastafarian phrase“steppin' outa Babylon.”
“Steppin'OutaBabylon ”: CulturalRevitalization
Concomitant with the relegation of Babylon and its ways to the realm of evil is the Rastas' attempt to rescue
themselves from the deformities brought on by Babylon. In the process, they have reconstituted their pride, self-
conﬁdence, and self-possession, whichrepudiatetheidentityforced upon them by theiroppressors. It is this“stanceof
self-possession and assured identity” that has a marked attractiveness to the dispossessed in Jamaica and elsewhere.
57
Important to an understanding of Rastafari is the recognition that Rastas are aiming at rediscovering their true selves
and at creating a cultural identity that synchronizes with their sense of their African past. Nettle-ford describes this
enterprise as a quest in which Rastas are being“liberated from the obscurity of themselves.”
58 That is why Leahcim
Semaj, a Rastafarian intellectual, identiﬁes the essence of Rastafari as follows:
In a generic sense a Rastafarian is one who is attempting to restructure identity so that s/he can consciously live
from an Africentric [sic] perspective. This covers the physical, mental and spiritual dimensions of life. Rastafari
therefore provides a vehicle through which and by which the Africans in the Diaspora can recreate an African
identity.
59
Semaj goes on to point out that theﬁrst step in the creation of identity is the creation of a culture, because culture
“gives you designs for living and patterns of interpreting reality.”60 Claudia Rogers quotes another Rasta, who concurs
with Semaj in describing this attempt at culture building:“We must work at recapturing and rebuilding our African
heritage, our culture, for a man without culture is a weak man, he knows notwhat he does or what he says. But when a
man has a culture, he becomes strong and does the right things.”
61 The rediscovery of their African heritage and
52 RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 68 ---
the recreation of what they perceive as their African culture are intended by Rastas as a source of self-knowledge and
power to be used in the struggle against Babylon, which seeks to strip Africans of their cultural heritage and sense of
self-worth.
This reconstruction of self must be viewed against the background of European assault on African and Afro-Jamaican
cultural ways. Barry Chevannes gives an apt description of this background:
Many of the most important aspects of Jamaican folk culture were the object of ideological denigration. The folk
religion, in all its variants, was described by one of Jamaica's leading intellectuals of the 1920s and 1930s asthe mud,
which he contrasted withthe gold. The mud was that tradition of African superstition and savagery, with its wild
drumming, dancing, spirit possession and polytheism, in which the ignorant masses were mired, the gold the
tradition of real religion, with its Easter morning pealing of bells, one true God and studied reﬂection.
62
British hegemonic culture denigrates notonly theJamaicanfolk culture, but also Africa and all thatis associated withit.
As Forsythe reminds us, Africa, to the white colonists, is“the antithesis in terms of which they deﬁned themselves.”
63
Forsythe continues,“Africa, in terms of this white-constructed symbolicimagery, was the‘dark’ continent inhabited by
apemen, and incapable of creating the‘arts,’ sciences and other evidences of authenticcivilization.”64 In this context of
cultural denigration, Afro-Caribbean people became alienated from their African selves and their cultural heritage and
began to evaluate their goodness in terms of their degree of approximation of the European ideal. The result was that
Caribbean people of African descent became sandwiched between their maligned African ways, which came naturally,
and the European ways, which were held out as the best of human civilization. The tension produced by this conﬂict
gave rise to the question of identity.
In response to Europeanization, the phenomenon of Rastafari represents a turning of the table. Again, Forsythe
addresses this issue:
Rastafarianism is the ﬁrst mass movement among West Indians preoccupied with the task of looking into
themselves and asking the fundamental question,Who Am I? or What Am I? As such, it reﬂects the spirit of
Garveyism at the roots level,and it is nowﬂourishing in all those areas where black West Indians are concentrated.
It is a desperate call for an alternative counterculture more suitable to the needs of black people in these times.
65
Semaj concurs, arguing that Rastafari seeks to banish the dichotomy of the African body with a European mind, by
proposing “attainable and
BABYLON AND DREAD REVITALIZATION 53


--- PAGE 69 ---
psychologically healthy answers to the question ofWHO AM I .”66 He goes on to point out that the Jamaican
institutions—church, school, and government—could not provide these answers“because of their subtle and not so
subtle philosophical ties to the colonial and imperial powers.”67 Noting that those most likely to be attracted to
Rastafari are those with the most tenuous ties to the institutions of Babylon, Semaj observes,“It appears that limited
exposure to these institutions have [sic] been a prerequisite to an answer to the questionWHO AM I?”68
Rastafari challenges the European notion of its own goodness and of African“darkness.” It also imbues Africa with
desirability and seeks to recapture the essence of Africa in the Rastafarian lifestyle. Rastafari therefore“afﬁrms the
African spiritual and cultural presence in the New World”69 and becomes the mirror through which the African
diaspora can see possibilities of self-identity other than those projected by Babylon.
Reappropriationof Africa/Ethiopia
A polarity is at the center of Rastafarian cosmology. It consists of Babylon, Jamaica, and the West on one side, and
Zion and Africa/Ethiopia on the other. While Babylon is symbolic of negative forces, Africa/Ethiopia is evocativeof
positive vibrations—pride, community, charity, and serenity. As much as Rastas seek to escape from or overcome the
negative forces of Babylon, they also seek to imbibe the positive vibrations of Zion. The deiﬁcation of Haile Selassie,
the call for repatriation, and the adoption of the Ethiopian national colors are indicative of the reappropriation of
Africa/Ethiopia.
As indicated in chapter 2, the crowning of Ras Tafari as Haile Selassie, emperor of Ethiopia, was a key eventin the rise
of the Rastafarian movement. For a group of people steeped in biblical messianism and versed in Ethiopianism, a
doctrinethat celebrated theancientglories of Ethiopia and looked forward to its future rise to eminence, thiscrowning
signiﬁed the appearance of the messiah who would restore the glories of Ethiopia (Africa) and liberate all of its
childrendispersed bythecolonialenterprise.Selassiewas therefore perceivedas and elevatedtothe position of a divine
African liberator. As Ajai Mansingh and Laxmi Mansingh state,“He became the nucleating agent for the jelling [sic]o f
the spiritual thoughts, concepts and experiences and emotional cravings of Rastas.”
70 The act of deifying Selassie
signals the break with the colonial establishment. It was a rejection of white European religion and the whole cultural
system that it legitimated. In the place of a white“gentle Jesus, meek and mild,” Rastas positan African liberator, Haile
Selassie I,“conquering lion of the tribe of Judah.”
54
RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 70 ---
The death of Selassie represented a potentially serious blow to the Rastafarian faith, and some thought that Selassie's
passing would be the death knell for the Rastafarian movement. However, Rastafari responded to the news of
Selassie's death (1975) in ways that defused its potential devastating effects on the movement. Some Rastas have
dismissed the reports of Selassie's death as just another malicious ploy of Babylon propagandists. Selassie cannot die
and hence any report of his death is a fabrication. These Rastas point to the fact that no body has been produced and
no funeral held. Others accept the fact of Selassie's departure from the human sphere, but do not speak of it in terms
of death. They argue that he has just assumed a different form and moved into another dimension. Still others
rationalize his passing by claiming that he was a mere“personiﬁcation” or “exteriorization” of God:“His body was
more a vehicular unit for the carriage of God.”
71 As a result, his death is inconsequential:“Jah Live!”72 Selassie,
therefore, has a continued existence as an ever-living spirit, who through“I and I” consciousness continues to live in
and with the individual Rasta.73 Thus Selassie remains a religious and political symbol inspiring the Rastafarian struggle
against the stiﬂing presence of oppression.74
The theme of repatriation is associated with the rediscovery of Africa. Looking to Africa/Ethiopia serves to give the
Rastas a sense of common cultural and historical identity. Drawing on Marcus Garvey's back-to-Africa campaign, the
Rastas have always made repatriation one of their tenets. However, the question of repatriation only became the
major preoccupationin the 1950s and 1960s. Severalfactorsmay haveled to thefocus on repatriation. During theﬁrst
two decades of the movement there was a preoccupation with establishing and expounding the divinity of Haile
Selassie. With thisﬁrmly ingrained in the movement, Rastas could then concentrate on a more practical issue—their
return to their African homeland.
75 At the same time, Rastas were becoming conﬁrmed in their conviction that
Jamaican nationalism and multiracialism would not beneﬁt the black masses and that the emerging middle-class-led
political parties and trade unions were producing no perceivable change in the condition of those whom Chevannes
describes as the“marginalised stratum of the working class,” that is, the unemployed, the underemployed, and the
unemployable.
76 Rastas therefore became convinced that there was no hope for social and economic salvation in
Jamaica.77 Massive migration to Britain and, on a lesser scale, to North America only conﬁrmed the Rastafarian
conviction of the hopelessness of the Jamaican situationand also fed theirdesire to leave. They were spurred on by the
reports of Ghana's independence and Liberia's desire to have West Indian immigrants.
The desire for repatriation was brought to a fever pitch in 1955 by the announcement of Haile Selassie's land grant,
through the Ethiopian
BABYLON AND DREAD REVITALIZATION 55


--- PAGE 71 ---
World Federation, to those blacks in the West who supported him against the Italian invasion and who were desirous
of migrating to Ethiopia.78 Hence in the 1950s and 1960s the fever of repatriation ran high and became the focal issue
of the movement. Though repatriation remains the desire of many Rastas, the emotional intensity that the issue
generated then has abated.
79
The adoption of the Ethiopian national colors of red, black, and green is another indication of the reappropriation of
Africa/Ethiopia. This adoptionsymbolizes Rastas'“allegiance toAfrica.”
80 These colors, alongwithgold, havebecome
a Rastafarian trademark, appearing on houses, vehicles, clothing, emblems, and accessories. Red represents the blood
of those who gave their lives for freedom, especially the black slaves; black represents African skin, holiness,ﬁre and
creativity; green is variously regarded as a symbol of Ethiopia, Jamaica, or ganja; and gold symbolizes the Rastafarian
faith, hope, or Jamaica.
81 Like dreadlocks, Rastafarian colors havebecomedistinguishingmarks for themembers of the
movement, “clearly and unambiguously” uniting them into a“single social structure.”82 Thus these colors serve the
function that membership cards serve in other organizations, declaring to the world the Rastas' African identity.
Lionismand the Exorcismof Anancyism
People create folklore to tell stories about themselves, their activities, and their personalities. The most celebrated
ﬁgure in Jamaica's folklore is Anancy, the spider.
83 Quintessentially, Anancy represents the ethic of survival in a hostile
environment. To quote Daryl C. Dance:
Anancy is generallyaﬁgure of admiration whosecunning and scheming nature reﬂects theindirectionand subtleties
necessary for survival and occasionally victory in a racist society. Though most of the storytellers rejoice in his
victories over the stronger animals with whom he is frequently in contest, they also recognize his immorality, his
greed, his stupidity, his deceitfulness.
84
In the face of oppression, Anancy resorts to chicanery as a means of survival, and in the process he loses his sense of
dignity and moral resolve. In the presence of his superiors/oppressors, Anancy acts silly and appears weak. Anancy is
therefore Jamaica's rough equivalentof America's UncleTom, or more exactly, of the type of African American whom
W. E. B. Du Bois describes as follows:
Today the young Negro of the South who would succeed cannotbe frank and outspoken, honest and self-assertive,
but rather he is daily
56
RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 72 ---
tempted to be silent and wary, politicand sly; he mustﬂatter and be pleasant, endure petty insults with a smile, shut
his eyes to wrong; in too many cases he sees positive personal advantage in deception and lying.85
In most of the Anancy stories (in Jamaica as well as in Africa, especially Ghana), the spider is at the mercy of other
animals, who are physically his superior. However, he uses his subtle intelligence to outwit them and hence to survive.
Sociologically, this represents the use of“tricksterisms and con-artistry” as a means of survival in an oppressive
situation.
86 Anancy represents what Jamaicans call“beating the system.”87 Because of this, Anancy has become for the
underclass in Jamaica“a kind of‘lovablerascal,’ impersonifying[sic] thegenius of our race to surviveunder Babylonian
conditions.”88 Therefore, as the earlier quote from Dance indicates, Anancy, in spite of his ethics, has the status of a
celebrity in Jamaican folklore and Jamaican society.
Despite Anancy's status in Jamaican folklore, Rastas reject this image as a positive representation of the African
personality they wish to embrace. They point out that since his ethic is an ethic of survival, Anancy has no resolute
moral standard, and he is often characterized by dishonesty, deceit, doubletalk, and backstabbing. Also, the depiction
of Anancy as“a little bald-headed man with a falsetto voice and a cringing manner in the presence of his superior,” is
antithetical to the valorization of dreadlocks, which symbolize fearlessness and fearsomeness.
89 Of course, this
apparent spinelessness, often accompanied by apparent incoherence, is part of Anancy's constrategy—what Jamaicans
call “playing fool to catch wise.” What is more despicable for Rastafari is that Anancy uses his conartistry not only
against his superiors/oppressors, but also against his friends and family. In other words, Anancy knows no other
modus operandi but conartistry or “jinnalship.” Even those who are closest to him—family and friends
90—are
subjected to his underhanded antics and tactics.91 Rastafarian lyrics are always chiding backbiters, back stabbers, and
“samﬁe men” (con artists). These appellations are a rebuke to those who practice Anancyism.
In detesting the lack of moral resolve, the spinelessness, and the endless connivings represented by the spider folk
hero, Rastas contend that “the System has made us all into Anancy,”
92 divesting the people of their sense of
uprightness, strength, and communality. Anancy represents the “inherited selves—albeit our acquired (slave)
selves”—foisted upon the African diaspora by the experience of colonialism.93 Therefore, the challenge of the African
diaspora is to recreate its moral, self-possessed ego. Rastas are the vanguard in responding to this challenge. By
invoking the lion as the symbol of their personality and by cultivating their dreadlocks
BABYLON AND DREAD REVITALIZATION 57


--- PAGE 73 ---
as evidence of their lion-ness, Rastas have set about expunging the Anancyism that characterizes much of Jamaica's
social life. Forsythe deﬁnes Rastas as“simply those black people who have grown tired of playing the role as‘bald-
headed anancies.’” He goes on to point out that since Rastas have no superior but Jah,“the Lion is a moreﬁttingideal
for a people bent on a militant march forward towards their own maximum and ultimate self-realization and self-
discovery.”
94
The choice of the lion as a Rastafarian symbol was doubtlessly inﬂuenced by the association of lions with Haile
Selassie. According to Rastafarian lore, Selassie descended from the tribe of Judah, whose emblem was the lion, was
born in the line of Solomon, who decorated the Solomonic temple with symbols of the lion, and was born under the
astral sign of Leo (July 23).
95 As part of his title, Selassie is identiﬁed as“the conquering lion of the tribe of Judah.”
Rastafarian tales tell of pet lions roaming freely through the imperial garden and the imperial palace. Furthermore,
Selassie and his predecessors had a preoccupationwiththelion: thelion's image is on theirofﬁcialseal, and lion statues
“guard” the gates of the imperial palace.
96
To proclaim their identity, Rastas surround themselves with symbols and emblems depicting the lion. They oftenpaint
pictures of the lion on their dwellings, businesses, and vehicles. Statues of lions are frequently seen guarding the
entrances to their homes or communes. The lion motif is ever-present in their songs, in the visual arts, and even on
their personal effects.
97 Even in their deportment, Rastas seek to convey to others their sense of lion-ness, their self-
conﬁdence and self-assertiveness. Barrett is convinced that the way they stride and their cultivation of dreadlocks are
attempts to embody or“simulate the spirit of the lion.”98
The lion is the antithesis of the Jamaican folk hero Anancy. The lion suggests nobility, self-conﬁdence, strength, pride,
and moral fortitude in the face of oppression.99 It symbolizes“power, dignity, beauty, fearlessness and wholesome
integritythatcome from self-realization.”100 The adoptionof thelion symbol represents Rastas'“attempt toconstruct a
new and noble identity.”101 As Forsythe expresses in terse Rastafarian lingo, it indicates a“return to black originality,
black creativity and to the ideals of‘Everliving Life.’” 102 This new or recreated identity repudiates the acquiescing
trickster identity of Anancy that is so popular in Jamaican folklore.
Cultivationof Dreadlocks
The dreadlocks hairstyle began in the 1940s. It was apparently inspired by the appearance in the Jamaican press of
Africans wearing a similar
58
RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 74 ---
hairstyle. Those whose pictures appeared have been variously identiﬁed as Gallas, Somalis, Masais,103 or Jomo
Kenyatta's Freedom Fighters.104 Along with the implicit justiﬁcation of the dreadlocks hairstyle that comes from its
alleged African origin, Rastas also invoke the biblical teaching concerning the Nazarites, whom the Levitical laws
forbade to trim their hair or shave (Num. 6:5), as a means of validating their hairstyle.105
Two theories exist concerning the origin of dreadlocks in Jamaica. Theﬁrst tradition, and the one more widely
circulated, traces the adoption of dreadlocks to Howell's guardsmen at his Pinnacle commune.106 The cultivation of
this hairstyle was an attempt to accentuate their fearsomeness. The other tradition traces the dreadlocks trademark to
the House of Youth Black Faith (HYBF), a group of young radical Rastas who exerted considerable inﬂuence on the
movement from the late 1940s to the 1960s. According to Chevannes, members of the HYBF grew their locks as a
direct assault on the Jamaican social norms concerning grooming, with full consciousness that the society would
regard them as antisocial, if not outright crazy. But this was their way of accentuating their sense of alienation, of not
belonging.
107 Whichever tradition best accounts for the origin of dreadlocks is still a question of debate. Dreadlocks,
however, have become the most salient and visible symbol of Rastafarian identity.
As with other Rastafarian symbols, dreadlocks have multiple levels of signiﬁcance. Aesthetically, they indicate a
rejection of Babylon's deﬁnition of beauty, especially as it relates to European features and hair quality. According to
Rastas, hair straightening and skin bleaching by black people reﬂect a yearning for whiteness and are therefore
symptomatic of alienation from one's African beauty. Against this background, dreadlocks signify the reconstitutionof
a sense of pride in one's African physical characteristics. As Cashmore explains, dreadlocks are“used to marry
blackness to positiveattributes and so to upgrade the black man and align him with elite groups—and so render white
stigmatic conceptions of blacks impotent. ”108 Ideologically, dreadlocks express the Rastafarian belief in and
commitment to naturalness. Trimming and combing, as well as straightening, are regarded as artiﬁcial, because they
change the natural looks and thus are proscribed by most Rastas. Dreadlocks thus bespeak the Rastas'
uncompromising posture against the artiﬁciality of Babylon.
109 Dread-locks also function as a mystical link between
Rastas and Jah, or“earth-force.” In this context locks are a kind of receptor or“psychic antenna,” as Semaj calls it,110
connecting Rastas with their God and with his mystical power, called earthforce, which is immanent in the universe.
Since they connect Rastas with earthforce, the shaking of the locks is thought to unleash spiritual energy, which will
eventually bring about the destruction of
BABYLON AND DREAD REVITALIZATION 59


--- PAGE 75 ---
Babylon. The locks are therefore symbolic of Babylon's unavoidabledoom, and the very sight of the locks is supposed
to generate fear in the hearts of Babylonians, hencedreadlocks.111
“ItalLivity”:Organic Living and HerbalHealing
Another indicator of Rastas' departure from Babylonis their commitment to ital living.Ital means “springing from the
earth, earthy, natural,”112 or organic. Livity is living according to the strict principles of Rastafari. Ital living is therefore
a commitment to using things in their natural or organic states. One of the ills of Babylon, according to Rastas, is its
departure from naturalness and its commitment to artiﬁciality. Rastas want to escape this artiﬁciality and return to
nature. Thus the Rastafarian ideal proscribes the use of synthetic materials and chemically treated foods. I say“ideal,”
because theeconomic reality of lifefor most Rastas makes strict ital livingdifﬁcult, if notimpossible.This proscription
applies to tobacco, alcohol, and most manufactured products, especially canned foods. Rastas proscribe alcohol and
other drugs because they view these as part of Babylon's plan to destroy the minds of black people.
Ital living also means that Rastas are basically vegetarian, rarely eating meat and strictly prohibiting the use of pork,
shellﬁsh, and scalelessﬁshes, especially those that are predators. The strong disapproval ofﬁsh that are predators
results from the belief that eating them would be an implicit approval of their“human predator” counterparts.
113
Central to the ideal of ital living is the belief in herbal healing. Rastas believe that the entire universe is organically
related and that the key to health, both physicaland social, is to live in accordance with organic principles, as opposed
to the artiﬁciality that characterizes modern technological society. In addition to the Rastafarian commitment to a
virtual vegetarian diet, there is a commitment to the use of various herbs which they believe promote human well-
being. Foremost among the herbs, that Rastas treasure is ganja, which they often refer to as the“holy herb” or
“wisdom weed.”
114 Ganja is used in a variety of ways. It is brewed as tea, soaked in rum for medicinal purposes,
smoked ritually and socially, and, as one Rasta told me, used as seasoning in a variety of dishes.115
The study of Vera Rubinand Lambros Comitas demonstrates thatthese uses of ganja are notlimitedto theRastas, but
are fairly widespread throughout Jamaican society.
116 The research of Kenneth Bilby has uncovered the fact that ganja
has long been smoked as part of a ritual in the Kumina ceremonies.117 However, the Rastas, more than any other
group, have elevated ganja to a central place in their religious practice and have
60 RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 76 ---
developed a well-articulated ideology justifying its use and explaining its signiﬁcance.
One source of justiﬁcationfor ganja use is theBible. Rastas point to Genesis 1:29 to make theargumentthatganja was
made by God for human use:“And God said, Behold, I have given you everyherb bearing seed, whichis upon the face
of theearth, and every tree, in whichis thefruit of a tree yielding seed;to you it shall be for meat” (KingJames Version).118
To justify their claim concerning the therapeutic value of ganja, they also cite Revelation 22:2:“the leaves of the tree
were for thehealingof the nation” (King James Version).119 Rastas also cite apocryphal sources, which indicate that ganja
grew on the grave of Solomon, which is why it is regarded as the wisdom weed.120 Rastas regard the proscription of
ganja use by Babylon's government as part of its strategy of social control.
Rastas also justify their use of ganja, particularly ganja smoking, by its purported therapeutic values. First, they allege
that ganja smokingis a source of illumination. It givesone access to“inner and worldlyknowledge.”121 In the words of
Carole Yawney, it provides“inspiration enough to penetrate to the core of whatever is currently occupying their
attention.”122 One ganja smoker, who is not a Rasta, described to me how ganja smoking opens up his mind and
provides him with a depth perception of his inner self.
As a source of illumination, ganja has becomean instrumentin thewar against Babylon and Babylonianconsciousness.
Its use, therefore, plays a major role in the de-alienation and decolonization of the African mind:“The proper use of
herbs has a central role to play in freeing the mind from thefuckery of colonialism. It provides the inspiration necessary
to transcend alienatingstructures of thought. Herbs, theysay, are thekey to thelock of understanding; God chooses to
reveal himself through herbs.”
123 Discussing the same point in another context, Carole Yawney explains that ganja
smoking is part of the process of mitigating the pressures and overcoming the distortions of Babylon. Ganja smoking
induces a visionary state, whichfacilitates transcending Babylon's categories and boundaries and returning home to the
reality of Jah. Yawney further underscores the role of ganja smoking in Rastas' attempts to expunge Babylon's false
consciousness from their minds. She notes that smoking is usually accompanied by“reasoning,” an informal, open-
ended dialogue, which is a collective attempt to gain new and liberating insight in a non-dogmatic manner.
124
Ganja smoking is also a means of creating and celebrating communality:“A communion bond develops among those
sharing the pipe, and it
BABYLON AND DREAD REVITALIZATION 61


--- PAGE 77 ---
would be a transgression to leave the circle until the last draw is taken.”125 This Rastafarian perspective on ganja
smoking is diametrically opposed to the ofﬁcial view regarding the effects of ganja use. The criminalization of ganja in
Jamaica is often justiﬁed by arguing that ganja smoking predisposes the smoker to violence. The incidents of violence
associated with the Rastas in the late 1950s and early 1960s were thought to have been triggered by ganja intoxication.
Rastas, however, contend that the smoking of ganja induces a feeling of peace and love. In a society rife with political
factions, economic disparities, and racial prejudices, Rastas prescribe the smoking of holy wisdom weed“for the
healing of the nation.”
126 The implication is that ganja smoking will facilitate social healing by inducing a feeling of
peace and love where factionalism once prevailed. As Forsythe notes:“If you have not taken the chalice [ganja pipe],
you are still at malice, and you will never enter the palace of the King Rasta Fari. The‘pulling’ or ‘drawing’ of the
chalice brings people together and thereby minimizes conﬂict and violence in the ghettoes.”127
Finally, ganja smoking is regarded as a source of physical healing. Many Rastas believe that their intake of ganja (in
various ways) ensures perpetual health. Marley's initial refusal to seek medical treatment at the onset of his cancer was
due in part to his belief in herbal healing, particularly the curative powers of smoking ganja.
“Dread Talk”:TheRastafarianArgot
What has become a distinct Rastafarian argot, aspects of which have been assimilated into the popular parlance of
Jamaica, developed in the House of Youth Black Faith, according to one of Chevannes's informants. The initial
impulse seems to have emerged spontaneously in reasoning sessions. However, it soon became a concerted effort to
conceal the meaning of their conversations from the uninitiated, particularly from Babylon's agents and informers.
128
Eventually,“dread talk” became a weapon in the Rastafarian ideological and symbolic war against Babylon.
The Rastafarian argot is an attempt to put distance between Rastas and Babylon. What Cashmore says about its
signiﬁcance in England is just as applicable to Jamaica:“Language was one of the blades used by the Rastaman to cut
his links with the encompassing Babylon. It aided maximal detachment from the everyday experience of white society
and encouraged insularity and the developmentof in-group solidarity.”
129 LaurenceA. Breiner concurs with Cashmore:
The development of the cult-language began as a kind of preemptive alienation: a gesture of withdrawal in the face
of exclusion. Especially in
62
RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 78 ---
the early days it was a language, like that of the exilic prophets, full of estrangement and imploded with violence. In
the penal colony of Babylon, this private language served as a psychic exercise yard, a protected arena for assertion
of self impossible in the wider society.
130
These comments revealthat the creationof a distinctlyRastafarian lingo is another missile in the Rastafarian arsenal to
be used in the ideological and cultural warfare against Babylon.Most directly, it betokens Rastas' nonacceptance of one
of Babylon's symbols of civility. According to Babylon's standard, the parlance of the poor is inferior to the staid and
standard articulation of the educated, whichsmacks of British culture. Thus one of the symbols of respectability, or of
being “cultured,” in Jamaica is the ability“to speak properly,” which means to show mastery of the intricacies of the
English (British) language, both in grammatical correctness and impeccable diction. Rastas have repudiated this
symbol of respectability and have created their own linguistic devices, which directly attack the integrity of the English
language and which make their speech almost incoherent to the uninitiated. The very act of making changes in the
accepted vocabulary and established syntaxis“a conscious act of protest against the established mores of‘Babylon.
’”
131
The Rastafarian approach to language may be regarded as an exercise in deconstruction and reconstruction. The
deconstruction part of the exercise attacks the integrity of the English language and the society that values it. The
reconstruction employs various stylistic and lexical innovations to create a linguistic medium that will express the
philosophical concepts and outlook of Rastafari. Peculiarities include changing sounds, forms and meanings of words
to reﬂect the Rastafarian outlook.
132 For example, consider the wordparticipate. Since in the reckoning of Rastas the
sound of the word conveys its meaning,participate signiﬁes less than full commitment to the speciﬁc venture at hand.
Thus, the word is changed tofullticipate to indicate that Rastas' involvement is always total and not partial. The same
process is at work in the change ofdedicate tolivicate. Theﬁrst syllable,ded, sounds like“dead” to Rastas. Since“dead”
signiﬁes something negative and the word dedicate is really positive, it has to be changed tolivicate.Rastas also exhibit
a boundless penchant for the creation of new words. Some examples areital, meaning organic, natural, and probably
vital in the sense of life giving;livity, meaning a lifestyle based on naturalness; andirie, meaning good,ﬁne, all right, or
anything positive or delightful.
Beyond its symbolic protest, the Rastafarian argot represents an effort to develop a medium of expression that will
convey the depth of the Rastafarian experiences and perceptions. K. M. Williams declares that it“expresses
BABYLON AND DREAD REVITALIZATION 63


--- PAGE 79 ---
the expanding self-awareness of the Rastafarian, and describes his visions, as well as the need of his everyday life.”133
According to Velma Pollard,“His [Rastafarian] speech form represents an attempt to bend the lexicon of Jamaica[n]
Creole to reﬂect his social situation and his religious views.”134 RexNettleford informs us that“the Rastafarians are
inventing a language, using existing elements to be sure, but creating a means of communication that would faithfully
reﬂect the speciﬁcities of their experience and perception of self, life and the world.”135 In “MABRAK,” Bongo Jerry
describes Rastas' intention to make over the language as an expression of their creative selves and as a reﬂection of
their own experiences. Contending that the English language is convoluted and alienating, he portrays his hero
“MABRAK” as the one who comes to right the wrong sounds and create a language that can adequately express the
thoughts and feelings of Rastas.
136 Cashmore makes the same point:“Language was probably the most important
symbolic device in enriching the Rastas' distinctiveness and elaborating the members' sense of identity.”137
The ingenuity of the Rastafarian argot is reﬂected in its ability to encapsulate loaded and sophisticated concepts in
simple expressions, which outsiders experience as linguistic crudities but which convey a whole range of meanings to
the initiated.I and I is one such expression. I and I is indicative of the divine essence in all people. For this reason,
everyone is potentially a Rasta, because everyone is born with the divine essence.
138 The true Rastas are those people
who have discovered the divine principle or the God within. In Rastafarian terms, they are the ones who have“come
into consciousness” of Rastafari or their divine essence.139 I and I also connotes the oneness of all things. Since“I,” in
Rastafarian thought, signiﬁes the divine principle, which is in all humanity, I and I is an expression of the oneness
between two (or more) persons and between the speaker and God (whether Selassie or the God principle that rules in
all creation).
140
Rastas' insistence on using I instead of the“mi” (me) of Jamaican patois141 expresses the dignity of the individual.
Becky Mulvaney observes,“‘ Me,’ for Rastas, represents an expression of subservience and self-degradation. It (me)
makes persons into objects, not subjects.”142 I expresses the assertion of self as an active agent instead of a malleable
object.In other words, Rastas haveceased to be objects—themi of theJamaican patois—to be molded and deﬁned by
Babylon and have declared their determination to be subjects, creating their own reality and identity. According to I
Jabulani Tafari, I and I is indicativeof Rastas' refusal to be Babylon's victims despite historical and current oppression.
It is a bold statement of self-assertion, which becomes a“high-calibre weapon” in the struggle against the system.
143
Breiner concurs with Tafari, arguing that the prominence of I and the creation of“I words” in Rasta language are
64 RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 80 ---
an attempt to recapture the self as an active agent in one's self-creation and self-deﬁnition. He labels this attempt“an
ingeniouspieceof ego assertion.”144 In thesame vein, Joseph Owens writesthat theRastafarian preoccupationwithI is
“the awesome, fearful confrontation of a people with a primordial but historically denied racial selfhood.”145
The Rastafarian reappropriation of Africa/Ethiopia, exorcism of Anancyism and imbibing of lionism, cultivation of
dreadlocks, espousal of ital livity, and development of dread talk, are all indicative of Rastas“steppin' outa Babylon”
and revitalizing their own sense of identity. Claudia Rogers captures the signiﬁcance of these efforts at culture building:
Sociologically, the development of ethnos and the maintenance of markedly different behavioral traits are of more
immediate signiﬁcance. They constantly re-afﬁrm to Rastas their own African-ness, their separateness, vis-à-vis the
wider society. Such patterns of behavior and attitude also become the primary means of declaringtheRasta belief in
African identity to the Jamaican society, of confronting that society with an ever-present reminder that Rastas reject
the categorization of“black masses” and are attempting to create yet another category for themselves. By donning
“a mask of confrontation” and establishing and maintaining the overt boundaries of appearance, linguistic usage,
religion, life style, and the subtle boundaries of attitudes, Rastas are attempting to reverse the syndrome of“the
black man has nothing and has no chance of getting anything.”
146
Summary
The Rastafarian movement, with its ideology, symbolism, and lifestyle, constitutes a deliberate undertaking aimed at
delegitimating the Jamaican sociopolitical order imposed by external powers and maintained by their local cohorts.
Declaring Jamaica's social institutions and cultural values to be a contemporary expression of ancient Babylon, Rastas
have embarked on the creation of a new order and a new identity.
147 Against the prevailing idea that linked Jamaicans
culturally with Britain, Rastas deﬁne themselves in relation to Africa, challenging the society's view concerning what is
aesthetically pleasing and culturally acceptable. In some cases, Rastas totally reverse the traditional good-bad
dichotomy. What was bad, Rastas elevate to the status of good, and what the society considered good, Rastas have
labeled bad or at least inferior. For example, against the notion that black is inferior, expressed in the phrase“nuthing
black evah good,”
148 Rastas have celebrated their blackness and have sought to recreate themselves in the image of
Africa. Against the notion that African
BABYLON AND DREAD REVITALIZATION 65


--- PAGE 81 ---
hair is not of good quality and that wearing beards is indecorous, Rastas have cultivated long and knotted locks and
have displayed them with the pride of a lion showing off its mane. In so doing they have made themselves into the
picture of the“bongo man,” thevery image thatthesocietyrejectsand fears.
149 Against thenotion thattobe civilized is
to adopt or approximate a British accent and Western aesthetic taste, Rastas create their own argot, their own unique
style of dress, and their own musical and artistic expressions. For Rastas, liberation begins with the reconstitution of
self and of cultural identity in the face of prolonged assaults from the oppressive, racist forces of domination.
150
66 RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 82 ---
4 The Ethos of Rastafari
Structure, Ideology, and Ritual
Without the development of formal institutional structures and a hierarchical organization, one would have expected
the Rastafarian movement to have met its demise a long time ago. However, Rastafari has survived both repression
and attempts at cooptation to become a movement with an appeal to disparate peoples around the world. In this
chapter I argue that instead of an overarching formal organization, the Rastafarian movement has developed a
distinctive ethos, the essential elements of which are informal networks, a shared ideological orientation, and common
ritual practices. These elements reveal the internal dynamics of the movement and are among the important factors
accounting for Rastafari's entrenchment in Jamaican society.
Reticulate Structure
The Rastafarian movement is characterized by muchﬂuidity and heterogeneity and lacks an umbrella organization
under which all elements of the movements are subsumed.It also lacks a formally established creed and an executive
or clerical leadership structure to ensure orthodoxy. Instead, the movement consists of various“groups, quasi-groups,
and individuals, who while sharing the same core beliefs, nevertheless remain separate and independent.”1 The
relationship between these groups and individuals centers around personal relationships and networks.2
This lack of formal structures has led some scholars to refer to the Rastafarian movement as amorphous, acephalous,
polycephalous, orﬁssiparous. The termsamorphous and acephalous seem to run counter to one of the basic sociological
axioms, whichstatesthat human activities and relationships always exhibitsome structure or pattern. The activities and
relationships of Rastafari are no exception. As I will demonstrate shortly, the Rastafarian movement has developedits
own complexof enduring forms of social organization.
3 The terms polycephalous and ﬁssiparous better


--- PAGE 83 ---
describe the nature of the movement, but do nothing to isolate its distinctive features, especially when compared to
other groups in Jamaican society. These terms could just as well be ascribed to Christianity in Jamaica, which is every
bit as polycephalous andﬁssiparous as Rastafari.
In light of its weblike or network conﬁguration, I characterize the Rastafarian movement as reticulate. Carole Yawney,
who has beendoing ethnographic research on the movementsince the 1970s, indicates that the Rastafarian movement
consists of a loose aggregation of groups connected to each other by personal networks. Yawney further points out
that this kind of reticulate,“decentralized multi-group formation is prevalent in the Caribbean, Latin America, and
Africa.”
4 Barry Chevannes'sresearchconﬁrms thispoint. The Rastafarianmovement,heargues, is characterized bythe
same multigroup formations seen in other Jamaican folkreligions, especiallyin Revivalism, Pukkumina, and the Native
Baptist movement. The unifying element in these religions is a“fairly uniform system of beliefs.”
5 Therefore, while the
movement has not developed the formal institutions and organizational structures that Weber sees as the indicator of
routinization, it has nevertheless developed its own mode of social formation—an ever-expanding network of
relationships that reaches not only across Jamaica but, in many cases, extends to other parts of the world.
Researchers haveidentiﬁed variouslevelsofparticipationwithin theRastafarianmovement.ManyRastas (probablythe
majority) fall into the category described by Velma Pollard as“own-built” Rastas.
6 These are persons who afﬁrm the
consciousness of Rastafari and share the foundational intellectual orientations and attitudes of the movement but do
not identify with any particular Rastafarian group or organization. For these adherents, Rastafari is a way of life.
Belonging to an organized group of Rastas is irrelevant. What is important is that one comes to I-and-I consciousness
and fashions one's lifestyle according to the precepts of Rastafari. At this individual level, Rastafari religiosity
approximates Troeltsch's description of mysticism as a radical individualism that deemphasizes dogma, sacraments,
and social organization.
7 It focuses instead on the individual's mystical links with Jah and the cosmic energy which
Rastas call earthforce. This individualism makes Rastafari attractive for many, especially those who are leery of
institutionalized religion. It enables them to establish a religious/cultural identity without the baggage and constraints
of hierarchical structures.
The relationships of other Rastas center around informal associations called“houses” or “yards,”
8 which are small
independent groups of Rastas who gather frequentlyto smoke ganja and to reason about their faith and about current
or historical events that affect their understanding of
68 RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 84 ---
their place in the world.“Houses” express the idea that each gathering of Rastas is to be guided by the spirit of
fraternity and by freedom of participation.9 A Rastafarian house may emerge wherever several Rastas (usually males)
attach themselves to a “leading brethren”;10 they frequently gather at his house or in his yard to partake of the
sacramental herb and to engage in the dialectical discourse called reasoning.
Leading brethren are often regarded as elders. However, eldership is not a formal position that is attained through
election, but rather an“inspirational position,” which is informally conferred on those who meet at least two criteria.
Elders must have a record of uncompromising commitment to and defense of the principles of Rastafari, a
commitment that often leads to confronting the establishment and paying for it by going to jail. Elders must also have
the ability to “speechify,” that is, the ability to expound the philosophy of Rastafari, to interpret historical and
contemporary events through the Rastafarian prism, and thus to inspire the brethren to greater understanding and
fortitude.
11 Eldership is therefore not an ecclesiastic ofﬁce with binding powers. Instead, the authority of eldership lies
in the elders' ability to exercisethe power of persuasion through words. That is why Homiak describes the Rastafarian
elder as“principally a man of words.”
12
Membership, like eldership, has no formal requirements. By virtue of their Rastafarian consciousness, Rastas attach
themselves to one or more houses of their choice from which they are free to leave at any time.
13 While there are no
formal rules governing a house, Rastas and especially the elders are desirous of projecting a positive image to the
community in which they live. Consequently, there are times when individuals are expelled from and forbidden to visit
a yard because of“bad behavior” or “lack of livity.”
Various groups of Rastas have emerged over the years. Some groups take the form of communes, organized around
and dominated by a particular leader or group of elders. Theﬁrst and probably thebest known communewas Pinnacle
(discussed in chapter 2), established and dominated by the charismatic Leonard Howell. After the demise of Pinnacle,
Wareika Hills, to the northeast of Kingston, became famous for its Rastafarian communes. Various rituals, especially
the ritual drumming called Nyabinghi, were developed in the Wareika Hills communes. At the end of the twentieth
century, the best known commune was that of the“Bobo Dreads” in Bull Bay to the east of Kingston. The Bobo
Dreads, named for the white head wrap that they wear, are the followers of Prince Emmanuel, who after being
dislodged from various locations in Kingston,ﬁnally moved to Bull Bay, where he established the“City on a Hill” on
captured government land.
14 Prince Emmanuel's charismatic authority is
ETHOS OF RASTAFARI 69


--- PAGE 85 ---
based on his claim to be the third person of the Rastafarian trinity, the other two being Haile Selassie and Marcus
Garvey.15 Rastas have also formed various voluntary organizations (sometimes legally registered) dedicated to the
accomplishment of particular goals. Some Rastas refer to these as mansions, because compared to the houses which
include maybe ten toﬁfteen Rastas, the mansions often have hundreds of members.
16 Conversely, as I discovered
during my research, many a high-sounding Rastafarian organization exists in name only with no deﬁnite location or
membership, except the person who conceived it in theﬁrst place.
These more formal groups fall into two categories:“churchical” and “statical.” The churchical are so designated
because of their emphasis on the development of Rastafarian religiosity and the cultivation of an African cultural
consciousness and lifestyle. Prince Edward's Ethiopian National Congress, Henry's Peacemakers Association, Abuna
Fox's Church of Haile Selassie, the Twelve Tribes of Israel, the Rastafarian Theocratic Government, and the Sons of
Negus are examples of churchical Rastafarian organizations. The statical organizations gain this designation from their
commitment to more political and social goals. For example, a goal of the Rastafarian Movement Association is to
organize all Rastas to seize power in Jamaica through the political process. Ras Historian, the leader of this
organization, told me in an interview,“Politicsis wha wi a deal wid” (Politicsis what we are dealing with).In the 1970s,
the Rastafarian Movement Association was active in organizing mass meetings, marches, and cultural events. In
addition, it published a newsletter with information of interest to or concerning Rastas.
17 The Mystic Revelation of
Rastafari, founded by the famous Ra stafarian drummer Count Ossie, provides another example of a statical
organization. This group seeks to organize Rastas to effect repatriation through rational means, rather than waitingfor
the mysterious arrival of ships. It also has a commitment to the development of the creative arts and to the creation of
educational opportunities for young people in the inner city of Kingston, Jamaica.
18 In the early 1970s, Count Ossie,
with the assistance of the Jamaican government, established a community center at the Mystic Revelation's Adasta
Road headquarters in an East Kingston ghetto to accomplish its goals. The distinction between churchical and statical
is more a matter of emphasis, since both functions are often present in a single organization.
Establishing the group memberships of individual Rastas can be quite a complicated exercise. Individual Rastas often
belong to more than one Rastafarian organization, and membership in a commune is marked byﬂuidity. A member of
the Rastafarian Theocratic Government may also belong to the Rastafarian Movement Association and vice versa. In
the case of Rastafarian communes, there are various patterns of participation.
70
RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 86 ---
Some reside in the commune on a permanent basis. Others alternate between the commune and some other place of
residence. Some will belong to a certain commune today and will move to another tomorrow. Yet others are just
visiting the commune and may reside there for a brief or extended period. In addition, Rastas also hold membership in
organizations that are not necessarily Rastafarian in nature, but that prove attractive to Rastas because of their
relationship with Africa or their commitment to African causes. For example, many Rastas belong to the Ethiopian
Orthodoxchurch, and others hold membership in the Ethiopian World Federation. When I visited the Ethiopian
Orthodoxchurch in Kingston, about a fourth of the congregants were Rastas.
The decentralized nature of the movement is probably a logical outcome of what Ernest Cashmore calls its
“epistemological individualism,”
19 or what Breiner terms the“authoritative individuality”20 that pervades Rastafari.
Epistemological individualism or authoritative individualism is rooted in the philosophical concept of I and I, which
leads to a ﬁerce freedom and a radical democracy, which, in turn, is resistant to centralization.
21 As noted in the
previous chapter, the basic notion of I and I is that the principleof divinity inheres in each individual, and hence truth
is equally accessible to all. A Rasta is one who has consciousness of the God within, and thus he is directlylinked with
the source of truth and life.
22 Therefore, there is no need for teachers to impart God's truths nor priests to mediate
between God and human beings. To know what is rightand how to liveand act, a Rasta just needs to get in touch with
the God within. This epistemological individualism leads to“a highly democratic process of interrelationships,”
23 or
what Breiner calls the“rule of democratic, and charismaticﬂuidity in Rastafarian groupings.”24 The locus of authority
is in each individual. Any agreement among Rastas must be arrived at intersubjectively through the process of
reasoning (discussed later in this chapter).
Interestingly, the issue of centralization has repeatedly come up for discussion among Rastas. But even in these
instances, the emphasis seems to fall on“greater cooperation and communication” rather than on the development of
hierarchical structures.
25 In the early 1980s, an organization called the Rastafari International Theocracy Assembly was
formed. The purpose of this organization is to bring a united front to the diverse“houses and ranks of Rastafari, so
that coherent inity [unity] might manifest as a result of this coming together.”26 As in the case for most Rastafarian
organizations, obtaining information about Rastafari International Theocracy Assembly is difﬁcult, partly due to an
oral culture that puts little premium on documentation and partly due to inconsistent media coverage. However, the
organization has had a number of meetings to
ETHOS OF RASTAFARI 71


--- PAGE 87 ---
discuss issues and problems facing the movement and to devise collective strategies to address those issues and
alleviate those problems. While the stated goal of Rastafari International Theocracy Assembly is to bring some levelof
organizational cohesivenessto Rastafari, in practice,it is reallya forum for sociallymobile Rastas to discuss positioning
themselves in the modern world. It has little signiﬁcance for those at the grass-roots.
Some researchers have been surprised to discover that despite the decentralized nature of the movement, Rastafari is
not in organizational chaos, but actually possesses the essential unity and identity necessary for it to be recognized as a
single social group. Although scattered throughout the island, many Rastas do know one another and are in frequent
contact. Yawney points out that one of the unifying elements of the movement is the vast network that exists among
various groups of Rastas and that is maintained through“intervisiting.”
27 This network disseminates information
concerning Rastafarian activities and announces the time and place of Nyabinghi assemblies.28 Through this informal
network, Rastas are able to share information and, probably more important from a sociological point of view, to
maintain a sense of belonging to a larger collectivity. In addition to networking, Rastafarian unity and identity are
established and perpetuated through sharing the same“system of beliefs and a state of consciousness”
29 and through
participating in the ritual activities referred to collectively as“grounding.”
Ideological/SymbolicWorldView
Rastas wouldprobablyoppose the descriptionof Rastafari as an ideology or system of beliefs. They woulddeclare that
Rastafari is not an“ism” but a way of life. They would contend also that Rastas do not deal with belief, which implies
doubt, but with knowledge, which implies certainty. Furthermore, Rastafari has no unequivocal Rastafarian creedal
statement or Rastafarian dogmatics (in the Weberian sense). However, Rastafari has developed identiﬁable ideological
orientations, which inform the movement as a whole and guide the action of individual Rastas.
Noting the heterogeneity of Rastafarian beliefs, Yawney nevertheless identiﬁes four orientations, which she believes
characterize the Rastafarian movement as a whole: Ethiopianism, biblicism, anticolonialism, and I-and-I
consciousness.
30 I would argue that the core of the Rastafarian world view to which all Rastas give assent is
twofold:a common sense of evil and a common sense of identity/solidarity. As discussed in the previous chapter, this
sense of evil is summed up in the termBabylon, which is
72
RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 88 ---
the recognition that blacks have been the victims of a white conspiracy, which has manifested itself in colonialism,
neocolonialism, imperialism, and racism. It is also a rejection of the values and institutions of Jamaican society as
inimical to the well-being of the people of African heritage. The common sense of identity/solidarity is powerfully
expressed at onelevelin theconcept of I and I, whichis an assertionof thegodlikeness and dignity of every individual,
notwithstanding the inferiority that Babylon brainwashing seeks to foist upon people of African heritage. At another
level, the common sense of identity/solidarity is expressed in the Rastas' embrace of their African past, their
recognition of the historic suffering of Africans at the hands of the colonial masters, their shared sense of acute pain,
which comes from living in the underside of Jamaican society, and their common struggle for liberation from
oppression and injustice.
Instead of elaborating these orientations in lengthy intellectual treatises, Rastas have encoded their ideology in certain
evocative symbols. Abner Cohen deﬁnes symbols as “objects, acts, concepts, or linguistic formations that stand
ambiguously for a multiplicity of disparate meanings, evoke sentiments and emotions, and impel to actions.”
31 Both
Cashmore and Paget Henry have observed that marginalized peoples, especially minority groups who lack access to
politicaland economic power, oftenturn to“symbolic strategies”
32 and “symbolic processes”33 in attempts to articulate
their grievances and to effect social change. This use of symbolic strategies is particularly true of the Rastafarian
movement. As Cashmore indicates,“Through symbolic strategies the Rastas were able to exteriorize their implicit
critique of society,” and their“symbolic activity articulated a concern not purely with incumbents of power positions
but with power arrangements themselves.”
34
In chapter 3, I discussed Rastafari as a movementof people responding to the Babylon experience.I described various
elements of the new cultural reality (or revitalized African identity) that Rastas have created and by which they deﬁne
themselves. As noted, all of these elements—dreadlocks, Ethiopian colors, dread talk, ital living, as well as the term
Babylon itself—are encoded with symbolic signiﬁcance, the essence of which is a rejectionof the Babylonian character
of Jamaican society and a commitment to the struggle for selfhood and dignity through the development of an
African-centered cultural identity.
Thus despite the heterogeneity of the Rastafarian movement there is an ideological/symbolic ethos that provides its
members with what Yawney calls a“rich complexof meaning and symbols” through which they canﬁlter the world
theyexperience and by whichtheycan shape their response to the pressures theyfeel.
35 Yawney further observes,“The
Rastas seem to have evolved a dynamic model of the universe in terms of which
ETHOS OF RASTAFARI 73


--- PAGE 89 ---
members of the lower class, the dispossessed and oppressed, often illiterate, have beenable both [to] construct a more
satisfying and meaningful lifestyle for themselves, and to enrich their understanding of what is happening to them and
why.”
36 This ideological/symbolic matrixfunctions as a lens through which Rastas ex perience and interpret the world.
In the words of one Rasta,“We were just blinded by European thought—but Ras Tafari brought us new sight.”37
Beyond being a prism through which the world is perceived and as an instrument in the struggle for change, the
Rastafarian complexof symbols serves as the unifying elementin the Rastafarian movement. Again, Cashmore is right
on target:
Bonds were expressed through symbolic procedures and such expressions served to consolidate and reinforce the
feelingof belongingness and unity. It was these bonds which held the Rastas together as a movementand not as an
aggregation of individuals sharing similar social positions.
38
In place of membership cards or confessed commitments to a creedal statement, evocative and provocative symbols,
which express a common sense of evil and of identity/solidarity, have become the badge of membership in the
Rastafarian movement. These symbols have uniﬁed and solidiﬁed the movement into a potent force in Jamaican
society.
RitualActivities
In addition to the informal network and the ideological/symbolic matrix, certain rituals serve to shape and perpetuate
Rastafarian religiosity and sociality. These rituals fall under the general rubric of what Rastas call grounding. John Paul
Homiak deﬁnes grounding as “informal instruction in Rasta precepts and ideology; the ritual process (reasoning) by
which circles of like-minded brethren are formed and maintained.”
39 Homiak's deﬁnition places grounding within the
context of the yards or houses I described earlier. However, while these“circles of like-minded brethren” provide the
day-to-day context in which Rastafarian religiosity is formed and sustained, the periodic gathering called Nyabinghi I-
ssembly or Groundation is another ritual event in which grounding takes place.
Grounding, in the context of the yards, takes place when a few Rastas gather to smoke ganja spliffs, or to“draw the
chalice,”
40 and to reﬂect on their faith or on any current or historical event that affects their lives. This is the most
informal level of grounding, and it can take place anywhere
74 RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 90 ---
and anytime without any prearrangement. However, for many, grounding is a daily activity, which takes place in the
yards of leading brethren or elders. In addition to these daily gatherings, some circles of Rastas hold periodic all-night
gatherings, some as often as once a week and others once a month or“as the spirit moves.”
41 Rastas who ground in
other yards on a daily basis may visit these all-night gatherings as part of the intervisitation discussed earlier. These
gatherings are somewhat more formal, and in addition to ritual smoking and reasoning, drumming, chanting, and
sometimes “speechifying” and feasting are often elements of the grounding.
As indicated, ganja is smoked in these Rastafarian gatherings as a sacrament, which is believed to be the source of
social and spiritual healing and insights. Rastas contend that the“herb” (ganja) is for“the healing of the nation.” They
further contend that the smoking of ganja“dispels gloom and fear, induces visions, and heightens the feelings, creating
a sensation of fellow love and peace.”
42 As noted in the previous chapter, ganja smoking is regarded as a source of
inspiration or as an inducer of a visionary state of consciousness.43 It lifts the users beyond the ordinary pace of life
and sharpens their perceptions so theycan penetrate truths hitherto not perceivedor apprehended.44 More speciﬁcally,
ganja smoking facilitates the transcending of Babylon's boundaries and the apprehending of new perspectives and
possibilities. The pressures and distortions of Babylon separate the individual from the real source of life and
knowledge; ganja smoking aids in dissolving the barriers and in hastening the return home to the reality of Jah.
Therefore, it is in the visionary state induced by ganja smoking that Rastas come to I-and-I consciousness,“the
merging of the individual with all lifeforces, the realizationthat all lifeﬂows from the same source, and the collapse of
the distance between internal and external, subject and object.”
45
As Homiak's deﬁnition indicates, an open-ended and informal discussion, known as reasoning, is an essential part of
grounding. Yawney describesreasoning as an open-ended, dialogical discourse between two or more brethren, which is
aimed at the exploration of intersubjectivity, that is, gaining“access toone visionary stream, to the condition of I and I
consciousness.”46 The idea of intersubjectivity, as it relates to Rasta reasoning, speaks to the Rastafarian conviction that
truth resides in each individual because the divine “I” is in each person. Therefore, reasoning, assisted by the
inspirationof ganja, stimulates the intersubjective exploration of truth. Stated another way, in the process of reasoning,
all the I's present are able to explore the same truth, which inheres in each of them.
Reasoning is a very intense activity, which can go on for hours in a dialogical manner until those involved arrive at a
consensus.
47 Yawney claims,“Two brethren may reason together, each prompting the other to
ETHOS OF RASTAFARI 75


--- PAGE 91 ---
higher and higher I-ghts [heights], accreting layer upon layer of meaning until a satisfactory view of reality is reached.”48
Despite the Rastafarian insistence on knowing in contrast to believing (which implies doubt, in their estimation) and
their elevation of the conclusions arrived at during reasoning sessions to the status of knowing, no conclusion or
consensus is ever elevated to the status of a binding creed. Each conclusion is subject to modiﬁcation or further
elaboration at future sessions.
49
What is most importantabout these reasoningsessions, from a sociologicalpoint of view, is thattheyfunction in much
the same manner as do catechism or Bible study in a church. They induct the initiates into the movementand conﬁrm
old adherents in the principles and precepts of Rastafari. It is noteworthy that new members of the movement are
usually recruited in the context of the yard, through their involvement in ganja smoking and reasoning. The outcome
of this collective activity, therefore, is the inculcation in Rastas of a common orientation to the world.
50 Reasoning,
therefore, provides the balance that tempers the individualism of the movement, that is inherent in their concept of I
and I. Reasoning allows Rastas to come together to pursue common understanding or to reach consensus on
particular issues.
51 According to Yoshiko Nagashima, through this ritual process“‘ communitas' can be actualized.”52
Hence the purpose of grounding is to“ground the nation” of Rastafari to the“essential foundation.”53 Through this
process, Rastas become steeped in the principles of“rastology.”54
Grounding also takes place at periodic movement-wide conventions variously called“Nyabinghi” (or “Binghi,” for
short), “I-ssembly” (Assembly), “Rasta Convention,”“ Nyabinghi Convention,” or “Nyabinghi I-ssembly.” The term
Nyabinghi was adopted from an East African group of the same name, which is reported to have been a secret society
led by Haile Selassie. The motto of this group is said to have been“death to the white oppressors.” By calling these
meetings Nyabinghis, Rastas are expressing their conviction that the activities at these gatherings serve to unleash
earthforce, thecosmicenergy thatpervades theuniverse,against those who havehistoricallyoppressed African people.
55
The where and when of the origin of the Nyabinghi I-ssembly is subject to conﬂicting claims. The Rasta convention
called by Prince Emmanuel Edwards in 1958 and the one convened by Claudius Henry in 1959 are often cited as the
beginnings of the Nyabinghi I-ssemblies. However, Verena Reckford cites a 1949 gathering at a Rastafarian camp in
Wareika Hills as the“ﬁrst really big congregation of Rastafarians.”
56 Homiak's research seems to support Reckford's
ﬁndings. Though Homiak gives no speciﬁc dates, he indicates that Rastafarian“grounation” (groundation) took place
in Rastafarian camps and yards prior to Edwards's convention
76 RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 92 ---
in 1958.57 The discrepancy may be due to the differences in the kind of publicity these events drew. The 1949
Nyabinghi was held in the relative seclusion of Wareika Hills without press coverage. Reckford seems to have come to
the knowledge of this gathering during herﬁeldwork among those who participated, especially Count Ossie, whose
drummers, along with some Burru players, provided music for the occasion.58 In contrast, the 1958 and 1959
conventionswere held in the city of Kingston with much fanfare and much media attention.59 So while the 1958 and
1959 conventions came to be regarded as the beginning of the Nyabinghi I-ssemblies, they appear to have been the
continuation of something started earlier. Their signiﬁcance comes from the fact that they brought to public awareness
a Rastafarian activity which had developed in the relative seclusion of the Rastafarian“cloister.”
Nyabinghi I-ssemblies are held according to the Rastafarian calendar of holy days. These are the Ethiopian Christmas
on January 7, the anniversary of Haile Selassie's visit to Jamaica on April 21, African Liberation Day (founding of the
Organization of African Unity) on May 26, Selassie's birthday on July 23, the Ethiopian new year on September 11,
and the anniversary of Selassie's coronation on November 2.
60 At these times, Nyabinghi I-ssemblies are convened.
Who convenes an I-ssembly and where it is held are determined in the give-and-take decisionmaking process within
the movement. However, the conveners always seem to meet two conditions. They must have reputations as
exemplars of Rastafarian“livity, that is, strict uncompromising lifestyles. They must also have the economic means to
make substantial contributions as the sponsors of the I-ssembly. An elder wishing to convene an I-ssembly usually
announces his intention at one of the bi-monthly meetings of elders, which are called“First Light Reasoning.” If he
secures the support of the other elders, information concerning planning for the I-ssembly is then disseminated
through the personal network of the movement.
61
The early Nyabinghi I-ssemblies were usually held in and around Kingston. However, since 1970, Nyabinghi I-
ssemblies have become rural events. As Homiak indicates, the shift is related to demographic changes affecting the
movement, speciﬁcally the dislocation of Rastas from West Kingston by the demolition of Back O’ Wall in 1966.
62
Many of the dislocated settled on the periphery of the city or moved to deep rural areas, taking the I-ssembly with
them.
63
Now, an I-ssembly lasts anywhere from three to seven days and is marked by a festive atmosphere, intense activities,
and ecstatic emotions.
64 Large numbers of Rastas from all over the island descend on the site of the I-ssembly,
sometimes in colorful motorcades. The daytime is occupied by feasting, ganja smoking, and reasoning in groups that
gather
ETHOS OF RASTAFARI 77


--- PAGE 93 ---
informally. At night, everything shifts into high gear. The congregants gather around huge bonﬁres or in booths
covered by leaves or thatch, and they are treated to all-night drumming, chanting, dancing, and speechifying. Of
course, no Rastafarian gathering is complete without the ritual smoking of ganja. These all-night sessions are intense
with many participants displaying an array of ecstatic emotions.
65
While the early Nyabinghi I-ssemblies were regarded as a preparation for repatriation, and while present-day
participants are frequentlyreminded that they are“sons and daughters of Zion” called out of Babylon, preparation for
immediate departure to Africa is no longer the central focus. The Nyabinghi I-ssemblies, their ritual activities, and the
ritual calendar have become the major means of facilitating solidarity in the Rastafarian movement as a whole.
66 The
functional signiﬁcance of the I-ssembly to the Rastafarian movement is multivalent as aptly summarized by Homiak.
First, it is a celebration and reinforcement of the oneness among Rastas and the oneness of Rastas with Jah. The mass
gathering and participation in the same activities generate a feeling of oneness akin to Durkheim'sconscience collectif.
Second, the I-ssembly is an occasion for the revitalization of the Rastas' African roots. A Nyabinghi I-ssembly is
therefore a“source of cultural and spiritual upliftment.” Third, the I-ssembly is also an occasion for the valorizationof
the strict ital livity (natural living) and precepts of Rastafari and for the purging of Babylon's inﬂuence from one's life.
Fourth, the I-ssemblygains further signiﬁcance from the role it is assigned in the destructionof Babylon.According to
Rastas, the ritual activities of the I-ssembly are a means of channeling earthforce against the oppressive agents of
Babylon. For example, the drumming and the chanting are often accompanied by ritual stomping and wild tossing of
dread-locks. These are symbolic acts aimed at destroying Babylon. Finally, the I-ssembly provides an arena for the
dramatization of contending claims for leadership within the movement. Since leadership is based on the individual's
reputationand facility with words, at these mass gatherings various elders seek to enhance their status and authority by
giving lengthy accounts of their history of uncompromising opposition to Babylon and by demonstrating their ability
to interpret historical and contemporary events from the perspective of Rastafari.
67
The foregoing discussion has demonstrated that, with all its plurality, Rastafari is a cohesive movement characterized
by structured relationships, a distinctive ideological/symbolic ethos, and routine ritual activities, all of which serve to
solidify and perpetuate the movement.
78
RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 94 ---
5“Coming in from the Cold”
Rastafari and the Wider Society
The relationship between the wider Jamaican society and the Rastafarian movement has progressed through three
identiﬁable phases: (1) resistance and repression, (2) accommodation and assimilation, and (3) cooptation and
commodiﬁcation. Prior to 1960 the relationship was primarily one of Rastas confronting the society and the society
responding by repressing Rastas. Although resistance and repression continued into the 1960s and thereafter, during
the 1960s, tensions started to ease, as the dominant powers pursued a policy of accommodation, which was supported
by many Rastas. At the same time, elements of the Rastafarian perspective were being embraced by segments of the
society. Since the early 1970s, Rastafari has been recognized as a positiveforce in Jamaican societyand has become the
object of cooptation by political and commercial interests.
Resistanceand Repression
The Rastafarian phenomenon is“an integral aspect of the larger matrixof black religious nationalism, folk revivalism,
and Jamaican resistance to the plantation economy and state.”1 As such, Rastafari is rooted in the rejection of the
legitimacy of the Jamaican social system and in resistance to its values and social arrangements. Owing to the
Rastafarian doctrineof nonparticipationin Babylonand because ofthecommunal living arrangements of some Rastas,
the movement has been sometimes characterized as passive or escapist. However, during theﬁrst three decades of its
existence, Rastas used a variety of means to confront the Jamaican establishment, including street meetings, at which
theydenounced the system. George Eaton Simpson made his initial observations, whichprovided the data for theﬁrst
academic treatment of the movement, at these meetings in the early 1950s. He identiﬁes sixthemes enunciated by
Rastafarian preachers at these street meetings: the wickedness of white people, the


--- PAGE 95 ---
superiorityof black people, Jamaica's false prophets(preachers and politicians), theoppressivenessand hopelessness of
Jamaica's social system, retribution to white and black oppressors, and repatriation to Africa, the homeland of black
people.
2 In the elaboration of these themes, Rastas sought to confront the colonial system and its local cohorts.
Leonard Howell's preaching was laced with contempt for the Jamaican government. He called for blacks to rise up in
violence against its custodians and even urged his followers not to pay taxes to the then-colonial government,
informing them that their only allegiance was to Haile Selassie.
3
Rastas also confronted the dominant powers of the society in public marches and symbolic“captures” of government
property. The 1940s and 1950s saw a proliferation of these marches by which Rastas sought to express their
disapproval of Jamaica's social, economic, and political system and their desire to be repatriated to the homeland of
their African ancestors. Sometimes, these marches had no speciﬁc purpose other than to demonstrate Rastafarian
deﬁance toward the custodians of power. They would march without acquiring the necessary permits, apparently
hoping to provoke a police reaction.
4
The smoking of ganja provided another means of resisting the civil authority. Although the government's prohibition
of ganja use was well known, the House of Youth Black Faith (HYBF), for instance, heightened the tension with the
colonial government by institutionalizing ganja smoking as the most sacred ritual activity of Rastafari, arguing that it is
a herb“for the healing of the nation” (Rev. 22:2) and that“every herb bearing seed” (Gen. 1:29) was made for human
consumption.
5 In addition, HYBF often went out of its way to provoke confrontation by ordering its members to
carry ganja on their persons, especially at their meetings, so that if they were searched by the police, the only case that
could be brought against them would be for possession of the holy herb, or wisdom weed.
6
Though not widely used, violentconfrontationperiodically appeared in the Rastafarian arsenal of resistance. Of course
Rastafarian rhetoric against Babylon has always been laced with violent images, such as the frequent invocation of
“blood andﬁre” against Babylon's agents and“baldheads.”
7 Early Rastafarian leaders, particularly Howell, advocated
the violent overthrow of the colonial system.8 On at least two occasions, the violence of words found more concrete
expressions. The ﬁrst occasion involved the Rastafarian leader Claudius Henry and his son, Ronald. In 1959 the
Jamaican security forces discovered a cache of small arms at Claudius Henry's Rosalie Avenue headquarters. Though
Henry claimed these were for ritual purposes, his claim was called into doubt shortly thereafter, when his son, Ronald,
was implicated in a“guerrilla” operation
80
RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 96 ---
designed to effect a coup d'etat. Though Ronald's commitment to Rastafari was questionable, and though the plot was
notengineered by Rastas, several Rastas wereactivelyinvolved withthe plotters. The other incident, whichhas become
known as the Coral Garden Massacre, took place in 1963 in a tourist area of Montego Bay. According to Derek
Bishton, this incident was triggered by efforts to prevent Rastas from using a footpath across the property of Rose
Hall Great House, which was being renovated as a tourist attraction. While the Rastas had used this path for years
without incident,
9 the authorities seemed bent on creating a“sanitized tourist zone” in which the sight of Rastas was
unacceptable. When the police were called in to settlethe matter, some Rastas were pushed too far and expressed their
anger by settingﬁre to a gas station, killing an attendant in the process. In the ensuing confrontation with authorities,
three Rastas, two policemen, and three other people were killed.
10
While early writers, such as Simpson, Lantenari, and Patterson, from their academic distance described Rastafari as a
movementof discontentedand maladjusted ghettoyouths displaying an escapist syndrome, those whowerecustodians
of the status quo rightly perceived that Rastafari was a challenge to the uneasy peace of the colonial establishment and
later of the newly independent Jamaica (1962). As early as the 1930s, a retired magistrate, C. A. Bicknell, expressed
concern about Rastafarian propaganda, which envisioned a“black war in Jamaica.” About the same time, Major B. F.
Cawes read The Promised Key, a Rastafarian text popularized by Howell, and wrote of the bitterness and hatred it
encouraged among the lower classes.
11 The forebodings of these representatives of the ruling class were of course
colored by the fact that the 1930s were characterized by broad social unrest and popular discontent as shown by the
widespread labor strikes of 1938.
12
Feeling challenged, the dominant classes and the civil authorities resorted to one of the classic weapons in the arsenal
of social control: labeling. The initial move, therefore, was to characterize the Rastafarian movementas a“criminalised
subculture”
13 and its members as a dangerous, lunatic fringe.Newspaper columnist ClintonParchmentsummed up the
attitude of the middle class (and probably of the majority of Jamaicans) toward the Rastas in a 1960 article.“It is self-
evident,” he claimed,“that the majority [of Rastas] are lazy, dirty, violent and lawless scoundrels mouthing religious
phrases to cover up their aversion to work and their ill habits.” He proceeded to declare that“the banning of the sect
and the repression of their habits is something that no Jamaican government with claims to public spirit ought to hold
back from.”
14 Parchment's perspectiveis representativeof the general perceptionof Rastas as a menace and a threat by
reason of their perceived criminality and mental deﬁciency.
RASTAFARI AND THE WIDER SOCIETY 81


--- PAGE 97 ---
After the Coral Garden incident, a newspaper article asked,“What is it like to live on an island where an estimated
60,000 lawless men —most of them thought to be mentally de ﬁcient—aim at the destruction of the island's
Government?”15 Apparently, from the perspective of those who represented the status quo, anyone who dared to
challenge the“civilized” colonial institutions and values of Jamaica or to advocate repatriation to the“dark continent”
of Africa must either be a criminal or suffering from delusions of grandeur.16
Since the“Rastafarian menace” was a threat to the stability and good name of thecountry,17 thegovernmentdeemed it
necessary to counter that threat. Having thus labeled the movement, the protectors of society initiated a campaign of
repression directed at Rastas because they regarded“misconduct and disorder” as “organic Rastafarian attributes.”18
The repression started as soon as the movementcame to the attentionof the authorities, and it grew in intensity as the
movement gained strength and notoriety. In the early days, Howell was the focus of attention. In 1934, he and his
associate Robert Hinds were arrested on the charge of sedition. Howell was convicted of trying to incite“disturbance
and violence among ignorant people.”
19 In conjunction with Howell's arrest and conviction, the religious activities of
Rastas were severely restricted in St. Thomas and Portland, where Howell had signiﬁcant followings. The Pinnacle
commune, which Howell established after serving hisﬁrst prison term, was subjected to repeated raids by the police.
The establishment of Pinnacle was symbolic of Howell's break with and rejection of the values and legitimacy of the
dominant society. It was also an act of retreat in order to pursue theRastafarian lifestylewithout confrontation withthe
establishment. However, the authorities regarded Pinnacle as a guerrilla or“terrorist base camp”
20 and proceeded to
conduct a relentless campaign of harassment against its members.21 On one occasion about seventy Rastas were
arrested on ganja and assault charges; twenty-eight of them received jail terms. Howell was again imprisoned for two
years.
22 Finally, in 1954, the police raided and demolished Pinnacle, arresting and imprisoning many of Howell's
followers and dispersing others. The government later conﬁned Howell to a mental institution.23
The 1950s and 1960s saw waves of repressive measures against Rastas. The ﬁrst wave came against bands of
Howellites who appeared in Kingston after the demolition of Pinnacle. Many were arrested for ganja possession and
others for rioting or assembling with the intent to riot.
24 The next wave came after the Rastafarian gathering convened
by Prince Emmanuel Edwards in 1958. The effusive enthusiasm of the Rastas and their vitriolic tirades against the
“system” during the conventionput the police on alert. Some attendees of the conventionengaged in skirmishes with
82
RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 98 ---
the police, the most serious of whichwas the forced removal of about three hundred Rastas from Victoria Park, which
they had occupied as a symbolic capture of the city of Kingston.25 Following the convention, Rastas were routinely
searched and arrested. Edwards's camp in Back O' Wall was raided and razed. All of the occupants were arrested but
were later acquitted.
26 In May 1959, after a fracas which started between a policeman and a Rasta in a downtown
Kingston market, the police descended on the Rastafarian enclave in Back O' Wall, arresting Rastas, ransacking their
dwellings, beating some, and forcibly shaving the locks of others.
27
What has been dubbed the“Henry affairs” marked the high point in the tension between the establishment and the
Rastafarian movement. The incidents involving Henry and his son created a wave of hysteria comparable to that
created by the Morant Bay Rebellion almost a hundred years earlier (1865),
28 and the establishment unleashed its wrath
against the Rastafarian movement. In addition to sentencing Henry to a long jail term and executing his son for
murder, the police stepped up their harassment of Rastas. A 1960 university report describes the harassment of Rastas
in the aftermath of the“Henry affairs”: “The police have carried out extensive raids, made numerous arrests, and, in
the heat of the moment, have indulged in many arbitrary acts against Ras Tafarians.”
29 According to Barry Chevannes'
characterization, “a wave of intimidation, shaving of locks, arrests, beatings and imprisonment descended on all
Rastafari, in unprecedented scale and scope.”30 Feeling the heat of arbitrary intimidation and imprisonment, some
Rastas approached the University College of the West Indies (now University of the West Indies) to investigate and
disseminate the truth concerning Rastafari, which they believed would show that they were neither lunatics nor
pathological criminals, but peace-loving and hard-working people.
Although the universitystudy indicated that Rastas were not the menace they were portrayed to be and recommended
rehabilitation instead of repression to resolve the“Rasta problem,” the tension between the movement and the
establishment remained high. Thus when the Coral Garden Massacre occurred in 1963, the government responded by
ordering the arrest of Rastas en masse.
31 A leading politician called on the general citizenry to assist in efforts against
Rastas. He asked everyone“to report any unusual movement of Rastafari people when they are going in ones or twos
or in groups, wherever they suddenly appear in suspicious circumstances.”32 Since the incident at Coral Garden was
attributed to ganja intoxication, the repressive measures taken against the Rastas went hand in hand with the
suppression of ganja cultivation and use. The Dangerous Drug Laws were amended to impose more severe penalties
for the cultivation,
RASTAFARI AND THE WIDER SOCIETY 83


--- PAGE 99 ---
trading, or use ofganja. The prime minister, Alexander Bustamante, declared his resolvetodeal with theganja menace:
“Whereverganja is grown, whether on thehills, on the plains, in theforests, or on platforms betweentrees or in pots, I
intend to see that there is no resting place for these evildoers until this country is rid of this menace.”33
The continued association of violence, ganja, and Rastas led to the destruction of Back O' Wall in 1966. In the 1960s
Back O' Wall, sometimes called Shanty Town, was the most depressed and depressing slum in Kingston. As part of its
move against increasing violence and other criminal activities, the government ordered it bulldozed. The Rastas who
had lived there since their dispersal from Pinnacle were again displaced.
34 This was the last major assault against the
perceived Rastafarian threat.
Accommodationand Assimilation
A 1960 study of the Rastafarian movement by a group of universityscholars marked the beginning of rapprochement
between Rastas and the wider Jamaican society. Approaching the university and asking for a team to study and
documentthe truth concerning themovementprovedto be an astute, if notstrategic, move by the Rastas. For theﬁrst
time, Rastas attempted to speak with a common voice and to defend their legitimacy and right to exist without
persecution. Even more important, the Rastas probably knew that within the establishment, the university was the
staunchest critic of Jamaica's Eurocentrism and the most open to new ideas. Therefore, Rastas felt that if they were
going to get a favorable portrayal in the society, it would most likely come from the universityintellectuals.
35 The study
was authorized by the university with the support of the Jamaican government. Theﬁnal report took on the character
of a public policy document.
This report, which was prepared by M. G. Smith, Roy Augier, and RexNettleford, without sanctioning the Rastafarian
movement portrayed it in a favorable light. The study counteracted the caricature of the movement as a group of
criminals and lunatics who preyed upon society. It pointed out that, with the exception of a few who used the guise of
Rastafari to engage in criminal activities, Rastas were peaceful, nonviolent citizens.
36 The study further indicated that
Rastas had justiﬁed grievances, which were fueled by the economic and social marginalization faced by the urban
unemployed and underemployed. These grievances, the report claimed, would lead to greater instability and perhaps
revolutionary violence if they were left unaddressed.
37 The report recommended that rehabilitative measures be taken
to alleviate destitution in the urban ghettos,
84 RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 100 ---
that the government investigate the possibility of repatriation to Africa,38 and that the Ethiopian Orthodoxchurch be
invited to establish a branch in Jamaica.39 The obvious conclusion of those who conducted the report was that Rastas
were not sociopaths or psychopaths but were instead suffering Jamaicans responding to the pressures of
marginalization.40
As is evident in the discussion of the confrontation between Rastas and the civil authorities, the tension between the
two did not dissipate overnight with the publication of the university report. In fact, the report received scathing
reviews in the press. The university scholars were labeled as Rastafarian sympathizers who were“whitewashing” the
dangerous dissidents, and the report was criticized as lacking in academic value and as a waste of taxpayers' money.
41
However, the study was ground breaking; as theﬁrst attempt by the society to take a serious look at Rastafari, it
represented the beginning of the debunking of the myths concerning the dementia and inherent criminalityof Rastas.42
Evenmore important, itset in motiona series of events, promotedby thegovernmentand supported by Rastas, which
facilitated the move toward rapprochement. Several of these events stand out: the mission to Africa to explore the
possibilityof repatriation, the visits of African dignitaries including Haile Selassie, to Jamaica, and the establishment of
the Ethiopian Orthodoxchurch in Jamaica.
Implementing oneof the recommendationsof the universitystudy, thegovernment sponsored fact-ﬁnding missions to
Africa in 1960 and 1962. The missions were composed of Rastas, members of“African consciousness” organizations,
and civic leaders. The purpose of the missions was to determine which African states would allow Jamaicans to
repatriate. The delegations visited Ethiopia, Nigeria, Ghana, Liberia, and Sierra Leone and met with high-level
government, civic, and religious leaders. On returning to Jamaica, the Rastas on these missions maintained that the
African governments were committed to the repatriation of Jamaicans whose forebears were displaced by the Middle
Passage. However, the majority report of theﬁrst mission, written by journalist Vick Reid, concluded that, while there
was an outpouring of goodwill from the African states visited, they were only interested in receiving professionals and
other skilled persons who could contribute to the building of their post-colonial societies.
43 Since most Rastas were
unskilled or semiskilled, they were effectively excluded as candidates for migration to Africa. In 1964–1965, a
delegation of Rastas made another mission to Africa in the hope of pushing their repatriation agenda. Though the
Rastafarian delegates were well received in the countries they visited, their mission failed to lead to an ofﬁcial policy of
repatriation by either the African governments or the Jamaican government.
RASTAFARI AND THE WIDER SOCIETY 85


--- PAGE 101 ---
Nettleford argues that because the government was pursuing a policy of migration, as a result of which thousands of
Jamaicans had moved to the United Kingdom and the UnitedStates, it felt constrained to deal withthe Rastafarian call
for repatriation to Africa. So without accepting the Rastas' arguments and demands for repatriation, it could pursue
the possibility of Jamaicans moving to Africa within its broader migration policy.
44 Another view, however, suggests
that the government never took the call for repatriation seriously and never pursued it with any vigor. Instead the
missions were intended to expose Rastas to the harsh realities of Africa in order to dampen their desire for
repatriation.
45 Whatever the motivationof the government, and although no repatriationtook place under government
sponsorship, the missions did indicate that Rastas were not criminals to be hounded, but Jamaicans whose problems
and aspirations needed to be addressed by the wider society.
Following the university report and the missions to Africa, a parade of African dignitaries made ofﬁcial visits to
Jamaica. Of course, the highlight was Haile Selassie's visit in 1966. During this visit, Rastas received prominence and
visibility hitherto unimaginable. To begin with, it took Mortimer Planno, an eminent Rastafarian elder, to quiet the
large crowd thatﬂocked to the airport to welcome the emperor. Many had broken through the police line and were
surrounding the plane. Repeated attempts by government ofﬁcials failedto bring them under control,and the emperor
could not deplane. Planno's appeal from the steps of the planeﬁnally brought the crowd under control. Rastafarian
representatives were invited to participate in state ceremonies and found themselves socializing and dining with the
upper and middle classes at Kings House (the residence of the governor general). In addition, the Rastas sought and
received a private meeting with Selassie. Most important, the exposure and digniﬁed conduct of the Rastas during the
visit of Haile Selassie marked another step in the rapprochement between Rastafari and the establishment. As John
Paul Homiak contends, the visibility of Rastas at important state functions“conferred a sort of‘warrant of credibility’
on the movement.”
46
Some scholars argue that the visits of African dignitaries, particularly Selassie, were calculated to mute the desire for
repatriation and induce the acceptance of Jamaica as home. For example, Nettleford characterizes these visits“as a
necessary exposure to combat the frustration born of ignorance and even to cure the Rasta desire for Africa by an
overdose.”
47 Homiak concurs:“The invitation by the Jamaican government to Emperor Selassie which eventuated in
his historic 1966 visit was calculated to quell the demands for repatriation and to promote the‘rehabilitation’ of the
brethren, i.e., to de-program Rasta[s] on the Back-to-Africa issue.”48
86 RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 102 ---
Certain incidents associated with these visits give merit to such claims. For example, a speech by a Nigerian
government ofﬁcial to a group of Rastas in 1962 seemed designed to encourage the acceptance of Jamaica as home.
He congratulated his audience on having achieved independence and encouraged them to make their contributions as
“citizens.”
49 What is more, during the Selassie visit, the phrase“liberation before repatriation” emerged. Reportedly,
this was a “directive” from Selassie for Rastas to free the people of Jamaica before returning to Ethiopia.50 The
credibility of this directive seems to be buttressed by the fact that, after the visit, there was a noticeable cooling of the
repatriation fervor that had been evident in the movement for more than a decade.
As another gesture of accommodation, the government invited the Ethiopian Orthodoxchurch to establish
congregations in Jamaica. This was one of the recommendations in the university study and hence a part of the
program of rehabilitating Rastas.
51 It was hoped that this denomination would provide a“positive functional haven for
those Jamaicans who wish to assert strongly their African origins” yet “at a more conventional and established
Christian level.”52 In other words, the invitation to the Ethiopian Orthodoxchurch was a political ploy aimed at
“incorporatingRastafarians under the Christian umbrella.”53 The ﬁrst congregation of the Ethiopian Orthodoxchurch
was organized in 1970. By 1982 the denomination had spread to several towns beyond Kingston, secured a sizable
following, and participated in the ecumenical activities of the Jamaica Council of Churches.
54 Rastas have identiﬁed
positively with this church, and many have become members. However, many who have become members refuse to
compromise their staunch Rastafarian convictions and often create heterodoxy in the church.
55
The fact-ﬁnding missions to Africa, the visits of African dignitaries, especially Haile Selassie, and the establishment of
the Ethiopian Orthodoxchurch in Jamaica were all efforts aimed at addressing the“Rasta problem.” The signiﬁcance
of these efforts lies mainly in the fact that they brought Rastas into increasingly amicable social intercourse with the
guardians of the society, thus changing the nature of their relationship from resistance and repression to one of
accommodation.
While the gestures of reconciliation between Rastas and the civil authorities were playing themselves out, two other
signiﬁcant processes were also developing. Theﬁrst process involved a growing alliance between Rastafari and the
progressive elements of the Jamaican intelligentsia, while the second involved a noticeable diffusion of Rastafarian
consciousness and social traits among the poor and the young in the society.
Between 1962 and 1972, there was an increasing radicalization of the
RASTAFARI AND THE WIDER SOCIETY 87


--- PAGE 103 ---
middle-class intelligentsia as a result of its disillusionment with the new independent government's inability to address
the issues of poverty and cultural identity.56 This radicalization crystallized into the Jamaican version of the Black
Power movement. These radical intellectuals, some of whom faced the brunt of British racism as they trained in the
corridors of Oxford and Cambridge,found a ready critique of Jamaican society and a more acceptable view of life in
theideology of Rastafari. One of these intellectuals, Walter Rodney, who was a Black Power activist at theUniversityof
the West Indies, gives this appraisal of Rastafari:
It was to the Rastafarian movement and its predecessors that Africa was our spiritual homeland and that our
“sojourn” in Jamaica should be used to develop her traditions and civilisation as far as was possible in“Babylon”
that is Jamaica. That was the only way in which Black men couldﬁnd themselves.
57
Rodney continues:
In our epoch the Rastafari have represented the leading force of this expression of black consciousness. They have
rejected this philistine white West Indian society. They have sought their cultural and spiritual roots in Ethiopia and
Africa.
58
Rodney's observations underscore the fact that Rastafarian ideas on“black power and majority control” had begun to
take center stage in local intellectual discussions. As an observer of the Rastafarian movement during this period,
Theodore Malloch came to this conclusion:“Some intellectuals in the Caribbean have understood the cruxof the
Rastafarian argument—that Jamaica tacitly denies its spiritual and cultural African past. These persons believe that
Jamaica must accept a connection with Africa as part of its national identity.”
59
With this acknowledgment of Rastafari's social signiﬁcance, the progressive elements of the Jamaican intelligentsia
soon developed social and intellectual exchanges with Rastas. These exchanges resulted in the forging of alliances
betweentheRastas and theBlack Power movement.Walter Rodneyhimselfepitomized thisexchange and theresulting
alliance. The very title of his book,Groundings with My Brothers, is a testament to his involvement with the Rastafarian
movement. Rodney deﬁnes grounding as “sitting down together to reason, to‘ground’ as the brothers [Rastas] say.”
60
When I met with Ras Historian in May 1991, he recalled how Rodney would visit Rastafarian yards and communes to
teach African history. Ras Historian even claimed that he gained his moniker because of
88
RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 104 ---
the penchant he displayed for history in Rodney's teachingsessions among the Rastas. Whenthe Jamaican government
declared Rodney persona non grata in 1968 as part of its suppression of Black Power, among the reasons it cited for
his banning were“subversive activities” among people associated with the Rastafarian movement.
61
The Abeng, a group formed in response to the banishment of Rodney, further exempliﬁed the alliance of Rastas and
middle-class intellectuals. Its membership included university professors and students, some of whom later became
prominent politicians, and persons outside of the academic world, especially those of working-class and Rastafarian
backgrounds. The expressed purpose of this group was to be critical of the social and political system in Jamaica.
62 Its
publication, also calledAbeng, declared solidarity with pop singers who were critical of the society, highlighted the
marriage between Rastafarian ideas and reggae music, gave prominence to the issues of race, class, black nationalism,
and the plight of the poor, employed Rastafari lingo liberally, and focused explicitlyon issues of particular relevanceto
Rastas.
63 Though the group and its publication were short-lived, they served to give further credibility to Rastafarian
criticism of the establishment.
The alliance between Rastas and the progressive elements of Jamaican society led to what may be called the
mainstreaming of the Rastafarian perspective. Nettleford, a long-time observer of the movement, correctly points out
that, by the late 1960s, Rastafarian criticisms of the societyhad become common fare even among those who would
have looked askance on Rastas in the early 1960s.
64
Even before the alliance of Rastafari and radical intellectuals, Rastafari was gaining ground in the consciousness of the
poor and the young throughout the society. As Yawney observes, Rastas had “found ways to impose their
transcendental framework of reality on the surrounding environment.”
65 “By the late sixties,” writes Nettleford,“there
was much more widespread embrace of Rastafarian attitudes, ideals and even practices.”66 Nettleford goes on to cite
several examples of the diffusion of Rastafari in the wider society:the popularity of“long and carefullyunkempt hair,”
the donning of multicolored clothing believed to be African, deﬁance of“ganja laws,”ﬁ rm and fervent afﬁrmation of
Africa and blackness, condemnation of neocolonialism, repeated calls for an end to police brutality against the poor,
criticisms of the white orientation of the society, and a reevaluation of colonial history.
67 As someone who became
socially and culturally aware in the late 1960s and early 1970s, I can recall some young persons being criticized as
“Rasta-minded,” because they were expressing ideas, wearing accessories, or using words and expressions that were
recognized as Rastafarian in origin.
RASTAFARI AND THE WIDER SOCIETY 89


--- PAGE 105 ---
Both Nettleford and Chevannes argue that the diffusion of Rastafari among the poor is related to the fact that Rastas
and therestof the poor share thesame folk ethos. According toChevannes, there is a continuity betweenRastafari and
the world view of the Afro-Christian traditions in-grained in the masses.
68 Nettleford maintains that“a closer look at
the Rastafarian practices reveals that much in their way of life is in any case based on a moral code akin to that of the
subculture.”
69 Because Rastafariﬁt into themold of thesubculture, it is notsurprisingthat the poor who inhabited that
subculture eventually accepted elements of what was initially considered distinctively Rastafarian.
Although the 1960s started with the Rastas marginalized, maligned, and repressed, by the end of the decade, the
movement was enjoying a great measure of acceptance from the wider society. By that time, the movement was not
only accommodated but had began to exert tremendous inﬂuence on the social discourse and popular culture of
Jamaica.
Cooptation and Commodication
The 1970s marked the beginning of a new era in the dynamics of the relationship between the Rastafarian movement
and the rest of the society, an era of cooptation and commodiﬁcation. With Rastafari becoming more diffused in the
society, the point of view of the sufferer/Rasta became an item to be exploited by politicians in their quest to outdo
their rivals. At the same time, Rastafarian images, symbols, and creativity became commodities to be peddled for
commercial gain.
During the general elections of the 1970s (1972 and 1976), the battle for the heart and soul, not to mention the votes,
of the people was waged around the manipulation of Rasta/African symbolisms. The visit of Haile Selassie, the Black
Power movement, and the unmistakable stamp of Rastafari on the popular culture (clothing, accessories, music, and
speech) had all spoken eloquently of the closeness of Africa to the hearts of the masses.
In 1972 the People's National Party (PNP), through its use of Rastafarian symbols and language and its espousal of
issues close to the hearts of Rastas, conducted an election campaign that suggested an alliance with Rastas and the rest
of the Jamaican lower classes.
70 This alliance was symbolized by Michael Manley's adoptionof the name“Joshua” and
by his carrying of a rod allegedly givento him by Haile Selassie on Manley's visit to Ethiopia in 1970. During the 1972
campaign,a pamphletprintedand distributed by thecontroversialRastafarian leader Claudius Henry proposed a trinity
of Henry (Moses), Manley (Joshua), and Selassie (“lord of
90
RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 106 ---
lords”).71 The implication was clear. The Rastas have traditionally interpreted biblical references to the plight of the
ancient Israelites in Egypt and Babylon as references to the suffering of the African diaspora. Now,“Joshua” would
lead the modern“Israelites” to the“promised land” of equality and prosperity.72
The “rod of correction,” as it was called, was a symbol of the authority that Selassie invested in Manley, empowering
him to deal with the corruption in Jamaican society.73 Additionally, a rod, or walking stick, is one of the trademarks of
distinguished Rastafarian elders. The rod also has signiﬁcance for African and Afro-Christian sects in Jamaica, since
their leaders, called“shepherds,” often carry rods as symbols of their authority. In 1972, even the leaders of the
traditional Christian churches saw the rod as a religious symbol that signiﬁed the need for a correction of the society's
moral and spiritual bankruptcy, which was charged to the Jamaican Labour Party (JLP) government.74 With this potent
symbol, Manley traveled around Jamaica promising to break the back of exploitation and corruption and bring justice
and equity to the Jamaican masses.
In addition, several slogans of the People's National Party were taken both from the Rastafarian argot and from
popular reggae songs with Rastafarian connotations. For example, the expressions“peace and love,”“ one love,” and
“hail de man,” which were on the lips of most PNP campaigners and supporters, are readily recognized in Jamaica as
Rastafarian greetings.75 Manley once referred to the rod of correction as“I-rod,” Rastafarian argot for“my rod.”76
“Better Must Come,” whichwas therallyingcry ofthePNP in 1972, was a popular reggae song. The PNPalso enlisted
popular Rastafarian musicians and singers, including Bob Marley, to travel on their bandwagons and to perform at
their political rallies. In addition, the PNP made unabashed use of many songs that were critical of the social and
economic situation in Jamaica. Many of these songs were clothed in Rastafarian rhetoric or had Rastafarian
implications.“Beat Down Babylon,” a song banned by the governing party,“When Jah Speaks,”“ Repatriation,” and
“Dem Ha Fe Get a Beatin,” all exploding with Rastafarian overtones and undertones, were blared from PNP
loudspeakers across the island.
77
The Jamaican Labour Party tried to neutralize the PNP strategy by also using songs with Rastafarian themes, by
claiming to capture the rod of correction, and by employingRastafarian language in their speeches. Hugh Shearer, the
prime minister and leader of the JLP in 1972, said at a rally before the election date was set,“Only one man can call
election and [he] isI-man.”
78 Edward Seaga, who was elevated to the leadership of the JLP by 1976, opened the 1976
campaign with a speech that read as though it were scripted by a Rasta. Among other things, he asserted,“Them
RASTAFARI AND THE WIDER SOCIETY 91


--- PAGE 107 ---
going to get a beating,” a clear allusion to Peter Tosh's“Dem Ha Fe Get a Beatin,” a song used by the PNP in 1972.
He continued,“But I want him [Manley] to know that Eddie is trodding creation, and the kingdom over which he
rules no longer exists, because‘Jah Kingdom Gone to Waste.’ ...Y o u t h m a na n ddaughta should know which is their
party.”79 In addition to using such Rastafarian expressions as“trodding creation,”“ Jah kingdom,”“ youthman,” and
“daughta,” the very tone of the speech was a simulation of dread talk, which had become“street talk” by the 1970s.80
“Jah Kingdom Gone to Waste” was Ernie Smith's hit song, which the JLP adopted as its theme song in 1976. The
song contains exclamations of“Oh Jah” and after describing the“dread” conditions of Jamaica, concludes with the
words, “Jah sey dat no right.”81 By using this song, the JLP sought to highlight the failures of the Manley government
over the previous four years and to claim that they would be better stewards of“Jah kingdom.”
Whether the invoking of Rastafarian symbols and perspectives was an expression of genuine concern for the issues
that affected Rastas and the black masses or just a political ploy is difﬁcult to ascertain. After winning the 1972
election, the PNP did make some halfhearted gestures to deal with issues that concerned Rastas. For example, the
governmentsought to developgreater tieswithAfrica, met withRastas to discuss repatriation, declared its intention to
review the ganja laws, and even pardoned some Rastas who were serving time on ganja charges.
82 Still,ganja remained
illegal, and many Rastas continued to be prosecuted for its possession. Interestingly, Seaga, long recognized as a
promoter of Jamaican culture, was involved in the recording and promotionof reggae. However, neither the PNP nor
the JLP seem to have had any deep commitment to the tradition of protest enshrined in the Jamaican popular music.
This was quite evident in the fact that while they were exploiting reggae to their own ends, they were also banning
songs they deemed subversive or disruptive to the stability of the society.
83 Sometimes, the songs were merely an
embarrassment to politicians or their political party and therefore hurtful to their egos to have them played on the air.
For many years, some Rastas argued that they were exploited for politicalgain, which has strengthened their view that
politics is really polytricks.
Whatever the motivations of the politicians might have been, the prominence of Rastafarian symbols, language, and
themes in these elections was of sociological importance. Rastafari had clearly become something that could be
exploited for political gain. Prior to this, Rastafari was something to be repressed, rehabilitated, or contained, so that it
would not disturb or corrupt the“civilized” society. But when, in the elections of the 1970s, politicians adopted its
language, symbols, and themes in their
92
RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 108 ---
efforts to appeal to the poor in the society, Rastas gained unprecedented exposure, attention, and respect.A wide cross
section of the society, especially the young, came to regard them as the vanguard of social and cultural change and
embraced their lifestyle and artistic productions as the most genuine cultural expressions of Jamaica.
In addition to the diffusion of Rastafarian inﬂuence in the wider societyand the notorietygained from the exploitation
of Rastafarian images by politicians, the embrace of Rastafarian symbols and artistic creativity as authentic Jamaican
culture was partly due to the international recognition of reggae. By the early 1970s, such reggae artists as Desmond
Dekker, Bob Marley and the Wailers, and Jimmy Cliff were gaining some popularity in England, and their songs were
appearing on the British pop charts. When this occurred, those Jamaicans who had formerly dismissed Jamaican
popular music as“uncultured” had no recourse but to turn around and embrace themusic,since their artistictaste was
formed by what the British considered acceptable.
84 This opened the way for the commodiﬁcation of Rastafari in
general and reggae in particular. Since then, people at all levels of the society have sought commercial gain by
exploiting the Rastafarian image.
By theearly 1970s, individuals aspiring to careers as singers had cometo realize that projecting a Rastafarian image was
part of the formula for having a proﬁtable career. The artists who took on the image of the sufferer/singer were often
not Rastas, but sensing that the commercial world was attracted to the Rastafarian elements in the music, they
“locksed” (adopted the dreadlocks hairstyle) and invoked Rastafarian ideology in their lyrics to boost their chances of
economic success.
85 For many, the key to success lay in clothing themselves in the Rastafarian image, employing
Rastafarianlanguage, and espousingRastafarianideas.86 This wearing of theRastafarianmask became so pervasive that
Rastas often bemoaned the fact that many jump onto the Rastafarian bandwagon for monetary gain“without walking
in the integrity of the priest.”87 Interestingly, Cedric Brooks, a renowned Rastafarian musician, cites Bob Marley as an
example of an artist who exploited the Rasta image for a long time before he came to the true consciousness of
Rastafari.
88
Importantly, middle-class entrepreneurs have built thriving businesses exploiting Jamaican popular music. For
example, Byron Lee, a local musician and producer, who once referred to the emerging local music as“buff-buff”
because of its dominant bass line, has become a millionaire through exploiting the same music.
89 Chris Blackwell, the
Jamaican-born British producer and promoter, has been able to build his Island Records empire through signing the
cream of the reggae singers and promoting them around the world.
90
RASTAFARI AND THE WIDER SOCIETY 93


--- PAGE 109 ---
Today, the commodiﬁcation of Rastafari and reggae is exempliﬁed in what Nettleford calls“culture tourism,” the
packaging of Rastafari as a tourist item.91 Above everything else, reggae has become the most salable element of
Jamaican folkor popular culture. The promotionof thisRasta-derivedmusical form as Jamaica's cultural productﬁnds
its highest expression in the yearly music festival called Reggae Sunsplash. Started in 1978, Reggae Sunsplash was for
many years the biggest tourist attraction of the summer season, until it was superseded by JamFest in the 1990s.
Sunsplash is a week-long music festival (as is JamFest) promoted by a group called Snergy with support from the
government and the Jamaica Tourist Board.
92 In July or August each year, plane loads of reggae fans from all over the
world—there are charterﬂights from as far away as Japan—descend on Jamaica to listen and dance to reggae music
under the stars at the Bob Marley Entertainment Centre or some other venue.93 The scheduling of these festivals at
this time of the year is calculated to boost tourism, which generally is leanest during July or August. In 1988, John
Jackson, an economist and research analyst, conducted a study to determine theﬁnancial contribution of Reggae
Sunsplash to the Jamaican economy during itsﬁrst ten years. He concluded that between 1978 and 1988, the festival
contributed an average of
US $10–12 million each year to the Jamaican economy. In 1989, the festival broughtUS $17
million to the economy, and was projected to bring inUS $20 million in 1990.94 Both Sunsplash and JamFest remain
strong tourist attractions. Although I have seen no recent calculation of the annual earnings of events, the fact that
tourism is the largest section of the Jamaican economy suggests that they continue to be signiﬁcant contributors to the
economy.
For those notable to make the trip to Reggae Sunsplash or to JamFest, smaller festivals at various international venues
bring the spice of Jamaican culture to the world. Obviously, reggae has not only become entrenched in the Jamaican
popular culture but has gained a signiﬁcant international following and has taken its place among the world's popular
music. An indication of the esteem that reggae has achieved internationally is its inclusion as a category in the
prestigious Grammy Awards.
In addition to reggae, the wares being hawked in Jamaica as tourist items reﬂect a pervasive Rastafarian inﬂuence.
95 In
1991, 1998, and 1999, I carried out research at Jamaica's craft markets in Kingston, Montego Bay, and Ocho Rios, as
well as at numerous streetside stalls across the island. In these markets and at these stalls, one isﬁrst confronted with
the ubiquitous Rastafarian colors: black, red, green, and gold. On closer examination, oneﬁnds Rastafarian motifs
everywhere: in the wood carvings, in the paintings, in the T-shirts, and in every imaginable accessory, from hats
94 RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 110 ---
and handbags to necklaces and earrings. Noting that all ofthe carvings of human heads in a particular stall in the craft
market in Montego Bay had dreadlocks, I inquired of the proprietor why all of the carvings portrayed Rastas. Without
thinking, he responded,“A wi kultra; a wha di peoplewant” (It is our culture; that is what the people want). On further
inquiry, I discovered that the carvers were not necessarily Rastas, though many of them were, but people who
embraced Rastafarian art as Jamaican culture and who were aware of the economic value of the Rastafarian image.
Some observers of the movement argue that cooptation by political and commercial forces has dulled the militancy of
the movement and has short-circuited its potential as an agent of social change. Carole Yawney maintains that the
adoption and promotion of Rastafarian cultural forms by the establishment has tempered the Rastas' trenchant
criticism of the society, without providing solutions to the social and economic problems that once fed its militancy
and criticism.
96 Carl Stone, a famous Jamaican pollsterand political scientist, believes that historicallythesigniﬁcance of
the Rastafarian movement lies in the fact that it originally represented a potential political alternative to Jamaica's two-
party system. He argues that the cooptation of the movement by the political establishment is now so complete that it
has lost this potential.
97 Colin Prescod concurs, arguing that cooptation has “diverted the development of
Rastafarianism.”98
These perspectives have an element of truth. However, the cooptation and commercialization of Rastafari have also
served to further entrench it in Jamaican society. These processes have facilitated the elevation and conﬁrmation of
Rastas as cultural heroes and their artistic productions as the most authentic expressions of indigenous Jamaican
culture.
99 Concomitantly, they have all but buried the negative stereotypes formerly attached to Rastas. By the middle
ofthe1970s, the persecuted had become the peacemakers. Formerly, whenthere was violencein theghettos, the police
turned out in force to round up and harass Rastas. Now, politicians assemble Rastafarian musicians and poets to hold
peace concerts. When a state of emergency cast a dark mood over the country in 1976, Prime Minister Manley
organized a Smile Jamaica concert, with Bob Marley as the star attraction. When political factionalism escalated into
“warfare” in the slums of Kingston in 1978, both political parties organized a Peace Concert, which featured all of the
famous Rastafarian musicians who had emerged out of the ghettos. The highlight of this concert came when Marley
called Manley and Seaga on stage and made them hold hands above his head as a gesture of reconciliation. By the end
of the twentieth century, there was hardly a national celebration at which reggae and Rastas were not featured
prominently. Klaus de Albuquerque is correct in his
RASTAFARI AND THE WIDER SOCIETY 95


--- PAGE 111 ---
assertion that the relationship between the Rastafarian movement and the rest of the society has undergone
considerable change: “The interaction . . . has brought about the Rastafarianization of Jamaica. . . and the
Jamaicanization of the movement.”100 Nowhere is this more evident than in Jamaica's popular culture, which is the
subject of the next chapter.
96 RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 112 ---
6 Rastafari Rules
Bearers of Jamaican Popular Culture
Beginning in the 1960s, Rastafari has become a ubiquitous presence in Jamaica's popular culture. This presence is
observable in the visual arts, performing arts, literature, and music. This chapter will be primarily concerned with
demonstrating how Rastafari has become the dominant inﬂuence in Jamaican popular music. I am concentrating on
music because this is theelementof Jamaicanculture on whichRastafari has made its boldest marks and whichis most
fully documented. However, the Rastafarian contribution to Jamaican culture goes far beyond music. Therefore,
before turning to the exploration of how Rastafari has factored into the development of popular music, I will outline
brieﬂy some of the other areas of artistic life on which the inﬂuence of Rastafari is evident.
In the visual arts, Rastafari and Rastas are subjects for artistic contemplation, and Rastafarian artists bring their own
consciousness to their artistic endeavors. What is called the Jamaican Art movement started in the 1920s under the
inﬂuence of Edna Manley, wife of Norman Manley, a Jamaican nationalist who was a leader in the Jamaican
independence movementand the trade union movement.The Jamaican Art movement had nationalist motivationand
reﬂected nationalist sentiments. Though Edna Manley was a white British woman, her art is in tune with the prevailing
nationalist sentiments. Her subjects are often black, and her work expresses the longings and yearnings of the black
populace for social, political, and racial uplift. Her famous sculptures,Negro Arousedand Prophet, exemplifyher concern
with the struggles of black Jamaicans.
Though Rastafari emerged at about the same time as the Jamaican Art movement, Rastas did not appear as subjects in
the ﬁrst two or three decades. However, by the mid-1950s, Rastafari began to emerge as a subject of interest to artists.
A 1955 painting by David Miller, Sr., entitledRasta: Don't Touch I signaled this artistic attention to Rastafari. Soon
Rastas began to appear in the works of the famous Jamaican painter Carl Abrahams and others. By the late 1960s and
early 1970s, artists who were inﬂuenced by Black Power and the growing African nationalism began to


--- PAGE 113 ---
use Rastafarian imagery to express their black consciousness. Painter Osmond Watson is the epitome of this trend.
While Watson never professed to be a Rasta, such pieces asEcce Homo, portraying a dreadlocksed Jesus;Peace and Love,
depicting a Rasta in a meditative mood; andRainbow Triptych, picturing a black Madonna, Jesus, and other saintly
ﬁgures as Rastas, are all believed to be somewhat autobiographical, reﬂecting Watson's consciousness of his African
divine self (I-and-I consciousness).1
While Rastafari was becoming a frequent subject of non-Rastafarian artists, a number of Rastas were emerging on the
Jamaican art scene.Historically, Rastas have shown a predilection for involvement in arts and crafts. This allows many
toescapeworkingin Babylon's economic structures, whichtheyview as oppressiveand exploitative. Also, strong visual
imagery and symbols form a part of the Rastafarian ethos. Thus art in the service of religious and cultural convictions
has always been essential to Rastafari. Hence, the emergence of Rastas as artists was just a matter of time. Eventually,
such artists as Ras Dizzy, Leonard Daley, and Everald Brown came to infuse their art with the“dread” consciousness
that is characteristic of Rastafari. Rastafarian painters and sculptors now explore themes of blackness, African
redemption, the apocalyptic destruction of Babylon, and the divine self.
2
The permanent collection of Jamaica's National Gallery, which is displayed in chronological order, is a good indicator
of Rastafari's imprint on Jamaican visual art. In the paintings prior to the 1960s, the colors black and white
predominate, with an occasional splash of red and green. Since the 1960s, red, green, and gold have been used with
growing liberality, with many pieces depicting or alluding to Rastafari. Rainbow Triptych (1978) epitomizes the
Rastafarian presence. This piece shows various faces of Rastafarian men and women appearing in stained-glass
windows. One frame is dominated by a black Madonna and another portrays a dread-locksed Jesus. All of this is
depicted in a profusion of Rasta colors.
3
Rastafari has also made its mark on literature and the performing arts. Contemporary Jamaican literature gives
extensive treatment to Rastafarian themes. Writers and poets, Rastas and non-Rastas alike, have reﬂected on the
phenomenon of Rastafari and on other phenomena using the prism of Rastafari.
4 The Joker of Seville and O Babylonby
Nobel laureate Derek Walcott,Brother Man by Roger Mais, and The Children of Sisyphus by Orlando Patterson are
examples of novels reﬂecting on the phenomenon of Rastafari.5 The Penguin Book of Caribbean Verse in Englishfeatures
such famous Rastafarian poets as Mutabaruka, Bongo Jerry, Oku Onoura, and Mikey Smith. These are performance
poets who are highly acclaimed in Jamaica and Jamaican communities abroad. The Penguin collection also features
poems by non-Rastas such as Louise Bennett and Linton Kwesi
98
RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 114 ---
Johnson, whichdeal with Rastafarian themes, reﬂectRastafarian inﬂuence, or employRastafarian parlance.6 Prominent
non-Rastafarian poets, such as Lorna Goodison, Andrew Salkey, and Denis Scott, often allude to or explore
Rastafarian themes, and they make liberal use of Rastafarian language and philosophy in their writings.7 Increasingly,
younger writers, such as poet Kwame Dawes and novelistCollinChanner, draw inspiration from Rastafari and reggae.
Although not much research has focused on the inﬂuence of Rastafari on the performing arts, the available evidence
suggests that the stage also has come under the sway of the Rastafarian phenomenon. Such theatrical productions as
Summer Dread, I-Man, andCourt of Jah explicitly tap into or celebrate Rastafari.8 In other productions with less obvious
Rastafarian imprints, Rastafarian ideas, language, and music abound. The Rastafarian-inﬂuenced reggae music is an
integral part of Jamaican theater, a frequent theme being the struggle of the reggae artist, often a Rasta, as he rises
from poverty to worldwide fame. Additionally, the limitedﬁlm production in Jamaica often makes use of Rastafarian
characters and reggae music. Of course, the most famousﬁlm to do this isThe Harder They Come, a 1972 feature-length
ﬁlm about the exploitation of a rising reggae star and his experiences after he turns to violence.The Harder They Comeis
credited with making reggae and Rastafari known around the world.
The presence of Rastafari in the artistic/cultural life of Jamaica is nowhere more obvious than in the popular music.
Here we see the greatest concentration of the Rastafarian creative genius and observe its most signiﬁcant imprint on
the popular culture. I will devote the rest of this chapter to exploring the development of Jamaica's most widely
recognized cultural product, reggae, as an example of the inﬂuence of Rastafari on culture formation in Jamaica. I will
also outline the social reactions to the development of Jamaican popular music in order to trace its elevation to the
status of national culture.
Rastafariand Jamaican Popular Music
The imprints of Rastafari are all over reggae, stylistically and lyrically. As Verena Reckford states,“Not only have the
instrumental and vocal styling of reggae directly been inﬂuenced by Rasta Music, but the lyrics of most reggae songs
and dance movements as well.”9 Agreeing with Reckford, Yoshiko Nagashima maintains,“The genuine fruit of
Jamaican pop music has been yielded through the ﬁlter of the Rastafarian Movement.”10 To understand the
relationship between Rastafari and reggae, we mustﬁrst
BEARERS OF JAMAICAN POPULAR CULTURE 99


--- PAGE 115 ---
understand the evolution both of Rasta music and of Jamaican popular music.
RastaMusic:Nyabinghi
Traditional Rasta music, called Nyabinghi drumming, is played on a three-drum set called theakete, whichprovides the
accompaniment at Rastafarian religious assemblies. Nyabinghi drumming emerged in the ghettos of West Kingston in
the 1940s and 1950s. Kenneth Bilby and Elliot Leib inform us that this was the meeting place of various Afro-
Jamaican folk styles brought to the city by rural migrants. They describe the folk music scene as“a cauldron of
competing cultural and musical styles and forms, all of which were interacting and inﬂuencing one another.”11 In this
mixwere Burru (an African-derived style of drumming), Kumina, Revival, Pukkumina, and Jonkunu.12 Of course,
these were complemented by more popular forms such as mento, calypso, a variety of Latin styles (brought back by
migrant workersfrom Cuba and Central America), jazz, and rhythmand blues. Identifyingthe degree to which each of
these forms inﬂuences Nyabinghi drumming is a difﬁcult task. However, the evidence suggests that Kumina and
Burru were the main inﬂuences, with Burru predominating.
Rastas, while acknowledging and embracing the Burru inﬂuence, tend to reject or downplay the Kumina inﬂuence,
presumably because of their distaste for its association with spirit possession and communication with dead ancestors,
bothof whichRastas abhor.
13 However, using historical and ethnographic evidence, Bilby and Leib havedemonstrated
that Howell and his followers integrated elements of Kumina, especially drumming and dancing, into their ritual
practices at Pinnacle. Interestingly, the majority of Howell followers at Pinnacle followed him there from St. Thomas,
the Kumina stronghold in Jamaica.
14 When Bilby and Leib did their ethnographic research in 1986, theyfound a group
of HowelliteRastas near SpanishTown, who werestillplaying theKumina rhythmsusingthetwo-drum set of Kumina
(the bandu and cyas), instead of the Nyabinghi three-drum set adopted from the Burru (bass, fundeh, and repeater),
which dominates in the Rastafarian movement. Bilby and Leib argue that the many Howellites who settled in West
Kingston after the destruction of their Pinnacle commune brought with them their Kumina drumming, which later
blended with Burru to create Nyabinghi. This leads the researchers to the conclusion that, even if Kumina had no
direct inﬂuenceon Nyabinghidrumming, its“invigorating rhythms” had already“meshed withthose of Buru [sic]” and
therefore have indirectly found their way into Rasta music.
15
100 RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 116 ---
The connection between Nyabinghi drumming and Burru is more well established. Burru is a form of African
drumming, which was very popular during slavery. Its survival was seemingly facilitated by the fact that slave masters
often allowed Burru drum corps to play in theﬁelds while others were working, because they had discovered that it
“buoyed up the spirits of the slaves and made them work faster and so speeded up production.”
16 Due to their
concentration on music, Burru drummers had few agricultural skills, and so after emancipation (1834), they gravitated
to the urban areas, mainly Kingston and Spanish Town. They seemed to have survived by working at odd jobs, while
continuing to practice their art. At Christmas time, they would go from house to house displaying their virtuosity on
the drums and singing their own compositions. Their songs addressed topical issues and exposed the“sins” of people
in the community:“If a shop sold stolen goods, a critical song was sung in front of the shop. If a man committed
adultery, the affair wouldbe sung about.”
17 Interestingly, this parallelsa practice that still goes on in West Africa. At the
endof eachyear, a troupegoesfrom house tohouse singing abouttheevildeeds of theresidents, who are forbidden to
retaliate.
18 Reckford points out that this“was a sort of puriﬁcation rite which absolved the village of its‘sins’ before
theyentered the new year.”19 The Burru people(they were identiﬁed as a distinct group) seemed to have retained some
memory of the original African practice. Burru drumming and dancing also were used ceremonially to receive back
into the community those who ran afoul of the law and consequentlyspent time in prison. This practicewas observed
particularly in West Kingston, which had a great concentration of Burru people during the formative years of the
Rastafarian movement.
20
The West Kingston slums have always been one of the haunts of Rastas, and they became even more of a focus after
the police destroyed Howell's commune at Pinnacle. Many of the residents of Pinnacle gravitated to West Kingston
where they built shacks on“captured” government land. The sharing of the same space by the Rastas and the Burru
people led to a mutual exchange, a gradual merging, andﬁnally, the virtual absorption of the Burru by Rastafari, with
the Burru adopting the Rastafarian world view and the Rastas adopting and adapting Burru drumming.
21 Reckford
describes the process this way:
The Burru people had no religion of their own so to speak. Rastas had no music. The Burru people comprised a
slowly disappearing group by the beginning of the forties,while the Rasta group was growing in numbers. The
exchange of music for doctrine in the later [19]40s resulted in merger of the two groups and the almost total
extinction of the Burru people as a social group.
22
BEARERS OF JAMAICAN POPULAR CULTURE 101


--- PAGE 117 ---
The dynamics behind the merging of the two are obvious. The anticolonialist, anti-European stance of the Rastas
proved attractive to the Burru who were steeped in an African art form (drumming). Rastas, bent on ridding
themselves of the trappings of Europe and on recreating themselves in the image of Africa, readily embraced this
surviving African form.
23
Of all African-derived musical forms surviving in Jamaica, Burru was probably the purest. Rastas were convinced that
this form had remained uncorrupted or undiluted by Babylonian inﬂuences, and hence they appropriated it.
24 Rastas
adopted the three-drum set used in Burru drumming: the bass, the fundeh, and the repeater (or‘peta). The bass and
fundeh carry the rhythm of a piece, with the bass providing the foundation of the music and the fundeh setting the
tempoor carryingthe “lifeline.” The repeater is thelead drum and suppliesthemelodiccomponent.The playing of the
repeater requires great skill, the drummer often improvising complexpatterns with considerable virtuosity.
25
The appropriation of Burru drumming and its development into a distinctly Rastafarian form is attributed to Count
Ossie (Oswald Williams), an eminent Rasta and distinguished Jamaican musician. During the 1940s, he was grounding
with other Rastas in the Dungle, a slum area built on a dump site in West Kingston.
26 A Burru player called Brother
Job sometimes played his drum when the Rastas met for their reasoning sessions. The Rastafarian concern for the
development of their own African culture led to the embrace of Burru drumming. Under the tutelage of Brother Job,
Count Ossie became theﬁrst and most renowned virtuoso of Rasta drumming. Having mastered the Burru patterns,
Count Ossie conducted his own experiments and made adaptations and innovations to suit his own taste and express
his Rastafarian“vibrations.”
27
The akete (the Rastafarian three-drum set) soon became a staple at reasoning sessions and Nyabinghi I-ssemblies. As
Reckford points out, the diffusion of the use of the akete throughout the Rastafarian movement was facilitated by the
Rastafarian informal networkkept aliveby intervisitation. In describinghowthenetworkfacilitated thespread of Rasta
music, Reckford observes,“Brethren came and went as the spirit or occasion moved them. There was a great deal of
dialogue and the exchange and transportation of ideas was strong. This was one of the means by which Rasta Music
spread from camp to camp, parish to parish, in Jamaica.”
28 Count Ossie's dwelling place, initially in the Dungle and
later at Adastra Road in East Kingston, became famous for the musical ferment it generated. Of course Ossie and the
group of drummers who gathered around him visited other camps and displayed their talents. They also played at the
periodic Rastafarian mass gatherings known as Nyabinghi I-ssemblies, thus further popularizing Nyabinghi drumming.
102
RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 118 ---
JamaicanPopularMusic
Historically, the colonial forces have actively suppressed genuine African cultural forms because of their potential to
generate resistance and rebellion. However, the colonial powers did allow what Garth White calls some“denuded
forms” (masquerades or Jonkunu) to exist for entertainment purposes. White further points out that wherever certain
attenuated forms managed to weather the storm of suppression to assert themselves,“the white[s], shouldering their
‘burden,’ often took over these watered-down forms under the pretext of‘polishing’ them up, pushing the black
practitioners out of the picture and thus, in addition to their general exploitation of his labour, virtually using his‘last
resort’ against him.”29 In spite of the colonial efforts to suppress the African-derived musical expressions, some of
these musical forms survived slavery and made it into the post-emancipation and post-independence eras.
Traditionally, the African presence was most evident in the music of the African and Afro-Christian religions, such as
Kumina, Myalism, Pukkumina, Revivalism, and the Native Baptist movement, and in more secular forms such as
Jonkunu, Burru, and a variety of work songs. While the African presence still persists in these forms, in recent times it
has expressed itself in what has become Jamaica's popular music.
Mento, whichﬂourished during the second quarter of the twentieth century, may be regarded as theﬁrst attempt at
developing an indigenous popular music in Jamaica. Mento is an ingenious blend of the various musical forms
transported to Jamaica. Of course, the African presence is foremost, mediated through Kumina, Myalism, and
Revivalism. The European presence comes in the form of British popular and religious music. Other inﬂuences come
from Trinidad calypso and Latin American rhythms. The Latin inﬂuence was mediated by returning migrant workers,
who had sought their fortunes in Central America, and by Cuban immigrants, who settled in Jamaica in the 1920s.
30
Mento music was mostly played at community functions in the countryside. Initially, it had little following in the urban
setting. It was particularly frowned on by“societypeople” (the middle and upper classes), because of its reputationfor
lewd and risque lyrics and because of its lower-class origins.
31 However, mento eventually gained some popularity
among the Kingston nightclub crowd (of middle and upper class) in the 1940s. This breakthrough was brought about
by such artists as Lord Fly and Lord Flea, who toned down thelewdness in mentoto make it palatable to thenightclub
patrons.
32
The early 1960s saw the emergence of a new form of Jamaican popular music called ska. It fused mento with
American rhythm and blues, which
BEARERS OF JAMAICAN POPULAR CULTURE 103


--- PAGE 119 ---
had become popular in Jamaica in the 1950s. Stephen Davis and Peter Simon explain the music:
The music was vibrant and loping, the dancers at the sound systems made up a dance to it and called the danceska,
and in time that became the name of Jamaican R&B. Ska. Cheerful, riddled with funky brass sections, disorganized,
almost random. Ska was mento, Stateside R&B, and Jamaicans coming to terms with electric guitars and
ampliﬁcation.
33
The sound systems—mobile musical sets that play recorded music through huge speakers at dances—were largely
responsible for the emergence of ska as a popular musical form. By the 1950s, sound systems had emerged as a major
form of entertainment for the urban poor, who were unable to afford the price of hiring live bands for their parties.
Initially, these systems played mostly rhythm and blues imported from the United States, with an occasional mento
record interspersed here and there. But at least three factors coincided in the early 1960s to stimulate the development
of the local recording industry and the emergence of ska. The sound systems faced the perennial difﬁculties of
importing records in sufﬁcient numbers to meet the local demand. To complicate this problem, the late 1950s and
early 1960s saw a decline in the output of rhythm and blues in the United States, making fewer records available for
import. At a more social-psychological level, the movement for political independence, which was afoot at that time,
spilled over into the cultural arena, stimulating local musicians to create a music that would reﬂect their social location
and cultural realities.
34 In this context, some owners of sound systems began to experiment with producing their own
music for the dance hall crowd. When these productions were received enthusiastically by the dance hall fans, local
producers, musicians, and singers rushed to cash in on the popularity of the emerging sound.
35
The wordska seems to have come from the stabbing manner in which the guitar or piano played the rhythm. Jackie
Mittoo, a noted ska keyboardist, claims that the name evolved from the people's call for“staya, staya” (the“chopping”
staccato played on the guitar or keyboard) at live performances.36 This piano or guitar chop or“riff,” accenting the
after-beat, became the distinctive feature of ska. White explains,“The Jamaican musicians accentuated this afterchord
so that it really became a backbeat or afterbeat. Or to put it another way, the piano or rhythm guitar emphasized the
and of one-and-two-and-three-and-four-and.”
37
In the middle of the 1960s, ska evolved into a new form calledrock-steady. Musically, rock-steady was much like ska.
However, the pace was considerably slower, the bass guitar and drums were more prominent,
104 RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 120 ---
and fewer horns were evident. The latter may have been an economic necessity due to the prohibitive prices of horn
instruments.38 The slowing down of the music consequently modiﬁed the popular dance. In fact, the music took its
name from the slow, steady manner in which it was danced. Ska was a fast dance, which placed emphasis on foot
movements. Rock-steady, in contrast, was slow with minimal foot movements. As Malika Whitney and Dermott
Hussey explain,“It was more laid back, giving rise to‘renting a tile,’ a style of dance where movement is restricted to
marking time on the spot, and resolving one's frustrations there.”
39
The last phrase in Whitney and Hussey's explanation reveals that the stylistic changes were more than artistic
innovations. The rock-steady dance movementsdramatized thesocial tensions in Jamaicansocietyand, particularly, the
social stress and strain of the urban ghettos. Sebastian Clarke captures this blending of art form and simmering social
anxiety:
When the rhythm slowed, paradoxically, the tension increased, and the body was now responding to an inner
rhythmic drive. The tension of the external society was internalized by the dancer and expressed physically. Thus in
rock steady, thedancer could remain on his spotof earth,and shake his shoulders, make pounding motionswith his
arms and hands (at an invisible enemy, or an anonymous force), without recourse to or consciousness of a partner.
The internal tension was demonstratively and explosively expressed. Because the movement was stylized, its
external appearance alone could be interpreted as tension-releasing, violence simmering at the surface.
40
This interpretation is quiteﬁtting because the social milieu of the mid-1960s, in which rock-steady emerged and to
which it responded, was marked by heightened tensions and heightened consciousness of the inequalities in the
society.
41 This was the era of the“rude boys,” who celebrated violence as a means of survival in a society rife with
inequities. Many rock-steady songs reﬂected on the rude boy theme, often extolling their exploits and their grittiness.
By the late 1960s, Jamaican popular music evolved into what we know today as reggae. The derivation of the word
reggae is shrouded in speculation. Ernest Cashmore's suggestions vary from the Bantu wordragga with y added on a
whim, to the Indian wordrafa,t orico, a reference to Rico Rodriques, a local musician, toragga-ragga or streggae, both
words meaning unkempt, ill-clothed, or ragged in Jamaican patois.
42 Toots Hibbert, whose song“Do the Reggay” is
the ﬁrst known use of the word, claims that reggae means“regular,” a reference to the fact that the music emanates
from regular people and portrays their experience of suffering, past
BEARERS OF JAMAICAN POPULAR CULTURE 105


--- PAGE 121 ---
and present.43 Many Rastas contend that reggae comes fromregal, and thus its meaning is“music of or for the king”
(Selassie).
Reggae music researcher Garth White points out that reggae is the result of an intermingling of a variety of musical
inﬂuences: “Listening to the range of reggae, one can detect the rhythms of the ancient ancestral cults [particularly
Kumina and Burru] and Jonkunu masquerades, strains of revivalist religion, the uses of European instruments and
melodies and the effect of exposure to music from all over the world.”
44
Of course, reggae evolved from and is a further reﬁnement of ska and rock-steady, which preceded it. White goes on
to describe how reggae differs from ska and rock-steady:“Basically in reggae a half-note is added to the classic
afterchord [of ska]—one-and-two-and-three-and-four-and—becoming ‘one-and a-two-and a-three-and a-four-and a.’
This produced the characteristic‘reggae’ or ‘sken-ay’ sound.”45 This description is particularly applicable to the rhythm
section of reggae, but that is only one element of the music. The reggae rhythm is played on guitars, keyboards, and
percussion instruments and accents the second and fourth beats of the bar. A second element of the music is the bass.
Reggae has speeded up the tempo, which was slowed in rock-steady, and made even more pronounced the heavy bass
introduced by rock-steady. The dominant bass often plays its own melody, leading some reggae enthusiasts to listen
and dance only to the bass section. The melody or tune, the third element of reggae, consists of short phrases, which
are adapted to the lyrics and which are often repeated.
46
RastafarianInuence on Jamaican PopularMusic
Part of what accounts for the evolution of popular music into reggae is the increasing incorporation of Rastafarian
elements. According to Whitney and Hussey,“The new music combined all the styles which had gone before, but with
a spiritual content only partially evident during the rock steady period. The growing Rastafarian faith gave the music a
new urgency, a new spirit.”
47 As White's research demonstrates, the inﬂuence of Rastafari on Jamaican popular music
goes back to the ska era. He writes,“From the earliest times in recent popular music history, Rastafarian music and
philosophy has wielded a mighty inﬂuence, much to the chagrin of many older upper- and middle-class Jamaicans.”48
Many of the musicians who oversaw the creation of the local music were Rastas, and they brought their religious and
ideological perspective to their music. The most distinguished of these were Don Drummond and Count Ossie.
Drummond was a leading member of the Skatalites, an instrumental band widely regarded as the creators and most
successful exponents of
106
RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 122 ---
the ska sound. The Skatalites provided the musical accompaniment for most of the famous ska singers. Drummond
was an accomplished trombonist and a musical genius. In addition to his involvement with the studio work and live
performances of theSkatalites, he wrote and recorded numerous instrumental pieces. His black consciousness, formed
by his Rastafarian faith, is readily apparent in such titles as“Marcus Garvey,”“ Addis Ababa,”“ Far East,”“ Fidel,”
“Man in the Street,” and “Johnny Dark.”
49 White concludes that Drummond's music summed up and expressed the
anguish and apocalyptic apprehensions associated with Rastafari:
This apocalyptic mood, this“blue” pervasive sense of dread—a “brooding melancholy which seems always on the
verge of exploding, but which is under some sort of formal control” was well suited to the developing Rastafarian
ethos. Tunes like“Snowboy,”“ The Return of Paul Bogle,” and the“Reburial of Marcus Garvey” underlined the
connection between the leading musicians in the popularﬁeld and the Rastafarian faith.50
The inﬂuence of Count Ossie on the developing popular music is even more distinct. During the 1950s, Count Ossie
formed a drum troupe. Atﬁrst the group was famous only on the ghetto dance scene, but withits performance on the
talent show“Opportunity Knocks,” it began to broaden its sphere of inﬂuence. Then in the early 1960s, Count Ossie
made his indelible mark on the local music. He arranged and, along with his drummers, provided the instrumental
accompaniment for “O Carolina,” recorded by the Folkes Brothers.
51 This was the ﬁrst time that the distinctly
Rastafarian rhythms appeared on a recording.52 The song became theﬁrst big hit of the ska era and marked the
beginning of the conscious incorporation of Rastafarian rhythms into Jamaica's popular music. Reckford comments,
“Ever since Carolina Rasta ridims [rhythms] have been used by other local musicians to create on. Rasta music
continued as the creative force through theRock Steady period and in theReggae period where it nowﬂourishes.”
53
Count Ossie's original group disbanded. He later formed another group called Count Ossie and the Mystic Revelation
of Rastafari. In this group, other instruments were added to the traditional Rastafarian drums. Through stage
performances and recordings, this group disseminated Rastafarian music and lore throughout Jamaica and abroad. It
performed at colleges in the United States and represented Jamaica at the Caribbean art and music festival called
Carifesta.
54
Probably even more important than Ossie's performances and recordings
BEARERS OF JAMAICAN POPULAR CULTURE 107


--- PAGE 123 ---
was the fact that his Adastra Road compound in East Kingston became the venue for local musicians to exchange
ideas in“jam sessions”: “Among them were‘Bra’ and Bunny Gaynair, Little G. McNair, Tommy McCook, Roland
Alphonso, Cedric Brooks—all saxophone players. Then there were people like Viv Hall, trumpet, Ernie Ranglin,
guitar, Donald Drummond, trombone.”55 These are all recognized pioneers of Jamaican music, who increasingly
incorporated the“ridims” of Rastafari in the emerging popular music.
At ﬁrst the Rasta presence in popular music was felt through the style of the drums in the rhythmic accompaniment.
However, as the experiment with Rasta music progressed, other instruments came to imitate the whole range of the
Rastafarian sound:
The bass guitar line and traps imitated the patterns of the Rasta bass drum. Later on the fundeh ridim could be
heard in the“Skengay” pattern of the rhythm guitar. It then left the lead guitar to imitate the adventurous repeater
drum. This took some time coming, but it did. Nowadays not only the lead guitar, but the electric organ, horns and
piano imitate the repeater.
56
So that is why one often hears the comment,“Reggae is Rasta music.” Of course reggae is not coterminous with the
Rastafarian ritual music, called Nyabinghi. The difference is so great that some fundamentalist-minded Rastas shun
reggae as“devil” music, while others fear that the simulation of Rasta music on modern instruments compromises its
authenticity.57 Furthermore, Jamaican popular musicians are not afraid to incorporate other inﬂuences that suit their
musical fancy. However, the dominant element in reggae remains the rhythms worked out in Nyabinghi drumming.
Alongwith itsinﬂuence on theinstrumentalqualityof Jamaican popular music,Rastafari has infused thelyrical content
of reggae with its philosophy. Some observers, including Cashmore, make the point thatska and rock-steady were void
of social consciousness, being preoccupied with evokingsexual images and sensual fantasies, whereas“reggae signiﬁed
a concentrated attempt to provoke social consciousness.”58 This perspective seems to be derived more from an
observationof the“sexual suggestiveness” of the swirling pelvic movementsof the dances to ska and rock-steady than
from a careful analysis of the lyrics of the songs. While sexual images and sensual fantasies were in the lyrics of many
songs, from the beginning, the popular music continued the folk tradition of using songs to make social and political
commentary. White, who is probably the most respected authority on Jamaican popular music, points out that“critical
social commentary and protest were in the music almost from its
108
RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 124 ---
inception.”59 White goes on to cite twopieces,“BabylonGone” and “Another Moses” by Count Ossie, as examples of
songs from the ska era that made social commentary from the Rastafarian perspective.60
If the presence of Rastafarian social protest in ska can be compared to the budding of a plant, we can say it blossomed
and bloomed in rock-steady and came to maturity in reggae. Describing the rock-steady era, Whitney and Hussey say,
“The Rastafari and‘Rude Boy’ sentiments of protest and rage that were instrumentalized by Drummond and the
Skatalites, took a lyrical form. Political protest by song became popular while other songs continue to speak of the
people's hardships.”
61 In rock-steady, the militant Rastafarian disdain and criticism of the status quo“became even
more menacing and laced with‘dread’ than ska had been.”62 As already indicated, rock-steady appeared in the midst of
the political and social tensions of the 1960s. At the same time, there was a coalescing of youth, music, and Rasta, all
taking a posture of contempt for the status quo and demanding changes in the social system. The three leading
members of the Wailers—Bob Marley, Peter Tosh, and Bunny Wailer—best exemplify this coalescence. Here were
three young men from Trench Town, a most notorious ghetto in Jamaica. They were self-taught musicians trying to
make a living on the recording scene. Gradually, theycame to the consciousness of Rastafari and eventuallybecame its
best-known international spokespersons.
The most disturbing phenomenon of this period, from the perspective of the status quo, was the emergence of the
rude boys. As White points out, the term covers a wide range of individuals,“from the anarchic and revolution-
minded youth of the poorer classes to the young political‘goons,’ mercenaries of the two existing political parties
and Rasta-spawned‘cultural’ rude boys who rejected the aping of white standards and continued existence of‘white
bias.’”
63 Despite the differences, rude boys were united in their attitude of deﬁance and posture of toughness. The
lyrics of rock-steady songs were preoccupied with the rude boy phenomenon, sometimes cautioning the rude boys, at
other times berating them, but most of the time celebrating their grittiness (unyielding courage) in the face of ofﬁcial
actions against them.
64
In the lyrics of reggae, the perspectiveof Rastafari has exerted its fullest inﬂuence.Since the late 1960s, the Rastafarian
point of view has come to dominate the lyrical content of reggae music. When observers of the music identify it as
protest music, they are referring to the strident criticisms directed at Jamaican and Western establishments and its
militant call to “Get up, stand up. Stand up for your rights.”
65 We should not, however, make the mistake of
characterizing reggae as exclusively protest music or its lyrical content as exclusively Rastafarian philosophy. Reggae
BEARERS OF JAMAICAN POPULAR CULTURE 109


--- PAGE 125 ---
lyricists touch on the whole range of human experience, and as White informs us,“This music sees no theme as
outside its scope and in the framework of that relentless beat addresses itself to key issues of life both within and
outside of Jamaica.”66 However, the issues facing the poor of African descent, interpreted from a Rastafarian
perspective and expressed in Rastafarian terms, constitute the dominant element in reggae lyrics. With all of the
heterogeneityof the Rastafarian movement, twothings characterize all Rastas: a conviction that Jamaica's social system
is indefensible and destined to doom and a commitment to recoup and promote proudly their African heritage. What
John Sealey and Krister Malm call the“dread tunes” became imbued with this Rastafarian posture:
“Dread tunes” reject middle-class and white values and praise the black African homeland. To make their music
more fearsome, Rastafarians brought back into the their music the original, threatening and heavy drumming of
Africa....I td e scribes, in music and words, a powerful protest against poverty, unemploymentand inequalityin the
society and contains the message of the Rastafarian religion.
67
The exponents of reggae in general, and the Rastas in particular, infuse their songs with these sentiments, regarding
themselves as“ﬁghting against the system.”
68 In this regard, White describes reggae as a musical weapon,“a musical
hand-grenade, to be used against those seen as the oppressors and agents of Babylon.”69
Of course, social criticism through the medium of music did not originate with Rastas. Social criticism of the Jamaican
society is characteristic of most local musical expressions. Sometimes, it ridicules“high” society or presents satirical
commentary on its pretentious values. At other times, itis just an ejaculativecry brought on bytheharsh realities of life
on the margins or by what Whitney and Hussey call“the permanent trauma of poverty.”
70 What Rastafari has brought
to this tradition is philosophical depth, a serious ideology that repudiates the values and institutions associated with
Western civilization and that explains the roots of the contradictions that pervade Jamaican society. By the late 1960s
and early 1970s, Rastafari had become the mold in which criticism of Jamaican society was fashioned and the grid
through which it was sifted and analyzed.
The foregoing considerations lead to the conclusion that Rastafari has been a dominant force in the development of
Jamaican popular music. The Rastafarian contribution is readily evident in the musical characteristics and the lyrical
content of reggae. The rhythmic quality, especially the dominant bass line of reggae, is acknowledged by all as derived
110
RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 126 ---
from Nyabinghi drumming, which in turn was derived from Burru and Kumina. Furthermore, many of the
instrumentalists who fashioned the indigenous musical sound that eventually became reggae were of the Rastafarian
faith. In this respect, Don Drummond and Count Ossie were key players. Also evident is the role of the Rastafarian
philosophy or world view as the“philosophical guiding force” in the lyrics of reggae.
71 Whether or not the singers and
songwriters are committed Rastas, their lyrics are saturated with the Rastafarian perspective and clothed in Rastafarian
language.
Social Reactionto JamaicanPopularMusic
From thebeginning,the “newsounds” found ready acceptanceamongthe masses of poor Jamaicans. Ska, rock-steady,
and reggae became themainstays of the sound systems thatplayed at communitydances. The ready, almost instinctive,
acceptance of the emerging local music by the poor was probably due to the fact that the music gave expression to the
experience and point of view of the poor, especially the urban under-class. It sometimes expressed their stoic response
to their experience of being excluded and their undying hope for better fortunes. Reggae singer/lyricist Jimmy Cliff
poignantly expresses their stoicism as“sitting here in limbo” and their hope as“waiting for the tide toﬂow.”
72 At other
times, the music articulates “the oppressive world and environment of the masses,”73 raises questions about the
political and cultural integrity of the status quo, and declares their resolve to have their“piece of the pie, right here,
right now.”74 The African elements in the music strike responsive chords in the hearts of a people who have struggled
for centuries to keep the African presence in their song. The embrace of Jamaican popular music by the masses of the
poor is unreserved and enthusiastic.
The initial response of the privileged and the guardians of Jamaican society ran the gamut from disdain to near-
paranoia. Disdain was born of the mentality of the black and brown middle class that Chevannes describes as mostly
European in all respects, except for the color of their skin.
75 This mentality “embraced anything white and
metropolitan and conversely rejected anything that was reminiscent of the black past.”76 Therefore, ska, by displaying
continuity with African rhythms, grated on the“reﬁned” sensibilities and European aesthetics of the Jamaican middle
class. This emerging cultural expression was dismissed as mere“noise.” As mentioned earlier, Byron Lee, a middle-
class musician and entrepreneur, referred to the emerging local music as“buff-buff” because of the
BEARERS OF JAMAICAN POPULAR CULTURE 111


--- PAGE 127 ---
prominence of the drum and the bass. In the early days, local radio stations all but ignored the local music, giving
instead a steady diet of rhythm and blues and rock and roll.77
Despite their disdain, members of the middle class, and particularly the government, could not ignore the new musical
ferment. Its popularity among the masses and its lyrics, which railed against Jamaica's social system, made them
uncomfortable, to say the least. In Clarke's words,“Once the articulation of the oppressive world and environment of
the masses came into focus, middle-class Jamaicans felt threatened and apprehensive. The status quo was being
vigorously questioned.”
78 In many instances, the government's response was to ban the songs it considered disruptive
to social order. When these songs became jukeboxand dance hall hits all across the island, the police frequentlyraided
the dance halls and clashed with the patrons.
79
The Jamaican establishment eventuallycame to embrace reggae, with all of its Rastafarian overtones, as Jamaica's most
genuine indigenous cultural expression and as a cultural commodity. This has led Malloch to observe that“dreadlocks
and reggae music have become a mainstay of Jamaican and Caribbean culture.”
80 With the national embrace of reggae
has come the elevation of Rastas to the status of culturebearers and cultural heroes. Bob Marley, the most famous
exponent of reggae music, exempliﬁes this elevation. Like most other artists engaged in the development of Jamaica's
popular music, Marley emerged from the ghettos of West Kingston. By the early 1970s, the Wailers, the group led by
Marley, had imprinted itself on the Jamaican public as the leading voice of the ghetto. In fact, the original name of the
group was the Wailing Wailers, signifying that their music was a plaintive cry born of the ghetto experience. Such
Wailers classics as“Concrete Jungle,”“ Trench Town Rock,”“ Duppy Conqueror,”“ No Woman No Cry,”“ We an'
Dem,”“ Babylon System,” and others tell tales of the suffering, the deﬁance, and the hope of ghetto dwellers. As
Whitneyand Hussey observe,“It was as if the people had entrusted theirconsciousness to theWailers. They raised the
life in Trench Town, Kingston 12, to the forefront of awareness in Jamaica and internationally.”
81
The emergence of Bob Marley and the Wailers as the leading reggae group was due to an auspicious combination of a
number of factors: themusical creativityof thegroup, theability of Marley and other lyricists to tap thefolk wisdom of
thecommon people and to interpret their experiences to theworld,and thesuccessful collaborationbetweenpromoter
Chris Blackwell and Marley. Prior to meeting Blackwell, Marley and the Wailers had many hits on the local recording
scene, but remained struggling
112
RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 128 ---
artists. Whether it was because of his perspicacity or his penchant for a gamble, Blackwell signed the Wailers to the
Island Records label in 1972 and gave them£4,000 and virtual artistic freedom to make an album. The result was
Catch a Fire, which signaled the coming of age of reggae (on both the local and international music scenes).Catch a Fire
received critical international acclaim and opened the world's pop stages to the curious group of Rastas from
Kingston's worst ghetto. They plied their hypnotic rhythms and revolutionary lyrics about life on the margins and the
injustices in the world. The collaboration between Blackwell and the Wailers made Marley into an international star,
and even though he died in 1981, Marley is probably still the most widely known Jamaican.
With Marley's international success, the society came to embrace him as a cultural hero and reggae music as Jamaica's
contribution to the world. After all, reggae music was replacing rum and limbo as the things for which Jamaica was
known and was enhancing its status in the world.
82 Any lingering doubt concerning Marley's status dissipated when he
was awarded the Order of Merit, Jamaica's third-highest honor, and further granted the respect of a state funeral at his
premature death.
83 For a man who had made a career of“wailing” against the system and who once sang,“Mi no have
no friend inna high society,”84 these were incredible honors.
The kind of esteem in which the public held Marley was reﬂected in the outpouring of respect during the period of
national mourning that followed his passing. Whitney and Hussey describe it:“On the morning of May 21, 1981, they
all came to pay their respects, the well-heeled and the barefooted. They hadﬁled by in numbers like the stones in the
Great Wall of China. For three days the procession seemed endless.”85 The politicians were not to be outdone. At the
funeral, Michael Manley and Edward Seaga, Jamaica's two leading politicians, both eulogized Marley, highlighting his
contribution to the popular art form. According to Seaga,“His music did more than entertain. He translated into
music, in a remarkable style, the aspirations, pain and feeling of millions of people throughout the world. As an
individual, Bob Marley was the embodiment of disciplineand he personiﬁed hard work and determination to reach his
goals. He left us with a rich heritage of popular Jamaican music.”
86 Manley was equally eloquent:“He is a genius. He's
one of those extraordinaryﬁgures that. . . comes along perhaps once in a generation; who, starting with a folk art, a
folk form, by some inner magic of commitment, sincerity of passion and of just skill, turns it into a part of the
universal language of the arts of the world.”
87
Whitney and Hussey comment on how Marley's funeral symbolized
BEARERS OF JAMAICAN POPULAR CULTURE 113


--- PAGE 129 ---
the turnaround in the manner in which Rastas and Jamaican popular music are regarded:“A swarm of international
journalists and photographers, some of whom may have onceﬁlled their news reports with stories about what they
referred to as Rastafarian riff raff, were now elbowing for the best vantage point to record the last important event in
the life of the front line man.”88
Today, Marley is probably more alive in Jamaica's national consciousness than during his lifetime. His birthday,
February 6, has become a de facto public holiday, having been declared Bob Marley Day.
89 Each May, his passing is
commemorated with special events. During my trip to Jamaica in 1991, the Ministry of Culture and the Bob Marley
Foundation sponsored a concert at the Ward Theatre to commemorate the tenth anniversary of his death. A Marley
monument stands in front of the National Arena. The Marley Museum at his Hope Road residence receives a constant
stream of visitors from around the world. Marley's mausoleum has become one of the most visited shrines in Jamaica.
And Marley's music is as popular as ever, selling more than three million albums by 2000. At the turn of the century,
the British Broadcasting Corporation played“One Love” as the anthem of the twentieth century, andTime magazine
named Marley's Exodus as the album of the century.
90 As Rita Marley says, “Jah live, Bob lives, his music
lives—Rastafari lives forever. . . . Bob is with us continually.”91
The Rastafarian contribution to the evolutionof Jamaica's indigenous culture is quite remarkable and has led Laurence
Breiner to conclude that the movement is“the most energetic and creative segments [sic] of the Jamaican society,”
providing the masses of Jamaicans with“the only coherent culture to which they have access.”
92 Velma Pollard and
Yoshiko Nagashima concur. For Pollard, Rastafari“has moved like yeast through the Jamaican society, infusing all
these expressions [artistic and cultural] with its power.”93 According to Nagashima, the“revitalization of hitherto
repressed and seemingly moribund African [Afro-Jamaican] tradition in general is a reﬂection of the precious outcome
of Rastafarian culture.”94 The Rastafarian contributions to and inﬂuence on the visual arts, the performing arts,
literature, and particularly music have brought them widespread acceptance and have conferred legitimacy on the
movement.
Summary
In this chapter, I have demonstrated that Rastas have emerged as the most creative segment of the Jamaican
population, making imprints on the
114
RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 130 ---
popular culture in a variety of ways, but most signiﬁcantly in the area of popular music. The evidence, I conclude,
suggests that Rastafari has assured itself of perpetuity by etching itself in Jamaica's national consciousness and by
becoming embedded in the social and cultural fabric of Jamaican life. Hence, we can speak unequivocally of the
routinization of Rastafari in Jamaican society.
BEARERS OF JAMAICAN POPULAR CULTURE 115


--- PAGE 131 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 132 ---
7 Summary and Conclusions
The primary purpose of this study has been to identify and explain the factors that have led to the routinization and
entrenchment of the Rastafarian movement in Jamaican society. In the process of doing this, I have argued that the
theory of charisma and routinization, as articulated by Weber, is in need of modiﬁcations at some points. In thisﬁnal
chapter, I will summarize myﬁndings and indicate their implications for the theory of charisma and routinization. I
will also reﬂect brieﬂy on the future of the Rastafarian movement with regard to its organization and its status in
Jamaican society.
Charisma, Routinization,and Rastafari
Rastafari, at its very core, is a response to colonialism and its impact on the lives of Afro-Jamaicans. In the broader
sociohistorical context, the movement emerged against the background of the miseries and atrocities experienced by
the majority of Afro-Jamaicans since their removal from Africa in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. In the
more immediatecontext, themovementwas an attempt todeal withtheeconomichardship, political disfranchisement,
and cultural imperialism of the 1920s and 1930s. Though novel in some respects, Rastafari has deep roots in the
African and Afro-Christian traditions that preceded it. In particular, Rastafarian messianism, biblical apocalypticism,
and Ethiopianism have their roots in ideas that have long been current in the folk tradition and in the tradition of
resistance in Jamaica.
The crowning of Haile Selassie as emperor of Ethiopia was the catalyst that brought to the fore the deep-seated
attitudes of many Afro-Jamaicans toward Jamaica's colonial establishment. It also heightened their desire for liberation
from oppression and alienation. The Rastafarian movement, therefore, emerged because some Afro-Jamaicans
perceived the crowning of an African monarch as the sign that their liberation from colonial oppression


--- PAGE 133 ---
was imminent. Shortly after Selassie's crowning, some people started proclaiming him as divine and calling on others
to reject the authority of Jamaica's colonial government and to give allegiance to Selassie alone. In time, Leonard
Howell distinguished himself as the most forceful and persuasive personality.
Though this study has focused primarily on routinization, the phenomenon of Rastafari also has some implicationsfor
Weber's theory of charisma. By placing the emergence of Rastafari within the social and historical context of the
experiences of the Afro-Jamaican masses, I wish to demonstrate that the context in which charismatic movements are
likely to arise is too narrowly depicted by Weber. Instead of seeing charismatic movements as generated by merely
extraordinary events or situations, we should see them as convergences of historical and social forces. In this light,
equal emphasis should be placed on charisma as a collective social phenomenon as on charisma as the extraordinary
qualities or exceptional powers of individuals. Weber himself indicates that for authority to be considered legitimate,
those who submit to it must believeit to be so. From this perspective,charismatic leaders have only as much authority
as their followers accord them. Therefore, those who recognize and submit to charismatic leadership are just as
responsible as the leaders themselves for the creation of charismatic movements.
By pointing to the sources that helped to shape the character and message of Rastafari, I hope to correct the
impression given by Weber that the teachings of charismatic leaders are completely novel. My contention is that the
teachings and pronouncements of charismatic leaders must resonate with and have some measure of familiarity to
those whose loyalty they solicit. Such familiarity is usually achieved by the charismatic leaders tapping into ideas and
invoking symbols that have currency in the culture or subculture.
Furthermore, the emergence of Rastafari raises the question of the possibility of multiple charismatic leaders arriving
at the same conclusions, advocatingthe same goals, and hence all contributing to the emergence of a single movement
(a possibility not explored by Weber). Though the career of Leonard Howell is more fully documented than that of
other early advocates of Rastafari, all historical studies of the emergence of Rastafari indicate that shortly after the
crowning of Haile Selassie several persons, independent of each other, started proclaiming his divinity and enunciating
the fundamental principles of Rastafari. If charismatic movements are collective social phenomena generated by
convergences of social and historical forces, then it is quite likely that multiple charismatic personalities may emerge
with similar ideas and similar agendas in those contexts that give rise to such movements.
118
RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 134 ---
With regard to the routinization/entrenchment of Rastafari in Jamaica, three contributing factors have been explored
in this study: the movement's own internal development of an ethos, the rapprochement between the movement and
the wider society, and the inﬂuence of Rastafari on the evolution of popular culture in Jamaica.
Though the movement has not developed the centralized and bureaucratic organization traditionally viewed as the
most salientfeature of routinization, it has evolved a reticulate typeof organization, an intricate network of houses and
mansions, connected and kept alive by personal relationships and intervisitation. The movement also exists within
what I have labeled an ideological/symbolic/ritual ethos. The core of Rastafarian ideology is a common sense of evil,
expressed in the concept of Babylon, and a common sense of identityand solidarity, centered around Rastas' attempts
to recreate themselves in the image of Africa. This ideology is powerfully expressed in evocative symbols (Babylon,
Zion, I and I, dreadlocks, the lion, Ethiopian national colors, and so on) instead of in elaborate treatises or carefully
crafted creedal statements. Rastafarian rituals center around the concept of grounding, the establishing and
strengthening of adherents in the principles of Rastafari. These include daily reasoning and the ritual smoking of ganja
in the houses and mansions of Rastafari, periodic all-night sessions among circles of Rastas, and movement-wide I-
ssemblies held according to the Rastafarian calendar of holy days.
The second factor facilitatingthe routinization/entrenchment of Rastafari was the gradual rapprochement between the
movement and the rest of the society. Initially, the movement's antiestablishment posture was met by ofﬁcial
repression. However, after a 1960 study by a group of university scholars defused some of the negative
misconceptions about Rastas, the governmentbegan to pursue a policy of rehabilitation/accommodation, whichled to
greater social intercourse between Rastas and the rest of the society and an attendant lessening of the tensions the
movementhad occasioned in the society. At the same time, the Rastafarian perspectivewas gaining favorableattention
among the radical intellectuals, the poor, and the young in the society, which led to a gradual assimilation of some of
the elements of Rastafari by the wider society. Eventually, the cooptation of Rastafarian symbols and language by the
political establishment and the commodiﬁcation of the Rastafarian image and creativity by commercial interests from
the 1970s onward served to confer legitimacy on the movement. More speci ﬁcally, Rastafari has become the
recognized voice of the poor and dispossessed and the creative edge of Jamaica's indigenous culture.
This leads to the third factor in the routinization of Rastafari. Rastafari
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 119


--- PAGE 135 ---
has made an imprint on all areas of artistic and cultural endeavor in Jamaican society: literature, poetry, painting,
sculpture/carving, theater, dance, and music. The contribution of Rastafari to the recent development of Jamaican
culture has been so far-reachingthatRastas havebeen recognized as themost creativesegment of theJamaicansociety,
and their artistic/cultural products have been lauded as Jamaica's only coherent indigenous cultural expression. Above
all, reggae music, which imitates the rhythms of the Nyabinghi drums and which is infused with the language and
ideological perspective of Rastafari, exempliﬁes the Rastafarianization of Jamaica's popular culture.
The entrenchment of Rastafari has several implications for the theory of routinization. First, the phenomenon of
Rastafari indicates that a movement's ability to gain perpetuity and become a part of the social landscape is not solely
dependent on the formalization of leadership and administrative structures. Observers of the movement have
repeatedly underscored that the Rastafarian movement has not evolved any formal structures within which leaders are
chosen, decisions are made, and the affairs of the movementare administered. Instead, the movementhas developeda
reticulate organizational structure, with unity and solidarity being facilitated by intervisitation, by sharing the same
ideological/symbolic points of reference, and by participating in the same ritual activities.
Second, in addition to how a movement negotiates the problems of succession, economic support, and organization,
routinizationis also contingent on how it negotiates its relationship withthe rest of the society, especially the dominant
powers in thesociety. This pointis almost self-evident,especiallyfor a newmovementemerging as an alternativetothe
established institutions and values of the society. While it cannot be determined beforehand what the society's reaction
to the new movement is going to be and how that reaction may stiﬂe or facilitate the development of the new
movement, the dialecticof the relationship between the twois bound to affectthe fate of the new movement.In some
instances, the repression of the new movementby the establishment may be so rigorous as to bring about the death of
the movement. In other instances, repression may only serve to strengthen the resolve of those involved in the
movementand toattract others to it.In some instances, theacceptanceof themovement by thewider societymay lead
to its domestication andﬁnally to its demise as a force for social change. At other times, acceptance may confer
credibility and legitimacy on a new movement,leading to its embrace by more and more people within the society and
eventually to the mainstreaming of its perspective. As I outlined in chapter 5, the Rastafarian movement seems to have
run the gamut from weathering
120
RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 136 ---
the storms of repression to gaining accommodation and, eventually, to achieving credibility and legitimacy.
Third, the phenomenon of Rastafari also shows that, in theabsence of formal leadership and organizational structures,
a movementmay work its way intothe fabric of societyby becoming the impetus for the artistic/cultural development
of that society. The artistic innovations of the Rastas in Jamaican society and their elevation to the status of culture
bearers serve to underscorethefact thatthesocial signiﬁcance of a newmovementmay notliein theformal structures
it evolves, but in its ability to affect the subsequent artistic/cultural development of the society.
Any theory of routinization, therefore, must take into consideration the development of social structures other than
those considered formal or bureaucratic. It must address the dialectic of the relationship between the new movement
and therest ofthesociety, and itmust factorin theability(or thelackthereof) ofthenewmovementtobecome a force
for social/cultural change in the society.
The Future of the Rastafarian Movement
The inﬂuence of Rastafari on Jamaican society and its growth into an international movement have been phenomenal,
especiallyconsidering its humblebeginnings. However, in recent years there have been questions concerning the future
of the movement. Will Rastafari ever develop centralized bureaucratic structures and become an organized political
force? Is the dynamism of the movementabating, thus signaling its decline and eventualdemise? Deﬁnitiveanswers to
these questions will have to await the further disclosure of the historical process. Nevertheless, I wish to reﬂect on
them in light of my perception of the present state of the Rastafarian movement.
The answer to theﬁrst question willdepend in part on whose assessment of this lack of centralized leadership prevails
among the majority of adherents to Rastafari. Some Rastas and some experts on Rastafari see this lack of centralized
leadership as a positive characteristic of the movement. According to I Jabulani Tafari,“One of the reasons for the
survival of Rastafari in Jamaica has probablybeenthe fact that I and I didn't have any formal centralized structure, but
came into the faith and expressed the Rasta conception through various mansions and houses.”
1 By this statement,
Tafari is implying that the movement has maintained its appeal because of the attractiveness of its“ethical value of
complete freedom from the force of man-made rules.”2 As I noted in chapters 3 and 4, the Rastafarian principle of I
and I engenders a radical philosophical individualism.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 121


--- PAGE 137 ---
To those wary of being dominated by Babylon's systems and agents, this individualism is particularly attractive. As
Yoshiko Nagashima indicates,“The individual is liberated from the feeling of bondage. . . to associate freely with any
larger or smaller group or become independent.”3 This kind of freedom of association and participation provides a
haven for those who want to belong without institutional commitments.
At the same time, other Rastas and other experts on Rastafari recognize the limitations that come with a lack of
centralized organization and leadership. Among these limitations are the difﬁculty of acting as a united force, the
difﬁculty of securing formal recognition (from the government), and the inability to protect the Rastafarian image and
creativity from exploitation by outsiders. Educated Rastas, who seem to value the political clout that would come with
a united front and with formal recognition, are the ones most concerned about these limitations. Therefore, they have
made some attempts to unify the movement. The Rastafarian Movement Association of Ras Historian and the
Ethiopian International Uniﬁcation Committee organized by attorney Michael Lorne are examples of such efforts.
4
They have also initiated efforts to secure from the Jamaican government a formal recognition of Rastafari as a socially
acceptable religion.
5 Since the 1980s, a group named the Rastafarian Centralisation Organization (RCO) has been
meeting to discuss the issue of and strategize for the uniﬁcation of the various elements of Rastafari. Furthermore,
inspired by a Catholic commission, whichrecommended that theRastafarian movementin England be recognized as a
valid religion, some Jamaican Rastas sought to gain admission (without success) to the Jamaica Council of Churches in
the early 1980s.
6 The problem with Rastafarian organizations such as the Rastafarian Centralisation Organization is
thatthey are initiated with much enthusiasm and fanfare and then theydisappear from the publicradar because no one
is willing or able to do the systematic, sustained grassroots organizing that is necessary for long-term success.
I have no way of predicting whether the radical individualism of the movement will continue to resist centralized
organization and leadership or whether the appeal of political clout, the need for social recognition, and the desire for
economic proﬁt will lead to centralization. However, from my contact with Rastas during the 1990s, I have detected a
growing conviction among Rastas—mostly the young and the better educated—that, if they are going to gain the
recognition they demand and effect the changes they envision in the social institutions of Jamaica, they will have to
become a rationally organized movement with centralized leadership. For example, at a special groundation held at the
University of the West Indies in Mona, Brother Samuel, a young Rasta, related to me that the elders
122
RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 138 ---
(older, inﬂuential Rastas) have resisted any attempt to organize the movement in a rational manner. He claimed,
however, that the younger Rastas realize that different times call for different strategies and that for the movement to
receive the recognition it deserves, it has to organize itself.7 Part of the impetus for more rational and centralized
organization among the educated comes from their desire to have the same kind of respectability and clout that their
non-Rastafarian colleagues and counterparts enjoy in Jamaican society. With the passing of theﬁrst and second
generations of elders, who were the“leading lights” of the movement, and with more educated Rastas becoming
prominent in the movement, there are likely to be continued calls for uniﬁcation or centralization.
With regard to the second question raised above, some observers of the movement have expressed the idea that
Rastafari is in a state of decline. Eron Henry contends that“Rastafarianism has lost its light and is now in a state of
eclipse,” despite the“epochal” impact it has had on Jamaican society.
8 Arthur Kitchen, an intellectual of Rastafarian
persuasion,9 has noted that the Rastafarian penetration of all occupational ranks and other facets of Jamaican society
has been accompanied by shifts in the movement, which have led to questions concerning the direction in which
Rastafari is going. As examples of these shifts, Kitchenmentions both the move from an emphasis on immediate
repatriation to an emphasis on social and economic rehabilitation and the absence of militancy and open agitation,
which have historically characterized the movement.
10 To some, these shifts indicate that Rastas are capitulating to the
wider society and are therefore losing their distinctive edge. The Reverend Samuel Vassel, with whom I have had a
number of discussions concerning the movement in general and this study in particular, contends that social
acceptancehas led to the“Babylonizationof Rastafari.” WhenI interviewed Vassel in May 1991, he agreed with Henry
and Kitchen that Rastafari lacked the militancy it has historically displayed and was also no longer the magnetic
attraction it was for Jamaican youth in the 1960s and 1970s. Furthermore, during the decade of the 1990s, several
notable Rastas, including Tommy Cowan and Judy Mowatt (of the I/Threes), converted to evangelical Christianity.
This defection raises further questions about the possible demise of Rastafari.
11
My response to these concerns and observations is threefold. First, we may characterize the lack of dynamism in the
Rastafarianmovementin the1980s and 1990s as the price of success. Mayer Zald and Roberta Ash haveobserved that
when new movements have gained some measure of success and“have found a niche for themselves” in the society
they once opposed, they are likely to become “becalmed,” which is characterized by a lack of activism, by
conservatism, and even by attrition.
12 Therefore, it
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 123


--- PAGE 139 ---
should not be surprising that the mainstreaming of Rastafari, especially in the artistic/cultural arena, should be
accompanied by a noticeable decrease in the vigor with which the movement formerly confronted the wider society.
Second, the perceived lack of militancy on the part of Rastas may also indicate the extent to which Rastafari has
become a familiar presence on Jamaica's social scene. Before 1970, the very proclamation of oneself as a Rasta was a
militant and challenging gesture. The wearing of dreadlocks, the repeated enunciations of“blood andﬁre” and other
vitriolic outbursts by Rastas, and the combative lyrics of the popular songs were likely to create panic in non-Rastas
and to set the establishment on alert. Today, dreadlocks have become a trendy hairstyle among many non-Rastas,
verbal outbursts by Rastas are regarded as comical (non-Rastas are also likely to clothe their verbal outbursts in
Rastafarian terms), and protest in reggae lyrics is commonplace, hardly regarded as anything but an outlet for pent-up
frustration.
13 The movementhas therefore become less threatening as it has become more familiar to thewider society.
Third, social movementsare often subject to a pattern of ebbandﬂow, and being in theebbphase does notnecessarily
indicate that a movement is destined for death. Historically, the Rastafarian movement has shown a pattern of
militancy and retrenchment. The emergence of the movement in the early 1930s was accompanied by public agitation,
especially in Kingston and St. Thomas. The main focus of the early agitation was the condemnation of Jamaica's
colonial government and the proclamation of the divine kingship of Haile Selassie. Early persecution led to a kind of
retreat, as in the creation of Howell's commune at Pinnacle. The mid-1950s to the early 1960s saw another period of
activism, which focused mainly on the demand for repatriation to Africa. Public marches, mass conventions, and
refusals to cooperate with the law enforcement and judicialsystems were the main activities of this period. Most of the
1960s was a period of cooling off as the movement and the wider society brokered a kind of truce. The late 1960s
through the1970s marked a thirdperiod of militancy, aimed at expunging Eurocentrism from theJamaicanpsyche and
infusing it with a sense of African history and culture. In that period, the hypnotic rhythms and the scathing lyrics of
reggae became thecatalystand medium of protest.The 1980s and the1990s can be characterized as an ebb phase, and
signs of renewed strength and militancy are on the horizon in the early twenty-ﬁrst century.
One sign is the effort of some Rastas to effect changes in the legal and political structures of the society. Using the
arrest (December 1996) and conviction (1997) of Dennis Forsythe, who is a Rasta and an attorney, on possession of
ganja and ganja paraphernalia, Rastas and their liberal supporters
124
RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 140 ---
spearheaded a high-level campaign for the legalization of ganja in the late 1990s. Forsythe's case was eventually
considered by Jamaica's constitutional court, which ruled that section 21 of Jamaica's constitution allows for the
possession and use of ganja for religious observances. Probably as a response to the case and the decriminalization
campaign it sparked, the Jamaican government empaneled a commission to study the existing laws concerning ganja
and to recommend whatever changes it considers necessary.
14 In 2001, the panel, headed by University of the West
Indies professor and expert on Rastafari Barry Chevannes, recommended the eventual decriminalization of ganja. So
far, the Jamaican Government has not indicated if it will accept the commission's recommendation and start the
legislative process that will lead to the decriminalization. Such a process will not only face opposition from civic and
religious organizations in Jamaica, but also from the U.S. government, which will consider any move toward the
decriminalization of ganja as a dereliction of duty in the war against drugs.
Renewed Rastafarian activism is also seen in the decision of a group of Rastas to contest political elections in Jamaica.
In doing so, they claim that Rastafari remains the only viable hope for social justice in Jamaican society. During the
1997 general election in Jamaica, they entered four candidates, and though these candidates garnered little electoral
support, the group declared its intention to continue its participation in the electoral process.
The reemergenceof a strong Rastafarian militancy in Jamaican popular music, after the dominance of sexand violence
in the dance hall era (1980–mid-1990s), is another sign that Rastafari may be ready to reassert itself more forcefully in
Jamaican society. Popular artists, such as Luciano and Sizzla, infuse their lyrics with Rastafarian spirituality and cultural
awareness. Others, such as Anthony B and Buju Banton (shedding his reputation for“slackness”), have emerged as
serious social and political critics. Anthony B's“Fire Pon Rome” is a bold, scathing, and frontal attack on political
corruptionand economic exploitationin Jamaica.
15 He evencalls the names of prominent politicians and businessmen,
whom he sees as responsible for poverty and oppression in Jamaica.
Renewed Rastafarian militancy has also emerged in reactionto theconversion of some prominentRastas to evangelical
Christianity. In the late 1990s, there was a strident rhetoric of “bun Jeezas” (burn Jesus) emanating from
fundamentalist Rastafarian circles. Prominent Rastas also wrote editorials suggesting that the so-called converts were
never genuine Rastas and calling into question the Rastafarian credentials of professing Rastas whom they viewed as
too enmeshed in Babylon.
16
The next phase of Rastafarian militancy is likely to be presided over by
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 125


--- PAGE 141 ---
the intellectual elite, which developed in the movement over the last twenty years of the twentieth century. The voices
of these educated Rastas are becoming the leading voices in the movement, and their concerns are beginning to shape
the agenda for the future. This agenda is likely to be marked by more political pragmatism than the Rastafarian
movement has exhibited to date.
In conclusion, Rastafari has become a“part of thetaken-for-granted landscape” of Jamaicansociety.
17 It has weathered
the storm of repression and has emerged as a legitimate religious and cultural expression of a people bent on
rediscoveringtheir African heritage after prolonged oppression and Europeanization. Furthermore, it has become the
sociocultural force exerting the most signiﬁcant impact on the evolution of Jamaica's indigenous popular culture.
Where themovementgoes from here willdepend largely on how it faces the challenges and existentialproblems of the
twenty-ﬁrst century. Whatever thetrajectory of Rastafari in thefuture, thehistory so far has been an amazing transition
from Rastas being social outcasts to being the bearers of Jamaica's popular culture.
126
RASTAFARI


--- PAGE 142 ---
Appendix
AReview of the Literatureon Rastafari
For itsﬁrst twenty years, the Rastafarian movement did not attract much scholarly attention. Since 1953, however, the
movement has been receiving increasing scholarly treatment. From my reading of the literature, several distinct
approaches and emphases have become evident. These approaches see Rastas as (1) millennial escapists, (2) social
change agents, (3) a dynamic community, (4) people returning to authentic, ancient roots, or (5) social/political
activists. To consider every signiﬁcant piece of the literature would make this review too voluminous. Therefore, I will
present a sampling of those treatments that I consider the best examples of each approach or emphasis in order to
provide the newcomer to the study of Rastafari with an introduction to the range of literature on the movement.
Rastas as Millennial Escapists
Between 1953 and 1969, researchers mostly focused on deprivation theory to explain the phenomenon of Rastafari.
Both George Eaton Simpson, whose researchﬁrst introduced Rastafari to the scholarly community in the 1950s, and
Leonard Barrett, whose research on Rastafari in 1965 was theﬁrst attempt at a comprehensive treatment of the
movement, view the Rastafarian movement in terms of millennial/messianic cultism. From this perspective, these
scholars emphasize the oppressive social situation from which the movement originated and view the Rastafarian
ideology/theology and agitation as escapist or at best adjustive. In Simpson's words, the movement is a compensation
for the“deprivationof [a] lowly social situation.”
1 But the compensatory measures, manifested in“political withdrawal
combined with verbal aggression” and in a desire to repatriate to Africa,2 are escapist rather than creative. Simpson's
basic claim is that the Rastafarian posture results from an acceptance of the dominant values of the society coupled
with frustration at the prospects


--- PAGE 143 ---
of achieving success under the existing system. The Rastafarian posture is therefore an avenue for the release of pent-
up frustrations.3
While Barrett's work is based on more substantial ethnography (providing a wealth of descriptive information on the
history, doctrines, and social organization of theRastas), and whileit recognizes therole of Rastafari in creating a more
positive self-image for its members, Barrett follows Simpson in casting the movement in terms of millennial
messianism and in concluding that it is escapist. Barrett argues that the Rastafarian posture of nonparticipation in the
political and social processes of Jamaica is dysfunctional, because it does nothing to change the oppressive situation
that Rastas are protesting.
4
The University of the West Indies' study of 1960, while not a theoretical work, implicitly accepts the deprivation
premise (probablyinﬂuenced by Simpson). The study concludes that theRastafarian movement,rooted and thriving in
the urban slums, is a response to the poverty, the unemployment, and the lack of acceptable physical infrastructures
that characterize these areas.
5 However, the university report does not follow Simpson with regard to his claims that
Rastafarian ideas are fanciful and farfetched. Its analysis of thesocial and economic conditions under which Rastas
lived in West Kingston in the 1950s and early 1960s and its recommendations to the Jamaican government are implicit
admissions that Rastas had legitimate grounds for complaint against the dominant powers in the society.
6 As a public
policydocument,the study recommends that steps be taken to remedy theconditions under whichRastas liveand that
their concerns be addressed. Among the recommendations are the exploration of the possibility of repatriation to
Africa, the building of low-income houses, the provision of public utilities, and the offering of social services.
7 Despite
the positiveintentionsof theuniversityscholars, their recommendationsseem tohave been born of theconvictionthat
the Rastafarian movement was socially pathological and had the potential to generate serious social upheaval. In fact,
the report speciﬁcally claims that the movement is malleable material for Marxists and other radicals desirous of
fomenting revolutionary activities.
8 Thus the recommendations must be seen as an effort to rehabilitate or repatriate
Rastas before they become more socially dangerous.
Sociologist Orlando Patterson and anthropologist Sheila Kitzinger have more social-psychological interpretations of
the movement. Both seem to subscribe to an interpretation of millennialism as a psychosocial pathology or a sign of
“group neuroses.”
9 For Patterson, Rastafari is a psychological reaction to cultural alienation born of unsuccessful social
mobility, urban ghettoization,and economic deprivation.Barred from thefruits of thesociety, Rastas havedevelopeda
kind of“sour grape syndrome,”
128
APPENDIX


--- PAGE 144 ---
which manifests itself in an aggressive denunciation of Jamaica and an avid desire to emigrate.10 Therefore, the
expression of a desire for repatriation among Rastas is, from a psychological point of view, really a desire to participate
in the beneﬁts of the society. In other words, the Rastas' expression of a desire to repatriate should be interpreted as a
coded way of saying they wish to be made full participants in the privileges of mainstream society.11
While claiming to recognize the potential of Rastafari as a political force, Kitzinger categorizes the movementas a“last
ditch effort” to preserve some sense of identity in a society which has made them outcasts.12 But while the Rastafarian
faith serves as a coping mechanism in a desperate situation, it does nothing to address the objective structures that
create and maintain the situation. Rastafarian beliefs, political stance, and lifestyle only serve to make Rastas further
marginalized.
13 Kitzinger's conclusion is that“repressed psychological drives,” resulting from marginality,14 “provide
the basis for faith and action for the Rastafari.”15
The scope of this review will not permit me to do an extensive critique of the millennialist approach to Rastafari.
However, I would like to raise a few points. On the positive side, the studies that I have just reviewed are signiﬁcant in
that they introduced Rastafari to the scholarly community and provided the initial data on the movement.
Furthermore, they are correct in identifying the economically underprivileged sector of Jamaican society as the strata
from which Rastafari emerged and in which it thrives. However, these approaches suffer from at least three critical
problems: limited data, myopicfocus, and theoretical rigidity. A number of the earlytreatmentsof Rastafari werebased
on limited data. For example, Simpson's data were obtained by observing Rastafarian street meetings and visiting
several Rastafarian yards in Kingston over a brief period of time. The university report, for all of its acclaim, was
limited to Kingston (mainly West Kingston) and based on research that lasted only a month.
Along with the limited data, there is a narrow focus on certain aspects of the movement. Even when researchers (like
Barrett, Kitzinger, and Patterson) acknowledge the complexity of the Rastafarian experience and philosophy, they
manifest a tendency to focus on repatriation and political withdrawal as the most signiﬁcant elements. This of course
ﬁts into their millennialist mold, but it not only ignores the complexity of the movement but also fails to grapple with
the signiﬁcance of Rastafari as a call for social change and as an attempt to reconstruct an African identity for people
of African ancestry.
In the 1950s and 1960s, viewing religious movements indigenous to colonial and postcolonial societies in terms of
millennialism and escapism seemed to have been in vogue among sociologists and anthropologists.
16
APPENDIX 129


--- PAGE 145 ---
The use of the millennialist framework was supposed to be a mark of scholarly sophistication, so investigators felt
compelled toﬁlter their research through this model. The uncritical application of this approach to Rastafari results in
a theoretical rigidity, which forces the movement into a predetermined model, thus emphasizing those elements of the
movement(thedeprivation of its adherents and theircall for repatriation) that tend to support the biases of the theory.
The movementis far more complexthanthese researchers' analyses indicate. But the problemgoes evendeeper. Some
scholars seem to consider an acceptance of the status quo as normal and legitimate, and thus any challenge or
alternative must be considered pathological. They therefore join the status quo in viewing the Rastas as criminals,
lunatics, or fanciful dreamers because of their rejection of the established values and institutions. However, the
repressive actions of the guardians of the society revealed their fear of the potential of Rastafari as a vehiclefor social
change. The next generation of scholars would highlight such a potential.
Rastas as Social Change Agents
The growth and visibility of the Rastafarian movement during the 1960s seemed to have alerted scholars to its
revolutionary potential. Professor RexNettleford, an astute observer of cultural and social change in Jamaica and one
of the three researchers who conducted the university study of 1960, was theﬁrst to break with the millennial/escapist
tradition. Focusing on the dynamic interactions between the movement and the wider society, Nettleford argues that
Rastafari represents a creative and revolutionary force in a society plagued by inequalities and a denial of its African
heritage.
17 As Joseph Owens comments, Nettleford's break with the previous scholarship is evident in the fact that he
boldly asserts that“it is the society that is abnormal and the Rastas sane.”18
Since Nettleford's observation, there has been a chorus of voices hailing the Rastas as social change agents. The
recurring theme in these studies is the role of Rastafari in resisting colonial and neocolonial ideology and
socioeconomic structures and in forging an Afro-Caribbean consciousness thatreﬂects theAfro-Caribbeanexperience.
Some studies focus on the historical signiﬁcance or the historical trajectory of the movement. Horace Campbell and
Frank Jan van Dijk represent this historical approach to Rastafari as social change agents. Others, including Maurice
Bryan, Becky Michele Mulvaney, and Jack Anthony Johnson-Hill, focus on how the internal character and social
dynamics of the movement embody protest and advance social change.
130
APPENDIX


--- PAGE 146 ---
Horace Campbell places the Rastafarianmovement in the context of the history of social and political resistance in
Jamaica. As indicated by the titleof his book,Rasta and Resistance: From Marcus Garvey to Walter Rodney, between the eras
of these twoformidableﬁgures (Garvey and Rodney),Rastas bore the torch of black consciousness and carried on the
struggle for political and economic power and cultural authenticity. Rastafari, therefore, falls within the tradition of
radical protest by Afro-Jamaicans in the quest for social change.19 Frank Jan van Dijk is more concerned with tracing
the historical development of Rastafari within the context of Jamaican society and beyond. Using all available sources
(archives, interviews, books, and so on), van Dijk seeks to present the world of Rastafari to his readers while
highlightinghow a despised minorityresists racial, economic, cultural, and political domination to create a voiceand an
identity for itself.
20
Like Campbell, Maurice Bryan also portrays Rastafari as a resistance movement and places it in the tradition of black
struggle in the Americas. However, Bryan hones in on how aspects of Rastafari, such as its spirituality, philosophy, and
music,continue thetradition of black strugglein thecontemporary world.
21 Similarly, Becky Michele Mulvaneyfocuses
on the protest, resistance, and call for social change characteristic of reggae to underscore the transformative impetus
of Rastafari. Using Rastafarian poetry and reggae lyrics ashis data, Jack Anthony Johnson-Hill also emphasizes the
transformative inﬂuence of Rastafari but focuses primarily on the transformation of the consciousness of the
adherents of Rastafari. The wordI-Sight in the title of Johnson-Hill's book is indicative of the transformed self-
understanding of Rastas which leads them to embrace new ethic and a new way of life.22
Even some scholars whoﬁrst described the movementas millennial and escapist have come around to a more positive
appraisal. For example, Simpson and Barrett, in more recentpublications, have pointed to theimpact of themovement
on the wider society and to its potential as a catalyst for social change.
23
The social change approach grounds Rastafari in the social realities that the movement has faced over the years and
that have shaped its perspective on the world. At the same time, it raises questions about the inequities of Jamaican
society, takes seriously the ideals of Rastafari, and gives credence to the Rastafarian demands for redress of the
structural ills of the society. Today, the almost universal acknowledgment of the positive inﬂuence of the Rastafarian
movement on Jamaican society gives strength to the validityof this approach. However, this perspective demonstrates
a tendency to gloss over such issues as repatriation and ganja smoking. In addition, these theorists must admit that, in
spite of the
APPENDIX 131


--- PAGE 147 ---
changes that the Rastafarian movement has effected in Jamaican society in terms of African consciousness and
acceptable cultural and artistic expressions, it has done little to change the European-derived political, economic,
judicial, and educational institutions. While Rastafari may rule in the culture of the streets, Europe still rules in the
culture of the established institutions. Furthermore, while the social change theorists provide invaluable information
on the interface of Rastafari and the wider society, they do not shed enough light on the experiences of those who
inhabit the world of Rastafari. It is to the research of those who see Rastafari as a dynamic community that we must
turn for such a perspective.
Rastafarias a Dynamic Community
A growing body of scholarly literature focuses primarily on the internal dynamics and inner workings of the
Rastafarian movement. This body of literature places emphasis on the ideological and symbolic content of the
movement, the historical evolution of various aspects of the movement, the ritual and social dynamics of the
movement, and gender issues within themovement.Ernest Cashmore and Joseph Owens represent theﬁrst emphasis.
Cashmore, focusing primarilyon theRastafarianmovementin England, uses insights from thesociology of knowledge
to focus on how the movement constructs, communicates, and preserves its world view in a hostile environment. He
pays particular attention to the use of symbols (for example, Rasta colors, dreadlocks, I and I, and Babylon) as
embodiments of such a world view.
24 Owens also seeks to articulate the Rastafarian world view, which he believes
authenticates the religiosity of Rastafari. Without casting the movement within any sociological and anthropological
framework, he provides a thematic analysis of Rastafarian beliefs.
25
Barry Chevannes's research pays close attention to the social history and the development of various aspects of the
Rastafarian movement. He traces many aspects of Rastafari to the African and Afro-Christian traditions, which
preceded it in Jamaica. Particularly, he demonstrates how a number of Rastafarian beliefs and practices are taken from
Jamaican folk religion, particularly Revivalists. Chevannes's research also sheds light on the emergence of certain
Rastafarian distinctions. For example, he traces the institutionalization of the smoking of the ganja pipe (chillum or
kochi) as a ritual activity, the establishment of dreadlocks as a Rastafarian trademark, and the development of a distinct
Rastafarian argot to a group of young radical Rastas in the House of Youth Black Faith, who came to prominence in
the late 1940s and early 1950s.
26
The third emphasis is represented by Carole Yawney and John Paul Homiak.
132 APPENDIX


--- PAGE 148 ---
They are more concerned with the ritual and social dynamics of the movement. Yawney's major concern is how
reasoning and the ritual smoking of ganja serve as media for the creationof a new consciousness that is different from
and rejecting of that of the dominant society. Yawney's other concern is Rastafarian sociality. Here she highlights the
polity of the yards,
27 the importance of the informal network that links yards across the island, and the subdued role
that womenplay in the movement.28 Homiak's investigation deals with the role of elders as inspirational leaders and as
charismatic exponents and defenders of the strict, conservative principles of Rastafari, which are upheld in the
Nyabinghi Order.
29 Homiak outlines the role of elders in the oral tradition of the movement, in the ritual
administration of reasoning sessions, in the convening of Rastafarian conventions, and in the decisionmaking process
in the movement.
30
While various scholars have pointed to the patriarchal ethos of Rastafari, only a few have focused on analyzing the
dynamics of gender relations. Maureen Rowe, Imani M. Tafari-Ama, and Obiagele Lake are most representative of
those who pay close attentionto this aspectof Rastafari. Both Rowe and Tafari-Ama are Rastas and therefore bring an
insider's perspective to their work.
Rowe basically outlines the traditional gender roles of Rastafarian women in relation to their “kingmen”(male
partners). She argues that this ascription of a subordinate status to Rastafarian women mirrors the patriarchy
31 of
Jamaican societyand draws ideological support from African patriarchyand the Old Testament, especially the Levitical
laws. Rowe also agues that in early Rastafari, male-female relationships were on more equal terms and women
participated in all aspects of Rastafari. The advent of dreadlocks with its attendant emphasis on“dreadness” and the
inﬂuence of the male-oriented, macho-steeped rude boy movement on Rastafari led to both a discourse and a praxis
that relegated women to the background of the movement. Developments since the 1970s, such as the entrance of
more educated women(as wellas men)intothemovement,thewillingness of more“liberated” Rastafarian men to talk
about gender issues and the place of women in the movement, and the phenomenon of more single, independent
women who are“trodding” Rastafari on their own terms, have created fractures in the staunch patriarchy of earlier
years.
32
Tafari-Ama takes a similar position as Rowe concerning the roots of Rastafarian patriarchy. However, she focuses
more on how women wrestle with such a system and negotiate spaces for themselves within the movement.
33 This
perspectiveon gender issues in Rastafari gives voiceand agency to Rastafarian women, a perspective noticeably absent
from the works that simply charge the movement with being patriarchal.
APPENDIX 133


--- PAGE 149 ---
Obiagele Lake's book,Rastafari Women: Subordination in the Midst of Liberation Theology, is a serious critique of the position
of women in Rastafari. Showing how women are relegated to the margins of the movement and how the Jamaican
popular culture that has developed around or under the inﬂuence of Rastafari denigrates and objectiﬁes them, Lake
seriously questions whether Rastafari can be a serious force for the liberation of the African diaspora when it makes
women into second-class citizens.
34
Two otherscholars of notewho havewrittenabout womenin Rastafari are CaroleYawney and anthropologist Diane J.
Austin-Broos. Following through on her exploration of the internal dynamics of Rastafari, Yawney describes how
women ﬁgure in the patriarchal religious and social ethos of Rastafari.
35 Austin-Broos's work compares the male-
centeredness of Rastafari with the female-centeredness of Pentecostalism in Jamaica.36
Approaches to the study of Rastafari that focus on its internal dynamics tend to be ethnographically rich, revealingthe
intricate contours of Rastafari as a dynamic community. Most of the researchers I have mentioned in this section have
engaged in extensive or intensive primary research (usually participant observation)on the movementas a wholeor on
various aspects of the movement. The result is a wealth of information on the historical evolution, the ideological
sophistication, and the social dynamics of Rastafari. The majorﬂaw in this approach is its tendency to ignore the
dynamic interactions between the movement and the rest of the society. The most telling example of this tendency is
Joseph Owens's work, which systematically explains the beliefs of the Rastas, but says precious little about who these
believers are and how they relate to the rest of the society. The result is that his treatment reads like a systematic
theology of Rastafarianism and pays little attention to the sociological and social-psychological issues facing the
movement. Other studies review the historical background against which the movementemerged but fail to followthe
ongoing relationship between the movement and the wider society. One notable exception is the work of Chevannes,
who in an article entitled“Case of Jah versus Society: Rastafari Exorcism of the Ideology of Racism in Jamaica,”
demonstrates how Rastafari confronted Jamaica's Eurocentricity and became the vanguard in leading Jamaica to a
sense of its African heritage and identity.
37
Rastafarias Authentic Culture
Because of the oral culture that prevails in the movement, serious extended theorizing has been slow in coming from
Rastas themselves. However, as an intelligentsia emerges in the movement, scholarly reﬂections
134
APPENDIX


--- PAGE 150 ---
have begun to appear from within the ranks. Dennis Forsythe's work represents one objective of the emerging
literature: the provision of an apologia for the authenticity of the Rastafarian movement. Forsythe points out that
historically, “the insider's account of Jah Rastafari has been told only in the form of song, dance, parables and
symbols,” but he proposes to use the biographical method to explain the phenomenon of Rastafari“in plain enough
terms.”
38 His account of Rastafari has a threefold purpose. First, he seeks to demonstrate that Rastafari is not a
parochial religion based on the eccentricity of its practitioners in Jamaica. He does this by tracing Rastafari's“mystical
roots” to ancient mysticism, particularly Egyptian mythology, the wider African religious experience, and the gnostic
elements in early Christianity.39 Second, he seeks to demonstrate that Rastafari is essentially an attempt to recreate an
African cultural identity in a context that has historically imposed European deﬁnitions on theAfrican diaspora. Rastas
replace thenegativeassociations thathavebeen attached to Africa and Africans with a bold assertionof African beauty
and dignity.
40 Third, Forsythe provides an apology for ganja use. Amassing any kind of evidence he canﬁnd (historical,
personal, scientiﬁc), he argues that ganja is a therapeutic substance. Its use by Rastas, he contends, aids in the
rediscovery of the African self and the universal spiritual reality and, at the same time, unleashes natural energy, which
heals the body and restores it to a state of equilibrium.
41
To Forsythe's credit, he delivers on his promise to present Rastafari in“plain enough terms.” He avoids the tendency
of many Rastas, who like to communicate in streams of esoteric verbiage that seem calculated to obfuscate rather than
to elucidate. His account of Rastafari is passionate, yet lucid and cohesive. He manages to capture and systematize
ideas carefully worked out in Rastafarian oral culture but hitherto expressed only in parables, poetry, songs, and
symbols. This is the best example of systematic theorizing or theologizing coming from inside the movement. Though
an insider's account like Forsythe's will obviously help in focusing sociological and anthropological investigations of
Rastafari, the apologetic nature of his work has to be taken into account in assessing its analytic value.
Others from within the Rastafarian movement have joined Forsythe in reﬂecting on various aspects of Rastafari. In
1999, Douglas R. A. Mack, an adherent of Rastafari for more thanﬁftyyears, published a book entitledFrom Babylon to
Rastafari. With much the same objective as Forsythe and using the same“biographical method,” he explains the
historical and biblical roots of the movement, its evolutionin Jamaica, and the centralityof Haile Selassie as its guiding
light. He also explains the ethos of Rastafari, including its major tenets and ritual activities.
42 Though not as rigorous as
APPENDIX 135


--- PAGE 151 ---
Forsythe's, Mack's account is lucid and coherent. As someone who has witnessed from the inside the major
developments (including participating in two missions to Africa to investigate the possibility of repatriation) in the
Rastafarian movement since the 1960s, Mack's account rings with authenticity.
Recent years have seen a proliferation of publications on Rastafari by Rastas. While these books may not be deemed
scholarly, they provide helpful insights into Rastas' attempts to assert the authenticity of their movement and its vision
of the world. These recent publications fall roughly into four categories. Theﬁrst includes republication or reworking
of “sources” that have inspired the Rastafarian vision. Some examples areThe Holy Piby: The Blackman's Bible ,a n
African redemption text written in 1924 by Robert Athlyi Rogers, an African-American minister from Newark, New
Jersey;
43 The Promised Key, written by the most well known early Rastafarian leader, Leonard P. Howell, under the
pseudonym G. G. Maragh, and primarily dedicated to proving and afﬁrming the divinity of Haile Selassie;44 and The
Rastafari Ible45 and The Kebra Negast: The Lost Bible of Rastafarian Wisdom and Faith from Ethiopia to Jamaica,46 both retellings
of an Ethiopian legend that traces the royal line of Haile Selassie to a sexual liaison between Solomon (of the Hebrew
Bible) and the queen of Sheba.
The second category consists of works concerning the person or teachings of Haile Selassie (teachings are culled from
his speeches). The purpose of these works is to establish thecentralplace of Selassie as thedivineblack messiah and to
valorize his teachings on various subjects as a source and guide to the Rastafarian philosophy of life. Examples of
books that fall within this category areHaile Selassie and the Openingof the Seven Seals,
47 The Important Utterances of H. I. M.
Emperor Haile Selassie I Jah Rastafari,48 The Testimony of His Imperial Majesty Emperor Haile Selassie I, Defender of the Faith,49
and Rasta: Emperor Haile Selassie and the Rastafarians.50
The work of E. S. P. McPherson exempliﬁes the third category of books in the growing repertoire of Rastafarian
writers. His works focus more on the social, cultural, and historical development of Rastafari:Rastafari and Politics: Sixty
Years of a DevelopingCultural Ideolog y: Sociolog y of Development Perspective51 and The Culture-History and Universal Spread of
Rastafari.52 McPherson's writings tend to be in the same spirit as that of Douglas R. A. Mack.
The ﬁnal category of writings being published by Rastas consists of personal reﬂection on various issues or poetic
expressions of Rastafarian consciousness. Examples of personal reﬂections areProphet on Reggae Mountain: Meditations of
Ras Shabaka Maasai, Prophet of Jah Rastafari53 and Christopher Columbus and Rastafari: Ironies of History and Other Reﬂections on
136 APPENDIX


--- PAGE 152 ---
the Symbol of Rastafari.54 Numerous Rastafarian poets have published (and recorded) their works over the years. The
most well known collections are in the series called Itations of Jamaica and I Rastafari , published by Mihlawhdh
Faristzaddi.55
Like Forsythe and Mack, these works are concerned with establishing Rastafari as an authentic lifestyle with deep
cultural roots. The outsider may remain unconvinced by their evidence and argument. However, these works have
begun to establish a body of literature by Rastas, which will give researchers insights into the thinking of members of
the movement.
Rastas as Social/politicalActivists
Another theorist writing from within the ranks of the Rastafarian movement is Leahcim Semaj.56 Semaj agrees with
Forsythe that the essence of Rastafari is a“restructuring of identity” from an“Africentric [sic] perspective.”57 However,
he argues that historically the effort has been religious in nature, founded on a body of myths concerning Garvey,
Africa, and Selassie. As a religion, Semaj believes, Rastafari has succeeded as much as it can in Jamaica, having become
an integral and vital component of the popular culture, that is, the indigenous values and expressions of the people.
58
Semaj asserts that for Rastafari to move to the level of national culture (the collective and conscious ideas on which a
society is built), to the level of scientiﬁc culture (a critical assimilation of all human achievements), and to the level of
universal culture (a humanistic respect for and solidarity with all human beings), it must make the transition from
religion (a body of myths) to social theory (with a carefully crafted agenda for social, political, and economic activity).
59
To do this, Rastas must cease perceiving Garvey as a prophet and regard him as a social activist whose ideas must be
critiqued and placed in the context of the liberation struggles faced by the African diaspora today. Rastas must also
refrain from regarding the Bible as special revelationand see it as an interesting book, which sheds light on the human
situation. Selassie must no longer be regarded as the Creator, but as a symbol of the God-man unity. Repatriation as a
mysterious act must give way to collectiveactivityin the contextof global Pan-Africanism. Personal appearance should
not only be projected in terms of its symbolic values, but also as an expression of African aesthetic pride. The use of
ital (natural, organic) food and ganja smoking must not be explained in terms of biblical restrictions or prescriptions
but in terms of their medicinal and health values.
60
Whereas the objective of the writing by Rastas that I mentioned in the
APPENDIX 137


--- PAGE 153 ---
previous section is to demonstrate that Rastafari is a cogent world view and an acceptable lifestyle with deep historical
and cultural roots, Semaj wantsto go onestep furtherand fashion theideology of Rastafari into a rationalsocialtheory
thatwill beableto critique and change theworld.Semaj's position represents thethinking of a new breed of intellectual
Rastas. They recognize that the Rastafarian mythology and lifestyle have been useful in the process of recapturing a
sense of the signiﬁcance of Africa to their lives. However, they are acutely aware that this does not change the
conﬁguration of power and privilege in Jamaica and the world. Therefore, Semaj and his like-minded brethren wish to
move Rastafari beyond its cultural achievementsand, evenmore, beyond its vitriolic rhetoric, to coherent social theory
and concrete, rational, political actions, which will facilitate the liberationprocess in Jamaica and the political objectives
of Pan-Africanism worldwide.
Beyond providing a window into the thinking of the new breed of intellectual Rastas, Semaj's approach reveals the
impact of the academic process on their perspective. On the one hand, the impetus for the evolution of a rational
social theory comes from the fact that intellectual Rastas have come to the realization that some of the mythology of
Rastafari is based on unsupportable propositions or naive projections. For example, the conception of Africa as the
promised land“ﬂowing with milk and honey” ignores Africa's hardships, poverty, political clannishness, and tribalism.
On the other hand, the inﬂuence of radical social theorists is apparent in Semaj's approach. He quite openly accepts
Feuerbach's and Marx's notion that religion is a human creation.
61 However, instead of seeing religion as false
consciousness to be destroyed in the revolutionary process, he sees religion as a malleable tool, which must be shaped
to ﬁt the demands of particular historical circumstances.
62 It is in this intellectual framework that he proposes that
Rastafari make the transition from religion to social theory. Although Semaj's ambition for Rastafari to become the
national and eventuallythe universal culture may concur with the aspirations of many Rastas, I seriously doubt that his
neo-Marxist assumptions willﬁnd acceptance among the rank andﬁle of Rastas. In fact, the Jamaican grapevine has it
that Semaj is not a genuine Rasta, but an opportunistic intellectual who uses the guise of Rasta for his own economic
and political aims.
Conclusion
Not all studiesﬁt comfortably within the categories I have used here. The purpose of my arrangement is to give the
reader a broad sense of the approaches
138 APPENDIX


--- PAGE 154 ---
and foci that appear in the growing body of literature on Rastafari. As Rastafarian studies has grown in recent times,
some books attempt to present a more macro perspective, while others focus on more micro concerns. A good
example of the macro perspective isChantingDown Babylon: The Rastafari Reader, which is a collection of essays seeking
to give an overview of the movement from multiple perspectives.
63 Dread Jesus, which focuses on the Rastafarian
understanding of Jesus and how that understanding challenges traditional Christian understanding,64 “Rastafari in the
Promised Land,”65 and “First Generation Rastafari in St. Eustatius” are good examples of micro perspectives.66
Furthermore, the ballooning academic interest in Rastafar i is spawning ethnographic studies of Rastafarian
communities from South Africa to Cuba to Brazil to New Zealand to New York City to the Fiji islands. In the years to
come, scholars in anthropology, sociology, history, comparative religions, literature, and cultural studies will no doubt
add to our understanding of this socioreligious group, which started on the margins of Jamaican society but now
attracts and inspires people from across the globe.
APPENDIX 139


--- PAGE 155 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 156 ---
Notes
Introduction
1. Themovementis named afterRas Tafari, whichwas Haile Selassie's name beforehebecame emperorof Ethiopia
(one of the central tenets of the movement is the divinity of Selassie). Ras is a royal title similar to duke, and
Tafari is a family name. The movement is variously referred to asRastafari, “Ras Tafari,” or the“Rastafarian”
movement. In this study, I will use the formRastafari in a generic sense to refer to the totality of the experience
that constitutes the movement. I will refer to the movement as theRastafarian movement. When referring to an
individual member or members of the movement, I will useRasta or Rastas.
2. The movement has adherents in most Caribbean islands, North America, Brazil, the British isles, northern
Europe, Africa (particularly Nigeria, Ghana, and South Africa), New Zealand, Australia, and even Japan. See
Carole D. Yawney,“The Global Status of Rastafari,” Caribbean Times, July 10, 1990, p. 24.
3. According to the dictionary, entrench means “to place in a position of strength; to establishﬁrmly or solidly”
(Random House Dictionary of the English Language, unabridged ed., 1983); or“to establish securely,” often “used in
the passive voice or with a reﬂective pronoun (an ofﬁcial entrenched in ofﬁce)” (Webster's New World Dictionary of
American English, 3d college ed., 1988). My use of the wordentrenchment in this volume is intended to reﬂect these
meanings.
4. Anthony Wallace also uses the termroutinization to refer to theﬁnal stage of revitalization movements, although
his cursory treatment of the term only lasts for a short paragraph. Therefore, he adds nothing substantive to
Weber and comments that routinization usually takes place along the lines outlined by Weber. See Anthony
Wallace, “Revitalization Movements,” American Anthropologist 58 (1956): 275.
5. MaxWeber, Economy and Society: An Outline of Interpretive Sociology , 3 vols., edited by Guenther Roth and Claus
Wittich (New York: Bedminster, 1968), 1:246.
6. Leonard E. Barrett, The Rastafarians: Sounds of Cultural Dissonance (Boston: Beacon, 1988), 146.


--- PAGE 157 ---
7. Jack AnthonyJohnson-Hill, “Elements of an Afro-Caribbean SocialEthic:A Disclosure of theWorld of Rastafari
as a Liminal Process (Jamaica)” (Ph.D. diss., Vanderbilt University, 1988).
8. Neville Callam, “Invitation to Docility: Defusing the Rastafarian Challenge,” Caribbean Journal of Religious Studies3
(Sept. 1980): 28–29.
9. Ibid., 43 –44.
10. As will be made clear in chapter 5,houses refer to small, informal groups of Rastas, which usually form around
local leading Rastas.Mansions are intended to convey the idea of larger groups, usually communes or more formal
Rastafarian organizations.
11. The reader who has no interest in theﬁner points of sociological theory, but who is interested in the dynamics of
the Rastafarian movement itself, may skip chapter 1 and yet get a good understanding of Rastafari.
Chapter1
1. Lewis A. Coser, Masters of Sociological Thought: Ideas in Historical and Social Context , 2d ed. (New York: Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich, 1977), 228.
2. MaxWeber, The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism , translated by Talcott Parsons (New York: Scribner,
1958), 26–27.
3. Ibid., 27 –28; MaxWeber,Ancient Judaism, translated and edited by Hans Gerth and Don Martindale (Glencoe, Ill.:
Free Press, 1952),The Religion of India: The Sociology of Hinduism and Buddhism, translated and edited by Hans Gerth
and Don Martindale (New York: Free Press, 1967), andThe Religion of China, Confucianism and Taoism,translated
and edited by Hans Gerth and Don Martindale (New York: Collier and Macmillan, 1964).
4. Although Weber wants to emphasize the role of ideas as independent variables, he does not deny that ideas are
always interactive with social structures and material circumstances.
5. MaxWeber, The Sociology of Religion, translated by Ephraim Fischoff (Boston: Beacon, 1963), xxxii–xxxiii.
6. Hans H. Gerth and C. Wright Mills, ed.,From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology(London: Routledge and Kegan Paul,
1948), 56–57; Coser,Masters of Sociological Thought, 218–19.
7. Weber, Sociology of Religion,1 –2.
8. Anthony Orum, Introduction to Political Sociology: The Social Anatomy of the Body Politic, 3d ed. (EnglewoodCliffs, N.J.:
Prentice Hall, 1989), 70.
9. Weber, Protestant Ethic,8 8–90, 178, 180–81.
10. Orum, Political Sociology, 70.
11. Jonathan H. Turner, Leonard Beeghley, and Charles Power,The Emergence of Sociological Theory (Belmont, Calif.:
Dorsey, 1989), 215.
12. MaxWeber, Economy and Society: An Outline of Interpretive Sociology , 3 vols., edited by Guenther Roth and Claus
Wittich (New York: Bedminster, 1968), 1:241.
13. Weber, Sociology of Religion, xxxiii.
142 NOTES


--- PAGE 158 ---
14. Ibid., 46.
15. Ibid., 46 –47.
16. Weber, Economy and Society, 1:245.
17. Ibid., 1:243 –44.
18. Ibid., 1:244.
19. Ibid., 1:245.
20. Ibid., 3:1116.
21. Ibid.
22. Weber, Protestant Ethic, 181–82.
23. Weber, Economy and Society, 1:246.
24. Ibid., 1:212, 3:946.
25. Orum, Political Sociology, 67; Weber,Economy and Society, 1:112–13; Turner et al.,Sociological Theory, 214.
26. Orum, Political Sociology, 67; Weber,Economy and Society, 1:264.
27. Weber, Economy and Society, 1:213.
28. Ibid., 1:215, 226–41.
29. Ibid., 1:215, 217–26.
30. Ibid., 1:215, 241.
31. Ibid., 1:241.
32. Weber, Sociology of Religion,5 1 .
33. Weber, Economy and Society, 3:1115.
34. Ibid., 3:1117.
35. Ibid., 3:1112.
36. Ibid., 1:242; Reinhard Bendix, Max Weber: An Intellectual Portrait (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1960), 298.
37. Weber, Economy and Society, 1:242. In one sense, charisma inheres in the acclaim and devotion of followers as
much as in the exceptional qualities of the charismatic leader. In other words, followers cocreate and maintain
charismatic leaders.
38. Ibid., 3:1111.
39. Ibid., 3:1111 –12.
40. Ibid., 3:1117.
41. Ibid., 3:1134.
42. Turner et al., Sociological Theory, 215.
43. Weber, Economy and Society, 1:246, 3:1121.
44. Ibid., 1:246.
45. Ibid., 1:246 –50.
46. Ibid., 3:1123.
47. Ibid., 3:1121.
48. Ibid., 3:1122.
49. Ibid., 1:246 –49.
50. Though not pure charisma, depersonalized charisma is still charisma in the sense that it is a quality not available
totherank and ﬁleand in thesense that itremains thesourceof legitimationfor theexerciseofauthorityover the
masses.
NOTES 143


--- PAGE 159 ---
51. Weber, Economy and Society, 3:1135.
52. Ibid., 3:1121.
53. Theodore Long, “Prophecy, Charisma and Politics: Reinterpreting the Weberian Thesis,” in Prophetic Religions and
Politics: Religion and the Political Order, edited by Jeffrey K. Hadden and Anson Shupe (New York: Paragon, 1986),
7–10.
54. Peter L. Berger, “Charisma and Religious Innovation: The Social Location of Israelite Prophecy,” American
Sociological Review 28 (1963): 948.
55. Ibid., 949.
56. Weber, Sociology of Religion,4 7–48.
57. Weber, Economy and Society, 3:1132.
58. For rather extensive discussions of these theories, see Orum,Political Sociology; and Doug McAdam, John D.
McCarthy, and Mayer Zald,“Social Movements,” in Handbook of Sociology, edited by Neil J. Smelser (Newbury
Park, Calif.: Sage, 1988), 696–737.
59. John J. Macionis, Sociology, 2d ed. (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1989), 597–98; Orum, Political Sociology,
345–46; McAdam et al.,Handbook, 696.
60. Macionis, Sociology, 598; McAdam et al.,Handbook, 596.
61. Macionis, Sociology, 599–600; Orum, Political Sociology, 338–39.
62. Macionis, Sociology, 601; Orum, Political Sociology, 339–41; McAdam et al.,Handbook, 697.
63. Orum, Political Sociology, 350.
64. Ibid., 246 –47.
65. Weber, Economy and Society, 3:1120; see also 1111–12.
66. See Anthony Orum's discussion of social movements (Political Sociology, 332–52). Most of the social movements
mentioned are represented by bureaucratic organizations.
67. Ann Ruth Willner, Charismatic Political Leadership: A Theory (Princeton, N.J.: Center of International Studies,
Princeton University, 1968), 35.
68. Ibid., 35 –36. These conditions parallel the factors identiﬁed by the structural strain theory.
69. W
eber, Economy and Society, 3:1138.
70. Willner, Charismatic Political Leadership, 44.
71. Ibid., 47; Richard H. Dekmejian and Margaret J. Wyszomirski,“Charismatic Leadership in Islam: The Mahdi of
the Sudan,” Comparative Studies in Society and History 14, no. 2 (Mar. 1972): 194.
72. Willner, Charismatic Political Leadership, 45.
73. CurlewO. Thomas and Barbara Boston-Thomas,“Charisma and Charismatic Changes: A Study of a Black Sect,”
Free Inquiry in Creative Sociology 17, no. 1 (1989): 108–10.
74. Robert Alun Jones and Robert M. Anservitz,“Saint-Simon and Saint-Simonism: A Weberian View,” American
Journal of Sociology 10, no. 5 (Mar. 1975): 1109.
75. Ibid., 1098; Dekmejian and Wyszomirski,“Charismatic Leadership,” 195.
144 NOTES


--- PAGE 160 ---
76. Jones and Anservitz, “Saint-Simon,” 1098. The emphasis is mine.
77. Anthony F. C. Wallace,“Revitalization Movements,” American Anthropologist 58 (Apr. 1956): 270.
78. Jones and Anservitz, “Saint Simon,” 1107–9.
79. Ibid.
80. Ann Ruth Willner and Dorothy Willner,“The Rise of Charismatic Leaders,” Annals of the American Academy of
Political and Social Science 358 (1965): 83–84.
81. Dekmejian and Wyszomirski, “Charismatic Leadership,” 196.
82. Mayer N. Zald and Roberta Ash,“Social Movement Organizations: Growth, Decay and Change,” Social Forces44,
no. 3 (Mar. 1966): 327–42; see also Orum,Political Sociology, 352-54; and McAdam et al.,Handbook, 716–18.
83. Zald and Ash, “Social Movement Organizations,” 330.
84. Ibid.
85. Orum, Political Sociology, 332.
86. McAdam el al., Handbook, 716.
87. Thestructural straintheorists pointout thata lackof rigid socialcontrolis oneof theconditions necessary for the
rise and survival of new movements (see Orum,Political Sociology, 338). However, strict repressive actions have
often served to further radicalize new movements and to strengthen the resolve of their members to resist the
establishment. Furthermore, some movements have theﬂexibility to adapt to situations of either repression or
accommodation.
88. Paget Henry, “Indigenous Religions and the Transformation of Peripheral Societies,” in Prophetic Religions and
Politics: Religion and the Political Order, edited by Jeffrey K. Hadden and Anson Shupe (New York: Paragon, 1986),
124, 129–30.
89. Barry Chevannes, “Rastafari: Towards a New Approach,” New West Indian Guide 64, nos. 3–4 (1990): 138.
90. Jones and Anservitz, “Saint-Simon,” 1119–21.
91. Long, “Prophecy, Charisma and Politics,” 13. The quotation is from MaxWeber,The Theory of Social and Economic
Organization, translated by A. M. Henderson and Talcott Parsons (New York: Free Press, 1947), 363.
92. Long, “Prophecy, Charisma and Politics,” 14–
 16.
93. Berger, “Charisma,” 949–50.
Chapter2
1. John Paul Homiak, “The ‘Ancient of Days’ Seated Black: Eldership, Oral Tradition and Ritual in Rastafari
Culture” (Ph.D. diss., Brandeis University, 1985), 101–2.
2. Ibid., 132.
3. Samuel J. Hurwitz and Edith Hurwitz, Jamaica: A Historical Portrait (New York: Praeger, 1971), 175–78.
NOTES 145


--- PAGE 161 ---
4. RexNettleford, Mirror, Mirror: Identity, Race and Protest in Jamaica(Kingston, Jamaica: Collins and Sangster, 1970),
171–72.
5. Aggrey Brown, Color, Class, and Politics in Jamaica (New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction, 1979), 13, quoted by
Theodore Malloch,“Rastafarianism: A RadicalCaribbean Movement/Religion,” Center Journal4, no. 4 (Fall1985):
69.
6. Leahcim Semaj, “Race and Identity and Children of the African Diaspora: Contributions of Rastafari,” Caribe 4,
no. 4 (1980): 15.
7. Ibid.
8. Bob Marley and the Wailers, “One Drop,” on Survival, Island Records, 90088-4-7, 1979.
9. Patrick D. M. Taylor, “Perspectives on History in Rastafari Thought,” Studies in Religion19 (Nov. 1990): 194. Also
see Monica Schuler,“Myalism and the African Religious Tradition in Jamaica,” in Africa and the Caribbean: The
Legacies of a Link, edited by Margaret Graham and Franklin Knight (Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University
Press, 1979), 60.
10. Taylor, “Perspectives on History,” 195.
11. Dale Bisnauth, A History of Religions in the Caribbean(Kingston, Jamaica: Kingston Publishing, 1989), 83. Bisnauth
goes on to point out that after this insurrection the Jamaican legislature banned the practice of obeah because of
its fear that it would foment revolts. Of course, myal and obeah were confused.
12. In some Afro-Christian sects in Jamaica, notably revivalism and its predecessor, the Native Baptist movement,
the spiritual leader is referred to as“Daddy” or “Madda” (mother).
13. Bisnauth, History of Religions, 186.
14. Derek Bishton, Black Heart Man (London: Chatto and Windus, 1986), 10. Bishton argues that with increasing
contact between Europe and Africa, the maps began to change until
AETHIOPIA was replaced by Africa, in the
same manner that individual countries lost their names and were renamed by the Europeans. According to
Bishton, there seems to have been an ideological reason behind this, since the positive image of Ethiopia was
replaced by the concept of Africa as the“dark continent” (11).
15. Fascination with the greatness of Ethiopia predates the African diaspora. There is a long history of European
fascination with Ethiopia, dating back to the Greeks. With each succeeding generation, this fascination received
additional embellishment. At one point, Ethiopia was believed to be the kingdom of the fabled Prester John, a
supposed Christian king. The initial impulse of European explorationmay haveresulted from a desire to establish
alliance with this supposed Christian king (ibid., 10).
16. Bisnauth, History of Religions, 189.
17. Bishton, Black Heart Man, 63, 81.
18. Peter Clarke, Black Paradise: The Rastafarian Movement (Wellingborough, Northamptonshire, England: Aquarian,
1986), 30.
19. The tradition of linkingEthiopian's religionand monarchyto Solomon is set forthin theEthiopian legends of the
kings, theKebre Negest, which is
146
NOTES


--- PAGE 162 ---
translated as the Greatness of Kings. See Bishton,Black Heart Man, 11–19, for discussion of the Sheba legend.
20. Clarke, Black Paradise, 34.
21. Bishton, Black Heart Man, 82; Bisnauth,History of Religions, 186. Casely Hayford expressed these ideas in a book
entitled. Ethiopia Unbound: Studies in Race Emancipation (London: Cass, 1969),ﬁrst published in 1911.
22. Leonard E. Barrett, The Rastafarians: Sounds of Cultural Dissonance, rev. ed. (Boston: Beacon, 1988), 76.
23. Bishton, Black Heart Man, 100.
24. Ibid., 100 –101.
25. Taylor, “Perspectives on History,” 198.
26. Robert A. Hill, “Leonard P. Howell and Millenarian Visions in Early Rastafari,” Jamaica Journal 16, no. 1 (1983):
26–27.
27. Amy Jacques-Garvey, ed., Philosophy and Opinions of Marcus Garvey (New York: Atheneum, 1974), 140–41.
28. Barrett, Rastafarians, 7, quoting Robert Hill and Barbara Bair,Marcus Garvey: Life and Lessons(Berkeley: University
of California Press, 1987), 20.
29. Jacques-Garvey, Philosophy, 68.
30. Psalm 68:31; Barrett, Rastafarians, 78.
31. Barrett, Rastafarians, 79.
32. Bisnauth, History of Religions, 187.
33. Hill, “Leonard P. Howell,” 26.
34. The factthatno documentationhas been found in Garvey's writings for this predictionhaveled some scholars to
believethat it was fabricated by theearly exponents of Rastafari. However, it is likely thatGarvey made some oral
declaration to that import and that it was kept alive in the memory of people steeped in oral tradition.
35. Haile Selassie means “power of the trinity.”
36. Ivor Morrish, Obeah, Christ and Rastaman: Jamaica and Its Religion (Cambridge: Clarke, 1982), 69.
37. Bisnauth, History of Religions, 189.
38. This raises a question concerning the possibility of multiple charismatic personalities being active in the founding
of a single movement.
39. M. G. Smith, Roy Augier, and RexNettleford,The Rastafari Movement in Kingston, Jamaica(Mona, Jamaica: Institute
of Social and Economic Research, University College of the West Indies, 1960), 6.
40. Hill, “Leonard P. Howell,” 28.
41. Malloch, “Rastafarianism, ” 74; Smith et al.,Rastafari, 7.
42. Barrett, Rastafarians , 85.
43. Smith et al., Rastafari, 7.
44. Ibid., 8; Hill, “Leonard P. Howell,” 36; Horace Campbell,Rasta and Resistance: From Marcus Garvey to Walter Rodney
(Trenton, N.J.: African World, 1987), 94; Bishton,Black Heart Man, 117.
45. Morrish, Obeah, 71; Smith et al.,Rastafari, 9.
46. Morrish, Obeah, 71; Smith et al.,Rastafari, 9.
NOTES 147


--- PAGE 163 ---
47. Barrett, Rastafarians, 87.
48. Members of the movement who distinguish themselves as uncompromising exponents of Rastafari are often
referred to as“leading lights.”
49. Barrett, Rastafarians, 87.
50. Hill, “Leonard P. Howell,” 34.
51. Taylor, “Perspectives on History,” 198.
52. Bishton, Black Heart Man, 111.
53. Ibid.
54. Hill, “Leonard P. Howell,” 30.
55. Ibid., 35.
56. This name obviouslyhas an East Indian origin. Reportedly, Howelladopted it through the inﬂuence of one of his
lieutenants, who was an East Indian with Hindu connections (Taylor,“Perspectives on History,” 199). This raises
the question of East Indian inﬂuences on Rastafari, which has been discussed in the literature. For some
indicationof the issues involved, see Ajai Mansingh and Laxmi Mansingh,“Hindu Inﬂuences on Rastafarianism,”
Rastafari (Kingston, Jamaica: Caribbean Quarterly, University of the West Indies, 1985): 96–115 (this is a
collection of essays published by Caribbean Quarterly as a monograph. Most of the essays were previously
published in Caribbean Quarterly 26, no. 4 in 1980); and Kenneth Bilby, “The Holy Herb: Notes on the
Background of Cannabis in Jamaica,” Rastafari (Kingston, Jamaica: Caribbean Quarterly, University of the West
Indies, 1985), 82–95.
57. Taylor, “Perspectives on History,” 199; Hill,“Leonard P. Howell,” 35.
58. Hill, “Leonard P. Howell,” 34–35.
59. Barry Chevannes, “Era of the Dreadlocks,” unpublished manuscript, n.d., 10.
60. MaxWeber, The Sociology of Religion, translated by Ephraim Fischoff (Boston: Beacon, 1963), xxxiii.
Chapter3
1. MaxWeber, Economy and Society: An Outline of Interpretative Sociology, 3 vols., edited by Guenther Roth and Claus
Wittich (New York: Bedminster, 1968), 3:1115, 1117.
2. Anthony Wallace, “Revitalization Movements,” American Anthropologist 58 (Apr. 1956): 265.
3. Ibid., 269.
4. During the African slave trade, from the seventeenth to the nineteenth centuries, each slave ship would make a
triangular journey from Europe to Africa, from Africa to the Americas, and from the Americas back to Europe.
The leg of the journey from Africa to the Americas is referred to as the Middle Passage. The use of the term is
often meant to suggest the physical squalor and psychic trauma faced by the human cargo during this journey.
5. I am using delegitimation to refer to thefact thattheRastafarian ideology, by assigning an evilstatus totheJamaican
establishment, has effectively
148
NOTES


--- PAGE 164 ---
destroyed the establishment's legitimacy in the eyes of Rastas. While the rest of the society may take the inherited
colonial culture and institutions for granted, they have lost that status for Rastas.
6. Ernest Cashmore, Rastaman: The Rastafarian Movement in England (Boston: Unwin, 1983), 129.
7. Ibid.
8. Ibid., 130.
9. Patrick D. M. Taylor, “Perspectiveson History in Rastafari Thought,” Studies in Religion19, no. 1 (Nov. 1990): 191.
10. This stone is generally interpreted as a symbolic prophecy of Israel's messiah.
11. Dennis Forsythe, Rastafari: For the Healingof the Nation (Kingston, Jamaica: Zaika, 1983), 91.
12. Joseph Owens, Dread: The Rastafarians of Jamaica (Kingston, Jamaica: Sangster's, 1976), 69–70.
13. The Nyabinghi Order are those Rastas who take the strictest and most uncompromising stance against
involvement with Babylon. In theological terms, they represent the fundamentalist element in the Rastafarian
movement.
14. John Paul Homiak, “The ‘Ancient of Days’ Seated Black: Eldership, Oral Tradition and Ritual in Rastafari
Culture” (Ph.D. diss., Brandeis University, 1985), 510.
15. Quoted in Horace Campbell, Rasta and Resistance: From Marcus Garvey to Walter Rodney (Trenton, N.J.: African
World, 1987), 135.
16. Forsythe, Rastafari, 91.
17. Bob Marley and the Wailers,“Talkin' Blues,” on Talkin' Blues, Island Records, 848243-4, 1991.
18. Owens, Dread, 74-80.
19. Ibid., 70.
20. Ibid., 88.
21. Ibid., 70, 71.
22. Ibid., 70, 73.
23. Bob Marley and the Wailers,“RedemptionSong,” on Songs of Freedoncompilation, Island Records, 414-514 432-2,
1999.
24. Bob Marley and the Wailers,“Slave Driver,” on Talkin' Blues.
25. Burning Spear, “Do You Remember the Days of Slavery?” (recorded at a live performance in Reggae Park, St
Anns, Jamaica, May 1991).
26. Bob Marley and the Wailers,“Survival,” on Survival, Island Records, 90088-4-7, 1979; Michael N. Jagessar,“JPIC
and Rastafarians,” One World, Feb. 1991, p. 17.
27. Bob Marley and the Wailers,“Burnin' and Lootin',”on Talkin' Blues.
28. Cashmore, Rastaman,1 7 3 .
29. Ibid., 177.
30. Bob Marley and the Wailers,“Pimper's Paradise,” on Uprising, Island Records, 422-846211-4, 1980.
NOTES 149


--- PAGE 165 ---
31. Bob Marley and the Wailers,“Babylon System,” on Survival.
32. Bob Marley and the Wailers,“Crazy Baldhead,” on Rastaman Vibration, Island Records, 422-846205-4, 1976.
33. Bob Marley and the Wailers,“Rat Race,” on Rastaman Vibration.
34. K. M. Williams, The Rastafarians (London: Ward Lock, 1981), 27.
35. Marley, “Crazy Baldhead,” on Rastaman Vibration.
36. Klaus de Albuquerque, “The Future of the Rastafarian Movement,” Caribbean Review 8, no. 4 (1979): 44; Owens,
Dread, 75.
37. Walter Rodney, Groundings with My Brothers (London: Bogle L'Ouverture, 1969), 10.
38. Williams, Rastafarians, 27. Ironically, Haile Selassie Secondary School was among the schools that refused to
accept children with dreadlocks.
39. Bongo Jerry, “MABRAK,” in The Penguin Book of Caribbean Verse in English, edited by Paula Burnett (London:
Penguin, 1986), 70–71.
40. Marley, “Babylon System,” on Survival.
41. Owens, Dread, 81, 85.
42. Bob Marley and the Wailers,“Revolution,” on Talkin' Blues.
43. Marley, “Babylon System,” on Survival.
44. Jack AnthonyJohnson-Hill, “Elements of an Afro-Caribbean SocialEthic:A Disclosure of theWorld of Rastafari
as a Liminal Process (Jamaica)” (Ph.D. diss., Vanderbilt University, 1988), 360.
45. RexNettleford, Mirror, Mirror: Identity, Race and Protest in Jamaica(Kingston, Jamaica: Collins and Sangster, 1970),
60.
46. Mikey Smith, “Tell Me,” quoted by Johnson-Hill,“Afro-Caribbean Social Ethic,” 362.
47. Marley, “Crazy Baldhead,” on Rastaman Vibration.
48.
Mikey Smith,“Dread,” quoted by Johnson-Hill,“Afro-Caribbean Social Ethic,” 364.
49. Bob Marley and the Wailers,“Ambush in the Night,” on Survival, Island Records, 90088-4-7, 1979.
50. Paget Henry, “Indigenous Religions and the Transformation of Peripheral Societies,” in Prophetic Religions and
Politics: Religion and the Political Order, edited by Jeffrey K. Hadden and Anson Shupe (New York: Paragon, 1986),
135.
51. Ibid.
52. Marley, “Crazy Baldhead,” on Rastaman Vibration.
53. Marley, “Babylon System,” on Survival.
54. de Albuquerque, “Future,”45.
55. Linden F. Lewis,“Living in theHeart of Babylon: Rastafari in theUSA,” Bulletin of Eastern Caribbean Affairs15, no.
1 (Mar.–Apr. 1989): 22.
56. I Jabulani Tafari, “The Rastafari: Successors of Marcus Garvey, ” Rastafari (Kingston, Jamaica: Caribbean
Quarterly, University of the West Indies, 1985), 2.
57. Laurence A. Breiner, “The English Bible in Jamaican Rastafarianism,” Journal of Religious Thought 42, no. 2
(Fall–Winter 1985–86): 35.
150 NOTES


--- PAGE 166 ---
58. Nettleford, Mirror, Mirror, 47.
59. Leahcim Semaj, “Rastafari: From Religion to Social Theory,” Rastafari (Kingston, Jamaica: Caribbean Quarterly,
University of the West Indies, 1985), 22.
60. Ibid., 23.
61. Claudia Rogers, “What's a Rasta?” Caribbean Review 7, no. 1 (Jan.–Mar. 1977): 10.
62. Barry Chevannes, “Case of Jah versus Society: Rastafari Exorcism of the Ideology of Racism in Jamaica,” Social
Movement Seminary Paper 1 (1989): 7.
63. Dennis Forsythe, “West Indian Culture through the Prism of Rastafarianism,” Rastafari (Kingston, Jamaica:
Caribbean Quarterly, University of the West Indies, 1985), 64.
64. Ibid.
65. Ibid., 62.
66. Leahcim Semaj, “Race and Identity and Children of the African Diaspora: Contributions of Rastafari,” Caribe 4,
no. 4 (1980): 17.
67. Ibid.
68. Ibid.
69. Lewis, “Living in the Heart of Babylon,” 22.
70. Ajai Mansingh and Laxmi Mansingh, “Hindu Inﬂuences on Rastafarianism,” Rastafari (Kingston, Jamaica:
Caribbean Quarterly, University of the West Indies, 1985), 112.
71. Cashmore, Rastaman, 60.
72. Ibid., 62.
73. I and I has several levels of importance for Rastas. Here it indicates the Rastafarian belief that the divine essence
inheres in all human beings and that through it they can experience unity with the Creator. Later in this chapter, I
will explore the concept of I and I more fully.
74. Taylor, “Perspectives on History,” 201.
75. Chevannes, “Jah versus Society,” 11.
76. Ibid., 12; also see Williams,Rastafarians, 24.
77. In the late 1960s and early 1970s, middle-class academics and university students were converted to this point of
view. Socialistpoliticians also became convinced that thefuture of the societylay in addressing theconditionsthat
gave rise to this sentiment. Hence the People's National Party appealed to the poor using Rastafarian and
revivalist symbolisms (Williams,Rastafarians,2 5 ) .
78. Chevannes, “Jah versus Society,” 12; M. G. Smith, Roy Augier, and RexNettleford,The Rastafari Movement in
Kingston, Jamaica (Mona, Jamaica: Institute of Social and Economic Research, University College of the West
Indies, 1960), 12–13.
79. Among Rastas, there are divergent views about the meaning and means of repatriation. Some insist on a physical
relocation to Africa/ Ethiopia. For others, repatriation is the psychological and cultural reappropriation
NOTES 151


--- PAGE 167 ---
of their African identity and culture. Some expect repatriation by divine intervention, some by the Jamaican or
British governments as a gesture of restitution, and others by means of their own rational efforts.
80. Cashmore, Rastaman,2 4 1 .
81. Williams, Rastafarians,1 5 .
82. Cashmore, Rastaman,1 6 0 .
83. The Anancy/Spider stories are part of the African retention in the Caribbean, a carry-over from the folklore of
West Africa. However, theyhave been modiﬁed to reﬂect the realities of plantationslavery and the entire colonial
complex.
84. Daryl C. Dance, Folklore from Contemporary Jamaicans (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1985), 12.
85. W. E. B. Du Bois,The Souls of Black Folk,i nWritings, edited by Nathan Huggins (New York: Literary Classics of
the United States, 1986), 503.
86. Forsythe, Rastafari, 73.
87. Anancyism has come to describe the attitude or practice of“beating the system.”
88. Forsythe, Rastafari, 74.
89. Forsythe, “West Indian Culture,” 73.
90. One story tells of how Anancy deliberately gave all of his food to his wife and children, leaving himself with
nothing. This act made him look altruistic. However, his family, seeing that he had nothing to eat, felt such a
sympathy for him that each of them gave him half the portion each had received. Of course, he ended up with
half of the total available ration, which was his desire in theﬁrst place.
91. Campbell, Rasta and Resistance, 99.
92. Forsythe, Rastafari, 81.
93. Forsythe, “West Indian Culture,” 75.
94. Ibid., 73.
95. Forsythe, Rastafari, 53.
96. Ibid., 52; Forsythe, “West Indian Culture,” 76.
97. Forsythe, Rastafari, 102.
98. Leonard Barrett, The Rastafarians: Sounds of Cultural Dissonance (Boston: Beacon, 1988), 142.
99. Diane J. Austin-Broos,“Pentecostals and Rastafarians: Cultural, Political and Gender Relations of Two Religious
Movements,” Social and Economic Studies 36, no. 4 (Dec. 1987): 20.
100. Forsythe,Rastafari, 101.
101. Austin-Broos,“Pentecostals and Rastafarians,” 21.
102. Forsythe,“West Indian Culture,” 73.
103. Smith et al.,Rastafari,9 .
104. Campbell,Rasta and Resistance, 96.
105. Williams,Rastafarians, 15; Barry Chevannes,“Era of the Dreadlocks,” unpu
 blished manuscript, n.d., 15.
152 NOTES


--- PAGE 168 ---
106. Theodore Malloch,“Rastafarianism: A RadicalCaribbean Movement/Religion,” Center Journal4, no. 4 (Fall1985):
74.
107. Chevannes,“Era of Dreadlocks,” 15.
108. Cashmore, Rastaman,1 5 8 .
109. Chevannes,“Era of Dreadlocks,” 15.
110. Semaj, “Rastafari,” 29.
111. Rogers,“What's a Rasta?” 11–12.
112. Ibid., 11.
113. Williams,Rastafarians,2 3–25; Rogers,“What's a Rasta?” 10.
114. Some Rastas seldom use the wordganja. They regard it as Babylon's derogatory label for the holy herb.
115. Rogers,“What's a Rasta?” 12.
116. Vera Rubin and Lambros Comitas,Ganja in Jamaica (The Hague: Mouton, 1975).
117. Kenneth Bilby,“The Holy Herb: Noteson theBackground of Cannabis in Jamaica,” Rastafari (Kingston, Jamaica:
Caribbean Quarterly, University of the West Indies, 1985), 85.
118. The emphases are mine.
119. The emphasis is mine. Rastafarian biblical hermeneutics isﬂuid and expedient. When necessary, Rastas will yank
a verse or a word out of context to prove a point. However, when the obvious meaning of a passage seems to
disprove a particular Rastafarian notion, they will dismiss it as an interpolation by the white editors, especially of
the King James Version. It seems the truth is what Rastas have come to intuitively. Biblical authority is invokedto
legitimize preconceived notions. See Breiner's discussion of Rastafarian interpretiveﬂuidity in“English Bible,”
370.
120. Sebastian Clarke,Jah Music: The Evolution of the Popular Jamaican Song (London: Heinemann, 1980), 49; Forsythe,
“West Indian Culture,” 71.
121. Rogers,“What's a Rasta?” 12.
122. Carole D. Yawney,“Dread Wasteland: Rastafarian Ritual in West Kingston, Jamaica,” in Ritual, Symbolism and
Ceremonialism in the Americas: Studies in Symbolic Anthropology, edited by N. Ross Crumrine (Greenley, Colo.: Museum
of Anthropology, University of Northern Colorado, 1978), 165; also see Bilby,“Holy Herb,” 88.
123. Yawney,“Dread Wasteland,” 169; also see Bilby,“Holy Herb,” 88.
124. Carol
e D. Yawney,“Lions in Babylon: The Rastafarians of Jamaica as a Visionary Movement” (Ph.D. diss.,
McGill University, 1978), 213; also see Bilby,“Holy Herb,” 88.
125. Yawney,“Dread Wasteland,” 169.
126. Forsythe,Rastafari, 118–20.
127. Forsythe,“West Indian Culture,” 72.
128. Chevannes,“Era of the Dreadlocks,” 16.
129. Cashmore, Rastaman,1 6 7 .
130. Breiner,“English Bible,” 38.
NOTES 153


--- PAGE 169 ---
131. Carolyn Cooper,“Chanting Down Babylon: Bob Marley's Song as Literary Text,” Jamaica Journal 19, no. 4 (Nov.
1986–Jan. 987): 7; Malika Lee Whitney and Dermott Hussey,Bob Marley: Reggae King of the World (Kingston,
Jamaica: Kingston Publishers, 1984), 115.
132. For an analysis of the Rastafarian approach to language, see Velma Pollard,“The Social History of Dread Talk,”
Caribbean Quarterly 28, no. 2 (Dec. 1982): 17–40. Also see Velma Pollard,“Dread Talk: The Speech of the
Rastafarian in Jamaica,” Rastafari (Kingston, Jamaica: Caribbean Quarterly, University of the West Indies, 1985),
32–41.
133. Williams,Rastafarians,2 2 .
134. Pollard,“Dread Talk,” 32.
135. RexNettleford, introduction to Owens,Dread, ix.
136. Bongo Jerry, in Burnett,Caribbean Verse,7 0–71.
137. Cashmore, Rastaman,1 6 3
138. Williams,Rastafarians,2 2 .
139. Ibid.
140. Cashmore, Rastaman,6 7 .
141. In Jamaican patois,me or mi is used as both object and subject. In Rastafarian understanding (or“overstanding,”
as Rastas wouldsay), this is an indicationthat people conceivethemselvesas objects. In contrast, Rastas useI and
I and I in all cases and all persons to indicate that all people are active, creative agents and not passive objects.
142. Becky Michele Mulvaney,“Rhythms of Resistance: On Rhetoric and Reggae Music” (Ph.D. diss., University of
Iowa, 1985), 74.
143. Tafari,“Rastafari,” 3.
144. Breiner,“English Bible,” 39.
145. Owens,Dread, 3; Breiner,“English Bible,” 39.
146. Rogers,“What's a Rasta?”12.
147. Henry,“Indigenous Religions,” 131–32.
148. de
Albuquerque, “Future,” 44.
149. Ibid.
150. Henry,“Indigenous Religions,” 134–35.
Chapter4
1. Barry Chevannes, “Rastafari: Towards a New Approach,” New West Indian Guide 64, nos. 3–4 (1990): 137.
2. Carole D. Yawney, “Lions in Babylon: The Rastafarians of Jamaica as a Visionary Movement” (Ph.D. diss.,
McGill University, 1978), 102.
3. Carole D. Yawney, “Dread Wasteland: Rastafarian Ritual in West Kingston, Jamaica,” in Ritual, Symbolism and
Ceremonialism in the Americas: Studies in Symbolic Anthropology, edited by N. Ross Crumrine (Greenley, Colo.: Museum
of Anthropology, University of Northern Colorado, 1978), 156.
4. Yawney, “Lions in Babylon,” 107.
5. Chevannes, “Rastafari,” 138.
154 NOTES


--- PAGE 170 ---
6. Velma Pollard, “The Social History of Dread Talk,” Caribbean Quarterly 28, no. 2 (Dec. 1982): 17.
7. See Ernst Troeltsch, The Social Teachingof the Christian Churches, translated by Olive Wyon (New York: Macmillan,
1931), 377–78, 745, 993.
8. Yards as a sociological category are not distinct to Rastas. They represent the practice of poor urban dwellers,
who often congregate in someone's yard to share ideas or rumors, discuss politics, or engage in communal
activities, such as playing dominoes.
9. Barry Chevannes, “Era of the Dreadlocks,” unpublished manuscript, n.d., 13.
10. The Rastafarian argot and Jamaican patois usebrethren as both singular and plural.
11. Chevannes, “Era of the Dreadlocks,” 13; Chevannes,“Rastafari,” 138.
12. John Paul Homiak, “The ‘Ancient of Days’ Seated Black: Eldership, Oral Tradition and Ritual in Rastafari
Culture” (Ph.D. diss., Brandeis University, 1985), 355.
13. Chevannes, “Rastafari,” 138.
14. Barry Chevannes, Rastafari: Roots and Ideology (Syracuse, N.Y.: Syracuse University Press, 1994), 171–4.
15. Ibid., 179.
16. Yawney, “Lions in Babylon,” 108–10.
17. Ibid., 58.
18. Ibid., 108.
19. Ernest Cashmore, Rastaman: The Rastafarian Movement in England (Boston: Unwin, 1983), 126.
20. Laurence A. Breiner, “The English Bible in Jamaican Rastafarianism,” Journal of Religious Thought 42, no. 2
(Fall–Winter 1985–86): 37.
21. Chevannes, “Rastafari,” 137. There are only a few instances in which there is any semblance of hierarchical
organization: the Twelve Tribes of Israel, Prince Emmanuel Edwards's Bobo Dreads, and Henry's Peacemakers
Association are some examples. Even in these cases, the group is dominated more by the personality of the
leaders than by rational principles.
22. Chevannes, “Era of the Dreadlocks,” 12.
23. Sebastian Clarke, Jah Music: The Evolution of the Popular Jamaican Song (London: Heinemann, 1980), 5.
24. Breiner, “English Bible,” 37. The“democracy” is mainly among men. Traditionally, the Rastafarian movement is
patriarchal, with explicit ideas about female subordination. However, there is some indication that the role of
women within the movement is changing. For a discussion of the traditional and changing roles of women in the
Rastafarian Movement, see Maureen Rowe,“The Woman in Rastafari,” Rastafari (Kingston, Jamaica: Caribbean
Quarterly, University of the West Indies, 1985), 13–21.
25. Y
awney, “Lions in Babylon,” 301–2.
26. Rasta Speaks, June–July 1983, p. 17.
27. Yawney, “Lions in Babylon,” 110.
NOTES 155


--- PAGE 171 ---
28. Homiak, “‘ Ancient of Days,’” 407.
29. Chevannes, “Rastafari,” 143.
30. Yawney, “Lions in Babylon,” 258–60, 343.
31. Abner Cohen, Two-Dimensional Man(London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1974), quoted by Cashmore,Rastaman,
152.
32. Cashmore, Rastaman,1 5 2 .
33. Paget Henry, “Indigenous Religions and the Transformation of Peripheral Societies,” in Prophetic Religions and
Politics: Religion and the Political Order, edited by Jeffrey K. Hadden and Anson Shupe (New York: Paragon, 1986),
124.
34. Cashmore, Rastaman,1 5 4 .
35. Yawney, “Lions in Babylon,” 9.
36. Carole D. Yawney, “Remnant of All Nations: Rastafarian Attitudes to Race and Nationality,” in Ethnicity in the
Americas, edited by Francis Henry (The Hague: Mouton, 1976), 232.
37. Cashmore, Rastaman, 137. The emphasis is mine.
38. Ibid., 151.
39. Homiak, “‘ Ancientof Days,’” 512. In thecontext of theyard, ganja smoking and reasoning are traditionallymale
activities. Women are mostly excluded from the circle in which the chalice is passed and in which reasoning takes
place.Males are expected to“educate” the“sistren.” Women, however, take active parts in NyabinghiI-ssemblies,
though the males dominate. See Rowe,“Woman in Rastafaris,” 15–16.
40. Spliffs are huge, conical marijuana cigars.Chalice is the ritual name for either of the two pipes used in the ritual
smoking of ganja. One is called thekochi (also cutchie), a kind of water pipe with a bowl on the top to hold the
ganja. This is of African origin. The other is called thechillum, a conical or cylindrical pipe of East Indian origin.
See Kenneth Bilby,“The Holy Herb: Notes on the Background of Cannabis in Jamaica,” Rastafari (Kingston,
Jamaica: Caribbean Quarterly, University of the West Indies, 1985], 87).
41. Yoshiko S. Nagashima, Rastafarian Music in Contemporary Jamaica: A Study of the Socioreligious Music of the Rastafarian
Movement in Jamaica (Tokyo: Institute for the Study of Languages and Cultures of Asia and Africa, 1984), 115.
42. K. M. Williams, The Rastafarians (London: Ward Lock, 1981), 20.
43. Y
awney, “Lions in Babylon,” 213.
44. Williams, Rastafarian, 20.
45. Yawney, “Lions in Babylon,” 201.
46. Ibid., 216. The emphasis is mine.
47. Yawney, “Remnant of All Nations,” 239.
48. Yawney, “Lions in Babylon,” 216.
49. Ibid., 216; Yawney, “Remnant of All Nations,” 243.
50. Cashmore, Rastaman,6 4 .
51. Yawney, “Lions in Babylon,” 102.
52. Nagashima, Rastafarian Music, 116.
156
NOTES


--- PAGE 172 ---
53. Homiak, “‘ Ancient of Days,’” 512.
54. Rastology is a term used sometimes to refer to the Rastafarian world view, ideology, or theology.
55. Williams, Rastafarians, 18.
56. Verena Reckford, “Rastafarian Music: An Introductory Study,” Jamaica Journal 11, nos. 1–2 (1977): 9.
57. Homiak, “‘ Ancient of Days,’” 361.
58. Reckford, “Rastafarian Music,” 9.
59. For a discussion of the conventions and their publicity, see M. G. Smith, Roy Augier, and RexNettleford,The
Rastafari Movement in Kingston, Jamaica (Mona, Jamaica: Institute of Social and Economic Research, University
College of the West Indies, 1960), 14–15; and Clarke,Jah Music, 47.
60. Homiak, “‘ Ancient of Days,’” 361.
61. Ibid., 401.
62. Back O' Wall was a slum in West Kingston, which the Jamaican government bulldozed because of its association
with endemic criminality. I will say more about this later.
63. Homiak, “‘ Ancient of Days,’” 367.
64. Williams, Rastafarians, 18.
65. Ibid., 20.
66. Yawney, “Lions in Babylon,” 54.
67. Homiak, “‘ Ancient of Days,’” 362–72, 382–85.
Chapter5
1. Robert A. Hill, “Leonard P. Howell and Millenarian Visions in Early Rastafari,” Jamaica Journal 16, no. 1 (Feb.
1983): 38.
2. George Eaton Simpson, “The Ras Tafari Movement in Jamaica: A Study in Race and Class Conﬂict,” Social Forces
34, no. 2 (1955): 168.
3. Hill, “Leonard P. Howell,” 34; Leonard Barrett,The Rastafarians: Sounds of Cultural Dissonance, rev. ed. (Boston:
Beacon, 1988), 85.
4. Barry Chevannes, “Era of the Dreadlocks,” unpublished manuscript, n.d., 17–19.
5. Ibid., 14.
6. Ibid.
7. Baldheads are non-Rastas; the term is intended as the antithesis of“dreadlocks.”
8. M. G. Smith, Roy Augier, and RexNettleford,The Rastafari Movement in Kingston, Jamaica(Mona, Jamaica: Institute
of Social and Economic Research, University College of the West Indies, 1960), 9.
9. It is common practice in the rural areas of Jamaica to make footpaths as shortcuts across open land.
10. Derek Bishton, Black Heart Man(London: Chatto and Windus, 1986), 122; Horace Campbell,Rasta and Resistance:
From Marcus Garvey to Walter Rodney (Trenton, N.J.: African World, 1987), 106–7.
NOTES 157


--- PAGE 173 ---
11. Hill, “Leonard P. Howell,” 34.
12. Chevannes, “Era of the Dreadlocks,” 4–5.
13. Ernest Cashmore, Rastaman: The Rastafarian Movement in England (Boston: Unwin, 1983), 48.
14. Daily Gleaner (Jamaica) Apr. 30, 1960, quoted by W. Errol Bowen,“Rastafarism and the New Society,” Savacou 5
(June 1975): 41.
15. Bishton, Black Heart Man, 122. The emphases are mine.
16. Campbell, Rasta and Resistance, 93.
17. Bishton, Black Hearet Man, 122.
18. Linden F. Lewis,“Living in theHeart of Babylon: Rastafari in theUSA,” Bulletin of Eastern Caribbean Affairs15, no.
1 (Mar.–Apr. 1989): 24.
19. Ivor Morrish, Obeah, Christ and Rastaman: Jamaica and Its Religions (Cambridge: Clarke, 1982), 71.
20. Bishton, Black Heart Man, 117.
21. Yoshiko S. Nagashima, Rastafarian Music in Contemporary Jamaica: A Study of the Socioreligious Music of the Rastafarian
Movement in Jamaica (Tokyo: Institute for the Study of Languages and Cultures of Asia and Africa, 1984), 19.
22. Morrish, Obeah, 71; Smith et al.,Rastafari, 8.
23. Smith et al., Rastafari, 9, 11; Morrish,Obeah, 71–72.
24. Smith et al., Rastafari, 11.
25. Morrish, Obeah, 72–73; Smith et al.,Rastafari, 14–15.
26. Morrish, Obeah, 73.
27. Smith et al., Rastafari, 16.
28. The Morant Bay Rebellionwas a peasant revoltprotesting theeconomic hardships of the earlypost-emancipation
era. Paul Bogle and William Gordon, two of Jamaica's national heroes, were key players in this revolt.
29. Smith et al., Rastafari, 27; also see Campbell,Rasta and Resistance, 104.
30. Barry Chevannes, “Case of Jah versus Society: Rastafari Exorcism of the Ideology of Racism in Jamaica,” Social
Movement Seminar Paper 1 (1989): 16.
31. Campbell, Rasta and Resistance,106–7; RexNettleford, Mirror, Mirror: Identity, Race and Protest in Jamaica(Kingst on,
Jamaica: Collins and Sangster, 1970), 79–80.
32. Bishton, Black Heart Man, 122.
33. Daily Gleaner (Jamaica), Oct. 19, 1963, quoted by Carole Yawney,“Lions in Babylon: The Rastafarians of Jamaica
as Visionary Movement” (Ph.D. diss., McGill University, 1978), 53.
34. K. M. Williams, The Rastafarians (London: Ward Lock, 1981), 40.
35. Chevannes, “Jah versus Society,” 17; Yawney,“Lions in Babylon,” 52.
36. Smith et al., Rastafari, 27.
37. Nettleford, Mirror, Mirror, 44.
38. By recommending that the possibility of repatriation be investigated, the study team declared, in effect, that the
doctrine of repatriation was not a fanciful dream of deluded people but a legitimate desire of a people wanting
158 NOTES


--- PAGE 174 ---
to return to their ancestral home from which their forebears had been forcibly removed.
39. Smith et al., Rastafari, 33–38; Yawney,“Lions in Babylon,” 52.
40. Nettleford, Mirror, Mirror, 54.
41. Ibid., 55 –56; Chevannes,“Jah versus Society,” 17.
42. Nettleford, Mirror, Mirror, 57; Nagashima,Rastafarian Music, 123.
43. Douglas R. A. Mack, From Babylon to Rastafari: Origin and History of the Rastafarian Movement (Chicago: Research
Associates School Times Publications, 1999), 94–115.
44. Nettleford, Mirror, Mirror, 70.
45. Rupert Lewis, “Black Nationalism in Jamaica in Recent Years,” in Perspectives on Jamaica in the Seventies, edited by
Carl Stone and Aggrey Brown (Kingston, Jamaica: Jamaica Publishing, 1981), 68.
46. John Paul Homiak, “The ‘Ancient of Days’ Seated Black: Eldership, Oral Tradition and Ritual in Rastafari
Culture” (Ph.D. diss., Brandeis University, 1985), 372.
47. Nettleford, Mirror, Mirror, 62.
48. Homiak, “‘ Ancient of Days,’” 328; also see Nettleford,Mirror, Mirror,5 8–78.
49. Nettleford, Mirror, Mirror, 62.
50. Barrett, Rastafarians, 160.
51. Nettleford, Mirror, Mirror, 44.
52. Morrish, Obeah, 95.
53. Nagashima, Rastafarian Music, 118.
54. Morrish, Obeah, 95.
55. Nettleford, Mirror, Mirror, 109. There have been disagreements between Rastas and church ofﬁcials concerning
the status of Haile Selassie in the Ethiopian Orthodoxchurch.
56. Anita M. Waters, Race, Class, and Political Symbols: Rastafari and Reggae in Jamaican Politics (New Brunswick, N.J.:
Transactional, 1984), 94.
57. Walter Rodney, Groundings with My Brothers (London: Bogle L'Ouverture, 1969), 8.
58. Ibid., 61.
59. Theodore Malloch, “Rastafarianism: A Radical Caribbean Movement/ Religion,” Center Journal 4, no. 4 (Fall
1985): 79.
60. Rodney
, Groundings, 64.
61. Waters, Race, Class, and Political Symbols, 94.
62. Ibid., 85 –86.
63. Ibid., 96.
64. Nettleford, Mirror, Mirror, 61.
65. Carole Yawney, “Dread Wasteland: Rastafarian Ritual in West Kingston, Jamaica,” in Ritual, Symbolism and
Ceremonialism in the Americas: Studies in Symbolic Anthropology, edited by N. Ross Crumrine (Greenley; Colo:Museum
of Anthropology, University of Northern Colorado, 1978), 176.
66. Nettleford, Mirror, Mirror, 46.
NOTES 159


--- PAGE 175 ---
67. Ibid., 46 –47; also see Chevannes,“Jah versus Society,” 19.
68. Barry Chevannes, “Rastafari: Towards a New Approach,” New West Indian Guide 64, nos. 3–4 (1990): 129–30.
69. Nettleford, Mirror, Mirror, 77.
70. Carole Yawney, “Remnant of All Nations: Rastafarian Attitudes to Race and Nationality,” in Ethnicity in the
Americas, edited by Francis Henry (The Hague: Mouton 1976), 234.
71. Ibid.
72. Waters, Race, Class, and Political Symbols, 124.
73. Ibid., 111.
74. Ibid., 115.
75. Ibid., 124.
76. Ibid., 115.
77. Ibid., 130 –35; Yawney,“Remnant of All Nations,” 235.
78. Waters, Race, Class, and Political Symbols, 123. The emphasis is mine.
79. Ibid., 178.
80. For a discussion of the inﬂuence of dread talk on popular Jamaican parlance in the 1970s see Velma Pollard,
“Dread Talk: The Speech of the Rastafarian In Jamaica,” Rastafari (Kingston, Jamaica: Caribbean Quarterly,
University of the West Indies, 1985), 39–40.
81. Waters, Race, Class, and Political Symbols, 185.
82. Yawney, “Remnant of All Nations,” 23.
83. Sebastian Clarke, Jah Music: The Evolution of the Popular Jamaican Song (London: Heinemann, 1980), 95.
84. Chevannes, “Jah versus Society,” 22.
85. Clarke, Jah Music,9 4 .
86. Nagashima, Rastafarian Music,1 6 1 .
87. Lewis, “Living in the Heart of Babylon,” 23.
88. Clarke, Jah Music,9 5 .
89. Ibid., 63.
90. Malika Lee Whitney and Dermott Hussey, Bob Marley: Reggae King of the World (Kingston, Jamaica: Kingston
Publishers, 1984), 69–70.
91. RexNettleford, “The Caribbean: The Cultural Imperative,” Caribbean Quarterly 34, no. 3 (1989): 5.
92. Leslie Miles, “Reggae Sunsplash: A Brief History,” in Reggae Sunsplash 1990: A Special Report (Kingsto
 n, Jamaica:
Daily Gleaner, 1990), 7–8.
93. Because of a suit brought by theBob Marleyestate, theoriginalvenueof Reggae Sunsplash is no longer called the
Bob Marley Entertainment Centre.
94. Calvin A. Brown, “Reggae Sunsplash: A Boom for MoBay,” in Reggae Sunsplash 1990: A Special Report (Kingston,
Jamaica: Daily Gleaner, 1990), 14.
95. Not only in Jamaica, but in many other parts of the world, creating and dealing in Rastafarian paraphernalia has
become a proﬁtable business. In most large cities in North America and Britain, for example, one can purchase
dreadlocksed wigs and T-shirts, necklaces, earrings, bracelets, handbags, hats,
160 NOTES


--- PAGE 176 ---
and posters with Rastafarian colors or symbols. (Lewis,“Living in the Heart of Babylon,” 23.) I often see these
items being sold in the Drew University Center. The number of these items usually multiplies at the bazaar held
during African-American History Month.
96. Yawney, “Lions in Babylon,” 94.
97. Carl Stone, Class, Race, and Political Behaviours in Urban Jamaica (Kingston, Jamaica: Institute of Social and
Economic Research, University of the West Indies, 1973), 153, 156, quoted by Yawney,“Lions in Babylon,” 71.
98. Colin Prescod, “The People's Cause in the Caribbean,” Race and Class17 (1975): 72, quoted by Yawney,“Lions in
Babylon,” 71.
99. Laurence A. Breiner, “The English Bible in Jamaican Rastafarianism,” Journal of Religious Thought 42, no. 2
(Fall–Winter 1985–1986): 42.
100. Klaus de Albuquerque,“The Future of the Rastafarian Movement,” Caribbean Review 8, no. 4 (1979): 22.
Chapter6
1. Interview with Veerle Poupeye, art historian and critic of Jamaican art, August 1998.
2. K. M. Williams, The Rastafarians (London: Ward Lock, 1981), 44; Walter Rodney,Groundingwith My Brothers
(London: Bogle L'Ouverture, 1969), 68; Wolfgang Bender,“Liberation from Babylon,” in Missile and Capsule,
edited by Jurgen Martini (Bremen, Germany: Druckerei der Universität Bremen, 1983), 22–28.
3. This observation is from ﬁeldwork at the Jamaican National Gallery, May 1991. Many pieces on display celebrate
Rastafari in both the titlesand the contents:Ras Smoke Idepicts a dread with a chalice;The Mysticis a portrait of a
Rasta; Hymn of Praiseshows Rastas singingwithhalos around their heads;Ecce Homoportrays a dreadlocksed Jesus
in a stained-glass window wearing black, red, and green and with a golden halo;Peace and Love is a portrait of a
dread in a meditative mood;Homage to the Rastamanshows the upper body of a Rasta with his hands crossed over
his chest;Ras Dizzyis a portrait of the famous Rastafarian painter;Nyabinghi Hourdepicts a Nyabinghi ceremony;
and The Dreads at Large shows four Rastas hiding in the bushes.
4. Laurence A. Breiner, “The English Bible in Jamaican Rastafarianism,” Journal of Religious Thought 42, no. 2
(Fall–Winter 1985–1986): 41; Anita M. Waters,Race, Class, and Political Symbols: Rastafari and Reggae in Jamaican
Politics (New Brunswick, N.J.: Transactional, 1984), 177.
5. Derek Walcott, The Joker of Seville and O Babylon(New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1978); Orlando Patterson,
The Children of Sisyphus(Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin, 1965); Roger Mais,Brother Man (London: Heinemann, 1982).
6. Paula Burnett, ed., The Penguin Book of Caribbean Verse in English (London: Penguin, 1986).
7. Barry Chevannes, “Case of Jah versus Society: Rastafari Exorcism of
NOTES 161


--- PAGE 177 ---
the Ideology of Racism in Jamaica,” Social Movement Seminar Paper 1, (1989), 23.
8. Seretha Rycenssa, “The Rastafarian Legacy: A Rich Cultural Gift,” Economic Report on Jamaica: Paul ChengYoungand
Associates 4, no. 1 (Aug. 1978): 24; Waters,Race, Class, and Political Symbols, 177.
9. Verena Reckford, “Rastafarian Music: An Introductory Study,” Jamaica Journal 11, nos. 1–2 (1977): 13.
10. Yoshiko S. Nagashima, Rastafarian Music in Contemporary Jamaica: A Study of the Socioreligious Music of the Rastafarian
Movement in Jamaica (Tokyo: Institute for the Study of Languages and Cultures of Asia and Africa, 1984), 162.
11. Kenneth Bilby and Elliot Leib,“Kumina, the Howellite Church and the Emergence of Rastafarian Traditional
Music in Jamaica,” Jamaica Journal 19, no. 3 (Oct. 1986): 23.
12. Kumina is a spirit-possession cult that practices mainly in the eastern section of Jamaica. It was brought to the
island by Africans and is believed to have remained relatively pure. Pukkumina blends elements of African and
Christian religions. Revival similarly blends African and Christian elements, but it is more distinctlyChristian than
Pukkumina. Drumming is a regular feature of these religious groups. Jonkunu is traditional music and dance
performed during the Christmas holidays in Jamaica.
13. Nagashima, Rastafarian Music, 77–78.
14. Bilby and Leib, “Kumina,” 26.
15. Ibid., 26 –27.
16. Reckford, “Rastafarian Music,” 6.
17. Nagashima, Rastafarian Music, 72.
18. Roger Schmidt, ExploringRelig ion, 2d ed. (Belmont, Calif.: Wadsworth, 1988), 425–26.
19. Reckford, “Rastafarian Music,” 6; also see Sebastian Clarke,Jah Music: The Evolution of the Popular Jamaican Song
(London: Heinemann, 1980), 52.
20. Reckford, “Rastafarian Music,” 8; M. G. Smith,Roy Augier,and RexNettleford,The Rastafari Movement in Kingston,
Jamaica (Mona, Jamaica: Institute of Social and Economic Research, University College of the West Indies, 1960)
14; Stephen Davis and Peter Simon,Reggae Bloodlines: In Search of the Music and Culture of Jamaica(Garden City, N.Y.:
Anchor, 1977), 141.
21. Clarke, Jah Music, 52; Nagashima,Rastafarian Music, 74.
22. Reckford, Rastafarian Music, 8; also see Nagashima,Rastafarian Music, 74–75.
23. Reckford, “Rastafarian Music,” 7–8.
24. Clarke, Jah Music,5 3 .
25. Michael Burnett, Jam
 aican Music (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1982), 27; Reckford,“Rastafarian Music,” 6;
Davis and Simon,Reggae Blood-lines, 21; Clarke,Jah Music, 53.
26. The Dungle was a part of Back O' Wall. It was basically a tangle of
162 NOTES


--- PAGE 178 ---
shacks built on a garbage dump. Thus the nameDungle was meant to suggest“dung” and “jungle.”
27. Reckford, “Rastafarian Music,” 8–9; Clarke,Jah Music, 53.
28. Reckford, “Rastafarian Music,” 9.
29. Garth White, “Reggae: A Musical Weapon,” Caribe 4, no. 4 (1980): 6.
30. Ibid., 6; Malika Lee Whitney and Dermott Hussey, Bob Marley: Reggae King of the World (Kingston, Jamaica:
Kingston Publishers, 1984), 9; Nagashima,Rastafarian Music, 163.
31. Davis and Simon, Reggae Bloodlines, 12.
32. Whitney and Hussey, Bob Marley, 9-10.
33. Davis and Simon, Reggae Bloodlines, 14.
34. White, “Reggae,” 8; Davis and Simon,Reggae Bloodlines, 14; Clarke,Jah Music, 69.
35. White, “Reggae,” 8.
36. Clarke, Jah Music, 69.
37. White, “Reggae,” 8. The emphases are mine.
38. Davis and Simon, Reggae Bloodlines, 16.
39. Whitney and Hussey, Bob Marley, 13.
40. Clarke, Jah Music, 81.
41. Ibid., 82.
42. Ernest Cashmore, Rastaman: The Rastafarian Movement in England (Boston: Unwin, 1983), 102.
43. Davis and Simon, Reggae Bloodlines, 17, 91–92; see also Cashmore,Rastaman, 103.
44. White, “Reggae,” 6. This blend of diverse elements may account for why people from a variety of cultures are
drawn to reggae music.
45. White, “Reggae,” 9. The emphases are mine.
46. Burnett, Jamaica Music,4 3–44; White,“Regg ae,” 9.
47. Whitney and Hussey, Bob Marley, 14.
48. White, “Reggae,” 7.
49. Davis and Simon, Reggae Bloodlines, 21; Garth White,“The Development of Jamaican Popular Music. Part 2: The
Urbanization of the Folk,” African-Caribbean Institute of Jamaica Research Review 1 (1984): 65–66; Whitney and
Hussey, Bob Marley, 12.
50. White, “Development of Jamaican Popular Music,” 66.
51. This seems to have been the only recording by the Folkes Brothers, and their ﬁnancial remuneration was
inconsequential. Shaggy's recording of“O Carolina” (with some modiﬁcations) in 1993 was a huge hit, which
brought to the fore the issue of who had the rights to the song. Prince Buster, the producer of the original, made
claims to the rights, but the courts upheld the claim of one of the Folkes Brothers and gave him substantial
royalties from the Shaggy hit.
52. Clarke, Jah Music, 53, 62; Reckford,“Rastafarian Music,” 12; White,“Development of Jamaican Popular Music,”
63; Horace Campbell,Rasta and
NOTES 163


--- PAGE 179 ---
Resistance: From Marcus Garvey to Walter Rodney (Trenton, N.J.: African World, 1987), 127.
53. Reckford, “Rastafarian Music,”12.
54. Ibid., Davis and Simon, Reggae Bloodlines, 142; Clarke,Jah Music, 54.
55. Reckford, “Rastafarian Music,”12; also see White,“Development of Jamaican Popular Music,” 63.
56. Reckford, “Rastafarian Music,”13.
57. Lehkem [Leahcim] Semaj, “Rastafari and Jamaican Music,” Jamaica Record, Nov. 3, 1989, p. 7b.
58. Cashmore, Rastaman, 100.
59. White, “Development of Jamaican Popular Music,” 64; also see White,“Reggae, 8.
60. White, “Development of Jamaican Popular Music,” 64.
61. Whitney and Hussey, Bob Marley, 13.
62. White, “Reggae, 9.
63. Ibid.
64. Whitney and Hussey, Bob Marley, 58.
65. Bob Marley and the Wailers,“Get Up, Stand Up,” on Talkin' Blues, Island Records, 848243-4, 1991.
66. White, “Reggae, 10.
67. John Sealey and Krister Malm,Music in the Caribbean (London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1982), 37.
68. Ibid., 37.
69. White, “Reggae, 9.
70. Whitney and Hussey, Bob Marley, 15.
71. Clarke, Jah Music, 36.
72. Jimmy Cliff, “Sitting in Limbo,” on The Harder They Come (original soundtrack for the movie), Mango Records,
ZCM 9202, 1973.
73. Clarke, Jah Music, 63.
74. Jimmy Cliff, “Piece of the Pie,” on The Power and the Glory, Jimmy Cliff Oneness, C38986, 1983.
75. Chevannes, “Jah versus Society,” 15.
76. White, “Regg
 ae, 2.
77. Clarke, Jah Music, 62–63.
78. Ibid., 72.
79. Waters, Race, Class, and Political Symbols, 102.
80. Theodore Malloch, “Rastafarianism: A RadicalCaribbean Movement/Religion,” Center Journal4, no. 4 (Fall1985):
80.
81. Whitney and Hussey, Bob Marley, 14.
82. Clarke, Jah Music, 131.
83. Whitney and Hussey, Bob Marley, 23.
84. Bob Marley and the Wailers,“We an' Dem,” on Uprising, Island Records, 422-846211-4, 1980.
85. Whitney and Hussey, Bob Marley, 21.
86. Ibid., 28.
164
NOTES


--- PAGE 180 ---
87. Ibid.
88. Ibid., 30.
89. Bob Marley Day is also celebrated in North America in some large cities, such as New York, Los Angeles,
Atlanta, and Toronto.
90. Rebel Music: The Bob Marley Story, PBS video, 2001.
91. Quoted in Whitney and Hussey,Bob Marley, 5.
92. Breiner, “English Bible,” 42.
93. Velma Pollard, “Dread Talk: The Speech of the Rastafarian in Jamaica,” Rastafari (Kingston, Jamaica: Caribbean
Quarterly, University of the West Indies, 1985), 18.
94. Nagashima, Rastafarian Music, 32.
Chapter7
1. I Jabulani Tafari, “The Rastafari, Successors of Marcus Garvey, ” Rastafari (Kingston Jamaica: Caribbean
Quarterly, University of the West Indies, 1985), 11.
2. Barry Chevannes, “Rastafari: Towards a New Approach,” New West Indian Guide 64, nos. 3–4 (1990): 137.
3. Yoshiko S. Nagashima, Rastafarian Music in Contemporary Jamaica: A Study of the Socioreligious Music of the Rastafarian
Movement in Jamaica (Tokyo: Institute for the Study of Languages and Cultures of Asia and Africa, 1984), 26.
4. Chevannes, “Rastafari,” 138.
5. Arthur Kitchen, “Where Is Rastafari Going?” Daily Gleaner (Jamaica), June 25, 1987; Lekhem (Leahcim) Semaj,
“Revivalism, Mormonism and Rastafari,” Jamaica Record (Jamaica), Mar. 17, 1989, p. 9.
6. Joy Scott, “Rastas and the Council of Churches,” Daily Gleaner (Jamaica), Aug. 22, 1982. The Reverend Bevis
Byﬁeld, who chaired the Church and Society Commission that reviewed the Rastas' request for membership in
the Council of Churches, told me that the request was denied based on a determination that Rastafari does not
constitute a“church” according to Troeltsch's church-sect typology.
7. Interview with Brother Samuel, May 1991.
8. Eron Henry, “Rastafari in Eclipse,” Daily Gleaner (Jamaica), Dec. 2, 1987, p. 8.
9. I have been told that Kitchen has ceased wearing dreadlocks. I have not been able to conﬁrm this or to ascertain
whether this indicates that he no longer adheres to the Rastafarian faith.
10. Kitchen, “Where Is Rastafari Going?”
11. Jamaica Observer, May 10, 1988;Jamaica Observer, May 1, 1999.
12. Mayer N. Zald and Roberta Ash,“Social Movement Organizations: Growth, Decay and Change,” Social Forces44,
no. 3 (Mar. 1966): 33–34.
13. Ernest Cashmore, Rastaman: The Rastafarian Movement in England (Boston: Unwin, 1983), 104.
NOTES 165


--- PAGE 181 ---
14. Jamaica Gleaner[online], Aug. 17, 2001 (www.Jamaica-gleaner.com/gleaner/20010817/lead/lead1.html), andDaily
Gleaner (Jamaica), Oct. 27, 2000.
15. Anthony B, “Fire Pon Rome,” on So Many Things, VP Records, B000001TLY, 1996.
16. Two examples are Ras Bas's article in theJamaica Observer, May 1, 1999, and Abuna Foxe's“Of True and False
Rastas and Haile Selassie I” (http://koti.nettilinja.ﬁ/∼hsaarist/fox.htm).
17. Neville Callam, “Invitation to Docility: Defusing the Rastafarian Challenge,” Caribbean Journal of Religious Studies3
(Sept. 1980): 43.
Appendix
1. George E. Simpson, “The Rastafari Movement in Jamaica: A Study of Race and Class Conﬂict,” Social Forces 34,
no. 2 (Dec. 1955): 170.
2. Ibid.; also see George Eaton Simpson,“Political Cultism in West Kingston, Jamaica,” Social and Economic Studies5
(1955): 133–49.
3. Joseph Owens, “Literature on the Rastafari Movement, 1955–1974: A Review,” Savacou 11–12 (Sept. 1975): 88;
George E. Simpson,Religious Cults of the Caribbean: Trinidad, Jamaica and Haiti(Rio Piedras, Puerto Rico: Institute
of Caribbean Studies, University of Puerto Rico, 1970), 228.
4. Leonard Barrett, The Rastafarians: A Study of Messianic Cultism in Jamaica (Puerto Rico: Institute of Caribbean
Studies, University of Puerto Rico, 1969), 15, 175.
5. M. G. Smith, Roy Augier, and RexNettleford, The Rastafari Movement in Kingston, Jamaica (Kingston, Jamaica:
Institute of Social and Economic Research, University College of the West Indies, 1960), 28, 36, 37.
6. Ibid., 36 –38.
7. Ibid., 34 –38.
8. Ibid., 29.
9. Carole Yawney, “Lions in Babylon: The Rastafarians of Jamaica as Visionary Movement” (Ph.D. diss. McGill
University, 1978), 5. See pp. 66–70 for a fuller discussion of those who see Rastafari as a manifestation of social
pathology.
10. The desire to emigrate is no more characteristic of Rastas than of the rank andﬁle of Jamaicans. Repeated waves
of migration have seen hundreds of thousands of Jamaicans going to Central America, Cuba, Great Britain, and
North America. Scholars have repeatedly pointed to the tendency of Jamaicans to look outward for solutions to
their problems. See Barry Chevannes,“The Literature of Rastafari,” Social and Economic Studies 26 (1977): 247. If
this outward looking is pathological, then Rastas have many counterparts among Jamaicans, including Patterson
himself, who is a Jamaican who migrated to the United States years ago.
11. Orlando Patterson, “Ras Tafari: Cult of Outcasts,” New Society 4, 111 (Nov. 12, 1964): 16.
166
NOTES


--- PAGE 182 ---
12. Sheila Kitzinger, “Protest and Mysticism: The Rastafarian Cult in Jamaica,” Journal for the Scientiﬁc Study of Religion
8, no. 2 (Fall 1969): 242.
13. Ibid., 262.
14. Here Kitzinger speaks of a double marginality: of being outcasts from the dominant society and of being
marginalized males in their domestic sphere. Jamaican society is widely regarded as matrifocal, while
Rastafarianism is clearly patrifocal and patriarchal.
15. Kitzinger, “Protest and Mysticism,” 259.
16. Vittorio Lantenari's study of religions indigenous to colonial and former colonial societies, whichhas a chapteron
Rastafari, is a perfect example of this tendency. Vittorio Lantenari,The Religions of the Oppressed: A Study of Modern
Messianic Cults, translated by Lisa Sergio (New York: Knopf, 1963).
17. RexNettleford, Mirror, Mirror: Identity, Race and Protest in Jamaica(Kingston, Jamaica: Collins and Sangster (1970),
100–101.
18. Owens, “Literature on the Rastafari Movement,” 97.
19. Horace Campbell, Rasta and Resistance: From Marcus Garvey to Walter Rodney(Trenton, N.J.: African World, 1987).
20. Frank Jan van Dijk, Jahmaica: Rastafari and Jamaican Society,1 9 3 0–1990 (Utrecht, The Netherlands: Universiteit
Utrecht, 1993).
21. Maurice Bryan, Roots, Resistance and Redemption: The Rise of Rastafari (Africanstory, 1997).
22. Jack Anthony Johnson-Hill, I-Sight: The World of Rastafari: An Interpretive Sociological Analysis of Rastafarian Ethics
(Latham, Md.: Scarecrow, 1995), originally a dissertationentitled“Elements of an Afro-Caribbean Social Ethic: A
Disclosure of the World of Rastafari as a Liminal Process (Jamaica)” (Ph.D. diss., Vanderbilt University, 1988).
23. George E. Simpson, “Religion and Social Justice: Some Reﬂections on the Rastafari Movement in Jamaica,”
Phylon 46, no. 4 (Dec. 1985): 286–91; Leonard Barrett, The Rastafarians: Sounds of Cultural Dissonance , rev. ed.
(Boston: Beacon, 1988).
24. Ernest Cashmore, Rastaman: The Rastafarian Movement in England (Boston: Unwin, 1983), 128–44, 150–54.
25. Joseph Owens, Dread: The Rastafarians of Jamaica (Kingston, Jamaica: Sangster's, 1976).
26. Barry Chevannes, “Rastafari: Towards a New Approach,” New West Indian Guide 64, nos. 3–4 (1990): 127–48;
Barry Chevannes,“Era of the Dread-locks,” unpublished manuscript, n.d.; Barry Chevannes,Rastafari: Roots and
Ideology (Syracuse, N.Y.: Syracuse University Press, 1994); and Barry Chevannes, ed.,Rastafari and Other African-
Caribbean Worldviews (New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press, 1998).
27. Yards refer to the gathering places of the small groups of Rastas we have identiﬁed as houses. The designation
comes from the fact that each venue is usually on the grounds surrounding the dwelling place of a leading Rasta.
Jamaicans usually refer to the premises on which they live as their yards.
NOTES 167


--- PAGE 183 ---
28. Carole D. Yawney, “Lions in Babylon”; Carole D. Yawney, “Dread Wasteland: Rastafarian Ritual in West
Kingston, Jamaica,” in Ritual, Symbolism and Ceremonialism in the Americas: Studies in Symbolic Anthropology, edited by
N. Ross Crumrine (Greenley, Colo.: Museum of Anthropology, Universityof Northern Colorado, 1978), 154–78.
29. For Rastas, Nyabinghi originally meant“death to the white man” or “death to white and black oppressors.” In
Jamaica, it has come to refer to those Rastas who seek to maintain the strict ritual and ethical precepts that
formed the original ethos of Rastafari.
30. John Paul Homiak, “The ‘Ancient of Days’ Seated Black: Eldership, Oral Tradition and Ritual in Rastafari
Culture” (Ph.D. diss., Brandeis University, 1985).
31. Although families in Jamaica tend to be matrifocal, matrifocal is not the same as matriarchal. In spite of the fact
that the stability of the families most often depends on mothers and grandmothers, Jamaican society is still rife
with the ideology of male privilege and authority.
32. Maureen Rowe, “The Woman in Rastafari,” Rastafari (Kingston, Jamaica: Caribbean Quarterly, University of the
West Indies, 1985), 13–21; Maureen Rowe,“Gender and Family Relations in RastafarI: A Personal Perspective,”
in ChantingDown Babylon: The Rastafari Reader, edited by N. Samuel Murrell et al. (Philadelphia: Temple University
Press, 1998), 73–88.
33. Imani M. Tafari-Ama, “Rastawoman as Rebel: Case Studies in Jamaica,” in ChantingDown Babylon: The Rastafari
Reader, edited by N. Samuel Murrell et al. (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1998), 89–106.
34. Obiagele Lake, Rastafari Women: Subordination in the Midst of Liberation Theology(Durham, N.C.: Carolina Academic
Press, 1998).
35. Carole Yawney, “Rastafarian Sistrin by the Rivers of Babylon,” Canadian Women Studies 5, no. 2 (Winter 1983):
73–75, and“To Grow a Daughter: Cultural Liberation and the Dynamics of Oppression in Jamaica,” in Feminism
in Canada, edited by A. Miles and G. Ginn (Montreal: Black Rose, 1983), 119–44.
36. Diane J. Austin-Broos,“Pentecostals and Rastafarians: Cultural, Political and Gender Relations of Two Religious
Movements,” Social and Economic Studies 36, no. 4 (Dec. 1987): 1–39.
37. Barry Chevannes, “Case of Jah versus Society: Rastafari Exorcism of the Ideology of Racism in Jamaica,” Social
Moveme
nt Seminar Paper 1 (1989): 1–27.
38. Dennis Forsythe, Rastafari: For the Healingof the Nation (Kingston, Jamaica: Zaika, 1983), 7.
39. Ibid., 10 –35.
40. Ibid., chaps. 3, 4, and 8; Also see Dennis Forsythe,“West Indian Culture through the Prism of Rastafarianism,”
Rastafari (Kingston, Jamaica: Caribbean Quarterly, University of the West Indies, 1985): 62–85.
41. Forsythe, Rastafari, 113–34.
42. Douglas R. A. Mack, From Babylon to Rastafari: Origin and History of the
168 NOTES


--- PAGE 184 ---
Rastafarian Movement (Chicago: Research Associates, School Times Publications, 1999).
43. Robert Athlyi Rogers, The Holy Piby (Chicago: Research Associates School Times Publications, 2000).
44. G. G. Maragh [Leonard P. Howell],The Promised Key (Brooklyn, N.Y.: A&B, 2001).
45. Alemu I Jahson Atiba, The Rastafari Ible (Chicago: Research Associates School Times Publications, 1994).
46. Gerald Hausman, ed.,The Kebra Negast: The Lost Bible of Rastafarian Wisdom and Faith from Ethiopia and Jamaica(New
York: Martin's, 1997).
47. Kalin Ray Salassi, Haile Selassie and the Openingof the Seven Seals (Chicago: Research Associates School Times
Publications, 1997).
48. Rastafari Universal Zion,The Important Utterances of H. I. M. Emperor Haile Selassie I Jah Rastafari(London: Voice of
Rasta, 1994).
49. Karl Phillpotts Naphtali, ed., The Testimony of His Imperial Majesty Emperor Haile Selassie I, Defender of the Faith
(Washington, D.C: Zewd, 1999).
50. Jah Ahkell, Rasta: Emperor Haile Selassie and the Rastafarians (Chicago: Research Associates School Times
Publications, 1999).
51. E. S. P. McPherson,Rastafari and Politics: Sixty Years of a DevelopingCultural Ideolog y: Sociolog y of Development Perspective
(Clarendon, Jamaica: Black International Iyahbinghi Press, 1991).
52. E. S. P. McPherson,The Culture-History and Universal Spread of Rastafari (Clarendon, Jamaica: Black International
Iyahbinghi Press, 1993).
53. Ayotunde Amtac Babatunji, Prophet on Reggae Mountain: Meditations of Ras Shabaka Maasai, Prophet of Jah Rastafari
(Rochester, N.Y.: Garvey-Tubman-Nanny-Nzinga Press, 1994).
54. Tekla Mekfet, Christopher Columbus and Rastafari: Ironies of History and Other Reﬂections on the Symbol of Rastafari (St.
Ann, Jamaica: Jambasa, 1993).
55. Mihlawhdh Faristzaddi published three volumes of Itations:Itations of Jamaica and I Rastafari,3 vols. (Miami, Fla.:
Judah Ambesa Ihntanahshinahl, 1991–1997).
56. Leahcim Semaj is Michael James spelled backward. This is clearly an attempt to rid himself of the Europeanness
that his original name suggests.
57. Leahcim Semaj, “Rastafari: From Religion to Social Theory,” Rastafari (Kingston, Jamaica: Caribbean Quarterly,
University of the West Indies, 1985), 22.
58. Ibid., 23.
59. Ibid.
60. Ibid., 26 –30.
61. Lehkem (Leahcim) Semaj, “Revivalism, Mormonism and Rastafari,” Jamaica Record (Jamaica), March 17, 1989, p.
9.
62. Semaj, “Rastafari: From Religion to Social Theory,” 26.
63. N. Samuel Murrell, William D. Spencer, and Adrian A. McFarlane, eds.,ChantingDown Babylon: The Rastafari
Reader (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1998).
NOTES 169


--- PAGE 185 ---
64. William D. Spencer, Dread Jesus (London: Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, 1999).
65. Neil J. Savinshinsky,“Rastafari in the Promised Land: The Spread of a Jamaican Socio-religious Movement and
Its Music and Culture among the Youth of Ghana and Senegambia” (Ph.D. diss., Columbia University, 1993).
66. Heidi Gjerset, “First Generation Rastafari in St. Eustatius: A Case Study in the Netherlands Antilles,” Caribbean
Quarterly 40, no. 1 (Mar. 1994): 64–77.
170 NOTES


--- PAGE 186 ---
Selected Bibliography
Ahkell, Jah.Rasta: Emperor Hailes Selassie and the Rastafarians. Chicago: Research Associates School Times, 1999.
Atiba, Alemu I Jahson.The Rastafari Ible. Chicago: Research Associates School Times, 1994.
Austin-Broos, Diane J.“Pentecostals and Rastafarians: Cultural, Political and Gender Relations of Two Religious
Movements.” Social and Economic Studies 36, no. 4 (Dec. 1987): 1–39.
Babatunji, Ayotunde Amtac. Prophet on Reggae Mountain: Meditations of Ras Shabaka Maasai, Prophet of Jah Rastafari .
Rochester, N.Y.: Garvey-Tubman-Nanny-Nzinga, 1994.
Banton, Michael.“Black and White: Male and Female,” New Society 48, no. 872 (June 20, 1979): 704–6.
Barkun, Michael.Disaster and the Millennium. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1974.
Barrett, Leonard E.“African Roots in Jamaican Indigenous Religion.” Journal of Religious Thought 35 (Spring-Summer
1978): 7–26.
——. The Rastafarians: Sounds of Cultural Dissonance, rev. ed. Boston: Beacon, 1988.
——. The Rastafarians: A Study of Messianic Cultism in Jamaica. Puerto Rico: Institute of Caribbean Studies, University of
Puerto Rico, 1969.
——. Soul-force: African Heritage in Afro-American Religion. Garden City, N.Y.: Anchor, 1974.
Bastide, Roger.Les Ameriques noires. Paris: Payot, 1967.
Beckford, George, and Michael Witter.Small Garden . . . Bitter Weed: The Political Economy of Struggle and Change in Jamaica.
Morant Bay, Jamaica: Maroon, 1980.
Bender, Wolfgang.“Liberation from Babylon: Rasta Painters in Jamaica.” In Missile and Capsule, edited by Jurgen
Martini, 129-35. Bremen, Germany: Druckerei der Universität Bremen, 1983.
Bendix, Reinhard.Max Weber: An Intellectual Portrait. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1960.
Berger, Peter L.“Charisma and Religious Innovation: The Social Location of Israelite Prophecy.” American Sociological
Review 28, no. 6 (1963): 940–50.


--- PAGE 187 ---
Bilby, Kenneth.“The Holy Herb: Notes on the Background of Cannabis in Jamaica.” In Rastafari,8 2–95. Kingston,
Jamaica: Caribbean Quarterly, University of the West Indies, 1985.
Bilby, Kenneth, and Elliot Leib.“Kumina, the Howellite Church and the Emergence of Rastafarian Traditional Music
in Jamaica.” Jamaica Journal 19, no. 3 (Oct. 1986): 22–28.
Birhan, Iyata Farika.Jah Is I Shepherd. San Jose, Calif.: Rastas/Roots/Redemption/Repatriation Unlimited, 1981.
Bishton, Derek.Black Heart Man. London: Chatto and Windus, 1986.
Bisnauth, Dale.A History of Religions in the Caribbean. Kingston, Jamaica: Kingston Publishing, 1989.
Blacka, Razac [Garth White].“Master Drummer.” Jamaica Journal 11, nos. 1–2 (1977): 17.
Boot, Adrian.Bob Marley: Soul Rebel, Natural Mystic. New York: St. Martin's, 1982.
——. Jamaica: Babylon on a Thin Wire. London: Thames and Hudson, 1976.
Bowen, W. Errol.“Rastafarism and the New Society.” Savacou 5 (June 1975): 41–50.
Boyne, Ian.“Jamaica: Breaking Barriers between Churches and Rastafarians.” One World 86 (May 1983): 33–34.
Brake, Mike.“Under Heavy Manners: A Consideration of Racism, Black Youth Culture, and Crime in Britain.” Crime
and Social Justice 20 (1983): 1–15.
Breiner, Laurence A.“The English Bible in Jamaican Rastafarianism.” Journal of Religious Thought42, no. 2 (Fall-Winter
1985-86): 30–43.
Brown, Aggrey.Color, Class, and Politics in Jamaica. New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction, 1979.
Brown, Calvin A. “Reggae Sunsplash: A Boom for MoBay.” In Reggae Sunsplash 1990: A Special Report . Kingston,
Jamaica: Daily Gleaner, 1990.
Bryan, Maurice.Roots, Resistance and Redemption: The Rise of Rastafari. Africansstory, 1997.
Burnett, Michael.Jamaican Music. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1982.
Burnett, Paula, ed.The Penguin Book of Caribbean Verse in English. London: Penguin, 1986.
Bush, Diane Mitsch.“The Routinization of Social Movements Organizations: China as a Deviant Case.” Sociological
Quar
terly 19, no. 2 (Spring 1978): 203–19.
Byﬁeld, Bevis B. “Rastafarianism and Its Inﬂuence on Politics.” Paper presented at a seminar on “Religion and
Democracy.” Sponsored by the Bustamante Institute of Public and International Affairs, Trinidad, Nov. 12–18,
1987.
——. “Transformation of the Jamaican Society.” Caribbean Journal of Religious Studies 55 (Apr. 1983): 28–38.
Byﬁeld, Hazel G.“Women in the Struggle for True Community: A Caribbean Perspective.” Mid-stream 25, no. 1 (Jan.
1986): 49–56.
172 SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY


--- PAGE 188 ---
Callam, Neville.“InvitationtoDocility: Defusing theRastafarian Challenge.” Caribbean Journal of Religious Studies3 (Sept.
1980): 28–48.
Campbell, Horace.Rasta and Resistance: From Marcus Garvey to Walter Rodney. Trenton, N.J.: African World, 1987.
——. “Rastafari: A Culture of Resistance.” Race and Class 22, no. 1 (Summer 1980): 1–22.
——. “The Rastafarians in the Eastern Caribbean.” Caribbean Quarterly 26 (1980): 42–61.
Case, Charles G. “Rastafari and the Religion of Anthropology: An Epistemological Study.” Religious Education 78
(Summer 1983): 420.
Cashmore, Ernest.“More Than a Version: A Study of RealityCreation.” British Journal of Sociology30, no. 3 (Sept. 1979):
307–21.
——. Rastaman: The Rastafarian Movement in England. Boston: Unwin, 1983.
——. “The Rastaman Cometh.” New Society 41, no. 777 (Aug. 25, 1977): 382–84.
Cassidy, Frederic G.Jamaica Talk. London: Macmillan, 1961.
Chalfant, H. Paul, Robert E. Beckley, and E. EddiePalmer.Religion in Contemporary Society. Sherman Oaks, Calif.: Alfred,
1981.
Chevannes, Barry. “Case of Jah versus Society: Rastafari Exorcism of the Ideology of Racism in Jamaica.” Social
Movement Seminar Paper 1 (1989): 1–27.
——. “Era of the Dreadlocks.” Unpublished manuscript, n.d.
——. “The Literature of Rastafari.” Social and Economic Studies 26 (1977): 239–62.
——. Rastafari: Roots and Ideology. Syracuse, N.Y.: Syracuse University Press, 1994.
——. “Rastafari: Towards a New Approach.” New West Indian Guide 64, nos. 3–4 (1990): 127–48.
——. “T
he Rastafari of Jamaica.” In When Prophets Die, edited by Timothy Miller, 335–37. Albany: State Universityof
New York Press, 1991.
——. “Rastafarianism and the Class Struggle: The Search for a Method ology.” In Methodology and Change: Problems of
Applied Social Science Research Techniques in the Commonwealth Caribbean, edited by L. Lindsay, 244–51. Mona, Jamaica:
Institute of Social and Economic Research, University of the West Indies, 1978.
——. “The Repairer of the Breach: ReverendClaudius Henry and Jamaican Society.” In Ethnicity in the Americas, edited
by Francis Henry, 263–69. The Hague: Mouton, 1976.
——. Review ofDread: The Rastafarians of Jamaica, by Joseph Owens. InCaribbean Quarterly 24, nos. 3–4 (Sept.–Dec.
1978): 61–69.
——. The Social Origin of the Rastafari Movement. Mona, Jamaica: Institute of Social and Economic Research, University
of the West Indies, 1978.
Chevannes, Barry, ed.Rastafari and Other African-Caribbean Worldviews. New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press,
1998.
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY 173


--- PAGE 189 ---
Clarke, Peter B.Black Paradise: The Rastafarian Movement. Wellingborough, Northamptonshire, England: Aquarian, 1986.
Clarke, Sebastian.Jah Music: The Evolution of the Popular Jamaican Song. London: Heinemann, 1980.
Cohen, Abner.Two-Dimensional Man. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1974.
Collum, Danny.“Jubilee, Rastafarian Style: AVibrant Human Film on Reggae and Justice.” Sojourners 9 (Nov. 1980):
35–36.
Cooper, Carolyn. “Chanting Down Babylon: Bob Marley's Song as Literary Text.” Jamaica Journal 19, no. 4 (Nov.
1986–Jan. 1987): 2–8.
Coser, Lewis A.Masters of Sociological Thought: Ideas in Historical and Social Context, 2d ed. New York: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, 1977.
Cushman, Thomas, “Rich Rasta and Communist Rockers: A Comparative Study of the Origin, Diffusion and
Defusion of Revolutionary Musical Codes.” Journal of Popular Culture 25 (Winter 1991): 17–61.
Dalrymple, Henderson.Bob Marley: Music, Myth and the Rastas. London: Cari-Arawak, 1976.
Dance, Daryl C.Folklore from Contemporary Jamaicans. Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1985.
Davis, Stephen.Bob Marley. New York: Doubleday, 1985.
Davis, Stephen, and Peter Simon.Reggae Bloodlines: In Search of the Music and Culture of Jamaica . Garden City, N.Y.:
Anchor, 1977.
——. Reggae International. New York: Rodner and Bernhard, 1982.
de Albuquerque, Klaus.“The Future of the Rastafarian Movement.” Caribbean Review 8, no. 4 (1979): 22–25, 44–46.
Dekmejian, Richard H., and Margaret J. Wyszomirski.“Charismatic Leadership in Islam: The Mahdi of the Sudan.”
Comparative Studies in Society and History 14, no. 2 (Mar. 1972): 193–214.
Deschen, S. “On Religious Change: The Situational Analysis of Symbolic Action.” Comparative Studies in Society and
History 12 (1970): 260–74.
Dirk, Kaesler.Max Weber: An Introduction to His Life and Work. Translated by Philippa Hurd. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1988.
Dreher, M. C., and C. Rogers.“Getting High: Ganja Man and His Socio-Economic Milieu.” Caribbean Studies 16, no. 2
(July 1976): 219–31.
Du Bois, W. E. B.The Souls of Black Folk.I nWritings, edited by Nathan Huggins, 337 –547. New York: Literary Classics
of the United States, 1986.
Erskine, Noel Leo.DecolonizingTheolog y: A Caribbean Perspective. New York: Orbis, 1981.
Essien-Udom, E. U., and Amy Jacques-Garvey.More Philosophya nd Opinions of Marcus Garvey, vol. 3. Totowa, N.J.: Cass,
1977.
Faristzaddi, Mihlawhdh. Itations of Jamaica and I Rastafari . 3 vols. Miami, Fla.: Judah Ambesa Ihntanahshinahl,
1991–1997.
Foner, Nancy.Jamaica Farewell: Jamaican Migrants in London. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1978.
174 SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY


--- PAGE 190 ---
Forsythe, Dennis.Rastafari: For the Healingof the Nation . Kingston, Jamaica: Zaika, 1983.
——. “West Indian Culture through the Prism of Rastafarianism.” In Rastafari,6 2–85. Kingston, Jamaica: Caribbean
Quarterly, University of the West Indies, 1985.
Friday, Michael.“A Comparison of‘Dharma’ and ‘Dread’ as the Determinants of Ethical Standards.” Caribbean Journal
of Religious Studies 5 (Sept. 1983): 29–37.
Gardner, William James.A History of Jamaica from Its Discovery by Columbus to the Year 1872. Totowa, N.J.: Cass, 1971.
Garrison, Ken.Black Youth: Rastafarianism, and the Identity Crisis in Britain. London: Afro-Caribbean EducationResource
Project, 1979.
Gerth, Hans H., and C. Wright Mills, eds.From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul,
1948.
Gjerset, Heidi. “First Generation Rastafari in St. Eustatius: A Case Study in the Netherlands Antilles.” Caribbean
Quarterly 40, no. 2 (March 1994): 64–77.
Glazier, Stephen D.Marchin' the Pilgrims Home: Leadership and Decision in an Afro-Caribbean Faith . Westport, Conn.:
Greenwood, 1983.
——. “Religion and Contemporary Religious Movements in the Caribbean: A Report.” Sociological Analysis 41, no. 2
(Summer 1980): 181–83.
——. “Syncretism and Separation: Ritual Change in Afro-Caribbean Faith.” Journal of American Folklore 98 (1985):
49–62.
Gonsalves, Ralph.“The Rodney Affair.” Caribbean Quarterly 25 (Sept. 1979): 1–24.
Goulbourne, Erold.“Caribbean Paper on Rastafarianism: Cult or Religion?” Unpublished manuscript, 1980.
Graham, Margaret, and Franklin Knight, eds.Africa and the Caribbean: The Legacies of a Link . Baltimore, Md.: John
Hopkins University Press, 1979.
Greenberg, Alan.“Reggae International: Spiritual Balm for a Trembling World: A Review ofReggae International by
Stephen Davis and Peter Simon.” Caribbean Review 12, no. 2 (1983): 32–33.
Grifﬁn, Glen
n A., Richard L. Gorsuch, and Andrea-Lee Davis. “A Cross-Cultural Investigation of Religious
Orientations, Social Norms, and Prejudice.” Journal for the Scientiﬁc Study of Religion 26, no. 3 (Sept. 1987): 358–65.
Hadden, Jeffrey K., and Anson Shupe, eds.Prophetic Religions and Politics: Religion and the Political Order . New York:
Paragon, 1986.
Hausman, Gerald, ed.The Kebra Negast: The Lost Bible of Rastafarian Wisdom and Faith from Ethiopia to Jamaica. New York:
Martin's, 1997.
Hayford, Casely.Ethiopia Unbound: Studies in Race Emancipation. 1911. Reprint, London: Cass, 1969.
Hebdige, Dick.Subculture: The Meaningof Style . London: Methuen, 1979.
Hellstrom, Jan A.“Jah Live: Selassie-I: En Studie Kring Reggae-Musik och Afrikansk Messiaskult pa Jamaica.” Svensk
Teologisk Kvartalskrift 53, no. 4 (1977): 145–55.
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY 175


--- PAGE 191 ---
Henry, Paget.“Indigenous Religions and the Transformation of Peripheral Societies.” In Prophetic Religions and Politics:
Religion and the Political Order, edited by Jeffrey K. Hadden and Anson Shupe, 123–50. New York: Paragon, 1986.
Herskovits, Melville J.The Myths of the Negro Past. Boston: Beacon, 1965.
——. The New World Negro. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1966.
Hill, Robert A.“Leonard P. Howell and Millenarian Visions in Early Rastafari.” Jamaica Journal 16, no. 1 (Feb. 1983):
24–39.
Hill, Robert, and Barbara Bair.Marcus Garvey: Life and Lessons. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1987.
Hiller, Harry H.“A Reconceptualization of the Dynamics of Social Movement Development.” Paciﬁc Sociological Review
18, no. 3 (July 1975): 243–60.
Hoenisch, Michael.“Symbolic Politics: Perceptions of the Early Rastafari Movement.” Massachusetts Review 29 (Fall
1989): 432–49.
Hoetink, Harmannus.“National Identity, Culture, and Race in the Caribbean.” In Racial Tensions and National Identity,
edited by Ernest Q. Campbell, 17–44. Nashville, Tenn.: Vanderbilt University Press, 1972.
Hogg, Donald W.“Statement of a Ras Tafari Leader.” Caribbean Studies 6, no. 1 (1981–1982): 37–38.
Homiak, John Paul.“The ‘Ancient of Days' Seated Black: Eldership, Oral Tradition and Ritual in Rastafari Culture.”
Ph.D. diss., Brandeis University, 1985.
Hurbon, Laennec.“New Religious Movements in the Caribbean.” In New Religious Movements and Rapid Social Change,
edited by James A. Beckford, 146–76. Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage/UNESCO, 1986.
Hurwitz, Samuel J., and Edith Hurwitz.Jamaica: A Historical Portrait. New York: Praeger, 1971.
Jackson, Michael.“Rastafarianism.” Theology 83 (Jan. 1980): 26–34.
Jacobs, Virginia Lee.Roots of Rastafari. San Diego, Calif.: Avant, 1985.
Jacques-Garvey, Amy, ed.Philosophy and Opinions of Marcus Garvey. New York: Atheneum, 1974.
Jag
essar, Michael N.“JPIC and Rastafarians.” One World, Feb. 1991, pp. 15–17.
Johnson, Linton Kwesi.“Arts in Society: The Reggae Rebellion.” New Society 36, no. 714 (June 10, 1976): 589.
——. Dread Beat and Blood. London: Bogle L'Ouverture, 1975.
——. “Jamaica Rebel Music.” Race and Class 17, no. 4 (Spring 1976): 397–412.
——. “Roots and Rock: The Marley Enigma.” Race Today 7, no. 10 (Oct. 1975): 237–38.
Johnson-Hill, Jack Anthony.“Elements of an Afro-Caribbean Social Ethic: A Disclosure of the World of Rastafari as a
Liminal Process (Jamaica).” Ph.D. diss., Vanderbilt University, 1988.
——. I-Sight: The World of Rastafari. Latham, Md.: Scarecrow, 1995.
Jones, Robert Alun, and Robert M. Anservitz.“Saint-Simon and Saint-Simonism:
176 SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY


--- PAGE 192 ---
A Weberian View.” American Journal of Sociology 10, no. 5 (Mar. 1975): 1095–1123.
Kallynder, Rolston, and Henderson Dalrymple.Reggae: A People's Music. London: Carib-Arawak, n.d.
Kerr, Madeline.Personality and Conﬂict in Jamaica. London: Collins, 1963.
Kettle, Martin.“The Racial Numbers Game in Our Prisons.” New Society 61, no. 1037 (Sept. 30, 1982): 535–37.
Kilgore, John.“Rastafarianism: A Theology of the African Church.” Doctor of Ministries thesis, School of Theology
at Claremont, 1984.
Kitzinger, Sheila.“Protest and Mysticism: The Rastafarian Cult in Jamaica.” Journal for the Scientiﬁc Study of Religion8, no.
2 (Fall 1969): 240–62.
Kuper, Adam.Changing Jamaica. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1976.
Lacey, Terry.Violence and Politics in Jamaica, 1960–70: Internal Security in a DevelopingCountry . Totowa, N.J.: Cass, 1977.
Lake, Obiagele.Rastafari Women: Subordination in the Midst of Liberation Theology. Durham, N.C.: Carolina Academic, 1998.
Landman-Bogues. “Rastafarian Food Habits.” Cajanus 9, no. 4 (1976): 228–33.
Lanternari, Vittorio.The Religions of the Oppressed: A Study of Modern Messianic Cults. Translated by Lisa Sergio. New York:
Knopf, 1963.
Lewis, Linden F.“Living in the Heart of Babylon: Rastafari in the USA.” Bulletin of Eastern Caribbean Affairs 15, no. 1
(Mar./Apr. 1989): 20–30.
Lewis, Rupert.“Black Nationalism in Jamaica in Recent Years.” In Perspectives on Jamaica in the Seventies, edited by Carl
Stone and Aggrey Brown, 65–71. Kingston, Jamaica: Jamaica Publishing, 1981.
Lewis, William F.“The Rastafari: Millennial Cultists or Unregenerated Peasants?” Peasant Studies 14 (Fall 1986): 5–26.
——. Soul Rebels: The Rastafari. Prospect Heights, Ill.: Waveland, 1993.
Long, Theodore. “Prophecy, Charisma and Politics: Reinterpreting the Weberian Thesis.” In Prophetic Religions and
Politics: Religion and the Political Order, edited by Jeffrey K. Hadden and Anson Shupe, 3–17. New York: Paragon,
1986.
Low
enthal, David.West Indian Societies. London: Oxford University Press, 1976.
Macionis, John J.Sociology, 2d ed. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1989.
Mack, Douglas R. A. From Babylon to Rastafari: Origin and History of the Rastafarian Movement . Chicago: Research
Associates School Times Publications, 1999.
Mais, Roger.Brother Man. London: Heinemann, 1982.
Malloch, Theodore.“Rastafarianism: A Radical Caribbean Movement/Religion.” Center Journal 4, no. 4 (Fall 1985):
67–87.
Manley, Michael.Jamaica: Struggle in the Periphery. London: Writers and Readers Publishing Cooperative Society, 1982.
——. The Politics of Change: A Jamaican Testament. London: Deutsch, 1974.
Mansingh, Ajai, and Laxmi Mansingh.“Hindu Inﬂuences on Rastafarianism.”
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY 177


--- PAGE 193 ---
In Rastafari,9 6–115. Kingston, Jamaica: Caribbean Quarterly, University of the West Indies, 1985.
Maragh, G. G. [Leonard P. Howell].The Promised Key. Brooklyn, N.Y.: A & B, 2001.
Mau, James A.Social Change and the Images of the Future: A Study of the Pursuit of Progress in Jamaica. Cambridge: Mass.:
Schenkman, 1968.
Mazrui, Ali A.“ReligiousAlternatives in the Black Diaspora: From Malcolm X to Rastafari.” Caribbean Affairs 3, no. 1
(1990): 157–60.
McAdam, Doug, John D. McCarthy, and Mayer N. Zald.“Social Movements.” InHandbook of Sociology, edited by NeilJ.
Smelser, 695–737. Newbury Park, Calif.: Sage, 1988.
McCormack, Ed. “Bob Marley with a Bullet.” RollingStone , Aug. 12, 1976, pp. 37–41.
McPherson, E. S. P. The Culture-History and Universal Spread of Rastafari . Clarendon, Jamaica: Black International
Iyahbinghi, 1993.
——. Rastafari and Politics: Sixty Years of a Developing Cultural Ideology: Sociology of Development Perspective . Clarendon,
Jamaica: Black International Iyahbinghi, 1991.
Mekfet, Tekla.Christopher Columbus and Rastafari: Ironies of History and Other Reﬂections on the Symbol of Rastafari. St. Ann,
Jamaica: Jambasa, 1993.
Miles, Leslie.“Reggae Sunsplash: A Brief History.” In Reggae Sunsplash 1990: A Special Report. Kingston, Jamaica: Daily
Gleaner, 1990.
Mintz, Sidney.“The Caribbean as a Socio-Cultural Area.” In Peoples and Cultures of the Caribbean, edited by Michael M.
Horowitz, 18–46. Garden City, N.Y.: Natural History Press, 1971.
Morris, Mervyn.On Holy Week. Kingston, Jamaica: Sangster's, 1977.
Morrish, Ivor.Obeah, Christ and Rastaman: Jamaica and Its Religions. Cambridge: Clarke, 1982.
Mulvaney, Becky Michele.Rastafari and Reggae. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood, 1990.
——. “Rhythms of Resistance: On Rhetoric and Reggae Music (Jamaica, Rastafari).” Ph.D. diss., University of Iowa,
1985.
Murrell, N. Samuel, William D. Spencer, and Adrian A. McFarlane, eds.ChantingDown Babylon: The Rastafari Reader .
Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1998.
Myers, Trevor C.The Essence of Rastafari Nationalism and Black Economic Development. New York: Vantage, 1989.
Nagashima, Yoshiko S. Rastafarian Music in Contemporary Jamaica: A Stud y of the Socioreligious Music of the Rastafarian
Movement in Jamaica. Tokyo: Institute for the Study of Languages and Cultures of Asia and Africa, 1984.
Naphtali, Karl Phillpotts, ed. The Testimony of His Imperial Majesty, Emperor Haile Selassie I, Defender of the Faith .
Wa
shington, D.C.: Zewd, 1999.
Nettleford, Rex.“The Caribbean: The Cultural Imperative.” Caribbean Quarterly 34, no. 3 (1989): 4–14.
178 SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY


--- PAGE 194 ---
——. Caribbean Cultural Identity: The Case of Jamaica. Kingston, Jamaica: Institute of Jamaica, 1978.
——. “Caribbean Perspectives: The Creative Potential and the Quality of Life.” In Caribbean Rhythms: The Emerging
English Literature of the West Indies, edited by James T. Livingstonm, 298–318. New York: Washington Square Press,
1974.
——. Manley and the New Jamaica. New York: African Publishing, 1979.
——. Mirror, Mirror: Identity, Race and Protest in Jamaica. Kingston, Jamaica: Collins and Sangster, 1970.
Nicholas, Tracy.Rastafari: A Way of Life. Garden City, N.Y.: Anchor, 1978.
Norris, Katrin.Jamaica: The Search for Identity. London: Oxford University Press, 1962.
Noyce, John L.The Rastafarians in Britain and Jamaica. Brighton, England: University of SussexPress, 1978.
O'Gorman, Pamela.“An Approach to the Study of Jamaican Popular Music.” Jamaica Journal 6, no. 7 (Dec. 1972): 50.
Orum, Anthony. Introduction to Political Sociology: The Social Anatomy of the Body Politic , 3d ed. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:
Prentice Hall, 1989.
Owens, Joseph.Dread: The Rastafarians of Jamaica. Kingston, Jamaica: Sangster's, 1976.
——. “Literature on the Rastafari Movement, 1955–1974: A Review.” Savacou 11–12 (Sept. 1975): 86–105, 113–14.
——. “The Rastafarians of Jamaica.” In Troublingof the Waters, edited by Idris Hamid, 165–70. San Fernando, Trinidad:
Rahaman, 1973.
Patterson, Orlando.The Children of Sisyphus. Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin, 1965.
——. “Ras Tafari: Cult of Outcasts.” New Society 4, no. 111 (Nov. 12, 1964): 15–17.
Phillips, Peter.“Race, Class, Nationalism: A Perspective on Twentieth Century Social Movements in Jamaica.” Social
and Economic Studies 37, no. 3 (1988): 97–123.
Pollard, Velma. “Dread Talk: The Speech of the Rastafarian in Jamaica.” In Rastafari,3 2–41. Kingston, Jamaica:
Caribb
ean Quarterly, University of the West Indies, 1985.
——. “The Social History of Dread Talk.” Caribbean Quarterly 28, no. 2 (Dec. 1982): 17–40.
——. “Word Sounds: The Language of Rastafari in Barbados and St. Lucia.” Jamaica Journal 17, no. 1 (Feb. 1984): 57-
62.
Post, Ken.“The Bible as Ideology: Ethiopianism in Jamaica, 1930–38.” In African Perspectives, edited by Christopher
Allen and R. W. Johnson, 185–207. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1970.
Prescod, Colin.“The People's Cause in the Caribbean.” Race and Class 17 (1975): 71–85.
Price, Raymond.“The Rastafari of Jamaica: A Study of Group Beliefs and Social Stress.” Paper presented at theﬁrst
meeting of the Caribbean Psychiatric Association, Ocho Rios, Jamaica, 1969.
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY 179


--- PAGE 195 ---
Rastafari Universal Zion.The Important Utterances of H. I. M. Emperor Haile Selassie I Jah Rastafari . London: Voice of
Rasta, 1994.
Reckford, Verena.“Rastafarian Music: An Introductory Study.” Jamaica Journal 11, nos. 1–2 (1977): 2–13.
——. “Reggae, Rastafarianism and Cultural Identity.” Jamaica Journal 16 (1982): 70–79.
Ringenberg, Roger.“Rastafarianism: An Expanding Jamaican Cult.” Unpublished manuscript, n.d.
Robertson, Roland, ed.Sociology of Religion: Selected Readings. Bungay, Suffolk, England: Penguin, 1969.
Rodney, Walter.Groundings with My Brothers. London: Bogle L'Ouverture, 1969.
Rogers, Claudia. “Social Transformation in Jamaica: The Internal Dynamic of the Rastafarian Movement.” Paper
presented at the annual meeting of the Caribbean Studies Association, Fort–de–France, Martinique, 1978.
——. “What's a Rasta?” Caribbean Review 7, no. 1 (Jan.–Mar. 1977): 9–12.
Rogers, Robert Athlyi.The Holy Piby. Woodbridge, N.J.: 1924; reprint, Chicago: Research Associates School Times,
2000.
Rose, Terrence.“Emerging Problems in Jamaica and Their Pastoral Implications.” Caribbean Journal of Religious Studies6
(April 1985): 29–45.
Rowe, Maureen.“Gender and Family Relations in Rastafari: A Personal Perspective.” In ChantingDown Babylon: The
Rastafari Reader, edited by N. Samuel Murrell et al., 73–88. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1998.
——. “The Woman in Rastafari.” In Rastafari,1 3–21. Kingston, Jamaica: Caribbean Quarterly, University of the West
Indies, 1985.
Rubin, Vera, and Lambros Comitas.Ganga in Jamaica. The Hague: Mouton, 1975.
Rycenssa, Seretha.“The Rastafarian Legacy: A Rich Cultural Gift.” Economic Report on Jamaica: Paul ChengYoungand
Associates 4, no. 1 (Aug. 1978): 22–24.
Saakana, Amon Saba.“Garv ey and Rastafari.” Capital Issues Supplement, Aug. 1987, p. 15.
Salassi, Ray Kalin.Haile Selassie and the Openingof the Seven Seals . Chicago: Research Associates School Times, 1997.
Savinshinsky, Neil J.“Rastafari in the Promised Land: The Spread of a Jamaican Socio–religious Movement and Its
Music and Culture among the Youth of Ghana and Senegambia.” Ph.D. diss., Columbia University, 1993.
Scavilla, Norma.“The Persistence of Charisma: A Re-interpretation of Routinization.” Review of Social Theory 2, no. 2
(May 1974): 91–108.
Schmidt, Roger.ExploringRelig ion, 2d ed. Belmont, Calif.: Wadsworth, 1988.
Schuler, Monica.“Myalism and the African Religious Tradition in Jamaica.” In Africa and the Caribbean: The Legacies of a
Link, edited by Margaret Grahan and Franklin Knight, 65–79. Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press,
1979.
180 SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY


--- PAGE 196 ---
Schultz, Alfred, and Thomas Luckmann.The Structures of the Life –World. Translated by Richard M. Zanier and H.
Tristram Engelhardt, Jr. Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press, 1973.
Seaga, Edward.“Revival Cults in Jamaica.” Jamaica Journal 3, no. 2 (June 1969): 3–13.
Sealey, John, and Krister Malm.Music in the Caribbean. London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1982.
Segal, Aaron. “The Land of Look Behind: A Film about Reggae and Rastafarianism: A Review Article.” Caribbean
Review 12, no. 2 (1973): 36–37.
Semaj, Leahcim.“Race and Identity and Children of the African Diaspora: Contributions of Rastafari.” Caribe 4, no. 4
(1980): 14–18.
——. “Rastafari: From Religion to Social Theory.” In Rastafari,2 2–31. Kingston, Jamaica: Caribbean Quarterly,
University of the West Indies, 1985.
Semaj, Lehkem [Leahcim].“Rastafari and Jamaican Music.” Jamaica Record (Jamaica), Nov. 3, 1989, p. 7b.
——. “Revivalism, Mormonism and Rastafari.” Jamaica Record (Jamaica), Mar. 17, 1989, p. 9.
Sewell, Tony.Garvey's Children: The Legacy of Marcus Garvey. London and Basingstoke: Macmillan Caribbean/The Voice,
1990.
Signorile, Vito.“The Routinization of Hybris.” Qualitative Sociology 6, no. 3 (Fall 1983): 266–77.
Simpson, George Eaton.Black Religions in the New World. New York: Columbia University Press, 1978.
——. “Political Cultism in Western Kingston.” Social and Economic Studies 5 (1955): 133–49.
——. “The Ras Tafari Movement in Jamaica: A Study in Race and Class Conﬂict.” Social Forces 34, no. 2 (Dec. 1955):
168–70.
——. “The Ras Tafari Movement in Jamaica in Its Millennial Aspect.” InMillennial Dreams in Action, edit ed by SylviaL.
Thrupp, 160–65. The Hague: Mouton, 1970.
——. “Religionand SocialJustice: Some Reﬂections of theRastafari Movement.” Phylon 46, no. 4 (Dec.1985): 286–91.
——. Religious Cults of the Caribbean: Trinidad, Jamaica and Haiti. Rio Pedras, Puerto Rico: Institute of Caribbean Studies,
University of Puerto Rico, 1970.
Singham, A. W., and N. L. Singham.“Cultural Domination and Political Subordination: Notes Towards a Theory of
the Caribbean Political System.” Comparative Studies in Society and History 15, no. 3 (1973): 258–88.
Smelser, Neil J., ed.Handbook of Sociology. Newbury Park, Calif.: Sage, 1988.
Smith, M. G., Roy Augier, and RexNettleford.The Rastafari Movement in Kingston, Jamaica. Mona, Jamaica: Institute of
Social and Economic Research, University College of the West Indies, 1960.
Soukou, Ras.“Equality and Justice for All.” In Perceptions of the Environment: A Selection of Interpretative Essays, edited by
Yves Renard, 71–78. Bridgetown, Barbados: Caribbean Environmental Studies, 1979.
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY 181


--- PAGE 197 ---
Spencer, William David.Dread Jesus. London: Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, 1999.
Stephenson, Edward G.“Rastafari (Colonialism, Jamaica).” Ph.D. diss., University of California, Santa Cruz, 1987.
Stewart, Robert J.“Religionand Society in Jamaica, 1831–1880: Conﬂict, Compromise, and the Christian Churches in
the Post-slave Colony.” Ph.D. thesis, University of the West Indies, 1983.
Stone, Carl.Class, Race, and Political Behaviours in Urban Jamaica. Kingston, Jamaica: Institute of Social and Economic
Research, University of the West Indies, 1973.
Stone, Carl, and Aggrey Brown, eds.Essays on Power and Change in Jamaica. Kingston, Jamaica: Jamaica Publishing, 1977.
——. Perspectives on Jamaica in the 1970s. Kingston, Jamaica: Jamaica Publishing, 1981.
Surlin, Stuart H.“Authoritarianism and Alienation among African-Oriented Jamaicans.” Journal of Black Studies19 (Dec.
1988): 232–49.
Tafari, I Jabulani.“The Rastafari: Successors of Marcus Garvey.” In Rastafari, 1–12. Kingston, Jamaica: Caribbean
Quarterly, University of the West Indies, 1985.
Tafari, Ikael.“Rastafari in Transition: Cultural Confrontation and Political Change in Ethiopia and the Caribbean.”
Bulletin of Eastern Caribbean Affairs 15, no. 1 (Mar./Apr. 1989): 1–13.
Tafari-Ama, Imani M.“Rastawoman as Rebel: Case Studies in Jamaica.” In ChantingDown Babylon: The Rastafari Reader,
edited by N. Samuel Murrell et al., 89–106. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1998.
Taylor, Patrick D. M.“Perspectives on History in Rastafari Thought.” Studies in Religion 19 (Nov. 1990): 191–25.
——. “Rastafari, the Other and Exodus Politics: EATUP (Ethiopian-African Theocracy Union Policy).” Journal of
Religious Studies 17, nos. 1–2 (1991): 95–107.
Theobald, Robin.“A Charisma Too Versatile?” Archives Europeennes de Sociologie 19, no. 1 (1978): 192–98.
Thomas, Curlew O., and Barbara Boston-Thomas.“Charisma and Charismatic Changes: A Study of a Black Sect.” Free
Inquiry in Creative Sociology 17, no. 1 (1989): 107–11.
Thomas, Michael.“The Rastas Are Coming, the Rastas Are Coming.” RollingStone , Aug. 2, 1976, pp. 32–37.
Thompson, Winston A.“Reggae Music: The Affective Epistemology.” Union Seminary Quarterly Review 36 (Summer
1981): 259–69.
Toch, Hans.The Social Psychology of Social Movements. Indianapolis, Ind.: Bobbs-Merrill, 1965.
Troeltsch, Ernst.The Social Teachingof the Christian Churches . Translated by Olive Wyon. New York: Macmillan, 1931.
Troyna, Barry A.“The Reggae War.” New Society 39, no. 753 (Mar. 10, 1977): 491–92.
182 SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY


--- PAGE 198 ---
Turner, Jonathan H., Leonard Beeghley, and Charles Power.The Emergence of Sociological Theory, 2d ed. Belmont, Calif.:
Dorsey, 1989.
van Dijk, Frank Jan. Jahmaica: Rastafari and Jamaican Society, 1930– 1990. Utrecht, Netherlands: Intern Studenten
Overlegorgaan Rotterdam (ISOR), 1993.
Vermaat, J. A. Emerson.“Church and State in Grenada during the Bishop Regime, 1979–1983.” Religion in Communist
Lands 14, no. 1 (Spring 1986): 43–58.
Walcott, Derek.The Joker of Seville and O Babylon. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1978.
Wallace, Anthony.Religion: An Anthropological View. New York: Random House, 1966.
——. “Revitalization Movements.” American Anthropologist 58 (1956): 264–81.
Wallis, Roy.“Processes in the Development of Social Movements.” Scottish Journal of Sociology 1, no. 1 (Nov. 1976):
81–93.
Waters, Anita M. Race, Class and Political Symbols: Rastafari and Reggae in Jamaican Politics . New Brunswick, N.J.:
Transactional, 1984.
Watson, Lewelyn.“Patterns of Black Protest in Jamaica: The Case of the Rastafarians.” Journal of Black Studies4 (Mar.
1974): 329–43.
Weber, Max.Ancient Judaism. Translated and edited by Hans Gerth and Don Martindale. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press,
1952.
——. Economy and Society: An Outline of Interpretive Sociology, 3 vols. Edited by Guenther Roth and Claus Wittich. New
York: Bedminster, 1968.
——. The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. Translated by Talcott Parsons. New York: Scribner's, 1958.
——. The Religion of China: Confucianism and Taoism. Translated and edited by Hans Gerth and Don Martindale. New
York: Collier and Macmillan, 1964.
——. The Religion of India: The Sociology of Hinduism and Buddhism. Translated and edited by Hans Gerth. New York: Free
Press, 1967.
——. The Sociology of Religion. Translated by Ephraim Fischoff. Boston: Beacon, 1963.
——. The Theory of Social and Economic Organization. Translated by A. M. Henderson and Talcott Parsons. New York:
Free Press, 1947.
Welcome, B. Patricia.“Prejudice, Discrimination, and the Rastafarian Experience.” Bulletin of Eastern Caribbean Affairs
15, no. 1 (Mar./Apr. 1989): 14–19.
White, Garth.“The Development of Jamaican Popular Music. Part 2: The Urbanization of the Folk.” African-Caribbean
Inst
itute of Jamaica Research Review 1 (1984): 47–80.
——. “Reggae: A Musical Weapon.” Caribe 4, no. 4 (1980): 6–10.
——. “Ruddie, Oh Ruddie.” Caribbean Quarterly 13 (Sept. 1967): 39–45.
White, Timothy.Catch a Fire: Life of Bob Marley. London: Corgi, 1983; rev. ed., New York: Holt, 1986.
Whitney, Malika Lee, and Dermott Hussey.Bob Marley: Reggae King of the World. Kingston, Jamaica: KingstonPublishers,
1984.
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY 183


--- PAGE 199 ---
Williams, K. M.The Rastafarians. London: Ward Lock, 1981.
Willner, Ann Ruth.Charismatic Political Leadership: A Theory. Princeton, N.J.: Center of International Studies, Princeton
University, 1968.
Willner, Ann Ruth, and Dorothy Willner.“The Rise of Charismatic Leaders.” Annals of the American Academy of Political
and Social Science 358 (1965): 77–89.
Wilson, Bryan R.Magic and the Millennium. London: Heinemann 1973.
Witvliet, Theo.A Place in the Sun: Liberation Theology in the Third World. New York: Orbis, 1985.
Worsley, Peter.The Trumpet Shall Sound. London: MacGibbon and Kee, 1957.
Wright, Christopher.“Cultural Continuity and the Growth of West Indian Religionin Britain.” Religion 14 (Oct. 1984):
337–56.
Yawney, Carole D.“Don' VexThen Pray: The Methodology of Initiation Fifteen Years Later.” Paper presented at the
Qualitative Research Conference, University of Waterloo, Canada, May 15–17, 1985.
——. “Dread Wasteland: Rastafarian Ritual in West Kingston, Jamaica.” In Ritual, Symbolism and Ceremonialism in the
Americas: Studies in Symbolic Anthropology , edited by N. Ross Crumrine, 154–74. Greenley, Colo.: Museum of
Anthropology, University of Northern Colorado, 1978.
——. “The Global Status of Rastafari.” Caribbean Times, July 10, 1990, pp. 24–25.
——. “To Grow a Daughter: Cultural Liberation and the Dynamics of Oppression in Jamaica.” In Feminism in Canada,
edited by A. Miles and G. Finn, 119–44. Montreal: Black Rose, 1983.
——. “Herb and the Chalice: The Symbolic Life of the Children of Slaves in Jamaica.” Project G 218, Substudy no.
522. Toronto: Addiction Research Foundation, 1972.
——. “Lions in Babylon: The Rastafarians of Jamaica as Visionary Movement.” Ph.D. diss., McGill University, 1978.
——. “Rastafarian Sistrin by the Rivers of Babylon.” Canadian Women Studies 5, no. 2 (Winter 1983): 73–75.
——. “Remnant of All Nations: Rastafarian Attitudes to Race and Nationality.“In Ethnicity in the Americas”, edited by
Francis Henry, 231–62. The Hague: Mouton, 1976.
Yawney, Carole D., and Clemanada Yawney.“As Smoke Drive Them Out: Rastafarians and the Sacred Herb.” Paper
presented at the Bucke Memorial SocietyConference on the Transformation of Consciousness, Montreal, Oct. 24,
1973.
Zald, Mayer N., and Roberta Ash.“Social Movement Organizations: Growth, Decay and Change.” Social Forces44, no.
3 (March 1966): 27–42.
184 SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY


--- PAGE 200 ---
Index
Abeng, 89
Abrahams, Carl, 97
accommodation, 4, 23, 79, 84–90, 119, 145n87
activists, political and social, 137–38
Adastra Road compound, 70, 102, 107
African-American History Month, 160–61n95
African identity;cultural revitalization and, 52–54; I-ssemblies
and, 78; Rasta image and, 73, 119, 135; reappropriation
of, 5, 54–56, 151–52n79; reggae music and, 51
African Liberation Day, 77
African religions, 5, 32–33, 91, 103
Afro-Christian religions, 5, 25, 33, 90, 91, 103, 146n12
akete, 100, 102
alienation, 5, 21, 31, 49, 59, 128
Alphonso, Roland, 108
Amos, 17
Anancyism, exorcism of, 56–58, 65
Anancy, 49, 56–57, 58, 152nn83, 87, 90
Andy, Bob, 44
Anglo-American alliance, 45
Anservitz, Robert M., 21–22, 25, 27
Anthony B, 125
argot, Rastafarian, 62– 65, 155n10; in Abeng, 89; African
identity and, 73; cooptation of, 119; development of,
132; in literature, 98– 99; in political campaigns, 91– 92;
popular Jamaican parlance and, 160n80
Ash, Roberta, 23–24, 123
assimilation, 79, 84–90, 123
Augier, Roy, 84
Austin-Broos, Diane J., 134
authentic culture, 134–37
authority. See charismatic authority; rational-legal authority;
traditional domination
Babel, 43
Babylon, 41–42; artiﬁciality, 59, 60; background and signi-
ﬁcation of, 43–46; delegitimation of, 42, 44, 148–49n5;
demise of, 50– 52, 78; features ofeconomic rapacity,
47–48historical atrocities, 46–47mental slavery, 48–49political
trickery, 49–50; Jamaican life as exile in, 4, 29, 72–73,
79–81
Babylon conspiracy theory, 47
Babylonian civilization, 43, 45
Back O' Wall, 77, 83, 84, 157n62, 162–63n26
Baker,
Moses, 35
baldheads, 50, 57, 80, 157n7
Banton, Buju, 125
Baptist church, 33, 34–35. See also Native Baptist movement
Barrett, Leonard, 3–4, 58, 127–28, 129, 131


--- PAGE 201 ---
186 INDEX
Bedward, Alexander, 33
belief and doubt, 72, 76
Bennett, Louise, 98
Berger, Peter, 16, 27, 42
biblical hermeneutics, 43, 46, 61, 80, 90–91, 153n119
Bicknell, C. A., 81
Bilby, Kenneth, 60, 100
biographical method, 135–37
Bishton, Derek, 81
Bisnauth, Dale, 35, 36
Black Power movement, 88–89, 90, 97
Blackwell, Chris, 93, 112–13
Blyden, Edward Wilmot, 34
Bob Marley Day, 114, 165n89
Bob Marley Entertainment Centre, 94, 160n93
Bob Marley Foundation, 114
Bobo Dreads, 69, 155n21
Bogle, Paul, 33–34, 158n28
Bongo Jerry, 49, 64, 98
Boston-Thomas, Barbara, 21
Breiner, Laurence A., 62–63, 64, 71, 114
brethren, 69, 155n10
Brooks, Cedric, 93, 108
Brother Job, 102
Brother Man (Mais), 98
Brother Samuel, 122
Brown, Aggrey, 31
Brown, Everald, 98
Bryan, Maurice, 130, 131
bureaucratic organization, 9, 12, 17, 24–25, 119, 121, 144n66
Burning Spear, 46
Burru, 77, 100–102, 106, 111
Bustamante, Alexander, 84
Byﬁeld, Bevis, 165n6
calendar, Rastafarian, 77, 78, 119
Callam, Neville G., 4
Campbell, Horace, 130–31
capitalism, 8, 9, 16, 45, 47–48
Carifesta, 107
Cashmore, Ernest; on development of reggae, 105, 108; on
dreadlocks, 59; on dread talk, 62, 64; on ideological
delegitimation, 42; on individualism, 71; on police
brutality, 47; on symbolic strategies, 73, 74, 132
Catholic church, 45, 46, 122
Cawes, B. F., 81
centralization, 71–72, 122–23. See also bureaucratic organiza-
tion
chalice, 74, 156nn39, 40
Channer, Collin, 99
chanting, 75, 78
ChantingDown Babylon: The Rastafari Reader ,1 3 9
charisma; ideas as social forces and, 7–8, 41, 142n4; legitimate
domination and, 7, 11– 12; rationalization and, 8 –11;
routinization and, 3–5, 6, 12–16, 23–26, 118
charismatic authority, 12, 13–14, 26, 27. See also charismatic
leaders
charismatic eruption, 3, 13–14, 16, 17, 18–23, 40;
 Rastafarian
movementhistoricalroots of, 32–36sociohistorical context
for, 29–32
charismatic leaders, 13 –15, 27, 143nn37, 50; in early
Rastafarian movement, 36 –40, 147n38; emergence of,
8, 12, 20–23, 118; social location of, 16–18
Chevannes, Barry; on aftermath of Henry affairs, 83; on
dreadlocks, 59; on dread talk, 62; on European cultural
values, 53, 111, 134; on folk religions and Rastafari, 25,
68, 132; on ganja, 125; on Jamaican poor, 55, 90
Children of Sisyphus, The (Patterson), 98
chillum, 132, 156n40
Christmas, 77, 101, 162n12
Christopher Columbus and Rastafari, 136
Church and Society Commission, 165n6


--- PAGE 202 ---
INDEX 187
churchical organizations, 70
Church of Haile Selassie, 70
church-sect typology, 4, 165n6
City on a Hill, 69
Clarke, Sebastian, 105, 111
Claudius, 34
Cliff, Jimmy, 93, 111
Cohen, Abner, 73
colonialism; Anancy and, 57, 152n83; Babylon and, 41,
42–43, 45, 72–73; Jonkunu and, 103; Leonard Howell and,
80, 117–18
colors, Rastafarian, 56, 73, 94, 98, 119, 160–61n95
Comitas, Lambros, 60
commercial gain, 93–96, 119
commodiﬁcation, 79, 90–96, 119
communes, 69, 70–71. See also Pinnacle commune
conscience collectif,7 8
conventions, 76–77, 82–83, 133, 157n59.See also I-ssemblies
cooptation, 4, 79, 90–96, 119
Coral Garden Massacre, 81, 82, 83
Coser, Lewis, 8
Count Ossie, 70, 77, 102, 106, 107–8, 109, 111
Cowan, Tommy, 123
craft markets, Jamaican, 94–95
Crown Colony rule, 30–31
cultural deprivation, 5, 21, 31, 44, 48–49, 53
cultural revitalization.See revitalization
Culture-History and the Universal Spread of Rastafari (McPherson),
136
culture tourism, 4, 94
daddy, 33, 146n12
Daley, Leonard, 98
Dance, Daryl C., 56, 57
Dangerous Drug Laws, 83
Daniel, 43
Davies, James C., 19
Davis, Stephen, 104
Dawes, Kwame, 99
de Albuquerque, Klaus, 95–96
Dekker, Desmond, 93
Dekmejian, Richard H., 23
delegitimation, 5, 42–52, 148–49n5
demockroicy, 50
democracy, 71, 155n24
depersonalized charisma, 15, 143n50
deprivation theory, 127–28, 130
Dread Jesus,1 3 9
dreadlocks; adoption by non-Rastas, 93, 124; African identity
and, 56, 58–60, 73, 78, 119; Arthur Kitchen and, 165n9;
baldheads and, 57, 80, 157n7; on carved images, 95; in
educational system, 48, 150n38; gender roles and, 133;
origin of, 58–59; as Rastafarian trademark, 132; shaving
of, 83; signiﬁcance of, 50
dread talk,
62–65, 155n10; inAbeng, 89; African identity and,
73; cooptation of, 119; in literature, 98–99; origin of, 62; in
political campaigns, 91– 92; popular Jamaican parlance
and, 160n80; signiﬁcance of, 62–65
drumming, 75, 77, 78, 162n12.See also Nyabinghi drumming
Drummond, Don, 106–7, 108, 109, 111
Du Bois, W. E. B., 56–57
Dungle, 102, 162–63n26
Dunkley, Henry Archibald, 37
Durkheim, Émile, 78
dynamic community, 132–34
earthforce, 59, 68, 76, 78
East indian inﬂuences, 148n56
Easton, H., 34
economic deprivation, 5, 21, 29–30, 47–48
educational system, 48–49, 150n38
Edwards, Emmanuel, Prince, 69, 76, 82–83, 155n21
eldership, 44, 69, 75, 77, 78, 91, 122–23, 133


--- PAGE 203 ---
188 INDEX
election campaigns.See political campaigns
emancipation, 30, 47, 101
emigration, 55–56, 85–86, 129, 166n10
entrenchment, 3–6, 7, 27–28, 67, 117–21, 141n3
escapism, 127–30, 131, 167n16
Ethiopian International Uniﬁcation Committee, 122
Ethiopianism, 5, 32, 34–36, 54, 55, 72, 146nn14, 15, 19
Ethiopian national colors, 56, 73, 119
Ethiopian National Congress, 70
Ethiopian Orthodoxchurch, 71, 85, 87, 159n55
Ethiopian Salvation Society, 37
Ethiopian World Federation, 55–56, 71
Ethiopia Unbounded (Hayford), 34
ethos of Rastafari, 5, 67–78, 119, 135; ideological/symbolic
world view, 72–74, 119, 120, 157n54; reticulate structure,
67–72; ritual activities, 74–78
European cultural values; Babylon as, 48, 54, 74; of Jamaican
society, 5, 31–32, 53, 84, 111, 132
Exodus (Marley album), 114
Faristzaddi, Mihlawhdh, 137
Folkes Brothers, 107, 163n51
folklore, Jamaican, 49, 56–58, 152n83
Forsythe, Dennis, 44, 53, 58, 62, 124–25, 135, 136, 137
Fox, Abuna, 70
Freedom Fighters, 59
From Babylon to Rastafari (Mack), 135
frustration-eruption formula, 20–21, 40, 144n68
ganja; decriminalization of, 125; as derogatory term,
153n114; green as symbol of, 56; in I-ssemblies, 77–78; ital
living and, 60– 62; justiﬁcation of, 61–62; as means of
resistance, 61, 75, 80, 82; in ritual activities, 42, 68–69,
74–76, 119, 132, 133, 156nn39, 40; as a sacrament, 75; as a
source of illumination, 61, 65; suppression of cultivation
and use, 37– 38, 83–84, 92, 124–25; tendency to gloss
over, 131; as therapeuticsubstance, 135, 137; therapeutic
values, 61– 65, 75
Garvey, Marcus, 35–36, 55, 70, 131, 137–38, 147n34
Garveyism, 5, 32, 35–36, 53
Gaynair, Bunny, 108
gender roles
, 133–34, 155n24, 167n14, 168n31
Genesis, 43, 61, 80
Geographia (Claudius), 34
Gong (Howell), 39
Goodison, Lorna, 99
Gordon, William, 158n28
Grammy Awards, 94
grassroots movements, 47, 72, 122
groundation, 74, 76, 122
grounding, 72, 74–76, 88, 102, 119
Groundings with My Brothers (Rodney), 88
Haile Selassie; allegiance to, 80; association of lions with, 58;
birthdayof, 77; centralityof, 135, 136, 137; crowning of,
29, 32, 36, 54, 77, 117–18; death of, 55; divinity of, 36, 37,
38, 42, 45, 54–55, 124, 136, 147n34; land grant of, 55–56;
Nyabinghi secret society led by, 76; as person of the
Rastafarian trinity, 70; picture postcards of, 37, 39;
Rastafari named after, 141n1; reggae and, 106; rod of
correction and, 90 –91; status in Ethiopian Orthodox
church, 159n55; visit to Jamaica, 77, 85, 86–87, 90


--- PAGE 204 ---
INDEX 189
Haile Selassie Secondary School, 150n38
Hall, Viv, 108
Harder They Come, The (ﬁlm), 99
Hayford, Casely, 34
Henry, Claudius, 70, 76, 80, 83, 90, 155n21
Henry, Eron, 123
Henry, Paget, 25, 73, 155n21
Henry, Ronald, 80–81, 83
Henry affairs, 80–81, 83
herbal healing, 60–62
Hibbert, Joseph Nathaniel, 37
Hibbert, Toots, 105
hierarchicalorganization. See bureaucraticorganization; central-
ization
Hill, Robert, 35, 37, 39
Hinds, Robert, 37, 82
historical identity.See African identity
historical roots of Rastafarian movement, 32–36
holy days, 77, 78, 119
Holy Piby: The Blackman's Bible (Rogers), 136
Homiak, John Paul; on Babylon, 44; on elders, 69, 86,
132–33; on grounding, 74, 75, 76; on I-ssemblies, 77, 78
House of Youth Black Faith (HYBF), 40, 59, 62, 80, 132
houses, 4, 68–69, 70, 74, 119, 142n10
Howell, Hope L., 39
Howell, Leonard; arrests and conviction of, 37–38, 82; on
divinity of Haile Selassie, 136; dreadlocks and, 59; as
early charismatic leader, 5, 38– 40, 80, 118; as Gang-
unguru Maragh, 39, 148n56; Pinnacle commune and,
37–38, 69, 124
Hussey, Dermott, 105, 106, 109, 110, 112, 113–14
I-and-I consciousness; divine essence and, 55, 151n73; ganja
and, 75; in ideological/symbolic world view, 72, 73, 119;
individualism and, 68, 71, 76, 121; in Rastafarian argot,
64, 154n141; in visual arts, 98
ideas as social forces, 7–8, 120, 142n4
ideological/symbolic/ritual ethos, 25, 119
ideological/symbolic world view, 72–74, 119, 120, 157n54
individualism, 4, 68, 71, 76, 121–22
intelligentsia, Jamaican, 87–89, 119, 126
intervisitation, 72, 75, 102, 119, 120
Isaiah, 17
Island Records, 93, 113
I-ssemblies, 72, 74, 76–78, 102, 119, 156n39
ital living, 42, 60–62, 69, 73, 77, 78, 137
Itations of Jamaica and I Rastafari (Faristzaddi), 137
I/Threes, 123
Jackson, John, 94
Jah, 45, 55, 59, 61, 68, 75, 78
Jamaica Council of Churches, 87, 122, 165n6
Jamaican Art movement, 97
Jamaican Labour Party (JLP), 91–92
Jamaican patois, 64, 155n10
Jamaican society; as Babylon, 4, 29, 72–73, 79–81; entrench-
ment of Rastafari in, 5, 7, 27 –28, 67, 117 –20; as
matrifo
cal, 167n14, 168n31; rapprochement with Rasta-
farian movement, 4, 6, 84–90, 119
Jamaica Tourist Board, 94
JamFest, 94
Johnson, Linton Kwesi, 98–99
Johnson-Hill, Jack Anthony, 4, 130–31
Joker of Seville, The (Walcott), 98
Jones, Robert Alun, 21–22, 25, 27
Jonkunu, 100, 103, 106, 162n12
“Joshua” (Michael Manley), 90–91
Judah, tribe of, 58
Kebra Negast, The, 136, 146–47n19
Kenyatta, Jomo, 59


--- PAGE 205 ---
190 INDEX
Kitchen, Arthur, 123, 165n9
Kitzinger, Sheila, 128–29, 167n14
knowing, 72, 76
kochi, 132, 156n40
Kumina, 60, 100, 103, 106, 111, 162n12
labeling as social control, 81–82
Lake, Obiagele, 133, 134
Lantenari, Vittorio, 81, 167n16
leading brethren, 69, 75
leading lights, 38, 123, 148n48
Lee, Byron, 93, 111
legitimate domination, 7, 11–12
Leib, Elliot, 100
Lewis, Linden F., 51
Liele, George, 34–35
lionism, 56–58, 119
literature, Jamaican, 98–99, 120
Long, Theodore, 16, 25–26, 27
Lord Flea, 103
Lord Fly, 103
Lorne, Michael, 122
Luciano, 125
Luckmann, Thomas, 42
MABRAK, 64
Mack, Douglas R. A., 135–36, 137
madda, 146n12
Mais, Roger, 98
Malloch, Theodore, 88, 112
Malm, Krister, 110
Manley, Edna, 97
Manley, Michael, 90–91, 92, 95, 113
Manley, Norman, 97
Mansingh, Ajai, 54
Mansingh, Laxmi, 54
mansions, 4, 70, 119, 142n10
Maragh, Gangunguru (Howell), 39, 136, 148n56
marches, protest, 80
marginality, 129, 167n14
marijuana. See ganja
Marley, Bob; on African/Afro-Christian religions, 32; on
alienation, 44–45; on Babylon, 50, 51; on thechurch, 49;
as cultural hero, 4, 112 –13; death of, 62, 113 –14; on
economic exploitation, 47– 48; on education system,
48–49; on Middle Passage, 46; at peace concerts, 95; political
campaigns and, 91; on political trickery, 50; Rasta image
and, 93; social protest and, 109; on weapons of mass
destruction, 47
Marley, Rita, 114
Marley Museum, 114
Marx, Karl, 7–8, 22
mass society theory, 18–19
matrifocal society, 167n14, 168n31
McCook, Tommy, 108
McNair, Little G., 108
McPherson, E. S. P., 136
Menelik, 34
mental slavery, 48–49
mento, 103
middle class, Jamaican, 32, 49, 55, 81, 111–12, 151n77
Middle Passage, 41, 46, 85, 148n4
migration, 55–56, 85–86, 129, 166n10
militancy, 123–26
millennialism,
127–30, 131, 167n16
Miller, David, Sr., 97
Ministry of Culture (Jamaica), 114
missions to Africa, 85–86, 87
Mittoo, Jackie, 104
modernization paradigm, 25
Morant Bay Rebellion, 30, 33, 83, 158n28
Mowatt, Judy, 123
Muenster, Sebastian, 34
Mulvaney, Becky Michele, 64, 130–31
music, Rasta.See Nyabinghi drumming; reggae music
Mussolini, 46
Mutabaruka, 98
myalism, 33, 103, 146n11
Mystic Revelation of Rastafari, 70, 107
Nagashima, Yoshiko, 76, 99, 114, 122
National Gallery (Jamaica), 98, 161n3
Native Baptist movement, 35, 68, 103
Nebuchadnezzar, 43
Negro Aroused (Manley sculpture), 97


--- PAGE 206 ---
INDEX 191
Nettleford, Rex, 31, 52, 64, 84, 86, 89–90, 94, 130
networks, 67–68, 72, 77, 102, 119, 133
Nyabinghi drumming, 42, 69, 100–102, 108, 111, 120
Nyabinghi I-ssemblies.See I-ssemblies
Nyabinghi Order, 44, 133, 149n13
O Babylon (Walcott), 98
obeah, 33, 146n11
Onoura, Oku, 98
oppression, 5, 31, 42
organic living, 60–62
Organization of African Unity, 77
Owens, Joseph, 65, 130, 132, 134
Pan-Africanism, 137–38
paraphernalia, Rastafarian, 94–95, 160–61n95
Parchment, Clinton, 81
parlance, popular Jamaican, 4, 62–65, 160n80
Parsons, Talcott, 8
patriarchal ethos, 133–34, 155n24, 167n14, 168n31
Patterson, Orlando, 81, 98, 128, 129, 166n10
peace concerts, 95
Peacemakers Association, 70, 155n21
Pennington, J. C., 34
Pentecostalism, 134
People's National party (PNP), 90–92, 151n77
performing arts, Jamaican, 4, 98, 99, 120
picture postcards, 37, 39
Pinnacle commune, 37–38, 39, 59, 69, 82, 84, 100, 101, 124
Planno, Mortimer, 86
plantation slavery, 5, 29–30, 42, 47, 101, 152n83
police, 45, 47, 80–83, 112
political campaigns, 4, 90–93, 125
political deprivation, 5, 21, 30–31, 49–50, 55, 95
political independence, Jamaican, 32, 81, 104
Pollard, Velma, 64, 68, 114
polytricks/politricks, 49–50, 92
poor, Jamaican; Babylon and, 49
political campaigns and, 151n77; Rastafarian movement and,
5, 29, 87, 89–90, 119; reggae and, 51, 111; use of yards,
155n8
pope, 45, 46
popular culture, Jamaican, 99 –114; commodi ﬁcation of
Rastafarian image and, 93– 96; Rastafarian presence in,
3–5, 6, 90, 97–115, 119–21, 126
popular music, Jamaican, 99 –114; mento, 103; Nyabinghi
drumming, 42, 69, 100–102; Rastafarian inﬂuence on, 3,
97, 99–100, 106–11,
 125; reggae. See reggae music; rock-
steady, 104–5, 106, 107, 108–9, 111; ska, 103–4, 106–7,
108–9, 111; social reaction to, 111–14
Prescod, Colin, 95
Prester John, 146n15
Prince Buster, 163n51
Promised Key, The (Howell), 81, 136
Prophet (Manley sculpture), 97
Prophet of Jah Rastafari, 136
Prophet on Reggae Mountain, 136
prophets, 10, 13; Garvey as, 36; Howell as, 39; Old
Testament, 16–17, 25–26
Protestant ethic, 8, 9, 16
Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, The (Weber), 8, 9
protest music, 105, 108–10, 124
Psalms, 34
Pukkumina, 68, 100, 103, 162n12
Ranglin, Ernie, 108
Ras Dizzy, 98
Ras Historian, 70, 88, 122
Rasta and Resistance: From Marcus Garvey to Walter Rodney
(Campbell), 131


--- PAGE 207 ---
192 INDEX
Rasta: Don't Touch I (Miller painting), 97
Ras Tafari.See Haile Selassie
Rastafari; as authentic culture, 134–37; biblicalhermeneutics,
43, 46, 61, 153n119; as dynamic community, 132–34; East
indian inﬂuences on, 39, 148n56; ideological/symbolic
world view of, 72–74, 119, 120, 157n54
review of literature about, 127–39
ritual activities of, 74–78, 156nn39, 40; use of term in text,
141n1 See also Rastafarian movement
Rastafarian Centralisation Organization (RCO), 122
Rastafari and Politics (McPherson), 136
Rastafarianmovement;adherentsof, 3, 141n2; emergenceof,
29–40; entrenchment in Jamaican society, 3 –6, 7, 27– 28,
79–96, 120–21, 141n3; ethos of.See ethos of Rastafari; future
of, 6, 121–26; historical roots of, 32–36; 1960 study of,
83, 84–85, 87, 119, 128, 129, 130, 158–59n38; rapprochement
with wider society, 4, 6, 84–90, 119; reticulate structure
of, 67– 72, 119, 120; role of women in, 133–34, 155n24,
156n39, 167n14, 168n31; routinization of, 3 –5, 6, 115,
117–21; sociohistorical context of, 5, 29–32; use of term in
text, 141n1
Rastafarian Movement Association, 70, 122
Rastafarian Theocratic Government, 70
Rastafari Ible, The, 136
Rastafari International Theocracy Assembly, 71–72
Rastas; as millennial escapists, 127–30; as political and social
activists, 137–38; as social change agents, 130–32; use of
term in text, 141n1
Rastifari Women: Subordination in the Midst of Liberation Theology
(Lake), 134
rastology, 76, 157n54
rationalization, charisma and, 7, 8–11
rational-legal authority, 12, 20, 25–26, 27, 28
reappropriation of Africa/Ethiopia, 54–56, 65, 78, 151–52n79
reasoning, 68–69, 71, 74–76,
 77, 119, 133, 156n39
Reckford, Verena, 76–77, 99, 101, 102, 107
reggae music; Abeng and, 89; commodiﬁcation of, 93– 96;
cooptation by politicians, 91–92; in demise of Babylon,
51, 124; developmentof, 5, 105–11, 120, 163n44; inﬁlm, 99;
social reaction to, 111–14
Reggae Sunsplash, 94, 160n93
Reid, Vick, 85
relative deprivation theory, 18–19
repatriation; African identity and, 54–56, 151–52n79; change
in emphasis from, 123, 137; exploration of possibility,
84–87, 92, 128, 158–59n38; Howell's message of, 37–38; I-
ssemblies and, 78; as millennial escapism, 129; as theme
of street meetings and marches, 80, 124; through rational
means, 70
repression, 4, 79–84, 119, 120, 145n87
resistance, 5, 79–84
resource mobilization theory, 18–19
reticulate structure, 67–72, 119, 120
Revelation, 43, 61, 80


--- PAGE 208 ---
INDEX 193
revitalization, 41, 52–54, 65–66; of Africa/Ethiopia identify
and culture, 54– 56, 78, 151–52n79; dreadlocks, cultiva-
tion of, 58–60; ital livity, 60–62; lionism and exorcism of
Anancism, 56– 58; Rastafarian argot, 62–65
Revival, 100, 162n12
Revivalism, 68, 103
ritual activities, 74–78
rock-steady, 104–5, 106, 107, 108–9, 111
Rodney, Walter, 48, 88–89, 131
rod of correction, 90–91
Rodriques, Rico, 105
Rogers, Claudia, 52, 65
Rogers, Robert Athlyi, 136
Roman Empire, 43, 45, 46
Rose Hall Great House, 81
routinization; of Rastafari in Jamaican society, 3–5, 6, 115,
117–21; Weber's theory of, 12–16, 23–26, 68, 141n4
Rowe, Maureen, 133
Rubin, Vera, 60
rude boys, 105, 109, 133
Saint-Simonism, 21, 22, 25
Salkey, Andrew, 99
Scarlett, Z. Munro, 39
Scott, Denis, 99
Seaga, Edward, 91, 92, 95, 113
Sealey, John, 110
Semaj, Leahcim, 31, 52, 53–54, 59, 137–38
Shaggy, 163n51
Shanty Town.See Back O' Wall
Sharpe, Sam, 33–34
Shearer, Hugh, 91
Sheba legend, 34, 136, 146–47n19
Simon, Peter, 104
Simpson, George Eaton, 79, 81, 127–28, 129, 131
Sizzla, 125
ska, 103–4, 106–7, 108–9, 111
Skatalites, 106–7, 109
slavery. See Middle Passage; plantation slavery
Smile Jamaica concert, 95
Smith, Ernie, 92
Smith, M. G., 84
Smith, Mikey, 49–50, 98
Snergy, 94
social change, 5, 7, 8–11, 73; Rastas as agents of, 130–32
social deprivation. See cultural
deprivation
social forces, ideas as, 7–8, 120, 142n4
social movement organizations (SMOs), 24
social movements, emergence of, 18–19, 24–25, 27, 144n66
social protest music, 105, 108–10
social-psychological factors, 19–20, 128–29, 134
social-structural factors, 19–20
sociohistoricalconditions; forcharismaticeruptions, 18– 23; of
Rastafarian movement, 5, 29–32
sociological theory, 5, 142n11
Sociology of Religion, The (Weber), 8
Solomon, 34, 58, 61, 136, 146–47n19
Sons of Negus, 70
sound systems, 104, 111
spider. See Anancy
spliffs, 74, 156n40
statical organizations, 70
stone, 43, 149n10
Stone, Carl, 95
street meetings, 79, 129
street talk.See parlance, popular Jamaican
structural strain theory, 18–19, 144n68, 145n87
succession, 14–15, 24, 120
suffrage, universal adult, 31, 32
symbolic world view.See ideological/symbolic world view
symbols, Rastafarian, 73– 74; commodiﬁcation of, 94– 95,
160–61n95; cooptation of, 4, 90– 93, 119; in visual arts,
97–98, 161n3
Tacky Rebellion, 33, 146n11
Tafari, I Jabulani, 51, 64, 121


--- PAGE 209 ---
194 INDEX
Tafari, Ras.See Haile Selassie
Tafari-Ama, Imani M., 133
Taylor, Patrick, 42
Thomas, Curlew O., 21
Tosh, Peter, 92, 109
tourist attractions, 4, 81, 94
trade union movement, 32, 55, 97
traditional domination, 12, 25–26, 27, 28
Trench Town, 109, 112
trickery, political, 49–50
Troeltsch, Ernst, 4, 68, 165n6
Twelve Tribes of Israel, 70, 155n21
unemployment, 32, 55, 84
Universal Negro Improvement Association (UNIA), 35, 39
University of the West indies, 88, 122, 125; 1960 study, 83,
84–85, 87, 119, 128, 129, 130, 158–59n38
van Dijk, Frank Jan, 130–31
Vassel, Samuel, 123
vegetarian diet, 60
violence, 80–84
visits of African dignitaries, 85–87
visual arts, Jamaican, 4, 97–98, 120
Wailer, Bunny, 109
Wailers, 93, 109, 112–13
Walcott, Derek, 98
Wallace, Anthony, 22, 41, 141n4
Wareika Hills communes, 69, 76–77
Watson, Osmond, 98
Weber, Max; charisma and ideas as social forces, 7–8, 142n4;
charisma and legitimate domination, 11–12; charisma and
rationalization, 8–11; charisma and routinization, 3–4, 5,
7, 12–16, 23–26, 68, 141n4critique of, 16–28, 118; charismatic
eruption, sociohistorical conditions and, 18 –23, 29;
charismatic leaders, 16–18, 39, 40, 118
White, Garth, 103, 104, 106, 107, 108–9, 110
Whitney, Malika, 105, 106, 110, 112, 113–14
wider society, rapprochement with, 4, 6, 84–90, 119
Williams, K. M., 63
Williams, Oswald.See Count Ossie
Willner, Ann Ruth, 20–21, 22–23, 27, 29, 32, 40
Willner, Dorothy, 22–23
Wilson, Jephet, 39
wisdom weed.See ganja
women, role of, 133–34, 155n24, 167n14, 168n31
working
class, Jamaican, 32, 55, 89
world view; Afrocentric, 32 –33; ideological/symbolic, 4,
72–74, 119, 120, 157n54
Wyszomirski, Margaret J., 23
yards, 68–69, 74–76, 129, 133, 155n8, 156n39, 167n27
Yawney, Carole; on cooptation, 95; on ganja, 61, 132–33; on
ideological/symbolic ethos, 73–74, 89; on networks, 68,
72; on reasoning, 75, 132–33; on role of women, 134
Zald, Mayer N., 23–24, 123
Zion, 54, 119

