=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: RBG-Blakademics-ACTI-Afrikan-Centered-Thematic-Inventory.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 17
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:16:54.641249
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
RBG Blakademics ACTI: 
Afrikan Centered Thematic Inventory 
 
 
  
 “Akoto’s Afrikan Centered Thematic Inventory provides [the major themes of Nationalist 
/ Pan-Afrikanist centered theories of liberation…and the philosophical foundation of 
Afrikan centered curriculum ”Blueprint for Black Power, pg 130, 2000 AWI


--- PAGE 2 ---
Page 1 of 16 
 
RBG Blakademics ACTI- Afrikan Centered Thematic Inventory 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“A PRESENTATION OF THE STUDY DOMAINS OUR VARIOUS 
CURRICULA EXECUTE IN A WEB 2.0 ENVIRONMENT” 
 
In NATIONBUILDING, Agyei Akoto has produced a volume that 
challenges all Afrikan people, particularly those of us in the United 
States, to confront with seriousness the respon sibilities of educating 
for liberation, and the reality that the goal of liberation must be 
Nationhood. This book is a masterpiece of vision. More importantly, 
by writing candidly about the experience produced by 20 years of 
sustained kazi (work) within a collective of creative thinkers and 
doers, the author helps readers understand how the wisdom he 
reveals in NATIONBUILDING was developed. One appreciates, 
through Agyei's writing that nationbuilding is the process that gives 
us form and substance within humanity; it is through this process that 
we create and recreate the culture that defines our lives. RBG Street Scholars Think 
Tank in its content, methods and global level of participation is proving to be  one of  the 
most cutting edge digital  academic demostrations online  that has implemented Dr. 
Akoto’s Nationhood- Afrikan Centered Curriculum Standards , with a from GED to Phd 
focus.


--- PAGE 3 ---
Page 2 of 16 
 
RBG Blakademics ACTI- Afrikan Centered Thematic Inventory 
 
Akoto’s Curricular Domains 
 
 
I.Spirituality and the Psycho-Affective Domain  
 
 
i. SPIRITUAL AWARENESS  
Aim: To transmit the knowledge of Afrikan spiritual tradition, and develop an 
appreciation for tradition and the ability to apply the major principles to self, family and 
community  
 
ii. MORAL CONSCIOUSNESS  
Aim: To foster an understanding and willingness to be guided by those principles that 
characterize the righteous and just person  
 
iii. FAMILY AS BASIC SPIRITUAL AND MORAL UNIT  
Aim: To develop ail understanding and appreciation for the dynamics affecting the 
Afrikan family; to recognize its centrality to . the Afrikan nationality, and work to 
revitalize it  
 
iv. SELF-KNOWLEDGE PRACTICE  
Aim: To facilitate the achievement of total knowledge of self as a unique extension 
ofthe collective, defined by the collective and committed to it  
 
v. ANCESTRAL VENERATION  
Aim: To facilitate the acquisition and valuing of the wisdom of the ancestors; and to 
foster a commitment to restore their works and make those works even better than 
before  
 
II.  Cultural and Ideological Domain  
 
i. THE PRIMACY OF AFRIKAN CIVILIZATION AND THE AFRIKAN ORIGIN OF 
THE HUMAN SPECIES  
 
Aim: To develop and inform a complete and more comprehensive historical 
consciousness, from antiquity to the contemporary, that will be the basis for Afrikan 
unity and development  
 
ii. AFRIKAN HERITAGE AND CULTURAL UNITY  
Aim: To develop an appreciation of the need to foster cultural, and political unity among 
all Afrikan people, and to commit oneself to that task


--- PAGE 4 ---
Page 3 of 16 
 
RBG Blakademics ACTI- Afrikan Centered Thematic Inventory 
 
 
iii. AFRIKAN CENTERED HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE  
(Afrikan Perspective on all Knowledge and Intellectual Endeavor)  
 
Aim: To develop a commitment to reconstruct Afrikan culture through the reclamation of 
Afrikan history and the criti¬cal/creative analysis of all knowledge and experience from 
an Afrikan centered perspective  
 
iv. IDEOLOGICAL CLARITY (CONSCIOUSNESS), COMMITMENT  AND 
CONDUCT 
 
Aim: To foster an identification with and a desire to participate in  
the ongoing dialogue aimed at creating a coherent and dynamic Afrikan/nationalist 
ideology for the liberation and independ¬ence of Afrikan people  
 
v. BEAUTY AND AESTHETICS  
 
Aim: To foster the development of a sense of the. beautiful and righteousness that is 
Afrikan centered  
 
vi. WHITE SUPREMACY/ RACISM STUDIES  
 
Aim: To develop an awareness and sensitivity to the dynamics of white supremacy. To 
facilitate the development of personal and collective strategies to counteract the effects 
of racism/white supremacy  
 
 
III. Socio-Political and Economic Domain 
 
i. PAN AFRIKAN POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC UNITY, COOPERATION AND 
DEVELOPMENT  
 
Aim: To instill commitment to developing Pan Afrikan cultural, political and economic 
unity and cooperation. 
  
 
ii. AFRIKAN AMERICAN NATIONALITY  
Aim: To foster the commitment to the development of an organized, unified, productive 
and dynamic nationality of Afrikans in America  
 
 
iii. NATIONAL AND COMMUNITY LEADERSHIP  
Aim: To develop an awareness of the necessary qualities of leadership and to inculcate 
those necessary values and skills of leadership that are essential to the liberation and 
development of Afrikan people


--- PAGE 5 ---
Page 4 of 16 
 
RBG Blakademics ACTI- Afrikan Centered Thematic Inventory 
 
 
iv. COEQUALITY OF MEN AD WOMEN: EQUAL RESPONSIBILITY AND 
PARTICPATION 
 
Aim: To develop a sensitivity and commitment to eliminate any behaviors typical of 
sexism and sexual exploitation.  
 
v. DEMOCRATIC PLURALITY OF RACIAL/ETHNIC NATIONALITIES IN THE 
AMERICAN POLITICAL ECONOMY  
 
Aim: To foster a profound awareness of the psychic and constitutional entrenchment of 
white racial/ethnic supremacy in the U.S. and to advance the Afrikan nationality within 
the "nation of nations" that the American political economy in fact is.  
 
 
vi. HUMAN AND CIVIL RIGHTS  
 
Aim: To foster an awareness of one of the higher goals of social activism, the creation 
of a world order that is culturally pluralistic and truly democratic, equalitarian, and just  
 
vii. IMPEDIMENTS  
 
Aim: To inculcate a clear understanding of the historical impediments to Afrikan 
liberation and development, and further to provide a clear criteria for identifying and 
handling those less obvious impediments to the advancement of the race  
 
 
viii. INSTITUTIONAL AND NATIONHOOD GOALS  
 
Aim: To foster a clear understanding of our mission to build the institutional 
infrastructure of an independent nationality (Nationhood), and to foster a conscious 
commitment and conduct to advance the New Afrikan Nation and Afrikan race toward 
independence and freedom, and the human race toward greater humanity  
 
 
Akoto, Kwame Agyei. Nationbuilding: Theory and Practice in Afrikan Centered.  
Education. Washington, D.C.: Pan Afrkan World Institute, 1992. Asante, Molefi.pp 46-7


--- PAGE 6 ---
Page 5 of 16 
 
RBG Blakademics ACTI- Afrikan Centered Thematic Inventory 
 
 
 
 
Curricular Domains Outline  
 
 
 RBG Street Scholars Think Tank is horizontally,vertically and concentrically integreted; 
so one learns / teaches multiple domains simutanously, as against a linear subject 
curriculum. 
 For example, the Standard American White Supremacy Curriculum most  Afrikan 
children in America are taught from…(see: Intellectual Warfare/ a 2 hour Video 
presentation  by Dr. Jacob H. Carruthers 
 
Five curricular domains provide the basis for the organi zation of the subject content 
within RBG Street Scholars Think Tanks various curricula . Each curricular domain 
consists of one or more curriculum fields. The curriculum fields provide the actual 
structural basis for RBG’s organization and presentation of s ubject matterS within the 
curriculum. The purpose of listing the several fields under the curricular domains is to 
establish their relationships with the assumptions and aims of the ACTI (Afrikan 
Centered Thematic Inventory) above.  
The curriculum fields a re listed below under the curricular domains, and include the 
subject areas that comprise the respective fields  of learning/treaching in RBG Street 
Scholars Think Tank’s curricula.


--- PAGE 7 ---
Page 6 of 16 
 
RBG Blakademics ACTI- Afrikan Centered Thematic Inventory 
 
                 I. Cultural Ideological  
A. Culture and Ideology  
B.  Creativity  
II. Spiritual Psycho-Affective  
A. Self-Knowledge  
B. Ethics and Morality  
III. Socio-Political and Economic  
A. Political Economy  
B. Cognition and Inquiry  
C. Technology  
D. Mathematics  
E. Sciences  
F. Computer Sciences  
IV. Technology  
A. Mathematics  
B. Science  
C. Computer Science  
D. Functional Skills  
 V. Nation building (Practical Applications)  
 
A. Career Development Apprenticeships  
B. Research Theory and Practicum’s  
C.Community Development Projects  
D: Organizational Experience  
 
Each curricular domain includes several specific subjects that are 
integrated to reduce the compartmentalization that is typical of 
European subject centered curriculums."


--- PAGE 8 ---
Page 7 of 16 
 
RBG Blakademics ACTI- Afrikan Centered Thematic Inventory 
AFRIKAN CENTERED EDUCATION:THE BACKGROUND  
 
Intellectual Warfare/ a 2 hour Video presentation  by Dr. Jacob H. Carruthers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BRIEF CAPSULE OF  AFROCENTRIC EDUCATION 
 
Afrocentric education is education targeted towards Afrkan people. The 
premise behind it is the notion that human beings can be subjugated and 
made servile by limiting their consciousness of themselves and by imposing 
certain selective aspects of alien kn owledge on others.[1] To control a 
peoples culture is to control their tools of self -determination in relationship 
to others.[2] Afrocentrists argue that what educates one group of people 
does not necessarily educate and empower another group of people. 
Philosophy 
 
Afrocentric education has as one of its tenets, decolonizing the Afrkan mind. 
The central objective in decolonizing the Afrkan mind is to overthrow the 
authority in which alien traditions exercise over the Afrkan.[3] In order to 
achieve this, Eurocentric ideology must be dismantled from everyday Afrkan 
life. This is not to say that the Afrkan is to reject foreign tradition, but she or 
he is to deny its authoritative control in the culture of the Afrkan, and 
denounce allegiance to this author itative control. Decolonizing the Afrkan 
mind seeks to mentally liberate Afrkans. Economic and political control can 
never be complete or effective without mental control. It is then clear that 
an Afrocentric education is essential based on the idea of mental liberation.


--- PAGE 9 ---
Page 8 of 16 
 
RBG Blakademics ACTI- Afrikan Centered Thematic Inventory 
Education 
 
Education was understood to be a process of harnessing the inner potential, 
and thus it is imperative to equip the youth with an awareness of their 
identity. The term "miseducation" was coined by Dr. Carter G. Woodson to 
describe the process of systematically depriving Afrkan Americans of their 
knowledge of self. Dr. Woodson believed that miseducation was the root of 
the problems of the masses of the Afrkan American community and that if 
the masses of the Afrkan American com munity were given the correct 
knowledge and education from the beginning, they would not be in the 
situation that they find themselves in today. Dr. Woodson argues in his 
book, The Mis -Education of the Negro, that Afrkan Americans often valorize 
European culture to the detriment of their own culture. 
 
The problem concerning formal education is seen by Afrocentrists to be that 
Afrkan students are taught to perceive the world through the eyes of 
another culture, and unconsciously learn to see themselves as an 
insignificant part of their world. An Afrocentric education does not 
necessarily wish to isolate Afrkans from a Eurocentric education system but 
wishes to assert the autonomy of Afrkans and encompass the cultural 
uniqueness of all learners. 
 
A school based on Afrkan values, it is believed, would eliminate the patterns 
of rejection and alienation that engulf so many Afrkan American school 
children, especially males. The movement for Afrkan-centered education is 
based on the assumption that a school i mmersed in Afrkan traditions, 
rituals, values, and symbols will provide a learning environment that is more 
congruent with the lifestyles and values of Afrkan American families. 
 
History 
 
This has been an active area of Afrocentrism for many decades. 
 
19th and early 20th century 
 
Edward Wilmot Blyden, an Americo -Liberian educator and diplomat active in 
the pan -Africa movement, perceived a change in perception taking place 
among Europeans towards Afrkans in his 1908 book Afrkan Life and 
Customs, which originated as a series of articles in the Sierra Leone Weekly 
News.[4] In it, he proposed that Afrkans were beginning to be seen simply 
as different and not as inferior, in part because of the work of English writers 
such as Mary Kingsley and Lady Lugard, w ho traveled and studied in 
Africa.[4] Such an enlightened view was fundamental to refute prevailing 
ideas among Western peoples about Afrkan cultures and Afrkans.


--- PAGE 10 ---
Page 9 of 16 
 
RBG Blakademics ACTI- Afrikan Centered Thematic Inventory 
 
Blyden used that standpoint to show how the traditional social, industrial, 
and economic life of Afrkans untouched by "either European or Asiatic 
influence", was different and complete in itself, with its own organic 
wholeness.[4] In a letter responding to Blyden's original series of articles, 
Fante journalist and politician J.E. Casely Hayfo rd commented, "It is easy to 
see the men and women who walked the banks of the Nile" passing him on 
the streets of Kumasi.[4] Hayford suggested building a University to 
preserve Afrkan identity and instincts. In that university, the history chair 
would teach 
“Universal history, with particular reference to the part Ethiopia has played 
in the affairs of the world. I would lay stress upon the fact that while Ramses 
II was dedicating temples to 'the God of gods, and secondly to his own 
glory,' the God of the Hebrews had not yet appeared unto Moses in the 
burning bush; that Africa was the cradle of the world's systems and 
philosophies, and the nursing mother of its religions. In short, that Africa has 
nothing to be ashamed of in its place among the nations of t he earth. I 
would make it possible for this seat of learning to be the means of revising 
erroneous current ideas regarding the Afrkan; of raising him in self -respect; 
and of making him an efficient co -worker in the uplifting of man to nobler 
effort.[4]  ” 
 
 
The exchange of ideas between Blyden and Hayford embodied the 
fundamental concepts of Afrocentrism. 
 
In the United States, during the early 20th century and the Harlem 
Renaissance, many writers and historians gathered in major cities, where 
they began to work on documenting achievements of Afrkans throughout 
history, and in United States and Western life. They began to set up 
institutions to support scholarly work in Afrkan-American history and 
literature, such as the American Negro Academy (now the B lack Academy of 
Letters and Arts), founded in Washington, DC in 1874. Some men were self -
taught; others rose through the academic system. Creative writers and 
artists claimed space for Afrkan-American perspectives. 
 
Leaders included bibliophile Arthur Sch omburg, who devoted his life to 
collecting literature, art, slave narratives, and other artifacts of the Afrkan 
diaspora. In 1911 with John Edward Bruce, he founded the Negro Society for 
Historical Research in Yonkers, New York. The value of Schomburg's 
personal collection was recognized, and it was purchased by the New York 
Public Library in 1926 with aid of a Carnegie Corporation grant. It became 
the basis of what is now called the Arthur Schomburg Center for Research in


--- PAGE 11 ---
Page 10 of 16 
 
RBG Blakademics ACTI- Afrikan Centered Thematic Inventory 
Black Culture, based in Harlem, New York. Schomburg used the money from 
the sale of his collection for more travel and acquisition of materials.[5] 
 
Hubert Henry Harrison used his intellectual gifts in street lectures and 
political activism, influencing early generations of Black Socialis ts and Black 
Nationalists. Dr. Carter G. Woodson co-founded the Association for the Study 
of Afrkan American Life and History (as it is now called) in 1915, as well as 
the The Journal of Negro History, so that scholars of black history could be 
supported and find venues for their work. 
 
Among their topics, editors of publications such as NAACP's The Crisis and 
Journal of Negro History sought to include articles that countered the 
prevailing view that Sub -Saharan Africa had contributed little of value to 
human history that was not the result of incursions by Europeans and 
Arabs.[6] Historians began to theorize that Ancient Egyptian civilization was 
the culmination of events arising from the origin of the human race in Africa. 
They investigated the history of Africa from that perspective. 
 
In March 1925 Schomburg published an essay "The Negro Digs Up His Past" 
in the Survey Graphic in an issue devoted to Harlem's intellectual life. The 
article had widespread distribution and influence, as he detailed the 
achievements of people of Afrkan descent.[7] Alain Locke included the essay 
in his collection The New Negro. 
 
Afrocentrists claimed The Mis -Education of the Negro (1933) by Carter G. 
Woodson, an Afrkan-American historian, as one of their foundational texts. 
Woodson critiqued education of Afrkan Americans as "mis -education" 
because he held that it denigrated the black while glorifying the white. For 
these early Afrocentrists, the goal was to break what they saw as a vicious 
cycle of the reproduction of black s elf-abnegation. In the words of The Crisis 
editor W. E. B. Du Bois, the world left Afrkan Americans with a "double 
consciousness," and a sense of "always looking at one's self through the 
eyes of others, of measuring one's soul by the tape of a world that  looks on 
in amused contempt and pity."[8] 
 
In his early years, W. E. B. Du Bois, researched West Afrkan cultures and 
attempted to construct a pan -Afrkanist value system based on West Afrkan 
traditions. In the 1950s Du Bois envisioned and received fundi ng from 
Ghanaian president Kwame Nkrumah to produce an Encyclopedia Afrkana to 
chronicle the history and cultures of Africa. Du Bois died before being able to 
complete his work. Some aspects of Du Bois's approach are evident in work 
by Cheikh Anta Diop in the 1950s and 1960s.


--- PAGE 12 ---
Page 11 of 16 
 
RBG Blakademics ACTI- Afrikan Centered Thematic Inventory 
Du Bois inspired a number of authors, including Drusilla Dunjee Houston. 
After reading his work The Negro (1915), Houston embarked upon writing 
her Wonderful Ethiopians of the Ancient Cushite Empire (1926). The book 
was a compilation  of evidence related to the historic origins of Kush and 
Ethiopia, and assessed their influences on Greece. 
 
1960s and 1970s 
 
The 1960s and 1970s were times of social and political ferment. In the U.S. 
were born new forms of Black Nationalism, Black Power and Black Arts 
Movements, all driven to some degree by an identification with "Mother 
Africa." Afrocentric scholars and Black youth also challenged Eurocentric 
ideas in academia. 
 
The work of Cheikh Anta Diop  became very influential. In the following 
decades, histories related to Africa and the diaspora gradually incorporated a 
more Afrkan perspective. Since that time, Afrocentrists have increasingly 
seen Afrkan peoples as the makers and shapers of their own histories.[9] 
 
    You have all heard of the Afrkan Personality; of Afrkan democracy, of the 
Afrkan way to socialism, of negritude, and so on. They are all props we have 
fashioned at different times to help us get on our feet again. Once we are up 
we shan't need any of them any more. But for the moment it is in the nature 
of things that we may need to counter racism with what Jean -Paul Sartre 
has called an anti-racist racism, to announce not just that we are as good as 
the next man but that we are much better. 
    —Chinua Achebe, 1965[10] 
 
In this context, ethnocentric Afrocentrism was not intended to be essential 
or permanent, but was a consciously fashioned strategy of resistance to the 
Eurocentrism of the time.[8] Afrocentric scholars adopted two approaches: a 
deconstructive rebuttal of what they called "the whole archive of European 
ideological racism" and a reconstructive act of writing new self -constructed 
histories.[8] 
 
At a 1974 UNESCO symposium in Cairo titled "The Peopling of Ancient Egypt 
and the Decipherment of Meroitic Script", Cheikh Anta Diop brought together 
scholars of Egypt from around the world.[11]


--- PAGE 13 ---
Page 12 of 16 
 
RBG Blakademics ACTI- Afrikan Centered Thematic Inventory 
Key texts from this period include: 
 
    * The Destruction of Black Civilization (1971) by Chancellor Williams 
    * The Afrkan Origins of Civilization: M yth or Reality (1974) by Cheikh 
Anta Diop 
    * They Came Before Columbus: The Afrkan Presence in Ancient America 
(1976) by Ivan Van Sertima 
 
Some Afrocentric writers focused on study of indigenous Afrkan civilizations 
and peoples, to emphasize Afrkan history separate from European or Arab 
influence. Primary among them was Chancellor Williams, whose book The 
Destruction of Black Civilization: Great Issues of a Race from 4500 B.C. to 
2000 A.D. set out to determine a "purely Afrkan body of principles, val ue 
systems (and) philosophy of life".[12] 
 
1980s and 1990s 
 
In the 1980s and 1990s, Afrocentrism increasingly became seen as a tool for 
addressing social ills and a means of grounding community efforts toward 
self-determination and political and economic empowerment. 
 
In his (1992) article "Eurocentrism vs. Afrocentrism", US anthropologist 
Linus A. Hoskins wrote: 
 
The vital necessity for Afrkan people to use the weapons of education and 
history to extricate themselves from this psychological dependency 
complex/syndrome as a necessary precondition for liberation. [...] If Afrkan 
peoples (the global majority) were to become Afrocentric (Afrocentrized), ... 
that would spell the ineluctable end of European global power and 
dominance. This is indeed the fear of  Europeans. ... Afrocentrism is a state 
of mind, a particular subconscious mind -set that is rooted in the ancestral 
heritage and communal value system.[13] 
 
Afrikan American educator Jawanza Kunjufu made the case that hip hop 
culture, rather than being creative ex pression of the culture, was the root of 
many social ills.[14] For some Afrocentrists, the contemporary problems of 
the ghetto stemmed not from race and class inequality, but rather from a 
failure to inculcate Black youth with Afrocentric values.[15] 
 
In the West and elsewhere, the European, in the midst of other peoples, has 
often propounded an exclusive view of reality; the exclusivity of this view 
creates a fundamental human crisis. In some cases, it has created cultures 
arrayed against each other or eve n against themselves. Afrocentricity’s 
response certainly is not to impose its own particularity as a universal, as


--- PAGE 14 ---
Page 13 of 16 
 
RBG Blakademics ACTI- Afrikan Centered Thematic Inventory 
Eurocentricity has often done. But hearing the voice of Afrkan American 
culture with all of its attendant parts is one way of creating a mo re sane 
society and one model for a more humane world. -Asante, M. K. (1988)[16] 
 
In 1997, US cultural historian Nathan Glazer described Afrocentricity as a 
form of multiculturalism. He wrote that its influence ranged from sensible 
proposals about inclusion of more Afrkan material in school curricula to what 
he called senseless claims about Afrkan primacy in all major technological 
achievements. Glazer argued that Afrocentricity had become more important 
due to the failure of mainstream society to  assimilate all Afrkan Americans. 
Anger and frustration at their continuing separation gave black Americans 
the impetus to reject traditions that excluded them.[17] 
 
2000s 
 
Today, Afrocentricity takes many forms, including striving for a more 
multicultural and balanced approach to the study of history and sociology. 
Afrocentrists contend that race still exists as a social and political 
construct.[15] They argue that for centuries in academia, Eurocentric ideas 
about history were dominant: ideas such as blacks having no civilizations, no 
written languages, no cultures, and no histories of any note before coming 
into contact with Europeans. Further, according to the views of some 
Afrocentrists, European history has commonly received more attention 
within the academic community than the history of sub -Saharan Afrkan 
cultures or those of the many Pacific Island peoples. Afrocentrists contend it 
is important to divorce the historical record from past racism. Molefi Kete 
Asante's book Afrocentricity (1988) argues  that Afrkan-Americans should 
look to Afrkan cultures "as a critical corrective to a displaced agency among 
Afrkans." Some Afrocentrists believe that the burden of Afrocentricity is to 
define and develop Afrkan agency in the midst of the cultural wars debate. 
By doing so, Afrocentricity can support all forms of multiculturalism.[18] 
 
Afrocentrists argue that Afrocentricity is important for people of all 
ethnicities who want to understand Afrkan history and the Afrkan diaspora. 
For example, the Afrocen tric method can be used to research Afrkan 
indigenous culture. Queeneth Mkabela writes in 2005 that the Afrocentric 
perspective provides new insights for understanding Afrkan indigenous 
culture, in a multicultural context. According to Mkabela and others , the 
Afrocentric method is a necessary part of complete scholarship and without 
it, the picture is incomplete, less accurate, and less objective.[19] 
 
Studies of Afrkan and Afrkan-diaspora cultures have shifted understanding 
and created a more positive acceptance of influence by Afrkan religious, 
linguistic and other traditions, both among scholars and the general public.


--- PAGE 15 ---
Page 14 of 16 
 
RBG Blakademics ACTI- Afrikan Centered Thematic Inventory 
For example religious movements such as Vodou are now less likely to be 
characterized as "mere superstition", but understood in terms  of links to 
Afrkan traditions. 
 
In recent years Afrkana Studies or Africology[9] departments at many major 
universities have grown out of the Afrocentric "Black Studies" departments 
formed in the 1970s. Rather than focusing on black topics in the Afrkan 
diaspora (often exclusively Afrkan American topics), these reformed 
departments aim to expand the field to encompass all of the Afrkan 
diaspora. They also seek to better align themselves with other University 
departments and find continuity and comprom ise between the radical 
Afrocentricity of the past decades and the multicultural scholarship found in 
many fields today.[20] 
 
Reference Notes 
 
   1. Woodson, Dr. Carter G. (1933). The Mis -Education of the Negro. 
Khalifah's Booksellers & Associates. 
   2. Akbar, Dr. Na'im.(1998) 
   3. Chinweizu (1987). Decolonizing the Afrkan Mind. Sundoor Press.) 
   4. Blyden, Edward Wilmot (1994 -03-01). Afrkan Life and Customs. Black 
Classic Press. ISBN 978-0933121430.  
   5. NYPL, Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture 
   6. "The Afrkan Origin of the Grecian Civilisation", Journal of Negro History, 
1917, pp.334-344 
   7. Arthur Schomburg, "The Negro Digs Up His Past", The Survey Graphic, 
Harlem: March 1925, University of Virginia Library, accessed 2 Feb 2009 
   8 Tejumola Olaniyan, "From Black Aesthetics to Afrocentrism", West Africa 
Review, Issue 9 (2006) 
   9. a b Henry Louis Gates (Editor), Kwame Anthony Appiah (Editor), 
Afrkana: The Encyclopedia of the Afrkan and Afrkan-American Volume 1. 
Page 114, Oxford University Press. 2005. ISBN 0195170555 
  10. Chinua Achebe, The Novelist as Teacher, 1965 
  11. Bruce G. Trigger, "The Peopling of Ancient Egypt and the Decipherment 
of Meroitic Script: Proceedings of the Symposium Held in Cairo from 28 
January to 3 February 1974 by UNESCO", The International Journal of Afrkan 
Historical Studies, Vol. 13, No. 2 (1980), pp. 371-373 
  12. The Destruction of Black Civilization: Great Issues of a Race from 4500 
B.C. to 2000 A.D., p. 19 1987 
  13. Linus A. Hoskins, Eurocentrism vs. Afrocentrism: A Geopolitical Linkage 
Analysis, Journal of Black Studies (1992), pp. 249, 251, 253. 
  14. Hip-Hop vs MAAT: A Psycho/Social Analysis of Values Jawanza Kunjufu 
1993


--- PAGE 16 ---
Page 15 of 16 
 
RBG Blakademics ACTI- Afrikan Centered Thematic Inventory 
  15. a b Achieving Blackness: Race, Black Nationalism, and Afrocentrism By 
Algernon Austin. ISBN 0814707076 
  16. Asante, M. K. (1988). Afrocentricity. Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press 
Inc. Page 28 
  17. We Are All Multiculturalists Now By Nathan Glazer Published 1997 
Harvard University Press ISBN 067494836X 
  18. Teasley, M.; Tyson, E. (2007). "Cultural Wars and the Attack on 
Multiculturalism: An Afrocentric Critique" . Journal of Black Studies 37 (3): 
390. doi:10.1177/0021934706290081.  
  19. Using the Afrocentric Method in Researching Indigenous Afrkan Culture 
by Queeneth Mkabela The Qualitative Report Volume 10 Number 1 March 
2005 178-189 
  20. Out of the Revolution : The Development of Afrkana Studies By Delores 
P. Aldridge, Carlene Young. Lexington Books 2000. ISBN 0739105477 
 
 
Resources 
 
    * Woodson, Dr. Carter G. (1933). The Mis -Education of the Negro. 
Khalifah's Booksellers & Associates. 
    * Akbar, Dr. Na'im. (1998). Know Thyself. Mind Productions & Associates. 
    * Chinweizu (1987). Decolonizing the Afrkan Mind. Sundoor Press. 
    * Pollard Diane S., et al.(2000). Afrkan-Centered Schooling in Theory and 
Practice. Bergin & Garvey. 
 
 
Further reading 
 
    * Molefi Kete Asante (1980). Afrocentricity: The theory of social change. 
Amulefi Pub. Co. 
    * Kondo, Zak. Black Students Guide to Positive Education. 
    * Goggins II, Lathardus. Afrkan Centered Rites of Passage and Education. 
    * Gill, Walter. Issues in Afrkan American Education. 
    * Cartwright, Madeline. For the Children. 
    * Zaslavsky, Claudia. Africa Counts. 
    * Hilliard III, Asa G. SBA: The Reawakening of the Afrkan Mind. 
    * Hilliard III, Asa G. Maroons Within Us. 
    * Hilliard III, Asa G., et al. Young, Gifted and Black. 
    * Hilliard III, Asa G., Payton -Stewart, Lucretia, Williams, Larry Obadele. 
Infusion of Afrkan and Afrkan American Content in the School Curriculum. 
    * Palmer, Anyim. The Failure of Public Education in the Black Community. 
    * Foluke, Gyasi A. The Crisis and Challenge of Black Mis -Education in 
America. 
    * DuBois, W.E.B. and Aptheker, Herbert. The Education of Black People.


--- PAGE 17 ---
Page 16 of 16 
 
RBG Blakademics ACTI- Afrikan Centered Thematic Inventory 
    * Lomotey, Kofi. Going to School: the Afrkan American Experience. 
    * Ako to, Kwame Agyei. Nationbuilding: Theory and practice in Afrikan -
centered education. 
    * Shujaa, Mwalimu J. Too Much Schooling, Too Little Education. 
    * Lometey, Kofi. Sailing Against the Wind: Afrkan Americans and Women 
in U.S. Education. 
    * Richa rd Majors. Educating Our Black Children: New Directions and 
Radical Approaches. 
    * Hale, Janice E. Unbank the Fire: Visions for the Education of Afrkan 
American Children. 
    * Watkins, William H. The White Architects of Black Education: Ideology 
and Power in America, 1865-1954 
    * Denbo, Sheryl. Improving Schools for Afrkan American Students: A 
Reader for Educational Leaders. 
    * Ani, Marimba.Yurugu: An Afrkan-Centered Critique of European Cultural 
Thought and Behavior. 
    * Murrell Jr., Peter C . Afrkan-Centered Pedagogy:Developing Schools of 
Achievement for Afrkan American Children. 
    * Ford, Donna Y. Reversing Underachievement Among Gifted Black 
Students. 
    * Ratteray, Joan D. Center Shift: An Afrkan-Centered Approach for the 
Multi-Cultural Curriculum. 
    * Tatum, Beverly Daniel. Why Are All The Black Kids Sitting Together in 
the Cafeteria. 
    * Gentry, Atron A. Learning to Survive: Black Youth Look fo r Education 
and Hope. 
    * Kafele, Baruti K. A Black Parent’s Handbook to Educating Your Children 
(Outside of the Classroom)

