=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: RBG-Tribute-to-Our-General-Dr-Khallid-Abdul-Muhammad-Classic-Mp3-Download-Included.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 8
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:16:15.950731
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank                                                                                    January,2010 
 
 1 
RBG  TRIBUTE TO OUR GENERAL 
Dr. Khallid Abdul Muhammad 
Play Dr. Khallid vs donahue/ A RBG Classic 
 
January 12th, 1948 February 17, 2001 
http://bangout.ning.com/


--- PAGE 2 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank                                                                                    January,2010 
 
 2 
THE EARLY YEARS 
Minister Khallid Abdul Muhammad, 
born Harold Moore, Jr. by his parents, 
blessed this earth on January 12th, 
1948 in Houston, Texas. He  was the 
second? of six children to the late 
Harold Moore, Sr. and Lottie B. Moore. 
His Aunt Momma Carrie Moore Vann in 
Houston, Texas reared him. Minister 
Khallid Muhammad, affectionately 
known as "butch" by the family 
attended Bruce Elementary School, 
E.O.Smith Junior High School and all 
Black Phyllis Wheatley High School in 
Texas. At Phyllis Wheatley, Brother 
Khallid was an esteemed member of 
Stagecrafters, a group of exceptional 
students where he developed debate and drama skills under direction of Ms. Vernell 
Lillie. Minister Khallid as a young man would preach to cars from his porch as they 
passed by on the highway and was president of Houston Methodist Youth Fellowship. 
Khallid was a star quarterback, team captain of his high school football team, an eagle 
scout, a class officer and a star debater. 
RBG-Dr. Khallid on Black Unity, Black Army, United Black Nation


--- PAGE 3 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank                                                                                    January,2010 
 
 3 
 
THE CONVERSION 
Upon graduating high school, our bold and shining Black prince 
won a scholarship Dillard University in Louisiana to pursue his 
degree in theological studies. At this time he ministered at Sloan 
Memorial Methodist Church. While at Dillard University young 
Khallid first heard Minister Louis Farrahkan, the National 
Representative of the Honorable Elijah Muhammad. He had a big 
Afro and a huge medallion of Malcolm X around his neck. After 
hearing Minister Farrakhan speak Khallid Abdul Muhammad joined 
the Nation of Islam under the leadership of the Honorable Elijah 
Muhammad. Immediately Brother Harold X, as he was known at 
that time became renown as a top recruiter in the south for the 
Black Muslims. Dr. Khallid continued his studies and graduated 
from Pepperdine University in Los Angeles California. He then was 
the recipient of an academic fellowship, and matriculated to do 
"Intensive Studies" at Harvard, Yale, and Columbia Universities. 
The skills of higher education as well as his fighting spirit made 
Minister Khallid a valuable weapon to the Nation of Islam and the Black Nation in general. 
 
 
THE EVOLUTION 
When the Messenger of Allah, the Honorable Elijah Muhammad departed from amongst us in 
1975, Minister Khallid Abdul Muhammad kept on fighting. At this time he was known as Dr. 
Malik Rushaddin. He traveled throughout Africa an d trained in revolutionary movements with a 
focus on freeing apartheid ridden South 
Africa (Azania) from white oppression. 
When Minister Farrakhan decided to rebuild 
the Nation of Islam in 1978. Minister Khallid 
was right there with him when there were 
just a few. Minister Khallid Muhammad 
served as western regional minister of the 
Nation of Islam and leader of Mosque #27, 
which made lightning progress under his 
leadership. In 1983 Minister Louis 
Farrakhan named him Khallid, which has 
the historical interpretation of "great warrior" 
after the great follower of Prophet 
Muhammad (pbuh) Khallid ibn Walid. Like 
this great Islamic general Khallid 
Muhammad was called the "sword of 
Allah".. 
Minister Khallid Abdul Muhammad was soon appointed as Supreme Captain over the military in 
the Nation of Islam. In 1985 Minister Khallid Abdul Muhammad was appointed National


--- PAGE 4 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank                                                                                    January,2010 
 
 4 
Spokesman and Representative of Minister Louis Farrakhan, following in the footsteps of 
Minister Farrakhan and Malcolm X. At other points he also served the  posts of Southern 
Regional Minister, Minister of Mosque #7 in Harlem, New York City, and National Assistant. A 
true Pan Afrikanist, Minister Khallid Muhammad has traveled on research and fact -finding 
missions to Kemet (Egypt) Jerusalem, South Afrika and t hroughout the African sub continent. 
He made his sacred pilgrimage to the Holy City, Mecca, numerous times. He has earned the 
title El Hajj Khallid Abdul Muhammad. Minister Khallid Abdul Muhammad was the creator and 
founder of The New African Cultural Holi day alternative to Thanksgiving called "GYE NYAME 
(G-NY-MAY). Black youth and "gang" members loved Dr. Khallid. You have heard this dynamic 
soldier on rap albums from Tupac Shakur, Ice Cube, Sista Souljah, X-Clan, Public Enemy, Scar-
Face, Shaquille O'Neill, Erica Badu, Lauren Hill, Dead Prez, Capone N' Noriega and the Black 
Lyrical Terrorist. Dynamic fiery, explosive, electrifying, spellbinding! He has fired up and inspired 
audiences at over 100 universities in the United States, Africa, Europe and the worl d. He spoke 
at many churches and served as a minister at the 1st Afrocentric Temple in Atlanta, Georgia 
before his transition to the ancestors. 
THE CONTROVERSY 
After his historic lecture on November 29, 1993 at Kean College in 
Union, New Jersey which sh ook the racist, Zionist, imperialist, 
white supremist foundation of the world, the President of the United 
State and Vice President Gore condemned Dr. Khallid Muhammad. 
The United States Senate voted 97 -0 to censure him. Minister 
Khallid and Minister Louis  Farrahkan are the only two in history to 
be censured by the U.S. Senate. And for the first time in history, 
The United States House of Representatives (The Full Congress) 
in a special session, passed House Resolution 343 condemning a 
so called private cit izen. At historic Howard University in 1994 
Khallid Muhammad keynoted the world wide -watched Black 
Holocaust conference with Dr. Leonard Jeffries, Dr. Tony Martin 
and convened by then student organizer Malik Zulu Shabazz. 
 
These events shook the world but Khallid Muhammad did not break under the pressure. In May, 
1994 an assassination attempt was made on his life. Khallid Muhammad was blessed to recover 
and fight with even more vigor and intensity. He spoke at many churches and served as a 
minister at the 1st Afrocentric Temple in Atlanta, Georgia before his transition to the ancestors.


--- PAGE 5 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank                                                                                    January,2010 
 
 5 
THE FINAL VICTORIES 
 
 1998 Minister Khallid Abdul Muhammad led an armed 
militant group of New Black Panther members into Jasper 
Texas to chase out the Klu Klux Klan  who were making a 
mockery of the beheading and dragging death of brother 
James Byrd. On Sept 5th, 1998 He was the convener of 
the Million Youth March Black Power Rally, held on 
Malcolm X Blvd in New York. With the help of the 
December 12th Movement, the M illion Youth March won 
historic legal battles against the racist Guiliani 
administration over free speech "constitutional rights". The 
Million Youth March went forward the streets of Harlem 
were flooded with throngs of Black youth and people who 
supported this massive Black Power revival. 
In 1998 Dr. Khallid Muhammad was chosen to serve as 
The National Chairman of The New Black Panther Party 
for Self -Defense, chapters have sprouted nationwide. He 
leaves intact his National Spokesman- Attorney Malik Zulu 
Shabazz; National Assistant -Hashim Nzinga; National 
Chief of Staff -Malikah Muhammad; National Minister of 
Defense- Brother David Foreman; National Minister of 
Information-Minister Quannell X; National Southern 
Regional Representative -Sister Zoirada Higgen bothom; 
National Field Marshall -Minister Malik Shabazz. The New 
Black Panther Party is alive and well with chapters thriving 
throughout the country. Dr. Khallid's vision of a Black 
Power Movement shall live on!!!


--- PAGE 6 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank                                                                                    January,2010 
 
 6 
 
THE TRANSITION AND LEGACY 
Minister Khallid Abdul Muhammad leaves to cherish his memories; his wife, Queen Nefertari 
Muhammad, three sisters; Gloria Glenn from Los Angeles, Cynthia Moore Kelly from Los 
Angeles, KaShelia Moore Jackson from Houston, Texas; two brothers, Frank Moore Claybourne 
from Los Angeles, Darington Moore Smith from Los Angeles; father -in-law, Mr. Thomas 
Ambush of Cedric Maryland; his children, David and mother Mattie Morris Van, Khalfani and 
mother Mahasin Rushiddin, and Farrakhan Khallid, Malik, Kiki, Amir, Ali and mother Kha llidah 
Muhammad; four grandchildren and a host of nieces, nephews, friends, and comrades.


--- PAGE 7 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank                                                                                    January,2010 
 
 7 
BLACK POWER OBITUARY 
 
Today we gather to celebrate the courageous life, and 
fighting spirit of a true soldier and warrior. Minister 
Khallid Abdul Muhammad was  a general, a mentor, a 
teacher, and a strong Black man who epitomized the 
tenacity of our liberation struggle. Minister Khallid Abdul 
Muhammad represented to many of us as a father, 
brother, comrade, trainer and uncompromising leader 
who lived and gave hi s life for the liberation of African 
people all over the world. He stands in the great 
revolutionary line of divine with courageous African 
Ancestors like Nat Turner, Sojourner Truth, Denmark 
Vessel, Kwame Nkrumah, Queen Nzingha, Marcus 
Garvey, Elijah Muha mmad, Malcolm X, Huey P. 
Newton, Kwame Toure', Louis Farrakhan and many 
others who organized to free our people from a wicked 
and cruel enemy. He was proud, strong, dignified, and 
a man of great character, with a beautiful heart. He 
loved his people and fo ught day and night to move us 
closer to victory over our enemies. He will be 
remembered as a great field marshall, captain, trainer 
of men, and one who would not turn heels and run from 
our enemy- even when under fire. 
 
 
LONG LIVE OUR PAN-AFRICANIST GENERAL KHALLID ABDUL MUHAMMAD 
 
http://www.newblackpanther.com/


--- PAGE 8 ---
RBG Street Scholars Think Tank                                                                                    January,2010 
 
 8 
 
RBG National Strategy of the Front for the Liberation of the New Afrikan Nation

