=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Real-Istory-Anu-Migration-From-Mts-of-Moon-to-Kmt.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 16
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:16:50.622714
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
REAL ISTORY: ANU MIGRATION FROM MTs OF MOON TO KMT 
Posted By: Issembly For Rastafari Iniversal Education Date: 
Thursday, 21 April 2005, at 6:27 p.m. 
"We find when we discover Egypt in what we call the First Dynasty, 
under Menes, that it is at its absolute zenith of culture in painting, 
sculpture, architecture. From this peak period, the Egyptian culture 
steadily declines. It is very much as if the Egyptians found 
themeselves the inheritors of a great ready-made culture of which they 
could take advantafe, which they could utilize and even to some 
degree emulate, but which they themselves did not create . . . . This 
very strongly suggests that it drew its greatness from a source higher 
than itself . . . ." 
--Jalandris, The Hall of Records: The Hidden secrets of the 
Pyramid and Sphinx, 1980 
"This civilization called Egyptian in our period developed for a long 
time in its early cradle . . . This cycle of civilization, the longest in 
history, presumably lasted 10,000 years. This is a reasonable 
compromise between the long chronology (based on data provided by 
Manetho -the last student of the Ancient Egyptian Mystery School of 
Anu at Alexandria before it was invaded by Alexander the Great in 330 
BCE-- which places the beginning at 17,000 BCE) and the short 
chronology [3100 BCE] of the moderns - for the latter are obliged to 
admit that by 4245 BCE the Egyptians had already invented the 
calendar (which necessarily requires the passages of thousands of 
years)." 
--Cheik Anta Diop, The African Origin of Civilization: Myth or 
Reality (originally published Nations Negres et Culture) 
1955(Published in English in 1974) 
"In this chapter I hope to demonstrate that the origin of the civilization 
of Egypt (khem) was black African, specifically Ethiopian or Anu . . . 
The history of Black will remain suspended in air and cannot be written 
correctly until African historians dare connect it with the history of 
Egypt. In reviewing Egypt's beginnings, we find an advanced 
civilization already intact from the earliest Dynasty. This fact has 
perplexed historians down through the ages. Common sense dictates 
that if Egypt began fully mature, then its civilization must have 
originated elsewhere . . . . [Herodotus] The `Father of History' was 
told that the first man to rule Egypt was Min, who lived so long ago


--- PAGE 2 ---
that Egypt was still under water: `in (Min's) time the whole country, 
except the district around Thebes, was marsh, none of the land below 
Lake Moeris, was then showing above water. To this place from the sea 
[Nowe] is seven days passage up the river . . . . " 
--Wayne Chandler, Of Gods and Men: Egypt's Old Kingdom, 1989 
"According to Flnders Petrie these people were the Anu whose name, 
known to us since the protohistoric epoch, is always written with three 
pillars on the few inscriptions extant from the end of the fourth 
millennium before our era. The natives of the country are always 
represented with unmistakable chiefly emblems for which one looks in 
vain among the infrequent portrayals of other races, who are all shown 
as servile foreign elements having reached the valley by infiltration (cf. 
Tera Neter and the Scorpion king whom Petrie (wrongly) groups 
together; `The Scorpion King . . . belonged to the preceding race of 
Anu, moreover he worshipped Min and Set.'). As we shall see later 
Min, like the chief gods of Egypt, was called by the tradition of Egypt 
itself `The Great Negro'. . . . 
"The Palermo Stone is Egypt's oldest history book . . . revealing to us 
information on the early kings of Egypt, along with mythical kings prior 
to the dynastic era. This fragment of a 5th century basalt stele . . .was 
doubtless one of the documents that Manetho used to compile his 
history of Egypt. The king list covers the period from the Old Kingdom 
back thousands of years into the predynastic period. It chronicles 
these mythical kings until the time of the god Horus, who is said to 
have given the throne to the human king Menes. . . . Other interesting 
information recorded by the Palermo stone is the construction of a 
stone building called Men-netjeret (2686-2667 BCE), copper smelting 
and copper statues created in the 2nd Dynasty (2890-2686 BCE) and a 
record of forty ships that brought wood from an unknown region 
outside of Egypt during the reign of Sneferu . . . describing military 
expeditions such as campaign in Nubia that resulted in the capture of 
7,000 slaves . . . . .that probably resulted in the disappearance of the 
local Nubian culture. . . ." 
--Alan Winston, The Palermo Stone, 1999 
"More evidence comes from the Books of Thoth. It describes one of the 
pyramids as standing upon the sea-shore, `the waves of which dashed 
in powerless fury against its base.'. . . They add that from them 
[Ethiopians who built the pyramids], as from their authors and 
ancestors, the Egyptians get most of their laws. It is from them that


--- PAGE 3 ---
the Egyptians have learned to honor kings and gods and bury them 
with such pomp; sculpture and writing were invented by the 
Ethiopians. The Ethiopians cite evidence that they are more ancient 
than the Egyptians . . . .The most complete list of [Egyptian] kings 
known appeared in the Royal Papyrus of Turin, which assigned in order 
of dynasty the names of over 130 kings. . . . . Manetho named over a 
hundred kings and divided them into thirty dynasties . . . . 
The two most complete versions of his list are those quoted by Julius 
Africansu and by Eusebius. . . .According to Julius Africanus, 561 kings 
reigned for approximately 5,524 years in total. Eusebius, on the other 
hand, states that 361 kings ruled in 4,780 years. . . . Cheik Anta Diop, 
egyptologist, linguist, physicist and historian, allows 10,000 years for 
the cycle of Egyptian civilization. His logic is pure and simple and hard 
to refute. The Egyptian calendar was based on the cylce of the star 
Sirius whose rise coincides with the sun every 1,461 years. Now any 
astronomer will verify the fact that it takes thousands of years to study 
the stellar movement of celestial bodies before one may acquire 
information accurate enough to develop a calendar. . . . Thus, if the 
Egyptians had the calendar in 4245 BCE and it took the passage of 
several thousands years to amass enough data to create it, then it is 
only rational that we adhere to the logic of Professor Diop. Diop goes 
on to say, `The official date, adopted until now for no special reason 
wavers between 3100 BCE and 3000 BCE. In actual fact, the choice of 
3100 BCE results from no necessity but that of synchronizing Egyptian 
and Mesopotamian chronolgy.' 
--Wayne Chandler, Of Gods and Men: Egypt's Old Kingdom, 1989 
"The Ethiopians say that the Egyptians are one of their colonies which 
was brought into Egypt by Osiris. They claim that at the beginning of 
the world Egypt was simply a sea but that the Nile, carrying down vast 
quantities of loam from Ethiopia in its flood waters, finally filled it in 
and made it part of the continent . . . I not only believe the people 
who gave me this account of Egypt, but my own conclusions strongly 
support what they said . . . Now it is my belief that Egypt was 
originally an arm of the sea. I have observed for myself that Egypt at 
the Nile Delta projects into the sea beyond the coast on either side; I 
have seen sea shells on the hills and noticed how salt exudes from the 
soil to such an extent that it effects even the pyramids; I have noticed 
too, that the only hill where there is sand is the hill above Memphis, 
and that the soil of Egypt does not resemble that of the neighboring 
country of Arabia, or Libya, or even Syria . . . but is black as one 
would expect of an alluvial soil . . .'


--- PAGE 4 ---
--Diodorus of Sicily 
"The Egyptians are colonists sent out by the Ethiopians, Osiris having 
been the leader of the colony. . . . Osiris . . . . gathered together a 
great army, with the intention of visiting all the inhabited lands and 
teaching the race race of men how to cultivate . . . . for he suppsed 
that if he made men give up their savagery and adopt a gentle manner 
of life he would receive immortal honors. . . . . They were the earliest, 
and say that the proofs of this are clear. That they did not arrive as 
immigrants but are the natives of the country and therefore rightly are 
called authochthonous is almost universally accepted. That those who 
live in the south are likely to be the first engendered by the earth is 
obvious to all . . . .They further write that it was among them that 
people were first taught to honor the gods and offer sacrifices and 
arrange processions and festivals and perform other things by which 
people honor the divine. For this reason their piety is famous among 
all men, and the sacrifes among the Aithiopians are believed to be 
particularly pleasing to the divinity." 
--Diodorus, 1st Century BCE 
"These Anu [Ethiopians] were agricultural people, raising cattle on a 
large scale along the Nile, shutting themselves up in walled cities for 
defensive purposes. To this people we can attribute without fear of 
error, the most ancient Egyptian books, The Book of The Dead and the 
Text of the Pyramids, consequently all the myths of religious teachings. 
I would add almost all the philospohical systems then known and still 
called Egyptian. They evidently knew the crafts necessary for any 
civilization and were familiar with the tools those trades required. They 
knew how to use metals . . . They made the earliest attempts at 
writing, for the whole Egyptian tradition attributes this art to Thoth, 
the great Hermes, an Anu like Osiris, who is called Onian in chapter 
fifteen of The Book of the Dead and in the Texts of the Pyramids. 
Certainly the people already knew the principal arts; it left proof of this 
in the architecture of the tombs at Abydos, especially the tomb of 
Osiris, and in those sepulchres objects have been found bearing the 
unmistakeable stamp of their origin - such as carved ivory . . . . All 
those cities [Ant, Annu Menti, Aunti, Aunyt-Seni today called Esneh, 
Erment, Quoch, and Heliopolis] have the characteristic symbol which 
serves to denote the name Anu" 
--Abbe Emile Amelineau 1850-1916 CE


--- PAGE 5 ---
"Once again we must turn to Amelineau for it was he that discovered 
the tomb of Osiris at Abydos . . . [and] the head of Osiris found in a 
jar in the necropolis of Abydos. Because of this discovery Osiris could 
no longer be considered a mythical hero. The magnitude of this 
discovery cannot be stressed enough. . . " 
--Wayne Chandler, Of Gods and Men: Egypt's Old Kingdom, 1989 
"The common ancestor of the Annu settled along the Nile was Ani or 
An, a name determined by the word (khet) and which, dating from the 
earliest versions of the `Book of the Dead' (4100 BCE) onwards, is 
given to the god Osiris. . . . The identity of the god An with Osiris has 
been demonstrated by Pleyte; we should indeed, recall that Osiris is 
also surnamed by the Anu: `Osiris Ani' The god Anu is represented 
alternatively by the symbol and the symbol . Are the Aunak tribes now 
inhabiting the upper Nile (in Ethiopia) related to the ancient Annu? 
Future research will provide the answer to this question." 
--Cheikh Anta Diop, Origin of The Ancient Egyptians, 1981 
"And Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and was 
mighty in words and in deeds." Acts, chapter 7:22 
SO BEFORE MOSES "WROTE" THE FIRST FIVE BOOKS OF THE BIBLE, 
HE HAD FIRST LEARNED ALL THE WISDOM OF THE EGYPTIANS. 
WHAT DID THE EGYPTIANS TEACH? 
"He who is between the thighs of Nut (Goddess of sky and heaven) is 
the Pygmy who danceth like the god and who pleaseth the heart of the 
god before his great throne." 
--Pyramid Text of Pepi I, 6th Dynasty, 2300 BCE "The High Priest Tera 
Neter of the Temples of the God Seth of the Cities of the Anu Peoples" 
-- Inscription on Tera Neter tile dating around 3100 BCE at a temple at 
Aabdju (Abydos) in Ta-Seti (Upper Egypt) 
"Thou hast said in this thy letter, that thou has brought a dancing 
dwarf of the god from the land of spirits, like the dwarf which the 
treasurer of the god Burded [Ba-Wex-Djed, Chancellor of the Divine 
Seals of King Isosi] brought from Punt in the time of Isesi . . . . Come 
northward to the court immediately; . . . thou shalt bring this dwarf 
with thee, which thou bringest living, prosperous and healthy from the 
land of spirits, for the dances of the god, to rejoice and [gladden] the


--- PAGE 6 ---
heart of the king of Upper and Lower Egypt, Neferkare, who lives 
forever. . . . My majesty desires to see this dwarf more than the gifts 
of Sinai and of Punt. If thou arrivest at court this dwarf being with thee 
alive, prosperous and healthy, my majesty will do for thee a greater 
thing than that which was done for the treasurer of the god Burded in 
the time of Isesi, according to the heart's desire of my majesty to see 
the dwarf." 
-- Inscription from the Tomb of Prince Harkhuf from reign of Pepi II 
2250 BCE 
TO THE EGYPTIANS . . . 
"The land of Punt, with its reed, beehive shaped houses raised on stilts 
above water, was the most exotic and mysterious of places to visit, 
and from which to receive visitors, for more than once the Royaly of 
Punt came to the court of the Pharaoh in Egypt. It seems to have been 
considered by them a most unique haven; an emporium of goods for 
both king and gods, and gradually acquired an air of fantasy . . . . " 
"Punt seems to have been a commercial center for goods not only from 
within its own borders, but from elsewhere in Africa. Here, the 
Egyptians sought and found many items that did not exist within the 
Two Lands. From Punt, they received the incense known as antyu, 
which was produced in considerable quantities near Punt in the region 
of Utjenet (God's Land), as well as ivory, ebony (hebny) and gum 
(kemy). From this mystical place they also imprted the skins of 
giraffes, panthers and cheetahs which were worn by temple priests . . . 
. Cynocephalus baboons were imported from Punt. Because of the 
goods from Punt used by priests and to adorn temples, it was known 
as a region of God's Land, and considered a perosnal pleasure garden 
of the god, Amun . . ." 
"We will see below that [Queen Hatshepsut's] ambitious `Ship and 
Safari Expedition to the Land of the Ancestors/Gods' (Ta Neter)' 
includes sailing the Red Sea by ship to the coast of Punt (today called 
Eritrea), and then undertaking an interior of Africa land Safari on foot 
across Sheba (today called Ethiopia) into the Nile River Equatorial 
Great Lakes region known then as Khenthunefer. The `Welcome and 
Tribute by the Country of Punt' Wall Relief from the Hatshepsut Deir El 
Bahari Burial Temple specifically shows the Puntian people bringing 
welcoming gifts (lower level) and later delivering tribute (upper level) 
to the Egyptian soldiers . . . aboard 5 ships which sailed from 
Egypt/Kemit by way of a canal from the Nile River to the Red Sea . . .


--- PAGE 7 ---
.In 1962 the American Research Center in Egypt published a computer 
enhancement of the heavily vandalized `Safari' Wall Relief and 
exposed for the first time the presence of a male giraffe. 
�Specifically the left portion of the 3rd level of the `Safari' Wall Relief 
is inhabited by a male giraffe. Additionally the left portion of the 4th 
level of the `Safari' Wall Relief shows a hippopotamus and baboon. . . . 
.The proximity of the male giraffe with the hippopotamus strongly 
suggests that the ;Land of the Ancestors/Gods' is in the Nile River 
Region of the Great Lakes in Equatorial Africa starting at the northern 
most Lake Tana; being that these fauna naturally are found in close 
proximity together only in that region. Specifically it is theorized the 
18th Dynasty of Pharaoh Queen Hatshepsut commissioned `Safari' 
penetrated on foot into the interior of Africa, traveling through what 
we call today `Sustainable Agri-Forests' or cultivated jungles. . . . 
Consequently, in identifying the geographical location of Ancient 
Egypt's `Land of the Ancestors/Gods' (Ta Neter) the first key is the 
zoology of the giraffe and related fauna. . . . .This Wall Relief from the 
Hatshepsut Deir El Bahari Burial Temple records in hieroglyphic and 
visual detail describe the 5 Egyptian ships being loaded visible with at 
least 12 Frankincense and Myrrh trees, bags of resin incense, precious 
woods and metals, various rare `sacred' animals including at least 10 
caged leopards, 3 baboons, and other tribute . . . . [Here then] is the 
aboriginal paradigm of the `Garden of Eden" . . . . 
THIS IS WHY ANCIENT SCHOLARS SAID: 
"Eschatoi audron, `the most distant of men . . . . at earth's two 
verges, in sunset lands and lands of the rising sun." -- Homer, 
Odyssey , 850 BCE 
"Blameless Ethiopians" - Homer, Iliad , 850 BCE 
"Most Just Men . . . . The Ethiopians, a mighty race who surpass in 
comeliness and stature all peoples and who are firm believers in God." 
- Herodotus, 450 BCE 
"O Solon, Solon, You Greeks are always children . . . . You Greeks are 
novices in all knowledge in all knowledge of antiquity. You are ignorant 
of what passed here or among yourselves in the days of old. The 
history of eight-thousand years is deposited in our sacred books, but 
we can ascend to much higher antiquity and tell you what our fathers 
have done for nine-thousand years. I mean their institutions, their 
laws, and their brilliant accomplishments."


--- PAGE 8 ---
--Egyptian Priest at Sais to Solon, en route from Greece in Plato's 
Timaios 400 BCE 
"Ethiopia was the first established country on the earth, and the 
Ethiopians were the first who introduced the Gods and established 
laws." --Stephanus of Byzantium 
IT SHOULD BE NOTED THAT THE BIBLE SAYS THAT ONE OF THE 
BORDERS OF THE GARDEN OF EDEN WAS FORMED BY THE GIHON 
RIVER ( BLUE NILE) WHICH ENCOMPASSED THE WHOLE LAND OF 
CUSH (ETHIOPIA) WHILE IT IS SPECULATED THAT THE PISHON IS THE 
WHITE NILE. ACCORDING TO THE FIRST BOOK OF ADAM AND EVE, A 
BOOK THAT WAS ARBITRARILY REMOVED FROM THE BIBLE AS WE 
KNOW IT: 
5 But when God made Adam go out of the garden, He did not place 
him on the border of it northward. This was so that he and Eve would 
not be able to go near to the sea of water where they could wash 
themselves in it, be cleansed from their sins, erase the transgression 
they had committed, and be no longer reminded of it in the thought of 
their punishment. 
6 As to the southern side of the garden, God did not want Adam to live 
there either; because, when the wind blew from the north, it would 
bring him, on that southern side, the delicious smell of the trees of the 
garden. 
7 Wherefore God did not put Adam there. This was so that he would 
not be able to smell the sweet smell of those trees, forget his 
transgression, and find consolation for what he had done by taking 
delight in the smell of the trees and yet not be cleansed from his 
transgression. 
8 Again, also, because God is merciful and of great pity, and governs 
all things in a way that He alone knows He made our father Adam live 
in the WESTERN BORDER OF THE GARDEN, because on that side the 
earth is very broad. 
9 And God commanded him to live there in a cave in a rock the Cave 
of Treasures below the garden. 
THE WESTERN-MOST BORDER OF THE GARDEN WOULD BE THE 
SOURCE OF THE PISHON (WHITE NILE) NEAR MT RUWENZORI 
(MOUNTAINS OF THE MOON) ON THE EDGE OF THE CONGO (ITURI)


--- PAGE 9 ---
FOREST. THIS AGREES WITH MODERN SCIENCE WHICH SAYS THAT 
OUR ANCESTORS FIRST MIGRATED OUT OF THE MT. 
RUWENZORI/MOUNTAINS OF THE MOON AREA 180,000 TO 200,000 
YEARS AGO. THE ANCESTORS OF THESE PEOPLE remains are also 
found in this same area dated to 4.4 million years ago. 
"There is every reason to believe that Pygmies were the sole 
inhabitants of the African rain forest from Liberia to Rwanda at that 
time . . . . .It is likely [Bes and the Pygmy brought by Prince Harkhuf] 
are from a group that had adapted to the open forest like the Twa 
around Lake Kivu on the eastern side of the Mountains of the Moon. 
The Twa Pygmies are smiths, potters, and Jacks-of-all-trades, and are 
more aclimated to life outside the Ituri Forest and to the tall peoples." 
--C.J. Becker, Ashes of the Phoenix, 
THIS IS WHY ANCIENT SCHOLARS SAID: 
"Eschatoi audron, `the most distant of men . . . . at earth's two 
verges, in sunset lands and lands of the rising sun." -- Homer, 
Odyssey, 850 BCE 
"To warmer seas the cranes embodied fly, with noise and order 
through the midway sky; to Pygmy nations wounds and death they 
bring, and all the war descends upon the wing." - Homer, Iliad, iii 6-
10, 850 B.C. 
"Which they [Nasamonians crossing the Libyan deserts] were 
gathering fruit, some diminutive men, less than men of middle stature, 
came up ans seized them and carried them away." --Herodotus 450 
BCE 
"The cranes fly to the lakes above Egypt from which flows the Nile; 
there dwell the Pygmies, and this is no fable but the pure truth; there 
just as we are told, do men and horses of diminutive size dwell in 
caves." -- Aristotle 350 BCE 
According to the last Student of the Kemetic Mystery School System of 
the Anu (called "On" in the Bible and "Heliopolis" by the Greeks), as 
well as recent scientific discovery, there was 
1. Rule of Gods on Earth begins 34,525 BCE (Germinga shock wave, 
Late Wisconsin Glaciation) and lasts 13,900 years.


--- PAGE 10 ---
2. Rule of Demigods and Spirits of the Dead begins 20,625 BCE (last 
Glacial Maximum) and lasts 11,025 years. 
3. From the Rule of Gods on Earth to the end of the Rule of Demigods 
and Spirits of the Dead is therefore about 34,525- 9,600 = 24,925 
years, which is approximately the Earth precession period of 26,000 
years and the travel time of a light beam from the center of our Galaxy 
to our Sun, about 25,000 light years distance. 
4. Rule of Mortal Humans on Earth begins 9,600 BCE at the same time 
the Vela X supernova caused a dramatic warming period of about 50 
years that caused glaciers to melt and sea levels to rise more than 35 
meters with 30 percent per year net precipitation over evaporation loss 
by 5,600 BCE, forcing the earth's creatures to higher ground. 
ACCORDING TO RESEARCH DONE BY THE ISSEMBLY FOR RASTAFARI 
INIVERSAL EDUCATION: 
5. In 9,600 BCE, the Bongo, Kango, Efe, Akka and Twa - the Anu 
peoples, lived in the forest at the foot of BABA TIBA ("Mountains of the 
Moon") (Mt. Ruwenzori, east of Lake Kivu, Rwanda). The ANU say that 
in the beginning there was ELIMA (supreme being), TA-HU (Sacred 
Tree) of TA-HU-TI (Moon God) on BABA TIBA ("Mountains of the 
Moon"). The Anu gathered fruits, nuts and plants. When the Anu could 
not find fruit, nuts, or plants to eat, they hunted the creatures of the 
land for meat.The Anu listened to the sounds of the forests and 
learned to mimic them, thereby learning how to sing from the 
creatures of the air. With their photograph aural memory preserving 
the intrusion of sounds, words and legends in the most ancient form, 
virtually unchaged compared to the changes that have occurred 
outside the forest, even among literate peoples, their pronunciations 
may be the closest to the original. 
6. The Tswa say that Djakoba descended from the sky, dividing the 
waters by the power of ELIMA, the supreme being.The Efe say that the 
fruit of TA-HU (Sacred Tree of the Moon) was pillaged. The Kango say 
that a sinful woman caused a primordial disaster for which she is 
condemend to bring forth children in sorrow and do all the hardest 
work. 
7. The Efe say that Lulu, a monster that lives deep in the forest, came 
out one day with a terrible roar, demolished the camps and devoured 
the people. The only survivor was a pregnant woman. Her son killed 
the Lulu and released all those swallowed alive. The Efe say that TA-


--- PAGE 11 ---
WA ascended to the heavens after governing righteously his fellow 
Anu. 
8. TA-HATO, the Anubis "dog-faced" baboon was considered the most 
intelligent of the land creatures. When the Anu found unknown fruits, 
nuts and plants, they gave them to TA-HATO to test for human 
consumption. The Anu also followed TA-HATO to the sources of water. 
9. The Anu also watched the Sacred Ibis that appeared from time to 
time from the northeast. 
10. The Ishango, the first to move west from Baba Tiba, along the 
Lualaba tributaries the Ulindi, the Lowa, the Maiko and the Lindi to Kis-
Ng-Ani, made marks on the bone (dated 100,000 BCE) to calculate 
when the Sacred Ibis would appear. Further west along the Ng-gr 
(Niger river) moved the Nupe who say that an Oya (river) priest 
named Shango harnessed her powers, practised herbology, and 
defeated the priest Ologbajo wearing the Dje-n-dju (Jenju) mask in a 
bardic-singing contest between rainmaking gods. Shango won and 
established canoe-priests called Kede at Dje-abba (Jabba) on the Ng-
gr river and towns called Owo and Oya. Further west and up river are 
the Bariba and Sorko tribes who worship Dongo, a deity that throws 
lightning, thunder, stones, and rain. 
"Further north and west near the source of the Ng-gr river are the 
Bambara who say that Dji-Wa-Ra, an Onyx antelope, brough them 
knowledge of agriculture. From Gao, descendants of Nupe, Bariba, 
Sorko and Bambara moved north to the western foot of Mt. Ta-Hat 
where lived the Bel-la.Some Anu moved north along the Lualaba to 
Ba-ng-ui, north to N'Dja-mena to Lac Tchad, past the Te-nere to Akka-
dez, Ta-sili Ta-N-Ahaggar to Ta-Men-ghest to Mt. Ta-Hat, Mt Dje-Bel 
Te-ter-Tiba (Theba), Dj-Anet and Anak in west Ta-Tjaemen. what is 
called Algeria today. Thus spread the Anu sounds ta, tiba, dje, ng, 
ai(ui) and an(ak)(et). Rock paintings found in Tasili-n-Ahaggar dated 
6,000 to 4,000 BCE depict a great giant monster which destroyed the 
elephants, rhinos, and hippos and left only horses and camel. North of 
Mt. Ta-Hat is Ilezi, where all the travelers from Gao and Kis-Ng-Ani 
met to travel north to OEA (Ta-ra-bulus or Tripoli) the northern most 
part of in west Ta-Tjaemen. what is called Algeria today. Thus is the 
route and migration from OYA in the Gulf of Guinea to OEA in the 
Mediterranean Sea. 
11. From OEA the Anu people moved east to MIS-RA-TA to BA-NG-HA-
ZI and north to ANU-TA-IL-YA and IL-ANU-YA, MUT, and AD-ANU(A)


--- PAGE 12 ---
along the TAU-RUS Mountains in today's Southern Turkey. There, the 
ANU people lived in mud bricks and practiced agriculture. Rock 
paintings from 6,000 to 4,000 BC found in Catal Huyuk show men 
wearing leopard skins hunting bulls and crop rituals for TAU ("Bull 
God" and "Leopard Goddess" ) symbolized by bull-horns which 
decorated their houses. 
12. These Anu people spread south to HAY-TAU, a wooded region 
famous fo its conifers, junipers and a red-wood called "MER" south of 
TA-TUS (Tartus) in a town called Byblos in today's Lebanon. The god of 
Hay-Tau was Ne-ga (NG-AI) and TA-AUTOS invented their first written 
records. The cheif deity of Byblos was HAY-TAU (HA-THOR) sometimes 
called BA-ALAT ("Lady of Byblos"). Thousands of years later, the 
people of Greece pronounced TA-AUTOS as "THOTH". 
13. Some Anu moved east of Baba Tiba-the Twa, Wanyambo, Maasai, 
Hutu and Dorobo. The Maasai say that an Anu prophet brought them 
religion.and worshipped Ng-ai. The ayyantu (timekeepers) of the Bor-
Anu used a sophisticated calendircal system based on the conjunction 
of seven stars (Beta Triangulum, Pleiades, Aldebarran, Belletrix, 
Central Orion, Saiph, and Sirius) with certain lunar phases of either 29 
or 20 days. Bitotesa (New Year's day) is observed whene a new moon 
is in conjunction with Beta Triangulum. The first six months of the 
calendar are started by new moon conjunctions with six specific 
locations in the sky marked by seven stars . The method is switched 
and the final six months are identified by six different phases of the 
moon being found in conjunction with only one position in the sky - 
the one marked by Beta triangulum. 
14. Some Anu moved northeast of Baba Tiba - Shilluk, Nuer( Sudan) 
and the Anu-Ak of Ta- Seti and Ta-Nehisi (Ilubabor, Ethiopia). Ori of 
the Anu (Ori-Anu) is listed in Ethiopian records as the first "Ng-Ai" 
("Negus") in 4530 BCE. The first calendar date of the sideral (first 
known calendar) starts at 4241 BC with the helical rising of the Siris 
star.The first alphabet appeared around 4100 BC. 
15. Around 5,600 BCE the warm climate caused evaporation levels to 
supercede precipitation levels and water levels began to drop. Vast 
areas became desserts separated by large lakes that still existed for 
another 1,000 years in the area from the Baba Tiba Mountains to 
Taurus Mountains. This phenomenon left a remnant of hihgland 
peoples living in caves and on plateaus. These people learned from 
what they saw - spectacular views of the skies above. Here then is the 
basis for the sciences of astronomy and the zodiac.


--- PAGE 13 ---
The Anu peoples living in the highlands studied the stars, the moon 
and the sun. Moreover, until the drying up of the lakes, the Anu 
peoples developed a system of water navigation between the 
interconnected lakes and rivers. This would explain the emergence of a 
well-organized civilization possessing knowledge of the celestial 
bodies, capable of navigation on the lakes, rivers, seas and oceans of 
the earth, needed to know the circumference of the planer, the length 
of the year, the mean length of the Earth's orbit around the sun, the 
25,920 year cycle of the equinoxes, the accelration of gravity, and the 
speed of light in order to build the HU ("Sphinx") and Pyramid 
Complex at Dje-SAH (Giza). Clear geological signs of rain-water 
weathering on the HU/Sphinx indicate that it was constructed by the 
Anu peoples before the end of the rainy weather in the Nile River 
Valley. 
THE HU/SPHINX AND THE ANCIENT MYSTERY SCHOOL OF THE ANU 
The pre-dawn on the vernal equinox in 10,500 BCE, with the sun 12 
degrees below the horizon, HU, the Great Sphinx, would have gazed 
directly at his own celestial counterpart, the constellation of Leo which 
experienced it's "helical rising" at this moment. There is a relationship, 
in a scale of 1:43,200 that exists between the dimensions of the Great 
Pyramid and the dimensions of the earth. If you take the monuments's 
original height (481.3949 feet) and multiply it by 43,200 you get a 
quotient of 3,938.685 miles. This is an underestimate by just 11 miles 
of the true figure for the polar radius of the earth (3949 miles) worked 
out by the best modern methods. Likewise, if you take the 
monument's perimeter at the base (3023.16 feet) and multiply by 
43,200 then you get 24,734.94 miles, a result that is within 170 miles 
of the true equatorial circumference of the earth (24,902 miles) . . . . 
a minus-error of only three quarters of a single percent. 
Moreover, esoterically, at the Vernal (spring) Equinox of 10,500 BC, 
marking the beginning of the Astonomical Age of Leo the DJESAH 
Pyramid (Giza Egypt/Kemit) Plateau Complex located just west of the 
Nile River on a limestone rock plateau at the earth's 30 degree North 
Latitudinal Line; had the ground plan position of the Sphinx Rock 
Sculpture and the 3 Pyraminds facing exactly due east. Together they 
mimicked on the ground the celestial position of the unique 
convergence of the Constellation Leo (rising helically due east above 
the horizon) with the Constellation of Orion (Ori-Anu, aligned due 
south on the dissecting north-south Meridian Line) in the sky over the 
Anu Djesah Pyramid (Giza Egypt/Kemit) Plateau Complex.


--- PAGE 14 ---
Consequently, in the sky at the spring equinox of 10,500 BC, the 
celestial position of the Constellation Leo helically rose exactly east of 
the Milky Way on the Eliptical Path of the Sun and converged with the 
Constellation Orion (Ori-Anu) lying just west of the Milky Way exactly 
on the north-south Meridian line at 9 degrees 20' 'latitude south in the 
sky over the Anu Djesah Pyramid (Giza Egypt/Kemit) Plateau Complex. 
Consequently, on earth at the Spring Equinox of 10,500 BC the gorund 
plan position of the Sphinx Rock Sculpture pointed directly east across 
the Nile River to the helically rising Constellation Leo on the eastern 
horizon. The First ("Great " of Khufu) Pyramid, the Second (Khefra) 
Pyramid and Third (Menkare) Pyramid on the ground reflected their 
analogous celestial positions in the Orion (Ori-Anu) Constellation as its 
Belt Stars of Al Nitak, Al Nilam and Mintaka respectively. The Nile River 
flows south to north just east of the Giza Limestone Rock Plateau on 
earth analogous to the celestial Milky Way spanning the length of our 
galaxy just east of the Orion Constellation in the sky along a south to 
north course. 
Esoterically, prior to the Spring Equinox of 10,500 BC, from the Rule of 
the Gods on Earth (34,525 BCE) to the evaporation of the Nile valley 
lakes (4,600 BCE) . . . . the astronomer, architecture and temple 
engineering priests of the Ancient Egyptian Mystery School of Anu, 
known in the Bible as the School of On, designed, surveyed and 
constructed the Djesah Pyamid Plateau Complex. It was the main 
instructional university campus based on the 42 Books of DJEHUTI, the 
"Moon God" and was the spirituality system initiation and training 
center of the Aten Path. 
The leaders and staff of the Ancient Egyptian Mystery School of the 
ANU from TA-NETJER ("God's Land") were by definition priests who 
had attained spiritual deification and become `human gods' called in 
the ancient documents of Egypt/Kemit as the aakhu-hammet or `Sun 
People'. By 4241 BCE they had worked out the Sidereal Calendar and 
by 4100 BCE they were using the PER-UM-HERU ("Book of Coming 
Forth by Day"). The School of Anu trained amongst others Vizar 
Imhotep (2650 BCE), Pharaoh Amenemhet III ("Memnon" 1843 to 
1797 BCE), Pharoah-Queen Hatshepsut (1484-1462 BCE), Pharaoh 
Thuthmoses III and IV, and his Prime Minister YU-SEFI or YU-SEP 
(Joseph of the Bible, 1500-1429 BCE). At the Temple of WA-SET built 
by Amenhotep III (1391 BCE), students Pharaoh Akhenaton and 
Queen Nefertiti (1350-1340 BCE), Thales (600 BCE), Plato (400 BCE, 
studied 11 years), Socrates (15 years), Aristotle (11-13 years) Euclid 
(20 years), studied along with Pythagoras, Solon, Archemides, 
Euripides, Herodotus and 80,000 other students.


--- PAGE 15 ---
During the first half of the 18th Dynasty, Egyptian rulers began calling 
themselves "Thutmose" which means "reborn son of Thoth". Thoth was 
the mispronounciationof Dje-Hu-Ti or Ta-Hu-Ti (shortend to Ta-Hut, 
Thut, and finally Thoth). 
"Thoth, Thot, or Hermes as he was known to the Greeks is the last 
divine personage of the ancient pre-dynastic Anu. . . . To Thot we may 
attribute writing medicine, chemistry, law, rhetoric, the higher aspects 
of mathematics, astronomy and astrology, not to mention the early 
Egyptian understanding of the intricate dynamics of universal order. 
Thoth or Thot was divine mind. He was known as the messenger of the 
gods . . . . The word `thought' is derived from this deity's name Thot. 
Francis Barret said of Thoth, `If God ever appeared in man, he 
appeared in him." Legend holds that Thoth was the grand architect of 
the Great Pyramid aided by a high priest named RA or Ra Ta, and Isis, 
as counselor and advisor. This is said to have taken place in the year 
10,490 BCE. The fourth century philospher Iamblichus (330 CE), 
attributes to Thoth the writing of 1,100 books and Seleucus estimates 
no less than 20,000 of his works were done before the period of 
Menes. Eusebius saw but forty-two of these books in his time (360 
CE). . . . Tradition declares that on the dead body of Thoth, at Hebron, 
was found by an initiate, the tablet known as the Smaragdine (the 
Emerald Tablet). . . . From this tablet evolved the key to 
comprehending the axioms of the universe and how they affect 
mankind; the book came to Be known as th KYBALION.' 
--Wayne Chandler, Of Gods and Men: Egypt's Old Kingdom, 1989 
SO IF THE EGYPTIANS PRIOR TO AND DURING THE TIME WHEN 
MOSES WAS A STUDENT IN THEIR SCHOOL SYSTEM TAUGHT THAT 
"Utjenet (God's Land), " ALSO CALLED "Khenthunefer" AND "Punt" 
WAS SOUTH OF ETHIOPIA NEAR THE MOUNTAINS OF THE MOON 
INHABITED BY THE ANU PYGMIES, WHY DOES MOSES WRITE THE 
BOOK OF GENESIS TO MAKE IT SEEM THAT THE GARDEN OF EDEN 
WAS IN MESOPOTAMIA? 
ANSWER: BECAUSE "MOSES" WAS AN EGYPTIAN WHO WAS REJECTED 
BY THE EGYPTIAN PEOPLE FOR ATTEMPTING TO FORCE UPON THEM A 
NEW RELIGION NOT OF THEIR FATHERS. DESPERATE, MOSES WENT 
TO THE ONLY GROUP OF PEOPLE IN EGYPT WITH NO KNOWLEDGE OF 
GOD, A GROUP THAT MIGRATED INTO EGYPT FROM 
MESOPOTAMIA/SUMERIA, AND USING THE POWERFUL LEYDEN JAR 
CAPACITOR CAPABPLE OF PRODUCING 100,000 VOLTS OF 
ELECTRICITY (ARK OF THE COVENENAT), TOOK ADVANTAGE OF OF


--- PAGE 16 ---
THE EARTH'S HEIGHTENED ELECTRICAL CONDITION CAUSED BY 
CELESTIAL EVENTS AT THAT TIME, AND LED THIS GROUP OUT OF 
EGYPT. NEEDING TO UNIFY THE HISTORIES OF THE MIXED 
MULTITUDE, MOSES EXTENDED THE BOAUNDARIES OF GOD'S LAND 
TO INCLUDE MESOPOTAMIA/SUMERIA AND CONCOCTED THE STORY 
OF ABRAHAM THROUGH JOSEPH. LATER WRITERS RE-WROTE MOSES' 
CONCOTED STORY TO SUIT THEIR OWN NEEDS, AND WHAT IS READ 
IN THE BIBLE TODAY IS NOT THE WORD OF GOD BUT A NOVEL 
WRITTEN BY MOSES AND HIS LATER REDACTORS 
Asar Imhotep http://www.mochasuite.com

