=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Revolutionary Culture and the future of pan africanism.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 5
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:32:19.618266
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Home Browse Find Search Help
Baraka, Imamu Amiri, 1934-, Revolutionary Culture and the Future of Pan-African Culture . (Alexander Street Press, Alexandria, VA, 2003). [Author Information] [Bibliographic Details]
Table of Contents
Revolutionary Culture and Future of Pan-Afrikan Culture: The Revolutionary Uses of Culture Page
-- NA --
REVOLUTIONARY CULTURE AND FUTURE OF PAN-AFRIKAN CULTURE
CHAIRMAN AMIRI BARAKA
Presented at the 6th Pan-Afrikan Congress
June 19-27, 1974
-- NA --
Presented at the:
6th Pan Afrikan Congress
Dar es Salaam, Tanzania
June 19-27, 1974
-- [1] --
Revolutionary Culture and Future of Pan-Afrikan Culture: The Revolutionary Uses of Culture
FOR C.L.R. JAMES
The definitions of culture that we find most useful are firstly Maulana Karenga's that culture is a people's way of life, values, and the institutions created to perpetuate these values and
that way of life. Culture then is how we live, but also what that means to us and also what are the objective and subjective results of that life.
It also seems true that culture is produced by society, i.e., by the coming together, or recognition of that condition, of groups of people - not the other way around, but people coming
together and how and what they produce as a result of that, materially and spiritually. There is, as Cabral said, ". . . the strong, dependent and reciprocal relationships existing between the
cultural situation and the economic (and political) situation in the behavior of human societies. In fact, culture is always in the life of a society (open or closed) the more or less conscious
result of the economic and political activities of that society, the more or less dynamic expression of the kinds of relationships which prevail in that society, on the one hand between man
     
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
1 of 5 7/2/2011 9:57 AM


--- PAGE 2 ---
(considered individually or collectively) and nature, and on the other hand, among individuals, groups of individuals, social strata or classes." (National Liberation & Culture).
Culture is important to discussions we hold here because we are talking in actuality about the liberation of Afrikan people throughout the world, and by that projection the liberation of the
toiling, struggling masses of people throughout the world. Because, make no mistake, we cannot really be talking about one without the other! The politics and economics of the world are
by this time so inextricably integrated, oppressed with oppressed, oppressor with oppressor, and all together, simultaneously, that any talk that makes it seem that somehow Afrikan
peoples' struggle anywhere is a totally separate and removed struggle from the World War against imperialism, such talk is at best hopelessly naive.
-- 2 --
Talk of culture is relavent to this international struggle only in the sense that we understand, as the Honorable Ahmed Sekou Touré has indicated, that a culture can be progressive or
reactionary. It is directly characterized, to paraphrase Cabral, "by the mode of production and the level of productive forces," i.e., the social utilization of the people + the means of
production and the stage of development of the society. Its control of its environment and relationship to nature and between people and other material relationships." The national
liberation movements, for instance, are the political expression of that culture, whose values are mobilized in a revolutionary fashion. But Afrikans worldwide suffer under the yoke of the
monopoly capitalist mode of production, as the victims of imperialism, in one of its forms or another. Our cultures, therefore, are usually characterized as colonized, semicolonized,
neo-colonized, Bureaucratic Capitalist, Comprador Capitalist, &c. Either we are oppressed directly, by the existence of these forms of imperialism as the mode of production, and the
material and spiritual reality created by this mode, or else we are victimized by the internationally developing native and pseudo bourgeoisie, part of the exploiting element of Black
parasites victimizing Afrikan people, in clear collaboration with imperialism, that exist in various degrees and forms in almost every Afrikan state or community, in the world.
In such societies, one aspect of Afrikan culture [and sometimes it dominates all others], is reactionary, insofar as it actually collaborates or forms reactionary alliances with the enemies of
the masses of the earth's peoples. However, we know, as Cabral has pointed out, that in culture are to be found "the seeds of resistance", meaning that the consciousness, memory or will
to maintain indigenous ways of life, values and institutions dissimilar to the forms put forward by colonialism (or neo-colonialism and its many variations) is in itself the kernel of potential
new life, alternative forms and content in contrast to the culture of imperialism.
We know from Cabral and Touré that imperialism must either eliminate the colonized or assimilate them in order to more thoroughly exploit them economically. Cultural aggression is a
-- 3 --
weapon for the destruction of the seeds of resistance and new (revolutionary) culture. It is more dangerous than most other forms of aggression by imperialism since in most cases the
people do not even recognize it as aggression. It simply puts negative values and institutions in our societies. Values and institutions committed to the exploitation of Afrikans.
The mode of production and the level of productive forces, establishes the form a culture will take on regardless of nation and race, though nation and race are reflected directly in the
total cultural existence of a society. In the total existence of culture. Feudalism breeds and developes one kind of culture, Capitalism another. Colonialism and neo-colonialism will project
the specific identity of a capitalist subculture, the perverted growth patterns of societies whose productive forces are blunted by foreign domination or continuing domination by
international finance capital.
President Touré has pointed out that culture is material and spiritual. Cabral added, "Culture is a dynamic synthesis of the material and spiritual condition of the society and expresses
relationship both between man and nature and between the different classes within a society." (Identity and Dignity). It is both a material, physiological, economic and political reality as
well as the ideas, attitudes, and world view given off by that material reality. The material reality of imperialism, both its economic base, and its ideated and institutional super structure are
a culture, a way of life, values and institutions. The imposition of this culture, at one level, as an economic phenomenon, on another level as political repression, on another as cultural
aggression, reduces the people upon whom the aggression is perpetuated to a state of cultural stasis and national underdevelopment. From the Slave Trade to Colonialism to
Neo-Colonialism. This lack of development is the result of, and should be called, exploitation. Created by a culture of the exploiters and resulting in a culture of the exploited. To exist in the
culture of the exploited is to be deprived of history, repressed in the present, and uncertain of the future. To be of the culture of the exploited is to regard exploitation, in too many
instances, as normality. Or as an act of metaphysical significance, the will of some
-- 4 --
elemental anti-Afrikan nonmaterial force, that we cannot locate and destroy. In fact, we might even worship that force even though it is obviously as anti-Afrikan as it is said to be invisible.
[Though ultimately that force is material and locatable, as the economic and political designs of Imperialism].
Exploitation also shapes itself as a set of values, a way of life, and institutions - to perpetuate that exploitation. In the culture of the exploited, our religion, history, social organization,
political organization, economic organization, creative motif and ethos are not only exploited but are themselves forms of exploitation. Our religion and mythology include dieties that cannot
defeat our enemies. Our history no longer exists, or is merely a record of various times we have helped our enemies, our social organization in reality is a reflection of the exploitative
division of labor created by capitalism as well as the deadly capitalist ideology called Racism. Our economic organization is as the host of an international parasite, our creativity is
blockekd by the imprisoning of our productive forces, our ethos too often is to either accept our oppression or collaborate actively with our oppressors and call it pragmatism.
The act of foreign domination was not the beginning of all backwardness and reaction in all aspects of our culture. There were backward aspects to Afrikan culture simply by virtue of our
own historical development, but those aspects did not dominate. . . But foreign domination was the paralyzing of that culture and the active cultivation of that culture's most reactionary
aspects, but also it is the beginning of resistance. So that even the culture of the exploited can develope a reactive form to express the reactive and responsive energy of the oppressed to
that oppression. If a man is beaten, there is pain, physical, mental, spiritual, agony, depending on the severity of the beating. But what will the beaten man do, as a result of the beating?
Will he simply bleed and swell up or will he whimper on confusedly, stumble, curse, maybe try to make a deal, perhaps pretend he wasn't even assaulted, or maybe he will fight!
The revolutionary's task is to transform his culture from an exploited culture to a militant fighting culture. It is this
-- 5 --
view that we believe is reflected when Comrade Cabral said, "The more one realizes that the chief goal of the liberation movement goes beyond the achievement of political independence
to the superior level of complete liberation of the productive forces and the construction of economic, social and cultural progress of a people, the more evident is the necessity of
undertaking a selective analysis of the values of the culture within the framework of the struggle for liberation. The need for such an analysis of cultural values becomes more acute when
in order to face colonial violence, the liberation movement must mobilize and organize the people, under the direction of a strong and disciplined political organization in order to resort to
violence in the cause of freedom - the armed struggle for national liberation!!"
The repression and destruction of our productive forces by imperialism (in the era of neo-colonialism) is only made possible through the collaboration of native agents. That such native
agents abound in the Afrikan world is one surely expressive indication of the reactionary nature of some aspects of our culture.
"The elements of democratic and socialist culture are present, if only in rudimentary form, in every national culture, since in every nation there are toiling and exploited masses whose
conditions of life inevitably give rise to the ideology of democracy and socialism. But every nation also possesses a bourgeois culture (and most nations a reactionary and clerical cultural
as well)" - Lenin, Critical Remarks on the National Question.
In order to transform Afrikan culture from reactionary, i.e., capitalist dominated, whether colonial, semi- or neo-colonial, it will be necessary to mobilize the positive, democratic, socialist,
values or our people and to help eradicate the feudalistic, backward, defeatist, or opportunistic values. This requires self-criticism and criticism of ourselves, our organizations of struggle
and our communities at large. It requires self discipline and discipline and relentless reviews of "the prospects for the struggle," i.e., evaluations of ourselves and our enemies, merciless
objectivity and the undaunted construction of systems, institutions, that objectify the values and ideology of revolution and socialism.
-- 6 --
A revolutionary culture is simply the people, their way of life, their values and institutions consciously developed as a force for positive social transformation. The revolutionary culture is
the objective of what is called cultural revolution, intense struggle to transform the values and life of the masses of people. Cultural revolution in China, progressive Afrika, Southeast Asia,
have not only brought focus to conflict between the two world systems [capitalism and socialism] over the years, but even in the fortress of world imperialism, the U.S.A., the Black Cultural
revolution of the 60's, the Black power movement, led directly to a political reawakening to Afrika, and the understanding that Afrikans all over the world must be dedicated to the liberation
and unification of the Afrikan continent under socialism, as well as to the self-determination, self-respect, and self-defense of Afrikans everywhere.
The most progressive leaders in Afrika, from Mwalimu Nyerere to Jonas Savimbi, understand that the national liberation struggle is directly related to the transformation of the political
consciousness of the struggling people themselves. As Chairman Mao has said, a remolding of world view. And that as an initial part of that transformation is the phenomenon of
nationalism, i.e., identification of the oppressed people to themselves, oppressed. And with this identity comes a purpose and direction that moves toward the freeing of the national
consciousness of all foreign restraints. "This is why to attribute, recognize or declare the identity of an individual is above all to place that individual or group in the framework of a culture."
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
2 of 5 7/2/2011 9:57 AM


--- PAGE 3 ---
(Cabral, Identity and Dignity). And since identity is cultural, a cultural revolution is necessary to wrest that identity from reaction and thrust it toward progressive growth. One aspect of the
identity revolution of Afrikan people has been nationalism! "The insistence on an Afrikan identity is a worthwhile corrective not only to bourgeois cultural imperialism but also to dogmatic
expositions by self styled Marxists or scientific socialists." (Walter Rodney).
But Nkrumah and Cabral have also pointed out very clearly that nationalism is only an initial step and ultimately if nationalism is not merely a form of preparation for true national liberation
struggle which should in any progressive guise lead directly to socialist construction or socialist revolution, then nationalism,
-- 7 --
black or yellow, becomes as reactionary as the European variety, in fact it is in direct or indirect partnership with the European variety.
In such cases nationalism becomes the last refuge of rascals and new capitalists yearning only for control of their national market which political liberation or superficial national liberation
has made possible.
Nationalism, as an aspect of revolutionary culture, is necessary so that anti-imperialist struggles are also clearly struggles to end all forms of foreign domination, including social
imperialism. But political liberation and superficial national liberation struggles have created an international class of native agents directly related to imperialism, which is also
international. For instance, the pseudo-powerful American Black bourgeoisie and petty bourgeoisie could, objectively, be the new agents of yet another scramble for Afrika. By saying
Black is beautiful or we are an Afrikan people, yet representing the values and designs of U.S. imperialism.
There is a reactionary aspect to the Civil Rights movement (which corresponded to the political independence movement on the continent) and the Black cultural revolution that followed in
the U.S. It is that the superficial aspects of these movements, were coopted, so that Black power pimps and Afrikan nationalist-capitalists abound. The return to the source that Cabral
speaks of has become in many instances a display of irrelavence and opportunism, not a reaffirmation of struggle. The signal that the Black petty bourgeoisie was ready to struggle on the
side of Afrika has been distorted too often to either politically ineffective cults talking nonsense about atavistic feudalistic Afrika in the most modern technological state in the world, and
confusing that with revolutionary culture or to plain out opportunism and neocapitalist collaboration with imperialism.
This kind of reactionary petty bourgeois culture wherever in the Afrikan world it grows shows itself as political irrelavence and backwardness, even to support of proven murderers of
Afrikan
-- 8 --
people, like certain suddenly progressive Black leaders whom imperialism has miraculously absolved of their sins through "Afrikanization" and sporting events.
The cultural revolution, is the result of political struggle, or it is conceived as a method of raising the level of political struggle. But if it is authentic, a cultural revolution is just that,
radicalizing of the superstructure, to better perceive the need to transform the material base. The forcing of the consciousness of the masses to awareness of their own needs. And it is
proven by both those nations that have had cultural revolutions and began the rapid construction of socialism, and by those nations that didn't have cultural revolutions but instead had
political counterrevolutions, that cultural revolution, the radical transformation of the ideas, values, institutions and way of life, of the masses, is absolutely critical to continued positive
national development. It is also proven that these mass values transformations are a necessary part of the revolutionary program of any progressive nation seriously committed to raising
the material and spiritual level of the people. It perhaps should be added that would be revolutionary formations, revolutionary parties, and other formations of struggle also need their own
cultural revolutions. From the purging of reactionaries and opportunists, to the redefining of ideology and goals in the crucible of practice and in the act of struggle itself. If they are to
remain pertinent to the changing realities of life and revolution.
But in creating a revolutionary culture we should try to institutionalize the process of cultural revolution, just as we institutionalize unity-criticism-unity within revolutionary formations, as a
mode of theoretical and practical movement, and the self-criticism and criticism of Afrikan life and culture, toward the end of positive motion and constructing within the culture the forms
and systems that promote revolutionary dynamism as opposed to reactionary stagnation. Such stagnation is usually caused by opportunism and subjectivism, and their eradication should
be our constant goal.
The fact that the political independence movement of the 60's on the continent of Afrika and in the West Indies (which was
-- 9 --
linked directly to the Civil Rights movement and Black Power movements in the United States) has in most cases been spent or coopted and drained of its revolutionary motion, should
mean that for progressive Afrikans world wide we should be insisting on some form of values transformation to restore the revolutionary dynamism to our struggle that existed during that
earlier period. Obviously the national liberation movements in Guinea Bissau, Angola, Mozambique, Zimbabwe, Namibia, Zanania and elsewhere in the Afrikan world provide the impetus
of a great part of the present revolutionary dynamic of Afrikan culture. So much so that sometimes the bodies that represent the established governments of Afrikan nation-states, on the
continent and the West Indies, find themselves at variance with the liberation movements as to the degree of committment to total liberation and self reliance to which these governments
should pledge themselves.
The revolutionary stance of the political independence movements which led to the general end of colonialism in Afrika has become in too many cases, the accommodating posture of the
"pragmatic" semi-collaborator with imperialism. Even to the extent, in some extreme cases, where Afrikan governments do not even want to struggle directly with the blatant colonialists
such as Portugal, South Afrika, Rhodesia. And of course direct struggle with the manipulators of international finance capital, situated in the United States, Western Europe and Japan, is
completely out of the question.
The nations in question, the structures in question, are desperately in need of cultural revolutions. Because since the late 50's and the political independence movement, in too many
cases the internal contradictions of those movements have always been characterized in one aspect by sectors of Afrikan society which simply wanted the colonialists to leave so that
Afrikan ruling elites could spring into reaction. In open collaboration with world imperialism, no matter their grinding nationalist rhetoric. This is true all over the Afrikan world, not merely the
continent. The radical transformation of the values, way of life and institutions of these societies is what is necessary, leading toward socialist construction.
-- 10 --
It is reactionary to pretend that there is no class formation and resultant strife, i.e., class struggle throughout the Afrikan world. To say otherwise, at this point in history, is to be innocent of
reality, or mischievous for profit. The culture of Afrika circa 1960 and the culture of the 70's is radically changed. The principal struggle is not against colonialism no matter the continued
existence of minority White regimes and Portuguese colonialism, the principal struggle in this era is against neo-colonialism. Since this is the principal form of oppression of our people
world wide. Usually, those fighting the national liberation movements through armed struggle are already aware of the pitfalls of neo-colonialism, if only by their observation of many
member states of the O.A.U. The most progressive of such movements wage struggle for socialist construction, the defeat of capitalism, as well as wars of national liberation.
Unfortunately in some cases we are obstructed from development by a nationalist mystification of governments because for so long we were subjected to colonial ones, i.e., foreign
domination. So that the very existence of Afrikan governments sometimes moves us to such rapture we cannot be objective and therefore supportive of the social transformation needed
by the masses of Afrikans world wide.
A neo-colonial or political and economic collaborationist relationship to imperialism by Afrikan governments is the shaper of the culture these governments are the political expression of.
Just as the liberation movements by the act of their revolutionary struggle against racism and imperialism give to their cultures a revolutionary dynamic which is the positive values of the
culture mobilized for struggle.
For this reason, the O.A.U., for instance, is sometimes a creature of strange vacillation. It was created as an instrument of Afrikan Unity and Struggle, but too often it sacrifices the struggle
for questionable unity, which allows the reactionary statism of some of its members to impede the need for increased struggle in the war against imperialism that the masses of our people
need.
-- 11 --
With this observation, when we speak of the future of a PanAfrikan culture, it should be done with one eye squarely on the O.A.U., and the other eye on the progressive governments and
liberation movements on the continent and throughout the rest of the Afrikan world. But we should not single out the O.A.U., let us say, similar constructions which represent in one sense
institutionalizing of the political gains of the 50's and the 60's without the necessary reshaping that would result from adapting to the new dimensions of oppression brought on by the
neo-colonial 70's and the continued success of imperialism. Most Afrikan governments are at least in need of cultural revolutions so that they begin to value radical social transformation
rather than consolidation of economic and political dependency relations with monopoly capitalism. The fact that revolutionary movements within the West Indies have been almost totally
prevented from attending this Sixth Pan Afrikan Congress by neo-colonialism is screeching testimony to the existence and strength of such dependency relations and reactionary Black
governmental relations with radical political sectors. It is ironic that the Fifth Pan Afrikan Congress was banished to Manchester, England because of colonialism, which the participants of
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
3 of 5 7/2/2011 9:57 AM


--- PAGE 4 ---
that historic meeting pledged to help eliminate. But with the elimination of colonialism, now the Sixth Pan Afrikan Congress is distorted by neocolonialism, which will not allow its severest
critics to point out its negativity to the entire Afrikan world, and to oppressed people everywhere. So that even though most of Afrika is "independent", some of its sons and daughters in
the diaspora cannot be welcomed back because of the mystification of governments above people, and the determination of neo-colonialism not to be criticized, and therefore given the
possibility of self criticism and self transformation. If they will not have open forums to discuss these questions, what means of redress will the revolutionary youth use? Perhaps Trinidad is
one answer! But as one goal of the Fifth Pan Afrikan Congress was the destruction of colonialism, one goal of the Sixth Pan Afrikan Congress should be the elimination of neo-colonialism,
and the total unity and independence of Afrika.
PanAfrikanism is meaningless without it being conceived as a socialist construction as well as means of heightening the struggle for world socialism, the literal reorganization of world
society,
-- 12 --
and redistribution of the world's wealth. Nkrumah wrote, "At the core of the concept of Afrikan unity lies socialism and the socialist definition of the new Afrikan society." Unified
Independent Afrika, struggling for socialist reconstruction would be an ultimate weapon for the destruction of capitalism and the advent of socialism, internationally. Why? Because we
know that one of the important supports for the liberation movements, which at their most progressive are socialist revolutions, has been the existence of socialist states. China benefited
by the existence of the Soviet Union, whereas the Soviet Union was surrounded completely by capitalist and precapitalist states. North Korea, Cuba, North VietNam, as well as Guinea,
Tanzania, Somali, Congo, have all benefited by the existence of socialist states. In fact, all of Afrika has benefited, if we consider not only the subjectivism of the governments, but the
needs of the masses as well, all Afrika has benefited by the existence of socialist states. The existence of socialist states has transformed world culture, and taken one-third of the world's
peoples away from imperialism already!
A Pan Afrikan culture would mean that the values, way of life, and institutions of Afrika would first be mobilized and then be organized and politicized to promote a unified, independent,
socialist, continental Afrikan state. Which would by its creation intensify the struggle for Black self-determination, self-respect and self-defense everywhere Afrikans are. First, by
consciously proposing to do that, and by also being a "socialist liberation movement in power", continentally mobilized to defeat capitalism and imperialism and build socialism.
The O.A.U. was conceived in 1963 as a Pan Afrikanist institution, but in a decade the contradiction of nation-statism has often transformed this continent wide Afrikan body into a protector
of the national hegemony of a developing Afrikan petit-bourgeoisie. Also, to be truly PanAfrikan, Afrikans in the diaspora, the populations of North America, the West Indies, South and
Central America, and the Pacific Islands must be considered as needed members of that body. So that PanAfrikanism means world Afrikan unity as well.
-- 13 --
It has been written and discussed for the last decade that Afrika could not ever free all of its people unless it destroyed the colonial boundaries that have been placed upon it wherein our
people were separated (in 1884 at a Berlin Conference table) by the cruel vagaries of imperialism. These arguments have gone on to say that balkanization or the continuance of
fragmented nation-states are only dragging out the existence of neo-capitalism and a petty bourgeois Afrikan elite, in collaboration with imperialism. It is only in progressive Afrikan states
and the liberation movements that one even hears a great deal about PanAfrikanism, in many of the nation-states talk of PanAfrikanism is considered at best naive and idealistic. Almost as
naive and idealistic as talk about socialism! And the reactionary nationalist culture that has sprung up can only talk, when it does, about the needs of the masses, but the Afrikan masses
can only be truly provided for by a continental Afrikan state struggling to build socialism internally and internationally and defeat capitalism and imperialism.
The failure to understand the integral nature of Afrikans in the diaspora not only in the struggle to liberate Afrika but also in the struggle to liberate all oppressed people, is finally simply
reactionary. To not understand, e.g., that U.S. Imperialism is in charge of all imperialism. Pierre Jalee in Imperialism in the 70's points out that the gross national product of the United
States "all by itself is greater than the combined GNP of all the other capitalist countries combined". The Black Liberation Movement in the U.S. and in the West Indies harmonized with
progressive action on the continent in opposition to new systems of Imperialism could produce vanguard anti-racist anti-imperialist organizations of revolutionaries struggling within the
heart of the chief fortress of imperialism. Organizations which made one of their chief strategic thrusts the Liberation of Afrika and the resolution of the antagonistic contradiction between
the people and imperialism.
If the principal contradiction in the world today is between Imperialism and the People, the most intense or most antagonistic manifestation of that contradiction is between Imperialism and
The Third World. Primarily because, as Jalee says. . ."The domination and exploitation of the Third World (is) the basic material condition
-- 14 --
for the survival of Imperialism," but also, the cultural clash that has always existed and intensified between the way of life of the exploiters and the way of life, values, &c., of the exploited
are therein most sharply drawn. We know that where cultures are most dissimilar is when imperialism has the hardest time absorbing the people. This is one of the intensifying factors in
the contradiction between imperialism and the Third World. We should be most sensitive to that contradiction, that vicious conflict between Afrikans, on the continent, in the West Indies,
the Pacific Islands, or North America, and imperialism, because we share a common heritage, though it is variously reconstructed by our various specific experience and history, spread as
we are throughout the world. But oppression has singled us out, and generalized our condition and therefore brought a general description to our various Afrikan subcultures, as the
wretched of the earth. Nkrumah was fond of saying, "Imperialism will find its grave in Afrika". We would like to add, Imperialism will be driven to that grave in the struggle with Afrikan
people all over the world. The 30 to 40 million Afrikans in the United States alone, that part of the Third World, that capitalism stole from Afrika to build North American industrial
magnitude, shares the general culture of oppression most Afrikans on this planet are heir to. Though there is now swiftly consolidating class formation in that community and a Black
native, pseudo and petty bourgeois who are often the objective servants of Imperialism. And while we know that our struggle to liberate ourselves on the North American continent cannot
be separated from the struggle all the other dependent and powerless nations on that continent to liberate themselves must commit themselves to, we also are connected to Afrika by race,
history, culture, politics, and emotion. There can be no true PanAfrikanist thrust without a deep reflection and understanding as to the actual nature of the struggles in the West Indies, and
North America, South America and the Pacific Islands, and their relationship to the liberation of the continent of Afrika but also, the continent of Afrika's relationship to those Black
communities' liberation. They are inextricably bound together, because Afrikans are potentially the most severe critics, the most extreme battlers against imperialism. And Afrikans in the
United States, the chief fortress of imperialism, mobilized in anti-racist
-- 15 --
and anti-imperialist formations, developing revolutionary value systems that will allow them to utilize the technological advance of North American society without being subjugated by its
anti-human philosophies and culture, must play an important role in defeating imperialism. But this role can only be completely fulfilled in concert with the struggle of the Third World,
especially the struggle of Afrikan people everywhere. It is this kind of Third World and PanAfrikan integration that will help formulate values of international struggle for the communities in
the diaspora and the continent rather than narrow nationalist, or opportunist or assimilated values and culture.
The true PanAfrikan culture will be Afrikan people, institutions, values and way of life, our productive forces, our material and spiritual reality, mobilized, organized and politicized (the
creation of the revolutionary political culture) to struggle on a world wide basis to defeat colonialism, racial oppression, neo-colonialism, capitalism and imperialism. To create such a
culture, meetings like the Sixth Pan Afrikan Congress are critical, but we can see that even their healthy existence as complete reflectors of the contradictions and integrity of the struggle
can only be the result of a constant battle against opportunism and neo-colonialism.
True PanAfrikan institutions, historical, social, political, economic, creative and ethical are almost non-existent. The O.A.U. is a nationalist institution, of continental proportion, but it is not
PanAfrikanist, or Socialist. This Sixth Pan Afrikan Congress should help create serious, functioning, efficient, PanAfrikan systems and institutions that raise our level of struggle to a more
intense category internationally. Not just tourist arrangements with Blacks in the diaspora or neo-capitalist proposals offering Afrika "consumer power" in exchange for Afrikan "land and
resources." Such ideas are odious whether they come from Europeans or Afrikans.
The conscious determination to struggle demands the conscious creation of systems of struggle. The Tanzanian recruitment program of Afrikans in the diaspora represents a small
initiating step in creating some aspect of a revolutionary PanAfrikan culture. With the same seriousness with which NATO or SEATO or ECC, or GATT was
-- 16 --
created, as examples of Imperialist "integration" [to cut down rivalry between imperialists and jointly exploit the rest of the world]. So the anti-imperialist forces throughout the world must
have a similar integration. And Afrikans, oppressed and struggling in various parts of the world, must be integrated into a truly PanAfrikan anti-imperialist system. One that utilizes the
democratic and socialist element of each society, the revolutionary, anti-bourgeois quality of each of these Afrikan communities, the National Cultures linked together to struggle, as an
international anti-imperialist culture. We can only build an actual PanAfrikan culture by defeating petty bourgeois statism and neo-colonialism and the rule of imperialist borders and
treaties. Only by creating systems and institutions based on revolutionary ideology, incorporating Revolutionary Nationalism, PanAfrikanism and truly scientific Socialism. Which means
socialism based on analysis of our own social structures, though utilizing the universally applicable scientific method, and international revolutionary experiences. We cannot, as Walter
Rodney has said, use nationalism to deprive ourselves of the revolutionary aspects of European thought. We create an actual PanAfrikan culture by creating revolutionary systems and
institutions that practice self criticism and criticism, by creating systems that struggle for socialism and the defeat of capitalism throughout the Afrikan world. But we must understand that
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
4 of 5 7/2/2011 9:57 AM


--- PAGE 5 ---
PanAfrikanism is just another stage in our development. And as we move to attain this heightened unity and consciousness, this dramatic liberation of our productive forces, we move ever
closer to the system of world social, political, and economic organization that is what we are ultimately looking for. There can be no true PanAfrikan culture without the socialist revolution
[as, for instance, those made possible by the advanced armed national liberation struggles] or the intensification of socialist construction in the already "politically independent" states. In
fact the committment to build "true PanAfrikan culture" seems to us basically one part of a committment to build socialism for Afrikan people world wide, and to take on the struggle against
imperialism everywhere. In short, PanAfrikanism and the creation of a PanAfrikan culture is a committment to struggle for socialism for the world.
LONG LIVE THE WORLD AFRIKAN REVOLUTION!
LONG LIVE THE REVOLUTIONARY STRUGGLE OF OPPRESSED PEOPLE ALL OVER THE WORLD!!
Chairman Amiri Baraka
Produced in collaboration with the University of Chicago.
Send mail to Editor with questions or comments about this web site.
Copyright © 2009 Alexander Street Press, LLC. All rights reserved.
PhiloLogic Software, Copyright © 2009 The University of Chicago.
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
5 of 5 7/2/2011 9:57 AM

