=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Rex84.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 22
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:32:20.165507
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
U.S. Concentration Camps: FEMA and the REX 84 Program 
 
 
 
 
 
There over 600 prison camps in the United States, all fully operational and ready to 
receive prisoners. They are all staffed and even surrounded by full-time guards, but 
they are all empty. These camps are to be operated by FEMA (Federal Emergency 
Management Agency) should Martial Law need to be implemented in the United 
States and all it would take is a presidential signature on a proclamation and the 
attorney general's signature on a warrant to which a list of names is attached. Ask 
yourself if you really want to be on Ashcroft's list. The Rex 84 Program was 
established on the reasoning that if a "mass exodus" of illegal aliens crossed the 
Mexican/US border, they would be quickly rounded up and detained in detention 
centers by FEMA. Rex 84 allowed many military bases to be closed down and to be 
turned into prisons. 
 
 
 
Operation Cable Splicer and Garden Plot are the two sub programs which will be 
implemented once the Rex 84 program is initiated for its proper purpose. Garden 
Plot is the program to control the population. Cable Splicer is the program for an 
orderly takeover of the state and local governments by the federal government. 
FEMA is the executive arm of the coming police state and thus will head up all 
operations. The Presidential Executive Orders already listed on the Federal Register 
also are part of the legal framework for this operation. 
 
The camps all have railroad facilities as well as roads leading to and from the 
detention facilities. Many also have an airport nearby. The majority of the camps 
can house a population of 20,000 prisoners. Currently, the largest of these facilities


--- PAGE 2 ---
is just outside of Fairbanks, Alaska. The Alaskan facility is a massive mental health 
facility and can hold approximately 2 million people. 
 
 
Now let's review the justification for any actions taken... 
 
 
Executive Orders associated with FEMA that would suspend 
the Constitution and the Bill of Rights. These Executive Orders 
have been on record for nearly 30 years and could be enacted 
by the stroke of a Presidential pen:... 
 
 
EXECUTIVE ORDER 10990 
allows the government to take over all modes of transportation and control of 
highways and seaports. 
 
EXECUTIVE ORDER 10995 
allows the government to seize and control the communication media. 
 
 
EXECUTIVE ORDER 10997 
allows the government to take over all electrical power, gas, petroleum, fuels and 
minerals. 
 
 
EXECUTIVE ORDER 10998


--- PAGE 3 ---
allows the government to seize all means of transportation, including personal cars, 
trucks or vehicles of any kind and total control over all highways, seaports, and 
waterways. 
 
 
EXECUTIVE ORDER 10999 
allows the government to take over all food resources and farms. 
 
 
EXECUTIVE ORDER 11000 
allows the government to mobilize civilians into work brigades under government 
supervision. 
 
 
EXECUTIVE ORDER 11001 
allows the government to take over all health, education and welfare functions. 
 
 
EXECUTIVE ORDER 11002 
designates the Postmaster General to operate a national registration of all persons. 
 
 
EXECUTIVE ORDER 11003 
allows the government to take over all airports and aircraft, including commercial 
aircraft. 
 
 
EXECUTIVE ORDER 11004 
allows the Housing and Finance Authority to relocate communities, build new 
housing with public funds, designate areas to be abandoned, and establish new 
locations for populations. 
 
 
EXECUTIVE ORDER 11005 
allows the government to take over railroads, inland waterways and public storage 
facilities. 
 
 
EXECUTIVE ORDER 11051 
specifies the responsibility of the Office of Emergency Planning and gives 
authorization to put all Executive Orders into effect in times of increased 
international tensions and economic or financial crisis. 
 
 
EXECUTIVE ORDER 11310


--- PAGE 4 ---
grants authority to the Department of Justice to enforce the plans set out in 
Executive Orders, to institute industrial support, to establish judicial and legislative 
liaison, to control all aliens, to operate penal and correctional institutions, and to 
advise and assist the President. 
 
 
EXECUTIVE ORDER 11049 
assigns emergency preparedness function to federal departments and agencies, 
consolidating 21 operative Executive Orders issued over a fifteen year period. 
 
 
EXECUTIVE ORDER 11921 
allows the Federal Emergency Preparedness Agency to develop plans to establish 
control over the mechanisms of production and distribution, of energy sources, 
wages, salaries, credit and the flow of money in U.S. financial institution in any 
undefined national emergency. It also provides that when a state of emergency is 
declared by the President, Congress cannot review the action for six months. The 
Federal Emergency Management Agency has broad powers in every aspect of the 
nation. General Frank Salzedo, chief of FEMA's Civil Security Division stated in a 
1983 conference that he saw FEMA's role as a "new frontier in the protection of 
individual and governmental leaders from assassination, and of civil and military 
installations from sabotage and/or attack, as well as prevention of dissident groups 
from gaining access to U.S. opinion, or a global audience in times of crisis." FEMA's 
powers were consolidated by President Carter to incorporate the... 
 
            National Security Act of 1947 
            allows for the strategic relocation of industries, services, government and 
other essential economic activities, and to rationalize the requirements for 
manpower, resources and production facilities. 
 
            1950 Defense Production Act 
            gives the President sweeping powers over all aspects of the economy. 
 
            Act of August 29, 1916 
            authorizes the Secretary of the Army, in time of war, to take possession of 
any transportation system for transporting troops, material, or any other purpose 
related to the emergency. 
 
            International Emergency Economic Powers Act 
            enables the President to seize the property of a foreign country or national. 
These powers were transferred to FEMA in a sweeping consolidation in 1979. 
 
 
 
 
Where are these camps?


--- PAGE 5 ---
ALABAMA 
 
    Opelika - Military compound either in or very near town. 
 
    Aliceville - WWII German POW camp - capacity 15,000 Ft. McClellan (Anniston) 
- Opposite side of town from Army Depot; 
 
    Maxwell AFB (Montgomery) - Civilian prison camp established under Operation 
Garden Plot, currently operating with support staff and small inmate population. 
 
    Talladega - Federal prison "satellite" camp. 
 
ALASKA 
 
Wilderness - East of Anchorage. No roads, Air & Railroad access only. Estimated 
capacity of 500,000 Elmendorf AFB - Northeast area of Anchorage - far end of base. 
Garden Plot facility. 
 
Eielson AFB - Southeast of Fairbanks. Operation Garden Plot facility. 
 
Ft. Wainwright - East of Fairbanks 
 
ARIZONA 
 
Ft. Huachuca - 20 miles from Mexican border, 30 miles from Nogales Rex '84 
facility. 
 
Pinal County - on the Gila River - WWII Japanese detention camp. May be 
renovated. 
 
Yuma County - Colorado River - Site of former Japanese detention camp (near 
proving grounds). This site was completely removed in 1990 according to some 
reports. 
 
Phoenix - Federal Prison Satellite Camp. Main federal facility expanded. 
 
Florence - WWII prison camp NOW RENOVATED, OPERATIONAL with staff & 
400 prisoners, operational capacity of 3,500. 
 
Wickenburg - Airport is ready for conversion; total capacity unknown. Davis-
Monthan AFB (Tucson) - Fully staffed and presently holding prisoners!! 
 
Sedona - site of possible UN base.


--- PAGE 6 ---
ARKANSAS 
 
Ft. Chaffee (near Fort Smith, Arkansas) - Has new runway for aircraft, new camp 
facility with cap of 40,000 prisoners Pine Bluff Arsenal - This location also is the 
repository for B-Z nerve agent, which causes sleepiness, dizziness, stupor; admitted 
use is for civilian control. Jerome - Chicot/Drew Counties - site of WWII Japanese 
camps Rohwer - Descha County - site of WWII Japanese camps Blythville AFB - 
Closed airbase now being used as camp. New wooden barracks have been 
constructed at this location. Classic decorations - guard towers, barbed wire, high 
fences. Berryville - FEMA facility located east of Eureka Springs off Hwy. 62. 
Omaha - Northeast of Berryville near Missouri state line, on Hwy 65 south of old 
wood processing plant. Possible crematory facility. 
 
CALIFORNIA 
 
Vandenburg AFB - Rex 84 facility, located near Lompoc & Santa Maria. 
Internment facility is located near the oceanside, close to Space Launch Complex #6, 
also called "Slick Six". The launch site has had "a flawless failure record" and is 
rarely used. Norton AFB - (closed base) now staffed with UN according to some 
sources. Tule Lake - area of "wildlife refuge", accessible by unpaved road, just 
inside Modoc County. Fort Ord - Closed in 1994, this facility is now an urban 
warfare training center for US and foreign troops, and may have some "P.O.W. - 
C.I." enclosures. Twenty-nine Palms Marine Base - Birthplace of the infamous 
"Would you shoot American citizens?" Quiz. New camps being built on "back 40". 
Oakdale - Rex 84 camp capable of holding at least 20,000 people. 90 mi. East of San 
Francisco. Terminal Island - (Long Beach) located next to naval shipyards operated 
by ChiCom shipping interests. Federal prison facility located here. Possible 
deportation point. Ft. Irwin - FEMA facility near Barstow. Base is designated 
inactive but has staffed camp. McClellan AFB - facility capable for 30,000 - 35,000 
Sacramento - Army Depot - No specific information at this time. Mather AFB - 
Road to facility is blocked off by cement barriers and a stop sign. Sign states area is 
restricted; as of 1997 there were barbed wire fences pointing inward, a row of 
stadium lights pointed toward an empty field, etc. Black boxes on poles may have 
been cameras. 
 
COLORADO 
 
Trinidad - WWII German/Italian camp being renovated. Granada - Prowers 
County - WWII Japanese internment camp Ft. Carson - Along route 115 near 
Canon City 
 
CONNECTICUT, DELAWARE 
 
No data available.


--- PAGE 7 ---
FLORIDA 
 
Avon Park - Air Force gunnery range, Avon Park has an on-base "correctional 
facility" which was a former WWII detention camp. Camp Krome - DoJ 
detention/interrogation center, Rex 84 facility Eglin AFB - This base is over 30 miles 
long, from Pensacola to Hwy 331 in De Funiak Springs. High capacity facility, 
presently manned and populated with some prisoners. Pensacola - Federal Prison 
Camp Everglades - It is believed that a facility may be carved out of the wilds here. 
 
GEORGIA 
 
Ft. Benning - Located east of Columbus near Alabama state line. Rex 84 site - 
Prisoners brought in via Lawson Army airfield. Ft. Mc Pherson - US Force 
Command - Multiple reports that this will be the national headquarters and 
coordinating center for foreign/UN troop movement and detainee collection. Ft. 
Gordon - West of Augusta - No information at this time. Unadilla - Dooly County - 
Manned, staffed FEMA prison on route 230, no prisoners. Oglethorpe - Macon 
County; facility is located five miles from Montezuma, three miles from Oglethorpe. 
This FEMA prison has no staff and no prisoners. Morgan - Calhoun County, FEMA 
facility is fully manned & staffed - no prisoners. Camilla - Mitchell County, south of 
Albany. This FEMA facility is located on Mt. Zion Rd approximately 5.7 miles 
south of Camilla. Unmanned - no prisoners, no staff. Hawkinsville - Wilcox County; 
Five miles east of town, fully manned and staffed but no prisoners. Located on fire 
road 100/Upper River Road Abbeville - South of Hawkinsville on US route 129; 
south of town off route 280 near Ocmulgee River. FEMA facility is staffed but 
without prisoners. McRae - Telfair County - 1.5 miles west of McRae on Hwy 134 
(8th St). Facility is on Irwinton Avenue off 8th St., manned & staffed - no prisoners. 
Fort Gillem - South side of Atlanta - FEMA designated detention facility. Fort 
Stewart - Savannah area - FEMA designated detention facility 
 
HAWAII 
 
Halawa Heights area - Crematory facility located in hills above city. Area is marked 
as a state department of health laboratory. Barbers Point NAS - There are several 
military areas that could be equipped for detention / deportation. Honolulu - 
Detention transfer facility at the Honolulu airport similar in construction to the one 
in.Oklahoma (pentagon-shaped building where airplanes can taxi up to). 
 
IDAHO 
 
Minidoka/Jerome Counties - WWII Japanese-American internment facility possibly 
under renovation. Clearwater National Forest - Near Lolo Pass - Just miles from the 
Montana state line near Moose Creek, this unmanned facility is reported to have a 
nearby airfield. Wilderness areas - Possible location. No data. 
 
ILLINOIS


--- PAGE 8 ---
Marseilles - Located on the Illinois River off Interstate 80 on Hwy 6. It is a relatively 
small facility with a cap of 1400 prisoners. Though it is small it is designed like 
prison facilities with barred windows, but the real smoking gun is the presence of 
military vehicles. Being located on the Illinois River it is possible that prisoners will 
be brought in by water as well as by road and air. This facility is approximately 75 
miles west of Chicago. National Guard training area nearby. Scott AFB - Barbed 
wire prisoner enclosure reported to exist just off-base. More info needed, as another 
facility on-base is believed to exist. Pekin - This Federal satellite prison camp is also 
on the Illinois River, just south of Peoria. It supplements the federal penitentiary in 
Marion, which is equipped to handle additional population outside on the grounds. 
Chanute AFB - Rantoul, near Champaign/Urbana - This closed base had WWII - 
era barracks that were condemned and torn down, but the medical facility was 
upgraded and additional fencing put up in the area. More info needed. Marion - 
Federal Penitentiary and satellite prison camp inside Crab Orchard Nat'l Wildlife 
Refuge. Manned, staffed, populated fully. Greenfield - Two federal correctional 
"satellite prison camps" serving Marion - populated as above. Shawnee National 
Forest - Pope County - This area has seen heavy traffic of foreign military 
equipment and troops via Illinois Central Railroad, which runs through the area. 
Suspected location is unknown, but may be close to Vienna and Shawnee 
correctional centers, located 6 mi. west of Dixon Springs. Savanna Army Depot - 
NW area of state on Mississippi River. Lincoln, Sheridan, Menard, Pontiac, 
Galesburg - State prison facilities equipped for major expansion and close or 
adjacent to highways & railroad tracks. Kankakee - Abandoned industrial area on 
west side of town (Rt.17 & Main) designated as FEMA detention site. Equipped with 
water tower, incinerator, a small train yard behind it and the rear of the facility is 
surrounded by barbed wire facing inwards. 
 
INDIANA 
 
Indianapolis / Marion County - Amtrak railcar repair facility (closed); controversial 
site of a major alleged detention / processing center. Although some sources state 
that this site is a "red herring", photographic and video evidence suggests 
otherwise. This large facility contains large 3-4 inch gas mains to large furnaces 
(crematoria??), helicopter landing pads, railheads for prisoners, Red/Blue/Green 
zones for classifying/processing incoming personnel, one-way turnstiles, barracks, 
towers, high fences with razor wire, etc. Personnel with government clearance who 
are friendly to the patriot movement took a guided tour of the facility to confirm 
this site. This site is located next to a closed refrigeration plant facility. Ft. Benjamin 
Harrison - Located in the northeast part of Indianapolis, this base has been 
decommissioned from "active" use but portions are still ideally converted to hold 
detainees. Helicopter landing areas still exist for prisoners to be brought in by air, 
land & rail. Crown Point - Across street from county jail, former hospital. One wing 
presently being used for county work-release program, 80% of facility still unused. 
Possible FEMA detention center or holding facility. Camp Atterbury - Facility is 
converted to hold prisoners and boasts two active compounds presently configured


--- PAGE 9 ---
for minimum security detainees. Located just west of Interstate 65 near Edinburgh, 
south of Indianapolis. Terre Haute - Federal Correctional Institution, Satellite 
prison camp and death facility. Equipped with crematoria reported to have a 
capacity of 3,000 people a day. FEMA designated facility located here. Fort Wayne - 
This city located in Northeast Indiana has a FEMA designated detention facility, 
accessible by air, road and nearby rail. Kingsbury - This "closed" military base is 
adjacent to a state fish & wildlife preserve. Part of the base is converted to an 
industrial park, but the southern portion of this property is still used. It is bordered 
on the south by railroad, and is staffed with some foreign-speaking UN troops. A 
local police officer who was hunting and camping close to the base in the game 
preserve was accosted, roughed up, and warned by the English-speaking unit 
commander to stay away from the area. It was suggested to the officer that the 
welfare of his family would depend on his "silence". Located just southeast of 
LaPorte. Jasper-Pulaski Wildlife Area - Youth Corrections farm located here. 
Facility is "closed", but is still staffed and being "renovated". Total capacity 
unknown. Grissom AFB - This closed airbase still handles a lot of traffic, and has a 
"state-owned" prison compound on the southern part of the facility. 
 
UNICOR 
 
Jefferson Proving Grounds - Southern Indiana - This facility was an active base 
with test firing occuring daily. Portions of the base have been opened to create an 
industrial park, but other areas are still highly restricted. A camp is believed to be 
located "downrange". Facility is equipped with an airfield and has a nearby rail 
line. Newport - Army Depot - VX nerve gas storage facility. Secret meetings were 
held here in 1998 regarding the addition of the Kankakee River watershed to the 
Heritage Rivers Initiative. Hammond - large enclosure identified in FEMA-
designated city. 
 
IOWA 
 
No data available. 
 
KANSAS 
 
Leavenworth - US Marshal's Fed Holding Facility, US Penitentiary, Federal Prison 
Camp, McConnell Air Force Base. Federal death penalty facility. Concordia - 
WWII German POW camp used to exist at this location but there is no facility there 
at this time. Ft. Riley - Just north of Interstate 70, airport, near city of Manhattan. 
El Dorado - Federal prison converted into forced-labor camp, UNICOR industries. 
Topeka - 80 acres has been converted into a temporary holding camp. 
 
KENTUCKY 
 
Ashland - Federal prison camp in Eastern Kentucky near the Ohio River. Louisville 
- FEMA detention facility, located near restricted area US naval ordnance plant.


--- PAGE 10 ---
Military airfield located at facility, which is on south side of city. Lexington - FEMA 
detention facility, National Guard base with adjacent airport facility. Manchester - 
Federal prison camp located inside Dan Boone National Forest. Ft. Knox - Detention 
center, possibly located near Salt River, in restricted area of base. Local patriots 
advise that black Special Forces & UN gray helicopters are occasionally seen in 
area. Land Between the Lakes - This area was declared a UN biosphere and is an 
ideal geographic location for detention facilities. Area is an isthmus extending out 
from Tennessee, between Lake Barkley on the east and Kentucky Lake on the west. 
Just scant miles from Fort Campbell in Tennessee. 
 
LOUISIANA 
 
Ft. Polk - This is a main base for UN troops & personnel, and a training center for 
the disarmament of America. Livingston - WWII German/Italian internment camp 
being renovated?; halfway between Baton Rouge and Hammond, several miles 
north of Interstate 12. Oakdale - Located on US route 165 about 50 miles south of 
Alexandria; two federal detention centers just southeast of Fort Polk. 
 
MAINE 
 
Houlton - WWII German internment camp in Northern Maine, off US Route 1. 
 
MARYLAND, and DC 
 
Ft. Meade - Halfway between the District of Criminals and Baltimore. Data needed. 
Ft. Detrick - Biological warfare center for the NWO, located in Frederick. 
 
MASSACHUSETTS 
 
Camp Edwards / Otis AFB - Cape Cod - This "inactive" base is being converted to 
hold many New Englander patriots. Capacity unknown. Ft. Devens - Active 
detention facility. More data needed. 
 
MICHIGAN 
 
Camp Grayling - Michigan Nat'l Guard base has several confirmed detention 
camps, classic setup with high fences, razor wire, etc. Guard towers are very well-
built, sturdy. Multiple compounds within larger enclosures. Facility deep within 
forest area. Sawyer AFB - Upper Peninsula - south of Marquette - No data 
available. Bay City - Classic enclosure with guard towers, high fence, and close to 
shipping port on Saginaw Bay, which connects to Lake Huron. Could be a 
deportation point to overseas via St. Lawrence Seaway. Southwest - possibly Berrien 
County - FEMA detention center. Lansing - FEMA detention facility. 
 
MINNESOTA


--- PAGE 11 ---
Duluth - Federal prison camp facility. Camp Ripley - new prison facility. 
 
MISSISSIPPI 
 
These sites are confirmed hoaxes. Hancock County - NASA test site De Soto 
National Forest. "These two supposed camps in Mississippi do not exist. Members 
of the Mississippi Militia have checked these out on more than one occasion 
beginning back when they first appeared on the Internet and throughout the Patriot 
Movement." - Commander D. Rayner, Mississippi Militia 
 
MISSOURI 
 
Richards-Gebaur AFB - located in Grandview, near K.C.MO. A very large 
internment facility has been built on this base, and all base personnel are restricted 
from coming near it. Ft. Leonard Wood - Situated in the middle of Mark Twain 
National Forest in Pulaski County. This site has been known for some UN training, 
also home to the US Army Urban Warfare Training school "Stem Village". Warsaw 
- Unconfirmed report of a large concentration camp facility. 
 
MONTANA 
 
Malmstrom AFB - UN aircraft groups stationed here, and possibly a detention 
facility. 
 
NEBRASKA 
 
Scottsbluff - WWII German POW camp (renovated?). Northwest, Northeast 
corners of state - FEMA detention facilities - more data needed. South Central part 
of state - Many old WWII sites - some may be renovated. 
 
NEVADA 
 
Elko - Ten miles south of town. Wells - Camp is located in the O'Niel basin area, 40 
miles north of Wells, past Thousand Springs, west off Hwy 93 for 25 miles. Pershing 
County - Camp is located at I-80 mile marker 112, south side of the highway, about 
a mile back on the county road and then just off the road about 3/4mi. Winnemucca 
- Battle Mountain area - at the base of the mountains. Nellis Air Force Range - 
Northwest from Las Vegas on Route 95. Nellis AFB is just north of Las Vegas on 
Hwy 604. Stillwater Naval Air Station - east of Reno . No additional data. 
 
NEW HAMPSHIRE / VERMONT 
 
Northern New Hampshire - near Lake Francis. No additional data. 
 
NEW JERSEY


--- PAGE 12 ---
Ft. Dix / McGuire AFB - Possible deportation point for detainees. Lots of pictures 
taken of detention compounds and posted on Internet, this camp is well-known. 
Facility is now complete and ready for occupancy. 
 
NEW MEXICO 
 
Ft. Bliss - This base actually straddles Texas state line. Just south of Alomogordo, 
Ft. Bliss has thousands of acres for people who refuse to go with the "New Order". 
Holloman AFB (Alomogordo)- Home of the German Luftwaffe in Amerika; major 
UN base. New facility being built on this base, according to recent visitors. Many 
former USAF buildings have been torn down by the busy and rapidly growing 
German military force located here. Fort Stanton - currently being used as a youth 
detention facility approximately 35 miles north of Ruidoso, New Mexico. Not a great 
deal of information concerning the Lordsburg location. White Sands Missile Range 
- Currently being used as a storage facility for United Nations vehicles and 
equipment. Observers have seen this material brought in on the Whitesands rail 
spur in Oro Grande New Mexico about thirty miles from the Texas, New Mexico 
Border. 
 
NEW YORK 
 
Ft. Drum - two compounds: Rex 84 detention camp and FEMA detention facility. 
Albany - FEMA detention facility. Otisville - Federal correctional facility, near 
Middletown. Buffalo - FEMA detention facility. 
 
NORTH CAROLINA 
 
Camp Lejeune / New River Marine Airfield - facility has renovated, occupied WWII 
detention compounds and "mock city" that closely resembles Anytown, USA. Fort 
Bragg - Special Warfare Training Center. Renovated WWII detention facility. 
Andrews - Federal experiment in putting a small town under siege. Began with the 
search/ hunt for survivalist Eric Rudolph. No persons were allowed in or out of 
town without federal permission and travel through town was highly restricted. 
Most residents compelled to stay in their homes. Unregistered Baptist pastor from 
Indiana visiting Andrews affirmed these facts. 
 
NORTH DAKOTA 
 
Minot AFB - Home of UN air group. More data needed on facility. 
 
OHIO 
 
Camp Perry - Site renovated; once used as a POW camp to house German and 
Italian prisoners of WWII. Some tar paper covered huts built for housing these 
prisoners are still standing. Recently, the construction of multiple 200-man barracks 
have replaced most of the huts.


--- PAGE 13 ---
Cincinnati, Cleveland, Columbus - FEMA detention facilities. Data needed. Lima - 
FEMA detention facility. Another facility located in/near old stone quarry near 
Interstate 75. Railroad access to property, fences etc. 
 
OKLAHOMA 
 
Tinker AFB (OKC) - All base personnel are prohibited from going near civilian 
detention area, which is under constant guard. Will Rogers World Airport - 
FEMA's main processing center for west of the Mississippi. All personnel are kept 
out of the security zone. Federal prisoner transfer center located here (A pentagon-
shaped building where airplanes can taxi up to). Photos have been taken and this 
site will try to post soon! El Reno - Renovated federal internment facility with 
CURRENT population of 12,000 on Route 66. McAlester - near Army Munitions 
Plant property - former WWII German / Italian POW camp designated for future 
use. Ft. Sill (Lawton) - Former WWII detention camps. More data still needed. 
 
OREGON 
 
Sheridan - Federal prison satellite camp northwest of Salem. Josephine County - 
WWII Japanese internment camp ready for renovation. 
 
Sheridan - FEMA detention center. Umatilla - New prison spotted. 
 
PENNSYLVANIA 
 
Allenwood - Federal prison camp located south of Williamsport on the Susquehanna 
River. It has a current inmate population of 300, and is identified by William Pabst 
as having a capacity in excess of 15,000 on 400 acres. 
 
Indiantown Gap Military Reservation - located north of Harrisburg. Used for 
WWII POW camp and renovated by Jimmy Carter. Was used to hold Cubans 
during Mariel boat lift. 
 
Camp Hill - State prison close to Army depot. Lots of room, located in Camp Hill, 
Pa. New Cumberland Army Depot - on the Susquehanna River, located off 
Interstate 83 and Interstate 76. 
 
Schuylkill Haven - Federal prison camp, north of Reading. 
 
SOUTH CAROLINA 
 
Greenville - Unoccupied youth prison camp; total capacity unknown. 
 
Charleston - Naval Reserve & Air Force base, restricted area on naval base.


--- PAGE 14 ---
SOUTH DAKOTA 
 
Yankton - Federal prison camp 
 
Black Hills Nat'l Forest - north of Edgemont, southwest part of state. WWII 
internment camp being renovated. 
 
TENNESSEE 
 
Ft. Campbell - Next to Land Between the Lakes; adjacent to airfield and US Alt. 41. 
 
Millington - Federal prison camp next door to Memphis Naval Air Station. 
 
Crossville - Site of WWII German / Italian prison camp is renovated; completed 
barracks and behind the camp in the woods is a training facility with high tight 
ropes and a rappelling deck. 
 
Nashville - There are two buildings built on State property that are definitely built 
to hold prisoners. They are identical buildings - side by side on Old Briley Parkway. 
High barbed wire fence that curves inward. 
 
TEXAS 
 
Austin - Robert Mueller Municipal airport has detention areas inside hangars. 
 
Bastrop - Prison and military vehicle motor pool. 
 
Eden - 1500 bed privately run federal center. Currently holds illegal aliens. 
 
Ft. Hood (Killeen) - Newly built concentration camp, with towers, barbed wire etc., 
just like the one featured in the movie Amerika. Mock city for NWO shock- force 
training. Some footage of this area was used in "Waco: A New Revelation" Reese 
AFB (Lubbock) - FEMA designated detention facility. 
 
Sheppard AFB - in Wichita Falls just south of Ft. Sill, OK. FEMA designated 
detention facility. 
 
North Dallas - near Carrolton - water treatment plant, close to interstate and 
railroad. 
 
Mexia - East of Waco 33mi.; WWII German facility may be renovated. 
 
Amarillo - FEMA designated detention facility


--- PAGE 15 ---
Ft. Bliss (El Paso) - Extensive renovation of buildings and from what patriots have 
been able to see, many of these buildings that are being renovated are being 
surrounded by razor wire. 
 
Beaumont / Port Arthur area - hundreds of acres of federal camps already built on 
large-scale detention camp design, complete with the double rows of chain link 
fencing with razor type concertina wire on top of each row. Some (but not all) of 
these facilities are currently being used for low-risk state prisoners who require a 
minimum of supervision. 
 
Ft. Worth - Federal prison under construction on the site of Carswell AFB. 
 
UTAH 
 
Millard County - Central Utah - WWII Japanese camp. (Renovated?) 
 
Ft. Douglas - This "inactive" military reservation has a renovated WWII 
concentration camp. Migratory Bird Refuge - West of Brigham City - contains a 
WWII internment camp that was built before the game preserve was established. 
 
Cedar City - east of city - no data available. Wendover - WWII internment camp 
may be renovated. 
 
Skull Valley - southwestern Camp William property - east of the old bombing range. 
Camp was accidentally discovered by a man and his son who were rabbit hunting; 
they were discovered and apprehended. SW of Tooele. 
 
VIRGINIA 
 
Ft. A.P. Hill (Fredericksburg) - Rex 84 / FEMA facility. Estimated capacity 45,000. 
 
Petersburg - Federal satellite prison camp, south of Richmond. 
 
WEST VIRGINIA 
 
Beckley - Alderson - Lewisburg - Former WWII detention camps that are now 
converted into active federal prison complexes capable of holding several times their 
current populations. Alderson is presently a women's federal reformatory. 
 
Morgantown - Federal prison camp located in northern WV; just north of 
Kingwood. 
 
Mill Creek - FEMA detention facility. 
 
Kingwood - Newly built detention camp at Camp Dawson Army Reservation. More 
data needed on Camp Dawson.


--- PAGE 16 ---
WASHINGTON 
 
Seattle/Tacoma - SeaTac Airport: fully operational federal transfer center 
 
Okanogan County - Borders Canada and is a site for a massive concentration camp 
capable of holding hundreds of thousands of people for slave labor. This is probably 
one of the locations that will be used to hold hard core patriots who will be held 
captive for the rest of their lives. 
 
Sand Point Naval Station - Seattle - FEMA detention center used actively during the 
1999 WTO protests to classify prisoners. 
 
Ft. Lewis / McChord AFB - near Tacoma - This is one of several sites that may be 
used to ship prisoners overseas for slave labor. 
 
WISCONSIN 
 
Ft. McCoy - Rex 84 facility with several complete interment compounds. 
 
Oxford - Central part of state - Federal prison & satellite camp and FEMA 
detention facility. 
 
WYOMING 
 
Heart Mountain - Park County N. of Cody - WWII Japanese interment camp ready 
for renovation. 
 
Laramie - FEMA detention facility 
 
Southwest - near Lyman - FEMA detention facility 
 
East Yellowstone - Manned internment facility - Investigating patriots were 
apprehended by European soldiers speaking in an unknown language. Federal 
government assumed custody of the persons and arranged their release. 
 
OTHER LOCATIONS IN THE UNITED STATES 
 
There are many other locations not listed above that are worthy of consideration as 
a possible detention camp site, but due to space limitations and the time needed to 
verify, could not be included here. Virtually all military reservations, posts, bases, 
stations, & depots can be considered highly suspect (because it is "federal" land). 
Also fitting this category are "Regional Airports" and "International Airports" 
which also fall under federal jurisdiction and have limited-access areas. Mental 
hospitals, closed hospitals & nursing homes, closed military bases, wildlife refuges, 
state prisons, toxic waste dumps, hotels and other areas all have varying degrees of


--- PAGE 17 ---
potential for being a detention camp area. The likelihood of a site being suspect 
increases with transportation access to the site, including airports/airstrips, 
railheads, navigable waterways & ports, interstate and US highways. Some facilities 
are "disguised" as industrial or commercial properties, camouflaged or even wholly 
contained inside large buildings (Indianapolis) or factories. Many inner-city 
buildings left vacant during the de-industrialization of America have been quietly 
acquired and held, sometimes retrofitted for their new uses. 
 
CANADA 
 
Our Canadian friends tell us that virtually all Canadian military bases, especially 
those north of the 50th Parallel, are all set up with concentration camps. Not even 
half of these can be listed, but here are a few sites with the massive land space to 
handle any population: 
 
Suffield CFB - just north of Medicine Hat, less than 60 miles from the USA. 
 
Primrose Lake Air Range - 70 miles northeast of Edmonton. 
 
Wainwright CFB - halfway between Medicine Hat and Primrose Lake. 
 
Ft. Nelson - Northernmost point on the BC Railway line. 
 
Ft. McPherson - Very cold territory ~ NW Territories. Ft. Providence - Located on 
Great Slave Lake. Halifax - Nova Scotia. Dept. of National Defense reserve.... And 
others. 
 
OVERSEAS LOCATIONS 
 
Guayanabo, Puerto Rico - Federal prison camp facility. Capacity unknown. 
 
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba - US Marine Corps Base - Presently home to 30,000 Mariel 
Cubans and 40,000 Albanians. Total capacity unknown. 
 
 [If you found this article of interest, please consider perusing the 
FriendsOfLiberty/SiaNews archives 
 
        source: 
http://www.sianews.com/modules.php?name=News&file=article&sid=1062  3sep04 
 
U.S. Concentration Camps: FEMA and the REX 84 Program 
The Awakening News (undated) 3sep04


--- PAGE 18 ---
There over 600 prison camps in the United States, all fully operational and ready to 
receive prisoners. They are all staffed and even surrounded by full-time guards, but 
they are all empty. These camps are to be operated by FEMA (Federal Emergency 
Management Agency) should Martial Law need to be implemented in the United 
States. 
 
The Rex 84 Program was established on the reasoning that if a mass exodus of 
illegal aliens crossed the Mexican/US border, they would be quickly rounded up and 
detained in detention centers by FEMA. Rex 84 allowed many military bases to be 
closed down and to be turned into prisons. 
 
Operation Cable Splicer and Garden Plot are the two sub programs which will be 
implemented once the Rex 84 program is initiated for its proper purpose. Garden 
Plot is the program to control the population. Cable Splicer is the program for an 
orderly takeover of the state and local governments by the federal government. 
FEMA is the executive arm of the coming police state and thus will head up all 
operations. The Presidential Executive Orders already listed on the Federal Register 
also are part of the legal framework for this operation. 
 
The camps all have railroad facilities as well as roads leading to and from the 
detention facilities. Many also have an airport nearby. The majority of the camps 
can house a population of 20,000 prisoners. Currently, the largest of these facilities 
is just outside of Fairbanks, Alaska. The Alaskan facility is a massive mental health 
facility and can hold approximately 2 million people. 
 
A person named Terry Kings wrote an article on his discoveries of camps located in 
southern California. His findings are as follows: Over the last couple months several 
of us have investigated three soon-to-be prison camps in the Southern California 
area. We had heard about these sites and wanted to see them for ourselves. 
 
The first one we observed was in Palmdale, California. It is not operating as a 
prison at the moment but is masquerading as part of a water facility. Now why 
would there be a facility of this nature out in the middle of nowhere with absolutely 
no prisoners? The fences that run for miles around this large facility all point 
inward, and there are large mounds of dirt and dry moat surrounding the central 
area so the inside area is not visible from the road. There are 3 large loading docks 
facing the entrance that can be observed from the road. What are these massive 
docks going to be loading? 
 
We observed white vans patrolling the area and one came out and greeted us with a 
friendly wave and followed us until we had driven safely beyond the area. What 
would have happened had we decided to enter the open gate or ask questions? 
 
This facility is across the street from the Palmdale Water Department. The area 
around the Water Department has fences pointing outward, to keep people out of 
this dangerous area so as not to drown. Yet, across the street, the fences all point


--- PAGE 19 ---
inward. Why? To keep people in? What people? Who are going to be it’s 
occupants? 
 
There are also signs posted every 50 feet stating: State of California Trespassing 
Loitering Forbidden By Law Section 555 California Penal Code. 
 
FEMA? - The deportees were forced into rail cars, most of which were windowless, 
unheated cattle cars, and squeezed in so tightly that most were forced to stand. The 
doors were then sealed shut from the outside. 
 
The sign at the entrance says: Pearblossom Operations and Maintenance Subcenter 
Receiving Department, 34534 116th Street East. There is also a guard shack located 
at the entrance. 
 
We didn’t venture into this facility, but did circle around it to see if there was 
anything else visible from the road. We saw miles of fences with the top points all 
directed inward. There is a railroad track that runs next to the perimeter of this 
fenced area. The loading docks are large enough to hold railroad cars. 
 
I wonder what they are planning for this facility? They could easily fit 100,000 
people in this area. And who would the occupants be? 
 
Another site is located in Brand Park in Glendale. There are newly constructed 
fences (all outfitted with new wiring that point inward). The fences surround a dry 
reservoir. There are also new buildings situated in the area. We questioned the idea 
that there were four armed military personnel walking the park. Since when does a 
public park need armed guards? 
 
A third site visited was in the San Fernando Valley, adjacent to the Water District. 
Again, the area around the actual Water District had fences logically pointing out 
(to keep people out of the dangerous area). And the rest of the adjacent area which 
went on for several miles was ringed with fences and barbed wire facing inward (to 
keep what or who in?) Also, interesting was the fact that the addition to the tops of 
the fences were fairly new as to not even contain any sign of rust on them. Within 
the grounds was a huge building that the guard said was a training range for 
policemen. There were newly constructed roads, new gray military looking 
buildings, and a landing strip. For what? Police cars were constantly patrolling the 
several mile perimeter of the area. 
 
From the parking lot of the Odyssey Restaurant a better view could be taken of the 
area that was hidden from site from the highway. There was an area that contained 
about 100 black boxes that looked like railroad cars. We had heard that loads of 
railroad cars have been manufactured in Oregon outfitted with shackles. Would 
these be of that nature? From our position it was hard to determine.


--- PAGE 20 ---
In searching the Internet, I have discovered that there are about 600 of these prison 
sites around the country (and more literally popping up overnight do they work all 
night). They are manned, but yet do not contain prisoners. Why do they need all 
these non-operating prisons? What are they waiting for? We continuously hear that 
our current prisons are overcrowded and they are releasing prisoners because of 
this situation. But what about all these facilities? What are they really for? Why are 
there armed guards yet no one to protect themselves against? And what is going to 
be the kick-off point to put these facilities into operation? 
 
What would bring about a situation that would call into effect the need for these 
new prison facilities? A man-made or natural catastrophe? An earthquake, panic 
due to Y2K, a massive poisoning, a panic of such dimensions to cause nationwide 
panic? 
 
Once a major disaster occurs (whether it is a real event or manufactured event does 
not matter) Martial Law is hurriedly put in place and we are all in the hands of the 
government agencies (FEMA) who thus portray themselves as our protectors. Yet 
what happens when we question those in authority and how they are taking away all 
of our freedoms? Will we be the ones detained in these camp sites? And who are 
they going to round up? Those with guns? Those who ask questions? Those that 
want to know what’s really going on? Does that include any of us? The seekers of 
truth? 
 
When first coming across this information I was in a state of total denial. How could 
this be? I believed our country was free, and always felt a sense of comfort in 
knowing that as long as we didn’t hurt others in observing our freedom we were left 
to ourselves. Ideally we treated everyone with respect and honored their uniqueness 
and hoped that others did likewise. 
 
It took an intensive year of searching into the hidden politics to discover that we are 
as free as we believe we are. If we are in denial, we don’t see the signs that are 
staring at us, but keep our minds turned off and busy with all the mundane affairs 
of daily life. 
 
We just don’t care enough to find out the real truth, and settle for the hand-fed 
stories that come our way over the major media sources television, radio, 
newspaper, and magazines. But it’s too late to turn back to the days of blindfolds 
and hiding our heads in the sand because the reality is becoming very clear. The 
time is fast approaching when we will be the ones asking "What happened to our 
freedom? To our free speech? To our right to protect ourselves and our family? To 
think as an individual? To express ourselves in whatever way we wish?" 
 
Once we challenge that freedom we find out how free we really are. How many are 
willing to take up that challenge? Very few indeed, otherwise we wouldn’t find 
ourselves in the situation that we are in at the present time. We wouldn’t have let 
things progress and get out of the hands of the public and into the hands of those


--- PAGE 21 ---
that seek to keep us under their control no matter what it takes, and that includes 
the use of force and detainment for those that ask the wrong questions. 
 
Will asking questions be outlawed next? Several instances have recently been 
reported where those that were asking questions that came too near the untold truth 
(the cover up) were removed from the press conferences and from the public’s ear. 
Also, those that wanted to speak to the press were detained and either imprisoned, 
locked in a psychiatric hospital, slaughtered (through make-believe suicides) or 
discredited. 
 
Why are we all in denial over these possibilities? Didn’t we hear about prison camps 
in Germany, and even in the United States during World War II? Japanese 
individuals were rounded up and placed in determent camps during the duration of 
the War. Where was their freedom? 
 
 
 
You don’t think it could happen to you? Obviously those rounded up and killed 
didn’t think it could happen to them either. How could decent people have 
witnessed such atrocities and still said nothing? Are we going to do the same here as 
they cart off one by one those individuals who are taking a stand for the rights of the 
citizens as they expose the truth happening behind the scenes? Are we all going to sit 
there and wonder what happened to this country of ours? Where did we go wrong? 
How could we let it happen?


--- PAGE 22 ---


