=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Robert Hillary King Autobiography.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 225
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:32:28.357745
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
“Albert Woodfox, HermAn W AllAce  
and Robert Wilkerson are worth my efforts and the efforts of all 
who believe that you must fight injustice where you find it.”
dAme AnitA roddick Co-founder of The Body Shop and  
human rights activist
“tHe relentless prosecution of tHe 
Angola 3 in the infamous Penitentiary at Angola…is another in 
a long line of cases in this country involving egregious prosecuto-
rial misconduct. The interests of justice can only be served by 
ending the prosecution and dropping the charges against them, 
and setting them free.”
rAmsey clArk Former U.S. Attorney General 
“friendsHips Are forged in strAnge  
places. My friendship with Robert King, and the other two 
Angola 3 men Herman Wallace and Albert Woodfox, is based 
on respect. These men, as Robert reveals in this stunning account 
of his life, have fought tirelessly to redress injustice, not only for 
themselves, but for others. Since his release in 2001 Robert has 
been engaged in the fight to rescue these men from a cruel and 
repressive administration that colludes in deliberate lying and 
obfuscation to keep them locked up. This is a battle Robert is 
determined to win, and we are determined to help him.”
 gordon roddick Co-founder of The Body Shop and  
human rights activist
“tHis book is A seAring indictment of 
the contemporary USA, a rich and commanding nation, which 
still crushes the hopes and aspirations of so many poor black 
Americans and criminalizes their young. Robert Hillary King’s 
account of his horrifying 29 years in prison for a crime he did not 
commit should shame all of us who believe that justice has to be 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   1 8/25/08   10:31:07 PM


--- PAGE 3 ---
at the heart of any democracy worthy of that name.” 
(bAroness) HelenA kennedy Qc Member of the House of Lords, Chair 
of Justice, UK
“WHen tHere is A trAin Wreck, tHere is 
a public inquiry, to try to avoid it recurring. Robert King’s con-
viction was a train wreck, and this book is perhaps the only way 
the world will get to understand why. There are more than 3,000 
people serving life without the possibility of parole in Angola 
today, some as young as 14 when they were sent there, and many 
of them innocent but without the lawyer to prove it. We owe it 
to them, and others in a similar plight around the world, to read 
this book. And Robert King wears a mighty fine hat!” 
clive stAfford smitH Director, Reprieve
“As A brusH WitH deAtH sHArpens life, 
a lifetime of confinement can broaden the vision…” 
Austin AmericAn stAtesmAn 
“…disturbed by evidence suggesting 
that their long term isolation may have been based, at least in part, 
on their past activism and association with the Black Panther 
Party…the prisoners’ prolonged isolation breached international 
treaties which the USA has ratified…The relevant treaties have 
found that prolonged solitary confinement can amount to torture 
or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.”
Amnesty internAtionAl on "The Angola 3” 2007
“tHeir AdHerence to tHe blAck pAntHer 
ideology has given them the strength, courage and spirit to fight 
the prison system.”
dAvid HilliArd Former Black Panther Party Chief of Staff
RobertKing_Interior.indd   2 8/25/08   10:31:07 PM


--- PAGE 4 ---
“…tHere is poWerful evidence tHA t 
they were framed…despite the compelling evidence of a terrible 
miscarriage of justice, Woodfox and Wallace remain locked 
up….” 
independent television neWs uk
 “ tHey endured And survived over 
all these years with very little help from the outside. They are 
the kind of unsung heroes who we must come forward to help 
because they never asked for anything from us in exchange for 
what they have suffered.”
geronimo Ji JAgA Former Minister of Defense Black Panther Party  
and former U.S. political prisoner
“fAced WitH life WitHout p Arole in  
solitary, it is past time for us to organize for their lives to be lived 
in freedom. They are political prisoners of the highest caliber 
who deserve your support.” 
mumiA Abu-JAmAl Former Black Panther, and U.S. Political Prisoner 
on Death Row
“tHese kinds of WArriors must never 
be forgotten. They have been at the front line of the struggle, 
fighting against the worst kind of brutalities and humiliations.”
yuri kocHiyAmA Human Rights Activist
“i recently becAme AWAre of evidence 
that suggests these men were wrongly convicted. I urge a swift 
and just resolution of the matter.”
JoHn conyers U.S. Ranking Congressmen and Chairman of the U.S. 
House Judiciary Committee
RobertKing_Interior.indd   3 8/25/08   10:31:07 PM


--- PAGE 5 ---
“We kno W from guAntánAmo bAy And 
other notorious prisons that keeping detainees in solitary confine-
ment for extended periods of time can be extremely damaging 
and it is truly shocking that the Louisiana state authorities saw 
fit to inflict decades of solitary on ‘The Angola 3.’ Robert King’s 
book is a timely expose of past injustice as well as a call to action. 
It deserves to be read by anyone with even a passing interest in 
the United States, justice and human rights.”
kAte Allen Amnesty International UK director
“to lose ones freedom is A terrible 
punishment in itself.  To be innocent and incarcerated for 29 
years is almost beyond belief. Robert King survived this expe-
rience with his dignity intact and with a renewed passion for 
justice. An amazing story”.
terry WAite CBE 
 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   4 8/25/08   10:31:07 PM


--- PAGE 6 ---
FROM THE   
BOTTOM  
OF THE   
HEAP 
The Autobiography of Black Panther   
Robert Hillary King
pm press
RobertKing_Interior.indd   5 8/25/08   10:31:07 PM


--- PAGE 7 ---
RobertKing_Interior.indd   6 8/25/08   10:31:07 PM


--- PAGE 8 ---
FROM THE   
BOTTOM  
OF THE   
HEAP 
The AutOBiogrAphy oF blAck Panther   
Robert HiŁlary KinG
RobertKing_Interior.indd   7 8/25/08   10:31:07 PM


--- PAGE 9 ---
FROM  THE  BOTTOM  OF THE  HEAP :  
THE Au TOB iOgRAPH y OF Bl Ack P AnTHER R OBERT Hill AR y king
By Robert HiŁlary King
Copyright © 2009 Robert Hillary King
This edition copyright © 2009 PM Press
All Rights Reserved
Published by:
PM Press 
PO Box 23912
Oakland, CA 94623
www.pmpress.org
Cover photograph by Ann Harkness
Angola 3 illustration by Rigo 23
Robert King illustration by Emory Douglas
Designed by Courtney Utt
ISBN: 978-1-60486-039-9
Library Of Congress Control Number: 2008931839
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Printed in the USA on recycled paper.
RobertKing_Interior.indd   8 8/25/08   10:31:07 PM


--- PAGE 10 ---
dedicated to
Anita Roddick: activist, humanitarian, 
benefactor, and friend; 1942-2007.
RobertKing_Interior.indd   9 8/25/08   10:31:07 PM


--- PAGE 11 ---
RobertKing_Interior.indd   10 8/25/08   10:31:07 PM


--- PAGE 12 ---
11
acknowledgements
revolutionAry love And regArds to  
Herman Wallace and Albert Woodfox, who have kept the com-
mitment to truth throughout these years and have continued to 
pay for it by being held in solitary for over thirty-six years. Your 
freedom is inevitable.
Special thanks to Rigo 23, a friend and ardent supporter of The 
Angola 3, Mumia Abu-Jamal, Leonard Peltier and other politi-
cal prisoners for many years. Rigo chooses anonymity, but his 
artwork and activism denies his wishes to remain anonymous.
Special thanks to scott crow, Co-founder of Common Ground 
Collective, and many other visionary grassroots projects. His 
urgent persistence, hard work and enthusiasm was the inspira-
tion I needed in a time of crisis to continue this work.
My deepest gratitude and recognition to:
Ann Harkness, my sister in struggle, for working behind the 
scenes on my candy business and all the things you do. You’re a 
warrior. Marina Drummer, the ‘navigator’ for keeping up with 
all the details year in and year out. NPR’s The Kitchen Sisters: 
Davia Nelson & Nikki Silva,  for keeping my candy business 
and the story of the A3 alive. Gordon Roddick and Samantha 
Roddick, for keeping alive the legacy of your wife and mother 
Anita Roddick. Marion Brown, Co-founder of  A3 Support 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   11 8/25/08   10:31:07 PM


--- PAGE 13 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
12
Committee, my longtime comrade, for not forgetting. Malik 
Rahim, Co-founder of A3 Support Committee and Common 
Ground Collective, for not giving up the fight for justice all these 
years in New Orleans. Gail Shaw and Billy X, Co-founders of 
the A3 Support Committee and It’s about Time, Althea Francois, 
Co-founder of A3 Support Committee.
My heartfelt appreciation and thanks to many long time friends 
and comrades who shared so much and have never given up. 
Bruce Allen, Orissa Arend, Brackin ‘Firecracker’ Camp, Col. 
Nyati Bolt, Scott Fleming, James Clark, Shana Griffin, Anne 
Pruden, Jackie Sumell , Brice White, Chris Aberley, Brandon 
Darby, Millie Barnet, Brooke Biggs, Linda Carmichael, Tristesse 
Casimer, Geronimo Ji Jaga and the Kuji Foundation, Mumia 
Abu-Jamal, Anja DeGraff, Leslie George, Noelle Hanrahan 
and Prison Radio, Pam Holbrook, Erin Howley, Elizabeth Jef-
fers, Mwalimu Johnson, M.T. Karthik, Anake Konig, Mark 
and Anna Chiat, Anna Kraakman, Laurie Lazer, Cesar Maxit, 
Billie Mizell, Sarah Myers, Carrie Reichardt, Wanda Sabir, 
Kalil Shayid, Dave Strano, Tajiri (Truth Universal), Luis ‘Bato’ 
Talamantez and California Prison Focus, Ron Chisom and The 
Peoples Institute for Survival and Beyond, Akeilah, Khadijah 
and Jamilla,of the Community Defender, Garilla Ballard, Violetta 
Thompson (now an ancestor), Anita Yesho, Yasmine, Raul Sali-
nas (now an ancestor).
 
Thanks to all of our supporters overseas in the UK, Portugal, 
Belgium, and many other countries I have visited during my 
travels.
Special thanks to Chuck and all on our ‘A3 Team’ for your work 
behind the scenes
Thanks to David Martinez, for your presence to welcome me as 
I first walked free.
RobertKing_Interior.indd   12 8/25/08   10:31:08 PM


--- PAGE 14 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
13
Thanks to PM Press: Ramsey Kanaan, Andrea Gibbons, my 
editor, for being succinct and keeping the story and details alive 
through this, Terry Bisson for the editing of the words, and to 
everyone working behind the scenes at PM to bring this to life.
My indebtedness to all the readers and advisers of this book who 
gave feedback over the years, thank you for your input, patience 
and work to see it through. It has been a long time coming.
Thanks to the people who transcribed my original manuscript, 
typed on an old manual typewriter that was largely written while 
I was in solitary at Angola Prison: Charlene Rose, Clancy Rose, 
Evan St. John, Austin Van Zant, James Clark, Erin Howley, 
Brandon Darby and scott crow. 
Revolutionary love to all former members of the Black Panther 
Party for putting their lives on the line for the ideals, dedication 
and commitment to bring about revolutionary change in this 
country. The legacy lives on. 
And lastly thanks and deepest recognition to all the longtime 
and recent empathizers, sympathizers around the world and who 
have given their time and dedication to free Herman Wallace, 
Albert Woodfox, myself and all political prisoners over the years. 
Thank you for helping to bring these injustices to the forefront. 
If I omitted anyone it was an honest mistake, my apologies and 
sincere thanks for everything you have done too!!
Free The Angola 3!
Free ALL political prisoners and prisoners of conscience!
All Power to the People!
robert king
AKA Robert King Wilkerson 2008
RobertKing_Interior.indd   13 8/25/08   10:31:08 PM


--- PAGE 15 ---
RobertKing_Interior.indd   14 8/25/08   10:31:08 PM


--- PAGE 16 ---
15
Introduction
to me, robert HillAry king is A Hero. 
He survived over thirty years in prison, most of them in a soli-
tary segregation cell. After his exoneration in 2001 he emerged 
from prison a vital, socially conscious, and very caring leader. 
It could have been different. He could have emerged a bitter 
man, his every thought colored by a need to seek revenge for 
the horrible and horribly unfair years of incarceration. Or he 
could have shrunk from the social arena, becoming quiet and 
isolative like many who emerge from prison after years inside. 
Instead, Robert Hillary King came out of prison with a political 
vision, the vision that had kept him going during those years in 
solitary. But it’s not just his political consciousness that makes 
him a hero; it is how he has put this consciousness into practice 
as he vigorously champions the cause of Herman Wallace and 
Albert Woodfox, the members of The Angola 3 who remain 
behind bars. It is how he continues to campaign passionately for 
the rights of all prisoners. 
During Robert Hillary King’s lifetime we have witnessed a 
drastic and tragic shift in the very purpose of the state. Under 
capitalism, the state has always served the interests of the rich and 
powerful, and always will. But traditionally there has been a split 
between the section of the power elite who would use the state 
exclusively to increase their riches, and another section of that 
same elite who endorse public services and social welfare pro-
grams. This liberal wing also wants to expand corporate profits. 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   15 8/25/08   10:31:08 PM


--- PAGE 17 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
16
But they believe that by providing decent education, housing, 
and medical care to everyone, the state indirectly benefits the 
corporations (by fostering a more competent, healthy and reliable 
workforce for example). 
Roosevelt during the New Deal, and Kennedy and Johnson 
after him viewed the state as a provider-of-last-resort for the 
most disadvantaged in society. Programs included Head Start 
and Medicare, community mental health, low-income housing 
and aid to families with dependent children. It seemed by the 
mid-1960s as if the state was resuming its responsibility to try 
and provide for the most disadvantaged among us. But by the 
mid-70s, as the post-WWII economic boom evaporated, the 
social programs were de-funded and dwindled to almost noth-
ing. The state began to shift its focus more singularly to the 
maintenance of law and order and the expansion of corporate 
markets and profits, even when that meant waging wars. The 
Reagan years put the retreat from social responsibility into over -
drive, as budgets for education and social welfare programs were 
slashed. The slashing continues today, even accelerates as wars 
draw heavily on the state’s fiscal resources and the gap between 
rich and poor widens.
As the focus of the state shifted, a contradiction emerged in 
the public’s perception. People had grown used to thinking of 
government as the provider of public service programs. As the 
government shrank its public service role, an unavoidable contra-
diction emerged between the notion that we live in a just society 
where the state helps people in great need, and the ugly reality of 
an ever-increasing gap between rich and poor and a worsening of 
the plight of those at the bottom. If we are a just and democratic 
society, how can we ignore children who are failed by public 
education? How can we and our government stand by while 
millions of people lose their homes? How can we tolerate the 
denial of health and mental health care for a growing proportion 
of our population?
The Prison Industrial Complex grew up in the same decades 
the state was busy reneging on its social responsibility. There 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   16 8/25/08   10:31:08 PM


--- PAGE 18 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
17
was an urgent need to disappear the people who were harmed 
by the state’s callousness, an urgent need to hide the contradic-
tion created by a “democratic” society ignoring the needs of so 
many people. New laws make it illegal to sleep in the park or 
panhandle near an ATM machine, allowing the mass arrest of the 
homeless, and diverting attention from the fact that the wealthi-
est country in the world fails to insure housing for its people. A 
very large number of individuals suffering from mental illness 
have been arrested and locked up, their disappearance from the 
community hiding the fact that our society has reneged on its 
responsibility to provide adequate public mental health services. 
The War on Drugs has incarcerated many more, hiding the fail-
ure of inner-city schools to educate our children and the lack of 
living wage jobs.
The number of prisoners has expanded by leaps and bounds, 
past a million, past two million…it now approaches two and a 
half million people. Meanwhile, the measures taken within the 
prisons to control the disappeared masses and keep their stories 
from public view have become increasingly Draconian. They 
include massive overcrowding, the dismantling of rehabilita-
tion and job training programs, long stints in segregation or 
the “hole,” harsh restrictions on visits with families, gag orders 
precluding prisoners talking to the press, and the emergence 
of supermaximum security prisons where everyone is kept in 
segregation and put under the total control of officers.
I have toured many American prisons as a psychiatric expert 
witness in class action lawsuits over unacceptably harsh prison 
conditions and the sexual misconduct of male staff with women 
prisoners. I witness the harsh conditions, and I cite the research 
literature about the psychiatric damage they cause. I confess that 
I know a lot less about the real-time effects of prison conditions 
than do the men and women who are forced to live under such 
toxic conditions for long periods of time. Still, I am absolutely 
certain after interviewing over a thousand prisoners confined in 
segregation settings and reviewing the extant research literature, 
that long-term confinement in a cell where one is isolated and 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   17 8/25/08   10:31:08 PM


--- PAGE 19 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
18
idle almost twenty-four hours per day causes severe pain, suf-
fering and psychiatric damage. In far too many cases the despair 
bred of long-term isolation leads to suicide.
There is a falsehood at the heart of the rationale for the 
imprisonment binge. The lie is the notion that, by locking 
up the people who would otherwise clearly remind us of the 
failures of our society in regard to our social responsibility, we 
become safer and happier. In spite of nearly two and a half mil-
lion Americans incarcerated today, people are feeling both more 
strapped financially, and less safe in their communities than they 
did before the prison explosion in the 70s and 80s. In “locking 
‘em up and throwing away the key,” we have also broken up 
the families of the tens of millions of people who have been 
forced to spend time in jail or prison. And the average citizen 
has had to shut down their critical mind, and continually deny 
the contradiction between the USA’s claim of democracy and 
the reality of this country disappearing so many people behind 
bars. The only people happy with the massive Prison Industrial 
Complex that has evolved over the last three decades are those 
who make profits or enhance their power by regimenting those 
condemned to incarceration. 
There are among us powerful voices of protest, individuals 
who see clearly the contradictions between the ideals of democ-
racy and the lies behind the Prison Industrial Complex, and who 
successfully get the word out about it. Robert Hillary King is 
such a voice. And we know what happens to the people who 
vociferously and effectively expose the contradictions of a callous 
democracy and protest the disappearing of people behind bars. 
History has shown us that they are targeted as dangerous dis-
senters, branded as criminals, arrested en masse, and sent away 
to prison. I have known a large number of politically conscious 
leaders locked up in deep freeze, in supermaximum security 
units that are the “prisons within the prisons.” This is where 
you find the history of the Black Panther Party in the USA, 
and the history of Robert Hillary King, Herman Wallace and 
Albert Woodfox. 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   18 8/25/08   10:31:08 PM


--- PAGE 20 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
19
Whether or not you agree with the dramatic tactics of the 
Black Panther Party (BPP), it is important to understand that 
their real offense against the state was going public with the truth 
about this country failing in its social responsibility. Their famous 
ten-point program began with the demand for “power to deter -
mine the destiny of our black and oppressed communities’ educa-
tion.” It demanded free health care for all black and oppressed 
people, an immediate end to police brutality, an immediate end 
to all wars of aggression, full employment, decent housing and 
decent education for all black and oppressed people, freedom for 
all black and oppressed people now held in U.S. Federal, state, 
county, city and military prisons and jails, and trials by a jury of 
peers. The BPP’s ten-point program inspired a Free Breakfast 
for Children Program, free medical clinics, transportation to 
prisons located far from population centers for family members 
of inmates, community schools, and testing for sickle-cell disease. 
The Black Panther Party became the symbol of liberation to a 
generation who were questioning social contradictions.
Robert Hillary King joined the Black Panther Party while 
incarcerated as a young man; he tells of doing so because the 
party’s positions and activism fit his own perspective about 
what was wrong with our society and what needed to be done. 
When Robert joined the BPP , I was serving as physician for 
their Bunchy Carter Free Clinic in South Central Los Angeles. 
As nationwide attacks on the BPP and mass arrests of its mem-
bers occurred, I began to investigate the plight of my patients 
who had been taken off to jail. I became a forensic psychiatric 
“expert,” explaining to judges and juries the dreadful conse-
quences of inhuman conditions within the jails and prisons. Of 
course, I was an “outside expert,” living in the community while 
touring correctional facilities and testifying in court. Robert Hil-
lary King was learning about the same problems first hand, as a 
captive, and the occupant of a prison cell where he was confined 
for over thirty years years.
In the early 1970’s Herman Wallace and Albert Woodfox 
founded a chapter of the Black Panther Party at Angola State 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   19 8/25/08   10:31:08 PM


--- PAGE 21 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
20
Prison, formerly a slave plantation. Robert joined them in their 
political activism within the prison, becoming a member of the 
first chapter of the Black Panther Party actually formed within 
a prison. 
Community service in prison is different than in the com-
munity. Education is still a primary function, serving to bolster 
prisoners’ sense of themselves as decent people who retain 
rights in spite of their incarceration. But there are other issues, 
unique to the prison setting. One special problem in prison is 
sexual victimization, rape, forced sex, and even prostitution 
rings where weaker prisoners are forced to provide sexual favors 
while their pimps receive payment. The Angola Black Panther 
Party organized prisoners to stamp out prostitution and sexual 
victimization at Angola. They also organized prisoner strikes to 
improve inhuman living conditions. In the process, as they stood 
tall and encouraged other prisoners to do likewise, their keepers 
felt intimidated. 
The Warden at Angola State Prison, Burl Cain, would testify 
years later in federal court in The Angola 3’s civil lawsuit to gain 
release from extended solitary confinement: “It’s not obvious that 
they should be let out of extended lockdown, they were ‘not good 
men,’ they ‘haven’t reformed their political beliefs,’ and would 
be disruptive to the prison environment.” The Warden provides 
an excellent definition of a political prisoner: someone who has 
not reformed their political beliefs. The Warden has a right to his 
private views, but when he uses the occasion of a guard’s murder 
and no clear suspect to frame prisoners whose standing tall most 
intimidates him, he is violating all the rights and requirements 
of a democracy. 
Robert Hillary King was a truth-teller from very early in 
his life, and his touching autobiography is a page-turner. Not 
only the humble story of a hero in his own words, it is also a 
beautifully written piece of literature. A childhood in the South 
comes alive in the telling, the suspense mounts as the pages go by. 
Robert first went to jail at eighteen. In his early twenties, he was 
arrested for a burglary he had not done. While on trial, the man 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   20 8/25/08   10:31:08 PM


--- PAGE 22 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
21
who had falsely identified Robert as his accomplice admitted his 
lie in court and explained that he had had to identify someone 
in order to get a lighter sentence. He stated to judge and jury 
that Robert looked nothing like the much older man who had 
been his partner in the robbery. He had therefore believed the 
other witnesses would never identify Robert, and that all charges 
against him would have to be dropped. In spite of the confession, 
Robert was still convicted as the accomplice. The court was not 
interested in hearing the truth, only in sending another young 
black man to prison. Robert was forced to suffer the resulting 
disillusionment in a jail cell. 
He joined the Black Panther Party in prison. He believed in 
the good works of the Panthers, and the need to make an impas-
sioned statement about the scars of slavery and inequality that run 
deep in the American psyche. As an intellectual and a leader he 
was framed for the murder of an inmate, and went to “the hole,” 
or segregation, where he remained for twenty-nine of the thirty-
one years of his prison term. His fellow organizers and Black 
Panther Party members Herbert Wallace and Albert Woodfox 
were framed for a second murder: that of a guard named Brent 
Miller. Together they became known as The Angola 3. 
A strong national campaign has been waged to free The 
Angola 3. The struggle has been victorious to an impressive 
extent. Robert was essentially exonerated (he had to plead to a 
lesser charge) and released from prison in 2001. Due to Robert 
Hillary King’s activism and the National Coalition to free The 
Angola 3, and some excellent lawyering, the state was recently 
ordered by a federal court to release Herman Wallace and Albert 
Woodfox from segregation — but they remain in prison, and 
Robert is committed to winning their freedom. 
The entire point of supermaximum confinement is to “break” 
the prisoners who are forced to reside therein. The planners 
hoped that prisoners would eventually emerge from segregation 
with their tempers calmed and their behaviors shaped into total 
conformity. The hope is misplaced. Many prisoners in super -
maximum cells have told me that their anger mounts while 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   21 8/25/08   10:31:08 PM


--- PAGE 23 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
22
inside of them, and they get frightened that they will be unable 
to control it. As one prisoner in a supermax prison cell recently 
said: “You get angry, and then you get angrier, and then you 
become frightened that the large anger you feel all the time will 
burst out and get you in more trouble, so you’ll have to do more 
time in the hole.” 
Vengeance is not the answer. It’s certainly an understandable 
personal feeling, but a poor guide to activism and social policy. 
Getting angry, and getting back at the people who caused one’s 
pain and misery leads only to more pain and misery. A progres-
sive politics created out of vengeance is not progressive. This was 
Nelson Mandela’s great insight, and the reason he established the 
Truth and Reconciliation Commission after the fall of Apartheid 
in South Africa. 
Robert Hillary King is not especially angry, even with those 
who falsely prosecuted and persecuted him. Robert Hillary 
King is a humble man, a visionary leader, and a powerful writer. 
In this book, he speaks frankly about the pain of living with 
disenfranchisement, wrongful conviction and torture in prison. 
But he also tells of the sweet and poignant moments in his life, 
of a family’s love, of tender relationships, of family tragedies. 
His book is an indictment of the hypocrisy of a democracy that 
ignores the needs of a large segment of its population and then 
makes every attempt to disappear the evidence by locking up the 
people most harmed by society’s callousness. But Robert Hillary 
King will not be disappeared. And that is why his message is so 
powerful and important. 
 
terry A. kupers, m.d., m.s.p.
AUGUST, 2008 
Terry A. Kupers, M.D., M.S.P . is Institute Professor at The Wright 
Institute, a Distinguished Life Fellow of the American Psychiatric 
Association. Besides practicing psychiatry at his office in Oakland, 
he consults to various public mental health centers and jail mental 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   22 8/25/08   10:31:08 PM


--- PAGE 24 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
23
health services.  He provides expert testimony as well as consulta-
tion and staff training regarding the psychological effects of prison 
conditions including isolated confinement in supermaximum security 
units, the quality of correctional mental health care, and the effects 
of sexual abuse in correctional settings.  He has served as consultant 
to the U.S. Department of Justice, Civil Rights Division, as well as 
to Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International.  Dr. Kupers 
has published extensively, including the books Prison Madness: The 
Mental Health Crisis Behind Bars and What We Must Do About It (1999) 
and Public Therapy: The Practice of Psychotherapy in the Public Mental 
Health Clinic (1981). He is co-editor of Prison Masculinities (2002).  He 
is a Contributing Editor of Correctional Mental Health Report , and 
received the Exemplary Psychiatrist award from the National Alli-
ance on Mental Illness (NAMI) at the American Psychiatric Associa-
tion meeting in 2005. 
 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   23 8/25/08   10:31:08 PM


--- PAGE 25 ---
RobertKing_Interior.indd   24 8/25/08   10:31:08 PM


--- PAGE 26 ---
25
a word
i WAs born in t He u.s.A. born bl Ack, 
born poor. Is it then any wonder that I have spent most of my 
life in prison?
RobertKing_Interior.indd   25 8/25/08   10:31:08 PM


--- PAGE 27 ---
RobertKing_Interior.indd   26 8/25/08   10:31:08 PM


--- PAGE 28 ---
27
preface
in februAry, 1970, i WAs Arrested,  
charged, and convicted for an armed robbery which I hadn’t 
committed. My initial sentence was thirty-five years at hard 
labor in the Louisiana State Penitentiary, Angola. While being 
held at the New Orleans Parish Prison, I escaped, and was given 
an additional eight years for the “aggravation” I had caused my 
keepers. By 1974, in addition to the forty-three years (now housed 
at the State Prison), I had a life sentence without the possibility 
of parole, probation or the suspension of sentence for allegedly 
having participated in the death of another prisoner. Thus, the 
idea to write was born. If an epitaph was to be written for me, I 
wanted it to be written by me…
Given that life and politics are inseparable in America, I 
wished to describe the events of my childhood and adult life, and 
draw their political conclusions. While there has been a slight 
alteration in my status now that I have been released from the 
bondage of a prison cell, I note that there has been no structural 
change in those institutions in society that foster racism, classism, 
bigotry, oppression, and disenfranchisement. After enduring soli-
tary confinement for twenty-nine of the thirty-one years of my 
incarceration, my status continues, and so does my struggle.
For the sake of clarity, the reader needs to be informed of this: 
my given name at birth was not Robert King Wilkerson. The 
name given to me at birth was Robert Hillary King. I learned 
of this when I applied for my birth certificate on February 10th, 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   27 8/25/08   10:31:08 PM


--- PAGE 29 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
28
2001, two days after my release from Angola Prison. However, 
by whichever name I am called, I honor the surnames of both 
my parents. 
At the same time, I discovered that I actually entered this 
existence on May 30, 1942, and that my birthday was not the 3rd 
of May as I had always believed. It could very well be said that 
I was really born in February, 1970, when an unjust conviction 
and incarceration would change me forever, launching me into 
a new birth. But I shall begin at the beginning.
RobertKing_Interior.indd   28 8/25/08   10:31:08 PM


--- PAGE 30 ---
29
2001, two days after my release from Angola Prison. However, 
by whichever name I am called, I honor the surnames of both 
my parents. 
At the same time, I discovered that I actually entered this 
existence on May 30, 1942, and that my birthday was not the 3rd 
of May as I had always believed. It could very well be said that 
I was really born in February, 1970, when an unjust conviction 
and incarceration would change me forever, launching me into 
a new birth. But I shall begin at the beginning.
chapter 1
WHen i met my fAtHer, HillAry Wilkerson, 
for the first time I was thirteen years old. By that time, having 
lived an unsheltered lifestyle, I had already undergone the transi-
tion from man-child to man. But my maturity to actual manhood 
was to unfold more gradually. In the pages that follow, I share 
this unfolding with the reader. 
 T wo young people: Male and female…a dark night, desire to 
escape and explore the unknown. Hormones working overtime, 
helped by a nip from an hidden bottle. Nine months later (more 
or less), on Sunday, May 30th, 1942, into this world came one 
Robert Hillary King — a.k.a. Robert King Wilkerson. 
Hillary Wilkerson, my father — of whose seed I am the prod-
uct — having experienced the joy of planting the seed, found that 
joy to be short-lived. In the typical fashion of many Black men 
of that era, he split. The responsibility for and to the product of 
his seed proved much more than he was willing and perhaps 
capable of enduring. He had to seek refuge. Hillary enlisted in 
the imperialist army of these United States. From there, he went 
on to plant seeds in other, foreign soils…
Clara Mae King, my mother, who was very young when my 
older sister, Mary, was conceived — and not much older at my 
own conception — never developed a true sense of responsibil-
ity toward any of the three children she eventually brought into 
this world. Years later, Clara would tell me that at the time of 
Mary’s birth — and mine — she felt we would fare better with 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   29 8/25/08   10:31:08 PM


--- PAGE 31 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
30
her mother, Alice, than with her. My mother was very short, 
and her diminutive size seemed to have played a role in shaping 
her personality. Clara never revealed to me directly that she had 
hang-ups about her size, but when I came to know her years later, 
I could sense the insecurity that plagued her. She began drinking 
alcohol at a very early age, and it was alcohol that contributed to 
her early death at the age of forty-one. 
The first-born of my mother was Mary, two years, three months 
and seven days my senior. Mary took after Clara in size, inherit -
ing the gene that prevented her growth. She also began drinking 
heavily, and she too died young at the age of twenty-seven. 
Ella Mae, my younger sister, was born a few years after me. I 
didn’t have the pleasure of meeting her until I was twenty-three, 
at my mother’s wake and funeral in 1966. And it was shortly 
thereafter that Mary died also…
In retrospect, when I think of my mother Clara, I am grateful 
that in her attempt to shield and protect me from the savage forces 
that confronted her, she passed me on to her own mother, Alice. 
My grandmother’s own standing, in many ways, was as bare as 
Clara’s. But my grandmother did not view me (or my sister) as 
being a burden. And I can truthfully say that there were many 
other Black women of the same era who, while facing equally (or 
surpassing) bad odds as Clara, met the situation head on. Alice, 
whom I learned to call Mama, was one such woman.
At the time of my grandmother’s acceptance of Mary and me, 
Ella wasn’t born. When she was, she stayed in New Orleans. 
Though Mary and I were born in New Orleans, during our 
infancy, Clara had brought us both back to Gonzales, Louisiana, 
where Alice lived. Ella Mae never came to Gonzales. Shortly after 
her birth, Clara passed her off to another relative. However, had 
Clara brought Ella to Gonzales as she had done with her other 
two children, Mama would have also been responsible for Ella’s 
childhood survival. That was the type of woman Mama was. 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   30 8/25/08   10:31:08 PM


--- PAGE 32 ---
31
chapter 2
i HAve some vivid memories of tHe WAy 
Gonzales was back then. There wasn’t anything impressive about 
this small town and economic security was nearly non-existent, 
especially for Blacks. In order to feed her children, Mama worked 
the sugar cane fields, which was seasonal. I often heard her say, “I 
had to cut cane with ice on the stalks.” They grew a lot of corn 
there also. The town’s school was known by the simple name 
of “Smith’s.” I never knew the name of the school for whites. I 
remember Orice’s Grocery, where Mama used to “deal” (“deal-
ing” was synonymous with having established credit). Orice’s 
memory is vivid because, whenever I went there with Mama, I 
was always treated to a “moonshine cookie,” so called because of 
its size and shape. My great grandparents also lived in Gonzalez, 
as well as some of my great uncles and cousins. 
Gonzalez’s jailor, part-time handyman, and part-time janitor, 
was Black. According to Mama, the man who wore all of these 
titles was a distant cousin of ours. One day we stopped by the 
jail while this cousin was in the process of dining. The very first 
thing I noticed about him was that he had only one arm. He tried 
his damnedest to get me to join with him in his eats, offering me 
the same utensil he was eating from. I just stared at him. The 
truth is, I didn’t want any of that food. And the reason was, in 
the corner was another Black man, behind what I then described 
as being a “lot of skinny iron.” From behind this iron, the man 
watched us all, somber-like. Looking into his face, I immediately 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   31 8/25/08   10:31:08 PM


--- PAGE 33 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
32
felt some kinship with him, more than with my cousin and I felt 
that the one-armed man was responsible for keeping the somber-
looking man behind that skinny iron. The one arm, too, I found 
at that age to be monstrous. I disliked our cousin, and I was glad 
when we left. 
When we had gone some distance, I asked Mama what 
that other man was doing at our cousin’s house, and why was 
he behind all that skinny iron? She told me that it wasn’t our 
cousin’s house, but a jailhouse, that our cousin only worked there. 
And she told me that the man behind the bars (not skinny iron) 
must have done something bad to be there. She called him a 
“cornvick.” I was only about four years old at the time, and my 
small mind went to work. It told me that since there were many 
cornfields around, a “cornvick” must live between the stalks and 
was considered “bad” for doing so.
I was glad we lived in a house. It was an old, decrepit house, 
just off of the highway. It was shabby, unpainted, and leaky; 
whenever it rained, that old house rained also. The summers 
weren’t too bad, our house had lots of holes in it which served as 
air ducts. But the winters, even in Louisiana, were bitterly cold. 
At that time, Mama had nine living children of her own: Clara, 
my birth mother, was the eldest; Robert and Ruth were frater -
nal twins; Houston was next in line. Then there were George, 
Henry, William, Verna Mae, and James. By the time I made my 
fifth birthday, Clara, Robert, Ruth, Houston, George, and Henry 
(whom Mama had called her “first set of children”) had all gone 
their respective ways, some leaving as young as thirteen years 
old. That left William, Verna Mae, James, Mary and me, and of 
course, Mama. 
One bright summer evening, before Houston and George 
departed, I remember standing in our yard, looking across the 
street at the well-painted houses with manicured lawns inhabited 
by whites. I saw some activity in one of those yards. Looking 
closer, I saw two of my uncles, Houston and George, in a row of 
pear trees, loaded with ripened fruits. Houston and George were 
violently shaking the trees, while nearby a dog barked incessantly. 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   32 8/25/08   10:31:08 PM


--- PAGE 34 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
33
When they would get through shaking one tree, they would rush 
to another, repeating the effort. 
After doing this a number of times, they began picking the 
fallen pears from the ground and throwing them across the street, 
into our yard. Everywhere I looked, it seemed to be raining fruit. 
I wanted desperately to pick one up and eat it, but each time I 
attempted this, falling pears would barely miss my head. I began 
to dart from place to place, but everywhere I darted, more pears 
fell. Soon the thought of trying to get a pear left me. I was now 
desperate for some shelter. I tried to make it to the porch and 
into the house for safety, but the falling pears cut me off. So I just 
stood there, rooted in one place, and began to holler, louder and 
louder. I think my loud bellowing actually scared my uncles. I 
know for sure that it got their attention. They stopped throwing 
and began gesturing wildly for one of the other children to usher 
me to safety. 
When George and Houston returned from that escapade, we 
all had a big laugh. It was not long after this incident that George 
and Houston departed from us, only to be seen again years down 
the road. 
With the departure of Houston and George and with Mama 
working six days a week, the responsibility to watch us when 
Mama wasn’t home fell to William, the next oldest. Each day 
after Mama left for work, we would find ourselves plagued by a 
huge German shepherd dog that belonged to one of the whites 
living across the street. That dog knew we were alone, and that 
we were afraid of it. We would all be out in the yard playing, and 
one of the children would see it coming and yell, “Here comes 
the dog, git on the roof!” That was the safest place to hide from 
the dog when Mama wasn’t around. We had to shinny up a post 
to get to the roof, and as the littlest, I was always last. William 
would always be the one to reach down and pull me to safety. 
One day everyone was too busy playing to keep much of an 
eye out for the dog. By the time we spotted the animal, it had 
advanced too near. Everyone broke into a dead run straight for 
the porch. First William, then Verna, now Mary, then James. By 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   33 8/25/08   10:31:09 PM


--- PAGE 35 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
34
the time James had shinnied up the post, the shepherd was on the 
porch, snarling and baring its fangs. I tried to wrap my little legs 
around the post, at the same time reaching toward William, who 
was yelling for me to grasp his outstretched hand. At one point, 
William had me in his grasp. But then I slipped: I fell hard. 
Thinking only of the dog, I immediately sprang to my feet, 
turning around to face it. By this time, it was right upon me. I 
was trapped and I wasn’t expecting any help from William or 
any of the rest of them. They had proven time and time again 
that they were not going to tackle that dog, and neither was I! 
Trapped and frightened, I began to yell bloody murder. Then a 
strange, but wonderful, thing happened. The dog stopped in its 
tracks. It gave me a most curious look, dropped its tail between 
its legs, and hauled ass away from the premises, and didn’t look 
back until it had reached the other side of the highway. 
From that day on, I cannot recall our having any further 
trouble with that dog. Once more, my holler had come to my 
rescue! 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   34 8/25/08   10:31:09 PM


--- PAGE 36 ---
35
chapter 3
WilliAm HAd leArned tHe rudiments of 
cooking, but sometimes we had nothing. On these days, we had 
to wait until Mama came home. We all found consolation in sight 
of her coming up the highway, grocery bags in arms.
On one of those days, knowing that we all were hungry, she 
headed straight to the kitchen to prepare a meal. I was right 
behind her, holding onto her skirt. Every now and then she 
would reach down to cuddle me, saying, “Don’t worry, baby, 
mama gon’ feed you in a little while.” And I was believing this, 
too. I really thought it would only be a “little while.” But a “little 
while” turned into a “huge-while” that to a kid could seem like 
forever. Every now and then Mama would lift a lid from one 
of the pots, and the smell escaping would assault me with such 
intensity that I would bend over, holding my arm across my 
empty belly. Each time she would do it, Mama would say, “Just a 
little longer, children,” or something to that effect. Finally I could 
stand it no longer. She lifted a lid from one of the pots, and before 
she could say a word my belly growled in protest, and I followed 
suit: I started hollering and bellowing and didn’t stop until she 
knelt down and took me in her arms. It was this soul-searing 
yelling and bellowing that made Mama realize how truly hungry 
I was. She said, “Oh, my poor baby!” The rice was already done. 
The meats in the pots were not quite done, but the gravy was. I 
eagerly ate rice and gravy…
I have related these childhood incidents because I feel there 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   35 8/25/08   10:31:09 PM


--- PAGE 37 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
36
is a present-day application that can be drawn from them. The 
application is: when one has a legitimate beef, a loud protest is 
the correct behavior. 
Later I remember a deluge: Water — seemingly with a desire 
for retribution — literally poured from the sky. And the water 
rose. More than three feet high, it covered our porch and beyond. 
Inside the house the water was nearly up to my knees; off the 
porch, the water would be over my head. 
The morning after the rain ceased, Mama had to wade in 
water up to her waist in order to get to the highway so she could 
proceed to work. The land on our side of the highway was much 
lower than the other side, where the whites lived. 
Before Mama left that morning, she told William to keep us 
all inside, and for him to stay there too. But as soon as Mama was 
out of sight, William was heading for the porch. We all followed 
him. I stopped in the middle of the porch, for William told me to 
stay where I was. He and the others went splashing off into the 
yard. Watching them play, I felt alone, and the farther away they 
waded, the more alone I felt. I began to inch my way towards the 
end of the porch. I really didn’t intend to go off the porch, but 
with my eyes trained on their retreating forms, the spell was cast. 
Each time they would take a step, I would take one. The water 
did the rest. It was polite enough to pull me right off the edge 
of the porch. This is one time my yelling failed me. I tried, but 
nothing, not a sound would escape from my mouth. Then, from 
what seemed like a mile away, I heard Mary yelling: “Oh look! 
Junior is drowning, Junior is drowning.” They all hurried back 
as fast as they could, and pulled me to safety. I was numb with 
fear, but most grateful. I remember hearing William say: “We 
ain’t goin tell Mama about this, ya’ll hear?”
Mama never found out. 
A few days later — the water now receded — we were out 
playing once more. We spotted a big fat field rat. William decided 
to tackle it. He found a stick, and advanced upon the creature, 
backing it into a corner. Having no place to turn, the rat went 
on the offensive. It leapt up and caught one of William’s fingers, 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   36 8/25/08   10:31:09 PM


--- PAGE 38 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
37
biting down viciously. Surprisingly, William didn’t scream. 
Instead, he seized the rat by the throat, and choked it to death. 
When he pried its mouth open his finger looked as if it had been 
torn by a pair of pliers. 
We all went back to the house, bringing the dead rat with us. 
William poured coal oil on his wounded finger, which stopped 
the bleeding. Then he found a spider-web and wrapped it around 
his finger. He poured more coal oil on the web and finger, and 
wrapped a clean rag around it. The finger seemed to take no 
time to heal….
As for the rat, well…after dressing his finger, William put on a 
pot of water to boil. While the water was boiling, he reached for 
a kitchen knife and handed it to Verna, who gutted and cleaned 
the rat. The boiling water was used to make a rat stew, which 
we obligingly ate for lunch. After that day, William became 
somewhat of a hero to me, someone I could look up to. I was 
four years old at the time. 
With school beginning, and the rest of the children away, 
Mama would bring me to her parents’ house, and they would 
mind me while she worked.
Alice’s parents, Robert and Mary Larks, were my great grand-
parents, whom I addressed as “grandpa” and “grandma.” I am 
told that they had a total of twelve children, but in my lifetime 
I’ve only met seven: Norsey and Morris were the males; Carrie, 
Alice, Clementine, Alma and Alka were the females. 
With all of their children grown and gone, grandpa and 
grandma had lots of free time, and in their leisure, they were glad 
to have me around. But they were also to be feared at all times. 
Whenever either of them spoke, it seemed like a command. I 
stood in awe of both. 
I am told that they both were part African and part “Indian,” 
that is, Native-American. Her form of disciplining was the pull-
ing of the ears, his was the traditional “strop,” as he called it. I 
tried to steer clear, always, of grandpa’s “strop.” Neither Grandpa 
nor Grandma was mean or anything of the sort. They were just 
two people who tolerated no nonsense. 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   37 8/25/08   10:31:09 PM


--- PAGE 39 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
38
I remember once Grandpa and I were in his garden, hoeing 
the plants. Actually, Grandpa was doing the hoeing. Every now 
and then I would make an attempt at it, but the hoe I was trying 
to use wouldn’t let me. If the hoe wasn’t falling from my hands, 
I was falling to the ground in my attempt at hoeing! Each time 
this would happen, Grandpa would throw back his head and 
roar with laughter. 
Around noontime, we left the garden and headed to the house 
for lunch. Grandma was out visiting at the time, so Grandpa 
opened the china cabinet, removed a deep dish, and began fill-
ing it with good smelling food. Thinking it was my food, I was 
ready to sit and eat. But Grandpa sat at the table and began to eat 
all by himself instead. I stood there watching him all the while, 
wondering just when he would fix mine. When Grandpa had 
eaten all but a little of the food, he got up, nudged me to his chair, 
and told me to eat the rest. I sat eagerly and ate what was left. 
That evening Mama came and picked me up. She asked 
me, “What did you and papa do today?” I told her that we 
had worked in his garden, and that afterwards, Grandpa had 
gone into the house and fixed himself a great big plate of food. I 
motioned with my arms to show what a great big plate of food 
it was. Mama asked “Well, did he fix you one too?” I said, “No, 
Mama, he didn’t fix me no plate.” 
Mama was really asking if had I eaten that day. But at the 
time, my child’s rationale could not understand this. I answered 
directly, and what I thought to be correctly. Grandpa hadn’t fixed 
me a dish when he had fixed his own. But the way it came out, 
Mama believed that Grandpa hadn’t fed me at all. 
The next day, when Mama dropped me off at Grandpa’s, she 
turned to him and went into an unexpected tirade. “My baby tells 
me that y’all worked in the garden yesterday and afterwards, 
y’all went into the house and fixed you food, but you didn’t feed 
him.” She went on, “I leave my baby here with y’all, and if you 
don’t feed him, Papa, how do you expect him to eat?” At her 
words my ears perked up, because I hadn’t said Grandpa didn’t 
feed me, I had just said he hadn’t fixed me a plate! But wisely, 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   38 8/25/08   10:31:09 PM


--- PAGE 40 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
39
I kept my mouth shut. By Grandpa’s logic I had already lied on 
him, and if I had said anything, Mama would have interpreted 
that as me calling her a liar too. Grandpa’s mouth flew wide 
open; he was beyond just angry. He began to stutter, his face 
started twitching, and large veins protruded from his neck. I 
remember it from all those years ago because I learned then that 
even telling the truth can be misunderstood, and it can be the root 
of miscommunication.
For the rest of the morning, I made it a point to follow Grandpa 
around the house. In my little mind, I was doing my best to 
appease him. But whenever I’d get too close to him, he’d yell, 
“Git out of the way!” to let me know he would not be appeased. I 
could hear him mumbling to himself: “…telling your Ma I didn’t 
feed you huh? I’m gon’ fix ya.” But Grandpa never did ‘fix’ me. 
Instead, around noontime, we went back into the kitchen where 
he ordered me to sit down at the table. He then reached into the 
china cabinet and extracted the same dish as the previous day. He 
filled it up with food and set it in front of me, saying, “Now lie 
and tell your Ma I didn’t feed you again, you hear!” 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   39 8/25/08   10:31:09 PM


--- PAGE 41 ---
RobertKing_Interior.indd   40 8/25/08   10:31:09 PM


--- PAGE 42 ---
41
chapter 4
since mAmA’s life And mine Are inter-
twined, and since this autobiography could not be written with 
any degree of accuracy — or for that matter could not have been 
written at all, but for her — I think it is appropriate here to 
pause and delve briefly into the history of one Alice King, and 
the troubles she faced.
Mama and her husband, “Mr. King,” had gone their separate 
ways long before I entered this existence, leaving Alice with seven 
children to raise on her own — and two more children coming 
later on. With her first six children coming prior to, and imme-
diately following, the 1929 crash of the stock market, ushering 
in the Great Depression that lasted throughout the 30s — it was 
pure hell for her back then.
Mama worked the sugar cane fields from sun up ‘til sun down 
for less than a dollar a day. During the off-season, she washed, 
ironed clothes, and scrubbed floors for whites for pennies a day or 
for left-over food. Her bunions and blisters told a bitter but vivid 
tale of her travails. But with all the scars for show, her economic 
status was nil. In fact, this status for Black folks and poor whites 
was normal, but more so for Blacks. Racism, discrimination, and 
prejudice were rampant throughout America. 
The thing that stood out most in her character was her quiet, 
unselfish spirit and her ability to endure without complaints. 
Being long-suffering, she was contented with her meager state 
of existence. She never really, deeply, questioned anything. In the 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   41 8/25/08   10:31:09 PM


--- PAGE 43 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
42
final analysis, everything accorded her was God’s will. She bore 
her suffering and repression stoically. She never lost the belief 
that she would later be rewarded for her trials here on earth in 
a city whose streets were paved with gold. This was her only 
solace, though her trials were many. 
When considering Mama’s own state of hardship, I have to also 
view it in light of the other twenty-five million colonial subjects 
of the era. If distress and suffering could be measured in terms of 
weight, the distress and the suffering of Blacks in America could 
sink a million Titanics.
Following the crash of the stock market, there arose a lot of 
grumbling among people in general. Dissent, among the “privi-
leged race” as well as Blacks, prompted a few reforms and other 
governmental concessions, such as welfare. 
Then, with the coming of World War II, industry was once 
more on the rise. The job market increased, and Black leaders 
threatened to march on the White House unless they got some of 
the jobs being given out. As a result, President Franklin Roosevelt 
signed executive orders, opening the doors for Black subjects to 
enter into industry. However, as it turned out, only a few Blacks 
were lucky enough to acquire good paying jobs. Discrimination 
in the job market and racism were still rampant, and the vast 
majority of Blacks were still jobless. 
Such were the conditions to which Mama had to conform, and 
which made her lifestyle one of distress and suffering. And this 
lifestyle extended throughout the 1930s well into the 1940s.
 At four and a half years of age, my ears didn’t miss much. 
One day when Mama came to pick me up, I heard Grandma 
say: “Monk, you are going to work yourself to death. Why don’t 
you get on relief”? (Monk had been her childhood name.) So 
ultimately, Mama, with most of her first set of children grown 
and gone their separate ways, and still confronted with grief and 
distress, decided to take refuge in “relief” (i.e. welfare) as a means 
to supplement her meager income.
After getting on relief, things got a little better. Mama still 
worked, though. We finally moved from that old house on Airline 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   42 8/25/08   10:31:09 PM


--- PAGE 44 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
43
Highway, where the floods came frequently, inundating the house 
during the summers, bringing snakes in abundance and where, 
during the winter months, she would have to place old overcoats 
over our thin covers in an effort just to keep us warm.
With the new house came a dog, a big German shepherd we 
called Ring, short for Ringer. Ring was a pretty smart dog, and 
he’d do more than what was expected of him. Sometimes he 
would follow us into the woods, leave us, and go off to hunt. He 
would capture rabbits, squirrels, turtles, opossums, armadillos 
and even snakes. Not only would Ring bring game back from his 
hunt, he was good at “finding” other things: clothes and shoes — 
he was even smart enough to get the shoes in pairs! 
Then one day, without warning, Ring went mad. William, 
James, and I were preparing to go into the woods, but Ring was 
nowhere in sight. We began yelling for him, but got no response. 
Then James found Ring underneath the house. 
After taking one glance at the dog, I knew something was 
wrong. Ring had a fierce glare in his eyes: his teeth were bared, 
and he was slobbering all over the place. James, not understand-
ing the vast difference between the Ring of other days and of 
that day, reached in after him. Ring sprang, sinking his fangs 
into James’ arm. At this point, we all broke into a dead run, 
straight for the porch stairs. By this time, Mama and the others 
had heard the commotion and run out to see what all the fuss was 
about. Panting and frightened, we told her all that had happened. 
James’ bloody arm was the evidence. 
Our cousin Chest (short for Chester) was visiting that day. 
He appeared outside, rifle in hand. Ring had gone back under -
neath the house, and was peering out in a curious manner: his 
eyes still glowed. Chest went over, and after taking one look at 
Ring, concluded that the dog had “gone mad.” In retrospect, I 
don’t really think Ring was mad, because he seemed to have a 
remorseful look in his eye, as if he instinctively knew he had 
done something wrong. But at the time, I did think Ring was 
mad, and like the rest of the children, I stayed back, out of 
the way. 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   43 8/25/08   10:31:09 PM


--- PAGE 45 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
44
Cousin Chest approached closer to the dog, and in a loud com-
manding voice, he said, “Come ‘ere, Ring!” And Ring, without 
the slightest hesitation came out from under the house with his 
head bowed in submission. Again, in retrospect, I think that 
Ring’s instinct told him he would die that day. 
When Chest raised the rifle and took aim, Ring raised his 
head, looked briefly at each of us as if to apologize, then as a last 
and final gesture, Ring dropped his head in a complete form of 
surrender. The rifle cracked and Ring fell dead, shot through the 
head. We all cried.
It was later rumored that some whites who wanted Ring, but 
couldn’t have him, decided to make sure that no one else kept 
him. Still later, another rumor surfaced, which was that people 
knew that the dog was stealing their clothes and other items, and 
decided to eliminate him by poisoning him. While both of these 
rumors sound plausible, the latter seems more believable.
About a week or so later, we were all seated around the large 
fireplace in the house, enjoying the warmth, when all of a sud-
den James broke into a run, straight for the fire! He was caught 
and held just before reaching the flames. Looking at him was 
just like looking at Ring all over again. His eyes seemed to have 
receded into his head. He had the same vacant stare, and he was 
foaming at the mouth, making deep guttural sounds. Mama had 
to place a spoon in his mouth to keep him from swallowing his 
tongue. James was brought to the doctor, and from that day on, 
it was said that James had “spells” resulting from his having been 
bitten by Ring. When we moved to New Orleans, James’ spells 
were later diagnosed as epilepsy by doctors. Nevertheless, the 
family still cling to the idea that James’ seizures resulted from 
the incident with the dog.
It was soon time for Mama to send me to school. I was big for 
my age, not quite six years old. And I was eager to join the rest of 
the children. I did reasonably as a first grader. At the end of the 
year, however, school officials decided not to pass me on to the 
second grade. The reason given was that I was too young. I often 
wondered later, had I been white and affluent, would they have 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   44 8/25/08   10:31:09 PM


--- PAGE 46 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
45
allowed me to move ahead, and encouraged whatever potential 
I may have had?
Shortly after my fifth year in existence, I became aware of 
my uncle, Robert King — whom I was named after. Robert had 
begun to show up periodically at the house with his “wives.” He 
was the oldest son of Mama, the first to leave home. Each time he 
came home with a “wife,” we children would immediately adopt 
her into the family, calling her “sister.”
One day Robert came to the house and told Mama that he had 
finally “settled down” — that he was living in New Orleans, 
on the west bank, in the area known as Algiers. He tried and 
finally convinced Mama to move to Algiers, where some of her 
children lived.
The day we moved, Robert came with one of his male friends 
in a large, open-bodied truck. We piled in all of our belongings 
and headed for New Orleans, Louisiana, the place where I was 
born. While the move to New Orleans was significant, it was 
nothing compared to the friend that my uncle had brought with 
him. I didn’t know it at the time, but that man would play a most 
important role in my life.
RobertKing_Interior.indd   45 8/25/08   10:31:09 PM


--- PAGE 47 ---
RobertKing_Interior.indd   46 8/25/08   10:31:09 PM


--- PAGE 48 ---
47
chapter 5
more tHAn tHe greAt muddy mississippi 
River separated New Orleans’ east side from the west side, also 
known as Algiers. While Algiers sported its own downtown 
district, its own police precinct, and even a small loading dock, 
it was considered rural and unsophisticated in comparison to 
its urban counterpart across the river, which was known by a 
variety of names: The Crescent City, The Big Easy and Greater 
New Orleans, to name a few. New Orleans (east) was a growing 
metropolis, reeking with an energetic frenzy, making the separa-
tion psychological as well as physical. But Algiers suited Mama 
just fine, in spite of the fact that three of her sisters (Clementine, 
Alma, and Alka) all resided in New Orleans across the river 
from her.
We moved into an unimpressive, brown, brick-papered house 
which consisted of three rooms and a kitchen, and of course, the 
conventional outhouse. It wasn’t like the house in Gonzales — 
we were surrounded by other houses, taking away some of the 
emptiness. Algiers promised gaiety and liveliness, too: there was 
even a barroom next door.
After “Mr. King,” Mama never remarried. Now in her forties 
— and nine children later — she was still relatively attractive, so 
she had no trouble being seen and “found” by another man who 
cared. That man was Robert “Mule” Manning. He was the friend 
who had come with my uncle to help us to move. I immediately 
took to Mule and, as the saying goes, “I colored him father.”
RobertKing_Interior.indd   47 8/25/08   10:31:09 PM


--- PAGE 49 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
48
His nickname, “Mule,” was put on him by some of his cronies 
who worked with him. Whenever there was work, Mule never 
missed a day. The type of work he did wasn’t year ‘round; it 
consisted of loading sugar into boxcars for shipment to differ -
ent places around the country. Other times, he did carpentry, 
masonry, or whatever it took to make a dollar honestly. Mule 
didn’t make a lot of money, but whatever money he made, his 
new family came first. It is to Mule that I owe part of my child-
hood survival.
Originally from the state of Georgia, Mule had traveled all 
over the country, mostly by freight trains: yes, he was a one-time 
hobo. He eventually told me about a lot of his hobo adventures, 
and years later, one of his stories would help me through a very 
tough situation.
Mule was divorced from his wife. The marriage had produced 
two children, a boy and a girl. Both by this time were grown. 
Mule took an instant liking to all of Mama’s children. He and 
I spent a lot of time together, and we became real attached to 
each other. Mule had a unique way of adding humor to nearly 
everything he did. For instance, he loved to drink wine, and his 
favorite was muscatel, but he called it muscat, because of the 
smell it left on the breath. He would produce a pint bottle from 
his back pocket, turn it around to the clear side, and hold it up 
to the light so that the label on the opposite side could be seen. 
He would then tell me to call out the letters backwards. I’d say, 
“l-e-t-a-c-s-u-m.” He would ask me, “Do you know what that 
says?” I would shake my head, and he would say, “Don’t you get 
it, sport? Let’s act some!” He would then go through the ritual 
of carefully opening the bottle, taking a long drink, and after 
recapping it, putting it back in his pocket as carefully as he had 
removed it. To Mule, and others of his day, “Let’s act some,” 
meant the same as acting up, or creating a disturbance. Mule 
never acted up though, and the only thing the wine did for him 
was wind him up to talk about his past experiences, which we 
would all enjoy.
At some point during my fifth year in existence, my level of 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   48 8/25/08   10:31:09 PM


--- PAGE 50 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
49
cognition expanded from a mere perceptual observation to a 
degree of conceptual recognition. It was not just memory; I was 
beginning to be able to form patterns, and add ideas to those 
things I encountered. It happened so quickly and unexpectedly; 
it was as if I’d awakened one day into a new world, both beautiful 
and mysterious. I was full of life. And being full of life, I wanted 
very much to partake of this newly discovered existence.
Around this same time, I was out playing with some of the 
other children from the neighborhood when I noticed doors 
beginning to pop open, windows going up; people were coming 
out onto their porches, pointing at someone coming down the 
street, a stranger. I stopped playing and looked also. I saw a little 
girl and wondered what was so uncommon about a little girl 
walking down the street. But taking a closer look, I saw that 
what I had thought to be a little girl was actually a full-grown 
woman, fewer than four feet tall. By this time, she had advanced 
to where I was playing with the other kids; a small crowd of 
grown-ups and children had followed her. 
The lady asked no one in particular, “Is this Le Boeuf Street?” 
Someone volunteered that it was. The lady then asked, “Do any-
body know where Miss King lives?” When I heard her inquiring 
about Mama, this really got my attention, and I wanted to answer 
her, but someone in the crowd said, “There’s one of Miss King’s 
sons,” pointing at me. The little lady turned toward me, looking 
me up and down, as if trying to discern who I was. She smiled, 
then said, “Baby, can you take me to your mama?” 
“Yes, ma’am,” I said. Mama was sitting on the porch when we 
approached. The lady saw Mama and began to smile, and Mama, 
with a look of instant recognition and delight, smiled back at the 
lady and said, “Lord, here comes Clara Mae!” Then she turned 
to me: “Boy, Junior, here is your mama.” This was in 1948, some 
three months prior to my sixth year in existence.
Up to that point, I had no idea that Clara, my biological mother, 
existed. And whether or not it was Clara’s purpose to take Mary 
and me with her, I cannot say. But I do know that Mama would 
never have permitted it. So Clara’s visit only established the 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   49 8/25/08   10:31:09 PM


--- PAGE 51 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
50
fact, that she, not Mama, was my “real” mother and that Alice,  
whom I called Mama, was actually my maternal grandmother. 
When Alice said “Boy … here is your mama” it sounded strange 
and incomprehensible. And it remained strange, for Alice was 
“Mama” until the day she died, and Clara Mae, despite the love 
that eventually grew in me for her, remained Clara Mae until 
the day she died.
The move to New Orleans afforded Mama the privilege of 
being near three of her grown children: Clara, Robert, and his 
twin sister, Ruth. This close proximity brought some comfort 
to her. Shortly after our arrival, my uncle Houston had made 
a showing, but had since departed again. At this point, Mama 
had no idea where Houston, George, or Henry were. Clara, who 
had made her retreat as boldly and as unexpectedly as she had 
come, lived somewhere uptown, across the river, but I didn’t see 
her again until I was nearly twelve years old. Robert and Ruth 
lived only a short distance from where we lived, and both visited 
regularly. It was during this period that I first became conscious 
of Ruth, who Mama always said was her “best child.”
I was in grade school, and during this period, it was never 
boring. In school, a whole new world opened to me: I met a lot of 
new faces, and made a lot of new friends. The girls in my classes 
fascinated and intrigued me. I was infatuated with most of them. 
I cannot begin to count the number of girls or the number of 
times I fell secretly in love. And whether I was reciting lessons 
in class, fighting other boys, swimming or whatever, I felt I was 
able to do it better because I knew some girl was watching. Years 
later, I came to the conclusion that those first few years in school 
were the height of my receptive stage, and that I was only absorb-
ing higher images and impressions of the external world known 
as nature. Nature had cast me just beyond the threshold of the 
first stage of cognition, and I was making the leap from the first 
to the second stage: from external to internal, from quantitative 
to qualitative. The fascination and whatever else I may have felt 
about nature’s objects in my path — including girls — was only 
a feedback of a higher form of nature at work upon my then 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   50 8/25/08   10:31:09 PM


--- PAGE 52 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
51
totally receptive brain cells. But at the time, I didn’t know how to 
define or handle this. Thus, the development of an ego. While in 
grade school, I became a little-show off in front of my classmates, 
especially those of the opposite sex.
On a visit to Grandma (really my great-grandmother, of 
course), I learned two things: one was not to interfere when 
grown-ups were talking. It was her 70th birthday and we had 
all gone back to Gonzales to celebrate it with her. While cutting 
her cake, she paused and entered into what I thought was too 
long a conversation with another relative. Impatiently, I said, 
“Grandma, I ain’t had no cake yet.” Grandma stopped talking, a 
look of quiet rage on her face. She grabbed my left ear, yanking 
down hard, and said, “Don’t you interfere when grown-ups are 
talking.” She continued: “I know your number and it ain’t come 
up yet. Now be quiet!” And Quiet, I was. 
The second thing I learned on that visit to Grandma was that 
Mama’s former husband, Henry King Sr., or “Mr. King” as she 
called him, had died. I often wondered why Mama had addressed 
her husband as “mister,” and I asked her. She told me that when 
she had married, she was very young and that her husband was 
almost twenty years older than her. So she always called him 
“mister.” I guess I can understand Mama’s logic. After all, she 
was brought up during a period when children still respected 
their elders. Her learning that “Mr. King” had passed didn’t 
seem to affect her too much. And so “Mr. King,” who had never 
existed for me, abruptly ceased to exist for Mama as well.
In early 1949, a letter arrived from the authorities at the 
Michigan State Prison telling Mama that Houston was confined 
in their prison in Jackson, Michigan. The news that Houston 
was in prison hurt and haunted Mama. I think this was the very 
beginning of her major worries. And to compound matters, there 
was still no word as to the whereabouts of her other two wayward 
sons, George and Henry Jr.
The barroom next door was a thriving little business. It was 
owned by the man we rented from. On Friday and Saturday 
nights, the place was filled with people escaping the dullness and 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   51 8/25/08   10:31:09 PM


--- PAGE 53 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
52
toil of the previous week. The juke-box kept up a continuous 
blast of music: the clapping of hands, laughter, and the stamping 
of feet could be heard in the distance. Late one weekend night, 
we heard a blast like thunder; someone had been shot. We later 
learned that the person shot was Ruth’s husband, Berry, and 
the person doing the shooting was the proprietor, the man we 
rented from.
The rumor was, the man had accused Berry of owing him two 
cents, and Berry had refused to pay him, alleging that he had 
already paid the two cents. An argument ensued, and it finally 
ended with a shotgun blast. Luckily Berry wasn’t hit with the full 
blast, and those few pellets that did hit him didn’t penetrate any 
vital organs. He lived.
That weekend night was just a prelude to the many others 
I would witness, or hear about, where, without the slightest 
provocation, or hesitation, one Black subject would wound or 
slay another with an exaggerated intensity as if it were an act of 
nobility or a right of passage to manhood. And as I grew, I ques-
tioned the basis for this problem and many other problems that 
plague us within the colonies of America. I knew that these prob-
lems didn’t exist in a vacuum, there had to be reasons. Where, I 
asked myself, did the root of the problems lie? And much later, 
after careful thought, I summarized (and here, the reader will 
have to bear with me, for I cannot think of a better place than 
here to make these valid points) as follows: brought forth in 
chains; stripped of humanity; deprived of culture, or most of it; 
taught a warped sense of values by stripping us of responsibility 
for each other and our off-spring; “freed” but still enslaved — a 
personification of these problems can be seen in colonial subjects. 
It takes on human form; yeah, it stalks, gropes in confusion. It 
self-destructs by slaying itself, committing unseeing acts against 
itself with all intensity, as it was programmed to do, and takes 
pride in its own affliction… Yes! Black subjects, stripped… 
degraded… deprived… demoralized… and psychotic-minded 
(resulting from past and current experiences in America) must 
attempt to prove their worth and their manhood, even if at the 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   52 8/25/08   10:31:09 PM


--- PAGE 54 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
53
expense of each other. The causes of this effect are a trio: slavery, 
oppression, and racism. To label it “Black on Black” crime, or 
to say that the Black subject is inherently criminal, is a gross 
oversimplification and misrepresentation of the true facts and 
actual causes and this, in itself, is criminal.
RobertKing_Interior.indd   53 8/25/08   10:31:10 PM


--- PAGE 55 ---
RobertKing_Interior.indd   54 8/25/08   10:31:10 PM


--- PAGE 56 ---
55
chapter 6
sHortly After berry WAs s Hot, We 
moved to another house. This house, located on Hendee Street, 
was much like the one we had left behind in Gonzales. In fact, 
the house on Hendee Street was in worse shape than the one in 
Gonzales. It didn’t even have electricity, so one day when Mama 
was at work, William climbed a utility pole and ran a wire from 
the pole to the house. He didn’t hook it up to the main line; he 
just wanted to make it look like we had electricity like everyone 
else. But if William had any thought of becoming an electrician, 
Mama rebuked it out of him when she got home. 
One of my two most memorable events in that house on 
Hendee was seeing my aunt Clementine for the first time. Aunt 
Clem (as we called her) was a proud, impressive — and, if I 
may add — attractive woman. She and her husband, Uncle Wil-
lie, had come to New Orleans years earlier. They had managed 
to acquire a bar and restaurant, a double and single house, and 
several other properties. Among the properties she owned was 
the famous Club Rocket. Many of the old-timers knew it. It was 
located at the corner of Jackson and Derbigny. My first (and 
last) impression of Aunt Clem was that she was a very kind and 
compassionate person. I remember her saying to Mama, “Why 
don’t you come over the river, and live in one of my houses?” At 
the time, Mama declined, but the invitation was left open. Mama 
was a proud, independent woman who took pride in making her 
own way without relying on anyone, even her relatives.
RobertKing_Interior.indd   55 8/25/08   10:31:10 PM


--- PAGE 57 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
56
The other memorable event in the house on Hendee was my 
very first experience with muscatel (wine), or “Let-ac-sum,” if 
you prefer. It occurred on a Friday. I was kept home from school 
for some reason or another. Mama and I were on our way to visit 
Ruth, who lived close by. Just before getting to Ruth’s house, we 
spotted Mule making his way homeward. Held underneath his 
arm, wrapped in newspaper, was a familiar oblong shape that I 
knew to be a fifth of his favorite muscatel. And I had also come 
to know that whenever Mule had his supply of wine, money 
was high.
We met up with him, and while he and Mama talked, my little 
mind was beginning to work… scheming, thinking that here was 
a chance to get ahead of the other children, in nickels and dimes. 
I asked Mama could I go back home with Mule, and without 
hesitating, she said yes and proceeded on her journey. But just 
before getting out of hearing range, she turned back toward us 
and said, “Ba, don’t you give that boy none of that wine.” (“Ba” 
was the pet name she and Mule used when addressing each 
other.) Mule said, “Aw, Ba, you know I ain’t gon’ do nothin’ like 
that,” all the while looking at me and winking his eye. I winked 
back. Mama’s attempt to protect me from the wine had just the 
opposite affect. She put it on my mind. All I had intended to do 
was to talk Mule out of some change. But with the wink that 
Mule gave me, I got the idea that I could get my very first drink 
of wine, too.
Just before reaching home, I went out on the limb: I asked 
Mule, was he really going to give me a “lil’ taste,” as he called 
it? He said, “Naw, Ba wouldn’t like that.” Then he added: “You 
can’t handle it, anyway.” “Watcha mean, I can’t handle it?” I 
said, trying to sound offended. He said, “Ba would know I gave 
you some, because you’d be stumbling all over the place.” “No I 
won’t,” I said. For the rest of the journey home, nothing else was 
said about the wine. I was hopeful, because there was no note of 
finality in Mule’s voice when he said he wouldn’t give me a “lil’ 
taste.” I had sensed that he was reluctant, not because Ba had 
forbidden it, but only because he thought I couldn’t handle it. So 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   56 8/25/08   10:31:10 PM


--- PAGE 58 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
57
when we reached home I asked again, assuring him that I could 
handle it. Mule had himself hit the bottle several times since we 
reached the house, and I guess this helped him to throw caution 
to the wind. He poured about two fingers’ worth into a cup and 
gave it to me. I drank it all in one gulp, smacking my lips after -
wards. When the liquor reached my palate, I tasted its sweetish 
tinge, and almost at the same time, I experienced the tingling, 
burning sensation in my stomach, and the light-headedness that 
follows. Mule watched me down the drink, then asked me how 
did it taste? I said, “Good!” He asked me if I wanted some more, 
and of course, I assented. Mule said, “All right, I tell you what, 
we gon’ play a little game.” 
The game was, I had to walk a straight line, along a board on 
the floor, without staggering. I had my second drink. I walked 
it again, and was rewarded with my third. All I could think of 
now was, I wanted more wine. Mule would urge me to walk 
a straight line, applauding me when I did, and rewarding me 
with more wine. At one point I heard him say to me that I was 
getting drunk. In a blurred voice, I assured him I wasn’t. He 
asked me, did I think I could make it to the grocery, which 
was about a block and a half away? I told him I could, and he 
promised me another “lil’ taste” when I returned. As I stepped 
from the house I saw that the sky was a radiant blue, not a 
cloud to it and it seemed as if the very sky exuded an energy 
that I floated on, all the way to the store. I got the items Mule 
wanted and started back home. About halfway there, the wine 
hit me hard: I began groping as one might do in a darkened 
room. I somehow managed to find my way home. My groping 
turned to stumbling, and in my hazy state I heard Mule telling 
me, “See, I told you that you couldn’t handle it.” I was totally 
inebriated, drunk as a skunk. In my drunken state, I saw Mule 
go into his pocket and take out a handful of coins and offer 
them to me. I held out my hand to receive them but something 
went wrong, and money spilled everywhere — quarters, dimes, 
nickels and pennies were spread all over the floor. I dropped 
down on hands and knees in an effort to retrieve the coins…
RobertKing_Interior.indd   57 8/25/08   10:31:10 PM


--- PAGE 59 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
58
Mule began to laugh uncontrollably…and that’s the last thing 
I remember…
I awoke the next morning about nine o’clock, with the sun 
beaming in on my face. Mama entered the room, and asked me 
how I was doing. Then she gave me a mild rebuke, saying, “Boy, 
I told you not to drink none of that liquor.” Later, I overheard 
her telling Mule, “Robert, I ain’t playin’. Don’t you ever give that 
boy no mo’ wine.”
We didn’t stay very long in that house on Hendee Street. We 
moved to Jefferson Parish, Gretna, then back to Orleans Parish, 
in Algiers. The Algiers house was located on Wall Boulevard, 
just off of Whitney Avenue. It was at this new location that 
Mama received another troublesome letter. This one came refer -
ence to her other son, Henry King, Jr. He was confined in the 
Virginia State Prison. Like Houston’s imprisonment, Henry’s 
incarceration also haunted Mama. And still, no word from her 
other son, George…
A name can be very deceiving, sometimes. Wall Boulevard was 
such a name. When I think of a boulevard, what comes to mind 
is a wide, smooth street with beautiful trees lined up on both 
sides, providing shade for lovely houses. But the “boulevard” I 
lived on was a total antithesis to this. It was a dirt road with pot 
holes every few yards, and shabby shacks instead of lovely houses. 
Directly across the street, on the other side of the “boulevard,” 
there was a swampy wooded area, covering about four square 
blocks. The whole area was scary, especially at night. And Mule 
didn’t make it any better with his exaggerated spooky tales. 
While I learned to live with Mule’s spooky stories, I never 
learned to live with the contradiction between what the name of 
the street implied, and what it actually was. A lot of folks dubbed 
the 1950s “The Golden Years.” But there were no golden days 
for us as a family, or for that matter, for most of America. It was 
not that people didn’t desire to be prosperous: people labored, but 
the struggle to rise above poverty continued in a stalemate. Mule 
worked the docks, loading sugar, but the work was seasonal. He 
searched for, and occasionally found, odd jobs to fill out the down 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   58 8/25/08   10:31:10 PM


--- PAGE 60 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
59
times. Mama still found, and worked, jobs cooking and cleaning 
for those whites who could afford her. Her pay was never much, 
but it helped. However, despite our general poverty, for about 
four months out of the year — the period when Mule worked 
steady at the docks — my little world seemed almost luxurious; 
there was plenty to eat; there were nickels, dimes, quarters, and 
even a new piece of clothing from time to time.
Mule needed his muscatel, and he always made sure he 
started the next morning with a “lil’ taste.” But sometimes his 
“lil’ taste” ran out. So Mule devised a scheme to guard against 
this. There was this bar, located about four blocks from where 
we lived, called the Jungle Bar, perhaps because of the densely 
wooded area adjacent to it. Mule was never a barroom type, and 
he seldom went to them, but he and the owner of the Jungle Bar 
were friends. They had an agreement that went something like 
this: no matter what time of the day or night I went to the bar, 
the owner would know that I was on a wine errand for Mule. It 
didn’t matter if the bar was closed; the owner and his wife always 
slept in the place, to sell to late customers. Many nights, mostly 
on week-ends, Mule would awaken me and say: “Hey, Sport, you 
want to make a quarter?” I always knew what he wanted, and 
without hesitating I would tell him, yes. 
Late one Friday night — or early one Saturday morning — 
Mule sent me on a mission to get his “lil’ taste.” I left the house at 
a dead run, and reached the bar in no time. It was after midnight, 
and the place was closed. I knocked on the door, and called the 
owner. A voice from inside, recognizing my voice, asked “What 
do you want, a big ‘un (a quart) or a small ‘un (a pint)?” “A 
big ‘un,” I said. While waiting for the owner to bring the wine, 
I glanced up the street, and spotted a bright set of headlights 
approaching. Immediately I knew it was a police car. My first 
impulse was to run, but after weighing the options, I stayed 
where I was. The car stopped and two policemen emerged. One 
asked, “What are you doin’ out here this time o’ morning, kid?” 
I couldn’t tell him I was on a mission for Mule, so off the top 
of my head, I said, “This place belongs to my uncle. He asked 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   59 8/25/08   10:31:10 PM


--- PAGE 61 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
60
me to come real early so that he and I can go shopping for my 
back-to-school clothing.” By this time the owner had the wine, 
and was about to open the door, but had stopped when he heard 
voices. When he opened the door, he said, “You’re too early, son. 
We ain’t leavin’ ‘til ‘round nine o’clock,” all the while looking 
at the policemen and smiling. The officers smiled back, satisfied 
that I had told the truth; they told my “uncle” to make sure I 
stayed inside, and then left. My “uncle” and I had a good laugh. 
After waiting long enough to make sure the cops were gone, I got 
the wine and ran home — again at a dead run to be sure. After 
that episode, whenever Mule could afford it, he would give me 
something extra for making that particular trip.
RobertKing_Interior.indd   60 8/25/08   10:31:10 PM


--- PAGE 62 ---
61
chapter 7
in tHe lAtter pArt of 1951, tHey begAn 
clearing the large wooded area across from our house. When it 
was cleared, they began to build houses for Black soldiers and 
their families, under the G.I. Bill. It didn’t take them very long 
to put up the houses, and by the summer of ’52, there were about 
seventy or more new families living in the development known 
as “Truman’s Park.” What had been a desolate area was now 
bursting with new life and activity. I liked the new condition, for 
it eliminated some of the spookiness, and I was able to make lots 
of new friends. While the new houses were not overly fabulous, 
they had just enough sparkle in them to punctuate the shabbiness 
of the other houses, located on the other side of the boulevard, 
the side I lived on.
The same year that they began clearing the area for the new 
houses, my great-grandmother, Mary, passed away. At that age 
I didn’t understand the full meaning and finality of death. But 
Mama did. It was, as she put it, “one of her greatest losses.” And 
it was one of the losses she never recovered from.
Grandma was “waked” in Gonzales, Louisiana, at the Little 
Zion Baptist Church, and her remains were buried in the 
church’s cemetery. I did not attend my great-grandmother’s 
last rites, and I can only remember her as I last saw her, knife 
paused in midair, reaching over and pulling on my ear and say -
ing, in a shrill, high voice, “I know your number, and it ain’t 
come up yet!”
RobertKing_Interior.indd   61 8/25/08   10:31:10 PM


--- PAGE 63 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
62
Not long after Grandma’s passing, there was a strange, full-
grown greyhound dog that seemingly came out of nowhere and 
befriended us. With no apparent owner in sight, we befriended 
the dog, and though Mama warned us to “Git rid of that dog, 
I don’t like its looks!” James and I claimed ownership. One 
day when Mama was at one of her weekly prayer meetings, 
we decided to have some fun with the animal. At first the dog 
seemed delighted with the attention we were giving it. But James 
got a little carried away and wanted to straddle the dog’s back 
for a ride through the house. The greyhound, however, would 
have none of this. And that’s when all Hell broke loose. After 
taking a bite or two out of James, the hound bolted through the 
front door and went underneath the porch. And while the dog 
was making its way out the front door, I was making mine out 
the back. I ran as fast as I could to the church and told Mama 
what had happened. All she said was, “I told y’all to git rid of 
that dog.”
When we got home, Mama washed and dressed James’ inflic-
tions, and before taking him to the hospital, got a neighbor to call 
the dog-catcher to come out and “take care of” the dog. I watched 
the official as he came and called out to the dog. The greyhound 
came willingly, wagging its tail in the process. The man pulled 
a large pistol from his holster, took quick aim, and shot the dog 
in the head. For me, it was like seeing the Ring episode all over 
again. For James, too, I guess. Up until this second incident with 
a dog, James’ “spells” had nearly ceased altogether, but soon after 
this, he began to have “fit” after “fit” (as Mama called them), 
seemingly with a vengeance, as if to make up for lost time. He 
was in and out of the hospital after that. That’s when the doctors 
told Mama that he was epileptic, and that those “fits” he was 
having were seizures. The doctors also predicted that the seizures 
would become less severe as James grew older.
Of all the bizarre things that happened while living in the 
house on Wall Boulevard, one stands out. It happened late one 
evening, not long after the incident with the greyhound. The day 
had been very hot and humid. Mama, as usual, was at one of her 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   62 8/25/08   10:31:10 PM


--- PAGE 64 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
63
prayer services, and the rest of the children were out playing. 
Mule and I were sitting on the porch watching the sun as it 
descended deep into the western sky, and welcoming the cool-
ness as dusk approached. At the time, there was a picket fence 
made out of tin that ran the length of our house, separating the 
house from a wooded area. I was sitting at the edge of the porch, 
facing the woods. From the corner of my eye, I caught sight of 
a small, very bright object at the far end of the fence. At first I 
thought it might be a spark; people in the neighborhood were 
always building fires to make smoke to ward off the mosquitoes. 
I turned completely around, to get a better view. And with seem-
ing intelligence, the light began to travel down the length of 
the fence in my direction. I tried to convince myself that it was 
a lightning bug, but it was too bright. Mule must have sensed 
something, for I remember his asking me, “What are you looking 
at like that?” Not waiting for an answer, Mule came to the end 
of the porch. I continued to look, too fascinated to say anything. 
Mule stopped talking, and I could feel him next to me, watching. 
By now I was standing up. I somehow got the idea that whatever 
it was “knew” that it had our attention, and wanted to keep it. 
The light would stop, then move a few inches to the left, and 
then to the right, but never leaving its course along the fence. 
As it approached some of my fascination was replaced by fear 
and apprehension. I am sure Mule was experiencing the same 
symptoms. Nevertheless, we both continued to watch the light 
until it was directly across from us, only fifteen feet away, where 
it began an erratic up and down motion, as if it were trying to 
communicate something to us that we weren’t inclined to see or 
hear. And we never learned what the light represented, because 
Mule and I both ran inside, and I cannot tell the reader who 
outran whom.
We later told the rest of the family about it and had a good 
laugh. Still later, Mule related the incident to a “jackleg” preacher, 
who told us that someone was trying to communicate with us 
from the “spirit world,” to tell us that money was buried close 
by, perhaps in the very spot where we had last seen the light. But 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   63 8/25/08   10:31:10 PM


--- PAGE 65 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
64
neither Mule nor I was ever willing to approach the spot where 
he and I had last seen the light, so no digging was done.
I began to notice a wistful, faraway longing in Mama’s eyes 
right after Grandma’s death. It was as if her death had steered 
Mama — or a part of her — into another existence, as if some-
thing was tugging at her, beckoning for the remainder of Alice 
to enter into that “other existence” also. It was at this point that 
Mama began predicting and prophesying her own death, saying, 
“The sickness I got, no doctor can cure.”
The same year that Grandma died, the last of Mama’s way-
ward sons, George, made an unexpected showing. He came and 
went, but at least he wasn’t in prison. This had a very pleasing 
effect on Mama, for it eased some of the strain I knew she was 
under. 
After George’s unexpected showing and departure, Mama’s 
beloved Ruth and her five children (another would come later) 
came to live with us. She and her husband, Berry, had separated. 
Her coming was also good medicine for Mama.
In mid-1952, I was ten years old, and growing up pretty fast. 
Not only was I big for my age, I was also big-minded. During 
this period, Ruth was a friend indeed, and didn’t seem to mind 
my developing a few grown-up habits — one of them, smoking. 
Mama had labeled me “mannish,” which meant to her that I 
was trying to be a man before my time. But Ruth didn’t object 
to my doing all the things adolescent boys are supposed to do 
while growing up. She always made sure that her cigarettes were 
within reach, so that I could get my quota, which was no more 
than about three a day. 
I remember the day Mama found out that the little girl who 
had befriended us from Truman Park, and who visited regularly, 
was really coming so that she and I could get together in the old 
shed next to the outhouse, and play “games of our own making.” 
At this revelation, Mama was about to drive her knuckles deep 
into my skull. But Ruth intervened, saying, “Oh shucks, Mama, I 
don’t see why you want to hit him for that. At least we know that 
he is normal.” This stopped me from getting a knuckle drilling 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   64 8/25/08   10:31:10 PM


--- PAGE 66 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
65
from Mama, and it was at this point that I began to see Ruth as 
a protector to me. Whenever she felt I was being wrongfully 
accused, she didn’t hesitate to intervene on my behalf and oppose 
anyone, even Mama. This won my love, admiration, respect and 
gratitude toward her forever. Ruth’s kind nature also won the 
respect of others with whom she came into contact.
We eventually moved from the house on Wall Boulevard into 
a bigger and better house. And for a while, we all lived like one 
big happy family…
In 1953, William was sixteen years old. He wanted to enlist in 
the Army. Being underage, he needed Mama’s signature, which 
she gave. So William, whose ears had provided a substitute nipple 
for me when I was being weaned from the milk bottle; William, 
who was my hero after the incident with the rat, and even more 
so after he saved me from drowning; yes William, who seeing all 
the other houses on Hendee Street with electricity, decided to put 
us in the ratings by climbing a pole and running a wire to our 
house; William, who while we lived on Wall Boulevard, teamed 
up with a school buddy after school to shine shoes, providing 
Mama with a few extra dollars; William, who had never touched 
a cigarette (though nearly five years my senior), who saw one in 
my mouth at eight years old and kindly slapped it away (and in 
the process, slapped me as well); William, the quiet, unassuming 
one, the innovative and resourceful one who — now that I think 
about it — was never fully a part of us, withdrew the small part 
of him that was, by enlisting in the Army, and bowed out of our 
lives for the time being…
My great-grandfather’s health began to fail sometime after the 
death of my great-grandmother. Aunt Clem and the rest of his 
daughters — Mama included — had all agreed that it would be 
best for him to come to New Orleans so that he could be better 
cared for. So Grandpa had relocated, and was living in one side 
of the house owned by Aunt Clem. The last time I saw him, 1954, 
he had changed a great deal. At eighty-six, Grandpa had lost 
his burliness and thinned out. His former upright posture was 
replaced with a stoop. Mama and the rest of his children had all 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   65 8/25/08   10:31:10 PM


--- PAGE 67 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
66
resigned themselves to the inevitable, that he would soon “pass 
on.” As a matter of fact, Grandpa lingered much longer than 
anyone expected. He knew that Henry, his favorite grandchild, 
was in prison, and he assured everyone that would not “pass on 
to glory” until he saw his grandson out of prison. And so he 
lingered on…
In the latter part of the same year that William went into the 
Army, to everyone’s surprise and pleasure, Henry came home 
from prison. He had left home when he was fourteen years old; 
I had no recollection of him. He was now twenty-two years old, 
and I was going on eleven. I took to him immediately. Henry 
became the big brother that William had been to me. I admired 
the way that he established a no-nonsense reputation in the 
neighborhood, meaning that he was not to be messed with. At 
the time, I liked the image he projected. And I also loved the 
fact that, like Ruth, he did not object to me being “mannish” or 
smoking. In fact, Henry even supplied me with cigarettes.
Not long after Henry came home, he met and married his 
wife, Emelda, and moved from us. But the big brother image 
he had established remained with me. At the time, of course, 
he and I could never be considered peers. But time has a way of 
closing gaps…
True to Grandpa’s word, he lived to welcome Henry home. 
Shortly thereafter, he joined Grandma. Those closest to him 
took his passing pretty hard. Grandpa was brought back to 
Gonzales, and his remains are buried in Little Zion Cemetery 
next to Grandma’s. 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   66 8/25/08   10:31:10 PM


--- PAGE 68 ---
67
chapter 8
After WilliAm’s leA ving, And Henry’s  
return and eventual departure, I felt there was no one else among 
my siblings who could take responsibility for me. At eleven, I 
was the youngest, but I was as big as James, who was going on 
thirteen. I became my own keeper. I was doing my own thing, 
carving my own path, and at the same time, trying to mimic the 
“cool” images the older guys projected. I began trying to play the 
barrooms, or when I couldn’t, the sweetshops — smoking pot, 
engaging in petty thievery, and just doing whatever appealed 
to me. I did most of these things, however, under cover. Mama 
had no idea what I was doing, and I had sense enough to keep 
it from her.
Mama was known as an excellent cook. She made pastries and 
such, and she made things taste good. Aunt Clem needed a cook, 
badly, so she made another showing, appealing to Mama to come 
over and cook in her restaurant. Mama accepted. Mama would 
live in one side of a house that Aunt Clem owned, rent-free. At 
the time, this arrangement suited both Aunt Clem and Mama. 
This was in 1954, and I was going on thirteen years old.
The area we moved to was mid-city, called “Back-a-town.” 
We lived on Seminole Lane, right off of Jackson Avenue. Aunt 
Clem’s business, which was then a well-known establishment, 
was called Club Rocky. Her house was better by far than any of 
the houses we had lived in previously; it boasted six rooms, toilet 
and bath included. And it had electricity. 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   67 8/25/08   10:31:10 PM


--- PAGE 69 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
68
I didn’t see too much of Mama anymore, for she worked nights 
and days. Sometimes, however, I would make my way to the 
club to eat and to see her. The only thorn in my flesh during this 
period was Aunt Clem’s husband, Uncle Willie. I tried to steer 
clear of him. He was a longshoreman, but sometimes he also 
worked at the club. When talking about Uncle Willie, family 
members described him as “having a plate in his head.” This 
meant that most people who knew him thought he was mentally 
unbalanced. The truth of the matter was, Uncle Willie didn’t 
take no shit from his customers. Years before our moving there, 
Uncle Willie had shot and killed two allegedly unruly custom-
ers. He was never charged for these incidents. In any event, I 
deliberately avoided him whenever I could.
When we first moved to that neighborhood, James and I could 
not walk a block without running into other youths who saw our 
coming as an invasion of their territory, and wanted to “get it on.” 
It was during this time that James and I developed a comradely 
relationship. Where once we had elected to go our separate ways, 
we now by mutual consent — and necessity — began hanging 
out together. 
One night, about a month after moving to the neighborhood 
— and after about six encounters with the local dudes — we 
decided to take in a movie. Word had gotten out that we had 
fought with and beaten some of the gang, and that we needed 
to be “chastised.” Unknown to us at the time, our every move 
was watched. And that night as we neared the corner of South 
Roman Street and Seminole Lane, about twenty-five figures — 
ranging from the ages of twelve to seventeen — appeared seem-
ingly out of nowhere and surrounded us. They carried sticks, 
rocks, bottles, and other indistinguishable objects. The apparent 
leader of the group came face to face with us, asking, “Y’all got 
any money?” Almost in unison, we said “yeah.” “How much 
y’all got?” he demanded. And to my surprise — and with all the 
odds seemingly going against us — I heard James reply,“ None 
of your business.” 
I looked at James as though he had just tilted the scales of 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   68 8/25/08   10:31:10 PM


--- PAGE 70 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
69
insanity. We had fought many battles, but we had never encoun-
tered so many at one time. At the words “none of your busi-
ness” the leader gave his signal by making the first move. He 
swung first. And it was definitely on, a free-for-all! Us against 
them. Once the fight started, I realized that the odds weren’t so 
great after all. In fact, I soon realized that James and I had the 
advantage, because we had so many targets to choose from, while 
only giving our opponents two. We received some good blows 
that night, but we also delivered more than a few. As hard as 
they tried to bring us down, the harder we fought, refusing to be 
bested. At times James and I were back to back, and in the gang’s 
eagerness to get us, they only managed to hurt one another. We 
took their weapons and used them against them. We were mak-
ing a lot of noise, and a woman’s voice yelled, “Y’all cut that 
out, go on home!” We fought on. A while later, the same voice 
yelled, “I done called the police!” At the word police, individual 
members of the gang began to fade … until there was no one left 
but James and me. Bruised and a little battered, we headed back 
home. We never made it to the picture show that night, but we 
had made a good showing in the neighborhood.
The next day, a gang member who lived across the street 
invited us over to make friends. That evening, he, James, and I 
waited in his backyard for the rest of the gang to show up. His 
house was a regular meeting place for the gang. They eventually 
showed up, and most wanted to call it square. But some still 
held grudges. In the end, it was two brothers who held out, who 
weren’t satisfied with our showing and wanted to continue to 
fight with us. The leader of the gang said OK — but it would 
have to be a fair, one-on-one fight. James and I gladly obliged the 
brothers. The fight began in the backyard, but we ended up on 
Prieur Street, where a large crowd had gathered, grownups and 
kids alike, to watch the battle. James and I were winning easily, 
when one of the brothers pulled a hammer from under his shirt. 
I grabbed his up-raised arm, and the hammer fell to the ground 
where I quickly retrieved it. I had the hammer raised, ready to 
strike, when a woman (who I later learned was his mother) ran 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   69 8/25/08   10:31:10 PM


--- PAGE 71 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
70
toward us, pleading, “Please don’t hit my child!” Ashamed at 
what I was about to do, I gave the mother the hammer. In a voice 
filled with gratitude, she said, “Thank you!” She then grabbed 
one son by the collar and the other by the arm and dragged them 
both home.
After that incident, we had no further trouble with that gang. 
There were other fights, but not with them; they accepted us, and 
we became a part of them.
When I remember that encounter, I think about the broad 
lesson that I learned. The lesson was: had we not braved the odds, 
and stood our ground, we would have become of the doormat of 
the neighborhood, laid out like a rug for the gang members to 
walk on. And there was another lesson. People who adhere to 
(and become blinded by) logic would have told us that we didn’t 
have a ghost of a chance in that battle. But desperation sometimes 
trumps logic. 
Compared to our former home, Aunt Clem’s house was a 
palace, but for all its seeming luxury, it had an artificial ring to 
it. I never really adjusted to living there. The same feeling of 
superficiality engulfed me when I attended school. I made good 
grades, but my desire to learn, to excel, had diminished. I began 
playing hooky from home and school.
School and home both seemed much too slow and dull, and 
going to either felt like a visit. I identified wholly with what 
I had come to believe was the real world: the streets. Summer 
days, when I should have been in school, were spent at the lake, 
the beach, or wherever the action was, as long as it wasn’t school 
or home. I expropriated — i.e., shoplifted — small items and 
converted them into hard cash. And whenever or wherever I 
could, I expropriated petty cash and converted it into the items I 
desired. This new path I was cutting was far different from the 
one I had cut on Thayer Street, a few years earlier. There, on 
Thayer, I was the mimic, the impersonator. Here, on Seminole 
Lane, I was the innovator. I soon had my own following: guys 
who went when I went, came when I came, or who came and 
went when I said so.
RobertKing_Interior.indd   70 8/25/08   10:31:10 PM


--- PAGE 72 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
71
Word finally got back to Mama about some of my unsa-
vory activities. She went behind closed doors with Aunt Clem 
and Uncle Willie to have a conference about what to do with 
me. Uncle Willie and Aunt Clem both suggested that I live 
“uptown,” with Clara. Mary, almost 16 now, was also having her 
problems, and Clem and Willie thought that Mary should also 
go to live with Clara. But Mary had ideas of her own. Instead of 
going to live with Clara, she opted to go back to Algiers to live 
with a friend.
I couldn’t (and didn’t) make the transition to living with Clara. 
At the time, there was nothing between us—no physical, men-
tal, or psychological ties whatsoever. So I took it upon myself to 
depart from Clara after about a week and return home.
Leaving Clara and going back to what I called “home” was 
a big disappointment. In the short time that I had been gone, 
things had changed drastically. Mule was rarely seen, and the 
only people welcomed in that house were Mama, Verna Mae, and 
James. Anybody else became an intruder. Every time one of them 
departed, they’d lock the door, keeping me out. Prior to Mama’s 
decree that I live with Clara, whenever I’d wanted to escape from 
the streets for a while, I always had a place to go for a bite to eat 
when needed; for a bath, and a change of clothing; or for a few 
hours of sleep. But now that door was locked. Verna Mae was 
probably the only one who would have let me into the house, 
but I couldn’t catch her home these days. School was out, and 
she worked the bar for Aunt Clem. James was loyal to Mama, it 
seemed, and he wasn’t going to go against her decree that I must 
live with Clara. But once I left Clara’s house, I was determined 
to never go back there, ever, to live with her. All I did now was 
hang around the streets in my old neighborhood, sometimes 
with friends, but most times by myself. At night, I would go and 
crawl under the house that once housed me. I slept with the bugs 
and the other pests. After about a week of this, unable to bathe 
or change clothes, even my buddies began rejecting me. James 
would see me periodically, and he would try and encourage me 
to go back and live with Clara, but I wouldn’t budge. At other 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   71 8/25/08   10:31:10 PM


--- PAGE 73 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
72
times he would offer me food, which I would refuse. After a few 
weeks of this, James told me that Mama wanted to see me; he 
also told me that Mama said I didn’t have to go live with Clara. 
I still felt hurt and betrayed, but at this point in my life, I was in 
no mood to argue with James. He and I had become pretty close, 
had fought too many battles together, and with these thoughts in 
mind, I elected to return home with James.
When we reached home, Mama, who was usually at work on 
these days, was waiting. She came out of her room and gave me 
a long, curious stare, looking at me as if she were seeing me for 
the first time in her life. I looked at Mama’s face, trying to read 
something, but couldn’t. I did note that she was being extra nice, 
and this made me wary, put me on guard.
After I’d taken a bath and changed clothes, Mama even gave 
me some cigarettes. She had never approved of my smoking, so 
now I knew something was wrong. I became very suspicious. I 
decided to go out and sit on the porch, feeling that if trouble 
came, it would come from that way. And sure enough, just as I 
reached the front porch, a late-model car pulled up in front of the 
house. A well-dressed Black man got out. Instinctively, I knew 
it was trouble and that it or he had something to do with me. “Is 
this the Mrs. King residence?” he asked. “Yes, sir,” I said. And 
before the man could ask another question, I went in, passing 
Mama on her way to the front door to greet the visitor. I stopped 
in the hallway behind her to listen. Just as I had figured, I was 
the subject. I heard Mama say to the stranger, “Yes. He is here, 
and I can’t seem to do nothing with him.”
I didn’t need to hear anything more. I broke into a dead run 
out the back door. Behind me, I heard James yell, “There he 
goes!” And there I went, down the ally toward Roman Street, 
the next street over. There, I met up with a couple of my bud-
dies. “What’s going on?” they asked, but before I could answer, I 
heard the sound of screeching tires. When I looked up, there was 
the man, with Mama in the back seat of his car, looking for me. 
I wheeled around and ran back the same way I had come. It was 
a bit comical, for we repeated this several times. My friends got 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   72 8/25/08   10:31:11 PM


--- PAGE 74 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
73
into the act. Just as I would reach them, they’d shout, “Go back 
the other way!” and back the other way I’d go. After a while, 
even the grown-ups in the neighborhood got into the act, yelling, 
“Run, boy! Don’t let ‘em catch you.” 
But I was out of breath, the man was yelling, and Mama was 
waving her hands in frantic gestures for me to stop. I took one 
last look up the alleyway, then turned around to face Mama, the 
man, and the automobile. When the man emerged from the auto-
mobile, the first thing he said was: “You must be guilty, innocent 
people don’t run.” I wondered, what school did he go to? I knew 
instinctively that he was from Milny Boys’ Home, the juvenile 
jail in eastern New Orleans. I had passed it many times going out 
to the lake. Its huge gloomy building loomed like a nightmare. I 
didn’t want any part of it.
But though the man threatened me with Milny, his final 
assessment was that “all I needed was a good whipping.” Mama 
agreed, but said that I had outgrown her. The juvenile officer 
— for that’s who he was — pointed at Uncle Willie, who had 
heard the commotion and come to the door, and said, “Well, he 
ain’t outgrown him!” Uncle Willie readily agreed to help Mama 
chastise me. 
I later learned that Mama, wanting to give me a scare, had 
asked the juvenile authorities to send someone out to “scare me 
straight.” I also learned that Uncle Willie’s bite wasn’t as vicious 
as his bark. He didn’t do much in the way of chastising me.
So I escaped Milny Boys’ Home, and I was back at home with 
Mama, doing my old routine, and not having to live with Clara. 
During this period, I was at home a bit more often; I didn’t run 
the streets quite like before. 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   73 8/25/08   10:31:11 PM


--- PAGE 75 ---
RobertKing_Interior.indd   74 8/25/08   10:31:11 PM


--- PAGE 76 ---
75
chapter 9
in August, 1955 — tHree montHs into 
my thirteenth year in existence — Hillary, my biological father, 
made the scene and I saw him for the first time. Hillary’s step-
brother lived not far from us. I had discovered this about two 
months earlier, and had visited him at his home a few times. He 
and his wife lived on the corner of Felicity and Rampart streets. 
Hillary was accustomed to making sporadic visits to the city, 
and most of the time he would end up at his stepbrother’s house, 
waiting for the effects of his partying to wear off before heading 
back to Donaldsonville, Louisiana, where he resided. It was on 
one of Hillary’s trips that his brother told him that his son lived 
nearby.
The day I saw my father for the first time, I was on one of 
my usual escapades not far from home. One of my friends came 
running up to me, yelling, “Your daddy is here, your daddy is 
here!” I must admit, I didn’t show much elation nor emotion. 
On the short trip home, I began to think to think about some 
of those things I had heard from family members: that he had 
“disowned me”; that I “looked just like him”; and of course that 
I had his “ways.” 
When I arrived home, I saw my father for the first time and 
heard the usual lines a wayward father would say to a child he 
had all but abandoned. While he talked, I was scrutinizing his 
every word and taking in his new image and the impression he 
was projecting. There was indeed a resemblance, and at the time, 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   75 8/25/08   10:31:11 PM


--- PAGE 77 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
76
Hillary’s character seemed amiable. 
Talk finally got around to the possibility of his taking me back 
with him to Donaldsonville. Mama consented, saying, “ Maybe 
it’s best that you do leave New Orleans, ‘cause I fear you gon’ 
get killed if you stay here.” In Mama’s recent memory was an 
incident where I was involved in a gang fight resulting in my 
being stabbed in the back with an ice pick, and nearly paralyzed. 
But my decision to go to Donaldsonville with my father was not 
a result of this incident. I consented merely out of curiosity, the 
urge to explore. That very same day, Hillary and I boarded a 
Greyhound bus for the ninety-mile trek to Donaldsonville. 
T wo of the most depressing years of my post-formative period 
were spent in that town, in Hillary’s house. But, I must admit 
that they were also my best two years. For it was there, in Don-
aldsonville, that I learned humility, sensitivity, and compassion 
for the unfortunate. And my thought processes expanded to a 
capacity much greater than they would have, had I not encoun-
tered that experience.
Hillary’s house was located on Bryant Street. When we arrived, 
I was introduced to my “new family” — a stepmother and her 
two sons (ten and twelve) and a daughter from her previous 
marriage. Another daughter, Susan, would come later, resulting 
from her relationship with Hillary. I took an immediate liking 
to my stepbrothers, and we were almost inseparable. My feelings 
for my stepmother were mixed. Sometimes I saw her as being 
kind and sensitive. Most times, I saw her as being akin to the 
evil stepmother in the Cinderella story. In fact, I recognized the 
latter before I recognized the former. It surfaced only hours after 
I’d arrived. Unable to understand the difference between a child 
growing up in the city and one growing up in the country, my 
stepmother (who I shall henceforth refer to as Babs) showed her 
resentment toward me for knowing things she felt I was not sup-
posed to know at my age. But I couldn’t do anything about my 
obvious “over-exposure” to city ways. I responded by resenting 
both Babs and Hillary. Three days after my arrival, I knew I had 
hopelessly painted myself into the proverbial corner. 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   76 8/25/08   10:31:11 PM


--- PAGE 78 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
77
Donaldsonville was (and still is!) a small rural town, with not 
much to offer by way of excitement. The biggest attraction in 
those days was the State Fair, which showed up annually and 
lasted for about two weeks. The majority of the folk in the town, 
Black and white, would talk about the “coming of the fair” 
months ahead of time, as if it were the second coming of Christ. 
There was an old movie theatre that had been abandoned by 
whites once their new one was built; it was for us. Next door, 
there was a sweet shop for the Black teenagers. For work, the 
town boasted a sugar mill, a rice mill, and a sawmill. The rice 
and sugar mills were seasonal. Most Blacks, and some whites too, 
had to find work in the surrounding towns. 
When I first entered the town, I noticed a large sign bearing 
the words, “Donaldsonville, the Friendliest Town in the South.” 
It didn’t take me very long to learn why this was so. Whites 
“had their place” and Blacks all “knew theirs.” The ones who 
“knew” their places did the chores for the ones who “had” their 
places. Other than that, there was no contact — a very good way, 
I thought, to keep things good and friendly. 
The psychology of the townspeople, however, was a trivial 
matter. What was more depressing was the environment itself, 
and the restrictions that came with it. I missed the city life to 
which I had become accustomed. Nevertheless, I convinced 
myself that I would try to adapt to my new surroundings, and 
especially to Hillary. I felt that a father-son relationship needed 
to be established. But my desire to achieve this was shattered 
less than a week after my arrival. One of my stepbrothers and 
I were in a discussion, and at some point in the conversation, I 
made the fatal mistake of saying “Hot dog!” Babs said, “Hillary, 
did you hear what that boy said?” And without waiting for my 
father to answer, she explained to him that I had found a “new” 
way to say “god-damn.” He believed her, and his whole coun-
tenance changed from one that was friendly, to one of hostility. 
He then launched an unexpected tirade against me: “You think 
you’re smart just because you lived in the city! If you think you’re 
going to pull that stuff here, you got another thing coming!” I 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   77 8/25/08   10:31:11 PM


--- PAGE 79 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
78
just sat there, shocked and amazed at this rapid turn of events, 
looking at him as if seeing him for the first time. All the while, 
I was thinking: “Wow, this isn’t the same cat who was so full 
of smiles to see me a few days ago for the first time in his life.” 
Also, I was wondering how in the world Babs could say that the 
two phrases were the same, and then convince my father that 
they were. Maybe my father mistook my confusion for insolence 
or defiance. At any rate, he then did something I least expected 
him to do, something Mama had never done: Hillary, the man 
I had never laid eyes upon until a few days before, walked over 
to where I stood and gave me a hard slap that reverberated in 
my ears for several minutes. I was already shocked and amazed 
at his words, but the way I now felt was beyond description. 
For this unwarranted slap not only reverberated in my ears, but 
more so, it reverberated in my heart, and shattered any hopes of 
my having any affection whatsoever for my father during this 
crucial period.
That slap was only the beginning. After that first incident, 
others came in rapid succession. 
Not long after that first incident, Hillary — who worked at 
the sawmill –- asked me to go to the office and get his check. 
As I was leaving, Babs asked, “What you gon’ say when you get 
there?” I replied, “I am going to tell whoever’s in the office that 
Hillary Wilkerson has sent me to pick up his check.” She said, 
“No! You don’t say it like that. You are supposed to say, I come 
to pick up my father’s check, and when they ask you who your 
father is, then you say, Hillary Wilkerson.” And my father, who 
had been listening, said: “What’s wrong, you shame to own me 
as your daddy?” And following that question came a barrage of 
threats and verbal assaults that hurt more than a physical beating, 
or even another slapping, would have had. 
Another time, while calculating a grocery bill, Babs asked me 
to add along with her, to see if we would come up with the same 
figure. I could see that her sum was incorrect. And for all of my 
so-called street smarts, I knew nothing about tact, so I blurted 
out, “That’s wrong.” Babs replied that she had checked it twice. I 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   78 8/25/08   10:31:11 PM


--- PAGE 80 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
79
still insisted she was off, which was my mistake. For Hillary, who 
had been watching and listening, said, “What you doin’, calling 
her a liar?” I wisely said, “No, sir, I am not.” By this time, I was 
no longer surprised by my father’s irrational rages. And I was 
never disappointed, for they kept on coming. After that incident, 
I would watch Babs trying to figure up the grocery bill, and I 
would wisely keep my mouth shut. Sometimes, she would ask me 
to check her figures to see if she was right. I would feign adding, 
then tell her that I had come up with the same figure. She would 
later learn, however, that we “both” had figured incorrectly. And 
this would seem to delight her far more than if she had been 
incorrect by herself. 
It was such incidents that caused me to become nervous, men -
tally uncoordinated, and unsure of myself. For fear of saying 
the wrong things, I began to be very careful about what I did or 
didn’t say. And as a result of trying to choose the correct response, 
I began to stutter. My father became infuriated with me, and told 
me that I had picked up a bad habit, and that I had better stop or 
he would “whip me until I stopped.” And because I couldn’t stop 
right away, I did get whipped. I eventually stopped stuttering, 
but it was not as a result of his whippings.
In order to keep peace of mind, I tried another approach 
which should have worked. But, alas, it didn’t. I became obsessed 
with the idea of just remaining quiet, and tried to do so. Both 
Hillary and Babs would try to make conversation, but unless 
they directed something at me, I would say nothing. Then Hil-
lary would want to know why I was “wearing a long face.” The 
truth of the matter was, I wasn’t angry with either of them, I was 
just trying to stay out of trouble. But to Hillary, my silent state 
was insolence, an act of defiance that he wouldn’t tolerate. So to 
appease him, I had to pretend I was happy. As a result, among 
the other things I had become, I was now “the great pretender” 
in Hillary’s house. But only in his house, mind you. For I had a 
double that no one could touch…
Not long after I arrived in Donaldsonville, school opened and I 
registered at Lowery High School. This was 1955. School, at this 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   79 8/25/08   10:31:11 PM


--- PAGE 81 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
80
time, was a luxury. For at school, my double surfaced. I was a dif-
ferent person away from Hillary’s house. School eliminated some 
of my depression, and in time I excelled. While I was considered 
a flop at home, I was a celebrity at school, among classmates and 
even some of my teachers. Whatever was stripped from me at 
home, I regained it at school. My confidence, courage, poise, and 
equilibrium returned at school; while I strove to remain quiet in 
the presence of my father and step-mother, I was reprimanded 
by some of my teachers for being too talkative. While Hillary’s 
house was his domain, school was mine. I was selected by my 
eighth grade classmates to be president of the class. But when 
school was over for the day, I had to take off my fine dress of con-
fidence and poise, my courage and my stability, and change once 
again into my usual attire of diffidence and instability, which I 
was forced to wear at home. 
School afforded me the chance to meet a lot of new friends, 
both female and male. It was at school that I met this girl I’ll call 
Majorie. Each time we’d meet, she would smile at me; I’d smile 
back. One day, she told me that she wanted to ride home with me 
on the bus. This meant that she wanted to sit next to me because 
she liked me. And this was how it started. I eventually grew 
to like her too. I learned that she lived only a few blocks from 
me, with her grandmother. Each day when we would get off the 
school bus, I would walk her home. I wasn’t allowed to go into 
her house because her grandmother was old-fashioned and didn’t 
allow boys to visit her. 
Majorie did not dress as well as the other children; most of the 
clothes she wore were old. As a result, some of the children said 
that she was “nasty,” and later this was changed from just being 
“nasty” to “doing a lot of nasty things.” This gossip didn’t stop 
with the children; grown-ups picked up the chant. People who 
had never laid eyes on her labeled her as bad. Majorie knew that 
people were saying a lot of untrue things about, but she held her 
head up high, and even tried to be friends with those who she 
knew talked about her behind her back. She told me that there 
were only two other boys she had liked, but after they had both 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   80 8/25/08   10:31:11 PM


--- PAGE 82 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
81
tried to make a play on her supposed looseness, the relationships 
had ended. (Her telling me this made me feel guilty, because I had 
tried the same thing with other girls.) Anyway, my stepmother 
learned that I had a new girlfriend, and wanted to meet her. 
Majorie agreed to come by my house on the following Sunday.
When Sunday arrived, as promised, Majorie showed up and 
I introduced her to my stepmother. Majorie and I then went out 
to sit on the porch. After about twenty minutes, Babs called me 
inside and said, “Boy, what in the world is you doing with that 
girl? I done heard a lot of bad things about her. Of all the girls to 
choose from, you had to choose the worst one. I don’t think you 
ought to see her anymore.” Eventually, I went back outside to 
sit on the porch. Majorie, seeing the thoughtful look on my face 
that had replaced the jovial one I’d had before, wanted to know 
what was wrong. I said nothing. But I didn’t have to. For she 
had picked up the vibes, and said, “Oh, I see.” With those words 
uttered, Majorie got up and left.
I saw her a number of times at school after that Sunday, but 
things just weren’t the same. But I did feel strongly that I had 
let Majorie down, the same as the other children and grown-ups 
had. 
It wasn’t long afterwards that Majorie’s grandmother sent her 
away to live with a relative — where, I never learned. When she 
departed, she left me with memories of our holding hands and 
sharing secrets with each other that we wouldn’t dare share with 
others. Memories of our kissing remained. But that was as far as 
we ever went…
RobertKing_Interior.indd   81 8/25/08   10:31:11 PM


--- PAGE 83 ---
RobertKing_Interior.indd   82 8/25/08   10:31:11 PM


--- PAGE 84 ---
83
chapter 10
in donAldsonville, i leArned Just HoW 
small the world really was, and that the past is just one step away. 
Deeds of my past, which I thought I had left behind, caught up 
with me. One day I arrived home from school, and Babs handed 
me a letter addressed to me. It was from a company in New 
Orleans that published a weekly Black newspaper. The letter 
stated that I owed the company a certain amount of money, and 
that my failure to pay the company would or could result in their 
taking legal action…
I thought back to the time, in New Orleans, when some of my 
buddies and I had hustled this company. On Thursdays, the day 
the paper came out, we would go to one of its many distributors 
that were located around the city. We would approach the man 
in charge and tell him we wanted to sell some papers for him. 
The man would be delighted, and would give us as many as we 
thought we could sell; sometimes we’d get hundreds. He would 
take our names and addresses for reference. Once we sold the 
papers, we were supposed to return with the money and get a 
percentage. Most times, as planned, we would give the man phony 
names and addresses, and never return, keeping all the proceeds. 
But apparently, I had made the mistake of giving him my real 
name, once. And he had turned my name into the company. 
The company’s representative in Donaldsville was a preacher 
whose father lived next door to us. This preacher visited with 
his father on a regular basis and with us on occasions. The good 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   83 8/25/08   10:31:11 PM


--- PAGE 85 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
84
reverend needed someone to sell papers locally, and he offered 
me the chance to make a few dollars. Naturally I accepted, and 
even went so far as to tell the reverend that while living in New 
Orleans, I had once sold papers for that very company. Every 
Thursday the reverend would bring me a bundle of the papers, 
and I would walk through the town selling them. And I always 
sold them all. Four months later, the letter arrived…
After reading the letter, I knew I couldn’t beat this one, and 
didn’t even try. When Hillary got home and was informed by 
Babs of the letter’s contents, he was furious. But he paid the 
company the money I owed. 
In 1956, for the first time, I had the pleasure of meeting my 
paternal grandfather, Will Wilkerson. He looked to be in his 
late sixties. The gap between his and Hillary’s age — who was 
thirty-three years old at that time — was because Hillary was 
one of his later children. Just how many children Will actually 
had, I never learned. But I did learn that my grandfather was 
a “rolling stone,” and that “in his day, he was a hell-cat.” It 
was said that many sheriffs of many towns had given him one-
way tickets just to get rid of him. I only saw my grandfather 
twice, and I didn’t get a chance to really know him or to hear 
him tell his side of the story. Not many months after that first 
visit, I saw Will for the last time, in a coffin. He had died of 
natural causes. 
Sometimes on weekends, after school, I got the chance to 
hang out with my two stepbrothers. They and their sister lived 
with their grandmother, but sometimes they stayed overnight 
with their mother. And during the summer when school was 
closed, and when Hillary and Babs worked, we would spend 
a lot of time together. We would “scout” the town and do the 
forbidden: go swimming in the big muddy Mississippi River, or 
in the bayous, or the canals. During this time, I would tell them 
tales of my exploits while I was living in New Orleans, revealing 
to them things that I wouldn’t dare reveal to my father and their 
mother. They would be fascinated, and come right along with 
me in thought, as if they were experiencing the same things. 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   84 8/25/08   10:31:11 PM


--- PAGE 86 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
85
In all fairness, let me say that while there were things that 
Hillary and Babs did that repelled me and caused my depressive 
state, they also did things that attracted me to them. For instance, 
neither objected to my smoking, and they even supplied me 
with cigarettes. And whenever I couldn’t hustle my own ticket 
money for the “picture show,” Babs always made sure that I got 
it, even when Hillary didn’t show up on some Fridays with his 
paycheck, but would have detoured, spending his time and his 
money elsewhere. But this seldom happened, and for the most 
part, Hillary was probably as responsible as he felt he needed to 
be, or could be. I guess it’s true to say that there were whole days 
when feelings of rejection didn’t totally engulf me. 
Saturday was movie day, and looking forward to the weekend 
and going to the movies afforded me the reprieve from depres-
sion I needed. But while I liked going to the movies, I was also 
a lover of music. On my way to the theater, I would have to 
walk past a couple of juke joints or barrooms, where the juke-
boxes belted out the tunes of Big Joe Turner (“Morning Noon 
And Night”) or Little Richard (“Saturday Night”). In tune with 
music at this point, most times I would walk right past the movie 
theater, and go next door to the sweet shop, where Chuck Willis 
would be singing about “The Train That Stole His Love” or 
Fats Domino would be crying “Ain’t That A Shame” — not 
to mention so many others, such as Chuck Berry, Faye Adams, 
Bo Diddley, Big Maybelle (to be better known as “Big Mama 
Thornton”) and Bobby Mitchell, a product of Algiers. All this 
was long before the term “rock ‘n roll” was coined in Tennes-
see. Lloyd Price, Ruth Brown, and later, Jackie Wilson and Sam 
Cooke would emerge as top soul singers. While Jackie may have 
been “Mr. Excitement” to many, it was the melodious voice of 
Sam Cook that excited me and bound me forever to his voice; he 
simply was my favorite singer. But before Sam Cook and Jackie 
Wilson, there were Hank Ballard and the Midnighters, whose 
“twist” preceded Chubby Checker’s by half a dozen years. The 
dance was considered unacceptable by most American whites, 
who considered it lewd. In fact, during the early to mid 1950s, 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   85 8/25/08   10:31:11 PM


--- PAGE 87 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
86
many white parents forbade their children to even listen to 
“Black music.” Those young whites brave enough to buy records 
by Blacks had to hide them, and listen to them while their par -
ents slept or were at work. Until Elvis Presley came along. After 
Elvis, for some reason, what had once been unacceptable became 
respectable. It seemed that before White America could accept a 
Black music creation, or discover the use of the pelvis, they had 
to see another white perform the feat in public. Elvis was accept-
able, and the impact he had on White America was phenomenal; 
where music was concerned, he brought White America into 
another dimension entirely. 
But before Elvis and his pelvis, Black teens had the sweetshop 
where we spent our afternoons gyrating to the music of all the 
artists I have named and so many many more. Those many hours 
I spent in the sweetshop listening to their music had a consoling 
affect on me at the time…
While my father did many things during this time that 
prevented any loving relationship that should have developed 
between a father and son, I did develop a lot of respect for him 
— until the following incident.
It was late one evening. Besides Hillary, Babs and myself, my 
two stepbrothers were there to spend the night. We were in the 
living room, watching television. There was a knock on the front 
door, and Babs went to answer it. There stood two well-dressed 
white men, in suits. Without any preamble, one of them asked, 
“Does Hillary Wilkerson live here?” “Yes,” Babs replied. And 
without asking to enter, both men pushed their way past my 
stepmother, into the house. I was sitting there, taking all this in, 
and my first thought was, “These guys are crazy.” 
I was thinking about Hillary and how he would react. My 
father was one of those typical Saturday night brawlers. During 
my year of living with him, I had witnessed first hand on many 
occasions his fearlessness and brutality towards his peers. Nearly 
six feet tall, “Red”, as most called him, was strong and muscular. I 
was proud of him, and plenty afraid of him too. But on this night, 
I had nothing to feel proud about. For after the men pushed 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   86 8/25/08   10:31:11 PM


--- PAGE 88 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
87
inside, they put Hillary through an interrogation that a police 
officer would envy: Had he ever lived in New Orleans? Did he ever 
buy furniture from X’s store? Why in the hell had he left without 
paying the money he owed? While the men fired questions, Babs 
was protesting, ready to fight with them and so were we, my two 
stepbrothers and me. But not Hillary. He acquiesced and became 
too passive, trying to accommodate them by answering politely. 
Finally, one man said, “We want the furniture or the money 
now!” At this, Babs said, “We paid for those furnitures, now 
get out of my house!” My two stepbrothers and I joined the act. 
We began hollering, surrounding the intruders. We made such 
a fuss that it brought all the neighbors to their doors. I ran to 
the kitchen, found the biggest knife I could, and returned with 
it. One intruder asked the other, “You got your rod?” The reply 
was, “No, I left mine in the car.” The first one then said, “Let’s 
get out of here.” And they left, but not before promising that they 
would return. If they ever returned, we had no way of knowing, 
because not long afterwards, we moved.
When the above incident was happening, I had expected my 
father to lead the charge. In fact, we all were waiting for this to 
happen. But it didn’t. Not only was I disappointed in Hillary, I 
was also puzzled. He kept a gun, but he made no attempt to go 
for it. I felt that Hillary should have made a better showing, but 
he had performed poorly. And in doing so, he lost more than he 
ever knew. For not only did he lose some of the respect that I 
had developed for him, that day he also lost the controlling fear 
he had over me.
The house we moved to was located on Nolan Avenue. But 
the change of housing didn’t change my status, and I still felt 
like an outcast. Strangely though — or maybe not so strange — 
I felt very light-headed and less intimidated by my father and 
stepmother. The things that they did and said to me did not affect 
me as much as they had in the past. I was going on fifteen, and I 
found myself thinking more and more about the folks I had left 
behind in New Orleans. I felt that there was something I was 
forgetting or had forgotten. This nudge was persistent. 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   87 8/25/08   10:31:11 PM


--- PAGE 89 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
88
It was summer 1957, school had closed, and I did my best to get 
into things that would take me away from home — swimming (by 
this time they had built a pool for Blacks), baseball, or whatever 
else I could find to do. One day I mistakenly went off without 
Babs’ consent. It was standard policy that I ask first. When my 
father came home from work, he learned of my transgression and 
went into a rage, saying, “I’ve been watching you lately. You have 
begun to smell yourself.” (Meaning, I was acting like a man.) He 
went on: “I’m gon’ show you just how much man you ain’t.” He 
began hitting me. I just stood there, oblivious to the pain, looking 
at him, unflinching. Our eyes locked, and this time, my look was 
a deliberate act of defiance. Hillary continued to pound on me 
harder, but I continued to lock eyes with him, and his efforts to 
hurt me seemed ridiculous. I think my father finally realized how 
ridiculous his efforts were. He gave me a look as if he were seeing 
me for the first time, and abruptly stopped pounding on me. I 
remained quiet for the rest of the night, deep in thought. I didn’t 
verbally or physically challenge my father that night, but a test of 
wills had been fought, and I had won. I then made a solemn vow 
to myself, that never again would I allow my father to abuse me. 
And it was at this moment that I realized I had finally caught up 
with my double: we emerged, and together we were one — an 
entity that Hillary could no longer touch.
Clear-headed and feeling good about myself, I couldn’t 
sleep. A feeling of being refurbished and rested engulfed me. 
My thoughts began to flow, thinking about the past two years. 
Then I thought about Mama, and the folks I had left, in New 
Orleans…and then it happened! Something that had been trying 
to break through for months, hit me like a lightning bolt. The 
thought was like a voice within, which said, “Why don’t you 
just leave, what’s holding you here?” I jumped straight up out of 
the bed. Why, I thought, hadn’t I just left? The more I thought 
about leaving, the more appealing it became, until I was able to 
taste it. This was like a new secret weapon that I now possessed 
to be used at my leisure. I would leave, I was sure of that, but 
when? I knew that I had to leave before school started again. 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   88 8/25/08   10:31:11 PM


--- PAGE 90 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
89
For if I enrolled, the love I had for school wouldn’t let me leave 
Donaldsonville, and I would be stuck for nearly another year. I 
would leave before school reopened.
Some people will tell you that thoughts are very powerful — 
that one can think something into happening. I don’t know if this 
is true or not, but my secret intense wish was for Hillary to act 
up again, and to do it quickly. I didn’t have long to wait. On this 
night, as we sat watching television, Babs asked me a question 
to which I replied with a simple “yes” instead of my usual “yes 
ma’am.” My failure to answer her “properly” on this night wasn’t 
done out of any disrespect, but my father saw it that way. As a 
result, he lit into me as usual. His verbal attack was intense and 
abusive. I bore it stoically, glad that it was only verbal. His attack 
had given me the reason I needed. I knew my next move. I lay 
awake until about 1:00 a.m., when I knew he and Babs would be 
asleep. Then, while they slept, and while the town slept, I “tooled 
up” and crept out of the house. I would need money, I reasoned. 
I selected a building that was located about nine blocks from 
where we lived. Using the tool (screwdriver) I had brought with 
me, I opened a window and entered. Searching the interior of the 
building, I discovered a small metal box containing about $300. 
Placing the money inside my shirt, I withdrew from the building 
and carefully made my way back home. It was now about 3:30 
a.m. and the house was still asleep. My adrenaline was making 
me high, and in this enhanced state, I wanted Hillary to know I 
had left, and why. So I began to write:
Dear Daddy (& Babs):
By the time you read this letter, I will be on my way to 
New Orleans. I don’t have to do much explaining as to 
why I am leaving, because I am sure you already know. 
In fact, I don’t know why the idea to leave hadn’t 
occurred to me a long time ago. Let me say truthfully, 
that these last two years spent with you were the worst 
years of my life! I appreciate the shelter, and food, 
and the little clothing you provided me with these past 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   89 8/25/08   10:31:11 PM


--- PAGE 91 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
90
couple years. And while I cannot repay you for them, 
I believe I can repay you for the amount of kindness 
the both of you have given me. Here is $50. This will 
more than cover the amount of kindness you’ve given 
me. Sorry I had to leave in this manner, but I didn’t 
want to take the chance of angering you by asking you 
to send me back or to just let me leave.
Yours Truly,
Junior
I placed the money on top of the letter so they could see it. Day 
had broken now, and I had to hurry. I changed into the clothes 
I would bring with me, and with shoes in hand, I eased out the 
side door, past the window where Hillary slept, then stepped into 
my shoes and ran all the way to the bus station. When the New 
Orleans bus pulled out, a sigh of pure pleasure escaped from 
my throat. And the pleasure I experienced then was the same 
pleasure I experienced years later, when I escaped from the New 
Orleans Parish Prison. But that is a story later told…
RobertKing_Interior.indd   90 8/25/08   10:31:11 PM


--- PAGE 92 ---
91
chapter 11
About tWo Hours lAter, tHe bus pulled 
into New Orleans. I learned that Mama had moved back to 
Algiers, on Magellan Street. I headed straight there. Standing 
beside James, and having to look down at him, made me realize 
just how much I had grown. Mama, of course, was still Mama, 
and had worried about me. During the entire two-year period, I 
had lost contact with all my relatives who lived in New Orleans. 
Verna Mae was now married with an infant son, Charles; another 
son and four daughters would come later. Mary, nearly eighteen 
now, lived close by with the friend she had taken up with years 
earlier; Clara, my biological mother, still resided in New Orleans, 
and Robert, George, and Ruth (with her six children) lived close 
by. Henry, I learned, was back in prison, at the Louisiana State 
Penitentiary at Angola; last, but not least, Mule, to my delight, 
was still around, and still his usual humorous self, still drinking 
his muscatel. It was like old times only better, among people I 
felt comfortable with.
About a month after I came home, Houston was released from 
Michigan State Prison after serving seven years. Everyone was 
delighted to see him, but for Mama, it was much more than that. 
For her, it was an ending to an epoch, an answer to a prayer, for 
she had thought that she would not see him again before her 
death. Houston was her last object of worry. Henry had returned 
to prison, but Mama felt that to have lived to see him get out the 
first time was all that was appointed her. After he went back to 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   91 8/25/08   10:31:11 PM


--- PAGE 93 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
92
prison, Mama spoke of him always in the abstract, with a feeling 
of detachment, as if she had resigned herself to the fact that she 
would never again set eyes on him—or, under the circumstances, 
he on her. I heard her a number of times, saying, “Lordy, I don’t 
want Henry at my funeral with no chains on. If he got to come 
with ‘em on, I don’t want him there.” This wasn’t a prayer, but 
a statement.
I had been away from Algiers for more than two years. My 
friends and classmates had undergone a change, just as I had. 
Some I knew, others I didn’t. The girls all seemed to have under-
gone a beautiful metamorphosis. “Wow,” I would say. “What 
happened to them?” 
In 1957, at the age of fifteen, I registered at L.B. Landry High 
School. I was in the ninth grade. At first, everything seemed to 
be going okay. My grades were up to par, and I really enjoyed 
being around my classmates. But eventually, I lost the desire to 
stay in school. I saw school as a baby-sitter, and I felt I didn’t need 
that. After less than two months, total boredom engulfed me, 
and despite Mama’s desire that I stay in school, I bade farewell 
to classes and classmates alike…
After leaving school, I found odd jobs, nothing permanent. 
Whenever I couldn’t find work, I hung around with older guys, 
who always talked of “leavin’ the south and going north, where 
things was better.” It sounded worth a try to me. So in early 
November, penniless, I strode away from home, walking with a 
purpose, with thoughts of going up north, and making scads of 
money to send back home to Mama. Soon a steady drizzle began, 
and the temperature dropped. I pressed on, clothes soaked and 
chilled to the bone. Leaving Orleans Parish meant crossing the 
Huey P . Long Bridge, but when I neared it, I paused, unsure of 
myself. There was no law on the books against walking across 
it. But there was an unwritten law among pedestrians that “one 
didn’t walk across Huey.” The risk was just too great. The walk-
way was pretty narrow, and everyone had heard stories about 
walkers being “sucked” into traffic. 
While I pondered the dangers involved, I saw two dudes 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   92 8/25/08   10:31:12 PM


--- PAGE 94 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
93
— both white, with bedrolls on their backs — heading across 
the bridge. And I thought, if they can do it, so can I! Remember-
ing Mule and his stories, I had no doubt that they were hobos. 
I followed them up the ramp of the bridge. Minutes later, I 
had caught up with them. My hunch that they were hobos was 
verified by their smell. The shorter of the two spoke, saying, “By 
golly, looks like we aren’t the only brave ones around here today, 
huh?” “Yeah, looks that way, doesn’t it,” I said. I was trying to 
act casual, as if I had been doing this all my life. At the same 
time, I was sizing them up. They both looked to be in their mid 
to late twenties; one was much shorter than the other, who must 
have been more than six feet tall, and weighed about 250 pounds. 
Both seemed very friendly. The shorter of the two spoke again: 
“Ya got a cigarette?” I shook my head, sorry I didn’t have one 
to give him. “Hell, man, ya can’t get far without no cigarettes.” 
Reaching into his pocket, he pulled out a sack of tobacco and 
began rolling one for himself. Afterwards, he passed the sack 
to me to roll one for myself, which I did. The bigger one asked 
where I was going. “I don’t exactly know,” I said, and asked him, 
“Where y’all headed to?” “Chicago,” he said. And as casually as 
I could, I said, “Well, I may as well go along with y’all, if y’all 
don’t mind.” The larger one studied me and asked, “How old 
are you?” “Eighteen,” I said. The shorter one said, “Ya sure are 
a young lookin’ eighteen.” “Everybody tells me the same thing,” 
I said. They accepted me as a traveling companion.
We crossed the Huey P . Long Bridge without mishap and 
we headed for the railroad yard. All the while I was thinking 
that once I reached Chicago, my worries would be over. I had 
heard my uncle Houston speak of the city’s bright lights and 
good times. In my reverie, I began hallucinating — I was deliri-
ous with the thought of making lots of money, sending it back 
home to Mama, and later bringing her to Chicago to join me in 
my new found fame. In this frame of mind, I was impervious to 
the approaching colder weather and the insistent drizzle of rain 
that fell. I was brought back to reality when a passenger from 
a passing car threw a half-smoked cigarette out of his window. 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   93 8/25/08   10:31:12 PM


--- PAGE 95 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
94
“Shorty,” my smaller companion, with the agility and precision 
of an expert, caught the butt before it hit the wet ground. He 
yelled “a torch!” and began smoking the cigarette as if it had 
been in his hand all along. I was amazed, and told him so. I also 
asked him, why “torch?” He told me that in the world of hobos, 
it was common to collect cigarette butts, it saved them money 
they didn’t have. It was better to find a butt that was already 
“torched” or lit, for it saved them from having to use their valu-
able matches. I understood.
We reached the main yard and selected the freight we would 
ride. We also found cardboard boxes for cushioning and cover -
ing. And shortly after 7:00 p.m., the train pulled away. I was tired 
and hungry and cold. I immediately slept. At about midnight, 
I awakened with a start, as if someone had poured ice on me: I 
was freezing. It was at this time that I was brought back to real-
ity. I was ready to abandon my desire for traveling, and would 
have, too, but after awakening my companions and learning of 
our location (which was in the state of Mississippi), the urge to 
jump from the speeding train left me. While Louisiana’s legacy 
of racism and repression of Blacks wasn’t much better than Mis-
sissippi’s, the latter’s was more blatant and overt. The memory 
of the murder of Emmett Till two years earlier was still fresh 
on my mind. So I decided against jumping off that train. My 
two companions slept close together, sharing each other’s bed-
ding. Thinking about how warm they must be, I couldn’t resist 
the urge to share their covers. So without being invited, I dove 
feet first into the small gap between them. Shorty said, “Hey 
Bud’, whatcha doin’?” I said, “Shit, I already done it!” Both my 
companions laughed, and both were soon snoring away. A foul 
odor emanated from the bedrolls, and from my companions, but 
I didn’t care. I found warmth and comfort in the funkiest place 
I had thus far ever been. 
The train stopped in a small town in Tennessee, where my 
companions left me, and returned shortly with some crackers 
and sausage ends. They shared this with me. Other stops we 
made, we weren’t so lucky. Sunday came, and finally the train 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   94 8/25/08   10:31:12 PM


--- PAGE 96 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
95
came to a halt. According to my companions, this place, called 
“Chinatown,” was our final stop in our journey to Chicago. We’d 
have to hike it the rest of the way. We were all thinking of food, 
and the long journey ahead of us. We started walking, keeping 
to the tracks, which would bring us into the Chicago city limits. 
My bigger companion said, “Look, we got food yesterday, why 
don’t you try your hand at getting some today?” His suggestion 
was no more than fair, I thought; plus, I was hungry. So with 
the thought of food dominating my entire being, I headed for 
the houses in the distance. All of the houses looked alike, and I 
randomly selected one. I didn’t know exactly what I would say, 
but Mule had told me that a hobo’s livelihood depended upon 
his ability to solicit sympathy and pity from the most callous 
of individuals. 
I knocked on the door I had chosen, and within seconds, a 
man of oriental descent opened the door. I knew I looked a filthy 
sight: grease, mixed with grime, covered me entirely. I had also 
inherited the smell of my two companions. Trembling from the 
cold, and with a forlorn look in my eyes, I said, “Kind sir, I am 
so sorry to bother you. But I have been traveling ever since my 
mother and father died some three years ago, I was twelve years 
old at the time. I don’t have any other relatives, and I am tired 
of being dirty, hungry, and having no place to go. All I need is 
a broom. Would you please loan me your broom?” With a per -
plexed look on his face, the man said, “Why you need broom?” I 
said, “I just left a nice spot, right off the railroad tracks. It’s a little 
dirty, and I would like to borrow your broom so I could sweep 
that spot clean. Since it seems like I am going to die, I would like 
to die in a nice, clean place.” I don’t know if the man believed me 
or not, but he opened his door wider, asking me to step inside. 
He called out to someone — his wife, I suppose — in his native 
tongue. She entered the room, smiling, and he spoke rapidly in 
their oriental dialect; then the woman looked at me, still smiling, 
and bowed and left the room. Moments later, she returned carry-
ing a bag filled with food. She gave it to her husband, who in turn 
gave it to me, saying, “This much better than broom, huh?” He 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   95 8/25/08   10:31:12 PM


--- PAGE 97 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
96
then laughed out loud. I said, “Sure is.” I smiled, thanked them 
kindly, and bowed out of their lives as quickly as I had entered. 
I caught up with my companions. We shared the food (and the 
story) and continued on our journey. Once we got to Chicago, 
I thanked them for allowing me to travel with them. We then 
separated; they going one way, I another. 
Before departing from my companions, I had learned from 
them that the best place to get a meal, and possibly a bed for the 
night, was at a mission on Madison Avenue. Cold and miser -
able, I made it to Madison. Hobos lined both sides of the street, 
trying to find shelter from the frigid winds in doorways, but not 
having any success. Snow had fallen the night before, and the 
temperature had dropped into the teens. The mission opened 
its doors about 8:30 p.m. We all filed in, and after listening for 
what seemed like hours to a priest or some clergy-related person, 
we were given “soup” and bread. I ate the bread and gave the 
so-called soup to another, who gladly gulped it down. Limited 
bed space sent me back out into the icy winds. After roaming 
the streets for a while, I found shelter in the bed of a truck. For 
the next week or so, I slept in abandoned buildings, mostly on 
the south side. Sometimes I slept in large drainage pipes, using 
cardboard for covering. During the days, I made my way back 
to the north side, seeking employment. I had no luck. I also 
attempted to sell my blood, but since I was in such poor condi-
tion, and undernourished, the blood bank would not accept me 
as a donor.
One morning after leaving one of the employment agencies 
where jobs were “sold” (which meant that the agency provided 
daily jobs to a select few for a hefty fee) I met a guy I had seen 
before trying to get employment. He approached me, saying, 
“Still no luck, huh, man?” He looked to be about thirty or so, 
and appeared to be “carrying a stick” (i.e., to be a hobo) like 
me. I just shrugged. He said, “Look like you could use a meal. 
Have you tried to sell blood?” “Yeah,” I said. He said, “You look 
kinda young, how old are you?” I gave him the magic number of 
eighteen. “Where you from?” he asked. “New Orleans,” I said. 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   96 8/25/08   10:31:12 PM


--- PAGE 98 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
97
We walked a little further, and he said, “Well, I thought I could 
help you, but since you say you are eighteen, I won’t be able to.” 
I was curious now, and asked, “How could you help?” He said, 
“If you were under eighteen, I could bring you to a place where 
people would see that you got back home.” Still wanting to be 
resolute, I said, “All the help I need is finding a job. Can you help 
me do that?” The guy (whom I’ll call “Buddy”) gave me the most 
incredulous look and said in a loud voice, “Man, you don’t need a 
job! What you need is to get back home to your mama. Anybody 
can see you don’t belong here, and anybody can see you ain’t no 
eighteen, either!” 
Buddy went on: “Man, it’s like this all over this big raggedy 
motherfucker! Why do you think there are so many dudes 
carrying sticks; do you think they like carrying sticks? Do you 
think we like doing that?” He continued: “Man, we got pride, we 
don’t like doing this. At one time, I thought I had it made, but 
now hard times got me, hard times got a lot of us. I am going to 
git back on my feet, though.” He seemed to change gears then, 
saying, “I don’t know what’s with you ‘bloods’ coming all the 
way from down south thinking y’all gon’ come up here and do 
better. Yeah, a few of y’all gets lucky, but then a few of y’all 
gets lucky down there, too. So why don’t y’all stay down there? 
All them dudes you saw at them agencies weren’t hobos, either. 
You saw how well dressed some of them was. Them dudes all 
have families, little children and wives. But they can’t find jobs 
to support them most of the time.” He moved me with his rage 
and frustration, concluding angrily, “Man, there ain’t nothin’ for 
the ones who are already here. We all carryin’ sticks, we all are 
just carryin’ sticks.”
I wasn’t ready to give up. I told him I would think about what 
he said. And I did think about it. And after about three days, 
with still no luck at finding anyone who would hire me, I ran 
into Buddy again. I didn’t wait for him to ask me. I said, “What 
was it you said about helping me get back home?”
We ended up at the Traveler’s Aid Bureau in the Greyhound 
bus terminal. We went into the office and the man in charge 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   97 8/25/08   10:31:12 PM


--- PAGE 99 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
98
asked me how old I was. After I told him I was fifteen, he said, 
“Well, we can get you back home.” He introduced himself as 
Mr. Collingswoods, the director of the bureau, and asked me a 
few more questions; then he gave me some meal tickets (which 
looked like modern-day food stamps) and a sealed envelope and 
told me to go to the YMCA, where they would be expecting 
me. About ten minutes later, at the YMCA, Buddy said, “Man, 
you got it made now. These people will see to it that you get 
back home.” I tried to give him some of the meal tickets, but he 
refused. We shook hands and said our goodbyes. While I went 
into the warmth of the YMCA, Buddy headed back the way he 
had come, into the cold winds of the Chicago streets.
The YMCA was like a hotel. Approaching the guy at the 
desk, I handed him the envelope and started to explain who I 
was and why I was there. In a crispy and prissy voice, he said, 
“You needn’t explain. I know all the details.” Nevertheless, “Mr. 
Prissy” opened the envelope and read the letter. Then Mr. Prissy 
handed me a key with a room number on it. I located the room, 
saw how neat and clean it was, then located the shower, where I 
took a long bath, cleaning all the dirt and grime off. Also, I met 
a brother in the shower who, after learning of my plight, offered 
me a change of clothing, which I accepted. Afterwards, I went 
back to my room and slept for more than fifteen hours. When I 
awakened, it was almost noon. I headed for the cafeteria where 
I ate a big, luscious meal, then headed back to the Traveler’s 
Aid Bureau. Thinking I would be going back home that day, I 
hurried my pace. When I got there, Collingswood told me that 
though he had tried, he could not get in touch with my family. I 
had given him the right phone number, and I couldn’t understand 
him not being able to contact Mama. He told me to wait while 
he tried again. He went back into his office and I sat on a nearby 
bench. After about ten minutes or so, I looked up and saw two 
policemen approaching. Mr. Collingswood said, “Robert, I still 
cannot seem to get in touch with your folks. In the meantime, 
you will have to go with these two gentlemen.” My first impulse 
was to run, but I remained. Angrily, I told him, “Man, if I wanted 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   98 8/25/08   10:31:12 PM


--- PAGE 100 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
99
to go to jail, I didn’t need your help, I could have done that on my 
own.” He assured me that it wouldn’t be for long. 
The officers brought me to a juvenile detention home. The 
days and then the weeks crawled by. After about three weeks, 
when I thought I couldn’t stand being there any longer, in walked 
my caseworker. I did what I had seen the others do — I ran over 
to him and began inquiring about my case, telling him how long 
I had been there. After thinking a bit, he said, “You should have 
been gone.” He left with the promise of checking it out. About an 
hour later, he returned and told me that I would be going home 
that same day — that Mr. Collingswood of Traveler’s Aid had 
insisted on coming to sign me out himself! 
A few minutes past 3:00 p.m., Collingswood entered the 
dayroom, called out my name, and asked, “Ready to go home, 
Robert?” Was I! I said goodbye to my friends, and we left for the 
bus station. On the way Collingswood said, “Robert, I am sorry 
I had to lie to you that day when I told you I had called your 
people. It was the duty of the juvenile people to do that. After 
your coming to me, I did the next best thing by calling them and 
in case of juveniles, this is what I am suppose to do.” He went 
on, “If you had known I was going to call the juvenile people, 
you would have run, wouldn’t you?” I didn’t say anything. He 
had me right.
I was given a bus ticket and five dollars to buy food along the 
way. Collingswood escorted me to the bus, shook my hand and 
admonished me to go straight home. And with those words, he 
departed my world. In time, I would see him (as I saw Shorty and 
Jim, the couple in Chinatown, and “Buddy”) as another signpost 
along the course of my odyssey.
RobertKing_Interior.indd   99 8/25/08   10:31:12 PM


--- PAGE 101 ---
RobertKing_Interior.indd   100 8/25/08   10:31:12 PM


--- PAGE 102 ---
101
chapter 12
sitting on tHe bus tHAt tuesdAy nigHt, 
heading back to New Orleans, my mind flashed back over the 
events of the past month, and I didn’t like what I saw. I had 
arrived in Chicago on a freight train, with the hope of “making 
it.” I was now returning empty-handed on a Greyhound bus, 
defeated, ashamed and a little humiliated. Chicago had shown 
me just how frail and small I was; I had a lot of learning and 
growing up to do. I was like the frog in the well who jumped 
out one day and saw that the world was much vaster than he had 
thought, looking up. Awed and confused, he croaked himself 
to death. Well, I hadn’t croaked myself to death, but I was one 
hoarse frog.
On the other hand, I rationalized: had not I gained some-
thing? In defeat, isn’t there also a victory of sorts? Now I knew 
more about the world outside the South. Before falling asleep, I 
made a solemn promise to myself. I promised to one day return 
to Chicago. And this time I vowed it would be different.
To my surprise, no one ridiculed me for my “failure.” As a 
matter of fact I was praised by Mule, Houston, and others, who 
saw my adventure as something to be proud, and not ashamed, of. 
That is, all but Mama. She said, “Boy, you ought to be ashamed 
of yourself. What you trying to do, worry me to death? You leave 
home, don’t tell nobody where you goin’, I get a call you way in 
Chicago. I hope you learnt your lesson.”
About three days after returning, I began experiencing 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   101 8/25/08   10:31:12 PM


--- PAGE 103 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
102
excruciating pain in the balls of my feet. They felt as if someone 
were placing heated irons to them, setting them afire. I couldn’t 
stand or walk without the aid of crutches (which our next door 
neighbor loaned me when she learned of my predicament) and 
the only part of my feet that could come into contact with the 
floor (or anything else) were my heels. 
Mama diagnosed my case. She said my feet were frostbitten 
and brought me to the hospital. After standing in line for what 
seemed like hours (on my neighbor’s crutches), we finally reached 
the nurse’s desk. She bore a sour attitude and had a face to match 
it. It seemed she had won first prize at a sneering contest and was 
trying to stay in first place. Or maybe she was a devout member of 
the Daughters of the American Revolution (DAR). She sneered 
across her desk, and asked, “What’s wrong with you?” This was 
addressed to Mama, who said, “There ain’t nothin’ wrong with 
me. My son has frostbitten feet.” I then went on to explain what 
happened, my trip to Chicago, etc. When I finished, she said, 
“Well, I am sorry, but the doctors can’t do anything for frostbite; 
there is no cure.” After that she dismissed us by saying, “Next 
person, please,” in an exasperated manner. Mama, perhaps not 
realizing she could have demanded treatment, turned, me fol-
lowing, and left the charity hospital.
Three days later, the pain hadn’t yet let up. But I had began 
to notice that the pain was less intense when I kept my feet away 
from heat, and from this, an idea took shape: since heat increased 
the pain, cold would decrease it. I put my idea to test with a tub 
filled with ice cubes and water. I placed my feet therein and I 
felt the soothing effects. Wanting to be sure, I pressed the balls 
of my feet to the tub’s bottom. No pain whatsoever. Thinking I 
had found a cure, I stepped out of the tub and began jumping 
and shouting. But my joy was short-lived. For after being out of 
the cold water for about fifteen minutes, my feet went back to 
their normal temperature, and the red-hot pain was back. Well, 
so much for the cold water remedy, I thought. But while the 
ice water didn’t make my feet well, it gave me a reprieve from 
constant pain.
RobertKing_Interior.indd   102 8/25/08   10:31:12 PM


--- PAGE 104 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
103
But Mama was determined to make my feet well. She came 
back one day and said, “Junior, I can’t find nothing in the drug 
store to help you. I talked to the ‘drug store man’ and told him 
what you was doing to keep out of pain, and he told me to tell 
you to stop putting them in that water, if you don’t want to lose 
your feet,” I guess
I must have resigned myself to “losing my feet,” because I had 
no intention whatsoever of giving up my “remedy,” even if it 
was temporary. 
Unable to find anything at the pharmacy for frostbite, Mama 
resorted to a cure of her own. She went to the store and bought 
some rutabaga, which are like big turnips, in bunches. She sliced 
and dry roasted them, then placed them into thin linen strips 
and wrapped them around my feet while still scorching hot. She 
told me that it was an “old folks remedy,” and she had no doubt 
that it would “draw out the frost.” My belief in Mama (and her 
remedy) was the only thing that forced me to endure the intense 
pain I felt using that method. 
I dressed my feet in linen and rutabaga three times daily. The 
fourth day I was able to stand on them without feeling pain; less 
than two weeks later, I was walking as good as new.
Ten months had passed since I had returned from Donaldson-
ville, and I had yet to see my sister, Mary. I had begun to wonder 
about her. Then one night she knocked on the door. I opened it; 
she was standing there, holding her abdomen, moaning a little. 
She asked for Mama, her voice strained. Mama, hearing her 
name, came into the room and exclaimed, “Child, what in the 
world is wrong with you?” Mary didn’t answer, just continued 
holding her abdomen. Mama’s next words were, “Girl, is you 
pregnant?” Mary didn’t show any signs of pregnancy at all, but 
Mama was already getting dressed. When she finished, she said, 
“Come on, Junior, we have to go to the hospital. Mary is experi-
encing labor-pains.”
At the hospital, Mary was rushed to the emergency section, 
Mama with her. I sat in the waiting section. A few hours later I 
learned that Mary had indeed been pregnant and had given birth 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   103 8/25/08   10:31:12 PM


--- PAGE 105 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
104
to a still-born. The whole process — from the time of Mary’s 
knock upon the door, to her delivery — had taken less than four 
hours. And on the thirteenth hour, Mary left again, going back 
to whence she had come…
During the early months of 1958, I worked at odd jobs, noth-
ing permanent. Mama worked at odd jobs herself. She had ceased 
working for Aunt Clem, and had begun working for her other 
sister, Aunt Alma, who also owned a bar and restaurant. (Dur -
ing this period, the only businesses people of African descent 
were allowed to run were barber shops, small groceries, funeral 
parlors, barrooms and churches — the latter three in abundance.) 
Mama worked part-time for aunt Alma and also did housework 
for the white lady who owned the grocery store where she had 
established credit. I had a secret yearning to “retire” Mama from 
her meager jobs where she earned meager earnings and had 
nothing to show for her labors but the signs of weariness written 
on her face and body. But as things turned out, I was left with an 
unfulfilled yearning for all time…
RobertKing_Interior.indd   104 8/25/08   10:31:12 PM


--- PAGE 106 ---
photographs               
RobertKing_Interior.indd   105 8/25/08   10:31:12 PM


--- PAGE 107 ---
RobertKing_Interior.indd   106 8/25/08   10:31:13 PM


--- PAGE 108 ---
1.  My grandmother Alice, who raised me 
and who I will always call Mama.
2. My sister, Verna Mae.
3. My grandmother, Mary Larks.
4.  This is my son “Little Robert” who passed 
away at age five, while I was incarcerated.
5. My uncle, Robert King. 
1
2 3
5
4
RobertKing_Interior.indd   107 8/25/08   10:31:14 PM


--- PAGE 109 ---
1.   Kenya and her sidekick Robert at their new home in Austin, 2008. 
Photograph by Ann Harkness.
2. Being interviewed in London, 2008. Photograph by André Penteado.
3. Being interviewed soon after being released, 2001.
4.  In front of Truth mural by Rigo 23 in San Francisco, declared Robert King 
Day by Mayor Willie Brown on April 22, 2002. Photograph by Mark Eastman.
5.  In front of the ‘freedom’ monument of the African National 
Congress in South Africa after meeting with the ANC, 2003.
3
4
5
1
2
RobertKing_Interior.indd   108 8/25/08   10:31:15 PM


--- PAGE 110 ---
RobertKing_Interior.indd   109 8/25/08   10:31:15 PM


--- PAGE 111 ---
RobertKing_Interior.indd   110 8/25/08   10:31:15 PM


--- PAGE 112 ---
2
1
4
3
7
5 6
1.  Mural by Rigo 23 for the A3 in Los Angeles, circa 2002.
2. Illustration of me by Emory Douglas, circa 1998. 
3.  Mural by Rigo 23 in Bali painted by local kids upon 
my visit with Desmond Tutu in 2004. 
4.  Poster by Rigo 23, done after my release in 2001.
5.  Poster by former Black Panther Minister of Culture Emory Douglas to 
commemorate the Angola 3’s 36 years in solitary confinement, 2008. 
6.  Guards in front of Angola Prison, the “Last Slave Plantation,” 2002.
7.  Mural by Rigo 23 for the A3 painted by Rigo and scott crow 
in New Orleans during Critical Resistance, 2003.
RobertKing_Interior.indd   111 8/25/08   10:31:15 PM


--- PAGE 113 ---
RobertKing_Interior.indd   112 8/25/08   10:31:16 PM


--- PAGE 114 ---
1
2
3
4
5
1.  First protest against solitary confinement in front of Angola prison, 
and my first time to return to the prison since my release, 2002.
2.  Protest in support for the original ‘Angola 4’ (before the original 
cases were dropped). In the foreground is Jill Schaefer, a 
known FBI COINTELPRO informant, who disrupted and stole 
money from the original support committee, c. 1973. 
3.  Protesting Herman and Albert’s confinement in front of Angola, 2002. 
4.  Herman Wallace in the 1970s.
5. Albert Woodfox in the1970s.
RobertKing_Interior.indd   113 8/25/08   10:31:16 PM


--- PAGE 115 ---
3 4
1 2
7
5
6
1.  Making Freelines candy at my home in Austin after  
Hurricane Katrina. Photograph by Ann Harkness.
2.  Elatedly walking out of Angola Prison after 31 years, 29 of them spent in 
solitary confinement, February 2001. Photograph by Marina Drummer . 
3.  The only picture of the Angola 3 together, from left to right: 
Herman Wallace, Robert King, Albert Woodfox, 1990s. 
4.  Herman Wallace and Albert Woodfox during rare visit, and their 
first time to see each other since the early 90s, c 2001.
5.  Meeting my uncle William as adults after my release in 2001.
6.  With former U.S. House Representative Cynthia McKinney, 2007.
7.  With my good friend, and former Black Panther Minister of Defense 
Geronimo Ji Jaga (Pratt) who also served 27 years as a political prisoner 
before being released, 2007. Photograph by Marina Drummer .
RobertKing_Interior.indd   114 8/25/08   10:31:16 PM


--- PAGE 116 ---
RobertKing_Interior.indd   115 8/25/08   10:31:16 PM


--- PAGE 117 ---
4
2
1
3
1.  Me with kids in Pretoria, South Africa, 2003.
2.  From left to right: Lawyer Denise LaBouef, The Body Shop co-founder and 
head of the Roddick Foundation Gordon Roddick, and me in New Orleans 2008. 
3.  Greeting supporters at my release from prison, former Panther Marion 
Brown on left, February 2001. Photograph by Marina Drummer. 
4.  From left to right: Joju Cleaver (daughter of Former Panthers Kathleen 
and Eldridge Cleaver), Me, U.S. House Representative Maxine Waters, 
Former Panther Geronimo Ji Jaga in New Orleans, 2005. 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   116 8/25/08   10:31:17 PM


--- PAGE 118 ---
117
chapter 13
up until 1958, mAny memorAble events 
(some wanted, others unwanted) had transpired during my short 
life span. But that year ushered in an event that will follow me 
to my grave…
The day began like any other summer day, bright and sunny, 
lively and vibrant, a day easily taken for granted at fifteen. Walk-
ing with a friend, having nothing to do and not having seen Ruth 
lately, I decided to pay her a visit. We were met at the door by 
her eldest daughter, Ida, who was eleven at the time. She said, 
“Junior, she’s sick.” “What’s wrong with her?” I asked, entering 
the house. “I don’t know, just sick,” said Ida. I went straight to 
the room where Ruth lay on a bed, under a large pile of blankets. 
I found this strange because it was a burner outside, and much 
hotter inside the house. Concerned now, I asked, “What’s the 
matter, Ruth?” When she heard my voice she opened her eyes 
and said, “Oh Junior, I didn’t know you were here. I have a little 
fever, that’s all. I’ll be alright.” Looking down at her and seeing 
the beads of sweat upon her forehead, I asked, “Do you want me 
to go and get Mama?” knowing I would do so anyway, even if 
she said no. But she said, “Yes, go and get her, I want her to go 
to the hospital with me.” I made haste to get Mama, who, upon 
hearing that her “best child” was ill, dressed quickly, went to 
Ruth’s house, and from there they both went to the hospital. This 
was at about 1:00 p.m. 
Six…seven…eight o’clock, and neither Mama nor Ruth had 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   117 8/25/08   10:31:17 PM


--- PAGE 119 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
118
made it back. I went to bed early that night. About 9:00 p.m., I 
heard the insistent ring of our neighbor’s phone, then her knock 
on the wall (signifying that the call was for someone on our side 
of the house). “James, it’s your Mama,” I heard her say before 
dozing off again. The next I knew, I was being shaken violently 
by James. I remember saying, “Man, let me sleep.” But his insis-
tent shaking kept me from going back to sleep. “Wake up Junior! 
Ruth is dead…she’s dead.” 
No, no, no I thought; I’ll wait until Mama comes home and 
she’ll tell me better. Maybe the doctors had made a mistake. 
Maybe the phone will ring again, and Ruth will be alright… I 
actually willed myself into some kind of suspended animation, 
which lasted until Mama came home a few hours later and told 
us again that Ruth had died.
I tried and tried and tried to will it not to be. No. Not her, 
not Ruth. Not the understanding, the compassionate one. My 
Defender, my personal angel, protecting me from those who 
would harm me. Dead at the age of thirty-two, an untimely 
death. 
Once the event had passed, I was able to piece together the 
circumstances which led to her death. After she and her husband, 
Berry, separated, Ruth had applied for and got on welfare with 
the stipulation that she couldn’t have any more children. Her 
social worker had rubbed it on thick, had told her that if she 
came up pregnant, they wouldn’t hesitate to cut her off. Ruth 
held firm for four years, then became pregnant. And it was this 
pregnancy that cost her her life. 
Verna Mae, also separated from her husband, lived with Ruth. 
She was the only person besides Ruth who knew about the preg-
nancy. They had talked about it and decided to keep it from 
Mama and the rest of the family. Ruth knew she had to get rid 
of the baby, as Verna put it, but she kept putting it off. When she 
did decide to go through with it, she was more than four months 
pregnant. Whatever it was she took, it not only destroyed the life 
growing within her, but herself as well. Whatever the substance 
was, as Mama put it, “it ate up her insides” and proved fatal. I’ve 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   118 8/25/08   10:31:17 PM


--- PAGE 120 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
119
known a few major hurts in my lifetime. The death of Ruth was 
my first and foremost.
When it came to grieving over Ruth’s demise, I wasn’t alone; 
everyone in the family felt it, but Mama more so. During the 
wake and the funeral, raw, naked grief poured from her. One 
could almost reach out and touch that grief. She would repeat 
over and over, “Lord, I wanted Ruth to bury me; I wanted her 
to bury me.” 
With Ruth gone, her six children came to live with us. Besides 
Ida Mae, there were Clarence, Doris, Larry, Shirley, and Charles. 
Mama wanted to keep them all together. She had always main-
tained that it was unhealthy for a family to be split apart. I felt 
real close to Ruth’s children and was glad that they were with us. 
But this arrangement was not destined to last very long, for while 
Ruth’s children would remain together and eventually grow up 
together, it would not be with us…
About five months after Ruth’s passing, Mama allowed herself 
to be taken to the hospital. I say “allowed” because she put it off 
as long as she could. Mama knew she was sick and knew that 
this sickness was unto death. The day she went to the hospital, 
we learned that she had cancer and the doctors had given her no 
more than six months to live. This was September 1958.
Mama was in the hospital about two weeks before coming 
home. Thereafter, it was back and forth to the hospital for a 
few months, and finally she was sent home to die. Aunt Carrie, 
Mama’s eldest sister, who had nursing experience, came from 
California to “make y’all Mama comfortable before she die.” 
And in the process, she never ceased to remind us that it was 
worrying about us that had caused Mama to want to die. “Y’all 
Mama knew she had cancer, but she wanted to die. Y’all wore 
her out. She deliberately waited until it got to the stage it was, 
to make sure the doctors couldn’t cure her.” If Aunt Carrie was 
trying to make us feel guilty, she sure enough succeeded where 
I was concerned.
During this period, I felt closer to Mama than I ever had before. 
The only time I would leave the house was when I managed to 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   119 8/25/08   10:31:17 PM


--- PAGE 121 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
120
find a little work, which was seldom. I wasn’t the only one who 
had begun to realize that Mama would be lost forever to them. 
Everyone else realized this too, especially Mule. The only word 
that can describe Mule during this time is subdued. Mule, always 
quick-witted, could not find any retort to the voice of death. 
As time passed, Mama’s condition worsened. Aunt Carrie 
wired William, who was in the Coast Guard, stationed in Maine, 
telling him that Mama didn’t have more than a week or so left. 
A few days later, William was home with a week’s leave. Prior 
to his coming, Mama had been having “ups and downs,” but 
while William was home, she seemed to be more up. I believe 
William soon got the idea that Aunt Carrie and the doctors had 
been wrong. I know I did. To my delight, Mama looked to be on 
the road to recovery. When the week was up, William headed 
back to base. Before he left, Aunt Carrie said, “I wish you had 
gotten your leave extended, ‘cause you gon’ have to come right 
back.” She was right.
A day after William left, Mama’s condition “dropped pretty 
low,” as Aunt Carrie put it. She told us to stay close, because 
Mama would die that night or no later than the following day.
The next day Aunt Carrie called all of us who were at home 
into Mama’s room and told us, “Y’all Mama is dying.” I stood at 
the foot of the bed, looking down at the now-withered form of 
Mama. The pillow on which she rested her head seemed to engulf 
her and made her seem smaller than she actually was. There was 
a struggle for breath; I moved closer to the bed. Her breathing 
resumed, but was irregular. An intake of air…. a pause…. an 
expulsion. Inhale. Pause. Exhale. The time between her breaths 
became longer…. finally I watched the last shallow intake of 
breath… and the final sigh. Mama, having birthed nine children 
and raised two more (my sister and me) “gave up the ghost” at 
the young age of forty-nine. Aunt Carrie, now crying along with 
everyone else, said, “There goes Monk; there goes y’all Mama.” 
This was March 1959.
Ruth’s death had caught me unprepared and the impact it had 
had on me had sort of used me up. Mama’s death did not have 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   120 8/25/08   10:31:17 PM


--- PAGE 122 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
121
the same impact; it was expected, and we all had gotten used to 
the idea. But while the two deaths didn’t have the same impact 
on me, they bore the same significance; I had lost two champions, 
two giants. 
At the funeral, all of Mama’s children, except Henry, were 
there. William had returned from Maine. Mama was eulogized 
in the church she had joined after leaving Gonzales, St. Stephen’s 
Baptist Church. Then we all piled into automobiles and made 
the trek back to Gonzales, where a brief service was held for her 
in Zion Baptist Church, the church of her youth. Afterwards, 
Mama was laid to rest next to Grandma and Grandpa.
After the funeral, family members and friends went their sepa-
rate ways, never to be seen again. Among those was my uncle, 
William. After the funeral, he went back to the state of Maine. 
A few years later, he and his wife, Evelina, and their children 
moved to Oakland, California. From the day of Mama’s funeral, 
up to the time of this writing, none of the family (except James, 
for a brief period) he left behind, has seen him. So indeed, Wil-
liam, the quiet, thoughtful, resourceful one — who never seemed 
a part of us — left our lives for many years to come.
Less than a month after Mama’s death, all of Ruth’s children 
went to live with a paternal aunt, where they all grew up together, 
fulfilling Mama’s wish.
RobertKing_Interior.indd   121 8/25/08   10:31:17 PM


--- PAGE 123 ---
RobertKing_Interior.indd   122 8/25/08   10:31:17 PM


--- PAGE 124 ---
123
chapter 14
ApproAcHing my sixteentH birtHdA y, 
less than two months after Mama’s death, I was walking with two 
companions, Calvin and John, when we were unceremoniously 
stopped and arrested by police, who said that Calvin and I fit the 
descriptions of two men who had robbed a gas station two weeks 
earlier. At the station, under pressure, John told the cops that he 
didn’t know whether Calvin and I had robbed the gas station 
or not, but that we had talked of robbing places and had asked 
him if he knew of any good places to rob. This strengthened 
their suspicions against the two of us. So what began as a routine 
investigation turned out to be a case against Calvin and me. We 
were charged with the robbery.
Calvin, approaching twenty, would be tried as an adult if he 
went to trial. Instead, he copped out for five years and was sen-
tenced to Louisiana State Penitentiary, at Angola, and later trans-
ferred to the state’s only youth prison, DeQuincy. I went before 
a juvenile court. The judge, whose name was Blessing, decided 
to bestow a blessing upon me by sentencing me to an indefinite 
stay at the state reformatory in Scotlandville, called “Scotland” by 
most people. It was said that when Judge Blessing was deciding 
your punishment, he would fold his hands in front of his stom-
ach. If he twirled his thumbs in a forward motion, it meant you 
weren’t going to Scotland. If he twirled his thumbs in a backward 
motion, you were going to Scotland for sure. I watched intently 
and knew where I was heading before he told me. 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   123 8/25/08   10:31:17 PM


--- PAGE 125 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
124
The thought of going to Scotland (whose proper name at the 
time was State Industrial School for Colored Youth) didn’t dis-
turb me one bit. So much bad had happened to me in so short 
a period of time, I felt that nothing could be worse than what I 
had already encountered. I nevertheless wondered what it would 
be like. 
The trip from New Orleans lasted only a few hours. At a little 
before noon, the car pulled up at the front gate of the place that 
would be my home for the next year. At first glance, I thought the 
driver had made a mistake and that we had pulled into a college 
campus. But a dude who had run away and was being brought 
back with me, assured me that it was the reformatory.
I was brought to an office in the administration building and 
told that I would be residing in one of the “big boys’” dormitories. 
On the way to the assigned dormitory, the “runner” (an inmate 
whose job it was to escort new arrivals) brought me to a small 
house resembling a shed. A man sat by the door, and from his 
vantage point he could see the entire campus. The runner said, 
“Got one for you, Reverend Pert.” In a deep voice that sounded 
like thunder, the Reverend said, “You heard what the runner 
called me, didn’t ya? But just in case you didn’t, I am going to 
repeat it. My name is Reverend Pert, and like everyone else here, 
you’ll call me that.” By now he had stood up. And I noticed just 
how much bigger he was than me. Continuing, he said, “You 
from N’aw‘leans. I hear y’all likes to gang fight. Well, we don’t 
‘low no gang fights here. You either go to school or you work. On 
Saturday mornings you are ‘lowed to play on campus ‘til noon. 
Afterwards, you watch television, and some Saturdays, you get 
a chance to dance.” I was a little confused at his saying I’d get a 
chance to dance, but I held my tongue. The Reverend went on: 
“Sunday you go to church. If you got any money in your account, 
you can draw two packs of cigarettes and a quarter every week. 
You will be living in Pinecrest dormitory, and you will line up 
over there.” I thought he had dismissed me, but the Reverend 
had one other admonition. “Oh, yes, one last thing. While you are 
in the dining hall, dancing or whatever, there will be no feelin’ 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   124 8/25/08   10:31:17 PM


--- PAGE 126 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
125
on the girls.” I was more confused than ever. Of all the talk I 
had heard about Scotlandville, I had never heard that there were 
females housed there. 
After being dismissed, I strode into the midst of a group of 
boys hanging out and playing games. Not many minutes later, I 
heard something that sounded like a bullhorn. It was Reverend 
Pert, bellowing long and loud. His bellow carried from one end 
of the campus to the other, and brought an immediate end to 
all activities. I saw dudes lining up in all directions, in front of 
their respective dormitories. After being counted by the “house-
fathers,” (the men supervising the dormitories), we headed for 
the dining hall. 
Being a new boy, and not having changed from my street 
clothes into standard issue khaki shirt and pants, I stood out 
like a tin can in a pile of bottles. As I entered the dining hall, 
I heard “a new boy” and “bet he’s from the Crescent City.” It 
was not so much what was being said as who was saying it that 
caught my attention. Girls! Long tables filled with some of the 
most attractive girls I’d ever seen; they were beautiful, and they 
were bold. Some even reached out to grab my hand, despite the 
admonishing they got from their housemothers (female supervi-
sors). I didn’t say anything, I only smiled and looked and took 
pleasure in the sight. 
That first day, I made a lot of new friends. As a matter of fact, 
every brother who was from New Orleans was “my friend.” The 
reasoning behind this was that there were inmates from nearly 
every part of Louisiana: New Orleans, Shreveport, Baton Rouge, 
Monroe, Lake Charles, Lafayette, and other unheard-of places. 
In spite of Reverend Pert’s rules, gang fights were the order of 
the day, and your hometown determined both your friends and 
your enemies. 
I had a choice of going to school or work. I elected to go to 
school. About two weeks later, I was leaving one of my class-
rooms for a recess period when this sister I knew from the 
streets, Louise, came up to me and said, “Robert, do you know 
Cat?” The answer was no. Louise went on: “Well, she told me 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   125 8/25/08   10:31:17 PM


--- PAGE 127 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
126
to tell you that she digs you, and that she will be standing at the 
far end of the hallway at break. If you want to see her, you can 
meet here there.” I was about to go to the restroom and sneak a 
smoke, but I detoured back the other way. Louise had waited for 
me to decide and walked with me. As we neared the end of the 
hallway, she pointed to one of the most beautiful girls I had ever 
laid eyes on and asked, “Well, do you dig her?” And I almost 
screamed: “Yes!”
Cat and I got acquainted that day and I fell in love with her. 
Cat was a beautiful, charcoal black sister who could be picked 
out in a crowd of a thousand. Just looking at her, one had to 
wonder how a girl like her could have ever ended up in a refor -
matory. Cat and I sat at the same table, wrote love letters to each 
other, to be read at night, and promised that we would marry as 
soon as we were released.
A few days after meeting Cat, I noticed this brother watching 
me; he had a mean, vicious look on his face. They called him 
Pugnose because of his alleged boxing ability. He wasn’t one of 
my enemies, because he was from New Orleans, so I wondered 
just why he was “eye-fighting” me. I soon found out. He told 
everyone in the dormitory that I was messing with his girl, and 
that he “had a cake baked for me.” He and Cat had actually 
broken up, but that didn’t make any difference nor did it make 
any difference that Cat had chosen me. I was told by some of the 
guys that my going with Cat was going against the code, break-
ing a long-standing rule which held that once a courtship existed 
between a boy and a girl, even though it had ended, the girl 
could not court any other boy as long as the first boy remained 
in the institution. The boy could court another girl, but the girl 
still couldn’t court another boy. This didn’t make any sense to 
me, and code or no code, I decided that I would continue to 
court Cat for as long as she wanted, and Pugnose could continue 
to stare, glare, and snare if he wanted to. I didn’t care. I could 
have taken the low road and tried to reason with him, tried to 
convince him that the code was unfair. But that wouldn’t have 
done any good. After telling everyone that he had a cake baked 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   126 8/25/08   10:31:17 PM


--- PAGE 128 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
127
for me, he had to make good on his euphemistic threat. Too, I 
was new on the set, and there was no way he could let a new guy 
break the code, especially at his expense. He would have looked 
like a chump. 
Fighting was, of course, taboo, and anyone caught doing 
so faced the supervisor’s paddle or strap. But boxing was a 
sport. Every afternoon, during school days — weather permit-
ting — we had a recreation period. On this day, the teacher/
coach held a pair of boxing gloves high above his head and said, 
“Alright, who wants ‘em?” Pugnose quickly reached for a pair 
and began putting them on. No one else moved. The teacher 
said, “All right, who wants the other ones?” Still no one moved. 
By now everyone knew the tension between Pug and me, and 
everyone — even the coach — had their eyes focused on me. I 
heard someone said, “He wants you, Robert, go ahead!” I still 
didn’t move. Pug, now much more sure of himself, reached over 
and grabbed the gloves from the coach’s hand. Then he handed 
them to me. While I put the gloves on, Pug’ went into his stance; 
shadow-boxing and beating up on the wind. 
In case the reader has been wondering, the truth of the matter 
is, I wasn’t afraid of Pugnose, despite his reputation as a boxer 
and a brawler. By this time, I had fought many street fights, 
and while I hadn’t yet learned “scientific boxing,” I instinctively 
had the art of fighting down pat. After lacing up the gloves, 
I squared off with Pug and he and I began to swap leather. I 
think I surprised everyone, especially Pug. He was just a routine 
slugger, and his mechanized, predictable moves were no match 
for my undisciplined street style. I threw punches from every 
possible angle, and connected most of them. To sum it up, Pug 
didn’t have a chance that day. After the fight, he was admitted to 
the infirmary for three days. When he returned to the dormitory, 
he kindly gave me his blessing to continue my relationship with 
Cat. The code was broken. We became sort of friends. 
Not long afterwards, Cat went home to New Orleans and 
from there, her mother sent her off to Connecticut to live with 
a relative. She and I communicated for a while, but as with all 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   127 8/25/08   10:31:17 PM


--- PAGE 129 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
128
fires, when there is no feeding of the flame, it eventually dies out. 
Maybe it just wasn’t our time. 
As a result of that incident with Pug, my status on the campus 
rose, both among the inmates and the supervisors, especially the 
coaches and teachers. I did well in school, and I played every 
sport well, except basketball. I soon learned that once a status 
was achieved, it decreased one’s chances of coming into contact 
with the supervisors’ straps, which were used unsparingly at the 
time. I worked in the kitchen when I wasn’t in school. The cooks, 
mostly women, went to Reverend Pert and told him, “Reverend, 
that man (I had convinced them that I was nineteen years old) is 
gittin’ outta hand, and you gotta do somethin’ ‘bout him.” Rever-
end Pert came to me and told me that since they had complained, 
he had to “satisfy the wimmin folks.” He gave me a few token 
swats with the strap, telling me, “You understand, I got to please 
the wimmin folks.” I understood…
During the Christmas holidays, the reformatory had a policy 
to allow some of the inmates a visit home. I was granted a five-
day leave. 
Verna Mae now lived in the house on Magellan Street where 
Mama used to live. When I got home, Verna Mae was there, 
and so was her friend, Cherry. Cherry and I got acquainted and 
made passionate love throughout the night. Prior to Cherry, I 
had never had intercourse with a girl. (I don’t count the girls I 
used to “play house” with before reaching puberty.) Cherry was 
the same age I was, approaching seventeen, and we spent the 
nights in heaven, at least for a while. Then all hell broke loose. 
For Cherry, I learned, had no “cherry.” She had had multiple 
partners before me, and one of them had given her a venereal 
disease, which she in turn had passed on to me. When I returned 
to the reformatory, the head of my penis had swollen to twice its 
normal size, and a foul odor emitted from it: it dripped, and hurt 
like hell. I had what some termed “the bull-head clap.” A better 
word was gonorrhea. 
I was expelled from the State Industrial School for Colored 
Youth in 1960. As I was leaving, my counselor said, “Well, 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   128 8/25/08   10:31:17 PM


--- PAGE 130 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
129
Robert, you know you can’t come back here. Your next stop is 
the penitentiary.” He said this as if he knew or understood the 
inevitable link that existed between the colonized subject and 
prison: that Black men reaching a certain age were — as George 
Jackson put it — destined for prison or the grave…
RobertKing_Interior.indd   129 8/25/08   10:31:17 PM


--- PAGE 131 ---
RobertKing_Interior.indd   130 8/25/08   10:31:17 PM


--- PAGE 132 ---
131
chapter 15
vernA noW lived Alone in tHe House 
that Mama used to occupy. After Mama’s death, Mule had moved 
out; also James, who, after a short stay in Maine with William, 
now lived in Chicago. Houston, Robert, and George lived nearby 
and visited occasionally. When I got home, there was no welcom-
ing home party in the traditional sense. Verna Mae was there to 
greet me, and with her was Ellen.
I had known Ellen for years. She was about five years my 
senior. Her younger brother, Clifford, and I were friends. Look-
ing at Ellen that day was like seeing her for the first time. She and 
I got reacquainted, and intimate, that day. I didn’t have any real 
sense of what a relationship between a man and a woman meant, 
until Ellen. She taught me the ropes about sex. She led and I 
followed. I caught on quickly, and in time we became equals. 
I now had responsibilities to shoulder, and a job was essential. 
For the first months after leaving the reform school, I managed 
to find temporary employment. During this period, Louisiana 
(or maybe it was just New Orleans) had a “vagrant law” which 
required males of working age to show “visible means of sup-
port.” Policemen could stop a male (especially a Black male) and 
ask for check stubs, employer’s phone number, etc. If he couldn’t 
show sufficient “means of support,” the police had the power to 
arrest him, and hold him in detention for seventy-two hours; the 
law became known as “The 72.” The cops had a field day abusing 
this law, applying it to Blacks even when support was evident. 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   131 8/25/08   10:31:17 PM


--- PAGE 133 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
132
The few times I was arrested on a “72,” I produced check stubs 
proving I worked. Nevertheless, I was charged, booked, and 
held for 72 hours under “investigation.” I would get arrested 
on a Saturday night and be held until Tuesday night. When I 
returned to work, someone else had usually taken my place. But I 
was lucky. Many brothers who were arrested on a “72” ended up 
doing time in prison. While being investigated and interrogated, 
they would be coerced by the police into signing “confessions” to 
unsolved crimes.
Not long after my release, I learned that Hillary, my father, 
had moved back to New Orleans. Babs had also returned to the 
city, but she and my father — while seeing one another on occa-
sions — were separated. I met with my father. Even though I 
had “hated” him and Babs during my adolescent years, I con-
cluded that nearly all children when growing up at some point 
“hate” their parents. I was no exception. As it turned out, Hillary 
and I had a good reunion; he recognized me as an equal and, in 
time, we developed a pretty good relationship, considering all 
that had happened. 
The inability to find secure employment and matching pay, 
pushed me beyond the tolerance level; my desperation launched 
me into a direction contrary to the acceptable modes of society. 
I became a petty thief. I thought I was being discrete, and I was 
not violent in my acts. However, despite what I considered my 
discretion, by early 1961, I was being pursued in earnest by the 
New Orleans police for “questioning.” I had become a fugitive in 
my own hometown. So with the cops on my heel, I left the state 
and went back to Chicago.
As I alluded to earlier, James, after a brief stay in Maine where 
our brother William was stationed, had moved to Chicago. After 
a week or so of wandering about the city of Chicago, I found 
James on the South Side. He managed to get me a job where he 
worked, and while in Chicago this time, I really got a chance 
to see what the glamour was all about. It was a huge city, teem-
ing with all kinds of activities. I got the chance to patronize the 
famous Club Delsia, which was frequented by all the big names 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   132 8/25/08   10:31:17 PM


--- PAGE 134 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
133
of the time. I also got the opportunity to visit the infamous “47th 
and Calumet” area, where women of all shades and races, all 
types and ages, advertised their wares: “Hey Daddy, you want a 
date?” and, “Honey, come my way, she can’t do anything for you, 
I can.” The lines of women in competition extended for blocks. 
Their pimps, not far away, gambled in the hallways, competing 
with one another as ardently as their whores did for tricks. This 
was Chicago; this was part of the “bright lights.”
After about five months of Chicago, I became restless, moody, 
and homesick, and perhaps a little lovesick for Ellen, too. Lov-
ing and missing Ellen had the effect of dimming my vision of 
what awaited me should I return to New Orleans. But James, 
sensing my mood, and having no real knowledge of my extra-
curricular activities back home, suggested that I take a short 
leave of absence, which my job allowed. This was all the urging 
I needed. I made arrangements, boarded a bus, and headed back 
to New Orleans and disaster.
About ten days after being back from Chicago, I teamed up 
with a couple of my “Scotlandville” buddies. We met at the lake 
that day — picking up two more buddies — and decided against 
swimming in favor of riding around in an old jalopy belonging 
to one of them. Early that evening, while driving around in the 
downtown area, we were converged on by police cars, flashing 
their lights, sirens wailing. Policemen with drawn guns ordered 
us out of the car. According to them, three of the men in our 
car (there were five of us) fit the description of three men who 
had pulled a couple of robberies earlier. Upon seeing one of the 
cops, my heart sank. For he was the cop everyone called “Minnie 
Cat”, the same cop who had been responsible for my going to 
the reformatory. He now headed the arrests and the subsequent 
investigation.
As it turned out, none of the alleged victims identified me as 
being a perpetrator of either of the robberies. Steve, Duck, and 
Jellybean, however, were tentatively identified as being partici-
pants in at least one, if not both, of the robberies. It was assumed 
by the officers that since I wasn’t identified, I must have been 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   133 8/25/08   10:31:17 PM


--- PAGE 135 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
134
the driver of the getaway car. On this theory, I was booked. This 
theory could have been easily disproven had I been able to afford 
an attorney, because at the time, I didn’t know beans about driv-
ing an automobile and couldn’t tell the difference between first 
gear and neutral. A paid attorney might have been able to get this 
fact across even to an eager prosecutor who couldn’t care less how 
a conviction was obtained. But as it turned out, the theory that I 
had driven the car persisted, and in the end, prevailed.
The other, lesser crimes I was supposedly wanted for before 
leaving for Chicago, paled in favor of this new and bigger crime. 
After a brief stay in one of the city jails (called precincts at the 
time), we were shipped to the New Orleans Parish Prison to 
await the outcome. Lawyers appointed by the state approached 
us, mostly to get us to plead guilty, or “cop-out” for the ten years 
that the district attorney was offering. This ten-year offer was 
made to everyone except Jellybean, who, having no juvenile 
record, was offered seven and a half years, which he promptly 
accepted. The rest of us held out — for a while, anyway.
In 1961, the maximum sentence for an armed robbery was 
thirty years. Since then (and at present), it has more than tripled 
to ninety-nine years. And if one is unlucky enough to have a 
prior conviction, a 198 year sentence is common. But there we 
were with our lawyers telling us we didn’t have a chance of 
“beating the rap;” with the district attorney threatening to give 
us the whole thirty years if we went to trial; and with jailhouse 
lawyers urging us to cop-out and “run with the ten years,” or we 
might end up like Cocky Lindy (the nickname of the brother 
who was the first to receive the thirty year sentence, after refusing 
to cop-out). With pressure coming from all sides, the three of 
us — Steve, Duck, and I — talked it over and decided to “run 
with the ten years.”
The promotion from a juvenile facility to an adult prison 
didn’t take long, and it was quite easy: all it took was for me to 
plead guilty to an alleged armed robbery that two people com-
mitted but four pled guilty to. 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   134 8/25/08   10:31:18 PM


--- PAGE 136 ---
135
chapter 16
AngolA prison WAs knoWn by A number 
of aliases at the time: the Bottom; the River; the Ponderosa; the 
Mound; the Farm; the Hill — and probably many more which 
have escaped through time. Its location then, and now, is in the 
backwoods of northwest Louisiana. 
After traveling north on Highway 61 for a couple of hours, 
just before reaching the outskirts of St. Francisville, the police 
van turned off onto a stretch of narrow, winding road flanked 
on both sides by dense woods. Every now and then, a house came 
into view, as if to remind us that this remote area was part of 
civilization. This road lasted about twenty-one miles, and at the 
very end of it was the front gate of Angola Prison.
T welve prisoners, all black — Including Steve, Duck, Jelly-
bean, and me — chained together, stepped from the van. Passing 
through the gate, I saw a large, two-story building before me. I 
got the impression that someone had built up sand mounds and 
placed large cardboard boxes upon them in the shape of a huge 
T. This area was (and is) known as “The Hill” because it sits 
higher than the rest of the prison grounds. In this building was 
the prison hospital, death row, and CCR (closed cell restriction), 
the prison’s maximum security unit.
Entering the prison, I got the impression that I had been 
hurled backwards, into the past. The speech, the manner, and the 
actions of the prison’s keepers was indicative of a former period; 
their utter contempt towards the kept was a well-oiled science, 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   135 8/25/08   10:31:18 PM


--- PAGE 137 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
136
which the likes of Simon Legree (the slave owner in Uncle Tom’s 
Cabin) would have envied. I also noticed a number of other dudes 
dressed differently than those I knew to be the keepers and the 
kept, in khaki uniforms. As I was being processed into the peni-
tentiary that day, I learned of their function.
Those dudes dressed in khaki outfits were also prisoners. 
Their function was the backbone, so to speak, of the prison; 
over ninety percent of the prison’s security rested upon their 
egos and their shoulders. The “khaki-backs,” as they were called, 
shouldered this responsibility like well-trained hound-dogs, as 
if their very existence depended upon it. They internalized the 
keepers’ wishes with zeal. They manned most of the towers, 
guarded work lines, assisted in (and initiated) beatings, and 
headed the chases whenever some unfortunate attempted to flee. 
They had the run of the penitentiary, and the majority of them 
bore as much, or more, contempt for their fellow prisoners as 
the keepers did. 
After being processed, I was sent to Camp F , where the newly-
arrived were kept for approximately thirty days. This period in 
the reception center covered both quarantine and orientation 
for the “fresh fishes.” It didn’t take long for me to realize that 
everything centered around work. Work was the prison’s theme, 
its cardinal rule. As the keepers put it, “ev’ry swingin’ dick” was 
required to work, except for those locked down twenty-three 
hours a day for security reasons and thus denied the privilege to 
earn two and a half cents an hour (big deal!). 
After about three days in the reception center, we were called 
to the camp’s kitchen for continued initiation and orientation. 
After filing into the building, we came face to face with a Cap-
tain of the keepers. Without preliminaries or diplomacy, the 
man began, “I just summoned y’all heah for a few minutes to 
let y’all know a few facts.” He paused, took his time, and gazed 
at the forty-odd faces in the room in a slow, deliberate manner. 
Continuing, he said, “Some of y’all is goin’ in population soon; 
some of you will get jobs (which meant out of the field), but most 
of you will go to the field. Y’all work ever’ day but Saturday and 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   136 8/25/08   10:31:18 PM


--- PAGE 138 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
137
Sunday. During cane (cutting) season some of y’all will work 
those days, too, until cane season is ovah. Refusin’ to work is 
a serious charge, and we don’t tolerate it. If’n you refuse, we 
got a place to send ya.” He then reached into his back pocket, 
pulled out a handkerchief and blew his nose (which sounded like 
a horn), and asked, “Do I make myself clear?” After seeing a few 
bowing heads in assent, he went on, “Y’all come heah to do time, 
and by golly, y’all gon’ to do it if’n we have to kill ya and bury ya 
ovah thar (pointing) on Point Lookout. While yo’re heah you do 
yore own time, mind yore own business. Politicians will not be 
tolerated and no instigatin’ is allowed.” Then he turned and left 
us there, musing over what he had said. 
Angola covered about 18,000 acres at the time. Scattered over 
this vast acreage were many smaller prisons, commonly referred 
to as “outcamps.” Then there was the main prison, built in 1957, 
referred to by a variety of names: “The Walk,” “New Prison,” 
or the “Big Yard.” It consisted of cell blocks (which, at the time, 
had a status between medium and maximum security), sixteen 
medium security dormitories, and an equal number of minimum 
security dormitories. Of the more than 4,000 convicts held at the 
time, the main prison housed more than half.
On the day I was classified, they assigned me to the main 
prison; my living quarters were Hickory-4 and my work assign-
ment, Farm Line #7. I walked into the dormitory, which con-
sisted of about sixty beds, all neatly made. There were two people 
inside. One face, I could put no name to; the other belonged to 
my uncle Henry.
I knew Henry was still in prison, but until then, not where. He 
had long ago stopped writing the family. I had figured I would 
run into him before long, but I had no idea it would be so soon. I 
was glad to see him, for it had been more than six years since we 
had last cast eyes upon each other. It was a pity, though, that we 
had to meet in prison. He and I didn’t really know each other; we 
were strangers, despite having the same blood flowing through 
our veins. That day, we set out anew to become brothers and 
friends; in time, despite our age differences, we became peers. 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   137 8/25/08   10:31:18 PM


--- PAGE 139 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
138
Just before noon, the field hands and other workers began 
pouring up the walk, going to their respective dormitories to 
await the count clearance before the noon meal. Entering the 
dining hall, looking into the sea of black faces, I saw many that 
were familiar from the reformatory. Many others from the refor-
matory who weren’t at Angola that day would eventually show 
up another day.
October was cane-cutting season — two and a half cents an 
hour. In the months ahead, not only would I learn to cut cane, but 
also learn blading, ditching, quarter-draining, hoeing stubble, 
and a number of other tasks I had never before heard of, nor 
thought of doing. 
During sugar cane season, all attention was focused on cane-
cutting by the keepers. They were enthusiastic about it, and we 
prisoners were expected to show just as much enthusiasm and 
many did.
I had never cut cane before, but I was expected to learn that 
day. I did. There were old hands on the headland, whose job it 
was to count off rows and set others in, four to a set and offer 
a “lick to fresh fishes.” A lick was simply showing a new man 
how it was done very quickly, then leaving him on his own. Any 
problems the new man had after getting that first lick would be 
solved by the foreman, whose options were to call a patrol and 
send the man to the dungeon, or write up a disciplinary report, 
charging him with “dragging ass” (malingering).
Many of those who received disciplinary reports and were 
dungeonized for work offenses weren’t malingering. They 
just couldn’t do any better. Even veteran prisoners, after years 
of trying, never did. But no one was exempt where work was 
concerned, especially during the sugar cane season, which had all 
the hallmarks of chattel slavery, even to the two weeks off once 
the cane-cutting season was over, usually in December.
While it is true that, at the time, Blacks made up nearly two-
thirds of the prison population, the contrast between the number 
of white work lines and black work lines was stark. Blacks had 
some twenty-odd black lines, while whites had about three. 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   138 8/25/08   10:31:18 PM


--- PAGE 140 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
139
Even during sugar cane season, white lines were rarely seen 
working. Whenever we did come across them, on a certain day, 
in a certain cut, the next day would find them still in the same 
cut. Out of the fields, the numbers were reversed. Classification 
clerks, parole clerks, pardon board clerks, hospital clerks, and 
whatever other clerks were needed for the main prison to func -
tion, these positions were reserved for whites only. The prison 
boasted of only one black clerk, a protestant chaplain’s clerk. 
The all-white administration that ran Angola was overtly con-
ciliatory towards the white inmates, and showed unrestrained 
contempt for Blacks. 
Though only eighteen when entering Angola, I felt much 
older. And thanks (no thanks) to a rough street life, I felt I 
had paid my dues. My years of triumphs and trials had left 
me arrogant; I had what was called a “pretty ego.” I had the 
attitude that life had nothing more to offer me, nor could life 
get anything from me, for I had nothing. But in spite of feeling I 
had nothing, I felt I had done it all, and should I perish the next 
moment, so be it. I wouldn’t be missing out on anything. For 
the first few months after my arrival, I abandoned all caution 
where my fellow prisoners were concerned: a most dangerous 
approach at the time, for Angola was like a war zone, where 
my “devil may care” attitude and approach were mirrored 
hundreds of times in other prisoners who didn’t care either. 
If I somehow had the misconception that I was setting a pat-
tern, I was sadly mistaken, for I was only allowing myself to 
follow an already-set pattern, established by those who came 
before me. In this war zone, a day didn’t pass without casual-
ties. I witnessed young men, the flower of the Black Nation, 
dying for naught at the hands of their brethren, who delighted 
in slaying them, and saw their deeds as noble. It was indeed 
fratricide in practice, but with “bloods wasting bloods” it was 
more akin to suicide, self-destruction. My fellow “bloods” and I 
were caught up in this disastrous pattern, which no doubt would 
have inevitably destroyed me, had not Henry, concerned for my 
well-being, intervened. His seasoned wisdom (gained from years 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   139 8/25/08   10:31:18 PM


--- PAGE 141 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
140
of experience) persuaded me to move with more caution…to 
care. So I “lambed up” and survived.
After cleaning up my act, I needed something to replace what 
I had cast off. A void developed, and deepened. Feeling “clean 
and empty,” I attempted to fill this void by reading. At first I read 
everything I could get my hands on, the Bible included. And 
then (for a while) I ceased reading anything but the Bible. Thus, 
I was introduced to religion and Christianity as never before. It 
touched that part of me in which I had previously felt nothing or 
which no one could touch. And in time, I internalized Christian-
ity, made it my life style.
I had always been mindful of the imbalances of the society in 
which I subsisted—the unanswered questions that left me disori-
ented and wanting. At this time in my life, I needed something 
to justify my acceptance of this slavery-like condition, both in 
society and in prison. I wanted to give reasons why society was set 
up the way it was for people of African descent; to give reasons 
why my keepers acted the way they did; to give reasons why I 
(we) shouldn’t wage fervent struggle (but pray) in response; to 
give reasons why I (we) should remain passive in the wake of so 
much persecution, and turn the other cheek. The Bible, while it 
didn’t answer all questions, gave reasons. And this made life, as 
it was, more acceptable.
Armed with my new outlook, I engaged only in what I saw 
as constructive living, forsaking worldly aspirations. I took to 
Christianity with a fervor; after studying and learning about it, 
I taught it, ate with it, and slept with it. And for a while, put 
nothing before or after it.
After six months had passed, I got a new job assignment 
working in the kitchen. I met a guy (we became friends, of sorts) 
called “Cap Pistol.” Cap was also from New Orleans, and was 
noted among prisoners and “free folks” alike for his culinary 
talents. He made some of the best pecan candy I’d ever tasted. 
Cap learned of my interest and shared his secrets with me. Since 
then, I have added my own twist to making the candy, which I 
perfected while in prison. Instead of calling my candy pralines, I 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   140 8/25/08   10:31:18 PM


--- PAGE 142 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
141
call them “freelines” (thanks to a lady named Lorrie who coined 
the word). I have been making them since my release…
Those early years in Angola saw me become one of the cooks 
in the main kitchen, working along with Henry, with lots of 
leisure time. Still later, with the release of the chaplain’s clerk, 
I was reassigned to that job and given a trustee’s status, for all 
it was worth. During the two years or more that I was around 
Henry, I learned a lot from him about the art of boxing. At the 
time, he was reputed to be the “best boxer on the river.” I wanted 
some of that. So he and I began my training and he taught me, 
as he put it, everything he knew. When he had finished teaching 
me, I continued to teach myself. At that time it was my desire to 
go back into the “free world” and engage in boxing.
Being in the described state of conformity — that is, seeing my 
condition as being decreed — had its benefits. The time passed 
quickly. 1964 came around, and soon after that, Henry was 
released. Later that same year, I was brought before the parole 
board and missed it. Six months later they brought me back, 
and this time I made it. After a few more months of red tape, 
after more than four years of imprisonment, they released me in 
November 1965. I was twenty-two years old. 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   141 8/25/08   10:31:18 PM


--- PAGE 143 ---
RobertKing_Interior.indd   142 8/25/08   10:31:18 PM


--- PAGE 144 ---
143
chapter 17
upon my releAse, not only did i feel i 
had accomplished something attitudinal and emotional, but I also 
felt a physical accomplishment. Coming to Angola, the war zone, 
and leaving it alive was indeed an accomplishment.
Home, as I knew it, had long been destroyed, even before my 
going to the reformatory. Therefore, I had no home to go to. But 
the condition of my parole was that I would take up residence 
with Verna Mae, who had moved to New Orleans, east. In fact, 
most of the immediate family had moved to that area; my mother 
had always lived there. Robert, Houston, George, and James, 
who had by this time returned from Chicago, and Mary had 
become a part of the city’s crowd. Henry, upon his release, had 
moved east to Philadelphia, leaving his family.
Mule still lived in Algiers and he was his same old self, except 
that he didn’t drink anymore and walked with a cane due to a 
stroke. He now lived with a former neighbor, who was herself 
getting on in years. And what of Ellen? When I first went to 
prison, she had weighed heavily on my heart and mind. But with 
the prospect of a ten-year sentence before me, I had forced her 
back into the recesses of my consciousness and after my conver -
sion, she was pushed even further away. When I was released 
from prison, she was only a memory. Our time had passed. And 
besides, I had locked gazes with the woman who would eventu-
ally become my wife…
When I first saw Clara, Clara who became my wife, it was 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   143 8/25/08   10:31:18 PM


--- PAGE 145 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
144
as if I had known her all my life, as if we were only attempting 
to continue something that had started eons ago. Our attraction 
to each other was mutual. She had two lovely daughters from a 
previous relationship. With nothing standing in our way, and 
both professing Christian principles, we wed. I was working for 
a small construction company at the time. I was also training, and 
came to know a brief semi-pro boxing career under the name 
“Speedy King.” 
Clara, her youngest daughter, Marilyn, and I (with “Lil’ Rob-
ert” on the way) took up residence in the uptown area. During 
this period, I saw a lot of my mother, who seemed better able to 
deal with her self-consciousness in my presence. As a result, we 
were able to get much closer. In the summer of 1966, she had to 
be hospitalized. I visited her regularly and my wife did likewise. 
Actually, my wife (twenty-two years old at the time) and my 
mother had known each other since my wife was a tot; after our 
marriage, which my mother readily sanctioned, they hit it off 
real good. They found humor in being in each other’s company 
and I found humor in the fact that I had two women in my life 
both named Clara!
I never did find out the exact reason my mother had to be 
hospitalized, but I do know that it was related to her drinking 
and that the doctor, after releasing her, told her she had to stop 
drinking. As she had so many times before, she vowed she would 
stop. This vow she could never keep.
Less than a month later, she was dead.
At the wake, I met a lot of relatives I hadn’t seen in years; 
some I had never before met. One of those was Clara’s youngest 
daughter, my sister, Ella Mae. I was twenty-three years old.
Clara was not brought back to Gonzales, as Grandma, 
Grandpa, and Mama had been. Instead, a burial site was found 
in Providence Memorial Park, right off Airline Highway. Her 
remains are buried there.
In saying some final words for Clara, what can I say except that 
despite all, she was the one responsible for my being in this exis-
tence and, to a great degree, responsible for what I have become. 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   144 8/25/08   10:31:18 PM


--- PAGE 146 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
145
Though I have a beef, a complaint, about my station in this life, 
I have no beef about the person I have become. Therefore, she 
accomplished her mission. 
In spite of all that had occurred in my life, and in spite of all 
the “small inconsistencies” in my behavior, I had no problem 
identifying with the establishment and what it stood for. Not 
until the latter part of 1966, when the seeds of severance were 
implanted in my conscience, and the emotional tie I once felt for 
the American system began to fade…
In October of that year, while making my way home, after 
getting a lift from an acquaintance who had been driving down 
South Claiborne Ave., we passed a parked car. It was dark but 
we were able to see inside — and inside was a white dude who 
appeared to be unconscious. We both became concerned, and, in 
spite of my having some reservations, I was glad when Boogie 
stopped his car, got out and walked back to check on the guy. I 
remained in the car and watched through the rear view mirror 
as he looked inside, checking for signs of life from the occupant. 
From where I was, it appeared that Boogie was talking to the 
dude, and I saw movement, which indicated that the man was 
okay. Boogie came back and said, “The dude is drunk, probably 
sleeping it off.” With that he got in and we drove off. Within 
minutes we were surrounded by police cars, sirens wailing. 
Policemen jumped from their cars even before they had come 
to a stop, guns drawn, shouting “Get outta the car!” and “Reach 
for the sky!” (I immediately got a flashback to five years earlier.) 
We were frisked, handcuffed and unceremoniously placed in one 
of the police cars. An officer sent to check on the man in the car 
came back, saying, “He’s okay, still drunk.” Then he went to our 
car, gave it a superficial search, and came up with a watch from 
(as he said) “beneath the front seat.” And just like that, we had 
us a robbery charge.
On the night we got caught in the police dragnet, we didn’t 
know that they had the car under surveillance and were waiting 
for someone to approach. Being the good concerned citizens we 
thought ourselves to be, thinking that that dude needed help, 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   145 8/25/08   10:31:18 PM


--- PAGE 147 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
146
we had approached the car and played into their hands. The 
police’s official version of the incident was that they had spotted 
the drunk in the automobile and, instead of bringing him in, had 
left him there with a watch planted close by, waiting for someone 
to approach. The result was our arrest.
My version has been stated. Furthermore, I have no doubt 
whatsoever that the watch the police “found” under our front 
seat was planted there by the cop who searched the car. It was as 
clear a case of simple framing as I’d seen. I was able to make bail 
and was released that same night. The following day, knowing 
my innocence and wanting to do the right thing, I called my 
parole officer and informed him of this unusual turn of events. 
After hearing my version of what had transpired, he assured 
me that, if I was innocent, I had nothing to worry about. Then 
just before hanging up the phone, making it appear as an after -
thought, he said, “Oh, Robert how about coming down to my 
office? I want to go over those details again; I want to make 
sure I’ve got them right.” I didn’t think anything odd about 
it. Assured I didn’t have anything to worry about, like a good 
sheep going to slaughter, I made my way downtown to the P .O.’s 
office. I was told to wait a few minutes, and then he approached 
me, flanked by two other dudes, saying, “Robert, I am going to 
have to look into this matter further.” He then produced a set 
of handcuffs and said, “In the meantime, I am going to have to 
place a hold on you.” 
I couldn’t believe what was about to happen. I started to pro-
test in the only way I knew how, by proclaiming my innocence. 
One of the dudes flanking him must have mistaken my protest 
as a form of resistance, for he gave me a cold stare and rearrested 
me, revoking both my bail and my parole. He drove to the parish 
prison himself. At this time, my wife was eight and one half 
months pregnant. T wo weeks after my arrest, she bore a son, 
whom she named after me.
Six months after my arrest, I was still in jail, waiting to go 
to trial. It was about this time, the spring of 1967, that Clara 
came to visit me and told me that my sister, Mary, had died from 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   146 8/25/08   10:31:18 PM


--- PAGE 148 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
147
pneumonia. She was twenty-seven years old. Through the efforts 
of my wife, I was allowed to attend a brief funeral service held 
in the church. Afterwards, they ushered me back to the prison 
without allowing me to attend the burial.
Mary’s death was another in a series of losses for me. The 
harshness of her life-style had finally caught up with her. Right 
after my mother’s death, I had looked for her, to bring her to the 
funeral; she was, after all, the eldest child. I found her in a pretty 
bad state. I tried to get her to come with me, but she said she 
would come by later. As it turned out, Mary hadn’t shown up in 
time. When she did show, it was past 3:00 a.m. and the funeral 
parlor was closed for the night. The next day, about noon, when 
the procession was about to leave for the burial site, we found her 
sitting on the funeral parlor’s step, weeping. 
I was told by James at the brief service I attended for Mary, 
that she had “left the streets for good” before dying. I was glad 
of that. But what left a lasting impression upon me was her final 
gesture towards our mother, her weeping for her loss on the 
funeral parlor steps.
Eleven months later, I was still awaiting trial in the parish 
prison. By this time, I had made more than a dozen court appear-
ances, supposedly going to trial, but no victim ever showed up. 
Each time I went, the district attorney had tried vainly to get 
me, along with Boogie, to plea bargain — that is, to cop-out to a 
lesser charge for which we would have received a small sentence 
and credit for time served, which would have probably put us 
on the street. That was the theory. But this theory couldn’t apply 
to me, only to Boogie. I was on parole, and any conviction war -
ranted an automatic revocation. Boogie, who could have taken 
the prosecution’s offer six months earlier, had gallantly held out 
knowing that we both would be exonerated once we went to trial. 
But after nearly a year, his resolve was all used up. He went for 
the district attorney’s offer and was released the same day. I went 
to court that day also and the district attorney moved to drop 
the case against me. The court granted his motion, and the case 
against me was dropped.
RobertKing_Interior.indd   147 8/25/08   10:31:18 PM


--- PAGE 149 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
148
I was surprised. It looked like a victory. When the case against 
me was dropped, I was expecting to be released also. But that 
proved to be a vain hope, for I had been arrested with a felon 
who had been forced to plead to guilty to another felony. His 
guilty plea, though to a lesser charge, affected me as if I had pled 
guilty myself. The elaborate motion the prosecutor had made to 
the court to drop the case against me, and the court’s subsequent 
granting it, was purely for show. It was all a cruel charade.
When it became clear that I wouldn’t be released, I tried get-
ting the eleven months I had been held counted, but to no avail. 
It was considered “dead time.”
In September 1967, they returned me to prison to complete 
my original sentence. A few days after arriving back at Angola, 
I appeared before the Parole Board and had my parole “officially 
revoked.” Shit! That was a laugh. So it hadn’t been “officially” 
revoked nearly a year ago…
RobertKing_Interior.indd   148 8/25/08   10:31:18 PM


--- PAGE 150 ---
149
chapter 18
tHis lAst move by tHe st Ate WAs like 
water on a dying ember, smothering my already fading emotions 
and for the first time in my life, I stopped seeing ill-happenings 
as being decreed, and began to place the shoe on the foot where 
it belonged. I ceased subjecting myself blindly to the system and 
the powers-that-be. I was now primed for the education that 
eventually came.
Meanwhile, here I was, back in Angola knowing who was 
responsible for my being here, but not really understanding why. 
At this stage, causes and effects had little meaning. But I went 
about my prison activities suffering a lot less peacefully than I 
had the last time around; with the shadow of awareness came 
grief, and I would let nothing justify or moderate my grief this 
time around.
Initially, I worked in the field, but being an “old hand” and 
having a reputation as a cook, it didn’t take me long to get a job 
in the Camp A kitchen.
Clara made infrequent visits; each time she came, she brought 
the children. I had first seen my son at my sister’s funeral. He was 
a very small tot at the time. Children weren’t allowed to visit at 
the parish prison, so I was unable to see him the whole time I 
was there. By the time his mother brought him to visit me at the 
penitentiary, he was almost two years old and, if I might add, 
quite receptive. So it was in the prison visiting room that my son 
and I first got acquainted.
RobertKing_Interior.indd   149 8/25/08   10:31:18 PM


--- PAGE 151 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
150
Finally, the fifteen months I owed the state were behind me, 
and in January 1969, I was once again released from prison, dis-
charged after serving almost nine of the original ten years.
When I was released from prison in January 1969, Angola was 
worse than it was in 1961. Murders — condoned and perpetu-
ated by the prison officials — were rampant. Economic slavery, 
characterized by long hours of work for only pennies an hour, 
was the norm, as was sexual slavery, or the selling of “weakly” 
inmates into forced homosexuality for sexual exploitation.
While my wife Clara had made infrequent trips to Angola 
with Lil’ Robert, as we called him, she and I were emotionally 
separated. Nevertheless, we made a half-hearted attempt to get 
back together. I even managed to get a job in the city’s largest 
cemetery, receiving minimum wage. 
Clara and I eventually separated for good. However, despite 
the separation, I managed to see my son on a regular basis. By 
this time, there wasn’t much left of my immediate family. Mule, 
though plagued with health problems, was still hanging on. But 
while not much had changed regarding my family, I had begun 
to notice a mood shift in people old and young. 
In my more than two years away, a change had taken place in 
society. One big leap forward seemed to have occurred. There 
were all kinds of fads, whims, and trends, due to technology. 
People clung to (and changed) trends as they changed their 
dress. But the thing that most caught my attention was the leap 
in consciousness that had taken place, seemingly overnight, in 
the psychology of Black people in America. This new mood was 
widespread in New Orleans. This new state of mind, which even-
tually became known as “Black Consciousness,” had replaced (or 
had begun replacing) the old treadmill mentality that Blacks had 
of forever imitating and wanting to be like white folks. Now 
everybody who was Black, even those with just a “trace of black 
blood,” wanted to be Black and Proud. Even many of those 
Blacks who had been “passing” for years wanted to come back 
to the blackness they had previously denied. 
I loved it. And like so many others, after being caught up in 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   150 8/25/08   10:31:18 PM


--- PAGE 152 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
151
it, I accepted it as completely as I could, given my level of under -
standing at the time. I was Black and Proud.
Though we no longer related as husband and wife, Clara and 
I didn’t put too much distance between us. We sort of understood 
each other’s needs. Lil’ Robert was about three and a half years 
old by this time, and I was determined to see that he not suffer 
the poverty I had suffered at his age. Those basic necessities of 
life that had seemed like luxuries to me at his age (when I was 
fortunate enough to get them) would be things he would take for 
granted. I would see to that.
I didn’t have any major problem with finding employment as 
before, but, as before, the pay was minimal. To supplement my 
income, I began once more to engage in semi-pro bouts, fight-
ing as “Speedy King” in the limelight of the likes of Al (Alvin) 
Phillips, Jerry Pelligrini, and Percy Pugh. I was at the gym every 
chance I got and fighting whenever I could on whatsoever card 
came up. But with the more than two year’s interruption, my 
boxing had suffered a major setback. Many of my former spar -
mates had gone on, in my absence, to become local favorites, and 
some enjoyed national ratings. I had a lot of catching up to do, for 
I was still striving in the semi-pro ratings. But I didn’t catch up. I 
stayed with boxing a while longer, but I began to lose some of my 
interest and began to falter in the discipline it took to be a fighter. 
Boxing was a sport I loved, and loved doing. But not wanting to 
make a mockery of myself, I made a strategic retreat.
RobertKing_Interior.indd   151 8/25/08   10:31:18 PM


--- PAGE 153 ---
RobertKing_Interior.indd   152 8/25/08   10:31:18 PM


--- PAGE 154 ---
153
chapter 19
tHe yeAr WAs 1970. i HAd been on tHe  
street for a year, managing to provide for myself and Lil’ Rob-
ert, whom I saw regularly. Then my destiny caught up with me 
again. 
According to a police affidavit dated February 18, 1970, an 
alleged robbery was committed by two male subjects. The alleged 
victim said that one of the perpetrators was about forty years old, 
but she could not identify him. The other, a younger man, she 
could, and eventually did, identify. The man she identified was 
subsequently arrested and charged with the crime. 
Some two weeks after the incident, detectives converged upon 
my uptown residence without a warrant, forced their way inside, 
held me at gunpoint and methodically ransacked my dwelling. 
Their plundering naturally turned up a gun. I was told I was 
wanted for questioning in a robbery. They then took me to police 
headquarters and booked me.
Later, I was sent to the parish prison, placed on the same tier 
with Wortham Jones Jr., who had been previously identified 
as one of the perpetrators. When we learned that we had been 
arrested for the same charge, we talked. Jones said, ”Man, these 
cops are only feelin’ in the wind, chasing ghosts; they ain’t got 
nothin’ on me or you.” I knew they didn’t have anything on me, 
but I wondered how they could have tied me in with him? How 
had I become his forty-year-old accomplice at the age of twenty-
eight? I found the whole thing to be rather bizarre. Even more 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   153 8/25/08   10:31:18 PM


--- PAGE 155 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
154
so when, after about three weeks, my state-appointed attorney 
came to me with an offer from the D.A.’s office — if I pled guilty 
to the charge, the district attorney would see to it that I got only 
fifteen years! Naturally, I refused.
Not having the money to make the exorbitant bond placed 
upon me ($50,000!) I had to be content with waiting it out. I was 
eager and ready to go to trial, but knowing a little of the inner-
workings of the judicial system, I knew my wait could turn into 
a very long one. 
In my talks with Jones, what I didn’t know and what he chose 
not to tell me was that almost immediately after the alleged crime 
was committed, police had shown nine mug-shots to the victim. 
(It was, and probably still is, customary for police to show photos 
to victims of recently-released prisoners.) After viewing the pho -
tos, the victim had identified only Wortham Jones Jr. The police 
had then arrested Jones and given him the usual third-degree 
(their trademark) and forced him to select a photo (his testimony 
at trial). The photo Jones had selected was mine. This had given 
the police the “probable cause” needed to arrest me and hold me 
in jail for nine days without charging me. During those nine 
days, police made frequent trips back to the victim, urging, coerc-
ing and coaching her telling her that Jones had “admitted” I was 
his accomplice. So the victim, who hadn’t previously identified 
me as being one of the perpetrators, became convinced that I was. 
And the rest is history…
At the trial some three months later, the victim was convinced, 
beyond any doubt, that I was the “forty-year-old man” who had 
accompanied Jones in robbing her. My defense countered, “Look 
at him! The defendant is only in his mid-twenties, and could 
pass for twenty; how do you account for that?” The fact that 
she couldn’t account for it made no difference. Her in-court 
identification was all that mattered, all that was needed to satisfy 
the law. 
That day in court held many surprises for me. But the most 
startling, the most unexpected, was yet to come.
The prosecutor, attempting to administer the coup de grace, 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   154 8/25/08   10:31:19 PM


--- PAGE 156 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
155
called Jones to the stand, to be a witness for the state. I was 
not surprised, since I already knew about his role in my being 
arrested. I knew it was all lies, so I was barely listening as Jones 
took the stand and admitted, under oath, that he had pulled the 
robbery. The prosecutor then asked him about his accomplice; 
was he now seated in the courtroom? The room was quiet, and 
when Jones’s voice broke the silence with an emphatic “No!” it 
became quieter. The prosecutor looked at the judge in panic, 
then turned back to Jones and said, “Would you repeat your 
answer?” “No, my accomplice ain’t here,” said Jones. The pros-
ecutor’s face went white, even whiter, that is. “What? You don’t 
know Robert Wilkerson? He wasn’t with you on that robbery?” 
To that Jones replied, “I don’t know Robert Wilkerson and he 
wasn’t with me on no robbery.” Then Jones went into a loud 
and angry diatribe, telling the court that it was looking at “a case 
and victim of police brutality.” He then began pointing to scars 
that he said had been inflicted on him by police, at one time or 
another. When he was arrested for the robbery in question, he 
told the court, the police had beaten him while showing him 
mug shots (mine included), asking him which of the men in the 
photographs were his accomplices. He took as much torture as he 
could before finally picking one of the pictures at random as his 
“accomplice.” Further testimony by Jones revealed that the police 
had then drawn up a “confession” and had forced him to sign 
it. When he finished testifying, he said to the district attorney, 
“Look, man, if the police had shown me your picture and asked 
me was you the one with me on that robbery, I probably would 
have said yes.” 
At this point, had the district attorney really been interested 
in the proper administration of justice, he would have, with the 
consent of the trial judge, declared the proceeding a mistrial. 
Instead, he chose to continue the sham. However, my hopes had 
begun to soar. I felt that the truth would determine the outcome 
of the trial. And the truth, I knew, was on my side.
There were other witnesses called who had been at the place 
when it was robbed. None, however, could link me to the crime. 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   155 8/25/08   10:31:19 PM


--- PAGE 157 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
156
And I had witnesses to testify about my whereabouts at the 
approximate time the robbery allegedly occurred.
The trial ended that night with the prosecutor urging the 
jurors not to believe Wortham Jones Jr. “He is a liar!” he said in 
resounding tones. About two hours after leaving, the jury reen-
tered the courtroom. I was tense with anticipation, knowing I 
would be freed. Tense moments also passed for my friends and 
relatives. 
With the jury seated, the judge asked if they had reached a 
verdict. “Yes, your honor,” replied the foreman. “Well,” said the 
judge — smiling all the while — “let the court hear the verdict.” 
The foreman said, “We, the jury, find the defendant guilty as 
charged.” I sat there, transfixed with awe, terrified at the abuse of 
power I had just witnessed. The feeling then changed to indigna-
tion. I focused my anger on the jury. How could they, I thought, 
after all the evidence to the contrary? I then saw what “friend of 
the court” really meant. I learned what the district attorney had 
known all along. He knew he had a jury who, in the majority, 
were friends of the court. 
I must, however, give credit where credit is due. All jurors 
aren’t so easily persuaded. T wo of them at my trial — one black 
and one white — when the jury was polled, expressed their 
opinion in a manner that left me no doubt they were in dissent 
with their fellow-jurors: “Not guilty, absolutely not!” and “Not 
guilty, no way!”
I sat there in the aftermath, bathed in revulsion, while the 
prosecutor shook the hand of each individual juror, grinning 
like a wolf while doing so; the judge, from his bench, thanked 
them for doing such a “splendid job,” a broad smile etched on 
his face. 
Due to years of suffering, privation, and other hardships, a 
sophistication — commonly called, “knowing the game” — has 
developed among subjects in America. This is nature’s way 
of balancing, her way of making it up to those downtrodden 
individuals. 
While all subjects (“subject” is here used interchangeably with 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   156 8/25/08   10:31:19 PM


--- PAGE 158 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
157
African-American, but in a broader sense, it can refer to all 
people who are victimized by the system) aren’t exactly players, 
all, beyond doubt, are aware of the game. The most aware are 
the most dispossessed, the lumpen, the so-called “criminal ele-
ment.” The lumpen subject, by decree of the powers-that-be, is 
cut off from the economic security enjoyed by others and must 
therefore put his or her knowledge of the game into full play 
just to survive. With cunning, developed over a long period 
of having to struggle, he/she must extend and stretch himself/
herself beyond acceptable boundaries. To him/her there is a 
justifiable self-respect — even a challenge — found in playing 
out of bounds, pitting his or her wits against the system, getting 
over wherever, whenever and however he/she can.
At the same time, getting over on the establishment never 
means collaborating with police or other enforcers. In 1970, at 
the time of my trial, many lumpen subjects of the day took pride 
in seeing that the “game” was played straight and one of the 
ways of playing it straight was never ratting on a fellow subject. 
And so, as you can imagine, I had a difficult time putting Jones 
into perspective. For long moments after the guilty verdict, I 
was killing mad with him; I branded him a collaborator and a 
rat. But then I began to think: how could he have ratted on me 
when I wasn’t his actual accomplice? In spite of feeling used, 
hurt, and being the biggest loser at this bizarre throw of the 
dice, I had to conclude that Jones had stretched the “game” as 
far as he could, in an attempt to stay loyal to the code. The way 
he saw it, by selecting one of the photos the police showed him, 
he was leading them away from his true accomplice. Plus, the 
man in the mug shot wouldn’t be in any real danger of being 
convicted because he didn’t look at all like the man who was 
actually with him. To Jones, this was all a part of getting over 
on the system. 
After perceiving all of this, I couldn’t stay killing mad with 
Jones. This is why after being returned to jail, I was able to 
restrain myself when he came up to me and said, “Man, I’m 
sorry. Ain’t no way in the world those people should have found 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   157 8/25/08   10:31:19 PM


--- PAGE 159 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
158
you guilty. I just picked you knowin’ they couldn’t convict you, 
that you’d beat the rap, man. You didn’t look nuthin’ like the 
dude man, nuthin’ like the dude!”
I understood Jones’s logic, but I didn’t tell him this. I still felt 
the need to be killing mad with him; and although I wasn’t, I 
wanted him to think I was. So I didn’t say anything to him.
In the final analysis, my only beef with Jones was that he had 
not made me aware of this months earlier. Had he done so, my 
lawyer might have been able to somehow alter the circumstances 
in my favor. No, I wasn’t angry at Jones anymore. He had told the 
truth at trial, and it wasn’t he who had twisted the facts to find 
me guilty. The legal system had only proven what I had already 
begun to feel: that it ultimately cares little about guilt or inno -
cence, especially of black subjects. Its main concern is to obtain 
a conviction, to close the books and “clear” the case. In a process 
such as this, one can be morally innocent, but legally guilty.
Later that night, lying in my bunk, my whole life flashed 
before me. I refused to direct my anger toward Jones, a fellow 
victim. Instead, I became angry (and am to this day) at the ”jus-
tice” system, its deliberate wanton deficiency and gullibility.
Thinking about my past re-awakened something within me. 
Remembering my years with my father, a connection emerged. 
Just as I had felt overwhelmed in Hillary’s house by his unfair -
ness towards me, I now felt overwhelmed by the system and its 
injustices. For the first time since being captured, I thought of 
escape. “That’s my way out, my way of striking back,” I thought. 
My thoughts and actions would meet, embrace as theory and 
practice should do. And to not do what I felt needed to be done 
would be something akin to a betrayal to my new maturity, my 
new hard-earned awakening. But most of all, I knew that should 
I remain neutral in the wake of this new consciousness, it would 
be a betrayal of my sanity. I now felt psychologically whole, as 
one might feel who had been afflicted with a perpetual ooz-
ing sore, which had abruptly dried up as a result of getting the 
proper medication. 
T wo weeks later I was brought back to court and sentenced 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   158 8/25/08   10:31:19 PM


--- PAGE 160 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
159
to thirty-five years in prison. This meant nothing to me, for as I 
have said, the system no longer had any moral hold on me. After 
the sentencing, the state’s appointed attorney gave his notice of 
appeal. That was only a formality, one in which I wouldn’t par -
ticipate. I would “appeal” all right, but the type of appeal I had in 
mind would be far removed from tradition and formality.
As it turned out, there were other brothers in jail who also felt 
this need to appeal to no one but themselves, where freedom was 
concerned. Together we proceeded to plan. Circumstances did 
not allow us to plan beyond the escape, which was only known 
to a few of us, because of possible collaborators within our midst. 
We kept it a secret until the last minute. Of the sixty-odd prison-
ers living on the tier in squalid, dehumanizing conditions who 
now had a chance to make their bid for freedom, only about a 
third chose to do so after the way had been cleared by those of 
us who planned.
Of the twenty-odd who did make the break, only three actu-
ally escaped. I was one of those three.
Most were apprehended within minutes. They had actually 
made it out of the prison, but weren’t able to make themselves 
“invisible” in time. All of them suffered intense torture at the 
hands of the New Orleans police and prison deputies, who felt 
embarrassed and humiliated because of the escape. All were 
charged with new crimes (charges later dropped). The saddest 
note came some six hours after the jailbreak, when one of the 
brothers — Pulpwood, who had helped in the original plan — 
was spotted by a prison deputy, cornered and killed. The deputy, 
also a “brother,” was promoted to sergeant.
A week after the escape, there were only two of us still at large. 
A day or two into the second week, the other brother negotiated 
his own capture, and that left one. Me.
I stayed invisible for nearly two weeks before I was informed 
on (agents later told me) by a fellow subject who saw, recog-
nized, and reported me to my enemies. So in June 1970, four 
months after the ordeal had begun and exactly one month after 
my trial and conviction, and subsequent escape, I was once again 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   159 8/25/08   10:31:19 PM


--- PAGE 161 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
160
in captivity. I was charged with aggravated escape, and later 
brought back to court and sentenced to an additional eight years 
in prison. 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   160 8/25/08   10:31:19 PM


--- PAGE 162 ---
161
chapter 20
noW bAck in JAil, i pAid more Attention 
to current events: the face of America was undergoing a major 
transformation, especially where African-Americans were con-
cerned. I began to feel myself a part of something whole, some-
thing big, something I could not define at the moment. One day, 
while watching the small television in the hall through the bars, 
an announcer cut into the regular programming, informing the 
viewers that a group of Black militants — males and females — 
had barricaded themselves in an apartment complex located in 
the lower Ninth Ward and were “shooting it out with the police.” 
This caught my attention: it was something unprecedented in the 
city of New Orleans and as each scene unfolded, the kinship I felt 
with the group — whoever it was — grew. 
Later I learned that the militants in the house called them-
selves “The National Committee to Combat Fascism,” or NCCF . 
Still later, I learned that they were actually members of the Black 
Panther Party.
I had already been on the verge of “awakening,” and the emer-
gence of the Black Panther Party in New Orleans completed this 
awakening. The group, twelve in all, miraculously suffered no 
casualties. All were arrested and housed in the New Orleans Par-
ish Prison. I was fortunate to meet most of the group, consisting 
of nine males and three females, who managed to communicate 
with their male counterparts in spite of being held in another 
section of the facility. These females also communicated with 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   161 8/25/08   10:31:19 PM


--- PAGE 163 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
162
other prisoners besides their comrades. It was through this prison 
communication system that I met Cathy (or “Top Cat”), Leah, 
and Elaine (also known as “E-Baby”). Top Cat was a source 
of strength to many of the prisoners, and she was my greatest 
inspiration. In her letters to me, she uttered the Party’s doctrine 
as if she had written it herself and her in-depth knowledge 
of Marxism was second to none. She was fully dedicated and 
conducted herself as if she were in a hurry to accomplish an 
important mission. She remained true throughout her confine-
ment. During my years of incarceration, I often wondered what 
ever happened to Cathy. Upon my release, I learned that she had 
become an “ancestor,” dying in a Midwestern city, alone, aban-
doned by the very people that she was willing to die for. Other 
females affiliated with the New Orleans Black Panther Chapter 
(with the exception of Betty Toussaint Powell, who was shot in 
a second raid by policemen acting as priests, but survived and 
later came to jail) escaped jail time. They were Marion H. Brown 
and Mary (who later became members of the Party), and Linda 
who remained a “community worker.” These three had become 
affiliated with the Black Panther Party while students at Tulane 
University. Joined by Shirley Duncan (the youngest Pantherette 
at the time) and Althea Francois, these women zealously visited 
Party members and would-be members who were imprisoned 
at the time. Even to this day, Marion and Althea are still visiting 
imprisoned Panthers…
Ronald Ailsworth was one of nine Panthers arrested during 
the first police raid on the New Orleans chapter. If inspiration is 
likened to a two-sided coin (and held in my hand) with Top Cat’s 
face appearing on one side, then Ron’s face undoubtedly graces 
the other. It was Ron, working alongside Alton Edwards (or “E. 
D.”) and others, who helped secure the safety of those inside the 
house and thwarted a massacre by the police. It was Ron’s knowl-
edge of and revelations about the Party that ultimately commit-
ted me to their concepts. The keepers had separated him from 
the original group of Panthers, who were kept on tier C–1. Ron 
was sent to C-3, where I was kept. Shortly thereafter, another 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   162 8/25/08   10:31:19 PM


--- PAGE 164 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
163
Panther, Shelly Batiste (now an ancestor) was arrested and also 
sent to C-3. It was through Ron, though, that I was introduced 
to the Party’s teachings and Platform. We began to hold political 
discussions, and it was through these discussions that I grasped 
the historical plight of Blacks and other poor people in America. 
I also learned the art of collectivity, and the means and methods 
of struggle…
The conditions in the prison were horrible. The tiers, origi-
nally built to house forty-eight prisoners, were holding twice that 
many. Toilets ran all night, and water, infested with feces, would 
run into the hallways where prisoners had to sleep. Louse-infested 
mattresses and covers were given to us. Huge rats, coming up 
from the sewers, challenged prisoners for their food — which 
was inadequate anyway, both in quality and quantity, having 
no nutritional value. Many prisoners were held in these sordid 
conditions for two years or more, without being charged, tried, 
or sentenced. This practice later prompted the Panther brothers 
housed on tier C-1 to resort to drastic measures in order to rectify 
this. T wo deputies were held hostage, which got the attention of 
prison officials and the public at large.
On C-3 where I resided, we tried to negotiate with the keep-
ers to no avail; the practice of dehumanizing us continued. Ulti-
mately, we engaged in a hunger strike in which several hundred 
prisoners participated. Ron, Shelly and I were singled out as 
agitators and sent to another facility that housed federal prison-
ers. There we continued our political discussions and protests, 
educating those brothers who were there before us. 
After about six months, they returned me back to the parish 
prison. I met more members of the New Orleans Black Panther 
chapter, those caught up in the second police raid. Among them 
was Charles “Chucky” Scott (now an ancestor) who was respon-
sible for my becoming an official member of the Party. I also 
met Harold (“Poison”) Holmes (also an ancestor) and Donald 
Guyton, now Malik Rahim, who remains an advocate for justice 
and prisoners rights. He spearheaded the efforts to garner sup-
port for Herman Wallace, Albert Woodfox, and myself. In time, 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   163 8/25/08   10:31:19 PM


--- PAGE 165 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
164
we became known as The Angola 3. 
Contrary to what the power structure would have us believe, 
the Black Panther Party’s ideology was not cut from the block of 
gangsterism. Rather, its ideology defined the overall Black expe-
rience in America — past and current — and provided Blacks 
and other oppressed peoples in America with alternative ways 
of resisting American-style repression politically, economically, 
racially and/or socially — by any means necessary — as advo-
cated by one of the Party’s benefactors, Malcolm X.
The Party recognized the myth of democracy, particularly 
where Blacks were concerned, and set itself up from among the 
individuals downtrodden by the system. The goal was always for 
the people to be their own vanguard. It boasted a sound politi-
cal objective. Its main points were: We want freedom! We want 
justice! Land, Bread, Education, Housing. An end to police brutality 
and occupation of the Black communities. The Party took pride in 
and embraced nationalism or nationhood, where Blacks were 
concerned and it advocated internationalism, where oppressed 
peoples of the world were concerned. The Party saw revolution 
as the only means of altering the existing gap between the haves 
and the have-nots. I could not help but embrace its concepts, 
then and now.
Since that day, the Black Panther Party has become defunct. 
Over the years, its members have been imprisoned and mur -
dered. Its ideology has been subverted. In the Black Panther 
Party, Blacks had a truly legitimate political representative and 
defender for the first time. This is not to say that the Party was 
the only legitimate political party that Blacks have ever known, 
but it is saying that the Party was more truly legitimate than any 
other. This is because of its willingness to implement means to 
back up its political ideology. 
Malcolm X recognized the fact that the same conditions that 
made a Black political organization necessary, also made it nec-
essary that it be capable of defending itself against the system. 
Without this capability, no political structure, anywhere, can 
claim to be a truly legitimate representative of anyone. 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   164 8/25/08   10:31:19 PM


--- PAGE 166 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
165
Meeting those members of the Black Panther Party during the 
time it was in full swing was a plus for me. I was able to put the 
happenings of my individual life into a broader perspective. 
My awareness only added to my determination to escape those 
who held me unjustly, against my will. But it wasn’t to be. By this 
time, a number of other inmates and myself were being housed 
at the parish prison annex, formerly known as the First Precinct 
police station where, in the past, city policemen had satisfied 
their sadistic appetites on mostly black subjects. At the present 
time, though, it housed both federal and state prisoners, and 
had the distinction of being manned (most times) by segments 
of all law enforcement agencies, even the army. Except for court 
appearances and a few minutes for showering, we were locked in 
cells all day, harassed and provoked most of the time by sadistic 
guards. After months of this type of treatment, I and the two 
other inmates (now deceased) in the cell with me were fed up 
with it. There wasn’t much we could do except throw a little 
abuse of our own, and small pieces of bathing soap. One would 
have thought we had murdered the president and all his men. 
The warden arrived with a dozen or so of his goons, all carrying 
night-sticks, shields, iron pipes; a few were even brandishing 
knives. Our cell door was opened and we were ordered to “Come 
out, or be drugged out.” I looked at that warden like he was crazy. 
If he thought I was going to step into a sea of revenge-crazed men 
brandishing all that weaponry, he was crazy. I decided to take 
my chances by letting them drag me out. The two other bloods 
in the cell held those same sentiments. So we left it on them to 
come into the cell. And come they did. 
All the deputies, crazed as they were, crowded into the cell at 
one time, eager to get in on the beating. With the cell only six by 
nine, they could hardly achieve that goal effectively. In the melee, 
a deputy was stabbed, presumably by one of his fellow deputies. 
As one might guess, the blame was attributed to us. 
We were beaten and dragged from the cell to the dungeon, 
where we were beaten some more. By this time, deputies who 
had gone off duty were called back in to “help stop an escape 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   165 8/25/08   10:31:19 PM


--- PAGE 167 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
166
attempt” and get in on the action. In the meantime, the wounded 
deputy had already been taken to the hospital for treatment. 
The incident had begun around 7:00 p.m. By midnight, the 
three of us were in the dungeon, handcuffed and shackled to 
the bars, bruised, swollen and feeling somewhat defeated for the 
moment. Deputies came to the cell, unshackled one of the men 
from the bars, and took him to the hospital. I later learned that 
they administered more beatings to him on the way. 
Around 3:00 a.m., in the wee small hours of the morning, my 
turn came. At the time, I had no idea what had happened to my 
fellow inmate. I was pretty banged up, so when they told me 
that the warden had ordered them to take me to the hospital, I 
had no argument with that. I really needed my many wounds 
attended. 
The brother of the wounded deputy and another deputy were 
assigned to drive me to the hospital. Neither ever said a word to 
me. Still shackled, I was placed in the back of a police van, lying 
upon its floor, cuffed. A few blocks from the jail, in a secluded 
area, we stopped. Lights out. I braced myself as best I could. 
Within seconds the back of the van opened. Enter the brother 
of the wounded deputy, brandishing a three-foot tire iron. What 
followed was what always follows when a cop is allowed to vent 
his rage and racism unrestrained. By the time we reached the 
hospital, I was even more of a mess than before. 
The hospital staff had been prepared for my coming. I was the 
criminal who had “nearly killed a deputy on duty while attempt-
ing to escape.” I didn’t expect nor did I receive anything but the 
required perfunctory treatment reserved for persons of ill repute. 
Then I was returned to jail to nurse my own wounds and heal 
the best way I could.
The three of us were charged with the incident and each of us 
faced an additional ten years in prison. The way it turned out, 
though, I was the only one to receive more time. A deal was made 
that if one of us would “cop out” (plead guilty), it would set the 
others free. So without ever getting to the bottom of who it was 
who had really wounded the deputy, the matter was settled with 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   166 8/25/08   10:31:19 PM


--- PAGE 168 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
167
a plea bargain. I received an additional seven years to run concur-
rently with the time I had recently received for the escape. 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   167 8/25/08   10:31:19 PM


--- PAGE 169 ---
RobertKing_Interior.indd   168 8/25/08   10:31:19 PM


--- PAGE 170 ---
169
chapter 21
during my neArly tWo-yeAr stAy At tHe 
New Orleans Parish Prison, awaiting the results of my appeal, 
tragedy struck. It began in late 1970 with a visit from Clara, my 
wife. I learned that my four year old son, Lil’ Robert, had devel-
oped a tumor on his brain. The doctors had told her that his life 
couldn’t be saved. He would die within six months. This news 
left me wasted, weeping within and without, but still hopeful 
that the doctors were wrong and that he, my son, would live. 
But that wasn’t to be. Lil’ Robert didn’t live. Still approaching 
the tender age of five, my son passed from this existence, taking 
a part of me with him.
The death of my son was the final catalyst; it served as the final 
consciousness raiser for me. I now felt the need to know. That 
knowledge was a responsibility of the first magnitude and my 
personal object of study would be my enemy, the system.
In studying and learning of my enemy, I also learned of myself, 
my place in history. In learning of my place in history, I rediscov-
ered my long-lost humanity. Individuality was replaced with the 
need for unity. Certainty replaced uncertainty. 
I saw that all are expendable at the system’s whim. I saw 
how my mother, her mother and her mother’s mother before 
her suffered. I saw past generations of my forefathers stripped 
from their homeland, brought, by force, to these shores in chains. 
They were stripped of all sense of responsibility; their only obli-
gation belonged to their servitude. I saw mothers become the 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   169 8/25/08   10:31:19 PM


--- PAGE 171 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
170
predominant parental figure within the slave unit, while fathers 
did not know their offspring. I was able to put some of my father 
Hillary’s actions into perspective. Hillary, born into a white world 
and dominated at every turn, felt the need himself to dominate.
I saw the rising crisis of the late fifties and early sixties emerg-
ing — education, patriotism and deception being the main tools 
used to manipulate the masses. The word education became 
a banner for the young; you had to “get an education” if you 
wanted to “get a ‘decent’ job.” At that time, getting an education 
meant getting a high school diploma. With that, you could be 
hired as a clerk, a drugstore attendant, or maybe even a secretary. 
But as time went on, a pile-up occurred. Many did indeed get 
their high school diplomas, but a job they did not get.
The system had to boost the educational standards. A high 
school diploma was no longer enough; you had to go to college 
and get a degree. Those bearing a high school diploma were rel-
egated to a work bracket formerly designated to those who had 
not finished high school. And still, many of those with college 
degrees soon met the same fate of the bearers of diplomas; many 
found themselves still jobless. What followed was a snowballing 
of unemployment and under-employment, with people of African 
descent leading the pace. High school dropouts, and those having 
no former education whatsoever, found themselves outside the 
system completely, “carrying stick” as Buddy had once said.
Many recognized the deception of the system. Some felt help-
less to do anything about it, and languished in poverty. Others 
found contentment in living off their wits, by any means neces-
sary. Quite a few of the upper middle class youths, much closer 
to the system than most, took the matter more personally. They 
bypassed revolution and turned “hippie,” rejecting, for a while, 
the mores of the system.
Although the promise of education had initially succeeded 
in blunting the will for change, there were now many “edu-
cated” people, but no jobs. Nearly all the young by this time 
had begun to see the hypocrisy of the system, and the situation 
became potentially explosive. The youth had taken to the streets, 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   170 8/25/08   10:31:19 PM


--- PAGE 172 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
171
demonstrating, protesting, and burning. The system forestalled 
some protest in the form of federal grants to aid cities and states, 
along with other token approaches amounting to welfare. It 
augmented its already existing police state at a rapid pace. New 
police and defense agencies were created, and those already exist-
ing were increased in manpower. 
It became clear to me that, in spite of all its efforts to quell 
unrest, the system still found itself faced with the problem of the 
unemployed and underemployed. Enough prisons could never be 
built to accommodate this vast number of people. So the system 
developed a way to appeal to the loyalty of its inhabitants. It put 
up banners to America the Beautiful, it spouted slogans of “love 
it or leave it.” And it sent the young and the restless — therefore 
the most dangerous element — to fight an unjust war in South 
East Asia.
The war cut down on the demand for jobs, and took many of 
the young from the streets and soup lines of America. I saw the 
war absorbing two or more generations of youths. Many would 
never return alive from Vietnam. Many of those who managed 
to survive and return would join the future ranks of the unem-
ployed. Far too many would wind up in prison, languishing there 
until forgotten. The new prisons would over-flow, to be followed 
with a cry to build more, more, absorbing the life blood of the 
downtrodden. And still the deceptive cry for state education as 
the standard for decent human survival would once more rear its 
ugly head. I saw all of this, and was ready for the struggle.
In 1971, I was once more shipped to Angola. That same year, 
Albert Woodfox, Herman Wallace, and Ronald Ailsworth 
(among others who had affiliated themselves with the struggle 
and the Black Panthers) would also enter the prison. Arriving at 
Angola, I immediately noticed a mood change. There was a new 
psyche among the prisoners: not the subdued and broken spirit 
I saw in years past, but one of defiance, of people standing up. 
The mood in the streets had caught up with the men in prisons, 
and I knew it was due mainly to the presence of Albert, Herman, 
and Ron, and their work in spreading the message of the Black 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   171 8/25/08   10:31:19 PM


--- PAGE 173 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
172
Panther Party. They began teaching unity amongst the inmates, 
establishing the only recognized prison chapter of the Black Pan-
ther Party in the nation. Shortly thereafter, Ron was transferred 
to a federal facility but Albert Woodfox and Herman Wallace 
were slated to pay dearly for their organizing skills.
Upon my return I found the place in an uproar. Mass lock-
ups and severe repression by prison officials, especially of those 
quartered in the main prison, were the order of the day. A young 
prison guard named Brent Miller had been found slain in one of 
the dormitories and though I had not even been in Angola at the 
time of the guard’s death, I did not escape the unchecked repri-
sals by the keepers upon the kept. Along with three other broth-
ers, I was taken from the Admitting Unit and sent to the main 
prison dungeon. The only reason given was that we “wanted to 
play lawyer for another inmate.” In the dungeon, I witnessed 
even more severe repression. Prisoners who had been scooped 
up for “investigation” (into the death of the officer) were made 
to run the gauntlet past guards wielding bats and clubs. They 
were stripped of all clothing, their heads were shaved, and they 
were kept in bare, empty cells. White prisoners were spared this 
humiliation. None were beaten, placed into lockdown, or even 
investigated in the guard’s death. The beatings and intimidation 
of Black prisoners went on for days. The prison was closed down 
and visits were suspended. This made it much easier for prison 
officials to run amok, unchecked.
After about ten days, my three comrades and I were brought to 
disciplinary court and found guilty of “wanting to play lawyer for 
another inmate.” We were then sentenced to the infamous “Red 
Hat,” where we faced starvation and the threat of death. The Red 
Hat was the old death house where the electric chair was kept. 
At this time, it was used to house prisoners the administration 
wanted to punish. Its cells were about three feet wide by seven 
feet or so in length, with a slab of concrete for a bed, a naked toilet 
bowl and a sink that was usually inoperative. Meals, if one were 
to call them meals, were served in a small bowl. Breakfast was 
a dab of oatmeal and perhaps one slice of bread - or sometimes 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   172 8/25/08   10:31:19 PM


--- PAGE 174 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
173
a dab of grits in lieu of the oatmeal. Lunch and dinner, served 
in the same bowl, was boiled greens or carrots with one slice of 
bread. The Red Hat, at that time, still threatened death, not by 
electrocution, but by starvation. They closed it down in 1972. 
News had already traveled through the prison’s grapevine that 
prison officials (after days of investigation, brutality, and intimi-
dation) had selected four men and charged them with the death 
of Miller: Albert Woodfox, Herman Wallace, Gilbert Montegut 
and Chester Jackson.
In late May 1972, after being transported from the Red Hat 
back to the Admitting Unit, I was brought before the prison 
classification board. As I was ushered into the room, I saw a 
number of ranking officials that I knew. One of them, Hilton 
Butler, gave me a contemptuous look and said, “Y’all know my 
vote,” then left the room. I was still under investigation for the 
death of Miller although I had never met the guard, never been 
in general population where I could have had the opportunity to 
meet him, and had not even been in Angola prison at the time of 
his death. Without further ado, I was classified to CCR or closed 
cell restriction for this reason, a classification I would keep for 
the next twenty-nine years. They initially sent me to C-tier, then 
later to D-tier. Woodfox and Herman were initially on B-tier, 
known at the time as the “Panther Tier.”
Sometime in 1973, an official came to D-tier and asked if there 
was anyone who wanted to volunteer to go to B-tier, that a cell 
was needed on D. Not knowing all of the particulars, and seizing 
on the opportunity to be close to Albert and Herman, I volun-
teered. Once off the tier, I learned of the particulars. The officials 
meant to separate Herman and Albert from the men of B-tier, 
figuring to break up the “Panther Tier.” The men on B-tier were 
unaware of this, and I told them what was intended. We knew 
what was coming, and we made preparations to resist. After a 
nearly all-night battle against sticks, bats, tear gas and other more 
potent weapons — all wielded by the keepers — the separation 
was made. Wallace went to A-tier, and Woodfox to D-tier, to the 
very cell that I had volunteered to vacate.
RobertKing_Interior.indd   173 8/25/08   10:31:20 PM


--- PAGE 175 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
174
During this time, the men charged in the death of the prison 
guard were in and out of court. Subsequently, they received a 
change of venue. Albert Woodfox went to trial separately, and 
on the testimony of a prison snitch, Hezekiah Brown, was found 
guilty. There was no evidence whatsoever linking him (or the 
other men charged) to the crime, save the testimony of the snitch, 
who, after coercion and promises, fingered the men. Woodfox 
later received a second trial, based on the fact that the jury that 
tried him was all white. In this second trial, the jury’s foreperson 
stated that she had found him guilty because he had divulged 
the information that he had passed a lie detector test. That is so 
strange! Without any doubt, had Woodfox failed a polygraph 
test, this same juror would have used this failure (and surely the 
prosecution would have made it known) to the jurors as evidence 
to convict him.
As I stated, Hezekiah Brown was a well-known prison snitch. 
As a former inmate guard, he had no morals. It was easy for him 
to succumb to the temptation of promises. Brown was promised 
that he would live in an area by himself, separated from the other 
prisoners, and be able to come and go as he pleased. He was also 
promised (and records show that he received) a carton of ciga-
rettes a week. Despite the fact that he had a life sentence without 
the possibility of parole, Hezekiah Brown was given clemency 
and released sometime during the eighties. He is reported to have 
left the prison with nearly a thousand dollars in cash. Hezekiah 
Brown is now unfortunately deceased, of natural causes.
Herman Wallace and Gilbert Montegut (and allegedly, Chester 
Jackson) were to be tried jointly, but only Montegut and Wallace 
were actually tried. Montegut (with the jury hearing the same 
evidence that convicted Woodfox) was acquitted. Herman Wal-
lace was found guilty. Chester Jackson did not go to trial that day. 
Instead, he was given a reduced manslaughter charge. The reason 
for this magnanimity is simple. Chester Jackson (now deceased) 
was a snitch who, at the urging of prison officials, elected to sup-
ply them with corroborating evidence implicating Wallace in the 
killing. That both Wallace and Woodfox were (and are) innocent 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   174 8/25/08   10:31:20 PM


--- PAGE 176 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
175
is without doubt. Their convictions were a clear act of retribution 
by prison officials because of their activism, and the need to find 
scapegoats.
While there was no forensic evidence linking Woodfox or 
Wallace to the crime, there was evidence that pointed to other 
sources. According to the trial testimony of Herbert “Professor” 
Williams, Sr., an orderly whose responsibility was to keep the 
catwalk clean, the only person he saw on the morning of the 
killing in the vicinity was a “white boy.” This evidence was never 
pursued by either the state or the defense. The other bit of “evi-
dence” that ran through the prison grapevine was that Miller (the 
deceased) was killed by one of his own. The in-fighting that was 
taking place among prison officials at the time lends credibility 
to this theory. During this period, Governor Edwin Edwards 
appointed Elayn Hunt as Corrections Head. Her mission was to 
“clean up the prison, and bring it into the twenty-first century.” 
To that end, C. Murray Henderson was appointed warden. 
Coming from another state, Henderson was seen as an intruder 
and an outsider by some, who felt that their long tenure on “The 
Farm” should have qualified them to continue to run the place. 
This resentment was exacerbated when Henderson brought in 
his own people. Angriest of all was Hayden Dees, who felt he 
should have been head warden, not Henderson. It is rumored that 
Dees — obsessively ambitious, and bitter with resentment — did 
the unthinkable and ordered the “hit” on Miller (the deceased). 
If true, Dees, being the racist that he was, would never have sent 
a black prisoner to murder a white prison guard.
If all of the above rumors were correct, then it all lends cred-
ibility to Herbert “Professor” Williams’ trial testimony — that 
on the morning of the murder, the only person he saw was a 
“white boy.” 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   175 8/25/08   10:31:20 PM


--- PAGE 177 ---
RobertKing_Interior.indd   176 8/25/08   10:31:20 PM


--- PAGE 178 ---
177
chapter 22
As of tHis Writing, HermAn W AllAce 
and Albert Woodfox have been held in solitary confinement for 
more than thirty years. To be held guilty of a crime that one hasn’t 
committed — with exculpatory evidence to prove innocence, evi-
dence that has been willfully overlooked by the courts — is an 
act of terrorism. But what is even more terrifying is that unless 
there is an intervention by a court showing integrity, Albert and 
Herman will have to spend the remainder of their lives in prison, 
in solitary confinement for a crime neither committed. “Justice 
delayed is justice denied” and I agree. However, suffice it to say 
that justice delayed is equal to terrorism, especially in this case. 
Solitary confinement is terrifying, especially if you are innocent 
of the charges that put you there. It evokes a lot of emotion. For 
me, being in prison in solitary confinement was terrible; it was 
a nightmare. My soul still cries from all that I witnessed and 
endured. It mourns continuously. Through the course of my con-
finement, I saw men so desperate that they ripped prison doors 
apart, and both starved and mutilated themselves. It takes every 
scrap of humanity to stay focused and sane in that environment. 
I should be anything but what I am today; sometimes the spirit 
is stronger than the circumstances.
At some point, we are going to have to call prison exactly 
what it is: a perpetuation of slavery. The 13th amendment did 
not abolish slavery. It reconstituted slavery instead, by putting it 
on another plane, the prison plane. The 13th amendment says 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   177 8/25/08   10:31:20 PM


--- PAGE 179 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
178
“neither slavery nor involuntary servitude shall exist on these 
shores except for persons duly convicted of a crime.” But how 
many have been legally convicted of a crime even though they 
were innocent? At one point, I mistakenly believed that legality 
and morality were synonymous, that everything judged legal 
was also wholly and morally correct. Through hard experience, 
I learned that this is not true.
The Black Panther Party’s slogan “power to the people” cen-
tered around the concept that power actually does belong to the 
people. But the people have relinquished that power to a small 
faction of people called politicians, and in relinquishing power 
they have left themselves at the mercy of ever-changing restric-
tions defined as laws. Many of these laws deemed legal are in no 
way moral. In reality, we are empowered en masse to direct or 
redirect our own course. In redirecting our own course, one of 
the main focuses must be the prison system and how it is con-
nected to slavery. 
So let’s call prisons exactly what they are: an extenuation of 
slavery. And we must let the politicians know that we know 
this. Mumia Abu-Jamal is in prison because slavery was never 
abolished. Jalil Alamin, formerly Rap Brown; the San Francisco 
8, the remaining two of The Angola 3, Herman Wallace and 
Albert Woodfox; Leonard Peltier; the Jena 6… we could go on 
naming people, all political victims of a legal system that is in fact 
immoral. It is a system like this that allows a district attorney, 
Read Walters, to say to Jena youth Mychael Bell with impunity 
that “with a stroke of a pen, I can take your life away.” It is 
a system like this that gives district attorneys, defense lawyers, 
judges, legislators, politicians a vested interest in passing the laws, 
regulations, decisions and judgments that keep people in prison. 
Justice cannot exist when the people charged with defending the 
rights of people are invested in their incarceration.
During my twenty-nine years of solitary (and the two prior 
years in parish prison), I lived out the conclusion that the Black 
Panther Party’s assessment of America, as it related to Blacks and 
other minorities, was correct. Without the Party’s appraisal, and 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   178 8/25/08   10:31:20 PM


--- PAGE 180 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
179
my total acceptance of this appraisal, I could not have survived 
intact those twenty-nine years. I had been given a truth to live by, 
a truth to cling to. And despite the internal friction among the 
Party’s leaders and cadres (orchestrated by the FBI and CIA), and 
in spite of the eventual elimination of the Party as an organiza-
tion by these same forces, this truth has sustained me. I made a 
vow to myself that no matter what, I would do my best to live 
out this truth, even in solitary confinement. I told myself that no 
matter where one resided in America — whether in minimum 
(society) custody or maximum security (prison) custody — the 
struggle must continue. 
CCR or Closed Cell Restriction (when it was located at the 
front gate of the prison) was a unit that also housed Death Row 
prisoners. The entire unit had seven tiers; each tier (save one) 
had fifteen single man cells. We were kept in cells twenty-three 
hours a day, seven days a week. For years, we were denied any 
yard time. The one hour we were out of our cells was used for 
showering. Each morning the officer on duty, standing outside 
of the tier by the control box, would open all the cell doors. 
When the doors opened, the men wanting to shower would 
file out of their cells into the hallways. This was the practice 
until 1974.
On the morning of June 10, 1973, I was still on B-tier. It was 
on that date that one prisoner, with the intention of knifing 
another prisoner, but not realizing that his intended victim also 
had a knife, was killed. Ordinarily, the incident would have 
gone into the prison books as being a clear case of self-defense. 
But that didn’t happen. Instead, officials at the prison issued 
a “blanket indictment” against all the men who were out of 
their cells that morning — eleven of us. A short time later, this 
blanket indictment was dropped against nine of those origi-
nally charged. The remaining two men — Grady Brewer and 
myself — were officially indicted by a Grand Jury on charges 
of murder.
Neither Grady nor I were actually disturbed by this turn of 
events, and we both were eager to go to trial. Grady felt that 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   179 8/25/08   10:31:20 PM


--- PAGE 181 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
180
no reasonable jury would find him guilty of murder, for he had 
acted in self-defense. I was eager because I had nothing to do 
with the incident, and was sure that I could prove it to a jury.
The trial was held in rural St. Francisville, about 20 miles 
south of the prison. The town’s residents, especially the whites, 
didn’t take too kindly to prisoners confined at Angola, in spite 
of the fact that many of them (the males, that is) worked at the 
prison. Those who didn’t knew someone who did and it was 
from this linkage that jury pools were created. 
Grady Brewer and I were to be tried jointly and the trial began 
on October 10, 1973. Our appointed council made it known to 
the judge that he hadn’t enough time to prepare, and asked for 
an extension, which the court promptly refused. At that point, 
Grady and I got into the act. We tried to convince the court that 
we needed more time; the judge was adamant. Some more words 
were passed, resulting in our having to stand trial with our hands 
cuffed behind our backs, in shackles, with tape over our mouths. 
For two days, we sat in court, gagged and in chains, and watched 
the jury being picked to try us.
The state began its case by entering nine knives allegedly 
found near or in close proximity to the body, into evidence. This 
was despite the fact that the coroner’s report stated that “all of 
the wounds appear to have been made with the same weapon.” In 
the subsequent testimony, none of the officers who were on duty 
that morning implicated me as a participant. No fingerprints of 
mine were found on any of the knives. Nevertheless, the state 
produced two surprise witnesses in the persons of two of the 
inmates who were out of their cells that morning. Both inmates 
— with tailored testimonies — testified that I had participated 
in the murder, which in fact was a self-defense killing. Both their 
testimonies were riddled with inconsistencies, and they both lied 
about the events of that morning. One was in fact caught in a lie 
on the witness stand. Nevertheless, on the testimony of the other 
inmate — who had not witnessed the incident — Grady and I 
were found guilty as charged.
In 1974, the Louisiana State Supreme Court reversed my life 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   180 8/25/08   10:31:20 PM


--- PAGE 182 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
181
sentence and ordered a new trial. The reversal was not based on 
my innocence, but because the trial judge had abused his power 
by having me bound and gagged. In 1975, a second trial began 
and on the same frail evidence as before, I was found guilty a 
second time. 
Some time during 1975, I found myself back on D-tier, right 
next door to Woodfox. We resumed our political education 
classes, holding discussions and teaching those who couldn’t 
read or write to do so. Our efforts did not go unnoticed by our 
keepers: we were constantly being harassed, and worse. Once, 
an inmate “trusty” approached Woodfox, saying: “I know y’all 
wants to escape, so I’m gon’ help y’all.” He pulled out a fully 
loaded .32 revolver and handed it to Woodfox. After taking the 
pistol and examining it, Woodfox handed it back to him, tell-
ing him, “Thank you, but I’ll find another way.” Woodfox had 
seen that the firing pin had been filed to the nub. It was obvi-
ously a set-up. Not long after that incident, a group of security 
officers went to Woodfox’s cell to “shake him down,” or search 
his belongings. After handcuffing Albert and placing him in the 
hallway, the search began. I heard one of the officers yell, “Bingo, 
look what I found.” The officer came out of the cell holding a 
small pouch containing gunpowder. As a result, Woodfox spent 
quite a few days in isolation. There is no doubt that the item 
“found” in Woodfox’s cell was planted. It was a set-up that gave 
them the excuse needed to justify a major shakedown and to 
literally “tear up” our cells. 
The fact that we were constantly harassed and targeted by 
prison officials did not deter us in our efforts to change our 
conditions. We clearly understood the extreme limitations the 
keepers placed on us, but we were determined to eliminate some 
of those unnecessary restrictions. Therefore, we continued to set 
examples of resistance, examples that other prisoners in other 
areas could identify with. 
During the years from 1974 to 1978, we experienced some 
successes from our willingness to struggle; prisoners throughout 
the prison (and even in some parish jails) began hearing of our 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   181 8/25/08   10:31:20 PM


--- PAGE 183 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
182
accomplishments in CCR, especially in D-tier. Quite a few pris-
oners wanted to become part of us and do what we were doing. 
Some did. 
Each tier consisted of fifteen cells, six feet by nine feet, and the 
doors were barred. A long walkway connected them, with the 
shower at the front of each tier. The one hour a day that we were 
released from our cells we spent taking our shower, and then in 
that walkway. That was how we talked, passed papers, educated 
each other, and coordinated our actions. 
One of our successes was the elimination of a long-standing 
practice of feeding us. At mealtime our food was taken from a 
cart and placed on the floor in front of each cell. The prisoner 
then had to reach down and retrieve the tray by sliding it under 
a filthy door, losing some of the food in the process. Almost every 
cellblock was fed in this dehumanizing manner. Sensing how 
humiliating this practice was, we began to feel unclean, and 
angry with ourselves for having allowed ourselves to participate 
in our own victimization. After discussing the matter amongst 
ourselves, we decided that we would try to negotiate with the 
keepers. The prison administration told us that this was non-
negotiable, that “We always fed that way, and it will continue.” 
Plan B was simple enough: we went on a hunger strike. After 
many days of hunger, a representative of the warden came to 
us, telling us that if we would discontinue the hunger strike, the 
warden would at some point honor our request, by cutting holes 
in the bars large enough for a tray to pass through. Knowing that 
“at some point” meant many months, we continued with our 
hunger strike. We fasted for more than thirty days, and sometime 
after that point, the representative came back. After talking and 
wrangling a bit, it was agreed that until the holes were cut in the 
bars, we would be allowed to tie a sling made of cloth to our bars 
that would hold the trays. For nearly eighteen months we ate 
from slings, standing up at the bars. After that, the prison began 
cutting holes in every area. However, it must be noted that in a 
final gesture of utter contempt for us, the prison administration 
made sure that D-tier was the very last tier to be corrected.
RobertKing_Interior.indd   182 8/25/08   10:31:20 PM


--- PAGE 184 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
183
We were also successful in curtailing another routine, a dehu-
manizing, long-standing practice by the prison — the unneces-
sary and random rectal searches. During a strip search, we were 
required to undergo a visual anal search. We told ourselves that 
this practice served no penological purpose whatsoever; wherever 
we went, we were chained up, hand and feet. Coming to a con-
sensus conclusion that this practice was a carryover from slavery 
(before being sold, the slave had to be stripped and subjected to 
anal examination), and after months of appealing to our keepers, 
we decided to take a bold step: we would simply refuse a volun-
tary anal search. We would not be willing participants in our 
own degradation. We knew that there would be consequences, 
but we were more than willing to make the necessary sacrifices. 
We knew it could even mean death. We also knew that we, as a 
unit, would be disunited — separated by our keepers. With this 
in mind, addresses and telephone numbers of relatives outside 
were exchanged.
After having tried for months to get the keepers to discontinue 
this dehumanizing practice, we began refusing. They came, as 
we knew they would. My turn came around. I was taken from 
my cell, handcuffed and shackled, to a remote office room where 
prison guards lined the walls, some carrying bats, other brandish-
ing billy clubs and other assault weapons. I was ordered to strip, 
after their removal of the chains. I did. Mind you, we were not 
refusing the strip search, only the visual anal examination. I was 
then told to turn around and bend over. Naturally, I refused. 
I then readied myself for the ensuing onslaught which had to 
come. It came. We fought. Finally, I was subdued by sheer force 
of numbers. This was 1977.
After being taken to the prison hospital to have my many 
bruises examined, I was removed immediately to Camp J, the 
newly-built punishment camp, and charged with multiple counts 
of assaulting officers (charges were later dropped). The irony is, 
no anal examination occurred that night.
Meanwhile, Woodfox, who remained at CCR, managed to 
contact some of my relatives who called the prison inquiring 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   183 8/25/08   10:31:20 PM


--- PAGE 185 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
184
about my health and wellbeing. This gesture saved me from 
additional injuries, and perhaps death as well. Someone on the 
outside had shown concern.
Camp J was purely punitive. The practice of feeding prisoners 
was identical to the way we had been fed in CCR, prior to our 
protests. I was told that I would not be allowed to even put a sling 
on the bars as I done at CCR. Thus, I began a one-man protest. 
After making my point, by making clear to my keepers that 
I would absolutely not “eat off the floor,” I ceased my hunger 
strike. I talked to the inmate orderlies, explaining to them why I 
wouldn’t touch a tray they had set on the floor. Most understood, 
and would put the tray into my outstretched hand. I would then 
take the food I intended to eat from the tray folding the paper 
plate and pulling it through the bars. I always kept a cleaning 
rag to wipe up any spillage. I did this for better than two years. 
It wasn’t until after I was sent back to CCR that the keepers cut 
holes in the bars at Camp J. 
Prior to our having decided to resist the dehumanizing anal 
searches, we had talked about contacting an attorney to assist us 
in a civil suit. And during intervals, when Woodfox wasn’t in the 
dungeon for refusing the search, he contacted NOLAC, or New 
Orleans Legal Assistance. Recognizing the merits of the case, 
they decided to assist us in the case, representing us jointly. The 
suit (Woodfox, et al v. Phelps, et al) was filed in the Nineteenth 
District Court, and less than a year later the court issued a ruling, 
outlawing “routine anal searches.” Sulking, the prison officials 
reluctantly ceased this practice. Presently, anal searches are con-
ducted only when “warranted,” whatever that means.
I was at Camp J for more than two years, and the Struggle 
continued. Besides the inhumane practices, there were far greater 
atrocities. The physical and psychological torture of prisoners 
was unchecked. I was told by officials at the camp that what 
they were doing was condoned by persons in high places. I 
believed them; how else, unless it was “condoned by persons in 
high places,” could it have gone on for so long? Prisoners had 
no access to personal phone calls and could not inform their 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   184 8/25/08   10:31:20 PM


--- PAGE 186 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
185
relatives as to what was happening to them. There was no access 
to law books to properly challenge the practices. We were in cells 
twenty-three hours a day, at times twenty-four. Yard privileges 
were non-existent. Death by alleged suicide emerged around the 
same time as Camp J came into existence. A psychiatric unit was 
built, mostly for victims of Camp J’s atrocities. After my stint at 
Camp J, I was returned to CCR. This was around November 
1979.
In early 1981, I was once more residing on the tier with Wood-
fox. We shared the same tier until 1996, when — after having 
his original conviction and sentence of fifty years overturned 
— he was immediately retried for the alleged murder of prison 
guard Brent Miller. As in the first trial, Woodfox was convicted 
and given a life sentence. He was returned to the custody of the 
Department of Corrections, back to CCR and his former solitary 
confinement status within the prison. His struggle continues…
RobertKing_Interior.indd   185 8/25/08   10:31:20 PM


--- PAGE 187 ---
RobertKing_Interior.indd   186 8/25/08   10:31:20 PM


--- PAGE 188 ---
187
chapter 23
in 1987, tHe lone inmA te on WHose 
testimony my conviction rested made it known to me through 
another inmate that he “wanted to set the record straight.” He 
wanted to make it known publicly that he had lied throughout 
my trials, that he had not witnessed the incident on the morning 
that it had happened. This inmate later provided me with an 
affidavit to this effect. Shortly thereafter, I received a notarized 
statement from the other inmate who had testified against me 
during the first trial but had failed to appear during the second 
trial. In 1988, armed with these affidavits, I optimistically began 
post-conviction appeals, seeking relief based upon my actual 
innocence. But just claiming actual innocence was not enough. I 
also knew that I had to convince a reviewing court that my trial 
was unfair. So I included other claims: that I was denied the right 
to cross-examine the witnesses against me; that my council was 
ineffective; and that women were systematically excluded from 
the Grand Jury that had indicted me.
After many years of denials in the state courts, and still going 
pro se, I filed a petition for a writ of habeas corpus in the fed-
eral court, where a lone federal magistrate denied the petition. 
Undaunted, I appealed his decision to a panel of three judges. 
Constrained by a previous ruling, that panel granted relief, 
ordering a new trial. But in the doublespeak jargon that the 
courts are noted for, the panel suggested a full court review of 
its own decision, which automatically stayed the mandate. After 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   187 8/25/08   10:31:20 PM


--- PAGE 189 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
188
a full court hearing consisting of more than a dozen judges, the 
panel’s decision granting me a new trial was reversed. This was 
in 1993.
As required by law, the federal court at the appellate level had 
appointed me counsel to argue the case. His name was Christo-
pher A. Aberle. He had argued the case before the panel, and 
proceeded to argue the case before the full court. After the full 
court reversed the panel’s order, Aberle filed a writ of certiorari 
to the U.S. Supreme Court. In turn, the high court refused to 
entertain the petition. This was in 1995.
During this time, I was pondering ways to return to the fed-
eral court. This despite my already having had my “one bite at 
the apple.” I was feeling cheated because the federal court, while 
having granted (and then denied) me a new trial on procedural 
grounds, had merely brushed aside all evidence pertinent to my 
actual innocence. With that in mind, I cast my focus on another 
case, Kuhlmann vs. Wilson, 106 S. Ct. 2616 (1986). The United 
States Supreme Court stated in Kuhlmann vs. Wilson, in part, 
“That claims raised in an earlier federal habeas petition that 
was resolved adversely to a petitioner may be entertained in a 
subsequent federal habeas petition if the ‘ends of justice’ would 
be served.” That ruling alone afforded me “another bite at the 
apple” and a subsequent ruling, in Schlup vs. Delo, 513 U.S. 222 
(1995), strengthened and expanded upon the “ends of justice” 
doctrine. While I was studying, pondering and analyzing the 
legal ramifications of the two cases — knowing that I would 
eventually be going back to the courts — I received an unex-
pected, hand-written letter from my former lawyer, Christopher 
A. Aberle. In short, and in gist, the letter simply stated: “I’d be 
willing to represent you (pro bono) in a hearing for clemency on 
the pardon board, if you are interested.” Accompanying the letter 
was the standard form used for a clemency request. Feeling that 
this was a useless gesture, I nevertheless filled out the form and 
sent it in. The request to seek clemency was denied. Reason: I 
was not granted a hearing because I had not served enough time. 
At this time, I was into my twenty-sixth year of confinement.
RobertKing_Interior.indd   188 8/25/08   10:31:20 PM


--- PAGE 190 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
189
Since my former attorney, Chris Aberle, had extended an offer 
to aid me beyond the clemency process, I made my plans known 
to him that I was thinking about returning to the courts. He 
thought it was an excellent idea, and he was eager to help. Like 
myself, Chris felt that the courts (both state and federal) had dealt 
unfairly with my original claims. Communicating via mail, we 
discussed the possibilities of re-raising those same issues, but 
elaborating more on the issue of ineffective assistance of counsel. 
Chris would do the work, arguing and framing the petition and 
I would submit the writ to the court, pro se.
It didn’t take long for the state courts to deny me. However, 
once we reentered the federal court, it took more than two years 
for the magistrate to make a ruling. He did so after being ordered 
to do so by the then Senior Judge Parker as a result of a federal 
mandamus filed by Chris.
The filing of a mandamus in a federal court is very rare and 
unusual; it is rarely done. Defense counsel tends to shy away from 
having to file such a petition. They don’t want to piss off a federal 
judge or magistrate who might be sitting on a petition with the 
thought of being favorable to their client. However, in my case, 
for a judge to sit on the writ for more than two years could only 
mean one thing: that judge was looking for a reason to deny the 
petition. Chris knew this, and I knew this also. Plus, this same 
judge was the very same individual who had denied me some 
years earlier, going against the precedent that had been set by 
the federal appellate court. As anticipated, he denied the petition. 
But in his haste to deny the petition, the judge went on to say that 
under Schlup v. Delo (the precedent that I had cited) “it appeared 
that I had met one of the two required standards in Schlup; the 
one showing that I was probably innocent.” Thus, though the 
petition was denied, the ruling gave me hope. I had finally gotten 
a court to acknowledge the innocence factor. This was in 1998, 
twenty-five years after I was framed and convicted by prison 
officials utilizing the false testimony of inmates and twelve years 
after those same inmates had recanted their testimonies, exposing 
the lies and frame-ups.
RobertKing_Interior.indd   189 8/25/08   10:31:20 PM


--- PAGE 191 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
190
It was also in 1998 that I was called by court order to appear as 
a character witness for Albert Woodfox, who had won a new trial 
to be held in Amite, Louisiana. I was there for approximately 
two weeks, and the things that I witnessed there propelled me to 
recommit myself to the struggle. 
The jail, recently built, was designed to house about 650 pris-
oners on a temporary basis. It actually held about 1200. Over 90% 
of the inmates were black, and the average age was twenty-two. 
Most of those prisoners were kept in detention for years instead 
of being sent to Angola or another state prison. The Louisiana 
legislature had decided to allow local detention centers and par -
ish jails, entirely unequipped to handle large numbers of inmates 
for long periods of time, to serve as penitentiaries. This allowed 
federal and state funds to be diverted to local sheriffs and other 
municipal authorities charged with enforcing the law. But how 
can the law be fairly enforced when those who enforce it receive 
money for imprisoning people? When a parish receives extra 
funding for every person it locks up in the local jail, then their 
only incentive is to lock more people up. This is but one example 
of the legislation and legal maneuvering done to perpetuate slav-
ery. What was taking place in Amite was surely being replicated 
in each of Louisiana’s sixty-four parishes. 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   190 8/25/08   10:31:20 PM


--- PAGE 192 ---
191
chapter 24
i kneW from WHAt i sAW At Amite tHAt 
the Struggle continued. At this point, while I felt a bit more 
hopeful about my own case, I knew that the real battle for my 
freedom from prison still had to be waged. I had another major 
hurdle to cross: I had to convince a court that during my trial, a 
major constitutional violation had occurred.
Chris went to work on a new habeus corpus petition. When 
it was finished, it was a work of art. In the ensuing months, 
while we waited for a decision, Chris, convinced that the habeus 
would probably be denied, wrote a letter which appears here in 
its entirety:
April 30, 1999
Charles A. Shropshire
District Attorney
20th Judicial District Court
499 Royal Street
St. Francisville, LA 70775
Dear Mr. Shropshire:
I write wondering whether you wouldn’t mind 
reopening the 25-year-old murder case of State v. 
Robert King Wilkerson and then dismissing the case, 
so that Mr. Wilkerson can be released from Angola. 
I suspect that you have never had such a request, at 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   191 8/25/08   10:31:20 PM


--- PAGE 193 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
192
least not from an attorney, but before you ball up this 
letter and throw it away, I respectfully request your 
indulgence for the time it will take to get to the end 
of this letter.
Let me begin by noting that I have never before 
made such a request and I don’t anticipate having 
the opportunity to do so again. This case, however, is 
unusual. I was appointed to represent Mr. Wilkerson 
by the U.S. Fifth Circuit back in the early 1990s in 
his appeal from the federal district court’s denial of 
habeas corpus relief. Not only was Mr. Wilkerson 
my first appointed case, he was my first client. Prior 
to that, I had been a staff attorney in the U.S. Court 
of Appeals for four years, where I screened over 400 
criminal and habeas appeals. Since that appointment, 
I have represented convicted criminal defendants in 
about 150 appeals, most of them through my associa-
tion with the Louisiana Appellate Project, an entity 
with which I am sure you are familiar. 
Of course, as is the nature of criminal appellate 
defense, I have lost the vast majority of my cases. 
While a few of those were mildly troubling, I know 
that justice was achieved in most of those cases. No 
matter how hard I try, however, I cannot say the same 
thing for my first case. 
Mr. Wilkerson is an African-American inmate, 
who was accused of murdering a fellow inmate. He 
had been tried twice in the mid 1970s for this crime 
and was represented both times by Mr. Leslie Ligon. 
The first time, he was tried with a codefendant. 
Because the codefendant was unruly, the trial court 
ordered that both defendants be bound and gagged 
throughout the trial. The conviction was reversed 
as to Mr. Wilkerson because he had done nothing to 
justify his being presented to the jury in this fashion. 
Nevertheless, at the second trial, Mr. Wilkerson was 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   192 8/25/08   10:31:20 PM


--- PAGE 194 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
193
bound, but not gagged, and he wore a prison suit. He 
was also surrounded by a small army of armed law 
enforcement personnel.
The evidence in the case (the second trial) consisted 
solely of the testimony of a fellow inmate. Although all 
of the inmates on the tier witnessed the crime, only 
this witness testified against Mr. Wilkerson. Every 
inmate on the tier was charged with this murder 
except this witness, and, in exchange for testifying, he 
was moved out of his maximum security surroundings 
and given trusty status. Unfortunately for Mr. Wilk-
erson, the trial judge would not permit Mr. Ligon to 
cross examine this witness about his receiving a prison 
transfer in connection with his request to testify.
The case looked very good to me. I challenged 
his conviction on the grounds that he and his wit -
nesses should not have been presented to the jury in 
shackles, prison garb, and surrounded by so many law 
enforcement officers. I also argued that the limitation 
on cross examination of the State’s eyewitness regard-
ing his motivation to lie constituted a grossly serious 
violation of Mr. Wilkerson’s right to present a defense. 
Finally, I included a purely academic argument relat-
ing to the fact that there were no women on the grand 
jury venire. After all, I was appointed because of that 
issue. Mr. Wilkerson won in the Fifth Circuit on the 
grand jury argument, and the other issues were given 
nominal mention and then rejected. It soon became 
clear to me that the whole reason that I was appointed 
and that Mr. Wilkerson won the grand jury issue was 
so that the court could take the case en banc and over-
rule one of its pesky prior opinions that it felt was 
a thorn in its side. Mr. Jesse Means can tell you all 
about it. He was my opposing counsel. Unfortunately, 
given the court of appeals’ motivations, Mr. Wilker -
son’s truly meaningful claims were brushed aside, 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   193 8/25/08   10:31:21 PM


--- PAGE 195 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
194
and ultimately, I regret raising the grand jury issue 
on appeal. 
It is now several years later, and I still represent 
Mr. Wilkerson. It turns out that three witness have 
executed affidavits completely exonerating Mr. Wilk-
erson. One affidavit comes from Mr. Wilkerson’s 
codefendant. He swears that he, and only he, commit-
ted the murder. Another affidavit was executed by an 
inmate on the tier who testified against Mr. Wilkerson 
at the first trial. He now swears that prison officials 
coerced him into testifying, that he was standing next 
to Mr. Wilkerson during the commission of the crime, 
and that Mr. Wilkerson had nothing to do with it. 
The third witness turns out to be the sole eyewitness 
who testified at Mr. Wilkerson’s second trial. He too 
swears that he lied out of coercion by prison officials, 
and that Mr. Wilkerson is innocent. Additionally, a 
review of the testimony of prison guard John Baugh 
given only at the first trial, corroborates two of the 
affiants’ claims that they had previously lied.
A carefully detailed discussion of the evidence 
from both trials, the excluded evidence regarding 
the sole eyewitness’s change in custody status, and 
the newly acquired affidavits are provided on pages 
11-23 of the enclosed brief which is a copy of the brief 
in the appeal that is currently pending in the court of 
appeals. The appeal is from the district court’s denial 
of Mr. Wilkerson’s second habeas petition I filed for 
him a few years ago. Last month, Mr. Means was 
contacted by the court of appeals to provide copies of 
the state court records to aid in the court’s review of 
that appeal.
Notwithstanding my strong belief that Mr. Wilker-
son should win that appeal, I know he won’t. Habeas 
petitioners almost never win in the fifth circuit, 
regardless of the merits of their claims, and I surely 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   194 8/25/08   10:31:21 PM


--- PAGE 196 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
195
don’t expect the court to be too receptive to claims 
they have already addressed in a prior petition. I 
know that if Mr. Wilkerson had not been a convicted 
robber at the time of the murder and if his victim 
had not been a convicted African American, then he 
would have stood a better chance on his long road 
through the criminal justice system. If, in addition, 
Mr. Wilkerson had been given the death penalty, 
there would have been an international outcry if 
the courts tossed him aside as they have done so far. 
But, alas, Mr. Wilkerson was already a criminal at 
the time of the murder, and his alleged victim was 
likewise a convicted African-American prisoner. In 
addition this shackled, black criminal was tried by a 
predominantly white male jury in the 1970s in rural 
Louisiana. Mr. Wilkerson never stood a chance then, 
and now nobody much cares if an injustice may have 
occurred in this case. I think you would agree with 
me, however, that neither the defendant’s status nor 
his victim’s status should be factors in determining 
whether it is OK to convict a man wrongly. 
My decision to write to you was inspired by a bit of 
news I had heard one day about a similar case in some 
other part of the country. I don’t remember where this 
took place, but like Mr. Wilkerson’s case, the evidence 
in that case, including new evidence, cast considerable 
doubt over the validity of the conviction. As with Mr. 
Wilkerson, this defendant’s venture into the courts for 
redress was unavailing, due mostly to the procedural 
quagmires a habeas litigant faces. Then his attorney 
wrote a letter to the district attorney who agreed to 
reopen the case and dismiss the charges. In my years 
as a lawyer, I had never heard of such a thing, though 
in retrospect it makes perfect sense. After all, your 
job is not merely to put people in jail but to see that 
justice is done as well. 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   195 8/25/08   10:31:21 PM


--- PAGE 197 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
196
Accordingly, I write to ask you, humbly and 
respectfully, to review the enclosed brief and affida -
vits. Additionally, I can supply you with the two trial 
transcripts if you so request. After reading what I have 
written and verifying its accuracy, I suggest you will 
agree with me that the chances are pretty slim that Mr. 
Wilkerson deserves to be serving time for murder. If 
I am right and you do indeed feel that way, I would 
urge you to do what is in your power to give this man 
his freedom while he still has some good years left. Mr. 
Wilkerson is a very intelligent man and has become 
quite learned in his years at Angola. Lord knows, we 
need the bed space at Angola for the truly bad guys. 
If you review this case and don’t conclude that an 
injustice has been done, I apologize for taking your 
time. But PLEASE do not come to that conclusion 
before reading the enclosed materials. You are the end 
of the road for Mr. Wilkerson’s decade-long attempt 
at being a free man.
Your time and attention are greatly appreciated. 
Very truly yours,
Christopher A. Aberle
When a single judge on the Court of Appeals for the Fifth 
Circuit denied probable cause, in 2000, Chris filed for a re-
hearing. Then an unusual thing happened: the first judge sud-
denly revoked his own order of denial and ordered a hearing to 
be conducted before a three judge panel to deal with the merits 
of my case. Additionally, the order stated that Chris, who had 
been acting pro bono (for free) on my behalf for many years, was 
appointed by the court to represent me in any future proceedings: 
this meant he would be getting paid to represent me!
In 1998, when Albert “Cinque” Woodfox was retried and 
convicted, a small grassroots movement consisting mostly of 
anarchists (thanks to Malik Rahim, aka Donald Guyton, one of 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   196 8/25/08   10:31:21 PM


--- PAGE 198 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
197
the Panthers arrested in the first raid by New Orleans Police) had 
heard about the case and had come on board. This group showed 
its support by appearing at hearings and at the trial of Woodfox, 
held in the small town of Amite, Louisiana, home of the family 
of the security guard he was accused of slaying. During this time, 
support centered around Albert and Herman “Hooks” Wallace, 
and it was the “Committee to support/free the Angola T wo.” 
Later, however, with the insistence of Woodfox, it became the 
Committee to Free The Angola 3, myself included. Still later, it 
became the National Coalition to Free The Angola 3. 
By the time I was to have my hearing, efforts by the national 
coalition had intensified. Marion H. Brown, a former Tulane 
student and Panther, along with Althea Francois, another former 
Panther, had come on board. It was their grassroots organizing, 
getting information into the Black community, that paid off 
and set the catalyst for the national and international attention 
that The Angola 3 now get. There were also others who helped. 
Former journalist Leslie George of WBAI radio in New York 
City broadcast interviews that were heard by thousands. Marina 
Drummer of Berkeley, California, was dubbed “The Naviga-
tor” because she, from long distance, navigated the course of The 
Angola 3 like none other. She wrote to anybody she thought she 
could interest and influence to get involved. Scott Fleming, then 
a law student (since become a lawyer, defending Herman and 
Albert) also did outreach to others, seeking aid for The Angola 
3. Rose Braz, Gail Shaw, Bill Jennings (of “It’s About Time”), 
Richard Becker, Louis (Bato) Talementez, and so many many 
others who time and space will not allow me to name, all came 
on board in an unselfish effort to support The Angola 3.
My hearing in federal court before a three judge panel, was 
held in the year 2000. I was not allowed to attend. The court-
room, I was told, was packed with supporters: college, high 
school, and elementary students; community activists; and, of 
course, former members of the Black Panther Party, including 
Marion Brown and Althea Francois. There were several other 
cases heard by that panel that day, but I was told that when my 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   197 8/25/08   10:31:21 PM


--- PAGE 199 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
198
lawyers concluded their arguments, the courtroom immediately 
emptied. This was a signal to the judges that the courtroom had 
only been filled because of my case. 
During the first week of February 2001, I was told by security 
that I needed to call my lawyer. The news from Chris was stun-
ning! He had been advised by the District Attorney’s office, in St. 
Francisvillle, LA, that if I elected to plead guilty to a lesser charge 
of accessory-after-the-fact, I could be home within a week! While 
I didn’t wish to admit guilt or any culpability, accessory-after-
the-fact was no biggie. Shit, everyone on the tier at the time of 
the incident knew that a death had occurred. The hearing was set 
for the morning of February 8, 2001, in the 21st judicial district 
court, St. Francisville, LA.
A day before the scheduled hearing, I was again told that I 
needed to call my attorney. His message was that the District 
Attorney, fearing a civil suit, had upped the ante. As a measure 
of security (to forestall possible lawsuits) the state now wanted 
me to plead guilty to the reduced charge of manslaughter. I had 
no intention of suing the state; however, I also had no intention 
of pleading guilty to manslaughter, despite the fact that I was 
being urged to by my two comrades and other supporters. Per -
haps knowing this, and still fearing a lawsuit, the State dropped 
the ante again. Chris was told by the District Attorney’s office 
that I would go free if I would plead guilty to the lesser charge 
of “conspiracy to commit murder.” 
On the date of the hearing, the courtroom was packed with 
supporters from several states. Most of them did not know of 
these negotiations. All they knew was that I would probably be 
coming home soon. Their efforts on behalf of The Angola 3, 
and on behalf of me specifically, were to be rewarded. Many, 
including my two comrades, felt that my release could somehow 
impact the ultimate release of Herman and Albert. And so, after 
serving thirty-one years in prison (twenty-nine in solitary) for 
crimes I did not commit, I elected to plead guilty to conspiracy to 
commit murder. In a final gesture of contempt, when the judge 
asked me to raise my right hand to tell the truth, I threw up my 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   198 8/25/08   10:31:21 PM


--- PAGE 200 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
199
left. The courtroom was packed, and I believe only one person 
there caught my gesture. It was the District Attorney, who gave 
me a most peculiar look, but said nothing when our eyes met.
The district court judge computed my sentence to “time 
served.” All of my supporters who had came to the courthouse 
also came to the front gate of Angola State Prison, awaiting my 
release. Verna Mae was the only relative among them. I was 
scheduled to be released on February 9th, 2001, at 12:01 a.m., the 
prison authorities, perhaps eyeing the crowd, decided to not wait. 
At approximately 4:12 p.m., February 8th, 2001, in the midst of 
a throng of cheering supporters and guys cheering from death 
row, I walked free at last. 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   199 8/25/08   10:31:21 PM


--- PAGE 201 ---
RobertKing_Interior.indd   200 8/25/08   10:31:21 PM


--- PAGE 202 ---
201
postscript
upon my releAse from prison, i mAde  
the promise that “Even though I was free from Angola, Angola 
would never be free of me.” Since my release, I have traveled 
north, south, east, and west, speaking at colleges and universi-
ties, telling of my plight and that of the rest of The Angola 3 
and other political prisoners who are confined in this nation’s 
prisons and of others who have been wrongfully convicted and 
prosecuted. Also, I’ve traveled to more than a dozen different 
countries, some three or more times, telling folks about America 
and its fabled judicial system - exposing that it is synonymous 
with the chattel slave system of yesteryear. The only difference is 
that America has found a way to legalize the enslavement of its 
citizens through imprisonment, as only America can do!
Again I’ll say that legality and morality are opposites in this 
country. And contrary to what people may believe, the deeper 
discussion at this time should not just be about the immoral-
ity inherent in the American legal system, but rather about the 
people relinquishing their power. We the people are our own 
greatest resource. We, not elected officials, are empowered en 
masse to redirect our own course. And in redirecting our course, 
one of our main focuses has to be the prison system and how it is 
linked to the slavery of old.
Whether my release from prison has positively impacted the 
cases of Albert and Herman remains to be seen. I will continue 
to champion their cause, as well as that of other prisoners. The 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   201 8/25/08   10:31:21 PM


--- PAGE 203 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
202
National Coalition to Free The Angola 3 (and other political 
prisoners and political victims), with branches in New Orleans, 
Texas, New York, Chicago, and California and with supporters 
in England, Amsterdam (Holland), Paris, Portugal, Belgium, 
Germany, and Africa, will not give up the fight. We all know 
that…
The Struggle Continues!
robert HillAry king
a.k.a
robert king Wilkerson
Freed Member of The Angola 3 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   202 8/25/08   10:31:21 PM


--- PAGE 204 ---
appendices               
RobertKing_Interior.indd   203 8/25/08   10:31:21 PM


--- PAGE 205 ---
204
Jim Nabors
B: in Texas
DESCENDENTS OF JIM NABORS
DESCENDENTS OF HENRY KING
Omelia Head (half Blackfoot Indian)
B: in Texas
Francis Nabors
B: 1883
D: 1964 in Delhi, LA
Amy Nabors
B: 08 Dec 1892 in Baker’s Plantation
D: 25 Feb 1985
Ed Dunn
B: 10 Mar 1879
D: 10 Feb 1958
Laura Nabors
B: in Baker’s Plantation
Lee Gibson
Sarah Nabors
B: in Baker’s Plantation
Henry King
Alex Nabors
B: in Baker’s Plantation
John Nabors
B: in Baker’s Plantation
Andy Nabors
Hattie
Jeff Nabors
B: in Baker’s Plantation
Sophia
Alice King
B: 1900 in Gonzales
D: 1959
Clara
B: 125 in Gonzales
D: 1966
Robert
B: 1925
D: 2007
Ruth Douglas
B: 1925
D: 1958
Houston
B: 1929
D: 1989?
George
B: 1930
D: 1991
Henry II
B: 1932
D: ?
William
B: 1937
Verna Mae
B: 1939
James
B: 1941
Joe King
B: 19 Aug 1880 in LA
m: in Delhi, LA
D: 21 Sep 1966 in Delhi,LA
RobertKing_Interior.indd   204 8/25/08   10:31:21 PM


--- PAGE 206 ---
205
king family tree
Henry king, my mAternAl grAndfAtHer, 
was the son of Wyatt King, known as the “African” because he 
is believed to be the Kings’ direct link to Africa. Wyatt settled 
down in Louisiana and married Lucy Williams. They had eight 
children: Racheal, Lily, Ora, C.L., “Crocke”, Henry, Joe, and 
Bloom, in that order. My grandfather was number six. It is not 
exactly known where or when my grandfather was born. How-
ever, gauging from the information gathered, Henry was born 
around 1885. He married Sarah Nabors (in Baker’s Plantation). 
No search has been conducted in regards to children, if any, of 
this marriage between Henry and Sarah. Around 1923, he started 
having a relationship with Alice, my grandmother, who at the 
time, having previously married (as a child bride) to a Phillip 
Earle, was still in her teens. Alice had had no children from her 
previous marriage. From the marital bond between Henry and 
Alice came seven children: my mother Clara (being the first), 
Robert and Ruth (fraternal twins), Houston, George, Henry 
King Jr., and William. Alice would later have two more children: 
Verna Mae and James King.
RobertKing_Interior.indd   205 8/25/08   10:31:21 PM


--- PAGE 207 ---
RobertKing_Interior.indd   206 8/25/08   10:31:21 PM


--- PAGE 208 ---
207
anita roddick
a friend of distinction
i’ve HAd mAny dAys to reflect And to 
ruminate on the untimely departure of a friend of distinction, 
Anita Roddick. She was a friend to the planet, a friend to the 
environment, a friend to the downtrodden. She was both a friend 
of mine, and a friend to The Angola 3. I am here today as the 
only freed member of The Angola 3 to pay tribute, and to par -
ticipate in the memorial of my friend, our friend, a true friend 
of distinction who brought hope to so many. She even brought 
hope to Angola State Prison in the United States of America. 
When Anita heard of our collective plight in Angola and prisons 
throughout America, she became first enraged, and then engaged 
herself in becoming a friend through the struggle. 
My first recollection of Anita was at a dinner in 2003, in mid-
town New Orleans. She was a ball of energy, forever talking, 
laughing, and smiling. She was always just Anita. There were 
subsequent dinners and meetings as Anita’s quest to “free The 
Angola 3” heightened, and she increased her visits to Angola 
Prison, to meet and visit with Albert and Herman regularly. She 
also elevated her efforts to bring Herman and Albert to the rest 
of the world. She succeeded! This ever greater effort was paused 
by her sudden transition. But in pausing, there have been some 
reflections. Those reflections have revealed that, with her hus -
band Gordon and family at the helm, Anita’s fire will continue 
to burn brightly, illuminating the walls, prison bars, and halls of 
injustice that hold her friends captive.
RobertKing_Interior.indd   207 8/25/08   10:31:21 PM


--- PAGE 209 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
208
Anita took it personally. She looked at this monster in Amer -
ica. She saw the criminal in-justice system that is gobbling up 
so many of America’s minority youth, criminalizing whole gen-
erations, splitting families apart, and perpetuating a permanent 
underclass. She recognized it for what it was: slavery. Without 
Anita’s passion, it’s quite possible The Angola 3 would have 
remained obscured from the broader public view.
So let me say, we are here today for you, Anita. You left us a 
great legacy, but the memory of you is greater! No mourning, 
you would not want that…though I must confess quite a few of 
us cried anyway. I am sure you will forgive us. Please know that 
we are mindful of the legacy of struggle you left us. Because we 
love you and want to honor your memory, we know that it is 
imperative for us to continue walking your talk. For you yourself 
not only talked the talk, you walked your talk. We’re sending 
one of our family home to the ancestors. From Herman, Albert 
and all The Angola 3 supporters, we say ashe’ to a revolutionary 
comrade who has made her transition.
RobertKing_Interior.indd   208 8/25/08   10:31:21 PM


--- PAGE 210 ---
209
a poem for alice
(africa)
…A WomAn. tHe true WomAn. tHe 
Amazon. The Queen and Mother of the planet Earth. A Women 
whose greatness exceeds that of time itself. She gave birth to 
Kings of Egypt, and of Nubia: gave birth to Queens of Egypt 
and Ethiopia; to countless number of Princes and Princesses. 
She has been awarded the Noble Prize by Wisdom itself for her 
birth of the first civilization (and generation). She was Black; 
She is beautiful…
…Her name is Africa. Because of Her selfless nature, She 
welcomed strangers with outstretched arms. And because of 
Her multitude of kindnesses, Her magnanimous spirit, and Her 
longsuffering nature, those strangers looked upon Her as being 
simple….
…From far away places, they looked upon Her beauty which 
was a sight to behold! Lo! In time they came. Along with them 
came lust, greed, jealousy, and all manner of foul intent. They 
seized the symbol of beauty! Begun ravishing Her! Carried her 
seed by force into strange lands…
…They placed a ransom on Her and Her seed. And though 
this ransom has been paid many times over to the abductors, by 
Her and Her seed, the cries for freedom have gone unheeded, 
have become a byword, an object of contempt!
…Aiee! She is a righteous, longsuffering Woman; She is slow 
to anger, but rage undammed! Her powers, which are indeed 
mighty—are likened unto the rolling and coming together of 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   209 8/25/08   10:31:21 PM


--- PAGE 211 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
210
many waters. With a determination to match Her many powers, 
she will free herself from her abductors. Her seed will free itself 
also. The cries of victory and freedom for all will then be heard 
throughout the world!
RobertKing_Interior.indd   210 8/25/08   10:31:22 PM


--- PAGE 212 ---
211
malik rahim   
and the founding of  
common ground
mAlik rAHim WAs Among tHe first  
Panthers arrested by the New Orleans police. He was acquitted, 
but he remains an advocate for justice and prisoners rights, and 
spearheaded the efforts to garner support for Herman Wallace, 
Albert Woodfox, and myself. Enough could never be written 
about his undying work to claim justice for the downtrodden. 
Both Malik and I were living in New Orleans when Katrina 
hit in 2005. While Malik was on higher ground in Algiers, my 
own place in mid-city was almost completely flooded. And you 
could say that Common Ground arose out of Scott Crow and 
Brandon Darby’s efforts to find me. 
Scott and Brandon set out from Austin and Dallas to find me 
at my home. Their initial efforts failed. But, undaunted, they 
both set out once again three days later. Scott went over to Malik 
in Algiers, where they formulated the idea for an organization to 
deal with the crisis at hand that would become known as Com-
mon Ground while Brandon continued his search for me on the 
other side of the river.
He literally tried swimming to my house, even though New 
Orleans had become an armed and occupied camp. Nevertheless, 
his persistence in searching for me convinced the armed rangers 
in the area to come to my house. And this time, I decided to leave. 
I made a phone call to Brandon who met me at a freeway exit, 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   211 8/25/08   10:31:22 PM


--- PAGE 213 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
212
and drove me over to Algiers to meet up with Malik, Scott and 
Sharon Johnson who were working to found Common Ground. 
Malik used his home as a shelter and distribution center, and the 
organization to this day has been a key factor in the creation of 
shelters and distribution centers, and in providing the necessi-
ties of life in the absence of government support such as health 
clinics, legal assistance, and bio remediation efforts. Brandon 
Darby would also become a key figure in the coordination of 
Common Ground. He was the 9th ward project coordinator; he 
coordinated entire efforts to gut and save houses in both upper 
and lower 9th ward areas. Much has been written about Katrina 
and Common Ground, and Scott Crow is even now writing the 
story of its founding and a look at its successes and failures.
I believe that Common Ground — and other relief organi-
zations arising out of a necessity created by Federal, State, and 
local government neglect — could very well become catalysts 
of significant grassroots’ organization. They offer political alter -
natives and solutions to problems long faced by the poor, but a 
word of caution, however. Common Ground should not make 
the mistakes of past “catalysts” by allowing itself to become a 
fixed and therefore static organization without the potential to 
grow and keep growing with the needs of the people. Common 
Ground started out as a radical organization; radicalism in the 
aftermath of Katrina is required, and Common Ground needs 
to remain so. 
The emergence of Common Ground also gives us a deeper 
insight into the perception of young (and not so young) white 
Americans. More than 90% of the volunteers in New Orleans 
since Katrina have been young white radicals whose continued 
presence suggests their radical stance. It also suggests that these 
young radicals will no longer tolerate the oppression of those less 
privileged in society. Most importantly, it strongly suggests that 
the time is right for young (and not so young) African-Americans 
to examine their strategy of excluding whites from the struggle 
for fear of whites taking over. Common Ground is an orga-
nization started by Malik and Sharon Johnson, both African-
RobertKing_Interior.indd   212 8/25/08   10:31:22 PM


--- PAGE 214 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
213
Americans, and Scott Crow, who is white. Brandon Darby, who 
served as interim director, is also white, and is a good example of 
whites working alongside of black leadership. Together, they are 
telling our government “not anymore, not in our name, not on 
our watch.” In the aftermath of Katrina, I have met whites will-
ing to sacrifice their unearned privilege, their health, and, most 
importantly, their lives. More about Common Ground and its 
continued effort to aid victims in New Orleans and other Katrina 
affected areas can be found at www.commongroundrelief.org.
RobertKing_Interior.indd   213 8/25/08   10:31:22 PM


--- PAGE 215 ---
RobertKing_Interior.indd   214 8/25/08   10:31:22 PM


--- PAGE 216 ---
215
the case of the
angola 3
tHirty-six ye Ars Ago, t Hree young 
black men deep in rural Louisiana named Robert King, Herman 
Wallace and Albert Woodfox formed a prison chapter of The 
Black Panther Party. They were silenced for trying to expose 
continued segregation, systematic corruption, and horrific abuse 
in the biggest prison in the US: the 18,000-acre former slave 
plantation called Angola.
Peaceful, non-violent protest in the form of hunger and work 
strikes organized by inmates, caught the attention of prison, state 
and federal officials.
In the early 70s prison officials, targeted them for their activ-
ism and determined to put an end to their activities. They framed 
Herman Wallace, Albert Woodfox, and Robert King with mur -
ders they did not commit and threw them into 6x9 foot cells in 
solitary confinement, for over thirty years. Robert was exonerated 
and freed in 2001, but Herman and Albert who spent nearly 
thirty-six years in solitary, having just been moved to ‘tempo-
rary quarters’ after intense public pressure, are still serving life 
sentences remain behind bars.
Their cases have drawn the support of the A.C.L.U. (American 
Civil Liberties Union) and Amnesty International, and Senator 
John Conyers head of the House Judiciary Committee for the 
violations to their basic human rights.
There have been some breakthroughs in the campaign since 
Robert King proved his innocence and walked free in 2001. 
RobertKing_Interior.indd   215 8/25/08   10:31:22 PM


--- PAGE 217 ---
Ro BeRt Hilla Ry Kin G
216
sept. 19, 2006
In an evidentiary hearing Court Commissioner Rachel Morgan 
declared that Herman Wallace did not get a fair trial and recom-
mended that his conviction be overturned and granted a new 
trial. It was revealed that prison officials withheld information 
from the jury that they had paid off the chief witness in the case. 
Hezekiah Brown was paid a carton of cigarettes a week, used 
as prison currency, and eventually rewarded with a pardon and 
release from prison. She said those favors “should have been 
disclosed to the defense before trial,” because they weighed on 
the credibility of the witness.
may 15th 2008 
In a 2-1 decision, the 1st Circuit Court of Appeal denied his 
request to review the ruling of a state district judge who refused 
to throw out the conviction. The majority failed to give any 
reason for their decision, while Judge Welch, the dissenting 
voice said, ‘There was a reasonable likelihood that the verdict 
would have different had the jury been aware of the promise and 
favors to the state’s witness’ and “The majority did not choose to 
argue that the facts as set out by the Magistrate and Judge Welch 
weren’t correct, they just decided that these uncontradicted facts 
did not warrant a new trial, without giving a reason for their 
decision.” He also acknowledged that the state’s failure to disclose 
this information violated Herman’s constitutional rights.
march 26th 2008
Following a visit from U.S. House Judiciary Committee Chair -
man John Conyers Jr., Herman Wallace and Albert Woodfox 
were transferred from solitary after thirty-six years to a specially 
created and hastily built dorm that holds twenty men. Sen. 
Conyers and Cedric Richmond Chairman who heads the House 
Judiciary Committee in Louisiana have called for an investiga-
tion into the cases as well as into the ‘prosecutorial misconduct 
and corruption’ of prison officials.
RobertKing_Interior.indd   216 8/25/08   10:31:22 PM


--- PAGE 218 ---
FRO m THe B OTTO m OF THe He AP
217
June 10th, 2008
Federal Magistrate Christine Noland of the U.S. District Court 
for the Middle District of Louisiana recommended the reversal 
of Albert Woodfox’s conviction for the murder of Brent Miller 
due to numerous court and prosecutorial misconduct incidents 
in his 1998 retrial. The case is now pending before U.S. District 
Judge James Brady.
civil cAse 
In addition, The Angola 3 civil rights suit, which alleges that their 
thirty-six plus years as well as Robert King’s twenty-nine years 
in solitary confinement is a violation of the’ right to due process’ 
and amounts to ‘cruel and unusual punishment’ as set forth in 
the U.S. Constitution. The suit, which the United States Supreme 
Court ruled ‘has merit to proceed’ in 2004, is moving forward in 
federal court and could go to trial in the fall of this year.
In addition to King’s release, these developments are the big-
gest to happen in the years of being held behind bars. 
The future is unwritten….
For more information on the cases of The Angola 3, updates on 
Herman and Albert, and to write them please visit:
www.Angola3.org
www.3blackpanthers.org
www.A3grassroots.org
RobertKing_Interior.indd   217 8/25/08   10:31:22 PM


--- PAGE 219 ---
RobertKing_Interior.indd   218 8/25/08   10:31:22 PM


--- PAGE 220 ---
Also Av AilAble   
from Pm Press:  
The Real Cost of Prisons Comix
Edited by Lois Ahrens
ISBN: 978-1-60486-034-4  
$12.95
One out of every hundred adults in the U.S. 
is in prison. This book provides a crash 
course in what drives mass incarceration, 
the human and community costs, and 
how to stop the numbers from going even 
higher. This volume collects the three 
comic books published by The Real Cost 
of Prisons Project. The stories and sta -
tistical information in each comic book is 
thoroughly researched and documented.
Prison Town: Paying the Price tells the story of how the financing and site 
locations of prisons affects the people of rural communities in which prisons 
are built. It also tells the story of how mass incarceration affects people of 
urban communities where the majority of incarcerated people come from.
Prisoners of the War on Drugs includes the history of the war on drugs, man-
datory minimums, how racism creates harsher sentences for people of color, 
stories on how the war on drugs works against women, three strikes laws, 
obstacles to coming home after incarceration, and how mass incarceration 
destabilizes neighborhoods.
Prisoners of a Hard Life: Women and Their Children includes stories about 
women trapped by mandatory sentencing and the “costs” of incarceration 
for women and their families. Also included are alternatives to the present 
system, a glossary and footnotes.
Over 125,000 copies of the comic books have been printed and more than 
100,000 have been sent to families of people who are incarcerated, people 
who are incarcerated, and to organizers and activists throughout the country. 
The book includes a chapter with descriptions about how the comix have 
been put to use in the work of organizers and activists in prison and in the 
“free world” by ESL teachers, high school teachers, college professors, stu-
dents, and health care providers throughout the country. The demand for 
them is constant and the ways in which they are being used is inspiring.
“I cannot think of a better way to arouse the 
public to the cruelties of the prison system than 
to make this book widely available.”  
–Howard Zinn
RobertKing_Interior.indd   219 8/25/08   10:31:22 PM


--- PAGE 221 ---
Also Av AilAble   
from Pm Press:  
Let Freedom Ring: A Collection of 
Documents from the Movements 
to Free U.S. Political Prisoners
Edited by Matt Meyer
Foreword by Adolfo Perez Esquivel
Afterwords by Lynne Stewart 
and Ashanti Alston
ISBN: 978-1-60486-035-1  
$37.95
Let Freedom Ring presents a two-decade 
sweep of essays, analyses, histo-
ries, interviews, resolutions, People’s 
Tribunal verdicts, and poems by and 
about the scores of U.S. political pris-
oners and the campaigns to safeguard 
their rights and secure their freedom. In addition to an extensive section 
on the campaign to free death-row journalist Mumia Abu-Jamal, repre-
sented here are the radical movements that have most challenged the U.S. 
empire from within: Black Panthers and other Black liberation fighters, 
Puerto Rican independentistas, Indigenous sovereignty activists, white anti-
imperialists, environmental and animal rights militants, Arab and Muslim 
activists, Iraq war resisters, and others. Contributors in and out of prison 
detail the repressive methods—from long-term isolation to sensory depri -
vation to politically inspired parole denial—used to attack these freedom 
fighters, some still caged after 30+ years. This invaluable resource guide 
offers inspiring stories of the creative, and sometimes winning, strategies 
to bring them home.
Contributors include: Mumia Abu-Jamal, Dan Berger, Dhoruba Bin-Wahad, 
Bob Lederer, Terry Bisson, Laura Whitehorn, Safiya Bukhari, The San 
Francisco 8, Angela Davis, Bo Brown, Bill Dunne, Jalil Muntaqim, Susie 
Day, Luis Nieves Falcón, Ninotchka Rosca, Meg Starr, Assata Shakur, Jill 
Soffiyah Elijah, Jan Susler, Chrystos, Jose Lopez, Leonard Peltier, Marilyn 
Buck, Oscar López Rivera, Sundiata Acoli, Ramona Africa, Linda Thurston, 
Desmond Tutu, Mairead Corrigan Maguire and many more…
“Within every society there are people who, at great personal 
risk and sacrifice, stand up and fight for the most marginalized 
among us. We call these people of courage, spirit and love, our 
heroes and heroines. This book is the story of the ones in our 
midst. It is the story of the best we are.”  
–Asha Bandele, poet and author of The Prisoner’s Wife
RobertKing_Interior.indd   220 8/25/08   10:31:22 PM


--- PAGE 222 ---
Also Av AilAble   
from Pm Press:  
The Angola 3: Black Panthers  
and the Last Slave Plantation  
DVD
ISBN: 978-1-60486-020-7  
$19.95
The Angola 3: Black Panthers and the 
Last Slave Plantation tells the gripping 
story of Robert King, Herman Wallace 
and Albert Woodfox, men who have 
endured solitary confinement lon-
ger then any known living prisoner in 
the United States. Politicized through 
contact with the Black Panther Party 
while inside Louisiana’s prisons, they 
formed one of the only prison Panther 
chapters in history and worked to organize other prisoners into a movement 
for the right to live like human beings. This feature length movie explores 
their extraordinary struggle for justice while incarcerated in Angola, a 
former slave plantation where institutionalized rape and murder made it 
known as one of the most brutal and racist prisons in the United States. 
The analysis of The Angola 3’s political work, and the criminal cases used 
to isolate and silence them, occurs within the context of the widespread 
COINTELPRO being carried out in the 1960s and 70s by the FBI and state 
law enforcement against militant voices for change.
In a partial victory, the courts exonerated Robert King of the original charges 
and released him in 2001; he continues the fight for the freedom of his two 
brothers. The ongoing campaign, which includes a civil case soon to come 
before the Supreme Court, is supported by people and organizations such as 
Amnesty International, the A.C.L.U., Harry Belafonte, Ben Cohen and Jerry 
Greenfield of Ben and Jerry’s Ice Cream, Ramsey Clark, Sen. John Conyers, 
Sister Helen Prejean, (the late) Anita Roddick, Bishop Desmond Tutu and 
the ANC. Herman Wallace and Albert Woodfox have now endured as politi -
cal prisoners in solitary confinement for over thirty-five years.
Narrated by Mumia Abu-Jamal, The Angola 3 features interviews with for -
mer Panthers, political prisoners and revolutionaries, including the Angola 
3 themselves, and Bo Brown, Geronimo (ji Jaga) Pratt, Malik Rahim, Yuri 
Kochiyama, David Hilliard, Rod Coronado, Noelle Hanrahan, Kiilu Nyasha, 
Marion Brown, Luis Talamantez, Gail Shaw and many others. Portions of 
the proceeds go to support the Angola 3. 
Available on DVD from PM Press Video Series  
www.PMPress.org – www.3BlackPanthers.org
RobertKing_Interior.indd   221 8/25/08   10:31:23 PM


--- PAGE 223 ---
Also Av AilAble   
from Pm Press:  
The Jena 6  
DVD 
ISBN: 978-1-60486-011-5  
$14.95
Jena, LA - In a small town in 
Louisiana, six families are fighting 
for their sons’ lives.
Two nooses are left as a warning to 
black students trying to integrate 
their playground, fights break out 
across town, a white man pulls a 
shotgun on black students, someone 
burns down most of the school, the 
DA puts six black students on trial for 
attempted murder,and the quiet town of Jena becomes the site of the larg-
est civil rights demonstration in the South since the 1960s. 
Big Noise Tactical Media is a collective of media-
makers dedicated to circulating beautiful, 
passionate, revolutionary images.
RobertKing_Interior.indd   222 8/25/08   10:31:23 PM


--- PAGE 224 ---
Since his release from Angola, Robert King has been working 
on his own candy business called King’s Freelines. He explained 
how he came to start it in one of the all time requested episodes 
of hosts Davia Nelson and Nikki Silva’s Kitchen Sisters’ Hidden 
Kitchens Series on National Public Radio. It aired shortly after 
Hurricane Katrina in 2005, and was featured on the front page 
of the Austin American Statesman in 2006. He explained:
In 1962, at Angola Prison in Louisiana I learned to concoct 
a special praline-like candy from a fellow prisoner named 
“Cap Pistol.” I continued to make this recipe of sugar, butter, 
milk and pecans, even during the twenty-nine years I spent in 
restricted confinement. In my cell, I made my candy using a 
stove of stacked tin cans, and tissue for fuel. The ingredients 
came from other prisoners on the cellblock that saved their 
butter pats and sugar packets. The pecans were smuggled 
in by other means. On my first full day of freedom I was com -
pelled by my aunt, who is like a sister, to make a batch of candy 
at her house.
Later Laurie Lazer, a friend in San Francisco, helped me come 
up with the name Freelines. We liked the name because it 
sounds like pralines, which my candy is similar to, and I was 
finally free. It just made sense… Freelines.
Now that i Am free i hope to make 
life a little sweeter for you!
Try some of my freelines, please visit my site  
or contact me at: www.Kingsf reelines.com 
kingsfreelines@gmail.com
RobertKing_Interior.indd   223 8/25/08   10:31:23 PM


--- PAGE 225 ---
PM Press was founded in 2007 as an independent publisher with offices in the US 
and UK, and a veteran staff boasting a wealth of experience in print and online pub-
lishing. We produce and distribute short as well as large run projects, timely texts, 
and out of print classics.
We seek to create radical and stimulating fiction and non-fiction books, pamphlets, 
t-shirts, visual and audio materials to entertain, educate and inspire you. We aim to 
distribute these through every available channel with every available technology—
whether that means you are seeing anarchist classics at our bookfair stalls; reading 
our latest vegan cookbook at the café over (your third) microbrew; downloading geeky 
fiction e-books; or digging new music and timely videos from our website.
PM Press is always on the lookout for talented and skilled volunteers, artists, activ-
ists and writers to work with. If you have a great idea for a project or can contribute 
in some way, please get in touch.
Pm Press . P o box 23912 . oakland CA 94623  
www.pmpress.org
RobertKing_Interior.indd   224 8/25/08   10:31:23 PM

