=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Robert Williams and the Black Power Movement.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 79
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:30:10.723465
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
Cover: (Left) Robert F. Williams; (Upper right) from left: Edward S. “Pete” Williams, Robert F. Williams,
John Herman Williams, and Dr. Albert E. Perry Jr. at an NAACP meeting in 1957, in Monroe, North
Carolina; (Lower right) Mao Tse-tung presents Robert Williams with a “little red book.” All photos
courtesy of John Herman Williams.


--- PAGE 3 ---
The Black Power Movement
Part 2: The Papers of Robert F. Williams
Editorial Adviser
Timothy B. Tyson
Project Coordinator
Randolph H. Boehm
Guide compiled by
Daniel Lewis
A microfilm project of
UNIVERSITY PUBLICATIONS OF AMERICA
An Imprint of LexisNexis Academic & Library Solutions
4520 East-West Highway • Bethesda, MD 20814-3389
BLACK STUDIES RESEARCH SOURCES
Microfilms from Major Archival and Manuscript Collections
General Editors: John H. Bracey, Jr. and Sharon Harley
A Guide to the Microfilm Edition of
Microfilmed from the Holdings of the Bentley Historical Library,
University of Michigan at Ann Arbor


--- PAGE 4 ---
ii
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
The Black power movement. Part 2, The papers of Robert F. Williams [microform] /
editorial adviser, Timothy B. Tyson ; project coordinator, Randolph H. Boehm.
26 microfilm reels ; 35 mm.—(Black studies research sources)
Accompanied by a printed guide compiled by Daniel Lewis, entitled: A guide to the
microfilm edition of the Black power movement. Part 2, The papers of Robert F.
Williams.
ISBN 1-55655-867-8
1. African Americans—Civil rights—History—20th century—Sources. 2. Black
power—United States—History—20th century—Sources. 3. Black nationalism—
United States—History—20th century—Sources. 4. Williams, Robert Franklin, 1925—
Archives. I. Title: Papers of Robert F. Williams. II. Tyson, Timothy B. III. Boehm,
Randolph. IV. Lewis, Daniel, 1972–    . Guide to the microfilm edition of the Black
power movement. Part 2, Papers of Robert F. Williams. V. Series.
E185.61
323.1'196073'09045—dc21 2001007847
      CIP
Compilation 
© 2002 by Congressional Information Service, Inc.
All rights reserved.
ISBN 1-55655-867-8.


--- PAGE 5 ---
iii
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction ............................................................................................................... v
Scope and Content Note .......................................................................................... xix
Source Note ............................................................................................................... xxvii
Editorial Note ............................................................................................................ xxvii
Acronyms and Abbreviations .................................................................................. xxix
Reel Index
Reels 1–4
Group 1, Series 1: Correspondence, 1956–1979 ............................................... 1
Reel 5
Group 1, Series 1: Correspondence, 1956–1979 cont. ...................................... 7
Group 1, Series 2: Manuscripts and Writings, 1961–1970 ................................. 8
Reel 6
Group 1, Series 2: Manuscripts and Writings, 1961–1970 cont. ........................ 9
Group 1, Series 3: Public Statements and Publicity, 1956–1979 ....................... 9
Reel 7
Group 1, Series 3: Public Statements and Publicity, 1956–1979 cont. .............. 10
Group 1, Series 4: Biographical Material, 1962–1979 ......................................... 10
Reels 8–9
Group 1, Series 4: Biographical Material, 1962–1979 cont................................. 11
Reel 10
Group 1, Series 4: Biographical Material, 1962–1979 cont................................. 14
Group 1, Series 5: Republic of New Africa, 1968–1970 ..................................... 14
Group 1, Series 6: 
The Crusader (Newsletter), 1959–1969, 1980–1982 ........... 15
Reel 11
Group 1, Series 6: The Crusader (Newsletter), 1959–1969, 1980–1982 cont. .. 15
Group 1, Series 7: “Radio Free Dixie” Broadcasts, 1962–1966 ......................... 16
Reel 12
Group 1, Series 7: “Radio Free Dixie” Broadcasts, 1962–1966 cont. ................ 16
Reel 13
Group 1, Series 7: “Radio Free Dixie” Broadcasts, 1962–1966 cont. ................ 17
Group 2, Series 1: Calvin Cunningham Case, 1983–1996 ................................. 18
Reel 14
Group 2, Series 2: Clippings, 1961–1996 ........................................................... 18
Group 2, Series 3: Correspondence, 1961–1996 ............................................... 19


--- PAGE 6 ---
iv
Reel 15
Group 2, Series 3: Correspondence, 1961–1996 cont. ...................................... 20
Reel 16
Group 2, Series 3: Correspondence, 1961–1996 cont. ...................................... 22
Group 2, Series 4: Government Files, 1951–1981
Subseries 1: FBI Files, Organized by FBI Filing System.................................. 22
Reels 17–18
Group 2, Series 4: Government Files, 1951–1981 cont.
Subseries 1: FBI Files, Organized by FBI Filing System cont. ........................ 23
Reel 19
Group 2, Series 4: Government Files, 1951–1981 cont.
Subseries 1: FBI Files, Organized by FBI Filing System cont. ........................ 24
Subseries 2: FBI Files, Chronological............................................................... 24
Reels 20–22
Group 2, Series 4: Government Files, 1951–1981 cont.
Subseries 2: FBI Files, Chronological cont. ...................................................... 25
Reel 23
Group 2, Series 4: Government Files, 1951–1981 cont.
Subseries 2: FBI Files, Chronological cont. ...................................................... 27
Subseries 3: CIA Documents ........................................................................... 27
Subseries 4: IRS Documents ........................................................................... 27
Subseries 5: Michigan State Police Documents ............................................... 28
Reel 24
Group 2, Series 4: Government Files, 1951–1981 cont.
Subseries 6: Post Office Documents................................................................ 28
Subseries 7: State Department Documents ..................................................... 28
Subseries 8: Treasury Department Files .......................................................... 28
Group 2, Series 5: Lake County, Michigan, 1977–1994 ..................................... 28
Group 2, Series 6: Memorials, 1996 ................................................................... 29
Group 2, Series 7: Personal, 1961–1996............................................................ 29
Reel 25
Group 2, Series 7: Personal, 1961–1996 cont. ................................................... 29
Group 2, Series 8: Political Organizations, [1960]–1984 .................................... 30
Group 2, Series 9: Press Releases and Publicity, 1963–1985 .......................... 30
Group 2, Series 10: Print and Broadcast Material, 1965–1991 .......................... 30
Group 2, Series 11: Photographs, [Undated] ...................................................... 31
Reel 26
Group 2, Series 11: Photographs, [Undated] cont. ............................................. 31
Group 2, Series 12: Petitions, 1970–1973 .......................................................... 31
Principal Correspondents Index ............................................................................. 33
Subject Index ............................................................................................................. 37


--- PAGE 7 ---
v
INTRODUCTION
Robert F. Williams and the African American Freedom Struggles
Robert Williams, born in Monroe, North Carolina, became one of the most
influential African American radicals of his time, primarily for his advocacy of what he
called “armed self-reliance” during the late 1950s and the 1960s. He engaged in a
widely published written debate with Martin Luther King Jr. in 1960 and, though his
leadership abilities were no match for King’s, he wielded an enduring influence. His
life in the freedom struggles revealed the deep influence of black nationalism and
armed self-defense. His influence might have been even greater had he not been
forced to flee the United States in 1961 with his wife and two small children, a
machine gun slung over one shoulder, foiling a Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
dragnet. In Cuba and the People’s Republic of China, Williams shared podiums with
Fidel Castro, Ho Chi Minh, and Mao Tse-tung. “Radio Free Dixie,” his regular
program on Radio Havana from 1962 to 1965, blasted “rump-licking Uncle Toms” and
“Ku Klux Klan savages” from Seattle to New York City. His 1962 book, 
Negroes with
Guns, a decisive influence on the Black Panthers and a generation of young African
American radicals, became a classic document of the Black Power movement. Just
before his death on October 15, 1996, Williams completed a draft of his
autobiography, “While God Lay Sleeping.” In its pages, in his life, and in the Robert F.
Williams Papers, we find a distillation of the bitter history that shaped not only one of
the South’s most dynamic race rebels but thousands of other black insurgents
whose militant resistance helped end the racial caste system in the United States.
Robert Williams was born in 1925 to Emma C. and John L. Williams. His father
was a railroad boiler washer in Monroe, North Carolina, a town of six thousand in the
North Carolina piedmont. His grandfather, Sikes Williams, born a slave in Union
County, had attended Biddle Institute in nearby Charlotte after Emancipation and
became a Republican Party activist during the late nineteenth century. Sikes
Williams also published a small newspaper called “The People’s Voice” and
denounced the white supremacy campaign, which took the vote from black citizens
at the turn of the twentieth century.
Robert’s grandmother, Ellen Williams, also born a slave, was a daily presence in
his childhood: Williams remembered her as “my greatest friend.” He recalled that
“she read 
everything ” and that she “specialized in history.” She would point to the old
printing press in the shed and tell the young boy stories of the crusading editor’s
political exploits. Before she died, Ellen Williams gave young Robert a gift that
symbolized much that slavery and the struggle for liberty had taught her: the ancient
rifle that his grandfather had wielded against white terrorists.
During World War II, Williams moved to Detroit, where he worked at the Ford
Motor Company, joined a militant labor union, and battled white mobs in the Detroit
race riot of 1943. Drafted in 1944, Williams endured the ironies of marching for
freedom in a segregated army. Though the racial discrimination in the army angered


--- PAGE 8 ---
vi
Williams, military training gave him and a generation of African American veterans
“some feeling of security and self-assurance,” he recalled. “The Army indoctrination
instilled in us what a virtue it was to fight for democracy and that we were fighting for
democracy and upholding the Constitution. But most of all they taught us to use
arms.” Like thousands of other African American veterans, Williams came home
unwilling to accept the South’s racial caste system.
Another returning African American veteran, a friend of Williams’s named Bennie
Montgomery, killed his white landlord in a dispute over wages in 1946. The Ku Klux
Klan (KKK) wanted to lynch the black sharecropper, but instead state authorities
whisked Montgomery out of town, tried and convicted him of murder, and ten months
later executed him in the gas chamber at Central Prison in Raleigh. Robbed of their
lynching, the local klavern of “the invisible empire” let it be known that Bennie
Montgomery’s body belonged to the Klan. “They was gonna come and take Bennie’s
body out and drag it up and down the streets,” J. W. McDow, another African
American veteran, recalled. “I rather die and go to hell before I see that happen.” A
group of former soldiers met at Booker T. Perry’s barbershop and made a battle plan.
When the Klan motorcade pulled up in front of Harris Funeral Home, forty black men
leveled their rifles, taking aim at the line of cars. Not a shot was fired; the Klansmen
simply weighed their chances and drove away. Former U.S. Army Private First
Class Robert F. Williams cradled a carbine that night. So did three of the men who
would become key lieutenants in the “black militia” that Williams organized ten years
later. “That was one of the first incidents,” Williams recalled, “that really started us to
understanding that we had to resist, and that resistance could be effective if we
resisted in groups, and if we resisted with guns.”
Williams soon left the South for almost a decade, working briefly at Cadillac
Motor Company in Detroit before using his G.I. Bill benefits to write poetry and study
psychology at three different historically black colleges: West Virginia State College,
Johnson C. Smith College, and North Carolina Central College for Negroes.
“Someday,” he vowed in a 1949 article for the Detroit edition of the 
Daily Worker,  “I
would return seasoned from the fight in the north and more efficient in the fight for the
liberation of my people.” In 1952, Williams wrote an essay for Paul Robeson’s
newspaper, 
Freedom,  in which he predicted that African American college students
would soon become “the most militant agitators for democracy in America today.
They have nothing to lose and all to gain.” In 1953, Williams ran out of money for
college and reenlisted in the armed forces, this time in the United States Marine
Corps.
“Wherever he has gone,” an FBI observer noted during this period, “Williams
has constantly complained, both in the Army and at previous places of employment,
that he has been discriminated against.” The Marine Corps was no different.
Objecting bitterly to racial discrimination, Williams clashed with his officers, spent
much of his sixteen months in the Marine Corps in the brig, and received an
undesirable discharge in 1955. His one bright moment as a marine came on May 17,
1954, when he heard that the U.S. Supreme Court had struck down school
segregation. “At last I felt that I was a part of America and that I belonged,” he wrote.
“I was sure that this was the beginning of a new era of American democracy.”
Upon his return to Monroe in 1955, Williams joined both the local branch of the
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) and a mostly
white Unitarian fellowship. In a Sunday sermon delivered to his fellow Unitarians in
1956, Williams hailed the Montgomery bus boycott and celebrated what he called


--- PAGE 9 ---
vii
“the patriots of passive revolution.” His bitter collision with the Marine Corps had not
dampened his commitment to equal rights for all under the U.S. Constitution and to
those elements in the American political tradition that he believed undergirded black
liberation. Invoking “the spirit of Concord, Lexington and Valley Forge,” Williams
declared from the pulpit that, as he put it, “the liberty bell peals once more and the
Stars and Stripes shall wave forever.”
The atmosphere at the Monroe NAACP was less exuberant. In the wake of the
Brown decision and the triumph at Montgomery, KKK rallies near Monroe began to
draw crowds as large as fifteen thousand. Dynamite attacks on black activists in the
area were common and lesser acts of terror routine. “The echo of shots and
dynamite blasts,” the editors of 
The Southern Patriot  wrote in 1957, “has been almost
continuous throughout the South.” The Monroe NAACP dwindled to six members
who then contemplated disbanding. When the newest member objected to
dissolution, the departing membership chose him to lead the chapter. “They elected
me president,” Williams recalled, “and then they all left.”
Finding himself virtually a one-man NAACP chapter, Williams turned first to the
African American veterans with whom he had stood against the Klan that night back
in 1946. Another veteran, Albert E. Perry, M.D., became vice president. Finding it
“necessary to visit homes and appeal directly to individuals,” as Williams informed
the national office, he painstakingly recruited from the beauty parlors, pool halls, and
street corners, building a cadre of roughly two hundred members by 1959. The
Monroe branch of the NAACP became “the only one of its kind in existence,” Julian
Mayfield wrote in 
Commentary  in 1961. “Its members and supporters, who are mostly
workers and displaced farmers, constitute a well-armed and disciplined fighting unit.”
The branch became “unique in the whole NAACP because of a working class
composition and a leadership that was not middle class,” Williams wrote. “Most
important, we had a strong representation of black veterans who didn’t scare easily.”
In response to the drownings of several local African American children whom
segregation had forced to swim in isolated farm ponds, the Monroe NAACP launched
a campaign to desegregate the local tax-supported swimming pool in 1957. Not
surprisingly, the KKK blamed the affluent Dr. Perry for the resurgent black activism,
and a large, heavily armed Klan motorcade attacked Perry’s house one night that
summer. African American veterans greeted the night riders with sandbag
fortifications and a hail of disciplined gunfire. The Monroe Board of Aldermen
immediately passed an ordinance banning KKK motorcades, a measure they had
refused to consider prior to the gun battle.
An even more remarkable local drama dragged Robert Williams onto the stage
of international politics on October 28, 1958. Two African American boys, “Fuzzy”
Simpson and Hanover Thompson, ages eight and ten, met some white children in a
vacant lot. A kissing game ensued in which the ten-year-old Thompson and an eight-
year-old white girl named Sissy Sutton kissed one another. The worldwide
controversy that stemmed from the “kissing case” underlined the power of sexual
questions in racial politics and demonstrated both the promise and the problems of
cold war politics for the African American freedom struggle.
After the kissing incident, Sissy Sutton’s mother reported that “I was furious. I
would have killed Hanover myself if I had the chance.” Sissy’s father took a shotgun
and went looking for the two boys. Neighbors reported that a white mob had roared
up to the Thompson home and threatened not only to kill the boys but also to lynch
their mothers. Later that afternoon, police officers spotted Hanover Thompson and


--- PAGE 10 ---
viii
Fuzzy Simpson pulling a red wagon loaded with soft drink bottles. “Both cops jumped
out with their guns drawn,” Thompson recalled. “They snatched us up and
handcuffed us and threw us in the car. When we got to the jail, they drug us out of
the car and started beating us.” The local juvenile court judge reported to Governor
Luther H. Hodges that the police had detained the boys “for their own good, due to
local feeling in the case.”
Authorities held the two boys for six days without permitting them to see
parents, friends, or attorneys. Passing gunmen fired dozens of shots into the
Thompson home. Klan terrorists torched crosses on the lawn. Hanover’s sister
found his dog shot dead in the yard. For many white citizens, the case seemed to
resonate with the sexual fears that accompanied their vision of where school
desegregation would lead. “If [black children] get into our rural schools and ride the
buses with our white children,” one local woman wrote, “the Monroe ‘kissing’ incident
is only a start of what we will have.” On November 4, Judge J. Hampton Price
convened what he termed “separate but equal” hearings for the white parents and the
black boys and sentenced the pair to Morrison Training School For Negroes. If they
behaved well, Judge Price told the black boys, it might be that they could be
released before they were twenty-one.
Robert Williams saw the “kissing case” as more than a local expression of the
irrational sexual lynchpin of white supremacy; the bizarre clarity of the case and the
strange politics of the cold war suggested a larger strategy. Like Martin Luther King
Jr. and the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) would do in
Birmingham four years later, Williams and his friends in Monroe set out to use
international politics of the cold war as a fulcrum to push the U.S. government to
intervene. Determined to make the “kissing case” a global metaphor for the American
racial dilemma, they fired off press releases, pestered reporters, hounded the wire
services, and put in motion what 
Time magazine called “a rolling snowball” of
worldwide publicity.
This publicity campaign quickly attracted the support of the Socialist Workers
Party (SWP), a Trotskyite group attempting to break with the American left’s
tendency to subordinate race to class. Efforts for socialism and black liberation must
meet as equal partners, C. L. R. James and Claude DeBruce had persuaded their
SWP comrades. DeBruce, an African American member, saw the need for an
independent black political leadership, preferably with ties to the NAACP, that could
“project a program in the interest of the mass of Negroes.” Thus when Robert
Williams emerged from the black South in 1958, the SWP stood poised to assist him
on his own terms. Beginning in 1958, 
The Militant,  the SWP’s newspaper, carried
dozens of articles about Williams and Monroe—twenty-five on the “kissing case”
alone—coverage that overshadowed their reports on the Cuban revolution, the
anticolonial uprising in the Belgian Congo, and all the other developments in the
African American freedom struggle combined. “They knew I wasn’t going to join any
party,” he recalled, “because I had made that plain. I wasn’t interested in them.” The
reverse, however, was not true. Robert Williams “has some audacious plans which I
think are feasible,” SWP organizer George Weissman wrote. “Indeed, the more I see
of him the more I think he has the possibility of becoming a 
real Negro leader.”
With logistical assistance from the SWP, Williams addressed audiences at labor
halls, liberal churches, and college auditoriums across the country. Soon the “kissing
case” emblazoned front pages around the globe. John Shure, head of the United
States Information Agency at the Hague, reported that he himself had received over


--- PAGE 11 ---
ix
twelve thousand letters “even though the response does not appear to have been
organized.” While the White House and the State Department expressed alarm at the
damage to U.S. foreign relations, Williams had a ready answer. “It is asinine for
colored people to even think of sparing the U.S. State Department embarrassment
abroad,” he replied. “If the U.S. government is so concerned about its image abroad,
then let it create a society that will stand up under world scrutiny.” Three and a half
months after Hanover and Sissy had kissed each other, Governor Hodges
announced, under enormous political pressure, that the boys would be released.
“The kissing case,” activist lawyer Conrad Lynn observed years later, “was the
case that got [Williams] in national and international attention.” The case furnished
Williams not only with a network of seasoned activists in the American left but also
with a growing number of supporters among black nationalists in Harlem. Audley
“Queen Mother” Moore, an important figure in both communist and black nationalist
circles in Harlem from the 1920s to the 1970s, organized support for Williams. He
became a regular visitor to Louis Michaux’s National Memorial African Bookstore on
Seventh Avenue off 125th Street, where Michaux welcomed Williams to the podium
the store provided for the legendary Harlem street speakers of the day. The most
important of Williams’s contacts among the Harlem nationalists was Malcolm X,
minister at the Nation of Islam’s Temple Number 7. “Every time I used to go to New
York he would invite me to speak,” Williams recalled. Malcolm would tell his
congregation “that ‘our brother is here from North Carolina, and he is the only fighting
man that we have got, and we have got to help him so he can stay down there,’”
Williams recounted. Williams found ready support among Harlem intellectuals,
including Julian Mayfield, John Henrik Clarke, John O. Killens, and other literary and
political figures. “They all saw something in Monroe that did not actually exist—an
immediately revolutionary situation,” Harold Cruse observed. Julian Mayfield later
wrote an unpublished autobiography in which he disclosed that “a famous black
writer made contact with gangsters in New Jersey and bought me two sub-machine
guns which I took to Monroe.” Williams was not the best known black leader in the
United States, but he may have been the best armed.
The “kissing case” recruited new allies for Williams, but it launched him on a
collision course with the NAACP hierarchy. Since the Scottsboro trials of the 1930s,
the NAACP had steadfastly shunned so-called “sex cases” and political alliances
that might leave the organization open to red-baiting. Should the NAACP “ever get
identified with communism,” Kelly Alexander, head of the North Carolina Conference
of Branches, told a reporter, “the Ku Klux Klan and the White Councils will pick up
the charge that we are ‘reds’ and use it as a club to beat us to death.” Differences
over strategy became bitter: Alexander complained to the national office that Williams
“has completely turned his back on the one organization that is responsible for him
being in the spotlight today,”
 while Williams griped that Alexander “sounds more like a
Tom than ever.” Roy Wilkins, executive secretary of the national organization, began
to refer to Williams in private as “Lancelot of Monroe.”
Just as the “kissing case” headlines faded in the spring of 1959, two news
stories from other parts of the South gripped black America. One was the lynching of
Mack Charles Parker, accused of raping a white woman in Mississippi. When
Mississippi NAACP field secretary Medgar Evers heard that Parker had been
dragged from his cell and murdered by a mob, he told his wife, “I’d like to get a gun
and start shooting.” The other was the terrifying ordeal of four young black college
students at Florida A&M. Their double date after a college dance was interrupted by


--- PAGE 12 ---
x
four white men with guns and knives. The drunken assailants, who had vowed, as
one of them testified in court later, “to go out and get some nigger pussy,” forced the
two eighteen-year-old black men to kneel at gunpoint while they undressed the two
women and decided aloud which one they would kidnap and then gang-rape. In the
wake of these highly publicized outrages, Roy Wilkins conceded in a letter marked
“NOT FOR PUBLICATION” that “I know the thought of violence has been much in
the minds of Negroes.” By early May, Wilkins admitted that the NAACP found it
“harder and harder to keep feelings from boiling over in some of our branches.”
Right on the heels of the Parker lynching and the terrors in Tallahassee, two
pressing local matters brought Robert Williams and a crowd of black women to the
Union County courthouse. B. F. Shaw, a white railroad engineer, was charged with
attacking an African American maid at the Hotel Monroe. Slated for trial the same
day, Lewis Medlin, a white mechanic, was accused of having beaten and sexually
assaulted Mary Ruth Reid, a pregnant African American woman, in the presence of
her five children. According to Williams, Reid’s brothers and several of the African
American women of the Monroe NAACP had urged that the new machine guns be
tried out on Medlin before his trial. “I told them that this matter would be handled
through the law and the NAACP would help,” Williams recalled, “that we would be as
bad as the white people if we resorted to violence.”
The proceedings against the two white men compelled Williams to reconsider
his assessment. The judge dropped the charges against Shaw in spite of the fact
that he failed to appear for court. During the brief trial of Medlin, his attorney argued
that he had been “drunk and having a little fun” at the time of the assault. Further,
Medlin was married, his lawyer told the jury, “to a lovely white woman...the pure
flower of life...do you think he would have left this pure flower for 
that?” He gestured
toward Reid, who began to cry uncontrollably. Medlin was acquitted in minutes.
Robert Williams recalled that “the [black] women in the courtroom made such an
outcry, the judge had to send Medlin out the rear door.” The women then turned on
Williams and bitterly shamed him for failing to see to their protection.
At this burning moment of anger and humiliation, Williams turned to wire service
reporters and declared that it was time to “meet violence with violence.” African
American citizens unable to enlist the support of the courts must defend themselves.
“Since the federal government will not stop lynching, and since the so-called courts
lynch our people legally,” he declared, “if it’s necessary to stop lynching with
lynching, then we must resort to that method.” The next day Williams disavowed the
reference to lynching. “I do not mean that Negroes should go out and attempt to get
revenge for mistreatments or injustice,” he said, “but it is clear that there is no
Fourteenth or Fifteenth Amendment nor court protection of Negroes’ rights here, and
Negroes have to defend themselves on the spot when they are attacked by whites.”
Banner headlines flagged these words as symbols of “a new militancy among
young Negroes of the South.” Enemies of the NAACP blamed this “bloodthirsty
remark” squarely on the national office. That very morning, when he read the words
“meet violence with violence” in a United Press International dispatch, Roy Wilkins
telephoned Robert Williams to inform him that he had been removed from his post as
president of the Monroe NAACP.
The fiftieth anniversary convention of the NAACP that summer of 1959 became
a highly public show trial whose central issue was whether or not the national
organization would ratify Wilkins’s suspension of Robert Williams. The national office
printed up a pamphlet, “The Single Issue in the Robert Williams Case,” and


--- PAGE 13 ---
xi
distributed it to all delegates. As part of the coordinated effort to crush Williams,
Thurgood Marshall visited the New York offices of the FBI on June 4, 1959, and
urged agents to investigate Williams “in connection with [Marshall’s] efforts to combat
communist attempts to infiltrate the NAACP.” Wilkins twisted every available arm.
Daisy Bates, the pistol-packing heroine of Little Rock, agreed to denounce Williams
for advocating self-defense—after the national office consented to buy $600 a month
in “advertising” from her newspaper. “The national office,” Louis Lomax wrote,
“subjected the Williams forces to a heavy bombardment from the NAACP’s big
guns.” Forty speakers, including Bates, King, Jackie Robinson, and dozens of
distinguished lawyers, rose one after the other to denounce Williams. But when the
burly ex-marine from Monroe finally strode down the aisle to speak, he was neither
intimidated nor penitent.
“There is no Fourteenth Amendment in this social jungle called Dixie,” Williams
declared. “There is no equal protection under the law.” He had been angry, they all
knew, trials had beset him, but never had he intended to advocate acts of war.
Surely no one believed that. But if the black men of Poplarville, Mississippi, had
banded together to guard the jail the night that Mack Parker was lynched, he said,
that would not have hurt the cause of justice. If the young black men who escorted
the coed who was raped in Tallahassee had been able to defend her, Williams
reminded them, such action would have been legal and justified “even if it meant that
they themselves or the white rapists were killed.” “Please,” he beseeched the
assembly, “I ask you not to come crawling to these whites on your hands and knees
and make me a sacrificial lamb.”
And there the pleading stopped. “We as men should stand up as men and
protect our women and children,” Williams declared. “I am a man and I will walk
upright as a man should. I WILL NOT CRAWL.” In a controversy that the 
Carolina
Times called “the biggest civil rights story of the year,” the NAACP convention voted
to uphold the suspension of Robert Williams. The day after Daisy Bates had urged
the assembly to censure Williams for his vow to defend his home and family, she
wired the attorney general of the United States to complain about dynamite attacks
on her home in Little Rock. “We have been compelled to employ private guards,” she
said. Williams wrote to Bates soon afterward, “I am sorry to hear that the white
racists have decided to step up their campaign against you. It is obvious that if you
are to remain in Little Rock you will have to resort to the method I was suspended for
advocating.”
Against this backdrop of white lawlessness and political stalemate in 1959 and
early 1960, Robert Williams moved to strengthen the local movement in Monroe and
to reach out to a national audience. Though Williams underlined the fact that “both
sides in the freedom movement are bi-racial,” his emerging philosophy reinvigorated
many elements of the black nationalist tradition whose forceful reemergence in the
mid-1960s would become known as “Black Power.” His militant message was
neither racially separatist nor rigidly ideological. Williams stressed black economic
advancement, black pride, black culture, independent black political action, and what
he referred to as “armed self-reliance.” He connected the southern freedom struggle
with the anticolonialism of the emerging third world, especially African nations. In the
late 1950s, when other integrationists focused on lunch counters and voter
registration, Williams insisted on addressing persistent black poverty: “We must
consider that in Montgomery, where Negroes are riding in the front of buses,” he
said, “there are also Negroes who are starving.” His approach was practical,


--- PAGE 14 ---
xii
eclectic, and improvisational. There must be “flexibility in the freedom struggle,” he
argued, and tactics must emerge from the confrontation itself. At the core of his
appeal, however, stood his calls for absolute racial equality under a fully enforced
U.S. Constitution, backed by an unyielding resistance to white supremacy.
In pursuit of this uncompromising vision of interracial democracy, Williams
became an editor and publisher like his grandfather before him. Two weeks after the
1959 NAACP convention, FBI agents reported to J. Edgar Hoover that black children
were “selling a newsletter known as 
The Crusader  on the streets of Monroe.” Its title
honored the late Cyril V. Briggs, Harlem organizer of the left-wing African Black
Brotherhood in the early twentieth century. 
The Crusader ’s self-proclaimed mission
was “ADVANCING THE CAUSE OF RACE PRIDE AND FREEDOM.” Sample
mailings yielded several thousand subscribers across the country. Williams’s
newsletter fed a lively and important debate within the freedom movement about the
meaning of nonviolence.
“The great debate in the integration movement in recent months,” Anne Braden
of the Southern Conference Educational Fund wrote in late 1959, “has been the
question of violence vs. nonviolence as instruments of change.” Harry Boyte, soon
to be Martin Luther King Jr.’s first white aide, observed that “the idea of striking
back...meets a steady response among the downtrodden, grass roots of the
southern Negro population.” For several years, Boyte argued, Robert Williams “has
succeeded in reaching these grass roots,” exercising “great influence in Union
County and beyond because of his militant position and refusal to submit to
intimidation.” Williams “poses a real threat to more peaceful and non-violent methods
of solving our problems.” The FBI, too, remained uneasy about Williams’s expanding
range of contacts. Hoover’s files, agents reported, “reflect numerous instances
where groups in various sections of the country have proclaimed and demonstrated
their sympathies with Williams and have sent him money.”
Not merely the FBI but also the most influential advocates of nonviolence felt
compelled to deal with Williams’s growing reputation. In a series of public debates in
New York City, Williams faced A. J. Muste, Bayard Rustin, David Dellinger, and
others. “Nonviolence is a powerful weapon in the struggle against social evil,”
Williams conceded. “It represents the ultimate step in revolution against intolerable
oppression, a type of struggle wherein man may make war without debasing
himself.” The problem, according to Williams, was that the success of nonviolence
depended somewhat upon the adversary; rattlesnakes, he noted, were immune to
moral appeals, as were white terrorists in the South. “When Hitler’s tyranny
threatened the world,” he argued, “we did not hear much about how immoral it is to
meet violence with violence.” Williams “drew a large audience to his debate with the
pacifists,” George Weissman of the SWP wrote to Carl Braden in Louisville, “and
handled himself quite well.”
In a widely reprinted debate first published in 
Liberation  magazine, Williams
faced Martin Luther King Jr. Again careful to endorse King’s methods wherever they
proved feasible, Williams advocated “armed self-reliance,” explaining that among
well-armed white vigilantes, “there is open defiance to law and order throughout the
South today.” Where law has broken down, he said, it was necessary and right to
defend home and family. “Nonviolence is a very potent weapon when the opponent is
civilized, but nonviolence is no repellent for a sadist,” Williams noted. “Nowhere in
the annals of history does the record show a people delivered from bondage by
patience alone.”


--- PAGE 15 ---
xiii
King conceded that white violence and white intransigence had brought the
movement to “a stage of profound crisis.” African Americans were frustrated, he
said, and the “current calls for violence” reflected “a confused, anger-motivated drive
to strike back violently.” The Supreme Court’s 1954 mandate and even the triumph at
Montgomery had yielded small tokens, elaborate evasions, and widespread terror.
Only three responses presented themselves. One could practice “pure nonviolence,”
King said, but this path “could not readily attract large masses, for it requires
extraordinary discipline and courage.” A position that encompassed legitimate self-
defense was more practical. King pointed out that “all societies, from the most
primitive to the most cultured and civilized, accept [self-defense] as moral and legal.
The principle of self-defense, even involving weapons and bloodshed, has never
been condemned, even by Gandhi.” Here was where King the politician sensed his
constituency. “When the Negro uses force in self-defense,” he continued, “he does
not forfeit support—he may even win it, by the courage and self-respect it reflects.”
This widely accepted position was, of course, precisely Williams’s view—which was
King’s problem.
The third and most unacceptable position, King argued, was “the advocacy of
violence as a tool of advancement, organized as in warfare, deliberately and
consciously.” Here, then, was the pale beyond which King sought to cast his
adversary. “Mr. Robert Williams would have us believe that there is no collective or
practical alternative,” King insisted. “He argues that we must be cringing and
submissive or take up arms.” Essentially, King had invented his own Robert
Williams, a kind of black Geronimo plotting military strikes against the white man, and
then responded to 
that Robert Williams. Lacking theological training and combative in
his manner, Williams made himself vulnerable to this caricature. But the philosophical
position from which King centered his own argument—preferring nonviolence, but
endorsing “the principle of self-defense, even involving weapons and bloodshed”—
was precisely the place where Williams had taken his stand. After the debate
appeared in 
Liberation  and began to resonate throughout the movement, W. E. B. Du
Bois weighed in with a commentary, also entitled “Crusader Without Violence,” in
which he discouraged applause for King’s critique of Williams. In Montgomery, he
wrote, King had “stood firm without surrender,” but Du Bois considered it “a very
grave question as to whether or not the slavery and degradation of Negroes in
America has not been unnecessarily prolonged by the submission to evil.”
More than the persuasive skills of their elders, the bold actions of African
American college students set these philosophical debates aside and gave the
battalions of nonviolence their brief but compelling historical moment. On February 1,
1960, four students from North Carolina Agricultural and Technical College walked
into Woolworth’s in Greensboro, sat down at a segregated lunch counter, and asked
to be served. Within two months, the sit-ins had spread to fifty-four communities
across nine states of the old Confederacy, infusing the freedom movement with fresh
troops and new tactics.
Soon after the sit-ins began, Robert Williams followed a dozen black youths into
Gamble’s Drug Store in downtown Monroe and was the only person arrested.
Marched down the street in handcuffs, a shotgun-toting guard on either side of him,
Williams spoofed himself as “the dangerous stool-sitter bandit” and vowed that he
had “never felt prouder in my life.” Young insurgents in Monroe mounted an
aggressive campaign of sit-ins that displayed its own unique style. “The Negroes
remained in each store only a short time,” the 
Charlotte Observer  reported, “usually


--- PAGE 16 ---
xiv
until management closed the counters.” Under court orders to abide by the law or
face imprisonment, Williams defied the judge and marched with his young troops.
“We’re using hit-and-run tactics,” Williams told reporters. “They never know when
we’re coming or when we’re going to leave. That way we hope to wear them down,”
he said, managing to sound like a platoon leader even while participating in a passive
resistance campaign. “They were always doing something,” the manager of Jones
Drug Store recalled. “It’s a wonder somebody didn’t kill him.” It was no mystery to
Williams; the main difference between the sit-ins in Monroe and elsewhere was that
“not a single demonstrator was even spat upon during our sit-ins,” Williams claimed.
The uneasy peace in Monroe would soon be broken, in large measure by
followers of King. In 1961, Reverend Paul Brooks of SCLC and James Forman, soon
to become president of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC),
came to Monroe in the company of seventeen Freedom Riders fresh out of jail in
Jackson, Mississippi. The young insurgents arrived in Monroe to launch a nonviolent
campaign in Robert Williams’s backyard, though Forman later denied any intention to
undermine Williams. One of the Freedom Riders announced that he had come to
Monroe because he considered “Mr. Robert F. Williams to be the most dangerous
person in America.” Another proclaimed: “If the fight for civil rights is to remain
nonviolent, we must be successful in Monroe. What happens here will determine the
course taken in many other communities throughout the South.”
Williams welcomed the Freedom Riders warmly but had a similar understanding
of the stakes. “I saw it first as a challenge,” he recalled, “but I also saw it as an
opportunity to show that what King and them were preaching was bullshit.” Two
weeks of picketing at the Union County Courthouse grew progressively more
perilous for the Freedom Riders. Crowds of hostile white onlookers grew larger and
larger. Finally, on Sunday afternoon, August 28, a mob of several thousand furious
white people attacked the approximately thirty demonstrators, badly injuring many of
them. Local police arrested the bleeding protestors. In his classic memoir, 
The
Making of Black Revolutionaries,  Forman later called this riot his “moment of death”
and “a nightmare I shall never forget.” To the consternation of SCLC, the nonviolent
crusade swiftly deteriorated into mob violence. Throughout the community, white
vigilantes attacked black citizens and even fired fifteen shots into the home of former
mayor J. Ray Shute, a white moderate who had befriended Williams.
At the height of this violent chaos, a white married couple entered the black
community for reasons that are unclear and drove straight into an angry black mob
milling near Williams’s house. “There was hundreds of niggers there,” the white
woman stated, “and they were armed, they were ready for war.” Black residents,
under the impression that the demonstrators downtown were being beaten and
perhaps slaughtered, threatened to kill the white couple. Williams, though busy
preparing to defend his home, rescued the two whites from the mob and led them into
his house, where they remained for about two hours. White authorities later charged
Williams and several other people with kidnapping, although the white couple met two
police officers on their way home and did not report their alleged abduction. The
woman later conceded that “at the time, I wasn’t even thinking about being
kidnapped.... [T]he papers, the publicity and all that stuff was what brought in that
kidnapping mess.” During a long night of racial terror, Williams slung a machine gun
over his shoulder and walked several miles with his wife and two small sons to
where Julian Mayfield waited with a car. The Williams family fled first to New York
City, then to Canada, then on to Cuba to escape the hordes of FBI agents who


--- PAGE 17 ---
xv
combed the countryside in search of them. One of the agents assigned to search
locally for Williams reported his frustrations to FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover:
“Subject has become something of a ‘John Brown’ to Negroes around Monroe and
they will do anything for him.”
The FBI dragnet never snared Williams, but it did not take Hoover long to hear
from him. Every Friday night from 11:00 to midnight on Radio Havana, Williams
hosted “Radio Free Dixie,” a program that could be heard from 1961 to 1964 as far
away as New York and Los Angeles. From Cuba, Williams continued to edit 
The
Crusader  for a circulation that eventually grew to forty thousand. In 1962, his book
Negroes With Guns,  published from Cuba, became the single most important
intellectual influence on Huey P. Newton, soon to found the Black Panther Party in
Oakland. Copies of 
The Crusader  traveled down the Mississippi back roads with
SNCC organizers: “this leaflet is being distributed by SNCC and COFO [Council of
Federated Organizations] workers among U.S. Negroes,” the Mississippi State
Sovereignty Commission complained in the spring of 1964. Later that year, when
SNCC began to veer away from nonviolence, members cited Williams approvingly in
the fierce internal debates.
As black activists began to reject even the tactical pretense of nonviolence, the
influence of Robert Williams continued to spread. “Armed self-defense is a fact of life
in black communities—north and south—despite the pronouncements of the
‘leadership,’” a North Carolina activist wrote to Williams. Long before Stokely
Carmichael and Willie Ricks led the chants of “Black Power” that riveted national
media attention in the summer of 1966, most elements of that ambiguous slogan
already were in place. “Your doctrine of self-defense set the stage for the
acceptance of the Deacons For Defense and Justice,” Lawrence Henry told Williams
in the spring of 1966. “As quiet as it is being kept, the Black man is swinging away
from King and adopting your tit-for-tat philosophy.”
Williams’s influence was not limited to the South. “As I am certain you realize,”
Richard Gibson, editor of 
Now! magazine in New York, wrote to Williams in 1965,
“Malcolm’s removal from the scene makes you the senior spokesman for Afro-
American militants.” 
Life magazine reported in 1966 that Williams’s “picture is
prominently displayed in extremist haunts in the big city ghettos.” Clayborne Carson
names Williams as one of two central influences—the other being Malcolm X—on the
1966 formation of the Black Panther Party For Self-Defense in Oakland, “the most
widely known black militant political organization of the late 1960s.” The Central
Intelligence Agency (CIA) exaggerated considerably in 1969 when it reported that
Williams “has long been the ideological leader of the Black Panther Party.” It is closer
to say that the Panthers were “a logical development” from the philosophy of
Williams, as Reginald Major asserted in his 1971 book, 
A Panther Is a Black Cat.
According to Williams, he “talked to Bobby Seale and Mrs. [Kathleen] Cleaver by
telephone when I was in Africa” in 1968 and the leadership “asked me to become
Foreign Minister of the Panthers.” At that moment, Williams had already been named
president-in-exile of two of the most influential revolutionary nationalist groups: the
Revolutionary Action Movement, which the CIA believed to be “the most dangerous
of all the Black Power organizations,” and the Detroit-based Republic of New Africa.
“Despite his overseas activities,” the CIA reported in 1969, “Williams has managed to
becoming an outstanding figure, possibly 
the outstanding figure, in the black
extremist movement in the United States.”


--- PAGE 18 ---
xvi
Even though he became friends with Che Guevara and Fidel Castro himself,
Williams grew uneasy in Cuba: he yearned to return home. As the Soviet strings on
the Cuban revolution shortened, Williams resisted pressure to make his own politics
conform to the Soviet line. “I am under constant attack by the [Communist Party of
the United States],” Williams wrote to a friend in the mid-1960s. “They are trying to
cut off my facilities here in Cuba. One would think I am Hitler and Wall Street
combined.” An FBI informant as early as 1962 stated that Williams “has stubbed his
toes” with Cuban Communists through his “criticism of [the] Communist Party for
barring Negroes from leadership” and that he “may not be able to regain his footing.”
The Stalinists were “getting worse than the crackers in Monroe,” Williams
complained in 1964. “Things are about to the stage when I had to leave Monroe in a
hurry.” Williams persuaded Castro to let him travel to North Vietnam in 1964, where
he met Ho Chi Minh and wrote antiwar propaganda aimed at African American
soldiers. In 1965, the Williams family relocated to Beijing, where Williams was
“lionized and feted by top Peking leaders,” according to CIA intelligence reports. The
Williams family dined with Mao Tse-tung and moved in the highest circles of the
Chinese government for three years. Like the Black Power movement itself, as
Williams got farther away from his roots in the South he sometimes drifted into
apocalyptic nonsense. His 1967 essay, “The Potential of a Minority Revolution,” for
example, depicted a scenario in which black saboteurs and guerrilla enclaves could
bring down the U.S. government. Though Williams had been one of the best
organizers in the black freedom movement, his isolation from any local constituency
made him vulnerable to the same frustrations and delusions that plagued the rest of
the movement in the last half of the 1960s.
In the late 1960s, when the Nixon administration moved toward opening
diplomatic relations with China, Williams bartered his almost exclusive knowledge of
the Chinese government for safe passage home and a Ford Foundation–sponsored
post at the Center for Chinese Studies at the University of Michigan. Not that the
entire federal apparatus was happy to welcome him home: the Internal Security
Division of the Department of Justice observed that “Williams could be the person to
fill the role of national leader of the black extremists. We should offset attempts by
him to assume such a position.” Williams, however, wrote to a friend that “a lot of
people are going to be surprised after my arrival not to find me fighting for leadership
the way many others are doing.” Returning to family ties and local activism, Williams
spent the last twenty-seven years of his life in the small, trout-fishing village of
Baldwin in western Michigan and died on October 15, 1996.
A week after his death, Rosa Parks climbed slowly into a church pulpit in
Monroe, North Carolina. Beneath her lay the body of Robert F. Williams, clad in a
gray suit given to him by Mao Tse-tung and draped with a black, red, and green Pan-
African flag. Parks told the congregation that she and those who marched with Martin
Luther King Jr. in Alabama had always admired Williams “for his courage and his
commitment to freedom. The work that he did should go down in history and never be
forgotten.” Her presence in that pulpit, nearly inexplicable when viewed through the
traditional narrative of “the civil rights movement,” demonstrates in almost poetic
fashion that historians should reexamine the relationship between “civil rights” and
“Black Power.” Our vision of the postwar African American freedom movement prior
to 1965 as one characterized solely and inevitably by nonviolent “civil rights” protest
obscures the full complexity of racial politics. It idealizes black history, downplays
the oppression of jim crow society, and even understates the achievements of


--- PAGE 19 ---
xvii
African American resistance. Worse still, our cinematic “civil rights movement” blurs
the racial dilemmas that follow us into the twenty-first century.
The life of Robert Williams underlines many aspects of the ongoing black
freedom struggle—the decisive racial significance of World War II, the impact of the
cold war on the black freedom struggle, the centrality of questions of sexuality and
gender in racial politics, and the historical presence of a revolutionary Caribbean. But
foremost it testifies to the extent to which, throughout World War II and the postwar
years, there existed among African Americans a current of militancy—a current that
included the willingness to defend home and community by force. This facet of
African American life lived in tension and in tandem with the compelling moral
example of nonviolent direct action. No doubt those who began to chant “Black
Power” in the mid-1960s felt that slogan with an urgency specific to their immediate
circumstances. But then, as now, many aspects of its meaning endure as legacies
from earlier African American struggles. Above the desk where Williams completed
his memoirs just before his death, there still hangs an ancient rifle—a gift, he said,
from his grandmother.
Timothy B. Tyson
Associate Professor of Afro-American Studies
University of Wisconsin–Madison


--- PAGE 20 ---
xix
The Robert F. Williams Papers cover Williams’s career from his leadership of
the Union County, North Carolina, NAACP branch in the 1950s and early 1960s,
through his life in exile in Cuba and China between 1961 and 1969, to his return to
the United States in 1969, and his local activism in Baldwin, Michigan, from the mid-
1970s until his death in 1996. The collection spans from 1951 to 1996 and includes
documentation on each of the major episodes in Williams’s career. A significant
portion of the collection consists of items in Williams’s own words, including
correspondence written by Williams and writings and speeches, particularly in
 The
Crusader newsletter and “Radio Free Dixie” broadcasts. The Robert F. Williams
Papers were donated to the Bentley Historical Library at the University of Michigan in
several different accessions, and the collection is arranged in two groups based on
the dates of accession. The first group consists of materials donated between 1976
and 1979. The second group of materials were donated between 1983 and 1997.
Group 1, Series 1: Correspondence, 1956–1979
The correspondence series is particularly valuable because it contains both
incoming correspondence addressed to Williams and outgoing correspondence
written by Williams. The correspondence covers many of the most important events
in Williams’s career. For example, the collection includes a letter protesting his 1959
suspension from the NAACP; several letters pertaining to the 1961 kidnapping case
that forced Williams to escape from the United States and seek asylum in Cuba;
letters about conditions in Cuba and China, the two countries in which Williams lived
during his eight-year exile from the United States; and public reaction to 
The
Crusader  newsletter and “Radio Free Dixie” broadcasts. Other topics covered in the
correspondence series include the Revolutionary Action Movement (RAM), the
assassinations of John F. Kennedy and Martin Luther King Jr., the urban riots of the
mid-1960s, the war in Vietnam, and the Republic of New Africa movement. The
correspondence series begins at Frame 0001 of Reel 1 and continues through to
Frame 0346 of Reel 5.
Group 1, Series 2: Manuscripts and Writings, 1961–1970
This series primarily consists of items written by Williams while he was living in
Cuba and China from 1961 to 1969. This series reveals that, despite his exile from
the United States, Williams remained a careful observer of the black freedom
struggle in the United States. For example, the series includes an article critical of
John F. Kennedy’s civil rights policies as well as an article on the civil rights
demonstrations in Birmingham, Alabama, entitled “Birmingham: Symbol of
Representative Democracy in the U.S.A.” There is also a piece entitled “History of a
Self-Styled Savior of the World” in which Williams recounts many episodes of
lynching and racial violence in the twentieth century. These articles are indicative of
SCOPE AND CONTENT NOTE


--- PAGE 21 ---
xx
Williams’s scathing criticisms of U.S. politics and race relations, a style that also
manifests itself in the pages of The Crusader newsletter and in the typescripts of
“Radio Free Dixie” broadcasts. Williams saw a close connection between racial
discrimination in the United States and U.S. foreign policy, which he frequently
characterized as racist and imperialist. This series contains several articles in which
Williams writes about U.S. foreign policy. Other writings by Williams in this series
discuss his time in China; Mao Tse-tung; his ten-day, seven-hundred-mile
motorcycle journey from Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, to Zambia; and a pamphlet
entitled “Listen, Brother” in which Williams advised African American military
personnel to abandon the fight in Vietnam and to aid the black freedom struggle in the
United States. The series begins at Frame 0347 of Reel 5.
Group 1, Series 3: Public Statements and Publicity, 1956–1979
Document types in this series include correspondence, speeches, press
releases, and political flyers. The two folders of speeches contain addresses by
Williams on the fourteenth and seventeenth anniversaries of the People’s Republic of
China, on the second anniversary of the Patriotic Front of Thailand, and on the
Republic of New Africa movement in the United States. There is also a 1956 speech
on racial discrimination in the United States entitled “Colonel JC’s Last Stand.” In the
press release section, there is a release pertaining to the banning of
 The Crusader
by the U.S. Postal Service, in which Williams warns, in characteristically vivid
language, that the ban was “yet another warning of an ominous nightmare of fascism
hovering over America” (Reel 6, Frame 0771). The press releases also include a
1967 statement on the arrest of RAM leaders for their alleged involvement in an
assassination plot against American civil rights leaders. Commenting on this plot,
Williams wrote, “It is not my policy nor RAM’s to kill condescending Uncle Toms. We
are not an organization advocating pointless assassinations. We are dedicated
freedom fighters stressing armed self-defense. Our objective is to make America a
just and decent place to live” (Reel 6, Frame 0828). Other press releases cover the
assassination of Malcolm X, Williams’s assessment of the United Nations, and his
comments on Chinese accomplishments in agriculture and industry. This series
concludes with political flyers on various causes central to Williams’s career.
Group 1, Series 4: Biographical Material, 1962–1979
This series begins at Frame 0293 of Reel 7 with a folder on the Monroe, North
Carolina, kidnapping case, a case in which Williams was accused of kidnapping a Ku
Klux Klan member and his wife. Within this folder of materials is a speech by John H.
Morgan of First Unitarian Congregation of Toronto, Canada, entitled “From Civil War
to Civil Liberties.” This is followed by an article by the historian Truman Nelson,
entitled “People With Strength: The Story of Monroe, N.C.,” and an article by Julian
Mayfield. The folder also contains documents issued by the Committee to Aid the
Monroe Defendants and the Monroe Defense Committee, the two organizations that
formed to fight the kidnapping charges against Williams, Willie Mae Mallory, Richard
Crowder, and Harold Reape. The Biographical Material series also includes the full
testimony given by Williams in three different sessions of the Senate Internal
Security Subcommittee. The testimony covers the major episodes in Williams’s
career, particularly his time in exile. The subcommittee members also asked Williams
about several Black Power organizations. The series concludes with over two reels


--- PAGE 22 ---
xxi
of newspaper clippings about Williams. The newspaper clippings begin at Frame
0785 of Reel 7 and continue through to Frame 0103 of Reel 10.
Group 1, Series 5: Republic of New Africa, 1968–1970
The Republic of New Africa was founded in March 1968. It leaders planned to
establish an independent nation for African Americans in the five states of Louisiana,
Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia, and South Carolina. Although Williams was living in
China at the time of its founding, he was elected president-in-exile. Milton Henry was
elected first vice president, and he and his brother Richard B. Henry (Brother Imari)
were the main, day-to-day leaders of the organization. The materials in this series
include items such as the Republic of New Africa’s pledge of allegiance, its
declaration of independence, the basic policy of the government, the organization of
the government, the definition of a citizen of the Republic of New Africa, a copy of the
official newsletter, and several issues of 
The New African , the Republic of New
Africa’s newspaper.
Group 1, Series 6: The Crusader  (Newsletter), 1959–1969, 1980–1982
A complete run of  The Crusader newsletter is the sixth series in Group 1.
Williams and his wife Mabel, together with other Union County NAACP members,
began publishing 
The Crusader in June 1959. In its beginning issues, the newsletter
focused on local Monroe stories, but later it also had news about the NAACP and
civil rights movement, as well as national and international news. The early issues
had a column by Mabel, entitled “Looking Back,” in which she focused on a topic in
African American history. The columns ranged from Williams family history to
chronicles of Harriet Tubman. A column by Asa Lee (Ethel Azalea Johnson), entitled
“Did You Know,” occasionally discussed African American history, African history,
and other topics such as employment, housing, and education. 
The Crusader was
also Robert F. Williams’s primary mouthpiece. He had a regular column in which he
often discussed his philosophy of armed self-defense. He also frequently wrote
about other important topics of the period, such as the Vietnam War, Muhammad Ali,
and the Republic of New Africa. The pages of 
The Crusader are an excellent source
for tracing the evolution of Williams’s thought from his days as an NAACP leader
through his time in Cuba and China.
Group 1, Series 7: “Radio Free Dixie” Broadcasts, 1962–1966
The Crusader newsletter is followed by a nearly complete series of transcripts
of Williams’s radio show, “Radio Free Dixie.” This program aired from Havana, Cuba,
between 1962 and 1966 and was beamed to the United States in an effort to promote
Williams’s philosophy in America during his exile. The broadcast included a mix of
music (particularly jazz), news, and a weekly address by Williams. The news section
of the program is particularly interesting because it consisted of detailed reports on
both civil rights initiatives and racial violence against African Americans. The news
reports also covered international politics. This news section indicates the extent to
which Williams remained dedicated to and closely involved in both the African
American freedom struggle and international liberation movements. This series
begins at Frame 0490 of Reel 11 and continues through to Frame 0755 of Reel 13.


--- PAGE 23 ---
xxii
Group 2, Series 1: Calvin Cunningham Case, 1983–1996
The second group in the Robert F. Williams papers contains materials that
overlap with the chronological period in the first group and additional materials from
the mid-1970s through Williams’s death in 1996. This group consists of twelve
series. The first series in Group 2 is the Calvin Cunningham Case, 1983–1996.
Cunningham was convicted of killing a Charlotte, North Carolina, policeman in 1990.
Cunningham maintained his innocence throughout his trial and claimed that, at the
time the officer was shot, he was handcuffed in the backseat of a police car. Williams
became involved in the case and attempted to secure capable legal assistance for
Cunningham. The series includes a letter from Williams to Alan Dershowitz asking
for his help in the case. There is also correspondence between Williams and
Cunningham and between Williams and Gloria Jean White, Cunningham’s domestic
partner. This file provides one example of how Williams maintained his activism long
after his return to the United States.
Group 2, Series 2: Clippings, 1961–1996
This series includes several articles pertaining to Williams’s activism in Monroe,
North Carolina, but the majority of the clippings cover Williams’s time in exile
between 1961 and 1969, his return to the United States in 1969, and the long legal
battle over his extradition to North Carolina that finally ended in January 1976 when
the Union County district attorney dismissed the kidnapping charges against
Williams. There are also several articles on Williams’s activities in Lake County,
Michigan, where he settled in the mid-1970s following a brief stint as a research
associate at the University of Michigan’s Center for Chinese Studies.
Group 2, Series 3: Correspondence, 1961–1996
The Correspondence series in Group 2 also dates between 1961 and 1996;
however, the majority of the correspondence in this series is from the 1970s and
1980s. This series provides further documentation on and insight into Williams’s
activism and life following his return to the United States in 1969. Topics covered
include the Ruby Nelson case; the People’s Association for Human Rights; job
training programs in Baldwin, Michigan; and a protest by Williams regarding
Michigan’s automobile “Lemon Law.” This series also reveals that Williams
maintained his interest in international affairs during this period. There are letters on
the Iranian hostage crisis, the 1989 student demonstrations in China, and the
Ethiopian drought crisis.
Group 2, Series 4: Government Files, 1951–1981
This series consists of eight different subseries based on the government
agency that produced the documents. There are two subseries of FBI files: one
organized by the FBI filing system and the second organized chronologically. This
chronological arrangement was utilized by the Bentley Historical Library in cases
where the FBI filing system was disorganized or unclear. The FBI files include FBI
reports, newspaper clippings, press wire reports, and correspondence. Included
among the FBI files is a Naval Intelligence investigation of Williams that was initiated
because of a letter Williams sent to President Dwight D. Eisenhower in 1955
complaining of racial discrimination in the Marine Corps and informing Eisenhower
that he wanted to give up his U.S. citizenship so that he could obtain a discharge


--- PAGE 24 ---
xxiii
from the Marine Corps. The FBI files also include two important documents
assessing Williams’s position as a Black Power leader. The first is a May 1966
report summarizing an article by Ralph Matthews Jr. that appeared in the Baltimore
Afro-American  newspaper (Reel 20, Frames 0439–0440). The second is an August
28, 1969, report that characterizes Williams as a “powerful and influential, if behind-
the-scenes, figure in the most powerful of the black militant groups in this country;
and it would seem that he may well be emerging as the overall acknowledged Black
Militant leader of the future” (Reel 20, Frames 0519–0521). Following the FBI files,
there are several short subseries of documents collected by other government
agencies, including the Central Intelligence Agency, Internal Revenue Service,
Michigan State Police, Post Office, State Department, and Treasury Department.
Group 2, Series 5: Lake County, Michigan, 1977–1994
Williams moved to Lake County in the mid-1970s and became active in local
politics. This series includes a detailed report on community–police relations in Lake
County and a file on the Lake County empowerment zone, a project designed to
promote economic development in the county.
Group 2, Series 6: Memorials, 1996
This series contains obituaries and newspaper clippings, a program from a
conference in honor of Williams, a state of Michigan tribute to Williams, a Detroit City
Council resolution honoring Williams, and several letters of condolence.
Group 2, Series 7: Personal, 1961–1996
This series contains several articles assessing Williams’s career. The first of
these is a draft of a chapter on Williams by Ron Karenga. In this chapter, Karenga
discusses Williams’s philosophy of armed resistance, particularly focusing on the
evolution in Williams’s thought from armed self-defense to revolution. Karenga’s
article is followed by a draft of two chapters on the history of Monroe and Williams’s
life in Monroe by Timothy B. Tyson, author of 
Radio Free Dixie: Robert F. Williams
and the Roots of Black Power  (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press,
1999). The series also includes another article by Tyson that appeared in the
NAACP’s 
Crisis magazine, an article by Marcellus Barksdale on the civil rights
movement in Monroe, and a memorial pamphlet entitled “Legacy of Resistance” that
includes comments and reminiscences on Williams’s life and legacy. The Personal
series concludes with several folders of materials written by Williams. Among these
writings are a 1988 article on Jesse Helms and a 1993 statement on gun control.
About twenty-five pages of Williams’s memoir in manuscript form, in which he
discusses Ho Chi Minh, the Vietnam War, Cuba, and the 1965 Watts riot, completes
the series.
Group 2, Series 8: Political Organizations, [1960]–1984
This series consists of files on three different political organizations. The AD-
NIP Party (African Descendants Nationalist Independence Partition Party) was
philosophically related to the Republic of New Africa in its call for self-determination
for African Americans and the creation of an independent black republic. The file
includes a copy of the 1973 AD-NIP manifesto defining the boundary lines for the
new nation and demanding five hundred trillion dollars in reparations from the U.S.


--- PAGE 25 ---
xxiv
government. The file on the Committee to Aid the Monroe Defendants (CAMD)
consists of FBI documents on the Socialist Workers Party and CAMD. The
Spartacist League file contains copies of 
Workers Vanguard , the newsletter of the
Spartacist League. The issues collected by Williams include an article on African
American soldiers that mentions Williams; comments by Williams on the Socialist
Workers Party, and a pamphlet on “Black History and the Class Struggle.”
Group 2, Series 9: Press Releases and Publicity, 1963–1985
This series includes two articles on Williams’s Monroe activism, but it primarily
focuses on topics relating to his return to the United States. Excerpts from an
interview with Richard B. Henry (Brother Imari) cover the Republic of New Africa,
particularly the part it played in bringing Williams back to the United States. There
are press releases on Williams’s extradition to North Carolina and commentary by
Williams on Ronald Reagan, Mao Tse-tung, the Confederate flag, and the drug trade.
By the mid-1970s, Williams was also much in demand as a speaker, both on U.S.–
China relations and on the black freedom struggle, and there are several documents
in this series pertaining to Williams’s speaking engagements.
Group 2, Series 10: Print and Broadcast Material, 1965–1991
In 1980, Williams attempted to resurrect his newsletter, 
The Crusader . This
series includes copies of the Spring 1980, Winter 1980, and Winter 1981 issues.
Topics covered in these issues include Ronald Reagan, Haitian refugees, drug
trafficking, the moral majority, and social conditions in Lake County, Michigan. This is
followed by a 1965 transcript of a “Radio Free Dixie” broadcast and drafts of several
speeches given by Williams. An interview with Williams on the radio show, “Like It
Is,” and a copy of a December 1970 issue of 
Asahi Journal  containing an article by
Williams translated by Yoriko Nakajima complete this series.
Group 2, Series 11: Photographs, [Undated]
This series consists of photographs taken during Williams’s travels in China,
Africa, Cuba, and Vietnam. There are also several photographs of Williams in the
United States.
Group 2, Series 12: Petitions, 1970–1973
Williams developed a fairly significant following among the Japanese left, and in
the early 1970s, the Japanese Committee for the Defense of the Life and
Fundamental Human Rights of Robert F. Williams sent petitions containing over ten
thousand signatures to Attorney General John N. Mitchell and Michigan Governor
William G. Milliken protesting Williams’s extradition to North Carolina. This series
also includes a letter from Tohoru Takahashi of the Japanese Committee to
President Richard Nixon explaining the petitions sent to Mitchell and Milliken and
requesting that Nixon drop all charges against Williams. Other documents pertaining
to Japanese support for Williams, particularly his correspondence with Yoriko
Nakajima, can be found in other parts of the collection.


--- PAGE 26 ---
xxv
Related Collections
UPA has also microfilmed many other collections that provide documentation on
the Black Power movement. These include:
The Black Power Movement, Part 1: Amiri Baraka from Black Arts to Black
Radicalism
Centers of the Southern Struggle: FBI Files on Selma, Memphis,
Montgomery, Albany, and St. Augustine
Civil Rights During the Johnson Administration, 1963–1969
Civil Rights During the Nixon Administration, 1969–1974
Congress of Racial Equality Papers, 1959–1976
The Martin Luther King Jr. FBI File
The Papers of A. Philip Randolph
Papers of the NAACP
Records of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, 1954–1970
The Bayard Rustin Papers


--- PAGE 27 ---
xxvii
SOURCE NOTE
The material reproduced in this microfilm edition consists of the Robert F.
Williams Papers held by the Bentley Historical Library, University of Michigan at
Ann Arbor.
EDITORIAL NOTE
The Robert F. Williams Papers were donated to the Bentley Historical Library at
the University of Michigan between 1976 and 1997. The Bentley Historical Library
arranged the collection into two different groups based on the dates of the accession.
The materials in Group 1 were donated between 1976 and 1979. The materials in
Group 2 were donated between 1983 and 1997. Group 1 consists of seven series
and Group 2 consists of twelve series. UPA’s microfilm of this collection has
maintained the collection in the original order with one exception. Group 2 of the
collection concludes with an Audio Visual Series. UPA did not microfilm the sound
recordings or the videocassette portions of this series. The photograph portion of this
series is included in this edition, however.


--- PAGE 28 ---
xxix
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
The following acronyms and abbreviations are used throughout this guide.
ACLU American Civil Liberties Union
CIA Central Intelligence Agency
CPUSA Communist Party, United States of America
FBI Federal Bureau of Investigation
HUAC House Un-American Activities Committee
IRS Internal Revenue Service
KKK Ku Klux Klan
NAACP National Association for the Advancement of Colored People
NAFTA North American Free Trade Agreement
NRA Natonal Rifle Association
PRC People’s Republic of China
RAM Revolutionary Action Movement
SNCC Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee
TWA Trans World Airlines
U.S. United States
USSR Union of Soviet Socialist Republics


--- PAGE 29 ---
1 
REEL INDEX 
 
The following is a listing of the folders comprising The Black Power Movement, Part 2: The 
Papers of Robert F. Williams. The four-digit number on the far left is the frame at which a 
particular file folder begins. This is followed by the file title, the date(s) of the file, and the total 
number of frames. Substantive issues are highlighted under the heading Major Topics. Major 
correspondents are highlighted under the heading Principal Correspondents. Unless otherwise 
stated, all major topics entries listed as “Williams” refer to Robert F. Williams. 
Reel 1 
Frame No. 
Group 1, Series 1: Correspondence, 1956–1979 
0001 Correspondence, Undated (1).  46 frames. 
Major Topics: Ruby Nelson Legal Defense Committee; Chinese support for civil 
rights movement; John F. Kennedy. 
Principal Correspondent: Robert F. Williams. 
0047 Correspondence, Undated (2).  41 frames. 
Major Topics: Communism; Willie Mae Mallory. 
Principal Correspondents: Robert F. Williams; Jo Salas. 
0088 Correspondence, Undated (3).  35 frames. 
Major Topics: Robert F. Williams Legal Defense Fund; Monroe, North Carolina, 
kidnapping case and Williams’s extradition to North Carolina; Japanese 
Committee for the Defense of the Life and Fundamental Human Rights of Robert 
F. Williams. 
Principal Correspondents: Gary Green; Robert F. Williams. 
0123 Correspondence, Undated (4).  41 frames. 
Major Topics: Republic of New Africa; Senate Internal Security Subcommittee. 
Principal Correspondents: LeRoi Jones; Robert F. Williams. 
0164 Correspondence, Undated (5).  67 frames. 
Major Topics: Williams’s return to United States; Black Panther Party; Ruby Nelson 
Legal Defense Committee. 
Principal Correspondents: Robert F. Williams. 
0231 Correspondence, 1956.  4 frames. 
0235 Correspondence, 1959.  10 frames. 
Major Topics: Williams’s NAACP suspension; 1959 NAACP national convention. 
Principal Correspondents: Robert A. Fraser Jr.; Conrad J. Lynn; Richard A. Lowe. 
0245 Correspondence, 1960.  14 frames. 
Major Topic: Cuban revolution.


--- PAGE 30 ---
Frame No. 
 
 2 
0259 Correspondence, January –September 1961. 41 frames. 
Major Topics: Freedom Riders; Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case; Monroe 
Defense Committee; Committee to Aid the Monroe Defendants; Conrad J. Lynn. 
Principal Correspondents: Paul Brooks; Calvin Hicks; Paul Deitrich; Albert E. Perry. 
0300 Correspondence, October–December 1961.  48 frames. 
Major Topics: Williams family escape from United States; Monroe Defense 
Committee; KKK. 
Principal Correspondents: Gerald Quinn; Conrad J. Lynn; Gloster B. Current; Yoriko 
Nakajima; Robert F. Williams; Len Holt; John Boardman. 
0348 Correspondence, January–June 1962.  89 frames. 
Major Topics: Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case; arrest of William Worthy. 
Principal Correspondents: Robert F. Williams; Julian Mayfield; Conrad J. Lynn; 
William Worthy; Walter S. Haffner. 
0437 Correspondence, July–December 1962.  100 frames. 
Major Topic: Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case. 
Principal Correspondents: Charles Anderson; Robert F. Williams; Walter S. Haffner; 
Merle E. Byers; Vernal Olson; Richard Gibson; Wilford Lee Berry; Willie Mae 
Mallory; Conrad J. Lynn; Albert E. Perry; James H. Williams; LeRoi Jones. 
0537 Correspondence, January–March 1963.  76 frames. 
Major Topic: Reactions to Williams’s writings. 
Principal Correspondents: Robert F. Williams; Wilford Lee Berry; James H. Williams; 
Conrad J. Lynn; William K. Jackson. 
0613 Correspondence, April –June 1963. 90 frames. 
Major Topics: Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case; Fair Play for Cuba 
Committee; Conrad J. Lynn’s HUAC hearing; public reaction to The Crusader; 
murder of Medgar Evers. 
Principal Correspondents: Willie Mae Mallory; Conrad J. Lynn; Robert F. Williams; 
Tom Sanders; James H. Williams; Berta Green; Clyde Appleton. 
0703 Correspondence, July –December 1963. 105 frames. 
Major Topics: Monroe, North Carolina, kissing case; U.S. policy toward Cuba; 
Thomas E. Colgan; social and economic conditions in Cuba; Chinese support for 
civil rights movement; nuclear weapons conference; PRC; Monroe, North 
Carolina, kidnapping case; John F. Kennedy assassination; armed self-defense. 
Principal Correspondents: Conrad J. Lynn; Vernal Olson; Robert F. Williams; Slater 
H. King; Jo Salas. 
0808 Correspondence, January–April 1964.  75 frames. 
Major Topics: Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case; public reaction to “Radio 
Free Dixie”; Williams family escape from United States; social conditions in 
Cuba. 
Principal Correspondents: Robert F. Williams; Anne Olson; Jo Salas; Conrad J. 
Lynn; Dick Bayer; Julian Mayfield; Albert E. Perry. 
0883 Correspondence, May –August 1964. 67 frames. 
Major Topics: CPUSA in Cuba; State of North Carolina v. Williams; Mothers’ Defense 
Committee. 
Principal Correspondents: Clyde Appleton; Conrad J. Lynn; Edward Weber; Robert 
F. Williams; Mrs. C. L. R. James; Yoriko Nakajima; Anne Olson; Julian Mayfield. 
0950 Correspondence, September –December 1964. 33 frames. 
Major Topics: Public reaction to The Crusader; Vietnam War. 
Principal Correspondents: Conrad J. Lynn; Madalyn Murray.


--- PAGE 31 ---
Frame No. 
 
 3 
Reel 2 
Group 1, Series 1: Correspondence, 1956–1979 cont. 
0001 Correspondence, January –February 1965. 52 frames. 
Major Topics: Washington, D.C., home rule; State of North Carolina v. Williams; 
Malcolm X. 
Principal Correspondents: Richard Gibson; Conrad J. Lynn; Willie Mae Mallory. 
0053 Correspondence, March–April 1965.  67 frames. 
Major Topics: Armed self-defense; Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case; 
Vietnam War. 
Principal Correspondents: Richard Gibson; Robert F. Williams; Conrad J. Lynn;  
Anne Olson; H. W. Edwards. 
0120 Correspondence, May–June 1965.  67 frames. 
Major Topic: Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case. 
Principal Correspondents: Robert F. Williams; Mabel Williams; Clyde Appleton; 
Vernal Olson; Ernie Allen; Anne Olson. 
0187 Correspondence, July–August 1965.  60 frames. 
Major Topics: Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case; Charles Sims; Deacons for 
Defense and Justice; Martin Luther King Jr.; CPUSA in Cuba. 
Principal Correspondents: Frank Greenwood; Robert F. Williams; Richard Gibson. 
0247 Correspondence, September–December 1965.  85 frames. 
Major Topics: Public reaction to The Crusader; 1965 Watts riot; anti–Vietnam War 
movement; communism; Committee for the Establishment of a Black Liberation 
Front. 
Principal Correspondents: Richard Gibson; Clyde Appleton; Anne Olson; Yoriko 
Nakajima; Williams; Frank Greenwood; Ernie Allen. 
0332 Correspondence, Undated 1966 and January 1966.  52 frames. 
Major Topics: Travel to Cuba; Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case; Federal 
Fugitive Act. 
Principal Correspondents: Milton Henry; Laurence Henry; Yoriko Nakajima; Robert F. 
Williams; Mabel Williams; Anne Olson. 
0384 Correspondence, February –April 1966. 44 frames. 
Major Topics: Forged issue of The Crusader; white workers and black freedom 
struggle. 
Principal Correspondents: Robert F. Williams; Richard Gibson; Yoriko Nakajima; 
Laurence Henry; Ernie Allen. 
0428 Correspondence, May–June 1966.  30 frames. 
Major Topics: Translations of Negroes with Guns; shooting of James Meredith. 
Principal Correspondents: Richard Gibson; Yoriko Nakajima; Richard B. Henry; 
Robert F. Williams. 
0458 Correspondence, July–August 1966.  68 frames. 
Major Topics: Cultural Revolution; Williams’s complaints about treatment in Cuba. 
Principal Correspondents: John Chalmers Williams; Yoriko Nakajima; Richard 
Gibson; Robert F. Williams. 
0526 Correspondence, September 1966.  33 frames. 
Major Topic: Social conditions in Cuba. 
Principal Correspondents: Laurence Henry; Carlos More; Robert F. Williams; Richard 
Gibson.


--- PAGE 32 ---
Frame No. 
 
 4 
0559 Correspondence, October –November 1966. 53 frames. 
Major Topics: Georgia gubernatorial nomination of Lester Maddox; U.S. Postal 
Service; Monroe, North Carolina, freedom movement; publishing of The 
Crusader; Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case; escape from United States; 
“Radio Free Dixie”; CPUSA; PRC; Mao Tse-tung; Cultural Revolution. 
Principal Correspondents: Anne Olson; Timothy J. May; Conrad J. Lynn; Richard 
Gibson; Robert F. Williams; Richard B. Henry; Mabel Williams. 
0612 Correspondence, December 1966.  32 frames. 
Major Topics: Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case; KKK. 
Principal Correspondents: Richard Gibson; Cedric Belfrage; Robert F. Williams; Pete 
Young. 
0644 Correspondence, Undated 1967 and January 1967.  70 frames. 
Major Topics: Black America Cultural Committee; Williams’s meeting with U.S. 
prisoner in Hanoi; racism in Cuba; Ernesto “Che” Guevara; D. H. Mansur; 
USSR–PRC relations. 
Principal Correspondents: Pete Young; Robert F. Williams; Mabel Williams; Bill 
Lewis; Richard Gibson; Robert Carl Cohen; Cedric Belfrage. 
0714 Correspondence, February 1967.  29 frames. 
Major Topic: Cultural Revolution [in Chinese]. 
Principal Correspondents: Richard Gibson; Robert F. Williams; Willie Mae Mallory. 
0743 Correspondence, March –April 1967. 80 frames. 
Major Topics: Publicity for Challenge of the Congo by Kwame Nkrumah; Israel; anti–
Vietnam War demonstration. 
Principal Correspondents: Richard Gibson; Wilbur Grattan; Shirley Graham Du Bois; 
Len Holt; Yoriko Nakajima; Conrad J. Lynn; Shurli Grant; V. T. Lee; Duane Price; 
Akbar Muhammad. 
0823 Correspondence, May –June 1967. 86 frames. 
Major Topic: Forged issue of The Crusader. 
Principal Correspondents: Anne Olson; Clyde Appleton; Richard Gibson; Robert F. 
Williams; Pete Young. 
Reel 3 
Group 1, Series 1: Correspondence, 1956–1979 cont. 
0001 Correspondence, July 1967.  57 frames. 
Major Topics: Arrest of RAM members for assassination plot; Democratic People’s 
Republic of Korea; 1967 Newark riot. 
Principal Correspondents: Max Stanford; John Watson; Robert F. Williams; Richard 
Gibson; Julian Mayfield. 
0058 Correspondence, August 1967.  49 frames. 
Major Topics: Division between U.S. left and African American activists; Stokely 
Carmichael; urban riots. 
Principal Correspondents: Conrad J. Lynn; Richard Gibson; Robert F. Williams; 
Norodom Sihanouk; Carlos More; Wilbur Grattan. 
0107 Correspondence, September 1967.  91 frames. 
Major Topics: Martin Sostre Defense Committee; Williams’s return to United States; 
banning of The Crusader by U.S. Postal Service. 
Principal Correspondents: Richard Gibson; Shurli Grant; Robert F. Williams; Frank 
Greenwood; Carlos More; Mabel Williams.


--- PAGE 33 ---
Frame No. 
 
 5 
0198 Correspondence, October 1967.  88 frames. 
Major Topics: Banning of The Crusader by U.S. Postal Service; Ernesto “Che” 
Guevara; Williams’s return to United States; 1967 Detroit riot; New Detroit 
Committee; Albert Cleage. 
Principal Correspondents: Timothy J. May; Robert F. Williams; Shurli Grant; Ramon 
Acevedo; Conrad J. Lynn; Richard Gibson; Viola Parker. 
0286 Correspondence, November 1967.  83 frames. 
Major Topic: Williams’s return to United States. 
Principal Correspondents: Robert F. Williams; Richard Gibson; Carlos More; Alfred 
Bingham. 
0369 Correspondence, December 1967.  72 frames. 
Major Topics: PRC; Williams’s return to United States. 
Principal Correspondents: Shirley Wood; Albert E. Perry; Ramon Acevedo; V. T. Lee; 
Robert F. Williams; Daniel L. Mahony; Richard Gibson. 
0441 Correspondence, Udated 1968.  33 frames. 
Major Topic: Assassination of Martin Luther King Jr. 
Principal Correspondents: Charles X. Kenyatta; Robert F. Williams. 
0474 Correspondence, January 1968.  87 frames. 
Major Topics: Williams’s return to United States; public reaction to The Crusader. 
Principal Correspondents: Charles Darby; Audley Moore; Robert F. Williams; Richard 
Gibson; Talitha Gerlach; Conrad J. Lynn. 
0561 Correspondence, February 1968.  72 frames. 
Major Topic: Williams’s return to United States. 
Principal Correspondents: Richard Gibson; Roy Brown; Willie Mae Mallory; Robert F. 
Williams; Calvin Cobb; Alfred Bingham; V. T. Lee; Conrad J. Lynn; Shurli Grant. 
0633 Correspondence, March 1968.  56 frames. 
Major Topic: Williams’s return to United States. 
Principal Correspondents: Conrad J. Lynn; Robert F. Williams; Milton Henry; Ray 
Mungo; Richard Gibson. 
0689 Correspondence, April 1968.  108 frames. 
Major Topics: Rape case; Republic of New Africa; assassination of Martin Luther 
King Jr.; Williams’s return to United States. 
Principal Correspondents: Robert F. Williams; Roy Brown; Richard Gibson; Anne 
Olson; Len Holt; Johnny E. James; Al Plummer. 
0797 Correspondence, May 1968.  119 frames. 
Major Topic: Assassination of Martin Luther King Jr. 
Principal Correspondents: Calvin Cobb; Robert F. Williams; Al Plummer; Mabel 
Williams; Ramon Acevedo; Richard Gibson; Yoriko Nakajima. 
0916 Correspondence, June 1968.  31 frames. 
Major Topics: Vietnam War; Williams’s return to United States. 
Principal Correspondents: Roy Brown; Ray Mungo; Reginald E. Carles. 
0947 Correspondence, July –August 1968. 54 frames. 
Major Topics: Black Panther Party; Martin Sostre Defense Committee. 
Principal Correspondents: Willie Mae Mallory; Reginald E. Carles; Anne Olson; 
Robert F. Williams; Robert Carl Cohen; Roy Brown; Viola Parker.


--- PAGE 34 ---
Frame No. 
 
 6 
Reel 4 
Group 1, Series 1: Correspondence, 1956–1979 cont. 
0001 Correspondence, September –December 1968. 70 frames. 
Major Topics: Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case; motorcycle trip in Africa; 
Republic of New Africa; translations of Williams’s writings. 
Principal Correspondents: Richard Gibson; Robert F. Williams; Shurli Grant; Robert 
Carl Cohen; Laurence Henry. 
0071 Correspondence, Undated 1969.  23 frames. 
Major Topic: Assassination of Martin Luther King Jr. 
Principal Correspondents: Bill Lewis; Robert F. Williams. 
0094 Correspondence, January 1969.  55 frames. 
Major Topics: Union County, North Carolina, schools; Ritsumeikan University 
Caravan Club; Cultural Revolution. 
Principal Correspondents: Richard Gibson; Shurli Grant; Robert F. Williams; Shizuo 
Mizui. 
0149 Correspondence, February 1969.  59 frames. 
Major Topics: Progressive Labor Party criticism of Ron Karenga and LeRoi Jones; 
Republic of New Africa; Japanese student movement. 
Principal Correspondents: Richard Gibson; Robert F. Williams; Robert Carl Cohen; 
Roberto Kaffke. 
0208 Correspondence, March –April 1969. 42 frames. 
Major Topics: Black Panther Party; US Organization. 
Principal Correspondents: Bradley Polk; Richard Gibson; Shurli Grant; Robert F. 
Williams. 
0250 Correspondence, May–June 1969.  46 frames. 
Major Topics: Williams’s return to United States; Black Panther Party. 
Principal Correspondents: Robert F. Williams; Anna Louise Strong; Reginald E. 
Carles; Al Plummer. 
0296 Correspondence, July –August 1969. 67 frames. 
Major Topics: Williams’s return to United States; White Panther Party; Caribbean 
area politics. 
Principal Correspondents: Conrad J. Lynn; Rod Knight; James Forman; Mary 
Kochiyama; Julian Mayfield; C. L. R. James. 
0363 Correspondence, September 1969.  36 frames. 
Major Topic: Williams’s return to United States. 
Principal Correspondents: Conrad J. Lynn; Mary Kochiyama. 
0399 Correspondence, October 1969.  73 frames. 
Major Topics: Asian Americans; Organization of African Unity; Republic of New 
Africa; Williams’s criticism of Fidel Castro and CPUSA. 
Principal Correspondents: Mary Kochiyama; Yoko Kitazawa; Brother Imari (Richard 
B. Henry); Robert F. Williams. 
0472 Correspondence, November 1969.  37 frames. 
Major Topics: Republic of New Africa; Williams’s extradition to North Carolina. 
Principal Correspondents: Conrad J. Lynn; Milton Henry; Gwendolyn Midlo Hall. 
0509 Correspondence, December 1969.  31 frames. 
Major Topics: Williams’s request for release of American prisoner of war in Vietnam; 
Republic of New Africa. 
Principal Correspondents: Mary Kochiyama; Robert F. Williams; Reginald E. Carles.


--- PAGE 35 ---
Frame No. 
 
 7 
0540 Correspondence, January 1970.  25 frames. 
Major Topic: Williams’s extradition to North Carolina. 
Principal Correspondents: Conrad J. Lynn; John Conyers Jr.; Allen S. Whiting. 
0565 Correspondence, February –March 1970. 58 frames. 
Major Topics: Brandeis University; Williams’s college speaking engagements; 
Williams’s extradition to North Carolina. 
Principal Correspondents: Christopher Douglas; Allen S. Whiting; Robert F. Williams; 
Floyd B. McKissick; Mabel Williams; Conrad J. Lynn; Richard Gibson. 
0623 Correspondence, April –June 1970. 53 frames. 
Major Topics: University of Michigan Center for Chinese Studies; United States v. 
Williams. 
Principal Correspondents: Robert F. Williams; Rhoads Murphey; Mary Kochiyama; 
Mabel R. Williams. 
0676 Correspondence, July–December 1970.  82 frames. 
Major Topics: Racial discrimination; PRC; U.S.–PRC relations; Committee of Black 
Americans for Truth About the Middle East. 
Principal Correspondents: Mabel Williams; Robert F. Williams; Harrison E. Salisbury; 
Paul B. Boutelle. 
0758 Correspondence, Undated and January –February 1971. 55 frames. 
Major Topics: Williams’s extradition to North Carolina; PRC. 
Principal Correspondents: Robert F. Williams; Mabel Williams; Yoko Kitazawa; 
Taketomo Takahashi; Ichiyo Muto; Conrad J. Lynn; John M. Lawrence. 
0813 Correspondence, March –April 1971. 48 frames. 
Major Topics: PRC; Republic of New Africa. 
Principal Correspondents: Robert F. Williams; Mabel Williams. 
0861 Correspondence, May–June 1971.  27 frames. 
Major Topic: PRC. 
Principal Correspondents: Yoriko Nakajima; Rinjiro Sodei; Robert F. Williams. 
0888 Correspondence, July–August 1971.  32 frames. 
Major Topic: Williams’s extradition to North Carolina. 
Principal Correspondents: Rinjiro Sodei; Mary Kochiyama; Robert F. Williams; Mabel 
Williams; Gwendolyn Midlo Hall. 
Reel 5 
Group 1, Series 1: Correspondence, 1956–1979 cont. 
0001 Correspondence, September –December 1971. 74 frames. 
Major Topics: Crispin Campbell essay on Williams; Williams’s extradition to North 
Carolina; Senate Internal Security Subcommittee.  
Principal Correspondents: Allen S. Whiting; Robert F. Williams; Mabel Williams; 
Thelma Reece; Gwendolyn Midlo Hall. 
0075 Correspondence, January –February 1972. 50 frames. 
Major Topics: Draft resistance; Association for Grand Jury Action, Inc. v. Staggers 
(congressional powers); Boryszewski and Kesel v. U.S. Supreme Court; 
Williams’s extradition to North Carolina; KKK. 
Principal Correspondents: Robert F. Williams; Yoriko Nakajima. 
0125 Correspondence, March –June 1972. 25 frames. 
Major Topic: Translations of Williams’s writings. 
Principal Correspondents: Rinjiro Sodei; Yoriko Nakajima; Noboru Miyata; John 
Henrik Clarke.


--- PAGE 36 ---
Frame No. 
 
 8 
0150 Correspondence, July –December 1972. 52 frames. 
Major Topics: Williams’s petition for writ of habeas corpus; Williams v. Trans World 
Airlines; Brandeis University Transitional Year Program. 
Principal Correspondents: Yoriko Nakajima; Robert F. Williams. 
0202 Correspondence, 1973.  11 frames. 
0213 Correspondence, 1974 –1975. 22 frames. 
0235 Correspondence, 1976.  53 frames. 
Major Topic: Dismissal of kidnapping charges. 
Principal Correspondents: V. T. Lee; L. D. Reddick. 
0288 Correspondence, 1977.  8 frames. 
0296 Correspondence, 1978.  23 frames. 
0319 Correspondence, 1979.  28 frames. 
 
Group 1, Series 2: Manuscripts and Writings, 1961–1970 
0347 Manuscript Articles by Williams, Undated (1).  80 frames. 
Major Topics: U.S. foreign policy; racial violence; Diane Nash Bevel; PRC; armed 
self-defense; Willie Mae Mallory; Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case; 
criminal justice system. 
0427 Manuscript Articles by Williams, Undated (2).  71 frames. 
Major Topics: Racial violence; nonviolence; U.S. foreign policy; lynching. 
0498 Manuscript Articles by Williams, Undated (3).  52 frames. 
Major Topics: Birmingham, Alabama, civil rights demonstrations; racial violence; 
intimidation and harassment; U.S. foreign policy. 
0550 Manuscript Articles by Williams, Undated (4).  54 frames. 
Major Topics: Racial discrimination; African American press; PRC; CIA; RAM; 
revolutionary violence. 
0604 Manuscript Articles by Williams, 1961 –1962. 73 frames. 
Major Topics: Nonviolence; armed self-defense; police brutality; Montgomery bus 
boycott; African American women; NAACP; Union County, North Carolina, 
NAACP branch; Albert E. Perry; KKK; Monroe, North Carolina, kissing case; 
Williams’s escape from United States. 
0677 Manuscript Articles by Williams, 1963 –1964. 40 frames. 
Major Topics: Racial discrimination; Cuban refugees in Florida. 
0717 Manuscript Articles by Williams, 1965–1967.  17 frames. 
Major Topics: Racial discrimination; Lyndon B. Johnson’s civil rights policies. 
0734 Manuscript Articles by Williams, “From Peking, I Speak Again” (Addition to 
Negroes with Guns), [1967]. 65 frames. 
Major Topics: Cuban revolution and social conditions in Cuba; Monroe, North 
Carolina, freedom movement; SNCC; communism; lynching; murder of Vernon 
Dahmer and Wharlest Jackson. 
0799 Manuscript Articles by Williams, “The World Black Revolution,” [Undated].   
39 frames. 
0838 Manuscript Articles by Williams, “Listen Brother,” 1968.  51 frames. 
Major Topic: African American military personnel. 
0889 Miscellaneous Notes and Other Writings, [1959–1962 and Undated].  141 frames. 
Major Topics: W. E. B. Du Bois on China and Africa; Chinese Communist Party; 
nonviolence; Nation of Islam; labor unions.


--- PAGE 37 ---
Frame No. 
 
 9 
Reel 6 
Group 1, Series 2: Manuscripts and Writings, 1961–1970 cont. 
0001 Published Articles by Williams (Newspapers and Periodicals), [1961 –1991].  
204 frames. 
Major Topics: Williams’s return to United States; Union County, North Carolina, 
NAACP branch; Williams’s escape from United States; Martin Luther King Jr.; 
John F. Kennedy; Nation of Islam; nonviolence; armed self-defense; Montgomery 
bus boycott; communism; Japanese support for Williams; Mao Tse-tung; PRC; 
banning of 
The Crusader by U.S. Postal Service; Chinese People’s Rally for 
World Peace; Williams’s travels in Africa; RAM; racial violence; drugs. 
0205 International Conference for Solidarity with the People of Vietnam against U.S. 
Imperialist Aggression and for the Defence of Peace, 1964. 239 frames. 
0444 James Boggs and Robert F. Williams, La Revolution aux Etats-Unis? 1966.  
114 frames. 
 
Group 1, Series 3: Public Statements and Publicity, 1956–1979 
0558 Letters to Newspaper Editors by Williams, [1961 –1969]. 50 frames. 
Major Topics: Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case; criminal justice system; 
Vietnam War. 
0608 Speeches (1), [1963–1978 and Undated].  95 frames. 
Major Topics: PRC; African American military personnel; Patriotic Front of Thailand; 
U.S. foreign policy; Republic of New Africa; U.S. bicentennial; role of whites in 
black freedom struggle; lynching; John F. Kennedy’s civil rights policies; African 
American press; drug abuse. 
0703 Speeches (2), [1956 –1967]. 68 frames. 
Major Topics: Jim crow; lynching; John F. Kennedy’s civil rights policies; Mao Tse-
tung; arts; Vietnam War; U.S. foreign policy. 
0771 Press Releases (1), [1962 –1969]. 57 frames. 
Major Topics: Banning of The Crusader by U.S. Postal Service; Williams’s exile in 
Cuba and PRC; Williams’s extradition to North Carolina; Albany Movement; 
Monroe, North Carolina, freedom movement; RAM. 
0828 Press Releases (2), 1963 –1969. 88 frames. 
Major Topics: Willie Mae Mallory; arrest of Ivanhoe Donaldson and Benjamin Taylor 
in Clarksburg, Mississippi; Clyde Kennard; Operation Freedom (voter 
registration); Chinese support for civil rights movement; Monroe, North Carolina, 
kidnapping case; African American Party of National Liberation; United Nations; 
assassination of Malcolm X; U.S. invasion of Dominican Republic; Chinese 
nuclear bombs; Williams’s return to United States; Vietnam War; banning of 
The 
Crusader by U.S. Postal Service; Martin Luther King Jr.; National Black Power 
Committee; RAM; Palestine National Liberation Movement. 
0916 Press Releases (3), [1962, 1979, and Undated].  54 frames. 
Major Topics: Albany Movement; William Worthy; Monroe, North Carolina, 
kidnapping case; communism; shooting of civil rights workers in Ruleville, 
Mississippi; Fidel Castro.


--- PAGE 38 ---
Frame No. 
 
 10
Reel 7 
Group 1, Series 3: Public Statements and Publicity, 1956–1979 cont. 
0001 Miscellaneous Statements, Press Releases, and Other Writings (1), [1963 –1972]. 
87 frames. 
Major Topics: Deng Xiaoping; Williams’s travels in Africa; PRC; Williams’s arrest in 
London and TWA’s refusal to transport him to United States; Mao Tse-tung; 
American Indians. 
0088 Miscellaneous Statements, Press Releases, and Other Writings (2), [1963 –1969]. 
72 frames. 
Major Topics: Racial violence; PRC; civil rights legislation; Rhodesia; Willie Mae 
Mallory; Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case; Union County, North Carolina, 
NAACP branch. 
0160 Political Flyers (1), [1961–1970].  52 frames. 
Major Topics: Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case and Williams’s extradition to 
North Carolina; Black Action Movement; Ahmed Evans; anti–Vietnam War 
statements; Republic of New Africa. 
0212 Political Flyers (2), [1961 –1971]. 29 frames. 
Major Topics: RAM; Committee to Aid the Monroe Defendants; Monroe Defense 
Committee; Black Liberation Week. 
0241 Political Flyers (3), [1976–1979].  52 frames. 
Major Topics: Williams’s speaking visits; Wilmington 10. 
 
Group 1, Series 4: Biographical Material, 1962–1979 
0293 Monroe, North Carolina, Kidnapping [Case], [1961 –1963, 1972, and Undated].  
74 frames. 
0367 Miscellaneous (1), [1965–1976].  75 frames. 
Major Topics: Committee of Concerned Asian Scholars; Willie Mae Mallory; 
Williams’s extradition to North Carolina; Black Liberation Party; National Student 
Coalition Against Racism; Boston busing case; banning of The Crusader by U.S. 
Postal Service; Black Panther Party; RAM. 
Principal Correspondent: Huey P. Newton. 
0442 Miscellaneous (2), [1970 –1972, 1991]. 15 frames. 
Major Topics: John Brown Gold Medal Award presented by John Brown Society; 
Black Arts Festival. 
0457 Personal Miscellaneous Items, [1965–1969].  40 frames. 
Major Topics: Travel documents; foreign assets control. 
0497 Legal Papers and Government Testimony (1), [1970].  176 frames. 
Major Topics: Williams’s Senate Internal Security Subcommittee testimony regarding 
escape from United States, time in exile, writings, political thought, return to 
United States, and Black Power organizations. 
0673 Legal Papers and Government Testimony (2), [1961 –1971 and Undated]. 45 frames. 
Major Topics: State of North Carolina v. Williams; Pete Young statement on KKK; 
State of North Carolina v. Crowder et al.; Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping 
case; Senate Internal Security Subcommittee.


--- PAGE 39 ---
Frame No. 
 
 11
0718 Speeches about Williams by Chinese Leaders, [1963 –1968]. 67 frames. 
Major Topics: Mao Tse-tung on racial discrimination and black freedom struggle; Kuo 
Mo-Jo on imperialism and black freedom struggle; Chou En-lai and Peng Chen 
on fourteenth anniversary of PRC. 
0785 Articles about Williams in Foreign Language Newspapers (1) [Japanese, Chinese], 
[1967–1970]. 63 frames. 
0848 Articles about Williams in Foreign Language Newspapers (2) [Chinese, Japanese], 
[1963–1970]. 113 frames. 
Reel 8 
Group 1, Series 4: Biographical Material, 1962–1979 cont. 
0001 Articles about Williams in Foreign Language Newspapers (3) [Chinese], [1969].   
49 frames. 
0050 Articles about Williams in Foreign Language Newspapers (4) [Chinese], [1963 –
1969]. 73 frames. 
0123 Articles about Williams in Foreign Language Newspapers (5) [Chinese], [1963–
1967]. 45 frames. 
0168 Articles about Williams in Foreign Language Newspapers (6) [Spanish, German, 
French, and Dutch], [1960–1965]. 43 frames. 
0211 Articles about Williams in Foreign Language Newspapers (7) [Spanish], [1960–
1964]. 41 frames. 
0252 Itineraries [Speaking Visits], [1978–1979].  35 frames. 
0287 Miscellaneous Black Publications (1), [1964–1975].  73 frames. 
Major Topics: RAM; black united front; Republic of New Africa; Dodge Revolutionary 
Union Movement; Black Student Voice; Black Youth Liberation Movement; 
Michigan Alliance Against Repression. 
0360 Miscellaneous Black Publications (2), [1968–1972].  65 frames. 
Major Topics: Black Panther Party; Republic of New Africa; Audley Moore; Black 
Student Voice; H. Rap Brown; Stalinist Workers Group; CPUSA; Cyril Briggs; 
African American students; Carl Braden on North Carolina law enforcement.  
0425 Miscellaneous Black Publications (3), [1966–1967 and Undated].  23 frames. 
Major Topics: Black Power in Britain; Universal Coloured People’s Association; 
Stokely Carmichael on Black Power. 
0448 Miscellaneous Cuban Publications, [1962].  15 frames. 
0463 Miscellaneous Chinese and Asian Materials (1), [1963 –1970]. 38 frames. 
Major Topics: Patriotic Front of Thailand; anti–U.S. demonstration in Philippines; 
Anna Louise Strong; Chou En-lai speech on fourteenth anniversary of PRC;  
Liu Ning-yi speech at Peking demonstration to support black freedom struggle. 
0501 Miscellaneous Chinese and Asian Materials (2), [1963 –1968]. 118 frames. 
Major Topics: Mao Tse-tung on black freedom struggle; Chinese translation of 
Negroes with Guns. 
0619 Miscellaneous Chinese and Asian Materials (3), [1968–1969].  45 frames. 
0664 Miscellaneous, [1962–1975 and Undated]. 63 frames. 
Major Topics: Statement by Max Stanford to National Black Power Conference; 
Vietnam War; role of youth in black freedom struggle; Mao Tse-tung on black 
freedom struggle.


--- PAGE 40 ---
Frame No. 
 
 12
0727 Articles concerning Williams (Newspaper and Periodical), 1957 –1958. 8 frames. 
Major Topics: Albert E. Perry; Union County, North Carolina, NAACP branch; school 
desegregation request. 
0735 Articles concerning Williams (Newspaper and Periodical), 1959–1960.  13 frames. 
Major Topics: Williams’s Monroe mayoral candidacy; Williams’s suspension by 
NAACP. 
0748 Articles concerning Williams (Newspaper and Periodical), 1961.  24 frames. 
Major Topics: Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case; Williams’s escape from 
United States. 
0772 Articles concerning Williams (Newspaper and Periodical), 1962.  57 frames. 
Major Topics: Union County, North Carolina, NAACP branch; Monroe, North 
Carolina, kissing case; Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case; social 
conditions in Cuba; Monroe Defense Committee. 
0829 Articles concerning Williams (Newspaper and Periodical), 1963.  27 frames. 
Major Topics: Jackson, Mississippi, stores boycott; review of Negroes with Guns; 
Monroe Youth Action Committee; Socialist Workers Party. 
0856 Articles concerning Williams (Newspaper and Periodical), 1964.  21 frames. 
Major Topics: “Radio Free Dixie”; Williams’s 1964 visit to PRC; William Worthy on 
black freedom struggle. 
0877 Articles concerning Williams (Newspaper and Periodical), 1965.  32 frames. 
Major Topics: Review of Frank Greenwood’s play, If We Must Live; Williams’s 1964 
visit to PRC; Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case; RAM. 
0909 Articles concerning Williams (Newspaper and Periodical), 1966.  78 frames. 
Major Topics: CPUSA; Dick Gregory; RAM; Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping 
case; PRC; debate about Black Power among civil rights leaders; Chinese 
support for black freedom struggle; James E. Groppi; banning of The Crusader 
by U.S. Postal Service; Martin Sostre; Williams’s speech on seventeenth 
anniversary of PRC; Williams’s complaints about Cuba; Cultural Revolution. 
Reel 9 
Group 1, Series 4: Biographical Material, 1962–1979 cont. 
0001 Articles concerning Williams (Newspaper and Periodical), 1967 (1).  79 frames. 
Major Topics: Williams’s complaints about Cuba; CPUSA; RAM; forged issue of The 
Crusader; urban riots; Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party; Dallas County 
Independent Free Voters League; Meredith March against Fear; Muhammad Ali. 
0080 Articles concerning Williams (Newspaper and Periodical), 1967 (2).  52 frames. 
Major Topics: Williams’s complaints about Cuba; Cultural Revolution; banning of The 
Crusader by U.S. Postal Service. 
0132 Articles concerning Williams (Newspaper and Periodical), 1968 (1).  81 frames. 
Major Topics: Williams’s return to United States; ACLU; RAM; red-baiting of Black 
Power movement; Republic of New Africa. 
0213 Articles concerning Williams (Newspaper and Periodical), 1968 (2).  67 frames. 
Major Topics: Republic of New Africa; William Worthy on Martin Sostre; Willie Mae 
Mallory; National Black Power Conference; red-baiting of Black Power 
movement; RAM; National Black United Front; Williams’s travels in Africa; 
Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case.


--- PAGE 41 ---
Frame No. 
 
 13
0280 Articles concerning Williams (Newspaper and Periodical), 1968 (3).  38 frames. 
Major Topics: Williams’s return to United States; labor unions; Black Panther Party; 
revolutionary violence; Max Stanford; Martin Sostre. 
0318 Articles concerning Williams (Newspaper and Periodical), 1969 (1).  51 frames. 
Major Topics: Republic of New Africa; Williams’s detention in London; Williams’s 
return to United States; TWA. 
0369 Articles concerning Williams (Newspaper and Periodical), 1969 (2).  34 frames. 
Major Topics: Williams’s complaints about Cuba; Williams’s return to United States; 
Williams’s extradition to North Carolina; Republic of New Africa. 
0403 Articles concerning Williams (Newspaper and Periodical), 1969 (3).  20 frames. 
Major Topics: Williams’s return to United States; Republic of New Africa; Williams’s 
extradition to North Carolina; Williams’s resignation as Republic of New Africa 
president. 
0423 Articles concerning Williams (Newspaper and Periodical), 1969 (4).  27 frames. 
Major Topics: Williams’s resignation as Republic of New Africa president; Williams’s 
return to United States. 
0450 Articles concerning Williams (Newspaper and Periodical), 1969 (5).  20 frames. 
Major Topics: Cultural Revolution; revolutionary violence. 
0470 Articles concerning Williams (Newspaper and Periodical), 1969 (6).  39 frames. 
Major Topics: Detroit mayoral candidacy of Richard H. Austin; revolutionary violence; 
United Automobile Workers; League of Revolutionary Black Workers; Martin 
Sostre; Williams’s return to United States; Williams’s extradition to North 
Carolina. 
0509 Articles concerning Williams (Newspaper and Periodical), 1969 (7).  12 frames. 
Major Topic: Revolutionary nationalism. 
0521 Articles concerning Williams (Newspaper and Periodical), 1969 (8).  26 frames. 
Major Topics: Williams’s return to United States; Republic of New Africa; Williams’s 
extradition to North Carolina. 
0547 Articles concerning Williams (Newspaper and Periodical), 1970 (1).  31 frames. 
Major Topics: Williams’s time in exile; Republic of New Africa; Senate Internal 
Security Subcommittee; Williams’s complaints about Cuba; Mabel Williams. 
0578 Articles concerning Williams (Newspaper and Periodical), 1970 (2).  16 frames. 
Major Topics: Williams’s extradition to North Carolina; Senate Internal Security 
Subcommittee. 
0594 Articles concerning Williams (Newspaper and Periodical), 1970 (3).  14 frames. 
Major Topics: Senate Internal Security Subcommittee; Monroe, North Carolina, 
kidnapping case; Williams’s return to United States. 
0608 Articles concerning Williams (Newspaper and Periodical), 1971 (1).  37 frames. 
Major Topics: University of Michigan Center for Chinese Studies; Black 
Revolutionary Party; Afro-Asian–Latin American People’s Solidarity Movement; 
Williams’s speech on fourteenth anniversary of PRC; Williams on Nixon’s China 
policy; Republic of New Africa; Williams’s extradition to North Carolina. 
0645 Articles concerning Williams (Newspaper and Periodical), 1971 (2).  21 frames. 
Major Topics: PRC; University of Michigan Center for Chinese Studies. 
0666 Articles concerning Williams (Newspaper and Periodical), 1972 (1).  16 frames. 
Major Topics: Williams’s extradition to North Carolina; KKK; FBI involvement in 
Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case; review of Williams biography by 
Robert Carl Cohen. 
0682 Articles concerning Williams (Newspaper and Periodical), 1972 (2).  12 frames. 
Major Topics: KKK; Senate Internal Security Subcommittee.


--- PAGE 42 ---
Frame No. 
 
 14
0694 Articles concerning Williams (Newspaper and Periodical), 1972 (3).  27 frames. 
Major Topics: KKK; Republic of New Africa; Yoriko Nakajima; Williams’s extradition 
to North Carolina. 
0721 Articles concerning Williams (Newspaper and Periodical), 1973 –1975. 7 frames. 
Major Topic: Williams’s extradition to North Carolina. 
0728 Articles concerning Williams (Newspaper and Periodical), 1976.  27 frames. 
Major Topics: Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case; Wilmington 10. 
0755 Articles concerning Williams (Newspaper and Periodical), 1977.  3 frames. 
Major Topic: PRC. 
0758 Articles concerning Williams (Newspaper and Periodical), 1978.  13 frames. 
Major Topics: Education; Ruby Nelson. 
0771 Articles concerning Williams (Newspaper and Periodical), 1979. 19 frames. 
Major Topic: PRC. 
0790 Articles concerning Williams (Newspaper and Periodical), Undated (1).  47 frames. 
Major Topics: “Radio Free Dixie”; Julian Mayfield on Williams; revolutionary violence; 
Monroe Defense Committee; Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case; review of 
Negroes with Guns. 
0837 Articles concerning Williams (Newspaper and Periodical), Undated (2).  55 frames. 
Major Topics: KKK; TWA; Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case; RAM; Union 
County, North Carolina, NAACP, branch; Monroe, North Carolina, urban renewal 
plans; Williams’s complaints about Cuba. 
0892 Miscellaneous Newspaper and Periodical Articles (1), [1962 –1970]. 28 frames. 
Major Topics: Urban riots; KKK; PRC. 
0920 Miscellaneous Newspaper and Periodical Articles (2), [1962–1969 and Undated].   
47 frames. 
Major Topics: Detroit police; RAM; urban riots; National Black Power Conference; 
Milton Henry. 
Reel 10 
Group 1, Series 4: Biographical Material, 1962–1979 cont. 
0001 Miscellaneous Newspaper and Periodical Articles (3), [1965 –1969]. 57 frames. 
Major Topics: American Federation for Negro Affairs; National Black Power 
Conference; Republic of New Africa; Detroit police; repression of Black Power 
activists; Stokely Carmichael; RAM; anti–Vietnam War movement; murder of 
Phyllis Whittler; SNCC. 
0058 Miscellaneous Newspaper and Periodical Articles (4), [1967 –1969]. 31 frames. 
Major Topics: Repression of Black Power activists; arrest of Norman 3X Butler for 
Malcolm X assassination. 
0089 Miscellaneous Newspaper and Periodical Articles (5), [1965–1968, 1975].   
15 frames. 
Major Topic: Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case. 
 
Group 1, Series 5: Republic of New Africa, 1968–1970 
0104 Republic of New Africa (1), [1968 –1970]. 84 frames. 
0188 Republic of New Africa (2), [Undated].  56 frames.


--- PAGE 43 ---
Frame No. 
 
 15
Group 1, Series 6: The Crusader (Newsletter), 1959–1969, 1980–1982 
0244 The Crusader (Newsletter), June–September 1959. 125 frames. 
Major Topics: Armed self-defense; Williams’s family history; Williams’s suspension 
from NAACP; KKK; education; Daisy Bates; labor unions. 
0369 The Crusader  (Newsletter), October–December 1959. 119 frames. 
Major Topics: Highlander Folk School; labor unions; Williams’s suspension from 
NAACP; Monroe urban renewal plans; Albert E. Perry; Cuba; urban renewal 
plans in southern states; wages. 
0488 
The Crusader (Newsletter), January–March 1960. 133 frames. 
Major Topics: Assassination of Harry T. Moore; armed self-defense; Cuba; 
education; Monroe urban renewal plans; wages; employment; Carl Braden; 
Albert E. Perry; 1960 election; 
State of North Carolina v. Perry; labor unions; 
nonviolence; sit-ins; South Africa. 
0621 The Crusader (Newsletter), April–June 1960. 113 frames. 
Major Topics: Puerto Rico; State of North Carolina v. Perry; South Africa; Fair Play 
for Cuba Committee; White Citizens Council; Monroe urban renewal plans; sit-
ins; Cuba. 
0734 The Crusader (Newsletter), July–September 1960. 82 frames. 
Major Topics: Sit-ins; Albert E. Perry; NAACP national policy; Cuba; Fidel Castro; 
Congo; Monroe urban renewal plans; recreational facilities. 
0816 The Crusader (Newsletter), October–December 1960. 89 frames. 
Major Topics: Employment; recreational facilities; Fidel Castro; Cuba; 1960 election; 
nonviolence; Liberation Committee for Africa; labor unions. 
0905 The Crusader (Newsletter), January–August 1961. 137 frames. 
Major Topics: Fidel Castro; Monroe urban renewal plans; education; Fair Play for 
Cuba Committee; murder of Patrice Lumumba; wages; Kwame Nkrumah; Cuba; 
Martin Luther King Jr.; recreational facilities; attempts to kill Williams; 
nonviolence. 
Reel 11 
Group 1, Series 6: The Crusader (Newsletter), 1959–1969, 1980–1982 cont. 
0001 The Crusader (Newsletter), October 1961–May 1963. 80 frames. 
Major Topics: Williams’s escape from United States; racial violence;  
W. E. B. Du Bois; Crusaders Association for Relief and Enlightenment; rape 
cases. 
0081 
The Crusader (Newsletter), July 1963–1969, 1980–1982. 213 frames. 
Major Topics: Armed self-defense; Mao Tse-tung’s statement supporting black 
freedom struggle; PRC; International Conference for Solidarity with the People of 
Vietnam against U.S. Imperialist Aggression and for the Defense of Peace; 
revolutionary violence; Vietnam War; Cultural Revolution; African American 
press; Cuban revolution; anti–Vietnam War movement; Muhammad Ali; forged 
issue of 
The Crusader; RAM; banning of The Crusader by U.S. Postal Service; 
Williams’s return to United States; Republic of New Africa; Williams’s travels in 
Africa; Lake County, Michigan, social conditions; drugs. 
0294 Subscription Lists, [Undated].  196 frames.


--- PAGE 44 ---
Frame No. 
 
 16
Group 1, Series 7: “Radio Free Dixie” Broadcasts, 1962–1966 
0490 “Radio Free Dixie” Broadcasts, July–August 1962. 129 frames. 
Major Topics: Cuban revolution; police brutality; FBI; armed self-defense; racial 
violence; Monroe, North Carolina, freedom movement. 
0619 “Radio Free Dixie” Broadcasts, September[–October] 1962.  92 frames. 
Major Topics: U.S. foreign policy; racial violence; lynching; intimidation and 
harassment. 
0711 “Radio Free Dixie” Broadcasts, October 1962.  75 frames. 
Major Topics: Racial violence; police brutality. 
0786 “Radio Free Dixie” Broadcasts, November 1962.  113 frames. 
Major Topics: Willie Mae Mallory; Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case; police 
brutality; African American military personnel; John F. Kennedy. 
0899 “Radio Free Dixie” Broadcasts, December 1962.  63 frames. 
Major Topics: Police brutality; racial violence. 
Reel 12 
Group 1, Series 7: “Radio Free Dixie” Broadcasts, 1962–1966 cont. 
0001 “Radio Free Dixie” Broadcasts, January 1963. 77 frames. 
Major Topics: Police brutality; Clyde Kennard; lynching. 
0078 “Radio Free Dixie” Broadcasts, February 1963.  56 frames. 
Major Topics: Lynching; John F. Kennedy; police brutality; coal miners strike in 
Hazard, Kentucky. 
0134 “Radio Free Dixie” Broadcasts, March 1963.  77 frames. 
Major Topics: John F. Kennedy; racial discrimination in Monroe, North Carolina; 
violence against voter registration workers; Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping 
case; Willie Mae Mallory. 
0211 “Radio Free Dixie” Broadcasts, April 1963.  53 frames. 
Major Topics: Civil rights demonstrations; racial violence; rape case. 
0264 “Radio Free Dixie” Broadcasts, May–June 1963.  130 frames. 
Major Topics: Civil rights demonstrations; racial violence; John F. Kennedy; police 
brutality. 
0394 “Radio Free Dixie” Broadcasts, July 1963.  52 frames. 
Major Topics: Racial violence; Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case; 
nonviolence; Cuban revolution. 
0446 “Radio Free Dixie” Broadcasts, August–September 1963.  81 frames. 
Major Topics: Police brutality; armed self-defense; civil rights demonstrations; March 
on Washington for Jobs and Freedom; Monroe, North Carolina, school boycott; 
bombing of Sixteenth Street Baptist Church in Birmingham, Alabama. 
0527 “Radio Free Dixie” Broadcasts, October–December 1963.  82 frames. 
Major Topics: Assassination of John F. Kennedy; FBI; racial violence. 
0609 “Radio Free Dixie” Broadcasts, January 1964.  63 frames. 
Major Topics: Cuba; U.S. foreign policy; Willie Mae Mallory; revolutionary violence; 
intimidation of voter registration workers. 
0672 “Radio Free Dixie” Broadcasts, February 1964.  51 frames. 
Major Topics: Willie Mae Mallory; armed self-defense; Mabel Stegall; Monroe, North 
Carolina, kidnapping case; nonviolence.


--- PAGE 45 ---
Frame No. 
 
 17
0723 “Radio Free Dixie” Broadcasts, March 1964. 64 frames. 
Major Topics: Civil rights demonstrations; civil rights legislation; Charles Evers; 
armed self-defense; racial violence. 
0787 “Radio Free Dixie” Broadcasts, April 1964.  64 frames. 
Major Topics: Mary Peabody; civil rights demonstrations; Bruce Klunder; armed self-
defense; African American Party of National Liberation; civil rights legislation. 
0851 “Radio Free Dixie” Broadcasts, May 1964.  62 frames. 
Major Topics: Nonviolence; rape case; civil rights legislation; civil rights 
demonstrations. 
0913 “Radio Free Dixie” Broadcasts, June–July 1964.  103 frames. 
Major Topics: Barry Goldwater; George Wallace; Martin Luther King Jr.; nonviolence; 
African American military personnel; civil rights workers in Mississippi; civil rights 
legislation; racial violence. 
Reel 13 
Group 1, Series 7: “Radio Free Dixie” Broadcasts, 1962–1966 cont. 
0001 “Radio Free Dixie” Broadcasts, August–November 1964. 90 frames. 
Major Topics: Armed self-defense; police brutality; Chinese support for civil rights 
movement; Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case; March on Washington for 
Jobs and Freedom; racial violence. 
0091 “Radio Free Dixie” Broadcasts, January–February 1965.  66 frames. 
Major Topics: Civil rights legislation; armed self-defense; dismissal of charges in 
Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case. 
0157 “Radio Free Dixie” Broadcasts, March 1965.  49 frames. 
Major Topics: Selma voting rights demonstrations; civil rights legislation. 
0206 “Radio Free Dixie” Broadcasts, April 1965.  51 frames. 
Major Topics: KKK; If We Must Live by Frank Greenwood; Vietnam War. 
0257 “Radio Free Dixie” Broadcasts, May–June 1965.  66 frames. 
Major Topics: Murders of James Reeb and Jimmie Lee Jackson; U.S. foreign policy; 
Deacons for Defense and Justice; armed self-defense; second indictments in 
Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case. 
0323 “Radio Free Dixie” Broadcasts, July 1965.  43 frames. 
Major Topics: Police brutality; armed self-defense. 
0366 “Radio Free Dixie” Broadcasts, August–September 1965.  75 frames. 
Major Topics: Civil rights legislation; armed self-defense; Chinese support for civil 
rights movement; 1965 Watts riot; international support for civil rights movement; 
racial discrimination. 
0441 “Radio Free Dixie” Broadcasts, October 1965.  70 frames. 
Major Topics: Armed self-defense; Vietnam War; racial violence; 1965 Watts riot; 
criminal justice system. 
0511 “Radio Free Dixie” Broadcasts, November–December 1965.  72 frames. 
Major Topics: Martin Luther King Jr.; nonviolence; police brutality; Rhodesia; 
Vietnam War; armed self-defense. 
0583 “Radio Free Dixie” Broadcasts, January 1966.  25 frames. 
Major Topics: Afro-Asian–Latin American People’s Solidarity Conference; 1965 
Watts riot.


--- PAGE 46 ---
Frame No. 
 
 18
0608 “Radio Free Dixie” Broadcasts, February–March 1966. 54 frames. 
Major Topics: Police brutality; 1965 Watts riot; SNCC statement on Vietnam War; 
anti–Vietnam War movement. 
0662 “The Robert Williams Hour,” 1962 and Undated. 94 frames. 
Major Topics: Nonviolence; armed self-defense; John F. Kennedy. 
 
Group 2, Series 1: Calvin Cunningham Case, 1983–1996 
0756 Calvin Cunningham Case, 1983 –1992. 40 frames. 
Major Topic: Murder case. 
Principal Correspondents: Calvin Cunningham; Robert F. Williams. 
0796 Calvin Cunningham Case, 1991–1992.  24 frames. 
Major Topic: Murder case. 
Principal Correspondents: Robert F. Williams; Gloria Jean White; Calvin 
Cunningham. 
0820 Calvin Cunningham Case, 1991–1992. 91 frames. 
Major Topic: Murder case. 
Principal Correspondents: Gloria Jean White; Calvin Cunningham; Robert F. 
Williams. 
0911 Calvin Cunningham Case, 1992.  43 frames. 
Major Topic: Murder case. 
Principal Correspondents: Calvin Cunningham; Robert F. Williams; Arthur L. 
Campbell. 
0954 Calvin Cunningham Case, 1994–1996.  36 frames. 
Major Topic: Murder case. 
Principal Correspondents: Gloria Jean White; Robert F. Williams. 
Reel 14 
Group 2, Series 2: Clippings, 1961–1996 
0001 Clippings, [1952], 1957.  12 frames. 
Major Topics: Monroe, North Carolina, recreational facilities; historically black 
colleges and universities. 
0013 Clippings, 1961 –1984. 53 frames. 
Major Topics: Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case; John F. Kennedy; PRC; 
RAM assassination plot; “Radio Free Dixie”; Williams’s extradition to North 
Carolina. 
0066 Clippings, 1963 –1966. 97 frames. 
Major Topics: Armed self-defense; Williams’s travels in Africa; PRC; Williams’s 
complaints about Cuba; urban riots; Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case; 
debate on 
Negroes with Guns. 
0163 Clippings, China, [1964] –1969. 68 frames. 
Major Topics: Cultural Revolution; Mao Tse-tung; Chinese support for civil rights 
movement. 
0231 Clippings, [1966]–1990.  58 frames. 
Major Topics: Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case; criminal justice system; 
Williams’s return to United States; Martin Luther King Jr.; Eldridge Cleaver; 
armed self-defense. 
0289 Clippings (Korean, Japanese, Chinese), [1968 –1977, 1986]. 94 frames.


--- PAGE 47 ---
Frame No. 
 
 19
0383 Clippings, 1969 –1975. 11 frames. 
Major Topics: Williams’s return to United States; FBI harassment of Socialist 
Workers Party. 
0394 Clippings, 1969 –1985. 25 frames. 
Major Topics: TWA; FBI. 
0419 Clippings, 1970–1976.  56 frames. 
Major Topics: Williams’s complaints about Cuba; reparations; Monroe, North 
Carolina, kidnapping case; Odis Hyde; crime in Lake County, Michigan. 
0475 Clippings, 1970 –1992. 69 frames. 
Major Topics: U.S. Marine Corps; Williams’s extradition to North Carolina; Republic 
of New Africa; New Afrikan People’s Organization; New Afrikan Independence 
Movement; death of Robert F. Williams Jr.; Calvin Cunningham; Monroe, North 
Carolina, kidnapping case. 
0544 Clippings, 1975 –1976. 77 frames. 
Major Topics: Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case; West Central Michigan 
Employment and Training Consortium; Martin Sostre; Williams’s extradition to 
North Carolina. 
0621 Clippings, 1975 –1986. 19 frames. 
Major Topic: Williams’s extradition to North Carolina. 
0640 Clippings, 1980 –1995. 19 frames. 
Major Topic: Baldwin, Michigan, schools. 
0659 Clippings, [1960], 1983–1986.  26 frames. 
Major Topics: People’s Association for Human Rights; police brutality; African 
American military personnel. 
0685 Clippings, 1993 –1996. 36 frames. 
Major Topics: Obituaries of Williams; Boris Yeltsin; Cuba. 
0721 Clippings, Libya (Arabic).  18 frames. 
 
Group 2, Series 3: Correspondence, 1961–1996 
0739 Correspondence, Anne Olson, 1961 –1966. 69 frames. 
Principal Correspondents: Vernal Olson; Anne Olson; Robert F. Williams. 
0808 Correspondence, [1961]–1965 and Undated.  67 frames. 
Major Topics: African American Captive Nation; People’s Association for Human 
Rights. 
Principal Correspondents: Julian Mayfield; Willie Mae Mallory; Anne Olson; Robert F. 
Williams. 
0875 Correspondence (in Chinese), ca. 1963 –1967. 66 frames. 
0941 Correspondence, 1966–1969.  113 frames. 
Major Topics: Cultural Revolution; forged issue of The Crusader. 
Principal Correspondents: Walter Bryant; Robert F. Williams; Anne Olson; Carlos 
More; Willie Mae Mallory; Yoriko Nakajima.


--- PAGE 48 ---
Frame No. 
 
 20
Reel 15 
Group 2, Series 3: Correspondence, 1961–1996 cont. 
0001 Correspondence, 1970 –1972. 64 frames. 
Major Topic: Negroes with Guns royalties and reprinting. 
Principal Correspondents: Carl Marzani; Sunao Suzuki; Robert Carl Cohen; Carl 
Braden; Thelma Reece. 
0065 Correspondence, 1973–1975.  45 frames. 
Major Topic: Williams’s extradition to North Carolina. 
Principal Correspondents: Akiko Kurita; Albert Feuerwerker; Gwendolyn Midlo Hall; 
William M. Kunstler. 
0110 Correspondence, 1973 –1988 and Undated. 94 frames. 
Major Topics: Killing of Peruvian prisoners; FBI harassment of Socialist Workers 
Party. 
Principal Correspondents: Carl Braden; Thelma Reece; Marilyn Wilson; Gwendolyn 
Midlo Hall; Vicki Garvin; Robert F. Williams; Mabel Williams. 
0204 Correspondence, 1976.  74 frames. 
Major Topics: National Alliance Against Racism and Political Repression; Monroe, 
North Carolina, kidnapping case. 
Principal Correspondents: Charlene Mitchell; Ben Chavis; Robert F. Williams; 
Gwendolyn Midlo Hall; Tohoru Takahashi; Jodie Vernon Austin; Thelma Reece. 
0278 Correspondence, 1977.  69 frames. 
Major Topic: Southern League of Black/Afrikan Organizations. 
Principal Correspondents: Yoriko Nakajima; Joan V. Feeney; David Simpson. 
0347 Correspondence, 1978.  63 frames. 
Major Topics: U.S.–China Peoples Friendship Association; Ruby Nelson case. 
Principal Correspondents: Susan Ezell; Robert F. Williams; Yoriko Nakajima; 
Catherine Grant. 
0410 Correspondence, 1978 –1996. 33 frames. 
Major Topic: People’s Association for Human Rights. 
Principal Correspondents: Hosea L. Williams; Robert F. Williams. 
0443 Correspondence, 1979.  33 frames. 
Major Topics: Conviction of Amiri Baraka for resisting arrest; People’s Defense 
Committee. 
Principal Correspondents: Hunter Huang; Antonio Zamora; Gwendolyn Midlo Hall; 
Robert F. Williams. 
0476 Correspondence, 1980.  57 frames. 
Major Topics: Iranian hostage crisis; North Michigan statehood movement. 
Principal Correspondents: Robert F. Williams; Amiri Baraka; V. T. Lee; Coleman J. 
Chauncey. 
0533 Correspondence, 1980 –1983. 10 frames. 
Major Topic: Williams’s arrest for traffic violation, dismissal of case, and charges of 
police brutality. 
Principal Correspondent: Robert F. Williams. 
0543 Correspondence, 1980 –1985. 12 frames. 
0555 Correspondence, Notes, 1980–1995 and Undated.  38 frames. 
Major Topics: Patrice Lumumba Coalition; Elombe Brath; Calvin Cunningham case; 
Confederate flag. 
Principal Correspondents: Vicki Garvin; Robert F. Williams.


--- PAGE 49 ---
Frame No. 
 
 21
0593 Correspondence, 1980 –1996. 34 frames. 
Major Topics: People’s Association for Human Rights; Louis Farrakhan. 
Principal Correspondents: Robert F. Williams; Mabel Williams; Vicki Garvin; Timothy 
Tyson. 
0627 Correspondence, 1981.  79 frames. 
Major Topics: Cultural Revolution; Union County, North Carolina, NAACP branch; 
Jackson State Prison, Michigan. 
Principal Correspondents: Robert F. Williams; Thomas W. Mosley; Mabel Williams; 
Coleman J. Chauncey; Mary Kochiyama. 
0706 Correspondence, 1982 –1983. 78 frames. 
Major Topics: Lake County Jail, Baldwin, Michigan; National Black United Front; 
Nigeria; Darnell Summers case. 
Principal Correspondents: Amiri Baraka; Amina Baraka; Coleman J. Chauncey; 
Gwendolyn Midlo Hall; Mary Kochiyama; Robert F. Williams; Conrad J. Lynn; 
Herbert Daughtry; Susan Skinner. 
0784 Correspondence, 1984.  41 frames. 
Major Topic: Ethiopian drought crisis. 
Principal Correspondents: Robert F. Williams; Mabel Williams; James Jackson; 
Marcellus C. Barksdale; Coleman J. Chauncey; Kenneth O’Reilly; Guy Vander 
Jagt. 
0825 Correspondence, 1985.  70 frames. 
Major Topics: Building African American Leadership Conference; job training 
programs; Michigan’s Lemon Law. 
Principal Correspondents: Coleman J. Chauncey; Larry Lawrence; Michael Simanga; 
Marcellus C. Barksdale; Guy Vander Jagt; Robert F. Williams; Mabel Williams. 
0895 Correspondence, 1986.  94 frames. 
Major Topics: Conference on African American families; Chinese People’s Rally for 
World Peace. 
Principal Correspondents: Walter Bergman; Pat Bergman; Robert F. Williams; 
Joseph H. McMillan; Mabel Williams; Robert A. Hill. 
0989 Correspondence, Michigan Department of Civil Rights (Re: Lake County Star 
Lawsuit), 1987. 13 frames. 
Principal Correspondents: Ernest Goodman; Robert F. Williams. 
1002 Correspondence, Felon Flyers Inc., 1989 –1990. 5 frames. 
Major Topic: Transportation of prisoners. 
Principal Correspondent: Robert C. Redman. 
1007 Correspondence, Desoto Productions, 1989–1992.  4 frames. 
Major Topic: Film research for Monroe, North Carolina, kissing case. 
Principal Correspondent: Laura Mola. 
1011 Correspondence, 1989.  47 frames. 
Major Topic: Chinese students’ demonstrations. 
Principal Correspondents: Guy Vander Jagt; Connie Williams Sparks; Robert F. 
Williams; Mabel Williams; Coleman J. Chauncey; Vicki Garvin.


--- PAGE 50 ---
Frame No. 
 
 22
Reel 16 
Group 2, Series 3: Correspondence, 1961–1996 cont. 
0001 Correspondence, Ora Mobley, 1989 –1992. 10 frames. 
0011 Correspondence, 1990.  20 frames. 
Principal Correspondents: Robert F. Williams; Ila Warner; Mabel Williams; Vicki 
Garvin. 
0031 Correspondence, 1990–1996 (a).  31 frames. 
Major Topics: Oprah Winfrey show; death of Robert F. Williams Jr. 
Principal Correspondents: Robert F. Williams; Muhammad Ahmad; Mabel Williams. 
0062 Correspondence, 1990–1996 (b).  35 frames. 
Major Topics: NAFTA; Calvin Cunningham case; NRA. 
Principal Correspondents: Robert F. Williams; Timothy Tyson; Vicki Garvin; Mabel 
Williams. 
0097 Correspondence, 1991.  27 frames. 
Major Topics: Most-favored-nation status for PRC; death of Robert F. Williams Jr. 
Principal Correspondents: Robert F. Williams; Guy Vander Jagt; Ila Warner; Mabel 
Williams. 
0124 Correspondence, 1992.  42 frames. 
Major Topic: Death of Robert F. Williams Jr. 
Principal Correspondents: Vicki Garvin; Robert F. Williams; Mabel Williams; Mary 
Kochiyama; Gwendolyn Midlo Hall; Ila Warner. 
0166 Correspondence, 1993–1997.  38 frames. 
Major Topics: Drugs; Williams’s death. 
Principal Correspondents: Robert F. Williams; Mabel Williams; Arthur L. Campbell; 
Oprah Winfrey; Gloria Jean White; John Chalmers Williams. 
0204 Correspondence, 1995 –1996. 16 frames. 
Major Topic: NRA. 
Principal Correspondents: Robert F. Williams; Luke Tripp; Andrew H. Myers; Mabel 
Williams; Mildred M. Ransom. 
 
Group 2, Series 4: Government Files, 1951–1981 
Subseries 1: FBI Files, Organized by FBI Filing System 
0220 FBI Files, Section 1, 1951 –1960. 69 frames. 
Major Topics: Committee to Aid the Monroe Defendants; Williams’s escape from 
United States; Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case; Willie Mae Mallory. 
0289 FBI Files, Section 2, 1955 –1960. 112 frames. 
Major Topics: U.S. Marine Corps; employment history. 
0401 FBI Files, Section 2, 1960.  65 frames. 
Major Topics: Union County, North Carolina, NAACP branch; travel in Cuba. 
0466 FBI Files, Section 2, 1960–1961.  93 frames. 
Major Topics: Fair Play for Cuba Committee; travel in Cuba; Union County, North 
Carolina, NAACP branch. 
0559 FBI Files, Section 3, 1961.  58 frames. 
Major Topic: Williams’s escape from United States. 
0617 FBI Files, Section 3, 1961.  55 frames. 
Major Topic: Williams’s escape from United States. 
0672 FBI Files, Section 3, 1961.  75 frames.


--- PAGE 51 ---
Frame No. 
 
 23
Major Topic: Monroe Defense Committee. 
0747 FBI Files, Section 3, 1961.  75 frames. 
Major Topic: Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case. 
0822 FBI Files, Section 5, 1961.  127 frames. 
Major Topic: Williams’s escape from United States. 
0949 FBI Files, Section 5, 1961 –1962. 148 frames. 
Major Topics: Americans living in Cuba; Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case; 
Williams’s escape from United States. 
Reel 17 
Group 2, Series 4: Government Files, 1951–1981 cont. 
Subseries 1: FBI Files, Organized by FBI Filing System cont. 
0001 FBI Files, Section 4, 1962 –1963. 137 frames. 
Major Topics: Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case; Williams’s escape from 
United States. 
0138 FBI Files, Section 5, 1963 –1965. 133 frames. 
Major Topics: Travel to PRC; “Radio Free Dixie.” 
0271 FBI Files, Section 6, 1962.  128 frames. 
Major Topic: Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case. 
0399 FBI Files, Section 6, 1964 –1965. 113 frames. 
Major Topics: Travel in PRC; civil rights legislation. 
0512 FBI Files, Section 7, 1963.  115 frames. 
Major Topic: Williams’s escape from United States. 
0627 FBI Files, Section 8, 1964 –1969. 165 frames. 
Major Topic: Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case. 
0792 FBI Files, Section 8, 1967.  71 frames. 
Major Topics: 1965 Watts riot; Williams’s return to United States. 
0863 FBI Files, Section 9, 1968 –1969. 205 frames. 
Major Topics: SNCC; Williams’s travel in Africa and receipt of new U.S. passport; 
Williams’s return to United States; Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case. 
Reel 18 
Group 2, Series 4: Government Files, 1951–1981 cont. 
Subseries 1: FBI Files, Organized by FBI Filing System cont. 
0001 FBI Files, Section 11, 1968.  75 frames. 
Major Topics: Travel in Africa; Republic of New Africa; SNCC. 
0076 FBI Files, Section 11, 1969.  89 frames. 
Major Topic: Williams’s return to United States. 
0165 FBI Files, Section 12, 1969.  119 frames. 
Major Topics: TWA; Williams’s arrest in Detroit by FBI agents. 
0284 FBI Files, Section 13, 1969 –1970. 171 frames. 
Major Topics: Williams’s extradition to North Carolina; Black Panther Party. 
0455 FBI Files, Section 14, 1970 –1971. 122 frames. 
Major Topic: TWA.


--- PAGE 52 ---
Frame No. 
 
 24
0577 FBI Files, Section 15, 1961 –1973. 93 frames. 
Major Topics: Williams’s extradition to North Carolina; Williams v. Milliken. 
0670 FBI Files, Section 16, 1971.  101 frames. 
Major Topics: Senate Internal Security Subcommittee; Williams’s complaint 
regarding Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case and Williams’s extradition to 
North Carolina. 
0771 FBI Files, Section 16, 1972.  109 frames. 
Major Topics: Japanese Committee for the Defense of the Life and Fundamental 
Human Rights of Robert F. Williams; KKK; PRC; Yoriko Nakajima. 
0880 FBI Files, Section 17, 1973 –1974. 128 frames. 
Major Topic: Williams’s extradition to North Carolina. 
Reel 19 
Group 2, Series 4: Government Files, 1951–1981 cont. 
Subseries 1: FBI Files, Organized by FBI Filing System cont. 
0001 FBI Files, Section 18, 1974 –1976. 86 frames. 
Major Topics: Republic of New Africa; dismissal of Monroe, North Carolina, 
kidnapping case. 
 
Group 2, Series 4: Government Files, 1951–1981 cont. 
Subseries 2: FBI Files, Chronological 
0087 FBI Files, 1952 –1965. 59 frames. 
Major Topics: Cuba; Cultural Revolution. 
0146 FBI Files, 1952–1970.  147 frames. 
Major Topics: Committee to Aid the Monroe Defendants; Monroe Defense 
Committee; Williams’s return to United States. 
0293 FBI Files, Civil Rights Division, 1955 –1970. 97 frames. 
Major Topic: Student Organization for Black Unity. 
0390 FBI and Michigan State Police Files (1), 1955–1969.  94 frames. 
Major Topics: Monroe, North Carolina, kissing case; Monroe, North Carolina, civil 
rights demonstrations. 
0484 FBI and Michigan State Police Files (2), 1955–1972.  86 frames. 
Major Topics: Williams’s escape from United States; Williams compared to  
Malcolm X. 
0570 FBI Files, 1955 –1972 (1). 75 frames. 
Major Topics: Committee of Black Americans for Truth About the Middle East; 
Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case. 
0645 FBI Files, 1955–1972 (2).  37 frames. 
Major Topics: Cuba; Williams’s passport. 
0682 FBI Files, 1959 –1968. 79 frames. 
Major Topics: Williams’s extradition to North Carolina; RAM. 
0761 FBI Files, 1959 –1973. 77 frames. 
Major Topic: Armed self-defense. 
0838 FBI Files, 1960–1961.  94 frames. 
Major Topic: Fair Play for Cuba Committee.


--- PAGE 53 ---
Frame No. 
 
 25
0932 FBI Files, 1960 –1975. 13 frames. 
Major Topic: Williams compared to Malcolm X. 
0945 FBI Files, 1961 (1).  95 frames. 
Reel 20 
Group 2, Series 4: Government Files, 1951–1981 cont. 
Subseries 2: FBI Files, Chronological cont. 
0001 FBI Files, 1961 (2).  86 frames. 
0087 FBI Files, 1961 (3).  96 frames. 
0183 FBI Files, 1961 (4).  28 frames. 
Major Topic: Monroe, North Carolina, freedom movement. 
0211 FBI Files, 1961 –1969. 53 frames. 
Major Topic: Japanese student movement. 
0264 FBI Files, 1961–1971.  80 frames. 
0344 FBI Files, Passport Material, 1961–1971.  37 frames. 
0381 FBI Files, 1961–1973 (1).  52 frames. 
Major Topics: Armed self-defense; Yoriko Nakajima. 
0433 FBI Files, 1961–1973 (2).  57 frames. 
Major Topic: Williams compared to Malcolm X. 
0490 FBI Files, 1962–1966.  10 frames. 
0500 FBI Files, 1962–1975.  16 frames. 
0516 FBI Files, 1962–1976.  45 frames. 
Major Topics: Williams’s influence on Black Power organizations; Monroe, North 
Carolina, freedom movement; RAM. 
0561 FBI Files, Radio Broadcast Transcripts, “Radio Free Dixie,” 1962–1963. 60 frames. 
0621 FBI Files, Radio Broadcast Transcripts, “Radio Free Dixie,” 1963–1965 (1).   
55 frames. 
0676 FBI Files, Radio Broadcast Transcripts, “Radio Free Dixie,” 1963–1965 (2).  
67 frames. 
0743 FBI Files, Press Clippings, 1963–1968.  10 frames. 
Major Topics: PRC; banning of The Crusader by U.S. Postal Service; Williams’s 
return to United States. 
0753 FBI Files, 1963 –1970. 125 frames. 
Major Topics: Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case; Republic of New Africa; 
PRC; Williams’s return to United States; Williams’s extradition to North Carolina. 
0878 FBI Files, 1963 –1972, [1983]. 60 frames. 
Major Topics: Lake County, Michigan, Sheriff Department; Japanese Committee for 
the Defense of the Life and Fundamental Human Rights of Robert F. Williams. 
0938 FBI Files, 1963–1976 (1).  112 frames. 
Major Topics: Armed self-defense; Republic of New Africa. 
Reel 21 
Group 2, Series 4: Government Files, 1951–1981 cont. 
Subseries 2: FBI Files, Chronological cont. 
0001 FBI Files, [1961] –1976 (2). 99 frames. 
0100 FBI and CIA Documents, 1964–1966.  49 frames. 
0149 FBI Files, 1964–1968.  66 frames.


--- PAGE 54 ---
Frame No. 
 
 26
Major Topics: Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case; William Worthy; PRC; RAM; 
subversive activities. 
0215 FBI Files, 1964 –1970. 96 frames. 
Major Topics: Williams’s return to United States; Republic of New Africa. 
0311 FBI Files, 1964 –1973. 95 frames. 
Major Topics: Williams’s return to United States; Republic of New Africa. 
0406 FBI Files, 1965 –1966. 108 frames. 
0514 FBI Files, 1965–1970.  86 frames. 
Major Topics: Fair Play for Cuba Committee; “Radio Free Dixie”; Monroe, North 
Carolina, kidnapping case; banning of The Crusader by U.S. Postal Service; Mao 
Tse-tung; Republic of New Africa. 
0600 FBI Files, 1966 –1971. 82 frames. 
Major Topic: Armed self-defense. 
0682 FBI Files, 1967.  123 frames. 
0805 FBI Files, 1967–1968.  147 frames. 
Major Topics: Republic of New Africa; National Lawyers Guild; Organization of Afro-
American Unity. 
0952 FBI Files, 1967–1970.  62 frames. 
Major Topics: Revolutionary violence; Republic of New Africa. 
Reel 22 
Group 2, Series 4: Government Files, 1951–1981 cont. 
Subseries 2: FBI Files, Chronological cont. 
0001 FBI Files, 1968 [1961 –1969]. 96 frames. 
Major Topics: Republic of New Africa; CPUSA. 
0097 FBI Files, 1968–1969 [1961–1970].  51 frames. 
Major Topic: Williams’s return to United States. 
0148 FBI Files, 1968 –1969 (2). 77 frames. 
Major Topics: Union County, North Carolina, NAACP branch; Williams’s return to 
United States; PRC. 
0225 FBI Files, 1968 –1970. 89 frames. 
Major Topics: Williams’s return to United States; Republic of New Africa. 
0314 FBI Files, 1968 –1971. 85 frames. 
Major Topic: Republic of New Africa. 
0399 FBI Files, 1968–1972.  89 frames. 
Major Topic: Republic of New Africa. 
0488 FBI Files, 1968–1973.  92 frames. 
Major Topics: Williams’s extradition to North Carolina; Senate Internal Security 
Subcommittee. 
0580 FBI Files, 1968 –1975. 74 frames. 
0654 FBI Files, Correspondence regarding Williams, 1969.  77 frames. 
0731 FBI Files, 1969 (a).  99 frames. 
Major Topic: Williams’s return to United States. 
0830 FBI Files, 1969 (b).  59 frames. 
Major Topics: ACLU; Williams’s return to United States.


--- PAGE 55 ---
Frame No. 
 
 27
0889 FBI Files, 1969 –1970. 64 frames. 
Major Topics: University of Michigan Center for Chinese Studies; Williams’s 
extradition to North Carolina; Williams’s resignation as Republic of New Africa 
president; Williams’s return to United States. 
0953 FBI Files, [1968] –1970. 72 frames. 
Major Topic: Mabel Williams’s diary. 
1025 FBI Files, [1955]–1971. 76 frames. 
Major Topics: Republic of New Africa; Fair Play for Cuba Committee; RAM. 
Reel 23 
Group 2, Series 4: Government Files, 1951–1981 cont. 
Subseries 2: FBI Files, Chronological cont. 
0001 FBI Files, 1969 –1971. 64 frames. 
Major Topic: Public reaction to Williams’s return to United States. 
0065 FBI Files, 1969 –1971. 88 frames. 
Major Topics: Republic of New Africa; public reaction to Williams’s return to United 
States; Williams compared to Malcolm X. 
0153 FBI Files, 1969 –1971. 61 frames. 
Major Topic: Williams’s return to United States. 
0214 FBI Files, 1969 –1972. 95 frames. 
Major Topic: Williams’s return to United States. 
0309 FBI Files, 1969 –1973. 100 frames. 
Major Topic: Public reaction to Williams’s return to United States. 
0409 FBI Files, Letters from the Public to Government Offices Demanding Prosecution 
of Williams, 1969–1973. 33 frames. 
0442 FBI Files, 1970–1972.  52 frames. 
Major Topic: Williams v. Blount (banning of The Crusader). 
0494 FBI Files, 1971.  22 frames. 
Group 2, Series 4: Government Files, 1951–1981 cont. 
Subseries 3: CIA Documents 
0516 CIA Documents, 1961 –1968. 118 frames. 
Major Topics: RAM; Republic of New Africa; anti–Vietnam War movement; Williams’s 
extradition to North Carolina; Martin Sostre; urban riots. 
0634 CIA Documents, 1962 –1968. 133 frames. 
Major Topics: Urban riots; RAM; SNCC; armed self-defense; H. Rap Brown; PRC; 
banning of The Crusader by U.S. Postal Service; Republic of New Africa; “Radio 
Free Dixie”; Cuba; forged issue of The Crusader. 
 
Group 2, Series 4: Government Files, 1951–1981 cont. 
Subseries 4: IRS Documents 
0767 IRS Documents, 1962 –1972. 129 frames. 
Major Topics: Finances; income taxes; Williams’s extradition to North Carolina. 
0896 IRS Records, 1969 –[1974]. 31 frames. 
Major Topic: Income taxes. 
0927 IRS Files, 1972–1973.  21 frames. 
Major Topic: Income taxes.


--- PAGE 56 ---
Frame No. 
 
 28
 
Group 2, Series 4: Government Files, 1951–1981 cont. 
Subseries 5: Michigan State Police Documents 
0948 Michigan State Police Documents, 1968 –1971. 16 frames. 
Major Topic: Surveillance of Williams. 
0964 Michigan State Police Documents, 1969.  100 frames. 
Major Topics: Williams’s extradition to North Carolina; Republic of New Africa. 
Reel 24 
Group 2, Series 4: Government Files, 1951–1981 cont. 
Subseries 6: Post Office Documents 
0001 Post Office Documents, 1967 –1968. 37 frames. 
Major Topic: Williams v. O’Brien (banning of The Crusader by U.S. Postal Service). 
 
Group 2, Series 4: Government Files, 1951–1981 cont. 
Subseries 7: State Department Documents 
0038 State Department Documents, 1960 –1975. 101 frames. 
Major Topics: Williams compared to Malcolm X; “Radio Free Dixie”; Williams v.  
Trans World Airlines; PRC. 
0139 State Department Documents, 1961 –1971. 9 frames. 
0148 State Department Documents, 1961–1973.  92 frames. 
Major Topics: Williams compared to Malcolm X; Williams’s return to United States; 
PRC. 
0240 State Department Documents, [1960], 1967 –1972. 30 frames. 
Major Topic: Cuba. 
0270 State Department Documents, 1968–1969.  45 frames. 
0315 State Department Documents, Justice Department Documents, and Freedom of 
Information Act Correspondence, 1968–1980. 65 frames. 
Major Topics: Senate Internal Security Subcommittee testimony; Williams in 
Tanzania; passport for Williams to return to United States; RAM. 
 
Group 2, Series 4: Government Files, 1951–1981 cont. 
Subseries 8: Treasury Department Files 
0380 Treasury Department Files, 1967 –1981. 20 frames. 
Major Topic: Banning of The Crusader by U.S. Postal Service. 
 
Group 2, Series 5: Lake County, Michigan, 1977–1994 
0400 Lake County, Michigan, Miscellaneous Clippings, 1948, 1952.  5 frames. 
Major Topic: Percy Langster. 
0405 Lake County, Michigan, Community –Police Conflict, 1977–1983. 132 frames. 
0537 Lake County, Michigan, Empowerment Zone, [1991], 1994.  44 frames.


--- PAGE 57 ---
Frame No. 
 
 29
Group 2, Series 6: Memorials, 1996 
0581 Obituaries, Memorials, 1996.  24 frames. 
0605 Letters of Condolence, 1996.  24 frames. 
Principal Correspondents: Jan Bailey; Yoriko Nakajima; Betty Anderson; Vicki 
Garvin; Larry Lawrence; Kip Waldo; Qi Huai Yuan; Louis Farrakhan; Jackie 
Vaughn III. 
0629 Memorial Clippings, 1996.  11 frames. 
0640 Memorial Materials, [Obituaries], 1996. 56 frames. 
 
Group 2, Series 7: Personal, 1961–1996 
0696 Ron Karenga Book, Draft of Section on Williams, [1979].  44 frames. 
Major Topics: Armed self-defense; revolutionary violence. 
0740 Personal, Tim Tyson Manuscript, Undated.  43 frames. 
0783 Biographical Material, [Memorials, Obituaries, Scholarly Articles], [1984, 1992 –
1999]. 107 frames. 
0890 Financial Statements, 1961–1969.  10 frames. 
0900 Contracts and Agreements [and Other Correspondence], 1961–1986.  44 frames. 
Major Topics: Lake County Employment and Training Program; Williams’s protest 
regarding motor home; finances; Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case; 
Progressive Labor Party. 
Principal Correspondent: Robert F. Williams. 
0944 Center for Chinese Studies, University of Michigan Fellowship, 1970 –1973.  
16 frames. 
Principal Correspondents: Robert F. Williams; Rhoads Murphey. 
0960 Personal, Miscellaneous, 1960–1997.  8 frames. 
0968 Personal, Miscellaneous, 1965–1983.  38 frames. 
Major Topics: Southern Organizing Committee for Economic and Social Justice; Ho 
Chi Minh; Afro-American Marxist-Leninists Abroad. 
Principal Correspondent: Anne Braden. 
1006 Personal, Notes, Correspondence, and Clippings, 1969–1975. 36 frames. 
Major Topics: Senate Internal Security Subcommittee; Washington, D.C., City 
Council resolution saluting Williams; Monroe, North Carolina, kidnapping case; 
FBI; Socialist Workers Party; Republic of New Africa. 
Reel 25 
Group 2, Series 7: Personal, 1961–1996 cont. 
0001 Miscellaneous Personal Material, 1981 –1990. 64 frames. 
Major Topics: Travel to Libya; Michigan Department of Civil Rights; Jesse Helms; 
Israel. 
Principal Correspondents: Robert F. Williams; Gwendolyn Midlo Hall; James Ingram; 
Melissa Zakiya El. 
0065 Miscellaneous Personal Material, 1995–1996.  46 frames. 
Major Topics: Williams’s reinstatement by NAACP; Mabel Williams’s retirement as 
project director for St. Ann’s Lake County Meals and Human Services; NAACP. 
0111 Poetry, 1983 –1984, 1986. 14 frames.


--- PAGE 58 ---
Frame No. 
 
 30
0125 Personal, Writings, 1993.  27 frames. 
Major Topics: Gun control; PRC. 
0152 Personal, Memoir Manuscript, Undated.  29 frames. 
Major Topics: Ho Chi Minh; Vietnam War; Ernesto “Che” Guevara; 1965 Watts riot; 
Cuba. 
 
Group 2, Series 8: Political Organizations, [1960]–1984 
0181 AD-NIP Party [African Descendants Nationalist Independence Partition Party], 
[1960–1973]. 109 frames. 
0290 Committee to Aid the Monroe Defendants [and Socialist Workers Party], 1962–
1975. 64 frames. 
0354 Spartacist League, 1978–1984. 120 frames. 
 
Group 2, Series 9: Press Releases and Publicity, 1963–1985 
0474 Press Relations, 1963 –1985. 130 frames. 
Major Topics: Committee to Aid the Monroe Defendants; Mao Tse-tung’s statement 
on civil rights movement; Williams’s return to United States; Monroe, North 
Carolina, freedom movement; Republic of New Africa; Williams’s extradition to 
North Carolina; National Alliance Against Racism and Political Repression; 
Michigan Civil Rights Leadership Day; U.S.–China Peoples Friendship 
Association. 
0604 Speaking Engagements, 1972 –1984. 35 frames. 
0639 Speaking Engagements, Publicity, 1976–1979.  82 frames. 
0721 News Releases, Speeches, and Notes, 1979–1983 and Undated.  65 frames. 
Major Topics: Ronald Reagan; PRC; Head Start program; Lake County, Michigan, 
police; Moral Majority; Mao Tse-tung; drug trade; Cuba. 
0786 Speeches and Press Releases, Undated.  37 frames. 
Major Topics: Calvin Cunningham case; PRC; George Bush’s use of word “liberal”; 
Confederate flag; senior citizens; John Brown Society. 
 
Group 2, Series 10: Print and Broadcast Material, 1965–1991 
0823 Printed Material, The Crusader, 1980. 127 frames. 
Major Topics: Lake County, Michigan, social conditions and schools; Haitian 
refugees; Ronald Reagan; drug trade; Cuba; Moral Majority; Mao Tse-tung; 
migration of industry to southern states. 
0950 “Radio Free Dixie,” 1965 and Undated. 56 frames. 
Major Topics: U.S.–China Peoples Friendship Association; PRC; U.S. Marine Corps; 
Monroe, North Carolina, freedom movement; Williams’s escape from United 
States; CPUSA in Cuba; Republic of New Africa; Williams’s extradition to North 
Carolina. 
1006 Radio Transcript, “Like It Is,” November 10, 1991. 8 frames. 
Major Topics: Interview with Walter Sisulu, deputy president of African National 
Congress; interview with Williams on Monroe, North Carolina, freedom 
movement and time in exile. 
1014 
Asahi Journal, 1970. 7 frames.


--- PAGE 59 ---
Frame No. 
 
 31
Group 2, Series 11: Photographs, [Undated] 
1021 Photographs, Vietnam, [Undated].  3 frames. 
1024 Photographs, Africa and Cuba, [Undated]. 4 frames. 
1028 Photographs, China, Official and Formal Groups, [Undated]. 12 frames. 
Reel 26 
Group 2, Series 11: Photographs, [Undated] cont. 
0001 Photographs, China, Informal Groups, [Undated].  11 frames. 
0012 Photographs, Miscellaneous and Unidentified, [Undated]. 9 frames. 
 
Group 2, Series 12: Petitions, 1970–1973 
0021 Postcards [from Japan] regarding Williams’s Extradition to North Carolina, 1973. 
16 frames. 
0037 Letters to President Nixon and to Stephen Fleck [from Japanese Committee for 
the Defense of the Life and Fundamental Human Rights of Robert F. Williams, 
regarding Williams’s Extradition to North Carolina], 1971–1972. 6 frames. 
Principal Correspondents: Tohoru Takahashi; Yoriko Nakajima. 
0043 Petition [from Japanese Committee for the Defense of the Life and Fundamental 
Human Rights of Robert F. Williams, regarding Williams’s Extradition to North 
Carolina]. Role 1, 1970. 29 frames. 
0072 Petition [from Japanese Committee for the Defense of the Life and Fundamental 
Human Rights of Robert F. Williams, regarding Williams’s Extradition to North 
Carolina]. Role 2, 1970. 44 frames. 
0116 Petition [from Japanese Committee for the Defense of the Life and Fundamental 
Human Rights of Robert F. Williams, regarding Williams’s Extradition to North 
Carolina]. Role 3, 1970. 44 frames. 
0160 Petition [from Japanese Committee for the Defense of the Life and Fundamental 
Human Rights of Robert F. Williams, regarding Williams’s Extradition to North 
Carolina]. Role 4, 1970. 45 frames. 
0205 Petition [from Japanese Committee for the Defense of the Life and Fundamental 
Human Rights of Robert F. Williams, regarding Williams’s Extradition to North 
Carolina]. Role 5, 1971. 45 frames. 
0250 Petition [from Japanese Committee for the Defense of the Life and Fundamental 
Human Rights of Robert F. Williams, regarding Williams’s Extradition to North 
Carolina]. Role 6, 1971. 45 frames. 
0295 Petition [from Japanese Committee for the Defense of the Life and Fundamental 
Human Rights of Robert F. Williams, regarding Williams’s Extradition to North 
Carolina]. Role 8, 1971. 62 frames. 
0357 Petition [from Japanese Committee for the Defense of the Life and Fundamental 
Human Rights of Robert F. Williams, regarding Williams’s Extradition to North 
Carolina]. Role 9, 1971. 42 frames. 
0399 Petitions [from Japanese Committee for the Defense of the Life and Fundamental 
Human Rights of Robert F. Williams, regarding Williams’s Extradition to North 
Carolina]. Role 11, 1971. 47 frames.


--- PAGE 60 ---
33
PRINCIPAL CORRESPONDENTS INDEX 
 
The following index is a guide to the major correspondents in this microform publication. The 
first number after each entry refers to the reel, while the four-digit number following the colon 
refers to the frame number at which a particular file folder containing correspondence by the 
person begins. Hence 3: 0198 directs the researcher to the folder that begins at Frame 0198 of 
Reel 3. By referring to the Reel Index, which constitutes the initial section of this guide, the 
researcher will find the folder title, inclusive dates, and a list of Major Topics and Principal 
Correspondents, arranged in the order in which they appear on the film. 
 
Acevedo, Ramon 
3: 0198, 0369, 0797 
Ahmad, Muhammad 
16: 0031 
Allen, Ernie 
2: 0120, 0247, 0384 
Anderson, Betty 
24: 0605 
Anderson, Charles 
1: 0437 
Appleton, Clyde 
1: 0613, 0883; 2: 0120, 0247, 0823 
Austin, Jodie Vernon 
15: 0204 
Bailey, Jan 
24: 0605 
Baraka, Amina 
15: 0706 
Baraka, Amiri 
15: 0476, 0706 
Barksdale, Marcellus C. 
15: 0784–0825 
Bayer, Dick 
1: 0808 
Belfrage, Cedric 
2: 0612–0644 
Bergman, Pat 
15: 0895 
Bergman, Walter 
15: 0895 
Berry, Wilford Lee 
1: 0437–0537 
Bingham, Alfred 
3: 0286, 0561 
Boardman, John 
1: 0300 
Boutelle, Paul B. 
4: 0676 
Braden, Anne 
24: 0968 
Braden, Carl 
15: 0001, 0110 
Brooks, Paul 
1: 0259 
Brother Imari 
see Henry, Richard B. 
Brown, Roy 
3: 0561, 0689, 0916–0947 
Bryant, Walter 
14: 0941 
Byers, Merle E. 
1: 0437 
Campbell, Arthur L. 
13: 0911; 16: 0166 
Carles, Reginald E. 
3: 0916–0947; 4: 0250, 0509 
Chauncey, Coleman J. 
15: 0476, 0627–0825, 1011 
Chavis, Ben 
15: 0204


--- PAGE 61 ---
34
Clarke, John Henrik 
5: 0125 
Cobb, Calvin 
3: 0561, 0797 
Cohen, Robert Carl 
2: 0644; 3: 0947; 4: 0001, 0149; 
15: 0001 
Conyers, John, Jr.  
4: 0540 
Cunningham, Calvin 
13: 0756–0911 
Current, Gloster B. 
1: 0300 
Darby, Charles 
3: 0474 
Daughtry, Herbert 
15: 0706 
Deitrich, Paul 
1: 0259 
Douglas, Christopher 
4: 0565 
Du Bois, Shirley Graham 
2: 0743 
Edwards, H. W. 
2: 0053 
Ezell, Susan 
15: 0347 
Farrakhan, Louis 
24: 0605 
Feeney, Joan V. 
15: 0278 
Feuerwerker, Albert 
15: 0065 
Forman, James 
4: 0296 
Fraser, Robert A., Jr. 
1: 0235 
Garvin, Vicki 
15: 0110, 0555–0593, 1011; 16: 0011, 
0062, 0124; 24: 0605 
Gerlach, Talitha 
3: 0474 
Gibson, Richard 
1: 0437; 2: 0001–0053, 0187–0247, 
0384–0823; 3: 0001–0797; 4: 0001, 
0094–0208, 0565 
Goodman, Ernest 
15: 0989 
Grant, Catherine 
15: 0347 
Grant, Shurli 
2: 0743; 3: 0107–0198, 0561; 4: 0001, 
0094, 0208 
Grattan, Wilbur 
2: 0743; 3: 0058 
Green, Berta 
1: 0613 
Green, Gary 
1: 0088 
Greenwood, Frank 
2: 0187–0247; 3: 0107 
Haffner, Walter S. 
1: 0348–0437 
Hall, Gwendolyn Midlo 
4: 0472, 0888; 5: 0001; 15: 0065–0204, 
0443, 0706; 16: 0124; 25: 0001 
Henry, Laurence 
2: 0332–0384, 0526; 4: 0001 
Henry, Milton 
2: 0332; 3: 0633; 4: 0472 
Henry, Richard B. 
2: 0428, 0559; 4: 0399 
Hicks, Calvin 
1: 0259 
Hill, Robert A. 
15: 0895 
Holt, Len 
1: 0300; 2: 0743; 3: 0689 
Huang, Hunter 
15: 0443 
Ingram, James 
25: 0001 
Jackson, James 
15: 0784 
Jackson, William K. 
1: 0537 
James, C. L. R. 
4: 0296 
James, C. L. R., Mrs. 
1: 0883 
James, Johnny E. 
3: 0689 
Jones, LeRoi 
1: 0123, 0437 
Kaffke, Roberto 
4: 0149 
Kenyatta, Charles X. 
3: 0441 
King, Slater H. 
1: 0703


--- PAGE 62 ---
35
Kitazawa, Yoko 
4: 0399, 0758 
Knight, Rod 
4: 0296 
Kochiyama, Mary 
4: 0296–0399, 0509, 0623, 0888; 
15: 0627–0706; 16: 0124 
Kunstler, William M. 
15: 0065 
Kurita, Akiko 
15: 0065 
Lawrence, John M. 
4: 0758 
Lawrence, Larry 
15: 0825; 24: 0605 
Lee, V. T. 
2: 0743; 3: 0369, 0561; 5: 0235; 
15: 0476 
Lewis, Bill 
2: 0644; 4: 0071 
Lowe, Richard A. 
1: 0235 
Lynn, Conrad J. 
1: 0235, 0300–0950; 2: 0001–0053, 
0559, 0743; 3: 0058, 0198, 0474–
0633; 4: 0296–0363, 0472, 0540–
0565, 0758; 15: 0706 
Mahony, Daniel L. 
3: 0369 
Mallory, Willie Mae 
1: 0437, 0613; 2: 0001, 0714; 3: 0561, 
0947; 14: 0808, 0941 
Marzani, Carl 
15: 0001 
May, Timothy J. 
2: 0559; 3: 0198 
Mayfield, Julian 
1: 0348, 0808–0883; 3: 0001; 4: 0296; 
14: 0808 
McKissick, Floyd B. 
4: 0565 
McMillan, Joseph H. 
15: 0895 
Mitchell, Charlene 
15: 0204 
Miyata, Noboru 
5: 0125 
Mizui, Shizuo 
4: 0094 
Mola, Laura 
15: 1007 
Moore, Audley 
3: 0474 
More, Carlos 
2: 0526; 3: 0058–0107, 0286; 14: 0941 
Mosley, Thomas W. 
15: 0627 
Muhammad, Akbar 
2: 0743 
Mungo, Ray 
3: 0633, 0916 
Murphey, Rhoads 
4: 0623; 24: 0944 
Murray, Madalyn 
1: 0950 
Muto, Ichiyo 
4: 0758 
Myers, Andrew H. 
16: 0204 
Nakajima, Yoriko 
1: 0300, 0883; 2: 0247–0458, 0743; 
3: 0797; 4: 0861; 5: 0075–0150; 
14: 0941; 15: 0278–0347; 24: 0605; 
26: 0037 
Newton, Huey P. 
7: 0367 
Olson, Anne 
1: 0808–0883; 2: 0053–0120, 0247–
0332, 0559, 0823; 3: 0689, 0947; 
14: 0739–0808, 0941 
Olson, Vernal 
1: 0437, 0703; 2: 0120; 14: 0739 
O’Reilly, Kenneth 
15: 0784 
Parker, Viola 
3: 0198, 0947 
Perry, Albert E. 
1: 0259, 0437, 0808; 3: 0369 
Plummer, Al 
3: 0689–0797; 4: 0250 
Polk, Bradley 
4: 0208 
Price, Duane 
2: 0743 
Quinn, Gerald 
1: 0300 
Ransom, Mildred M. 
16: 0204


--- PAGE 63 ---
36
Reddick, L. D. 
5: 0235 
Redman, Robert C. 
15: 1002 
Reece, Thelma 
5: 0001; 15: 0001, 0110–0204 
Salas, Jo 
1: 0047, 0703–0808 
Salisbury, Harrison E. 
4: 0676 
Sanders, Tom 
1: 0613 
Sihanouk, Norodom 
3: 0058 
Simanga, Michael 
15: 0825 
Simpson, David 
15: 0278 
Skinner, Susan 
15: 0706 
Sodei, Rinjiro 
4: 0861–0888; 5: 0125 
Sparks, Connie Williams 
15: 1011 
Stanford, Max 
3: 0001 
Strong, Anna Louise 
4: 0250 
Suzuki, Sunao 
15: 0001 
Takahashi, Taketomo 
4: 0758 
Takahashi, Tohoru 
15: 0204; 26: 0037 
Tripp, Luke 
16: 0204 
Tyson, Timothy B. 
15: 0593; 16: 0062 
Vander Jagt, Guy 
15: 0784–0825, 1011; 16: 0097 
Vaughn, Jackie, III 
24: 0605 
Waldo, Kip 
24: 0605 
Warner, Ila 
16: 0011, 0097–0124 
Watson, John 
3: 0001 
Weber, Edward 
1: 0883 
White, Gloria Jean 
13: 0796–0820, 0954; 16: 0166 
Whiting, Allen S. 
4: 0540–0565; 5: 0001 
Williams, Hosea L. 
15: 0410 
Williams, James H. 
1: 0437–0613 
Williams, John Chalmers 
2: 0458; 16: 0166 
Williams, Mabel 
2: 0120, 0332, 0559, 0644; 3: 0107, 
0797; 4: 0565–0813, 0888; 5: 0001; 
15: 0110, 0593–0627, 0784–0895, 
1011; 16: 0011–0204 
Williams, Robert F. 
1: 0001–0164, 0300–0883; 2: 0053–
0714, 0823; 3: 0001–0797, 0947; 
4: 0001–0250, 0399, 0509, 0565–
0888; 5: 0001–0075, 0150; 
13: 0756–0954; 14: 0739–0808, 
0941; 15: 0110–0204, 0347–0533, 
0555–0989, 1011; 16: 0011–0204; 
24: 0900–0944; 25: 0001 
Wilson, Marilyn 
15: 0110 
Winfrey, Oprah 
16: 0166 
Wood, Shirley 
3: 0369 
Worthy, William 
1: 0348 
Young, Pete 
2: 0612–0644, 0823 
Yuan, Qi Huai 
24: 0605 
Zakiya El, Melissa 
25: 0001 
Zamora, Antonio 
15: 0443


--- PAGE 64 ---
37
SUBJECT INDEX 
 
The following index is a guide to the major topics, personalities, and organizations in this 
microform publication. The first number after each entry refers to the reel, while the four-digit 
number following the colon refers to the frame number at which a particular file folder containing 
information on the subject begins. Hence, 24: 0315 directs the researcher to the folder that 
begins at Frame 0315 of Reel 24. By referring to the Reel Index, which constitutes the initial 
section of this guide, the researcher will find the folder title, inclusive dates, and a list of Major 
Topics and Principal Correspondents, arranged in the order in which they appear on the film. 
Unless otherwise stated, all mentions of “Williams” refer to Robert F. Williams. 
 
Abortion 
State of North Carolina v. Perry 
10: 0488–0621 
Africa 
African National Congress 25: 1006 
Congo 10: 0734 
Du Bois, W. E. B., on 5: 0889 
Ethiopian drought crisis 15: 0784 
Liberation Committee for Africa 10: 0816 
Libya 14: 0721 
Nigeria 15: 0706 
Organization of African Unity 4: 0399 
Rhodesia 7: 0088; 13: 0511 
South Africa 10: 0488–0621; 25: 1006 
Tanzania 24: 0315 
Williams’s travels in 4: 0001; 6: 0001; 
9: 0213; 11: 0081; 14: 0066; 
17: 0863; 18: 0001 
African American Captive Nation 
14: 0808 
African American Party of National 
Liberation 
6: 0828; 12: 0787 
African Descendants Nationalist 
Independence Partition (AD-NIP) Party 
25: 0181 
African National Congress 
25: 1006 
Afro-American Marxist-Leninists Abroad 
24: 0968 
Afro-Asian–Latin American People’s 
Solidarity Movement 
9: 0608; 13: 0583 
Airlines 
TWA 5: 0150; 7: 0001; 9: 0318, 0837; 
14: 0394; 18: 0165, 0455; 24: 0038 
Alabama 
Birmingham 
civil rights demonstrations 5: 0498 
Sixteenth Street Baptist Church 
12: 0446 
Dallas County Independent Free Voters 
League 9: 0001 
Montgomery bus boycott 5: 0604; 
6: 0001 
Selma voting rights demonstrations 
13: 0157 
Albany Movement 
freedom movement 6: 0771, 0916 
Ali, Muhammad 
9: 0001; 11: 0081 
American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) 
9: 0132; 22: 0830 
American Federation for Negro Affairs 
10: 0001 
American Indians 
7: 0001 
Anticommunism 
red-baiting of Black Power movement 
9: 0132–0213


--- PAGE 65 ---
38
Antipoverty programs 
Head Start 25: 0721 
Anti–Vietnam War movement 
2: 0247, 0743; 6: 0205; 7: 0160; 
10: 0001; 11: 0081; 13: 0608; 
23: 0516 
Armed forces 
Marine Corps 14: 0475; 16: 0289; 
25: 0950 
see also Military personnel 
Armed self-defense 
see Self-defense 
Arrests 
Donaldson, Ivanhoe 6: 0828 
RAM members 3: 0001 
Taylor, Benjamin 6: 0828 
Williams 7: 0001; 9: 0318; 15: 0533; 
18: 0165 
Worthy, William 1: 0348 
Arts 
6: 0703; 7: 0442 
Asahi Journal 
25: 1014 
Asia 
see China, People’s Republic of 
see Japan 
see Thailand, Patriotic Front of 
see Vietnam War 
Asian Americans 
4: 0399 
Assassinations 
attempts to kill Williams 10: 0905 
Dahmer, Vernon 5: 0734 
Evers, Medgar 1: 0613 
Kennedy, John F. 1: 0703; 12: 0527 
King, Martin Luther, Jr. 3: 0441, 0689–
0797; 4: 0071 
Lumumba, Patrice 10: 0905 
Malcolm X 6: 0828; 10: 0058 
Moore, Harry T. 10: 0488 
RAM plot 3: 0001; 14: 0013 
see also Murder 
Association for Grand Jury Action, Inc. 
v. Staggers 
5: 0075 
Austin, Richard H. 
9: 0470 
Baldwin, Michigan 
Lake County Jail 15: 0706 
schools 14: 0640 
Baptist Church 
Sixteenth Street Baptist Church, 
Birmingham, Alabama 12: 0446 
Baraka, Amiri 
conviction for resisting arrest 15: 0443 
see also Jones, LeRoi 
Bates, Daisy 
10: 0244 
Bevel, Diane Nash 
5: 0347 
Birmingham, Alabama 
civil rights demonstrations 5: 0498 
Sixteenth Street Baptist Church 
12: 0446 
Black Action Movement 
7: 0160 
Black America Cultural Committee 
2: 0644 
Black Arts Festival 
7: 0442 
Black liberation front 
see Committee for the Establishment of 
a Black Liberation Front 
Black Liberation Party 
7: 0367 
Black Liberation Week 
7: 0212 
Black Panther Party 
1: 0164; 3: 0947; 4: 0208–0250; 
7: 0367; 8: 0360; 9: 0280; 18: 0284 
Black Revolutionary Party 
9: 0608 
Black Student Voice 
8: 0287–0360 
Black united front 
8: 0287 
see also National Black United Front 
Black Youth Liberation Movement 
8: 0287 
Bombs and bombings 
Sixteenth Street Baptist Church, 
Birmingham, Alabama 12: 0446 
Boryszewski and Kesel v. U.S. Supreme 
Court 
5: 0075 
Boston, Massachusetts 
busing crisis 7: 0367


--- PAGE 66 ---
39
Boycotts 
Jackson, Mississippi, stores 8: 0829 
Monroe, North Carolina, schools 
12: 0446 
Montgomery, Alabama, buses 5: 0604; 
6: 0001 
Braden, Carl 
8: 0360; 10: 0488 
Brandeis University 
4: 0565; 5: 0150 
Brath, Elombe 
15: 0555 
Briggs, Cyril 
8: 0360 
Brown, H. Rap 
8: 0360; 23: 0634 
John Brown Society 
7: 0442; 25: 0786 
Building African American Leadership 
Conference 
15: 0825 
Bus boycott 
Montgomery, Alabama 5: 0604; 6: 0001 
Bush, George 
25: 0786 
Busing 
Boston, Massachusetts 7: 0367 
Butler, Norman 3X 
10: 0058 
California 
Watts riot (1965) 2: 0247; 13: 0366–
0441, 0583–0608; 17: 0792; 
25: 0152 
Campbell, Crispin 
5: 0001 
Caribbean area 
Dominican Republic 6: 0828 
Haiti 25: 0823 
politics in 4: 0296 
see also Cuba 
Carmichael, Stokely 
3: 0058; 8: 0425; 10: 0001 
Castro, Fidel 
4: 0399; 6: 0916; 10: 0734–0905 
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) 
5: 0550; 21: 0100; 23: 0516–0634 
Challenge of the Congo 
by Nkrumah, Kwame, 2: 0743 
China, People’s Republic of (PRC) 
1: 0001, 0703; 2: 0458, 0644; 3: 0369; 
4: 0676–0861; 5: 0347, 0550, 0889; 
6: 0001, 0608, 0771–0828; 7: 0001–
0088, 0718; 8: 0463, 0856–0909; 
9: 0608–0645, 0755, 0771, 0892; 
11: 0081; 13: 0001, 0366; 14: 0013–
0163; 15: 0895; 16: 0097; 17: 0138, 
0399; 18: 0771; 20: 0743–0753; 
21: 0149; 22: 0148; 23: 0634; 
24: 0038, 0148; 25: 0125, 0721–
0786, 0950 
see also Cultural Revolution 
Chou En-lai 
7: 0718; 8: 0463 
Churches 
Sixteenth Street Baptist Church, 
Birmingham, Alabama 12: 0446 
Civil rights legislation 
7: 0088; 12: 0723–0913; 13: 0091–
0157, 0366; 17: 0399 
Clarksburg, Mississippi 
arrest of civil rights workers in 6: 0828 
Cleage, Albert 
3: 0198 
Cleaver, Eldridge 
14: 0231 
Coal miners 
Hazard County, Kentucky 12: 0078 
Cohen, Robert Carl 
9: 0666 
Colgan, Thomas E. 
1: 0703 
Colleges and universities 
Brandeis University 4: 0565; 5: 0150 
historically black 14: 0001 
Ritsumeikan University 4: 0094 
University of Michigan 4: 0623; 9: 0608–
0645; 22: 0889; 24: 0944 
Williams’s speaking visits 4: 0565 
Committee for the Establishment of a 
Black Liberation Front 
2: 0247 
Committee of Black Americans for Truth 
About the Middle East 
4: 0676; 19: 0570 
Committee of Concerned Asian Scholars 
7: 0367


--- PAGE 67 ---
40
Committee to Aid the Monroe 
Defendants 
1: 0259; 7: 0212; 16: 0220; 19: 0146; 
25: 0290, 0474 
Communism 
1: 0047; 2: 0247; 5: 0734; 6: 0001, 0916 
see also Anticommunism 
see also Communist Party, China 
see also Communist Party, USA 
Communist Party, China 
5: 0889 
Communist Party, United States of 
America (CPUSA) 
1: 0883; 2: 0187, 0559; 4: 0399; 
8: 0360, 0909; 9: 0001; 22: 0001; 
25: 0950 
Confederate flag 
15: 0555; 25: 0786 
Conference on African American families 
15: 0895 
Congo 
10: 0734 
Congress, U.S. 
Association for Grand Jury Action, Inc. 
v. Staggers 5: 0075 
see also House Un-American Activities 
Committee 
see also Senate Internal Security 
Subcommittee 
Crime 
Lake County, Michigan 14: 0419 
see also Assassinations 
see also Lynching 
see also Murder 
see also Rape cases 
Criminal justice system 
5: 0150, 0347; 6: 0558; 13: 0441; 
14: 0231; 15: 0443 
see also Crime 
see also Law enforcement 
see also Police 
see also Prisons 
The Crusader 
forged issue 2: 0384, 0823; 9: 0001; 
11: 0081; 14: 0941; 23: 0634 
issues of 10: 0244–0905; 11: 0001–
0081; 25: 0823 
public reaction to 1: 0613, 0950; 
2: 0247; 3: 0474 
publishing of 2: 0559 
subscription lists 11: 0294 
U.S. Postal Service ban on 3: 0107–
0198; 6: 0001, 0771–0828; 7: 0367; 
8: 0909; 9: 0080; 11: 0081; 
20: 0743; 21: 0514; 23: 0442, 0634; 
24: 0001, 0380 
Crusaders Association for Relief and 
Enlightenment 
11: 0001 
Cuba 
1: 0245, 0703–0883; 2: 0187, 0332, 
0458–0526, 0644; 5: 0677, 0734; 
6: 0771; 8: 0448, 0772, 0909; 
9: 0001–0080, 0369, 0547, 0837; 
10: 0369–0905; 11: 0081, 0490; 
12: 0394, 0609; 14: 0066, 0419, 
0685; 16: 0401–0466, 0949; 
19: 0087, 0645; 23: 0634; 24: 0240; 
25: 0152, 0721, 0823 
see also Fair Play for Cuba Committee 
Cultural Revolution 
2: 0458, 0559, 0714; 4: 0094; 8: 0909; 
9: 0080, 0450; 11: 0081; 14: 0163, 
0941; 15: 0627; 19: 0087 
Cunningham, Calvin 
murder case 13: 0756–0954; 14: 0475; 
15: 0555; 16: 0062; 25: 0786 
Dahmer, Vernon 
5: 0734 
Dallas County Independent Free Voters 
League 
9: 0001 
Deacons for Defense and Justice 
2: 0187; 13: 0257 
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea 
3: 0001 
Demonstrations and protests 
Albany Movement 6: 0771, 0916 
anti–Vietnam War 2: 0743 
Birmingham, Alabama 5: 0498 
Chinese People’s Rally for World Peace 
6: 0001; 15: 0895 
Chinese students 15: 1011 
civil rights 12: 0211–0264, 0446, 0723–
0851 
March on Washington for Jobs and 
Freedom 12: 0446; 13: 0001 
Meredith March against Fear 9: 0001 
Monroe, North Carolina 19: 0390


--- PAGE 68 ---
41
Montgomery, Alabama, bus boycott 
5: 0604; 6: 0001 
Peking, China—to support black 
freedom struggle 8: 0463 
in Philippines 8: 0463 
Selma, Alabama 13: 0157 
regarding Williams’s motor home 
24: 0900 
see also Riots and disorders 
see also Sit-ins 
see also Strikes 
Deng Xiaoping 
7: 0001 
Detroit, Michigan 
mayoral candidacy of Richard H. Austin 
9: 0470 
New Detroit Committee 3: 0198 
police 9: 0920; 10: 0001 
Riot (1967) 3: 0198 
Dodge Revolutionary Union Movement 
8: 0287 
Dominican Republic 
U.S. invasion of 6: 0828 
Donaldson, Ivanhoe 
6: 0828 
Draft resistance 
5: 0075 
Drought 
Ethiopia 15: 0784 
Drug trafficking 
25: 0721, 0823 
see also Narcotics 
Du Bois, W. E. B. 
5: 0889; 11: 0001 
Economic development 
Lake County, Michigan, empowerment 
zone 24: 0537 
see also Urban development 
Education 
9: 0758; 10: 0244, 0488, 0905 
see also Head Start program 
Elections, 1960 
10: 0488, 0816 
Employment 
10: 0488, 0816; 14: 0544; 15: 0825; 
16: 0289; 24: 0900 
see also Job training 
see also Labor organizations 
see also Labor unions 
see also Wages and salaries 
Empowerment zone 
Lake County, Michigan 24: 0537 
Ethiopia 
drought crisis 15: 0784 
Evans, Ahmed 
7: 0160 
Evers, Charles 
12: 0723 
Evers, Medgar 
1: 0613 
Exile 
Williams’s escape from United States 
1: 0300, 0808; 2: 0559; 5: 0604; 
6: 0001; 8: 0748; 11: 0001; 
16: 0220, 0559–0617, 0822–0949; 
17: 0001, 0512; 19: 0484; 25: 0950 
Williams’s return to United States 
1: 0164; 3: 0107–0369, 0474–0689, 
0916; 4: 0250–0363; 6: 0001, 0828; 
9: 0132, 0280–0423, 0470, 0521, 
0594; 11: 0081; 14: 0231, 0383; 
17: 0792–0863; 18: 0076; 19: 0146; 
20: 0743–0753; 21: 0215–0311; 
22: 0097–0225, 0731–0889; 
23: 0153–0214; 24: 0148; 25: 0474 
Extradition 
of Williams to North Carolina 1: 0088; 
4: 0472, 0540–0565, 0758, 0888; 
5: 0001–0075; 6: 0771; 7: 0160, 
0367; 9: 0369–0403, 0470, 0521, 
0578, 0608, 0666, 0694–0721; 
14: 0013, 0475–0621; 15: 0065; 
18: 0284, 0577–0670, 0880; 
19: 0682; 20: 0753; 22: 0488, 0889; 
23: 0516, 0767, 0964; 25: 0474, 
0950; 26: 0021–0399 
Fair Play for Cuba Committee 
1: 0613; 10: 0621, 0905; 16: 0466; 
19: 0838; 21: 0514; 22: 1025 
Farrakhan, Louis 
15: 0593 
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) 
9: 0666; 11: 0490; 12: 0527; 14: 0383–
0394; 15: 0110; 16: 0220–0949; 
17: 0001–0863; 18: 0001–0880; 
19: 0001–0945; 20: 0001–0938; 
21: 0001–0952; 22: 0001–1025; 
23: 0001–0494; 24: 1006 
Federal Fugitive Act 
2: 0332


--- PAGE 69 ---
42
Films 
Monroe, North Carolina, kissing case 
15: 1007 
Finances 
23: 0767; 24: 0900 
Flags 
Confederate States of America 
15: 0555; 25: 0786 
Florida 
Cuban refugees in 5: 0677 
Foreign assets control 
7: 0457 
Foreign policy, U.S. 
1: 0703; 4: 0676; 5: 0347–0498; 
6: 0608–0703, 0828; 9: 0608; 
11: 0619; 12: 0609; 13: 0257; 
15: 0476; 16: 0097 
Foreign relations 
USSR–PRC 2: 0644 
Freedom of Information Act 
correspondence 24: 0315 
Freedom Riders 
1: 0259 
Georgia 
Albany Movement 6: 0771, 0916 
Maddox, Lester 2: 0559 
Goldwater, Barry 
12: 0913 
Great Britain 
see United Kingdom 
Greenwood, Frank 
8: 0877; 13: 0206 
Gregory, Dick 
8: 0909 
Groppi, James E. 
8: 0909 
Guevara, Ernesto “Che” 
2: 0644; 3: 0198; 25: 0152 
Gun control 
25: 0125 
Haiti 
refugees 25: 0823 
Hazard, Kentucky 
coal miners’ strike 12: 0078 
Head Start program 
25: 0721 
Helms, Jesse 
25: 0001 
Henry, Milton 
9: 0920 
Highlander Folk School 
10: 0369 
Ho Chi Minh 
24: 0968; 25: 0152 
House Un-American Activities 
Committee (HUAC) 
1: 0613 
Human rights 
see People’s Association for Human 
Rights 
Hyde, Odis 
14: 0419 
If We Must Live (play) 
8: 0877; 13: 0206 
Income taxes 
23: 0767–0927 
Indians 
see American Indians 
Industry 
migration of, to southern states 25: 0823 
Intelligence services 
surveillance activities 23: 0948 
see also Central Intelligence Agency 
see also Federal Bureau of Investigation 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) 
23: 0767–0927 
International Conference for Solidarity 
with the People of Vietnam against U.S. 
Imperialist Aggression and for the 
Defense of Peace 
6: 0205; 11: 0081 
Intimidation and harassment 
5: 0498; 10: 0001–0058; 11: 0619; 
12: 0609 
Iranian hostage crisis 
15: 0476 
Islam 
see Nation of Islam 
Israel 
2: 0743; 25: 0001 
Jackson, Jimmie Lee 
13: 0257 
Jackson, Mississippi 
retail stores boycott 8: 0829 
Jackson, Wharlest 
5: 0734 
Jackson State Prison 
15: 0627


--- PAGE 70 ---
43
Japan 
Asahi Journal 25: 1014 
Japanese Committee for the Defense of 
the Life and Fundamental Human 
Rights of Robert F. Williams 1: 0088; 
18: 0771; 20: 0878; 26: 0021–0399 
Ritsumeikan University Caravan Club 
4: 0094 
student movement 4: 0149; 20: 0211 
support for Williams in 6: 0001 
Japanese Committee for the Defense of 
the Life and Fundamental Human Rights 
of Robert F. Williams 
1: 0088; 18: 0771; 20: 0878; 26: 0021–
0399 
Jim crow 
6: 0703 
Job training 
15: 0825; 24: 0900 
Johnson, Lyndon B. 
5: 0717 
Jones, LeRoi 
4: 0149 
see also Baraka, Amiri 
Karenga, Ron 
4: 0149; 24: 0696 
Kennard, Clyde 
6: 0828; 12: 0001 
Kennedy, John F. 
1: 0001, 0703; 6: 0001, 0608–0703; 
11: 0786; 12: 0078–0134, 0264, 
0527; 13: 0662; 14: 0013 
Kentucky 
Hazard coal miners’ strike 12: 0078 
Kidnapping case 
Monroe, North Carolina 1: 0088, 0259, 
0348–0437, 0613–0808; 2: 0053–
0187, 0332, 0559–0612; 4: 0001; 
5: 0150, 0235, 0347; 6: 0558, 0828–
0916; 7: 0088–0160, 0293, 0673; 
8: 0748–0772, 0877–0909; 9: 0213, 
0594, 0666, 0728, 0790–0837; 
10: 0089; 11: 0786; 12: 0134, 0394, 
0672; 13: 0001–0091, 0257; 
14: 0013–0066, 0231, 0419–0544; 
15: 0204; 16: 0220, 0747, 0949; 
17: 0001, 0271, 0627, 0863; 
18: 0670; 19: 0001, 0570; 20: 0753; 
21: 0149, 0514; 24: 0900, 1006 
King, Martin Luther, Jr. 
2: 0187; 3: 0441, 0689–0797; 4: 0071; 
6: 0001, 0828; 10: 0905; 12: 0913; 
13: 0511; 14: 0231 
Kissing case 
Monroe, North Carolina 1: 0703; 
5: 0604; 8: 0772; 15: 1007; 19: 0390 
Klunder, Bruce 
12: 0787 
Korea, Democratic People’s Republic of 
3: 0001 
Ku Klux Klan (KKK) 
1: 0300; 2: 0612; 5: 0075, 0604; 
7: 0673; 9: 0666–0694, 0837–0892; 
10: 0244; 13: 0206; 18: 0771 
Kuo Mo-Jo 
7: 0718 
Labor organizations 
Dodge Revolutionary Union Movement 
8: 0287 
League of Revolutionary Black Workers 
9: 0470 
Labor unions 
5: 0889; 9: 0280; 10: 0244–0488, 0816 
United Automobile Workers 9: 0470 
Lake County, Michigan 
crime 14: 0419 
Employment and Training Program 
24: 0900 
empowerment zone 24: 0537 
jail 15: 0706 
police 20: 0878; 24: 0405; 25: 0721 
schools 25: 0823 
social conditions 11: 0081; 25: 0823 
St. Ann’s Lake County Meals and 
Human Services 25: 0065 
Star newspaper 15: 0989 
Langster, Percy 
24: 0400 
Law enforcement 
8: 0360 
see also Federal Bureau of Investigation 
see also Police 
League of Revolutionary Black Workers 
9: 0470 
Legal cases 
Association for Grand Jury Action, Inc. 
v. Staggers 5: 0075 
Boryszewski and Kesel v. U.S. Supreme 
Court 5: 0075


--- PAGE 71 ---
44
Legal cases cont. 
Cunningham, Calvin—murder case 
13: 0756–0954; 14: 0475; 15: 0555; 
16: 0062; 25: 0786 
kidnapping case, Monroe, North 
Carolina 1: 0088, 0259, 0348–0437, 
0613–0808; 2: 0053–0187, 0332, 
0559–0612; 4: 0001; 5: 0150, 0235, 
0347; 6: 0558, 0828–0916; 7: 0088–
0160, 0293, 0673; 8: 0748–0772, 
0877–0909; 9: 0213, 0594, 0666, 
0728, 0790–0837; 10: 0089; 
11: 0786; 12: 0134, 0394, 0672; 
13: 0001–0091, 0257; 14: 0013–
0066, 0231, 0419–0544; 15: 0204; 
16: 0220, 0747, 0949; 17: 0001, 
0271, 0627, 0863; 18: 0670; 
19: 0001, 0570; 20: 0753; 21: 0149, 
0514; 24: 0900, 1006 
kissing case, Monroe, North Carolina 
1: 0703; 5: 0604; 8: 0772; 15: 1007; 
19: 0390 
Nelson, Ruby 15: 0347 
rape 3: 0689; 11: 0001; 12: 0211, 0851 
State of North Carolina v. Crowder et al. 
7: 0673 
State of North Carolina v. Perry 
10: 0488–0621 
State of North Carolina v. Williams 
1: 0883; 2: 0001; 7: 0673 
Summers, Darnell 15: 0706 
United States v. Williams 4: 0623 
Williams v. Blount 23: 0442 
Williams v. Milliken 18: 0577 
Williams v. O’Brien 24: 0001 
Williams v. Trans World Airlines 5: 0150; 
24: 0038 
Wilmington 10  7: 0241; 9: 0728 
Legal defense initiatives 
Committee to Aid the Monroe 
Defendants 1: 0259; 7: 0212; 
16: 0220; 19: 0146; 25: 0290, 0474 
Japanese Committee for the Defense of 
the Life and Fundamental Human 
Rights of Robert F. Williams 1: 0088; 
18: 0771; 20: 0878; 26: 0021–0399 
Monroe Defense Committee 1: 0259–
0300; 7: 0212; 8: 0772; 9: 0790; 
16: 0672; 19: 0146 
Mothers’ Defense Committee 1: 0883 
National Lawyers Guild 21: 0805 
Ruby Nelson Legal Defense Committee 
1: 0001, 0164 
People’s Association for Human Rights 
14: 0659, 0808; 15: 0410, 0593 
People’s Defense Committee 15: 0443 
Martin Sostre Defense Committee 
3: 0107, 0947 
Robert F. Williams Legal Defense Fund 
1: 0088 
Legislation 
civil rights 12: 0723–0913; 13: 0091–
0157, 0366; 17: 0399 
Federal Fugitive Act 2: 0332 
Michigan Lemon Law 15: 0825; 
24: 0900 
Liberation Committee for Africa 
10: 0816 
Libya 
14: 0721; 25: 0001 
Liu Ning-yi 
8: 0463 
Lumumba, Patrice 
10: 0905 
Patrice Lumumba Coalition 
15: 0555 
Lynching 
5: 0427, 0734; 6: 0608–0703; 11: 0619; 
12: 0001–0078 
Lynn, Conrad J. 
1: 0259, 0613 
Maddox, Lester 
2: 0559 
Malcolm X 
2: 0001; 6: 0828; 10: 0058; 19: 0484, 
0932; 20: 0433; 23: 0065; 24: 0038, 
0148 
Mallory, Willie Mae 
1: 0047; 5: 0347; 6: 0828; 7: 0088, 
0367; 9: 0213; 11: 0786; 12: 0134, 
0609–0672; 16: 0220 
Mansur, D. H. 
2: 0644 
Mao Tse-tung 
2: 0559; 6: 0001, 0703; 7: 0001, 0718; 
8: 0501, 0664; 11: 0081; 14: 0163; 
21: 0514; 25: 0474, 0721, 0823 
March on Washington for Jobs and 
Freedom 
12: 0446; 13: 0001


--- PAGE 72 ---
45
Marine Corps, U.S. 
14: 0475; 16: 0289; 25: 0950 
Massachusetts 
Boston busing case 7: 0367 
Brandeis University 4: 0565; 5: 0150 
Mayfield, Julian 
9: 0790 
Memorials and obituaries 
24: 0581, 0629–0640, 0783 
Meredith, James 
2: 0428; 9: 0001 
Meredith March against Fear 
9: 0001 
Michigan 
Alliance Against Repression 8: 0287 
Baldwin schools 14: 0640 
Civil Rights Leadership Day 25: 0474 
Department of Civil Rights 15: 0989; 
25: 0001 
Detroit  
mayoral race 9: 0470 
New Detriot Committee 3: 0198 
police 9: 0920; 10: 0001 
riot (1967) 3: 0198 
Jackson State Prison 15: 0627 
Lake County  
crime 14: 0419 
Employment and Training Program 
24: 0900 
empowerment zone 24: 0537 
jail 15: 0706 
police 20: 0878; 24: 0405; 25: 0721 
schools 25: 0823 
social conditions 25: 0823 
Star newspaper 15: 0989 
Lemon Law 15: 0825; 24: 0900 
North Michigan statehood movement 
15: 0476 
St. Ann’s Lake County Meals and 
Human Services 25: 0065 
state police 19: 0390–0484; 23: 0948–
0964 
University of Michigan 4: 0623; 9: 0608–
0645; 22: 0889; 24: 0944 
West Central Michigan Employment and 
Training Consortium 14: 0544 
Michigan Alliance Against Repression 
8: 0287 
Middle East 
see Committee of Black Americans for 
Truth About the Middle East 
see Iranian hostage crisis 
see Israel 
see Libya 
Military personnel 
African American 5: 0838; 6: 0608; 
11: 0786; 12: 0913; 14: 0659 
Mississippi 
Clarksburg—arrest of civil rights workers 
in 6: 0828 
civil rights workers in 12: 0913 
Freedom Democratic Party 9: 0001 
Jackson stores boycott 8: 0829 
Ruleville—shooting of civil rights 
workers 6: 0916 
Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party 
9: 0001 
Mobley, Ora 
16: 0001 
Monroe, North Carolina 
Committee to Aid the Monroe 
Defendants 1: 0259; 7: 0212; 
16: 0220; 19: 0146; 25: 0290, 0474 
freedom movement 2: 0559; 5: 0734; 
6: 0771; 11: 0490; 19: 0390; 
20: 0183, 0516; 25: 0474, 0950, 
1006 
kidnapping case 1: 0088, 0259, 0348–
0437, 0613–0808; 2: 0053–0187, 
0332, 0559–0612; 4: 0001; 5: 0150, 
0235, 0347; 6: 0558, 0828–0916; 
7: 0088–0160, 0293, 0673; 8: 0748–
0772, 0877–0909; 9: 0213, 0594, 
0666, 0728, 0790–0837; 10: 0089; 
11: 0786; 12: 0134, 0394, 0672; 
13: 0001–0091, 0257; 14: 0013–
0066, 0231, 0419–0544; 15: 0204; 
16: 0220, 0747, 0949; 17: 0001, 
0271, 0627, 0863; 18: 0670; 
19: 0001, 0570; 20: 0753; 21: 0149, 
0514; 24: 0900, 1006 
kissing case 1: 0703; 5: 0604; 8: 0772; 
15: 1007; 19: 0390 
mayoral race 8: 0735 
Monroe Defense Committee 1: 0259–
0300; 7: 0212; 8: 0772; 9: 0790; 
16: 0672; 19: 0146


--- PAGE 73 ---
46
Monroe, North Carolina cont. 
Monroe Youth Action Committee 
8: 0829 
racial discrimination in 12: 0134 
recreational facilities 14: 0001 
school boycott 12: 0446 
urban renewal plans 9: 0837; 10: 0369–
0734, 0905 
Monroe Defense Committee 
1: 0259–0300; 7: 0212; 8: 0772; 
9: 0790; 16: 0672; 19: 0146 
Monroe Youth Action Committee 
8: 0829 
Montgomery, Alabama 
bus boycott 5: 0604; 6: 0001 
Moore, Audley 
8: 0360 
Moore, Harry T. 
10: 0488 
Moral Majority 
25: 0721, 0823 
Mothers’ Defense Committee 
1: 0883 
Motor vehicles 
Michigan Lemon Law 15: 0825; 
24: 0900 
Murder 
Cunningham, Calvin, case 13: 0756–
0954; 14: 0475; 15: 0555; 16: 0062; 
25: 0786 
Jackson, Jimmie Lee 13: 0257 
Jackson, Wharlest 5: 0734 
Reeb, James 13: 0257 
Summers, Darnell, case 15: 0706 
Whittler, Phyllis 10: 0001 
Nakajima, Yoriko 
9: 0694; 18: 0771; 20: 0381 
Narcotics 
6: 0001, 0608; 11: 0081; 16: 0166; 
25: 0721, 0823 
National Alliance Against Racism and 
Political Repression 
15: 0204; 25: 0474 
National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People 
(NAACP) 
national convention (1959) 1: 0235 
national policies and organization 
5: 0604; 10: 0734; 25: 0065 
Union County, North Carolina, branch 
5: 0604; 6: 0001; 7: 0088; 8: 0727, 
0772; 9: 0837; 15: 0627; 16: 0401–
0466; 22: 0148 
Williams’s reinstatement 25: 0065 
Williams’s suspension from 1: 0235; 
8: 0735; 10: 0244–0369 
National Black Power Committee 
6: 0828 
National Black Power Conferences 
8: 0664; 9: 0213, 0920; 10: 0001 
National Black United Front 
9: 0213; 15: 0706 
National Lawyers Guild 
21: 0805 
National Rifle Association 
16: 0062, 0204 
National Student Coalition Against 
Racism 
7: 0367 
Nation of Islam 
5: 0889; 6: 0001 
Native Americans 
see American Indians 
Negroes with Guns 
Chinese translation of 8: 0501 
debate on 14: 0066 
“From Peking, I Speak Again” 5: 0734 
review of 8: 0829; 9: 0790 
royalties and reprinting 15: 0001 
translations of 2: 0428 
Nelson, Ruby 
9: 0758; 15: 0347; 24: 0405 
Ruby Nelson Legal Defense Committee 
1: 0001, 0164 
New Afrikan Independence Movement 
14: 0475 
New Afrikan People’s Organization 
14: 0475 
New Detroit Committee 
3: 0198 
New Jersey 
Newark riot (1967) 3: 0001 
Newark, New Jersey 
Riot (1967)  3: 0001 
Newspapers and periodicals 
African American 5: 0550; 6: 0608; 
11: 0081 
articles concerning Williams 8: 0727–
0909; 9: 0001–0837; 20: 0743


--- PAGE 74 ---
47
The Crusader 10: 0244–0905; 
11: 0001–0294; 25: 0823 
international 7: 0785–0848; 8: 0001–
0211 
Lake County Star 15: 0989 
Nigeria 
15: 0706 
Nixon, Richard M. 
9: 0608 
Nkrumah, Kwame 
2: 0743; 10: 0905 
Nonviolence 
5: 0427, 0604, 0889; 6: 0001; 10: 0488, 
0816–0905; 12: 0394, 0672, 0851–
0913; 13: 0511, 0662 
North American Free Trade Agreement 
(NAFTA) 
16: 0062 
North Carolina 
law enforcement 8: 0360 
State of North Carolina v. Crowder et al. 
7: 0673 
State of North Carolina v. Perry 
10: 0488–0621 
State of North Carolina v. Williams 
1: 0883 
Union County 
NAACP branch 5: 0604; 6: 0001; 
7: 0088; 8: 0727, 0772; 9: 0837; 
15: 0627; 16: 0401–0466; 
22: 0148 
schools 4: 0094; 8: 0727 
Williams’s extradition to 1: 0088; 
4: 0472, 0540–0565, 0758, 0888; 
5: 0001–0075; 6: 0771; 7: 0160, 
0367; 9: 0369–0403, 0470, 0521, 
0578, 0608, 0666, 0694–0721; 
14: 0013, 0475–0621; 15: 0065; 
18: 0284, 0577–0670, 0880; 
19: 0682; 20: 0753; 22: 0488, 0889; 
23: 0516, 0767, 0964; 25: 0474, 
0950; 26: 0021–0399 
see also Monroe, North Carolina 
North Korea 
3: 0001 
North Michigan statehood movement 
15: 0476 
Nuclear weapons 
1: 0703; 6: 0828 
Operation Freedom 
6: 0828 
Organization of African Unity 
4: 0399 
Organization of Afro-American Unity 
21: 0805 
Palestine National Liberation Movement 
6: 0828 
Passports and visas 
7: 0457; 17: 0863; 19: 0645; 24: 0315 
Patriotic Front of Thailand 
6: 0608; 8: 0463 
Peabody, Mary 
12: 0787 
Peng Chen 
7: 0718 
People’s Association for Human Rights 
14: 0659, 0808; 15: 0410, 0593 
People’s Defense Committee 
15: 0443 
People’s Republic of China (PRC) 
see China, People’s Republic of 
Perry, Albert E. 
5: 0604; 8: 0727; 10: 0369–0488, 0734 
Peru 
prisoners in 15: 0110 
Philippines 
anti–U.S. demonstrations in 8: 0463 
Police 
Detroit, Michigan 9: 0920; 10: 0001 
Lake County, Michigan 20: 0878; 
24: 0405; 25: 0721 
Michigan State Police 19: 0390–0484; 
23: 0948–0964 
see also Police brutality 
Police brutality 
5: 0604; 11: 0490, 0711–0899; 
12: 0001–0078, 0264, 0446; 
13: 0001, 0323, 0511, 0608; 
14: 0659; 15: 0533 
Political parties 
African American Party of National 
Liberation 6: 0828; 12: 0787 
African Descendants National 
Independence Partition Party 
25: 0181 
Black Liberation Party 7: 0367 
Black Panther Party 1: 0164; 3: 0947; 
4: 0208–0250; 7: 0367; 8: 0360; 
9: 0280; 18: 0284


--- PAGE 75 ---
48
Political parties cont. 
Black Revolutionary Party 9: 0608 
Communist Party, China 5: 0889 
CPUSA 1: 0883; 2: 0187, 0559; 4: 0399; 
8: 0360, 0909; 9: 0001; 22: 0001; 
25: 0950 
Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party 
9: 0001 
National Black United Front 9: 0213; 
15: 0706 
Progressive Labor Party 4: 0149; 
24: 0900 
Socialist Workers Party 8: 0829; 
14: 0383; 15: 0110; 24: 1006; 
25: 0290 
White Panther Party 4: 0296 
Political repression 
10: 0001–0058 
see also Ku Klux Klan 
see also Michigan Alliance Against 
Repression 
see also National Alliance Against 
Racism and Political Repression 
see also Wilmington 10 
Politics 
Caribbean area 4: 0296 
divisions between white left and African 
Americans 3: 0058 
Maddox, Lester—gubernatorial 
nomination 2: 0559 
Monroe, North Carolina, mayoral race 
8: 0735 
North Michigan statehood movement 
15: 0476 
Washington, D.C., home rule 2: 0001 
whites and black freedom movement 
2: 0384; 6: 0608 
see also Elections, 1960 
see also Political parties 
see also Voting rights 
Postal Service, U.S. 
2: 0559; 3: 0107–0198; 6: 0001, 0771–
0828; 7: 0367; 8: 0909; 9: 0080; 
11: 0081; 20: 0743; 21: 0514; 
23: 0442, 0634; 24: 0001, 0380 
Prisoners 
Peru 15: 0110 
transportation of 15: 1002 
Prisoners of war, U.S. 
Vietnam 2: 0644; 4: 0509 
Prisons 
Jackson State Prison, Michigan 
15: 0627 
Lake County, Michigan 15: 0706 
see also Prisoners 
Progressive Labor Party 
4: 0149; 24: 0900 
Public opinion 
The Crusader 1: 0613, 0950; 2: 0247; 
3: 0474 
“Radio Free Dixie” 1: 0808 
Williams’s return to United States 
23: 0001–0065, 0309–0409 
Williams’s writings 1: 0537 
Puerto Rico 
10: 0621 
Racial discrimination 
4: 0676; 5: 0550, 0677–0717; 12: 0134; 
13: 0366 
Racial violence 
2: 0428; 5: 0347–0498; 6: 0001, 0916; 
7: 0088; 11: 0001, 0490–0711, 
0899; 12: 0211–0394, 0527, 0723, 
0913; 13: 0001, 0441 
“Radio Free Dixie” (radio program) 
1: 0808; 2: 0559; 8: 0856; 9: 0790; 
11: 0490–0899; 12: 0001–0913; 
13: 0001–0608; 14: 0013; 17: 0138; 
20: 0561–0676; 21: 0514; 23: 0634; 
24: 0038; 25: 0950 
RAM 
see Revolutionary Action Movement 
Rape cases 
3: 0689; 11: 0001; 12: 0211, 0851 
Reagan, Ronald 
25: 0721, 0823 
Recreational facilities 
10: 0734–0905; 14: 0001 
Reeb, James 
13: 0257 
Refugees 
Cuban 5: 0677 
Haitian 25: 0823 
Reparations 
14: 0419 
Republic of New Africa 
1: 0123; 3: 0689; 4: 0001, 0149, 0399–
0509, 0813; 6: 0608; 7: 0160; 
8: 0287–0360; 9: 0132–0213, 0318–
0423, 0521–0547, 0608, 0694;


--- PAGE 76 ---
49
10: 0001, 0104–0188; 11: 0081; 
14: 0475; 18: 0001; 19: 0001; 
20: 0753, 0938; 21: 0215–0311, 
0514, 0805–0952; 22: 0001, 0225–
0399, 0889, 1025; 23: 0065, 0516–
0634, 0964; 24: 1006; 25: 0474, 
0950 
Retail stores 
boycott 8: 0829 
Revolutionary Action Movement (RAM) 
3: 0001; 5: 0550; 6: 0001, 0771–0828; 
7: 0212, 0367; 8: 0287, 0877–0909; 
9: 0001, 0132–0213; 0837, 0920; 
10: 0001; 11: 0081; 14: 0013; 
19: 0682; 20: 0516; 21: 0149; 
22: 1025; 23: 0516–0634; 24: 0315 
Revolutionary violence 
Williams’s advocacy of 5: 0550, 0799; 
6: 0444; 9: 0280, 0450–0509, 0790; 
11: 0081; 12: 0609; 21: 0952; 
24: 0696 
La Revolution aux Etats-Unis 
6: 0444 
Rhodesia 
7: 0088; 13: 0511 
Riots and disorders 
Detroit, Michigan (1967) 3: 0198 
Newark, New Jersey (1967) 3: 0001 
urban areas 3: 0058; 9: 0001, 0892–
0920; 14: 0066; 23: 0516–0634 
Watts, California (1965) 2: 0247; 
13: 0366–0441, 0583–0608; 
17: 0792; 25: 0152 
Ritsumeikan University 
Caravan Club 4: 0094 
Ruleville, Mississippi 
shooting of civil rights workers 6: 0916 
School desegregation 
Boston, Massachusetts 7: 0367 
Union County, North Carolina 8: 0727 
Schools 
Baldwin, Michigan 14: 0640 
Highlander Folk School 10: 0369 
Lake County, Michigan 25: 0823 
Monroe, North Carolina, boycott 
12: 0446 
Union County, North Carolina 4: 0094 
see also School desegregation 
Self-defense 
1: 0703; 2: 0053; 5: 0347, 0604; 
6: 0001; 10: 0244, 0488; 11: 0081, 
0490; 12: 0446, 0672–0787; 
13: 0001–0091, 0257–0511, 0662; 
14: 0066, 0231; 19: 0761; 20: 0381, 
0938; 21: 0600; 23: 0634; 24: 0696 
Selma, Alabama 
voting rights demonstrations 13: 0157 
Senate Internal Security Subcommittee 
1: 0123; 5: 0001; 7: 0497–0673; 
9: 0547–0594, 0682; 18: 0670; 
22: 0488; 24: 0315, 1006 
Senior citizens 
25: 0786 
Sims, Charles 
2: 0187 
Sisulu, Walter 
25: 1006 
Sit-ins 
1: 0883; 2: 0001; 10: 0488–0734 
Sixteenth Street Baptist Church, 
Birmingham, Alabama 
12: 0446 
Social conditions 
Lake County, Michigan 11: 0081;  
25: 0721 
Socialist Workers Party 
8: 0829; 14: 0383; 15: 0110; 24: 1006; 
25: 0290 
Social services 
St. Ann’s Lake County Meals and 
Human Services 25: 0065 
Sostre, Martin 
3: 0107, 0947; 8: 0909; 9: 0213–0280, 
0470; 14: 0544; 23: 0516 
Martin Sostre Defense Committee 
3: 0107, 0947 
South Africa 
10: 0488–0621; 25: 1006 
Southern League of Black/Afrikan 
Organizations 
15: 0278 
Southern Organizing Committee for 
Economic and Social Justice 
24: 0968 
Spartacist League 
25: 0354 
Stalinist Workers Group 
8: 0360


--- PAGE 77 ---
50
Stanford, Max 
8: 0664; 9: 0280 
St. Ann’s Lake County Meals and Human 
Services 
25: 0065 
State Department, U.S. 
24: 0038–0315 
State of North Carolina v. Crowder et al. 
7: 0673 
State of North Carolina v. Perry 
10: 0488–0621 
State of North Carolina v. Williams 
1: 0883; 2: 0001; 7: 0673 
Stegall, Mabel 
12: 0672 
Strikes 
Hazard County, Kentucky, coal miners 
12: 0078 
Strong, Anna Louise 
8: 0463 
Student Nonviolent Coordinating 
Committee (SNCC) 
5: 0734; 10: 0001; 13: 0608; 17: 0863; 
18: 0001; 23: 0634 
Student Organization for Black Unity 
19: 0293 
Students 
African American 8: 0360 
Black Student Voice 8: 0287–0360 
China 15: 1011 
Japan 4: 0149; 20: 0211 
National Student Coalition Against 
Racism 7: 0367 
SNCC 5: 0734; 10: 0001; 13: 0608; 
17: 0863; 18: 0001; 23: 0634 
Student Organization for Black Unity 
19: 0293 
Subversive activities 
21: 0149 
Summers, Darnell 
15: 0706 
Supreme Court, U.S. 
Boryszewski and Kesel v. U.S. Supreme 
Court 5: 0075 
Tanzania 
24: 0315 
Taxation 
see Income taxes 
see Internal Revenue Service 
Taylor, Benjamin 
6: 0828 
Television 
Oprah Winfrey show 16: 0031 
Thailand, Patriotic Front of 
6: 0608; 8: 0463 
Trade agreements 
most-favored-nation status for China 
16: 0097 
NAFTA 16: 0062 
Trans World Airlines (TWA) 
5: 0150; 7: 0001; 9: 0318, 0837; 
14: 0394; 18: 0165, 0455; 24: 0038 
Treasury Department, U.S. 
24: 0380 
Tyson, Timothy B. 
24: 0740 
Union County, North Carolina 
NAACP branch 5: 0604; 6: 0001; 
7: 0088; 8: 0727, 0772; 9: 0837; 
15: 0627; 16: 0401–0466; 22: 0148 
schools 4: 0094; 8: 0727 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 
(USSR) 
foreign relations with PRC 2: 0644 
United Automobile Workers 
9: 0470 
United Kingdom 
Black Power in 8: 0425 
Universal Coloured People’s 
Association 8: 0425 
United Nations 
6: 0828 
United States v. Williams 
4: 0623 
Universal Coloured People’s Association 
8: 0425 
University of Michigan 
Center for Chinese Studies 4: 0623; 
9: 0608–0645; 22: 0889; 24: 0944 
Urban development 
3: 0198; 9: 0837; 10: 0369–0734, 0905 
U.S. Bicentennial 
6: 0608 
U.S.–China Peoples Friendship 
Association 
15: 0347; 25: 0474, 0950 
US Organization 
4: 0208


--- PAGE 78 ---
51
USSR 
see Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 
Vietnam War 
1: 0950; 2: 0053; 3: 0916; 4: 0509; 
6: 0558, 0703, 0828; 8: 0664; 
11: 0081; 13: 0206, 0441–0511, 
0608; 25: 0152 
see also Anti–Vietnam War movement 
Violence 
against voter registration workers 
12: 0134 
see also Assassinations 
see also Crime 
see also Racial violence 
see also Revolutionary violence 
see also Riots and disorders 
see also Self-defense 
Voter registration 
6: 0828; 12: 0134, 0609 
Voting rights 
Dallas County Independent Free Voters 
League 9: 0001 
Selma, Alabama, demonstrations 
13: 0157 
see also Voter registration 
Wages and salaries 
10: 0369–0488, 0905 
Wallace, George 
12: 0913 
Washington, D.C. 
council resolution saluting Williams 
24: 1006 
home rule 2: 0001 
Watts, Los Angeles, California 
1965 riot 2: 0247; 13: 0366–0441, 
0583–0608; 17: 0792; 25: 0152 
West Central Michigan Employment and 
Training Consortium 
14: 0544 
White Citizens Council 
10: 0621 
White Panther Party 
4: 0296 
White supremacy groups 
KKK 1: 0300; 2: 0612; 5: 0075, 0604; 
7: 0673; 9: 0666–0694, 0837–0892; 
10: 0244; 13: 0206; 18: 0771 
White Citizens Council 10: 0621 
Whittler, Phyllis 
10: 0001 
Williams, Mabel 
9: 0547; 22: 0953; 25: 0065 
Williams, Robert, Jr. 
death 14: 0475 
Robert F. Williams Legal Defense Fund 
1: 0088 
Williams v. Blount 
23: 0442 
Williams v. Milliken 
18: 0577 
Williams v. O’Brien 
24: 0001 
Williams v. Trans World Airlines 
5: 0150; 24: 0038 
Wilmington 10 
7: 0241; 9: 0728 
Winfrey, Oprah 
16: 0031 
Women 
5: 0604 
Worthy, William 
1: 0348; 6: 0916; 8: 0856; 9: 0213; 
21: 0149 
Yeltsin, Boris 
14: 0685 
Young, Pete 
7: 0673 
Youth 
and black freedom movement 8: 0664 
Black Youth Liberation Movement 
8: 0287 
Monroe Youth Action Committee 
8: 0829 
SNCC 5: 0734; 10: 0001; 13: 0608; 
17: 0863; 18: 0001; 23: 0634 
see also Students


--- PAGE 79 ---
UNIVERSITY PUBLICATIONS OF AMERICA
www.lexisnexis.com/academic
Black Studies Research Sources
The Black Power Movement, Part 1: Amiri Baraka
from Black Arts to Black Radicalism
Centers of the Southern Struggle:
FBI Files on Selma, Memphis, Montgomery, Albany
and St. Augustine
Civil Rights During the Johnson Administration,
1963–1969
Civil Rights During the Nixon Administration,
1969–1974
Congress of Racial Equality Papers, 1959–1976
The Martin Luther King Jr. FBI File
The Papers of A. Philip Randolph
Papers of the NAACP
Records of the Southern Christian Leadership
Conference, 1954–1970
The Bayard Rustin Papers

