=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Rory McVeigh- Rise of the Klu Klux Klan.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 255
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:30:04.874780
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
The Rise of The Ku Klux Klan


--- PAGE 3 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 4 ---
The Ri se of The  
Ku Klux Klan
Right-Wing Movements  
and National Politics
Rory McVeigh
Social Movements, Protest, and Contention
Volume 32
University of Minnesota Press
Minneapolis • London


--- PAGE 5 ---
Copyright 2009 by the Regents of the University of Minnesota
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,  
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,  
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,  
without the prior written permission of the publisher.
Published by the University of Minnesota Press
111 Third Avenue South, Suite 290
Minneapolis, MN 55401-2520
http://www.upress.umn.edu
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
McVeigh, Rory.
   The rise of the Ku Klux Klan : right-wing movements and national 
politics / Rory McVeigh.
   p.  cm. — (Social movements, protest, and contention ; v. 32)
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
   ISBN 978-0-8166-5619-6 (hardcover : alk. paper) —  
ISBN 978-0-8166-5620-2 (pbk. : alk. paper)
   1. Ku Klux Klan (1915– )—History—20th century. 2. Right-
wing extremists—United States—History—20th century. 3. Social 
movements—United States—History—20th century. 4. Racism—
United States—History—20th century. 5. United States—Race 
relations—Political aspects—History—20th century. 6. United 
States—Politics and government—1913–1921. 7. United States—
Politics and government—1921–1923. 8. United States—Politics 
and government—1923–1929. 9. Political culture—United States—
History—20th century. I. Title.
  HS2330.K63M38 2009
  322.4'20973—dc22
 2008052973
Printed in the United States of America on acid-free paper
The University of Minnesota is an equal-opportunity educator and employer.
15 14 13 12 11 10 09      10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1


--- PAGE 6 ---
Contents
1. The Klan as a National Movement 1
2. The Rebirth of a Klan Nation, 1915–1924 19
3. Power Devaluation 32
4. Responding to Economic Change: Redefining Markets  
along Cultural Lines 49
5. National Politics and Mobilizing “100 Percent American” Voters 86
6. Fights over Schools and Booze 112
7. How to Recruit a Klansman 139
8. Klan Activism across the Country  167
9. The Klan’s Last Gasp: Campaigning to Keep a Catholic  
out of the White House, 1925–1928 180
Conclusion: Right-Wing Movements, Yesterday and Today 196
Acknowledgments 203
Notes 205
Works Cited 221
Index 231


--- PAGE 7 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 8 ---
1
The people are disgusted to exasperation with hollow shams. They have 
lost interest in parties without character, courage or program. Politics 
must be born again. The people require justice instead of expediency. They 
scorn administrations controlled by predatory interests. 
— Fiery Cross, August 17, 1923
On July 4, 1923, thousands of men, women, and children flocked to Malfalfa 
Park on the outskirts of Kokomo, Indiana, for a day filled with food, games, 
entertainment, fireworks, and stirring patriotic speeches. No one knows for 
certain how many people were in attendance that day. Estimates made by 
various newspapers within the state range from 10,000 people to upward of 
200,000. One thing is clear—  the crowd was unusually large for a Fourth 
of July celebration. Those in attendance had fought their way through the 
worst traffic jam in Kokomo’s history.
1 They came from every corner of the 
state, while many others descended on the small central Indiana city from 
neighboring states of Ohio, Illinois, Michigan, and Kentucky. Some even 
ventured from as far away as Atlanta, Georgia. This was no ordinary Fourth 
of July celebration. The people were assembled to celebrate the nation’s in-
dependence, but they had other things to celebrate as well. Representatives 
from each of Indiana’s ninety- two counties were on hand to receive official 
charters from the national headquarters of a fledgling organization that had 
enjoyed phenomenal growth within the state over the past two years. These 
were the men and women of the Ku Klux Klan.
Signifying the importance of the occasion, the Klan’s national leader, Im-
perial Wizard Hiram Wesley Evans, was on hand to speak to the assembled 
1
The Klan as a National Movement


--- PAGE 9 ---
2 The Klan as a na Tional MoveMenT
Klansmen and Klanswomen. Taking note of the rapid growth of the In -
diana Klan, Evans began,
Pure, progressive, American principles take a great stride forward in 
Indiana this Independence Day and it is very fitting that the Klans of 
Indiana should have selected July Fourth for the reception of their of -
ficial charters and the establishment of their state organization. Having 
emerged from a provisional status and become fully operative units of the 
Invisible Empire, the Klans in this great realm will approach the stupen-
dous task which lies before them with even greater enthusiasm and zeal 
than in the past.
2 
During the celebration, D. C. Stephenson was appointed as the Grand 
Dragon of Indiana and was also given control of operations in twenty- three 
states of the Klan’s northern realm.
3 This was no small honor for Stephen-
son because by 1923 the Klan was expanding rapidly throughout the na -
tion and was growing particularly strong in Indiana, Ohio, Pennsylvania, 
Illinois, and in several other western and midwestern states that were now 
under his control. 
After a brief introduction from the Imperial Wizard, Stephenson also 
addressed the crowd, communicating his vision of the Klan’s role in politics 
in a lengthy speech titled “Back to the Constitution.” Stephenson hailed the 
wisdom and foresight of the nation’s founding fathers and railed against 
alleged perversions in contemporary politics that threatened to destroy the 
republic that the founders had created. He characterized the United States 
as an exceptional nation that was blessed in the eyes of God. America’s ex-
ceptionalism, according to the newly appointed Grand Dragon, was rooted 
in an Anglo-  Saxon inheritance of pride and patriotism and an “irresistible 
urge toward self- determination.”
4 
The festivities in Kokomo continued on into the evening with a parade 
down Main Street. Robert Coughlan, a writer who grew up in Kokomo, 
recalled,
There were thirty bands; but as usual in Klan parades there was no music, 
only the sound of drums. They rolled the slow, heavy tempo of the march 
from the far north end of town to Foster Park, a low meadow bordering 
Wildcat Creek where the Klan had put up a twenty- five- foot “fiery cross.” 
There were three hundred mounted Klansmen interspersed in companies 
among the fifty thousand hooded men, women, and children on foot. 
The marchers moved in good order, and the measured tread of their feet, 
timed to the rumbling of the drums and accented by the off-  beat clatter


--- PAGE 10 ---
The Klan as a na Tional MoveMenT 3
of the horses’ hoofs, filled the night with an overpowering sound. Many 
of the marchers carried flaming torches, whose light threw grotesque 
shadows up and down Main Street.
5 
Understandably, Coughlan viewed the events of the day—  the throngs of 
sheeted and hooded men and women overflowing Malfalfa Park, the sol -
emn procession on Main Street, and the torching of a giant cross—  as omi-
nous. As a Catholic in Kokomo, he and his family were in the minority 
and Klan members during that time period tended to see Catholicism at 
the root of many societal problems. The Klan of the 1920s claimed to be 
a “one- hundred percent American” organization and promised to unite 
white, native-  born Protestants in a common cause. Catholicism, Klan 
leaders claimed, was incompatible with American democracy. In Indiana, 
and elsewhere, Catholic merchants were frequently subjected to Klan-
 sponsored boycotts and other forms of harassment.
6 Perhaps surprisingly, 
the Klan often flourished in towns such as Kokomo where Catholics, the 
Klansmen’s nemeses, were so few in number that they did not pose any 
serious threat to the established social, economic, or political order within 
the community.
Indeed, the Klan faced little opposition in Kokomo. Coughlan claimed 
that “literally” one-  half of Kokomo’s adult males were members of the Ku 
Klux Klan. His claim appears to be only slightly exaggerated. Klan docu -
ments uncovered in 1925 by a correspondent for the New York Times in -
clude membership figures for eighty-  nine of Indiana’s ninety-  two coun -
ties.
7 According to these documents 3,998 men were members of the Klan 
in Howard County, of which Kokomo is the county seat. In other words, 
approximately 28 percent of adult native-  born white males in the county 
were members of the Ku Klux Klan. A chapter of the Women’s Ku Klux 
Klan (WKKK) was also located in Kokomo at the time, but membership 
figures are unavailable for the women’s organization. According to Kathleen 
Blee, membership for women’s chapters rivaled those of the men’s organiza-
tion in many Indiana communities.
8
The Klan’s support in Kokomo certainly extended beyond that pro -
vided by its dues- paying members. Klansmen and Klanswomen could oper-
ate freely within the community, trusting that most residents in the town 
were at least sympathetic to the organization and its goals. Coughlan notes, 
for example, that many Klan members did not even bother to conceal 
their identities in public. Merchants openly courted Klan patronage, with 
“TWK” (Trade with a Klansman) signs posted on their establishments.
9 
Few county residents were excluded by the way in which the Klan used


--- PAGE 11 ---
4 The Klan as a na Tional MoveMenT
race, religion, and nativity to construct the boundaries of the organiza -
tion. Data from the U.S. census indicate that only 2.1 percent of Howard 
County residents were black and 97.1 percent were native-  born. Only 13.6 
percent of religious adherents in the county were Catholic.
10 In this favor -
able context, Klan-  endorsed political candidates were swept into local of -
fices in 1924.11 
Beyond Kokomo
How did the Ku Klux Klan take control of a small Indiana city? To answer 
that question, it is tempting to zoom in on Kokomo to ascertain what local 
problems, events, and issues stimulated the organization’s growth. However, 
the lesson to be learned from Kokomo is that a bird’s-  eye view, rather than 
a microscopic view, will be the most useful in understanding the growth of 
the Ku Klux Klan in the early 1920s. Why would an organization promot-
ing the supremacy of native-  born, white Protestants be so successful in a 
community where blacks, immigrants, and Catholics were few in number 
and posed no realistic threat to the dominate order? Why was the Klan 
able to generate similar levels of support in hundreds of other cities across 
the nation, some of which were similar to Kokomo in many respects, while 
others were dissimilar? Could it be that Klan members were responding to 
national, rather than exclusively local, concerns? 
When D. C. Stephenson addressed the crowd in Kokomo he used the 
opportunity to discuss national issues. For example, in a lengthy discussion 
of “currency and credit” the Grand Dragon argued that 
The constitution must be vitalized to compel common economic justice 
with respect to currency and credit. Otherwise, in another fifty years, 
this nation will be experiencing all the agonies of class conflict that can 
end only in economic chaos and political revolution. More and more will 
the great middle class be wiped out. Already the tendency is dangerously 
toward an unproductive dividend-  clipping aristocracy of wealth, with 
every billion that it gains through manipulations of money and monopo-
lization of credit adding by inverse ratio to the numbers whose unjust 
impoverishment becomes a menace to the nation.
12 
Later in the speech, Stephenson discussed the long-  and short- term costs of 
the recent world war, and argued that
The solvency of the world, the sanctity and security, nay, the very exis -
tence of civilization are involved in this problem. If its solution were in 
the keeping of men like the founders they would outlaw war; they would


--- PAGE 12 ---
The Klan as a na Tional MoveMenT 5
permit no secret diplomacy; they would publish to the world the full 
truth respecting concessions and every related economic cause of war; 
they would provide in the constitution that this nation should never en-
gage in war, except to repel invasion, unless, through a referendum, the 
sovereign people themselves had determined the fateful issue.
13 
Notably, in his speech Stephenson refrained from discussing any local 
threats posed by blacks, Catholics, or immigrants. Perhaps that should be 
expected, given that he spoke on Independence Day and addressed a large 
audience. Many people in the crowd were not, themselves, locals. Yet (as 
will be demonstrated in later chapters), Klan leaders’ diagnoses of contem-
porary national problems should have been warmly received by many in -
dividuals who joined the Klan. Scholars who have studied the movement 
have not fully appreciated the ways in which changes in the structure of 
American society in the early 1900s contributed to the phenomenal growth 
of the Ku Klux Klan. 
Explaining the extraordinary popularity of the 1920s Klan has chal -
lenged historians, sociologists, and other social scientists for many decades. 
In fact, one sociologist, John Moffat Mecklin, attempted to wrap his hands 
around the puzzle in a book published in 1924, at a time when the move -
ment was still gaining strength. In his book, The Ku Klux Klan: A Study of 
the American Mind, Mecklin seems at a loss to account for the Klan’s ap -
peal. For example, referring to the state of Oregon, he wrote,
Here is a state composed of eighty-  five percent native Americans. It has 
no race problem. It is predominantly Protestant in faith, the Catholics 
forming but eight percent of the population. It is not torn by industrial 
conflict. It is not threatened by radicalism in any form. It has progressive 
laws, an admirable educational system, less than two-  percent illiteracy. 
Yet this typical American state has been completely overrun and, for a 
time at least, politically dominated by a secret oath-  bound organization 
preaching religious bigotry and racial animosity and seeking primarily its 
own political aggrandizement.
14 
In the end, Mecklin characterized the Klan as an example of middle-  class 
hysteria.15 
Klan leaders seemed to recognize that the growth of their organization 
baffled many outsiders. In fact, an article in the Klan’s national newspaper, 
the Imperial Night- Hawk, sought to explain why the Klan thrived in loca -
tions where the movement’s enemies (Catholics, immigrants, and blacks) 
seemed to pose no real threat to the majority group’s interests. The Klan 
writer instructed,


--- PAGE 13 ---
6 The Klan as a na Tional MoveMenT
First, it should be remembered that the Klan is a national organization 
and deals with nation-  wide problems, as well as local conditions. . . . 
Since every community should be vitally interested in the public welfare 
of the nation as a whole, and each one has special conditions with which 
the Klan deals, it cannot be truthfully stated of any place that there is no 
need of an organization that has to do with national problems and seeks 
to improve national as well as local conditions. Most of our problems are 
of national scope and directly concern every community in America.
16 
What were these national issues that the Klan promised to address? 
Did the movement really build its support through its capacity to offer solu-
tions for pressing national- level problems? Of course, it would be unwise to 
rely upon the Klan’s propaganda to gain an objective understanding of the 
movement’s appeal. Klan leaders had few qualms about stretching the facts 
or, perhaps more accurately, running roughshod over the facts if it served 
their interests. Doing so helped them both to bring in new members and to 
line their pockets with money from membership dues and the sale of Klan 
robes and other paraphernalia. However, close (but skeptical) attention to 
the Klan leaders’ rhetoric— their “framing” of societal problems— may offer 
important clues about the organization’s successes and its failures.
Early scholarly studies of the movement tended to ignore the Klan 
leaders’ own interpretations of their organization and its goals, and instead 
assumed that the response to the movement from members and support -
ers represented some sort of collective psychological phenomenon. Recent 
research on the 1920s Klan has cleared up many misconceptions about 
the organization and has dramatically improved our understanding of the 
“Invisible Empire.” Kathleen Blee, for example, wrote an outstanding book 
about the Women’s Ku Klux Klan in Indiana, reconstructing the movement 
through intensive in- depth interviews with surviving members of the orga-
nization. Nancy MacLean’s fascinating study of a Klan chapter in Athens, 
Georgia, draws attention to the centrality of populist themes in the move -
ment’s discourse. Her work also shows how the Klan’s adherence to repub-
lican ideology was especially attractive to middle-  class Americans during 
that moment in history. Other excellent studies have highlighted the Klan’s 
affinity with the progressive movement of the era. The Klan’s pursuit of 
populist and progressive goals, however, was interwoven with its appeals 
to white supremacy, and with its xenophobia and religious bigotry.
17 
Although the fog surrounding the Klan’s appeal in the 1920s is begin-
ning to clear, many important questions remain unanswered. Most research 
on the movement has been based on case studies of Klan activity in a single


--- PAGE 14 ---
The Klan as a na Tional MoveMenT 7
community or in a single region of the country. Yet Klan leaders claimed to 
be a national organization concerned with national issues. Although such 
claims should be treated with some skepticism, they merit thorough inves -
tigation. Why did the movement grow so rapidly in the early 1920s? What 
was it about this moment in history that allowed the Klan to recruit so 
many members in so many different locations? Are there discernible geo -
graphic patterns in the movement’s recruiting successes and failures? The 
Klan’s role in politics, particularly its role in national politics, has received 
little attention from scholars. With millions of followers spread across the 
nation, the Ku Klux Klan certainly had the potential to be a major player 
in national politics. Although some scholars have examined the Klan at the 
national level, this work, while informative and often fascinating, is largely 
descriptive and does not provide a theoretical framework that can be used 
to account for the uneven geographic diffusion of Klan mobilization in 
the 1920s.
I show how macro-  level changes in the structure of American society 
facilitated the growth of the Klan in some locales, but not in others. I argue 
that the Klan can best be understood as a response to devaluation in the 
economic, political, and status-  based “purchasing power” of the move -
ment’s constituents, and I extend the analysis to shed light on the Klan’s 
attempts to influence national political outcomes. I find that many of the 
conditions that contributed to the Klan’s recruiting successes imposed se -
vere constraints on the movement’s capacity to influence national politics 
and these conditions contributed to the movement’s rapid decline. 
Beyond the Case of the Ku Klux Klan 
By 1924, the Klan could boast of having more members nationwide than 
the American Federation of Labor.
18 Nevertheless, most Americans (in -
cluding many academics) have little or no knowledge of the size and scope 
of the organization in the 1920s and would be surprised to learn that the 
movement enjoyed stronger support in northern states such as Indiana, 
Ohio, and Illinois than it did in the states of the Deep South. This book 
will promote a deeper understanding of the rise and fall of the Ku Klux 
Klan by calling attention to the way in which movement leaders articu -
lated grievances that were national in scope. The rise of the Ku Klux Klan 
coincided with significant changes in the structure of social relations in the 
United States, and Klan leaders developed interpretations of these changes 
that were designed to attract members and adherents to their organization. 
Acquiring a deeper understanding of the Ku Klux Klan is important 
in its own right, but I also use this fascinating historical case to develop


--- PAGE 15 ---
8 The Klan as a na Tional MoveMenT
theoretical insights that can be applied more generally. The book should be 
of particular interest to social scientists who study social movements and 
collective action. The Klan took only a few years to recruit millions of dues-
 paying members, yet this important movement simply cannot be explained 
with the theoretical tools most commonly used by social movement schol-
ars. Some scholars have argued that right- wing mobilization represents a re-
active response to a social group’s declining status. Movement participants, 
from this perspective, long for a return to the days in which their group was 
held in high esteem and such longings and desires bring them together to 
promote the superiority of their group’s culture, values, and lifestyle. These 
arguments typically overlook important economic and political incentives 
for right- wing mobilization and tend to characterize movement participants 
as irrational or misguided. While I do not hold that right-  wing movement 
participants always act rationally, and I certainly do not condone their ac -
tion, I do argue that right-  wing movements often provide individuals with 
an effective vehicle for preserving status-  based interests as well as political 
and economic interests. 
The most widely utilized theories of social movements, resource mobi-
lization theory and political opportunity theory, also miss the mark because 
these theories were developed with a different type of social movement in 
mind. They were designed to explain how relatively powerless groups are 
able to engage in collective contention to bring about social change. The 
theories were not intended to explain how, and under what conditions, so-
cial movements emerge among members of relatively advantaged groups 
that organize to preserve, restore, and expand their collective privileges. 
Although many of the concepts developed by contemporary social move -
ment scholars are valuable in understanding a case such as the Ku Klux 
Klan, the underlying logic regarding causal processes must be altered sub -
stantially. A central goal of this book, therefore, is to present and apply a 
theory of social movement action—  the “power- devaluation model”—  that 
is specifically designed to analyze right-  wing mobilization. 
The case of the Ku Klux Klan can also be used to generate new insights 
related to racial and ethnic conflict and maintenance of racial and ethnic 
inequality. Ethnic competition theory predicts that conflict is most likely to 
occur when ethnically distinct groups are coming into close contact and are 
competing over jobs or other scarce resources.
19 Along these same lines, it 
has often been shown that intergroup conflict represents a majority group’s 
response to a threat posed by members of a minority group.
20 Yet, as noted 
above, the Klan often thrived in homogeneous locales where Klan mem -
bers would have been relatively insulated from localized threats and com-


--- PAGE 16 ---
The Klan as a na Tional MoveMenT 9
petition. For the most part, Klan leaders advocated white separatism rather 
than open conflict with out- group members.
Mary Jackman argues that scholars miss out on much of the action 
when they focus on intergroup conflict rather than analyzing ways in which 
dominant groups seek to minimize conflict while maintaining advantages 
over subordinate groups. Indeed, John Gaventa argues that conflict is a 
sign that a dominant group is losing its capacity to control subordinates 
through less visible dimensions of power.
21 In the 1920s Klan leaders pre -
sented white privilege as natural and preordained, and they appealed to 
constituents by interpreting social change through the lens of white (and 
Protestant) supremacy. As George Lipsitz points out, 
Race is a cultural construct, but one with sinister structural causes and 
consequences. Conscious and deliberate actions have institutionalized 
group identity in the United States, not just through the dissemination of 
cultural stories, but also through systematic efforts from colonial times to 
the present to create economic advantages through possessive investment 
in whiteness for European Americans.
22
Leaders of the Klan frequently claimed that blacks, Catholics, and immi-
grants had no reason to fear the law- abiding men and women of the Ku Klux 
Klan. At the same time, they sought to mobilize millions of Americans to 
preserve a wide range of privileges reserved for native- born, white Protestants. 
The book should also interest anyone in the general public who cares 
about politics, race relations, and contemporary social problems. Develop-
ing a theory of right- wing activism is much more than an interesting intel-
lectual exercise. Social theory not only provides us with a means of gaining 
a deeper understanding of the case under study—  in this case the 1920s 
Klan— but it can also be invaluable in making sense of similar events, cases, 
and processes in contemporary settings. Indeed, social theory can help us 
to predict the future, and when good theory motivates social policy it can 
contribute to a better society.
In the 1920s millions of American men and women donned sheets and 
hoods and marched through towns such as Kokomo, Indiana. They par -
ticipated in massive rallies, parades, and countless meetings. They involved 
themselves in charity work and community service, but they also intimi -
dated, threatened, and at times inflicted violence on African Americans, 
Catholics, Jews, and immigrants. In some locations, they captured the 
machinery of state and local government. Although the 1920s Klan col -
lapsed soon after it reached its peak in 1924, anyone who is familiar with


--- PAGE 17 ---
10 The Klan as a na Tional MoveMenT
contemporary world events will recognize that we have yet to find effective 
ways of dealing with and containing organized racism and bigotry.
Episodes of racial and ethnic conflict continue to emerge in Europe, 
and in nations outside of Europe, as immigration streams bring different 
groups into contact, often leading to competition over jobs, housing, and 
other limited resources. Recently, white racists rampaged across beaches in 
Australia, using modern technology to coordinate attacks on local Muslim 
citizens and immigrants. In the United States, vigilante groups patrol the 
border between the United States and Mexico and political representatives 
compete for votes by taking tough stands on immigration. At the same time, 
a wide variety of racist groups continue to find a niche in the American so-
cial fabric— many of them taking advantage of the Internet to spread their 
messages of white supremacy and white separatism.
23 An analysis of the 
1920s Klan, therefore, should illuminate an important and fascinating case 
in American history. Perhaps more important, the analysis should generate 
new insights into more general problems faced in the modern world that 
involve conflicts rooted in racial, ethnic, religious, and class identities.
Geographic Diffusion of Klan Activism
My primary aim in this book is to investigate the Ku Klux Klan of the 1920s 
as a national movement. Rich case studies of local Klan chapters provide 
deep insight into the movement and the ways in which it was able to gener-
ate support in local settings. Yet by relying solely on case studies to under -
stand the Klan, we risk creating a situation similar to that described in the 
fable about the blind men and the elephant. Each observer comes away with 
a different understanding of the whole based on an examination of a single 
part. The Klan in Athens, Georgia, for example, may have been qualitatively 
different from the Klan in Oakland, California, or from the Klanswomen 
of Indiana.
24 Although each local chapter was different, they all claimed al -
legiance to the same national movement, and narratives constructed by na -
tional leaders imposed constraints on the extent to which local leaders could 
innovate when attempting to build and maintain support.
By examining the way in which national Klan leaders defined their 
movement, and by paying close attention to structural transformations tak-
ing place in the United States in the early 1900s, it should be possible to 
identify conditions that allowed the Klan to thrive in some locations but 
not in others. My analysis, therefore, does not contradict the insights that 
have been gained through case studies but instead aims to situate local Klan 
activity within a broader context. I rely heavily upon the Klan’s national 
publication, the Imperial Night-  Hawk, to gain access to the way in which


--- PAGE 18 ---
The Klan as a na Tional MoveMenT 11
national leaders constructed narratives that were designed to generate sup-
port for their movement. The Imperial Night-  Hawk was published weekly 
and distributed to all Klan chapters throughout the country during a time 
period, 1923 to 1924, when the movement was at its peak. Articles in the 
Imperial Night-  Hawk outlined the goals of the movement and also con -
veyed the Klan’s stances on a wide variety of issues. The publication also 
provided information about activities and progress of Klan chapters across 
the country and therefore provides a means of systematically assessing geo-
graphic variation in the movement’s strength.
Although it will never be possible to construct a perfect measure of Klan 
strength, the content of the Imperial Night-  Hawk does provide a unique 
opportunity to examine geographical variation in the movement’s activi -
ties in the early 1920s. The first article published in the inaugural issue, 
“The Purpose of This Publication,” announced that the central mission of 
the Imperial Night-  Hawk was to “keep Klansmen informed of activities 
at the Imperial Palace in their behalf and of the progress and advancement 
of the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan throughout the nation.”
25 Subsequent 
issues, published weekly, delivered on this promise. Each issue provided in-
formation on a wide range of Klan activities and events taking place all 
over the country. The editors frequently reminded readers that they should 
send information about local events to the Imperial Palace in Atlanta, so 
that the information could be published in the Klan’s national magazine. In 
some cases, local Klan events were covered in depth but in many other cases 
short descriptions of events were published in the Klan Komment column 
or mentioned in articles interspersed throughout the pages of the magazine. 
Almost invariably, the descriptions of Klan activity include information 
about the geographic location. In some cases the articles only mention the 
state in which the activity took place, but in the vast majority of cases the 
town or city is also identified.
Because the Imperial Night-  Hawk fulfilled its mission to keep read -
ers informed about Klan events taking place throughout the country, sys -
tematic coding of the magazine’s content can provide a valuable measure 
of state-  level variation in Klan activity. Although the measure does not 
represent an exhaustive list of all Klan activity that occurred in the early 
1920s, it does give us a precise count of Klan events and activities that were 
mentioned in the movement’s national publication. Given the publication’s 
mission—  to keep members informed about Klan activity taking place 
throughout the nation— this measure should closely approximate state- level 
differences in the total amount of Klan-  sponsored activity that took place 
in the early 1920s.


--- PAGE 19 ---
12 The Klan as a na Tional MoveMenT
To construct a measure of Klan activism, each article of the Imperial 
Night- Hawk was read and content- coded by two different coders. A total of 
eighty issues, published from March 28, 1923, to November 19, 1924, are 
included.
26 Almost all issues are eight pages in length, but some contain a 
few additional pages. Because my research assistants were coding for mani-
fest rather than latent content, there were few intercoder discrepancies. I 
was able to resolve each of the discrepancies that did occur. I opted for a 
broad and inclusive definition of Klan activism. Any type of Klan activity 
mentioned in the publication was recorded and counted, but only if the 
geographic location of the activity was specified. For example, a statement 
claiming that Klan membership has been growing rapidly in the United 
States would not be counted because it does not specify a state or town. 
If an article noted that membership had been growing rapidly in Howell, 
Michigan, on the other hand, that would be counted as an event and in -
cluded in the total number of events listed for the state of Michigan.
27 If 
the same event or activity is mentioned in more than one article, or several 
times within the same article, it is only counted once.
The events recorded in my data reflect a wide range of activity. In many 
cases, they represent references to initiation ceremonies, marches, parades, 
rallies, meetings, charitable acts, and cross burnings. The magazine also in-
cludes lists of donations made by Klan members to a special fund intended 
to offer support for the wife and children of a Klansman who was killed 
while marching in Carnegie, Pennsylvania. I counted these as events as long 
as the geographic location of the contributor was specified and as long as it 
was clear that the contributors were Klan members. I include these dona -
tions because they represent a form of Klan activity (charitable acts) and also 
indicate that Klan members were present and active in the location of the 
contributor. References to actions or activities of Klan opponents were not 
counted if the article does not also indicate that Klan members were pres -
ent at the same location. For example, if an article mentions that a speaker 
in Boston publicly condemned the Klan, no Klan event would be recorded 
because the article does not refer to Klan activity in Boston. However, if 
the article reports that Klansmen were attacked by an unruly mob in South 
Bend, Indiana, an event would be recorded because Klansmen were en -
gaged in activity in South Bend when they came under attack.
28
Certainly some of the events recorded in my data were more impor -
tant than others in terms of the number of people involved and the impact 
that they had on their communities. Yet a record of all Klan- related activity 
mentioned in the Imperial Night- Hawk reflects state- level differences in the 
total volume of Klan activism and also reveals how broadly the movement


--- PAGE 20 ---
The Klan as a na Tional MoveMenT 13
diffused in the early 1920s. In fact, the data show that the Imperial Night-
 H a w k reported a total of 2,669 events or activities in 1,285 different towns 
and cities. The broad geographic diffusion of the movement is particularly 
impressive in light of the short time span involved. The Klan was confined 
to two southern states until 1920, but within a few years it had established 
at least a minimal presence in more than 1,000 communities throughout 
the nation.
The data also reveal that the Klan was able to establish a presence in 
both rural and urban locations. According to the U.S. census, in 1920 there 
were a total of 144 cities in the United States with a population larger than 
50,000. At least one Klan event was reported for 101 of those cities (70.1 
percent). Most of the forty- three cities with a population above 50,000 and 
without reported Klan activity are located in the industrial core region of 
the country (see Table 1). In addition, in all but nine of these cases, residents 
of white and native- born parentage represented the numeri cal minority. 
Although the Klan was able to establish a presence in most major cities, 
it is noteworthy that the majority of events occurred in smaller towns and 
cities. In fact, of the 2,669 events recorded in my data only 668 (25 percent) 
occurred in cities with a population greater than 50,000 (see Table 2). The 
state of Texas leads the pack, with 216 events recorded, with these events 
occurring in 112 different towns or cities. These figures certainly reflect a 
high volume of Klan activity in the state, but may also reflect the close 
tie between the Texas Klan and the movement’s national headquarters be -
cause the Imperial Wizard, Hiram Evans, hailed from the Lone Star State. 
Consistent with other scholarly work on the Klan, the data also show that 
the movement had a particularly strong presence in Pennsylvania, Indiana, 
and Illinois. Georgia, not surprisingly, is also high on the list with the ma-
jority of activity taking place in the city of Atlanta where the Klan’s national 
headquarters were located. Alabama Klansmen and Klanswomen were also 
active. However, my data show that in spite of the southern roots of the 
original Ku Klux Klan, southern location is not strongly related to Klan ac-
tivity in the 1920s. Relatively little activity, for example, is reported for the 
states of North Carolina and Virginia.
With the exceptions of New Jersey and Pennsylvania, very little Klan 
activity is reported in northeastern states. And in both of these states, the 
majority of recorded events took place outside of the major cities. Thirty- one 
events are recorded for the state of New York, but it is important to keep in 
mind that New York was the most populous state in the nation in 1920. 
Only one event, a cross burning, was reported for New York City, and ap-
proximately 75 percent of events in New York State occurred in towns with


--- PAGE 21 ---
14 The Klan as a na Tional MoveMenT
less than 50,000 population. Only forty events are recorded for the six New 
England states of Vermont, Rhode Island, New Hampshire, Connecticut, 
Massachusetts, and Maine. North Dakota and South Dakota are the only 
states with no reported Klan activity. Farmer-  Labor Party activism, rather 
than Klan activism, was a force to be reckoned with in these states and also, 
particularly, in the state of Minnesota.
29 
Table 1. Cities with over 50,000 inhabitants in 1920  
with no reported Klan activity
  White   White 
  and of   and of 
  native   native 
  parentage   parentage 
City and state Population (%) City and state Population (%)
Albany, N.Y. 113,344 49.6
Allentown, Penn. 73,502 70.7
Augusta, Ga. 52,548 51.2
Bayonne, N.J. 76,754 18.9
Boston, Mass. 748,060 24.3
Brockton, Mass. 66,254 37.2
Cambridge, Mass. 109,694 26.5
Camden, N.J. 116,309 48.4
Canton, Ohio 87,091 61.8
Chester, Penn. 58,030 44.2
East Orange, N.J. 50,710 54.1
Elizabeth, N.J. 95,783 27.0
Gary, Ind. 55,378 29.8
Hoboken, N.J. 68,166 21.2
Holyoke, Mass. 60,203 18.3
Jersey City, N.J. 208,103 29.2
Lawrence, Mass. 94,270 13.1
Lowell, Mass. 112,759 21.9
Lynn, Mass. 99,148 34.4
Macon, Ga. 52,995 52.7
Manchester, N.H. 78,384 24.0
New Bedford, Mass. 121,217 16.6
New Britain, Conn. 59,316 18.8
New Haven, Conn. 162,537 27.3
Niagara Falls, N.Y. 50,760 26.6
Passaic, N.J. 63,841 13.8
Pawtucket, R.I. 64,248 23.0
Portsmouth, Va. 54,387 49.2
Providence, R.I. 237,595 26.8
Richmond, Va. 171,667 60.0
Salt Lake City, Utah 118,110 47.6
Schenectady, N.Y. 88,723 49.5
Scranton, Penn. 137,783 35.4
Sioux City, Iowa 71,227 54.4
Somerville, Mass. 93,091 34.7
Springfield, Mass. 129,614 37.8
Toledo, Ohio 243,164 51.0
Troy, N.Y. 72,013 45.9
Utica, N.Y. 94,156 35.8
Waterbury, Conn. 91,715 24.1
Wheeling, W.Va. 56,208 60.6
Wilkes Barre, Penn. 73,833 38.9
Yonkers, N.Y. 100,170 30.0
Source:  U.S. Department of Commerce, Statistical Abstracts,  1924. Population and Principal 
Cities, no. 38.


--- PAGE 22 ---
Table 2. Number of Klan events reported in the Imperial Night-Hawk
  Events in large cities Number of 
 Total with population towns/cities with 
State events over 50,000 (%) at least one event Larger cities with Klan events (number of events)
Texas 216 52 (24.1) 112  Dallas (23); El Paso (7); Fort Worth (12); Houston (4); San Antonio (6)
Pennsylvania 213 48 (22.5) 118  Altoona (17); Bethlehem (4); Erie (1); Harrisburg (5); Johnstown (1); 
Lancaster (1); Philadelphia (3); Pittsburg (15); Reading (1)
Indiana 168 43 (25.6) 72  Evansville (5); Fort Wayne (6); Indianapolis (16); South Bend (4); 
Terre Haute (12)
Illinois 158 49 (31.0) 76  Chicago (31); East St. Louis (3); Peoria (4); Rockford (5); Springfield (6)
Georgia 127 90 (70.9) 23 Atlanta (89); Savannah (1)
Alabama 126 31 (24.6) 52 Birmingham (27); Mobile (4)
Kansas 121 21 (17.4) 65 Kansas City (1); Topeka (13); Wichita (7)
Oklahoma 102 17 (16.7) 57 Oklahoma City (9); Tulsa (8)
Ohio 96 36 (37.5) 40  Akron (4); Cincinnati (4); Cleveland (1); Columbus (10); Springfield 
(11); Youngstown (6)
Missouri 96 32 (33.3) 47  Kansas City (15); St. Joseph (9); St. Louis (8)
California 89 25 (28.1) 45  Berkeley (1); Long Beach (1); Los Angeles (9); Oakland (7); 
Sacramento (3); San Diego (3); San Francisco (1)
Arkansas 85 19 (22.4) 46 Little Rock (19)
Michigan 83 23 (27.7) 37 Detroit (9); Flint (2); Grand Rapids (2); Lansing (8); Saginaw (2)
New Jersey 81 11 (13.5) 35 Atlantic City (2); Newark (3); Paterson (1); Trenton (5)


--- PAGE 23 ---
Table 2. Number of Klan events reported in the Imperial Night-Hawk (continued)
  Events in large cities Number of 
 Total with population towns/cities with 
State events over 50,000 (%) at least one event Larger cities with Klan events (number of events)
Iowa 71 19 (26.8) 38 Davenport (1); Des Moines (18)
West Virginia 70 3  (4.3) 37 Huntington (3)
Louisiana 67 8 (11.9) 34 New Orleans (8)
Tennessee 64 25 (39.1) 24 Chattanooga (19); Knoxville (1); Memphis (4); Nashville (1)
Mississippi 58 0  (0) 37 —
Washington 55 18 (32.7) 24 Seattle (15); Spokane (2); Tacoma (1)
Kentucky 50 6 (12.0) 28 Covington (1); Louisville (5)
Oregon 49 15 (30.6) 24 Portland (15)
Maryland 38 6 (15.8) 22 Baltimore (6)
South Carolina 37 7 (18.9) 16 Charleston (7)
Colorado 34 6 (17.6) 20 Denver (6)
Florida 33 6 (18.2) 18 Jacksonville (3); Tampa (3)
Arizona 31 0  (0) 13 —
New York 31 8 (25.8) 14  Binghamton (3); Buffalo (2); New York City (1); Rochester (1); 
Syracuse (1)
Virginia 29 3 (10.3) 17 Norfolk (1); Roanoke (2)


--- PAGE 24 ---
Delaware 23 7 (30.4) 9 Wilmington (7)
North Carolina 22 0  (0) 11 —
Minnesota 20 5 (25) 7 Duluth (1); Minneapolis (4)
Wisconsin 19 10 (52.6) 6 Milwaukee (9); Racine (1)
Nebraska 16 7 (43.8) 7 Lincoln (4); Omaha (3)
Montana 15 0  (0) 13 —
Wyoming 15 0  (0) 7 —
Massachusetts 13 5 (38.5) 8 Fall River (1); Haverhill (1)
Maine 12 3 (25.0) 5 Portland (3)
Connecticut 10 4 (40.0) 4 Bridgeport (3); Hartford (1)
Idaho 10 0  (0) 9 —
New Mexico 7 0  (0) 3 —
Nevada 2 0  (0) 1 —
New Hampshire 2 0  (0) 2 —
Rhode Island 2 0  (0) 1 —
Utah 2 0  (0) 0 —
Vermont 1 0  (0) 1 —
North Dakota 0 0  (0) 0 —
South Dakota 0 0  (0) 0 —


--- PAGE 25 ---
18 The Klan as a na Tional MoveMenT
When examining the specific towns and cities in which Klan activity 
occurred, the diversity of locations, both in terms of geography and in terms 
of population size, is striking. The Klan was active in Indianapolis, Indiana, 
but also had a presence in Logtown, Mississippi. Klan activity occurred 
in Modesto, California, but also in Columbus, Ohio. Because the Klan 
established a presence in so many different communities and in so many 
different types of communities, it is risky to draw general conclusions about 
the movement based on case studies of a single Klan chapter in a single lo-
cation. The Klan in Modesto, for example, was certainly different in many 
respects from the Klan of Indianapolis. Authors of several case studies of 
the movement that have been published in recent years have wisely re-
frained from making sweeping generalizations based on only a single case.
30 
The deep insights generated in these studies have been extraordinarily valu-
able to me as I have attempted to study the Klan as a national movement. 
By analyzing the diffusion of the Klan throughout the nation as a whole, 
it should be possible to understand how the Klan was able to build a mass 
movement within only a few years’ time. In spite of the diversity of the 
towns and cities in which the Klan mobilized, there are discernible patterns 
in my data. Some states were especially hospitable to Klan activism while 
the movement struggled to establish a foothold in many other states. The 
power- devaluation model can be used as a tool to reveal these patterns and 
to explain state- level variation in Klan activism.


--- PAGE 26 ---
19
Under the direction of Imperial Wizard Dr. H. W. Evans the Knights 
of the Ku Klux Klan is now financially able to combat the assaults of its 
enemies, is in a position to permit the Klansmen of the nation to enjoy the 
fruits of national economies and has also ample funds available for vigor-
ous membership extension campaigns through the United States.
— Imperial Night- Hawk, August 22, 1923
Approximately forty years after the original Ku Klux Klan disbanded, 
a new Klan rose from the ashes in 1915. The founder of the second Ku 
Klux Klan, Colonel William Joseph Simmons, envisioned the Klan as the 
ultimate fraternal lodge. Simmons was the son of a rural Alabama physi -
cian. In his younger years he had spent time as a farmer, a circuit-  riding 
preacher, and a lecturer in southern history at Lanier University.
1 He even-
tually threw himself into organizational work for several different fraternal 
organizations. Although a veteran of the Spanish American War, the title 
of “Colonel” was bestowed upon him by the Woodmen of the World.
2 In 
addition to the Woodmen, Simmons did organizational work for the Free -
masons, the Knights of Pythias, and the Odd Fellows. 
Early in 1915 Simmons designed the organizational framework for the 
new Ku Klux Klan. Obtaining a copy of the 1867 Reconstruction Klan 
Prescript, he designed the rituals and hierarchy of offices for the new orga-
nization, closely patterning it after the original Prescript. Simmons reserved 
the top position of Imperial Wizard for himself. When he was finished, the 
self- appointed Wizard had produced a “highly classified” fifty-  four- page 
2
The Rebirth of a Klan Nation, 1915–1924


--- PAGE 27 ---
20 The RebiRTh of a Klan na Tion, 1915–1924
pamphlet, which he named the Kloran. While he would swear members to 
secrecy regarding the Kloran’s contents, Simmons had the document copy-
righted in 1917 and placed two copies with the Library of Congress.3
Although the Imperial Wizard claimed that divine inspiration led to 
his decision to revive the Klan, his real inspiration was more down- to- earth. 
Simmons intended to capitalize on renewed interest in the Reconstruction-
 era Klan that resulted from two events that were beyond his control. In 
1915 the rape and murder of fourteen-  year- old Mary Phagan in Marietta, 
Georgia, sparked public outrage when the girl’s body was discovered in the 
basement of the pencil factory where she worked. Leo Frank, her Jewish 
employer, was arrested and convicted of the crime. Georgia’s governor com-
muted Frank’s death sentence to life in prison in response to pressure from 
civil liberties groups. On August 16, 1915, an angry mob took Frank from 
his Georgia prison and lynched him. Referring to the Frank incident, for -
mer Populist leader and U.S. congressman Thomas E. Watson called for a 
revival of the Ku Klux Klan. The Klan, Watson proposed, should be orga-
nized to restore home rule.
4 
Popular interest in a Klan revival was given an even stronger boost by 
the 1915 release of D. W. Griffith’s groundbreaking film The Birth of a Na-
tion. No previous film release could compare to Griffith’s epic in terms of its 
technological sophistication or in terms of its box-  office success. It was the 
controversial storyline, however, that stimulated the initial growth of the 
Klan. The movie was adapted from Thomas Dixon’s novel The Clansman.  
The Reconstruction- era Klan played a prominent role in both the book and 
the movie, being cast as valiant defenders of the South’s culture and po -
litical institutions, as well as guardians of the purity of white womanhood. 
The film climaxed with a dramatic and drawn-  out scene in which Klans -
men on horseback rode to rescue Flora Cameron from Gus, a lust-  crazed 
black assailant. Flora’s character was clearly intended to symbolize inno -
cence and purity of white southern women, and the film played on deeply 
entrenched fears and stereotypes regarding black men’s animalistic cravings 
for white women. In the film, the Klansmen got their man, unceremoni -
ously dumping Gus’s dead body in the street in front of the local sheriff’s 
office. According to historian Kenneth Jackson, in movie theaters through-
out the nation the chase scene prompted whoops and wild cheers from the 
audience and, on one occasion, gunfire, as an overly enthusiastic moviegoer 
shot up the screen.
5 
Ever the opportunist, Colonel Simmons strategically placed advertise-
ments for his new organization in Atlanta newspapers, alongside promos 
for showings of The Birth of a Nation. He solicited new members by billing


--- PAGE 28 ---
The RebiRTh of a Klan na Tion, 1915–1924 21
the Ku Klux Klan as a “ high class o RdeR foR Men of in Telligence 
and chaR acTeR.”6 Simmons made use of his fraternal ties to recruit new 
members and, drawing upon the skills that he crafted as a circuit-  riding 
preacher, used fiery religious oratory in public-  speaking engagements to 
motivate audience members to join his new organization. Simmons initially 
had limited success, enlisting approximately 2,000 members in the first five 
years.
7 In spite of the uproar surrounding the Leo Frank case and the con -
tinued interest in The Birth of a Nation, the Klan struggled to survive for 
several years. By early 1920 the movement was still confined to the states of 
Georgia and Alabama and was facing severe financial problems.
8
The Movement Takes Off
The organization’s fortunes shifted dramatically in 1920 when Simmons 
acquired the services of professional organizers Edward Young Clarke 
and Elizabeth Tyler. Clarke and Tyler’s Southern Publicity Association  be-
came the Propagation Department of the Ku Klux Klan. The Propagation 
Department sent recruiters, Kleagles, into the field working on commis -
sion. It kept 80 percent of all fees collected from new members (initiation 
fees were $10), paying commissions and other expenses out of its 80 percent 
share. The remaining 20 percent went to National Headquarters in Atlanta.
9 
Newly appointed Kleagles dispersed from the home base in Atlanta, pro -
moting “100 percent Americanism.” Over 200 Kleagles were in the field by 
the summer of 1921.
10 Kleagles were instructed to identify issues of concern 
within communities and then offer the Klan as a solution to those con -
cerns.11 Klan recruiters gave particular attention to Protestant ministers and 
to members of fraternal organizations. To the clergymen, Kleagles offered 
free membership, complimentary subscriptions to Klan publications, and 
the promise to actively promote the supremacy of Protestant Christianity. 
Embossed invitations to join the order were mailed to Masonic groups, pa-
triotic societies, and other fraternal orders.
12 
The Klan’s recruiting efforts were remarkably successful. During the 
first eighteen months that Clarke and Tyler directed recruitment, the or -
ganization expanded into the South, beyond the borders of Georgia and 
Alabama, as well as into the Southwest, the Midwest, and the West Coast. 
In a 1921 report to Colonel Simmons, Clarke claimed that the Klan had 
gained 48,000 members in only three months, adding, “In all my years of 
experience in organization work I have never seen anything equal to the 
clamor throughout the nation for the Klan.”
13 
Recruitment received an unintended boost from a three- week exposé of 
the Klan that ran in the New York World in September 1921. Eighteen other


--- PAGE 29 ---
22 The RebiRTh of a Klan na Tion, 1915–1924
major newspapers across the nation picked up the World’s coverage of the 
Klan. The newspaper estimated that the organization had 500,000 mem -
bers in forty-  five states. The primary purpose of the exposé, however, was 
to call attention to the Klan’s darker side. The paper documented 152 sepa-
rate incidents of alleged Klan violence. 14 Partly in response to the World’s 
exposé, Colonel Simmons was called to testify before a concerned congres-
sional committee.
In retrospect, the congressional hearing may have been Simmons’s fin-
est hour. The Imperial Wizard testified before Congress, assuring those as-
sembled that the Klan neither endorsed nor participated in violence of any 
sort. Simmons reasoned,
If the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan has been a lawless organization, as 
has been charged, it would not have shown the remarkable growth it has, 
for in the Klan is as fine a body of representative citizens as there is in the 
Figure 1. The Klan’s founder, Colonel William Joseph Simmons, at the House 
Committee investigation of the Ku Klux Klan in 1922. National Photo Company 
Collection. Library of Congress.


--- PAGE 30 ---
The RebiRTh of a Klan na Tion, 1915–1924 23
United States. In each community where there is a Klan will be found 
members from the leading citizens, men who stand at the forefront in 
their cities. These men would not stand for lawlessness.
15 
To counter charges that the Klan was essentially a money-  making scheme 
to enrich its leaders, Simmons claimed that surplus revenue was being in -
vested in worthy causes, such as the expansion of Lanier University. When 
questioned about the organization’s secretive nature, he reminded the com-
mittee that the Kloran containing the organization’s oath and ritual was on 
public record with the Library of Congress.
16 
Simmons also denied that his organization was organized to promote 
religious intolerance and to intimidate blacks: “If the Klan is to secure mem-
bers on an anti–Roman Catholic, anti-  Jew, and anti- Negro appeal, we do 
not want such members.”
17 Simmons discussed at length his boyhood ex -
periences playing with black children and his efforts as an adult to educate 
and assist blacks in any way that he could. Simmons, who claimed to be 
gravely ill during the hearings, summoned up all of his evangelical zeal in 
his closing statement. Addressing the movement’s opponents, he declared,
You are ignorant of the principles as were those who were ignorant of the 
character and work of the Christ. I can not better express myself than by 
saying to you who are persecutors of the Klan and myself, “Father forgive 
you, for you know not what you do,” and “Father forgive them for they 
know not what they do.”
18 
Congress did not pursue any further investigation and the Klan bene-
fited immensely from the free publicity granted by the congressional hear -
ing and the New York World . Most Americans, particularly outside of the 
South, were only vaguely aware of the movement’s existence until the World 
and the congressional hearings brought it to their attention. Within the 
next four months, more than 200 additional chapters were founded and 
total membership rose to nearly one million.
19 
The Changing of the Guard
Although the Klan continued to grow under Simmons’s reign, the organi -
zation lacked direction and a sense of purpose. Several state-  level leaders 
within the organization felt that the Klan was not realizing its potential as 
a political force. Publicity concerning Simmons’s drunken escapades and 
his alleged misappropriation of Klan funds also caused concern among 
the Klan faithful. Simmons’s behavior was particularly troubling be -
cause the Klan presented itself as a staunch defender of prohibition and of


--- PAGE 31 ---
24 The RebiRTh of a Klan na Tion, 1915–1924
Christian morality. Revelations of boozing and sexual impropriety of the 
Propagation Department’s Clarke and Tyler also damaged the organiza -
tion’s credibility.
20 
In November 1922, several disgruntled Klan leaders initiated a coup. 
Among them were Hiram Wesley Evans and D. C. Stephenson. At the first 
annual national convention of the Klan (Klonvocation) in Atlanta, the in-
surgents duped Simmons into accepting an exalted but meaningless posi -
tion. Evans, a Texas dentist, was named as the new Imperial Wizard.
21 Like 
his co- conspirator Stephenson, Evans was determined to turn the Klan into 
a potent political force. Internal factionalism continued to plague the orga-
nization, however. After Simmons realized that he had been maneuvered 
into irrelevance, he attempted to reclaim the Imperial Palace in Atlanta, 
taking possession by force when Evans was out of town in April 1923. A 
lengthy legal battle ensued. In the end, it was determined that Evans would 
retain the position of Imperial Wizard, but the copyrights to the ritual, re-
Figure 2. House Committee investigation of the Ku Klux Klan, 1922. National 
Photo Company Collection. Library of Congress.


--- PAGE 32 ---
The RebiRTh of a Klan na Tion, 1915–1924 25
galia, and signs of the Klan were granted to Simmons. Simmons eventually 
accepted $146,000 in compensation and, with that resolved, he was offi -
cially banished from the Klan in January 1924.
22 
The infighting was costly, as some members left the movement ei -
ther because of the bad publicity surrounding the legal battle or because 
they were faithful to Simmons.
23 Nevertheless, new members greatly out -
numbered defectors. 24 The organization continued to expand into previ -
ously uncharted territory, and the base of the movement’s support shifted 
from the southern to the midwestern states. The Klan’s assets also rose 
sharply after Evans assumed the leadership. According to the Klan’s Impe-
rial Night-  Hawk, total assets for the organization rose from $403,171 in 
July 1922 to $1,088,473 in July 1923. In addition to publishing the finan-
cial statement, a Klan writer added that “the Klan’s finances are in splendid 
condition and that the gain made in membership and financial strength 
during the past year had broken all previous records.”
25
With both membership and assets growing, Evans could focus on his 
political agenda. An important part of his plan involved enlisting the aid of 
women, who, with their newly won voting privileges, could contribute to 
the movement’s political clout. In another legal battle with Simmons, Evans 
secured the exclusive rights to organize women’s chapters and founded the 
Women’s Ku Klux Klan (WKKK) in 1923.
26 The WKKK was billed as 
“a Protestant Women’s Organization which is for, by, and of women.” 27 
The WKKK contributed mightily to the overall strength of the movement. 
The charter membership numbered roughly 125,000, with membership 
doubling to 250,000 within the fist four months. The WKKK continued 
to grow, leading one critic of the Klan to claim that at least three million 
women had joined the order.
28 
The Klan in Politics
Across the nation, Klansmen and Klanswomen sought to elect “100 per -
cent Americans” to political office. Early successes in Texas, Georgia, 
and Oregon encouraged the organization’s national leadership. In 1922 
Earle B. Mayfield of T exas became the first member of the Ku Klux Klan 
to be elected to the U.S. Senate. After defeating ex-  governor and anti- Klan 
candidate Jim Ferguson in the Democratic primary, he went on to defeat 
Republican challenger George Peddy in the general election. The defeated 
Ferguson charged that in Dallas “the Ku Klux Klan is in the saddle. It has 
elected nearly all the county officials, and the law, therefore, can be vio -
lated with impunity.”
29 
In 1922 the Georgia Klan elected several of its members and favorite


--- PAGE 33 ---
26 The RebiRTh of a Klan na Tion, 1915–1924
candidates to local offices, including Klansman Walter A. Sims, who was 
elected mayor of Atlanta. Sims defeated James G. Woodward, who openly 
opposed the Klan in his campaign. The Klan also broke through at the 
state level in Georgia, helping to remove Gov. Thomas W. Hardwick from 
office after he demanded that the Klansmen remove their masks in public 
and refrain from violence. The Klan threw its support behind former state 
attorney general Clifford Walker. After winning the election, Walker ap -
peared at the National Convention of the Klan in Atlanta, promising the 
assembled members that if the organization got into any trouble he would 
not report it to the press or to the electorate, but would instead come to talk 
directly with the Klan’s leaders.
30 
The Klan’s political success was not confined to the South. Beginning 
in 1922, the movement came to dominate Oregon politics. When the Klan’s 
Republican candidate for governor lost in the primaries, the organization 
threw its support behind Democrat Walter Pierce in the general election. 
Pierce openly courted the Klan vote by declaring that he was “100 percent 
American” and by promoting the Klan’s political agenda, which included 
the backing of a compulsory education bill, keeping “aliens” out of control 
of public affairs, and denying land ownership to aliens. With the Klan’s 
backing, Pierce won the election as a Democrat, in spite of the fact that 
registered Republicans outnumbered Democrats in Oregon by more than 
two to one.
31 In the following year, a slate of Klansmen and Klan- supported 
candidates were ushered into local offices in Portland. Fred L. Gifford, the 
Grand Dragon of the Oregon Klan, positioned himself at the head of a 
political machine that dominated Portland politics for several years.
32
The Klan also made waves in Oklahoma. In 1923 the movement 
played a central role in the successful impeachment of the governor, Jack 
Walton. Walton had run as a farmer-  labor candidate, with the backing of 
the Socialist party. After alienating many of his own supporters, Walton 
became embroiled in a war with the Ku Klux Klan. By 1923 the Klan had 
helped elect several of its own members to the Oklahoma state legislature.
33 
Throughout the state, Klan posses fought with union organizers and mem -
bers of the Industrial Workers of the World (I.W.W. or the “Wobblies”). The 
Klan announced that it would break up any attempts to form a farmer- labor 
union. Walton responded by declaring martial law over the entire state—
 an act that generated widespread resentment. At his impeachment hearing, 
Walton claimed that he was only guilty of fighting the hooded empire.
34
The high point for the Klan came in 1924. Gearing up for local- , state- , 
and national-  level campaigns, leaders of state organizations worked to get


--- PAGE 34 ---
The RebiRTh of a Klan na Tion, 1915–1924 27
out the vote and to identify the “100 percent American” candidates for the 
electorate. In some cases, the Klan threw its support behind a candidate 
who would have most likely won without its assistance. In Maine, for ex -
ample, the Republican Klan-  supported governor won handily, but because 
Maine was heavily Republican his chances of winning were never in jeop -
ardy.
35 In other states, candidates jumped on the Klan’s bandwagon, hop -
ing to increase their appeal.
Nowhere was the political dominance of the Klan more apparent than 
in Indiana. By 1924 D. C. Stephenson’s star was shining even brighter than 
that of the Imperial Wizard’s. As head of operations in twenty-  three north-
ern states, Stephenson was responsible for pumping thousands of dollars 
into the national organization, and was himself becoming a very wealthy 
man from his percentage of membership dues and the sales of Klan para -
phernalia. Stephenson was not averse to flaunting his wealth and power, 
which made Evans and the national headquarters nervous. Stephenson’s 
growing power, and his increasing tendency to butt heads with the na -
tional organization, eventually led to a rift between Stephenson and Hiram 
Evans.
36 Yet the Indiana Klan remained strong in the months leading up to 
the November elections. After the election, Stephenson was able to direct 
practically all the state’s political activity from his office in Indianapolis, 
with Klansmen deeply entrenched in the state’s legislature, judicial branch, 
and law enforcement offices.
37 
The Klan also made its presence felt in national politics. Hiram Evans 
appeared on the cover of Time magazine for his role in silencing opposition 
to the Klan at the Republican Party’s National Convention in Cleveland. 
Two weeks later, at the Democratic Convention in New York City, the Klan 
was at the center of controversy. The Party was deeply divided over a pro -
posed platform plank that condemned the Ku Klux Klan. After a very close 
vote, the Democrats chose not to condemn the Invisible Empire. The Klan’s 
leadership flirted with candidates from both major parties and displayed 
some initial curiosity about Robert LaFollette, the fiery Wisconsin sena -
tor who bolted from the Republican Party to run for the presidency as a 
Progressive.
38 
Klan leaders certainly recognized that an organization with millions of 
members and adherents nationwide could potentially impact national poli -
tics. Yet in the end, the movement was publicly spurned by LaFollette and 
by the Democratic presidential nominee, John W. Davis. Only Republican 
Calvin Coolidge declined to condemn the organization. Nevertheless, in the 
aftermath of the 1924 elections the Klan’s Imperial Wizard declared victory.


--- PAGE 35 ---
Figure 3. Imperial Wizard Hiram Wesley Evans is featured on the cover of 
Time magazine in the aftermath of the 1924 Republican National Convention. 
Reprinted through the courtesy of the editors of Time magazine. Copyright 
2007 Time Inc.


--- PAGE 36 ---
The RebiRTh of a Klan na Tion, 1915–1924 29
We Klansmen may be pardoned for our just pride in the part we have 
played in the saving of our country from alien propaganda. . . . Those 
who sought office through combinations of un- American influences were 
hopelessly defeated.
39 
By the time that Evans spoke these words, however, his movement was in 
steep decline. 
Attributes of Klan Members
Who were the men and women who fueled the growth of the Ku Klux Klan 
through their participation and membership fees? There is no simple an -
swer to that question because the composition of local organizations could 
vary substantially from community to community. What’s more, the socio-
economic status of Klan members, even within a single local chapter, often 
spanned a broad range. For example, among the members of the Athens, 
Georgia, Klan there were two lawyers, ten ministers, two physicians, and 
three pharmacists but also two plumbers, seven electricians, and five bak -
ers.
40 The socioeconomic diversity of the Klan’s membership is not sur -
prising in light of the Klan’s opportunistic recruiting strategy—  a strategy 
that involved offering the Klan as a solution to whatever issues might be 
troubling residents of a particular community. To some extent, the Klan did 
try to be all things to all people—  at least for people who were native- born, 
white, and Protestant. It would be a mistake, however, to assume that the 
Klan’s membership roles were representative of all those who were eli  gible 
to join. The few membership lists that have been recovered indicate that 
two groups were underrepresented. As Goldberg notes, the Klan seemed to 
appeal to all groups except the elite and the industrial proletariat.
41 
Several researchers have drawn attention to the disproportionate rep -
resentation of the middle class in the Klan’s membership and to the ways 
in which movement members and leaders pursued goals that benefited 
middle- class interests.
42 However, it is important to note that the “middle-
 class” label is only useful in this case if the term refers to one’s relationship 
to the means of production, rather than to some middle strata in a hierar -
chy of wealth and status. As noted above, Klan membership often displayed 
quite a bit of diversity in regard to the members’ wealth and status. Based 
on what we know about the occupations of Klan members, however, the 
movement seems to have been especially appealing to small businessmen, 
merchants, and skilled manufacturing workers—  the “old middle class”— as 
well as to a “new middle- class” of managers, professionals, and clerks.
43 The 
Klan recruited heavily from fraternal lodges such as the Masons and the


--- PAGE 37 ---
30 The RebiRTh of a Klan na Tion, 1915–1924
Odd Fellows—  organizations composed primarily of small businessmen, 
professionals, and skilled manufacturing workers. 
This is not to say, however, that the Klan did not draw some unskilled 
laborers into its ranks. It did. This fact, however, as will be discussed in 
more depth in later chapters, should not distract our attention from the 
ways in which the Klan’s leaders strategically articulated grievances faced by 
many middle- class Americans. Articles in Klan newspapers would, at times, 
describe the attributes of the organization’s members. For example, articles 
published in the Klan’s Illinois publication, the Dawn, described the typical 
members as clergymen, attorneys, bankers, doctors, financiers, clerks, and 
artisans.
44 Of course, such claims could reflect the types of individuals that 
the Klan hoped to recruit rather than the ones they actually recruited. But 
as mentioned previously, the claims are generally supported by the limited 
data available on the occupations of Klan members.
45 Perhaps equally im -
portant, the fact that movement leaders described the organization as being 
primarily a middle-  class movement, and articulated grievances shared by 
many middle-  class Americans, is meaningful when trying to understand 
the sources of the movement’s strength.
Hiram Evans offered a stinging critique of industrial capitalism that 
heaped scorn on both the capitalist and the industrial proletariat. At a time 
when conflict between industrialists and laborers was increasingly coming 
to define national politics, Klan leaders criticized the greed and excesses of 
both classes.
46 The Klansman’s Creed called for a closer and more harmoni-
ous relationship between capital and labor. The Klan press was particularly 
hostile toward labor radicalism. Drawing upon republican ideals, the Klan 
portrayed the political pursuit of class-  based interests as detrimental to the 
nation as a whole.
47 As one article in the Imperial Night- Hawk expressed it, 
“We must discourage, by stern and swift rebuke, all efforts to create a class 
consciousness among our people.”
48 Klan leaders resisted the advances of 
both capitalists and industrial laborers and promoted policies that would 
disproportionately benefit their middle- class constituency.
Although I will argue that economic factors contributing to the Klan’s 
growth have not been fully appreciated, it would be a mistake to over -
emphasize or exaggerate economic motives for joining the Ku Klux Klan. 
The causes of the movement’s growth are more complex. The economy was 
just one of many issues addressed by movement leaders as they attempted to 
enlist the participation and support of native- born, white Protestants across 
the nation. In fact, the Klan addressed such a broad range of issues that, 
at first glance, it may appear that there is no rhyme or reason to the move-
ment’s phenomenal growth. Indeed, it is tempting to simply assume, as did


--- PAGE 38 ---
The RebiRTh of a Klan na Tion, 1915–1924 31
many early scholarly studies of the Klan, that the movement’s growth can 
best be understood as some sort of collective psychological phenomena—
 an irrational response to social change. However, the sources of the Klan’s 
emergence and growth can be revealed through a close examination of the 
ways in which changes in the structure of social relations in the early 1900s 
led to shifts in the way that Americans understood their world. Through 
trial and error, and with opportunistic motives, Klan leaders developed in -
terpretations of local and national problems that struck a chord with many 
American citizens. With abundant organizational resources available to 
those who were adversely affected by structural change, and in a political 
context that provided them room to operate, a mass movement emerged— a 
movement that aimed to wrest political power from those who opposed its 
agenda. The power- devaluation model, a theory of right-  wing social move-
ment activism, will help to reveal what cannot be seen without structured 
investigation—  the secrets behind the Klan’s successes and failures in the 
early 1920s.


--- PAGE 39 ---
32
Those who think that the purpose and business of the Klan is to oppose and 
fight Negroes, Jews, Catholics and foreigners are sadly mistaken, and have 
no conception of its ideals and principles. 
— Imperial Night- Hawk, April 2, 1924
A sociologist (as I like to tell my daughter—  a huge Nancy Drew fan) is 
very much like a supersleuth. The sociologist’s job entails solving mysteries 
when the solution to the mystery is not obvious to the casual observer who 
stumbles upon the scene of the crime. Like a good detective, the sociologist 
closely examines evidence and relies upon logic, both inductive and deduc-
tive, to think about how various strands of evidence can be pieced together 
to reveal a solution to an intriguing puzzle. Sociologists, like supersleuths, 
require a good theory to help them organize the empirical clues at their dis-
posal. The emergence and growth of the Ku Klux Klan in the early part of 
the twentieth century is certainly an intriguing puzzle, but the most widely 
utilized theories of social-  movement mobilization provide little guidance 
to anyone who wishes to crack the case. Researchers who developed these 
theories did not have right- wing movements in mind.
When I use the term “right-  wing movement” I am referring to a so -
cial movement that acts on behalf of relatively advantaged groups with the 
goal of preserving, restoring, and expanding the rights and privileges of its 
members and constituents. These movements also attempt to deny similar 
rights and privileges to other groups in society. This operational definition 
distinguishes right-  wing movements from progressive movements, such 
3
Power Devaluation


--- PAGE 40 ---
PoweR devalua Tion 33
as the American civil rights movement, which seek to secure new bene -
fits, rights, and privileges for members of relatively disadvantaged or op -
pressed groups— rights and privileges that are already enjoyed by members 
of dominant groups. This distinction is critical when it comes to identifying 
the under lying causes of a movement’s emergence and growth. To appreci-
ate the significance of this distinction, however, it is necessary to briefly 
consider the historical development of social movement theory.
Do Grievances Matter?
When studying a social movement, it seems natural to begin by consider -
ing the sources of discontent among those who participate. What are the 
participants’ grievances? How long have the grievances been in existence? 
Are conditions improving or are they worsening? The importance of under-
standing collective grievances seems obvious, at first glance, because people 
do not engage in collective protest unless they have something to protest 
about. However, contemporary social-  movement theory does not treat col-
lective grievances as an important causal factor. At most, social-  movement 
theorists tend to view grievances as necessary but insufficient causes of col-
lective action.
This was not always the case. Prior to the 1970s, scholars tended to 
view a social movement as a reflexive response to changes in the structure 
of society that generate new sources of discontent. Social protest, according 
to this line of thinking, signals a temporary disruption in what is, under 
normal circumstances, a smoothly functioning society that operates like a 
complex system of interrelated parts. Smelser’s collective-  behavior theory, 
for example, proposed that changes in the structure of society can produce 
structural strain.
1 This strain generates anxiety and frustration among some 
individuals and leads them to engage in protest. Mass society theorists ar -
gued that mass movements emerge when structural changes disconnect in-
dividuals from social bonds that would otherwise constrain deviant action.
2 
In general, scholars viewed social-  movement activity as a form of deviance 
with its root causes being similar to those that lead to crime and delin -
quency. As Gurr expressed it, 
One of the most pervasive assumptions of theories of crime and conflict 
is that both are rooted in social tensions that are manifest in a prevailing 
sense of individual anomie, alienation, or discontent. It is plausible to 
suppose that such states of mind will motivate some to join in collective 
action and others, depending on their needs and opportunities, to take 
more individualistic courses of action.
3


--- PAGE 41 ---
34 PoweR devalua Tion
Some of these early theorists viewed social-  movement activism as a kind 
of disarticulated political rebellion. 4 Others, however, treated social protest 
as having more to do with individual psychological processes (e.g., a way 
that anxious or frustrated people let off steam) than with politics. McAdam 
used the term “classical theory” to refer to mass-  society theory, collective-
 behavior theory, and theories of relative deprivation, which, he argued, have 
a common explanatory structure. Each theory explains social-  movement 
mobilization as primarily an individual psychological response to stresses 
and strains produced by changes in the structure of society.
5
Stinging critiques of these “classical” theories began to emerge in 
the early 1970s, and by the mid-  1980s the classical perspective on social-
 movement mobilization had been almost completely abandoned. The cri -
tiques focused on the way in which classical theorists, either implicitly or ex-
plicitly, characterized social-  movement participants as being irrational and 
disconnected from social ties.
6 McAdam argued, for example, that classical 
theorists’ naïve assumptions about the openness of democratic political in-
stitutions led them to overlook the political motivations of social- movement 
participants.
7 After all, if individual and collective grievances can be satis-
fied by participating within established institutions, protest must be serving 
some nonpolitical function. McAdam, however, joined a growing chorus 
of voices arguing that social movement action represents a strategic form of 
political participation for those who are denied routine access to political 
power- holders and decisionmakers.
8 
As a new generation of scholars examined social- movement activism oc-
curring around them— for example, the civil rights movement, the women’s 
movement, student movements, the antiwar movement—  it became appar-
ent that social- movement participants are typically embedded in dense so-
cial networks and are not, as some classical theorists suggested, dis connected 
from social bonds. Oberschall coined the term “bloc recruitment,” referring 
to the way in which social- movement organizers often recruit members and 
participants among groups of individuals already organized for some other 
purpose.
9 This strategy is much more effective than recruiting isolated indi -
viduals one by one and it capitalizes on in-  group solidarity that often mo -
tivates individuals to contribute to the provision of a collective good rather 
than to free-  ride on the efforts of others.
10 Now, a large body of research 
confirms the importance of social-  network ties in drawing individuals into 
protest activities and campaigns.
Resource- mobilization theorists argue that social-  movement mobiliza-
tion should be viewed primarily as an organizational problem rather than as 
a form of deviance, delinquency, or disarticulated individualistic rebellion.
11


--- PAGE 42 ---
PoweR devalua Tion 35
These scholars note that social-  movement activism, like political action 
that takes place within political institutions, requires an organizational 
infrastructure, resources, and effective leadership. Pointing out that many 
impoverished and oppressed groups never rise up and engage in collective 
action, resource-  mobilization theorists argue that collective grievances are 
largely irrelevant when it comes to explaining the emergence of a social 
movement. What is relevant, according to the theory, is the infusion of new 
resources that make it possible for groups to take action to redress griev -
ances that, in some cases, have been in existence for years, decades, and 
even centuries. 
Growing concurrently with resource-  mobilization theory, political-
 opportunity theory places emphasis on how the political context either in-
hibits or encourages social-  movement mobilization. As is true of resource-
 mobilization theory, political-  opportunity theory downplays the causal 
significance of collective grievances. In what is perhaps the strongest state-
ment of this approach, Tarrow asserts, 
Even a cursory look at modern history shows that outbreaks of collective 
action cannot be derived from the level of deprivation that people suffer 
or from the disorganization of their societies; for these preconditions are 
more constant than the movements they supposedly cause. What varies 
widely from time to time, and from place to place, are political oppor -
tunities, and social movements are more closely related to the incentives 
they provide for collective action than to underlying social or economic 
structures.
12
The logic of both resource- mobilization theory and political- opportunity 
theory is compelling. Poor and oppressed people face formidable obstacles 
when it comes to challenging the existing order. Unless new resources be -
come available or the political context becomes less oppressive, collective 
action is unlikely to occur. Yet this logic fails when the goal is to explain 
social- movement action that emerges among relatively privileged actors who 
are not subjected to state repression and typically have ready access to orga-
nizational resources. This is not to say that organizational resources and po-
litical opportunities are irrelevant to right- wing mobilization. However, the 
timing of a right- wing movement’s emergence should be less dependent on 
both. The key question, it seems, is what leads members of relatively privi-
leged groups to utilize preexisting organizational resources and to exploit 
preexisting political opportunities in order to restore, preserve, or expand 
their preexisting privileges.


--- PAGE 43 ---
36 PoweR devalua Tion
Should We Return to Classical Theory? Yes and No (but Mostly No!)
So how do we explain the emergence and growth of right- wing movements? 
Interestingly, the classical theories that have been subjected to so much 
criticism in recent decades have enjoyed a longer shelf life when applied to 
right- wing movements. Perhaps this is because scholars are less likely to ob-
ject when participants in extreme conservative movements are characterized 
as irrational and marginalized. Researchers who have studied the Klan have 
pointed to social changes taking place in the early 1920s—  such as indus -
trialism, urbanism, immigration—  as causes of structural strain. Actions 
initiated by the movement have often been described as futile responses to 
irreversible social forces that did not address the real causes of collective 
grievances, but were instead merely expressions of frustration, anomie, and 
dissonance.
13 
Lipset and Raab, for example, argue that millions of individuals joined 
the Klan in the 1920s because the movement offered a release for psycho -
logical tension that resulted from rapid changes in society. Moore argues 
that a breakdown in traditional institutions such as the church and the family 
created social atomization and led individuals to attempt to re  establish 
community cohesion through their participation in the Klan. Jackson ar -
gues that the Klan lacked a meaningful reason for its existence and relied 
upon emotion rather than reason. David Chalmers, author of what is per -
haps the most widely read historical study of the movement, describes the 
Klan as a response to a breakdown of traditional social order embodied in 
the religious and moral values of small- town America.
14
The earliest scholarly attempts to make sense of the 1920s Klan rest 
on similar assumptions, as scholars sought to explain the movement pri -
marily in psychological terms. Sociologist John Moffat Mecklin, the Klan’s 
contemporary, wrote that the movement was “essentially a defense mecha-
nism against evils which are more often imaginary than real.”
15 Richard 
Hofstadter saw the movement as a response to status anxiety. He character-
ized Klansmen as “gullible nativists,” and argued, 
The Klan impulse was not really a response to direct personal relation -
ships or face- to- face competition, but rather the result of a growing sense 
that the code by which rural and small-  town Anglo-  Saxon America had 
lived was being ignored and even flouted in the wicked cities, and espe -
cially by the “aliens” and the old religion and morality were being snick-
ered at by the intellectuals.
16
Although it may seem comforting to think of Klansmen and Klans -
women as being irrational, ignorant, and gullible, more recent studies of the


--- PAGE 44 ---
PoweR devalua Tion 37
Klan largely contradict such characterizations. Interviews with surviving 
members of the organization and close scrutiny of historical documents and 
of recorded minutes of Klan meetings indicate that Klan members were, in 
many respects, quite ordinary.
17 Of course, Klan members were racists and 
religious bigots, but it is important to keep in mind that the bigoted views 
articulated by Klan members and leaders were broadly held by native-  born, 
white Protestant Americans in the early 1920s. During this time period, 
even some of the nation’s most renowned scientists were involved in the 
study of eugenics and claimed to have evidence of the inherent superiority 
of Anglo-  Saxons. Similar themes were also pursued in the popular press. 
In a widely read book, The Passing of the Great Race, Madison Grant attrib-
uted the success and prosperity of the United States to the intellectual and 
physical superiority of the nation’s Nordic colonizers.
18 The Klan members’ 
nativist views and their views on race and religion are certainly relevant in 
any attempt to explain the movement’s appeal. However, it is important to 
recognize that these beliefs, to a great extent, mirrored mainstream beliefs 
and values in society at large.
Recent analysis of the Klan has also debunked the notion that Klan 
members were at the margins of society or were disconnected from social 
bonds.
19 Indeed, the Klan’s form of bloc recruitment, which targeted fra -
ternal organizations and Protestant congregations, ensured that many of 
its members would be embedded in dense social networks and would be 
actively involved in community life. Individuals who are socially isolated 
are rarely drawn into sustained social-  movement activism regardless of the 
ideological orientation of the social movement in question. The 1920s Klan 
was not an exception to this rule. Although the Klan members and lead -
ers expressed concern about the breakdown of traditional institutions, the 
movement often thrived in locations that were the most insulated from 
such changes. Even Leonard Moore, who argues that the Klan’s growth 
was stimu  lated by white Protestants’ perceptions that community cohe -
sion was in decline, argues that in local communities the Klan’s success 
“resulted from widespread support for traditional moral values and law 
enforcement.”
20 
In light of available evidence, it would be unwise to return to classical 
social- movement theory to explain the rise of the Klan. The criticisms lev -
eled against this general theoretical approach seem just as valid when study-
ing right- wing movements as they do when studying more progressive forms 
of social- movement mobilization. However, neither resource-  mobilization 
theory nor political-  opportunity theory will do the trick, because these 
theories beg the question of why the Klan mobilized in the first place. The


--- PAGE 45 ---
38 PoweR devalua Tion
lack of prior mobilization (before 1915) cannot be explained in terms of 
insufficient resources or limited political opportunities. To solve the puzzle 
it is necessary to reconsider the possibility that collective grievances can 
play an important causal role when it comes to explaining right-  wing mo-
bilization. The power-  devaluation model specifies the role of grievances in 
right- wing mobilization but rejects assumptions made by classical theorists 
about the attributes and motives of movement participants. Grievances 
resulting from structural changes in society do not automatically lead to 
participation in a social movement, but they can alter the way in which 
people interpret their circumstances and they can generate new incentives 
for right- wing mobilization.
The Power- Devaluation Model 
A theory of social movement mobilization must address questions related to 
the timing of a movement’s emergence and growth. With progressive social 
movements it is often the case that collective grievances exist long before 
the emergence of collective action. In such cases, extant social-  movement 
theory correctly focuses on time-  variant factors, such as availability of or -
ganizational resources and political opportunities, as possible causal fac -
tors. A grievance-  based explanation of the movement’s emergence would 
be unsatisfying because it begs the question of why the movement did not 
emerge at some earlier historical moment when collective grievances were 
also present. 
I have defined a right-  wing movement as a social movement that acts 
to preserve, restore, or expand rights and privileges of a relatively ad -
vantaged societal group. Almost by definition, then, the grievances of a 
right- wing movement’s constituents are time-  variant. The fact that mem -
bers of the group are acting within a social movement suggests that par -
ticipants sense that their capacity to maintain privileges by acting within 
established institutions is being threatened. Under normal circumstances, 
members of privileged groups seek to maintain an advantaged position in 
ways that minimize conflict with the disadvantaged because open conflict 
tends to shine a light on social inequality and processes of exploitation and 
domination, which can lead dominated and exploited groups to demand a 
greater share of societal benefits.
21 When right-  wing mobilization occurs, 
it is likely in response to a threat to established power relationships that is 
generating incentives to act outside of established institutions and within a 
social movement. To be analytically useful, however, the power- devaluation 
model must further specify threats to power relationships that contribute to 
right- wing mobilization.


--- PAGE 46 ---
PoweR devalua Tion 39
The power- devaluation model consists of three key components. The 
theory proposes that power devaluation, resulting from structural change, 
produces shifts in interpretive processes which, in turn, lead to activation 
of organizational resources and exploitation of political opportunities (see 
Figure 4). The model also includes feedback loops, representing movement 
mobilization as an ongoing process. As movements gain strength, they are 
likely to gain more resources and to produce changes in the political con -
text. These changes also typically force movements to make adjustments in 
interpretive frames, as movement leaders seek to form alliances with other 
groups that will help the movement to gain power. 
Power Devaluation (Economic, Political, and Status- Based)
To identify ways in which a threat to existing power relations can provide 
incentives for right-  wing mobilization, it is useful to conceptualize three 
distinct markets of exchange based on economic relationships, political 
relationships, and status relationships. Changes in the structure of society 
can lead to devaluation in the “purchasing power” of various actors within 
these markets. When members of clearly identifiable groups appear to be 
disproportionately suffering from power devaluation, incentives for right-
 wing mobilization emerge. Although I view power devaluation as a social 
process, simple microeconomic logic is useful in determining when, where, 
and for whom power devaluation occurs. Devaluation in actors’ purchasing 
Figure 4. The power-devaluation model.


--- PAGE 47 ---
40 PoweR devalua Tion
power within an exchange market results from a decline in the demand for 
what an actor offers in the exchange, and from an increase in the supply of oth-
ers who offer the same thing in exchange.
In an economic market, actors exchange labor, wages, goods, services, 
and money. Macro- level shifts in the structure of social relations can pro -
duce changes in both the demand for, and supply of, these basic exchange 
mediums. For example, mechanization of industry can reduce the demand 
for human labor while immigration can increase the supply of human labor. 
In both cases, the purchasing power of laborers within a preexisting labor 
pool undergoes devaluation. Similarly, power devaluation results when the 
demand for a particular service or commodity declines, or when there is an 
increase in the supply of the service or commodity in question. 
In a democratic society, the political arena can also be viewed as an 
exchange market. Votes and monetary contributions are exchanged for rep-
resentation and political patronage. As is true in an economic market, po-
litical “purchasing power” is affected by the demand for what an actor offers 
in exchange and the supply of others who offer the same thing in exchange. 
Macro- level structural changes can affect levels of supply and demand and 
can produce political power devaluation for some individuals and groups. 
Changes in factors such as fertility rates, migration, immigration, and eco-
nomic cycles can affect the supply of voters and the supply of cash con -
tributions in a political market. Electoral rules and regulations can also 
come into play. Extension of suffrage to a previously excluded group, for 
example, increases the overall supply of voters and leads to devaluation in 
the purchasing power of voters who were already in the electorate. Changes 
in rules governing elections can also affect the demand side. For example, if 
legislation was enacted calling for public funding of campaigns (and mak-
ing private donations illegal), the demand for campaign contributions from 
private individuals or corporations would be eliminated, resulting in sharp 
devaluation in the political purchasing power of those who had previously 
used large campaign contributions to buy disproportionate attention from 
legislators and other political officials.
The metaphor of an exchange market is also useful when considering 
the role of status in right-  wing mobilization. My thinking on this point 
is primarily influenced by Georg Simmel, but similar ideas can be found 
in the work of exchange theorists such as Blau and Emerson.
22 Much of 
Simmel’s work calls attention to the ways in which individuals and groups 
seek to differentiate themselves from others in society. For example, Simmel 
notes the tendency for organizations to emphasize unity, while at the same 
time failing to resist inevitable movement toward factionalism. As Simmel


--- PAGE 48 ---
PoweR devalua Tion 41
expresses it, “It is as if each individual largely felt his own significance only 
by contrasting himself with others. As a matter of fact, where such a con -
trast does not exist, he may even artificially create it.”
23
Within a status market, individuals and groups offer certain behaviors, 
traits, cultural knowledge, and tastes in exchange for esteem from others. 
As is true in economic and political markets, one’s purchasing power within 
a status market is determined by the demand for what an actor offers in ex -
change and the supply of other actors who offer the same thing. As Simmel 
notes in his discussion of fashion, an individual receives little recognition 
for simply adhering to widely shared norms and values.
24 Refraining from 
committing homicide is certainly a good practice, but it does not distin -
guish the individual or set her apart because most people, thankfully, exer-
cise similar restraint. Instead, actors gain prestige and esteem by adhering 
to and displaying behaviors and traits that are simultaneously admired and 
relatively scarce. If these traits or behaviors become increasingly common, 
then the purchasing power of the actor displaying such behaviors or pos -
sessing such traits undergoes devaluation.
Simmel makes a similar point when he discusses how fashion is used 
by members of the upper classes to distinguish and separate themselves 
from the lower classes. When a trend- setting fashion is widely diffused and 
mimicked by those of various social strata, the fashion no longer serves its 
purpose. Members of the elite class will then seek out different means of 
distinguishing themselves from the masses. Macro-  level changes that lead 
to an increase in the supply of individuals possessing a particular trait or 
behavior, therefore, can result in devaluation in status-  based purchasing 
power. On the demand side, new cultural knowledge and behavioral prac-
tices can be imported into a given social system and used by some groups 
as a marker of status. Beisel, for example, describes how, in New York City 
in the early 1900s, the nouveaux riche consumed and displayed European 
artwork as a means of buying entry into elite social circles.
25 To the extent 
that such new cultural practices reduce the demand for preexisting status 
markers, devaluation results for those who previously derived status from 
such markers.
Multiple Sources of Devaluation
Although I have conceptualized three distinct markets, I emphasize that the 
markets should not be viewed as being completely independent of one an -
other. As Max Weber pointed out long ago, processes related to status, class, 
and politics are distinct but also tend to be deeply intertwined.
26 Failing to 
recognize these interdependencies can lead to a flawed analysis. Incentives


--- PAGE 49 ---
42 PoweR devalua Tion
to support right-  wing activism should be particularly strong when groups 
are experiencing power devaluation from multiple sources and in more 
than one market. Nicola Beisel’s study of the antivice movement provides 
a noteworthy example.
27 She convincingly argues that many elite families 
supported the movement because they came to believe that their children’s 
exposure to vice could bring shame upon the family. This public shame 
would have negative consequences in terms of their children’s social capital 
and could lead to downward mobility in the class structure. 
Status, as reflected in both cultural and social capital, certainly can 
affect one’s purchasing power within economic and political markets of ex-
change.
28 As a general rule, power within each of the exchange markets that 
I have discussed is transferable to other markets. Economic power can be 
used to gain more political power and is often valuable in maintaining so-
cial esteem. Political power can be used to secure more wealth and income 
in an economic market. It is this transferability that makes simultaneous 
devaluation (power devaluation in more than one exchange market) im -
portant in stimulating right-  wing activism. If an actor’s purchasing power 
is only devaluating within one market, his power within other markets can 
be utilized to restore his devaluating purchasing power. When the actor is 
losing power within more than one market, however, there is a greater in -
centive to act outside of established institutions within a social movement. 
In such cases, the actor’s capacity to maintain or restore power through 
institutionalized means is weakening.
I do not argue that every person who joins a right-  wing movement is 
experiencing power devaluation. The circumstances described above, how-
ever, can contribute to the formation of a critical mass of activists who have 
particularly strong incentives to support right-  wing activism. Once such a 
critical mass is formed, other supporters may be drawn into the organiza -
tion for a wide variety of reasons (including social incentives—  a point that 
will be addressed in depth in chapter 7). Social-  movement organizations 
are typically diverse in terms of their members’ level of commitment to the 
cause and in terms of their own ideologies and goals.
29 Yet, as discussed 
in the next section, individuals are unlikely to join an organization if that 
organization does not construct a rationale for its existence that at least ap-
pears credible in light of conditions that the potential supporter is able to 
observe within her or his community.
Interpretive Processes
I have identified conditions that produce economic, political, and status-
 based power devaluation. Macro-  level shifts in the structure of social re -
lations may be linked to changes in the supply of, and demand for, that


--- PAGE 50 ---
PoweR devalua Tion 43
which individuals offer in exchange. Devaluation in purchasing power 
within either exchange market can generate incentives to engage in right-
 wing activism, particularly when clearly identifiable groups are dispropor -
tionately bearing the brunt of devaluation. Power devaluation reduces a 
group’s capacity to maintain its advantages within established institutions, 
and many individuals are likely to be open to any form of collective action 
that is oriented toward maintaining and/or restoring their power. Power de-
valuation by itself does not directly stimulate right-  wing activism. It does, 
however, alter individuals’ perceptions of their circumstances and provide 
opportunities to construct new interpretive frames that generate support for 
right- wing mobilization.
The insights of frame-  alignment theorists are crucial here. In a path-
 breaking article published more than twenty years ago, David Snow and his 
colleagues, drawing on Goffman’s frame-  analytic perspective, emphasized 
the important role of cognition in social movement activism. The frame 
concept refers to schemata of interpretation that allow individuals to make 
sense of their social environment and the world at large.
30 Frame alignment 
refers to an active and ongoing process of making interpretive orientations 
offered by social movement organizations congruent with those held by 
individuals whose support the social-  movement organization hopes to en -
list. The key insight of the framing perspective on social movements is that 
individuals are unlikely to participate in collective action unless they first 
perceive that social change is both desirable and possible. McAdam makes 
a similar point, giving an important role to “cognitive liberation” in his po-
litical process model. As McAdam states,
The important implication of this argument is that segments of society 
may very well submit to oppressive conditions unless that oppression is 
collectively defined as both unjust and subject to change. In the absence 
of these necessary attributions, oppressive conditions are likely, even in 
the face of increased resources, to go unchallenged.
31
These general insights are crucial in the study of social movements. The 
framing perspective in social-  movement research is a remedy for the way 
in which classical theories, and contemporary theories such as resource-
 mobilization theory and political-  opportunity theory, have neglected 
micro- level mobilization processes. The framing perspective invites investi-
gation into how members and leaders of social- movement organizations ac-
tively construct interpretive frames that encourage and inspire individuals 
to participate in collective action.
Power devaluation, as described above, can cause a shift in interpretive 
orientations and can lead many individuals to perceive that social change


--- PAGE 51 ---
44 PoweR devalua Tion
is indeed desirable. It is the time-  variant nature of the collective grievances 
that is important in this regard. When individuals or members of a par -
ticular group have never possessed certain rights and privileges, it may not 
naturally occur to them that they deserve a claim to those rights and privi-
leges. However, individuals and group members are more quickly disposed 
toward action when they are losing rights and privileges that they have pre -
viously enjoyed. Many of us may wish to own an expensive sports car, but 
we do not vigorously pursue the goal. An owner of a Ferrari, on the other 
hand, is quick to respond when his possession is threatened by thieves or by 
wind- blown shopping carts in the supermarket parking lot. Snow and his 
colleagues make a similar point when they discuss how collective action can 
be spurred by a “disruption of the quotidian,” wherein groups respond to an 
event that “disrupts everyday subsistence and survival routines.”
32 
Although power devaluation is likely to lead many individuals to de -
sire social change—  change that would preserve or restore their power— 
participation in a social movement requires more than desire. As the fram-
ing literature emphasizes, individuals must also perceive that social change 
is possible and that their participation in collective action will contribute to 
a successful outcome. Structural changes that lead to power devaluation, 
therefore, can generate a pool of individuals who are favorably predisposed 
toward right- wing mobilization. To capitalize on these conditions, leaders 
of an emergent movement must develop collective action frames that con -
vince these same individuals that participation in the movement will not be 
wasted effort. Movement leaders and recruiters must demonstrate that they 
not only understand the problems of those they wish to recruit, but that 
they also have a solution. Along these lines, Snow and Benford point out 
that a successful collective-  action frame includes diagnostic, prognostic, 
and motivational components.
33 To enlist support, movement leaders must 
diagnose the problems facing their constituents, propose a course of action 
that could address their grievances, and create a sense of both urgency and 
efficacy to encourage immediate action.
34 
These framing efforts must resonate strongly with those being targeted 
for recruitment.35 A movement’s diagnosis and prognosis need not be factu-
ally accurate to be effective.36 The frames, however, must appear credible to 
those who are on the receiving end. Successful frames are those that speak 
directly to the source of the problems confronting potential members and 
supporters and also present a plausible course of action that could be taken 
to reverse power devaluation.
If power devaluation results from changes in the supply of, and de -
mand for, that which actors offer in exchange, simple microeconomic logic


--- PAGE 52 ---
PoweR devalua Tion 45
implies a course of action that should be intuitively appealing to anyone ex-
periencing power devaluation. An actor’s purchasing power can be restored 
by (a) stimulating the demand for what the actor offers in exchange and/or 
(b) restricting the supply of competitors. 
One strategic framing option that is available to those initiating right-
 wing mobilization is to activate cultural identities and offer these identities 
as alternative bases of exchange. Activation of cultural identities can add 
a motivational component to the frame. But it can also be useful in de -
veloping the frame’s prognosis. Cultural appeals may be used to stimulate 
demand for what the movement’s constituents offer in exchange. In this 
way, the movement seeks to enlist support from those who share a cultural 
bond. Such appeals can promote solidarity and a common consciousness 
among those who are experiencing power devaluation, but they may also 
gain support and sympathy from individuals who share the cultural bond 
but are not experiencing power devaluation in an economic, political, or 
status- based market. Cultural attacks can also be used to restrict the sup -
ply of competitors. Arguments for strict restrictions on immigration, for 
example, can be made on both cultural and economic grounds. Regardless 
of which grounds are used in the argument, enactment of strict restrictions 
limits the supply of individuals entering the country. 
As is true in most social movements, organizers and recruiters for right-
 wing movements must foster a strong sense of collective identity. This pro-
cess typically involves identifying group boundaries—  that is, specifying 
which social groups the movement represents and which social groups it 
opposes. Individuals are unlikely to participate in a movement unless they 
view themselves as being a member of a clearly identifiable group represented 
by the movement.
37 The task of mobilizing right-  wing activism, therefore, 
would be considerably more difficult if power devaluation was randomly 
distributed across members of all social groups. That is rarely the case, how-
ever. More often than not, the population experiencing power devaluation 
overlaps substantially with cultural boundaries, making cultural identity an 
effective tool for any movement seeking to reverse power devaluation.
38 The 
slogan “buy American,” for example, encourages consumers to disregard 
quality and price of commodities and instead purchase American-  made 
goods out of a sense of patriotism and civic duty.
Organizational Resources and Political Opportunities
I have argued that the emergence of right- wing social movements such as the 
Ku Klux Klan cannot be explained by either resource mobilization theory 
or by political opportunity theory. Each of these theories takes collective


--- PAGE 53 ---
46 PoweR devalua Tion
grievances as a starting point and seeks to explain how, rather than why, 
collective action emerges. Resource- mobilization theory treats collective ac-
tion as an organizational problem and draws attention to how qualitative 
and quantitative changes in organizational resources available to a group 
can stimulate collective action. Political-  opportunity theory gives attention 
to how changes in the political context can contribute to collective action 
primarily by influencing people’s perceptions of the likelihood of succeed -
ing if they were to engage in collective action. No matter how aggrieved 
people may be, if they sense that the political climate dooms them to failure 
they are unlikely to mobilize.
When we are considering collective action that is undertaken by 
relatively powerless and oppressed groups, both of these theories make 
good sense. In such cases, the why of collective action is not problematic. 
Members of the group are deprived of benefits enjoyed by others in society, 
and they are treated unjustly by legal and political authorities. It is often 
safe to assume that many members of the relatively powerless group desire 
social change, but require an organizational infrastructure and a favorable 
shift in the political context to make change happen. When considering 
right- wing mobilization, however, the why of collective action may not be 
obvious. More important, it is likely that time variant grievances, rather 
than an infusion of new organizational resources or a favorable shift in the 
political context, provide the initial impetus for action. Indeed, the reac -
tive or defensive nature of right-  wing action suggests that resources avail -
able to the movement’s constituents are declining rather than increasing, 
and political circumstances are becoming less favorable rather than more 
favorable. These groups are, after all, oriented toward restoring and pre -
serving preexisting benefits and privileges. Rather than capitalizing on new 
resources and new political opportunities to expand their rights and privi-
leges, they are reacting to a new threat to their capacity to maintain an ad-
vantaged position.
This is not to say, however, that resources and political opportunities 
are irrelevant to right-  wing mobilization. Indeed, it is difficult to imagine 
sustained collective action taking place when resources are lacking or where 
the political context is so oppressive that a movement does not have some 
room to breathe. Although neither resources nor political opportunities 
trigger right- wing mobilization, each plays an important role in determin -
ing the movement’s growth and trajectory. According to my theory, power 
devaluation leads to a shift in interpretive processes, which can lead those 
who are experiencing power devaluation to activate preexisting organiza -


--- PAGE 54 ---
PoweR devalua Tion 47
tional resources and exploit preexisting political opportunities in an effort 
to reverse devaluation.
Because right-  wing movements act on behalf of relatively advantaged 
groups, the movement’s constituents typically have access to organizational 
resources and they have some degree of access to those who hold political 
power. However, organizational resources and political opportunities should 
be treated as variables rather than as constants. Not all groups affected by 
power devaluation are equal in these regards, and these differences can de-
termine whether or not collective grievances are transformed into sustained 
collective action. Sustained collective action, right-  wing or otherwise, re -
quires money, space, equipment, alternative media, and leadership.
39 The 
greater the availability of such resources, the more likely it should be that 
groups of individuals experiencing power devaluation will be able to attract 
large numbers of members and supporters and to sustain collective action.
Sustained collective action should also depend on the structure of po-
litical opportunities, defined by Tarrow as “consistent—  but not necessarily 
formal or permanent—  dimensions of the political environment that pro -
vide incentives for people to undertake collective action by affecting their 
expectations of success or failure.”
40 Some of the primary forms of political 
opportunities that have been identified in the social movement literature 
have to do with popular access to the political system, instability of elite 
alignments, the presence of elite allies, and levels of state repression directed 
against the group.
41 Political opportunities vary over time and across space 
and, like organizational resources, can shape the trajectory and growth 
of right- wing mobilization. The more favorable the political context, the 
stronger the movement can grow.
Consequences of Right- Wing Movements
The logic of the power-  devaluation model can be extended to analyze the 
consequences, as well as the causes, of right-  wing mobilization. What de -
termines whether or not a right- wing movement will influence the political 
process? To a great extent, this will depend on how successful the move -
ment is in terms of recruiting members and supporters. Strength in num -
bers is clearly applicable when considering a movement’s capacity to seize 
power by force, win power through electoral processes, or gain significant 
concessions from the state’s representatives. All else constant, it is easier for 
a large and resourceful group to seize power than it is for a smaller and less 
resourceful group. Size also matters when it comes to influencing electoral 
outcomes or gaining concessions from state representatives. If a movement


--- PAGE 55 ---
48 PoweR devalua Tion
can deliver a large block of votes from its members and adherents, it is pos-
sible to elect candidates who will serve the movement’s constituency. And if 
the movement is large and resourceful, any candidate seeking to maintain 
his or her power must consider the costs and benefits of granting conces -
sions (or failing to grant concessions) to the movement.
42 
Even a strong and resourceful movement, however, must typically en -
list support from allies if it is to seize power or if it is to win victories by 
influencing electoral processes.
43 The movement’s core constituency may be 
of sufficient size to demand attention, but not large enough to overcome 
all other groups contending for power. Indeed, a right-  wing movement 
typically generates a backlash, and the threat that it poses to those who 
are outside of the movement can promote unified opposition. In addition 
to organizational strength and the size of its membership base, therefore, 
the impact that the movement has on political processes will depend on its 
capacity to forge alliances with other groups. The movement’s capacity to 
form such alliances is to some degree predetermined by the nature of power 
devaluation and the interpretive processes that gave life to the movement in 
the first place.
Right- wing movements draw upon cultural identities as a remedy for 
power devaluation, using cultural appeals to stimulate the demand for what 
their constituents offer in exchange and using cultural attacks to restrict the 
supply of competitors. In a sense, the movement is drawing new battle lines, 
promoting in- group solidarity on one front to overcome losses suffered by 
core constituents on another front. Once these battle lines are drawn it is 
hard to turn back, even when doing so would be necessary to form alli -
ances needed to secure political victories. Framing strategies that are effec-
tive in recruiting members and supporters may limit a movement’s capacity 
to forge alliances that are needed to secure political victories.
I apply the power- devaluation model in the remaining chapters of this 
book. I begin by considering how economic power devaluation contributed 
to the growth of the Klan. I identify important sources of economic power 
devaluation that affected many individuals who were drawn to the Klan in 
the early 1920s. I also show how Klan leaders responded to economic power 
devaluation as they developed collective action frames that were designed to 
attract members and adherents.


--- PAGE 56 ---
49
Klansmen should be taught that it is their sacred duty as Klansmen to al-
ways favor a Klansman in the commercial world, whether it be in buying, 
selling, advertising, employment, political, social, or in any way wherein 
a Klansman is affected.
— Imperial Night- Hawk, November 7, 1923
According to the power- devaluation model discussed in the previous chap-
ter, macro- level shifts in the structure of social relations can result in eco -
nomic, political, and status-  based power devaluation for subsets of the 
population. This devaluation can provide incentives to support right-  wing 
mobilization. It alters the way in which individuals understand their cir -
cumstances and creates new framing opportunities for those who wish to 
organize collective action. In this chapter I begin by identifying primary 
sources of economic power devaluation that affected many of those who 
were drawn to the Klan in the early 1920s, and I discuss how the Klan con-
structed interpretive frames that should have resonated strongly with those 
whom the movement sought to recruit. I rely primarily upon the Klan’s 
publications, especially its national publication, the Imperial Night- Hawk, 
to identify the major themes that the movement addressed within its fram-
ing efforts. The Klansmen’s words, expressed in these periodicals, also pro-
vide a window into the way in which Klan leaders diagnosed the problems 
confronting the movement’s constituents. 
Although I believe that scholars have not fully appreciated the role that 
economic conditions played in stimulating the Klan’s growth, I also feel it 
4
Responding to Economic Change:  
Redefining Markets along Cultural Lines


--- PAGE 57 ---
50 ResPonding T o econoMic change
is important to avoid economic reductionism. The economy is just one of 
several factors relevant in understanding the emergence and growth of the 
Klan. It is noteworthy that movement leaders had more to say about race, 
religion, and nativity than they did about the economy. However, Klan 
leaders did discuss economic conditions, and the power-  devaluation model 
will help to illuminate the way that economic grievances articulated by the 
movement were intertwined with cultural identities. Because racial, ethnic, 
religious, and gender boundaries overlapped substantially with economic-
 class positions and occupational boundaries in the 1920s, cultural conflicts 
were often simultaneously economic conflicts.
Although I reject assumptions made by classical social-  movement 
theory about the irrationality of social- movement participants, I believe it is 
also important not to exaggerate the rationality and foresight of the move-
ment’s leaders and members. I am not arguing that Klan leaders convened 
to discuss economic policies and as a result devised a clear, consistent, and 
always coherent set of positions that, if implemented, would have solved the 
economic grievances confronting the movement’s members and supporters. 
It would be more accurate to say that the movement leaders, through pro-
cesses of trial and error, stumbled upon a way of talking about the economy 
that appealed to many native-  born white Protestant Americans during this 
specific historical moment. The Klan practiced an opportunistic form of 
recruiting. As discussed in the opening chapter, the movement began to hit 
its stride when recruiters were instructed to go into the field and identify 
problems facing community members and then offer the Klan as a solu -
tion to those problems. Through this process, recruiters certainly would 
have learned that the economic livelihoods of many Americans were being 
threatened by macro-  level shifts in economic arrangements. These eco -
nomic conditions provided a framing opportunity for the movement’s lead-
ers and recruiters. 
Klan leaders emphasized that they were not in favor of policies that 
would benefit any particular social class. Indeed, they consistently argued 
that class divisions were dangerous to American society and Americans 
should subordinate their class interests to promote the common interests of 
all native- born, white Protestants. The “Klansman’s Creed” includes state -
ments professing the movement’s belief in “a closer relationship of capital 
and labor” and “the prevention of unwarranted strikes by foreign labor agi-
tators.”
1 Varying responses to the Klan’s message should have had less to do 
with specific attributes of individuals and more to do with how economic 
life was organized in local communities.


--- PAGE 58 ---
ResPonding T o econoMic change 51
Consolidation of Capitalism and the Deskilling of Labor
The decade of the 1920s is often described as a period of economic pros -
perity that preceded the Great Depression, but the prosperity of the 1920s 
was unevenly distributed. Economic hardships and uncertainties facing 
many Americans during this decade were described at length by Robert 
and Helen Lynd in the classic sociological study Middletown: A Study of 
American Culture.
2 We now know that “Middletown” was actually Muncie, 
Indiana. Like nearby Kokomo, Muncie was swarming with Klan members 
in the early 1920s. In fact, according to the Klan’s membership lists for 
the state of Indiana, 27 percent of white, native-  born males in Delaware 
County (of which Muncie is the county seat) were members of the Ku Klux 
Klan. As the Lynds describe it, 
Coming upon Middletown like a tornado, catching up many of these 
latent differences into a frenzy of activity, the Ku Klux Klan has empha-
sized, during its brief career in Middletown, potential factors of disinte-
gration. Brought to town originally, it is said, by a few of the city’s lead-
ing business men as a vigilante committee to hold an invisible whip over 
the corrupt Democratic political administration and generally “to clean 
up the town,” its ranks were quickly thrown open under a professional 
organizer, and by 1923 some 3,500 of the local citizens are said to have 
joined. As the organization developed, the business men withdrew, and 
the Klan became largely a working class movement. Thus relieved of the 
issue that prompted its original entry into Middletown, the Klan, lacking 
a local issue, took over from the larger national organization a militant 
Protestantism with which it set about dividing the city; the racial issue, 
though secondary, was hardly less ardently proclaimed.
3 
Although the Lynds emphasized the working-  class composition of the 
Klan’s membership in Muncie, it is important to keep in mind that the 
authors defined “working-  class status” in very broad terms. Working-  class 
individuals were defined as those who “address their activities in getting a 
living primarily to things, utilizing material tools in the making of things 
and the performance of services.”
4 This definition includes skilled workers 
and artisans—  for example, members of the old middle class who engage in 
labor but also own the means of production (such as tools and small shops). 
As the Lynds describe it, social relations in Muncie were increasingly 
circumscribed by social class during this time period. An intensification of 
class stratification was accompanied by rapid changes in the organization 
of work in the city. Women were beginning to enter the labor force at an


--- PAGE 59 ---
52 ResPonding T o econoMic change
unprecedented pace, with many of them going into manufacturing occupa-
tions. Manufacturing employment was itself undergoing dramatic change. 
In a very short time span, the apprentice–master craftsman system that had 
characterized manufacturing production in the city had largely given way 
to assembly- line production. As the superintendent of a Muncie machine 
shop expressed it, “Seventy-  five percent of our force of 800 men can be 
taken from the farm or high school and trained in a week’s time.” Muncie’s 
workers were vulnerable to the fluctuating labor demands. In fact, 62 per -
cent of the working class males interviewed by the Lynds had lost time due 
to a layoff in the first six months of 1924.
5 
The Lynds chose to study Muncie, Indiana, because of its middle-  of-
 the- road quality. Muncie, they believed, was a representative case in the 
study of contemporary American life. Although Muncie may not have been 
perfectly representative of American cities, the conditions described by the 
Figure 5. A Klan parade in Muncie, Indiana, 1923. The sign reads “If you 
can’t respect our country’s flag 
m o v e o n. You’ll never be missed.” W. A. Swift 
Collection. Courtesy of Ball State University. Copyright 2006. All rights 
reserved.


--- PAGE 60 ---
ResPonding T o econoMic change 53
Lynds certainly extended beyond Muncie’s city limits. In many commu -
nities throughout the nation, similar changes in manufacturing produc -
tion were being implemented. Economic transitions in the early 1900s, of 
course, were rooted in ongoing processes of industrialization. The Industrial 
Revolution in the United States began, in earnest, in the aftermath of the 
American Civil War. It was not until the 1920s, however, that a majority 
of U.S. citizens resided in urban locations. As industrialization developed, 
economic and political power steadily accrued to the industrial elite. Along 
with prosperity generated by industrialization, many Americans also expe-
rienced negative consequences. As Link and McCormick describe it, 
When Americans of the early 1900s looked at their society, many sensed 
what a few articulated: the economic changes of the preceding genera -
tion had created profound social strains and widespread misery. Mothers 
worked for long hours in unsafe factories in exchange for fewer dol -
lars than single people, let alone families, could survive on in decency. 
Figure 6. Marching Klansmen attract a crowd of curious onlookers in Anderson, 
Indiana, 1922. W. A. Swift Collection. Courtesy of Ball State University. 
Copy right 2006. All rights reserved.


--- PAGE 61 ---
54 ResPonding T o econoMic change
Twelve- year- old children labored there too; some of them fell down ele -
vator shafts or lost their hands to the machines. 6 
Such conditions helped to give rise to the Progressive movement in the 
early 1900s. The banner of “progressivism” covered a wide variety of re -
form efforts initiated by numerous groups (often with contradictory goals). 
Progressives voiced their opposition to trusts, robber barons, big- money in-
terests, and protective tariffs that sheltered manufacturing interests while 
raising prices for farmers and middle-  class consumers. Progressives also 
opposed urban political machines. Middle-  and upper- class reformers were 
critical of the machines because of the high real estate taxes that they im -
posed, their alleged corrupt practices, and the special attention that they 
paid to poor and working-  class immigrants who often formed the base of 
the bosses’ electoral support.
7 
Industrialization was also accompanied by the growth of organized 
labor. Total union membership increased from less than 500,000 just be -
fore the turn of the century to approximately 5,000,000 by 1920. Labor 
strengthened its position during World War I, as President Wilson granted 
several concessions in order to promote national unity during wartime. 
Labor exercised its growing muscles in the late 1910s and early 1920s with 
a series of strikes. As the war came to an end, however, capitalists intensi -
fied efforts to undermine the strength of labor through an open-  shop drive 
combined with paternalistic practices. Workers were encouraged to express 
their grievances through company unions. Company unions had enrolled 
about 1.5 million workers by 1928, while membership in the American 
Federation of Labor plummeted during the 1920s.
8 Welfare capitalism of 
the 1920s was promoted by industrialists and by many in the Republican 
Party as a way to promote general prosperity that would benefit both em -
ployers and employees. 
Organized labor was an impediment to capitalists’ profits because the 
unions stood in the way of the rationalization of manufacturing produc -
tion.
9 Much of the unions’ bargaining power came from skilled manufac -
turing workers’ ability to maintain control over the production process. A 
monopoly over the skills required for production gave workers some au -
tonomy and allowed them to pace their work and control levels of output.
10 
A booming wartime economy allowed employers to profit without aggres -
sively pursuing wage reductions for employees. 11 However, the increased 
production levels during the war (and in the years before the United States 
entered the war) also provided a justification for consolidating industry and 
implementing more efficient production methods.
12


--- PAGE 62 ---
ResPonding T o econoMic change 55
During the wartime economic expansion, with labor in short supply, 
unions focused primarily on bargaining for higher wages rather than re -
sisting rationalization. 13 A sharp postwar recession, however, provided ad -
ditional incentives for capitalists to reduce worker autonomy in the work -
place. Technological advances, particularly increased capacity to harness 
electricity in manufacturing production, facilitated the process. Phenomenal 
growth in the auto industry also provided a clear example of how the high-
 speed assembly line could dramatically increase productivity while simulta-
neously stripping control of the production process from the worker. 
Changes in the organization of work sharply increased productivity in 
manufacturing production during the years in which the Klan was gaining 
strength. Although skilled labor still had a role to play in industrial produc-
tion, industrialists increasingly relied upon unskilled labor in the pursuit of 
profit. Skilled laborers and small-  scale manufacturers became increasingly 
vulnerable due to a declining demand for skilled labor and because small 
producers were at a competitive disadvantage due to the increasing effi -
ciency and higher volumes of output in large factories employing unskilled 
labor. According to U.S. census reports, the number of manufacturing es -
tablishments in the nation producing in excess of $1 million in products 
increased from 3,819 in 1914 to 10,583 in 1925. In 1914 these large estab-
lishments employed approximately 35 percent of manufacturing wage earn-
ers in the United States. By 1925, more than half of manufacturing wage 
earners (56.8 percent) were employed by establishments producing more 
than a million dollars worth of products annually.
14 The average number of 
workers per manufacturing establishment remained relatively constant in 
the early part of the century, but then increased substantially from 1914 to 
1919 (see Figure 7). Value added to manufacture in the United States also 
increased sharply during this same time period (see Figure 8). 
Increasing reliance on unskilled labor in manufacturing production 
held cultural, as well as economic, implications. Those who occupied posi-
tions as skilled workers or as small-  scale manufacturers were, overwhelm -
ingly, native- born white Protestant males whose ancestors had come to the 
United States from northern and western European nations. Structural 
changes in the early 1900s, however, meant that different actors would be 
available to fill unskilled manufacturing positions. Immigration was an im-
portant factor. Immigration rose steadily in the first decade of the twentieth 
century and remained high until the onset of World War I (see Fig  ure 9). 
After a steep decline during the war years, immigration rates began to rise 
again in the early 1920s. Unlike earlier waves of immigration, the vast ma-
jority of individuals entering the country in the early 1900s came from


--- PAGE 63 ---
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
1899 1904 1909 1914 1919
Year
Workers per Manufacturing Establishment in the United States
Figure 7. Average number of workers per manufacturing establishment, 1899–1919. 
U.S. Department of Commerce, Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1924.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
1899 1904 1909 1914 1919
Value Added to Manufacture in the United States (millions of dollars)
Year
Figure 8. Value added to manufacture (in millions of dollars), 1899–1919. U.S. 
Department of Commerce, Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1924.


--- PAGE 64 ---
ResPonding T o econoMic change 57
central, eastern, and southern European nations. English was not their na-
tive tongue, and the immigrants tended to be Catholic or Jewish rather than 
Protestant. In the 1920s, the divide between skilled and unskilled labor 
overlapped substantially with ethnic and religious cleavages.
Immigration was not the only source of unskilled labor in the 1920s. 
Based on data from the U.S. census, the number of gainfully employed 
women in the United States increased from approximately 5.3 million 
in 1900 to 8.6 million in 1920. During this time period, the number of 
women in sales and clerical occupations increased by 390 percent. Although 
in manufacturing the change is less dramatic, women also increasingly en-
tered manufacturing occupations. According to the census, the number of 
women entering into manual occupations (excluding mines and farms) in-
creased from 1.48 million in 1900 to 2.05 million in 1920. The number of 
women listed as laborers (excluding mines and farm) increased by 45 per -
cent. Among men, the number of laborers increased by 35 percent during 
the same period.
African American migration also provided a new source of unskilled 
labor in many urban locations. The Great Migration began around 1910 and 
Figure 9. Immigration to the United States (in thousands), 1899–1929. U.S. 
Department of Commerce, Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1930.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
 
Year
Immigrants
1899
1900
1901
1902
1903
1904
1905
1906
1907
1908
1909
1910
1911
1912
1913
1914
1915
1916
1917
1918
1919
1920
1921
1922
1923
1924
1925
1926
1927
1928
1929


--- PAGE 65 ---
58 ResPonding T o econoMic change
quickly accelerated. Between 1910 and 1930 the percent of southern-  born 
blacks residing outside of the South rose from 5 percent to 13 percent. 15 In 
fact, more than five million blacks migrated out of the South from 1910 to 
1919.
16 Census data indicate that the number of blacks living in northeast-
ern states increased from 484,000 in 1910 to 1,147,000 in 1930. In north-
 central states, the black population increased from 543,000 to 1,262,000 
during the same period. Although smaller in absolute numbers, the num -
ber of African Americans in western states more than doubled, rising from 
51,000 to 120,000. While the Great Migration of African Americans has 
been well documented, it is important to keep in mind that the South also 
experienced substantial intraregional migration during this time period 
with African Americans moving from rural southern locales to southern 
cities. White southerners, also, migrated to nonsouthern states. And like 
African Americans, large numbers of white Americans migrated from rural 
to urban locations. According to census figures, approximately 48.7 percent 
of white Americans lived in an urban location in 1910. Twenty years later, 
almost 60 percent (59.3) resided in an urban location.
Changes in the organization of manufacturing production gener -
ated economic power devaluation for many native-  born white Protestant 
Americans in the early 1900s. Skilled laborers experienced declining de -
mand for their services as industrialists increasingly relied upon machinery 
and unskilled labor in the factories. Small-  scale manufacturers also experi-
enced devaluation resulting from an overall increase in the supply of goods 
being produced. Advances in modern transportation and the expansion of 
retail chain stores such as F. W. Woolworth, S. S. Kresge, and J. C. Penney 
also meant that goods produced in large cities and in distant locations were 
increasingly available for purchase in small towns throughout the nation. As 
a result, small- scale producers in midwestern, western, and southern towns 
increasingly found themselves in competition with large manufacturers in 
cities such as New York, Boston, Chicago, and Philadelphia. According to 
data from the U.S. Federal Trade Commission, there were only 257 retail 
chains in operation in 1910.
17 By 1920, that number had increased to 808, 
and only five years later, in 1925, there were 1,440 chains in operation.18 
Just as skilled manufacturing workers were adversely affected by the con-
solidation of industrial capitalism, small merchants and shop  keepers also 
experienced economic power devaluation by virtue of the overall increase in 
supply of goods which could be purchased from a chain store or through a 
Sears, Roebuck and Co. catalog. Indeed, in many communities during the 
1920s chain stores faced organized resistance. Historian Carl G. Ryant notes 
that Sears adopted the practice of shipping its goods in unmarked wrappers


--- PAGE 66 ---
ResPonding T o econoMic change 59
so that customers would not have to face the wrath of those who opposed 
retail chains.
19 The grievances against chain stores are nicely summarized 
by an operator of a foundry and machine shop in Shreveport, Louisiana:
We have sought to portray the inequities attendant with short weights 
and inferior quality of merchandise sold by the chain store. We have at -
tempted to bring to light the ruinous and devastating effect of sending 
the profits of business out of our local communities to a common center, 
Wall Street. We have appealed to the fathers and mothers— who entertain 
the fond hope of their children becoming prosperous business leaders—
 to awaken to a realization of the dangers of the chain stores’ closing this 
door of opportunity. We have insisted that the payment of starvation 
wages, such as the chain-  store system fosters, must be eradicated. . . . We 
have importuned those who labor to join in striking down the chain sys-
tem in every form and character, before it enslaves the masses and holds 
them prisoners of an economic system which will destroy every vestige of 
individual initiative and personal incentive to progress.
20 
As this statement suggests, power devaluation could be widespread in 
many communities whose local economies had previously been driven by 
local production and where commodities had previously been marketed by 
local merchants. With profits flowing out of the community and toward 
large manufacturing centers and national corporations, local money sup -
plies declined. Stagnating local economies could reduce consumer demand 
for goods and services as well as local employers’ demand for labor. 
Agricultural Depression
A severe agricultural depression in the early 1920s also produced power de-
valuation for many native-  born white Protestant Americans. As was true 
of the industrial changes during this time period, changes in agricultural 
production were rooted in ongoing historical conflicts and struggles. By the 
late 1800s, fewer and fewer individuals could escape the impact that rich 
and powerful organizations had on their everyday lives. American farm -
ers, in particular, were affected by the emergence of powerful corporations. 
Farmers relied upon the railroads to transport their goods to market, but 
resented the large profits falling to the railroad barons. They were also an -
gered by the profits accruing to warehousers and speculators, believing that 
the rewards should go to the producers of goods, rather than to those with 
enough capital to hold them for speculation.
21 American farmers were also 
at the mercy of the seemingly mysterious forces that were responsible for 
the nation’s money supply. Deflationary monetary policies hurt farmers


--- PAGE 67 ---
60 ResPonding T o econoMic change
by increasing the price of credit and by forcing down commodity prices. 22 
Wall Street bankers came to symbolize farmers’ increasing vulnerability to 
forces that were out of their direct control.
Although agrarian grievances lingered, many farmers reaped enormous 
profits in the 1910s. Agricultural exports increased dramatically during the 
decade (see Figure 10). The change is mainly due to increased exports to 
European nations whose populations were preoccupied with war. During 
this time period, many American farmers optimistically increased pro -
duction levels and borrowed money to purchase new equipment to make 
farming more efficient. When the war came to an end, however, exports 
quickly plummeted, and the supply of agricultural commodities produced 
by American farmers substantially exceeded the demand.
23 
The problem was exacerbated by high tariffs. Protective tariffs had been 
relatively low during the years in which Woodrow Wilson, a Democrat, oc-
cupied the White House. When Republican Warren Harding assumed the 
presidency, high tariffs were reinstated with the Emergency Tariff Act of 
1921 and the Fordney- McCumber Tariff Act of 1922. This contributed to 
Figure 10. Exports of crude and manufactured foodstuffs (in thousands of dol-
lars), 1899–1926. U.S. Department of Commerce, Statistical Abstract of the 
United States, 1926, Table 477.
300000
800000
1300000
1800000
2300000
2800000
1899190019011902190319041905190619071908 1909191019111912191319141915191619171918191919201921 19221923192419251926
Year
U.S. Exports of Manufactured Foodstuffs (thousands of dollars)


--- PAGE 68 ---
ResPonding T o econoMic change 61
economic grievances in America’s heartland. The war had transformed the 
United States from a debtor to a creditor nation. The capacity of European 
nations to purchase American farm commodities hinged on their ability 
to sell products to the United States. Tariffs protecting American indus -
try, therefore, impeded such sales. Many Americans residing outside of in-
dustrial centers resented the way in which tariffs benefited those who were 
linked to the industrial economy at the expense of those who were not. As 
can be seen, farmers’ purchasing power rose to high levels in the years 1917 
to 1919 before declining, after the war, to levels even lower than those of the 
early 1900s (see Figure 11). These conditions certainly helped fuel agrarian 
discontent in the early 1920s.
The agricultural depression did not affect all farmers equally. Those 
who produced crops for export were hit especially hard. During the war, for 
example, many hog farmers profited handsomely by exporting pork prod -
ucts to Europe. In 1918 hog prices were close to $18 per hundredweight. By 
1923 prices had plummeted to $7.55 per hundredweight. Similarly, corn 
Figure 11. Ratio of prices received by farmers to prices paid, 1910–1929. U.S. 
Department of Commerce, Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial 
Times to 1970.
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
1910 1911 1912 1913 1914 1915 1916 1917 1918 1919 1920 1921 1922 1923 1924 1925 1926 1927 1928 1929
Year
Parity Ratio


--- PAGE 69 ---
62 ResPonding T o econoMic change
(which many midwestern farmers grew to feed hogs) sold for approximately 
$1.50 per bushel in 1918 but dropped abruptly to $0.64 per bushel in 1920 
and remained low in the early 1920s. Wheat farmers were also hit hard, 
with prices dropping from a high of $2.19 per bushel in 1919 to $0.93 per 
bushel in 1922. Cotton prices also peaked in 1919 at about $35 per pound, 
only to drop to about $17 per pound by 1921.
Changes in the agricultural economy in the early 1920s resulted in 
widespread power devaluation. Many American farmers bore the brunt 
of an abrupt drop in demand for agricultural commodities. Increases in 
protective tariffs further agitated long-  standing resentments held by many 
Americans who paid higher prices for manufactured goods due to policies 
designed to protect the interests of large manufacturers located in a differ-
ent region of the country. While farmers were directly affected by declin -
ing demand for farm commodities, the loss of farm income could have a 
devastating effect on an entire community where agricultural production 
drove the local economy. An overall decline in the supply of money in such 
a community meant that power devaluation would be experienced by mer-
chants, shop owners, professionals, and individuals seeking employment.
The Klan’s Framing of Economic Grievances
The 1920s Klan, in many respects, resembled European fascist movements 
that were emerging during the same time period. The organization employed 
a strategy combining electoral participation, violence, and intimidation as it 
sought to promote “100 percent Americanism,” breaking down all class bar-
riers. Like the Rexists in Belgium, the Klan was strongly anti-  Communist, 
but also blamed big business for the impoverishment of small and medium 
sized family run businesses.
24 As was the case in 1924 Germany, where col-
lapses in agricultural prices in some regions made rural communities suscep-
tible to mobilization by the Nazi Party, devastating agricultural declines in 
the early 1920s made many American rural-  dwellers receptive to the Klan’s 
message.
25 And similar to the Italian case, where a socialist mo  nopoly over 
employment opportunities and wage contracts pushed excluded groups to-
ward fascism, the Klan acted against Socialists and other groups on the 
political left, and against the patronage systems typical of urban political 
machines in the United States.
26
While many modern historians have overlooked connections between 
the 1920s Ku Klux Klan and rising European fascism, these comparisons 
were being made by contemporaries of the Klan, both by opponents of the 
movement and by Klan leaders who spoke admirably of European fascists.
27


--- PAGE 70 ---
ResPonding T o econoMic change 63
For example, one article in the Klan’s Imperial Night- Hawk proclaims “the 
Facisti of Italy came into existence in a cloak of liberty, like a rainbow of 
promise, and was hailed by even the enlightened element of the world as a 
‘voice in the wilderness’ of human freedom and religious tolerance.” In an -
other article, the Night- Hawk claimed that “Mussolini’s battle in his home 
country to subdue communism and anarchy and halt Papal aggression was 
an entirely worthy cause.”
28 Klan leaders of the 1920s saw their movement 
as playing a similar role. 29 According to Hiram Evans, the Klan intended 
to break down all barriers between classes to create a united America. He 
added that this required violence, at times, because of vigorous and orga -
nized resistance to this goal.
30
Economic changes taking place in the United States generated incen -
tives for many individuals to support right-  wing mobilization. People who 
were adversely affected by these changes were not elite, yet they were also 
not poor and oppressed. For many, a relatively advantaged position was 
being undermined by decreasing demand for what they offered in economic 
exchange or from an increase in the supply of others who offered something 
similar in economic exchange. However, power devaluation does not auto -
matically result in right-  wing activism. For a social movement to emerge, 
interpretive frames must be constructed, and these frames must convince 
a critical mass of individuals that social change is both desirable and pos -
sible through collective action. These interpretive processes are vital when it 
comes to transforming collective discontent into collective action.
The Klan’s leaders discussed a wide range of issues in public addresses 
and in the periodicals that they published. The power-  devaluation model, 
combined with knowledge of the economic changes that were taking place 
in the early 1900s, can be used to show why the Klan’s framing of economic 
problems struck a chord with many Americans in the early 1920s. The ar -
ticle below, penned by the Klan’s national leader, Imperial Wizard Hiram 
Wesley Evans, nicely summarizes themes that were addressed elsewhere 
(albeit in a more fractionalized manner) in the Klan’s literature. Here, the 
Klan’s Imperial Wizard offers his analysis of economic transitions that were 
taking place in the early 1900s:
Since the Lord said, “Six days shalt thou labor, and rest upon the seventh 
day,” all the emphasis has been placed upon the latter part of that divine 
injunction. We have defied the Sabbath, when God intended and so ar -
ranged His universe, that the six days of labor should be all-  important. 
The command from on high was to work, work, work, work, work,


--- PAGE 71 ---
64 ResPonding T o econoMic change
work— and not by proxy, but with our own hands and hearts and feet. 
Otherwise it would not have been provided in nature’s laws that health 
and happiness have no other source that is so invariably safe and sure.
This Nation has committed, or at least permitted, fundamental errors 
for which the curse of evil consequences may never entirely be obliterated. 
Slavery was instituted and the racial results of it will probably remain so 
long as the Republic has existence. Then, in response to the same un-
 Christian dread of creative work, more vaguely and yet more generally we 
established serventry [sic]. There followed logically, inevitably, the more 
modern and monstrous cheap labor idea. The steps have been: owner and 
slave, master and serving man, magnate and menial.
This is a national tendency which we cannot charge to immigration, 
old or new. In fact the old immigration is perhaps more guiltless than the 
native stock. But it is fundamentally related to our modern immigration 
problem.
Humanity has become a commodity. For mercenary motives, our im-
porters of it want the most inferior grade. Industry desires cheap labor. 
Therefore, we have had this recent flood of 5 and 10- cent citizenship.
Take any map which shows the concentration of the South and East-
ern European type of immigrant and you will see what has happened. 
Wherever manufacturing and mining and lumbering predominate, there 
the hordes of unskilled labor have overwhelmingly been assembled. In 
the last two decades it has reached the proportions of a deluge.
Do our overlords of industry realize what they are doing to America? 
Have they stopped to measure the national consequences of this cheap 
foreign labor idea? Is it the part of patriotism to import inferior men -
tal and moral elements in such numbers as to lower our standards even 
below the danger point? Is profit more important than the sum total of 
American Citizenship?
31 
Evans’s discussion of the economy reflects republican ideology and 
Jeffersonian ideals that were widely and deeply held by skilled laborers, 
farmers, and other middle- class Americans in the early 1900s.
32 Republican 
ideology stressed the importance of individual autonomy in sustaining 
democratic institutions. Individuals, according to this line of thought, must 
participate in the political process while considering what is in the best in-
terest of the nation as a whole, rather than what is in the best interest of 
the individual voter. To do this, citizens must be free from coercion and, 
therefore, not dependent upon employers, spouses, religious authorities, or 
others who might limit their autonomy. Evans bemoans the commodifi -


--- PAGE 72 ---
ResPonding T o econoMic change 65
cation of human labor and notably places blame on the industrial elite— 
the “overlords of industry”—  for prioritizing profit over republican virtue. 
The Klan’s Imperial Wizard condemned slavery, arguing that the system 
reflected “un- Christian dread of creative work.” In general, economic prob-
lems of the day, according to Evans’s analysis, were rooted in the increasing 
reliance on unskilled labor in the pursuit of profit.
Although critical of industrial capitalists, Evans expressed no sympathy 
toward the proletariat. Indeed, as was common in Klan literature of the 
time, he conflates unskilled laborers and immigrants. Much of the article 
from which I have quoted above describes the recent wave of immigrants in 
very disparaging terms. For example, later in that article Evans writes,
The present and recent flood of inferior foreigners has vastly increased our 
illiteracy, vitally lowered the health level and visibly menaced America by 
inheritable mental and moral deficiencies. Where among true Americans 
is the voice that would dare either to contradict or defend these evil 
conditions?
33 
The Klan’s leader thus provides both an economic and a cultural argument 
for restricting immigration. The economic problem is that a steady flow of 
immigrants facilitates capitalists’ efforts to rationalize manufacturing pro -
duction, devaluing skilled labor in the process. At the same time, Evans 
characterizes immigrants as inherently inferior to the native stock.
Notably, Evans did allow for one important exception to the rule in 
terms of his condemnation of the use of unskilled labor. Referring to condi-
tions in rural America he wrote,
In this farm field exists the only legitimate and justifiable excuse for cheap 
labor, yet that class is moving irresistibly cityward to swell the slums and 
multiply immorality. For example, throughout the south the colored 
race, in numbers far beyond the statistical showing, is migrating to the 
North— not to its rural districts, but to its industrial centers.
34 
This argument could simultaneously satisfy two different constituencies. 
On the one hand, migration of blacks to urban centers was one factor facili-
tating the rationalization of manufacturing production and undermining 
the bargaining power of white laborers.
35 At the same time, many southern 
farm owners were facing severe labor shortages during this time period as 
blacks migrated toward the North and toward southern cities.
36 Stemming 
black migration would restrict the supply of unskilled labor in urban set -
tings and would also maintain the demand for positions as agricultural


--- PAGE 73 ---
66 ResPonding T o econoMic change
laborers or sharecroppers, with the latter effect being desirable to Klan con -
stituents in rural locales who exploited black labor. 
Prognosis: Supply Restriction
The Klan’s framing of economic conditions should have resonated strongly 
with many Americans in the early 1920s. Klan leaders spoke directly to 
grievances resulting from economic transitions and, just as important, they 
proposed a cure that would have seemed plausible to those in their targeted 
audience. As argued above, microeconomic logic should be intuitively ap -
pealing to anyone who is experiencing power devaluation. If power devalua-
tion results from an increase in the supply of that which members of a par-
ticular group offer in economic exchange, then advocating courses of action 
that restrict the supply of competitors would seem like an effective means 
of reversing power devaluation. Klan leaders discussed economic conditions 
in a wide variety of ways. However, they consistently emphasized supply 
restrictions as a solution for economic problems. 
Klan writers published numerous articles advocating immigration re -
striction. The general approach taken in these articles is similar to that illus-
trated in Hiram Evans’s article. The Klan writers specify adverse economic 
consequences of immigration, but in order to expand their base of support, 
they also describe the immigrants in unflattering terms. By promoting eth-
nic and cultural solidarity, Klansmen could transform individual grievances 
into collective grievances. At the same time, appeals to cultural identities 
could be used to gain support among those who were not being directly 
affected by the economic consequences of immigration. For example, one 
Klansman writes, 
There are two great influences in this country opposed to checking this 
stream of European “riff-  raff” and in favor of letting down the bars and 
flooding this country with the very scum of the earth. These influences 
are the Roman Catholic church and the big employers of pauper labor.
37 
Similar to Evans, the author points out industrialists’ motive for supporting 
unrestricted immigration and, in the same sentence, also characterizes the 
immigrants as “scum” and “riff- raff.” 
The Klan’s literature focuses primarily on immigration from Europe 
and almost invariably reminds readers that recent waves of immigrants were 
composed primarily of Catholics who, Klan leaders argued, could not be as-
similated into American society. As a national movement, however, the Klan 
also sought to appeal to Protestants in western states who were concerned 
with immigration from other parts of the world. One article “reports,”


--- PAGE 74 ---
ResPonding T o econoMic change 67
Fifty thousand Mexicans have sneaked into the United States during the 
past few months and taken the jobs of Americans at wages on which a 
white man could not subsist. All of the Mexicans are low type peons. 
They are all Catholics and many of them are communists.
38 
Occasional references to Asian immigrants can also be found in the Klan 
literature. These references, like those directed toward European and 
Mexican immigrants, point to dire economic consequences of immigra -
tion while characterizing the immigrants as inherently inferior to white 
Protestant Americans.
The Klansmen’s writing clearly communicates their view that the na -
tion did not require additional unskilled laborers. One article, for example, 
complains about how “those admitted are predominantly of the unskilled 
labor class and those with no occupations at all, the unskilled classifica -
tion being the largest.” The author goes so far as to report relevant data on 
the skills possessed by recent immigrants. In an address to Klansmen at 
a national convention (Klonvocation) in Kansas City, a Klansman argued 
that “Alpines” were unfit for immigration to the United States, describ -
ing them in the following manner: “This group forms the bulk of Europe’s 
peasant class. They come here from the Slavic countries and from Southern 
Germany. They are a stolid, docile, tenacious people— enduring heavy labor, 
but contributing nothing to leadership, initiative and independence.”
39 
From the Klansmen’s perspective, tenacity and a capacity to endure hard 
labor were undesirable traits for immigrants, reflecting the Klansmen’s con-
cerns about the increased use of unskilled labor in American society and 
the deterioration of republican ideals.
Evans proposed that immigration policy should be based on social sci-
entific research and consideration of the welfare of the nation as a whole, 
rather than on the desires of industrialists. In an interview printed in the 
Imperial Night- Hawk, he suggests, 
With exceptions applying only to separated families, we temporarily 
should stop immigration absolutely. Then we should collect the informa -
tion indispensable to a wise immigration policy. Such information would 
contain full knowledge of the causes and the effects of the foreign influx, 
the facts relative to our needs for rural and urban labor, and scientific 
counsel concerning how these needs can be met without injury to the 
all- important principle of ultimate amalgamation into our political and 
social structure.
40 
Notably, such a “scientific” approach would not only restrict the supply 
of unskilled labor that could be employed in manufacturing occupations,


--- PAGE 75 ---
68 ResPonding T o econoMic change
it would also be sensitive to the labor needs of Klan constituents in rural 
locations— what Evans elsewhere referred to as “the only legitimate and jus-
tifiable excuse for cheap labor.”
41 
The Klan leaders’ negative characterizations of unskilled labor indicate 
that they did not view unskilled laborers as a core constituency, regardless 
of the race or ethnicity of the laborer. However, their argument could be ex-
tended, and was extended, in such a way that some unskilled laborers might 
find it appealing. As noted above, promoting cultural solidarity can be an 
effective means of combating power devaluation. In addition to criticizing 
the use of unskilled labor, Klan leaders also argued that unrestricted immi-
gration drove down wages for all American workers. Hiram Evans claimed 
that competition with immigrants “saps the vitality of leadership, because 
it makes the struggle for existence such a burden that people stagger under 
it.” Other Klan writers noted that immigrants “come from countries where 
they have been accustomed to a lower standard of wages and living; they, 
therefore, compete with American labor, which is already over-  crowded.”
42 
These same sentiments were echoed in the Indiana Klan’s newspaper, the 
Fiery Cross:
Stated in plain terms, the demand of large manufacturers for immi -
grant labor at the present time is baldly a demand for cheap labor. It 
is a demand for men who will accept work at wages below that which 
the American standard of living demands; for men who will work longer 
hours than American standards of health and comfort insist should con -
stitute a day’s work; for men who will undermine the American standard 
of living, who will tend to break down the labor unions, who will work 
for a wages so small that the employing class can temporarily reap larger 
profits from their labor.
43 
Klan leaders attempted to make the case that immigration was det -
rimental to all “100 percent Americans,” regardless of their occupational 
status. For example, one author wrote, 
Every foreign government realizes that the liberty of the United States 
and the ease with which the citizens of other countries become enriched, 
at the expense of one hundred per cent American citizens, makes it a 
most desirable place to come to. They are anxious, therefore, to send their 
citizens here to accumulate fortunes and return to their native heath with 
the wealth garnered from the American people who are careless with their 
money and never think that it will eventually find its way to the coffers of 
some foreign banking institution, thereby taking away that which right-
fully belongs to the American citizen.
44


--- PAGE 76 ---
ResPonding T o econoMic change 69
In this way, the Klansman suggests that Americans were unwittingly con -
tributing to the flow of capital from the United States to foreign nations. 
This argument tapped into the same resentments that many Americans held 
about how consumer dollars spent in southern, midwestern, and western 
states enriched large corporations in eastern U.S. cities. Indeed, Hiram 
Evans claimed that some of the eastern states were already “lost to true 
Americanism” and that the midwestern, southern, and western states were 
the new battlegrounds in a fight over fundamental American values and 
interests.
45 
African American Migration
The way in which Klan writers addressed race relations also indicates that 
the movement was not primarily concerned about its constituents’ direct 
competition for jobs but was instead focused on the way that unskilled 
labor strengthened large manufactures at the expense of small-  scale manu-
factures and skilled laborers. The Klan’s rhetoric rarely mentions competi -
tion with African Americans as a problem in need of redress, in spite of 
the fact that during this time period industrialists’ use of blacks as strike -
breakers was a source of racial conflict in many urban locations.
46 In fact, 
several articles boast of the Klan’s efforts to protect blacks from unruly 
mobs. This is not to say that Klan members did not, at times, inflict violence 
upon African Americans. Indeed, before assuming the position of Imperial 
Wizard, Hiram Evans allegedly led a group of Klansmen who brutally as -
saulted a black bellhop in Texas. Many other instances of Klan-  initiated 
violence have been noted by historians and other scholars. However, when 
Evans took control of the national organization, he strategically calculated 
that curtailing Klan violence would be necessary if the movement were to 
broaden its appeal, especially as it moved into the political arena.
47 
The Klan’s leaders characterized blacks as inferior to whites much in the 
same way that they characterized the new wave of European immigrants as 
inherently inferior to native-  born Americans. However, the Klan’s litera -
ture primarily adopted a paternalistic stance toward blacks and spared them 
much of the venom that was directed toward Catholics and immigrants. 
The following passage from the Imperial Night-  Hawk typifies the way in 
which the Klan press addressed the race issue:
We of the Klan are supposed to hate the negro. Nothing could be further 
from the truth. The negro was brought to America. He came as a slave. 
We are in honor and duty bound to promote his health and happiness. 
But he cannot be assimilated. Intermarriage with him on a wholesale scale 
is unthinkable. There are more than ten millions of him—  about a tenth


--- PAGE 77 ---
70 ResPonding T o econoMic change
of our population. He cannot attain the Anglo-  Saxon level. Rushing into 
cities, he is retrograding rather than advancing, and his rate of mortality 
is shockingly high. It is not in his interests any more than in the interests 
of our white population that he should seek to assume the burdens of 
modern government. These are almost too heavy for the strongest shoul-
ders, and their weight is increasing. However much we may regret to state 
the truth when the truth is otherwise than pleasant, it is better that it be 
stated and faced. I am sure the interests of all are served thereby.
48 
This passage clearly illustrates the strategic calculations involved in the 
Klan’s official stance in regard to race relations. Certainly, the Klan’s as -
sertions of white supremacy were attractive to many Americans, given the 
deeply entrenched prejudices of the time period. Unlike the immigration 
issue, however, it was the internal migration of African Americans that con-
tributed to the economic grievances of Klan constituents. The Klan offered 
paternalism as the optimal strategy for discouraging black migration. 
Klan writers, it seems, had resigned themselves to the fact that black 
Americans composed a significant proportion of the American population 
and would continue to do so into the foreseeable future. They attributed that 
reality to mistakes of the past—  a system of slavery that they condemned. 
As Hiram Evans put it, “The negro is here. He was brought here. In love 
and justice must we ever promote his welfare, his health and happiness.”
49 
It was the migration of blacks and their potential for moving out of menial 
positions that was of primary concern. In an article titled “Negroes Flock-
ing to Industrial Centers,” a Klan author alarmingly cites an address made 
by a public figure in Chicago who described how, in the previous ten years, 
Negroes, both men and women, have gained and held places of employ-
ment in five or six of the basic industries of the North, such as pack -
ing, iron and steel and clothing industries. Formerly they were restricted 
mainly to domestic and personal service. Today negroes are coming 
North in numbers comparable to the days of the war labor shortage.
50 
The Klan’s paternalism was undoubtedly designed to keep blacks “in 
their place.” It is important to bear in mind that in the early 1900s not 
all white Americans shared similar strategic interests in regard to African 
Americans. Some whites were engaged in a competitive relationship with 
blacks and had an incentive to support racial violence as a means of elimi-
nating and/or driving away competitors. More prosperous whites did not 
compete with blacks but instead exploited their labor. As Tolnay and Beck 
point out in their study of lynching patterns in the American South, the 
Great Migration prompted a shift in the way in which many southern land


--- PAGE 78 ---
ResPonding T o econoMic change 71
owners interacted with African Americans. Before the exodus began, when 
exit to the North was not a viable option for most blacks, white southern 
landowners could rely upon intimidation and coercion to facilitate the ex -
ploitation of black labor. However, once the migration flow was underway, 
many prosperous southern whites shifted strategies, using paternalistic ap-
peals to dissuade blacks from migrating. In many cases, white landowners 
intervened to prevent lynching attempts initiated by less prosperous white 
southerners— something that they had failed to do before the onset of the 
Great Migration.
51 
The Klan’s paternalism is strikingly similar to that described by Tolnay 
and Beck. As one Klan writer expressed it, “The Knights of the Ku Klux 
Klan has no fight to make upon the negro. He is recognized as an inferior 
race and Klansmen are sworn to protect him, his rights and property and 
assist him in the elevation of his moral and spiritual being and in the pres-
ervation of the purity of his race.”
52 
In the Klan press, movement leaders consistently discouraged members 
and supporters from inflicting violence on African Americans. One Klan 
writer, for example, described how some Klan members aided southern 
farmers by protecting African Americans:
The farmers in the southern part of our territory have seen fit to bring 
in negroes to handle their crops due to the fact that they can’t get white 
labor. Inasmuch as there have not been any negroes in that part of the 
country before, it has caused a lot of trouble, by a bunch of good for 
nothing loafers trying to run out the negroes. At —  —  the other night a 
negro house was fired on and a negro man killed. The Klan has furnished 
the authorities sufficient information to lead to the arrest of the supposed 
murderers. In addition to that fact they have paid the undertaker’s bill 
and mailed the receipt to the negro widow with a letter explaining that 
the Klan had nothing to do with the murder and also offered her assis -
tance in the future.
53
Still another article described how Klansmen prevented the lynching of 
a black man in South Carolina while risking their own lives in the process. 
This type of protection that the Klan offered to black Americans, of course, 
came with strings attached. As Mary Jackman has emphasized, paternalism 
is often an effective strategy in processes of domination and exploitation.
54 
Lurking beneath the surface of the paternalistic rhetoric is an understanding 
that violence may be utilized against members of an exploited group who 
do not conform to the dominant group’s expectations and desires. 
The Klan’s writings make it very clear that the protection it offered to


--- PAGE 79 ---
72 ResPonding T o econoMic change
black Americans extended only to those who were willing to accept a sub-
servient role in society. Klan writers appeared to be particularly concerned 
about the possibility that blacks would be drawn into radical politics. One 
article claimed that an organization called the African Blood Brotherhood 
was being directed from Moscow and was seeking to promote communism 
in the United States. The article concludes, “It proves that there are black 
Bolsheviks as well as white ones and that the call of the Klan for the main -
tenance of White Supremacy is not an idle one.”
55 In another lengthy tirade 
on the threat of communism, a Klan author claims that Communists were 
secretly organizing blacks as part of a plot to extend their influence to the 
United States. According to the author,
To Communists there are but two classes: the working class, and all oth-
ers. There [sic] ideal is to have the working class absorb the others and 
to make of the United States a working class republic, a part of similar 
republics all over the world and all dominated by the central government 
in Moscow.
56 
Klansmen clearly feared the prospects of labor radicals inciting a re -
volt among black Americans. Sounding the alarm on this issue also seems 
to reflect a deliberate strategy used to motivate Klan members and adher -
ents. According to the Imperial Night-  Hawk, “white-  girl followers of the 
Communists are meeting classes of negro prospects as social equals. These 
girls are teaching the negroes to demand social equality.”
57 Black men who 
dared to associate with white women, or who dared to challenge racial in-
equality in any of its dimensions, were immune from the Klan’s paternalistic 
protection. In fact, they were at risk to the type of Klan-  initiated violence 
that movement members administered to those whom the Klan accused of 
immoral or traitorous behavior.
Through paternalism, the Klan aimed to stem the flow of black migra-
tion, which would, in turn, reduce the supply of unskilled laborers in cities 
while preserving the demand for positions as laborers in rural settings. The 
paternalistic rhetoric offered by the Klan’s national leadership was flexible 
enough, however, to provide cover for acts of violence against blacks that 
were carried out in many local settings.
58 As one article expressed it, “The 
law abiding negro need have no fear of the Klan; but woe be unto the 
criminal, white or black.”
59 African Americans who refused to accept a sub-
ordinate position could be victims of the brutality embedded in the Klan’s 
white supremacist views. In an angry response to W . E. B. Du Bois’s call 
for racial equality, a Klan writer declares, “This negro has a wonderful fine 
opinion of himself. We expect he thinks he would make a black pope, and


--- PAGE 80 ---
ResPonding T o econoMic change 73
a good one. The menace of the black brute will never be ‘downed’ until this 
[sic] kind of negroes are put where they can never raise their voice.”
60 
In the early 1920s, the range of acceptable behavior for African Ameri -
cans was extraordinarily narrow. Virtually any type of behavior that did 
not serve the interests of Klan constituents could be defined by Klansmen 
as a threat to the established order. This established order, according to the 
Klan, was sanctioned by an almighty God.
Traditional Families and Labor Force Participation
Women, as well as African Americans and immigrants, provided a source 
of unskilled labor that was needed to fuel the consolidation of industrial 
capitalism as well as the expansion of retail chain stores throughout the 
nation. Not unlike the Klan’s approach to African Americans, men of the 
Klan utilized paternalism in an attempt to control the behavior of women 
and to keep women out of the paid labor force. Klan leaders, for example, 
criticized businessmen who threatened the family and contributed to im -
moral behavior by hiring women to work in offices and factories.
61 Kathleen 
Blee notes that women of the Ku Klux Klan shared the prejudices that the 
men held, but saw the women’s chapters as vehicles for expanding women’s 
rights.
62 However, Blee describes the Klansmen’s approach to women as 
a mixture of paternalism and misogyny. 63 As self-  appointed guardians of 
traditional morality, Klansmen would at times instigate public floggings, 
victimizing those accused of immoral behavior. Klan posses punished men 
for not taking care of their wives and children, targeting vagrants, drunk -
ards, adulterers, abusive husbands, and those who abandoned their families. 
Women were also victimized for offenses such as infidelity, flirting, or ne -
glecting their children. Working outside the home was interpreted, by some 
Klansmen, as a form of child neglect.
64 
The Klan’s paternalistic approach to gender relations was different from 
its approach to African Americans. While the Klan promoted white su -
premacy, its leaders argued that women were equal to (or perhaps superior 
to) men. They did this by advocating separate spheres for women and men 
while claiming that the roles traditionally performed by women should be 
valued more in American society. Whenever possible, the men of the Klan 
liked to have their paternalistic rhetoric conveyed by an object of their pa-
ternalism. For example, the Indiana Klan’s Fiery Cross would, on occasion, 
publish letters that were said to have been written by black Americans who 
endorsed the goals of the Klan. Similarly, an article published in the Klan’s 
national magazine, the Kourier, was written by the “Imperial Commander 
of the Women of the Ku Klux Klan.” According to the author,


--- PAGE 81 ---
74 ResPonding T o econoMic change
Herein lies the greatest strength of woman’s power. Men depend upon 
her and are, for the most part absolutely, or nearly so, helpless without 
her. Men do not question her motives. Men do not tolerate abuse of her. 
Men receive their greatest inspirations from her. They perform their most 
noble deeds, or they make their most crushing failures, according to her 
power over them.
65 
This power that women held over men, however, was rooted in women’s 
roles as men’s helpmates. The Klan’s literature makes it clear that women’s 
primary responsibilities were to care for the home and to raise children— 
the next generation of Klansmen. In the same article, the writer refers to the 
American flag and opines, 
The white of our flag’s folds cries out for unstained purity and virtue in 
manhood and womanhood, and bears silent testimony that the men of 
the nation would rise as one to protect and keep spotless the honor and 
chastity of our home- builders—  our women.
66 
The men of the Klan sought to enlist the support of women within the 
political arena and became advocates of women’s suffrage after the fact—  a 
point addressed in more depth in the next chapter. Relevant to a discus -
sion of economic power devaluation is the way that the Klan omitted labor 
force participation when it constructed its notions of gender equality. A re-
port issued by a committee of Klansmen began to outline “the position as-
sumed by the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan toward the Women of the Ku 
Klux Klan” by stating, “The women of the nation are an important factor 
in the development of the moral, educational, ethical and political life of 
the people. The American men need the co-  operation and assistance of the 
women if the best results are to be obtained.”
67 In another article, a Klan 
writer encourages women to participate in politics because governmental 
policies directly impact family and home life. He adds,
We know that home life is held in low esteem, and childhood and woman-
hood are neither protected nor honored, where the forces of radicalism 
have swept a country and gained the upper hand. We find woman as a 
home builder, an important and never-  failing ally in times of greatest 
need.
68 
Women of the Klan, at least from the perspective of the men of the 
Klan, were emancipated, yet also primarily responsible for maintaining the 
home and rearing children. This dualism is reflected in the following excerpt 
from the “Klanswomen’s Creed,” published in the Imperial Night- Hawk:


--- PAGE 82 ---
ResPonding T o econoMic change 75
We believe in the American home as the foundation upon which rests se-
cure the American Republic, the future of its institutions, and the liber-
ties of its citizens. We believe in the mission of emancipated womanhood, 
freed from the shackles of old-  world traditions, and standing unafraid 
in the full effulgence of equality and enlightenment. We believe  in the 
equality of men and women in political, religious, fraternal, civic, and 
social affairs wherein there should be no distinction of sex.
69 
Obviously, the men of the Klan could not attack women, as a category, 
in the same way that they rhetorically attacked Catholics and immigrants. 
Klansmen, after all, were tied to women through kinship. Men directly 
benefited from these ties to women and sought to confine women to sub -
servient roles. By praising women who attended to the home and raised 
children, and by defining nonconformity as immoral and un-  American, 
Klansmen aimed to stem the flow of women into the labor force much in 
the same way that they sought to stem the flow of black migration to urban 
locales. The Klan’s message should have resonated strongly with many men 
who were not only concerned about the economic consequences of increas-
ing utilization of unskilled labor, but were also concerned about the power 
that they held over their wives (and over women more generally). 
The Klansmen’s concerns about the family also extended to children 
and, more specifically, child labor. Several articles in the Klan press ad -
dress the topic. One ties the issue to the value of public education, argu-
ing that “one serious cause of illiteracy in America is the fact that parents 
frequently let their children stay out of school to work. It is said that more 
than a million children between the ages of ten and fifteen years of age are 
out of school to work in different industries.”
70 In another article a Klans -
man writes,
It is to the corporations’ interest that the child labor laws and Sterling-
 Reed Educational bill and a rigid immigration measure be kept off the 
statute books. By the failure of measures of this nature they are enabled 
to secure a cheaper class of labor and hold the price paid to the American 
citizen down to a minimum at all times. The un-  educated child of today 
will be the common laborer of the future and every day the ambition of 
men is being blighted when they realize that they are fighting losing bat-
tles because they were not as fortunate during their school days as were 
their playmates. One of the greatest duties of Klankraft to the American 
child is the successful carrying on of an educational program that will 
put every child in the United States, of school age, into a Free Public 
school.
71


--- PAGE 83 ---
76 ResPonding T o econoMic change
Similar to the way in which Klansmen discussed immigration, the 
writer calls industrial capitalists to task for profiting from the use of un -
skilled labor. However, while the Klan denigrated immigrants in order to 
supplement its argument on behalf of immigration restriction, it spoke of 
the importance of protecting innocent children:
The children whom we expect to be the leading citizens in a few short 
years are now employed in sweat-  shops; their small frames are being 
stunned and their minds will, sooner or later, become warped, by con -
stant association with a class whose interests are foreign to the United 
States. A condition of this kind will soon beget a generation of children 
whose thoughts will be of unclean things and whose acts will be those of 
the criminal.
72 
Certainly, many of the men and women who were drawn to the Ku 
Klux Klan were genuinely concerned about the detrimental effects of labor 
on young children and not simply concerned about restricting the supply 
of unskilled labor. On this point, and on several others, the Klan aligned 
with the progressive movement. Economic transformations described ear -
lier in this chapter should have made any argument that advocated restric-
tion in the labor supply appealing to many native-  born white Protestant 
Americans. The potency of these frames rested on the movement’s abilities 
to link these economic arguments to shared cultural values that were deeply 
held by those whom they sought to recruit.
Prognosis: Stimulate Demand
By constructing interpretive frames advocating restrictions in the sup -
ply of unskilled labor, while simultaneously drawing upon cultural values 
that were shared by many native-  born, white Protestant Americans, the 
Klan made itself attractive to skilled laborers and small-  scale manufactur -
ers whose own economic livelihoods were being harmed by the increasing 
concentration of industry. The resonance of the Klan’s economic framing 
extended beyond these groups. Changes in manufacturing production not 
only affected skilled workers and small manufacturers, but could also af -
fect entire local economies. As industrial production increasingly became 
concentrated in large cities, wages and consumer dollars followed. The ag -
ricultural recession pushed many individuals off the farm and into urban 
centers where they were pulled by a growing demand for unskilled labor. 
Local merchants and professionals residing outside of these urban centers 
experienced shrinking demand for the goods and services that they offered.
The Klan leaders advocated programs that would benefit individuals


--- PAGE 84 ---
ResPonding T o econoMic change 77
residing in towns and cities outside of the industrial centers, but for the 
most part they did not appeal directly to farmers. In fact, there are some 
indications in the Klan press that movement leaders did not see farmers as 
a natural constituency; rather, they sought out ways of including farmers’ 
grievances in their frames to expand their base of support. For example, one 
writer commenting on the importance of public education noted,
Those of us who live in the towns and cities must learn to look beyond 
the family circle and take an active interest in our rural brother and make 
the country school measure up to the importance of the economic posi-
tion which the American farmer occupies. The farmer is the wealth pro-
ducer of the nation, the backbone of all industry. The better educated the 
farmer, the greater becomes his capacity to produce. The greater the fa -
cilities for education in the rural schools, the more attractive the farm life 
becomes. Let us extend the right hand of fellowship to our rural brother, 
with our influence, our taxes—  and demonstrate the true fraternity of 
brotherhood.
73 
Although the Klan sought the support of farmers, movement leaders 
were harshly critical of radical responses to farmers’ grievances—  responses 
that would benefit farmers at the expense of their other middle-  class con-
stituents. Movement leaders pitched their message to property owners and 
to those who aspired to own property. Any response to the agricultural crisis 
that challenged private property rights would have threatened many of the 
Klan’s constituents. Rather than aligning with radical agrarian movements, 
the Klan leaders instead aligned themselves with progressives and populists. 
This can be seen in the way in which the Klan press discussed party politics. 
Several articles in the Imperial Night- Hawk are critical of the old guard in 
the U.S. Congress and speak positively of the progressive insurgents. One 
article, for example, noted that the progressive insurgents in Congress are 
greatly outnumbered and emphasized the importance of increasing their 
numbers in coming elections. Another article complained about how the 
old guard politicians in Congress were deeply entrenched and described 
the Progressives (the opponents of the old guard) as “Representatives who 
would unselfishly put public welfare above personal and political gain.”
74 
Klan leaders frequently discouraged supporters from claiming alle -
giance to a single party. Progressives could be found in the ranks of both 
the Democrats and the Republicans— as could the Klan’s own constituents. 
The Imperial Night- Hawk, for example, offered praise for William Jennings 
Bryan, the fiery Democratic leader who articulated the grievances of rural 
Americans and strongly advocated inflationary monetary policies and low


--- PAGE 85 ---
78 ResPonding T o econoMic change
tariffs. Yet the Klan also offered positive comments on behalf of Republican 
progressives such as Theodore Roosevelt and Robert LaFollette.
75 The Klan 
press would later turn against LaFollette after the Wisconsin senator pub -
licly condemned the Invisible Empire during his third-  party presidential 
bid in 1924.76 Before LaFollette spurned the organization, it is clear that the 
Klan’s sympathies were with the Democratic and Republican progressive 
insurgents.
As the election of 1924 approached, an article in the Klan’s Fiery Cross 
offered a state-  by- state evaluation of each of the U.S. senators (see Fig -
ure 12). Notably, progressive Republican Robert LaFollette was charac -
terized as “an outstanding liberal leader.” Idaho’s progressive Republican 
senator, William Edgar Borah, is described by the Klan as “an outstanding 
progressive.” In general, the word “progressive” is modified by positive ad -
jectives such as “good” and “dependable.” Pro-  business Republicans and 
conservative Democrats, on the other hand, are described as reactionaries or 
as being “Old Guard” or “machine Republicans.” Several of the Progressives 
whom the Klan writer admired shared the movement’s racial and religious 
bigotries and their support for prohibition. However, the progressives and 
populists earning the Klan’s praise were also advocates of economic policies 
favored in regions of the country in which agricultural production was vital 
to local economies. These policies include low tariffs, inflationary monetary 
policies, tax reduction, regulation of railroads, and better credit terms for 
debtors. Reflecting the economic interests of its broad middle- class constitu-
ency (those whose fortunes were not tied to industrial production in north-
ern cities), Klan leaders aligned themselves with populist and progressive 
legislators and encouraged their constituents to support independent and 
progressive candidates, regardless of the candidate’s party identification.
Although the Klan press made relatively few specific references to farm-
ers’ grievances, the references that do appear reflect progressive and populist 
goals. The Imperial Night- Hawk criticized Kansas gubernatorial candidate 
William Allen White for taking a stance against the Klan but failing to 
offer any programs to address farmers’ grievances.
77 Articles published in 
the Indiana Klan’s Fiery Cross did occasionally comment on difficulties 
faced by midwestern farmers. They cautioned against radical responses to 
agrarian grievances and instead endorsed populist and progressive stances 
such as expanded credit, government aid for more efficient farming tech -
niques, lower taxes, and lower railroad rates.
78 There are some indications 
in the Klan literature that the leaders and recruiters spoke more directly to 
farmers’ grievances in public appearances delivered in rural settings. For


--- PAGE 86 ---
ResPonding T o econoMic change 79
example, an article in the Imperial Night- Hawk commented on a joint ap -
pearance in Indiana by Hiram Evans and D. C. Stephenson and noted that 
Stephenson “decried the Federal reserve system ‘as the organized betrayal of 
America,’ and condemned them for their inadequacy and failure to render 
farm relief measures.”
79 
Similar language can be found in D. C. Stephenson’s July 4 speech 
in Kokomo, which was reprinted in the Fiery Cross. There, Stephenson 
declared, 
Today we are turning backward in the hope that we might again meet in 
a common bond of mutual understanding on a basis of hope, and may 
that hope not be forlorn, that the men who manipulate the affairs of the 
American government today shall not lose sight of the founding fathers 
and that they shall now arise to our present need and come forth with a 
response which will answer the crying need of the farmers of America, 
who have been neglected and pushed out in the cold; who have been ig-
nored and in a large measure hampered from receiving their just portion 
of governmental support where the institution of governing found it ex -
pedient to protect and defend our industry.
80 
In the same speech, Stephenson adds,
The manipulators of our national government have seen fit to erect high 
walls of tariff to protect our industrial interest, which were not justified, 
and while they have permitted the Federal Reserve Bank to become a tool 
in the hands of selfish and sordid men, the great agricultural districts of 
American have been sorely neglected to a point where they have suffered 
almost beyond hope of repair.
81 
Passionately delivered populist rhetoric such as this was, certainly, music 
to the ears of many Americans who resided in communities that were bear -
ing the brunt of a sharp decline in demand for agricultural commodities in 
the aftermath of World War I. Klan leaders were careful to avoid pitting the 
specific interests of farmers against those held by other Klan constituents.
Vocational Klannishness: The Klan’s Boycotting Strategy
In light of the economic changes taking place during the Klan’s ascen -
dance, it is understandable why many skilled laborers, small manufacturers, 
and farmers were attracted to the movement. Yet the Klan’s leaders sought to 
construct frames that would unite all white Protestants in a powerful social 
movement. Many of the Klan’s members and supporters were professionals


--- PAGE 87 ---
State Evaluation
Alabama Two Democrats, Underwood, reactionary, and Heflin, progressive.
Arizona Ashurst, progressive Democrat; Cameron, Old Guard Republican.
Arkansas Robinson and Caraway, Progressive Democrats.
California Both Republicans, Johnson listed as progressive with a question 
mark, and Shortridge a machine man.
Colorado Has Adams—a recently appointed Democrat, and Phipps, Old 
Guarder.
Connecticut Brandegee and McLean—both reactionary Republicans.
Delaware Bayard, untested Democrat, and Ball, a machine Republican.
Florida Fletcher and Trammell, both Democrats, the latter more 
progressive.
Georgia Has Harris and George, good Democrats.
Idaho Borah is an outstanding progressive, and Gooding a “me too” 
Republican.
Illinois Two machine Republicans, McCormick and McKinley.
Indiana Ralston is a progressive Democrat; Watson has been a Republican 
machine leader.
Iowa Has Cummins, Republican reactionary, and Brookhart, who is 
his own boss.
Kansas Curtis as a machine leader, with Capper somewhat on the fence.
Kentucky Stanley, progressive Democrat on most issues; Ernst, colorless 
Old Guarder.
Louisiana Ransdell and Broussard, both very conservative Democrats.
Massachusetts Lodge is the dean of Republican reactionaries, with Walsh a pro-
gressive Democrat.
Maryland Has Bruce, an untried Democrat, and Weller of the Republican 
Old Guard.
Maine Both Fernald and Hale are Republican regulars.
Michigan Ferris is a progressive Democrat and Couzens, an independent 
Republican.
Minnesota Both Shipstead and Johnson are ultra progressive.
Mississippi Has Harrison and Stephens, good Democrats.
Missouri Reed is an able Democrat, while Spencer will do anything the 
Old Guard machine thinks best.
Montana Walsh and Wheeler, both able Democrats with the latter a real 
independent.


--- PAGE 88 ---
Nebraska Has two Republican progressives—Norris and Howell.
Nevada Pittman is a progressive Democrat and Oddie an Old Guard 
Republican.
New Hampshire Both Moses and Keyes are regular Republicans.
New Jersey Edwards is an untested Democrat and Edge a reactionary 
Republican.
New Mexico Has a progressive Democrat in Jones, with Bursum a machine 
Republican.
New York Has Copeland, a liberal Democrat, and Wadsworth, Old Guard.
North Carolina Simmons is an able, progressive, Democrat, with Overman, also 
of that party, but conservative.
Ohio Has two regular Republicans—Willis and Fess.
Oklahoma Checks itself, Owen being a liberal Democrat and Harreld a ma-
chine Republican.
Oregon Both Republicans, with McNary a wobbler and Stanfield de-
pendable from the Old Guard point of view.
Pennsylvania Has two Old Guarders—Pepper and Reed.
Rhode Island Gerry is a progressive Democrat and Colt a Republican regular.
South Carolina Two Democrats—Smith and Dial, with the former more liberal.
South Dakota Both Republicans, with Norbeck having progressive leanings and 
Sterling in the camp of the regulars.
Tennessee Has two Democrats—Shields and McKellar, the latter progressive.
Texas Both Democrats, Sheppard being a dependable progressive, with 
Mayfield, a new senator, said to be in that camp. 
Utah King is a fighting, independent Democrat, with Smoot an expert 
Republican machinist.
Vermont Has one Republican—Greene—and a vacancy due to the death 
of Dillingham.
Virginia Swanson and Glass are good Democrats.
Washington Hass Dill, a progressive Democrat, and Jones, a sometimes inde-
pendent Old Guard Republican.
West Virginia Neeley is an average Democrat, and Elkins a completely colorless 
Old Guarder.
Wisconsin LaFollette is an outstanding liberal leader, with Lenroot a regular.
Wyoming Has one of the highest class Democrats in Kendrick and an Old 
Guard wheel horse in Warren.
Source: Fiery Cross, Michigan State edition, December 14, 1923.
Figure 12. A Klan writer’s evaluation of the U.S. Senate, December 1923.


--- PAGE 89 ---
82 ResPonding T o econoMic change
and merchants rather than skilled laborers, small manufacturers, or farm-
ers. Yet, many professionals and merchants were affected by the same eco -
nomic transitions. Their livelihoods were, after all, linked to the strength of 
local economies. Many suffered from a sharp decline in demand for their 
goods and services. The Klan’s promotion of “Klankraft” or “Vocational 
Klannishness” should have been especially appealing to any native-  born, 
white Protestant who was suffering from such a decline in demand. 
Essentially, the Klan attempted to organize a nationwide boycott, insisting 
that Klan members only do business with other Klansmen, or with other 
“100 percent Americans.” 
The foundation of the Klan’s boycotting strategy can be found in the 
Klansman’s Creed, which states, “I am a native-  born American citizen and 
I believe my rights in this country are superior to those of foreigners.”
82 
Although Klan leaders resented the alleged “clannishness” of Catholics 
and Jews, which was interpreted as a violation of republican ideals, they 
surmised that they should adopt a similar practice as a necessary defense 
mechanism. An article titled “The Definition of Klankraft and How to 
Disseminate It” nicely summarizes the motivation behind the practice:
Vocational Klannishness is paramount to the ultimate success of our 
order. All other sects practice it in one way or another, and in many in -
stances to the entire exclusion of the protestant world, and it is apparent 
that the protestant world has failed to realize the significance of this prac -
tice. It is our duty as Klansmen, for self-  preservation, if for no other rea-
son, to practice vocational klannishness and I am firmly of the opinion 
that the time is coming, and not far distant, when we shall be compelled 
to follow this phase of Klankraft religiously. Otherwise, we shall feel the 
yoke of utter dissension in our own ranks brought about through our 
inability to compete in a commercial way with great corporations owned 
and controlled by men who do not hold their allegiance to one flag and 
government. Therefore, the seeds of vocational klannishness should be 
sworn at every opportunity in all meetings of Klansmen, and in carefully 
worded press items. Klansmen should be taught that it is their sacred 
duty as Klansmen to always favor a Klansman in the commercial world, 
whether it be in buying, selling, advertising, employment, political, so -
cial or in any way wherein a Klansman is affected.
83 
The Klan’s practice of Klankraft draws upon (and constructs) cultural 
solidarity to stimulate the demand for goods and services provided by white, 
native- born Protestant Americans. In some instances this practice involved 
direct boycotts of specific merchants. In other instances it involved profes-


--- PAGE 90 ---
ResPonding T o econoMic change 83
sionals and merchants publicly displaying their ties to the Invisible Empire 
in hopes of attracting customers.
84
The practice could also be extended to and applied against national cor-
porations. MacLean, for example, describes how a Klan lecturer in Athens, 
Georgia, railed against the encroachment of large retail chain stores:
Local Klan lecturers on “Americanism,” for their part, blamed Jews and 
Catholics for the chain-  store peril. One speaker dared his listeners to 
“find out who owns stock” in companies like the “A & P Grocery stores.” 
Jews and Catholics, it seems, hid behind the initials. He further com -
plained that “department stores, all of which are principally owned by 
Jews or foreigners,” were pushing out “American” businesses. He raved 
against the inroads made into Georgia by Sears & Roebuck, which he 
insisted was owned by “Jews. Jews. Jews.” Its entrenchment would “spell 
ruination” for the state’s independent merchants. He told listeners to find 
out whether their druggists, undertakers, grocers, butchers, and clothing 
and shoe merchants were “ jews oR  ca Tholics ,” and if so, to boycott 
them and organize others to do the same.
85 
The boycotting strategy, a recurrent theme in the movement’s dis -
course, was ideally suited for the task of uniting a socioeconomically diverse 
constituency and providing an economic motivation to support the Klan. 
Regardless of whether one was a professional, merchant, farmer, artisan, 
or small manufacturer, many stood to benefit from a massive boycott of 
all commercial enterprises that could be linked in some way to Catholics, 
Jews, or immigrants. The Klan justified its tactics by making positive claims 
about the cultural heritage of its own constituency and derogatory claims 
about their cultural enemies. Klansmen even offered a religious rationale 
for boycotting. In one article, the writer asserts, “Above all else, Jesus Christ 
was a Klansman.” Christ, according to the Klan’s author, “sought, first of 
all, to deliver the people of his own race, blood and religion from bondage 
of ignorance, tradition and superstition.” After quoting from the book of 
Romans, the author then instructed his readers, “Real Klankraft requires 
that Klansmen be knit together as the members of our body, each co-
 operating with the other; so closely and vitally connected that when one 
member suffers the whole body suffers.”
86 
Vocational Klannishness applied not only to trade, but also to employ-
ment. Klan publications frequently published notices where individuals 
were seeking a “100 percent American” worker or a “100 percent American” 
employer. A notice in the Imperial Night- Hawk, for example, sought to help 
a small Georgia town attract a physician:


--- PAGE 91 ---
84 ResPonding T o econoMic change
Klansmen of a thriving Georgia town are anxious to get in touch with a 
first- class, one hundred percent American physician who wishes to locate 
in a town in which Klankraft predominates. The physician, as a citizen of 
the Invisible Empire, will receive the endorsement of the entire Klanton. 
For further information, address The Imperial Night- Hawk, Post Office 
Box 1204, Atlanta, Ga.
87 
The Klan’s practice of vocational Klannishness could backfire. One ar -
ticle in the Imperial Night- Hawk noted, “In communities where Protestants 
are in the minority, Klansmen dare not let their identity be known, lest 
they be boycotted or Ostracized.”
88 Indeed, in Chicago, the National Unity 
League used its publication Tolerance to expose the names of thousands 
of local Klansmen. In response, local merchants and businessmen rushed 
to the newspaper’s office to apologize for their involvement in the Klan. 
The National Unity League’s tactics caused thousands of Chicago-  area 
Klansmen to abandon the order. Similarly, in Buffalo, New York, the local 
Klan organization virtually disintegrated when the names of its members 
were exposed.
89 Chalmers notes that Klan-  friendly businesses, such as the 
Budd Dairy Company in Columbus, Ohio, were crippled when their asso-
ciation with the Invisible Empire was brought to light.
90 
The effectiveness of “vocational klannishness” hinged, to a great extent, 
on the ethnic composition of local communities. Klan-  sponsored boycotts 
would be of little value in communities that were completely homogeneous. 
Boycotting Catholic merchants would not generate new business for Klan 
constituents if there were no Catholic merchants in the community. The 
strategy could backfire in communities where its enemies were numer -
ous enough to stage an effective counter-  boycott. However, in many Klan 
strongholds conditions were such that the promise of klankraft would have 
been appealing. Vocational klannishness was also used as a weapon against 
large corporations with headquarters in distant cities that, according to the 
Klansmen, were run by Jews, Catholics, and foreigners.
Conclusion
Founded in 1915, the Ku Klux Klan struggled for five years. When profes-
sional organizers were placed in charge of recruiting, the movement began 
its phenomenal ascendance. Millions of new members were enlisted, Klan 
chapters were organized in every state in the Union, and the movement 
grew particularly strong in America’s heartland. The growth in the Klan co-
incided with major shifts in the organization of economic life. During and 
after World War I, labor conflict intensified and industrialists intensified


--- PAGE 92 ---
ResPonding T o econoMic change 85
efforts to rationalize manufacturing production, relying on unskilled labor 
and machinery to increase profits. After the war ended, a deep agricultural 
recession gripped rural America, generating widespread hardships and un-
certainties. Klan leaders discussed economic conditions in the frames that 
they constructed, combining progressive and populist discourse with mili-
tant expressions of white supremacy, nativism, and religious bigotry.
The Klan’s discussion of economic conditions was cognizant of the way 
in which the movement’s constituents were experiencing power devaluation 
by virtue of declining demand for what they offered in exchange and from 
increasing supplies of competitors. While drawing on cultural solidarity, 
movement leaders advocated programs and policies that would restrict the 
supply of what its constituents offered in economic exchange and also stim-
ulate the demand for what its constituents offered in exchange. The strategy, 
as I will argue in the next chapter, was enhanced by the way in which move-
ment leaders addressed their constituents’ political power devaluation.


--- PAGE 93 ---
86
The vote is the instrument by which each man exercises his equality. 
When the vote is given those who are not entitled to it, its value to the real 
American citizen is depreciated and his equality is encroached upon.
— Imperial Night- Hawk, September 19, 1923
The vast majority of the Klan’s members and supporters were neither rich 
nor poor. Many recognized, however, that economic transitions taking 
place in the early 1900s were redistributing wealth in American society and 
they would have to organize to preserve advantages they previously enjoyed. 
Rationalization of manufacturing production and a severe agricultural re -
cession directly affected small-  scale manufacturers, skilled laborers, and 
farmers. These changes also disrupted exchange relationships for merchants 
and service workers whose fortunes were linked to the strength of the local 
economy and to the economic prosperity of their clients and customers. As 
the Klan’s recruiters fanned out across the nation in the early 1920s, they 
recognized an opportunity. Incorporating economic grievances into their 
collective action frames could help the movement grow. And the movement 
did grow. In only a few short years, the Klan was transformed from a rela-
tively small organization, teetering on the brink of bankruptcy and confined 
to two southern states, to a mass movement with chapters established in all 
forty- eight states and with millions of members nationwide who enriched 
the national headquarters with their membership dues and their purchases 
of robes and other Klan paraphernalia.
5
National Politics and Mobilizing “100 Percent American” Voters


--- PAGE 94 ---
naTional PoliTics and Mobilizing v oTeRs 87
The Klan’s rhetorical response to its constituents’ economic grievances 
drew inspiration from the Progressive movement, the populist movement, 
and a republican tradition. Yet the Klan added its own twists and turns 
and, as a result, bore a stronger resemblance to fascism than to progressiv-
ism or populism. Movement leaders promised to deliver a classless society, 
united by a common racial, ethnic, and religious heritage and committed to 
promoting the welfare of the people—  its people— rather than the welfare 
of all citizens or of members of a particular social class. Klan leaders capital-
ized on the intuitive appeal of microeconomic logic as they drew on deeply 
rooted cultural values to construct frames advocating policies and programs 
that would restrict the supply of individuals competing with the Klan’s key 
constituencies while also stimulating demand for what Klan constituents 
offered in economic exchange.
It would be a mistake to attribute the Klan’s recruiting success solely 
to the way in which it appealed to the economic self-  interest of its support-
ers. As the power- devaluation model stipulates, incentives to support right-
 wing mobilization should be especially strong when members of clearly 
identifiable social groups are experiencing power devaluation on multiple 
dimensions. Economic grievances, after all, are often addressed and satis -
fied through participation in institutionalized politics. However, if those 
who are experiencing economic power devaluation are simultaneously ex -
periencing political power devaluation, it becomes increasingly difficult for 
them to solve economic problems through normal channels. Political power 
devaluation provides an incentive to supplement participation in political 
institutions with extra- institutional right- wing activism.
As was true of the movement’s discussions of economic conditions, Klan 
leaders often railed against Catholics and immigrants when they described 
political problems facing their supporters. The fact that the Klan often 
thrived in communities where Catholics and immigrants were few in num -
ber has led some scholars to argue that the movement’s recruiting success can 
be explained in terms of status politics or as a form of low-  status backlash.
1 
This view rests on an assumption that all “real” political struggles are local. 
If the movement’s declared political enemies pose no real threat within the 
community, the declared enemies must be symbolic of something else. This 
type of thinking, however, when applied to the Klan of the 1920s, misses the 
national scope of the religious and ethnic conflicts of the time period and 
fails to consider the extent to which religious and ethnic boundaries over -
lapped with competing economic interests in a national economy.
These same scholars also argue that status anxiety resulted from a pre -
vailing sense that rural and small-  town values were being replaced by urban


--- PAGE 95 ---
88 naTional PoliTics and Mobilizing v oTeRs
cosmopolitan values, contributing to the Klan’s political mobilization. 2 An 
apparent contradiction to this argument—  that the Klan thrived in many 
urban locations as well as in small towns—  is attributed to white migra -
tion patterns. Based on some rather sketchy evidence, they argue that urban 
Klansmen were predominantly recent migrants to the city. These migrants 
looked favorably on the Klan, the argument goes, because they viewed it as 
a vehicle for imposing law and order and small- town values on the chaos of 
urban life. Chalmers, for example, writes, “The internal migrant brought his 
heartland values and defensiveness with him to the metropolis. . . . Poorly 
educated and unsure of himself, he was a likely recruit for the Klan.”
3
More recent research calls this thesis into question. Rhomberg’s analysis 
of the rise of the Klan in Oakland, California, for example, presents persua-
sive evidence that the Klan drew its support in that city primarily from 
an upwardly mobile middle class rather than from poorly educated rural 
migrants.
4 In general, the Klan’s heavy recruitment from Protestant congre-
gations and fraternal orders strongly suggests that most of the movement’s 
members had established some roots in the communities in which they re-
sided, whether those communities were rural or urban.
While much has been made about the Klan’s capacity to attract mem-
bers in both urban and rural locations, the urban-  versus- rural dichotomy 
is not very useful when trying to understand the growth of the Klan. A 
more relevant distinction has to do with whether the local economy was 
linked primarily to agricultural production or to industrial production. In 
the early 1920s, even large cities that were located outside of core industrial-
ized regions of the country had yet to break their ties with the agricultural 
economy. As Sanders describes it,
The role of cities in the core was fundamentally different from the role of 
cities in the periphery. The great industrial cities of the manufacturing 
belt existed as loci of factories and of those who worked in and other -
wise supported them. There were, and are, agricultural areas within the 
manufacturing-  belt states, but they are dependent on the industrial cities 
for their raison d’être and not the reverse. The dairy, truck, and poultry 
farms outside the industrial cities existed to supply city residents with 
foodstuffs, particularly perishables. In the agriculture/extraction-  based 
periphery, on the other hand, the engine of economic growth lay in the 
surrounding country side. Cities here existed to supply surrounding 
farms, ranches, mines, and forests with banking, storage, and transporta-
tion services and essential commodities.
5
Rural dwellers residing in the industrial core regions, therefore, shared many 
of the same economic interests as their proximate urban counterparts. Simi-


--- PAGE 96 ---
naTional PoliTics and Mobilizing v oTeRs 89
larly, the interests of urban and rural residents overlapped substantially in 
the “periphery” because agricultural production drove both the urban and 
rural economies. 
When viewed from this perspective, the Klan’s political attacks on 
Catholics and immigrants take on an entirely different meaning. In terms 
of national politics there were, essentially, two different economies housed 
under the same political roof. Kathleen Schwartzman persuasively dem -
onstrates that these same conditions (intense sectional economic conflicts) 
contributed to the collapse of the first Portuguese Republic. Barrington 
Moore sees the same conditions as the determining factor leading to the 
American Civil War. According to Moore, there was no inherent conflict 
between the slavery-  based agricultural economy of the southern states and 
the industrial economy of the North, were it not for the fact that the two 
economies coexisted within a single nation- state. An irreconcilable conflict, 
he argues, resulted from a struggle between representatives of two different 
regional economies as they attempted to secure national policies that would 
favor their sectional interests over those of the other sector.
6 
The Civil War put an end to the slavery- based economy, but competing 
sectional interests would continue to shape political conflicts at the national 
level. In the years following the Civil War, several social movements emerged 
to address agrarian grievances, most notably the cooperative enterprises of 
the Grange and the Farmers’ Alliance. Organizing in the 1880s and 1890s, 
the Farmers’ Alliance promoted a platform wherein the federal government 
would underwrite a local farmer cooperative system, and would regulate 
banks, railroads, and manufacturers.
7 Farmers’ grievances also found ex -
pression in the third-  party challenge of the People’s (or Populist) Party in 
the 1890s. While the party failed in its bid for the presidency in 1896, it 
had some success in other campaigns. Seven U.S. senators and thirty U.S. 
congressmen elected in 1896 were either Populists, fusionists (populist can-
didates running under the Democratic banner), or Silver Party members. 
The gains were short-  lived, however. The Party splintered into competing 
factions, and much of its agenda was co- opted by the Democratic Party.
8 
To absorb the Populist Party support, Democrats adopted the rhetoric 
of agrarian protest, articulated by the party’s new figurehead, William 
Jennings Bryan. Bryan and other Democratic leaders argued against indus-
trial tariffs and argued for inflationary monetary policies. The new agrarian 
agenda of the Democratic Party drove many industrial workers to the Re -
publican Party— workers who feared higher food prices and who tended to 
benefit from protective tariffs on industry.
9 
The Republican and Democratic parties became institutionalized 
vehicles for sectional conflict, pitting states in the industrialized core against


--- PAGE 97 ---
90 naTional PoliTics and Mobilizing v oTeRs
states in the agrarian periphery. By the 1920s, the link between sectional 
interests and party alignments was becoming more complex. After suffer -
ing a severe nationwide beating in 1920, the Democratic Party staged an 
impressive comeback in the off-  year elections of 1922, gaining seventy-
 eight new congressional seats. The new Democratic support, however, 
came primarily from northeastern cities. These cities, previously dominated 
by the Republican Party, were quickly shifting to the Democratic camp. 
Immigrants and Catholics, in particular, were pouring into the Democratic 
Party. Twelve of New York’s thirteen newly elected congressmen in 1922 
were elected from districts with high percentages of immigrants.
10 
Increased Catholic and immigrant participation contributed to a vir -
tual stalemate in the Democratic Party between core and periphery states. 
In fact, the balance of power within the party had shifted, for the first time, 
toward the core. Hostility between the two factions made it virtually impos-
sible to come up with any meaningful agenda that could garner the support 
of the majority of Democrats. Senator Nathaniel B. Dial of South Carolina 
expressed the viewpoint of many in the periphery when he stated:
We have infected ourselves and our party with political miasma and pes-
tilence, brought here from fetid and sickening atmospheres of the old 
countries. We have permitted the great Democratic Party to be degraded 
and used by a small alien faction. . . . The Democratic Party must declare 
whether it will serve high, straight, outspoken American democracy or 
some kind of shambling, bastard, shame- faced mixture of so- called democ-
racy and alien-  conceived bolshevism or socialism or hell broth and all.
11 
The strong resemblance between the senator’s words and those ex -
pressed by leaders of the Ku Klux Klan is not coincidental. Both were re -
sponding to similar political grievances. Prior to the Democratic National 
Convention in 1924, a Klan writer sized up the Democratic Party in the 
following manner: 
On the one side will be the drys and against them the wets. On the side 
of the drys will be the progressives and on the side of the wets will be ar-
rayed the conservatives. The drys and progressives, so[-  ]called, will come 
largely from the west and south, while the wets and reactionaries, so 
called, will come from the north and east. The Klan will be found fight-
ing with the drys and liberals.
12 
The article describes how the fault line in the Democratic Party had played 
out since 1896, with the Klan’s favored progressive or populist candidates, 
such as William Jennings Bryan and Woodrow Wilson, contending with


--- PAGE 98 ---
naTional PoliTics and Mobilizing v oTeRs 91
“reactionaries” and “conservatives” whose strength was rooted in Tammany 
Hall and, more generally, in the northeastern states.
Klansmen were not the only ones who recognized the way in which 
immigration contributed to the political clout of the industrialized core at 
the expense of the agrarian periphery. This was a central issue of contention 
in the early 1900s. Sanders describes the situation when speaking of debates 
about immigration restriction: 
As for periphery agrarians, they had two strong reasons to support immi-
gration restriction with few, if any, to oppose it. In the first place, many 
southern and Midwestern rural and small urban communities had tried, 
without success, to entice more European settlers. Most immigrants 
settled in cities in the industrial core where, given the region’s propen -
sity to vote Republican, their numbers expanded the political power of 
the farmers’ chief rivals. Second, ethnic prejudice led agrarians, along 
with most other contemporary citizens (including AFL and Socialist 
Party leaders), to argue that the newer immigrants could not easily be 
assimilated into American society and culture. Even the most idealistic 
and humanitarian of the agrarian progressives—  like George Norris of 
Nebraska—  saw the “immigration problem” in these terms.
13
The fact that Catholics and immigrants were moving into the Democratic 
fold only compounded the problem for many in the periphery. Although 
there was a bloc of progressive Republicans in Congress, the majority of 
Republican legislators remained committed to advancing and protecting the 
industrial economy (“old guard” or traditional Republicans). Meanwhile, 
the Democratic Party was becoming increasingly factionalized and unable 
to mount an effective national level challenge to the Republicans.
Expansion of Suffrage
Expansion of suffrage also helped strengthen the political hand of the in -
dustrial core. The 1920 election was the first national election in which 
women in all forty-  eight states were eligible to vote. The Klan began its 
phenomenal growth throughout the nation in the same year. Notably, new 
women voters were not randomly distributed across geographic and political 
space. Many western states had extended voting rights to women prior to 
the Nineteenth Amendment. In the more restrictive southern polities, pas-
sage of the Nineteenth Amendment did not immediately lead to a substan-
tial increase in actual votes cast. In South Carolina, where women’s suffrage 
had been strongly resisted, there was only about a 4 percent increase in the 
number of total votes cast in the 1920 presidential election relative to the


--- PAGE 99 ---
92 naTional PoliTics and Mobilizing v oTeRs
election of 1916. The percentage increase in voters was substantially higher 
in many northern industrialized states such as Rhode Island (91.2 percent) 
and Massachusetts (86.7 percent). The migration of African Americans 
from southern states to northern industrial cities also contributed to this 
substantial geographic redistribution of eligible voters. Blacks migrated 
from southern states where they were disfranchised to northern industrial 
cities where there were fewer restrictions on voting (see Figure 13).
A Challenge from the Left
As Elisabeth Clemens’s work emphasizes, the historical time period in which 
the Klan emerged was characterized by significant changes in the way that 
citizens approached the polity. Republican ideology espoused by the leaders 
of the Klan was being undermined as groups increasingly organized around 
their specific interests (e.g., as industrial laborers, farmers, or women) and 
pressured legislators to satisfy their collective demands. In addition, farm -
ers and industrial laborers were increasingly pressing their demands at the 
national, rather than at the local, level.
14 Individuals who were not part of 
an organized group contending for influence had much to lose in emerging 
zero- sum struggles in national politics. Those who were neither farmers nor 
industrial laborers, for example, faced the prospect of footing the bill for 
any new benefits secured by the “producing class.” Not surprisingly, repub-
lican ideology was particularly appealing to the middle class because of the 
Figure 13. Percent increase in total votes cast for U.S. president by state, 
1916 –1924.


--- PAGE 100 ---
naTional PoliTics and Mobilizing v oTeRs 93
way it condemned the pursuit of class-  based interests, thereby protecting 
the interests of an unorganized middle class. 15 
While middle-  class interests were threatened by the way in which la -
borers and farmers pressed their specific demands on representatives of the 
major political parties, more radical forms of political organizing also posed 
a significant threat. Prior to World War I, support for left-  wing political 
parties tended to come from the West rather than from the northeastern 
industrialized core. Industrial workers, for the most part, were engaged 
in trade unionism and often attached themselves to urban patronage ma -
chines. Accordingly, the Socialist Party agenda, to a great extent, reflected 
the grievances of the agrarian periphery. Eugene Debs, a gifted orator, came 
to symbolize America’s unique brand of radical politics in the early 1900s. 
Debs, a former leader of the American Railroad Union, offered rhetoric that 
combined Marxist thought with heavy doses of American populism and 
progressivism.
16 Although his presidential candidacies never posed a realis-
tic threat to the two dominant parties, he consistently captured between 3 
and 6 percent of the popular vote, having his best outing in 1912.
Figure 14. A rally held by a women’s auxiliary in New Castle, Indiana, 1923. 
Women played a vital role in the Klan’s mobilization. W. A. Swift Collection. 
Courtesy of Ball State University. Copyright 2006. All rights reserved.


--- PAGE 101 ---
94 naTional PoliTics and Mobilizing v oTeRs
Debs was the most widely recognized national figure of the Socialist 
Party in the early 1900s, but his popularity overshadowed, to some extent, 
the strength that the party had at the local level. Debs’s advocacy of in -
dependent political action placed him in the left wing of the party. Other 
more conservative Socialist leaders, such as Victor Berger and Morris 
Hillquit, preferred to work within the dominant political parties and to 
forge alliances with the American Federation of Labor (AFL). Support for 
socialism in the United States ran deeper than electoral support in national 
elections would indicate. With the failure of the populist challenge fresh in 
their minds—  a failure that illustrated the difficulties of mounting a third-
 party challenge in the American electoral system—  most Socialists operated 
within the two dominant parties. This was a practice used effectively by the 
Non- Partisan League and by various farmer-  labor coalitions that were also 
promoting socialist goals.
17 
The structure of the political left in the United States was abruptly re-
shaped in the late 1910s by World War I and the Russian revolution. As 
America entered the war, the Socialist Party was one of the few large domes-
tic organizations that openly criticized the nation’s involvement. Socialist 
opposition to the war led to substantial state-  sponsored repression. After a 
speech in Canton, Ohio, in 1919, Eugene Debs was arrested and sentenced 
to ten years in prison. Numerous other Socialists were also imprisoned for 
openly voicing their opposition to the war. But while the party’s antiwar 
stance attracted the wrath of the federal government, it also attracted many 
new members. Party membership grew during the war years in spite of state 
repression.
18 As the war ended, the Socialist Party was stronger than it had 
ever been. In 1920 Debs managed to secure over 4 percent of the popular 
vote for the presidency, running a makeshift campaign from his prison cell.
Although the war strengthened the party, the Russian revolution splin-
tered it. The key issue of contention was whether American workers should 
follow the Soviet model and organize for militant action, or work for pro -
gressive reform within American labor unions and within conventional po-
litical institutions. A compromise could not be reached, and the relative har-
mony that once characterized the left came to an end. In 1921 many in the 
left wing of the Socialist Party defected to the Communist Party, causing 
membership in the now more conservative Socialist Party to plummet.
19 
Those who favored gradual reform within the electoral process still out-
numbered those who were promoting a more militant strategy. By 1922, 
farmer- labor parties, rather than the Socialist Party, were taking the lead in 
promoting the socialist platform. Farmer-  laborism was particularly strong 
in Minnesota, which elected two of its candidates to the U.S. Senate. The


--- PAGE 102 ---
naTional PoliTics and Mobilizing v oTeRs 95
farmer- labor movement was having a significant impact in state-  level poli-
tics outside of Minnesota as well, particularly in the western states. 20 Most 
of the leaders were either Socialists, former Socialists, or at least sympa-
thetic to the cause.
Prior to 1924, the organizational focus of farmer- labor parties had been 
at the local and state level. In 1920, a Farmer-  Labor candidate from Utah 
did make a tentative move into the national political arena. Parly Parker 
Christianson only polled 1 percent of the vote nationwide in his run for 
the presidency, but his support in several states was impressive consider -
ing the limited resources at his disposal. Christianson received 19.4 percent 
of the vote in the state of Washington and nearly 7 percent in Wyoming. 
Still, neither Debs nor Christianson posed a legitimate threat to the domi-
nant parties’ nominees. The results of the 1920 election convinced all fac -
tions of the left that a more mainstream candidate with name recognition 
and popularity was needed to have an impact in national politics and to 
establish a competitive third party devoted to the interests of laborers and 
farmers. As the 1924 election year approached, all eyes on the left turned to 
Robert LaFollette Sr., the progressive Republican senator from Wisconsin.
LaFollette was more conservative than the Socialists would have pre -
ferred. Strong support from middle- class Wisconsin Progressives prevented 
him from declaring that he was exclusively a representative of farmers and 
industrial laborers. Nevertheless, he shared many of the Socialists’ goals 
and Socialists and Farmer- Laborites hoped to capitalize on his considerable 
nationwide popularity to launch a third-  party challenge on their behalf. In 
1923, even the American Communists, who had temporarily moderated 
their stance on electoral politics, fell into the movement to draft LaFollette 
as a third- party presidential candidate.
21 It appeared that a LaFollette can -
didacy could bring together the deeply factionalized political left and draw 
enough support from the middle to establish a viable third party devoted to 
the producing classes and to progressive reform. 
LaFollette was ready to run. He was becoming increasingly frustrated 
in his attempts to operate within a Republican Party that appeared to be 
moving further and further to the right.
22 His progressive minority report 
to the party platform was shouted down vociferously at the 1924 Republi-
can National Convention and was rejected without a vote. LaFollette saw a 
third- party bid as his only option. The only question was who would spon-
sor his candidacy. The Minnesota Farmer-  Labor Party was busy preparing 
for a run at the presidency, and its leaders assumed that LaFollette would 
be their candidate.
23 William Mahoney, the party’s leader, decided to allow 
the full participation of Communists within the national campaign—  a


--- PAGE 103 ---
96 naTional PoliTics and Mobilizing v oTeRs
move that was against the better judgment of many of the party’s members. 
The Communists, led by William Z. Foster, were intent on having influ -
ence within the party in excess of their numbers.
24 Even more damaging, 
however, was the reaction that communist participation prompted from 
LaFollette. LaFollette denounced the Communists, once again splintering 
the left, and chose to run as an independent Progressive rather than as a 
Farmer- Labor candidate. 
LaFollette’s decision to run as an independent Progressive caught the 
Farmer- Labor Party leaders and the Socialists off guard. Yet with nowhere 
else to go, they fell in line behind him, committing their organizations, 
resources, and members to his campaign. Eugene Debs, rather than mak -
ing his usual bid for the presidency, threw his support to LaFollette. Debs 
gave his formal endorsement on July 7. In a letter to Socialist leaders in New 
York, he wrote that while he was not in full accord with the Convention 
of the Conference on Political Action (LaFollette’s initial sponsors), the 
Socialist Party need not blush for supporting LaFollette, who “all his life 
had stood up like a man for the right according to his light; he has been 
shamefully maligned, ostracized and persecuted by the predatory powers of 
the plutocracy yet his bitterest foe had never dared to question his personal 
integrity or his political rectitude.”
25 
LaFollette and his running mate, Burton Wheeler, a progressive Demo-
cratic senator from Montana, also received the endorsement of the Ameri -
can Federation of Labor. This is the first time that the AFL had endorsed 
a presidential candidate. In justifying this unusual move, the executive 
committee for the AFL issued the following statement: “Mr. LaFollette and  
Mr. Wheeler have throughout their whole political careers stood steadfast 
in the defense of the rights and interests of the wage-  earners and farm -
ers.”
26 The AFL’s endorsement of LaFollette, which meant cooperation with 
Socialists, represented a significant leap for the relatively conservative labor 
organization. The AFL leadership was being radicalized to some extent by 
attacks from organized capitalists, continued setbacks in the court system, 
and by the lack of sympathy that the unions were receiving from either of 
the two dominant parties.
27 
La Follette’s third- party challenge created ambivalence for the types of 
individuals who were drawn to the Klan. He was one of the nation’s promi-
nent progressive legislators, and he was a forceful opponent of monopolies, 
trusts, and exploitative capitalism. He was outspoken in his opposition to 
industrial tariffs. LaFollette’s alliance with Socialists and his growing radi-
calism, however, were problematic for many who feared that they would 
come out on the losing end if the polity became an arena of conflict be -


--- PAGE 104 ---
naTional PoliTics and Mobilizing v oTeRs 97
tween organized classes. And, although the Klan’s leaders criticized capital -
ists for exploiting unskilled labor, they were staunch defenders of private 
property rights and spoke disparagingly of unskilled laborers. The challenge 
from the radical left threatened the interests of many of the Klan’s members 
and adherents. Klan supporters’ ambivalence was resolved when LaFollette 
condemned the Invisible Empire soon after launching his presidential cam-
paign. The Klan press then characterized LaFollette as someone who had 
abandoned progressive principles and had instead chosen to become a rep-
resentative of Catholics, immigrants, and radicals. Because LaFollette and 
left- wing parties did, in fact, draw strong support from immigrant popu -
lations, Klansmen could wage political warfare with cultural weapons. 
Machine Politics
To understand sources of political power devaluation confronting many of 
the Klan’s constituents, it is useful to give attention to national-  level poli-
tics. Immigrants and Catholics settling in northeastern industrial cities ad-
versely affected the political power of those residing outside of the indus -
trial core regions of the country. Immigrants settling in western states, on 
the other hand, could potentially strengthen left-  wing political organiza -
tions. Similarly, with new women voters being concentrated in northeastern 
industrial states, there were incentives for national politicians to give extra 
attention to these new voters when formulating policies and when making 
campaign promises. States that were not gaining new voters might be ig -
nored in the process. As important as national politics were, it is also neces-
sary to consider how local political conditions contributed to the rise of the 
Ku Klux Klan. 
In the early 1900s, the urban political machine was a primary target 
of progressive reformers. Opposition to patronage politics was especially 
popular among the middle class. Fighting the corruption of urban patron-
age machines was a task perfectly suited for the Klan’s constituencies be -
cause the machines often represented an alliance between powerful cor -
porations and working-  class immigrants. Those in the middle class were 
often denied benefits and services provided by local government because 
they were not connected to patronage networks established in working-
 class neighborhoods. Those who opposed machine politics also had cause to 
oppose immigration because a steady flow of new immigrants could poten-
tially strengthen the position of the party bosses. Clemens points out:
Notwithstanding conflicts among themselves, the middle classes, there -
fore, viewed their mounting public burdens as the alarming portents 
of a new democracy, a democracy mobilized around two predatory


--- PAGE 105 ---
98 naTional PoliTics and Mobilizing v oTeRs
constituencies. One constituency was composed of “vulgar” hordes of 
workingmen and immigrants substantially devoid of a real stake in so -
ciety; the other comprised the corporate rich and their “unproductive” 
retinues. Both constituencies were believed to be drawing power from the 
debasement of traditional morality and from the confiscation of estab -
lished properties. In respectable quarters, moreover, the aggressive agent 
in the advancement of this destruction was identified with party organi-
zation, usually symbolized by bosses, rings, and machine politics.
28
Machine politicians essentially served as middle- men between the busi-
ness elite and industrial laborers. The former could provide jobs and other 
valued resources that could be passed along to laborers in exchange for 
their political support. Patronage networks tended to be organized along 
ethnic lines due to the high concentration of immigrants and Catholics in 
working- class occupations. The system, of course, was ripe for corruption 
and could generate widespread resentment among those who were left out of 
the patronage loop. Because of the way in which immigrants and Catholics 
were incorporated into machine politics, it was easy for contemporary ob -
servers to attribute the machines’ corrupt practices to “foreign influences.” 
Link and McCormick note that many progressive reformers concluded that 
taking on patronage politics on behalf of “clean and efficient” government 
would require restraining the unruly behavior of immigrants and even plac-
ing restrictions on political participation for immigrants, Catholics, African 
Americans, and the poor.
29
Corporate funding was especially important in establishing and main-
taining patronage machines in western cities, where politicians could not 
always count on establishing ties in relatively stable immigrant neighbor -
hoods.
30 Dynamic population growth in western cities could make elec -
tions unpredictable. Under such conditions, resources from large corpora -
tions were especially useful in helping the local machine to maintain power. 
The Ku Klux Klan, for example, battled machine politics in Oakland, Cali -
fornia, in the early 1920s. As Rhomberg describes it, 
The franchise corporations formed the core of the urban regime in 
Oakland. Through them, local politicians satisfied public demands for 
both low taxes and basic city services. Corporate elites, in turn, protected 
their profits and privileges by forming alliances with the ward bosses who 
controlled the votes of the dependent working class.
31 
As the city expanded, a growing middle class grew increasingly frustrated as 
their suburban neighborhoods received low priority from local government 
when it came to providing basic services.
32


--- PAGE 106 ---
naTional PoliTics and Mobilizing v oTeRs 99
Middle-  class voters in cities such as Oakland confronted political 
power devaluation from multiple sources. The size of the national electorate 
(the overall supply of voters) had increased substantially due to women’s suf-
frage, yet California women had been eligible to vote in national elections 
prior to passage of the Nineteenth Amendment and the new women voters 
who were concentrated in the industrial Northeast. Immigration had de -
clined in the latter half of the 1910s but was on the rise again after the war, 
preceding the Klan’s growth spurt. Returns to high levels of immigration 
would strengthen the hand of northeastern core states but would also be 
consequential in urban politics. A rise in the number of immigrants settling 
in cities such as Oakland, Denver, or Portland, for example, would add to 
the strength of the political machine that the Klan opposed. Population 
growth in general, even that which could be attributed to an influx of 
native- born, white Protestants, also contributed to power devaluation by 
increasing the overall supply of voters. New voters in the electorate can rep-
resent both a threat and an opportunity to those who were previously in the 
electorate. To benefit from population growth, groups must organize and 
they must take steps to ensure that the new voters are not captured by po-
litical competitors.
The Klan’s Prognosis: Supply Restriction
According to the power- devaluation model, political power devaluation can 
result from an increase in the supply of, and decreases in demand for, that 
which is offered in political exchange. In a political market, mediums of 
exchange include votes, money, representation, and patronage. The theory 
does not presuppose that any particular collectivity (e.g., the capitalist 
class, the proletariat, or Protestants) will always act together based on some 
common interest that is inherent to group membership. Instead, it focuses 
on how extant exchange relationships are affected by shifts in supply and 
demand.
It is important to be clear that power devaluation can result from sup -
ply increases even when new entrants to the political arena appear to be 
similar to those who are already established within a political market. A 
simple example will illustrate the point. A small group of friends (Mary, 
Jane, and Charlie) are attempting to decide whether to go out for pizza or 
for Chinese food. If the friends wish to solve the problem democratically, 
each one of them controls one-  third of the votes. Mary must only reach 
agreement with one of her two friends in order to secure her preferred out-
come. If three more friends (Bob, Amy, and Norman) decide to join them, 
then Mary, Jane, and Charlie each experience political power devaluation.


--- PAGE 107 ---
100 naTional PoliTics and Mobilizing v oTeRs
Mary now controls only one- sixth of the votes in the group and her capacity 
to influence the outcome has been diminished. It may be the case that Bob, 
Amy, and Norman all share her love for pepperoni pizza. But Mary cannot 
assume that initially. The addition of three new friends provides her with an 
incentive to take political action, off- setting her diminished political power 
by persuading the newcomers to join her in the pizza vote. If Mary knows in 
advance that Bob, Amy, and Norman are craving Chinese food, she would 
have an incentive to prevent them from joining the group for dinner.
It is this simple intuitive logic that made the Klan’s message resonate with 
so many Americans in the 1920s. At a time when many of the Klan’s con-
stituents were undergoing economic power devaluation, the pool of eli  gible 
voters was expanding in ways that generated incentives to advocate restric-
tions in the supply of voters. Klan leaders capitalized on these circumstances, 
constructing collective- action frames that noted how their constituents’ po-
litical purchasing power was being diminished. Indeed, they often used lan-
guage that directly applied the logic of market dynamics. In reference to vot-
ing rights, for example, one article in the Imperial Night- Hawk complained, 
“We have cheapened American citizenship until it has become worthless.” 
Another Klan writer, directly applying microeconomic logic, wrote, “The 
vote is the instrument by which each man exercises his equality. When the 
vote is given those who are not entitled to it, its value to the real American 
citizen is depreciated and his equality is encroached upon.”
33
Klan leaders frequently commented on how immigration affected the 
political power of their own constituents. One article cautioned,
Americans should regard with alarm the fact that nearly one half of the 
population of the United States is composed of Poles, Russians, Greeks, 
Italians, Negroes, and European Asiatics. If these nationalities were to com-
bine their votes, they could gain control of the American government.
34 
Similarly, another Klan writer warned, 
The total foreign vote has grown until its combined strength is sufficient 
to control a national election, and this does not take into consideration 
the influence of the un-  naturalized foreigners, who may, in some locali -
ties wield a power practically equivalent to the strength they would have 
if they were allowed to vote. This is done by bringing pressure to bear on 
local politicians.
35 
This writer also noted that “the foreign born multiply their political power 
by settling themselves in cities, and that is why their leaders and their news-
papers are loath to see the racial groups break up.”
36


--- PAGE 108 ---
naTional PoliTics and Mobilizing v oTeRs 101
The Klan’s strong advocacy on behalf of immigration restriction was 
motivated by political as well as economic concerns. By restricting immigra-
tion or by changing voter registration laws, the Klan hoped to stem the flow 
of new voters into the electorate. As Colorado’s Grand Dragon expressed 
it, “I hope to see the day when every foreigner must live in this country 
twenty- one years before he or she becomes a voter. We have to do it, why 
not they?”
37 The fact that immigrants tended to vote differently from the 
Klan’s constituents only compounded the problem from the Klansman’s 
perspective. Klan leaders frequently commented on how recent immigrants 
were from Catholic countries, and the Klansmen, quite simply, did not like 
the way that Catholics tended to vote.
Drawing on a deep vein of anti-  Catholic bigotry that existed in the 
United States long before the Klan resurfaced in the 1920s, movement lead-
ers argued that Catholics should not be allowed to participate in democratic 
institutions because they allegedly placed loyalty to the pope above loyalty 
to the United States. This argument, that Catholics received their political 
marching orders from Rome, contrasted Catholicism with republican vir -
tue. Catholics, the argument assumes, were subject to coercion from reli -
gious authorities and were, therefore, unable to act in the best interest of the 
nation as a whole.
38 As one Klan writer put it, 
The time has full come when this country, and every other country ought 
to serve notice on the Catholic church that its days in politics has passed, 
that so long as it meddles in affairs of state its activity will be an insur -
mountable barrier to official preferment for any man who owes allegiance 
to its authority. This, we repeat, is no discrimination against Catholicism 
as a church. It is simply saying that we do not approve of the brand of 
politics that Catholicism represents, and that we do not mean to have it.
39 
Similarly, another Klan writer claimed, 
It is a significant fact, borne out by the pages of history, that the effort of 
the Roman Catholic hierarchy in the past to dominate state affairs has led 
to more wars and more unhappiness throughout Christendom than any 
and all other causes for seven hundred years. In this country it is ideas 
and votes, rather than sword, battle- axe or gun, with which we fight.
40 
When discussing the movement’s political goals, Klan leaders often 
presented their arguments as being motivated by patriotism and a deep con-
cern for the welfare of the nation rather than by hatred or bigotry. Speaking 
at the Klan’s national convention in 1924, Hiram Evans emphasized, “We 
have no fight to make upon the Catholic church, no fight upon the Catholic


--- PAGE 109 ---
102 naTional PoliTics and Mobilizing v oTeRs
creed, no fight upon the Catholic religion. We are here to protect as the 
fundamental of our American government, and the basis of our American 
Constitution, the right of religious freedom in America.” One article de -
scribed, in detail, how Klansmen rescued a six-  month- old baby from a kid-
napper and returned the child to its Catholic mother. Again, the point of 
the story was to demonstrate that the Klan held no ill will toward indi -
vidual Catholics; the Klan only opposed their involvement in politics.
41 
The Klan leaders’ attempts to display pure motives in their political 
fight with Catholics were often contradicted by words and deeds. Direct 
appeals to anti-  Catholic bigotry could be valuable tools when it came to 
attracting members and spurring members to action. Klan recruiters and 
lecturers often made false claims about atrocities committed by Catholics 
in order to stir up their audiences. One recruiting tactic involved having 
women pose as former nuns, delivering public lectures describing depraved 
sexual acts committed by Catholic priests behind convent walls.
42 The Klan 
press at times supplemented its “high- minded” arguments against Catholics’ 
participation in politics with more blatant appeals to anti-  Catholic bigotry. 
This was especially true of some of the movement’s local or regional papers. 
Hiram Evans characterized such practices as strategically flawed, however. 
Speaking at the Klan’s national convention, he noted, “A few of the editors 
waste no time preparing constructive articles since it is much easier to stick 
their pens in the vitriol bottle and anathemize everyone who does not think 
precisely as they do.”
43 Here, Evans’s strategic calculations are transparent 
as he went on to emphasize the importance of presenting the Klan in a 
positive light in order to gain favorable publicity from the non-  Klan press.
Rather than resorting to “vitriolic” attacks on Catholics, the Klan press 
more commonly presented its own members and constituents as victims of 
poorly behaved Catholics. One particularly interesting article describes how 
Catholic students at the University of Notre Dame rioted against the Klan 
in South Bend, Indiana. According to the Klan writer, the college students 
“showed no regard for sex or age, beating up men, women and children. . . . 
One old man, an old lady and a little child were so badly beaten up and 
trampled that the attention of a physician was necessary.”
44 
By advocating clean government at both the national and local level, 
Klan leaders were free to take numerous potshots at Catholics for their al-
leged involvement in corrupt practices. Combining the themes of immigra-
tion and Catholic corruption, one article claimed, “In certain Texas towns 
like El Paso, and Corpus Christi, and in many towns in Arizona and New 
Mexico where the Roman Catholic influence is a power in politics, these 
Mexicans are voted at the polls like sheep in order to thwart government by 
loyal Americans.”
45 Klan leaders articulated the grievances of many middle-


--- PAGE 110 ---
naTional PoliTics and Mobilizing v oTeRs 103
 class Americans who were growing increasingly frustrated by patronage-
 based urban politics. A “prominent minister” addressed Klansmen at a 
Klonvocation in Kansas City, asserting, “If we look out into the political 
realm we discover in many places, and many localities, that they have no 
government by the people. There is a government by political machines that 
are corrupted by shyster politicians, government by clique.” An “Exalted 
Cyclops” from Monroe, Louisiana, noted that the Klan “strenuously objects 
to any church being used as a political machine and its members voted to 
warp, annul or set aside a highly cherished American institution.”
46 And 
lest any of the Klansmen forget, the Exalted Cyclops reminded readers that
A large percentage of the foreign immigrants pouring into this country, 
during the past few years, have been Roman Catholics and a big percent 
of these immigrants are from the lowest strata of Italy, Poland and other 
Roman Catholic countries. As fast as these immigrants land upon our 
shores they are “corraled” by the Catholic church, herded into conjested 
[sic] sections of big cities, naturalized as soon as possible and voted in 
order to elect men to office who will do the bidding of Rome.
47 
Compared to Catholics and immigrants, African Americans were not 
viewed by Klan leaders as a serious political threat. On this point, Evans’s 
paternalism is evident:
The Negro is not a menace to Americanism in the sense that the Jew 
or Roman Catholic is a menace. He is not actually hostile to it. He is 
simply racially incapable of understanding, sharing in or contributing to 
Americanism. Booker T. Washington, the greatest of Negro leaders, ex -
horted his brethren to cast aside their political and social ambitions. The 
Klan stands where he stood upon this phase of the question.
48 
Disenfranchisement in southern states minimized any political threat posed 
by African Americans south of the Mason-  Dixon Line. In northern states, 
Klan leaders banked on black voters’ loyalty to the Republican Party as a 
factor that would at least make their vote predictable. In Indiana, where the 
Klan forged strong ties with the Republican Party, movement leaders even 
hoped to enlist black voters as allies or, at the very least, to dissuade them 
from defecting to the Democratic Party.
49 
Attacking the Political Left
Klan leaders also recognized that immigration contributed to the strength 
of a growing coalition on the political left. While concerns about public 
perception led them to tone down their rhetorical attacks on Catholics 
(especially in their national publication), the gloves came off in the fight


--- PAGE 111 ---
104 naTional PoliTics and Mobilizing v oTeRs
against radicals. In the wake of the Russian revolution and on the heels of 
the red scare in the United States, movement leaders could harshly attack 
groups on the left in the name of patriotism and civic virtue. One Klan 
writer noted, “Trotsky was spawned in a New York slum, and who can haz-
ard how many more future communist, bolshevik, and anarchist leaders are 
now sheltered in this and other great American cities, by grace of our lax 
immigration laws.”
50 
For Klansmen, the threat from the left was not only in the slums of 
great American cities. The Imperial Night- Hawk cautioned,
Out in California the IWW’s are threatening armed revolution and sabo-
tage against the lumber companies, while in St. Joseph, Mich., in trials 
of communists, it is proved that the Russian Soviet government still con-
tinues its attempt to forment [sic] revolution in America. So it looks as if 
there is a very real need for a hundred-  percent- American organization 
after all.
51
Indeed, the Klan writers seemed particularly concerned about the threat 
posed by the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW or “Wobblies”). 
The IWW was particularly threatening to the Klan because, unlike the 
American Federation of Labor, it was committed to organizing unskilled 
laborers, immigrants, African Americans, and women along with other 
workers into “One Big Union.”
52 
Radical groups such as the IWW provided Klan leaders with an oppor-
tunity to use scare tactics to motivate their own supporters by exaggerating 
the threat posed by the radicals. For example, one article in the Imperial 
Night- Hawk printed what it claimed to be “The I.W.W. Oath”:
I do solemnly swear that I hold in contempt all institutions of capitalism, 
including ecclesiastical and secular; and its laws, its flag, its courts, its 
codes, its churches and its religion; that I will obey all summons and 
commands of the elected officials of this order under penalty of death, 
and spare neither my time, effort or money to obey, even to the last drop 
of my blood.
This “I.W.W. Oath” was juxtaposed against “The Klan Oath,” which read, 
I most solemnly declare and affirm that to the government of the United 
States of America and any State thereof, of which I may become a resi -
dent, I sacredly swear an unqualified allegiance above any other and every 
kind of government in the whole world. I most solemnly pledge my life, 
my property, my vote and my sacred honor to uphold its flag, its constitu-


--- PAGE 112 ---
naTional PoliTics and Mobilizing v oTeRs 105
tion and constitutional laws, and will protect, defend, and enforce the 
same unto death.
53
Numerous articles in the Klan press sound the alarm about the threat 
posed by political radicals. When writing on the topic, Klansmen almost 
invariably conveyed a sense of urgency. One article described the Bolshevist 
threat in the following manner:
Their object is to tear down the Stars and Stripes and supplant it with a 
red rag. To destroy all capital and slaughter the “b[o]urgeois[i]e” who are 
every man, woman, and child who loves God and the United States. To 
agitate strikes, bloodshed and anarchy, that the work of our forefathers 
in establishing the glorious free republic of America may be brought to 
naught at the hands of such foreign revolutionary swine as dominate un-
fortunate Russia today.
54 
The Klan writer’s extraordinarily inclusive definition of the “bourgeoisie” is 
particularly notable given the Klan’s criticisms of large-  scale capitalists and 
the way it targeted its appeal toward the middle class or the petite bourgeoi-
sie. Movement leaders clearly wanted to emphasize the way in which class 
conflict threatened the interests of the middle class. Later in his article the 
same writer added, “To Communists there are but two classes: the working 
class, and all others. Their ideal is to have the working class absorb the oth-
ers and to make the United States a working- class republic, a part of similar 
republics all over the world and all dominated by the central government 
in Moscow.”
55 
Although the Klan often relied on scare tactics when describing the 
threat posed by the political left, the Klan press also made it clear that the 
movement opposed any political group that was organized on behalf of 
a social class. Movement leaders emphasized the way in which their own 
middle- class constituents would pay the price for policies and programs de-
signed to address the particular interests of farmers or unskilled laborers. 
The Klan declared its opposition to “Universalism, Sovietism, Communism, 
Socialism, Anarchism, Judaism, and especially Roman Catholicism,” 
arguing that “each is fundamentally different from, and is opposed to, 
Americanism. Each is personal, selfish or sectional—  sometimes all three.” 
Calling for a return to republican values, a Klan writer declares, “We must 
educate our people to a knowledge of the fact that statutes are not a panacea 
for social and economic ills. By precept and example we must create anew 
among the people the idea that government is for all, and not for a clamor-
ous, organized few.”
56


--- PAGE 113 ---
106 naTional PoliTics and Mobilizing v oTeRs
Klan leaders argued that class-  based political mobilization was un-
 American and could be traced to foreign influence and to vast Jewish con-
spiracies. Immigration, they argued, was the primary cause of the problem. 
Restricting the supply of voters was offered as a solution. One article, titled 
“Restricted Franchise,” proposed that “Klansmen believe that the time is 
at least near when American citizenship must be protected by restricting 
franchise to men and women who are able through birth and education 
to understand Americanism.” Another writer recommended deportation 
or imprisonment for those advocating “Bolshevism, Sovietism, Anarchism, 
Communism, and every other ‘ism.’ ” A more feasible remedy, however, was 
immigration restriction: “If we are to preserve unsullied the ideals, the prin-
ciples, and the government transmitted to us by our forefathers, America 
must close the door to the diseased minds and bodies and souls of the 
peoples of foreign lands.”
57 
Prognosis: Stimulate Demand
For many Klan constituents, political power devaluation resulted not only 
from an increase in the supply of voters but also from a decline in demand 
for their votes. As other societal groups began to organize to pressure po -
litical representatives to act on behalf of their specific interests, those run -
ning for political office faced greater pressure to satisfy the demands of 
these constituencies and, in the process, become less attentive to the needs 
of an unorganized middle class whose votes were split among the two major 
political parties. Klan leaders condemned interest-  group politics and ap -
pealed to republican ideals. To address the problem, Klan leaders proposed 
that it would be necessary to abandon republicanism and to form their 
own interest group. Much in the same way that they advocated “vocational 
Klannishness” to address economic grievances, movement leaders argued 
that they must counter interest group politics by forming their own bloc 
of voters— a huge bloc that would bring together all of the nation’s native-
 born, white Protestants. Only then would “100 percent Americans” be able 
to compete with other groups that were “clamoring” to influence the po -
litical process. In other words, Klan leaders aimed to stimulate demand for 
their constituents’ votes by organizing them in to a solid bloc that would be 
large enough to elect or defeat candidates running for office—  depending 
on the candidates’ stances on issues near and dear to the hearts of the Klan 
members.
Klan leaders frequently commented on the way in which other groups 
organized in politics. Catholic voting habits were of particular interest: “It


--- PAGE 114 ---
naTional PoliTics and Mobilizing v oTeRs 107
is a significant fact that in matters of politics the Roman Catholic Church 
stands peculiarly united.” The Klan writer added, “A block vote in America 
is a dangerous thing, and that is the trend of the times today.”
58 However, 
the Klan’s reactive response to interest- group politics extended beyond their 
opposition to Catholics. The Klan’s stance on this issue is nicely summa -
rized in a speech attributed to Elmer D. Brothers, president of the Board 
of Trustees at Valparaiso University. The Imperial Night-  Hawk noted that 
Brothers was not a Klansman but that his remarks were both timely and in 
line with the Klan’s principles.
59 Brothers argued that it was essential to
Restore the fundamental idea that this is a government of majorities, 
within constitutional limitations and provisions; learn to respect the 
opinions of the majority when enacted into laws, and to seek changes 
ther[e]in, if any, only through constitutional and orderly processes; cease 
the practice of arraying interest against interest, section against section, 
passion against passion, and of exaggerating the miseries of the poor and 
the comforts of the rich; confine governmental activities to governmental 
functions, and dedicate ourselves anew to the principle of the Fatherhood 
of God and the Brotherhood of Man—  a principle upon which this gov-
ernment was founded.
60 
Similarly, another Klan writer asserts, “Class legislation is unconstitutional; 
then let us enforce the Constitution that the interests of the weak and the poor 
may be as well provided for as are the interests of the strong and the rich.”
61 
Klan leaders recognized that before they could exert full influence on 
political representatives they must first unite public opinion behind their 
movement and its goals. Speaking of the immigration issue, for example, 
South Carolina’s Grand Dragon noted,
America is largely governed by public opinion, and the sources of that 
opinion concerning the problems of immigration are of vital importance. 
To deal with so complex a national situation and so profound an inter -
national situation requires the public to be intelligently informed before 
we can have a united public opinion. This can be acquired only by a great 
movement, such as the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, which is willing 
to gather this information and to see that the public is properly and cor-
rectly informed of the true facts.
62 
Similarly, Colorado’s Grand Dragon argued, 
A Klansman’s obligation to his country is to lead public opinion in the 
right direction, for public opinion is the force that moves the wheels of


--- PAGE 115 ---
108 naTional PoliTics and Mobilizing v oTeRs
government for good or for evil. What excuse is there for the American 
citizen who allows public opinion to be swayed by every wind of foreign 
sentiment from abroad?
63 
Klan leaders understood that as long as their members and support -
ers divided their votes among Democratic and Republican candidates, they 
would have very little leverage against those who held political office. One 
article noted, “In our councils are found as many, if not more, Republicans 
than Democrats.” Klan leaders criticized “partyism” as a fundamental evil 
in politics and promoted their own brand of nonpartisan politics.
64 In a 
column titled “Christian Citizenship: The Gospel according to the Klan,” a 
Klansmen declares,
Blind obedience to partisan politicians of two hostile camps—  the barter-
ing of the people’s interests to partisan advantage—  the placing of the 
crown of party servitude above the diadem of American sovereignty and 
placing party banners above Old Glory’s star-  gemmed promise of ever -
lasting unity have brought this great democracy near the rocks.
65 
Klan leaders expressed dissatisfaction with both major parties and were 
frustrated by the way in which the progressive candidates that they admired 
represented numerical minorities in each party. According to one writer, 
Partyism in politics has long hindered our national progress. The Klan’s 
educational program is already modifying this deplorable condition, 
and the signs are that before many years pass the real citizen of our great 
country, no matter where he resides, will regard himself as an American 
first and a Democrat, Republican or something else second.
66 
As late as September 1924, the Imperial Night-  Hawk expressed dis -
satisfaction with the presidential candidates. A Klan writer complained, 
“Neither party will put their best men forward. The men nominated must 
subserve the political machine and the machine goes in always for the spoils 
of office.” The article concludes, “The Ku Klux Klan is for no particular 
party. The Ku Klux Klan is for America—  an America awakened to patri -
otic citizenship.”
67 By persuading Klansmen to abandon party loyalty and 
be loyal, instead, to the Ku Klux Klan, movement leaders hoped to demon-
strate that they represented a formidable voting bloc that could determine 
the outcome in any election. This would restore the demand for the votes 
and political support of their middle- class constituents.
In addition to breaking down party loyalties, it was also important to 
increase voter turnout among the faithful. Citizens who do not vote can


--- PAGE 116 ---
naTional PoliTics and Mobilizing v oTeRs 109
be safely ignored. At the Klan’s national convention, a speaker noted with 
dismay,
Many of our people do not exercise their right of suffrage, with the result 
that a few tricky scheming politicians often control whole sections of our 
nation. What is the great duty of Klansmen on the political situation? It 
is to arouse our fellow citizens to their civic duty and responsibility, in 
order that government of the people, for the people, by the people, shall 
not perish from the earth.
68 
Another Klan writer encouraged his readers to “ponder these statistics: In 
1920 there were 54,421,823 men and women in this country entitled to 
vote in the presidential election. Only 26,705,246 voted. When you reflect 
that we punish crime by disfranchising people, somebody is guilty of the 
crime of disfranchising themselves. Who is asleep?”
69 
In this respect, promoting voter turnout among women who were 
sympathetic to the Klan’s agenda was especially important. Many mem -
bers of the Women’s Ku Klux Klan had experience with the suffrage move -
ment, and men of the Klan understood that the votes of native-  born, white 
Protestant women would be needed to counter new women voters who op-
posed the goals of the Invisible Empire.
70 The same writer who reported 
voter turnout statistics added,
The exercise of women’s rights in the affairs of the state is inevitable. The 
women’s day is here. The right to vote carries with it the obligation to 
vote. The power of the ballot now granted to women is a challenge to our 
real one hundred percent American women to join the men of the nation 
in laying the axe of the ballot at the root of every American tree which 
does not bring forth American fruit.
71 
The Klansmen’s paternalistic approach to gender roles carved out a role 
for women in the political sphere. One article claimed that “woman has 
now come into her own through the 19th Amendment.”
72 The author ex -
plained that women are perfectly suited for voting and engaging politics 
because they have given birth to the world’s greatest leaders, and they are 
more practical than men and, therefore, “she is needed to combat the forces 
of radicalism that are ever increasing in America.” The article concludes, 
We find woman as a home builder, an important and never- failing ally in 
times of greatest need; we note with ever- increasing gratitude that she has 
not been found wanting in places of important trust, and has proved that 
her patriotism and loyalty are above reproach.
73


--- PAGE 117 ---
110 naTional PoliTics and Mobilizing v oTeRs
Conclusion
Claiming to represent the viewpoint of the nation’s majority— native- born, 
white Protestants— Klan leaders sought to gain new members and motivate 
their current members by drawing attention to ways in which their con -
stituents were losing their capacity to influence political outcomes at both 
the national and local levels. Although they considered a wide range of po-
litical problems, their discussions were structured by an overarching logic: 
an increase in the supply of voters was contributing to a substantial geo -
graphic redistribution of voters that was detrimental to many of the Klan’s 
constituents. Immigration was, without question, the issue that received the 
most attention from the Klan press. On that front, the Klansmen claimed a 
victory when national legislation was enacted in 1924 that sharply curtailed 
immigration. One Klansman boasted,
It is seen that there was no time to be wasted if America was to be saved 
from the evil effects of the lax immigration laws. If the flow of foreign -
ers into this country had not been checked, it would have been but a 
short time until they would have made of America a country far different 
from the ideals on which it was founded. The Klan has taken the lead in 
teaching and expounding the ideals of true Americanism, and to it is due 
most of the credit for warning and protecting the country from the alien 
hordes that have threatened to overrun it.
74 
Attention to the historical context in which the Klan operated reveals 
why the Klan’s advocacy of immigration restriction was appealing to so 
many Americans, even in communities where immigrants and Catholics 
were few in number and posed little or no challenge in local politics. Klan 
spokesmen articulated what many Americans of the time understood— their 
lives were affected by what took place in the nation’s capital just as much 
as they were affected by what took place in the town hall. Yet the general 
logic of their argument could just as easily be applied, and modified, in the 
urban context to fight local battles. Restricting the supply of voters and pro-
moting a solid voting bloc among native- born, white Protestants would have 
been an attractive political strategy for many Americans, and it is a strategy 
that could be applied in many different political struggles, given the way in 
which ethnic, religious, and racial boundaries overlapped substantially with 
class boundaries and occupational boundaries in the early 1900s.
In addition to advocating supply restriction, Klan leaders attempted to 
organize a solid bloc of voters composed of all native- born, white Protestant 
Americans. To members of the cultural majority group who stood on the


--- PAGE 118 ---
naTional PoliTics and Mobilizing v oTeRs 111
sidelines of intensifying class conflict and who could expect to pay the costs 
of any new benefits that would be awarded to farmers, industrial laborers, 
or industrial capitalists, becoming part of such a voting bloc would have 
been appealing. By organizing the majority racial, ethnic, and religious 
group— and by making special efforts to encourage political participation 
among native- born, white Protestant women— the Klan stimulated the de-
mand for what its constituents offered in exchange and became a force to be 
reckoned with in both national and local politics.


--- PAGE 119 ---
112
One of the principal duties of the Klan today is to build up a great free 
educational system. Fifty percent of our taxes should go towards educa -
tion instead of only five per cent. Go home and talk education among the 
Klansmen and soon your representatives in congress will see the light and 
will be voting to make America the best educated country on earth so that 
through education our children and our children’s children can care for 
themselves and be of value to their state.
— Hiram Evans, speaking at a national convention of  
Grand Dragons and Grand Titans held in Asheville,  
North Carolina, Imperial Night- Hawk, July 25, 1923
Few social movements in the history of the United States have been as suc-
cessful as the Ku Klux Klan in recruiting members and supporters. With 
the leverage that comes from enlisting millions of dues- paying members, the 
movement forced political representatives, including those who had their 
sights set on the presidency, to take a stand in regard to the Ku Klux Klan 
and its agenda. In spite of the movement’s successes, scholars have been 
reluctant to give the Klan credit for its accomplishments. Rather than in -
vestigating how the movement was able to develop a program that appealed 
to so many people, many scholars have instead approached the problem by 
trying to figure out what was wrong with the people who joined. The Klan’s 
popularity is presented as a lesson on how easily the masses can be deceived 
by leaders who exploit common fears, anxieties, and resentments.
Some writers have, tautologically, supported their arguments by pointing 
6
Fights over Schools and Booze


--- PAGE 120 ---
fighT s oveR schools and booze 113
to the movement’s ultimate demise. Chalmers, for example, argues that the 
Klan went into decline because it appealed to “negative, defensive feelings 
which, though strongly rooted in the American life, did not prove suffi -
cient to long sustain a major movement.”
1 Jackson echoes these sentiments, 
claiming,
Without a meaningful raison d’être  the Invisible Empire was exposed as 
a ludicrous sham, for neither its infantile mumbo jumbo nor its exagger-
ated claims could bear objective scrutiny, even among those it counted as 
Knights. The genuine American sense of decency finally asserted itself 
and consigned the once mighty Klan to obscurity.
2
Richard Hofstadter, one of the first scholars to comment on the Klan’s 
popularity, helped set the tone for later studies that would characterize the 
movement as a classic example of low- status backlash. Hofstadter described 
the Klansmen as “gullible nativists” who sensed that their rural values were 
being ignored and even ridiculed by those residing in the “wicked cities.” 
The same type of interpretation was later offered by Lipset and Raab who 
proposed that “the backlash of the 1920’s demonstrated again the simple 
phenomenon of status substitution.”
3 Like Hofstadter, these authors argued 
that changes in society at large were viewed as threatening to traditional 
values and that individuals joined the organization because they perceived a 
decline in their status. Numerous other studies attribute the Klan’s growth 
to the fears and anxieties of its members or to the way in which Klansmen 
felt that their core values were being threatened.
4 
Motivations for joining the organization were far more complex than 
the status anxiety argument suggests. More recent scholarship has focused 
on how the Klan became a vehicle for pursuing political interests of its con-
stituents in local settings and has revealed complex ways in which race, class, 
religion, and gender interacted to produce both support for, and opposition 
to, the movement.
5 Those who have explained the Klan in terms of status 
anxiety focused on the movement’s racism, religious bigotry, and xenophobia 
and failed to consider how these characteristics of the movement were deeply 
intertwined with its other political goals. The Klan’s other goals were either 
ignored or dismissed as being irrelevant to the central task of explaining 
why a white supremacist movement could become so popular in the United 
States. In the process, these scholars neglected to consider many of the issues 
raised in the preceding two chapters— they failed to consider how economic 
and political power devaluation generated incentives to join the organization 
and how the leaders of the Klan constructed collective-  action frames that 
resonated strongly with those who were experiencing power devaluation.


--- PAGE 121 ---
114 fighT s oveR schools and booze
Does this mean that concerns about status had nothing to do with the 
movement’s growth? I believe the answer is no. The Ku Klux Klan was, 
among other things, a moral reform movement. The Klan sought not only 
to defend the core cultural values of its own adherents but also to impose 
those values on others and at times resorted to violence as a means of pun-
ishing transgressors.
6 More commonly, the Klan sought to work with local 
law enforcement agents who were sympathetic to their goals, helping them 
to root out and punish bootleggers, drunkards, adulterers, gamblers, and 
anyone else who violated the moral code promoted by the movement. It is 
hard to explain these actions solely in terms of economic and political in -
centives, as they seem to indicate that social esteem derived from adhering 
to a particular code of moral behavior was an important motivating factor.
Nicola Beisel has criticized students of moral reform movements for 
constructing a false dichotomy between class-  based interests and status-
 based interests. Marxist scholars, she argues, have mistakenly dismissed the 
significance of status because they tend to view a movement’s rhetoric about 
cultural values as a mask used strategically to obfuscate a group’s pursuit of 
class interests. Other scholars have gone too far in the other direction by 
focusing solely on status and neglecting to consider the interdependence of 
status and class interests. High levels of cultural capital, for example, not 
only garner social esteem but also connect individuals to social networks 
that can be useful in maintaining a position (or advancing) in a class hier -
archy.
7 Yet the values themselves are not simply tools for obtaining material 
wealth. They represent core beliefs about how one should live one’s life, and 
they often carry with them powerful emotions because they define, to a 
great extent, collective identities and one’s sense of self. Interpretive frames 
that forge connections between class-  based interests and core cultural val -
ues, particularly if they pertain to children and the family, Beisel argues, 
are especially potent when it comes to motivating collective action.
In agreement with Beisel, I believe it is important to consider how sta-
tus and class concerns interacted to generate support for the Ku Klux Klan. 
Indeed, Klan leaders appealed to both when they discussed issues such as 
patriotism, Prohibition, and public education. Their arguments in support 
of public schools, for example, typically emphasized their view that the 
schools should instill core Christian (i.e., Protestant) values in all students, 
but also noted that such values would contribute to the students’ well- being 
and economic prosperity. In this chapter, I consider the role that status 
played in the Klan’s mobilization by focusing primarily on one key issue, 
public schooling, which was centrally featured in the Klan’s agenda. The 
Klan’s recruiting success was not simply a case of status backlash. Instead,


--- PAGE 122 ---
fighT s oveR schools and booze 115
applying the logic of the power-  devaluation model reveals how status con-
cerns contributed to the movement’s growth. 
The Klan’s Defense of Public Schools
When considering the role of status in social movement mobilization, 
education is a logical starting point. Klan leaders took pains to present 
their movement as one composed of individuals who were well educated 
and highly regarded in their communities, and they often ridiculed their 
enemies for their lack of educational credentials. Articles written in the 
Imperial Night-  Hawk were clearly intended to convey a sense of intellec -
tual sophistication (but not elitism); they often referred to philosophers, 
biblical passages, scholarly work, and speeches made by prominent political 
figures. Perhaps more important, movement leaders frequently identified 
public education as the most pressing issue requiring the Klan’s attention. 
Speaking to “seventy- five thousand Ohio Klansmen,” Hiram Evans declared 
that saving, enlarging, and expanding the free public school system was 
the greatest necessity currently facing the movement. Evans clearly saw the 
issue as one that could be useful in attracting more members and support-
ers. Speaking to Grand Dragons and Grand Titans at a national conven -
tion held in Asheville, North Carolina, he advised his fellow Klan leaders 
to “go home and talk education among the Klansmen,” and he addressed 
the topic in depth in numerous speeches and public addresses.
8
Early in the Klan’s ascendance, movement leaders discovered that con-
cerns about public schooling provided them with an ideal issue to gener -
ate support for their organization. The Klan entered the state of Oregon in 
1921 and quickly became involved in political controversy. The movement 
backed a ballot initiative sponsored by Scottish Rites Masons that essen -
tially outlawed private schooling. The Scottish Rites Masons served, it is 
widely believed, as a front for the Klan in the state. The initiative, which 
was later found to be unconstitutional, passed with 115,506 votes in favor 
and 103,685 votes opposed.
9 The public school issue was also central to the 
gubernatorial campaign of 1922. Siding with the Klan on the issue, and de-
claring himself to be a 100 percent American candidate, Democrat Walter 
Pierce won a bitterly contested contest in a state that had previously been 
dominated by Republicans. 
What was it about public education that captured the hearts and minds 
of Klansmen and Klanswomen in the early 1920s? Why did leaders of the 
Klan feature public education prominently in their collective- action frames? 
The Klan’s rhetoric creates the image of an educational system in crisis. 
Movement leaders frequently commented on high rates of illiteracy, poor


--- PAGE 123 ---
116 fighT s oveR schools and booze
attendance in the schools, poorly funded schools, and underpaid teachers 
as problems in need of immediate attention. Certainly there was room for 
improvement in public education in the 1920s, and issues related to school-
ing can generate powerful emotions because parents are concerned about 
their children’s prospects for social mobility.
10 Yet to understand the role 
that public education played in the rise of the Klan, it is important to ask 
whether conditions were improving or worsening in the 1920s. Were Klan 
members responding to new objective grievances (increasingly poor perfor-
mance of the public schools) or were they reacting instead to status-  based 
power devaluation resulting from gains made in education in the years prior 
to the Klan’s emergence?
Available data suggest that to a great extent the Klan’s discussions of an 
educational system in crisis were more an exercise in the social construction 
of a social problem than an accurate assessment of worsening conditions 
in the United States. This is not to say, of course, that Klan members were 
not genuinely concerned about the quality of public education. Certainly, 
many were. And clearly the educational system had significant deficiencies 
in the 1920s. In fact, in the 1919–20 school year the average annual salary 
of teachers, principals, and supervisors was only slightly higher than the 
average annual income of manufacturing wage earners.
11 However, these 
and other deficiencies in public education represent a cross-  sectional snap-
shot of what was generally a positive longitudinal trajectory. According to 
U.S. census data, total salary paid to teachers, principals, and supervisors 
increased by 133 percent from 1910 to 1920. Salaries continued to rise dur-
ing the years of the Klan’s growth, showing a 70 percent increase from 1920 
to 1925.
12 Census data show a similar trend in total expenditures on public 
schools. Expenditures per student (for the population aged five to seventeen) 
nearly doubled from 1909 to 1919 and nearly doubled again during the de-
cade in which the Klan began its phenomenal growth (see Figure 15).
13
While public spending on education was on the rise, so were rates 
of enrollment. In 1900 72.4 percent of the population from age five to 
seven teen was enrolled in public schools. By 1920 that figure had risen to 
77.8 percent. Although this change is not dramatic, a state-  by- state ex -
amination of census data provides a more interesting story. Table 3 ranks 
states according to the change in the percentage of school-  age population 
enrolled in public schools from 1900 to 1920. Many northeastern states, 
such as New Hampshire, Vermont, Massachusetts, Maine, Rhode Island, 
and New York, experienced a decline in public school enrollment. Much of 
the change can be attributed to the expansion of parochial schools in these 
states where Catholics comprised a sizable proportion of the total popu -


--- PAGE 124 ---
fighT s oveR schools and booze 117
lation. However, several predominantly Protestant states such as Indiana, 
Kansas, and Oregon also lost ground to other western and especially south-
ern states. In 1900 the enrollment rate for Indiana was higher than rates 
of all eleven states of the former Confederacy, but by 1920 Indiana had 
been surpassed by Arkansas, Florida, North Carolina, South Carolina, and 
Tennessee.
Increases in rates of public school enrollment in southern states can be 
attributed to several factors. Relatively few Catholics resided in the South, 
so the public schools faced little competition from parochial schools in 
these states. Also, urbanization and northern migration certainly played a 
role. As long as a majority of black Americans were confined to positions 
as sharecroppers, subsistence farmers, or laborers in rural locales, there 
were few opportunities to secure a quality education for their children.
14 
Urbanization generated additional incentives for white migrants to enroll 
children in schools. The low rates of school enrollment in southern states at 
the turn of the century reflect the low priority placed on public education 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
1869 1879 1889 1899 1909 1919 1929
Year
Expenditures per Pupil in the United States  (in constant 1899–1890 dollars)
Figure 15. Total expenditures on public schools per pupil, 1869–1929. Figures 
are based on average daily enrollment. U.S. Department of Education, 120 Years 
of American Education: A Statistical Portrait.


--- PAGE 125 ---
Table 3. Percentage of school-age population (five to seventeen years old) enrolled in public schools, by state
 Enrolled Enrolled Change in  Enrolled Enrolled Change in 
State 1900 1920 Enrollment State 1900 1920 Enrollment
Arizona 51.9 88.0 36.1
Wyoming 65.7 91.6 25.9
South Carolina 60.7 83.9 23.2
Louisiana 43.6 63.5 19.9
Montana 72.8 92.2 19.4
North Carolina 63.6 82.4 18.8
Nevada 63.6 82.4 17.4
Florida 66.6 82.6 16.0
Idaho 79.2 94.8 15.6
Arkansas 71.0 85.7 14.7
New Mexico 61.4 75.4 14.0
Oklahoma 79.8 92.6 12.8
Tennessee 75.1 87.6 12.5
Alabama 61.7 74.1 12.4
Virginia 63.2 73.3 10.1
New Jersey 68.5 77.4 8.9
Georgia 65.3 74.0 8.7
Texas 64.7 73.4 8.7
Colorado 88.2 95.0 6.8
Utah 81.0 87.2 6.2
Washington 87.9 94.1 6.2
Connecticut 74.5 80.3 5.8
Minnesota 77.6 81.8 4.2
South Dakota 79.5 82.9 3.4
North Dakota 81.3 84.6 3.3
New York 69.6 72.8 3.2
Pennsylvania 68.9 71.5 2.6
Michigan 77.1 79.3 2.2
Oregon 82.1 84.1 2.0
West Virginia 78.6 79.8 1.2
Ohio 75.4 76.6 1.2
Nebraska 89.5 90.5 1.0
Kentucky 75.3 76.2 0.9
Maryland 6
7.0 66.9 –0.1
Missouri 78.6 78.3 –0.3
Illinois 72.7 72.1 –0.6
Kansas 89.2 87.9 –1.3
Rhode Island 66.8 65.4 –1.4
Indiana 81.1 79.4 –1.7
Delaware 75.3 73.3 –2.0
Iowa 89.1 86.1 –3.0
Mississippi 73.3 69.8 –3.5
Wisconsin 72.5 68.2 –4.3
Massachusetts 76.2 71.3 –4.9
Maine  81.4 76.3 –5.1
Vermont 82.2 73.4 –8.8
New Hampshire 74.0 64.3 –9.7
Source: U.S. Department of Commerce, Statistical Abstracts of the United States, 1925.


--- PAGE 126 ---
fighT s oveR schools and booze 119
in an agrarian economy in which a privileged few possessed most of the 
land, the wealth, and the political power and had little incentive to promote 
educational opportunities for those who labored in the fields. Most north-
ern and midwestern states had passed compulsory education laws prior to 
the turn of the century, while southern and southwestern states were hold-
outs.
15 That began to change in the early 1900s. By 1920 all southern states 
had enacted compulsory education laws with most of these laws enacted in 
the 1910s.
Although these laws were not enforced as aggressively in southern states 
as they were in northern states, and while expenditures on black schools 
continued to lag behind spending on white schools, new educational oppor-
tunities were opening up for southern blacks.
16 Census data show evidence 
of a sharp reduction in illiteracy among black Americans in southern states 
from 1900 to 1920. Although the census figures on illiteracy are not com-
pletely reliable, they do show a consistent trend toward increasing literacy. 
For example, the census reports that 54.7 percent of adult black males in 
South Carolina were illiterate in 1900. By 1920 black adult male illiteracy 
had decreased to 37.7 percent. In Arkansas the illiteracy rate for adult black 
males dropped from 44.8 percent to 25.4 percent during the same period. 
Indeed, all southern states show a sharp drop in black illiteracy in the years 
prior to the Klan’s resurgence.
In the nation as a whole, enrollment in public schools was on the rise 
but so was enrollment in Catholic schools. Indeed, the Klan emerged dur-
ing a time of rapid expansion of parochial education, which began in the 
mid- 1870s. There were approximately 1,400 Catholic schools in the nation 
in 1875; within ten years, there were more than 2,500 schools.
17 By 1920, 
the year in which the Klan began to spread across the nation, the number of 
Catholic schools had reached 8,706. An increase in the number of Catholic 
high schools was particularly sharp in the years leading up to the Klan’s 
rise: in 1915 there were 1,276 Catholic high schools in the United States, 
and by 1922 that number had nearly doubled to 2,129. Perhaps more tell -
ing, the number of teachers in Catholic high schools increased by 298 per-
cent, and the number of students enrolled in Catholic high schools jumped 
by 106 percent during the same time period.
18 
Although Klan leaders criticized Catholic schools for their failure to 
promote assimilation of European immigrants and for not instilling core 
American values in students, these criticisms were leveled at a time when 
Catholic schools, ironically, were becoming more and more like the public 
schools. The Catholic school system in the United States originated and 
developed in a larger context characterized by deep-  seated and intense


--- PAGE 127 ---
120 fighT s oveR schools and booze
religious animosity. To a great extent, Catholic schools emerged in response 
to teaching and practices in public school that Catholics viewed as hos -
tile to their faith. Many Protestants drew on republican theory to argue 
that (Protestant) religion must serve as a foundation for public education. 
According to this line of thought, the fate of the republic rests on partici -
pation of moral citizens in the public sphere. The public schools, therefore, 
must draw on core religious values to produce successive generations of moral 
citizens. As Tyack and colleagues express it, nonsectarian public schooling 
in this context “meant that the Protestant churches agreed to suspend their 
denominational quarrels within the public schoolhouse.” However, reading 
from the Bible in public schools was quite common throughout most of the 
nineteenth century.
19
Catholic and Protestant disagreement over the role of public schools 
provided impetus for the development and expansion of a parochial school 
system: 
So deep were the differences of religious outlook between Protestants and 
Catholics in the mid-  nineteenth century that they often seemed inca -
pable of understanding one another. Enraged by compulsory reading of 
the King James Bible and by textbooks that derogated Catholicism and 
often the lands from which Catholic immigrants had come, Catholics 
in many communities came to believe that they must build their own 
school system.
20 
In spite of such conditions, many Catholics continued to send their children 
to public schools. Limited resources possessed by Catholic immigrants and 
other working- class Catholic families put the Catholic schools at a competi-
tive disadvantage, and Protestants, in most instances, successfully resisted 
public funding of Catholic schools.
In the nineteenth century, Catholics were divided on the role of paro-
chial education and how Catholic schools should relate to the public school 
system. In some communities Catholic schools did receive public funding. 
This typically resulted from local conditions that required cooperation be-
tween the public school system and the Catholic Church. In Poughkeepsie, 
New York, for example, Catholic schools were in danger of closing due to 
lack of funding. Closure of the schools would have resulted in a 50 percent 
increase in public school enrollment, severely straining the resources of the 
public schools. To avoid such a crisis, public money supported the failing 
Catholic schools, while the Catholic schools agreed to refrain from offering 
religious instruction during normal school hours.
21 
In most instances, Catholic schools had to make do without public


--- PAGE 128 ---
fighT s oveR schools and booze 121
funding but still had to come to terms, in some way, with the public school 
system and with the larger society in which they were embedded. Many 
Catholics believed that the schools should provide religious teaching but 
should otherwise be closely modeled after the public schools.
22 Proponents 
of this model argued that Catholic schools should not only cover similar 
nonreligious content in the classroom but also should strive to surpass the 
public schools in terms of the quality of the overall educational experience. 
Other Catholics believed that parochial schools should avoid convergence 
with public schools. From this perspective, the schools were charged with 
preserving not only the Catholic faith within a hostile environment but also 
the language and culture of the immigrant parishioners’ home countries.
23 
By the turn of the century an expanding and increasingly structured 
parochial school system ran parallel to the public school system. It served 
many of the same purposes and was subjected to many of the same state-
 imposed regulations. As the size of the Catholic middle class expanded, so 
did the demand for high academic standards in parochial schools. To pre-
vent defection to public schools, Catholic educators had to convince parents 
that they could do a better job than the public schools in preparing students 
for higher education.
24 
Catholic schools also converged with public schools in their efforts to 
promote citizenship and patriotism within the classroom. In part, this re -
flected the preferences of second-  and third- generation Catholic immigrants 
who were reaching middle-  class status and valued assimilation into the 
larger society. But outside pressure to promote patriotism and assimilation 
became intense during World War I and in the war’s immediate aftermath 
as a strong nativist current swept across the nation. Veverka notes that dur-
ing this period Catholic educators generally agreed that Americanization 
was an important function of Catholic schooling.
25 The following state -
ment from a diocesan school superintendent in Pittsburgh in 1919 is strik-
ingly similar to statements made by Klan leaders about the role of schools in 
American society:
To strengthen our national life, to perpetuate our liberties under the 
Constitution, to guard against insidious attacks upon republican insti -
tutions, we advocate a vigorous and holy spirit of Americanism in our 
schools, a deep and intelligent love of our institutions, reverence for our 
flag and respect for our laws. The lessons of patriotism based on religion 
should be made a part of our daily school life so that our educational sys-
tem should maintain a strong national character and be a powerful aid to 
the true development of our national life and national ideals.
26


--- PAGE 129 ---
122 fighT s oveR schools and booze
Status- Based Power Devaluation
As the Klan’s leaders and recruiters opportunistically searched for issues that 
they could exploit to attract members and supporters, they soon discovered 
that public education fit the bill. The Klan’s leaders generated the impression 
that schools were failing miserably during a period in which educational 
opportunities were actually improving for many Americans. Because the 
Klansmen made exaggerated, inaccurate, and misleading claims about the 
state of education in the United States, it is tempting to concur with early 
scholars who argued that the movement exploited the irrational fears and 
anxieties of individuals that it hoped to recruit. If the educational system 
was not actually collapsing, then why did so many American Protestants 
embrace the Klan’s message? Close scrutiny of the Klan’s rhetoric can re -
veal a solution to the puzzle. The Klan’s message resonated strongly because 
changes in the educational system (both public and private) taking place in 
the early 1900s generated status- based power devaluation for many middle-
 class, white Protestants.
Labaree points out that rapid industrialization in the United States led 
many middle-  class Americans to embrace public education as the key to 
maintaining a favorable position for oneself and one’s family within a fluid 
class structure. The middle class 
was caught between two advancing dangers. On the one side, the en -
croachment of successful entrepreneurial competitors threatened bank -
ruptcy. On the other side, the rapid growth of wage labor threatened pro-
letarianization. As the reliability of economic property as a guarantee of 
social reproduction decreased, the middle class’s dependence on cultural 
property increased.
27 
Middle- class Americans recognized that education set them apart from in-
dustrial laborers and that education was vital in terms of ensuring that their 
children would not fall into the ranks of the proletariat. As Lynd and Lynd 
point out in their classic study of “Middletown,” by the early 1920s the topic 
of education evoked “the fervor of a religion” among many Muncie residents, 
as they saw education as salvation from a hard working- class existence.
28
A high school diploma, and for some a college diploma, had utilitarian 
value but also generated a considerable amount of social esteem for those 
who possessed one. The status derived from a high school diploma was a 
function, to a great extent, of the relative scarcity of degrees awarded.
29 
High school graduation rates were very low in the late 1800s and early 
1900s, but began to rise sharply around 1910 (see Figure 16). The Klan 
emerged in a time when a high school diploma was becoming increasingly


--- PAGE 130 ---
fighT s oveR schools and booze 123
common and this, in the language of the power-  devaluation model, meant 
that the status-  based purchasing power of those who gained social esteem 
by virtue of their educational credentials was undergoing devaluation. 
What is more, levels of educational attainment for the Klan’s enemies were 
converging with those of the native- born, white Protestants whom the Klan 
hoped to recruit. The gap between white and nonwhite Americans in school 
enrollment began to close rapidly in the years leading to the Klan’s mobili -
zation (see Figure 17). As discussed earlier, the parochial school system was 
also expanding, with the growth in secondary schooling being especially 
striking. Growing Catholic prosperity and Catholics’ commitment to build 
a school system that could compete with, and surpass, the public school 
system understandably led many middle-  class Protestants to worry about 
whether the education provided by the public schools would be sufficient to 
allow their children to maintain their position within the class structure.
College enrollment was also on the rise in the early 1900s, although 
the most dramatic increases in college enrollment would not occur until 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
1869 1879 1889 1899 1909 1919 1929
Year
High School Graduates in the United States (per 100 17-year-olds)
Figure 16. High school graduates in the United States per 100 seventeen-year-
olds. U.S. Department of Education, 120 Years of American Education: 
A Statistical Portrait.


--- PAGE 131 ---
124 fighT s oveR schools and booze
several decades after the Klan’s mobilization. Notably, in the years leading 
up to the Klan’s mobilization, women were beginning to comprise a larger 
proportion of the undergraduate population. In 1900 close to 20 percent of 
bachelor’s degrees in the United States were conferred to women. By 1920 
women earned approximately 35 percent of conferred bachelor’s degrees.
30 
Many white, middle-  class Protestants, men in particular, were experienc -
ing status-  based power devaluation in the early 1920s resulting from in -
creases in the supply of others who were gaining educational credentials. 
These conditions provided a framing opportunity for the leaders of the Ku 
Klux Klan.
Prognosis: Supply Restriction 
The Klan’s arguments on behalf of public education were deeply rooted in 
republican ideology. One Klan writer lays the groundwork for an argument 
to improve the public schools system by writing,
The greatest American problem is to learn how to have voters and taxpay-
ers recognize the fact that the children of today will be the responsible 
government of tomorrow and that governments reflect the character of 
individual constituents. Unless the child’s character is founded on good 
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
1880 1890 1900 1910 1920
Year
White
Nonwhite
 
Percent of 5- to 19-Year-Olds Enrolled in School in the United States
Figure 17. Percentage of five- to nineteen-year-olds enrolled in school by 
race, 1880–1920. U.S. Department of Education, 120 Years of American 
Education: A Statistical Portrait.


--- PAGE 132 ---
fighT s oveR schools and booze 125
principles, mental and moral trustworthiness, he can not attain the full 
measure of responsible citizenship. The public school is the training 
school for the potential responsible citizen.
31 
The writer praised the founders of public schooling for developing a system 
that provides an “equal chance for all,” and reminded readers that it was 
every citizen’s duty, even those without children, to support public school-
ing with tax dollars. Klan writers, including the one cited above, also ex -
pressed concern that the value of education in the United States was being 
“cheapened.”
The Klan’s framing of education conveys deep concern that the pub -
lic schools were losing ground. One article describes a speech delivered by 
Hiram Evans in Pennsylvania, where the Imperial Wizard “pleaded for ac-
tion to guard this country against a recurrence of the conditions found in 
the world war, where 24 percent of the men in the army were found to be 
illiterate. This disgrace of the nation, not fully appreciated before, would be 
wiped out if compulsory education were required of all children.”
32 Evans 
was referring to tests administered to servicemen that revealed high rates 
of illiteracy. The issue was covered extensively by the national media, and 
groups such as the National Education Association (NEA) capitalized on 
the media attention to demand that greater investments be made in edu -
cation.
33 Klan leaders sought to capitalize on the publicity to advance their 
own agenda. Hiram Evans advocated compulsory education as a cure but 
was quick to point out that the solution lay in public rather than paro -
chial schooling. According to Evans, “Children taught in parochial schools, 
Roman Catholics or otherwise, can not grow up with open minds. They 
have been taught what to think . . . rather than how to think.”
34 
Although Evans and other Klan leaders criticized Catholic schools, it is 
clear that they sensed that the public schools were losing ground to parochial 
schools. One article addressed this issue in considerable depth, noting,
The Catholics, who number in the United States considerably over eigh-
teen million, against eighty million Protestants, are awake to the advan-
tages of an education and have established their schools at central points 
where every child of the Catholic faith is enabled to attend and secure 
the benefits that are being denied the majority. Of course the schools are 
owned and controlled by the Catholic and Catholicism is drilled into 
the children from the day they first enter school until their education 
is completed. If this is good for the minority of the population of the 
United States, then why should not the Protestant citizen see the point 
and work with the idea of developing their children into leaders? The 
illiteracy of Protestant America is not so astounding after a careful study


--- PAGE 133 ---
126 fighT s oveR schools and booze
of the school system without a compulsory education or child labor law. 
On the other hand, the Catholic does not have to be forced to send his 
child to school. He is training him to dominate the child who is raised a 
Protestant and in this manner they will be enabled to completely control 
economic conditions after a few years of intensive education. Our schools 
will then fall into the hands of the Catholic and the wonderful system 
that our forefathers have labored to build up and turn into a most effi -
cient system will become a thing of the past. Our children’s children will 
be taught the religion of the Catholic in our own schools and in a few 
generations the United States will be a Catholic country.
35 
Klan leaders expressed grudging admiration for the way in which 
Catholics were taking advantage of educational opportunities and ex -
pressed fear that Catholics would translate superior educational training 
into economic and political power. They raised concerns about individual 
Catholics influencing the public schools by gaining seats on the school 
board or through teaching in the public schools. The Klan leaders’ diatribes 
often spoke of Vatican- inspired conspiracies to take over public education. 
One such article ends by instructing the Klan’s followers to “see to it that 
no boards of education are elected who, directly or indirectly, come under 
the influence of the Vatican, so that teachers may be selected and employed 
who will teach the principles of real Americanism.” Another article warned 
of Catholic propaganda creeping into public school textbooks: “Take a look 
at the youngsters’ school books when they bring them home. Maybe you 
will find the hierarchy at work.”
36 
Klan leaders’ framing of education tapped into a general feeling among 
members of the racial and religious majority that they were losing ground 
to subordinate groups. While Catholic competition generated the most 
concern, race also came into play. One article chastises white Protestants 
for spending more on cigarettes, movies, and cosmetics than they do on 
education, while “eighty percent of the negroes are now able to read and 
write, yet, there are thousands of whites that cannot. No one will deny 
that the negro has the right to an education, but are one hundred per cent 
Americans willing to allow whites to group up in ignorance while negroes 
are educated?”
37 Clearly, Klan leaders knew how to push their constituents’ 
buttons when it came to constructing collective-  action frames. Given the 
prejudices of the day, and the prejudices held by members of the Klan, the 
prospect of being surpassed by black Americans in educational achievement 
was, undoubtedly, a powerful motivator. 
Although Klan leaders noted the educational progress made by Catho-


--- PAGE 134 ---
fighT s oveR schools and booze 127
lics and African Americans and criticized fellow Protestants for being com -
placent about public education, they argued that problems in the public 
schools resulted in part from the burden of having to incorporate blacks 
and Catholic immigrants into the system. Doing so, they argued, resulted 
in a lowering of standards that, in the language of the power-  devaluation 
model, diminishes the value of public education as a source of social es -
teem. As one Klan writer put it, 
Many of our public schools, I am told, do not teach English. Few of the 
emigrants past thirty years of age ever gain a speaking acquaintance with 
our language as it is spoken or written. Go to a foreign district in any city 
and see them reading their particular newspaper or books printed in their 
particular language. With that state of affairs, how in the name of God 
can they learn what Americanism means?
38 
To emphasize the magnitude of the problem, another Klan writer claimed 
that the task of educating immigrants was even more complicated and seri -
ous than a world war. The immigrants, he argued, were
A stupendous army of downtrodden, landless peasants, illiterate for a 
thousand years, submerged and warped in mind and body and spiritual 
estate by their cramped existence and the absolutism under which they 
have lived— the very flood from the cesspools of that old continent boil-
ing and reeking with the filth of ten centuries of plundered, profaned and 
disinherited mankind.
39 
The Klan’s arguments in favor of immigration restriction had implica-
tions for public education as well as for economic and political struggles. 
If the status derived from a public education was being diminished by in -
creasing numbers of individuals receiving similar educational credentials, 
then immigration restriction would reduce the supply of individuals in the 
public schools. It would also reduce the number of students who might fuel 
the growth of a parochial school system that, Klansmen feared, was out -
performing the public schools in many respects. Public schools, from the 
Klansmen’s perspective, were burdened with educating poor immigrants, 
many of whom were Catholic, while the Catholic schools could devote their 
resources to training relatively prosperous Catholic students.
Interestingly, the Klan did not argue that Catholic or black students 
should be prohibited from attending the public schools. They were more 
concerned about the possibility that Catholics would control or influence 
public education. Klan leaders advocated a form of compulsory education 
that would not only compel all school-  age children to attend school but


--- PAGE 135 ---
128 fighT s oveR schools and booze
also force them to attend public schools. They advocated sharp increases in 
spending on public schooling that, through public taxation, would require 
all Americans (including Catholics) to fund a school system that would be 
completely under the control of Protestants. Evans argued that 50 percent 
of taxes, rather than 5 percent, should go toward education.
40 
To address status-  based power devaluation resulting from changes in 
education, the Klan did much more than advocate immigration restriction. 
Indeed, the movement’s leaders embraced a failed effort to establish a fed -
eral department of education in the 1920s. Efforts to create a department of 
education preceded the Klan’s growth in the early 1920s and, as Dumenil 
notes, it was an issue that stimulated intense debate throughout the na -
tion. According to the New York Times, the debate could be characterized 
as a “controversial discussion that spreads in an accelerating wave over the 
whole country, until every village is lined up pro or con.”
41 
The attempt to create a federal department of education was an out -
growth of the progressive movement and was closely linked to ongoing ef-
forts of education reformers who were promoting expansion, centralization, 
and standardization in public schooling—  what Tyack refers to as an ef -
fort to develop the “one best system.” The Smith-  Towner Bill, introduced 
in 1919, not only sought to create a federal department of education but 
also aimed to raise educational standards through research and through 
the provision of federal funding. Similar bills, the Towner-  Sterling Bill 
and the Sterling- Reed Bill, were introduced in 1921 and 1924. The legisla-
tion also included provisions to promote “Americanization” in the public 
schools. Klan leaders viewed the legislation as an opportunity to secure a 
Protestant monopoly on the administration and delivery of education, and, 
as Dumenil notes, they were also attracted to the proposed legislation be -
cause of the way in which it would elevate the public schools at the expense 
of parochial schools. Using federal influence and federal funding to raise 
standards in the public schools could go a long way toward restoring the 
status- based purchasing power of a public education.
42 
Several lengthy articles in the Imperial Night- Hawk describe the Klan’s 
rationale for supporting legislation that would establish a department of 
education. These articles clearly demonstrate the Klan’s view that federal 
aid was required to guarantee that a public school education would be supe-
rior to a parochial school education. One writer enthusiastically supported 
the Sterling- Reed Education Bill, reasoning that its passage “will mean that 
the public schools will rank along with the best of sectarian schools and 
be efficiently controlled with the highest of American ideals and usages 
being taught, making, in the end, a completely Americanized government.”


--- PAGE 136 ---
fighT s oveR schools and booze 129
Another author noted that the bill was opposed by the “corporations” be -
cause of a desire to maintain a supply of cheap labor. The Klansman added, 
“The un-  educated child of today will be the common laborer of the fu -
ture and every day the ambition of men is being blighted when they real -
ize that they are fighting losing battles because they were not as fortunate 
during their school days as were their playmates.”
43 Arguments such as 
this one surely resonated strongly with middle-  class Protestant Americans 
who feared that their children would fall into the ranks of the proletariat 
while Catholics experienced upward mobility due to superior educational 
opportunities.
Klansmen noted that the Sterling-  Reed Bill would accomplish two 
general goals. First, it would establish a department of education with a 
Cabinet secretary at the head, and second, it would provide badly needed 
federal funding to the schools. One writer argued that the first goal was 
the most important: “The big thing, the fundamental, all important thing, 
to be accomplished for the cause of democratic education in America is to 
give it the recognition, the dignity, the established standing, of a high place 
in the Cabinet.” Klansmen believed that increasing federal involvement in 
public education would prevent Catholics from influencing public schools, 
even in communities where Catholics represented the numerical major -
ity. By enacting the Sterling- Reed Bill, the Klan argued, “we will find that 
Protestant Americans will cease to be discriminated against because of their 
affiliations with those things that are purely of America and for America.”
44 
Especially appealing to the Klansmen, in this regard, was $7,500,000 ear -
marked for promoting Americanization in the public schools.
While the Klan embraced legislation that would establish a federal de-
partment of education, the movement also backed efforts in states such as 
Michigan, Oregon, and Alabama to require all children to attend public, 
rather than private, schools. By advocating immigration restriction and by 
seeking ways to establish a Protestant monopoly on education, the move -
ment offered a remedy for status- based power devaluation that resulted from 
increasing supplies of individuals possessing educational credentials at a 
time when the educational gap separating white Protestants from Catholics 
and African Americans was rapidly closing.
Prognosis: Stimulate Demand
Although the Klan raised concerns about public schooling, arguing that 
the quality of education had been “cheapened,” the movement’s frames 
also forcefully argued that a public education, if properly supported and 
funded, was inherently superior to private education—  parochial education


--- PAGE 137 ---
130 fighT s oveR schools and booze
in particular. In essence, the frames aimed to demonstrate that those who 
were educated in the public schools had a superior educational experience 
and were therefore more worthy of social esteem than were individuals who 
were either uneducated or were educated in private schools. By promoting 
Protestant values and patriotism, the Klansmen argued, public schools not 
only produced better citizens but also produced citizens better equipped to 
succeed in life. One article, titled “Christian Citizenship: The Gospel ac -
cording to the Klan,” makes the following argument:
The Klan insists that education must lead to a larger realization of citi -
zenship; a deeper spiritual, a broader intellectual preparation for its privi-
leges and duties. This is placing education on a higher plane than the 
Old World system. There they train a man into a machine, the soul into 
a pair of hands. We believe that citizenship in a democracy like ours is 
essentially Christian therefore, we insist on the Bible being placed in the 
public schools. We want every child in America to become intimately ac-
quainted with the Christ, the most uplifting personality in all history.
45 
The quotation above exemplifies the way in which Klan leaders spoke 
to the special role that public education played for middle- class Americans. 
The public school represented a bulwark against intergenerational down -
ward mobility. Bible reading and Protestant teaching in the public schools, 
they argued, were not only good for the soul but also good for the pocket-
book. Acquaintance with Christ, in other words, was “uplifting” in a ma -
terial sense as well as in a spiritual sense. Klansmen argued that even if 
Catholic schools could teach basic academic skills as effectively as the public 
schools, the Catholic schools were inferior in other important respects. One 
article, for example, characterized Catholic schools, and more generally the 
Catholic faith, as being antidemocratic. According to the writer, 
To attempt to institute a “parallel” system of sectarian or culturally and 
spiritually separate schools is to undertake something which, gloss it over 
as you wish, is “not specifically national” and furthermore is essentially 
un- American and un-  democratic. A parochial school or any separate 
school which is educationally equal, or even superior to a public school, is 
its hopeless inferior as a democratic school.
46 
Quality education, according to the Klansmen, involved much more 
than the transmission of academic skills. As one writer expressed it, “Today, 
we need something more than grammars and fractions and geographies to 
prepare our youths and maidens for good citizenship. The great curse of the 
whole world today is the educated villian [sic]. These men know enough,


--- PAGE 138 ---
fighT s oveR schools and booze 131
they know everything, they know too much, but they have no moral prin-
ciple.”
47 Given the historical context, arguments such as this could help 
restore (or shore up) the social esteem that individuals derived by virtue 
of their public education. Indeed, for small businessmen, craftsmen, shop 
owners, and other middle-  class Protestants targeted by the Klan’s recruit -
ment, a reputation for being honest and dependable was as least as impor -
tant in securing a livelihood as was possession of reading, writing, and 
math skills. 
Klan leaders criticized Catholicism and, more specifically, parochial 
education for allegedly promoting superstition and ignorance. According 
to the Klansmen, Catholics were taught to obey the pope’s commands 
and were discouraged from thinking for themselves. According to Hiram 
Evans, in Catholic schools “memory has been developed at the expense of 
reason. Graduates of such schools can not be so well fitted for public life as 
those who grow up with minds keenly trained to reasoning who can face 
problems and decide them free of bias or prejudice.”
48 
Klan leaders viewed secularism, as well as Catholicism, as a threat to 
the public schools. They countered this threat by arguing that Christian 
spirituality was a key ingredient in a superior educational experience. 
Protestantism, they argued, promoted free thinking and creativity but also 
grounded students in certain fundamental truths pertaining to the natural 
world. In one article critical of the theory of evolution, for example, a 
Klansman writes,
All true knowledge of consciousness, the gaining of which is the correct 
evolution, is the enlightenment of the mind by the application of Truth 
as taught by the Bible, and not by Darwin. When education has lost its 
element of spiritual truth it is not worth having.
49 
The same author passionately concludes,
With unselfish hands we must guard well the portals of knowledge. We 
must purify every avenue with the philosophy of the Man of Nazareth. 
For in such philosophy rests all human hope, all the elements which go 
to make a great people, who can stand the storm of assault, of envy and 
religious intolerance in its organized effort to enslave.
50 
Klan leaders spoke positively about the value of education in science, 
mathematics, literature, and history. However, they resented attempts to 
remove the Bible from the schoolhouse. The Bible, according to one Klan 
writer who was also a Protestant minister, “is a book which is the basis of 
every other book that is worth while. Books of science, which were the basis


--- PAGE 139 ---
132 fighT s oveR schools and booze
of scientific investigation ten years ago, are now discarded, but this book 
has been true in all ages. It is the one book that sets a standard for moral 
culture in every age.”
51 
Faced with the prospect that public schools were losing ground to paro-
chial schools, and that Catholics and black Americans were gaining ground 
on native- born, white Protestants, Klan leaders embraced public education 
as an issue that could rally the troops and motivate members of the racial 
and ethnic majority to join their cause. Klan leaders sought not only to gain 
a Protestant monopoly on the administration and delivery of education in 
the United States, but also to elevate public education as a source of so -
cial esteem. The public school system, if generously funded, could not only 
provide children with specific academic skills required to succeed in life 
but also arm them with a strong moral character. Catholics, the Klansmen 
Figure 18. Klan children and a little red schoolhouse on parade in New Castle, 
Indiana, 1923. W. A. Swift Collection. Courtesy of Ball State University. 
Copyright 2006. All rights reserved.


--- PAGE 140 ---
fighT s oveR schools and booze 133
argued, were hostile to these laudable goals. At a time when many Catholics 
were experiencing upward mobility and at a time when a Catholic—  New 
York’s governor, Al Smith— had his sights set on the presidency, Klan lead-
ers sought to stimulate the demand for values that they claimed were the 
exclusive property of Protestants while characterizing Catholicism as an 
imminent threat to those values. Speaking before an “immense gathering 
in Ohio,” Hiram Evans posed the following question: “What are the agen-
cies and who are the people that would try to circumscribe the educational 
possibilities and prevent the enlightenment of mind and conscience which 
comes from a free and broad education?” Answering his own question, the 
Imperial Wizard asserted,
During all ages a brutal and religious priesthood has sought through 
superstition, ignorance, and passion to prevent the emancipation of the 
human souls who come within the spread of their influence. Slowly from 
age to age the proponents of real liberty have come to see and to know 
from the history of their past and the acts of their present that the only 
sure way to insure to a people independence of thought and action is 
separation of church and state and the broad education of the masses of 
the people.
52 
Conclusion: Other Sources of Status- Based Power Devaluation
The Klan’s mobilization in the early 1920s represents, in part, a response 
to a perceived decline in status for many native-  born, white Protestants. 
How ever, theoretical arguments that explain the Klan in terms of status 
anxiety or status substitution badly mischaracterize the movement. These 
arguments mistakenly assume that Klan members were downwardly mobile 
and that they were irrationally clinging to a worldview that was becoming 
obsolete in a rapidly changing world. Contrary to such explanations, the 
Klan was attractive to many members of the cultural majority because the 
organization provided them with a political vehicle for engaging in ongoing 
cultural conflicts and the stakes of these conflicts were high. For middle-
 class Americans who were targeted by Klan recruiters, social esteem was 
valuable in its own right, but it was also vital in maintaining a position in 
a class hierarchy. Cultural capital, like other forms of capital, is subject to 
deflationary pressures. 
The Klan’s fight on behalf of public education was, in some respects, 
ahead of its time. The movement strongly backed a failed attempt to estab-
lish a federal department of education, and the Klan’s leaders advocated dra-
matic increases in spending on public schools with the federal government,


--- PAGE 141 ---
134 fighT s oveR schools and booze
rather than local governments, providing the bulk of the funding. On these 
issues, they were aligned with Progressives and with educational reformers 
of the era who recognized the increasing relevance of education in a mod -
ern economy. As argued earlier, the Klan’s rhetorical stance struck a chord 
with many individuals because it connected with a prevailing sense that the 
esteem derived from a public education was in decline. This devaluation oc-
curred, in part, because of improvements in the educational system. A high 
school diploma, once a scarce commodity, was becoming increasingly com-
mon. Adding insult to injury, from the Klansman’s perspective, increasingly 
large percentages of these diplomas were earned by Catholics and African 
Americans. In addition, a rapidly expanding parochial school system of -
fered a different type of educational experience that, Klansmen feared, 
would come to be viewed as superior to that which could be experienced in 
the public schools. 
As was true of most issues addressed by the movement, Klansmen ar -
gued that immigration restriction was one remedy for the problem. Many 
problems in the public schools, they argued, resulted from the burden of 
incorporating immigrants into the system—  immigrants who, the Klan 
claimed, were not eager to learn the language of the land and who were 
unfamiliar with, and even hostile toward, the republican tradition in the 
United States. Klansmen also sought to secure a Protestant monopoly on 
the administration and delivery of education. They clearly recognized the 
advantages that would come their way if the public schools were to be 
generously funded through tax revenue. Catholics (as well as Protestants) 
would be compelled to enrich the public school system to a point where 
Catholics schools could no longer be competitive. These “supply side” tac -
tics were complemented by an attempt to stimulate demand for public edu-
cation in a status- exchange market, as Klansmen argued that public schools 
were inherently superior to private schools because of the way in which they 
instilled morality and patriotism in students.
I have focused on public education in this chapter because of the cen-
tral role that the issue played in the Klan’s agenda. Klan leaders wrote 
extensively on the topic, making it possible to observe the way in which 
movement leaders constructed frames that offered a remedy for status- based 
power devaluation. However, Klan members concerned themselves with 
several other issues that are related to status. Klansmen, for example, were 
staunch defenders of Prohibition. Interestingly, the Klan makes relatively 
few references to the subject in the Imperial Night- Hawk in issues published 
in 1923 and 1924. This may reflect a strategic calculation by Klan leaders 
who thought that the issue was best suited for specific local contexts where


--- PAGE 142 ---
fighT s oveR schools and booze 135
anti- liquor sentiment was especially strong. Klan leaders opportunistically 
sought ways to add new items to their agenda—  what Snow, Rochford, 
Worden, and Benford refer to as “frame extension”—  to broaden their base 
of support.53 In doing so, they had to take care not to alienate preexisting 
members and supporters.54 Klan leaders, for example, purposefully glossed 
over denominational distinctions among Protestants to avoid narrowing 
the movement’s appeal.
When the Klan did address the Prohibition issue in its national publi-
cation (and also within the pages of Indiana’s Fiery Cross), the writers typi-
cally addressed the topic in terms of the movement’s role in helping law en-
forcement agents crack down on bootleggers and, more generally, to enforce 
the Volstead Act. Law enforcement was an issue that most of the Klan’s 
constituents could support, even if they were not enthusiastic supporters of 
Prohibition. The “Great Titan” of the Realm of Texas expressed the Klan’s 
position in the following way:
Klansmen are sworn not only to obey the laws themselves but also to 
aid the constituted law authorities in enforcing them. Many a bootlegger 
and illicit narcotic dealer, many a trafficker in the shame of womanhood, 
many a vagrant loafer and thief has met his downfall directly owing to 
information lodged with the proper authorities by Klansmen. Klansmen 
by thus aiding the officers of the law are making their home cities hap -
pier, safer, brighter and cleaner places in which American women and 
children may live.
55 
Although Klan leaders publicly cautioned their members that they 
should assist constituted authorities and not take the law into their own 
hands, Klansmen often resorted to the latter.
56 In the states of Indiana and 
Ohio, the Klan acted as an armed, militant, and highly organized vigilante 
force. The movement’s militant wing operated under legislation enacted in 
the 1870s that allowed vigilante groups to form in order to protect against 
horse theft. The new “Horse Thief Detective Association,” over 20,000 
members strong, answered only to the Klan, not to the state governments. 
The armed Klansmen took it upon themselves to perform vice raids, and 
they stopped and searched automobiles on the highway attempting to con-
fiscate liquor.
57 
How did the Klan’s support for Prohibition fit into the movement’s 
overall recruiting success? The power-  devaluation model suggests an an -
swer. Many of the Klan’s constituents exchanged abstinence for social es -
teem. With passage of the Volstead Act, abstinence became a common trait 
in the general population—  the supply of abstainers increased dramatically


--- PAGE 143 ---
136 fighT s oveR schools and booze
and literally overnight. Abstaining from consumption of alcohol (not un -
like refraining from homicide) lost some of its luster as a source of respect 
and admiration. Protestants who deeply believed that sobriety signaled 
respectability and virtue were suddenly indistinguishable from a Catholic 
who abstained not because he viewed abstinence as virtuous but because 
alcohol was illegal and no longer readily available. I am not arguing that 
Klan adherents were not genuinely angered by bootlegging and by lax en -
forcement of Prohibition laws. I am arguing that the Klan’s vigilantism and 
its emphasis on law and order was particularly appealing to many of the 
movement’s supporters because it helped to generate the impression that 
“true abstinence” remained a scarce commodity. The more that the Klan’s 
members and leaders drew attention to Prohibition violations, the more 
they symbolically restricted the supply of abstainers.
It also seems likely that the Klan’s position on Prohibition attracted 
members and adherents because of a shift in the demand side. Most no -
tably, a significant proportion of the industrial elite began to redefine ab -
stinence and its relation to economic prosperity and progress during the 
time in which the Klan gained strength. Historically, much of the initial 
support for Prohibition and for shutting down saloons came from the in -
dustrial elite who sought a stable and dependable workforce and bemoaned 
losses in productivity (and industrial accidents) that could be attributed to 
drink. Alcohol could cut into the profit margin, and employers, therefore, 
were motivated to construct a narrative that emphasized the virtues of so -
briety. Abstinence was good not only for the individual but also for business 
and the nation.
58 As Beisel’s work emphasizes, abstinence, and more gener-
ally avoidance of all forms of vice, became particularly important to many 
middle- class Americans in the late 1800s and early 1900s.
59
In a fluid class structure, middle-  class parents feared that their chil -
dren would be tempted by illicit activity. They could be drawn into activity 
that would bring shame on the family, thereby diminishing the family 
members’ cultural capital and severing network ties to those who might 
otherwise help them to advance (or maintain a position) in the class hierar-
chy. For many middle-  class Protestants of the time, abstinence served as a 
marker distinguishing them from members of the working class. Protecting 
children from exposure to alcohol seemed to be particularly important to 
Klansmen. One article in the Imperial Night- Hawk describes how a Texas 
statute would result in up to ninety- five years in the penitentiary for “giving 
intoxicants to a girl.” According to the Klansmen, “Such a law will go far 
towards placing the fear of God in the hearts of libertines and should prove 
a powerful deterrent to juvenile delinquency.”
60


--- PAGE 144 ---
fighT s oveR schools and booze 137
After passage of the Volstead Act, capitalists’ desires for a sober and re-
liable workforce had to be weighed against their desires to avoid antagoniz-
ing workers to the point of open rebellion. Indeed, concerns about stirring 
up working- class anger motivated some capitalists to form the Association 
Against the Prohibition Amendment (AAPA) in 1918, and the organization 
began to gain strength in the early 1920s.
61 Blatant disregard for Prohibition 
legislation in many communities also concerned capitalists who feared that 
social disorder threatened the legitimacy of their dominance in American 
society. Middle-  class Americans were also troubled by an apparent dis -
regard for the law, but the Klan’s supporters advocated strict enforcement of 
the law rather than compromise and concessions. The Grand Dragon of the 
Klan’s South Carolina Realm disdainfully noted, 
There is an effort being made by certain organizations and individuals 
to amend the Volstead law in order to include light wines and beers. The 
Klansmen of South Carolina are called upon to make a united effort in 
opposition to any amendment of the Volstead law and to stamp their ap-
proval upon the prohibition law as it now stands.
62 
As mentioned above, the Klan’s national publications did not delve 
deeply into the topic of Prohibition. Perhaps this is because the merits of 
abstinence would have appeared obvious to the Klan’s supporters, but there 
are some indications that the movement’s leaders sought to capitalize on a 
general sentiment among middle-  class Protestants that the economic and 
social elite had betrayed the noble cause. Klan leaders seemed to be particu-
larly incensed when teetotalers were ridiculed in the movies or by other pub-
lic figures (not unlike the way in which contemporary social conservatives 
resent Hollywood for being out of touch with their traditional beliefs and 
values). They also complained about how Catholics were over represented in 
motion pictures and presented in a positive light, while Protestant funda -
mentalists were caricatured and ridiculed.
Clearly angered by the way in which it seemed that the “demand” for 
abstinence was declining, Klan leaders pushed back by reasserting the view 
that abstinence was an admirable trait and one that should be emulated 
by all Americans. One Klan writer approvingly described a circular being 
distributed in Kansas that presents a view of how the issue will be discussed 
forty- four years in the future. 
Officers and private citizens are agreed that prohibit[i]on is the state’s best 
business asset. Many crimes that are common in communities that toler-
ate liquor are absent from Kansas. Conviction of violators is easier now


--- PAGE 145 ---
138 fighT s oveR schools and booze
than at any time in the past, due to the years of proof that intoxicating 
liquor is a commercial and social detriment to any community. Many un-
desirable influences that attend liquor were banished from the state when 
liquor was banished. Liquor sales are not even permitted in Kansas on 
doctor’s proscriptions. Liquor is an outlaw in Kansas. Kansas is forty- four 
years removed from the thought of ever returning to the saloon.
63 
From the Klansman’s perspective, movement members already understood 
what others would eventually discover about the social and economic con-
sequences of liquor. Klansmen were, in other words, ahead of their time.


--- PAGE 146 ---
139
More than seven hundred members of the Ku Klux Klan attended services 
at the First Methodist Church in Wellsville, Ohio, recently and presented 
a silk American flag and a purse of money to the pastor. The minister in 
receiving and thanking the Klansmen for the gifts spoke of the work of the 
Knights of the Ku Klux Klan as being “the world’s greatest movement.”
— Imperial Night- Hawk, January 16, 1924
According to the theory advanced in this book, structural changes that pro-
duce devaluation in economic, political, and status-  based exchange mar -
kets provide incentives to participate in right- wing movements. Individuals 
who are experiencing power devaluation are likely to be receptive to a pro-
posed course of action that aims to restore their power. This is especially 
true when power devaluation is not distributed randomly in the popula -
tion but instead appears to be disproportionately affecting a clearly identifi-
able social group. In preceding chapters I have identified several ways in 
which structural changes related to immigration, transformations in manu -
facturing production, an agricultural depression, women’s suffrage, public 
and private schooling, and Prohibition legislation, along with other factors, 
contributed to power devaluation for many native-  born, white Protestant 
Americans in the years leading up to the Klan’s mobilization.
Yet power devaluation by itself does not automatically translate into 
right- wing mobilization. Individuals respond to power devaluation in a va-
riety of ways. Some may not even be aware of their own depreciating power. 
Others may understand (on some level) that they are experiencing power 
7
How to Recruit a Klansman


--- PAGE 147 ---
140 how T o RecR uiT a KlansMan
devaluation but are unable to identify the source of the devaluation and, 
therefore, are uncertain as to how they should respond. Many will simply 
accept their fate and accommodate to their new circumstances. Interpretive 
processes are required to transform collectively held grievances into collec-
tive action. As Snow and Benford point out, collective-  action frames are 
most effective when they provide both a diagnosis and a prognosis for prob-
lems confronting potential members and adherents while simultaneously 
motivating them to take action. To be effective, these frames must reso -
nate with those who are targeted for recruitment, and they should appear 
credible in light of their perceptions and lived experiences.
1
Collective-  action frames constructed by leaders of the Ku Klux Klan 
addressed a wide variety of topics. At first glance, the Klan’s framing may 
appear to be incoherent and disarticulated because it addresses so many 
different issues seemingly in a piecemeal fashion. However, I believe that 
the Klan’s framing succeeded because of a consistently applied overarch -
ing logic embedded in the frames. Klan leaders opportunistically sought to 
identify problems confronting potential members and adherents and capi -
talized on the intuitive appeal of simple microeconomic logic to gain their 
support. If power devaluation results from an increase in the supply of that 
which individuals have to offer in exchange and from a decrease in demand 
for that which they offer in exchange, cultural attacks and cultural appeals 
could be used to restrict the supply and to stimulate the demand.
Power devaluation and effective framing can generate a large pool of 
individuals who are favorably predisposed toward right-  wing mobiliza -
tion. In Klandermans’s terms, they have become a part of the “mobiliza -
tion potential.”
2 If mobilization is to occur, organizational resources must 
be available and the political context must be conducive to collective ac -
tion. Because right- wing movements represent relatively advantaged groups 
rather than those facing extreme poverty and political oppression, resources 
and political opportunities are typically available. Right-  wing mobilization 
does not require the infusion of new, previously unavailable resources or a 
favorable shift in political opportunities. However, growth in the size and 
strength of a right- wing movement does depend heavily on how effectively 
movement leaders exploit preexisting resources and political opportunities. 
Organizational Models: Fraternal Lodges and Protestant Churches
When analyzing a social movement, one should not assume that the mem-
bership is homogeneous in terms of motives for participation or in terms 
of the intensity of their commitment to the cause.
3 The Ku Klux Klan was 
not an exception to this general rule. Klan leaders cast a very broad net and 
were constantly seeking to identify new issues that would attract members


--- PAGE 148 ---
how T o RecR uiT a KlansMan 141
and adherents. Some individuals were attracted to the movement because 
of the way in which it addressed their economic grievances, while others 
were drawn to the organization because they opposed political machines 
and because they felt Catholics were gaining too much political clout. Still 
others sided with the Klan’s approach to issues such as public schooling 
and Prohibition. Some Klansmen and Klanswomen were so committed to 
the movement that they were willing to contribute substantial time, energy, 
and personal resources to help the Klan to achieve its goals. As is true of 
most social movements, however, many participants sided with the Klan 
but their commitment to the cause was not so great that they would partici-
pate without receiving something in return. 
The economist Mancur Olson pointed out years ago that those who 
wish to organize collective action must overcome a “freerider dilemma.”
4 
Social- movement organizations aim to secure collective benefits for constitu-
ents. If the movement succeeds, individuals can enjoy the benefits without 
participating. The American civil rights movement sought to secure fun -
damental rights and privileges for all African Americans, not just for those 
who marched in the streets and sat-  in at southern lunch counters. The Ku 
Klux Klan aimed to secure benefits for all native- born, white Protestants, 
not just for those who joined the organization. Because individuals can 
enjoy the benefits of a collective effort without participating, and because 
participation entails personal costs, many people will rationally choose not 
to participate. It is more rational to free- ride on others’ efforts.
To overcome the free- rider dilemma, according to Olson, participation 
must be enticed by offering selective incentives. The term “selective incen -
tives” refers to benefits that individuals receive only through participation in 
the collective effort. These benefits may be “hard” (e.g., material) or “soft” 
(nonmaterial or social).
5 Building on Olson’s logic, resource mobilization 
theorists have emphasized the importance of an organizational infrastruc -
ture in social- movement activism. Organizations provide not only a base for 
staging protest rallies, marches, meetings, and other movement activities 
but also communication networks and the resources needed to supply the 
selective incentives that draw people into collective action. As Oberschall 
points out, preexisting organizations are also an important source of mem-
bers and leaders. It is much more efficient to recruit blocs of individuals 
who are already organized for some other purpose than it is to recruit iso -
lated individuals one by one.
6
The Klan’s leaders aimed to enlist 10 million dues-  paying members, 
recognizing that it would be difficult for political representatives to ignore 
any social movement that could boast of such a large membership.
7 Al-
though the Klan ultimately fell short of its goal, its recruiting success was


--- PAGE 149 ---
142 how T o RecR uiT a KlansMan
nevertheless impressive in terms of both the number of people who joined 
and the speed of the movement’s growth. In only a few years, several mil -
lion Americans joined an organization dedicated to white supremacy and, 
more generally, to advancing the interests of native- born, white Protestants. 
The capacity to offer selective incentives was crucial to the movement’s re -
cruiting successes.
In comparison to many social movements, the costs of participation in 
the Ku Klux Klan were high. In some locations, for example, Klansmen were 
on the receiving end of mob violence. Indeed, a few Klansmen were killed 
in skirmishes with the movement’s enemies. In Carnegie, Pennsylvania, an 
industrial town on the outskirts of Pittsburgh, ten thousand Klansmen at-
tempted to march through the town. They were met by a barrage of rocks 
and bricks. A Klansman was shot and killed, and his fellow marchers were 
forced to retreat. Klansmen were also bombarded with bricks in Boston. In 
Perth Amboy, New Jersey, Klansmen who were assembled in the city’s Odd 
Fellows Hall came under siege as a mob five thousand strong gathered outside 
of the building. The local police were unable to protect Klan members from 
attack. Car windshields were smashed, and Klansmen attempting to escape 
were chased down and beaten in the streets.
8 These attacks mostly took 
place in northeastern cities where the Klan’s Catholic enemies were concen-
trated, but the movement also faced similar opposition in some midwest -
ern and western locations where the Klan’s opponents were more numerous 
than its supporters. 
In many communities, however, the Klan enjoyed broad support, 
and its members were free to reveal their ties to the movement without 
fear of violent retaliation. Even so, membership entailed significant costs. 
Klansmen paid a ten-  dollar initiation fee and also had to foot the bill for 
their robes and other components of Klan regalia worn in parades and cere-
monies. There were significant opportunity costs involved as Klansmen and 
Klanswomen took time away from other activities to attend frequent meet-
ings and other Klan-  sponsored events. To gain mass support, Klan leaders 
had to offer something more than simply a promise to address their con -
stituents’ collective grievances.
The content of the Imperial Night-  Hawk reveals an impressive range 
of creatively conceived activities sponsored by the movement designed to 
attract new members to the organization and to maintain the interest and 
loyalty of those who had already joined. The leadership also made many 
mistakes, and corruption and factionalism would continually threaten the 
movement’s growth— even its very existence. Nevertheless, the phenomenal 
growth of the Klan is much easier to understand after examining the way


--- PAGE 150 ---
how T o RecR uiT a KlansMan 143
in which the movement exploited preexisting organizational resources and 
offered a variety of selective incentives to participants.
Elisabeth Clemens’s work demonstrates that preexisting organizations 
provide not only resources and participants for activism but also organiza-
tional models that can be co-  opted by social movements.
9 Transplanting a 
particular organizational form into a social movement provides a familiar 
script that is useful in coordinating the activities of many people. But the 
organizational form may also serve as a symbolic expression of core values 
that the movement wishes to convey.
10 A social movement, for example, 
may opt for a decentralized and democratic form of organization because 
that organizational form maps (ideologically) onto its goal of challenging 
hierarchical systems of dominance and oppression.
11 In contrast, the Klan 
was organized in a military fashion, and its leaders frequently invoked “war” 
analogies to describe it. Hiram Evans once claimed that “the Klan literally 
is once more the embattled American farmer and artisan coordinated into 
a disciplined and growing army.”
12 “Onward Christian Soldiers” was one 
of the movement’s favorite anthems. Klan leaders constructed a world in 
which “100 percent Americans” were locked in battle with formidable foes. 
As one Klan writer expressed it, 
If the time shall come when the purposes for which the Klan was orga -
nized have all been accomplished, then its members need no longer be a 
militant, fighting organization, and they may possibly revert into an or -
ganization something like the veterans of foreign wars, or the veterans of 
any other crusade; but until such time, and until the purpose for which 
the Klan was organized have been accomplished, the military feature of 
the Klan must be maintained.
13 
Although the Klan adopted a militaristic, hierarchical organizational 
form, fraternal lodges, rather than the military, were the most influential 
models. Indeed, Klan members conceived of their organization as a frater-
nal order not unlike the Masons and the Odd Fellows. The Klan’s founder, 
William Joseph Simmons, had considerable experience with fraternal orga-
nizing, as did many of the Klan’s recruiters. Not unlike fraternities of the 
era, the Klan’s internal hierarchy tended to reinforce class-  based distinc -
tions among members, in spite of rhetoric that denied the significance of 
class in evaluating the worth of a Klansmen.
14 Based on her study of the 
Athens, Georgia, Klan, MacLean observes,
The fact that the Law Enforcement Committee included none of the 
Klan’s poorer, less prominent members is significant. The order seems to


--- PAGE 151 ---
144 how T o RecR uiT a KlansMan
have purposely staffed the committee with men whose claim to authority 
would be difficult for their non- Klan peers to question. In so doing, Klan 
leaders most likely aspired to attract others of the same class. Whether 
intentional or not, the composition suggests a clear hierarchy within the 
Klan. It replicated internally the chain of command it prescribed for 
the rest of society. Indeed, internal Klan documents indicated that only 
better-  off members were trusted to plan activities and speak publicly. 
These practices illustrated how intimately the quest for respectability was 
tied to class differentiation.
15
The Klan’s self-  comparisons to mainstream fraternal organizations 
were not always appreciated by its models. In some cases, fraternity officers 
spoke out against the Klan. One Klan writer noted that an Elks lodge in 
Atlantic City, New Jersey, had voted to expel any members who were also 
Klan members. The Klan writer warned that because many Klansmen be -
long to the Elks, it would be foolish for other Elks lodges to follow suit. As 
Chalmers points out, the rank-  and- file fraternity members often embraced 
the Klan in spite of their officers’ stance toward the Invisible Empire. One 
Klan writer describes how some leaders of the American Legion failed in 
their efforts to “ramrod through a resolution” that condemned the Klan 
at their national convention.
16 Even among the leadership, however, most 
members of fraternal orders and other voluntary associations had no fight to 
pick with the Klan, and many were themselves Klansmen. 
Fraternal organizations offered fertile recruiting ground for the Ku 
Klux Klan, and Klan leaders vigorously sought to reap the harvest. To help 
promote their own movement, and to stake a claim for the Klan’s respecta-
bility, Klan leaders took pains to call attention to the Klan’s fraternal ties. 
For example, one article in the Imperial Night-  Hawk describes a funeral 
ceremony of a Dr. Bobo in Pisgah, Alabama. Bobo, a “prominent Mason,” 
had apparently requested to have a Klan funeral rather than a Masonic fu-
neral. Several articles make a point of describing how members of organiza-
tions such as the Kiwanis Club, Masons, and Elks paid visits to the Klan’s 
Imperial Palace in Atlanta when their conventions were being held in the 
city. Each of these articles notes that many of the visitors were Klansmen 
taking advantage of an opportunity to visit the national headquarters. The 
Klan went so far as to decorate the Imperial Palace with purple and white 
bunting, the national colors of the Elks, “in recognition of another great 
fraternal order.”
17 
The Klan, on occasion, staged joint meetings and ceremonies with 
other fraternal organizations. Klansmen in Loogootie, Indiana, attended


--- PAGE 152 ---
how T o RecR uiT a KlansMan 145
services at a Methodist church and then marched along with Masons, Odd 
Fellows, and Knights of Pythias members to a cemetery to honor the dead 
on Memorial Day.
18 One Klan writer describes activities staged during a 
special “Klan Day” at a Shriner’s Circus in Akron, Ohio, and points out,
The friendly relations of the Masons and the Klan was greatly emulated 
in this incident when Klansmen from far and near attended the circus 
and during the evening staged an open-  air ceremony at Summit Beach 
Lake. Thousands of Klansmen and Masons expressed their appreciation 
of the work that is being accomplished by these two fraternal orders.
19 
The Imperial Night-  Hawk even announced plans to construct a meeting 
hall that would be shared by the Klan and by the Odd Fellows of Stigler, 
Oklahoma.
20
While the Klan sought to strengthen its ties to various fraternal lodges, 
movement leaders worked just as diligently to forge strong bonds with 
Protestant churches and church leaders. Using religious oratory to recruit 
new members seemed to come naturally to Simmons, the movement’s 
founder and a former preacher, and to many Klansmen who would follow 
in his footsteps. Klan-  sponsored lectures drew large crowds and often pro-
duced substantial membership gains in their wake. Religion was a popular 
theme addressed in the lectures. One article in the Imperial Night-  Hawk 
describes the Klan’s new “National Program of Education,” designed to en-
lighten Klansmen and also the general public. Titles of some of the planned 
lectures include “Christ, the Klansman’s Criterion of Character” and “The 
Relation of the Klan to the Protestant Church.” Another article emphasizes 
the importance of scheduling lectures for the winter months so that the 
movement would not lose momentum when harsh weather prevented stag-
ing outdoor ceremonies. Suggested topics included “History of Protestant 
Christianity” followed by “History of Roman Catholicism.”
21 Klan rallies 
and ceremonies often resembled church services, characterized by solemn 
rituals and featuring sermon-  like lectures that drew on broad Christian 
themes to inspire and motivate the Klan faithful and to make converts 
among those who had yet to join. 
Reciprocal Ties between Protestant Churches and the Klan
Klan leaders recognized that Protestant churches were an important poten-
tial source of resources and members. Both resource-  mobilization theory 
and the political-  process model have drawn attention to the way in which 
social movements rely on preexisting organizations (including churches) to 
provide resources required for mobilization, and that dynamic was certainly


--- PAGE 153 ---
146 how T o RecR uiT a KlansMan
important in the Klan’s recruiting success. Less attention has been given to 
the motives underlying the transfer of organizational resources. Why would 
members and leaders of any organization allow their resources to be di -
rected toward social-  movement activism? In some instances, the answer to 
that question is rather straightforward. If the organization’s constituency 
and the movement’s constituency are one and the same, then few would 
object if the organization’s resources are temporarily used to fund social-
 movement activities. Decisions would still need to be made about how 
the organization can most appropriately utilize its resources, but at least 
there would be general consensus in regard to the movement’s goals and 
its worthiness for receiving organizational support. In other instances, the 
movement and its organizational sponsor might not be so tightly coupled, 
and movement leaders would have to invest energy in nurturing a stronger 
relationship. 
In the case of the Ku Klux Klan and Protestant congregations, constitu-
ency overlap was not so great that the movement could simply assume that 
churches and church members would willingly redirect resources to fund 
the Ku Klux Klan. The relationship had to be nurtured and church leaders 
had to be courted. Klan leaders did not simply approach the churches with 
hat in hand but came bearing gifts and promises. Klan recruiters offered 
clergymen free membership, complimentary subscriptions to Klan pub -
lications, and a promise to actively promote the supremacy of Protestant 
Christianity.
22 Beyond that, the Klan promised to increase church atten -
dance and even increase cash donations in the collection plate. As one Klan 
writer expressed it, “It is a very noticeable fact that in communities where 
the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan are active, Protestant church attendance 
has shown notable increase and church work generally has taken on re -
newed vigor.”
23 
The Klan’s strategic courting of Protestant clergymen is clearly evident 
in numerous articles in the Imperial Night- Hawk. One article was directly 
addressed to clergymen, stating, “We have the welfare and progress of every 
Protestant pastor and every Protestant congregation in the United States 
at heart.” Another article describes how an “Exalted Cyclops” begins Klan 
meetings in Chattanooga, Tennessee, by asking every Klansman who went 
to church the previous Sunday to stand up. Following that, he would ask all 
those who pledged to go to church the next Sunday to stand up. According 
to the Klan writer, “Sunday school and church attendance has been in -
creased in every Protestant church in Chattanooga by this activity of the 
Klan and the men’s Bible classes have grown rapidly.”
24 
The Klan also made a practice of publicly rewarding ministers who


--- PAGE 154 ---
how T o RecR uiT a KlansMan 147
were deemed to be friendly to the movement. One article praises the bold 
response of a Methodist minister in West Virginia who ignored a death 
threat while delivering a sermon on Americanism. Frequently, such praise 
would be delivered in person as the Klansmen, dressed in full regalia, 
would unexpectedly appear at a church service. The Imperial Night- Hawk 
describes how Klansmen dropped in on a Calvary Baptist Church revival 
tent in Jacksonville, Florida, to express appreciation for the work being 
performed by evangelist Allen C. Shuler.
25 These Klan visitations were de -
signed not only to befriend the minister but also to impress the congrega -
tion. The events were carefully staged to maximize the dramatic effect. De -
scrib ing visitations in Altoona, Pennsylvania, a Klan writer instructs:
These visitations are made by committees numbering from fifty to one 
hundred robed men, who make contributions to the church and get in 
close contact with the Christian element. They are telling the church-
 goers just what the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan stand for and of the 
many duties they have voluntarily allotted to themselves. These visita -
tions are proving very successful in combating the un- American and 
anti- Klan influences.
26 
The Klan’s church visitations were calculated to solidify a strong tie be-
tween the social movement and Protestant Christianity. Movement leaders 
purposefully downplayed denominational differences, hoping to unite all 
white Protestants behind their cause. The Klan leaders seemed to appreciate 
the symbolic value of downplaying racial distinctions among Protestants. 
Although the movement continued to claim white supremacy and advocate 
white separatism, on several occasions they praised black individuals for 
being on the “right side” of the religious battle. One article describes how a 
group of fifty white- robed Klansmen in Princeton, Kentucky, paid a visit to 
a “Negro Baptist church” to present the pastor with an envelope containing 
sixty- five dollars for the church building fund. The article makes a point 
of noting that the minister had been told of the visit in advance so that his 
congregation would not be alarmed by the sight of hooded Klansmen enter-
ing the church.
27 
The Klan press makes many references to less dramatic ways in which 
the movement sought to win favor with Protestant congregations so that 
they could rely on churches to provide members, adherents, and resources. 
Klansmen in Casper, Wyoming, initiated a drive to increase attendance 
in local Sunday schools. Klansmen in Wichita Falls, Kansas, donated an 
American flag and flagpole to a Protestant church, which then prompted 
several additional requests from other local churches. An American flag


--- PAGE 155 ---
148 how T o RecR uiT a KlansMan
made from silk, along with a “purse of money,” was donated to a pastor in 
Wellsville, Ohio. Klansmen in Coraopolis, Pennsylvania, made a substan -
tial donation to the building fund of the “Fifth Avenue Negro Church” and 
presented a number of Bibles to the faculty at Coraopolis Heights School. 
Many similar donations are mentioned in the Klan’s publications, and read-
ers were encouraged to adopt similar practices in their own communities.
28
In return for the Klan’s support of Protestant churches, Klan leaders 
expected (and received) endorsements from Protestant clergy. According to 
the Imperial Night- Hawk, even the black minister in Princeton, Kentucky, 
publicly thanked the Klansmen for their cooperation and assistance and 
commended the movement for its decision to admit women into the orga-
nization. But, of course, most endorsements came from white clergymen. A 
short letter from a Baptist minister in Alabama informs the editor of the 
Imperial Night- Hawk that he had become a Klan member soon after read -
ing a copy of the Klan’s publication. Another issue reports that a concerned 
minister had sent telegrams to fellow pastors asking if the Klan should be 
“regarded as a menace.” In response, the paper published numerous ringing 
endorsements from Protestant ministers and from political representatives— 
including Oregon’s governor, Walter Pierce. While the Klan was careful not 
to claim that Billy Sunday was a member of their organization, movement 
leaders sought to capitalize on the evangelist’s immense popularity. One 
article describes how hundreds of Klansmen in full regalia attended a re -
vival meeting in West Virginia and slipped $226 into the collection plate. 
According to the Klan writer, Billy Sunday told the world “in his unique 
and emphatic way that he endorses the Klan Kreed and everything the 
order stands for.”
29 
While having a Klan- friendly pastor in a particular church clearly aided 
the movement in its recruiting, even better results could be obtained when 
an actual Klansman manned the pulpit. One article notes with pride that a 
Methodist bishop addressed the eighty- eighth annual New Jersey Methodist 
conference and “flatly denied” that he would take action against any minister 
who was a member of the Ku Klux Klan. On special occasions, Hiram Evans 
was invited to deliver the Sunday sermon to Klan-  friendly congregations. 
One article reports that the Klan’s Imperial Wizard drew a large crowd in 
the First Christian Church in Hot Springs, Arkansas, when he served as the 
guest minister. Another article describes how the minister at Foss Memorial 
Methodist Church in Minneapolis ignited a fiery cross that was erected 
near the pulpit before delivering a sermon titled “The De  velopment of the 
Protestant Church.”
30 In cases such as these, where the Klan had successfully 
forged a strong bond with the minister and his flock, extraction of organi -


--- PAGE 156 ---
how T o RecR uiT a KlansMan 149
zational resources was especially nonproblematic. The pastor’s constituency 
and the Klan’s constituency were, in essence, one and the same.
Ceremonies, Parades, and Social Gatherings
Strong ties to fraternal lodges and Protestant churches gave the Klan access 
to millions of potential members and the vast resources that were under 
their control. As a result, the movement was able to offer selective incentives 
to draw even more people into the movement and to maintain the interest 
and loyalty of preexisting members. Part of the movement’s allure stemmed 
from the mystery that surrounded it. The secretiveness of the order freed 
members of their inhibitions. Klansmen paraded through the streets of their 
hometown, yet their identity was known only to fellow members. In fre -
quently held meetings, Klan members engaged in secret rituals and shared 
a secret language that solidified distinctions between insiders and outsiders.
Klan leaders clearly understood the value of staging elaborate cere -
monies, marches, and rallies. They used the Imperial Night- Hawk to solicit 
ideas from members who were dispersed across the nation and to share “best 
practices” with its readership for staging events. On several occasions, the 
editor asked Klansmen to submit photographs of local Klan activities, and 
each issue of the Imperial Night-  Hawk contained photos of various Klan-
 sponsored events. The editor expressed particular interest in receiving pho-
tographs and information pertaining to ceremonials, parades, charitable ac-
tivities, and other meetings of general interest, and he promised to devote as 
much space to these events as possible.
31 Plans to erect new Klaverns (Klan 
meeting halls) also received significant coverage in the weekly publication. 
The movement pulled out all the stops for initiation or “naturalization” 
ceremonies. The initiation ceremonies were often so spectacular that Klan 
members would travel great distances to attend. As one Klan writer describes 
it, “Klansmen the count[r]y over are getting the special train habit. Almost 
daily reports tell of the chartering of special trains or interurban coaches 
for the purpose of carrying Klansmen on visits to adjoining territory for 
parades and naturalizations.” The program for one initiation ceremony held 
in Pueblo, Colorado, offers a glimpse into how a typical ceremony was orga-
nized. The event began with singing of the national anthem followed by an 
invocation. After lowering the American flag and lighting a giant cross, the 
Klansmen sang “Onward Christian Soldiers.” Next, the new members were 
“naturalized.” Following more singing, Colorado’s Grand Dragon made a 
speech. One more song—  “Blest Be the Tie That Binds”—  and a benedic -
tion brought the formal ceremony to a close. Before returning home, Klan 
members (both old and new) enjoyed a barbecue supper.
32


--- PAGE 157 ---
150 how T o RecR uiT a KlansMan
Frequently, the initiation ceremonies were combined with family enter-
tainment. A ceremony in Birmingham, Alabama, caused severe traffic jams 
throughout the day. As a Klan writer tells it:
Edgewood Park was crowded by noon. Klansmen and their wives and 
families enjoyed a great barbecue, went swimming, dancing and picnick-
ing. There were airplane stunts during the day with band concerts thrown 
in for good measure. At night there was a wonderful display of fireworks 
following the initiation and the address of the Imperial Wizard.
33 
Fireworks and airplane stunts were regular features of major Klan ceremo -
nies and parades. The Imperial Night- Hawk reports that a novel feature was 
introduced at a meeting in Kansas City, Missouri, that was attended by ten 
thousand Klansmen. “Powerful searchlights suddenly illuminated a white-
 robed horseman on a white steed standing on a hill near the meeting while 
an airplane bearing a huge fiery cross swooped low above the celebration.” 
Figure 19. Townspeople witness a Klan initiation ceremony in Marion, Indiana, 
1922. W. A. Swift Collection. Courtesy of Ball State University. Copyright 
2006. All rights reserved.


--- PAGE 158 ---
how T o RecR uiT a KlansMan 151
Another article mentions that residents in Seattle received a thrill “when a 
brilliantly illuminated airplane flew over the city at night. The plane carried 
a Fiery Cross on one wing and the letters K.K.K. on the other.” Many ar -
ticles boast of magnificent fireworks displays. To celebrate Easter, Klansmen 
in Hamilton County, Kentucky, ignited three hundred fiery crosses across 
the countryside just before midnight, and “throughout this spectacular 
scene aerial bombs were discharged from a high point of vantage which 
added greatly to the effectiveness of the affair.”
34 
While fireworks displays and aerial stunts were tried-  and- true crowd-
 pleasers, Klan writers eagerly described other innovative ways in which local 
Klan chapters made ceremonies memorable and even awe inspiring. In one 
locale, members created a “human fiery cross” as “one hundred Klansmen 
in full regalia aligned themselves in the form of a cross as they stood on a 
hill side. At a given signal, each Klansman in the formation lighted a red 
torch forming a moving fiery cross visible for miles. It was a most strik -
ing spec  tacle.” A variation on the theme was carried out by Klansmen in 
Figure 20. Klansmen frequently took to the sky to draw attention to their orga-
nization. National Photo Company Collection. Library of Congress.


--- PAGE 159 ---
152 how T o RecR uiT a KlansMan
Clarksburg, West Virginia, where three thousand Klansmen “formed 
themselves into an immense human group of letters reading ‘Ku Klux Klan’ 
beneath the light of three large fiery crosses.”
35 
Klan leaders also took care to select scenic locations for initiation cere-
monies to add additional drama to the events. Klansmen ignited a fiery 
cross on top of Pikes Peak for a ceremony attended by “several hundred 
Klansmen,” which, a Klansmen noted, broke all records in Klan history 
“so far as altitude is concerned.” On several occasions, Klan members capi-
talized on the majesty of crashing waves and moonlight reflecting on the 
ocean, staging late-  night ceremonies on scenic beaches. One article notes 
that Klansmen in Kentucky held “a most impressive ceremonial on the 
cliffs which tower three hundred feet above the Kentucky river.” Klansmen 
at times added their own manmade diversions when exploiting the wonders 
of nature. At an initiation ceremony in Santa Monica, California, “A fiery 
cross suspended from an immense gas balloon floated above the naturaliza-
tion field, which was marked by a forty- foot electric sign bearing the letters 
‘K. K. K.’ attracting thousands of automobilists to the scene. Five thousand 
robed klansmen took part in the exercises.”
36 
In addition to scenic landscapes, the movement experimented with a 
wide array of venues. In Durham, North Carolina, Klansmen staged an 
initiation ceremony at a local amusement park. In several other locations, 
initiation ceremonies were held during special “Klan Days” at state and 
county fairs. An initiation in Terre Haute, Indiana, featured a Klan wed -
ding. Klansmen and Klanswomen frequently celebrated life transitions 
with elaborate rituals. A Klan chapter in Lenoir City, Tennessee, was rec -
ognized for having the oldest Klan member (101 years old). The movement 
also made a practice of awarding a special “hero cross” to members who 
had belonged to the original Ku Klux Klan in the 1860s and 1870s. The 
Klan press noted that a Klansman in Gainesville, Georgia, not only was a 
member of the original Klan but also frequently wore the same robe that he 
wore when he rode for the Klan during the Reconstruction. Klan members 
honored the young as well as the old. In Tullahoma, Tennessee, the Women 
of the Ku Klux Klan presented a miniature robe and helmet to the newborn 
baby of Klan parents.
37 
While many of the Klan’s ceremonies were designed primarily to forge 
strong bonds between the movement and its members, other activities were 
developed to capture the attention of those who might be enticed to join. 
Parades and public rallies were perfectly suited for this task. As was true 
of initiation ceremonies, Klan leaders were eager to identify innovative 
means of capturing attention and providing dramatic flare to public events.


--- PAGE 160 ---
how T o RecR uiT a KlansMan 153
They were especially pleased when their activities captured the attention of 
various media outlets. One Klansmen boasted of a “most successful and 
impressive” parade in Shreveport, Louisiana. “Moving picture operators 
took pictures of the Klansmen by the light of powerful magnesium torches. 
These pictures were displayed at local theaters during the week.” The writer 
could not resist the urge to add that the theaters, which were “owned and 
controlled by Jewish interests,” were packed with customers who were eager 
to see the Klansmen march.
38 
In some instances, the Klan aimed to impress community members 
with the sheer size of a parade or rally. An impressive show of strength 
could be used to convince bystanders that they should become part of an 
increasingly powerful movement. For example, the Imperial Night-  Hawk 
describes a parade in Indianapolis that, the paper claimed, included 55,000 
Klansmen and was witnessed by 300,000 people. “One hundred and thirty 
beautifully decorated automobiles were in the parade, to which were added 
more than one hundred floats of great beauty. Music was provided by 
thirty- nine bands and there were eighteen drum corps in line. A squad of 
motorcycle policemen led the way.”
39
High drama could substitute for raw numbers to produce the desired 
effect. A Klan writer describes one such event that was held in Kirksville, 
Missouri:
Although a drizzling rain was falling at about six-  thirty a lone robed 
horseman rode through the business district with a megaphone announc-
ing that the parade would take place at nine o’clock, rain or shine. As 
a result the spectacle was witnessed by a huge crowd. The Fiery Cross 
which shone from the court house was made of powerful red electric light 
bulbs and the light was so strong it reddened the public square and gave 
an uncanny effect to the street- lights on the public square through the 
misty rain that was falling.
40 
Klan members often strategically linked their parades and rallies to 
public events taking place in the community at large. Klan members in Day-
ton, Washington, became part of a parade celebrating “Pioneer Day.” Klan 
members in Pawnee, Texas, staged a rally from midnight until 2:00 a.m. on 
Flag Day so that they could be “the first Klan in the country to pay their 
respects to the national colors on the anniversary of our flag’s origins.” Klan 
members across the country sought to participate in numerous Indepen -
dence Day celebrations. In Stockton, California, the Klan was not allowed 
to participate in the city’s parade and instead staged a parade of its own. A 
photo published in the Imperial Night- Hawk captures an awkward moment


--- PAGE 161 ---
154 how T o RecR uiT a KlansMan
as parading Klansmen crossed paths with Knights of Columbus members 
who, unlike the Klansmen, were given permission to march in the regu -
lar parade. In many instances, in communities where the movement had 
few enemies, the Klan entered floats in public parades. A favorite theme for 
Klan floats depicted Klansmen protecting a red schoolhouse.
41 
The Klan press eagerly reported news of other innovative ways in which 
local Klan chapters captured public attention. Klansmen in Yell County, 
Arkansas, staged an “auto tour”: 
One hundred automobiles, each carrying Klansmen, started from 
Danville, Arkansas, early in the morning. They toured the Fourche Valley 
in the Southern part of the County, stopping at every small town and 
holding a meeting at which various speakers described the patriotic aims 
and purposes of the Klan. At night the tour ended in Gravelly, Arkansas. 
The tourists, donning their regalia, attended the religious meeting con -
ducted by Rev. J. W. Ashmore and presented him with $350 to be used 
towards rebuilding his church which had recently been destroyed by a cy-
clone. As the result of the trip, many applications are being filed by aliens 
who wish to join the two Yell County Klans.
42 
Another Klan writer boasted of “many novel features” planned to coincide 
with a Klan parade in Trenton, New Jersey. Among these novel features 
was a sightseeing tour of the Trenton area, including a visit to Princeton 
University.
43 
Kathleen Blee points out that the social activities planned by the move-
ment’s leaders played a vital role in the Klan’s growth.44 For many Klansmen 
and Klanswomen, the movement offered fun, excitement, and fellowship, 
and these selective incentives more than compensated for the costs of par -
ticipation. Throughout the nation, Klan members organized baseball teams, 
marching bands, drum and bugle corps, and choirs. The Klan developed 
a regulation band uniform that could be purchased by local chapters. It 
was described by the Imperial Night- Hawk as “one of the most colorful and 
most handsome uniforms yet worn by Klansmen of any rank or station, 
being made up entirely of real satin with a pleasing distribution of white, 
gold, crimson, and purple.” Space for recreation was also an important con-
sideration in the construction of Klan meeting halls. A Klavern constructed 
on a farm in New Philadelphia, Ohio, included “a golf course, baseball dia-
monds, tennis courts, a football field and two swimming pools.”
45 
Klan leaders understood that “fun” was an effective selective incentive 
that could help them build their movement. In Fresno, California, Klan 
members staged a nine- day “fun frolic.” Arkansas Klansmen held a “seven-


--- PAGE 162 ---
how T o RecR uiT a KlansMan 155
 act Klan circus” along with other recreational activities “to assist in keeping 
the spirit of the klansmen to the highest pitch of enthusiasm.” In January 
1924, San Antonio Klansmen held their third annual cowboy contest and 
Klan Karnival. In addition to seeing the “world’s greatest bronco busters, 
bull- doggers, [and] ropers,” Klan members in attendance would have a 
chance to win a “new Jewett touring car.”
46
As discussed in previous chapters, Klan leaders sought to identify griev-
ances of potential members, and they developed collective-  action frames 
designed to motivate action. However, they also understood that selective 
incentives were needed to build a mass movement. Some Klan members 
were drawn into the organization primarily because they were persuaded by 
the movement leaders’ rhetoric, and they placed high value on the collective 
goals pursued by the movement. Others, while sharing many of the move-
ment’s general goals, were primarily drawn into the Klan by something as 
simple as a pleasant Sunday afternoon picnic. The following quote illus-
trates how the Klan developed a knack for mixing business with pleasure: 
Warm weather brings thoughts of fried chicken, pies, cakes, sandwiches, 
and numerous other goodies to be found when the family and friends 
assemble in some wooded space and enjoy a picnic. Brazil, Realm of 
Indiana, Klansmen recently became so enthused over the picnic idea that 
Figure 21. Klan musicians posing in Muncie, Indiana. W. A. Swift Collection. 
Courtesy of Ball State University. Copyright 2006. All rights reserved.


--- PAGE 163 ---
156 how T o RecR uiT a KlansMan
they pulled off a big two-  day feast at which time a huge ceremonial was 
staged and a large Kavalkade marched through the streets. At night a 
Klan photo- play “A Traitor Within,” was shown at the auditorium.
47 
By offering simple pleasures such as a Sunday picnic, and by staging dra -
matic rallies and ceremonies, Klan leaders provided enticing incentives for 
participation and then used these occasions to speak to the collective griev-
ances of those whom they hoped to recruit. The availability of organiza -
tional resources made it all possible.
Communication Networks
As might be expected, the rapid growth of the movement and the vast geo-
graphical dispersion of the Klan’s chapters made it difficult to keep all of 
the local organizations in line and to promote a united front. Indeed, the 
national leadership was itself struggling to maintain a semblance of unity 
as the movement expanded. The Klan’s founder, Colonel Simmons, was 
Figure 22. Klan members pay final respects to one of their own in Muncie, 
Indiana, 1923. W. A. Swift Collection. Courtesy of Ball State University. 
Copyright 2006. All rights reserved.


--- PAGE 164 ---
how T o RecR uiT a KlansMan 157
ousted in 1922. A rift between Hiram Evans and D. C. Stephenson devel-
oped as Stephenson’s northern realm began to surpass the southern realm 
in terms of members enlisted and revenue raised. Throughout the Empire, 
local Klan leaders would at times question Evans’s legitimacy or, more com-
monly, express resentment about dues extracted by the national organiza -
tion. While we should not ignore the factionalism that plagued the move -
ment, the Klan’s organizational shortcomings should not overshadow its 
successes. There were bumps in the road, some of them substantial, but the 
Klan was able to hold a mass movement together for several years during a 
period of startling growth. This was made possible in part because of the 
way in which movement leaders utilized the vast resources at their disposal 
to establish communication networks that could be used to spread informa-
tion, to promote unity, and to quell (or at least contain) internal rebellion. 
Resource-  mobilization theorists have called attention to the value of 
establishing alternative media in the diffusion of social-  movement activ -
ism.
48 Through alternative media, movement leaders can stay in touch with 
members and supporters while simultaneously exerting control over the in-
formation they receive. This is especially important when the movement is 
portrayed negatively in the mainstream media as was often the case with 
the Ku Klux Klan. The Imperial Night-  Hawk played a vital role in terms of 
helping national leaders maintain control of the movement. The first pub -
lished issue noted that the magazine was established to “carry a weekly mes-
sage from the Imperial Palace to every Klansman in America.”
49 
The Imperial Night- Hawk was also used to assure readers that the na -
tional leaders were working diligently on behalf of local Klan chapters and 
that they were exercising fiscal responsibility—  doing all that was possible 
to reduce fees and expenses. The magazine reported the financial assets 
and liabilities of the national organization and drew attention to impres -
sive revenue surpluses accumulating in the Klan treasury after the fiscally 
irresponsible Simmons had been replaced. According to the Imperial Night-
 H a w k , Hiram Evans’s wise stewardship made it possible to reduce prices 
on Klan robes and other materials and to allow local chapters to hold on to 
a larger share of revenue derived from membership fees and other sources. 
Numerous articles boasted about how the Klan’s newly constructed build -
ings in Buckhead, Georgia, which consisted of a printing plant and a plant 
to produce Klan robes and other paraphernalia, would save thousands of 
dollars for the organization. One article noted that “skilled workers, all 
Klansmen, will be employed to operate both plants” and that the money for 
construction of the plants was “made available through the great saving of 
expense in propagation work effected by Dr. H. W. Evans and his cabinet


--- PAGE 165 ---
158 how T o RecR uiT a KlansMan
from the abolishment of useless departments and the cutting of needless ex-
penses found both at Atlanta and in the field during the past six months.”
50 
The Imperial Night-  Hawk provided movement leaders with a venue 
for disseminating collective-  action frames designed to have a broad appeal 
among the movement’s constituency. Perhaps just as important, the publi -
cation made it possible for Klansmen in Durham, North Carolina, to read 
about activities staged by Klansmen thousands of miles away in locations 
such as Elgin, Oregon, or Modesto, California. A virtual flood of informa-
tion about Klan events and activities taking place throughout the United 
States helped to ensure that Klan members would see themselves as being a 
part of a large, powerful, and thriving social movement, thereby strength -
ening their commitment to the organization.
Of course, the Klan’s resources were not unlimited. Copies of the Night-
 H a w k were mailed weekly to each Klan chapter so that they would be avail-
able “without cost to Klansmen.” Klan readers were encouraged, however, 
to recycle the magazine for the benefit of the movement— “Don’t throw it 
away. Give it away. Put it where it will do the most good for Klankraft.” To 
emphasize the importance of broadly circulating the Klan’s publication, one 
article described how a copy of the Imperial Night-  Hawk traveled eight 
hundred miles, passed from Klansman to Klansman, and eventually wound 
up in the hands of eight readers in Wyoming.
51 
As a national publication, the Imperial Night- Hawk mainly addressed 
broad themes that would appeal to Klan members and adherents. A local 
problem that had Klansmen up in arms in Lorain, Ohio, after all, may be of 
little interest to a Klansman in Shreveport, Louisiana. To address local con-
cerns, the movement relied on numerous regional Klan newspapers. One 
article in the Imperial Night- Hawk listed twenty-  four of these local papers 
and encouraged Klan members to read them and distribute them. Of the 
editors of these local Klan papers, the Imperial Night-  Hawk proclaimed, 
“They are the shock troops of the Klan armies. They are the buttresses 
against which beat the waves of anti-  Klan venom and hatred. They have 
thrown their own money and personalities into the cause and it is up to the 
Klansmen of the nation to help them to make good.” As the number of local 
publications increased, the national Klan tried to impose some uniformity 
by establishing a Bureau of Publication and Education. The bureau, located 
in Washington, D.C., was charged with “serving as a medium of expression 
and furnishing publicity and information for the Knights of the Ku Klux 
Klan” and supervising the content of all official Klan publications.
52 
In addition to its national and regional newspapers, Klansmen and 
Klanswomen were encouraged to publish bulletins and newsletters to keep


--- PAGE 166 ---
how T o RecR uiT a KlansMan 159
members informed of local activities and meetings. The Imperial Night-
 H a w k approvingly noted that the Milwaukee Klan was publishing a “series 
of pamphlets regarding the purposes and principles of the Knights of the 
Ku Klux Klan” titled “The Abraham Lincoln Series of Public Information.” 
According to the author, the pamphlets were in demand and were doing 
“much good for the cause.” Another article describes how many local chap-
ters were using mimeograph machines to produce bulletins to keep mem -
bers informed of local meetings and activities.
53 
While the Klan’s development of alternative media was vital to the 
movement’s growth and diffusion, local movement leaders were encouraged 
to exploit the mainstream media whenever possible to draw attention to 
movement activities. The Imperial Night- Hawk noted that in communities 
where the Klan enjoyed broad support, the editors of local newspapers were 
often willing to publish information about the movement and its activities. 
One article instructs, “If the editor of your newspaper believes in fair play 
ask him if he will permit your Klan to edit a weekly Klan Kolumn, giving 
news of activities of the order and carrying constructive arguments for pa-
triotic Protestant Americanism.” Another article commends Klansmen in 
Evansville, Indiana, for “  ‘selling’ the organization to the desirable citizens 
by the use of much good printer’s ink, mixed with brains” because they had 
taken out a full-  page advertisement in the Sunday paper to promote their 
organization. In Pekin, Illinois, the Klan went so far as to purchase the 
town’s newspaper, the Pekin Daily Times.
54 
When it came to utilizing media, Klansmen were not limited to the 
printing press. One Klan writer reports that the Klansmen in Texas were 
airing a program on radio using “the powerful broadcasting station of 
the Fort Worth Star Telegram.” Klansmen in Raleigh, North Carolina, 
rented billboard space “in various good locations” to promote the move -
ment. One article described plans to develop a major motion picture titled 
Armageddon, which would “depict the patriotic work of the Knights of the 
Ku Klux Klan.” According to the Klan writer, D. W. Griffith would be 
asked to direct the film and “picture stars of international fame will take the 
leading roles.”
55 
In general, the Klansmen’s writing reveals an infatuation with mod -
ern technology. For example, when it came to providing security, writers 
boasted of how the Klan used the most efficient and up- to- date techniques. 
One article describes how members had installed two telephone poles in a 
field outside of Morgantown, West Virginia, so that Klansmen at an initia-
tion ceremony would be able to communicate with Klan headquarters to 
check credentials of those seeking admission.
56 Klansmen and Klanswomen


--- PAGE 167 ---
160 how T o RecR uiT a KlansMan
used media technology as well as good old-  fashioned gossip networks to 
keep tabs on the movement’s enemies and to spread information about 
businesses deemed to be unfriendly to the Klan that would be targeted 
for boycott.
57 The Klan even established an Intelligence Bureau, under the 
direct control of Hiram Evans.58 
The growth and diffusion of the Ku Klux Klan cannot be explained 
in terms of new resources becoming available to the movement’s constitu -
ents. Klan members had access to these resources long before the movement 
emerged. What was needed was an incentive to activate and exploit these 
resources to promote collective action. Power devaluation provided the in-
centive and effective framing motivated action. Yet the movement could 
not have spread so quickly and attracted so many members and supporters 
if its leaders had not exploited the vast resources at their disposal.
Exploiting Openings in the Political Opportunity Structure
The Klan’s mobilization did not require a favorable shift in political op -
portunities. The movement’s constituents, as members of the racial, ethnic, 
and religious majority in the United States, enjoyed free access to the polity 
prior to the movement’s emergence. They had little reason to fear that they 
would be violently repressed by the government if they were to engage in 
collective action. There was, however, local variation in the way in which 
authorities responded to the Klan, and at the national level there were limits 
to the political freedom that the movement enjoyed. The Klan’s growth and 
diffusion, therefore, did depend in part on how effectively its leaders were 
able to strategically exploit opportunities that existed in the political ter -
rain on which they operated. Just as important, movement leaders had to 
take care to avoid actions that would prompt a crackdown from the federal 
government.
The Klan posed a dilemma for political representatives. The movement 
was, after all, named after a violent terrorist organization that had wreaked 
havoc throughout the South during Reconstruction. And, in spite of deni-
als issued by Klan leaders, members of the second Ku Klux Klan did com-
mit violent acts. Especially in southern states in the early years of the move-
ment’s growth, Klan-  initiated violence could be brutal and disruptive. In 
1922 the governor of Louisiana called in federal law-  enforcement agents to 
restore order after two murders committed by Klansmen had the popula -
tion in an uproar.
59 Oklahoma’s governor Jack Walton declared martial law 
in his state in response to the Klan’s skirmishes with Socialists, Wobblies, 
and other groups on the political left.
60 Although the Klan promoted white 
supremacy and spoke disparagingly about Catholics and immigrants, much


--- PAGE 168 ---
how T o RecR uiT a KlansMan 161
of the movement’s violence was directed toward fellow native- born, white 
Protestants.61 Klansmen would, at times, engage in public floggings to en-
force “morality” and traditional gender roles.62 
Public concern about violence could provide political authorities with 
some cover if they chose to act against the movement. As discussed in chap-
ter 2, the New York World ’s 1921 exposé detailing violent acts allegedly 
committed by the Klan led to congressional hearings. During those hear -
ings, Colonel Simmons assured members of Congress that the Klan was a 
nonviolent organization. Simmons and other Klan leaders came to under -
stand that political authorities would give the movement free rein as long as 
the Klan kept the violence under control. As one Klan leader expressed it, 
I have watched, with no small degree of interest, at least three Federal in-
vestigations of this order, with a view of stopping its “illegal activities” and 
dispersing its membership. The Post Office Department, the Department 
of Justice and the Congress of the U.S. have each looked carefully into its 
workings. Three times the Federal Government has said, as Pilate said of 
Christ, “We find no fault in them.” But still the angry, blood- thirsty, law-
less, un- American mob cries outside the Halls of Justice, “Crucify them. 
Crucify them. If you turn these white- robed, hooded monsters loose, you 
are no friend of the pope.”
63 
Hiram Evans seemed especially cognizant of the way in which the 
Klan’s violent reputation could provoke the government and impede his ef-
forts to win broader support for the Klan as it became involved in politics. 
Evans repeatedly denounced the use of violence and reminded other Klan 
leaders to do the same. At the first annual meeting of Grand Dragons (state-
 level leaders) held in Asheville, North Carolina, in 1923, Evans commented 
on the Klan’s reputation for vigilantism:
The first time one of your Klansmen violates the law, thus breaking his 
obligation, thus doing a thing in direct conflict for which we stand, let 
us administer on him as Klansmen for breaking his obligation. Let us get 
them outside of the Klan and let the judge and the jury and the peniten-
tiary take care of them. When we do that, this thing will fade like the 
morning dew.
64 
Although Klan leaders condemned violence, it was really the unorga -
nized and nonselective use of violence that they sought to curtail. According 
to Pennsylvania’s Grand Dragon, “selective and active intolerance is neces-
sary to defend liberty.” Klansmen drew inspiration from the Populist legacy 
and from the writings of Thomas Jefferson, claiming that it was the duty of


--- PAGE 169 ---
162 how T o RecR uiT a KlansMan
every citizen to rebel if the government was ignoring the will of the people. 
Klan leaders argued that the federal government was being challenged by 
“alien” forces and it was their patriotic duty to restore order, with force if 
necessary.
65 
Under Evans’s leadership, the Klan increasingly sought to institutional-
ize (rather than forgo) violence. Klan members were encouraged to offer 
their assistance to local law-  enforcement agencies, and in many cases their 
assistance was welcome. Movement leaders took special pride in their 
ability to recruit policemen. Membership lists confiscated in a raid on Klan 
headquarters in Inglewood, California, revealed that Klansmen were deeply 
rooted in law-  enforcement positions throughout the state, including the 
chiefs of police in Fresno and Los Angeles, a U.S. attorney general, and 
the Los Angeles County sheriff.
66 California was not unusual in this sense. 
Wherever the Klan was strong, it seemed to draw law enforcement officers 
into its ranks.
67 The movement’s leaders drew attention to these ties as way 
of legitimizing the Klan’s activities. One article in the Imperial Night- Hawk 
describes a funeral ceremony for a Klansman who had been a police officer 
in Indianapolis. 
Uniformed police officers and Klansmen in full regalia marched side by 
side in the funeral cortege. . . . The funeral procession was headed by 
the Police and Firemen’s Band and a detail of fifty police officers who 
stood at attention as the three hundred and fifty robed Klansmen passed 
through their ranks on their way to the cemetery.
68 
The Klan’s selective use of violence contributed to the movement’s 
strength in many regions of the country, especially where its violence was 
institutionalized and legitimated. Where the movement’s enemies were 
weak, the Ku Klux Klan was able to use violence to alter individual behav-
ior. More important, the threat and reality of violence increased the costs of 
individual resistance to the movement. The Klan also made effective use of 
rumor and gossip networks to either destroy or to gain information about 
potential foes.
69 Violence, however, was a two- way street. Typically, the 
Klan would victimize individuals who had violated community norms in 
locations where the movement enjoyed broad support. In such instances, 
Klan-  sponsored violence was unlikely to create problems for the move -
ment, but in communities where the movement had significant opposition, 
Klansmen could themselves be targeted for violence. 
In some locations the movement was confronted with nonviolent ob -
stacles. An article in the Imperial Night- Hawk reports that the movement’s 
enemies tried to put a damper on a Klan march in Sherwood, Tennessee, by


--- PAGE 170 ---
how T o RecR uiT a KlansMan 163
turning off the streetlights. The writer boasts of the Klansmen’s resourceful-
ness as they “provided themselves with hundreds of red torches and their 
ceremonial went off without a hitch.” Klan members faced opposition from 
local politicians who sought to prevent them from staging public events. 
According to one Klan writer, the mayor of Youngstown, Ohio, had given 
“shoot to kill” orders if Klansmen attempted to parade in his city. The pa-
rade apparently went off without incident, and the Klan writer noted that 
the mayor had recently been defeated in his bid for reelection.
70 Opposition 
from local authorities was clearly something that Klan leaders had to con -
sider as they attempted to build their movement. Recovered Klan docu -
ments that assessed the movement’s strengths and weaknesses in Indiana 
counties include notes about whether local politicians and law- enforcement 
agents were either friendly or hostile toward the Klan.
71 More often than 
not, in the early 1920s local authorities either left the movement alone or 
embraced the Klan as a way of bolstering their own political power.
Making the Klan a “Civic Asset”
Even if political authorities were wary of the Klan because of its violent 
reputation, it was risky to oppose the movement—  so risky that most were 
unwilling to do so. The Klan’s leaders invested substantial time, effort, 
and resources in public relations work, and they presented the movement 
as a patriotic organization whose members were sworn to protect and de -
fend the U.S. Constitution. The Klan claimed to represent the interests of 
native- born, white Protestants during a time in which ethnic and religious 
identities strongly influenced voting behavior and electoral outcomes. Any 
politician who needed votes from members of the cultural majority had to 
think twice before attempting to stand in the path of a mass movement 
seeking to purge “un-  American influences” from government. Klan lead -
ers understood that they could create their own political opportunities by 
doing good deeds in the communities in which they operated and, just as 
important, shining a spotlight on their charitable activities.
Community service was centrally featured in the Klan leaders’ strate -
gic plan for building their movement. One Klansman addressed his fellow 
leaders at the Grand Dragon’s meeting in Asheville, North Carolina, com-
menting on how community service was not only in line with the values 
that Klan members should hold but could also provide the movement with 
cover, shielding them from enemy attacks. The Klansman added, 
That we may hold the respect and confidence of the Christian people of 
every community, it behooves every executive, as well as every Klansman,


--- PAGE 171 ---
164 how T o RecR uiT a KlansMan
to make the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan the big civic asset in every 
Klanton in America. Be not unmindful of the fact that public opinion 
will be crystallized by your actions and your activities.
72 
In the pages of the Imperial Night-  Hawk, readers were repeatedly re -
minded of the importance of community service. North Carolina’s Grand 
Dragon scolded the Klan faithful, pointedly asking,
What are you doing besides meeting once in a while? Are you taking a 
proper part in local affairs? Are you supporting public schools and seeing 
to it that the children of your communities are getting a proper educa -
tion? Are you seeing to it that officers of the law are doing their duties? In 
other words, are you real citizens of your community, or are you just jelly-
 fish, existing without interest in anything excepting that small portion of 
the universe that lies within yourselves? There is no vice so reprehensible 
as selfishness combined with laziness.
73 
Based on the content of the Imperial Night- Hawk, it appears that many 
Klan members across the country did seek to make the Klan a civic asset in 
their local communities. It is also clear that Klan members were eager to 
publicize news of their charitable activities. Many Klan chapters announced 
plans to provide funding for new hospitals. One article announced that the 
Klan broke ground for a new hospital in El Dorado, Arkansas, and noted 
that the hospital will care for patients “without regard to race, color or 
creed.” Klansmen pledged to give the state of Oklahoma a great Protestant 
hospital. Klan leaders clearly deduced that charity directed toward sick chil-
dren would go a long way toward creating a favorable impression of their 
movement. Klan members in Jacksonville, Florida, announced a significant 
contribution to the “Baby Milk Fund.” One article noted that Klansmen 
in Wellsburg, West Virginia, were heavily involved in charitable work and 
had recently helped a needy family by sending a sick child to a health resort 
when her doctor advised that a change in climate was necessary to save her 
life. During “Klan Day” at the Texas State Fair, the Klan donated a “Hope 
Cottage” that would be built “to care for homeless and friendless babies.”
74 
Many other articles describe the Klan’s efforts to provide aid to wid -
ows, orphans, and families who were down on their luck. In Okmulgee, 
Oklahoma, Klansmen gave a new home to a woman whose husband had 
died, “leaving her in destitute circumstances.” Not only that, they claimed 
to have found employment for her eldest son. Numerous stories describe 
how Klan members distributed gifts, food, and money to needy families at 
Christmastime. One story reports that Klansmen in Indianapolis “distrib-


--- PAGE 172 ---
how T o RecR uiT a KlansMan 165
uted five hundred baskets of Christmas cheer to the worthy poor of that 
city. The baskets contained every article of food necessary to make a com -
plete Christmas dinner, articles of clothing where needed, and toys, candy 
and fruit for the children.” In Blackwell, Oklahoma, Klansmen delivered 
baskets of food, toys, and clothing while dressed as Santa Claus.
75 
The Klan’s writing also indicates that the men of the Ku Klux Klan 
perceived that Women of the Ku Klux Klan could be particularly valuable 
to the broader movement by taking on a disproportionate share of chari -
table work. Soon after announcing the founding of the Women’s Ku Klux 
Klan, one article instructs, “The women of the Ku Klux Klan, while fighting 
for the same principles as the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, will also be ac-
tive in other lines of work peculiar to women’s organizations, such as social 
welfare work, the prevention of juvenile delinquency, etc.” Several other ar-
ticles noted charitable activities carried out by the WKKK members, such 
as providing Christmas gift baskets for “all the deserving poor of Lisbon, 
Ohio.” Klan writers also, on several occasions, made a point of demonstrat-
ing that race and ethnicity did not define who was or was not deserving of 
Klan aid. One article describes how the Klan gave money to a Polish widow 
with five children and added that the Klan “makes no distinction as to race, 
creed or color” when it comes to distributing aid. The article reports that 
the woman was astounded to learn that the gift had been provided by the 
Ku Klux Klan because she had been told by the Klan’s enemies that the 
organization was opposed to foreigners and to her religion.
76 
Consistent with the movement’s advocacy on behalf of public edu -
cation, the Klan sought to publicize its contributions in support of edu -
cation. Klansmen offered a scholarship to a twenty-  six- year- old high school 
graduate so that he could attend the University of North Carolina. In 
Arkansas, Klan members paid $1,250 to purchase a park adjoining a public 
school, and they presented the park to the local school board for public 
use. The Imperial Night-  Hawk also reports that the Klan donated $4,000 
to the school fund in Cashville, Virginia, for construction of a public high 
school. In Asbury Park, New Jersey, the Klan offered to pay tuition at the 
Naturalization Night School for any “foreigner who wishes to be taught to 
speak and write in English.” Klansmen, it seems, even aimed to be useful at 
the college level, as the Imperial Night- Hawk describes how members who 
were enrolled at the University of Kansas were organizing a “Fiery Cross 
Club” on campus. The club would “help new students by assisting in find-
ing good rooms and in helping those who must earn a part or all of their 
way through school to find jobs.”
77


--- PAGE 173 ---
166 how T o RecR uiT a KlansMan
Conclusion
The emergence of the Ku Klux Klan did not require a change in the sup -
ply of organizational resources nor did it require a favorable shift in the 
structure of political opportunities. Resources possessed by Klan constitu -
ents were in abundant supply long before the movement was founded, and 
the native- born, white Protestants who would eventually join the organiza-
tion had little to fear in terms of government repression before or after the 
time in which the movement took root. In this sense, the Ku Klux Klan 
cannot be explained by either resource-  mobilization theory or by political-
 opportunity theory. This does not mean that resources and political oppor-
tunities are irrelevant when explaining the movement’s growth and trajec -
tory. Power devaluation and effective framing provided the incentives to 
utilize preexisting organizational resources and to exploit preexisting po -
litical opportunities. The resources that were available to the movement 
made it possible for the leaders to develop many innovative strategies for 
building the movement, offering selective incentives to entice individuals to 
participate. 
The Klan did use violence to intimidate opponents and, in some cases, 
to impress potential supporters by demonstrating a commitment to enforce 
a moral code that was embraced by potential members. However, Klan 
leaders also sought to keep the violence under control to prevent govern -
ment repression and to avoid a backlash from the general public that could 
damage its recruiting efforts. The Klan’s charitable activities also could go 
a long way toward preventing such a backlash. By focusing on the Klan’s 
charitable work, I do not mean to suggest that the movement was, as its 
leaders claimed, a wonderful civic asset for the communities in which it 
operated. Nor do I wish to be too cynical by suggesting that the charitable 
work only reflected the members’ desire to create favorable publicity that 
would protect it from government repression. The truth is somewhere in 
between. Many members of the Ku Klux Klan truly believed in the value of 
doing good works for others and for the community, yet at the same time, 
Klan leaders emphasized the importance of charitable activity because they 
understood that favorable publicity that comes from community service 
would make it increasingly difficult for political representatives and com -
munity leaders to oppose their movement. Favorable publicity could also 
be useful in recruiting new members among those who came to view the 
movement as a civic asset.


--- PAGE 174 ---
167
The time is coming when the Americans of the West, South, and Middle 
West must Americanize the East and it can’t be done by putting the 
supreme power in the hands of a foreign- made section of the country. 
— Judge Chas. J. Orbinson of Indiana, speaking at the  
first annual meeting of Grand Dragon Knights of the  
Ku Klux Klan in Asheville, North Carolina, in 1923
Changes in the structure of American society in the early 1900s provided 
fertile recruiting ground for the Ku Klux Klan. Many native-  born, white 
Protestants were experiencing power devaluation in economic, political, 
and status- based exchange relationships, and the Klan’s leaders constructed 
collective- action frames that struck a chord with those whom they wished 
to recruit. However, the Klan’s framing was not embraced by all Americans 
and was, in many cases, strongly rejected. As I argued earlier, the resonance 
of the Klan’s message should have depended, to a great extent, on geographic 
location. The Klan’s opposition to deskilling of manufacturing jobs, for ex-
ample, should have been most warmly received in locations where changes 
in manufacturing production were occurring, not in locations where large-
 scale manufacturing was already firmly entrenched or in locations that con-
tinued to be dominated by agricultural production. Similarly, the Klan’s 
support for public education—  more specifically its plan to use federal tax 
dollars to fully fund the public schools—  should have been embraced in 
states where the vast majority of families enrolled their children in public 
8
Klan Activism across the Country


--- PAGE 175 ---
168 Klan a cTivisM acR oss The c ounTR y
schools. The Klan’s proposals should have received a chillier reception where 
high proportions of families paid tuition in private schools and would likely 
resent the burden of paying higher taxes to support schools not attended by 
their own children.
In preceding chapters I have described structural changes taking place 
in the early 1900s and have shown how the Klan’s framing should have 
been appealing to many individuals at this particular historical moment, 
especially in locations where significant numbers of native-  born, white 
Protestant Americans were experiencing power devaluation. In this chapter 
I take a more quantitative approach, assessing state-  level variation in Klan 
activity when the movement was at its peak in 1923 and 1924. The analysis 
shows that the Klan tended to stage more events in states where smaller 
proportions of residents were immigrants or Catholics. These relationships 
are only revealed after controlling for other state features that are related to 
economic, political, and status-  based power devaluation of the Klan’s con-
stituency. The findings support my argument about how the Klan gained 
strength by interpreting economic, political, and social changes by appeal-
ing to and by constructing a common cultural identity. 
Multivariate Analysis of Klan Activity
Engaging in a quantitative analysis of the Klan’s strength is easier said than 
done. A highly secretive organization whose members wore sheets and 
hoods to conceal their identities in public, the Klan, not surprisingly, left 
few membership records behind. In earlier research, I used membership fig-
ures taken from recovered Klan documents to analyze county-  level varia -
tion in Klan strength within the state of Indiana.
1 However, my goal in this 
book is to examine the movement’s mobilization at the national level, rather 
than restricting the analysis to a single state. 
Several scholars have referred to state-  level estimates of Klan member-
ship made by historian Kenneth Jackson to comment on regional varia -
tion in the movement’s strength. However, Jackson’s estimates are not ideal 
when it comes to a systematic quantitative analysis. Jackson makes it clear 
that his figures represent only personal estimates based on claims made by 
Klan leaders and based on Jackson’s reading of scholarly accounts of the 
movement.
2 The estimates lack precision. For example, five states have an 
estimated membership of 25,000, and seven states are estimated to have 
had 5,000 members. The time period is also problematic. Jackson made 
estimates of the number of people joining the Klan from 1915 to 1944, but 
the Klan reached its peak in 1924 and membership declined rapidly begin-
ning in 1925. The types of people who joined the Klan in the 1940s were 
likely quite different from those who joined in the 1920s, and they were


--- PAGE 176 ---
Klan a cTivisM acR oss The c ounTR y 169
drawn to the organization for reasons other than those that I have identified 
in this book. In my quantitative analysis, therefore, I return to the data that 
I presented in the opening chapter. The content of the Imperial Night-Hawk 
provides a unique opportunity to examine state-level variation in Klan ac-
tivism in the early 1920s.
State- Level Variation in Klan Activity
The power- devaluation model, combined with the qualitative application 
of the theory in preceding chapters, can be used to identify varying state 
attributes that predict varying levels of Klan activism across the forty-  eight 
states in the early 1920s. Multivariate analysis is required to assess the pre -
dictive power of the theory. For example, bivariate analysis reveals that more 
Klan activity tended to occur in states where a high percentage of farmland 
was devoted to corn production (r = .453), a finding that is consistent with 
my earlier research on county-  level variation in Klan membership in the 
state of Indiana.
3 That relationship could be spurious, however, and may 
simply reflect the fact that corn-  growing states also tended to be the more 
populous states ( r = .478), and more events occurred in states with large 
populations ( r = .646). My analysis is further complicated by the nature 
of the dependent variable, which is the total number of events or activities 
in each state as reported in the Imperial Night- Hawk. There is good reason 
to expect that the likelihood of any event occurring in a state (and being 
reported) was heavily influenced by the number of prior events occurring 
in the state. The events, in other words, are not statistically independent. A 
parade or initiation ceremony taking place in Alabama, for example, might 
spur additional activity within the state because the event captured public 
attention, attracted new members and resources, and thus provided incen-
tives and the means to engage in more activity.
Because the dependent variable is a cumulative total of discrete events, 
and because there is good reason to expect that the events occurring in a 
state are not independent of one another, ordinary least squares regression is 
likely to produce biased estimates. Cases such as this are usually dealt with 
using techniques designed for event history analysis. However, because I 
am working with a relatively short time span (less than two years) and be-
cause I do not have complete information about the time that elapsed be -
tween events, I estimate models using a continuation- ratio logit model. This 
method is closely related to discrete- time methods used in survival analysis 
but was developed for use with ordinal-  dependent variables. The model 
can be used when the dependent variable represents a progression through 
stages. For example, before a sixth Klan event can be reported for the state 
of Missouri, it must be preceded by a fifth event, which must be preceded


--- PAGE 177 ---
170 Klan a cTivisM acR oss The c ounTR y
by a fourth event, and so on. Here, I will discuss the technique in a way that 
should make intuitive sense to readers who are not interested in the techni-
cal details. Readers may refer to a number of sources for a more thorough 
discussion of the methodology.
4 
The method simultaneously estimates a series of binary logistic models. 
In the first stage, states with no events are compared with all other states. 
In the second stage, states with no events are discarded, and the states with 
just one event are compared to states in which more than one event oc -
curred. The process continues until all categories have been exhausted. Gaps 
between categories are ignored. For example, several states have 2 reported 
events but the next highest value is 7. The gap between 2 and 7 is treated as 
the progression through a single stage. The model includes a separate inter-
cept for each stage and constrains the coefficients so that they are the same 
across all stages. The technique yields beta coefficients, which represent the 
estimated effect of a one-  unit increase in the explanatory variables on the 
log odds of moving to the next stage in the rank ordering of Klan events, 
holding other variables constant, and taking the interdependence of Klan 
events into account. 
Independent Variables
I draw primarily on historical U.S. census data to construct measures of my 
independent variables. Because my units of analysis are states, rather than 
individuals or groups of individuals, I cannot directly measure the power-
 devaluation concept. However, when selecting independent variables, my 
aim is to identify state attributes that indicate that many individuals resid-
ing in the state would have been experiencing power devaluation and would 
also have been responsive to the Klan’s framing. At this point, it is worth 
repeating my earlier argument that many factors that contributed to the 
Klan’s growth were national in scope. An influx of immigrants could re -
sult in power devaluation for the native- born, white Protestants in Indiana, 
even (and perhaps especially) if those immigrants were settling in New York 
and not in Indiana. The Klan’s rhetoric calls attention to sectional conflicts 
in which, for example, Catholic voters in the northeast advocated national 
policies and programs that were perceived to be detrimental to the interests 
of Protestants in the Midwest.
Political Context
Because the dependent variable represents a discrete count of events, it is 
essential to control for the population of the state. All else constant, we 
would expect that more events would take place in more populous states.


--- PAGE 178 ---
Klan a cTivisM acR oss The c ounTR y 171
Therefore, I include the natural log of the states’ total population in 1920 
in all my analyses. Because the Klan represented itself as an organiza -
tion devoted to promoting the interests of native-  born, white, Protestant 
Americans, it is also important to account for racial, ethnic, and religious 
distributions in the states. I include a measure of the percent of the total 
population in the state that was nonwhite and a measure of the percent of 
white residents that were foreign- born in 1920. I use the religious census to 
calculate a measure of the percent of church adherents who were Catholic 
or Jewish in 1926.
5
I also include measures of the percent increase in the number of non-
white individuals in each state from 1910 to 1920, the percent increase 
in foreign-  born residents from 1910 to 1920, and the percent increase in 
Catholic or Jewish adherents from 1916 to 1926. Ethnic competition theory 
proposes that intergroup conflict is most likely to occur when different 
ethnic groups are coming into closer contact and competing over scarce 
resources.
6 For the sake of this analysis it is important to make a concep -
tual distinction between episodes of intergroup conflict and mobilization of 
right- wing activism. Klan members did, at times, engage in direct conflict 
with African Americans, Catholics, and immigrants. Yet the movement’s 
mobilization strategy involved interpreting economic, political, and status-
 based grievances in cultural terms, drawing upon shared values and world-
views held by many native- born, white Protestants. The effectiveness of this 
strategy should have depended to a great extent on how strongly the Klan’s 
cultural framing resonated with high proportions of individuals residing in 
a state. I emphasize once again that the Klan’s framing of national issues 
drew attention to sectional conflicts, with immigrants and Catholics con -
centrated in northeastern states embracing policies that, Klan leaders ar -
gued, were detrimental to the interests of Klan constituents in other regions 
of the country. I expect to find that states characterized by homogeneity, 
rather than heterogeneity, were most receptive to the Klan’s framing and 
most likely to be sites for Klan activism.
Also relevant in regard to political-  power devaluation is the percent in-
crease in total votes cast for the president from 1916 to 1920. As discussed 
earlier, the effects of women’s suffrage were not uniformly distributed across 
states. Voting rights had been extended to women prior to passage of the 
Nineteenth Amendment in many western states, and there was state-  level 
variation in turnout among women who were newly eligible to vote. Klan 
leaders noted that new women voters were disproportionately located in 
northeastern states where the movement’s enemies were concentrated. In 
response, they attempted to promote higher rates of voter turnout among


--- PAGE 179 ---
172 Klan a cTivisM acR oss The c ounTR y
women and men who were sympathetic to the Klan’s agenda and sponsored 
the Women’s Ku Klux Klan as a vehicle for promoting political participation 
among white, native-  born, Protestant women. Because these incentives to 
promote higher turnout would have been stronger in states that did not gain 
new voters, I expected to find that the Klan was more active, holding other 
variables constant, in states that had the smallest increase in votes in 1920.
Also related to the political context, I include the percent of votes cast 
for either the Socialist or Farmer- Labor presidential candidate in 1920. The 
Klan, as discussed previously, rejected radical responses to the plight of 
farmers or unskilled laborers and viewed these campaigns as threatening to 
the interests of their own middle- class constituents. In preliminary analyses 
I included a dichotomous measure for states located in the South, but the 
variable was not statistically significant so I do not include it in my models.
Economic Context
The Klan’s framing addressed economic grievances related to organization 
of manufacturing production. The main problems diagnosed by Klan lead-
ers were rooted in the concentration of manufacturing production and the 
increasing reliance on unskilled labor. The demands of a wartime economy 
provided a rationale for economic concentration, and significant transfor -
mations in manufacturing production were enacted in the late 1910s. In 
1914 the average number of wage earners per manufacturing establishment 
in the state of Indiana was 24.6. By 1919 that figure had jumped to 35.1. 
Similarly, the average number of wage earners per manufacturing establish-
ment increased from 32.6 to 45.3 in Ohio during the same period. The 
change is particularly striking in the state of Michigan. In 1914 the average 
number of wage earners per establishment was 31.1. By 1919 the figure had 
risen to 56.7. Not all states experienced such significant changes in manufac-
turing production during this period, however. Many states whose econo -
mies were dominated by agricultural production were largely un affected. In 
both North and South Dakota, for example, the average number of wage 
earners per establishment remained below 5 in 1919. In North Carolina the 
figure rose from 24.9 in 1914 to only 26.3 in 1919. Many northeastern states 
also experienced little change during this period because the concentration 
of manufacturing production had taken place at an earlier historical mo -
ment. In the state of Connecticut, for example, the average number of wage 
earners per establishment was already high in 1914 (55.1) and rose only to 
60.1 by 1919. To capture these state- level differences in the concentration 
of manufacturing production, I include a measure of the percent increase 
in wage earners per manufacturing establishment from 1914 to 1919. The


--- PAGE 180 ---
Klan a cTivisM acR oss The c ounTR y 173
variable ranges from a high of 82.6 for the state of Michigan (followed by 
Oregon and Oklahoma, each with 74.2 percent increase) to a 17 percent 
decrease for the state of Arizona.
I have argued that the agricultural depression in the early 1920s also 
played a role in the Klan’s mobilization. It is important to keep in mind, 
however, that Klan leaders’ framing, as reflected in its national publication 
and also in regional papers such as Indiana’s Fiery Cross, did not directly 
target farmers for recruitment. In fact, Klan leaders condemned radical 
responses to the farmers’ plight and discouraged any solution to farmers’ 
grievances that would benefit farmers at the expense of other Klan con -
stituencies. As Klan leaders grappled with issues related to agriculture, they 
sought to draw support in rural locations by emphasizing common interests 
held by farmers and members of a broad middle class composed of shop 
owners, merchants, professionals, and skilled manufacturing workers. The 
Klan’s framing was most likely unsatisfying in states such as South Dakota 
and North Dakota where agriculture dominated the economy and where 
state residents desperately sought direct relief for farmers’ grievances. In 
such states, farmer-  labor activism would have been more appealing than 
Klan activism.
Rather than endorsing policies that would benefit farmers as a group, 
the Klan instead aligned itself with progressive legislators in both the Re -
publican and Democratic parties and drew on long-  standing regional ri -
valries and resentments of tariff policies that benefited the industrial core 
at the expense of those residing outside of the core. The strength of the 
cotton economy, for example, had historically been largely dependent on 
the demand for cotton from abroad. Similarly, during the war years, local 
economies in corn-  growing regions of the country were stimulated by an 
unusually high demand for pork and other meat products in European na-
tions.
7 The effects of declining demand in Europe for U.S.-  grown agricul -
tural commodities after the war were exacerbated by restoration of high 
tariffs during the Harding administration in the early 1920s. Wheat farm-
ers, on the other hand, were hoping that government subsidies rather than 
free- market dynamics would address their grievances.
8 
I include several variables that reflect state-  level differences in agri -
cultural conditions. First, I include a measure of the percent of the labor 
force in 1920 that was employed in agricultural occupations. The Klan’s 
agenda would not have been attractive in many states where the economy 
was dominated by agricultural production because it neglected to directly 
address the grievances of farmers as a group. I also include a measure of the 
percent decrease in the estimated total value of twenty-  two primary crops


--- PAGE 181 ---
174 Klan a cTivisM acR oss The c ounTR y
from 1919 to 1924, as reported in the U.S. census. Again, holding other 
factors constant, residents of states experiencing the sharpest declines in the 
value of farm commodities should have been unsatisfied with the Klan’s 
approach to agricultural grievances—  an approach that aimed to find com-
mon ground between farmers and the movement’s other middle-  class con-
stituents. The Klan’s framing should have been effective, however, in states 
with high levels of either corn production or cotton production. In such 
states, the Klan’s identification with progressive and populist legislators and 
its leaders’ attempt to identify common grievances of farmers and middle-
 class consumers should have facilitated recruiting. I include a measure of 
the acres devoted to cotton production as a percent of acres of improved 
farm land in the state. Similarly, I include a measure of acres devoted to 
corn production as a percent of total acres of improved farm land.
Status- Based Exchange Relations
When discussing status-  based power devaluation, I gave particular atten -
tion to the Klan’s advocacy on behalf of public schooling. The movement’s 
support for public schooling and its opposition to parochial education 
should have been most warmly received in states where most residents en -
rolled their children in public schools and therefore stood to benefit from 
the Klan’s agenda. I include a measure of the number of children enrolled 
in public elementary and secondary schools as a percentage of total elemen-
tary and secondary school enrollment in 1920. I also noted that the Klan’s 
framing conveyed concerns about how other groups were catching up to the 
Klan’s white Protestant constituents in terms of their educational creden -
tials. Long before the 1920s, student enrollment had been relatively high 
in many states where the Klan became active. The Klan’s argument about 
public schools failing to fulfill their mission should have been more compel-
ling in states that were not experiencing significant growth in enrollment in 
the years prior to the Klan’s mobilization. To test this argument, I include a 
measure of the percent increase in the number of students enrolled in public 
schools from 1900 to 1920. Because some of this growth in enrollment was 
due to migration and fertility, I also control for the percent increase in the 
total population during the same time period.
The Klan’s support for Prohibition legislation should have been most 
effective in states where most individuals endorsed the movement’s stand 
on the issue. To some extent, varying support for Prohibition should be cap-
tured by our measures of religion and nativity since opposition to the sale of 
alcohol was strongest among native- born Protestants, and the Klan empha-
sized the extent to which Catholics and immigrants opposed Prohibition.


--- PAGE 182 ---
Klan a cTivisM acR oss The c ounTR y 175
Although it is not possible to directly measure state- level differences in sup-
port for Prohibition, these differences were likely reflected in votes cast by 
delegates to the 1924 Democratic National Convention. A platform plank 
was introduced that, if it had been approved, would have committed the 
party to legalizing the sale of light wines and beer for home consumption.
9 
As noted in chapter 6, Klan leaders instructed members to oppose any effort 
to amend the Volstead Act.
10 I calculate a measure of the percentage of each 
state’s delegates that opposed the plank at the 1924 Democratic National 
Convention. In twenty states, opposition to the plank was unanimous; sup-
port for the plank exceeded 80 percent in six states.
Results
Results of the analysis are presented in Table 4. I begin by examining the 
effects of variables related to race, religion, and nativity (with a control 
for population size) when the other variables are excluded from the mod-
els. In spite of the fact that the Klan claimed to represent all native- born, 
white Protestants, these cultural identity variables by themselves explain 
very little state- level variation in Klan activity. In the first model, the log of 
population has a strong positive effect on the number of Klan events. Aside 
from that, only the percent foreign-  born variable is statistically significant. 
The coefficient, as expected, is negative, which indicates that the Klan was 
most active in states where higher percentages of residents were native- born. 
When I include measures of percent change in Catholics, immigrants, and 
nonwhites, as can be seen in model 2, none of the variables are statistically 
significant with the exception of the control for population size.
At this point it is worth remembering that my units of analysis are 
states, rather than individuals. Obviously, race, religion, and nativity were 
important factors distinguishing Klan members from nonmembers be -
cause only white, native-  born Protestants were eligible for membership. 
Individuals ineligible for membership had good reasons to oppose the Klan. 
Yet when the goal is to explain state-  level variation in Klan activity, racial, 
ethnic, and religious distributions seem, at first glance, to have been irrele-
vant. My theoretical argument suggests, however, that these factors should 
have played a role in the Klan’s mobilization but only when considered in 
light of other important transformations taking place in the early 1900s. 
The incentive for right-  wing mobilization came from economic, political, 
and status- based power devaluation among those whom the Klan hoped to 
recruit. The Klan articulated its members’ grievances by drawing on cul -
tural identities rooted in race, nativity, and religion. What’s more, Klan 
leaders called attention to the way in which Catholic and immigrant voters


--- PAGE 183 ---
Table 4. State-level variation in Klan events as reported in the  
Imperial Night-Hawk, 1923–24
Independent variable  Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4
Population, 1920 (logged) 1.324*** 1.325*** 2.262*** 3.699***
  (.219) (.223) (.391) (.590)
Percent Catholic or Jewish, 1926 .006 –.005  –.072*
  (.014) (.016)  (.031)
Percent foreign-born, 1920 –.010* –.089  –.181*
  (.043) (.049)  (.076)
Percent nonwhite, 1920 –.003 –.008  –.067
  (.015) (.015)  (.038)
Percent increase in Catholic  
or Jewish, 1916–26  .003  –.032*
   (.009)  (.013)
Percent increase in foreign-born,  
1910–20  –.002  –.061*
   (.013)  (.025)
Percent increase in nonwhite, 1910–20  .004  –.004
   (.003)  (.004)
Percent increase in votes cast, 1916–20   –.027*** –.036***
    (.007) (.009)
Percent voting Socialist or Farmer-Labor,  
1920   –.097 –.154*
    (.056) (.076)
Percent increase of workers per  
establishment, 1914–19   .045*** .072***
    (.013) (.019)
Percent employed in agricultural occupations  –.210*** –.435***
    (.038) (.071)
Percent decrease in farm commodity  
prices, 1919–24   –.035** –.069***
    (.012) (.016)
Percent acres devoted to cotton, 1920   .140*** .319***
    (.029) (.065)
Percent acres devoted to corn, 1920   .221*** .281***
    (.050) (.069)
Percent of enrolled students in public  
schools, 1920   .377*** .442***
    (.076) (.103)
Percent increase in students enrolled  
in public schools, 1900–20   .002 –.015*
    (.004) (.006)
Percent increase in total population,  
1900–20   –.010 .025
    (.012) (.015)
Percent of delegates supporting  
prohibition, 1924   .035*** .039**
   (.010) (.014)
 Log likelihood –149.12 –148.12 –118.39 –99.95
 Number of observations 889 889 889 889
 Pseudo r square .138 .146 .3
17 .423
*p < .05 **p < .01 ***p < .001
Continuation-ratio logit estimates. Standard errors are in parentheses.


--- PAGE 184 ---
Klan a cTivisM acR oss The c ounTR y 177
were concentrated in northeastern states and how these conditions held im-
plications for national level political conflicts.
In the third column of Table 4 (model 3), I present results when all 
variables except the cultural identity variables are included. Most of these 
variables are statistically significant predictors of Klan activity. As expected, 
increases in the number of wage earners per manufacturing establishment 
have a strong positive effect on the dependent variable. Coefficients for the 
percent employed in agricultural occupations and the percent decline in 
crop prices indicate that the Klan had some difficulty gaining strength in 
predominantly agricultural states and where declines in crop prices were 
steep. As discussed previously, the Klan opposed radical policies that would 
address farmers’ grievances, and they condemned policies that would ad -
vance the interests of farmers at the expense of other constituents. However, 
the results indicate that the Klan was able to establish a strong foothold in 
states where cotton and corn were primary crops. The coefficients of each 
variable are positive and highly significant. The Klan’s self-  identification 
with progressive legislators helped the movement to effectively argue that 
farmers and middle-  class consumers had a common interest in opposing 
policies such as the protective tariff that disproportionately benefited large 
manufacturing interests in northeastern states.
Regional political conflicts also seem to have played a role in terms of 
how women’s suffrage factored into the Klan’s mobilization. Klan leaders 
noted that the supply of new voters was not uniformly distributed across 
states and emphasized the importance of stimulating voter turnout among 
women who were sympathetic to their agenda. My results confirm that the 
Klan tended to stage more events in states that gained the fewest new voters 
in 1920. Klan mobilization does not seem to have been in response to local-
ized threats posed by Socialists or by the farmer-  labor movement. Instead, 
the Klan tended to be strongest where the political left was weakest, and 
weakest where the left was strongest. In the midst of a steep agricultural 
depression and during a time period in which manufacturing production 
was becoming increasingly centralized and reliant on unskilled labor, Klan 
leaders reacted against political mobilization that sought to secure benefits 
for farmers and unskilled laborers at the expense of the middle class. Farmers 
mobilizing in the Dakotas and in Minnesota threatened the interests of Klan 
constituents in states such as Indiana, Ohio, and Illinois. While the relation-
ship falls just shy of statistical significance, the percent vote for left-  wing 
presidential candidates in 1920 has a negative effect on Klan activity, under-
scoring once again the regional nature of the political conflict. 
The results also show that Klan activity was much more likely to occur


--- PAGE 185 ---
178 Klan a cTivisM acR oss The c ounTR y
in states where high percentages of students were enrolled in public rather 
than private schools. The exponentiation of the beta coefficient produces an 
odds ratio that is useful for interpretation. Each 1 percent increase in public 
schooling multiplies the odds of proceeding to the next stage in the states’ 
rank ordering of Klan activity by 1.5. All the attention that Klan leaders 
gave to the issue of public education seems to have paid off. The variable 
measuring the percent increase in enrollment from 1900 to 1920 is not sta-
tistically significant, yet the measure of support for Prohibition is statisti -
cally significant and has a positive effect on Klan activity.
Several interesting findings emerge when all of the variables are in -
cluded in the model simultaneously (model 4). First, it is noteworthy that 
most of the cultural identity variables are significant predictors of Klan 
activity, but only after controlling for other structural changes that were 
taking place during the time period. The results clearly demonstrate that 
the Klan tended to thrive on homogeneity within the state rather than on 
high rates of contact with Catholics, immigrants, or African Americans. 
This does not mean that the Klan did not respond to local threats posed by 
Catholics or immigrants, but the results do show that the Klan was more 
active in states in which higher proportions of the population were native-
 born and Protestant. Variables measuring the percent of church adherents 
who were either Catholic or Jewish, and the percent of the white population 
that was foreign-  born, are statistically significant and negatively related to 
Klan activity. The percent nonwhite is also negatively related to Klan ac -
tivity, but the coefficient falls just short of statistical significance ( p = .075). 
The Klan was also more likely to stage events and activities in states that 
were not experiencing growth in the number of Catholics or immigrants. 
This underscores the point that new Catholic and immigrant voters repre -
sented a source of political power devaluation in national politics, often pit-
ting Catholics residing in the northeast against Protestants residing in other 
sections of the country. The measure of the percent increase in the nonwhite 
population is also negative, but not statistically significant.
It is noteworthy that the effects of the other variables become stronger 
after including the cultural identity variables as controls. The measure of 
left- wing voting and the measure of the increase in public school enroll -
ment become statistically significant after controlling for distributions of 
nonwhites, Catholic and Jewish adherents, and immigrants. The magni -
tude of the coefficient for each of the other variables also increases. This 
should be expected in light of the way in which the Klan drew on race, reli-
gion, and nativity to interpret changes in the structure of American society 
that generated economic, political, and status-  based power devaluation for 
many individuals who were eligible to join the Klan.


--- PAGE 186 ---
Klan a cTivisM acR oss The c ounTR y 179
The results of my analysis demonstrate that the Klan did tend to be 
more active in states where large proportions of the population were ex -
periencing power devaluation stemming from changes in the structure 
of American society in the early 1920s. Holding other variables constant, 
states that experienced an increase in wage earners per manufacturing es -
tablishment had more Klan activity. The Klan also was strong in states 
where agricultural production was oriented more toward cotton and corn 
production, making it possible for the Klan’s leaders to incorporate agri -
cultural grievances into their frames without alienating other core con -
stituencies. Klan activity was also highest in states that gained the fewest 
new voters in the first national election in which women in all forty-  eight 
states were eligible to vote.
The Klan was more active in states with high percentages of students 
enrolled in public, rather than private, schools. Interestingly, the Klan was 
also more active in states that had experienced the smallest growth in public 
school enrollment since 1900. I have argued that this was due to the way in 
which Klan leaders drew attention to the way in which other groups were 
catching up to the Klan’s constituents in terms of their educational creden-
tials. Klan leaders noted gains made by Catholics, immigrants, and non -
whites and spoke with alarm about the need to improve educational oppor-
tunities for native-  born white Protestants. The fight over public education 
in the 1920s was being carried out at the national level, pitting state against 
state in a competition for federal funding. States that had experienced the 
smallest gains in enrollment should have been most receptive to the Klan’s 
claims that public education for native-  born, white Protestants needed ad-
ditional support from the federal government. Finally, the results suggest 
that the Klan’s endorsement of Prohibition at a time when Prohibition had 
become the law of the land also played a role in the Klan’s mobilization.


--- PAGE 187 ---
180
The Imperial Night-  Hawk is not dead—  in being superseded by The 
Kourier Magazine, it simply enters a new stage of growth or development. 
— Imperial Night- Hawk, November 19, 1924
By 1924 the Ku Klux Klan had emerged as a powerful social movement 
claiming the allegiance of millions of members and adherents. Its growth 
was in part fueled by the way in which recruiters opportunistically offered 
the Klan as a remedy for problems in local communities. However, the Klan 
quickly became a national social movement whose reach extended into all 
of the nation’s forty- eight states. How was the movement able to diffuse so 
broadly? The Klan articulated the grievances of many native-  born, white 
Protestants, and those grievances were to a great extent rooted in national, 
rather than localized, conflicts. As the analysis in the preceding chapter 
shows, the Ku Klux Klan became most active in states where high pro -
portions of native- born, white Protestants were being affected by economic 
changes, political changes, and social changes related to status hierarchies. 
Just as important, the analysis shows that the movement thrived on cultural 
homogeneity and tended to be most active in states in which native- born, 
white Protestants greatly outnumbered immigrants and Catholics. The 
Klan used racial, ethnic, and religious identities to draw battle lines, and 
that strategy would have implications for the movement’s long-  term trajec-
tory and for its attempts to influence the political process.
One should be careful not to exaggerate or overemphasize the unity 
and cohesiveness of the movement. If it were possible to go back in time and 
9
The Klan’s Last Gasp: Campaigning to Keep a Catholic  
out of the White House, 1925–1928


--- PAGE 188 ---
The Klan’s l asT gasP 181
select a random sample of twenty Klan members, I suspect that each indi-
vidual selected would offer a different explanation for her or his participa -
tion. That is not unusual, as individual motives for participation often vary 
widely even within social movements that appear, from the outside, to have 
clear goals and a unity of purpose. Indeed, in order to build a powerful so-
cial movement with a large and resourceful membership, leaders must pro-
vide a variety of incentives for participation. A common path to movement 
participation involves simply being asked to participate by a close friend 
or a neighbor. Initial exposure to a movement often comes through social 
activities rather than through an individual’s burning ideological commit-
ment to a particular cause.
1 
Yet as framing theorists emphasize, attracting and maintaining the 
support of movement members and adherents involves interpretive and cog-
nitive processes. After all, one need not join a social movement to engage 
in social activities. There needs to be something more to motivate ongoing 
participation and commitment. Movement leaders must provide a rationale 
for collective action. The frames that they construct must come into align-
ment with the beliefs, values, and worldviews held by active members and 
by those who are being targeted for recruitment.
2 This does not mean that 
all members and participants come to share an identical set of logical and 
coherent beliefs. It does mean that the movement’s framing resonates on 
some level with participants and does not repel them by contradicting their 
core beliefs, values, and interests. 
The geographic distribution of Klan activities strongly suggests that the 
Klan’s fortunes were linked to the way in which the movement attached 
itself to ongoing sectional conflicts in the United States. Structural changes 
in the early 1900s, described in previous chapters, provided incentives for 
action, and Klan leaders responded by constructing narratives that linked 
constituents’ grievances to cultural identities and to preexisting narratives 
that pitted the interests of northeastern industrialists against the interests of 
white Protestant Americans residing in the South, West, and Midwest. The 
statistical analyses in the preceding chapter identify varying state-  level at-
tributes underlying these sectional conflicts that facilitated and constrained 
the Klan’s geographic diffusion in the early 1920s. 
While the Klan’s growth in the early 1920s was impressive by almost 
any standard, its rapid decline was equally impressive. Perhaps the move -
ment’s general health was tenuous even during the years of rapid expansion. 
The organization was continually plagued by internal factionalism, and the 
movement made plenty of enemies during its ascendance who vigorously re-
sisted the Klan and all that it stood for. Until 1925, the movement survived


--- PAGE 189 ---
182 The Klan’s l asT gasP
factionalism and several scandals involving its leaders. For the most part, 
it successfully deflected attacks launched by opponents. The movement, 
after all, argued on behalf of the nation’s dominant racial, ethnic, and reli-
gious groups. Challenging such a movement entailed risks for political and 
legal authorities. Soon after the 1924 elections, however, Klansmen and 
Klanswomen began to leave the organization like rats fleeing a sinking ship. 
Hiram Evans, sounding temporarily optimistic about a Klan revival in 
1929, commented on how “there had been a steady loss in membership for 
about four years and reaching its crisis during last winter.”
3 Despite Evans’s 
efforts, the anticipated revival never materialized. The historian David 
Chalmers describes it: “In the mid-  twenties the Invisible Empire exercised 
dominion over more than three million subjects. By 1928, no more than 
several hundred thousand remained.”
4
For some early observers, the collapse of the Klan seemed inevitable. 
The sociologist John Moffat Mecklin argued that the Klan’s failure resulted 
from its “dearth of great unifying constructive ideals.” David Chalmers 
concurred, commenting that “apart from a certain skill in merchandising, 
its leadership was as uninspiring as its program.” Kenneth Jackson adds 
that the Klan’s ultimate weakness “was its lack of a positive program and a 
corresponding reliance upon emotion rather than reason.” Lipset and Raab 
proposed that a kind of “Gresham’s law” seems to operate within organi-
zations that rely on overt bigotry to attract supporters. “Bad leaders con -
stantly drive out the more respectable, who find a remote partnership and a 
less gross approach more tolerable. The resultant poverty and inferior brand 
of leadership often has its own deteriorative consequences.”
5
There may be a grain of truth in these interpretations. The Klan’s leader-
ship could be justifiably criticized for both incompetence and hypocrisy. Yet 
on the whole, such explanations of the movement’s decline are unsatisfying 
because they beg the question of why the movement did not collapse sooner 
than it did. Why was recruiting by these “inept” leaders so successful until 
the end of 1924? These interpretations of the movement fail to appreciate the 
ways in which Klan leaders, in spite of their many shortcomings, effectively 
articulated grievances of a broad constituency, convinced these same constitu-
ents of the Klan’s political efficacy, and offered numerous selective incentives 
to entice participation. So why did the Klan collapse in the mid twenties? To 
address that question, I return to the power- devaluation model.
As discussed in chapter 3, the logic of the power- devaluation model can 
be extended to guide an analysis of the consequences of right-  wing move-
ments. In order to influence the political process, a movement must not only 
gain strength in numbers by recruiting participants but also form alliances


--- PAGE 190 ---
The Klan’s l asT gasP 183
with other groups. These alliances are typically needed to seize power or 
to win victories within democratic political institutions. Yet a movement’s 
capacity to form alliances is constrained by the strategic framing utilized to 
attract members and supporters. A strategic response to power devaluation, 
as stipulated in the theory, involves connecting constituents’ grievances to 
cultural identities. If power devaluation results from a decrease in demand 
for what individuals offer in exchange relationships or from an increase in 
the supply of what they offer in exchange, then devaluation can be coun -
tered by appealing to cultural identities to stimulate demand and using 
cultural attacks to restrict the supply of competitors. The process involves 
redrawing battle lines, capitalizing on in-  group solidarity to restore con -
stituents’ purchasing power within economic, political, and status-  based 
exchange relationships.
This process of constructing group boundaries can be crucial to mobili-
zation. Individuals are unlikely to participate in collective action if they are 
unable to see themselves as part of a clearly defined group.
6 Yet boundary 
construction that helps a movement grow can generate problems as the 
movement seeks to form alliances with other groups. The very process that 
stimulates movement growth can generate a backlash among those who fall 
outside of the movement’s constructed cultural boundaries.
7 This tension 
between the general goals of mobilization and alliance formation contrib -
uted to the Klan’s demise.
The Klan’s Relation to Party Politics
To counter the economic, political, and status- based power devaluation 
of its constituency, Klan leaders sought to organize a solid (and massive) 
voting bloc composed of native-  born, white, Protestant Americans. While 
Klan leaders discussed the specific merits of many policies and political 
agendas, they repeatedly argued that policies and programs running con -
trary to their preferences were inspired by foreigners, Bolsheviks, or the 
Vatican. The Klan claimed to represent “100 percent Americanism” and 
sought to purge foreign influences from government. Such a strategy had 
broad appeal. The goal of forming a huge voting bloc of native-  born, white 
Protestants certainly was attractive to many Americans in the early part of 
the twentieth century. It could be applied at the local level, pitting “100 
percent American” voters against urban political machines.
8 At the same 
time, a voting bloc composed of members of the cultural majority could 
check the influence of large corporations and of the industrial proletariat 
at a time when class conflict threatened the interests of an unorganized 
middle class.
9


--- PAGE 191 ---
184 The Klan’s l asT gasP
As the movement gained steam, its leaders were careful not to tie their 
organization to a single national political party. This tactic, first of all, gave 
the movement leverage against those seeking political office. In a national 
campaign it could be dangerous to ignore a large voting bloc claiming to 
represent the cultural majority group, and gaining the movement’s support 
could potentially determine electoral outcomes. Klan leaders hoped to have 
all major candidates competing to win the movement’s endorsement by 
promoting policies favorable to the Klan constituency. The Klan’s leader -
ship wanted to keep their options open and repeatedly announced that the 
movement was not aligned with any political party.
This nonalliance strategy was also valuable as a recruiting tool. The 
Klan drew its members from Democratic as well as Republican voters. If the 
movement had aligned itself with a single political party, it would have sub-
stantially narrowed its pool of potential recruits. The Klan, in other words, 
did not force its members to permanently abandon party loyalties that, in 
many cases, are products of life-  long socialization processes and come to 
represent an important piece of one’s identity or sense of self.
10 When forced 
to choose between party loyalty and the Ku Klux Klan, a significant num-
ber of individuals would have chosen to remain loyal to their party. Just as 
important, the Klan’s leaders could convincingly argue that neither of the 
dominant parties was serving their constituents’ interests. Both parties had 
been infected by foreign influences, they argued, and would have to be res-
cued by an organization comprised of 100 percent Americans.
The problem with the Republican Party, from the Klan’s perspective, 
was that it was too closely linked to big business. Until the 1920s, that often 
meant that the party backed liberal immigration policies, tariff protection 
for industry, and tight monetary policies.
11 Klan leaders distinguished be -
tween “old guard” or “stand-  pat” Republicans, on the one hand, and pro -
gressive Republicans on the other. They spoke approvingly of the latter and 
with disdain toward the former. Yet the progressive wing of the Republican 
Party was becoming increasingly marginalized in the early 1920s. Indeed, 
Senator Robert LaFollette’s frustration with the declining influence of pro-
gressives within the Party motivated his third-  party presidential challenge 
in 1924.
12 
The problem with the Democrats, from the Klan’s perspective, was 
that the party had become deeply factionalized and therefore ineffective 
as a vehicle for pressing the movement’s agenda. Catholic and immigrant 
voters in the northeastern states were pouring into the Democratic camp, 
strengthening the hand of urban Democrats who promoted policies that 
were often at odds with those favored by southern and western Democrats.


--- PAGE 192 ---
The Klan’s l asT gasP 185
Klansmen were outraged, for example, when a large contingent of north -
eastern delegates to the 1924 Democratic National Convention showered 
William Jennings Bryan with boos and catcalls when he addressed the con-
vention for the last time and urged fellow delegates to reject New York’s 
Catholic governor, Al Smith, as the party’s presidential nominee.
13 
The Klan identified with the goals of progressive legislators in both 
the Republican and Democratic parties, yet in both parties the progres -
sive wings were too weak to set the agenda. As discussed in chapter 5, 
Klan leaders were wary of backing a third-  party candidate but did express 
some initial interest in LaFollette. LaFollette had, throughout his long ca -
reer, been a sharp critic of monopoly power and of political corruption. He 
had enjoyed strong support from middle-  class progressives in Wisconsin. 
And not unlike the Klan leaders, LaFollette attempted to forge a common 
bond among farmers, manufacturing workers, and middle- class consumers. 
Campaigning on Labor Day, for example, he made the following pitch:
Farmers, driven from the soil at the rate of more than one million a year 
under the present administration, can earn their bread only in competi-
tion with the wage earners. Such an enormous annual reduction in the 
number of producers on the farm inevitably means a decreased production 
of food, lower wages, stagnant business and widespread discontent.
14 
Although LaFollette was not hostile to the Socialist Party and accepted its 
endorsement of his presidential bid, his position on class- based politics was 
not too distant from that expressed by Klan leaders. He frequently empha-
sized his opposition to any group that favored a dictatorship of the prole -
tariat, and he was friendly toward small business, defending the right of 
businessmen to keep a just return on their investment. LaFollette’s critique 
was directed not against capitalism but against the domination of both eco-
nomic and political arenas by an elite minority.
15 
The Klan’s construction of group boundaries along racial, ethnic, 
and religious lines, however, prevented an alliance between the Klan and 
LaFollette. Even before he hit the campaign trail, LaFollette was asked to 
state his position in regard to the Ku Klux Klan. On August 8, 1924, he ex-
pressed his opposition to discrimination of any kind and forcefully declared 
his opposition to the goals of the Ku Klux Klan. These comments drew 
a quick response from Hiram Evans, who declared that “no paternalistic, 
Communistic, Bolshevistic appeal to the political passions of the masses 
should go unchallenged.” Robert LaFollette, Evans declared, is “the arch 
enemy of the nation.” After rejecting the movement’s rejecter, Evans an -
nounced that the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan find themselves “now and


--- PAGE 193 ---
186 The Klan’s l asT gasP
ever ready to work with any group of America’s people where purposes are 
to make this a freer, a more homogenous, and a more enlightened nation.”
16 
The Klan’s construction of group boundaries also prevented an alli -
ance with the Democratic nominee, John W. Davis. A stalemate at the 
Democratic National Convention in 1924 blocked the nomination of Al 
Smith but also thwarted the ambitions of another strong contender for the 
nomination, progressive William Gibbs McAdoo. McAdoo was a native of 
Georgia and the son-  in- law of former president Woodrow Wilson. He had 
also served as Wilson’s treasury secretary. He kept his distance from Klans-
men at the convention, but instructed his lieutenants to court the move -
ment’s leaders and members.
17 Balloting continued for several days with 
neither Smith nor McAdoo gaining enough votes to secure the nomination. 
Eventually, Davis emerged as a compromise candidate.
Initially, the Klansmen seemed willing to give Davis the benefit of a 
doubt. He had remained silent during a debate over a proposed (and failed) 
platform plank that condemned the Ku Klux Klan.
18 Movement leaders in-
terpreted his silence as a positive sign. After the convention, in a lead ar -
ticle of the Imperial Night-  Hawk titled “Democrats Make Wise Choice,” 
a Klan writer declared, “In nominating John W. Davis for president, the 
Democratic party chose a man admirably fitted to lead the party and a man 
who can appeal to all elements of the country.”
19 The Klansmen were also 
encouraged by the selection of Davis’s running mate, Charles W. Bryan.
The fact that he is the brother of the “Great Commoner” will also carry 
weight in many quarters even though it is claimed that the name, Bryan, 
is losing its influence. The great speech of William Jennings Bryan against 
naming the Klan in the platform of the Democratic party, and the subse-
quent nomination of his brother for vice-  president, proves that the name 
of Bryan is still weighty in political circles.
20 
Like LaFollette, Davis was forced to take a stand in regard to the Klan. 
With his party badly splintered along religious and ethnic lines, there were 
few good options available to the candidate. If he embraced the Klan, he 
risked losing Catholic and immigrant voters who might turn instead to 
LaFollette. If he condemned the Klan, he would lose votes among native-
 born Protestants, particularly in western and southern states. Davis chose 
to condemn the Klan, banking on the South’s loyalty to the Democratic 
Party and the possibility of picking up votes from urban centers and from 
northern black voters.
21 Only days after accepting the nomination, Davis 
launched his first of many attacks against the Ku Klux Klan. In Sea Girt, 
New Jersey, he told a cheering crowd,


--- PAGE 194 ---
The Klan’s l asT gasP 187
If any organization, no matter what it chooses to be called, whether Ku 
Klux Klan or by any other name, raises the standard of racial and reli -
gious prejudice or attempts to make racial origins or religious beliefs the 
test of fitness for public office, it does violence to the spirit of American 
institutions and must be condemned.
22
Of the three major presidential candidates, only Calvin Coolidge chose 
not to condemn the Klan. Instead, he offered vague statements about reli -
gious freedom. At the Republican Convention, a small group of delegates 
failed in their effort to condemn the Klan within the party platform. The 
platform that was accepted expressed the party’s devotion to the U.S. 
Constitution and its commitment to protect civil, political, and religious 
liberties.
23 Klan leaders could easily interpret such statements as endorse -
ments of their position, arguing that Catholicism violated the separation 
of church and state and infringed on religious liberty. In many locations, 
after being rejected by both LaFollette and Davis, Klansmen concluded 
that the enemy of an enemy is a friend and embraced Coolidge’s candi -
dacy. Indiana’s weekly publication, the Fiery Cross, ran numerous articles 
attacking both LaFollette and Davis and endorsing Coolidge. In previous 
research my colleagues and I showed that variation in Klan strength across 
Indiana counties was strongly associated with an increase in Republican 
voting in the 1924 election.
24 
Klan leaders were more cautious in the pages of their national pub -
lication. Coolidge scored points with the Klan faithful when he signed a 
bill in 1924 that severely limited immigration, and immigration restriction 
was a very important issue for the Klan’s followers. Yet Coolidge was still 
a far cry from the progressive candidate that Klansmen had been pining 
for. The Klan’s national leadership understood that a strong endorsement 
of Coolidge could lead to mass defection in southern states where loyalty to 
the Democratic Party was deep and long- standing. These concerns were well 
founded. In spite of his condemnation of the Klan, Davis actually gained 
votes (compared to the Democratic vote in 1920) in ten out of eleven states 
of the former Confederacy. As election day approached, the Imperial Night-
 H a w k offered a few mild jabs at LaFollette and Davis and offered some cau-
tious praise for Coolidge. The magazine repeated Hiram Evans’s announce-
ment about how the Klan is willing to work with any group whose goals are 
consistent with those held by the Klan. The announcement also warned, 
“We will permit no political party and no group of politicians to annex, 
own, disown, or disavow us. Where our conscience leads us, we will be 
found, regardless of whom we find in the different political camps.”
25


--- PAGE 195 ---
188 The Klan’s l asT gasP
A Defining Moment
When the votes were in, the one candidate who would not condemn the Ku 
Klux Klan scored an overwhelming victory. Coolidge received 54 percent 
of the popular vote while his Democratic challenger, John W. Davis, re -
ceived 28.8 percent. LaFollette came in a distant third with 16.5 percent of 
the vote. The outcome of the election turned out to be a defining movement 
in the Klan’s trajectory. Throughout the nation, many Klan members and 
Klan- supported candidates had been elected to local-  and state- level offices. 
The movement was less successful at the national level. After being rejected 
by two candidates, the Klan’s leaders struggled to define the significance of 
Coolidge’s victory. The Klan had promised to unite progressive voters, who 
at the national level were split between the two major parties, and to use 
the movement’s influence to elect a 100 percent American president. When 
the dust settled, many things remained unchanged and Calvin Coolidge 
remained in the White House. The Klansmen could point to Coolidge’s 
endorsement of the restrictive immigration bill that passed in 1924, and 
Coolidge, like the Klan, supported Prohibition. Certainly these issues were 
important to the Klansmen and Klanswomen. But the Republican presi -
dent opposed many of the Klan’s other goals, including one of its most 
prized objectives— a federal department of education.
Klan leaders were forced to make a tough decision in the election’s 
aftermath. They could have admitted that many of the movement’s pri -
mary goals had yet to be accomplished, and they could have issued a call 
to arms for an ongoing struggle. Publicly acknowledging the movement’s 
impotence, however, would have been risky. Certainly, many Klan mem -
bers had been drawn to the organization because they perceived it to be a 
powerful political force that could defeat any foe and meet any challenge. 
Another option was to declare victory, in hopes that a sense of accomplish-
ment would encourage rank- and- file members to stay with the movement as 
it outlined a new agenda and new challenges to be surmounted. The Klan 
leadership went with the second option.
Symbolic of the Klan’s new orientation, its weekly national newspaper, 
the Imperial Night-  Hawk, was superseded by a monthly publication titled 
the Kourier. The change was announced in the Imperial Night- Hawk’s pen-
ultimate issue and noted that the Kourier “will carry material of a thought-
 provoking nature rather than news items of passing interest.” Indeed, the 
Kourier no longer invested much energy in updating readers on Klan events 
taking place across the nation. In its first year of publication, aside from 
fifteen cities visited by Hiram Evans during a four-  week speaking tour, the


--- PAGE 196 ---
The Klan’s l asT gasP 189
Kourier mentioned events in only seventeen towns or cities. Instead, the new 
publication offered lengthy articles on topics such as “Jesus the Protestant” 
and “Christian Citizenship.”
26 The Kourier even included a series of articles 
containing rich descriptions of the geography and history of various cities 
in the Holy Land.
Soon after the election, Hiram Evans used the pages of the Kourier to 
proclaim that the Klan’s primary goals had been achieved.
No incident during nineteen twenty- four so aptly displayed the solidarity 
of our organization and its influence for Americanism as did the elections 
in November. From Maine to California, from Kentucky to Minnesota, 
native- born Americans who have high standards of Americanism and 
personal rectitude of life were swept into office. Those who sought of -
fice through combinations of un-  American influences were hopelessly 
defeated. While the Klan takes no credit for the elections, with singular 
pride we note that our people supported the best offered, and are happy 
in victory.
27 
After his “mission accomplished” declaration, Evans proposed a new direc-
tion for the movement. “In nineteen twenty- five,” he proposed, “our mani-
fest duty lies before us in another field. Our program calls for active support 
of Protestant Christianity.”
28 
In the months after the election, Klan writers used the Kourier to pro-
vide evidence that the Coolidge victory was indeed a Klan victory. One 
article praised the president’s inauguration speech and quoted Coolidge as 
saying that “we must remember that every object of our institutions, of so-
ciety and government will fail, unless America be kept American.” Under 
the heading “Said President Coolidge, So Says the Klan,” the Kourier listed 
a page of quotations from the president that were designed to demonstrate 
that Coolidge was, in fact, the “100 percent American” president that the 
movement had promised to deliver.
29 Beneath the quotations, as if to re -
mind readers of the Klan’s potency, the magazine printed the results of the 
popular vote showing that Coolidge had soundly defeated his less-  than-
 100- percent- American challengers.
The Klan’s strategy seems to have contributed to a predictable outcome. 
The pages of the Kourier show the Klan leadership struggling to develop 
a new course of action for the movement—  one that would stem the flow 
of defections. If the mission had been accomplished, members had to be 
convinced that their participation was still needed. In the lead article of the 
September 1925 issue, for example, the Kourier’s editor sought to identify a 
new “National Objective.” He writes:


--- PAGE 197 ---
Figure 23. In spite of sharply declining membership, the Klan managed to turn 
out large numbers for a 1926 march in Washington, D.C. National Photo 
Company Collection. Library of Congress.


--- PAGE 198 ---
The Klan’s l asT gasP 191
What we Americans need, is a National Objective. We are going some -
where— but where? This is being asked on all sides, and asked by earnest, 
determined men. In the Klan, as a National unit, and in the local Klans 
as neighborhood groups, it is being asked. The question will not down. 
The answer must be forth- coming.
30 
Addressing the problem even more directly, the editor noted that 
Klansmen are asking, “Why are we still keeping the Klan alive?” Klansmen, 
the editor complained, seem “to think the one mission of the Klan having 
been accomplished, there was no longer any need for the Klan.” Throughout 
the article, the editor repeated the importance of a national objective. 
Numerous articles published in 1925 and 1926 reveal the same struggle 
to justify the movement’s continued existence. In February 1926, Hiram 
Evans boasted of past accomplishments but reminded readers that there was 
more important work ahead. “So the Klan will always move forward from 
one battle to another, from one crusade to another; and so it will always 
have before it not merely a single fight, not even merely a single crusade, but 
several crusades and many fights.”
31 
Interestingly, Klan leaders could be quite introspective when discussing 
the declining membership in their organization. Hiram Evans wrote, “Our 
Organization is in a dangerous state—  success may cause relaxation, hence 
we must spur ourselves to grow, develop and advance, lest we stagnate and 
die.” Evans put his finger on the cause of the movement’s precarious condi-
tion when he noted that the Klan had risen to its highest heights when it 
was playing defense. “Our battle cry has ever been ‘Americans Guard Your 
Own.’ It has carried us to many victories, but, thank God, the time has 
now passed when that must be our only rallying cry.” Evans argued that to 
continue, the movement would have to “change from the defensive to the 
constructive side,” but he continued to struggle in terms of defining the 
movement’s new goals.
32 
The Imperial Wizard’s problems were compounded by several issues. 
One of these was a major scandal involving D. C. Stephenson, the Grand 
Dragon of Indiana. After the 1924 election, intense feuding between Evans 
and Stephenson reemerged, causing a fair amount of dissension among 
rank- and- file Klansmen. Even more damaging, however, was a heinous 
crime committed by Stephenson on March 15, 1925, that would later cap-
ture the attention of the entire nation. Stephenson, who had been drinking, 
arranged to have twenty- eight- year- old Madge Oberholtzer accompany him 
on a train ride to Chicago. Stephenson brutally assaulted Oberholtzer, liter-
ally chewing off pieces of her flesh. The next day, when she was temporarily 
left unguarded, the deeply distressed woman swallowed poison, causing


--- PAGE 199 ---
192 The Klan’s l asT gasP
her to become gravely ill. 33 Now sober , and fearful of bad publicity ,  
Stephenson promised to take Oberholtzer to the hospital if she would agree 
to marry him. She refused. Stephenson held her captive for several days in 
a loft apartment above his garage while he continued to push his marriage 
proposal. Finally, he returned her to her parents’ home. Oberholtzer died 
within a few weeks, but not before she told her gruesome tale to the po -
lice and to the press.
34 After his conviction, Stephenson felt betrayed when 
Governor Ed Jackson, who was closely tied to the Klan, failed to offer a 
pardon for the former Klan leader. In response, Stephenson revealed infor-
mation about his former Klan associates leading to successful prosecutions 
of Republican office holders in Indiana.
35 
The Klan’s national publication was largely silent on the topic. A 
couple of articles made veiled references to the scandal. It is clear that the 
Stephenson fiasco, combined with the sharp drop in membership preceding 
it, emboldened the Klan’s opponents and provided incentives for political 
authorities to distance themselves from the organization. One Klan writer 
made note of a newspaper article charging that “evidence was gradually ac-
cumulating that ‘Klan leaders are utterly devoid of principle or regard for 
the truth.’ ”
36 The Klansmen responded with the following argument:
Figure 24. After brutally assaulting Madge Oberholtzer in 1925, Grand 
Dragon D. C. Stephenson was convicted of second-degree murder. Courtesy 
of Indiana State Archives, Commission on Public Records. All rights reserved.


--- PAGE 200 ---
The Klan’s l asT gasP 193
It would seem by the gist of the article that if a Klan leader should hap-
pen to go adrift, one is immediately to conclude that the whole institu -
tion is born of the devil and the entire membership on a par with ordi -
nary horse- thieves. Such logic would also infer that the Church of Christ 
should be denounced when a single minister goes astray. Am I to repudi-
ate my country and my government because one or two United States 
Senators are disloyal to a nation’s ideals? God forbid! I am convinced that 
there are traitors in every organization known to man. Even in Christ’s 
little band there was a Judas.
37 
An article published in the Kourier in May 1928 did address the issue di -
rectly, describing Stephenson as a former Indiana Grand Dragon who had 
been “banished for gross misconduct, and later convicted of murder of a girl 
and sentenced to the penitentiary for life.” The article suggests that if there is 
any truth in the stories that Stephenson was telling about the Klan—  “tales 
of murder, sudden death, lawlessness and political corruption”—  they date 
back to when Colonel Simmons, rather than Hiram Evans, was in charge of 
the organization.
38 
Gearing Up for Another National Election
As the movement increasingly came under attack from outsiders, its leader-
ship found that they had become snared in a trap of their own making. 
They had declared victory in the aftermath of the 1924 elections, raising 
questions about whether the movement had served its purpose and was 
no longer needed. A declaration of “mission accomplished” led the Klan’s 
rank- and- file members to expect that solutions to their grievances would 
be forthcoming. Economic conditions in agricultural districts did improve 
in the mid- 1920s, but such improvements led some of the Klan’s support -
ers to conclude that participation in the movement was no longer urgent. 
Yet many of the grievances confronting the Klan’s constituency persisted, 
which undoubtedly left many to wonder if the Klan’s mission accomplished 
declaration had been premature. The Klan, perhaps, was not as influential 
and potent as its leaders claimed.
As the Klan moved into the second half of the decade, the pages of 
the Kourier  included many articles describing the unresolved grievances 
confronting the Klan’s constituency, such as lengthy essays about public 
schools, descriptions of new threats posed by immigrants, and warnings of 
efforts to repeal the Volstead Act. While appeals such as these were effective 
in the early 1920s, they did not produce the intended results after 1924. 
Undoubtedly, many who received the Klan’s message wondered why the


--- PAGE 201 ---
194 The Klan’s l asT gasP
problems identified by the Klan’s leadership were not being addressed by 
their 100 percent American president.
The nomination of Al Smith as the Democratic presidential candidate 
provided the Klan with a new issue that could be used to resurrect a social 
movement that was in freefall. Beginning in 1927, the pages of the Kourier 
were filled with articles warning of the dangers of a Smith presidency. Ac -
cording to the Klansmen, a Catholic president, by definition, subordinated 
the United States to a foreign religious leader in the Vatican. Indeed, the 
Klan’s writers seemed to be invigorated, sensing that they had now identi -
fied the national objective they had been seeking to revive the movement. 
However, if the movement did experience a brief resurgence from its fight 
against “The Happy Warrior,” Al Smith, it was a minor resurgence and it 
was short- lived. 
As the Klan’s leaders took on Al Smith in the pages of the Kourier, they 
bemoaned the way in which aliens had wrested control of a great political 
party from the hands of real Americans. Hiram Evans sounded the alarm, 
warning Klan members that
We sometimes forget how greatly the President is responsible for the ad-
ministration of law, which, in the long run, depends upon him almost 
entirely. Except for the possible opposition of the Senate, which is seldom 
used and which would never be used under true alien ruler-  ship, he ap -
points all important officers. He appoints all Federal judges, and within 
a few years could have alien tools on every Federal bench. He appoints 
all the prosecutors, and could have alien tools in those positions within a 
single term of office. He controls the administration of all Federal laws, 
through the Department of Justice, and could fill that with alien tools 
within a month. Through his power of patronage he has an immense 
power determining the local control of his party; he could throw that to 
aliens in almost every case. He has some power even over local elections; 
that, too, would go to aliens.
39 
Evans and other Klan writers spoke with nostalgia of former Democratic 
leaders who represented the interests of Americans living outside of the 
industrialized Northeast. The Kourier condemned the Democratic Party 
for turning away from paths blazed by the likes of Samuel Tilden, Grover 
Cleveland, William Jennings Bryan, and Woodrow Wilson.
40 
Hiram Evans lectured Kourier  readers on the great tradition of the 
Democratic Party. According to Evans, John W. Davis turned his back on 
that tradition in 1924 and suffered a stinging defeat as a result. The Imperial


--- PAGE 202 ---
The Klan’s l asT gasP 195
Wizard argued that the party had a chance to return to its historic prin -
ciples in 1928 but instead nominated Al Smith. Of Smith, Evans declared,
It is known positively that in his speech of acceptance of the nomination 
there will be further betrayal. He hopes to be able to convince manu -
facturers and business interests of the Eastern states that they will be as 
highly favored by him as by any Republican. To do this he will renounce 
the Democratic economic policies and the great Democratic principle of 
representing the common man.
41 
Another Klan writer added that upon receiving his party’s nomination, 
Al Smith “completely submerged the principles, the desires and the pur -
poses of the Southern and Western Democracies for the sole benefit of the 
Northeastern, city dwelling, unassimilated Democrats.”
42 
Rhetoric such as this helped the Klan to become a powerful social 
movement. In the early 1920s, millions of American men and women, the 
majority of whom were native-  born, white, and Protestant, felt that their 
interests were no longer being represented in national politics. The Klan 
promised to force the nation’s leaders to hear their voices. A lot had changed, 
however, by 1928. The threat of an Al Smith presidency had pushed the 
Klan even further into the Republican camp. While movement leaders gave 
cautious praise to Calvin Coolidge, they virtually gushed with enthusiasm 
for Smith’s Republican opponent, Herbert Hoover. In the September issue 
of the Kourier, Hiram Evans wrote a thirteen-  page article titled “Hoover, 
the American,” in which he described the many virtues of the Republican 
nominee. Hoover, according to the Imperial Wizard, represented a perfect 
contrast to Al Smith, “for there has never come before the American vot -
ers a man who so perfectly shows the character, principles and the attitude 
towards affairs which have for generations been universally regarded as the 
best product of Americanism, and none who has been more highly quali -
fied for the duties of great office.”
43 
In 1928 many Americans agreed with the Klan’s characterizations of 
Smith. It would be another thirty-  two years before a Catholic would be 
elected to the presidency. In November 1928, Herbert Hoover won in a 
landslide with over 58 percent of the popular vote. But aligning itself with 
the winner did little to boost the Klan’s membership in the long run. Who 
needs a “100 percent American” social movement when a “100 percent 
American” president resides in the White House? As the nation fell into 
the grip of the Great Depression in the 1930s, little was heard from the Ku 
Klux Klan. The movement had cast its lot with the Republican Party and 
the party had no answer for the economic crisis.


--- PAGE 203 ---
196
The purpose of the Klan is to capitalize love—  to promote goodwill and 
the spirit of kindness. In opposing to the uttermost the wrongs and evils 
which are the root causes of the woes of humanity, the Klan may seem, to 
the uninitiated, to be narrowly sectarian, but this is not true; its policy is 
generous, its viewpoint broad and liberal, its tolerance unmeasured, but 
it strikes without mercy or compromise at the pernicious foreign influ -
ences which are undermining liberty and seeking to dominate American 
institutions. 
— Imperial Night- Hawk, May 16, 1923
Beginning in 1915, the Ku Klux Klan organized to advance the interests 
of native- born, white, Protestant Americans and to restrict the rights and 
freedoms of individuals the organization chose to exclude by virtue of their 
racial, ethnic, or religious identities. The Klan’s leaders and members ex -
pressed bigoted views while wearing sheets and hoods that concealed their 
identities. At times they intimidated or inflicted violence upon those they 
perceived to be enemies, and at all times they aimed to enforce conformity 
to behaviors and practices that they had determined to be “American.” Yet 
at the same time, as the quotation at the beginning of this chapter illus -
trates, Klan leaders described their organization as liberal and tolerant and 
declared that the Klan’s purpose was to spread love, goodwill, and kindness 
throughout the land. This type of contradiction is not uncommon in right-
 wing movements. Movement leaders stake a claim to moral authority while 
simultaneously attempting to persuade both insiders and outsiders that they 
Conclusion
Right- Wing Movements, Yesterday and Today


--- PAGE 204 ---
conclusion 197
are motivated by the purest of intentions. The Ku Klux Klan pledged to fix 
that which was wrong with America, and from the Klansmen’s perspective, 
all Americans should hold their movement in highest regard. Those who 
opposed the Klan were by definition opposed to America. 
In previous chapters I have used the power-  devaluation model to ana-
lyze the growth and trajectory of the Ku Klux Klan from 1915 to 1928. 
Although I developed the theory with the case of the Klan in mind, it is 
intended to be a general theory of right-  wing mobilization. It is fair to ask 
if we really need a new theory of right- wing mobilization. Couldn’t we con-
tinue to analyze right-  wing movements with theoretical tools that are al -
ready available? What does the power-  devaluation model contribute that 
cannot be found in other theories? I address these questions and point to 
ways in which my theory might be particularly helpful in understanding 
right- wing mobilization in contemporary contexts.
In agreement with resource- mobilization theorists, the power- devaluation 
model draws attention to the importance of an organizational infrastruc -
ture for sustained mobilization. In chapter 7 I discussed in depth how the 
Ku Klux Klan capitalized on resources and organizational structures of 
fraternal lodges and Protestant congregations to facilitate the movement’s 
growth. Without such resources at the disposal of its leaders, members, and 
constituents, the Klan would not have become a mass movement. However, 
when studying mobilization among relatively advantaged populations, it is 
necessary to ask what changed in the social environment that created the 
incentives to engage in collective action. As important as the organizational 
infrastructure was to the Klan’s mobilization, these organizational resources 
were available long before the Klan’s rise, and the lack of prior mobilization 
cannot be explained by a prior lack of resources.
In agreement with political opportunity theorists, the power- devaluation 
model calls attention to the way in which a favorable political context fa -
cilitates mobilization. Mobilization is unlikely to occur if individuals sense 
that the political environment is so oppressive that collective action will be 
fruitless. The Klan’s leaders exploited a relatively open political opportu -
nity structure as they organized to preserve, restore, and expand upon their 
constituents’ privileges. Klan leaders learned early that as long as they kept 
the violence under control, or at least as long as they were able to success -
fully distract attention from violent acts committed by members, political 
and legal authorities would be reluctant to stand in the movement’s path. 
Blocking the path of a large social movement representing members of the 
cultural majority would have been tantamount to political suicide for many 
political and legal authorities, particularly for those who primarily drew


--- PAGE 205 ---
198 conclusion
support from native- born, white, Protestant voters. This feature of the po -
litical context, while vital to the movement’s growth, was relatively stable 
over time and therefore tells us little about why the Ku Klux Klan emerged 
at this particular moment in history.
Not unlike the so- called classical theories of social movements (such as 
collective- behavior theory, mass- society theory, or theories of status politics 
or status substitution), the power-  devaluation model proposes that macro-
 level changes in the structure of society generate new forms of discontent 
that provide incentives for some groups to participate in collective action. To 
understand why groups organize to preserve or defend privileges, it is nec-
essary to pay attention to what is changing in the social environment that 
poses a threat to those privileges. However, the power-  devaluation model 
is very different from these classical theories in other important respects. 
The power- devaluation model contradicts mass-  society theory by showing 
that movement participants are not disconnected from social bonds but in-
stead tend to be embedded in dense social networks. The power- devaluation 
model also draws attention to rational motives for participation. My theory 
does not make unrealistic assumptions about the rationality and foresight 
of movement participants. Instead, it draws on a growing literature on 
social- movement framing processes to examine how social movement actors 
interpret changes in the structure of social relations, with the goal of win -
ning and maintaining the support of a broad constituency.
Like theories of status politics or status substitution, I argue that par -
ticipants in right- wing movements are motivated in part by a desire to pre-
serve or restore status benefits. However, my model calls attention to ways 
in which economic, political, and status-  based grievances often combine to 
provide incentives for collective action. My theory does not assume that sta-
tus defense is only an issue for the lower middle class, and my model does 
not simply attribute collective action to individuals’ anxiety, resentment, or 
frustration. Instead, movement members and supporters are typically en -
gaged in cultural conflicts, and the stakes of these conflicts can be quite 
high for the combatants.
The power-  devaluation model is similar in some respects to ethnic-
 competition theory and to other theoretical models that explain racial and 
ethnic conflict in terms of a threat to majority group interests. Yet right-
 wing mobilization does not always involve open conflict between racial 
or ethnic groups. As my analysis has shown, the Ku Klux Klan was most 
active in homogenous states, and its leaders more often advocated white 
separatism rather than open conflict. In some instances, the Klan was ac -
tive in heterogeneous local contexts and responded to localized competition


--- PAGE 206 ---
conclusion 199
and threat. In many other instances, the Klan grew strong in local settings 
where Klan constituents were insulated from localized threats. The power-
 devaluation model provides specific guidelines for identifying changes in 
social structure that provide incentives for right-  wing mobilization. In 
other words, it provides a means of identifying the nature of various threats 
to the interests of relatively advantaged groups. As the theory emphasizes, 
these threats do not automatically produce protest but must instead be in-
terpreted or framed in ways that inspire individuals to act collectively in 
response to the threat.
In agreement with Mary Jackman, I think that we too often neglect 
the nonconflictual ways in which dominant groups maintain an advantage 
over subordinate groups.
1 In a strange and interesting way, the Klansmen 
of the 1920s were early practitioners of “color-  blind racism,” as movement 
leaders repeatedly claimed innocence in terms of their harboring ill feel -
ings toward out-  group members or in terms of advocating discriminatory 
policies. 2 At the same time, they fought vigorously to hoard opportuni-
ties for native- born, white Protestants through the practice of “Klankraft,” 
and made subtle and not-  so- subtle use of stereotypes regarding African 
Americans and immigrant populations to rationalize their exclusionary 
practices.
3 Klansmen were not only deeply engaged in the “social construc-
tion of whiteness,” their project involved the social construction of “native-
 born, Protestant whiteness.”
4
I began to think of Klan mobilization in terms of power devaluation 
long ago as an undergraduate student. At the time, I was thinking about 
the peaks and valleys in Klan strength throughout more than one hundred 
years of American history. The first Ku Klux Klan emerged in the after -
math of the Civil War and quickly spread throughout the South. It takes 
very little investigation to understand the driving force behind the first Ku 
Klux Klan: the movement was responding directly to new economic and 
political freedoms that had been granted to former slaves. The size of the 
pool of free labor and the size of the electorate had increased dramatically, 
and white men donned sheets and hoods and used violence and intimida -
tion to protect their prior advantages. They justified their actions in terms 
of the natural superiority of the white race and by drawing on racial stereo-
types that characterized African Americans as dangerous degenerates. The 
first Klan eventually collapsed in the 1870s, in part because of a crackdown 
from the federal government, but only as economic dominance over blacks 
in the South was being reestablished through a debt peonage system and 
political dominance was being reestablished through disfranchisement.
A third Ku Klux Klan emerged in the 1960s that was similar in many


--- PAGE 207 ---
200 conclusion
respects to the first one. It was largely confined to southern states, and its 
members reacted to gains made by the civil rights movement as the civil 
rights movement struggled, once again, to secure economic and political 
rights for African Americans. As in the 1860s, the Klan resorted to violence 
and intimidation and justified the response in terms of shared racial iden -
tity and appeals to negative stereotypes pertaining to African Americans. 
This Klan also collapsed partly as a result of federal intervention, but at a 
time when Klan constituents were discovering new paths to protect white 
privilege through institutionalized politics.
5 George Wallace articulated 
grievances of many white southerners in his 1968 third-  party presidential 
bid, and Republican strategists took note of an opportunity to capitalize 
on white resentment. In a short time, a solid Democratic South was trans-
formed into a solid Republican South.
When trying to understand the largest of the Klan’s historical peaks, 
the one that took place in the 1920s, it seemed to me to be more than co -
incidence that each major rise in Klan strength coincided with the extension 
of suffrage to a previously excluded group and with significant transitions in 
the economic order that threatened the interests of many white Americans. 
These transitions provided incentives to band together to protect, and even 
expand on, preexisting privileges. Racial, ethnic, and religious identities 
provided a source of solidarity for those who were adversely affected by so-
cial transformations and provided a means to attract support from those 
who were not directly affected by the changes but shared a cultural bond. 
Catholics and immigrants, to a great extent, represented the largest threat 
to the Klan’s constituency because they had a different stake in economic, 
political, and cultural conflicts of the time period. These conflicts could 
play out at the local level but were also national in scope and did not require 
localized competition to fuel the fire. 
More than eighty years ago, the sociologist Guy B. Johnson offered 
his interpretation of the “New Ku Klux Movement” in the pages of the 
academic journal Social Forces. Johnson observed, “The notable thing in the 
whole program is the defensive characteristic: the Klan aims to preserve, to 
protect,  to prevent,  to suppress. In fact, the Ku Klux philosophy might best 
be expressed briefly as interference with anything that conflicts with the 
established order of American Society.”
6 Such a philosophy would be most 
appealing to individuals who benefit from the established order and have 
something to lose if that order is transformed. 
In 1925 another scholar, Frank Bohn, offered his interpretation of the 
Klan in the American Journal of Sociology.  Bohn described the Klan as “the 
American Fascisti” and condemned the organization’s tactics. However, 
he appears strikingly sympathetic when discussing the conditions that gave


--- PAGE 208 ---
conclusion 201
rise to the movement. Reflecting the prejudices of the day, Bohn suggested 
that the native stock in America was committing “race suicide.” Pointing 
to low fertility rates among Americans of western European ancestry, he 
claimed that the “original population is being displaced at a speed which 
requires few citations of statistics to make the process evident.” These types 
of concerns were also expressed by Klansmen of the era (and continue to be 
expressed by conservatives in contemporary times). Yet Bohn, in my view, 
misunderstood the link between demographic change and right-  wing ex-
tremism. Not unlike other early analysts, Bohn viewed Klan mobilization 
primarily as a collective psychological phenomenon. The Klan, he argued, 
was an expression of pain and sorrow, as many Americans came to grips 
with the fact that the “old American and the old America are passing into 
history.”
7 Bohn failed to consider the interpretation that I have offered in 
this book. Demographic shifts often produce changes in power relations. 
Power dynamics are influenced by shifts in the supply of, and the demand 
for, individuals possessing particular skills, traits, and values. Shifts in 
power relations, or threats to power relations, provide incentives for some 
individuals to act collectively, as Johnson put it, “ to preserve, to protect, to 
prevent, to suppress.”
8 
The Ku Klux Klan has survived into the twenty-  first century, but it is 
not poised to become a formidable political force and, unlike in the 1920s, 
it is far removed from the American mainstream. America’s values have 
changed, and so has the Klan. Yet right-  wing extremist movements con -
tinue to rise and at times thrive in the United States and in other countries 
throughout the world. These movements coexist with more mainstream 
conservative organizations that also seek to preserve advantages of their 
constituents. In the twentieth century, democratic expansion and economic 
transition provided a context that was conducive to Klan mobilization. In 
the twenty-  first century, globalization and democratization provide op -
portunities for the formation of progressive coalitions seeking to promote 
human rights and a more equal distribution of wealth. These changes also 
provide new incentives for right-  wing mobilization among those who ex -
perience economic, political, and status-  based power devaluation. As vigi -
lante groups patrol the border between the United States and Mexico, and 
as neo- Nazis boldly march through European cities spouting anti-  Semitic 
rhetoric and threatening immigrant populations, it is my hope that the 
power- devaluation model will be used to identify the underlying causes of 
contemporary right- wing mobilization. With such knowledge, we may de-
velop strategies for preventing the harm that right-  wing extremism causes 
to individuals and to the social fabric of our communities.


--- PAGE 209 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 210 ---
203
In the mid- 1990s, as a graduate student at the University of North Carolina, 
I wrote my doctoral dissertation on the rise of the Ku Klux Klan and its ef-
fect on the political left. I published a few articles based on my dissertation, 
but waited more than ten years to begin working on this book. Rather than 
revising my dissertation, I decided to start over. I held on to my general 
theoretical argument, the power- devaluation model, but gathered new data, 
performed new analyses, and rewrote virtually every word (saving a few 
choice sentences from the dissertation). Because I found that my theoretical 
argument stood the test of time, I do owe a debt of gratitude to those who 
provided mentorship as I worked on the dissertation.
I am particularly grateful to my primary adviser, Peter Bearman. Peter 
read numerous drafts of the dissertation, offered extensive comments, and 
spent countless hours meeting with me in his office. He helped me to bring 
my fuzzy ideas into focus, and he challenged me to think and to write on 
a deeper level. He also had a knack for knowing when I needed encourage-
ment. I benefited from simply hanging around with a brilliant theorist for 
five years of my life.
François Nielsen was a valued friend and adviser during those years 
and was extraordinarily helpful. I thoroughly enjoyed arguing with Tony 
Oberschall about everything from social movements to golf, and I learned a 
lot from him along the way. Mike Savage served on my committee and pro-
vided helpful comments. Kathleen Schwartzman also served on my com -
mittee and gave much great advice. She had a strong impact on my thinking 
even before graduate school; I earned twelve credit hours taking Kathleen’s 
Acknowledgments


--- PAGE 211 ---
204 acKnowledgMenT s
difficult courses when I was an undergraduate student at the University of 
Arizona. While at Arizona I also took an amazing theory course taught by 
Liz Clemens; Liz later provided extraordinary feedback on my dissertation. 
I am also grateful to Judith Blau for her support and encouragement.
More recently, Edwin Amenta, David Cunningham, and Vinnie 
Roscigno each provided extensive and valued comments on earlier drafts 
of the book manuscript. Colleagues at Notre Dame, in particular Maureen 
Hallinan, Christian Smith, Dan Myers, David Sikkink, Maria Diaz, Jackie 
Smith, and Erika Summers- Effler, provided feedback on parts of the manu-
script as did graduate students participating in a working research group 
that we call SPAM (Study of Politics and Movements). Liz Martinez offered 
valuable assistance, helping me to organize the coding project for content 
analysis of the Imperial Night-  Hawk and assisting me as I tracked down 
photographs for the book. Stephen Armet, Josh Dinsman, Sarah Shafiq, 
Nicolas Somma, and Emma Yohanan also provided valuable research 
assistance.
I thank Maren L. Read of Ball State University library for helping me 
to obtain photographs. I thank Mark Lewis of the Library of Congress, 
Vickie Castell of the Indiana State Archives, and Christine Dunham for 
helping me to secure additional photographs. I especially appreciate the ad-
vice and assistance I have received from Jason Weidemann, my editor at the 
University of Minnesota Press.
On a personal note I express appreciation to family members who 
indirectly made this work possible. My parents, Catherine and Maurice 
McVeigh, inspired me with their intellectual curiosity and their passion for 
social justice. My sister Sheila showed me the value of striving for excellence, 
and my brother Kerry got me interested in politics (and introduced me to 
Chuck Berry and Little Richard). For more than fifteen years I have been 
inspired by the perseverance and kindness of my mother-  in- law, Mariam 
(Bonga) Thomas. I am grateful for the love and support of my wife, Mim 
Thomas, and I dedicate this book to Mim and to our two amazing daugh-
ters, Bronwen and Meillyn.


--- PAGE 212 ---
205
1. The Klan as a National Movement
 1. Lutholz, Grand Dragon, 85; Blee, Women of the Ku Klux Klan, 136.
 2. Imperial Night- Hawk, July 11, 1923.
 3. Chalmers, Hooded Americanism, 164.
 4. Fiery Cross, July 6, 1923.
 5. Coughlan, “Konklave in Kokomo,” 109.
 6. Ibid., 109.
 7 . See Greenapple, D. C. Stephenson; Moore, Citizen Klansmen;  McVeigh, 
“Structural Incentives for Conservative Mobilization”; McVeigh, Myers, and Sikkink, 
“Corn, Klansmen, and Coolidge.”
 8. Blee, Women of the Ku Klux Klan.
 9. Coughlan, “Konklave in Kokomo”; Blee, Women of the Ku Klux Klan.
10. U.S. Department of Commerce, Historical Census of the United States; U.S. 
Department of Commerce, Statistical Abstract of the United States (1926).
11. Coughlan, “Konklave in Kokomo.”
12. Fiery Cross, July 6, 1923.
13. Ibid.
14. Mecklin, Ku Klux Klan, 103.
15. McVeigh, “Power Devaluation.”
16. Imperial Night- Hawk, April 2, 1924.
17. Ble e, Women of the Ku Klux Klan;  MacLean, Behind the Mask of Chiv-
alry; Horowitz, ed., Inside the Klavern;  Rhomberg, No There There; Moore, Citizen 
Klansmen .
18. McVeigh, “Structural Incentives for Conservative Mobilization.”
Notes


--- PAGE 213 ---
206 no Tes T o chaPTeR 2
19. Olzak, Dynamics of Ethnic Competition.
20. Blalock, Toward a Theory of Minority Group Relations.
21. Jackman, Velvet Glove; Gaventa, Power and Powerlessness.
22. Lipsitz, Possessive Investment in Whiteness, 2.
23. Blee, Inside Organized Racism;  McVeigh, “Structured Ignorance and Or -
ganized Racism”; McVeigh and Sikkink, “Organized Racism and the Stranger”; 
Adams and Roscigno, “White Supremacists.”
24. MacLean, Behind the Mask of Chivalry; Rhomberg, No There There;  Blee, 
Women of the Ku Klux Klan.
25. Imperial Night-Hawk, March 28, 1923.
26. The Imperial Night-  Hawk changed its name to the Kourier in December 
1924. At that time, it changed its format and also became a monthly publication. 
I do not include the Kourier in the analysis because it was published during a time 
in which the Klan’s membership was in steep decline and when the movement had  
shifted its goals and strategies. I discuss the Klan’s decline in more depth in chapter 8.
27. E.g., Imperial Night- Hawk, March 5, 1924.
28. Imperial Night- Hawk, June 4, 1924.
29. Valelly, Radicalism in the States.
30. E.g., Blee, Women of the Ku Klux Klan; MacLean, Behind the Mask of Chiv-
alry; Rhomberg, No There There.
2. The Rebirth of a Klan Nation, 1915–1924
 1. MacLean, Behind the Mask of Chivalry, 4.
 2. Alexander, The Ku Klux Klan in the Southwest,  3.
 3. Jackson, Ku Klux Klan in the City, 6, 7.
 4. MacLean, Behind the Mask of Chivalry, 14.
 5. Jackson, Ku Klux Klan in the City, 4.
 6. Chalmers, Hooded Americanism, 30.
 7. Bullard, ed., Ku Klux Klan; Lay, Hooded Knights on the Niagra, 7.
 8. Jackson, Ku Klux Klan in the City, 7–8.
 9. Alexander, Ku Klux Klan in the Southwest,  7.
10. Jackson, Ku Klux Klan in the City, 10.
11. Alexander, Ku Klux Klan in the Southwest; Tucker, Dragon and the Cross, 70.
12. Jackson, Ku Klux Klan in the City, 10.
13. Ibid.
14. Ibid., 11.
15. Fogelson and Rubenstein, eds., Hearings on the Ku Klux Klan, 69.
16. Ibid., 69–70.
17. Ibid., 73.
18. Ibid., 138.
19. Jackson, Ku Klux Klan in the City, 12.


--- PAGE 214 ---
no Tes T o chaPTeR 3 207
20. Ibid. 
21. Chalmers, Hooded Americanism, 164.
22. Jackson, Ku Klux Klan in the City, 16.
23. Ibid.
24. Chalmers, Hooded Americanism, 108.
25. Imperial Night- Hawk, August 29, 1923.
26. Blee, Women of the Ku Klux Klan, 27.
27. MacLean, Behind the Mask of Chivalry, 117.
28. Blee, Women of the Ku Klux Klan.
29. Jackson, Ku Klux Klan in the City, 74.
30. Chalmers, Hooded Americanism, 74.
31. Jackson, Ku Klux Klan in the City, 204, 207.
32. Chalmers, Hooded Americanism, 88.
33. Jackson, Ku Klux Klan in the City.
34. Chalmers, Hooded Americanism, 51, 53.
35. Ibid., 276.
36. Jackson, Ku Klux Klan in the City, 146, 154.
37. Greenapple, D. C. Stephenson.
38. McVeigh, Myers, and Sikkink, “Corn, Klansmen, and Coolidge.”
39. Kourier, February 1925.
40. MacLean, Behind the Mask of Chivalry, 55–56.
41. Goldberg, Grassroots Resistance. See also Jackson, Ku Klux Klan in the City;  
MacLean, Behind the Mask of Chivalry; Horowitz, ed., Inside the Klavern; Rhomberg, 
No There There.
42. MacLean, Behind the Mask of Chivalry; Rhomberg, No There There;  
McVeigh, “Structural Incentives for Conservative Mobilization”; McVeigh, “Power 
Devaluation”; McVeigh, Myers, and Sikkink, “Corn, Klansmen, and Coolidge.”
43. Mills, White Collar.
44. Dawn, October 21 and November 11, 1922.
45. E.g., see MacLean, Behind the Mask of Chivalry; Goldberg, Grassroots Resis-
tance; Moore, Citizen Klansmen; Rhomberg, No There There; Jackson, Ku Klux Klan 
in the City; Cocoltchos, “Invisible Government”; Gerlach, Blazing Crosses in Zion.
46. See Clemens, People’s Lobby; Valelly, Radicalism in the States.
47. MacLean, Behind the Mask of Chivalry.
48. Imperial Night- Hawk, November 21, 1923.
3. Power Devaluation 
 1. Smelser, Theory of Collective Behavior.
 2. Kornhauser, Politics of Mass Society; Arendt, Origins of Totalitarianism.
 3. Gurr, Rogues, Rebels, and Reformers, 82.
 4. Ibid.; Merton, “Social Structure and Anomie.”


--- PAGE 215 ---
208 no Tes T o chaPTeR 3
 5. McAdam, Political Process and the Development of Black Insurgency.
 6. Oberschall, Social Conflict and Social Movements;  Schwartz, Radical Pro -
test and Social Structure; Tilly, From Mobilization to Revolution;  McAdam, Political 
Process and the Development of Black Insurgency; Rule, Theories of Civil Violence.
 7. McAdam, Political Process and the Development of Black Insurgency; also see 
Tilly, From Mobilization to Revolution.
 8. Also see Oberschall, Social Conflict and Social Movements;  Schwartz, 
Radical Protest and Social Structure; Tilly, From Mobilization to Revolution; Gam -
son, Strategy of Social Protest.
 9. Oberschall, Social Conflict and Social Movements .
10. Olson, Logic of Collective Action; Fireman and Gamson, “Utilitarian Logic 
in the Resource Mobilization Perspective.” 
11. Oberschall, Social Conflict and Social Movements;  McCarthy and Zald, 
Trend of Social Movements in America; McCarthy and Zald, “Resource Mobiliza -
tion and Social Movements”; Jenkins, “Resource Mobilization Theory.”
12. Tarrow, Power in Movement, 81.
13. Lipset and Raab, Politics of Unreason; Jackson, Ku Klux Klan in the City; 
Chalmers, Hooded Americanism. 
14. Lipset and Raab, Politics of Unreason; Moore, Citizen Klansmen;  Jackson, 
Ku Klux Klan in the City; Chalmers, Hooded Americanism.
15. Mecklin, Ku Klux Klan, 32–33.
16. Hofstadter, Age of Reform, 293–94.
17. Blee, Women of the Ku Klux Klan; MacLean, Behind the Mask of Chivalry; 
Rhomberg, No There There; Horowitz, ed., Inside the Klavern.
18. Grant, Passing of the Great Race.
19. Blee, Women of the Ku Klux Klan; MacLean, Behind the Mask of Chivalry; 
Rhomberg, No There There; Horowitz, ed., Inside the Klavern.
20. Moore, Citizen Klansmen,  189.
21. Gaventa, Power and Powerlessness; Jackman, Velvet Glove.
22. Blau, Exchange and Power in Social Life; Emerson, “Power-  Dependence 
Relations.” 
23. Simmel, Sociology of Georg Simmel, 31.
24. Simmel, Conflict and the Web of Group- Affiliations.
25. Beisel, Imperiled Innocents.
26. Weber, “Class, Status, Party.”
27. Beisel, Imperiled Innocents.
28. Bourdieu, “Forms of Capital.” 
29. See Granovetter, “Threshold Models of Collective Behavior”; Marwell, 
Oliver, and Prahl, “Social Networks and Collective Action”; Blee, Inside Organized 
Racism.


--- PAGE 216 ---
no Tes T o chaPTeR 4 209
30. Snow, Rochford, Worden, and Benford, “Frame Alignment Processes,”; 
Goffman, Frame Analysis.
31. McAdam, Political Process and the Development of Black Insurgency, 34.
32. Snow, Cress, Downey, and Jones, “Disrupting the ‘Quotidian’  ”; also see 
Snow, Soule, and Cress, “Identifying the Precipitants of Homeless Protest”; Useem, 
“Breakdown Theories of Collective Action”; Walsh, “Resource Mobilization and 
Citizen Protest.”
33. Snow and Benford, “Ideology, Frame Resonance, and Participant 
Mobilization.” 
34. Also see Gamson, Strategy of Social Protest.
35. Snow and Benford, “Ideology, Frame Resonance, and Participant 
Mobilization.” 
36. McVeigh, “Structured Ignorance and Organized Racism.” 
37. Gamson, Strategy of Social Protest.
38. See Swidler, “Culture in Action.”
39. McCarthy and Zald, Trend of Social Movements in America; Jenkins, “Re-
source Mobilization Theory”; Klandermans, Social Psychology of Protest, 150.
40. Tarrow, Power in Movement, 85.
41. See McAdam, McCarthy, and Zald, eds., Comparative Perspectives on So-
cial Movements.
42. Amenta, Bernstein, and Dunleavy, “Stolen Thunder?” 
43. Przeworski, Capitalism and Social Democracy.
4. Responding to Economic Change
 1. E.g., Imperial Night- Hawk, November 14, 1923.
 2. Lynd and Lynd, Middletown.
 3. Ibid., 481.
 4. Ibid., 22.
 5. Ibid., 57, 74.
 6. Link and McCormick, Progressivism,  67.
 7. Ibid., 49.
 8. Griffen, Wallace, and Rubin, “Capitalist Resistance to the Organization of 
Labor”; Weinstein, Decline of Socialism in America; National Industrial Conference 
Board, Collective Bargaining through Employee Representation.
 9. Griffen, Wallace, and Rubin, “Capitalist Resistance to the Organization of 
Labor”; Clawson, Bureaucracy and the Labor Process;  Edwards, Contested Terrain;  
Haydu, “Factory Politics in Britain and the United States.”
10. Clawson, Bureaucracy and the Labor Process.
11. Stark, “Class Struggle and the Transformation of the Labor Process.”


--- PAGE 217 ---
210 no Tes T o chaPTeR 4
12. Griffin, Wallace, and Rubin, “Capitalist Resistance to the Organization 
of Labor.” 
13. Stark, “Class Struggle and the Transformation of the Labor Process.”
14. U.S. Department of Commerce, Statistical Abstract of the United States 
(1925).
15. Tolnay, “Great Migration and Changes in the Northern Black Family,” 
1215.
16. Lee, Miller, Brainerd, and Easterlin, Population Redistribution and Eco -
nomic Growth in the United States; McAdam, Political Process and the Development 
of Black Insurgency, 74.
17. For data before 1928, two or more stores compose a chain.
18. U.S. Department of Commerce, Historical Statistics of the United States.
19. Ryant, “The South and the Movement against Chain Stores.”
20. Quoted in ibid., 209.
21. McMath, American Populism.
22. Redding, “Failed Populism,” 341.
23. Valelly, Radicalism in the States.
24. Brustein, “Political Geography of Belgian Fascism”; Weber, Varieties of 
Fascism,  125; Schepens, “Fascists and Nationalists in Belgium,” 507; Etienne, Le 
Mouvement Rexiste Jusqu’ en 1940, 90–95.
25. Brustein and Markovsky, “Rational Fascist,” 187; Noakes, Nazi Party in 
Lower Saxony, 114–19; MacLean, Behind the Mask of Chivalry.
26. Cardoza, Agrarian Elites and Italian Fascism, 338–39.
27. MacLean, Behind the Mask of Chivalry; Chalmers, Hooded Americanism. 
28. Imperial Night- Hawk, April 4 and May 30, 1923.
29. Klan leaders did become critical of Mussolini, however, when he made peace 
with the pope. They also spoke in opposition to Italian fascist groups in the United 
States because these organizations pledged loyalty to Italy rather than to the United 
States.
30. MacLean, Behind the Mask of Chivalry, 160.
31. Dawn, November 10, 1923.
32. MacLean, Behind the Mask of Chivalry; Clemens, People’s Lobby;  Glenn, 
Unequal Freedom.
33. Dawn, November 10, 1923.
34. Ibid.
35. E.g., see Bonacich, “Theory of Ethnic Antagonism”; Bonacich, “Advanced 
Capitalism and Black/White Race Relations.”
36. Tolnay and Beck, Festival of Violence.
37. Imperial Night- Hawk, May 30, 1923.
38. Ibid., May 30, 1923.


--- PAGE 218 ---
no Tes T o chaPTeR 4 211
39. Ibid., May 30, 1923, and October 15, 1924.
40. Ibid., January 23, 1924.
41. Dawn, November 10, 1923.
42. Imperial Night- Hawk, August 29, 1923, and October 8, 1924.
43. Fiery Cross, September 28, 1923.
44. Imperial Night- Hawk, June 11, 1924.
45. Ibid., October 8, 1924.
46. Bonacich, “Theory of Ethnic Antagonism,” and “Advanced Capitalism 
and Black/White Race Relations”; Wilson, Declining Significance of Race.
47. Alexander, Ku Klux Klan in the Southwest, 80; Chalmers, Hooded Ameri -
canism; Jackson, Ku Klux Klan in the City; MacLean, Behind the Mask of Chivalry; 
Blee, Women of the Ku Klux Klan.
48. Imperial Night- Hawk, January 23, 1924.
49. Dawn, November 10, 1923.
50. Imperial Night- Hawk, May 16, 1923.
51. Tolnay and Beck, Festival of Violence; Bonacich, “Advanced Capitalism and 
Black/White Race Relations”; Olzak, “Political Context of Competition.”
52. Imperial Night- Hawk, May 30, 1923.
53. Ibid., May 23, 1923.
54. Ibid., March 28, 1923; Jackman, Velvet Glove.
55. Imperial Night- Hawk, April 18, 1923.
56. Ibid., June 20, 1923.
57. Ibid., August 6, 1924.
58. See MacLean, Behind the Mask of Chivalry.
59. Imperial Night- Hawk, July 23, 1924.
60. Dawn, January 13, 1923.
61. MacLean, Behind the Mask of Chivalry; Moore, Citizen Klansmen.
62. Blee, Women of the Ku Klux Klan.
63. Blee, Review of Behind the Mask of Chivalry.
64. MacLean, Behind the Mask of Chivalry; Blee, Women of the Ku Klux Klan.
65. MacLean, Behind the Mask of Chivalry; Blee, Women of the Ku Klux Klan.
66. Kourier, April 1925.
67. Imperial Night- Hawk, June 13, 1923.
68. Kourier, April 1925.
69. Imperial Night- Hawk, May 14, 1924.
70. Ibid., October 1, 1924.
71. Ibid., May 28, 1924.
72. Ibid.
73. Ibid., May 16, 1923.
74. Ibid., December 12 and 26, 1923.


--- PAGE 219 ---
212 no Tes T o chaPTeR 5
75. Ibid., October 10 and December 12, 1923, July 16, 1924; Fiery Cross, Feb-
ruary 29, 1924, and December 14, 1923.
76. See McVeigh, Myers, and Sikkink, “Corn, Klansmen, and Coolidge.”
77. Imperial Night- Hawk, October 8 and November 5, 1924.
78. E.g., Fiery Cross, October 26, November 9, and December 28, 1923; May 2 
and October 17, 1924.
79. Imperial Night- Hawk, November 14, 1923.
80. Fiery Cross, November 9, 1923.
81. Ibid.
82. Imperial Night- Hawk, November 14, 1923.
83. Ibid., November 7, 1923.
84. Blee, Women of the Ku Klux Klan; MacLean, Behind the Mask of Chivalry.
85. MacLean, Behind the Mask of Chivalry, 78.
86. Imperial Night- Hawk, February 6, 1924.
87. Ibid., June 11, 1924.
88. Ibid., September 17, 1924.
89. Jackson, Ku Klux Klan in the City, 104, 109, 174.
90. Chalmers, Hooded Americanism, 180.
5. National Politics and Mobilizing “100 Percent American” Voters
 1. E.g., see Lipset and Raab, Politics of Unreason; Hofstadter, Age of Reform;  
Chalmers, Hooded Americanism.
 2. Mecklin, Ku Klux Klan; Alexander, Ku Klux Klan in the Southwest; Lip -
set and Raab, Politics of Unreason; Hofstadter, Age of Reform; Chalmers, Hooded 
Americanism; Jackson, Ku Klux Klan in the City.
 3. Chalmers, Hooded Americanism, 114–15; also see Lipset and Raab, Politics 
of Unreason, 123.
 4. Horowitz, ed., Inside the Klavern; Rhomberg, No There There; Blee, Women 
of the Ku Klux Klan; Moore, Citizen Klansmen;  Johnston, Radical Middle Class.
 5. Sanders, Roots of Reform, 15 –16.
 6. Schwartzman, Social Origins of Democratic Collapse; Moore, Social Origins 
of Dictatorship and Democracy.
 7. S c hwa r t z , Radical Protest and Social Structure; Redding, “Failed Popu -
lism,” 342.
 8. McMath, American Populism,  206; Redding, “Failed Populism.”
 9. Link and McCormick, Progressivism.
10. Burner, Politics of Provincialism, 103, 106.
11. Quoted in ibid., 160–61.
12. Fiery Cross, July 4, 1924.
13. Sanders, Roots of Reform, 351.


--- PAGE 220 ---
no Tes T o chaPTeR 5 213
14. Clemens, People’s Lobby; Valelly, Radicalism in the States.
15. MacLean, Behind the Mask of Chivalry; Glenn, Unequal Freedom.
16. McGuiness, National Party Conventions.
17. Valelly, Radicalism in the States.
18. Weinstein, Decline of Socialism in America.
19. Ibid.
20. Valelly, Radicalism in the States.
21. Ibid.
22. LaFollette and LaFollette, Robert M. LaFollette.
23. Gieske, Minnesota Farmer-  Laborism.
24. Valelly, Radicalism in the States.
25. LaFollette and LaFollette, Robert M. LaFollette, 1115.
26. Ibid., 1118.
27. Quadagno, Transformation of Old Age Security.
28. Clemens, People’s Lobby, 31.
29. Link and McCormick, Progressivism,  85.
30. Clemens, People’s Lobby, 182.
31. Rhomberg, No There There, 32.
32. Ibid.
33. Imperial Night- Hawk, September 19 and November 21, 1923.
34. Ibid., September 10, 1924.
35. Ibid., September 17, 1924.
36. Ibid.
37. Ibid., September 19, 1923.
38. MacLean, Behind the Mask of Chivalry.
39. Imperial Night- Hawk, October 1, 1924.
40. Ibid., March 28, 1923.
41. Ibid., September 3 and October 8, 1924.
42. Blee, Women of the Ku Klux Klan, 88.
43. Grob, ed., First Annual Meeting of Grand Dragon Knights, 98.
44. Imperial Night- Hawk, June 4, 1924.
45. Ibid., May 30, 1923.
46. Ibid., May 30, 1923, and October 8, 1924.
47. Ibid., May 30, 1923.
48. Ibid., October 15, 1924.
49. McVeigh, Myers, and Sikkink, “Corn, Klansmen, and Coolidge”; Thorn-
brough, “Segregation in Indiana during the Klan Era.”
50. Imperial Night- Hawk, April 25, 1923.
51. Ibid., May 9, 1923.
52. Kimeldorf, Battling for American Labor, 2.


--- PAGE 221 ---
214 no Tes T o chaPTeR 6
53. Imperial Night- Hawk, April 25, 1923.
54. Ibid., June 20, 1923.
55. Ibid.
56. Ibid., November 21, 1923, and October 15, 1924.
57. Ibid., April 25, May 30, and December 19, 1923.
58. Ibid., March 28, 1923.
59. At the time, D. C. Stephenson was promoting a plan for the Klan to pur-
chase Valparaiso and run it as the Klan’s institution of higher learning.
60. Imperial Night- Hawk, November 21, 1923.
61. Dawn, October 21, 1922.
62. Imperial Night- Hawk, August 29, 1923.
63. Ibid., September 19, 1923.
64. Ibid., September 12 and December 16, 1923.
65. Ibid., November 28, 1923.
66. Ibid., October 22, 1924.
67. Ibid., September 24, 1924.
68. Ibid., October 8, 1924.
69. Ibid., October 3, 1923.
70. Blee, Women of the Ku Klux Klan.
71. Imperial Night- Hawk, October 3, 1923.
72. Kourier, April 1925.
73. Ibid., April 1925.
74. Imperial Night- Hawk, September 17, 1924.
6. Fights over Schools and Booze
 1. Chalmers, Hooded Americanism, 295.
 2. Jackson, Ku Klux Klan in the City, 255.
 3. Hofstadter, Age of Reform, 292; Lipset and Raab, Politics of Unreason, 118.
 4. E.g., see Alexander, Ku Klux Klan in the Southwest;  Jenkins, Steel Valley 
Klan.
 5. See Blee, Women of the Ku Klux Klan; MacLean, Behind the Mask of Chiv-
alry; Rhomberg, No There There; Johnston, Radical Middle Class;  McVeigh, “Struc-
tural Incentives for Conservative Mobilization”; McVeigh, Myers, and Sikkink, 
“Corn, Klansmen, and Coolidge.”
 6. See Blee, Women of the Ku Klux Klan; MacLean, Behind the Mask of Chiv-
alry; Chalmers, Hooded Americanism .
 7. Beisel, Imperiled Innocents; Bourdieu, “The Forms of Capital.”
 8. Imperial Night- Hawk, July 18 and 25, 1923.
 9. Tyack, James, and Benavot, eds., Law and the Shaping of Public Educa -
tion, 180.


--- PAGE 222 ---
no Tes T o chaPTeR 6 215
10. Beisel, Imperiled Innocents. 
11. Dumenil, “Insatiable Maw of Bureaucracy.”
12. U.S. Department of Commerce, Statistical Abstract of the United States  
(1926).
13. U.S. Department of Education, 120 Years of American Education.
14. McAdam, Political Process and the Development of Black Insurgency.
15. Lieberson, Piece of the Pie, 136; Tolnay and Beck, Festival of Violence.
16. Lieberson, Piece of the Pie, 136.
17. Walch, Parish School, 60.
18. Bureau of Education, Directory of Catholic Colleges and Schools, 246, 478.
19. Tyack, James, and Benavot, eds., Law and the Shaping of Public Educa -
tion, 162.
20. Ibid., 163–64.
21. Walch, Parish School, 68–69.
22. Veverka, “For God and Country.”
23. Walch, Parish School.
24. Ibid.
25. Veverka, “For God and Country.”
26. Quoted in ibid., 83.
27. Labaree, “Curriculum, Credentials, and the Middle Class,” 50.
28. Lynd and Lynd, Middletown, 187.
29. Labaree, “Curriculum, Credentials, and the Middle Class.”
30. U.S. Department of Education, 120 Years of American Education.
31. Imperial Night- Hawk, May 23, 1923.
32. Ibid., September 24, 1924.
33. Tyack, One Best System; Dumenil, “Insatiable Maw of Bureaucracy.”
34. Imperial Night- Hawk, September 24, 1924.
35. Ibid., May 28, 1924.
36. Ibid., May 9 and 30, 1923.
37. Ibid., October 1, 1924.
38. Ibid., September 12, 1923.
39. Ibid., October 10, 1923.
40. Ibid., July 25, 1923.
41. New York Times, February 20, 1921; Dumenil, “Insatiable Maw of Bureau-
cracy,” 499.
42. Tyack, One Best System; Dumenil, “Insatiable Maw of Bureaucracy,” 506.
43. Imperial Night- Hawk, May 14 and 28, 1924.
44. Ibid., February 14 and May 14, 1924.
45. Ibid., November 14, 1923.
46. Ibid., March 12, 1924.


--- PAGE 223 ---
216 no Tes T o chaPTeR 7
47. Ibid., September 10, 1924.
48. Ibid., September 12, 1923, and September 24, 1924.
49. Ibid., May 16, 1923.
50. Ibid.
51. Ibid., July 11, 1923.
52. Ibid., July 18, 1923.
53 Snow, Rochford, Worden, and Benford, “Frame Alignment Processes, Micro-
mobilization, and Movement Participation.” 
54. McVeigh, Myers, and Sikkink, “Corn, Klansmen, and Coolidge.”
55. Grob, ed. First Annual Meeting of Grand Dragon Knights, 68.
56. E.g., see Blee, Women of the Ku Klux Klan; MacLean, Behind the Mask of 
Chivalry.
57. Jackson, Ku Klux Klan in the City, 145, 146; Chalmers, Hooded American-
ism, 166.
58. E.g., see Rumbarger, Profits, Power, and Prohibition.
59. Beisel, Imperiled Innocents.
60. Imperial Night- Hawk, July 4, 1923.
61. Rumbarger, Profits, Power, and Prohibition, 190.
62. Imperial Night- Hawk, July 11, 1923.
63. Ibid., August 27, 1924.
7. How to Recruit a Klansman
 1. Snow and Benford, “Ideology, Frame Resonance, and Participant Mobili-
zation”; McVeigh, “Structured Ignorance and Organized Racism.”
 2. Klandermans, Social Psychology of Protest.
 3. E.g., see Granovetter, “Threshold Models of Collective Behavior”; Mar -
well, Oliver, and Prahl, “Social Networks and Collective Action.”
 4. Olson, Logic of Collective Action.
 5. Klandermans and Oegema, “Potentials, Networks, Motivations, and Bar-
riers,” 520; Fireman and Gamson, “Utilitarian Logic in the Resource Mobilization 
Perspective,” 8–44.
 6. McCarthy and Zald, Trend of Social Movements in America; McCarthy 
and Zald, “Resource Mobilization and Social Movements”; Oberschall, Social Con-
flict and Social Movements .
 7. Imperial Night- Hawk, July 25, 1923.
 8. Jackson, Ku Klux Klan in the City,  171, 179; Chalmers, Hooded American-
ism, 251.
 9. Clemens, People’s Lobby; Chalmers, Hooded Americanism, 251.
10. Clemens, People’s Lobby.
11. Polletta, Freedom Is an Endless Meeting.


--- PAGE 224 ---
no Tes T o chaPTeR 7 217
12. MacLean, Behind the Mask of Chivalry, 160.
13. Imperial Night- Hawk, September 3, 1924.
14. E.g., see Clawson, “Fraternal Orders and Class Formation.”
15. MacLean, Behind the Mask of Chivalry, 108.
16. Chalmers, Hooded Americanism; Imperial Night- Hawk, October 24, 1923.
17. See Imperial Night-  Hawk, June 6 and 13, and July 18, 1 923; Septem -
ber 10, 1924.
18. Ibid., June 11, 1924.
19. Ibid.
20. Ibid., April 2, 1924.
21. Ibid., October 24, 1923, and March 19, 1924.
22. Jackson, Ku Klux Klan in the City, 10.
23. Imperial Night- Hawk, April 25, 1923.
24. Ibid., May 23 and June 6, 1923.
25. Ibid., May 2 and June 13, 1923.
26. Ibid., December 12, 1923.
27. Ibid., June 4, 1923.
28. Ibid., May 2 and 23, and October 24, 1923; January 16, 1924.
29. Ibid., July 11, August 1, and September 26, 1923; June 4, 1924.
30. Ibid., May 23 and 30, 1923; March 19, 1924.
31. Ibid., November 14, 1923.
32. Ibid., July 11 and 25, 1923.
33. Ibid., September 19, 1923.
34. Ibid., June 13, 1923; January 30 and May 14, 1924.
35. Ibid., August 8 and October 3, 1923.
36. Ibid., July 18, September 26, and October 17, 1923.
37. Ibid., April 25 and May 30, 1923; February 21 and 27, 1924.
38. Ibid., August 8, 1923.
39. Ibid., June 4, 1924.
40. Ibid., December 12, 1923.
41. Ibid., July 4 and August 8, 1923; December 5, 1924.
42. Ibid., August 15, 1923.
43. Ibid., June 4, 1924.
44. Blee, Women of the Ku Klux Klan.
45. Imperial Night- Hawk, January 2 and March 12, 1924.
46. Ibid., January 16, April 2, and May 14, 1924.
47. Ibid., June 4, 1924.
48. Jenkins, “Resource Mobilization Theory and the Study of Social Movements”; 
Smith, McCarthy, McPhail, and Augustin, “From Protest to Agenda- Building.”
49. Imperial Night- Hawk, March 28, 1923.


--- PAGE 225 ---
218 no Tes T o chaPTeR 8
50. Ibid., July 18, 1923.
51. Ibid., July 11 and 25, 1923.
52. Ibid., May 9 and December 19, 1923.
53. Ibid., August 1 and 8, 1923.
54. Ibid., May 30 and August 29, 1923; January 30, 1924.
55. Ibid., May 16, July 25, and August 22, 1923.
56. Ibid., July 16, 1923.
57. See Blee, Women of the Ku Klux Klan.
58. Imperial Night- Hawk, May 16, 1923.
59. Chalmers, Hooded Americanism.
60. Valelly, Radicalism in the States; Alexander, Ku Klux Klan in the Southwest .
61. Chalmers, Hooded Americanism.
62. Blee, Women of the Ku Klux Klan; MacLean, Behind the Mask of Chivalry.
63. Imperial Night- Hawk, April 4, 1923.
64. Grob, ed., First Annual Meeting of Grand Dragon Knights, 13.
65. MacLean, Behind the Mask of Chivalry, 159.
66. Jackson, Ku Klux Klan in the City, 190.
67. MacLean, Behind the Mask of Chivalry.
68. Imperial Night- Hawk, October 17, 1923.
69. Blee, Women of the Ku Klux Klan.
70. Imperial Night- Hawk, October 10 and November 21, 1923.
71. Greenapple, D. C. Stephenson. 
72. Grob, First Annual Meeting of Grand Dragon Knights, 4.
73. Imperial Night- Hawk, May 23, 1923.
74. Ibid., June 27, July 4 and 25, September 19, and November 28, 1923.
75. Ibid., September 19, 1923; January 2 and 9, 1924.
76. Ibid., June 20 and December 26, 1923; August 6, 1924.
77. Ibid., July 25 and September 26, 1923; January 30 and October 1, 1924.
8. Klan Activism across the Country
 1. McVeigh, “Structural Incentives for Conservative Mobilization”; McVeigh, 
Myers, and Sikkink, “Corn, Klansmen, and Coolidge.”
 2. Jackson, Ku Klux Klan in the City, 237.
 3. McVeigh, Myers, and Sikkink, “Corn, Klansmen, and Coolidge.”
 4. Allison, Logistic Regression Using the SAS System, 159; Agresti, Categori -
cal Data Analysis; Allison, Event History Analysis,  81; Fienberg, Analysis of Cross-
 Classified Categorical Data; McVeigh, Welch, and Bjarnason, “Hate Crime Report-
ing as a Successful Social Movement Outcome.”
 5. U.S. Department of Commerce, Statistical Abstract of the United States  
(1926).


--- PAGE 226 ---
no Tes T o chaPTeR 9 219
 6. Olzak, Dynamics of Ethnic Competition and Conflict. 
 7. McVeigh, Myers, and Sikkink, “Corn, Klansmen, and Coolidge.”
 8. Valelly, Radicalism in the States.
 9. McVeigh, “Power Devaluation.”
10. Imperial Night- Hawk, July 11, 1923.
9. The Klan’s Last Gasp
 1. Blee, Inside Organized Racism.
 2. Snow, Rochford, Worden, and Benford, “Frame Alignment Processes.”
 3. Kourier, November 1929.
 4. Chalmers, Hooded Americanism, 291.
 5. Mecklin, Ku Klux Klan, 32–33; Chalmers, Hooded Americanism,  296; 
Jackson, Ku Klux Klan in the City, 254; Lipset and Raab, Politics of Unreason, 143.
 6. Gamson, Talking Politics.
 7. McVeigh, Myers, and Sikkink, “Corn, Klansmen, and Coolidge.”
 8. Rhomberg, No There There.
 9. MacLean, Behind the Mask of Chivalry.
10. Campbell, Converse, Miller, and Stokes, American Voter.
11. Valelly, Radicalism in the States.
12. LaFollette and LaFollette, Robert M. LaFollette.
13. Bain, Convention Decisions and Voting Records;  Chalmers, Hooded  
Americanism.
14. Burgchardt, Robert M. LaFollette Sr., 214.
15. Ibid.
16. New York Times, August 9, 11, and 23, 1924.
17. Judah and Smith, The Unchosen, 204.
18. McVeigh, “Power Devaluation.”
19. Imperial Night- Hawk, July 16, 1924.
20. Ibid.
21. Chalmers, Hooded Americanism, 213–14.
22. Ibid., 213.
23. Ibid.
24. McVeigh, Myers, and Sikkink, “Corn, Klansmen, and Coolidge.”
25. E.g., Imperial Night- Hawk, October 15, 1924.
26. Imperial Night- Hawk, November 12, 1924; Kourier, February and March 
1925.
27. Kourier, February 1925.
28. Ibid.
29. Ibid., February and April 1925.
30. Ibid., September 1925.


--- PAGE 227 ---
220 no Tes T o conclusion
31. Ibid., September 1925 and February 1926.
32. Ibid., November 1926.
33. Chalmers, Hooded Americanism.
34. Greenapple, D. C. Stephenson.
35. Chalmers, Hooded Americanism.
36. Kourier, December 1925.
37. Ibid.
38. Ibid., May 1928.
39. Ibid., May 1927.
40. Ibid., July and September 1928.
41. Ibid., August 1928.
42. Ibid., September 1928.
43. Ibid.
Conclusion
 1. Jackman, Velvet Glove.
 2. E.g., see Bonilla- Silva, Racism without Racists.
 3. See Tilly, Durable Inequality, for an extended discussion of the role of “op-
portunity hoarding” in the reproduction of inequality.
 4. Frankenberg, White Women, Race Matters.
 5. Cunningham, There’s Something Happening Here.
 6. Johnson, “Sociological Interpretation of the New Ku Klux Movement,” 441.
 7. Bohn, “The Ku Klux Klan Interpreted,” 405, 407.
 8. Johnson, “Sociological Interpretation of the New Ku Klux Movement,” 441.


--- PAGE 228 ---
221
Adams, Josh, and Vincent J. Roscigno. “White Supremacists, Interpretational 
Framing, and the World Wide Web.” Social Forces 84 (2005): 759–78.
Agresti, Alan. Categorical Data Analysis.  Hoboken, N.J.: John Wiley and Sons, 
2002.
Alexander, Charles C. The Ku Klux Klan in the Southwest.  Norman: University of 
Oklahoma Press, 1995.
Allison, Paul. Event History Analysis: Regression for Longitudinal Event Data. New-
bury Park, Calif.: Sage, 1984.
— — — . Logistic Regression Using the SAS System: Theory and Application. Cary, 
N.C.: SAS Institute, 1997.
Amenta, Edwin, Mary Bernstein, and Kathleen Dunleavy. 1994. “Stolen Thunder? 
Huey Long’s ‘Share Our Wealth,’ Political Mediation, and the Second New 
Deal.” American Sociological Review  59 (1994): 678–702.
Arendt, Hannah. The Origins of Totalitarianism. New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1951.
Bain, Richard. Convention Decisions and Voting Records. Washington, D.C.: The 
Brookings Institution, 1960.
Beisel, Nicola. Imperiled Innocents: Anthony Comstock and Family Reproduction in 
Victorian America. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1997.
Blalock, Hubert M. Toward a Theory of Minority Group Relations. New York: John 
Wiley, 1967.
Blau, Peter M. Exchange and Power in Social Life. New York: Wiley, 1964.
Blee, Kathleen. Inside Organized Racism: Women in the Hate Movement. Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 2002.
— — — . Review of Behind the Mask of Chivalry: The Making of the Second Ku Klux 
Klan, by Nancy MacLean. Contemporary Sociology  24 (1995): 346–47.
Works Cited


--- PAGE 229 ---
222 woRKs ciTed
— — — . Women of the Ku Klux Klan: Racism and Gender in the 1920s. Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1991.
Bohn, Frank. “The Ku Klux Klan Interpreted.” American Journal of Sociology 30 
(1925): 385–407.
Bonacich, Edna. “Advanced Capitalism and Black/White Race Relations in the 
United States: A Split Labor Market Interpretation.” American Sociological 
Review 41 (1976): 34–51.
— — — . “A Theory of Ethnic Antagonism: The Split Labor Market.” American 
Sociological Review 37 (1972): 547–59.
Bonilla- Silva, Eduardo. Racism without Racists: Color-  blind Racism and the Per-
sistence of Racial Inequality in the United States. Lanham, Md.: Rowman and 
Littlefield, 2006.
Bourdieu, Pierre. “The Forms of Capital.” In Handbook of Theory and Research for 
the Sociology of Education, ed. J. G. Richardson, 241–58. New York: Green-
wood, 1986.
Brustein, William. “The Political Geography of Belgian Fascism: The Case of 
Rexism.” American Sociological Review  55 (1988): 69–80.
Brustein, William, and Barry Markovsky. “The Rational Fascist: Interwar Fascist 
Party Membership in Italy and Germany.” Journal of Political and Military 
Sociology 17 (1989): 177–202.
Bullard, Sarah, ed. The Ku Klux Klan: A History of Racism and Violence. Montgom -
ery, Ala.: Southern Poverty Law Center, 1991.
Burgchardt, Carl. Robert M. LaFollette Sr.: The Voice of Conscience . New York: 
Greenwood Press, 1992.
Burner, David. The Politics of Provincialism: The Democratic Party in Transition, 
1918–1932. New York: Knopf, 1968.
Campbell, Angus, Philip Converse, Warren Miller, and Donald Stokes. The 
Ameri can Voter. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1960.
Cardoza, Anthony L. Agrarian Elites and Italian Fascism: The Province of Bologna, 
1901–1926. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1982.
Chalmers, David. Hooded Americanism: The History of the Ku Klux Klan. 3rd ed. 
Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 1987.
Clawson, Dan. Bureaucracy and the Labor Process: The Transformation of U.S. 
Industry, 1860 –1920. New York: Monthly Review Press, 1980.
Clawson, Mary Ann. “Fraternal Orders and Class Formation in Nineteenth-
 century United States.” Comparative Studies in Society and History 27 (1985): 
672–95.
Clemens, Elisabeth S. The People’s Lobby: Organizational Innovation and the Rise of 
Interest Group Politics, 1890–1925. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1997.
Cocoltchos, Christopher. “The Invisible Government and the Visible Community:


--- PAGE 230 ---
woRKs ciTed 223
The Ku Klux Klan in Orange County, California during the 1920s.” Doc-
toral dissertation, University of California at Los Angeles, 1979.
Coughlan, Robert. “Konklave in Kokomo.” In The Aspirin Age, 1919–1941, ed. 
Isabel Leighton, 105–29. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1949.
Cunningham, David. There’s Something Happening Here: The New Left, the Klan, 
and FBI Counterintelligence. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2004.
Dumenil, Lynn. “ ‘The Insatiable Maw of Bureaucracy’: Antistatism and Educa-
tion Reform in the 1920s.” Journal of American History 77 (1990): 499–524.
Edwards, Richard. Contested Terrain: The Transformation of the Workplace in the 
Twentieth Century. New York: Basic Books, 1979.
Emerson, Richard. “Power- Dependence Relations.” American Sociological Review  
27 (1962): 31–41.
Etienne, J. M. Le Mouvement Rexiste Jusqu’ en 1940. Paris: Colin, 1968.
Fienberg, Stephan. The Analysis of Cross- Classified Categorical Data. Cambridge, 
Mass.: MIT Press, 1980.
Fireman, Bruce, and William Gamson. “Utilitarian Logic in the Resource Mobili-
zation Perspective.” In The Dynamics of Social Movements, ed. Mayer Zald and 
John McCarthy, 8–44. New York: Winthrop, 1979.
Fogelson, Robert M., and Richard E. Rubenstein, eds. Hearings on the Ku Klux 
Klan, 1921. New York: Arno Press and the New York Times, 1969.
Frankenberg, Ruth. White Women, Race Matters: The Social Construction of White-
ness. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1993.
Gamson, William. The Strategy of Social Protest. Homewood, Ill.: Dorsey Press, 
1975.
— — — . Talking Politics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992.
Gaventa, John. Power and Powerlessness: Quiescence and Rebellion in an Appala-
chian Valley. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1982.
Gerlach, Larry. Blazing Crosses in Zion: The Ku Klux Klan in Utah. Logan: Utah 
State University Press, 1982.
Gieske, Millard. Minnesota Farmer-  Laborism: The Third Party Alternative. Minne -
apolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1979.
Glenn, Evelyn Nakano. Unequal Freedom: How Race and Gender Shaped American 
Citizenship and Labor. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2004.
Goffman, Erving. Frame Analysis. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1974.
Goldberg, Robert Alan. Grassroots Resistance: Social Movements in Twentieth Cen-
tury America. Belmont, Calif.: Wadsworth, 1991.
Granovetter, Mark. “Threshold Models of Collective Behavior.” American Journal 
of Sociology 83 (1978): 1420–43.
Grant, Madison. The Passing of the Great Race. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 
1916.


--- PAGE 231 ---
224 woRKs ciTed
Greenapple, H. R. D. C. Stephenson. Irvington 0492: The Demise of the Grand 
Dragon of the Indiana Ku Klux Klan. Plainfield, Ind.: SGS Publications, 1989.
Griffen, Larry, Michael Wallace, and Beth Rubin. “Capitalist Resistance to the 
Organization of Labor before the New Deal: Why? How? Success?” American 
Sociological Review 51 (1986): 147–67.
Grob, Gerald N., ed. First Annual Meeting of Grand Dragon Knights of the Ku Klux 
Klan. New York: Arno Press, 1977.
Gurr, Ted Robert. Rogues, Rebels, and Reformers: A Political History of Urban 
Crime and Conflict. Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage, 1976.
Haydu, Jeffrey. “Factory Politics in Britain and the United States: Engineers and 
Machinists, 1914–1919.” Comparative Studies in Society and History 27 (1985): 
57–85. 
Hofstadter, Richard. The Age of Reform: From Bryan to F.D.R. New York: Knopf, 
1955.
Horowitz, David, ed. Inside the Klavern: The Secret History of a Ku Klux Klan of the 
1920s. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 1999.
Jackman, Mary. The Velvet Glove: Paternalism and Conflict in Gender, Class, and 
Race Relations.  Berkeley: University of California Press, 1994.
Jackson, Kenneth. The Ku Klux Klan in the City, 1915–1930. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1967.
Jenkins, J. Craig. “Resource Mobilization Theory and the Study of Social Move-
ments.” Annual Review of Sociology 9 (1983): 527–53.
Jenkins, William D. Steel Valley Klan: The Ku Klux Klan in Ohio’s Mahoning Val-
ley. Kent, Ohio: Kent State University Press, 1990.
Johnson, Guy B. “A Sociological Interpretation of the New Ku Klux Movement.” 
Journal of Social Forces 1 (1923): 440–45.
Johnston, Robert. The Radical Middle Class: Populist Democracy and the Question 
of Capitalism in Progressive Era Portland, Oregon. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton 
University Press, 2003.
Judah, Charles, and George Winston Smith. The Unchosen. New York: Coward 
and McCann, 1962.
Kimeldorf, Howard. Battling for American Labor: Wobblies, Craft Workers and the 
Making of the Union Movement. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1999.
Klandermans, Bert. The Social Psychology of Protest. Cambridge, Mass.: Blackwell, 
1997.
Klandermans, Bert, and Dirk Oegema. “Potentials, Networks, Motivations, and 
Barriers: Steps toward Participation in Social Movements.” American Socio-
logical Review 52 (1987): 519–31. 
Kornhauser, William. The Politics of Mass Society. Glencoe, Ill.: The Free Press, 
1959.


--- PAGE 232 ---
woRKs ciTed 225
Labaree, David F. “Curriculum, Credentials, and the Middle Class: A Case Study 
of a Nineteenth Century High School.” Sociology of Education 59 (1986): 
42 –57.
LaFollette, Belle Case, and Fola LaFollette. Robert M. LaFollette, June 14, 
1855– June 18, 1925. New York: Macmillan, 1953.
Lay, Shawn. Hooded Knights on the Niagra: The Ku Klux Klan in Buffalo, New 
York. New York: New York University Press, 1992.
Lee, Evertetts, Ann Ratner Miller, Carol P. Brainerd, and Richard A. Easterlin. 
Population Redistribution and Economic Growth in the United States, 
1870 –1950. Volume 1, Methodological Considerations and Reference Tables. 
Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society, 1957.
Lieberson, Stanley. A Piece of the Pie: Blacks and White Immigrants since 1880. 
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1980.
Link, Arthur, and Richard McCormick. Progressivism.  Arlington Heights, Ill.: 
Harlan Davidson, 1983.
Lipset, Seymour Martin, and Earl Raab. The Politics of Unreason: Right- wing Ex-
tremism in America, 1790–1970. New York: Harper and Row, 1970.
Lipsitz, George. The Possessive Investment in Whiteness: How White People Profit 
from Identity Politics. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1998.
Lutholtz, William M. Grand Dragon: D. C. Stephenson and the Ku Klux Klan in 
Indiana. West Lafayette, Ind.: Purdue University Press, 1991.
Lynd, Robert, and Helen Lynd. Middletown: A Study in Contemporary American 
Culture. New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1929/1956.
MacLean, Nancy. Behind the Mask of Chivalry: The Making of the Second Ku Klux 
Klan. New York: Oxford University Press, 1994.
Marwell, Gerald, Pamela Oliver, and Ralph Prahl. “Social Networks and Collec-
tive Action: A Theory of the Critical Mass III.” American Journal of Sociology 
94 (1988): 502–34.
McAdam, Doug. Political Process and the Development of Black Insurgency, 
1930 –1970. 2nd ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999.
McAdam, Doug, John McCarthy, and Mayer Zald, eds. Comparative Perspectives 
on Social Movements: Political Opportunities, Mobilizing Structures, and Cul-
tural Framings. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1996.
McCarthy, John, and Mayer Zald. The Trend of Social Movements in America: Pro-
fessionalization and Resource Mobilization. Morristown, N.J.: General Learn-
ing Press, 1973.
McCarthy, John, and Mayer Zald. “Resource Mobilization and Social Move-
ments: A Partial Theory.” American Journal of Sociology 82 (1977): 1212–41.
McGuiness, Colleen. National Party Conventions, 1831–1988. Washington, D.C.: 
Congressional Quarterly, 1991.


--- PAGE 233 ---
226 woRKs ciTed
McMath, Robert. American Populism: A Social History, 1877–1898. New York: 
Hill and Wang, 1993.
McVeigh, Rory. “Power Devaluation, The Ku Klux Klan, and the Democratic Na-
tional Convention of 1924.” Sociological Forum 16 (2001): 1–31.
— — — . “Structural Incentives for Conservative Mobilization: Power Devaluation 
and the Rise of the Ku Klux Klan, 1915–1925.” Social Forces 77 (1999): 
1461–96.
— — — . “Structured Ignorance and Organized Racism in the United States.” So-
cial Forces 82 (2004): 895–936.
McVeigh, Rory, Daniel J. Myers, and David Sikkink. “Corn, Klansmen, and 
Coolidge: Structure and Framing in Social Movements.” Social Forces 83 
(2004): 653–90.
McVeigh, Rory, and David Sikkink. “Organized Racism and the Stranger.” Socio-
logical Forum 20 (2005): 497–522.
McVeigh, Rory, Michael Welch, and Thoroddur Bjarnason. “Hate Crime Report-
ing as a Successful Social Movement Outcome.” American Sociological Review  
68 (2003): 843–67.
Mecklin, John Moffat. The Ku Klux Klan: A Study of the American Mind. New 
York: Harcourt, Brace, 1924.
Merton, Robert. “Social Structure and Anomie.” American Sociological Review  3 
(1938): 672–82.
Mills, C. Wright. White Collar: The American Middle Classes. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1956.
Moore, Barrington. Social Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy: Lord and Peasant 
in the Making of the Modern World. Boston: Beacon Press, 1966.
Moore, Leonard. Citizen Klansmen: The Ku Klux Klan in Indiana, 1921–1925. 
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1991.
National Industrial Conference Board. Collective Bargaining through Employee 
Representation.  New York: NICB, 1933.
Noakes, Jeremy. The Nazi Party in Lower Saxony, 1921–1933. London: Oxford 
University Press, 1971.
Oberschall, Anthony. Social Conflict and Social Movements. Englewood Cliffs, 
N.J.: Prentice- Hall, 1973.
Olson, Mancur. The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the Theory of 
Groups. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1965.
Olzak, Susan. The Dynamics of Ethnic Competition and Conflict. Palo Alto, Calif.: 
Stanford University Press, 1992.
— — — . “The Political Context of Competition: Lynching and Urban Racial Vio-
lence, 1882–1914.” Social Forces 69 (1990): 395–421.


--- PAGE 234 ---
woRKs ciTed 227
Patillo- McCoy, Mary. “Church Culture as a Strategy of Action in the Black Com-
munity.” American Sociological Review  63 (1988): 767–84.
Polletta, Francesca. Freedom Is an Endless Meeting: Democracy in American Social 
Movements. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2002.
Przeworski, Adam. Capitalism and Social Democracy. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1985.
Quadagno, Jill. The Transformation of Old Age Security: Class and Politics in the 
American Welfare State. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988.
Redding, Kent. “Failed Populism: Movement- Party Disjuncture in North Caro-
lina, 1890–1900.” American Sociological Review  57 (1992): 340–52.
Rhomberg, Chris. No There There: Race, Class, and Political Community in Oak-
land. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2004.
Rule, James. Theories of Civil Violence. Berkeley: University of California Press, 
1988.
Rumbarger, John J. Profits, Power, and Prohibition: Alcohol Reform and the In-
dustrializing of America, 1800–1930. Albany: State University of New York 
Press, 1989.
Ryant, Carl G. The South and the Movement against Chain Stores. The Journal of 
Southern History  39 (1973): 207–22.
Sanders, Elizabeth. Roots of Reform: Farmers, Workers, and the American State, 
1877–1917. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999.
Schepens, Luc. “Fascists and Nationalists in Belgium, 1919–1940.” In Who 
Were the Fascists?, ed. Stein Ugelvik Larsen, Bernt Hagtvet, and Jan Petter 
Myklebust, 501–16. Oslo, Norway: Universitetsforlaget, 1980.
Schwartz, Michael. Radical Protest and Social Structure: The Southern Farmers’ 
Alliance and Cotton Tenancy, 1880–1890. New York: Academic Press, 1976.
Schwartzman, Kathleen. The Social Origins of Democratic Collapse: The First 
Portuguese Republic in the Global Economy. Lawrence: University of Kansas 
Press, 1989.
Simmel, Georg. Conflict and the Web of Group- Affiliations. New York: Free Press, 
1955.
— — — . The Sociology of Georg Simmel. Translated and edited by Oscar Louis 
Wolff, Hans Schiebelhuth, and Karl Wolfskehl. New York: Free Press, 1950.
Smelser, Neil. Theory of Collective Behavior. New York: Free Press, 1962.
Smith, Jackie, John McCarthy, Clark McPhail, and Boguslaw Augustin. “From 
Protest to Agenda- Building: Description Bias in Media Coverage of Protest 
Events in Washington D.C.” Social Forces 79 (2001): 1397–1423.
Snow, David A., and Robert Benford. “Ideology, Frame Resonance, and Participant 
Mobilization.” In From Structure to Action: Social Movement Participation


--- PAGE 235 ---
228 woRKs ciTed
across Cultures, ed. Bert Klandermans, Hanspeter Kreisi, and Sidney Tarrow, 
197–217. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 1988.
Snow, David A., E. Burke Rochford Jr., Steven Worden, and Robert Benford. 
“Frame Alignment Processes, Micromobilization, and Movement Partici-
pation.” American Sociological Review  51 (1986): 454–81.
Snow, David A., Daniel M. Cress, Liam Downey, and Andrew W. Jones. “Dis-
rupting the ‘Quotidian’: Reconceptualizing the Relation between Breakdown 
and the Emergence of Collective Action.” Mobilization 3 (1998): 1–22.
Snow, David A., Sarah A. Soule, and Daniel Cress. “Identifying the Precipitants 
of Homeless Protest Across 17 U.S. Cities, 1980 to 1990.” Social Forces 83 
(2005): 1183–1210.
Stark, David. “Class Struggle and the Transformation of the Labor Process.” 
Theory and Society 9 (1980): 89–130.
Swidler, Ann. “Culture in Action: Symbols and Strategies.” American Sociological 
Review 51 (1986): 273–86.
Tarrow, Sidney. Power in Movement: Social Movements, Collective Action and Poli-
tics. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1994.
Thornbrough, Emma Lou. “Segregation in Indiana during the Klan Era of the 
1920s.” Mississippi Valley Historical Review 47 (1961): 594–618.
Tilly, Charles. Durable Inequality.  Berkeley: University of California Press, 1998.
— — — . From Mobilization to Revolution. Reading, Mass.: Addison-  Wesley, 1978.
Tolnay, Stewart. “The Great Migration and Changes in the Northern Black 
Family, 1940–1990.” Social Forces 75 (1997): 1213–38.
Tolnay, Stewart, and E. M. Beck. A Festival of Violence: An Analysis of Southern 
Lynching, 1882–1930. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1995.
Tucker, Richard. The Dragon and the Cross: The Rise and Fall of the Ku Klux Klan 
in Middle America. Hampden, Conn.: Archon Books, 1991.
Tyack, David. The One Best System: A History of American Urban Education. Cam -
bridge: Harvard University Press, 1974.
Tyack, David, Thomas James, and Aaron Benavot, eds. Law and the Shaping of 
Public Education, 1785–1954. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1987.
U.S. Bureau of Education. Directory of Catholic Colleges and Schools. Washington, 
D.C.: National Catholic Welfare Conference, 1926.
U.S. Department of Commerce. Historical Census of the United States. Washing -
ton, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1920.
— — — . Historical Statistics of the United States: Colonial Times to 1970. Washing -
ton, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1975.
— — — . Statistical Abstract of the United States. Washington, D.C.: Government 
Printing Office, 1924, 1925, 1926.
U.S. Department of Education. 120 Years of American Education: A Statistical Por-


--- PAGE 236 ---
woRKs ciTed 229
trait. Edited by Thomas D. Snyder. Washington, D.C.: National Center for 
Education Statistics, 1993.
Useem, Bert. “Breakdown Theories of Collective Action.” Annual Review of Soci-
ology 24 (1998): 215–38.
Valelly, Richard. Radicalism in the States: The Minnesota Farmer-  Labor Party and 
the American Political Economy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989.
Veverka, Fayette Breaux. “For God and Country:” Catholic Schooling in the 1920s. 
New York: Garland, 1988.
Walch, Timothy. Parish School: American Catholic Parochial Education from Colo-
nial Times to the Present. New York: Crossroad, 1996.
Walsh, Edward J. “Resource Mobilization and Citizen Protest in Communities 
around Three Mile Island.” Social Problems 29 (1981): 1–21.
Weber, Eugen. Varieties of Fascism. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 
1964.
Weber, Max. “Class, Status, Party.” In From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology, ed. 
H. H. Gerth and C. Wright Mills, 180–95. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1946.
Weinstein, James. The Decline of Socialism in America, 1912–1925. New York: 
Monthly Review Press, 1967.
Wilson, William Julius. The Declining Significance of Race: Blacks and Changing 
American Institutions.  2nd ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1980.


--- PAGE 237 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 238 ---
231
AAPA. See Association Against the 
Prohibition Amendment
activism: across country, 167–79, 
218–19n; cities with no reported ac-
tivity, 14; and collective action, 167; 
cultural identity variables, 178; eco-
nomic context, 172–74; geographic 
diffusion 7, 10–18, 181; indepen-
dent variables, 170; multivariate 
analysis, 168–69; political context, 
170–72; and power devaluation, 
167–71, 174–76, 178–79; state-level 
variation, 169–70, 176; status-based 
exchange relations, 174–75; and 
women voters, 179
AFL. See American Federation of 
Labor
African American migration: and eco-
nomic change, 57–58, 69–73, 92
African Americans. See blacks
African Blood Brotherhood, 72
agricultural depression: and economic 
change, 59–62, 77–79, 80, 89, 139, 
173, 174, 177, 179
Akron, Ohio: Klan in, 15, 145
Alabama: Klan in, 13, 15, 19, 21, 129, 
144, 148, 150, 169
Altoona, Pennsylvania: Klan in, 15, 
147
American Federation of Labor (AFL), 
7, 54, 91, 94, 96, 104
Americanism, 3, 21, 25–27, 62, 68–69, 
82–84, 103–6, 105, 109–10, 115, 
121, 126–27, 128–29, 143, 147, 
159, 167, 183–84, 188–89, 193–95, 
196
American Journal of Sociology, 200
American Legion, 144
American Railroad Union, 93
anarchism, 63, 104–6
Anderson, Indiana: Klan in, 53
Anglo-Saxons, 2, 36, 37, 70
anti-Semitism, 210
antivice movement, 42
Arizona: Klan in, 16, 102, 172–73
Arkansas: Klan in, 15, 148, 154–55, 
164, 165
Armageddon (film), 159
Index


--- PAGE 239 ---
232 index
Asbury Park, New Jersey, 165
Asheville, North Carolina: Klan in, 
112, 115, 161, 163–64, 167
Ashmore, J. W., 154
assimilation, 66, 69, 91, 119, 121, 195
Association Against the Prohibition 
Amendment (AAPA), 137
Athens, Georgia: Klan in, 6, 10, 29, 
83, 143–44
Atlanta, Georgia: first national con-
vention, 1922, 24, 26; Klan in, 
1, 13, 15, 20–21, 25–26; national 
headquarters, 13, 21, 157–58. See 
also Imperial Palace
Atlantic City, New Jersey, 15, 144
“Back to the Constitution” (Stephen-
son), 2
Baptist Church, 147, 148
Beck, E. M., 70–71
Beisel, Nicola, 41, 42, 114, 136
Belgium, 62
Benford, Robert, 44, 135, 140
Berger, Victor, 94
bigotry, 5–6, 9–10, 85, 101–2, 
113, 182. See also racism; white 
supremacy
Birmingham, Alabama: Klan in, 15, 
150
Birth of a Nation, The (film), 20–21, 
159
blacks: disenfranchisement of, 103; 
and education, 126–27, 129, 134; 
as enemy of Klan, 5–6, 9; stereo-
types regarding, 20, 199–200; and 
unskilled labor, 73, 104. See also 
civil rights movement
Blackwell, Oklahoma, 165; Klan in, 
165
Blau, Peter M., 40
Blee, Kathleen, 3, 6, 73, 154
bloc recruitment, 34, 37, 141
Bohn, Frank, 200–201
Bolsheviks, 72, 90, 104–6, 183, 185
Borah, William Edgar, 78, 80
Boston, Massachusetts: Klan in, 142
boycotts and boycotting: of businesses, 
3, 160; of Catholic merchants, 
3; and economic change, 79–84; 
and vocational klannishness, 79, 
82–84, 106
Brothers, Elmer D., 107
Bryan, Charles W., 186
Bryan, William Jennings, 77, 89, 
90–91, 184–85, 186, 194
Buckhead, Georgia, 157
Budd Dairy Company (Columbus, 
Ohio), 84
Buffalo, New York: Klan in, 16, 84
Bureau of Publication and Education 
(Klan), 158
burning crosses. See fiery crosses
buy American (slogan), 45
California: Klan in, 10, 15, 18, 88, 
98–99, 104, 152, 153–54, 158, 
162, 189
Canton, Ohio: Klan in, 94
capital: cultural, 114, 133, 136; and 
labor, 30, 50
capitalism: and deskilling of labor, 
51–59; and economic change, 
51–59; industrial, 30, 58, 65, 73, 
76, 111
Carnegie, Pennsylvania: Klan in, 12, 
142
Cashville, Virginia: Klan in, 165
Casper, Wyoming: Klan in, 147
Catholicism: as incompatible with 
democracy, 3; as infringement


--- PAGE 240 ---
index 233
on religious liberty, 187; lectures 
about, 145; opposition to, 105; and 
parochial schools, 125, 131; poli-
tics of, 101; and public schools, 
120, 131; vs. republican virtue, 101; 
and societal problems, 3; as threat 
to values, 133. See also parochial 
schools
Catholics: as enemy of Klan, 3, 4, 5–6, 
9, 32, 200
census. See U.S. census
Chalmers, David, 36, 84, 88, 113, 
144, 182
Chattanooga, Tennessee: Klan in, 146
Chicago: Klan in, 191
Christianity, 21, 145, 146, 147, 189
Christianson, Parly Parker, 95
churches. See Baptist Church; Catholi-
cism; Methodist Church; Protes-
tant churches
civil rights movement, 32–33, 34, 141, 
200
Civil War, 53, 89, 199
Clansman, The (Dixon), 20
Clarke, Edward Young, 21, 23–24
Clarksburg, West Virginia: Klan in, 
151–52
classical theories, 34, 36–38, 43, 
50, 198. See also specific theory or 
movement
Clemens, Elisabeth (Liz) S., 92, 
97–98, 143, 204
Cleveland, Grover, 194
Cleveland, Ohio: Klan in, 15, 27
cognitive liberation: in political pro-
cess model, 43
collective action: and activism, 167; 
and communication networks, 160; 
and economic change, 63; and edu-
cation, 113–16, 126; and politi cal 
mobilization, 86, 100, 181, 183; 
and power devaluation, 33–35, 38, 
43–48, 49, 160; and recruitment, 
140–41, 155, 158; and right-wing 
mobilization, 197–98, 199, 201; 
and social movements, 8, 31, 
33–35, 38, 43–48, 49, 198
collective-behavior theory, 33–34, 198
collective grievances. See grievances
collective psychology, 8, 30–31, 201
college students: as members, 102, 165
Colorado: Klan in, 16, 99, 101, 107–8, 
149
Columbus, Ohio, 84; Klan in, 15, 18, 
84
communication networks: and recruit-
ment, 141, 156–60
communism, 62, 63, 67, 72, 94–96, 
104–6, 105, 185
Connecticut: Klan in, 14, 17
Convention of the Conference on 
Political Action, 96
conventions and conferences (Klan), 
24, 26, 67, 101–2, 103, 109, 112, 
115
Coolidge, Calvin, 27, 187–89, 195
Coraopolis, Pennsylvania, 148
Coughlan, Robert, 2–3
crosses. See fiery crosses
cultural capital, 114, 133, 136
cultural identities, 45, 48, 50, 66, 168, 
175, 177–78, 181, 183, 200
cultural solidarity. See solidarity 
Dallas, Texas: Klan in, 15, 25
Danville, Arkansas: Klan in, 154
Darwin, Charles, 131
Davis, John W., 27, 186–87, 188, 194
Dawn (Klan publication), 30
Dayton, Washington: Klan in, 153


--- PAGE 241 ---
234 index
Debs, Eugene, 93–96
Delaware: Klan in, 17
Delaware County, Indiana: Klan in, 51
demand, stimulation of: and economic 
change, 59, 62–69, 76–82, 85; 
and education, 129–33; and po-
litical mobilization, 87, 99, 106–9, 
110–11, 183; and power devalua-
tion, 38, 39–42, 39–45, 44–45, 
48, 140, 183; and power dynamics, 
201. See also supply restriction
democracy, 3, 90, 97–98, 108, 130
Democratic National Conventions, 27, 
90, 175, 184–86
Democratic Party, 89–91, 103, 
186–87, 194
democratization: and globalization, 
201
Denver, Colorado: Klan in, 99
devaluation. See power devaluation
deviance and deviant action, 33–34
Dial, Nathaniel B., 81, 90
discontent, 33–35, 61, 63, 185, 198. 
See also grievances
disenfranchisement/disfranchisement, 
92, 103, 109, 199
Dixon, Thomas: Clansman, 20
Du Bois, W. E. B., 72–73
Dumenil, Lynn, 128
Durham, North Carolina: Klan in, 
152, 158
economic change: and activism, 
172–74; and African American 
migration, 57–58, 69–73, 92; and 
boycotting strategy, 79, 82–84; and 
capitalism, 51–59; and collective 
action, 63; and elite, 63; and labor 
force, 51–59, 73–76; and power 
devaluation, 49–50, 58–59, 62–63, 
66, 68, 74, 85; redefining mar-
kets along cultural lines, 49–85, 
209–12n; and vocational klannish-
ness, 79, 82–84, 106. See also 
agricultural depression; demand, 
stimulation of; grievances; supply 
restriction
education: and blacks, 126–27, 129, 
134; and collective action, 113–16, 
126; college enrollment, 123–24; 
framing of, 126, 129, 130; high 
school graduates, 122–23, 165; 
and middle class, 122; and power 
devaluation, 113–16, 122–24, 
127–29, 133–38, 174; and stimu-
lation of demand, 129–33; and 
supply restriction, 124–29. See also 
illiteracy; parochial schools; public 
schools
El Dorado, Arkansas: Klan in, 164
Elgin, Oregon: Klan in, 158
elite: as dominant group, 185; and eco-
nomic changes, 63; industrial, 53, 
64–65, 136; as Klan members, 29, 
47; and laborers, 98; vs. masses, 41; 
and prohibition, 137
Elks, 144
Emergency Tariff Act of 1921, 60–61
Emerson, Richard, 40
emigrants, 127
ethnic competition theory, 8–9, 171, 
198–99
Evans, Hiram Wesley, Imperial 
Wizard: appears on cover of Time, 
27, 28; on black immigrants, 70; 
on Catholicism, 101–2; on Demo-
cratic Party, 194–95; on economic 
transitions, 63–64; on education 
and schools, 112, 113, 115, 125–26, 
131, 133; financial growth of Klan 
under direction of, 19, 25, 157–58; 
on growth of Klan in Indiana, 1–2;


--- PAGE 242 ---
index 235
as guest pastor, 148; on immigra-
tion restriction, 65–67; on indus-
trial capitalism, 30; Intelligence 
Bureau under direct control of, 160; 
on Klan, 27, 29, 143, 182, 185–86, 
187, 188–89, 191; vs. LaFollette, 
185–86; leads coup against Sim-
mons, 24; named Imperial Wizard, 
1922, 24; and national elections, 
27–29; on paternalism, 103; on 
presidential election, 194–95; vs. 
Stephenson, 27, 156–57, 191; as 
Texas resident, 13; on unskilled 
labor in rural areas, 65; on violence, 
161, 162 
Evansville, Indiana: Klan in, 159
evolution, theory of, 131
Exalted Cyclops, 103, 146
exchange markets: and power de -
valuation, 39–43, 134, 139, 174
factionalism, 24, 40, 91, 95, 142, 157, 
181–82, 184
families: and labor force participation, 
73–76
Farmer-Labor Party, 14, 26, 94–96, 
172–73, 176, 177
Farmers’ Alliance, 89
fascism, 62–63, 87
Federal Reserve Bank, 81
Ferguson, Jim, 25
Fiery Cross (Klan newspaper), 1, 68, 
73, 78, 79, 81, 135, 173, 187
Fiery Cross Club (University of 
Kansas), 165
fiery crosses, 2, 148–53
Florida: Klan in, 16, 147, 164
Fordney-McCumber Tariff Act of 
1922, 60–61
Foster, William Z., 96
frame alignment theory, 43, 181
frame extension, 135
framing: of economic grievances, 
62–66, 76, 77, 85–87, 172, 179; 
of education, 126, 129, 130; and 
social movements, 39, 43–45, 48, 
63, 79, 100, 113–15, 126, 134, 140, 
155, 158, 167, 198, 199. See also 
recruitment
Frank, Leo, 20, 21
fraternal organizations: as model for 
recruitment, 19, 21, 29–30, 37, 88, 
140–45, 149, 197. See also specific 
organization(s)
Freemasons, 19
Fresno, California: Klan in, 154, 162
fusionists, 89
Gainesville, Georgia, 152
Gaventa, John, 9
geographic diffusion: of activism, 7, 
10–18, 181
Georgia: Kan in, 1, 6, 10, 11, 13, 15, 
20, 21, 25–26, 29, 83–84, 143–44, 
152, 157, 186
Gifford, Fred L.: Grand Dragon of 
Oregon, 26
globalization: and democratization, 
201
Goffman, Erving, 43
Goldberg, Robert Alan, 29
Grange, The, 89
Grant, Madison: Passing of the Great 
Race, 37
Gravelly, Arkansas: Klan in, 154
Great Depression, 51, 195
Gresham’s law, 182
grievances: collective, 33–38, 44, 
47, 66, 142, 156; and economic 
change, 62–66, 76, 77, 85–87, 172, 
179; national, articulated by Klan, 
7; and power devaluation, 33–35;


--- PAGE 243 ---
236 index
and recruitment, 30; and social 
movements, 33–35, 38. See also ag-
ricultural depression; discontent
Griffith, D. W.: Birth of a Nation 
(film), 20–21, 159
group identity, 9
Gurr, Ted Robert, 33–34
Hamilton County, Kentucky: Klan 
in, 151
Harding, Warren, 60, 173
Hardwick, Thomas W., 26
heterogeneity, 171, 198–99. See also 
homogeneity
Hillquit, Morris, 94
Hofstadter, Richard, 36, 113
home rule, 20. See also martial law
homogeneity, 8, 84, 140, 171, 
178, 180, 186, 198. See also 
heterogeneity
hooded empire, 26
hoods, 2–3, 9, 147, 161, 168, 196, 199. 
See also masks
Hoover, Herbert, 195
Hot Springs, Arkansas: Klan in, 148
Howard County, Indiana: Klan in, 
3–4
Howell, Michigan: Klan in, 12
Idaho: Klan in, 17, 78
identity. See cultural identities; group 
identity
Illinois: Klan in, 1, 2, 7, 13, 15, 30, 
159, 177, 191
illiteracy, 5, 65, 75, 115–16, 119, 
125–26, 127
immigrants and immigration: as 
enemy of Klan, 5–6, 9, 200; and 
racial and ethnic conflict, 10; 
stereotypes regarding, 199; and 
unskilled laborers, 65
immigration restriction, 65–67, 76, 91, 
101, 106, 110, 127–29, 134, 187
Imperial Night-Hawk (Klan national 
newspaper), 5–6, 19, 25, 30, 32, 
49, 196, 204; and activism, 10–13, 
169; on economic change, 63, 67, 
69–70, 72, 74–75, 77–78, 83–84; 
on education, 112, 115, 128; events 
reported in (table), 15–17; finances 
published in, 25; and geographical 
variation in activities, 10–13, 
169; mailing address, 84; mission 
and purpose of, 11; name change, 
260n26; on politics, 86, 100, 104, 
107, 108, 180, 186–88; and Prohi-
bition, 134, 136; and recruitment, 
139, 142, 144–51, 153–54, 157–59, 
162–65
Imperial Palace (Atlanta, Georgia), 11, 
24, 144, 157
Indiana: Klan in, 1–13, 15, 18, 27, 
51–53, 68, 73, 78, 79, 81, 93, 
102–3, 132, 135, 144–45, 150, 
152–56, 159, 162–65, 167–70, 173, 
177, 187, 191–93
Indianapolis, Indiana: Klan in, 15, 18, 
27, 153, 162, 164–65
industrial capitalism. See capitalism 
industrial elite. See elite
industrialism and industrialists, 30, 
36, 54, 55, 58, 66, 67, 69, 84–85, 
181
industrialization, 53, 54, 122
Industrial Revolution, 53
Industrial Workers of the World 
(IWW), 26, 104–5
Inglewood, California: Klan in, 162
initiation (naturalization) ceremonies, 
12, 149–50, 152, 159, 165, 169
institutionalized group identity, 9
Intelligence Bureau (Klan), 160


--- PAGE 244 ---
index 237
intimidation, 23, 62, 71, 166, 196, 
199–200, 234
intolerance, 23, 131, 161
Invisible Empire, 2, 6, 27, 78, 82–83, 
84, 97, 109, 113, 144, 182
Iowa: Klan in, 16
IWW. See Industrial Workers of the 
World
Jackman, Mary, 9, 71, 199
Jackson, Ed, 192
Jackson, Kenneth, 20, 36, 113, 168, 
182
Jacksonville, Florida: Klan in, 16, 147, 
164
Jefferson, Thomas, 161–62
Jeffersonian ideals, 64
Jews: as enemy of Klan, 9, 32, 57, 
82–84, 106, 153, 171, 176, 178
job market. See labor force
Johnson, Guy B., 200–201
Judaism, 105
Kansas: Klan in, 15, 78, 137–38, 147, 
165
Kansas City, Missouri: Klan in, 15, 67, 
103, 150
Kentucky: Klan in, 1, 16, 147–48, 151, 
152, 189
Kirksville, Missouri: Klan in, 153
Kiwanis, 144
Klankraft, 199
Klan Kreed, 148
Klan nation. See Ku Klux Klan: as na-
tional movement
Klan Oath, 104–5
Klansman’s Creed, 30, 50, 82
Klanswomen, 2, 3, 10, 13, 25, 36–37, 
93, 115, 141, 142, 152, 154, 158–60, 
182, 188. See also Women’s Ku 
Klux Klan
Klanswomen’s Creed, 74–75
Klaverns (Klan meeting halls), 149, 
154
Kleagles, recruiters, 21
Klonvocations, 24, 67, 103. See also 
conventions and conferences
Kloran, 19–20, 23
Knights of Columbus, 153–54
Knights of Pythias, 19, 145
Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, 11, 
19, 22, 71, 74, 107, 113, 146–47, 
158–59, 163–64, 165, 167, 185–86
Kokomo, Indiana: Klan in, 1–4, 9, 
51, 79
Kourier (Klan magazine), 73–74, 180, 
188–89, 193–95, 206n26
Ku Klux Klan: cities with no reported 
activity, 14; as civic asset, 163–65; 
first annual meeting of state Grand 
Dragons, 161; first annual national 
convention Atlanta, 24, 26; as mili-
tary organization, 143; as national 
movement, 1–18, 21–23, 205–6nn; 
organizational framework for, 19; 
revival of, 19–31, 206–7nn; self-
preservation of, 82. See also hooded 
empire; Invisible Empire; Knights 
of the Ku Klux Klan; Women’s Ku 
Klux Klan
Ku Klux Klan, The (Mecklin), 5, 36, 
182
Labaree, David F., 122
labor: and capital, 30, 50
laborers: and elite, 98; vs. industrial-
ists, 30
labor force: deskilling of and capi-
talism, 51–59; and economic 
change, 51–59; as members of 
Klan, 29–30; traditional families, 
participation in, 73–76


--- PAGE 245 ---
238 index
labor radicalism: Klan hostile toward, 
30
LaFollette, Robert, 27, 78, 81, 95–97, 
184–88
Lanier University, 19, 23
Law Enforcement Committee (Klan), 
143–44
left, the. See political left
Lenoir City, Tennessee, 152
Library of Congress, 204; Kloran in, 
20, 23
Link, Arthur, 53–54, 98
Lipset, Seymour Martin, 36, 113, 182
Lipsitz, George, 9
Lisbon, Ohio: Klan in, 165
Logtown, Mississippi: Klan in, 18
Loogootie, Indiana: Klan in, 144–45
Lorain, Ohio: Klan in, 158
Los Angeles: Klan in, 162
Louisiana: Klan in, 16, 103, 153, 158, 
160
Lynd, Robert and Helen: Middletown, 
51–53, 122
MacLean, Nancy, 6, 83, 143–44
Mahoney, William, 95–96
Maine: Klan in, 14, 17, 27, 189
Marion, Indiana: Klan in, 150
martial law, 26, 160. See also home rule
Marxism, 93, 114
Maryland: Klan in, 16
masks, 26. See also hoods
Mason-Dixon Line, 103
Masons, 21, 29–30, 115, 143, 144–45
Massachusetts: Klan in, 14, 17, 92, 
142
mass society theory, 33–34, 198
Mayfield, Earle B., 25, 81
McAdam, Doug, 34, 43
McAdoo, William Gibbs, 186
McCormick, Richard, 53–54, 98
Mecklin, John Moffat: The Ku Klux 
Klan, 5, 36, 182
members and membership: attributes 
of, 29–31; college students, 102, 
165; economic motives and benefits 
of, 30; elite underrepresented, 29; 
fees and costs, 21, 142; industrial 
proletariat underrepresented, 29; 
middle class, 5, 6, 29–30; and rural 
communities, 13, 19, 36, 62, 66, 
68, 72, 77–78, 87–89, 113, 173; 
socioeconomic diversity of, 29. See 
also recruitment
Methodist Church, 139, 144–45, 147, 
148
Michigan: Klan in, 1, 12, 15, 129
microeconomics, 39, 44–45, 66, 87, 
100, 140
middle class: and education, 122; Klan 
as hysteria of, 5; as Klan members, 
5, 6, 29–30; and republican ide-
ology of Klan, 6, 30
Middletown (Lynd), 51–53, 122
Milwaukee, Wisconsin: Klan in, 159
Minnesota: Klan in, 14, 17, 94–95, 
148, 177, 189
Mississippi: Klan in, 16, 18
Missouri: Klan in, 15, 67, 103, 150, 
153, 169
Modesto, California: Klan in, 18, 158
Monroe, Louisiana, 103; Klan in, 103
Montana: Klan in, 17, 96
Moore, Barrington, 89
Moore, Leonard, 36, 37
Morgantown, West Virginia: Klan in, 
159
Muncie, Indiana: Klan in, 51–53, 122, 
155 –56
Mussolini, Benito, 63, 210n29


--- PAGE 246 ---
index 239
National Education Association 
(NEA), 125
“National Objective,” 189, 191
National Unity League, 84
nativism and nativity, 3–5, 9, 13, 14, 
29–30, 36, 37, 50–51, 57–59, 85, 
109–11, 113, 121, 132–33, 141–42, 
166–68, 170–72, 174–76, 178–80, 
199, 201
naturalization ceremonies. See initia-
tion (naturalization) ceremonies
Nazi Party, 62, 201
NEA. See National Education 
Association
Nebraska: Klan in, 17, 91
Nevada: Klan in, 17
New Castle, Indiana: Klan in, 132; 
Klanswomen in, 93
New Hampshire: Klan in, 14, 17
New Jersey: Klan in, 13, 15, 142, 144, 
148, 154, 165, 186–87
New Mexico: Klan in, 17, 102
New Philadelphia, Ohio: Klan in, 154
New York (city and state): Klan in, 
13–14, 16, 27, 84, 96, 133, 170, 185
New York Times, 3, 128
New York World, 21–22, 23, 161
Nineteenth Amendment, 91, 99, 109, 
171
Non-Partisan League, 94
Nordic colonizers, 37
Norris, George, 91
North Carolina: Klan in, 13, 17, 112, 
115, 152, 158, 159, 161, 163–64, 
165, 167
North Dakota: Klan in, 14, 17, 173, 177
nouveaux riche, 42
Oakland, California: Klan in, 10, 15, 
88, 98–99
Oberholtzer, Madge, 191–92
Oberschall, Anthony, 34, 141, 203
Odd Fellows, 19, 29–30, 142–43, 
144–45
Ohio: Klan in, 1, 2, 7, 15, 18, 27, 
84, 94, 115, 133, 135, 139, 145, 
147–48, 154, 158, 163, 165, 177
Oklahoma: Klan in, 15, 26, 145, 160, 
164, 165
Olson, Mancur, 141
“Onward Christian Soldiers” (an-
them), 143, 149
Orbinson, Charles J., Judge, 167
Oregon: Klan in, 5, 16, 25, 26, 99, 
115, 129, 148, 158
parochial schools, 116–34, 174. See 
also education; public schools
Passing of the Great Race, The (Grant), 
37
paternalism, 54, 69–73, 103, 109, 185
patriotism, 2, 45, 64, 101, 104, 109, 
114, 121, 130, 134
Pawnee, Texas: Klan in, 153
Peddy, George, 25
Pekin, Illinois: Klan in, 159
Pekin Daily Times (Klan-owned town 
newspaper), 159
Pennsylvania: Klan in, 2, 12, 13, 15, 
125, 142, 147, 148, 161
People’s Party, 89. See also populism
Perth Amboy, New Jersey: Klan in, 
142
Phagan, Mary: rape and murder of, 20
Pierce, Walter, 26, 115, 148
Pisgah, Alabama: Klan in, 144
political left, 62, 92–97, 103–6, 160, 
177, 203
political opportunity theory, 8, 35, 37, 
43, 45–46, 160–63, 166, 197


--- PAGE 247 ---
240 index
political process model, 43, 145–46
politics: and activism, 170–72; attack-
ing the left, 103–6; and candidate 
support and endorsements, 4, 
25–29; of Catholicism, 10; chal-
lenge from the left, 92–97; and 
collective action, 86, 100, 181, 183; 
and expansion of suffrage, 91–92; 
exploiting openings, 160–63; in-
volvement and participation in, 
7, 25–29, 86–111, 180–95; and 
justice, 1; machine politics, 97–99; 
members elected to U.S. Senate, 
25; and mobilization, 86–111, 
212–14n; and national elections, 
27–29, 180–95, 219–20n; and 
power devaluation, 45–47, 85, 87, 
97, 99–100, 106, 182–83; and 
recruitment, 31, 160–63; relation 
to party politics, 183–87; during 
revival period, 25–29; role of Klan 
in, 2; and stimulation of demand, 
87, 99, 106–9, 110–11, 183; and 
supply restriction, 99–103. See also 
political left; right-wing move -
ments; specific political movements 
and parties
populism, 6, 20, 77–78, 79, 85, 87, 89, 
90–91, 93–94, 161–62, 174
Portland, Oregon: Klan in, 16, 17, 26, 
99
Portuguese Republic: collapse of, 89
power devaluation, 8, 18, 31, 197–99, 
201, 203, 207–9n; and activism, 
167–71, 174–76, 178–79; and clas-
sical theory, 36–38; and collective 
action, 33–35, 38, 43–48, 49, 160; 
and economic change, 49–50, 
58–59, 62–63, 66, 68, 74, 85; 
and education, 113–16, 122–24, 
127–29, 133–38, 174; and ex-
change markets, 39–43, 134, 139, 
174; and grievances, 33–35; inter-
pretive processes, 42–45; multiple 
sources of, 41–42; organizational 
resources, 45–47; and political 
mobilization, 45–47, 85, 87, 97, 
99–100, 106, 182–83; and purchas-
ing power, 39–45; and recruitment, 
139–40, 160, 166; and resource 
mobilization theory, 197; and right-
wing mobilization, 8–9, 31, 32–48, 
49, 87, 139–40, 182–83, 197; and 
social change, 36, 43–44, 46; and 
social movements, 8, 32–48; and 
solidarity, 45; sources of, 41–42, 
133–38; status-based, 7, 122–24, 
133–38
power-devaluation model, 207–9n; 
and ethnic-competition theory, 
198–99; and geographic diffusion of 
activism, 18; political, 97, 99, 106, 
182–83; and right-wing mobiliza-
tion, 8, 31, 32–33, 38–39, 182–83; 
and social movements, 8, 38–39, 
47–48; status-based, 174–75; three 
key components, 39
power dynamics, 201
Princeton, Kentucky: Klan in, 147–48
Princeton University, 154
Progressive party, 27, 77–78, 90, 91, 
95, 96, 134, 184, 185
progressivism, 6, 32–33, 54, 76, 87, 
93, 128, 174, 188
Prohibition, 23–24, 78, 114, 134–41, 
174–79, 188
proletariat, 29–30, 65, 99, 122, 129, 
183, 185


--- PAGE 248 ---
index 241
Propagation Department (Klan), 21, 
23–24
Protestant churches: reciprocal ties 
between Klan, 3, 145–49; and re-
cruitment, 21, 140–49
protests: collective, 33; social, 33–34
psychology, collective, 8, 30–31, 201
public schools: defense of, 115–21; 
high school graduates, 122–23, 
165; and power devaluation, 
122–24, 174; role of in society, 
121; and stimulation of demand, 
129–33; student enrollment in, 
118, 176, 179; and supply restric-
tion, 124–29; total expenditures 
per pupil, 117. See also education; 
parochial schools
Pueblo, Colorado: Klan in, 149
purchasing power, 7, 61, 100, 122–23, 
128, 183; and power devaluation, 
39–45
Raab, Earl, 36, 113, 182
race: and construction off boundaries, 
3–4; as cultural construct, 9; and 
group identity, 9
race suicide, 201
racism, 9–10, 113, 199. See also 
bigotry; white supremacy
radicalism, 5, 30, 74, 96–97, 109
Raleigh, North Carolina: Klan in, 159
Reconstruction-era, 19–20, 152, 160
Reconstruction Klan Prescript (1867), 
19
recruitment, 139–66, 216–18n; bloc, 
34, 37, 141; ceremonies, parades, 
and social gatherings, 149–50; 
and civic assets, 163–65; and col-
lective action, 140–41, 155, 158; 
communication networks, 141, 
156–60; and framing, 5, 6, 31, 
43–45, 48–50, 124, 135, 140, 155, 
158, 160, 166–68, 170, 171, 173, 
174, 181, 183, 198; and grievances, 
30; and Klan as civic asset, 163–65; 
opportunistic strategy of, 29; or-
ganizational models, 140–45; and 
political opportunities, 31, 160–63; 
and power devaluation, 139–40, 
160, 166; reciprocal ties with Prot-
estant churches, 21, 140–49. See 
also members and membership
religion: and construction off bound-
aries, 3–4; intolerance, 23, 131. See 
also Catholicism; specific churches
republican ideology, 6, 30, 64, 67, 82, 
92–93, 101, 106, 124–25
Republican National Conventions, 27, 
28, 95, 187
Republican Party, 27, 54, 89–90, 95, 
103, 184, 195
resource mobilization theory, 8, 
34–35, 37, 43, 45–46, 141, 
145–46, 157, 166, 197
Rexists (Belgium), 62
Rhode Island: Klan in, 14, 17, 92
Rhomberg, Chris, 88, 98
right-wing movements, 196–201, 
220n; and collective action, 
197–98, 199, 201; consequences 
of, 47–48; economic incentives, 
8; and extremism, 201; political 
incentives, 8, 182–83; and power 
devaluation, 8–9, 31, 32–48, 49, 
87, 139–40, 182–83, 197; and 
social movements, 31, 32–48; and 
social theory, 9; and status-based 
interests, 8


--- PAGE 249 ---
242 index
Rochford, E. Burke, Jr., 135
Roman Catholic Church, 66, 106–7
Roosevelt, Theodore, 78
Russian revolution, 94, 103–4
Ryant, Carl G., 58–59
San Antonio, Texas: Klan in, 155
Sanders, Elizabeth, 88, 91
Santa Monica, California: Klan in, 152
schools. See parochial schools; public 
schools
Schwartzman, Kathleen, 89
Scottish Rites Masons, 115
Sea Girt, New Jersey, 186–87
Seattle, Washington: Klan in, 151
secularism, 104, 131
self-determination, 2
Sherwood, Tennessee, 162–63; Klan 
in, 162–63
Shreveport, Louisiana, 153, 158
Shriner’s Circus, 145
Shuler, Allen C., 147
Silver Party, 89
Simmel, Georg, 40–41
Simmons, William Joseph, Colonel: 
coup against and banishment from 
Klan, 24–25, 156–57; as founder 
and Imperial Wizard of second 
Klan, 1915, 19–21, 193; fraternal 
organizations experience, 143; 
Kloran,  19–20; on movement’s 
opponents, 23; testifies before con-
gressional hearing, 22–23, 161
Sims, Walter A., 26
slavery, 64–65, 69–70, 89, 199
Smelser, Neil, 33
Smith, Al, 133, 185, 186, 194–95
Smith-Towner Bill, 128
Snow, David, 43, 44, 135, 140
social atomization, 36
social change, 8, 9, 31–36, 43–44, 46, 
63, 168, 180; and power devalua-
tion, 36, 43–44, 46
social equality, 72
Social Forces (journal), 200
socialism, 62, 90, 94, 105
Socialist party, 26, 62, 91, 93–96, 160, 
172, 176, 177, 185
social movement theory: and collective 
action, 8, 31, 33–35, 38, 43–48, 
49, 198; and deviance, 33–34; and 
framing of, 39, 43–45, 48, 63, 79, 
100, 113–15, 126, 134, 140, 155, 
158, 167, 198, 199; and grievances, 
33–35, 38; historical development 
of, 33; and political rebellion, 
33–34; and power devaluation, 8, 
32–48; and right-wing mobiliza-
tion, 31, 32–48; and social policy, 
9. See also political opportunity 
theory; resource mobilization 
theory
social protest, 33–34
sociologists, 5, 32
solidarity: cultural, 66, 68, 82, 85; 
and identity, 200; in-group, 34, 48, 
183; and national elections, 189; 
and power devaluation, 45
South Bend, Indiana: Klan in, 12, 15, 
102
South Carolina: Klan in, 16, 71, 90, 
91, 107, 137
South Dakota: Klan in, 14, 17, 173, 
177
Southern Publicity Association (Clarke 
and Tyler), 21
Sovietism, 105, 106
SPAM (Study of Politics and Move-
ments), 204
Stephenson, D. C.: appointed Grand


--- PAGE 250 ---
index 243
Dragon of Indiana, 2; “Back to 
the Constitution,” 2; convicted of 
murder, 191–92; on currency and 
credit, 4; vs. Evans, 27, 156–57, 
191; on farmers’ grievances, 79; 
and Indiana politics, 27; leads coup 
against Simmons, 24; on world war, 
4–5
Sterling-Reed Bill, 75, 128–29
Stigler, Oklahoma: Klan in, 145
stimulation of demand. See demand, 
stimulation of 
Stockton, California: Klan in, 153–54
Study of Politics and Movements 
(SPAM), 204
suffrage, 40, 74, 91–92, 99, 109, 139, 
171, 177, 200
Sunday, Billy, 148
supply restriction: and economic 
change, 66–69; and education, 
124–29; and national political 
mobilization, 99–103. See also 
demand, stimulation of 
Tammany Hall, 90–91
Tarrow, Sidney, 35, 47
Tennessee: Klan in, 16, 146, 152, 
162–63
Terre Haute, Indiana: Klan in, 152
Texas: Klan in, 13, 15, 24, 25, 69, 102, 
135, 136, 153, 155, 159, 164
theory of evolution, 131
Tilden, Samuel, 194
Time magazine: Evans on cover, 27, 
28
Tolerance (National Unity League), 84
Tolnay, Stewart, 70, 71
Towner-Sterling Bill, 128
Trade with a Klansman (TWK), 3–4
“Traitor Within, A” (Klan film), 156
Trenton, New Jersey: Klan in, 15, 154
Trotsky, Leon, 104
Tullahoma, Tennessee, 152
TWK. See Trade with a Klansman
Tyack, David, 120
Tyler, Elizabeth, 21, 23–24
universalism, 105
University of Kansas, 165
University of North Carolina, 165, 
203
University of Notre Dame, 102
urbanization, 117
U.S. census, 4, 13, 55, 57–58, 116, 119, 
170–71, 173–74
U.S. Constitution, 2, 4, 5, 102, 105, 
107, 115, 121, 163, 187
U.S. Dept. of Commerce, 14, 56, 57, 
60, 61, 118
U.S. Federal Trade Commission, 58
U.S. House: Committee investigation 
and hearing (1922), 22–23, 24, 161
U.S. Senate, 25, 80–81, 94–95, 194
Utah: Klan in, 17, 95
Valparaiso University, 107
Vatican, 126, 183, 194
Vermont: Klan in, 14, 17
vigilantism, 10, 51, 135, 136, 161, 201
violence, 9, 21–22, 26, 62–63, 69–72, 
114, 142, 160–63, 166, 187, 196–
97, 199–200
Virginia: Klan in, 13, 16, 165
vocational klannishness: and economic 
change, 79, 82–84, 106
Volstead Act, 135–36, 137, 175, 193
Walker, Clifford, 26
Wallace, George, 200
Walton, Jack, 26, 160


--- PAGE 251 ---
244 index
Washington (state): Klan in, 16, 95, 
151, 153
Washington, Booker T., 103
Washington, D.C.: Klan in, 158, 190
Watson, Thomas E., 20
Weber, Max, 41
Wellsville, Ohio: Klan in, 139, 147–48
West Virginia: Klan in, 16, 147, 148, 
151–52, 159, 164
Wheeler, Burton, 96
white separatism, 9, 10, 147, 198
white supremacy, 6, 8–9, 10, 70, 
72–73, 85, 113, 142, 147, 160–61. 
See also bigotry; racism
Wichita Falls, Kansas, 15, 147
Wilson, Woodrow, 54, 60, 90–91, 
186, 194
Wisconsin: Klan in, 17, 27, 78, 95, 
159, 185
WKKK. See Women’s Ku Klux Klan
Wobblies. See Industrial Workers of 
the World
women. See suffrage; Klanswomen; 
Women’s Ku Klux Klan
Women’s Ku Klux Klan (WKKK), 
3, 6, 25, 73–74, 109, 152, 165, 
171–72. See also Klanswomen
women’s rights, 73, 109
Woodmen of the World, 19
Woodward, James G., 26
Worden, Steven, 135
workers. See labor force
World War I, 4, 54, 55, 79, 84–85, 93, 
94, 121, 125, 127
Wyoming: Klan in, 17, 95, 147, 158
xenophobia, 6, 113
Yell County, Arkansas: Klan in, 154
Youngstown, Ohio: Klan in, 15, 163


--- PAGE 252 ---
Ro R y M c v eigh  is associate professor of sociology at the University of 
Notre Dame.


--- PAGE 253 ---
Social Movements, Protest, and Contention
Series Editor: Bert Klandermans, Free University, Amsterdam
Associate Editors: Ron R. Aminzade, University of Minnesota 
David S. Meyer, University of California, Irvine 
Verta A. Taylor, University of California, Santa Barbara
Volume 32 Rory McVeigh, The Rise of the Ku Klux Klan: Right- Wing 
Movements and National Politics
Volume 31 Tina Fetner, How the Religious Right Shaped Lesbian and 
Gay Activism
Volume 30 Jo Reger, Rachel L. Einwohner, and Daniel J. Myers, editors, 
Identity Work in Social Movements
Volume 29 Paul D. Almeida, Waves of Protest: Popular Struggle in 
El Salvador, 1925–2005
Volume 28 Heidi J. Swarts, Organizing Urban America: Secular and Faith-
 based Progressive Movements
Volume 27 Ethel C. Brooks, Unraveling the Garment Industry: 
Transnational Organizing and Women’s Work
Volume 26 Donatella della Porta, Massimiliano Andretta, Lorenzo Mosca, 
and Herbert Reiter, Globalization from Below: Transnational 
Activists and Protest Networks
Volume 25 Ruud Koopmans, Paul Statham, Marco Giugni, and Florence 
Passy, Contested Citizenship: Immigration and Cultural Diversity 
in Europe
Volume 24 David Croteau, William Hoynes, and Charlotte Ryan, editors, 
Rhyming Hope and History: Activists, Academics, and Social 
Movement Scholarship
Volume 23 David S. Meyer, Valerie Jenness, and Helen Ingram, editors, 
Routing the Opposition: Social Movements, Public Policy, and 
Democracy
Volume 22 Kurt Schock, Unarmed Insurrections: People Power Movements 
in Nondemocracies


--- PAGE 254 ---
Volume 21 Christian Davenport, Hank Johnston, and Carol Mueller, 
editors, Repression and Mobilization
Volume 20 Nicole C. Raeburn, Changing Corporate America from Inside 
Out: Lesbian and Gay Workplace Rights
Volume 19 Vincent J. Roscigno and William F. Danaher, The Voice of 
Southern Labor: Radio, Music, and Textile Strikes, 1929–1934
Volume 18 Maryjane Osa, Solidarity and Contention: Networks of Polish 
Opposition
Volume 17 Mary Margaret Fonow, Union Women: Forging Feminism in the 
United Steelworkers of America
Volume 16 Bert Klandermans and Suzanne Staggenborg, editors, Methods 
of Social Movement Research
Volume 15 Sharon Kurtz, Workplace Justice: Organizing Multi- Identity 
Movements
Volume 14 Sanjeev Khagram, James V. Riker, and Kathryn Sikkink, 
editors, Restructuring World Politics: Transnational Social 
Movements, Networks, and Norms
Volume 13 Sheldon Stryker, Timothy J. Owens, and Robert W. White, 
editors, Self, Identity, and Social Movements
Volume 12 Byron A. Miller, Geography and Social Movements: Comparing 
Antinuclear Activism in the Boston Area
Volume 11 Mona N. Younis, Liberation and Democratization: The South 
African and Palestinian National Movements
Volume 10 Marco Giugni, Doug McAdam, and Charles Tilly, editors, 
How Social Movements Matter
Volume 9 Cynthia Irvin, Militant Nationalism: Between Movement and 
Party in Ireland and the Basque Country
Volume 8 Raka Ray, Fields of Protest: Women’s Movements in India
Volume 7 Michael P. Hanagan, Leslie Page Moch, and Wayne te 
Brake, editors, Challenging Authority: The Historical Study 
of Contentious Politics
Volume 6 Donatella della Porta and Herbert Reiter, editors, Policing 
Protest: The Control of Mass Demonstrations in Western 
Democracies


--- PAGE 255 ---
Volume 5 Hanspeter Kriesi, Ruud Koopmans, Jan Willem Dyvendak, 
and Marco G. Giugni, editors, New Social Movements in 
Western Europe: A Comparative Analysis
Volume 4 Hank Johnston and Bert Klandermans, editors, Social 
Movements and Culture
Volume 3 J. Craig Jenkins and Bert Klandermans, editors, The Politics 
of Social Protest: Comparative Perspectives on States and Social 
Movements
Volume 2 John Foran, editor, A Century of Revolution: Social Movements 
in Iran
Volume 1 Andrew Szasz, EcoPopulism: Toxic Waste and the Movement for 
Environmental Justice

