=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Scenes In Life of Harriet Tubman.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 148
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:12:42.283192
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
WfrMs'
University of California Berkeley


--- PAGE 3 ---



--- PAGE 4 ---



--- PAGE 5 ---



--- PAGE 6 ---



--- PAGE 7 ---



--- PAGE 8 ---
HARRIET TTJBMAN.


--- PAGE 9 ---
SCENES
IN THE LIFE OF
HARRIET TUBMAN.
SARAH H. BRADFORD.
AUBURN:
W. J. MOSES, PRINTER.
1860.


--- PAGE 10 ---
E44f
T3
Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1869,
BY WILLIAM G. WISE,
In the Clerk's Offl^^eDi^*<^*| Northem Districl
STEREOTYPED BY
DENNIS BRO'S & CO.,
AUBURN, N. Y.


--- PAGE 11 ---
rnTBODUOTKXST.
THE following little story was written by Mrs. Sarah H.
Bradford, of Geneva, with the single object of furnishing
some help to the subject of the memoir. Harriet Tubman's
services and sufferings during the rebellion, which are
acknowledged in the letters of Gen. Saxton, and others, it
was thought by many, would justify the bestowment of a
pension by the Government. But the difficulties in the
way of procuring such relief, suggested other methods, and
finally the present one. The narrative was prepared on
the eve of the author's departure for Europe, where she
still remains. It makes no claim whatever to literary
merit. Her hope was merely that the considerably numer-
ous public already in part acquainted with Harriet's story,
would furnish purchasers enough to secure a little fund for
the relief of this remarkable woman. Outside that circle
she did not suppose the memoir was likely to meet with
much if any sale.
In furtherance of the same benevolent scheme, and in or-
der to secure the whole avails of the work for Harriet's
benefit, a subscription has been raised more than sufficient
to defray the entire cost of publication. This has been
effected by the generous exertions of Wm. G. Wise, Esq.,
of this city. The whole amount was contributed by citi-
M79798


--- PAGE 12 ---
INTRODUCTION.
zens of Auburn, with the exception of two liberal subscrip-
tions by Gcrrit Smith, Esq., and Mr. Wendell Phillips.
Mr. Wise has also consented, at Mrs. Bradford's request,
to act as trustee for Harriet
; and will receive, invest, and
apply, for her benefit, whatever may accrue from the sale
of this book.
The spirited wood-cut likeness of Harriet, in her costume
as scout, was furnished by the kindness ofMr. J. C. Darby,
of this city. S. M. H.
AUBUKN, Dec. 1, 1868.


--- PAGE 13 ---
PEEFAOE.
IT is proposed in this little book to give a plain
and unvarnished account of some scenes and adven-
tures in the life of a woman who, though one of
earth's lowly ones, and of dark-hued skin, has
shown an amountof heroism in her character rarely
possessedby those of any station in life. Her name
(we say it advisedly and without exaggeration)
deserves to be handed down to posterity side by
side with the names of Joan of Arc, Grace Darling,
and Florence Nightingale ;
for not one of these
women has shown more courage and power of en-
durance in facing danger and death to relieve hu-
man suffering, than has this woman in her heroic
and successful endeavors to reach andsave all whom
she might of her oppressed and suffering race, and
to pilot them from the land of Bondage to the
promised land of Liberty. Well has she been call-
ed " Moses" for she has been a leader and deliverer
unto hundreds of her people.


--- PAGE 14 ---
2 PREFACE.
Worn down by her sufferings and fatigues, her
health permanently affected by the cruelties to
which she has been subjected, she is still laboring
to the utmost limit of her strength for the support
of her aged parents, and still also for her afflicted
people by her own efforts supporting two schools
for Freedmen at the South, and supplying them
with clothes and books
;
never obtruding herself,
never asking for charity, except for " her people."
It is for the purpose of aiding her in ministering
to the wants of her aged parents, and in the hope
of securing to them the little home which they are
in danger of losing from inability to pay the whole
amount due which amount was partly paid when
our heroine left them to throw herself into the work
of aiding our suffering soldiers that this little ac-
count, drawn from her by persevering endeavor, is
given to the friends of humanity.
The writerofthis story has till verylatelyknown
less personallyof the subject of it, than manyothers
to whom she has for years been an object of inter-
est and care. But through relations and friends in
Auburn, and also through Mrs. Commodore Swift
of Geneva, and her sisters, who have for many years
known and esteemed this wonderful woman, she
has heard tales of her deeds of heroism which


--- PAGE 15 ---
PREFACE. 3
seemed almost too strange for belief, and were in-
vested with the charm of romance.
During a sojourn of some months in the city of
Auburn, while the war was in progress, the writer
used to see occasionally in her Sunday-school class
the aged mother of Harriet, and also some of those
girls who had been brought from the South bythis
remarkable woman. She also wrote letters for the
old people to commanding officers at the South, mak-
ing inquiries about Harriet, and received answers
telling of her untiring devotion to our wounded and
sick soldiers, and of her efficient aid in various ways
to the cause of the Union.
By the graphic pen of Mrs. Stowe, the incidents
of such a life as that of the subject of this little
memoir might be wrought up into a tale of thrilling
interest, equaling, if not exceeding, anything in her
world-renowned " Uncle Tom's Cabin ;
" but the
story of Harriet Tubman needs not the drapery of
fiction ;
the bare unadorned facts are enough to stir
the hearts ofthe friends of humanity, the friends of
liberty, the lovers oftheir country.
There are those who will sneer, there are those
who have already done so, at this quixotic attempt
to make a heroine of a black woman, and a slave ;
but it may possibly be that there are some natures,


--- PAGE 16 ---
4 PREFACE.
though concealed under fairer skins, who have not
the capacity to comprehend such general and self-
sacrificing devotion to the cause of others as that
.here delineated, and therefore they resort to scorn
and ridicule, in order to throw discredit upon the
whole story.
Much has been left out which would have been
highly interesting, because of the impossibility of
substantiating by the testimony of others the truth
of Harriet's statements. But whenever it has been
possible to find those who were cognizant with the
facts stated, they have been corroborated in every
particular.
Afew years hence and we seem to see a gather-
ing where the wrongs of earth will be righted, and
Justice, long delayed, will assert itself, and perform
its office. Then not a few of those who had
esteemed themselves the wise and noble of this
world, " will begin with shame to take the lowest
place ;
" while upon Harriet's dark head a kind hand
will be placed, and in her ear a gentle voice will
sound, saying
:
" Friend ! come up higher
!
"
S. H. B.
The following letters to the writer from those
well-known and distinguished philanthropists, Hon.


--- PAGE 17 ---
PREFACE. 5
Gerrit Smith and Wendell Phillips, and one from
Frederick Douglass, addressed to Harriet, will serve
as the best introduction that can be given of the
subject of this memoir to its readers :
Letterfrom Hon. Gerrit Smith.
PETERBORO, June 13, 1868.
MY DEAR MADAME: I am happy to learn that
you are to speak to the public of Mrs. Harriet
Tubman. Of the remarkable events of her life I
have no personal knowledge, but of the truth of
them as she describes them I have no doubt.
I have often listened to her, in her visits to my
family, and I am confident that she is not only
truthful, but that she has a rare discernment, and a
deep and sublime philanthropy.
Withgreat respect your friend,
GERRIT SMITH.
Letterfrom Wendell Phillips.
JUNE 16, 1868.
DEAR MADAME: The last time I ever saw John
Brown was under my own roof, as he brought
Harriet Tubman to me, saying
:
" Mr. Phillips, I
bring you one of the best and bravest persons on
this continent Crfinercil Tubman, as we call her."


--- PAGE 18 ---
6 PREFACE.
He then went on to recount her labors and sacri-
fices in behalfofherrace. After that, Harriet spent
some time in Boston, earning the confidence and
admiration of all those who were working for free-
dom. With their aid she went to the South more
than once, returning always with a squad of self1
emancipated men, women, and children, for whom
her marvelous skill had opened the way of escape.
After the war broke out, she was sent with indorse-
ments from Governor Andrew and his friends to
South Carolina, where in the service of the Nation
she rendered most important and efficient aid to
our army.
In my opinion there are few captains, perhaps
few colonels, who have done more for the loyal
cause since the war began, and few men who did
before that time more for the colored race, than our
fearless and most sagacious friend, Harriet.
Faithfully yours,'
WEXPELL PHILLIPS.
Letterfrom Frederick Douglass.
ROCHESTER, August 2*9, 1868.
DEAR HARRIET: Iain glad to know that the
storv of your eventful life has been written by u


--- PAGE 19 ---
PREFACE. I
kind lady, and that the same is soon to be published.
You ask for what you do not need when you call
upon mefor a word of commendation. I need such
words from you far more than you can need them
from me, especially where your superior labors and
'devotion to the cause of the lately enslaved of our
land are known as I know them. The difference
between us is very marked. Most that I have
done and suffered in the service of our cause has
been in public, and I have received much encour-
agement at every step of the way. You on the
other hand have labored in a private way; I have
wrought in the day you in the night. I have had
the applause of the crowd and the satisfaction that
comes of being approved by the multitude, while
the most that you have done has been witnessed
by a few trembling, scarred, and foot-sore bondmen
and women, whom you have led out of the house
ofbondage, and whose heartfelt " God bless you"
has been your only reward. The midnight sky and
the silent stars have been the witnesses of your de-
votion to freedom and of your heroism. Excepting
John Brown of sacred memory I knowofno one
who has willingly encountered more perils and
hardships to serve our enslaved people than you
have. Much that you have done would seem im-


--- PAGE 20 ---
8 PREFACE.
probable to those who do not know you as I know
you. It is to me a great pleasure and a great privi-
lege to bear testimony to your character and your
works, and to say to those to whom you maycome,
that I regard you in every way truthful and trust-
worthy. Your friend,
FREDERICK DOUGLASS.


--- PAGE 21 ---
SOME SCENES
IN THE
LIFE OF HARRIET TUBMAN.
HARRIET TUBMAN, known at various times,* and
in various places, by manydifferent names, such as
" Moses," in allusion to her being the leader and
guide to so manyof her people in their exodus from
the LandofBondage ;
" the Conductorofthe Under-
ground Railroad ;
" and " Moll Pitcher," for the en-
ergy and daring by which she delivered a fugitive
slave who was about to be dragged back to the
South ; was for the first twenty-five yours of her
life a slave on the eastern shore of Maryland. Her
own master she represents as never unnecessarily
cruel ; but as was common among slaveholders, he
often hired out his slaves to others, some of whom
proved to be tyrannical and brutal to the utmost
limit of their power.
She had worked only as a field-hand for many
years, following the oxen, loading and unloading
wood, and carrying heavy burdens, by which her


--- PAGE 22 ---
10 SOME SCENES IX THE
naturally remarkable power of musclewas so devel-
oped that her feats of strength often called forth
the wonder of strong laboring men. Thus was she
preparing for the life of hardship and endurance
which lay before her, for the deeds of daring she
was to do, and of which her ignorant and darkened
mind at tii'iit i .ii'<" i:<-\ cr dreamed.
Tin liivt, <perso>i ,by w,hom she was hired was a
vcuuv.i who, though married and the mother of a
iamily, was still " Miss Susan " to her slaves, as is
customary at the South. This wroman was possess-
ed of the good things of this life, and provided lib-
erally for her slaves so far as food and clothing
went. But she had been brought up to believe,
and to act upon the belief, that a slave could be
taught to do nothing, and would do nothing but
under the sting of the whip. Harriet, then a young
girl, was taken from her life in the field, and having
never seen the inside of a house better than a cabin
in the negro quarters, was put to house-work with-
out being told how to do anything. The first thing
was to put a parlor in order. " Move these chairs
and tables into the middle of the room, sweep the
carpet clean, then dust everything, and put them
back in their places
!
" These were the directions
given, and Harriet was left alone to do hor work.


--- PAGE 23 ---
LIFE OF HARRIET TUBMAN. 11
The whip was in sight on. the mantel-piece, as a
reminder of what was to be expected if the work
was not done well. Harriet fixed the furniture as
she was told to do, and swept with all her strength,
raisins: a tremendous dust. The moment she hadO
finished sweeping, she took her dusting cloth, and
wiped everything
" so you could see your fo.cc in
'em, de shone so," in haste to go and set the table
for breakfast, and do her other work. The dust
which she had set flying only settled down again
on chairs, tables, and the piano.
" Miss Susan "
came in and looked around. Then came the call
for "
Minty
" Harriet's name was Araminta at
the South.
She drew her up to the table, saying,
" What do
you mean by doing my work this way, you
!
"
and passing her finger on the table and piano, she
showed her the mark it made through the dust.
" Miss Susan,! done sweep and dust jus' as youtole
rue." But the whip was already taken down, and
the strokes were falling on head and face and neck.
Four times this scene was repeated before break-
fast, when, during the fifth whipping, the door
opened, and "Miss Emily" came in. She was a
married sister of " Miss Susan," and was making
her a visit, and though brought up with the same


--- PAGE 24 ---
12 SOME SCENES IN THE
associations as her sister, seems to have been a per-
son of more gentle and reasonable nature. Not
being able to endure, the screams of the child any
longer, she came in, took her sister bythe arm, and
said,
" If you do not stop whipping that child, I
will leave your house, and never come back !
" Miss
Susan declared that " she would not mind, and she
slighted her work on purpose." Miss Emily said,
" Leave her to me a few moments ;
" andMiss Susan
left the room, indignant. As soon as they were
alone, Miss Emily said :
"
Now, Minty, show me
how you do your work." For the sixth time Har-
riet removed all the furniture into the middle of
the room; then she swept; and the moment she
had done sweeping, she took the dusting cloth to
wipe off the furniture. " Now stop there," said
Miss Emily ;
"
go away now, and do some of your
other work, and when it is time to dust, I will call
you." When the time came she called her, and ex-
plained to her how the dust had now settled, and
that if she wiped it off now, the furniture would
remain bright and clean. These fewwords an hour
or two before, would have saved Harriet her whip-
pings for that day, as they probably did for many
a day after.
While with this woman, after working from early


--- PAGE 25 ---
LIFE OF HARRIET TUBMAN. 13
morning till late at night, she was obliged to sit up
all nio-ht to rock a cross, sick child. Her mistressO
laid upon her bed with a whip under her pillow,
and slept ; but if the tired nurse forgot herself for
a moment,if her wearyhead dropped, and her hand
ceased to rock the cradle, the child would cry out,
and then down would come the whip upon the neck
and face of the poorwearycreature. The scars are
still plainly visible where the whip cut into the
flesh. Perhaps her mistress was preparing her,
though she did not know it then, by this enforced
habit of wakefulness, for the many long nights of
travel, when she was the leader and guide of the
weary and hunted ones who were escaping from
bondage.
" Miss Susan "
got tired -of Harriet, as Harriet
was determined she should do, and so abandoned
her intention of buying her, and sent her back to
her master. She was next hired out to the man
who inflicted upon her the life-long injury from
which she is suffering now, by breaking her skull
with a weight from the scales. The injury thus
inflicted causes her often to fall into a state of
somnolency from which it is almost impossible to
rouse her. Disabled and sick, her flesh all wasted
away, she was returned to her owner. He tried to


--- PAGE 26 ---
14 SOME SCENES IN THE
sell her, but no one would buy her. "
Deysaid dey
wouldn't give a sixpence for me," she said.
" And so," she said,
" from Christmas till March
I worked as I could, and I prayed through all the
long nights I groaned and prayed for ole master:
'
Oh Lord, convert master !
'
'Oh Lord, change
dat man's heart!' 'Pears like I prayed all de
tune," said Harriet ;
" 'bout my work, everywhere,
I prayed an' I groaned to de Lord. When I went
to de horse-trough to wash my face, I took up do
water in my han' an' I said,
'
Oh Lord, wash me,
make me clean !
'
Den I take up something to
wipe my face, an' I say,
'
Oh Lord, wipe away
all my sin !
'
When I took de broom and began
to sweep, I groaned,
'
Oh Lord, wha'soebber sin
dere be in my heart, sweep it out, Lord, clur an'
clean !'
'
Nowords can describe the pathos of her
tones, as she broke out into these words of prayer,
after the manner of her people. "An' so," said
she,
" I prayed all night long for master, till the
first of March ; an' all the time he was bringing
people to look at me, an' trying to sell me. Den
we heard dat some of us was gwine to be sole to go
wid de chain-gang down to de cotton an' rice fields,
and dey said I was gwine, an' my brudders, an' sis-
ters. Den I changed my prayer. Fust of March


--- PAGE 27 ---
LIFE OF HAKBIET TUBMAN. 15
I began to pray,
4
Oh Lord, if you ant nebber
gwine to change clat man's heart, kill him, Lord,
MII' take him out ob de way.'
" Nex' ting I heard old master was dead, an' he
died jus' as .he libed. Oh, then, it 'peared like I'd
give all de world full ob gold, if I had it, to bring
dat poor soul back. But I couldn't pray for him
no longer."
The slaves were told that their master's will pro-
vided that none of them should be sold out of the
State. This satisfied most of them, and they were
very happy. But Harriet was not satisfied ; she
never closed her eyes that she did not imagine she
saw the horsemen coming, and heard the screams
of women and children, as they were being dragged
away to a far worse slavery than that they were
enduring there. Harriet was married at this time
to a free negro, who not only did not trouble him-
self about her fears, but did his best to betray her,
and bring her back after she escaped. She would
start up at night with the cry,
" Oh, dey're comin',
dey're comin', I mus' go
!
"
Her husband called her a fool, and said she was
like old Cudjo, who when a joke went round, never
laughed till half an hour after everybody else got
through, and so just as all danger was past she be-


--- PAGE 28 ---
16 SOME SCENES IN THE
gan to be frightened. But still Harriet in fancy
sawthe horsemen coming, and heard the screams
of terrified women and children. "And all that
time, in my dreams and visions," she said,
" I
seemed to see a line, and on the other side of that
line were green fields, and lovely flowers, and
beautiful white ladies, who stretched out their arms
to me over the line, but I couldn't reach them no-
how. I always fell before I got to the line."
One Saturday it was whispered in the quarters
that two of Harriet's sisters had been sent off with
the chain-gang. That morning she started, having
persuaded three of her brothers to accompany her,
but they had not gone far when the brothers, ap-
palled by the dangers before and behind them,
determined to go back, and in spite of her re-
monstrances dragged her with them. In fear and
terror, she remained over Sunday, and on Monday
night a negro from another part of the plantation
came privately to tell Harriet that herself and
brothers were to be carried off that night. The
poor old mother, who belonged to the same mis-
tress, was just going to milk. Harriet wanted to
get away without letting her know, because she
knew that she would raise an uproar and prevent
her going, or insist upon going with her, and the


--- PAGE 29 ---
LIFE OF HARRIET TUBMAN. 17
time for this was not yet. But she must give some
intimation to those she was going to leave of her
intention, and send such a farewell as she might to
the friends and relations on the plantation. These
communications were generally made by singing.
They sang as they walked along the country roads,
and the chorus was taken up by others, and the
uninitiated knew not the hidden meaning of the
words
When clat ar ole chariot comes,
I'm gwine tolebe you ;
I'm boun' for de promised laud,
I'm gwine to lebe you.
These words meant something more than a-jour-
ney to the Heavenly Canaan. Harriet said,
" Here,
mother, go 'long; I'll do the niilkin' to-night and
bring it in." The old woman went to her cabin.
Harriet took down her sun-bonnet, and went on
to the "
big house," where some of her relatives
lived as house servants. She thought she could
trust Mary, but there were others in the kitchen,
and she could say nothing. Mary began to frolic
with her. She threw her across the kitchen, and
ran out, knowing that Mary would follow her.
But just as they turned the corner of the house, the
master to whom Harriet was now hired, came rid-
ing up on his horse. Mary darted back, and Har-


--- PAGE 30 ---
18 SOME SCENES IN THE
riot thought there was no way now but to sing.
But " the Doctor," as the master was called, was
regarded with special awe by his slaves ;
if they
were singing or talking together in the field, or on
the road, and " the Doctor "
appeared, all was hush-
ed till he passed. But Harriet had no time for
ceremony; her friends must have a warning ;
and
whether the Doctor thought her "
imperent
" or
not, she must sing him farewell. So on she-went to
meet him, singing
:
I'm sorry I'm gwine to lebe you,
Farewell, oh farewell ;
But I'll meet youin the mornin',
Farewell, oh farewell.
The Doctor passed, and she bowed as she went
on, still singing
:
I'll meet you in the mornin',
I'm boun' for de promised land,
On the oder Bide ofJordan,
Boun' for de promised land.
She reached the gate and looked round; the
Doctor had stopped his horse, and had turned
around in the saddle, and was looking at her as if
there might be more in this than " met the ear."
Harriet closed the gate, went on a little way, came
back, the Doctor still gazing at her. She lifted up
the gate as if she had not latched it properly,
waved her hand to him., and burst out again
:


--- PAGE 31 ---
LIFE OF HARRIET TUBMAX. 19
I'll meet you in the morniiT,
Safe in de promised land,
On the oder side ofJordan,
Bonn
1
for de promised land.
And she started on her journey,
" not knowing
whither she went," except that she was going to
follow the north star, till it led her to liberty.
Cautiously and by night she traveled, cunningly
feeling her way, and finding out who were friends
;
till after a long and painful journey she found, in
answer to careful inquiries, that she had at last
crossed tfcat magic "line" which then separated
the land of bondage from the land of freedom ; for
this was before we were commanded by law to
take part in the iniquity of slavery, and aid in
taking and sending back those poor hunted fugi-
tives who had manhood and intelligence enough
to enable them to make their way thus far towards
freedom.
" When I found I had crossed dat line? she
said,
" I looked at my hands to see if I was de
same pusson. There was such a glory ober ebery
ting ; de sun came like gold through the trees, and
ober the fields, and I felt like I was in Heaben."
But then came the bitter drop in the cup of joy.
fehe said she felt like a man who was put in State
Prison for twenty-five years. All these twenty-


--- PAGE 32 ---
20 SOME SCENES IN THE
five years he was thinking of his home, and long-
ing for the time when he would see it again. At
last the day comes he leaves the prison gates he
makes his way to his old home, but his old home
is not there. The house has been pulled down,
and a new one has been put up in its place ;
his
family and friends are gone nobody knows where ;
there is no one to take him by the hand, no one to
welcome him.
" So it was with me," she said. " I had crossed
the line. I was/ree/ but there was no one to wel-
come meto the land of freedom. I was a stranger
in a strange land ; andmyhome, after all, was down
in Maryland; because my father, my mother, my
brothers, and sisters, and friends were there. But
I was free, and they should be free. I would
make a home in the North and bring them there,
God helping me. Oh, how I prayed then," she
*aid ;
" I said to de Lord,
'
I'm gwineto hole stiddy
on to you, an' I know you'll see me through.'
' :
She came to Philadelphia, and worked in hotels,
in club houses, and afterwards at Cape May.
Whenever she had raised money enough to pay
expenses, she would make her way back, hide her-
self, and in .various ways give notice to those who
were ready to strike for freedom. When her


--- PAGE 33 ---
LIFE OF HAKKIET TUJJMAS. 21
party was made up, they would start always on
Saturday night, because advertisements could not
be sent out on Sunday, which gave them one day
in advance.
Then the pursuers would start after them.
Advertisements would be posted everywhere.
There was one reward of $12,000 offered for the
head of the woman who \vus constantly appearing
and enticing away parties of slaves from their
master. She had traveled in the cars when these
posters were put up over her head, and she heard
them read by those about her for she could not
read herself. Fearlessly she went on, trusting in
the Lord. She said,
u
I started with this idea in
my head,
'
Dere's two things I've got a riyht to,
and dese are. Death or Liberty one or tother I
mean to have. No one will take me back alive ; I
shall fight for my liberty, and when de time has
come for me to go, de Lord will let dem kill me."
And acting upon this simple creed, and firm in this
trusting faith, she went back and forth nineteen
times, according to the reckoning of her friends.
She remembers that she went eleven times from
Canada, but of the other journeys she kept no reck-
oning.
While Harriet was working as cook in one of


--- PAGE 34 ---
22 SOME SCENES IN THE
the large hotels in Philadelphia, the play of " Uncle
Tom'sCabin" was being performed for many weeks
every night. Some of her fellow-servants wanted
her to go and see it. "No," said Harriet,
" I haint
got no heart to go and see the sufferings of my peo-
ple played 011 de stage. I've heard
'
Uncle Tom's
Cabin
'
read, and I tell you Mrs Stowe's pen hasn't
begun to paint what slavery is as I have seen it at
the far South. I've seen de real ting, and I don't
want to see it on no stage or in no teater."
I will give here an article from a paper published
nearly a year ago, which mentions that the price
set upon the head of Harriet was much higher than
I have stated it to be. When asked about this,
Harriet said she did not know whether it was so,
but she heard them read from one paper that the
reward offered was $12,000.
" Among American women," says the article re-
ferred to,
"who has shown a courage and self-devo-
tion to the welfare of others, equal to Harriet
Tubman? Hear htr story of going down again
and again into the very jaws of slavery, to rescue
her suffering people, .bringing them off through
perils and dangers enough to appall the stoutest
heart, till she was known among them as
'
Moses.'
" Forty thousand dollars was not too great a


--- PAGE 35 ---
LIFE OF HARRIET TUBMAN. 23
reward for the Maryland slaveholders to offer for
her.
" Think of her brave spirit, as strong as Daniel's
of old, in its fearless purpose to serve God, even
though the fiery furnace should be her portion. I
have looked into her dark face, and wondered and
admired as I listened to the thrilling deeds her lion
heart had prompted her to dare. 'I have heard
their groans and sighs, and seen their tears, and I
would give every drop of blood in my veins to free
them,' she said.
" The other day, at Gerrit Smith's, I saw this he-
roic woman, whom the pen of genius will yet make
famous, as one of the noblest Christian hearts ever
inspired to lift the burdens of the wronged and op-
pressed, andwhat do you think she said to me? She
had been tending and caring for our Union black*
(and white) soldiers in hospital during the war,
and at the end of her labors was on her way home,
coming in acar through New Jersey. Awhite man,
the conductor, thrust her out of the car with such
violence that she has not been able to work scarcely
any since ; and as she told me of the pain she had
and still suffered, she said she did not know what
she should have done for herself, and the old father
and mother she takes care of, if Mr. Wendell


--- PAGE 36 ---
24- SOME SCENES IN THE
Phillips had not sent her $00, that kept them warm
through the winter. She had a letter from W. II.
Seward to Maj.-Gen. Hunter, in which he says,
'
I
have known her long, and a nobler, higher spirit,
or truer, seldom dwells in the human form.' "
It will be impossible to give any connected ac-
count of the different journeys taken by Harriet for
the rescue of her people, as she herself has no idea
of the dates connected with them, or of the order
in which they were made. She thinks she was
about 25 when she made her own escape, and this
was in the last year of James K. Folk's administra-
tion. From that time till the be^innin^ of the warO O
her years were spent in these journeyings back and
forth, with intervals between, in which she worked
only to spend the avails of her labor in providing
"for the wants of her pext party of fugitives. By
night she traveled, many times on foot, over moun-
tains, through forests, across rivers, mid perils by
land, perils by water, perils from enemies, "
perils
among false brethren." Sometimes members of
her party would become exhausted, foot-sore, and
bleeding, and declare they could not go on, they
must stay where they dropped down, and die ;
others would think a voluntary return to slavery
better than being overtaken and carried back, and


--- PAGE 37 ---
LIFE OF HARRIET TUBMAX. 25
would insist upon returning ; then there was no
remedy but force ; the revolver carried bythis bold
and daring pioneer would be pointed at their
heads. " Dead niggers tell no tales," said Harriet
;
"Go on or die;" and so she compelled them to
drag their weary limbs on their northward journey.
At one time she collected and sent on a gang of
thirty-nine fugitives in the care of others, as from
some cause she was prevented from accompanying
them. Sometimes, when she and her party were
concealed in the woods, they saw their pursuers
pass, on their horses, down the high road, tacking
up the advertisements for them on the fences and
trees.
" And den how we laughed," said she. " We
was de fools, and dey was de wise men
;
but we
wasn't fools enough to go down de high road in de
broad daylight." At one time she left her party in
the woods, and went by a lon^ and roundabout
way to one of the " stations of the Underground
Railway," as she called them. Here she procured
food for her famished party, often paying out ofher
hardly-gained earnings, five dollars a day for food
for them. But she dared not go back to them till
night, for 'fear of being watched, and thus reveal-
ing their hiding-place. After nightfall, the sound


--- PAGE 38 ---
26 SOME SCENES IN THE
of a hymn sung at a distance comes upon the ears
of the concealed and famished fugitives in the
woods, and they know that their deliverer is at
hand. Theylisten eagerly for the words she sings,
for by them they are to be warned of danger, or
informed of safety. Nearer and nearer comes the
unseen singer, and the words are wafted to their
ears:
Hail, oh hail ye happy spirits,
Death no more shall make you fear,
Nogriefnor sorrow, pain nor anger (anguish)
Shall no more distress you there.
Around him are ten thousan' angels,
Always ready to 'bey comman'.
*Dey are always hobring round you,
Till you reach the hebbenly Ian'.
Jesus, Jesus will go wid you ;
He will lead you to his throne ;
He who died has gone before you,
Trod de wine-press all alone.
He whose thunders shake creation ;
He who bids the planets roll ;
He who rides upon the temple, (tempest)
An' his scepter sways de whole.
Dark and thorny is de desert,
Through de pilgrim makes his ways,
Yet beyon' dis vale of sorrow,
Lies de fiel's of endless days.
I give these words exactly as Harriet sang them
to me to a sweet and simple Methodist air. " De
first time I go by singing dis hymn, dey don't come
out to me," she said,
" till I listen if de coast is


--- PAGE 39 ---
LIFE OF HARRIET TUBMAN. 27
clar ; den when I go back and sing it again, dey
come out. But if I sing
:
Moses go clown in Egypt,
Till ole Pharo' let mego;
Hadn't been for Adam's fall,
Shouldn't hab to died at all,
den dey don't come out, for dere's danger in de
way."
And so by night travel, by hiding, by signals,
by threatening, she brought the people safely to
the land of liberty. But after the passage of the
Fugitive Slave law, she said,
" I wouldn't trust Un-
cle Sam wid my people no longer ;
I brought 'em
all clar off to Canada."
Of the very many interesting stories told me by
Harriet, I cannot refrain from telling to my read-
ers that of Joe, who accompanied her upon her sev-
enth or eighth journey from Maryland to Canada.
Joe was a noble specimen of a negro, and was
hired out byhis master to a man forwhom he work-
ed faithfully for six years, savinghimthe expense of
an overseer, and taking all trouble off his hands. At
length this manfound him so absolutely necessary
to him, that he determined to buy him at any cost.
His master held him proportionably high. How-
ever, by paying a thousand dollars down for him,
and promising to pay another thousand in a cer-


--- PAGE 40 ---
28 SOME SCENES IN THE
tain time, Joe passed into the hands of his new
master.
Asmay be imagined, Joewas somewhat surprised
when the first order issued from his master's lips,
was,
" Now, Joe, strip and take a whipping
!
"
Joe's experience of whippings, as he had seen them
inflicted upon others, was not such as to cause him
particularly to desire to go through the same ope-
ration on his own account ; and he, naturally
enough, demurred, and at first thought of resisting.
But he called to mind a scene which he had wit-
nessed a few days before, in the field, the particu-
lars of which are too horrible and too harassing
to the feelings to be given to my readers, and he
thought it best to submit ; but first he tried remon-
strance.
" Mas'r," said he,
" habn't I always been faith-
ful to you? Habn't I worked through sun an'
rain, early in de mornin', and late at night ; habn't
I saved you an oberseer by doin' his work ; hab
you anyting to complain of agin me? "
" No, Joe ;
" I've no complaint to make of you ;
you're a good nigger, and you've always worked
well ; but the first lesson my niggers have to learn
is that I am master^ and that they are not to resist
or refuse to obey anything I tell 'em to do. So


--- PAGE 41 ---
LIFE OF HARRIET TUBMAK. 29
the first thing they've got to do, is to be whipped;
if they resist, they get it all the harder
;
and so
I'll go on, till I kill 'em, but they've got to give up
at last, and learn that I'm master."
Joe thought it best to submit. He stripped off
his upper clothing, and took his whipping without
a word ; but as he drew his clothes up over his
torn and bleeding back, he said,
" Dis is de last !
"
That night he took a boat and went a long dis-
tance to the cabin of Harriet's father, and said,
" Next time Moses comes, let me know." It was
only a week or two after that, that the mysterious
woman whom no one could lay their finger on ap-
peared, and men, women, and children began to
disappear from the plantations. One fine morning
Joe w
r
as missing, and his brother William, from
another plantation ; Peter and Eliza, too, were gone;
and these made part of Harriet's next party, who
began their pilgrimage from Maryland to Canada,
or as they expressed it, from "
Egypt to de land of
Canaan."
Their adventures were enough to fill a volume ;
they were pursued ; they were hidden in "
potato
holes," while their pursuers passed within a few
feet of them
; they were passed along by friends in
various disguises ; they scattered and separated, to


--- PAGE 42 ---
30 SOME SCENES IN THE
be led by guides by a roundabout way, to a meet-
ing-place again. They were taken in by Sana
Green, the man who was afterwards sent to State
Prison for ten years for having a copy of " Uncle
Tom's Cabin " in his house ; and so, hunted and
hiding and wandering, they came at last to the
long bridge at the entrance of the city of Wil-
mington, Delaware. The rewards posted up
everywhere had been at first five hundred dollars for
Joe, if taken within the limits of the United States ;
then a thousand, and then fifteen hundred dollars,
" an' all expenses clar an' clean, for his body in
Easton Jail." Eight hundredfor William, and four
hundred for Peter, and twelve thousand for the
woman who enticed them away. The long Wil-
mington Bridge was guarded by police officers,
and the advertisements were everywhere. The
party were scattered, and taken to the houses
of different colored friends, and word was sent
secretly to Thomas Garrett, of Wilmington, of
their condition, and the necessity of their being
taken across the bridge. Thomas Garrett is a Qua-
ker, and a man of a wonderfully large and generous
heart, through whose hands, Harriet tells me, two
thousand self-emancipated slaves passed on their
way to freedom. He was always ready, heart and


--- PAGE 43 ---
LIFE OF HAUEIET TUBMAN. 31
hand and means, in aiding these poor fugitives,
and rendered most efficient help to Harriet on
many of her journeys back and forth. A letter
received a few days since by the writer, from
this noble-hearted philanthropist, will be given
presently.
As soon as Thomas Garrett heard of the condi-
tion of these poor people, his plan was formed.
He engaged two wagons, filled them with brick-
layers, whomof course he paid well for their share
in the enterprise, and sent them across the bridge.
They went as if on a frolic, singing and shouting.
The guards saw them pass, and ofcourse expected
them to re-cross the bridge. After nightfall (and
fortunately it was a dark night) the same wagons
went back, but with an addition to their party.
The fugitives were on the bottom of the wagons,
the bricklayers on the seats, still singing and
shouting ; and so they passed by the guards, who
were entirely unsuspicious of the nature of the
load the wagons contained, or of the amount of
property thus escaping their hands. And so they
made their wayto NewYork. When they entered
the anti-slavery office there, Joe was recognized at
once by the description in the advertisement.
"Well," said Mr. Oliver Johnson, "I am glad to


--- PAGE 44 ---
32 SOME SCENES IN THE
see the man whose head is worth fifteen hundred
dollars." At this Joe's heart sank. If the adver-
tisement had got to New York, that place which ii
had taken them so many days and nights to reach,
lie thought he was in danger still. a And how far
is it now to Canada ? " he asked. When told how
many miles, for they were to come through Xew
York State, and cross the Suspension Bridge, he was
ready to give up.
" From dat time Joe was silent,"
said Harriet ;
" he sang no more, he talked :io
more ; he sat wid his head on his hand, and nobody
could 'muse him or make him take any interest in
anyting." They passed along in safety, and at
length found themselves in the cars, approach-
ing Suspension Bridge. The rest were very
joyous and happy, "but Joe sat silent and sad.
Their fellow-passengers all seemed interested in
and for them, and listened with tears, as Harriet
and all their party lifted up their voices and
sang
:
I'm on ray way to Canada,
That cold and dreary land ;
The sad effects of slavery,
I can't no longer stand.
I've served mymaster all my day?,
Widout a dime's reward ;
And now I'm forced to run away,
To floe the lash abroad.
Farewell, ole master, don't think hard of me,
I'll travel on to Canada, where all the slaves are free.


--- PAGE 45 ---
LIFE OF HARRIET TUBMAN. 'A3
The hounds are baying on my track,
Ole master comes behind.
Resolved that he will bring me back,
Before I cross de line ;
I'm now embarked for yonder shore,
There a man's a man by law ;
The iron horse will bear me o'er,
To shake de lion's paw.
Oh, righteous Father, wilt thou not pity me,
Andaid me on to Canada where all the slaves are free.
Oh, I heard Queen Victoria say,
That if we would forsake
Our native land of slavery,
And comeacross the lake ;
That she was standin' on de shore,
Wid arms extended wide,
To give us all a peaceful home
Beyond de rolling tide.
Farewell, ole master, etc.
The cars began to cross the bridge. Harriet
was very anxious to have her companions see the
Falls. William, Peter, and Eliza came eagerly to
look at the wonderful sight; but Joe sat still, with,
his head upon his hand.
"
Joe, <-<-n e look at deFalls !
Joe, you fool you,
come see de Falls ! its your last chance." But Joe
sat still and never raised his head. At length Har-
riet knew by the rise in the center of the bridge,
and the descent on the other sid^ that they had
crossed " the line." She sprang across to Joe's
seat, shook him with all her might, and shouted,
" Joe, you've shook de lion's paw
!
" Joe did not
know what she meant. " Joe, you're free ! " shout-


--- PAGE 46 ---
34: SOME SCENES IN THE
ed Harriet. Then Joe's head went up, he raised
his hands on high, and his face, streaming with
tears, to heaven, and broke out in loud and thrill-
ing tones:
" Glory to God and Jesus too,
One more soul is safe !
Oh, go and carry de news,
One more soul got safe."
" Joe, come and look at de Falls !
" called Har-
riet.
" Glory to God and Jesus too,
One more soul got safe."
was all the answer. The cars stopped on the other
side. Joe's feet were the first to touch British soil,
after those of the conductor.
Loud roared the waters of Niagara, but louder
still ascended the anthem of praise from the over-
flowing heart of the freeman. And can we doubt
that the strain was taken up by angel voices, and
that through the arches of Heaven echoed and re-
echoed the strain :
Glory to God in the Highest,
Glory to God and Jesus too,
One more soul is safe.
" Theladies and gentlemen gathered round him,"
said Harriet, " till I couldn't see Joe for the crowd,
only I heard
'
Glory to God and Jesus too !
'
louder
than ever." William went after him, and pulled


--- PAGE 47 ---
LIFE OF HARRIET TUBMAN. 35
him, saying,
"
Joe, stop your noise !
you act like
a fool !
'
Then Peter ran in and jerked him mos'
off his feet,
"
Joe, stop your hollerin' ! Folks '11
think you're crazy
!
" But Joe gave no heed.
The ladies were crying, and the tears like rain ran
down Joe's sable cheeks. A lady reached over
her fine cambric handkerchief to him. Joe wiped
his face, and then he spoke.
" Oh ! if I'd felt like dis down South, it would
hab taken nine men to take me; only one more
journey for me now, and dat is to Hebben !
"
" Well, you ole fool you," said Harriet, with whom
there seems but one step from the sublime to the
ridiculous,
"
you might a' looked at de Falls fust,
and den gone to Hebben afterwards." She has
seen Joe several times since, a happy and industri-
ous freeman in Canada.
Whenasked, as she often is, how it was possible
that she was not afraid to go back, with that tre-
mendous price upon her head, Harriet always an-
swers, "
Why, don't I tell you, Missus, t'wan't me,
'twas de Lord! I always tole him,
'
I trust to you.
I don't know where to go or what to do, but I ex-
pect you to lead me,' an' he always did." At one
time she was going down, watched for everywhere,
after there had been a meeting of slaveholders in


--- PAGE 48 ---
36 SOME SCENES IN TIIK
the court-house of one of the large cities of Mary-
land, and an added reward had been put upon her
head, with various threats of the different cruel de-
vices by which she should be tortured and put to
death ; friends gathered round her, imploring her
not to go on directly in the face of danger and
death, and this was Harriet's answer to them :
" Now look yer! John saw the city, didn't he?
Yes, John saw the city. Well, what did he
see? He saw twelve gates three of dose gates
was on de north three of 'em was on de east
and three of 'em was on de west but dere was
three of 'em on de South too ; an' I reckon if dey
kill me down dere, I'll o-it into one of dem <rates,7 <T> O
don't you ? "
Whether Harriet's ideas of the geographical
bearings of the gates of the Celestial City, as seen
in the Apocalyptic vision, were correct or not, we
cannot doubt that she was right in the deduction her
faith drewfrom them
;
and that somewhere, whether
north, south, east, or west, to our dim vision,
there is a gate to be opened for Harriet, where the
welcome will be given,
" Come in thou blessed of
my Father/'
Many of the stories told me by Harriet, in an-
swer to questions, have been corroborated by let-


--- PAGE 49 ---
LIFI-: OF HARRIET TUBMAN. 37
ters, some of which will appear in this book. Of
others, I have not been able to procure confirma-
tion, owing to ignorance, of the address of those
conversant with the facts. I find among her pa-
pers, many of which are defaced by being carried
about with her for years, portions of letters ad-
dressed to myself, by persons at the South, and
speaking of the valuable assistance Harriet was
rendering our soldiers in the hospital, and our
armies in the field. At this time her manner of
life, as related by herself, was this :
" Well, Missus, I'd go to de hospital, I would,
early eb'ry mornin'. I'd get a big chunk of ice, I
would, and put it in a basin, and fill it with water;
den I'd take a sponge and begin. Fust man I'd
come to, I'd thrash away de flics, an' dey'd rise,
dey would, like bees roun' a hive. Den I'd begin
to bathe der wounds, an' by de time I'd bathed off
three or four, de fire and heat would have melted
de ice and made de water warm, an' it would be as
red as clar blood. Den I'd go an' git more ice, I
would, an' by de time I got to de nex' ones, de
flies would be roun' de fust ones black an' thick as
eber." In this way she worked, day after day,
till late at night; then she went home to her
little cabin, and made, about fifty pies, a great


--- PAGE 50 ---
38 SOME SCENES IN THE
quantity of ginger-bread, and two casks of root
beer. These she would hire some contraband to
sell for her through the camps, and thus she would
provide her support for another day ;
for this
woman never received pay or pension, and never
drew for herself but twenty days' rations during
the four years of her labors. At one time she was
called away from Hilton Head, by one of our offi-
cers, to come to Fernandina, where the men were
"
dying off like sheep," from dysentery. Harriet
had acquired quite a reputation for her skill in
curing this disease, by a medicine which she pre-
pared from roots which grew near the waters
which gave the disease. Here she found thou-
sands of sick soldiers and contrabands, and imme-
diately gave up her time and attention to them.
At another time, we find her nursing those who
were down by hundreds with small-pox and ma-
lignant fevers. She had never had these diseases,
but she seems to have no more fear of death in
one form than another. " De Lord would take
keer of her till her time came, an' den she was
ready to go."
SWhen our armies and gun-boats first appeared
in any part of the South, many of the poor negroes
were as much afraid of " de Yankee Buckra " as of


--- PAGE 51 ---
LIFE OF HAKRIET TUBMAN. 39
their ownmasters. It was almost impossible to win
their confidence, or to get information from them.
But to Harriet they would tell anything ; and so it
became quite important that she should accompany
expeditions going up the rivers, or into unexplored
parts of the country, to control and get information
from those whom they took with them as guides.
Gen. Hunter asked her at one time if she would
go with several gun-boats up the Combahee River,
the object of the expedition being to take up the
torpedoes placed by the rebels in the river, to de-
stroy railroads and bridges, and to cut off supplies
from the rebel troops. She said she would go if
Col. Montgomery was to be appointed commander
of the expedition. Col. Montgomery was one of
John Brown's men, and was well known to Harriet.
Accordingly, Col. Montgomery was appointed to
the command, and Harriet, with several men un-
der her, the principal of whom was J. Plowden,
whose pass I have, accompanied the expedition.
Harriet describes in the most graphic manner the
appearance of the plantations as they passed up
the river ; the frightened negroes leaving their work
and taking to the woods, at sight of the gun-boats ;
then coming to peer out like startled deer, and
scudding away like the wind at the sound of the


--- PAGE 52 ---
40 SOME SCENES IN THE
steam-whistle. " Well," said one old negro,
"Mas'r
said de Yankees had horns and tails, but I nebber
beliebed it till now." But the word was passed
along by the mysterious telegraphic communication
existing amongthese simple people, that these were
" Lincoln's gun-boats come to set them free." In
vain, then, the drivers used their whips, in their ef-
forts to hurry the poor creatures back to their quar-
ters ; they all turned and ran for the gun-boats.
They came down every road, across every field,
just as they had left their work and their cabins;
women with children clinging around their necks,
hanging to their dresses, running behind, all mak-
ing at full speed for "Lincoln's gun-boats." Eight
hundred poor wretches at one time crowded the
banks, with their hands extended towards their de-
liverers, and they were all taken off upon the gun-
boats, and carried down to Beaufort.
" I nebber see such a sight," said Harriet ; we
laughed, an' laughed, an' laughed. Here you'd see
a woman wid a pail on her head, rice a smokin' in
it jus as she'dtaken it from de fire, young one hang-
in' on behind, one han' roun' her forehead to hold
on, 'tother han' diggin' into de rice-pot, eatin' wid
all its might ; hold of her dress two or three more ;
down her back a bag wid a pig in it. One woman


--- PAGE 53 ---
LIFE OF HARRIET TUBMAJNT. 41
brought two pip;?, a white one, an' a black one;
we took 'em all on board ; named de white
] ng
Beaurcgard, an
1
de black pig Jeff Davis. Some-
times de women would come wid twins lian<nn'O
roun' der necks; 'pears like I nebbcr see so many
twins in my life; bags on der shoulders, baskets on
der heads, and youngones taggin' behin', all loaded ;
pigs squealin", chickens screamin', young ones squal-
lin'." And so they came pouring down to the gun-
boats. When they stood on the shore, and the small
boats put out to take them off, they all wanted to
get in at once. Aftertheboats were crowded, they
would hold on to them so that they could not leave
the shore. The oarsmen would beat them on their
hands, but they would not let go; they were afraid
the gun-boats would go off and leave them, and all
wanted to make sure of one of these arks of ref-
uge. At length Col. Montgomery shouted from
the upper deck, above the clamor of appealing
tones, "Moses, you'll have to give 'em a song."
Then Harriet lifted up her voice aijd sang
:
" Of all the whole creation in the east <& in the west,
The glorious Yankee nation is the 'greatest and the best.
Come along ! Come along ! don't be alarmed,
Uncle Sam is rich enough to give yon all a farm.'
1
At the end of every verse, the negroes in their
enthusiasm would throw up their hands and shout


--- PAGE 54 ---
42 SOME SCENES IN THE
"
Glory," and the row-boats would take that op-
portunity to push off; and so at last they were all
brought on board. The masters fled ; houses and
barns and railroad bridges were burned, t*acks
torn up, torpedoes destroyed, and the expedition
was in all respects successful.
This fearless woman was often sent into the rebel
lines as a spy, and brought back valuable informa-
tion as to the position of armies and batteries
;
she has been in battle when the shot was falling-
like hail, and the bodies of dead and woundedmen
were dropping around her like leaves in autumn
;
but the thought of fear never seems to have had
place for a moment in her mind. Shehad her duty
to perform, and she expected to be taken care of
till it was done.
Would that instead of taking them in this poor
way at second-hand, my readers could hear this
woman's graphic accounts of scenes she herself
witnessed,, could listen to her imitations of negro
preachers in their own very peculiar dialect, her
singing of camp-meeting hymns, her account of
"
experience meetings," herimitations ofthe dances,
and the funeral ceremonies of these simple people.
"
Why, dcr language down dar in de far South is
jus' as different from ours in Maryland, as you can


--- PAGE 55 ---
LIFE OF HARRIET TUBMAN.
think," said she. "
Deylaughed whendey heard me
talk, an' I could not understand dem, no how."
She described a midnight funeral which she at-
tended ;
for the slaves, never having been allowed
to bury their dead in the day time, continued the
custom of night funerals from habit.
The corpse was laid upon the ground, and the
people all sat round, the group being lighted up
by pine torches.
The old negro preacher began by giving out a
hymn, which was sung by all. "An' oh ! I wish
you could hear 'em sing, Missus," said Harriet.
" Dervoices is so sweet, and dey can sing eberyting
we sing, an' den dey can sing a great many hymns
dat we can't nebber catch at all."
The old preacher began his sermon by pointing
to the dead man, who lay in a rude box on the
ground before him.
"Shum? Ded-a-de-dah ! Shum, David? Ded-
a-de-dah ! NowI wantyou all toflee* for moment.
Who ob all dis congregation is gwine next to lie
ded-a-de-dah ? You can't go nowheres, my frien's
and bredren, but Deff '11 fin' you. You can't dig
no hole so deep an' bury yourself dar. but God
A'mighty's far-seein' eye '11 fine you, an' Deff '11
come arter you. You can't go into that big fort


--- PAGE 56 ---
44 SOME SCENES IN THE
(pointing to Hilton Head), an' shut yourself up dar
;
dat fort dat Sesh Buckner said de debil couldn't
take, l)ut I)eff '11 fin' you dar. All your frien's may
forget you, but Deff '11 nebber forget you. Now,
my bredren, prepare to lie ded-a-de-dah !"
This was the burden of a very long sermon, after
which the whole congregation went round in a soil
of solemn dance, called the "
spiritual shuffle,"
shaking hands with each other, and calling each
other by name as they sang
:
My sis'r Mary 's bouiv to go ;
Mysip'r Nanny 's boun' to go ;
Mybrudder Tony 's boun' to go ;
Mybradder July 's boun' to go.
This to the same tune, till every hand had been
shaken by every one of the company. When they
came to Harriet, who was a stranger, they sang
:
Eberybody 's boun' to go !
The body was then placed in a Government wagon,
and by the light of the pine torches, the strange,
dark procession moved along, singing a rude fune-
ral hymn, till they reached the place of burial.
Harriet's account of her interview with an old
negro she met at Hilton Head, is amusing and
interesting. He said,
" I'd been yere seventy-
three years, workin' for my master widout even a


--- PAGE 57 ---
LIFE OF IIAKIilET TUBMAN. 45
dime wages. I'd worked rain-wet sun dry. I'd
worked wid my mouf full of dust, but would not
stop to get a drink of water. I'd been whipped,
an' starved, an' I was always prayin',
'
Oh! Lord,
come an' delibber us !
'
All dat time de birds had
been flyin', an' de rabens had been cryin', and de
fish had been sunnin' in de waters. One day I
look up, an' I see a big cloud ; it didn't come up
like as de clouds come out far yonder, but it
'peared to be right ober head. Der was tunders
out of dat, an' der was lightnin's. Den I looked
down on de water, an' I see, 'peared to me a big
house in de water, an' out of de big house came
great big eggs, arid de good eggs went on trou' de
air, an' fell into de fort; an' de bad eggs burst
before dey got dar. Den de Sesh Buckra begin
to run, an de neber stop running till dc git to de
swamp, an' de stick dar an' de die dar. Den I
heard 'twas the Yankee ship* firm' out de big
eggs, an dey had come to set us free. Den I praise
de Lord. He come an' put he little finger in de
work, an' dey Sesh Buckraall go ; and de birds stop
flyin', and de rabens stop cryin', an' when I go to
catch a fish to eat wid my rice, de 's no fish dar.
De Lord A'mighty 'd come and frightened 'em all
* The Wabaeh.


--- PAGE 58 ---
46 SOME SCENES IX THE
out of tie waters. Oh ! Praise de Lord ! I 'd
prayed seventy-three years, an' now he 's come an'
we's all free."
The last time Harriet was returning from the
war, with her pass as hospital nurse, she bought a
half-fare ticket, as she was told she must do ; and
missing the other train, she got into an emigrant
train on the Amboy Railroad. When the con-
ductor looked at her ticket, he said,
"
Come, hus-
tle out of here ! We don't carry niggers for half-
fare." Harriet explained to him that she was in
the employ of Government, and was entitled to
transportation as the soldiers were. But the con-
ductor took her forcibly by the arm, and said,
" I'll make you tired of trying to stay here," She
resisted, and being very strong, she could probably
have got' the better of the conductor, had he not
called three men to his assistance. The car was
filled with emigrants, and no one seemed to take
her part. The only words she heard, accompa-
nied with fearful oaths, were, " Piti'h the nagur
out !
"
They nearly wrenched her arm off, and
at length threw her, with all their strength, into a
baggage-car. She supposed her arm was broken,
and in intense suffering she came on to New York.
As she left the car, a delicate-looking young man


--- PAGE 59 ---
LIFE OF HARRIET TUBMAX. 4:7
came up to her, and, handing her a card, said,
" You ought to sue that conductor, and if you
want a witness, call on me." Harriet remained all
winter under the care of a physician in NewYork;
he advised her to sue the Railroad company, and
said that he would willingly testify as to her inju-
ries. But the card the young man had given her
was only a visiting card, and she did not know
where to find him, and so she let the matter go.
The writer here finds it necessary to apologize
for the very desultory and hasty manner in which
this little book is written. Being herself pressed
for time, in the expectation of soon leaving the
country, she is obliged to pen down the material to
be used in the short and interrupted interviews she
can obtain with Harriet, and also to use such let-
ters and accounts as maybe sent her, as they come,
without being able to work them in, in the order of
time. Avery material assistance is to be rendered
her by the kind offer of an account of Harriet's
services during the war, written by Mr. Charles P.
Wood, of Auburn, and kindly copied by one of
Harriet's most faithful and most efh'cient friends,
Mrs. S. M. Hopkins, of that place.
It was a wise plan of our sagacious heroine to
leave her old parents till the last to be brought


--- PAGE 60 ---
48 SOME SCENES IN THE
away. They were pensioned off as too old to work,
had a cabin, and a horse and cow, and were quite
comfortable. If Harriet had taken them away be-
fore the young people, these last would have been
sold into Southern slavery, to keep them out of her
way. But at length Harriet heard that the old
man had been betrayed by a slave whom lie had
assisted, but who had turned back, and when ques-
tioned by his wife, told her the story of his intended
escape, and of the aid he had received from "Old
Ben." This woman, hoping to curry favor with
her master, revealed the whole to him, and " Old
Ben " was arrested. He was to be tried the next
week, when Harriet appeared upon the scene, and,
as she says, "saved dem de expense ob de trial, and
removed her father to a higher court, bv takingO */ O
him off to Canada. The manner of their escape is
detailed in the following letter from Thomas Gar-
rett, the Wilmington Quaker :
WILMINGTON, 6th Mo., 1868.
MY FRIEND: Thy favor of the 12th reached me \
yesterday, requesting such reminiscences as I could
give respecting the remarkable labors of Harriet
Tubmari, in aidingher colored friends frombondage.
I may begin by saying, living as I have in a slave
State, and the laws being very severe where any


--- PAGE 61 ---
LIFE OF HARRIET TUBMAN. 49
proof could be made of any one aiding slaves on
their way to freedom, I have not felt at liberty to
keep any written word of Harriet's or my own la-
bors, except in numberingthose whomI have aided.
For that reason I cannot furnish so interesting an
account of Harriet's labors as I otherwise could, and
now would be glad to do
; for in truth I never met
with any person, of any color, who had more confi-
dence in the voice of God, as spoken direct to her
soul. She has frequently told me that she talked
with God, and he talked with her every day of her
life, and she has declared to me that she felt no
more fear of being arrested by her former master,
or any other person, when in his immediate neigh-
borhood, than she did in the State of New York,
or Canada, for she said she never ventured only
where God sent her, and her faith in a Supreme
Power truly was great.
I have now been confined to my room w
r
ith in-
disposition more than four weeks, and cannot sit to
write much
; but I feel so much interested in Har-
riet that I will try to give some of the most remark-
able incidents that nowpresent themselves to my
mind. The date of the commencement of her la-
bors, I cannot certainly give ; but I think it must
have been about 1845 ; from that time till I860, I


--- PAGE 62 ---
50 SOME SCENES IN THE
think she must have brought from the neighborhood
where she had been held as a slave, from 60 to 80
persons, from Maryland, some 80 miles from here.
No slave who placed himself under her care, was
ever arrested that I have heard of; she mostly had
her regular stopping places on her route ; but in
one instance, when she had two stout men with her,
some 30 miles below here, she said that God told
her to stop, which she did
; and then asked him
what she must do. He told her to leave the road,
and turn to the left ; she obeyed, and soon came to
a small stream of tide water; there was no boat,
no bridge ; she again inquired of her Guide what
she was to do. She was told to go through. It
was cold, in the month of March; but having con-
fidence in her Guide, she went in ; the water came
up to her arm-pits ; the men refused to follow till
they saw her safe on the opposite shore. They then
followed, and if I mistake not, she had soon to wade
a second stream; soon after which she came to a
cabin of colored people, who took them all in, put
them to bed, and dried their clothes, ready to pro-
ceed next night on their journey. Harriet had run
out of money, and gave them some of her under-
clothingto pay for their kindness. Whenshe called
on me two days after, she was so hoarse she could


--- PAGE 63 ---
LIFE OF HARRIET TUBMAN. 51
hardly speak, and was also suffering with violent
toothache. Thestrange part of the story we found
to be, that the master ofthese two men had put up
the previous day, at the railroad station nearwhere
she left, an advertisement for them, offering a large
reward for their apprehension ; but they made a
safe exit. She at one time brought as many as
seven or eight, several of whom were women and
children. She was well known here vin Chester
County and Philadelphia, and respected by all true
abolitionists. I had been in the habit of furnish-
ing her and those that accompanied her, as she re-
turned from her acts of mercy, with new shoes;
and on one occasion when I had not seen her for
three months, she came into my store. I said,
" Harriet, I am glad to see thee ! I suppose thee
wants a pair of new shoes." Her reply was " I
want more than that." I, in jest, said,
" I- have al-
ways been liberal with thee, and wish to be ; but I
am not rich, and cannot afford to give much." Her
reply was :
" God tells meyou have moneyfor me."
I asked her "if God never deceived her?" She
said,
" TsTo !
" " Well ! howmuch does thee want? "
Afterstudyinga moment, she said :
" About twenty-
three dollars." I then gave her twenty-four dol-
lars and some odd cents, the net proceeds of five


--- PAGE 64 ---
52 SOME SCENES IN THE
pounds sterling, received through Eliza Wigham,
of Scotland, for her. I had given some accounts
of Harriet's labor to the Anti-Slavery Society of
Edinburgh, of which Eliza Wigham was Secretary.
On the reading of my letter, a gentleman present
said he would send Harriet four pounds if he knew
of any wayto get it to her. Eliza Wigham offered
to forward it to me for her, and that was the first
money ever received by me for her. Some twelve
months after, she called on me again, and said that
God told her I had some money for her, but not so
much as before. I had, a few days previous, re-
ceived the net proceeds of one pound ten shil-
lings from-Europe for her. To say the least, there
was something remarkable in these facts, whether
clairvoyance, or the divine impression on her mind
from the source of all power, I cannot tell
;
but
certain-it was she had a guide within herself other
than the written word, for she never had any edu-
cation. She brought away her aged parents in a
singular manner. They started with an old horse,
fitted out in primitive style with a straw collar, a
pair of old chaise wheels, with a board on the axle
to sit on, another board swung with ropes, fastened
to the axle, to rest their feet on. She got her par-
ents, who were both slaves belonging to different


--- PAGE 65 ---
LIFE OF HARRIET TUBMAN. 53
masters, on this rude vehicle to the railroad, put
them in the cars, turned Jehu herself, and drove to
town in a style that no human being ever did be-
fore or since ; but she was happy at having arrived
safe. Next day, I furnished her with money to
take them all to Canada. I afterwards sold their
horse, and sent them the balance of the proceeds.
I believe that Harriet succeeded in freeing all her
relatives but one sister and her three children.
Etc., etc. Thy friend,
THOS. GARRETT.
Friend Garrett probably refers here to those who
passed through his hands. Harriet was obliged to
come by many different routes on her different
journeys, and though she never counted those
whom she brought away w
r
ith her, it would seem,
by the computation of others, that there must have
been somewhere near three hundred brought by
her to the Northern States and Canada.
Extracts from a letter written by Mr. Sanborn,
Secretary of the Massachusetts Board of State
Charities.
MY DEAR MADAME : Mr. Phillips has sent me
your note, asking for reminiscences of Harriet Tub-


--- PAGE 66 ---
54. SOME SCENES IN THE
man, and testimonials to her extraordinary story,
which all her New England friends will, I am
sure, be glad to furnish.
I never had reason to doubt the truth of what
Harriet said in regard to her own career, for I
found her singularly truthful. Her imagination is
warm and rich, and there is a whole region of the
marvelous in her nature, which has manifested
itselfat times remarkably. Herdreamsand visions,
misgivings and forewarnings, ought not to be
omitted in any life of her, particularly those re-
lating to John Brown.
She was in his confidence in 1858-9, and he had
a great regard for her, which he often expressed to
me. She aided him in his plans, and expected to
do so still further, when his career was closed by
that wonderful campaign in Virginia. The first
time she came to my house, in Concord, after that
tragedy, she was shown into a room in the evening,
where Brackett's bust of John Brown was stand-
ing. The sight of it, which was new to her, threw
her into a sort of ecstacy of sorrow and admiration,
and she went on in her rhapsodical way to pro-
nounce his apotheosis.
She has often been in Concord, where she resided
at the houses of Emerson, Alcott, the Whitneys,


--- PAGE 67 ---
LIFE OF HARRIET TUBMAN. 55
the Brooks family, Mrs. Horace Mann, and other
well known persons. They all admired and re-
spected her, and nobody doubted the reality of her
adventures. She was too real a person to be sus-
pected. In 1862, I think it was, she went from
Boston to Port Royal, under the advice and encour-
agement of Mr. Garrison, Governor Andrew, Dr.
Howe, and other leading people. Her career in
South Carolina is well known to some of our offi-
cers, and I think to Colonel Higginson, now of
Newport, R. I., and Colonel James Montgomery,
of Kansas, to both of whom she was useful as a
spy and guide, if I mistake not. I regard her as,
on the whole, the most extraordinary person of her
race I have ever met. She is a negro of pure or
almost pure blood, can neither read nor write, and
has the characteristics of her race and condition.
But she has done what can scarcely be credited on
the best authority, and she has accomplished her
purposes with a coolness, foresight, patience, and
wisdom, which in a ichite man would have raised
him to the highest pitch of reputation.
I am, dear Madame, very truly your servant,
F. B. SANBORN.
Of the " dreams and visions " mentioned in this


--- PAGE 68 ---
56 SOME SCENES IN THE
letter, the writer might have given many wonder-
ful instances ; but it was thought best not to
insert anything which, with any, might bring dis-
credit upon the story. When these turns of som-
nolency come upon Harriet, she imagines that her
"
spirit
" leaves her body, and visits other scenes
and places, not only in this world, but in the world
of spirits. And her ideas of these scenes show, to
saythe least of it, a vividness of imagination seldom
equaled in the soarings ofthe most cultivated minds.
Not long since, the writer, on going into Harriet's
room in the morning, sat down by her and began
to read that wonderful and glorious description of
the heavenly Jerusalem in the two last chapters of
Revelations. When the reading wasfinished, Har-
riet burst into a rhapsody which perfectly amazed
her hearer telling of what she had seen in one of
these visions, sights which no one could doubt had
been real to her, and which no human imagination
could have conceived, it would seem, unless in dream
or vision. There was a wild poetry in these descrip-
tions which seemed to borderalmost on inspiration,
but by many they might be characterized as the
ravings of insanity. All that can be said is, how-
ever, if this woman is insane, there has been a won-
derful " method in her madness."


--- PAGE 69 ---
LIFE OF HARRIET TUBMAN. 57
At one time, Harriet was much troubled in
spirit about her three brothers, feeling sure that
some great evil was impending over their heads.
Slio wrote a letter, by the hand of a friend, to a
man named Jacob Jackson, who lived near there.
Jacob was a free negro, who could both read and
write, and who was under suspicion at that time,
as it was thought he had something to do with the
disappearance of so many slaves. It was neces-
sary, therefore, to be very cautious in writing to
him. Jacob had .an adopted son, William Henry
Jackson, also free, who had come South ;
and so
Harriet determined to sign her letter with his
name, knowing that Jacob would be clever enough
to understand, by her peculiar phraseology, what
meaning she intended to convey to him. She,
therefore, after speaking of indifferent matters,
said, "Read my letter to the old folks, and give
my love to them, and tell my brothers to be
always watching untoprayer, and when the good
old ship of Zion comes along, to be ready to step
aboard"
The letter was signed
" William Henry Jackson."
Jacob was not allowed to have his letters till the
self-elected inspectors had had the reading of
them, and studied into their secret meaning.


--- PAGE 70 ---
58 SOME SCENES IN THE
They, therefore, got together, wiped their glasses,
and got them on, and proceeded to a careful peru-
sal of this mysterious document. What it meant,
they could not imagine ; William Henry Jackson
had no parents or brothers, and the letter was in-
comprehensible. White genius having exhausted
itself, black genius was called in, and Jacob's
letter was at last handed to him. Jacob saw at
once what it meant, but tossed it down, saying,
" Dat letter can't be meant for me, no how. I
can't make head nor tail of it," and walked off and
took immediate measures to let Harriet's brothers
know secretly that she was coming, and they must
be ready to start at a moment's notice for the North.
When Harriet arrived there, it was the day before
Christmas, and she found her three brothers, who
had attempted to escape, were advertised to be
sold on Christmas day to the highest bidder, to go
down to the cotton and rice fields with the chain-
gang. Christmas came on Sunday, and therefore
they were not to be sold till Monday. Harriet
arrived on Saturday, and gave them secret notice
to be ready to start Saturday night, immediately
after dark, the first stopping-place to be their
father's cabin, forty miles away. When they
assembled, their brother John was missing ; but


--- PAGE 71 ---
LIFE OF HARRIET TPBMAN. 59
when Harriet was ready, the word was " For-
ward !
" and she " nebber waited for no one."
Poor John was almost ready to start, when his
wife was taken ill, and in an hour or two, another
little inheritor of the blessings of slavery had come
into the world. John must go off for a "Granny,"
and then he would not leave his wife in her pres-
ent circumstances. But after the birth of the
child, he began to think he must start ; the North
and Liberty, or the South and life-long Slavery
these were the alternatives, and this was his last
chance. He tried again and again to steal out of
the door, but a watchful eye was on him, and he
was always arrested by the question,
" Where you
gwine, John ? " At length he told her he was
going to try to see if he couldn't get hired out on
Christmas to another man. His wife did not
think that he was to be sold. He went out of the
door, and stood by the corner of the house, near
her bed, listening. At length, he heard her sob-
bing and crying, and not being able to endure it,
he went back. " Oh ! John," said his wife,
"
you's
gwine to lebe me; but, wherebber you go, remem-
ber me an' de chillen." John went out and started
at full speed for his father's cabin, forty miles
away. At daybreak, he overtook the others in


--- PAGE 72 ---
60 SOME SCENES IN THE
the " fodder house," near the cabin of their pa-
rents. Harriet had not seen her mother there for
six years, but they did not' dare to let the old
woman know of their being in her neighborhood,
or of their intentions, for she would have raised
such an uproar in her eiforts to detain them with
her, that the whole plantation would have been
alarmed. The poor old woman had been expect-
ing the boys all day, to spend Christinas with her
as usual. She ,had been hard at work, had killed
a pig, and put it to all the various uses to which
sinner's flesh is doomed, and had made all the
preparations her circumstances admitted of, to
give them a sumptuous entertainment, and there
she sat watching. In the night, when Harriet and
two of her brothers and two other men, who had
escaped with them, arrived at the "fodder house,"
they were exhausted and famished. They sent
the two strange men up to the house to try and
speak to " Old Ben," their father, but not to let
their mother know of their being in the neighbor-
hood. The men succeeded in rousing old Ben,
who came out, and as soon as he heard their story,
he gathered together a quantity of provisions, and
came down to the fodder house, and slipped them
inside the door, taking care not to see his children.


--- PAGE 73 ---
LIFE OF HARRIET TUBMAN. 61
Up among the ears of corn they lay, and one of
them he had not seen for six years. It rained
very hard all that Sunday, and there they lay all
day, for they could not start till night. At about
daybreak, John joined them. There were wide
chinks in the boards of the fodder house, and
through them they could see their father's cabin ;
and all daylong, every few minutes, they would see
the old woman come out, and, shading her eyes
with her hand, take a long look down the road to
see if her children were coming, and then they
could almost hear her sigh as she turned into the
house, disappointed.
Two or three times the old man came down, and
pushed food inside the door, and after nightfall he
came to accompany them part of the way upon
their journey. When he reached the fodder house,
he tied his handkerchief tight over his eyes, and
two of his sons taking him by each arm, he
accompanied them some miles upon their' jour-
ney. They then bade him farewell, and left
him standing blind-fold in the middle of the
road. When he could no longer hear their foot-
steps, he took off the handkerchief, and turned
back.
But before leaving, they had gone up to the cabin


--- PAGE 74 ---
62 SOME SCENES IN THE
to take a silent farewell of the poor old mother.
Through the little window of the cabin, they saw
the old woman sitting by her fire with a pipe
in her mouth, her head on her hand, rocking back
and forth as she did when she was in tiouble, and
wonderingwhat new evil had come to her children.
With streaming eyes, they watched her for ten or
fifteen minutes ; but time was precious, and they
must reach their next station before daybreak, and
so they turned sadly away.
When the holidays were over, and the men came
for the three brothers to sell them, they could not
be found. The first place to search was of course
the plantation where all their relatives and friends
lived. They went to the "
big house," and asked
the "Doctor" if he had seen anything of them.
The Doctor said,
" No, they mostly came up there
to see the other niggers when they came for Christ-
mas, but they hadn't been round at all. " Have
you been down to Old Ben's ? " the Doctor asked.
" Yes." " What does Old Kit say ? " " Old Kit
says not one of 'em came this Christmas. She was
looking for 'em most all day, and most broke her
heart about it." "What does Old Ben say?"
" Old Ben says that he hasn't seen one of his chil-
dren this Christmas." " Well, if Old Ben says that,


--- PAGE 75 ---
LIFE OF HAKRLET TUBMAN. 63
they haven't been round. " And so the man-hunters
went off disappointed.
One of the other brothers, William Henry, had
long been attached to a girl named Catherine,
who lived with another master; but her master
would not let her marry him. When William
Henry made up his mind to start with Harriet, he
determined to bring Catherine with him. And so
he went to a tailor's, and bought a new suit of
men's clothes, and threw them over the garden
fence of Catherine's master. Thegarden ran down
to a run, and Catherine had been notified where to
find the clothes. When the time had come to get
ready, Catherine went to the foot of the garden
and dressed herself in the suit of men's clothes.
She was soon missed, and all the girls in the house
were set to looking for Catherine. Presently they
saw coming up through the garden, as if from the
river, a well-dressed little darkey, and they all
stopped lookingfor Catherine to stare at him. He
walked directly by them round the house, and
went out of the gate, without the slightest sus-
picion being excited as to who he was. In a fort-
night from that time, the whole party were safe in
Canada.
William Henry died in Canada, but Catherine


--- PAGE 76 ---
64 SOME SCENES IN THE
has been seen and talked with by the writer, at the
house of the old people.
Of the many letters, testimonials, and passes,
placed in the hands of the writer by Harriet, the
following are selected for insertion in this book,
and are quite sufficient to verify her statements.
A Letterfrom Gen. Saxton to aLady of Auburn.
ATLANTA, GA., March 21, 1868.
MY DEAR MADAME : I have just received your
letter informing me that Hon. Wm. H. Seward,
Secretary of State, would present a petition to
Congress for a pension to Harriet Tubman, for
services rendered in the Union Armv durin<>- the
/ O
late war. I can bear witness to the value of her
services in South Carolina and Florida. She was
employed in the hospitals and as a spy. She made
many a raid inside the enemy's lines, displaying
remarkable courage, zeal, and fidelity. She was
employed by General Hunter, and I think by
Generals Stevens and Sherman, and is as deservino-O
of a pension from the Government for her services
as any other of its faithful servants.
I am very truly yours,
RUFUS SAXTOX, Bvt. Brig.-Gen. U. S. A.


--- PAGE 77 ---
LIFE OF HARRIET TUBMAN. 65
Letterfrom* Ilo
r
n. Wm.H. Seward.
WASHINGTON, July 25, 1868.
MAJ.-GEN. HUNTER
MY DEAR SIR: Harriet Tubman, a colored
woman,lias been nursing our soldiers during nearly
all the war. She believes she has a claim for faith-
ful services to the command in South Carolina with
which you are connected, and she thinks that you
would be disposed to see her claim justly settled.
I have known her long, and a nobler, higher spirit,
or a truer, seldom dwells in the human form. I
commend her, therefore, to your kind and best
attentions. Faithfully your friend,
WILLIAM H. SEWARD.
Letter from Col. James Montgomery.
ST. HELENA ISLAND, S. C., July 6, 1863.
HEADQUARTERS COLORED BRIGADE.
BRIG.-GEN. GILMAX, Commanding Department of
the South
GENERAL: I wish to commend to your atten-
tion, Mrs. Harriet Tubman, a most remarkable
woman, and invaluable as a scout. I have been
acquainted with her character and actions for
several years.


--- PAGE 78 ---
66 SOME SCENES IN THE
Walter D. Plowden is a man of tried courage,
and can be made highly useful.
I am, General, your most ob't servant,
JAMES MONTGOMERY, Col. Com. Brigade.
Letter from Mrs. Gen. A. JBaird.
PETERBOKO, Nov. 24, 1864.
The bearer of this, Harriet Tubman, a most ex-
cellent woman, whohas rendered faithful and good
services to our Union army, not only in the hos-
pital, but in various capacities, having been em-
ployed under Government at Hilton Head, and in
Florida ; and I commend her to the protection of
all officers in whose department she may happen
to be.
She has been known and esteemed for years by
the family of my uncle, Hon. Gerrit Smith, as a
person of great rectitude and capabilities.
MRS. GEN. A. BAIRD.
letterfrom Hon. Gerrit /Smith.
PETERBORO, N. Y., Nov. 4, 1867.
I have known Mrs. Harriet Tubman for many
years. Seldom, if ever, have I met with a person


--- PAGE 79 ---
LIFE OF HARRIET TDBHAN. 67
more philanthropic, more self-denying, and of more
bravery. Nor must I omit to say that she com-
bines with her sublime spirit, remarkable discern-
ment and judgment.
During the late war, Mrs. Tubmanwas eminently
faithful and useful to the cause of our country.
She is poor and has poor parents. Such a servant
of the country should be well paid by the country.
I hope that the Government will look into her
case. GERRIT SMITH.
Testimonial from Gerrit Smith.
PETERBORO, Nov. 22, 1864.
The bearer, Harriet Tubman, needs not any rec-
ommendation. Nearly all the nation over, she has
been heard of for her wisdom, integrity, patriotism,
and bravery. The cause of freedom owes her much.
The country owes her much.
I have known Harriet for many years, and I
hold her in my high esteem. GERRIT SMITH.
Certificate from Henry K. Dum*ant, Acting Asst.
Surgeon, U. 8. A.
I certify that I have been acquainted with Har-
riet Tubman for nearly two years ; and myposition


--- PAGE 80 ---
68 SOME SCENES IX THE
as Medical Officer in charge of " contrabands " in
this town and in hospital, has given me frequent
and ample opportunities to observe her general de-
portment ; particularly her kindness and attention
to the sick and suffering of her own race. I take
much pleasure in testifying to the esteem in which
she is generally held.
HKNEY K. DUEEANT,
Acting Assistant Surgeon, II. S. A.
In charge
" Contraband "
Hospital.
Dated at Beaufort. S. C., the 3d day of May,
1864.
I concur fully in the above.
R. SAXTON, Brig.-Gen. Vol.
The following are a few of the passes used by
Harriet throughout the war. Many others are so
defaced that it is impossible to decipher them.
HEADQUARTERS DEPARTMENTOP THE SOUTH,
HILTON HEAD, PORT ROYAL, S. C., Feb. 19, 1863.
Pass the bearer, Harriet Tubman, to Beaufort and
back to this place, and wherever she wishes to go ;
and give her free passage at all times, on all Gov-
ernment transports. Harriet was sent to me from


--- PAGE 81 ---
LIFE OF HARRIET TUBMAN. 69
Boston by Gov. Andrew of Mass., and is a valua-
ble woman. She has permission, as a servant of
the Government, to purchase such provisions from
the Commissary as she may need.
D. HUNTER, Maj.-Gen. Com.
General Gillman, who succeeded General Hunter
in command of the Department of the South, ap-
pends his signature to the same pass.
HEADQUARTERS OF THE DEPARTMENT OF THE SOUTH,
July 1, 1863.
Continued in force.
I. A. GILLMAN, Brig.-Gen. Com.
BEAUFORT, Aug. 28, 1862.
Will Capt. Wai-field please let " Moses " have a
little Bourbon whiskey for medicinal purposes.
HENRY K. DURBANT, Act. Ass. Surgeon.
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D. C.,
March 20, 1865.
Pass Mrs. Harriet Tubman (colored) to Hilton
Head and Charleston, S. C., with free transporta-
tion on a Government transport.
By order of the Sec. of War.
Louis II., Asst. Adj.-Gen., U. S. A.
ToBvt. Brig.-Gen. Van Vliet, U. S. Q. M., N. Y.
Not transferable.


--- PAGE 82 ---
70 SOME SCENES IN THE
WAR DEPAHTMENT, WASHINGTON, D. C.,
July 22, 1865.
Permit Harriet Tubman to proceed to Fortress
Monroe, Va., on a Government transport. Trans-
portation will be furnished free of cost.
By order of the Secretary of War.
L. H., Asst. Adj.-Gen.
Not transferable.
Appointment as Nurse.
Sin : -I have the honor to inform you that the
Medical Director Department of Virginia has been
instructed to appoint Harriet Tubman nurse or
matron at the Colored Hospital, Fort Monroe, Va.
Very respectfully, your obdt. servant,
V. K. BAKXES, Surgeon-General.
Hon. WM. H. SEWAKD,
Secretary of State, Washington, D. C.
Names of Harriet's Assistants, /Scouts, or Pilots.
Scouts who are residents of Beaufort, and well
acquainted with the main land : Peter Barns, Mott
Blake, Sandy Selters, Solomon Gregory, Isaac Hay-
ward, Gabriel Cohen, George Chrisholm.


--- PAGE 83 ---
LIFE OF HARRIET TUBMAN. 71
Pilots who know the channels of the rivers in
this vicinity, and who acted as such for Col. Mont-
gomery up the Cornbahee River: Charles Simmons,
Samuel Hayward.
App'd, R. SAXTON, Brig.-Gen.
At this point the following good and kind letter
from Rev. Henry Fowler is received :
AUBURN, June 23, 1868.
Mr DEAR FRIEXD: I wish to say to you how
gratified I am that you are writing the biography
of Harriet Tubrnan. I feel that her life forms part
of the history of the country, and that it ought not
to depend upon tradition to keep it in remembrance.
Had not the pressure of professional claims pre-
vented, I should have aspired to be her historian
myself; but my disappointment in this regard is
more than met by the satisfaction experienced in
hearing that you are the chosen Miriam of this Af-
rican " Moses
;
" the name by which she was known
among her emancipated followers from the land of
bondage. Blessed be God! a "Greater than
Moses " has at last broken every bond.
As ever, with warm regard, your friend,
HENRY FOWLER.


--- PAGE 84 ---
72 SOME SCENES IN THE
The following account of the subject of this
memoir is cut from the Boston Commonwealth of
1863, kindly sent the writer by Mr. Sanborn :
" It was said long ago that the true romance of
America was not in the fortunes of the Indian,
where Cooper sought it, nor in the New England
character, where Judd found it, nor in the social
contrasts of Virginia planters, as Thackeray im-
agined, but in the story of the fugitive slaves.
The observation is as true now as it was before
war, with swift, gigantic hand, sketched the vast
shadows, and dashed in the high lights in which
romance loves to lurk and flash forth. But the
stage is enlarged on which these dramas are
played, the whole world now sit as spectators, and
the desperation or the magnanimity of a poor
black woman has power to shake the nation that
so long was deaf to her cries. We write of one
of these heroines, of whom our slave annals are
full, a woman whose career is as extraordinary
as the most famous of her sex can show.
" Araminta Ross, now known by her married
name of Tubman, with her sounding Christian
name changed to Harriet, is the grand-daughter
of a slave imported from Africa, and has not a
drop of white blood in her veins. Her parents


--- PAGE 85 ---
LIFE OF HARRIET TUBMAN. J3
were Benjamin Ross and Harriet Greene, both
slaves, but married and faithful to each other.
They still live in old age and poverty, but free, on
a little property at Auburn, N". Y., which their
daughter purchased for them from Mr. Seward,
the Secretary of StatA She was born, as near as
she can remember, in 1820 or in 1821, in Dorchester
County, on the Eastern shore of Maryland, and
not far from the town of Cambridge. She had ten
brothers and sisters, of whom three are nowliving,
all at the North, and all rescued from slavery by
Harriet, before the War. She went back just as
the South was preparing to secede, to bring away
a fourth, but before she could reach her, she
was dead. Three years before, she had brought
away her old father and mother, at great risk to
herself.
" When Harriet was six years old, she was taken
from her mother and carried ten miles to live with
James Cook, whose wife was a weaver, to learn
the trade of weaving. While still a mere child,
Cook set her to watching his musk-rat traps, which
compelled her to wade through the water. It
happened that she was once sent when she was ill
with the measles, and, taking cold from wading in
the water in this condition, she grew very sick,


--- PAGE 86 ---
74 SOME SCENES IN THE
and her mother persuaded her master to take her
away from Cook's until she could get well.
" Another attempt was made to teach her weav-
ing, but she would not learn, for she hated her
mistress, and did not want to live at home, as she
would have done as a weaver, for it was the cus-
tom then to weave the cloth for the family, or a
part of it, in the house.
" Soon after she entered her teens she was hired
out as a field hand, and it was while thus em-
ployed that she received a wound which nearly
proved fatal, from the effects of which she still
suffers. In the fall of the year, the slaves there
work in the evening, cleaning up wheat, husking
corn, etc.- *On this occasion, one of the slaves of a
farmer named Barrett, left his work, and went to
the village store in the evening. The overseer
followed him, and so did Harriet. When the slave
was found, the overseer
'
swore he should be
whipped, and called on Harriet, among others, to
help tie him. She refused, and as the man ran
away, she placed herself in the door to stop pur-
suit. The overseer caught up a two-pound weight
from the counter and threw it at the fugitive, but
it fell short and struck Harriet a stunning blow on
the head. It was long before she recovered from


--- PAGE 87 ---
LIFE OF HARRIET TUBMAN. 75
this, and it has left her subject to a sort of stupor
or lethargy at times ; coming upon her in the
1
midst of conversation, or whatever she may be
doing, and throwing her into a deep slumber, from
which she will presently rouse herself, and go on
with her conversation or work.
" After this she lived for five or six years with
John Stewart, where at first she worked in the
house, but afterwards
'
hired her time,' and Dr.
Thompson, son of her master's guardian,
'
stood
for her,' that is, was her surety for the payment
of what she owed. She employed the time thus
hired in the rudest labors, drove oxen, carted,
plowed, and did all the work of :i man, some-
times earning money enough in a year, beyond
what she paid her master, 'to buy a pair of
steers,' worth forty dollars. The amount exacted
of a woman for her time was fifty or sixty dollars,
of a man, one hundred to one hundred and fifty
dollars. Frequently Harriet worked for her
lather, who was a timber inspector, and superin-
tended the cutting and hauling of great quantities
of timber for the Baltimore ship-yards. Stewart,
his temporary master, was a builder, and for the
work of Ross used to receive as much as five
dollars a day sometimes, he being a superior work-


--- PAGE 88 ---
76 SOME SCENES IN THE
man. While engaged with her father, she would
cut wood, haul logs, etc. Her usual
'
stint
'
was
half a cord of wood in a day.
" Harriet was married somewhere about 1844,
to a free colored man named John Tubman, but
she had no children. For the last two years of
slavery she lived with Dr. Thompson, before men-
tioned, her own master not being yet of age, and
Dr. T.'s father being his guardian, as w
r
ell as the
owner of her own father. In 1849 the young man
died, and the slaves were to be sold, though pre-
viously set free by an old will. Harriet resolved
not to be sold, and so, with no knowledge of the
North having only heard of Pennsylvania and
New Jersey she walked away one night alone.
She found a friend in a white lady, who knew her
story and helped her on her way. After many ad-
ventures, she reached Philadelphia, where she found
work and earned a small stock of money, ^ith
this moneyin her purse, she traveled back to Mary-
land for her husband, but she found him married
to another woman,and no longer caring to live with
her. This, however, was not until two years after
her escape, for she does not seem to have reached
her old home in her first two expeditions. In
December, 1850, she had visited Baltimore and


--- PAGE 89 ---
LIFE OF HARRIET TUBMAK. 77
brought away her sister and two children, who had
come up from Cambridge in a boat, under charge
of her sister's husband, a free black. Afew months
after she had brought away her brother and two
other men, but it was not till the fall of 1851 that
she found her husband and learned of his infidelity.
She did not give way to rage or grief, but collected
a party of fugitives and brought them safely to
Philadelphia. In December of the same year, she
returned, and led out a party of eleven, among them
her brother and his wife. With these she journey-
ed to Canada, and there spent the winter, for this
was after the enforcement of Mason's Fugitive
Slave Bill in Philadelphia and Boston, and there
was no safety except
'
under the paw ofthe British
Lion,' as she quaintly said. But the first winter
was terribly severe for these poorrunaways. They
earned their bread by chopping wood in the snows
of a Canadian forest ; they were frost-bitten, hun-
gry, and naked. Harriet was their good angel.
She kept house for her brother, and the poor
creatures boarded with her. She worked for them,
begged for them, prayed for them, with the strange
familiarity of communion with God which seems
natural to these people, and carried them by the
help of God through the hard winter.


--- PAGE 90 ---
78 SOME SCENES IN THE
"Inthe spring she returned to the States, and
as usual earned money by working in hotels and
families as a cook. From Cape May, in the fall of
1852, she went back once more to Maryland, and
brought away nine more fugitives.
"
Up to this time she had expended chiefly her
own money in these expeditions money which she
had earned by hard work in the drudgery of the
kitchen. Never did anyone more exactly fulfill the
sense of George Herbert
"Aservant with this clause
Makes drudgery divine."
" But it was not possible for such virtues long to
remain hidden from the keen eyes of the Abolition-
ists. She became known to Thomas Garrett, the
large-hearted Quaker of Wilmington, whohas aided
the escape of three thousand fugitives ; she found
warm friends in Philadelphia and New York, and
wherever she went. These gave her money, which
she never spent for her own use", but laid up for the
help of her people, and especially for her journeys
back to the
'
land of Egypt,' as she called her old
home. By reason of her frequent visits there, al-
ways carrying away some of the oppressed, she
got among her people the name of
'
Moses,' which
it seems she still retains.


--- PAGE 91 ---
LIFE OF HARRIET Tt'BMAN. 79
"Between 1852 and 1857, she made but two of
these journeys, in consequence partly of the in-
creased vigilance of the slaveholders, who had suf-
fered so much by the loss of their property. A
great reward was offered for her capture, and she
several times was on the point of being taken, but
always escaped by her quick wit, or by
'
warnings
'
from Heaven for it is time to notice one singular
trait in her character. She is the most shrewd and
practical person in the world, yet she is a firm be-
liever in omens, dreams, and warnings. She de-
clares that before her escape from slavery, she used
to dream of flying over fields and towns, and
rivers and mountains, looking down upon them
'
like a bird,' and reaching at last a great fence, or
sometimes a river, over which she would try to fly,
4
but it 'peared like I wouldn't hab de strength, and
jes as I was sinkin' down, dare would be ladies all
drest in white ober dere, and dey would put out
dere arms and pull me 'cross.' There is nothing
strange in this, perhaps, but she declares that when
she came Xorth she remembered these very places
as those she had seen in her dreams, and many of
the ladies who befriended her were those she had
15een helped by in her visions.
" Then she says she always knows when there is


--- PAGE 92 ---
80 SOME SCENES IN THE
danger near her, she does not know how, exactly,
but
'
'pears like myheart goflutter, flutter, and den
dey may say
" Peace, Peace," as much as dey likes,
Iknow its gwine to be war/' She is very firm on
this point, and ascribes to this her great impunity,
in spite of the lethargy before mentioned, which
would seem likely to throw her into the hands of
her enemies. She says she inherited this power,
that her father could always predict the weather,
and that he foretold the Mexican war.
" In 1867 she made her mostventuresomejourney,
for she brought with her to the North her old pa-
rents, who were no longer able to walk such dis-
tances as she must go by night. Consequently she
must hire a wagon for them, and it required all
her ingenuity to get them through Maryland and
Delaware safe. She accomplished it, however, and
by the aid of her friends she brought them safe to
Canada,where they spent the winter. Her account
oftheir sufferings there of her mother's complain-
ing and her own philosophy about it is a lesson of
trust in Providence better than many sermons.
But she decided to bring them to a more comforta-
ble place, and so s.he negotiated with Mr. Seward
then in the Senate for a little patch of ground
with a house on it, at Auburn, near his own home.


--- PAGE 93 ---
LIFE OF HARRIET TUBMAN. 81
To the credit of the Secretary of State it should be
said, that he sold her the property on very favora-
ble terms, and gave her some time for payment.
To this house she removed her parents, and set
herself to work to pay for her purchase. It
was on this errand that she first visited Boston
we believe in the winter of 1 858-9. Shebrought
a few letters from her friends in NewYork, but she
could herself neither read nor write, and she was
obliged to trust to her wits that they were deliv-
ered to the right persons. One of them, as it hap-
pened, was to the present writer, who received it
by another hand, and called to see her at her board-
ing-house. It was curious to see the caution with
which she received her visitor until she felt assured
that there was no mistake. One of her means of
security was to carry with her the daguerreotypes
of her friends, and show them to each new person.
If they recognized the likeness, then it was all
right.
" Pains were taken to secure her the attention to
which her great services to humanity entitled her,
and she left NewEngland with a handsome sum of
money towards the payment of her debt to Mr.
Seward. Before she left, however, she had several
interviews with Captain Brown, then in Boston.


--- PAGE 94 ---
SOME SCENES IN THE
He is supposed to have communicated his plans to
her, and to have been aided by her in obtaining re-
cruits and money among her people. At any rate,
he always spoke of her with the greatest respect,
and declared that
'
General Tubman,' as he styled
her, was a better officer than most whom he had
seen, and could command an army as successfully
as she had led her small parties of fugitives.
" Her own veneration for Captain Brown has
always been profound, and since his murder, has
taken the form of a religion. She had often risked
her own life for her people, and she thought nothing
ofthat; but that a white man, and a man so no-
ble and strong, should so take upon himself the
burden of a despised race, she could not understand,
and she took refuge from her perplexity in the
mysteries of her fervid religion.
"Again, she. laid great stress on a dream which
she had just before she met Captain Brown in Can-
ada. She thought she was in
'
a wilderness sort of
place, all full of rocks and bushes,' when she saw
a serpent raise its head among the rocks, and as it
did so, it became the head of an old man with a
long white beard, gazing at her
'
wishful like, jes
as ef he war gwine to speak to me,' and then two
other heads rose up beside him, younger than he,


--- PAGE 95 ---
LIFE OF HARRIET TCBMAN. 83
and as she stood looking at them, and wondering
what they could want with her, a great crowd of
men rushed in and struck down the younger heads,
and then the head of the old man, still looking at
her so
'
wishful.' This dream she had again and
again, and could not interpret it ; but when she
met Captain Brown, shortly after, behold, he was
the very image of the head she had seen. But
still she could not make out what her dream
signified, till the news came to her of the tragedy
of Harper's Ferry, and then she knew the two
other heads were his two sons. She was in New
York at that time, and on the day of the affair at
Harper's Ferry, she felt her usual warning that
something was wrong she could not tell what.
Finally she told her hostess that it must be Captain
Brown who was in trouble, and that they should
soon hear bad news from him. The next day's
newspaper brought tidings of what had happened.
"Her last visit to Maryland was made after this,
in December, 1860 ; and in spite of the agitated
condition of the country, and the greater watchful-
ness of the slaveholders, she brought away seven
fugitives, one of them an infant, which must be
drugged with opium to keep it from crying on the
way. and so revealing the hiding place of the party.


--- PAGE 96 ---
SOME >C'KNES TX THE
She brought these safely to NewYork, but there a
new difficulty met her. It was the mad winter of
compromises, when State after State, and politician
after politician, went down on their knees to beg
the South not to secede. The hunting of fugitive
slaves began again. Mr. Seward went over to
the side of compromise. He knew the history
of this poor woman ;
he had given his enemies
a hold on him, by dealing with her ; it was
thought he would not scruple to betray her. The
suspicion was an unworthy one, for though the
Secretary could betray a cause, he could not surely
have put her enemies on the track of a woman who
was thus in his power, after such a career as hers
had been. But so little confidence was then felt in
Mr. Seward, by men who had voted for him and
with him, that they hurried Harriet off to Canada,
sorely against her will.
" She did not long remain there. Thewar broke
out, for which she had been long looking, and she
hastened to her New England friends to prepare
for another expedition to Maryland, to bring away
the last of her family.
" Before she could start, however, the news came
of the capture of Port Royal. Instantly she con-
ceived the idea of going there and working among


--- PAGE 97 ---
LIFE OF HARRIET TUBMAN. 85
her people on the islands and the mainland. Money
was given her, a pass was secured through the
agency of Governor Andrew, and she wentto Beau-
fort. There she has made herself useful in many
ways has been employed as a spy by General
Hunter, and finally has piloted Col. Montgomery
on his most successful expedition. We gave some
notice of this fact last week. Since then we have
received the following letter, dictated by her, from
which it appears that she needs some contributions
for her work. Wetrust she will receive them, for
none has better deserved it. She asks nothing for
herself, except that her wardrobe may be replen-
ished, and even this she will probably share with
the first needy person she meets.
" '
BEAUFORT, S. C., June 30, 1868.
* * * " '
Last fall, whenthe people here became
very much alarmed for fear of an invasion from the
rebels, all my clothes were packed and sent with
others to Hilton Head, and lost ; and I have never
been able to get any trace of them since. I was
sick at the time, and unable to look after them my-
self. I want, among the rest, a bloomer dress,
made of some coarse, strong material, to wear on
expeditions. In our late expedition up the Com-


--- PAGE 98 ---
86 SOME SCENES IN THE
bahee River, in coming on board the boat, I was
carrying twopigs for a poor sick woman, who had
a child to carry, and the order " double quick
" was
given, and I started to run, stepped on nay dress, it
being rather long, and fell and tore it almost off,
so that when I got on board the boat, there was
hardly anything left of it but shreds. I made up
my mind then I would never wear a long dress on
another expedition of the kind, but would have a,
bloomer as soon as I could get it. So please make
this known to the ladies, if you will, for I expect to
have use for it very soon, probably before they
can get it to me.
" '
Youhave, without doubt, seen a fall account of
the expedition I refer to. Don't you think we col-
ored people are entitled to some credit for that ex-
ploit, under the lead of the brave Colonel Montgom-
ery ? We weakened the rebels somewhat on the
Combahee River, by taking and bringing away
seven hundred andfifty-six head of their most val-
uable live stock, known up in your region as " con-
trabands," and this, too, without the loss of a sin-
gle life on our part, though we had good reason to
believe that a number of rebels bit the dust. Of
these seven hundred and fifty-six contrabands,


--- PAGE 99 ---
LIFE OF HARRIET TUBMAN. 87
nearly or quite all the able-bodied men have joined
the colored regiments here.
" '
I have nowbeen absent two years almost, and
have just got letters from my friends in Auburn,
urging meto come home. Myfather andmother are
old and in feeble health, and need mycare and atten-
tion. I hope the good people there will not allow
themto suffer, and I do not believe theywill. But I
do not see howI amto leave at present the very im-
portant work to be done here. Amongother duties
which I have, is that of looking after the hospital
here for contrabands. Most of those coming from
the mainland are very destitute, almost naked. I
am trying to find places for those able to work,
and provide for them as best I can, so as to lighten
the burden on the Government as much as possi-
ble, while at the same time they learn to respect
themselves by earning their own living.
" '
Remember mevery kindly to Mrs. andher
daughters ; also, if you will, to my Boston friends,
Mrs. C., Miss H., and especially to Mr. and Mrs.
George L. Stearns, to whom I am under great
obligations for their many kindnesses. I shall
be sure to come and see you all if I live to go
Xorth. If you write, direct your letter to the care
of 0.' "


--- PAGE 100 ---
88 SOME SCENES IN THE
In the Spring of 1860, Harriet Tubman was re-
quested by Mr. Gerrit Smith to go to Boston to
attend a large Anti-Slaverymeeting. On her way,
she stopped at Troy to visit a Cousin, and while
there, the colored people were one day startled
with the intelligence that a fugitive slave, by the
name of Charles Nalle, had been followed by his
master (who was his younger brother, and not
one grain whiter than he), and that he was already
in the hands of the officers, and was to be taken
back to the South. The instant Harriet heard the
news, she started for the office of the U. S. Com-
missioner, scattering the tidings as she went. An
excited crowd were gathered about the office,
through which Harriet forced her way, and rushed
up stairs to the door of the room where the fugi-
tive was detained. Awagon was already waiting
before the door to carry off the man, but the
crowd was even then so great, and in such a state
of excitement, that the officers did not dare to
bring the man down. On the opposite side of the
street stood the colored people, watching the win-
dow where they could see Harriet's sun-bonnet,
and feeling assured that so long as she stood there,
the fugitive was still in the office. Time passed
on, and he did not appear.
"
They've taken him


--- PAGE 101 ---
LIFE OF 1IAKKIET TUUMAX. 89
out another way, depend upon that," said some of
the colored people.
" No," replied others,
" there
stands
'
Moses
'
yet, and as long as she is there, he
is safe." Harriet, now seeing the necessity for a
tremendous effort for his rescue, sent out some
little boys to cry fire. The bells rang, the crowd
increased, till the whole street was a dense mass of
people. Agpln and again the officers came out to
try and clear the stairs, and make a way to take
their captive down; others were driven down, but
Harriet stood her ground, her head bent down, and
her arms folded. " Come, old woman,you mustget
out of this," said one of the officers
;
" I must have
the way cleared ; if you can't get down alone, some
one will help you." Harriet, still putting on a
greater appearance of decrepitude, twitched away
from him, and kept her place. Offers were made
to buy Charles from his master, who at first agreed
to take twelve hundred dollars for him
; but when
that was subscribed, he immediately raised the
price to fifteen hundred. The crowd grew more
excited. A gentleman raised a window and called
out,
" Two hundred dollars for his rescue, but not
one cent to his master !" This was responded to
by a roar of satisfaction from the crowd below.
At length the officers appeared, and announced to


--- PAGE 102 ---
90 SOME SCENES IN THE
the crowd that if they would open a lane to the
wagon, they would promise to bring the man down
the front way.
The lane was opened, and the man was brought
out a tall, handsome, intelligent white man, with
his wrists manacled together, walking between the
U. S. Marshal and another officer, and behind him
his brother and his master, so like him that one
could hardly be told from the other. The moment
they appeared, Harriet roused from her stoopingpos-
ture, threw up a window, arid cried to her friends :
" Here he comes take him !" and then darted
down the stairs like a wild-cat. She seized one
officer and pulled him down, then another, and
tore him away from the man
;
and keeping her
arms about the slave, she cried to her friends :
"
Drag us out !
Drag him to the river ! Drown
him ! but don't let them have him !
"
They were
knocked down together, and while down she tore
off her sun-bonnet and tied it on the head of the
fugitive. When he rose, only his head could be
seen, and amid the surging mass of people the
slave was no longer recognized, while the master
appeared like the slave. Again and again they
were knocked down, the poor slave utterly help-
less, with his manacled wrists streaming with blood.


--- PAGE 103 ---
LLFE OF HARRIET TUBMAX. 91
Harriet's outer clothes were torn from her, and
even her stout shoes were all pulled from her feet,
yet she never relinquished her hold of the man,
till she had dragged him to the river, where he was
tumbled into a boat, Harriet fo'lowing in a ferry-
boat to the other side. But the telegraph was
ahead of them, and as soon as they landed he was
seized and hurried from her sight. After a time,
some school children came hurrying along, and to
her anxious inquiries they answered,
" He is up in
that house, in the third story." Harriet rushed up
to the place. Some men were attempting to make
their way up the stairs. The officers were firing
dow
T
n, and two men were lying on the stairs, who
had been shot. Over their bodies our heroine
rushed, and with the help of others burst open the
door of the room, dragged out the fugitive, whom
Harriet carried down stairs in her arms. Agen-
tleman who was riding by with a fine horse, stop-
ped to ask what the disturbance meant; and on
hearing the story, his sympathies seemed to be
thoroughly aroused ;
he sprang from his w
r
agon,
calling out,
" That is a blood-horse, drive him till
he drops." The poor man was hurried in
; some of
his friends jumped in after him, and drove at the
most rapid rate to Schenectady,


--- PAGE 104 ---
02 SOME SCENES IN THE
This is the story Harriet told to the writer. By
some persons it seemed too wonderful for belief,
and an attempt was made to corroborate it. Rev.
Henry Fowler, who was at the time at Saratoga,
kindly volunteered to go to Troy and ascertain the
facts. His report was, that he had had a long in-
terview with Mr. Townsend, who acted during the
trial as counsel for the slave, that he had given
him a " rich narration," which he would write out
the next week for this little book. But before he
was to begin his generous labor, and while engaged
in some kind efforts for the prisoners at Auburn, he
was stricken down by the heat of the sun, and is
for a long time debarred from labor.
FUGITIVE SLAVE RESCUE IN TROY.
From the Troy Whig, April 28, 1859.
Yesterday afternoon, the streets of this city and
West Troy were made the scenes of unexampled
excitement. For the first time since the passage
of the Fugitive Slave Law, an attempt was made
here to carry its provisions into execution, and the
result was a terrific encounter between the officers
and the prisoner's friends, the triumph of mob law,


--- PAGE 105 ---
LIFE OF HARRIET TUBMAN. 93
and the final r:s';ue of the fugitive. Our city was
thrown into a grand state of turmoil, and for a
time every other topic was forgotten, to give place
to this new excitement. People did not think last
evening to ask who was nominated at Charleston,
or whetherthe news of the Heenan and Sayers bat-
tle had arrived everything was merged into the
fugitive slave case, of which it seems the end is notO
yet.
Charles Nalle, the fugitive, who was the cause
of all this excitement, was a slave on the planta-
tion of B. W. Hansbnrough, in Culpepper County,
Virginia, till the 19th of October, 1858, when he
made his escape, and went to live in Columbia,
Pennsylvania, Awife and five children are resid-
ing there now. Xot long since he came to Sand-
lake, in this county, and resided in the family of
Mr. Crosby until about three weeks ago. Since
that time, he has been employed as coachman by
Uri Gilbert, Esq., of this city. He is about thirty
years of age, tall, quite light-complexioned, and
good-looking. He is said to have been an excel-
lent and faithful servant.
At Sandlake, we understand that Nalle was of-
ten seen by one H. F. Averill, formerly connected
with one of the papers of this city, who commu-


--- PAGE 106 ---
94 SOME SCENES IN THE
nicated with his reputed owner in Virginia, and
gave the information that led to a knowledge of
the whereabouts of the fugitive. Averill wrote let-
ters for him, and thus obtained an acquaintance
with his history. Mr. Hansborough sent on an
agent, Henry J. Wall, by whom the necessary pa-
pers weregot out to arrest the fugitive.
Yesterday morning about 11 o'clock, Charles
'
Nalle was sent to procure some bread for the family
by whom he was employed. He failed to return.
At the baker's, he was arrested by Deputy United
States Marshal J. W. Holmes, and immediately ta-
ken before United States Commissioner Miles
Beach. The son of Mr. Gilbert, thinkingit strange
that he did not come back, sent to the house of
William Henry, on Division Street, where he board-
ed, and his whereabouts was discovered.
The examination before Commissioner Beach
was quite brief. The evidence of Averill and the
agent was taken, and the Commissioner decided to
remand Nalle to Virginia, The necessary papers
were made out and given to the Marshal.
By this time it was two o'clock, and the fact be-
gan to be noised abroad that there was a fugitive
slave in Mr. Beach's office, corner of State and
First Streets. People in knots of ten or tweh


--- PAGE 107 ---
LIFE OF HARRIET TUBMAN. 95
collected near the entrance, looking at Nalle, who
could be seen at an upper window. William
Henry, a colored man, with whom Nalle boarded,
commenced talking from the curb-stone in a loud
voice to the crowd. He uttered such sentences as,
" There is a fugitive slave in that office pretty
soon you will see him come forth. He is going to
be taken down South, and you will have a chance
to see him. He is to be taken to the depot, to go
to Virginia in the first train. Keep watch of those
stairs, and you will have a sight." A number of
women kept shouting, crying, and by loud appeals
excited the colored persons assembled.
Still the crowd grew in numbers. Wagons
halted in front of the locality, and were soon piled
with spectators. An alarm of fire was sounded,
and hose carriages dashed through the ranks of
men, women, and boys ; but they closed again, and
kept looking with expectant eyes at the window
where the negro was visible. Meanwhile, angry
discussions commenced. Some persons agitated a
rescue, and others favored law and order. Mr.
Bi'ockway, a lawyer, had his coat torn for express-
ing his sentiments; and other melees kept the inter-
est alive.
' '
All at once there was a wild hulloa, and every


--- PAGE 108 ---
06 SOME SCENES IX THE
eye was turned up to see the legs and part of the
body of the prisoner protruding from the second-
story window, at which he was endeavoring to
escape. Then arose a shout !
"
Drop him!
" " Catch
him !
" " Hurrah !
" Butthe attempt was a fruitless
one, for somebody in the office pulled Nalle back
again, amid the shouts of a hundred pair of lungs.
The crowd at this time numbered nearly a thousand
persons. Many of them were black, and a good
share were of the female sex. They blocked up
State Street fromFirst Street to the alley, and kept
surging to and fro.
Martin I. Townsend, Esq., who acted as counsel
for the fugitive, did not arrive in the Commissioner's
office until a decision had been rendered. He im-
mediately went before Judge Gould, ofthe Supreme
Court, and procured a writ of habeas corpus in the
usual form, returnable immediately. This was given
Deputy Sheriff Nathaniel Upham, who at once pro-
ceeded to Commissioner Beach's office, and served
it on Holmes. Very injudiciously, the officers
proceeded at once to Judge Gould's office, although
it w,as evident they would have to pass through an
excited, unreasonable crowd. As soon as the offi-
cers and their prisoner emerged from the door, an
old negro, who had been standing at the bottom of


--- PAGE 109 ---
LIFE OF HARRIET TUBMAN. 97
the stairs, shouted, " Herethey come," andthe crowd
made a terrific rush at the party.
From the office of Commissioner Beach, in the
Mutual Building, to that of Judge Gould, in Con-
gress Street, is less than twoblocks, but it was made
a regular battle-field. The moment the prisoner
emerged from the doorway, in custody of Deputy-
Sherift" Upham, Chief of Police Quin, Officers
Cleveland and Holmes, the crowd made one grand
charge, and those nearest the prisoner seized him
violently, with the intention of pulling him away
from the officers, but they were foiled
; and down
First to Congress Street, and up the latter in front
of Judge Gould's chambers, went the surging mass.
Exactly what did go on in the crowd, it is impossi-
ble to say, but the pulling, hauling, mauling, and
shouting, gave evidences of frantic efforts on the
part of the rescuers, and a stern resistance from
the conservators of the law. In front of Judge
Gould's office the combat was at its height. No
stones or other missiles were used ;
the battle was
fist to fist. Webelieve an order was given to take
the prisoner the other way, and there w^as a grand
rush towards the West, past First andRiverStreets,
as far as Dock Street. All this time there was a
continual melee. Many of the officers were hurt


--- PAGE 110 ---
98 SOME SCENES IN THE
among them Mr. Uphani, whose object was solely
to do his duty by taking Nalle before Judge Gould
in accordance with the writ of habeas corpus. A
number in the crowd were more or less hurt, and
it is a wonder that these were not badly injured, as
pistols were drawn and chisels used.
The battle had raged as far as the corner of Dock
and Congress Streets, andthe victory remained with
the rescuers at last. The officers were completely
worn out with their exertions, and it was impossible
to continue their hold upon himany longer. Nalle
was at liberty. His friends rushed him down Dock
Street to the lower ferry, where there was a skiff
lying ready to start. The fugitive was put in, the
ferryman rowed off, and amidthe shouts ofhundreds
who lined the banks of the river, Nalle was carried
into Albany County.
As the skiff landed in West Troy, a negro sym-
pathizer waded up to the waist, and pulled Nalle
out of the boat. He went up the hill alone, how-
ever, and there who should he meet but Constable
Becker ? The latter official seeing a man with
manacles on, considered it his duty to arrest him.
He did so, and took him in a wagon to the office of
Justice Stewart, on the second floor of the corner
building near the ferry. The Justice was absent.


--- PAGE 111 ---
LIFE OF HARRIET TUBMAN. 99
When the crowd on the Troy bank had seen
Nalle safely landed, it was suggested that he might
be recaptured. Then there was another rush made
for the steam ferry-boat, which carried over about
400 persons, and left as many more a few of the
latter being soused in their efforts to get on the
boat. Onlanding in WestTroy, there, sure enough,
was the prisoner, locked up in a strong office, pro-
tected by Officers Becker, Brown and Morrison,
and the door barricaded.
Not a moment was lost. Up stairs went a score
or more of resolute men the rest "
piling in" pro-
miscuously, shouting and execrating the officers.
Soon a stone flew against the door then another
and bang, bang
! went off a couple of pistols, but
the officers who fired them took good care to aim
pretty high. The assailants were forced to retreat
for a moment. "
They 've got pistols," said one.
" Who cares ? " was the reply ;
"
theycan only kill
a dozen of us come on." More stones and more
pistol-shots ensued. At last the door was pulled
open by an immense negro, and in a moment he
was felled by a hatchet in the hands of Deputy-
Sheriff Morrison ; but the body of the fallen man
blocked up the door so that it could not be shut,
and a friend of the prisoner pulled him out. Poor


--- PAGE 112 ---
100 SOME SCENES IN THE
fellow ! he might well say,
" Save me from my
friends." Amid the pulling and hauling, the iron
had cut his arms, which were bleeding profusely,
and he could hardly walk, owing to fatigue.
He has since arrived safely in Canada.
Statements made by Martin I. Townsend, Esq.,
of Troy, who was counsel for the fugitive,
Charles Nalle.
Nalle is an octoroon ; his wife has the same in-
fusion of Caucasian blood. She was the daughter
of her master, and had, with her sister, been bred
by him in his family, as his own child. When the
father died, both of these daughters were married
and had large families of children. Under the
highly Christian national laws of "Old Virgiuny,"
these children were the slaves of their grandfather.
The old man died, leaving a will, whereby he manu-
mitted his daughters and their children, and pro-
vided for the purchase of the freedom of their hus-
bands. The manumission of the children and
grandchildren took effect ; but the estate was insuf-
ficient to purchase the husbands of his daughters,
and the father of his grandchildren. The manu-
mitted, by another Christian, " conservative," and


--- PAGE 113 ---
LIFE OF HARRIET TUBMAISL,
" national "
provision of law, were forced to leave
the State, w^ile the slave husbands remained in
slavery. ISTalle andhis brother-in-law were allowed
for a while to visit their families outside Virginia
about once a year, but were at length ordered to
provide themselves with newwives, as they would
be allowed to visit their former ones no more. It
was after this that Nalle and his brother-in-law
started for the land of freedom, guided by the
steady light of the north star. Thank God, neither
family now need fear any earthly master or the
bayof the blood-hound doggingtheir fugitive steps.
Nalle returned to Troy with his family about
July, 1860, and resided with them there for more
than seven years. They are all now residents of
the city ofWashington, D. C. Nalle and his family
are persons of refined manners, and of the highest
respectability. Several of his children are red-
haired, and a stranger would discover no trace of
African blood in their complexions or features. It
was the head of this family whom H. F. Averill
proposed to doom to returnless exile and life-long
slavery.
When Nalle was brought from Commissioner
Beach's office into the street, Harriet Tubman, who
had been standing with the excited crowd, rushed


--- PAGE 114 ---
tt02c
.
, < SOME SCENES IN THE
amongst the foremost to Nalle, and running one
of her arms around his manacled arm, held on to
him without ever loosening her hold through the
more than half-hour's struggle to Judge Gould's
office, and from Judge Gould's office to the dock,
where Nalle's liberation was accomplished. In the
melee, she was repeatedly beaten over the head
with policemen's clubs, but she never for a moment
released her hold, but cheered Nalle and his friends
with her voice, and struggled with the officers un-
til they were literally worn out with their exer-
tions, and Nalle was separated from them.
True, she had strong and earnest helpers in her
struggle, some of whom had white faces as well as
human hearts, and are now in Heaven. But she
exposed herself to the fury of the sympathizers
with slavery, without fear, and suffered their blows
without flinching. Harriet crossed the river with
the crowd, in the ferry-boat, and when the men
who led the assault upon the door of Judge Stew-
art's office, were stricken down, Harriet and a
number of other colored women rushed over their
bodies, brought Nalle out, and putting him in the
first wagon passing, smarted him for the West.
Alivery team, driven by a colored man, was im-
mediately s-ent on to relieve the other, and Xalle


--- PAGE 115 ---
LIFE OF HARRIET TUBMAN. 103
was seen about Troy no more until lie returned a
free man by purchase from his master. Harriet
also disappeared, and the crowd dispersed. How
she came to be in Troy that day, is entirely un-
known to our citizens ; and where she hid herself
after the rescue, is equally a mystery.^ But her
struggle was in the sight of a thousand, perhaps
of five thousand spectators.
This woman of whom you have been reading is
poor, and partially disabled from her injuries ; yet
she supports cheerfully and uncomplainingly her-
self and her old parents, and always has several
poor children in her house, who are dependent en-
tirely upon her exertions. At present shehas three
of these children for whom she is providing, while
their parents are working to pay back money bor-
rowed to bring them on. She also maintains by
her exertions among the good people of Auburn,
two schools of freedmen at the South, providing
them teachers and sending them clothes and books.
She never asks for anything for herself, but she
does ask the charity of the public for "her people."
For them her tears will fall,
For them her prayers ascend ;
To them her toils andcares be given,
Till toils and cares will end.
If any persons are disposed to aid her in her be-


--- PAGE 116 ---
104 LIFE OF HARRIET TUBMAN.
nevolent efforts, they may send donations to Rev.
S. M. Hopkins, Professor in the Auburn Theologi-
cal Seminary, who will make such disposition of
the funds sent as may be designated bythe donors.


--- PAGE 117 ---



--- PAGE 118 ---



--- PAGE 119 ---
APPENDIX.
A few circumstances having come out in conver-
sation with Harriet, they are added here, as they
may be of interest to the reader.
On asking Harriet particularly as to the age of
her mother, she answered, "Well, I'll tell you, Mis-
sis. Twenty-three years ago, in Maryland, I paid
a lawyer $5 to look up the will of my mother's
first master. He looked back sixty years, and said
it was time to give up. I told him to go back
furder. He went back sixty-five years, and there
he found the will giving the girl Ritty to his
grand-daughter (Mary Patterson), to serve her
and her offspring till she wasforty-five years of age.
This grand-daughter died soon after, unmarried;
and as there was no provision for Ritty, in case of
her death, she was actually emancipated at that
time. But no one informed her of the fact, andshe
and her dear children remained in bondage till
emancipated by the courage and determination of


--- PAGE 120 ---
108 APPENDIX.
this heroic daughter and sister. The old woman
must then, it seems, be ninety-eight years of age,
and the old man has probably numbered as many
years. Andyet theseold people, living out beyond
the toll-gate, on the South Street road, Auburn,
come in every Sunday more than a mile to the
Central Church. To be sure, deep slumbers settle
down upon them as soon as they are seated, which
continue undisturbed till the congregation is dis-
missed ; but they have done their best, and whocan
doubt that they receive a blessing. Immediately
after this they go to class-meeting at the Methodist
Church. Then they wait for a third service, and
after that start out home again.
On asking Harriet where they got anything to
eat on Sunday, she said, in her quiet way,
" Oh !
de ole folks nebber eats anyting on Sunday,
Missis !
We nebber has no food to get for dem on Sunday.
Dey always fasts ; and dey nebber eats anyting on
Fridays. Good Friday, an' five Fridays hand
gwine from Good Friday, my fader nebber eats or
drinks, all day fasting for de five bleeding wounds
ob Jesus. All the oder Fridays ob de year he neb-
ber eats till de sun goes down; den he takes a
little tea an' a piece ob bread." " But is he a
Roman Catholic, Harriet ? " " Oh no, Misses ;
he


--- PAGE 121 ---
APPENDIX. 109
does it for conscience we was taught to do so
down South. He says if he denies himself for the
sufferings of his Lord an' Master, Jesus will sustain
him."
It has been mentioned that Harriet never asks
anything for herself, but whenever her people
were in trouble, or she felt impelled to go South
to guide to freedom friend or brother, or father
and mother, if she had not time to work for the
money, she was persistent till she got it from
somebody. When she received one of her inti-
mations that the old people were in trouble, and
it was time for her to go to them, she asked the
Lord where she should go for the money. She
was in some way, as she supposed, directed to the
office of a certain gentleman in New York. When
she left the house of her friends to go there, she
said,
" I'm gwine to Mr. - 's office, an' I ain't
gwine to lebe there, an' I ain't gwine to eat or
drink till I git enough money to take me down
after the ole people."
She went into this gentleman's office.
" What do you want, Harriet ? " was the first
greeting.
" I want some money, sir."
" You do ? How much do you want ? "


--- PAGE 122 ---
110 APPENDIX.
" I want twenty dollars, sir."
"
Twenty dollarsf Who told you to come here
for twenty dollars ? "
" De Lord tole me, sir."
" Well, I guess the Lord's mistaken this time."
"I guess he isn't, sir. Anyhow I'm gwine to
sit here till I git it."
So she sat down and went to sleep. All the
morning and all the afternoon she sat there still,
sleeping and rousing up sometimes finding the
office full of gentlemen sometimes finding herself
alone. Many fugitives were passing through New
York at that time, and those who came in sup-
posed that she was one of them, tired out and
resting. Sometimes she would be roused up with
the words, "
Come, Harriet, you had better go.
There's no money for you here." "
No, sir. I'm
not gwine till I git my twenty dollars."
She does not know all that happened, for deep
sleep fell upon her; but probably her story was
whispered about, and she roused at last to find
herself the happy possessor of sixty dollars, which
had been raised among those who came into the
office. She went on her wayrejoicing, to bring her
old parents from the land of bondage. She found
that her father was to be tried the next Monday,


--- PAGE 123 ---
APPENDTX. Ill
for helping off slaves ; so, as she says, she " re-
moved his trial to a higher court," and hurried
him off to Canada. One more little incident,
which, it is hoped, may not be offensive to the
young lady to whom it alludes, may be mentioned
here, showing Harriet's extreme delicacy in asking
anything for herself. Last winter ('6*7 and '68),
as we all know, the snow was very deep for
months, and Harriet and the old people were com-
pletely snowed-in in their little home. The old
man was laid up with rheumatism, and Harriet
could not leave home for a long time to procure
supplies of corn, ift she could have made her way
into the city. At length, stern necessity com-
pelled her to plunge through the drifts to the
city, and she appeared at the house of one of her
firm and fast friends, and was directed to the room
of one of the young ladies. She began to walk up
and down, as she always does whe'n in trouble.
At length she said, "Miss Annie?" "What,
Harriet ? " A long pause ; then again,
" Miss
Annie?" "Well, what is it, Harriet?" This
was repeated four times, when the young lady,
looking up, saw her eyes filled with tears. She
then insisted on knowing what she wanted. And
with a great effort, she said,
" Miss Annie, could


--- PAGE 124 ---
112 APPENDIX.
you lend me a quarter till Monday? I never
asked it before." Kind friends immediately sup-
plied all the wants of the family, but on Monday
Harriet appeared with the quarter she had bor-
rowed.
But though so timid for herself, she is bold
enough when the wants of her race are concerned.
Even now, while friends are trying to raise the
means to publish this little book for her, she is
going around with the greatest zeal and interest
to raise a subscription for her Freedmen's Fair.
She called on Hon. Wm. H. Seward, the other
day, for a subscription to this object. He said,
" Harriet, you have worked for others long enough.
It is time you should think of yourself. If you
ask for a donation for yourself, I will give it to
you ; but I will not help you to rob yourself for
others."
Harriet's charity for all the human race is un-
bounded. It embraces even the slaveholder it
sympathizes even with Jeff. Davis, and rejoices nt
his departure to other lands, with some prospect
of peace for the future. She says,
" I tink dar's
many a slaveholder '11 git to Heaven. Dey don't
know no better. Dey acts up to de light dey hab.
Yon take dat sweet little child (pointing to a


--- PAGE 125 ---
APPENDIX. 113
lonely baby) 'pears more like an angel dan any-
ting else take her down dere, let her nebber
know nothing 'bout niggers but they was made
to be whipped, an' she '11 grow up to use the whip
on 'em jus' like de rest. No, Missus, its because
dey don't know no better." May God give the
people to whom the story of this woman shall
come, a like charity, so that through their kind-
ness the last days of her stormy and troubled life
may be calm and peaceful.


--- PAGE 126 ---



--- PAGE 127 ---
ESSAY ON WOMAN-WHIPPING.
THE subject of the preceding memoir appears to
have retained all her life a feeling recollection of
the effects of the whip in the hands of her youth-
ful mistress. Considering the vigor and frequency
of the application, this is not strange. Infinite
cuffs and thwacks, more or less, pass into oblivion ;
but a flogging with a raw-hide is not easily forgot-
ten. A slave's experience of the whip, however,
was not confined to his or to her early days. A
slave race must be controlled by fear and pain ;
and the discipline, it was naturally thought, could
not begin too early. From childhood to old age
theywere liable to stripes, for any reason or for no
reason. If the slave was guilty ofnofault, he might
be whipped, as appears from the preceding narra-
tive, merely to impress him with a salutary sense
of the master's right and disposition to whip.
A Northern man, born and bred under the influ-
ences of freedom and the protection of law, and


--- PAGE 128 ---
118 ESSAY ON WOMAN-WHIPPING.
madeacquainted with slaver)
7 in its old palmy days,
can never forget his sensations at his first sight of
a slave-whipping. The utmost he has ever seen
in the way of corporal punishment has been the
switching of.some obstreperous child by competent
authority ; a discipline administered with prudence
and moderation ; drawing no blood and leaving no
scar. He now sees an adult person stripped to the
skin, his arms tied at their utmost stretch above
his head, or across some object which binds him in-
to a posture the best adapted to feel the full force
of each blow. The instrument of suffering is not a
birch twig or a ferule, but a twisted raw-hide, or
heavy
" black snake ;
" either of them highly ef-
fective weapons in the hands of a stout executioner.
Our Northern novice stands horror-stricken and
paralyzed for a moment; but at the second or third
blow, and the piteous scream of OhLord! Massa!
which follows, he digs his fingers into his ears, and
rushes to the furthest corner of his tent or dwelling,
to escape the scene. Even if he could have en-
dured the sight and sound a while longer, he dared
not. The horror in his face, and perhaps the irre-
pressible word or act of interference was too sure
to bring upon himself the vengeance due to a
Abolitionist." The little knot of Southern


--- PAGE 129 ---
ESSAY OX WOMAN-WHIPPING. 119
habitues look on with critical inspection, squirting
tobacco-juice, with their hands in their pockets.
If the subject is a woman, the interest rises
higher, and the crowd would be greater. There is
a refinement ofcruelty in the whipping of a woman
which used to stimulate agreeably the dull sensi-
bilities of a Southern mob. Adish of torture had
to be peppered very high to please the palates of
those epicures in brutality. The helplessness and
terror ofthe victim, the exposure of her person, the
opportunity for coarse jests at her expense, all com-
bined to make it a scene of rare enjoyment. How
the " chivalric" mind can endure the loss of such
gratifications it is difficult to conceive. The Ro-
mans were weaned from crucifixions and gladiato-
rial combats very gradually. The process of ame-
liorating criminal law and humanizing public senti-
ment went on for more than two centuries. It was
full four hundred years after the epoch of our re-
demption when the monk Telemachus threw him-
self between the hired swordsmen, whoma Christian
audience was applauding, and laid down his own
life to wind up the spectacle. But the bloody
morsel has been snatched from the mouths of the
"
chivalry" at one clutch. No wonder their mor-
tification vents itself in weeping and wailing, and


--- PAGE 130 ---
120 ESSAY ON WOMAN-WHIPPING.
knashing of teeth, and in such miscellaneous atroci-
ties as their " Ku-Klux-Klans" can venture to in-
flict on helpless freedmen and radicals.*
A recent Southern paper (the Virginia Adver-
tiser) finds a providential provision for the enslave-
ment of the negro race in the thickness of their
skulls, enabling them to bear without injury the
blows inflicted in sudden rage by their masters ;
a suggestive confession, bythe way, of the influence
of slavery on the tempers of the slaveholders.
The whole race must be prepared, it seems, for
blows on the head with Avhatever weapon came to
hand ! But admitting the thickness of the skulls,
it appears from an incident in the preceding pages,
as well as from other known instances, that the
inventive genius of the slave-whipping chivalry
contrived to baffle the humane designs of Provi-
dence a negro skull well padded with wool might
bear without injury the blow of a boot-jack or a
hammer, and yet prove insufficient to resist the
impact of a musket-ball or a ten-pound weight.
* It is curiously illustrative of the mixed childishness and ferocity
which characterizes the Southern civilization, that this secret associa-
tion of ruffians, organized to terrorize the loyal South, styles itself by
an absurd, mis-spelled name, and goes about on its nightly work of
murder in harlequin costume, with one of its leaders acting the part of
ghost, to frighten the superstitious blacks. Some more courageous
freedman occasionally makes a bonaflde ghost of this masquerade.


--- PAGE 131 ---
ESSAY ON WOMAN-WHIPPING. 121
It is of no avail to plate a vessel with six inches of
iron, if she is to be pounded with bolts that can
mash an eight-inch armor. Apparently, Divine
Providence stopped short of the necessary security
for the predestined slave race. It should have ar-
ranged for a progressive thickening of the negro
cranium to meet the increase of violence on the
part of the master; until at length slavery might
be encountered with a difficulty like that which
besets naval gunnery, viz., whatwould be the result
if an infrangible African skull should be beaten by
an irresistable Caucasian club ?
But even this Virginia laudator temporis acti,
this melancholy mourner at the tomb of defunct
slavery, does not allege any such Providentialthick-
ening of the negro cuticle as to amount to a satis-
factory anaesthesia against whipping. It has never
been proven that a Virginia paddle or a Georgia
raw-hide well applied did not make the blood spirt
as freely through a black skin as through a white
one ; nor has anySouthern savant of the Nott and
Gliddon school shown that there was not the same
relative delicacy of organization in the slave woman
as in the free. A black woman was, relatively to
the black man, the more delicate subject for the
whip ; something more sensitive to the shame of


--- PAGE 132 ---
122 ESSAY ON WOMAN-WHIPPING.
stripping, more liable to terror, and of rather softer
fiber ; so that the lash went deeper both into soul
and sense than in the case of her sable brother.
And this fact made the black woman a very
suitable subject for the whip in the hands of the
Southern lady. To succeed in slave-whipping as
in any other fine art, the Horatian canon must be
regarded, which requires us to take a subject
suited to our strength. It would have been unrea-
sonable, in ordinary cases, to expect a "
dark-eyed
daughter of the South " to flog handsomely a stal-
wart negro man; she sometimes didit, after he had
been well tied up. But the slave girl was exactly
suited to her flagellating capacities. Agood many
women,Northas well as South, manifest a tendency
to become tyrants in their own households, and
love to bully their servants. But this is an evil of a
mitigated nature in Northern society. The stupid-
est "
help
" in the kitchen knows she is safe from
any other lash than her mistress' tongue, and is
commonly an adept at the business of answering
back again.
But the Southern mistress was a domestic devil
with horns and claws ; selfish, insolent, accustomed
to bewaited on for everything. She grewup with
the instinct of tyranny to punish violently the


--- PAGE 133 ---
ESSAY ON WOMAN-WHIPPING. 123
least neglect or disobedience in her servants. The
variable temper of girlhood, not ugly unless
thwarted, became in the "Southern matron" a
chronic fury. She was her own " overseer," and,
like that out-door functionary,had her own scepter,
which she did not bear in vain. The raw-hide lay
upon the shelf within easy reach, and her arm was
vigorous with exercise. The breaking of a plate,
the spilling of a cup, the misplacing of a pin in her
dress, or any other misadventure in the chapter of
accidents, was promptly illustrated with numerous
cuts. The lash well laid on the shoulders of a
blackfemme-de-chambre,or screaming child, was an
agreeable titillation of the nervous sensibilities of
the languid Creole ; a headache, or a heartache,
transferred itself through the medium of the raw-
hide to the back of Phillis or Araminta. They no
doubtwhipped sometimes, like Mr. Squeers, for the
mere fun of the thing. It is an exquisite pleasure
to a cowardlynature to have some creature to tor-
ment ;
and there is this nemesis about cruelty that
it engenders an appetite which,like that foralcoholic
stimulents, for ever demands increased indulgence.
It was the vindictive woman's nature in the
South that protracted and gave added ferocity to
the rebellion. These woman-whipping wives and


--- PAGE 134 ---
124 ESSAY ON WOMAN-WHIPPING.
mothers it was who hounded on the masculine
chivalry to the workof exterminating the " accursed
Yankees," and thus made their own punishment so
much sorer than it need have been.
The mention of these amiable Southern charac-
teristics cannot fail to recall that highly suggestive
scene ofthe Malebolge, with the illustration of Gus-
tave Dore, in which the tempters and destroyers of
women are seen scourged with whips, in the hands
of demons ; especially when we remember that the
whipping of slave women to make them consent to
their own dishonor, was one of the usages of the pa-
triarchal chivalry. There is not a scene in which
the imaginings of Dante have been better seconded
by the pencil of the great French artist : the flying
wretches hurrying in opposite directions, as the
crowds in the Jubilee year trampled each other, go-
ing and returning across the St. Angelo Bridge ;
among them the bat-winged fiends with whips,
lashing right and left ! In the throng are female
figures
: womenwho in life tortured and corrupted
other women. What terror in face an attitude !
How desperately theygrapple with the rocks to lift
themselves out of reach of the scourge
! And these
two demons in the foreground
! Whatan absolute
idealization of muscular ferocity! Every pirn
1
wy


--- PAGE 135 ---
ESSAY ON WOMAN-WHIPPING. 125
line in their cantour displays the force of a fallen
demi-god ;
their very tails curl with delight in
their ministry of vengeance.
AM; come facen Iftvar le berze,
Alle prime percosse, e gia nessuno,
Le second aspettava ne le terze !
Ah ! how they make them skip
! There is Le-
gree and Tom Gordon, and Madame de Schlangen-
bad, from Louisiana, and Mrs. Crawley (ne'e Sharp)
from South Carolina, squirming under the torture !
Avery instructive, if not agreeable exhibition !
But this fury in celestial Southern bosoms was
merely institutional. Dip the gentlest nature into
the element of irresponsible power, and it becomes
in time covered over with a foul incrustation of
cruelty. Those beastly Roman ladies of Juvenal's
time, who could order a slave womanto be whipped
to death without condescending to give any other
reason than their sic volo, sic jubeo, were not natu-
rally worse than others. Take any Roman or
Southern girl of ten years of age, put a whip in her
hands, and a helpless slave child at her mercy; let
her see nothing but brutality to inferiors all around
her, and by the time she is ready to be married,
she can hold up her thumb to the standing gladia-
tor in the arena, or beg her lover to bring her back


--- PAGE 136 ---
126 ESSAY ON WOMAN-WHIPPING.
from Bull Run a ring from the bones of some Yan
kee soldier. It is a publicly known private fact,
illustrative of the influence of slavery on the fe-
male character, that when a certain Northern cler-
gyman applied to her father for the hand of a cele-
brated Maryland heiress, the reply was, " You are
quite welcome to her ! but I think it only fair to
tell you that if I were going to storm hell, I should
put her in the advance."
There is every reason to hope, therefore, that the
Southern character, both male and female, will be-
come gradually ameliorated by the changed condi-
tion under which it will hereafter be formed. It is
a common error, one in which the Southern people
themselves share, that there is something in their
climate to nurse and to justify their "high spirit,"
anglic'e their quarrelsomeness and brutality of tem-
per. It is very pleasant to lay off upon Nature or
Providence what belongs only to will or institu-
tions. A man indulges in violent passions with
little restraint or remorse, so long as he can per-
suade himself he is merely what certain positive
natural laws make him. Whatan opiate for a con-
science defiled with lust and blood, to think that
this is only natural to the " sunny South." But in
fact, the people of warm, temperate, and tropical


--- PAGE 137 ---
ESSAY ON WOMAN-WHIPPING. 127
regions are most commonly gentle of mood; the
climate acts as an anodyne, and soothes them into
a peaceful equilibrium of the passions. The ne-
groes of the Southern States are not passionate or
vindictive well for their late masters and present
persecutors that they are not ! What they may be-
come from the treatment they are experiencing
from those preternatural and predestinated fools, is
another question.
The only reason the "
chivalry
" are bad-tem-
pered and quarrelsome, is found in that despotism
in which they have been nursed, and which associ-
ates the idea of personal dignitywith an instant re-
sort to violence at any contradiction. But for sla-
very, the people ofMississippi would have been no
more addicted to street fights, dueling, midnight
assassinations, etc., than the people of Massachu-
setts. That the former have any advantage in re-
spect to courage, has been sufficiently disproved by
the rebellion. Whether the ex-Confederate ladies
may or may not be able to " fire the Southern
heart" for another attempt to overthrow the Gov-
ernment, it will at least never be done under
the persuasion that one Southerner is equal to
five or any other number above unity, of Yankees.
The traditions of slavery, indeed, will remain to


--- PAGE 138 ---
128 ESSAY ON WOMAN-WHIPPING.
keep alive among the late slaveholding caste, the
insolent and unchristian temper on which they have
prided themselves. But having no more helpless
dependants to storm at and abuse, their valor will
needs submit to gradual modifications. Some de-
gree of self-government will become a necessity.
It mayrequire several generations ; but institutions
ceasing to corrupt them, the loss of wealth, the ne-
cessity of work and a new Gospel of peace, better
than their old slaveholding Christianity, will grad-
ually educate them into a law-abiding, orderly, and
virtuous people.
The Southern woman will of course share early
in this beneficent change no longer perverted into
a she-devil bythe possession ofunrestrained power,
and paying just wages to servants, who, if not
suited with their work, can leave without having
to run oif ; her gentler virtues will have a chance
to assert themselves. Her striking qualities will
subside into a charming vivacity of temper. She
will become a gracious and pious mater-familias ;
she will perhaps in time learn to apply to her own
children a portion of that discipline of which her
slaves enjoyed a monopoly. In short, there neither
is nor ever was any reason, slavery excepted, why
the Southern whites should not possess a character


--- PAGE 139 ---
ESSAY ON WOMAN-WHIPPING. 129
for industry, peacefulnwss, and religion, equal to
that of the rural districts of New York and New
England.
Thank God that we have lived to see such awful
barbarisms extinct ! In fifty years the last woman-
whipper at the South will be as dead as Cleopa-
tra ;
as dead as the pre-Adamite brute organiza-
tions. History will be ashamed to record their do-
ings. The fictions in which thev are enbalmedo *
will be lost in the better coming era of morals and
letters. By the time the South has been overflow-
ed and regenerated by a beneficent inundation of
Northern "carpet-baggers," with Yankee capital
and enterprise, it will be forgotten that a race ca-
pable of the crimes referred to in the preceding
story, ever existed.


--- PAGE 140 ---



--- PAGE 141 ---
LIST OF SUBSCRIBERS
TO THE
PUBLISHING FUND.
GEKRIT SMITH, Peterboro, N. Y., $25 00
WENDELL PHILLIPS, Boston, Mass., 25 00
J. S. SEYMOUR Auburn, N.Y., 2500
D.M.OSBORNE, " " 2500
CHAS. P. WOOD, " " 2500
WM. H. SEWARD, JR.,
" " :.... 2500
J.N. KNAPP, " " 2500
RUFUS SARGENT, " " * 2500
H. IVISON, New York 25 00
TIMOTHY L. BARKER, SanFrancisco, Cal., 20 00
WM. G. WISE, Auburn, N. Y., 10 00
G. I. LETCHWORTH, " " 10 00
S.L.BRADLEY, " " 1000
I. F. TERRILL " " 1000
ABIJAH FITCH,.
" " 10 00
T. M. POMEROY, M. C " " 1000
F. L. GRISWOLD, " " 1000
CYRENUS WHEELER, " " 10 00
JOHN CHEDELL, " " 10 CO
DAVID WRIGHT, " " 10 00
Jo IAH BARBER, " " 10 00
GEO. E. BARBER, " " 10
S. WILLARD, M. D., " " 10 00


--- PAGE 142 ---
132 LIST OF SUBSCRIBERS.
RICHARD STEEL, Auburn, N. Y.. $500
C. H. MERRIMAN, " " 5 00
J. LEWIS GRANT, " " 500
A. H. Goss, " " ... 500
CHRISTOPHER MORGAN, . .
" " 5 00
J.M.HuRD,
lt " 500
W. J. SUTTON, " " 50;)
WM. A. KIRBY, " " 500
THOS. McCREA, " " 5 00
J.N.STARIN, " '
500
C. P. FORD,... " " 500


--- PAGE 143 ---



--- PAGE 144 ---
(678 HL
78B7


--- PAGE 145 ---



--- PAGE 146 ---



--- PAGE 147 ---
'B 374S8
GENERAL LIBRARY -U.C. BERKELEY


--- PAGE 148 ---


