=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Seeking Hurricane Katrina.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 337
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:12:09.781340
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
SEEKING HIGHER GROUND
pal-marable2-00fm.qxp  10/25/2007  1:03 PM  Page i


--- PAGE 3 ---
THE CRITICAL BLACK STUDIES SERIES
Institute for Research in African-American Studies
Columbia University
Edited by Manning Marable
The Critical Black Studies Series features readers and anthologies examining challenging topics
within the contemporary black experience—in the United States, the Caribbean, and Africa, as
well as across the African Diaspora. All readers include scholarly articles originally published in
the acclaimed quarterly interdisciplinary journal Souls, published by the Institute for Research
in African-American Studies at Columbia University. Under the general editorial supervision of
Manning Marable, the readers in the series are designed both for college and university course
adoption, as well as for general readers and researchers. The Critical Black Studies Series seeks
to provoke intellectual debate and exchange over the most critical issues confronting the polit-
ical, socioeconomic, and cultural reality of black life in the United States and beyond.
Titles in this series published by Palgrave Macmillan:
Racializing Justice, Disenfranchising Lives: The Racism, Criminal Justice, and Law Reader
Edited by Manning Marable, Ian Steinberg, and Keesha Middlemass
Seeking Higher Ground: The Hurricane Katrina Crisis, 
Race, and Public Policy Reader
Edited by Manning Marable and Kristen Clarke
Transnational Blackness: African Americans Navigating the Global Color Line
Edited by Manning Marable and Vanessa Agard-Jones
The Islam and Black America Reader
Edited by Manning Marable and Hisham Aidi
The New Black History: The African-American Experience since 1945 Reader
Edited by Manning Marable and Peniel Joseph
Beyond Race: New Social Movements in the African Diaspora
Edited by Leith Mullings
The Black Women, Gender, and Sexuality Reader
Edited by Manning Marable
Black Intellectuals: The Race, Ideology, and Power Reader
Edited by Manning Marable
pal-marable2-00fm.qxp  10/25/2007  1:03 PM  Page ii


--- PAGE 4 ---
SEEKING HIGHER GROUND
THE HURRICANE KATRINA CRISIS, RACE, 
AND PUBLIC POLICY READER
Edited by Manning Marable and Kristen Clarke
pal-marable2-00fm.qxp  10/25/2007  1:03 PM  Page iii


--- PAGE 5 ---
SEEKING HIGHER GROUND
Copyright © Manning Marable and Kristen Clarke, 2008.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner
whatsoever without written permission except in the case of brief quotations embodied
in critical articles or reviews.
First published in 2008 by
PALGRAVE MACMILLAN™
175 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10010 and
Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, England RG21 6XS.
Companies and representatives throughout the world.
PALGRAVE MACMILLAN is the global academic imprint of the Palgrave 
Macmillan division of St. Martin’s Press, LLC and of Palgrave Macmillan Ltd.
Macmillan
® is a registered trademark in the United States, United Kingdom and 
other countries. Palgrave is a registered trademark in the European Union and 
other countries.
ISBN-13: 978-1-4039-8396-1 (hardcover)
ISBN-10: 1-4039-8396-8 (hardcover)
ISBN-13: 978-1-4039-7779-3 (paperback)
ISBN-10: 1-4039-7779-8 (paperback)
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available from the Library of
Congress.
A catalogue record of the book is available from the British Library.
This volume includes articles which originally appeared in Souls, published 
by the Institute for Research in African-American Studies, Columbia University.
Design by Scribe, Inc.
First edition: January 2008
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Printed in the United States of America.
pal-marable2-00fm.qxp  10/25/2007  1:04 PM  Page iv


--- PAGE 6 ---
CONTENTS
List of Illustrations vii
Introduction: Seeking Higher Ground: Race, Public Policy 
and the Hurricane Katrina Crisis ix
Manning Marable
I. Politics and Place
1 The New Orleans Mayoral Election: 
The Voting Rights Act and the Politics of Return and Rebuild 3
Ronald Walters
2 The New Orleans That Race Built: Racism, Disaster, 
and Urban Spatial Relationships 17
Darwin Bond Graham
3 Race-ing the Post-Katrina Political Landscape: 
An Analysis of the 2006 New Orleans Election 33
Kristen Clarke
4 Property and Security, Political Chameleons, 
and Dysfunctional Regime: A New Orleans Story 39
D. Osei Robertson
5 Hurricane Katrina as an Elaboration on 
an Ongoing Theme: Racialized Spaces in Louisiana 65
K. Animashaun Ducre
6 An Interview with Judge Ivan L. R. Lemelle 75
Suzette M. Malveaux
II. Culture, T radition, and Identity
7 New Orleans’s African American Musical 
T raditions: The Spirit and Soul of a City 87
Michael White
8 Hero, Eulogist, T rickster, and Critic: Ritual and 
Crisis in Post-Katrina Mardi Gras 107
Chelsey Louise Kivland
pal-marable2-00fm.qxp  10/25/2007  1:04 PM  Page v


--- PAGE 7 ---
9 (Re)Imagining Ethnicity in the City of 
New Orleans: Katrina’s Geographical Allegory 129
Stephanie Houston Grey
10 The Rebuilding of a T ourist Industry: Immigrant Labor Exploitation in the
Post-Katrina Reconstruction of New Orleans 141
Loren Redwood
III. Race and Repression
11 “Do You Know What It Means . . . ?”:
Mapping Emotion in the Aftermath of Katrina 153
Melissa Harris-Lacewell
12 Witness: The Racialized Gender Implications of Katrina 173
Kathleen A. Bergin
13 The Impact of Hurricane Katrina 
on the Race and Class Divide in America 191
Thomas J. Durant Jr. and Dawood Sultan
14 Katrina’s Southern “Exposure”: 
The Kanye Race Debate and the Repercussions of Discussion 203
Erica M. Czaja
15 Oral History, Folklore, and Katrina 225
Alan H. Stein and Gene B. Preuss
IV . Reimagining the Past and Reconstructing the Future
16 What Happens When the Footprints Shrink: 
New Orleans and the End of Eminence 243
Julianne Malveaux
17 “The City I Used to . . . Visit”: T ourist 
New Orleans and the Racialized Response to Hurricane Katrina 255
Lynell Thomas
18 The Social Construction of Disaster: 
New Orleans as the Paradigmatic American City 271
Chester Hartman and Gregory D. Squires
19 Are They Katrina’s Kids or Ours? The Experience 
of Displaced New Orleans Students in Their New Schools 
and Communities 295
Kevin Michael Foster
20 Envisioning “Complete Recovery” as an Alternative 
to “Unmitigated Disaster” 303
Mindy Thompson Fullilove, et al.
About the Authors 312
Index 318
CONTENTSvi
pal-marable2-00fm.qxp  10/25/2007  1:04 PM  Page vi


--- PAGE 8 ---
ILLUSTRATIONS
Table 11.1 Mean scores on Kennedy Assassination Survey 
Symptom Checklist 155
Figure 11.1 Percent who report feeling negative emotions “very often” 
in the weeks immediately following Hurricane Katrina 157
Table 11.2 Model of emotional distress among black and white 
Americans in the immediate aftermath of Hurricane Katrina 163
Table 11.3 Percent of white and black respondents who agree with 
indicators in model 166
Table 14.1 Audience size and reader income distribution of the three 
largest national newspapers 212
Table 14.2 Katrina discussion content 213
pal-marable2-00fm.qxp  10/25/2007  1:04 PM  Page vii


--- PAGE 9 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 10 ---
Introduction
SEEKING HIGHER GROUND:
RACE, PUBLIC POLICY AND
THE HURRICANE KATRINA
CRISIS
MANNING MARABLE
UNQUESTIONABLY, THE SEPTEMBER 2005 HURRICANE KATRINA was the largest natu-
ral disaster in U.S. history. Yet, contrary to the assertions of President George W .
Bush that no one could have “anticipated the breach of [New Orleans’s] levees” and
the massive flooding and destruction of one of America’s historic cities in the wake
of a major hurricane, the catastrophe we have witnessed was widely predicted for
decades.
1 A 2002 special report of the New Orleans Times-Picayune, for example,
warned, “It’s only a matter of time before South Louisiana takes a direct hit from a
major hurricane. . . .Levees, our best protection from flooding, may turn against us.”
The Times-Picayune predicted that such a disaster might “decimate the region” from
flooding and that in New Orleans, “100,000 will be left to face the fury.”
2 That same
year, in a New York Timeseditorial, writer Adam Cohen predicted coldly, “If the Big
One hits, New Orleans could disappear.” A direct major hurricane strike, Cohen
estimated, would certainly force Lake Pontchartrain’s waters “over levees and into the
city. . .there could be 100,000 deaths.” Thousands “could be stranded on roofs, sur-
rounded by a witches’ brew of contaminated water.”
3
A natural disaster for New Orleans was statistically inevitable. But what made the
New Orleans tragedy an “unnatural disaster” was the Federal government’s gross
incompetence and indifference in preparing the necessary measures to preserve the
lives and property of hundreds of thousands of its citizens. The Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA), established in 1979, has been plagued for years with
financial mismanagement, administrative incompetence, and cronyism.
The litany of FEMA’s bureaucratic blunders has been amply documented: its
insistence that vital supplies of food, water, and medical aid were impossible to
pal-marable2-00fm.qxp  10/25/2007  1:04 PM  Page ix


--- PAGE 11 ---
deliver to thousands of people stranded at New Orleans’s downtown Morial
Convention Center, though entertainers and reporters easily reached the site; its
inability to rescue thousands of residents marooned on the roofs and in flooded
houses for days; the failure to seek deployment of active duty troops in large num-
bers until three days after Hurricane Katrina struck the Gulf Coast region. But the
incompetence goes deeper than that. FEMA Director Michael Brown actually
instructed fire departments in Louisiana, Mississippi, and Alabama not to send
emergency vehicles or personnel into devastated areas unless local or state officials
communicated specific requests for them—at a time when most towns and cities
lacked working telephones, fax machines, and internet access. Florida’s proposal to
send 500 airboats to assist rescue efforts was blocked by FEMA. Thousands of
urgently needed generators, communications equipment, and trailers and freight
cars of food went undelivered for weeks. Meanwhile, hundreds of dead bodies
floated in New Orleans’s streets and rotted in desolated houses. Millions of desper-
ate Americans who attempted to phone FEMA’s 800 telephone number for assis-
tance heard recorded messages that all lines were busy or were disconnected.
4
Even before Katrina struck, it was obvious that the overwhelming majority of
New Orleans residents who would be trapped inside the city to face the deluge
would be poor and working-class African Americans, who comprised nearly 70 per-
cent of the city’s population. As the levees collapsed and the city’s Ninth Ward
flooded, tens of thousands of evacuees were herded into the Superdome and
Convention Center, where they were forced to endure days without toilets and run-
ning water, food, electricity, and medical help. Hundreds of black evacuees seeking
escape on a bridge across the Mississippi River were confronted and forcibly pushed
back into the city. One paramedic witnessing the incident stated, “I believe it was
racism. It was callousness, it was cruelty.”
5
As the media began to document this unprecedented tragedy, the vast majority of
New Orleans’s victims were “the faces at the bottom of America’s well—the poor,
black and disabled,” as reporters Monica Haynes and Erv Dyer of the Pittsburgh Post-
Gazette observed. “The indelible television images of mostly black people living in
subhuman conditions for nearly a week have prompted some to ask whether race
played a role in how quickly or how not-so-quickly federal and state agencies
responded in [Katrina’s] aftermath.”
6
However, much of the media coverage cruelly manipulated racist stereotypes in its
coverage. In one well-publicized example, the Associated Press released two photo-
graphs of New Orleans residents, wading through chest-deep water, carrying food
obtained from a grocery store. The whites were described as carrying “bread and soda
from a local grocery store” that they found; the black man pictured was characterized
as having “loot[ed] a grocery store.”
7 A London Financial Times reporter, on
September 5, 2005, declared New Orleans had become “a city of rape” and “a war
zone,” with thousands subjected to “looting” and “arson.”
8 Administrators in
Homeland Security and FEMA justified their lack of emergency aid by claiming that
they had not anticipated that “people would loot gun stores. . .and shoot at police,
rescue officials and helicopters.” The flood of racialized images of a terrorized, crime-
engulfed city prompted hundreds of white ambulance drivers and emergency person-
nel to refuse to enter the New Orleans disaster zone. T elevision reports locally and
INTRODUCTIONx
pal-marable2-00fm.qxp  10/25/2007  1:04 PM  Page x


--- PAGE 12 ---
nationally quickly proliferated false exposés about “babies in the Convention Center
who got their throats cut” and “armed hordes” highjacking ambulances and trucks.
Baton Rouge’s mayor Kip Holden imposed a strict curfew on its facility that held
evacuees, warning of possible violence by “New Orleans thugs.”
9 That none of these
sensationalized stories were true hardly mattered: as Matt Welch of Reason magazine
noted, the “deadly bigotry” of the media probably helped to “kill Katrina victims.”10
The terrible destruction of thousands of homes and businesses, and relocation of
over one million New Orleans and Gulf area residents, was perceived as a golden
opportunity by corporate and conservative political elites who had long desired to
“remake” the historic city. Even before the corpses of black victims had been cleared
from New Orleans’s flooded streets, corporations closely associated with George W .
Bush’s administration secured noncompetitive, multibillion dollar reconstruction
contracts. Brown and Root, a subsidiary of Halliburton, for example, was awarded
the contract to reconstruct Louisiana and Mississippi naval bases. Bechtel was
authorized to provide short-term housing for several hundred thousand displaced
evacuees. Shaw, the Louisiana engineering corporation, received lucrative contracts
for rebuilding throughout the area. Bush waived provisions of the Davis-Bacon Act,
allowing corporations to hire workers below the minimum wage. After Congress
authorized over $100 billion for the region’s reconstruction, Halliburton’s stock price
surged on Wall Street.
11 Local corporate subcontractors and developers who directly
profited from federal subsidies set into motion plans for what local African
Americans feared could quickly become a gentrification removal of thousands of
black households from devastated urban neighborhoods.
Behind the plans to “rebuild” New Orleans may be racially inspired objectives by
Republicans to reduce the size of the city’s all-black voting precincts. About 60 per-
cent of New Orleans’s electorate is African American, which normally turns out at
50 percent in local elections. All-white affluent neighborhoods have turnout rates
exceeding 70 percent. In the 1994 mayoral race, only 6 percent of the city’s white
voters supported successful black candidate Marc Morial.
12
African American political analyst Earl Ofari Hutchinson speculated that “the
loss of thousands of black votes” could easily “crack the thirty years of black, and
Democratic dominance of City Hall in New Orleans.” The seat of black Democrat
William Jefferson, who represents the city in Congress, could be in jeopardy. Even
more seriously, Hutchinson observed, the massive African American vote in New
Orleans in 2000 and 2004 “enabled Democrats to bag many top state and local
offices, but just narrowly. A shift of a few thousand votes could tip those offices back
to Republicans.”
13
Nationally, most African American leaders, public officials, and intellectuals were
overwhelmed and outraged by the flood of racist stereotypes in the media, as well as
their government’s appalling inaction in failing to rescue thousands of black and
poor people. They observed that the most devastated sections of the city were nearly
all black and mostly poor. Local blacks had been largely ignored in preparations for
evacuating the city.
14 Beverly Wright, the director of Xavier University’s Deep South
Center for Environmental Justice, expressed the general sentiment of most African
Americans by declaring, “I am very angry, and I really, really believe that [the crisis]
is driven by race. . . .When you look at who is left behind, it is very disturbing to
INTRODUCTION xi
pal-marable2-00fm.qxp  10/25/2007  1:04 PM  Page xi


--- PAGE 13 ---
me.”15 Wright’s viewpoint was echoed by many black intellectuals. For example,
Harvard professor Lani Guinier observed that in American society “poor black peo-
ple are the throw-away people. And we pathologize them in order to justify our dis-
regard.”
16 Some reporters assigned to the Katrina crisis soon began to reflect these
mounting criticisms. Detroit Free Press columnist Desiree Cooper drew parallels
between the economic devastation of New Orleans and that of Detroit, noting, “The
poverty rate in both cities rivals that of Third World nations. So as I watched the hur-
ricane coverage with racism and poverty, creating the perfect storm, I couldn’t help
but think: If Detroit were underwater, no one would bother to rescue us either.”
17
By mid September, 2005, 60 percent of African Americans surveyed in a national
poll believed that “the federal government’s delay in helping the victims in New
Orleans was because the victims were black.” By contrast, only 12 percent of white
Americans agreed.
18 In response, the Bush Administration unleashed its black apol-
ogists to deny any racial intent of its policies and actions. Secretary of State
Condoleezza Rice insisted, “Nobody, especially the President, would have left peo-
ple unattended.”
19 Black conservative ideologue John McWhorter, a senior fellow at
the Manhattan Institute, ridiculed the accusations of racism as “nasty, circular, [and]
unprovable.... I t ’ s  not a matter of somebody in Washington deciding we don’t need
to rush [to New Orleans] because they’re all poor jungle bunnies anyway.”
20
African Americans were stunned and perplexed by white America’s general apa-
thy and denial about the racial implications of the Katrina catastrophe. On a nation-
ally televised fundraiser for the hurricane’s victims, rap artist Kanye West sparked
controversy by denouncing “the way America is set up to help the poor, the black
people, the less well off as slow as possible.”
21 Blacks were especially infuriated with
the descriptions of poor black evacuees as “refugees” by officials and the media. Black
Congresswoman Diane Watson protested vigorously, “‘Refugee’ calls up to mind
people that come here from different lands and have to be taken care of . . . .These
are American citizens.”
22 But the racial stigmatization of New Orleans’s outcasts
forced many African Americans to ponder whether their government and white
institutions had become incapable of expressing true compassion for the suffering of
their people. Prominent Princeton professor Cornel West, at a Columbia University
forum sponsored by the Institute for Research in African-American Studies, pon-
dered whether “black suffering is required for the preservation of white America.”
23
West’s provocative query ought to be explored seriously. The U.S. government and
America’s entire political economy were constructed on a racial foundation. Blacks
were excluded by race from civic participation and voting for several hundred years;
they were segregated into residential ghettoes, denied credit and capital by banks, and
relegated to the worst jobs for generations. Over time, popular cultural and social
attitudes about black subordination and white superiority were aggressively rein-
forced by the weight of discriminatory law and public policy. Psychologically, is the
specter of black suffering and death in some manner reaffirming the traditional racial
hierarchy, the practices of black exclusion and marginalization?
Even before Katrina’s racial debate had receded from the media, the question of
racial insensitivity was posed again by former Reagan Education Secretary William
Bennett’s remarks in a national radio broadcast. In early October 2005, Bennett
announced to his radio audience: “I do know that it’s true that if you wanted to
INTRODUCTIONxii
pal-marable2-00fm.qxp  10/25/2007  1:04 PM  Page xii


--- PAGE 14 ---
reduce crime, you could—if that were your sole purpose—you could abort every
black baby in this country, and your crime rate would go down.” Perhaps covering
his racial gaffe, Bennett immediately added, “That would be an impossible, ridicu-
lous and morally reprehensible thing to do, but your crime rate would go down.”
New York Timescolumnist Bob Herbert interpreted Bennett’s remarks as the central
aspect of the Republican Party’s “bigotry, racially divisive tactics and outright anti-
black policies. That someone who’s been a stalwart of that outfit might muse pub-
licly about the potential benefits of exterminating blacks is not surprising to me at
all. . .Bill Bennett’s twisted fantasies are a malignant outgrowth of our polarized
past.”
24 Bennett’s repugnant statements, combined with most white Americans’
blind refusal to recognize a racial tragedy in New Orleans, illustrate how deeply
rooted racial injustice remains in America.
Has the public spectacle of black suffering and anguish evolved into what might
be defined as a “civic ritual,” reconfirming the racial hierarchy with blackness perma-
nently relegated to a subordinate status? During the summer of 2005, the U.S.
Senate seemed to confirm Cornel West’s hypothesis as it was forced to confront the
civic ritual of lynching. Between 1882 and 1927, over 3,500 blacks were lynched in
the United States, about 95 percent in the South. An unknown number of addi-
tional African Americans were killed, especially in rural and remote areas where we
have few means to reconstruct these crimes.
In Marion, Indiana, on August 7, 1930, a massive white mob stormed the jail in
the local county courthouse, seizing two incarcerated African American teenagers,
Thomas Shipp and Abram Smith, who had been accused of raping a white woman.
Within less than an hour, a festive gathering of several thousand white women and
men armed with baseball bats, crowbars, and guns beat and then lynched the two
black boys. A photograph of the Marian lynching was reproduced in my book co-
authored with Leith Mullings, Freedom. It depicts smiling young adults, a pregnant
woman, teenage girls, and a middle-aged man, pointing proudly to one of the dan-
gling corpses.
25
A third young African American, a sixteen-year-old shoeshine boy named James
Cameron, was also seized and beaten by the mob that night. Several men lifted
Cameron up, and a noose was slipped around his neck. Just at that moment, a local
white man in the crowd pushed forward and declared that young Cameron was inno-
cent. Years later, on June 13, 2005, speaking at a U.S. Senate new conference, ninety-
one-year-old James Cameron recalled: “They took the rope off my neck, those hands
that had been so rough and ready to kill or had already killed, they took the rope off
my neck, and they allowed me to start walking and stagger back to jail, which was
just a half-block away.”
26 Cameron, the only known survivor of an attempted lynch-
ing, had come to the Capitol as part of an effort to obtain a formal apology from the
Senate for its historic refusal to pass federal legislation outlawing lynching. For
decades, Southern senators had filibustered legislative attempts to ratify anti-lynch-
ing legislation, denouncing such bills as an unnecessary interference with states’
rights. Prompted by the emotional testimony of Cameron and the family members
and descendants of lynching victims, the Senate finally issued an apology for lynch-
ing—the first time in U.S. history that Congress has acknowledged and expressed
regret for historical crimes against African Americans—in a formal resolution. What
INTRODUCTION xiii
pal-marable2-00fm.qxp  10/25/2007  1:04 PM  Page xiii


--- PAGE 15 ---
was most significant, perhaps, was that only eighty-five of the one hundred U.S. sen-
ators had co-sponsored the resolution when it came up for a voice vote. The fifteen
senators who did not initially co-sponsor the bill were Republicans. Belatedly, seven
senators subsequently signed an oversized copy of the senate’s anti-lynching resolution
that was to be publicly displayed. The eight senators who still refused to concede an
apology were Lamar Alexander (R-T ennessee); Thad Cochran (R-Mississippi), John
Cornyn (R-T exas), Michael Enzi (R-Wyoming), Judd Gregg (R-New Hampshire),
T rent Lott (R-Mississippi), John Sununu (R-New Hampshire), and Craig Thomas
(R-Wyoming).
27
Why the steadfast refusal to acknowledge the forensic evidence and the obvious
human pain and suffering inflicted not only on the victims of racist violence but
upon their descendants? Because, in a racist society—by this I mean a society deeply
stratified with “whiteness” defined at the top and “blackness” occupying the bottom
rungs—the obliteration of the black past is absolutely essential to the preservation of
white hegemony, or domination. Since “race” itself is a fraudulent concept, devoid
of scientific reality, “racism” can only be rationalized and justified through the sup-
pression of black accounts or evidence that challenges society’s understanding about
itself and its own past. Racism is perpetuated and reinforced by the “historical logic
of whiteness” that repeatedly presents whites as the primary (and frequently sole)
actors in the important decisions that have influenced the course of human events.
This kind of history deliberately excludes blacks and other racialized groups from
having the capacity to become actors in shaping major social outcomes.
In this process of falsification, two elements are crucial: the suppression of evi-
dence of black resistance and the obscuring of any records of white crimes and
exploitation committed against blacks as an oppressed group. In this manner, white
Americans can more easily absolve themselves of the historical responsibility for the
actions of their great-grandparents, grandparents, and parents—and of themselves.
Thus the destructive consequences of modern structural racism that can be easily
measured by social scientists within contemporary U.S. society today, as well as the
human suffering we have witnessed in New Orleans—can be said to have absolutely
nothing to do with “racism.” Denial of responsibility for racism permits the racial
chasm in America to grow wider with each passing year.
When the “unnatural disaster” of the New Orleans tragedy of race and class is
examined in the context of American structural racism, the denial by many whites
of the reality of black suffering becomes clear. It parallels the denial of the T urkish
government of the massive genocide of the Armenian population committed by the
former Ottoman empire in 1915–1916. It mirrors the repulsive anti-Semitism of
those who to this day deny the horrific reality of the Holocaust during World War
T wo. Until the denial of suffering ceases, there is no possibility of constructing
meaningful, corrective measures for addressing the racial chasm that continues to
fracture the foundations of democratic life and a truly civil society in America.
N
OTES
1. T ed Steinberg, “A Natural Disaster, and a Human T ragedy,” Chronicle of Higher
Education 52, no. 5 (September 23, 2005), 811–12.
INTRODUCTIONxiv
pal-marable2-00fm.qxp  10/25/2007  1:04 PM  Page xiv


--- PAGE 16 ---
2. “Washing Away,” New Orleans Times-Picayune, June 23–27, 2002.
3. Adam Cohen, “If the Big One Hits, New Orleans Could Disappear,” The New York
Times, August 11, 2002. Also see Jon Nordheimer, “Nothing’s Easy for New Orleans
Flood Control,” idem., April 30, 2002.
4. Editorial, “T ruly Clueless at FEMA,” Boston Herald, September 8, 2005; Editorial,
“Political Appointments, Loss of Focus, Crippled Disaster Relief Agency,” USA T oday,
September 8, 2005; Tina Susman, “FEMA: Effort Mired in Bureaucratic Hash,”
Newsday, September 11, 2005; Jonathan S. Landay, Alison Young, and Shannon
McCaffrey, “Was FEMA’s Brown the Fall Guy?” Seattle Times, September 14, 2005;
Angie C. Marek, Edward T . Pound, Danielle Knight, Julian E. Barnes, Judd Slivka and
Kevin Whitelaw, “A Crisis Agency in Crisis,” U.S. News and World Report, September
19, 2005; Editorial, “FEMA: Just a Money Pit?” Hartford Courant, September 23, 2005.
5. Andrew Buncombe, “‘Racist’ Police Blocked Bridge and Forced Evacuees Back at
Gunpoint,” Independent [London], September 11, 2005.
6. Monica Haynes and Erv Dyer, “Black Faces Are Indelible Image of Katrina,”
Independent, September 4, 2005.
7. Aaron Kinney, “‘Looting’ or ‘Finding’?” Salon, Septermber 1, 2005, http://dir.salon
.com/story/news/feature/2005/09/01/photo_controversy/index.html.
8. Guy Dinmore, “City of Rape, Rumour and Recrimination,” Financial Times
[London], September 5, 2005.
9. David Caruso, “Disaster Official at NY Symposium: Planners Didn’t Anticipate Gun
Problem after Katrina,” Newsday, September 12, 2005.
10. Matt Welch, “The Deadly BigoT ry of Low Expectations? Did the Rumor Mill Help
Kill Katrina Victims?” Reason Online, http://www.reason.com/links/links090605.shtml.
11. Katherine Griffiths, “Firms Linked with Bush Get Katrina Clean-Up Work,” The
Independent [London], September 17, 2005; Scott Van Voorhis, “Katrina Boon to
Builders,” Boston Herald, September 6, 2005.
12. Coleman Warner, “Primary T urnout Makes Black Vote Crucial in Runoff,” New
Orleans Times-Picayune, February 7, 1994.
13. Earl Ofari Hutchinson, “Katrina Wallops Black Voters,” available from hutchinson
report@aol.com.
14. Jonathan Curiel, “Disaster Aid Raises Race Issue; Critics Say Poor Blacks Not
Considered in Planning for Emergencies, Evacuations,” San Francisco Chronicle ,
September 3, 2005.
15. Alex Tzon, “Katrina’s Aftermath: Images of the Victims Spark a Racial Debate; Some
Say Authorities’ Response Time Is Affected by the Victims’ Skin Color,” Los Angeles
Times, September 3, 2005.
16. Lynne Duke and T eresa Wiltz, “A Nation’s Castaways: Katrina Blew In, and T ossed Up
Reminders of a Tattered Racial Legacy,” Washington Post, September 4, 2005.
17. Desiree Cooper, “Outrage, Caring Mix in Katrina Response,” Detroit Free Press,
September 15, 2005.
18. CNN, USA T oday, and the Gallup poll released September 13, 2005, cited in Ibid.
Other opinion polls confirmed that most black Americans believed that racism was
behind the federal government’s inaction to aid Katrina’s victims. A Pew Institute poll,
for example, indicated that 66 percent of blacks surveyed “felt the government would
have reacted faster if the stranded victims had been mainly white than black.” See Alex
Massie, “Racial T ensions Simmer as Blacks Bear Brunt of Slow Official Response,”
http://www.Scotsman.com/?id=1920892005.
19. Elisabeth Bumiller, “Gulf Coast Isn’t the Only Thing Left in Tatters; Bush’s Status with
Blacks Takes a Hit,” The New York Times, September 12, 2005.
INTRODUCTION xv
pal-marable2-00fm.qxp  10/25/2007  1:04 PM  Page xv


--- PAGE 17 ---
20. Duke, “A Nation’s Castaways.”
21. Kanye West, quoted on The O’Reilly Factor, Fox News Network, September 8, 2005.
22. Robert E. Pierre and Paul Farhi, “‘Refugee’: A Word of T rouble,” Washington Post,
September 7, 2005.
23. Cornel West, “When Affirmative Action Was White” (remarks, Institute for Research
in African-American Studies, Columbia University, New York City, October 1, 2005).
24. Bob Herbert, “Impossible, Ridiculous, Repugnant,” The New York Times, October 6,
2005.
25. See Manning Marable and Leith Mullings, Freedom: A Photographic History of the
African American Struggle (London: Phaidon, 2002), 132.
26. Sheryl Gay Stolberg, “Senate Issues Apology Over Failure on Anti-Lynching Law,” The
New York Times, June 14, 2005.
27. “Eight U.S. Senators Decline to Cosponsor Resolution Apologizing for Failure to
Enact Anti-Lynching Legislation,” Journal of Blacks in Higher Education Weekly
Bulletin, June 30, 2005; Avis Thomas-Lester, “Repairing Senate’s Record on
Lynching,” Washington Post, June 11, 2005.
INTRODUCTIONxvi
pal-marable2-00fm.qxp  10/25/2007  1:04 PM  Page xvi


--- PAGE 18 ---
Part I
POLITICS AND PLACE
pal-marable2-01-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:27 PM  Page 1


--- PAGE 19 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 20 ---
Chapter 1
THE NEW ORLEANS
MAYORAL ELECTION: 
THE VOTING RIGHTS ACT
AND THE POLITICS OF
RETURN AND REBUILD
RONALD WALTERS
INTRODUCTION
The first regular post-Katrina election for the city of New Orleans, originally set for
February 2, 2006, was washed out following the damage wrought by Hurricane
Katrina. An important post-Katrina case study is to analyze the extent to which the
hurricanes, which affected the physical condition of so many African Americans,
also impacted their fundamental citizenship rights. In particular, it is important to
assess whether those rights, especially the right to vote, would be protected given
the scope of general issues that encompass the rehabilitation process. Given the
state of disorganization, despair, and urgency for some of the displaced New
Orleans residents that I encountered in visits to the region, voting in the election
was a lower priority relative to other rebuilding issues such as finding housing,
obtaining economic subsistence, finding and burying relatives, and other critical
issues. Nevertheless, what was at stake in the election was the potential displace-
ment of black political power, not only in the city of New Orleans, but as it affected
the status of black presence in the state legislature and in the Congress of the
United States as well.
Also at stake in the election was a test of democratic theory—that is to say,
whether the selection of the leadership for the city by the electorate would represent
pal-marable2-01-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:27 PM  Page 3


--- PAGE 21 ---
a choice for a particular set of desired public policy. Theorist Robert Dahl’s argu-
ments have particular relevance to the situation in New Orleans; he has suggested
that “[a] good deal of Democratic theory leads us to expect more from national elec-
tions than they can possibly provide. . .[i.e., that they] reveal the ‘will’ of the major-
ity on a set of issues.”
1 Rather, he argues, most often the normal result of voting by
majorities is that they express the underlying consensus on policy but that the par-
ticulars of policy are most often the work of minorities.
2 Thus, what “underlying
consensus” was expressed in this case? In post-Katrina New Orleans, the concern was
not merely the process by which the votes would be cast, but the presumption
among those who advocated for the right to vote that participating in the election
would have an empowering effect, as I described in Freedom Is Not Enough.
3 In that
sense, as the mayoral election addressed the monumental crisis caused by Katrina,
the election would be the instrument through which the citizens of New Orleans
could make manifest their views about their right to return and rebuild. The elec-
tion carried with it, then, decisions about who would lead and what would be the
priorities in the agenda of their leadership.
Pre-Katrina census data indicate that the city of New Orleans had 462,269 resi-
dents prior to the storm. The stakes of this election were dependent upon the nearly
impossible task of mobilizing all voters in a city where 70 percent of the population
was black and over 200,000 residents remained displaced. The result was that the
large number of persons who remain displaced, particularly those in various parts of
Louisiana and among forty-four other states, left the city with well under 50 percent
of its black population to participate in the election. Thus, issues concerning the sta-
tus of the black vote immediately drew the specter of voting rights activists given the
prohibition in the Voting Rights Act (VRA) that the black vote should not be
diluted. Their attention was focused on the extent to which the Louisiana State
Legislature and the city would, in pursuing the election, help preserve the ability of
blacks to vote, and thus ensure that the voting system would provide fair access to
the ballot. By extension, the problem of addressing barriers to vote in New Orleans
was set in the context of the actions and attitude of the Bush administration with
respect to the manner in which the Justice Department implemented provisions of
the Voting Rights Act that were in the process of being reauthorized. This analysis
will proceed from the perspective of the black community’s understanding of the
issues surrounding these elections and the dilemmas involved.
E
LECTORAL DISENFRANCHISEMENT
In the uncertainty that characterized whether the post-Katrina municipal election
could be conducted in New Orleans in light of extensive hurricane damage, then-
Governor Kathleen Blanco announced that the election date would be moved from
February to April 22. Soon thereafter, the state legislature met in an emergency ses-
sion in February to consider the parameters under which the election could be con-
ducted, given the extraordinary circumstances that existed in New Orleans. It passed
Act 40, which attempted to establish a new set of procedures for voting in the con-
text of the crisis, but that expanded access only slightly.
4 The leading local election
RONALD WALTERS4
pal-marable2-01-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:27 PM  Page 4


--- PAGE 22 ---
official in New Orleans, Katherine Butler, indicated that of the normal 427 election
precincts only 300 were operable and that her usual staff of 3,000 election officials
had shrunk by more than half. Moreover, the infrastructure of the city was eroded
such that it made transportation, administration, and other vital functions of elec-
tion administration particularly onerous.
5
Meanwhile, it became clear both to local officials and outside observers that hold-
ing an election under circumstances in which the population had been so widely dis-
persed presented a unique challenge, and thus a debate developed over whether the
election should be delayed further or held as soon as possible. Those who felt that it
should be delayed reasoned that it would take some time to determine where voters
had been displaced and to reorganize the election system to permit a satisfactory
process. On the other hand, those who felt that it should be held sooner believed
that the delay would promote conditions under which displaced residents would
adjust to their local circumstances outside of the state and become registered voters
and permanent residents in those areas. In any case, there was considerable angst and
concern in the national civil rights community that black voters would be disenfran-
chised, as indicated by Bruce Gordon, President of the NAACP , who said: “We are
afraid that many African-American voters will be disenfranchised due to unclear
directives, misinformation, and acts of omission on the part of those officials charged
with ensuring equal access to the polls.”
6
Therefore, what came to be regarded as a “two-track” strategy developed. The first
track focused on preparations for the election while attempting to remove the barri-
ers in the process—this plan, established by then-Secretary of State Al Ater’s office,
concerned absentee voting, first-time voting, validating voter rolls, presenting accu-
rate information to voters, et cetera. This track was led by the NAACP , the NAACP
Legal Defense Fund (LDF), National Bar Association, the National Coalition of
Black Civic Participation (NCBCP), the Advancement Project, the Lawyers
Committee for Civil Rights Under Law, the Congressional Black Caucus (CBC) and
the Louisiana Black Legislative Caucus (LBLC). Beginning with a meeting between
the NAACP head, Bruce Gordon, and U.S. Attorney General Alberto Gonzalez,
these groups pushed to ease the rules by which displaced voters could participate in
the election.
Other local and national leaders such as the Reverend Jesse Jackson Sr., the
Reverend Al Sharpton, Louisiana State Senator Cleo Fields, and others were con-
cerned however, that the election itself was being held under apparent illegal circum-
stances.
7 They pointed to the formidable barriers to participating in the election
process, including changes in the voting procedures that had not been precleared by
the Justice Department in accordance with the requirements of the Voting Rights
Act given Louisiana’s status as one of the Act’s covered states. In this respect, an
important mid March meeting was initiated by the Reverend Jackson and Senator
Fields with the U.S. Assistant Attorney General and representatives of the Voting
Rights Section of the Civil Rights Division to voice concerns about the lack of
Justice Department preclearance and the existence of formidable barriers facing vot-
ers in the upcoming election. Preclearance had not yet occurred, in violation of the
Act’s requirements, despite the fact that the Louisiana state legislature had enacted,
and the Secretary of State had implemented, a set of changes to voting procedure in
THE NEW ORLEANS MAYORAL ELECTION 5
pal-marable2-01-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:27 PM  Page 5


--- PAGE 23 ---
New Orleans. Some of these changes included the merger of voting precincts in the
predominantly black sections of the city where the damage was greatest. The
response from Justice officials to these issues was a noncommittal and cautious
promise to review all the facts before making a finding.
A summary analysis of the barriers that impacted the rights of displaced voters
follows:
Demand for Satellite Voting outside Louisiana
As indicated above, the majority of the dispersed residents were relocated to several
nearby states, such as Mississippi, Alabama, T exas and Arkansas. However, the State
of Louisiana established only ten satellite voting sites, all located inside the state. The
prevailing view among black leaders was that satellite voting sites that would capture
the votes of a sizeable number of displaced citizens could be mounted in other states.
The historical precedent for this demand was that for the first democratic election
in Poland, election sites were set up in Chicago, Illinois, and for the December 2005
Iraqi election, out-of-country voting was also allowed to take place within the
United States. With respect to the most recent example, the Independent Election
Commission of Iraq conducted voting at sites in six cities and Washington, DC. The
conditions under which the voting was conducted were even more liberal than in
some U.S. states, allowing for same-day voter registration, permitting two among
seventeen kinds of identification cards to be used, and permitting those Iraqi citizens
held in detention to vote.
8
Voting Precincts That Are of Questionable Validity
As a result of the hurricanes, many voting precincts were damaged or destroyed, and
thus, election officials merged and relocated some voting stations to reflect this sit-
uation. Yet, the NAACP regional office in New Orleans also physically reviewed
each of the sites selected by the election officials and confirmed that several sites were
in unattractive and unusable locations. A review of merged voting precincts by this
writer revealed that 60 percent of those moved or merged were in areas largely inhab-
ited by blacks.
9
Moreover, changes in the voting precincts were not decided upon nor publicized
to voters in a manner and in sufficient time that would allow those voters to iden-
tify their assigned polling location in advance of the election. Neither was polling
place access made easy, given a recent decision by a district court judge that required
individuals to observe a state law that required individuals who were monitoring the
elections to maintain a distance of 600 feet from the polling station.
The Unavailability of Voter Rolls
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) had at its disposal a list of
evacuees that it serviced in various states—a list that also was useful in that it
reflected the location of both actual and potential voters. The list had to be cross-ref-
erenced or merged with the pre-Katrina voter registration list in order to establish
RONALD WALTERS6
pal-marable2-01-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:27 PM  Page 6


--- PAGE 24 ---
the whereabouts of registered voters, but it was a potentially valuable resource for
identifying the universe of eligible voters in this election. However, this list was given
by FEMA to the Louisiana Secretary of State Ater, who refused to provide it to city
officials. This meant that candidates for various offices were unable to use the list to
contact potential voters to campaign, thus denying some potential voters important
information about those who were running for various offices. The maladministra-
tion and mishandling of the displaced resident list is not only a change in voting pro-
cedure that required clearance by the Justice Department, it is also a violation of the
National Voter Registration Act, which aimed to make voter participation easier.
10
The Difficult Procedures of Absentee Voting
Act 40 was passed within a context that sought to extend to displaced voters the kind
of benefits that overseas and military voters received, including liberal access to the
absentee ballot. However, the process required individuals who would vote by absen-
tee ballot to submit an application that could be obtained from various sources,
including the state’s Web site. Thus displaced individuals had to apply for the ballot,
receive the ballot (which is twenty-five pages long), then mail it back to the Secretary
of State or the New Orleans Registrar’s Office, whose mailing address had been tem-
porarily moved to Baton Rouge. Given the abnormalities with the mail system in the
state, the city of New Orleans announced in March that it would construct ”cluster
boxes” for the receipt of mail for those areas that experienced considerable storm
damage. Nonetheless, persisting problems with mail service may have resulted in
some displaced not receiving their ballots in a timely manner. As a result of these
problems, absentee ballot request forms were distributed by officials and local com-
munity organizations to displaced persons and organizations serving them outside
the city and the state.
The Requirement for First-Time Voters to Appear in Person
Louisiana election law requires individuals voting for the first time to vote in person,
but allowed those who registered in person to cast their vote by absentee ballot if
they submitted an affidavit notarized two witnesses with an understanding that they
waived their right to a secret ballot. The problem with arriving in New Orleans in
person to register, however, was that under the current financial circumstances of
Katrina evacuees, this requirement amounted to a modern day poll tax.
The Placement of Satellite Voting Station inside the State
Satellite voting sites were located within ten cities around the state, but many evac-
uees who resided in trailers were located in trailer parks outside of the cities, where
public transportation was generally not available. Thus, although a displaced resident
may have been located within the state, they still may not have had efficient access to
polling stations without adequate transportation networks. Therefore, local as well as
national organizations such as the National Coalition on Black Civil Participation,
the Coalition of Black T rade Unions, and the National Association for the
THE NEW ORLEANS MAYORAL ELECTION 7
pal-marable2-01-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:27 PM  Page 7


--- PAGE 25 ---
Advancement of Colored People focused on providing transportation to such sites.
Why the state could not mobilize extensive transportation networks is not known.
Given that black residents of the city of New Orleans were found statistically to
have experienced the brunt of the hurricane because they were less likely to own pri-
vate transportation, the stationing of such in-state satellite sites in a context where
officials fail to provide transportation should be regarded as a practice that violates
Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act, which prohibits actions that dilute the black vote.
THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT PRE-CLEARS THE ELECTION
Despite the extensive problems outlined above, some of which clearly violate the
Voting Rights Act, the Justice Department precleared the election in New Orleans
on March 16.
11 As described, the state election plan called for sending mass mailings
to evacuees to inform them of voting procedures, such as procedures for requesting
absentee ballots and the establishment of satellite voting centers in the state.
However, that plan did not include the designation of satellite voting centers in the
adjacent states of T exas, Mississippi, and Georgia where the majority of the evacuees
were deposited. The basis of the Justice Department’s decision to preclear the New
Orleans election was that the procedures did not amount to “retrogression” of the
voting status of blacks (meaning they did not worsen the position of minority vot-
ers) and that the state had no affirmative obligation to enhance such opportunities
to vote. Their argument was that although “the state may well have done more under
the circumstances,” because the state did not cause the circumstances that dimin-
ished the opportunities for voters to vote, their efforts were sufficient under the law.
These arguments, however, received strong objection by individuals such as U.S.
Senator John Kerry, who wrote Attorney General Alberto Gonzalez, saying: “I do
not understand how the Department of Justice could approve a plan that threatens
the civil rights of hundreds of thousands of citizens rather than postponing the
upcoming elections until a time when a suitable plan could be developed.”
12 The
lack of an adequate reply by the Justice Department leaves open the question of why
neither the state nor the federal government adopted a more aggressive plan under
the circumstances and thus why they abdicated their ultimate responsibility to
enhance the quality of democracy under which its citizens ostensibly live.
VOTER MOBILIZATION: THE “TWO-TRACK” STRATEGY
The election was approached by blacks under the two assumptions cited above,
which was that organizations would work to assist those who desire to vote by
attempting, by legal means, to remove the barriers to voting and by mounting assis-
tance projects to provide information, transportation, and other resources to poten-
tial voters, while at the same time mounting “election protection” efforts.
This effort required 50–150 volunteers, who were needed to greet voters coming
from both out of state and outside the city and to direct them to appropriate voting
locations, that, in most cases, had been established. Many of these volunteers,
including those who came from the surrounding colleges such as Xavier, Southern
RONALD WALTERS8
pal-marable2-01-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:27 PM  Page 8


--- PAGE 26 ---
University, and Dillard, would also man transport systems, child care facilities and
feeding stations. Polling station workers would be sent to high-performing voting
districts in the Uptown section, Gentily and Pontchartrain Park, to distribute infor-
mation and handle questions about election procedures, especially where there was
some doubt about people’s voting eligibility status. Volunteers were also going door
to door in Algiers and the West Bank of Orleans Parish and other neighboring areas
to “pull” voters out. The central base of operations was the Greater Urban League
headquarters on Canal Street, which served as the main field office for poll moni-
tors. There was also a legal command center staffed by attorneys to answer questions
coming in from the field.
13
Other organizations including the churches, the National Coalition on Black
Civic Participation, the NAACP , and others sponsored transportation for displaced
residents wishing to vote—buses of voters came from Atlanta, Baton Rouge, and
other cities. These buses were organized through Ebenezer Baptist Church and
Greater St. Stephens Full Gospel Ministry, among others.
In order to stimulate voter turnout and to guard against voting rights violations,
the Reverend Jesse Jackson organized a march in New Orleans on April 1. It was a
spirited affair that drew more than 5,000 people, who marched over a route that
included the Gretna Bridge. In the ensuing rally after the march, speakers repeatedly
referred to the juxtaposition of the New Orleans election and the pending Voting
Rights Act reauthorization sitting before Congress. Reverend Jackson said: “All citi-
zens have the right to protect their right to return. We are looking to establish jobs,
training, and contracts. Now it is up to the state and local officials to carry the ball
in the state legislature. No matter what we sacrifice today, [this march] is not as long
as the march from Selma to Montgomery.”
14 The march to Gretna was organized, in
part, to highlight the fact that on September 1, 2005, when several hundred black
people who were flooded out of their homes fled over that bridge, attempting to
access higher ground in the town of Gretna, they were met by armed law enforce-
ment officials who forced them to go back. This march, along with a previous one
led by former Georgia Representative Cynthia McKinney, may have created the cir-
cumstances that led to the U.S. Department of Justice’s decision to review the block-
ade. At the time of this writing, the state’s investigation of the incident had been
turned over to the Orleans Parish District Attorney for possible legal action.
At the same time, it was an opportunity for the legal and civil rights organizations
that provided the infrastructure of support to meet, and in that setting, they were
able to confirm their sphere of operation, tighten cooperation with various groups
by clarifying their roles, and discuss overhanging legal problems and logistical con-
siderations. The meetings were not only important but reflected an impressive dis-
play of black organizations working together to achieve the common goal of
facilitating the right of people to vote.
THE VOTE
When Ray Nagin ran in the 2002, he did so as a former Republican cable company
executive—a political outsider who was relatively unknown but stood out in a
THE NEW ORLEANS MAYORAL ELECTION 9
pal-marable2-01-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:27 PM  Page 9


--- PAGE 27 ---
crowded field with an anti-corruption, clean-government campaign, and with strong
ties to the city’s white business establishment. He managed to win the primary elec-
tion with 29 percent of the vote against Richard Pennington, then went on to defeat
him in the runoff 59 to 41 percent.
The 2006 race for Mayor of New Orleans featured twenty-two candidates from
various walks of life in the city, including Kimberly Butler, then-Clerk of the
Criminal Court and chief elections official. However, the press focused on the two
leading candidates, Mayor Ray Nagin and principal challenger Mitch Landrieu, with
an outside chance given to Ron Forman, head of the city zoo and an aggressive fund-
raiser with strong business connections. Landrieu was the brother of the Mary
Landrieu, who is the current U.S. Senator, and son of the last white mayor of New
Orleans, Moon Landrieu, whose term ended in 1978. In the April primary election,
Nagin received 38 percent of the vote to 28 percent for Landrieu, with Forman run-
ning a distant third at 17 percent. In the May 20 runoff, Nagin defeated Landrieu
by 52 to 48 percent.
15
The April 22 election attracted 298,000 voters, 63 percent of whom were black,
so the issue at hand was essentially whether enough of the black voters together with
a coalition of whites wanted change. That black voters desired change was indicated
by the fact that Nagin appeared to garner the lion’s share of the black vote even
though many of the poorest citizens could not get out of the city and ended up at
the Superdome. Then, in an effort to recoup his standing with black voters in the
runoff, Nagin suggested that in the reconstruction, New Orleans would become
itself, a “chocolate city.” The extent of support that Nagin received following Katrina
stands in stark contrast to the 2002 election, in which he received a mere 40 percent
of black voters support.
16
It is also possible to suggest that the impact of the black electorate on the selection
of leadership in the city was formidable to the extent that Mayor Nagin took into
consideration their sensitivity to issues such as the size or “footprint” of the city, by
the inclusion of the Ninth Ward in the priority areas for rebuilding. Before the elec-
tion runoff, Mayor Nagin accepted the recommendations of a reconstruction task-
force that he had created, known as the Bring New Orleans Back Commission, that
a moratorium be placed on the rebuilding of flood-prone areas, including the lower
Ninth Ward. However, opposition to this recommendation forced Nagin to alter his
position and ultimately agree that all areas of the City were a priority for rebuilding.
17
In fact, race played an even stronger role in the runoff election, given the expec-
tation that the election between Landrieu and Nagin would be influenced, in large
part, by the proposals for rebuilding that they put forth. Neither candidate, however,
made any bold, effective, or clear proposals that could be attacked by the other.
Instead, both candidates were purposefully vague, and Landrieu was loath to attack
Nagin too sharply for risk of alienating black voters, since his own fortunes
depended upon construction of a biracial coalition.
18
Black voter turnout in the April election was 36 percent or 108,153, a modest per-
formance in light of the 45 percent turnout in the 2002 election, and the estimated
30 percent turnout in the black sections lent strong credibility to the view that blacks
had to overcome substantial barriers to vote.
19 Overall turnout in the May runoff
election was estimated to be about 43 percent overall and about 50 percent among
RONALD WALTERS10
pal-marable2-01-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:27 PM  Page 10


--- PAGE 28 ---
black voters, a phenomenal number given the obstacles that voters had to overcome.
Nagin’s voting bloc was comprised of 80 percent of blacks in majority-black voting
precincts and 20 percent of the white vote, largely from the Uptown area, while
Landrieu won the rest of the city’s white precincts.
However, the fact that black voters came back to New Orleans from wherever
they were in the country to provide Nagin a winning margin proved that their vote
was not so much about Nagin as it was against the attempt to wrest control of the
city from black leadership and by so doing, not only to disenfranchise them but to
disempower them politically, and thus to affect their permanent displacement. This
would give their opponents the opportunity to refashion New Orleans as they
wished, free of the domination of a black majority. As such, the black vote was less,
then, about Nagin, and more about their own investment in the city, its history and
culture, and preserving a future in which they continued to see themselves as vital
players through an act of political accountability.
T
HE ELECTION’S IMPACT ON THE RIGHT TO RETURN
In effect, the post-Katrina election was black New Orleans’s modern-day civil rights
movement, a moment in time when they chose to upset expectations that they
would not turn out strongly and, as such, also upset calculations that the city would
be reconstructed without having to take their views under consideration. As a mem-
ber of the Katrina Survivors Association in Dallas shouted in response to the group’s
chairwoman Katie Neason’s cry of “Let’s go do it” as she and others filed out of a bus
that brought them to New Orleans to vote, “We’re back, we’re back. . .and we’re
going to be at the table.”
20 On the other hand, some white conservative votes for
Nagin were born of the same calculation as when he was first elected—that he would
be more amenable to their control than Landrieu, who had his own base of support
through the State legislature and his family’s political status Therefore, to support
Nagin would both localize city power under their control and do so through the a
black leader, thus avoiding rancorous racial politics.
This was something of a miscalculation of the power of black voters, many of
whom had characterized Nagin as ”Ray Reagan” in his first administration and who
were acutely aware of their interests in the rebuilding process. Proof of this is that
they have influenced and redefined Nagin’s leadership in the post-election period
when the contests for control of the plans for rebuilding have been tended both by
legislators in Baton Rouge and in the city.
The Louisiana State Legislature created a Louisiana Recovery Authority (LRA),
which constituted the vehicle through which funds would be channeled to the city and
other areas for the rebuilding process. And, although the LRA was to work with the
city at the primary level of planning, it has in fact developed its own policy postures.
Thus, the connection between the Bush administration and the LRA is a linkage that
has involved the White House in a process governing the control and expenditure of
arguably the largest sums of urban redevelopment funds in American history.
Many of the wishes of the grassroots citizens in the city, then, would be depend-
ent upon the behavior of their representatives on the city council, a lineup that was
also changed somewhat by the elections. Nagin had governed in his first term with
THE NEW ORLEANS MAYORAL ELECTION 11
pal-marable2-01-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:27 PM  Page 11


--- PAGE 29 ---
strong support from a coalition that included Oliver Thomas, the highly regarded
council chair; Jay Batt, a white businessman; and Jackie Clarkson, an at-large mem-
ber.
21 However, both Batt and Clarkson were defeated. Among the four members
who often opposed Nagin, only one was defeated. The net effect of this was to shore
up a level of accountability by the council to citizen demands.
Some evidence of this newfound accountability is made evident by the city coun-
cil’s recent efforts to establish its own planning process, one involving community
hearings and deliberations, to create a unified plan for land use, infrastructure
enhancement, and wetlands rebuilding. With Ron Forman having lost the election,
the wealthier whites in New Orleans felt they had no direct involvement in the plan-
ning process and thus sought and attracted the financial support of the Rockefeller
Foundation to develop a more comprehensive planning mechanism. However, that
mechanism was perceived by grassroots community activists to be a substitute colo-
nial system in which blacks were reduced to subordinate role players—they effec-
tively intervened in the city’s attempt to establish a memorandum of understanding
between the foundation and the city council.
In another example, the mayor proposed wage increases for police but only first-
year firefighters on the logic that firefighters, unlike other city civil service employ-
ees, received a 2 percent annual pay increase mandated by state law. However, a
majority of the city council voted an increase for all members of the police and fire
Departments that was eventually upheld by the mayor.
22
Finally, in April of 2006, an August 29 deadline was established by the city gov-
ernment for homeowners to clean, gut, and board up damaged homes. However,
after the election, the council voted to extend that deadline for several more months,
in effect acknowledging the complexities surrounding verification of land owner-
ship, contacting home owners, and completion of other administrative procedures.
The council also voted to exempt the entire Lower Ninth Ward from that process,
largely in response to the views of activists who argued that the city had allowed
derelict homeowners to abdicate their responsibility to clean up their properties
before the hurricanes, thus the unusual circumstances should result in a greater
degree of leniency.
23
IMPACT OF THE “TWO-TRACK STRATEGY”
The “two-track strategy” largely worked in this case, first through the mobilization
of various interest groups and civic organizations that came together with city offi-
cials to express their electoral choices in a surprisingly effective manner. As indicated
above, blacks were able to vote in significant numbers not only by physically return-
ing to the city but also by overcoming the difficulties associated with the first-time
voting, absentee voting, and provisional balloting procedures. The fact that the state
legislature and the state administration did little to greatly ease the voting process
in light of the context within which it occurred says much about the political obsta-
cles encountered by displaced voters in a state largely dominated by a Republican
establishment (even though a U.S. Senator and the Governor are Democrats). The
election also illustrates the continued and effective resistance mounted by a largely
black Democratic establishment.
RONALD WALTERS12
pal-marable2-01-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:27 PM  Page 12


--- PAGE 30 ---
The objections to the election raised by the Reverend Jesse Jackson, the Reverend
Al Sharpton, the NAACP , the National Urban League, and others were also impor-
tant as a backdrop to the federal legislative process that was occurring during
Congress’s reauthorization of the Voting Rights Act. As indicated above, the Justice
Department precleared the election and in doing so said that it was not unusual for
the jurisdiction in question to prematurely implement changes in the election pro-
cedures while the Justice Department was considering the case.
Unusual actions like this from the Justice Department raised questions about
whether or not Republican legislators would attempt to legalize them in the process
of the Voting Rights Act reauthorization. Hearings pertinent to reauthorization were
conducted by the House Judiciary Committee, under the leadership of Representative
F . James Sensenbrenner, from October 25, 2005, to November 9, 2005.
24 Tw o
things occurred to mitigate the decision to bring court action after the election. The
first factor was that the election turnout of blacks appeared not to have been dam-
aged to the extent feared, although blacks were disproportionately hurt by the elec-
toral structure. Nevertheless, their vote was large and influential in the final analysis,
promoting the feeling that justice had been served by their own actions.
Then, the Voting Rights Act was eventually reauthorized on July 13, 2006, by a
vote in the House of Representatives of 390 to 33, with most of the votes in oppo-
sition coming from Southern Republicans. Moreover, the amendments to the Act
corrected the flaws in the process of preclearance that were the result of the Supreme
Court’s rulings in Bossier Parish and the Georgia v. Ashcroft cases that set a confusing
standard for evaluating of whether changes in districts harmed or helped minority
voters. The Voting Rights Act was subsequently passed in the Senate by a nearly
unanimous vote of 98 to 0 and signed into law by President Bush.
C
ONCLUSION
The danger, however, in the positive impact that voters have had to date on the deci-
sions of the mayor and city council is that the center may not hold. Time is an issue
because the further the election and the hurricane’s impact recede into the past, if a
critical mass of residents does not return, black power will slip ineluctably into the
reservoirs of those who are able to wait and profit from the barriers to the right of
return. Black New Orleanians may find themselves stripped of the spirit of resistance
and turning from their history to something new. The potential exists in that a
mayor with a background rooted in the white power structure, still somewhat unsure
of the strength of his fidelity to the black community, is still vulnerable to the pre-
vious forces that initially produced him.
Moreover, the possibility of the negative pull of time occurring is great also
because of the massive barriers to the right to return, rebuild, and restore life posed
by the challenges that displaced residents continue to face. This analysis suggests at
least three formidable problems. The first is the inequalities of power in the various
levels of control of spending and the regulations devised for spending by the White
House through FEMA, the state through the Louisiana Redevelopment Authority,
and the city through the local planning boards. The FEMA/LRA nexus would
appear to be the most important, given the $110 billion that been allotted for
THE NEW ORLEANS MAYORAL ELECTION 13
pal-marable2-01-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:27 PM  Page 13


--- PAGE 31 ---
Louisiana reconstruction and the $12 billion allotted for the city of New Orleans
itself, while the city government will have to adjust to rules that they design. Those
rules doubtless could have the imprimatur of wealthy, locally connected private
interests as well. In fact, the second contradiction is the superior ability of private
interests to compete for land, political legitimacy, and other resources in order to
promote their interests in developing a business-friendly area. That has been the
driving force behind the reluctance of city leaders to vigorously support programs
that would provide for the speedy return of poor and low-income residents who
require affordable housing for purchase and rental. Third and finally, the Bush
administration’s Justice Department will have responsibility for the implementation
of the Voting Rights Act until 2008, and it has exhibited a troubling pattern of lag-
gard enforcement of the law. It has precleared changes in voting procedures such as
the Georgia photo identification requirement and changes in other states that have
had the capacity to disenfranchise black voters. So, despite the passage of the VRA,
its enforcement will have to be monitored. If it is not, the political paradigm in New
Orleans could change quickly if voting procedures, approved through the preclear-
ance process, continue to make voter participation difficult. That could promote city
officials who could enact legislation that opposes not only the specific issues involved
in the right of return but that also has the affect of undoing the right itself.
Since Dahl’s time, tools such as public opinion polling have also illustrated with
a degree of specificity the wishes of the electorate. In this case, the Iraq-Katrina rela-
tionship exists as reflected by a September 2005 CNN/USA T oday/Gallup poll,
which finds that while 93 percent of respondents say that Katrina is the worst natu-
ral disaster in their lifetime, 63 percent say that New Orleans should be rebuilt.
25
However, a November 2005 poll of ethnic groups by New California Media found
that blacks disapproved of the Iraq war the most of all groups. In particular, 77 per-
cent of blacks, 69 percent of Hispanics, 60 percent of Asians, and a plurality of
whites opposed the war. Moreover, blacks also privileged the elimination of poverty
by the highest score (blacks, 58 percent; Hispanics, 43 percent; Asians, 38 percent;
whites, 36 percent).
26 Nevertheless, a USA T oday poll also found a twenty-point
decline among those who said they “would definitely return” to New Orleans
between October of 2005 and August 2006.
27
So I recommend a minor correction of Robert Dahl’s thesis that elections rarely
give specific mandates to the winners by suggesting that when the issue faced by vot-
ers in an election is large enough, it constitutes a rather specific target, such that the
result of the voting may indeed be informative. In this case, the perception of blacks
was the specific issue of the extent to which they would be allowed to return and to
participate in the life of a reconstructed New Orleans. And the political answer was
resoundingly positive.
N
OTES
1. Robert Dahl, A Preface T o Democratic Theory(Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1956), 131.
2. Ibid, 132–34.
3. Ronald Walters, Freedom Is Not Enough: Black Candidates, Black Voters and American
Presidential Elections (Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 2005).
RONALD WALTERS14
pal-marable2-01-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:27 PM  Page 14


--- PAGE 32 ---
4. See also Acts 2005, No. 220, para 4, Jan. 1, 2006; Acts 2005, No. 431, para 1, Jan. 1,
2006; Acts 2006, 1st Ex. Sess. No. 2, para 1, Feb. 23, 2006, at the following URLs:
http://www.legis.state.la.us/Iss_doc/Iss_house/RS/18/Copy%20of%20RS%2018 and
http://www.legis.state.la.us/Iss_doc/Iss_house/RS/18/Doc%2081629.html.
5. T elephone discussion, Ms. Kimberly Butler with the author, February 23, 2006.
6. James Parks, “Homes Gone, Lives Destroyed: Now Katrina Evacuees T ry to Keep
Right to Vote,” PoliticalAffairs.net, April 12, 2006, Blog.aflcio.org.
7. Letter, State Senator Cleo Fields to John Tanner, Voting Section Chief, Civil Rights
Division, U.S. Department of Justice, March 7, 2006.
8. “Voting Registration Update: Procedures,” Independent Electoral Commission of Iraq ,
http://www.Iraqvote.org/ (accessed June 2005); Idem, “Iraq Election Polling Sites in
United States Announced,” idem, (accessed December 11, 2005).
9. Clerk of the Criminal Court, Election Administration, “Polling Place Changes,” April
22, 2006. Presents changes of April 22 with the status of voting precincts as of March
20. This data was compared to ward racial data from the Department of State, Parish
Report of Registered Voters as of March 7, 2006, Orleans Parish. My analysis indicates
that of the wards with 99–100 percent changes in voting precincts (Wards 3, 5, 7, 8,
9, 10, 16), five of the seven had majority black populations.
10. “FEMA Voter Data Dispute,” The Institute for Southern Studies Newsletter (February
23, 2006).
11. Peter Whoriskey, “Election Plan for New Orleans Approved,” The Washington Post,
March 17, 2006.
12. Senator John Kerry, letter to John K. Tanner, Chief, Voting Rights Section, Civil
Rights Division, U.S. Department of Justice, April 3, 2006.
13. Author’s notes.
14. Author’s notes.
15. Mayor City of New Orleans, Louisiana Secretary of State, Parish Election data, 2006.
16. Cathy Booth and Russell McCulley, “Will Ray Nagin Win Redemption in New
Orleans?” Time, April 10, 2006, online edition.
17. Coleman Warner, “Candidates Playing It Safe on Land Use,” New Orleans Times-
Picayune, May 13, 2006, online edition.
18. Gordon Russell, “Mastermind Puts the Mayors in City Hall; Political Strategist’s win
Record Will go Down in N.O. History,” New Orleans Times-Picayune, June 11, 2006,
online edition.
19. Mayors Election, Primary Election Results, Department of State, New Orleans Parish,
2002.
20. Gwen Filosa, “Voters Determined to Take a Stand; Many Drive In to Make Sure
Voices Are Heard,” New Orleans Times-Picayune, May 21, 2006, online edition.
21. Bruce Eggler, “Re-elected to Council,” New Orleans Times-Picayune, April 23, 2006.
22. Bruce Eggler, “Panel Defies Nagin on Raise,” New Orleans Times-Picayune, August 25,
2006, online edition.
23. Bruce Eggler, “City Council Eases the Gutting Law,” New Orleans Times-Picayune,
August 26, 2006, online edition.
24. House Committee of the Judiciary, Subcommittee on the Constitution, “Voting
Rights Act: The Judicial Evolution of the Retrogression Standard,” Hearing,
November 9, 2005.
25. CNN/USAT oday/Gallup, “Poll: Most Americans believe New Orleans Will Never
Recover,” September 7, 2005.
26. Haider Rizvi, “Post-Katrina Poll Finds Americans Prioritizing Poverty over T errorism,”
Common Dreams News Center, http://OneWorld.net (accessed November 26, 2005).
27. “USA T oday/Gallup Hurricane Katrina Survivors Follow-up Poll,” USA T oday,
USAT oday.com/news/polls/tables/live/2006-08-20-Katrina-poll.htm.
THE NEW ORLEANS MAYORAL ELECTION 15
pal-marable2-01-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:27 PM  Page 15


--- PAGE 33 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 34 ---
Chapter 2
THE NEW ORLEANS
THAT RACE BUILT: 
RACISM, DISASTER, 
AND URBAN SPATIAL
RELATIONSHIPS
DARWIN BOND GRAHAM
Far down Desire Street, off St. Claude Avenue, the main thoroughfare through the
Ninth Ward of New Orleans, Jackie stands outside her home on an unusually cold
December day eating a hot lunch provided by Common Ground, a mutual aid
organization formed immediately after Katrina struck. The entire contents of her
house are piling up on the sidewalk beside her. All of the electronics—television,
radio, fan, lamps, VCR, and a pair of heavy electric metal-framed medical beds—are
sitting in one stack by the bumper of a wrecked Oldsmobile with four flat tires.
Carpeting dragged from her house is sitting in another humungous mound. The
largest stack of waterlogged belongings consists of miscellaneous furnishings—cloth-
ing, books, CDs, drapes, toys, and kitchen utensils. In a few hours a new pile will
rise beside all of this; the mold-infested drywall and plaster that must be torn from
her home’s interior, floor to ceiling.
Inside Jackie’s house there are multiple brownish-yellow lines about two, three,
five, and seven feet up on all the walls. Each line marks a level at which the toxic
floodwaters settled for several days. The flooding took weeks to subside completely.
On its way down it settled at many different levels for extended periods of time leav-
ing graduated marks. The whole building smells of mold and mud. A crew of stu-
dents from California (of which the author is a member) has been helping Jackie gut
her house for several days. They don protective suites, respirators, goggles, and
gloves. The entire house interior needs to be bleached and dried out before recon-
struction can start, before Jackie can think about moving back in. In the front room
pal-marable2-01-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:28 PM  Page 17


--- PAGE 35 ---
of her home she’s collected a dozen porcelain sculptures, keepsakes, and as many
photographs and personal papers as she’s been able to salvage. They’re all coated in
the same powdery brown film.
A haunting reminder of the floods that overtook New Orleans sits beached in her
side yard. Constructed from a refrigerator, empty barrel, several ice chests, and fas-
tened together with metal straps and nails, the improvised boat probably could have
seated four to five adults and several children. A wide piece of scrap lumber about
four feet long, a paddle, lies inside of it.
Jackie’s neighborhood is dead quiet. The twin holly bushes that used to shine
bright green with red berries on each side of the stairs up to the front porch are dead
and withered. What’s left of the lawn is a brown, shaggy mass of dead blades. Jackie’s
lived here a long time. She says the neighborhood has had more than its fair share of
troubles in recent times, but that it’s a good place in spite of the bleak pictures
painted by demographic statistics, press reports, and sociological works that con-
demn communities like this as oppressive slums caused purely by spatial concentra-
tion and segregation of a poor, predominantly black population. Community
cohesion and people’s attachment to place have been profoundly powerful in the
Ninth Ward (and New Orleans in general). William Falk’s research on “family and
belonging in a southern black community,” articulates the transcendent power of
place for those who dwell in geographies like the Ninth Ward, a power that appears
capable of nullifying the negativity of oppression and that provides hope, happiness,
and a collective means to struggle for those who live there:
The real way in which one is related to the place is what matters. Thus, for a suppos-
edly “poor” place. . .the real testament of faith for local people is: this is where I live.
This is where my history is grounded. My biography is here. I know everyone here, at
least everyone who matters the most to me. Here, me and mine are left to ourselves. I
may not know much that matters to some other people, but I know well this place and
my place in it. It is a place consisting of memories good and bad, but all of them are
mine, things that cannot be bought or taken away from me. I am quite literally
grounded in this place. It is in me; I am in it.
1
Although it is poor, segregated, scorned by outsiders, criminalized, redlined,
over-policed, and now finally flooded to Noahic proportions, New Orleans remains
an assemblage of terrains imbued with so much meaning, nesting so much struggle
and power, history and community. That residents of the Ninth Ward like Jackie
are returning to rebuild, even without pledges from city leaders that their neighbor-
hood will be provided with sewerage, gas, and electricity, is a testament to the
power of place.
But will New Orleans be bought now? Will portions of it be taken away from
those who have called it home for so long? “Land grab” is on the tip of every poor
New Orleanian’s tongue. Will community be taken away from those parts of New
Orleans least able to protect themselves, or those neighborhoods most heavily tar-
geted for sacrifice and redevelopment?
According to Jackie, the Ninth Ward “used to be a very white neighborhood
when my family first moved in. There were a lot of white families and some elderly
DARWIN BOND GRAHAM18
pal-marable2-01-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:29 PM  Page 18


--- PAGE 36 ---
folks. My family was probably the first black one to move in on this particular block.
Soon after it became all black.” Her description matches the basic dynamics that sus-
tain racial segregation; nonwhite urban migration and concentration, spillover into
accessible and marginalized neighborhoods, reactionary white flight from many of
these integrating areas, and the consequent social-urban ecological decline that
results from environmental racism and neglect.
2 The Ninth Ward, where Jackie has
lived most of her life, started out as a neighborhood of white-ethnic immigrants and
a large number of black families, all working class. The modest homes with ample
backyard space, wide streets fit for automobiles, numerous churches, and small cor-
ner shops, was the American dream for many. The properties were cheap and prone
to minor flooding during a hard rain, but nothing catastrophic, as long as the levees
held. The Federal government, state of Louisiana, and the city and levee boards
mostly upheld this promise through the twentieth century. The city certainly expe-
rienced floods, but nothing on the scale of Katrina. The worst were hurricanes Betsy
and Camille, but these were not catastrophic by any means.
Many older residents of the Ninth Ward have memories of Betsy, when their
homes were flooded and they had to evacuate. New Orleans City Council member
Oliver Thomas, whom Douglas Brinkley interviewed for his book about Katrina,
recalled that “as a child, the scariest thing in my life was Hurricane Betsy.”
3 Even
though Betsy flooded parts of New Orleans, it wasn’t anything approaching cata-
strophic. In the 1960s, it was in everyone’s interest to make sure the levees held
because back then much more than just the poor could be washed away. Industry,
shipping, the growing tourism trade, and the workforce that these economic activi-
ties required meant that the levees and other infrastructure were supported in kind.
4
By the 1960s, the Ninth Ward was fast becoming a segregated black ghetto. By
the time Hurricane Betsy flooded parts of the city in several feet of water, the Ninth
Ward and many of the most vulnerable neighborhoods had become virtually all
black.
5 In 1965, when President Johnson wandered into a church in the Ninth Ward
days after Hurricane Betsy, ankle deep in water, he announced “This is your
President, I’m here to help you!” However, he saw only black faces staring back at
him from the damp flashlight-illuminated interior. Days later he would write in his
diary that the shelter he visited was a “mass of human suffering,” and “most of those
inside were Negro.”
6 The differential impact that Betsy had on New Orleans’s blacks
made a lasting impression, but it ultimately served as little incentive for future
investments in the area’s infrastructure—to say nothing about redressing the envi-
ronmental racism that was creating vast regions of vulnerability in and around New
Orleans (and beyond). Indeed, global economic restructuring and the concomitant
decline of the welfare state would soon lead to the opposite outcome; less social
investment would be made in New Orleans’s infrastructure. This, combined with
racial residential segregation, is part of the cause of the Katrina catastrophe.
One precipitating event that set segregation into full swing in New Orleans was
the integration of local schools. New Orleans schools were some of the first in the
Deep South to be opened up by civil rights activists. After McDonogh #19 on St.
Claude Avenue in the Lower Ninth Ward was integrated, many of the remaining
white residents fled the city, believing that if living around blacks wasn’t bad enough,
having one’s child attend school alongside them was the final straw. McDonogh #19
THE NEW ORLEANS THAT RACE BUILT 19
pal-marable2-01-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:29 PM  Page 19


--- PAGE 37 ---
is now known as Louis Armstrong Elementary School. Like other schools across the
nation that were desegregated, many in New Orleans took on the names of promi-
nent black political leaders and artists. One can only imagine what Armstrong would
think of this.
The school’s original namesake came from John McDonogh, a wealthy local slave
owner and businessman who made a point of educating his slaves and financing a
recolonization society that transported black New Orleanians to the newly estab-
lished nation of Liberia. On his deathbed he willed enough money to open dozens
of schools in the greater New Orleans area. Some still bear his name. Most were the
sites of civil rights struggles aimed at integration. William Frantz Elementary is in
the same neighborhood that Jackie lives in. It was here in 1960 that six year-old
Ruby Bridges and her mother drove to school one morning. They were greeted by
an angry mob of parents. Up until that date the school had been reserved for whites
only.
7 It wasn’t long till the school, and the neighborhood, became nearly all black.8
Many of the McDonogh high schools went through the same process (although
some of them were open to blacks much earlier). That McDonogh’s name is so
prominent in the greater New Orleans educational system tells us something about
education and racial inequality in Louisiana. The man worked his slaves in order to
build up real estate around the city and Algiers, and some of these properties would
be turned into schools for slaves, the emancipated, and the poor.
9
McDonogh was a peculiar but also typical benevolent white patriarch in the
Louisiana slavocracy. Leighton Ciravolo, a sympathetic biographer of McDonogh,
describes his fatherly ante bellum style in the following terms: “McDonogh, being a
deliberate thinker, realized that people work best when there is hope ahead. This con-
tinuous labor builds up a work ethic. He in fact treated his slaves more as students
than like the property they were considered legally. The philosophy involved is a mod-
ern, fundamental idea of proper education: if students see prospects in their lives, they
will develop self-esteem and will become energetic, useful members of society.”
10
McDonogh’s efforts to “better” Afro-Americans was in no small part a means
toward his re-colonization plans—sending slaves back to Africa. Recolonization was
an early attempt by some white Americans to “balance” the races and distribute them
to their proper spatial locations. In the first half of the nineteenth century, this
meant sending emancipated blacks to found Liberia, a nation where black men and
women could live better lives, according to men like McDonogh. It would right the
wrong—the wrong not necessarily being slavery but rather the mixing of races in the
New World. The proper place for blacks was ultimately viewed as Africa, far from
the North American continent, which according to the McDonoghs of the nation
was destined to become a white civilization.
This notion of relocating blacks to places where they will supposedly be better
off—regardless of what black communities might think for themselves—is a thread
that runs throughout the history of race relations in the United States. Although spa-
tial notions of the proper places for certain races took particular forms in New
Orleans, somewhat complicated by the city’s truly unique history and traditions, the
city was by no means an exception.
Exactly where this proper place for the black population was supposed to be
would change dramatically after the Civil War and through the Jim Crow era, and
DARWIN BOND GRAHAM20
pal-marable2-01-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:29 PM  Page 20


--- PAGE 38 ---
again with the coming of World Wars I and II. Recolonization schemes would even-
tually be abandoned, maps of the Atlantic were shelved for maps of the city, and the
spatial fix began take a more purely localized geographical form. Blacks were here to
stay, so other means of geographically managing race relations would need to be
sought. In white-dominated New Orleans, a city unique for always having had a
large slave and free black population, this would mean living with slaves and mulat-
tos, free and bound, manumission and recolonization plans, violent pogroms, mar-
ginalization into the “bottom of the bowl,” and eventually a localized spatial division
of the races in a hyper-segregated pattern whereby race and class correlates to topo-
graphical elevation. Residential and other localized types of segregation of one sort
or another was always a reality, but by the twentieth century it became the only spa-
tial division of races that mattered.
Patterns of racial segregation and spatial location in the socio-political ecology of
New Orleans were by no means crafted through a logical process of intentional out-
comes. There was no committee or organization seeing to it that race was manifested
in space. The process was much more convoluted. Many actions were intentional,
hostile, or outright violent. But many more were subtle, subconscious, and assumed.
Peirce Lewis describes New Orleans from the Civil War almost until the early
1960s as having a regime of racial segregation defined by its micro-spatial ordering.
Prior to the civil rights movement and the end of legally sanctioned segregation,
blacks and whites lived much closer to one another. Residential segregation was
ordered in a complex patchwork in which clusters of predominantly black blocks
would be encapsulated within super-blocks. On the main avenues and outer fringes
of these super-blocks lived whites and more affluent citizens. According to Lewis,
“such patches of black population by no stretch of the imagination can be called
‘ghettos’. . .these Negro neighborhoods of New Orleans were quite small and mult-
inucleated, with fuzzy boundaries.”
11 This peculiar residential pattern was due in
part to the custom of building slaves’ and servants’ quarters in back of the master’s
house. Jim Crow segregation in New Orleans adopted this spatial design, and there
was very little pressure to change it until the black freedom movement of the 1960s.
As black communities began to question the norms and laws of Jim Crow in the
middle of the twentieth century, this type of segregation had begun to give way to
large contiguous areas within the city populated by blacks at rates approaching 80 to
90 percent. These areas consolidated the black population most intensely in the low-
est, most vulnerable, and marginalized portions of the city.
For New Orleans, like much of the Southern United States, the “proper” spatial-
racial regime was a problem of enormous proportions for the dominant-class and
working-class whites who sought to separate themselves from blacks, a problem that
had to be continually reworked as the region developed from a plantation economy
to sharecropping and shipping, and finally the industrial production, transport, and
tourism economy. T o earlier New Orleanians, miscegenation had been identified as
the most pernicious effect of an improper proximity amongst the races, but so, too,
were rebellion, maroonage, crime, and loss of morality associated with spatial con-
centrations of blacks. What had always made New Orleans’s problems of racial
geography even more intractable for the ruling planter class was the relative abun-
dance of free blacks and mulattos from early on. Later, racial geographies would be
THE NEW ORLEANS THAT RACE BUILT 21
pal-marable2-01-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:29 PM  Page 21


--- PAGE 39 ---
rearticulated to deal with the changing economic and political circumstances of
blacks and whites in the city.
One way of understanding the Katrina catastrophe is that it is the product of the
latest racial geographic regime in the Gulf Coast, one not all that different from the
immediate past, but certainly very extreme in the degree to which nonwhites and the
poor have found themselves relegated to extremely vulnerable positions within the
socio-political ecology (and with very few resources to deal with this vulnerability).
Hurricane Katrina’s effects were structured by the spatial reordering of New Orleans
since the mid twentieth century that came about directly through racial segregation,
and its consequences are being played out under the new politics of race—a politics
in which racial hierarchies and inequalities are being rearticulated and fashioned in
novel ways that mask the racist causes and consequences.
12
From the 1950s on, white New Orleanians moved just outside the city limits,
separating themselves from the Ninth Ward and other increasingly black neighbor-
hoods. Many whites migrated east, just a mile or two into St. Bernard Parish, sepa-
rating their new homes from the old with a set of railroad tracks, a military reserve,
and an ample sized patch of green space. Many more moved into Jefferson Parish to
the west. The push and pull forces that motivated white flight were many. They
included racist yearnings for a segregated society that was being fundamentally chal-
lenged, but also economic forces and technological breakthroughs that made subur-
banization possible. St. Bernard Parish became a destination that promised secure
jobs, a large affordable home, and distance from the ever-darkening “chocolate city.”
Beyond city limits in the Parish, St. Claude Avenue becomes the St. Bernard
Highway, and Claiborne Avenue becomes Judge Perez Drive. The homes in St.
Bernard are much newer than those in the Ninth Ward. Many of them are two sto-
ries tall and almost every last one is made of sturdy brick. The houses in the Ninth
Ward are mostly small wood-framed structures. In St. Bernard, the yards are larger,
and the streets twist and turn in the curvaceous fashion that is a hallmark of the
modern suburban development. The trees are taller, and one can presume that,
before the floods, the grass was greener on this side. St. Bernard Parish was flooded
just as deep and long as the neighboring Ninth Ward. Only the area’s sturdier infra-
structure kept it from taking as bad a beating from the winds and rain—that and the
fact that the worst effect of flooding was only felt in the Lower Ninth Ward where
levee failure created a wall of rushing water that leveled several square blocks, picked
up and moved homes and cars, and crushed anything in its path.
Arabi and Chalmette, the first two towns in St. Bernard adjacent to the Ninth
Ward, were 96 and 92 percent white before Katrina hit. Both towns have a poverty
rate below the national average of 12 percent. Homes in Arabi are valued at a
median of $77,000, with comparable houses in Chalmette worth about $10,000
more (for the New Orleans metro region, this is very high). In New Orleans’s Ninth
Ward, 36 percent of Jackie’s neighbors live below the poverty line. Some blocks
have astronomical rates of impoverishment with more than half of all residents liv-
ing in poverty. The Ninth Ward is virtually all black today except for the southern
section around the edge of the French Quarter, which is not coincidentally on
higher ground and separated from the rest of the ward by St. Claude Avenue’s four
lanes and a median. Home values are much lower in the Ninth Ward even though
DARWIN BOND GRAHAM22
pal-marable2-01-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:29 PM  Page 22


--- PAGE 40 ---
ownership rates are incredibly high. 13 This is spatial segregation on the local level,
and it is characteristic of the larger pattern that can be discerned at the citywide level.
For the first half of the eighteenth century, St. Bernard Parish was a French colony
(as was all of Louisiana). Planters established themselves on the high ground near the
banks of the Mississippi and used African slaves to raise sugarcane and indigo in the
rich soils deposited over several millennia of delta building. The natural levees up and
down river from New Orleans were developed in the same manner. Thus, New
Orleans began and thrived as a port city surrounded by vast plantations.
14 (Even
today the region’s most important economic activity takes place on “plantations” out-
side the city—many of the Port of Southern Louisiana’s facilities are named after the
properties that used exist there; bulk goods are shipped from Angelina Plantation,
Hope Plantation, Goldmine Plantation, and so forth. Some of the refineries and
chemical plants along the “cancer alley” corridor are also located on industrial lots
still called plantations.)
The slave-based economy flourished through thirty years of Spanish rule, the
second brief French dominion, and American control until the Civil War. All the
while, New Orleans expanded rapidly, becoming the largest Southern city (the sixth
largest in the United States) by 1860. After the war, many emancipated slaves left
the rural parishes of Louisiana for New Orleans. Others stayed as sharecroppers and
small farm owners alongside Spanish and German immigrants and the propertied
upper class. Until the end of World War II, St. Bernard remained a rural backwa-
ter—its total population a mere 7,000, according to the 1940 Census. In 1950 its
population exploded. Several large factories, including an aluminum works, a sugar
refinery, and an oil refinery, provided an economic base for the working-class pop-
ulation that moved in. The majority of this growth took place right on the edge of
New Orleans’s city limits. Builders provided spacious homes for the new suburban-
ites. State policies and practices within the real estate and banking industries pro-
moted racial segregation at the expense of nonwhites. Blacks were kept out via
norms and laws.
By 1970, more than 50,000 people lived in St. Bernard Parish, most of them
closer toward the New Orleans end. White families moved into the new residential
developments, finding employment in the factories that were moving out of New
Orleans. Jefferson Parish, on the opposite side of the city, experienced a similar pat-
tern of growth. Both parishes experienced rapid economic and population growth.
Nonwhites, meanwhile, were restricted inside the city limits of New Orleans, unable
to gain employment in the booming exurban industries or purchase a home in the
rapidly expanding (and financially appreciating) suburban neighborhoods. These
new dynamic places were not theirs to enter. They were forced to rely on whatever
they could manage within the city limits. This was the consolidation of the new spa-
tial regime of race that jelled after World War II and solidified after the 1960s. As
industries left and investments dwindled, times became tougher for those working-
class and poor populations restricted geographically (and by nonspatial means, of
course). Redlining was rampant. Property values in black neighborhoods stagnated,
jobs became increasingly scarce, and major redevelopment projects, like the I-10
freeway, cut through the social fabrics of these communities, laying waste to business
districts and cultural centers like the Claiborne neutral grounds.
THE NEW ORLEANS THAT RACE BUILT 23
pal-marable2-01-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:29 PM  Page 23


--- PAGE 41 ---
Left in the Ninth Ward and other formerly mixed working-class districts, many
poor black New Orleanians were able to purchase their homes and build surprisingly
vibrant communities and some degree of wealth, all in spite of their situation.
However, the overall costs outweighed the benefits. White racism was rearticulated in
new forms during and after the civil rights movement. Across much of America, geo-
graphical segregation that created powerfully different life chances became a para-
mount means of maintaining the racial hierarchy that had previously been constructed
through other less spatially deterministic forms. In New Orleans this created an espe-
cially vulnerable poor black population, but also much vulnerability amongst middle-
class blacks and whites who fled the inner city only to settle in swamp lands no more
fit for habitation than the Ninth Ward or the “bottom of the bowl.”
15 The socio-polit-
ical ecology resulting from the push for racial integration and reactionary suburban-
ization (propelled by the white population’s possessive investment in whiteness that
promised a maintenance of privilege in the suburbs) built a cityscape under sea level,
surrounded by a maelstrom for a river on one side, lakes to the north, and rapidly dis-
appearing marshes to the south and southeast. In 1965, Hurricane Betsy exposed the
harm wrought by this regime of racial segregation and disaccumulation structured
into the geography of greater New Orleans. Betsy was a preview. Katrina, a disaster of
far larger magnitude, has irrefutably affirmed this point.
16
As of July of 2006, Jackie’s house sits quietly on Desire Street, gutted, its former
contents hauled away, but little more progress has been made on it. Her neighbors
are filtering back in slowly, many of them just to survey the damage and salvage a
few belongings. The street is mostly deserted, however. Most inhabitants of the
Ninth Ward have few savings to spend on reconstruction. Few of them have flood
insurance. What wealth they had was literally embodied in their homes. Now it’s in
no condition to use as any kind of equity. Other streets have more activity. Some are
bustling with trucks, hammers, generators, and crews of men and women gutting
interiors and fixing rooftops. The Ninth Ward’s pace of reconstruction has been slow,
but it appears to be on track. More and more lights can be seen flickering in win-
dows at night. Many families have returned and parked trailers in their yards.
Children roam the streets on bicycles, making occasional forays out to Claiborne
Avenue to the Family Dollar Store to buy candy and soda.
Once, New Orleans was named the “Crescent City” because it was literally
shaped like a slender moon, following a big bend in the Mississippi. Most of the
houses, businesses, churches, and schools were built on the high ground closest to
the riverbank. Then it waxed in size, filling in the low-lying areas east and west,
bounded only by Lake Pontchartrain above. The way things are going politically, it
looks as though New Orleans might once again become the Crescent City in shape
as well as name. Half of the city’s population may never be able to return. Many of
their homes, businesses, and places of worship might be leveled and turned into
parks or more expensive housing. Residents now refer to the wealthy parts of town
that compose the bright edge of this crescent as the “sliver by the river.” T o carry the
lunar metaphor even further, one can imagine the New Orleans that existed pre-
Katrina as a crescent moon, a crescent only because of its black core. The city’s black
majority has long been the core of its cultural and economic vitality. But this core is
unseen, like the shaded side of the real crescent moon. Politically speaking, many
DARWIN BOND GRAHAM24
pal-marable2-01-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:29 PM  Page 24


--- PAGE 42 ---
black and poor residents, returned or otherwise, believe that the city’s powerful want
to tear out this black core but keep its cultural products—music, food, language, his-
tory, and art. It will be the aesthetic sort of crescent moon, a crescent without a shaded
core; the convex portion will be punched out, and sitting on it, perched on the bot-
tom lip of the hook-shaped moon, will be the representation of that black-Creole,
selling the city, selling voodoo, sin, gumbo, and the blues to the world at large.
The politics of rebuilding New Orleans are incredibly complex, but not without
precedent. Major disasters throughout American history have more often than not
been followed by intense political jockeying among economic and political elites in
order to retain control of local and regional government or wrest it from one
another. Redevelopment schemes have always emphasized the various and compet-
ing spatial interests of different groups cut along lines of class, race, ethnicity, and
gender. Capital has often responded to widespread destruction in a Schumpeterian
fashion by taking advantage of the liquidation of finances, firms, and the physical
landscape to refashion whole new designs for locally based accumulation. Social
movements in the forms of place-based mobilizations, racial coalitions, and labor
organizations have arisen to meet the innumerable challenges facing different popu-
lations after disaster events.
Early on, the most powerful lobby in post-Katrina New Orleans was Mayor Ray
Nagin’s Bring New Orleans Back Commission (BNOB). Composed mostly of local
business elites (real-estate developers in particular) with a vested interest in growth-
machine politics,
17 the Commission also seated prominent artists, several black busi-
nessmen, and a few putative community leaders. Its vision for the future of New
Orleans promotes the city’s “culture” and music, improving government effective-
ness, and radically reshaping the urban landscape and overall footprint. Although the
BNOB Commission has disintegrated due to lack of funding or political stability, its
vision for New Orleans represents the thinking of city elites, real estate developers,
many powerful civic leaders, and large portions of the middle and upper classes (pre-
dominantly whites).
Early in 2006, several commission members publicly affirmed the right of all
neighborhoods to be rebuilt on several occasions, but the Commission made no
commitments to provide resources for residents to do the rebuilding. BNOB leader
Joseph Canizaro even happens to be the chairman of the Urban Land Institute, a
think tank that advised the city in Katrina’s wake that many neighborhoods like the
Ninth Ward should definitely not be rebuilt. Apparently, the Commission has not
held any recent public meetings or moved forward with any of its proposals. But this
does not necessarily mean that its vision is not being pushed forward by the new offi-
cial planning process or through the haphazard reconstruction efforts underway.
According to the Times-Picayune, as of July 2006, the city has only managed to
craft a “plan to create a plan to rebuild New Orleans.”
18 This latest official frame-
work for reconstruction, called the Unified New Orleans Neighborhood Plan, is
described as, “a single comprehensive land-use planning process, which will coordi-
nate the recovery of more than seventy distinct neighborhoods.”
19 So far so good,
but the plan appears short on substance, despite being funded to the sum of $4.5
million from the Rockefeller Foundation and Greater New Orleans Foundation. The
Louisiana Recovery Authority has decided to throw its weight behind this scheme,
THE NEW ORLEANS THAT RACE BUILT 25
pal-marable2-01-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:29 PM  Page 25


--- PAGE 43 ---
making it the current front-runner among planning schemes. Mayor Nagin and
other officials have said that any planning already conducted by third parties will be
incorporated into this master plan for the city, giving those neighborhoods that have
used private resources to rebuild a further lead in the chaotic process.
Initially the BNOB Commission proposed giving neighborhoods a window of
one year to rebuild, and that if at the end of that timeframe a community had failed
to show its “viability,” it would be demolished, entirely re-planned, and redeveloped.
As of July 2006 it is not clear whether this mandate is being upheld. Nagin was
forced to distance himself from this proposal after multiple communities voiced
their opposition to it. If this idea is adopted in some form or another, exactly who
will define progress, and what will be considered a neighborhood “comeback,” are
subjective determinations that remain to be seen. As of today, it appears that the
massive public outcry (coming from diverse quarters of the city) defeated this point
on the wish list of large-scale real estate capital.
As one walks through the streets of New Orleans, it’s hard to tell what the storm
wrought and what neglected conditions were already present. Much of the city had
already been slummed by racist real estate practices and the realities of poverty.
Current planning policies are heavily weighted toward those neighborhoods inhab-
ited by more affluent residents and those not hit as hard by the storm, where organ-
izing a community recovery effort will occur smoothly or will not be needed at all.
The BNOB Commission’s final report, released on January 11, 2006, spells out
the Commission’s ambitious plans in detail.
20 Its proposals are worth studying
because they represent a wish list for the city’s power elites and will carry weight
regardless of the fact that BNOB has been all but disbanded.
Their recommendations for rebuilding embrace many of the design philosophies
that can be found in new urbanism, a school of thought within the professions of
urban planning and architecture that emphasizes the aesthetics of city life (without
its harsh realities). T o rebuild the city’s neighborhoods, they state, reconstruction
must be “built on neighborhood history and culture; respectful of historic block pat-
terns, architecture, and landscape; mixed income communities with a diversity of
housing types; parks and open space connected to a city-wide system; city-wide
accessibility through transit; neighborhood centers that provide a high quality of
daily life.” It all sounds very appealing, but it’s premature to assume that the actual
reconstruction process will abide by these principles in any equitable shape or man-
ner. Statements such as this also tend to avoid issues of race or economic justice by
using language such as “culture,” “diversity” and “mixed-income” solutions.
The Commission’s report is laden with empty appeals to the disadvantaged along-
side benign-sounding code words for demolition and gentrification. Some are prob-
ably there only to appease the gods of ecological sustainability and justice—while
other recommendations actually mean what they say and will be carried out in the
fullest. The BNOB Commission’s plans, as well as the other efforts that will influ-
ence the Unified New Orleans Neighborhood Plan, must all be synthesized by city
authorities before they can unlock the funds currently held by the Louisiana
Recovery Authority.
Residents across the city responded with outrage and suspicion to the officials’ early
plans, especially Nagin’s comments about issuing a moratorium on building permits
DARWIN BOND GRAHAM26
pal-marable2-01-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:29 PM  Page 26


--- PAGE 44 ---
in sections of the city like the Ninth Ward. (Nagin later withdrew this idea and
allowed building to commence). One aspect of the BNOB Commission’s thinking
that may be incorporated into the final planning (explicitly or tacitly) is its identifica-
tion of four “opportunities for neighborhood rebuilding” based on location and the
extent of resulting damage from the hurricane and floods. “Immediate opportunity
areas” are those that sustained little or no damage and can be improved without fur-
ther debate. Their future is assured. Not surprisingly, these areas mostly cover the
Uptown, Garden District, French Quarter, Bywater along the Mississippi, and north-
ernmost portions of the Lakeview and Gentilly communities—affluent and predom-
inantly white neighborhoods. T rue to their label, residents in these neighborhoods
immediately began repairing their homes. Contractor vehicles can be spotted on every
street. Power tools are buzzing and hammers are pounding away at homes that suf-
fered mostly minor wind damage, fallen trees, or leaky roofs.
21 Planning in these zones
of the city is somewhat redundant because of the minor damage they sustained and
the overabundance of resources at the disposal of residents and other property owners.
The second major classification for neighborhoods is termed “infill development
areas.” The Commission recommends that these areas be consolidated under public
and private ownership, that development plans be drafted, and proposals solicited
from demolition and construction firms. The areas in question would probably be
consolidated under the auspices of some sort of redevelopment agency. (The BNOB
Commission proposed the creation of a Crescent City Redevelopment Corporation
[CCRC], which would sell land back to private developers). Again, not surprisingly,
neighborhoods deemed “infill development areas” are predominantly black and poor
sections of the city. They include large swaths of the Ninth Ward, Bywater, Gentilly,
Mid-City, T remé and Central City, and the McDonogh, Whitney, and Fischer
neighborhoods across the river in the Algiers district. Under the Unified New
Orleans Neighborhood Plan, the mechanism by which large tracts of land are seized
and redeveloped by real estate capitalists is likely to take a different form, but some
means of consolidating properties is in the works.
The BNOB Commission was also asked to look ahead and create an overall
vision for the kind of city they’d like to see. Among the more novel proposals is one
to build a network of high-speed light rail commuter lines linking New Orleans with
its suburbs—Jefferson, St. Bernard, St. Tammany Parish, and the Slidell region.
Most critical studies of rapid transit around the nation have concluded that the ben-
efits of such a system will primarily go to those on the ends of the lines—the subur-
ban bedroom communities and the central business district. Those in the middle,
the neighborhoods the rail lines will cut through, will see very little utility in such a
system.
22 The benefits to the real estate lobby and large employers concentrated in
the downtown area could be immense, as parcel values for office and retail develop-
ments would likely multiply in value, and a light rail system would guarantee a
white-collar professional suburban workforce. Whether neighborhoods like the
Ninth Ward or the T remé live to see this future is an open question. Whether these
neighborhoods will retain the communities—the residents, families, and local busi-
nesses that give them their culture and traditions—is even more uncertain.
The plans for the regional rail system gives some insight into the larger goals and
vision of the interests originally behind the BNOB Commission and now at work in
THE NEW ORLEANS THAT RACE BUILT 27
pal-marable2-01-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:29 PM  Page 27


--- PAGE 45 ---
other organizations and agencies or behind the scenes as private actors to influence
the Unified New Orleans Neighborhood Plan. The New Orleans they envision is a
global city, surrounded by an affluent suburban professional workforce. The central
business district will be the center of the region. Its office towers will fill every morn-
ing with professionals and white-collar workers from outlying areas. It will be an
information economy instead of what New Orleans has been, a working class city
with a large population of supernumeraries (the structurally unemployed). Much of
the city will become parkland. The metropolitan region’s population will shrink by
half. Families will also move back into the central city districts. On top of what
remains, redevelopment will create neighborhoods in the architectural style of the
past. It will attempt to recapture the sense of community lost in the past half cen-
tury by deindustrialization and suburbanization. Condos will fill in the old ware-
houses, the racially cleansed housing projects like Lafitte, and the new towers built
upon old barren blocks. T ownhouses will parallel city streets just beyond the down-
town. The streets will be sanitized for the newcomers. In some respects, census data
confirms that New Orleans had already begun to move in this direction.
This vision for New Orleans is motivated in part by a desire among exurbanites to
return to the city and rediscover its magic. New Orleans, like many cities, is being
seen as an appealing place to live. But sadly, it’s a desire that will be fulfilled only in
the displacement of those who currently reside in central cities, those who were aban-
doned in T remé and the Ninth Ward decades ago. In New Orleans it’s a return that
will be made possible by exploiting a disaster. In other cities it’s simply called gentri-
fication. But in post-Katrina New Orleans, it will be called “logical,” the “return of
nature,” “opportunity,” and “market forces.” Or, in the now-infamous words of U.S.
Representative Richard Baker, God did it.
23
The disaster that hit New Orleans in the form of a hurricane and flood wasn’t a
freak event. It wasn’t a break with the normal as much as it was a punctuated moment
of continuity in the longue durée of this city. Katrina is business as usual, packed into
an exclamation point. The eradication of poorer neighborhoods like the Ninth Ward
has long been the dream of many of New Orleans’s more affluent and privileged.
One of the primary ways racism and socio-economic exploitation works is along
spatial lines. Racialized and poor populations are related to by the dominant society
most concretely in terms of geographical proximity. The different regimes that sub-
jugate poor and nonwhite communities must calibrate a proper spatial distribution
of populations. Post-Katrina New Orleans appears to be unfolding toward a new
type of spatial ordering unlike anything New Orleans has known in the past. There
are like-minded people in every American city who just want the ghettos or the
“wrong side of the tracks” to disappear, and they don’t care how or where they go, as
long as it’s somewhere else. It’s what helped create the conditions for this latest dis-
aster in New Orleans. But other complex factors (economic, cultural, and happen-
stance) push and pull on the demographic order.
This peculiar American creed of racism and cruel indifference toward the poor
characterizes much of our urban history. It was there when plantations spread along
the banks of the Mississippi and slashed into the delta swamps. It didn’t end with the
Civil War or the civil rights movement. It raged in 1866 when ex-Confederates and
police officers massacred black and white radical Republicans at their New Orleans
DARWIN BOND GRAHAM28
pal-marable2-01-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:29 PM  Page 28


--- PAGE 46 ---
convention (which was also fundamentally a struggle over who would rebuild New
Orleans and how it would be rebuilt following a civic disaster of another sort). It was
there when public housing went awry and when the I-10 highway destroyed the
Claiborne neutral grounds. It was there when white parents pulled their kids out of
integrating schools and fled to St. Bernard and Jefferson Parishes. What floats to the
top now in this time of uncertainty and indecision is a desire that many have for a
new New Orleans. Leaving the city a half-century ago was a privilege made possible
largely along lines of race. But leaving the city took its toll on the spirits of many.
The desire for an urban way of life always remained in the hearts of some suburban-
ites. That sort of magical urban place was calling. Coming back to the city after
Katrina is the new privilege. The Bring New Orleans Back Commission articulated
the first statement of this vision. As the process progresses and takes a new form, we
still find that there is little or no room in this vision for the Ninth Ward and neigh-
borhoods like it. There is certainly no room for public housing like the St. Bernard
projects. The Department of Housing and Urban Development has now called for
its demolition along with the Lafitte, C. J. Peete, and B. W . Cooper Homes.
24
After a jazz benefit concert for the reconstruction of New Orleans, poet Amiri
Baraka explained, “What Bush wants is to make New Orleans like his mother—
shriveled and colorless.”
25 Whether or not Bush wants this, the city has certainly
shrunk in numbers. Without a serious federal commitment, far beyond what has
been allocated to date, and without strident activism at all levels to ensure that fed-
eral funds and policies are administered fairly, any effort to rebuild the city will end
in an outcome that can only be characterized as racial cleansing and the eradication
of the poor. (We are already seeing this in the year since, but we are also seeing
diverse social movement activity.) This is the other side to the politics of rebuilding
New Orleans. It’s the grassroots response. It’s agitating, organizing, rallying, docu-
menting, building, cleaning, and speaking out. For every speech that Nagin gives,
for every new official planning scheme announced, there are a thousand volunteer
work crews helping to revive shell-shocked neighborhoods. For every visit Bush
makes to the Gulf Coast, there are thousands of college students, activists, former
residents, and citizens making the trip to the Big Easy to provide assistance to indige-
nously led groups like Common Ground, the People’s Hurricane Relief Fund, C3,
United Front for Affordable Housing, Survivor’s Village, and others.
Back on Desire Street in the Ninth Ward, Jackie’s house stands empty. It’s July, the
midst of a new hurricane season. The house’s insides are completely gutted. If she can
muster up the money to install new drywall and carpeting, fix the holes in the roof,
and to buy the bare necessities of life like a bed and kitchenware, she could move
back in before long. If she does, she might be alone. However, judging from the activ-
ity on her street in the past few months she’ll probably be moving back in alongside
some neighbors. Every day, more and more residents are coming home. Many are still
just stopping by to survey the scene, but quite a few are breaking out their tools and
putting good, old-fashioned sweat equity back into their humble houses. Whether or
not they can make enough of a difference and help to rekindle the shattered social
bonds and a sense of community is uncertain, but the future relies upon them, not
on some city official who measures and deems a “viable comeback” or on some city-
or state-sanctioned planner who imposes wonderful new plans upon them.
26 The
THE NEW ORLEANS THAT RACE BUILT 29
pal-marable2-01-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:29 PM  Page 29


--- PAGE 47 ---
point here, if you ask many people, is to rebuild the community so that it can resist
the inevitable attempts that the powerful will make to destroy it, attempts that always
seem to be made when a “natural” disaster provides an alibi.
N
OTES
1. William S. Falk, Rooted in Place: Family and Belonging in a Southern Black Community
(New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 2004).
2. Social scientists have been reconsidering the dynamics of racial succession in neighbor-
hoods, noting that ecological approaches that focus entirely on spatial variables like the
number of black residents on a block, the particular patterns of black residence in rela-
tion to whites, and so forth are inadequate to explain how it is that certain neighbor-
hoods become all white or non-white (for instance, see Kevin Fox Gotham, “Beyond
Invasion and Succession: School Segregation, Real Estate Blockbusting, and the
Political Economy of Neighborhood Racial T ransition,” City & Community, 2002 1,
no. 1 [March 2002]: 83–111). Nevertheless, the decline of black neighborhoods like
the Ninth Ward are due to structural racism in American society, no matter how com-
plex it is.
3. Douglass Brinkley, The Great Deluge: Hurricane Katrina, New Orleans, and the
Mississippi Gulf Coast (New York: Harper Collins, 2006) 45.
4. Additionally, the perceived legitimacy—however shaky—of the welfare state during
this era (and up until at least the 1980s) meant that social investments and social con-
sumption protecting places like the Ninth Ward from catastrophic flooding were
uncontroversial and ensured. The levees were funded, and so were welfare programs for
the growing population of dislocated workers (supernumeraries) pushed out of work
by rapidly transforming monopoly sector industries, most of whom were black
Americans who lived in places like the Ninth. See James O’Connor’s Fiscal Crisis of the
State (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1973), for a detailed theoretical treatment of how
this political-economy that sustained social investment/consumption in levees, city
services, and welfare (broadly defined) is inevitably outpaced by a fiscal crisis that leads
to cutbacks, the sort of which weakened New Orleans infrastructure and put much of
its population in a position of critical vulnerability.
5. For a more historical treatment of environmental racism in New Orleans (particularly
the segregation of poor blacks into the “bottom of the bowl” and the back swamps),
see Craig E. Colten, An Unnatural Metropolis: Wresting New Orleans from Nature
(Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 2005); also, Peirce F . Lewis, New
Orleans: The Making of An Urban Landscape (Cambridge: Ballinger, 1976).
6. Quoted in David Remnick, “High Water: How Presidents and Citizens React to
Disaster,” The New Yorker, October 3, 2005.
7. Ruby Bridges, Through My Eyes: Articles and Interviews Compiled and Edited by Margo
Lundell (New York: Scholastic Press, 1999).
8. Morton Inger, Politics and Reality in an American City; The New Orleans School Crisis
of 1960 (New York: Center for Urban Education, 1969).
9. As of July 2006, many of the public schools in New Orleans remain closed. In their
place have sprouted up dozens of charter schools. Prior to Katrina, the New Orleans
public school system resembled many other inner-city districts; it was chronically
under-funded and highly segregated. Bill Quigly, lawyer and professor at Loyola
University of New Orleans, says, “Public education in New Orleans is mostly demol-
ished and what remains is being privatized. The city is now the nation’s laboratory for
DARWIN BOND GRAHAM30
pal-marable2-01-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:29 PM  Page 30


--- PAGE 48 ---
charter schools—publicly funded schools run by private bodies. Before Katrina the
local elected school board had control over 115 schools—they now control four. The
majority of the remaining schools are now charters. The metro area public schools will
get $213 million less next school year in state money because tens of thousands of pub-
lic school students were displaced last year.” Bill Quigly, “T en Months After Katrina:
Gutting New Orleans,” Dissident Voice, July 1, 2006, http://www.dissidentvoice.org.
10. G. Leighton Ciravolo, The Legacy of John McDonogh (Lafayette: Center for Louisiana
Studies, 2002).
11. Peirce F . Lewis, New Orleans: The Making of An Urban Landscape (Cambridge:
Ballinger, 1976).
12. Howard Winant, The New Politics of Race: Globalism, Difference, Justice (Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, 2004.
13. U.S. Census, http://www.census.gov.
14. Thomas Ingersoll describes New Orleans as an urban core surrounded by rural plan-
tations, a situation of such proximity and almost conflicting roles that the city became
a microcosm of America as a whole, torn between rural and urban life, slavery and
wage labor, and the industrialism of the factory and the plantation. Thomas N.
Ingersoll, Mammon and Manon in Early New Orleans: The First Slave Society in the
Deep South 1718–1819 (Knoxville: University of T ennessee Press, 1999).
15. The “bottom of the bowl” refers to some of the lowest lying grounds in the city—lit-
erally in the center of New Orleans, far below sea level.
16. Note that I am not arguing that Katrina was a greater disaster because of the storm’s
characteristics. Rather, Katrina was a greater disaster in the sense that the disaster was
the sum of several parts, both natural (the storm) and social (the political system, eco-
nomic structure, race relations, poverty rate, condition of infrastructure, et cetera).
17. John Logan and Harvey Molotch, Urban Fortunes: The Political Economy of Place
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1987).
18. “Nagin Sets Guidelines to Plan Rebuilding,” New Orleans Times-Picayune, July 5,
2006, http://www.nola.com/newslogs/breaking/index.ssf?/mtlogs/nola_localbreaking
news/archives/2006_07_05.html.
19. Susan Saulny, “New Orleans Sets a Way to Plan Its Rebuilding.” The New York Times,
July 6, 2006.
20. Wallace Roberts & T odd, LLC, “Action Plan for New Orleans: The New American City,”
Bring New Orleans Back Commission, Urban Planning Committee, January 11, 2006.
21. As I write this piece I sit on the porch of a double-shotgun home in the Faubourg-
Marigny neighborhood. I moved in a week ago. According to my neighbor, who is a
longtime resident, the flood waters only covered the street by a few inches. The worst
damage in this section of the city was to walls and roofs from the wind.
22. See Joseph A. Rodriguez, “Rapid T ransit and Community Power: West Oakland
Residents Confront BART ,” Antipode 31, no. 2 (1999). Rodriguez summarizes some
of the literature critical of BART’s claims that it would benefit low-income communi-
ties along its lines and also describes the black community’s political opposition to var-
ious aspects of the BART project, including its overall purpose, impact on black
business districts, and union racism that locked nonwhites out of from high-paying
construction and operation jobs.
23. Baker’s words, first reported by the Wall Street Journal were, “We finally cleaned up
public housing in New Orleans. We couldn’t do it, but God did” (“Washington Wire,”
Wall Street Journal, September 9, 2005).
24. Filosa, Gwen. “HUD Demolition Plan Protested: Residents Say They’re Being Shut
Out of City.” New Orleans Times-Picayune, June 16, 2006.
THE NEW ORLEANS THAT RACE BUILT 31
pal-marable2-01-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:29 PM  Page 31


--- PAGE 49 ---
25. Larry Blumenfeld, “America’s New Jazz Museum! (No Poor Black People Allowed),”
Salon, July 7, 2006, http://dir.salon.com/story/ent/feature/2005/10/12/jazz/index.html.
26. However, one planning/architectural firm working on the Ninth Ward through the
New Orleans Neighborhood Rebuilding Plan is Stull and Lee, an African American
firm with experience in designing racially conscious architecture that is sensitive to
poverty and economic development in places like West Palm Beach, Florida, for
instance. The official planning process may not be all that bad for the Ninth Ward
after all. See Stull and Lee Inc., “A Community Vision for the Future of the Lower
Ninth Ward: Presentation of Initial Sketch Plan Alternatives,” June 17, 2006,
http://www.nolanrp.com (accessed July 6, 2006).
DARWIN BOND GRAHAM32
pal-marable2-01-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:29 PM  Page 32


--- PAGE 50 ---
Chapter 3
RACE-ING THE POST-KATRINA
POLITICAL LANDSCAPE: 
AN ANALYSIS OF THE 2006
NEW ORLEANS ELECTION
KRISTEN CLARKE
INTRODUCTION
The elections that were conducted in New Orleans in the spring of 2006 were his-
toric in a number of regards. These elections were the first conducted following a
major natural disaster and with significant numbers of residents displaced from the
city. In many respects, these elections tested our nation’s commitment to ensuring
broad levels of equal and open participation in the political process while raising pro-
found questions regarding the impact of delayed elections on the democratic con-
science. Ultimately, these elections will figure significantly into the rebuilding and
reconstruction process that is now unfolding. This essay will describe the positive
and negative aspects of the elections while analyzing their larger relevance to black
political power in the Gulf.
P
REELECTION STRUGGLE
There was no shortage of controversy surrounding the spring 2006 elections in New
Orleans. In the weeks and days leading up to the elections, many black leaders called
for a delay to give people enough time to get back to the city to cast their ballots.
1
Others called for satellite voting—the establishment of strategically placed centers
around the country that would have allowed displaced voters to cast their ballots
from their temporary places of residence. Given the displacement patterns that
pal-marable2-01-3.qxp  10/21/2007  1:31 PM  Page 33


--- PAGE 51 ---
emerged following Katrina, the placement of satellite voting centers in cities such as
Houston, Atlanta, Memphis, Jackson, and Dallas would certainly have helped make
participation easier for significant numbers of displaced voters. Although a federal
judge was unwilling to order it,
2 the body that could have crafted and implemented
legislation authorizing the satellite voting centers was the Louisiana State Legislature.
Ultimately, the legislature voted against this ambitious undertaking, arguing in part
that they lacked the ability to establish secure computer databases out of state and that
they were uncertain that officials in the respective jurisdictions would comply with
their mandate.
3 Instead, legislation was passed that allowed for limited satellite voting
in ten parishes around the state: Caddo, Ouachita, Rapides, Calcasieu, Lafayette, East
Baton Rouge, St. Tammany, Tangipahoa, Jefferson, and Orleans.
4 These centers,
based at the registrar’s offices in each of the ten parishes, helped make voting easier
for the large numbers of African American voters who remained displaced in-state.
Despite the problems and challenges with these elections, there are some notable
and appreciable aspects to the process. For one thing, these elections were conducted
despite significant damage to the city’s infrastructure. Numerous polling locations
were destroyed or damaged beyond repair.
5 The identification of alternative locations
that would provide voters the opportunity to cast ballots was likely not an easy feat.
In addition, many poll workers needed to be recruited and trained in order to ensure
that there were sufficient numbers of personnel working the polls during the elec-
tions. Notice of all changes regarding the elections needed to publicized to voters who
were now dispersed throughout the country—a task that must have been particularly
difficult given the fact that many displaced voters were in a constant state of flux.
This reality was further complicated by the unwillingness of the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) to share updated address lists on the grounds that it
would breach privacy restrictions. Although these tasks were accomplished under dif-
ficult circumstances, providing more time would have benefited voters.
T
HE LACK OF POLITICAL WILL TO ENSURE BROAD
PARTICIPATION IN THE NEW ORLEANS ELECTION
In many respects, the recent elections in New Orleans will serve as a guidepost for
future elections conducted under emergency circumstances. With the specter of
intensifying international conflict lying on the country’s shoulders and a world that
is increasingly vulnerable to natural disaster, Hurricane Katrina will certainly not be
the last tragedy to befall the country. The elections illustrates how much of a delay
in the election schedule the public is willing to tolerate and reveals how aggressive
officials are willing to be to ensure that displaced voters are able to cast their ballots.
In general, it appears that the public will not tolerate a long delay in elections, in
part because disasters embroil human emotions and spark political debate. Indeed,
in the days following Katrina, blame was levied on local, state, and federal officials
of all stripes, and there were immediate calls for the removal of FEMA Director
Michael Brown, Governor Kathleen Blanco, and Mayor Ray Nagin at various
points.
6 It is difficult to suspend elections under these circumstances because emo-
tions are running incredibly high and the public is eager to have some say about the
KRISTEN CLARKE34
pal-marable2-01-3.qxp  10/21/2007  1:31 PM  Page 34


--- PAGE 52 ---
type of leadership they want to help them get through the difficult period that
inevitably lies ahead. Indeed, at least two lawsuits were filed by those seeking to expe-
dite the elections. However, these elections also show that elected officials are unwill-
ing to take aggressive steps to facilitate voting under these circumstances, perhaps
because the scope of the tragedy did not reach far enough and officials have a hard
time grasping the severity of the situation. The failure of the state to do more
explains why many displaced African American voters may have wanted to partici-
pate in these elections but were unable to.
Certainly, there are a number of other steps that could have been taken to make
it easier for displaced voters to participate in what were arguably the most important
elections in the city’s storied history.
7 The out-of-state satellite voting centers are cer-
tainly one such measure that would have allowed those who had been unable to find
a way back into the city to cast their ballot from their temporary domicile. Taking
this concept one step further, an extensive period of early voting could have been
made available at registrars’ offices around the country, giving displaced voters a wide
window of time during which to cast their ballots. Preaddressed, prestamped ballots
could have been made available at post offices around the country with a verification
process established at the Orleans Parish Registrar’s Office for all ballots returned by
mail. Problems with mailing lists aside, ballots could have been automatically mailed
to all displaced voters, thus eliminating the requirement that voters first request their
ballots and wait for their arrival. Finally, election officials could have conducted
extensive voter outreach by negotiating with FEMA officials to make ballots avail-
able at FEMA Centers and during well-attended public meeting held around the
country to educate displaced voters about the receipt of social services and benefits.
S
HIFTING ALLEGIANCES AND OVERCOMING OBSTACLES
In 2002, Ray Nagin ran a campaign that clearly appealed to white voters and busi-
ness interests in New Orleans. He received marginal support from the black com-
munity (approximately 45 percent), with the majority of African American voters
supporting his opponent, former New Orleans Police Chief Richard Pennington.
Nagin’s lowest levels of support were in black enclaves of the city such as the Ninth
Ward. However, white voters turned out to the polls in exceptionally high numbers,
helping ultimately tip the scales in Nagin’s favor. During his time in office preced-
ing Hurricanes Katrina and Rita, Nagin did not enjoy a great reputation among the
city’s black community. He continued to be regarded a mayor on behalf of white and
monied interests in the city. However, the tide shifted in Nagin’s favor in the months
following Katrina when it appeared that he was the only viable African American
candidate to throw his hat in the ring for the mayoral race. Early polls suggested that
among the large pool of candidates, Nagin, Louisiana Lieutenant Governor Mitch
Landrieu, and Ron Foreman were the frontrunners.
Analysts suggested that Landrieu was the more moderate and progressive of the
three candidates; he was running on a platform that would have likely brought a
more immediate impact on poor New Orleanians and increased the likelihood that
poor, black voters might be able to make a speedy return to the city. Nagin’s victory,
RACE-ING THE POST-KATRINA POLITICAL LANDSCAPE 35
pal-marable2-01-3.qxp  10/21/2007  1:31 PM  Page 35


--- PAGE 53 ---
however, meant that an African American continued to hold the most powerful posi-
tion in the city and reduced fears among many displaced black residents that the city
would be rebuilt to their exclusion. Although Nagin came under sharp criticism for
his now-infamous “Chocolate City” comment, some black voters interpreted this as
a firm, if perhaps belated, promise on his part to maintain the racial status quo.
8
Nagin’s victory in the most recent election reflects the fact that race continues to
play a significant role in the political conscience of the Deep South—a reality that
has not been altered by the hurricanes. African American voters in New Orleans are
deeply concerned about holding on to their political gains and fear that the hurri-
canes may upset a delicately forged power balance in the city. Many black voters,
particularly in the Ninth Ward, cast aside their profound disdain for Nagin out of a
desire to keep the city’s twenty-eight–year-old black mayoral legacy intact.
9 Likewise,
white voters have seen the mass destruction of the city as an opportunity to rebuild
a “new” New Orleans. Indeed, some white voters, the vast majority of whom are
middle or upper class, have expressed a desire to see major reform to the social fab-
ric of the city—a sentiment that some interpret as a desire for exclusion of the black
poor.
10 White voters saw these elections as a unique opportunity to put a new face
on the city, while black voters feared what that face might look like. 11 With these
heightened stakes as a backdrop and despite the obstacles that displaced voters face,
many endured long bus rides back to the city, found their way to one of the in-state
satellite voting centers or cast absentee ballots in order to ensure that their voices
would be heard. Although a sizeable number were not able to overcome the obsta-
cles, the political will exercised by many African Americans evidences a real commit-
ment to not only rebuild their homes but to maintain the long sought political gains
that existed pre-Katrina. In this sense, Katrina presents interesting prospects for
heightened black civic participation as communities throughout the Gulf are forced
to confront the glaring specter of continued racism and assess the power balance that
exists within their respective communities.
N
OTES
1. “Protesters Call for New Orleans Election Delay: Jackson, Sharpton among Critics
Claiming Vote Not Fair to Evacuees,” Associated Press, April 1, 2006.
2. See Wallace v. Blanco —litigation brought by the NAACP Legal Defense and
Educational Fund in the Eastern District of Louisiana seeking remedial relief to help
ease the burdens on displaced voters.
3. “Bill fails to Change Rules for New Orleans Election,” Associated Press, April 2006.
4. Charles Lussier, “New Orleans Election Off to a Slow Start,” Baton Rouge Advocate ,
April 11, 2006, http://naacpldf.org/. . ./epp_katrina/Early_Voting_and_Satellite_
Locations.pdf.
5. “Committee OKs New Orleans Election Plan,” Associated Press, January 23, 2006.
6. Elizabeth Bumiller, “Casualty of Firestorm: Outrage, Bush and FEMA Chief,” The
New York Times, September 10, 2005; Brown Puts Blame on Louisiana Officials,”
CNN.com, September 28, 2005, http://www.cnn.com/2005/POLITICS/09/27/katrina
.brown/index.html.
7. Kristen Clarke-Avery and M. David Gelfand, “Voting Rights Challenges in a Post-
Katrina World: With Constituents Dispersed, and Voting Districts Underpopulated,
KRISTEN CLARKE36
pal-marable2-01-3.qxp  10/21/2007  1:31 PM  Page 36


--- PAGE 54 ---
How Should New Orleans Hold Elections?” findlaw, October 11, 2005, http://writ
.news.findlaw.com/commentary/20051011_gelfand.html.
8. John Pope, “Evoking King, Nagin Calls New Orleans Chocolate City: Speech Addresses
Fear of Losing Black Culture,” New Orleans Times Picayune, January 17, 2006.
9. John Pope, “Black Precincts Buttress Nagin Victory,” New Orleans Times-Picayune,
April 24, 2006.
10. Michael Eric Dyson, Come Hell or High Water: Hurricane Katrina and the Color of
Disaster (New York: Perseus Books, 2006), 204–205.
11. Manning Marable, “New Orleans Reconsidered: Race or Class,” Along the Color Line,
January 2006; Ceci Connolly, “Ninth Ward: History Yes, But a Future? Race and Class
Frame Debate on Rebuilding New Orleans District,” Washington Post, October 3, 2005.
RACE-ING THE POST-KATRINA POLITICAL LANDSCAPE 37
pal-marable2-01-3.qxp  10/21/2007  1:31 PM  Page 37


--- PAGE 55 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 56 ---
Chapter 4
PROPERTY AND SECURITY,
POLITICAL CHAMELEONS, 
AND DYSFUNCTIONAL REGIME:
A NEW ORLEANS STORY
D. OSEI ROBERTSON
INTRODUCTION
We from a town where
everybody drowned
...
Everybody crying,
...
There’s no doubt in my mind it was George Bush
.
—New Orleans Hip Hop Artist Lil’ Wayne1
On August 29, 2005, a series of events were put into motion that would change my
life forever. The week before, I had been watching the news, observing a massive hur-
ricane named Katrina move toward the Gulf of Mexico. This was an annual ritual,
however. New Orleans and many other communities along the Gulf Coast deal with
hurricane season every year. My main concern was for my family; they needed to
leave. So I called my mother and father and urged them both to leave, which they
did by August 27. Up to this point things were pretty much protocol; this was not
the first time they had fled their homes as a precautionary measure. I thought I knew
pal-marable2-01-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:33 PM  Page 39


--- PAGE 57 ---
the drill—they would leave for a few days, there would be some minor flooding and
roof damage, and the power would probably be out several days. On August 29 this
annual routine turned into a nightmare. When the initial reports came in, it
appeared that New Orleans had dodged a bullet. Small flooding and power outages
constituted the preliminary reports. At approximately 1:00 a.m. on August 30, I
logged onto a radio feed from a local CBS affiliate. Mayor Nagin was reporting that
80 percent of the city was experiencing major flooding, with up to ten feet in some
areas. This couldn’t be happening. I called my father right away, and told him the
news. I was afraid to call my mother, I was afraid to tell her what had probably hap-
pened to her house. By daybreak all news agencies were beginning to report the
depths of the disaster. This was not the usual drill, and people would not be return-
ing in a few days. Three major levees had been breached—the 17th Street canal, the
London Avenue canal, and the Industrial canal. The place where I was born and
raised was under water.
As a native of the city, I found it very interesting to observe news analysts, schol-
ars, and politicians making various assessments of the outcomes associated with
Katrina. Some writers wish to highlight the impact of racism, while others focus on
class-based discrimination.
2 Although these dynamics are important parts of the
story, many accounts fail to capture some of the deeper challenges that confront the
city. New Orleans has been a dying city for the past fifteen to twenty years. T o grasp
the uphill battle that we face, it is essential to understand the political and eco-
nomic context in the city before Katrina and how these factors will affect future
rebuilding plans.
Before beginning this analysis, however, I must first admit to bending a number
of (traditional) social science rules. The usual stance of objectivity is one that I can-
not claim. My vantage point is far from clear, clouded by reflections of my home. No
matter where you lay your head, home is home—that place where your formulative
experiences reside. Thus, because this event has affected my family and me, I must
acknowledge that I am far from a distant observer. The role I occupy in this analysis
is more like that of a participant observer selectively referencing “hidden transcripts.”
3
In light of this position, I occasionally employ narrative and cultural devices in the
analysis in an effort to tie the personal to the general electoral and political-economic
dynamics this chapter explores. In addition to experiences and observations drawn
from family and friends, I draw on traditional political-economic sources that include
public opinion data, socio-economic statistics, and local periodicals.
This is a study of New Orleans before and after Katrina. It begins with an exam-
ination of the electoral and attitudinal patterns in the city over the past couple of
decades. This section concentrates on the mayoral office and African American occu-
pancy of City Hall since the administration of Ernest “Dutch” Morial, with partic-
ular attention on Mayor Nagin’s first electoral campaign. The next section continues
this theme by examining the transformation and shift Nagin made in his bid for
reelection following the hurricane. Following an analysis of mayoral politics, the sec-
ond section explores the city’s political-economic policies and performance since the
1980s. New Orleans was a struggling city prior to Katrina, and this section details
some of the root causes of the city’s political and economic woes. In the final section,
I offer some conclusions regarding the city’s future.
D. OSEI ROBERTSON40
pal-marable2-01-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:33 PM  Page 40


--- PAGE 58 ---
NEW ORLEANS: AN OVERVIEW
T o accurately analyze the challenges the city of New Orleans faces in the future, it is
important to be clear about its political, economic, and cultural history. Culturally
speaking, New Orleans is unique; it is one of the most fascinating places in the coun-
try. The historical blend of Spanish, French, African, and Native American cultures
has created a city rich in musical, artistic, and spiritual traditions. It was New Orleans
that both gave birth to jazz and vanguarded its resurgence in the early 1980s. The
New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival, the Bayou Classic, the Essence Festival, and
Mardi Gras are all national events. Layered underneath the public view of such events
as Mardi Gras are traces of very old racial patterns. For example, few outsiders recog-
nize that there are two different Mardi Gras events that take place on Fat T uesday.
Whites historically have gathered on St. Charles Avenue and Canal Street, while
blacks historically have gathered at the intersection of Orleans and Claiborne
Avenues, where the Zulu parade ends. Additionally, the Mardi Gras Indians function
as a living tribute to the associations between slaves and Native Americans.
Politically, New Orleans has had African American mayors since the late 1970s.
Following the enactment of the 1965 Voting Rights Act, several American cities wit-
nessed a large surge in the number of African American voters, which increased the
electoral strength of blacks. By the mid-1970s, it was not a question of whether an
African American would be mayor, but when. Ernest “Dutch” Morial would follow
an electoral path to City Hall comparable to that of Atlanta’s Maynard Jackson.
Neither candidate was selected to run for office by the establishment. In New
Orleans, Sidney Barthelemy was gradually being groomed by insiders for the seat,
while Morial ran for election without strong ties to former mayor Moon Landrieu
and his associates. Morial was from the Seventh Ward, the historical center of the
Creole community in New Orleans, a community that exemplified what historian
Arnold Hirsch has labeled “creole radicalism.”
4 Though race has always been a part
of American politics, in certain areas of the country there has historically been a
deeper intra-group tension focused on complexion. Beyond aesthetic considerations,
the main concern here is the general belief that Creoles (the earliest free blacks of
mixed genealogy drawing from French, Spanish, and Native American peoples) were
granted access to society’s institutions prior to darker blacks. Although the influence
of the traditional Creole community has waned in recent decades, traces of these
intra-group patterns still linger today.
FLIPPING CHANNELS
In this day and age of cable and satellite TV , we often flip though channels, searching
for our favorite movies, shows, news, or sporting events. Out of two hundred chan-
nels, for example, we may only regularly look at thirty or fewer channels, skipping
several channels in search of our favorites. On the local level, many cable providers
have public access channels that feature local activists, entertainers, and news. In the
nineties, the local cable provider in New Orleans (Cox Communications) had a reg-
ular information program where managers and executives would update the viewing
PROPERTY AND SECURITY, POLITICAL CHAMELEONS, AND DYSFUNCTIONAL REGIME 41
pal-marable2-01-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:33 PM  Page 41


--- PAGE 59 ---
audience on various service issues as they related to Cox. It goes without saying that
this was a flip-through channel: you passed it when looking for something else to
watch. I recall asking a friend to tell me who was running for mayor in 2002, and
he mentioned a few names. The only ones I recognized were career politicians
Paulette Irons (a local state senator), T roy Carter (a city councilman), Jim Singleton
(City Council Chair), and Richard Pennington (then-Chief of Police). But when my
friend mentioned another name, Ray Nagin, my response was, “Who is that?”
He said, “You know, the guy from Cox, the one always on their public access
channel.”
Like the city itself, politics in New Orleans has long followed a traditional path
in that there are relatively few unknowns operating in the political landscape.
Following “Dutch” Morial, mayors in the city were either longtime politicians or had
links to political families. Some people felt that Sidney Barthelemy, because of his
associations with the Landrieu administration, would be the city’s first African
American mayor, so his election following “Dutch” was of little surprise. Marc
Morial was the son of Dutch, and it was merely a matter of time before he ran for
office. So when a businessman who was a political outsider announced his candi-
dacy, I thought he had little or no chance. Little did I know that he would become
a central figure in one of the most traumatic and challenging times that the city has
ever faced.
Many scholars of black politics distinguish between the first wave of BEOs
(Black Elected Officials) that came to office in the late 1960s and early 1970s and
a new crop of BEOs who began winning office in the late 1980s and early 1990s.
The early BEOs, such as Carl Stokes, Kennith Gibson, and Maynard Jackson,
gained political office through explicit appeals to their black voting base. “Most
early black mayors,” Persons contends, “explicitly articulated a social reform agenda
in their campaigns emphasizing issues of police brutality, the hiring of blacks in
municipal jobs, increasing low-income housing choices,” and other areas associated
with working-class and lower-class blacks.
5 These city leaders were, in theory, carry-
ing on the struggles of the civil rights movement within the institutional confines
of local governance. None of these mayors were radicals or called for massive redis-
tribution efforts while in office, but they at least gave the impression that they were
concerned with the collective good of African Americans. Regarding this tradition,
Walters asserts, “The essence of the problem is that the aggressive legacy of the civil
rights movement contains the inherent notion of confrontation and pressure as a
methodology for forcing major American institutions to legitimize black demands
for justice.”
6 This characterization of the first wave of BEOs has been contrasted
with groups of candidates emerging in the late 1980s who neither in substance nor
style seem to reflect the same concerns of those earlier elected officials. In many
cases these women or men are seeking to “normalize black politics or to subordinate
black demands to the normal workings of the political process and, thereby, delude
it of its urgency and oppositional character.”
7 In response to this growing trend,
some scholars have attempted to conceptualize this process under the analytical
heading of deracialization. Deracialization is a concept that analysts have advanced
to account for the ways in which race has been downplayed by African Americans
running for office in recent years. Specifically, it refers to the process whereby black
D. OSEI ROBERTSON42
pal-marable2-01-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:33 PM  Page 42


--- PAGE 60 ---
candidates campaign without overtly emphasizing race or making direct appeals to
issues that are associated with African Americans in an effort to draw white support.
McCormick and Jones are among a group of scholars who have sought to fully artic-
ulate this concept. They define deracialization as a electoral strategy as “conducting
a campaign in a stylistic fashion that defuses the polarizing effects of race by avoid-
ing explicit reference to race-specific issues, while at the same time emphasizing
those issues that are perceived as racially transcendent, thus mobilizing a broad seg-
ment of the electorate for purposes of capturing or maintaining public office.”
8
In addition to this general concept, the authors suggest that deracialized cam-
paigns may be divided into three parts: political style, mobilization, and issues.
Political style refers to the manner in which candidates project themselves in a cam-
paign, particularly in terms of presenting a nonthreatening or safe image to poten-
tial voters. The confrontational or protest image represented by first generation of
BEOs is replaced with a candidate focused on racial reconciliation. Mobilization tac-
tics refer to a candidate’s direct or explicit efforts to target African American voters,
as candidates operating from a deracialized context make generic multicultural
appeals to voters seeking to avoid alienating potential white voters. Issues directly
associated with African Americans, such as police brutality or allocating minority
contracts, are rejected in favor of racially neutral policy advocacy.
Deracialized campaigns are largely dependent on two factors: the demographic
makeup of the jurisdiction and the racial background of candidates. If a city, for
example, has a majority minority population, one can generally assume that a minor-
ity candidate will easily win an election if they are running against a white opponent.
But when there are several minority candidates, the minority vote is split, thereby
increasing the chances that whites, or other minorities, will provide the critical
threshold to win the election.
9 For example, following Dutch Morial’s two terms in
office, Sidney Barthelemy won his first term in office with 85 percent of the white
vote. It is in these scenarios that the chances of a deracialized campaign increase.
Looking at the 2002 election, one could argue that Nagin’s campaign reflected these
factors in terms of political style, mobilization, and issues.
In terms of political style, Nagin took the honest businessman approach, point-
ing to the fact that he had worked with various different groups in the business com-
munity. For example, he often pointed to his role as president of the local hockey
team—the New Orleans Brass. As one of his supporters noted, “The Brass is a dif-
ficult group to work with. . . .There are about twelve partners, and they’re from five
parishes, and they’re black and white, young and old. The only thing they have in
common is that they’re all successful. Ray holds the group together with his humil-
ity, his pleasant demeanor and his unquestioned integrity.”
10 In just about every dis-
cussion of Nagin leading up to election he was described as an effective businessman
with an “off-the-cuff” speaking style, and these were characterizations offered by
whites. Because Nagin was not a career politician, he did not have connections to
many of traditional political organizations in the city such as SOUL, BOLD, COUP ,
ACORN, or LIFE.
11 “I don’t owe anything to a BOLD or a SOUL or a COUP or
a LIFE, all that alphabet-soup stuff,” he asserted in one interview. 12 All of these
organizations are affiliated with political insiders, and if he made any direct appeals
to ACORN or SOUL, for example, this could have been viewed as a direct appeal
PROPERTY AND SECURITY, POLITICAL CHAMELEONS, AND DYSFUNCTIONAL REGIME 43
pal-marable2-01-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:33 PM  Page 43


--- PAGE 61 ---
to African American voters. Moreover, as the Times-Picayune endorsement of Nagin
noted, “He’s not tight with the city’s alphabet soup of vote-getting organizations.”13
In terms of policy issues, Nagin advocated a classical pro-business approach.
Urban regime theorists often speak of different types of policies advocated by city
administrators. Sites points to three types of regimes that scholars commonly employ
in their analytical assessments: caretaker, pro-growth, and progressive. Those regimes
that support classical liberal doctrines often advocate pro-growth strategies, in which
the emphasis is on “market-oriented development, using incentives or public subsi-
dies to promote the kind of economic growth favored by downtown interest.”
14
Those regimes that seek to stabilize or reform government advocate caretaker (main-
tenance) positions in which developmental issues are largely avoided, “concentrating
instead on fiscal stability and improvements in the provision of routine services.”
15
And finally, those regimes that “seek to limit downtown expansion in favor of more
community-oriented development” are viewed as progressive or social-reform
regimes. Nagin advocated the path of pro-growth, with little or no concern for pro-
gressive or redistributive alternatives. One of the highlights of his platform was the
suggestion that Louis Armstrong Airport should be sold or leased, and then the city
could use the proceeds for rebuilding infrastructure. Another indicator of his racially
neutral and pro-growth stance involved a proposed City Council referendum to raise
the minimum wage $1 above the federal rate. He was the only candidate who
opposed the referendum outright, while his opponents expressed support with reser-
vations.
16 In terms of style, mobilization, and policies Nagin was able to present
himself as a nonthreatening candidate who focused on economic issues from a mar-
ket or pro-growth perspective. There would be no threats of redistributive policies
on his watch, and because of his lack of political ties, concerns about allocational
abuses (awarding political appointments and contracts based on connections rather
than merit) were minimal.
A total of fifteen candidates were running for mayor, and prognosticators pointed
to Pennington and Irons as the early frontrunners. One poll taken in early December
2001 indicated that voters favored Pennington (23.3 percent), followed by Irons
(21.1 percent), Singleton (13.6 percent), and Carter (10.7 percent).
17 At this point
in the campaign Nagin was not on the political radar screen, and by early January he
was receiving barely 5 percent in the polls. A series of allegations directed at fron-
trunner Irons caused an opening in the crowded landscape, with Nagin being the
primary beneficiary,
18 and by late January Nagin had increased his support to 11.9
percent. In a matter of two months he went from dark horse to frontrunner.
In the February 2 primary election, Nagin received the most votes, 29 percent
versus Pennington’s 23 percent. When Nagin made it into the runoff, endorsements
and campaign contributions began to roll in. Several members of the political estab-
lishment threw their support behind Nagin, including Council Chair Jim Singleton,
Councilman Oliver Thomas, and Councilman T roy Carter, while Pennington
received the support of ACORN and the support of Mayor Morial.
19 Allegations of
corrupt business dealings were directed at Nagin, while Pennington had to answer
questions about rumors of domestic abuse. Nevertheless, in a campaign that became
very dirty, even by Louisiana standards, Nagin was able to hold on to his lead and
be elected to office. He won his first term because he secured a larger percentage of
D. OSEI ROBERTSON44
pal-marable2-01-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:33 PM  Page 44


--- PAGE 62 ---
the white vote, more than 80 percent. He was clearly a candidate embraced more by
whites than blacks. In particular he was supported by the very influential business
community. Looking at election results from 2002, Nagin won those areas heavily
populated by whites (Appendix A). In the Lakeview and Audubon Park/St. Charles
parts of the city, Nagin received almost five times as much support as Pennington. For
example, in the Fourteenth Ward, which represents the center of old wealth in the
city, Nagin received 5,782 votes compared to 1,635 for Pennington. In the Lakeview
area (Fourth Ward), which may be the most segregated part of the city,
20 Nagin had
a similar winning margin of 5,949 versus Pennington’s 1,471. It may be noted, how-
ever, that Nagin made a strong showing throughout the city and won the election by
more than 20,000 votes. In three of the largest wards that are predominantly black—
the Seventh, Eighth, and Ninth Wards—Nagin won the majority of votes.
I O
NCE WAS LOST, BUT NOW I’M FOUND: NAGIN’S RETURN HOME
“I can’t stand him,” I recall my mother saying in the immediate months following
the hurricane. She was talking about Mayor Nagin. Since he had been elected in
2002, she would from time to time mention her general dislike for the new mayor.
He was a new face, not part of the traditional old guard, and he secured his election
by appealing to whites through his pro-business rhetoric. In the first election he won
85 percent of the white vote, compared with only 35 percent of the black vote. So
when my mother mentioned her dislike for the mayor, it was not an isolated view-
point. T o a certain degree, the city was at a crossroads. The traditional Creole elite
had no new candidates because both Barthelemy and Morial had secured successive
terms. Although Pennington had been endorsed by outgoing mayor Marc Morial
and Congressmen William Jefferson, the combination of last-minute scandals and
Nagin’s alliance with the business community allowed him to be elected. Nagin
entered office with a classic reform/pro-business agenda. In his inaugural address he
suggested that the city needed to be a place where “the business community is heav-
ily involved and invested in the growth and success of the entire New Orleans met-
ropolitan area,” and he spoke of the need to put an end to “past parochial politics.”
21
His reform agenda mainly centered on ending the high degree of corruption associ-
ated with previous administrations. Like the scandals that can emerge in Congress
when a new party takes power, the target of many of Nagin’s probes were former
associates of Mayor Morial; he also enacted a dramatic firing of hundreds of city
workers (partially due to budgetary issues). Nagin did little to endear himself to the
old guard, those associated with either the Barthelemy or the Morial regimes. He was
not the typical Seventh Ward Creole. Nevertheless, incumbency in the New Orleans,
as it is in most cities, was viewed as virtually a shoo-in. That was until Katrina hit.
Instead of an easy reelection campaign, Nagin found himself in one of the most
interesting reelection campaigns in recent state history.
As mentioned earlier, Nagin won his first term by running a classic deracialized
campaign, gaining that critical threshold of white support needed to win an elec-
tion between black candidates. Following the hurricane there was general percep-
tion among blacks that Nagin shared a large responsibility for the incompetence of
PROPERTY AND SECURITY, POLITICAL CHAMELEONS, AND DYSFUNCTIONAL REGIME 45
pal-marable2-01-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:33 PM  Page 45


--- PAGE 63 ---
government in the first ten days after the storm. Local hip-hop artist Juvenile summed
up the feeling of many in one of his songs: “Your mayor ain’t your friend he’s the
enemy / Just to get your vote a saint is what he pretend to be / F__ him.”
22 This is
not surprising, considering the horrific experience the people of New Orleans went
through during and after the storm; for one not to be angry would be a surprise. But
given the large amount of public outcry following the storm, one would assume that
a Nagin reelection would be virtually impossible, but this was not the case.
KATRINA AND THE POLITICAL CONTEXT
Hanes Walton argues that any analysis of the field of black politics must first seek to
identify the particular political context, spatial and temporal, in which the subjects
are operating. He contends that black politics is not linear, nor does it replicate itself
cross-nationally; instead, black politics is highly sensitive to the local context in
which it is operating. Furthermore, “the political context variable is. . .a thesis that
postulates that political behavior at either the individual or the group level is not
independent of the political environments (a particular time and a particular period)
in which it occurs.”
23 Walton’s positions are reinforced by Kaufmann in her analysis
of mayoral elections in Los Angeles and New York. Drawing from socio-psycholog-
ical group interest theory, she contends that in times of racial conflict voting will be
“polarized” along racial lines, whereas in the absence of racial conflict voting patterns
will follow traditional cues such as party identification and ideology. “When elec-
tions take place in a conflictual environment,” Kaufmann contends, “voting behav-
ior will likely reflect the temporal salience of these interests. However, when racial
conflict recedes, voting behavior will likely revert to more normal political consider-
ations.”
24 Despite different theoretical origins, both Walton and Kaufmann high-
light the salience of the political context, particularly at the local level. Before we
consider the campaign efforts of the mayor, it is critical to recognize the immediate
demographic byproduct (and therefore political opportunity) of the storm that
immediately affected the political context.
Katrina affected the political context in New Orleans in two key ways: attitudi-
nally and demographically. The post-Katrina response by government agencies
elicited a critical response on the part of blacks and whites. Although several national
and local commentators attributed government mismanagement to Mayor Nagin,
public opinion data suggest that both blacks and whites attributed more culpability
to Governor Blanco and President Bush than to the mayor. Mayor Nagin had a 54
percent approval rating, compared with 33 percent for Governor Blanco, 23 percent
for President Bush, and 22 percent for the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
25 Looking more closely at the approval ratings of key actors, some racial dif-
ferences are revealed. Nearly 60 percent of blacks approved, compared with 47 per-
cent of whites. Only 24 percent of those who approved of Governor Blanco were
white, versus 41 percent of blacks. Overall, blacks were more prone to direct respon-
sibility at the federal government than at local or state politicians, except in the his-
torically sensitive area of law enforcement. In the days immediately following the
storm, a number of politicians seemed to be more concerned with “law and order”
D. OSEI ROBERTSON46
pal-marable2-01-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:33 PM  Page 46


--- PAGE 64 ---
or “property and security” than with “search and rescue.” These cognitive cues were
also reinforced by the physical byproducts of the storm.
Demographically, initial surveys indicated that the city was now majority
(roughly 60 percent) white. Over twenty candidates threw their hats in the electoral
ring, with only two other African American candidates (the Reverend T om Watson
and Civil Clerk Kimberly Butler) in the race. There was a general feeling that white
elites wished to exploit the forced mass exodus of blacks into a political advantage.
One state representative even commented that the storm had accomplished what
they were trying to do for years—clean up public housing (translation: get rid of
poor blacks). Scholars of black politics have long discussed issues of gentrification
and the increase in the number of low-income blacks being forced from central cities
because of massive redevelopment projects. New Orleans has the potential to be the
largest gentrification project in history, and there was a growing sentiment among
African Americans that this was being planned. This demographic factor had a large
impact on the public perception of blacks. Thus the political context that Walton
speaks of had been significantly altered. Keeping in mind the contextual factors that
affected Nagin’s attempt for reelection, we need to ask the next critical question:
what type of campaign measures did Nagin undertake to secure reelection?
CHOCOLATE CITY: THE ANATOMY OF A POLITICAL CROSSOVER
“What’s up with Nagin?” I recall asking one of my friends after Nagin’s comments
on Martin Luther King Day. On MLK Day most networks were broadcasting sound
bites of the Mayor stating that New Orleans would be a “Chocolate City” again. I
wanted to know if I was missing something in the national media; maybe it was dif-
ferent in New Orleans. Mayor Nagin talking about New Orleans being a Chocolate
City was as surprising to me as it must have been for some whites. “I don’t know,”
my friend responded, “I think he might have been drunk.” He was joking, but this
explanation seemed to be more plausible than the thought of a contemporary politi-
cian making an explicitly racial comment about the demographics of his jurisdiction.
This was far from the political style that characterized him during his first term; he
rarely made any direct appeals to African Americans. As the previous section noted,
his electoral victory was largely due to white support; Pennington won a larger per-
centage of the black vote than Nagin. If Nagin represented a classic case of a dera-
cialized campaign the first go-round, he was risking a key component of his electoral
base by making these comments. Of whites, 52 percent indicated that they were
offended by his statement, compared with, predictably, only 17 percent of blacks
stating they were offended.
26 The majority of blacks (66 percent) and a significant
number of whites (42 percent) responded that they were not offended but thought
he could have said it better. Contemporary politicians, both black and white, often
speak in general terms absent of specific racial markers. When a politician says they
are concerned about “soccer moms” or middle-class issues, they are indirectly refer-
ring to issues that largely concern whites. Conversely, when a politician starts men-
tioning “cleaning up housing” or more “law and order,” these are cognitive cues that
convey to some whites their desire to eliminate any perceived threat posed by blacks.
PROPERTY AND SECURITY, POLITICAL CHAMELEONS, AND DYSFUNCTIONAL REGIME 47
pal-marable2-01-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:33 PM  Page 47


--- PAGE 65 ---
The issue is not whether or not Nagin should have mentioned his concern that
African Americans return to New Orleans, but how he said it.
What initially was seen as political misstep, may have been, in fact, a well-calcu-
lated move. The demographic shift toward a white majority was clear immediately
after the hurricane, and any questions about how this would affect the political land-
scape were answered when the candidates were announced. While there had occa-
sionally been a white challenger since Dutch Morial’s mayorship, there had never
been more than two other white candidates in a campaign. With several white can-
didates running for mayor, it was clear that whites saw this as an opportunity to
retake City Hall. Rather than deny the existence of this new political context, Nagin
sought to abandon any hope of matching the large percentage of whites who sup-
ported him during his first election and instead focused on attracting a greater pro-
portion of African American voters. This process would entail both national and
local linkages.
Although there is a significant degree of fragmentation within the black commu-
nity, most blacks accept that they have a shared history and culture and view racism
as still a salient component of American society (although in more indirect ways).
Whether one chooses to label it as a cultural-historical dynamic or a variant of group
identity (socio-psychological), there is a general sense of being black. As is often the
case following serious incidents with racial undertones, most African Americans
viewed the post-Katrina problems as indicators of racism. A small indicator of this are
the lyrics offered by Mos Def on an underground remix released days after the storm:
Its dollar day in New Orleans
...
and Mr President he bout that cash
he got a policy for handling the niggas as trash. . .
27
Despite the claims of some “post”-oriented critics, cultural forms have always
revealed a certain essence about African Americans, and the lyrics from this song
seem to reflect what a large number of blacks nationally were thinking following the
storm. These positions are empirically reinforced by some of the surveys taken fol-
lowing the storm. According to a New York Times/CBS News Poll, two-thirds of
African Americans said that race was a factor in the government’s response, com-
pared to only a third among whites.
28 Data from a Pew Center poll also supports this
view. Of blacks, 66 percent felt the government’s response would have been faster
had the victims been white, compared with only 17 percent of whites. Predictably
the event was a painful reminder to African Americans that racism still exists in this
country, with 77 percent of blacks responding that “racial inequality still a major
problem.” As in other polls conducted during this period, the majority of African
Americans held President Bush responsible for the government’s incompetence fol-
lowing the storm, with 85 percent of blacks responding that he could have done
more. The looting following the storm, additionally, was also viewed differently by
blacks and whites. Of blacks, 57 percent felt that the looters were just “ordinary peo-
ple who were desperate,” versus 38 percent of whites. Beyond the difference between
D. OSEI ROBERTSON48
pal-marable2-01-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:33 PM  Page 48


--- PAGE 66 ---
white and black responses to the hurricane, these data also indicate that there was a
national concern about the collective fate of blacks in the months to come. In terms
of electoral considerations, several national organizations indicated their concern
about the upcoming elections. They suggested that Louisiana officials were attempt-
ing to disenfranchise blacks by holding early elections. Initially, the Louisiana
Secretary of State sought to postpone the election indefinitely, but a group of whites
challenged this ruling in court. The court ruled in favor of the plaintiffs, and the elec-
tion was scheduled for April 22, 2006. The NAACP and Urban League attempted to
appeal the decision, but to no avail. These events were important because they indi-
cate there was a certain level of national support for the candidacy of Nagin; in par-
ticular, there was the feeling nationwide that whites were trying to strip blacks of
their voting rights.
Locally, Mayor Nagin focused his attention on winning the support of African
Americans, those still in New Orleans and those scattered across the country. He
made a 180-degree turn in terms of style, mobilization, and issues, abandoning the
deracialized tactics that had defined his first campaign. Both locally and nationally
there was a huge uproar about his chocolate city remarks. At a Martin Luther King
Day march the Mayor said, “We ask black people: it’s time. It’s time for us to come
together. It’s time for us to rebuild New Orleans—the one that should be a choco-
late New Orleans. And I don’t care what people are saying Uptown or wherever they
are. This city will be chocolate at the end of the day.”
29
Despite the fact the comments were largely unfiltered in terms of the language he
used, the Mayor did touch a sensitive issue among African Americans from the
city—that whites were going to use the hurricane to significantly reduce the num-
ber blacks in the city. Not only did Nagin make frequent mentions of race in his
Martin Luther King Day speech, but he also did so in speeches throughout the city
and in places like Houston and Atlanta, where a large number of New Orleans res-
idents had relocated. In one talk in Houston, the Mayor noted that none of the other
candidates looked like him (i.e., black), while several campaign billboards in the city
referred to Nagin as “our mayor.”
In terms of mobilization, Nagin gained the support of ACORN, a community-
based organization seeking to address the needs of working- and lower-class African
Americans. This group served a key role in both voter registration efforts and busing
out-of-state residents to the polls. On a national level, the National Coalition of
Black Civic Participation (an umbrella group consisting of the National Urban
League, the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, the Lawyers Committee
on Civil Rights, and the Louisiana ’06 Coalition) assisted in holding mayoral
debates in Houston and Atlanta and provided poll monitors in several sites.
30 In
terms of policy articulations, Mayor Nagin resisted recommendations by several
groups to restrict building in areas such as the Ninth Ward. Many groups called for
a selective repopulation of the city, starting with (disproportionately white) areas that
had lower levels of damage. The mayor rejected this suggestion, announcing all areas
could be repopulated but at the citizens’ own risk. De facto gentrification via a
process of large-scale seizures of property is one of the key concerns of African
Americans in the post-Katrina context, as the Ninth Ward east of Industrial Canal
(New Orleans East) has long been viewed among the worst land (in terms of flood
PROPERTY AND SECURITY, POLITICAL CHAMELEONS, AND DYSFUNCTIONAL REGIME 49
pal-marable2-01-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:33 PM  Page 49


--- PAGE 67 ---
potential) in the city. However, to condemn the Ninth Ward would be political sui-
cide for a candidate counting on African American votes to be reelected. The Ninth
Ward is the largest ward in the city (in the 2002 elections over 40,000 votes came
from this area), and New Orleans East has a large number of middle- and upper-class
blacks. Overall, Nagin courted these areas, suggesting to African Americans on a
consistent basis that he was their only hope for the future.
Mayor Nagin’s reelection strategy worked, because of him and in spite of him. A
total of twenty-two candidates were on the April 22 primary ballot, and Mayor Nagin
and Lieutenant Governor Mitch Landrieu finished first and second in voting. Nagin
received 38 percent, Landrieu received 29 percent, Audubon Institute Director Ron
Forman received 17 percent, Republican Lawyer Robert Courhig received 10 per-
cent, and the rest of candidates each received less than 2 percent (the other two
notable African American candidates, the Reverend T om Watson and Civil Clerk
Kimberly Butler received 1 percent each). Although Nagin finished first in the pri-
mary (securing nearly all precincts that were black), nearly 60 percent of voters voted
for Landrieu, Forman, and Courhig. Scholars of voting behavior have long noted that
runoffs can potentially serve as a form of vote dilution, and in races where the bulk
of candidates are white, the general assumption is that their votes will be aggregated
behind one candidate, thereby making it more difficult for the minority candidate to
win. In theory, if Landrieu was able to secure the support of Forman and Courhig,
winning the May 20 runoff should have been easy. Landrieu was able to secure the
endorsement of Forman, but Courhig threw his support behind Nagin. Within a
racialized context many observers thought the contest would come down to who
would win the largest percentage of the crossover vote, but in the runoff both candi-
date, received roughly 20 percent from crossover voters. The key to Nagin’s victory
was the overwhelming support among African Americans. The mayor received near
unanimous support from local and national black leaders and organizations. More
importantly, he was able to increase voter turnout among blacks, whose turnout
increased from 53 percent in the primary to 55 percent in the runoff. Looking at the
election returns (Appendix B), Nagin won virtually all precincts where blacks consti-
tuted well over 80 percent of the population; conversely, Landrieu won nearly all
precincts where whites represented over 80 percent of the population. In wards Four
and Five, which represent the Lakeview/City Park area, Landrieu led Nagin by a ratio
of almost 3 to 1 (3,876 versus 1,365 in the Fourth Ward, for example). In the influ-
ential Uptown/Audubon Park area (the Fourteenth Ward) Landrieu had his highest
turnout of any wards with 5,246 versus Nagin’s 1,733. When one looks at the areas
with a large number of blacks, a similar trend emerges. In the now-infamous Ninth
Ward, Nagin received 13,972 votes compared with Landrieu’s 6,163, while he also
won a solid majority in the Seventh Ward (5,230 versus 3,442). The white vote that
gave Nagin his victory in 2002 was almost completely against him in 2006. For
example, in two areas that have a high concentration of wealthy whites, the Fourth
and Fourteenth Wards, in 2002 Nagin won by a ratio of almost four to one (11,371
compared to Pennington’s 3107). In the 2006 election his opponent won those areas
by almost a three-to-one ratio (9,122 versus 3,098 for Nagin). Overall, African
Americans were able to reelect Nagin in one of closest elections in the city’s history
with Nagin, receiving 52 percent of the vote versus Landrieu’s 48 percent. I know of
D. OSEI ROBERTSON50
pal-marable2-01-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:33 PM  Page 50


--- PAGE 68 ---
no other contemporary politician who has been able to switch bases and still win
reelection. For their strategic insight the Nagin camp must be applauded, but for one
to view this election as simply about Ray Nagin would be thoroughly shortsighted.
When election night came, my mother asked me who I thought would win (I’m
the political scientist, right?), and I said Landrieu. If the demographics the media
were reporting of a new white majority were right, I didn’t see any way Nagin could
win. She seemed down when I said that, in an “oh, well” kind of way. When she
found out Nagin won the following morning, she was visibly happy. “Yeah, I voted
for him,” she hastily admitted. This was the same person that “couldn’t stand him”
six months ago. She was by no means a Nagin convert, but she did recognize (as
most other blacks from New Orleans) the significance of this election. One could
argue that African Americans were making a statement: they were not about to let
whites take over the city. Scholars of local politics acknowledge the limited power
that most mayors have in implementing policy without the support of the federal
government and local business communities. Moreover, contemporary mayors rarely
favor any type of progressive or redistributive policies that favor minorities or low-
income groups. Most are forced to adopt a pro-growth or caretaker posture if they
wish to achieve anything. After nearly three decades of black mayors, there has been
very little improvement in the city, and most blacks are well aware of this. However,
on a symbolic level, blacks were not ready to concede City Hall to a white mayor. In
an environment devoid of post-Katrina racial polarization, this may have been pos-
sible. But the political context of Katrina created a nonphysical conflictual environ-
ment between blacks and whites over the future of New Orleans, and in such an
environment racial symbolism can be very powerful. Nagin deserves credit for skill-
fully manipulating the context, but the true victors (at least symbolically) were the
black voters of New Orleans.
(D
YSFUNCTIONAL) REGIME POLITICS: A NEW ORLEANS STORY
From the dirty dirty, ya heard me,
u either shoot or get shot
From where the unemployment line
be as long as your block. . .
—New Orleans hip-hop artist Juvenile, “NOLA Clap”
31
T o only focus on the electoral aspects of New Orleans would be terribly shortsighted.
A critical problem in black politics is that African Americans frequently evaluate
minority candidates employing only descriptive and symbolic considerations,
whereas substantive evaluations often elude the evaluation process.
32 Instead of this
process, Manning Marable suggests, “accountability must be measured objectively
according to a list of priorities, and not determined by political rhetoric at election
time.”
33 Despite any momentary euphoria caused by Nagin’s successful reelection,
the most substantial problems that confront New Orleans were present prior to
Katrina’s devastation. New Orleans native and political theorist Adolph Reed Jr.
PROPERTY AND SECURITY, POLITICAL CHAMELEONS, AND DYSFUNCTIONAL REGIME 51
pal-marable2-01-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:33 PM  Page 51


--- PAGE 69 ---
asserted shortly after the storm, “What happened in New Orleans is the culmination
of twenty-five years of disparagement of any idea of public responsibility.” 34 The
lyrics quoted above were released in 2004, and they reflect (although somewhat
exaggerated) the problems of high poverty and crime that gripped New Orleans. The
city has been plagued by a number of problems that reflect mismanagement or failed
policy in key economic and educational areas. Public schools in the city have been
deteriorating since the early 1980s, while there are only two “Fortune 500” compa-
nies in the metropolitan area. As a result of the city’s underperformance, it has wit-
nessed one of the highest population declines of a mid-sized city in the region (-3.2
percent) between 2000 and 2003.
35 With the exception of the tourist industry, the
city had been steadily declining economically for the past twenty-five years. This
decline can be attributed (locally) to two primary reasons: a dysfunctional regime
and a one-dimensional focus on tourism. Elite greed and corruption has lead to a
dysfunctional regime that lacks the ability to attract or develop corporate interest
locally, while the main source of revenue—tourism—has not been connected with
any developmental projects for the general population. Before examining these
underlying factors that plague the city, however, it is first important to have baseline
understanding of the city’s economic performance.
POLITICAL ECONOMY IN BRIEF
When one looks at various economic indices in New Orleans, the picture of a strug-
gling economy emerges. The decline is more apparent when the city is compared
with other cities in the South. The median income in New Orleans is $27,133, more
than seven thousand less than Houston ($36,616) and Atlanta ($34,770), and only
slightly more than Birmingham ($26,735). Poverty and underemployment are also
major issues in the city, as nearly 30 percent of individuals make less than $15,000
a year, while another 15 percent of the population makes less than $25,000 a year.
When compared to the regional jewels of Houston and Atlanta, New Orleans lags
significantly behind. In terms of low-income households, New Orleans has a larger
percentage than Atlanta and Houston at 36.3 percent, that is more than 10 percent
higher than Houston (which does have a significantly larger population) and higher
than Birmingham, which has a smaller population. A similar gap emerges when
comparing high-income groups, with only 12 percent of households in the high
income group in New Orleans, compared with 20.9 percent in Atlanta and 17.1 per-
cent in Houston.
Income inequality is only one part of the equation in examining New Orleans’s
economic woes; the composition of industry is another major problem. Cities like
Atlanta and Houston have a major corporate presence; this is the true engine of eco-
nomic growth, not tourism. New Orleans only has two Fortune 500 companies,
while Atlanta has seventeen, and Houston has twenty-two. I have lived in both New
Orleans and Atlanta, and the numbers fail to capture the huge discrepancy between
the two cities in terms of economic development. When I moved to Atlanta in the
late 1990s, I was struck by the level of development and economic growth. Driving
around the perimeter (I-285), one witnesses regional or home offices for nearly every
D. OSEI ROBERTSON52
pal-marable2-01-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:33 PM  Page 52


--- PAGE 70 ---
major corporation in the country; large cranes and construction are part of daily life
in both the central city and the suburbs. Atlanta’s economic boom has led to a dra-
matic increase in its population. One indicator of this growth is building permits.
Although Atlanta is generally viewed as much larger than New Orleans, much of its
population resides in suburban areas. In 2003 the population of the city of Atlanta
was 419,729, while the total population of the metropolitan area was 4,529,371.
Conversely, the population of the city of New Orleans is 467,934, while the total
metropolitan area is 1,336,348. Keeping these demographics in mind, the gaps
between the two cities in terms of housing growth is substantial. In 1980, New
Orleans issued 2,047 housing building permits compared with Atlanta at 1,285. By
the mid 1980s this had reversed, with the number of new building permits signifi-
cantly dropping in New Orleans while there was a steady increase in Atlanta.
Housing growth peaked in New Orleans in 1983 when 3,199 new permits were
issued (1,103 in Atlanta); after that the city began a steady decline. In 1986 there
were 2,346 building permits issued in Atlanta with only 637 issued in New Orleans.
The recession that affected the national economy in the late 1980s and early 1990s
had a predicable impact on housing growth in both cities, but by 1993 Atlanta was
well on its way to a recovery while New Orleans would struggle until 1996 before it
returned to pre-1987 levels. The mean number of housing permits over this twenty-
four year period is 2,534 for Atlanta and 893 for New Orleans. In the last year for
which data was available (2003), there were 917 permits issued in New Orleans,
compared with 6,893 in Atlanta. Within this time period New Orleans has yet to
issue more than 1,000 permits in one year and falls well short of the 1983 total of
3,199. In nearly every major category of social and economic development the city
of New Orleans falls well behind its regional neighbors.
Some of New Orleans’s economic problems, though, can be partially attributed
to the general decline in federal support to cities that occurred after the 1970s.
Under the heading of “New Federalism,” presidents since the 1970s have signifi-
cantly reduced federal aid to cities.
36 Republican occupancy of the oval office has led
to two policy patterns that have significantly reduced the amount of revenues dis-
tributed to local governments. First, the Republican belief that the private sector is
a better source for economic development and growth than are federally funded pro-
grams has had a significant impact on urban development. Beginning with Reagan
and continuing to the second President Bush, lawmakers have championed the
virtues of market-based growth. “The Reagan Administration,” Judd and Swanstrom
note, “set about sharply reducing federal urban aid proclaiming that ‘the private mar-
ket is more efficient than federal program administrators in allocating dollars.’”
37
This was also related to the second policy shift of devolution, “a strategy in which
the national government would grant more authority over a range of policies cur-
rently under national government authority,” although in many instances the states
bore a substantial portion of the cost of these programs.
38 The move from a central-
ized to decentralized view of the government on the part of Republican presidents
has lead to an environment in which state and local governments have more author-
ity but a decline in intergovernmental grants. As a result of this policy shift, between
1980 and 1990 there was a 46 percent net reduction in federal grants to city govern-
ments.
39 When the federal government does provide grants, Rich asserts, “the vast
PROPERTY AND SECURITY, POLITICAL CHAMELEONS, AND DYSFUNCTIONAL REGIME 53
pal-marable2-01-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:33 PM  Page 53


--- PAGE 71 ---
majority of federal urban assistance today is not being administered by city govern-
ments or local agencies aligned with City Hall.”40 T o solely locate New Orleans’s eco-
nomic struggles within an intergovernmental context, however, would be to
overlook the gains that other cities have made since the early 1980s. As the previous
data has indicated, places like Atlanta and Houston continued to exhibit strong eco-
nomic performance in the same environment that New Orleans struggled with.
Therefore, to understand the source of the city’s troubles it is necessary to examine
the performance of the local regime.
REGIME POLITICS
Scholars of local politics often use the term urban regime to refer to the interaction
of political and business interests that facilitate the growth and development of
cities. At the core of this relationship are elected officials who are responsible for
steering institutional mechanisms and business actors who command large amounts
of financial capital. According to Stone, an urban regime refers to the “informal
arrangements by which public bodies and private interest function together in order
to be able to make and carry out governing decisions.”
41 While civic associations
(such as community groups) may sometimes enter into the equation, the central area
of concern is the interaction between business and government officials. The end of
big government, exemplified in the Great Society programs of the 1960s and 1970s,
led to an increasing strain on municipal governments, thereby making the support
of private business critical in the vitality of modern cities. Conversely, despite the
large amounts of capital that financial elites can throw around, they are still depend-
ent on elected officials for navigating institutional regulations (property taxes, land
grants, public works, et cetera).
Some scholars have noted that urban regime theory, as articulated by Stone and
others, fails to account for macroeconomic shifts that oftentimes constrain the activ-
ities of local government.
42 Another important criticism of urban regime theory is
the failure to account for racial and ethnic dynamics in some cases. 43 In terms of an
urban regime with a black majority, Reed notes that the combination of macro polit-
ical-economic pressures and the intra-group hegemony of the black middle and
upper class has produced a generation of black mayors who proclaim a progressive
agenda while maintaining an unwavering commitment to pro-growth strategies. He
asserts that “the new regime of race relations. . .has exerted a demobilization effect
on black politics precisely by virtue of its capacities for delivering benefits and, per-
haps more important, defining what benefits political action can be legitimately be
used to pursue.”
44 The main factor that Reed and others point to is not anti-com-
munal policy, but it is the ability of BEOs to frame their public discourse to shape
the public’s perception that “downtown development” strategies are good for lower-
class blacks. Employment promises (as a byproduct of these development projects),
combined with selective administrative appointments, have allowed many BEOs to
give the impression that they were involved in policy promulgation and implemen-
tation that would aid the majority of the population, when in fact only elites receive
any substantial returns from these directives.
45 When one looks at the actions of the
D. OSEI ROBERTSON54
pal-marable2-01-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:33 PM  Page 54


--- PAGE 72 ---
urban regime in New Orleans, this pattern is clearly evident. Unlike the elites in
municipalities like Atlanta, New Orleans elites cannot claim aggregate economic
growth. The following section highlights some of the characteristics of this dysfunc-
tional regime.
Outside of tourism, New Orleans generates the bulk of its revenues from small
businesses and the health industry. This is not to say there have not been opportu-
nities for corporate development; rather, the other key issues—corruption and
greed—have served to alienate potential investors. For example, high levels of cor-
ruption have existed since the days of Governor Huey Long, and they were exempli-
fied in the conviction of former Governor Edwin Edwards. Mardi Gras is another
example: for all the fanfare it receives nationally, few outsiders recognize that on cer-
tain levels it is an elite ritual; many of the largest parades, like Bacchus and
Endymion, are sponsored by private social organizations whose members (nearly all
white) are composed of some of the wealthiest people in the city. In an earlier study,
Schexnider noted that “wealth and power in New Orleans are concentrated in a
small but powerful oligarchy that unduly influences the direction of economic devel-
opment and public policy.”
46 Citing from a study by James Bobo, he continues,
“Significantly, there is a small but powerful, highly structured upper class and the
middle income class is much smaller in metropolitan New Orleans, compared to all
SMSA’s [standard metropolitan statistical areas], Atlanta, Dallas, and Houston. In
few, if any, major metropolitan areas is income so inequitably distributed. And an
inequitable income distribution is in part self-perpetuating.”
47
Contemporary talks of reform often overlook the influence of this group, but as
one writer noted prior to Mayor Nagin’s first term, these individuals share an equal
responsibility for the city’s decline over the past fifty years: “No one denies that cor-
rupt politics has held Louisiana back, yet for all their protestations about reform,
many members of the business community have formed a co-dependent relationship
with the very people they publicly revile.”
48
Some observers have characterized the economic plans of the city as “ad hoc” or
“surprise” planning. One columnist in the Times-Picayune has noted, “New Orleans
lurches forward in an unplanned, ad hoc manner with private-sector development
gathering support and public works receiving approval largely based on what inter-
est group, developer or politician influences the planning process at a particular
time. While more progressive cities in this country have master plans, New Orleans
has what I like to call ‘planning by surprise.’ You wake up in the morning, you read
The Times-Picayune, you see what the plan is.”
49
Some may contend that these backroom deals are a normal part of politics.
Peterson, for example, contends that “issues of patronage and corruption dominate
local politics not because local officials are particularly venal or devious, but because
employment issues are one of the limited set of matters readily resolved at the local
level.”
50 Despite the commonality of this practice, nevertheless, in New Orleans allo-
cational policies are so exaggerated that competence, economic growth, and the gen-
eral impact on the city are completely overlooked in exchange for political
connections. One example of this involved the management of Louis Armstrong
Airport during Marc Morial’s second term. Although it is located in Jefferson Parish,
the airport is governed by New Orleans officials, and every five years a contract
PROPERTY AND SECURITY, POLITICAL CHAMELEONS, AND DYSFUNCTIONAL REGIME 55
pal-marable2-01-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:33 PM  Page 55


--- PAGE 73 ---
worth approximately $20 million is awarded to a firm to manage the facilities. In a
story published by the Louisiana Weekly, it was reported that Mayor Morial was
attempting to bypass the committee setup to evaluate candidates and select a per-
sonal ally. It noted:
Bob T ucker, friend of New Orleans Mayor Marc Morial, has endeavored to win the
$20,000,000 management contract at the Airport for some time. Of the original six
applicants for the private operations contract, only T ucker’s AMC and Parson’s
Aviation remain. A private poll of the Aviation Board allegedly reveals that the major-
ity of the members want Parson’s, an international firm that operates airports all over
the world, to get the contract. The members were reportedly impressed by Parson’s
experience and expertise. However, sources reveal to The Louisiana Weekly that
“friends of T ucker and Morial” have blocked Parson’s bid.
51
These types of occurrences were so commonplace that they rarely attracted public
attention; allocational corruption was viewed almost as a part of the city’s political
culture.
Reed notes that one of the main characteristics of urban regimes with black
majorities is the ability of black elites to mold the public’s expectations of success and
failure. Like other mayors in the past, Marc Morial was able to shape public percep-
tion of his performance in a positive light largely due to reductions in crime and new
tourism projects. Howell and McLean report that Morial enjoyed a 90 and 91 per-
cent approval rating among blacks in 1996 and 1998, respectively, with a 59 percent
approval rating among whites.
52 In addition to improvements in law enforcement,
Morial was able to point to a number of large projects under his watch, including an
expansion of the Ernest “Dutch” Morial Convention Center, the construction of an
amusement park—JazzLand—in New Orleans East, and the construction of a new
sports arena built to attract an National Basketball Association (NBA) franchise.
Among blacks and whites these efforts led to positive evaluations, yet, as the data in
the previous section reveals, New Orleans lagged significantly behind places like
Houston and Atlanta in median income and income distribution among the popu-
lation during his administration. The regime’s emphasis on insider politics, without
any efforts to expand the city’s middle class, led to a situation of incremental eco-
nomic growth exaggerated under the pretext of tourist events and downtown build-
ing projects.
TOURISM IN THE BIG EASY
New Orleans was the place everyone liked to go see, visit, and party. A place that peo-
ple from other places wanted to go to act silly, it was viewed largely as a party town.
It had good food, good music, and relaxed laws when it came to social pleasures. This
is a key part of the problem. Because New Orleans combines a rich artistic history
with an open tolerance for various types of human behavior viewed much more neg-
atively in other areas of the country, its economy has largely been built around
tourism. T ourism contributes $5–8 billion to the city and state economies annually,
as well as 30 percent of its tax revenue.
53 In addition to its natural endowment of fine
D. OSEI ROBERTSON56
pal-marable2-01-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:33 PM  Page 56


--- PAGE 74 ---
food and music, the city and state have built an infrastructure aimed at harnessing
the tourist industry. The Superdome and Convention Center were built to draw
large sporting events (the Sugar Bowl, the Super Bowl, the Bayou Classic, and the
Essence Festival) and various conventions and conferences. The problem is not that
tourism serves no benefit to the local economies, but rather the nature of that ben-
efit. New Orleans has long been a top (adult) entertainment destination, not only
for native events such as Mardi Gras or the Jazz & Heritage Festival, but also for
sports. Prior to conflicts between the state and Saints owner T om Benson, the city
had hosted the most Super Bowls, along with Miami and Los Anteles (it is also home
for the college Sugar Bowl). Over the past twenty years nearly all major development
projects have centered on tourism. The state has financed the building of the Morial
Convention Center (with subsequent expansions) and the New Orleans Arena (in
order to attract an NBA team). Like other cities, the “downtown” area has also been
subject of investments such as the Riverwalk, Jax Brewery, and the Aquarium of the
Americas. Many of the earlier downtown projects were an outgrowth the World’s
Fair, which the city hosted in 1984.
The state and city benefit heavily from these venues and events. As noted earlier,
the city and state received more than $5 billion from tourism in 2004. The issue is
linkage: does an economy centered on tourism benefit the general population?
Building a new sports arena or aquarium cost hundreds of millions of dollars,
finances that could greatly benefit a public school system that has been struggling for
decades. Politicians often speak about the benefits of these projects to the city and
state, but after years of investment there has been virtually no improvement in the
city’s other areas. The reality, as Eisinger notes, is that “the amount of fiscal and polit-
ical resources and the level of energy that local elites must devote to the revitaliza-
tion of large entertainment projects are so great that more mundane urban problems
and needs must often be subordinated or ignored.”
54 Several studies have noted that
cities that engage in these gathering industries rarely see the returns they predicted
from these investments, or the revenues received are not funneled towards more
pressing needs. Moreover, as Judd and Swanstrom indicate, “the downtown corpo-
rate economy has few links with small business and job creation in neighborhoods.
Central city residents often lack the skills and education to qualify for the knowl-
edge-intensive jobs that locate in central business districts .... M any of the jobs in
the tourist industry that do go to central city dwellers are unpleasant, low-skilled
jobs, with little or no prospects for advancement.”
55
Although the tourist industry can generate significant revenues for the city and
state, it does not develop the type of corporate infrastructure that defines the coun-
try’s big cites. It has failed to attract industry like Atlanta, lacks the financial and
industrial legacies of New York and Chicago, and, more importantly, it has failed to
capitalize on its comparative advantage in the petroleum industry (due to its close
location to the Gulf of Mexico), losing out to Houston. This is not to suggest that
these cities have linked these industries to progressive or redistributive policy agen-
das, as these areas have also neglected their lower-income populations.
56 These
industries, however, do lead to aggregate city growth, whether it be in finance, tech-
nology, or manufacturing. The only people I ever hear mentioning that they want to
move to New Orleans are artists or musicians; everyone else would mention it as a
PROPERTY AND SECURITY, POLITICAL CHAMELEONS, AND DYSFUNCTIONAL REGIME 57
pal-marable2-01-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:33 PM  Page 57


--- PAGE 75 ---
place they would like to go and party. “The Big Easy” may be a nice name for a
movie or a song, but in terms of politics and economics, it symbolizes that the city
is a joke. Houston, Chicago, or Atlanta—you go to these places to do business; peo-
ple go to New Orleans to get drunk. Sometimes I wonder who is more intoxicated—
the visitors or the local elites who celebrate these excesses as an accomplishment.
C
ONCLUSION: NEW ORLEANS—THE CITY THAT CARE FORGOT
There is a lot unknown in terms of the rebuilding process and the future of New
Orleans. The city is incrementally struggling to get back on its feet. When I ask
friends about their future plans, I get mixed responses. A longtime friend who lived
in one of the few areas that had minimal damage (the West Bank) is planning on
moving his family to Atlanta. Both he and his wife worked for the public school sys-
tem prior to the storm, but since the hurricane an already deplorable school system
is currently in shambles as the state seeks to reorganize it. My friend lost his job, while
his wife was offered another position with the school board at the “very competitive”
salary of $28,000. This is a typical middle-class family like those most cities seek to
attract, yet New Orleans is driving these residents away. Unlike my friends who are
younger and more mobile, my immediate family wishes to return home. “After the
hurricane season” is the familiar response I hear from them, as no one wants to deals
with the anxiety of being in the city if a hurricane enters the Gulf. This is the
unknown part of the equation, but as the example of my friend illustrates, much of
the city’s future is dependent on the plans and policies that will be implemented in
the near future. More than a year after Katrina, politicians at the local and state level
continue to move at a snail’s pace. There are at least four different commissions
appointed by the governor, the mayor, and City Council that are charged with artic-
ulating policy options. Each plan has a different vision of the city’s future. One major
issue is whether the city should focus its resources on the rebuilding process. Outside
planners have favored the areas that suffered the least amount of damage, those at
higher elevations. However, these areas are disproportionately inhabited by whites.
After winning an election through strong African American support, the mayor
would be committing political suicide to condemn large parts of the city. At the state
level, the governor has been slow to distribute funds to individuals, particularly the
Road Home Grants. Needless to say, the frictions that existed between Blanco and
Nagin before the storm continue to be an issue. Yet within this political stalemate,
the people of New Orleans continue to suffer. Visiting there in August 2006, I was
struck by this weird combination of despair and hope. The bulk of the city still looks
like a ghost town, but there are pockets where the spirit of New Orleans is alive and
well. But the question remains: Will New Orleans ever be the same?
N
OTES
1. Lil’ Wayne, “George Bush,” DJ Drama and Lil’ Wayne Mixtape (Sum. 2006).
2. Consider the following: Michael Parenti, “How the Free Market Killed New Orleans,”
The Humanist (November/December 2005): 16–18; Saladin Muhammad, “Hurricane
D. OSEI ROBERTSON58
pal-marable2-01-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:33 PM  Page 58


--- PAGE 76 ---
Katrina: The Black Nation’s 9/11! A Strategic Perspective for Self-Determination,”
Socialism and Democracy 20 (July 2006): 3–17; Henry Giroux, “Reading Hurricane
Katrina: Race, Class, and the Biopolitics of Disposability,” College Literature 33
(Summer 2006): 171–96; and David T routt, After the Storm: Black Intellectuals Explore
the Meaning of Hurricane Katrina (New York: New Press, 2006).
3. Several scholars have used terms like “hidden transcripts” and “standpoint epistemolo-
gies” to highlight the difference between public (superordinate) and private (subaltern)
discourses. These authors note the importance of examining personal narratives and
cultural production as a means of countering the dominant discourse, and understand-
ing the resistance practices of the oppressed. My usage of the concept focuses mainly
on tapping into perspectives that may have been overlooked in the dominant discourse
on Hurricane Katrina. See Patricia Hill Collins, Fighting Words: Black Women and the
Search for Justice (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1998); James Scott,
Domination and the Arts of Resistance: Hidden Transcripts(New Haven: Yale University
Press, 1990); Manning Marable, Living Black History: How Reimaging the African-
American Past Can Remake America’s Racial Future (New York: Basic Books, 2006);
Robin Kelley, Freedom Dreams: The Black Radical Imagination (Boston: Beacon Press,
2002); Gayatri Spivak, “Can the Subaltern Speak?” in Colonial Discourse and Post-
Colonial Theory: A Reader , ed. P . Williams and L. Chrisman (New York: Columbia
University Press, 1994); Bat-Ami Bar On, “Marginality and Epistemic Privilege,” in
Feminist Epistemologies, ed. L. Alcoff and E. Potter (New York: Routledge, 1993); and
John Michael, “Making a Stand: Standpoint Epistemologies, Political Positions,
Proposition 187,” T elos, no. 108 (Summer 1996): 93–103.
4. See Arnold Hirsch, “Harold and Dutch Revisited: A Comparative Look at the First
Black Mayors of Chicago and New Orleans,” in African-American Mayors: Race,
Politics, and the American City , ed. D. Colburn and J. Adler (Urbana: University of
Illinois Press, 2001), 109–10; also consider Gwendolyn Hall, Africans in Colonial
Louisiana: The Development of Afro-Creole Culture in the Eighteenth Century (Baton
Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1992).
5. Georgia Persons, “Black Mayoralties and the New Black Politics: From Insurgency to
Racial Reconciliation,” in Dilemmas of Black Politics: Issues of Leadership and Strategy ,
ed. G. Persons (New York: Harper Collins, 1993), 46.
6. Ronald Walters, “T wo Political T raditions: Black Politics in the 1990s,” National
Political Science Review 3 (1990): 199.
7. Ibid.
8. Joseph McCormick II and Charles Jones, “The Conceptualization of Deracialization:
Thinking Through the Dilemma,” in Dilemmas of Black Politics: Issues of Leadership
and Strategy, 76. Additional discussions of this concept can also be found in Huey
Perry, introduction to Race, Politics, and Governance in the United States , ed. Huey
Perry (Gainesville: University of Florida Press, 1996); and Roger Oden, “The Election
of Carol Mosley-Braun in Illinois,” in Race, Politics, and Governance.
9. Another type of deracialized campaign occurs when African Americans are running
against whites in cities or districts where whites constitute the majority. In these situ-
ations the African-American candidates make strong appeals to white voters and “usu-
ally do not make strong racial appeals in their campaigns. This is the essence of a
deracialized campaign.” Examples of this type of deracialized campaign include the
election of Douglas Wilder as governor of Virginia and David Dinkins as Mayor of
New York. See Perry, introduction to Race, Politics, and Governance, 5.
10. Roy Rodney, cited in “Nagin Counts on Compromise, Integrity,” New Orleans Times-
Picayune, January 12, 2002, p. 1.
PROPERTY AND SECURITY, POLITICAL CHAMELEONS, AND DYSFUNCTIONAL REGIME 59
pal-marable2-01-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:33 PM  Page 59


--- PAGE 77 ---
11. There are a number of PACs (political action committees) that have been operating in
New Orleans since the mid 1960s. The Community Organization for Urban Politics
(COUP) was associated with Seventh Ward conservative Creoles, and key leaders have
included the city’s second African-American mayor, Sidney Barthelemy. The Southern
Organization for Unified Leadership (SOUL) was an outgrowth of the activities of the
Congress Of Racial Equality in New Orleans and was initially associated with the
emerging black consciousness of the 1960s. The Black Organization for Leadership
Development (BOLD) emerged out of an association of uptown blacks affiliated with
former mayor Moon Landrieu. The Louisiana Independent Federation of Electors
(LIFE) is an organization of former Mayor Marc Morial and his supporters, while the
Association of Community Organizations for Reform Now (ACORN) is a group
formed in 1990s by a number of community activists. For discussions of SOUL,
COUP , and BOLD, see Arnold Hirsch, “Simply a Matter of Black and White: The
T ransformation of Race and Politics in T wentieth-Century New Orleans,” in Creole
New Orleans: Race and Americanization, ed. A. Hirsch and J. Logsdon (Baton Rouge:
Louisiana State University Press, 1992).
12. “Nagin Counts on Compromise, Integrity,” New Orleans Times-Picayune, January 12,
2002, p. 1.
13. Editorial, “Ray Nagin for Mayor,” New Orleans Times-Picayune, January 17, 2002, p. 6.
14. William Sites, “The Limits of Urban Regime Theory: New York City Under Koch,
Dinkins, and Giuliani,” in The Politics of Urban America: A Reader, ed. D. Judd and P .
Kantor (New York: Longman, 2002), 215.
15. Ibid.
16. See Frank Donze, “7 Mayoral Rivals Stick to Their Scripts in Debate,” New Orleans
Times-Picayune, January 31, 2002.
17. Stephanie Grace, “Nagin Shoots Up, Irons Loses Steam in Newest Poll,” New Orleans
Times-Picayune, January 23, 2002, p. 1.
18. The slide of Irons in relationship to Nagin is important for one reason: she was the can-
didate receiving the most support from whites in the beginning of the mayoral cam-
paign. She was subject to a number of allegations; among the more notable accusations
were that she was employed in two different state government positions (Dual Office
Holding Law) and that she had claimed that her brother had been innocently shot years
ago when in fact he had been shot by the police after robbing a store. See Christopher
Tidmore, “Inside Political T rack,” Louisiana WeeklyJanuary 14, 2002; idem., January
21, 2002; “Integrity Questions Are Mounting for Mayoral Candidate: Ad, Job
Inquiries Hit Irons Campaign,” New Orleans Times-Picayune, January 12, 2002, p. 1;
“Mayoral Attack Hits the Airwaves,” New Orleans Times-Picayune, January 19, 2002.
19. See Christopher Tidmore, “Mayor’s Race Heats Up as Nagin Gets Backers,” Louisiana
Weekly, February 11, 2002, p. 1; Frank Donze and Stephanie Grace, “ACORN Plants
Its Support in Pennington,” New Orleans Times-Picayune, February 22, 2002, p. 1.
20. Although there is housing segregation in New Orleans, the city is not rigidly segre-
gated in a spatial sense. The average distance that separates a white neighborhood from
a black neighborhood is often only a few blocks. For example, the wealthiest part of
the city, the St. Charles Audubon Park area, is thoroughly integrated, with many
lower-income and high-crime neighborhoods.
21. C. Ray Nagin, “New Orleans Is on the Move Again: New Orleans’ Mayor C. Ray
Nagin Inaugural Address,” New Orleans Times-Picayune, May 7, 2002, p. 6.
22. Juvenile, “Get Ya Hustle On,” Reality Check (Atlantic Records, March 2006).
23. Hanes Walton, African American Power and Politics: The Political Context Variable
(New York: Columbia University Press, 1997), 7. Also see idem,”The Nature of Black
D. OSEI ROBERTSON60
pal-marable2-01-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:33 PM  Page 60


--- PAGE 78 ---
Politics and Black Political Behavior,” in Black Politics and Black Political Behavior, ed.
Hanes Walton (Westport, CT: Praeger, 1994); and idem., Black Politics: A Theoretical
and Structural Analysis (Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1972).
24. Karen Kaufmann, Group Conflict & Mayoral Voting Behavior in American Cties (Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2004), 5. Additional discussion of racial models
employed by voting and attitudinal analysts can be found in Katherine Tate, From
Protest T o Politics(New York: Russell Sage Foundation/Harvard University Press, 1993);
Michael Dawson, Behind The Mule: Race and Class in African-American Politics
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1995); Dianne Pinderhughes, Race and
Ethnicity in Chicago Politics: A Reexamination of Pluralist Theory(Urbana: University of
Illinois Press, 1987); Cathy Cohen and Michael Dawson, “Neighborhood Poverty and
African American Politics,” American Political Science Review87 (June 1993): 286–302;
and Richard Allen, Michael Dawson, and Ron Brown, “A Schema-Based Approach to
Modeling an African-American Racial Belief System,” American Political Science Review
83 (June 1989): 421–41
25. The specific question was, “Do you approve of the job–person– in responding to the
effects of Hurricane Katrina?” Gallup Poll conducted February 18–26, 2006.
26. Gallup Poll conducted February 18–26, 2006.
27. Mos Def, “Katrina Remix,” Underground (net) Release (Approx. Sept. 2005).
28. T odd Purdam et al., “Support for Bush Continues to Drop as More Question His
Leadership Skills, Poll Shows,” The New York Times, September 15, 2005.
29. Mayor Nagin, cited in John Pope, “Evoking King, Nagin Calls N.O. ‘Chocolate City,’
Speech Addresses Fears of Losing Black Culture,” New Orleans Times-Picayune,
January 17, 2006, p. 1.
30. See George Curry, “Political Cross-dressing in New Orleans,” Louisiana Weekly, May
29, 2006.
31. UTP , “Nolia Clap,” NOLA CLAP (2004).
32. The terms descriptive, symbolic, and substantive, as modifiers of representation, are often
used by congressional scholars as an analytical tool to evaluate the representativeness
of elected officials to their constituents. “Descriptive representation,” according to
Walton and Smith, “is the extent to which the legislature looks like the people in a
demographic sense. Symbolic representation concerns the extent to which people have
confidence or trust in the legislature, and substantive representation asks whether the
laws passed by the legislature correspond to the policy interests or preferences of the
people.” See Hanes Walton and Robert Smith, American Politics and the African
American Quest for Universal Freedom (New York: Longman, 2000), 178; Katherine
Tate, Black Faces in the Mirror: African Americans and Their Representatives in the U.S.
Congress (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2003), 13.
33. Manning Marable, “Violence, Resistance, and the Struggle for Black Empowerment,”
in Speaking Truth to Power: Essays on Race, Resistance, and Radicalism (Boulder, CO:
Westview, 1996), 132.
34. Aldoph Reed, Jr.,“Classifying the Hurricane,” The Nation, October 3, 2005, online
edition.
35. U.S. Census Bureau.
36. For discussions of the contemporary federalism see: Paul Peterson, “From the Price of
Federalism,” in The Enduring Debate: Classic and Contemporary Readings in American
Politics, ed. D. Canon, J. Coleman, and K. Mayer (New York: Norton, 2006); Craig
Volden, “The Politics of Competitive Federalism: A Race to the Bottom in Welfare
Benefits,” American Journal of Political Science 46 (April 2002): 352–63.
37. Dennis Judd and T odd Swanstrom, City Politics: Private Power and Public Policy (New
York: Longman, 1998), 236.
PROPERTY AND SECURITY, POLITICAL CHAMELEONS, AND DYSFUNCTIONAL REGIME 61
pal-marable2-01-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:33 PM  Page 61


--- PAGE 79 ---
38. Theodore Lowi, Benjamin Ginsberg, and Kenneth Shepsle, American Government:
Freedom and Power ( New York: Norton, 2006), 65.
39. Judd and Swanstron, City Politics, 239.
40. Michael Rich, “The Intergovernmental Environment,” Cities, Politics, and Policy: A
Comparative Analysis, ed. J. Pelissero (Washington, DC: CQ Press, 2003), 48.
41. Clarence Stone, Regime Politics: Governing Atlanta: 1946–1988 (Lawrence: University
Press of Kansas, 1989), 6. Also consider Russell Murphy, “Politics, Political Science,
and Urban Governance: A Literature and a Legacy,” Annual Review of Political Science
(2002): 63–85.
42. Regarding this omission, Davies contends that “the heart of the problem is the limited
theorizing of the way economic forces affect local political institutions and the balance
of power within them. It is not enough to acknowledge the influence of the market
economy on local political processes, it is also necessary to explain how fluctuations in
the economy enable and constrain political options.” Most regime theorists reject the
type of economic determinism associated with Marxism; however, critics maintain that
these proponents have failed to account for market forces at macro level and their
potentially constraining effects on municipal governance. The recessions of the 1980s,
combined with a federal government determined to reduce the amount of funding at
the local level, clearly had an impact on the ability of mayors to govern. The key issue,
these authors raise, is to what degree these macro processes influence or limit decision
making on the local level. These pro-growth market strategies also contradict any
efforts toward egalitarian social-communal development. Imbroscio characterizing Paul
Peterson’s analysis of local politics, says, “He argued that the mobility of economic
resources (resulting from the nature of capitalism), combined with the intergovern-
mental (subnational) competition for investment (resulting from the nature of feder-
alism) left American cities constrained by economic pressures. These constraints
limited the range of political choice. Cities were compelled, by necessity, to pursue
developmental policies (that enhance the economic position of the city) while eschew-
ing policies to redistribute wealth (that harm this economic position).” Therefore, one
witnesses both an analytical limitation that leads to an ideological contradiction on the
part of regime theorists. See Jonathan Davies, “Urban Regime Theory: A Normative-
Empirical Critique,” Journal of Urban Affairs 24, no.1 (2002): 13; David Imbroscio,
“Overcoming the Neglect of Economics in Urban Regime Theory,” Journal of Urban
Affairs 25, no. 3 (2003): 272.
43. The issue is not the assignment of racial categories to key actors, but the failure to
examine how race sometimes serves as a structuring principle, that can lead institu-
tional biases. These institutional biases play themselves out in a class-based analysis
that overlooks intragroup activities outside the systemic context. See Cynthia Horan,
“Racializing Regime Politics,” Journal of Urban Affairs 24, no 1 (2002): 25.
44. Adolph Reed Jr., “Sources of Demobilization in the New Black Political Regime:
Incorporation, Ideological Capitulation, and Radical Failure in the Post-Segregation
Era,” in Stirrings in the Jug: Black Politics in the Post-Segregation Era (Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, 1999), 121.
45. A key consideration from Reed’s perspective is the tactical ability of BEOs in relation-
ship to their constituents. He notes that “Jackson’s success at reinvention suggest one
mechanism through which the black administration can mediate the tension between
electoral and governing constituencies. By virtue of his representation of his position
as the ‘black’ position, he added an epicycle of racial self-defense to blacks’ considera-
tion of policy options; to that extent, Jackson shifted the basis for black policy debate
away from substantive concern with the potential outcomes and toward protection of
D. OSEI ROBERTSON62
pal-marable2-01-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:33 PM  Page 62


--- PAGE 80 ---
the racial image and status, as embodied in the idiosyncratic agenda of the black offi-
cial. In this way it becomes possible for black officials to maintain support from their
black constituents and the development elites that systematically disadvantage them.”
Ibid., 177.
46. Alvin Schexnider, “Political Mobilization in the South: The Election of a Black Mayor
in New Orleans,” in The New Black Politics: The Search for Political Power , ed. M.
Preston et al. (New York: Longman, 1982), 223. Also consider Huey Perry, “Black
Political and Mayoral Leadership in Birmingham and New Orleans,” National Political
Science Review 2 (1990): 154–61.
47. Schexnider, “Political Mobilization,” 223.
48. Christopher Tidmore, “It’s Not Just the Politicians’ Fault,” Louisiana Weekly, February
25, 2002.
49. William Borah, “City Must Have a Real Master Plan,” New Orleans Times-Picayune,
May 21, 1998.
50. Paul Peterson, City Limits (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1981), 154.
51. Christopher Tidmore, “Inside Political T rack,” Louisiana Weekly, January 21, 2002.
52. Susan Howell and William McClean, “Performance and Race in Evaluating Minority
Mayors,” Public Opinion Quarterly 65, no. 3 (2001): 327–33.
53. See Bringing New Orleans Back Commission (BNOBC), “Post-Katrina Economic
Redevelopment Plan,” Version 4.1, January 2006; BNOBC, “Rebuilding New Orleans,”
January 2006.
54. Peter Eisinger, “The Politics of Bread and Circuses: Building the City for the Visitor
Class,” in The Politics of Urban America: A Reader, 257. Also see John Kasarda, “Urban
Change and Minority Opportunities,” in The New Urban Reality , ed. P . Peterson
(Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 1985).
55. Dennis Judd and T odd Swanstrom, City Politics: Private Power and Public Policy (New
York: Longman, 1998), 368.
56. While Atlanta, for example, has been a model city in terms of rapid political-eco-
nomic growth, this is not to suggest that low income and minority groups’ relative
socio-economic position has improved. For discussions of this contradictory perform-
ance see Manley Banks, “A Changing Electorate in a Majority Black City: The
Emergence of a Neo-Conservative Black Urban Regime in Contemporary Atlanta,”
Journal of Urban Affairs 22, no. 3 (265–78); Rob Gurwitt, “How to Win Friends and
Repair a City,” in State and Local Government 2005–2006, ed. K. Smith (Washington,
DC: CQ Press, 2006), 173–77; Mack Jones, “Black Mayoral Leadership in Atlanta:
A Comment,” National Political Science Review 2 (1990): 138–44; Reed, “A Critique
of Neoprogressivism in Theorizing about Local Development Policy: A Case from
Atlanta,” in Stirrings in the Jug; and Stone, Regime Politics.
PROPERTY AND SECURITY, POLITICAL CHAMELEONS, AND DYSFUNCTIONAL REGIME 63
pal-marable2-01-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:33 PM  Page 63


--- PAGE 81 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 82 ---
Chapter 5
HURRICANE KATRINA AS
AN ELABORATION ON AN
ONGOING THEME: 
RACIALIZED SPACES IN
LOUISIANA*
K. ANIMASHAUN DUCRE
INTRODUCTION
A search of the WORLDCAT database yielded 786 sources related to Hurricane
Katrina in summer 2006.1 Over half of the sources cited in WORLDCAT are books
(419) related to the impacts of the disaster, as well as rebuilding the city of New
Orleans and the Gulf. The wealth of opinion and intellectual work on Katrina reveals
a particular assumption about the storm. The common sentiment is that Hurricane
Katrina was an extraordinary event. While it is not my intent to belittle the signifi-
cant pain and suffering of Katrina victims and their families, I contend that Katrina
does not mark a significant departure, as many have suggested. Rather, Hurricane
Katrina should be examined as an eloboration on an ongoing theme, another signif-
icant note in the sordid history of American racism. In fact, the state of Louisiana
emerges as an important site for chronicling America’s race relations, beginning in
1865 with the Louisiana Black Code, the Plessy v. Fergusondecision in 1896, the rise
of the oil and gas industry in Louisiana, and the treatment of African Americans dur-
ing the Great Mississippi Flood of 1927. Given this chronology of events and against
*Direct correspondence to: K. Animashaun Ducre, Department of African American Studies,
Syracuse University, 200 Sims Hall, Syracuse, New York 13244.
pal-marable2-01-5.qxp  10/21/2007  1:35 PM  Page 65


--- PAGE 83 ---
this historical backdrop, the chaos that ensued in Katrina’s aftermath is unremark-
able. Furthermore, placing the history of Louisiana within this historical context can
explain why many in the Gulf Coast continue to suffer until this day.
R
ACIALIZED SPACES IN LOUISIANA: RACE, SPACE, AND POWER
There was little question that Katrina had sparked renewed debate about race, class,
and institutional approaches towards vulnerable population groups in the
US. . . .Whether or not one believed racist charges were well-founded (and clearly a
majority of our members did not) the Select Committee agreed it should recognize and
discuss the socioeconomic and racial backdrop against which Katrina unfolded.
2
This statement, issued by the Congressional Select Committee, reflects the persist-
ent amnesia regarding racism in the United States. In their 500-plus–page report,
race is only mentioned briefly. Unlike Congress, many see race as an important
dimension in understanding Katrina. The concept of racialized spaces is a useful
framework to support the idea of Hurricane Katrina as a postscript. This concept
evolved prior to Katrina as a possible explanation for the emergence of environmen-
tal racism and injustice. While not a native Louisianan, I had spent most of my adult
life in and around the state, first as an undergraduate at T ulane University and later
as a community organizer in the environmental justice movement until the late
1990s. Louisiana’s culture seems distinct to me. I figured that there must be some-
thing unique about its history that facilitated contemporary examples of racism and
injustice. For example, I was a student when David Duke ran his campaign for gov-
ernor and later an unsuccessful bid for the Presidency. He only lost by a narrow mar-
gin to former Governor Edwin Edwards. I can also recall the controversial acquittal
of Rodney Peairs of Baton Rouge, who shot a Japanese exchange student, Yoshihiro
Hattori, on Halloween in 1992.
3 I also recall the marching of the Ku Klux Klan on
the town square in Homer, in northern Louisiana. Homer was also the proposed
host site of a uranium enrichment facility—a proposal that was later challenged on
the basis of environmental racism. In fact, one of the most decisive battles for envi-
ronmental justice occurred in southeastern Louisiana in the city of Convent. There,
residents launched a successful campaign against a proposed plastics complex.
4
The state of Louisiana emerges as an important site for a discussion of race rela-
tions centering on race, space, and power. This intersection of race, space, and power
is what I refer to as racialized spaces. The racialized spaces hypothesis is defined as
“historic practice and spatial designation of a particular area for racial and ethnic
minorities as a means of containment and social control. This practice serves to rein-
force preconceived notions of Otherness or, result in the creation of a culturally infe-
rior Other.”
5
The key themes of this concept concern history, containment, and social control.
The first element is history. History acknowledges the genealogy of patterns that
push and pull the poor and people of color under racial segregation, class segrega-
tion, or both. Examples include racial violence, deed restrictions, restrictive
covenants, blockbusting, redlining, slum clearance, creation of public housing, and
discriminatory mortgage lending. The second element, containment, emphasizes the
K. ANIMASHAUN DUCRE66
pal-marable2-01-5.qxp  10/21/2007  1:35 PM  Page 66


--- PAGE 84 ---
geographic isolation of Others within racialized spaces, from and by those with
power. The final element is social control, which refers to the methods that maintain
racialized spaces, like surveillance and institutionalization. Quite literally, social con-
trol is the element designed to keep folks in their places . All of these tenets can be
applied to the historical and socio-spatial context of African American life in the
state of Louisiana. Moreover, the concept of racialized spaces helps place the events
surrounding Hurricane Katrina and the resulting levee failure into context.
In the early 1970s, Blauner was the first academic to suggest that the severe con-
centration and socioeconomic disparities in black neighborhoods resulted in internal
colonialism.
6 The racialized spaces framework relates to the internal colonization the-
sis. France was the first colonial power in the area that encompasses present-day
Louisiana. The first settlement started in 1699, and the importation of African slaves
began as early as 1717. The largest consignment of African slaves came in June 1719,
with Africans originating from Senegal-Gambia.
7 By 1724, African slaves outnum-
bered the French colonial population, necessitating the need for stricter controls. The
first sets of controls, the “Code Noir,” or Black Codes, were instituted. The codes
would serve as the basis for the American institution of the Black Codes in 1865.
The Louisiana Purchase was perhaps the most lucrative land deal in U.S. history.
The American government paid almost four cents an acre for 900,000 square miles
of territory, expanding the size of its empire by 23 percent. In 1808, federal law pro-
hibited the importation of African slaves into the United States, but interstate slave-
trafficking was alive and well. There are also numerous accounts of illegal
importation of African slaves post-1808. Louisiana is admitted into the Union as the
eighteenth state in 1812. By 1849, there were 1,536 plantations, producing 96 per-
cent of the nation’s raw sugar, using the labor over 325,000 enslaved Africans.
8 And
like many places in the South, its landscape and economy were devastated by Civil
War and Union occupation.
While the plantation regime and slavery proved the cornerstone of the Gulf econ-
omy, its strength was always tested by nature. Major hurricanes hit in 1856 and
1915. Hurricane Betsy devastated the region in 1965. Major flooding occurred in
1884, 1897, 1902, 1903, 1912, 1913, 1922, 1973, 1983, and 1995. Despite these
challenges, New Orleans rose to become a major port. By 1880, New Orleans was
the second-largest port in the United States, falling short to New York.
9 By 1995,
New Orleans was ranked the world’s largest port by cargo volume. T o remain com-
petitive, New Orleans economy revolves around control and mastery of space by the
exploitation of (black) labor, land, and capital.
The mastery over space by land relies on the daunting task of controlling the
mighty Mississippi River and its tributaries. The United States Army Corps of
Engineers was created in 1802 by the federal government. Soon after its establish-
ment, one of the key tasks of this federally funded civil engineering agency was to
ensure navigability of the Mississippi River for trade. From then on, the Army Corps
of Engineers began a long and complex relationship with Louisiana’s natural envi-
ronment. Its central role in controlling land reflects the value of engineering and
enterprise during the Progressive Era. Barry notes, “In the century of the engineers,
the study of this writhing river began as a scientific enterprise. The resulting policy
became a corruption of science.”
10
HURRICANE KATRINA AS AN ELABORATION ON AN ONGOING THEME 67
pal-marable2-01-5.qxp  10/21/2007  1:35 PM  Page 67


--- PAGE 85 ---
The mastery over space by labor centers on the role African Americans play in
empire building. In applying the element of history from the racialized spaces frame-
work, there is evidence that Louisiana initiated the formal era of racially discrimina-
tory policies with landmark legislative initiatives like the Black Codes of 1865 and
the events leading up to the Plessy decision in 1896.
Louisiana is credited as the pioneer of the South’s new post–Civil War labor sys-
tem, which led to the establishment of labor contracts through the Freedmen’s
Bureau.
11 After New Orleans fell to Union forces in 1862, a commander in the
Department of the Gulf (the antecedent to the Freedmen’s Bureau) was faced with
the mass exodus of former slaves from area plantations, resulting in a severe labor
shortage. The solution was a contractual agreement between the government and
planters, supposedly on behalf of the freedmen. These labor contracts were reminis-
cent of ante-bellum policies. This type of sentiment would become the basis for the
Black Codes of 1865.
In reaction to imminent emancipation, Louisiana, along with other Southern
states, established laws, often referred to as Black Codes, to limit black mobility.
The French had established Code Noir to govern the rights of slaves as early as
1724 in the Louisiana territory. Southern plantations were regarded as the prior-
ity in restoring the devastated, post-Civil War economy. While these codes guar-
anteed civil rights to freedmen such as the right to marry and own property, their
general purpose was to ensure a supply of former slaves as workers on labor-inten-
sive plantations. In addition to these codes, some scholars have suggested that the
establishment of vagrancy and convict laws during the same era were also a means
to restrict black mobility and guarantee labor.
12 Vagrancy laws succeeded in com-
pelling black workers to choose between the field or imprisonment. In Louisiana,
violation of a labor contract was tantamount to a criminal act. With regards to
criminality, convict laws were established to create a policy for prison labor. Under
the racialized spaces hypothesis, the earlier forms of labor contracts for freedmen
and the enactment of the Black Codes can be viewed as the attempt to restore the
racial order of white supremacy that existed before the Civil War. Blacks were free
in a very limited sense. However, blacks were not without agency. There were
attempts to organize under the Knights of Labor, but their efforts were met with
racial violence.
13
The most significant opportunity for black advancement was in the proposal for
land redistribution. In August of 1865, the assistant commissioner for the Freedmen’s
Bureau of Louisiana announced plans for the redistribution of thousands of acres of
abandoned and confiscated lands; however, President Johnson quickly nixed those
plans.
14 The lands were restored to their prior owners, and so the chance to establish
place for black Louisianans was abandoned.
While efforts to create new black spaces were thwarted, there was also political
momentum to further diminish the remaining spaces where blacks could live, work,
and play. This political momentum was codified into what is referred to as the “sep-
arate but equal” doctrine. While many recall and herald the 1954 Brown v. Board of
Education decision to desegregate public schools and other facilities, the shameful
decision in American history that catalyzed the institutionalization of the “separate
but equal” doctrine was the 1896 Supreme Court decision of Plessy v. Ferguson.
K. ANIMASHAUN DUCRE68
pal-marable2-01-5.qxp  10/21/2007  1:35 PM  Page 68


--- PAGE 86 ---
Homer A. Plessy was born in 1863 in New Orleans to parents known in French
creole as gens de colour, “free people of color.” On June 7, 1892, Plessy, a shoemaker,
sat in the whites-only railcar on the East Louisiana Railroad; he was arrested for vio-
lating the state law mandating separate cars for whites and blacks. His trial judge,
John Ferguson, ordered him to pay fines for this violation, and the case was appealed
to the U.S. Supreme Court. Lawyers for Plessy argued that his arrest violated his civil
rights under the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Amendments. Delivering the opinion,
Justice Brown wrote in 1896,
The object of the [fourteenth] amendment was undoubtedly to enforce the absolute
equality of the two races before the law, but in the nature of things it could not have
been intended to abolish distinctions based on color, or to enforce social, as distin-
guished from political equality, or commingling of the two races upon terms unsatis-
factory to either. Laws permitting, and even requiring, their separation in places where
they are liable to be brought into contact do not necessarily imply the inferiority of
either race to the other, and have been generally, if not universally, recognized within
the competency of the state legislatures in the exercise of their public power. . .we can-
not say that a law which authorizes or even requires the separation of the two races in
public conveyances is unreasonable.
15
The intersection between race and space here in this case is quite profound. This deci-
sion cements the establishment of black spaces and white spaces as a rule in race rela-
tions. Over a century later, most American neighborhoods, particularly New Orleans,
are still divided along racial lines despite civil rights challenges to the contrary.
16
The Great Mississippi River Flood of 1927 provides an interesting parallel to
Hurricane Katrina, especially in its treatment of African Americans and the vulner-
ability of oppressed communities during natural disaster. It is reported that over
700,000 people were displaced during the floods and 330,000 were African
Americans. The relief agencies respected Jim Crow policy and provided racially seg-
regated shelters for those displaced. Barry chronicles the most vivid example of racial
oppression, the fate of African American families in the Mississippi Delta during the
flood.
17 Black men were forced to work at gunpoint to increase levee protection.
Once the water broke in Greenville, Mississippi, 13,000 blacks were forced to live in
squatter conditions on the actual levee. The city of New Orleans was spared in the
1927 flood, in part because a portion of the levee in St. Bernard Parish was blown
up with dynamite to keep the city from being flooded. Thus, allegations that the pre-
dominantly African American neighborhood in the Ninth Ward of New Orleans was
similarly sacrificed during Hurricane Katrina are not entirely outrageous.
18 At one
time, the political elite of New Orleans did pull together to sacrifice the livelihood
of St. Bernard Parish in the interest of New Orleans.
19
Parallel to the development of racially segregated spaces was the transition of
Louisiana’s agricultural economy to a petrochemical-based economy. The first suc-
cessful oil well was established in 1901 in Jennings, Louisiana, marking the begin-
ning of a century-long relationship between land, oil, and capital in Louisiana. The
other major event that signaled a shift in the economic base was the decision by
Rockefeller to build a Standard Oil refinery in Baton Rouge, Louisiana in 1909.
20
Southeastern Louisiana was attractive to the petrochemical industry due to the
HURRICANE KATRINA AS AN ELABORATION ON AN ONGOING THEME 69
pal-marable2-01-5.qxp  10/21/2007  1:35 PM  Page 69


--- PAGE 87 ---
abundance of natural resources like salt, freshwater, oil, and natural gas, as well as
transportation routes by rail and waterway along the Mississippi River. 21
The conversion of sugarcane fields to petrochemical facilities resulted in what
many refer to as cancer alley, the eighty-five-mile stretch of the Mississippi River cor-
ridor with over 100 chemical complexes. Many reports indicate that there is a dis-
proportionate impact on the African American population in this area.
22 Why? As
former field workers of the sugarcane plantations, many of the African American
neighborhoods found themselves sandwiched between these immense chemical
complexes. In fact, Wright relates the corporate buyouts of historic African American
communities. These communities were established as freetowns by former slaves
after emancipation, and the buyouts represent the most extreme example of the
impact of racialized spaces in Louisiana.
23 Reveilletown was bought out by Georgia
Gulf, Good Hope was purchased and moved by St. Charles Refinery, and the com-
munity of Sunrise was taken over by Placid Refining Company. Additionally,
Morrisonville was relocated by Dow Chemical, and the former homes of this historic
black community have become green space by the Dow complex grounds. One of the
most heart-wrenching sacrifices of this relocation is the historic cemetery of
Morrisonville, which is still located on Dow’s grounds. Former church members are
allowed access to the gravesites, but the area is closed to the public. The pattern of
environmental racism found in Louisiana provides even more evidence of racialized
spaces in Louisiana. The environmental justice perspective is useful in understand-
ing the racial disparities in the impacts of Katrina.
24
KATRINA AS AN ELABORATION ON AN ONGOING THEME
Racism stands apart by a practice of which it is a part and which it rationalizes: a prac-
tice that combines strategies of architecture and gardening with that of medicine—in
the service of the construction of an artificial social order. . .racism manifests the con-
viction that a certain category of human beings cannot be incorporated into the
rational order, whatever the effort. . . .The consequence is that racism is inevitably asso-
ciated with the strategy of estrangement
.25
The estimate of those displaced from Hurricane Katrina is akin to the number of
African Americans who were displaced by massive restructuring of cities during
urban renewal in the 1960s and 1970s. The mass exodus or removal of African
Americans is not a new phenomenon, and this is another reason why Katrina should
be viewed as an elaboration on the ongoing theme of American racism.
As with the rhetoric behind urban renewal policies, local politicians are not inter-
ested in promoting a new New Orleans with its former low-income residents. Also
reminiscent of urban renewal, resources for neighborhood revitalization in New
Orleans and all along the Gulf are prioritized according to race and class privilege.
There has been a strong response from the academic community in the aftermath of
the devastating hurricane season of 2005 and the horrors of Katrina. For example,
many have spoken about the consequences of Katrina from various medical, social,
behavioral, engineering, and religious perspectives. Others critique the political and
militaristic systems that fostered the cataclysmic effects of Katrina on the Gulf Coast.
K. ANIMASHAUN DUCRE70
pal-marable2-01-5.qxp  10/21/2007  1:35 PM  Page 70


--- PAGE 88 ---
My contention in this chapter is that Katrina’s aftermath should not be highlighted
as something significantly different than what has happened in America’s racial his-
tory prior to August 2005.
The racialized spaces hypothesis explicates the ways in which policy can be used
to erect rigid racial boundaries. In the case of Louisiana, there has been evidence of
these segregationist mechanisms. The most historic and significant event was the
Plessy decision, which hailed from an incident on the East Louisiana Railroad.
Other key early segregation policies centered on housing. Prior to 1930, the
Louisiana state legislature enacted a series of laws to restrict housing and enforce seg-
regation. In 1917, municipalities were granted the power to deny building permits
for homes for both blacks and whites in areas principally inhabited by residents of a
different race. This law was strengthened by a new statute in 1921 that provided
penalties for housing blacks and whites in the same dwelling, with the exception of
domestic help.
26
In the case of Louisiana, containment is exemplified by the geographic and eco-
nomic isolation of African Americans within the state. With the exception of New
Orleans, the African American population of the state was historically situated in
rural areas. This demography is no coincidence. Many strategies were employed to
limit black mobility after emancipation. The first of such strategies included the
Black Codes of 1865, vagrancy laws, and forms of debt peonage.
27 The final element
of the racialized spaces hypothesis is social control. If the previous element of history
and containment served to create and subordinate black space, the institution of Jim
Crow reified those spaces.
28 Placed within this context of racialized spaces, there is
no doubt that African Americans and the poor in New Orleans were burdened with
disproportionate impact from the storm. The social position of African Americans
throughout the history of Louisiana makes them vulnerable to the adverse impact of
disasters, whether natural or manmade. Efforts to improve the fate of African
Americans in the event of an emergency should begin with efforts to improve their
social condition: better education, better homes, better jobs, and provide greater lev-
els of access to opportunity. We cannot stop storms like Katrina, but we can amelio-
rate their impact. It is my contention that eradicating institutional racism and
injustice would go far in lessening disproportionate burdens of disasters like Katrina.
B
IBLIOGRAPHY
Allen, Barbara. “The Popular Geography of Illness in the Industrial Corridor.” In
Transforming New Orleans and Its Environs, edited by Craig Colten, 178–201. Pittsburgh:
University of Pittsburgh Press, 2000.
Barry, John. Rising Tide: The Great Mississippi Flood of 1927 and How It Changed America .
New York: Simon and Schuster, 1997.
Bauman, Zygmunt. Modernity and the Holocaust. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1989.
Blauner, Robert. “Internal Colonialism and Ghetto Revolt.” Social Problems 16, no. 4 (1969):
393–408.
Bullard, R. D. “Confronting Environmental Racism: The Case of Shintech and Convent,
Louisiana.” T estimony prepared for the Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality
Hearing. Convent, LA: January 24, 1998.
HURRICANE KATRINA AS AN ELABORATION ON AN ONGOING THEME 71
pal-marable2-01-5.qxp  10/21/2007  1:35 PM  Page 71


--- PAGE 89 ---
Bullard, Robert D. Unequal Protection: Environmental Justice and Communities of Color . San
Francisco: Sierra Club Books, 1994.
Burby, Raymond. “Baton Rouge: The Making (and Breaking) of a Petrochemical Paradise.”
In Transforming New Orleans and Its Environs , edited by Craig Colten, 160–77.
Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 2000.
Cohen, William. At Freedom’s Edge: Black Mobility and the Southern White Quest for Racial
Control. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University, 1991.
Colten, Craig. An Unnatural Metropolis: Wresting New Orleans from Nature . Baton Rouge:
Louisiana State University Press, 2005.
de Jong, Greta. A Different Day: African-American Struggles for Justice in Rural Louisiana,
1900–1970. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Ducre, K. Animashaun “Racialized Spaces and the Emergence of Environmental Injustice.” In
Echoes from the Poisoned Well: Global Memories of Environmental Injustice, edited by Sylvia
Hood Washington, Paul C. Rosier, and Heather Goodall, 109–24. Lanham, MD:
Lexington, 2006.
Dugas, Caroll Joseph. “The Dismantling of De Jure Segregation in Louisiana, 1954–1974.”
PhD diss. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University, 1989.
Dyson, Michael Eric. Come Hell or High Water: Hurricane Katrina and the Color of Disaster .
New York: Basic Civitas Books, 2006.
Ellis, Catherine. “The Legacy of Jim Crow in Rural Louisiana.” PhD diss. New York:
Columbia University, 2000.
Hair, William Ivy. Bourbonism and Agrarian Protest: Louisiana Politics 1877–1900 . Baton
Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1969.
Halpern, Rick. “Solving the ‘Labour Problem’: Race, Work and the State in the Sugar
Industries of Louisiana and Natal, 1870–1910.” Journal of Southern African Studies30, no.
1 (2004): 19–40.
Hines, Revathi I. “African Americans’ Struggle for Environmental Justice and the Case of the
Shintech Plant.” Journal of Black Studies 31, no. 6 (2001): 777.
Jackson, Kenneth. Crabgrass Frontier: The Suburbanization of the United States . New York:
Oxford University Press, 1985.
Louisiana Advisory Committee to the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights. “The Battle for
Environmental Justice in Louisiana. . .Government, Industry, and the People.”
Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1993.
Maguire, Robert E. Hustling to Survive: Social & Economic Change in a South Louisiana Creole
Community. Vol. 2, Project Louisiane. Quebec: Departement de Geographie de l’Université
Laval, 1989.
Massey, Douglas S., and Nancy A. Denton. American Apartheid: Segregation and the Making
of the Underclass. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1993.
Miller, Randall. “The Freedmen’s Bureau and Reconstruction: An Overview.” In The
Freedmen’s Bureau and Reconstruction:Reconsiderations, edited by Paul Cimbala and Randall
Miller, xiii–xxxii. New York: Fordham University Press, 1999.
Pastor, M., R. D. Bullard, James Boyce, Alice Fothergill, R. Morello-Frosch, and Beverley
Wright. In the Wake of the Storm: Environment, Disaster and Race after Katrina. New York:
Russell Sage Foundation, 2006.
Plessy v. Ferguson, 163 U.S. 537 (1896).
Powell, Bernice, and R. D. Bullard. From Plantations to Plants: Report of the Emergency
National Commission on Environmental and Economic Justice in St. James Parish, Louisiana.
Cleveland, OH: United Church of Christ Commission for Racial Justice, 1998.
Reid, T .R. “Japanese Media Disparage Acquittal in ‘Freeze Case’: Commentators See America
as Sick Nation.” Washington Post, May 25, 1993, p. A14.
K. ANIMASHAUN DUCRE72
pal-marable2-01-5.qxp  10/21/2007  1:35 PM  Page 72


--- PAGE 90 ---
Ripley, C. Peter. Slaves and Freedmen in Civil War Louisiana . Baton Rouge: Louisiana State
University Press.
Roberts, J. Timmons, and Melissa T offolon-Weiss. “Roots of Environmental Injustice in
Louisiana.” In Chronicles from the Environmental Justice Frontline , 29–41. New York:
Cambridge University Press, 2001.
Rodrigue, John. “The Freedmen’s Bureau and Wage Labor in Louisiana Sugar Region.” In The
Freedmen’s Bureau & Reconstruction: Reconsiderations, edited by Paul Cimbala and Randall
Miller, 193–218. New York: Fordham University Press, 1999.
U.S. Congress. Select Bipartisan Committee to Investigate the Preparation for and Response
to Hurricane Katrina. A Failure of Initiative: Final Report of the Select Bipartisan Committee
to Investigate the Preparation for and Response to Hurricane Katrina . 109th Congress, 2nd
Session. Washington, DC: United States Government Printing Office, 2006.
Shallat, T odd. “In the Wake of Hurricane Betsy.” In Transforming New Orleans and Its Environs,
edited by Craig Colten, 121–37. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 2000.
Sternberg, Mary Ann. Along the River Road . Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press,
2001.
NOTES
1. WORLDCat, Search:Hurricane Katrina, http://newfirstsearch.oclc.org.libezproxy2.syr
.edu/WebZ/FSQUERY?format=BI:next=html/records.html:bad=html/records.html:n
umrecs=10:sessionid=fsapp4–59032–eqwivfav-49sp8f:entitypagenum=2:0:
searchtype=basic.
2. Select Bipartisan Committee to Investigate the Preparation for and Response to
Hurricane Katrina, “A Failure of Initiative: Final Report of the Select Bipartisan
Committee to Investigate the Preparation for and Response to Hurricane Katrina,”
109th Cong. 2nd Session, 2006, pp. 19–20.
3. T . R. Reid, “Japanese Media Disparage Acquittal in ‘Freeze Case’: Commentators See
America as Sick Nation,” Washington Post, May 25, 1993.
4. R. D. Bullard, “Confronting Environmental Racism: The Case of Shintech and Convent,
Louisiana.” T estimony prepared for the Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality
hearing, Convent, LA, January 24, 1998; Revathi I Hines, “African Americans’
Struggle for Environmental Justice and the Case of the Shintech Plant,” Journal of
Black Studies 31, no. 6 (2001).
5. K. Animashaun Ducre, “Racialized Spaces and the Emergence of Environmental
Injustice,” in Echoes from the Poisoned Well: Global Memories of Environmental Injustice,
ed. Sylvia Hood Washington, Paul C. Rosier, and Heather Goodall (Lanham:
Lexington Book, 2006).
6. Robert Blauner, “Internal Colonialism and Ghetto Revolt,” Social Problems 16, no. 4
(1969).
7. Mary Ann Sternberg, Along the River Road (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University
Press, 2001).
8. Robert E. Maguire, Hustling to Survive: Social & Economic Change in a South Louisiana
Creole Community, vol. 2, Project Louisiane (Québec: Université Laval, 1989).
9. John Barry, Rising Tide: The Great Mississippi Flood of 1927 and How It Changed
America (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1997).
10. Ibid.
11. William Cohen, At Freedom’s Edge: Black Mobility and the Southern White Quest for
Racial Control (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1991).
HURRICANE KATRINA AS AN ELABORATION ON AN ONGOING THEME 73
pal-marable2-01-5.qxp  10/21/2007  1:35 PM  Page 73


--- PAGE 91 ---
12. Ibid.; Greta de Jong, A Different Day: African-American Struggles for Justice in Rural
Louisiana, 1900–1970 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2002),
Randall Miller, “The Freedmen’s Bureau and Reconstruction: An Overview,” in The
Freedmen’s Bureau and Reconstruction:Reconsiderations, ed. Paul Cimbala and Randall
Miller (New York: Fordham University Press, 1999), C. Peter Ripley, Slaves and
Freedmen in Civil War Louisiana (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press).
13. William Ivy Hair, Bourbonism and Agrarian Protes: Louisiana Politics 1877-1900t
(Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1969); Rick Halpern, “Solving the
‘Labour Problem’: Race, Work and the State in the Sugar Industries of Louisiana and
Natal, 1870–1910,” Journal of Southern African Studies 30, no. 1 (2004).
14. John Rodrigue, “The Freedmen’s Bureau and Wage Labor in Louisiana Sugar Region,”
in The Freedmen’s Bureau & Reconstruction: Reconsiderations.
15. Homer A. Plessy v. John H. Ferguson , 163 U.S. 537; 16 S. Ct. 1138; 41 L. Ed. 256;
1896 U.S. Lexis 3390 (1896).
16. Kenneth Jackson, Crabgrass Frontier: The Suburbanization of the United States (New
York: Oxford University Press, 1985); Douglas S. Massey and Nancy A. Denton,
American Apartheid: Segregation and the Making of the Underclass (Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 1993).
17. Barry, Rising Tide.
18. Michael Eric Dyson, Come Hell or High Water: Hurricane Katrina and the Color of
Disaster (New York: Basic Civitas Books, 2006).
19. T odd Shallat, “In the Wake of Hurricane Betsy,” in Transforming New Orleans and Its
Environs, ed. Craig Colten (Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 2000).
20. Raymond Burby, “Baton Rouge, LA: The Making (and Breaking) of a Petrochemical
Paradise,” in Transforming New Orleans and Its Environs, ed. Craig Colten (Pittsburgh:
University of Pittsburgh Press, 2000); Craig Colten, An Unnatural Metropolis: Wresting
New Orleans from Nature (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 2005).
21. Barbara Allen, “The Popular Geography of Illness in the Industrial Corridor,” in
Transforming New Orleans and Its Environs.
22. Louisiana Advisory Committee to the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, “The Battle
for Environmental Justice in Louisiana. . .Government, Industry, and the People,”
Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1993); Bernice Powell and R. D.
Bullard, “From Plantations to Plants: Report of the Emergency National Commission
on Environmental and Economic Justice in St. James Parish, Louisiana” (Cleveland:
United Church of Christ Commission for Racial Justice, 1998); J. Timmons Roberts
and Melissa T offolon-Weiss, “Roots of Environmental Injustice in Louisiana,” in
Chronicles from the Environmental Justice Frontline (New York: Cambridge University
Press, 2001).
23. Robert D. Bullard, Unequal Protection: Environmental Justice and Communities of Color
(San Francisco: Sierra Club, 1994).
24. M. Pastor et al., “In the Wake of the Storm: Environment, Disaster and Race after
Katrina,” (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2006).
25. Zygmunt Bauman, Modernity and the Holocaust (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University
Press, 1989), 65.
26. Caroll Joseph Dugas, “The Dismantling of De Jure Segregation in Louisiana,
1954–1974” (Louisiana State University Press, 1989).
27. Halpern, “Solving the ‘Labour Problem.’”
28. Catherine Ellis, “The Legacy of Jim Crow in Rural Louisiana” (PhD diss., Columbia
University, 2000).
K. ANIMASHAUN DUCRE74
pal-marable2-01-5.qxp  10/21/2007  1:35 PM  Page 74


--- PAGE 92 ---
Chapter 6
AN INTERVIEW WITH
JUDGE IVAN L. R. LEMELLE
SUZETTE M. MALVEAUX
The Honorable Ivan L. R. Lemelle (E. D. La)* was born in 1950 and grew up in a
small, rural town outside of Lafayette, Louisiana—Opelousas. He graduated from
Xavier University and Loyola University, as well as the New Orleans School of Law,
and then practiced law in the private and public sectors. He was appointed a United
States Magistrate Judge in 1984 and then United States District Judge (Eastern
District of Louisiana) in 1988 by President Clinton.
Judge Lemelle, one of many displaced citizens of New Orleans and the only
African American district judge on the United States District Court in the Eastern
District of Louisiana, presided over Wallace v. Blanco, a federal lawsuit challenging
Louisiana’s emergency election plan for failing to sufficiently protect the voting
rights of the primarily African American New Orleans population displaced by
Hurricanes Katrina and Rita. The NAACP Legal Defense and Education Fund
(LDF) and local counsel from Louisiana argued that measures taken by the state leg-
islature were inadequate and would disenfranchise temporary evacuees from partic-
ipating in New Orleans’s April 2006 primary and May 2006 runoff elections, in
which the mayor and city council selections would be made. The LDF contended
that the state’s voting scheme was inadequate and threatened to disproportionately
impact black voters, in violation of the Voting Rights Act. While the city’s primary
election did not take place on February 4 as originally planned, it was later slated for
April 22, a date many civil rights organizations and leaders challenged as too soon.
Judge Lemelle, while recognizing room for improvement in the electoral process,
refused to delay the election.
Judge Lemelle shared his thoughts on why he permitted New Orleans’s first
municipal elections post-Katrina to go forward, how Katrina has impacted the city
*Judge Lemelle is the author’s cousin. This interview took place on June 16, 2006.
pal-marable2-01-6.qxp  10/21/2007  1:44 PM  Page 75


--- PAGE 93 ---
and himself personally, and what lessons can be learned for the future. Judge Lemelle
also reflected on what it is like to be one of the few African American federal judges
in the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit and on the pioneers that
inspired him.
* * *
SM: T ell us about Opelousas, Louisiana and what that was like when you were
young, growing up there.
JUDGE LEMELLE: I was born in Opelousas, Louisiana. Most of my early and high
school years were spent in the public and Catholic school systems in Opelousas.
Upon graduation, I went on to obtain degrees from Xavier University in New
Orleans and the Loyola School of Law.
During those formative years in Opelousas, I still recall some of the used and
marked books that were discarded by the white Catholic school and sent to us at the
black Catholic school—Holy Ghost Catholic School. My parents emphasized edu-
cation as the key to overcoming racial barriers.
SM: So what made you decide to become a judge?
JUDGE LEMELLE: A difficult decision made easy with the help of some heroes in
the early civil rights era. Founding members of the law firm I practiced in, Judge
Robert Collins, who later became the first African American federal judge in the
Deep South. Judge Nils Douglas, a magistrate judge commissioner in state court.
And Lolis Elie, attorney, activist, and frequent judge pro tem in the state courts, Ron
Nabonne, Jeff Wilkerson, and Okla Jones II, all alumni like me from the same firm,
provided encouragement and support. They thought the time was right for someone
to be the first black magistrate judge in the federal courts in Louisiana. Through
their persistence and with additional support from my family, I accepted the chal-
lenge and applied. The Eastern District of Louisiana has a grand history of brilliant
jurists. I was presented with a chance to walk in the footsteps of J. Skelly Wright,
Alvin Rubin, Fred Heebe, and many others.
SM: What kind of challenges have you had being the only African American judge
in the Eastern District of Louisiana? And one of the few in the Fifth Circuit?
JUDGE LEMELLE: We have ten African American jurists in the Fifth Circuit. The
Fifth Circuit, as you know, is one of the busiest circuits in the country.
The challenges that I face are no different than when Judge Collins was the first
and only one, when Judge Okla Jones II was the second and only one. Court
employees, especially minority members, would often present us concerns about
working conditions, hiring and promotion practices. I was honored when our Chief
Judge appointed me to be the chairman of our court’s EEO [Equal Employment
Opportunity] and affirmative action committee. Through the years, we were able to
resolve a lot of complaints. People felt comfortable talking to us and not discouraged
in bringing issues they might otherwise stay silent about. While not an issue for me,
I could sense some misgivings in a few, not most, senior members of downtown
majority firms who appeared in Title VII racial discrimination litigation. But I did
not have the time or inclination to prove myself to anyone. Justice had to be served
by an impartial application of law to facts, not by perceptions or one-sided thinking.
SUZETTE M. MALVEAUX76
pal-marable2-01-6.qxp  10/21/2007  1:44 PM  Page 76


--- PAGE 94 ---
SM: Can you tell me about Hurricane Katrina? How has that impacted your life?
You were in New Orleans. You’ve been in New Orleans for how long?
JUDGE LEMELLE: Since 1967. Along with our fellow citizens, we were displaced
from our homes by the storms and [are] still coping with every imaginable and unex-
pected matter in the aftermath of our exodus. Our family home is in New Orleans
East. Katrina‘s path came right over that area. It left us with an average flood depth
of eight feet. My home had over six feet of water. It settled at four feet for about ten
days before it finally drained out. My first floor was devastated. My second floor is
intact but damaged by wind, hail, and looting that occurred in our neighborhood.
But, you know, I was lucky. My family safely evacuated before that momentous day,
August 29, 2005. We lost close friends as a direct result of the storm and a sister-in-
law’s husband as an indirect result of the same. Our material losses pale in light of
the human casualties.
There was a total collapse of our infrastructure. New Orleans East is the largest
land area of the city, composed of a significant number of middle-class African
Americans, including my subdivision, Lake Willow. Solo practitioner lawyers, doc-
tors, poor people, retirees, [and] teachers who evacuated ultimately found, in many
instances, better opportunities elsewhere. But most still want to return home to New
Orleans. Many just could not afford to come back to New Orleans.
As a Red Cross volunteer in Lafayette, Louisiana, where I eventually relocated to,
I vividly recall meeting an eighty-plus-year-old couple. . .evacuees from Betsy, and
again Katrina. The only reason they are alive was because they recalled from Betsy
that a lot of people died from drowning or suffocation in the attics of their homes,
trying to escape the flood. Accordingly, this couple kept an axe to cut a hole in the
roof of the attic, in the event that there was another hurricane that forced them into
the attic. And that‘s what they did in Katrina. They were rescued from their home’s
rooftop in New Orleans East by helicopter.
The wife told me, “Judge, I never saw him move so fast in chopping the hole in
that attic!”
And he said to me, “You know, Judge, the only frightful moment I had was not
when the flood came and when I was chopping that hole—because I know I was going
to get us out and on the roof.” He said the most frightening moment was when he was
being lifted by the helicopter up in the air towards roaring helicopter blades. They
never flew on any aircraft before in their life. He related how the helicopter’s basket
kept swinging and turning. And he‘s laughing about it. And I‘m almost in tears.
Here they are telling me this story in a very nonchalant, casual, calm and sooth-
ing way. I‘m listening and I told them, “You gave me more strength in the telling of
that story than I‘m giving to you, and I‘m supposed to be your comforter as a Red
Cross volunteer.” When I came back the next day, they were evacuated from the Red
Cross shelter in Lafayette and sent to Houston. One of my biggest disappointments
since the evacuation was not being able to locate and follow up with this beautiful
couple. God bless them for giving this ill-prepared “Red Crosser” comfort.
* * *
New Orleans municipal elections were initially set for February 4, 2006, but were
postponed on account of state officials’ contentions that the elections could not be
AN INTERVIEW WITH JUDGE IVAN L. R. LEMELLE 77
pal-marable2-01-6.qxp  10/21/2007  1:44 PM  Page 77


--- PAGE 95 ---
held so soon after the devastation of Hurricanes Katrina and Rita. This postpone-
ment prompted a lawsuit by New Orleans citizens who argued that an indefinite
delay in the electoral process deprived citizens of their voting rights, in violation of
the Constitution and the Voting Rights Act. Consequently, the state set April 22,
2006, as the date for the primary election.
On February 23–24, 2006, and March 27, 2006, Judge Lemelle heard oral argu-
ment by plaintiffs’ counsel in Wallace v. Chertoff, Civil Action No. 05-5519 (which
was consolidated with Tisserand v. Blanco, Civil Action No. 05-6487, and ACORN
v. Blanco, Civil Action No. 06-611), arguing for a delay in the New Orleans munic-
ipal elections scheduled for April 22, 2006.
At the March 27, 2006 hearing, plaintiffs’ counsel, among other things, chal-
lenged the state election law requiring first-time voters who registered by mail to
vote in person at a registrar’s office or polling place. Counsel contended that requir-
ing evacuees to return to Louisiana to vote imposed on them an unreasonable finan-
cial burden, comparable to a poll tax. Plaintiffs’ counsel also challenged the state
election law that provided for in-state satellite voting in cities in the state of
Louisiana. Counsel contended that satellite voting should also be made available in
cities outside of Louisiana.
On March 27, 2006, Judge Lemelle denied the Wallace Plaintiffs Motion to
Reconsider, Alter, or Amend. “Recognizing the importance of the issues raised and
the need for further monitoring,” Judge Lemelle also ordered that the parties’ coun-
sel meet within that week and submit, among other things, “an update on voter
information/outreach initiatives, absentee balloting, polling locations and staffing of
same, election day monitoring” so that he could address any remaining issues. See
Order of Mar. 27, 2006.
New Orleans’s first post-Katrina municipal elections were held on April 22, 2006,
as scheduled. A runoff election was held on May 20, 2006. Incumbent Mayor Ray
Nagin was reelected after defeating Louisiana Lieutenant Governor Mitch Landrieu.
* * *
SM: Let me turn to the litigation that came before you in your court. I’ve looked at
some of the court filings and the record. The NAACP Legal Defense Fund and oth-
ers have argued that the state of Louisiana’s emergency election scheme was going to
disenfranchise a lot of displaced New Orleanians, and disproportionately African
Americans. The plaintiffs were concerned that first-time voters would have to come
back to Louisiana to vote and that they could not vote by absentee ballot. The plain-
tiffs were also concerned that evacuees would be disenfranchised because there was-
n’t satellite voting outside of the state of Louisiana. The plaintiffs wanted Atlanta,
Houston—some of the places where a lot of people had been dislocated—to also
have satellite voting sites. Consequently, plaintiffs asked for a delay in the primary
election. Can you tell me about your decision not to permit that delay?
JUDGE LEMELLE: I will try giving you the procedural background, how it got
started and, to some extent, how it ended.
The first of three lawsuits was brought by a group contending that Governor
Blanco’s call for an election in September [2006] was going to lead to disenfranchise-
ment of minority voters, and by not calling the election before then would have
SUZETTE M. MALVEAUX78
pal-marable2-01-6.qxp  10/21/2007  1:44 PM  Page 78


--- PAGE 96 ---
some impact on minority voters. So it was quite the opposite of what was eventually
argued when the NAACP LDF was allowed by me to join the case.
After several hearings, there were two other lawsuits that brought somewhat sim-
ilar, yet dissimilar, claims in terms of what relief they were seeking. The cases were
heard on an expedited basis.
After evidentiary hearings, I, ruled that if the state did not take action to call the
election on the date that the original plaintiffs wanted, I might be forced to do so—
on the basis that it would lead to disenfranchisement of African American voters. In
ruling, I strongly urged the state legislature to consider some other methods of vot-
ing, because after Katrina a lot of things—not just in terms of elections, but in terms
of everything that affected normal life activities—changed and were being done in
different ways. So I directed the parties to meet with the Legislature and the
Governor‘s representatives. I wanted everyone to get together to see if they could
come up with a plan—resolve some of the differences. If they couldn’t, they would
come back to me.
A plan was eventually presented. Initially, the plan was rejected by the Legislature,
causing the Legislative Black Caucus to walk out of the session. When I heard news
of the rejection, then obviously, I was disappointed. I expressed that disappointment
to parties’ counsel and told them to try again. Shortly thereafter, the Legislature
reconsidered the proposals. All the proposals passed that were being sought, except for
two. The two that did not get implemented, or were not considered, were the one that
was going to set up satellite voting outside of the state and the other concern[ing]
first-time voters. The major changes that passed involved certain provisions for first-
time voters and satellite voting outside of Orleans Parish in other parts of the state.
Ultimately, another hearing was called by me to consider what was done and not
done and whether or not there was evidence of voter disenfranchisement. None was
found. I signed a judgment recently on all three cases, and those cases are now
closed. I‘m told that the election returns showed the percentage of black turnout was
comparable to what it was pre-Katrina in mayoral elections. I don‘t know if that‘s
correct or not. It’s possible that another lawsuit involving similar claims might urge
similar issues for a different election. Courts of law can only rule based upon the
record evidence and applicable law, not upon outside-the-record influences. I based
my rulings on evidence presented to me in court, and that evidence led to the relief
I ultimately approved.
SM: I want to go to some of the media coverage at the time you made your decision.
There were a number of civil rights organizations that argued that requiring first-
time voters to vote in person was equivalent to a poll tax. Did that argument res-
onate with you at all, given the historical racial discrimination in Louisiana and
other states in the South?
JUDGE LEMELLE: I know the history of the Voting Rights Act. The firm that I
was with—all of us in the firm—at one time or another, had a civil rights case. We
worked on voting rights cases; we were involved in a number of election lawsuits as
lawyers for black litigants.
I think that the lawyers in this case, particularly the lawyers for the original set of
plaintiffs, who are local evacuees themselves in Lafayette and Houston—did a fine job.
AN INTERVIEW WITH JUDGE IVAN L. R. LEMELLE 79
pal-marable2-01-6.qxp  10/21/2007  1:44 PM  Page 79


--- PAGE 97 ---
Subsequently, when we allowed the NAACP Legal Defense team to get involved,
they did, as I expected, excellent work on behalf of their clients. Their legal argu-
ments were all on point. Did it influence me? It had influence. But again, we can
argue legal points of view and argue what the Voting Rights Act stands for, but you
still have that burden of proof, to show with factual evidence that this is a disenfran-
chisement in some manner or another. And if [disenfranchisement is] proven, the
relief has to be balanced and focused in light of several factors. There was insufficient
evidence to fashion any more relief than what was already obtained.
SM: Why not delay? If you could have permitted more people to be enfranchised,
then why not push back the election to make that possible?
JUDGE LEMELLE: There was a group of plaintiffs who wanted the election called
earlier, and I didn’t allow that; it would have been too early. There was also a belief
that holding it too late would also lead to disenfranchisement. Voters were entitled
to vote, and the elections were supposed to be held in February [2006]. They could-
n’t be held in February [2006]—that was too early. Do you delay it until possibly
September? Would that effectively lead to disfranchisement because of a likely
impact upon voter interest or turnout? Should that matter? It’s an important elec-
tion—mayor, city council, assessor—elections were designated under the city char-
ter for a certain date. T o delay it any further than necessary would be problematic.
New Orleanians wanted to come home; they wanted normalcy in their lives—at
least that road to normalcy, if not that exactly. And to do otherwise, to me, would
deflate their expectations. The most powerful tool of minorities in any society, in a
democratic society like ours, is the power of the vote. Every vote counts—regardless
of wealth, color, or any other factor—to determine the direction of society through
elected representatives of the people. That‘s power. The Voting Rights Act, while in
some respects imperfect, is designed to help protect that power. The people of our
city had a need, a right, to feel like they have a right to determine where this city‘s
headed. There were some angry voters out there. People, for one reason or another,
justified or not, felt official efforts to promote normalcy and rebuilding were ineffec-
tive or untimely. I cannot speculate whether my decision—coupled with outside
demonstrations related to it—contributed in positive ways to voter turnout. I like to
think it did.
My object or role in deciding a voting rights case is not what the turnout is,
because that‘s after the fact. It’s to deal with it before, and to make certain that legal
rights are protected. There was some speculation that black voters did not trust
absentee or mail-in balloting. But more black voters voted absentee and by mailing
in this election than ever before, because they were out of town, displaced. The same
motivations that cause a white person to vote absentee will be the same motivations
that cause a black person to vote absentee. Even more so here.
SM: Did you ever think, though, because the NAACP Legal Defense Fund, and
ACORN, and Jesse Jackson and Marc Morial [Urban League President and former
mayor of New Orleans]—because major civil rights organizations and leaders were
taking a position counter to yours that your position was not the correct one?
SUZETTE M. MALVEAUX80
pal-marable2-01-6.qxp  10/21/2007  1:44 PM  Page 80


--- PAGE 98 ---
JUDGE LEMELLE: I respect anyone’s right to disagree. However, I would not be a
good judge if I based my judicial rulings on matters outside the trial record.
In January 2005, Iraqi expatriates were able to participate in Iraq’s first demo-
cratic elections held in fifty years, by casting their ballots at satellite polling places
located in five cities throughout the United States. Had the attorneys come into
court and given me some evidence, some proof, something to show for instance, how
did the government set up the system of voting for displaced Iraqi nationals, I could
have considered such as evidence—they and such evidence were not offered.
I asked them, “Well, how do you do that? How is that done? What did it take?” If
I had gotten some proof along those lines, then it could have affected the extent of
available relief, but I never got those answers to my questions. I cannot base my deci-
sion in any case on what I read about in the press, see on TV , or hear on the radio.
My sister-in-law participated in the march [challenging the state’s emergency
election scheme]. She was back in New Orleans. She felt as if my decision was going
to make people come here and vote because they were going to be ticked off, they
were going to be mad. Later, when she saw the electoral turnout, she said, “Maybe
you did the right thing after all.” I hope she’s right. I called it based on the facts pre-
sented in court.
SM: There was an article that came out in the New York Timesthat said something
to the effect that you had chastized social activists for using people who were suffer-
ing.
1 Do you recall anything like that?
JUDGE LEMELLE: One of the lawyers during a hearing argued what some protest-
ers were saying. I asked in response, “Where are those civil rights leaders? They‘re
not in my courtroom today. I’ve asked for this before. If they have testimony on
something bring them to court. I can‘t go beyond the record. Where is that proof?”
I respect Jesse Jackson, I respect Marc Morial. Particularly Jesse Jackson, for his
early role in the hard and very dangerous period of the civil rights struggle. We‘re the
beneficiaries of his efforts. Certainly I would have been impressed by having Jesse
Jackson in my courtroom. Just his presence, and listening to what he had to say in my
courtroom, would have been a momentous occasion. But I couldn’t base my ruling
on what he had to say to the press. So it wasn’t chastising them; it was more to the
lawyers saying, “Are you going to call them as witnesses, counselor?” My intent was
not to chastise anyone. I didn’t have a right to. The press, perhaps, took it that way.
I do question anyone’s underestimation of the human resolve, the will of the peo-
ple to overcome Katrina’s wrath, by participating in the electoral process. Black vot-
ers, like white voters, have a right to participate in the electoral process. And to say
that simply because you are going to have to now vote absentee or by mail is not in
itself a violation of the Voting Rights Act. You have to show how that is going to neg-
atively impact black voters. My people are displaced. The evidence showed that they
were going to vote—for a number of reasons. I had one witness who was a major
civil rights leader in New Orleans and displaced to Georgia. He said that come hell
or high water he was going to vote, no matter what. That impressed me. He dis-
agreed with my ultimate findings. He thought there should be satellite voting out-
side the state. I respectfully disagree with the unproven notion that the absence of
some, as a legal matter, would lead to voter disenfranchisement.
AN INTERVIEW WITH JUDGE IVAN L. R. LEMELLE 81
pal-marable2-01-6.qxp  10/21/2007  1:44 PM  Page 81


--- PAGE 99 ---
SM: Do you think there are lessons here that have been learned?
JUDGE LEMELLE: Quite a bit. In terms of voter election laws, the public learned
more about the electoral process. I authorized, for instance, election day monitors to
further assist and educate voters and voting day commissioners. New Orleanians are
rebuilding and are on that bumpy road to normalcy. Voters in New Orleans East,
Gentilly, Lakeview, and Lower Ninth Ward, among others, will probably have to
return in the future to mega precincts in order to vote. I voted in Lafayette in both
elections. I was thankful to see and hear about voter commissioners and registrars
throughout Louisiana who were very hospitable, courteous, and professional to dis-
placed voters.
SM: If there‘s data that shows that some of the election procedures had a dispropor-
tionate impact on African American voters, then changes could take place for the
September election. For example, satellite voting polls outside of Louisiana and per-
mitting first-time voters to vote by mail. Maybe those kinds of changes could occur
in time for the September election.
JUDGE LEMELLE: And you’ve got some other variables too. A big unknown right
now is, “Of the New Orleanians who evacuated, who‘s returning back? Are they
returning back?” We did a lot of soul searching to determine whether or not we‘re
going to rebuild or return to New Orleans. I wish I could convince everybody who
left to come back, but I realize they have to make their own personal decisions after
assessing many factors that affect individual concerns.
SM: As the only African American judge in the Eastern District,. . .you are [proba-
bly] seen as a leader and a role model. Do you think that people understand what
was behind your decision to return?
JUDGE LEMELLE: I’m one little cog in the wheel amongst several cogs. Am I flat-
tered by the thought that somehow I may inspire people to action? Of course. I‘m
taking a risk like everyone else does in rebuilding. The future is uncertain, with no
guarantees.
SM: Did you ever think about not coming back?
JUDGE LEMELLE: No, never did; that never entered my mind.
SM: Why?
JUDGE LEMELLE: Suzette, when I came back the first time—and as devastated as
my home was—I didn’t want to leave. I didn’t have power. I didn’t have water or gas.
I didn’t have anything, but I wanted to stay on the second floor; just me, I wouldn’t
put my family through that. But there was mold everywhere and people said, “Oh
no, you‘re going to get sick.” My family would have suffered more out of concern
for me had I done that. So I didn’t stay. But every time I go back home, it’s very dif-
ficult for me to leave. . .very difficult. Concern over the suffering conditions of
homes and neighbors drive me to return. Remembrances—Lake Willow constantly
pulls me back and one day I will stay.
SUZETTE M. MALVEAUX82
pal-marable2-01-6.qxp  10/21/2007  1:44 PM  Page 82


--- PAGE 100 ---
What really hurts is when I hear people who are not coming back, like my neigh-
bor, a physician, at the peak of his career, in a home he and his wife put everything
into. Yeah, [sighing] those are the hurting things—to lose neighbors, friends, family,
et cetera. We learn our lessons and one of the things I guess you learn in this is who
are your true friends. And you learn a lot about human nature as a result of it.
SM: And about yourself.
JUDGE LEMELLE: Oh! A lot about myself. A lot of things I didn’t even want to
know! It scares me! [ He laughs.] Like I told you when I didn’t want to leave the
house. I look back on that and I said, “Hmm, what would have happened to me had
I stayed?” Then again, I was there yesterday. I go as often as I can.
Life in the “Big Easy” has everyone Katrina-weary, yet steadfast in seeing the city’s
rebirth.
N
OTE
1. “Judge Orders New Orleans to Proceed With Election,” New York Times, March 28,
2006.
AN INTERVIEW WITH JUDGE IVAN L. R. LEMELLE 83
pal-marable2-01-6.qxp  10/21/2007  1:44 PM  Page 83


--- PAGE 101 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 102 ---
Part II
CULTURE, TRADITION, 
AND IDENTITY
pal-marable2-02-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:44 PM  Page 85


--- PAGE 103 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 104 ---
Chapter 7
NEW ORLEANS’S AFRICAN
AMERICAN MUSICAL
TRADITIONS: THE SPIRIT
AND SOUL OF A CITY
MICHAEL WHITE
It has become fashionable to label August 2005’s devastating Hurricane Katrina as
“the greatest natural disaster in American history,” when considering the combined
loss of life, massive destruction, economic impact, and prolonged displacement of
citizens. What is less often discussed is that from the perspective of New Orleans’s
African American population, Katrina’s aftermath has potentially launched the great-
est cultural disaster in this country’s history. The United States is a comparatively
young nation that lacks the presence of many original vernacular traditions and the
rich cultural history that can be found in Africa, Europe, and Asia. Despite this, the
city of New Orleans embodies the variety, longevity, level of community involve-
ment, and social relevance of its several one-hundred-plus-year-old African
American folk traditions.
Though not generally understood beyond its entertainment value, the best known
New Orleans cultural tradition is jazz. First taking shape around the late 1890s, jazz’s
lively rhythms and largely improvised instrumental melodies facilitated its transition
from its birthplace throughout the world. By the 1920s, this musical genre had begun
to influence most popular music and had become the ideological basis for the spir-
ited “Jazz Age.” It was also well on its way to being universally viewed as “America’s
only truly original artistic contribution.” Other local customs—such as brass bands,
social club parades, jazz funerals, and Mardi Gras Indian processions—have, until
recent decades, remained almost hidden in the heart of New Orleans’s African
American community—socially, physically, and psychologically removed from most
of white New Orleans and a large number of culturally isolated blacks.
pal-marable2-02-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:44 PM  Page 87


--- PAGE 105 ---
The African American population of New Orleans shares with the rest of black
America a varied and distinct existence formed by centuries of blending of African,
European, and other ethnicities. Many black visitors from other American cities,
Africa, the Caribbean, and Latin America notice New Orleans’s uniqueness, yet they
also express a strong spiritual and ancestral identification with the city as feeling like
“home.” New Orleans’s physical distance from other large urban areas, its varied social
makeup, and its cultural history have combined to form one of the most rich, diverse,
and distinctive subcultures in American history. The local black population con-
tributed greatly to New Orleans’s unique nature, spirit, and identity. Though not often
recognized or acknowledged as such—even among natives—jazz represents a synthe-
sis and transformation of several cultures, with a dominant West African influence,
that laid the fertile background from which emerged the plethora of New Orleans’s
rich cultural traditions. Many who view the New Orleans jazz tradition rarely recog-
nize that jazz and other local music are all aspects of an endemic community lifestyle
and philosophy that also manifests in a unique local approach to neighborhoods, fam-
ily, language, cooking, dancing, humor, celebration, worship, and other aspects of life.
M
USIC IN NEW ORLEANS AND THE AFRICAN AMERICAN POPULATION
Since its founding and early colonization by the French in 1718, New Orleans was des-
tined to be different from other American cities. Its location along the Mississippi River
near the Gulf of Mexico contributed to its use as a major port—and made possible
long-term exposure to Caribbean and other Latin American cultural influences. From
the beginning, hardship and tragedy resulting from a geographically harsh and vulner-
able environment and a series of devastating natural disasters led to a common special
appreciation for life. Many holidays and feast days observed in the predominantly
Catholic city also contributed to a longstanding obsession among New Orleanians
with excessive pleasure seeking through food, alcohol, music, dancing, and celebra-
tion. These customary “necessities” often took precedence over “less serious issues,”
such as punctuality, business, and progress.
During the nineteenth century, New Orleans experienced a wide range of musi-
cal activity—from opera and classical forms, to military marching bands, dance
music, religious songs and various ethnic folk music styles. The large, diverse popu-
lation of slaves and free blacks was often exposed to and participated in an unusu-
ally wide range of musical styles. Throughout much of the nineteenth century, a
tradition of authentic West African drumming, chanting, dancing, and celebrating
was performed by scores of slaves and later free blacks on Sunday afternoons at an
open public field known as Congo Square. African-style musical practices existed in
New Orleans far beyond the legally sanctioned public spectacles of Congo Square in
secret voodoo ceremonies, in private locations and along levees, bayous, and Lake
Pontchartrain. While these ancestral traditions evolved and disappeared under-
ground by the twentieth century, their existence is strongly felt in the spirit of excit-
ing rhythms, creative dancing, and collective community celebration that colors and
serves as the foundation for most indigenous and local versions of music, ranging
from jazz, gospel, and rhythm and blues, to funk and contemporary hip-hop styles.
MICHAEL WHITE88
pal-marable2-02-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:44 PM  Page 88


--- PAGE 106 ---
The cultural diversity within “black New Orleans” is also unique in America,
consisting of distinctive strains of African tribes and significant blendings of
Haitians, Americans Indians, French, Spanish, English, and other ethnic groups—
all of whom contributed to the rich cultural heritage of pre-Katrina’s native popula-
tion. Miscegenation, a practice that stems from the French practice of long-term
illicit liaisons with black women, brought about an almost unheard-of third social
tier: the Creoles of Color. For many generations, these mulattos were a highly visi-
ble and vibrant force in New Orleans culture. They were a privileged class, comfort-
ably wedged between black and white society. Among the largely free Creoles, many
were well schooled in European classical music, with several developing active careers
as performers, composers, teachers, and devotees.
The tense post-Reconstruction social climate had important effects on black New
Orleans culture. New Orleans had been a city in which blacks were accustomed to a
certain degree of freedom, comfort, and mobility. The optimism resulting from win-
ning legal battles, successful civil rights protests, and having black elected officials
and government promises began to disappear under a new wave of white supremacy,
violence, and racial oppression. Creoles of Color were officially and legally defined
as “Negroes,” resulting in the loss of their privileged status, economic power, and
other rights. An air of confusion, anger, and defiance arose among a collective black
population whose quest for freedom and equality would not be easily compromised.
O
RIGINS OF JAZZ
While national black leaders like W . E. B. Du Bois and Booker T . Washington
sought ways to organize, combat racism, and improve the black condition in
American society, black New Orleans’s most significant response to these issues was
a locally contained cultural revolution. As many legal struggles were being stifled—
as by the landmark Plessy v. Ferguson case, which originated among black New
Orleans activists—social and economic conditions worsened. The defiant spirit of
the times and the traditional celebratory character of New Orleans synthesized to
create a new musical form—jazz—which expressed, through sound and related
movement (dancing), the hopes, aspirations, emotions, and needs of black New
Orleans. This new music (not called “jazz” until years later) was a collective creation
drawn from various musical, social, cultural, ancestral, ethnic, and religious elements
that formed the total black New Orleans experience. There were a number of prac-
tical and logical reasons for the origins of jazz.
Along with the forced legal merger between blacks and Creoles of Color came a
cultural one, which led to a great degree of teaching, exchange and blending of dis-
tinct musical traditions. The Creoles’ familiarity with European classical instru-
ments, techniques, and repertoire synthesized with the local African American folk
tradition of work songs, spirituals, blues, ragtime, dance music, ethnic folk songs,
rhythmic interplay and authentic African-style celebrations to create a new form of
expression that would have far-reaching social and cultural implications and would
also change the direction of western music.
Regardless of any economic or social conditions, the local obsession with
music, dancing, and good times never waned among most black and whites in late
NEW ORLEANS’S AFRICAN AMERICAN MUSICAL TRADITIONS 89
pal-marable2-02-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:44 PM  Page 89


--- PAGE 107 ---
nineteenth-century New Orleans. African American musicians had many opportu-
nities to perform in a variety of contexts for all social classes. A tradition of skilled
black and Creole reading musicians, who played in refined dance orchestras and
European-style marching bands, had been a source of pride and respect. This prac-
tice grew steadily after the Civil War.
Like other Southern areas with large black populations, New Orleans also had
various types of African American folk music in the form of work songs, street cries,
spirituals, and dance music. After the Civil War and into the twentieth century,
thousands of poor black immigrants from neighboring states brought musical tradi-
tions, such as the rural blues, which were absorbed into the rich gumbo pot of local
sound and expression.
It was in this climate of social turbulence and vibrant musical activity during the
late 1890s that legendary cornetist Charles “Buddy” Bolden and others were among
the first to employ a looser, freer, more exciting, personal, improvised approach to
playing ragtime, blues, hymns, marches, and popular dance music. Music had been
an attractive option for African Americans to earn extra income and achieve a greater
degree of mobility. The local demand for music grew to exceed the number of trained
reading players and available musical scores. As a result, bands were often smaller, and
by necessity many groups consisted of nonreading musicians who memorized,
adapted or improvised their parts. Bolden was among the earliest to experiment with
various music styles and to apply vocal effects, feeling, and rhythms of black blues
and hymn singing to horn playing. Soon, this hotter, more exciting style became pop-
ular among both musicians and dancers in public parks, dance halls and community
parades. Though never universally accepted, jazz groups gradually replaced many of
the refined reading society orchestras and marching bands that had previously dom-
inated. Early jazz did not attempt to ignore or destroy the rules of European classical
music (which governed most popular music of the day); it extended and reinterpreted
conventional musical principles by blending them with an African-influenced folk
approach to tone, melody, and rhythm. Underlying jazz performance was an almost
existential philosophy of music and life, which offered the public a living, visible, and
audible democratic model of the freedom and equality being sought by African
Americans in social, economic, and political arenas throughout the nation.
More than a limited repertoire of specific songs, early New Orleans jazz was an
approach that was applicable to music of almost any style. It was characterized by
collective improvisation and steady driving rhythms—created by various combina-
tions of a horn section (trumpet or cornet, clarinet and trombone) and a rhythm sec-
tion (banjo, bass, drums and piano). Under a steady, danceable rhythmic pulse, the
trumpet played a melodic lead as the other horns “answered” in call-and-response-
type musical conversations. Much more than the stereotype of just “playing what
you feel,” there was a consciously constructed ensemble approach consisting of free-
dom with a general role or direction for each instrument. In this context, equal
importance was given to the development of both individual and collective aspects.
Possessing an individual personal tone and expression was as important an objective
as was using one’s sound for the sake of creating a more swinging, unified and iden-
tifiable group. Most early New Orleans jazz emphasized this instrumental ensemble
approach and limited the use of vocals and improvised solos.
MICHAEL WHITE90
pal-marable2-02-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:45 PM  Page 90


--- PAGE 108 ---
By the early 1900s, jazz had become a functional musical expression of the core
local black community (and had also begun to be adopted by some whites). It was
seen and heard in many neighborhoods at almost any time, accompanying a wide
variety of functions, including dances, picnics, boat rides, sporting events, bars, wed-
dings, and parties. Many families used jazz as a form of diversion by forming bands
with each member playing a different instrument. An active musical family tradition
developed, which contributed greatly to the core of professional and seminal New
Orleans jazz players. This custom continues as a vital aspect of local culture and
music across several generations and musical styles. The range of early jazzmen went
from self-taught nonreaders to well-trained reading musicians. Several prominent
African American music teachers had provided varying degrees of schooling—both
privately and in groups—to a large number of young future jazz players.
B
RASS BANDS AND COMMUNITY PARADES
One of the most important aspects of the New Orleans jazz tradition—in terms of
its social significance and potential for widespread community interaction—is that
it has also functioned at the center of a vibrant street culture: open to all ages, classes,
genders, and ethnic groups. A common occurrence in the early 1900s was seeing jazz
bands playing atop advertising wagons that rolled through various neighborhoods.
When two wagons met, the bands would engage in a competitive “cutting contest,”
which drew large crowds of “judges.” The most widespread and socially relevant
function of jazz among New Orleans’s African American population was the tradi-
tion of street parades, which continued throughout the twentieth century and into
2005’s Hurricane Katrina. By 1900, dozens of benevolent societies and “social aid
and pleasure clubs” had become a well-needed black staple that addressed a variety
of social, political, and economic concerns and provided much-cherished entertain-
ment. It was these organizations that became the principal sponsors of jazz-related
activities in the African American community, the most popular of which were
dances, parades, and funerals.
The tradition of black social club parades was very different in style, purpose, and
form from the better-known, mainly white Mardi Gras parades of New Orleans.
These annual social club functions passed through black neighborhoods on Sundays
and lasted several hours. The community-oriented processions consisted of three
main components: social club members, brass bands, and the crowd. Social clubs
may have had several divisions of elaborately adorned members. Often, a consider-
able amount of money was spent on special outfits purchased for one day’s use.
Many times, club members wore extremely bold color combinations or extreme vari-
ations of the same color. As they walked and danced through the streets, club mem-
bers carried beautifully adorned umbrellas, canes, baskets, fans, or handkerchiefs, all
of which were used for dancing.
Forming a visual contrast to club divisions were one or more hired brass bands,
which were traditionally adorned in dark band uniforms or black pants, white shirts
and white band caps. A typical traditional New Orleans brass band is a ten- to
twelve-piece “marching” (in reality, just walking) jazz ensemble, consisting of three
NEW ORLEANS’S AFRICAN AMERICAN MUSICAL TRADITIONS 91
pal-marable2-02-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:45 PM  Page 91


--- PAGE 109 ---
trumpets, two trombones, a tuba, a clarinet, a bass drum, a snare drum and two
lower brass instruments (later replaced by saxophones). As with smaller jazz combos,
collective improvisation and a loosely executed role for each instrument are the
essence of their performance style. The bands walked between club divisions to a
static military beat when not playing their standard repertoire of jazzed-up marches,
hymns, blues, and other lively songs. The louder, more raucous brass band sound
was characterized by a distinctive, very danceable underlying beat—drawn from
West African rhythms. This medium tempo pulse and its variations were promi-
nently played on the bass drum—in counterpoint to a steady basic tuba line. This
“second line beat” served as the motivating force behind spirited mutual inspiration
and interaction between musicians and dancers. The distinctive brass band parade
rhythm is the foundation for and a dominant influence on not only New Orleans
jazz, but also other local musical styles.
The last but equally important part of a black social club parade was the “second
line”—a crowd of up to thousands of anonymous followers who seemed to appear
from nowhere with the first hypnotic three-beat song introduction of the bass drum.
Much more than casual observers, this multitude of souls followed along the side
and in back of the parade—dancing, cheering, and collecting others throughout its
duration. The “second line” dance of the club members and crowd was a free-form
West African–influenced set of movements that accompanied and paralleled jazz—
in terms of its characteristic collective and individually improvised variations.
“Second liners” often used a basic shuffle step with feet close to the ground, but an
endless variety of jumping, crawling, shaking, spinning, and other motions were also
common. Despite significant changes in brass band sound and appearance after the
late 1970s, the overall look and spirit of social club parades continued into August
2005 much as they had for over one hundred years. Finding oneself in the midst of
such a spectacle could cause one to feel like one was being hypnotically swept along
in a massive spiritual “human tsunami.” It was impossible to see or hear more than
a fraction of the millions of subtle ripples of motion, sound, and ecstasy that regu-
larly occurred during these processions. A casual glance in any direction would reveal
frenzied dancers everywhere: on the tops of cars, swinging from light posts, “hover-
ing” over the roofs of building, riding through the crowd on the backs of others,
moving in and out of impromptu circle formations, or gliding belly down in the
street—all the while keeping perfect time and pace with the parade.
In this sea of various shades of black skin there were young faces and old faces;
soft faces and hard faces; faces on bicycles and in cars, doorways and windows.
Normal sensory perception was altered, as time, space, weather, age, class, and phys-
ical ailments seemed to disappear in a steamy tidal wave of hot music and dancing.
Walking canes and crutches that rarely left the ground were suddenly hoisted high,
like the club members’ umbrellas. Elderly faces, wrinkled, tired, and helpless from
years of struggle—now glowed with youthful joy. Babies, too young to walk, glee-
fully wiggled in their mothers’ arms—also in tempo with the music. Even house pets
occasionally came along and got caught up in the frenzy. Major disappointment
often came at parade’s end, when the participants “awoke” from the trance to dis-
cover themselves on another side of town and facing the difficult task of having to
“walk” back the same distance they had just danced.
MICHAEL WHITE92
pal-marable2-02-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:45 PM  Page 92


--- PAGE 110 ---
T o some participants these activities were nothing more than fun—a pleasant
diversion from daily routines. For many more conscious African Americans of New
Orleans, a redefinition of existence—pointing toward the unjust social and political
structure—was a fundamental underlying theme of early jazz and social club
parades. One typical example is the popular standard European march song (with its
common challenging array of strict rules and varying key changes, several sections,
and harmonic and melodic shifts). In New Orleans both musicians (and dancers)
regularly transformed this originally static form into a freer, more rhythmic, relaxed,
personal, lively and enjoyable set of musical possibilities.
Thus, at the time of their origin, these parades offered the black community a
euphoric transformation into a temporary democratic world characterized by free,
open participation and self-expression through sound, movement, and symbolic
visual statements. A variety of passions and attitudes that may have been repressed
in normal daily life could be released in the security of these processions. Impositions
and limitations of “second class” social status could be replaced by a democratic exis-
tence in which one could be or become things not generally open to blacks in the
“normal” world: competitive, victorious, defiant, equal, unique, hostile, humorous,
aloof, beautiful, brilliant, wild, sensual, and even majestic.
The social club parade often became a massive, almost religious-like gathering of
African Americans, which, under the guise of entertainment, could also be a form of
protest: a show of strength and unity and a defiant march toward freedom and democ-
racy in a society where such assemblies would normally be discouraged or illegal.
There were also other implications and symbolism: from the loud, colorful club
outfits (in contrast with the more conservative band uniforms), through the unre-
stricted freedom of the “second line” dancing, which often included dancing with or
on top of any objects or structures that one came upon, to the occasional songs,
which had breaks (brief pauses) that were filled in by shouts from the crowd. What
was so blatantly (and simply) demonstrated time and again by various aspects of
social club parades was that all forms of existence are acceptable and can function
together. T o a larger extent the concepts of possibility and transformation in music
and dance had implications pointing toward a more just restructuring of society, pol-
itics, and life in general. Over the course of a several-month-long social club parade
season (and throughout the twentieth century), a large segment of the community—
people of all ages and backgrounds—had the opportunity to reap the benefits of par-
ticipating in these unique customs: psychological and social uplift, release and
coping devices, acknowledgement and acceptance, and a shared spiritual connection
to community and ancestral traditions.
Funerals with music, labeled “jazz funerals” in recent decades, were a time-hon-
ored tradition and variation of social club parades. While the most-publicized twen-
tieth-century jazz funerals were held in honor of deceased musicians, the majority
of these ceremonies were given for members of benevolent societies and social aid
and pleasure clubs. The funeral ceremony juxtaposed two different perspectives on
death in the context of an open community celebration. After the religious service,
a brass band (adorned in black suits) lined up outside the doors of the church or
funeral home and played a slow, solemn dirge or hymn as the casket was placed into
the hearse. Then began a procession led by an elaborately adorned grand marshal,
NEW ORLEANS’S AFRICAN AMERICAN MUSICAL TRADITIONS 93
pal-marable2-02-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:45 PM  Page 93


--- PAGE 111 ---
followed by the band, social club members (also in black), the hearse, and finally the
family (in funeral cars). As the procession proceeded, accompanied by a muted snare
drum beat and more sad music, a crowd gathered and walked respectfully alongside.
Slow mournful songs, like “Flee As A Bird” and “Nearer, My God, to Thee,” high-
lighted the sadness and sense of loss felt by family and friends. The solemnity of this
part of the service was reflected in the music, which was characterized by preacher-
like trumpet melodies, “amen” responses from other horns, shrill high note clarinet
wails, and a gloomy death march pulse throughout. As the procession neared the
cemetery or had proceeded for several blocks, the band lined both sides of the street
and played one last dirge as the remaining procession passed through. This final pub-
lic sendoff was called “cutting the body loose.”
After the burial, or when the hearse and family were a respectable distance away
(en route to the cemetery), then began a joyous celebration accompanied by lively
up-tempo songs like “Oh, Didn’t He Ramble” and “When The Saints Go Marchin’
In” and “second line” dancing by the crowd. The ensuing procession lasted for sev-
eral blocks—sometimes miles—in this final recollection of the deceased’s good time
on earth. More importantly, this jubilant expression reflected a symbolic happiness
because the dead person has attained the “ultimate freedom” from earthly burdens
and has transitioned to a glorious union with the Creator. This is a New Orleans rep-
resentation of the biblical reference to “rejoicing at death.”
Religious community members—who sometimes avoided the frenzied, “sinful”
social club events—were exposed to and participated in local music–related customs
through a longstanding (but now virtually extinct) tradition of church parades. Held
early on Sunday mornings to celebrate anniversaries and religious holidays, these
Protestant (usually Baptist) processions had divisions of church members attired in
white dresses and black suits. Brass bands played jazzed-up, lively versions of tradi-
tional hymns like “Lord, Lord, Lord” and “Bye and Bye” as church members and
ministers strutted gracefully through otherwise quiet community streets. Here, the
demonstration of strength, unity, and desire for freedom and social justice was acted
out from the more solemn religious perspective of paying homage to and petition-
ing the Creator.
Another unique New Orleans African American cultural tradition that developed
during the turbulent post-Reconstruction period of the 1880s and continued into the
2000s was the Mardi Gras Indians. Self described as “gangs,” the Mardi Gras Indian
tribes consisted of elaborately costumed blacks (predominantly males) who paraded
through neighborhood streets on Mardi Gras and St. Joseph’s Day. The outward pur-
pose of these groups was to pay homage to the Native American spirit of resistance
and to recognize cultural and ancestral ties between the two races. In appearance,
music, and procession style, the Mardi Gras Indians were actually expanding the local
tradition of transformed West African–style celebrations seen at Congo Square and
other locations. This was yet another poplar music-related custom that involved large
segments of the black community through massive open attendance and participation.
Most Indians were also from New Orleans’s lower-economic-level neighborhoods.
Much time, money, and effort were spent preparing their boldly colored, breathtak-
ingly beautiful costumes—all original creations that reflected traditional folk charac-
ters or individual statements. Several months of collective work from family and
MICHAEL WHITE94
pal-marable2-02-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:45 PM  Page 94


--- PAGE 112 ---
friends were necessary to produce each year’s cherished new suits made of feathers,
beads, sequins, and other materials. Within the dozens of tribes—which had names
like the Creole Wild West and the Golden Eagles—there were coveted positions, like
the “big chief,” “wild man,” and “spy boy”—each carrying different levels of responsi-
bility and degrees of honor and respect.
In addition to preparing new costumes, other year-round activities, such as musi-
cal rehearsals and parading on special days, all contributed to a transformed existence
in which pride, strength, respect, and nobility masked harsh everyday realities and
difficult socio-economic conditions. So serious was the Mardi Gras Indian persona
that deadly confrontations often resulted from random encounters of rival tribes on
carnival day. Fortunately, modern day “battles” were of a friendlier nature, taking the
form of competition for the most beautiful costume or the most skilled dancing. As
they paraded through black neighborhoods, the Indians acted out a series of rituals
through chanting, song, and dance. Special traditional Indian songs were sung in
English and in unknown or secret dialects. Singing was accompanied by a “small
band” of nonuniformed marchers, who used drums, tambourines and other percus-
sion instruments to play long stretches of increasingly intense African-style
polyrhythms. Indian dances were a series of West African–inspired movements and
gestures, yet very different from “second line” dancing. Like social club parades and
funerals, Mardi Gras Indian processions attracted large crowds of followers, who
usually walked, clapped, and cheered along the entire route. These parades tradition-
ally proceeded defiantly without legal permits over unplanned and improvised paths.
Though traditional New Orleans–style jazz was the only musical form to actually
originate in the Crescent City, the local musical heritage is also marked by stylistic
diversity. A unique approach to singing, piano playing, drumming, and horn play-
ing for the basis of a “New Orleans sound” has been transmitted into other more
contemporary musical styles. This community has also produced distinctive local
versions of other musical genres—such as rhythm & blues, funk, and hip-hop. These
styles often reflect inspiration and influence from the vernacular music of brass
bands, jazz, and Mardi Gras Indian traditions, especially in terms of rhythm,
melodic phrasing, and conveying the local community spirit. Fats Domino, the
Dixie Cups, the Neville Brothers, Allen T oussaint, Irma Thomas, Juvenile, Master P ,
and Lil Wayne are few of the local artists from the wellspring of New Orleans talent
to garner national attention. A small modern jazz movement, fostered by saxophon-
ist/producer Harold Batiste in the 1950s and 1960s, gained momentum after the
1980s through the efforts of performers/teachers like Ellis Marsalis, Alvin Batiste,
and Edward “Kidd” Jordan. These men taught several of the current international
stars of contemporary jazz—including Wynton and Branford Marsalis, T errance
Blanchard, Donald Harrison, and Nicholas Payton. Though not having as wide-
spread community involvement and social significance as traditional jazz, social club
parades and Mardi Gras Indians, other local musical genres are the products of the
same environment of supportive family and community traditions in a culture where
musical activities, creativity, and community celebrations are a way of life.
No uniquely New Orleans style of religious music came to prominence; however,
common Southern gospel forms were also influenced by the sound and spirit of local
traditions in the city’s many vibrant Protestant church choirs. A strong family church
NEW ORLEANS’S AFRICAN AMERICAN MUSICAL TRADITIONS 95
pal-marable2-02-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:45 PM  Page 95


--- PAGE 113 ---
tradition has produced many singers and musicians who performed only in religious
settings or have had successful crossover careers in other genres. It is no coincidence
that the rich environment of jazz and street parades of her hometown helped to nur-
ture a young Mahalia Jackson (1912–72), who would go on to become “the world’s
greatest gospel singer.”
When considering the potential impact and implication of Hurricane Katrina on
New Orleans’s culture and traditions, one must recognize that the city and all of its
customs (which evolved remarkably little throughout three-quarters of the twentieth
century), had been undergoing a series of dramatic changes during the thirty years
prior to the storm. Before Katrina, New Orleans music and culture found themselves
in a state of transition in which commercialism and other changes had infused and
transformed local traditions to the point that both authentic and generic styles
existed together. In a popular, commercially oriented environment, the idea of “New
Orleans music” came to mean many things to many people: local rhythm and blues,
black traditional New Orleans jazz, modern jazz, Bourbon Street, brass bands,
Dixieland, Cajun and zydeco music, Mardi Gras Indians, white rock groups, etc.
Factors that affect lives across America—like computers, cell phones, cable televi-
sion, video games, and other technological developments—have also affected local
cultural traditions. Younger generations often approach concepts like tradition, race,
culture, music, etc., from an understandably different perspective than their elders.
Their thoughts, values, orientation, needs, views, and experiences are of a more
modern world; they face different realities. Some younger African Americans do
sense a uniqueness about being from New Orleans, but many are more in tune with
the majority of American youth—and think more generically than regionally.
Education, family background, and class differences affect the likelihood of partici-
pation in local traditions. Though some continue customs practiced by their ances-
tors for generations, others bypass those traditions and seek a “better life” and take
advantage of “greater” opportunities.
Contemporary inner-city social problems have had more than a “healthy” exis-
tence in the black New Orleans neighborhoods from which local traditions origi-
nated during the thirty years prior to Hurricane Katrina. In some ways, it is
miraculous that one-hundred-year-old-plus folk traditions could remain alive and
vital in a community in which drugs, murder, poor health, illegitimacy, poverty,
unemployment, illiteracy, urban decay, and other problems regularly rank among the
worst in the nation. Like several other American cities, New Orleans saw a massive
level of urban decay during the post–civil rights years; this was caused by diverse fac-
tors such as “white flight” to the suburbs, ineffective political leadership, corruption,
indifference, failure to keep up public facilities and institutions, the Louisiana oil
bust, incompetence, racism, and an seemingly unstoppable influx of illegal drugs
and weapons into the black community.
Race relations in New Orleans were, as always, a confusing mixture of genuine
interaction and brotherhood, open and covert hostility, and a disturbing mutual tol-
erance or acceptance of the longstanding socioeconomic class structure and racial
boundaries. Despite a 67-percent majority black population, significant progress in
higher education and other areas, a rising black middle class, and the election of
black mayors and other public officials beginning in the late 1970s, African
MICHAEL WHITE96
pal-marable2-02-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:45 PM  Page 96


--- PAGE 114 ---
Americans in New Orleans continued to retain a high level of poverty and a low level
of business and economic power. A small number of prominent white families
tightly retained control over much of the social, economic, and industrial condition
of New Orleans. The imbalance of power is reflected by a static, poor, black labor
force destined for menial service-industry jobs. Apathy, a breakdown of social and
family values, and a poorly maintained public education system are factors that have
continued to maintain the “status quo” and influence the direction of local tradi-
tions. A once-thriving and competitive school music program (often an indirect
feeder to brass bands and other musical forms) has suffered greatly due to program
and budget cuts, as well as an overall decay of the local public school system.
Despite New Orleans’s continuing social problems and a decline of activities
between the 1930s and early 1960s, all of the city’s black cultural traditions saw a
period of transformation and renewal that brought them to the height of their pop-
ularity during the decades leading up to Hurricane Katrina. Beginning in the 1940s,
a worldwide “revival” of interest in traditional New Orleans-style jazz led to the first
authentic brass band recordings in the late 1950s. Though far from national best
sellers, collections of this underground “traditional soul music” of black New
Orleans (and subsequently the rituals and organizations around it) made it accessi-
ble to the outside world for the first time. One repercussive effect of the “revival”
began in the early 1960s, when the brass bands, in particular Dejan’s Olympia Brass
Band, were promoted as symbols of traditional jazz and New Orleans itself in the
city’s growing tourist industry. The environment of hotels, conventions, tourists, and
businessmen—vastly different from that of social clubs, ”second liners,” and neigh-
borhood streets—resulted in a commercialization of brass bands that greatly altered
their size, appearance, sound, and demeanor. Ironically, the outside success and vis-
ibility of a few brass bands—which came to include performances at major festivals,
international travel, television and movie appearances, documentary films and high
profile political engagements, helped to renew and inspire interest in brass bands
within the black community.
By the late 1970s, Mardi Gras Indians (and to a lesser degree social aid and pleas-
ure clubs) began to make occasional appearances in the outside commercial arena.
New economic possibilities, an ever-present local celebratory nature, and the homol-
ogous and static condition of many inner-city residents all contributed to a renais-
sance of community cultural traditions that continued into the early 2000s. Newer
generations and current social conditions resulted in several changes in these tradi-
tions, which yielded both positive and negative effects. The most drastic, far-reach-
ing change in local black musical traditions was the evolution and explosive growth
of brass bands that began in the late 1970’s and has gained momentum since the
1980s. In addition to increased work opportunities for brass bands in the commer-
cial and tourist industries, several other factors contributed to a new sound, look,
and attitude in what can be called the “brass band revolution.” The deaths and retire-
ments of older players, Sunday jazz brunches, increased travel by established groups,
the rising cost of professional union musicians, a static traditional jazz repertoire, the
heyday of a vibrant popular high school band tradition, the initiation of dozens of
younger players into veteran trumpeter Ernest “Doc” Paulin’s popular nonunion
brass band, and the efforts of legendary guitarist Danny Barker, who founded the
NEW ORLEANS’S AFRICAN AMERICAN MUSICAL TRADITIONS 97
pal-marable2-02-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:45 PM  Page 97


--- PAGE 115 ---
first children’s brass band (Fairview) to help young people learn about their jazz her-
itage, were all important factors in causing this evolution.
Many changes in society were reflected in the new wave of brass bands. Soon the
traditional marches and repertoire, collective improvisation, uniforms, and some
instrumentation were being replaced by T-shirts, street clothes, smaller groups (eight
pieces or less), riffing horn sections, faster tempos, and bebop solos. The new sound
was still “New Orleans,” but dominant overtones were not as much from “traditional
jazz” as they were from a combination of rhythm and blues, modern jazz, and Mardi
Gras Indian music. First the Dirty Dozen, then the Rebirth, and then a continuous
flow of dozens of new, younger bands virtually replaced the few remaining tradi-
tional brass bands—both in the black community and the commercial world. By the
early 1990s it had become as common for several competitive younger groups to
gain international success as recording artists and night club acts, as well as to play
stage shows and concerts, as it was for them to play for social club parades and funer-
als in the local black community. Some “retired” from community processions alto-
gether in favor of more lucrative outside work. In 1986 the Rebirth Brass Band
released a vocal/instrumental recording; “Do What Ya Wanna,” which became the
first-ever brass band local radio hit and an enduring favorite at sports events, parties,
weddings, Mardi Gras, and a host of other New Orleans festivities. In a sense, this
song’s title, simple form, and hypnotic tuba riff signaled the spirit and direction of a
new era of brass bands and community processions.
The younger brass bands presented a steady repertoire of original songs and
themes from various sources, which were converted into their modern style. Despite
complaints from some older club members and brass band veterans that the newer
groups’ music was too fast and frantic for the traditionally relaxed, medium tempo
“second line” dancing, the competitive modern groups held a firm reign over most
community street processions. The fresher contemporary sound, extremely casual
appearance, and defiant attitude of change satisfied the youthful needs of self-expres-
sion and rebellious identity for new generations of social club members, “second lin-
ers,” and musicians throughout the decades leading to Katrina. Partly as a response
to both community and commercial interests, a few semi-traditional brass bands
were formed. These groups wore more conventional attire, but used instrumentation
and a style that hovered between modern and classic brass bands.
Another major change in New Orleans’s black cultural traditions during the years
prior to 2005 was a significant increase in the membership and number of new social
clubs and Mardi Gras Indian tribes on the streets. Many of the newer clubs seemed
to have been organized primarily for “pleasure”–mainly parading—as most of the
“social aid” activities and rituals of older clubs had disappeared. Some modern club
parades were marred by overtly vulgar gestures, language, and behavior on the part
of second liners, club members, and bands (which now also “sing” or “rap” in the
streets). A new generation of Indians and tribes had initiated a number of changes
that threatened to alter the purpose and meaning of that tradition. Some of the
newer Indians seemed more interested in the idea of parading, marching, and hav-
ing fun, as well as in the attention gotten from the community, than in the original
meaning, purpose, symbolism, and nobility of the tradition. A few had begun to take
shortcuts in the ritual of suitmaking by gluing instead of hand-sewing pieces of their
MICHAEL WHITE98
pal-marable2-02-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:45 PM  Page 98


--- PAGE 116 ---
costumes. Some had avoided the valued recognition of individual creativity and group
effort altogether by paying others to completely make their suits. Other staples of
Mardi Gras Indian tradition, like the symbolic march from “uptown” to a “down-
town” meeting at a location called the “battlefield,” had been altered by some who
removed their costumes, threw them in trucks and rode to the other side of town.
No longer the exclusively black functions of earlier days, it had become common
to see several white faces (often more bohemian transplants than white natives) danc-
ing among the throng of “second liners” who follow social club and Indian parades.
Random violence (nonracial)—ranging from robbery and assault to drug dealing
and murder—had been an occasional, unwelcome, and unfortunate presence at
some community processions since their earliest days. A small number of criminal-
minded individuals used the massive crowd cover and confusion to exact revenge or
seize opportunities to commit illegal activities. These random individuals marred the
celebration for the hundreds of participants who regularly came out to share and
enjoy the events. At various periods, parade-related violence resulted in legislation
and police actions that limited parade lengths and routes.
Another major change among New Orleans’s black music–related traditions is
seen in contemporary “jazz funerals” (often irreverently called “second lines” today).
More frequent and popular than ever before, many funerals are dominated by a car-
nival or circus-like atmosphere consisting of family, friends, and band members
wearing commemorative T-shirts or casual street clothes; fast music throughout;
“second liners” who eat, drink, party, and behave disrespectfully; video and television
cameras that disregard order and influence behavior; vendors selling drinks along the
way; and several disturbing newer “rituals” like pouring beer over the casket and
stopping the procession to stand the corpse up in a house to give final “tributes.” T o
many older community members and musicians, the time honored jazz funeral has
largely degenerated into a mockery of what was once a spiritual, glorious, and majes-
tic tradition. On some rare occasions, more traditional style “jazz funerals”—with
conventional brass bands wearing black suits, slow dirges, and ceremonial dignity—
can still be seen in community neighborhoods. A tragic sign of the times is that
many funerals of recent decades are more likely to have been given for young victims
of violent crime than for deceased older social club members or musicians.
While the argument can be made that local social traditions and music have
evolved to reflect the lifestyle and needs of today’s black community, necessary
change has too often resulted in an overall decline of values, quality, integrity, sym-
bolism, unity, professionalism, pride, purpose, and meaning—the essential, uplift-
ing, community-strengthening characteristics upon which all of these traditions
originated and were maintained. One of the more positive changes—perhaps as a
more-controlled expression of “New Orleansness”–is that the tradition of “second
line” dancing has found renewed popularity. Many local, mainly black weddings,
parties and other celebrations (among all social classes) often have small brass bands
at the end to bring these events to a frenzied climax. Several small “underground”
neighborhood clubs (of varying degrees of longevity) also used modern brass bands
that played long hours to jam-packed crowds of locals and visitors.
Prior to Hurricane Katrina, nationally successful local rhythm and blues, funk,
modern jazz, and hip hop artists—though popular—made only sporadic appearances
NEW ORLEANS’S AFRICAN AMERICAN MUSICAL TRADITIONS 99
pal-marable2-02-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:45 PM  Page 99


--- PAGE 117 ---
at home due to an overabundance of talented regularly performing musicians and
the lack of good pay, which is a reality for most New Orleans musicians of any genre.
Many talented black musicians and singers performed regularly (sometimes exclu-
sively) in the city’s vibrant Protestant church circuit of popular (mainly contempo-
rary) gospel choirs, services, and musicals.
The spirit of open acceptance, tolerance, flexibility, and a lax approach to rules—
qualities that were initially essential to the creation and development of local musi-
cal traditions—also contributed to the formation of a “pseudo–New Orleans
culture” in the years leading up to Hurricane Katrina. For much of their history,
black New Orleans cultural traditions—except for the prototypical traditional jazz
combos—existed almost in a vacuum; they were detached from many local whites
and much of the black middle class and largely ignored by mainstream media, busi-
ness interests, educational institutions, and city officials. When the already-popular
tourism became the city’s main support industry, local government and business
leaders were reminded that music and food were the main interests of visitors. Many
popular Bourbon Street nightclubs featured fast, loud, slick, generic “Dixieland”—
a commercialized, denatured (white) imitation of black New Orleans jazz that,
though using similar instrumentation and repertoire, sounds and feels radically dif-
ferent. This rather bland and comic version of traditional jazz is often played by
whites and some blacks who were less familiar and concerned with the more authen-
tic black New Orleans jazz style. New Orleans soon saw a steady influx of mostly
white American and foreign-born musicians who quickly established careers (some-
times very successfully) on the local scene.
For many natives and transplants living in New Orleans pre-Katrina, the idea of
“New Orleans music” had become more important than the actual music itself. An
often-shifting and fabricated image of local musical traditions frequently served
mainly as a means of financial gain. In a climate of little accountability or responsi-
bility, many musicians, writers, media figures, businessmen, club owners, teachers,
and politicians—often indifferent to or ignorant of the history and meaning of
authentic black musical traditions—had become self-appointed arbitrators and dic-
tators of “New Orleans culture.” As a result, much of what was presented as “authen-
tic” and “traditional” New Orleans music, as well as some highly publicized
“preservation” efforts, had little actual essence or relevance to perpetuating the city’s
musical heritage. One example of this deception is how since the 1980s, movies and
commercial interest have misled much of the world into believing that central
Louisiana Cajun and zydeco are indigenous to the Crescent City. In truth, these
musical styles are as foreign to native New Orleanians and local culture as are
Tibetan wedding songs. One fact that is hardly recognized today is that since the
deaths of remaining early-generation players during the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s,
authentic black traditional New Orleans–style jazz is almost extinct. More often
than not, most “traditional jazz” played by African Americans was a limited commer-
cial repertoire played in a dominant mainstream rhythm and blues or modern jazz
style that had little of the distinctive “New Orleans sound” and could be heard any-
where. A very small number of conscious players and descendants of jazz families
have continued the more authentic style and sound of traditional New Orleans jazz,
both in terms of performing a more “classic” repertoire and in using traditional jazz
MICHAEL WHITE100
pal-marable2-02-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:45 PM  Page 100


--- PAGE 118 ---
principles as the basis of new songs and creative expression. Far from a unified con-
cept or direction of “New Orleans music” or “traditional jazz,” the local music scene
was an evolving hodgepodge of different sounds and styles that had varying degrees
of relevance to authentic black New Orleans traditions or their survival.
One year after Hurricane Katrina caused flooding of 80 percent of New Orleans,
leading to massive loss of life and property, the effect on the city’s unique longstand-
ing black musical traditions and culture has potentially been devastating. More than
half of the city’s total population—including a core of musicians, Mardi Gras
Indians, and social club members—have lost loved ones, lost their homes, suffered
severe losses of property, and remain displaced. Many neighborhoods that were alive
with the sounds of brass bands and Mardi Gras Indian chants lie in ruins. Many
New Orleanians have established lives in other cities. Others have returned and are
struggling with rebuilding. Many others wish to return home but cannot, due to a
lack of jobs, affordable housing, and basic services. Hundreds of thousands of New
Orleans natives, both at home and abroad, cope with a variety of new and continu-
ing Katrina-related hardships: housing, schools, health care, depression, stress, sui-
cide, illness, death, unemployment, insurance companies, accidents, government
agencies, displacement, loss of neighborhoods, and separation of families.
It is difficult to put a price tag on or predict the total cultural losses that Katrina
has brought to the black New Orleans area. While the more immediate threats to the
amount of participants in, frequency of, and existence of social club parades, jazz
funerals, and Mardi Gras Indian processions are obvious and measurable, other
losses are immeasurable. This writer lost a valuable archive and collection of materi-
als on New Orleans, Louisiana, and African American and African history, culture,
and music; it consisted of thousands of rare, out-of-print, vintage, and original
books, recordings, videos, and sheet music transcriptions, as well as new composi-
tions, interviews, research, and photographs, plus vintage instruments and musical
memorabilia, the sum of which rivaled and exceeded the collections of many local
public libraries, university archives, and museums. More than a hidden, private stash
of cultural treasures, this material was being actively used to promote and perpetu-
ate authentic black New Orleans traditions in a number of ways through teaching,
exhibits, special concerts, consulting, band development, new compositions using
traditional styles, lectures, publications, et cetera. Many of these items were slated to
become books, to be loaned to museums, to be the subjects of films, et cetera—
which would have made a great contribution to the history, nature, and understand-
ing of local music-related traditions from a rarely documented African American
perspective. Several other musicians, photographers, writers, and filmmakers lost
priceless and irreplaceable amounts of equipment and local cultural materials.
Many New Orleans musicians have been scattered across the United States.
Bands have been broken up. There is an increased difficulty in finding and hiring
local musicians in New Orleans. Much of the work that supported musicians in New
Orleans, including parades, clubs, funerals, conventions, jazz brunches, and house
parties, is greatly diminished or has not yet returned. Several neighborhood bars have
again begun to regularly feature small modern-style brass bands. One fortunate con-
sequence of the worldwide attention placed on the disaster has been a temporarily
renewed interest in New Orleans music—resulting in various international tours,
NEW ORLEANS’S AFRICAN AMERICAN MUSICAL TRADITIONS 101
pal-marable2-02-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:45 PM  Page 101


--- PAGE 119 ---
television appearances, tribute concerts, and commemorative recordings—which has
employed and reunited dozens of local musicians in various genres.
Despite the devastation, displacement, and uncertainty that Katrina has brought,
the irrepressible flame of ancestral traditions has not been completely extinguished.
In addition to major commercial events like Mardi Gras and the New Orleans Jazz
& Heritage Festival, the spring of 2006 also saw the return of some local commu-
nity traditions. A large, commemorative, traditional-style jazz funeral for Katrina
victims and a massive all-club “second line” parade seemed to give the message that
neither time nor nature would obliterate the spirit of the New Orleans black com-
munity. Some Indian tribes paraded on Mardi Gras. A number of other funerals and
social club parades also took place. These positive signs of return and renewal mask
a serious concern in the community that the city’s pre-Katrina masses of lower-
income African Americans are now in the way of “progress.” A common fear is that
a conglomeration of businessmen, land developers, and politicians seeks to capital-
ize on the city’s post-hurricane climate of mass destruction, confusion, and displace-
ment. Some believe that several means are being employed to discourage residents
from returning and to create a chaotic environment in which the takeover of black
neighborhoods would seem a viable and welcome solution. Some view nationally
broadcast signs of renewal as part of the deception. They feel that contrived and lim-
ited aspects of recovery are intentionally overblown in an effort to reduce widespread
concern—by giving the false impression that most of New Orleans is back to nor-
mal. Many fear that current proposals for rebuilding and redevelopment would turn
the city into a caricature of itself: a fabricated “pseudo-New Orleans” in which gen-
uine culture and community would be replaced by a Disneyland or Las Vegas-type
atmosphere designed for mass tourist and commercial consumption.
Those who express concern about the survival of the local black community and
its musical traditions cite steady, quiet, pre-Katrina urban regentrification; the cur-
rent slow progress of rebuilding efforts; questionable political actions on all levels;
and recent tensions between parading community organizations and city govern-
ment (and police) as signs of impending trouble. Just months before Katrina, popu-
lar big chief Allison “T utti” Montana collapsed and died in the city council chambers
while protesting police harassment of Indians during a St. Joseph’s Day procession.
In the spring of 2006, the city council used recent shootings at community parades
as the motivation behind levying a prohibitive increase of nearly 400 percent in the
parade tax for social clubs. Though the Black Men of Labor club began the
September 2006 social club parade season on the streets with a full membership of
thirty-six, several other clubs cannot afford the fee and will not parade. It is hard to
predict what long-term effects the combined actions of prolonged displacement, the
post-Katrina climate, and city government will have on the survival and direction of
local black traditions.
While some may see the hurricane as a welcome opportunity for ethnic and
demographic restructuring, the disaster has also brought about the potential for a
major renaissance of local black music-related traditions and their more positive
aspects. The survival and future of local traditions depends on several factors—some
beyond the control of man. First, no matter what is or isn’t done to restore people,
culture, and landscape, ultimately New Orleans’s current geographic reality is a risky
MICHAEL WHITE102
pal-marable2-02-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:45 PM  Page 102


--- PAGE 120 ---
and uncertain future to be determined by the random whims of nature. T oxicity of
the environment, the threat of more frequent and severe hurricanes, an inadequate
and weakened levee system, steady city-wide land sinkage, a powerful Mississippi
River fighting to run a more natural course, and a continuously eroding Louisiana
coastline, are all realities that many simply will not face. For various reasons, many
citizens have decided to live off of hope, prayer, and the belief that Katrina was a
once-in-a-lifetime event. Some point out that millions worldwide choose to live in
areas that have constant threats from tornadoes, earthquakes, tsunamis, and other
natural disasters. For local traditions to survive, New Orleans needs a concerted
effort by leaders in city government, business, and industry to decide how to bring
people back or allow those who wish to come back home to do so. More than accept-
ing and expecting a return to the deplorable socio-economic conditions of pre-
Katrina, citizens would need better and adequate housing, jobs, pay, education,
sanitation, health care, and basic services. Effective and realistic ways need to be
sought to attack problems like drugs, crime, and black-on-black violence, which—
although they are major national problems—have recently returned to New Orleans
in epidemic proportions.
Ultimately, the will and spirit of the people will help determine how, if at all, local
neighborhoods and vernacular musical traditions will return. Thousands of citizens
are struggling with thoughts of returning to a damaged, compromised city with an
uncertain future. Many indicate that they have begun lives and found better oppor-
tunities and conditions elsewhere. Among those that have returned, confusion,
anger, and frustration resulting from the slow rebuilding process and continued dis-
comfort caused by present conditions have not yet revealed how much of the neigh-
borhoods’ family traditions, collective community spirit, and interest in previous
musical practices will return. New Orleans is a wounded city with a wounded com-
munity. The healing process will take much time.
One thing is certain: the next several years will be an important defining period
in the cultural history of New Orleans. There is a tremendous opportunity for native
descendants and concerned citizens not to allow their history and culture to be
washed away. It is an opportunity for all people to come together for the common
good. It is a chance to do away with the widespread and divisive clannish mentality
that for too long has limited growth and progress in many areas. It is a chance to use
New Orleans’s most significant contribution—jazz—as a central component of
rebuilding and improving the city. In order for that to happen, a serious, honest,
introspective self-examination needs to be directed by both citizens and civic leaders
concerning the state of local jazz culture. A massive effort needs to be undertaken to
better educate the general public, and especially business, political, and educational
leaders, about the little-known history, meaning, style, values, importance, and
socioeconomic potential of jazz.
With that in mind, many common myths and attitudes need to be brought forth
and examined, especially by those in important decision-making positions. The
selection of decision makers in the cultural arena needs to be carefully done and
based on more reliable criteria than favoritism and popularity. The community as a
whole needs to understand that while it is good to feature a variety of musical styles,
the majority of visitors expect to find the only musical style that originated in New
NEW ORLEANS’S AFRICAN AMERICAN MUSICAL TRADITIONS 103
pal-marable2-02-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:45 PM  Page 103


--- PAGE 121 ---
Orleans—traditional New Orleans jazz. A major emphasis should be placed on pre-
senting and promoting more authentic and artistically relevant traditional music
from the wide spectrum of classic jazz, “revival” styles, and creative new traditional
music, in addition to the usual commercial fare.
A serious look needs to be taken at how other cities—with less indigenous cul-
ture, authentic traditions and talent—have built tremendously successful music-
based economies. A delicate balance between authenticity and commercial interests
should be of central importance. A number of harmful, longstanding myths about
local jazz need to be exposed and explored in an effort to more honestly and realis-
tically make assessments. We can no longer afford to let fame, self-promotion, and
deception become easy ways for those who pimp and fake involvement in the
authentic jazz tradition. It has been common among most previous decision makers
to be oblivious to facts like these: Most music teachers and many musicians are not
experts or trained in jazz. Many harbor negative attitudes toward it, especially tradi-
tional jazz. Most don’t realize that different jazz styles are like different languages,
and a knowledge of and proficient performance base in one style does not usually
translate into expertise in other jazz forms. Many do not understand that under the
umbrella of what is labeled “traditional jazz” in New Orleans are several different
styles and approaches that have varying degrees of relevance to the authentic New
Orleans jazz sound or tradition.
At the risk of upsetting favoritism, political correctness, and indifference, which
have governed many local culture-based selections and decisions of the past, a more
responsible ethic marked by authenticity, knowledge, and accountability needs to be
implemented to educate, develop, and promote genuine local talent in the area of
traditional jazz music. When considering the future of the descendants of local black
musical traditions, one must question the possible effectiveness of nonnatives and
specialists in other genres and their motives for taking positions of dictating local
cultural policies and dominating some performance activities. One influential for-
eign musician, who made a successful career off of black traditional jazz musicians
and serves on a policy-making board, candidly expressed his feelings this way: “I
don’t give a damn about no culture. I just came here for the music. Hell, if I wanted
culture, I’d have stayed in Europe.”
The original style of New Orleans jazz as handed down from the generation of
Buddy Bolden is often misunderstood and unjustly labeled as “dated period music”
that has little musical or cultural value in today’s world. In reality, both the style of
jazz and its principles can be used for new creative expression. It can also serve as a
powerful metaphor in the rebuilding and future of New Orleans. Very often, good
authentic, traditional jazz still proves itself to be an exciting, danceable, and spiritu-
ally satisfying music to countless varied audiences worldwide. It should be viewed
and treasured as the “classical music” of New Orleans. Jazz is a collective style based
on a combination of teamwork and individual creative expression. It transforms con-
ventional reality into a series of new ideas and possibilities. Jazz can be used in a
number of ways to address social and economic issues.
T raditional New Orleans jazz needs to be taught in public and private schools by
qualified individuals. For the youth, jazz can be an inroad to learning everything from
local history and racial harmony to a team-oriented set of values like those associated
MICHAEL WHITE104
pal-marable2-02-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:45 PM  Page 104


--- PAGE 122 ---
with sports. T raditional jazz music can offer more easy access to early travel and
employment opportunities than the more competitive and less open popular music
fields. In many parts of the world, more authentic black New Orleans style jazz
remains as a popular “cult” music performed in clubs and churches and at festivals.
Those destined for other styles of music could gain the advantage of acquiring extra
and special melodic and rhythmic instincts by having some experience with local tra-
ditions. Not everyone will become jazz musicians, but exposure to the field can lead
to other employment possibilities in a much-needed local music business support
system: entertainment attorneys, music writers and journalists, teachers, nightclub
operators, recording technicians and manufacturers, musical instrument sales and
repair specialists, et cetera. At the very least, the history and value system of jazz
could offer young people positive ancestral connections and a sense of pride, self-
worth, and accomplishment. It could also serve as an inspiration for achieving indi-
viduality and mobility in many areas of life. In this regard, jazz could become one
possible deterrent to youthful unemployment, crime, and despair.
New Orleans has a new opportunity to become a standout in the tourist indus-
try by setting a higher standard of offerings based on authentic local traditions. A
cultural district or center with museums, performance venues, and retail outlets,
largely jazz related, could be established. Regular promotional mini-festivals of jazz
and interactive events could be sponsored and promoted by local government. Ways
should also be found to reestablish and improve neighborhoods conducive to cul-
tural traditions.
More African Americans must learn to value and recognize jazz and other aspects
of their unique cultural heritage. Recognition of the post-Katrina threat to the sur-
vival of local music-related traditions has led to some promising new developments.
For the first time, members of several younger groups have expressed interest in
learning about the history, style, and repertoire of early jazz and brass bands. They
have engaged in a number of workshops and concerts with members of more tradi-
tional-style groups. Both younger and older musicians involved in these collabora-
tions demonstrate a renewed and heightened recognition of the value of heritage and
tradition. They are coming together with the intention of learning, preserving, and
passing on authentic New Orleans music to future generations, as well as infusing it
with new life. In a positive and timely fashion, two African American universities,
Xavier and Dillard (both badly damaged by Hurricane Katrina), have resumed a
series of recently established programs that highlight local musical and cultural tra-
ditions. In addition to helping to document, preserve, and promote jazz and local
vernacular customs, these efforts also serve as a way to bring together various groups
from the community.
While racism cannot be completely eliminated, realistic solutions to deal with
issues of race and economic structure should be sought. More whites must share eco-
nomic opportunities and not be threatened by the idea of positive black self-promo-
tion. Asian, Hispanic and other cultures use and celebrate their cultural heritage in
positive ways without the perception of being hostile, militant, or anti-white. Jazz
promotes a democratic construct characterized by acceptance, unity, cooperation,
and a celebration of differences. Another optimistic development in Katrina’s after-
math has been the appearance of several dedicated white and black individuals,
NEW ORLEANS’S AFRICAN AMERICAN MUSICAL TRADITIONS 105
pal-marable2-02-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:45 PM  Page 105


--- PAGE 123 ---
groups, churches, and organizations who are spending considerable time, money and
effort to aid and assist all elements of the New Orleans cultural community. This pos-
itive demonstration of humanity should serve as inspiration for the community as a
whole. Everyone needs to recognize the real possibilities of losing jazz and the cultural
traditions around it, without which New Orleans simply would not be New Orleans.
Many important questions concerning the survival of one of America’s most cul-
turally rich and diverse cities will remain unanswered for years to come. Will an
injured New Orleans culture become a victim of “progress,” greed, ignorance, and
Hurricane Katrina? Can the city overcome its many problems and rebuild and
restore its traditional neighborhoods, community bonds, and local spirit? What
shape and direction will the future Crescent City take? Will it become a community
that is authentic, fabricated, or ethnically restructured? Will New Orleans lose its
“soul”? As several hundred thousand citizens struggle for survival in a limbo of con-
tinuing problems, unanswered questions, and uncertain futures, one can only won-
der if the sad, sweet dirges or happy, dancing melodies of a recent authentic,
traditional jazz funeral foreshadowed certain death or a glorious resurrection.
MICHAEL WHITE106
pal-marable2-02-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:45 PM  Page 106


--- PAGE 124 ---
Chapter 8
HERO, EULOGIST, 
TRICKSTER, AND CRITIC:
RITUAL AND CRISIS IN
POST-KATRINA MARDI GRAS
CHELSEY LOUISE KIVLAND
The way everybody is looking at Mardi Gras 2006 here, it’s sort of the communi-
ties planting the flag in the ground saying, “We’re back!”
—Stephen Perry, President, New Orleans Convention & Visitors Bureau
The year 2006 marks the 150th anniversary of Mistik Krewe of Comus’s parade, in
which hooded club members, born of New Orleans’s most elite families, paraded on
horseback down crowded streets, founding Mardi Gras of New Orleans. Mardi Gras
2006, where exclusive clubs now parade on papier-mâché floats while throwing
cheap charms to a crowd shouting “Give me beads!” also marks nearly six months
since Hurricane Katrina claimed thousands of lives and displaced many more in its
wake. Performing an intricate web of social unions and exclusions through the cul-
tural costume of carnival, Mardi Gras 2006 manifested familiar tensions between
tradition and change, where somewhere between the quotation of its past and the
foreboding of its future lay the (re-)invention of the city of New Orleans, its rela-
tionality and politics, communities and power, which comprise, in their embodied
performance, the city’s “agora.” The becoming of this agora—as it emerged at the
intersection of the ritual of Mardi Gras; the orchestrated performance of Carnival
rites; and the crisis, the critical social change, of Hurricane Katrina—is the focus of
this essay.
T o foster appreciation of this complex intersection, I explore how different com-
munities addressed the crisis through their ritual performances. The disparate forms
through which the crisis was given presence or absence, voice or silence, within the
pal-marable2-02-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:51 PM  Page 107


--- PAGE 125 ---
ritual performances demonstrated a politics of representation for the reclamation of
divergent histories of the event and, accordingly, of communities’ practical orienta-
tions to (and through) them. Indeed, each performance demonstrated a commu-
nity’s struggle to reconcile the past with the ominous future. Yet, seen collectively,
the ritual performances played against each other to compete for the authority to
assert a particular form of reconciliation. While each historical representation
assuaged the crisis’s impact within a community, the interplay of the representations
fortified the very tensions that the crisis unleashed.
Four pivotal performances during the post-Katrina Mardi Gras, observed during
my participation as a spectator, will serve as the basis of my exploration.
1 They are:
(i) the “Rex” parade, a predominantly white social club, or krewe, founded in 1872
and comprised of the city’s elite businessmen, which stands as the culmination of the
festival, where the “King of Carnival” is crowned; (ii) the “Zulu Social Aid and
Pleasure Club” parade, a predominantly black working class club, founded in 1909,
which is the most popular parade and precedes the Rex parade; (iii) the “T-shirt
brigades,”
2 groups of ten or more black men who, wearing satirical T-shirts, march
through the crowds along the parade routes; and (iv) the “unofficial parades,” groups
of young people of various racial backgrounds who stand atop flatbed trucks or
gather on foot and perform in unofficial festival areas. These four performances con-
stitute communities of performance , a categorization that designates the momentary
solidification of actions and affect by performers and audience. Describing each
community in terms of their concerted social action highlights how the designation
of ascribed features (e.g., race, class, gender) obliges the performance of membership.
COMMUNITIES OF PERFORMANCE
T o enter the scene of the post-Katrina Mardi Gras is to inhabit a complex space of
performance, but to grasp its social significance one must locate within this space the
play of potent symbols. My descriptions of the four performances illustrate the par-
ticular exchange of discourse, actions, and objects that gave rise to four mythic per-
sonalities: the “hero” in the Rex parade, the “eulogist” in the Zulu parade, the
“trickster” in the T-shirt brigades, and the “critic” in the unofficial parades.
If the mythic personalities are read as performative representations of the com-
munities, these personalities constitute, following Durkheim, the totemic incarna-
tions of the communal consensuses generated through performance.
3 The mythic
personality, as totem, is the tangible symbol that represents each community’s collec-
tive feelings regarding the crisis by consolidating a “shared past” and a “rallying cry”
for the future.
4 Constructed through the communal ritual performance, it is a living
symbol in a double sense: its enactment is as much the sign of a mythic personage
as its embodiment is the myth itself. This duality means that the embodied totem
carries both the meaning of the representation (e.g., King) and the confines of the
one who enacts it (e.g., the white man is king). The symbolic assemblage that makes
the representation and the assemblage that makes up the social body construct the
mythic personality. Hence, the performers—and also, crucially, those to whom they
are performing directly (audience) and indirectly (beholders)—actively signified the
CHELSEY LOUISE KIVLAND108
pal-marable2-02-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:51 PM  Page 108


--- PAGE 126 ---
symbols used to covey each community’s relation to the crisis. Though both groups
vitally participated in shaping the totems, the audience was “seeing with” the per-
formers, entering the community of performance, whereas the beholders were “see-
ing against” the performance, distancing this community from their own.
Rex Parade: The Hero
The King of Carnival, Rex, parades as the culminating event of Mardi Gras Day with
his “court” plucked from the city’s elite white men and his queen selected from the
city’s “leading debutantes.” Rex is adorned with a crown set atop a faux white wig
and beard that accents a gold-trimmed white velour robe, while his young queen
wears a gold dress with a large feathered crown and his court “maskers” wear hooded
velour costumes of green, purple, and gold, the royal colors. Their premier float pro-
claims their theme: “Beaux Arts and Letters.” Icons of Jazz and Blues remain largely
absent, as the figures of white, male authors and artists hearken the embedded “civil-
ity” of Rex’s full name: “The School of Design.” The next float’s banner announces
“Renew Orleans” alongside the parade’s motto, “Pro Bono Publico.”
Winding through city center, the parade shields itself from the eyesores of
Hurricane Katrina. Their throws meet the hands of two tiers of spectators: elite fam-
ilies who, waving signs of their affiliations in the parades, collect the signature
throws—fat stuffed-animal goats that symbolize the boeuf gras—from constructed
platforms atop rented street space; and a mixture of local and tourist communities,
which, segregated by race and class, vie for “good spots” on the street space between
the stands. When the last float, which bears the insignia “Dignity and Strength,”
passes, the parade pauses before Gallier Hall for a moment of silence to honor, as
King Logan made clear, “what [not who] has been lost and to recognize those who
have given so much to help the city survive and rebuild.” After Rex raises a toast to
the black mayor of the predominantly black city, C. Ray Nagin, the maskers signal
the end of the parade to scarcely visible authorities and are escorted by police to their
gala housed at the local Marriot alongside hundreds of evacuees. Against the exodus
of pedestrians, a fierce panorama of black graffiti on boarded-up storefronts surfaces
across the empty trolley tracks: “U LOOT , WE SHOOT.” And soon all that is left
is the thick accumulation of waste in the eerie silence of the sparsely populated city.
The hero, White argues, when cast as the protagonist of a historical narrative, is
the romantic avenger who embodies “transcendence over the world of experience,” a
victory over the forces of nature.
5 This transcendence is made possible by bravery in
the face of a danger and a gallant design to overcome it. Similarly, the final declara-
tion to the spectators, “Dignity and Strength,” constitutes the heroic transcendence
of the Rex parade in the face of crisis: to renew their ritual and their city. As an
embodied declaration, this semantic pairing is a claim to the manner of strength and
strength of manner that will usurp the social unsettlement and physical damages of
Hurricane Katrina.
The parade’s enactment of a kinship between the thematic statement of civility
and the honors it bestows expressed the performers’ claim to a dignified social sta-
tus. The cultural exaltation of royal culture concealed the parade’s racially segrega-
tionist practices by eliding the language of race for that of civility. Ornamental
HERO, EULOGIST, TRICKSTER, AND CRITIC 109
pal-marable2-02-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:51 PM  Page 109


--- PAGE 127 ---
costumes and court practices hearkened back to the cultural authority, as opposed to
class status, of their imagined colonial descendents, while the selection of authors in
“Beaux Arts and Letters” solidified this authority. Hence, the parade presented evi-
dence that the elite’s ability to rebuild the city is owed to their superior culture rather
than economic, racial hegemony. This intimation echoed the original parade, which,
debuting a decade before emancipation, embraced the theme “Milton’s Paradise Lost,”
a civilly disguised attempt to wrest control of the city from the “demon actors” (i.e.,
slaves) soon to “upset our way of life.”
6 Seen against the backdrop of the aggressive
graffiti, the awakening of this heritage highlights how the hurricane ignited colonial
appeals to civility as a master trope with which to define racial groups and justify their
social positions within the city. Finally, the spatial demarcations revealed an inextrica-
ble bond between the economic and cultural exchanges used to define the community
of performance, the performers, and the audience. Opposed to the obstructed street
space, the elevated street stands translate the performance into a private event that can
only be fully appreciated from this view above the chaos. Through signaling affiliation,
the parade implicated certain viewers into the ancestral line of the Rex court and its
just rewards, whether cultural pride, beads, or a good view. In this way, the parade sug-
gested an exclusive community built on the performance of a shared history.
Furthermore, by separating their chivalrous performance from the eyesores of
Hurricane Katrina, Rex and court substitute the damaged reality of New Orleans
with an image of their common power “to show what we can do,” metonymically ref-
erencing New Orleans’s power as a city. Exemplifying this common power, their
moment of silence, taken at Gallier Hall, where Jefferson Davis lies in state, and ded-
icated to lost property and rebuilding efforts, revealed the maskers’ ability, as heroes,
to rebuild the city as before. The maskers also exhibited their strength through their
control of the city. In the face of nearly disbanded civil services, the parade laid bare
the mayor’s civic acknowledgement of and acquiescence to the commercial elite. Not
only was the Rex parade able to have a police escort despite the untended, crowded
streets, but they were also able to hold their performance of waste despite the city’s
crippled sanitation infrastructure. This latter act, which transformed their perform-
ance of excess into the accumulation (not expenditure) of waste, boldly emphasized
the present neglect of the dire situation in the city.
7
Dignity and strength gave form to the task of recovery by substantiating the
declared wish of the Rex parade “to ‘Renew New Orleans’s for the ‘public good.’”
However, while the members of Rex demonstrated their imperviousness to the
graver consequences of the hurricane, the embedded contradictions of their wish
revealed themselves. For renewal, as a remaking of what came before, vividly dissim-
ulated and dismissed the needs and desires of the very public they claimed to aid. All
three of the other performances would uniquely highlight this contradiction.
Zulu Parade: The Eulogist
Begun as a lending organization, Zulu Social Aid and Pleasure Club parades before
Rex along a notably different path. Donning thick blackface with white outlines
around the mouth and eyes and outfitted in “primitive African attire” of grass skirts,
zebra print belts, and large afros, Zulu thrusts its theme banner draped across the
CHELSEY LOUISE KIVLAND110
pal-marable2-02-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:51 PM  Page 110


--- PAGE 128 ---
lead float—“Zulu Leading the Way Back Home”—to the crowds awaiting Rex at
city center. “Authentic Zulu warriors” who traveled from Africa and performed
before the parade obstruct the lead float, asserting the equivocal hope of the parade’s
claim: T oward which home? The third float confirms this question, as it reads, “9th
Ward, Gentilly,” a memorial for the neighborhoods lost. Close behind, last year’s
king and queen stand, with their golden sashes but without crowns, before the word
“Reunion.” They wait “till all our family is home” before a “real reign” can begin.
With a final wave to city officials, Zulu begins its second route. Ordered to dis-
mount their floats in this “ghostly territory,” the maskers mark the first official steps
of revelers beyond city center. Accompanied by marching bands, they tread through
their neighborhoods in the fashion of a “second line,” the New Orleans–style jazz
funeral. Here is a vast crowd of predominantly black families, who stand atop the
dirt of now vacant plots of land with arms reaching anxiously for Zulu’s—and
indeed Mardi Gras’—most “prized throws” of hand-painted coconuts. The throws
portray images ranging from the standard “Z” insignia to pictures of people in acts
of prayer and carpentry. Contrary to the Rex parade, Zulu pauses for silence abreast
the Convention Center, where crowd and maskers have gathered to “cut the body
loose.” Following this tribute to the individuals who awaited accommodation and
rescue in a crowed pool of bodies, waste, and darkness, the music takes an upbeat
turn, dancing resumes, and the party really “comes home.”
There are two intertwined responsibilities of a eulogist: to honor the deceased and
in so doing to restore the spirits of the living. By tying together the acts of mourn-
ing and festivity, of “cutting loose” and “coming home,” the performance of Zulu
personified the mythic eulogist. The intricate interplay of this duality, shifting con-
stantly through the parade, facilitated for the community of performance the wish
of reunion that the maskers proclaimed.
This initial duality of emotion occurred in the parade’s first scenes with the the-
matic declaration of Zulu’s initiated homecoming and the tribute to lost neighbor-
hoods. The juxtaposition captured the “need to honor the missing and honor those
who must keep going.” The absence of new royalty continued this theme with its
demonstration that full restoration of the Zulu community necessitates the presence
of those displaced. Echoing practices of ritual regicide, the dethroned old king and
queen appeared here as effigies holding the tiers of the hierarchy in place until suc-
cessors could be named and the devotees returned.
8 The most forceful demonstra-
tion, however, occurred in the parade’s enactment of a second line through the
damaged areas. This act undoubtedly communicated the mournful burial of all that
has been lost: the homes, livelihoods, and lives. Yet, in the full tradition of second
line, the joyful music and dancing accented the funeral as a burial of the crisis itself,
where it no longer would haunt the present. Such exorcism within the scene of aban-
doned neighborhoods was remarkably vivid in the maskers’ memorial throws, which
articulated the sequence of custom, cleansing, and change constitutive of the tradi-
tional funeral. Indeed, festivities fully surged only after the final parting gesture of
the funeral, “cutting the body loose,” an occurrence that exemplified the role of the
eulogist: to simultaneously honor the dead and revitalize the living.
Through uses of racially coded symbols, such as stereotypical costumes of African
warriors, the parade designated the homebound community. A young black man,
HERO, EULOGIST, TRICKSTER, AND CRITIC 111
pal-marable2-02-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:51 PM  Page 111


--- PAGE 129 ---
when asked about the seemingly offensive use of such stereotypical allusions to
African “savagery” after the crisis’s exposure of the city’s unconscionable racialized
oppression, clarified the complex message of this costume: “You know, they’re mak-
ing fun of white people.” The reappropriation of the stereotype was plainly visible in
the performance: the real Zulu warriors, referencing the ancestral strength of the
black community, figuratively positioned a cultural home, one that outlasts the dev-
astation of property in their territorial home. Suggesting a pride in the cultural sep-
aration of the races, the glorification of this stereotype performatively challenged the
degradation of black culture in the city, especially salient in the conflation of poor,
black people with criminals in the rumors of violence following the storm.
9 For this
reason, the intensified allusion to Africa in 2006 not only indexed its historical use
as an unthreatening mask that avoids the scrutiny of elites by accommodating their
stereotype, but also communicated the fragility of this stereotype by exhibiting its
equivocal meanings.
10 Indeed. Zulu performed the ineptitude of those—the maskers
of “whiteness” beneath the blackface—who promulgate such stereotypes, challeng-
ing the authority of Rex parade’s claim that the city’s rebirth lay in their hands.
Acting as a strategic dual emasculation, the performance’s hyperbolic caricatures of
race attenuated the elite’s backlash and their power, the interpretation of which
depends, as the young man clarified, on who is watching.
T-
SHIRT BRIGADES: THE TRICKSTER
Though most audience members dress in costumes, one occurrence renders itself
especially salient in its mass and its deviations from the parade audience containing
it. From the end of the main thoroughfare of the parades, an oncoming group of ten
or more black men walking in uneven, but discernible lines with a steady, measured
beat approaches the crowds of the mainline parades. The coordinated “black mob,”
as one beholder calls it, moves against the stationary, mostly white crowds of tourists
and locals, drawing the attention of all those they pass over and around. Long after
the disruption passes, the striking commentary of the T-shirts that each marcher
wears remains. Their white T-shirts boldly display the words “Willy Nagin and the
Chocolate City, Semi-Sweet and a Little Nuts” surrounded by the mayor digitally
rendered in the costume of “Willy Wonka,” complete with cane, top hat, and three-
piece suit. This satire thrown in the face of the crowds seeking to forget the crisis
welcomes the convulsions of shock, laughter, and shouts; “That’s just wrong!” is
heard long after they have turned the corner. Awaiting the parades, the crowds are
passed by two more brigades. One wears black shirts with a white machine gun
encircled by the words “Battle of New Orleans 2005,” and another the picture of a
plasma TV to the side of which is an old-fashioned scroll that reads, “I escaped
Hurricane Katrina. . .with nothing but a Land Rover, New Plasma TV .... ”  Aside
from condemnations, one repeatedly hears the outcry, “Where did they get those?”
Identifying the role of the trickster figure of Esu-Elegbara in Yoruba mythology,
Gates states, “tricksters are mediators and their mediation is tricks.”
11 He argues,
drawing on Bakhtin’s concept of “double-voicedness,” that tricksters join disparate
discourses through two technologies of trickery, parody and the hidden polemic.
CHELSEY LOUISE KIVLAND112
pal-marable2-02-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:51 PM  Page 112


--- PAGE 130 ---
Bakhtin suggests that in parody the “author employs the speech of another, but intro-
duces into that speech an intention which is directly opposed to the original one.”12
The author of the hidden polemic, in contrast, “brings a polemical attack against
another speech act, another assertion, on the same topic” without adopting another’s
speech.
13 In their double-voiced speech, the T-shirt brigades mediated the contradic-
tory discourses of tragedy and comedy to produce a satire of the vices and follies of
Hurricane Katrina. Their trick was, in the “Willy Nagin” shirt, accomplished through
parody, but a new trick emerged in the other shirts, “I escaped Hurricane Katrina”
and “Battle of New Orleans,” through the combination of parody and hidden
polemic; a possibility generated by mass mediated coverage of the crisis.
The “Willy Nagin” shirt stole the speech of the mayor, who infamously compared
in a public address the masses of black bodies wading through floodwaters in the days
following the breach of the levees to a “chocolate city.” By parodying this comment,
the tricksters altered the dire state of the victims to a joke, protecting the dignity of
those so labeled. This act also gained the force of condemnation by questioning the
black mayor’s affiliation with the black community. The shirts mocked the authority
of the mayor, as a high-status black man, to speak for the majority of poor, black res-
idents in the city, bringing attention to not only the racist but also classist connota-
tions of his comment. The other two shirts deployed trickery straddling parody and
hidden polemic by taking full advantage of unauthorized speech. Following White’s
apt description of rumor, this “ghost speech,” as speech belonging to everyone and no
one, subverted the accusatory rumors applied to the stranded victims of Hurricane
Katrina by asserting that their deeds were valorous acts.
14 Because the national media
promulgated such accusations without verification, heightening the event’s sensation-
alism, the act, described as a “polemic of valor,” subverted the accusations of a mass
of potential authors. The beholders’ fierce condemnations reacted against the trick-
ster’s embodied suggestion that the shirt’s message was directed at all of them, as each
potentially voiced the original accusation.
To  resignify the tragic with the comedic in a satirical appropriation of the plight
and accusation of the victims of the crisis was the wish of the trickster. Their control
of this appropriation, accomplished by their independent, occult production of the
shirts and by the symbolic value of their bodies, empowered the tricksters against
those satirized. Since the maskers were exclusively black, their acts were not general
comments crafted by all for the comedic release of all. Rather, the accusations tar-
geted those not included in the original accusations, those not socially defined as
black and poor, as “looters” or “wading bodies.” Confronting the predominantly
white beholders, the trickster laid the final trick in defining the performance com-
munity through their ability to pull off the joke, as a white man commented, “I
could never get away with that.”
Unlike the other parades, the trickster combined the symbols of ritual and crisis
by questioning tourism as a means to restore the city. T-shirts are the characteristic
souvenir of tourists, and Mardi Gras is the quintessential event for which tourists
come. Using the T-shirt to deliver a crass joke—one exceeding “good fun”— mocked
the city as a venue for tourism. More pointedly, the T-shirts ridiculed the use of the
crisis as an opportunity for a value-added Mardi Gras experience, shown in bus tours
of the destruction or the cottage industry of trinkets inscribed with “Katrina slogans”
HERO, EULOGIST, TRICKSTER, AND CRITIC 113
pal-marable2-02-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:51 PM  Page 113


--- PAGE 131 ---
(e.g., “I survived Katrina”). The trickster’s act of ridicule, though suggestive of the
problematic relation between the hurricane and Mardi Gras, was given the valence
of critique in the unofficial parades.
U
NOFFICIAL PARADES: THE CRITIC
A walk to the parade outskirts meets the “hidden carnival.” The floats of main
parades have passed, the bead cries die, and loud political chants—“What do you
want?” “Levees!”— crescendo. As the performers appear, their distinctiveness
declares itself. Groups of revelers of various racial backgrounds wear outfits redolent
of the mainline parades, but with a tinge of mockery, for in place of crowns and
velour are cone-shaped heads and frilly satin suits. They stand atop flatbed trucks
between posters emblazoned with messages that mock the festival of Mardi Gras by
relating it to Hurricane Katrina. “Beads for Sandbags?” calls out from a disordered
mass of bodies, posters, and frills. Openly contesting the parade tradition, the floats
do not pass, but confront the street beholders who are walking toward the main
parades. Their throws of political messages inscribed on strips of scrap or toilet paper
mostly land in the palms of other revelers on the same float or one nearby.
Another set of revelers interweave between these flatbeds; on their bodies hang
creative amalgamations of Hurricane Katrina and Mardi Gras. T wo white male
rollerbladers protested the work of the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) by wearing a bird costume made of blue tarp that urges, “FUCK FEMA”;
six black men display a sandwich board with a scene depicting the stranded victims
of the storm and the phrase, “It’s No Party Here”; and two white men hold plywood
tagged with a city map, the outer ring of which reads, “T ourists Welcome!” Close
together, these performers march through the flatbeds, paying no attention to oth-
ers in the streets.
A critic is one who pronounces judgment—not official evaluation, but public
commentary—on others’ actions or statements. Standing on the margin of the fes-
tivities, the unofficial parades made contact with revelers en route, yet were dis-
tanced from the legal sanctions of the ordered parades (e.g., street permits and
authorized throws). Both sets of unofficial parades, the flatbed groups and the street
performers, performed an exclusive exchange of symbols that defined their critical
community against other revelers by protesting the tropes of Mardi Gras and
Hurricane Katrina. The flatbed groups, by throwing actual waste (e.g., toilet paper)
and political chants, and the street performers, by bodying forth denigrations,
announced an evaluation of this Mardi Gras and the action to follow from this eval-
uation. Such gestures urged the beholders to evaluate the festival as an untimely per-
formance of waste and to focus efforts on the physical and social damages from
Hurricane Katrina.
When costumed in the carnivalesque, the critic emerges, Bakhtin suggests, within
a momentary suspension of established custom through the medium of masquerade.
Carnival allows the “lowly peasant” to mask the elite and play with their privileged
customs, temporarily inverting the social order.
15 “Carnival,” he states, “celebrates
temporary liberation from the prevailing truth of the established order; it marks the
CHELSEY LOUISE KIVLAND114
pal-marable2-02-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:51 PM  Page 114


--- PAGE 132 ---
suspension of all hierarchical rank, privileges, norms, and prohibitions.”16 In so doing,
carnival opens a domain of “freedom” where communication becomes “directed at
everyone,” severing hegemonic relations by furnishing the people’s “ancestral body.”17
However, this assertion has been shown to exaggerate the extent to which Carnival
produces effective critics of established social order. As T urner notes, though the car-
nivalesque performs reversals of social roles, it is dependent on a set of rules and reg-
ulations that ultimately disabuses such reversals.
18 In this reading, the uninhibited
reversal within Carnival presents ambiguity and contradiction within social relation-
ships, but within “a structure of order” that ultimately projects the instability of this
temporary space of play.
19 Carnival’s acts of masquerade are redressed by the rules that
allow them to exist; the performed fragility of the “ancestral body” makes desirable
the social privileges and prohibitions that keep this body controlled.
In New Orleans’s Carnival, though excessive libation and promiscuity take place
on Bourbon Street, the Bakhtinian ideal of carnival has been virtually silenced by
authoritative regulation. Since 1857, when “Krewe of Comus” decided to “control
the disgraceful actions of the ruffians,” Mardi Gras has not been a release from reg-
imented life.
20 Demonstrated through officially ordered parades and forceful relega-
tion of the public audience, Mardi Gras is a tightly controlled affair. Yet this
regulation never completely silences the expression of social tensions; rather, it
imparts to the critiques a fleeting and measured existence, which transforms play
into an institution upholding city’s social “rank and order.”
An explanation of why the role of the critic intensified in the post-Katrina Mardi
Gras emerges from the social instability and ambiguity that Hurricane Katrina
exposed. The catastrophic effects of the event mirrored the ritual of Mardi Gras, for
it put established norms of social life in flux. But crucially, the crisis disobeyed the
ritualized rules of destruction and construction, leaving “undressed” the between-
ness of order and disorder. By challenging the ability of the ritual to complete its
redressive sequence in the face of the city’s social liminality, the crisis “denatured” the
symbolic structure of the ritual. It opened a new space where the symbols of ritual
and crisis could be arranged in novel ways to critique social relations. Indeed, as two
signs on flatbeds stated: “Rex Drowned” and “Guess who is Rex now?”
By taking advantage of this liminal state, the performances of the unofficial
parades exposed a critique of the social relations that produced the very catastrophe
of Hurricane Katrina, including the ineptitude of governmental organizations (e.g.,
FEMA), lack of state and federal support, the media’s exaggerated emphasis on
crime, and the neglect of revelers. This polemic was fronted with the aid of the car-
nivalesque, which referenced costumes of beads and capes and behaviors of partying
and tourism, and used the ritual as a medium to highlight the catastrophic effects of
poverty on the victims and the still untended exigencies of the city. Such use served
to denigrate Mardi Gras as, again, an exclusive, inopportune, wasteful party not ben-
efiting those who need help now. Viewed in combination, the performances of the
critics expressed a wish of resistance against the concentrated forces of power, hoping
“to really enliven Hurricane Katrina as a means for change. . .for after this, we want
no more business as usual.” In this way, the critics rejected the idea that the crisis
could be overcome through a return to the status quo of social relations in the city,
whether represented by renewal or reunion.
HERO, EULOGIST, TRICKSTER, AND CRITIC 115
pal-marable2-02-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:51 PM  Page 115


--- PAGE 133 ---
ANALYTIC OF CONSENSUS
I argue that the performed relations between crisis and ritual of the post-Katrina
Mardi Gras depend on continual tension between the provisional establishment of
agreement on the center ground of symbolic significances and the continual shifting
and transforming of this center per the evolving settings where symbols are used.
The specific dynamics of this constitutive tension of social action establishes what
might be called the “signifying practice” of consensus.
21 The analytic of consensus is
a tool to identify how communities of performance materialized a totem through the
intersection of past representations and future imaginings and how they established
a provisional accord on the sense and meaning of this totem. The first dimension
marks the subject of consensus: the dialectic of historical materiality at play in the
performances’ construction of a specific kind of totem, a mythic personality, which
harnesses shared history into a condensed rallying cry, a “wish” that orients action
toward the crisis.
22 This dialectical totem is implicated in the act of performance and
emerges through the interrelated acts of restoring the past, as well as meaningfully
completing this restoration by implicating it in the active imagination of a possible
future. The second dimension articulates the practice of consensus: the active process
of attaining a provisional state of accord on the affective and semantic messages of
the symbols deployed and assembled in performance. The formation of embodied
agreement on the sense and meaning, the significance, of the totem is attained
through each community’s coordinated engagement with a symbolic dialogue, as
well as their juxtaposition against other communities’ performances.
Subject of Consensus: Dialectical T otems. Drawing together Benjamin’s notion of
the “dialectical image”
23 with the idea of the totemic mythic personality further clar-
ifies how the mythic personalities, the hero, eulogist, trickster, and critic, embodied
an orientation to the crisis that is retrospectively meaningful and prospectively use-
ful for a community of performance as situated against other communities.
24
Situated at a historical juncture, the dialectical image, Benjamin states, is neither
that the past gives light to the present nor that the present gives light to the past;
instead, the dialectical image is where the past meets the future in a present constel-
lation.
25 Because the performances enacted totems that uniquely represented a vision
of the social wounds endured by New Orleanians and the efforts needed to address
them, each totem materialized a representation that uniquely recovered the histori-
cal materiality of the crisis, surfacing certain artifacts of its impact and occluding
others in order to mount a collective effort to address those wounds. Such recovery,
however, necessitated the calling forth of past traditions, the “archaic images [ ur-
images],” as Benjamin terms them, of cultural practice (e.g., Mardi Gras, second line)
to either front, blend, or hide the ruins of crisis. This play of ritual and crisis ruins—
the archived tropes of both events—realized in a tension between revelation and con-
cealment within each totem indicates a particular relationship with the future: a
wish. Hence, the wish of ruins materializes the dialectic of past representations and
future imaginings that established a more confined set of symbols that together gave
form to a totem on which minimal consensus could be attained.
26
First, the hero emerged from the ruins not only of longstanding traditions of
royal costumes, courtly rituals, and cultural themes performed during the parade but
CHELSEY LOUISE KIVLAND116
pal-marable2-02-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:51 PM  Page 116


--- PAGE 134 ---
also of the longstanding economic superiority and political clout of the social bod-
ies performing. Where the former instantiated the “civilized” boundaries of the elite
class, the latter allowed this class to showcase its power during its most unabashed
performance of the year: Mardi Gras. Noted in the misrecognition of the dire state
of city services and the absence of social concerns in their moment of silence, the
hero’s exaltation of tradition and ignorance of crisis oriented the performance to the
archaic past before the fissures of Hurricane Katrina. Bringing forth, as one audience
member stated, “our traditions, the traditions of the families in this city,” demon-
strated the hero’s vision of the future as the perpetuation of the social order “we have
built and will build again.” The wish to renew the city, proclaimed by the hero, rep-
resented a dream to overcome the crisis as though its impact was but a minor unset-
tlement. Those who have “proven their resilience before,” one masker noted, “will do
so again.” The “who” was those who have contributed to the city as it was and not,
as many of the audience offered, “the criminals” who are now “thank goodness,
gone” or the “whiners” who “cannot take matters into their own hands.” Like the
masks concealing the elite’s faces, the hero’s ignorance of the crisis concealed grave
racialized, economic abuses while revealing an evaluation of them as attributable to
personal (not public) responsibility.
Opposed to the hero, the eulogist emphasized the devastation caused by the cri-
sis. But, like the hero, the eulogist attained the credence to amend the social suffer-
ing, beyond physical damages, through the confluence of ruined traditions.
Integrating practices of mourning and festivity, a funeral procession and celebratory
parade, the eulogist used the archaic images of established cultural practices to facil-
itate the reunion desperately needed after the crisis left many “not here with us.”
Evident in their choices of theme and the position and dedication of their moment
of silence, as well as their insistence in performing with dethroned royalty and
marching through the damaged areas, explicated the use of ritual to bring together
the community of performance. This communal act of remembrance, articulated by
an audience member as “our way of healing. . .[is] to move on with what we have
left,” merged past imagery of togetherness with the imagery of dissolution wrought
by the crisis (i.e., the unsettling of Zulu’s “family”) in order to envision progress
through the crisis. The wish of reunion, though oriented to the future, emerged from
a symbolic blend that used archaic images of communal traditions to address the
newly emergent images of crisis that challenged the community. This blend posi-
tioned a familiar pathway for the community that could, as long as the audience fol-
lowed the cue, “lead them back home.”
The orchestrated marching of the T-shirt brigades did not explicitly use the dis-
cursive force of any established traditions. However, the act of resignifying accusations
in an effort to alter the meaning and direction of blame is well established in black
cultural practice as a means to resist otherwise damaging significations.
27 Their
embodied communication demonstrated how the “exchange of blame” arising from
the crisis held the potential to negatively interpret the behaviors of black, poor vic-
tims who, in the wake of the storm, tried to cope with their destitute conditions. By
appropriating the invidious accusations, the trickster’s resignification of the ruins of
accusations—helplessness, on the one hand, and unwarranted violence, on the
other—demonstrated an effort to publicly and presently vindicate the community
HERO, EULOGIST, TRICKSTER, AND CRITIC 117
pal-marable2-02-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:51 PM  Page 117


--- PAGE 135 ---
while retroactively blaming those supposed to have applied them, the mass of behold-
ers. Their performance did not demonstrate an orientation to a glorious past of
resilience or unity, nor a hopeful orientation to the future, but rather an orientation
to the city’s present racial tension. A resignification of behavior, their performance was
perhaps an effort to “save face” for the accused and to deface the supposed accusers.
Finally, the unofficial parades, as the only performances that explicitly stressed the
political abuse and neglect of the crisis, deployed the literal ruins of the crisis
through the mask of Mardi Gras traditions. Calling out through chants or signs the
characteristic imagery, objects, and social institutions of Hurricane Katrina, the crit-
ics highlighted the structural poverty and organizational failures exposed by the cri-
sis. They did so by using the customary practices of floats, costumes, and throws of
Mardi Gras in order to enable, in contrast to Rex, an emphasis on the crisis’s impact
and moreover, the social ills that caused it. The critic’s refusal to silence the social
forces (as opposed to the hurricane’s natural force) at work in making the crisis ori-
ented the community of performance to a future where the past, like its images,
would be “turned upside down.” Built on the subversion of ruins, their wish came
to the fore through the performance’s disavowal of the past and interest in change.
T o resist by questioning the past’s concentrated forces of power was, at base, an icon-
oclastic hope to alter them, for the critics insisted that social change is part and par-
cel to remaking a viable New Orleans.
These four examples illustrate that these totemic mythic personalities material-
ized at the juncture of past and future as a representation of how the past can be ren-
dered intelligible and how it can be made useful for the imminent future. Within
each performance, the totem formed a different dialectical image through the use of
a unique combination of ritual and crisis symbols, which communicated disparate
orientations to not only the crisis, but the persistence of sociality in New Orleans.
Performing consensus on the significance of these wishes of ruins—renewal,
reunion, resignification, and resistance—within each community of performance,
however, cannot be fully appreciated without attention to the coordinated and jux-
taposed symbolic exchanges occurring within and between the communities.
Practice of Consensus: Sense and Meaning. Articulating minimal consensus within
the performances demands an illustration of how each community established co-
presence, engaged in a meaningful dialogue, and was differentiated from other
coeval performances. Each of these conditions of emergence, however, cannot be
apprehended sequentially; they are realized in their simultaneous and collaborative
execution. The ensuing illustrations emphasize the layered communicative practices
that associated emergent and traditional symbols with the consequence of forming
relations and divisions among individuals. This emphasis will develop the concept of
minimal consensus as an evolving practice, highlighting the extent to which this
Mardi Gras actively performed the formation of common understandings of the
relation between the ritual and the crisis and yet also reinforced contentious differ-
ences regarding these understandings.
“The very act of congregating,” Durkheim states, “is a very powerful stimulant,”
for within a state of closeness emotions begin to “echo” each other.
28 This, he argues,
leads inevitably to a “harmony and unison of movement,” a rhythm where those pres-
ent together, “co-present,” become joined in the mutual expression of their affective
CHELSEY LOUISE KIVLAND118
pal-marable2-02-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:51 PM  Page 118


--- PAGE 136 ---
excitement.29 The intensified experience of co-presence occurred on the level of the
collective through the inhabitation of the city during the post-Katrina Mardi Gras.
Many revelers attested to the sensible intensification rendered through the height-
ened activity of the city, asserting this is the “first time the city feels alive since
Katrina.” Yet, beyond the citywide revelry, each of the communities of performance
generated and occupied a unique space of co-presence.
Whereas the Zulu and Rex parades initiated a coordinated rhythm between per-
formers through the measured beats of parades and throws, the unofficial parades
did so through the dual acts of embodying stagnant, enclosed spaces where throws
were exchanged and marching between these spaces in coordinated waves of move-
ment. The T-shirt brigades, however, generated co-presence through orchestrating a
highly rhythmic and tightly woven march against the muddled, stationary bodies of
the mainline parade audiences. In this very act of coming into a space of closeness,
all of the performers entered into an experience unlike their everyday encounters.
Here, they entered a space charged with, what Durkheim calls, the “energized
impulses of others’ impressions”
30 where an intensity of experience emerged; as one
unofficial parade participant stated, “It’s so exciting here now. . .our rhythms, our
bouncing off each other. . .the excitement is unstoppable.”
31
Building on Durkheim, I seek to draw attention to the unique forms of affective
intensity that the performances produced through embodying their disparate
totems. Within the entire ritual of Mardi Gras, the rhythmic echoes of bodily, ver-
balized, and inscribed gestures of the performances not only demonstrated the con-
stitution of different spaces of intensity, but these intensities held different
significance for the communities. This is because performance, in its production of
intense co-sympathizing, is more than an exchange of symbols that designates
semantic referents.
32 Because consensual practice highlights the affect of perform-
ance, its use, as an analytic, appreciates that an attainment of a momentary state of
mutual accord on the meaning of symbols involves the practice of bringing individ-
uals to a state where they share, and inextricably so, a sense of the symbols, a feeling
that the symbols ignite. In so doing, consensual practice nuances how, and in what
form, intensified co-presence fashions a unified social corpus, such as Durkheim’s
“collective effervescence” (the compression and exaltation of one collective
33) or
T urner’s “communitas” (“the domain of equality where all are placed without dis-
tinction on an identical level of social evaluation”
34).
As palpable constructions that emerge from symbolic exchanges within a state of
collective intensity, the totems evolve during situated and distinctive interaction. The
significance of the mythic personality hence reflects the needs and desires of individ-
uals to settle on interpretations of events in order to collectively act on (or with)
them. But, because the settlement is negotiated through communication, it resists
attaining a homogeneous or fixed state of significance across an interacting collec-
tive. Rather, communication only temporarily and restrictively warrants consensus
within the specific setting of interaction. Articulating how the different perform-
ances attained this active accord involves describing, in the tradition of Bakhtin, the
structure and specificity of their communication or, more precisely, their dialogic
interaction within the community and against other communities. Dialogic interac-
tion demonstrates how the significance of each community’s embodiment of a
HERO, EULOGIST, TRICKSTER, AND CRITIC 119
pal-marable2-02-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:51 PM  Page 119


--- PAGE 137 ---
totemic mythic personality specifically evolves in an environment of performative
unity and alterity. 35 As the very preconditions of performance, these coordinated
exchanges of significant gestures carve up the nebulous region of intensified co-pres-
ence by giving valence to particular performances within the collective.
Dialogue, as the ever-present orientation to a “greater or lesser degree” of one’s
utterance toward some “other’s utterances,” Bakhtin suggests is foundational to all
communication.
36 Appropriating the meaning in communication depends not only
on the arrangement of a “neutral and impersonal language” but also on how the “ges-
tural” symbols exist in dialogue within developing social situations. Situational use
reflects a historical dialogue (engagement of past uses) and an interactional dialogue
(engagement with others’ uses), the intersection of which outlines the tension
between tradition and change. The symbolic gestures communicated within the
Mardi Gras performances of 2006 carry the traces of the conceptual and social
changes they have made through their yearly renditions. This was made plain in the
performances’ uses of ritual symbols in relation to the emergent crisis symbols. Yet
the meanings of symbols are also co-constructed by those with whom the commu-
nity of performance is interacting within the present environment of the ritual.
Bakhtin emphasizes that this co-construction locates a tension between the “coming
together” of individuals on their similar uses of symbols and also the “coming apart”
of individuals per their different uses of symbols.
37 Communicating meaning within
interaction entails not the merging of all into one but rather the founding of a unique
space of accord that is simultaneously with some individuals and against others.
Because the Katrina crisis impacted social relations within the city, creating fis-
sures within social groups, the performances brought the community to a tenuous
state of accord on the social implications of the event. The efforts to form a level of
consensus were especially salient. Yet because the crisis also demonstrated strong
divisions across social groups, it initiated the use of the ritual to front and comment
on the rifts between groups. Such divisions were identified and created in the
totemic features—from overcoming to mourning, joking to critiquing—and in the
spaces of their deployment—from high to low, dry to wet ground. Merging dialogic
accord and discord, minimal consensus settled through the construction of juxta-
posed symbolic dialogues that took place on historical as well as two interactional
planes, within the community of performance and against other communities,
which furnished the evolving sense and meaning of each totem.
Within Rex, the hero aligned the community of performance around a feeling of
hopeful cheer, incorporating the audience into the timeless parade rendition. Their
insistence on having the parade met the willful enthusiasm of the audience members
begging for throws, who called out “Thank you for parading!” on numerous occasions
when throws landed in their hands. During the scene of the parade, audience mem-
bers attested to both the pride that they have in their city (as Rex displayed its the-
matic icons of culture) and the assurance that New Orleans will recover. One audience
member stated, “This parade reminds us of the history of our city. . . .It is a history
that what happened cannot destroy....  W e  k n o w  that now with Rex here today.”
Moreover, the earnestness with which Rex orchestrated control of the city was echoed
in the accounts of audience members who articulated how “this is not a party like
what they show on TV . . .it is us bringing back our traditions.” These traditions
CHELSEY LOUISE KIVLAND120
pal-marable2-02-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:51 PM  Page 120


--- PAGE 138 ---
included the exchanges of throws, cheers, and also the honorary gestures of salutes and
bows, which marked the embodied recognition of the elite power of the Rex parade.
As tied to the performed strength of the maskers, the performed loyalty of the
Rex parade audience also undoubtedly rested on the creation of a space apart from
the crisis. From the high, dry ground of city center, where the mark of Katrina is all
but erased, the hero’s exhortation to overcome the crisis through renewal of the city
resonated easily across the audience. Such ease was also supported through the loca-
tion of the moment of silence. Indexing an acclaimed Civil War general, this locale
called forth among the community their actual past heroes, who have long been
mobilized to instantiate conceit among the elite, as well as to make claims regarding
the ownership of urban space and control of urban affairs.
38 The tenable status of
this message, however, arose through the surfacing not only of the piles of waste and
graffiti tags after the passage of the parade, but also in the references to the crisis
played out in the three other performances.
Incorporating them into a funeral procession, which necessitated insider knowl-
edge of the symbolic meaning of gestures, the eulogist of the Zulu parade brought its
community to a feeling that rested between mourning and rejoicing. Following the
cued dialogue of the procession, most noted in the synchronized raising of coconuts
and the incitement of song and dance, the audience substantiated and solidified the
intended affect of the eulogist. Where one audience member highlighted the “calm
made through our parade,” another noted how Zulu made “it now okay to celebrate.”
Joining these feelings within the very spatial and movement choreography of the
parade, Zulu coordinated the community to merge in the act, as much as the belief,
of reunion. In so doing, the Zulu parade invaded the parade to follow.
The Zulu maskers challenged the strength and dignity of the following Rex
parade as its unwelcome reminder that the “hero’s civilized city” rests on the mis-
recognition of the economic and cultural contributions made by the black, working
class, that needs to be reunified for renewal to even begin. Moreover, the transgres-
sion of Zulu into the ruined neighborhoods and their tribute to them reminded the
community of Rex that reunification was indeed necessary, for much needed to be
rebuilt. One audience member developed this point: “We parade second but have
more fans. . .makes no sense. But it’s a good thing today ‘cause we can show Rex that
all those away must come home before anything is rebuilt.” Yet, as the parades col-
lided in Zulu’s departure and Rex’s beginning, Rex audience members replied to this
assertion with the remarks that “we are not whiners like them” and “people should
just start building their own communities.” These totems, the hero and the eulogist,
at this moment engaged in a symbolic tour de force where their wishes—renewal and
reunion—battled for sequential precedent.
The T-shirt brigades, though mute, initiated a dialogue between the performers
through their unified display of a single message on their bodies. The valence of their
message, as a twisted assertion of blame, instilled itself against the shock of the
beholders through their forceful, uniform movements through the crowds.
Generating an obviously discernible rhythm, the tricksters’ march circumscribed the
space of the performance and also shaped the flow of the performed actions, insist-
ing on the meaning of their wordless melody. The rhythmic march mirrored the
satirical aim of the T-shirt, forming a crass parody of the mainline parades, which
HERO, EULOGIST, TRICKSTER, AND CRITIC 121
pal-marable2-02-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:51 PM  Page 121


--- PAGE 139 ---
coded the brigades’ intentions as derogatory. Moreover, the blank expressions across
the tricksters’ faces demonstrated an absence of shame in embodying the accusation
against those confronting their bodies. Emerging at the intersection of their embod-
ied movements and message, the tricksters’ resignification of behavior depended on
the ability to orient an affect within the community while producing an opposed
affect among their beholders.
The tricksters, weaving between the Rex and Zulu parades and their audiences,
impacted the symbols of these parades. The tricksters disturbed the flow and mood
of the audiences of these parades, causing many to loudly condemn their actions.
Second, they demonstrated to Zulu that reunification necessitates a struggle between
communities to signify their social positions as much as a struggle within the com-
munity on the level of mutual mourning. Third, they fronted that which the Rex
parade physically blocked and performatively ignored: the graffiti, the evidence of
the moral panic that Hurricane Katrina spawned within the city. Last, by challeng-
ing the very definition of the community of the eulogist and hero, both based on
racial ancestry (e.g., Zulu warriors, colonial royalty), the tricksters suggested that the
community of performance could form through a mutual (accusatory) reaction
against ersatz others.
Despite their division into two groups, the flatbed floats and the street perform-
ers, the unofficial parades formed a dialogue among themselves that oriented their
engagement in mutual condemnation of the politics of the crisis. Their joint repeti-
tion of chants and pointed exchanges of throws, both of which excluded the partic-
ipation of the beholders, fashioned the critics of each group as members of a
collective project of protest. As such, their alliance was strengthened by the identifi-
cation of a common enemy. One street performer confirmed this idea: “I came out
today alone with my idea to say something to those watching, but. . .it is not just
me here . . .now we are really making the partiers [of Rex] look.” Additionally, the
unofficial parades highlighted their outsider status by confronting these beholders
from the low, wet ground of the city where the storm’s destruction was most vivid.
As opposed to Zulu, however, this act did not engender mourning but rather fur-
thered the efforts of the critics to emplace evidence of their message by indexing and
using the artifacts of the storm’s surrounding debris. As such, the choice of place sub-
stantiated the dialogue of the critic, bolstering their acts of resistance.
Due to this oppositional stance, the critics, more than any other totem, purpo-
sively challenged the wishes of the other coeval performances. Emphasizing the
parade of Rex, the critics’ message took shape by, as the posters asserted, drowning
“Rex,” understood as the ideology, the naturalized exaltation of the cultural and
political power, upon which the man who performs Rex stands. If Rex, however, can
be taken to represent, as “King,” Mardi Gras, then the critics can be seen as challeng-
ing as well the parade of Zulu, who, despite efforts to amend the festival in address
of the crisis, articulated only its effects, leaving unacknowledged the causal factors
that put at risk Rex’s “family.” By deploying its symbolic material to execute critique,
the critics shook the very frame of Mardi Gras. Their actions impacted the festival
air of the ritual, damaging the quests to “forget and party” heard across the entire
scene. But, without the passages of the audiences of the mainline parades through
their performances, the critics would have called out to an absent space. It was clear
CHELSEY LOUISE KIVLAND122
pal-marable2-02-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:51 PM  Page 122


--- PAGE 140 ---
that their chants climbed as the crowds en route thickened, for, as one street per-
former noted, “We are here to remind the ‘bead whores’ of what is really important
for the people of this city.”
When analyzed collectively, each of the communities of performance can be seen
to have joined together in a moment of co-presence where they engaged in symbolic
dialogues that served to unify performers and audience while distancing this unity
from other coeval performances. The repertoire of practices that each of the per-
formances choreographed, cued, and coordinated represented a symbolic dialogue
that aligned action in relation to the significance of the totem and thus, in relation
to the significance of the crisis, for then and for now. In this way, each performance
constituted an act of persuasion toward an ideology—an orienting framework for
action—of how to progress through the crisis socially. The hero demonstrated an
ideology of personal resilience, affirming the powers of individuals to “overcome the
crisis on their own” by exploiting their (assumed) independent economic capital to
rebuild the city; the eulogist demonstrated an ideology of moral unity, affirming the
power of their communal networks to heal the social wounds of the crisis; the trick-
ster demonstrated an ideology of clandestine collective action, affirming the power
of orchestrated satire to reclaim their social pride from damaging accusations while
denigrating others; and the critic demonstrated an ideology of public protest, affirm-
ing the power of resistant action to mobilize the crisis, as well as its causes and impli-
cations, as a force for change.
Therefore, the performances notably revealed allegiances and contentions with
the dominant, contemporary economic-political model of neoliberalism, the ethos
of valuing and validating economic relations as guides for all social relations that is
represented by governmental structures and officials at federal, state, and local lev-
els.
39 Explicitly fronting their ability to escape the crisis without suffering grave dam-
ages to property or welfare, the hero of the Rex parade left unacknowledged the
social networks that greatly advanced, if not facilitated, this ability. With their
emphasis on rebuilding, they demonstrated an allegiance to renewal through eco-
nomic power, namely, the business infrastructure of the city. Contrarily, the eulogist
stressed, per tradition, the viability of social networks to mediate economic loss and
emotional suffering. Although not necessarily contradicting the neoliberal ethic of
nonstate support, this performative statement emphasized social networks, rather
than personal funds, as the alternative support mechanism. Specifically, it high-
lighted the need for redistribution in sustaining the city.
The tricksters reiterated this need, though they added a more clandestine valence.
Not only did the tricksters insist on exonerating criminal acts of redistribution (e.g.,
looting), they also hinted at the reluctance of the mayor to recognize the larger prob-
lem of economic oppression that provoked the metaphor of a “chocolate city.” Most
fervently, the critics challenged the ethics of maintaining a racially hegemonic class
structure in the city. Through the juxtaposition of symbols in their performance,
these revelers asserted a relation between the elite’s misrecognition of the crisis and
the state and federal neglect during the crisis. They emphasized the allegedly corrupt
partnerships between government officials (including Mayor Nagin, Governor
Blanco, and President Bush) and the business elite that exacerbated the crisis and
could furnish, as posters threatened, the “death of the city.”
HERO, EULOGIST, TRICKSTER, AND CRITIC 123
pal-marable2-02-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:51 PM  Page 123


--- PAGE 141 ---
Though not discernibly revolutionary or anti-revolutionary, these ritual perform-
ances hence demonstrated “the politics in all ritual.”40 Specifically, they engaged the
motors of ritual and crisis in the political act of crafting an ideology with which to
evaluate current social relations and provoke their reproduction or change. The full
execution of this performative communication involved constructing and adopting
an embodied representation, the totem, able to signify the event of crisis in the serv-
ice of imagining and thus engendering future social action. The totem’s adoption
depended on the coordinated exchange of these symbols through semantic and prag-
matic communication during the scene of the performance. These dialogic interac-
tions within communities of performances critically enabled each community’s
exclusion from other communities. Explicating the complexity of the signifying
practice of consensus, these performances manifested not only the dialectical nego-
tiation of past representations and future imaginings to craft a significant represen-
tation of the crisis, but also the dependency of this significance on historically
situated yet presently interacted dialogues that disseminate the representation’s sense
and meaning. The achievement of minimal consensus proved necessary for each
community to render the intersection of crisis and ritual sensible and meaningful
and to, as such, outline, ignite, and authorize social action accordingly.
P
ERFORMATIVE INTERSECTION OF RITUAL AND CRISIS
Because this Mardi Gras contained disparate reactions to the crisis, the ritual com-
plicates the established tendency to understand crisis and ritual as inherently oppo-
sitional categories of social action.
41 Crisis, as an event that intensely demonstrates
the instability of social relations and ritual, as an event that constructs an intensified
vision of social relations, simultaneously exposes the structures of these relations and
engenders the active process of reorienting individuals. Therefore, though crisis and
ritual collide in the nature of their impact on social life (the former as “undoing,” the
latter as “redoing”), their impacts curiously ape each other in that they both moti-
vate processes of making sense of sociality, the roles and relations, associations, and
divisions of persons within the agora. Rather than expressing the use of ritual to
redress the crisis, this intersection instead expresses the contentious, symbolic inter-
play of both events to provide a forum and motivation for asserting which “expo-
sure” of social relations is valid and, moreover, socially useful as a representation of
the past and a motivation for action.
Hurricane Katrina and Mardi Gras collaborated in their mutual establishment of
a pool of potent symbols that individuals could creatively relate and deploy in their
efforts to publicly support or challenge the social aims of ritual and/or the social
effects of crisis. The performances’ unique efforts uncovered the vast range of possi-
bilities for the (mis)uses of ritual in order to form a degree of accord on the implica-
tions of the crisis and the (mis)uses of crisis to form a degree of accord on the social
implications of ritual. The performances can thus be seen to have established minimal
consensus not only on the significance of crisis (through using ritual to steer social
action in its wake) but also on the significance of ritual (through indexing the experi-
ence of the crisis during ritual enactments). This latter act, as seen most prominently
CHELSEY LOUISE KIVLAND124
pal-marable2-02-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:51 PM  Page 124


--- PAGE 142 ---
by the critics and tricksters, not only evaluated the ritual’s social consequences in
their general form but also indicated an evaluation of the ritual’s specific role in pro-
moting the crisis.
The post-Katrina Mardi Gras thus made plain the role of ritual performance, at
times clever and discreet and at others frank and forceful, to address experiential con-
flict in order to orient a future relieved of its “menacing stance,” as T urner states, “in
the agora.”
42 Yet, to the extent that this ritual also warranted the address of conflict,
it reinvigorated it, for it facilitated a space for competing evaluations of crisis. These
four performances opened a complex terrain of social interactions where communi-
ties, conjoined through performance, interpreted and influenced the social signifi-
cance of the ritual and the crisis. This landscape of performance can be seen neither
as ritual’s use to redress crisis nor as crisis’s use to change ritual. In conclusion, the
intersection of ritual and crisis in the post-Katrina Mardi Gras vividly demonstrated
the myriad ways that each event can be combined within historically specific con-
texts of interaction to tread an inextricable duality of tradition and change, between
the reinforcement and condemnation of sociality within the agora.
43
CODA
As the last float of Rex passed, an assertion cut across the sirens and footsteps: “By
holding Mardi Gras, we are showing the rest of the world that New Orleans is not
dead.” Not long after, affirmative “seconds” followed, and soon all that could be
heard was, “No, not dead; no, not dead; no, not dead. . .” repeating endlessly as the
memorable stage of New Orleans’s post-Katrina Mardi Gras emptied.
Each of the performances fervently instilled this echo of assertions in their efforts
to awaken New Orleans. But if their performed addresses of the crisis foremost
breathed life into the corpse of the city, the forms of life they revitalized were remark-
ably different. It is my hope that this essay has enriched our understanding of the
dynamic and diverse intersection of ritual and crisis by increasing appreciation for the
dual processes contained in performing—making by doing—consensual representa-
tions of the past in order to raise hope for a certain future. This duality is best repre-
sented through merging the process of constructing a totem that may momentarily
stand within while standing for a community by, first, dialectically engaging symbolic
ruins of ritual and crisis to orient a wish for the future, and, second, disseminating the
sense and meaning of this totem through dialogic exchanges of these symbols. The
symbolic assemblages of the hero, eulogist, trickster, and critic drew together the sym-
bols of ritual and crisis to furnish a degree of consensus on how to (re-)invent social
life in the traumatized yet emergent city, to, as this essay began, “plant the flag.” In
the most profound sense, the agora born of the post-Katrina Mardi Gras was a per-
formative contest staged and waged for the very life of New Orleans.
N
OTES
1. During my observations, I recorded daily field notes, which included descriptions of
the performances and quotations from festival performers and audience members. All
HERO, EULOGIST, TRICKSTER, AND CRITIC 125
pal-marable2-02-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:51 PM  Page 125


--- PAGE 143 ---
of the quotations contained in this essay (unless otherwise marked) were gathered dur-
ing informal conversations. I chose not to record names.
2. The “T-shirt brigades” is a term I have coined. I have been unable to discern a regu-
larity of word choice among the festival participants.
3. E. Durkheim, Elementary Forms of Religious Life (New York: Free Press, 1995),
220–22, 229.
4. Ibid., 217–24.
5. Hayden White, The Historical Imagination in Nineteenth-Century Europe (Baltimore:
John Hopkins, 1973), 8.
6. J. Curtis Waldo, History of the Carnival in New Orleans, 1857–1882 (New Orleans:
Ghaham & Son, 1882).
7. G. Bataille, Consumption (New York: Zone Books, 1991). Bataille observed that in a
capitalistic economy where products accumulate at a rate surpassing their ability for
consumption, individuals take relief in expending the excess unproductively. The accu-
mulated waste of the Rex parade demonstrated quite boldly Mardi Gras’s situatedness
within an economy currently unable to support the elite’s expenditure during the rit-
ual, which put at risk the power of ritual act to effect the satisfaction of the elite.
8. E. E. Evans-Pritchard, Witchcraft, Oracles, and Magic among the Azande (London:
Oxford University, 1976).
9. The most widely cited rumor was delivered by Mayor C. Ray Nagin, who reported
during national programming of the Oprah Winfrey Show, that he had been “in that
frickin’ Superdome for five days watching dead bodies, watching hooligans killing peo-
ple, raping people,” but nearly all nationally distributed newspapers published numer-
ous unverified reports of seven-year-old children being raped, nightly murders in the
Superdome, roving bands of armed gangs in the Convention Center, or “dozens” of
people being shoveled into the freezers of public shelters. It is necessary to add that
after two weeks of flooding, city and state officials documented none of the rumors.
10. The use of blackface in the Zulu parade has a long history; its first use, as Roach
(1996) notes, dates to the decade after Plessy v. Ferguson.
11. H. L. Gates, The Signifying Monkey: A Theory of African American Literacy Criticism
(New York: Oxford University, 1988), 6.
12. M. M. Bakhtin, “Discourse Typology in Prose,” trans. L. Matejka and K. Pomorska,
in Readings in Russian Poetics: Formalist and Structuralist Views(Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 1971), 186.
13. Ibid, 87.
14. L. White, Speaking with Vampires: Rumor and History in Colonial Africa (Berkeley:
University of California, 2000).
15. M. M. Bakhtin, Rabelais and his World , trans. H. Iswolsky (Bloomington: Indiana
University Press, 1984).
16. Ibid., 109.
17. Ibid., 11.
18. T urner, Anthropology of Performance, 131.
19. Ibid., 129–30.
20. J. Roach, Cities of the Dead: Circum Atlantic Performance (New York: Columbia
University, 1996), 246.
21. J. Comaroff, Body of Power, Spirit of Resistance(Chicago: University of Chicago, 1895),
265. Following Comaroff, I seek to highlight social action as a communicative process
denoting the “meaningful structure inherent in practice and the practical structure
inherent in meaning.” For the semantic complexity of the term “consensus” I am
indebted to the etymological tracing of Raymond Williams’ Keywords: A Vocabulary of
Culture and Society (New York: Oxford University Press, 1976).
CHELSEY LOUISE KIVLAND126
pal-marable2-02-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:51 PM  Page 126


--- PAGE 144 ---
22. Durkheim, Elementary Forms of Religious Life, 220–221.
23. I focus my analysis on the contributions of Walter Benjamin in the posthumously pub-
lished Das Passagen-Werk (Berlin: Suhrkamp, 1983), with notable support from the
reading of this work by Susan Buck-Morss in Dialectics of Seeing: Walter Benjamin and
the Arcades Project (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991).
24. Durkheim, Elementary Forms of Religious Life; W . Benjamin, Das Passagen-Werk.
25. Benjamin, Passagen, 579 (my translation).
26. Ibid., 124.
27. C. Mitchell-Kernan, “Signifying Loud-talking and Marking,” in Rappin’ and Stylin’
Out: Communication in Urban Black America (Chicago: University of Illinois, 1972).
28. Durkheim, Elementary Forms of Religious Life, 217.
29. Ibid., 218.
30. Ibid., 217.
31. Ibid., 218–19.
32. D. Kapchan, “Performance,” The Journal of American Folklore 108 (1995): 479–508.
33. Durkheim, Elementary Forms of Religious Life, 221.
34. T urner, Anthropology of Performance, 137.
35. M. M. Bakhtin, Speech Genres and other Late Essays , trans. V . W . McGee (Austin:
University of T exas, 1986).
36. Bakhtin, Speech Genres, 92.
37. M. M. Bakhtin, “Author and Hero in Aesthetic Activity,” trans. M. Holquist and V .
Liapunov, in Art and Answerability: Early Essays by M. M. Bakhtin (Austin: University
of T exas, 1990), 33.
38. The debate in 1993 regarding Mardi Gras Krewe integration and the removal of the
Liberty Place Monument (which has inscribed in its granite base that the End of
Reconstruction “recognized White Supremacy and gave us back our state” and stands in
a central New Orleans park) provides a parallel example. See Roach, Cities of the Dead.
39. D. Harvey, A Brief History of Neoliberalism (London: Oxford University, 2005).
40. It is important to note that this insistence on viewing ritual as political follows the
assertion of Kelly and Kaplan that key to understanding ritual is to understand the rit-
ual in all politics and the politics in all ritual. See, J. Kelly and M. Kaplan, “History,
Structure, and Ritual,” Annual Review of Anthropology 19 (1990): 119–50.
41. T urner’s influential model of the three-wave process of social dramas, which begins
with a social breach, climaxes with crisis, and meets its redress with ritual, marks the
solidification of an idea that has had longstanding in ritual analysis. See, for example,
J. L. Comaroff and J. Comaroff, introduction to Modernity and Its Malcontents: Ritual
and Power in Postcolonial Africa (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993).
42. T urner, Anthropology of Performance, 34.
43. For a critical review of the literature on the intersection of history and ritual, in crisis con-
texts and noncrisis contexts, see J. Kelly and M. Kaplan “History, Structure, and Ritual.”
HERO, EULOGIST, TRICKSTER, AND CRITIC 127
pal-marable2-02-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:51 PM  Page 127


--- PAGE 145 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 146 ---
Chapter 9
(RE)IMAGINING ETHNICITY IN
THE CITY OF NEW ORLEANS:
KATRINA’S GEOGRAPHICAL
ALLEGORY
STEPHANIE HOUSTON GREY
When Hurricane Katrina swept across the Gulf Coast in August 2005, the diaspora
that it produced hollowed the city of New Orleans. In a recent issue of the New York
Times, satellite photos revealed that the devastation is no longer evidenced by post-
apocalyptic debris, but by the rows of now empty communities that have left much
of the urban landscape bereft of vibrant human activity. As these ancient neighbor-
hoods dig themselves out of the mud and silt, the displacement of hundreds of thou-
sands of persons has created a new challenge for this iconographic city. This challenge
stems from the endeavor to recapture an essence that many feared had been washed
into the Gulf of Mexico. As the shrimp boats that now serve as debris gatherers
extract Mardi Gras beads from the ocean, the cultural gulf that has been etched into
the urban landscape raises questions about the future of this community in an age
where the American city has itself become a mere echo of civic society and celebra-
tion. Reflecting upon the racial implications of this event, it is clear that the storm
ignited a combustible mixture of social and economic issues surrounding race, class,
and space. The following discussion explores the nexus between social geography and
the political allegories used to define those that inhabit urban spaces. The city of New
Orleans must now grapple with both its representation at a national level and the
realities of alienation so vividly amplified by this catastrophe—a process that means
examining the role that its own history has played in creating certain geographical
containment fields that isolate those populations most deserving of assistance.
One common thread that runs through the accounts of those citizens who survived
the storm emerges as a pronounced sense of betrayal. In the wake of Hurricane Katrina,
the diaspora and the federal government’s ambivalence have created a situation where
citizens and their organs of public deliberation have been deeply fractured. Significant
pal-marable2-02-3.qxp  10/25/2007  1:05 PM  Page 129


--- PAGE 147 ---
portions of the city’s infrastructure, including large sections of St. Bernard and
Jefferson Parishes, continue to suffer from the aftereffects of water damage and pop-
ulation displacement. The key to the successful reconstruction of New Orleans, with
its unique and diverse cultural identity, revolves around the coordinated efforts of city
leaders, contractors, and a citizenry that has largely lost faith in these governmental
bodies. Recognizing the depth of this cultural rupture, the City Council of New
Orleans adopted Resolution R-05-525 on October 12, 2005, establishing the
Hurricane Recovery Advisory Committee. The charge of this entity includes rebuild-
ing trust with the citizenry and business leaders, developing communication infra-
structure, and speaking for the population of the city in a clear voice that reflects their
concerns and anxieties. For a city to provide a genuine public space, it must address
the gap between public and private identities so that urban designs and culture reflect
the consciousness of those who inhabit them. One of the primary obstacles to realiz-
ing this laudable goal is the way that allegories of stigma and ethnic containment—
social barriers that are often animated by racial dimensions—continue to inhibit this
endeavor. Renewing a vibrant urban space means examining the grounds upon which
the city’s sense of authenticity has been established in the past and confronting the
spatial ideologies that continue to inhibit the process of recovery.
Fredric Jameson notes that national allegories find their most vivid embodiment in
the urban spaces where social divisions evolve into crushing material realities. The nar-
ratives that facilitate the citizen’s identification with the polis, while critical to the
process through which governing bodies reflect popular ethos, may be deflected by
interests that diverge from those of the population. Rather than creating a public space
where government and citizens participate in meaningful exchange, geographical alle-
gories function to divide, isolate, and stigmatize. This chapter traces the way that these
destructive allegories were mobilized against New Orleans’s citizens of color during the
Katrina event. This three-part analysis begins with the rationality of containment that
marks many urban environments and the way that this logic “colored” the national
response to the catastrophe. Then attention shifts to the history of New Orleans and
exposes the factors that contributed to this national response by tracing the racial
legacy of geographical allegory within the city—particularly the way that decadence
has been linked to ethnic ambiguity in the lower Mississippi region. The final section
proposes a template for appropriating these metaphors that link ethnic diversity to the
unique physical and social ecology of the region and using this revised ethical vocab-
ulary to facilitate a new consciousness that opens avenues of dialogue between the
city’s citizens and its representative bodies. At the core of this discussion is the assump-
tion that urban environments are not simply determined by economic realities and do
not merely reflect the natural teleology of population movement but are the products
of communicative practices. Only by interrogating these models of population man-
agement can the city of New Orleans posit a new future where its metropolitan ethos
facilitates social progress rather than retarding growth and development.
T
HE BIOETHICS OF CONTAINMENT
The federal response to Katrina demonstrated that the catastrophe was not to be
addressed via outreach and rescue but through strategies of containment. With the
STEPHANIE HOUSTON GREY130
pal-marable2-02-3.qxp  10/25/2007  1:05 PM  Page 130


--- PAGE 148 ---
exception of the United States Coast Guard, federal responders established a periph-
ery around the city that blocked access to its main staging areas for at least five days.
People sat in unbearable heat and on overpasses—scavenging for food and supplies
while trying to keep sick relatives alive. This delay was the result not of a lack of
access to the city itself but of an unwillingness to enter the urban zone for reasons
that have never been fully explained. Some critics of the Bush administration sug-
gest that this failure stemmed from the federal government’s apathy toward these cit-
izens and the region as a whole—that their responsibility ended after they simply
stood in front of cameras and said that they cared. These explanations are, however,
incomplete. During this time period, certain media outlets began to flood the air-
waves with gruesome stories of rioting, murder, and particularly graphic accounts of
child rape that were later revealed to be either fabrications or exaggerations. In their
work on collective responses to urban crises, Stuart Hall et al. coined the term “moral
panic” to describe situations where racial otherness is projected as a source of vio-
lence—leading to media hyperbole that feeds fear and hysteria, provoking a police
response that is out of proportion to the actual threat that may or may not be posed.
The moral panic generated by Katrina kept both police and military from entering
a city that was in desperate need of relief, leading instead to the containment strat-
egy. This sense of cultural anxiety regarding particular urban environments is not a
new phenomenon, but it is nurtured and informed by metropolitan rationalities that
place the isolation and management of ethnicity above other priorities.
During the later half of the twentieth century, the American city became a focal
point for discussions of civic culture, control, and authenticity. In her book The
Death and Life of the American Cities , Jane Jacobs suggested that the new design
schemes being created by urban planning specialists produced a cityscape that inhib-
ited genuine community by allowing inhabitants to circumvent their neighborhoods
while moving through them. Rather than fostering interaction within these spaces,
interaction that is critical to the life of any neighborhood, the modern city became a
series of containment spaces. In his reflections on the city of Los Angeles, Mike Davis
notes that ethnic isolation creates a series of social barriers that many cities reinforce
through a unique confluence of strategies that include police enforcement of social
and ethnic boundaries, control of press organs, and architectural innovations
designed to isolate disenfranchised individuals from what little public life remains
intact. He goes on to write that “the universal consequence of the crusade to secure
the city is the destruction of any truly democratic space. The American city is being
systematically turned inward. The public spaces of the new megastructures and
supermalls have supplanted traditional streets and disciplined their spontaneity.”
Recent studies demonstrate that while many urban neighborhoods are more ethni-
cally integrated than in the past, class distinctions remain intact due to the flow of
commerce and social activities to the suburban periphery. The manipulation of mod-
ern urban infrastructure is designed to isolate both ethnic and economic groups from
one another by creating a protective membrane around the privileged to shield them
from those deemed less desirable. Thus, the federal response was not simply an aber-
ration of administrative policy, but a logical extension of existing urban rationality.
What the media panic that followed in the wake of Katrina demonstrated is the
extent to which these logics, while often obscured by tourist guides and cosmetic
(RE)IMAGINING ETHNICITY IN THE CITY OF NEW ORLEANS 131
pal-marable2-02-3.qxp  10/25/2007  1:05 PM  Page 131


--- PAGE 149 ---
social policy, reside very close to the surface and can be activated very quickly with
devastating consequences. Glenda Dickerstetsun states that the media “have given us
an orgy of wall-to-wall coverage chronicling the catastrophe,” likening it to a “block-
buster film, which uses the misery of the developing world as an exotic backdrop for
a story about the travails of white people.” Here the citizens left behind to face the
storm became a savage testimony to the dangers associated with color and the chal-
lenge that it posed to the rationality of law and order. This lexicon of violence and
containment emerged within a media context where radio hosts were referring to the
remaining citizens as parasites fleeing a dying animal. Fox reporter Bill O’Reilly
labeled these citizens as thugs and drug addicts who were only attempting to leave
the city because they could no longer get their fix. While rumors of ethnic savagery
turned out to be fabrications, the racial codes used to define the looters activated the
allegories of geographical decadence and transformed these survivors into a threat.
Thus the chaos that emerged in the wake of the storm was characterized as an issue
that originated within the indigenous culture rather than from these extraordinary
circumstances. There can be few more vivid portraits of the impact that mediated
environments and communication technology have on the management of space
and population movement than in the days immediately following the storm. This
continues to be reflected in the Katrina Smithsonian exhibit where the slow federal
response is attributed to this violence rather than problematic social policies. Thus
the savagery produced by the storm was naturalized by the composition of the pop-
ulation itself rather than the lack of supplies and medical aid.
Katrina reveals that the problem confronting New Orleans is not just an issue of
rebuilding infrastructure, but it is one that is deeply rooted in issues of urban
bioethics. In her now well-documented visit to the Astrodome, Barbara Bush
explained to television cameras that “so many of the people here, you know, were
underprivileged anyway, so this is working very well for them.” This response
demonstrates the lacuna that now exists between spheres of governance and the pop-
ulations with whom they have either lost touch or against which they constitute their
own interests. Henry Giroux refers to this ideology as the “biopolitics of disposabil-
ity,” an ethical stance that views individuals as either resources for advancing politi-
cal interests or potential barriers to the social and economic development of
empowered groups. He proceeds to draw an extended comparison between the
visual images spawned by Katrina and the brutal murder of Emmit Till in 1955:
Till’s body allowed the racism that destroyed it to be made visible, to speak to the sys-
tematic character of American racial injustice. The bodies of the Katrina victims could
not speak with the same directness to the state of American racist violence but they
reveal and shatter the conservative fiction of a color-blind society. The bodies of the
Katrina victims lard bare the racial and class fault lines that mark an increasingly dam-
aged and withering democracy and revealed the emergence of a new kind of politics,
one in which entire populations are now considered disposable, and unnecessary bur-
den on state coffers, and consigned to fend for themselves.
While Giroux’s comparison is designed to demonstrate the extent to which these
national political boundaries have created undesirable bioethical ideologies, the
STEPHANIE HOUSTON GREY132
pal-marable2-02-3.qxp  10/25/2007  1:05 PM  Page 132


--- PAGE 150 ---
metaphors of ethnicity, the South, and the river preexisted as extremely powerful
components of a broader geographical allegory. The comparison of the drowning of
New Orleans to the drowning of a victim of a brutal lynching reveals not a direct
causal relationship but a topographical legacy that permeates both the local culture
that has birthed the Crescent City and the stigma that it carries as the southernmost
urban center on the lower Mississippi River.
G
EOGRAPHICAL ALLEGORIES OF WASTE, 
POLLUTION, AND ETHNIC PERMEATION
The geographical allegories that mark New Orleans and the surrounding region are
defined by a metaphorical interconnection between ethnicity and pollution. In the
wake of the disaster, Mayor Ray Nagin asserted that New Orleans would remain a
“chocolate city”—a comment for which he was later subjected to criticism. But as
Michael Dyson points out, this characterization is not inaccurate. In many ways, this
ethnic metaphor resides at the heart of the geographical allegory that demarcates the
alluvial plains of the lower Mississippi.
Using this concept of allegory to foreground the containment strategies that
define New Orleans, Mayor Nagin’s metaphor represents a deeper symbolic under-
current than is immediately recognizable when one ponders a map of the United
States. As the Mississippi traverses the cities that run from North to South—from
Chicago to St. Louis to Memphis and finally New Orleans—one sees a gradual shift
in the allegories used to define these urban environments that belies a certain hier-
archy. Residing as it does at the mouth of the Mississippi River, the city of New
Orleans has been historically characterized as a site of expulsion, waste, and excess.
When the unusual ethnic composition of the city is read through these geographical
allegories, the impact upon both national and local policy can be devastating to the
citizens of this region.
The ability to characterize American citizens as disposable resources stems
directly from a topography of ethics and race that remains embedded within the
American consciousness. Tara McPherson describes the visual representations of the
South as displaying a lenticular logic—a “schema by which histories or images that
are actually copresent get presented (structurally, ideologically) so that only one of
the images can be seen at a time.” In these depictions, the poverty and industrial pol-
lution are often negated in pristine images of plantation ideals, allowing the social
and economic problems associated with the region to remain more or less invisible
to the national consciousness. This is compounded by the fact that the alluvial plain
of the Mississippi is a sphere of literal expulsion where waste and pollution are forced
from the nation’s industrial core. For many historians and urban engineering schol-
ars, this dumping associated with the chemical industry is justified by the ethnic
composition of the area. Much as the nation expels its detritus and waste through
the great river, New Orleans and its citizens are marked by their existence in this top-
ographical boundary as extensions of this expulsion. Given the power of this allegory
to isolate and stigmatize entire urban populations—when, for example, news com-
mentators feed these stereotypes by asserting, without evidence, that an entire
(RE)IMAGINING ETHNICITY IN THE CITY OF NEW ORLEANS 133
pal-marable2-02-3.qxp  10/25/2007  1:05 PM  Page 133


--- PAGE 151 ---
urban/ethnic population is fleeing a disaster due to its collective desire to acquire ille-
gal drugs—the need to rearticulate this unique cityscape is a pressing one. One of the
animating features of Southern Jim Crow policies was the assumption that African
American populations were more prone than whites to vices such as cocaine addic-
tion and therefore had to be contained via legislation. These images and commentary
do not emerge from a political vacuum, but they remain dormant in the American
consciousness until they can be activated in times of perceived threat or crisis.
As one moves south, narratives of progress and commerce are increasingly sup-
planted by metaphors of pleasure, waste, pollution, and decadence. The city of New
Orleans has, in fact, turned these narratives into a source of income through its well-
known tourist industry. While Ronald Pelias suggests that the Creole carnival has
emerged as a site for lived critical practice where pleasure can become a source of
empowerment, these exhibitions also mark these urban spaces as spheres of iniquity.
Narratives of ethnic decadence would continue to mark the city’s identity despite the
fact that the carnival culture had itself been orchestrated by white business owners
since the mid nineteenth century, when organizations such as the Mistick Krewe of
Comos used the demonic language of Milton to fashion this city as a respite from
the oppressive moral standards of the white middle class of the period. It is not sur-
prising that the Hurricane has been likened to a Greek tragedy, complete with hubris
and unheeded sibylline prophecies. Here in this great “ship of fools,” the carnival
continued until the eventual apocalypse that brings the participants before their
eventual divine judgment. In her book Southern Babylon, Alecia Long notes that his-
torically the sexuality associated with New Orleans was peculiar for the region
because it manifested itself through the violation of ethnic boundaries. The response
of city leaders at the turn of the twentieth century was not to regulate sexual behav-
ior but to police racial integration. The creation of the Storyville district was an
attempt not to eliminate sexual activity but to maintain the color line that separated
various ethnic groups from one another. Thus the transgressions committed by the
city—in the eyes of its critics in other parts of the nation—were not just those deal-
ing with over-indulgence, but it failed to sufficiently police the ethnic boundaries
that drive the ethnic rationality of other urban centers.
This obsession with ethnic division can be seen in Shirley Thompson’s descrip-
tion of the case of T oucoutou, a woman of mixed ethnic background who sued one
local citizen for referring to her as a “woman of color,” a charge that threatened her
marriage to a prominent white citizen. Her failure to achieve this status stemmed
from a continuing struggle where the realities of ethnic ambiguity were coming into
conflict with social policies that promoted racial purity in the face of licentious sex-
ual practices. This ethnic ideology continues to animate the national debate sur-
rounding the city of New Orleans as it remains a space marketed as a release from
repressive ethical systems—a release facilitated by primal, ethnic color. Thus it was
not sexual behavior itself that brought the wrath of God down upon the citizens of
this city, but it was the inappropriate mixing of ethnic categories and the creation of
the racial ambiguity that has come to define its amorphous borders. Mayor Ray
Nagin would lend support to this allegory of retribution by publicly agreeing with
Pat Robertson that the storm had been a divine judgment directed against the city
for its iniquity. At the February 2006 Martin Luther King Day ceremony, he stated
STEPHANIE HOUSTON GREY134
pal-marable2-02-3.qxp  10/25/2007  1:05 PM  Page 134


--- PAGE 152 ---
that “surely he [God] is mad at black America also. We’re not taking care of our-
selves, we’re not taking care of our women, and we’re not taking care of our chil-
dren.” This unfortunate choice of words lent support to the allegorical ideology that
posited the city as a space where moral transgressions were characterized as the log-
ical extension of the city’s ethnic conglomeration.
The geographical location of the city, combined with its unique culture, has led
to a presumption that the entire region exists in a natural state of degradation. In her
analysis of the literary styles that followed Reconstruction, Jennifer Greeson argues
that Southern culture was exported through images of a people “glorified by disas-
ter.” The presumption that the city and the region itself is doomed to suffer has, in
many ways, permeated the local culture itself. Clyde Woods suggests that this has
sparked a rebirth in the blues culture of the region, writing that this “indigenous
knowledge system has been used repeatedly by multiple generations of working-class
African Americans to organize communities of consciousness.” Yet in some ways this
indigenous epistemology views social isolation and economic deprivation as
inevitable and inescapable conditions. This inability to adopt a restorative narrative
is the product of a geographical allegory that transposes the ethnic fragmentation
experienced within other urban cultures onto the survivors of Hurricane Katrina,
rendering their urban space a withering appendage. Thus, the existing media insti-
tutions and urban boundaries have reduced the disaster to a dramatic event that fur-
ther isolates these communities.
R
ETHINKING THE ETHICS OF CONTAINMENT
This regulation of racial ambiguity animates these narratives that dictated that the
city deserved to be punished for its transgressions. In a discussion of the social meta-
physics of racial mixing, Naomi Pabst suggests that those caught in the middle “are
regulated, disciplined, and punished by being cast as inauthentic,” as “white” and/or
“white-like.” The problem that New Orleans presents is not an immediate physical
threat, but it is a threat to the ethnic logic of racial division and containment. T eresa
Zackodnik goes on to suggest that “the disruption posed by the mulatto’s racial ille-
gitimacy as neither white nor black, then, was neutralized to a certain extent by this
concentration on issues of moral legitimacy.” Thus frameworks of morality, or the
decadence of uncertainty, become linked to the threat that accepted borders and eth-
nic logics can be challenged and permeated. While the carnival is a site of release and
sexual freedom, it also represents a site where the biopolitics of blood and alchemy
threaten to destabilize existing racial hierarchies. Castigating New Orleans as a
sphere of moral degradation stems directly from these attempts to maintain ethnic
borders, thus isolating its urban populations of color.
The challenge for the city is to create a shift in the ethical categories and frame-
works that have been used to define these urban spaces. If the Hurricane Recovery
Advisory Committee (HRAC) is to be successful in reestablishing trust within the
community and creating a thriving urban economy, the geographical allegories of
pollution and decadence that directly breed apathetic public policies must be recog-
nized and addressed. In their call for a renewed attention to urban bioethics as a
(RE)IMAGINING ETHNICITY IN THE CITY OF NEW ORLEANS 135
pal-marable2-02-3.qxp  10/25/2007  1:05 PM  Page 135


--- PAGE 153 ---
unique field of study, V . Ruth Cecire, Jeffrey Blustein, and Alan Fleischman write
that “what marks and, for some, stigmatizes urban existence is the magnitude and
extent of poverty; the multiplicity, urgency, and severity of related social problems;
and the uneasy coexistence of citizens and immigrants across a wide economic spec-
trum. The latter generates. . .tensions that arise from the challenge of creating a uni-
fying moral consensus that will nourish the public good.” This renewed attention to
an ethical system that focuses upon the factors that can bridge communities remains
one of the best possibilities for rebuilding the shattered ties between the citizens of
the city and their local leaders. T o directly address the allegorical degradation of their
urban spaces, this commission should look for new, invigorating metaphors that
draw upon the city’s unique qualities to create a binding force that will lead it into
the future. In an analysis of the Corps of Engineers’ response to the disaster, T odd
Shallat notes that “in the wake of Hurricane Katrina the agency confronts a conun-
drum beyond the scope of its dam-it, ditch-it tradition; how to let the world’s third-
ranking river approximate the rhythms of nature, and meander and spread its
replenishing mud blanket across the Delta without disrupting navigation or risking
a serious flood.” While the natural topography of the area is often seen as an obsta-
cle to development and economic prosperity, so are its urban populations. It is this
assumption that the fluidity and ambiguity of the area constitutes a sign of its degra-
dation that must be addressed and, if possible, revised.
Most urban spaces are constructed through a rationality of division where groups
or classes of individuals are managed and separated via a series of containment fields
to ensure that individuals can persist in isolation. In his most recent work on the new
templates for understanding urban landscapes, Edward Soja notes that the binary
logic of class no longer works because we now must deal with polymorphous iden-
tities that ebb and flow through unexpected gaps in social boundaries. The creative
reformulation of the vacuum left by Katrina presents an opportunity to create a city
that, rather than isolating humans as disposable debris, can be imagined using a new
set of principles. An authentic space is one in which citizens move freely through
space and acquire access to public spheres of deliberation and commerce—but do so
in a way that allows for the mutual recognition of the essential humanity of the
entire polis. Forty-five years ago, Jacobs suggested that the rationality of efficiency
had killed the city because people moved in isolation from one another and in igno-
rance of the neighborhoods where local consciousness is produced. The challenge for
the city of New Orleans stems from its ability to take its ambiguous, amorphous top-
ographical qualities and use these to create a counternarrative to the allegories of
expulsion and decadence that have been deployed to render its diverse and vibrant
urban population a product of waste.
Historians of social engineering have long recognized that the city of New
Orleans is peculiar, given that the integration of culture, history, geography, and
nature combine to create a unique chemistry. The city itself is unstable and exists in
a liminal zone that is constantly shifting and sinking as new land is added while
other portions are eroded away. William Howarth suggests that swamps and wet-
lands have a peculiar ontology within western literature that impacts the manner in
which they are represented within our culture. Often these places that are neither
land nor water are viewed as “dangerous, useless, fearful, diseased, noxious.”
STEPHANIE HOUSTON GREY136
pal-marable2-02-3.qxp  10/25/2007  1:05 PM  Page 136


--- PAGE 154 ---
Conversely, their topographical ambiguity can be reconstituted as a more positive
discursive zone that is seen as places of “beauty, fertility, variety, utility, and fluidity.”
It is precisely this fecundity that can animate New Orleans as a unique urban space
where the boundaries of modern urban rationality can be challenged. Here, the rich
indigenous culture becomes a sign not of licentious moral behavior but of creativity
and invention. Jazz music, with its focus upon “condensation, fragmentation, and
the innovative use of found-material, articulated always with an eye toward prior tra-
dition,” creates a sphere where the very character of the city can emerge as a source
of rich invention. While tourists are titillated by tales of corpses bubbling to the sur-
face during rainstorms, the jazz funeral remains a unique tradition where the zone
between life and death, much like that between water and land, is subject to scrutiny.
The presence of the city is in its power not to reinforce the binary logics of division
and containment but to embody a tradition that celebrates ambiguity as a moral
strength rather than a source of weakness.
The central dilemma facing the city of New Orleans centers around city planners’
ability to confront the urban vacuum that still exists at the heart of the city while
creating an urban design that embodies its ethics of diversity. In his discussion of the
allegories of colonialism that have come to define the city of Nairobi, Joseph
Slaughter describes a city that provides the illusion of vibrant urban culture but is in
many ways an absent city, where the forces of export lead to an economic emptiness
at its core. In some ways, this phenomenon has become a hallmark of the American
urban space as well: while providing for the transport of goods, it does not signal the
presence of life. M. Christine Boyer suggests that this modern rationality creates
urban environments that are unrecognizable and without historical location. Local
communities were reorganized according to a logic of movement and commercial
efficiency that erased their unique consciousness and produced the now-familiar
modern “this place = any place” vertigo. As the public was further fragmented into
a series of private interiors, the modern city evolved to accommodate this new ethic
through the suburban trend labeled variously “spread cities” “edge cities” “disurbs”
or “post-suburbs.” The city of New Orleans stands at a unique point in history where
its unique cultural flavor can emerge to contest this seemingly inexorable march of
progress. Rather than a choice between the present core or the absent citizen, it has
the possibility to become a place where its infrastructure and governance can evolve
to reflect the carnival as a rejuvenating force. T o avoid the fate of those spaces that
have surrendered to become a series of edges, it can become an organic system where
its citizens participate in the rebuilding process and, through their dialogue, create
an authentic urban experience. The challenge that the recovery organizations face is
substantial because the politics of space continue to marginalize citizens of color
from the political and economic centers of commerce within which these ethics of
division are generated.
C
ONCLUSION
For the public sphere to serve the needs of its populace, it must be ideally situated
as a site for public engagement, deliberation, and trade; it must also be integrated
(RE)IMAGINING ETHNICITY IN THE CITY OF NEW ORLEANS 137
pal-marable2-02-3.qxp  10/25/2007  1:05 PM  Page 137


--- PAGE 155 ---
with communication technology. For Richard Sennett, these issues of functionality
are preceded by a concern over authenticity: a citizenry finding its sense of identity
in increasingly privatized spaces leads to a balkanization of culture. This logic of
urban containment has emerged in New Orleans from a series of problematic histor-
ical assumptions about the nature of the city and its unique consciousness. The geo-
graphical allegories of Southern degradation find their nexus in a city that has been
denigrated as a zone of both environmental and moral pollution. Even many of its
leaders have been implicated in this system of thought that has emerged over the
course of the past two centuries. If the HRAC is to be successful, it must do more
than simply hand out government contracts; it must develop cognizance of the spe-
cific geographical logics that led to the city’s isolation during Katrina and address
them accordingly at the national level. It must then address the extent to which these
allegories have permeated the local consciousness and created powerful rifts between
the citizens of color and their government. This paper has suggested that the local
ethnic culture, rather than being viewed as an obstacle to recovery, can become a
source of pride and reinvigoration. This is not utopian idealism but represents strate-
gic reassessment of the city and its resources. The key to this process is to open chan-
nels of communication between the various communities that have been affected by
the storm and work actively to reorganize the ethical character of the city at this tran-
sitional time.
The complexity of this process is not to be underestimated. The creation of a
more authentic urban culture means that the citizens see themselves reflected in the
mediated environments that constitute the city itself. One place to start is to use
existing media technology both to project these voices within the urban environ-
ment and to articulate this reorganization at the national level. These voices of recon-
struction do not emerge from the discourse of violence and victimhood, but they
allow the unique and diverse identities that compose the city to project their own
indigenous knowledge systems in such a way that they can have genuine influence
upon the urban planning process. Rather than people being treated as debris or
obstacles, they become partners and interlocutors in the rebuilding process. At pres-
ent the dramatic impact of the storm has subsided within the national media, and
the process of reconstruction is not itself immediately accessible to a news culture
that craves spectacle and conflict. Rather than allowing these citizens to slip back
into invisibility, this project suggests that communication scholars have valuable
roles to play in identifying areas where social barriers can be permeated through
existing technologies and new, more vigorous narratives that form the backbone of
urban organization.
S
ELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY
Allen, Barbara. “Cradle of a Revolution? The Industrial T ransformation of Louisiana’s Lower
Mississippi.” T echnology and Culture47 (2006): 112–19.
Boyer, M. Christine. Dreaming the Rational City: The Myth of American City Planning .
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1983.
Bullard, Robert. Dumping in Dixie: Race, Class, and Environmental Quality . Boulder, CO:
Westview, 1990.
STEPHANIE HOUSTON GREY138
pal-marable2-02-3.qxp  10/25/2007  1:05 PM  Page 138


--- PAGE 156 ---
Brattain, Michelle. The Politics of Whiteness: Race, Workers, and Culture in the Modern South .
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2001.
Cecire, V . Ruth, Jeffrey Blustein, and Alan Fleischman. “Urban Bioethics.” Kennedy Institute
of Ethics Journal 10 (2000): 1–20.
Coclanis, Angelo, and Peter Coclanis. “Jazz Funeral: A Living T radition.” Southern Culture 11
(2005): 86–92.
Cohen, Michael. “Jim Crow’s Drug War: Race, Coca-Cola, and the Southern Origins of Drug
Prohibition.” Southern Cultures 12 (2006): 55–79.
Constant, Edward. “Certainties of Very Low Probability.” T echnology and Culture47 (2006):
249–52.
Colten, Craig. “The Rusting of the Chemical Corridor.” T echnology and Culture47 (2006):
95–101.
Cuff, Dana. “The Figure of the Neighbor: Los Angeles Past and Future.” American Quarterly
56 (2004): 559–582.
Davis, Mike. “Fortress Los Angeles: The Militarization of Public Space.” In Variations on a
Theme Park: The New American City and the End of Public Space, edited by Michael Sorkin,
154–80. New York: Hill and Wang, 1992.
Dickerstetsun, Glenda. “Katrina: Acting Black / Playing Blackness.” Theatre Journal 57
(2005): 614–616
Dumenco, Simon, and Ann Marie Kerwin. “Bush’s PR Problem? He believes it Equals
Action.” Advertising Age 76 (2005): 50.
Dyson, Michael Eric. Come Hell or High Water: Hurricane Katrina and the Color of Disaster .
New York: Perseus, 2006.
Fischer, Claude, Gretchen Stockmeyer, Jon Stiles, and Michael Hout. “Distinguishing the
Geographical Levels and Social Dimensions of U.S. Metropolitan Segregation,
1960–2000.” Demography 41 (2004): 37–59.
Gilfoyle, Timothy. “White Cities, Linguistic T urns, and Disneylands: The New Paradigms of
Urban History.” Reviews in American History 26 (1998): 175–204.
Giroux, Henry. “Reading Hurricane Katrina: Race, Class, and the Biopolitics of
Disposability.” College Literature 33 (2006): 171–196.
Greeson, Jennifer. “Expropriating the Great South and Exporting Local Color: Global and
Hemispheric Imaginaries of the First Reconstruction.” American Literary History 18
(2006): 496–520.
Gumpert, Gary, and Susan Drucker. “Communication and Urban Life.” Intermedia 33
(2006): 18–23.
Hall, Stuart, Chas Critcher, T ony Jefferson, John Clarke, and Brian Roberts. Policing the
Crisis: Mugging, the State, and Law and Order. New York: Holmes and Meier, 1978.
Horne, Jed. Breach of Faith: The Near Death of a Great American City . New York: Random
House, 2006.
Howarth, William. “Imagined T erritory: The Writing of Wetlands.” New Literary History 30
(1999): 509–539.
Jacobs, Jane. The Death and Life of the American Cities. New York: Random House, 1961.
Jameson, Fredric. Postmodernism, or, the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism . Durham, NC:
Duke University Press, 1991.
Kelman, Ari. A River and Its City: The Nature of Landscape in New Orleans . Berkeley:
University of California Press, 2003.
Kodat, Catherine. “Conversing with Ourselves: Canon, Freedom, Jazz.” American Quarterly
55 (2003): 1–28.
Kolb, Carolyn. “Crescent City, Post-Apocalypse.” T echnology and Culture47 (2006): 108–11.
(RE)IMAGINING ETHNICITY IN THE CITY OF NEW ORLEANS 139
pal-marable2-02-3.qxp  10/25/2007  1:05 PM  Page 139


--- PAGE 157 ---
Lewis, Peirce. New Orleans: The Making of an Urban Landscape. Charlottesville: University of
Virginia Press, 2003.
Long, Alecia. The Great Southern Babylon: Sex, Race, and Respectability in New Orleans
1865–1920. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 2004.
McPherson, Tara. Reconstructing Dixie: Race, Gender, and Nostalgia in the Imagined South .
Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2003.
Pelias, Ronald. “A Personal History of Lust on Bourbon Street,” T ext and Performance
Quarterly 26 ( 2006): 47–56.
Rambuss, Richard. “Spenser and Milton at Mardi Gras: English Literature, American Cultural
Capital, and the Reformation of the New Orleans Carnival.” Boundary 2 27 (2000):
45–72.
Reuss, Martin. “Searching for Sophocles on Bourbon Street.” T echnology and Culture 47
(2006): 349–56.
Sennett, Richard. The Fall of Public Man. New York: Random House, 1975.
Shallat, T odd. “Holding Louisiana.” T echnology and Culture47 (2006): 102–07.
Shayt, David. “Artifacts of Disaster: Creating the Smithsonian’s Katrina Collection.”
T echnology and Culture47 (2006): 357–368.
Slaughter, Joseph. “Master Plans: Designing (National) Allegories of Urban Space and
Metropolitan Subjects for Postcolonial Kenya.” Research in African Studies 35 (2004):
30–51.
Soja, Edward. Postmetropolis: Critical Studies of Cities and Regions. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
2000.
Thevenot, Brian. “Myth-Making in New Orleans.” American Journalism Review27 (2006): 16.
Thompson, Shirley. “Ah T oucoutou, ye conin vous: History and Memory in Creole New
Orleans.” American Quarterly 53 (2001): 232–66.
T rout David, and Derrick Bell. After the Storm: Black Intellectuals Explore the Meaning of
Hurricane Katrina. New York: New Press, 2006.
Woods, Clyde. “Do You Know What it Means to Miss New Orleans? Katrina, T rap
Economics, and the Rebirth of the Blues.” American Quarterly 57 (2005): 1005–1018.
Zackodnik, T eresa. “Fixing the Color Line: The Mullatto. Southern Courts, and Racial
Identity.” American Quarterly 53 (2001): 420–51.
Zizek, Slavoj. “The Subject Supposed to Loot and Rape: Reality and Fantasy in New Orleans.”
These Times, October 20, 2005. http://www.inthesetimes. com/site/main/article/2361.
STEPHANIE HOUSTON GREY140
pal-marable2-02-3.qxp  10/25/2007  1:05 PM  Page 140


--- PAGE 158 ---
Chapter 10
THE REBUILDING OF A
TOURIST INDUSTRY:
IMMIGRANT LABOR
EXPLOITATION IN THE
POST-KATRINA
RECONSTRUCTION OF
NEW ORLEANS
LOREN REDWOOD
On August 29, 2005, the storm referred to as Hurricane Katrina, one of the most
deadly and destructive in U.S. history, struck land, causing massive devastation in
the states of Louisiana, Mississippi, and Alabama. Less than a month later, Hurricane
Rita hit the same area, magnifying the damage to infrastructure, buildings, and serv-
ices for basic survival. Now, more than a year after Katrina and Rita, the efforts at
recovery continue. The massive needs for reconstruction and attempts at revitaliza-
tion of economies in the region have served as catalysts to changes in the demo-
graphic landscape. Mainstream media coverage and academic attention to the
injustices experienced by survivors of the hurricanes are continuing to expose tangi-
ble evidence of racial and class oppressions. There exists, however, an omission in the
examination of the complexity of racial oppressions. I refer here to the large immi-
grant populations that now comprise the primary work force in reconstruction of the
impacted region. This work force is made up of primarily Latina/o women and men
who have been lured to the Deep South by unscrupulous labor recruiters to fill the
demand for low-wage, exploitable labor. In the examination of racial oppression and
class oppressions post-Katrina, the struggles and abuses of this highly marginalized
population have most often received one of two responses: erasure or hostility.
pal-marable2-02-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:53 PM  Page 141


--- PAGE 159 ---
A recently released report detailing ongoing racial division in New Orleans
asserts, “In the aftermath of Katrina, the authors of media and political discourse
wrote scrip about race war and job theft. They cast the actors as Black victims and
Brown invaders, and told stories that distracted the public’s focus from the institu-
tional responsibility of government and private contractors to insure that all work-
ers are treated with fairness. This ‘bait and switch’ has fueled the perception of racial
conflict and competition. The conflict has been embraced by many, to the disadvan-
tage of the excluded and exploited communities.”
The presence of this work force of alternately invisible and vilified low-wage
laborers, instrumental to the rebuilding of the region, is the product of the larger
structures of capitalism and of U.S. governmental policy and intervention. Of key
importance in the rebirth of the economy in Louisiana is the rebuilding of the
tourism industry, the primary site being New Orleans. This chapter exposes the inex-
tricable links between tourism and state-sanctioned exploitation of immigrant labor
and expands upon current understandings of tourism as an enactment of neocolo-
nial violence. An investigation of the most recent shifts in labor and immigration
post–Hurricanes Katrina and Rita will follow, with particular attention given to
labor exploitation in the rebuilding of a major U.S. tourist destination. Acts of resist-
ance and protest by exploited immigrant workers are discussed. Also examined are
the rising racial tensions between African American communities and Latino com-
munities in the Deep South brought about by labor conditions, creating hostility
between local poor and global poor. This examination concludes with a look at
immigrant rights advocacy organizations in the Deep South, their growth, and the
need for racial coalitions to address shared oppressions.
On August 25, 2006, the USA T odayarticle “French Quarter Set to Roll” notified
the American tourist that New Orleans was back and ready to receive visitors. The
opening paragraph of the article stated, “On the river side of Jackson Square in the
heart of the French Quarter, a dozen carriage mules stand in a line in the late-after-
noon swelter, looking thoroughly bored from mane to hoof. Not clipping, not clop-
ping, barely munching. Just standing there. Still. Mulishly underemployed.” A few
days later Mitch Landrieu, the Lieutenant Governor of Louisiana, expressed his
appreciation of the article. Speaking of the need to rebuild New Orleans and the state
of Louisiana following Hurricanes Katrina and Rita, Landrieu argued, “T ourism is
critical to the rebirth of Louisiana and, as the state’s second largest industry, it
employs more than 100,000 people. This is why everyone can feel good about hav-
ing fun while making a difference for those who make the Big Easy swing.” However,
little attention was given to a more important and ongoing story concerning eighty-
two guest workers, women and men from South America and the Dominican
Republic, who had joined a lawsuit filed by the Southern Poverty Law Center against
Decatur Hotels LLC, the wealthiest luxury hotel owners in New Orleans and one of
the largest hotel chains in Louisiana. The case, filed in the U.S. District Court for
Louisiana, focused on the issue of labor exploitation of immigrant workers, which
had become increasingly common in New Orleans and other parts of the Deep South
in the rebuilding efforts that followed Hurricanes Katrina and Rita.
The suit alleged that Decatur Hotels LLC, violated the Fair Labor Standards Act
when the company failed to reimburse workers for the exorbitant fees they paid to
LOREN REDWOOD142
pal-marable2-02-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:53 PM  Page 142


--- PAGE 160 ---
aggressive labor recruiters working as agents for the hotel chain. Guest workers,
recruited to New Orleans by the hotel chain, were brought in to work in hotel sup-
port positions such as housekeepers, guest service attendants, and hotel maintenance
workers. Federal regulations require employers to first attempt to recruit U.S. work-
ers and to demonstrate proof of their efforts before requesting access to guest work-
ers. The lawsuit highlighted the fact that U.S. workers were available and that the
company’s goal in hiring foreigners was to drive down wages. The number of immi-
grant workers currently employed by Decatur is estimated by the Southern Poverty
Law Center to be approximately three hundred.
The laborers recruited by Decatur LLC under the H-2B guest worker program,
paid labor recruiters between $3,500 and $5,000 to take them to New Orleans. After
being lured to New Orleans, many of these guest workers faced enormous debt and
were struggling to meet their most basic of needs while laboring in luxury hotels,
including the renowned Astor Crowne Plaza. Workers reported that the recruiters
promised full-time work and wages between $1000 and $1200 per month; however,
most received low wages in the range of $6.02 and $7.79 per hour, were significantly
underemployed, and had no overtime opportunities; additionally, workers had not
yet been reimbursed for the huge expense associated with travel to the United States.
For example, Luis Lopez, employed as a room service employee at the Astor Crowne
Plaza, reported that he “spent most of the last two months without the work hours
he was promised. . .[and that] his last paycheck was for just $18.” Lopez further
claimed that his wife, in caring for their three children in the Dominican Republic,
was “getting desperate as debt collectors swarm in and she can’t buy food.” Lopez,
housed in a Decatur-owned hotel for guest workers where he shared a room with
three other men, paid $50 per week to the hotel for housing, the same hotel chain
to which they were contracted to work.
These workers had few options. The nature of the federal guest worker agree-
ments bound the workers to their employers and disallowed workers from leaving,
even if the employer did not deliver on promises with regard to wages, work hours,
or working conditions. T eresa Ortiz, a guest worker also employed by Decatur
stated, “It’s modern-day slavery. What are my options? I go home to Bolivia, poorer
than when I got here and deeper in debt. Or I break the law to find another job.”
The filing of the lawsuit was marked with a protest by the guest worker hotel
employees staged outside the United States Federal Court building in New Orleans.
Protest signs clearly reflected the injustices experienced by the workers. Workers and
their allies held signs bearing the words “Dignidad” and “Dignity” while other guest
workers wore enlarged copies of H-2B visas on ropes around their necks. Some held
up enlarged signs of their visas, symbolizing the legal process that irreversibly bound
them to their employer. In an effort to expose the extreme economic injustice, one
man carried an enlarged copy of a check issued by Decatur Hotels Corporation for
$18.08. Many of the guest workers also wore handcuffs to symbolize their bondage.
The study of tourism presents a significant site of inquiry into the ongoing
understandings of empire. The growth of tourist industries globally, initiated by
“First World North” countries (either by direct investment or as a result of structural
adjustment programs) impacts countries of the “Third World South” on a massive
scale. Sharon Bohn Gmelch argues that “tourism has enormous social implications
THE REBUILDING OF A TOURIST INDUSTRY 143
pal-marable2-02-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:53 PM  Page 143


--- PAGE 161 ---
globally. It represents the largest ever movement of people across national boarders,
eclipsing migration and immigration, refugee flight, pilgrimage, business and educa-
tional travel.” The enormous growth of this industry makes tourism an increasingly
important site for investigation. Gmelch notes that “the travel and tourism industry
generates $4.5 trillion (U.S.) in economic activity and provides over 2 million jobs
globally.” Gmelch further reports, “worldwide, tourism employs one in every twelve
workers and accounts for 11 percent of global gross domestic product.” This
becomes a relevant concern to scholars when issues of labor in the tourist industry
intersect with issues of subject position and imperial power. In this framework,
tourists can be viewed as neocolonial actors with the labor of production for tourist
sites performed by neocolonial subjects.
The study of tourism is inextricably linked to the study of transnational labor,
immigration and migration, labor market theory, and racialization, and it therefore
requires an analysis of Western Empire. The role of the United States through gov-
ernment funding and corporate investment includes both the internal colonization
exemplified by tourist sites within the country, as well as international sites of occu-
pation. T ourism is a continuing location of colonial enterprise and is an enactment of
nation-state violence. E. San Juan Jr.’s articulation of the U.S. positioning in terms of
postcolonialism and corporate and state violence provides a context for the consider-
ation of tourism. Juan argues that postcolonialism, the ideology of globalized capital-
ism, “offers a metaphysics of legitimation for those groups who stand to benefit from
the predatory economics of uneven development, namely, transnational corporations
and their compradors, including their retinue of postcolonial rationalizers.”
The nation-state manipulates the use of immigrant labor as an exploitable and
disposable workforce, especially in the maintenance of the tourist industry, follow-
ing an established historical pattern. The aftermath of the Katrina disaster has greatly
influenced migration and demographic patterns in the Deep South, calling attention
to the legal, civil, and human rights needs of a disenfranchised population consist-
ing mostly of Latina/o immigrants. The federally funded rebuilding of this major
tourist enterprise has strategically promoted the recruitment of a large superex-
ploitable workforce comprised of both documented guest workers and undocu-
mented immigrant laborers. This strategy included the Department of Homeland
Security’s deferment of I-9 employer inspections, which required employers to ver-
ify the citizenship status of their employees, and the Bush Administration’s tempo-
rary suspension of the Davis-Bacon Act of 1931, under which employers must pay
prevailing wage rates on federally financed construction projects. Additionally, the
failure of the Environmental Protection Agency and Occupational Safety and Health
Administration to uphold and reinforce safety regulations further demonstrates the
inextricable links of the nation-state in the creation of superexploitable labor in the
service of capitalist enterprise. The rebuilding of tourist infrastructure has proved to
be a financial windfall for a select number of primary contracting corporations, most
with connections to the federal government, who received no-bid contracts from the
Federal Emergency Management Agency and now stand to collect enormous profits
from the labor of immigrant workers. The opportunity for further exploitation is
even more serious when coupled with the fact that the trail of contracting and sub-
contracting is quite difficult to trace. James Hale, a vice president of the Laborers
LOREN REDWOOD144
pal-marable2-02-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:53 PM  Page 144


--- PAGE 162 ---
International Union of North America states “contracts let to the subcontractors are
just plain invisible” and concludes that this environment creates “an open invitation
for exploitation, fraud and abuse.”
In addition, agencies such as The Hispanic Connection Inc., based in Baton
Rouge, report a dramatic growth in the demand for recruitment of Latina/o labor-
ers as H-2B guest workers needed for clean-up, construction, and service work in the
aftermath of the hurricane. Guest worker recruitment agencies like The Hispanic
Connection are in the business of recruiting women and men immigrants as H-2B
workers for labor as janitorial and service workers in casinos and hotels and for
domestic workers in private homes. Immigrant labor scholar Kristen Hill Maher
asserts that “such businesses function less as employer agencies than as labor brokers,
treating migrant workers as commodities for sale.” Maher notes a frequency of fidu-
ciary abuses present in the contracting relationship between the agency and the
worker.
4 Maria Edwards, director of the Hispanic Connection, notes that her agency
has been flooded with requests for laborers since the two hurricanes hit but is cur-
rently unable to meet the demand. She also observes that those employers she was
unable to assist have gone to extensive lengths to find workers on their own.
Prospective immigrant workers are particular targets for labor abuses at times
when attempting to participate in guest worker programs. In November of 2005, the
publication La Jornada reported that businesspeople from the Gulf Coast, posing as
representatives of three different companies, came to the Mexican city of Guanajuato
to recruit laborers. These companies’ representatives allegedly obtained permission
to conduct business in Mexico from the Secretary of the Government and told
prospective workers that through their connections to the Secretary of Exterior
Relations, they were able to secure worker visas for those willing to come to the
United States. Reportedly, many paid between $500 to $800 to these imposters, a
fee that was alleged to be payment for a work visa and transportation to New
Orleans; the representatives reportedly offered payment of $12 an hour for electri-
cians, construction and carpentry; the day the workers were scheduled to travel to
the United States, the recruiters absconded with the money. Unfortunately, this is
not an isolated event but a recurring pattern of U.S. corporations who employ labor
brokers. What is significant about this particular incident is the apparent complicity
of the Mexican government, an act that further demonstrates the unequal power
relations between the United States and Mexico and the reliance of the United States
on Mexico for a large exploitable pool of labor.
A recently published study of Latina/o workers in New Orleans, conducted by
U.C. Berkeley and T ulane University, details the conditions for both documented and
undocumented laborers. Study findings indicate that “nearly half of the reconstruction
workforce in New Orleans is Latino, of which 54 percent is undocumented.” The find-
ings of the study show that both groups are exposed to wage abuses, hazardous work-
ing conditions, lack of health care, inadequate housing, and police and Immigration
and Naturalization Service harassment. In all cases, undocumented workers fare signif-
icantly worse than documented laborers. Undocumented workers are paid signifi-
cantly less and are frequently the victims of labor theft, not being paid at all for their
work. Employers, who many times do not provide workers with information regard-
ing their identity, disappear or shut down worksites without warning, leaving workers
THE REBUILDING OF A TOURIST INDUSTRY 145
pal-marable2-02-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:53 PM  Page 145


--- PAGE 163 ---
with no recourse. H2–B guest workers, however, are not immune to wage abuses.
Some guest workers relate that after being recruited to the Deep South, they have not
worked for months, but they cannot look for other employment due to government
restrictions. Still others report being virtually held captive by employers who confis-
cated their visas upon arrival to the job site and withheld wages. These workers report
paying recruiters thousands of dollars to immigrate that has not been reimbursed.
The incidents of hazardous exposure to toxins are too numerous to assess.
Thousand of workers report they live in the homes that they are dismantling and are
exposed to mold, chemicals, sewage, and nonpotable water. In recent accounts by
H2–B guest workers, laborers report being forced to live in the same hotels they are
gutting. Others report being forced to live in squalid conditions with contaminated
water sources and very little food. Undocumented workers also have little to no
access to health care when sick or injured. Roberto Lovato has reported on numer-
ous incidents of laborers working on military bases in Mississippi who “complained
of suffering from diarrhea, sprained ankles, cuts and bruises, and other injuries”
incurred on the worksite; they were given no medical attention “despite being close
to medical facilities on the same bases they were cleaning and helping rebuild.”
Additional investigations of worker abuses have uncovered incidents of immi-
grant laborers threatened with guns when they complain of not being paid. In one
case, two workers report being forced to work at gunpoint by their employers, who
were also New Orleans police officers, for no pay. United States Immigration and
Customs Enforcement actions have soared in the last year with the deployment of
more than “725 personnel to the Gulf, including approximately 400 special agents
from the office of investigations, 200 officers from Federal Protective Services, and
100 offices from Detention and Removal Operations.”
The urgent demand for labor in the Deep South as a result of hurricane damage
and changes in labor restrictions that have allowed for a high level of exploitation is
already causing friction between established disenfranchised groups and their new
counterparts. While many residents are temporarily displaced and may never return,
active recruitment with the promise of lucrative work opportunities in the region is
luring nonresidents to the area from all parts of the United States, as well as Mexico
and Central America. Frank Mercado, a construction worker from Puerto Rico cur-
rently employed in Mississippi, states, “We’re brown people. We’re just an appara-
tus.” As a heavily disenfranchised group, these workers will likely join African
American and black populations as another underclass of the Deep South.
The “rebirth” of a tourist mecca demands this pool of underclass laborers, to both
rebuild infrastructure and provide service work labor. Raymond Mohl has docu-
mented the ways in which the processes of globalization have resulted in changes in
the Southern economy. Mohl attributes the demand and growth of a transnational
labor force in the South to “new economic investment poured into the region as
American and foreign capital.”
Eduardo Bonilla-Silva examines the changes in labor brought about by globaliza-
tion and a “new world-systemic need for capital accumulations.” Bonilla-Silva asserts
that demand to maximize profits drives wages down and “has led to the incorpora-
tion of ‘dark’ foreigners as ‘guest workers’ and even as permanent workers. . .who are
progressively becoming an underclass.”
LOREN REDWOOD146
pal-marable2-02-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:53 PM  Page 146


--- PAGE 164 ---
The presence of racial and ethnic tensions, which continues to grow in the Deep
South, are the result of much larger systems of capitalism and a worldwide process
of globalized labor exploitation. Edna Bonacich’s theory of “ethnic antagonism”
describes the consequences of globalized labor, which speaks to the split between
working-class African Americans and the new workforce of immigrant laborers. The
prevailing rhetoric that directs the focus on to issues of immigration only serves to
obscure the true issue. This claim is further supported by Fred Krissman, who cites
neoclassical economics as providing an “academic fig leaf, behind which those who
decry immigration can hide their nativist sentiments even as they dictate ever more
punitive actions against immigrants.”
Saket Soni of the New Orleans Worker Justice Coalition addresses this conflict by
referring to guest worker programs as “wedge policies that divide African Americans
and immigrants.” Guest workers brought in to the area for exploitable labor in the
service industry create a “misperception of competition that positions labor issues as
a wedge issue between communities of color.” Soni notes that in the post-Katrina
economic crisis faced by African American communities in New Orleans, unem-
ployment is “7.2 percent. . .[and] survivors are locked out of the hotel industry even
as they struggle to return home and regain their lives a year after Katrina.”
In the examination of immigration policy and imported labor, the Bracero
Program, active from 1948 to 1964, is important to the U.S. historical context of
guest worker programs. As Mae Ngai points out, other cases of contract-labor were
in operation during this time period; however, “the Bracero Program was by far the
largest project, involving some 4.6 million workers.” Ngai employs the concept of
“imported colonialism,” which the author explains has “produced new social relations
based on the subordination of racialized foreign bodies who worked in the United
States but who remained excluded from the polity by both law and by social custom.”
The history of guest worker programs in the United States is one fraught with
problems of abuse and exploitation. Cindy Hahamovitch exposes the role of the
nation-state by framing guest worker programs as “state-brokered compromises
designed to maintain high levels of migration while placating anti-immigrant move-
ments.” She concludes, “In the process they have drawn nations together in a new
sort of dependency, in which the world’s wealthy nations rely on foreigners to do
their hardest and dirtiest work, and in which poorer nations depend on earnings
abroad for their very survival.” Concern for U.S. immigration policy as it applies to
guest worker programs is echoed by the executive vice president of the Service
Employees International Union (SEIU), Eliseo Medina. David Bacon notes that the
SEIU is “one of the AFL-CIO’s key policy makers on immigration.” In response to
the Bush Administration’s proposed legislation regarding guest worker programs,
Medina notes the hypocrisy of telling immigrants “you have no right to earn citizen-
ship but tell[ing] corporations you have the right to exploit workers, both American
and immigrant. . . .This proposal allows hardworking tax-paying immigrants to
become a legitimate part of our economy, but it keeps them from fully participating
in our democracy, making immigrants a permanent sub-class of our society. Such
sub-classes are consistently vulnerable to a variety of abuses.”
The labor abuses primarily experienced by an immigrant labor force in the
affected regions go largely unchecked. According to the Gulf Coast Commission on
THE REBUILDING OF A TOURIST INDUSTRY 147
pal-marable2-02-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:53 PM  Page 147


--- PAGE 165 ---
Reconstruction Equity, Mississippi and Louisiana, which fall into the category of
“right to work” states, have no departments of labor at the state level, and there is
“only one bilingual Department of Labor investigator to cover the states of Alabama
and Mississippi.” Thus, there are only two formal recourses available to the individ-
ual in response to labor abuses: a civil suit filed with the state where the work is per-
formed, or a claim filed with the Federal Department of Labor. Neither action is
likely to be taken by an undocumented immigrant.
In response to human rights abuses, the Deep South is currently experiencing a
growth in immigrant rights advocacy by such organizations as The Southern Poverty
Law Center, The Mississippi Immigrant Rights Association, and Oxfam American
(Oxfam). Also responding to these abuses are faith-based organizations including the
Catholic Legal Immigration Network Inc., Catholic Charities, and the Hispanic
Apostolate of New Orleans (Catholic Legal Immigration Network). These organiza-
tions are providing another avenue for exploited immigrant laborers to pursue
human and civil rights protections.
In conclusion, a visit to the French Quarter, including a stay at the Astor
Crowne Plaza and a carriage ride from an “underemployed mule” obfuscates the
reality of the superexploited laborers who are integral to the creation and continued
operation of this major American tourist site. The study of tourism must acknowl-
edge the relationship of transnational labor, immigration and migration, labor mar-
ket theory, and racialization in its analysis of the Western Empire as colonial actor
upon the global south. The multiple connections between tourism in the “First
World North” and labor from “Third World South,” the role of globalization and
global financial institutions, the active encouragement of the U.S. government, and
immigration policy, as well as the effects of environmental devastation on the health
and safety of laborers recruited from the “Third World South,” make this a relevant
area of inquiry.
Another things obfuscated by the media and current scholarship is the presence
of this workforce, which is either made invisible or vilified. What requires illumi-
nation here is the commonality of racial oppressions experienced by all communi-
ties of color now present in New Orleans and the Deep South generally. The
rhetoric that is currently successfully dividing these communities must be con-
fronted and interrogated. In the protest held by guest workers on the steps of the
federal court house in New Orleans, T racie Washington, Director of the NAACP
Gulf Coast Advocacy Center and co-counsel in the case against Decatur Hotels,
helps highlight this need when she joins hands with Latino and Latina American
immigrants and calls for solidarity between communities. Washington notes that
the New Orleans guest worker program is a “continuation of the racial exploitation
that began with slavery in this country that is corporate-driven.” Indeed, the
rebuilding of New Orleans as a major U.S. tourist destination in the aftermath of
Hurricanes Katrina and Rita requires a large pool of highly exploitable labor. In this
context, building alliances across racial, ethnic, and class lines presents the oppor-
tunity for greater empowerment for all communities in the fight for dignity, human
rights, and social and economic justice.
LOREN REDWOOD148
pal-marable2-02-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:53 PM  Page 148


--- PAGE 166 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bacon, David. “The Political Economy of Immigration Reform: The Corporate Campaign for
a U.S. Guest Worker Program.” Multinational Monitor 25, no. 11 (November 2004):
9–13.
Barclay, Eliza. “As Locals Struggle, Migrants Find Work in New Orleans.” The San Francisco
Chronicle, October 12, 2005. http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?file=/c/a/
2005/10/12/MNG53F74SK1.DTL.
Bonacich, Edna. “A Theory of Ethnic Antagonism: The Split Labor Market.” American
Sociological Review 37, no. 5 (1972): 547–59.
Bonilla-Silva, Eduardo. “From Bi-racial to T ri-racial: T owards a New System of Racial
Stratification in the USA.” Ethnic and Racial Studies 27, no. 6 (November 2004):
931–50.
Brown-Danis, Judith, et al. “And Injustice for All: Workers’ Lives in the Reconstruction of
New Orleans.” Leadership Conference on Civil Rights, July 6, 2006. http://newreconstruction
.civilrights.org/details.cfm?id=46602.
Cass, Julia. “Guest Workers Sue New Orleans Hotel Chain: Immigrants Say Decatur Group
Failed to Deliver on Promised Employment.” The Washington Post, August 16, 2006.
“Center Exposes Exploitation of Immigrant Workers.” Southern Poverty Law Center, August
16. 2006. http://splcenter.org/legal/news/article.jsp?aid =205&site_area=1.
Chandler, Bill, and Tina Susman. Interview with Amy Goodman. “Workers in New Orleans
Denied Pay, Proper Housing and Threatened with Deportation.” Democracy Now!
Online, December 16, 2005. http://www.democracynow.org.
Diego-Rodríguez, Martín. “Timan en Guanajuato a más dos 2 mil posibles migrantes.” La
Jornada, November 10, 2005. http://www.jornada.unam.mx/imprimir.php?fecha=200
51110&nota= 022n2pol.php&seccion.
Fletcher, Laurel E., Phuong Pham., Eric Stover, Patrick Vinck. Rebuilding After Katrina: A
Population-Based Study of Labor and Human Rights in New Orleans . New Orleans:
Payson Center for International Development and T echnology T ransfer, 2006.
Gmelch, Sharon Bohn. “Why T ourism Matters.” T ourists and T ourism: A Reader, ed. Sharon
Bohn Gmelch. Long Grove, IL: Waveland, 2004.
Goodman, Julie. “Problems Growing Along Coast: Labor Department Looking into Disputes
over Wages, Unsafe Work Conditions.” Clarion Ledger Online , November 6, 2005.
http://clarionledger.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20051106/NEWS0110/511060
344/1260.
“Guest Workers Charge Racial Exploitation, File Federal Suit Against Luxury Hotel Chain.”
New Orleans Independent News Center, August 17, 2006. http://neworleans.indymedia
.org/news/2006/08/8452.php.
Gulf Coast Commission on Reconstruction Equity. Good Work and Fair Contracts: Making
Gulf Coast Reconstruction Work for Local Residents and Businesses . Chicago: Interfaith
Workers Justice, 2006.
Hahamovitch, Cindy. “Creating Perfect Immigrants: Guestworkers of the World in Historical
Perspective.” Labor History 44, no. 1 (2003): 69–94.
Krissman, Fred. “Sin Coyote Ni Patr”n: Why the “Migrant Network” Fails to Explain
International Migration.” The International Migration Review 39, no. 1 (2005): 4–45.
Landrieu, Mitch. Commentary. USA T oday. August 31, 2006, p. A10.
Lavato, Roberto. “Gulf Coast Slaves.” Salon Online November 15, 2005.
http://dir.salon.com/story/news/feature/2005/11/15/halliburton_katrina/index.html.
THE REBUILDING OF A TOURIST INDUSTRY 149
pal-marable2-02-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:53 PM  Page 149


--- PAGE 167 ---
Lydersen, Kari. “Immigrants Rebuilding Gulf Coast Suffer ‘Third-World’ Conditions.” The
New Standard Online, November 3, 2005. http://newstandardnews.net/content/index
.cfm/items/2559.
Maher, Kristen Hill. “Good Women ‘Ready to Go’: Labor Brokers and the T ransnational
Maid T rade.” Labor Studies in Working-Class History of the Americans 1, no. 1 (2004):
55–76.
Mohl, Raymond A. “Globalization, Latinization, and the Nuevo New South.” Journal of
American Ethnic History (Summer 2003).
Ngai, Mae M. Impossible Subjects: Illegal Aliens and the Making of Modern America. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press, 2004.
Oxfam America. “Disaster and Recovery Along the U.S. Gulf Coast: Oxfam America’s
Response to the Hurricanes.” Oxfam America Online , February 2006. http://oxfam
america.org/ (accessed March 16, 2006).
“Post-Katrina T ourism in Louisiana Packs Fun, State’s Rebirth.” USA T oday Online, August 30,
2006. http://www.usatoday.com/travel/destination/2006–08–24–new-orleanstourism
_x.htm?csp.
Roberts, Michelle. “Immigrants Sue New Orleans Hotelier.” USA T oday, August 18, 2006, p.
B3.
Root, Jay, and Aaron C. Davis. “Undocumented Immigrants Flock to Jobs on Gulf Coast.”
Knight Ridder Washington Bureau Online October 12, 2005. http://realcities.com/
mld/krwashington/news/world/12885261.htm.
San Juan, E. Jr. Racism and Cultural Studies: Critiques of Multiculturalist Ideology and the
Politics of Difference. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2002.
Shriver, Jerry. “French Quarter Set to Roll.” USA T oday Online, August 25, 2006.
http://www.usatoday.com/travel/destination/2006–08–24–new-orleans-
tourism_x.htm?csp.
T exeira, Erin. “Immigration is Dividing Blacks, Latinos.” St. Louis Dispatch, April 9, 2006, p.
B6.
“Update: Immigrant Rights Post-Katrina.” Catholic Legal Immigration Network, August 23,
2006. http://www.cliniclegal.org (accessed August 27, 2006).
LOREN REDWOOD150
pal-marable2-02-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:53 PM  Page 150


--- PAGE 168 ---
Part III
RACE AND REPRESSION
pal-marable2-03-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:54 PM  Page 151


--- PAGE 169 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 170 ---
Chapter 11
“DO YOU KNOW WHAT
IT MEANS . . . ?”: 
MAPPING EMOTION IN THE
AFTERMATH OF KATRINA
MELISSA HARRIS-LACEWELL
Do you know what it means to miss New Orleans
And miss it each night and day?
—Louis Armstrong
George Bush doesn’t care about black people.
—Kanye West
On the first anniversary of the Katrina disaster, a documentary film about the
events premiered on HBO. “When The Levees Broke: A Requiem in Four Acts”
was produced by award-winning, African American filmmaker Spike Lee. Lee used
the enduring images of human suffering in New Orleans and the compelling nar-
ratives of hurricane victims to give new meaning and poignancy to the tragedy.
Although the film is political in its thesis and conclusions, it is fundamentally an
emotional tale about the heart of the experience of Katrina for the people of New
Orleans. HBO promoted the film as an “intimate, heart-rending portrait of New
Orleans in the wake of the destruction that tells the heartbreaking personal stories
of those who endured this harrowing ordeal and survived to tell the tale of misery,
despair and triumph.” In his discussion of the film and its importance, Lee makes
a claim to the centrality of the emotional effects of the storm on its victims: “Post-
Katrina, the obituary column in the Times-Picayune is 30 percent more. Suicides are
pal-marable2-03-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:54 PM  Page 153


--- PAGE 171 ---
u p .... People are just buggin’. And there are no facilities to deal with the mental-
health issue down there. This stuff is going to have reverberations for many years to
come. When you have children who’ve seen their parents drown in front of them or
parents who have seen their children drown in front of them, I mean, how do you
deal with that?”
Building on this compelling articulation of the emotional effects of the storm,
this chapter explores the interconnection of race, politics, and emotion in the after-
math of Hurricane Katrina. When the levees of New Orleans failed, it was not a col-
orblind disaster. The storm caused greater loss and displacement for black New
Orleans residents (Cutter 2005; Gabe et al. 2005; Sherman and Shapiro 2005). The
storm also provoked significantly different reactions from black and white
Americans who viewed the unfolding disaster through the media (Bobo 2006;
Sweeney 2006; Huddy and Feldman 2006). Not only did Americans of different
races perceive vastly different realities about the events in New Orleans, but black
and white Americans felt differently about what happened. The affective responses
of African Americans were more pronounced than those of their white counterparts.
These emotions are rooted in America’s racial history and the resonance of that his-
tory in contemporary U.S. society. In the aftermath of Katrina, emotional devasta-
tion is a political response. Using data from several national surveys conducted in the
weeks following September 11, 2001, and the weeks following Hurricanes Katrina
and Rita in 2005, I map the differences in emotional responses among black and
white Americans to both disasters. I then analyze this survey data to suggest that
Americans’ political and racial beliefs were significantly related to their psychologi-
cal experiences in the weeks following Katrina. Finally, I argue that the emotional
map of Katrina responses demonstrates the centrality of race over class in shaping
how black Americans understood and experienced the disaster.
E
VALUATING AMERICAN FEELINGS ABOUT DISASTER
Katrina wrought enormous devastation on those who lost property, sustained injury
and suffered displacement as a direct result of the flooding in New Orleans. While
compelling and important, it is hardly surprising that victims of a catastrophic nat-
ural disaster experienced profound emotional reactions. Symptoms of posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD) are common among disaster survivors (Harvey and Bryant
1998; Kessler et al. 1995; North et al. 1999; Davidson et al. 1991; Green 1991). Far
more remarkable are the occasions when those who are not directly victimized by a
disaster experience negative emotional consequences simply as a result of their vicar-
ious exposure to the vulnerability and suffering of others. The terrorist attacks of
September 11, 2001, generated precisely this sort of collateral emotional damage for
Americans who were not directly victimized by the events (Schuster et al. 2001).
Several national studies demonstrate that in the days and weeks following
September 11, Americans experienced elevated stress and signs of probable posttrau-
matic stress disorder (Shuster et al. 2001; Schlenger et al. 2002). In the two months
following the attack, 17 percent of respondents in a national sample reported post-
traumatic stress symptoms. Although New York City was most directly affected by
MELISSA HARRIS-LACEWELL154
pal-marable2-03-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:54 PM  Page 154


--- PAGE 172 ---
the attacks, Americans throughout the country shared in the anxiety and stress that
the tragedy evoked. While there was a shared sense of distress, residents of New York
experienced more negative emotions; follow-up studies revealed that New Yorkers
were still experiencing emotional suffering while much of the country had begun to
return to more normal psychological functioning six months following the attacks
(Silver et al. 2002). Proximity to the disaster left New Yorkers more shaken at the
outset and more distressed in the long term than initially empathetic fellow citizens
who could more easily return to normal emotional states.
The National Opinion Research Center (NORC) at the University of Chicago
conducted the National T ragedy Study between September 13 and September 27,
2001. NORC interviewed 2,126 Americans, with an oversample of residents in New
York City and Washington, DC.
1 The National T ragedy Study replicated a series of
questions used to gauge the emotional state of Americans in the days following the
assassination of President Kennedy in 1963. The Kennedy Assassination Survey
Symptom Checklist (KASSC) measures fifteen physical and emotional reactions to
traumatic shock.
2 Table 11.1 reports the average score on the KASSC for black and
white respondents in both the national and New York samples. New York residents
(both black and white) have elevated KASSC scores compared with their counter-
parts in the general population. New Yorkers were more upset by the events of
September 11, but many people throughout the country shared a sense of vulnera-
bility and sadness after vicariously experiencing the attacks on Manhattan.
“DO YOU KNOW WHAT IT MEANS . . . ?” 155
Table 11.1   Mean scores on Kennedy Assassination Survey Symptom Checklist
Mean SE Mean SE
National New York
White White
n=641 4.29 0.16 n=166 5.67 0.30
Black Black
n=95 3.85 0.41 n=81 4.59 0.44
Source: The National T ragedy Study 2001
Table adapted from T om Smith, Kenneth Rasinski, and Marianna T oce, “America Rebounds: A National Study of Public
Response to the September 11 T errorist Attacks,” Report of the National Opinion Research Center (Chicago: University of
Chicago, October 25, 2001).
Importantly, when the KASSC score is modeled as a function of race, gender,
age, education, income and employment and estimated with an ordinary least
squares regression, the results demonstrate that in the days immediately following
September 11, there was no statistically significant difference in KASSC scores
among blacks and whites in either the national or the New York samples (Rasinski
et al. 2002). In the case of September 11, proximity to the disaster was much more
important than race in predicting initial emotional responses. Understandably,
New Yorkers felt the tragedy most sharply, but all of America, black and white,
mourned along with the city. NORC researchers concluded, “Nationally, the attack
pal-marable2-03-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:54 PM  Page 155


--- PAGE 173 ---
engendered anger, confusion and both defensive and altruistic behaviors. There is no
indication that African Americans and Caucasians differed in their initial appraisal
and behavioral coping. The overwhelming nature of the attacks appears to have cut
across ethnic groups in response” (Smith et al. 2001, 6).
While September 11 provoked similar initial responses from blacks and whites,
the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina revealed a wide emotional chasm between the
races. A Pew Foundation survey
3 conducted immediately following Katrina asked
respondents, “Have you yourself felt angry because of what’s happened in areas
affected by the hurricane?” Although a significant proportion of whites responded to
the disaster with anger (46 percent), anger was much more prevalent among African
Americans. Of black respondents, 70 percent reported that the events surrounding
Katrina made them angry. Similarly, African American respondents to the Pew sur-
vey were much more likely (71 percent) than white respondents (55 percent) to
report they “felt depressed because of what’s happened in areas affected by the hurri-
cane.” These results suggest that Spike Lee’s documentary film accurately captured a
sense that black America experienced the aftermath of Katrina with intense emotion.
The Racial Attitudes and Katrina Disaster Study by the University of Chicago
Center for the Study of Race, Politics and Culture
4 further explores the emotions
that Americans experienced in response to Katrina. The Katrina Disaster Study, con-
ducted approximately one month after the initial levee breaches in New Orleans,
asked respondents, “In the past five weeks since the Hurricane Katrina disaster how
often have you felt: so sad that nothing could cheer you up; nervous; restless or fidg-
ety; hopeless; that everything was an effort; worthless; that difficulties were piling up
so high you could not overcome them; and that you are unable to control the impor-
tant things in your life.” For each emotion, respondents could report that they felt
this way very often, fairly often, not too often, hardly ever, or never. Figure 11.1
reports the percentage of blacks and whites who felt these emotions “very often” in
the weeks after the hurricane.
There are clear and consistent differences between African American and white
respondents. Approximately double the proportion of African Americans report the
highest level of suffering from each of the negative emotions they were asked about
in the survey. They are twice as likely to report being sad, nervous, restless, and hope-
less. They are also twice as likely to feel overwhelmed, worthless, and as though
everything takes more effort. Just over a month after Katrina, more than one in ten
African Americans report feeling very often that they are unable to control the
important things in their lives.
The aftermath of Hurricane Katrina provoked different patterns of emotional
responses than the tragedy of September 11, 2001. There was little difference in how
black and white Americans felt about the horror of the terrorist attacks. Predictably,
New Yorkers felt worse in the days, weeks, and months following September 11, but
these differences were true for New Yorkers of both races. The country mourned
together in a sense of shared vulnerability. Although the aftermath of Katrina pro-
voked strong emotional responses from all Americans, the impact of the storm seems
to have been more deeply felt among African Americans. Black respondents were
also more debilitated by their negative emotions. When asked if these emotions had
interfered with life activities, 67 percent of whites reported that they had felt no
MELISSA HARRIS-LACEWELL156
pal-marable2-03-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:54 PM  Page 156


--- PAGE 174 ---
impairment of life activities. Only 58 percent of blacks believed they suffered no
impairment. A full 42 percent of the black Americans reported that their negative
emotions had interfered with their life activities.
Similar to the ways citizens of New York felt more distress following September
11, black Americans had more negative emotions after Katrina. While the response
of New York residents is likely explained by their greater proximity to Ground Zero
and perception of greater vulnerability to repeat attacks, these explanations cannot
account for the heightened emotional distress of African Americans in the weeks fol-
lowing Katrina. Most African Americans have little reason to fear being struck by a
hurricane with the potential to destroy their homes, neighborhoods and city. So why
were black people more distressed than whites?
It could be that black people are generally more sad and anxious. There is some evi-
dence from prior research suggesting that African Americans report chronically ele-
vated levels of emotional distress compared to whites (Amato 1991; Breslau et al.
1998). This evidence, however, is decidedly mixed. In some studies black Americans
report fewer symptoms of sadness. In other studies, the racial disparity in negative emo-
tions can be explained by controlling for class. Because of conflicting findings across
multiple studies, the evidence is neither clear nor compelling that black people express
chronically higher levels of negative emotions. Analysis of data from the University of
Chicago Katrina Disaster Study shows that when income, education, gender, and age
are accounted for in a simple regression model, race still has a strong and significant
correlation with reported mental distress. This suggests that the emotional disparity
“DO YOU KNOW WHAT IT MEANS . . . ?” 157
Figure 11.1   Percent who report feeling negative emotions “very often” in the weeks immediately follow-
ing Hurricane Katrina
Source: Racial Attitudes and Katrina Disaster Study by the University of Chicago Center for the Study of Race, Politics
and Culture
pal-marable2-03-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:54 PM  Page 157


--- PAGE 175 ---
between blacks and whites following Katrina cannot be accounted for solely on the
basis of enduring markers of social differences between the races.
Even if black respondents are not chronically more negative in their emotional
reports, it is possible that the post-Katrina racial disparity is the result of African
Americans regularly responding to national crises with more negative emotions than
their white counterparts. Data on racial responses to September 11 show that this
explanation is incorrect. In Table 11.1 there are no statistically significant differences
between black and white respondents in the days immediately following 9/11. T o the
extent that there are differences in average emotional responses between blacks and
whites immediately following September 11, those differences indicate that whites,
not blacks were more distressed. The Katrina gap is not present in the case of
national tragedy four years earlier, so it cannot be explained away as the mere exten-
sion of an ingrained racial pattern of response to disaster.
The analysis below explores a third hypothesis, suggesting that the reason for the
racial disparity in emotional response to Katrina lies not with the essential psychol-
ogy of black or white Americans but rather with historical and contemporary racial
beliefs that shape the political and emotional lives of many black Americans, but of
far fewer white Americans. September 11 was widely understood as an American
tragedy that was national in scope, but Hurricane Katrina was perceived as a more
narrow racialized disaster. It is therefore the politics of race that helps explain why
whites and blacks feel so differently about these two events.
T
HE POLITICS OF RACIAL EMOTION
Their government had forsaken them; they weren’t citizens but castoffs, evacuees
turned effortlessly, in language and life, into refugees.
—Michael Eric Dyson
When newly emancipated black men entered the American polity at the end of the
Civil War, it was with optimism about the possibility of becoming full partners in the
American democratic experiment. Despite having suffered generations of forced labor,
formerly enslaved persons allowed themselves to embrace the rights and responsibili-
ties of citizenship. Having fought to preserve the Union, black men took on the fran-
chise and ran for elected office. Black women and men opened businesses, founded
schools, and formed organizations and associations to support their new status as
wage earners, taxpayers, and citizens. Then in 1877 the Hayes-Tilden Compromise
crushed the emerging dream of black citizenship. The country’s political parties bal-
anced their own power on the backs of black people, negotiating away the responsi-
bility of the United States to protect its citizens. The federal government withdrew
troops from the former Confederacy and initiated one hundred years of creative bru-
tality as the South instituted Jim Crow, lynch mob rule, and disenfranchisement.
Still, with each major military conflict of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries,
black men marched into battle believing that their service as citizens might translate
into protection by the American state. Black people earned a fraction of all other
MELISSA HARRIS-LACEWELL158
pal-marable2-03-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:54 PM  Page 158


--- PAGE 176 ---
workers, but they faithfully paid taxes despite having been shut out of the public
schools and accommodations that these taxes financed. As taxpayers and soldiers,
black men and women expected the full rights and protections of other Americans,
but the country remained steadfast in its refusal to grant them even the basic rights
of access to public education, public facilities, government aid, voting rights, or
social equality.
Racial inequality has persisted into the twenty-first century. African Americans
continue to earn a fraction of their white counterparts, suffer from worse physical
health, enjoy fewer educational opportunities, are less well represented in politics
and popular culture, and labor under persistent racial stereotypes. Despite significant
and continuing racial inequality, one might argue that the last half-century has been
the most hopeful time for black citizenship in American history. Having fought and
died in the streets of the urban South, African Americans rolled back voting restric-
tions, asserted the right to fair and equal treatment under the law, and made real
gains in education, access, and visibility. The months immediately preceding the
Katrina disaster in 2005 witnessed several important milestones in the history of
African American citizenship. The United States Senate issued an official and public
apology for never passing anti-lynching legislation. The government exhumed the
body of Emmett Till to bring closure to the murder that helped launch the civil
rights movement. Prosecutors in the state of Mississippi reopened and successfully
litigated the case of the murders of the three civil rights workers Chaney, Goodman,
and Schwerner. These were positive steps in the history of black America, but when
the levees broke in New Orleans, the destruction of the city was accompanied by a
disillusion of emerging optimism about the contemporary state of black citizenship.
It is possible that this history of disappointed expectations influenced the emo-
tional reactions of black people during Katrina. I initially began to hypothesize this
connection when I traveled to New Orleans in November 2005, just seven weeks
after the levee breach. While in New Orleans, I conducted dozens of interviews with
survivors of the storm. I also attended several community meetings led by Mayor
Ray Nagin and his Bring Back New Orleans Commission. The emotional devasta-
tion of those who had lived through the storm was palpable. Everyone I spoke with
had been displaced following the city’s mandatory evacuation; the majority had sus-
tained unimaginable loss of personal property; many had survived the nightmarish
conditions of the Superdome or Convention Center; some were still searching for
missing family members and friends; and a few had confirmed that family members
had died during the storm. As direct survivors of the storm, they manifested classic
symptoms of posttraumatic shock disorder.
5 I was not surprised to find that these
survivors were enduring painful and raw emotions, but I was stunned by the nearly
universal agreement among African American survivors that their suffering was
related to their status as second-class citizens.
An example of how Katrina’s black survivors in New Orleans talked about their
own experience emerged in the November 14, 2005, meeting of Mayor Nagin’s
Bring Back New Orleans Commission. The meeting was held in a large ballroom at
the Sheraton hotel in downtown New Orleans, which had become a kind of head-
quarters for municipal action. Mayor Nagin presided over the meeting, and the offi-
cial panel included representatives from several federal agencies, local utility
“DO YOU KNOW WHAT IT MEANS . . . ?” 159
pal-marable2-03-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:54 PM  Page 159


--- PAGE 177 ---
companies, elected officials, and community leaders. After an update on the state of
the city and the pace of recovery, members of the audience were allowed to come to
a central microphone and address the panel.
The first four persons who spoke were white residents from the Garden District
area who had a variety of concerns about power outages, mold, and general health
concerns. The fifth person to speak was an African American man who owned his
own trucking business. As a local contractor, he expressed outrage at the “storm fol-
lowers” who were making “$18 per hour while I can only manage to get $15 per
hour.” In an impassioned plea to the mayor he shouted, “Listen. I got four hundred
black men ready to work, and we are being talked to like dogs. This is our city and
we are being treated like second-class citizens.” In response to his statement, the
audience broke into unrestrained applause. When the next African American man
spoke, he pleaded for a moment “to pause and recognize the loss of thousands of
people. The nation paused on 9-11, but not now. No one cares about our losses. I
am a homeowner who is homeless. I am a taxpayer and a voter. I placed my trust in
the elected officials to do what is right, but instead we got nothing. We are not
refugees, we are Americans.”
Subsequently, a black woman, who had stood while holding her sleeping toddler
in her arms during the first seven speakers, continued the theme of government
accountability to its citizens: “I was one of the people left behind. I was stuck on a
roof in New Orleans East. I am a taxpayer and a registered voter. I am happy, but I
am not rich. I have been shifted to five hotels all around the country. I am tired. I
have never asked Louisiana for anything. I just want a place to call my own. I didn’t
need help before this. I was doing for myself and for my children. Mr. Mayor, all I
want is a home for my children for Christmas.”
After this woman, a black man who lost his home in the Ninth Ward and was
displaced first to Denver and then to Dallas confronted the mayor, saying, “What is
really going on? You are asking us to come back to work. I served this city for thirty-
five years, and we are watching foreigners get paid to rebuild it while we are sitting
on the curb. There is something going on, Mr. Mayor. I understand about the dol-
lar bill situation, but I want to come back and function for my people, for New
Orleans. It is wrong for us to be turned down. I was willing to stay an extra year to
help my city. This is my home; these are my roots. We are not in T exas. We are here.”
It is not surprising that individuals who suffered catastrophic losses would artic-
ulate impassioned emotional pleas. It is more provocative when so many of these
requests are framed with an anxiety about citizenship. Not only did the people of
New Orleans whom I spoke with express sadness and grief about their loss, they also
provided explanations for that loss that were rooted in racialized understandings of
themselves as disposable members of the American populace. They asserted their
positions as homeowners, taxpayers, citizens, and government workers as they con-
structed an argument about their city and country’s betrayal of them. These inter-
views proved to be a rich source for understanding the depth of the emotional
trauma and the importance of political explanations for survivors. However, what
remains remarkable about the aftermath of Katrina is that black Americans who were
not directly impacted by the disaster also experienced significant elevations of nega-
tive emotions.
MELISSA HARRIS-LACEWELL160
pal-marable2-03-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:54 PM  Page 160


--- PAGE 178 ---
Survey data make clear that Americans not only felt bad as they witnessed
Katrina; the vicarious experience of the disaster had immediate and dramatic politi-
cal consequences. The Pew study reported that 67 percent of Americans believed
that President Bush could have done more in his handling of the relief effort, and
nearly 60 percent rated the response of the federal government as only fair or poor.
6
The Katrina disaster also caused many Americans to reconsider the nation’s security,
with 42 percent reporting that the events surrounding Hurricane Katrina made
them feel less confident that the government can handle a major terror attack. In the
aftermath of the hurricane, job approval ratings for President Bush plummeted,
7 and
one year later they still had not rebounded to their pre-Katrina levels. Many
observers point to the Katrina disaster as both a national tragedy and a political turn-
ing point, linking an emotionally difficult experience with a politically relevant
change in public opinion.
The nation’s emotional reactions to the Katrina disaster are important because
they demonstrate the link between how Americans think about social and political
realities and how they feel about national events. T o test the hypothesis that
Americans’ affective responses to Katrina were primarily rooted in a particular
understanding of America’s racial history, the analysis below estimates a model of
emotional distress among black and white Americans in the weeks following Katrina
as a function of personal, political, and racial variables. This estimation is performed
using data from the Racial Attitudes and Katrina Disaster Study by the University of
Chicago Center for the Study of Race, Politics and Culture.
Researchers normally do not think of an individual’s mental or emotional state as
resulting primarily from world political events. Decades of epidemiological work have
convincingly demonstrated that we can make predictions about the likelihood that an
individual will feel depressed, angry, or fragile based on a number of personal charac-
teristics and proximate life circumstances. Even in the days and weeks following
Katrina we should expect most emotional variability between individuals to be
directly related to durable and personal patterns that have been explicated in previous
research. We should expect that poorer and less-educated Americans should generally
feel more psychological distress than their more affluent counterparts. We should
expect women to express more sadness than men, and for the very young and very old
to express more sadness than those who are middle-aged. In light of these expecta-
tions, the equations estimated below control for education, income, sex, and age.
8
Acknowledging that a significant proportion of the variation in individual emo-
tional responses can be accounted for by these variables, the goal of this analysis is
to determine whether there is an independent relationship between negative emo-
tions and political variables after accounting for the demographic variables. T o
explore this question, the model below uses three categories of variables. The parti-
san variables used in the equation include partisan self-identification
9 and agree-
ment with the statement “President George W . Bush represents the concerns of
people like you.” The second set of questions taps respondents’ attitudes toward
America. Respondents were asked to rank their level of agreement with the state-
ment “I am proud to be an American” and with the statement, “America is the land
of opportunity. If a person works hard in America he or she can accomplish almost
anything.” The survey respondents were also asked to assess which statement is
“DO YOU KNOW WHAT IT MEANS . . . ?” 161
pal-marable2-03-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:54 PM  Page 161


--- PAGE 179 ---
truer: “America’s economic system is fair to everyone” or “America’s economic sys-
tem is unfair to poor people.”
The model tests the hypothesis that Americans’ emotional responses to Hurricane
Katrina were intimately linked to their beliefs about race and America’s racial history.
Several measures of racial attitudes are used to capture this idea. Blacks were asked if
they believed that what happens to black people will affect their lives and whites were
asked if they believe what happens to whites will affect their lives. These racially-
linked fate attitudes are included in the model below. Respondents also indicated if
they believed that blacks in America have achieved racial equality, will soon achieve
racial equality, will not achieve equality in their lifetimes, or will never achieve racial
equality. Responses to this question serve as a measure of racial pessimism.
Finally, respondents were asked a series of questions about their support for fed-
eral reparations for African Americans as compensation for a number of historic
injustices. Blacks and whites were asked, (1) “Do you think the federal government
should or should not pay money to African Americans whose ancestors were slaves
as compensation for that slavery?” (2) “Do you think the federal government should
or should not pay money to African Americans as compensation for the system of
anti-black violence and legal segregation known as ‘Jim Crow’?” (3) “Do you think
that reparations should or should not be paid to survivors and their descendants of
large, violent, twentieth-century anti-black riots such as those that occurred in T ulsa,
Oklahoma and Rosewood, Florida?” Responses to these three items are combined in
a single scale indicating overall support for reparations to black Americans.
The dependent variable is a scale derived from a factor of eight emotional response
variables that asked respondents, “In the past five weeks since the Hurricane Katrina
disaster how often have you felt: so sad that nothing could cheer you up; nervous;
restless or fidgety; hopeless; that everything was an effort; worthless; that difficulties
were piling up so high you could not overcome them; and that you are unable to con-
trol the important things in your life.” The scale is computed as a factor and is con-
strained to a unit scale where 1 represents the highest presentation of symptoms on
all indicators and 0 represents having none of these negative emotions.
Table 11.2 presents the estimated coefficients and standard errors from an ordi-
nary least squares regression modeling the emotional distress scale from the
University of Chicago Katrina Disaster Study as a function of these partisan vari-
ables, demographic variables, and national and racial attitudes. The model is esti-
mated separately for white and black respondents to account for possible differences
in the emotional processes operating for each group.
As expected, the model accounts for relatively little of the variation in emotional
distress among blacks or whites. As predicted, most people feel bad or good based
on personal and proximate causes. There is a substantial and statistically significant
effect that gender and age bear on both whites and blacks. Men and middle-aged
people experienced fewer symptoms of emotional distress in the weeks following
Katrina. Somewhat surprisingly, education is not a statistically significant covariant
for either group. Income is significant only for whites. Poorer whites are far more
emotionally distressed in the weeks following Katrina than are their wealthier coun-
terparts. For African Americans however, income makes no difference. Poorer and
richer blacks were equally likely to feel sad and overwhelmed.
MELISSA HARRIS-LACEWELL162
pal-marable2-03-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:54 PM  Page 162


--- PAGE 180 ---
While demographic variables account for some of the variation in the emotional
distress measure, statistically significant relationships between emotions and racial
and political variables are present. Negative affective reports were not related to par-
tisan attitudes for either blacks or whites. The emotions of Republicans and
Democrats are indistinguishable from the emotions of those with no partisan pref-
erence. Also, those who believe that President Bush is representative of people like
them had the same bad feelings post-Katrina as those who do not. Similarly, patri-
otism is unrelated to the emotional impact of the disaster. NORC researchers con-
cluded that in the weeks following September 11, patriotism helped provide an
emotional buffer against despair for many Americans. In the case of Katrina, patri-
otism has no discernable impact on emotional reports of whites or blacks.
While these basic political beliefs had little influence on how Americans felt,
racialized political variables were important. For both white and black respondents,
“DO YOU KNOW WHAT IT MEANS . . . ?” 163
Table 11.2   Model of emotional distress among black and white Americans in the immediate aftermath
of Hurricane Katrina
Whites Blacks
n=602 n=345
r2 = 0.16 r2 = 0.10
Coefficient SE Coefficient SE
Partisan Variables
Bush represents people like me -0.05 0.04 -0.06 0.06
Democrat -0.03 0.02 -0.01 0.02
Republican -0.03 0.02 -0.02 0.06
Attitudes toward United States
Proud to be American -0.06 0.05 -0.05 0.06
America is unfair to the poor -0.01 0.02 -0.01 0.02
America is the land of opportunity -0.15* 0.04 -0.10* 0.05
Racial Attitudes
Racial linked fate -0.04* 0.01 -0.05* 0.02
Blacks will not achieve equality -0.01 0.01 -0.03 0.02
Reparations Support (3 item scale) -0.04* 0.02 -0.03* 0.01
Demographic Variables
Education -0.03 0.04 -0.03 0.06
Income -0.14* 0.04 -0.07 0.05
Female -0.04* 0.01 -0.04* 0.02
Age2 -0.002* 0.0004 -0.001* 0.0006
Constant -0.62* 0.05 -0.48* 0.07
Source: Racial Attitudes and Katrina Disaster Study by the University of Chicago Center for the Study of Race, Politics,
and Culture
Coefficients estimated with ordinary least squares regression. The dependent variable is constrained to a unit scale.
Coefficients can be read as the percent change in total emotional distress. For example, those whites who support all
three forms of reparations are 4 percentage points more distressed in the weeks following Katrina than those whites who
do not support any form of reparations, all else being equal.
* indicate significance at p<.05
pal-marable2-03-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:54 PM  Page 163


--- PAGE 181 ---
there were three key factors associated with their emotional responses after Katrina.
First, those who believed that America is a land of opportunity where individuals can
accomplish anything were significantly less distressed following the hurricane. This
belief in America’s limitless potential served as a buffer for some who witnessed the
events in New Orleans. Perhaps they reasoned that although terrible things were
happening, America would provide opportunities for these citizens to be restored
and reestablished. Among both blacks and whites, those who were optimistic about
the nation’s opportunities felt relatively better than those who were more pessimistic.
While American idealism mitigated negative emotions, belief in racially linked
fate and recognition of America’s historic racial injustices were related to more nega-
tive emotions after the hurricane. African Americans and whites who believe that
their fate is linked to the fate of their race felt more distressed than those with less
sense of linked fate. For African Americans, this finding seems straightforward. Just
as New Yorkers felt more vulnerable than the rest of the country in the days follow-
ing September 11, so too did black people, who perceived their life opportunities
linked to that of other black people, feel more vulnerable in the aftermath of Katrina.
Although probably not estimating that they were more likely to be affected by a nat-
ural disaster, blacks’ perception of a linked fate likely heightened the sense that they
were more vulnerable to the inadequate government response to human suffering.
More surprising, whites who sensed their fate linked to that of other whites also
felt more distressed following Katrina. We might expect that they would feel less dis-
tress because most whites escaped the worst horrors of the New Orleans disaster.
However, white respondents who have a sense of linked fate may be more racially
empathetic because they are more aware of the operation of race in individual life
outcomes. If this hypothesis is accurate, then these white respondents are people
who recognize race in America and express that recognition through a belief that the
outcomes of their racial group influences their experiences. Forman and Lewis assert
that when Americans expressed shock about the racialized poverty exposed by
Katrina, they were articulating a willful ignorance of race that characterizes contem-
porary racial understandings in America. Contemporary racism in the form of racial
apathy is not the explicit desire to inflict racial harm but instead a willful expression
of ignorance about racial inequality and its effects. It is not possible to fully test this
hypothesis with the available data in this study, but simple bivariate correlations
show that a sense of white linked fate is positively correlated with the belief that
blacks will never achieve racial equality (0.11), positively correlated with the belief
that America is unfair to poor people (0.08), and negatively correlated with the belief
that America is the land of opportunity (0.04). White linked fate covaries with neg-
ative emotions in the aftermath of Katrina for those white people who recognize and
acknowledge the continuing importance of race and inequality in American society.
Finally, those blacks and whites who support federal reparations for slavery, Jim
Crow and twentieth-century race riots felt, statistically, significantly worse in the
weeks following Katrina. Respondents were not asked to predict the likelihood
that federal reparations would be forthcoming. We should not assume that the
clear majority of black respondents who believe the federal government should pro-
vide reparations are optimistic that the federal government will provide repara-
tions. Instead support for federal remuneration is more accurately understood as
MELISSA HARRIS-LACEWELL164
pal-marable2-03-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:54 PM  Page 164


--- PAGE 182 ---
recognition of the lingering effect of racial injustice and the government’s failure to
acknowledge or make amends for that injustice. Both black and white Americans
reported feeling greater levels of sadness and distress in the weeks following Katrina
if they also believed that the federal government stilled owed black Americans for
centuries of previous injustices.
C
ONCLUSION
T o the real question, how does it feel to be a problem? I answer seldom a word. And
yet, being a problem is a strange experience,—peculiar even for one who has never
been anything else, save perhaps in babyhood and in Europe.
—W . E. B. Du Bois
Three tentative conclusions suggest themselves in light of this analysis. The first
raises profound questions concerning race and class. Vulnerability to the storm’s rav-
ages fell disproportionately on those who lived at the intersection of poverty and
blackness. Wealthier black people in New Orleans fared better in the aftermath of
the storm than poorer blacks. While the disaster’s direct effects had a class compo-
nent, the emotional responses to the storm for black observers were structured by
racial considerations, not class concerns. Income and education did not distinguish
the emotional experience of Katrina for black people. Further, as Table 11.2 shows,
questions concerning America’s fairness toward poor people bore no direct correla-
tion with negative emotions. Although some researchers and observers have worked
to point attention toward issues of class and away from discussions of race in the
aftermath of Katrina, it seems that race and not class is at the heart of the black affec-
tive experience of the disaster.
In his foundational text, Behind the Mule: Race and Class in African-American
Politics (1994), political scientist Michael Dawson convincingly demonstrates that
African Americans often use racial group interests as a proxy for determining their
own interests. This black linked fate results in many African Americans expressing
public opinions and supporting public policies that are not apparently in their class
interests. Black linked fate emerges both from historical, race-based experiences of
discrimination and contemporary realities that make class interests more compli-
cated for African Americans. The black middle class is likely to be residentially seg-
regated from their white counterparts, economically vulnerable, and linked through
familial and social ties to the black poor. Black observers may have seen the black
poor suffering in New Orleans, but they also saw themselves. The white middle class
was more insulated from these negative emotions. Thus, while socioeconomic status
was correlated with white emotional patterns in the weeks following Katrina, class
was unimportant for understanding black American feelings.
The second conclusion we can draw from this research is that the disparity
between blacks and whites is not because white people are essentially unable to
empathize with blacks. The disparity grows out of differing meanings given to the
events. If white people see the world the way that black people do, then they feel the
“DO YOU KNOW WHAT IT MEANS . . . ?” 165
pal-marable2-03-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:54 PM  Page 165


--- PAGE 183 ---
way that black people do. The disparity emerges because only a tiny fraction of
whites share African Americans’ perceptual experiences. The responses in Table 11.3
underline the point that black and white Americans exist and operate in vastly dif-
ferent political realities. Blacks and whites score significantly differently on every
political and racial variable importantly correlated with emotional distress. White
people are much more optimistic about the opportunity for individual advancement
in the American system. A clear majority (55 percent) strongly agree that America is
the land of opportunity, while fewer than one third (31 percent) of black Americans
join them in this optimistic assessment. While a clear majority of whites express a
sense of linked fate with other whites (57 percent), this is dwarfed by the near una-
nimity among blacks that their race helps determine life chances. Finally, while a
substantial majority of black Americans believe that the federal government should
provide compensation to black Americans for historical injustices, only a tiny frac-
tion of whites agree.
The small proportion of white Americans who perceive America’s racial landscape
in ways similar to the majority of black Americans also felt significant distress and
sadness following Katrina. The enormous racial disparity is not attributable to the
fact that whites are essentially incapable of racial empathy. Instead, the disparity
MELISSA HARRIS-LACEWELL166
Table 11.3   Percent of white and black respondents who agree with indicators in model
%White %Black
Partisan Variables
Bush represents people like me (yes, a lot) 22.6 3.4
Democrat 29.1 57.9
Republican 30.1 3.4
Independent or No Preference 38.6 37.8
Attitudes toward United States
Proud to be American (strongly agree) 77.1 57.9
America is unfair to the poor 41.7 71.3
America is the land of opportunity (strongly agree) 54.9 30.8
Racial Attitudes
Racial linked fate 57.2 79.2
Blacks will not achieve equality 27.4 67.2
Reparations Support
Reparations for slavery 2.6 51.7
Reparations for Jim Crow 3.4 59.2
Reparations for twentieth-century race riots 4.9 63.7
Demographics
Female 50 58
Income (mean on a 0–1 scale) 0.56 0.45
Source: Racial Attitudes and Katrina Disaster Study by the University of Chicago Center for the Study of Race, Politics,
and Culture
pal-marable2-03-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:54 PM  Page 166


--- PAGE 184 ---
exists because so few whites see the world through the lens that most black
Americans use for understanding their world.
The final tentative conclusion to be drawn from this research is that America’s
racial history affects America’s emotional present. September 11 proved to be a ral-
lying point of American identity. Americans largely shared a sense of vulnerability
and loss in the days, weeks, and months following 9-11. However, the national
camaraderie after September 11 did not last. American’s responses to the tragedy
became increasingly complicated by race, region, and partisanship as the domestic
and international responses to the attack emerged. The Hurricane Katrina aftermath
did not provoke such a uniform affective emotional response. Black people found
themselves relatively more isolated in their grief and fury. At the core of this differ-
ing response are the racial and political meanings that black people assigned to the
Katrina disaster. Good citizens of conscience and kindness responded with generos-
ity and concern for those who had been displaced and devastated. White doctors,
nurses, preachers, lawyers, and everyday working people were moved to great acts of
heroism, generosity, and benevolence. But still, in the nation as a whole there was a
significant gap in the emotional experiences of the disaster. While most whites
believed that the abandonment of New Orleans was the result of bureaucracy, inef-
ficiency, lack of preparedness, or technical capacity, most blacks believed that race
was the real issue.
The levee failure in New Orleans that trapped thousands of Americans and
destroyed one of America’s most distinctive cities was one of the few televised
American tragedies. Until the events in New Orleans, only the assassination of
President Kennedy in 1963 and the destruction of the World T rade Center buildings
in 2001 allowed Americans to share in the trauma of their fellow citizens in real
time. Unlike either of these earlier events, the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina was
an unfolding drama that lasted for days. Rather than a single, terrible moment
replayed by the media, the horror of New Orleans increased daily, produced new
images of agony and death, and generated increasingly awful narratives of suffering.
Americans witnessed hours of grisly footage. The nation was able to watch in real
time as the faces of their fellow citizens were contorted in fear, pain, and hunger;
unable to feed their children or comfort their parents or find their partners.
While the terrible consequences of Katrina were readily apparent to most, African
Americans suffered unique horrors as they watched the aftermath of the storm.
Hurricane Katrina was not colorblind in its effects, and Americans were not color-
blind in their interpretations of the disaster. There is a vast racial disparity between
how black and white Americans understood the lessons of the storm.
Empirical social science can open up the human experience of politics by prompt-
ing considerations about what it means to feel bad within the context of American
politics. T o be a citizen in a democracy is to be not only the ruled, but also the ruler.
T o be a citizen in a democratic republic is to have a voice in which you can name your
experiences and pursue your good through public means. On September 11, the
nation momentarily felt like vulnerable, attacked, but united citizens. This sense of
vulnerability was less shared in the case of Katrina. Not only were the victims of the
hurricane abandoned in their drowning city, but black Americans were abandoned in
their grief as they once again confronted the fact of their second-class citizenship.
“DO YOU KNOW WHAT IT MEANS . . . ?” 167
pal-marable2-03-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:54 PM  Page 167


--- PAGE 185 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Aneshensel, Carol, and Clea Sucoff. “The Neighborhood Context of Adolescent Mental
Health.” Journal of Health and Social Behavior 37, no. 4 (1996): 293–310.
Avis, Thomas-Lester. “A Senate Apology for History on Lynching Vote Condemns Past Failure
to Act.” Washington Post, June 14, 2005.
Ballie, Andrea. “Spike Lee Painstakingly Chronicles Katrina in Epic Doc ‘When the Levees
Brooke.’” Canadian Press, September 16, 2006.
Blau, Francine, and John Graham. “Black-White Differences in Wealth and Asset
Composition.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 105, no. 2 (1990): 321–39.
Bobo, Lawrence. “Katrina: Unmasking Race, Poverty, and Politics in the 21st Century.” Du
Bois Review: Social Science Research on Race 3, no. 1 (2006): 1–6.
Breslau, N., G. C. Davis, and P . Andreski. “Risk Factors for PTSD-related T raumatic Events:
A Prospective Analysis.” American Journal of Psychiatry 152 (1995): 529–35.
Breslau, N., R. Kessler, H. Chilcoat, L. Schultz, G. Davis, and P . Andreski. “T rauma and Post-
traumatic Stress Disorder in the Community: The 1996 Detroit Area Survey of T rauma.”
Archives of General Psychiatry 55 (1998): 626–32.
Brunner, Borgna. “The Murders of James Chaney, Andrew Goodman, and Michael
Schwerner: The Ringleader of the Murders, Edgar Ray Killen, Was Convicted on June 21,
2005, the 41st Anniversary of the Crimes.” http://www.infoplease.com/spot/bhmjustice4
.html.
The Brookings Institution Metropolitan Policy Program. “New Orleans After the Storm:
Lessons for the Past, a Plan for the Future.” Publication of the Brookings Institution.
Washington, DC, October 2005.
Chan, Emily. “Evidence-based Public Health Practices: Challenges for Health Needs
Assessments in Disasters. Hong Kong Medical Journal 12, no. 4 (2006): 324–326.
Cockerman, William. “A T est of the Relationship between Race, Socioeconomic Status and
Psychological Distress.” Social Science and Medicine 31 (1990): 321–31.
Cooper, Frederick, Thomas Holt, and Rebecca Scott. Beyond Slavery: Explorations of Race,
Labor and Citizenship in Postemancipation Societies . Chapel Hill: University of North
Carolina Press, 2000.
Cutter, Susan, Bryan Boruff, and W . Lynn Shirley. “Social Vulnerability to Environmental
Hazards.” Social Science Quarterly 84, no. 1 (2003): 242–61.
Cutter, Susan. “The Geography of Social Vulnerability: Race, Class and Catastrophe.”
Understanding Katrina: Perspectives from the Social Sciences (2005).
Darden, Joe. “Black Residential Segregation since the 1948 Shelley v. Kramemer Decision.”
Journal of Black Studies 25, no. 6 (1995): 680–91.
Davidson, L. M., L. Weiss, M. O’Keefe, and A. Baum. “Acute Stressors and Chronic Stress at
Three Mile Island.” Journal of Traumatic Stress4 (1991): 481–93.
Du Bois, W . E. B. 1903. The Souls of Black Folk. New York: Norton, 1999.
Dyson, Michael Eric. Come Hell or High Water: Hurricane Katrina and the Color of Disaster .
New York: Basic Books, 2006.
Forman, Tyrone, and Amanda Lewis. “Racial Apathy and Hurricane Katrina: the Social
Anatomy of Prejudice in the Post-Civil Rights Era. Du Bois Review: Social Science Research
on Race 3, no. 1 (2005): 175–202.
Frymer, Paul, Dara Strolovitch, and Dorian T . Warren. “New Orleans is not the Exception:
Re-politicizing the Study of Racial Inequality.” Du Bois Review: Social Science Research on
Race 3, no. 1 (2006): 37–58. http://understandingkatrina.ssrc.org/FrymerStrolovitchWarren.
Fullilove, Mindy Thompson. Root Shock: How T earing Up City Neighborhoods Hurts America
and What We Can Do About It. New York: Random House, 2005.
MELISSA HARRIS-LACEWELL168
pal-marable2-03-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:54 PM  Page 168


--- PAGE 186 ---
Green, B. L. “Evaluating the Effects of Disasters.” Psychological Assessment 3 (1991): 538–46.
Harvey A. G., and R. A. Bryant. “The Relationship between Acute Stress Disorder and
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: A Prospective Evaluation of Motor Vehicle Accident
Survivors.” Journal of Consulting Clinical Psychology 66 (1998): 507–12.
HBO.com. Synopsis: When the Levees Broke; A Requiem in Four Acts. September 26, 2006.
Huddy, Leonie, and Feldman, Stanley. “Worlds Apart: Blacks and Whites React to Hurricane
Katrina. Du Bois Review: Social Science Research on Race 3, no. 1 (2006): 97–114.
Kessler R., A. Sonnega, E. Bromet, M. Hughes, and C. B. Nelson. “Posttraumatic Stress
Disorder in the National Comorbidity Survey.” Archive of General Psychiatry 52 (1995):
1048–60.
Kessler, R. “Epidemiology of Women and Depression.” Journal of Affective Disorders 74, no. 1
(March 2003): 5–13.
Litwack, Leon. 1979. Been in the Storm so Long: The Aftermath of Slavery. New York: Random
House.
Logan, John. “Population Displacement and Post-Katrina Politics: The New Orleans Mayoral
Race, 2006.” June 1, 2006.
Massey, Douglass. “American Apartheid: Segregation and the Making of the Underclass.”
American Journal of Sociology 96, no. 2 (1990): 329–57.
McLeod, Jane and Shanahan, Michael. “Poverty, Parenting, and Children’s Mental Health.”
American Sociological Review 58, no. 3 (1993): 351–66.
National Fair Housing Alliance, “No Home for the Holidays: Report on Housing
Discrimination against Hurricane Katrina Survivors.” December 20, 2005.
North, C. S., S. J. Nixon, S. Shariat et al. “Psychiatric Disorders among Survivors of the
Oklahoma City Bombing. Journal of the American Medical Association 282 (1999):
755–62.
Nguyen, Manthi, ed. Black Americans: A Statistical Sourcebook . Palo Alto, CA: Information
Publications, 2003.
Norris, F . “Epidemiology of T rauma: Frequency and Impact of Different Potentially
T raumatic Events on Different Demographic Groups. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology 60 (1992): 409–18.
Pew Research Center for the People and the Press. Hurricane Katrina Survey. September 6–7,
2005.
Rasinski, Kenneth, Alicia Matthews, Bethany Albertson, T om Smith, and Jennifer Berkhold.
The 9/11 T errorist Attacks: Ethnic Differences in Emotional Response and Recovery. Chicago:
University of Chicago National Opinion Research Center, 2002.
Schlenger, W . E., J. M. Caddell, L. Ebert, B. K. Jordan, K. M. Rourke, D. Wilson et al.
“Psychological Reactions to T errorist Attacks: Findings from the National Study of
Americans’ Reactions to September 11.” Journal of the American Medical Association 288
(2002): 581–88.
Schuster M. A., B. D. Stein, L. Jaycox et al. “A National Survey of Stress Reactions after the
September 11, 2001, T errorist Attack.” Journal of the American Medical Association 345
(2001): 1507–12.
Sheehan, Charles. “Till Is Exhumed: Experts Hope Science Can Unravel Case. Chicago
Tribune, June 2, 2005.
Sherman, Arloc and Isaac Shapiro. “Essential Facts about the Victims of Hurricane Katrina.”
Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, September 19, 2005.
Silver, R. C., E. A. Holman, D. N. McIntosh, M. Poulin, and V . Gil-Rivas. “Nationwide
Longitudinal Study of Psychological Responses to September 11.” Journal of the American
Medical Association 288 (2002): 1235–44.
“DO YOU KNOW WHAT IT MEANS . . . ?” 169
pal-marable2-03-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:54 PM  Page 169


--- PAGE 187 ---
Smith, T ., K. Rasinski, and M. T oce. “America Rebounds: A National Study of Public
Response to the September 11 T errorist Attacks.” Report of the National Opinion Research
Center. Chicago: University of Chicago, 2001.
Sweeney, Kathryn. 2006. “The Blame Game: Racialized Responses to Hurricane Katrina.” Du
Bois Review: Social Science Research on Race 3, no. 1 (2005):161–174.
Weisman, Jonathan, and Michael Abramowitz. “Many See Storm as President’s Undoing.”
Washington Post, August 26, 2006, p. A1.
NOTES
1. The National T ragedy Study was conducted between September 13 and September 27,
2001, by the National Opinion Research Center, University of Chicago. It was a tele-
phone interview of adults (18 years old and older) living in households with tele-
phones in the United States. The total sample size of 2,126 comprised a national
sample of 1,013 households and additional samples in the New York City,
Washington, DC, and Chicagoland areas. The overall response rate was 52 percent.
2. The Kennedy Assassination Study was conducted between November 26 and
December 3, 1963, by the National Opinion Research Center, University of Chicago.
The Kennedy Assassination Study Symptoms are derived from responses to the follow-
ing: “I am going to read a list of things some people have said happened to them since
they heard about the attack on the World T rade Center. Please tell me whether or not
they happened to you: Didn’t feel like eating. Smoked more than usual. Had
headaches. Had an upset stomach. Cried. Had trouble sleeping. Felt nervous and
tense. Felt like getting drunk. Felt more tired than usual. Felt dizzy at times. Lost my
temper more than usual. Hands sweat and felt damp and clammy. Had rapid heart-
beats. Felt sort of dazed and numb. Kept forgetting things.”
3. Results for the survey are based on telephone interviews conducted under the direc-
tion of Princeton Survey Research Associates International among a nationwide sam-
ple of 1,000 adults, 18 years of age or older, including an oversample of African
Americans, during the period September 6–7, 2005. The oversample of African
Americans is designed to allow a sufficient number of interviews for reporting results
of this demographic group. The national sample of telephone households was supple-
mented with an additional 103 interviews with African Americans whose households
had been recently contacted for past Pew Research Center national surveys.
Demographic weighting was used to ensure that the survey results reflect the correct
racial and ethnic composition of national adults, based on U.S. Census information.
4. The Center for the Study of Race, Politics and Culture at the University of Chicago
supported a national survey of Americans to gauge political and racial attitudes in the
aftermath of Hurricane Katrina. Principal investigators were Michael Dawson, Melissa
Harris-Lacewell, and Cathy Cohen. The data were collected by Knowledge Networks
between October 28, 2005, and November 17, 2005. Knowledge Networks employed
a Random Digit Dialing (RDD) telephone methodology to develop a representative
sample of households for participation in its panel. Once a Knowledge Networks
household was selected, members were contacted first by an express delivery mailing
and then by telephone for enrollment in the Knowledge Networks panel. The panel
structure enables clients to conduct surveys of low-incidence populations, such as
African Americans, more efficiently and inexpensively than would otherwise be possi-
ble. Every participating Knowledge Networks household receives free hardware, free
Internet access, free e-mail accounts, and ongoing technical support. Participants
MELISSA HARRIS-LACEWELL170
pal-marable2-03-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:54 PM  Page 170


--- PAGE 188 ---
receive a short multimedia survey about once a week. Surveys are delivered by e-mail
on the same standardized hardware, through the television set. The data include
responses from 1252 Americans. The racial composition of the respondents is as fol-
lows: White: 703, Black: 487, Hispanic: 52, Other: 10. Interviews are conducted in
person by Melissa Harris-Lacewell in various locations in New Orleans November
11–18, 2005. Interviews include than 28 personal discussions with local residents and
hours of transcripts from three community meetings about rebuilding efforts.
5. The name Post-traumatic Stress Disorder first appeared in 1980 in DSM-III, the
American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders Third Edition. The diagnosis was updated in 1994 in the latest edition,
DSM-IV . The diagnostic criteria for Post-traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) are
defined in DSM-IV as follows:
The person experiences a traumatic event in which both of the following
were present: the person experienced or witnessed or was confronted
with an event or events that involved actual or threatened death or seri-
ous injury, or a threat to the physical integrity of self or others; and the
person’s response involved intense fear, helplessness, or horror. The trau-
matic event is persistently re-experienced in any of the following ways:
recurrent and intrusive distressing recollections of the event, including
images, thoughts or perceptions; recurrent distressing dreams of the
event; acting or feeling as if the traumatic event were recurring (eg reliv-
ing the experience, illusions, hallucinations, and dissociative flashback
episodes, including those on wakening or when intoxicated); intense psy-
chological distress at exposure to internal or external cues that symbolize
or resemble an aspect of the traumatic event; physiological reactivity on
exposure to internal or external cues that symbolize or resemble an aspect
of the traumatic event. Persistent avoidance of stimuli associated with the
trauma and numbing of general responsiveness (not present before the
trauma). Persistent symptoms of increased arousal (not present before
the trauma) as indicated by at least two of the following: difficulty falling
or staying asleep; irritability or outbursts of anger; difficulty concentrat-
ing; hypervigilance; exaggerated startle response.
6. News sources mattered for the conclusions that Americans drew about the efficiency
of presidential response. Seventy-three percent of CNN watchers reported that the
president could have done more, but only 50 percent of Fox News viewers agreed.
Forty-six percent of those whose primary source of Katrina coverage was Fox News
believed that the president had done all he could.
7. The Pew survey reports a 50 percent approval rating for President Bush in January
2005 and a 40 percent approval rating immediately following Katrina.
8. Education is coded as years of education. Income is measured as self-reported house-
hold income and coded on a unit scale where 0 represents the lowest income category
and 1 represents the highest income category. Sex is coded as a dichotomous variable
with female = 1. Age is coded as reported age at time of survey. The variable used in
the equation is age squared to account for the hypothesized parabolic relationship
between age and mental health.
9. Democrat and Republican self-identification are included in the model. They should
be read against the excluded category of those who say that there are independent or
have no preference.
“DO YOU KNOW WHAT IT MEANS . . . ?” 171
pal-marable2-03-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:54 PM  Page 171


--- PAGE 189 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 190 ---
Chapter 12
WITNESS: THE RACIALIZED
GENDER IMPLICATIONS OF
KATRINA*
KATHLEEN A. BERGIN**
INTRODUCTION
Rechelle Carter. Brianna Carter. Linda Watson. Errolyn Warden. Barbara Richards.
These five women came to Houston following Hurricane Katrina on a bus from
Violet, Louisiana, a small black community located on the banks of the Mississippi
River in St. Bernard Parish east of New Orleans. I met them while volunteering at
the Reliant Complex, where 25,000 hurricane evacuees lived for three weeks in the
fall of 2005. There I learned their story.
Several neighborhood streets in Violet are sandwiched between Judge Perez Drive
and St. Bernard Highway: Guerra Drive, Lucciardi Drive, Caluda Lane. They are
also surrounded by water. Behind St. Bernard Highway is a levee that holds back
water from the Mississippi River basin. On the opposite side of Violet, behind Judge
Perez, is a floodgate that traps the water from Lake Borgne.
On August 29, residents of Violet breathed a sigh of relief when the local news
announced that Hurricane Katrina had passed. There were a few downed tree
* Originally published in 31 Thurgood Marshall L. Rev. 531 (2006) with additional source
attribution.
** Many friends and colleagues read earlier drafts of this chapter and kept me stable through
my own experiences, however comparatively trivial, with Hurricanes Katrina and Rita. I
hope they will understand if I thank them collectively and use this space exclusively to
honor and dedicate this chapter to the brave women of Violet, Louisiana, whose unbreak-
able spirit I could only hope to emulate.
pal-marable2-03-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:55 PM  Page 173


--- PAGE 191 ---
branches and a few puddles on the lawn, but the neighborhood was intact. Violet
was not destroyed by the hurricane. But it was destroyed. After the storm was over,
police cruisers and fire trucks rolled down the streets with bullhorns warning resi-
dents to take cover: “We’re about to open the floodgate.”
1
Rechelle was cooking lunch for her family when she heard the ominous warning.
Within minutes a violent surge of water burst through her house. Before she could
react, the water was knee deep. It was waist high by the time she made it to the liv-
ing room to save her daughter. She knew her elderly neighbors in the home across
the street would never make it out alive.
Errolyn saw the warning about the floodgates on the television news ticker. The
water came so fast she nearly drowned before she could reach the bedroom to warn
her sister. Neither of them could swim, so they clung breathlessly to a floating dresser
that had overturned in the surge. Water reached the ceiling within minutes but nei-
ther of them had the strength to punch a hole to the roof. They were lucky, though.
Errloyn’s brother and her sister’s boyfriend were home. They punched the hole. For
two nights the four of them waited to be rescued from the roof. They weren’t. Rescue
choppers flew by so close they could see the crew smile. But the pilots did not stop.
Finally, out of food, out of water, sweltering in the rotten stench, men from the
neighborhood took matters into their own hands. They jumped from the roofs,
waded through the sewer below, commandeered a canoe from Tim’s Marine, and
went house to house picking up stranded survivors. Errolyn was one of them. She
was six months pregnant.
The men ferried hundreds of stranded survivors to the dry levy behind St.
Bernard Highway, across town from the opened floodgate. There they waited for
days, again, no food, no water. A “big house” owned by a white family sat just
beyond the levee. The owners invited the evacuees to take refuge from the scorching
sun under their patio roof. But they weren’t allowed inside the house. Coast Guard
choppers eventually arrived to drop off bottled water. None of the pilots spoke with
the stranded black survivors. They spoke only to the white woman who owned the
“big house.” They gave her the bottled water and told her to pass it on to the rest.
All five women eventually came to Houston as part of the massive evacuation
from New Orleans. For weeks, they set up camp at the Houston Astrodome and
Reliant Arena with tens of thousands of other evacuees. Some they knew. Some they
did not. They now owned only what they wore on their back. Nothing else. Even
that was torn, dirty, and reeked of stench. They slept one next to the other alongside
unknown evacuees in rows of cots that stretched the length of a cement amphithe-
ater. It was hot. It was cold. It was loud. It was dirty. It stunk. There were strangers
on all sides of them, front and back, right and left. Snoring. Coughing. Pissing.
Vomiting. Still, Rechelle was grateful to be alive in the Astrodome and for the angelic
charity of individual volunteers who worked to make an intolerable situation—well,
survivable. There were many: those who believed her when she said that no one came
to rescue them, how they had to rescue themselves; those who listened when she said
that Katrina did not destroy Violet, that someone opened the floodgates; those who
didn’t question. She worried, though, how long she and her daughter would have to
stay in the Astrodome, when they could get back to New Orleans. She worried
whether her daughter was safe. Men had repeatedly entered the women’s restroom
KATHLEEN A. BERGIN174
pal-marable2-03-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:55 PM  Page 174


--- PAGE 192 ---
and showers, and she knew that it was only a matter of time before they came when
her daughter was inside.
Linda Watson and her best friend Barbara Richards stayed at Reliant Arena after
moving from the Astrodome when rumors started to surface that women there had
been raped and sexually assaulted. They too were indebted to volunteers for human-
izing their very inhumane ordeal, those who laughed with them and cried with them
and brought toys for their kids. But they had no “next step.” Linda and Barbara had
two daughters and two grandchildren between them and still had not received a
housing voucher from the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) by the
time officials in Houston issued their own orders to evacuate the city in advance of
Hurricane Rita. Linda was earning $12,000 a year as a school bus driver in New
Orleans, hardly enough to pay for a new apartment, never mind rebuilding in an
unknown city. In three weeks’ time, Linda, Barbara, and four children in tow had
moved from a rooftop, to the Convention Center, to the Astrodome, to Reliant
Stadium, and they were now were being told over the public address system to find
alternative shelter by the morning or board a bus to Fort Chaffee, Arkansas.
* * *
Multiple vulnerabilities uniquely endanger the lives of women in times of displace-
ment and disaster, particularly poor women of color. Katrina was no exception.
Black, white, rich, poor, young, old—the storm showed no one mercy. But Katrina
was both a highly racialized and gendered event.
2 New Orleans had a higher propor-
tion of blacks and greater number of women than any other metropolitan area
within the hurricane’s path.
3 According to the Institute for Women’s Policy Research,
more than half of the women in the city were single mothers, like Rechelle Carter,
Linda Watson, and Barbara Richards, independently responsible for ensuring they
and their children survived the storm. These women lived in greater poverty than
men, owned fewer assets than men, had less formal education than men, and worked
in less lucrative jobs than men. Women in New Orleans also comprised a majority
of the elderly population, most of whom were destitute.
Physical limitations, economic hardship, and dependent care responsibilities
made it impossible for many women to escape rising flood waters and compounded
the difficulty of securing housing and employment once the storm took these things
from them.
4 For this reason, black women, including Errolyn Warden, Brianna
Cater, and thousands of others like them, made up the majority of those trapped in
New Orleans during Katrina and confined to evacuation centers after the storm
passed.
5 The resulting forced isolation—whether in an abandoned city or the anony-
mous vacuum of a mass evacuation shelter—amplified the violence of Katrina by
subjecting these women to an unprecedented risk of rape and sexual assault. Though
no woman is immune from sexualized violence following a natural disaster, dimen-
sions of race and socio-economic status converged in Katrina, as they typically do,
to increase the risk for black women.
6
The sexualized violence black women disproportionately experienced at the hands
of both intimate partners and strangers, both during and after the storm, is being sub-
merged in the narratives arising out of New Orleans. This is in part reflective of most
WITNESS 175
pal-marable2-03-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:55 PM  Page 175


--- PAGE 193 ---
postdisaster discourse that marginalizes the experiences of women. 7 It is in part the
product of patriarchy that promotes sexual exploitation with the aim of subordinat-
ing women.8 It is in part proof that racism intersects with patriarchy to propagate
stereotypes of black women as deceitful and promiscuous to an extent that denies
their vulnerability to sexual assault.
9
This essay testifies to structural inadequacies in the official Katrina relief effort
that contributed to the sexual exploitation of black women during and after the
storm. Part I discusses false reports of violence coming out of New Orleans that
made it difficult to bring attention to the real risk of rape and sexual assault. Part II
explains why rape, an already under-reported crime, was even less likely to be
reported during and after Hurricane Katrina. Part III discusses the proven risk of sex-
ual assault during natural disaster and exposes the tragic oversights that brought
these risks to bear during Katrina and its aftermath. This essay concludes that race,
sex, and class played a role in the government’s failure to adequately predict, prevent,
and respond to this risk of sexualized violence during Katrina.
No doubt this small effort to speak truth to power will meet resistance. Black
women who speak out on their own behalf will be denied, disparaged, and disbe-
lieved. White women and other allies who stand in solidarity with black women will
be doubted, too, though we will be silenced in a different way. Charges of racism will
be levied against those of us who seek to expose how sexualized racial violence was
permitted to flourish in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina. We will be blamed for
mythologizing stereotypes of black men when we protest the rape of black women.
We will be accused of conspiring a divide-and-conquer strategy that pits black men
against black women in the service of a white racist patriarchy. Most ferocious in
assailing us will likely be the very same reporters, politicians, media analysts, and law
enforcement officials who themselves shamelessly disparaged black men through
sensationalized violence after the storm. Still, the charges will sting. They are meant
to. These charges divert attention away from the aim of this project, which is not to
perpetuate black male stereotypes but to expose the indifference government officials
displayed towards black women in failing to anticipate, prevent, and respond to the
predictable epidemic of forced sex Katrina would bring to them. In short, we will be
called racist for exposing racism in America. And still we bear witness.
P
ART I: CRYING WOLF
Raising awareness about sexual assault is never an easy task, but false reports of vio-
lence that erupted in the wake of Hurricane Katrina make it even more difficult to
convince observers that allegations of rape and sexual assault taking place during and
after the storm are legitimate.
Hurricane Katrina bulldozed the Gulf Coast of the United States on August 29,
2005. Leading up to the storm, the nation’s attention was focused on New Orleans,
a city of 1.2 million people situated below sea level directly in Katrina’s path.
Thousands of evacuees were ordered into the New Orleans Superdome and
Convention Center without being told that the shelters did not have enough food
or water. Within days supplies ran out, and desperate evacuees began to leave the
KATHLEEN A. BERGIN176
pal-marable2-03-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:55 PM  Page 176


--- PAGE 194 ---
shelters looking for a way to escape the city. They were not alone. Thousands of
other survivors stranded on rooftops descended into the flood waters, taking it upon
themselves to find a means to survive.
Reports of lawlessness spread like wildfire: thieves bulldozed a pharmacy, looters
raided Wal-Mart, rioters sacked Baton Rouge, and gangsters waged open warfare in
streets that had not flooded in the storm. The Time-Picayune reported that up to
forty decomposing bodies were stuffed in freezers in the Convention Center, one of
them being a 7-year-old girl “with her throat cut.”
10 A later report told of rescue hel-
icopters taking on sniper fire from stranded survivors perched on a rooftop. The New
York Times, the Los Angeles Times, the Chicago Tribune, and every other major news
outlet in the country repeated these accounts without verifying their accuracy. So,
too, did media outlets across the globe. BBC News, the Ottawa Citizen , The
Australian and Al Jazeera all reported how black evacuees stranded by Hurricane
Katrina had descended into a state of madness. The unprecedented destruction and
desperation of the storm dovetailed with, and seemed to explain, these accounts as
survivors struggled to find food, water, and bodies of loved ones in a city Katrina had
turned into a toxic wetland.
Confirmation by public officials made unverified reports of carnage and deprav-
ity all the more believable. Mayor C. Ray Nagin publicly pleaded for federal inter-
vention to help evacuate people out of New Orleans: “They have people standing
out there, have been in that frickin’ Superdome for five days, watching dead bodies,
watching hooligans killing people, raping people.”
11 Appearing on the Oprah
Winfrey Show on September 6, New Orleans Police Chief Eddie Compass reported
on the conditions in the shelters: “We have individuals who are getting raped; we
have individuals who are getting beaten. We had little babies in there, some of the
little babies getting raped.”
12
The picture of New Orleans that ultimately emerged after the storm is now very
different than what was first reported. Dead bodies were never found in the
Convention Center freezers, and though it remains unclear whether helicopters in
New Orleans took fire during the initial rescue effort, officials from the U.S. Air
Force, Coast Guard, and Department of Homeland Security could not immediately
confirm such incidents. The Louisiana State Department of Health and Hospitals
reported in late September that ten people died at the Superdome, four at the
Convention Center. Only two of those deaths appeared homicide related. Thankfully,
no child was found with a slit throat.
Racism undoubtedly contributed to reports of widespread violence after Katrina;
this in turn perpetuated invidious stereotypes about black storm victims, particu-
larly black men. As one commentator noted, unverified accounts of black criminal
behavior were taken as true because observers were “predisposed to accept the worst
about poor, black flood victims.” The aggregate of these initial reports coalesced
into a single master narrative of mostly poor, mostly black flood victims “portrayed
as beasts, raping and killing one another and even shooting at rescue workers try-
ing to save them.”
13
This epidemic of false reporting reified criminal stereotypes about black men.
Now, against this backdrop, those who shamelessly sensationalized a post-Katrina
crime wave are eager to deflect charges of racism by demanding hard evidence,
WITNESS 177
pal-marable2-03-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:55 PM  Page 177


--- PAGE 195 ---
eyewitness testimony, or “official reports” before acknowledging an episode of Katrina-
related violence, particularly sexual assault. Yet to presumptively discredit what is an
objectively predictable form of violence against women—rape in times of natural
disaster—reflects its own brand of racism. It relies on racism against black men to
excuse the structural inadequacies of the relief effort that contributed to the sexual
victimization of black women. It perpetuates stereotypes about black women—that
they are deviant, deceptive, and promiscuous, and therefore to blame for their own
victimization. It discredits the heroic efforts of the many black men who no doubt
fought against individual predators and simultaneously shifts attention from those
government officials whose malicious indifference ultimately provided those preda-
tors with an opportunity to assault black women. T o deny the violently sexualized
reality of Katrina on account of previous false reporting only compounds the horror
of the storm for both black men and black women.
P
ART II: RAPE AND REPORTING
T o deny that black women faced a disproportionate risk of sexual violence during
Hurricane Katrina naively overlooks what is, at bottom, an unexceptional female life
experience. According to the U.S. Department of Justice, nearly 18 million women
are forcibly raped at some point in their lives.
14 A woman in this country is raped or
sexually assaulted every 2.5 minutes, 15 most often at the hands of an acquaintance
or intimate partner.16 Whether characterized by violence, sex, or both, the sadistic
subordination of rape and sexual assault perpetually endangers the everyday lives of
women, especially women of color.
17
Against this reality it is incomprehensible to suggest that sexual assault was any-
thing but commonplace among black women already ravaged by Katrina’s deadly
strike on Louisiana and the other Gulf Coast states. Unlike acts of murder or other
forms of alleged Katrina violence that can be discredited in the absence of hard evi-
dence, the same cannot be said of rape and sexual assault. Rape scars are not always
visible on the surface, and the emotional signs of sexual assault—anxiety, depression,
sleeplessness—are indistinguishable from the posttraumatic stress induced by the
death, destruction, and displacement of a natural disaster.
18 Sexual violence would
compound the trauma of Katrina but would not be immediately apparent to an
untrained eye.
Nor does the lack of an “official report,” eyewitness testimony, or confirmation
by police discount the violently sexualized aftermath of Katrina, as some news
accounts and public officials suggest.
19 Experts agree that even in times of social sta-
bility less than one third of all rapes and sexual assaults are reported to police.20 The
majority of rape survivors never tell anyone about the incident. The intimate nature
of rape and sexual assault, coupled with feelings of guilt, shame and stigmatization,
make it extraordinarily difficult to track these crimes even under normal circum-
stances. Indeed, the worldwide attention paid to high-profile accounts of sexual vio-
lence, such as that of singer-songwriter Charmaine Neville, might have legitimized
the experience for women subject to similar violence, but it exposed the risks of dis-
closure for those victims emotionally unprepared to relive the nightmare of assault.
21
KATHLEEN A. BERGIN178
pal-marable2-03-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:55 PM  Page 178


--- PAGE 196 ---
Witnesses to sexual violence also struggle to process the stigma, guilt, and helpless-
ness that keeps victims themselves from reporting, and they are also not likely to
come forward with an accusation of abuse in the immediate aftermath of a crisis
when focused on their own survival and that of their loved ones.
Indeed, few women should be expected to take on the psychological stress of
coming forward to reveal a rape when displaced by a natural disaster. This is partic-
ularly true for those women whose motivation for reporting might be retribution
against an assailant. The likelihood of a sexual predator spending any amount of
time behind bars is negligible. When a rape is reported, there is only a 16 percent
chance the rapist will go to jail. Factor in unreported rapes and fifteen out of sixteen
rapists will walk free. Only one will spend a day in jail.
22 Moreover, research suggests
that perpetrators who sexually assault black women are least likely to be prosecuted
or convicted.
23 The prospect of prosecution and punishment, therefore, is neither a
significant deterrent against an act of sexual aggression nor an incentive for black
women to report one.
The government’s botched relief effort is itself in part responsible for the low
number of official rape reports immediately following Katrina. Inadequate prepara-
tion and inexcusable delay showed government officials to be wholly indifferent to
the survival needs of the mostly poor, mostly black residents of New Orleans hard-
est hit by the storm. Though scientists for years had predicted the destruction of
New Orleans in the wake of even a category 3 hurricane,
24 Louisiana officials had no
preestablished plan in place to evacuate the city’s most vulnerable residents. Once the
storm hit, state officials failed to marshal all available resources to accelerate evacua-
tions and made an unwise and dangerous choice in directing stranded residents to
either the Superdome or Convention Center as a refuge of last resort without an ade-
quate supply of food or water.
25 Governor Kathleen Blanco’s failure to make good
on her promise to expedite evacuations using hundreds of available school buses
showed her to be either incompetent or apathetic to the 150,000 residents who
could not afford their own transportation out of New Orleans.
26 Convinced that
government officials cared not whether those trapped inside New Orleans lived or
died, why would black women trust law enforcement on the ground to respond to
the victimization they experienced during or after the storm?
The federal government’s deadly nonresponse likely killed whatever trust in gov-
ernment officials anyone should have had following the storm. Katrina made land-
fall on August 29, but as early as August 26, the likelihood of “unprecedented
cataclysm” had been predicted.
27 President Bush nonetheless refused to convene a
task force to coordinate a federal response until August 31, four days after Louisiana
was placed under a state of emergency. That same day Bush told the nation, “I don’t
think anyone anticipated the breach of the levees.”
28 Yet even before the storm made
landfall, in addition to the public reports warning of catastrophic devastation, the
Director of the National Hurricane Center personally briefed Bush and other high-
ranking security officials that Katrina would overwhelm the deteriorating levee sys-
tem meant to keep flood waters out of New Orleans.
29
The Department of Homeland Security was also aware. Still, FEMA director
Michael Brown waited three days before formally requesting that the Department
dispatch rescue personnel to the Gulf,
30 and though the Louisiana National Guard
WITNESS 179
pal-marable2-03-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:55 PM  Page 179


--- PAGE 197 ---
requested 700 buses to speed evacuations, FEMA sent only 100. 31 All the while, on
a Navy vessel stocked with hospital beds, food, and supplies, doctors and rescue
workers waited offshore for dispatch instructions that never came. 32 The President
vacationed in Crawford, T exas and posed for a birthday photo-op; the Secretary of
State enjoyed a Broadway show in New York City; and the Secretary of Defense took
in a San Diego Padres baseball game.
33 For high-ranking national officials, first-class
entertainment appeared more important than saving the lives of destitute black hur-
ricane victims abandoned in New Orleans. Surely such indifference at the federal
level did little to persuade black women to trust the government officials and law
enforcement agents they encountered in New Orleans.
Indeed, at the local level, allegations of racism and rampant corruption in the
New Orleans Police Department led black residents of the city to distrust law
enforcement long before Katrina hit. The devastation created by the storm only
exacerbated existing tensions. Police officers themselves lived and worked in New
Orleans and witnessed their own loved ones and livelihoods wash away in the storm.
Looting among some members of the New Orleans police force was caught on video.
Others abandoned their posts in the midst of the relief effort. At least two commit-
ted suicide.
34 Widespread reports of New Orleans descending into chaos, though
now largely discredited, at the time prompted Governor Blanco to announce on tel-
evision that local law enforcement agents deputized by the state “have M-16s and are
locked and loaded. These troops know how to shoot and kill and I expect they
will.”
35 This hysteria influenced how law enforcement officials perceived and
behaved towards black residents stranded by the hurricane, and it no doubt con-
tributed to several shoot-outs, a videotaped beating, and at least one post-Katrina
fatality at the hands of the police.
36
Police from New Orleans were not the only law enforcement agents black citizens
had reason to fear. T o escape the intolerable conditions in the Convention Center,
an estimated 800 black residents of New Orleans attempted to cross the Crescent
City Bridge into neighboring Gretna where they were told buses would be waiting
to take them to a safe shelter.
37 But before they reached the other side, members of
the local sheriff’s office halted them at gunpoint and turned them back to New
Orleans. These experiences surely discouraged black women from engaging the help
of law enforcement officials they already considered hostile to black men and dis-
trustful of black women even before Katrina confirmed that impression.
Despite all this, some women did bravely attempt to elicit the help of law enforce-
ment in response to rapes that did occur. Overwhelmed by the storm, however, some
law enforcement officials were either unable or unwilling to take reports. When a
forty-six-year-old home health care worker was raped at gunpoint in an abandoned
New Orleans apartment building on the first night of the storm, a rape subsequently
verified by a forensic nurse, members of the local National Guard refused to take her
report a week later when they finally came with guns drawn to evacuate the building.
The police were “stressed out themselves,” the woman later recounted. “They didn’t
have no food. They didn’t have water. They didn’t have communication. They didn’t
have ammunition. The National Guards didn’t want to hear it.”
38
Rescue operations taking place in cities outside of New Orleans also made it
impossible for some Katrina evacuees to report a sexual assault that occurred in the
KATHLEEN A. BERGIN180
pal-marable2-03-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:55 PM  Page 180


--- PAGE 198 ---
Superdome, the Convention Center, or anywhere else on the Gulf Coast for that mat-
ter. For the first several weeks following Katrina, police in Houston’s major evacua-
tion centers refused to take reports from shelter evacuees about sexual assaults that
occurred outside their jurisdiction because, as a spokesperson for the police depart-
ment explained, “there was no way to code reports from Katrina evacuees in the
Department’s computer system.”
39 Though such “courtesy reports” are routinely col-
lected to coordinate law enforcement activity, officers in Houston did not start doing
so until September 13, after this appalling administrative defect was revealed in the
press. In the meantime, the spokesperson stated, “Anything that happened in New
Orleans [would] be reported to New Orleans” for possible investigation in the future.
Under these conditions, it is inconceivable to require a woman to produce an eye-
witness, police officer, or “official” report to confirm that she was raped. Women
raped in New Orleans were told in Houston to report the assault to law enforcement
officers in a city whose infrastructure was submerged in water. In New Orleans itself,
local police had either abandoned their post or remained on duty with orders to
shoot on sight. Six regional domestic violence shelters were closed because of hurri-
cane damage. Five were destroyed.
40 In the wake of Katrina to whom, exactly, were
rape victims supposed to report?
PART III: RAPE AND NATURAL DISASTER
Law enforcement officials shrewdly denounced an epidemic of violence following
the storm,
41 and as of December 21, 2005, the official number of post-Katrina rapes
and attempted rapes stood at four.42 What should have been apparent at the time is
that additional rapes would eventually be reported. Predictably, they have.
The National Sexual Violence Resource Center has partnered with the Louisiana
Foundation Against Sexual Assault and four other Gulf Coast rape crisis centers to
track the number of unreported post-Katrina rapes through an internet database
accessible to medical practitioners, social service providers, crisis counselors, and sex-
ual assault victims. In its first six weeks of operation, and with almost no publicity,
the group received forty-two reports of Katrina-related sexual assaults that occurred
both inside and outside of New Orleans, including a disproportionate number of
gang rapes and stranger rapes.
43 Witness Justice, a nonprofit victim services organi-
zation, received 156 reports of Katrina-related violent crimes in the first few days
after the storm. About one third of those involved sexual assault. That number no
doubt continues to grow.
The experience of the women who reported these crimes is entirely consistent
with the violently sexualized aftermath of mass displacement worldwide. Reported
sexual assaults rose 300 percent following the 1990 earthquake in Lome Prieta,
California.
44 Similar trends were reported in the wake of the 2005 tsunami that
pummeled South East Asia and the horn of Africa. The eruption of Mount Pinatubo
in the Philippines, and Mt. St. Helens in Washington state triggered a spike in vio-
lence against women, as did the massive 1998 Canadian ice storm, the 1995 Exxon
Valdez environmental oil disaster, and every one of the four major hurricanes that
pummeled Florida in 2004.
45
WITNESS 181
pal-marable2-03-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:55 PM  Page 181


--- PAGE 199 ---
The reality of gender specific violence, particularly sexual assault, is so predictable
during times of catastrophic upheaval that major human rights instruments that
address the needs of refugees and displaced persons—including the Beijing
Declaration and Platform of Action, and the United Nation’s Guiding Principles on
Internal Displacement—presume a heightened risk to women. The World Health
Organization advises relief agencies, health workers, and other field staff working
with displaced populations to “assume that sexual assault may be a problem unless
they have conclusive proof to the contrary.” The United Nations Population Fund
advises that emergency responders treating refugees and others subjected to refugee
like conditions “should act on the assumption that sexual violence is a problem,
unless they have conclusive proof that it is not the case.” The United Nation’s Inter-
Agency Standing Committee instructs relief workers that preventive measures should
be implemented in the earliest stages of a disaster “regardless of whether the ‘known’
prevalence of sexual violence is high or low.” Because of the difficulty in accurately
measuring the magnitude of sexual violence in an emergency, “all humanitarian per-
sonnel should therefore assume and believe that [gender-based violence], and in par-
ticular sexual violence, is taking place and is a serious and life-threatening protection
issue, regardless of the presence or absence of concrete and reliable evidence.”
These organizations recognize that hardships created by displacement following
natural disaster precipitate conditions ripe for sexual assault and violence. In his
opening remarks to the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement, Francis Deng,
the Special Representative of the United Nations Secretary General emphasized,
“Displacement. . .breaks up families, cuts social and cultural ties, terminates depend-
able employment relationships, disrupts educational opportunities, denies access to
such vital necessities as food, shelter and medicine, and exposes innocent persons to
such acts of violence as attacks on camps, disappearances and rape. . . .The internally
displaced are among the most vulnerable populations, desperately in need of protec-
tion and assistance.”
46
Experts in the gendered dynamics of natural disaster agree that the destruction
and disorder created by Katrina undermined social constructs of masculinity in a
way that rendered women vulnerable to rape and violent assault. “Men without jobs
and those unable to save family members and other victims may feel unmasked and
unmanly. . . .Some men will cope through drugs, alcohol, physical aggression or all
three, hurting themselves and putting the women and girls around them at risk.”
47
In Katrina, sexual violence provided a mechanism for reasserting control and
reestablishing patriarchy upset by social instability.
Natural disasters are particularly threatening to women when they obstruct law
enforcement capabilities and destroy familial arrangements that naturally deter
aggression. Katrina rendered large portions of New Orleans inaccessible to law
enforcement officials and rescue workers. Communications breakdowns, logistical
obstacles and personnel shortages delayed even volunteer efforts to rescue stranded
survivors in those few areas that were marginally accessible. In the isolation of disas-
ter, sexual abuse at the hands of a spouse or intimate partner becomes much more
likely. At the same time, a disproportionate number of stranded survivors were single
women, including those widowed or abandoned in the storm. Left to fend for them-
selves and their children without the protective buffer of a male spouse or partner,
KATHLEEN A. BERGIN182
pal-marable2-03-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:55 PM  Page 182


--- PAGE 200 ---
these women too become targets for assault from strangers who conceived of them
as common property.48
Moreover, gendered economic disparities, childcare responsibilities, and divisions
of labor render women increasingly dependent on abusive partners for support in
times of crisis. This situational vulnerability undermines the ability of poor women
to deny consent to sex and reduces the chance that a woman will report a sex crime
that does occur.
49 It also increases the likelihood that a woman trapped by disaster
will be forced to barter sex with men in exchange for food, shelter and children’s
needs.
50 An undetermined number of women from New Orleans will be forced into
prostitution as a result of Katrina.51
Katrina forced these conditions not only on black women and their children
trapped by rising floodwaters in New Orleans, but also on those stranded in swelter-
ing, overcrowded shelters where they were forced to sleep and breathe in a miasma
of human waste and disease. This is why leaders of the National Sexual Violence
Resource Center and other anti-violence advocates called on government officials to
prioritize evacuations out of the shelters as early as September 2.
52 Judy Benitez,
Executive Director of the Louisiana Foundation Against Sexual Assault, warned that
steps should immediately be taken to avoid sexual violence in light of the powerless-
ness and alienation evacuees were experiencing. Speaking of the inhumane condi-
tions at the Superdome, Benitez warned:
It is no secret that in our society, some people are strong and some are weak. Some of
the strong help those who are weaker—and some prey on them. The animal-like cir-
cumstances of the evacuees in the Superdome—conditions in which no human being
should ever have to live—caused frustration on a level that most people will never
know. That sense of helplessness, lack of control, and powerlessness would make most
people angry; for predatory people, the availability of someone over whom they can
have power and control, on whom they can take out their anger, is all the excuse they
need to commit rape.
53
Shelters in Houston were only marginally safer than those in New Orleans, if at all.
A spokesperson for the National Alliance to End Sexual Violence confirmed that
“the Astrodome, while convenient and a first-step towards the goal of evacuation, [is]
less than ideal. These large-scale shelters can become dangerous settings for so many
crimes. We have already heard of many rapes being committed among those still
waiting to be rescued and among those in the refugee areas.”
54
The population mix in the mass evacuation shelters established to house Katrina
evacuees made them particularly dangerous settings for women. In anticipation of
the storm, more than 15,000 registered sex offenders from New Orleans and sur-
rounding parishes were sent to open shelters along with tens of thousands of other
evacuees.
55 Though some states require that sex offenders be housed in separate facil-
ities, no apparent effort was made in New Orleans either at the Superdome or
Convention Center to segregate sex offenders from the general population during
the initial evacuation effort. Nor did officials in Houston monitor initial access to
the four shelters there. Privacy concerns prompted federal officials to withhold the
identity of registered sex offenders from state and local officials operating shelters
WITNESS 183
pal-marable2-03-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:55 PM  Page 183


--- PAGE 201 ---
outside of Louisiana.56 The absence of an accessible national database made it impos-
sible to identify known sex offenders even among the understandably few evacuees
who would have been able to show any form of identification. High rates of recidi-
vism particular to untreated sex offenders, coupled with the increased stress created
by the disaster itself, rendered the environment within the mass shelters particularly
volatile for the many black women housed there.
Conditions within the mass evacuation centers that I witnessed firsthand in
Houston aggravated the risk of assault by a sexual predator.
57 The people who came
to Houston arrived on hot, crowded buses after spending days upon days trapped on
a rooftop or packed into a distressed shelter in New Orleans. Many were elderly, many
were sick. By the time the first few buses arrived, basic medical supplies had already
run out. Several evacuees approached me begging for insulin to stave off diabetic
shock—an elderly man, a sixty-year-old woman, a ten-year-old boy. The medical
team had none, and together we tried to compensate with orange juice and chocolate
bars that my colleague and I had brought anticipating a shortage of supplies.
58
Inside the Astrodome, evacuees were promised a cot to sleep on. There were not
enough. Blankets, sheets and pillows had either run out or were not being distrib-
uted. Clogged toilets spewed feces and other waste onto the bathroom floors that
bare-footed evacuees tracked into the hallways, spreading disease where babies
wrapped in sopping, soiled diapers slept on hard, cold, dirty concrete. The inhuman-
ity of these conditions undoubtedly created frustrations that a sexual predator would
unleash on a more vulnerable evacuee.
Though shelter conditions improved over time, their physical layout was inher-
ently dangerous. International relief agencies recommend against “shared communal
living space with unrelated families” in order to reduce the likelihood of sexual
exploitation among displaced populations.
59 Despite this advice, women had no
option but to share sleeping space with strangers while sheltering in the Astrodome
and Reliant Park, as they did in the Superdome and Convention Center in New
Orleans. This oversight was particularly troublesome in Houston given that protec-
tive arrangements were provided to families sheltered in the George R. Brown
Convention Center, a downtown facility connected by skywalk to the Hilton of the
Americas that operated its services under the watchful eye of international visitors.
Security lapses created additional problems. “The sheer size of the shelters and
their many hiding places, coupled with a lack of lighting due to power outages,
makes them less than ideal for emergency housing,” said a representative for the Red
Cross, the organization in charge of coordinating Houston’s relief effort.
60 Though
shelters were inexcusably overcrowded, they nonetheless provided ample opportu-
nity for violence to take place without notice, especially in the most crucial hours of
the evacuation when volunteers focused on rescue and relief over sex and security. In
the Houston Astrodome, dark hallways, open storage rooms, and a labyrinth of
secluded bleachers provided plenty of opportunity for a would-be rapist to perpe-
trate an assault beyond sight and out of earshot. A colleague and I proved as much
by photographing these hotspots without ever being detected by law enforcement
officers, evacuees or other volunteers. Broken furniture, open liquor bottles, the
pungent stench of urine and feces and, most disturbingly, a wet, discarded baby’s
bunting, made it clear that someone had located these areas before we had. Surely
KATHLEEN A. BERGIN184
pal-marable2-03-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:55 PM  Page 184


--- PAGE 202 ---
one intent on perpetrating an act of violence could have surreptitiously accessed
these areas, if they had not already.
Intermittent monitoring of restrooms and shower areas created additional dan-
gers for women and girls housed in evacuation centers. At Reliant Arena, access to
both male and female shower stalls was through a single entrance that opened to
opposite facing hallways-showers for men to the left, showers for women to the
right. Law enforcement officials monitored this area only sporadically. When they
did, they stood outside the open entryway facing the shelter’s main living area with
their back towards the hallways that led to the shower stalls. Men and boys entering
the showers took advantage of this arrangement by making a quick turn behind the
officers, down the right-facing hallway, into the women’s bath. I observed this on
more than one occasion and chased down several boys trying to sneak into the
women’s showers. This was more than child’s play. Many female evacuees I spoke
with at Reliant Arena, as well as other shelters in Houston, refused to enter the show-
ers because men and boys had made their way inside. The same was true for female
restrooms. A girl about twelve years old recounted to me that a man opened the door
to the ladies room and attempted to pull her into the men’s room where she could
see a number of other men waiting behind the open door. She was able to escape
before the man grabbed her.
P
ART IV: CONCLUSION
Gendered aspects of inequality endanger all women in a natural disaster. They cru-
elly intersected with race and class to particularize the danger for black women
trapped in New Orleans during Hurricane Katrina and housed in Houston’s shelters
following the storm. But more than situational vulnerability is to blame for the cir-
cumstances black women faced following Katrina.
Government officials inexcusably failed to anticipate and prevent hurricane-
related sexual violence throughout the evacuation and sheltering process. They also
failed to respond when concerns about sexual assault were brought directly to their
attention. More than once I personally informed law enforcement officials in
Houston that women had relayed to me their fear of vulnerability, that they or other
women they knew had been harmed. Yet these concerns were dismissed. One officer
acknowledged that he too “heard rumors about sexual assault,” but could do noth-
ing until an attack was “officially reported.” Another blithely conceded that “any-
where you have 25,000 people, sexual assaults are bound to happen,” so there was
little he could do to prevent them from occurring. Only after photographs of secu-
rity lapses inside the Astrodome were posted on the internet did law enforcement
officials in Houston block access to at least some secluded rooms and passageways.
T o me, there is no doubt that the bulk of this indifference was influenced by
race—by the fact that a majority of the evacuees sent to Houston from New Orleans
were black—and poor. Just as quickly as law enforcement officers and other shelter
officials dismissed my concerns for the security of evacuees, they queried whether I
had been “attacked,” whether I felt “unsafe.” These exchanges became routine, and I
suspect that similar exchanges with white volunteers took place in New Orleans as
WITNESS 185
pal-marable2-03-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:55 PM  Page 185


--- PAGE 203 ---
well. I wonder how they would have responded had I answered yes to their ques-
tions. I wonder if they understood, as I did, how racism, conscious or otherwise,
influenced their interactions with me, how it triggered a spontaneous emotional
concern for the well-being of a white woman while at the same time dampened their
willingness to acknowledge, much less address, the very real risk of rape and sexual
assault facing thousands of stranded black women. Perhaps they cannot see, and
would never admit, the pernicious influence of sex, class and race on the decisions
they made, and action they neglected to take, during Katrina. Yet some of us know.
Because this we witnessed.
N
OTES
1. Several evacuees recounted to me how Violet was destroyed by waters released by the
floodgates. See also Cameron McLaughlin, “New Orleans: Deliberate Act of Sabotage
Was the Opening of Floodgate,” Global Research, September 11, 2005, http://www
.globalresearch.ca/PrintArticle.php?articleId=930; “T o ABC’s Surprise, Katrina
Victims Praise Bush and Blame Nagin,” Cyberalert, September 16, 2005, http://www
.mrc.org/cyberalerts/2005/cyb20050916.asp.
2. Elaine Enarson, “Women and Girls Last? Averting the Second Post-Katrina Disaster,”
Social Science Research Council (November 15, 2005), http://understandingkatrina.ssrc
.org/Enarson; Joni Seager, “Natural Disaster Exposes Gender Divides,” Chicago
Tribune, October 3, 2005, http://www.thedailytimes.com/sited/story/html/21906.
3. “The Women of New Orleans and the Gulf Coast: Multiple Disadvantages and Key
Assets for Recovery,” Institute for Women’s Policy Research, October 2005,
http://www.iwpr.org/pdf/D464.pdf; John Logan, “The Impact of Katrina, Race and
Class in Storm-Damaged Neighborhoods,” Brown University , 2006, http://www.s4
.brown.edu/katrina/report.pdf; Member scholars of the Center For Progressive
Reform, “An Unnatural Disaster: The Aftermath of Hurricane Katrina,” Center For
Progressive Reform, 2005, http://www.progressivereform. org/Unnatural_Disaster_512
.pdf.
4. Joni Seager, “Natural Disaster Exposes Gender Divides,” Chicago Tribune, October 3,
2005, http://www.thedailytimes.com/sited/story/html/219062; Loretta J. Ross, “A
Feminist Perspective on Katrina,” Sister Song , October 10, 2005, http://zmag.org/
content/showarticle.cfm? SectionID=72&ItemID=8912. See also Elaine Enarson,
“Surviving Domestic Violence and Disasters,” The FREDA Center for Research on
Violence Against Women and Children, http://www.harbour.sfu.ca/freda/reports/
dviol.htm.
5. “Survey of Hurricane Katrina Evacuees,” The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation ,
September 2005, http://www.kff.org/newsmedia/upload/7401.pdf.
6. Shelby A. D. Moore, “Understanding the Connection Between Domestic Violence,
Crime and Poverty: How Welfare Reform May Keep Battered Women from Leaving
Abusive Relationships,” T exas Journal of Women and the Law12 (2003): 455; Adriene
Katherine Wing, “A Critical Race Feminist Conceptualization of Violence: South
African and Palestinian Women,” Albany Law Review 60 (1997): 948.
7. Alice Fothergill, “The Neglect of Gender in Disaster Work: An Overview of the
Literature,” in The Gendered T errain of Disaster: Through Women’s Eyes , ed. Elaine
Enarson and Betty Hearn Marrow (Westport, CT: Praeger, 1988), 11–25.
8. Mary Ann Becker, “The Prostitution of Sexuality,” De Paul Law Review 52 (2003):
1043–44.
KATHLEEN A. BERGIN186
pal-marable2-03-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:55 PM  Page 186


--- PAGE 204 ---
9. Marilyn Yarbrough and Crystal Bennett, “Cassandra and the ‘Sistahs’: The Peculiar
T reatment of African American Women in the Myth of Women as Liars,” Journal of
Gender, Race and Justice 3 (2000): 625, 634–55; Lisa A. Crooms, “Speaking Partial
T ruths and Preserving Power: Deconstructing White Supremacy, Patriarchy, and the
Rape Corroboration Rule in the Interest of Black Liberation,” Howard Law Journal 40
(1997): 459, 469–90; Sarah Gill, “Dismantling Gender and Race Stereotypes: Using
Education to Prevent Date Rape,” U.C.L.A. Women’s Law Journal7 (1996): 27, 40–46;
Morrison T orrey, “When Will We Be Believed? Rape Myths and the Idea of a Fair T rial
in Rape Prosecutions,” U.C. Davis Law Review 24 (1991): 1013, 1053–55.
10. Brian Thevenot, “Bodies Found Piled in Freezer at Convention Center,” New Orleans
Times-Picayune, September 6, 2005, http://www.nola.com/newslogs/tporleans/index
.ssf?/mtlogs/nola_tporleans/archives/2005_09_06.html; “New Orleans Mayor Orders
Looting Crackdown,” MSNBC News , September 1, 2005, http://www.msnbc.msn
.com/id/9063708; Robert E. Pierre and Ann Gerhart, “News of Pandemonium May
Have Slowed Aid,” Washington Post, October 5, 2005.
11. Martin Savidge, “Separating Fact From Fiction in Katrina’s Wake,” MSNBC News,
September 27, 2005, http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/9505408.
12. Michelle Roberts, “Reports of New Orleans Mayhem Probably Exaggerated, Police
Say,” Houston Chronicle, September 28, 2005, http://www.freerepublic.com/focus/f-
news/1492418/posts; Martin Savidge, “Separating Fact From Fiction in Katrina’s
Wake,” MSNBC News, September 27, 2005, http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/
9505408/.
13. Brian Thevenot, “Myth-Making in New Orleans,” American Journalism Review ,
December 2005/January 2006, http://www.ajr.org/Article.asp?id=3998; see also
Danny Duncan Collum, “Reporting Through the Grapevines,” Sojourners (January
2006): 40.
14. Patricia Tjaden and Nancy Thoennes, U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Justice
Programs, Extent, Nature, and Consequences of Rape Victimization: Findings from the
National Violence against Women Survey, Pub. No. NCJ 210346 (2006), 1.
15. Rape, Abuse & Incest National Network, http://www.rainn.org/statistics/minutes.html.
16. Shannon M. Catalano, U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics,
Criminal Victimization 2004 , Pub. No. NCJ 210674 (2004); Patricia Tjaden and
Nancy Thoennes, National Institute of Justice, Full Report of the Prevalence, Incidence
and Consequences of Violence against Women , Rept. NCJ 183781 (2000); Ida M.
Johnson and Robert T . Sigler, Forced Sexual Intercourse in Intimate Relationships (New
York: New York University Press, 1997), 35–49.
17. Despite statistically insignificant differences in the absolute number of rapes and sex-
ual assaults against black and white women in the general population, statistics suggest
that black women face an increased danger of assault from an intimate partner. C. M.
Rennison, U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Prevalence and
Consequences of Violence against Women Survey, Violent Victimization and Race,
1993–98, Pub. No. NCJ 176354 (2001).
18. Diane Myers, “Disaster Response and Recovery: A Handbook for Mental Health
Professionals,” Empowerment Zone , 1997, http://www.empowermentzone.com/
disaster.txt.
19. Michelle Roberts, “Reports of New Orleans Mayhem Probably Exaggerated, Police
Say,” Houston Chronicle, September 28, 2005, http://www.freerepublic.com/focus/f-
news/1492418/posts; Gary Younge, “Murder and Rape–Fact or Fiction?” The
Guardian, September 8, 2005, http://www.freerepublic.com/focus/f-news/1478276/
posts; Nancy Cook Lauer, “Rape-Reporting Procedure Missing After Hurricane”,
WITNESS 187
pal-marable2-03-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:55 PM  Page 187


--- PAGE 205 ---
Women’s eNews, September 13, 2005, http://www.womensenews.org/article.cfm/dyn/
aid/2448.
20. Catalano, Criminal Victimization; Mary P . Koss, “Hidden Rape: Sexual Aggression and
Victimization in a National Sample of Students in Higher Education,” in Rape and
Society: Readings on the Problem of Sexual Assault , ed. Patricia Searles and Ronald J.
Berger (Boulder, CO: Westview, 1995), 35, 42–46.
21. On the impact of victim disclosure, see Patricia H. Davis, “The Politics of Prosecuting
Rape as a War Crime,” International Lawyer 34 (2000): 1223, 1245; T erry Nicole
Steinberg, “Rape on College Campuses: Reform Through Title IX,” Journal College &
University Law 18 (1991): 39, 46–47.
22. “Every T wo and a Half Minutes,” Rape, Abuse & Incest National Network ,
http://www.rainn.org/statistics/minutes.html.
23. Gail Elizabeth Wyatt, “The Sociocultural Context of African American and White
American Women’s Rape,” Journal of Social Issues 48 (1992): 77–91; Kimberle
Crenshaw, “Mapping the Margins: Intersectionality, Identity Politics, and Violence
Against Women of Color,” Stanford Law Review 43 (1991): 1250–51 and n. 35.
24. Joel K. Boerne, Jr., “Gone With the Water,” National Geographic, October 2004, http://
magma.nationalgeographic.com/ngm/0410/feature5/?fs=www3.nationalgeographic
.com; John McQuaid & Mark Schleifstein, “In Harm’s Way,” New Orleans Times-
Picayune, June 23–27, 2002, http://www.nola.com/hurricane/index.ssf?/washingaway/
harmsway_1.html; Mark Fischetti, “Drowning New Orleans,” Scientific American ,
October 1, 2001, http://www.sciam.com/article.cfm?articleID=00060286-CB58-13
15-8B5883414B7F0000&sc=I100322.
25. Lara Jakes Jordan, “Docs Show City Opened Shelter Without Food,” Houston
Chronicle, January 31, 2006, http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/n/a/2006/
01/31/national/w162827S06.DTL.
26. Brian DeBose, “Blacks Fault Lack of Local Leadership,” Washington Times, September
10, 2005, http://washingtontimes.com/national/20050909-113107-3180r.htm.
27. Jose Antonia Vargas and Brendan Loy, “The Guy of the Storm,” Washington Post,
October 23, 2005.
28. Joby Warrick, “White House Got Early Warning On Katrina,” Washington Post,
January 24, 2006.
29. Tamara Lush, “For Forecasting Chief, No Joy in Being Right,” St. Petersburg Times,
August 30, 2005, http://www.sptimes.com/2005/08/30/State/For_forecasting_chief
.shtml.
30. T ed Bridis, “FEMA Chief Waited Until After Storm Hit,” SFGate.com, September 6,
2005, http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/n/a/2005/09/06/national/w16331
1D97.DTL. Brown’s memo to Department of Homeland Security Chief Michael
Chertoff is available at http://wid.ap.org/documents/dhskatrina.pdf.
31. Keith O’Brien, “Chronology of Errors: How a Disaster Spread,” Boston Globe ,
September 11, 2005, http://www.boston.com/news/nation/articles/2005/09/11/
chronology_of_errors_how_a_disaster_spread/?rss_id=Boston+Globe+-+National
+News; Matthew Cella and Robert Redding Jr., “New Orleans Evacuation Lapses
Hold Planning Lessons: Officials Likely to Focus Efforts on Those Who Are Poor,
Without Vehicles,” Washington Times, September 9, 2005, http://nl.newsbank.com/
nl-search/we/Archives?p_action=list&p_topdoc=111.
32. Stephen J. Hedges, “Navy Ship Nearby Underused,” Chicago Tribune, September 4,
2005, http://www.chicagotribune.com/news/nationworld/chi-0509040369sep04,
0,3659600.story?track=mostemailedlink.
KATHLEEN A. BERGIN188
pal-marable2-03-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:55 PM  Page 188


--- PAGE 206 ---
33. Susan Page, “Hurricane’s Aftermath Whips Up New Deal For President,” USA T oday,
September 27, 2005, http://www.usatoday.com/news/washington/2005-09-27-bush-
roosevelt-cover_x.htm; James Ridgeway, “Crude Manipulation,” Village Voice,
September 13, 2005, http://www.villagevoice.com/news/0537,mondol,67761,6.html;
Larry Eichel, “Hesitancy Deadly, Seen at All Levels,” San Diego Union Tribune ,
September 11, 2005, http://www.signonsandiego.com/uniontrib/20050911/news_1n
11response.html; The White House, http://www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/
2005/08/images/20050829-5_p082905pm-0125-515h.html.
34. Manuel Roig Franzia, “New Orleans Fires 51 Police Officers,” Washington Post ,
October 29, 2005; Adam Nossiter, “New Orleans Probing Alleged Police Looting,”
Washington Post, September 30, 2005; Keith O’Brien, “Amid Horror T wo Officers
Commit Suicide,” Boston Globe, September 5, 2005, http://www.boston.com/news/
nation/articles/2005/09/05/amid_horror_2_officers_commit_suicide/.
35. Felicity Barringer, “T roops Bring Food, Water and Promise of Order to New Orleans,”
The New York Times , September 2, 2005, http://www.nytimes.com/2005/09/02/
national/nationalspecial/02cnd-storm.html?ex=1283313600&en=a144858313
da66be&ei=5088&partner=rssnyt&emc=rss.
36. James Rainey, “Doubts Now Surround Account of Snipers Amid New Orleans Chaos,”
Los Angeles Times , November 24, 2005, http://www.informationclearinghouse.info/
article11135.htm.
37. Andres Buncombe, “‘Racist’ Police Blocked Bridge and Forced Evacuees Back at
Gunpoint,” The Independent, September 11, 2005, http://news.independent.co.uk/
world/americas/article311784.ece.
38. John Burnett, “More Stories Emerge of Rapes in Post-Katrina Chaos,” National Public
Radio, December 21, 2005, http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=
5063796.
39. Nancy Cook Lauer, “Efforts to T rack Rape Emerge Between Hurricanes,” Women’s
eNews, September 23, 2005, http://www.womensenews.org/article.cfm?aid=2460.
40. Jordan Flaherty, “Notes From Inside New Orleans,” Left Turn Magazine, September 2,
2005, http://www.leftturn.org/Articles/Viewer.aspx?id=670&type=W; Sexual Assault
and Trauma Resource Center of Rhode Island , http://www.satrc.org (accessed February
5, 2006).
41. “Shelter Security Balances Order with Accommodation,” Houston Chronicle,
September 4, 2005, http://www.chron.com/disp/story.mpl/metropolitan/3339312
.html.
42. John Burnett, “More Stories Emerge of Rapes in Post-Katrina Chaos,” National Public
Radio, December 21, 2005, http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=
5063796.
43. Relief Fund For Sexual Assault Victims , http://relieffundforsexualassaultvictims.org/
(accessed April 4, 2006); “Katrina Rapes Reported; U.S. Cuts Social Programs,”
Women’s e-News, December 24, 2005, http://www.womensenews.org/article.cfm/dyn/
aid/2583/context/outrage.
44. “Fact Sheet: Women, Natural Disaster and Reconstruction,” Women’s Edge Coalition,
http://www.womensedge.org/index.php?option=com_kb&Itemid=91&page=articles
&articleid=5.
45. Elaine Enarson, “Violence Against Women in Disasters,” Gender Disaster Network ,
http://www.gdnonline.org/resources/VAW%20in%20Disasters%20Fact%20Sheet%
202006.doc.
46. Report of the Representative of the Secretary-General, “Guiding Principles on Internal
Displacement,” Introductory Note, delivered to the UN Commission on Human
Rights, UN Doc. E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.2, February 11, 1998.
WITNESS 189
pal-marable2-03-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:55 PM  Page 189


--- PAGE 207 ---
47. Elaine Enarson, “Women and Girls Last? Averting the Second Post-Katrina Disaster,”
Social Science Research Council, November 15, 2005, http://understandingkatrina.ssrc
.org/Enarson.
48. UN Population Fund, Reproductive Health In Refugee Situations, An Inter-Agency Field
Manual (1999): 37–38.
49. World Health Organization, World Report on Violence and Health (2002): 96, 156.
50. Reproductive Health, 38.
51. Loretta J. Ross, “A Feminist Perspective on Katrina,” Sister Song, October 10, 2005,
http://zmag.org/content/showarticle.cfm?SectionID=72&ItemID=8912.
52. “Urgent Call to Evacuate Victims of Katrina by Nation’s Anti-Sexual Violence
Leaders,” National Sexual Violence Resource Center, September 2, 2005, http://www
.ncdsv.org/images/UrgentCallEvacuateVictimsKatrina.pdf.
53. Lucinda Marshall, “Were Women Raped in New Orleans? Addressing the Human
Rights of Women in Times of Crisis,” Dissident Voice, September 14, 2005, http://
www.dissidentvoice.org/Sept05/Marshall0914.htm.
54. “Urgent Call T o Evacuate Victims of Katrina By Nation’s Anti-Sexual Violence
Leaders,” National Sexual Violence Resource Center, September 2, 2005, http://www
.ncdsv.org/images/UrgentCallEvacuateVictimsKatrina.pdf.
55. Monica Novotny, “Sex Offenders Scattered after Katrina,” MSNBC.Com, September
21, 2005, http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/9426538/.
56. Hugh Aynesworth, “FEMA Slow to ID Sex-Offender Evacuees,” Washington Times,
November 5, 2005, http://www.washtimes.com/national/20051104-111846-7487r.htm;
Kevin Johnson, “Sex Offenders Gone Missing After Katrina,” USA T oday, October 12,
2005, http://www.usatoday.com/news/nation/2005-10-12-katrina-sex-offenders_x.htm.
57. T racy McGaugh and Kathleen Bergin, “It’s Been a Long Time Coming,” Whitewashing
the Black Storm, December 8, 2005, http://whitewashingblack.blogspot.com.
58. Leigh Hopper, “Astrodome Medical Volunteers Overwhelmed,” Houston Chronicle ,
September 2, 2005, http://www.chron.com/disp/story.mpl/special/05/katrina/33369
27.html.
59. Reproductive Health, 39.
60. Nancy Cook Lauer, “Rapes in New Orleans Chaos Were Avoidable,” Women’s eNews,
September 4, 2005, http://www.womensenews.org/article.cfm/dyn/aid/2439/context/
cover. Ironically, the representative praised Houston for its response, even though the
characteristics of its major relief centers created the very conditions for abuse she
warned against.
KATHLEEN A. BERGIN190
pal-marable2-03-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:55 PM  Page 190


--- PAGE 208 ---
Chapter 13
THE IMPACT OF HURRICANE
KATRINA ON THE RACE AND
CLASS DIVIDE IN AMERICA
THOMAS J. DURANT JR. AND DAWOOD SULTAN
INTRODUCTION
In the days immediately following the devastation caused by Hurricane Katrina,
media attention primarily focused on the rescue and relief operations, the extent of
the physical damage, and the slow response by local, state, and federal agencies to
one of the worst disasters in recent American history. However, it would not take
long before journalists, researchers, and political analysts turned their attention to
the social problems and issues created by the destruction that resulted from
Hurricane Katrina. T wo social issues that recently have been vigorously debated by
the media, journalists, academicians, and the general public are whether or not black
residents received more exposure to damage from Hurricane Katrina than white res-
idents and whether or not lower-class residents received more exposure to damage
than middle- or upper-class residents. These issues are related to a larger issue con-
cerning the extent to which Hurricane Katrina exacerbated the race and class divide
in New Orleans, as well as other large American cities in the United States, and what
can be done to remedy the problem of inner city poverty exposed by the hurricane.
This chapter focuses on the impact of Hurricane Katrina on concentrated black
poverty in New Orleans and on the race and class divide in New Orleans and other
large American cities. The implications for policy solutions to the problem of con-
centrated black poverty and the race and class divide in America are discussed. We
argue that there is a continuing race and class divide in America and that this
divide was exposed by the devastation caused by Hurricane Katrina in New
Orleans. The city of New Orleans was selected as the focus of this chapter because
pal-marable2-03-3.qxp  10/21/2007  1:55 PM  Page 191


--- PAGE 209 ---
it affords the opportunity to explore the social effects of a major disaster as a natu-
rally occurring phenomenon and to compare pre-Katrina New Orleans with post-
Katrina New Orleans in order to understand the effects of a major disaster on
poverty, social inequality, and the race and class divide.
A major premise of this chapter is that in order to fully understand the effects of
Hurricane Katrina on the racial and class divide in New Orleans, one must under-
stand the conditions that prevailed in the city prior to the hurricane. In this chapter,
we illustrate that pre-Katrina New Orleans was already on the brink of a “social dis-
aster” and that this powerful storm exposed and exacerbated the problem of chronic,
concentrated black poverty in the city of New Orleans. We also show that impover-
ished black neighborhoods in New Orleans were highly vulnerable to the disaster
caused by Hurricane Katrina, and, in a sense, these communities were a tragedy just
waiting to happen with the right precipitant. Hurricane Katrina was that precipitant.
D
ISASTERS IN AFRICAN AMERICAN HISTORY
African Americans have historically been victimized by a variety of disasters (both
natural and manmade). Thus, it is important to place the Katrina disaster in histor-
ical perspective before conducting an assessment of race and class in pre-Katrina and
post-Katrina New Orleans. Disasters historically experienced by African Americans
helped to create and perpetuate conditions such as urbanization, poverty, racial seg-
regation and inequality, and social isolation, all of which directly or indirectly con-
tribute to the racial and class divide in America. Moreover, the history of disasters
among African Americans contribute to their perceptions of the importance, rele-
vance, causes, and effects of disasters. In this regard, it is important to understand
the historical effects of disasters, like Hurricane Katrina, on the social and psycho-
logical status of African Americans.
The history of African Americans is replete with catastrophic events, ranging
from manmade disasters, such as the enslavement “holocaust” or “maafa” (a word
from Kiswahili, spoken in east Africa, that means “great disaster”) to vigilante terror-
ism, lynchings, race riots, and massacres. T o illustrate, between 1889 and 1932,
almost 4,000 people were lynched in the United States, the majority of whom were
African Americans. During the early 1900s, thousands of African Americans were
killed by white mobs and vigilantes, as well as militias, in so-called “race riots.”
During the great Mississippi Flood of 1927, many residents of black communities
were forced to build or repair levees and were often the victims of racial discrimina-
tion and brutal attacks by white militants who sought to maintain Jim Crow laws of
racial segregation. During this period, a levee was dynamited to protect upper-class
and commercial areas, resulting in flooding and damage to poor black neighborhoods
in New Orleans. Many blacks in New Orleans believed that in 2005, during
Hurricane Katrina, a levee was intentionally breached by city officials in order to save
upper-class mostly white neighborhoods resulting in greater flooding and damage to
black neighborhoods in the Ninth Ward. During the civil rights movement of the
1960s, violence against African Americans was rampant, as blacks fought to eliminate
poverty, racial discrimination, segregation, inequality, injustices, and violence by
THOMAS J. DURANT JR. AND DAWOOD SULTAN192
pal-marable2-03-3.qxp  10/21/2007  1:55 PM  Page 192


--- PAGE 210 ---
whites, especially in large cities across America. These illustrations reveal that African
Americans have frequently been plagued with “disasters” over an extended period of
their history. The widespread, persistent, and cumulative effects of these disasters over
more than a century contributed to the current racial and class divide in America,
which was exposed and exacerbated when Hurricane Katrina struck New Orleans.
T
HE CONTEMPORARY BLACK-WHITE DIVIDE IN AMERICA
The racial and class divide in America is not a new phenomenon. In 1967, almost forty
years ago, in the wake of the Newark, Detroit, and Cleveland riots, President Lyndon
Johnson appointed a special commission of distinguished Americans, under the lead-
ership of Governor Otto Kerner of Illinois, to search for the root causes of urban dis-
content and the widening gap between white and black Americans. After seven months
of “painstaking investigation” the National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders
found that the underlying cause of the riots was “white racism.” The Commission went
on to explain that pervasive racial discrimination and segregation resulted in urban
black poverty and its effects, including black migration and white exodus, black ghet-
tos, frustrated hopes, violence, powerlessness, and confrontations with the police. The
Commission also warned of a growing inner-city black population and noted that
“Our nation is moving towards two societies, one black, one white—separate and
unequal” (National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders 1968, 1).
More than a decade after the National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders
issued its report, Andrew Hacker similarly concluded that America had become two
nations, black and white, separate, hostile, and unequal (Hacker 1992, ix). These
findings suggest that American society is characterized by a close interplay between
race and class. Accordingly, on one side of the divide are blacks living in poverty,
within inner-city areas perpetuated by social isolation, institutional racism, and
socioeconomic inequality; and in stark contrast, on the other side of the divide, are
whites living in affluence, primarily in buffeted and fortified suburbs, perpetuated
by the intergenerational transmission of wealth, power, and white privilege. These
two contrasting groups at opposite ends of the continuum define the extreme ends
of the race and class divide in America.
R
ACE AND CLASS IN PRE-KATRINA NEW ORLEANS
The interplay of race and contemporary poverty in the city of New Orleans has been
rather unfavorable to black people, who comprised more than two-thirds of the pre-
Katrina population. Official census data reveal that over the five years that preceded
the arrival of Hurricane Katrina, about one-third of the total black population con-
sistently earned incomes below the poverty benchmark. What is rather paradoxical
about this unfortunate connection is that in 2004, the percentage of poor African
Americans in New Orleans was the same as the percentage of poor American blacks
in 1974. U.S. Census Bureau statistics reveal that from 2000 to 2004, the percent-
ages of African Americans in New Orleans with incomes below the poverty threshold
gradually declined, but averaged about 30 percent of the total city black population
and about 19 percent of the total city population. Yet Census Bureau statistics for
THE IMPACT OF HURRICANE KATRINA 193
pal-marable2-03-3.qxp  10/21/2007  1:55 PM  Page 193


--- PAGE 211 ---
the same period show that from 2000 to 2004, the percentage of African Americans
nationwide with incomes below the poverty level averaged about 24.6 percent.
Despite a very gradual decrease in the indicators of individual and household
poverty between 2000 and 2003, the economic fortunes of African Americans in
New Orleans took a turn for the worse in the year preceding Hurricane Katrina.
Census data for 2004 revealed a 4.8 percent increase in the number of poor blacks
in the total black population and a 3.5 percent increase in the percentage of African
Americans with incomes below the poverty threshold in the total city population.
These conditions occurred with practically no change in the percentages of black
people in the total black and city labor force populations. That is, relatively more
black people were ushered into the ranks of the poor while the relative share of black
people in the total labor market of the city remained unchanged.
The economic histories of the State of Louisiana, Orleans Parish, and the city of
New Orleans have much to do with the stagnation in employment rates among
African Americans. On a variety of recent income and poverty measures, the State of
Louisiana appears to have a rather poor performance. In 2000, the median house-
hold income in Louisiana was among the lowest in the United States (at $32,566,
only third from the bottom above Mississippi and Arkansas). Louisiana ranked third
from the bottom (with 19.6 percent and 15.8 percent of individuals and families,
respectively), above Mississippi and the District of Columbia, in the percentage of
both individuals of all ages and of families with incomes below the poverty level.
Official statistics reveal that in 2004, the economic fortunes of Louisiana were not
much better, and its rankings remained more or less the same. Overall, New Orleans
did not fare well, either. The median family income levels in the city were below
national averages, and unemployment and poverty rates were well above the national
averages. Furthermore, in 2004, only “a very small portion of jobs in the metropol-
itan area and an even smaller portion in the city were in the high-paying manufac-
turing sector.... B y  contrast, a large portion of metropolitan employment and an
even larger share of city employment were located in the hospitality and entertain-
ment sectors. The average wage in these sectors was the lowest among sectors.”
Still, higher collective financial gains from a service-oriented and rather weak eco-
nomic structure are possible for any social group if a significant portion of its pop-
ulation has a disproportionately higher educational attainment profile. However, the
figures on the educational attainment of African Americans twenty-five years and
older in New Orleans show that despite gradual improvements, the numbers of
black people who possessed the educational credentials necessary for entitlement to
higher occupational earnings remained very modest. Between 2000 and 2004, the
percentage of black adults twenty-five years and older with college degrees ranged
from 11 to 18 percent and averaged about 15.3 percent, well below the national
average of 24.4 percent. The bulk of the adult black population (averaging more
than 80 percent for each of the five years under consideration) did not possess the
educational means to competitively access whatever high-paying service sector jobs
were available. The overall performance and dynamics of the economies of both the
city and metropolitan area might be responsible for generating formidable forces
that consistently pressured down black incomes and inadvertently kept a consider-
able number of black people in the ranks of the poor.
THOMAS J. DURANT JR. AND DAWOOD SULTAN194
pal-marable2-03-3.qxp  10/21/2007  1:55 PM  Page 194


--- PAGE 212 ---
Between 2000 and 2004, an average of slightly less than 40 percent of the New
Orleans black workers were employed in full-time occupations; an average of 33 per-
cent of full-time black workers earned less than $17,499 in annual real incomes; and
the median annual real earnings of black workers were about 11 percent less than the
median annual real earnings in New Orleans. When coupled with the fact that the
structure of the New Orleans economy was primarily constituted of low-paying jobs,
these figures suggest that the black work force in New Orleans not only lacked the
protection provided by tenure of full-time occupations against economic recessions
and downturns in business cycles, but that the majority of full time workers were
concentrated in low-paying jobs. Moreover, the fact that annual rates of participa-
tion in full-time, year-round employment varied narrowly from 2000 to 2004, fur-
ther suggests that black people in New Orleans consistently faced structural
impediments to tenure-protective employment.
Median annual individual black earnings stood anywhere from 11 percent to 19
percent below the estimate of the median real earnings for the city as a whole. The
same trend seems to appear in the household income statistics, with the estimated
median black household annual real income being 12.6 percent to 27.3 percent
below the corresponding estimates for the city. These figures indicate considerable
income disparities and reveal the relatively low economic standing of both individ-
ual African Americans and black families in New Orleans. What is rather troubling
about this finding is the fact that the distribution of income in New Orleans became
increasingly polarized over time. In fact, in 1999 the top 10 percent of New Orleans
city households accounted for an estimated 41 percent of all income earned in the
city while “those households in the middle of the income distribution experienced a
significant decline in their income share.” There is no evidence to suggest to that this
pattern improved in the 2000 to 2004 period.
We can get a closer view of the socioeconomic disparities in pre-Katrina New
Orleans by observing the neighborhoods with the highest concentration of urban
black poverty. The neighborhoods with the highest concentration of urban black
poor were the housing projects, including Fisher, Iberville, Florida, Calliope, St.
Thomas, St Bernard, and Desire. Although these neighborhoods vary in size of
population, they were almost completely black, with the percentage of poor rang-
ing from 62.5 percent to 88.2 percent. Thirty-three of the sixty-nine neighbor-
hoods had a percentage of poor that exceeded that for the city as a whole (27.9
percent), and 54 neighborhoods in New Orleans exceeded the national average of
15.5 percent poor.
Census data compiled by the Brookings Institution reveal that in 2000, New
Orleans ranked second among U.S. cities on concentrated poverty, with a rate of
37.7 percent. Concentrated poverty is not unique to New Orleans and can be found
in many large cities across the nation. T o illustrate, Fresno, California ranked first of
ten major U.S. cities, with a rate of 43.5; Louisville, Kentucky, third (36.7); Miami,
Florida, fourth (36.4); Atlanta, Georgia, fifth (35.8); Long Beach, California, sixth
(30.7); Cleveland, Ohio, seventh (29.8); Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, eighth (27.9);
Milwaukee, Wisconsin, ninth (27.0); and New York, New York, tenth (25.9); com-
pared to the U.S. total of 10.3. New Orleans ranked third in the rate of concentrated
black poverty (42.6) behind Miami (67.7) and Louisville (53.2).
THE IMPACT OF HURRICANE KATRINA 195
pal-marable2-03-3.qxp  10/21/2007  1:55 PM  Page 195


--- PAGE 213 ---
These statistics show that the rate of concentrated black poverty is a much more
serious problem in large American cities than the rate of concentrated poverty in the
total population of these cities. What makes the problem more serious in New
Orleans is that poor black households were highly concentrated in high-poverty
zones: of the 131,000 poor people residing in New Orleans in 2000, almost 50,000
(38 percent) lived in high-poverty zones. Research has well documented that con-
centrated poverty exacts multiple costs on individuals, families, and society, includ-
ing reduced private-sector investments and job opportunities, inflated food prices
for the poor; higher levels of crime, negative impacts on mental and physical health,
low-quality neighborhood schools, heavy burdens on local governments; and high
out-migration of middle-class households, all of which adversely influence the life
chances and quality of life of residents of high-poverty neighborhoods.
Although much attention was given to the poor or lower class in the aftermath of
Hurricane Katrina, pre-Katrina New Orleans had a substantial number of middle-
class blacks residing in middle-class neighborhoods, notably Village de L ’Est,
Pontchartrain Park, Read Boulevard East, Read Boulevard West, Gentilly Woods,
Edgelake/Littlewood, Fairgrounds/Broad, Pines Village, Dillard, and St. Anthony.
Other black middle-class residents were scattered over different neighborhoods that
contained a relatively low percentage of poor residents. An interesting pattern that
existed in pre-Katrina New Orleans, due in part to high population density, was the
close proximity of lower-class and middle-class neighborhoods, a condition that
helped to reduce the isolation of the poor. At one popular restaurant in the inner
city, one could dine with a full view of a housing project located just across the street.
However, most middle-class neighborhoods were buffered by a major thoroughfare,
drainage canal, lake, park, business area, wall, or natural barrier. In spite of the close
proximity of middle- and lower-class neighborhoods, most residents who had lived
in the city for some time were readily aware of neighborhood boundaries, as well as
the type of people who lived in different neighborhoods. However, Hurricane
Katrina did not spare middle-class black neighborhoods, especially in the New
Orleans East and Gentilly communities, which suffered substantial damage.
THE EFFECTS OF KATRINA ON RACE AND CLASS IN POST-KATRINA NEW ORLEANS: 
SOME EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATIONS
New Orleans lost more than three-fourths of its total population due to Hurricane
Katrina, mostly from the massive evacuation that occurred before and after the
storm. Although the storm adversely affected a wide range of people across different
races, classes, and neighborhoods, a number of studies have shown that the real or
perceived effects of Hurricane Katrina were not uniform across racial, class, and res-
idential groups in different neighborhoods in New Orleans. In a study of the impact
of race on the social construction of reality by those who responded to Hurricanes
Katrina and Rita, Austin and Miles (2006, 2) found that two separate realities
existed in the Gulf Coast following Hurricane Katrina—one for whites and one for
blacks. Based on data gathered from ethnographic observations and personal inter-
views of black and white residents included in a purposive sample, two contrasting
THOMAS J. DURANT JR. AND DAWOOD SULTAN196
pal-marable2-03-3.qxp  10/21/2007  1:55 PM  Page 196


--- PAGE 214 ---
realities were identified: the reality for whites, which included the perceptions that
“there were dangerous black men looting, marauding and raping,” and “race did not
play a role in rescue, relief and recovery efforts”; and the reality for blacks, which
included the perceptions that “race was and is a factor in the white authority’s res-
cue, relief and recovery efforts” and “white authority criminalized blacks due to
racism.” Austin and Miles reported that lower class residents of the Ninth Ward of
New Orleans were more likely to feel that “race did matter” while middle class whites
of the Garden District were more likely to feel that “race did not matter” in the res-
cue, relief, and recovery efforts following Katrina. In general, they concluded that
whites were less likely and blacks were more likely to perceive that race was a factor
in the rescue, relief, and recovery efforts following Hurricane Katrina.
In support of the conclusions reached by Duke and Austin, Elliot and Pais
explained that in times of crisis, class differences are likely to shrink and racial dif-
ferences expand as individuals define, interpret and respond to the situation before
them. Accordingly, the perception that race matters in times of disasters may be
shaped by a variety of factors, including past experiences, historical memory/knowl-
edge, et cetera. The rationale is that because blacks are more likely than whites not
only to experience social inequality, racism, injustices, and poverty, but also to pos-
sess a collective memory of black victimization by white supremacy, white power,
authority, racism, and discrimination, their definitions and perceptions of the rescue,
relief, and recovery efforts following Katrina are likely to be different from that of
whites, thus creating two separate realities of Hurricane Katrina. This notion is sim-
ilar to what Du Bois observed over one hundred years ago in his seminal research,
The Philadelphia Negro , in which he concluded that among Negroes there was a
“widespread feeling of dislike for his blood, something that keeps him and his chil-
dren out of decent employment, from certain public conveniences and amusements,
from hiring houses in many sections, and in general, from being recognized as a
man.” These findings suggest that the racial and class divide may be characterized by
differential perceptions or definitions of the reality between blacks and whites, in
addition to socioeconomic disparities.
In testing general hypotheses regarding racial and class differences in responses to
Hurricane Katrina, Elliot and Pais found that blacks were less inclined than whites
to evacuate before the storm, mostly because they did not believe that the hurricane
would be as devastating as it eventually was; blacks were more likely to report “lean-
ing on the Lord” while whites were more likely to report relying on friends and fam-
ily; black workers were seven times more likely to have lost their jobs than the
average white worker and thus would be less likely to return to the city, leaving New
Orleans with a different racial and class composition, with fewer blacks; poor blacks
had fewer cars to get out of the city; and low-income home owners needed the most
assistance with housing and new jobs in order to return to the city and rebuild.
Elliott and Pais concluded that both race and class appeared to have mattered in
response to hurricane Katrina.
In a study of the social and demographic effects of Hurricane Katrina, using offi-
cial statistics from secondary sources, sociologist John Logan found that although
some neighborhoods received greater damage than others, the damage caused by the
hurricane was disproportionately borne by African Americans compared to whites,
THE IMPACT OF HURRICANE KATRINA 197
pal-marable2-03-3.qxp  10/21/2007  1:55 PM  Page 197


--- PAGE 215 ---
renters compared to home owners, and the poor and unemployed compared to the
wealthy and employed. Accordingly, damaged areas were 45.8 percent black, com-
pared to only 26.4 percent in undamaged areas; 45.7 percent of homes in damaged
areas were occupied by renters, compared to 30.9 percent in undamaged areas; in
damaged areas, 20.9 percent of households had incomes below the poverty line,
compared with 15.3 percent in undamaged areas; and 7.6 percent of persons in dam-
aged areas were unemployed, compared to 6.0 percent in undamaged areas. These
results reveal that the typical neighborhood or group that received the most damage
from the storm was comprised of black, poor, unemployed renters, a combination
that indicates multiple jeopardy (that is, multiple disadvantages) in poor neighbor-
hoods in New Orleans. This means that in the event of a disaster, the more vulner-
able neighborhoods are likely to be those with a relatively high proportion of
residents with multiple disadvantages, and these neighborhoods are also likely to be
more severely affected and to have greater difficulty in recovering from disasters like
Hurricane Katrina. Consequently, these factors may also contribute to the widening
of the race and class divide.
Policy Implications and Solutions
Mostly everyone would agree with the observation made by the United Nations
human rights panel that the United States must better protect poor people and
African Americans in natural disasters to avoid problems such as those that occurred
after Hurricane Katrina. Although official responses to the Hurricane Katrina disas-
ter revealed a critical need for improvement of rescue, relief, and recovery operations,
the storm exposed epidemic proportions of concentrated urban black poverty that
existed in New Orleans, and “laid bare many of the disparities that continue to sep-
arate Americans by race and class.” Thus it seems rather obvious that in order to
lessen the detrimental social effects of natural disasters in urban areas, policy solu-
tions must be fashioned and implemented to reduce, if not eliminate, the roots
causes of concentrated urban black poverty.
Although many public officials, including the president of the United States,
acknowledged that inner-city poverty exposed by Hurricane Katrina runs much
deeper due to the destruction caused by the storm, little serious attention has been
given to the development of policies and action plans aimed at resolving the prob-
lem of concentrated urban black poverty that was exposed by Hurricane Katrina.
However, policy recommendations are gradually beginning to emerge from “think
tank” policy institutes and research centers around the country. For example, the
Brookings Institution recommends that “Congress should consider policy options to
put the nation back on track toward alleviating concentrated poverty, by supporting
choice and opportunity for lower-income residents in distressed neighborhoods.”
The following policy recommendations were offered: restore funding to the HOPE
VI program, increase support for housing vouchers, pilot a “housing-to-school
voucher initiative,” adopt President Bush’s proposed tax credits for homeownership,
target affordable housing to low-poverty areas with the assistance of regional hous-
ing corporations, and expand the EITC (Earned Income Tax Credit) to help work-
ing families afford housing in better neighborhoods.
THOMAS J. DURANT JR. AND DAWOOD SULTAN198
pal-marable2-03-3.qxp  10/21/2007  1:55 PM  Page 198


--- PAGE 216 ---
T otal Community Action Inc. (TCA) found that there has been little progress in
reducing poverty in New Orleans in the past three decades. Thus, there is a need to
resolve the chronic socioeconomic problems in New Orleans, including economic
stagnation, sub-employment, excessive unemployment, low labor force participation
rates, a disproportionate level of poverty, extreme income inequality, low educational
attainment, and a high geographic concentration of the poor are long-term problems
in New Orleans. In addition, New Orleans lags behind peer cities; blacks lag behind
whites; males lag behind females; poverty is heavily concentrated in poor black neigh-
borhoods that have been isolated by the flight of middle-class black and white fami-
lies; and the higher educated, working population has moved to the suburbs. On top
of these problems are failing schools, high crime rates, and substandard housing.
A critical part of the problem of concentrated urban poverty that needs to be
addressed is the worsening condition of undereducated, disconnected, unemployed,
young black males in inner cities across America. For example, in New Orleans in
1999, only 49 percent of black males age sixteen to twenty-four were in the labor
force, compared to 62 percent of the white male population. The jobless rate for
male high school dropouts in their twenties soared to 72 percent by 2004, compared
with only 34 percent for white dropouts and 19 percent for Hispanic dropouts. Due
to these findings, TCA calls for an official policy aimed at reducing poverty and
improving the economic conditions among urban black males.
TCA also argues that there is a need for a poverty-reduction policy at both the
state and city levels that includes formally trained professionals who would system-
atically formulate and administer a plan to help reduce poverty, instituting a wide
range of considerations of interventions tried in many cities, regions, and countries.
TCA offers an eight-point poverty reduction plan, specifically directed at New
Orleans and the State of Louisiana. It recommends that the city and state (1) adopt
an official policy on poverty reduction as a part of their economic development strat-
egy; (2) use a percentage of the city’s Community Development Block Grant Funds
to induce private/public partnerships to tailor their fringe benefits to help income-
eligible workers of six years to build assets; (3) formally link and coordinate with
public and private entities to intensively and consistently promote proven interven-
tions that both grow and sustain growth out of poverty; (4) weigh the pros and cons
of instituting an Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) at local and state levels; (5) enact
procurement policies that drastically reduce the underutilization of minority and
female entrepreneurs in public procurement; (6) undertake an aggressive, intensive,
and ongoing campaign to encourage the private sector to purchase goods and serv-
ices from minority entrepreneurs as a normal course of business; (7) encourage uni-
versities in Louisiana to offer curricula that prepare students and current public
employees on policies and methods for averting and reducing poverty, as well as sus-
taining growth from poverty, and also to offer undergraduate and graduate degrees
with concentrations in poverty reduction; and (8) urge the media to use their con-
siderable resources to assist in educating citizens, themselves, and policymakers as to
the causes and consequences of chronic poverty.
In consideration of the findings reported in this chapter, it is reasonable to con-
clude that the reduction of urban black poverty must be is a key factor in closing the
race and class divide. It is also reasonable to conclude that the reduction in racism in
THE IMPACT OF HURRICANE KATRINA 199
pal-marable2-03-3.qxp  10/21/2007  1:55 PM  Page 199


--- PAGE 217 ---
all of its forms and its attendant consequences is critical to closing the race and class
divide. However, in order to accomplish this monumental task, a monumental effort
is required, one that includes a comprehensive and effective combination of policies,
strategies, actions, and resources aimed directly at the heart and roots of the prob-
lem. In essence, there is need to establish a permanent structure of government, in
partnership with the private sector, with the mandate to develop and implement offi-
cial policies aimed at the reduction of urban black poverty. This mandate and com-
mitment must be pursued with the same vigor, determination, and tenacity as those
made by the national program to conquer outer space. This mandate must include
the most basic elements that are essential to improving the quality of life of the
masses, including education, health, employment, and housing.
A major challenge is to find meaningful ways to involve grassroots individuals
and agencies in the development and implementation of policies aimed at the reduc-
tion of poverty in their communities. Whereas it seems plausible to adopt strategies
or programs with “proven” success, there is also a need for fresh, innovative ideas
from a variety of sources that could be considered or utilized, based on merit.
Although it may not be possible to eliminate all poverty or completely close the race
and class divide, it does seem plausible that the quality of life of people who live in
substandard conditions in America’s largest cities can be vastly improved. Hurricane
Katrina exposed a small part of the larger problem of urban poverty and the malaise
that accompanies it. However, Hurricane Katrina created a great challenge and
opportunity to reduce poverty in America. Hurricane Katrina also tested the will and
soul of America. The question that remains to be answered is, will America rise to
the challenge?
S
UMMARY
Poverty remains one of the most critical social problems in both the State of
Louisiana and the nation. The problem becomes even more serious when combined
with race, in the sense that poverty is more heavily concentrated among blacks who
reside in America’s largest cities. When race and poverty meet, they contribute to the
race and class divide in America, a divide that has widened in recent years. The race
and class divide was graphically exposed by Hurricane Katrina in the city of New
Orleans. However, it could well have taken place in any of the large cities in America
where the problem of concentrated urban black poverty exists. If Hurricane Katrina
taught us any lesson, beyond the need to take swift and certain action before and
after a major natural disaster, it is that we must also take swift and certain actions to
resolve the problem of urban black poverty in America.
R
EFERENCE LIST
Austin, Duke, and Michelle Miles. 2006. The construction of reality along the color line follow-
ing Hurricanes Katrina and Rita . Unpublished Paper, University of Colorado, Boulder,
CO.
Bankole, Katherine. 1995. The Afrocentric guide to selected black studies terms and concepts, an
annotated index for students. Lido Beach, New York: Whittier Publications.
THOMAS J. DURANT JR. AND DAWOOD SULTAN200
pal-marable2-03-3.qxp  10/21/2007  1:55 PM  Page 200


--- PAGE 218 ---
Barry, John. 1998. Rising tide: The great Mississippi flood of 1927 and how it changed America.
New York: Simon and Schuster.
Berube, and Katz. 2005. Katrina’s window: Confronting concentrated poverty across America .
Washington, DC: The Brookings Institutition.
Bobo, James. 1975. The New Orleans economy: Pro bono publico ? Research study no. 19. New
Orleans, LA: Division of Business and Economic Research, College of Business
Administration, University of New Orleans, HC107.L58, no. 19 SPEC.
Brinkley, Douglas. 2006. The great deluge, Katrina, New Orleans and the Mississippi Gulf Coast.
New York: Morrow, HarperCollins.
Brookings Metropolitan Policy Program. 2005. New Orleans after the storm: Lessons from the
past, a plan for the future. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.
Dangerfield, Peter W ., William B. Oakland, and KL&M Company of New Orleans. 2006.
Poverty reduction, a plan for Louisiana. New Orleans: T otal Community Action.
Du Bois, W . E. B. 1899. The Philadelphia negro. New York: Schocken Books.
Elliot and Pais. 2006. Race, class and Hurricane Katrina: Social differences in human responses
to disaster. Social Science Research 35:295–321.
Fothergill, A., E. Maestra, and J. Darlington. 1999. Race, ethnicity and disasters in the United
States: A review of the literature. Disasters 23 (2): 156–173.
Hacker, Andrew. 1992. Two nations, black and white, separate, hostile, unequal . New York:
Charles Scribner’s Sons.
Haynes, Gerald David, and Robin M. Williams Jr. 1989. A common destiny: Blacks and
American society. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Hine, Darlene Clark, William Hine, and Stanley Harrold. 2006. An African-American odyssey.
3rd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education.
Klapper, Bradley. 2006. U.N. panel addresses shortcomings: Effects of Katrina reveal need for
U.S. to ensure rights of poor, it says. The Advocate, Baton Rouge, July 29, p. 7A.
Logan, John. 2006. The impact of Katrina: Race and class in storm-damaged neighborhoods .
Unpublished Manuscript, Spatial Structures in the Social Sciences Initiative, Brown
University.
National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders. 1968. Report of the national advisory com-
mission on civil disorders. New York: New York Times Company.
Page, Clarence. 2006. President’s address to NAACP left unsaid issues with black poverty. The
Advocate, Baton Rouge, July 27, p. 13B.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2000. Income and poverty in 1999–2000. Census 2000 Summary File 3
(SF3)—Sample Data. Available at http://www.census.gov.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2000–2004, American community survey . Available at http://www
.census.gov.
THE IMPACT OF HURRICANE KATRINA 201
pal-marable2-03-3.qxp  10/21/2007  1:55 PM  Page 201


--- PAGE 219 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 220 ---
Chapter 14
KATRINA’S SOUTHERN
“EXPOSURE”: THE KANYE
RACE DEBATE AND THE
REPERCUSSIONS OF
DISCUSSION
ERICA M. CZAJA*
In the weeks that followed Hurricane Katrina, many scholars and media profession-
als expressed the view that devastating racial inequality had been “exposed,”
“revealed,” and “laid bare” by the hurricane and its aftermath (DeParle 2005;
Frymer, Strolovitch, and Warren 2005; Gilman 2005; Jackson 2005; Stevenson
2005; Weisman 2005). A discernable air of hope was present in their writings, hope
that this natural disaster would increase understanding of and concern for the social
disaster that existed in the Ninth Ward of New Orleans and many other predomi-
nantly black neighborhoods around the country long before Hurricane Katrina hit
the Gulf Coast (Massey and Denton 1993). However, nationwide public opinion
polls conducted a week after the hurricane on September 6 and 7, 2005, found that
71 percent of African American respondents, but only 32 percent of white respon-
dents, said that they “felt that the disaster revealed the persistence of racial inequal-
ity” (Pew Research Center 2005). Later polling, conducted October 28, 2005,
through November 17, 2005, as part of the “2005 Racial Attitudes and the Katrina
Disaster Study” at the University of Chicago, found an even greater divide between
*For their helpful advice at various stages of this work, I thank Kim Babon and Martha Van
Haitsma. I am also grateful for the intellectual stimulation of Elisabeth S. Clemens,
Melissa Harris-Lacewell, and Michael C. Dawson. Finally, for his limitless generosity,
encouragement, and direction, I am especially indebted to my advisor, Dorian T . Warren.
pal-marable2-03-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:56 PM  Page 203


--- PAGE 221 ---
blacks and whites on this same issue: 90 percent of African Americans agreed that
“Katrina shows there’s a lesson to be learned about continued racial inequality,” com-
pared to only 38 percent of white respondents (Dawson, Cohen, and Harris-
Lacewell 2006).
These surveys highlight the drastically different interpretations that most blacks
and whites took away from the disaster. Though a hurricane by itself is not a racial-
ized event, the lower rates at which whites perceived Katrina’s aftermath as evidence
of racial inequality compared to blacks mirror the racial gaps in public opinion about
issues of race consistently found by numerous studies over the last several decades
(Schuman et al. 1997; Sears, Sidanius, and Bobo 2000). Hurricane Katrina did not
teach black or white Americans anything new. Scholars and journalists were evidently
too hopeful about the impact Hurricane Katrina could have on mass public opinion.
But why? Why did what seemed so obvious to some resonate so little with the white
majority? T o determine why what I call the “exposure hypothesis” (that the hurricane
exposed racial inequality in the minds of ordinary Americans) fell flat, I examine pub-
lic discussions about race that occurred in Hurricane Katrina’s aftermath. In doing so,
I aim to build a bridge between studies of public opinion and studies of public dis-
course. Specifically, this project attempts to answer the following: How did
Americans publicly communicate about race in Katrina’s aftermath? More broadly,
how does contemporary race discourse influence continuing racial inequality in the
United States? These are important questions because widespread public discussion
of race in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina has the potential to foster greater
understanding of the historical and societal forces that influence African Americans’
life chances, thereby altering prevailing public opinion. Gaining a more structural
understanding of the legacies and persistence of racism, particularly among white
Americans, could then be the first step toward increasing public support for govern-
ment policies that attempt to ameliorate the problem of racial inequality.
On the whole, my findings are troubling. Most problematic for those who had
hoped that Katrina would reveal something about racial inequality is that, while nine
of the fifty-four letter writers in my sample reference race along with class, only two
letter writers recognize the relationship between colored skin and poverty as prob-
lematic; the remaining seven seem to take this correlation for granted ( USA T oday,
September 14, 2005, p. A10; September 15, 2005, p. A12). In addition, only one
letter writer demonstrates any understanding of the structural and historical forces
that determine life chances ( USA T oday, September 14, 2005, p. A10). My results
confirm those of survey researchers: while Hurricane Katrina may have exposed
something to the American public, it was not racial inequality as traditionally con-
ceived by progressives. In the absence of acknowledgement of racial inequality and
without discussion of social structural forces, changes in racial attitudes and policy
preferences as a result of this disaster are unlikely. Under these conditions, societal
change seems nearly impossible.
The rest of this paper will proceed as follows. First, I review previous research on
the racial opinion gap, its potential sources, and the influence of the media on
whites’ racial attitudes and policy preferences. I also explore recent literature on how
and in what contexts people use conversations to interpret media information. In an
attempt to bridge the divide between public opinion scholarship and recent work on
ERICA M. CZAJA204
pal-marable2-03-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:56 PM  Page 204


--- PAGE 222 ---
public political discourse, I then suggest how both lines of research might apply to
citizens’ discussions of the role of race in Katrina’s aftermath. Using letters to the edi-
tor of USA T odayas my data, I explore why assumptions among scholars and jour-
nalists that Katrina’s aftermath exposed continuing racial inequality in the United
States did not hold true. Finally, I propose strategies that the government, the acad-
emy, the media, and the American public might adopt to overcome current obsta-
cles to informed, productive discussions about racial issues.
L
ITERATURE REVIEW
Public opinion often drives government policy (Gilens 1999; Hetherington 2005;
Kinder and Winter 2001; Schuman et al. 1997; Sears, Sidanius, and Bobo 2000), and
the American public often bases its opinions on information it receives from the media
(Delli Carpini and Keeter 1996). If media coverage of Katrina exposed racial inequal-
ity in the public mind as many have claimed, then longstanding differences in the
opinions of blacks and whites should not have been reflected in Americans’ interpreta-
tions of the Katrina disaster as the above surveys demonstrate. How ordinary
Americans discussed what, if any, lesson Hurricane Katrina’s aftermath taught is an
important topic of study because it may help us learn something about the mechanisms
of and necessary conditions for public opinion shifts and therefore policy change.
RACIAL INEQUALITY, PUBLIC OPINION, AND POLICY PREFERENCES
While surveys over the last four decades have found steadily increasing support
among the American public for the principle of racial equality, white support for a
government role in making such equality a reality has consistently registered at much
lower levels than that of African Americans (Kinder and Winter 2001; Schuman et
al. 1997; Sears, Sidanius, and Bobo 2000). However, there is much disagreement
among scholars regarding the source of this racial opinion gap. In Racialized Politics:
The Debate about Racism in America , editors David Sears, Jim Sidanius, and
Lawrence Bobo outline three theoretical approaches to explaining the racial opinion
gap; the divergence of whites’ policy preferences from those of African Americans has
three potential sources: “prejudice, social structure, [and] ordinary politics” (Sears,
Jim Sidanius, and Lawrence Bobo 2000, 2).
Prejudice or “new racism” models assume that whites are socialized into the prej-
udiced belief that African Americans are less committed to American values, such
as individualism and hard work (Sears, Sidanius, and Bobo 2000). According to
these models, perceptions of African Americans as values-deficient and undeserving
are largely responsible for whites’ opinions about racial inequality and what to do
about it, particularly when it comes to welfare (Gilens 1999). Alternatively, schol-
ars who argue that social structure is the source of whites’ public opinion assert that
inter-group competition for limited resources and self-interest explain whites’ lower
levels of support for government policies that address racial inequality. Finally, some
scholars claim that the source of the racial opinion gap is merely a result of regular
political processes. They maintain that, because “public opinion on racial policy is
now primarily motivated by values and ideologies that are race-neutral. . .whites’
KATRINA’S SOUTHERN “EXPOSURE” 205
pal-marable2-03-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:56 PM  Page 205


--- PAGE 223 ---
opinions are strongly influenced by the exact nature of the policy proposals under
consideration” (Sears, Sidanius, and Bobo 2000, 16).
In his study of public opinion and support for welfare, Martin Gilens (1999) finds
evidence for “new racism” models, but he also complicates the story by highlighting
the nuanced opinions of whites regarding anti-poverty policies. He finds that whites
overwhelmingly think that government welfare spending should be reduced but also
that the government should be doing more to help the poor. These seemingly con-
tradictory beliefs stem from the false, but prevailing, perception that most welfare
recipients are African American and the stereotype that blacks lack work ethic and are
not committed to the American value of individualism. Accordingly, whites dislike
welfare because they believe that predominantly black welfare recipients would rather
milk the system for benefits than work to provide for themselves. Because of blacks’
perceived laziness, welfare recipients are seen as undeserving, which then leads to
unfavorable opinions about welfare. However, Gilens argues that poor individuals
who are perceived to be working toward self-sufficiency, including African
Americans, can join the ranks of the deserving poor in the public mind. Employing
a type of “ordinary politics” argument, he advocates for anti-poverty policies that help
the poor to help themselves, which he claims should receive the widest public sup-
port (Gilens 1999). However, despite the sweeping welfare reforms of 1996, includ-
ing time limits and work requirements, other researchers have found that public
opinion regarding poverty and government assistance has not changed (Shaw and
Shapiro 2002). Thus, negative stereotypes about African Americans continue to
undermine support for welfare even under the conditions that Gilens suggests.
Recent studies suggest that whites use a color-blind ideology to maintain their
privileged position in society, especially when arguing against race-based policies
designed to reduce racial inequality such as affirmative action. Eduardo Bonilla-Silva
(2003), for example, finds through interviews with white college students that many
passionately deny the existence of racism, claiming that society is now color-blind;
the disadvantaged position of blacks is therefore considered their own fault (Bonilla-
Silva 2003). Joe Feagin and Eileen O’Brien (2003) also find evidence of a color-
blind ideology during their interviews with wealthy, white male professionals (Feagin
and O’Brien 2003). These findings, along with evidence that negative stereotypes
and racist attitudes still exist (Gilens 1999; Hetherington 2005; Myers 2005), sug-
gest that whites may have found denying racism with a color-blind ideology to be an
effective strategy for maintaining their dominant group position. Denying racism
(even as it persists) and thereby any societal responsibility for racial inequality while
still supporting modest assistance for the poor, who are disproportionately African
American, could simply reflect greater sophistication on the part of whites in their
competition for scarce resources.
THE INFLUENCE OF MEDIA BIAS AND FRAMING EFFECTS ON
RACIAL ATTITUDES AND POLICY SUPPORT
Based on the above literature, negative stereotypes and prejudiced beliefs that
African Americans lack commitment to traditional American values appear to
account for whites’ opinions and policy preferences. But how do these negative
ERICA M. CZAJA206
pal-marable2-03-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:56 PM  Page 206


--- PAGE 224 ---
stereotypes persist in a self-proclaimed color-blind culture? Gilens (1999) explains
that stereotypes originally used by whites to justify slavery lived on in the minds of
media professionals even after formal equality was established during the civil rights
era. Journalists unconsciously employed their prejudices, particularly during Lyndon
B. Johnson’s War on Poverty, which ushered in a new era of negative media coverage
of the poor, depicted as predominantly black and undeserving (Gilens 1999). As
Shanto Iyengar (1996) notes, the consequences of such media coverage have been
and continue to be counterproductive to the goal of racial equality: “The frequent
association of African Americans with economic failure. . .encourages and justifies
the expression of racist attitudes” (Iyengar 1996, 70). In terms of policy, he also finds
that racial cues, such as images of the black poor, elicit individualized rather than
societal solutions among media consumers more frequently than do images of
impoverished whites (Iyengar 1996).
While Gilens (1999) and Iyengar (1996) find that media attention to social prob-
lems affecting blacks makes things worse, Eric Klinenberg (2002) demonstrates that
completely race-neutral media coverage can actually be biased and inaccurate, too.
In his social autopsy of the deadly Chicago heat wave of 1995, he shows how jour-
nalistic practices and the framing of the heat wave as a natural phenomenon that
affected all Chicagoans equally directed public attention away from the issues of
race, poverty, social isolation, and neighborhood breakdown, which were highly rel-
evant to an accurate representation of the disaster. Though the heat wave dispropor-
tionately affected poor, elderly African Americans, local news coverage actually
served to naturalize the disaster and mask the underlying societal conditions that
contributed to the most devastating outcomes for the most vulnerable (Klinenberg
2002). Klinenberg’s findings along with those of Iyengar (1996) point to a kind of
paradox in which media coverage produces a negative result, in the form of public
unawareness of social problems or reduced policy support, regardless of whether it
glosses over or showcases issues of black poverty.
The conclusions of Paul Kellstedt’s (2000) study, based upon his content analy-
ses of 4,040 Newsweek articles about race printed between 1950 and 1993, offer a
solution to this apparent paradox. His study provides indirect support for Iyengar’s
(1996) findings but also sheds light on ways that the media could overcome its cur-
rent contribution to negative stereotypes and racial inequality. Through his content
analysis, Kellstedt measures the potential media framing effects of two core
American values, egalitarianism and individualism, on the enactment of liberal race-
conscious policies (Kellstedt 2000). Because media framing operates not by chang-
ing people’s core beliefs but by calling to mind pre-existing beliefs and thereby
making them more salient (Nelson, Oxley, and Clawson 1997), Kellstedt’s study
offers important insight into when U.S. citizens might prioritize one core American
value over another, such as equality over individualism, or vice versa. Kellstedt
counted articles as employing egalitarian frames when they “portray[ed] American
society as one in which blacks are (or have been) treated as less-than-full citizens, as
unequals.” He coded articles as individualistic when they contained some reference
to the following merit-based criteria for deservingness: “Those who live the
Protestant work ethic are exalted as virtuous, whereas those who depend (especially
on the government) lack character” (Kellstedt 2000, 253).
KATRINA’S SOUTHERN “EXPOSURE” 207
pal-marable2-03-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:56 PM  Page 207


--- PAGE 225 ---
Kellstedt (2000) finds that frames highlighting individualism have neither a pos-
itive or negative effect on policy preferences, which indirectly confirms Iyengar’s
(1996) findings that racial cues alone bring to mind individualistic attitudes.
T ogether, their studies suggest that media frames highlighting individualism are
redundant among Americans, many of whom already adhere strongly to individual-
istic values. However, media frames that highlight egalitarianism increase aggregate
support for race-based government policies (Kellstedt 2000), demonstrating that
media emphasis on equality is one effective method for overriding Americans’ ini-
tial, individualistic reactions to racial cues. In addition, Kellstedt (2000) finds that
the amount of coverage about race matters little for the level of public support for
race-based policies. This finding must be interpreted carefully, though, since race-
neutral coverage of events and social conditions that disproportionately affect
African Americans, as Klinenberg (2002) has shown, can obscure racial inequalities
and prevent public realization of the presence of social problems.
In sum, while Gilens (1999) and Iyengar (1996) show the potentially detrimen-
tal effects of portraying black poverty in the media, the findings of Klinenberg
(2002) and Kellstedt (2000) illustrate that a certain amount of media attention given
to race is a necessary, but not sufficient, condition for positively influencing citizens’
opinions regarding racial inequality and a need for race-conscious government pro-
grams. In addition, Kellstedt’s (2000) study provides hope that media coverage of
racial issues does not inherently perpetuate racial stereotypes. Rather, certain types
of media coverage, such as that which employs egalitarian frames, can counteract the
powerful combination of negative stereotypes and American individualism that
other scholars have termed “new racism,” which often influences public opinion and
policy preferences.
THE ROLE OF PUBLIC DISCUSSION
As stated earlier, this project aims to build a bridge between the public opinion lit-
erature and studies of public discourse. Other scholars have already begun to lay the
foundation. Though it seems like common sense when stated so plainly, Nina
Eliasoph (1999) illuminates what many interested in eliminating racial inequality
seem to overlook: “Changing the structure of communication has to be part of the
process of social change. But to do that, whites would have to acknowledge, together,
that racial inequality is indeed a problem” (Eliasoph 2000, 483; emphasis in origi-
nal). In relation to Hurricane Katrina, the survey data indicate that the hurricane did
not expose racial inequality as a problem to most white Americans (Pew Research
Center 2005; Dawson, Cohen, and Harris-Lacewell 2006). Why?
While “new racism,” a color-blind ideology, and the influence of the media all
likely play a role in perpetuating racial inequality and the racial opinion gap,
Eliasoph (1999) explains that there is a real need for social scientists to examine the
interactive discussion processes through which people reproduce racial inequality:
“Social research often focuses either on internal subjective states or objective patterns
of segregation and oppression in competitive markets. But this focus on civil society
could overcome this seeming dichotomy, by examining the implicit rules in play in
ERICA M. CZAJA208
pal-marable2-03-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:56 PM  Page 208


--- PAGE 226 ---
institutions that members themselves assume are ‘free’. . .conversations are. . .the
muscles and tendons that make the bones of social structural racism move.
Understanding them requires understanding how people create civic institutions
that so often silence the most well-meaning whites and amplify voices of indifference
or bigotry” (Eliasoph 1999, 484).
As “the muscles and tendons that make the bones of social structural racism
move,” discussions among citizens in Hurricane Katrina’s aftermath are crucial pieces
needed to solve the puzzle of why racial inequality was not exposed in the way that
so many assumed (Eliasoph 1999, 484). Eliasoph (1999) finds that whites with good
intentions often do not speak up about racial issues, which are widely viewed as
political, because talk is not seen as an effective method for enacting change in racial,
as well as numerous other, matters of politics. In addition, most of Eliasoph’s (1999)
participants constantly distinguished between “speech contexts” by evaluating “what
is sayable where” (Eliasoph 1999, 485); accordingly, they were much more likely to
express anti-racist sentiments in private settings but appeared indifferent or racist in
public when they remained silent in response to others’ racism. In essence, a few bad
apples, in combination with the silence of the rest of the bunch, spoiled the overall
speech environment by making it “more racist than the sum of its parts” (Eliasoph
1999, 488). Based upon this finding, the letters to the editor section of a newspaper
seems promising as a forum for discussing racial inequality in that it allows people
who might remain silent in a group setting to formulate and express their thoughts
in private before making them public.
A national newspaper may also be useful as a public discussion forum because it
is the public’s main source of information (Delli Carpini and Keeter 1996) and often
assists people in gauging the relative importance of issues and events (Nelson, Oxley,
and Clawson 1997). However, based upon her ethnographic study of two groups of
white senior citizens living in a Midwestern town, Katherine Cramer Walsh cautions
that the influence of media on public opinion should not be overemphasized. She
participates in a women’s craft guild and a (mostly) men’s daily discussion group and
finds that, while mass media stories did direct the issues and information that the
groups discussed, the interactive processes through which people make meaning of
the news significantly impact their media consumption (Walsh 2004).
Using the perspective of their collective social identity, the men’s group “trans-
formed” media frames by adding social categories, such as race, that were not sug-
gested by news stories in order to make sense of the news (Walsh 2004). When the
men discussed a newspaper story about a recent high school graduate who drowned
in a nearby pond after a graduation party, for example, they organized their discus-
sion around the fact that the young man was black and therefore an “other.” This
racial detail was evident from a photograph accompanying the story, but the text of
the newspaper article did not include race as a salient category. Similar to the men’s
group in Walsh’s (2004) study, Kanye West interpreted early media coverage of
Katrina’s aftermath based on his racial group identity, even though the media frames
did not initially highlight race:
I hate the way they portray us in the media. You see a black family, it says, “They’re loot-
ing.” You see a white family, it says, “They’re looking for food.”; And, you know, it’s been
KATRINA’S SOUTHERN “EXPOSURE” 209
pal-marable2-03-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:56 PM  Page 209


--- PAGE 227 ---
five days [waiting for federal help] because most of the people are black . And even for me
to complain about it, I would be a hypocrite because I’ve tried to turn away from the
TV because it’s too hard to watch. I’ve even been shopping before even giving a dona-
tion, so now I’m calling my business manager right now to see what is the biggest
amount I can give, and just to imagine if I was down there, and those are my people
down there. So anybody out there that wants to do anything that we can help—with
the way America is set up to help the poor, the black people, the less well-off, as slow as pos-
sible. I mean, the Red Cross is doing everything they can. We already realize a lot of
people that could help are at war right now, fighting another way—and they’ve given
them permission to go down and shoot us!. . . George Bush doesn’t care about black peo-
ple! (de Moraes 2005; emphasis added)
Though only West, his family, and his friends know for sure, it seems likely that he
would have discussed the post-Katrina media coverage with other African Americans
within his social circle. These conversations may then have contributed to his under-
standings of the events in New Orleans. Perhaps also because of his African American
social identity, West interpreted the racial cues present in the media images not indi-
vidualistically, as many Americans may have done, but in egalitarian terms (Iyengar
1996; Kellstedt 2000). West’s critiques of the media and the government for not
treating blacks equally to whites became a part of the media coverage itself, both dur-
ing the live NBC telethon when it originally aired and in subsequent news contro-
versy, producing an egalitarian frame for American media consumers to interpret.
Looking only at the reaction of West, the idea that media coverage of Hurricane
Katrina exposed racial inequality seems like a valid assumption. However, given what
we already know about black public opinion and African Americans’ greater sense of
racial group interest (Dawson 1994), it may also be that such exposure did not reveal
anything new to West. Previous public opinion polls have demonstrated that white
Americans are those that most needed to learn the lesson of racial inequality, but they
likely approached Katrina with diverse conceptions of their own social identities and
varied pre-existing racial attitudes. Therefore, it seems safe to assume, then, that ordi-
nary Americans, particularly whites, interpreted the hurricane’s aftermath in multiple
different ways in comparison to West and each other.
D
ATA/METHODS
Though survey data show that Hurricane Katrina did not impact Americans’ beliefs
about the persistence of racial inequality in the manner that many progressives
assumed would occur, how ordinary Americans’ discussed race in Katrina’s aftermath
has yet to be examined. That is the purpose of the present project. T o accomplish
this, I analyze a rather unique, nonrandom sample of “discussions”: letters to the edi-
tor written to USA T odayabout Hurricane Katrina in the immediate aftermath of its
landfall in New Orleans (published Aug. 29 through Sept. 2, 2005, Sept. 5 through
Sept. 9, 2005, and Sept. 12, through Sept. 16, 2005). I contend that a content
analysis of these letters will provide insight into the ways in which ordinary
Americans from across the nation discussed Hurricane Katrina within their own
social circles.
ERICA M. CZAJA210
pal-marable2-03-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:56 PM  Page 210


--- PAGE 228 ---
I chose to examine letters written to USA T oday, as opposed to other newspapers,
for multiple reasons. First, USA T odayis a national newspaper, which is consistent
with my goal of assessing the national landscape of public discourse in Katrina’s
aftermath. Second, it is the most frequently purchased and read of American
national newspapers (see Table 14.1). Finally, readers of USA T odayare more repre-
sentative of the American public than the readers of other large national newspapers,
namely The Wall Street Journaland the New York Times.
A comparison of readers’ household incomes, a standard measure of socioeco-
nomic status, given the national median household income of $44,389 (U.S. Census
Bureau 2004) strongly suggests that Americans who read USA T odayare much more
ordinary than the elite readers of The Washington Post and the New York Times (see
Table 14.1).
I collected these letters to the editor electronically using an online database of
newspaper text, Proquest Newsstand. During my initial review, I found sixty letters
written in response to Hurricane Katrina. From these sixty, I decided to exclude one
letter because it focused entirely on gas prices and energy efficiency rather than the
events in New Orleans. Since my study focuses on the ways in which Americans
talk about race, I also excluded five other letters based on the foreign citizenship of
their writers. In total, I analyzed fifty-four letters. Through both deductive and
inductive reasoning, I coded all fifty-four letters about Hurricane Katrina along
three variables: identity, responsibility, and action (see Table 14.2). I then per-
formed a more in-depth, textual analysis of the eleven letters that directly men-
tioned race or racial categories.
A
NALYSIS
The near absence of discussions about values-deficiency in the hurricane’s aftermath
demonstrates that “new racism” models cannot explain the opinion gap between
blacks and whites regarding whether Hurricane Katrina showed the persistence of
racial inequality. New Orleans residents were identified overwhelmingly as fellow
Americans in writers’ usage of “we,” “our,” and “us.” While 11 percent blamed the
victims at least partially for their fate, only two letter writers (4 percent) justified
themselves by questioning victims’ adherence to the traditional American values of
self-reliance and personal responsibility. In light of previous research, the strong
sense of collective identity that results in times of crisis on American soil may be
enough to drum up the core American value of egalitarianism and override the indi-
vidualism that is often elicited when white Americans view African Americans in
need (Iyengar 1996; Kellstedt 2000). Alternatively, the idea of a natural disaster per-
petrated by Mother Nature might make it more difficult for whites to propose indi-
vidualized rather than societal solutions to problems that resulted from Katrina.
However, it is unclear from the letters what, if anything, Americans believe should
be done about social problems that pre-dated the hurricane.
In addition, conceptions of American culture and notions of what it means to be
an American were overtly stated by some writers and used to generate individual acts
of assistance. Ginny from Pennsylvania reminded readers of their identities as follows:
KATRINA’S SOUTHERN “EXPOSURE” 211
pal-marable2-03-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:56 PM  Page 211


--- PAGE 229 ---
Table 14.1   Audience size and reader income distribution of the three largest national newspapers
Daily Audience Percent of Readership by Household Income
Circulation Readership $25,000–$34,999 $35,000–$49,999 $50,000–$74,999 $75,000–$99,999 $100,000–$149,000 $150,000 and up
USA T oday 2,590,695 6,980,074 7.7 17.8 21.9 18.3 15.6 11.4
Wall Street Journal 2,100,760 5,242,129 4.3 11.5 15.5 18.3 20.0 26.8
New York Times 1,682,644 5,065,303 5.7 13.6 15.4 16.8 17.5 23.8
Source: Circulation figures represent the largest number of copies sold in a day as reported by the Audit Bureau of Circulations during the six-month period between April 1, 2005, and September 30, 2005.
Readership figures represent the number of readers on an average weekday. Readership and income figures are from the Newspaper Association of America’s 2006 Newspaper Audience Database Report,
which reported Scarborough Research data from telephone interviews conducted between February 2004 and March 2005.


--- PAGE 230 ---
“Americans are a great people who always help those in need” (USA T oday, September
1, 2005, p. A12). In line with this spirit of compassion and cooperation, Joshua from
New York scolded other letter writers who blamed those who did not evacuate New
Orleans on the grounds that these writers were “doing a disservice to what it should
mean to be an American” (USA T oday, September 9, 2005, p. A10). Accordingly,
many used the concept of collective American identity to garner individual acts of
support for Katrina victims, such as volunteering at shelters, donating money, or giv-
ing blood. These appeals drew on a rosy view of American history in which Americans
were, by virtue of their identity, cooperative and generous. Ronald from Pennsylvania,
for example, issued the following rallying cry for help: “Now is the time for all
Americans to help their fellow countrymen, as we have done consistently since the
inception of this great nation” (USA T oday, September 2, 2005, p. A20). While put
to an arguably good purpose, these kinds of historical fictions may also serve to blur
our country’s ugly racial past in the minds of Americans, thereby reducing under-
standing of the historical and structural forces that contribute to racial inequality
(One America in the 21st Century 1998). Furthermore, the sentiments of Ginny,
Joshua, and Ronald echo those of Eliasoph’s (1998, 1999) volunteers, whose idea of
good citizenship hinged on the ability to cheerfully roll up one’s sleeves or get out
one’s checkbook to do something or make a difference as an individual.
While a substantial proportion of letter writers (31 percent) advocated such indi-
vidual acts of assistance, a full half of writers understood the disaster in political
terms, contradicting my expectations given Eliasoph’s findings (Eliasoph 1998,
1999). Those who favored talking politics as a response in and of itself to the Katrina
disaster used the national newspaper opinion forum to criticize the government (39
percent), to discuss the social structural factors present in New Orleans that may
have inhibited evacuation (17 percent), or to make suggestions for government
action. Again, in opposition to Eliasoph’s research (Eliasoph 1998, 1999), I found
that only 17 percent of letter writers expressed distaste for “playing” politics or the
KATRINA’S SOUTHERN “EXPOSURE” 213
Table 14.2   Katrina discussion content
Identity: Who are New Orleans residents?
Fellow Americans 69%
African Americans or blacks 20%
Persons lacking American values 4%
Responsibility: Who or what is to blame?
Government, any level or leader 39%
Social factors (i.e., poverty, sickness, old age) 17%
New Orleans residents 11%
Action: What will help?
Talking about politics 50%
Individual acts (i.e., volunteer, donate, etc.) 31%
Not talking politics or playing “blame game” 17%
Both talking politics and individual acts 5.5%
Note: Percentages in each category /HS11549100%.
pal-marable2-03-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:56 PM  Page 213


--- PAGE 231 ---
“blame game,” which for these folks meant “name-calling,” “pointing fingers,” and
just generally being critical and negative ( USA T oday, September 6, 2006, p. A20;
September 16, 2005, p. A10). While these results might initially appear to disagree
with Eliasoph’s findings, her argument is largely based on context (Eliasoph 1998,
1999). It is probable that the context of a face-to-face group meeting within one’s
own community is sufficiently different from an anonymous discussion forum in a
national newspaper to produce these divergent findings. Coupled with the self-selec-
tion of more politically oriented individuals into the group of letter writers, the con-
text of a public newspaper forum likely makes it more conducive to generating
greater discussion around the issues of race and politics. It is noteworthy that nine
writers (17 percent) implicated social structural factors, such as poverty, old age, and
illness, in preventing many New Orleans residents from evacuating before Katrina
sideswiped the city and broke the levees. With no basis for comparison, however, it
is difficult to say whether the hurricane revealed previously unknown, social prob-
lems to the American public.
THE KANYE RACE DEBATE
Overall, eleven out of the fifty-four letter writers, or about 20 percent, referenced
race directly, using words such as “race,” “black,” “white,” and “African-American.”
Given the demographic makeup of the city of New Orleans and those that did not
evacuate, most of the media images that circulated in Katrina’s wake depicted
African Americans (Frymer, Strolovitch, and Warren 2005). Combined with the
media controversy over Kanye West’s September 2 comments, particularly his state-
ment that “George Bush doesn’t care about black people,” the information environ-
ment during the three-week period immediately after Hurricane Katrina was replete
with racial cues and frames (de Moreas 2005). Even given the influence of USA
T oday’s opinion editors’ selection processes, it is significant that only 20 percent of
the published letters during this time made mention of race. Previous research has
shown that people forego public discussions of race for a number of reasons. They
might ascribe to a color-blind ideology and consider race irrelevant (Bonilla-Silva
2003; Feagin and O’Brien 2003); they might be afraid of revealing racist beliefs
(Myers 2005) or being called a racist (Wachtel 1999); or they might place race in the
same category as other sociopolitical problems, which they consider too discourag-
ing, and therefore unbecoming of good citizens, to discuss (Eliasoph 1998, 1999).
Of these eleven letter writers, eight entered the debate about whether race played
a role in the federal response or commented upon blacks’ and whites’ divergent per-
spectives on the disaster. Four writers supported the idea that race factored into the
federal response or at least expressed understanding of why African Americans might
hold this opinion. The other four writers expressed strong feelings of displeasure
related to the introduction of race as a relevant issue. Given the survey data showing
a divide along racial lines in interpretations of the role of race in Katrina’s aftermath,
this equal division between those who generally support the position of Kanye West
and those who disagree with him likely reflects journalistic practices rather than an
actual opinion distribution. Despite these letter writers’ divergent opinions regarding
ERICA M. CZAJA214
pal-marable2-03-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:56 PM  Page 214


--- PAGE 232 ---
the role of race in the disaster, a common thread ran throughout the majority of their
writings: class. In fact, nine out of the eleven letter writers who mentioned race also
made reference to class, suggesting that these issues, particularly blackness and
poverty, are strongly linked in the public mind.
KANYE’S RIGHT!
Drawing upon the models of other scholars (Eliasoph 1998, 1999; Gilens 1999;
Walsh 2004), I carefully analyze the letters that directly mention race or racial cate-
gories in order to illuminate the patterns of discussion that Americans use to talk
about race. I begin with Steve, “a middle-age, middle-class, white guy” from
Massachusetts, who finds the racial divide in opinion regarding the federal response
predictable. T o Steve, it is obvious that the government would have acted differently
had the hurricane occurred in a wealthy area, which he believes “by definition would
be white.” His association of whiteness with wealth and his usage of the term “poor
people” to reference New Orleans residents are evidence that perhaps Steve also
believes that the poor are by definition African American:
I am a middle-age, middle-class, white guy . I find it amazing and disheartening, but
expected, that there is such a divide along racial lines regarding the response to the Gulf
Coast disaster. Of course the federal response would have been different had the hurricane
struck a predominately rich area—which, I believe, by definition would be white. After all,
the current political credo is “of the rich, by the rich and for the rich.” Having lived in
Florida, I know that the primary disaster avoidance technique is “get in your car and
drive away.” This could not work in areas with a concentration of poor people who do
not own cars and where public transportation is not designed for evacuation. As New
Orleans Mayor Ray Nagin has made clear, evacuations to the convention center and
Superdome were desperate measures. . . .And Nagin based his decisions on the expec-
tation that the cavalry would be there within a day, not days. No federal plans seem to
have been developed to take care of the most vulnerable in our society . (USA T oday,
September 15, 2005, p. A12; emphasis added)
Connie of Washington, who identifies herself as “a sixty-year-old white person,”
makes a very similar argument by hypothetically changing the race and class stand-
ing of the hurricane victims: “On the third day after Katrina struck, with no relief
in sight, I said to my husband, ‘“I’ll bet if New Orleans were made up of mostly rich
white people, they’d be getting help in there sooner.’ I also told him I thought the
response would worsen race relations. . . .Would our government have allowed thou-
sands of upper-crust white folks to sit in that holding tank for days on end without
food or water, in those deplorable conditions? I don’t think so” ( USA T oday,
September 15, 2005, p. A12; emphasis added).
Although they are among the most progressive letter writers in my sample, both
Steve and Connie seem to take the correlation between blackness and poverty for
granted; like their more conservative counterparts (see the letters of Becky and Ed
below), they unquestioningly accept it as a social fact.
Lending support to those who had hoped that the hurricane would expose the
persistence of racial inequality, Greg of Utah goes beyond just associating race with
KATRINA’S SOUTHERN “EXPOSURE” 215
pal-marable2-03-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:56 PM  Page 215


--- PAGE 233 ---
class by pointing out that there is something wrong with this close relationship: the
poor are “disproportionately” African American. Greg also offers evidence that some
Americans did gain larger, contextual understandings of racial issues when thinking
about Hurricane Katrina.
The disjunction of views that blacks and whites have of the federal response to Katrina
may relate to the different views they have of black American poverty. This Republican
administration has undeniably favored the rich and disproportionately white, while
attempting to cut the social safety systems relied upon by the poor and disproportionately
black. When this is factored in as part and parcel of the federal response, it is a logical
conclusion that there is some racist principle at work. Perhaps, as many are doing now,
the debate begun by Katrina should be expanded to how we, as a society, deal with the
invisible poor. (USA T oday, September 15, 2005, p. A12; emphasis added)
Greg’s critical thinking around the issues of race, policy, and politics is encouraging.
Unlike Ed of T exas, who criticizes African American leaders for failing to recognize
Bush for positive actions (see below), Greg shows an understanding of why this
might be the case given the Republican Party’s policy platform. He argues that it
makes sense for African Americans to view the federal response as racist in light of
the current administration’s attempts to shrink safety net policies. In addition, unlike
Eliasoph’s volunteers (Eliasoph 1998, 1999), Greg seems to value public political
talk among citizens in his proposal to continue the national conversation on black
poverty that he perceives Katrina to have started.
KANYE’S WRONG!
An examination of letters that disagreed with the introduction of race into the post-
Katrina discussion paints a much different picture than the letters above. Analyzing
these letters, however, helps to explain why more letter writers did not join the
Katrina race debate. Letter writers who insisted that race was not a factor in Katrina’s
aftermath utilized arguments based on two types of evidence: the positive proof of
individual acts of help on the part of many Americans and the lack of evidence for
intentional discrimination along racial lines. Eric from Kansas, for example, takes
offense in response to the comments of Kanye West and others:
I am outraged at rapper Kanye West and other critics who have turned the aftermath of
Hurricane Katrina into an issue of ethnicity and race.... We, as Americans, have come
together and supported the survivors of Hurricane Katrina with food and water.... Let
us not confuse a natural disaster with an ethnic issue. This comparison is a slap in the face
for those of us who have poured out our hearts and given donations. ( USA T oday,
September 12, 2005, p. A22; emphasis added)
Becky from T exas finds the race debate similarly upsetting:
How distressing it is to hear the continued focus on the division Hurricane Katrina cre-
ated in this country vs. the unity 9/11 brought about .... For those of us who are actu-
ally working with Katrina survivors , these are times not of division, but of healing.
ERICA M. CZAJA216
pal-marable2-03-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:56 PM  Page 216


--- PAGE 234 ---
These are times of crossing racial and economic lines to help one another and perhaps
to heal some of the old wounds. USA TODAY’s poll focusing on the racial issue creates a
problem. It also may dissuade some from doing volunteer work . (USA T oday, September
15, 2005, p. A12; emphasis added)
Both Becky and Eric use evidence of individual acts of charity to deny the salience
of race in the hurricane’s aftermath. Many Americans certainly made donations and
volunteered to provide assistance to Katrina victims; however, it is unclear why peo-
ple believe that after-the-fact help by individual citizens counters government criti-
cism or charges of structural racism. Eric’s proclamation of American identity and
Becky’s volunteer-style attitude offer a window into why this might be the case: their
ideas about what it means to be a good citizen include individual acts of help but
exclude racial/political talk. These letter writers confirm Eliasoph’s (1998, 1999)
conclusions in that they perceive racial/political talk as “distressing” in Becky’s case
or as “a slap in the face” in Eric’s case. Indeed, Becky plainly states her volunteer ori-
entation when she highlights one of the worst aspects of “focusing on the race issue”:
it “may dissuade some from doing volunteer work.” While Eliasoph’s (1998, 1999)
volunteers never said that talking about race or politics was anything but pointless
and ineffective, Becky asserts that talking about race actually “creates a problem.”
Interestingly, she contradicts herself by acknowledging the persistence of racial prob-
lems, such as “racial and economic lines” that are not usually crossed and “old
wounds” which may not be healed. Still, she sees no value in talking about racial
divisions or past harms since discussing such matters only makes things worse. T o
Becky, volunteering is the best way to fix old problems without creating new ones.
Another T exan, Ed, directs his “frustration” directly at African Americans. He
does not understand why African Americans would perceive President Bush’s efforts
as less than positive, because, for him, the “outpouring of selfless love and hospital-
ity” that citizens of the president’s home state have bestowed upon Katrina survivors
somehow negates the lacking federal response:
I read with frustration USA TODAY’s report on the perceptions of African Americans toward
the president for his role or lack thereof in the Katrina relief effort.... And I find it hard
to recall when any African-American leader has stepped up and recognized President Bush
for anything positive. Never before has the president’s home state of T exas—considered a
bastion of conservatism—shown such an outpouring of selfless love and hospitality. As
a T exan, I don’t care in the least whether victims are white or black, poor or rich, Democrat
or Republican. Katrina didn’t discriminate, and neither will most of those helping our neigh-
bors to the east.... T o  those who see this catastrophe as an opportunity to gain political
ground, stop your bashing. And to USA TODAY and other media, why not direct polls at
Katrina’s victims now living in T exas to determine what they think? My guess is that you’d
get quite different results. (USA T oday, September 15, 2005, p. A12; emphasis added)
Ed demonstrates his understanding of racism in terms of acts of individual prejudice
when he claims that “Katrina didn’t discriminate.” He does, however, acknowledge at
least residual racism by saying that “most” T exans will not discriminate in their efforts
to help victims of Hurricane Katrina. Even still, Ed seems convinced that a poll of sur-
vivors who evacuated to T exas would show that experiences with hospitable,helpful
KATRINA’S SOUTHERN “EXPOSURE” 217
pal-marable2-03-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:56 PM  Page 217


--- PAGE 235 ---
T exans had changed African Americans’ views of the President and government’s
response. In stark contrast to conservative Ed’s homegrown sympathy for the presi-
dent, Michael of Ohio demonstrates that Americans do not have to be Bush sup-
porters in order to come to his defense against allegations of racism:
These absurd assumptions that race played a role in the federal relief effort following Hurricane
Katrina are preposterous. I agree the federal response to Katrina was initially lethargic, but
the ineptitude of the federal government did not discriminate. Both whites and blacks
were dreadfully impacted by the government’s initial ineffectiveness. I concur that
President Bush should be criticized—not for any racism... President Bush is not a racist. He’s
merely incompetent. (USA T oday, September 15, 2005, p. A12; emphasis added)
Like Ed, Michael understands racism as an act of intentional malice. Even though
he is much less sympathetic to President Bush than Ed, he is appalled that people
might call the president a racist. However, the originator of the Katrina race debate,
Kanye West, did not call President Bush a racist, either; he called him indifferent.
While alleging indifference to human suffering based on skin color is certainly not
an attempt at flattery, it is definitely distinct from calling someone a racist (Wachtel
1999). It may be that some people equate talk of race with talk of racism and there-
fore immediately transformed the terms of debate in the aftermath of Hurricane
Katrina from passive indifference to active racism. Paul Wachtel (1999), a psycholo-
gist who studies interracial dialogue, metaphorically makes the negative conse-
quences of such a transformation abundantly clear:
Accusing a guilty man of the wrong crime is one of the greatest gifts one can bestow
upon him. It fosters an orgy of self-righteous conviction of innocence, and conve-
niently diverts his attention from the offense of which he is truly guilty. In similar fash-
ion, the ubiquitous claim that racism is the cause of the grievous circumstances of life
in our inner cities is, ironically, enabling white America to slough off its responsibility
for the shameful neglect of the least privileged members of our society. The real crime
of which white America is now most guilty is not racism. It is indifference.
Understanding the difference between the two is a crucial step in liberating ourselves
from the sterile and unproductive impasse that has characterized the dialogue on race
relations in recent years. (Wachtel 1999, 37–38)
As was the case in Katrina’s aftermath, such unproductive dialogue limits opportu-
nities for increasing understanding of structural inequalities.
In summary, the public discourse that immediately followed Hurricane Katrina
provided little evidence for “new racism” models. While Katrina’s predominantly
African American victims were frequently referred to as fellow Americans, the rosy
view of history that accompanied writers’ attempts to generate material support for
the victims may have served to further erase our racial past from collective memory.
The vast majority of letter writers failed to address race at all, but of the eleven who
did, nine also made reference to class standing. Still, just two of these nine letter
writers acknowledged the association between race and class as a problem ( USA
T oday, September 14, 2005, p. A10; September 15, 2005, p. A12). Finally, just one
letter writer showed an understanding of the longstanding societal forces, which
ERICA M. CZAJA218
pal-marable2-03-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:56 PM  Page 218


--- PAGE 236 ---
some scholars have termed structural racism, that drive racial inequality (USA T oday,
September 14, 2005, p. A10). In general, letter writers seemed to understand racism
purely in terms of individual acts. Hence, these writers disagreed with the introduc-
tion of race into the post-Katrina discussion because neither Mother Nature, the fed-
eral government, nor Americans who volunteered as part of relief efforts were seen
as being discriminatory on the basis of race. Indeed, focusing on race was discourag-
ing and insulting to those who were trying to help through individual acts, such as
volunteering and making donations. Furthermore, my data provide evidence that a
debate that originally began with accusations of indifference was “transformed” into
one about racism (Walsh 2004).
I
MPLICATIONS
If a tragedy like Hurricane Katrina cannot alert Americans to the realities of racial
inequality in the United States and prompt widespread public dialogue aimed at
greater interracial understanding, is there really any hope for a racially equitable soci-
ety? How can policy makers gain support for programs directed at reducing racial
inequality if the public is unwilling or unable to collectively acknowledge racial
inequality as a societal problem? What mechanisms might be employed in the future
to structure public discussions in ways that would facilitate heightened understand-
ing of racial inequality? Some scholars have suggested the utility of newspapers for
informing the public about contemporary political issues (Delli Carpini and Keeter
1996). Despite extensive news coverage of Hurricane Katrina, my research demon-
strates that media efforts alone are not enough. The complex processes through which
letter writers interpreted and discussed the Katrina disaster did not produce the result
for which optimistic journalists and scholars, including this researcher, had hoped.
Walsh (2004) demonstrates that the use to which people put media information
often depends upon the group in which they discuss and interpret it. Many members
of the men’s group that Walsh observed were former high-school classmates who had
lived together in the same town for their entire lives and shared similar worldviews.
These men frequently discussed politics in reference to their similar social identities,
which they partially constructed based upon membership in their cohesive, homoge-
neous group. By interacting with each other, the men reinforced their political views
and social identities as well as their notions of “we” and “us.” Along with the sense of
community on which they built their social identities, however, the men also distin-
guished themselves from those they identified as “others,” “they,” or “them.” The men
“otherized” liberals, university students and faculty, and particularly, African
Americans. At the same time that it produced social and democratic desirables, like
solidarity, social capital, and increased political engagement, membership in this
homogenous group also had a dark side: the exclusion of other social categories of
Americans from the group’s sphere of concern (Putnam 2005; Walsh 2004).
T o counteract the in-group, out-group identity perspectives that undermine the
social and democratic utility of traditionally homogenous, voluntary associations,
Walsh offers the solution of local, inter-group dialogue programs. In these programs,
individuals of diverse backgrounds volunteer to participate in a series of facilitator-led
KATRINA’S SOUTHERN “EXPOSURE” 219
pal-marable2-03-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:56 PM  Page 219


--- PAGE 237 ---
discussions regarding pressing social issues, such as racial tensions or educational
achievement gaps (Walsh 2004, 2005). These sessions “often end in ‘action forums’
in which the participants propose and plan ways to address the issues they have dis-
cussed” (Walsh 2004, 191). “Through the dialogues, participants lay open their dif-
ferent experiences, testify to their perceptions of other groups, and thereby gain
awareness of the perspectives through which other people view public prob-
lems.... S elf-reports from participants in community dialogues suggest that these
programs succeed in. . .achieving a more pluralistic conception of community”
(Walsh 2004, 192–93). At the national level, Bill Clinton’s Initiative on Race, enti-
tled One America in the 21st Century , facilitated various types of community dia-
logues about racial issues around the country with the goal of establishing “common
ground” (One America in the 21st Century 1998, 2).
Other scholars emphasize the potential utility of combining such dialogue groups
with media as a strategy for increasing interracial understanding. In a recent, quasi-
experimental study, Hernando Rojas and his colleagues (2005) examine the effects
of media consumption on political dialogue using a television documentary of the
racially motivated murder of James Byrd, Jr. by three white men in Jasper, T exas.
These researchers find that watching the documentary and participating in an inter-
racial dialogue group about it increased awareness of and willingness to discuss
racism (Rojas et al. 2005). Overall, the above findings suggest that combining media
and discussion in a heterogeneous group setting may be the most successful strategy
for increasing interracial understanding.
C
ONCLUSIONS
In their efforts to understand and respond to the Katrina disaster, ordinary
Americans who wrote to USA T odayoverwhelmingly identified New Orleans resi-
dents as fellow Americans in need. Of writers, 20 percent identified Katrina victims
as blacks or African Americans and 17 percent acknowledged pre-existing social fac-
tors that contributed to the scope of the disaster. Furthermore, nine of the eleven let-
ter writers who mentioned race also mentioned class issues, illustrating a robust link
between these two concepts in the public mind. Unfortunately for those who had
hoped that Hurricane Katrina would reveal continued racial inequality in the United
States, only two of these nine letter writers viewed the overrepresentation of African
Americans within the lower tiers of society as a problem that ought to be solved. In
addition, just one letter writer demonstrated any understanding of the structural and
historical forces that determine life outcomes. These findings show that the public
discourse in Katrina’s aftermath was not one of racial inequality and suggest that the
ways in which Americans discussed race prevented the “exposure” that many
believed would occur.
The American public failed to see racial inequality in Katrina’s aftermath for two
main reasons. First, the strong notions of collective American identity that Katrina
produced drew on a rosy, fictional view of history; the idea that Americans have
always helped one another likely served to further obscure public awareness of neg-
ative historical and structural forces that influenced the lives of African Americans
ERICA M. CZAJA220
pal-marable2-03-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:56 PM  Page 220


--- PAGE 238 ---
even before Hurricane Katrina made landfall in New Orleans. Second, Kanye West’s
introduction of race into the post-Katrina debate, though mainly a structural argu-
ment about government indifference and maltreatment, was transformed into a dis-
cussion of individual acts of racism. When any discussion of race ultimately turns
into one of racism, my analysis of letters shows that Americans, particularly whites,
become distressed, insulted, and outraged. Such defensive reactions halt productive
dialogue and make greater understanding of structural racism and recognition of
racial inequality impossible. This was particularly true in Katrina’s aftermath when
perceived charges of individual racism proved largely incompatible in the public
mind with Americans’ outpouring of individual acts of help.
If the United States is ever to live up to its egalitarian ideals, the government, the
academy, the media, and the American public all need to work together to confront
our nation’s ugly racial past and present. Combining media that uses racial frames of
equality with well-facilitated, interracial dialogue groups is one method that we
already know works. In the tradition of President Bill Clinton’s Initiative on Race,
this method should be used to begin an ongoing, national dialogue about racial
inequality in order to educate the American public about the historical and struc-
tural forces that continue to shape the lives of African Americans today. T o do their
part, social scientists should develop interracial dialogue experiments that will
strengthen this method and allow for the discovery of other variables that influence
racial understandings. From these experiments, “pre-packaged” dialogue programs
could be established and distributed to government organizations and civic groups.
While the present study has shed light upon how Americans from across the
nation publicly talked about race in Hurricane Katrina’s immediate aftermath, the
ways in which citizens will continue to discuss race as rebuilding efforts in New
Orleans progress is an equally important topic of study. Specifically, ethnographic
research of race talk among those directly involved with planning and rebuilding
activities in New Orleans, such as members of community organizations, local offi-
cials, and residents, would greatly increase scholarly understandings of the repercus-
sions of discussion—how public discourse perpetuates or redresses racial inequality.
R
EFERENCE LIST
Appiah, Anthony, and Amy Gutmann. 1996. Color conscious: The political morality of race .
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Bonilla-Silva, Eduardo. 2003. Racism without racists: Color-blind racism and the persistence of
racial inequality in the United States. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
Dawson, Michael. 1994. Behind the mule: Race and class in African-American politics .
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Dawson, Michael, Cathy Cohen, and Melissa Harris-Lacewell. 2006. 2005 Racial Attitudes
and the Katrina Disaster Study . Initial report available at http://www.melissaharrislacewell
.com.
Delli Carpini, Michael X., and Scott Keeter. 1996. What Americans know about politics and
why it matters. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
de Moraes, Lisa. 2005. Kanye West’s T orrent of Criticism, Live on NBC. The Washington Post,
September 3.
KATRINA’S SOUTHERN “EXPOSURE” 221
pal-marable2-03-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:56 PM  Page 221


--- PAGE 239 ---
DeParle, Jason. 2005. Broken Levees, Unbroken Barriers. New York Times, September 4.
Druckman, James N., and Kjersten R. Nelson. 2003. Framing and deliberation: How citizens’
conversations limit elite influence. American Journal of Political Science 47 (4): 729–45.
Dyson, Michael Eric. 2006. Come Hell or High Water. New York: Basic Civitas.
Eliasoph, Nina. 1998. Avoiding politics: How Americans produce apathy in everyday life . New
York: Cambridge University Press.
———. 1999. “Everyday racism” in a culture of political avoidance: Civil society, speech, and
taboo. Social Problems 46 (4): 479–502.
Feagin, Joe and Eileen O’Brien. 2003. White men on race: Power, privilege, and the shaping of
cultural consciousness. Boston: Beacon Press.
Frymer, Paul, Dara Z. Strolovitch, and Dorian T . Warren. 2005. Katrina’s political roots and
divisions: Race, class, and federalism in American politics. SSRC Forum on Understanding
Katrina: Perspectives from the Social Sciences . http://understandingkatrina.ssrc.org/frymer
strolovitchwarren.
Gilens, Martin. 1999. Why Americans hate welfare: Race, media and the politics of antipoverty
policy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Gilman, Nils. 2005. What Katrina teaches about the meaning of racism. SSRC Forum on
Understanding Katrina: Perspectives from the Social Sciences . http://understandingkatrina
.ssrc.org/gilman.
Hetherington, Marc. 2005. Why trust matters: Declining political trust and the demise of
American liberalism. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Iyengar, Shanto. 1996. Framing responsibility for political issues. Annals of the American
Academy of Political and Social Science 546:59–70.
Jackson, Stephen. 2005. Un/natural disasters, here and there. SSRC Forum on Understanding
Katrina: Perspectives from the Social Sciences. http://understandingkatrina.ssrc.org/jackson/.
Kellstedt, Paul M. 2000. Media framing and the dynamics of racial policy preferences.
American Journal of Political Science 44 (2): 245–60.
Kinder, Donald R., and Nicholas Winter. 2001. Exploring the racial divide: Blacks, whites,
and opinion on national policy. American Journal of Political Science 45 (2): 439–53.
Klinenberg, Eric. 2002. Heat wave: A social autopsy of disaster in Chicago. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Kluegel, James R. 1987. Macro-economic problems, beliefs about the poor and attitudes
toward welfare spending. Social Problems 34 (1): 82–99.
Massey, Douglas S., and Nancy A. Denton. 1993. American apartheid: Segregation and the
making of the underclass. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Myers, Kristen. 1998. Allegiances, coups, and color wars: A strategy for breaking the silence
on race issues in the classroom. Transformations 9:183–95.
———. 2005. Racetalk: Racism hiding in plain sight. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
Nelson, Thomas E., Zoe M. Oxley, and Rosalee A. Clawson. 1997. T owards a psychology of
framing effects. Political Behavior 19 (3): 221–46.
One America in the 21st century: Forging a new future. 1998. President’s initiative on race, advi-
sory board’s report to the president. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
Orbe, Mark, and Tina M. Harris. 2001. Interracial communication, theory into practice .
Belmont, CA: Wadsworth/Thomson Learning.
Pew Research Center. 2005. Commentary: The black and white of public opinion: Did the
racial divide in attitudes about Katrina mislead us? October 31.
Putnam, Robert. 2000. Bowling alone: The collapse and revival of American community . New
York: Simon and Schuster.
Rojas, Hernando, Dhavan V . Shah, Jaeho Cho, Michael Schmierbach, Heejo Keum, and
Homero Gil-de-Zuniga. 2005. Media dialogue: Perceiving and addressing community
problems. Mass Communication & Society 8 (2): 93–110.
ERICA M. CZAJA222
pal-marable2-03-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:56 PM  Page 222


--- PAGE 240 ---
Schuman, Howard, Charlotee Steeh, Lawrence Bobo, and Maria Krysan. 1997. Racial atti-
tudes in America: Trends and interpretations. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Sears, David O., Jim Sidanius, and Lawrence Bobo. 2000. Racialized politics: The debate about
racism in America. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Shaw, Greg M., and Robert Y. Shapiro. 2002. The polls—T rends: Poverty and public assis-
tance. Public Opinion Quarterly 66 (1): 105–28.
Stevenson, Richard W . 2005. Amid the ruins, a president tries to reconstruct his image, too.
The New York Times, September 16.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2004. Income, poverty, and health insurance coverage in the United States:
2004. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
Wachtel, Paul L. 1999. Race in the mind of America: Breaking the vicious circle between blacks
and whites. New York: Routledge.
Walsh, Katherine Cramer. 2004. T alking about politics: Informal groups and social identity in
American life. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Walsh, Katherine Cramer. 2005. Communities, race, and talk: An analysis of occurrence of civic
intergroup dialogue programs. Extension of a paper presented at the 2003 annual conference
of the Political Communication section of the American Political Science Association,
Annenberg School for Communication, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, August 27.
Weisman, Jonathan. 2005. Economists, housing experts question proposals. The Washington
Post, September 16.
KATRINA’S SOUTHERN “EXPOSURE” 223
pal-marable2-03-4.qxp  10/21/2007  1:56 PM  Page 223


--- PAGE 241 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 242 ---
Chapter 15
ORAL HISTORY, FOLKLORE,
AND KATRINA
ALAN H. STEIN AND GENE B. PREUSS
The hurricane season of 2005 reached historic proportions in the sheer number of
tropical storms and hurricanes, people displaced, homes and businesses destroyed,
and lives lost to Hurricanes Katrina, Rita, and Wilma. The Associated Press over-
whelmingly voted the Gulf Coast hurricanes as the number one story of 2005. The
growing number of town meetings, conferences, and congressional subcommittees
that have convened to hear the testimony and stories of both the disaster itself and
the condemnations of the slow response of local, state, and national relief efforts pro-
vide an overwhelming amount of oral history material.
Dyan French Cole told the members of the House Select Committee investigat-
ing the response to Hurricane Katrina, “I have witnesses that they bombed the walls
of the levee, boom, boom!” Cole, a community activist known to many of New
Orleans’s Seventh Ward residents as “Mamma D,” was among several witnesses to
address the Committee in early December 2005. Other witnesses told U.S.
Representatives of the harsh treatment they received from U.S. military personnel,
who kept refugees penned behind barbed wire, refusing requests for health care and
first aid. “They set us up so that we would rebel, so that they could shoot us,”
another woman complained. “At one point they brought in two truckloads of dogs
and let the dogs out.” Another woman was even more emphatic: “We was treated
worse than an animal. People do leave a dog in a house, but they do leave him food
and water. They didn’t do that. And that’s sad.” She explained her frustration:
I’m from New Orleans, Louisiana and I was caught into the storm. I never thought
New Orleans would have done us the way they done us. I didn’t realize what was going
on until maybe the third day after I was trying to get out of that place—they would
not let us out. I was on top of the Interstate, the Interstate in front to the Superdome
and some guys came along in an Ozone Water truck and picked up a lot of people and
we got near as far as getting out. They turned us around with guns. The army turned
pal-marable2-03-5.qxp  10/21/2007  1:58 PM  Page 225


--- PAGE 243 ---
us around with guns. Policemen. And I realized then that they really was keeping us in
there. And you want me to tell you the truth, my version of it? They tried to kill us.
When you keep somebody on top of the Interstate for five days, with no food and water,
that’s killing people. And there ain’t no ands, ifs, or buts about it, that was NOPD [New
Orleans Police Department] killing people. Four people died around me. Four.
Diabetes. I am a diabetic and I survived it, by the grace of God, but I survived it. But
they had people who were worse off than me, and they didn’t make it. Old people. One
young woman couldn’t survive it because of the dehydration. So I mean, this is what you
call NOPD murder. Murder. That’s what I call it. What else would you call it?
Certainly, historians writing about the effect of the hurricanes and the historical sig-
nificance of the 2005 hurricane season, the damage visited on the Gulf Coast, and
the changed lives of the people of New Orleans and the American South will assess
and analyze the oral testimony, but how should we respond presently? Mamma D’s
story of levee bombings are among the stories circulating that lend credence to the
growing belief that racism and a lack of concern for victims in poorer sections of the
Crescent City influenced the government’s reaction to the hurricane’s victims. For
historians, oral history methodology helps with conducting, collecting, and evaluat-
ing personal narratives that can shed the light of experience on a path increasingly
darkened by the overwhelming number of accounts that emerge on a daily basis.
WHAT IS ORAL HISTORY AND HOW DOES IT PRESERVE COMMUNITY?
This chapter explores the uses of oral history in documenting and interpreting
Katrina. As a general matter, oral history is the application of modern technology to
history’s most ancient technique of gathering historical material: using a recording
machine to preserve both the questions to, and answers of, eyewitnesses or partici-
pants concerning selected aspects of history. For centuries, stories and traditions were
passed orally from one generation to the next. One of the stories that emerged from
the massive tsunami of 2004 that killed hundreds of thousands is the account of how
relatively few died on the Indonesian island of Simeulue. Residents remembered the
stories their grandparents told them of the “semong”—big waves—that followed
earthquakes and so headed for high ground when they first felt the earthquake.
Oral history became a tool of significant historical inquiry and documentation in
both the literate and nonliterate worlds, but it was with the development of record-
ing technology and the ability to capture the actual voices of narrators that the prac-
tice became more popular and legitimate. During the Great Depression, the Federal
Writers’ Project employed writers and folklorists to document the stories of ex-slaves,
immigrant families, famines, and floods.
While the field was legitimized in 1948 by the creation of the Columbia
University Oral History Program, it was not until the 1960s and the development
of the new social history that the oral history movement came into its own, as it
focused on the lives and experiences of “ordinary people.” History “from the bottom
up” became favored by social historians and activists who viewed oral history in the
community as an empowering process for interviewer and narrator alike: it brought
to light the voices of those who had been silenced by the dominant historiography
due to race, gender, and class biases.
ALAN H. STEIN AND GENE B. PREUSS226
pal-marable2-03-5.qxp  10/21/2007  1:58 PM  Page 226


--- PAGE 244 ---
Aided by the world of television and digital media, oral history is a way of docu-
menting urgent events and insights that otherwise might not be recorded. The
numerous Katrina projects cited in this chapter illustrate how evacuees are active
participants in their own historical drama. Through rich audio-video interviews,
their life stories present enormous opportunities for uses from pedagogy to research.
But they also present profound challenges: How reliable are the interviewers and the
oral sources? How will the interviews be accessed in their audio and video form?
When should we even begin collecting “urgent” oral history of a catastrophe? Finally,
how do we interpret what we are collecting?
W
HEN SHOULD WE BEGIN COLLECTING ORAL HISTORY?
Oral historians, a multidisciplinary group that includes folklorists, anthropologists,
sociologists, and historians, have worked for many years with testimony, family sto-
ries, and oral accounts like those arising from the ruined areas of the Gulf Coast
region. The techniques and methodologies oral historians have developed may help
unravel the tangle of confused, horrific, and contradictory testimony from evacuees
and survivors displaced by the hurricanes.
An important question oral historians (unlike their journalism colleagues) wres-
tle with is when to begin collecting the narratives. How our media responded is at
the same time reflective of our interest in catastrophes and the media’s need for rat-
ings, but there is human compassion as well. USA T oday’s Peter Johnson wrote “The
human side of Katrina—tales of agony and misery that thousands of Katrina’s vic-
tims still endure a month after the storm—also has gripped many reporters, who
want to stay on the story indefinitely.”
1 Reporters covering the 9/11 terrorist attacks
and the Shuttle Columbia accident expressed similar sentiments. How should the
oral historian respond? The gut-level instinct is to grab a recorder and get “in the
field” as soon as possible. But historians, like journalists, are always concerned about
maintaining an objectivity about their research and writing. Most historians achieve
this “historical distance” by writing about the past, not contemporary events.
The discussion about Katrina oral history projects became one of the year’s lead-
ing discussions on H-ORALHIST , an H-NET discussion list [http://www.h-net
.org/~oralhist], with oral historians divided in their opinion. The subsequent discus-
sion begged the question: When do current events become history? Historians usu-
ally prefer the temporal distance presented by the past. “I have never come nearer to
contemporary history than a perspective of 25 years,” Barbara T uchman wrote. On
September 8, 2005, Holly Werner Thomas wrote: “It may be too soon to ask, but it
seems important that the stories of the refugees from Hurricane Katrina be told.
Does anyone have any information about a possible oral history project regarding
the hurricane and its aftermath?” One respondent admitted that he felt vexed about
beginning to collect narratives too rapidly. After rushing to the refugee center located
in Houston’s Astrodome to collect oral history of this disaster, he admitted, “Yet
when I arrived, I found myself wondering if we should allow some time for reflec-
tion.” Would rushing in to collect oral histories while people were still displaced,
sheltered in auditoriums, churches, and public buildings, be adding more traumas to
ORAL HISTORY, FOLKLORE, AND KATRINA 227
pal-marable2-03-5.qxp  10/21/2007  1:58 PM  Page 227


--- PAGE 245 ---
their lives? “People will need time to settle down, time to reflect, and time to put
their lives back together before they will be able to discuss how the disaster affected
them. . . .They are still ‘in the midst’ of their story.” He worried that rushing in and
conducting interviews too close to the traumatic incident would be “working at the
intersection of grief and history,” as public historians have described in their experi-
ence working with 9/11 survivors.
Columbia University Oral History Research Office Director Mary Marshall
Clark argues, “If projects can be well-organized, funded well enough, and there is an
archive willing to accept tapes and transcripts and to disseminate them when the
time comes—it is possible to begin early.” Getting an early start could also be impor-
tant not only to historians, but also to survivors as many interviewed after 9/11
“experienced relief in knowing that someone was willing to listen to personal
accounts of horror.”
Another dilemma facing oral historians and others working with people whose
lives were shattered by disasters and tragedy is maintaining a professional distance.
How involved should one become? Public historians working after the September 11
tragedy in New York explained that they confronted this dilemma. How should his-
torians collect historical information for the future, and still provide for the needs of
the present? Mary Marshall Clark described the importance of interviewing soon
after an event in order to avoid the problems of contaminating individual memories
with those of others, or a larger “public narrative.” While conducting interviews for
Columbia’s September 11, 2001, Oral History Narrative and Memory Project, Clark
reported that many interviewees expressed confusion about the meaning and signif-
icance of the attacks. There were multiple interpretations based upon the intervie-
wee’s ethnicity, sex, and culture. Clark and her colleagues found themselves asking,
“Is this history yet? Is it memory? And .... I s  i t  therapy?” Clark goes on to describe
the challenges of doing Katrina-related oral history projects:
I have a perspective on the questions raised about documenting Katrina. It’s in part
philosophical perspective, which is based on understanding how important oral history
can be to those who tell. My perspective is this: I think it is both “never too soon” to
tell, and “never too late” to tell. The story of Katrina and the failure of the relief effort
[as well as] the impact on African Americans and others and the poorest of the poor is
still unfolding. Oral histories of Katrina will involve not only the event and its imme-
diate aftermath but its still unfolding legacy: the story of the largest displacement of
people since the Civil War and maybe the largest displacement of children ever.
These stories of displacement and resettlement, the decisions about how and
whether to return, the redefinition of home, etc. are all stories that can be documented
over time, and should be carefully planned so as to respect the human struggles that
will be involved. We found with 9/11, though, it can’t compare to Katrina in most
ways, as the complete destruction and devastation of every kind of support is so much
more extreme, that people who were displaced from their homes/lost jobs/were dis-
rupted in major ways couldn’t really focus on the oral history process. So we never
pushed them to describe the difficulties that were ongoing unless they chose to describe
these specific struggles themselves.
ALAN H. STEIN AND GENE B. PREUSS228
pal-marable2-03-5.qxp  10/21/2007  1:58 PM  Page 228


--- PAGE 246 ---
HOW INVOLVED SHOULD ONE BECOME WHEN COLLECTING
“URGENT” ORAL HISTORY OF A CATASTROPHE?
In the spirit of “never too soon to tell,” volunteers began conducting oral history
research within weeks of the Katrina crisis, even as the crisis event unfolded. Most
notably is the “Alive in T ruth: The New Orleans Disaster Oral History and Memory
Project” [http://www.aliveintruth.org], run by an all-volunteer group of interview-
ers/recorders, transcribers, translators, therapists, donors, and community members.
The project began in early September 2005 outside the Austin Convention Center,
which sheltered some 6,000 New Orleans evacuees, mostly African American resi-
dents who were trapped in the city after the storm. It is one of the first projects to
utilize a “life history” approach, focusing on the entire life of the interviewee, not
only their hurricane-experience stories: “I’m from the 7th Ward, and I was raised in
New Orleans. I was raised and born in New Orleans. I worked as a babysitter. Went
to school there, finished the 10th grade. Went to Warren Easton High School. At
the age of 17, I decided to go to Job Corps, but so far I didn’t make it there, so I
wound up getting pregnant with my first daughter, which is named Dionnka T .”
This kind of bottom-up approach also helps evacuees find their voice. By inter-
viewing residents from New Orleans’s Lower Ninth Ward, the project seeks to doc-
ument individual lives, restore community bonds, and uphold the voices, culture,
rights, and history of New Orleanians.
Some members of the Oral History Association expressed concern over Alive In
T ruth’s volunteers because they become directly involved as advocates for the inter-
viewee. Interviewers have driven narrators to sign up for Medicare, to access ware-
houses of clothing and furniture, and to file claims with the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA). In the meantime, volunteers continue to encounter
people who do not have furniture, who are missing family members and are unaware
of resources to help locate them. In many cases, the volunteers encounter survivors
with untreated medical conditions and who are not in contact with preliminary case
management services. Volunteers are prepared to help evacuees find social services for
help or to accompany them to FEMA information centers. In the minds of some oral
historians, the Alive in T ruth interviewers are too close to the problems, and so their
personal “bias” will intrude on the interview since the interviewer takes an activist
role by empathizing with the narrator who is contributing their story to the project.
Alive in T ruth Project Director and former New Orleanian Abe Louise Young has
been a Research Fellow for the Jewish Women’s Archive, for The Project in
Interpreting the T exas Past, and for the Danish-American Dialogue on Human
Rights. She describes the importance of active oral history in shaping public policy
by networking with other organizations—grassroots, nonprofits, oral history, human
rights, state and national, people of color–led groups—in order to connect with a
broader social change movement. She also believes that the legacy of Alive in T ruth
will be in preserving “the archive of accounts [that have] achieved rapid dissemina-
tion, educating and informing various constituencies: this is evidence of the broad
scope possible with multiple media liaisons, a vision of justice, and belief in the
speakers.” In February 2006, Young also introduced an interpretative photography
exhibit documenting Katrina at the Carver Library in East Austin, T exas. Entitled
ORAL HISTORY, FOLKLORE, AND KATRINA 229
pal-marable2-03-5.qxp  10/21/2007  1:58 PM  Page 229


--- PAGE 247 ---
“Surviving Katrina: Sharing Our Stories,” it was one of the first oral history exhibits
documenting the experience of Katrina evacuees. Through text and photographs, it
tells the story of six New Orleanians and their experiences coming to Austin.
The project also collected over sixty interviews that are, on average, one to two
hours long. Young has contributed the interviews to the U.S. Human Rights
Network reports, as well as the Katrina Task Force, established at the Ben L. Hooks
Center for Social Change at the University of Memphis.
HOW DO WE INTERPRET WHAT WE ARE COLLECTING?
In response to the critical issues laid bare by Hurricane Katrina and its aftermath, the
Open Society Institute (OSI) offered a fellowship competition for projects exposing
the persistent problems of poverty, racism, and government neglect. OSI, part of the
George Soros Foundations Network, recognized the importance of documenting the
hurricane aftermath by creating the Katrina Media Fellowships in 2006, a one-time
award (averaging $15,000–$35,000) for journalists, photographers, and documen-
tary film makers who are using sound recordings collected from oral history inter-
views for media production. Along with OSI, other national and state arts and
humanities councils have supported oral history research projects in the past, but
there exists a greater sense of urgency for funding these special projects, a fact recog-
nized by the Oral History Association (OHA), the national organization of oral his-
tory professionals headquartered at Pennsylvania’s Dickenson College.
The increases in recent disasters and tragedies have forced oral historians to
reevaluate the timely collection and interpretation of “urgent” interviews. The OHA
is primarily concerned with the slow response time from foundations for funding
meaningful interpretative projects. It recognized the importance of emerging crises
in oral history research by creating an Emerging Crises Oral History Research Fund
in 2006. The fund is primarily designed to provide a more expedient source of fund-
ing and a quick turnaround time for oral historians to undertake “crisis research,” as
well as field work in the United States and internationally.
While Katrina has provided an opportunity for gathering documentary photog-
raphy and oral history recordings, the real challenge has been the dissemination of
the digital data. The digital revolution means that crucial aspects of information can
be organized, searched, extracted, and integrated with relative speed and accuracy,
leading historians like Roy Rosenzweig into the age of digital history. Rosenzweig is
the founder and director of The Center for History and Media at George Mason
University and Executive Producer of The Hurricane Digital Memory Bank
(HDMB), which uses electronic media to collect, preserve, and presents the stories
of Hurricanes Katrina, Rita, and Wilma. The George Mason Center for History and
New Media (http://chnm.gmu.edu) and the University of New Orleans, in partner-
ship with the Smithsonian Institution’s National Museum of American History and
other partners, organized this project. HMDB is an ongoing effort by historians and
archivists to preserve the record of these storms by documented firsthand accounts,
on-scene images, blog postings, and podcasts.
A project partner with the HDMB is the University of Southern Mississippi
Center for Oral History and Cultural Heritage. They are engaged in a large-scale
ALAN H. STEIN AND GENE B. PREUSS230
pal-marable2-03-5.qxp  10/21/2007  1:58 PM  Page 230


--- PAGE 248 ---
“Hurricane Katrina Oral History Project” that will seek to capture the larger human
experience of this landmark event. T o date this project includes a partnership with
scholars in six states (South Carolina, Louisiana, T ennessee, Utah, Virginia, and
Arizona) trained in oral history. The Center is conducting over 1,000 interviews to
capture the breadth of the experiences of those impacted, including emergency man-
agement officers, local officials, residents, volunteer relief workers, and those dis-
placed by the storm. Other partner projects include:
The Photojournalists of Hurricane Katrina. This oral history and book project fea-
tures a dozen of the photojournalists who covered New Orleans and the Mississippi
coast post-Katrina. The project will feature unpublished photographs and personal
narratives of the aftermath of the storm, allowing these journalists to relate a power-
ful story through a blend of words and images.
Archivists and Hurricane Katrina Project . Working with archivists and libraries
along the Mississippi Gulf Coast, this project will use focus groups and individual
interviews to assess the disaster preparedness of historical and cultural institutions.
This initiative will examine existing protocols, how these were implemented, and
identify issues that need to be addressed in planning. The outcome of the project will
be to develop and disseminate documented, workable procedures to fulfill commu-
nity information needs of archival processes when disaster strikes. This project is a
partnership with Solinet, Mississippi Library Commission, and the School of
Library and Information Science at The University of Southern Mississippi.
Hurricane Katrina and the Coastal Vietnamese Community . One of the most at-
risk communities following the storm are the coastal Vietnamese. This project,
working with humanitarian relief agencies along with local churches and temples,
strives to capture the stories of these members of the Gulf Coast community, many
of whom lost everything in the storm. Through gathering the personal narratives of
the Vietnamese, this project offers a unique opportunity not only to affirm the
strength of their community but also share with them as they rebuild.
Mississippi Nurses and Hurricane Katrina Project . This is an effort to interview
nurses who worked during the immediate pre- and post-Katrina period on the
Mississippi Gulf Coast and in the Hattiesburg area. Nurses, as frontline caregivers,
were the ones at the “point of care,” attempting to improvise and prioritize care as
they could. These stories are critical to capture, for, as time goes by, many of these
nurses who are already in a state of flux are becoming harder to identify and locate.
Hurricane Katrina Exhibit. A partnership with the Mississippi Sound Historical
Museum to develop a museum exhibit at their facility in Gulfport, MS. The exhibit
will feature oral narratives, photographs, and artifacts in one of the first efforts by a
cultural institution to place the storm in historical perspective. One documentary
project, entitled “People Power: Citizen Responses to Hurricane Katrina,” is a photo-
driven, electronic media project that tells the dramatic stories of how Louisianans
responded with bravery, improvisation, and humanity to save lives, evacuate sur-
vivors, and continue to care for those affected by the hurricane and subsequent
flooding. Each person interviewed will provide a case study of the recovery process,
access to resources and information, and the interviewee’s personal well-being. The
narrators will represent the diversity of people living in southern Louisiana pre-
Katrina. Their stories will shed light on the complexities of the social inequalities
ORAL HISTORY, FOLKLORE, AND KATRINA 231
pal-marable2-03-5.qxp  10/21/2007  1:58 PM  Page 231


--- PAGE 249 ---
and shared histories of this region. The project combines photography, recorded
interviews, and written stories to stimulate debate about the effectiveness of civil
society’s response to the disaster.
Dr. Lance Hill is the Executive Director of the Southern Institute for Education
and Research at T ulane University. Hill worked as a community activist and labor
organizer for twenty years before embarking on an academic career. From 1989 to
1992, he served as the Executive Director of the Louisiana Coalition Against Racism
and Nazism (LCARN), the grassroots organization that led the opposition to former
Klansman David Duke’s Senate and gubernatorial campaigns. Hill is a consultant
and appears in the New Orleans Documentary Project, produced by Organic Process
Productions. The film uses oral histories to interview “characters” like Lewis Taylor,
a retired farmer and fisherman, and to document the impact of uprooting commu-
nities, as well as the effect this will have on future land development and gentrifica-
tion plans for the area. The film examines controversial issues of governmental
power, such as the use of eminent domain and privatization.
Oral history can be used as a tool in collecting social history and folklore.
Folklorists must confront “tall tales” or urban myths. Can memories always be
trusted? How do we respond to stories so fantastic that they tax credulity, even when
they come from dispassionate sources? For example, T ulane historian Douglas
Brinkley witnessed Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) officials pro-
hibiting private citizens and people in unauthorized trucks from trying to aid oth-
ers. Rescuers pulled people from the water, he reported, but medical aid was absent;
instead, FEMA officials stood idly by. Brinkley’s new book, The Great Deluge:
Hurricane Katrina, New Orleans, and the Mississippi Gulf Coast , draws upon hun-
dreds of oral history interviews and arrives at the conclusion that it was not a natu-
ral disaster at all but a failure of government—“one that, through breached levees
and massive government incompetence, the country brought upon itself.”
A coalition of Louisiana- and Mississippi-based scholars, coordinated by Maida
Owens, director of the Louisiana Folklife Program, has developed two projects
designed to empower evacuees and help contribute to public policy decisions. One
program is entitled “In the Wake of the Hurricanes: A Coalition Effort to Collect Our
Stories and Rebuild Our Culture.”
2 Folklorist Susan Roach, an English professor and
folklorist at Louisiana T ech University in Ruston, began talking to other folklorists
around the state. Roach teamed up with Shana Walton, former associate director of
T ulane’s Deep South Humanities Center to design a project and sought a grant to
help pay interviewers and hire unemployed hurricane survivors to conduct interviews.
They model their program on the New Deal Writers’ Project, which paid unemployed
writers and artists to do interviews and life histories with ex-slaves and survivors of
the Dust Bowl. T ogether, they have recruited about 100 people, from Mississippi to
California. Sponsored by the American Folklife Center at the Library of Congress,
these projects involve seven universities and faculty throughout Louisiana.
Walton had conducted several interviews at a New Orleans–area shelter shortly
after the hurricane struck but realized that it was too soon after the event. Because
of the chaos and stress, it was not the best place to do formal interviews or field
work. She then began collecting oral histories for her project on Little Black Creek,
a FEMA Camp in rural Mississippi, one of dozens of temporary housing camps
ALAN H. STEIN AND GENE B. PREUSS232
pal-marable2-03-5.qxp  10/21/2007  1:58 PM  Page 232


--- PAGE 250 ---
established by FEMA to house people displaced from New Orleans and the Gulf
Coast after the hurricanes. The project is based on relief work and oral histories with
camp residents between November 2005 and January 2006, giving an overview of
demographics of the approximately 200 camp residents; how their individual trajec-
tories led them to be in a FEMA camp; their assessment of the local and federal gov-
ernment; the biggest challenges facing them; and the attitudes of most toward
returning to where they lived before the hurricane. Walton also documents the emer-
gence of community in the camp, and the long-term view from the residents’ per-
spective. Interviews show that camp residents are not only displaced from their
homes, but also isolated from reliable sources of information about the rebuilding or
from having any input in the process. This overview will be generally compared with
others whose research looks at residents who lost their homes but have returned to
the city and those who have chosen to relocate.
A similar effort is underway in T exas. As Houston’s post-hurricane population
swelled by 250,000, Carl Lindahl, a folklorist and English professor at the University
of Houston, started conducting several interviews with evacuees, eventually expand-
ing it into a project entitled “Surviving Katrina and Rita in Houston,” with his col-
league Patricia Jasper, a folklorist with over twenty years of experience. Their goal is
to create as many as 3,000 narratives by teaching volunteers how to interview evac-
uees, because, as he explained, “We’ve found that a person who has gone through
this is a much better interviewer than those who have not. I found the survivors to
be heroes rather than victims.” He added that the project will not stress the “trauma-
tizing effects” of the storms themselves, nor dwell on the “horror stories,” but instead
will focus on the “cultural richness” in Houston’s community, pointing to the influx
of Louisiana evacuees after the 1927 Mississippi River flood that created a section of
the city called “French T own.”
“Narrating Katrina Through Oral History” (a project sponsored by the Albert
Gore, Sr., Research Center at Middle T ennessee State University) is the title of a new
initiative under the direction of Lisa Pruitt. T eams of student interviewers from
Middle T ennessee State University, working under Pruitt’s direction, are conducting
oral history interviews with individuals who were forced to evacuate to middle
T ennessee from coastal Louisiana, Mississippi, and Alabama before, during, and after
Hurricane Katrina. The students are also interested in interviewing volunteer
responders from the Middle T ennessee region. Several thousand people relocated to
Middle T ennessee, either temporarily or permanently. Furthermore, hundreds of
people from Middle T ennessee have traveled to the Gulf Coast as volunteer respon-
ders. The overall goal of this project is to create a documentary record of the experi-
ences of as many of these people as possible through the medium of oral history.
Tapes and transcripts of the interviews will become a permanent part of the Middle
T ennessee Oral History Collection at the Gore Center. T eams of student interview-
ers will ask participants to describe their experiences evacuating; staying in shelters
or with family or friends; and re-establishing their lives in Middle T ennessee
(whether temporarily or permanently). It will also cover their perceptions of media
coverage of the events, their evaluation of various agencies and organizations that
responded to the disaster and with whom they had direct experience, and their hopes
for their own futures and the future of the affected region. Volunteer responders will
ORAL HISTORY, FOLKLORE, AND KATRINA 233
pal-marable2-03-5.qxp  10/21/2007  1:58 PM  Page 233


--- PAGE 251 ---
be asked to describe their motives for volunteering, the logistics of volunteering, the
details of their work, their perception of the scope and impact of the disaster, their per-
ception of media coverage, their perception of the performances of various agencies
and organizations involved in responding with whom they had direct contact, and
their feelings about the experience of volunteering in response to a major disaster.
The Historic New Orleans Collection (HNOC), a museum and research center
located on the dry ground of the French Quarter, found itself at the center of the del-
uge and established oral history projects with the first responders from the New
Orleans Police Department and the New Orleans Fire Department. The interviews
with NOPD and NOFD members, entitled “Through Hell and High Water,”
focuses on the period between August 29, when Katrina made landfall, and
September 15, when President Bush gave his address to the nation in front of the St.
Louis Cathedral. It was difficult to gain the trust and cooperation of the departments
due to the intense media scrutiny of the event. The breakdown of the social structure
of the city is a focus of the NOPD interviews, as are the tensions between personal
and professional responsibilities, as well as interaction with the citizens who remained
there. But memories of both departments’ past hurricane preparedness plans were
also discussed. How these plans were implemented during the hours before the storm
and how they unraveled during it and its aftermath are major themes of the project.
Within the NOFD interviews is the documentation of the rescue operations of about
twenty-five firemen, who, based on their own memories of Hurricane Betsy in 1965,
took it upon themselves to bring their own recreational boats to the NOFD prestorm
staging areas on the upper floors of downtown hotel parking garages and began boat
rescue operations immediately following the storm. It is estimated that in the days
following the storm that these twenty-five boats rescued between 12,000 and 15,000
people who were stranded on rooftops or trapped in attics. In addition to the inter-
views, HNOC has collected approximately 1,000 images taken during this two-week
period by members of both the NOFD and NOPD.
Phyllis E. Mann coordinated the volunteer criminal defense attorney efforts in
Louisiana to assist evacuated prisoners. She described her experiences in an article for
The Advocate, the Louisiana Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers newsletter.
“There has been so much bad this month in Louisiana,” she recalls, and then “there
has been so much good.” In her own “oral history,” she relates the stories she heard
from people in jail cells:
The first stories we heard were from men evacuated out of the many Orleans Parish
Prison buildings. They received their last meal on Sunday night—it was a cold sand-
wich. During the night, the power began to go on and off as the Hurricane began to
make landfall. Inside the jail, it was dark and the air soon became hot and stale.
Without electricity, the controls for the cell doors, dormitory doors, and main doors
were inoperable—everyone was trapped. Guards had been required to stay in Orleans
during the storm and had been encouraged to bring their families to the jails, so there
were children in those buildings also. And the guards were stretched to the breaking
point—worrying about their own safety, worrying about the safety of their families,
and not doing quite so much worrying about the safety of the people locked inside the
cells. . . .The people who were locked inside were so very much like you and I and espe-
cially like our children. There was one young man who had been arrested for reading
ALAN H. STEIN AND GENE B. PREUSS234
pal-marable2-03-5.qxp  10/21/2007  1:58 PM  Page 234


--- PAGE 252 ---
Tarot cards without a permit. . . .There were college age folks who had come to New
Orleans for a good time, but had the misfortune of getting a little too drunk just a day
or two before a hurricane. There were young women who were pregnant;. . .middle-
aged soccer moms who just had not gotten around to paying that speeding ticket; an
older grandmother who was visiting her grandchildren and overstayed her visa from
Jamaica; and then there were the poor of New Orleans who were arrested for sleeping
on the street. . .and the stories go on and on. What all of these people had in com-
mon. . .is that they were all trapped together, inside of a building with no lights, with
no air, and they had no food to eat or water to drink. . . .These are the stories that have
broken our hearts.”
HOW CAN WE LEARN FROM THE MISTAKES ?
The debate over oral histories has often focused on the issue of historical accuracy.
Like the dramatic accounts of the bombing of the New Orleans levees Mamma D
remembers in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina, other witnesses and officials have
denied deliberate acts of destruction and malevolence. Instead, they note, the levees
were bombed during the Great Mississippi Flood of 1927, and suggest that perhaps
the collective memory of these two events long separated chronologically were some-
how merged in the memory of the witness. Validation is a common phenomenon
oral historians face. While some reminiscences might not be factually accurate, they
are accurate in the psyche of the interviewee.
Captain Francis J. Arnona Jr. was a ship-docking captain for Crescent T owing
and Salvage in New Orleans. T wo months before Katrina, he had been through trop-
ical storm Cindy. He had a different impression about the collapse of the levees. He
confirmed this in an oral history interview he gave at the Gore Center:
Basically, New Orleans did well. Yeah, there was a lot of wind damage and all from the
storm. A lot of windows, the roof on the Superdome was blown off. But, as far as the
storm, that didn’t cause it. That problem came when the levees breached. . .after the
fact. Now, seems to me. . .they have levee boards down there and, you know, that’s run
by politicians again. Well, if those levees breached, there was a reason they breached.
And they’re supposed to be monitoring those levees and shoring them up constantly,
but they got a little sitting back on their haunches, “Oh, we’re all right. We’re all right.”
Well, guess what? It wasn’t all right....
All they are is dirt and they stick a little slab of concrete on them. That’s all they
are. I’m going to tell you—a lot of those levees, there were so many broke loose barges
and boats drifting around. They hit those levees, they cracked the cement, you know.
And they said, “Oh, St. Bernard [Parish] and all got flooded because the levee gave
away back there.” But, if they ever looked real close, there was a barge sitting on the
other side of the levee in somebody’s front yard.
3
One woman who left New Orleans and was interviewed in Austin tells a story where
her fear, exaggerated by exhaustion, played tricks with her imagination:
We wanted to stay. We thought maybe the water was going to go down. We didn’t
know it was that damaged. You know, all over the city because for days we couldn’t get
ORAL HISTORY, FOLKLORE, AND KATRINA 235
pal-marable2-03-5.qxp  10/21/2007  1:58 PM  Page 235


--- PAGE 253 ---
out, you know, go nowhere, ’cause of the flood. So they took us, we got on the bus,
took us to a bus, took us to the Louis Armstrong airport, and flew us here to Austin.
Mm-hm.
’Cause I seen so much, so much happening, hearing so much happening; I was dev-
astated. I was walking in the water, trying to find a way, you know, to get out? And I
could ‘a sworn I felt a body, or, something; somebody’s body wrapped around my leg!
But I know it couldn’t ‘a been true! [laughing]
Careful analysis has provided several explanations for the problems in relying upon
multiple versions of oral testimony. Psychologists term the tendency for hostages to
identify with their captors “Stockholm Syndrome,” and interviews with former pris-
oners of war, kidnapping victims, and torture survivors reveal that some victims do
not assess any personal blame upon the perpetrators. Historian Alessandro Portelli
explains that for some people, certain “climatic moments” overwhelm their ability to
place these events into perspective; instead, they are “wholly absorbed by the total-
ity of the historical event of which they were a part.” For them, these events become
epic stories in their memories.
Another method historians have used to overcome the conflict between narrative
and documentary evidence is to compare oral traditions with the commonly
accepted scholarly version of history. James G. Blight, a cognitive psychologist who
is professor of international relations at the Watson Institute at Brown University,
has pioneered what he terms “Critical Oral History.” Critical oral history seeks to
reevaluate historical events by bringing together academic scholars, leading actors
and policy makers, in the event, and historical documents, in an attempt to arrive at
a fuller understanding of how the historical event in question developed. By com-
bining documents, scholars, and participants, Blight explains, the goal is to “learn to
collaborate in an effort to get a more comprehensive picture of the historical reality
during whatever events we are studying.”
In the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina, many have criticized the treatment
African American Louisianans received. Among the dozen or so hurricane
research projects listed on the Louisiana Folklife Web site is one offering a social
and environmental interpretation of events, entitled “Katrina Narratives of
African Americans in an Unprecedented Diaspora: A Social and Environmental
Oral History Project,” coordinated by Dr. Dianne Glave from T ulane University’s
Bioenvironmental Research Department (which relocated to Atlanta following
Katrina). Glave’s proposal re-enforces the need for oral historians to expand on
the news media’s impressionistic reporting. She believes oral history interviewers
share responsibilities with news media:
In the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina, the fragmented and harrowing pieces of many
narratives of African Americans who were trapped in the Superdome, Convention
Center, and their flooded homes have emerged on television and the internet. Some
evacuated immediately while others were forced to wait many days to be rescued; most
migrated to points across the United States; and many are now attempting to return to
the Gulf region. As a result, the news media has opened an insightful dialogue across
the United States and throughout the world concerning race, racism, and class. Scholars
now have an opportunity to add to this exchange of ideas—not merely replicating the
ALAN H. STEIN AND GENE B. PREUSS236
pal-marable2-03-5.qxp  10/21/2007  1:58 PM  Page 236


--- PAGE 254 ---
news—as a catalyst for analyzing the historical context for this natural disaster by look-
ing at African influences, the Middle Passage, enslavement, freedom, migration, the
Civil Rights movement and more. Out of this tragedy, I propose an oral history proj-
ect that would give the Katrina narratives by African Americans scope, adding to what
is in the news [by] emphasizing the social and environmental implications.
4
Ninety-year-old folklorist Stetson Kennedy infiltrated the Ku Klux Klan during the
1940s and exposed it in a series of documentary books like Southern Exposure (still
doing business as an investigative magazine). As the director of the Florida Writers’
Project Folklore unit in the 1930s, Kennedy worked with Zora Neal Hurston to
gather Negro folklore, interview ex-slaves, and expose slave-labor conditions through-
out the South. Kennedy wasted no time in making his voice heard in support of the
African Americans who were trapped inside the Superdome. Watching the catastrophe
unfold on CNN angered Kennedy, who would later write, “It is up to every American
to assess, according to his or her conscience, our individual and national shame for
what happened before and after Katrina.” He wondered what the men, women, chil-
dren, infants, aged, and infirm victims of Katrina did to deserve such “bestial” treat-
ment in the Superdome and elsewhere. “Absolutely nothing,” he concluded:
Much like the victims of the Holocaust, theirs was the misfortune of being the wrong
kind of people. They were poor and, for the most part, dark-skinned. When Katrina
took aim at New Orleans, they were included out of preparations for evacuation. And
when push came to shove, and everybody else had gotten out, they were left stranded
and abandoned in the tsunami of debris and excrement. And all that the great city,
state, and nation offered them was to go to the Superdome.
With the backdrop of a devastated city, it was all too obvious that whoever took
them in would be stuck with them for a very long time—perhaps even forever.
Evacuating Japanese-Americans from our Pacific Coast during WW II was quite dif-
ferent. We wanted them out of there, ostensibly for reasons of security, and none of us
objected, because Uncle Sam would be feeding them behind barbed wire out in the
desert for the duration, and meanwhile, some of us could take over their homes and
businesses. No such incentives in New Orleans.
Was racism/bigotry an added factor on top of the economic tab? This observer was
reminded of the time, a half century earlier, when a shipload of one thousand Jewish
refugees from Nazi Germany sailed up and down the coast of America, hoping in vain
for us to take them in. No nation in the world would open its doors, so most of them
ended up in the ovens. It was shame on us then and shame on us now.
Narratives and public statements reflect deep-seated resentment against years of
poverty and discrimination. There is even fear that as communities rebuild, the dis-
crimination will persist. Sibal Holt is the first African American and first woman to
head the Louisiana AFL-CIO. She expressed her concerns to an interviewer about the
social transformation and gentrification of poor communities devastated by the storm:
A socially engineered community is what’s being done here! They want to engineer
what the community should look like. That is wrong! I don’t care what anybody else
says, that is wrong and that is not paranoia speaking. From the Governor on down
they’re talking about who should be allowed to come back. They gave certain people
ORAL HISTORY, FOLKLORE, AND KATRINA 237
pal-marable2-03-5.qxp  10/21/2007  1:58 PM  Page 237


--- PAGE 255 ---
one way tickets out of this state, OK? Well some of this money may be able to be used
to give them a ticket back into this state. This is their home. But let’s be real, what peo-
ple are booking on is that if these people aren’t able to come home within a year, [then]
they’re going to get settled somewhere else. But what areas of New Orleans and
Louisiana are we talking about? The French Quarter, Uptown, and the Garden
District—we’re talking about the casino areas—what does that sound like to you? Did
you hear any names of any predominately African-American poor communities that
they’re talking about? Now I’m not going to say that they’re never going to get to
them—but it won’t be tomorrow, trust me.
CONCLUSIONS
What will the “new” New Orleans look like? Who rebuilds, and who does not? The
answers to questions such as these will pique the attention of social commentators,
politicians, community activists, and historians long into the future. Sibal Holt
reflects the concerns shared by many displaced workers from the Gulf Coast.
Her concerns remind us of the importance of perspective: How we deal with one
disaster will teach us lessons that will help us prepare for the future.
And all these issues have been brought up, but we need to keep them in the face of
America because people easily forget, we forget so easily, but what has been happening
down here in New Orleans and Louisiana is nothing new—people chose not to see it
before. Katrina has brought out some of the ugliest things in this state, and that’s the
embarrassment—that the outside world has seen it. Katrina has brought out how our
government treats the poorest of its poor—and that’s an embarrassment. Katrina has
brought it out, you know. I hope that all of America, that their hearts are touched, their
conscience is raised and we need to do right by all our citizens because it’s Louisiana
today but there could very well be an earthquake in California tomorrow, or it could
be a tornado in Oklahoma, you know. It could be anything, mudslides or snowstorms,
where they would feel the same type of tragedy, not necessarily a hurricane but the dev-
astation of that tragedy. Would you want the people of your state to be treated the way
they treated the people in New Orleans?
Using oral history will help prepare not only for future Katrinas, but future race and
class struggles. The past connects us to the present, and to the future; it is part of
that human need for immortality of some sort. How investigators, lawmakers, and
the public wade through the mountains of oral witnesses to evaluate what went
wrong during and after Katrina will inform their decisions as they make plans for
future responses.
How Americans weave this tragedy into their collective history and the lessons we
take from the disaster will preoccupy the minds of pundits, historians, and both
political and community leaders for generations. However, the impact of Hurricane
Katrina is not limited to Louisiana, Mississippi, and the Gulf Coast. “Katrinaland”
has become a national and international phenomenon that has struck both the
nation and the world.
ALAN H. STEIN AND GENE B. PREUSS238
pal-marable2-03-5.qxp  10/21/2007  1:58 PM  Page 238


--- PAGE 256 ---
REFERENCE LIST
Alive in T ruth. 2005a. Lynette T , interview, September 20, 2005. The New Orleans Disaster
Oral History & Memory Project. http://www.aliveintruth.org/stories/lynette_t.htm.
Alive in T ruth. 2005b. Clarice B., interview, October 12, 2005. The New Orleans Disaster
Oral History & Memory Project. http://www.aliveintruth.org/stories/clarice_b.htm.
American Folklife Center, Folklife Program. 2006. List of hurricane research projects. http://
www.louisianafolklife.org/hurricane_projects.html.
Brinkley, Douglas. 2006. New Orleans: Diary of a disaster. Vanity Fair. June.
Chronicle of Higher Education. 2002. “Critical oral history” as a scholarly tool. http://chronicle
.com/colloquylive/2002/10/blight/.
Clark, Mary Marshall. 2003. The September 11, 2001, Oral History Narrative and Memory
Project. In History and September 11 , ed. Joanne Meyerowitz, 125. Philadelphia: T emple
University Press.
Clark, Mary Marshall. 2005. E-mail message to H-Oralhist. http://h-net.msu.edu/cgi-
bin/logbrowse.pl?trx=vx&list=h-oralhist&month=0509&week=c&msg=fipOoibMC7xz
4lboKrUTSg&user=&pw=.
Dallas Morning News. 2005. Hurricanes’ havoc overwhelming choice as top ’05 news story,
December 22.
Gardner, James B., and Sarah M. Henry. 2002. September 11 and the mourning after:
Reflections on collecting and interpreting the history of tragedy. Public Historian 24
(Summer): 41.
Hodges, Leah. 2005. T estimony before the Select Bipartisan Committee to Investigate the
Preparation for and Response to Hurricane Katrina, December 6, 2005. http://katrina
.house.gov/hearings/12_06_05/hodges_120605.rtf.
Johnson, Peter. 2005. Media mix: Katrina could forever change how TV news covers storms.
USA T oday, September 25, Life section.
Kennedy, Stetson. 2005. Shame on us! Unpublished manuscript.
K’Meyer, T racy E. 2005. E-mail message to H-Oralhist. http://h-net.msu.edu/cgi-bin/log-
browse.pl?trx=vx&list=H-Oralhist&month=0509&week=b&msg=bgZiWbA%2bLB
xeRfPRAfGLZw&user=&pw=.
Louisiana Division of the Arts. 2006. In the wake of the hurricanes: A coalition effort to col-
lect our stories and rebuild our culture. Folklife in Louisiana. http://www.louisianafolk
life.org/katrina.html.
Mann, Phyllis E. 2005a. E-mail message to Chester Hartman, November 29.
Mann, Phyllis E. 2005b. “Hurricane Relief Aid,” The Advocate: Louisiana Association of
Criminal Defense Lawyers 2, no. 4 (Fall): 3, 50–51.
Mead, Jerry. 2005. Labor Express Radio , “Hurricane Katrina Reveals the T rue Race & Class
Divide in U.S. Society: An Interview with Sibal Holt, President of the Louisiana AFL-
CIO.” 21 December, 2005. http://www.laborexpress.org/page7.html (accessed ).
Myers, Lisa. 2005. Were the levees bombed in New Orleans? MSNBC. http://www.msnbc
.msn.com/id/10370145.
Oral History Association. 2006. Emerging Crises Oral History Research Fund. http://www
.dickinson.edu/organizations/oha/org_aw_ecoh.html.
Portelli, Allesandro. 1991. The death of Luigi Trastulli and other stories: Form and meaning in
oral history. Albany: State University of New York Press.
ORAL HISTORY, FOLKLORE, AND KATRINA 239
pal-marable2-03-5.qxp  10/21/2007  1:58 PM  Page 239


--- PAGE 257 ---
Preuss, Gene B. 2005. E-mail message to H-Oralhist. http://h-net.msu.edu/cgi-bin/log-
browse.pl?trx=vx&list=H-Oralhist&month=0509&week=b&msg=A%2bY3nNi
WmbdMejZ5qoPGTQ&user=&pw=.
Scudder, John R. Jr., and Barbara Gulick. 1972. History’s purpose: Becker or Ortega? In
History T eacher5, no. 4 (May): 41–45.
Shilds, Gerard. 2005. Project to record storm stories. The Baton Rouge Advocate, November 6.
Thomas, Holly Werner. 2005. E-mail message to H-Oralhist http://h-net.msu.edu/cgi-bin/
logbrowse.pl?trx=vx&list=H-Oralhist&month=0509&week=b&msg=kevhqGOTlW8fC
dHxg0DZkg&user=&pw=.
T uchman, Barbara. 1996. Distinguishing the significant from the insignificant. In Oral his-
tory: An interdisciplinary anthology , ed. David K. Dunaway and Willa K. Baum, 2nd ed.
Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira.
Young, Abe Louise. 2005. Alive in truth. http://www.aliveintruth.org/a_pages/our_process
.htm.
NOTES
1. Author John R. Tisdale wrote in The Oral History Review that “the journalist and the
oral historian, however, are concerned with leaving information in a physical format
to be studied later. Both are concerned with recording information, both are con-
cerned with accuracy, and both rely on the interview as the primary source of informa-
tion and credibility.” John R. Tisdale, “Observational Reporting as Oral History: How
Journalists Interpreted the Death and Destruction of Hurricane Audrey,” The Oral
History Review 27, no. 2 (Summer–Fall 2000): 41.
2. According to Maida Owens in an e-mail to co-author Stein, her organization had the
first of four anticipated budget cuts in 2005–06. State government will greatly be
affected by the hurricanes, and learned society meetings will not likely be supported at
all. Even travel expenses to the American Folklore Society will not supported, forcing
staff to take vacation days to attend. No changes are anticipated in the 2006 budget.
3. For more information, please contact Gore Center Director Lisa Pruitt (lpruitt@
mtsu.edu) or Project Coordinator Sarah Elizabeth Hickman (seh2r@mtsu.edu).
4. In the wake of Hurricane Katrina, cable news networks experienced huge spikes in ratings.
See “Eyes On the Storm,” Broadcasting & Cable135, no. 36 (September 5, 2005): 6.
ALAN H. STEIN AND GENE B. PREUSS240
pal-marable2-03-5.qxp  10/21/2007  1:58 PM  Page 240


--- PAGE 258 ---
Part IV
REIMAGINING THE PAST
AND RECONSTRUCTING
THE FUTURE
pal-marable2-04-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:58 PM  Page 241


--- PAGE 259 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 260 ---
Chapter 16
WHAT HAPPENS WHEN
THE FOOTPRINTS SHRINK:
NEW ORLEANS AND THE
END OF EMINENCE
JULIANNE MALVEAUX
When people talk about New Orleans these days, they talk about the footprint
shrinking. What they seem to mean is that the city needs to be content to be smaller
and more compact, more “safely” built and on higher ground. This concept is openly
discussed, with no hesitation or embarrassment, as if a city that was once half a mil-
lion people strong should now be half that size and as if it were OK that those who
can’t afford to come back don’t.
If someone posited, openly, that the coming Chinese economic revolution would
eclipse the United States, you would have an organized response and resistance
aimed at dealing with the reality that China’s economy is thriving, that a quarter of
the world’s consumers are Chinese, and that as China develops there are competitive
issues that the United States must confront. There is no casual talk of a shrinking
footprint when we look forward to shifting global realities. Instead, the United States
behaves as if we will maintain our preeminence and role.
Considering the double standards and hypocrisies that define the United States
of America, this chapter examines the concept of the shrinking footprint in New
Orleans, as well as our nation’s inevitable shrinking footprint in the world. In par-
ticular, this chapter considers whether our nation will be willing to allow New
Orleans to shrink and fade away. Or will we attempt to fiercely defend our global
position by invading countries we cannot possibly defeat, making global pronounce-
ments we cannot possibly defend, and breaking international agreements because we
don’t play well with others? All the while learning the hard way that we must play
on a field that we no longer dominate. It seems to me that much of our eroding
global position hinges on the inadequate manner in which we have dealt with race
matters—with those who lie on the margins.
pal-marable2-04-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:58 PM  Page 243


--- PAGE 261 ---
My thesis here is that the United States responded so poorly in New Orleans that
we have raised questions about our principles, efficiency, and integrity. In addition,
our behavior raises questions about our fitness as a world leader. Questions of our
fitness have been raised, naturally, because of the war in Iraq and the erosion of our
international esteem. These issues are exacerbated by our response to our own citi-
zens in the wake of a devastating hurricane and the preventable breach of levees.
T o explore this thesis, this essay is divided into two parts. First, I explore the after-
math of Hurricane Katrina; then I look at the U.S. position in the world and ways
that our kaleidoscope shifts because of the flaws illustrated from our response to the
hurricane. I conclude that Hurricane Katrina and the levee breach is, perhaps, a
metaphor for our nation’s challenges around race, growth, engagement, and integrity.
K
ATRINA AND ITS AFTERMATH
When I link footprints in New Orleans to footprints in the rest of the world, my
thesis largely hinges on race matters. Race matters in the United States shape our
economic future. Ignoring race matters essentially erodes our eminence and shrinks
our footprint in the world because our demographics are changing. If we don’t deal
with race, we can’t deal with the future of America. But race matters are rarely dis-
cussed when we consider our nation’s future. What do we see when we look in the
mirror and when we look down the road? What do we see when we look at our coun-
try, and what do we see when we look at the future? What kind of decisions are we
making now that will impact us in the future?
We could answer those questions by simply looking at the aftermath of the
tragedy of August 29, 2005. The aftermath of the natural disaster of Hurricane
Katrina, and the subsequent manmade disaster of the broken levees, gave living
expression to numbing statistics about the quality of life for African American peo-
ple, particularly in New Orleans. According to the African American Leadership
Project,
1 a group of African American leaders who were personally affected by the
hurricane and serve as watchdogs and advocates, between 35 and 40 percent of
African American people in New Orleans lived in poverty. Between 40 and 50 per-
cent of them were underemployed. Of African American households, 62 percent had
annual incomes of less than $25,000 a year. Thirty-one thousand children were
undereducated. Only 14 percent of New Orleans businesses were owned by African
Americans, although the African American population exceeded 65 percent.
New Orleans had abject poverty pre-Katrina. Then the hurricanes hit and the lev-
ees broke, and the city ended up with 80 percent of its housing under water. People
living on high ground were much less affected than the mostly black folks in the city’s
“Lower Ninth,” but in many ways the flood waters did not know race or class.
However, relief and recovery efforts revealed striking disparities that followed race and
class lines. Still, many people, especially some in the African American Leadership
Project, thought that the aftermath of the tragedy might be a practical and histori-
cal opportunity to promote racial justice, equity, and healing.
Prior to Katrina, New Orleans was a city where injustice was rife. It was a tourist
economy where the success of the gaming industry was tied to business owners’
JULIANNE MALVEAUX244
pal-marable2-04-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:58 PM  Page 244


--- PAGE 262 ---
ability to pay people minimum wage or only a dollar or two above it. When Harrah’s
and the other casinos came to New Orleans, there was a notable increase in every
social indicator that you expect from gambling, including heightened levels of spousal
abuse and alcoholism, as well as an understandable increase in crime. How do you
take a glittering Harrah’s and place it six blocks from a housing project where jobless-
ness is rife and expect everything to be OK? The juxtaposition of glitter and grit is a
slap in the face to economic justice. It’s an in-your-face manifestation of inequality.
Does the post-Katrina rebuilding process offer New Orleanians an opportunity
to humanize the city? Have people embraced the international concept of a right to
return for displaced people? What should happen to the displaced population?
Could New Orleans become a model of a sustainable and just city in a global era?
After working for about six months, the African American Leadership Project issued
a statement in which they asked that some of the federal dollars be used to improve
human development and capacity and issues like literacy, to rebuild the physical
infrastructure, and to rebuild institutional services and systems. Even as their ambi-
tious and hopeful vision was being put forth, several members of the Rebuild New
Orleans Committee were speaking openly about a shrunken footprint.
Some civil leaders appeared content with the mass displacement of New
Orleanians and openly delighted at the notion that the city would be different. An
industrialist and “business turnaround specialist” quoted in the September 8, 2005,
issue of the Wall Street Journal, James J. Reiss, commented that post-Katrina New
Orleans would be different “demographically, geographically, and politically.”
2
Although he did not explicitly discuss racial difference, his comments and subse-
quent actions and behaviors certainly implied as much. Reiss led the New Orleans
Regional T ransit Authority, which he resigned from following the rejection of pro-
posals to reduce the city’s already limited bus service and lay off half of the system’s
700 employees. In June 2006, Reiss advocated for eliminating the public transporta-
tion system on the grounds that the city could not afford it. What did we learn in
the wake of the levee breaking? Of African Americans in New Orleans, 35 percent
had no cars, compared to 15 percent of whites. In part, this explains why many did
not leave. In this context, Reiss’ efforts to quash public transportation in the name
of affordability suggests that only those who can afford automobiles need return to
New Orleans, effectively excluding over a third of the city’s African American pop-
ulation. What would the international community think of our position in the
global economy if they knew of our inability to maintain domestic needs and prior-
ities such as public transportation? What happens when the footprint shrinks?
Reiss was not alone in his myopic, Machiavellian ignorance. House Speaker
Dennis Hastert said that New Orleans should simply be “bulldozed.” Republican
Congressman Richard Baker of Baton Rouge, Louisiana, responded to the devasta-
tion from Katrina by saying, “We finally cleaned up public housing in New Orleans.
We couldn’t do it, but God did.” How would we respond if an international neigh-
bor made comparable statements in the wake of a disaster that impacted not a mostly
black community such as New Orleans but a mostly white one such as Maine? We
would decry the comment, condemn it, and insist that others do the same. What is
happening in New Orleans? While the African American Leadership Project would
push the city toward striving for social and economic justice, other forces would
WHAT HAPPENS WHEN THE FOOTPRINTS SHRINK 245
pal-marable2-04-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:58 PM  Page 245


--- PAGE 263 ---
align to work for a whiter version of the status quo. Politics, chicanery, and racism
are pulling the city in a direction to shrink the footprint. Those forces, and the peo-
ple that support them, are making conscious decisions to remove and exclude
African American people permanently from New Orleans. I would also suggest that
what is happening in New Orleans is happening in cities across the country, but in
a more languid, less crisis-driven way.
The first thing we would have to look at in the wake of Katrina is what happened
in those five days when people were abandoned. Spike Lee’s painful and moving
HBO film, When the Levees Broke: A Requiem in Four Acts, describes it best, but the
written record is equally powerful. What we know is that there was an attempt to
sear racial stereotypes into the American consciousness. If you were black, you were
looting, but if you were white, a loaf of bread merely came upon you through neces-
sity. Miraculously, bread just came to you as if you had a bread magnet. Many of the
people who were so-called looters were taking food, shoes, and other things back to
their abandoned neighborhoods so that children, the elderly, and others could have
those things needed to survive. That story was not told in the media, but people
spread it word of mouth.
The other story that was not told concerned the mental health crisis that emerges
when people lose everything and thus desperately seek to get their hands on some-
thing. Why do people with water up to their waists go get flat screen TVs? One
would rightly presume that they were not intending to plug them in and risk elec-
trocution. In the post-storm context, taking a flat screen television is an irrational
decision that people in trauma make because they want to have something. In other
words, one could literally view the city as being in the middle of a nervous break-
down. We did not see mental health professionals responding to the crisis or hear the
issue of mental health being spoken of generally in the aftermath of the storm.
Indeed, this is attributable, in part, to the fact that the health care industry was also
impacted and many of these professionals left the city, too. Instead, pundocrats
opined that African Americans were just crazed, stealing savages. More than a year
later, a New Orleans Times-Picayune reporter has written about his depression mov-
ingly, and the New Orleans City Council released information that the city’s suicide
rate, at 26 per 100,000 residents has nearly tripled in a year. The city has lost many
of its mental health workers, and depression is compounded significantly by post-
traumatic stress. While candid conversations about mental health have begun to
occur, few have been willing to reassess the harsh indictment of African American
New Orleanians and consider that some of the behavior witnessed in the storm’s
aftermath may have been a function of mental health breakdowns. However, people
were committed to the stereotypes and the lies. The media had seared this notion of
black people as criminals into our collective consciousness. We didn’t want to con-
sider other explanations. Those were “the days of looters and lies” because they were
all lies. The stories we heard about children being raped turned out to be untrue. Yes,
there were a couple of rapes, but the evidence showed that the number of rapes that
occurred were no greater than what usually occurred in New Orleans or, frankly, in
any other American city.
Of course, even one rape is one too many, but the lies about rapists roaming “out
of control” contributed to the stereotypes that led the governor to focus the efforts
JULIANNE MALVEAUX246
pal-marable2-04-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:58 PM  Page 246


--- PAGE 264 ---
of the National Guard on protecting property instead of saving people. Indeed, there
were no murders committed inside the Superdome. In my opinion, the United
States of America committed murders by deciding not to go and rescue Americans
who subsisted without food and water for five days. There were diabetic people with-
out access to medicine; there were people who were immobile and were abandoned.
The Red Cross collected money for hurricane relief but did not enter New Orleans
because of “safety” issues. Newspapers reported that Mr. Bush took a helicopter over
New Orleans to assess the damage while Condoleezza Rice shopped for designer
shoes in New York City. Who really committed crimes after the levees broke?
Thousands of children were separated from their parents with many not reunited
until months after their separation. The callous manner in which families were sep-
arated is reminiscent of the separations that took place during slavery.
Another important aspect of the Katrina disaster concerned the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and its then-director Michael Brown.
While people were dying, newspapers reported an aide telling Mr. Brown to “Roll
up your sleeves so it looks like you’re working hard.” Another paper quoted Brown
in New Orleans asking, “Where can I get something to eat that’s not fried?” While
people were dying, Brown cared more about his appearance and appetite than the
loss of life. After that, we saw the uneven, arbitrary way in which FEMA assistance
was administered and distributed. While some got ATM cards worth $2,500, others
received checks for $800 although they didn’t have banks. Different people got dif-
ferent forms of assistance without rationale. Although some have focused on alleged
fraud that existed, few have focused on the fraud was perpetrated by FEMA. It
would be expected that those who had nothing would willingly accept a $2,500
debit card from FEMA.
Essentially, FEMA gave people money to leave. They eventually helped get peo-
ple out of the city but is not working effectively to bring them back. Despite the
impact of that displacement, there was abject insensitivity on the part of some. For
example, Barbara Bush, the former first lady of the United States, visited Katrina
evacuees at the Houston Astrodome and commented, “These people are doing very
well for themselves.” Her comments help make it possible to comprehend the abhor-
rent inattention to poverty that emanates from the current Bush administration.
Barbara Bush’s repulsive condescension was only dwarfed by her son’s failure to
respond to the Americans who were disadvantaged by the broken levees.
During my time at the Superdome on September 11, 2005, with Minister Louis
Farrakhan and a delegation who came to address the needs of evacuees, I saw chil-
dren curled up into fetal positions and old people sitting in their wheelchairs with
vacant stares. The floor was concrete. We saw many people in need of a hot meal or
immediate medical attention. The political structure is one that exploited the lack of
organization in New Orleans and the over-organization in Mississippi. Ray Nagin
and Kathleen Blanco and George W . Bush do not get along. Louisiana is a
Democratic state, marginally. New Orleans is most emphatically a Democratic city,
despite the fact that Ray Nagin is a neophyte reform Republican elected in the
Democratic city. The fissures in intergovernmental cooperation were more than
apparent. Mr. Bush held money for political advantage even as he promised
Mississippi Senator T rent Lott (R) a new house. Although Lott is able to and will
WHAT HAPPENS WHEN THE FOOTPRINTS SHRINK 247
pal-marable2-04-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:58 PM  Page 247


--- PAGE 265 ---
rebuild his house, how many others will? Examinations of federal appropriations
in the wake of Katrina revealed that Mississippi got $5.2 billion compared to $6.2
billion for Louisiana. Mississippi households will get 4 times as much for rebuild-
ing as Louisiana households. Indeed, Mississippi Republicans T rent Lott and T odd
Cochran were able to take full advantage of the political system. However, infight-
ing between Kathleen Blanco and Ray Nagin produced little results for Louisiana.
Blanco and Nagin could have benefited from the assistance of the former mayor and
Urban League president, the politically savvy Marc Morial, but did not seek it.
Morial has strongly rejected the notion of the shrinking footprint, but Nagin has
ignored him.
From a political perspective, what has also been developed is a set of quasi-legal
bodies that both overlap and seep away authority from elected officials. There is
the Rebuild New Orleans Commission, the Rebuild Louisiana Commission, and
other entities that claim responsibility for determining the reconstruction vision
for the city. As of this writing, in October 2006, there are several rebuilding and
recovery plans, and the governor’s housing rebuilding initiative, the Road Home
Homeowner Assistance Program, among others. That many of these programs are
administered on the state level and not city level has caused tension among some
politicians. However, while politicians jockey for positions of leadership and
power, people are suffering.
Hurricane Katrina and the broken levees destroyed much of the New Orleans
public education system. According to an Urban Institute report, fewer than 20 of
about 115 public school buildings remained usable in the storm’s aftermath. By
November, the state had taken over the New Orleans public education system. “We
see an opportunity to do something incredible,” Governor Blanco said when she
signed the authorizing legislation. What benefits resulted from the take-over remain
questions in light of the fact that 7500 teachers and employees who worked in the
public school system and more than 400 other school employees including truck
drives, custodians, and cafeteria workers were fired. Many learned that they were ter-
minated not through formal notice but rather through reports on the local evening
news. The takeover, and the subsequent firings proved to be a blow to the African
American middle class in New Orleans, as the majority of the New Orleans Public
School workers were African American.
The New Orleans Public Schools (NOPS) system currently receives funding for
just 9,300 students in the four district schools and twelve charter schools that the
school board operates. The NOPS has inherited all of the previous bond debt and
operating deficits from the system but exercises little control over the schools them-
selves. Much of the revenue, controlled by the state, is being diverted to charter
schools. In some cases, charter schools have been allowed to take over buildings that
once belonged to public schools. Many of the charter schools have admissions
requirements that are exceedingly high for many prior public school students. The
takeover of NOPS exacerbated Katrina’s devastation of the educational system, at
least for some students. For example, the children of T ulane faculty have access to a
charter school that was once a fairly strong but open public school. The students who
used to go to this public school prior to Katrina now have to compete for a limited
number of slots. While some are excited about T ulane’s institutional involvement in
JULIANNE MALVEAUX248
pal-marable2-04-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:58 PM  Page 248


--- PAGE 266 ---
public education, there is something of a class bias that results from the transfer of a
public school into private hands, with many former students unable to experience
the benefits of the new arrangement.
Mayor Nagin says he wants people to come back to New Orleans. For working-
class people who want to return and live in the city, jobs are an absolute prerequi-
site. T oday, many African Americans have expressed anger at the Latino immigrants,
especially Mexican and Nicaraguan, who have come to New Orleans in search of
jobs. While much of the immigrant population lives in single-male housing, African
American men who have families can only return to the city and secure low-wage
jobs if they are willing to live in dormitory-style housing.
The same companies that made billions in Iraq have also profited tremendously
in New Orleans by exploiting low-wage and undocumented labor. The way to pre-
vent that kind of exploitation is to make sure that undocumented workers belong to
unions that will fight for secure job conditions and a living wage. The politics of
immigration are part of the conversation that must take place regarding the recon-
struction of New Orleans, particularly as some have attempted to pit black against
brown. Fairness would dictate that we support a living wage for all workers, docu-
mented or undocumented, and institute preferences for those who are native New
Orleanians.
A law passed by the New Orleans City Council in May 2006 said if you did not
gut your house by August 28, 2006, the city could use its eminent domain powers
to claim the house. On average, gutting of a home costs at least $5,000, with higher
rates charges based on the severity of the damage to the home. However, analysis of
the labor market reveals that there were not enough contractors present in the region
to carry out the necessary gutting. The Association of Community Organizations for
Reform Now (ACORN), a national grassroots organization that focuses on eco-
nomic justice issues, mobilized volunteers to gut more than 1500 homes at no cost
by the one-year anniversary of the storm. The organization has also been on the cut-
ting edge in organizing for displaced people in New Orleans. Despite their work,
though, the die is cast against poor people, especially poor black in New Orleans.
The Congressional Black Caucus offered a piece of omnibus legislation, H.R.
4197, in late 2005. Congress has not yet acted on it and apparently refuses to. One
of the bill’s ten provisions mounts a powerful challenge. That provision requires the
President to chart how we might eliminate poverty in the United States. The bill also
seeks to address a number of challenges concerning rebuilding, homeownership, and
education. However, requiring executive-branch solutions that would eliminate
poverty gets to the heart of the matter. After all, the national conversation about
poverty was fairly dormant until the levees broke.
Loyola Law School Professor Bill Quigley, an economic justice advocate and
activist, considers the problems in New Orleans comparable to the problems hap-
pening elsewhere in the country. The poor are being pushed out. Quigley believes
that officials might as well place a sign up at the border that says, “poor people don’t
come back.”
Although there is a housing shortage in New Orleans, there is also unoccupied,
available housing. Perfectly livable public housing projects are boarded up and have
steel plates screwed into the windows. These places were not destroyed in the storm,
WHAT HAPPENS WHEN THE FOOTPRINTS SHRINK 249
pal-marable2-04-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:58 PM  Page 249


--- PAGE 267 ---
and displaced persons could come back to them. Interestingly, some of these places
are just a few blocks from the French Quarter. However, the Department of Housing
and Urban Development (HUD) does not want public housing anymore; there is a
national movement towards mixed-use housing. While luxury condos are receiving
subsidies, people who could return to New Orleans and live in sturdy, empty low-
income public housing are being kept away. Currently, residents of the Lafitte public
housing project are planning to sue HUD to prevent the demolition of their homes.
With the changing face of cities, one of the things we see is a political shift.
Already in New Orleans a white attorney, Stacy Head, replaced an African American
female city councilor, Renee Gill Pratt. Pratt’s politics are distinctly to the left of
Head’s, but many of her constituents remain displaced and were thus unable to get
back to vote. The urban demographic and political shift is happening in many
cities—Washington DC; New York; Boston; and Oakland, among many others. The
changing face of cities means the changing face of urban politics. In the long run, it
means the diminution of African American political power.
W
HAT DOES THE FATE OF NEW ORLEANS SAY TO THE WORLD?
What did the United States reveal about itself in the treatment of New Orleans?
How does this further erode our moral authority? What will happen when others
treat us the way we’ve been trying to treat New Orleans? What happens when our
footprint shrinks?
Fifteen months after Hurricane Katrina hit New Orleans, the city is still unset-
tled. Billions of federal dollars have been directed to the area, but the people who
need money most for resettlement haven’t received it. Instead, the same profiteers
who have exploited the Iraq situation have gained in New Orleans. By late October
2006, the debate about the shrinking footprint and neighborhood development con-
tinues. The world’s eyes have been on the United States as we have dealt with our
citizens, and in the world’s eyes we are lacking. Our nation’s treatment of New
Orleans belies the notion of our greatness and of our eminence.
Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez’s September 2006 speech at the United
Nations was provocative and on point. Indeed, there is only one letter between “evil”
and “devil.” In his 2004 State of the Union Address, Mr. Bush described Libya,
Syria, and Iran as axis of evil. People get upset about name-calling, but Mr. Chavez
is not the only one who engages in the act of political rhetoric. When Pat Robertson
calls for his assassination, no one in his church says anything about supporting mur-
der. Hugo Chavez’s remarks regarding America’s hypocrisy and reduced eminence
shed light on our government’s poor response to the Katrina crisis.
In The Paradox of Loyalty: An African American Response to the War on T errorism,
University of Maryland political scientist Ron Walters defined foreign policy equity.
He asked why we can’t have something called foreign policy justice. We fought for
China to get the Olympics, despite their repressive human rights policies, but we
argue against other countries playing a role in world economic development because
their human rights policies are not correct. We talk about human rights in Iraq, but
we know this conflict is not about human rights. First it was about weapons of mass
JULIANNE MALVEAUX250
pal-marable2-04-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:58 PM  Page 250


--- PAGE 268 ---
distraction, then oil, and now ego. At one point, First Lady Laura Bush incredibly
claimed that our invasion of Iraq was about women’s rights.
Iowa Senator T om Harkin said he understood the frustration that Chavez and
others in the world harbor towards our nation’s foreign policy arrogance. While call-
ing the Chavez rhetoric “incendiary,” he also recognized it as the rhetoric of frustra-
tion. However, when the President of the United States uses that same kind of
invective, he is met with little criticism or condemnation.
We had enormous moral authority after September 11. The world saw what we
saw. Many people believed that our actions were aimed at stamping out terrorism in
the world. If we had simply gone to Afghanistan, we would still have enormous sup-
port from all kinds of countries. However, we chose to invade Iraq. In September
2002, before the invasion of Iraq, Mr. Bush described Saddam Hussein as “the guy
who tried to kill my dad.” In other words, his actions were clearly personally moti-
vated and thus irrational. Should we squander our nation’s collective future for a
family feud?
It’s not just squandering esteem and moral authority; the war in Iraq is also erod-
ing our economy. We are spending so much money on the war that we have elimi-
nated the surplus that remained from President Clinton’s tenure and amassed one of
the largest deficits we have ever seen. Because of that deficit, we have systematically
cut social programs. We had so little money that we did not fulfill the request of the
Army Corps of Engineers to repair the levees before they broke in 2005.
Is the United States at the end of its eminence? Certainly, we have communicated
our weakness to the world by our failure to respond to New Orleans in an effective
way. But several factors suggest that unless we make major changes, we are coming
to the end of our era of world dominance. The education situation is perhaps the
most important. Our ability to compete has been impaired by the eroding state of
our educational system and our country’s self-divestment of that system. Although
we once we had the best educational system in the world, now the poor quality of
inner city K-12 education raises pipeline issues, and our self-divestment of public
higher education raises other issues. Our system still has strengths, especially in the
humanities and sometimes the social sciences, but we are losing our edge in engi-
neering and science. These fields are ones that dictate whether we have sufficient
capital to build and maintain effective levee systems to protect cities such as New
Orleans, among other things.
The second issue is China, a nation on a fast track to full industrialization. They
fully intend to compete with the United States and Western Europe in the next
twenty years. Right now, one in twenty households in China has a car. Most people
get around by bicycle. But in ten years, we should expect that there will be increas-
ing reliance on cars and perhaps one in ten households will have a car. What pres-
sure will this place on gasoline prices? China represents one quarter of the world’s
population and consumption possibility. If they are as fuel inefficient as we are, what
does that mean for the rest of the world, and what does that mean for us? Are we
prepared to compete with this new superpower?
The third sign that our eminence is ending is the arrogance that we bring to the
table on foreign policy. It has had reverberations in terms of the way global nations
respond to us. Many think the economic consequence of our own arrogance is that
WHAT HAPPENS WHEN THE FOOTPRINTS SHRINK 251
pal-marable2-04-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:58 PM  Page 251


--- PAGE 269 ---
some oil-producing countries will shift from the dollar to the euro. When they do
that, it essentially weakens the United States’ world position. The dollar has been the
primary world currency since after World War II. If we have to compete with the euro,
which has become more stable, we may end up in a situation where we will be talking
about balance-of-payment problems that weaken the ways we do business day to day.
Our nation’s failure to deal with our diversity, and especially to deal with race
matters, also signals the end of our eminence. Part of this is connected to the educa-
tion issue. While our nation is divesting education, that divestment clearly does not
affect all Americans equally. Upper-middle-class Americans are likely to continue to
be educated at our nation’s best universities and institutions. It is the students who
need help, particularly those who need financial assistance, who are finding educa-
tion less attainable. We can talk about affirmative action as much as we like, but the
real challenges in the twenty-first century are educational access and affordability.
Public colleges and universities are going to have less money available. Will the qual-
ity of education suffer, and if it does, will it erode our global position? The strength
of our educational system and student access to that system are directly tied to our
country’s ability, or lack thereof, to deal with and have smart discussion about ongo-
ing racial crises in the United States. Some may argue that this is a post-racial era.
However, the data certainly do not suggest so. The average white household has an
income of $51,000 a year, and the average black household has $31,000. The black
unemployment rate is twice the white unemployment rate. These disparities are par-
ticularly heightened in New Orleans. Every socioeconomic indicator shows that race
matters, but there is a reluctance to deal with race problems in a real way.
We are like ostriches, burying our heads in the sand. Demographically, the
fastest-growing population is the Latino population. The slowest-growing popula-
tion is the white population. Rates of African American growth fall somewhere in
between that of Latinos and whites. If you are of a certain age and thinking about
who will be your nurse in your golden years, she is likely to be a woman of color.
Many of our workforce issues could be solved if we talked about educating people
of color and those whites who can’t afford education.
Our future hinges on the development of a competitive and able workforce. We
are not technologically superior to the rest of the world. However, what we have that
other countries don’t is the diversity that we’ve generally ignored. When we pay
attention to this diversity, it strengthens us, but when we ignore it, it erodes our abil-
ity to move into a future with strength and moral authority. The world looked at
what happened post-Katrina, and what they saw was a great nation that did not care
about black people and poor people. Our treatment of our very own citizens raised
questions about the empty rhetoric we announce before the United Nations about
how much we care about a thriving democracy. New Orleans showed us at our very
worst—venal, uncaring, and inefficient.
What happens when our footprint shrinks? What happens when the United States
goes the way of Great Britain, that once-great superpower that is now teetering at the
edge, with high poverty, unemployment, crime, and racial problems? We are poised
to be the next dinosaur, the next Britain, the next once-great nation. The way we treat
New Orleans is, in my opinion, a metaphor for what we can and must do with our
nation. If we can fix New Orleans, we can fix our nation. But if we cannot fix New
JULIANNE MALVEAUX252
pal-marable2-04-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:58 PM  Page 252


--- PAGE 270 ---
Orleans, we are sending a clear signal that we lack the will to help our own. If we
cannot help our own, how can we lead in the transformation of the rest of the world?
Our failures in New Orleans lead me to believe that we have reached the end of our
nation’s eminence.
B
IBLIOGRAPHY
Much of this information comes from interviews I conducted July 24–25, 2006, for
The Salteaux Report, a television show in development. There are more than fifteen
hours of taped interviews that deal with Katrina, broken levees, and the recovery,
especially around housing, economic development, and education. This material will
be cited as Malveaux Report, 2006.
Bucks, Bruce, Arthur Kennickell and Kevin Moore. “Recent Changes in US Family Finances:
Evidence from the 2001 and 2004 Survey of Consumer Finances.” Federal Reserve Bulletin,
January 2006.
Columbus, Danae. News for June and July, New Orleans City Council, July 26, 2006.
Danielson, Darwin. “Harkin Defends Venezuelan President’s UN Speech Against Bush.”
Radio Iowa, September 21, 2006.
Democracy Now. “Interview with Joe DeRose, Communications Director, United T eachers of
New Orleans.” http://www.democracynow.org.
DeNavas-Walt, Carmen, Bernadette D. Proctor, and Cheryl Hill Lee. Income, Poverty, and
Health Insurance Coverage in the United States: 2004 . U.S. Census Bureau, Current
Population Reports, P60–229. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 2005.
DeNavas-Walt, Carmen, Bernadette De. Proctor and Cheryl Hill Lee. Income, Poverty and
Health Insurance Coverage in the United States: 2005 . U.S. Census Bureau, Current
Population Reports, P60–231, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC, 2006.
Hill, Paul, and Jane Hannaway. The Future of Public Education in New Orleans, Washington,
DC: The Urban Institute, 2006.
Kamenetz, Anya. Generation Debt: Why Now is a T errible Time to Be Young . New York:
Riverhead Press, 2006.
King, John. “Bush Calls Saddam ‘The Guy Who T ried to Kill My Dad.’” CNN, September
27, 2002.
Malvaeux Report interview with Bill Quigley, July 2006.
Message from the School Board President, New Orleans Public Schools, October 17, 2006.
http://www.nops.k12.la.us (accessed [date]).
Reckdahl, Kathy. “Like A T on of Bricks.” Gambit Weekly, New Orleans, October 2006.
Rose, Chris. “Hell and Back.” New Orleans Times-Picayune, October 22, 2006.
Walters, Ronald. “The U.S. War on T errorism and Foreign Policy Justice.” In Julianne
Malveaux and Reginna Green, eds., The Paradox of Loyalty: An African American Response
to the War on T errorism(New York: Third World Press, 2003).
NOTES
1. The African American Leadership Project has been a voice and force of resistance to
the shrinking footprint, as well as a force for economic justice in New Orleans. Their
Web site is at http://www.hurricane-katrina.org/2006/07/africanamerican.html.
2. Christopher Cooper, “Old Line Families Escape Worst of Flood and Plot the Future,”
Wall Street Journal, September 8, 2005.
WHAT HAPPENS WHEN THE FOOTPRINTS SHRINK 253
pal-marable2-04-1.qxp  10/21/2007  1:58 PM  Page 253


--- PAGE 271 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 272 ---
Chapter 17
“THE CITY I USED
TO... V ISIT”: TOURIST
NEW ORLEANS AND THE
RACIALIZED RESPONSE TO
HURRICANE KATRINA
LYNELL THOMAS
Late last August, like so many others around the world, I sat glued to Hurricane
Katrina news coverage and the now-infamous images of African Americans and their
corporeal indictment of American politics and policies. In my case, I was desperate
for information about my husband and family members who had remained in our
New Orleans home during the storm. In those critical days of anxiety and outrage,
I recognized in a new and painful way how representations of race define and delimit
citizenship. I wondered in disbelief, first, how news reporters who were intractably
anchored in the French Quarter had repeatedly and falsely reported that the city had
escaped major damage as flood waters engulfed most of the city; second, how even
as levees remained breached, rescue efforts were suspended because of alleged vio-
lence (later revealed to be largely exaggerated), leaving tens of thousands of people
stranded and unprotected from the rising flood waters; and finally, how local, state,
and national public officials and media collaborated in promoting destitution,
debauchery, and complete degradation as the most predominant and enduring
image of black New Orleans.
1
A year later, my initial disbelief has given way to the realization that Hurricane
Katrina revealed the public level of invisibility of New Orleans’s black population,
the limited categories and conventions available for identifying that population even
after the storm victims demanded recognition, and the public costs of this distortion
of black people’s lives. I might have foreseen this outcome if I had given more weight
to my own research on representations of race in contemporary New Orleans
pal-marable2-04-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:59 PM  Page 255


--- PAGE 273 ---
tourism. In fact, the responses to Hurricane Katrina eerily emulate New Orleans’s
tourism narrative, which limits New Orleans to the French Quarter and the city’s
European identity, labels historically and predominantly black areas of the city as
dangerous, and obscures and distorts the African presence and participation in the
development and sustenance of the city. Given that tourism is New Orleans’s most
lucrative industry and that most outsiders’ perceptions of the city are mediated
through its tourist identity, it should come as little surprise that even in the midst of
unprecedented crisis, the representation of New Orleans during Hurricane Katrina
continued to be dominated by the troubling images and ideas of the city’s all-too-
familiar and overdetermined tourism narrative.
The city’s contemporary tourism industry invites white visitors to participate in
a glorified Southern past. Black residents, if they appear at all in this narrative,
appear as secondary characters who are either servile or exotic—always inferior to
whites and never possessing agency over their own lives. Hence, New Orleans’s pre-
dominant tourism narrative is predicated on the propagation, albeit distorted, and
the negation of New Orleans’s black history. White tourists are encouraged to view
the Old South with a sense of loss and nostalgia as they play the part of wealthy
planters by visiting plantations and touring historic home that display the wealth of
a bygone era, by shopping for the ubiquitous “contemptible collectibles” in French
Quarter shops and hotel lobbies, and by themselves being cared for by the highly vis-
ible African American service workers often “performing” to garner a larger tip.
2
Visiting tourist New Orleans promises historical authenticity by bringing visitors to
the past itself, not just a scale reproduction of the past.
3 Unlike many other Southern
cities, where black cultural traces have been largely erased from the mainstream nar-
ratives, New Orleans tourists are invited to consume black cultural production by
listening to black music and hearing anecdotes of the secret rites of quadroon balls
and voodoo ceremonies. Yet these purportedly black experiences are limited to the
safe tourist space of the heavily police-patrolled French Quarter. Outside these
boundaries, the city’s majority African American population is portrayed as physi-
cally and socially threatening. These multiple representations sustain the stereotypes
of black servility and inferiority, and in the process, they ignore the historical and
contemporary realities of the city’s African Americans.
New Orleans tourism perpetuates these representations by focusing almost exclu-
sively on two periods in history: the colonial period under French and Spanish rule
and the antebellum period following the Louisiana Purchase. The emphasis on these
periods (to the exclusion of more recent history) and the depiction of these periods
together create a very particular racial image of the city. Even when the tourism nar-
rative represents African American culture and history, it does so through the lens of
New Orleans exceptionalism, thereby exempting New Orleans from any real racial
problems in the past or present. Consequently, assertions of French and Spanish
leniency during the colonial period; depictions of a romantic, paternal slave system
during the antebellum period; and an oversimplified insistence on a constantly self-
sustaining, vibrant class of free people of color who themselves were aligned with
white interests than with black interest obscure the fact that enslaved and free blacks
in both colonial and antebellum New Orleans fought in a myriad of ways to obtain
their freedom, assert their rights, and demand equitable treatment.
LYNELL THOMAS256
pal-marable2-04-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:59 PM  Page 256


--- PAGE 274 ---
The representation of New Orleans’s colonial history exemplifies this distortion
with numerous references to the enduring legacy of the French and Spanish. The
official New Orleans tourism Web site announces, “New Orleans, with its richly
mottled old buildings, its sly, sophisticated—sometimes almost disreputable—air,
and its Hispanic-Gallic traditions, has more the flavor of an old European capital
than an American city.”
4 Another tourism article refers to New Orleans as “the most
European American city,” although historian Gwendoyn Midlo Hall’s designation of
New Orleans as “the most African city in the United States” is far more accurate.
5
The colonial construction of New Orleans accredits the city’s white, European her-
itage with most of what makes the city unique—from its architecture to its zydeco.
This construction privileges a particular episode in New Orleans history and a par-
ticular racial and cultural group. New Orleans’s tourism literature exalts European
and particularly French culture as the most predominant and influential culture in
New Orleans despite the tremendous presence and influence of Africans and Native
Americans throughout the city’s colonial history.
6 The tourism narrative employs
New Orleans’s colonial history to emphasize the racial distinctions that made New
Orleans a world apart to the exclusion of the characteristics that bind New Orleans
to the rest of the United States, particularly the Southern United States. The city’s
portrayal as racially unique is girded by the notion that the racism and racial conflict
that continue to haunt other U.S. cities is largely lacking or lessened in New Orleans
because of its unique historical and cultural legacy.
The tourist industry’s homage to the French and Spanish extends to those
nations’ purported humane and even charitable treatment of enslaved Africans.
Generally, tour guides and tourism literature focus almost exclusively on slavery dur-
ing the colonial period, emphasizing a supposed unique and favored position of New
Orleans slaves who were protected by the Code Noir, were given Sundays off to con-
gregate in Congo Square, and were allowed to purchase their own freedom. One
Web site’s assessment is typical:
There were. . .important differences between Louisiana and other slave-driven
Southern states. Here slavery was more in the West Indian mould [sic] than the Anglo-
American. The Black Code of Louisiana, established by the French, upheld by the
Spanish and then effectively broken by the Americans, gave slaves rights unparalleled
elsewhere, including permission to marry, meet socially and take Sundays off. The
black population of New Orleans in particular was renowned as exceptionally literate
and cosmopolitan.
7
Despite acknowledging a slave past, this account privileges slavery in the colonial
period as a time of European beneficence, an idea refuted in recent historiography.
Historian Thomas Ingersoll argues, “The principal intent of the Black Code of
1724. . .was evident in the many measures aimed at ensuring the subjugation of all
blacks and separating the races so as to limit the numbers of mixed-race and free black
people.”
8 Even Ingersoll’s detractors who argue for distinctions between the British
and French or Spanish systems of slavery generally attribute gains made by Africans
and their descendants primarily to their own agency, aptitude, and creativity, not to
their enslavers’ compassion or generosity. Despite contrary historical evidence, New
“THE CITY I USED TO. . .VISIT” 257
pal-marable2-04-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:59 PM  Page 257


--- PAGE 275 ---
Orleans emerges in its colonial tourism narrative as a city whose attitudes about race
and treatment of its residents of African descent—in both historical and contempo-
rary representations—are exceptionally benign.
Just as New Orleans’s tourism narrative diminishes the brutality and degradation
of the slave system under the French and Spanish, it also erases completely the more
rigid system of slavery that evolved in the nineteenth century, marked by a more ten-
uous position for the city’s free people of color and the near impossibility for bonds-
men and women to purchase their own freedom.
9 While the emphasis on New
Orleans’s European or French heritage highlights the city’s distinctiveness, an
emphasis on the antebellum period in the tourism literature blurs those distinctions
by situating New Orleans in the clichéd construction of a romantic antebellum
South. The Old South is evoked countless times in descriptions of contemporary
New Orleans. Visitors are invited to experience firsthand the Old South, although
this experience rarely incorporates the experiences of those bondsmen, women, and
children who supported the mansions and sustained, through great sacrifice and
hardship, the fabled “good old days.”
Most Web sites and tourism brochures advertise or feature nearby plantations and
plantation tours, which are represented as authentic recreations of New Orleans’s
antebellum past.
10 With few exceptions, however, this authenticity is reserved solely
for decorative and architectural replications of the antebellum South. Advertisements
and descriptions of the plantations and tours are interspersed with language that
almost literally reconstructs an antebellum mythology. “Grand winding staircase,
original slave cabins, magnificent oaks”; “tours by guides in [a]ntebellum dress”;
“Belter & Mallard furnishings, five hand-painted ceilings, faux marbling and wood
graining”; and “elaborate wrought iron trimmed galleries, ornate friezes and medal-
lions” conjure up hackneyed notions of “romance, history, and beauty” associated
with the “grandeur and elegance of 19
th century southern living.”11 Although River
Road and many of its plantations are listed in the National Register of Historic
Places, very few of the plantation tours interrogate the history that the sites repre-
sent, namely the history of slavery, which enabled the wealth and accompanying
lifestyles that the plantation tours celebrate.
Even when slave dwellings are present on these properties, they form part of the
backdrop to the romanticized Southern mystique, thereby enhancing, not counter-
ing, the mythology of a glorious Southern past.
12 Many of these plantations and their
outbuildings, including the slave cabins, have been renovated into bed and breakfasts,
exploiting the performative possibilities of a white antebellum Southern mythology.
Examples include Oak Alley Plantation, Restaurant & Inn and Nottoway Plantation
Restaurant & Inn, which advertise their sites as places to “enjoy elegant accommoda-
tions overlooking the Mississippi River or the charming surroundings of the over-
seer’s cottage.”
13 The Southern past is reduced to a checklist of objects and
images—period furnishings, oak and fruit trees, Greek Revival or Italianate architec-
ture, slave quarters—that provide ideal settings for film and literary portrayals of the
antebellum South.
14 Implicit in the invitation for visitors to “feel the gentle breeze of
southern hospitality on a tour that takes you back to a time of mint juleps, gracious
living and the glory of the Old South,” is either the erasure of the South’s slave past
or appropriation of that history to suit a more romantic, idyllic narrative of slavery.
15
LYNELL THOMAS258
pal-marable2-04-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:59 PM  Page 258


--- PAGE 276 ---
The portrayal of a relatively benevolent, paternal slave system relies on some of the
very images and arguments of nineteenth-century pro-slavery ideology. What results
is a re-writing of the historical narrative that erases the violence, exploitation, and
depravation of slavery and the accompanying culpability of whites.
This rewriting of slavery is not limited to outlying plantation tours. New
Orleansonline.com includes a page on historic homes within the city limits of New
Orleans. By visiting selected “architectural treasures”—mansions and “palatial ante-
bellum residences”—the page invites visitors to “step into the past” and “learn about
the culture and history of the city’s colorful and hospitable past.”
16 While descrip-
tions of these historic homes do not allude to the city’s slave history (yet another era-
sure of that history), the romanticizing of slavery for local and tourist consumption
abounds in the city. The designation of former slave quarters as chic, quaint, and
marketable by area tour guides, hotels, realtors, and restaurants illustrates how the
history of slavery is removed from its historical context in New Orleans’s tourism
industry. Consequently, these venues can offer potential visitors and buyers the
“sheer romance” and the opportunity to “go native” that coincide with being enter-
tained, fed, or housed in “quite attractive” or “liberated, languorous cottages,” which
once housed the city’s enslaved, black population.
17
In these topsy-turvy appropriations of slavery, the remnants of New Orleans’s
slave system are beautified and decontextualized. These descriptions imaginatively
wrest slavery from its historical and ideological contexts and repackage it for tourist
consumption; visitors to the city—for a price—are able to reap the material and psy-
chological rewards of others’ labor. Beyond these imaginative reenactments of slav-
ery, several New Orleans French Quarter restaurants and hotels literally bear the
mark of the city’s slave past.
18 The façade of the upscale Omni Royal Hotel still car-
ries the ironic inscription “Change”—the remaining words from “Slave Exchange”
following the building’s renovation.
19 In addition to the promotion of former slave
quarters, the sale, display, and dispersal of an array of slavery images and reproduced
artifacts create a disturbing tourist landscape. French Quarter businesses greet cus-
tomers with mammy- or Sambo-adorned signs, packaging, and products. These
images appear on everything from store signage to souvenirs and perpetuate an idea
of the antebellum South that caricatures and trivializes black contributions to and
contests over Southern history. Despite the omnipresence of these markers of slav-
ery, the tourism narrative generally fails to include a discussion of those who were
enslaved. Even when antebellum slavery is discussed, tourist narratives focus prima-
rily on New Orleans’s wealth and prosperity during the nineteenth century, not on
the human cost exacted because of this wealth.
Usually, however, slavery is not discussed, despite the wealth of firsthand accounts
of the slave system in nineteenth-century New Orleans. The city was, after all, the
leading North American slave-trading city by the 1850s, with numerous slave auc-
tion houses and regular auctions.
20 De T ocqueville and Beaumont observed that slav-
ery in Louisiana was equally as brutal as elsewhere in the South, and numerous
nineteenth-century slave narratives record the harrowing experiences that bondsmen
and women faced in New Orleans’s slave market.
21 The exclusion of these accounts
to promote New Orleans’s racial exceptionalism further perpetuates an idea of a city
that is devoid of any real black presence or significance.
“THE CITY I USED TO. . .VISIT” 259
pal-marable2-04-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:59 PM  Page 259


--- PAGE 277 ---
This omission is compounded by the fact that New Orleans’s tourism narrative
does not give any sustained attention to the historical period following the Civil War
and continuing through the post-civil rights era, the very period when most African
Americans obtained their freedom and made more concerted efforts to demand and
exercise their civil rights. The dismissal of this history continues to shape tourist
accounts of New Orleans’s more recent past. In the rare instance when recent history
is presented to tourists, it is a history that does little to challenge the mythology of
New Orleans’s racial, cultural, and social harmony. For instance, NewOrleans.com
explains that New Orleans’s 1960 school desegregation “was not marked by the racial
strife found in other Southern cities.”
22 This rather innocuous account, of course,
disclaims the years of struggle preceding and following the 1960s desegregation
movement.
23 Because so much effort goes into sustaining New Orleans’s image as a
historic city through a reverence for the city’s past, careful preservation efforts, and
attention to genealogies and historical figures, the history of New Orleans presented
in tours and tourism literature gains an air of credibility and comprehensiveness it
may not always deserve, particularly as it relates to the city’s multiracial heritage.
On the other hand, multicultural and black heritage tours do provide competing
narratives that acknowledge New Orleans’s multiracial heritage and the contribu-
tions of black people to the city. However, these tours generally reinforce the racial
ambivalence and anxiety of the mainstream narrative or remain otherwise ephemeral
or marginal. Increasingly, as New Orleans tourism attempts to respond to public and
scholarly demands for a more inclusive representation of history, both mainstream
and black heritage tours incorporate the language and symbols of diversity, multicul-
turalism, and black history.
24 Despite this seeming embrace of different cultural, lin-
guistic, and social influences, the city’s multiracial tourism narrative is cloaked in the
conventions of a problematic multiculturalism that in the end promotes a clichéd,
trivialized understanding of race and aggrandizes the structures of oppression that it
purports to disrupt. In other words, the language may have changed, but the
mythology of racial exceptionalism remains the same. In many ways, the message of
multicultural New Orleans is often as conservative and regressive as more racially
exclusive representations of the city.
The New Orleans melting pot—or more accurately “gumbo” pot—motif
demonstrates the limitations of the multicultural narrative. The success of New
Orleans’s culinary assimilation of foods from throughout the world is used to sym-
bolize an equally successful and satisfying racial and cultural assimilation in the city.
The 2002–3 New Orleans Official Visitors Guide describes the people of New
Orleans as being “as diverse and unique as the ingredients in gumbo, and each group
has brought its own influences to the city.”
25 Although much of this gumbo pot rhet-
oric originated as a direct challenge to previously dominant tourism narratives that
ignored or distorted the contributions by non-Europeans, even the city’s so-called
multicultural tours offer divergent narratives of New Orleans’s multicultural heritage
and suggest the problem of associating terms, such as “melting pot,” “diversity,” or
“multiculturalism” exclusively with the progressive agendas of social change.
26 Often
these terms create and sustain an image of social transformation, particularly in ref-
erence to racial equality, that is not substantiated by the realities of New Orleans’s
historical and contemporary experiences. What results is yet another mythology of
LYNELL THOMAS260
pal-marable2-04-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:59 PM  Page 260


--- PAGE 278 ---
New Orleans’s racial history, perhaps a more palatable romance than the one por-
trayed by the plantation and slave cabin stories, but one equally as inaccurate. In this
construction of the city, New Orleans is (and has always been) a place of racial har-
mony. This notion of unity that transcends racial, class, religious, and other divisions
is echoed in former mayor Marc Morial’s introduction to the 2000 New Orleans
Official Visitors Guide. Morial—son of the city’s first African American mayor Ernest
“Dutch” Morial—boasts, “Proud of our heritage, we have combined the influences of
our European, African, Caribbean and, of course, American forefathers into how we
live, what we eat and how we celebrate”
27 The present mayor Ray Nagin takes this
idea even further in his welcome in the official multicultural visitor guide, Soul of New
Orleans. He invokes the customary “cultural gumbo” and proffers the city’s diversity
as a commodity “within easy reach of visitors and locals alike.” Most tellingly, Nagin
attributes the origin of jazz to the “waves of immigration from Africa, Europe, the
Caribbean, Latin America and Asia.” In an effort to portray present-day New
Orleanians as equal participants in the city’s culture, this assessment obscures the his-
tory of jazz, whose origins are generally attributed to the united efforts of Afro-
Creoles and African Americans, as well as obscures the history of slavery, which Nagin
euphemistically substitutes with New Orleans’s “immigration from Africa.”
28
Other tourism sites likewise portray historical and contemporary New Orleans
through the lens of a noncontentious multiculturalism. This “history” has become so
diluted as to be rendered ineffectual in challenging white privilege and the continu-
ing legacy of racism. Instead, New Orleans’s construction as a multicultural city works
to reinforce the idea that racism in the city is either nonexistent or aberrant. Generally
overlooked in this notion of the gumbo pot is the potential and actual divisiveness of
the languages, cultures, ethnicities, races, and economic classes of the city’s inhabi-
tants since the city’s founding. Just as de Crevecoeur’s “melting pot” referred to the
amalgamation of many races into one American identity, the New Orleans gumbo
pot motif suggests that all people, regardless of national, racial, social, or cultural
background forge a new Creole identity once they become New Orleanians.
However, just as the melting pot has been criticized for its underlying assumption that
its designation of a new American race was in fact a Western identity available only
to European immigrants, so, too, the gumbo pot’s Creole identity often excludes the
city’s non-European population or mandates a very particular profile for people of
color that reifies the divisions a Creole identity is supposed to mitigate.
The term creole has had a very circuitous and contentious evolution. Historians
acknowledge that the term’s meaning has shifted over time and in relation to differ-
ent political, historical, and economic developments. Throughout Louisiana’s his-
tory, Creole has been used at different times and for different reasons to describe all
native-born inhabitants of the early colony, irrespective of race; those native-born
colonists and their descendants of French or Spanish heritage; native-born colonists
and descendants of interracial unions among French, Spanish, African, and
American Indian settlers; and numerous combinations thereof. Different groups
continue to wrangle for entitlement to an exclusive Creole identity. Despite these
continued contests over the term, many definitions of the term advanced in the
tourist literature leave little room for Afro-Creoles, whether poor or enslaved, or even
the much-touted free people of color. Instead, tourist literature often uses the term
“THE CITY I USED TO. . .VISIT” 261
pal-marable2-04-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:59 PM  Page 261


--- PAGE 279 ---
to distinguish between the wealthy, aristocratic, Catholic, in-grown (white) Creoles
and the more industrious, hard-working, Protestant, though less interesting, (white)
Americans who arrived in the city following the Louisiana Purchase. In most cases,
the term is stripped of its racial, cultural, and historical meanings. Even on
SoulofAmerica.com, a national black travel Web site, the term’s technical meaning is
said to refer to “a city resident who claims to be of French descent and speaks
French,” which would eliminate many New Orleanians who consider themselves
Creole. Now, according to the site, the term refers to “practically all residents who
enjoy life and cooking and music of New Orleans. They truly believe in the art of
sophisticated living, no matter how short their average life span.”
29 This attempt to
neatly obliterate the contests over meaning and power conceals the serious political,
economic, legal, and social connotations of the term.
Although creole is a term that remains contested in New Orleans’s tourism and in
the historiography, the tourist literature problematically uses and portrays creole both
as a metaphor for New Orleans’s all-inclusive society and as a way to signify divisions
and racial exclusions.
30 This anxiety over the designation of Creole identity is most
clearly reflected in the widespread claim that Creoles of Color, because of their eco-
nomic and political wherewithal and racial anxiety, identified more with upper-class
whites than with enslaved or poor blacks throughout the city’s history. The tourist
literature’s insistence on a racially and economically exclusive denotation of Creole
sets up an impossible stratification of society and insists even now on the purity of
race as a legitimate means of classification.
In this system, it somehow goes without question that—despite a history of both
inter- and intraracial unions among enslaved and free blacks; shared language and
culture; familial and social bonds between enslaved and free blacks; and economic,
educational, and professional diversity within the free black population, as well as a
range of phenotypes among the black population, both enslaved and free—New
Orleans’s communities of free people of color and enslaved blacks can be neatly and
categorically distinguished by skin color, class, education, profession, and/or racial
identity.
31 Historian Jerah Johnson counters this myth, basing his argument on the
recent proliferation of scholarship on Afro-Creoles in Louisiana:
Acutely conscious of their legal rights and their group’s interests as well as the tenuous
and fragile nature of their position, [free Creoles of Color] tended to act with an excep-
tionally high degree of cohesiveness. At the same time, individual members of the
group freely associated with the European colonials, the African slaves, and the Indians,
both free and slave. Work, service, trade, and plaçage, the developing institution of for-
malized mistress-keeping, brought them into close contact with the European commu-
nity, while close cultural and family bonds tied them to both slave and Indian
communities. Except for recently arrived islanders, there were few free people of color
who did not have relatives, often immediate family members, among the African slaves
and not infrequently among the Indians.
32
Unlike the tourist narrative’s fixed Creole identity, recent historiography recognizes
the complexity and variety of Creole society, a society that included free blacks
immigrating from other parts of the United States, free dark-skinned blacks,
enslaved light-skinned French-speaking blacks, poor free blacks, inter-class and
LYNELL THOMAS262
pal-marable2-04-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:59 PM  Page 262


--- PAGE 280 ---
inter-color unions, and any number of combinations thereof. These encounters and
interconnections illustrate the inexact, ambiguous uses and meanings of the term
creole throughout the city’s history and belie the simplistic definitions included in
tourist representations. The contention over the term continues among different
groups that claim to be Creole and fight for a Creole identity rooted in history, cul-
ture, and genealogy.
In the end, New Orleans’s multicultural narrative promotes a vision that limits
and distorts the actual black presence and experience in New Orleans. One reason
for this distortion is a dearth of tours and sites that reference the city’s deeply rooted
African culture. Many potential sites and areas of the city that would serve as ideal
settings for black heritage sites have either been destroyed, neglected, or undeveloped
by the city of New Orleans. A relevant example has been the city’s neglect of its jazz
history. The creation of jazz in New Orleans by classically trained and self-taught
black musicians influenced by African musical traditions is inextricably linked to the
development of a unique African American culture. Yet critics point out that these
early jazz musicians, including the much-touted Louis Armstrong, are shamefully
underrepresented by historical monuments. In fact, in her article on New Orleans’s
fledgling jazz tourism, one reporter notes that the former homes and hangouts of the
city’s early black jazz musicians are “now abandoned buildings, dilapidated Creole
cottages, and in some cases, parking lots.”
33 New Orleans’s physical landscape, with
its deteriorating and demolished jazz structures—even prior to the destruction lev-
eled by Hurricane Katrina—is suggestive of its tourism landscape that also neglects
the city’s black heritage.
Another reason for the omission of potential black heritage sites and spaces is
their designation as “unsafe.” Although New Orleans’s crime and murder rates have
been consistently high for the past twenty years, additional resources and police
patrols are dispatched to certain tourist areas of the city, particularly the French
Quarter and central business district, which attract the largest volume of tourists.
Consequently, tourism brochures, Web sites, and safety notices reassure visitors
about their safety in these areas while tacitly or overtly discouraging ventures into
other areas of the city. Many of these other areas of the city are either predominantly
or historically black neighborhoods; they are almost always excluded from the
accepted demarcation of tourist New Orleans. In fact, despite the recent trend to
encourage visitors to explore beyond the city’s French Quarter, the sanctioned spaces
for these excursions rarely include black neighborhoods or black heritage sites.
34
The failure of even the city’s multicultural tourism narrative to present a viable
counternarrrative to the myth of New Orleans’s racial exceptionalism points to the
difficulty of overcoming a deeply entrenched narrative that provides economic bene-
fit to the city and psychological rewards to many of its locals and visitors. After all, to
fully revise this narrative would necessitate not simply an inclusion of characters of
color or a commitment to more accurate or authentic cultural representations but a
revision of the idea of New Orleans itself. Such a revision is a costly one, for the idea
of New Orleans—a city of uncontested contradictions that include its simultaneous
claim of uniqueness from the rest of the South and its Old South romance, its cele-
bration of racial exoticism and mixture and its insistence on racial boundaries and
exclusiveness, and its allure of decadence and danger and its continual demarcation
“THE CITY I USED TO. . .VISIT” 263
pal-marable2-04-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:59 PM  Page 263


--- PAGE 281 ---
of safe spaces—is one that appeals to and validates a broad spectrum of locals and
visitors. For many whites, this idea of New Orleans provides a safe, sanctioned space
to indulge in black culture and unite with black bodies, if only vicariously. In the
context of New Orleans tourism, this racialized consumption is afforded without
censure and with the added benefit of absolving whites of guilt and culpability for a
racist past or present. The idea of New Orleans has also provided psychological and
economic benefit for blacks in the city, who are not only able to subsist on tourism
dollars, but for whom a glorified past of beneficent slavery, wealthy and independ-
ent free people of color, and racial harmony counters a far less redeeming and digni-
fied history of slavery, racism, and degradation.
Despite these psychological and material benefits, Hurricane Katrina epitomized
the devastating human cost of New Orleans’s racial mythology. Ultimately, those
who were most responsible for representing the city and the citizens of New Orleans
in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina did so from a very limited perspective that was
mediated by the popular or tourist image of the city. Without the proper terms and
conventions to represent New Orleans’s rich and varied black experience, the cover-
age of and response to the hurricane grotesquely mimicked the distortions and
stereotypes of the tourism narrative. Because of the limitations of the New Orleans
tourism narrative, which misrepresents the city’s black population, neglects and
abandons New Orleans’s black history, and clearly delimits the proper, safe New
Orleans as nonblack, representations of the city in the aftermath of Hurricane
Katrina ignored the complexity and diversity of New Orleans’s black experience and
continued to entrench the boundaries around the New Orleans French Quarter,
abandoning the rest of the city as too dangerous and menacing to rescue or rebuild.
In an article detailing the widespread exaggeration and false reporting in the after-
math of Hurricane Katrina, local journalists surmise, “The picture that emerged was
one of the impoverished, masses of flood victims resorting to utter depravity, ran-
domly attacking each other, as well as the police trying to protect them and the res-
cue workers trying to save them. [New Orleans mayor Ray] Nagin told [Oprah]
Winfrey the crowd has descended to an ‘almost animalistic state.’”
35
More frequently, Hurricane Katrina survivors forged a community of mutual
support and protection in the days following the storm instead of waiting for the
uncoordinated and ineffective national response to materialize. Residents pooled
resources by sharing food, water, generators, working cell phones, and necessary sup-
plies; they coordinated and staffed makeshift shelters in abandoned homes, schools,
and churches; they patrolled neighborhoods to search for elderly and infirm relatives
and neighbors; they held continuous vigils to discourage looters; and they saved lives
using their own fishing boats, rafts, and whatever else would float.
36 This type of
community effort reflects black New Orleans’s history of grassroots organizing,
strong kinship ties, and multigenerational cooperation, a portrayal absent from the
wake coverage and public portrayals of the city in the aftermath of Katrina.
Instead, the vilification of black New Orleans as an incorrigible drain on finan-
cial and civic resources continues to shape the debate about whether to proceed with
rebuilding efforts and illustrates the limited terms and conventions available to pol-
icy-makers and news media to imagine who New Orleans residents are and what
they might need now. We see the public policy impact of the city’s tourism narrative
LYNELL THOMAS264
pal-marable2-04-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:59 PM  Page 264


--- PAGE 282 ---
in the insufficiency of federal relief, redlining of black neighborhoods, lack of a coor-
dinated rebuilding effort, disregard of the interests of primarily black renters and
public housing tenants, silence around the decimation of the black middle class, and
exclusion of minority contractors, community leaders, and black residents from the
rebuilding efforts.
37
That is why it is not surprising that during a brief visit to New Orleans less than
five months after the storm, President George W . Bush bypassed the worst-hit, pre-
dominantly black areas of the city. Instead, his comments to Mayor Nagin and a
group of business owners reflected the degree to which New Orleans’s tourism image
continues to obfuscate the reality of racial dignity and racial inequality in the city.
Bush announced to the group,
I will tell you, the contrast between when I was last here and today, is pretty dramatic.
It may be hard for you to see, but from when I first came here to today, New Orleans
is reminding me of the city I used to come to visit. It’s a heck of a place to bring your
family. It’s a great place to find some of the greatest food in the world and some won-
derful fun. And I’m glad you got your infrastructure back on its feet. I know you’re
beginning to welcome citizens from all around the country here to New Orleans. And
for folks around the country who are looking for a great place to have a convention, or
a great place to visit, I’d suggest coming here to the great—New Orleans.
38
That the president returned to the familiar image of the “city [he] used to visit”—
one of frivolity and flavorful food—in the midst of a national catastrophe speaks vol-
umes about the impact and enduring legacy of New Orleans’s problematic
representations of race. Even in the midst of heart-wrenching devastation and poten-
tially new understandings about race and poverty in the city and the nation, the pres-
ident circulated a construction of a New Orleans without racial problems at best, or
worse, without a black population worthy of attention.
Given the tourism narrative’s influence on political and economic support, we
must demand and create a more truthful, thoughtful, and positive historical assess-
ment, interpretation, and reimagining of New Orleans on the part of cultural insti-
tutions, the tourism industry, and public officials. What is at stake is not only a guide
for remembering the past but a blueprint for re-envisioning New Orleans’s future.
Henceforth, we can ignore the tourism narrative and its exclusions and influence
only at our own peril. The limitations of the responses to Hurricane Katrina uncov-
ered the ways that racial representations within popular culture profoundly impact
the way that we live and die.
N
OTES
1. For an example of media coverage in the aftermath of the hurricane, see “Official:
Astrodome Can’t Take More Refugees,” FoxNews.com, September 2, 2005, http://www
.foxnews.com/story/0,2933,168112,00.html
2. For a similar analysis of Jamaican tourism and its reliance on the plantation economy and
the social relations of slavery, see Frank Fonda Taylor, T o Hell with Paradise: A History of
the Jamaican T ourist Industry(Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1993).
“THE CITY I USED TO. . .VISIT” 265
pal-marable2-04-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:59 PM  Page 265


--- PAGE 283 ---
3. New Orleans T ourism Marketing Corporation’s 1995 travel survey indicates that an
exceptionally high percentage of visitors to New Orleans consider their experience in
the city historically notable. According to the survey, New Orleans tourists visited his-
toric sites more than any other activity in the city and more than anyplace else in the
country. Sixty-four percent of New Orleans tourists visited historic sites. Eighty-eight
percent of those tourists who engaged in sightseeing thought that their experience was
historically notable, which exceeds the national average. “New Orleans 1995 T ravel
Year: Final Report” (New Orleans: Longwoods International, 1996), 166.
4. Jonathan Fricker, “Uncommon Character,” New Orleans Metropolitan Convention and
Visitors Bureau, June 2000, http://www.neworleanscvb.com/ (accessed March 1, 2003).
5. Will Coviello, “Style Points: French Quarter Architecture,” Visitor Magazine (January
2003): 10; Gwendolyn Midlo Hall, “The Formation of Afro-Creole Culture,” in
Creole New Orleans: Race and Americanization , ed. Arnold R. Hirsch and Joseph
Logsdon (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1992), 59.
6. For detailed arguments about how Africans’ language, customs, political traditions,
labor and technology influenced and sustained the new colony, see Raphael Cassimere
Jr., African Americans in New Orleans before the Civil War(New Orleans: University of
New Orleans, 1995); Gwendolyn Midlo Hall, Africans in Colonial Louisiana: The
Development of Afro-Creole Culture in the Eighteenth Century (Baton Rouge: Louisiana
State University Press, 1992); Kimberly S. Hanger, Bounded Lives; Bounded Places: Free
Black Society in Colonial New Orleans, 1769–1803 (Durham, NC: Duke University
Press, 1997); Hirsch and Logsdon, eds., Creole New Orleans; Daniel Usner, Indians,
Settlers, and Slaves in a Frontier Exchange Economy: The Lower Mississippi River Valley
before 1803 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1992); Charles Vincent,
The African American Experience in Louisiana (Lafayette: University of Southwestern
Louisiana, 1999).
7. “Louisiana Basics,” Baton Rouge City Guide , http://www.baton-rouge.com/Baton
Rouge/labasics.htm.
8. Thomas Ingersoll, “Free Blacks in a Slave Society: New Orleans, 1718–1812,” The
William and Mary Quarterly 48, no. 2 (1991): 176.
9. See Ingersoll, Mammon and Manon in Early New Orleans: The First Slave Society in the
Deep South, 1718–1819 (Knoxville: University of T ennessee Press, 1999); Walter
Johnson, Soul by Soul: Life Inside the Antebellum Slave Market (Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 1999).
10. Most New Orleans tourism guides and Web sites feature plantations located on River
Road, listed on the National Register of Historic Places and described in the 2002
Louisiana Official T our Guideas “plantation alley.” River Road stretches for about 70
miles between New Orleans and Baton Rouge on both sides of the Mississippi River.
The road is noted for the elaborate plantations that were constructed by exorbitantly
wealthy sugar cane planters in the years preceding the Civil War. See also, “The River
Road,” National Park Service , http://www.cr.nps.gov/nr/travel/louisiana/riverroad
.htm. In addition to charter companies that customize tours, Cajun Pride Swamp
T ours, Charilie’s T ours, Good Old Days, Gray Line, Machu Picchu, T ours by Isabelle,
Old River Road Plantation Adventure, Steppin’ Out T ours, and New Orleans T ours all
offered tours from New Orleans to River Road plantations prior to Hurricane Katrina.
11. “Les Grandes Dames of the River Road,” Oak Alley and Nottoway Plantations, New
Orleans Official Visitors Guide 1 (2000): 127; “Evergreen Plantation—New Orleans
T ours,” New Orleans Official Visitors Guide1 (2000): 116; “Houmas House Plantation
and Garden,” New Orleans Official Visitors Guide 1 (2000): 116; “San Francisco
Plantation,” New Orleans Official Visitors Guide (Winter/Spring 1999): 107;
LYNELL THOMAS266
pal-marable2-04-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:59 PM  Page 266


--- PAGE 284 ---
“Romance, History & Beauty on the Great River Road: Oak Alley Plantation,” New
Orleans Official Visitors Guide (2002–3), 131; and “T ezcuco Plantation,” New Orleans
Official Visitors Guide (Winter/Spring 1999): 107.
12. San Francisco Plantation has even transplanted slave cabins and a school room on the
property to lend more verisimilitude to the plantation. See “San Francisco Plantation,”
New Orleans Official Visitors Guide (Winter/Spring 1999): 127.
13. New Orleans Official Visitors Guide (2002–3): 42.
14. Films, such as Hush, Hush, Sweet Charlotte, Interview with a Vampire, Primary Colors,
and Gone with the Wind were either filmed at or inspired by Louisiana plantations,
including Houmas House, Oak Alley, Chretien Point, and Greenwood Plantations.
See Louisiana Official T our Guide, 152, 194, 208; “Media,” Oak Alley Plantation ,
http://www.oakalleyplantation.com/media/.
15. See “Oak Alley Plantation,” Gray Line T ours, http://www.graylineneworleans.com/
plantation.shtml.
16. “Historic Homes: Step into the Past,” New Orleans Online, http://www.neworleanson-
line.com (accessed March 6, 2003). The list includes the Hermann-Grima Home, The
Williams Residence, Beauregard-Keyes House, Longue Vue House and Gardens, and
the Women’s Opera Guild Home.
17. Jolene Bouchon, “Big Easy Dining: Feelings Café,” Epicurious, http://www.epicuri-
ous.com/e_eating/e03_restaurants/neworleans/ (accessed October 7, 2003); “Past
Perfect Reservations” http://www.ppreservations.com/ (accessed October 7, 2003);
“New Orleans Real Estate: Elegant Victorian Home,” Nolarealtor.com, http://www
.mathildenelson.com/vt_3727_coliseum.htm (accessed October 7, 2003); “Past
Perfect Reservations,” http://www.ppreservations.com/ (accessed 7 October, 2003).
18. Examples include the Original Pierre Maspero’s Restaurant, which is advertised as the
site of the Old Slave Exchange, and Feelings Café (promoted for its “charming piano
bar”), which once served as the slave quarters for D’Aunoy Plantation.
19. The Omni Royal is on the site of the former St. Louis Hotel, which held the slave auc-
tions in the nineteenth century. This account is given on several New Orleans tours,
including Le Monde Creole, African American Legacy Heritage T our (in association
with the T ennessee Williams Festival), and Eclectic T ours’ “Freedom’s Journey: An
African American Perspective” walking tours.
20. See Johnson, Soul by Soul.
21. Introduction to Part 1, in Hirsch and Logsdon, eds., Creole New Orleans, 9. New
Orleans functions literally and symbolically in nineteenth-century slave narratives as
“down river,” or the epitome of the slaveholding Deep South. New Orleans figures
prominently in nineteenth-century slave narratives as the ultimate punishment for
bondsmen and women. In these narratives, New Orleans is equated to its slave mar-
ket, the center of slave trading in the United States. Its market is associated with the
lowest elements of slave society, namely, unscrupulous slave traders and harsh or neg-
ligent slave masters. New Orleans is the constant threat for runaways, unwilling con-
cubines, and other recalcitrant bondsmen and women. Even the threat of being sent
to New Orleans serves as an act of correction because the city/slave market personified
for bondsmen and women the evils of the slave system—heart-wrenching separation
of families, the moral undermining and abuse of black womanhood, and inhumane
conditions, marked by unrelenting labor and inadequate provisions. Although numer-
ous nineteenth-century narratives include references to New Orleans and its feared
slave market, three narratives, in particular, give sustained accounts: Henry Bibb’s
1849 Narrative of the Life and Adventures of Henry Bibb ; William Wells Brown’s 1847
Narrative of William Wells Brown, a Fugitive Slave ; and Solomon Northup’s 1853
“THE CITY I USED TO. . .VISIT” 267
pal-marable2-04-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:59 PM  Page 267


--- PAGE 285 ---
Twelve Years a Slave. For a brief discussion of New Orleans’ association with the evils
of slavery, see John Cleman, George Washington Cable Revisited (New York: T wayne,
1996), 5–6.
22. Jeff Crouere, “History of New Orleans” NewOrleans.com, http://www.neworleans.com
(accessed 2 April 2003).
23. For a detailed history of the struggle for civil rights in New Orleans and Louisiana, see
Adam Fairclough, Race and Democracy: The Civil Rights Struggle in Louisiana,
1915–1972 (Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1995).
24. For different analyses of the heritage industry in the US, see Richard Gable and Eric
Handler, The New History in an Old Museum: Creating the Past at Colonial Williamsburg
(Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1997); Barbara Kirshenblatt-Gimblett,
Destination Culture: T ourism, Museums, and Heritage(Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1998); Hal Rothman, The Culture of T ourism, the T ourism of Culture: Selling the
Past to the Present in the American Southwest (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico
Press, 2003); Fath Ruffins, “Mythos, Memory, and History: African American
Preservation Efforts, 1820–1990,” in Museums and Communities: The Politics of Public
Culture, ed. Ivan Karp, Christine Mullen Kreamer, and Steven D. Lavine, 506–611
(Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1992).
25. “Explore the City of Mystery,” New Orleans Official Visitors Guide (2002–3), 14.
26. For instance, T our with Chris and T ours by Isabelle, two of the four multilingual tour
companies included on the NewOrleansOnline.com’s multicultural pages before
Hurricane Katrina, offer typical plantation tours romanticizing the Old South. In
another publication, I critique a third tour, Le Monde Creole French Quarter walking
tour, for its inability to fully extricate itself from New Orleans’s racial mythology,
despite its inclusion of black characters and storylines. See “Race and Erasure in New
Orleans T ourism” (PhD diss., Emory University, 2005), chs. 1 and 3. The African
American heritage tours listed on the Web site, in contrast, propose a revisionist
approach to New Orleans’s typical tourism narrative by focusing on the “voice of the
slave” in plantation tours and/or by providing a black heritage city tour that incorpo-
rates a detailed history of African Americans in New Orleans. See “Heritage and
Multilingual T ours,” New Orleans Online, http://www.neworleansonline.com (accessed
March 6, 2003).
27. Marc H. Morial, “Dear Friends,” The New Orleans Official Visitors Guide 1 (2000), 3.
28. C. Ray Nagin, “Welcome to New Orleans,” The Soul of New Orleans (New Orleans:
New Orleans Multicultural T ourism Network, 2002), 5.
29. “Social T raditions and Cemeteries,” Soul of America , http://www.soulofamerica.com
(accessed 5 June 2003).
30. For scholarly discussions of Creoles of Color, see Caryn Cosse Bell, Revolution,
Romantics, and the Afro-Creole Protest Tradition in Louisiana, 1716–1868 (Westport,
CT: Greenwood, 1996); Carl A. Brasseaux, Creoles of Color in the Bayou Country
(Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 1994); Rodolphe Desdunes, Our People and
Our History (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1973) [ Nos Hommes et
Notre Histoire, 1910]; Virginia Dominguez, White by Definition: Social Classification in
Creole Louisiana (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1986); James H.
Dormon, ed., Creoles of Color in the Gulf South (Knoxville: University of T ennessee
Press, 1996); Hall, Africans in Colonial Louisiana ; idem., “Myths About Creole
Culture in Louisiana: Slaves, Africans, Blacks, Mixed Bloods, and Caribbeans,”
Cultural Vistas 12, no. 2 (Summer 2001): 78–89; Kimberly S. Hanger, Bounded Lives,
Bounded Places: Free Black Society in Colonial New Orleans, 1769–1803(Durham, NC:
Duke University Press, 1997); idem., “Conflicting Loyalties: The French Revolution
LYNELL THOMAS268
pal-marable2-04-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:59 PM  Page 268


--- PAGE 286 ---
and Free People of Color in Spanish New Orleans,” Louisiana History 34, no. 1 (1993):
5–33; Hirsch and Logsdon, eds., Creole New Orleans; Thomas Ingersoll, “The Slave
T rade and the Ethnic Diversity of Louisiana’s Slave Community,” Louisiana History 37,
no. 2 (1996): 133; Jerah Johnson, “New Orleans’ Congo Square: An Urban Setting for
Early Afro-American Culture Formation,” Louisiana History 32, no. 2 (1991): 117–57;
Paul F . Lachance, “The Formation of a Three-Caste Society: Evidence from Wills in
Antebellum New Orleans,” Social Science History 18 (Summer 1994): 211; Joseph
Logsdon, “Americans and Creoles in New Orleans: The Origins of Black Citizenship
in the United States,” Americastudien/America Studies (Germany) 34, no. 2 (1989):
187–202.
31. The historiography on Creoles of Color has until recently advanced this same idea of
Creole conservatism. Most notably, historian David C. Rankin has argued that Creoles
of Color unwaveringly upheld elite, white interests through slave ownership,
endogamy, and their insistence on a cultural, political, and social divide between them
and enslaved blacks. See, David C. Rankin, “The Forgotten People: Free People of
Color in New Orleans, 1850–1870” (PhD diss., University of Chicago, 1976); idem.,
“The Impact of the Civil War on the Free Colored Community of New Orleans,”
Perspectives in American History (1977): 377–416; idem., “The Politics of Caste: Free
Colored Leadership in New Orleans During the Civil War,” in Louisiana’s Black
Heritage, ed. Robert R. MacDonald, John R. Kemp, and Edward F . Haas (New
Orleans: Lousiana State Museum, 1979), 107–46. For a similar argument, see Laura
Foner, “The Free People of Color in Lousiana and St. Domingue: A Comparative
Portrait of T wo Three-Caste Slave Societies,” Journal of Social History 3 (1970):
415–22; Hanger, Bounded Lives, Bounded Places. For recent scholarship that argues for
Creole radicalism and alliances between enslaved and free blacks, see Bell, Revolution;
Hall, Africans in Colonial Louisiana; and Hirsch and Logsdon, Creole New Orleans.
32. Jerah Johnson, “Colonial New Orleans: A Fragment of the Eighteenth-Century French
Ethos,” in Hirsch and Logsdon, eds., Creole New Orleans, 53.
33. Ronette King, “Blowing Life Back into the Birthplace of Jazz,” Newhouse News Service,
http://www.newhousenews.com (accessed June 7, 2003.
34. For instance, while NewOrleans.com does include a fairly extensive section on neigh-
borhoods, the site provides a warning for only predominantly black New Orleans East:
“Neighborhoods vary in this area, so be aware. Take taxis at night.” Ironically, this
warning seems appropriate to most, if not all, neighborhoods in the city, yet it is
applied to only one. Furthermore, the only areas of New Orleans East that are high-
lighted in the section include the white neighborhoods of the Holy Cross community
and the suburb of St. Bernard Parish, neither of which are truly part of New Orleans
East. See “Areas of the City: New Orleans East,” http://www.neworleans.com (accessed
April 2, 2003). Another Web site joins the prevailing demarcation of the French
Quarter as safe, with this warning: “The area along the N. Rampart St . side of the
Quarter, and some parts near Esplanade are probably not safe any time ” (emphases
original). The site lists the “iffy-to-dangerous” areas of the city as “anywhere across
Esplanade Avenue into Elysian Fields” and “anyplace approaching N. Rampart Street,
from Canal to Esplanade, with an additional note that the public housing develop-
ment at the former site of the historic Storyville neighborhood “look[s] rough to me.”
See “Safety Tips,” Dave and Susie’s Guide to Romance in New Orleans, http://www.angel
fire.com/jazz/davensusie/safety.htm.
35. Brian Thevenot and Gordon Russell, “Rumors of Deaths Greatly Exaggerated,” New
Orleans Times-Picayune, September 26, 2005.
“THE CITY I USED TO. . .VISIT” 269
pal-marable2-04-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:59 PM  Page 269


--- PAGE 287 ---
36. For examples of Weblogs that corroborate this type of community effort, see Quixote,
“New Orleans, Hurricane Katrina, Update #3,” Acid T est Weblog, September 1, 2005,
http://acid-test.blogspot.com (accessed August 1, 2006); “St. Mike’s Hardware,”
Katrina New Orleans Weblog, October 24, 2005, http://katrinola.typepad.com/katrina
_new_orleans/2005/week43/index.html.
37. Charles Babington, “Some GOP Legislators Hit Jarring Notes in Addressing Katrina,”
Washington Post , September 10, 2005; Jennifer Barrett, “‘A Right to Rebuild,’”
Newsweek, January 13, 2006, http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/10841718/site/
newsweek; Julia Cass, “Notable Mardi Gras Absences Reflect Loss of Black Middle
Class,” special to the Washington Post, February 25, 2006; James Dao, “Study Says
80% of New Orleans Blacks May Not Return,” The New York Times , January 27,
2006; Mike Davis, “Who is Killing New Orleans?” The Nation, March 23, 2006,
http://www.thenation.com/doc/20060410/davis.
38. “President Participates in Roundtable with Small Business Owners and Community
Leaders in New Orleans,” The White House, January 12, 2006, http://www.whitehouse
.gov/news/releases/2006/01/20060112-1.html.
LYNELL THOMAS270
pal-marable2-04-2.qxp  10/21/2007  1:59 PM  Page 270


--- PAGE 288 ---
Chapter 18
THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION
OF DISASTER: NEW ORLEANS
AS THE PARADIGMATIC
AMERICAN CITY*
CHESTER HARTMAN AND GREGORY D. SQUIRES
The water- and wind-driven devastation that wracked New Orleans and the entire
Gulf Coast region during and after the 2005 hurricane season is virtually without
parallel in recent U.S. history. A staggering two million people were displaced (Hsu
2006). In the wake of Katrina and Rita came a series of striking events, most of
which were also without parallel. Illustrations include:
• Credible accusations of dereliction, even financial improprieties, on the part of
national sacred cows such as the Red Cross and the Humane Society, leading
to firings, resignation of the Red Cross president, criticisms by international
Red Cross organizations, and official state and federal investigations (Strom
2005, 2006a, 2006b; Salmon 2006a, 2006b; Nossiter 2006a). Workers for the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) also have been accused of
bribery (Lipton 2006c).
• Foreign aid coming to us, not from us—and then mishandled. The United Arab
Emirates was the leader, contributing $100 million (Lipton 2006b). (Cuba, on
the other hand, proposed to send medical personnel and equipment— as it does
to many countries—which the State Department ignored.)
• Pets taking center stage: many flood-endangered folks, the elderly in particu-
lar, refused evacuation when they learned from government workers that they
* Parts of this essay are drawn from chapters in our edited collection, There Is No Such Thing
as a Natural Disaster: Race, Class and Hurricane Katrina, with considerable updating.
pal-marable2-04-3.qxp  10/21/2007  2:02 PM  Page 271


--- PAGE 289 ---
could not take their pets—in effect, their family—with them. In response,
full-page ads, with maudlin photos, later appeared in the New York Timesand
the Washington Post. The Humane Society of the United States cleverly enti-
tled them “No Pet Left Behind” in their attempt to generate support for the
Pets Evacuation and T ransportation Standards (PETS) Act, signed into law in
late 2006.
• A mandating of moratoriums (albeit ephemeral) on mortgage foreclosures and
evictions—an intervention in the private housing market virtually unheard of
since Depression days.
• Absentee voting problems (only partially solved) on an unprecedented scale
for the April 22 New Orleans primary and May 20, 2006, runoff elections.
• The limitations of insurance coverage, as insurance companies flee coastal
areas and the federal flood insurance program went into the red to the tune of
$23 billion as a result of post-Katrina claims (T reaster 2006a; T reaster and
Dean 2006).
• The Iraq war comes home, as a strapped U.S. military, bogged down in the
Middle East, was unable to send National Guard, reservists, or active person-
nel and equipment to help out in the many ways the federal government has
supplemented state and local resources in the past.
But of course the most salient and ongoing story in New Orleans and cities through-
out the United States is one of poverty and racism—all those dramatic, pathetic
shots, on television and in the papers, showing who the prime victims were and their
helplessness, suffering, and abandonment —reflecting the current realities of race
and povery in America. Correspondent Wolf Blitzer, on September 1, 2005,
lamented on CNN: “You simply get chills every time you see these poor individu-
als. . .so many of these people. . .are so poor and are so black, and this is going to
raise lots of questions for people who are watching this story unfold” (CNN 2005).
While such images were no surprise to the community organizers, journalists,
academics, and others who deal with these issues every day, for all too many seg-
ments of America this was regarded as a “wake-up call” (T urner and Zedlewski 2006;
Broookings Institution 2005; Pastor et al. 2006; Dyson 2006). Speaking from New
Orleans just a few weeks after the storms, President Bush asserted: “Poverty has its
roots in racial discrimination, which cut off generations from the opportunity of
America.... W e  h a v e  a  duty to confront this poverty with bold action. . . .Let us rise
above the legacy of inequality” (Bush 2005). Conservative New York Times colum-
nist David Brooks, while mislabeling the events as merely a “natural disaster,” recog-
nized that they “interrupted a social disaster” (Brooks 2005).
And so the real questions are these: What created the pre-Katrina world? What
should the post-Katrina world be? How might we get from here to there? And since
Katrina is really a shorthand for a set of economic, social, and political conditions
that characterize most of metropolitan America, what lessons and models does this
provide for the nation as a whole? Ironically, we might say that in some sense we are
fortunate that iconic New Orleans is the focus: one can hardly imagine equivalent
national attention, had the locus been Spokane, T oledo, or Utica.
CHESTER HARTMAN AND GREGORY D. SQUIRES272
pal-marable2-04-3.qxp  10/21/2007  2:02 PM  Page 272


--- PAGE 290 ---
PRE-KATRINA NEW ORLEANS
Pre-Katrina New Orleans, like most major U.S. cities, was characterized by extreme
levels of poverty and racial segregation. The local poverty rate has long been high,
and poor residents have been heavily concentrated. New Orleans’s poverty rate in
2000 was 28 percent, compared to 12 percent for the nation. The number of high-
poverty census tracts (tracts where 40 percent or more of the residents are poor) grew
from thirty in 1980 to forty-nine in 2000. The number of people living in these
tracts increased from 96,417 to 108,419. Consequently, among U.S. cities, New
Orleans had the second-highest share of its poor citizens (38 percent) living in such
neighborhoods in 2000. In addition, the black poverty rate of 35 percent was more
than three times the white rate of 11 percent, and 43 percent of poor blacks lived in
poor neighborhoods (Jargowsky 1996, 2003; Brookings Institution 2005; Wagner
and Edwards 2006). And New Orleans has long been highly segregated. According
to two common indicators of racial segregation—the Index of Dissimilarity and the
Isolation Index—New Orleans is one of the ten or fifteen most racially segregated
among the nation’s fifty largest metropolitan areas. As a Brookings Institution report
summed up the situation: “By 2000, the city of New Orleans had become highly
segregated by race and had developed high concentrations of poverty . . . .[B]lacks
and whites were living in quite literally different worlds before the storm hit”
(Brookings Institution 2005).
But where New Orleans stands relative to other metropolitan areas is almost
beside the point. Big cities throughout the United States all contain large numbers
of poor people, many neighborhoods of concentrated poverty, and highly segregated
housing patterns. Why is this? What are the consequences? Oddly enough—and
even though nothing from his personal history or his follow-up actions reflects such
understanding and analysis (in his January 2007 State of the Union address, there
was not a single mention of Katrina)—George W . Bush got it right: We need to
understand the history and the legacy of inequality and why generations of
Americans have been and continue to be cut off from opportunity (Massey and
Denton 1993; Briggs 2005).
STRUCTURAL RACISM
Racial disparities and poverty are not the result primarily of individual actions or
character traits, as the culture-of-poverty theory asserts (Thernstrom and Thernstrom
1997; McWhorter 2000). They are the cumulative result of a long history of institu-
tional arrangements and structures that have produced current realities. We can start
with the 250 years of African American slavery and the longer-term effects that sta-
tus has had on wealth creation, family life, and white attitudes toward—as well as
treatment of—blacks. Eleven Southern states (including Louisiana) seceded; a bloody
civil war followed; and the defeated states (selectively) asserted a claim of “states’
rights” as a means of limiting national intervention. Afterwards, a century of legal
segregation throughout the South—overturned by the civil rights movement and sev-
eral court rulings—ensued, with less formal barriers at work in other parts of the
THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF DISASTER 273
pal-marable2-04-3.qxp  10/21/2007  2:02 PM  Page 273


--- PAGE 291 ---
country. Even progressive national policies—in particular, those introduced in the
New Deal period—were racially discriminatory (Katznelson 2005).
The Social Security system, when introduced, categorically excluded two occu-
pations, courtesy of Southern members of Congress: farmworkers and domestics.
Not coincidentally, these were occupations dominated by racial minorities, partic-
ularly African Americans. Federal housing programs provided minimal home own-
ership assistance to minority households and reinforced patterns of residential
segregation. The GI Bill following World War II similarly provided relatively little
education and housing assistance to minorities, compared to the massive benefits
whites secured from this program. Even when African Americans were offered these
federal benefits, all too often they were still effectively denied by educational insti-
tutions, housing providers, and employers.
But, of course, this is not “just history”—and in any case, history has clear and
powerful continuing impacts (Williams 2003; Brown et al. 2003). “Redlining” by
lending institutions and insurance companies is still all too common. School con-
ditions for black and white students are very different, and, Brown notwithstand-
ing, K-12 schools are resegregating all over the country, providing minorities with
inferior education, which in turn perpetuates intergenerational disadvantage.
Housing and employment discrimination is rife, as demonstrated by reams of
scholarly literature. Exclusionary zoning regulations, racial steering by real estate
agents, federally subsidized highways, and tax breaks for homeowners as well as sub-
urban business development prop up the system. Racial health disparities abound.
The criminal justice system—incarceration rates, sentencing patterns, the laws
themselves—reflects extreme racial disparities (Massey and Denton 1993; Mauer
2006; Smelser et al. 2001; O’Connor et al. 2001; Squires and Kubrin 2006). Need
we go on? Concentrated poverty and racial segregation severely reduce opportunity
of all types. As sociologist Douglas Massey (2001), co-author of the classic American
Apartheid, observes: “Any process that concentrates poverty within racially isolated
neighborhoods will simultaneously increase the odds of socioeconomic failure.”
The racial segregation and concentration of poverty resulting from these forces
have shaped development in New Orleans and metropolitan areas around the coun-
try. One consequence is that in New Orleans those with means left when they knew
the storm was coming: They had access to personal transportation or plane and train
fare, money for temporary housing, in some cases second homes. Guests trapped in
one luxury New Orleans hotel were saved when that chain hired a fleet of buses to
get them out. Patients in one hospital were saved when a doctor who knew Al Gore
contacted the former vice president, who was able to cut through government red
tape and charter two planes that took them to safety. This is what is meant by the
catch phrase “social capital”—a resource most unevenly distributed by class and race.
Various processes of racial segregation have resulted in middle- and upper-income
whites being concentrated in the outlying (and in New Orleans, literally higher) sub-
urban communities, while blacks have been concentrated in the low-lying central
city, where the flooding was most severe. And they had difficulty escaping: most
notoriously, on August 31, 2005, police in the West Bank city of Gretna blocked a
bridge from New Orleans, preventing large numbers of African American evacuees
from leaving the deluged city (Hamilton 2006).
CHESTER HARTMAN AND GREGORY D. SQUIRES274
pal-marable2-04-3.qxp  10/21/2007  2:02 PM  Page 274


--- PAGE 292 ---
INFRASTRUCTURE AND UNEVEN DEVELOPMENT
A related key issue is the failure to maintain critical public services, including the
infrastructure (e.g., levees in flood-prone areas). In the Katrina case, officials long
knew the protective levees surrounding the city were inadequate, leaving it vulnera-
ble to precisely the type of disaster that occurred on August 29. But whether it is the
levees in New Orleans, the bridges in the San Francisco Bay Area and the T win Cities,
or the public schools in almost every city, such public services are generally viewed as
expenses that need to be minimized rather than essential investments to be maximized
for the purpose of enhancing the quality of life in the nation’s cities. In its 2005 Report
Card for America’s Infrastructure, the American Society of Civil Engineers concluded:
“Congested highways, overflowing sewers and corroding bridges are constant
reminders of the looming crisis that jeopardizes our nation’s prosperity and quality of
life.” Assessing twelve infrastructure categories, the Society gave the nation a “D” for
its maintenance efforts, noting there had been little improvement in recent years and
asserting an as-yet unfunded $1.6 trillion investment need over the next five years
(American Society of Civil Engineers 2005). The consequences have not been and
will not be race- or class-neutral. Low-income people and people of color are dispro-
portionately dependent on public transportation to get to work and to shop, on local
police to keep their neighborhoods safe, and on emergency services of all types. They
have fewer private resources to serve as cushions in times of stress caused not only by
outside forces like hurricanes but by personal disasters such as sudden unemploy-
ment, unexpected illness or injury, or other vagaries of modern life. As James Carr
observed, if the city of New Orleans had been a more diverse community, it may well
have had the political clout to secure the levees long ago (Carr 2005).
The clear “bottom line” is that, while there still is plenty of racist behavior by
individuals, incompetence by FEMA and other public and private bureaucracies,
corruption on the part of government contractors and their partners in the public
sector (Eaton 2006), and other widely reported forms of malfeasance and misfea-
sance, by far the most potent force in creating these extreme disparities is institu-
tional racism—“color-blind racism,” as it is often termed (Bonilla-Silva 2003)—
something that most black people understand and experience but most white peo-
ple do not. Consequently, it should have been no surprise when Katrina hit New
Orleans that the areas damaged were 45.8 percent black, compared to 26.4 percent
in undamaged areas, and that 20.9 percent of the households in damaged areas were
poor, compared to 15.3 percent in undamaged areas. And if nobody is allowed to
return to damaged areas, New Orleans will lose 80 percent of its black population,
compared to just 50 percent of its white population (Logan 2006).
New Orleans and the Gulf Coast region generally, like virtually all metropolitan
areas in the United States, experience many costs of racism, concentrated poverty, and
uneven development. These forces may well shape, and hinder, redevelopment efforts
in and around both New Orleans and other communities seeking paths to prosperity
for their citizens (Mann 2006). Inequities associated with race, class, gender, and
other socially constructed markers are not inevitable. They reflect the conscious
choices made by political and economic decision-makers and implemented by public
and private institutions. Different choices are available in a post-Katrina world.
THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF DISASTER 275
pal-marable2-04-3.qxp  10/21/2007  2:02 PM  Page 275


--- PAGE 293 ---
SPECIFIC COSTS AND SPECIFIC LESSONS OF KATRINA
Not all past U.S. disasters were so poorly handled by government. While there were
both mistakes and positive lessons to be learned, a look at the Chicago Fire of 1871,
the 1906 San Francisco Earthquake, the 1927 Mississippi flood, the 1930s
Dustbowl, and Hurricane Andrew in 1992 is highly instructive, showing the impor-
tance of a comprehensive revitalization approach to recovery, rather than simple
rebuilding; involvement of the affected persons in their own recovery; the impor-
tance of oversight and accountability; the need for ecological balance; and the appro-
priate division between private- and public-sector responsibilities (Powers 2006).
Recovery in some instances focused on restoring the status quo, in others on true
reform—depending on who was in the decision-making role. Recovery in New
Orleans, no doubt, has been and will be a contested process. A brief examination of
key areas illustrates these dynamics.
HOUSING
Housing and rehousing (temporary and permanent) are of course critical issues for
family life, access to jobs, schools and other community facilities, and household
finances. The extent of destruction (of both privately-owned as well as public and
assisted housing) was unprecedented—a National Low Income Housing Coalition
September 2005 analysis showed 302,405 housing units seriously damaged or
destroyed by Hurricane Katrina, 73 percent of all units in the jurisdictions studied.
Slightly under half (47 percent) were rental units, 71 percent affordable to low-income
households (Crowley 2006). Subsequent HUD data showed that 932,944 homes were
damaged in Alabama, Louisiana, Mississippi, T exas, and Florida, 30 percent of which
sustained severe or major damage (U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development 2006). Of the 103,019 occupied public or assisted units (including
privately-owned units rented by Section 8 voucher holders) in the Katrina-affected
areas of Louisiana, Mississippi, and Alabama, 41,161 were damaged, 15,199 so
severely damaged as to render them uninhabitable (Jackson 2006).
And the government—national, state, and local—largely botched efforts at relo-
cation and replacement housing (Fischer and Sard 2006; Frank and Waters 2005;
Hsu and Connolly 2005; Lipton 2006a; Steinhauer and Lipton 2006; T orpy 2005;
Weisman 2005). In the scramble to find shelter for displaced people as they were dis-
persed to cities across the county, HUD encouraged local public housing authorities
to give admission priority to evacuees over people on the waiting lists—thereby pit-
ting one needy group against another, a predictable situation at a time when there
are 4.5 million more extremely low-income households in the United States than
there are affordable rental units (Pelletiere 2006).
FEMA’s initial response after the disaster was its standard disaster response: it
ordered trailers, providing them rent-free for up to eighteen months. Other FEMA
housing relief programs provide funding for emergency shelters and cash grants to
individuals for rental assistance, home repairs, and other personal costs. FEMA
ordered 300,000 travel trailers and mobile homes but placed them mostly in trailer
CHESTER HARTMAN AND GREGORY D. SQUIRES276
pal-marable2-04-3.qxp  10/21/2007  2:02 PM  Page 276


--- PAGE 294 ---
camps (“FEMAvilles”) they set up, isolated from transportation, jobs, schools, health
care, and shopping (Cohn 2005). The agency was able to install only 500 a day, with
a waiting list of 40,000 in Louisiana alone (Collins and Lieberman 2006). News
images of thousands of trailers awaiting delivery and installation sinking into the
mud in a field near Hope, Arkansas became a symbol of FEMA’s incompetence
(Brand 2005; Neuman 2006). Siting of trailers has been met with “Not in my back-
yard!” resistance by some parish governments in Louisiana and by neighbors in New
Orleans (Hustmyre 2005; Jensen 2005; Tizon 2005; Reuters 2006).
Perhaps the most bizarre problem with trailers is that they are structurally unsuit-
able for hurricane-prone areas (Barbour 2006). Added to that are the serious health
perils to occupants from high-formaldehyde-emitting particle board and composite
wood, causing serious eye, lung and nose irritation; the Gulf’s hot, humid climate
increases the rate at which these toxic, caracinogenic vapors are released. The vast
majority of the trailers FEMA ordered were built very quickly, likely with poor qual-
ity control (Spake 2007). More than 500 hurricane survivors living in these trailers
and mobile homes have sued 14 manufacturers in federal court, accusing them of
using inferior materials in a profit-driven rush to build the temporary homes (Storm
Victims Sue Over T railers, Associated Press, Aug. 9, 2007). Most disturbingly, since
early 2006 FEMA knew and suppressed warnings from its own health workers about
these trailer hazards—the agency stopped testing occupied trailers after discovering
formaldehyde levels 75 times the U.S.-recommended safety threshold for work-
places, and more stringent standards likely are appropriate for tight living spaces
where occupants (many of whom are children) spend more time than at their work-
place (Hsu 2007b, 2007c; Palank 2007).
As of late April 2007, some 86,000 families were still living in government trail-
ers, under unstable conditions (Eaton 2007a). A typical account of one such FEMA
trailer park, in Hammond, Lousiana—a rural area an hour north of New Orleans—
was headed, quoting one resident, “We Called It Hurricane FEMA” (Whoriskey
2007a). Five trailer parks in Baton Rouge, on airport land, are closing as the airport
has declined to renew the lease. “What trauma victims need most, stability, is just
what has proved most elusive,” noted one New York Timesstory (Dewan 2006a). Nor
is the agency’s profound dereliction limited to the housing area or the 2005 events:
as one account noted, “As many as six million prepared meals stockpiled near poten-
tial victims of the 2006 hurricane season spoiled in the Gulf Coast heat last summer
when the Federal Emergency Management Agency ran short of warehouse and
refrigeration space” (Hsu 2007a). In July 2007, FEMA announced it was throwing
away the last of 42,000 tons of ice purchased at a price of $24 million for the total
112,000 ton buy when Katrina struck—after paying $12.5 million in storage fees,
plus $3.4 million to melt what’s left (Washington Post 2007b).
Yet another expensive and contentious form of temporary housing was
hotel/motel rooms, furnished first by the Red Cross, then taken over by FEMA. At
the peak of hotel usage, FEMA reported paying for 85,000 rooms a night (U.S.
Department of Homeland Security 2006). FEMA’s repeated attempts to end the
hotel program and compel the evacuees to move elsewhere, when there were no
alternative quarters available, resulted in widespread public outcry and lawsuits
(McWaters v. FEMA2005; Blumenthal and Lipton 2005; Driver 2005; San Francisco
THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF DISASTER 277
pal-marable2-04-3.qxp  10/21/2007  2:02 PM  Page 277


--- PAGE 295 ---
Sentinel 2005; Austin-American Statesman 2005; Lipton 2006d). A Louisiana-based
federal judge issued a temporary restraining order enjoining FEMA from proceeding
with its December 15, 2005 hotel assistance deadline, calling FEMA’s actions “numb-
ingly insensitive” and “unduly callous” (McWaters v. FEMA 2005). And in late
November 2006, a federal judge ordered FEMA to restore housing assistance and pay
back rent to at least 11,000 families, calling the agency’s cut-off unconstitutional and
“Kafkaesque” (New York Times2006; Dewan 2006d)—a decision FEMA appealed. In
other lawsuits against FEMA, other federal judges used such terms as “incomprehen-
sible” and “a legal disaster” (Apuzzo 2006). The details of other, mostly inadequate
government rehousing efforts are catalogued in Crowley 2006 and Quigley 2007.
Insurance has been a further and quite serious problem. Insurance companies
have been insisting that their policies do not cover water damage caused by flood-
ing—and proving that there was wind damage (which is covered) rather than water
damage has been highly contentious (T reaster 2006c). Some 6,600 insurance-related
lawsuits have landed in Federal District Court in New Orleans alone, and as a recent
summary of popular sentiment put it: “Every neighborhood [in New Orleans] is full
of horror stories about companies that reneged on their promises, offered only pen-
nies on the dollar in settlements, dribbled out payments, deliberately underestimated
the costs of repairs, dropped longtime customers and sharply increased the price of
coverage” (Eaton and T reaster 2007). And yet, as an October 2006 New York Times
headline reported, “Earnings for Insurers are Soaring”—with the jump page head-
lined, “Record Profits Expected for Insurers in ’06” (T reaster 2006b). The Mississippi
Attorney General has sued one of the major carriers, State Farm and Casualty, and a
Mississippi Grand Jury heard testimony on possible criminal charges against State
Farm (New York Times2007).
A further dimension of the housing problem has been salvaging, rebuilding, and
reoccupying New Orleans’s damaged homes—deciding what houses or parts of
houses are salvageable, how to carry out the salvage and rebuilding work expedi-
tiously and at modest cost, who will do the work, and of course how to do it in ways
that do not endanger the health and safety of those carrying out these tasks.
“Deconstructing” homes, rather than bulldozing them—careful dismantling in
order to re-use the building materials, providing skilled employment, and reducing
landfill dumping—has been suggested (Zdenek et al. 2006).
A related problem has been the overwhelming focus on homeowners, with wholly
inadequate attention paid to the rental housing supply, both private and public—
which, of course, is disproportionately where the region’s poor families live (Carr
2005). Despite the huge hit the region’s rental stock took, few replacement units have
been built or restored for renters; consequently, rents have risen markedly: HUD’s
Fair Market Rent (a measure used for the agency’s Section 8 rent subsidy program)
for a two-bedroom apartment in the New Orleans metropolitan area was $978 in
mid-2007, up from $676 in pre-Katrina 2005 (Brookings Institution 2007).
But neither is Louisiana’s Road Home program—to assist homeowners in repair-
ing or replacing their damaged homes—anywhere near successful: as of June 2007,
it was estimated that the federally funded program may be as much as $5 billion
short, and as of May 2007, only 16,000 of 130,000 applicants had received money
(Washington Post 2007a; Whoriskey 2007b).
CHESTER HARTMAN AND GREGORY D. SQUIRES278
pal-marable2-04-3.qxp  10/21/2007  2:02 PM  Page 278


--- PAGE 296 ---
New Orleans’s public housing program and projects—a major resource of low-
rent housing for the city’s poor—were in poor shape before the storms. HUD went
so far as to place the city’s Housing Authority in receivership in 2002. There is 
considerable pressure not to replace or renovate damaged and destroyed units;
instead, to redevelop those projects located in potentially upscale neighborhoods—
the city’s public housing population was nearly 100 percent black—for entirely dif-
ferent uses and users (Nelson and Varney 2005; Filosa 2006b; Wilgorin 2005).
Louisiana Congressman Richard Baker was heard to say, a few days after the storm,
“We finally cleaned up public housing in New Orleans. We couldn’t do it, but God
did it” (Babington 2005).
In December 2006, HUD vastly added to the city’s housing problems with its
decision to demolish more than 4,500 public housing apartments—a move charac-
terized as “the most prominent skirmish in the larger battle over the post-Katrina bal-
ance of whites and blacks in New Orleans and how decisions on rebuilding shape the
city’s demographic future” (Cass and Whoriskey 2006). Noteworthy is what the New
York Times architecture critic had to say about New Orleans housing projects, in a
plea for restoration: “Built at the height of the New Deal, the city’s public housing
projects have little in common with the dehumanizing superblocks and grim plazas
that have long been an emblem of urban poverty. Modestly scaled, they include some
of the best public housing built in the United States .... [ T ]he notion [of dynamit-
ing the projects] is stupefying” (Ouroussoff 2006). And, in a declaration submitted
as part of a lawsuit to prevent HUD from going ahead with its plan to demolish these
projects, MIT Architecture Professor John Fernandez, following a five-day survey of
140 units in four projects (Lafitte, C. J. Pete, B. W . Cooper, and St. Bernard),
asserted: “My inspection and assessment found that no structural or nonstructural
damage was found that would reasonably warrant any cost-effective building demo-
litions. . . .I did not find any conditions in which the. . .residential units themselves
could not be brought to safe and livable conditions with relatively minor invest-
ment. . . .[R]eplacement of these buildings with contemporary construction would
yield buildings of lower quality and shorter lifetime duration, the original construc-
tion methods and materials of these projects are far superior in their resistance to hur-
ricane conditions than typical of new construction, and with renovation and regular
maintenance, the lifetimes of the buildings in all four projects promise decades of
continued service that may be extended indefinitely” (Fernandez 2006).
The centrality of housing to racial issues has been vividly illustrated in many
ways following the storms. Racial discrimination has been demonstrated in the fol-
lowing ways:
First, studies by the National Fair Housing Alliance (2006a, 2006b) found that
black evacuees were treated less favorably than white evacuees in their attempts to
obtain housing. Using standard “paired tester” techniques, the Alliance revealed the
litany of standard discriminatory housing market practices in two-thirds of their tests:
Some landlords represented to black home seekers that vacant livable units were
unavailable or unlivable, while showing several homes to whites; black home seekers
were charged more rent and higher deposits than their white counterparts; rental
agents failed to return messages to African American home seekers while returning the
calls of their white counterparts; rental agents offered special inducements like lower
THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF DISASTER 279
pal-marable2-04-3.qxp  10/21/2007  2:02 PM  Page 279


--- PAGE 297 ---
security deposits to white home seekers, while failing to offer the same to their black
counterparts. Parallel racial discrimination in the French Quarter’s tourist establish-
ments was revealed in similar testing by the Greater New Orleans Fair Housing
Action Center (2006a). T o wit: African American customers at Bourbon Street bars
and nightclubs received less favorable treatment than their Caucasian counterparts
and were charged more for drinks; house rules concerning minimum number of
drinks and dress codes were more frequently and stringently enforced against black
testers than white testers (Korosec 2005; Greater New Orleans Fair Housing Action
Center 2006).
The Greater New Orleans Fair Housing Action Center (2006b) also examined
listserv postings for rehousing offers (including one sponsored by FEMA)—most of
which reflected admirable charitable instincts, but some of which demonstrated far
less admirable, but widely prevalent (and self-deluding), racism in housing patterns
(Filosa 2006a). Among the postings (Perry 2006a; Greater New Orleans Fair
Housing Action Center 2007; Korosec 2005):
• “I would love to house a single mom, with one child, but white only.”
• “Not to sound racist, but because we want to make things more understand-
able [sic] for our younger child, we would like to house white children.”
• “Provider would provide room and board for $400, prefers 2 white females.”
Second, in September 2006, St. Bernard Parish, right outside New Orleans,
passed an ordinance barring single-family homeowners from renting their home to
anyone except a blood relative without special permission from the parish council.
Given St. Bernard’s history and reputation as a segregated, predominantly white
community, the motives for this extraordinary measure were not hard to decipher.
(Nearly 93 percent of the parish’s owner-occupied housing is white-occupied, and
potentially thousands of homeowners who left the parish after Katrina may wish to
rent out their otherwise-empty homes.) The council cited the need to “maintain the
integrity and stability of established neighborhoods as centers of family values and
activities,” and one of the supportive councilors remarked, “We don’t want to change
the aesthetics of the neighborhood.” The Greater New Orleans Fair Housing Action
Center, represented by attorneys from the Lawyers Committee for Civil Rights
Under Law and John Relman Associates, immediately filed a motion in Federal
District Court for a temporary injunction, claiming a clear violation of the Fair
Housing Act, leading the council to announce it would suspend enforcement of the
ordinance (but not repeal it). A second, similarly motivated council ordinance
imposed a year-long moratorium on the redevelopment of multifamily housing, pro-
hibiting renovation without strict screening and pre-approval by the council itself
(Chen 2006; Bazille 2006; National Fair Housing Alliance 2006).
But the overall problem is massive. As Sheila Crowley writes: “Solving the levee
problem may pale in comparison to solving the housing problem. It is impossible to
disentangle the housing problems in the Gulf Coast from its other major institu-
tional crises. The challenge for public officials and private enterprise is to restore
housing, health care, schools, jobs and commercial establishments in concert with
one another. Most people cannot return in the absence of any one of these elements
CHESTER HARTMAN AND GREGORY D. SQUIRES280
pal-marable2-04-3.qxp  10/21/2007  2:02 PM  Page 280


--- PAGE 298 ---
of community life. Moreover, rebuilding has stalled because there is not enough
housing for the workforce needed for the task” (Crowley 2006; see also Rivlin 2006;
Sayre 2006.) T o this list of linked needs should be added child care—“without child
care, parents miss days of work or lose jobs” (Reckdahl 2007). And the broader con-
text is that as a nation we do not take housing problems seriously enough. We are
light years away from establishing and implementing a right to decent, affordable
housing (Hartman 2006). And, of course, fundamental to the future of housing in
the Gulf Coast is the question of who has the right to return. Sheila Crowley again:
“While policymakers have been dithering, the modern-day carpetbaggers have
moved in. Speculators are buying up property at bargain prices, and multinational
corporations are getting richer off of FEMA contracts. Longtime residents some-
times do not have clear title to properties handed down through the generations.
Evacuees in far-off places are tempted to take what looks like a windfall of needed
immediate cash—usually well below what a knowledgeable on-site seller could com-
mand—for their homes” (Crowley 2006).
EDUCATION
Almost as important as housing—for families with K-12 children—is schools. Prior
to the storm, the system was one of worst in the country, according to Michael
Casserly of the Council of the Great City Schools, who observed: “Before Katrina’s
onslaught, the children of New Orleans were isolated racially, economically, academ-
ically and politically in public schools that were financed inadequately, maintained
poorly, and governed ineptly” (Casserly 2006). The damage to the educational enter-
prise on August 29 was enormous, as over two-fifths of the system’s schools (dispro-
portionately those in low-income, African American neighborhoods) sustained
severe wind and flooding damage, many beyond repair, and almost as many suffered
moderate damage. And so tens of thousands of K-12 students wound up in differ-
ent school districts and different states, disrupting their curriculum and teacher/stu-
dent as well as peer relationships. A great many of them missed months of formal
education (Dewan 2006c). New Orleans Charter Science and Math High School
(2006) produced a collection of personal narratives by the school’s students chroni-
cling their evacuations from Katrina. Dewan (2007) describes a moving art therapy
program at the largest trailer park for Katrina evacuees, Renaissance [sic] Village, in
Baker, Louisiana, which helps children deal with their ongoing posttraumatic stress.
Their evocative drawings will be displayed at the New Orleans Museum of Art in an
exhibit entitled “Katrina Through the Eyes of Children.”
The U.S. Department of Education estimated that some 372,000 students—pre-
school through college—were displaced from the states hit by the storms. Louisiana
alone estimated that some 105,000 of its students were dislocated and not attending
their home schools—creating sudden and severe burdens on the receiving school sys-
tems, such as overcrowded classrooms. T exas indicated it received some 40,200 out-
of-state students as a result of Katrina and Rita; Georgia was accommodating 10,300
students; Florida, 5,600 (Jacobson 2006). These newly arriving students, of course,
arrived without academic, discipline, immunization, or health records. As of the
Summer of 2007, just 45 percent of New Orleans’s public schools had opened
THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF DISASTER 281
pal-marable2-04-3.qxp  10/21/2007  2:02 PM  Page 281


--- PAGE 299 ---
(Brookings Institution 2007). A state school board member is quoted as saying:
“The teacher shortage is real. The book shortage is real. We have a labor shortage.
There is a shortage of bus drivers. The whole food-service industry is short of work-
ers” (Nossiter 2006b).
A major change in the New Orleans public school system has been state takeover
of a large portion of the system and a shift to charter schools, a controversial move
and one that has been pushed as a more general goal by market-oriented advocates
in the education reform field (Saulny 2006a; Center for Community Change 2006;
Adamo 2007). An ancillary result (some claim, a goal) is weakening of the teachers’
union; the district’s teachers were furloughed in the weeks immediately following
Katrina, and their right to return to the system on a seniority basis was replaced by
state authority to hire and place teachers in the schools it had seized (Maggi 2005).
T eachers in most public charter schools are on year-to-year contracts without collec-
tive bargaining leverage. United T eachers of New Orleans has filed suit challenging
these arrangements (United T eachers of New Orleans, Louisiana Federation of
T eachers, and American Federation of T eachers 2007).
A more recent phenomenon has been a steep rise in violence and misbehavior in
the reopened schools, due in large part to the return of teenagers without accompa-
nying parents. Some parents, for a variety of reasons—many job-related—have cho-
sen to remain, at least temporarily, but possibly permanently, in the cities to which
they were evacuated, but they gave in to their children’s entreaties to return to friends
and a familiar environment, making do as best they can with respect to sleeping and
eating arrangements. One New Orleans high school, the largest one still function-
ing, where up to a fifth of the 775 students live without parents, is described as hav-
ing “at least 25 security guards, at the entrance, up the stairs, and outside classes. The
school has a metal detector, four police officers and four police cruisers on the side-
walk.” A student observed, “We have a lot of security guards and not enough teach-
ers.” Another student added, “It’s like you’re in jail. You have people watching you
all the time” (Nossiter 2006b). One can only imagine the long-range impact of this
schooling crisis on the future lives of thousands of angry, lonely, deracinated teens.
The new focus on “the school-to-prison pipeline” around the country certainly has
taken root here.
The future of the city’s school system remains murky, in part because no one can
reliably predict how many families will eventually return, who they will be, and to
which parts of the city they will return. The experience of better schooling for their
children in another city may be a key decision-making factor for some families. But,
as Michael Casserly (2006, 211–12) observes: “One can also see flashing yellow
lights on the horizon. The preliminary plans for remaking the city’s public schools
were designed by people who were substantially different in hue from educational
decision-makers before the storm, a touchy issue in these still racially-sensitive times.
The proposal to replace the currently elected school board with an appointed school
board, for instance, is bound to exacerbate concerns among community activists and
parents that the schools, along with other city agencies, are being highjacked by alien
forces.” And Casserly (2006, 213) appropriately extends this warning: “New Orleans
is not the only city. . .in which our poorest children are concentrated and isolated in
such a way. . . .And it is not the only one that embodies the nation’s neglect of its
CHESTER HARTMAN AND GREGORY D. SQUIRES282
pal-marable2-04-3.qxp  10/21/2007  2:02 PM  Page 282


--- PAGE 300 ---
poor. One can see the same pattern in many other cities across the country—if one
is only willing to open one’s eyes. And, in other cities, we run the same risk. . .what-
ever the next storm, wherever the next levees.”
HEALTH
Another critical service is public health. The storms created their own public health
problems—notably, toxins from damage to buildings and vehicles; brackish, sewage-
contaminated flood water; decomposing bodies; vermin; and many other sources.
The immediate crisis was described by Dr. Evangeline Franklin (2006), Director
of Clinical Services and Employee Health for the City of New Orleans:
Aside from immediate and long-term mold and the lack of water, food, shelter and san-
itation facilities, there was concern that the prolonged flooding might lead to an out-
break of health problems in many neighborhoods among the remaining population. In
addition to dehydration and food poisoning, there was the potential for communica-
ble disease outbreaks of diarrhea and respiratory illness, all related to the growing con-
tamination of food and drinking water supplies in the area. After dewatering and
house-to-house searches for dead bodies and animals, public health concerns centered
around acute environmental hazards related to houses standing in water for several
weeks (mold, bacteria, concealed rodents, snakes and alligators). This was combined
with ruptured sewage lines, refuse, structural instability, debris, the lack of sanitary
water (what water they had was usable only for flushing toilets), as well as a lack of gas
and electricity. . . .There was concern that the chemical plants and refineries in the area
could have released pollutants into the floodwaters. People who suffer from allergies or
chronic respiratory disorders, such as asthma, were susceptible to what some health
officials have dubbed “Katrina Cough.” On September 6, it was reported that
Escherichia coli (E. coli) had been detected at unsafe levels in the water that flooded the
city. The CDC [Center for Disease Control and Prevention] reported on September 7
that five people had died of bacterial infection from drinking water contaminated with
Vibrio vulnificus, a bacterium from the Gulf of Mexico. (Franklin 2006)
As was the case with the schools, New Orleans was a community at risk well
before August 29. An Urban Institute report (Zuckerman and Coughlin 2006, cited
in Franklin 2006, 185) noted that before the storms hit: “According to the United
Health Foundation’s 2004 State Health Rankings. . .Louisiana ranked lowest overall
in the country. It numbered among the five worst states for infant mortality, cancer
deaths, prevalence of smoking, and premature deaths. . . .Louisianans also had
among the nation’s highest rates of cardiovascular deaths, motor vehicle deaths,
occupational fatalities, infectious diseases, and violent crime.” This majority-black
city with extreme levels of poverty produced a de facto caste system of health care,
providing unequal, lesser treatment for the poor, the uneducated, the homeless, the
immigrant, the uninsured, and others who are disenfranchised (Institute of
Medicine 2003; Franklin, Hall, and Burris 2005). State funding cutbacks beginning
in 2004 led to dramatic reductions by more than two-thirds in ambulatory care serv-
ices for the poorest residents and reduced access to nonemergency care for the unin-
sured—leading to increasingly congested emergency rooms.
THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF DISASTER 283
pal-marable2-04-3.qxp  10/21/2007  2:02 PM  Page 283


--- PAGE 301 ---
Most of the city’s hospitals, located in the center of the city, were damaged or
flooded, leading to loss of over half of the state’s hospital beds and one of the state’s two
Level 1 trauma centers (Barringer 2006). As of the Summer of 2007, only 13 of New
Orleans’s 23 pre-Katrina hospitals were open (Eaton 2007b; Brookings Institution
2007). Doctors’ offices were rendered unusable, as were pharmacies. As part of gen-
eral layoffs of city workers, Health Department staff for its clinics went from 250 to
72. Health workers at all levels evacuated, and a great many likely will not return. As
of spring 2006, there were virtually no dentists practicing in the city. Absence of for-
mer patient loads of course is a factor influencing health providers’ return plans, and
physicians need hospitals, support facilities, labs, x-ray units and pharmacies to pro-
vide the proper level of health care. One major problem is the loss of health records—
leading to strong recommendations for development of a system of portable, electronic,
transmittable records (Franklin 2006).
Higher rates of illness among evacuees have been reported, especially among chil-
dren. Mental health problems are rife, with a notable rise in suicides (T urner 2006).
The Regional Administrator for Health Unit 2 in Baton Rouge Parish, where some
30,000 persons relocated following the hurricanes, noted that the parish’s mental
health clinic has seen a 30 percent increase in post-Katrina office visits. “Many expe-
rience depression, anxiety, Post-T raumatic Stress Disorder and other mental illness
due to hurricane displacement and trauma.... T ransitional housing areas are report-
ing problems with child abuse, sexual abuse, domestic violence and substance abuse
as people struggle to cope with the loss of their community/support system while liv-
ing in close proximity to each other in tiny FEMA trailers” (Roques 2007).
Decomposed bodies are still being found, adding to the still incomplete toll of
storm-related deaths. And toxic waste problems doubtless will persist and show up—
Agent Orange–like—in years to come (Dewan 2006a, 2006b; Redlener 2006;
Nossiter 2005; Connolly 2005; Cass 2006; Hsu and Eilperin 2006; Barringer 2005,
2006; Cole and Woelfle-Erskine 2006; Saulny 2006b; T urner 2006).
A range of political, economic, and social forces have contributed to health care
challenges in New Orleans. The city’s historic absence of a manufacturing sector pre-
vented the development of a strong labor movement with its demands for health care
benefits. Cultural patterns (“ Laissez les bons temps rouler ”), and the high-calorie,
high-cholesterol local cuisine were contributing factors to the local health picture
(T urner 2006b; Franklin 2006).
In sum, the medical problems and unequal access to health care were predictable,
just one of the many areas in which poverty and race in our society compound vul-
nerability (Franklin 2006).
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
The issue of future (and past) economic development is prominent as well. Pre-
Katrina, as Robert K. Whelan points out, “the local economy was highly polarized,
with some professional people doing very well and a much larger number of people
employed in low-wage jobs.” (Whelan 2006). Employment growth was stagnant
during the 80s and 90s, and the city registered substantial job losses in port-related
CHESTER HARTMAN AND GREGORY D. SQUIRES284
pal-marable2-04-3.qxp  10/21/2007  2:02 PM  Page 284


--- PAGE 302 ---
industries and manufacturing while gaining jobs in health care, tourism, legal serv-
ices, social services, and education (Whelan, Gladstone, and Hirth 2002). The met-
ropolitan area lost more than 200,000 jobs in the wake of the storms; in November
2005, the unemployment rate in the New Orleans area was a staggering 17.5 percent.
Rebuilding economically has been hampered by multiple failures on the part of
the Small Business Administration and FEMA (Nixon 2007), as well as the failure
of insurance companies to make prompt and full payment, followed by the with-
drawal of several key companies from the area with respect to writing new policies.
Government cleanup and construction contracts went to firms from T exas and
Arkansas, rather than to local firms, which would have had the benefit of shoring up
the local economy. Labor contractors and outside firms imported large numbers of
immigrant workers, a substantial portion of whose wages did not circulate in the
local economy but were remitted to their home countries. And predictably, many
were not paid promptly, were paid less than what they were promised, or were not
paid at all. MacDonald (2007) offers a case study of Maryland day laborers who trav-
eled to Louisiana and Mississippi, working long hours, for a promised $10/hour,
shoveling mud and debris out of Gulf Coast gambling casinos and other dirty, dan-
gerous jobs—only to have to wait two years to get their paychecks—and then only
by virtue of a lawsuit on their behalf brought by a Maryland advocacy organization
that assists Latinos (See also Beutler 2007; Browne-Dianis et al. 2006). For a con-
structive approach to employment generation and economic development in recon-
struction projects—framed around conflicts but applicable as well to other disasters,
see Mendelson-Forman and Mashatt 2007. See also Browne-Dianis et al. 2006.
Unequal access to credit—residential as well as commercial—has been a serious
problem in the past and likely will continue to be. John Taylor and Josh Silver
(2006) have documented the extensive redlining that existed pre-Katrina and its
relation to unemployment and poverty conditions. In 2004, African Americans
received just 15 percent of all market-rate home loans written in the New Orleans
metropolitan statistical area, where they comprised 34 percent of the population—
leaving them to rely on high-cost, often predatory, lending. Had they received mar-
ket-rate mortgages in proportion to their population, they would have received
4,269 additional loans worth $458 million. In the area of small business lending,
during 2004, Community Reinvestment Act–covered lenders made loans to 38 per-
cent of the small businesses in Mississippi’s minority neighborhoods, compared to
51 percent of the small businesses in white neighborhoods. Equalizing the 51 per-
cent rate would have increased the number of such loans in Mississippi’s minority
neighborhoods by 6,588, worth $307 million. While income and creditworthiness
obviously play a role, differences in unequal access to credit are rooted in the struc-
tural dimensions of race and space, as noted above.
A further important element in the lending picture is the location of bank
branches: such local branches are generally found to boost small business lending,
but there are far fewer bank branches in low-income and minority neighborhoods—
as an extreme example, the predominantly minority, lower-income Lower Ninth
Ward and St. Claude neighborhoods of New Orleans have just one branch, while
bank branches are clustered around the French Quarter tourist hub and predomi-
nantly white neighborhoods across the city. As Taylor and Silver write, “the financial
THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF DISASTER 285
pal-marable2-04-3.qxp  10/21/2007  2:02 PM  Page 285


--- PAGE 303 ---
sector. . .has yet to address the inequalities between minorities and whites that were
magnified by the hurricanes’ damage” (Taylor and Silves 2006).
WHAT DOES THE FUTURE LOOK LIKE?
What, then, is the future of New Orleans—and by extension, America’s metropoli-
tan areas?
A story in the September 8, 2005, Wall Street Journal offers one vision:
Despite the disaster that has overwhelmed New Orleans, the city’s monied, mostly
white elite is hanging on and maneuvering to play a role in the recovery when the
floodwaters of Katrina are gone. . . .The power elite of New Orleans—whether they
are still in the city or have moved temporarily to enclaves such as Destin, Fla., and Vail,
Colo.—insist the remade city won’t simply restore the old order. . . .The new city must
be something very different, Mr. Reiss [chairman of the city’s Regional T ransit
Authority, who helicoptered in an Israeli security company to guard his Audubon Place
house and those of his neighbors] says, with better services and fewer poor peo-
ple. . .,“Those who want to see the city rebuilt want to see it done in a completely dif-
ferent way: demographically, geographically and politically.”
This speaks to the replanning process and who is involved in it. Is there to be a true
right of return (Wellington 2006)—especially for those who lived in the most run-
down and vulnerable parts of the city, such as the infamous Lower 9th Ward? (See
ACORN 2007; Nossiter 2007; Solnit 2007) How can we avoid placing people in
danger of future storms and levee failures? Who is responsible for carrying out plans?
(An interesting international dimension to these issues occurred in November 2006,
when a delegation of Katrina/Rita survivor advocates traveled to Thailand to meet
with representatives of those impacted by the 2004 tsunami and the more recent
earthquake in Yogyakarta, Indonesia, “to claim their human rights and dignity, while
leading the process of rebuilding their communities with full participation and
empowerment.” Reference was made to government responsibility for such survivors
as Internally Displaced Persons, who have special protections under international
human rights standards. (See National Economic & Social Rights Initiative 2006.)
Peter Marcuse offers a counter to the Wall Street Journalvision: “the principle guid-
ing the planning efforts should not simply be subservience to the desires of the
‘monied, mostly white elite,’ sweeping the area’s past problems under the table and its
poorer residents out the door” (Marcuse 2006). Rather the process should provide true
democratic participation of all those affected by the disaster (involving evacuees who
have not returned, as well as those now in New Orleans) and equitable distribution of
costs and benefits. That latter goal speaks to economic development for the poor, a
true safety net, fair compensation for what has been lost. Beyond New Orleans, “the
goals should. . . be. . . moving towards making the cities and region affected a model
of what American communities should and could be,” and the federal government
needs to play the key financing role. (See also Birch and Wachter 2007.)
The most detailed, comprehensive approach—combining democracy and equity,
backed by the needed implementation resources—is the Congressional Black Caucus’
CHESTER HARTMAN AND GREGORY D. SQUIRES286
pal-marable2-04-3.qxp  10/21/2007  2:02 PM  Page 286


--- PAGE 304 ---
Hurricane Katrina Recovery, Reclamation, Restoration, Reconstruction and Reunion
Act of 2005 (H.R. 4197 of the 109th Congress, with ninety-one cosponsors.) It did
not pass, and it was not reintroduced in the 110th Congress, but elements of it—
dealing with grants to states to respond to disasters and improvements to the Small
Business Administration loan guarantee program—have been introduced as free-
standing bills.
In December 2006, an elaborate “community engagement” process was held,
involving evacuees in New Orleans, Baton Rouge, Atlanta, Houston and Dallas
(with satellite gatherings in sixteen other diaspora cities attended by numerous, but
fewer, evacuees), produced by America Speaks, designed to produce a comprehen-
sive “bottom-up” rebuilding plan  (Unified New Orleans Plan 2006). And in the
same month, New Orleans Mayor C, Ray Nagin appointed Edward Blakely, a highly
regarded urban planner, former Chair of the University of California–Berkeley
Urban Planning Department, as “executive director for recovery management” for
his city (Nossiter 2006c).
john powell and his colleagues at the Kirwan Institute for the Study of Race and
Ethnicity (2006, 60-61) offer the following guidance on what is the most critical
issue--the role of race in America:
Questions about why African Americans are more likely than whites to be poor, and
why poor African Americans are more likely to live in areas of concentrated poverty,
are questions that were neither asked nor answered. . . .There was little critical discus-
sion of how historical patterns of segregation contributed to the racial layout of the city,
and how structures worked together to produce racial disparities and economic
inequality (Muhammed et al. 2004). . . .[B]roadening how we think and talk about
race is critically important for making sense of today’s world. Doing so also raises crit-
ical questions about the shrinking middle class, our anemic investment in public space,
the meaning of merit in a purported meritocracy, and the promises and failures of the
American experiment—all of which concern every American. Once we are able to dis-
cuss race and racism in these broad terms, we will be able to construct a response not
only to the damage wrought by Katrina, but also to that which occurs across the coun-
try every day. . . .[Katrina] created an opportunity for reexamining the connections
between race and class, and deciphering precisely how race has been inscribed spatially
into our metropolitan areas. In short, it has provided a rare chance to discuss the links
between race, equity, justice and democracy.
Race, as a transformative tool, can and should be applied to more than just the
rebuilding effort in New Orleans. Racialized poverty, segregation, and the decaying
infrastructure of our central cities are common problems plaguing urban areas nation-
wide. Used properly, race allows us to examine how institutional failings affect every-
one, and enables us to re-imagine a society where democracy and democratic ideals are
not constricted and undermined by structural arrangements.
We end with this observation by three academics (Frymer et al. 2006):
“The experience of African Americans in New Orleans can serve as the ‘miner’s
canary,’ as Lani Guinier and Gerald T orres argue. Similar to the way in which canaries
alerted miners to the specter of poisonous air, the fates that befall people who are dis-
advantaged by inequalities based on, for example, race, class, and gender are signifiers
THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF DISASTER 287
pal-marable2-04-3.qxp  10/21/2007  2:02 PM  Page 287


--- PAGE 305 ---
of society-wide inequalities. If policymakers and the public heed the lessons of Katrina
and make efforts to address the structural and institutional sources of American
inequality, perhaps the brunt of future disasters will not be borne by those who are least
able to endure their costs.”
Sober words.
REFERENCE LIST
ACORN. 2007. A people’s plan for overcoming the Hurricane Katrina Blues—A comprehen-
sive strategy for building a more vibrant, sustainable, and equitable 9th Ward.
http://www.rebuildingtheninth.org.
Adamo, Ralph. 2007. NOLA’s failed education experiment: Privatization runs amok in the
post-Katrina New Orleans school system. The American Prospect . August 15. http://
www.prospect.org/cs/articles?article=nolas_failed_education_experiment_.
American Society of Civil Engineers. 2005. 2005 report card for America’s infrastructure.
Reston, VA: American Society of Civil Engineers.
Apuzzo, Matt. 2006. Judge tells FEMA to “get going” on aid. Washington Post, December 14.
Austin-American Statesman. 2005. With holidays coming, evacuees will be sent packing.
Austin-American Statesman, November 22.
Babington, Charles. 2005. Some GOP legislators hit jarring note in addressing Katrina.
Washington Post, September 10.
Barbour, Governor Haley. 2006. T estimony before Committee on Appropriations, U.S.
Senate. March 6. http://www.appropriations.senate.gov/hearmarkups/gov’stestimony-
fullapprops.march06.htm.
Barringer, Felicity. 2005. T oxic residue of hurricane stirs debate on safety. New York Times,
December 2.
———. 2006. Long after storm, shortages overwhelm N.O.’s few hospitals. New York Times,
January 23.
Beck, Chris, and Preston Browning 2006. Fables of the deconstruction. Op-ed. New York
Times, November 30.
Beutler, Brian. 2007. In the lawless post-Katrina cleanup, construction companies are preying
on workers. July 16. http://www.alternet.org/story/56958.
Birch, Eugenie L., and Susan M. Wachter, eds. 2007. Rebuilding urban places after disaster:
Lessons from Hurricane Katrina. Philadelphia: PennPress.
Blumenthal, Ralph, and Eric Lipton. 2005. FEMA broke its promise on housing, Houston
mayor says. New York Times, November 17.
Bonilla-Silva, Eduardo. 2003. Racism without racists: Color-blind racism and the persistence of
racial inequality in the United States. New York: Rowman & Littlefield.
Brand, Aaron. 2005. Rep. Mike Ross critical of FEMA mobile homes delay. T exarkana
Gazette, December 15.
Briggs, Xavier de Souza, ed. 2005. The geography of opportunity: Race and housing choice in met
ropolitan America. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Brookings Institution. 2005. New Orleans after the storm: Lessons from the past, a plan for the
future. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.
———. 2007. The New Orleans Index—Second Anniversary Special Edition: A review of key
indicators of recovery two years after Katrina. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.
Brooks, David. 2005. “Katrina’s silver lining.” New York Times, September 8.
CHESTER HARTMAN AND GREGORY D. SQUIRES288
pal-marable2-04-3.qxp  10/21/2007  2:02 PM  Page 288


--- PAGE 306 ---
Brown, Michael K., Martin Carnoy, Elliott Currie, T roy Duster, David B. Oppenheimer,
Marjorie M. Shultz, and David Wellman. 2003. White-washing race: The myth of a
color-blind society. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Browne-Dianis, Judith, Jennifer Lai, Marielena Hincapie, and Saket Soni. 2006. And injustice
for all: Workers’ lives in the reconstruction of New Orleans . Washington, DC:
Advancement Project.
Bush, President George W . 2005. Address to the Nation from Jackson Square on Hurricane
Relief. http://www.whitehouse.gov.
Carr, James. 2005. Comments at conference on “Predatory home lending: Moving toward
legal and policy solutions.” John Marshall School of Law, Chicago, September 9.
Carr, Martha. 2005. Housing shortage hinders rebound. New Orleans Times-Picayune,
October 16.
Cass, Julia. 2006. For many of Katrina’s young victims, the scars are more than skin deep.
Washington Post, June 13.
Cass, Julia, and Peter Whoriskey. 2006. New Orleans to raze public housing. Washington Post,
December 8.
Casserly, Michael. 2006. Double jeopardy: Public education in New Orleans before and after
the storm. In There is no such thing as a natural disaster: Race, class and Hurricane
Katrina, ed. Chester Hartman and Gregory D. Squires. New York: Routledge.
Center for Community Change. 2006. Dismantling a community. Washington, DC: Center for
Community Change. http://www.communitychange.org/issues/education/publications.
Chen, Michelle. 2006. Housing watchdogs call post-Katrina ordinance "racist." New
Standard, October 6. http://www.newstandardnews.net/content/index.cfm/items/3731.
Christensen, Congresswoman Donna M., Brian Weinstock, and Natasha H. Williams. 2006.
From despair to hope: Rebuilding the health care infrastructure of New Orleans after
the storm. Harvard Journal of African American Public Policy 12:17–22.
CNN. 2005. “The situation room.” http://transcripts.cnn.com.
Cohn, Jonathan. 2005. T railer trash: Katrina victims need real housing. The New Republic,
September 26.
Cole, Oskar, and Cleo Woelfle-Erskine. 2006. Rebuilding on poisoned ground. ColorLines
(Spring): 26–28.
Collins, Senator Susan, and Senator Joseph Lieberman. 2006. Letter to Secretary of U.S.
Department of Homeland Security Michael Chertoff. http://www.nlihc.org/news/
031406collinsletter.pdf.
Connolly, Ceci. 2005. Katrina’s emotional damage lingers. Washington Post, December 7.
Crowley, Sheila. 2006. Where is home? Housing for low-income people after the 2005 hurri-
canes. In There is no such thing as a natural disaster: Race, class and Hurricane Katrina ,
ed. Chester Hartman and Gregory D. Squires. New York: Routledge.
Dewan, Shaila. 2006a. Storm evacuees found to suffer health setbacks. New York Times, April
18.
———. 2006b. In attics and rubble: More bodies and questions. New York Times, April 11.
———. 2006c. For many, education is another storm victim. New York Times, June 1.
———. 2006d. FEMA ordered to restore evacuees’ housing aid. New York Times, November 30.
———. 2006e. Storm evacuees remain in grip of uncertainty. New York Times, December 6.
———. 2007. Using crayons to exorcise Katrina. New York Times, September 17.
Driver, Anna. 2005. Some Katrina victims face NY homeless shelters. Reuters, November 18.
Dyson, Michael Eric. 2006. Come hell or high water: Hurricane Katrina and the color of disas-
ter. New York: Perseus Books.
Eaton, Leslie. 2006. In Louisiana, graft inquiries are increasing. New York Times, March 18.
THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF DISASTER 289
pal-marable2-04-3.qxp  10/21/2007  2:02 PM  Page 289


--- PAGE 307 ---
———. 2007a. Hurricane survivors to buy U.S. trailers or pay rental fee. New York Times,
April 27.
———. 2007b. Shuttered hospitals ensure slow recovery in New Orleans. New York Times,
July 24.
Eaton, Leslie and Joseph R. T reaster. 2007. Insurers bear brunt of anger in New Orleans. New
York Times, September 3.
FEMA's latest fumble. 2005. Northeast Mississippi Daily Journal, November 18.
Fernandez, John E. 2006. Declaration of John F . Fernandez, U.S. District Court for the
Eastern District of Louisiana. Yolanda Anderson et al. v. Alphonso Jackson et al . Civil
Action No. 06-3296. October 23.
Filosa, Gwen. 2006a. Housing discrimination hits the Web: Post-Katrina ads cited in federal
complaints. New Orleans Times-Picayune, January 3.
———. 2006b. Displaced residents demand access to public housing. New Orleans Times-
Picayune, June 3.
Fischer, Will, and Barbara Sard. 2006. Housing needs of many low-income hurricane evacuees are
not being adequately addressed . Washington, DC: Center on Budget and Policy
Priorities.
Frank, Representative Barney, and Representative Maxine Waters. 2005. Reps. Frank and
Waters: Where’s the Katrina Housing Plan? Press Release. November 8. http://www
.house.gov/banking_democrats/pr11082005a.html.
Franklin, Evangeline. 2006. A new kind of medical disaster in the United States. In There is
no such thing as a natural disaster: Race, class and Hurricane Katrina , ed. Chester
Hartman and Gregory D. Squires. New York: Routledge.
Franklin, Evangeline, Patrick Hall, and Nancy Burris. 2005. Getting people healthy in New
Orleans. 2 Vols. New Orleans Health Department. Unpublished.
Frymer, Paul, Dara Z. Strolovitch, and Dorian T . Warren. 2006. Katrina's political roots and
divisions: Race, class, and federalism in American politics. Understanding Katrina:
Perspectives from the social sciences. http://understandingkatrina.ssrc.org/Frymer
StrolovitchWarren.
Greater New Orleans Fair Housing Action Center. 2006. Audit of Bourbon Street discrimi-
nation against African-American males. Unpublished manuscript.
———. 2007. For rent, unless you’re black: An audit report and study on race discrimina-
tioin in the greater New Orleans metropolitan rental housing market. New Orleans:
The Center.
Hamilton, Bruce. 2006. Bridge standoff still under scope: Gretna faces lawsuit for stopping
evacuees. New Orleans Times-Picayune, January 4.
Hartman, Chester. 2006. The case for a right to housing. In A right to housing: Foundation 
for a new social agenda, ed. Rachel G. Bratt, Michael E. Stone, and Chester Hartman.
Philadelphia: T emple University Press.
Hattiesburg American. 2005. "What next" for victims of Katrina? Hattiesburg American
(Hattiesburg, MS), November 16.
Hsu, Spencer S. 2006. 2 million displaced by storms. Washington Post, January 13.
———. 2007a. T ons of food spoiled as FEMA ran out of storage space. Washington Post, 
April 13.
———. 2007b. FEMA knew of toxic gas in trailers. Washington Post, July 20.
———. 2007c. FEMA to let Katrina victims move from trailers into hotels. Washington Post,
September 5.
Hsu, Spencer S., and Juliet Eilperin. 2006. Safety of post-hurricane sludge is disputed.
Washington Post, February 23.
Hsu, Spencer S., and Ceci Connolly. 2005. Housing the displaced is rife with delays.
Washington Post, September 23.
CHESTER HARTMAN AND GREGORY D. SQUIRES290
pal-marable2-04-3.qxp  10/21/2007  2:02 PM  Page 290


--- PAGE 308 ---
Hustmyre, Chuck. 2005. Residents, evacuees jam meeting. Baton Rouge Advocate, November 9.
Institute of Medicine. 2003. Unequal treatment: Confronting racial and ethnic disparities in
health care, ed. Brian D. Smedley, Adrienne Y. Stith, and Alan R. Nelson. Washington,
DC: National Academy Press.
Jackson, Secretary Alphonso. 2006. T estimony before Committee on Banking, Housing, and
Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate. http://www.nlihc.org.
Jacobson, Linda. 2006. Hurricane’s aftermath is ongoing. Education Week, February 1.
Jargowsky, Paul. 1996. Poverty and place: Ghettos, barrios, and the American city. New York:
Russell Sage Foundation.
———. 2003. Stunning progress, hidden problems: The dramatic decline of concentrated poverty
in the 1990s. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.
Jensen, Lynne. 2005. FEMA trailer plans hit stoplight in New Orleans. New Orleans Times-
Picayune, December 1.
Katznelson, Ira. 2005. When affirmative action was white: An untold history of racial inequality
in twentieth-century America. New York: Norton.
Korosec, Thomas. 2005. Survey finds bias in evacuee housing: 66 percent of white callers got
better deals in Houston and 16 other cities. Houston Chronicle, December 27.
Lipton, Eric. 2006a. T railers, vital after hurricane, now pose own risks on Gulf. New York
Times, March 16.
———. 2006b. Hurricane relief from abroad was mishandled. New York Times, April 7.
———. 2006c. FEMA workers accused of bribery. New York Times, January 26.
———. 2006d. FEMA is set to stop paying hotel cost for storm victims. New York Times,
November 16.
Logan, John R. 2006. The impact of Katrina: Race and class in storm-damaged neighbor-
hoods. Working paper, Spatial Structures in the Social Sciences, Brown University.
MacDonald, Christine. 2007. The Big Sleazy: Area day laborers helped a local contractor with
the Katrina cleanup. T wo years later, they’re getting their paychecks. Washington City
Paper, August 31.
Maggi, Laura. 2005. State to run New Orleans schools. New Orleans Times-Picayune,
November 23.
Mann, Eric. 2006. Katrina’s legacy: White racism and black reconstruction in New Orleans and
the Gulf Coast. Los Angeles: Frontlines Press.
Marcuse, Peter. 2006. Rebuilding a tortured past or creating a model future: The limits and
potentials of planning. In There is no such thing as a natural disaster: Race, class and
Hurricane Katrina, ed. Chester Hartman and Gregory D. Squires. New York: Routledge.
Massey, Douglas S. 2001. Residential segregation and neighborhood conditions in U.S. met-
ropolitan areas. In America becoming: Racial trends and their consequences , ed. Neil J.
Smelser, William Julius Wilson, and Faith Mitchell. Washington, DC: National
Academy Press.
Massey, Douglas S., and Nancy Denton. 1993. American apartheid: Segregation and the mak-
ing of the underclass. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Mauer, Marc. 2006. Race to incarcerate. New York: New Press.
McWaters v. FEMA. 2005. Case 2:05–cv-05488–SRD-DEK, Document 38.2005. E.D.La
2005. December 12.
McWhorter, John. 2000. Losing the race: Self-sabotage in black and white. New York: Free Press.
Mendelson-Forman, Johanna, and Merriam Mashatt. 2007. Employment Generation and
Economic Development in Stabilization and Reconstruction Operations. Washington,
DC: United States Institute of Peace. http://www.usip.org/pubs/specialreports/srs/
srs6.pdf.
THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF DISASTER 291
pal-marable2-04-3.qxp  10/21/2007  2:02 PM  Page 291


--- PAGE 309 ---
Muhammed, Dedrick, Attieno Davis, Meizhu Lui, and Betsy Leondar-Wright, 2004. The
state of the Dream 2004: Enduring disparities in black and white. United for a Fair
Economy. http://www.faireconomy.org/press/2004/StateoftheDream2004.pdf.
National Economic & Social Rights Initiative. 2006. Media Advisory. December 1.
National Fair Housing Alliance. 2006. “Still No Home for the Holidays” for Katrina Survivors.
Washington, DC: The Alliance.
National Low Income Housing Coalition. 2005. National housing advocates call on admin-
istration and Congress for action on housing hurricane victims. Press Release. http://
www.nlihc.org/press/113005pr.html.
Nelson, Rob, and James Varney. 2005. “Not in my back yard” cry holding up FEMA trailers:
Emotional tone of opposition hints at role and stereotypes of race, class. New Orleans
Times-Picayune, December 26.
Neuman, Johanna. 2006. The land of 10,770 empty FEMA trailers. Los Angeles Times,
February 10.
New Orleans Charter Science and Math High School. 2006. From the Second Line. Houston:
Katrina Writing Project.
New York Times. 2006. Kafka and Katrina. New York Times, December 2.
———. 2007. Mississippi Attorney General sues State Farm over Katrina claims. New York
Times, June 12.
Nixon, Ron. 2007. House committee to examine recent performance of S.B.A. New York
Times, February 8.
Nossiter, Adam. 2005. Hurricane takes a further toll: Suicides up in New Orleans. New York
Times, December 27.
———. 2006a. F .B.I. to investigate Red Cross over accusations of wrongdoing. New York
Times, March 31.
———. 2006b. Students after the storm, left alone and angry. New York Times, November 1.
———. 2006c. New Orleans picks professor to lead efforts on rebuilding. New York Times,
December 6.
———. 2007. In New Orleans, progress at last in the Lower Ninth Ward. New York Times,
February 23.
O’Connor, Alice, Chris Tilly, and Lawrence D. Bobo, eds. 2001. Urban inequality: Evidence
from four cities. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Ouroussoff, Nicolai. 2006. All fall down. New York Times, November 19.
Palank, Jacqueline. 2007. FEMA faulted on response to risks in storm trailers. New York
Times, July 20.
Pastor, Manuel, Robert D. Bullard, James K. Boyce, Alice Fothergill, Rachel Morello-Frosch,
and Beverly Wright. 2006. In the wake of the storm: Environment, disaster, and race after
Katrina. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Pelletiere. Danilo. 2006. The rental housing affordability gap: Comparison of 2001 and 2003
American Housing Surveys. Washington, DC: National Low Income Housing Coalition.
Perry, James. 2006a. T estimony before Subcommittee on Housing and Community
Opportunity, U.S. House of Representatives, February 28. http://financial services
.house.gov/media/pdf/022806.pdf.
———. 2006b. Fair Housing and Hurricane Katrina. Presentation at National Fair Housing
Alliance Fair Lending Conference, Washington, DC, October 12–13.
powell, john a., Hasan Kwame Jeffries, Daniel W . Newhart, and Eric Stiens. 2006. T owards a
transformative view of race: The crisis and opportunity of Katrina. In There is no such
thing as a natural disaster: Race, class and Hurricane Katrina, ed. Chester Hartman and
Gregory D. Squires. New York: Routledge.
CHESTER HARTMAN AND GREGORY D. SQUIRES292
pal-marable2-04-3.qxp  10/21/2007  2:02 PM  Page 292


--- PAGE 310 ---
Powers, Michael P . 2006. A matter of choice: Historical lessons for disaster recovery. In There
is no such thing as a natural disaster: Race, class and Hurricane Katrina , ed. Chester
Hartman and Gregory D. Squires. New York: Routledge.
Quigley, William P . 2007. Obstacle to opportunity: Housing that working and poor people
can afford in New Orleans since Katrina. Wake Forest Law Review 42:393–418.
Reckdahl, Katy. 2007. Crisis in child care: The extreme shortage strains local families and the
economy. New Orleans Times-Picayune, May 14.
Redlener, Irwin. 2006. Orphans of the storm. New York Times, May 9.
Reuters. 2006. T railer T rouble Chills New Orleans-FEMA Relations. Reuters, April 3.
Rivlin, Gary. 2006. Patchy recovery in New Orleans. New York Times, April 5.
Roques, Jamie M. 2007. Urban MCH leaders assess local urban mental health services (E-
Roundtable). City Lights 16 (1): 1, 4–5. http://webmedia.unmc.edu/community/city
match/CityLights/CLsum07.pdf.
Salmon, Jacqueline L. 2006a. Red Cross, Humane Society under investigation. Washington
Post, March 26.
———. 2006b. Counterparts excoriate Red Cross Katrina effort. Washington Post, April 5.
San Francisco Sentinel. 2005. Newsom slams Bush decision to cut off housing vouchers for
Katrina victims at beginning of holidays. San Francisco Sentinel, November 17.
Sarbanes, Senator Paul. 2005. Letter to Senators Thad Cochran and Robert Byrd. December
8. http://www.nlihc.org/news/120905sarbanes.pdf.
Saulny, Susan. 2006a. U.S. gives charter schools a big push in New Orleans. New York Times,
June 13.
———. 2006b. A legacy of storm: Depression and suicide. New York Times, June 21.
Sayre, Alan. 2006. Post-storm New Orleans economy a huger question mark: Housing short-
ages are on the minds of everyone. Associated Press, March 28.
Smelser, Neil J., William Julius Wilson, and Faith Mitchell. 2001. America becoming: Racial
trends and their consequences. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Solnit, Rebecca. 2007. The Lower Ninth battles back. The Nation, September 10/17.
Spake, Amanda. 2007. Dying for a home. The Nation, February 26.
Squires, Gregory D., and Charis E. Kubrin. 2006. Privileged places: Race, residence, and the
structure of opportunity. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner.
Steinhauer, Jennifer, and Eric Lipton. 2006. Storm victims face big delay to get trailers. New
York Times, February 9.
Strom, Stephanie. 2005. President of Red Cross resigns; board woes, not Katrina, cited. New
York Times, December 14.
———. 2006a. Red Cross fires administrators in New Orleans. New York Times, March 25.
———. 2006b. Bill would restructure Red Cross. New York Times, December 5.
Taylor, John, and Josh Silver. 2006. From poverty to prosperity: The critical role of financial
institutions. In There is no such thing as a natural disaster: Race, class and Hurricane
Katrina, ed. Chester Hartman and Gregory D. Squires. New York: Routledge.
Thernstrom, Stephan, and Abigail Thernstrom. 1997. America in black and white: One nation
indivisible. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Tizon, T omas Alex. 2005. La. trailer villages bring hope, some fear. Los Angeles Times,
December 15.
T orpy, Bill. 2005. $11 million per night to house evacuees. Atlanta Journal-Constitution,
October 15.
T reaster, Joseph B. 2006a. Home insurers embrace the heartland. New York Times, May 20.
———. 2006b. Earnings for insurers are soaring. New York Times, October 26.
———. 2006c. Judge upholds policyholders
’ Katrina claims. New York Times, November 29.
———. 2007. Grand jury looking at Katrina insurer. New York Times, January 18.
THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF DISASTER 293
pal-marable2-04-3.qxp  10/21/2007  2:02 PM  Page 293


--- PAGE 311 ---
T reaster, Joseph B., and Cornelia Dean. 2006. Yet another victim of Katrina: Federal flood
insurance program is itself under water. New York Times, January 6.
T urner, Dorie. 2006. Mental health problems from Katrina persist. Washington Post,
November 9.
T urner, Margery Austin, and Shelia R. Zedlewski. 2006. After Katrina: Rebuilding opportunity
and equity into new New Orleans. Washington, DC: The Urban Institute.
Unified New Orleans Plan. 2006. Preliminary Report, Community Congress II. December 2.
United T eachers of New Orleans, Louisiana Federation of T eachers, and American Federation
of T eachers. 2007. No experience necessary: How the New Orleans school takeover exper-
iment devalues experienced teachers. New Orleans: UTNO.
U.S. Department of Homeland Security. 2006. FEMA concludes short-term lodging pro-
gram: Longer-term housing efforts continue. Press Release Number HQ-06–020.
http://www.fema.gov/news/newsrelease.fema?id=23158.
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Office of Policy Development and
Research. 2006. Current housing unit damage estimates: Hurricanes Katrina, Rita,
and Wilma. February 12. Unpublished document.
Wagner, Peter, and Susan Edwards. 2006. New Orleans by the numbers. dollars & sense
264:54–55.
Warner, Coleman 2006. Rebuild sessions casting wide net. New Orleans Times-Picayune,
December 1.
Washington Post. 2007a. Nation in brief. Washington Post, June 2.
———. 2007b. Nation in brief. Washington Post, July 18.
Weisman, Jonathan. 2005. Critics fear trailer “ghettoes”—Right, left target FEMA initiative.
Washington Post, September 16.
Wellington, Darryl Lorenzo. 2006. New Orleans: A right to return? Dissent 3:23–35.
Whelan, Robert K. 2006. An old economy for the “new” New Orleans? Post-Hurricane
Katina economic development efforts. In There is no such thing as a natural disaster:
Race, class and Hurricane Katrina, ed. Chester Hartman and Gregory D. Squires. New
York: Routledge.
Whelan, Robert K., David L. Gladstone, and T risha Hirth. 2002. Building a workforce devel-
opment system in New Orleans . New Orleans: College of Urban and Public Affairs,
University of New Orleans.
Whoriskey, Peter. 2007a. “We called it Hurricane FEMA.” Washington Post, March 12.
———. 2007b. $2.9 billion shortfall seen in Katrina aid. Washington Post, May 12.
———. 2007c. Victims of Katrina file rash of lawsuits. Washington Post, May 13.
Wilgoren, Jodi. 2005. Vouchers in their pockets, evacuees find it hard to get keys in hand.
New York Times, October 28.
Williams, Linda Faye. 2003. The constraint of race: Legacies of white skin privilege in America .
University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press.
Zdenek, Robert O., Ralph Scott, Jane Malone, and Brian Gumm. 2006. Reclaiming New
Orleans’ working-class communities. In There is no such thing as a natural disaster:
Race, class and Hurricane Katrina, ed. Chester Hartman and Gregory D. Squires. New
York: Routledge.
Zuckerman, Stephen, and T eresa Coughlin. 2006. After Katrina: Rebuilding opportunity and
equity into the new New Orleans: Initial policy responses to Hurricane Katrina and possi-
ble next steps. Washington, DC: The Urban Institute.
CHESTER HARTMAN AND GREGORY D. SQUIRES294
pal-marable2-04-3.qxp  10/21/2007  2:02 PM  Page 294


--- PAGE 312 ---
Chapter 19
ARE THEY KATRINA’S KIDS
OR OURS? THE EXPERIENCE
OF DISPLACED NEW ORLEANS
STUDENTS IN THEIR NEW
SCHOOLS AND COMMUNITIES
KEVIN MICHAEL FOSTER
This chapter uses examples from the challenging year of teaching, learning, and heal-
ing that has occurred in Austin, T exas, to discuss the complex and varied impacts of
forced dispersal upon African American schoolchildren who are now attending
schools across the country. This chapter provides a picture of children, teachers, and
community in adjustment, including examples of effective practices in working with
children dispersed from New Orleans and examples of ineffective or racist responses
to new students that have been present and that we must counter.
This chapter is grounded in the perspective and methods of a school- and com-
munity-engaged educational anthropologist. It reflects over 100 hours of work in a
shelter immediately following Hurricane Katrina, and a subsequent school year of
work in Austin public schools working on issues of black student achievement—
including the achievement of close to 1,000 students and 10,000 families from New
Orleans. It builds upon Katrina-related work published in Transforming Anthropology
and forthcoming in Perspectives on Urban Education.
For most of us, the year starts on January 1 and goes from there. For the U.S. gov-
ernment, which maintains its own fiscal calendar, the year starts in October. In either
case, the “New Year” is a time of new beginnings—new money to be spent, new
ideas to be tried, new hopes for better days ahead. When things go well, the world
of teachers, students, and schools is little different. In late August of each year, there
are new teachers to meet, new students to teach, and new classroom communities to
join or build.
pal-marable2-04-4.qxp  10/21/2007  2:03 PM  Page 295


--- PAGE 313 ---
So what did “New Year 2005” bring to our children from New Orleans and the
Gulf Coast region? As we can imagine, for our children who were displaced by the
aftermath of Hurricane Katrina, the new school year meant displacement, loss, and
the realization of their worst nightmares. And what did the new school year bring to
teachers whose cities took in those displaced following the Katrina aftermath? Our
teachers and school administrators, along with many of the rest of us, began a jour-
ney into the surreal—where ideas about what was possible in this powerful nation
were challenged, and where ideas about how and how much we care for all of our
children, and about our lack of prejudice in this “colorblind society,” were put to the
test. It was also a year in which schools’ utter lack of preparedness to teach and serve
the diversity that is represented by our nation’s students was on tragic display.
In short, and though an admitted generality, for those in schools across the coun-
try that were affected by Katrina, this past year has been a meeting of the trauma-
tized (displaced children) with the insecure and ill-prepared (teachers, schools
administrators, and schools)–sometimes with surprising and beautiful outcomes, but
too often with predictable results that confirm our worst fears about the manner in
which American schools routinely abuse poor black children.
This essay provides a glimpse into the ongoing circumstances and adjustments of
children displaced from New Orleans
1 and of the schools and school districts in
which they eventually enrolled following their relocation. It focuses on Austin, T exas
(as one of the cities that has taken in thousands of new children and families) and is
grounded in the observations and work of a community-engaged educational
anthropologist. The essay reflects over 100 hours of work in a shelter immediately
following Hurricane Katrina and a subsequent school year of work in Austin public
schools working on issues of black student achievement—including the adjustment
and achievement of close to 1000 black students and 10,000 black families from
New Orleans. It builds upon Katrina-related writings published in Transforming
Anthropology
2 and forthcoming in Perspectives on Urban Education.
FIRST DAYS OF SCHOOL
During the evacuation and immediately afterwards, Austin proved to be a decent and
caring city, full of people who dropped everything to volunteer in any way they
could. But what would happen in areas of ongoing and close interactions between
displaced residents and those who were already established? Schools were one of the
spaces of such ongoing interaction—as students met teachers and teachers met fam-
ilies. So what are some of the stories from those early days? Do they give us hope for
what might come next for members of the New Orleans Diaspora?
Austin Independent School District (AISD) personnel spent several days in early
September on-site at the Convention Center, enrolling students and assigning them
to schools. As school and district personnel sat at computers and attended to those
who lined up to enroll, some progressive volunteers (several of whom had themselves
been displaced and had lost all of their material possessions) organized students and
got them and their parents into line. As the first day of schooling en masse began for
displaced children, busses lined up outside the Convention Center, and kids were sent
to one of several schools chosen for their initial transition into AISD. As families 
KEVIN MICHAEL FOSTER296
pal-marable2-04-4.qxp  10/21/2007  2:03 PM  Page 296


--- PAGE 314 ---
transitioned out of the Convention Center, kids changed schools and ended up scat-
tered across the District’s 107 campuses—two or three here, none there, and in some
cases, several dozen attending the same elementary, middle, or high school.
For one elementary school student things had started off well. As we sat at an arts
and crafts center in the corner of the cafeteria area that had been set up in the
Convention Center, he offered his perspective on his schooling circumstances. He
shared a sentiment that I would hear from other young children—he hoped that he
would get to stay in Austin. He liked his new school. It was clean, he explained; the
people were nice; he liked his teacher.
Other students started out similarly well, even as the magnitude and difficulty of
the circumstances meant that many approached school with little guidance or sup-
port. Once children were enrolled in schools, but before they left the Convention
Center, most spent their afternoons at a large computer area, which had morphed
into a video game area after some movie stars who live in Austin visited the Center
and donated video game equipment. Kids gathered around large screen televisions
and computers and watched one another play. Not too many seemed concerned
about homework. Meanwhile, a small number of children went straight to their liv-
ing areas that they and their families had set up. These were generally children whose
parents had provided strict instructions to go straight to their cots after school and
to do their homework. There they would quietly sit and work on math problems or
craft stories that they had been instructed to write. A couple of hours later their par-
ents would return from their day of job hunting, apartment hunting, or navigating
the city or federal service bureaucracy.
For one high school, where several students from the shelter were initially
enrolled, things hadn’t started so well. It is sometimes impossible to think of every-
thing, so perhaps no one is too blame for the placement of members of two rival
gangs onto the same bus for the ride to school. The bus actually carried students
from a variety of backgrounds and from different neighborhoods across New
Orleans, so there were plenty of students who wanted nothing to do with the fights
that broke out on the bus and compelled the bus driver to pull over and work to get
everything settled down. When the bus finally pulled into the school lot, students
who were already filled with trepidation and unsure about what to expect now felt
the added burden of being associated with and talking about “the fights.” This was
their unfortunate welcome to high schooling in Austin.
Finally, in yet another case, things didn’t go so well for a fifth grade teacher and
one of her new students. Ms. B had introduced herself to her newest fifth graders in
a manner that was unsurprising and routine. She asked students their names and
about themselves and told them she would like to be called Ms. B. The response
from Earl, one of her new students from New Orleans, was nothing she anticipated
or had ever experienced. “I’d like to be called Ms. B,” went her side of the conversa-
tion. “OK, Bitch” was his. The story of Ms. B and Earl, to which I’ll return later in
this chapter, provides a poignant glimpse of the challenges and possibilities inherent
in teaching students who have experienced trauma—be that trauma of several hell-
ish days (as during the Katrina aftermath) or of a lifelong nature (as in the case of
thousands and thousands of black and poor children who had been systematically
undereducated and abused in a broken public school system in New Orleans).
ARE THEY KATRINA’S KIDS OR OURS? 297
pal-marable2-04-4.qxp  10/21/2007  2:03 PM  Page 297


--- PAGE 315 ---
SETTLING IN
As the school year rolled on in Austin, the mobility rates of children from New
Orleans was very high—students switched schools often as parents worked towards
establishing stability. For many families, two immediate priorities emerged—finding
jobs and finding affordable housing. The most pressing complication, of course, was
making sure that both jobs and homes were accessible by bus. School placement was
often dictated by those other pressing needs, such that as families continually worked
to improve their circumstances, they were pressed to change schools as well. Things
began to settle down after a time, but even at the end of the 2005–2006 school year,
student mobility remained an important dynamic in the education of our children.
Throughout the 2005/6 school year, there were spaces of remarkable and dynamic
teaching, examples of the inadequacy of schools to address the circumstances at hand,
and some unfortunate cases of inexcusable behavior on the part of teachers and
administrators. Citywide, one concern put forth by the city manager and the mayor
was whether the City of Austin would be reimbursed by the Federal Government for
the canceled Convention Center events, the overtime paid to city employees, and the
expansion of the social service net to account for the new residents.
3 On campuses
across the school district, one early concern was whether the “Katrina Kids” would
“count” in the standardized testing accountability system (where schools are penal-
ized for failing to adequately educate their students). In classrooms, one concern was
how to handle “those bad Katrina Kids.” Over the course of several months, some
began to adopt the term “compassion fatigue” to capture their sense of having been
asked to care too much, for too many, for too long.
Such discourses of self-concern, selfishness, privilege, and fear did not go uncon-
tested, however, although they remain powerful and present. Discourses of despair,
hardship, and defeat were answered head-on by competing discourses of compassion
and (ironic) opportunity. Some nonprofit social service organizations, schoolteach-
ers, community members, and others actively countered the emerging rhetoric of
self-concern. Others simply did not care to notice them. Most notable was the
resilience, strength, and resourcefulness of many of the families from New Orleans,
as they saw a chance for a fresh start in a new place and were eager to make things
work for them in their new environment.
Within the swirling context of competing ideas about our newest residents and
their impact upon Austin, and amidst their lived realities of grieving and ongoing
struggles regarding future plans, schooling went on. The story of Earl and Ms. B—
the student who used profanity to address his teacher and the teacher who had to
figure out how to handle the situation—captures some of the challenges and possi-
bilities that some chose to acknowledge and work through in the midst of this whole
confusing morass.
EARL AND MS. B
T eachers across the nation know the exercise well. It is captured by a statement like
this: “Oh, she is so good with ‘those children’; we should give them to ‘her.’” “Those
children” are children with special needs. The ‘her’ is deemed an effective teacher.
4
KEVIN MICHAEL FOSTER298
pal-marable2-04-4.qxp  10/21/2007  2:03 PM  Page 298


--- PAGE 316 ---
In some schools and districts in Georgia, Illinois, or South Carolina, “those” may be
migrant children. In California, T exas, New York, or Florida “those” may be English
language learners. Often, “those” are the “discipline problems.” All too often, “those
children” are black boys. Regardless of the specifics, children are dehumanized by
such labels, but in the cases of our best teachers—the ones who do the most and the
best work—stigmatized children come into a classroom where their humanity is
restored. In Austin 2005–2006, “those children” were “the Katrina Kids.” At AISD’s
Slaughter Elementary the “her”—that effective teacher to whom the fifth-grade
“Katrina Kids” were sent—was Ms. B.
After Ms. B’s initial run-ins with Earl, she sent him to the principal’s office. She
did this with other kids as well. This backfired, however, and she quickly abandoned
the strategy. The problem was that, as the children quickly figured out, her well-
meaning administrators had trouble disciplining children who had been through so
much trauma. As Ms. B relates the story, she figured this out one day when she over-
head one student from New Orleans telling another in so many words, “If you get
sent to this principal’s office, just give your story—tell her all your stuff about what
you’ve been through and then she won’t do anything.” In essence, the kids, through
no fault of their own, were learning to be victims, to use their tragedy to their advan-
tage to receive sympathy instead of punishment (and who can blame them—this is
the type of strategy that smart ten-year-olds employ as they negotiate schools, par-
ents, and authority). But this was a disaster for Ms. B’s classroom. Kids came back
as unruly as before, but now were emboldened in their misbehavior because there
were no consequences for misdeeds.
As Earl continued to address Ms. B with curse words, she adapted her strategy (as
good and thoughtful teachers do). Showing extraordinary patience (not over hours,
days, or weeks but over months) she withheld attention from Earl. Unless a situation
demanded intervention, she simply ignored Earl when he was uncivil. On the other
hand, appropriate behavior was met with authentic and caring interest and engage-
ment, which could have been difficult, given the many times when Earl had been so
profoundly disrespectful.
Over the course of the year, an interesting dynamic emerged in Ms. B’s classroom.
Sometimes Earl wanted attention, and became tired of being ignored. At those
moments, and with increasing frequency, Earl began to refer to the teacher by her
name, and with appropriate respect. And then came what may have been the defin-
ing moment—just a moment—but one that Ms. B and Earl had been working
towards. Just before the Christmas break, Ms. B did what she usually did at that time
of year; she gave everyone a gift, along with a note about something she appreciated
about them. Nothing big—a cute pencil, a pad, a trinket of appreciation. Earl
received a gift, too. He took it with mild suspicion and surprise, but he took it.
And then came the break. And then back came Earl. By Ms. B’s account, he was
not suddenly perfect, but he was markedly different. He still cursed too much, but
no longer at her, and not so much at other people. His classroom and academic
engagement improved, and he generally behaved according to the expectations of the
classroom community. Over a very difficult several months, Ms. B had earned the
trust of a hurting little boy, and he had begun to respond. Earl’s story is ongoing of
course, and things are not perfect for him—in school or outside of it. But he is now
ARE THEY KATRINA’S KIDS OR OURS? 299
pal-marable2-04-4.qxp  10/21/2007  2:03 PM  Page 299


--- PAGE 317 ---
a more integrated member of a school community because of Ms. B’s work—he is
taught, cared for, and held up to standards of behavior and academic behavior. This
is a small story, of course, and it is a one of thousands of stories across Austin, and
thousands of others across the country—some of which have turned out well, many
others of which have gone horribly wrong.
There is an epilogue to the story of Earl and Ms. B. Once Earl and Ms. B had a
reasonable student-teacher relationship, they were able to talk. Ms. B asked Earl
what all the cursing was about. He told her in plain terms that cursing was what he
was used to in his old school—his teachers cursed at him and he cursed back. It was
the norm. In short, Earl’s New Orleans schooling experience sounded like one of sys-
tematic abuse.
5
Some would refer to Ms B. as an everyday hero. At the same time, we must rec-
ognize that what Ms. B offers is the spirit, perseverance, patience, and competence
that is required of teachers if we are to have children endure the everyday challenges
of life (let alone the horrific experience of Katrina) with their humanity and poten-
tial intact. Although not a trained counselor, Mrs. B and other teachers have had to
maintain a difficult balance in working with so many traumatized children. On one
hand, it is a teacher’s responsibility to provide for the academic and moral develop-
ment of all of the children in his or her classroom. According to a rich and histori-
cally rooted tradition of African American teachers teaching African American
children, this has meant high academic and behavioral standards and expectations
for students, along with adherence to an age-old adage that we need to hold our stu-
dents to the highest standards because our children need to be twice as good to get
half as far as their nonblack peers. On the other hand, the question that effective,
caring and reflective teachers struggle with is whether this is all the more true when
our kids suffer such trauma, or if under such absolutely horrific circumstances we
better serve our children by backing off and “cutting some slack.”
T rained counselors, let alone teachers, struggle with just how much to push and
how much to ease up in such circumstances. What astute teachers and counselors
in Austin reported and realized was that a range of inappropriate or difficult behav-
iors was to be expected of displaced children—not just cursing, but also fighting,
crying, disengagement from the classroom, and sullenness, among other behaviors.
In addition, poor behaviors were often wholly unavoidable, as they were fueled by
circumstances completely beyond students’ control—lack of sleep due to recurring
nightmares; entire families in mourning for lost homes, lost family members, and
lost stability; and additional home stress due to financial instability, overcrowding,
and not knowing where the family would live next month. The reality that cannot
be overstated is that our children from New Orleans have been through and con-
tinue to endure significant trauma, that this represents an ongoing challenge to those
who take their charges as public servants seriously, and that in those cases where we
are ineffective, children’s tragedies are only compounded by our failures.
Our best teachers, heroic teachers like Ms. B, can, must, and do find a way to
account for and even address students’ realities as they teach, in fact subtly weaving
healing processes into the classroom communities that they shepherd.
Unfortunately, the fact that teachers like Ms. B have to be seen as heroes lets us know
that she is not the current norm. Across Austin, many teachers and administrators
KEVIN MICHAEL FOSTER300
pal-marable2-04-4.qxp  10/21/2007  2:03 PM  Page 300


--- PAGE 318 ---
have not been effective in addressing the needs of our children from New Orleans.
In some cases, where administrators lacked the necessary socio-cultural awareness to
build bridges of possibility out of the circumstances, kids ended up fighting with one
another—kids from New Orleans trying to establish a sense of space and place, kids
from Austin defending the same, and ineffective administrators not understanding
what was happening and chalking it all up to the typical behavior of black people.
In other cases, teachers, parents, and principals could barely hide their disdain for
their new students. One administrator expressed that she “hated” the Katrina Kids.
In classrooms across the district, teachers sought to have kids from New Orleans
moved out of their classrooms and into someone else’s classroom, into special edu-
cation, or into the principal’s office. In such cases, the trauma experienced by our
displaced students was only deepened.
In such spaces of tragic ineffectiveness, we actually have schooling as usual in
countless U.S. public schools. Educational anthropologist Michele Foster relates that
she always knows when she is in a U.S. public school because of the line of black
boys waiting to see the principal. T o wit, I could have quickly exhausted my word
count for this chapter by sharing horror stories from the past year. My hope, how-
ever, is that readers are at least generally aware of the unchecked racism and teacher
ineffectiveness in our schools, so that while I can (and will) return to that topic in
other writings, I have been able to focus here on those aspects of our current crisis
that provide us (those in Austin, but also those in Houston, San Antonio, Baton
Rouge and any other city, school or neighborhood with new residents from New
Orleans) with positive examples that will best prepare us to move forward.
Some citizens from the Gulf Coast region have returned to places like New
Orleans to rebuild, but many others have chosen to stay in their new locales. Of the
thousand or so students that have entered AISD, close to seven hundred were still
with us by the end of the 2005/6 school year. Issues for subsequent school years
include (1) better accounting for the cultural and linguistic differences that our new
children bring with them to school [this will mean anti-racist teacher training as well
as training in cross socio-cultural competence], (2) more pro-action in our work to
incorporate families from New Orleans into the fabric of everyday life in Austin
schools, (3) the need for ongoing mental health monitoring and counseling, (4) bet-
ter accounting (and less blaming) for behavioral issues that arise from students’
ongoing posttraumatic adjustments, and (5) more and better support to facilitate the
academic growth of the many students from New Orleans whose academic prepara-
tion is well below grade level.
In short, we have a lot of work to do. Austin schools have had a year of trial by
fire, and I would be less than candid if I did not say that many of the kids we should
care about the most have been burned on top of their burns, and that we have not
done enough to heal wounds and promote health and recovery. But now that we
have been through the year, there is no reason for us to not do better in the next.
The lives of our children depend upon it. For my part, I will stay involved in the
work in the schools for three reasons: (1) our kids are there, (2) their educational
lives are at stake, and (3) the local district, while far from perfect, and while filled
with many people who have no idea of just how ineffective they are, has shown a
willingness to grow, learn, and improve. This is at least a foundation. It is a start.
ARE THEY KATRINA’S KIDS OR OURS? 301
pal-marable2-04-4.qxp  10/21/2007  2:03 PM  Page 301


--- PAGE 319 ---
NOTES
1. Children and families came from throughout the Gulf Coast region, but the over-
whelming majority were from New Orleans.
2. Foster, Kevin Michael (2006) “Austin Shelter Notes,” Transforming Anthropology 14
(1): 26–30.
3. The Austin Business Journal reported that the city was reimbursed 100% for its expen-
ditures: “All together, Austin estimates it spent $22.65 million on its Katrina
response—$5.47 million of that for emergency shelter operations. The total includes:
$2.5 million in payments to vendors, $2.9 million for labor, use of city vehicles and
related items, $17.1 million for interim housing for more than 1,200 households, cov-
ering everything from $12 million in rent to $500,000 in moving expenses. The
Federal Emergency Management Agency fully reimbursed the city for those costs
through public assistance grants from the Division of Emergency Management in the
T exas Governor’s Office” (Austin Business Journal, October 10, 2005). The city was not
reimbursed for lost business in the Convention Center ( Austin Business Journal ,
October 28, 2005).
4. For instance, teacher and researcher Jeff Duncan-Andrade notes the presence of this
practice in a California school he has worked with for several years (2005).
5. In following up on this with others, several have shared that Earl’s claim is not at all
unreasonable. Former New Orleans teachers who now live in Austin, along with social
workers and others from New Orleans, have all met this part of the story with no sur-
prise and rather with sad shakes of affirmation to the possibility that some elementary
school children (of whatever race) were subject to cursing by their teachers in their old
schools (not to mention the readily evident, thorough under-education that is reflected
by the abysmal academic levels of many of our newest students).
KEVIN MICHAEL FOSTER302
pal-marable2-04-4.qxp  10/21/2007  2:03 PM  Page 302


--- PAGE 320 ---
Chapter 20
ENVISIONING “COMPLETE
RECOVERY” AS AN
ALTERNATIVE TO
“UNMITIGATED
DISASTER”
MINDY THOMPSON FULLILOVE, 
FRED BOSMAN, HENK BAKKER, PIETER DE WIT,
ERIC NOORTHOORN, AND ROBERT FULLILOVE
INTRODUCTION
This essay represents a collaboration between two teams, the United States–based
Community Research Group and the Dutch Mediant Psychiatric Group. The first
part of the essay draws on the work of the American-based Community Research
Group (CRG), which is co-led by Drs. Mindy and Robert Fullilove. For the past fif-
teen years, CRG has conducted studies of epidemics that have affected inner-city
communities in the United States, including AIDS, violence, crack addiction, and
obesity. The co-location of these epidemics in particular neighborhoods led CRG to
study the contribution of spatial organization to illness. In particular, the human ecol-
ogy studies of Drs. Rodrick and Deborah Wallace on forced displacement have pro-
vided important theoretical guidance to CRG’s work. While studying forced
displacement, and the seriousness of its consequences, CRG also looked for examples
of complete recovery of ruptured communities. While there are many interesting
examples of recovery, none are of the order of magnitude needed to achieve complete
repair or to reverse the trends created by past upheaval. Rather, what CRG encoun-
tered was a hegemonic discourse that labeled forced displacement “progress,” which
ultimately justified scenarios of disaster without mitigation.
pal-marable2-04-5.qxp  10/22/2007  2:11 PM  Page 303


--- PAGE 321 ---
Thus, the Fulliloves were intrigued when they heard the story of Enschede from
Dr. Pieter de Wit, one of many people who was engaged in recovery after a major
disaster in the town of Enschede, The Netherlands. The second part of this essay
draws on the work of the Mediant Aftercare T eam, which provided a wide array of
mental health services to the people affected by the Enschede disaster. Dr. de Wit
and his colleagues, Fred Bosman, Henk Bakker and Eric Noorthoorn, invited the
Fulliloves to visit Enschede, meet with key leaders of the recovery effort, visit the site
of the disaster, and participate in a mini-symposium on the work of the Aftercare
T eam. Enschede benefited from massive national commitment to the “right to
return,” which proved to be a foundation for everything from individual treatment
to neighborhood rebuilding. This work offers a model of complete recovery that
challenges many of the hegemonic concepts surrounding U.S.-style forced displace-
ment. The third part of this essay examines the implications of the Enschede model
for complete recovery from the Gulf Disaster.
M
ASSIVE DISASTER IN THE GULF
In late summer 2005, Hurricanes Katrina and Rita hit the Gulf Coast of the United
States, among the deadliest and most costly hurricanes ever experienced. Especially
the first of these, Hurricane Katrina, mobilized wind force, water surge, and flooding
to create havoc in small and large cities of the Gulf. The terrors of the storm were aug-
mented by government failure at every level. Indeed, the actions of the Federal
Emergency Management Agency created chaos, rather than calming it, with the result
that hundreds of thousands of poor people, many black, were left in dangerous flood
waters, without food, water to drink, medicine, or succor. When help arrived, it was
often callous and random, dispersing the survivors of the flood throughout the forty-
eight contiguous states without a plan for their arrival or their return home.
The American public, watching these events on television, was horrified that fel-
low citizens were treated in such a manner. As investigations of the disaster have col-
lected the details, stories have accumulated of rescuers turned away or punished by
federal, state, and local officials. This inefficiency and abandonment produced a
death toll that stands at over 1,800 people, many of which were preventable deaths.
A clear and persistent outrage and sorrow marks the public’s reaction to this failure
to rescue Americans in their hour of need.
This essay, however, addresses a problem that is unacknowledged in the hege-
monic discourse: the problem of the secondary disaster attending the forced dis-
placement of over a million people. In New Orleans alone, 80 percent of the city was
flooded, destroying homes, businesses and urban infrastructure. Given the magni-
tude of the damage, a massive recovery plan was needed. Almost immediately, the
shape of the plan began to emerge, characterized by three features: (1) poor blacks
were congratulated on having moved to a “better place” where they might start over;
(2) speculators began to purchase property from the displaced with the intention of
rebuilding for the benefit of wealthier individuals; and (3) planners started to
develop proposals for a “new” city, cleansed of the problems associated with poverty.
What is striking is that the outrage that followed the failure of disaster management
MINDY THOMPSON FULLILOVE, ET AL.304
pal-marable2-04-5.qxp  10/22/2007  2:11 PM  Page 304


--- PAGE 322 ---
has been largely absent as this secondary disaster unfolds. In fact, many Americans,
if queried, would support the new plans. We propose to challenge this acceptance by
arguing that forced displacement is not “good luck” but rather an unmitigated dis-
aster of a sort that has been a cyclical part of the African American experience.
R
EPEATED DISPLACEMENT IN AFRICAN AMERICAN HISTORY
Repetitive forced displacement is a major organizing process in the African American
experience. The violence of the international and internal slave trade, which were
accompanied by the development of a philosophy and social structure of racism, laid
the groundwork for many forms of abuse. Among these abuses was involuntary and
forcible removal of Africans from their homes. This trope of loss has been played out
in the implantation of Jim Crow (1890–1910), the Great Migrations (1916–30 and
1940–70), the mechanization of agriculture (1940–70), urban renewal (1949–73),
deindustrialization (1945–present), planned shrinkage (1974–present), HOPE VI
(1992–present) and gentrification (1965–present).
1 During each of these important
historical moments, African Americans have been pushed out of their homes or
forced off the land they once occupied.
A large body of literature documents the many health and social costs of
upheaval, particularly in refugee situations caused by war. In order to understand the
costs of upheaval under peacetime conditions, M. Fullilove studied the long-term
consequences of urban renewal, a federal program that destroyed urban neighbor-
hoods in order to improve cities. She examined the costs associated with loss of a
neighborhood. Interviews with displaced people in five American cities revealed that
they had suffered from severe social, cultural, political, and economic losses that
exposed them to further losses as time went on.
2 Based on these findings, Fullilove
proposed that forced displacement be understood as causing a traumatic stress reac-
tion among those who had lost all or part of their emotional ecosystem, a reaction
she called “root shock.”
The crucial issue in the concept of “root shock” is that it recognizes that the loss
of a massive piece of human habitat causes harms that go far beyond individual emo-
tional suffering and require united action on the part of social groups to ensure the
recovery of the people and restoration of their way of life. Forced displacement has
played a major role in social and health problems such as the overrepresentation of
blacks in the AIDS epidemic and the surge of incarceration.
3 Thus the consequences
of forced displacement are both severe and enduring.
A major reason for the heavy consequences of forced displacement is the failure
of society to repair the damage caused by upheaval. Fullilove notes that, although
displaced people suffered massive losses, increased rates of disease and earlier deaths,
their upheaval was portrayed in mainstream media and described in political dis-
course as “progress.”
4 Hence, these losses were neither acknowledged nor remedied.
Even among African American people, the discourse surrounding issues of loss of
home and place has been fractured and minimizing.
This distorted discourse on displacement was shaped by a number of additional
factors that interacted with the assumptions of structural apartheid. These included
ENVISIONING “COMPLETE RECOVERY” 305
pal-marable2-04-5.qxp  10/22/2007  2:11 PM  Page 305


--- PAGE 323 ---
upheaval among other populations related to economic disaster (the Great
Depression and the accompanying drought), suburbanization, deindustrialization,
and reorganization of the economy from the Rust Belt to the Sun Belt. These more
general, but very dramatic, reorganizations of the American landscape translated into
widespread relocation: approximately one in five Americans moves every year. The
longstanding cultural ideal of chasing opportunity has both supported this move-
ment and obscured its true costs for the population. Thus, massive movement of
population is not restricted to African Americans, and its general integration into the
popular imagination as “moving to the good life” has stood in the way of a deeper
understanding of the traumatic effects of displacement. This is as true among men-
tal health professionals as it is among the general public.
H
URRICANES KATRINA AND RITA: “MOVING IS GOOD FOR YOU”
This disaster, but the latest in the series of unmitigated forced displacements,
occurred in the context of a particular national discourse that seemed to both
encourage and promote the idea of moving.
5 The displacement of poor black people
from their homes was immediately reframed to fit this national discourse, Most
notably, former First Lady Barbara Bush noted that “moving is good for you” while
observing African Americans seeking shelter and relief in the Houston Astrodome.
6
News reports made it clear that poor black people would have a very difficult time
getting back to their homes, but this was distorted as a real improvement in their sit-
uation. Indeed, one columnist called the concept of moving the “silver lining” of
Katrina. This false depiction of the consequences of forced displacement has been
the ideological underpinning for exclusionary planning for the future of New
Orleans and other parts of the Gulf.
Given the very long litany of experiences of displacement without mitigation,
there is a paucity of information about the processes and outcomes that accompany
full recovery from disaster. In order to contribute to the development of a language
of recovery that understands and repairs root shock, we pose the question: what
should have happened after the disaster caused by Hurricanes Katrina and Rita in
order to ensure full recovery of the people and their lifeworlds? This is a question of
great importance, because in the absence of an ideal response, people will remain
trapped in the “moving is good for you” paradigm.
In order to answer this crucial question, we report on the recovery process uti-
lized in Enschede, The Netherlands, after a major explosion destroyed a substantial
part of the city. While the scale of the disaster is admittedly smaller than that faced
in the Gulf, the successful actions taken by national and local officials and other local
leaders point towards the set of actions that we might call “tender reimplantation.”
TENDER REIMPLANTATION IN ENSCHEDE
Enschede is a city with 150,000 inhabitants, situated in the eastern part of The
Netherlands, in a region called T wente. This region was very stable from the Middle
Ages to the beginning of the twentieth century, when the establishment of cotton
MINDY THOMPSON FULLILOVE, ET AL.306
pal-marable2-04-5.qxp  10/22/2007  2:11 PM  Page 306


--- PAGE 324 ---
and metalworking factories called for a massive influx of new workers. These work-
ers came to the city from other parts of The Netherlands and other parts of Europe,
as well as from T urkey, Morocco, and Syria, particularly members of the Syrian
Orthodox religion.
As in many other parts of the developed world, much of the industry that helped
Enschede grow had moved away by the end of the century. This left the Roombeck
neighborhood with many abandoned or partially used factories that stood alongside
residences. The neighborhood, despite its collection of derelict buildings, was well
positioned near downtown, used for many purposes, and occupied by a wide variety
of people. Redevelopment of the area was on the minds of city officials, but it was
forced to the top of the agenda when, on May 13, 2000, at 3:35 PM, a fireworks
factory exploded, killing 23 people, wounding 1,000, leaving 1,500 homeless, and
destroying hundreds of acres of urban habitat.
T
HE RESPONSE
PHASE ONE: IMMEDIATE DISASTER RESPONSE
The first phase of disaster required the immediate intervention of firefighters, police,
and medical personnel. As in any disaster of this magnitude, first responders came
from great distances to provide help. These included firefighters from Munich,
Germany, health professionals from many parts of the Netherlands, and others. In
addition, there was an equally crucial political response by national leaders, who
quickly committed to rebuilding the area in a safe and secure manner so that all for-
mer inhabitants could return to their homes. The “right to return” is a significant
antidote to the profound feelings of loss that accompany the destruction of homes
and neighborhoods.
A third part of the immediate disaster response was the rehousing of the home-
less and the provision of funds for various necessities, including food and clothing,
among other things. A part of this effort involved deepening the level of multicul-
tural understanding of the ways in which each group hoped to receive help from oth-
ers around them. A single government office was set up to help people manage all of
the problems that they faced in getting on their feet again.
PHASE TWO: TREATMENT FOR PHYSICAL AND MENTAL WOUNDS
Medical and psychiatric care was immediately established for all of the people
affected by the disaster. General practitioners handled the medical problems of the
injured, while a special psychiatric unit handled the emotional problems related to
what people had seen and lost. Part of the work conducted by the psychiatric team
was ensuring cooperation among many sectors of the city government. This was
essential to maintaining long-term cooperation and commitment to recovery.
PHASE THREE: REBUILDING THE AREA
Another special unit was established to develop a plan for rebuilding. Prior to the
development of the plan, many groups of people, including former residents, were
ENVISIONING “COMPLETE RECOVERY” 307
pal-marable2-04-5.qxp  10/22/2007  2:11 PM  Page 307


--- PAGE 325 ---
consulted about their memories of the neighborhood and their hopes for the future.
This resulted in a series of principles for redevelopment that guided the architects in
their design. This plan had eight elements:
• A district to return to (right to return)
• A lively district
• A familiar district
• A district with history
• A district with value for the future
• A district within boundaries
• A district within your own hands
• A safe district
The plan, once accepted by the people of the city, was implemented. In the first
phase, much of the housing for low-income residents was rebuilt, allowing those
most in need to move home again. In a next phase, people who wished to build their
own homes began to buy plots of land, work with architects, and reconstruct their
houses. The development of condominiums and cultural facilities followed. Six years
after the disaster, a massive amount of rebuilding had been accomplished, and the
intensity of work was obvious to those who visited the site.
PHASE FOUR: UNDERSTANDING THE DISASTER AND ITS CONSEQUENCES
As part of the national response, research in a number of areas was implemented
immediately. In fact, the national group that studies environment pollution was in
the area and arrived in Enschede hours after the disaster to begin studies of possible
contamination of the site. Studies were also conducted to examine the use and effec-
tiveness of mental health services. In addition, displaced residents and first respon-
ders were interviewed and surveyed about their firsthand knowledge of the disaster.
PHASE FIVE: HOUSEWARMING FOR THE NEW ROOMBECK NEIGHBORHOOD
As the new neighborhood emerged, the groups that helped to ensure its develop-
ment shifted their relationship. As a marker of the end of the beginning, a “house-
warming party” was held at which various parts of the city celebrated the repair and
reconstruction of this central piece of Enschede.
U
NDERSTANDING THE ENSCHEDE MODEL
The rapid recovery of Enschede is reminiscent of the recovery European cities expe-
rienced after World War II, due in no small part to the aid of the Marshall Plan.
Recovery from a massive disaster requires an unambivalent commitment of
resources. But the resources that are required often go far beyond the money sup-
plied by major governments. The resources must include contributions from indi-
vidual citizens, from the fire fighters who make the first stand against destruction to
MINDY THOMPSON FULLILOVE, ET AL.308
pal-marable2-04-5.qxp  10/22/2007  2:11 PM  Page 308


--- PAGE 326 ---
the social organizers who ensure that rebuilt neighborhoods develop a functional
revitalization as well.
Some of the contributions that made the Enschede recovery so remarkable were
• the long-term maintenance of cooperation and commitment even after the
postdisaster “honeymoon” phase ended,
• the engagement of many sectors of the city in developing a statement of prin-
ciples about rebuilding, and
• the recurrent use of arts to help the recovery, ranging from children designing
their own memorials to homeowners designing their own homes.
In the United States, we are familiar with the story of the little Dutch boy who
understood that he had to tend to the leak in the dyke no matter how difficult it was
for him. The actions in Enschede represent, on a larger scale, the commitment of
Dutch citizens to protecting their cities and the human relationships they embody.
Dutch society, like other societies, is challenged by rapid social changes from immi-
gration to deindustrialization. Despite these changes, the people of Enschede, sup-
ported by the larger nation, worked together to rapidly repair a devastated
neighborhood. This real story offers some benchmarks in recovery from disaster at
any scale and in any place.
T
HE ENSCHEDE MODEL AND THE RECONSTRUCTION OF THE GULF
The Enschede Model is characterized by three features: (1) it is founded on a vision
of complete recovery for the city and the affected individuals; (2) it was based on
participation and inclusion; and (3) it embodied respect in interpersonal interac-
tions. We have called this “tender reimplantation” to underscore the degree to which
it addresses, in an appropriate manner, the traumatic stress of root shock. The
Enschede Model is one in which people are aided to rebuild their life on the foun-
dation of the world that was destroyed. This model respects culture, social ties, and
urban form as the building blocks of a healthy society. In restoring each of these
aspects of the lost neighborhood, the Enschede Model creates a stable foundation
that helps ensure the future well-being of the affected people and of the city. The
principles of the Enschede Model are not limited to a disaster of a particular level or
scale; they can be easily adapted to a disaster of any size. That is because these are
transferable principles of interpersonal respect and mutual responsibility.
Obviously, there is nothing about the exclusionary recovery process in the Gulf
that resembles what happened in Enschede. The political fight, therefore, is to cre-
ate a new national commitment to complete recovery that respects people’s right to
return home and their need to be treated with respect. The Enschede Model offers
us many useful benchmarks for judging the degree to which we have succeeded in
achieving these goals.
B
IBLIOGRAPHY
Brooks, David. “Katrina’s Silver Lining.” New York Times, Opinion/Editorial, September 9,
2005.
ENVISIONING “COMPLETE RECOVERY” 309
pal-marable2-04-5.qxp  10/22/2007  2:11 PM  Page 309


--- PAGE 327 ---
Fullilove, Mindy. Root Shock: How T earing Up City Neighborhoods Hurts America and What We
Can Do About It. New York: Ballantine/One World, 2004.
Hanchett, Thomas. Sorting Out the New South City: Race, Class, and Urban Development in
Charlotte, 1875–1975. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1998.
Hirsch, Arnold. Making the Second Ghetto. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983.
Powell, J. A., and M. L. Spencer, “Giving them the Old ‘One-T wo’ Punch: Gentrification and
the K.O. of Impoverished Urban Dwellers of Color.” Howard Law Journal (Winter 2000).
Wallace, D., and R. Wallace, A Plague on Your Houses: How New York Was Burned Down and
National Public Health Crumbled. London: Verso, 1998.
NOTES
1. These processes are not all equally well known to the American public, nor is their
cumulative impact–what my colleague Rodrick Wallace has called “synergistic damage
accumulation”—fully appreciated. The African slave trade, which dragged people from
their homes in Africa and sold them into slavery in the Americas, took the liberty of
12 million who arrived alive. It is estimated that twice that number died on the jour-
ney within Africa and during the middle passage across the Atlantic. After the slave
trade was banned in 1808, an internal slave market developed in the United States,
which regularly sold slaves from Virginia and other more Northern states to the lower
South. Emancipation restored people’s liberty, but put them at the great disadvantage
of owning no land and having no education. There was massive movement after the
war, as people sought to reunite with family, go to school, find land or work, and begin
their new lives as freedmen. This hopeful epoch came to a violent end with the insti-
tution of Jim Crow laws, which made African Americans second-class citizens, stripped
of their right to vote or to be protected in the courts. The two Great Migrations rep-
resented people’s efforts to make new homes in the city, where they might have more
economic and political opportunity. This effort, too, was thwarted by the reification
of segregation in the cities. Redlining, instituted in 1937, aggravated segregation by
steering investment away from African American ghetto neighborhoods. Urban
renewal then found these to be “blighted” and ordered them cleared for “higher uses.”
Catastrophic disinvestment in the 1970s and 1980s represented the active removal of
assets—from fire stations to banks and supermarkets—from minority and poor neigh-
borhoods. Many of those displaced by urban renewal and catastrophic disinvestment
moved into housing projects and became vulnerable to a new “improvement” scheme,
this one called HOPE VI. At the same time, poor and minority neighborhoods that
had maintained some of their historic buildings and charm were targeted for gentrifi-
cation, and the poor were forced to move again. In sum, the efforts of African
Americans to free themselves and become first-class citizens have not only met with
resistance but also have been actively undone by government programs operated in
close cooperation with business leaders. See, especially, Hanchett, Sorting Out the New
South City and Hirsch, Making the Second Ghetto , on the institution of segregation;
Fullilove, Root Shock, on urban renewal; Wallace and Wallace, A Plague on Your Houses,
on catastrophic disinvestment; and Powell and Spencer, “Giving Them the Old ‘One-
T wo’ Punch,” on gentrification.
2. Fullilove introduced the concept of “root shock” in order to explain the social, cultural
and emotional consequences of the loss of the near environment. Indeed, as many
authors have argued, the near environment provides an external homeostatic system
that maintains the individual’s well-being. It has also been observed that complex
MINDY THOMPSON FULLILOVE, ET AL.310
pal-marable2-04-5.qxp  10/22/2007  2:11 PM  Page 310


--- PAGE 328 ---
human habitat plays this role in supporting the organization of larger social groups.
For example, a home helps a family function; a well-organized assemblage of housing,
services, and businesses helps a neighborhood function; and so on. Because social
organization is tightly linked to human health, we find that physical organization
influences human health in its ability to support productive interpersonal relation-
ships, among other factors.
3. Rodrick Wallace and Deborah Wallace have an extensive body of work on the effects
of forced displacement on health. Their book, A Plague on Your Houses, offers an excel-
lent introduction to their findings, as it describes the unintended consequences of forc-
ing poor people out of their homes in the South Bronx in the 1970s. Among these
consequences, they argue, was the widespread and rapid dissemination of AIDS in the
South Bronx, New York City, and the region. Because of the region’s dominating posi-
tion in the U.S. urban hierarchy, the unleashing of an important epidemic in New
York City had severe consequences for the nation’s health.
4. During the course of the fieldwork on the long-term consequences of urban renewal,
the CRG team heard a number of planners and politicians point out that “you have to
break a few eggs to make an omelet.”
5. The concept that “moving is good for you” is embedded in the thinking of US federal
government. T wo examples may suffice to make this point: (1) The HOPE VI project
is breaking up so-called “distressed” federal housing projects, dispersing their residents
to areas of less concentrated poverty. (2) HUD funded a large study, called “Move to
Opportunity,” in which residents of housing projects are given Section 8 so that they
can move elsewhere.
6. Many people took up the theme that dispersal of the poor from New Orleans was a
blessing in disguise. Among the first were Barbara Bush and David Brooks. Former
First Lady Barbara Bush, during a visit to the Houston Astrodome shelter, said, “What
I’m hearing, which is sort of scary, is they all want to stay in T exas. Everyone is so over-
whelmed by the hospitality. And so many of the people in the arena here, you know,
were underprivileged anyway, so this is working very well for them.” In similar vein,
David Brooks, columnist for the New York Times , wrote an op/ed piece called
“Katrina’s Silver Lining” (September 9, 2005), which argued that poor people had
been separated from their dysfunctional neighborhoods and could be dispersed among
middle class people, thereby creating more opportunity for their children.
ENVISIONING “COMPLETE RECOVERY” 311
pal-marable2-04-5.qxp  10/22/2007  2:11 PM  Page 311


--- PAGE 329 ---
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Kathleen A. Bergin : Kathleen A. Begin, Associate Professor of Law, South T exas
College of Law, BA, University of Massachusetts, 1994; JD, University of Baltimore
School of Law, 1997; LLM, New York University Law School, 1999.
Professor Bergin teaches and writes in the areas of Constitutional Law, Critical
Race Theory, Feminist Jurisprudence, and International Human Rights. Her writ-
ings have appeared in the Yale Journal of Law and Feminism, University of Miami Law
Review, Pace Law Review, and other academic journals. She has spoken nationally
and internationally on the risks of human rights violations following natural disas-
ter and was recognized in 2005 as a “Local Hero” by the Houston Bar Association
for her work with evacuees from Hurricane Katrina. Prior to joining academia,
Professor Bergin served as the Derrick Bell Fellow at New York University Law
School, completed a judicial clerkship at the Connecticut Supreme Court, and
worked as a litigation associate in Boston, where her practice focused on commercial
disputes, employment discrimination, and civil rights.
Darwin Bond Graham: Darwin Bond Graham is a graduate student in sociology
and a teaching assistant in the department of Black Studies at the University of
California Santa Barbara. In New Orleans he has worked with many post-Katrina
social justice organizations including the Survivor’s Village, Hands Off Iberville,
and Common Ground. He is currently working on an ethnographic account of
postdisaster social movements in the city, specifically the movement to reopen and
reoccupy public housing.
Kristen Clarke: Kristen Clarke Co-Director of the Political Participation Group at the
NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc. Prior to joining LDF , Ms. Clarke
worked for several years in the Civil Rights Division of the U.S. Department of Justice
through the Attorney General’s Honors Program. Between 2000 and 2003, Ms.
Clarke served as a trial attorney in the Voting Section of the division where she han-
dled enforcement efforts under the Voting Rights Act of 1965. Between 2003 and
2006, Ms. Clarke worked as a federal prosecutor in the Criminal Section of the divi-
sion, where she helped promote criminal civil rights enforcement efforts. She handled
a range of police misconduct, police brutality, hate crimes, human trafficking, and
obstruction matters. The vast majority of her work at the Justice Department was con-
centrated in the Deep South. Ms. Clarke received her AB from Harvard University
and a JD from Columbia Law School, where she served as editor in chief of the
National Black Law Journal. She has also served as an Editorial Assistant for Souls.
pal-marable2-05ata.qxp  10/22/2007  2:12 PM  Page 312


--- PAGE 330 ---
Erica M. Czaja: Erica M. Czaja is a survey coordinator in the survey research divi-
sion of the RAND Corporation. Czaja received her BA in psychology from the
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, and her MA in the social sciences from the
University of Chicago. Her research interests include American public opinion and
political behavior, public discourse, racial and ethnic politics, social movements,
public policy, and the politics of Hurricane Katrina.
K. Animashaun Ducre: K. Animashaun Ducre is an assistant professor in the
Department of African American Studies at Syracuse University. She received her PhD
in environmental justice from the University of Michigan. As a toxics campaigner for
Greenpeace, she assisted in the victories of key environmental justice battles in
Louisiana against a uranium enrichment facility in north Louisiana and the nation’s
largest proposed plastic manufacturing complex in Convent, Louisiana. Dr. Ducre
combines her experiences in the environmental justice movement and academic train-
ing for a unique perspective on the environment, linking race, space, and exploitation.
Thomas J. Durant: Thomas J. Durant, Jr., PhD, Sociology, University of Wisconsin,
is Professor of Sociology and African and African-American Studies at Louisiana
State University. His research and teaching interests include social stratification,
minorities, Southern culture, gerontology, criminology, and global development. He
has authored or co-authored three books: Plantation Society and Race Relations, Our
Roots Run Deep, and The Charity Hospitals of Louisiana, A Story of Poverty, Politics,
Public Health and the Public Interest.
Kevin Michael Foster: Kevin Michael Foster received his BA from The College of
William and Mary (1991) and his MA and PhD from The University of T exas, Austin
(1994, 2001). He is an educational anthropologist whose work looks at the social, cul-
tural and structural factors affecting African Americans students‘ educational outcomes.
His published work can be seen in publications including Transforming Anthropology,
International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education, and Anthropology News. He
began serving as President of the Association of Black Anthropologists in 2005 and is
Associate Editor of Anthropology and Education Quarterly.
Mindy Thompson Fullilove: Mindy Thompson Fullilove, MD, is a research psychi-
atrist at New York State Psychiatric Institute and a professor of clinical psychiatry and
public health at Columbia University. She was educated at Bryn Mawr College (AB,
1971) and Columbia University (MS, 1971; MD 1978). She is a board-certified psy-
chiatrist, having received her training at New York Hospital-Westchester Division
(1978–81) and Montefiore Hospital (1981–82). She has conducted research on
AIDS and other epidemics of poor communities, with a special interest in the rela-
tionship between the collapse of communities and decline in health. From her
research, she has published Root Shock: How T earing Up City Neighborhoods Hurts
America and What We Can Do About It, as well as The House of Joshua: Meditations on
Family and Place. She has also published numerous articles, book chapters, and
monographs. She has received many awards, including inclusion in many “Best
Doctors” lists and two honorary doctorates (Chatham College, 1999, and Bank Street
College of Education, 2002). Her work in AIDS is featured in Jacob Levenson’s The
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 313
pal-marable2-05ata.qxp  10/22/2007  2:12 PM  Page 313


--- PAGE 331 ---
Secret Epidemic: The Story of AIDS in Black America. Her current work focuses on the
connection between urban function and mental health.
Stephanie Houston Grey: Stephanie Houston Grey is an assistant professor in the
Department of Rhetoric and Public Address at Louisiana State University. She
earned her PhD at Indiana University. She has received a number of awards for
research and teaching excellence. Her published work can be seen in national rheto-
ric and media studies journals such as The American Communication Journal , The
Quarterly Journal of Speech, Critical Studies in Media Communication , and T ext and
Performance Quarterly.
Melissa Harris-Lacewell: Melissa Harris-Lacewell is associate professor of politics
and African American Studies at Princeton University. She is the author of Barbershops,
Bibles and BET: Everyday T alk and Black Political Thought.
Chester Hartman: Chester Hartman (chartman2@aol.com) is Director of Research for
the Washington, DC–based Poverty & Race Research Action Council and Adjunct
Professor of Sociology at George Washington University. He has served on the faculty
of Columbia, the University of North Carolina, Cornell, Yale, American University,
and the University of California-Berkeley. He is founder and former chair of The
Planners Network, a national organization of progressive urban planners, and he
serves on the Long-Range Planning Task Force of the Louisiana Recovery Authority.
His most recent books are A Right to Housing: Foundation for a New Social Agenda
(T emple University Press, 2006); Poverty & Race in America: The Emerging Agendas
(Lexington, 2006); City for Sale: The Transformation of San Francisco (University of
California Press, 2002); and Between Eminence & Notoriety: Four Decades of Radical
Urban Planning (Rutgers Center for Urban Policy Research, 2002).
Chelsey Louise Kivland: Chelsey Louise Kivland is a PhD candidate in anthropol-
ogy at the University of Chicago. A native of Haiti, her interests include social the-
ory, culture, public suffering, tragic narratives, and performance. She is currently
conducting research on carnival bands in Haiti.
Julianne Malveaux : Recognized for her provocative, progressive and insightful
observations, Dr. Julianne Malveaux, an economist, author, and commentator, is the
President and CEO of Last Word Productions, Inc, a multimedia production com-
pany. As a writer and syndicated columnist, her work appears regularly in USA
T oday, Black Issues in Higher Education , Ms. magazine, Essence magazine, and The
Progressive. Her weekly columns appear in numerous newspapers across the country,
including the Los Angeles Times, The Charlotte Observer , The New Orleans Tribune,
the Detroit Free Press , and the San Francisco Examiner. She appears regularly on
CNN and BET , as well as on Howard University’s television show, Evening Exchange.
She has appeared on PBS’s T o The Contrary, ABC’s Politically Incorrect , Fox News
Channel’s O’Reilly Factor, and stations such as C-SPAN, MSNBC and CNBC. She
is the editor of Voices of Vision: African American Women on the Issues(1996) and the
co-editor of Slipping Through the Cracks: The Status of Black Women(1986), and she
recently co-edited The Paradox of Loyalty: An African American Response to the War on
T errorism(2002). She is the author of two column anthologies: Sex, Lies, and
ABOUT THE AUTHORS314
pal-marable2-05ata.qxp  10/22/2007  2:12 PM  Page 314


--- PAGE 332 ---
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 315
Stereotypes: Perspectives of a Mad Economist (1994) and Wall Street, Main Street, and
the Side Street: A Mad Economist T akes a Stroll(1999). A committed activist and civic
leader, Dr. Malveaux serves on the boards of the Economic Policy Institute, The
National Committee for Responsive Philanthropy, Women Building for the Future
(The Future PAC), and The Recreation Wish List Committee of Washington, DC.
Dr. Malveaux received her BA and MA degrees in economics from Boston College
and earned a PhD in economics from MIT . A native San Franciscan, she currently
resides in Washington, DC.
Suzette Malveaux: Suzette Malveaux is an associate professor at Catholic University of
America’s Columbus School of Law. Professor Malveaux earned her JD from New York
University School of Law and graduated with an AB, magna cum laude, from Harvard
University. Professor Malveaux joined Catholic University’s faculty from the University
of Alabama School of Law, where she had taught complex litigation, civil procedure,
public international law and employment discrimination since 2003. T oday, Professor
Malveaux writes primarily in the areas of arbitration, class actions, and civil rights. Her
interest in civil rights extends beyond the classroom. Malveaux’s recent publications
include co-authorship of Class Actions and Other Multi-Party Litigation; Cases and
Materials, 2nd edition, (West Group, 2006); “Statutes of Limitations: A Policy
Analysis in the Context of Reparations Litigation,” 74 Geo. Wash. L. Rev. 68, (2005);
and “Fighting to Keep Employment Discrimination Class Actions Alive: How
Allison v. Citgo ’s Predomination Requirement Threatens to Undermine Title VII
Enforcement,” 26 Berkeley J. Emp. & Labor L. 405 (2005).
Gene B. Preuss: Gene B. Preuss is Assistant Professor of History at the University of
Houston-Downtown. He obtained his BA and MA from T exas State University-San
Marcos, and his PhD from T exas T ech University. His academic areas of focus
include oral history, ethnic and immigration history, and childhood and education.
Loren K. Redwood: Loren K. Redwood is a PhD candidate in American Studies at
Washington State University at Pullman, Washington, where she is a graduate teach-
ing assistant in the Department of Women’s Studies. Her current research centers on
issues of gender inequity, immigration and migration, labor exploitation, and
tourism as a force of internal imperialism. She is currently writing her dissertation,
which focuses on the civil and human rights abuses of immigrant women laborers in
post-Katrina New Orleans.
D. Osei Robertson: D. Osei Robertson is Assistant Professor of Government in the
Department of History and Government at Bowie State University (MD). He
obtained his PhD in Political Science from Howard University and holds a Masters
in International Affairs in Development from Clark Atlanta University, as well as a
BA in History from Xavier University (LA). Professor Robertson’s research interests
include black politics, comparative politics, research methods, and political theory.
He has presented papers in these areas at the annual meetings of the National
Conference of Black Political Scientists, the American Political Science Association,
and the Association for the Study of African American Life and History.
pal-marable2-05ata.qxp  10/22/2007  2:12 PM  Page 315


--- PAGE 333 ---
ABOUT THE AUTHORS316
Gregory D. Squires : Gregory D. Squires (squires@gwu.edu) is a Professor of
Sociology and Public Policy and Public Administration at George Washington
University. Currently he is a member of the board of directors of the Woodstock
Institute and the Social Science A dvisory Board of the Poverty & Race Research
Action Council in Washington DC. He has served as a consultant for civil rights
organizations around the country and as a member of the Federal Reserve Board’s
Consumer Advisory Council. He has written for several academic journals and gen-
eral interest publications including Housing Policy Debate, Urban Studies, New York
Times, and Washington Post. Recent books include Privileged Places (with Charis E.
Kubrin; Lynne Rienner, 2006) and There Is No Such Thing as a Natural Disaster(with
Chester Hartman; Routledge, 2006).
Alan H. Stein: Oral Historian Alan H. Stein is Head of the Louisiana Division and
City Archives at the New Orleans Public Library. Mr. Stein is a regular contributor to
Oral History Review and editor of the Northwest Oral History Association Newsletter.
He has conducted many oral history interviews, including interviews of Jewish vet-
erans for the Library of Congress and the Institute of Southern Jewish life.
Dr. Dawood H. Sultan is Assistant Professor of Sociology in the Department of
Sociology, Anthropology, Social Work and Criminal Justice at the University of
T ennessee at Martin (UTM). He is also a UTM College of Education and Behavioral
Sciences Distinguished Research Scholar and is a member of UTM’s Graduate
Faculty. He is published in a number of refereed journals. He received a BSc
(Honors) in economics from the University of Gezira (Sudan), an MA in develop-
ment studies from the University of East Anglia (England), and a PhD from
Louisiana State University (LSU).
Lynell Thomas : Lynell Thomas is Assistant Professor of the Department of
American Studies at the University of Massachusetts-Boston. She earned her PhD at
Emory University, and her academic areas of focus are African American Studies,
American Literature and Culture, and New Orleans Culture and History.
Ronald Walters: Dr. Ronald Walters is internationally known for his expertise on the
issues of African American leadership and politics, his writing, and his media savvy.
Walters carries three major titles. He is director of the African American Leadership
Institute and Scholar Practitioner Program, Distinguished Leadership Scholar at the
James MacGregor Burns Academy of Leadership, and professor in government and
politics at the University of Maryland. Walters received his Bachelor of Arts degree in
History and Government with Honors from Fisk University (1963) and both his MA
in African Studies (1966) and PhD in International Studies (1971) from American
University. In 1984, Walters served as deputy campaign manager for issues of the Jesse
Jackson campaign for president, and in 1988, he was consultant for convention issues
for the Jackson campaign directed by former Secretary of Commerce Ron Brown. Dr.
Walters is the author of over 100 articles and eight books. His book, Black Presidential
pal-marable2-05ata.qxp  10/22/2007  2:12 PM  Page 316


--- PAGE 334 ---
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 317
Politics in America (SUNY Press, 1989), won the Ralph Bunche Prize, given by the
American Political Science Association and the Best Book award from the National
Conference of Black Political Scientist (NCOBPS). Pan Africanism in the African
Diaspora (Wayne State University Press, 1993) also won the NCOBPS Best Book
award. His most recent books are White Nationalism, Black Interests: Conservative
Public Policy and the Black Community (Wayne State University Press, 2003) and
Freedom Is Not Enough: Black Voters, Black Candidates, and American Presidential
Politics (Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc., 2005).
Michael White: Michael Gerard White, PhD holds the Keller Endowed Chair in the
Humanities at Xavier University of Louisiana. Since 1980 he has also served as a
Professor of Spanish and as Instructor of African American Music. The New Orleans
native has been active for over thirty years as a jazz clarinetist, composer, bandleader,
lecturer, and consultant. He has numerous publications and has appeared in various
documentaries and feature films. White tours regularly and has performed on over
three dozen recordings. He is the recipient of several honors and awards, including
the French Chevalier of Arts and Letters.
pal-marable2-05ata.qxp  10/22/2007  2:12 PM  Page 317


--- PAGE 335 ---
Advancement Project   5
African American Leadership Project
244–45, 253
Alive in T ruth Project   229
Armstrong, Louis   20, 44, 55, 153, 263;
Airport, 55, 236; Elementary School, 20
Association of Community Organizations
for Reform Now (ACORN)   43–44,
49, 60, 78, 80, 249, 286
Austin   29, 236, 295, 301
Baraka, Amiri   29
Batiste, Alvin   95
Batiste, Harold   95
Batt, Jay   12
Bechtel   xi
Bennett, William   xii
Black Elected Officials (BEOs)   42–43, 58,
70
Blanchard, T errance   111
Blanco, Kathleen (Governor)   4, 34, 46,
59, 78, 123, 179, 180, 248
Bolden, Charles “Buddy”   90, 104
Bourbon Street   96, 100, 115, 280
Bring New Orleans Back Commission
(BNOB)   25–27
Brookings Institution   195, 198, 273, 278,
281, 283
Brown, Michael   x, 34, 179, 247
Brown vs. Board of Education
68
Bush, Barbara   132, 247, 306
Bush, George W .   ix, xi, xii, 4, 11, 13, 14,
29, 46, 48, 53, 123, 131, 144, 147,
161, 163, 179, 198, 210, 216, 217,
218, 234, 247, 250, 251, 265, 272, 273
Bush, Lura   251
Butler, Katherine   5
Butler, Kimberly   10, 47, 50
Cameron, James   xiii
Casserly, Michael   281–82
Catholic Charities   148
Clarkson, Jackie   12
Clinton, William J.   75, 220, 221, 251
Columbia University Oral History Program
226
Community Research Group   303
Congo Square   88, 94, 257
Congressional Black Caucus (CBC)   5,
249, 286
Council of the Great City Schools   281
Courhig, Robert   50
Creole   25, 41, 45, 69, 89, 90, 95, 134,
261–63
Dahl, Robert   4, 14
Dawson, Michael   165, 203
Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD)   29, 250, 276,
278, 279
Domino, Fats   95
Du Bois, W . E. B.   89, 165, 197
Dyson, Michael Eric   133, 158
Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC)   198,
199
education   20, 52, 57, 71, 96, 97, 100,
103, 155, 157, 159, 161, 165, 175,
182, 194, 199, 200, 220, 248, 249,
251, 252, 262, 274, 281, 282, 284,
295, 296, 298, 301
environmental racism   19, 66, 70
evacuees   6–8, 75, 77–79, 109, 158, 173,
174, 176, 177, 180, 181, 183–85,
227, 229, 230, 232, 233, 247, 274,
276, 277, 280, 284, 286, 287
Fair Labor Standards Act   147
Farrakhan, Louis   247
INDEX
pal-marable2-05index.qxp  10/24/2007  4:49 PM  Page 318


--- PAGE 336 ---
Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA)   ix, x, 6, 7, 13, 34, 35, 115,
115, 175, 179, 180, 185, 229, 232,
233, 247, 250, 271, 275–78, 280, 284,
285; FEMA trailers, 276, 277, 284
Fields, Cleo   5
Forman, Ron   10, 12, 50
French Quarter   22, 27, 142, 148, 234, 238,
250, 255, 256, 263, 264, 280, 285
George Mason University   230
Gonzalez, Alberto   3, 8
Gordon, Bruce   5
Greater New Orleans Fair Housing Action
Center   280, 281
guest (immigrant) workers (H-2B)
142–48, 285
Guinier, Lani   xii, 287
Halliburton   xi
Harkin, T om   251
Harrison, Donald   95
Herbert, Bob   xiii
Hill, Lance   232
Historic New Orleans Collection   234
Homeland Security   x, 144, 177, 179, 277
Houston Astrodome   132, 174, 175, 183,
184, 185, 227, 247, 306
Houston Reliant Arena   174, 175, 185
Hurricane Betsy   19, 24, 67, 77, 234
Hurricane Camille   19
Hurricane Digital Memory Bank   230
Hurricane Recovery Advisory Committee
(HRAC)   135, 138
Hurricane Rita   141, 175
Hutchinson, Earl Ofari   xi, xv
injustice   xiii, 66, 71, 141, 143, 162,
164–66, 192, 197, 244
Jackson, Jesse   5, 9, 13, 80, 81, 317
Jackson, Mahalia   96
Jackson, Maynard   41, 42
jazz   29, 41, 87–106, 109, 111, 137, 261,
263; jazz funerals, 87, 91, 93, 95, 98,
99, 101, 102
Jim Crow   20, 21, 69, 71, 134, 158, 162,
164, 192, 305
Justice Department   4, 5, 7, 8, 13, 14, 313
Katrina Survivors Association   11
Kerry, John   8
Lake Pontchartrain   ix, 24, 88
Landrieu, Mitch   10, 11, 35, 50, 51, 78,
142
Lawyers Committee for Civil Rights   5, 281
Lee, Spike   153, 156, 246
Lemelle, Ivan L. R.   75–83
levees   ix, x, 19, 23, 40, 88, 113, 114, 153,
154, 159, 179, 192, 214, 232, 235,
244, 246–49, 251, 253, 255, 275, 282
Lindahl, Carl   233
Louisiana Black Legislative Caucus (LBLC)
5
lynching   xiii, xiv, 133, 159, 192
Mann, Phyllis E.   234
Marcuse, Peter   286
Mardi Gras   41, 55, 57, 91, 94, 98, 102,
107–9, 111–20, 124, 129
Mardi Gras Indians   41, 87, 94–99, 101
Marsalis, Branford   95
Marsalis, Ellis   95
Marsalis, Wynton   95
McDonogh, John   20
Mississippi River   x, 67, 69, 70, 88, 103,
133, 173, 233, 258
Morial, Ernest “Dutch”   40–43, 48, 56, 261
Morial, Marc   xi, 42, 44, 45, 55, 56, 80,
81, 248, 261
Morial Convention Center   x, 56, 57, 111,
159, 175–77, 179–81, 183, 184, 215,
229, 236, 296–98
NAACP Legal Defense Fund (LDF)   5, 78,
80
Nagin, C. Ray   9–12, 25–27, 29, 34–36,
40, 42–51, 55, 58, 78, 109, 112, 113,
123, 133, 134, 159, 177, 215,
247–49, 261, 264, 265, 287
National Association for the Advancement
of Colored People (NAACP)   5, 6, 9,
13, 49, 75, 148
National Bar Association   5
National Coalition of Black Civic
Participation (NCBCP)   5
National T ragedy Study   155
Neville Brothers   95
New Orleans City Council   19, 246, 249
New Orleans Fire Department   12, 234
New Orleans Police Department   12, 180,
181, 226, 234
INDEX 319
pal-marable2-05index.qxp  10/24/2007  4:49 PM  Page 319


--- PAGE 337 ---
New Orleans Public Schools   19, 20, 24,
29, 52, 68, 101, 104, 158, 159, 196,
199, 248, 274–77, 279, 281–83,
295–99, 301; teachers, 100, 104, 105,
248, 282, 295–301
New Orleans Times Picayune
ix, 25, 44,
55, 153, 246
New York Times ix, 48, 81, 129, 177,
211, 272, 277–79
Ninth Ward   x, 10, 12, 17–19, 22, 24, 25,
27–29, 35, 36, 45, 49, 50, 69, 82,
160, 192, 197, 203, 229, 285
Open Society Institute (OSI)   230
oral history   225–38
Oral History Association (OHA)   230
O’Reilly, Bill   132, 315
Oxfam   148
Payton, Nicholas   95
Pennington, Richard   10, 35, 42, 44–45,
47, 50
Pets Evacuation and T ransportation
Standards (PETS) Act   272
Pew Foundation   156
Plessy v. Ferguson
65, 68, 89
post-Katrina election   1–14, 33–36, 40–58,
75, 77–82, 96, 103, 104, 110, 272
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)   154,
284
poverty   xii, 14, 22, 26, 52, 96, 97, 115,
118, 133, 136, 142, 143, 148, 164,
165, 175, 191–200, 204, 206–8,
214–16, 230, 237, 244, 247, 249,
252, 265, 272–75, 279, 283–85, 287,
304, 315
racial disparities   70, 273, 274, 287
Reiss, James J.   245
“Rex” parade   108–11, 115, 118–23, 125
Rice, Condoleezza   xii, 247
Roach, Susan   232
Road Home Grants   58
Robertson, Pat   134, 250
satellite voting   6–8, 33–36, 78, 79, 81, 82
sexual violence   178, 179, 181–83, 185
Sharpton, Al   5, 13
slavery   20, 67, 143, 148, 162, 164, 207,
247, 257–59, 261, 264, 273
Social Security   274
St. Bernard Parish   22, 23, 27, 29, 69, 130,
173, 174, 235, 279, 280
Superdome   x, 10, 57, 159, 176, 177, 179,
181, 183, 184, 215, 225, 235–37, 247
Thomas, Irma   95
Thomas, Oliver   12, 19, 44
Till, Emmit   132, 159
T otal Community Action, Inc. (TCA)   199
tourist   52, 56, 57, 97, 102, 105, 109,
112–14, 131, 134, 137, 141–48, 244,
255–65, 280, 281, 285
T oussaint, Allen   95
t-shirt brigades   108, 112, 113, 117, 119,
121
Unified New Orleans Neighborhood Plan
25–28
University of Chicago Katrina Disaster
Study   156, 157, 161, 162, 203
unnatural disaster   ix
Urban Land Institute   25
Violet, Louisiana   173–74, 186
Voting Rights Act   3–5, 8, 9, 13, 14, 41,
75, 78–81
Walton, Hanes   46
Walton, Shana   232
Washington Post
211, 273
Watson, Diane   xii
West, Cornel   xii, xiii
West, Kanye   xvii, 153, 209, 214, 216, 218
Wright, Beverly   xi, xii
Zulu parade   41, 108, 110, 111, 112, 117,
119, 121, 122
Zulu Social Aid and Pleasure Club   108,
110
INDEX320
pal-marable2-05index.qxp  10/24/2007  4:49 PM  Page 320

