=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Select Black Nationalism Historical Icons Introductions.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 15
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:12:37.650566
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Hypertext TOC 
Clarke, John Henrik (1915-1998) ................................ ................................ ............................ 2 
Cleage, Albert,Jr. (Jaramogi Abebe Agyeman) (1911-2000) ................................ ................... 3 
Delany, Major Martin Robison (1812-1885) ................................ ................................ ............ 4 
Fard, Wallace (ca. 1891-1934) ................................ ................................ ...............................  5 
Hampton, Fred (1948-1969) ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 7 
Karenga, Maulana (c. 1943- ) ................................ ................................ ................................ . 8 
Newton, Huey P. (1942–1989)................................ ................................ ................................  9 
Turner, Henry McNeal (1834-1915) ................................ ................................ ...................... 10 
Walker, David (1785-1830) ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 12 
Malcolm X (1925-1965) ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 13 
 
 
Document designed by RBG Street Scholar for sharing, study and download 
COMPANION TUTORIAL 
A Brief History of Black 
Nationalism and RBG's Current 
Academic Contributions 
 
 
CLICK FOR OVER 2,000 RBG STREET SCHOLAR LESSON ATTACHED IMAGES 
RBG Revolutionary Black 
Nationalism Studies Page 
 
The RBG FROLINAN Collection


--- PAGE 2 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                November, 2010 
 
 Black Nationalism Historical Icons                                                                                     Page 2 
 
 
Clarke, John Henrik (1915-1998) 
John Henrik Clarke, historian, black nationalist and 
Pan-Africanist, was a pioneer in the formation of 
Africana studies in the United States.   Principally a 
self-trained historian, Clarke dedicated his life to 
correcting what he argued was the prevailing view that 
people of Africa and of African decent had no history 
worthy of study.   Over the span of his career Clarke 
became one of the most respected historians of 
African and African American history.  
 
Clarke was born on New Year’s Day, 1915, in Union 
Springs, Alabama.   He described his father as a 
―brooding, landless sharecropper,‖ who struggled to 
earn enough money to purchase his own farm, and his 
mother as a domestic.   Clarke’s mother Willie Ella 
(Mays) Clarke died in 1922, when he was about seven 
years old. 
  
 
In 1932 Clarke left the South at age eighteen and he traveled by boxcar to Chicago.   He 
then migrated to New York City where he came under the tutelage of noted scholar 
Arthur A. Schomburg.  While in New York City’s Harlem, Clarke undertook the study of 
Africa, studying its history while working full time.   In 1949 the New School for Social 
Research asked Clarke to teach courses in a newly created African Studies Center.   
Nineteen years later Clarke founded the African Heritage Studies Association in 1968, 
and was principally responsible for the creation of the Black and Puerto Rican Studies 
Department at Hunter College in New York City.   He later lectured at Cornell University 
as a distinguished visiting Professor of African history.  
 
 
Clarke numerous work s include A New Approach to African History  (1967), African 
People in World History (1993), and The Boy Who Painted Jesus Black (1975).  He died 
in New York City in 1998.   
Sources: 
http://www.africawithin.com/clarke/dr_clarke.htm ; 
 http://www.library.cornell.edu/africana/


--- PAGE 3 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                November, 2010 
 
 Black Nationalism Historical Icons                                                                                     Page 3 
 
Cleage, Albert,Jr. (Jaramogi Abebe Agyeman) (1911-2000) 
 
Albert Cleage, jr., or Jaramogi 
Abebe Agyeman, Black Nationalist 
and civil rights activist, was one of 
the most prominent black religious 
leaders in America. Agyemen 
preached a form of nationalism 
within the black community that 
stressed economic self -sufficiency 
and separation that relied on a 
religious awakening among black 
people.   
 
Albert Cleage, Jr. was born in Indianapolis, Indiana on June 13, 1911.   Cleage 
graduated from Wayne State University in 1937, earning a B.A. in sociology, and a M.A. 
in Divinity from Oberlin School of Theology in 1943.   Cleage married Doris Graham and 
had two daughters. Cleage and Graham later divorced in 1955.   Cleage ran for 
governor of Michigan in 1962 under the Freedom Now Party, and was a candidate in 
the Democratic prim ary for U.S. Representative from Michigan, 13th District, in 1966. 
Cleage later changed his name to Jaramogi Abebe Agyeman.    
His most recognized work was the Black Messiah (1968).  In Messiah, Agyeman argued 
that Jesus was a black revolutionary who sough t to lead a ―Black Nation‖ to freedom. 
Agyeman believed the emergence of nationalist movements of the world’s colored 
majority would reveal the historic truth that Jesus was the ―non -white leader of a non -
white people struggling for national liberation aga inst the rule of a white nation, Rome.‖   
Agyeman understood the power of the church within the black community and thought 
the re-orientation from a ―white‖ Jesus to a ―black‖ Jesus would be a necessary step in 
the spiritual liberation of black America.   Some believe the basis of Agyeman’s spiritual 
teachings was based on the theology rooted in Robert Young’s Ethiopian Manifesto  
(1829).     
In 1967 Agyeman unveiled the portrait of the Black Madonna.   He went on to found and 
lead the Pan African Orthodox Church, which was part of the Black Christian Nationalist 
Movement.  This nationalist movement had 50,000 members nationwide.   
Sources: 
“Albert Cleage,” in African American Encyclopedia, Michael Williams, ed., (New York: 
Back to Top


--- PAGE 4 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                November, 2010 
 
 Black Nationalism Historical Icons                                                                                     Page 4 
1989); “Albert Cleage,” in Encyclopedia of American Culture and History, Colin Palmer, 
ed., (New York: 2006); http://www.pbs.org/thisfarbyfaith/people/albert_cleage.html  
 
Delany, Major Martin Robison (1812-1885) 
 
Martin Robison Delany was an African American 
abolitionist, the first African American Field Officer in 
the U.S Army, and one of the earliest African 
Americans to encourage a return to Africa. 
 
 
Delany was born in Charleston, Virginia (now West 
Virginia) to a slave father and a free mother.   
Delany’s mother took her children to Pennsylvania 
in 1822 to avoid their enslavement and per secution 
brought on by attempting to teach her children to 
read and write, which was illegal in the state at that 
time. In 1833 Martin Delany began an apprenticeship with a Pittsburgh physician and 
soon opened a successful medical practice in cupping and l eeching (it was not 
necessary to be certified to practice medicine prior to 1850).   In 1843 he began 
publishing a newspaper in Pittsburgh called The Mystery, Later Delany joined Frederick 
Douglass to produce and promote The North Star in Rochester, New York.  
    
 
Martin R. Delany entered Harvard Medical School in 1850 to finish his formal medical 
education (along with two other black students) but was dismissed from the institution 
after only three weeks as a result of petitions to the school from white st udents.  Two 
years later he published The Condition, Elevation, Emigration, and Destiny of the  
Colored People of the United States, Politically Considered  claiming that even 
abolitionists would never accept blacks as equals and thus the solution to the bla ck 
condition lay in the emigration of all African Americans back to Africa.   In 1859 Delany 
led an emigration commission to West Africa to explore possible sites for a new black 
nation along the Niger River, ―We are a nation within a nation, we must go fro m our 
oppressors‖ he wrote. 
   
 
When the Civil War began in 1861 Delany returned to the United States.   Jettisoning for 
a time his emigrationist views, Delany recruited thousands of men for the Union Army.   
In February 1865, after meeting with President Abraham Lincoln to persuade the 
administration to create an all -black Corps led by African American officers, Delaney 
Back to Top


--- PAGE 5 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                November, 2010 
 
 Black Nationalism Historical Icons                                                                                     Page 5 
was commissioned a Major in the 52nd U.S. Colored Troops Regiment.   With that 
appointment he became the first line officer in U.S. Army history. 
   
 
When Reconstruction began Delany was assigned to the Freedman’s Bureau in South 
Carolina.  There he called for black pride, the enforcement of black civil rights and land 
for the freedpeople. Delany b ecame active in local Republican politics, losing a close 
election for Lieutenant Governor of South Carolina but later serving briefly as a judge in 
Charleston, South Carolina.  As the Republicans lost power in the state Delany renewed 
his calls for emigra tion, becoming in 1878 an official in the Liberian Exodus Joint Stock 
Steamship Company.   He also wrote in 1879 The Principia of Ethnology , a book that 
argued for race pride and purity. 
   
 
In 1880 Delany withdrew from the Liberian Exodus Company and moved  first to Boston 
and then to Wilberforce College in Xenia, Ohio.   Martin R. Delany, considered my many 
as the ―father of black nationalism,‖ died in Xenia, Ohio on January 12, 1885.   
Sources: 
Victor Ullman, Martin R. Delany: The Beginnings of Black Nationalism (Boston: Beacon 
Press, 1971); Jim Haskins, Black Stars: African American Military Heroes  (John Wiley 
and Sons, Inc., New York, NewYork, 1998);  
http://www.libraries.wvu.edu/delany/home.htm  
 
Fard, Wallace (ca. 1891-1934) 
Wallace Fard, also known as W. Farad Muhammad, the 
Prophet, was founder the first Temple of Islam which 
evolved into the Nation of Islam or the Black Muslims. 
Authentic, documented information about Fard is very 
scarce and there is only a four year period (1930 -1934) in 
which dependable information exists. 
  
 
According to Fard (although there is no documentation to 
prove or disprove his account) he was born in Mecca to 
wealthy parents in the tribe of Koreish, the tribe of the 
Prophet Mohammad. According to FBI records Fard was 
born in 1891 in New Zealand. He arrived in the United States in 1913 and briefly settled 
in Portland, Oregon. Fard was arrested in California in 1 918 for possession of alcohol 
(against the state law of prohibition) and again in 1926 for the possession of narcotics. 
After spending time in San Quentin Prison in California, Fard was released and moved 
to Detroit. 
 Back to Top


--- PAGE 6 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                November, 2010 
 
 Black Nationalism Historical Icons                                                                                     Page 6 
  
 
Fard’s exact arrival date in Detroit  is unknown, but once he arrived he made a meager 
living peddling umbrellas and silks door-to-door in Detroit’s African American community 
called ―Paradise Valley.‖ At some point Fard began promoting a new faith he believed 
would liberate Detroit blacks sp iritually, psychologically and financially.    He began to 
preach that Christianity was a false religion.  He particularly denounced ―white devils‖ as 
exploiters of the black race and called on his followers to join his Temple of Islam and 
replace their last names with ―X‖ in order to renounce their slave ancestry.  
 
 
During this period Detroit’s burgeoning African American population was ravaged by the 
Great Depression. Fard’s teachings became popular solace for many in the African 
American community. Fard’s First Temple of Islam included the Fruit of Islam, a military-
like organization of black male converts, a Muslim Girls’ Training Corps Class and a 
University of Islam which, despite its name, was mainly focused on elementary and 
high-school level education.  
 
 
Fard disappeared in 1934.   One of his disciples, Elijah Poole, who became the 
Honorable Elijah Muhammad, succeeded Fard and by World War II had built the 
Temple of Islam into a network of mosques across the United States.  
Sources: 
Rayford W. Logan and Michael R. Winston, eds., Dictionary of American Negro 
Biography (New York: W.W. Norton, 1982); http://foia.fbi.gov/foiaindex/fard.htm  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Back to Top


--- PAGE 7 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                November, 2010 
 
 Black Nationalism Historical Icons                                                                                     Page 7 
 
Hampton, Fred (1948-1969) 
Fred Hampton, deputy chairman of the Illinois 
chapter of the Black Panther Party, was born on 
August 30, 1948 and raised in the Chicago suburb 
of Maywood, Illinois. In high school he excelled in 
academics and athletics. After Hampton 
graduated from high sc hool, he enrolled in a 
prelaw program at Triton Junior College in River 
Grove, Illinois. Hampton also became involved in 
the civil rights movement, joining his local branch 
of the National Association for the Advancement 
of Colored People (NAACP). His dyna mic 
leadership and organizational skills in the branch 
enabled him to rise to the position of Youth 
Council President. There Hampton mobilized a 
racially integrated group of five hundred young people who successfully lobbied city 
officials to create better  academic services and recreational facilities for African 
American children.  
 
 
In 1968, Hampton joined the Black Panther Party (BPP), headquartered in Oakland, 
California. Using his NAACP experience, he soon headed the Chicago chapter. During 
his brief B PP tenure, Hampton formed a ―Rainbow Coalition‖ which included Students 
for a Democratic Society, the Blackstone Rangers, a street gang and the National 
Young Lords, a Puerto Rican organization. Hampton was also successful in negotiating 
a gang truce on local television.  
 
In an effort to neutralize the Chicago BPP, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and 
the Chicago Police Department placed the chapter under heavy surveillance and 
conducted several harassment campaigns. In 1969, several BPP members a nd police 
officers were either injured or killed in shootouts and over one hundred local members 
of the BPP were arrested. 
 
 
During an early morning police raid of the BPP headquarters at 2337 W. Monroe Street 
on December 4, 1969, twelve officers opened fi re, killing the 21 year old Hampton and 
Peoria, Illinois Panther leader Mark Clark. Police also seriously wounded four other 
Panther members. Many in the Chicago African American community were outraged 
over the raid and what they saw as the unnecessary de aths of Hampton and Clark. 
Over 5,000 people attended Hampton’s funeral where Reverends Ralph Abernathy and 
Jesse Jackson of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference eulogized the slain 
activist. Years later, law enforcement officials admitted wrongdoi ng in the killing of


--- PAGE 8 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                November, 2010 
 
 Black Nationalism Historical Icons                                                                                     Page 8 
Hampton and Clark. In 1990 and later in 2004 the Chicago City Council passed 
resolutions commemorating December 4 as Fred Hampton Day.  
Sources: 
Peniel E. Joseph, Waiting ‟Til the Midnight Hour: A Narrative History of Black Power in 
America (New York: Henry Holt and Company, 2006); Huey P. Newton, War against the 
Panthers: A Study of Repression in America  (New York: Harlem River Press, 1996); 
John Kifner, ―Police in Chicago Slay 2 Panthers,‖ New York Times, December 5, 1969; 
John Kifner, ―Panthers Say an Autopsy Shows Party Official was Murdered,‖  New York 
Times, December 7, 1969.  
 
Karenga, Maulana (c. 1943- ) 
Maulana Karenga, born in Salisbury, Maryland the early 1940s as 
Ronald Everett. He moved to California in the late 1950s, attended 
Los Angeles City College and went on to UCLA where he received 
a Master's degree in political science and African studies. In  the 
early 1960s, he met Malcolm X and embraced black nationalism. 
After the Watts Revolt in 1965 he changed his name to ―Maulana‖ 
(master teacher) Karenga, interrupted his doctorate studies and 
formed a nationalist organization called "Us," which became a  part 
of the Black Power movement. When the Black Panther Party 
began organizing in Los Angeles in 1966, the two organizations 
became political rivals. That rivalry led to a bloody confrontation on the UCLA campus in 
1969 which resulted in the deaths of two Panthers, Alprentice ―Bunchy‖ Carter and John 
Higgins and the wounding of Us member Larry Stiner.  
Three years before that confrontation with the Panthers, Karenga created ―Kwanzaa‖ 
(first fruit) to provide an opportunity for blacks to celebrate their po sitive connection with 
Africa. The celebration’s central themes are cooperation and sharing the good in the 
world. Many symbols are involved in the Kwanzaa celebration which lasts from 
December 26 through January 1. On September 17, 1971, Karenga was sente nced to 
one to ten years in prison relating to assault charges against members of the Us 
organization. After his release from prison, Karenga returned to his studies, received 
graduate degrees and is currently a professor at Cal State -Long Beach and the Chair of 
the Black Studies Department.  
Sources: 
Scot Brown, Fighting for US: Maulana Karenga, the US Organization, and Black 
Cultural Nationalism (New York: New York University Press, 2003) Peniel E. Joseph, 
Waiting 'Til The Midnight Hour: A Narrative History of Black Power in America  (New 
York: Henry Holt and Company, 2006)  
Back to Top


--- PAGE 9 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                November, 2010 
 
 Black Nationalism Historical Icons                                                                                     Page 9 
 
 
Newton, Huey P. (1942–1989) 
Born in Monroe, Louisiana, the youngest and 
seventh son, Newton was named after the populist 
governor Huey Long.   His parents moved to 
Oakland during World War II seeking economic 
opportunities.  Newton attended Merritt College, 
where he met Bobby Seale. At Merritt, Newton 
fought to diversify the curriculum and hire more 
black instructors.   He also was exp osed to a rising 
tide of Black Nationalism and briefly joined the Afro -
American Association.  Within this group and on his 
own, he studied a broad range of thinkers, including 
Frantz Fanon, Che Guevara, Mao Zedong, E. 
Franklin Frazier, and James Baldwin. 
  
 
 
Newton eventually developed a Marxist Leninist perspective, where he viewed the black 
community as an internal colony controlled by external forces such as white 
businessmen, the police, and city hall.   He believed the black working class needed to 
seize the control of the institutions that most affected their community and formed the 
Black Panther Party for Self Defense with Bobby Seale in October of 1966 to pursue 
that goal.  
 
 
Newton became the Minister of Defense and main leader of the Party.   Writing in the 
Ten-Point Program, the founding document of the Party, Newton demanded that blacks 
need the ―power to determine the destiny of our Black Community.‖   That power would 
allow blacks to gain ―land, bread, housing, education, clothing, justice and peace.‖ 
 
 
Taking advantage of a California law that allowed people to carry non -concealed 
weapons, the Panthers instituted armed patrols that monitored police activity in the 
black community.  These patrols led to increasingly tense relations with the police and 
in October of 1967 Newton was arrested following a Panther -police shootout that 
resulted in the death of an Oakland police officer.   Considered a political prisoner by 
many on the left, the Panthers orchestrated a Free Huey campaign led by the Party’s 
Minister of Information, Eldridge Cleaver.   Charles R. Geary, a well -known attorney, 
headed Newton’s legal defense and in July of 1968 Newton was convicted of the lesser 
Back to Top


--- PAGE 10 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                November, 2010 
 
 Black Nationalism Historical Icons                                                                                     Page 10 
charge of voluntary manslaughter.   That conviction was overturned on appeal and in 
1970 Newton was freed from prison. 
 
 
 
 
Newton’s leadership of the Black Panther Party in the early 1970s helped contribute to 
its demise.  He led a number of purges of Party members, most famously in 1971 when 
he expelled Eldridge Cleaver in what was called t he Newton -Cleaver split. In 1974 
Newton was accused of assaulting a prostitute who later died.   Instead of standing trial, 
he fled to Cuba.  He returned to the U.S. in 1976, stood trial, but was acquitted.  In 1978 
he enrolled in the History of Consciousne ss program at the University of California, 
Santa Cruz where he earned his doctorate in 1980.   His dissertation, ―War Against the 
Panthers: A Study of Repression in America,‖ was later published as a book. In August 
of 1989, Newton was killed in Oakland, allegedly when purchasing drugs.    
Sources: 
Huey P. Newton, To Die For The People: The Writings of Huey P. Newton  (New York, 
Random House, 1972); Newton, War against the Panthers: A Study of  Repression in 
America (New York: Harlem River Press, 1996); and P eniel E. Joseph, Waiting „til the 
Midnight Hour: A Narrative History of Black Power in  America (New York: Henry Holt 
and Co., 2006). 
 
 
 
 
Turner, Henry McNeal (1834-1915) 
Black Nationalist, repatriationist and minister, Henry M. 
Turner was 31 years old at the time of the 
Emancipation. Turner was born in 1834 in Newberry 
Courthouse, South Carolina to free black parents Sarah 
Greer and Hardy Turner. The self -taught Turner by the 
age of fifteen worked as a janitor at a law firm in 
Abbeville, South Carol ina. The firm’s lawyers noted his 
abilities and helped with his education. However, 
Turner was attracted to the church and after being 
converted during a Methodist religious revival, decided 
to become a minister. He joined the African Methodist 
Episcopal ( AME) Church and became a licensed 
minister in 1853 at the age of 19. Turner soon became


--- PAGE 11 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                November, 2010 
 
 Black Nationalism Historical Icons                                                                                     Page 11 
an itinerant evangelist traveling as far as New Orleans. By 1856 he married Eliza 
Peacher, the daughter of a wealthy African American house builder in Columbia, South 
Carolina. The couple had fourteen children but only four of them survived into 
adulthood. 
 
In 1858 Turner entered Trinity College in Baltimore where he studied Latin, Greek, 
Hebrew and theology. Two years later he became the pastor of the Union Bethel 
Church in Washington, D.C. Turner cultivated friendships with important Republican 
Congressional figures including Ohio Congressman Benjamin Wade, Pennsylvania 
Congressman Thaddeus Stevens, and Massachusetts Senator Charles Sumner. Turner 
had already become a national figure when in 1863 at the age of 29 he was appointed 
by President Lincoln to the position of Chaplin in the Union Army. Turner was attached 
to 1st Regiment, U.S. Colored Troops, making him the first African American chaplain in 
the history of the United States Army.  
 
 
After the Civil War Turner returned to Georgia and quickly became active in 
Reconstruction-era politics. In 1867 he organized for the Republican Party in Georgia 
and the following year was elected a delegate to the Georgia State Constitutional 
Convention. In the same year he was also elected to the Georgia State Legislature. 
Although 27 African Americans were elected to that body, a coalition of white 
Democrats and Republicans declared the African American members disqualified and 
refused to seat them.  
 
 
President Ulysses S. Grant appointed Turner postmaster of Macon, Georgia. He was 
forced to resign in a few weeks under pressure from local Democrats. The U.S. 
Congress intervened and allowed Turner to reclaim his legislative seat in 1870 but he 
was not reelected in an election marred by fraud. Turner abandoned politics and moved 
to Savannah, Georgia where he served as pastor of St. Phillips AME Church. In 1876 
he was appointed President of Morris Brown College in Atlanta. Four years later he was 
appointed a Bishop in the African Methodist Episcopal Church.  
 
 
Turner became the first AME Bishop to ordain a woman, Sarah Ann Hughes, to the 
office of deacon. He also wrote The Genius and Theory of Methodist Polity in 1885 as a 
guide to the policies and practices of the AME Church. 
 
 
By the late 1870s Turner became increasingly disillusioned with the inability of African 
Americans to achieve social justice in the United States. He proposed emigration back 
Back to Top


--- PAGE 12 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                November, 2010 
 
 Black Nationalism Historical Icons                                                                                     Page 12 
to African, an idea much discussed in the antebellum period b ut which all but 
disappeared during the Civil War and Reconstruction. By 1880 Turner had become one 
of the leading advocates of emigration, particularly to Liberia. He founded two 
newspapers, The Voice of Missions (1893 -1900) and the Voice of the People (1 901-
1904) to promote emigration. Between 1895 and 1896, Turner organized two ship 
voyages to Liberia which carried over 500 emigrants to Liberia. Many of them returned 
disillusioned and thus undermined Turner’s emigrationist work.  
 
 
Independently of his emigrationist efforts, Turner also promoted the AME Church 
abroad. Between 1891 and 1898 he traveled to Africa four times to promote the church 
in West and South Africa. He also sent AME missionaries to Cuba and Mexico.  
 
 
Although he never completely reli nquished his emigrationist ideas and remained in 
touch with numerous African leaders, Turner increasingly devoted the remainder of his 
life to church work. He died on May 8, 1915 in Windsor, Canada while traveling on AME 
Church business.  
Sources: 
Stephen Ward Angell, Bishop Henry McNeal Turner and African American Religion in 
the South (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1992); Edwin S. Redkey, Black 
Exodus, Black Nationalist and Back-to-Africa Movements, 1890-1910 (New Haven: Yale 
University Press, 1969); The Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, African 
American Desk Reference (New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc, 1999); Kenneth Estall, 
ed., The African American Almanac 6th edition (Detroit: Gale Research, Inc. 1994). 
 
Walker, David (1785-1830) 
The fiery -militant David Walker was born on September 28, 
1785, in Wilmington, North Carolina.   His father was an 
enslaved African who died a few months before his son’s 
birth, and his mother was a free woman of African ancestry. 
Walker grew up to despise the system of slavery that the 
American government allowed in America.   He knew the 
cruelties of slavery were not for him and said, ―As true as 
God reigns, I will be avenged for the sorrow which my people 
have suffered.‖   He eventually moved to Boston duri ng the 
1820s and became very active within the free black 
community.  Walker’s intense hatred for slavery culminated in 
him publishing his Appeal to the Colored Citizens of the 
World in September 1829. The Appeal was smuggled into the


--- PAGE 13 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                November, 2010 
 
 Black Nationalism Historical Icons                                                                                     Page 13 
southern states, and was considered subversive, seditious, and incendiary by most 
white men in both northern and southern states.   It was, without a doubt, one of the 
most controversial documents published in the antebellum period.  
Walker was concerned about many social issues affecting free and enslaved Africans in 
America during the time.   He also expressed many beliefs that would become 
commonly promoted by later black nationalists such as: unified struggle for resistance of 
oppression (slavery), land reparations, self -government for people of African descent in 
America, racial pride, and a critique of American capitalism.   His radical views prompted 
southern planters to offer a $3000 bounty for anyone who killed Walker and $10,000 
reward for anyone who returned him alive ba ck to the South.   Walker was mysteriously 
found dead in the doorway of his Boston home in 1830, some people believed he was 
poisoned and others believed that he died of tuberculosis.  
Sources: 
Thabiti Asukile, "The All -Embracing Black Nationalist Theories of David Walker's 
Appeal," Black Scholar, 29 (Winter 1999), 16–24.  
 
 Malcolm X (1925-1965) 
Malcolm X, one of the most influential African 
American leaders of the 20th Century, was born 
Malcolm Little in Omaha, Nebraska on May 19, 1925 
to Earl Little, a Georgia native and itinerant Baptist 
preacher, and Louise Norton Little who was born in 
the West Indian island of Grenada.   Shortly after 
Malcolm was born the family moved to Lansing, 
Michigan.  Earl Little  joined Marcus Garvey’s 
Universal Negro Improvement Association (UNIA) 
where he publicly advocated black nationalist beliefs, 
prompting the local white supremacist Black Legion to 
set fire to their home.   Little was killed by a streetcar 
in 1931. Authoriti es ruled it a suicide but the family 
believed he was killed by white supremacists.  
 
Although an academically gifted student, Malcolm dropped out of high school after a 
teacher ridiculed his aspirations to become a lawyer.   He then moved to Boston’s 
Roxbury district to live with an older half -sister, Ella Little Collins.   Malcolm worked odd 
jobs in Boston and then moved to Harlem in 1943 where he drifted into a life of drug 
dealing, pimping, gambling and other forms of ―hustling.‖   He avoided the draft in Wo rld 
War II by declaring his intent to organize black soldiers to attack whites which led to his 
classification as ―mentally disqualified for military service.‖ 
Back to Top


--- PAGE 14 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                November, 2010 
 
 Black Nationalism Historical Icons                                                                                     Page 14 
 
 
Malcolm was arrested for burglary in Boston in 1946 and received a ten year prison 
sentence. There he joined the Nation of Islam (NOI).   Upon his parole in 1952, Malcolm 
was called to Chicago by NOI leader, the Honorable Elijah Muhammad.   Like other 
converts, he changed his surname to ―X,‖ symbolizing, he said, the rejection of ―slave 
names‖ and his inability to claim his ancestral African name.     
  
 
Recognizing his promise as a speaker and organizer for the Nation of Islam, 
Muhammad sent Malcolm to Boston to become the Minister of Temple Number Eleven. 
His proselytizing success earned a reassignm ent in 1954 to Temple Number Seven in 
Harlem. Although New York’s one million blacks comprised the largest African American 
urban population in the United States, Malcolm noted that ―there weren't enough 
Muslims to fill a city bus.   "Fishing" in Christian storefront churches and at competing 
black nationalist meetings, Malcolm built up the membership of Temple Seven.   He also 
met his future wife, Sister Betty X, a nursing student who joined the temple in 1956.   
They married and eventually had six daughters. 
 
 
Malcolm X quickly became a national public figure in July 1959 when CBS aired Mike 
Wallace’s expose on the NOI, ―The Hate That Hate Produced.‖   This documentary 
revealed the views of the NOI, of which Malcolm was the principal spokesperson and 
showed th ose views to be in sharp contrast to those of most well -known African 
American leaders of the time. Soon, however, Malcolm was increasingly frustrated by 
the NOI’s bureaucratic structure and refusal to participate in the Civil Rights Movement.   
His November 1963 speech in Detroit, ―Message to the Grass Roots,‖ a bold attack on 
racism and a call for black unity, foreshadowed the split with his spiritual mentor, Elijah 
Muhammad.  However, Malcolm on December 1, in response to a reporter’s question 
about the a ssassination of President John F. Kennedy, used the phrase "chickens 
coming home to roost" which to Muslims meant that Allah was punishing white America 
for crimes against black people.   Whatever the personal views of Muslims about 
Kennedy’s death, Elijah Muhammad had given strict orders to his ministers not to 
comment on the assassination.   Malcolm defied the order and was suspended from the 
NOI for ninety days. 
   
 
Malcolm used the suspension to announce on March 8, 1964, his break with the NOI 
and his cr eation of the Muslim Mosque, Inc.   Three months later he formed a strictly 
political group (an action expressly banned by the NOI), called the Organization of Afro 
American Unity. 
 
His dramatic political transformation was revealed when he spoke to the Mil itant Labor 
Forum of the Socialist Worker’s Party.   Malcolm placed the Black Revolution in the 
context of a worldwide anti -imperialist struggle taking place in Africa, Asia, and Latin 
America, noting that   ―when I say black, I mean non -white—black, brown, red or


--- PAGE 15 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                November, 2010 
 
 Black Nationalism Historical Icons                                                                                     Page 15 
yellow.‖  By April 1964, while speaking at a CORE rally in Cleveland, Ohio, Malcolm 
gave his famous ―The Ballot or the Bullet‖ speech in which he described black 
Americans as ―victims of democracy.‖   
 
 
 
Malcolm traveled to Africa and the Middle East in late Spring 1964 and was received 
like a visiting head of state in many countries.   While there, Malcolm made his hajj to 
Mecca and added El -Hajj to his official NOI name Malik El -Shabazz.  The tour forced 
Malcolm to realize that one’s political position as a revolutionary superseded ―color.‖ 
   
 
The transformed Malcolm reiterated these views when he addressed an OAAU rally in 
New York, declaring for a pan -African struggle ―by any means necessary.‖    Malcolm 
spent six months in Africa in 1964 in an unsuccessful attempt to get international 
support for a United Nations investigation of human rights violations of Afro Americans 
in the United States.  In February 1965, Malcolm flew to Paris to continue his efforts but  
 
 
 
 
was denied entry amidst rumors that he was on a Central 
Intelligence Agency (CI A) hit list.   Upon his return to New 
York, his home was firebombed.   Events continued to 
spiral downward and on February 21, 1965, Malcolm X 
was assassinated at the Audubon Ballroom in Harlem.  
 
Source: 
 Robert L. Jenkins and Mafanya Donald Tryman, The 
Malcolm X Encyclopedia  (Westport, Conn.: Greenwood 
Press, 2002); Eugene V. Wolfenstein, The Victims of 
Democracy: Malcolm X and the Black Revolution  
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1981); Karl 
Evanzz, The Judas Factor: The Plot to Kill Malcolm X  
(New York: Thunder‟s Mouth Press, 1992); Malcolm X 
with Alex Haley, The Autobiography of Malcolm X  (New 
York: Grove Press, 1965).

