=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Selections From the Husia Text.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 144
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:12:35.487756
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
SELECTIONS FROM
THE HUSIA


--- PAGE 2 ---
ALSO BY MAULAIUA KAREIUGA
The African American Holiday of Kwanzaa: A celebration of
Family, Community and Culture (1g8g)
The Book of Coming Forrh By Day:
The Ethics of the Declanations of Innocence (1gBg)
Studies in Kemetic Culture (1g8g)
The Foundations of Kawaida Theony (1g8g)
Kemet and the African Worldview (1g861
Intr'oduction to Black Studies (1982)
Kawaida Theory: An Introductory Outline (1gBO)
Essays on Struggle: Position and Analysis (1978)
Kwanzaa: Origins, Concepts, Pnactice (1 9771


--- PAGE 3 ---
SELECTIONS FROM
Selected and Fletranslated by
MAULANA KARENGA
THE HUSIA
SACRED WISDOM OF ANCIENT EGYPT
THE UNIVERSITY OF SANKORE PRESS / LOS ANGELES


--- PAGE 4 ---
First Printing, 1984
Second Printing, 1989
Cover design and artwork Kweli
sELEcrloNS FROM THE HUSIA: sACRED wlsDoM oF ANO|ENT EGYPT.
Copyright@ 1984 by Maulana Karenga. All rights reserved. Printed in the United
states of America. No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner
whatsoever without written permission except in the case of brief quotations
embodied in cnitical articles and reviews. For information address: The University
of Sankore Press,2650 West 54th Str€et, Los Angeles, CA 90O43
lsBN 0-943412{,64


--- PAGE 5 ---
To Cheikh Anta Diop who posed the proiect of rescuing
and reconstructing the legacy of ancient Egypt and using
it to revivify African culture and to produce a truly African
paradigm of what humans ought to be and become.
And to Afnican people hene in the U.S. and evenywhene
whose nich and ancient monal and spinitual henitage
i'epresents a fundamental legacy not only for them-
selves but for all humanity.


--- PAGE 6 ---



--- PAGE 7 ---
CONTENTS
Foreword
The Book of Knowing the Cneations . .. .
The Book of Knowing the Creations
The Book of Pnayens and Sacred Pnaises
The Book of Prayers and Sacred Praises .....
The Book of the Monal Namative
The Book of Khun-Anup ...
The Books of Wise lnstnuction ... .
The Book of Ptah-Hotep ,.
The Book of Kagemni .....
The Book of Kheti
The Book of Ani
The Book of Amenomope
The Book of Ankhsheshonqi
The Book of Phebhon
xiii
1
5
11
15
27
31
37
41
49
50
53
58
64
67
The Books of Contemplation 7s
The Book of Khakheper-Ra-Soneb ..., 77
The Book of lpuwer 78
The Book of Dialog with the Soul . 80
The Book of Songs 82
The Book of Neferti 85
The Book of Declanations of Vintues
The Book of Declarations of Virtues . . . .
89
g3
The Books of Rising Like Ra ..
The Book of Coming Forth By Day
The Book of Vindication
The Book of Rising and Transformation
99
105
112
118


--- PAGE 8 ---



--- PAGE 9 ---
FOREWOBD
Fon at least two centuries conscious and committed
Black thinkens have taught Black people about oun
ancient Ethiopian and Egyptian heritage. Intenestingly,
consciousness about this cultunal henitage during that
period seems to have oniginated among Blacks in the
Diaspona and neturned from the Western Hemisphere
to the African continent. Certainly, such conscious-
ness has been an integral fonce in the Black national-
ist movements in the Western Hemisphene, as well as
Africa fon well oven a hundned yeans. Thnoughout the
period thene has been a stnong appreciation fon the
highly developed spirituality of rhe Black people of the
Nile Valley whom we call the ancient Egyptians. So
dominant was this aspect of the gneatest civilization
of antiquity that Martin Delaney, wniting in the nine-
beenth century, proclaimed that the governmental sys-
tem of ancient Egypt was a "neligious polity".
Dr. Maulana Karenga following the teachings of Dr.
Carter G. Woodson, George G.M. James and Dr. Cheikh
Anta Diop, has made a distinct contnibution to an honorabre
tradition. The Husia is an outstanding compiration and
rendition of selections from the most important sacred
litereture of all time. The need for such works is rong
past due, and Dr. Karenga should be commended for his
pioneering effort in this direction.
The quest fon spiritual ennichment among Black peo-
ple in the physical and cultunal Diaspona has led to the
adoption of the Holy Books of other peoples; the
Tonah, the Bible and the Guran. lronically, the sacned
literature of ancient Egypt which pnedates those texts
by thousands of yeans is the source of much of the
wisdom in those Holy Books, as Dr, Karenga points
out. The fact that Black people could find spir-itual
comfont in those alien scriptunes speaks both to the
African contnibutions to those religions and the inten-
sity of the Afnican spiritual quest. with all due regand


--- PAGE 10 ---
to the Black tnadition within the so-called gneat neli-gions, it is now time to "return to the sounce".
The Husia is thus a vital step towand the ne-cneation
and restonation of our spirituar foundation. The texts
selected by Dr. Karenga ane from the tnuly great
books of ancient Egypt. These serections as well as
the cneative arnangement into seven sections provide a
suggested fnamewonk fon the development of a langen
and more definitive Holy Book for Afnican people.
The netnanslations done by Dr. Kanenga ane gneatly
enhanced by his wide familianity with many languages,
especiqlly bhe Afnican languages, as well as his talent
as a poet. He has not only rescued the texts from the"libenal" and stilted translations of the egypbologists,
but in my opinion, he has also nendered bhem in spinit
much mone akin to the tnue meaning of the ancient
scribes. In a typically Egyptian sense, he has bneathed
life into them, The nesult is a thonoughly neadable,
enjoyable and inspining volume of spinitual literatune.
The commentaries at the beginning of each of the
seven sections ane veny insightful in helping the reader
put the text in the proper context. Dr. Kanenga dem-
onstnates a profound gnasp of the inner meaning of
the various concepts as well as the ovenall ontology.
His modest and subtle critique of the amogance of the
egyptologists in these commentaries as well as in his
intnoduction is a good argument for the task he has
undentaken.
The artwonk done by Kweli is superb. The illustra-
tions ane clear and authentic and very appropriately
selected in accondance with the theme of the wonk.
Thus, all of these elements: the appnopniate selec-
tions: the cneative arrangement; the poetic and contex-
tual retranslations; the insightful commentaries; and
the superb antwonk nesult in a book that will be
immensely useful to millions of Black people seeking


--- PAGE 11 ---
spiritual enrichment and cultural renewal. The is espe-
cially tnue of those who have recently founded temples
based upon ancient Egyptian spinituality. The work will
also be useful to Black scholars in thein effonts to
chart new dinections in our intellectual development.
To the ancient Black people of the Nile Valley, Maat
was the highest ethical commitment. The social for-
mula for Maat is reciprocity: the creaton "Di.fAnkh"
(He gives life). Human beings in tunn must give that'
which sustains life - both mental and physical, ln that
regard, The Husia is an outstanding model of Maat.
Jacob H. Canruthers
The Kemetrc lnstitute, Chtcago


--- PAGE 12 ---



--- PAGE 13 ---
INTRODUCTION
For years African scholans on the Continent and in the
Diaspora have taught on the rich moral and spiritual
legacy of ancient Afnica, especially that of Egypt. But no
one has written more on or given more substantive
proof - textually, logically and historically - of the achieve-
ment of Egypt and the debt owed Africa by the world
than Dr. Cheikh Anta Biop. He has constantly urged us
to study the ancient texts and extract from them their
rich and varied cultural legacy and use it as a basis for a
renewed and reinvigorated Afnican culture. Moreover,
Dr. Jacob Canruthers, Directon of the Kemetic Insti-
tute in Chicago and his colleagues ane doing impontant
wonk focused on the need to nescue and netranslate
the sacred and seculan liEeratune of ancient Egypt as
a means to gnasp more effectively our histony and our
role in the fonwand thrust of human history. This
volume is a self-conscious contribution to this histon-
ical and cunnent pnoject.
A pnimany aim of this volume is to pnovide a bnief
repnesentative selection of ancient Egyptian sacned lit-
enatune which can senve as a readable and enjoyable
refenence for those intenested specifically in ancient
Egyptian and Afnican sacned litenature and those who
ane interested in ancient Egyptian and African litena-
tune in genenal whebhen sacred or secular, Moneoven,
as a part of a langen work, it nepnesents a contnibu-
tion to developing a definitive African sacned text
which will senve as a moral and spinitual guide and
reinforcement in the same way othen sacned texts do
fon their adhenents and believers. The langer volume
when it is completed will be published by Thind World
Press.
I have organized The Husia into seven sections
xiii


--- PAGE 14 ---
which represents the vanious kinds of texts I found inmy neseanch, i. e, , books of cneation, pnayers andsacned praises, monal nannative, wise instnuction, con-templation, declanations of vintues and "nising like Ra',.
As thene is no single ancient Egyptian sacned text, it
was necessary not only to collect wnitings fnom
vanious sounces and attempt to impose some onder on
them, but to give the wnitings a name also.
The title of this text, The Husia, is raken fnom twoancient Egyptian wonds which signify the two divinepowers by which Ra (Ptah) cneated the wonld, i,e,, Htr,authoritative utterance and sia, excepbionaf insight,
Thus, I have put the two together to expness the con-
cept "auLhonitative uttenance of exceptional insighl".
Given the impontance of authoritative utterance and
exceptional insight to the monal and spinitual nealm and
thein divine chanacten in ancient Egyptian theology,
Husia appeans as both compelling and p.ope. as a title
for a text of ancient Egyptian sacned wnitings.
In preparing this volume, I have made necessany use
of the existing tnanslations and studies in English and
French and am thus indebted to them. Howeven, I
often disagneed with thein conceptual conclusions on
many passages and the words they used to express
them. lt was and is my conclusion that they have pro-
vided essentially dull and neductive translations of a
very beautiful and rnoving litenature. In their epignaphic
fascination fon litenal tnanslations, the epignaphens and
traditional egyptologists have given us tnanslations of
literatune not only devoid of much of its original beauty
but much of its meaning also. One can appreciate the
need fon exact translations but litenal tnanslations ane
not always exact on connect. Fon example, one can
tnanslate the Swahili sentence "Wanasema Kizulu kama
maji" litenally and get "They speak Zulu like water".
But it figuratively and connectly means "They speak
Zulu fluently." Thus, I have taken the libenty of being
figunative whene a literal tnanslation would deprive the


--- PAGE 15 ---
passage of eithen beauty ol' meaning on both. And
whene thene are questions of conrectness in tnansla-
tion on whene I have added a wond on phrase fon clan-
ity, I have used italics, Also, fon the most pant' I have
used modern English nathen than the stilted Elizabe-
than, biblical language so often used by tnanslators.
Howeven, when anchaic wonds like "behold" seemed
more poeLic and appnopriate, I took poetic license and
used them. And with the same license, I attempted to
neduce and nemove the male and class bias of the
writings.
Moneoven, I have used one name fon God, Ra,
except in the Men-nofenite tMemphite) descniption of
cneation. Even then, I used Ra aften the name Ptah. In
othen cases, I simply tnanslated the wond as an attr^ib-
ute on pnaise name of Ra, i.e., Atum, the Complete on
Penfecten; Khepen, the Bningen-into-Being, etc. I also
tnanslated the names of "gods" and "goddesses" by
their attnibu[es and tnanslated the words "god" and
"goddess" as powens of heaven, divine powens on
exalted ones, This was done fon simplification as well
as the fact that thene is suppor"t fon the angument
that all of these ane simply attnibutes and manifesta-
tions of Ra, Also, "netchen" or "netel'" is not only the
wot'd fon god or goddess as in English, but penhaps is
best bnanslated as powen on pninciple.
Finally, it is important to state here that this retranslation,
as I have tenmed it, is neithen set in cement nor resistant to
revision. lt is, in truth, a working version only, a tentative
presentation, inviti ng response, cornection and a ssista nce.
It is for this reason that I have prepared this volume to be
released duning the First Annual Ancient Egyptian Studies
Conference, which is to be held24-26 Febnuary 1984 in Los
Angeles and which is sponsorcd by the Institute of Pan-
Af rican Studies and co-chaired by Dr. Jacob Carruthens and
me.


--- PAGE 16 ---
It is at this point I acknowledge most gnatefully thefraternal and important collaboration anJ hetp I havehad fnom Dr. canruthers in prepaning this volume. Histranslations, advice and encouragement are important
material out of which this volume is made, Also, I give
thanks to my friend and wife, Tiamoyo, who pnepaned
the manuscript for the pubrisher, and to the lnstitute
of Pan-African studies and the advocates of us fon
suppont, suggestions and inspiration. As always, I am
grateful to my people whose stnuggre and aspinations
for liberation and a higher lever of human life encour--
ages me constantly to seek effective models and
means fon both,
Maulana Kanenga
Institute of Pan-African Studies
Los Angeles, Califonnia
January,1g84
xvl


--- PAGE 17 ---
Book of Knowing the Gneations


--- PAGE 18 ---



--- PAGE 19 ---
THE BOOK OF KNOWING THE CREATIONS, This book
takes its title from "The Book of Knowing the Creations of
Ra and of Striking Down Apophis" [the serpent of evil and
chaosJ, but it contains writings from other sources as well.
Since thene is no single Eext which pnesents a composite of
the ancient Egyptian concept of cneation, an effective grasp
of it is possible only thnough gaLhering and synLhesizing
passages from sevenal sources.
As the title suggests, the ancient Egyptians viewed crea-
Eion as a continuous process. Thus, we have "The Creations"
rather than "The Creation". The finst cneation was the finst
event at the first time. But creation is nepeated each day in
nature and in human history. In nature, sunnise and the new
beginning it bnings each day is a reflection of this, ln human
history, it is reflected in humanity's constant establishment
and neestablishment of order and righteousness in the midst
of chaos and evil in a nole similar to Ra.
ln just these few passages we nead the eanliest wnitten
record of the dawning of humanity's sEnuctured conscious-
ness concerning ontology and ethics. These sacred writings
predaEe Hebnew, Christian and Muslim ontologies and ethics
by thousands of years and apparently contributed to them,
Thus, we find for the first time in human history the con-
cept of Logos, i,e., creation thnough conceptual thought and
authoritative utterance; the concept of fnee will and human
equality in Ra's statement on His Four Good Deeds; and a
reflective monality which indicates definite social judgments
on that which is loved and that which is hated. and the


--- PAGE 20 ---
belief that God wourd gnant rife for the righteous and punish-ment and death for the wicked.
It is intenesting and important to note that Ra cr.eates theunivense thnough maat, a tenm with multiple meanrngs, i.e.,nighteousness, truth, justice, order, harmony, nightness,evenness, levelness, etc. lts importance lies in the fact thatit is a divine concept, power and practice which not onryinformed and aided Ra's action, but was established as thefundamental concept, power. and practice for- the organiza-Eton, maintenance and development of human society also.Thus, in each book maat is a centrar concenn and focus,whether as tnuth, justice, r-ighteousness, orden on hanmony.


--- PAGE 21 ---
The
Book of Knowing the Greations
l. RA's DESCRTpToN oF Hrs cREATtoN
Thus said Ra, the Lond of All, Lord of the Utmost
Limits, after He had come into being: lam the one
who came into being as Khepen, He who comes into
being and brings into being. When I came into being,
being itself came into being. All beings came into being
aften I came into being, Many wene the beings that
came forth fnom the commands of my mouth. Heaven
had not yet come into being. Non had earth come into
being. Non had the gnound been cneated on the things
which creep and cnawl upon it. I raised up beings in
the pnimondial watens as inent things. I found no place
on which to stand. I for-med it from the desire in my
heart; I laid the foundation thr-ough Maat. I cr-eated
fonms of eveny kind, Many wene the fonms which
issued fonth fnom the commands of my mouth. Not yet
had t established Shu, the power and principle of ligh|
and air, Nor sent fonth Tefnut, the power and principle
of moisture. Thene existed no one who acted togethen
with me. I conceived it in my own heant, And thene
came inbo being a vast numben of fonms of divine
beings as fonms of offspr-ing and fonms of their. off-
spning from them . . .
I came fonth fnom among the plants which I created
and I cneated all things which cneep and cnawl and all
that exists among them. Then by the power and pninci-
ples of light and air and the power and pninciple of
moistune, heaven and eanth were br.ought into being,
and by eanuh and heaven Osinis, Hor.us, Seth, lsis and
Nephthys wene bnought into being fnom the womb, one
aften anothen, and they gave binth to the multitudes in
this land,


--- PAGE 22 ---
tl
II . THE CREATION OF RA AS PTAH
lt is Ptah b form of Bd, the Most Gneat, who hasgiven existence to all the divine powens and to their
essences thnough his heant, mind and tongue, Thus it
came to pass that the heart, mind and tongue ruled all
the othen membens thnough teaching that ptan Hd is
within every body, as heart and mind, and within eveny
mouth, as .tongue, of all the divine powers, of ait
humankind, of cattle, of all creeping things and of all
living bhings. And He thinks as heart and mind and
commands as tongue whatever He wishes.
Ptah's (Ra'd cCImpany of divine powens ane before
Him as teeth and lips...and. .ane the teeth and lips
which established the names of all things and from
which came fonth Shu, the powens of light and ain and
Tefnut, the powen of moistune and brought into being
the company of divine powers themselves.
The seeing of the eyes, the hearing of the eans and
the bneathing of the nose ane communicated to the
heant and mind, and the heant and mind cause all per-
ceptions to come forth. And what the heant and mind
think and wish is declared by the tongue. So wene all
divine powens created and the company of divine pow-
ers completed.
Indeed every wond of God came into being through
that which the heart and mind thought and the tongue
commanded,
Thus, by means of the Word, all faculties and quali-
ties wene fashioned and created which furnish all food
and yield all nourishment,
And thus, Justice is given to one who does what is
loved and punishment is given to one who does what is
hated.
Thus, also, is life given to the peaceful and death
given to one who violates the Law.


--- PAGE 23 ---
And thus wene made every work and all cnafts, the
action of the anms and hands, the motion of the legs,
the movement of every memben of the body, according
to the command which is conceived by the heant and
mind and bnought fonth by the tongue, and which cne-
ates the usefulness and action of evenything.
It is said of Ptah (Fla) then, He is He who made all
and created the divine powers. He is Ta-tenen tthe
Risen Landl who pnoduced the divine powens and from
whom everything came forth food and pnovisions,
divine offerings and eveny good thing.
Thus, it was necognized and understood that He is
the mightiest of all divine powers. And after He had
cneated all Ehings and all the divine uttenances, Ptah
(Ra) was pleased and nested.
| | l. THE FouR GooD DEEDS oF THE cREAToR
These are wonds spoken by Him-Whose-Names-Ane-
Hidden, the Lord of All, as He speaks befone those
who silence the stonm duning the sailing of the com-
pany of Ra: Hail and Peacel I r'epeat to you the Foun
Good Deeds which my own heant and mind did for me
in the midst of the senpent coil of evil, in orden to
silence the turmoil. I did Foun Good Deeds on the
threshold of the horizon.
I created the foun winds so that every penson might
bneathe in his on her time and place, This is one of
the deeds.
I cneated the great flood for inrigation so that the
humble might benefit from it like the gneat. This too,
is one of the deeds.
I made eveny person like his and her fellow; and I did
not command them to do evil. lt was in their own


--- PAGE 24 ---
hearts and minds which caused them to disobey thatwhich I commanded. This too is one of the deeds.
I made the heants of men and women so that theywould not fonget the day of death, so that sacnedofferings might be made to the divine powe.s of thedistricEs. And this too is one of the deeds.
Thus, I have created the divine powens fnom mysweat and humankind fnom the tears of my eye,
lV. sELF DEFrNrroN By RA
_ And His Majesty Ra, Lord of Ail, spoke to rsis the
Gneat, saying:
I am He who made heaven and eanth and knitted
together the mountains and cneated all thal exist upon
them,
I am He who made the pnimeval waten and caused
heaven to come into being.
I am He who made the male and the female so that
the joys of love might come into the wonld,
I am He who made the heavens and the hidden
places of the two honizons so that the sours may dwell
in them.
I am He who when He opens His eyes, it becomes
light and when He closes His eyes, it becomes dark;
He at whose command the watens of the Nire nise and
whose name the Exalted Ones do nob know,
I am He who cneates the houns so that the days
come into being.
I am He who initiates the new yean festivals and
cneates the flood watens.


--- PAGE 25 ---
I am He who made living fire so that bhe works of
the houses might be performed.
I am Kheper, the Bringer into Being, in the morning,
Ra, the Most High and Glorious at noon and Atum,
the Complete One in the evening.


--- PAGE 26 ---



--- PAGE 27 ---
The
Book of Pnayers and Sacned
Praises


--- PAGE 28 ---



--- PAGE 29 ---
BOOK OF PRAYERS AND SACRED PRA|SES. Praise poerry
is a mode of verbal celebration of both the secular and
sacred which is a distinct and undeniable Afnican institution
and achievement. Although othen peoples in othen times
engaged in poetic praising, it was and is not as pervasive or
vital bo the seculan and sacned as in Afnica. And the fact
that praise poetry of both kinds - or "songs of praising and
glorifying" as they ane called in the Book of Coming Forth by
Day - was so pervasive and vital to ancient Egypt nein-
forces the tr-uth of its African rootedness. The praise poem
is both aesthetic and spiritual. In fact, its beauty is a part
of its spinituality, for it enhances the sense of wonden, gran-
deur and oneness with the God on penson pnaised,
The effective word in Africa is divirre and cneative. rt cails
to mind Ra, at the first event, who conceived and com-
manded and the universe and all in it came into being. lt not
only announces, it evokes attitude and behavior and rein-
fonces both. Moreoven, the praise poem is an act of partici-
pation and sharing in the qualities and action of the praised,
Thus, the pnaise poems to Ra ane not only acts of worship
and offering, but a shaning in His strength and glory, His
beneficence and beauty and in His creation and active care
of it.
I had originally intended to
Psalms, fon psalms ane sacred
changed for two basic neasons,
call this book the Book of
songs or hymns. However, I
Finst, I did not want to give
13


--- PAGE 30 ---
the impression I or ancient Egypt was borrowing from theBible. For in truth it was the other way anound as bothchronological and textual evidence pnove. And secondly, theterm psalms is not as aesthetic or definitive of the contentsof the book as the chosen tible, "prayers and sacred
Praises."
In this book we find descriptions and praises of God that
would later appear in Hebrew, christian and Muslim sacned
texts. Ra is the Good shepard fond of His flock which is in
His own image. He rescues the humble and needy, heans and
answers the prayens of the prisoner and the oppressed. He
is "the helmsman Uhat knows the water well" and the res-
cuer and "pnime minister of the poor", He is the physician
who cures without medicine and the judge that takes no
bribes. lt is this imagery of God and humankind's relationship
and the use of human society and nature as realms of
revealing the Cneator's benevolence that senved as a source
of not onfy the Hebrew Psalms but, as we shall see of their
theology in general also.
14


--- PAGE 31 ---
The
andBook of Prayers Sacred Praises
l.
And Amenomope and his wife Hathon said:
Blessed is one who sits in the hands of Amen Ra,
for it is He who dinects the timid, who nescues the
humble and the needy, who gives the breath of life to
bhe one whom He loves and gnants him or her a long
life in the West of Thebes.
Oh my God, Lond of Londs, Amen Ra, Lond of Kar-
nak. Give me your hand and save me. Shine upon me
and sustain me. You ane the only God and there is
none like you. You ane Ra who rises in the heavens,
the God who created men and women.
It is you who heans the prayers of one who calls on
Him, who saves a man and woman from the hands of
the violent and who makes the Nile rise and flow fon
those who are in Him. Ra is the perfect guide for
evenyone.
When He nises men and women live and thein heants
are lifted up when they see the one who gives the
breath of life to those who are in the egg, who make
people and birds to live, who supplies even food fon
mice in their holes as well as for wonms and fleas.
May He grant us an honorable bunial after an old age,
so that we may be safe in His hands.
lt.
Neb-Ra gives praise to Amen Ra saying:
Amen, Ra, Lord of Karnak, the great God, who pne-
15


--- PAGE 32 ---
sides over Thebes, the Holy God who heans pnayens,
who comes at the call of the humble and needy and to
those in distress, who gives stnength to the one who
is weak.
I give pnaise to Amen Ra, Lord of the Thrones of
Egypt who presides over Thebes. I kiss the gnound
befone Amen Ra of Thebes, the great God, the Lor.d
of the sanctuary, gneat and beautiful, that He may let
my eyes see His beauty.
Praise be to Amen Ra. I make hymns in His name, I
give Him praise to the heights of heaven and to the
ends of the earth. I tell of His majesty and might
to those who sail downstream and those who sail
upstneam.
Stand in awe of Him, Declane Him to your- son and
daughter, to the gneat and the small. Declare Him tb
genenation aften generation who ane not yet bonn,
Declane Him to the fish in the deep and to the binds in
the sky. Declare Him to the ignonant and to Lhe wise.
Stand in awe of Him.
You, O' Amen Ra, are Lond of those who have no
voice. You come at the call of the humble and needy.
When I cry out to you in my distness, y-ou come quickly
to my rescue, you come to give strength to one who is
weak and to save me fnom my enslavement.
You, Amen Ra, Lond of Thebes, are One who nes-
cues those who are shut in and cut off. For you ane
He who is menciful. And when people cny out to you,
you come fnom afar.
The painter of Amen Ra in the Place-of-Truth, Neb-
Ra, who stands vindicated, son of anothen painten in
the Place-of-Tnuth, Pai who stands vindicated also,
made this stela in the name of His Lond Amen Ra,
Lord of Thebes who comes at the call of the humble
and needy.
16


--- PAGE 33 ---
I made fon Him pnaises to His name' For His might
and majesty ane gneat, And I prayed to Him before
Him and in the pnesence of the whole land, on behalf
of my son, the painter, Nakht-Amen, when he lay sick
and nean unto death, being in the power of Amen
because of his deeds.
I found the Lond of Lords coming as a northwind and
that sweet breezes went befone Him. And He nescued
my son, Nakht-Amen, the vindicated, the son of God's
painten in the Place-of-Tnuth, Neb-Ra, and of the lady
Peshed, both of whom stand vindicated.
Neb-Ra says:
Though the senvant be inclined to make mistakes,
the Lond is inclined to be merciful. The Lord of The-
bes does not spend a whole day in angen. He is angry
fon but a moment and none of it nemains behind, The
wind tunns for us in His mency and Amen Ra comes
back upon the bneeze. May youn spirit be always kind,
may you always fongive. And may what has once been
tunned away not come back to us.
This stela, then, I will make in youn name and I shall
recond this hymn of praise on it in writing. For you
saved fon me my son, Nakht-Amen. I spoke to you and
you heard me. Now, behold I do what I promised. Fon
you are the Lond to the one who calls on you and He
who is satisfied with nighteousness.
lll.
Amen Ra is the helmsman who knows the water
well, He is the rudden fon the weak. He gives bread to
those who have none, and sustains those who senve
Him in His temple.
17


--- PAGE 34 ---
I take not the powerful as a protecton. I dependnot on those with wearth. And I place not my rifeunder the strong arm of another. For my wealth andstrength are in the house of my Lond. My t-oro is mypnotector; I know His might. lndeed, He is a helperstrong of arm and none is truly stnong but He.
Amen Ra is He who knows compassion who heank-
ens to those who call Him. Amen Ra, Lord of Lords.
The Bull of gneat strength who delights in mightiness.
lv.
My heart longs to behold you, O' Lond of the acacia
trees. My heant desines to see you O' Amen Ra. you
ane the protecton of the humble and needy, a father
and mothen to the orphan, a husband to the widow.
Sweet it is to speak youn name, it is like the taste
of life, yes, like the taste of bnead bo a child, like the
breath of freedom to the captive.
Turn yourself to us, O' Etennal One, who was hene
befone any other existed. Though you make for me
dankness, yet cause light to shine on me lhat I may
see you. As youl' soul endures fon eternity and as your
beautiful and beloved face lasts forever, may you come
from afar and let me see you. To worship you O' Ra,
is good. You are, O' Lord, great to seek, for if found
you turn away all fean. Place joy, 0' Ra, in the hearts
of the people. For happy are those who see you, O'
Ra, and they nejoice each day.
V.
O' Amen Ra, you shepherd who brings forth the
18


--- PAGE 35 ---
flock in the morning, leading the hungny to green pas-
tunes. As the shephend leads his flock to gneen mead-
ows, so do you, O' Ra, lead the needy to food. For Ra
is indeed a good shephend, neven idle, attending those
who lean on Him.
O' Ra, I love you and I have filled my heart with you.
You will nescue me fnom the mouth of the multitude
on the day when they speak lies against me. Fon the
Lond of Righteousness lives in nighteousness. Thus I
will not dwell on bhe anxiety in my heart, fot' surely
what Ra has said will come to pass.
vl.
And Phanoah Ramesses ll surnounded on the battle-
field by enemies and gneatly tnoubled pr-ayed saying:
Now I call on you from the ends of the eanth,
O' Amen Ra. All that I have done was fon love of you,
O' Fathen, Amen Ra, I cny out to you, fon I am in the
midst of many enemies and the whole of this land is
against me, I am alone and my only defense, for my
many soldiens have desented me; my chaniots nefused
to nemain with me. Though I called out to them, there
was none who responded to my call.
Now, I cny [o you O' Ra, and I find that you, Ra, ane
more helpful to me than millions of soldiens, mone than
hundneds of thousands of chaniots. mone than thou-
sands of bnothers and sons, all put together. Fon bhe
effort of many is naught compar.ed to Ehe majesty and
might of Amen Ra.
Then said Pharoah Ramesses ll: Now, though I pnay-
ed in a distant land, my voice nesounded in southenn On.
I found Amen Ra came when I called to Him. He gave
me His hand and . . . I found my heant stnong and full of
19


--- PAGE 36 ---
joy. And all I did succeeded.
vll.
Pnaise to you, Amen Ra, who spoke with His mouth
and there came into being men, powens and pninciples
of the universe, cattle great and smail, and evenything
that flies and alights, all of them.
You created even the banks of the Hanebu people
who settle in thein cities and also the fruitful meadows
fertilized by the originat waters and giving birth there-
after to good things without number to suppont all
that lives.
You ane mighty as a shephend, tending all people fon
all etennity. Bodies are filled with youn beauty, and
eyes see because of you. You inspire awe in evenyone
and Lhein hearts tunn to you, Fon you are good at all
times. And all the wonld lives from yout" presence.
Evenyone says: "We ane youns," the stnong and the
weak togethen, the nich and the poon with one mouth
and all othens likewise. You are lovely in their hearts.
And no body lacks some of youn beauty.
Do not the widows say: You ane oun husband, and
the small childnen say you are our fathen and mothen?
The rich boast wibh youn beauty and the poor revere
youn pnesence. The prisonen tunns to you and the sick
call out to you.
Youn name will be a protection for the body of any-
one who is alone. lt is salvation and health fon those
on the waEen and deliverance fnom the cnocodile. lt is
good to rememben Ra in the time of tunmoil, for He is
a deliverance from the mouth of the aggnessive,
O' Ra, all can tunn to you and place thein petitions
before you. Your eans are open to hean them and you
20


--- PAGE 37 ---
grant what they desine. You are the Creator who
loves those in His image, the shepherd who is fond of
His flock.
vlll.
Praise be to you O' Ra, Lord of Tnuth, whose sanc-
tuary is hidden, Lord of Londs. The Bringen-into-Being
in His sacred boat, who commanded and the powers
and principles of the universe came into being. The
CreaEor who cneated humankind and distinguished their
characters, who made their life, who made their colors
diffenenr fnom each other,
Praise to Ba, He who hears the prisoner's prayen,
beneficient of heart when one calls to Him. He who
rescues the oppnessed from the oppnesson, who judg-
es between the weak and the strong, Lord of Percep-
tion, in whose mouth is authoniEy.
Fon love of Him, the Nile comes. The Beneficenb
One, the greatly beloved, and when He comes the peo-
ple live
O' Almighty One, Lord of Londs, we nevere your
might because you created us; we shout 1oy to you
because you molded us; we offer you praise because
you weanied younself with us.
Pnaise be unto you, who did make all of this; unique
and only one with many hands who passes the night
awake while men and women sleep, seeking the best
fon His cneatunes.
lx.
Pharoah Akhenaten sang praises saying:
21


--- PAGE 38 ---
You nise in beauty on the horizon of heaven, o' Liv-
ing Aten, creator of life, when you l-ise on the eastennhorizon, you fill eveny land with your- beauty. you are
Ra and you reach the limits of the lands and restrain
them fon your beloved son (Akhenated. you make
seed gnow in women and cneate people fnom sperm.
You feed the embnyo in the mothen's womb, soothing
it to still its teans.
How manifofd are your works though hidden from
sight, o' sole God besides whom thene is none, you
cneated earth according to youn desine, you alone. Allpeoples, cattle and all kinds of animals, all on earth
that walk on legs and all on high rhat fly with wings.
You set eveny person in his (hed place and satiJfy
their needs. All have food and rheir time of life is
detenmined. Their tongues differ in speech and so do
their chanacters. The colors of their skins are diffen-
ent also. For you distinguished the people. How excel-
lent ane youn ways O' Lond of etennity.
X.
Eveny city is under the shadow of Amen Ra, so that
His heart can move in that which He has loved. people
sing Eo Ra unden eveny r-oof, and eveny foundation
sLands fir-m under His love. They celebrate for Him
on festival days and pass the night still awake at
midnight
Ra is He who fnees one from evil and drives away
suffening, He is a docton who heals the eye wibhout
medicine, who opens the eye and cunes squinting, He
saves whomeven He will even though they ane ah.eady
in the gnave.
He hears lhe pr.ayers of those who call on Him, and
comes in a moment from afar to those who cny out to
Him,
22


--- PAGE 39 ---
He lengthens the span of life and shortens it and
gives beyond what is allotted by fate to those whom
He chenishes,
Amen Ra is magic, words of power, over water
when His name is said above the deep. And the croco-
dile has no power when a penson calls His name.
The winds change and the headwind moves anound.
It grows calm when one remembens Ra. His name is a
useful word in the time of tnouble, a gentle bneeze for
one who calls on Him.
It is Ra who saves those who have come to grief, a
gentle God with effective counsel, He belongs to those
who rest their back on Him when they are in their
hour of trouble.
He is more powerful than millions to those who set
Him in their heart and one is mightier than the many
through the power of His name. He is the compassion-
abe protecton, the Beneficent One, one who makes no
mistakes, and one whom humans cannot hold off.
xl.
Amen Ra who was the first King, the God of the
earliest time and He who remains Ehe Pnime Ministen
of the poor. Ra accepts no bribes fnom the guilty; He
takes no tesbimony from the witness and pays no
attention to one who promises. Amen Ra judges the
land with a wave of His finger. He speaks to the heart
and judges the guilty. And He assigns the guilty to the
fire of the East and the righteous to Ehe peace of the
West.
Amen Ra, lend youn ean to Ehose who stand alone
in court. They ane poor and not nich. And the counts
extort from them saying, "silver and gold for the
clerks and clothes fon the attendants." May you,


--- PAGE 40 ---
Amen, appear as pnime ministen and let the poor gofree. May the poor be vindicated and their just ne.ooutweigh wealth."
xll.
Pharoah Piankhi instructed his men before battlepraising the powen of Amen Ra and saying:
when you arrive at Thebes, before Karnak, you shall
enter the water and bathe yourself. you shall dress rn
fine clothing, unstring your bows and set aside your
arrows. Let no overlond or ruler boast of being mighty.
For there is no strength fon the mighty without Amen
Ra. He makes Ehe weak-armed into the strong-armed,
so that the multitudes flee from the feeble and one
alone takes a thousand captive. Anoint yourselves,
then, with the waters of His altars and bow down to
the eanth before Him and say "Make for us a way
that we might fight in the shadow of your sword. For
when the young men you have sent forth launch their
attack, the multitudes flee from Ehem."
xlll.
Montemhet, the Prophet of Amen Fla, prayeC saying:
Homage to you, O' Amen Ra, maker of humankind,
God who created all beings. Beneficent King, First One
of Egypt, The Two Lands, who conceived in His heant
and mind the eternity which He created. One great in
power, awesome in His might, whose forms are exalted
above all other divine powers. The Most Strong who
sbrikes down Ehe violators of the Law, whose horn
attacks the doers of evil. I rely on your name. May it be
24


--- PAGE 41 ---
my physician. May it eliminate my body's illness and drive
away all pain from me.
May Ra put love of me in the hearEs of the people
so that all may be fond of me. May He grant me a
good burial in the cemeteny of my city. For bhe sacned
land is in His grasp. May He make my name last like
the stars of heaven and my monument last like those
of His followers. May my divine essence be nemem-
bened in His temple day and night. May I renew my
youth like the moon and may my name not be forgot-
ten in the yeans that come forever after.
a5


--- PAGE 42 ---



--- PAGE 43 ---
The
Book Of The Moral Narrative


--- PAGE 44 ---



--- PAGE 45 ---
THE BOOK OF THE MORAL NARHATIVE. Although there
are other moral narratives in ancient Egyptian sacred wis-
dom, none is so clear, beautiful and definitive as the Book of
Khun-Anup. This Book is called "The Eloquent Peasant" by
tnaditional egyptologists, However, I have chosen to call it by
the name of the man who is its central character and
spokesman, a peasant or farmen who is unjustly treated and
appeals for relief, justice and nighteousness fr"om the High
Steward, Flensi, who handled such matters. Bensi is
impressed with Khun-Anup's eloquence and reponts it to bhe
pharoah. The pharoah impressed by the nepont asks Flensi to
delay ruling on the case in order to benefit from Khun-Anup's
beautiful speech which in ancient Egypt as in othen parts of
Afnica was/is highly appreciated. Rensi was also ondered to
take care of Khun-Anup's family for the days he kept Khun-
Anup waiting for a decision and to meticulously copy down all
he said.
What follows is a senies of nine petitions made by Khun-
Anup for justice and righteousness or as the Egyptians
calfed both, maat. As stated in the intnoduction to the Book
of Knowing the Creations, maat was the foundation of both
the natural and social order, lts cone concept is nightness in
nature and righteousness (which makes an onder or system
right) in human society. Although traditional egyptologists
translate maat mostly as justice in this narrative, I tnanslate
it mostly as righteousness. For among the three most used
meanings - tnuth, iustice and righueousness - righteous-
ness seems to me to be the most comprehensive and inclu-
sive tenm and suggests and necessitates both tnuth and
justice.
29


--- PAGE 46 ---
Khun-Anup appears to Rensi's sense of righteousness,
truth and justice, for maat was seen in ancient Egyptian
society as the spirit and method of organizing and con-ducting the relations of human society. ThE phanoah and hissociety wene the symbol and embodiment of maat andjudges, as the representatives of the pharoah, wore on thein
chest an image of the divine powen, Maat, (see above) point-
ing it towand the vindicated in a case. Khun-Anup begins bypraising Rensi, pharoah's representative, as one who
destroys falsehood and brings nighteousness, and challenges
him to win etennal life by his righteousness. He subsequ"ntly
criticizes him for not acting acconding to maat. But in the
end a judgment is rendered in Khun-Anup's favon.
The language of the narnative is fulr of nautical and meas-
urement terminology. This is because religion is reflective of
a people's social life. Ancient Egyptian life was greatly
shaped by activities on and anound the Nile and by agricul-
tural activities such as plowing, hanvesting and measuring
grain. Thus, the phanoah and his representative are seen as
the helmsman of the ship of state and are wished good sail-
ing, Likewise, they ane seen as the balance on scares which
should not tilt, Ehe plummet which should not stray or the
tongue that should not swerve - lest the system itself
become unbalanced and the social orden be interrupted and
upset. The appreciation for the balance on weighing comes
also from refenence to the sacned Balance in which the
heant of the depanted and nisen will be weighed on the Day
of Judgment. (see below the Books of Rising Like Ral.
30


--- PAGE 47 ---
The
Book of Khun-Anup
Then Khun-Anup said to the High Steward, Rensi:
l.
When you embark on the Lake of Maat (truth, justice
and nighteousness). May you sail on it with a good wind.
May no stonm tean away your sail nor your boat lag
behind. May no misfortune fall on your mast and may
youn mainstays not snap. May you not run agnound nor
the cunnent carny you away. May you not taste the evils
of the niven nor see a face of fean. And may the fish
come quickly to you and plump birds gather around you,
For you ane the father of the orphan, the husband of
the widow, the bnother of the divorced woman and a
proEecEive garment for the motherless.
Let me raise up youn name in this land as the
embodiment of every good law. For you are, a leader
without gneed, a great man free of baseness, one who
destnoys f alsehood and bnings nighteousness into
being, one who comes at the voice of the caller, When
I speak may you hear me. Grant me justice, O' Praise-
wonthy One to whom those who are praised give
pnaise. Put an end to my oppression, for I am greatly
bundened. Count me and you will find me lacking.
ll.
A montal man dies along with his dependents but will
you be a man of etennity by your righteousness? ls it
not wnong when a balance tilts, a plummet strays, and
the stnaight becomes cnooked? Lo, justice has fled
fnom you, dniven fnom its place, The judges do wnong
and night-speech has become one-sided, The judges
take what has been stolen. He who should set mat-
31


--- PAGE 48 ---
tens right makes things go wnong. He who should give
bneath chokes one who is on the ground and he who
should make breathing easier makes one gasp fon ain.
The mediator is a robber and he who should destroy
need, commands its cneation. The town is its own
floodwaten and he who should combat evil, commits
cnimes himself,
Bedress is short but misfortune is long and a good
deed neturns to those who do it, This is the pnecept:
Do to the doen that he or she may also do. lt is
thanking one fon what one may do, blocking a blow
befone it strikes and giving an assignment to one who
is skillful, Be a shelten and make your shore safe. See
how your whanf is covened with cnocodiles. Let your
tongue speak stnaight and not go astnay.
lll.
Punish the nobben and save those who suffen. Do
not be a flood against the petitionen. Be aware of the
appnoach of eternity. Desire to live long, fon as it is
said: Doing right is breath for the nose. Punish those
who desenve punishment and none will equal youn right-
eousness. Answer not good with evil and put not one
thing in the place of anothen,
The balancing of the land lies in Maat - truth, just-
ice and nighteousness. Do not speak falsely fon you
are great; do not act lightly for. you have weight; be
not untrue fon you are the balance and do not swenve
fon you ane the standard. You are on the level with
the balance, lf it tilts, then, you will lean too. Do not
drift, rathen steen. Do not nob, nather act against the
nobber. For one is not really great, if he is gneat with
gneed. lf you tunn youn face fnom violence, who will
punish wnongdoing?


--- PAGE 49 ---
lv.
Thene is none quick of speech who is fnee of hasty
words and none light of heant and mind whose thoughts
have weight. Be patient that you may leann nighteous-
ness and nestnain your angen for the good of one who
entens humbly. No one hasty achieves excellence and
one who is impatient is not leaned on. Let your eyes
see and your heart take notice. Do not act harshly with
youn power lest a misfortune fall on you,
Helmsman, do not let youn ship go astray. Life-given,
do not let the people die. Pnovider, do not let the peo-
ple penish from need. Shade, do not let the people
become dny in the sun. Protecton, do not let the cnoc-
odiles seize the people and dnag them away.
V.
Rob not the poon of thein goods, the,humble whom
you know, Fon the poon's belongings ane bneath to
them and to take them away is to stop up thein nose.
vt.
One who lessens falsehood encounages tnuth. One
who supponts good diminishes evil - even as satisfac-
tion comes and ends hungen and clothing nemoves
nakedness; even as the sky becomes calm after a
stonm and warms all who are cold; even as fine cooks
that which is naw and water quenches fhinst. He who
cheats diminishes justice. But lustice nightly given nei-
Ehen falls shont non bnims oven. Do not delay; deal with
the matten at hand. lf you sepanaLe who will join? The
sounding pole is in youl- hand, take the measunements.
33


--- PAGE 50 ---
surely the waten is shailow. And if the boat runsaground, its cango will not on shone.
vil.
Be patient so that one may cail on you concer-nrnghis on he. just cause. Do not be angny io. it does notbecome you. The bnooding face becomes easily upset,Bnood not on what has not yet happened, nor rejoiceoven what has not yet come to pass. patience pno_longs fniendship and disposes of a pasb concern, forone does not know what is in the heart. lf the law isundenminded and order destroyed, the poor cannotsurvive' Fo' when they ane nobbed justice does notapply to them,
vilt.
People fall low thnough gneed. Those who prey on
othens achieve no real success. Thein success is, in
truth, a loss, Though you ane greedy, it yields you
nothing; though you steal you do not benefit by ib. Act
righteously fon the Lor"d of Righteousness whose right-
eousness is righteousness indeed. When goodness is
good, it is truly good. Sur.ely, r.ighteousness is fon eten-
nity. lt goes bo the gnave with those who do it. When
they ane bunied and the eanth envelops them, thein name
is not enased fnom the face of the eanth. They ar.e
nemembened because of their goodness, For this is a
pninciple established by the wond of God. Speak night
and do right. For righteousness is mighty. lt is greaE it
endunes; its wonth is neal and it leads one to blessed-
ness. Wrongdoing does not achieve its goal, but one
who is nighteous neaches dny land,


--- PAGE 51 ---
tx.
The tongue is a person's balance and it is the
balance which discovers defects, Punish those who
should be punished and none shall equal youn night-
eousness. When falsehood walks anound it goes
astnay. lt does not cross over in the ferry nor does ib
go forwand. One who becomes nich by it has no chil-
dren or heirs on earth. Those who sail with it do not
neach dry land and their boat does not drop anchon at
the inbended town.
Be not too heavy nor yet too light. Do not delay or
be foo hasty. Be not partial non listen to pure emo-
tion, Do not burn youn face fnom one whom you know.
Be not blind to one whom you have seen and do not
reject one who petitions you. Abandon this sluggish-
ness and let your speech be heand. Act for one who
acts for you. Do not listen to evenyone, but call those
who have a just cause, The slow and idle have no heri-
tage; one deaf to tnuth has no fniends and those who
ane gneedy have no holiday.
35


--- PAGE 52 ---



--- PAGE 53 ---
Books Of Wise lnstnuction


--- PAGE 54 ---



--- PAGE 55 ---
THE BOOKS OF WISE INSTRUCTION. Cer-tainly one of the
most important and well-written kinds of sacred literatune of
ancient Egypt are the Books of Wise Instruction. Although
some tnaditional egyptologists would argue that the Instnuc-
tions are more secular than sacred, evidence does not sup-
pont such a contention. One assumes they came to this
conclusion because the lnstructions offer explicit life-lessons
of how to conduct oneself, alone and with others. Howeven,
if that is their main angument - and it seems to be from all
readings - then they would have to nule the Book of Prov-
erbs seculan. Fon not only does it contain similan instruc-
tions, but also it was based on the ancienL Egyptian model
and borrowed whole passages from the Book of Amenomope
lsee below).
The Books of Wise lnstruction ane as sacred as any of
the other books of lhe Husia, for the main focus is on maat
and the moral and spiritual obligation each penson has in
preserving and practicing it in and for the community. Thus,
each person, not lust the pharoah, was urged to pneserve
and practice maat, Fon he or she was judged by it and
granted long life on eanth as well as eternal life in Amenta
(panadise) or death and non-existence based on this.
Therefore, Ptah-hotep says, "Maat is great, its value is
lasting and it has remained unchanged and unequaled since
the time of its Creator." lt is, he continues, "a plain path
even for bhe ignonant and those who violate its laws ane
punished." Thus, he unges monal excellence in all one does
"so no fault can be found in your chanacter". Likewise,
Kheti, tells his son Merikare that "righteousness is fitting
for a rulen" and that he should "do that which is right that
39


--- PAGE 56 ---
you may live long on earth", Fon "more acceptable is the
bnead of Ehe righteous than the ox of those who do evil".
cleanly bhen, maat, uhe quintessen[ial monal and spiriuual
concept of ancient Egyptian sacred liter-ature, fonms Lhe
cone focus of the Instructions even though some rather sec-
ular situations and solutions ane posed. Moreoven, given the
inseparable link in ancient Egypt and othen pants of Afr-ica
between the sacred and seculan, the attempt to separate
them makes liLtle sense and meets with even less success.
Thus, the sages teach their children and the people to think
maat, speak maat and do maat in seculan and sacred situa-
tions. For this will not only insure a mutually beneficial com-
munity based on maat, but also everlasting life,
In tenms of bhe names of the Books, I have made two
changes in names which should be noted. Fir"st, the book
called the "lnstructions for Merikare" by traditional egyptolo-
gists is re-titled "The Book of Kheti", This was done because
it is relatively centain the pharoah who wrote it was named
Kheti and the "Book fon Merikare" would be inconsrsrent
with the other' "Books of", Secondly, the book called the
Papyrus Insingen by traditional egyptologists is ne-titled the
Book of Phebhor after its authon. The traditional egyptolo-
gists and collector-s had the nather- unsettling and even arro-
gant habit of naming ancient Egyptian papyni by the name of
someone who bought them "or came into possession of
them" by various means, Thus, Insinger., Hanr"is, Beatty, etc.,
ane affixed to papyri which often have their own names. Nat-
urally, I saw no need or reason to follow chis pnactice.
40


--- PAGE 57 ---
The
Book of Ptah-Hotep
t.
Be not arnogant because of youn knowledge. Take
counsel with the ignonant as well as with the wise.
Fon the limits of knowledge in any field have never
been set and no one has even neached them. Wisdom
is nanen than emenalds, and yet it is found among the
women who gathen at the gnindstones.
ll.
lf you ane a leader and command many, stnive fon
excellence in all you do so Lhat no fault can be found
in youn chanacten. Fon Maat - the way of Tnuth, Jus-
tice and Righteousness - is gneab; its value is lasting
and it has nemained unequalled and unchanged since
the time of its Creaton. lt lies as a plain pabh befone
even the ignonant and bhose who violabe its laws ane
punished. Although wickedness may gain wealth,
wnong-doing has neven bnought its wares to a safe
por-t. In the end, it is Maat, the way of Tnuth, Juslice
and Righteousness that endunes and enables the
upnight to say "lt is the legacy of my father and
mothen. "
ilr.
Do not terrorize people for. if you do, God will punish
you accondingly. lf anyone lives by such means, God
will take bread fnom his on her" mouth. lf one says I
shall be rich by such means, she will evenLually have
41


--- PAGE 58 ---
to say my means have entnapped me. lf one says I will
nob anothen, he will end up being robbed himself. The
plans of men and women do not always come to pass,
fon in the end it is the will of God which prevails.
Thenefone, one should live in peace with othens and
they will come and willingly give gifts which another
would take from them through fear.
tv.
Be diligent as long as you live, always doing mone
than is commanded of you. Do not misuse your time
while following youn heart, for it is offensive to the
soul to waste one's time. Do not lose the daily oppon-
tunity to incnease that which you have. Diligence pno-
duces gains and gains do not endure when diligence is
abandoned.
V.
lf you are parents of wonth and wisdom, tnain youn
childnen so that they will be pleasing to God. And if
they do what is right, following yout' example, and han-
dle yout' affains as they should, do fon them all that is
good. Fon they are begotten of yout' own heart and
soul, Thenefone, sepanate noL youn heart fnom lhem.
But if they fail to follow your counse, oppose your will,
reject all counsel, and se[ their mouth in motion with
vile wonds, then dnive them away. Fon they ane not
youn childnen and were not bonn for you. Those who
ane guided do not go wnong, but those who wilfully
lose their way will not find a str"aight counse.
42


--- PAGE 59 ---
vl.
lf you move among people, gain nespect and tnust
thnough speaking openly and tnuthfully. Those who ane
tnusted and speak tnuthfully, will become leaders and
mastens of themselves.Those who masten themselves
enjoy a good name and ane not maligned. They ane in
good health and their face is turned towand thein peo-
ple. And they ane pnaised without Ehein knowing it. But
those whose heant obeys base desines causes con-
tempt nathen than love. Their heant diminishes and
thein body dwindles. Those of greaL heant ane the cho-
sen of God, but those who obey base desines, become
bhe possession of the enemy.
vll.
lf you are a leaden, see that the plans you make ane
cannied out. Do gneat things which will be nemembered
long after you. Whene thene is pnaise, detnaction can-
nol sunvive. But whene those of ill-will enten. like croc-
odiles, strife also comes.
vlil.
lf you are a leaden, be counteous and listen carefully
to the presentations of petitioner.s, Stop not their-
speech until they have pouned out their heant and spo-
ken that which they came to say. Those with gr.iev-
ances like to speak out and have their petitions heard.
But whosoeven sfops a pnesentation naises the ques-
tion of why does one having this powen act in this
mannen. Not all that is asked fon can be granted, but
a fain hearing satisfies the heart.


--- PAGE 60 ---
lx.
lf you want friendship to last in the house you enter
as masten, fniend on bnothen, or in any other place you
enten, avoid appnoaching the women in an impnopen
mannen, No place is peaceful whene this is done and
he who intnudes on them is unwelcome, Thousands of
men have been ruined for the pleasure of a shont
moment, which passes like a dream and then brings
death to those who have indulged in it. Men and
women leave home because of it and the heart should
refnain fnom it. As for those who go wnong because of
lust, none of thein plans will pnospen,
X.
lf you wish your conduct to be perfect, to be free
fnom all that is evil, guand against the vice of gneed
for matenial things. lt is a gnievous sickness and there
is no cune fon it. Thene can be no confidence among
those infected with it. lt tunns a kind fniend into a bit-
ten enemy. lt causes conflict with fathens, moLhers
and the bnothens of mothers and rt separates the wife
from her husband. lt is a bundle of all kinds of evil and
a bag containing vices of every kind. Established ane
those whose standand is righteousness, who walk
according to its ways. They shall sunely prospen
theneby, but the greedy will not have even a grave.
xl.
lf you are wise and seek to make youn house stable,
love youn wife fully and nighteously. Give her food,
clothes and oil fon hen body and make her happy as


--- PAGE 61 ---
long as you live. For she is of
husband. Be not bnutal to her..
ation witl influence her better
tion to what she wishes, aims
Thus, she will nemain with you.
call hen and show hen youn love.
great value to you her
Kindness and considen-
than fonce. Pay atten-
ab and negands highly.
Open youn anms to hen;
xll.
Shane with youn fniends that which you have, fon
that which is youns is a gift of God. Those who fail to
share with thein fniends ane shunned fon having a self-
ish soul. Although people might plan for tomonnow,
they do not know what will come to pass, But it is
nighteousness by which people ane sustained. Thene-
fone, if misfontune comes and you have been nighteous
wibh youn fniends, youn fniends will welcome you. peace
will not be found in a city where fniends ane fongotten
and thein needs not answened.
xil t.
lf you ane one of worth and wisdom who stts on a
council of govennance, apply your hear t and mind
toward that which is wise. Speak only when you know
you can assist in the solution of a difficulty. For
silence is betten than useless chatter. Ther"e is an ant
lo giving sound advice in council, Sunely ib is mone dif-
ficult than all othen duties. Those who gnasp this can
make it serve them well.
45


--- PAGE 62 ---
XIV.
lf you ane a powenful penson, gain nespect through
knowledge and gentleness of speech and conduct. Give
commands only whene necessany and fitting, Those
who abuse thein authority pnovoke nesistance. And
those who place themselves above others ane brought
low. Be not silent when it is youl- duty to speak, buL
be cautious in youn speech lest you offend. When you
answen the angny, show self-contr"ol. Fon Lhe angny
heant speaks fier-y wonds, but those who walk gently,
thein path is alneady paved. Moneoven, those who
worny all day will have no happy moment. But those
who punsue pleasune all day will not be able to sustain
themselves.
XV.
lf you ane a judge chosen to maintain orden among
the people, handle mattens with a stnict sense of just-
ice. Do nob lean to one side on the other'. Take care
that no one complains that you ane unfain and your
actions nesult in a judgment against you,
XVI.
lf you ane angered by a wnong done you by anothen,
lean not towand nemembening it, but toward nighteous-
ness, Pass oven it quickly and do not hold it in yout-
heant aften the first day it happens.
46


--- PAGE 63 ---
XVII.
lf you have gnown gneat after having lived in a lowly
condition, and have gained wealth aften having been
poor in youn town in the past, fonget not how it was
with you in fonmen times. Tnust not in youn wealth,
which came to you as a gift of God. And put not
behind you another who is youn equal and to whom the
same has happened.
xvlll.
Be genenous as long as you live. what goes into the
stonehouse should come out, Fon bread is made Lo be
shaned. Those whose bellies are empty tunn into
accusens and those who ane deprived become oppo-
nents. see that none such as these ane your- neigh-
bors. Generosity is a memoniar fon those who show it,
long aften they have departed.
XIX.
Know those who ane faithful to you and do not mis-
treat those who ane your friends. They ane a well-
watered field to you and more varuable than great
riches. For what belongs to one friend belongs to
another. The characten of a nighteous penson is an
honon to him or her and a thing of varue which is long
remembered,
47


--- PAGE 64 ---
XX.
lf nespect for night exists in the heant of those who
have been set in authority, they will be beneficent
always and thein wisdom shall endune foreven. The
heant of the wise reloices when wisdom is estabrished
and is happy when it pnospers on earth. The wise ane
known by thein wisdom and the great by thein good
actions. Thein heant is in harmony with thein tongue,
their lips are tnue when they speak, thein eyes see
rightly and their ears hear that which is profitable for
their childnen, so that they may do what is right and
are free fnom unnighteousness,
XXI.
lf a son and daughten accept the righteaus teach-
ings of thein panents, none of thein plans will go
wnong. Teach youn childnen, then, to be those who
hear well; Lhey will be valued by those of weight and
substance and their speech will be informed by what
they have heand, Respected ane those who listen well,
they will excel and thein deeds will distinguish them,
But failune will follow those who hean not, The wise
wake eanly in onden to establish themselves, but fools
always fail to nise at the oppontune time.
48


--- PAGE 65 ---
The
Book of Kagemni
t.
The modest penson is stnong and one who is
wond and just in deed is pnaised. Houses ane
to the humble and a wide seat is given to one
gentle in speech and conduct. But sharp knives
neady fon the unrighteous intruden. Fon there
entnance except for the righteous,
true in
opened
who is
stand
is no
ll.
Those who ane blameless in mattens of conduct, no
wonds can prevail against them. And those who are
self-mastered, the harsh ane kinden to them than their
own mothers, and all people become thein senvants.
Let your name go fonth, then, while you younself, ane
silenb and you will be necognized and nespected.
lll.
Be not annogant among youn peens because of your
stnength. And bewane of acting in such a way to
encounage opposition. For one knows not what will
come to pass or the things God will do to punish the
evil.
49


--- PAGE 66 ---
The
Book of Kheri
t.
Be skilled in speech so that you will succeed. The
tongue of a man is his sword and effective speech is
stnongen than all fighting. None can ovencome the skiil-
ful, A wise penson is a school fon the nobles and
those who ane aware of his knowledge do not attack
him. No evil takes place when he is near, Truuh comes
to him in its essential fonm, shaped in the sayings of
the ancestons.
il.
Follow in the footsteps of youn ancestons, fon the
mind is tnained thnough knowledge, Behold, their wonds
endune in books, Open and read them and follow their
wise counsel. Fon one who is taught becomes skilled.
Do not be evil fon kindness is good. Make the memony
of you last thnough love of you. Multiply the people
whom the city sheltens, then God will be pnaised fon
your- donations. And the people will . . . give thanks fon
youn goodness and pnay fon youn health.
lll.
Advance your officials so that they will act by your
laws. One who has abundance at home will not be
biased, One has wealth when he on she has no wants.
A poor person may not speak Eruly and one who says
"l wish I had" is not stnaightfonwand. He leans towand


--- PAGE 67 ---
him who will pay him. Tnuly great is a gneat penson
when his men and women of statune ane gneat. strong
is the king who has councillons and wealthy is one who
is nich in persons of statune.
lv.
Speak tnuth in your house that the princes of the
eanth may nespect you. Righteousness is fitting for a
nulen. For it is the front of the house that inspires
respect in the back. Do that which is right that you
may live long upon the earth. Comfort the weepen and
oppress not the widow. Dnive no one away from the
property of his or hen fathen, Defnaud not the nobles
of thein pnopenty. Bewane of punishing unjustly. Do not
kill fon it will not pr"ofit you,
V.
Make no distinction in your behavior between those
of rank and the common people, Rathen choese a pen-
son because of his on her skills so that every craft
may be cannied on.
vl.
One generation succeeds another and God who
knows human natune is hidden, One cannot avoid or
oppose the hand of God. He neaches all that the eyes
see. Thus, one should nevene God on his path As
a dry watercourse is replaced by a stneam, so no niver
allows itself to be concealed. lb bneaks the bannien
behind which it was hidden, So too the soul comes to
51


--- PAGE 68 ---
the place that it knows and sErays not from its fonmerpath.
vll.
Make wonthy your house in the west and make firmyour place in the city of the depanted by being upnightand just. lt is on this that the hearts of men and womenrely. For mone acceptable is the virtue of the righteous
than the ox of those that do evif.serve God thati" ,.yalso wonk for you.
vilt.
well caned for is humankind who are the flocks of
God. He made the sky and earth for their sake. He
destroyed the dangers of the waten. He gave the
bneath of life fon thein noses, They are in nis image
and came from His body. He shines in the sky fon
their sake. He made plants fon them and cattle, fish
and fowl to nounish them. He has killed His enemies
and neduced His childnen when they conspined to nebel
against Him, He makes daylight for their sakes and He
sails around in His sacred boat so that He can see
them. He has built His shnine anound them and when
they weep He heans. He made for them nulers even
fnom the egg, leaders to fift the load from the back of
the weak. He made fon them words of power as weap-
ons to ward off the blow of evil events, guanding them
by day and by night. He has slain the traitons among
them as a man stnikes his son for the sake of his
bnother. Fon God knows eveny name.
52


--- PAGE 69 ---
The
Book of Ani
l.
Do not go in and out of the court of justice so that
your name may not be soiled, Do not contend in a
quarnel. Keep silent and it will serve you well. Go not
in the pnesence of a dnunkard even if it promises to
bning you honor.
il.
Pour libation fon youn fathen and mothen who nest in
the valley of the dead. God will witness your action
and accept it. Do not fonget to do this even when you
are away fnom home. For as you do for your panents,
youn childnen will do fon you also.
lll.
Do not fnequent tavenns lesL evil wor-ds fall from
your mouth and you know not what you ane saying, lf
you fall, your limbs may be bnoken and thene will be no
one to help you. Even youn dninking companions may
stand up and say "Put the dnunkand out." lf one
comes to seek and talk with you, one will find you lying
on the gnound as if you wene a little child.
53


--- PAGE 70 ---
lv.
When the messengen of death comes to take you,
let him find you neady to go to your nesting place, say_
ing "Here comes one pnepar.ed befone you.'; Do not say
then "l am too young to be taken." Fo. death comes
and seizes the baby at his on hen mothen's bneast as
well as the man and woman who have r-eached an old
age.
V.
Guand against wonds and deeds of deception and
against wonds that ane untnue. Destnoy the desine to
do and speak evil within you, fon the evil man have no
nest.
vr.
Stay away fnom the aggnessive man and take him
not fon a companion. Take then for a fr-iend one who is
true and just, one whose actions you have obsenved.
And if your nighteousness equals his ol. hens, youn
fniendshrp will be balanced.
vil.
Small gifts netunn greater and what is replaced
bnings abundance. The wise live off the house of the
fool. Pnotect what is yours and you will always find it.
Be watchful of what you own lest you end up as a
beggan, One who is always idle amounts to nothing but
one who is diligent is honored.


--- PAGE 71 ---
vlll.
lf God granbs you children, may the heant of thein
fathen and mother know them. Whoeven hungens, let
them be satisfied in the house of thein mothen and
father. Let them find thene a wall which pnotects
them, Be not without a genenous heant fon it is God
who gives you wealth.
lx.
Do not sit when one who is olden than you is stand-
ing, even if you have achieved a highen status in your'
pnofession. No fault is found with good chanacten but
an evil characten is always blamed.
X.
Walk each day in the way of nighteousness and you
will reach the place to which you ane going. Neven
speak evil wonds to any visitons; a wond spoken cane-
lessly some day when you are gossiping may oventunn
your house. lf you ane found genenous in times of
prospenity, when adversity comes you will be able to
bean it. lf you ane nighteous you will be recognized and
nespected. And, whether you are among many on few,
you will find youn family and fniends, and all you wish
will be gnanbed.
55


--- PAGE 72 ---
xl.
Let not your heant be reveared to stnangens restthey use youn wonds against you. offensive wonds thatcome fnom your mouth, if nepeated, can make bittenenemies. A penson can be nuined by his on hen tongue.Take care and you will fare well. The heant of humansis wide as a stonehouse and fuil of answens of arlkinds' choose then those that are good and speakthem and keep those that ane bad encrosed in your
belly. A hansh answer pnovokes stnife, but one whospeaks with gentleness is loved.
xll.
. Double the gifts youl" mothen gave you and cane fon
her as she cared of you. she bone a heavy bunden inyou and did not abandon you. when she bnought you
fonth after youn months, she was still bound closely toyou. Fon hen bneasts wene stiil in your- mouth for thr-eeyeans. while you grew, she cleaned your- filth wiihout
disgusb in hen heart and without saying "o, rvhat can I
do?" she placed you in schoor to be educated and
came thene daily on your behalf with bnead and been
for your teachen. Thus, when you become a young man
and marny a wife and establish youn house, lose not
sight of youn own childhood. Raise youn childnen asyoun mothen did you. Do not let her find fault withyou, lest she naise her hands to God against you and
God hear hen complaints and punish you.


--- PAGE 73 ---
xlll.
Eat not bnead while anothen stands by without
extending youn hand to him or hen. As fot' food, it is
always hene, it is man and woman who do nor remain.
A person may be nich on poon but bread remains with
those who share it, One who was nich last yean may
be a vagrant this yean. Thenefone, be noL anxious to
fill youn belly without regard for others. Fon you know
not whene your course will lead. lf you become needy,
another may do good by you. The waten counse of last
year has disappeaned and this yean anothen stneam
has appeared in its place. Gneat watens have become
tracts of dny land and seashones have disappeared
into the ocean depths. No man on woman, then, walks
a single way. This is a lesson fnom the Lord of Life.
XIV.
Do not onden your wife around in her house when
you know she keeps it in excellent order. Do not ask
her "whene is it" on say to her "bning it to us" when
she has put it in the propen place. Wabch hen carefully
and keep silent and you will see how well she man-
ages. How happy is your house when you support her,
Thene ane many men who do not know this. But if a
man nefrains from provoking strife at home, he will not
see its inception. Thus, every man who wishes to mas-
ter his house, must first master his emotions.
57


--- PAGE 74 ---
XV.
Answer not elders who ane angry. Let them have
thein way. speak sweetly when they speak bittenly, Fon
it is a nemedy that soothes the heant. contentious
answens pnovoke strife and eventually youn will will be
broken. Let not your heant be tnoubled, fon they will
soon netunn to pnaise you when thein houn of nage has
passed. When your wonds please the heant, the heart
is inclined to accept them. seek serf-masteny Lhen and
your self-mastery will subdue them.
The
Book of Amenomope
t.
Bewane of robbing the poon and of oppnessing the
weak and helpless. Raise not yout" hand against the
aged non addness an elden with impnoper speech. Let
not yourself be sent on an evil mission non stand in
the company of those who have penfonmed it. Rage
not against those who injune you, non on your account
answen them. The wharf falls fr^om unden the wicked
and a flood of waten washes them away, The nonth
wind comes down to end thein houn on ear-th and tunns
into a tempest; the thunder noars and the crocodiles
come without mercy,


--- PAGE 75 ---
ll.
Let us steen a nighteous counse so that we may
carry the wicked acnoss without becoming like them.
Raise them up, give them youn hand and then, leave
them in the hands of God. Fill them with the food of
your kindness that they might be satisifed and repent,
Anofher thing good in the heart of God is that you
pause and think befone speaking.
lll.
Do not argue with the contentious, non provoke
them with wonds. Pause before those who intenrupt
and give way to those who venbally attack you. Sleep
a night before speaking. For the unrestnained penson
is like a stonm which bursts forth like a flame in a pile
of straw.
lv.
Now, the unnestnained man or woman in the temple
is like a tnee grown in unfertile gnound, lts leaves
wither quickly and its unnipe fruit falls to the earth. lt
neaches its end in the lumben yand on it is floated far
fnom its place. And its bunial cloth becomes a flame of
fire. But the self-mastened man or woman sets himself
on henself apart. He or she is like a tree gnown in fer-
tile ground. lt gnows green and doubles its yield of
fnuit. lt has its place in the eyes of its ownen. lts fnuit
is sweet, its shade is pleasant and its end is reached
in the garden.
59


--- PAGE 76 ---
V.
Better is a bushel which God gives you than fivethousand wnongfully gotten, such gains 
"l"y not a dayin the stonehouse or bann and they ane oi no use inmaking beer', Their stay in the storehouse is no mone
than a moment. when morning comes they have sunk
from sight. Betten to be poor- in the hands of God
than niches in the stonehouse. Betten is bnead with a
happy heant than niches with much wonny.
vt.
Rejoice not over niches gained by robbery non mounn
because of pover.ty. lf anchens in fnont advance too
far, then thein company abandons them. The boat of
the covetous is abandoned in the mud, but the ship of
the self-mastened man and woman sails with the wind.
Pray then to God each day as the sun rises, saying,
"Gnant me pnospenity and health." And God will give
you all you need in life and you will be safe from fear.
vil.
Keep youn tongue away from words of detnaction,
and you will be one loved by the people. You will find
your seat in the Temple of God and your gifts shall be
among the offenings to youn Lond. You will be gneatly
hononed in old age, duly concealed in your coffin, and
safe from the wnath of God.
60


--- PAGE 77 ---
vlll,
Fon the unrestnained woman and man ane like a wolf-
cub in the fanm yand. They turn one eye against the
othen. They cause bnothens and sistens to angue. They
go before eveny wind like clouds. They dim the bnight-
ness of the Sun. They bend their tail like a baby cnoc-
odile, cur'ling up to inflict hanm. Thein lips ane sweet
but their tongue is bitter and a consuming fire burns
in thein belly, Do not jump to join such a one, lest you
bning misfortune upon yourself,
tx,
Do not speak falsely to anyone, fon it is an abomina-
tion [o God. Do not separate youl" heant fnom youn
tongue, and all youn plans will be successful. You will
have weight in the presence of others and be secune
in the hands of God. God hates one who falsifies
words. And the gneat abomination of God is decep[ion
and double-dealing.
X.
Do not mislead a man or woman with pen and papy-
nus. lt is an abomination to God. Do not bean witness
with false wonds non injune another with youn tongue.
Do nob tax one who has nothing, nor make your pen
wnite falsely. lf you find a large debt against a poor
penson, divide it into thnee pants, fongive two and let
one stand, You will find this a path of life. You will
pass the night in sound sleep and in the monning, you
will find it again like good news. Betten is praise with
the love of others than wealth in the stonehouse. Bet-
ten is bread when the mind is at peace than riches
with a troubled heant.
61


--- PAGE 78 ---
xl.
Do not confuse a penson in the court of raw nonmistneat the righteous. Do not give considenation tobhose in clean clothes and reject those who appear inrags. Accept not the gift of the stnong man nonoppress the weak fon him. Justice is a gneat gift ofGod and God gives it to whom God wiils. sr.ely, thestrength of one who is rike God saves the wretched
fnom thein oppresson.
xll.
Do not say: "Find me a stnong pnotecton, for one in
my city has injured me." And say not "Find me a
redeemer, for one who hates me has done me harm. "
Sunely, you know not the plans of God and cannot see
tomonnow. Settle down, then, in the hands of God.
And your self-mastery in silence will overthrow them.
For ancient and deep is the fean of the cnocodile who
makes no sound.
xlll.
Bane not your soul to everybody non damage thereby
nespect for you. Spnead not youn wonds among others
non associate younself with those who bane their
heart. Better are those whose knowledge remains
inside them, than those who talk to their disadvan-
tage. One does not nun to neach penfection. And one
does not cneate it in onden to destnoy it.
62


--- PAGE 79 ---
XIV.
Laugh not at the blind, nor make fun of a dwarf' nor
interfere with the plans of the lame. Do not hanass
those who are in the hands of God, nor be fience of
face against them if they enn. Surely, humans are clay
and stnaw, and God is the builden. God teans down
and builds up daily. God makes a thousand humble as
He wills. lt is God who makes thousands into overse-
ens when they ane in thein houn of thein life. Blessed
are those who neach the West while they ane safe in
the hands of God,
XV.
lf you see a person youn senior outside, walk behind
him or her respectfully. Give also a hand to elders
filled with been, And nespect them as thein childnen
would. The stnong anm is not weakened by being
uncovened. And the back is not broken by bending it rn
respect. Better is a poor penson who speaks pleasant
wonds than a nich penson whose wonds are as hansh
and dry as straw. A pilot who sees fan ahead will not
wneck the ship on rocks.
XVI.
Do not expose a widow if you catch her in the field,
Non fail to be undenstanding of hen neply. Do not
nefuse your oil jan to a strangen to double it fon your'
friends and family. God loves those who nespect the
poon mone than those who nevere the rich.
63


--- PAGE 80 ---
The
Book of Ankhsheshonqi
l.
senve God that He may protect you. senve you.
bnothens and sisters that you may enjoy a good repu-
taLion, senve a wise person that he or she may senveyou. senve one who senves you. senve any person so
you may benefit fnom it. And serve your- mother and
father that you may go fonwand and pnospen.
Examine every matter that you may undenstand it.
Do not say I am leanned but rathen set younself to
become wise. Be gentle and patient, then your- chanac-
ten will be beautiful. lt is in the deveropment of char-
acter that instruction succeeds. Leann the stnuctune
and functioning of the sky. Learn the s[nucture and
functioning of the earth.
The good fontune of a town is a leader who acts
nighteously. The good fortune of a temple is its pniest.
The good fontune of a field is the time it is worked.
The good fortune of a storehouse is the stocking of it.
And the good fontune of the wise is thein exceilent
advice.
ll.
May the "elden bnothen" of the town be the one to
whom it is entnusted. May the kindest bnother of the
family be the one who acts as "elden bnother' for it,
May I have something and my nelatives have something
so that I may eat my own without holding back. May
the floodwaten neven fail to come. May the field neven
fail to flounish. May childnen do honon to thein fathen


--- PAGE 81 ---
and mother. May the moon follow the sun and not fail
to nise. May I necognize my fniends that I may share
my goods with them. May I necognize my bnother and
sister that I may open my heart to them. And may life
always follow death.
Do not send a wise man in a small matter when an
important matten is waiting. Happy is the heart of him
who has made a judgment befone a wise man. A wise
master who asks advice, his house stands foneven. A
wise man seeks a friend, a fool seeks an enemy. The
children of a fool wander in the street, but those of
the wise ane always with them. A wise man is one
who knows what goes on anound him.
lll.
May the heart of a wife be the heart of her hus-
band so that they may be free of contention, lf a
woman is at peace with hen man, they will neven fare
badly. lf a woman whispers about her man, they will
neven fare well. A good woman of noble chanacten is
food that eomes in times of hunger. A woman who
remains a woman at night is praised duning the day.
He who violates a marnied woman on the bed will have
his wife violated on the gnound. A woman lets herself
be loved according to the character of her man.
Do not send a fool in an important matter when you
can send one who is wise. Do not instruct a fool lest
he hate you fon it. When one isntnucts a fool, he or
she says "What they are doing insults me." The fniend
of a fool is a fool. The fniend of a wise person is
anothen wise person. lf you are given bread for being
stupid, you may learn to despise instruction. Although
the way of God is befone all people, the fool cannot
find it.
65


--- PAGE 82 ---
lv.
Do not belittle the eldenly in youn heant. Honon the
eldenly in youn heart, and you will be hononed in the
heants of all. Do not laugh at youn son in front of his
mother lest you leann the measune of his fathen. Do
not prefer one of youn childnen to the othen, for you
know not which one of them will be kind to you.
There is no tooth that decays that stays in its
place. Thene is no friend who walks alone. There is no
wise one who comes to grief. Thene is no fool who
finds profit. There is no one who deserts his tnavelling
companion whom God does not hold accountable for it.
Thene is no one who deceives who is not deceived and
no one who does wnong that goes on and tnuly pnos-
pers.
V.
Do not hunl a lance if you cannot aim connectly. Do
not do evil to a person and thus cause anothen to do
it to you. Let youn generosity neach one who needs it.
Do not be stingy, fon wealth is no real security. Speak
truth to evenyone; let it cling to your speech. Do not
do to a penson what you dislike and thus cause
another to do it to you also, Thene is no good deed
except the good deed that is done fon one who needs
it, Those who stnuggle together with the people of
thein town will nejoice in the victory with them.
66


--- PAGE 83 ---
The
Book of Phebhor
t.
tf a beam is longer than its right measure, the
excess is cut off, lf the wind blows beyond its right
measune, it wrecks the ships, Those who apply the
right measure in all good things are not blamed. The
God of just measure has cneated a balance in orden to
esbablish right measune on eanth. He placed the heart
deep in the body fon [he night measure of its owner.
Thus, if those who ane learned ane not balanced, their
learning is of little use and a fool who knows not bal-
ance does not escape misfortune. Pride and anrogance
ane the destnuction of their ownen. But those who are
gentle in chanacten create bheir own fate.
il.
The foolish child whom a father or mother has not
instnucted is like a statue of stone. lt is a son's and
daughter's advantage and good fortune to receive
instruction and to ask for it. But no instruction can
succeed, if thene is nesentment for it. Youth who are
nob cornupted by base desires ane not blamed and
those who contnol their sexual appetite, their name
does not send fonth an unpleasant odon. Those who
ane steadfast and thoughtful ane chosen among the
people and those who listen to a correction protect
themselves from neceiving anothen. Surely, the fault in
eveny kind of chanacten lies in not listening. The God
of wisdom has placed the stick on earth in orden bo
teach the fool by means of it. But He gave the wise a
67


--- PAGE 84 ---
sense of shame in orden to avoid all punishment, Thus,a youth who has nespect thnough shame is notrejected with punishment.
lll.
It is betten for a serpent to be in the house than afool who comes often. Those who associate with afool ane dnawn into wnongdoing. Those who live with afool die in captivity. The fniends of fools sleep tied to
them. And Lhe wnongdoing of fools harm even their
own nelatives. when a fool lights a fine he goes too
close to it and gets burnt. And when a fool starts a
!sht' she goes too close to it and gets knocked down.
Those who walk with the wise shane their- praise, but
those who walk by in the company of a fool cneate an
evil odor in bhe street.
lv.
Do not be gneedy lest your name send fonth an
offensive odon. Gneed bnings conflict and fighting in a
house. lt takes all sense of shame, mency and trust
from one's heant and it causes turmoil in a family.
Those who ane greedy do not like to give to those who
gave to them. They do not considen tomonrow, fon
they are only concerned with the moment, Thene is no
end to the wnong done when money and greed ane
togethen. Money is the trap God placed on eanth for
the ungodly so that they would wonny each day. But
He gives it to those whom He favons in order to take
away worny fnom thein hearts.
58


--- PAGE 85 ---
V.
Those who give food genenously when they have
money ane the ones bo whom fate gives fontune. Fon
wealth goes to those who give food to othens by
means of it. The heant of God is satisfied when the
poon stand pnovided fon befone Him. Thus, if you
acquine property, give a pontion to God by giving a
pontion to the poon. lf you acquine pnopenty, spend it
on youl^ town so that there will be no turmoil in it. lf it
is in youn powen, invite those fan away as well as
those nean you. Fon those who invibe those fnom afar,
their name will be great when they go afan. Those who
love thein neighbors will find a family anound them. God
allows one to acquine wealth in netunn fon doing good.
And those who give food to the poor, God takes them
to Himself in mency wibhout measune,
vl.
Gentleness in conduct of every kind causes the wise
to be pnaised. Do not make youn mouth hansh or
speak loudly with youn tongue. Fon a loud voice does
damage to members of the body just like an illness.
Do not be so impatient when you ask that you get
angry while you ane listening. The pnaise of the wise is
gneat befone the people because they lisEen. Do not
yield ofben to your tongue in onden to advise when you
have not been asked. Those who hunry with thein
mouth, give an incornect answen when they speak. One
does not take seriously the wonds of the talkative
when considering an accusation, And one does not
judge the complaint of a fool based on how loud it is
presented.
69


--- PAGE 86 ---
vll.
lf the wise ane not carm, their manner is noL per-
fect. lf no calm comes in battle, the anmy gets no
rest. lf thene is no calm between feasts, the masten
and mistress of the house cannot enjoy themselves.
And if there is no calm in a temple, God abandons it.
Thus, pnaise is given to the wise because of thein calm
and old age is a good time in life because of the calm
that comes with it.
vlll.
Do not take lightly a small thing lest you suffen fnom
it. Deadly hanm comes to the fool fon taking gneatness
lightly in his heart. Likewise, hanm comes to a great
person for taking smallness lightly. lt is God who gives
the wise the discerning heant in onden that they may
have appropriate nespect. one who fears all hanm
avoids all harm. Do not take rightry a small illness fon
which there is a nemedy, take the nemedy.
A small snake has poison. A small river has its dan-
gens. A small fire should be feared. A small document
has gneat benefit. A small cond binds. A small truth
defends its ownen. A small rie causes tnouble for one
who tells it. A little food gives health to one who has
it, A little saving leads to wearth. The rittle heant sus-
tains its ownen. A little good news make the heart
happy, A little dew gives life to rhe fields. A lirtle wind
carries bhe boat along. A little bee brings honey. A
small locust lays waste the grapevine. A smail wrong
leads towands death. And a small good deed is not hid-
den from God. Thus, many ane the small things that
deserve nespect but few ane the gneat things that
menit admination.
70


--- PAGE 87 ---
lx.
The heart and tongue of the wise and the gneatness
of the place in which they rest, all come from God.
When the people raise thein hands God knows it. He
knows the ungodly who imagines evil. He knows the
godly and that they have the greatness of God in their
heart. Before the tongue has been asked the question,
God knows its answer. He directs the heart and
tongue by His command. lt is He who makes the way
safe without a guard. lt is He who gives a just ruling
without having a hearing. He lets a person be great in
his or her lifetime because of His mency. And He
makes the poor beggar a master because He knows
his heant.
71


--- PAGE 88 ---



--- PAGE 89 ---
Books of Gontemplation


--- PAGE 90 ---



--- PAGE 91 ---
THE BOOKS OF CONTEMPLATION. These books contatn
thnee fonms of contemplation: lamentations, pnophetic asser-
tions and meditations on death and etennal life. These books
reflect a skepticism, sadness and contemplative postune
born of the collapse and transformaEion of the social order
and the resultant chaos and loss of cultural center this
bnought. The Books of Khakheper-Ra-Soneb, and lpuwer rep-
resent lamentations on Ehe low state to which the society
had fallen. As Khakheper-Ra-Soneb says, "Maat, righteous-
ness and order, has been cast out and isfet, evil and chaos,
is in the Council Hall, The way of God is violated and His
Commandants are bnushed aside, The land is in tunmoil and
there is mounning evenywhere."
lpuwer laments the revensal of the social order when
outsiders have destroyed the intennal hanmony and stability
of ancient Egyptian society. "Behold now," he says, "how
greatly the people have changed," "The nobber has become
rich and the hononable penson a thief." The foreigners have
imposed new ways and created new relations and the right-
eous "Egyptian of yesterday cannot be found anywhere."
In the Book of Dialog with the Soul a man expresses despair
at the changed social cincumstances and contemplates death.
This is the eanliest known literary example of a soul in turmoil
confronting unjust suffening and raising the question of why
and what is to be done. lt predates the Hebnew Book of Job
approximately fifteen hundned yeans which represenbs a similar
concenn and question and to which it has been compared. The
75


--- PAGE 92 ---
Book of songs focuses meditation on the inevitability of deathand the need to enjoy life now fon Ehe most part and suggestsa postune that is expnessed later in the Hebr-ew Book ofEcclesiastes. The last song, however, focuses on praise oflearning and the learned and argues it rs learned achievement
which causes one's name to last foreven.
Finally, the Book of Nefenti offens pr"ophecy of the comingof a r-ighteous savior-king, a messiah to neestablish maat anJcast out isfet. This is the oldest and cleanest messianic pno_jection and antedates the Hebr.ew rnodel of David by morethan a thousand yeans. At least one tnaditional egyptorogisthas argued that such messianism was evident in lpuwer,
which is at least five hundred yeans earlier, but the passage
he quotes to support it seems more an appeat to God thanthe pharoah. However, there are othen passages in rpuwer
that suggest such a messianic hope and proyection. Also,
a note of interest in this prophecy is the prediction of amessiah king born of a mothen from Nubia, which was the
source of nepeated Egyptian nenaissances after periods ofdegenenation and despair.
76


--- PAGE 93 ---
The
Book of Khakheper-Ba-Soneb
l.
Would that I knew what others ane ignonant of,
something that had not alneady been said, that I might
speak and have my heart answen me. That I might
explain to it my distness and shift to it the bunden on
my back and speak of that which afflicts me. That I
might tell it what I suffer and breathe a sigh of relief
afterwand.
I meditate on what has happened, on the things
which have come to pass thnoughout the land. Changes
are taking place and it is not like last year, One yean
is mone troublesome than the next. The land is in tun-
moil, and being destroyed. Maat, righteousness and
orden, has been cast out and lsfet, evil and chaos, is
in the Council Hall. The way of God is violated and His
commandments ane brushed aside. The land is in tun-
moil and thene is mounning evenywhene,
il.
Eveny day that dawns bnings events fnom which the
face is forced to turn. I speak out strongly against it.
My limbs are heavy laden and my heart is heavy with
gnief, lt is painful not to speak about it. Anothen heant
might bend on break, but a strong heant in the midst
of difficulties is an ally to its ownen.
Then Khakhepen-Ra-Soneb said to his heant: Come
my heant, that I might speak to you and you might
respond to what I have said, lnterpret for me what is
happening in the land, why those who wene once so
bnilliant are now brought low. I meditate on what has


--- PAGE 94 ---
come to pass. Misery has
not end tomonrow.
come today and turmoil wifl
lll.
Everyone is silent about The whole fand is ingreat tnouble. And none ane wise enough to know it;
none are angry enough to speak out and eveny day one
wakes to suffering. Thus, my suffering is long and
heavy. The weak and wretched lack the stnength to
save themselves from that which overwhelms them. lt
is painful to keep silent about what one heans and yet
it is of no use to answer the ignorant.
People only love their own words. Evenyone builds on
cnookedness and night-speaking is abandoned. I have
spoken to you my heart; now answer me. A heant that
is approached must not keep silent, fon surely the ser-
vant and the masten share the same fate. And thus,
many are the things that must weigh heavy on you,
also.
The
Book of lpuwer
l.
Lo, what the ancestors foretold has come bo pass.
The land is full of bands of evil-doers and the prowman
goes to plow with his shield. Faces are pale; the bow-
men stand ready; wrongdoing is evenywhere and thene
is no man or woman of yesterday. Lo, the women are


--- PAGE 95 ---
bannen and none conceive, for God does not make chil-
dren anymone because of the state of the land. There is
blood everr/rruhere and no shortage of the dead. lndeed
the bunial cloth cnies out befone one appnoaches it.
Lo, the land tunns like a potter's wheel. The robber
has become rich and the honorable penson a thief, The
foneigners fnom without have come to Egypt and the
Egyptian of yesterday cannot be found anywhene. Lo,
the great and small say "l wrsh I were dead" and little
children say "He should not have caused me to live."
Lo, the unrestnained says: "lf I knew whene God is, I
would senve Him. "
ll.
Behold now, how greatly the people have changed.
One who once did not sleep even on a box now owns a
bed. Those who once owned nobes now ane in rags
and those who once did not weave fon themselves now
own fine linen. Behold, those who once did not build
boats, now own ships and the fonmen ownens just look
at them, for they ane no longen theins, Those who
once lacked shelten now have homes and those who
had homes ane in the blast of bhe stonm. And those
who knew nothing of God now make offenings to Him
with the incense of others.
Lo, why does God seek to create men and women,
when the gentle are not distinguished from the violent?
But He bnings coolness in the midst of heat. And all
say: "He is the shepherd of all humankind and thene is
no evil in His heart. Though His flocks ane few, He
spends the whole day tending them. But there is fine in
their heants. Oh, that He had penceived bheir nature in
the first genenation. Then He would have destnoyed the


--- PAGE 96 ---
wicked, stretched out His arm against them. surely, Hewould have destroyed their seed and their legacy,
The
Book of Dialog Wirh the Soul
l.
I spoke to my soul
To whom shall I speak
evil and fniends today
gneat with greed and
bon's goods, Kindness
imposed on everyone.
To whom shall I speak today? people willingly accept
evil and goodness is cast to the gnound evenywhere.
Those who should enrage people by their wrongdoing
make them laugh at thein evll deeds. people piunoer
and everyone seizes his or her neighbor's goods.
ll.
To whom shall I speak
is an intimate fniend and
used to deal is an enemy,
and none netunn the good
and sisters are evil and
that I might answen what it said:
today? Bnothers and sisters ane
ane not worth loving. Hearts ane
everyone seizes his on her neigh-
has passed away and violence is
today? The one doing wnong
the bnother with whom one
No one nemembens the past
deed that is done. Bnothers
people turn to stnangers for
righteousness or affection.
To whom shall I speak today? Faces are empty and
all tunn their faces fnom thein brothers and sisters.
80


--- PAGE 97 ---
Heants ane great with gneed and thene is no heart of
a man on woman upon which one might lean. None ane
just on righteous and the land is left to the doers of
evil.
To whom shall I speak today? Thene ane no intimate
fniends and the people turn to strangers to tell thein
troubles. None ane content and those with whom one
used to walk no longen exist. I am burdened with gnief
and have no one to comfont me. Thene is no end to
the wnong which noams the eanth.
| | l. Thus,
Death, to me, today is like health to the ill, like
going outdoors after confinement. Death, to me, today
is like the smell of myrnh, like sitting unden the sail on
a windy day. Death, to me, today, is like the fnagnance
of lotus, like sitting on the shone of feasting.
Death, to me, today is like a well-trodden way, like
netunning home from wan. Death, to me, today, is like
the cleaning up of clouds fnom the sky, like a penson
discovening that which was unknown, Death, to me,
today, is like longing to see home aften spending many
yeans in captivity.
tv.
Sunely, one who neaches the beyond will be a living
god, punishing the offenses of the wrongdoen. Sunely,
one who reaches the beyond will be one who stands in
the Sun Bark of Ra, causing abundant gifts to be
given to the temples. Surely, one who neaches the
beyond will be considened wise and will not be pre-
vented fnom appealing to Ra when he on she speaks.
81


--- PAGE 98 ---
And my soul said to me. cast youn complaints aside,
my comnade and bnothen. Make offenings on the sacni-
ficial fine and cling to life as lhave said. Love me,
yaur soul, hene. Set aside thoughts of death and
desine death only when youn body joins the eanth, Then
I will alight on you afren you have become tnuly weany
and we shall dwell togethen foneven.
The
Book of Songs
I
L Song of Phanoah Antef, the vindicated:
Pnospenous is this good pnince. For his kind destiny
has come to pass. One genenation passes and anothen
remains since the Lime of the ancestons. The exalted
ones who lived in formen times now nest in their pyra-
mids. And the blessed nobles ane likewise bunied in
thein pynamids also. Yet those who built those pyr.a-
mids, thein places ane no mone. Behold what has been
done to them.
I have heand the wonds of lmhotep and Handedef,
two sages of old, whose teaching ane nepeated often.
Yet whene ane thein places now. Their walls all have
wasted away and thein places ane gone as though they
had neven existed. There is none who netunns fnom
thene that he on she may tell us how they fane, on
what they need so that oun hearts may be at peace
until we too neach the place whene they have gone.
Let your heant be happy then, and fonget your day
of departure. Follow the desine of youn heart fon long
82


--- PAGE 99 ---
as you live, Put myrrh on your head and clad yourself
in fine clothes, Enjoy the wondnous things fit fon a
god. lncnease the number of the things you enjoy and
let not your heant become lax on lose its vigon, Follow
Ehe desires of your heart and do that which is good
fon you. Fulfill youn needs on eanth acconding to the
commands of youn heart til the day of mounning comes
fon you. For the God of the depanted heans nob the
mounning, and wailing saves no one fnom the grave'
Celebrate, then, the days of nejoicing and do not tine
of them, Fon lo, none may take their- goods with them
and none who depant even come back again,
ll . Song fon the Pniest of Ra, Nefenhotep (l):
Generations pass away since the first day of crea-
tion and othen generations come in their places. The
splendon of Ra rises in the monning and goes to nest
in the west. Men beget and women conceive and eveny
nostril bneathes ain. Day dawns and the new bonn go
to their appointed places, Celebrate the days of nejoic-
ing, then, o' pniest. Put the finest scents to yout' nose
and ganlands of lotus flowens anound your neck and
shouldens and on the body of your beloved sister" who
sits beside you, Set song and music before you and all
evil things behind. Rememben only joy until the day
comes when you reach the port in the land that loves
silence, And give bread to those who have no field, fon
so shall you gain a good name fon the futune forever.
lll. Also, for the Pniest Nefenhotep (ll):
I have heand those songs which ane in tombs of
ancient times. And of what they say when they pnaise


--- PAGE 100 ---
life on eanth and belittle the city of rhe depanred. whyis this done to the land of etennity, bhe just and night,
where no feans ane found? Thene quannering is anabomination and no one places him on henself against afellow. Fon this is a land which has no opponenrs.
Thene is none who will fail to neach bhis place. The
dunation of what is done on earth passes like a dneam.
But to those who neach panadise in the west, is said,"Welcome, safe and sound."
lV. Song in Pnaise of rhe Leanned
As fon those leanned scnibes of the time that came
aften the powens of heaven and who fonetold the
futune, thein names have become evenrasbing even
though they have depanted having completed the days
of their' lives. And all thein neratives ane for-gotten,
They made not fon themselves pynamids of metal with
stelae of metal from heaven. They did not know to
leave heins, childnen that might r-epeat their names,
Instead they made heins out of the books of instnuc-
tion which they composed.
They took fon themselves the scnoll as teacher--priest
and bhe wniting board as a loving son. Books of instnuc-
tions are thein pynamids, the need pen their- chird and
the stone sunface on which they wrote, thein wife. The
gneat and small became thein childnen. For- the scr-ibe
became thein leaden. Man decays; his conpse becomes
dust and all his nelatives die, But a book causes him to
be remembened thnough the mouth of those who quote
it, Betten is a book than a well-builb house, than a tomb
in the West, lndeed a book is betten than a gneat house
with a solid foundation on a stela in the temple,
ls thene any one like the sage Handedef, on anothen
B4


--- PAGE 101 ---
like lmhotep? None stands among oul' nelatives who is
like Neferti or Kheti, the foremost of them. I submit
to you the name of Ptah-em-Djehuti and of Khakheper-
Ra Soneb, ls there another like Ptah-hotep on one who
is equal to Ka-iris? That which came fnom the mouths
of these learned men who foretold Lhe future came to
pass. And it is found as a clear statement wnitten in
their books. Though they may have concealed thein
wonds of powen fnom evenyone else, they can be found
in thein books of instnuction. Death might have caused
their names to be forgotten, but it is thein wnitings
that causes them to be remembened.
The
Book of Neferti
l.
And His Majesty Phanoah Snefru said: "Come Nef-
erti, my fniend and speak to me some beautiful words
and well-chosen phrases which might please me upon
heaning them. And the teachen-priest, Nefenti, de-
ploned what had come to pass in Egypt, speaking on
the condition of the East where Asiatic peoples noam
in strength, frightening those about to hanvest thein
crops and seizing cattle even at the plough. He said:
Be moved my heart and mounn for this land in which
you wene born, For there is silence befone evil; what
should be condemned is feared and the great ane oven-
thnown in the land of your birth. Tine not then while
this evil exists. Rise up against that which is befone
you. Fon lo, the gneat no longen nule the land and what
85


--- PAGE 102 ---
was established has now been undone. May Ra begin
to re-establish this land for it is ruined and nothing
of value nemains. Not even the black of a nail has
escaped this fate. Lo, the land is destnoyed and thene
ane none to cane fon it. Thene are none who speak and
none who weep. How then fares this land?
ll.
I shall speak of what is befone me. I will neven fonetell
that which will not come, A strange bind will bneed rn
the Delta marsh and make its nest beside the people of
Egypt. For the people will let it appnoach thnough lack of
action. And aftenwards, all good things will pass away.
Beasts of the desent will dnink at the niven of Egypt
and take thein ease on the shones fon they will have
no one to fean. The land is in tunmoil and no one
knows what will come to pass, fon what the futune will
bning is hidden. And as it is said: when sight and hean-
ing fail the many, those who cannot speak will lead.
ilt.
I show you a land torn up by tunmoil. That which
should nob be has come to pass. people will take up
weapons of wan and the land will live in confusion,
People will spill blood for bnead and laugh out loud at
pain and miseny. And none will weep over death. Every-
one's heant shall cane only for him on herself. A per-
son will sit with hisihen back tunned while one murdens
anothen. I show you the son and daughter as enemy,
the bnothen and sister as foe and the child slaying
mother and fathen. I show you the undenmost turned
to the uppermost.


--- PAGE 103 ---
lv.
But a king shall come from the south named Ameni,
the vindicated one, the son of a woman of Nubia. He
will join together the Double Cnown and the land will
be enclosed in his gnasp. The people of his neign will
nejoice, for Ameni, the son of man, will make his name
for all eternity. The evil-minded plottens of treason will
hold back their speech thnough fear of him. The Asi-
atic invaders will fall before his funy and the Libyan
invaders will be consumed by his flame. Rebels will
yield before his wrath and tnaitors will be brought low
by his might. Then, Maat, righteousness and orden, will
retunn to its place and lsfet, evil and chaos, will be
driven away.
87


--- PAGE 104 ---



--- PAGE 105 ---
The
Book of Declanations
of Uirtues


--- PAGE 106 ---



--- PAGE 107 ---
THE BOOK OF DECLARATIONS OF VIFTUES. As stated
earlier, the heart of ancient Egyptian ethics and spiritual
striving is maat. Ancient Egyptian ethics and spirituality, like
all African ethics and spinituality, have and stress a practical
dimension. Righteousness is real only in personal and social
practice, Maat, Ehen, is a social as well as spiritual task for
which the reward is an enjoyable and beautiful rife in the
community on earth and a spiritual life in the heavens as a
living god. [see below in the Books of Bising Like Ra). In a
word, maat is both a pensonal and social Eask and the prom-
ise and reward for completing it.
The ancient Egyptians, thus, developed an ideal characten
type rooEed in and neflective of maat which the Instructions
urge and the Declarations of Vintues state as both an accom-
plished fact and a model to emulate. This ideal type was the
gerLt, the self-mastened, i,e,, calm, silent, controlled, modest,
wise, gentle and socially active; and the geru maaf, who was
truly the self-mastened. The first was the serf-mastered. the
second a kind of master of the self-mastered. The opposite of
the self-mastered is the unnestrained person - hot-mouthed,
hot-Eempered, aggressive, and generally infused with isfet, the
opposite of maat.
what one sees, then, in the Declarations of Virtues is the
pnactice of basic values on the personal and social level
which pose an ideal type and serve as a model of maat for
others to emulate, lt is important to note that the personal
is inseparable fnom the social, that righteousness and
nestnaint are always, as in other African ethics and spinit-
g1


--- PAGE 108 ---
uality, achieved, tested and tempered in nelations with oth-
ers. Maat begins with family nelaEions that makes one
praised by his ther) father, loved by his (her) mother, and
cherished by his (herl bnothers and sisters. Maat expnesses
itself in a classic statement of Egyptian morality which
appears thousands of years laten in Hebrew-Chnistian sacred
bexts: "l gave food to the hungry, clothes to the naked,
water to the thirsty and a boat to those without one." The
last part of this declaration of vintue, of course, reflects
again the ancient Egyptian sea-f aning environment and
reveals the essentiality of having a means of transportation
on water.
These Declarations which were usually found on stelae, a
kind of memorial plaque, fonm a parallel and complement to
the Declarations of lnnocence which appear in the Book of
Coming Forth by Day (see belowl and thus, expness a con-
sistent ethic of right thought and practice whose reward is
found in this life and the next.


--- PAGE 109 ---
The
Book of Declarations of Virtues
l. Harwa, chief official of the High Pniestess of
Amen-Ra says:
I am a noble for whom one should act, one of finm
heart to the end of life. I am one beloved of his city,
pnaised by his distnict, kind-heanted to his towns. I
have done what the people love and God praises. I
was one tnuly venenated and had no fault, who gave
bnead to the hungny and clothes to the naked, I put an
end to pain and enased wnongdoing, I bunied the bles-
sed, supported the aged and satisfied the needs of
the have-nots. I was a shelten fon the child and help
to the widow; one who gave nank even to an infant.
I did these things knowing their value and knowing
thein newand fnom the Lond of Maat, in a word, to
endune in the mouth of the people without end, to be
well-remembered fon yeans and yeans to come,
It
ll . Djedkhonsefankh, pnophet of Amen-Ra, says:
Hail to you who will come after me, who shall live in
times to come. I shall make you call me blessed, fon
my destiny was gneat. Ra, as Khnum the Gneat Pot-
ter, fashioned me into one most able, an advisol' of
excellent counsel. He made my chanacten supeniot' to
othens and guided my tongue to that which was excel-
lent. I kept my mouth fnee fr^om attacking those who
attacked me. My patience turned my foes into fniends
and my enemies into allies. I conbnolled my mouth and
was skilled in nesponse, yet I did not submib to evil
doing.
The people judged me as one genenous, Fon I hated
the hoanding of riches, I caused them all to gneet me
fon my excellence, paying homage to my innen essence
93


--- PAGE 110 ---
and saying of me "he is a righteous offspring of his
fathen and a divine descendent of his mother. No onespoke evil of my panents because of me. My panents
wene hononed greatly because of my wonthiness,
Indeed, they found me helpful while they lived upon the
eanth, And I pnovide offenings fon them now that they
have depanted. Moreover, I did not allow my senvants
to addness me as "our masten", but instead made
myself in the image of their fathen.
lll. Paheni, scnibe of the noyar tneasuny and mayon of
two towns, says:
I am a noble who served his Lord, one skilled and
fnee of negligence. I walked the noad I had explored. I
was guided by my own heart on the road of those
praised by the pharoah. My good chanacten naised me
high. I was summoned as one in whom no faulb was
found, lf I wene placed on the scales, I would come
out complete, blameless and without a blemish. I came
and went with a firm heart, telling no lies to anyone. I
know the God that dwells in man and woman. Knowing
Him I knew this fnom that and perfonmed the tasks as
they were commanded. I neven confused the message
with the messengen. I did not speak vurgan wonds on
talk with wonthless people. Indeed, I was the model of
kindness.
lV. Harkuf, governon of Uppen Egypt and teacher-
pniest, says:
The phar"oah pnaised me and my fathen made for me
a will, fon I was one wonthy. One beloved of his fathen,
pnaised by his mothen and one whom all his sisters
and bnothens loved. I gave bnead to the hungny, cloth-
ing to the naked and brought the boatless to dry land.


--- PAGE 111 ---
I was one who spoke justly, who nepeated t,hat
which was pleasing to hear. I neven spoke evilly
against anyone bo his on her supenior, Fon I wished to
stand well with the Most High God. Never- did I judge
between two contenders in such a way that it
depnived a child of his on her parents' legacy.
V. Nefer-seshem-Ra, says:
I have spoken tnuly and done night. I spoke justly
and nepeated that which was just, I seized the night
moment so as to stand well with the people. I judged
between two in such a way that would satisfy both
of them. I nescued the weak fnom those who wene
stnongen as much as was in my powen. I gave bread
to the hungry, clothes to the naked and bnought the
boatless to dry land. I bunied those who had no chil-
dnen and built a boat for those wene without one. I
respected my fathen, pleased my mothen and naised
my sistens and brothens.
Vl. Wennofen, pnophet of Osinis, says:
May God give me incense for the city of etennity
and waten for the gnaveyand of the West. Fon I am a
man fon whom one should act. I was true-heanted, just
and tnustworthy. One who walked on the waten of
God. I was one praised in his town, generous in his
distnict and kind and compassionate to evenyone. I was
friendly and one welcomed by othens, widely loved and
cheenful. I was self-mastened in times of sbness and
misfontune, beautiful of speech and well-spoken. I was
a stnong shelter fon the needy, one on whom all could
lean. I welcomed the stnanger and was a helpful ad-
viser and an effective guide, I was one who pnotected
95


--- PAGE 112 ---
the weak fnom the strong and was a boat to cnoss
waten for everyone.
I was a worthy noble who did God's wish and one
kind and compassionate to his fniends. I was genenous
to the have-nots. My heart did not say "give me" to
anyone, I was one who loved justice and hated wnong-
doing. And I always did what was good.
Vll. Nebnefer.u, pnophet of Amen Ra, says:
I live on earth as . one who gave guidance in work
to the unawane, who instnucted the cnaftsman by the
rufe. Who knew what to say when speaking in the pal-
ace, who enased wnong in eveny situation, who pleased
God with cleansing. I spoke to the people in a manner
they liked and judged evenyone acconding to thein chan-
acben, giving attention to what they wished.
Vlll. Ankhrifi, gnear ruter of fhe dismicrs of Edfu
and Hienaconpolis, says:
I am the vanguand and neanguand of the people. One
who finds the solution whene it is lacking, A leader- of
the land thnough active assention. I choose and use
wonds well and am collected in thought on the day of
the joining of three southenn most distnicts. Fon I am
a champion without peen who spoke out when the peo-
ple were silenb, on the day of fean when Upper Egypt
was silent. Those on whom I placed my hand, neven
met misfortune, for. my heant was committed and my
counsel excellent.
lX. Beka, stewand of the public gnanany, says:
I was just and tnue and one without malice. Fon I
placed God in my heant and was quick in discerning


--- PAGE 113 ---
His will. I have reached the city of those who dwell in
etennity. I have done good on earth. I have not injured
othens. I have neither been evil nor approved of any-
thing evil on offensive. I have delighted in speaking
tnuth. For I knew well the neward that comes from
doing this on earth from the Eime of one's first act
til the time one reaches the grave. lndeed my sure
defense shall be in speaking truth on the day when I
reach the divine judges, the skillful interpneters, dis-
coverens of all actions and chastisens of all offenses.
I took pleasure in righteousness, staying in hanmony
with the laws of the Hall of Maat. I have not oppnes-
sed the lowly nor done harm to those who honon God.
I have spent my life in the way of righteousness. The
sincenity and goodness which wene in the heart of my
fathen and mother I returned through my love for
them. And I never acted in any manner to dishonor
them, even fnom the earliest days of my youth. Though
of great status I have acted as one whose position
was low. And I have not undermined anyone worthier
than myself.
X. Antef, High Stewand of the office of the Govenn-
ment, says:
I am silent befone the angny, patient with the igno-
nant in orden to quell conflict, lam cool, free from
hasty acts, anticipating the outcome, expecting what
occuns. I am one who counsels in situations of strife,
a person who knows which words incite anger. I am
fr"iendly, when called upon, to those who would tell me
their concern. I am contnolled, kind, friendly, one who
comforts the weeper with good words. I am genenous
to those who count on me and one who does good to
his peens. I am one who is iust, in the house of his
Lond, who recognizes flatteny when it is spoken. I am
pleasant, openhanded, a possessor of food who does
not hide his face from those in need. I am a friend of
97


--- PAGE 114 ---
the poor and favonable to those who have not. I am
one who feeds the hungry who are needy and one who
is openhanded to those who are destrtute.
I am one who is informed to those who lack knowl-
edge and one who teaches a person what is useful to
him or her. I am upright in the house of the phanoah,
one who knows that which should be said in every
office. I am a listener, one who listens to Maat and
who ponders it in the heart. I am a peacemaker in the
house of his Lond, one who is remembered by reason
of his excellent qualities. I am kind in the courts, one
who is calm, and not offensive,
I am a good man, not acting hastily, one who does not
attack a person for a single remank. I am accunate like
the scale, impartial and true like the Lord of Just Mea-
sure. I am a man firm of foot whose plans ane well
thought out who is loyal to those who have caused him
to prospen. I am a knower who taught himself knowl-
edge, an advisor whose advice is sought. I am one who
speaks in the hall of justice, one who is skilled tn speech
in difficult situations.
Moreover, he says:
I set goodness under my house and love for me
went thnoughout the land. I gave bnead to the hungry,
waten to the thirsty and helped the shipwrecked on
thein way. I buried the aged, I clothed the naked. I
committed no sin against man on woman and none that
God hates. I applied the Law which the phanoah loved.
I have come to my city and entered my home. I have
done that which both man and woman love and things
that are approved of by God.
n/\
Hw
FI
il
ltU
g8


--- PAGE 115 ---
Books of Rising Like Ba


--- PAGE 116 ---



--- PAGE 117 ---
THE BOOKS OF HISING LIKE RA. These books are singu-
larly and together the oldest written record of the dawn of
strucEured moral consciousness, They nepresenb Afnicans
leading the human rupture with the animal world and estab-
lishing not only an ethical slandard of social behavior but
posing the possibility of resurrection, ascension and trans-
formation into a living god. ln this section, I have given these
books titles diffenent than those most tnaditional egyptolo-
gists have assigned them. The oldcst texts which ane from
the Old Kingdom and are called by them the Pyramid Texts,
I have titled the Book of Rising and Transformation. The
rationale for this is the focus and activity expressed in the
text where the royal vindicated one, i,e., the pharoah in this
case, rises from the dead, ascends in the heavens and
ffansforms into a living god. Rising here refers both to res-
unnection and ascension in the heavens. And transfonmation
is achieved through having lived righteously, becoming one
with God and then becoming a living god oneself, i.e., a
power in the heavens.
The texts from the Middle Kingdom are called the Coffin
Texts by the tnaditional egypEologists. These I have titled
"The Book of Vindication" which, as the first line in the book
shows, is what at least one part of ib, if not the total text,
was called. Finally, I have neiected the title, Book of the
Dead, and used also the title the ancient Egyptians assigned
the book, i.e., The Book of Coming Forth By Day,
Although Ehe Book of Rising and Tnansformation was
10,,


--- PAGE 118 ---
appanently first used mainly for pharoahs, it was, in my esti-mation, a moder fon human possibirity represented by theperson who more than anyone else symbolized the possibilityof divinity. Moneover, this book and the others in this sec-tion wene eventuaily appnopriated by the masses and becamethe basic texts for "nising like Ra", Thus, I used .,royal vindi-cated one", or "vindicated one" rather uhan the ,,N,, or nameof. a parti!l'|". pharoah as is the practice of haditionar egyp-tologists' For it is not just the phanoah who nose and trans-formed, but any and all vindicated ones.
I have put the books in an orden that is reversed chrono-logically, but which logically fit acconding to the activity eachcontains. Finst a person comes forth (nesurrecLs), declareshis (her) innocence in the Hail of Judgment, is vindicated,and then rises and transforms into a riving god. ArEhoughthere is some of each in all, each book tendl 1o have moreof the activity by which it is named.
In the Book of coming Forth By Day, r have used the tide,Declarations of Innocence, fon the thirty-six and forty-twodeclarations made by a person in tne n"it of Righteousne"s
to establish his ther) blamelessness. Although some tnadi-bional egyptologists call this statement, "the Negative con-fession", others have used "the Declarations of Innocence,,
also. The Declaration is obviously not a confession eithen incontent or context. lt is not an admission of faults, butrather a denial of them. And the Hall of Righteousness isnot a place where one confesses faults, buL rather whereone declares oneself innocent so that he or she may be vin-dicated and rise like Ra.
one of the majon significances of these "Books of Rising
Like Ra" is Ehein emphasis on the ancient Egyptian belief inthe concept of the possibility of immontality and divinity fonhumans. ln a word, they posit that through right uhought
and pnactice, one could become a god and liu" foreven atthe right hand of Ba. This could be achieved as these booksand oEhers of rhe Husia state and suggest, in thnee basicways: 1) achieved intennal devetopment; 2) excef lence in
social nelations; and 3) significant socio-historical senvice and
achievement,
1A?


--- PAGE 119 ---
Finally, it is important to note that in the Declarations of
lnnocence, as has been poinbed out often, we find a source
of the Ten Commandments and in the Books of Rising Like
Fla we find again the histonical source of so many othen con-
cepLs central to Hebrew and Chnistian theology, i.e', resur-
rection, the Risen Savior, the Beloved Son, the Day and Hall
of Judgment, immontality of the soul, etc. lt is this and the
other conEributions cited above as well as those unmentioned
in this volume which form the rich and ancient moral and
spiritual legacy Africa, through its daughter, ancient Egypt,
has given the world,
103


--- PAGE 120 ---



--- PAGE 121 ---
The
Book of Goming Forth By Day
Hene begins the Book of Coming Fonth by Day, of
songs of pnaising and glorifying, of coming fonth and
entening God's Blessed Domain in the beautiful West,
These are to be recited on the day of burial, of
entering in after coming fonth.
L
O you who bning blameless souls in the House of
Osiris the Risen Savior, bring this excellent soul with
you. Let him heil hean as you hean and see as you
see. Let him heil stand up even as you stand up and
sit down as you sit down. O you who give bread and
been to blameless souls in the House of Osiris, give
bread and beer day and night to this soul whose word
is true befone God, Lord of the sacred city of Abydos,
and before you.
O you who open bhe way and clear bhe paths for
blameless souls in the House of Osinis, open the way
and clear the paths for the soul of this one whose
voice is vindicated by you. May he bhel enter the
House of Osinis in boldness and ceme fonth in peace.
May he bhd not be opposed on sent back, May he
fshd enter praised and come fonth loved and trium-
phant. May his (herl commands be canried out in the
House of Osiris. May his heil wonds travel wiEh you.
And may he fshel not be found deficient in the Balance
and be free fnom all faults.
ll.
May I not be judged
multitude. May my soul
and be found to have
according to the mouth of the
lift itself up before my heant,
been nighLeous on earth, May
105


--- PAGE 122 ---
I come into your pnesence O' Lond of Londs, may I
neach the Hall of Flighteousness. May I nise like a liv-
ing god and give fonth light like the divine powers that
ane in heaven.
Let me proceed in peace to the Wes[, May the
londs of the sacned Land neceive me and give me
thnee-fold praise in peace. May they make a seat for
me besides the Eldens of the council, May I ascend in
the pnesence of the Beneficent one. And may I as-
sume whatever fonm I want in whateven place my
spirit wishes to be.
llf.
O My heart, my mothen, my heant, my mothen, my
heant wheneby I come into being. stand not up against
me as a witness nor oppose me in the council of
Judgment. weigh nob heavy against me befone the
Keepen of the Balance. you ane my divine essence
which dwells in my body, the divine powen which makes
stnong my limbs. when you come forth in the place ofhappiness where we go, may you not cause my name
to send fonth an offensive odon befone those who
assign people to their rightful place.
May it be favorable fon us and the Hearer be favo'-
able to us and thene be joy at the weighing of wonds.
Let not falsehood be uttened against he befone the
Gneat God. Fon sunely youn r-igl'rteousness will cause
you to rise up in triumph.
tv.
Behold, I am in youl- presence '0 Lor.d of Heaven.
Thene is no evil in my body, I have not knowingly spo-
106


--- PAGE 123 ---
ken that which is not true, nor have I done anything
with a false heart. Gnanf that I may be like those
favoned ones who are in youn following and that I may
be an Osiris - one vindicated and risen - and greatly
favoned by the Beneficenb God
V.
I come forth tniumphantly against my enemies. I split
the heavens and open up the horizon. I travel acnoss
the eanth on the heels of my enemies. I cause the
Glonious and Gneat Ones to come to me, for I am
equipped with wonds of powen. I eat with my own
mouth and chew with my own jaw. Fon I wonship God
in heaven and I am given that which endures in the
midst of things which ane overthnown.
Stand back from my path, for I am one with Ra,
coming fonth across the honizon against His enemy,
who shall not be nescued from me, I have stneLched
out my hand as Lord of the Cnown of Upper Egypt. I
lifbed up my legs as one who hurries the dawn. My
enemy shall not escape me, Indeed he shall fall befone
me. He has been given to me and shall not be rescued.
vt.
I stand up as Horus, betoved son and avenger of his
father. I sit down as Ptah, God who taid the founda-
tions of the universe, I have gnown stnong as ThoLh,
wisdom exalted. I have become as powenful as Atum
- Ra as the Perfecter. I walk with my own feeb, I
speak with my own mouth. I punsue my enemy. He is
given to me and he shall not be nescued fnom he, I
have entened as a falcon and come fonth as a phoenix,
107


--- PAGE 124 ---
Morning star make way for me, so that I may adore
Ra in the beautiful paradise of the West.
vll.
My name does not pass away. I am the soul that
created the deep, that makes its seat in God's do-
main. My nest, my place of birth, is hidden and my egg
has not been broken. I am Lord of the heights ano I
have made my nest in the sky. But I come down to
earth bhau I may do away with my uncleanliness.
O Lord Osiris, come
make me strong. Gnant
everlastingness as you
father Ra, whose body
one who indeed does
then and establish me and
that I may enter the land of
have done along with your
never passed away and who is
not die. I have not done that
which you hate, but have pnaised youn name among
those who love youn Divine Essence. May your spirit
love me and not neject me. And may you not let my
body decay, but deliven me as you did deliven younself.
Let life rise out of death. Let not decay make an end
of me or my enemies come against me in thein many
fonms.
vllf .
I am the Great One, the son of a Great One. I amthe Fieny one, the son of the Fiery one, whose headwas nestoned to him after it had been cut off. Thehead of osiris, the Risen savion, is not taken fnom hitm
from me, I have risen
I have made myself
young again. I am one
and my head shall not be taken
up and knitted myself together.
whole. I nenew myself and gnow
with Osiris, Lord of Etennity.
108


--- PAGE 125 ---
He who shall accompany me who am about to f all
will lift me up when I have descended in the valley of
Abydos and gone to nest. For sunely I am one who
worships Him, I have assumed divine authority in the
city where I found Him, I conquened and carried away
the dankness by my strength. I have taken possession
of the crown of Uppen Egypt. Truth is my body. I have
come to lighten dankness and to oventhrow the evil
spirits thenein. Those who dwelled in the darkness
adore me. I have caused the weeping ones to stand up
even though they ane weary. Behold me, I am indeed
the Deep one who has subdued dankness. I have driven
away darkness so that light could be lifted up.
lx.
These ane words which shall be said on arniving at
the Gneat Hall of Maati, so that one may be sepa-
rated from all offenses he on she may have committed
and may behold the faces of the divine ones. (The
Declaration of lnnocenceJ
One says: Homage to you, Gneat God, Lond of
Maati. I have come to you O' Lond that I may behold
youn beauty. I know you; I know youn name; I know the
names of the forty-two divine beings who live with you
in this Hall of Maati, who live on the doens of evil and
feed on their blood on the day of taking account of
characten in the pnesence of Osinis, The Good One,
Surely, the Two Daughtens, the Two Eyes, Lond of
Bighteousness is youn name: Behold, I have come to
you, I have bnought you righteousness and have done
away with unnighteousness fon you.
PART L have not done evil against people. I have not
mistneated my family and associates. I have not told
lies in the court of law, the seat of Truth. I have not
109


--- PAGE 126 ---
associated with evil or worthless pensons. I have not
done evil things. I have not begun a day by demanding
mone than I was due. I have not bnought fonth rv
name fon pnaise. lhave not cunsed God. lhave nol
defnauded the poon of their property. I have not done
what is hateful to God. I have not slander-ed a senvant
to his supenion. I have not infricted pain. I have not
caused anyone to be hungny. I have not made anyone
weep,
I have not committed murder. I have not ondered a
murden on tunned oven anyone to a killen. I have not
caused anyone to suffen. I have not stolen the offen-
ings of the temple. I have not defnauded the divine
beings of thein bnead offer-irrgs, I have not stolen the
offenings of the depanted. I have not committed adul-
tery, I have not been unchaste in the sanctuary. I
have not incneased or diminished the measune of gnain.
I have not neduced the length of the palm, I have not
encnoached upon fields of anothen. I have not added to
the weight of the scales, I have not tampened with the
tongue of the scales, I have not taken milk fnom the
mouth of childnen. I have not dr-iven cattle fnom their
pastune.
I have not snared sacred birds. I have not caught fish
with the bait of thein own bodres. I have not stopped
the flow of waten in its season, I have not damed up
waten when it should flow. I have not put out a fire
when it should bunn. I have not viorated the times of
making meat offenings. I have not dr-iven away cattle
from the pnoperty of God. And I have not turned back
God at His appearances. I am pune.
PART ll. I have not done wnong, I have not robbed. I
have not been gr-eedy. I have not stolen. I have nou mun-
dered people. I have not cheated at the measures. I
have not committed fnaud. I have not stolen the prop-
enty of God. I have noL told lies. I have not stolen food.
110


--- PAGE 127 ---
I have not spoken cunses. I have not violated the law, I
have not killed sacred animals, I have not dealt
deceitfully.
I have not stolen land. I have not eavesdnopped.
I have not talked overmuch, I have not been angry with-
out just cause. I have not committed adultery.
I have not been unchaste. I have not ternorized anyone,
I have not violated the law. I have not been hot-
tempened. I have not been deaf Lo wonds of tnuth. I
have not stinred up str.ife. I have not been blind to injus-
tice, I have not engaged in unnatural sex. I have not
been deceitful,
I have not indulged in quarnelling. I have not engaged in
violence. I have not been quick tempened, I have not
misrepnesented my natune. I have not gossiped. I have
not slandered the pharoah. I have not waded in drinking
waten. I have not been loud voiced. I have not blas-
phemed against God. I have not been ar.nogant. I have
not discniminated against others. I have not coveted oth-
ens' property, I have not offended the God of my city.
X.
Behold, I have come to you,
of deceit, a blameless one,
against him heil. Thenefone,
against me,
I live on Maat, I satisfy myself with the nighteous-
ness of my heart. For I have done that which men and
women request and that which pleases God. I have
found favon with God by doing that which He loves, I
have given bnead to the hungny, waten to the thinsty,
clothes to the naked and a boat to bhose wi[hout one, I
have made due offenings to God and funenal offenings to
empty of evil and devoid
one wiuhout a witness
let no case be brought
111


--- PAGE 128 ---
the departed, Deliven me then, and protect me. Make no
report against me in the presence of the Gneat God,
For I am one whose mouth is pure and whose hands ane
clean. Thenefore, let, it be said to me: "Welcome, come
in peace" by those who shall see me.
The
Book of Uindication
Hene begins the Book of Vindicating a Person in the
Realm of the Beautiful West.
l.
Seeker of vindication, you are the Lion, indeed the
Double Lion. You are Honus, pnoLecton of his father',
You ane the founth of these four powens of heaven
who ane strong and mighty who bning waten and make
bhe Nile flow through powen of thein divinity. O seeken
of vindication, naise yourself on your left side and put
yourself on your night side.
The God of eanth has commanded and the Double
Lion has nepeated, that you be given youn soul which
is on earth and youn shadow which is in secnet places.
Seeken of vindication, naise younself that you may be
vindicated against your enemies. Take youn staff, youn
loin cloth and youn sandals and go to the Council of
Judgment. May you be vindicated against youn ene-
mies, male and female, against those who would hanm
you and those who would bning a case against you in
the Council of Judgment on this day of joy.
112


--- PAGE 129 ---
ll.
O' seeken of vindication, the earth opens its mouth
for you; it opens up its jaws in your behalf. May you
eat youn bnead and neceive your abundance. May you
neach the Gneat Stainway and annive at the Sacned
City, May you negain youn wanmth upon the eanth and
may you become one with Osinis, the Bisen Savior. O'
seeken of vindication, the gneat ones stand up fon you
and the scnibes who sib upon their mats are in awe of
you in youn pnesence. You have assumed for younself
the attnibutes of the wise senpents in the sacr-ed city
of On, Hail seeken of vindication, take possession of
the sky and inhenit the eanth. Who shall take away the
sky fnom you, you beautiful youthful god? Fon you ane
vindicated against your enemies, male and female,
ilt.
The seeken of vindication says: Hail to you, Judg-
ment Council of God, who shall judge me on this day
concerning what I have said and done being ignonant,
remiss and unmindful, o' you who sunround me and
stand at my back, may I be vindicated in bhe pnesence
of the Lord of eanth. He shall judge me acconding to
what I have knowingly done. I have stood up witl-r my
feather of truth on my head and my righteousness on
my bnow. My enemies ane greatly gnieved and in my
vindication, I have gained possession of all I own.
lv.
O' vindicated one, go forth gneat and mighty even as
Ra went fonth gneat and mighty on the eastenn side of
the sky. The powens of heaven who spoke on behalf of
Honus, the protector of his father, and who subdued
113


--- PAGE 130 ---
his enemies who hated him, they shall speak on behalf
of this vindicated one and subdue those who would
injure him (heil, who hate him (heil, and who would
bring a case against him hefl on this day.
V.
Hail, vindicated one. You shall cnoss the sky and
travel acnoss the expanse of the heavens; those in the
winding watenway shall nevene you and see you when
you nise on the eastern honizon. You shall come forth
fnom the Night-bank of Ba arrd go aboand the Day-bank
as Horus, Lord of nobles, himself, commands you.
Hail, vindicated one, You shall go up on the gneat
eastern side of the sky and go down on the gneat
western side of the eanth among those powens of
heavens who ane in the company of Osinis, the Bisen
Savior. And you shall go in peace, in peace with Ra,
who is in the heavens,
vl.
Hail vindicated one, You ane a god and you shall be
a god. You shall have no enemies or opponents before
Ra who is in the heavens or befone Osinis Lhe gneaL
and divine power who is in the sacred city of Abydos.
The Lond of the eanth will open your blind eyes and
straighten out your bent knees fon you. And you wilt
be given yout' heant which came fnom your mothen,
youn heart which belongs to youn body, youn soul which
was on eanth, and youn corpse which was in the
ground, Thene will be bnead for" youn body, waten fon
youn thnoat, and sweet ain fon youn nostnils.
vll.
Hail, vindicated one. Come that you may nise up in
114


--- PAGE 131 ---
the heavens. The ladden at the side of Ra has been
assembled fon you among the powens of heaven who
punge the stneams of thein pestilence so that you may
dnink water from them, You shall walk upon your own
feet and you shall not walk with your" head downwand.
You ane clean and pure. As Ra lives you ape blameless
and without blemish,
vil l.
The doors of the heavens ane opened to you be-
cause of youn nighteousness. May you ascend and see
Hathor, Love and Eeauty Exalted. May any case
against you be cancelled. May any offense of yours be
erased by those who weigh hearts in the balance on
the day of taking accounl of charactens. May it be
granted that you join those who are in the Sun-Bark
by those who are in the company of Ra.
lx.
Go and open the mansion of the soul beyond . . ' lf
you find the powens of heaven seated, you shall sit
with them. Receive this sceptre of yours which is at
the feet of Ra and youn nod which is at Lhe feet of
the Monning Stan. You should rise into the heavens
among the stans which do not die and you shall strike
with your sceptne and nule with youn nod.
X.
May you cnoss the desent with Ra, May He cause
you to see the places of those who follow thein heart.
May you find Ehe valleys full of waten for youn wash-
ings. May you pick papyrus plants, l-ushes, and lotus
blossoms and buds. Watenfowls shall come Lo you in
thousands, lying on youn path. You will cast youl-
115


--- PAGE 132 ---
throwing stick at them and a thousand will fall at the
sound of its wind. For you, a ladder to the heavens
shall be assembled and heaven shall extend hen hand
to you.
xl.
You have youn legs. Lift up youn body; gathen togethen
your membens that you might take the steps to the
Council of Judgment, to the place whene the powens
of heaven are, that they may give you the life fluid
that comes fonth from you. May you neven be motion-
less when you regain it, May you tnavel and never tine.
May you travel across heaven and earth and neven
tire, o' vinLuous and vindicated one.
xll.
A ct'y went fonth fon me fnom bhe mouth of Ra, the
Penfecten, and [he arn opened up upon my ways. lt is I
who make the sky light after dankness. My pleasing
colon comes fnom the air which goes fonth aften me
from the mouth of Ra, the Penfecter. The storm
clouds of heaven are that which flow fnom me; and hail
sbonms and half-dankness ane my sweat. The length of
the sky belongs to my stnides and the width of the
eanth belongs to my domain. I am one whom Ba, the
Penfecten, created and I am bound fon my place in
eternity.
xlll.
I have come into being fnom the flesh of the self-
cneated God. I am the soul of Shu, the Lond of Light,
the God of invisible shape. I am he fshe) who is one
with God, I have become He. I am one who calmed the
sky fon himself herselfl and established onder in the
116


--- PAGE 133 ---
Two Lands of Egypt. I am stnonger and more fience
than the Exalted Nine.
XIV.
I witl neven obey any evil wonds of power and nothing
harmful will happen to me. I have ascended and have
set my enemies unden my feet that I may exencise
power over them in accordance with that which Ra
commanded of me, I am the wise senpent, Bull of the
Exalted Nine, who obeys no magic, who is not burned
by fire and who is not wet by water. Indeed, I will
never be burnt by fire on wet because of waten. I will
be like Ra everyday, one who will be shaped and pro-
duced evenyday by the sun people who have seen
yesbenday.
XV.
I shine like Ra daily. I establish tnuth and expel false-
hood. I open the doons which ane in the abyss below, I
am this friend of Ra, weary with wounds. And I am
given stnength through wisdom. I have found the fenr.y-
boat which was lost in its flood wabens and I have
brought it Lo land. lhave gone fonth in it and have
fennied acnoss. I have dinected my feet to the right
place. I have extended my anms. I have established
nule in the heavens and taken possession of bhe earth.
And the Exalted Ones of heaven are pleased by it.
XVI.
I am the Lion, the Double Lion and the gneatest of
his heil pniesthood. I am Horus, the uniter. I am he
khel who bnings stillness aften the storm. I am lsis in
Chemmis taking refuge from Seth, the evil one, and I
will listen like one who is deaf and stnains to see. I am
117


--- PAGE 134 ---
the Lord of eanth, who entered the eanth. I am he
{,shd who evaluates whoever senves him heil. I am
transfonmed into one whose spirits ane mighty. I am
one with Ra, Lord of His Two Lands, and am he bhe)
who is put behind Him. I am the watens and the eanth.
The Bitten Lakes and the Gneat Bull are my
will tnavel and enten the place which I know.
The
Book of Rising and Transformation
t.
Raise yourself o' vindicated one. Run, fot' you are
exceedingly stnong. You shall sit at the heads of the
powens of heaven. You shall do that which Osinis, the
Risen Savior, did in the Mansion of the Pnince which is
in the sacned city of On. Receive your due honor; your
foot will not be obstnucbed in heaven non will you be
opposed on eanth. For you ane the spinit whom Nut,
the mothen of heaven, bore and Nephthys, youn sister
spinit, suckled, and Lhey have put you togethen. Anise
in your stnength and do what you did before. For you
are a spinit. Arise o' spirit, exceedingly strong, adorn-
ed as a great wild bull. You will not encounter opposi-
tion anywhene you walk and yout' foot will not be
obstnucted anywhene you wish to be,
il.
Rise up o' vindicated one, Take hold of youn head'
Gathen together yout' bones, collect youl' limbs and
118


--- PAGE 135 ---
shake bhe dust fnom your flesh. Take youn bnead which
knows no mouldiness and your beer which neven
becomes soun. Stand at the gates that bar those with
no name. Lo, the gatekeeper comes out to you. He
takes hold of your hand and takes you to heaven to
youn Fathen. He rejoices at youn coming, gives you His
hands, kisses you, comfonts you and sets you befone
the spirits, the impenishable stans.
ilr.
The Heavens declane: This royal vindicated one is my
beloved son in whom I am well pleased, my first
born upon the thnone of eanth, and Ra has given him
his henitage in the pnesence of the Gneat Powens of
heaven. All the powers of heaven nejoice saying how
blessed is this vindicated one, for His Fathen is greatly
pleased with him.
lv.
O' royal vindicated one, you have not departed dead.
You have left alive. Sit then upon the throne of Osinis,
the Bisen Savior, with your sceptne in youn hand, that
you may command the living, with youn lotus-bud scep-
tre in your hand that you may give ordens to those
whose seats are hidden. Youn arms and shouldens ane
those of Ra, your back and belly ane those of Ra, your
back loins and legs ane those of Ra. Youn face is that
of the God of the dead. And both the hills of Horus
and Seth serve you.
V.
O' Ra, this noyal vindicated one comes to you, an
undying and indestnuctible spirit, one who lays claim to
119


--- PAGE 136 ---
the foun pillars, the foun cardinal points of the uni-
verse, Your son tdaughEeil comes to you, this noyal
vindicated one comes to you. May you and he bhel
cnoss the sky togethen united in the dank and nise
together oven the horizon, in the place whene it pleases
you. Raise him (heil up, O' Ra, and enclose him herl
in youn embrace fon he khel is the son {daughterl of
your own body foreven and even.
vl.
The priest of the royal vindicated one says: Stand up
upon this earth which originated from Ra, as the one
who completes this spittle which came fonth fnom Ra
as the Bninger Into-Being. Come into being upon this
earth, o' noyal vindicated one. Be exalted upon it, so
that youn Fathen, Ra, may behold you. Says the royal
vindicated one: I have come to you my Fathen; I have
come to you O' Ra. Gnant that I may seize the sky
and bake possession of the honizon. Gnant that I might
rule the powers of heaven and pnovide for them, Place
the crook of leadenship in my hand that the head of
Lowen and Upper Egypt may be humbled.
vll.
The royal vindicated one says: I am this sacred
flowen which spnang up fnom earth. My hand is purified
by Him who pnepaned my thnone and I am at Ehe nose
of Ra, the Great in Power. I have come to the lsland
of Fine for testing. I have established Right in the
place of wrong hene and I am on my way to clothe and
equip myself. I appean as the lotus-blossom which is at
the nose of Ra. He will come fonth over the horizon
each day rn the splendor of the sun and the powers of
heaven will be cleansed at the sight of Him.
120


--- PAGE 137 ---
vlll.
The noyal vindicated one says: I have come bo my
throne which is over the spinits. I unite heants, o' you
who are gneat and in charge of wisdom. I become the
embodiment of Sia, Wisdom Exalted, which bears
God's book and which rests at the right hand of Ra. O
you who ane protected by my hand, it is I who speak
what is in the heant of Ra the Great. l, even, I am
Wisdom Exalted which resfs at the night hand of Ra;
the proud one who presides oven the cavenn of the
depths,
tx.
The noyal vindicated one says: o' you who ane oven
the houns, who stand befone Ra, pnepare a way fon
me that I may pass among the patrol of those with
wannior faces, fon I am on my way to this throne of
mine. / am one who is behind the Gneat God, one
whose head is set in place, who has acquined a shanp
stnong honn , That which nemoves Er-ouble fnom
befone Ra, the Gneat Bull, that which causes those in
dankness to tnemble is the strong honn which is behind
the Great God. I have subdued those who should be
punished. I have stnuck them hand on thein foreheads
and I stand unopposed on the honizon,
X.
The reedfloats of the sky ane set in place fon Ra
that Ra may cnoss on Lhem to the honizon. And the
reedfloats of the sky ane set in place for me that I
may cross on them to the honizon to Ra. The canal is
opened, the Field of Rushes is filled and the winding
watenway is flooded so that I may be fennied oven
theneon bo Ra. Bning to me the foun brothens who
pass by, wearens of the side-lock who sband by rhein
121


--- PAGE 138 ---
staffs in the easEern side of the sky. May they tell mygood name to Ra. Reloice fon me, nejoice fon my divine
essence. For I am vindicated and my divine essence rs
vindicated before God.
Ra has received me to himself, to the sky, to the
eastenn side of the sky, as Honus the avengen of his
father, as osinis the one Risen, as uhis star which
lights up the sky. My sis[en is sothis and my offspning
is the monning stan. Neven again wiil the sky be void oi
me on the eanth be empty of my pnesence,
xt.
The sky is clear and Sothis lives. Fon I am a living
one, the son [daughter] of Sothis and the Gneat Pow-
ens of heaven have cleansed themselves fon me among
the stans of Unsa Majon, the everlasting. My house in
the heavens will nob pass away, and my throne on
eanth will not be destroyed. The Openen-of-the-Ways
has caused me to fly up to the sky in the company of
my bnothers and sisters, the powens of heaven. And
heaven has extended its anms in welcome fon me.
My seat is with you, O' Ra, and I will not yield it to
anyone. I will ascend to the sky to you, O' Ra, My
face is Ehe face of falcons; my wings are those of the
duck and my talons ane those of Him who dwells on
Cenastes Mountain. Thene is no evidence against me
on earth among men and women and no accusation
against me in the sky among the powers of heaven.
For I have proved false all evidence against me; indeed,
I disposed of it so that I mighr fly up to the sky
among my bnothers and sistens, the powens of heaven.
I use my arms as a goose and flap my wings like a
122


--- PAGE 139 ---
hawk. Lo, the flier flies. O' men and women of earth. I
rise and fly away fnom you.
xlll.
"How beautiful to behold, and how wondenful to
witness," so say the powens of heaven when this noyal
vindicated one nises in the sky, when you, o' vindicated
one, ascend in bhe sky with your powen upon you, your
awe around you, and youn words of powen at youn feet.
The powens of heaven and of eanth come Lo you. They
make supports fon you upon their anms. May you
ascend unto the sky and nise up in it on the Divine
Ladder'. Fon Ra says "The heavens and eanth ane given
to you." Behold you have become the enduning bull
among the wild bulls set against the evil one. Endure
and last, o' enduring bull, that you may prevail at the
head of them and at the head of the spirits forever
and ever.
XIV.
I am a holy one who stands in the forefnont, who
lifts the forehead, a star before whom the powers of
heaven are humble, and the Exalted Ones stand in
awe. And it is my own hand which will naise me up. I
am the one who escaped from the coiled senpent of
evil. I have nisen in a blast of fine, having turned my-
self around. I have travelled the noads of Heaven. I
have cleansed myself on the hill where Ra naised Him-
self, I place the stairway, I set up the ladder and
those in panadise take hold of my hand and tift me up
into the heavens.
XV.
Homage to you, O' Ra, you who travels acnoss the
123


--- PAGE 140 ---
sky and heavens, who cross the winding waterway. I
have grabbed hold of you for myself, for I am a god
and the son of a God. Indeed, I am a flower which
came forth from the Nile, a golden flower which origi-
nates from lseion.
XVI.
Heaven has commended this vindicated one to Ra,
the Perfecter, and the Open-armed has commended
this vindicated one to the Lond of Light, that He may
cause yonder doors of heaven to be opened for the
vindicated and bar others who have no name. Take
hold of the hand of this vindicated one and carry him
up to the sky that he may not die on earth among
men and women.
XVII.
"How beauEiful to behold and wonderful to wiEness,"
says lsis, sacred mother, when you ascend in the
heavens, with your power upon you' your awe around
you and your words of power at your feet. You are
helped by Ra, the Perfecter, just as He always does.
The Exalted Ones of heaven are brought to you and
the exalted ones of earth are assembled fon you. They
place their hands under you and make a ladder for you
so thaE you may ascend on it to the heavens. The
doors of the heavens and the entranceways of the
starry expanse are opened for you. Ra, the Perfecter,
has gathered together the districts fon you and has
given you the cities of earth. You are the one who
presides over Upper Egypt and Nubia. Have they killed
you on said you shall die? You shall never die, but shall
surely live forever. You shall be effective agarnst them
bnil superion to them, living and enduring fonever and
ever.
1?4


--- PAGE 141 ---
xvlll.
I have come to you O' Mother of Heaven, I have duly
bunied my father and left Horus, the new pharoah,
behind me. My wings have grown into those of a fal-
con, full of feathers of the sacred hawk. My soul has
brought me and my words of power have made me
effective.
Behold me O' Ra and recognize me, I belong to
those who know you; thenefore know me also. lf this
vindicated one is raised up, I will not forget the good
deed done for me. Commend me to the foun fience and
raging winds which ane around you and which see with
two faces, Lhe winds which confront with funious noar-
ing those who are destined for distress, those whom
they would destroy. May they offer no opposition when
I tunn to you, when I come to you and tell you this
name of yours, "Great Flood which came forth from
One-who-is-Gneat." I will not be blind, even if you put
me in darkness and I will not be deaf, even if I do not
hear your voice. Take me wiEh you, O' Ra. For I will
drive away storms for you, clear away clouds for you
and break up and scatter hail for you. Sunely, I will
produce praises upon praises for you and adorations
without end.
name of yours, "Great Flood which came forth from
125


--- PAGE 142 ---



--- PAGE 143 ---
SELECTED BIBIIOGRAPHY
Allen, Thomas. n97q The Book of the Dead or @11glorth By
Day, Chicago: Univers
Breasted, James. t1906) Ancient Records of Egypt, 5 volumes,
Chicago: University of Cnffi
Budge, E,A. Wallis. (1898) The Book of the Dead. 3 volumes,
London: Kegan Paul, Tnench, Trubnen & Co., LTD,
Canruthers, Jacob. (19841 Essavs in Ancient Egvptian Studies,
Los Angeles: University of Sankore Press.
Diop, Cheikh Anta. t1981 ) Civilisation ou Barbanie, Paris: Presence
Afnicaine,
Erman, Adolf. (1927) The Litenature of the Ancient Eqvptians,
London: Methuen & Co.
Faulkner, R,O. t1969) The Ancient Egyptian Pyr
2volumes,London: Ox@
ngTA fhe Ancient Egyptian Coffin Texts, 2
volumes, London: Aris & Phillips.
James, George. Stolen Legacy, San Francisco: Julian Richardson
Associates. 
-
Karenga, Maulana. (19891 The Book of Coming Forth Bv Oav:
The Ethics of the Declarations of lnnocence. Los Angeles Univer-
sity of Sankore Press.
. (ed.) (1989) Studies in Kemetic Culture, Los
Angeles: University of Sankore Pness.
Karenga, Maulana and Jacob Canruthers, (eds.) (1986) Kemet
and the Afnican Worldview, Los Angeles: University of
Sankore Pness.
Kaster, Joseph, (1gBB)
tAncient Egypt, New York Holt, Reinhant and Winston.
Lichtheim, Miriam. t1975, 1976,1980) Anq"@
ature, 3 volumes, Los Angeles:@
fornia Pness.
Mayer, Josephine and Tom Prideaux. (1961 ) Neven To Die, The
Egyptians in Their Own Words, New York Viking Press.
Piankoff, Alexandre. (1957 - 1964) Egyptian Religious Texts and
Representations, 6 volumes, Princeton: Princeton University
Press,
Pritchard, John. (ed.) (19551 Ancient Near Eastern Texts, Prin-
ceton: Princeton University Press.


--- PAGE 144 ---


