=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Septimius Severus~ The African Emperor of Rome.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 292
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:12:00.312616
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
SEPTIMIUS SEVERUS 
The African Emperor
Anthony R. Birley 
LONDON AND NEW YORK 
-iii- 
First published 1971 by Eyre & Spottiswoode 
Revised edition published 1988 by B.T. Batsford Ltd 
First published in paperback 1999 
by Routledge 
11 New Fetter Lane, London EC4P 4EE 
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada 
by Routledge 
29 West 35th Street, New York, NY 10001 
© 1971 and 1988 Anthony R. Birley 
The right of Anthony R. Birley to be identified as the Author of this Work has been asserted 
by him in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 
Typeset by Latimer Trend and Co. Ltd, Plymouth 
Printed and bound in Great Britain by Biddles Ltd, Guildford and King’s Lynn 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any 
form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, 
including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, 
without permission in writing from the publishers. 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
Library of Congress Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book has been requested


--- PAGE 2 ---
ISBN 0-415-16591-1 
-iv- 
Contents 
List of illustrations vii 
Preface ix 
Note to the paperback edition xi 
1 The Emporia 1 
2 Lepcis Magna: From Free State to Colonia 8 
3 Life in Roman Tripolitania 23 
4 The Broad Stripe 37 
5 Into the Emperor’s Service 47 
6 A Caesar Born to the Purple 57 
7 The Great Marshal 63 
8 Julia Domna 68 
9 The Conspirators 81 
10 The Year 193 89 
11 The War against Niger 108 
12 The War against Albinus 121 
13 Parthia and Egypt 129 
14 Return to Africa 146 
15 The Years in Italy 155 
16 Expeditio Felicissima Brittannica 170 
17 Aftermath and Assessment 188 
Abbreviations used in Appendices and Notes 201 
Appendices 
1 Ancient Sources and Modern Scholarship 203 
-v- 
2 The Septimii and Fulvii of Lepcis Magna, the Julii of Emesa, and their 
connections 212 
References and Notes 230 
Bibliographies 238 
Addenda (1999) 273 
Index 275 
-vi- 
List of Illustrations 
Plates (between pages 84 and 85) 
1 The theatre at Lepcis Magna 
2 Inscription from the Lepcis theatre 
3 Aerial view of Lepcis 
4 Stele from the old Forum at Lepcis 
5-8 Coins of Pertinax, Didius Julianus, Niger and Albinus 
9-11 Coins of Septimius, Julia, Antoninus (Caracalla) 
12-14 Coins of Antoninus (Caracalla) and Geta 
15 The Arch of Septimius Severus in the Forum at Rome 
16 The Berlin Tondo


--- PAGE 3 ---
17 The dextrarum iunctio from the Severan Arch at Lepcis 
18 Julia Domna, from the Severan Arch at Lepcis 
19 Plautianus and the elder Geta (?) on the Severan Arch at Lepcis 
20 Septimius and his sons from Arch at Lepcis 
21 The fort at Gholaia (Bu-Ngem) 
22 The Severan Basilica at Lepcis 
23 Marble piers from the Severan Basilica 
24 Zinchecra, the Garamantian stronghold 
25 Carpow, Septimius’ new base in Scotland 
Maps 
The Roman Empire 10 
The March on Rome 100 
The Eastern Provinces 111 
-vii- 
[This page intentionally left blank.] 
-viii- 
Preface 
ONCE THE ROMAN IMPERIAL SYSTEM became well established, it did not matter much—so it 
can be argued—who was emperor. ‘As for the Emperor and the Emperor’s friends’, Synesius 
wrote in a letter, ‘and fortune’s dance…certain names shooting up like flames to a great 
height of glory and being extinguished—there is complete silence on these things here, our 
ears are spared from news of that sort. Maybe people know well enough that there always is 
some Emperor who is alive, because we are reminded of this every year by the tax-
collectors. But who the Emperor is, that is not so clear, in fact there are some among us 
who think Agamemnon is still on the throne.’ Synesius could make a joke out of the 
remoteness of Arcadius and the sheltered ignorance of Cyrenaica. But he strongly 
disapproved, as he told Arcadius in his address On Kingship: the emperor should lead his 
armies in person, and tour the provinces to see and be seen. Septimius Severus is not 
known to have visited Cyrenaica; but this is one of the very few parts of the empire that he 
did not see. For one thing, he was the first emperor born and raised away from Rome and 
Italy, in his ancestral Tripolitania. His career as a senator took him to Sardinia, Spain, Syria, 
Gaul, Sicily and Pannonia, with a stay at Athens while out of office. Once he had seized 
power he spent all but four of his eighteen years as emperor on the move, notably in the 
east, where he extended Rome’s borders to the Tigris; in Egypt; the Balkans and Rhineland; 
Africa; finally remote Britain, where he stayed longer than any other ruler. Such a man 
deserves close scrutiny, even if it is difficult, impossible no doubt, to get beneath his skin. 
His African origin is not the least remarkable aspect of Septimius. As the work of numerous 
scholars, archaeologists and epigraphists in the main, now makes clear, Tripolitania stood 
apart from the rest of Roman Africa, deeply conservative after centuries of virtual 
independence, with its Punic or Libyphoenician identity still strongly apparent when it finally 
entered Rome’s orbit under Augustus. No influx of colonial migration disturbed the 
dominance of the Punic élite; yet they responded with alacrity to Rome’s presence —as a 
free city Lepcis had won allied status long before. Septimius’ ancestors became Romans, his 
grandfather emerges as a knight owning land near Rome and a minor figure in 
-ix-


--- PAGE 4 ---
fashionable literary circles of late Flavian Italy—but he returned to Lepcis to preside over 
the culmination of its transformation, into an honorary colonia. Septimius’ father spent his 
entire life in Tripolitania, Septimius himself grew up there. 
My interest in Septimius goes back a long way. He is a key figure for the student of Roman 
Britain, and it was a matter of great excitement when Robin Birley’s excavations at Carpow 
on the Tay in 1961-2 revealed that the site was Severan, with stone principia and 
praetorium. This made it clear that Septimius really had sought to conquer the whole of 
Britain (as Dio said), not just to crush Caledonia before returning to the Wall. A few years 
later I was lucky enough to visit Lepcis Magna, and by an unusual route, coming up across 
the desert from the Garamantian country, past the Black Mountain and the outpost fort at 
Bu-Ngem which Septimius built, grateful to reach the coast after the searing heat of the 
ghibli. Meanwhile I had been plunging ‘into the ocean of the Augustan History’, but not 
‘insensibly’ (as Gibbon recalled he had done). I was fortunate to have been guided by Sir 
Ronald Syme in my first steps through what he has called a ‘Serbonian bog’. The Historia 
Augusta —which I abbreviate HA throughout this book—is a problem that must be 
confronted by any student of the second and third centuries AD. Participation in several of 
the Colloquia organised by Professor Johannes Straub proved very beneficial. At the first 
one that I attended the late H.-G. Pflaum urged me to undertake a biography of Septimius. 
The result, mostly written at Duke University, was published in 1971. It has long been out 
of print and I have often enough been asked for spare copies by would-be readers. In the 
meantime a considerable body of new evidence and a mass of new literature have 
appeared. The invitation to produce a completely new version was thus both welcome and 
daunting. I have had to be selective, some might call it eclectic, in what I have cited, to 
avoid excessively ponderous documentation. I have subdivided the bibliography, in some 
cases by a group of chapters, often chapter by chapter. To a limited extent the 
bibliographies give a conspectus of the literature, but I have refrained from listing a fair 
number of standard works if they have not been expressly cited in the notes. 
Work of this kind is only made possible by the work of a host of scholars. It is proper to 
register the benefit I derived from the studies by De Ceuleneer, Platnauer and Hasebroek, 
the last of whom remains of great value on the HA vita Severi. When I began my own 
research I gained particular inspiration from a series of articles by Julien Guey and great 
benefit from the work of the late Guido Barbieri. My debt to Eric Birley is incalculable, but I 
can express it best by stating the conviction I have derived from him that Roman history, 
epigraphy and provincial 
-x- 
archaeology are essential to one another. Those to whom I owe thanks— for discussion of 
detail, for sending me copies of their work, for fruitful debate—are very numerous: some 
fifty names deserve listing, but I must refrain lest I appear to shelter behind their authority. 
I must nonetheless explicitly thank Géza Alföldy, who not for the first time let me see some 
of his new work before publication; Charles Daniels, who made possible my visit to 
Tripolitania and has provided illustrations for this book; Barri Jones, for generous help while 
I was preparing my text and other kindnesses over many years; David Kennedy, for advice 
on eastern frontiers; and David Mattingly, for guidance on the most recent work in 
Tripolitania. The interpretations offered here—and responsibility for error— remain my own, 
something which I need to stress since I am aware that some of my views may be 
controversial. Imperial biographies are frowned on in some quarters as a genre and, to 
return to the subject of this one, my emphasis on his African nature may be unwelcome. 
There are difficult and delicate questions here, not to mention the ethnic identity of his wife,


--- PAGE 5 ---
Julia Domna: her city, Emesa, was founded by Arabs. Not all consent to call her one. 
Further, I lay weight not merely on the ‘otherness’ of Tripolitania and her most famous son, 
but on the strong involvement of Roman Africans, including Septimius and his brother, in 
the conspiracy which toppled Commodus. Anglo-Saxons, mostly monoglot, may not always 
grasp the complexity of a society in which there were two languages of culture, Latin and 
Greek, and a variety of other tongues in common use. Septimius Severus is an instructive 
phenomenon. My belief that his origin mattered has led me to call this story of his life The 
African Emperor. 
ANTHONY BIRLEY 
Manchester 
27 February 1988 
NOTE TO THE PAPERBACK EDITION 
Septimius Severus: The African Emperor was first published in 1971 by Eyre & 
Spottiswoode, a firm that no longer exists, based at 11 New Fetter Lane, and in 1972 in the 
USA by Doubleday. In 1988 Batsford brought out a much revised edition, for which—to re-
affirm my view that there was something specifically African about this man—I altered the 
title to The African Emperor: Septimius Severus. Now it comes back to 11 New 
-xi- 
Fetter Lane, to Routledge, unchanged from 1988 except for a list of recent publications (pp. 
273-4) with brief comment on their relevance. 
ANTHONY BIRLEY 
Friedberg 
31 July 1998 
-xii- 
1 
THE EMPORIA 
SEPTIMIUS SEVERUS WAS BORN ON 11 April 145, at Lepcis Magna in Tripolitania, son of P. 
Septimius Geta and Fulvia Pia. Lepcis had had the status of a Roman colony for a generation 
and was one of the great cities of Roman Africa. Tripolitania, land of three cities, took its 
name from Lepcis and her two western neighbours, Oea (Tripoli) and Sabratha. The Roman 
empire was then at the height of its prosperity. Antoninus Pius, the emperor, give his name 
to an era synonymous with peace and affluence. In 145 he himself was consul with his 
adopted son as colleague. The year of Septimius’ birth was thus the year of ‘the emperor 
Antoninus for the fourth time and Aurelius Caesar for the second time’. 1


--- PAGE 6 ---
The son born to Geta and Fulvia was given the names of his paternal grandfather: ‘Lucius 
Septimius Severus’. Fifty years later Septimius was to denote himself ‘son of the deified 
Marcus’ in place of ‘son of Publius’. Soon after this retrospective adoption into the Antonine 
dynasty a cynical senator congratulated Septimius on ‘finding a father’, implying that the 
real parent was a nobody. Geta was an obscure provincial, it is true (and long dead by 195). 
But men of his family in the same generation as himself were already senators when his son 
was born: P. Septimius Aper and C. Septimius Severus, both on the road to high office in 
145. These men, probably Geta’s first cousins, were no doubt older than him. But Geta 
never held public office. Ill health may have been a bar, or lack of ambition, but hardly 
poverty. His sister Polla, who apparently died unmarried, was a very wealthy woman, and 
the family had property in Italy as well as estates at Lepcis. For whatever reason, Geta 
seems to have stayed in Africa with his wife and three children. There was another son, 
named after himself, hence probably the elder, and a daughter, Octavilla. However obscure 
his life, the biographer Marius Maximus discoursed ‘quite copiously’ about him and his 
character in his life of Septimius, according to the HA (which fails to reproduce any details). 2     
Even within so variegated an empire, Septimius’ home town, where he spent the first 
seventeen years of his life, was a very exceptional place, and the ‘three cities’ markedly 
different from the rest of what the Romans called ‘Africa’. A look at Lepcis’ origins is 
required to understand better 
-1- 
who Septimius Severus was. ‘Civilisation’ came to North Africa with Canaanite traders from 
Tyre and Sidon, their language—Phoenician, later called Punic in the western Mediterranean
—closely related to Hebrew. They began exploring the coasts of the west in the late second 
millennium BC. Phoenicia had acquired expertise in seamanship and trade over the 
preceding centuries, when Ugarit on the Syrian coast played no small part in the economy 
of Egypt. The great disturbances caused by the ‘Sea Peoples’ in about 1200 BC forced her to 
look further afield. North Africa’s few natural harbours became Phoenician staging-posts on 
the route to southern Spain. Not quite the earliest, but soon the most important, was 
Carthage, Qart-Hadasht, ‘new city’. During the first half of the first millennium BC these 
trading-stations began to take on the character of towns. The process was accelerated and 
stimulated by the march of events in Asia. Assyria crushed the mother-cities Tyre and Sidon 
in the eighth century. Further colonists, this time refugees, arrived. Carthage and her fellow 
Punic cities prospered. They faced rivalry, before long, from the Greeks, active in southern 
Italy and Sicily from the eighth century, and from the mid-seventh interested in Africa, 
‘Libya’. Dorian Greeks from the island of Thera established themselves in eastern Libya, the 
‘Green Mountain’, founding Cyrene in 531 BC. From there daughter-cities were sent out, 
extending Greek settlement from the borders of Egypt to the Syrtica. Carthage responded, 
it is clear, by planting a settlement at a site called Lpqy in Tripolitania, at first perhaps on a 
little island opposite the mouth of the wadi, but soon on the mainland. Later two more 
colonies followed, to the west, Wy‘t and Sbrt‘n. All three names are Libyan, not Punic. They 
were trading stations, and the Greeks subsequently still called them the emporia—and 
Lepcis was often known as Neapolis. Tripolitania lies hundreds of kilometres closer to black 
Africa than Carthage herself. It was clearly to control the shortest paths to the interior by 
the transsaharan routes that Carthage planted the emporia. But the hills to the south-west 
of Lepcis, the Gebel Msellata, Herodotus’ ‘Hill of the Graces’, cried out for exploitation, 
likewise the rich valley of the River Cinyps (Wadi el-Caam), which rises in the Gebel and 
flows into the sea twelve and a half miles (20 km) east of Lepcis. ‘It is equal to any country 
in the world for cereal crops and is nothing like the rest of Libya. The soil here is black and


--- PAGE 7 ---
springs of water abound so that there is no fear of drought and heavy rains—for it rains in 
that part of Libya—do no harm when they soak the ground. The returns of the harvest come 
up to the Babylonian measures …the Cinyps region yields three hundred-fold’, Herodotus 
wrote. Further, ‘the Hill of the Graces is thickly wooded and is thus very unlike the rest of 
Libya, which is bare’. 3     
In about 514 BC a Spartan adventurer, Dorieus, guided by men of 
-2- 
Thera, ‘came to Cinyps, where he colonised a place which has not its equal in all Libya, on 
the banks of a river’, Herodotus records. But ‘he was driven out in the third year by the 
Macae, the Libyans and the Carthaginians’. Greeks from Asia Minor had managed to found 
Massilia in about 600 BC and exploited much of southern Gaul. But Carthage was by then 
strong enough virtually to exclude them from Spain, expelled them from Corsica and 
dominated Sardinia and western Sicily. Northern and central Italy were controlled by the 
Etruscans, with whom Carthage allied herself, as she did with the infant Roman republic. 
Only in southern Italy, eastern Sicily and Cyrenaica could the Greeks secure a firm foothold. 
The western Mediterranean was virtually a Punic preserve until the third century BC. 4     
Tripolitania, the land between the two Syrtic Gulfs, is lost to history between the expulsion 
of Dorieus and the end of the third century. During these three hundred years the emporia 
clearly flourished, in spite of the obstacles. In its physical relief and climate Tripolitania 
stands apart from the rest of North Africa, a hybrid between Mediterranean and Sahara, 
with a fertile margin along and near the coast and a vast desert hinterland. A wide coastal 
plain, the Gefara, stretches from just west of Lepcis to the mainland opposite Meninx 
(Djerba), the ‘Isle of the Lotuseaters’, bounded on the south by the great rocky escarpment 
of the Gebel. This band of hills, some twelve and a half miles (20 km) wide for the most 
part, merges with the Saharan plateau, the Dahar, which in turn slopes away to the 
southwest into the Great Eastern Erg or sand sea, an almost impassable barrier, further to 
the east into the ‘red rock’, Hamada elHamra, which divides Tripolitania from the Fezzan. 
Much of the Gefara plain itself is arid scrub, apart from a band of oases along the coast. 
Rainfall in Tripolitania is far lower than in the Maghreb proper and the scorching wind from 
the Sahara, the ghibli, is an added hazard. Another might have been the presence of hostile 
Libyan tribes. Yet Herodotus knew that Carthage had combined with the largest of these, 
the Macae, to expel Dorieus. The Libyans were the ancestors of the modern Berbers, who 
have seemingly preserved their identity through three thousand years of domination by 
Phoenicians, Greeks, Romans, Vandals, Arabs, French and Italians. Neither they nor the 
Phoenicians practised cultural or social apartheid. There was considerable intermarriage, 
and the population of Carthage’s Tripolitanian colonies were to become known as 
‘Libyphoenicians’. Further east, the Nasamones of the Syrtica were semi-nomadic, moving 
from the oasis of Augila to the coast, where they were feared by passing traders. To the 
south, in the oases of the Fezzan, lay the Garamantes, around whom legend accumulated. 
They were clearly important middlemen in the transsaharan trade, but from time to time 
-3- 
were liable to raid their northern neighbours. Other indigenous peoples of the interior, 
between the coast and the Garamantes, are labelled ‘Gaetuli’, doubtless linked to the semi-
nomads of Numidia and with the Numidae themselves, the most powerful people of the 
Maghreb. The Moors, Mauri, of the far west, were too distant to affect Lepcis. 5


--- PAGE 8 ---
Until the third century only the Greeks had challenged Punic dominance. But the steady 
advance of Rome was to lead to Carthage’s downfall. Her mercenary armies lost the first 
long war (264-241 BC) to Rome’s citizen legions. She surrendered Sicily, and soon after 
Sardinia and Corsica. Hannibal came within an ace of destroying Rome during the second 
war (218-202 BC) and Carthaginian armies roamed Italy for thirteen years. But Carthage 
lost again, when Rome took the war first to Spain and then to Africa. She had invaded, to 
be sure, during the first war (the expedition of Regulus in 256 BC) but that venture had 
ended in disaster. This time there was no mistake. 
Near the end of the Hannibalic war a Numidian chief who had served with Carthage, 
Massinissa, son of Gaia, defeated by a rival, took refuge in the region ‘between the Emporia 
and the Garamantes’. He did not forget what he saw there. Lepcis was still small, no doubt, 
clustered on the headland on the left bank of the Wadi Lebdah, but its control of the Gebel 
and the Cinyps valley made it rich from the cultivation of cereals and olives. It was paying 
Carthage tribute of one talent a day. The peace settlement between Rome and Carthage in 
201 BC made Massinissa, who had switched sides opportunely, king of a united Numidia. 
For over half a century this remarkable man greatly enlarged his dominions, at the expense 
of Carthage. He repeatedly attempted to take over the emporia. In the 1905 Roman 
commissioners came to Lepcis, three eminent men, Cornelius Cethegus, Minucius Rufus and 
the great Scipio himself, Hannibal’s conqueror. No clear decision seems to have been made, 
but by the 160s Carthage’s rights were finally lost. However, Lepcis and her neighbours 
were left in relative independence from the distant Numidian king. Links with the eastern 
Mediterranean were developed, not least with Alexandria. 6     
In 149 BC Roman fear and greed brought about her third and final war with Carthage. After 
three years the old enemy was destroyed by the younger Scipio, who formally cursed the 
levelled ruins. Her former territory in north-eastern Tunisia now became the Roman 
province Africa, with Utica as the governor’s residence. Little is heard of it until 122 when C. 
Gracchus attempted a refoundation. His embryonic colonia was abandoned on his death the 
next year although numbers of the settlers retained their land-allotments. Soon afterwards 
the Numidian kingdom entered a crisis. In 112 the most powerful claimant to the contested 
throne, 
-4- 
Jugurtha, was at war with Rome. ‘As soon as war broke out the Lepcitani sent envoys to the 
consul Bestia, then to Rome, requesting friendship and alliance’, Sallust wrote. It was 
granted: Lepcis became a ‘treaty state’, civitas foederata, a friend and ally of the Roman 
people, and steadily provided assistance to successive consuls, Bestia, Albinus and Metellus. 
In 109 an internal conflict broke out: a noble called Hamilcar was plotting a coup, perhaps 
in Jugurtha’s interests. Metellus sent four Ligurian cohorts to Lepcis in response to an 
appeal. After numerous blunders the ‘new man’ C. Marius ended the war in 105 BC. The 
boundaries of the Roman province, defined by the ‘royal ditch’ (fossa regia) traced from the 
north-west to south-east by Scipio in 146, remained unchanged; but Marius settled some 
veterans in northern Numidia. 7     
After the war Lepcis and the other emporia remained free states, allies of Rome. In due 
course they issued their own coinage, that of Lepcis depicting the city’s two guardian 
deities, Mlkqrt, the ‘king of the city’, the main god of Phoenician Tyre, worshipped at Lepcis 
under the name Mlk‘shtrt or Milk‘ashtart, underlining an association with Astarte, or 
‘Ashtaroth the abomination of the Sidonians’, and Shdrp’, or Shadrapa. ‘Only the language 
of the city has been affected by intermarriage with the Numidians’, Sallust wrote in the late


--- PAGE 9 ---
first century BC. ‘The laws and customs are Sidonian [i.e. Punic]: they were able to retain 
them because of their great distance from the king’s authority. There are considerable tracts 
of desert between them and the settled part of Numidia.’ As it happens, an inscription from 
the late second or early first century BC shows that the Punic language was not affected 
either. Only the script was debased, the so-called ‘Neo-Punic’ or cursive script being used 
rather than the lapidary forms found in Punic areas before the fall of Carthage. The stone 
honours ‘the Lord Shdrp’ and Mlks‘htrt, patrons of Lepcis’, to whom a statue was set up by 
‘drb‘l (Adherbal), during the terms of office as špṭm—sufetes—of ‘rš (Arish) and Bdmlqrt 
(Bodmelqart or Bomilcar), in accordance with a decision of ‘the great of Lepcis and all the 
people of Lepcis’ (‘dr‘Lpqy wkl’m’Lpqy, in other words the council and assembly). The 
sufetes, as the title of these magistrates was written in Latin, were the twin annually elected 
magistrates at Carthage and all over the Punic world, equivalent to the ‘Judges’ of their 
Israelite cousins. Melqart, identified with the Greek Heracles and Roman Hercules, and 
Shadrapa, equated with Dionysus or Bacchus, and with the Roman Liber Pater, were to 
remain the guardian deities of Lepcis down to Septimius’ day. The Carthaginian Ba’al 
Hammon, whom the Romans called Saturn, and Tanit, the Roman Juno Caelestis, seem to 
have had a more restricted following than in the more westerly Punic cities. 8     
After the Jugurthine war Lepcis is lost to history for half a century, 
-5- 
avoiding entanglement in the civil wars that wracked Rome in the 80s. But the tide of 
events was soon to sweep her firmly into the Roman orbit. The silence is broken only by 
Cicero’s mention, in 70 BC, of a Roman banker, T. Herennius, in business at Lepcis, and a 
victim of the notorious governor of Sicily, Verres. Neighbouring Cyrenaica, bequeathed to 
Rome by her last Ptolemaic king early in the century, was finally annexed in the 70s. An 
inscription from one of the Greek cities, Arsinoe, mentions the possibility of importing corn 
from Lepcis during a food shortage. Lepcis continued to prosper, although it was olive oil, 
for which the Gebel and even the pre-desert beyond could be exploited, which was her main 
source of wealth. It was probably before the end of the second century that a new city 
centre was laid out, with twin temples of the ancestral gods as its main focus. 9     
The last of the Numidian kings (as it turned out), Juba, resumed the practices of Massinissa 
at this time, seizing ‘property’ and perhaps land from Lepcis. The city complained to the 
Roman senate, which appointed arbitrators: her losses were restored. But in 49 BC, when 
Rome’s greatest civil war began, Juba was again in conflict with Lepcis, and was only 
recalled from Tripolitania by news that Caesar’s supporter Curio had landed with an army in 
Africa. Juba backed the Pompeians and Curio was crushed near Utica. After Pompey’s death 
in Egypt in 48, the Republican forces regrouped in Africa. The redoubtable Cato led a force 
right across the scorching Syrtica to join them, and wintered at Lepcis. Two years later 
retribution followed. Caesar arrived at the beginning of 46: the Pompeians were defeated, 
their vicious ally Juba committed suicide and the bulk of his kingdom was annexed as the 
province ‘Africa Nova’, ‘New Africa’. Lepcis paid dearly for its assistance to Caesar’s 
enemies. The dictator imposed a fine of three million pounds weight of olive oil, presumably 
as an annual payment. To be able to produce such a quantity as a surcharge—over one 
million litres—the Lepcitani must have possessed in the region of a million trees. 10     
Caesar took other, vital steps in Africa. Carthage was once again refounded as a Roman 
colony. This time it worked, and the new city was to become great again, second only to 
Rome in the western Mediterranean. Caesar sent veteran settlers to a number of other 
places in Africa. Augustus’ victory in the renewed civil wars that followed Caesar’s murder


--- PAGE 10 ---
meant further changes. The two provinces were amalgamated and administered by a 
proconsul with a standing army, of which the main force was the legion III Augusta. The 
western part of North Africa became the kingdom of Mauretania, and was given to the 
younger Juba, who had married a daughter of Antony and Cleopatra. Both in Mauretania 
and in the enlarged province Augustus founded further colonies, 
-6- 
mainly for veteran soldiers. A particular region around the old Numidian royal city of Cirta 
(Constantine) had been briefly seized, during the confused years when the Republic was 
collapsing, by the Campanian condottiere Publius Sittius, with a host of mercenary 
followers. He and his men at first retained Cirta as a private empire in northern Numidia, 
but Sittius was dead before Caesar Augustus gained sole power, and this area too, with its 
now strong Italian element, formed part of the province. Lepcis and the other emporia were 
probably left out; but not for long. 11     
-7- 
2 
LEPCIS MAGNA: FROM FREE STATE TO COLONIA 
CAESAR’S MASSIVE FINE DOUBTLESS ACTED as a stimulus to Lepcis to develop its olive 
cultivation further in the Gebel and indeed in the valleys south and east. How long she had 
to go on paying is unknown, but the emporia clearly regained their status as free cities 
during the Triumviral period. Lepcis’ independent coinage continues, and before long the 
image of Caesar Augustus appears on it, as an additional and potent presiding deity. During 
the period from the mid-forties to the mid-twenties large numbers of Italians settled in 
Africa, not merely government-sponsored colonists but people dispossessed from their own 
land. ‘At nos sitientes ibimus Afros’, says an Italian farmer whose land was confiscated, in 
Virgil’s first Eclogue, ‘but we will go off to the thirsty Africans’. Not, however, to Tripolitania
—more likely than not to Sittius’ ‘New Campania’ (with sitientes a punning allusion to the 
founder), in the Cirta region. Nor did Tripolitania receive any official settlers. A few Italians 
may be detected at Lepcis, probably traders or bankers (like Cicero’s Herennius). There is a 
man called Perperna, an Etruscan by his name; and a family of Fulvii: these were Septimius’ 
maternal ancestors. Lepcis, Oea and Sabratha were in a different position to the rest of 
Punic Africa. They had enjoyed virtual independence for a century and a half, had never 
been conquered and had not had to surrender land to settlers from Rome. The Punic 
heritage was thus unusually strong, although the emporia had clearly developed strong links 
with Alexandria, continuing the tradition of trade and contact with Egypt that went back 
long before the great Greek metropolis was founded. Lepcis was going to become a Roman 
city, in the end; but on her own terms. She is generally referred to as ‘Lepcis Magna’, ‘Great 
Lepcis’, to distinguish her from Lepti in Byzacena. The label was apt. 1     
Africa occupied an anomalous position in the new order of Caesar 
-8- 
Augustus. Alone among the proconsular provinces it was to retain a legion, the III Augusta. 
The proconsuls had fighting to do. There had already been three triumphs ‘from Africa’ 
before the settlement of 27 BC which divided the provinces between princeps and senate. In


--- PAGE 11 ---
21 there was another, then, in 19, the last to be celebrated by any Roman other than an 
emperor. The proconsul L. Cornelius Balbus, himself of Punic origin, from Gades, had 
achieved a remarkable feat in the south. As well as campaigning against the Gaetuli, he 
took an army across the Black Mountain (mons Ater) and deep into the oases of the Fezzan, 
as far as Garama, ‘the most famous capital of the Garamantes’, whose name was 
synonymous with the ends of the earth. His expedition had important results on the 
Garamantes themselves. Within a few decades this people across the Sahara was 
constructing stone houses and tombs of Roman type, and using imported Roman pottery. 
Balbus must have imposed a treaty on them, by which peaceful trade would be guaranteed. 
Ivory, gold dust, gems, ostrich feathers—and slaves—were among the items traded, also 
exotic wild beasts. Lepcis and the other emporia must have benefited. 2     
Just over ten years later (8 BC) the first dated inscription in Latin is found. As with most 
public inscriptions at Lepcis for the next century it was bilingual, in Punic and Latin. The text 
is carved on thirty-one sandstone blocks, each half a metre square on the face, placed 
round the precinct wall of the market (macellum). It honours Augustus, with all his titles, 
and the proconsul Crassus Frugi. In the Punic text imperator is rendered mynkd, perhaps a 
Libyan word related to the Tuareg amanukal, ‘paramount chief. Muttun son of Anno was 
sufes (his colleague’s name is missing), Iddibal son of Arish and Bodmelqart son of Annobal 
were priests, flamines, of Caesar Augustus. The work was paid for by Annobal Tapapius 
Rufus, son of Himilcho, flamen, former sufes, and ‘prefect of sacred affairs’. The names are 
typically Punic, with the termination -bal referring to the god Ba‘al. ‘Annobal’ is the name 
more familiar to Romans as ‘Hannibal’ (likewise ‘Anno’ as ‘Hanno’, and ‘Bodmelqart’ as 
‘Bomilcar’, which means ‘in the hands of Melqart’). Annobal had taken steps to adapt his 
names. His family name, the Punic ‘Tabahpi’, was given a Latin-style termination and he 
had taken the additional name Rufus. The flamines of Caesar Augustus, from their position 
in the dedication, were persons of major importance in the town. The worship of the 
emperor was now firmly implanted in the heart of Lepcis. What had presumably been built 
as the temple of Milk‘ashtart or Melqart was now rebuilt as a shrine for ‘Roma et Augustus’. 3     
Annobal Rufus appears on three other monumental inscriptions, lintels in grey limestone, 
from a new quarry, better adapted for elaborate moulding and fine lettering. Eight or nine 
years later Annobal paid for 
-9-


--- PAGE 12 ---
-10- 
additions to the theatre. He bears additional titles, traditional in Punic cities, ‘adorner of his 
country’ and ‘lover of concord’. The theatre already had a statue of Augustus, set up in 3 BC 
to ‘their protector’ (conservatori) by the ‘Fulvii Lepcitani’ along with one of his adopted sons, 
Gaius Caesar. At about this time the remodelling of the Forum was being completed. The 
proconsul Piso’s name, in massive bronze lettering in the pavement, presumably marked 
the dedication of a new small temple alongside those of Liber Pater (Shadrapa) and of Rome 
and Augustus; it was perhaps a new home for Melqart. 4     
Lepcis needed protection. The semi-nomadic peoples of the interior were reacting with 
resentment to Rome’s ever more pervasive presence and the transformation of North 
Africa’s economy. Several proconsuls campaigned in the area. Sulpicius Quirinius was 
successful, but Cornelius Lentulus was killed by the Nasamones. Another Lentulus, Cossus, 
won victories against a series of Gaetulian peoples, including the Musulamii and the Cinithii. 
The civitas Lepcitana marked ‘the liberation of the province Africa in the Gaetulian war 
under the auspices of Imp. Caesar Augustus, pontifex maximus, pater patriae, and the 
generalship of Cossus Lentulus, consul, XVvir, proconsul’, with a dedication to ‘Mars 
Augustus’. 5     
At Rome itself the cult of Augustus reached a new stage when Tiberius dedicated an altar to 
his numen in AD 10. Lepcis became the first ‘free state’ within the Roman world to follow 
suit when another imposing new building, the Chalcidicum, next to the market, was 
consecrated to the ‘Numen imp. Caesaris divi f. Aug.’ by a college of ‘fifteen priests’. The 
Chalcidicum, together with its double porticoes, gate and adjacent structures, was paid for 
by Iddibal Caphada Aemilius, son of Himilis. The experiences of Cossus and his predecessors 
no doubt made it seem imperative to improve communications between Tripolitania and the 
rest of Africa. Late in Augustus’ reign the proconsul Caecina Severus set up a milestone on 
the coast road between Sabratha and Oea, presumably only one stage in what was to


--- PAGE 13 ---
become the imperial Carthage to Alexandria highway. In AD 14 the proconsul Asprenas built 
a road joining Tacape on the coast, just beyond the western end of Tripolitania, with the 
winter-quarters of III Augusta far to the north-west. 6     
Soon another proconsul was to render Lepcis very special favour. As recorded on a stone at 
a major crossroad in the city, ‘by order of Tiberius Caesar Augustus, Lucius Aelius Lamia, 
proconsul, directed (a road) from the town to the south for forty-four miles’. The road ran 
along the-Gebel to the furthest limit of Lepcis’ territory. Lamia is also recorded in the Gebel 
itself, on a Neo-Punic inscription close to Mesphe (Medina Doga), about five miles from the 
terminus of his road, where one of ‘the sons of 
-12- 
Masinkaw’, a native Libyan, paid for ‘a beautiful statue of the Lord Ammon…and the 
sanctuary of his temples and the porticoes, which were built and dedicated in the year of 
“the general in place of the general of the army” (t‘ht rb mhnt) [proconsul] “over the land of 
the Libyans” (shd Lwbym) [of Africa], Lwqy ‘Yly L‘my‘ ’. 7     
Shortly after Lamia’s departure a guerrilla war began that over-shadowed anything that 
Lepcis had seen before, an uprising of the semi-nomadic peoples of the south that spread 
right across from the emporia to the Atlas mountains. Their leader Tacfarinas, a Numidian 
from the Musulamii, won allies among the Moors, the Cinithii and the Garamantes. The first 
proconsul to face the rebels, a man with the resplendent name of Furius Camillus, inflicted 
an initial defeat on Tacfarinas in AD 17, but the war spread and was to last for seven years, 
even though a succession of proconsuls won victory honours. At one stage an extra legion, 
IX Hispana, was despatched from the Danube. For a time it was stationed, under the 
command of a Scipio, ‘where there was a possibility of ravaging the territory of the Lepcitani 
and where there were escape-routes to the Garamantes’, Tacitus wrote. The king of the 
Garamantes had supported Tacfarinas ‘not to the extent of invading with an army but by 
sending light troops, whose strength was exaggerated in view of the distance, and acting as 
a repository for booty and ally in plunder’. The proconsul Dolabella, though deprived of the 
Ninth legion, eventually trapped and killed Tacfarinas far away in the north-west. 
Inscriptions at Oea and Lepcis commemorated his achievement. The Garamantes actually 
sent envoys to Rome to plead for mercy, ‘a rare sight’, Tacitus commented. 8     
During the troubles Lepcis confirmed its loyalty by further embellishment to the temple of 
Rome and Augustus, which became in effect a shrine to the entire Julio-Claudian family. 
Statues were erected in the covered courtyard, not only of Augustus and Roma, but of 
Tiberius and Livia, and of Germanicus and Drusus Caesar and their wives and mothers. The 
inscription in Punic listed their names and recorded that the work was done during the 
sufeteship of Balyaton ben Hanno G […] Saturninus and Bodmelqart ben Bodmelqart 
Tabahpi. When the war ended, the proconsuls took some time to deal with its effects. In the 
late 20s Vibius Marsus was busy defining tribal boundaries at the western limits of 
Tripolitania; but found time to dedicate an arch of Augusta Salutaris at Lepcis. It was as late 
as 35-6 before Rubellius Blandus, husband of Tiberius’ granddaughter, could instruct his 
legate Etrilius Lupercus to arrange ‘the paving of all the streets of Lepcis’, to be paid for 
‘from the revenues on the lands restored to the Lepcitani’ —presumably parts of the Gebel 
and the valleys taken over first by rebels, then perhaps by the army. Two arches were 
-13- 
erected spanning major streets, bearing an inscription that commemorated this action. 9


--- PAGE 14 ---
Whatever the exact status of the emporia, they were clearly now treated as effectively part 
of Roman Africa. Tiberius’ death and the accession of Caligula marked a major change in the 
province. Control of the legion was removed from the proconsul and the legate of III 
Augusta was now a separate source of authority, commander of the ‘army of Africa’. For the 
emporia, it meant that whereas the proconsul was still supreme within their territory, the 
legate policed and guarded the pre-desert hinterland from his base in Numidia. Caligula also 
deposed and killed the Mauretanian king Ptolemy, son of Juba. At the beginning of Claudius’ 
reign his territory was pacified and converted into two provinces. The Roman writ now ran 
uninterrupted from the straits of Gibraltar to Egypt. 10     
Claudius was notoriously generous with grants of Roman citizenship. Some beneficiaries 
took his name, at Lepcis as elsewhere, becoming ‘Ti. Claudius’; but others chose the name 
of the proconsul or legate through whose good offices the boon was obtained. In 43 one of 
the Tapapii, Iddibal son of Mago, dedicated a shrine to the ‘Di Augusti’, the ‘August deities’, 
probably the deified Augustus and his widow Livia, herself deified by her grandson Claudius. 
The little shrine was dedicated by the proconsul Q. Marcius Barea. It can be no coincidence 
that the name of this early Claudian proconsul is well represented at Lepcis: the Marcii of 
this place descend from persons enfranchised through him. Iddibal son of Mago may have 
been one. Other Lepcitani became Romans at this time, the best known being a Stoic 
philosopher, L. Annaeus Cornutus, friend and teacher of the poets Persius and Lucan. 
Cornutus’ first two names point to the patronage of his fellow-Stoic and Lucan’s uncle—
Seneca. Cornutus could have met him much earlier, perhaps at Alexandria. 11     
The proconsul Barea, like others active at Lepcis, is described as the city’s patron. 
Predecessors include the first proconsul recorded there, the aristocratic Crassus Frugi, 
Caninius Gallus, Blandus and his legate Lupercus. Others for whom the evidence is not 
explicit may be postulated, such as Aelius Lamia; and often a son would continue the role, 
prepared to offer support at Rome if Lepcis asked for it. The uniform high rank of Lepcis’ 
patrons is yet another indication of the exceptional influence of the city. 12     
At the very end of Claudius’ reign Pompeius Silvanus, proconsul and patron, dedicated to 
the emperor another piece of largesse. The Forum was paved and provided with a 
colonnaded portico, paid for by G’y ben Hanno in honour of his grandson G’y. The 
grandson’s adoptive brother Ba‘alyaton Qmd’ ben M‘qr supervised the completion of the 
work, as the Neo-Punic version of the bilingual dedication expressed it. The council, 
-14- 
called senatus, and people of Lepcis set up a statue of the grandson, here called Gaius 
Phelyssam, son of Macer, grandson of Gaius Anno; and the adoptive brother is called Balitho 
Commodus, son of Macer. The family display a variety of Latin names, ‘Gaius’, ‘Macer’ and 
‘Commodus’; but are not yet citizens. Still, the family was clearly eminent; Gaius Anno was 
perhaps brother of the sufes in whose year of office the statues had been dedicated in the 
main forum temple. 13     
Early in Nero’s reign, when Silvanus—who served three years—was still proconsul, Lepcis 
achieved an amphitheatre of its own, located beyond the eastern limit of the city, between 
the Alexandria road and the sea. In AD 62 the proconsul Orfitus was at Lepcis, with his 
legate Silius Celer, dedicating to Nero another grandiose new building, a portico by the 
harbour. The work was supervised by a Tapapius, Ithymbal Sabinus, son of Arish, flamen of 
Augustus and ‘curator of public money’. Ithymbal is elsewhere on record, in Punic, 
honouring his aunt Arishut bat Yatonbaal, ‘the builder’. Ithymbal’s grandfather, to judge


--- PAGE 15 ---
from this title, had also played a part in the growth of Lepcis. The building by the harbour 
no doubt represented merely the top dressing for a programme of improvement to the port. 
For a long time Lepcis had relied on a roadstead a few kilometres west at Cape Hermes 
(Homs), where the headland offered protection from the north-east wind. Now the olive oil 
exports could be shipped more conveniently. 14     
A Punic inscription from the 60s records the sufetes Abdmelqart Tabahpi and Arish, and 
lower officials, mahazim, equivalent to the Roman aediles, two pairs of them: one called 
Candidus and Donatus, the other Idnibal ben Hannobal and Hanno ben Arish. It would not 
be long before the Roman names took over, among the élite. Lepcis no doubt watched 
nervously the upheavals which began in 68, with Nero’s fall. Africa, not the centre of the 
struggles, was nonetheless affected. The legate of III Augusta, Clodius Macer, apparently 
bidding for power, raised a new legion and minted his own coins before he was suppressed. 
His successor Valerius Festus studied developments anxiously, as a kinsman of Vitellius but 
seeing Vespasian’s forces on the way to victory. Lepcis will have known both men, recent 
proconsuls—and Vespasian’s wife, now dead, had once been the mistress of a Roman knight 
from Sabratha, T. Statilius Capella. Soon there were more immediate concerns. Confident 
that Lepcis’ powerful patrons could not intervene and that the legion would remain 
elsewhere, Lepcis’ neighbour Oea seized the chance to settle a dispute. ‘It had a trivial 
origin’, Tacitus relates, ‘in thefts of fruit and cattle by peasants, but now they were trying to 
settle them in open warfare.’ (Did the ‘free states’ have their own militia?) ‘Oea, being 
inferior in numbers, had called in the aid of the Garamantes, an invincible tribe, who 
-15- 
were always a fertile source of damage to their neighbours. Thus the people of Lepcis were 
in great straits. Their fields had been wasted far and wide, and they had fled in terror 
behind their walls’ —temporary earth-works, it would seem. Festus, who had just acquired a 
reputation for ruthlessness by eliminating the proconsul, probably welcomed the excuse for 
a campaign. He followed up his suppression of the disturbance with a lightning raid to the 
far south which recalled Balbus’ expedition ninety years before. The Garamantes were 
battered into submission, and gave no more trouble for over a century. 15     
Lepcis had thus come to the attention of the new emperor at the very outset of his reign; 
and Vespasian was interested in Africa. He needed revenue, Africa was rich as he must have 
known well. Nero had confiscated large estates in the ‘old province’, which needed 
organisation; and the taxation yield could be increased. Among other measures he sent in a 
special commissioner in 73, Rutilius Gallicus, as imperial governor (instead of a proconsul). 
Gallicus is attested, with an assistant of high rank, adjusting boundaries, including the old 
‘royal ditch’ marked out in 146 BC. He also confirmed the dividing line between Oea and 
Lepcis, as two stones from the Gebel show: to the benefit of Lepcis, it is clear. The people of 
the city honoured the governor’s wife, Minicia Paetina, with a statue in their home town, 
Turin (and, no doubt, Gallicus himself, though no inscription has survived). It would not be 
surprising if Lepcis struck home her advantage, whether through the good offices of Rutilius 
Gallicus or of another patron, perhaps the son of the Tiberian proconsul Lamia, Plautius 
Silvanus Aelianus, a figure of great eminence under Vespasian, City Prefect at Rome and a 
consul a second time in 74. (The name Plautius was perpetuated at Lepcis.) At all events, at 
the latest by the year 78 Lepcis had become a municipium, a chartered town with the ius 
Latii, the ‘Latin right’. In 77 or 78 the proconsul Paccius Africanus dedicated an arch in 
honour of Vespasian. He and his legate could now be called patronus municipii. The grant 
was fully in accord with Vespasian’s overall policy—he gave the same privilege to the whole 
of Spain. What it meant was that the Roman authorities recognised the Latin nature of a


--- PAGE 16 ---
formerly alien community, civitas peregrina. In particular, the new status automatically 
conferred full Roman citizenship on those annually elected as magistrates. It was normal in 
such cases for the city to give the traditional Latin style of quattuorviri to their chief officers, 
two senior, and two aediles. At Lepcis, although the mahazim became IIIIviri aedilicia 
potestate, the two senior magistrates retained the ancient Punic style of sufetes. It is an 
anomaly, but a sign of Lepcis’ self-confidence and pride: she could have the best of both 
worlds. 16     
The change of status did mean that the élite of Lepcis changed their names. Iddibal, son of 
Balsillec, grandson of Annobal, great-grandson of 
-16- 
Asmun, who paid for the temple of the ‘Great Mother’, Magna Mater, in the Forum in 72, 
was probably to be the last Punic notable to go on record with his Punic names. Within a few 
years the Annobals, Balsillechs, Balithos, the Bodmelqarts, Magos and Ithymbals, disappear 
from public records, to be replaced by Claudii and Flavii, Marcii, Paccii, Cornelii and Plautii. 
Back in 8 BC Annobal Rufus had pointed the way, adding a Latin cognomen to his native 
style, followed by the family of Anno who chose both ‘Macer’ and a praenomen, ‘Gaius’. By 
92, when Ti. Claudius Sestius, son of Ti. Claudius Sestius, in the Quirina tribe (to which new 
citizens were attached between the years 41-96) erected a massive podium and altar in the 
orchestra of the theatre, the transition might seem complete— except that Sestius bears the 
peculiarly Punic titles ‘adorner of his country’, ‘lover of concord’, and the text is given in 
both Latin and Punic. Still, that is the latest recorded public inscription in the old language. 
Punic continues, written sometimes in the Latin alphabet, for which it was ill-suited, as well 
as in the Neo-Punic script, but in the city it recedes into the background. The language was 
still spoken and used by the Lepcitani, above all in the countryside. 17     
If Festus’ expedition had removed the Garamantian peril from Lepcis, it probably revived 
Roman interest in the Sahara too. The elder Pliny, writing a few years later, lists the places 
Balbus had conquered long before, and adds that Festus had discovered a new and shorter 
route ‘by the Head of the Rock’, praeter caput saxi, and that the Garamantes were no 
longer preventing passage by filling up the wells en route with sand. They had indeed been 
brought to a cooperative attitude: a mosaic from Zliten, east of Lepcis, seems to show 
Garamantian prisoners being punished in the Lepcis amphitheatre. Not long after Festus 
another Roman officer, Septimius Flaccus, took a force from Lepcis to the Garamantian 
oases and went on further south ‘for three months’ journey, towards the Ethiopians’ —in 
other words into black Africa. The second century Alexandrian geographer Ptolemy derived 
his information from Marinus of Tyre, with which Lepcis still had links. Marinus may be 
supposed to have taken special interest in this mission, in which men of Lepcis probably 
played a part, and also to have supplied Ptolemy with evidence for a second transsaharan 
venture. This one, evidently not military, was led by ‘Julius Maternus from Lepcis’, who went 
from Garama, accompanied by the Garamantian king, for ‘four months’ journey to the 
south’, reaching ‘Agisymba, where the rhinoceroses congregate’. Ptolemy was sceptical; but 
the emperor Domitian was to display a rhinoceros at Rome for the first time in the early 
90s. Well before that the Colosseum, or Flavian amphitheatre, had been opened by Titus, in 
June 80: nine thousand wild beasts were slaughtered for the delectation of the Roman 
people. Flaccus’ 
-17- 
expedition may have been prompted by orders to obtain choice specimens. 18


--- PAGE 17 ---
Septimius Flaccus has been identified by some with Suellius Flaccus, legate of III Augusta, 
on record as fighting the Nasamones of the Syrtica who had rebelled against Roman tax-
collectors. He also adjudicated a boundary between two tribes on the coast in 87. 
Nonetheless, it seems plausible that a Roman senator called Septimius was active in 
Tripolitania in the early Flavian period, when a boy called Septimius Severus was taken from 
Lepcis by his wealthy father and brought up near Rome. The father must have been one of 
the notables of Lepcis who had acquired Roman citizenship and had taken a Roman 
gentilicium, ‘Septimius’. The HA, in the slightly garbled opening to the life of Septimius, 
assigns him an ancestor called ‘Macer’, and one of his grandfather’s brothers was called 
‘Gaius Septimius’. It is reasonable to detect the emperor’s pre-Roman paternal ancestors in 
the family of Gaius Anno, son of Anno, father of Anno Macer and grandfather of Gaius 
Phelyssam and Balitho Commodus. The first to be enfranchised may have taken the names 
‘Gaius Septimius Macer’. It is conceivable that he had become wealthy in part through the 
transsaharan trade; but the Septimii certainly possessed olive plantations as well. 19     
The Italian estates of the Septimii were near Veii, north of Rome, some seventeen Roman 
miles along the Via Cassia at a place perhaps called Baccanae; at Cures Sabini further 
north-east, close to the Via Salaria; and in Hernican country south-east of Rome, perhaps at 
Anagnia on the Via Latina. The young Septimius Severus was evidently a child when he first 
came to southern Etruria and to Rome to be educated with the sons of the great, in the 80s. 
He lost any trace of an African or Punic accent, was imbued, no doubt, with Greek and Latin 
literature, and completed his education by studying with the great Quintilian, first holder of 
an imperially endowed chair of rhetoric. His fellow-pupils included senators, such as Vitorius 
Marcellus, a ‘new man’ from Teate Marrucinorum on the east side of Italy, but married into 
the by now aristocratic house of the Hosidii. Quintilian was to dedicate his treatise on 
oratory to Marcellus. Another pupil of his was the younger Pliny. Severus could have 
acquired senatorial rank, but was content with the ‘narrow stripe’ of a Roman knight. He 
began to practise as a barrister, wrote verses and had literary friends, among them the poet 
Statius, author of the Thebaid. Statius wrote a poem in 91 or 92 to celebrate the recovery 
from illness of an eminent man, Rutilius Gallicus, by then City Prefect. By the time it was 
published, in the first instalment of Statius’ occasional pieces, the Silvae, Gallicus had died. 
The Septimii may have found Gallicus a helpful patron after their migration to Italy. Gallicus 
had probably met Severus’ father when he was 
-18- 
at Lepcis in the 70s. Statius’ poem recalled, among the other highlights of Gallicus’ career, 
‘the tribute and wondrous obedience of Libya…and such wealth as not even he who gave the 
order dared to expect’. Africa’s wealth, of which the Septimii possessed a share, gave them 
the entrée to Rome’s high society. 20     
The overthrow of Nero had begun in the west and the new dynasty was first proclaimed in 
the east. Civil war accelerated the opening up of the highest positions to provincial Romans, 
already well advanced: the government of Nero had been handled for some years by 
Seneca, from Spain, and Burrus, from southern Gaul. ‘Colonials’ from the west had achieved 
the consulship long before. Now they were joined by men from the east and from Africa, at 
first descendants of Italian settlers, such as Junius Montanus of Alexandria Troas and 
Pactumeius Fronto of Cirta in the Numidian ‘New Campania’. Before the Flavian dynasty 
finished Greek senators with Roman names would be consuls; and by the year 98 a western 
colonial would be emperor. In this society a family from Lepcis could have felt at ease. Still, 
the Punic background was a potential embarrassment. The very label could be held 
pejorative. Rome still remembered Hannibal. Anyone with literary interests who preferred to


--- PAGE 18 ---
forget him might have had difficulty in evading recitals of Silius Italicus’ Punica. The 
distinguished senator was producing the longest epic in the Latin language, devoted to the 
Hannibalic war. Statius himself, in a poem to celebrate a road built by Domitian in 95, starts 
by expressing relief that ‘no Libyan hordes’ were marching on it, that no ‘foreign general’ 
was ‘scouring the Campanian fields in treacherous warfare’, alluding to the proverbial 
Punica fides, ‘bad faith’, of the old enemy. Another poem in the same book of the Silvae, on 
a statuette of Hercules, imagines its former owners, including Hannibal, variously labelled 
the ‘Nasamonian king’ and the ‘Sidonian general’ —and as ‘ruthless, treacherous and 
arrogant’, hated by the god as being ‘drenched in Italian blood’. Not surprisingly, when—in 
the same book—he dedicated an Ode to his friend Septimius Severus, in fifteen four-line 
stanzas, he was careful to make it clear that his friend was different. 21     
No one would imagine that he had been born at Leptis (outside Tripolitania the name was 
almost invariably misspelled): 
tene in remotis Syrtibus avia
Leptis creavit?
Did far away Leptis really bear you, 
in the remote Syrtes? 
No, says Statius, ‘who would not assume sweet Septimius had crawled in 
-19- 
infancy on all Romulus’ hills? But, after all, he had been brought to Italy as a boy and swam 
in Tuscan pools: the language echoes Aeneas’ arrival— from Carthage—with his son Iulus. 
The young Severus ‘grew up among the sons of the senate, but content with the glory of 
the narrow purple’. Then come the striking lines: 
non sermo Poenus, non habitus tibi,
externa non mens: Italus, Italus.
Your speech is not Punic, nor your dress, 
Your mind not foreign: you are Italian, Italian! 
Had his ‘speech been Punic’, which may mean ‘a Punic accent’, Statius’ friend might have 
pronounced his own name as ‘Sheptimiush Sheverush’, it might be guessed. The young man


--- PAGE 19 ---
had become completely assimilated, ‘Romanised’ (to use a modern term). Statius’ poem 
shows the facility with which the process could take place. His fellow poet and contemporary 
Martial (himself from Spain) praised a young British woman, Claudia Rufina, in rather 
similar terms: 
Claudia caeruleis cum sit Rufina Britannis
edita, quam Latiae pectora gentis habet!
quale decus formae! Romanam credere matres
Italides possunt, Atthides esse suam.
Though brought up among the sky-blue Britons, 
Claudia Rufina has the spirit of the Latin race. 
What graceful beauty—the Italian ladies can 
believe she is Roman, the ladies of Athens that she is theirs. 
Martial too may have been a friend of Septimius Severus—he had a poet friend called 
Severus, but that name was very common. Statius had been supported by his friend during 
Domitian’s literary competition at Alba; and he encouraged Severus to write more poetry in 
his country retreat, after his exertions in the courts. 22     
In September 96 Domitian was assassinated. The new emperor Nerva and his heir Trajan, 
adopted in 97 and emperor from January 98, were generally welcomed, especially by 
senators. But poets like Martial and Statius, who had flattered Domitian with sickening 
adulation, may have found the change less advantageous. Martial returned to Spain. Old 
Silius Italicus committed suicide. Statius is not heard of again. The young Severus may 
have abandoned thoughts of a career at the bar or of an official post. He did obtain a minor 
distinction at some stage, being appointed a ‘select judge’ or juryman, iudex selectus, and 
would have served in one of the first three of the five panels, or decuriae, that heard 
-20- 
cases at Rome. Whether or not he decided to return to ‘far off Lepcis’ straightaway, events 
there may have made his return mandatory. The change of ruler had had unwelcome effects 
in some provinces. With the removal of Domitian’s iron control some governors practised 
graft on a colossal scale. The proconsul of Africa, Marius Priscus, perhaps in office in 96-7, 
oppressed his province greedily, not least Lepcis Magna. A member of the town council, 
Flavius Marcianus, bribed him with the enormous sum of 700,000 sesterces to eliminate an 
enemy, who was a Roman knight. The man had been flogged, sentenced to the mines, and 
finally executed by strangulation. In another case which may also have taken place at 
Lepcis a certain Vitellius Honoratus had paid 300,000 for a knight to be exiled and seven of 
the man’s friends to be killed. 23


--- PAGE 20 ---
Priscus had acted at Lepcis through the agency of his legate Hostilius Firminus. He too 
received money from Marcianus, though less than he had hoped for: ‘it was proved from 
Marcianus’ accounts and a speech he had made in the Lepcis council that Firminus had 
helped Priscus with a particularly shameful service, and had bargained with Marcianus to get 
200,000 sesterces. He had in fact been given 10,000, entered in the accounts under the 
heading of “cosmetics”.’ When Priscus’ proconsulship ended action against him commenced. 
‘Many private individuals and one particular city’ —surely Lepcis—preferred charges. The 
case came to the senate, and was prolonged. Priscus was at first accused of minor 
extortion, and pleaded guilty, asking for damages to be assessed by a senate committee. 
Pliny and Tacitus were appointed to represent the Africans. It is from the former’s 
correspondence that the account of the trial derives; Tacitus may have learned details of 
Lepcis’ history at this time, later to be incorporated in his Histories and Annals. The two 
eminent and eloquent prosecuting counsel revealed that Priscus was trying to evade trial on 
more serious charges by a plea of guilty to minor ones. A commission of enquiry, inquisitio, 
was set up to summon witnesses from the province. Priscus was in the meantime convicted 
on the minor charges and deprived of his rank. At least twelve months after the case began 
the main hearing was opened. At the second session, in January 100, Trajan himself 
presided, as consul. It was one of the new emperor’s first appearances at Rome since his 
accession. 24     
Pliny opened with a speech lasting nearly five hours. Salvius Liberalis, defence counsel, 
replied the next day, followed by Tacitus for the prosecution, ‘eloquent, with all the 
solemnity that typifies his style of public speaking’. After this the defence could only appeal 
for leniency. On the third day Priscus was found guilty, but his punishment was merely 
banishment from Rome and Italy and repayment of the bribes; his legate Firminus lost 
some privileges, but not his senatorial rank. The poet 
-21- 
Juvenal recalled the case some years later: the guilty proconsul begins ‘drinking from the 
eighth hour, while you, victorious province, lament’. All the same, Lepcis had once again 
managed to capture the attention of a new dynasty. Shortly after this at least one 
Lepcitane, a man called Fronto, entered the Roman senate. The city’s powerful patrons had 
redressed her grievances and her position was enhanced. A few years later this was 
recognised formally. Lepcis was granted the rank of colonia, taking the titles Ulpia Traiana 
fidelis. All its inhabitants became Roman citizens and its chief magistrates now, at last, shed 
the Punic name sufetes and were entitled duoviri. Lucius Septimius Severus, who had 
already been sufes of the municipium, was given a special post as prefect at the time when 
the grant of civitas, Roman citizenship, was made, and became one of the first two duoviri 
of the new colonia. Lepcis was now in the fullest sense Roman, so it might seem. Another 
feature of the town’s constitution might appear to confirm this: the division of part of the 
population into curiae, ‘wards’, evoking the primeval organisation of the Roman people. In 
fact the curiae, each given a name associated with the imperial family, Ulpia, Traiana, 
Nervia, Plotina, and so on, mask an ancient Punic institution. Punic culture did not disappear 
and the Punic language was still used. Besides, the Roman colonia, with its impressive and 
gleaming array of public buildings, actually looked more like a Greek city than a Roman one. 
At all events, Lepcis in the year 110 erected another arch, in grateful thanks to Trajan. 25     
-22- 
3


--- PAGE 21 ---
LIFE IN ROMAN TRIPOLITANIA 
WHEN LEPCIS BECAME A colonia, Lucius Septimus Severus, its leading man, was doubtless 
already married. His wife’s name and origin are unknown—and he could have married more 
than once. He might have found a wife in Italy; a local heiress is perhaps more probable. 
Nothing is known of his daughter Polla’s date of birth; the son, Geta, old enough to father 
children himself by the year 144 at latest, can hardly have seen the light of day much after 
Hadrian’s accession. Some comment is required on the choice of names for his children by 
the sufes and duumvir. ‘Geta’ is very rare (and originally a slave’s name), but it was borne 
by the son of Vitorius Marcellus. The sufes was surely recalling his days in Italy and 
honouring his old fellow-student. ‘Polla’ is commoner; but the charming Argentaria Polla, 
Lucan’s widow and wife of Pollius Felix, is celebrated—more frequently than Severus himself 
or Marcellus—in the Silvae of Statius. 1     
While Geta grew to manhood Lepcis continued to expand and develop. Magnificent public 
baths were built in the south-east part of the town. The aqueduct, dating to 120, was paid 
for by Q. Servilius Candidus, whose generosity is commemorated, with due honour to the 
emperor Hadrian, on three Latin inscriptions. He had brought in water from the River Cinyps 
and an extension supplied a fountain in the theatre. A stamped tile from the baths shows 
that the Punic element, now less openly displayed, was still present. In the old language, 
but in the Latin alphabet, it records that it was ‘made in the workshops of Rogate (Rogatus) 
the master’ (felioth iadem sy-Rogate ymmanai). Candidus himself, on another public 
inscription, from the temple of Liber Pater, is accorded traditional Punic titles in Latin 
translation: amator patriae, amator civium, amator concordiae. He was probably a 
descendant of the Punic magnate ‘Candidus son of Candidus, grandson of Hanno, great-
grandson of Abdmelqart’. Private and official dedications alike, honouring Hadrian and his 
successor Antoninus Pius, display the zealous loyalty of the Lepcitane notables. A Septimius 
is among them, donating a statue of Cupid to the Chalcidicum, ‘for the welfare of the 
emperor Antoninus 
-23- 
Augustus Pius and his children’. This man, by his full names Gaius Claudius Septimius Aper, 
may be presumed the father of Septimius’ senatorial kinsmen, Aper and Severus, whom the 
HA calls his ‘uncles’, patrui. The two are known from other evidence, P. Septimius Aper as 
consul suffect in 153, C. Septimius Severus consul a few years later. The latter turns out to 
be ‘son of Gaius’ (C.f.), hence not son of Lucius the sufes. Perhaps C. Cl. Septimius Aper 
was a brother of Lucius; his sons would then be cousins, fratres patrueles, of Septimius’ 
father Geta, not uncles of Septimius in the strict sense. 2     
P. Septimius Aper, born at latest c. 110, presumably entered the Roman senate under 
Hadrian. Nothing else is known of him except his consulship: but he is the earliest known 
man of Lepcis to hold the fasces. The career of the other ‘uncle’ is known in detail. After a 
compulsory presenatorial post, but no military tribunate, he moved through the three 
‘qualifying’ republican magistracies: quaestor, tribune of the plebs, praetor. There followed 
the curatorship of an Italian road and the command of a legion in Syria, XVI Flavia at 
Samosata, and, a sign of high favour, two senatorial priesthoods, before he returned to the 
east as governor of Lycia-Pamphylia in the 150s, with the consulship to follow, probably in 
160. 3


--- PAGE 22 ---
In the Antonine era the Roman Africans were beginning to storm the heights, whether 
descended from Italian settlers or enfranchised notables, from Numidia and from the ‘old 
province’ above all. But the Tripolitanians, who had plenty of links with the rest of Africa, 
economic as well as of sentiment and common education (at Carthage in many cases), will 
have benefited too. An early harbinger of the Africans’ rise is the literary man and Roman 
knight, Suetonius Tranquillus, biographer of the Caesars, from Hippo Regius, who popped 
up as Chief Secretary, ab epistulis, of the emperor early in Hadrian’s reign. He did not last 
the course (he was sacked in Britain in the year 122). But one of the two Guard Prefects 
that Hadrian bequeathed to Antoninus Pius was, it seems, another Numidian, M. Petronius 
Mamertinus. This man’s son or nephew, consul in 150, evidently married a Septimia, quite 
possibly from the Lepcis family. (C. Septimius Severus later had links with Numidian 
Thubursicu.) 4     
A kinsman of the Guard Prefect Mamertinus, M. Cornelius Fronto of Cirta, was now at the 
height of his fame, not merely as the leading orator at Rome: he was the tutor and friend of 
Antoninus’ heir, Marcus Aurelius Caesar. Another of the Caesar’s tutors, the grammaticus 
Tuticius Proculus, was from African Sicca, and the doyen of that profession, Fronto’s friend 
Sulpicius Apollinaris, was from Carthage. Fronto’s links with his fellow-countrymen, and the 
wider fellowship of his admirers, pupils and acquaintances from Italy, and the eastern and 
western provinces, formed a powerful nexus. More influential still, it may be argued, was 
another man 
-24- 
from Cirta, Q. Lollius Urbicus. This younger son of a local magnate at Tiddis, a dependency 
of Cirta, had a distinguished military record, culminating in a victory over rebellious north 
Britons in 142 and the re-occupation of southern Scotland. Soon after, probably in 146, 
Urbicus was elevated to the Prefecture of Rome itself, the pinnacle of the senatorial career. 
He was to occupy the post for the rest of his life, until 160. Eminence in literature and in 
war was matched by legal distinction. The greatest jurist of the Antonine era, P. Salvius 
Julianus, was another African senator, his home town being Hadrumetum in Byzacena. 
Hadrian had recognised his outstanding talent in the 130s, commissioning him to 
reformulate the ‘praetor’s edict’. In the year 148, which marked the 900th anniversary of 
Rome’s foundation, Julianus held office as consul ordinarius, a rare honour for a new man. 5     
The ‘old province’ and Numidia were certainly to the fore. But the leading families of Lepcis, 
Oea and Sabratha, with some of their own men already senators, some of their women, no 
doubt, married to other senators, were well placed to push forward. And there were still 
regular opportunities to canvas proconsuls for assistance, when they visited Tripolitania on 
assize. The possibilities are illustrated in the writings of another African, Apuleius, the most 
celebrated Latin author of the age, best known for his novel, the Golden Ass or 
Metamorphoses. In the early 160s, Apuleius settled at Carthage, where he commanded vast 
audiences for public lectures, many on subjects which he preferred to call ‘philosophy’. 
Some surviving extracts are elaborate panegyrics of proconsuls and their kin. One of the 
shorter pieces, to an unknown dignitary, captures the tone well: ‘Out of countless men there 
are but few senators, and of senators few are of noble birth; and of the consulars few are 
good men, and of those good men few are learned.’ 6     
Apuleius was probably born at the beginning of Hadrian’s reign, at Madauros, once a 
Numidian town in the kingdom of Syphax, later part of Massinissa’s realm, but given a 
charter as a colonia under Vespasian, who settled veteran legionaries there. Apuleius could 
call himself, deprecatingly, a ‘semi-Gaetulian, semi-Numidian’, but was doubtless of settler


--- PAGE 23 ---
or mixed stock. His father had been a member of the élite, a duumvir, and had left Apuleius 
and his brother an estate worth 2,000,000 sesterces, enough to make them each 
comfortably qualified for equestrian rank. At an early age Apuleius went to Carthage, some 
150 miles (240 km) from his home, to further his education. His affection for Carthage 
remained immense: ‘Carthage is the revered teacher of our province,’ he said years 
afterwards, ‘Carthage is the divine muse of Africa, Carthage is the foundation of inspiration 
for the Roman World.’ From Carthage he went to Athens, the greatest university in the 
ancient world, and travelled further afield: he happens to mention visiting Samos and 
Phrygian Hierapolis. At Athens he 
-25- 
drank in ‘the imaginative draught of poetry, the clear draught of geometry, the sweet 
draught of music, the austerer draught of dialectic, and the nectar of all philosophy’. There 
he met a student several years younger than himself, Sicinius Pontianus of Oea. 7     
From Athens Apuleius went to Rome, where he gained the entrée to the literary circles of 
the upper classes, including friends of the patrician senator Scipio Orfitus, as he later 
recalled. If, as is generally reckoned, the end of his Metamorphoses contains some 
autobiographical material, he went to Rome shortly after his initiation into the mysteries of 
Isis, became a fervent worshipper at the temple on the Campus Martius, and was initiated 
further. His funds were by now becoming depleted and to support himself he began to 
practise as a rhetorician. He had thus found his vocation. When he returned to Africa his 
talents were greatly in demand. 8     
Apuleius still had an urge to travel, and in winter 156 began a journey by land to 
Alexandria. On his way he stayed at Oea, with his friend Appius Quintianus. He fell ill, and 
was visited by his old fellow-student Sicinius Pontianus, who begged him to prolong his visit, 
adding that he himself would like to accompany Apuleius when he did resume his travels. 
He urged that Apuleius, because of his illness, should postpone the journey until the 
following winter (travel in summer along the baking hot Syrtic coast was out of the 
question). Further, he should move from the house of Appii to Pontianus’ own, overlooking 
the sea. 9     
Pontianus’ household consisted of his widowed mother Aemilia Pudentilla, and a younger 
brother, Pudens—a surly youth, who unlike Pontianus had had no higher education. He was 
later alleged to speak virtually no Latin: his normal language was Punic, and he had been 
taught a little Greek by his mother. Even if this description is overdrawn, it must indicate a 
state of affairs that was possible, even in a family of equestrian rank, with great estates. 
Pudens was only a few years older than Septimius from neighbouring Lepcis, who was said 
to have spoken fluent Punic. Apuleius quickly made himself at home. As his health gradually 
improved, his friends persuaded him to give a public lecture. It took place in the town hall, 
basilica, of Oea, which was packed out. The lecture was a rousing success—the audience 
shouted their approval (calls of insigniter!) and there were cries that Apuleius should stay 
and become a citizen of Oea. Afterwards, Pontianus put a proposition to Apuleius. ‘This 
universal enthusiasm is a sign from heaven’, he said; and then revealed that he wanted 
Apuleius to marry his mother Pudentilla. ‘You are the only friend I can rely on with complete 
trust and confidence.’ His mother had many suitors, although just a plain widow with 
children. If Apuleius refused, and wanted to reserve himself for a more attractive and 
wealthier match, 
-26-


--- PAGE 24 ---
he, Pontianus, would regard it as unworthy of a philosopher and a friend. Pudentilla may not 
have been ‘wealthy’, but as Pontianus himself had pointed out, there were several men 
eager to marry her—and she had an estate worth 4,000,000 sesterces. 10     
After the death of her husband Sicinius Amicus some fourteen years before, her father-in-
law, who became the guardian of Pontianus and Pudens, was eager that she should marry 
another of his sons, Sicinius Clarus. Pudentilla was unwilling, but the old man threatened 
that if she married anyone else he would exclude his grandsons from their father’s share of 
his property. Pudentilla, more or less forced to comply, was betrothed to Clarus, but 
managed to defer the marriage. It had still not taken place when the old man died, leaving 
Pontianus and Pudens as his heirs. Pudentilla was ill for some time, and was strongly urged 
to marry again for her health’s sake before her elder son left home for good. He was by this 
time studying abroad. She refused to marry Clarus despite pressure from her late husband’s 
other brother Aemilianus. But she was determined on a marriage of some kind, to protect 
herself, and so informed Pontianus, who by now had gone from Athens to Rome. He 
returned post-haste, determined to make sure that whoever became his stepfather, his own 
and his brother’s inheritance would not be placed in jeopardy. It was at this juncture that 
Apuleius appeared. 11     
Apuleius had already spent a year or so with the Sicinii by the time that he became 
personally involved in the question of Pudentilla’s remarriage. He had got to know her well, 
but was reluctant to tie himself down. Still, he soon found—as he himself put it—that he 
was beginning to love Pudentilla, and agreed. Pontianus had no difficulty in getting his 
mother’s consent, and was all for arranging the ceremony at once. Apuleius and Pudentilla 
persuaded him that they should wait until Pontianus himself took a wife and Pudens 
assumed the toga of manhood. Meanwhile Pontianus was beginning to study oratory with 
Apuleius, who continued to give public lectures. One was attended by the proconsul 
Lollianus Avitus, who was on a tour of duty in Tripolitania (during which he supervised 
repairs to the fountain Candidus had given to the theatre at Lepcis). Apuleius, who had 
probably met Avitus at Rome, recommended his future stepson to the proconsul. Avitus is 
known from another source as an influential patron. A year or two later he did his best to 
secure a commission as centurion for a disillusioned grammaticus, Helvius Pertinax. 12     
Then came Pontianus’ marriage and Pudens’ entry into manly status, public occasions 
because of the high position of the Sicinii at Oea— requiring distribution of largesse to the 
tune of 50,000 sesterces. Pontianus married the daughter of one Herennius Rufinus, whose 
character Apuleius 
-27- 
later presented in the blackest terms. Pontianus’ attitude and behaviour towards Apuleius 
suddenly changed. He now tried to prevent his mother from remarrying, evidently 
influenced by Rufinus. Pontianus told his mother that Apuleius practised the black arts and 
had bewitched her into falling in love with him. Pudentilla wrote to him—in Greek—
attempting to calm him down: 
Since I determined to marry, for reasons that I explained to you, you yourself persuaded 
me to choose Apuleius as a husband in preference to all others, because you admired him 
and were eager that he should become a member of our family. But now that certain ill-
disposed persons have accused us, and are persuading you against us, suddenly ‘Apuleius is 
a magician’, and I have been ‘bewitched by him and love him’. Come to me then, while I am 
‘still in my senses’.


--- PAGE 25 ---
Pontianus and his wife, and Pudens, then returned to their mother’s house, and stayed 
there for about two months. 13     
The marriage of Apuleius and Pudentilla took place, quietly, at one of her villas outside Oea, 
to escape the distribution of presents to the townspeople that had already been necessary 
when Pontianus married. But the ill-feeling was revived. It was felt by the family that 
Pontianus and Pudens would now lose their inheritance to the usurping stepfather. Apuleius 
persuaded Pudentilla to make over a substantial part of her late husband’s property to her 
sons, in the shape of farms—to be valued at a low assessment—and, from her personal 
property, lands, a large, well-appointed house, a great quantity of wheat, barley, wine and 
oil, a large number of cattle and 400 slaves. This graphically illustrates the substantial 
nature of the family’s possessions. Pudentilla retained a substantial number of slaves over 
and above the 400 she gave her sons. She also had fifteen in her fine town house 
overlooking the sea. It emerges, too, that the estate included property almost 100 Roman 
miles from Oea. This must have been in the Gebel, south of Thenadassa. Apuleius received 
from his bride another, modest property worth 50,000 sesterces (the same sum that had 
been lavished on the people of Oea not long before). The wealth of the Sicinii and Aemilii of 
Oea was certainly matched, indeed exceeded, by the Septimii and their kin of Lepcis. Lepcis 
unquestionably possessed the greater share of the best olive growing lands in the Gebel, 
those of the Tarhuna and Msellata sectors. The élite of Lepcis had most of that relatively 
small portion of the Gebel plateau where the average annual rainfall reaches twelve inches 
(300 mm). Further to the south-west, past the terminal point of the forty-four mile road 
from Lepcis constructed long before by the proconsul Lamia, the levels decline markedly. 
The area where the landowners of Oea and Sabratha had their olive groves will 
-28- 
have had a lower yield and smaller profits than were enjoyed by their neighbours at Lepcis. 
Tripolitania was an unusual region, set apart from the rest of the province of Africa, not only 
geographically and in climate, but in its history. Nearly two centuries of virtual 
independence after the second Punic war had allowed them to consolidate their hold on very 
large territories. That of Lepcis must have comprised at least 2000 square miles (well over 
5000 square km). In the old province and its extension to the west, only Carthage and Cirta 
exceeded this. Lepcis, city and territory, not only outdid Oea and Sabratha. She was much 
richer than most other cities in Africa. 14     
Pudentilla’s generous provision for her sons won round public opinion at Oea. Pontianus’ 
father-in-law Rufinus was now criticised for setting son against mother. Pontianus and 
Pudens came to ask for forgiveness. Pontianus asked Apuleius to explain to Lollianus Avitus, 
to whom he had just written with an account of Pontianus’ behaviour, asking him to ignore 
the earlier recommendation. Apuleius gave Pontianus another letter, to take to Carthage in 
person. Avitus was awaiting the arrival of his successor, Claudius Maximus. The 
reconcilation probably took place in early spring of 158. Pontianus set off at once, was 
favourably received, and given a reply to take back to Apuleius. 15     
But on his homeward journey Pontianus, who had been sending ahead letters written in the 
warmest tones, fell ill, and died soon after his arrival at Oea. In his will he left everything to 
his mother and brother. The young widow, Rufinus’ daughter, got nothing except some linen 
worth 800 sesterces. Rufinus would clearly be incensed. His aim had presumably been to lay 
his hands on the estate of the Sicinii through the marriage connection. He now took steps to 
entice Pudens away from Apuleius, not a difficult task. Rufinus’ daughter exerted her 
charms again, and Pudens once more left his mother’s house, moving to that of his uncle


--- PAGE 26 ---
Sicinius Aemilianus. Aemilianus must have been watching the turn of events with impotent 
rage. He was not the man to give in without a fight—he had previously contested the will of 
his own uncle, and the case had reached the court of the Prefect of Rome, Lollius Urbicus, 
who decided against him. He had given an unfortunate exhibition of himself—his violent 
insistence, in spite of the Prefect’s verdict, that the will was a forgery, put him in danger of 
punishment for calumnia. Pudens, away from his mother’s guidance, gave up school, 
spending his time drinking and going to the gladiatorial training establishment. Pudentilla 
fell ill again under the strain, and wanted to disinherit Pudens. But Apuleius dissuaded her. 16     
The change of proconsul in the spring of 158 perhaps made Apuleius’ enemies think that 
they had a better chance than with Avitus, to whom Apuleius was known. Claudius 
Maximus, like his predecessor, came to 
-29- 
Tripolitania. He held assizes at Sabratha, probably in the autumn of 158. Apuleius attended, 
to appear on behalf of his wife in a case brought against her by the Granii brothers. Sicinius 
Aemilianus, appearing as a witness for the Granii, made a staggering assertion against 
Apuleius, accusing him of practising black magic to gain the hand of Pudentilla—and of 
murdering Pontianus. His enemies saw that the proconsul viewed the charge with some 
scepticism, and decided to modify it. Four or five days later Apuleius was formally indicted 
on lesser charges: the principal one was that he practised the black arts (which could be 
treated as a capital offence); further, that he was a dandy and a debauchee who had 
married an elderly woman for her money. The charges were filed in the name of Sicinius 
Pudens, with his uncle Aemilianus merely listed as his ‘representative’. An advocate, 
Tannonius Pudens, was engaged to present their case. Apuleius made his own defence, and 
the speech that he gave, no doubt considerably rewritten, survives as the Apologia—the 
source of virtually all our information about the affair. 17     
Clearly Apuleius goes out of his way to blacken his opponents. But the speech is an 
authentic record from a trial that actually took place. Apuleius may have been a novelist, 
among his other accomplishments, but he did not invent the characters in the trial at 
Sabratha. The names of most of the persons involved can be matched on contemporary 
inscriptions from Tripolitania. For an account of provincial life ‘with the lid off’, the only rival 
to the Apologia is Cicero’s pro Cluentio, even if Apuleius’ enemies appear relatively harmless 
compared with Cluentius’ murderous persecutor Oppianicus. The speech casts vivid light on 
life in Antonine Tripolitania. Its value as a commentary on the agrarian economy has 
already been indicated. It would be a waste not to quote a little more. There can be no 
doubt that the Septimii of Lepcis would hear about Apuleius. Some of them perhaps 
attended his lectures at Oea, and conceivably even attended the trial. It would have been 
desirable to visit Sabratha when the proconsul was in residence. Apuleius refers to ‘the vast 
multitude, which has flocked together from every quarter to hear this case’. Even the young 
Septimius himself, as a thirteen-year-old, may have been there. 18     
Among the evidence produced by the prosecution, who had seized on every scrap or detail 
that could discredit Apuleius, were poems, some alleged to be obscene. Another was to a 
certain Calpurnianus describing a special toothpowder Apuleius had prepared at the latter’s 
request. The prosecution tried to put on this the connotation of mixing magic potions. Later, 
they produced the letter from Pudentilla to Pontianus, but quoted only the end of it, out of 
context: ‘Apuleius is a magician and I have been bewitched by him and love him. Come to


--- PAGE 27 ---
me then while I am still in my senses.’ The accusation of black magic took various forms. 
Apuleius 
-30- 
mocked his accusers—if he were really a magician, it was reckless to attack him, for they 
would be in danger of supernatural reprisals. He was said to have used a rare fish for 
magical purposes, to have hypnotised a young slave to make him prophesy, to have kept 
‘something mysterious’ wrapped up in linen among the household goods at Pontianus’ 
house, to have performed a nocturnal ceremony at someone else’s house, and to have had 
a magic image made. Apuleius answered the charges one by one, with evident relish. The 
fish was dissected for the purpose of scientific research. The slave was a sufferer from 
epilepsy. The objects covered with a cloth were connected with the Greek mystery-cult into 
which he had been initiated, and he appealed to fellow-initiates in court for conformation of 
the necessity to remain silent about their nature. As for the ‘nocturnal ceremonies’, that was 
a pure invention, and the ‘image’, allegedly of a skeleton, was a statuette of Mercury, made 
for him quite openly by ‘the craftsman Cornelius Saturninus, a man whose skill is famous 
among the townspeople and whose character is above reproach’. 19     
On the two latter charges Apuleius may well have been disingenuous. The ‘nocturnal rites’ 
were supposedly performed with his friend Appius Quintianus at the house of Junius 
Crassus, which Quintianus was renting during Crassus’ absence at Alexandria. Crassus did 
not appear and the prosecution produced written testimony. Apuleius simply denies the 
charge and discredits Crassus as a glutton and drunkard who had been bribed to invent the 
whole story. ‘Why is Crassus not in court? I myself saw him here at Sabratha yesterday, 
Aemilianus, belching in your face… I tell you that Crassus has long since been snoring in a 
drunken stupor, and has taken a second bath—or is now sweating out his drunkenness at 
the baths to be ready for a second binge after supper.’ Or perhaps, he suggested, 
Aemilianus simply thought that the appearance of his witness, ‘a young man with his face 
stripped of the beard and hair that ought to adorn it, his eyes heavy with wine, his eyelids 
swollen, his vacant grin, his slobbering lips, harsh voice, trembling hands, his breath 
reeking of the cookshop’, would weaken the credibility of his sworn evidence. As for the 
‘image’, Apuleius sidesteps the charge, giving details of a statuette of Mercury, making it 
obvious that it in no way resembles a skeleton and giving a detailed account of when and 
how it was made for him—but does not state unambiguously that the Mercury was the 
‘image’ described by his accusers. 20     
After dealing with the accusations of magic he turns at last to the real issue, his marriage 
with Pudentilla. On specific questions he shows that the prosecution have concocted the 
evidence, as with Pudentilla’s letter. Again, they had tried to prove that she was nearly 
sixty, whereas Apuleius demonstrated that she was twenty years younger than that. Having 
-31- 
attacked Aemilianus and Crassus, he turned the full force of his invective on Rufinus, 
accusing him of being the prime mover in the conspiracy against him. ‘In his boyhood 
before he became so hideously bald, he readily submitted to pederasts in every 
unspeakable way; as a young man he was a stage dancer…except for his immorality he is 
said to have possessed none of the qualities of an actor.’ Now that he is older, ‘his house is 
a home for pimps and the whole household is contaminated: his own character is 
disgusting, his wife is a prostitute, his sons are like their parents…. His wife was getting old 
and worn out and refused to go on supporting the whole family by her own actions’ —so the


--- PAGE 28 ---
daughter was then set to work, and seduced the affections of young Pontianus. Rufinus was 
also charged with ‘consulting Chaldaean astrologers’ —something that Septimius is said to 
have done not many years later. 21     
Apuleius’ portrayal of Sicinius Aemilianus was couched in rather different terms. He mocks 
his poverty—he had not long before owned no more than a tiny plot of land at Zaratha (far 
to the west, along the Tripolitanian coast), which he cultivated without any slave labour. He 
derides the man’s show of austerity and his boorish disapproval of erotic verse. In a long 
passage he points out that Aemilianus has ample scope for criticising him: ‘You have the 
advantage of one who, himself shrouded in darkness, surveys another who chances to have 
taken his stand in the full light of the day.’ Defending himself on the charge of ‘the objects 
wrapped in linen’, Apuleius contrasts his own piety with the total lack of interest in religion 
displayed by Aemilianus, who thinks it: 
a good joke to mock at things divine. For I learn from certain men of Oea who know him, 
that to this day he has never prayed to any god or frequented any temple. And if he 
happens to pass any shrine, he regards it as a crime to raise his hand to his lips in token of 
reverence. He has never given first fruits of crops or vines or flocks to any of the gods of 
the farmer, who feed him and clothe him; his farm holds no shrine, no holy place, nor 
grove. But why do I speak of groves or shrines? Those who have been on his property say 
they have never seen one stone where an offering of oil has been made, one bough where 
wreaths have been hung. 
The combination of an austere character with unmistakable lack of traditional pagan piety 
hint that Aemilianus was being subtly labelled a Christian. Apuleius actually uses the word 
‘lucifugus’, ‘shunning the light of day’ to characterise Aemilianus. The term reappears in 
Minucius Felix’s Octavius a few generations later describing the Christians. Apuleius also 
compares his opponent to Thyestes. This was a current insult applied to Christians: the 
great Cornelius Fronto, whose speeches Apuleius must 
-32- 
have known, is quoted by Minucius, accusing Christians of holding ‘Thyestean banquets’. It 
is unnecessary to believe that Aemilianus was really a Christian. Apuleius’ hints, which the 
proconsul and others in the Sabratha court-house would readily follow, would be enough. It 
was part of Apuleius’ attempts to establish the respectability of his own religious practice by 
discrediting the opposition. 22     
Throughout his defence Apuleius played on his philosophical and literary prowess, to win the 
respect of the proconsul. Claudius Maximus was a personal friend of Aurelius Caesar, and 
one of his mentors in philosophy. Apuleius claims him as a fellow-authority on Plato and 
Aristotle, and praises his patience in listening to the long-winded prosecution, his acuteness 
in interrogating witnesses. A trump card was the letter to himself from Maximus’ 
predecessor Lollianus Avitus, which he read out in court. ‘What witness to my character 
more worthy of all confidence? What more eloquent advocate? Many eloquent men who 
bore the Roman name I have known and studied in my life, but never did I admire any as 
much as him.’ The effect of this letter was manifest: ‘I see, Maximus, with what pleasure 
you hear those characteristics described, which you recognise as distinguishing your friend 
Avitus.’ There is no doubt that the defence succeeded. Not long after, Apuleius was at 
Carthage, highly esteemed by the city and the proconsuls; and he was to be chosen as ‘high 
priest of the province’, chairman of the provincial council.


--- PAGE 29 ---
If excuse were needed for introducing the story of Apuleius at Oea into a biography of 
Septimius Severus, it can only be repeated that for the thirteen-year-old boy the trial must 
have represented one of the most striking events of his life. Connections between the three 
cities of Tripolitania were close. It may be that the Granii, whose lawsuit with Pudentilla 
provided the opportunity for the attack on Apuleius, were from Lepcis Magna. Sicinius 
Pudens, that unprepossessing youth who was Septimius’ near-contemporary, may be the 
same Pudens who half a century later composed a curious inscription in honour of Septimius 
as emperor, in gratitude for the advancement of his son, no doubt the senator Q. Sicinius 
Clarus Pontianus, governor of Thrace in 202. It would be curious—though there is no proof—
if the Septimii, from whose ranks the lawyer friend of Statius had come, failed to take note 
of this cause célèbre, worthy indeed of Africa, ‘the nurse of pleaders’, nutricula 
causidicorum. Septimius certainly would have the chance of hearing Apuleius at Carthage 
ten years later, and was then to plead his own case in court also, although in an altogether 
less exciting and brilliant affair. 23     
Few details are recorded of the boyhood of Septimius. It is said that his favourite game was 
‘judges’, and that he himself would make his 
-33- 
playmates act the part of lictors, carrying the bundles of rods and axes in front of him, while 
he took the role of the Roman magistrate. Of course his schooling is referred to—prowess in 
both Latin and Greek is mentioned in the HA. Another late source speaks of his fluency in 
Punic. One may accept the judgment of his contemporary Cassius Dio, who recalled that 
Septimius had been eager for more education than he actually got. At seventeen, in 162, he 
gave a speech, or declamation, in public, no doubt in his home town. This marked the end 
of his formal schooling. His brother Geta had probably already left Lepcis for the start of an 
official career. After serving as decemvir stlitibus iudicandis, one of the posts in the 
vigintivirate, he gained a commission as the senatorial tribune of the legion II Augusta in 
Britain. There was warfare in Britain at this time, and the governor, Sex. Calpurnius 
Agricola, very probably himself from Africa, may have been persuaded by some mutual 
acquaintance to give Geta the appointment. 24     
Much of the empire was indeed in a state of ferment. Antoninus Pius had died on 7 March 
161, and his two adopted sons succeeded him jointly as M. Aurelius Antoninus and L. 
Aurelius Verus. The omens were good, but disaster loomed: the long Antonine peace was 
shattered on the eastern frontiers, the northern barbarians were threatening, there was a 
war in Britain. But Africa was still prosperous and tranquil, and these troubles may have 
seemed very remote to a young man with his way in the world to make. Soon after his 
formal speech at Lepcis, Septimius set out for Rome, ‘to study’. 25     
It is far from simple to assess the influence of his Lepcitane background. In many respects 
he would be a typical representative of the provincial aristocracy, a member of one of the 
leading families in one of the principal towns of a wealthy province. Lepcis Magna had long 
had a thoroughly Roman outward appearance, a theatre for more than 150 years, an 
amphitheatre for more than a century. In the very year that Septimius left for Rome, it 
acquired its own Circus, a large and imposing structure beyond the eastern end of the city, 
close to the shore, some fifteen minutes walk away. There may have been some sort of 
chariot racing stadium there earlier, but the new Circus was a remarkable affair. It was 
integrated with the amphitheatre, alongside, into a single architectural complex. Its 
estimated seating capacity, over 20,000, gives a useful indication of Lepcis’ total population
—more than twice that figure. Lepcis now had all the trappings of a great Roman city. To be


--- PAGE 30 ---
sure, the old Punic gods, Melqart and Shadrapa, joint patrons of Lepcis, had long been 
labelled ‘Hercules’ and ‘Liber’. As Apuleius’ speech would suggest, the Lepcitanes, like all 
Africans, were markedly superstitious, addicted to the science of the stars. The dazzling 
clarity of the North African night sky might well have 
-34- 
inspired faith in astrology. Apuleius indeed accused Herennius Rufinus of consulting 
‘Chaldaeans’. The streets of Lepcis were liberally adorned with phallic symbols—not a sign of 
excessive sexual indulgence: it was to ward off the evil eye. There was a wide variety of 
deities. Septimius, later known as a devotee of Sarapis, the new version of an Egyptian god 
devised by the Ptolemies, may have first encountered him in the temple by the port at 
Lepcis. 26     
Septimius’ grandfather had become completely Italianised— ‘non sermo Poenus…Italus, 
Italus’, Statius had told him; and he was even a Latin poet. But he had been taken to Italy 
as an infant. Septimius was brought up in Lepcis, surrounded by monuments which still bore 
the old Punic script; and the language was still spoken and written in his own day, if no 
longer used on public buildings. He would have needed to speak the old language, certainly 
when out in the hinterland, on the family estates; no doubt he could write in it too. But he 
had been educated in Latin and Greek, like Sicinius Pontianus or Apuleius. An anonymous 
Latin writer, the author of the Epitome de Caesaribus, says that he was ‘adequately trained 
in Latin literature, a polished speaker of Greek, more fluent in Punic eloquence’, Latinis 
litteris sufficienter instructus, Graecis sermonibus eruditus, Punica eloquentia promptior—
adding, to explain the last comment, ‘because he was born at Leptis in the province Africa’. 
The source of these remarks was probably Marius Maximus, Septimius’ younger 
contemporary and supporter, later the biographer of the Caesars—and himself, it seems 
clear, from Africa. 27     
The HA says that his voice was tuneful, but that ‘he retained a trace of an African accent 
into old age’. The statement may be a guess. But it is least plausible: a man from 
Tripolitania would speak a Latin that was affected by the rhythms and accents of the Punic 
and Libyan languages still in regular use there. It was possible, no doubt, for an African to 
achieve perfect ‘Roman’ diction: Apuleius, in spite of ironic remarks about his ‘Numidian-
Gaetulian’ origins, knew that his sophisticated hearers at Carthage would not forgive him a 
‘single syllable of barbarous pronunciation’. Occasional mentions in later writers provide 
some idea of what this African accent was. The Africans dropped their aitches and 
mispronounced the letter L. They tended to lengthen short syllables at the beginning of 
words, and made a whistling sound over certain letters. Above all, they had difficulty in 
adapting sibilants to the restricted sounds of Latin. There is a chance that Septimius 
pronounced his own names in a manner resembling ‘Sheptimiush Sheverush’. His sister 
Octavilla was later supposed to have been scarcely able to speak Latin. But there is no 
doubt that Septimius himself, accent or not, was completely fluent. The ‘African accent’ was 
a provincial Roman accent, not a foreign accent. 28     
-35- 
The muddled Antiochene chronicler John Malalas, four centuries later, says that Septimius 
was dark-skinned. There is not much chance of verifying this statement now (although one 
colour portrait has survived). Malalas also says that he had a long nose, which is false: 
portraits show it was short, slightly turned-up. His hair seems to have been naturally curly. 
Later he would grow a beard, as was still the fashion; not as long as some wore it. He was a


--- PAGE 31 ---
small man, but powerful and energetic. The portraits give an idea of this energy: the eyes 
look keen and searching; but sometimes also he appears brooding and abstracted. 29     
-36- 
4 
THE BROAD STRIPE 
ROME IN THE EARLY 160s must have had an atmosphere of urgency. The long calm ended 
when the dying emperor breathed the watchword to the officer of the guard: ‘Equanimity’. 
In his last moments Pius ‘had spoken only of the foreign kings that angered him’. His 
adopted sons had scarcely had time to grasp the reins before those kings gave real cause 
for anger: they provoked a frontier incident on the upper Euphrates. It was blown up into a 
major war by the rash response of the governor of Cappadocia, Sedatius Severianus. He 
found himself trapped with inadequate forces. A legion was wiped out, and Severianus 
committed suicide. The governor of Syria, Attidius Cornelianus, had the clear duty of 
preserving calm and maintaining Roman defences. But he was defeated by a Parthian force, 
and put to flight. The Syrian legions were apparently in a poor state. C. Septimius Severus, 
who had commanded one a few years before, must have had a keen personal interest in the 
course of events. His brother Septimius Aper may have been disturbed more than most by 
what had happened: Sedatius Severianus had been his colleague in the consulship in the 
summer of 153. 1     
Marcus had to take rapid action on a variety of fronts. His brother Verus was to go to the 
east. In late 162 he arrived in Asia Minor after a somewhat leisurely journey. One of the 
outstanding generals of the day, Statius Priscus, had been appointed to take over 
Cappadocia and the war in Armenia. He had just been sent to govern Britain, where the 
situation was also disturbed, and had to be replaced there. The man chosen was Calpurnius 
Agricola. At the same time one of Marcus’ closest friends, Aufidius Victorinus, son-in-law of 
his former tutor Fronto, was made governor of Upper Germany, to cope with an invasion by 
the Chatti. These were only part of a whole series of transfers, promotions and new 
appointments that were being put through when Septimius arrived in Rome. A change of 
emperor might in any case have brought some such measures in its train, but Marcus had 
long been sharing Pius’ power, so continuity in commands would have been perfectly 
possible. As it was, the crisis made drastic changes necessary. 2     
Men from Africa soon came to the fore. Two compatriots of Fronto are 
-37- 
found playing an active role in the east. Geminius Marcianus of Cirta, commanding X 
Gemina at Vindobona (Vienna) was directed to take reinforcements from the Danube. 
Antistius Adventus of Thibilis, already in the east in command of VI Ferrata in Palestine, 
took over the Aquincum (Budapest) legion II Adiutrix when it arrived at the front. The new 
governor of Britain, Calpurnius Agricola, was probably also from Numidia. But the wars 
which were to occupy the entire reign of Marcus saw men from virtually every province in 
the empire, as well as Italians, some of lowly origin, taking a prominent role. Statius 
Priscus, who won the first Roman victories in the east, and Pontius Laelianus, who seems to 
have acted as chief of staff to Verus at the beginning the the war, were probably both 
natives of Italy. Avidius Cassius, who won the final victories in the east, was Syrian, likewise


--- PAGE 32 ---
Claudius Pompeianus, who played a leading role in the north. A general who played a 
distinguished role on both Euphrates and Danube, Claudius Fronto, came from proconsular 
Asia. Two men from western provinces prominent in high commands were Martius Verus 
and Julius Verus, from Gaul and Dalmatia respectively. One of the Praetorian Prefects, 
Macrinius Vindex, and his son, who held high positions as a senator, were from the north-
west, perhaps from Cologne, or even Colchester. Valerius Maximianus, who had a meteoric 
military career, was Pannonian. 3     
When the imperial dynasty was itself provincial in origin, and so firmly entrenched, this was 
in no way surprising. Trajan and Hadrian sprang from colonial families that had been settled 
in Spain for hundreds of years. Trajan’s wife Plotina came from Nemausus (Nîmes) in Gaul, 
the home of Antoninus’ ancestors. Marcus himself, nephew by marriage of Pius, and thus 
linked with the Gallic provincial aristocracy, was from another Spanish colonial family, 
although his grandfather had married into the most blue-blooded Italian nobility. Leading 
men from Africa, as has been seen, had begun to rise to prominence even before Trajan’s 
accession, and Trajan and Hadrian played a large part in promoting the wealthy from the 
Greek-speaking provinces to positions of power and influence. The long and peaceful reign 
of Pius had allowed the rise of the provincials to proceed gently and unobtrusively. When it 
ended, and the Antonine peace suddenly broke up, it was natural that men from all over the 
empire should take a leading part in its defence. Some were of Italian ancestry, others, 
such as Avidius Cassius and Claudius Pompeianus, descendants of men who had received 
the Roman franchise in the provinces. 4     
Thus it would be mistaken to view the arrival of the young Septimius at Rome, seeking 
senatorial rank, as anything but normal. On the contrary, with two close kinsmen who had 
already served as consul, and an elder brother already started on a senatorial career, it 
would have been 
-38- 
strange if he had opted out. The broad purple stripe of senatorial rank, which, according to 
Statius, his grandfather could have had for the asking, was granted him by Marcus at the 
request of ‘his kinsman Septimius Severus’, that is, his ‘uncle’ Gaius, consul not long before. 5     
Septimius gained thereby no guarantee of a glittering career. The emperor had only one 
criterion in making appointments, merit. There is no sign that Septimius made his mark at 
the beginning of his career. He could not indeed enter the senate, as quaestor, until he had 
passed his twenty-fourth birthday, in April 169. One might have expected that he would 
obtain a commission as tribune with a legion. At latest by the summer of 164, when he 
reached his twentieth year, he may have hoped for such a post, may have canvassed by 
letter or through intermediaries. As it happens, his kinsman was governor of one of the 
German provinces in the early 160s and might have been expected to offer Septimius a 
commission. But Lower Germany, which was probably the province in question, had only 
one legion at this time, XXX Ulpia. The other, I Minervia, was in the east. In any case, if 
Septimius was vigintivir in 164, his kinsman may have almost completed his German 
command before Septimius was available. Meanwhile, Septimius’ slightly older 
contemporary from Lepcis, Silius Plautius Haterianus, was serving in the Parthian war, 
probably under Antistius Adventus, and was to earn military decorations. 6     
However this may be, Septimius ‘omitted the military tribunate’, in the laconic phrase of the 
HA, derived ultimately perhaps from his autobiography. His brother Geta did obtain a


--- PAGE 33 ---
tribunate, with II Augusta in Britain. It was based at Isca (Caerleon), but in the 160s, when 
Geta was there, it may have operated for some time in the north of the province. It seems 
likelier, although there is no proof, that Geta was the elder of the two brothers. In that 
case, he was probably in Britain with Calpurnius Agricola. This would be an interesting link 
between the Septimii and Numidia, Agricola’s probable home. Geta’s military service in 
Britain is important in two other ways for his brother’s future. There is a strong possibility 
that he became acquainted with Helvius Pertinax who served in two posts there in the 160s. 
Geta’s experience in Britain can hardly fail to have made an impact on him, and when he 
next saw his brother he must have given him some account of the province. Calpurnius 
Agricola’s governorship was a time of considerable activity on the frontier. The territory re-
occupied by Lollius Urbicus twenty years before was now definitively abandoned. Hadrian’s 
Wall and its hinterland were strengthened and refurbished. Not all the men on the spot may 
have approved. Events in Britain in the 160s must not be forgotten when considering 
Septimius’ own campaigns there forty years later. 7     
-39- 
Septimius’ omission of a tribunate may have been his own choice. But even if he tried for a 
tribunate and failed, this is not surprising. Although there were more legions than the 
twenty candidates who might seek a commission each year, other factors complicated the 
picture. Some young men with inclination or aptitude, or with influential relatives or 
patrons, served for more than one season and sometimes in more than one legion. Such 
cases must have been especially frequent when there was warfare on several fronts. The 
young tribunus laticlavius normally had little real responsibility, although in theory he was 
second in command of the legion. But in time of war too frequent changes of personnel 
must have been unwelcome to those in command. And, after all, when the fighting was 
fierce, the death of a general might make it necessary for the tribune to assume his latent 
powers as deputy-legate. 8     
Geta had gone to Britain after the mandatory year in the vigintivirate. He was one of the 
decemviri stlitibus iudicandis, who made up half of the young men thus designated as 
potential senators each year. The HA does not record any service in the vigintivirate at all 
for Septimius. This silence, combined with a confused story elsewhere about his early 
career, has led to the view that he did not occupy any such post, which is unjustified. One 
may be confident that soon after his arrival in Rome Septimius did spend a year as a 
vigintivir, either as decemvir like his brother, with duties in the courts, or in one of the other 
groups. He may have been triumvir capitalis or quattuorvir viarum curandarum, but hardly 
triumvir monetalis, to judge from his background and later career. This function, involving 
its three holders in some titular authority over the workings of the mint, was reserved in the 
first instance for patricians. Other vacancies went to plebeians with powerful patrons. 9     
The year 164 seems the most likely for Septimius to have served as a vigintivir. His formal 
duties must inevitably have brought him into touch with the leading men in Rome. But even 
the granting to him of the latus clavus on his arrival at Rome in 162 placed him on the 
threshold of public life. In his early years Septimius must have forged contacts with some of 
the men who would later play an important part in the fateful year 193. During this period 
in Rome he may have first met two men from Spain, Cornelius Anullinus and Fabius Cilo. 
Anullinus, ten years or more his senior, was from Iliberris (Granada) and Cilo, a year or two 
younger than Septimius, came from Iluro in the same region. Anullinus must have become 
praetor in 163 or soon after. Septimius may also have met his near contemporary Clodius 
Albinus from Hadrumetum in Africa, and Pescennius Niger, an Italian of equestrian family.


--- PAGE 34 ---
Much senior to Septimius and with connections at the palace was Didius Julianus, a man of 
Milanese 
-40- 
family, whose mother came from Hadrumetum and was a close relation of the great jurist 
Salvius Julianus. 10     
Consideration of what men of influence the young Septimius may have met can only be 
speculative. The letters of the younger Pliny show how Pliny himself in his youth relied on 
his links with the great men of the day, and then, as he climbed higher, exerted his 
influence to further the careers of his protégés at all levels. Such was the normal duty of a 
Roman senator. In the case of Septimius the direct evidence is lacking. The Pliny of the 
Antonine age, Cornelius Fronto, was still alive and flourishing when Septimius came to 
Rome. Some of his correspondence with his friends— and with his imperial pupils—has been 
preserved, and must be glanced at presently for the light it throws on Rome in the 160s. 
The only information preserved about Septimius’ life at this time concerns omens which 
gave him hopes of future greatness. In his autobiography he recorded numerous episodes 
and dreams which at various stages in his life led him to hope that he would become 
emperor. Some were even depicted in works of art after events had seemed to prove their 
accuracy. The HA has several anecdotes, some of which—perhaps all—derive from 
Septimius’ own account. Dio likewise includes a number in his History. He was a fervent 
believer in omens and signs of all kinds. Soon after Septimius’ accession he wrote his first 
historical work, an account ‘of the dreams and omens that caused Severus to hope for the 
imperial power’. It is all too easy to comment that omens were only seen to be significant 
when they had already been fulfilled. Septimius was probably only one of numerous 
senators who convinced themselves that supernatural powers were showing them signs of 
future eminence. The age was highly superstitious. Even the emperor Marcus, with his lofty 
Stoic beliefs, was not altogether free from faith in the irrational. Belief in, and practice of, 
astrology was on the increase and Septimius was a prominent addict. But it was not new: 
had not Hadrian been a devotee? 11     
At the moment when Septimius first set foot in Rome, his host at the house where he was 
to stay happened to be reading a life of Hadrian — presumably reading aloud as was then 
the custom. The young man may have decided in advance that he would take as an omen 
the first words that he heard spoken at Rome. It is easy to guess at some particular phrase 
that could have given him special hope. It must be conceded that the HA would have found 
it amusing to invent the story. This note of caution must apply to all omens that otherwise 
unattested. But it would be unwise to neglect the ones authenticated by Dio. Their historical 
importance is small—they merely add a little colour—but they exemplify Septimius’ extreme 
superstition. The biographer gives four more omens, only two of 
-41- 
which are in Dio. The first, if authentic, would neatly illustrate how the young laticlavius was 
being prepared for public life. He was invited to dine at the Palace, and came incorrectly 
dressed, wearing the pallium or Greek cloak instead of the formal toga. To remedy his 
mistake one of the emperor’s togas was given him. This may be an invention to introduce 
the next omen, which Dio also records. The same night, after the banquet (Dio does not 
have this detail), Septimius had a dream, in which he was sucking the teats of a she-wolf, 
like Romulus. Dio sets his dream at the time ‘when he was enrolled in the senate’. The


--- PAGE 35 ---
context of the story in the HA would place it earlier, and it may be that Dio’s phrase should 
be understood as referring to the award to the latus clavus. The third omen, also in Dio, is 
not specifically assigned to this occasion in the HA, although it could have occurred at the 
same banquet. One of the emperor’s servants inadvertently offered the imperial chair to 
Septimius, who promptly sat down on it, ‘not knowing that this was not permitted’. The HA 
rounds off the account with the story that ‘once when he was asleep in a stable a snake 
wound itself round his head. The members of the household were alarmed and shouted, and 
the creature went away without harming him’. 12     
However ill-informed about Septimius’ life in these years we may be, it is fair to assume 
that he had already displayed some of the traits that were to impress Dio and Herodian. Dio 
describes him as small but physically powerful, a man of few words but with an active and 
original mind. Herodian calls him a born administrator, a man of great energy, used to living 
under rough conditions and capable of hard physical effort, quick to understand a problem 
and to act on it. The HA’s character-sketch, including plausible details about his tastes in 
food and African accent, betrays itself by the claim that he was ‘huge’ in stature. Dio, who 
saw him many times, will hardly have distorted the truth to say the opposite. Thus the 
‘African accent’ may arouse suspicion. It may be a guess: if so, an informed one. After all, 
Septimius’ grandfather—who had been brought up in Italy—had been complimented by 
Statius for not having an accent. Hadrian, as quaestor in 101, was laughed at in the senate 
for ‘his somewhat rustic pronunciation’. He took steps to remedy it by intense application to 
eloquence in Latin. Hadrian’s accent was unlikely to have been much affected by the speech 
of his family’s home in southern Spain. He was born at Rome and had only spent a few 
years in Baetica, in his ‘teens. In his case, prolonged army service—a record three military 
tribunates—had perhaps had an effect. His older contemporaries Tacitus and Pliny may have 
had a Celtic inflection, however, to judge from Pliny’s story of a Roman knight at the races 
asking Tacitus: ‘Are you Italian or provincial?’, and then: ‘Are you Tacitus or Pliny?’ In 
Septimius’ case, his upbringing in 
-42- 
the still Punic or Libyphoenician society of Tripolitania very probably left its mark on his 
pronunciation. But the Roman senate now had plenty of members from all over the 
Mediterranean. Africans like Fronto may have made sure that their Latin was perfect, even if 
Fronto, in jest, liked to call himself ‘a Libyan of the Libyan nomads’. But Fronto was the 
leading Latin literary man at Rome. Many others would have been less inclined to worry. 13     
Septimius’ grandfather had had literary learnings. He himself ‘received less education that 
he would have liked’. But it is not unreasonable to wonder whether he may have gained 
entry to the literary salon of Cornelius Fronto. Certainly there is no sign that he had 
philosophical leanings. One would not expect him to have joined the emperor and his 
admirers at the lectures of Sextus of Chaeronea. He is unlikely to have attended dissections 
performed by the young doctor from Pergamum, Galen, which attracted an audience of 
scientifically minded senators. But the chance of hearing Fronto converse or discourse may 
well have attracted him, even if Fronto’s way of life in the 160s may not have resembled the 
halcyon days of twenty years before, when enthusiasts for learning would call on the great 
man simply to hear the flow of conversation and repartee. The times were no doubt long 
since gone by when a man going through the entrance-hall of the Palace could listen in as 
Fronto and his friends discussed the various Latin words for dwarf. Marcus Aurelius had 
given up this sort of thing more than fifteen years before; Lucius Verus was away in the 
east. 14


--- PAGE 36 ---
Fronto continued to correspond with the emperors, sending off a flow of comfort and advice 
to Marcus, weighed down by his responsibilities, and to Verus, clearly in danger of 
neglecting his, in favour of high—or low—living. Fronto’s other favoured pupil was now his 
son-in-law. While Victorinus was away in Germany, Fronto and his wife looked after their 
young grandson. A letter written soon after Victorinus went to Germany conveys a picture of 
the old orator blissfully happy responding to the boy’s constant ‘da!’ ‘give’, by supplying him 
with ‘pieces of paper and writing tablets—things that I want him to ask me for’. This child, 
M. Aufidius Fronto, is next heard of over thirty years later, as consul in 199, when Septimius 
was emperor; and a younger brother was to be consul the following year. Septimius might 
have first met the young Fronto at the orator’s house. 15     
Fronto was still active enough to take an interest in other matters besides his health, his 
family and his imperial ex-pupils. His young compatriot Arrius Antoninus of Cirta, serving in 
northern Italy as one of the newly instituted juridici, was flooded with firmly worded 
appeals, in the form of avuncular advice, to look after the interests of various of 
-43- 
Fronto’s clients. One Caelius Optatus received a letter in which Fronto warmly, though in 
terms long conventional, recommended another friend, Sardius Saturninus, whose sons ‘are 
constantly in my quarters’. One of these sons was recommended by Fronto to his kinsman, 
the influential Petronius Mamertinus, son or nephew of Pius’ Guard Prefect. This man had a 
link with a family of Septimii, perhaps the one from Lepcis. This is the nearest one can get 
to any hint that Septimius may have had access to a member of Fronto’s circle. 16     
It was customary for young laticlavii who aspired to enter the senate to practise advocacy in 
the Roman courts at an early age. Pliny, for example, appeared (in the Centumviral Court) 
as junior counsel at the age of eighteen. There is every reason to believe that Septimius 
would have done likewise. The whole of his education will have been directed towards 
perfecting his ability as a public speaker: the only direct evidence comes in a phrase of 
Aurelius Victor. But at least he was competent enough, at the age of twenty-three, to plead 
a case (his own) before a magistrate. Fronto was the doyen of the Roman bar, and it is 
quite possible that Septimius, like the sons of Sardius Saturninus, sat at his feet. 17     
In 165 Fronto was preparing for a new role, as the historian of the Parthian war, now being 
brought to a successful conclusion. In the next year Verus returned as a conquering hero 
and in October 166, with Marcus, celebrated a triumph. Septimius is unlikely to have missed 
the occasion, the first of its kind for nearly fifteen years. The troops that had gone east to 
reinforce the eastern armies went back to their bases on the Rhine and Danube. Rome’s 
victory in the east had apparently been sweeping: her generals crossed the Tigris into Media 
in 166, and in the previous year the twin Parthian capitals of Seleucia and Ctesiphon had 
been sacked. There was no doubt talk at Rome of reviving Trajan’s policy of annexing 
Mesopotamia. Hadrian had rejected this, and Trajan’s new eastern provinces had been 
hastily abandoned on his death in 117. Hadrian’s whole policy of peaceful retrenchment was 
now being seriously questioned and some no doubt favoured a revival of Trajanic aims and 
methods in the east. But whatever may have been said or hoped by Verus and his staff or 
by circles in Rome, Marcus can scarcely have considered adding to Roman responsibilities in 
that quarter. The campaign of Calpurnius Agricola in Britain and of Victorinus in Germany 
would be sufficient to illustrate that serious problems elsewhere demanded attention. But 
these provinces were not the most crucial. The real threat to the Empire’s security lay 
directly to the north of Rome itself, beyond the upper Danube. Pressure had been building


--- PAGE 37 ---
up among the people of Bohemia, Moravia and Slovakia. The governors of the frontier 
provinces had instructions to refrain from military action until the eastern war was 
-44- 
over. Meanwhile, two new legions were being recruited in Italy under the supervision of two 
generals, returned from the east before the war there was over. In 166 or 167 the first 
wave of barbarian invaders broke through into Pannonia. Much worse was to come. 18     
The festivities associated with the triumph gave a façade of public rejoicing. But the soldiers 
returning from the east, who included guardsmen, brought back the plague. Within a few 
months thousands had died, and the upper classes suffered with the rest. Senators and 
other men of wealth no doubt retired to the country estates. Even senators of moderate 
means, such as Pliny the younger had been, owned land in different parts of the peninsula. 
Senators of provincial extraction were required to have at least a proportion of their wealth 
invested in Italian land—Trajan had set the minimum at one third, Marcus reduced it to a 
quarter. Septimius must have had a place to go to, or else his property qualification for 
entering the senate would have been invalid. Later, except for an apartment in Rome, his 
only property was ‘a single farm at Veii’, clearly part of his grandfather’s estate. But 
southern Etruria, however pleasant in normal times, was uncomfortably close to Rome. 
What is more, Lucius Verus had a pleasure villa on the Via Clodia, which must have brought 
sources of potential infection even closer to the country house of Septimius on the Cassia. 19 
It must have been an obvious decision to return for a time to Africa. Entry into the senate 
would still be assured. Septimius just had to wait until he entered his twenty-fifth year, on 
11 April 169, or for the quaestorian elections in January of that year. In the meantime Africa 
was much healthier. Besides, his brother Geta had probably left Rome again, to be quaestor 
to the proconsul of Crete and Cyrenaica. Septimius may have gone home to Lepcis, and 
from there across the barren Syrtica to Cyrene, to visit him. After Rome Lepcis may have 
seemed a backwater. One may suspect that Septimius gravitated to Carthage in the year 
167. There he could have heard the great Apuleius at last, if he had not already done so. 20     
His activities in Africa are revealed explicitly by one episode only, in the HA. He was a wild 
young man, the biographer records, hinting that he got into a lot of trouble. One instance is 
given. He was prosecuted for adultery, and pleaded his defence in person. The judge was 
either the proconsul Salvius Julianus, or his legate, Didius Julianus. The HA (misled by 
Aurelius Victor) found it difficult to distinguish between the two. However this may be, 
Septimius was found not guilty. There is no means of telling where the case came up—or 
where the lady in the case lived. It might have been at Carthage, perhaps even at Lepcis. 
The HA does not even put the case in Africa, and some have suspected the story as a 
fiction. 
-45- 
Now that Salvius Julianus is attested as proconsul for the year 168 to 169, with Didius as 
his legate, there is no longer any reason to doubt it. 21     
If there was any basis for the prosecution, it might be fair to construe any misbehaviour of 
Septimius as a last fling before attention to his future at Rome became necessary. By 
January 169 he should have been back at the capital, endeavouring to secure election as 
quaestor. The evidence suggests that the original minimum age of thiry had been modified 
to twenty-five. Hadrian, if not his predecessors, had then allowed a further reduction of one


--- PAGE 38 ---
year: a man in his twenty-fifth year could count as qualified. Election was now the affair of 
the senate; to be elected quaestor meant being co-opted into the senate. Up till the end of 
the first century AD some genuine competition for the tribunate and praetorship may have 
continued. But there is no trace during the principate of competition for the quaestorship. 
Once a man had gained the latus clavus and had been vigintivir, it must have been 
automatic to proceed to the next stage: there were twenty quaestorships each year, one for 
each of the vigintiviri. But the vigintiviri would mostly be eighteen or nineteen-years-old, 
and would wait five or six years before becoming quaestors. A number of Septimius’ fellow-
vigintiviri may have been eliminated by war or plague. The same applies to his immediate 
predecessors. All things considered, it is highly unlikely that Septimius had any need to 
wait. It is probable that he was elected in 169, and took office on 5 December that year, for 
twelve months. Thus Septimius entered the senate, joining the venerable assembly, 600-
strong, which constituted the élite of an empire containing some 60,000,000 people. He was 
vir clarissimus, the ‘Right Honourable’. 22     
-46- 
5 
INTO THE EMPEROR’S SERVICE 
AT THE BEGINNING OF each year lots were cast in the senate for the proconsulships of the 
ten provinces still administered in the republican style. Ten of the twenty quaestors would 
be assigned to them: their duties would not begin until they left the city in the spring—at 
latest before 13 April—to go to their province. The other ten would serve in Rome. The HA 
does not specify where Septimius served. From its silence one may assume that it was at 
Rome. Equally, since nothing is said about it, one may assume that he was not one of the 
emperor’s two personal quaestors. He may have been one of the two urban quaestors, 
whose residual duties, after the supervision of the state treasury had been taken away, 
were light. Otherwise he will have been assigned duties by the consuls. Only the two 
ordinarii and one suffect of 170 are known for certain. The ordinarii were Erucius Clarus and 
Gavius Cornelius Cethegus, the suffect Hoenius Severus. The latter was an Italian patrician, 
as was Cethegus, a pupil of Fronto. Fronto rated Cethegus’ eloquence highly in a letter to 
his pupil’s father: the satirist Lucian says the man was a fool—but the family was influential. 
The other consul, Erucius Clarus, was the son of a friend of Pliny who had eventually 
become Prefect of Rome, with a second consulship in 146. His own son was to be consul in 
the fateful year 193. The family had estates in Africa. 
A major change had taken place during Septimius’ absence. In spring 168 the emperors had 
left for the northern wars. They had inspected the Danubian front and returned to winter at 
Aquileia. Life in winter quarters on the Adriatic had irked Lucius Verus. His war in the east 
had been conducted from far pleasanter bases—Daphne on the Orontes and Laodicea on 
Sea. The presence of his dedicated elder colleague and adoptive brother demanded from 
him an attention to duty that he found difficult to maintain. In midwinter the spread of 
plague among the troops had provided a welcome excuse for the emperors to withdraw to 
more salubrious quarters. They began the return to Rome, but within a few days Verus died 
from a stroke. He had barely passed his thirty-ninth 
-47-


--- PAGE 39 ---
birthday. Septimius may have been back in Rome in time to witness the funeral and 
deification. 2     
The enforced return to Rome delayed Marcus’ plans even more than he can have 
anticipated. He took the opportunity of raising funds for his projected campaign with a 
striking symbolic act, the auction of precious gems, clothing and furnishings from the 
palace. The sale went on for two months in the Forum of Trajan. A pressing concern for the 
emperor was what he should do about his widowed daughter Lucilla. She was a high-spirited 
and headstrong young woman, not lacking in physical charms. Some young senators of 
noble birth may have considered themselves eligible to be the second husband of a princess 
and stepfather to an emperor’s child. But Marcus took no particular note of a man’s origin, 
whether in appointing men to high office or in choosing husbands for his daughters. One 
was married to a man from proconsular Asia, Claudius Severus. As for Lucilla’s two 
youngest sisters, one was to marry Burrus, from the family of the rising Numidian general 
Antistius Adventus, the other, Sura Mamertinus, possibly a kinsman of Septimius. It would 
be absurd to suggest that Septimius himself had any hopes—even in his dreams—of gaining 
the hand of Lucilla. But the choice of her husband is something that he must have watched 
with considerable interest. In the event almost everyone must have been surprised, not 
least Lucilla herself and her mother. The emperor married his daughter to a Syrian of 
equestrian background, Claudius Pompeianus. Indirectly this match was to affect the 
fortunes of Septimius. Pompeianus soon became the principal military adviser of his father-
in-law, and was able to advance the career of a protégé, Helvius Pertinax. 3     
In October 169 Marcus returned to the northern front. As quaestor that year Septimius will 
have felt personally the effect of one of his measures. The emperor had conscripted 
gladiators into the army. This created difficulties for those who had to put on public games, 
including the quaestors. Septimius may have been able to use his connections at Lepcis to 
ensure a supply of wild beasts. But if the games were inadequate, there were soon more 
serious concerns. In spring 170 the emperor launched his long-delayed offensive across the 
Danube, evidently to prepare the way for the annexation of the Transdanubian lands. It was 
a disastrous failure. Roman losses were enormous. In the ensuing chaos a flood of 
northerners descended into the empire. 4     
The capital must have been thunderstruck by the news of the Roman defeat, on a scale not 
suffered since the disaster to Varus and his legions in AD 9. But that had taken place well 
beyond the Rhine, and the victorious Germans had failed to cross that river. This time the 
enemies of Rome were much closer to the heart of the empire. One group swept into 
-48- 
Greece, while two German tribes, outflanking the emperor’s battered forces, broke into Italy 
itself. It was fortunate for Rome that Aquileia, the great trading city at the head of the 
Adriatic, acted as a magnet for the invaders. They could easily have pressed on southwards, 
crossed the Po and gone on to Ariminum (Rimini) and Fanum Fortunae (Fano), the roadhead 
of the Via Flaminia that led straight across the Apennines to Rome. Septimius, who was 
himself to lead an invading army by this route twenty-three years later, will have been 
impressed by the defencelessness of Rome. A force coming down on the city from Pannonia 
would find little in its path to oppose it. Through the efforts of Pompeianus and Pertinax in 
particular, Italy was cleared of the first foreign invaders for nearly three centuries. The 
situation was gradually restored in this and the following year, and the emperor was able to 
resume his offensive in 172. But many lives had been lost, not least among the officers. 
Many special measures were necessary. Septimius’ brother Geta may have made a modest


--- PAGE 40 ---
contribution. When land communications between Rome and the Danube were blocked or 
threatened, it was essential to maintain the sea-routes across the Adriatic, and the few 
Italian ports south of Ravenna were especially important. At about this time—the exact year 
cannot be fixed—Geta was made curator of Ancona. The appointment came after he had 
been aedile and was probably still under thirty. The curatores of towns in Italy and the 
provinces were normally concerned with the auditing of the municipalities’ finances. This 
alone may well have been a vital matter when supplies were passing from Ancona across to 
Salonae (Split) in Dalmatia. As curator of Ancona in 170 or soon after Geta may have had 
added responsibilities. 5     
Although Septimius himself did not participate in any of the major actions of the 170s, his 
career was naturally affected. He was too junior to be given high responsibilities, but there 
were gaps to be filled at all levels. At some stage in 170 or early 171 it became clear that 
there would not be enough quaestors to serve in the provinces: Septimius was asked, or 
perhaps ordered to serve a second term, in the province of Baetica. It seems that the 
proconsul under whom he was to serve was Cornelius Anullinus. In 193 this man would 
emerge as a major supporter of Septimius in the struggle for the empire. It may be that the 
two were already acquainted. If the lot were operated strictly, the assignment of quaestors 
would be a matter of choice. But not infrequently personal choice was permitted. There is a 
chance that Septimius’ second term as quaestor was the result of a request by Anullinus. 6     
Septimius will have been obliged to leave Rome for southern Spain before 13 April. But 
evidently before his departure he learned of his father’s death, and he went first to Lepcis to 
settle the affairs of the family. 
-49- 
While he was in Africa events prevented him from taking up his appointment. Moorish 
tribesmen took ship and invaded southern Spain. It was only twenty years since their 
rebellion in Mauretania had been suppressed and the defences of western North Africa 
extensively reorganised. Now they were after a richer prize, and they could hardly have 
choosen a more favourable moment to attack. There was only one legion in the peninsula, 
stationed hundreds of miles from Baetica, at León. The single legion in Africa could not be 
safely transferred, especially as it was already weakened by sending men to the Danubian 
armies. Marcus again turned to his old friend Aufidius Victorinus. Baetica was temporarily 
taken out of the senate’s control and joined to Tarraconensis, under Victorinus’ overall 
authority. Cornelius Anullinus was made commander of the legion VII Gemina, sent down to 
Baetica from León. Victorinus’ modest forces were strengthened by the despatch of a special 
force under the procurator Julius Julianus, who had just completed clearing-up operations in 
the Balkans. 7     
When the senate was obliged to hand over a province to the emperor— for only the elastic 
imperial administration could deal with an emergency situation and provide the military 
means of solving it—care was taken to avoid upsetting the system. The normal solution was 
for the emperor to surrender one of his own minor provinces to the senate. The province 
selected to compensate the senate for Baetica was Sardinia. Septimius thus spent the best 
part of twelve months in the island. Nothing is recorded about this stay there. If he was 
already as energetic and ambitious as he later showed himself to be, he must have 
wondered whether he would ever achieve greatness. Service in Sardinia can scarcely be 
said ever to have led that way before. One aspect of the island may have some interest for 
him: Sardinia in antiquity bore the stamp of Africa rather than of Italy. The Punic influence 
was still strong, and the Punic language still in use. 8


--- PAGE 41 ---
The leges annales which still regulated the old republican magistracies apparently laid down 
that a biennium must elapse between each office. ‘Two years’ was interpreted liberally to 
mean anything over twelve months. But Septimius can have had little prospect of election 
as aedile or tribune of the plebs, the next obligatory stage in the cursus honorum, until the 
elections of January 173. This would have allowed him, as tribune, to take office on 10 
December 174 (or I January 175 if he had become aedile). Of course, particularly at times 
of crisis, the rules could be adjusted to accelerate the careers of promising men. The 
procedure followed was adlectio: the emperor, in his censorial capacity, could enroll a man 
into a higher grade, allowing him to dispense with at least a year’s service. Men needed on 
active service could not be held back by formalities. There were now senators who had been 
given their rank of vir clarissimus, and 
-50- 
ex-praetor, at the front, and would not enter the curia in Rome for ten years—men like 
Helvius Pertinax. There is no sign that Septimius was deemed sufficiently vital to the state 
to be allowed such privileges. 9     
In the meantime employment of another kind was offered. C. Septimius Severus, by 173 a 
fairly senior consular—particularly as plague and war had thinned the ranks of the senate—
was chosen by a lot to be proconsul of Africa. He selected Septimius as one of his legati pro 
praetore. They will have proceeded to Carthage in the spring or early summer. Septimius 
and the other legatus may have deputised for the proconsul on occasions. There would be 
some work of a judicial nature, on assizes—as with the memorable trial at Sabratha fifteen 
years earlier. The presence of proconsul and legate would be expected at a number of 
ceremonial occasions too. Ten years earlier the proconsul Salvidienus Orfitus had dedicated 
a monumental arch to Marcus and Verus at Oea, paid for by a local dignitary, Calpurnius 
Celsus. Apuleius’ fulsome tribute to Orfitus, delivered at Carthage, suggests, combined with 
the evidence of this arch, that Oea was working hard to ensure favour in high places. 10     
Lepcis Magna was not to be outdone by her neighbour. A wealthy citizen, Avilius Castus, 
bequeathed 120,000 sesterces for an arch at Lepcis. The city provided additional funds and 
in 174, ‘when the proconsul was C. Septimius Severus, and his legate was L. Septimius 
Severus, it was dedicated’. The arch was erected at the west end of Lepcis, on the Oea 
road. The proconsul himself may not have presided at the dedication, although he 
presumably did visit Lepcis during his year of office. He was also at the far north-western 
end of his province, it must be assumed: he was honoured with a statue at Thubursicu 
Numidarum, of which he was patron. During the year when the Septimii were in proconsular 
Africa, the army of Numidia was surprisingly active. A mixed force penetrated as far as 250 
miles (400 km) beyond the frontier, to Agueneb. Proconsul and legates would not be 
formally involved—this was a matter for the commander of the legion, presumably 
instructed to exercise stronger control over the tribes. But Septimius must have heard of 
the venture, and approved. Two decades later he would be able to institute further 
measures of a more radical kind in this quarter. 11     
The inscription from the Lepcis arch provides good reason to accept as authentic the HA’s 
story of Septimius, as legate in Africa, returning to his home town. When he arrived there, 
preceded by lictors bearing the fasces which denoted his authority, and was embraced by an 
old acquaintance, he had the man flogged. The demonstration was followed up by an 
announcement by the legate’s herald: no plebeian was to embrace a legate of the Roman 
people in this undignified way again. 12


--- PAGE 42 ---
The arrogant and hot-tempered streak that this episode reveals is borne 
-51- 
out in future occasions. His arrogance may have been encouraged by something else that 
happened during this spell of duty. In ‘a certain African town’, not specified by the HA, he 
consulted a mathematicus. When the details of his birth had been revealed, the astrologer 
was incredulous. He had seen a great future (ingentia) ahead, which he found incompatible 
with the young man he saw in front of him. ‘Give me your real horoscope, not someone 
else’s,’ he told Septimius. He swore that it was indeed his own, and was then told 
‘everything that afterwards came to pass’. Dio records that Septimius later concealed the 
full details of his birth. It would not do for it to be widely known what was in store for him. 13     
By the end of his term as legate, Septimius had entered his thirtieth year and was still 
unmarried. It is probable that he took the opportunity during his return to Lepcis of finding 
himself a wife. The girl he chose was called Paccia Marciana. Her names reveal that she was 
ultimately of Punic or Libyan, rather than Italian origin: her ancestors had clearly derived 
citizenship from the first-century proconsuls Marcius Barea and Paccius Africanus. Her 
family was possibly linked distantly with that of Septimius’ mother, the Fulvii. But a leading 
provincial family such as the Septimii, or the Fulvii, would inevitably have some marriage 
links with most of the other upper-class families in their own town. Nothing is known for 
certain of any of Paccia’s relatives. 14     
If Septimius had first entered the senate in December 169, as has been suggested, he 
would now be ready and eager to set his foot on the next rung of the ladder. It seems that 
he had now attracted the attention of the emperor (or of his advisers—Marcus Aurelius was 
still far from Rome, at the front). He was chosen tribune of the plebs with the distinction of 
being one of the emperor’s candidati. His year of office began on 10 December, presumably 
in 174. Paccia Marciana, if she did not accompany him back from Africa in the summer, 
must have followed soon after. The marriage took place during or immediately after his 
term of office. It lasted for some ten years, until Paccia’s death. There were almost certainly 
no children—or none that survived infancy, unless credit is given to a suspect story in the 
HA. According to this, Septimius had two daughters old enough to be married in 193, hence 
born in the years 176-180. There is no other record of any daughters. He himself was silent 
about his first marriage in his autobiography, although he later had statues erected in 
memory of Paccia. 15     
The tribunate was in a sense even more obsolete than the other republican magistracies. 
The tribunes’ once powerful position as initiators of legislation, and their right of veto, had 
quickly lapsed (after all, the emperors possessed the tribunician power). But their most 
ancient duty, 
-52- 
to protect fellow citizens from injustice, remained, in theory at least. In practice this 
involved watching to see that other magistrates, especially the praetors, did not endanger 
the rights of Roman citizens. Some judicial functions may have been passed to them. Pliny 
as tribune refused to practise at the bar during his term of office, so that the dignity of his 
office should not be sullied. His sanctimonious reference to the course that he followed 
shows only too clearly that others rarely did this. 16


--- PAGE 43 ---
However, Septimius is stated to have performed his duties ‘with great rigour and energy’. 
And there may indeed have been the occasion, during the year 175, for the tribunes to take 
part in preserving public order. In the spring, following a false report that Marcus was dead, 
the governor of Syria, Avidius Cassius, proclaimed himself emperor. Once he had taken this 
step, he could not go back, even though it was soon confirmed that Marcus was alive and 
prepared to spare him. Cassius, one of the heroes of the Parthian war, had been endowed 
for several years with special overall authority over a large part of the east. He had support 
from the Prefect of Egypt and elsewhere. But Martius Verus, the governor of Cappadocia, 
remained loyal to Marcus. The rebellion was over by June: Cassius was murdered by one of 
his own officers. But there had been panic at Rome, and the emperor was obliged to send 
detachments from the northern legions to protect the city. Most of the Guard will have been 
at the front, and the forces available in the capital were minimal. The heir to the throne, 
Marcus’ only surviving son, Commodus Caesar, was there. A boy of thirteen, he was still 
under the guidance of tutors. The emperor summoned him to the front, and he was invested 
with the toga virilis in July. Before his departure the young prince performed his first public 
act, distributing largesse to the people. 17     
These events must have made a deep impression on Septimius. He will have heard lively 
discussion of the upheaval in the east. There was gossip impugning the reputation of the 
empress Faustina: that she had written secretly to Cassius, encouraging him to make his 
coup, in the belief that Marcus was dying. Senators whose homes were in the east must 
have felt particular anxiety, and some, whether eastern or not, may have received 
messages from the pretender beseeching support. Cassius may have had many supporters 
among the senate. Septimius probably had no personal links with any of them. But he must 
have realised that Cassius’ rising had more behind it than a piece of opportunism by an 
ambitious general. There was debate among the emperor’s advisers concerning his war 
policy. Marcus was determined to annexe territories beyond the Danube. The eastern 
provinces will not have viewed this war with enthusiasm. It may not be fanciful to detect 
among Cassius’ supporters elements that wanted a return to a purely Hadrianic policy. For 
all his philhellenism 
-53- 
Marcus was behaving in the manner of a Trajan, waging an all-out war of conquest. But in 
contrast to Trajan’s Dacian wars, the northern campaigns of Marcus were bringing no profit 
to anyone, least of all to the wealthy east. 18     
There was something else for senators to gossip about in 175. Helvius Pertinax, the 
freedman’s son and ex-schoolmaster, was made consul (in absence) with Didius Julianus as 
his colleague. The appointment was not completely unprecedented, but it caused a good 
deal of ill-feeling. Soon Pertinax, who went east with the emperor in the summer, returned 
to the Danube as governor, first of Upper, then of Lower Moesia. Septimius Geta was made 
legate of the legion I Italica, not long after this, and probably served under the command of 
Pertinax. Shortly before taking up his command Geta had been co-opted into one of the 
ancient priesthoods, the fetiales, whose task it was to make solemn declaration of war. The 
fetiales did not rank with the pontifices, augures, quindecimviri and septemviri, but they 
had great prestige—Aufidius Victorinus was a fellow-member. It is not known whether 
Septimius obtained a priesthood of any kind; but his kinsman C. Septimius Severus was 
both a quindecimvir and a sodalis Hadrianalis and is likely to have made efforts to have 
Septimius coopted into one of the colleges. 19


--- PAGE 44 ---
Septimius probably remained in Rome during 176, awaiting the next stage in his career. He 
was designated praetor at the beginning of the year. But he did not achieve the honour of 
being candidates of the emperor again. Marcus returned to Italy in the autumn, after an 
absence of seven years. On 27 November Commodus was granted imperium and celebrated 
a joint triumph with his father on 23 December. On 1 January he was consul and was given 
the tribunician power, soon followed by the title Augustus. There were thus once more two 
emperors, the younger being only fifteen years old. Marcus Aurelius’ intention was plain: his 
death would no longer place the succession in jeopardy. Commodus would need no further 
powers, all he lacked was the priestly dignity of being pontifex maximus. Doubtless 
Septimius was deeply influenced by this act, which he witnessed at close quarters as a 
magistrate of the Roman people. He was to follow this precedent, in a more extreme form, 
with his own elder son. 20     
Some of the eighteen praetors each year had additional titles and specific duties—the 
praetor urbanus, peregrinus, hastarius, and so on. The remainder presided over the 
permanent courts manned by the iudices. The HA does not specify any particular 
praetorship in Septimius’ case. He may have presided at one of the courts where his 
grandfather had served as a simple juryman. The praetors had to work hard—in comparison 
with the tribunes—for the courts were in session for well over half the year. 
-54- 
Marcus had increased the number of days when legal proceedings could be carried on, to 
two hundred and thirty. Presumably November and December were still vacation periods, so 
for the first ten months of 177 Septimius will have been kept busy. And he will have needed 
to take his duties seriously. Marcus supervised the praetors with especial care. 21     
In the course of 177 Septimius’ ‘uncle’ C. Septimius Severus had the honour of serving on 
the consilium of the emperors, when they considered a request forwarded by the procurator 
of Mauretania Tingitana on behalf of a Moorish chieftain. Marcus and Commodus duly 
granted citizenship, to the wife and four children of Julianus of the Zegrenses, on 6 July. An 
impressive extract from the imperial archives was despatched to the province, backed up by 
the names of the twelve imperial counsellors. C. Septimius Severus is listed in fourth place, 
after three more senior ex-consuls. This is the latest record of Septimius’ kinsman. Whether 
or not he survived much longer, his young protégé was now well launched on his senatorial 
career. The praetorship was the springboard to posts of some responsibility. 22     
Praetors were liable to heavy expenses, for they were expected to put on games, as were 
the quaestors. If this had been unusually expensive when Septimius was quaestor, it must 
have become even more so now. All over the empire men whose holding of office obliged 
them to put on public spectacles were finding the task increasingly difficult. The supply of 
gladiators had become increasingly limited. In the course of 177 the matter was raised in 
the senate, and a decree was passed to reduce the price. Septimius did not put on games 
during his praetorship: he was sent off to his next post—his first in the emperor’s service—
before his year of office was up. This would have obliged him to miss the games, which he 
gave in absence, according to the HA. The post was in Spain, in the province of Hispania 
Tarraconensis. No details are given by the HA, but it is practically certain that he was 
legatus iuridicus, with special responsibility for Asturia and Callaecia. The Moors were again 
causing trouble in southern Spain, and it is possible that Baetica had reverted to imperial 
control. The governor and the legionary legate in Tarraconensis no doubt had military duties 
at this time. In that case Septimius’ role as iuridicus will have been of especial importance. 23


--- PAGE 45 ---
The HA has nothing more to record about his stay in Spain, except for two dreams, one of 
which certainly belongs later. In the other he was told to restore the Temple of Augustus at 
Tarraco. (If there was any basis for this subconscious command, one must assume that 
Hadrian’s restoration of the temple fifty years before had not lasted long.) His term as 
iuridicus would not normally have lasted for more than three years at the most. By the 
beginning of 180 he will have been hoping for promotion. It was to 
-55- 
come in the shape of a legionary command in Syria. But, perhaps before Septimius had 
obtained this appointment, Marcus Aurelius died, on 17 March 180, at his northern 
headquarters. The fateful sole reign of Commodus had begun. 24     
The philosopher emperor had ruled nineteen years and ten days. The empire had been 
through a considerable ordeal: almost continuous warfare against external enemies, 
rebellion, plague. Yet, as Ammianus Marcellinus put it in the fourth century, ‘after 
calamitous losses things were restored anew…with unanimous ardour highest and lowest 
hastened, as if to a calm and peaceful haven, to an honourable death in the service of the 
republic’. Out of the whole empire, almost the only part that had not been directly affected 
was Septimius’ homeland, Africa, already the richest part of the west, and now still further 
at an advantage. Septimius himself can hardly be said to have contributed much. But he 
and other senators will have noted the incredible devotion to duty shown by the emperor. 
Marcus spent more than half his reign away from Rome, with the armies. Septimius was to 
follow this example. Another and telling example was Marcus’ unequivocal rejection of the 
‘adoptive principle’. Indeed, he may not have recognised its existence. The rebellion of 
Cassius may have forced his hand a little, obliging him to accelerate promotion of his son to 
a share in his powers. But he had no scruples in associating a fifteen-year-old boy with 
himself as emperor. This must have made a deep impression on Septimius. 25     
-56- 
6 
A CAESAR BORN TO THE PURPLE 
No ONE HAD HAD ANY EXPERIENCE of an emperor like Commodus, a Caesar born to the 
purple. The seventeenth emperor of Rome, he was the first who had been born during the 
reign of his father. What is more, by the series of adoptions begun by Nerva, and continued 
by Trajan, Hadrian and Pius, the dynasty to which he belonged had now produced a sixth 
emperor (one more than the Julio-Claudians). Commodus could call himself ‘son of the 
deified Marcus’, but by virtue of those adoptions he could and did style himself ‘great-great-
great-grandson’, adnepos, of Nerva as well. Not for nothing was he called ‘most nobly born 
of all emperors’. 1     
It was indeed to the ill-starred Julio-Claudians that men will have turned their minds in 180. 
Since the accession of Nero in 54, there had been no emperor as young as this. Commodus 
was only eighteen when Marcus died, just two years older than Nero had been when he 
gained the throne. The omens now appeared more favourable. Commodus succeeded a 
father who had been almost universally popular, and who had been revered by the senate. 
The suspicion that Marcus had been poisoned by Commodus (as Claudius had been by—or 
for—Nero), if present as early as this, will not have been widespread. 2


--- PAGE 46 ---
Commodus may have been a lonely figure. His mother had died when he was fourteen. His 
twin brother had died when he was only four, and a younger brother four years after that. 
There were five sisters, all but one considerably older than him. Lucilla, the eldest, who had 
been the wife of Verus, was an Augusta. She was twelve years older than Commodus, and 
detested her husband Ti. Claudius Pompeianus, who had been Marcus’ principal military 
adviser, and was old enough to be Commodus’ —and Lucilla’s—father. He was with 
Commodus on the Danube. Other senior advisers from the imperial family were there too: 
Bruttius Praesens, the emperor’s father-in-law, and Vitrasius Pollio, husband of a cousin of 
Marcus. One of Marcus’ best friends, Aufidius Victorinus, was ruling the city of Rome as 
Prefect. These and their like were the foundations of 
-57- 
Marcus’ hope that his son’s reign would continue along the lines of his own. 3     
The new emperor needed no further powers. There was merely the need to adjust his name 
and titles. But in spite of an apparent continuity in the administration, it is fair to suppose 
that there was a rush of applications for jobs, at all levels. Those who had connections at 
the court will have sought to use them. It is just at this time that Septimius received his 
next post, the command of the legion IV Scythica in Syria. Some new appointments may 
have been set in motion already by Marcus or made on the advice of Pompeianus and other 
senior men. But Commodus will already have found other voices more persuasive than that 
of his elderly and plebeian brother-in-law. 4     
In the Meditations, which Marcus Aurelius had been writing during his last campaigns, he 
thanked the gods that he found good teachers for his children. Only three are named in the 
HA, and only one of these is more than a name, Aius Sanctus, Commodus’ tutor in oratory, 
who had combined his instruction of the prince with a career in the imperial service. In 
March 180 he had been for several years in Egypt, as prefect; his teaching duties had 
clearly ended. Marcus had himself studied oratory with Fronto—and other tutors—until his 
twenty-sixth year. Besides, he was an ardent student of philosophy from boyhood until 
death. No philosophy teachers at all are recorded for Commodus. One is driven to the 
melancholy conclusion that Marcus may have overreacted against his own upbringing. 
Faced, as emperor, with nothing but continuous warfare, he may have decided that he had 
been overeducated—and in the wrong fields—for his role. For the last two-and-a-half years 
of his life he had Commodus with him at the front. Among other motives he must have 
wished his son to acquire military experience at first hand. Other instruction may have 
continued, but it certainly ceased for good when Marcus died. Commodus had no ‘higher 
education’. 5     
There was another difference. Marcus had not entered the imperial family until the age of 
sixteen, after a boyhood closely supervised by a host of relatives. Commodus, born a 
prince, probably did not see his father at all—or only briefly—from the age of eight to the 
age of thirteen. Marcus was away on campaign. Commodus was by nature ‘lacking in evil 
qualities’, Dio was convinced. As his near-contemporary, Dio had ample opportunity to form 
a judgement. The HA biographer seems almost to be going out of his way to contradict Dio. 
The report may derive from another contemporary, Marius Maximus, the neo-Suetonius of 
the third century. Maximus, a little older than Dio, was serving in the northern armies at the 
end of Marcus’ reign. The verdict of the HA is savage: ‘From early boyhood cowardly, 
dishonourable, cruel, lustful, defiled in mouth 
-58-


--- PAGE 47 ---
and debauched.’ A sarcastic aside is added, that he had some talent for pottery, dancing, 
singing and whistling— ‘qualities unsuited for the imperial station’. 6     
Herodian avoids speculation about Commodus’ character, but reports the emperor’s outward 
appearance: ‘he was in the prime of youth and was most attractive to look at because of his 
well-proportioned body and the manly beauty of his face. His eyes had a commanding look 
and flashed like fire. His hair was naturally blond and curly. When he walked in the sunlight 
it shone like fire (so that some thought he sprinkled it with gold dust before coming out) 
while others regarded it as a sign of divinity, saying that a heavenly light shone out above 
his head. And the first down was just beginning to appear on his cheeks.’ Later, the flashing 
eyes were dulled (by drink) —and the shining locks were no longer naturally shiny. 7     
His parents had been first cousins. Children of such unions sometimes tend towards 
extremes. Clearly, the sober and philosophical inclinations of his father were totally lacking. 
His grandmother, Faustina I, had had a reputation for levity. But there is no need to look for 
the influence of heredity. Marcus was not a particularly typical product of his age. His co-
emperor Verus, with his love of the stage and the arena, also reflected prevalent fashions 
and sentiments. Commodus, only seven when Verus died, may nonetheless have wanted to 
ape the man whose original names—Lucius Aurelius Commodus—he bore. At any rate, there 
is no need to believe the stories raked up later, that Marcus was not his real father. It 
seemed natural that the man he became must have been the son of a gladiator and it 
seemed incredible that Marcus could have fathered a son like Commodus—hence the gossip 
that he was illegitimate. 8     
For a few months after his accession Commodus remained with the armies on the Danube. 
Then the exhortations of Pompeianus and the other amici proved insufficient. Peace was 
made with Rome’s northern enemies. Commodus returned to a rapturous welcome at Rome. 
He was lazy. This was perhaps his chief characteristic (not simple physical indolence—for he 
was to show himself a superb athlete). The courtiers knew how to play on his weaknesses—
those among them, that is, who were themselves unmilitary, and eager to return to the 
centre of the empire. Chief among these was his chamberlain (a cubiculo), Saoterus, a 
Bithynian like Dio, who seems to have regarded this man without hostility. He is mentioned 
merely en passant in what survives of the History. Herodian knew nothing about him. But 
the HA, true to form, records that, when Commodus celebrated the triumph for the German 
wars on 22 October 180, ‘Saoterus, his subactor, was placed on the chariot behind him. 
Often Commodus turned his head round and publicly kissed him. He did the same in the 
orchestra as well.’ Saoterus’ function on this 
-59- 
occasion was to hold the golden crown above the head of the triumphator. But the word 
subactor has a double meaning. Marius Maximus, and many others, were disgusted. 
Saoterus soon acquired paramount influence over Commodus. No Roman emperor had let 
favourites of this kind exercise such power since the dark days of Nero. To those who had 
served Antoninus and Marcus, it must have been sickening. For the members of the imperial 
family, it must have been equally unnerving. Yet given the quite exceptional dynastic claims 
of Commodus and the charismatic nature of his position, any action would be difficult. Five 
years earlier, Avidius Cassius had not hesitated to claim the throne on a false report of 
Marcus’ death. The immediate collapse of his rebellion, and his murder following the news 
that Marcus was after all alive, will have served as a warning to impatient and ambitious 
army commanders. And things were now different. In 175 Commodus was still a boy. Now 
he was recognised as emperor. Any rival would need vast prestige to gain acceptance.


--- PAGE 48 ---
Marcus had chosen husbands for his daughters with the apparent deliberate intention of 
preventing counter-claims from that quarter. Only one of Commodus’ six brothers-in-law, 
the obvious source of a rival to his throne, could be described as an aristocrat. 9     
In spite of these difficulties, there was an attempted coup less than two years after 
Commodus’ return to Rome. With the benefit of hindsight it is possible to view the entire 
twelve-and-a-half years of his reign as a long drawn-out battle for survival by an emperor 
who was nonetheless, for much of the time, seemingly unaware of the danger. A succession 
of favourites held the real power like Grand Viziers, and Commodus devoted himself to 
pleasure. Meanwhile, with the exception of a few unambitious and devotedly loyal men like 
Claudius Pompeianus, the most prominent among the ruling classes plotted incessantly and 
manoeuvred for his inevitable removal. 10     
The first attempt was made by Lucilla, the former empress. Not with her husband’s 
connivance; but two of the other brothers-in-law were to be executed for conspiracy later in 
the reign. In a second conspiracy, uncovered immediately after that of Lucilla, the military 
men can be seen to have had a bid ready—and a cousin of Commodus, perhaps intended to 
be used as a pawn, was implicated. There were signs of unrest in different parts of the 
empire throughout the reign. The British army, for example, twice attempted to force the 
throne on nervous and reluctant generals. 11     
The hatred that Commodus brought on himself because of Saoterus gave a group centred 
around Lucilla its cue in 182. Her motive is alleged to have been jealousy at the loss of her 
privileges in favour of the new empress Crispina. It may be only Herodian’s naivety that led 
him to believe that the loss of the front seat at the theatre caused her to act. But it 
-60- 
could be that her resentment was used by others. Two men are named. One was her lover 
Ummidius Quadratus, adopted son of Marcus’ nephew and stepson of Commodus’ eldest 
sister. The other was Lucilla’s prospective son-in-law, Quintianus, a nephew of her husband 
Pompeianus. He too was said to be Lucilla’s lover. These two men, closely connected to the 
dynasty by marriage, were predictable claimants to Commodus’ throne. 
But they bungled the job. As Commodus entered the hunting-theatre, Quintianus, his 
trusted boon companion, appeared in the narrow pass-ageway. He held out his weapon, 
proclaiming rhetorically: ‘This dagger the senate sends you!’ The little speech gave the 
emperor’s bodyguards time to seize the assassin. Fatuus was the opinion that the HA has of 
Quintianus, no doubt echoing Marius Maximus, who may have been a derisive onlooker. 
Quintianus and Quadratus were executed, along with others. Lucilla was exiled to Capri at 
first. Later she too was killed. Her husband Pompeianus withdrew from public life, pleading 
the excuse of failing eyesight. He had not been involved, but others had been, including one 
of the two Guard Prefects, Taruttienus Paternus. For the time being he escaped undetected. 
And, perhaps in the confusion that followed the attempt, he and his colleague Tigidius 
Perennis had Saoterus murdered by the secret police. 12     
Commodus took the loss of his favourite badly. The ambitious Perennis took his chance. He 
instigated the dismissal of his more distinguished colleague, who was ‘kicked upstairs’ by 
the award of senatorial rank. A few days later evidence was produced implicating Paternus 
in another conspiracy, and he was executed. This second plot was potentially much more 
serious. Paternus’ alleged involvement with the Lucilla affair suggests that he may have 
been trying to use her group to remove Commodus, leaving the throne vacant for his own


--- PAGE 49 ---
candidate, Salvius Julianus, whose son was betrothed to Paternus’ daughter. Julianus, son 
of the great jurist, was commanding an army at the time the plot was detected, perhaps 
that of Upper Germany. Dio asserts that the charge was false, but it is plausible. Salvius’ 
kinsman Didius Julianus, who had been governing Lower Germany, was later charged with 
complicity. He cleared himself but was ordered to withdraw to his native Milan. Apart from 
Paternus and Salvius Julianus, two of the consuls of 182, two exconsuls, the ab epistulis 
Vitruvius Secundus, and Vitrasia Faustina, were also put to death. The involvement of the 
ab epistulis is a hint that Paternus had been attempting to use the secretariat to contact the 
provincial armies. 13     
More heads were to roll. The Quintilii brothers, who had shared the consulship over thirty 
years before, were executed. Quintilius Condianus, son of one of them, was then in Syria. 
He was hunted down and killed. 
-61- 
The pursuit of Condianus was a dramatic affair. Pertinax the governor of Syria, and 
Septimius Severus as one of the three legionary legates, will have had to take a leading role 
in this distasteful task. Condianus did not submit tamely, as so many had in the past to the 
assassins of a tyrannical emperor. Dio, who was at this time in the neighbouring province of 
Cilicia, which his father was governing, gives a detailed account. Condianus feigned death, 
by drinking the blood of a hare, falling purposely from his horse and vomiting the blood out, 
after which he was carried in as if dead. While he made his escape, a dead ram was 
cremated in his coffin. The story got out and he was hunted everywhere. Many suspects 
who resembled him were executed and their heads sent to Rome. His eventual fate was 
never discovered. 
Witnessing what was happening both in Rome and in Syria, and elsewhere, Septimius 
cannot have felt secure. Before the end of 182 the blow fell. Pertinax was dismissed from 
his Syrian command. At the same time, or soon after, Septimius himself was sacked. 14     
-62- 
7 
THE GREAT MARSHAL 
SEPTIMIUS’ JOURNEY TO SYRIA must have affected him in many ways. It was, for one 
thing, probably his first experience of the Greek-speaking part of the empire. One cannot of 
course exclude that he had been to neighbouring Cyrenaica from Lepcis, during his 
boyhood, or even to Alexandria. But travelling through Greece and the great cities of Asia, 
at this time at the peak of their prosperity, must have been an absorbing experience for 
anyone with an interest in antiquity, which Septimius certainly possessed. Perhaps more 
than this though, it may have been a curiously moving experience for a man from Punic 
Africa to visit the heartland of Phoenician civilisation, to see Tyre and Sidon, the mother 
cities of Carthage. Septimius will have found that the predominant language was Aramaic, a 
Semitic tongue related to the Punic that he and his fellow-Africans still used. Greek was the 
language of the state and of culture. Aramaic was the language of the people. 1     
The most immediately significant experience for Septimius in Syria would be that he would 
serve under the governor Pertinax. This contact was fateful for Septimius’ entire future. P.


--- PAGE 50 ---
Helvius Pertinax was one of the most remarkable figures of that or any age of Roman 
history. Born in north-west Italy, at Alba Pompeia in Liguria, he was the son of a freedman. 
That a man whose father had been a slave had even reached the eminence of the 
consulship had, some years earlier, attracted considerable surprise and comment, not all of 
it favourable. His future was to be even more remarkable. Yet his career in the imperial 
service had not begun until he was thirty-four, almost precisely the age of Septimius himself 
when he went to Syria. The great marshal’s father, Helvius Successus, like other freedmen
—the example that springs to mind is the father of the poet Horace—had determined to 
advance his son’s career by giving him a good education. He was sent to Rome to study 
with the celebrated grammaticus, Sulpicius Apollinaris of Carthage. Entry to Apollinaris’ 
classes was perhaps secured through the mediation of Successus’ patron, the well-
connected senator Lollianus Avitus, on whose estates the Helvii lived. When his tuition from 
Apollinaris ended, Pertinax became a teacher himself, for at least ten years. Finally, in 160 
he became discontented with 
-63- 
his low income and decided on a very different career. He asked his father’s patron to get 
him a commission as a centurion. This would have assured him a steady job with reasonable 
pay and prospects for the rest of his working life. There had even been men, such as the 
great Marcius Turbo forty years before, who had risen to be Praetorian Prefect from such 
beginnings. Pertiriax had left his application for a commission too late to hope for this. In 
any case, Lollianus Avitus, for all his prestige, seems to have failed to acquire a 
centurionate for Pertinax. Perhaps he did not try very hard, or possibly something made 
Pertinax change his mind. At any rate, he accepted instead an ostensibly more attractive 
post, as prefect of a cohort of Gauls in Syria. This was the first grade of the equestrian 
militiae. But as prefect of an infantry battalion 500-strong, of non-citizen soldiers, Pertinax 
had acquired only a short-service commission, with no fixed length of tenure. When he was 
replaced, there would be no guarantee of further employment. 2     
Dio appears to state that Pertinax began his army career through the mediation of another 
patron, whom he had met ‘in the course of his teaching’. This was Claudius Pompeianus, a 
native of Antioch in Syria, later to be the second husband of Lucilla. Attidius Cornelianus, 
the governor under whom Pertinax was to serve, had been in Syria since 157. Pertinax’s 
first meeting with him was inauspicious. He made use of the government posting-service to 
get to Antioch, without having the official pass (diploma). As a punishment the governor 
refused him transport to get to his unit: Pertinax had to walk. 3     
Unfortunately, the rigidity of Attidius Cornelianus over regulations was not made up for by 
military capacity. The following year the Parthian war broke out. In 162, after the defeat of 
Severianus in Cappadocia, Cornelianus attempted to restore the situation: he was 
ignominiously defeated. The Syrian army had been a slack and undisciplined condition. 
Before long the balance was redressed. The expeditionary force under Verus came to Syria 
before the end of the year, and in 163 a great victory was won by Statius Priscus in 
Armenia. Pertinax had the opportunity to show his talents, showing a capacity for ‘hard 
work’. Perhaps the new governor Cn. Julius Verus sent in a favourable report on him to the 
ab epistulis. Pertinax was promoted to the second militia. It may seem surprising that from 
Syria he was sent to distant Britain. But the Roman government never hesitated to transfer 
men from one end of the empire to the other. The governor Calpurnius Agricola had 
probably asked Rome for battle-trained men—or perhaps specifically for men of high 
intelligence and maturity. It could even be that Julius Verus, himself a former governor of


--- PAGE 51 ---
Britain, was asked directly to recommend an officer that he judged would be suitable for 
service in Britain. 4     
-64- 
Pertinax became one of the five equestrian tribunes of the legion VI Victrix at Eboracum 
(York). Their duties were mainly administrative. An ex-schoolmaster with several years of 
military service behind him, and one who had probably seen some fighting, will have been a 
useful staff officer. Calpurnius Agricola was engaged on an extensive reorganisation of the 
British frontier in the face of hostility both in the Scottish Lowlands and in the Pennines. 
Hadrian’s Wall was reoccupied in strength and became the frontier line once more. 
Pertinax’s duties may have taken him away from York, closer to the frontier: legionary 
detachments were stationed at Coria (Corbridge). Pertinax then went to the Wall itself. He 
was given command of another unit, evidently the First Tungrians, probably already at 
Housesteads, at the central point of the Wall. Pertinax may have made the acquaintance of 
Septimius’ brother Geta, who was tribune with II Augusta in the 160s. The legion’s base 
was at Isca (Caerleon), but parts of the legion were out-stationed, at Coria and on the Wall. 5     
Before the Parthian war ended preparations were in hand for the inevitable war on the 
Danube. It was an indication that Pertinax continued to show promise that his next 
appointment was to command a cavalry regiment in Moesia. As praefectus alae he had now 
reached the third militia. His friend and patron Pompeianus was also serving on the Danube, 
in the much more exalted position of governor of Lower Pannonia, with his headquarters at 
Aquincum (Budapest). It may be coincidence, but Pertinax appears for the first time in the 
historical record in this province, adjacent to Upper Moesia. An altar has been found at 
Sirmium, dedicated to ‘Jupiter Best and Greatest and Mars the Protector’ by ‘P. Helvius 
Pertinax, prefect’. Sirmium was soon to become an important military headquarters. It was 
also on Pertinax’s route from Britain to Moesia. But one may suspect that his presence there 
was brought about by Pompeianus, and that his unit was transferred to reinforce the Lower 
Pannonian garrison. Pertinax will have been close to the first ominous outbreak of war, 
when Upper Pannonia was invaded by a force of 6000 Germans. The officer who repulsed 
them, Macrinius Avitus, was a little senior to Pertinax and, like him, had come to the 
Danube from the VIth legion in Britain. 6     
Pertinax had now reached a turning point in his new career. In normal conditions he might 
well have been obliged to retire from the service. There was only one further promotion 
open to him as an equestrian officer, the fourth militia. But the number of appointments 
available was so small as to make it out of the reach of most. The alternative was the 
administrative service. No doubt with the backing of Pompeianus, he was appointed 
procurator of the alimenta system for the district of the Via 
-65- 
Aemilia in northern Italy. Although it was on the lowest rung of the procuratorial ladder, 
with a salary of 60,000 sesterces a year, the area had key significance at this time, almost 
certainly the year 168, precisely when the emperors established their base at Aquileia. 
Pertinax was soon promoted again, his salary increasing to 100,000 sesterces with the 
command of the German fleet. This appointment cannot have lasted long, perhaps less than 
a year, for he was then given a special procuratorship in Dacia, with a salary of 200,000 
sesterces. Within three years at the most he had climbed through all the grades of the 
procuratorial hierarchy. Within the 200,000 or ‘ducenary’ category there were, it is true,


--- PAGE 52 ---
variations of prestige, and a new higher grade of 300,000 a year had just been established. 
But the rapid promotion is very striking. The people of Cologne, where the German fleet was 
based, erected a statue to him when the news of his Dacian post came through. 7     
His new appointment lay in the thick of the action. In 170 Italy was invaded while Marcus 
was trying unsuccessfully to launch a Roman offensive across the Danube. Roman losses 
were heavy, and they included one of the leading generals, M. Claudius Fronto, who was 
killed in battle. It is uncertain where Pertinax was at the moment of the invasion. But now 
his career took a backward turn. He was dismissed from his Dacian post, and not given any 
further appointment. This is all the more surprising in that his patron Pompeianus had now 
reached a new pinnacle of influence, having married the widowed Lucilla. Perhaps the 
removal of Pertinax was engineered by enemies of Pompeianus, too weak to attack the 
emperor’s son-in-law in person. But Pompeianus was entrusted with the task of clearing the 
invaders out of Italy, and selected Pertinax as his aide. He performed well, and was 
rewarded with promotion to the senate. There was a desperate need for senators with 
military talent, and after a short period he was given the rank of ex-praetor and command 
of the Pannonian legion I Adiutrix. Marcus had been informed of his dismissal in Dacia, and 
wanted ‘to compensate for the wrong done him’. With his legion he completed the rout of 
the invaders by clearing the provinces of Raetia and Noricum. Soon after came a mysterious 
episode, the Rain Miracle. The long-delayed Roman offensive had at last begun. A Roman 
force operating in enemy territory was surrounded, exhausted from the heat and with no 
drinking water. A sudden cloudburst revived them and stunned the enemy, who were 
further disarrayed by hail and thunderbolts. The Roman victory which followed was 
commemorated on the coinage and in the sixteenth scene of the Aurelian Column. The 
followers of various religions claimed that their prayers had brought about the rain. Most 
versions of the story speak of the emperor’s presence—and some credit him with the 
prayers that brought the rain. But one source states 
-66- 
that Pertinax was in command of the troops saved by the miraculous storm. Circumstantial 
evidence suggests that this is correct and that Pertinax was there as legate of I Adiutrix in 
172. The prestige gained among the troops must have been immense. His legionary 
command evidently continued until he became consul in 175, with, as his colleague, Didius 
Julianus. Julianus’ connections would have ensured him the consulship as his rightful due. 
Pertinax’s tenure of the fasces (in absentia) provoked some to quote Euripides: ‘Things of 
this kind wretched war brings to pass.’ The emperor, as if to answer critics, made a speech 
recommending Pertinax as consul, with ‘a eulogy of him’, and an account ‘of everything that 
he had done or suffered’. Marcus frequently praised Pertinax both before the troops and to 
the troops, and ‘publicly expressed regret that he was a senator and could not be made 
Praetorian Prefect’. In the spring of 175 Avidius Cassius proclaimed himself emperor, but 
was subsequently killed by one of his own officers. For the second time in the reign the east 
was in turmoil. Cassius was a Syrian, and had won considerable local support. Marcus went 
to the east, and Pertinax was among the comites who accompanied him, though his second 
visit to Syria was brief. He returned to the Danube, governing Upper and Lower Moesia and 
Dacia in rapid succession. But before the death of Marcus in 180 Pertinax was appointed 
governor of Syria. 8     
The significance of this appointment is manifest. In the year before his death Marcus had 
sensed that he had not long to live. He wanted to ensure the succession, and above all to 
ensure that Commodus continued to rely on Claudius Pompeianus. By placing a protégé of


--- PAGE 53 ---
Pompeianus in this key province he could secure both the allegiance of the east and the 
maintenance of Pompeianus’ influence after his death. 
As governor of Syria, Pertinax had now, at the age of fifty-three, reached the summit of the 
senatorial career. In normal circumstances he would have looked forward to an honourable 
retirement, with the option of serving for a year as proconsul of Asia or Africa some fifteen 
years after his consulship; perhaps a second consulship might be hoped for, or even the 
Prefecture of the City of Rome. The retirement that was forced upon him only two years 
after the death of Marcus must have seemed a cruel anti-climax. 9     
-67- 
8 
JULIA DOMNA 
As LEGATE OF IV SCYTHICA Septimius had been assigned to the most prestigious of the 
three Syrian legions, the closest to the capital, Antioch on the Orontes. XVI Flavia, which his 
‘uncle’ Gaius had commanded twenty-five years earlier, was based at Samosata on the 
Euphrates, in Commagene, not far from the border with Cappadocia. III Gallica lay at 
Raphaneae, south of Apamea, between the Orontes and the sea. As for IV Scythica, it had 
long been stationed at or near Zeugma, ‘the bridge’ over the Euphrates, where the road 
from Antioch crossed the river into the client kingdom of Osrhoene, in north-western 
Mesopotamia. The HA states that Septimius ‘was put in command of the legion IV Scythica 
near Massilia’. A simple emendation produces ‘circa Massiam’. Places or rivers called 
‘Massyas’ or ‘Marsyas’ are found in various parts of Syria. Massyas was the fertile upper 
Orontes valley, called ‘Hollow Syria’, Coele Syria, by the Greeks, between the Lebanon and 
Anti-Lebanon mountains, north-west of Damascus. But there is no other evidence for IV 
Scythica being based so far south, although it is more than likely that Septimius visited the 
area while in Syria. More plausible perhaps would be the River Marsyas, a western tributary 
of the Euphrates between Samosata and Zeugma. The HA doubtless drastically abbreviated 
its source, Marius Maximus. He certainly reported another story that the HA uses about 
Septimius’ Syrian command; and he had reason to know this province well. 1     
Septimius was certainly at Antioch on occasion. He may even have been acting governor for 
a short time, after Pertinax’s dismissal and before the arrival of the new governor Domitius 
Dexter. According to the HA the Antiochenes made fun of him while he was there in an 
official capacity. No details or reasons are given; but Septimius did not forget the slight. 
Apart from his duties, Septimius may have attended the Antiochene Olympic games, held 
every four years for forty-five days, beginning in August. All public spectacles at Antioch 
had been abolished by Marcus a few years earlier, to punish the city for supporting the 
usurper Cassius. Commodus had allowed the games to be restored. His brother-in-law 
Claudius Pompeianus, himself an Antiochene, may have exerted 
-68- 
influence: the Secretary of the restored games, held in summer 181, was another 
Pompeianus. Antioch’s teeming population needed public entertainment as Verus had found, 
to his own satisfaction, in the early 160s. The great city may have had as many as half a 
million inhabitants, making it the largest in the east after Alexandria. 2


--- PAGE 54 ---
There was much here for Septimius to reflect upon. He will have come across Parthians and 
others from across the frontier. The Euphrates, which marked the border with Parthia, is a 
mere 100 miles in a direct line from Antioch. Osrhoene was some kind of buffer, and Roman 
garrisons may have been left at certain points in Mesopotamia, such as Nisibis—as they 
were in the kingdom of Armenia—after the end of the Parthian war in 166, but Septimius 
may have perceived the vulnerability of the Syrian frontier. As legate of IV Scythica he 
guarded the central sector and the route by which invaders would aim for the Syrian capital. 
His military responsibilities may have taken him across the Euphrates on occasion, for 
example to Edessa, capital of Osrhoene. Here reigned the Roman vassal Abgar IX, who had 
recently succeeded Ma‘nu VIII, ‘Mannus Philoromaeus’, as he was known to the Romans. 
Ma’nu had been deposed by the Parthians in the 160s and restored by the armies of Lucius 
Verus. The dynasty, in origin desert Arabs, had ruled in this part of Mesopotamia since the 
late second century BC over a population whose language was a form of Aramaic, the lingua 
franca of the entire region, alongside Greek. 3     
It may have been necessary for Septimius to inspect Roman garrisons south of Zeugma, 
along the Euphrates as far as Dura-Europus, captured in the 160s and now Rome’s furthest 
outpost on the Parthian frontier. The desert was the land of the bedouin, traversed above all 
by the caravanserai from Palmyra. This country must have reminded him of the hinterland 
of his native Tripolitania. Whether or not Septimius saw Dura and Palmyra during his tour of 
duty as legionary legate, it is clear enough that he went to another city in southern Syria, 
Palmyra’s western neighbour, Emesa. Like Edessa, Emesa had once been the seat of an 
Arab principality. But whereas Edessa was a Macedonian foundation on the site of an earlier 
city, there is no record of any settlement at Emesa before the first century BC, when an 
Arab sheikh named Samsigeramus played a notable part in the last years of the Seleucid 
kingdom of Syria. The luckless Antiochus XIII, who had been promised the Seleucid throne 
by Lucullus, was backed by Samsigeramus; his rival Philip relied on another Arab dynast, 
Aziz of Beroea (Aleppo). Then, in 64 BC, Pompeius Magnus arrived. He refused to recognise 
Antiochus, who was killed by his erstwhile ally. The rump of Seleucid Syria was annexed as 
the Roman province of Syria. But Samsigeramus retained Emesa, and the strongpoint of 
Arethusa to the north, with Pompey’s blessing. No doubt he made some of his consider- 
-69- 
able wealth available to the great general, whose relations with the Arab ruler were before 
long made fun of by Cicero (he began to nickname Pompey ‘Samsigeramus’). A few years 
later Cicero himself was in the vicinity, as governor of Cilicia, and wrote warmly of 
Samsigeramus’ successor Iamblichus, ‘phylarch of the Arabs’, as ‘a person that men reckon 
has the right ideas and is a friend of our Republic’. Iamblichus was soon to ingratiate 
himself with Caesar, sending much-needed military assistance when the dictator was 
trapped in Egypt in 47 BC. He survived for another fifteen years, only to be executed by 
Antony, whom he had supported, on the eve of Actium in 31 BC. After a gap, his son of the 
same name was reinstalled by Augustus in 20 BC, to reign at Emesa as one of the 
numerous petty princes of the east, among whom Herod is the best known. The Emesene 
dynasty, like many of the others, was to become closely intermeshed with the Herodian 
royal house. Iamblichus II reigned until AD 14, his successor Samsigeramus II until AD 47. 
The latter was married to Iotape, descendant of a Median princess of that name; his 
daughter, also Iotape, married Aristobulus, brother of Herod Agrippa I. Samsigeramus 
attended Herod Agrippa’s ‘conference of kings’ at Caesarea in 43, and his successor Aziz 
married Drusilla, sister of Herod Agrippa II (while the marriage lasted he converted to 
Judaism). 4


--- PAGE 55 ---
Another Emesene princess, Julia Mamaea, was married to Polemo, king of Pontus and of 
Cilician Olba, whose previous wife was the Jewish princess Berenice. The last of the 
Emesene dynasts, Sohaemus, outdid all his predecessors. He became ruler in 54, the year 
Nero succeeded Claudius. Rome was heavily engaged with Parthia throughout Nero’s reign, 
and Sohaemus was given the chance to play an active part. He was granted a second 
kingdom in far off Sophene, near the source of the Tigris, where his mounted archers could 
ward off the Parthians. When the Jewish revolt broke out he was quick to lend support to 
Rome; when Vespasian was proclaimed emperor he was among the first to swear 
allegiance; and a few years later he brought troops to assist in the annexation of 
Commagene. At the Roman colony at Heliopolis (Baalbek) in the Bekaa valley, Gaius Julius 
Sohaemus was honoured as the ‘great king, honorary duumvir quinquennalis, and patron’. 
Furthermore, he had been granted the ornamenta consularia, honorary consular status. 5     
Sohaemus was apparently the last king. It is uncertain exactly when he died, but it seems 
probable that Emesa was absorbed into the Roman province of Syria soon afterwards, in the 
Flavian period. This is what happened to Agrippa II’s realm when the last Jewish king died in 
the 90s. After the kingship lapsed, descendants of the royal house are still found at Emesa. 
The names Samsigeramus, Sohaemus, Iamblichus, Aziz, Iotape, likewise Alexio and 
Alexander, appear on inscriptions frequently. Two 
-70- 
particular Emesenes achieved wider prominence in the second century. Sohaemus, already 
a Roman senator of consular rank, was installed by Lucius Verus as king of Armenia in 163. 
His contemporary the novelist Iamblichus, himself ‘descended from the ancient dynasts’, 
says that Sohaemus reigned ‘in succession to his ancestors’. This must refer to the first 
century Sohaemus, to whom Nero granted the kingdom of Sophene. Iamblichus also calls 
the king of Armenia ‘an Arsacid and an Achaemenid’: he was, after all, a descendant of the 
Median princess Iotape. Iamblichus’ novel, the Babyloniaca, by its very name underlines 
Emesa’s connections with the east. The Arab names of the Emesene dynasts and their 
descendants, derived from Semitic deities in several cases, recall Emesa’s links with her 
founder’s bedouin past. 6     
Emesa was unquestionably wealthy. The fertile volcanic soil of the Orontes valley favoured 
cultivation. It produced wheat, vines and olives. Its great lake, formed by a dam across the 
Orontes, south of the city, provided ample water. Its territory extended far to the east 
across the steppe, where it bordered the western lands of Palmyra. The trade route from 
the east, via Palmyra, passed through Emesa on its way to the coast. This was terrain that 
the ancestors of the first Samsigeramus had travelled again and again, before deciding to 
settle in the Orontes valley. The people of Emesa evidently spoke Aramaic and Greek. 
Knowledge of Latin was probably also common: Berytus (Beirut) on the coast, a Roman 
colony with a flourishing law school, was not too far distant; Heliopolis, another colony, was 
only some fifty miles south; Raphaneae, where the legion III Gallica had its base, was even 
closer, to the north-west. 7     
The coastal cities of this region were all Phoenician in origin: Aradus, Tripolis, Byblus, 
Berytus, Sidon and Tyre. They retained some consciousness of their ancient past, even 
though by the first century AD they carried a heavy veneer of Hellenic culture, and the 
Greek language predominated. By extension Arab Emesa considered itself, or was 
considered to be, a Phoenician city. One of its best known sons, the novelist Heliodorus, 
called himself ‘a Phoenician from Emesa, from the race of the Sun’. Emesa was to become 
famous above all for its cult of the god Elagabal, thought by Herodian to be ‘the Phoenician


--- PAGE 56 ---
name for the sun-god’. In fact the deity was the god (El) of the mountain (gabal), 
worshipped in the form of a conical black stone. To the Greeks the name sounded like 
‘Heliogabalus’, and the Emesenes themselves seem to have happily accepted the 
identification: dedications are found overseas to ‘the ancestral Sun God Elagabal’. 8     
The earliest coin issues from Emesa, under Antoninus Pius, celebrate the cult of Elagabal: 
they depict an eagle perched on the black stone. Later an elaborate monumental altar is 
shown. Two superimposed rows of niches, between two pilasters, stand on a massive base, 
with statues in each of the 
-71- 
six niches. Above is a smaller altar, surmounted by the great stone itself, ornamented with 
mysterious markings. According to Herodian, who describes the cult when it had reached 
even greater renown, ‘all the neighbouring princes and rulers sent generous and expensive 
gifts there every year’. The priesthood was held by a family that may be assumed to 
descend from the princely house of Samsigeramus and Sohaemus. At the time of Septimius’ 
visit the priest was named Julius Bassianus, whose Latin-sounding cognomen was 
presumably adapted from the Semitic priestly title basus. Herodian portrays the priest of 
Elagabal as clad in ‘barbaric’ costume—in fact it sounds Parthian—with long-sleeved and 
gold-embroidered purple tunic reaching to his feet, gold and purple trousers, and a jewelled 
diadem on his head. Julius Bassianus had two daughters, Domna and Maesa. Both names 
are Semitic, Domna being close to the Arabic ‘Dumayna’, an archaic diminutive form of 
Dimna (related to the colour black). It was assumed often enough by Romans to be a 
contracted form of Domina. A few years later Septimius was to marry Julia Domna, 
allegedly having learned that ‘her horoscope predicted that she would marry a king’. For the 
time being, Septimius was still married to Paccia Marciana, and, addicted though he was to 
astrology, he may not yet have consulted what the stars foretold for Julia. 9     
As daughter of the priest of Elagabal, from a royal line, Julia might not have regarded such 
a horoscope as far-fetched. It was not long since a Sohaemus had been crowned king in 
Armenia. Whether he was still on the throne at this time is unknown. Sohaemus had been a 
Roman senator and consul before he was made king of Armenia; Julia Domna’s father was 
of less exalted rank—Cassius Dio calls her ‘plebeian’, meaning no doubt, non-senatorial. A 
person of the same names happens to be registered at this very time by the jurist Cervidius 
Scaevola: a woman called Julia Domna was declared the rightful inheritor of an estate left 
some years before by her great-uncle, Julius Agrippa, a primipilaris. There is nothing 
inherently implausible about the notion that a man from the family of the Emesene high 
priests should serve in a legion and rise to be chief centurion. The Emesenes were a warlike 
people, and sent men into the legions, as well as contributing their archers to the auxilia of 
the imperial army. 10     
It is attractive to imagine Septimius visiting Tyre and Sidon, the mother cities of the 
western Phoenicians. Whether he would have had the opportunity at this time is hard to 
say. At all events, Dio registers a visit to a city north of Emesa, Apamea on the Orontes, 
about halfway between Emesa and Antioch. Here he consulted the oracle of Zeus Belos, that 
is, the local Ba‘al. The god’s reply was a quotation from Homer’s Iliad:
-72- 
Eyes and head like Zeus who delights in thunder,


--- PAGE 57 ---
Like Ares his waist, his chest like Posidon. 
Whether Septimius instantly took this as a prediction of future greatness is not clear: it is a 
description of king Agamemnon. But he noted the response carefully. 11     
Septimius’ dismissal from his legionary command is not described in explicit terms, nor 
indeed is Pertinax’s removal from the governorship. But the HA reports of Pertinax that after 
his return from Syria to Rome and his attendance, for the first time, in the senate-house, 
‘he was immediately ordered by Perennis to withdraw’ to the family property in Liguria. The 
‘exile’ lasted three years and was ended by the fall of Perennis in 185. Hence Pertinax’s 
dismissal must belong to the aftermath of Lucilla’s conspiracy. As a protégé of Lucilla’s 
husband Pompeianus—even though Pompeianus himself was not involved—Pertinax would 
be suspect. Furthermore, the Condianus affair had taken place in his province, and two 
senators from the province, Aemilius Juncus of Tripolis and Velius Rufus of Heliopolis, were 
exiled after the Lucilla plot. It looks as if Syria, which had supported the rebellion of Avidius 
Cassius only seven years before, was still disaffected. 12     
As for Septimius himself, there is no direct clue. He may have remained at his post for a 
time after Pertinax’s departure, long enough to serve the new governor Domitius Dexter, 
later an ally of his. Likewise he may have overlapped with Fabius Cilo, who commanded XVI 
Flavia in the early 180s. The HA does not state outright that Septimius was dismissed or 
that he was told to withdraw from public life. But following his departure from Syria he went 
to Athens ‘to study, and for religious purposes and to see the monuments and antiquities’. 
He was denied further advancement for several years. Tourism was by this time in vogue. 
Less than twenty years before Pausanias had published his guide to Greece to cater for it. 
Plenty of wealthy Romans from the west went to Athens to study, as was the case with 
Apuleius and Sicinius Pontianus of Oca. Septimius had left it a little late, perhaps, to attend 
lectures by the great Hadrianus of Tyre, foremost among the pupils of the celebrated 
Herodes Atticus. Hadrianus was probably already professor of rhetoric at Rome, and his own 
pupil Julius Pollux held the chair at Athens. Pollux was a man of mediocre talent, known as 
the author of an Onomasticon and as composer of Commodus’ wedding hymn a few years 
before. One teacher that Septimius may have met and liked was Aelius Antipater of 
Phrygian Hierapolis, his exact contemporary. Antipater was later to be a close associate of 
Septimius. 13     
-73- 
The religious motives are not specified. One may suspect that he had himself initiated into 
the Eleusinian Mysteries, following the example of four emperors, Hadrian, Verus, and, most 
recently, Marcus and Commodus in 176. One of the teachers whose lectures Septimius 
could have attended, if he really devoted himself to study at this time, was Apollonius, a 
native of Athens, who was hierophant of Demeter at Eleusis. 14     
At best these activities can only have palliated the boredom and frustration that so 
ambitious a man must have felt. News from Rome in 183 and 184 will have occupied his 
attention. Commodus inaugurated 184 as consul for the fourth time, with Victorinus, still 
City Prefect, as his colleague. But the reins of government were in the hands of the Prefect 
of the Guard, Tigidius Perennis. The emperor took a new title, ‘Pius’, and victories in the 
north won him fifth and sixth salutations as Imperator. Fighting was also going on in Britain, 
following disaster there at the opening of the reign. The governor Ulpius Marcellus ruthlessly 
suppressed the north Britons, winning Commodus a seventh salutation and the title 
‘Britannicus’. But Marcellus’ harsh character caused trouble with the legions. There was an


--- PAGE 58 ---
attempted coup, when the troops tried to invest a legionary legate named Priscus with the 
purple. He wisely refused. But Perennis took reprisals: the legates of the British legions 
were all dismissed and their duties assumed by equestrian officers. This was an 
unprecedented blow against the system of cooperation between senate and emperor. 15     
Perennis’ hostility to the senate was far-reaching, if the HA may be believed: many senators 
were put to death. Yet at the same time Perennis’ own sons advanced rapidly to the heights 
of the senatorial cursus. One was given the principal credit for victories on the Danube. This 
gave plausibility to the rumour that Perennis was plotting to place his son on the throne. 
Since the beginning of the second century it had been the army of the Danube, rather than 
of the Rhine, which was predominant. 16     
The confused conditions in the western half of the empire provided the opportunity to 
overthrow Perennis in the following year. Herodian attributes his fall to the arrival of soldiers 
from Pannonia who revealed his secret plans. Dio has another story: the soldiers who came 
to Rome were 1500 men from the army of Britain—and Commodus actually allowed them to 
carry out Perennis’ execution themselves. It is hard to understand why or how a contingent 
of troops from Britain should have turned up outside Rome. Dio gives no clue that it was 
anything other than a deliberate sending of a deputation. But it may be that a force from 
the British army was already operating on the continent for another purpose, the 
suppression of brigandage. The end of the Marcomannic wars had left bands of runaway 
slaves and deserters roaming through Gaul, Spain and Italy. The soldiers in Britain were 
already mutinous and discontented. 
-74- 
There was a powerful ally in the palace, the freedman Oleander, who may have urged 
Commodus to believe the accusations against Perennis. 17     
The death of the Prefect brought about many changes. Ulpius Marcellus, recalled from 
Britain, was tried and narrowly escaped with his life. There were other trials also. The place 
of Perennis as real master of the empire was now taken by Cleander. Brought to Rome from 
Phrygia as a slave, to be a pack-carrier, he had become an imperial freedman and 
succeeded Saoterus as chamberlain. Now Cleander bestowed and sold entry to the senate, 
army commands, governorships, procuratorships. The great Aufidius Victorinus, renowned 
for his incorruptibility, preferred not to remain and watch. He committed suicide. Others had 
less scruples, especially those whom the domination of Perennis had thrust to the side. 
Pertinax was brought back and appointed governor of Britain, with the mandate of 
eliminating the spirit of mutiny in the army there. Septimius too was recalled, and received 
his first governorship, of Gallia Lugdunensis. 18     
Here he had no military force under his command, with the exception of the Urban Cohort at 
Lugdunum, 500 strong. But he had a large province, stretching from its capital on the 
Rhône, which was also the meeting-place of the annual assembly of the three Gallic 
provinces, to the Atlantic and Channel coasts. His duties were those of any Roman 
governor: to keep the province quiet and peaceful, and to act as its Chief Justice. There 
may have been particular difficulties at this time, on account of the widespread and 
increasingly dangerous activities of the deserters. In 186 there was serious trouble in the 
southern part of the adjacent province of Upper Germany, and later one of the deserters’ 
leaders, Maternus, is said to have been daring enough to try to assassinate Commodus at 
Rome itself. 19


--- PAGE 59 ---
Soon after Septimius’ arrival in Gaul, Paccia Marciana died. Virtually nothing is known of her
—Septimius apparently did not even mention her in his autobiography, although he did 
subsequently commemorate her with statues when he became emperor. Now over forty and 
still childless, he was anxious to remarry. According to the HA, ‘as a very skilled astrologer 
he enquired into the horoscope of potential brides. Since he had heard that there was a 
woman in Syria whose horoscope predicted that she would be married to a king, he sought 
her as his wife—it was, of course, Julia—and through the mediation of friends he gained her 
hand.’ The story of Julia’s horoscope, for which the HA gives Marius Maximus as the source, 
sounds plausible enough: Septimius was unquestionably an addict, and an expert. (It might 
however have been concocted as propaganda at a later stage, when Septimius was fighting 
to keep the throne.) Septimius had at any rate had the opportunity to visit the great temple 
at Emesa a 
-75- 
few years before. He probably knew its high priest, Julius Bassianus, and had perhaps met 
his daughters too—Julia Domna’s sister Maesa was to marry a man of Emesa, Julius Avitus 
Alexianus, an equestrian officer at this time. For a proposal of marriage to be sent from 
Lugdunum to Syria was straightforward. Syrian merchants were present in strength in the 
Rhône valley. It would be simple for Julia, too, to take ship off Aradus, a short distance from 
Emesa. 20     
Some time early in 187, at latest, the letter went to Syria. After the proposal was accepted 
Septimius had a dream: the empress Faustina, dead for more than ten years, was preparing 
the bridal chamber for himself and Julia in the great temple of Rome and Venus, near the 
imperial Palace. He had other dreams at Lugdunum, so it was later advertised, to one of 
which he attached a deep meaning. In one, water appeared to gush from his hand. In 
another, the Roman empire itself, personified, approached him and saluted. Most impressive 
of all, someone took him up to a high mountain, from which he could see Rome and all the 
world. ‘As he gazed down on all the land and sea, he laid his hands on them as one might 
on an instrument capable of playing all modes, and they all sang together.’ This is Dio’s 
version. The HA, which has more or less the same story (though sets it during the time in 
Spain ten years earlier), has the variant that ‘the provinces sang together to the 
accompaniment of the lyre and flute’. 21     
The marriage took place in the summer of 187. Julia was a striking, indeed beautiful 
woman, to judge from her later portraits, with fine and sensitive features. As Gibbon put it, 
‘she deserved all that the stars could promise her. She possessed…the attractions of beauty, 
and united to a lively imagination a firmness of mind and strength of judgement, seldom 
bestowed on her sex.’ She and Septimius probably spoke to each other in Greek, at first at 
least. It is conceivable that they could also communicate in a mixture of Aramaic and Punic. 
The two languages, both from the ‘north-west Semitic’ family, were closely related. Julia ‘at 
once conceived’. Her first child, a son, was born on 4 April 188, at Lugdunum, and was 
given the cognomen of his mother’s father, Bassianus; the praenomen is not recorded. 22     
During his governorship of Gaul there were several opportunities for Septimius to form close 
associations with fellow-senators serving in the region. The aristocratic Lollianus Gentianus, 
son of Avitus, patron of Apuleius and of Pertinax, may have passed through Lugdunensis on 
his way to assume command of the legion XXII Primigenia at Moguntiacum. Fabius Cilo, 
whom Septimius may have had as colleague in Syria, was proconsul of Narbonensis, the 
neighbouring province, at about this time. If the deserters were still a serious problem, 
governors would have


--- PAGE 60 ---
-76- 
been obliged to cooperate closely. Indeed the HA, in its admittedly mainly bogus life of 
Pescennius Niger, claims that Niger was sent ‘to hunt down deserters’ while Septimius was 
governing Lugdunensis, and that the later rivals were at that time on very friendly terms. 23     
Septimius’ governorship in Gaul ended in 188 and he returned to Rome, where his name 
went into the ballot for a proconsulship in the New Year. He received Sicily. Julia was 
pregnant again, and early in 189 a second son was born, named after Septimius’ father and 
brother: P. Septimius Geta. In the spring or early summer the family went to Sicily. It is not 
impossible that Septimius’ brother was his predecessor as proconsul. His career also may 
have suffered a setback while Perennis was in power. It is impossible to tell at what pace his 
rise in the cursus proceeded, but its stages were closely parallel to that of Septimius: a 
legionary command (in Lower Moesia), a provincial governorship (Lusitania) and a 
proconsulship. 24     
While Septimius had been in Gaul the pace had quickened in the murderous politics of 
Commodus’ reign. In Britain Pertinax had been almost lynched by his own men when a 
legion broke into open mutiny. This may have been when he refused to let the British army 
set him up as emperor— ‘for they wanted to set up any one (other than Commodus) as 
emperor, preferably Pertinax himself. While in Britain Pertinax took a surprising step. He 
wrote to Commodus, informing him that the emperor’s brother-in-law Antistius Burrus was 
seeking the throne, in association with his fellow-Numidian Arrius Antoninus. Antoninus 
must have been well known to Pertinax, and Burrus’ kinsman Antistius Adventus had served 
with distinction as a general in both Parthian and Marcomannic wars. It is fair to suppose 
that Pertinax had some evidence for his allegations. Perhaps the two men had approached 
him, by letter or through an intermediary, wanting the support of the three disaffected 
British legions and their commander-in-chief. It may therefore have been an act of self-
preservation to unmask the plans of Burrus—who might have seemed to Pertinax incapable 
of the task, not capax imperii. There may have been another motive. Burrus is said to have 
been ‘denouncing and reporting to Commodus’ everything that was being done—by the 
freedman Cleander. As Pertinax himself had regained his influence thanks to Cleander, he 
may have been persuaded by the freedman to act against a man whose outspokenness 
threatened to end his power. 25     
How long it took before Burrus and Antoninus were disposed of is not clear. Burrus had 
powerful allies, including the Guard Prefect Atilius Aebutianus; and Antoninus survived long 
enough to be proconsul of Asia for the year 188-9. Well before this Pertinax asked to be 
relieved of his 
-77- 
command: ‘The legions’, he said, ‘were hostile to him because of his strict discipline.’ He 
returned to Rome, and was given the undemanding charge of the alimenta. 26     
He had become something of a hero on account of his success in quelling the British mutiny. 
‘When a horse called Pertinax won—it was raced by the Green faction and was favoured by 
Commodus—its partisans raised a great shout: “It is Pertinax!” The others, their opponents
—in disgust at Commodus—added a prayer, shouting out: “If only it was!”, referring to the 
man, not the horse.’ But now Cleander was beginning to feel more confident. In 188 he 
disposed of Burrus and his ally the Prefect Aebutianus, latest of the numerous successors to


--- PAGE 61 ---
Perennis. Thereafter Cleander obtained direct personal authority over the praetorians, as 
‘Bearer of the Dagger’, a pugione, with two colleagues as Prefects. 27     
In the summer of 188 Pertinax went to Africa as proconsul. His term of office is alleged to 
have been stormy, with rioting at Carthage provoked by prophecies from the priests of Juno 
Caelestis, the Punic goddess Tanit. Pertinax survived these difficulties, and on his return to 
Rome in 189 became Prefect of the City. His colleague in Asia Arrius Antoninus, who had 
been faced only by fanatical would-be Christian martyrs, was less fortunate. Whether 
because of Pertinax’s intrigues, or perhaps, as the HA suggests, because he had offended a 
powerful personage in Asia, Attalus, Antoninus was put to death on Cleander’s orders. It 
was to create a backlash against Cleander and contribute to his downfall. 28     
The following year, 190, had the record number of twenty-five consuls. Commodus, holding 
office for the sixth time, opened the year with Petronius Sura Septimianus (brother of his 
brother-in-law Mamertinus). The emperor obviously resigned the fasces after a matter of 
days, his successor served as suffect with Sura Septimianus for the rest of January, and a 
new pair of suffects must have taken office in each of the remaining eleven months of the 
year. It was a scandalous climax to Cleander’s selling of offices. Septimius was one of the 
twenty-five consuls, who, Dio specifically states, were ‘appointed by Cleander’. But before 
Septimius’ proconsulship in Sicily ended, Cleander had fallen. The death of Arrius Antoninus 
had made him intensely unpopular with the volatile plebs. In addition, he had made a 
dangerous enemy, Papirius Dionysius. This man, after a distinguished equestrian career 
begun under Marcus, had been serving as Prefect of the Annona. He was then appointed 
Prefect of Egypt, a normal promotion. But he may not even have reached Egypt, or, if he 
did, his promotion was rapidly cancelled, and he was recalled to be prefect of the grain-
supply again. Back in his old position he was well placed to hurt Cleander. He deliberately 
created a corn-shortage, a sure way to arouse unpopularity against any government. 29     
-78- 
The discontent broke out during a performance in the Circus Maximus. This vast stadium, 
capable of seating 150,000 spectators, was a standing source of danger if the mob got out 
of hand. As Prefect of the Annona, with his offices a few yards from the Tiber end of the 
Circus, Dionysius probably controlled the seating for the shows. It would have been easy to 
arrange favourable positions for his agents. 
As the horses were about to start the seventh lap, a crowd of children ran into the Circus, 
led by a tall maiden of grim appearance—who, afterwards, because of what happened, 
people thought must have been a goddess. The children shouted out in unison, long and 
bitterly. The people took up the chant, and then began to shout out every conceivable 
insult. Finally the mob jumped down from their seats and went to look for the emperor, 
calling out many blessings on him and many curses against Cleander. 
Commodus was at this moment at the villa he had confiscated from the Quintilii, a few miles 
out of Rome along the Via Appia. Cleander sent a few soldiers against the mob, but it was 
undeterred, especially, Dio records, ‘because it was encouraged by the strength’ of some 
other ‘troops’. Who were these troops? Dio’s abbreviated account gives no clue. But in 
disturbances at the theatre and on other occasions, the official whose duty it was to keep 
order was the City Prefect with the 1500 men of the Urban Cohorts. Pertinax clearly took no 
action, nor did Cleander’s ‘colleagues’, the other Guard Prefects, to prevent the crowd 
streaming out of Rome. Finally Commodus’ mistress Marcia told the emperor what was 
going on. He was terrified and at once ordered Cleander to be put to death. 30


--- PAGE 62 ---
Pertinaxs’ change of front vis-à-vis Cleander is not difficult to explain. For one thing, he had 
had the chance to observe the man at close quarters. Besides this, both Dionysius and 
another key figure, Julius Julianus, who were keenly interested in getting rid of Cleander, 
were men whom Pertinax is likely to have known well and trusted. It seems that Julianus 
was serving as Prefect of the Guard, with one Regillus, under Cleander. When Cleander was 
killed, they acquired substantive control, if only briefly. Julianus’ career had begun many 
years before as prefect of a cohort in Syria at precisely the time when Pertinax himself was 
there in that rank. He too, like Pertinax, had commanded vexillations in the Marcomannic 
wars. Dionysius, although not primarily a military man, had had an administrative post 
during the second Marcomannic war at the end of Marcus’ reign. Pertinax could have felt 
solidarity with people of this kind. 31     
The overthrow of Cleander may be dated with some plausibility to 19 
-79- 
April, when the ludi Ceriales took place. At this time of year a corn-shortage was quite likely 
and it would have been a master-stroke for Cleander’s opponents to mount their attacks at 
games honouring the corn goddess. It was probably in the immediate aftermath of these 
events that Septimius returned from Sicily, and at once faced trial, according to the HA: ‘he 
was accused of consulting seers or astrologers about the imperial position.’ The charge 
could be constructed as treason; but the case, which was heard by the Guard Prefects, was 
dismissed, and his accuser crucified. 32     
Julius Julianus’ colleague Regillus was soon removed. By 15 July 190 Julianus was sole 
Prefect. He may have been given another colleague after the fall of Regillus: one Motilenus 
is mentioned as Prefect after Cleander’s death. Nothing was done to alter the arrangements 
for the consulship: too many were involved. Septimius duly held office, with the otherwise 
unknown Apuleius Rufinus as his colleague. After his month as consul, no appointment was 
offered. A period of waiting in the background was in any case desirable: a new bloodbath 
was about to begin. Septimius was ‘without employment for about a year after his 
consulship’. 33     
-80- 
9 
THE CONSPIRATORS 
THE FALL OF CLEANDER HAD inevitable repercussions among the ruling élite. Julius Julianus 
did not long enjoy his position at the pinnacle of the equestrian order, the reward for more 
than thirty years’ service. The veteran general was embraced in public and called ‘Father’ by 
Commodus. But he had to submit to indignities at the emperor’s hands. Being pushed into a 
swimming-pool when clad in the formal toga and in the presence of his own staff, could be 
laughed off, perhaps. But it was another matter when the Prefect of the Guard was made to 
dance naked before the emperor’s concubines, clashing cymbals and making grimaces. The 
charade did not last long. Julianus was murdered. 1     
Other executions followed. One of these must have been noted with anxiety or at least 
particular interest by Septimius and Julia. A prominent Emesene, who may well have been a 
kinsman of Julia, was the victim, one Julius Alexander. The motive for this murder as given


--- PAGE 63 ---
by Dio sounds surprising but may well be plausible: it was because ‘he had brought down a 
lion with his javelin, from horseback’. The emperor who prided himself on his gladiatorial 
skill could not endure competition: Commodus’ mania for the arena was soon to become 
further intensified. The HA states that Alexander was executed for rebellion. That may well 
have been the official version, justified by the man’s behaviour when he learned that the 
assassins had arrived at Emesa. He somehow contrived to kill both them and his enemies in 
the city, and set off for the Euphrates, hoping for asylum with Parthia. ‘And he would have 
escaped,’ says Dio, ‘if he had not taken a boy-favourite with him, for he was an excellent 
horseman himself. But he could not bear to abandon the boy, who was exhausted. So when 
he began to be overtaken, he killed both the boy and himself.’ 2     
This was only the beginning of a bloody purge. The HA gives the names of fifteen senators, 
at least twelve of whom were ex-consuls, who were put to death in the last two and a half 
years of the reign. They included Sulpicius Crassus, proconsul of Asia, Commodus’ brother-
in-law Mamertinus and the latter’s brother Septimianus. Another victim was first cousin of 
Marcus, Annia Fundania Faustina. Her daughter Vitrasia had been murdered after the 
conspiracies of 182 and she herself was living 
-81- 
in Achaia at the time, no doubt in deliberately chosen retirement. As for the fifteen 
senators, the HA notes with all of them that they were killed cum suis, ‘together with their 
kin’. And the biographer adds, after recording the death of Annia: et alios infinitos. It may 
be an exaggeration that ‘innumerable others were put to death’. But there can be no doubt 
that many more than the fifteen senators and one noblewoman lost their lives. The panic 
that was thereby created must have been accentuated by the recurrence of plague, the 
greatest outbreak that Dio—too young at the time to remember the great plague of 166-7—
ever experienced: ‘2000 people often died at Rome in a single day’. He added a curious 
story. ‘Also at this time, many others, not only in the city but throughout most of the 
empire, died at the hands of criminals who smeared deadly drugs on tiny needles and were 
hired to infect people with them.’ Whatever the facts, this peculiar anecdote reveals a great 
deal about the climate of the time. 3     
Cleander’s removal had left a vacuum which Julius Julianus had not filled. In 191 
unmistakable signs appeared that Commodus himself, now twenty-nine, was at last 
asserting his own authority. Coins of late 190 had proclaimed a new ‘Golden Age of 
Commodus’. Now, in 191, Commodus changed his names. Abandoning ‘Marcus’ and 
‘Antoninus’, that he had assumed on his father’s death, he reverted to his original names, 
Lucius Aelius Aurelius Commodus. He was finally sloughing off any allegiance, even token, 
to the memory of Marcus. It could be that it showed merely that Commodus was now going 
to be ‘his own man’. Or perhaps it was intended as deference to the memory of Lucius 
Verus, after whom he had been named originally. The coinage now began to identify 
Commodus with Hercules, and his devotion to oriental cults was intensified, to Isis and 
Sarapis, and to Mithras, in particular. 4     
Whatever the legends on the coinage, something else had changed. From 190 the silver 
content had been further debased. The wars under Marcus had necessitated a reduction in 
the fineness of the denarius, first in 161-6; then, after an improvement, from 170-80. On 
Commodus’ accession the silver content had gone down further. Now it reached a new low. 
Clearly revenues were not keeping pace with spending. Meanwhile a new Guard Prefect had 
been appointed, Q. Aemilius Laetus. He came from Thaenae on the coast of Byzacena in 
Africa, where the old ‘royal ditch’ had marked off the first Roman province and the Numidian


--- PAGE 64 ---
kingdom. There was also a new chamberlain in succession to Cleander. This was Eclectus, 
who had started in L. Verus’ service, and then moved to the household of Ummidius 
Quadratus. When Quadratus was executed in 182 he entered the palace again, together 
with Marcia, the freedwoman who had been Quadratus’ mistress. She became the concubine 
of Commodus, and after Cleander’s death acquired immense 
-82- 
influence over him. Laetus, Eclectus and Marcia between them now had the task of 
controlling Commodus, if it should be possible. 5     
Laetus’ origin is another sign of the advance of Africans. Even the Christian leader at Rome 
at this time was from Africa, Pope Victor. It is no surprise to find the HA claiming that 
Commodus intended a visit to Africa, probably in early 191. The project was abandoned: it 
had only been a pretext to get an extra grant of funds voted. Commodus may, however, 
have been aware that he should conciliate the African elite, potentially alienated after the 
murders of Burrus and Arrius Antoninus. The province supplied a large part of Rome’s food 
supply. 6     
Laetus soon began to exercise power. His brother Pudens, a former legionary centurion, was 
attached to the emperor’s personal bodyguard. In the summer of 191 Laetus put through a 
surprising appointment. Septimius was made governor of Upper Pannonia ‘on Laetus’ 
recommendation’. With its three legions, this province could be of vital importance. No large 
army lay nearer to Italy. Yet Septimius was an unlikely choice. Few men were given 
command of so large an army unless they had had some experience of post-consular 
provincial government or, in the case of Upper Pannonia, unless they had governed the 
Lower province immediately before their consulship. Septimius had done neither, and his 
previous military experience was limited to his legionary command in Syria. He had never 
served on Rhine or Danube. The imperial government did not favour specialisation, and it 
was rare for a man to serve two terms in the same province. But this was not carried to 
extremes. Service somewhere on the northern frontiers was generally a prerequisite for a 
governor of one of the major provinces there. 7     
Septimius may not have been made aware at first of the reasons for his selection. But his 
star was in the ascendant—and no doubt his credit rating improved also. Up to this moment 
his property in Italy had consisted of a house in Rome and the ‘single farm’ at Veii. Shortly 
before his departure for his province he purchased elaborate gardens, horti, in the city. 8     
At the same time or a little later, his brother Geta was also appointed governor of a 
Danubian province, Lower Moesia, with two legions, and Clodius Albinus of Hadrumetum 
was made governor of Britain. The result was that men from Africa controlled eight of the 
northern legions. It may be that some of the other northern provinces were placed in the 
hands of Africans, or at least assigned to men whom Laetus and Pertinax could trust. The 
governor of Dacia, appointed at latest in 192, was one Q. Aurelius Polus Terentianus. Study 
of his nomenclature suggests, although it cannot prove, that he too derived from Africa. In 
any case, he had almost certainly served under Pertinax in Britain a few years before; as a 
fetialis he was a fellow-member of the same priestly college as Septimius 
-83- 
Geta. Another fetialis, incidentally, was sent to Lower Moesia to command one of the 
legions. This was Marius Maximus, the future biographer of the Caesars, whose younger


--- PAGE 65 ---
brother Perpetuus had perhaps served under Pertinax and Septimius in Syria: the Marii, too, 
were African. 9     
Legionary legates were appointed directly by the emperor. At a lower level, provincial 
governors had wide powers of patronage. The influence wielded by Septimius, Geta, Albinus 
and Polus Terentianus would be felt in many areas. They could give commissions to officers 
up to and including the rank of tribunus laticlavius. Septimius alone could offer positions to 
three tribuni laticlavii and fifteen angusticlavii, and had in his army seven auxiliary cohorts 
and five alae of cavalry (one of them an élite milliary ala), in command of which he could 
place his own nominees. One of the tribuni laticlavii that he appointed sounds like a 
kinsman: C. Julius Septimius Castinus. 10     
In 191 Commodus decided to hold the consulship for the seventh time, for 192. Pertinax 
was chosen as his colleague—the HA says that Commodus was pleased with the sixty-five-
year-old Prefect of the City. No reason is given for his satisfaction. Pertinax is said to have 
performed his duties as Prefect ‘with extreme gentleness and consideration’. Unfortunately 
the text of the HA is defective at this point, making it unclear whether this had anything to 
do with Commodus’ feelings about him. However this may be, either in 191, or soon after 
Commodus and Pertinax inaugurated the year 192, Pertinax was approached by Laetus and 
Marcia to participate in a conspiracy to murder the emperor. He accepted. Without doubt he 
was already Laetus’ choice as successor to Commodus. 11     
There had been many attempts against Commodus’ life. The entire reign is a story of 
miscarried conspiracies. This time careful steps were taken to ensure success. The packing 
of the major northern provinces with safe men has already been described. Egypt was 
always of crucial importance. In the second half of 192 the Prefect Larcius Memor, who had 
been in office for less than two years, was replaced by one Mantennius Sabinus. No explicit 
connection has been recorded between Sabinus and the conspirators. But it was perhaps no 
coincidence that his wife came from Praeneste, where Pertinax’s father-in-law Flavius 
Sulpicianus had estates. No doubt Pertinax and Sabinus were well acquainted. As important 
as Egypt was Syria. Events in Parthia had created a delicate situation there, but one which 
reduced the potential threat to Rome. The Parthian King Vologaeses III had been either 
challenged or was about to be deposed after reigning for over forty years. Laetus and 
Pertinax may have been unable to control the selection of the governor of Syria. The post 
went to Pescennius Niger. Dio says that he was given the job 
-84-


--- PAGE 66 ---
1 AboveThe theatre at Lepcis Magna
2 BelowInscription from the theatre: the Latin text honours Caesar Augustus (AD 1-2) 
and records the benefaction of Annobal Tapapius Rufus; lines 3-5 are repeated in Punic 
below (IRT 322; IPT 24) 
-84a- 
 
3 Aerial view of Lepcis Magna. The massive rectangle west of the Wadi Lebdah is the 
Severan Forum. North-west of this is the old Forum, to the south-west the theatre, to 
the south the Hadrianic Baths. The circus and amphitheatre complex is at the far right.


--- PAGE 67 ---
3 Aerial view of Lepcis Magna. The massive rectangle west of the Wadi Lebdah is the 
Severan Forum. North-west of this is the old Forum, to the south-west the theatre, to 
the south the Hadrianic Baths. The circus and amphitheatre complex is at the far right.
-84b- 
 
3 Aerial view of Lepcis Magna. The massive rectangle west of the Wadi Lebdah is the 
Severan Forum. North-west of this is the old Forum, to the south-west the theatre, to 
the south the Hadrianic Baths. The circus and amphitheatre complex is at the far right.
-84c- 
 
4 Stele commemorating the paving of the old Forum at Lepcis in AD 53. The bronze 
letters of the Latin text have been removed. In the first sixteen lines the emperor 
Claudius is honoured and the proconsul and legate named; the last nine record the 
benefactor Gaius Anno and his family (possible ancestors of the Septimii); these details 
are repeated in Punic at the foot (IRT 338; IPT 26) 
-84d-


--- PAGE 68 ---
5 Pertinax (BMC V, Pertinax 26) 
6 Didius Julianus (Roman Imperial Coins in the Hunter Coin Cabinet, III, Didius Julianus 
10) 
7 Pescennius Niger (BMC V, p. 74* n.) 
8 Clodius Albinus as Caesar to Septimius (the reverse shows the African deity Ba’al 
Hammon, with his Latin name favoured at Hadrumetum, Saeculum Frugiferum) (BMC V, 
Wars of Succession 103) 
-84e-


--- PAGE 69 ---
9 Septimius (BMC V, Wars of Succession 582; AD 196) 
10 Julia Domna (BMC V, Septimius & Caracalla 767) 
11 Antoninus (Caracalla) (BMC V, Wars of Succession 613; AD 196-7) 
-84f-


--- PAGE 70 ---
12 Antoninus (Caracalla) and Geta (Roman Imperial Coins in the Hunter Coin Cabinet, 
III, Septimius 44) 
13 Antoninus (Caracalla) (BMC V, Septimius, Caracalla, Geta 205; AD 210)


--- PAGE 71 ---
14 Geta (ibid. 313; AD 210) 
-84g- 
15 LeftThe Arch of Septimius Severus in the Forum at Rome
-84h-


--- PAGE 72 ---
16 The Berlin Tondo: Septimius, Julia and their sons portrayed in Egypt. (Geta was 
defaced after his murder by his brother)
-84i-


--- PAGE 73 ---
17 The central scene of frieze D from the Severan Arch at Lepcis Magna, a dextrarum 
iunctio, Septimius and Antoninus joining hands. The head of Geta is restored, the original 
having been stolen by an allied soldier during the Second World War
-84j- 
 
18 Julia Domna, shown looking towards her husband and sons on frieze D of the Severan 
Arch at Lepcis
-84k-


--- PAGE 74 ---
19 A portion of the frieze D from the Severan Arch at Lepcis. These two figures, belong 
to the right of the dextrarum iunctio (plate 17) and are clearly important, perhaps 
Plautianus (left) and Septimius’ brother Geta, the consuls of AD 203
20 Septimius, flanked by his two sons, shown in a triumphal chariot on the Arch at Lepcis 
Magna


--- PAGE 75 ---
-84l- 
 
21 The fort at Gholaia (Bu-Ngem), blocking the eastern route from the Sahara to the 
Tripolitanian coast
-84m-


--- PAGE 76 ---
22 The Severan Basilica at Lepcis
-84n- 
 
23 Carved marble piers from the Severan Basilica at Lepcis
-84o-


--- PAGE 77 ---
24 AboveZinchecra: the original promontory stronghold of the Garamantes, looking out 
over the Wadi El-Agial
25 BelowCarpow, Septimius’ new base in Scotland, from the north. The Tay is in the 
foreground and the north rampart is marked by the line of trees
-84p- 
precisely because of his mediocrity. This may have made him seem harmless. The HA 
alleges that he owed the appointment to an athlete with whom Commodus trained, 
Narcissus. The two consular proconsulships, Asia and Africa, were given to Asellius 
Aemilianus and Cornelius Anullinus. Aemilianus was a kinsman of Clodius Albinus; hence 
perhaps African. He had also been Niger’s immediate predecessor as governor of Syria. It 
may have been thought that he could exert some influence over the eastern legions if need 
should arise. Anullinus, a Spaniard, may have been a friend of Septimius Severus already—
he was certainly a close friend later. 12     
Towards the end of the year 192 Commodus’ pathological inclinations became even more 
extreme. He now identified himself completely with Hercules. As the Roman Hercules the 
emperor wished to become the divine founder of Rome, and the city was renamed colonia 
Commodiana. All the months of the year were now to bear his own extravagant 
nomenclature—which had conveniently expanded to make up the exact number required: 
Amazonius Invictus Pius Felix Lucius Aelius Aurelius Commodus Augustus Hercules 
Romanus Exsuperatorius. Places and institutions of all kinds throughout the empire were to 
exchange their original names for that of Commodus. 13     
Marius Maximus, source for some of the more reliable parts of the HA, was already serving 
on the Danube in 192, and did not witness these bizarre events to their final conclusion. 
This may be why there is no trace or mention in the HA of an event in that year which 
deeply impressed both Dio and Herodian. ‘A fire that began at night in some house leaped 
into the Temple of Peace and spread to the Egyptian and Arabian warehouses. From there 
the flames were carried up into the Palace and consumed very extensive portions of it, so 
that nearly all the state records were destroyed.’ Dio took it as an omen. This in particular—
the destruction of the archives—made it clear to Dio that the calamity portended by this fire 
would not be confined to the city but would extend over the entire world. The great doctor 
Galen had particular cause for regret. Many of his writings, housed in the Palace libraries, 
perished. Herodian also describes the fire in dramatic terms, as a portent of impending


--- PAGE 78 ---
disaster. It was preceded by a slight earthquake, and the Temple of Peace, which he calls 
‘the largest and most beautiful building in the city’, was according to him totally destroyed— 
‘and some conjectured that the destruction of the Temple of Peace was a prophecy of war’. 
He adds that the fire consumed the Temple of Vesta and exposed the sacred Palladium to 
public view for the first time since its legendary journey from Troy to Italy. The Vestal 
Virgins hurriedly carried the statue along the Sacred Way into the Palace. 14     
-85- 
Herodian and Dio give detailed accounts of Commodus’ last display in the arena. Probably at 
the Plebeian Games, which lasted fourteen days in November—unless it was at new, 
specially founded games—people came to Rome from all over Italy and the neighbouring 
provinces to see the emperor shoot down deer, roebuck, lions and leopards. On one 
occasion he shot down 100 lions with 100 javelins. On another he shot off the heads of 
ostriches with crescent-headed arrows—and the birds continued to run around. These 
performances won him some admiration for his marksmanship, says Herodian. Dio gives 
even more details: he killed 100 bears on the first day, ‘shooting down at them from the 
railing of the balustrade’. 
For the whole amphitheatre had been divided up by means of two intersecting cross-walls, 
which supported the gallery that ran its entire length. The animals, divided into two groups, 
could thus be speared more easily from any point, at short range. In the middle of the 
‘contest’ he became tired. He took some chilled sweet vine in a club-shaped cup from a 
woman, and drank it in one gulp. At this both we and the people all shouted out 
straightaway the words so familiar at drinking-sessions: ‘Long life!’ 
Dio hastens to defend himself against anyone who might think that he was ‘sullying the 
dignity of history’ by recording such details. These were the events that dominated life in 
the capital, and he was obliged to watch. 
In the mornings the emperor shot down wild beasts. In the afternoons he fought as a 
gladiator—fighting with shield in right hand and sword in left, ‘indeed he took great pride in 
the fact that he was left-handed’. ‘Standing beside him as he fought,’ Dio continues, ‘were 
Aemilius Laetus the Prefect and Eclectus the chamberlain. When he had fought his bout— 
and, of course, won—he would then kiss them just as he was, through the visor of his 
helmet.’ Whenever Commodus himself was fighting, the senators and knights were obliged 
to watch. ‘Only Claudius Pompeianus the elder never appeared, but sent his sons, and did 
not come herself, preferring death rather than see the emperor, the son of Marcus, do such 
things.’ The rest of the senators were not only made to attend but to join in chorused 
chants of admiration: ‘You are Lord and you are first and most fortunate of all men! You are 
victorious, you will be victorious! From everlasting you are victorious, Amazonian!’ The 
common people, according to Herodian, flocked in large numbers. They may have done so 
on the first day. But Dio notes that many did not come and others left after a brief look. For 
one thing, a rumour had got about that Commodus intended to pursue his self-identification 
with Hercules to the extent of shooting some of the spectators, who were thus to play the 
role of the 
-86- 
Stymphalian birds. Dio and his fellow-senators were made to feel the danger themselves: 
‘Having killed an ostrich and cut off its head, he came up to where we were sitting, holding


--- PAGE 79 ---
the head in his left hand and raising the bloody sword in his right. He said nothing, but he 
wagged his head with a grin, showing that he would treat us likewise.’ 
Dio’s reaction may be described as verging on the hysterical: ‘Many of us would have been 
killed on the spot, for laughing at him—for it was laughter rather than the fear that took 
hold of us—if I had not chewed some laurel leaves that I took from my garland, and 
persuaded the others sitting next to me to do the same. By moving our jaws steadily we 
could thus conceal that fact that we were laughing.’ During these games Commodus 
displayed the old champion racehorse from the Green stable, now put out to grass in the 
country. It was shown to the people at the last race of the year in the Circus Maximus, its 
hooves gilded, and a gilded skin on its back. A great shout went up: ‘It is Pertinax!’ On the 
last day, when he was about to begin his bout as a gladiator, Commodus handed his club to 
the like-named Prefect. Whether these things seemed as significant, at the time, as Dio 
suggests is another matter. But if Dio was superstitious, the urban plebs as a whole will not 
have been less so, and superstitions could be worked on. The episode of Pertinax the 
racehorse may have been engineered. 15     
According to Dio, Commodus’ behaviour began to worry Laetus and Eclectus, and they tried 
to restrain him. Commodus replied with threats. Terrified, they formed a plot against him to 
preserve their own lives. It seems, still following Dio, that Commodus intended to kill both 
the new consuls on New Year’s Day 193, and to take their place as sole consul, garbed in 
the costume of a gladiator. ‘Let no one doubt this statement’, he concludes. As 
corroboration he cites the fact that Commodus cut off the head of the 100-foot high statue 
of the Sun god outside the Colosseum and replaced it with his own portrait. He added a club 
and a bronze lion at its foot to give the composite figure the appearance of the new Roman 
Hercules. After taking Marcia into their confidence, Laetus and Eclectus chose New Year’s 
Eve to carry out the murder, while the people were celebrating the holiday. (The court was 
at this time in the Vectilian House on the Caelian Hill; Commodus said he could not sleep in 
the Palace.) Marcia administered poison. Commodus vomited but did not succumb. He 
became suspicious and began to look threatening. The athlete Narcissus was then sent in to 
strangle him in his bath. 16     Even more explicitly than Dio, Herodian indicates that the 
decision to murder Commodus was taken suddenly, only a few hours before it was carried 
out. Neither suggests that Pertinax, who was at once offered the throne, had any inkling in 
advance. The HA, or its source Marius Maximus, knew 
-87- 
better: Pertinax was involved in the conspiracy, which had its origin some while before, and 
was consumated when the moment was ripe. 17     
How many of the men set in positions of power by Laetus and Pertinax had been warned is 
another matter. The conspirators had chosen their time supremely well—during a festival, 
when even the praetorians were to a large extent unarmed and unprepared. One may 
suspect that in some of the excesses perpetrated by Commodus in the last weeks of his life 
he was egged on, not restrained, by Laetus and Eclectus. One may even wonder about the 
poisoned needles rumour—and the fire. It would have been a risk to encourage an autocrat 
who was already demented to indulge his megalomania further, to increase the fear and 
hatred with which he was regarded. But this would have made his murder more palatable to 
those who might otherwise have reacted with suspicion or sorrow. The only hint of this kind 
is provided by the HA: Commodus’ ‘insane wish that Rome should be named the “Colony of 
Commodus” was put into his head while listening to the blandishments of Marcia’. Perhaps 
the conspirators merely took the easier course, acquiescing in the behaviour of their insane


--- PAGE 80 ---
master. It is still reasonable to conclude that they had been waiting for many months for 
the moment when they could kill him. After the murder, they naturally put out a detailed 
story to justify their action. It is hard to believe that Dio was really deceived: devotion to 
the memory of Pertinax must have obliged him to suppress the latter’s participation. His 
urgent insistence that no one should disbelieve the plot to kill the consuls surely betrays 
him. 18     
It was probably already dark when Commodus was murdered. Laetus and Eclectus at once 
sent word to Pertinax. To make sure that it was not a trick, he sent his ‘most trusted 
companion’ to see the body. When this man had confirmed the report, Pertinax left for the 
camp of the Guard, in secret. His arrival caused some alarm at first, but Laetus and his 
agents allayed the troops’ fears. Pertinax made a speech that Commodus had died a natural 
death and that Laetus and Eclectus had thrust the imperial power on him. He promised a 
donative of 12,000 sesterces per man. The end of his speech upset them: ‘“There are many 
disturbing features about the present situation, fellow-soldiers, but with your help the rest 
of them will be right again”.’ What was intended, probably, as no more than a vague and 
generalised reassurance seemed to the men like a veiled threat. ‘He was a mediocre orator’, 
the HA records, adding that he was ‘smooth [blandus] rather than good-natured, and was 
never regarded as straightforward [simplex].’ The response was neither immediate nor 
unanimous. When a few, no doubt primed by Laetus, finally shouted out the acclamation, 
the rest followed. He was now imperator. It was not yet midnight.18
-88- 
10 
THE YEAR 193 
PERTINAX WENT STRAIGHT FROM the praetorian camp to the senate house. It was still 
pitch dark and a mist was rising rapidly from the low ground around the Circus Maximus. He 
ordered the doors of the curia to be opened, but the janitor could not be found. Pertinax 
walked over to the Temple of Concord close by, and sat waiting while arrangements were 
made. Claudius Pompeianus then arrived to see him, lamenting the fate of Commodus. The 
old man had not been seen at Rome by Dio for at least the past ten years: he had been 
living in retirement. Had he been forewarned and asked to come to Rome to lend moral 
support to his former protégé? It is impossible to believe that news of the murder of 
Commodus could have reached his estate at Tarracina sixty miles away in time to get him 
to Rome before the night ended. His appearance so soon after Commodus’ death is yet 
another indication that the story told by Herodian and in the surviving excerpts from Dio is 
propaganda. Pertinax urged Pompeianus to take the throne. Pompeianus could see that 
Pertinax was already invested with the imperium by the soldiers, and refused. It was no 
doubt a purely formal gesture. 1     
The curia was now opened and the consuls and magistrates with the other senators entered. 
It was still night. Pertinax did his best to greet them, although there was such a jostling 
throng that it was difficult for anyone to approach him. In ‘an off-hand way’ he announced 
to them that he had been chosen emperor by the soldiers, but ‘I do not want the office and 
I shall resign it today, because of my age and poor health and the distressing situation’. His 
health was excellent, except for slight lameness: and he was a little overweight. The stated 
unwillingness to serve was another gesture. He was unanimously acclaimed as emperor. 
The consuls Clarus and Falco made speeches in his honour. Then a remarkable scene took


--- PAGE 81 ---
place. The senators poured out a savage chanted litany of execration against the fallen 
tyrant. Marius Maximus gave the acclamations in full, and they are reproduced by the HA. 
The recurring theme came with the words unco trahatur, ‘let him be dragged with the hook’. 
‘Put it to the vote! We all call for him to be dragged with the hook.’ Pertinax intervened to 
inform them that Commodus had already been buried. At his orders, the 
-89- 
procurator of the imperial estate, Livius Larensis, who had been guarding it, had handed the 
body over to the consul designate, Fabius Cilo. No doubt in his capacity as sodalis 
Hadrianalis Cilo had it placed in the Mausoleum of Hadrian. In due course a purely factual 
tombstone was placed there, giving Commodus his full name and titles, with his ancestry 
back to Nerva, and styling him as he had preferred to be known in his last two years, L. 
Aelius Aurelius Commodus, instead of M. Aurelius Commodus Antoninus. It will have cost no 
effort to deprive him of the names Marcus and Antoninus, that he had rejected and had so 
little deserved. The extravagant titles of the last months, Hercules Romanus, Amazonius, 
and the rest, were also left out, likewise Pius and Felix. 2     
Pertinax’s report caused an outcry: ‘Let the buried murderer be dug up and dragged by the 
hook!’ One of the pontifices, Cingius Severus, gave it as his opinion, speaking as pontifex on 
behalf of the college, that Commodus had been wrongfully buried. The office of pontifex 
maximus was of course momentarily vacant; Cingius was no doubt the senior pontifex 
present. At least, he added, his statues must be overthrown and his name erased from all 
public and private records—and the names of the month should return to what they were 
before. The motion was evidently accepted. Renewed shouting broke out. Dio comments 
that ‘all the shouts that they had been accustomed to chant in rhythmic fashion, in the 
theatres, to flatter Commodus, were repeated with certain changes that now made them 
sound ridiculous’. Pertinax finally spoke again. He expressed his thanks to the senate, and 
also, especially, to Laetus. At the mention of Laetus the consul Falco interjected: ‘We can 
tell from this what sort of emperor you will be—the fact that we can see Laetus and Marcia, 
the instruments of Commodus’ crimes, behind you.’ Pertinax made a gently sarcastic reply. 
‘You are a young man, consul, and you do not know the necessity of obedience. They 
obeyed Commodus against their will, and as soon as they had an opportunity they showed 
what they had always been wanting.’ 3     
The customary titles and powers were voted. Exceptionally, the title pater patriae, ‘Father of 
his Country’, which by tradition previous emperors had not accepted until a decent interval 
had elapsed, was granted as well, and Pertinax revived in his official style the title of 
princeps senatus. He then went to the Capitol to pay his vows to the gods. Meanwhile the 
senate voted his wife Flavia Titiana the title of Augusta, and that of Caesar for his son. 
These titles Pertinax rejected on their behalf. Finally he entered the Palace. When the 
tribune of the guard asked for the watchword, he replied militemus, ‘let us be soldiers’. This 
did nothing to allay the nervousness that the praetorians had already begun to feel when he 
spoke to them in the camp. He had chosen it without thinking—it was the same 
-90- 
watchword that he had given in all his commands. On the first day he entertained the 
magistrates and leading men at a banquet. 4     
The following day, 2 January, the statues of Commodus were over-thrown. And Pertinax 
gave the same watchword. The soldiers reacted unfavourably. In any case, they disliked the


--- PAGE 82 ---
prospect of service under a sixty-six-year-old emperor. On 3 January the annual oath of 
loyalty had to be taken. During the ceremony some of the praetorians attempted to stage a 
coup, and dragged a senator named Triarius Maternus into the camp. Maternus fled, naked, 
came to Pertinax in the Palace, and then left the city. No action was taken against him. 5     
The lesson was not lost on Pertinax. ‘He ratified the concessions that Commodus had made 
to the soldiers and the veterans’, no doubt on 7 January, the normal day when time-expired 
men serving in the capital received their discharge. At the same time he introduced a whole 
series of proposals in the senate. Treason trials were abolished, the exiles were restored, 
and the good name of those who had been unjustly executed was restored. The imperial 
treasury was virtually empty, and the donative to the troops, coupled with a bounty to the 
plebs, made matters worse. An obvious way to raise funds rapidly lay to hand: an auction of 
Commodus’ luxury goods, including the extravagant costumes in which he had performed, 
and the imperial carriages. These were ‘the very latest masterpieces of the art’: some had 
seats that could be moved round into the shade or the breeze, others were equipped with 
mileometers and clocks, or were designed ‘for the indulgence of his vices’, as the HA puts it. 
The imperial household included large numbers of concubines, buffoons and other non-
essential personnel. These too were sold, bringing in immense sums. Some of them, the HA 
adds maliciously, ‘found their way back to minister to the old man’s pleasure’. 6     
Pertinax was clearly determined to attack the economic crisis by drastic means. The change 
of policy that he instituted was dramatised by the auction. It can be observed in the change 
he made in the coinage. After the drastic debasement of 190-2, the silver content was 
pushed up to the standard of Vespasian. The aim must have been to restore confidence 
where he thought it mattered. But if that meant a short-term belttightening, there were 
risks. Herodian outlines a programme designed to improve agriculture and to remit newly 
instituted customs tariffs. He also tried to regulate the senate. Cleander’s corrupt regime 
had upset seniority. Pertinax ruled that those who had held the praetorship should take 
precedence over those adlected. Ironically, he himself had been adlected inter praetorios by 
Marcus. The HA reports that there was ill feeling, doubtless reflecting the opinion of Marius 
Maximus, one of those affected; one reason for the slightly mixed verdict on Pertinax in the 
HA. During 
-91- 
January Pertinax made arrangements for the next year’s magistrates. Cassius Dio 
(wholeheartedly in favour of Pertinax in his History) was designated praetor. 7     
One of the first steps taken after the new emperor had been installed must have been to 
inform the provincial governors of what had taken place. Some may not have been 
surprised. But many were suspicious that it was a trick, a test of their loyalty by 
Commodus, and imprisoned the couriers. The season of the year did not facilitate rapid 
transmission of messages. Still, in 69 the news of the revolt of the Rhine on 1 January, sent 
by the procurator at Trier, reached Rome in less than nine days. There is no reason to 
believe that the news of Pertinax’s accession took any longer than this to get to the 
northern armies. It may have taken longer to reach overseas provinces. In 68 the freedman 
Icelus had reached Galba at Tarraco with the news of Nero’s death after only seven days’ 
journey from Italy. But that was in the summer. Nonetheless, this time the news reached 
Novius Rufus, the governor of Hispania Tarraconensis, by the beginning of February at 
latest. A decision that he made settling a dispute was issued under the new emperor’s 
authority on 11 February. In Egypt the news was not issued until 6 March. Mantennius 
Sabinus may not have received word until shortly before making the announcement, for


--- PAGE 83 ---
winter navigation from Italy to Alexandria was not easy. When his proclamation was issued, 
the wife and son of Pertinax were given the titles which Pertinax had rejected. It will be 
remembered that Sabinus’ wife was a neighbour of the wife of Pertinax. Some provincial 
governors may have waited for quite some time before announcing what had happened. 
They will have wished to make absolutely certain that it was true, in their own interests: it 
had been Commodus’ practice to keep the children of provincial governors at Rome as 
guarantees of fidelity. 8     
Septimius reacted to the news characteristically. After making sacrifice and administering 
the oath of allegiance to the new emperor, he returned to his quarters in the evening, fell 
asleep and dreamed a portentous dream. In his dream he saw a large and noble horse 
carrying Pertinax along the central portion of the Sacred Way. But when the horse reached 
the comitia at the far end of the Forum, it unseated Pertinax and threw him to the ground. 
While Septimius stood there, the horse slipped under him, took him up and carried him on 
its back. Then it stopped, in the middle of the Forum, lifting him up high so that he was 
seen and cheered by all. This dream, according to Herodian, was the climax of the long 
series of supernatural signs that had fed his burning ambition. It finally confirmed him in the 
belief that he would get everything that he hoped for. 
Meanwhile, he was already a key figure. Pertinax ‘did not remove any of those whom 
Commodus had put in charge of affairs’. He said that he 
-92- 
was waiting for the anniversary of the founding of the city, 21 April. Considering that most 
of those holding office had probably been appointed with the approval, if not by the direct 
nomination, of Laetus and Pertinax himself, this is not surprising. But there were vacancies 
to fill. The obvious one was the City Prefecture, which he had held himself. He appointed his 
father-in-law Flavius Sulpicianus. The only other recorded promotion that he made was ‘a 
favour to Septimius’. A man whom Pertinax himself, when proconsul of Africa, had 
condemned for corrupt practices, was given some unspecified post. The name is given in an 
extract from Dio as ‘Fluvius’. This will be one of the Fulvii, Septimius’ mother’s family, 
almost certainly its best known member, Fulvius Plautianus. According to Herodian, he had 
in fact been condemned for certain offences before 193. Plautianus was soon to enter the 
stage at Rome. It is plausible that he was now given some post by Pertinax. He may have 
become praefectus vehiculorum, ‘prefect of vehicles’, that is, supervisor of the imperial 
posting-system, a vital role at this time. 9     
Pertinax relied a good deal on Aemilius Laetus, the Guard Prefect. At the beginning, Laetus 
was full of praise for the new emperor. It was no doubt with pride and pleasure that he 
despatched couriers to overtake a barbarian delegation, on its way back home with a 
subsidy in gold that Commodus had handed over. The gold was demanded back. The 
envoys were to tell their people that Pertinax was now ruler. Laetus knew that the name of 
Pertinax carried weight beyond the Danube. As governor of the principal military province 
on the Danube, Septimius had no doubt been responsible both for the original passage of 
the envoys to Rome and for their return. 10     
A new foreign policy was implied by this episode. At home a vital matter was the 
safeguarding and improvement of the corn supply. If this should fail, the urban plebs, which 
had shown in 190 that it was still a force to be reckoned with, might get out of hand again. 
In early March Pertinax visited Ostia to inspect the arrangements. The organisation of 
Rome’s food supply, the Annona, was a vast and complex operation, directed from the city


--- PAGE 84 ---
by the Prefect, the third most senior equestrian official in the empire. It is not known who 
occupied this key post in 192-3. But the procurator responsible for the safe arrival of the 
Annona at Ostia was a man from Emesa, the brother-in-law of Julia Domna, C. Julius Avitus 
Alexianus. Pertinax doubtless met him at the port. 11     
In his absence a second attempt was made to stage a coup, again by the praetorians. This 
time their candidate was the consul Falco, and again the attempt fizzled out. Falco was 
declared a public enemy by the senate, but Pertinax asked that he should be pardoned. 
‘May it never happen that any senator should be put to death, even for just cause, while I 
am emperor,’ 
-93- 
he said, jumping to his feet. At the same meeting of the senate he spoke bitterly of the 
soldiers’ ingratitude, claiming that he had given them as much as Marcus and Verus at their 
accession, in spite of having far smaller funds available. This was not quite the truth. 
Pertinax’s donative was not all that large. There were many soldiers and freedmen present 
in the curia and they reacted unfavourably to the exaggerated claim. Pertinax had long had 
a reputation for meanness. But, whether or not this was deserved, what he was now trying 
to do was to restore ‘sound money’. His restoration of the denarius must inevitably have 
meant a reduction in the number that could be struck, and a lack of funds. 12     
The Falco affair is mysterious. Dio asserts that Laetus and the praetorians were behind it, 
and selected Falco. One may doubt this, especially in view of Falco’s bitter attack on the 
Prefect at the senate’s meeting on 1 January, unless Laetus engineered the coup, with the 
deliberate intention of suppressing it, for purposes of his own. The HA is of some help, 
although the text is fragmentary: the biographer reports that, according to many people, 
Falco did not know that he was being put forward as a candidate for the throne. In other 
words, he was framed; and show trials followed. Some soldiers were executed, but Falco 
himself was spared. Laetus had this done, but in the name of Pertinax, whose unpopularity 
with the Guard increased sharply. Laetus’ own relations with Pertinax are said to have 
deteriorated—the emperor found fault with him because of ‘the foolish advice he had given’. 
This may be true, but it is hardly sufficient as a motive for Laetus to have launched the final 
attempt to remove Pertinax, which soon followed. 13     
The successful coup came on 28 March. Pertinax had planned a visit to the Athenaeum for a 
poetry recital, but changed his mind and sent his escort back to the barracks. The rest of 
the Guard was there that day. A disturbance broke out—what started it is not recorded. 
Pertinax apparently had time to send Sulpicianus, his father-in-law, to the camp, and to 
summon a special meeting of the senate. But while he was returning to the Palace some two 
or three hundred men were on their way with drawn swords. They arrived just as Pertinax 
was inspecting the Palace slaves in the portico. The HA states that the troops were urged on 
by the Palace staff, who hated Pertinax. The emperor, informed of their entry by his wife, 
sent Laetus to meet them. But the Prefect covered up his head and went to his own house. 
Dio says that Pertinax could have ordered the vigiles, ‘the night watch’, and equites 
singulares Augusti, ‘Horse Guards’, who were in attendance, to kill the mutineers, or at least 
could have locked himself inside the Palace. Instead, he went out to confront them in 
person. The men were overawed at first when he spoke to them, at length and in a serious 
tone, and sheathed their swords. Then a Tungrian named 
-94-


--- PAGE 85 ---
Tausius, shouting out, ‘This sword the soldiers have sent you!’, fell upon him. He covered 
his head with his toga, with a prayer to Jupiter the Avenger, and was struck down. Only 
Eclectus defended him, and even managed to wound two of the assailants before being 
killed. The soldiers cut off the emperor’s head and stuck it on a spear. That was the end of 
Pertinax: he had reigned eighty-seven days. 14     
In contrast to the coup of 31 December, no successor was ready. Laetus may perhaps bear 
some negative responsibility for his refusal to make any resistance. But the fact that he did 
not produce a new candidate and did not participate in what followed, shows that he was 
not the moving spirit this time. It can only be explained as an act of mutiny. Only eight 
years before Perennis had fallen victim to a band of mutinous troops from the British army. 
Subsequent events in Dio’s lifetime were to prove that the possibility of such outbreaks was 
constantly increasing. By the mid-third century no emperor was to be safe from his own 
troops for more than a few years. 15     
When Sulpicianus heard the news he at once began a move to have himself declared 
emperor. As City Prefect he commanded the Urban Cohorts, and may have hoped for their 
support. Convincing promises might have won over the praetorians as well. But all the City 
troops will have been wary of accepting as emperor the father-in-law of one who had just 
been murdered. Two tribunes of the Guard recognised the difficulty and went to look for an 
alternative candidate. They waited outside the senate-house, and there they found their 
man. Didius Julianus, with his son-in-law Cornelius Repentinus (whose father had been 
Guard Prefect thirty years before), had come to attend the meeting that Pertinax had 
summoned; but the doors of the curia were closed. The tribunes urged him to seize the 
throne. He pointed out that another man was already in possession, but they overrode his 
objections and took him to the camp. Sulpicianus’ followers refused to let him through the 
gates. 16     
There ensued one of the most notorious episodes in the history of Rome. Two rival 
candidates bid for the throne, as if at an auction. Eventually Julianus got up on the wall. He 
warned the men not to choose an emperor who would avenge the death of Pertinax and 
gave written promises that he would restore the good name of Commodus. When 
Sulpicianus reached the figure of 20,000 sesterces per man, Julianus raised his bid by 5000, 
shouting it out in a loud voice and holding up his fingers as well as to indicate the amount. 
This won him the throne. 17     
Towards evening he came to the Forum to meet the senate in the curia. He had appointed 
two new Guard Prefects. Laetus’ career was at an end. Julianus was escorted by a vast 
number of praetorians carrying their standards as if prepared for battle. The senators were 
nervous, not least 
-95- 
Dio, who had successfully prosecuted Julianus in court on several occasions. Julianus told 
the senate that the throne was vacant, and that he was the best qualified to fill it. The claim 
was not as boastful or empty as Dio makes it sound. He was possibly the senior consular 
living, with the sole exception of Claudius Pompeianus. He had had a long career in the 
imperial service, having commanded a legion and governed four imperial provinces. He was 
well-connected. During the reign of Commodus he had been in trouble several times—
almost a guarantee of acceptability to the senate. (On the last occasion he had been 
protected by Laetus.) Pertinax had respected him also. The two men’s careers had indeed 
been closely parallel since 175, when they had been colleagues in the consulship. Shortly


--- PAGE 86 ---
before his death Pertinax had been guest of honour at the betrothal ceremony of Julianus’ 
daughter. Pertinax had told the girl’s fiancé to respect Julianus, ‘my colleague and 
successor’ —not only had they shared the fasces but Julianus had succeeded Pertinax as 
proconsul of Africa in 190. Pertinax’s remark seemed like an omen, in retrospect. A 
comment by Julianus at this meeting of the senate was viewed in a similar light later on. 
When the consul designate formally proposed the motion ‘That Didius Julianus be declared 
emperor’, Julianus said, ‘Add “Severus”.’ His full names were M. Didius Severus Julianus. 18     
Julianus had no fears about either the British or Danubian armies. He had connections 
through his mother with Hadrumetum, the home of the governor of Britain Clodius Albinus. 
Furthermore, his son-in-law Repentinus’ origin was Simitthu in Numidia. These African links 
may have served to inspire his confidence in the reaction of Septimius and other northern 
commanders to his accession. But whatever his relations had been with the governor of 
Syria, he soon had cause to fear him. On 29 March the plebs shouted insults at him as he 
went to the senate-house and even threw stones at him. Dio records that ‘they all began 
shouting, as if by preconcerted plan, calling him a thief and a parricide’. At first Julianus 
took it coolly and promised them money. But this failed to pacify them and he had to use 
force. A mob then poured into the Circus Maximus, where they spent that night and the 
following day. They changed slogans, calling on Pescennius Niger and the Syrian army to 
come to their support. 19     
Julianus’ prospects were slim. He could rely only on the praetorians, to whom he had paid a 
donative even higher than he had promised. But the Guard had not succeeded in imposing 
an emperor of its choice for more than a century and a half, since the accession of Claudius. 
With the death of Nero ‘the secret of the empire was made public: that an emperor could be 
made elsewhere than at Rome’. The provincial armies had learned this 
-96- 
lesson in 68-9 and again in 97. Beside, the Guard had done no fighting since the 
Marcomannic war ended in 180. 20     
The news of the attempted coups of Maternus and Falco will have prepared Septimius and 
his fellow-governors for rapid action. It is not hard to believe that a contingency plan had 
been concerted by 28 March, if indeed Laetus had not made arrangements with Septimius 
and others in 192 in case something were to go wrong on 31 December. The news of 
Pertinax’s murder had to be taken some 683 Roman miles from Rome to Carnuntum—if 
Septimius was still at the Pannonian capital. He might well have moved to the south-
western borders of his province to await developments, when the news of the Falco coup 
reached him. He had allies in Rome, his kinsman Fulvius Plautianus for one. His brother-in-
law, husband of his sister Octavilla, may have been at Rome. There were also various 
relatives of his wife, including her sister’s husband Avitus Alexianus. Fabius Cilo, who had 
perhaps by now held his consulship, will have been another supporter. Someone must have 
rushed the news to him. He may have known the fate of Pertinax by the evening of 1 April. 
It would take little time to ensure the support of the legates of the three legions in his 
province and the governors of Raetia, Noricum and Lower Pannonia. The governor of Lower 
Pannonia, C. Valerius Pudens, later to receive high office from Septimius, must have given 
him unstinted backing at the time. He could rely on Geta in Lower Moesia. But he will have 
sent messages to the two German provinces and to Dacia and Upper Moesia as well. It is 
impossible to tell how long he had to wait for replies from all these provinces. By 9 April, 
the twelfth day after the murder of Pertinax, he felt secure enough to act. The Carnuntum 
legion XIV Gemina, and no doubt some other troops, were summoned, and he was saluted


--- PAGE 87 ---
as emperor. The HA states that he tried to resist—repugnans. This was the conventional 
display of reluctance. He had no intention of refusing. Septimius depicted himself to the 
troops as the avenger of Pertinax. One of his three Upper Pannonian legions, I Adiutrix, had 
been commanded by Pertinax twenty years before. Some of the men still in the legion 
would have served under Pertinax. The same applied even more strongly to the six legions 
in the Moesias and Dacia. Septimius emphasised his attachment to the murdered emperor 
by adding that name to his new style: ‘Imperator Caesar L. Septimius Severus Pertinax 
Augustus.’ He will have refrained from laying claim to the tribunician power, which could 
only be conferred in Rome. There is one other thing for which Septimius may have waited 
before he acted on 9 April: news that his sons were safe. At any rate, one of his first actions 
on deciding to bid for the throne was to send a secret message for them to be brought to 
him. Fabius Cilo may have been the man who ensured their safety. 21     
-97- 
Preparations for the march on Rome would already have begun before the proclamation. But 
there would still be much to do. A particular concern was the attitude of Clodius Albinus. 
Since Albinus was from Hadrumetum, the home of Julianus’ mother, he could not be 
regarded as reliable. With his three legions and the enormous number of auxiliary regiments 
in Britain, he could pose a serious threat to Septimius’s western flank. Septimius sent 
emissaries offering the title of Caesar, which carried with it the prospect of succession, if 
anything should happen to himself. Since his own elder son Bassianus was barely five, the 
offer was surely genuine, worth Albinus’ while to accept. He now styled himself ‘D. Clodius 
Septimius Albinus Caesar’, and remained in Britain. 22     
Before Septimius began his march, news may have reached him that Niger had proclaimed 
himself emperor at Antioch, and that the east, including Egypt, had gone over to him. Niger 
thus had a force of ten legions at his disposal, against Septimius’ sixteen from the Rhine 
and Danube armies, as well as, in theory, the three from Britain. In the meantime 
Septimius’ agents will have been soliciting support from Novius Rufus, the governor of 
Hither Spain, who had one legion, and from the legate of III Augusta in Numidia, Naevius 
Quadratianus. It was forthcoming in both cases. Niger’s move cannot have come as a 
surprise. Reports of the murder of Pertinax must have been followed almost at once by 
news of the riots in his favour by the Roman plebs. Septimius’ prime concern was to seize 
Rome. The east could wait; but a force was sent from Geta’s Lower Moesian army down into 
Thrace. 23     
Inscriptions provide details about two men who played a vital role in the expeditio urbica, as 
the march was styled. M. Rossius Vitulus, a former equestrian officer who had served in 
both Germany and Pannonia, was appointed quartermaster-general, praepositus annonae. 
He was probably a native of Tergeste (Trieste), hence would have personal knowledge of 
the territory through which the march was to go. L. Valerius Valerianus, a former equestrian 
officer and procurator, possibly of Pannonian origin, was given command over the cavalry. 
The advance guard was led by Julius Laetus, who had undoubtedly been serving in one of 
the northern provinces, if not as a legionary legate in Upper Pannonia, perhaps as governor 
of Raetia or Noricum. 24     
While Septimius and Niger were seizing control of most of the empire, Julianus blithely had 
coins issued proclaiming himself ‘ruler of the world’, rector orbis, and asserting the ‘unity of 
the armies’, concordia militaris. Septimius was declared a public enemy by the senate, at 
his request (as Niger no doubt was also), when the news of the revolt reached Rome. The


--- PAGE 88 ---
soldiers in his army were offered an amnesty if they withdrew their support before a certain 
date. One Valerius Catullinus was designated 
-98- 
Septimius’ successor. Envoys of consular rank were selected to take Julianus’ appeal to the 
northern armies. They included Vespronius Candidus, a former governor of Dacia. A more 
practical step was the assignment of a former officer in the secret police, frumentarii, M. 
Aquilius Felix, to the task of assassinating Septimius. The ‘murder of senators’ had been this 
man’s speciality. 25     
According to Herodian, Septimius and his army appeared on the borders of Italy before it 
was known that he had been proclaimed. At all events, Julianus failed to block the passes. 
The best he could manage was to send one of the Guard Prefects, Tullius Crispinus, to take 
command of the Ravenna fleet and lead some resistance with it. But Septimius, proceeding 
via Emona (Ljubljana) and Aquileia, met no resistance in taking Ravenna, and Crispinus 
fled. 
Meanwhile Julianus was attempting to construct fortifications at Rome. The city became an 
armed camp. Even elephants designed for performance at the games were conscripted for 
military use. But, according to Dio, who watched the proceedings, Julianus’ preparations 
were futile and ineffective: ‘At times we were overcome with laughter.’ The praetorians 
were loth to undertake the kind of military engineering at which the legions were so skilled, 
and some of them hired substitutes to do the work for them. The marines summoned from 
the Misenum fleet could not drill properly. And the elephants could not be trained to carry 
towers and threw their drivers. At this stage, Julianus had Laetus and Marcia murdered—he 
reckoned that Laetus was going to support Septimius. 
However, Septimius was continuing to move at speed. The senatorial envoys went over to 
him, not before the unpopular Vespronius Candidus had nearly been lynched by the troops. 
The news that a senatorial deputation was on its way had at first caused Septimius some 
anxiety, but as it turned out he managed, by bribing them, to induce the envoys to address 
the troops in his favour and then to desert to him. Likewise Aquilius Felix adroitly changed 
sides. Julianus began to panic. He proposed to the senate that the priests, Vestal Virgins 
and senators should go to meet the advancing army as suppliants. But his authority was 
already negligible: the motion was rejected after a speech by Plautius Quintillus, himself an 
augur and a son-in-law of Marcus Aurelius. After contemplating a mass purge of the senate, 
and then abandoning the idea, Julianus had a decree passed making Septimius joint ruler 
with himself. He sent Tullius Crispinus to announce this to Septimius, and meanwhile 
nominated a third Guard Prefect, Veturius Macrinus, who he knew had already been 
appointed to this post by Septimius. Crispinus was intercepted by the Septimian advance 
guard under Julius Laetus, whose recommendation to put him to death was authorised by 
Septimius. 
-99-


--- PAGE 89 ---
-100- 
 
-101- 
Julianus replaced him with Flavius Juvenalis, presumably, like Veturius Macrinus, thought to 
be acceptable to Septimius. Septimius’ agents were now active in Rome itself, posting 
placards which announced his programme. 26     
Julianus had reached the end of the road. He again summoned the senate and demanded 
advice, but no one would commit himself. As a final despairing gesture he appealed to 
Claudius Pompeianus to share the rule with him, but Pompeianus revived the excuses that 
had kept him out of public life under Commodus, old age and weak eyesight. The 
praetorians received a direct order from Septimius, to keep the murderers of Pertinax under 
arrest. It was obeyed, and the fact was announced to the consul Silius Messala. He 
summoned the senate to the Athenaeum: Julianus was condemned to death, Septimius 
proclaimed emperor, and Pertinax deified. Julianus was killed by a common soldier in the 
Palace, deserted by all except his son-in-law Repentinus and the Prefect Flavius Genialis. He 
had been emperor for sixty-six days. It was 1 June. Septimius was at Interamna, just over 
fifty miles (80 km) to the north. Seven and a half weeks had elapsed since his proclamation 
and he had won Rome without a battle. The march must have been exhausting. Surrounded 
day and night by a picked bodyguard of 600 men who did not take off their breastplates, 
and sharing their hardships himself, he had delayed at no city in his path except to address 
a few words to the people and make sacrifice. 
Messengers from Pescennius Niger were now beginning to appear, bearing proclamations to 
the people and letters to the senate. Septimius had them intercepted, and at the same time 
sent Plautianus to search for and seize Niger’s children. The children of Asellius Aemilianus 
were also taken into custody. Reports indicated that the proconsul of Asia, after some 
hesitation, had thrown in his lot with Niger. 27     
Immediately after the meeting of the senate a deputation of too senators went to greet 
Septimius, who remained encamped at Interamna ‘as though moving through enemy 
territory’. When they arrived they were searched for concealed weapons and he remained 
armed in their presence, with armed guards standing round. The next day the entire Palace


--- PAGE 90 ---
staff-slaves and freedmen—appeared. They may have brought a supply of ready cash with 
them, for Septimius now presented each member of the senatorial delegation with seven 
hundred and twenty gold pieces. Those who wished were invited to remain in his entourage 
for the final stages of his journey. 28     
Septimius’ next and most pressing concern was the Guard. First he formally reappointed 
Flavius Juvenalis Prefect. The only other record of a man with these names is of a centurion 
in the Numidian legion III Augusta in the year 162. It would have made an appropriate 
choice for 
-102- 
Septimius to have put an African who had risen through the centurionate in command of the 
Guard. The other Prefect, Veturius Macrinus, cannot have been a young man either. He had 
served as Prefect of Egypt at the beginning of Commodus’ reign, but had received no further 
promotion. He must have been out of the service for ten years. 29     
Meanwhile Septimius issued secret instructions to the Guard tribunes and centurions. To the 
troops he issued a proclamation: they were to put on parade uniform, leave their weapons 
in the camp, take the oath of allegiance and assemble to greet him outside the city. Its 
language conveyed the implications that obedience would ensure their continued service, 
and the officers paraded the men. Septimius mounted the tribunal for what was expected to 
be a speech of welcome. But a detachment from his expeditionary force was on its way to 
the castra praetoria, where they seized the armoury and manned the gates. As the 
praetorians waited for the emperor to speak, other Danubian soldiers surrounded the 
parade ground. Then Septimius began. He attacked them bitterly for their treachery to 
Pertinax, telling them that even if they had not actually killed him, their failure to kill the 
assassins made them guilty. He formally discharged them, and ordered them to remove 
themselves beyond the hundredth milestone from the City on pain of death. They were to 
take off their uniforms and ceremonial daggers, inlaid with silver and gold. Most complied, 
those that hesitated had their belts and uniforms ripped off. The mounted men were told to 
let their horses go. One horse refused to leave his rider, but kept following and neighing. 
The man killed the horse and then himself; ‘And,’ says Dio, ‘it seemed to those that watched 
that the horse too was glad to die.’ 
This was the end of the old élite corps of the Roman imperial army. The praetorians, nearly 
all Italians and from provincial families of Italian stock, had had a disproportionate influence 
on the course of events for over two hundred years. Service in the Guard was regarded with 
envy by the legionaries. The pay was much higher, conditions were more favourable and the 
length of service was shorter. Septimius began at once, during June, to form his new Guard, 
larger than the old one and manned by soldiers who had served in the northern legions. In 
partial compensation for the exclusion of Italians from the Guard, he increased the size of 
the Urban Cohorts and the vigiles. 30     
There had been panic at Rome among the civilian population, as well as among the guilty 
praetorians, as Septimius approached, not without reason. Septimius himself, after 
advancing as far as the gates uniformed and on horseback, dismounted and changed into 
civilian dress. But the entire expeditionary force, both infantry and cavalry, escorted him 
fully armed. Dio’s account of ‘the most brilliant spectacle of any that I have 
-103-


--- PAGE 91 ---
seen’, fails to give an objective impression. It was written only a few years after the event, 
as part of the history of the civil wars that he presented to Septimius, and later 
incorporated, with some changes, into his complete work. He describes how the whole city 
was decked with garlands of flowers and with laurel branches and shone with the light of 
torches and burning incense. (Tertullian implies that only the Christians failed to participate: 
Dio, if he knew or cared, in accordance with his practice does not mention them.) This much 
of Dio’s account is no doubt factual. But when he goes on to add that the white-robed 
citizens were radiant-faced as they uttered shouts of good omen, one may suspect that his 
language is disingenuous. When he says that the soldiers ‘stood out conspicuously in their 
armour as they moved about like participants in some holiday procession’, it is clear that 
tact has triumphed over accuracy. One must turn to the HA for a truer version. Septimius 
went first to the Capitol to make sacrifices. Then to the Palace, preceded by his legionaries 
trailing the standards of the disbanded Guard, a sign of his bloodless victory. The soldiers 
were quartered all over the City, in temples and porticoes and even in the shrines on the 
Palatine. Septimius’ entry inspired ‘hatred and fear’, the biographer concludes, for the 
soldiers seized goods without paying for them and threatened to lay the city waste. 31     
The following day Septimius came to the curia, once more escorted by an armed guard. In a 
speech he justified his seizure of power, claiming that his coup had been made in self-
defence: Julianus had sent men ‘notorious for assassinating generals to murder him’. Most 
will have known that Julianus took this step only after Septimius’ march had begun. Still, he 
was under no necessity to be apologetic: as he told them, he had come to avenge Pertinax, 
whom the senate had clearly preferred to Julianus. But to make it clear that no purge was 
to begin, he asked that a decree be passed, ‘that the emperor shall not be permitted to put 
a senator to death without consulting the senate’. One Julius Solon, who had bought his 
senatorial rank from Cleander, had the honour of introducing the formal motion. While the 
session was in progress the soldiers began to create a disturbance outside, demanding that 
the senate grant them a bounty. The sum that they named was 10,000 sesterces—2500 
denarii—the equivalent of eight years’ pay, per man. They claimed as a precedent the grant 
to Octavian’s soldiers in 43 BC. It is remarkable that the soldiers should have had 
knowledge of an event 235 years before. No doubt this colossal donative had become part 
of legionary folklore. Septimius was eventually able to pacify them with a tenth of what they 
asked, and then sent them away. It cannot have been easy to raise funds after two 
emperors had given out donatives. One may wonder whether steps were taken to recover 
the money Julianus had lavished on the praetorians—150 million sesterces. It 
-104- 
was probably to pay the donative to Septimius’ troops that a special issue of coins was 
struck. They bear the names of all but one of the Rhine, Danube and Dacian legions. 32     
His next public act was to order the state funeral and deification of Pertinax; and at his 
request, the senate formally bestowed the name Pertinax on him. Dio’s elaborate 
description of the ceremonies has been preserved by Xiphilinus. A wooden platform was 
built in the Forum near the Rostra and on it a shrine surrounded by ivory and gold columns. 
A funeral bier, likewise of ivory and gold, was placed within, on which lay a wax effigy of 
Pertinax in triumphal dress. The emperor, with the senators and their wives, approached, 
wearing mourning. Then busts of famous Romans were carried past the bier, followed by 
male choirs singing a funeral lament, symbolic bronze representations of the provinces and 
the city guilds. More portrait busts were then carried past, of famous men from all nations. 
The troops rode and marched past and finally funeral gifts were laid before the bier. Then 
Septimius mounted the Rostra and delivered the customary eulogy, to shouts of approval


--- PAGE 92 ---
from the senators. When it was over the bier was taken down by the priests and 
magistrates—including those designated for the following year, of whom Dio was one. They 
handed the bier to pall-bearers from the equestrian order, who proceeded to the Campus 
Martius, followed by the senators, ‘some of us beating our breast and others playing a dirge 
on the flute’. Septimius came last of all. A three-storey funeral pyre had been built, 
surmounted by a gilded chariot that Pertinax had once driven. The offerings and the bier 
were placed in it, Septimius and the relatives of Pertinax kissed the effigy, and then 
withdrew to a safe distance. Magistrates, equites and soldiers paraded round the pyre and 
then the consuls fired it. When it began to blaze, an eagle flew out and upwards, 
symbolising that Pertinax had been deified. The worship of the new god was to be 
supervised by the sodales appointed for the cult of the Antonine Emperors, and Pertinax’s 
son was made flamen Helvianus. 33     
The ceremony was an important gesture, which would give some credence to his claimed 
intention of modelling his administration on that of Pertinax—and that of Pertinax’s own 
exemplar, Marcus Aurelius. Now there were more practical matters to attend to, first and 
foremost the preparation for the campaign against Niger. Septimius refused for the time 
being to make any public reference to his rival. But one of the first acts, before he reached 
Rome, must have been to despatch his friend Fabius Cilo to take command of a force at 
Perinthus, to prevent Niger’s troops advancing any further into Thrace. Another army, under 
Marius Maximus, was already besieging Byzantium. 34     
The mint began striking coins in the names of Septimius and of 
-105- 
Albinus. These first issues stressed the generosity of the emperor, presumably indicating 
that he had issued a congiarium to the plebs, and the ‘fertility of the age,’ as well as the 
‘loyalty of the legions’. The saeculum frugiferum had already been advertised on the coinage 
of Pertinax. Its reappearance now is interesting. It was also the Latin name for an African 
god, the patron deity of Hadrumetum, home of Albinus. The Caesar’s own coins stress the 
‘divine foresight’ by which Septimius provided against future eventualities with his choice of 
successor. The first coins struck for Julia Domna celebrate the goddess Venus, both Venus 
Victrix who had won Caesar his Civil War victories, and Venus Genetrix, the divine 
ancestress of the original Julian family. 35     
Meanwhile Septimius and Albinus were designated to hold the consulship jointly for 194. 
Septimius had little time for civilian matters. He left Rome less than thirty days after his 
triumphant entry. He did find time on 27 June to give an adjudication on a point of law, 
preserved as the first of over 150 rescripts from him in the Code of Justinian. Interpretation 
of the law was to be a major feature of his reign. In the capital, particularly in the emperor’s 
absence, the Prefect of the City played a preeminent role in the administration of justice. 
Immediately after his arrival he had appointed a friend named Bassus to the office. Just 
before the expedition departed, Bassus resigned. Perhaps Septimius had decided to take 
him to the east, or possibly he had been intended merely as a stop-gap, until a suitable 
man was available. At any rate, the person now appointed was C. Domitius Dexter, once the 
successor of Pertinax as governor of Syria, and hence perhaps Septimius’ own commanding 
officer there for a short time. Undoubtedly the City Prefect would have exceptional 
importance during the absence of a new emperor. The same applies even more strongly to 
the commanders of the Guard—for some of the Guard at least would be left in Rome, with 
one of the Prefects. But no certain information is available. All that can be said is that the


--- PAGE 93 ---
sources give scarcely any hint of trouble for Septimius in Rome during his absence, in spite 
of the earlier support for his rival. 36     
There were others besides the City Prefect left behind to watch his interests. The ex-
centurion Aquilius Felix was one. He was placed in simultaneous control of three important 
bureaux, public works, Crown property (patrimonium) and the private property of the 
Antonine family (ratio privata). This would be a strategic role; and he could use it as a cloak 
for other activities. Steps were also taken to put new men into the senate. Ti. Claudius 
Claudianus, an African from Rusicade in Numidia, was made praetor. He had been serving 
as equestrian officer in Septimius’ army, and was soon to take up a legionary command in 
Dacia. Another new senator was Claudius Gallus, perhaps a kinsman of Claudianus. He 
-106- 
too was shortly to have an important position. A third was Julia’s brother-in-law, the Ostia 
procurator, Julius Avitus Alexianus. Septimius’ kinsman Plautianus, no doubt already 
promoted to a high equestrian post, was to accompany the expedition. He soon became the 
dominant figure in the new emperor’s entourage, almost constantly at Septimius’ side. 37     
The prime consideration at this time must have been the raising of new troops. Septimius 
had perhaps already decided to create three new legions, although he could hardly have 
formed them before his departure. His stated pretext for these military preparations may 
have been an expedition against the Parthians: the new legions were to be called I, II and 
III Parthicae. But it is probable that the HA is correct that Septimius officially set out ‘to set 
eastern affairs in order’, ad conponendum orientis statum. This terminology will have 
deceived no one, even though news from the east was still being suppressed. Septimius 
held a trump card. In his custody were the children of all those in official positions in the 
east, except for those of Niger himself. Plautianus was still hunting down Niger’s children. 
Septimius doubtless hoped that when they fell into his hands he could use them as a 
bargaining counter. Meanwhile he ordered ‘a legion to Africa’, according to the HA, 
apparently fearing that Niger would send forces through Egypt and Cyrenaica to seize the 
province. This would cut off Rome’s food supply. Further, Septimius’ home town would fall 
into his rival’s hands. Septimius’ anxiety may have been lessened by the confidence that 
Mantennius Sabinus would try to swing Egypt out of Niger’s camp at the first opportunity. 
For the time being it may be assumed that the legate of III Augusta was instructed to send 
detachments to Tripolitania. But it is not impossible that elements from the northern legions 
were shipped from Italy. Africa was worth defending. 38     
The vast palace household now had, in Septimius, their fourth new master in less than six 
months. He may have known some of the principal freedmen already and must have 
selected some of them and of the imperial slaves, to go with him. At the higher level of the 
secretariat and the great departments of state—a rationibus, a libellis, and the rest—he may 
have made changes now; but was probably obliged to take over most of the personnel. The 
familia Caesaris, certainly, was a major element in continuity, coups d’état or civil wars 
notwithstanding. Septimius’ elevation gave him a further privilege of which he probably 
availed himself at once. Galen, the doyen of the medical profession, was at Rome and 
readily prescribed for Septimius the medicine he used to give Marcus (Commodus had done 
without), from the cinnamon-like cassia twigs. The best quality ones had perished in the 
Temple of Peace (with much of Galen’s writings) when it burned two years earlier, and he 
had to use an old stock, stored up since Hadrian’s day. Septimius was to recommend the 
treatment enthusiastically; Galen was much gratified. 39


--- PAGE 94 ---
-107- 
11 
THE WAR AGAINST NIGER 
THE EXPEDITION LEFT ROME by the Via Flaminia, the route by which Septimius had arrived 
only a month before. He soon ran into difficulties. At Saxa Rubra, less than ten miles north 
of the city, the troops mutinied, allegedly over the choice of camp site. The trouble was 
evidently overcome without difficulty, perhaps with a rapid distribution of the new coins 
struck in the legions’ honour. The quartermaster on the ‘city expedition’, expeditio urbica, 
Rossius Vitulus, now had charge of the ‘war-chest for the expedition’, area expeditionalis, 
proof that Septimius was continuing to cement the loyalty of his troops by disbursements of 
money. 1     
Septimius’ departure from Rome by the northern route indicates that he travelled east by 
land. It might have been risky to cross from Brundisium to Dyrrachium and follow the Via 
Egnatia when Niger’s forces were still in Europe. Indeed, Niger, who had apparently made 
Byzantium his headquarters, inflicted heavy casualties on Fabius Cilo’s force in an attempt 
to seize Perinthus. This battle induced Niger to advertise a victory on his coinage, and made 
him conceited. His followers called him a new Alexander, Dio records. Niger clearly had 
every intention of fighting for the empire. But it was he who had opened hostilities. Now 
Septimius could take the step which he had so far avoided. The senate was asked to declare 
Niger and Asellius Aemilianus public enemies. Septimius was particularly incensed about 
Aemilianus, who had temporised for a time before accepting a major position under Niger. 
Since he was a kinsman of Clodius Albinus, Septimius may have hoped that he would back 
them rather than Niger. 2     
In spite of the support that had been shown to Niger at Rome, and his initial success at 
Perinthus, Septimius was confident. He believed in his destiny. Apart from the astrologer’s 
forecast, and other omens, there had been a sign given to him while he was still at 
Carnuntum. The priest of Jupiter—at the shrine outside the town—had told him how he had 
seen, in a dream, a black man forcing his way into Septimius’ camp and then being put to 
death. The ‘black man’ was Niger, so it was interpreted. No 
-108- 
doubt Septimius’ officers and agents broadcast this and other dreams and omens. They 
greatly impressed Cassius Dio. 3     
Septimius’ route to the east presumably took him via Aquileia and the R. Save to 
Singidunum (Belgrade) on the Danube and down the river to Viminacium. From there he 
probably struck south, on the road to Naissus (Niš). Before he himself, with his wife and 
sons, and strong elements of the new Guard among other forces, reached Thrace, he must 
have sent another army drawn from the Pannonian legions, the exercitus Illyricus. The 
command was assigned to Ti. Claudius Candidus. This man, probably a Numidian from the 
Cirta region, had begun as an equestrian officer late in the reign of Marcus. He had become 
a senator, after holding a procuratorship, in the early 180s, but his career had stagnated. 
One of the few posts he obtained was that of legate to a proconsul of Asia. Conceivably he 
had been holding it under Aemilianus and had fled to join Septimius. At all events, he had 
some useful recent experience of the likely theatre of war. 4


--- PAGE 95 ---
At some point in Septimius’ journey east, probably soon after he reached Naissus, his 
brother Geta came to meet him. Septimius ‘told him to govern the province that had been 
entrusted to him’. This may mean simply that he was ordered back to Lower Moesia. More 
probably Geta was transferred to Dacia, replacing Polus Terentianus. His successor in Lower 
Moesia was Pollienus Auspex, who had been in Dalmatia at the moment of the coup. Geta 
had ‘hoped for something else’, according to the HA. Some have deduced from this cryptic 
statement that he hoped for a share in the imperial power. It is more likely that he hoped 
for a field command. The HA undoubtedly derives the story from Marius Maximus, Geta’s 
subordinate as legate of I Italica—the legion that Geta himself had commanded more than 
ten years previously. Geta may not have taken favourably to the prospects of Maximus and 
others acquiring glory in battle, while he remained far behind the front. Maximus had been 
given command of an army corps drawn from the Moesian legions, and the assignment to 
capture Byzantium. 5     
Niger had done his best to defend the coast of Asia Minor, giving the command to 
Aemilianus. But as he watched first Maximus’ army settling down to besiege him in 
Byzantium and then Septimius himself arrive to make his headquarters at Perinthus, less 
than fifty miles (80 km) away, he began to lose his confidence. Besides, Septimius would 
have had Niger’s children brought to Perinthus. Niger now made an offer to Septimius to 
share the empire. It was rejected out of hand. Septimius was prepared to spare Niger’s life 
if he submitted and went into exile. But he refused to pardon Aemilianus. 6     
-109- 
In the autumn Claudius Candidus took the Pannonian army across the Sea of Marmara. He 
defeated Aemilianus, who fled to Cyzicus, no doubt trying to reach Niger at Byzantium. But 
he was captured and executed by Candidus. His army fled eastwards, out of the province of 
Asia into Bithynia. Candidus pursued on both land and sea. Two great Bithynian cities 
reacted predictably. Nicomedia responded to the Septimian victory by an immediate change 
of side, sending offers of support. Candidus sent his troops ahead there, outflanking the 
enemy. Nicomedia’s rival Nicaea gave a welcome to Niger’s army. Niger himself managed to 
make his way there from Byzantium to take personal command. 7     
Candidus led his troops against Nicaea from the north. The battle took place in the narrow 
passes west of the city, leading past Lake Ascania to Cius. Dio gave a detailed account. As a 
native of Nicaea, he knew the terrain and was able to hear from eyewitnesses. Candidus 
had stationed his troops on the high ground and at first they had the advantage, although 
the fighting was confused. Some of the enemy were shooting arrows from boats on the 
lake. When Niger himself appeared, the Septimians began to give way. At this point 
Candidus displayed outstanding qualities of leadership. ‘He seized hold of the standard-
bearers and forced them to turn round to face the enemy, rebuking his men for taking 
flight.’ This saved the day, and Niger’s forces only escaped complete destruction through 
the onset of darkness. The battle must have taken place in December, or early January at 
the latest. News of Septimius’ victory reached Rome by 31 January, and by 13 February 
Egypt had gone over to him. Niger’s army retreated rapidly, and Niger hurried ahead to 
Antioch. 8     
Septimius now took possession of Asia as well as Bithynia. Fabius Cilo was made governor 
of the latter province. Claudius Candidus took at least part of his victorious Pannonian army 
into the province of Asia, where he pursued ‘public enemies of the Roman people on both 
land and sea’. Claudius Xenophon, formerly procurator in Moesia and Dacia, and sub-prefect 
of the Annona, became procurator of Asia. Although there were no executions of prominent


--- PAGE 96 ---
figures, except of Aemilianus, there will have been large scale confiscations and other 
penalties imposed on the cities that had supported Niger. 9     
The two victories had caused Septimius’ army to acclaim him as imperator. He was able to 
add first ‘Imp. II’ and then ‘Imp. III’ to his titles, which, from the opening of 194, included 
pater patriae. Unlike Pertinax, he had allowed at least a token interval to elapse before he 
accepted this distinction. The mint of Rome hastened to strike new coins following each 
victory. After Cyzicus, as well as ‘the emperor’s victory’ and the ‘spirit of the Roman people’, 
the ancestral gods of Lepcis Magna, the di auspices—Hercules and Father Liber—were 
invoked, making their first 
-110- 
 
-111- 
appearance on the Roman coinage. Nicaea-Cius produced reverses of Mars the pacifier and 
Peace herself, and Septimius is shown clasping hands with Jupiter. Eternal Rome is figured 
on the bronze coinage from Rome, another issue of which shows Africa, with elephant-skin 
headdress and a lion at her feet, and corn-ears in her bosom. The exceptional prominence 
given to the province on the coinage was no doubt caused in part by its importance in 
supplying Rome with cereals. But in this and the following year the coinage of Albinus 
repeatedly shows the African deity called in Latin saeculum frugiferum. On one particularly 
fine aureus the god is represented seated with sphinxes on either side of his throne, 
wearing a fez-like headdress. The figure closely resembles a Punic relief of the fifth century 
BC found in the shrine of Ba’al Hammon at Hadrumetum, home town of Albinus. This coin, 
and those of the di auspices, suggest that Septimius, or the controller of the mint, thought 
it proper and desirable to advertise very specifically the African backgrounds of the 
Augustus and his chief ally, the Caesar. 10     
A new commander-in-chief for the Septimian army had now arrived, Cornelius Anullinus. He 
had been in Africa, as proconsul, when Septimius gained power, and may have been 
summoned to join him in Thrace before completing this year of office. Septimius had 
probably been well acquainted with Anullinus for over twenty years. He was a trusted friend, 
whom he was to honour and enrich. Niger had clearly valued the seniority and prestige of 
Asellius Aemilianus. Now Septimius could put a man of equal standing against Niger. 11


--- PAGE 97 ---
While Anullinus began advancing through Galatia and Cappadocia in pursuit of Niger, 
Septimius may have remained at Perinthus. Before long he will have begun to follow. The 
only certain stage on his journey is Prusias ad Hypium, some sixty miles east of Nicomedia. 
Niger was making frantic preparations, fortifying the Taurus passes and raising further 
troops. But his support was dwindling further. The defection of Egypt was followed by that 
of Arabia: the governor of that province was a native of Perinthus. One of the two legions in 
Palestine, VI Ferrata, also defected, and even some of the cities of Syria itself showed 
support for Septimius. Two of these, Laodicea and Tyre, were punished by Niger. It may be 
that Emesa also abandoned Niger for the husband of Julia Domna well before the war was 
over. 12     
Only Herodian records a battle at one of the passes fortified by Niger. His account appears 
to indicate that the Septimians forced the pass during the winter or spring, for he speaks of 
a fall of snow. The decisive battle was to come near Issus, where Alexander had defeated 
Darius more than five hundred years before. Niger came out to meet the enemy as they 
moved down into the Gulf of Alexandretta. Dio gives a convincing 
-112- 
account of the manner in which the victory was gained. Anullinus’ men were helped by a 
heavy thunderstorm and rain from behind them driving at the faces of the enemy. But the 
decisive factor was Anullinus’ move in sending Valerius Valerianus round with the cavalry to 
take Niger’s army in the rear. They were already retreating, their morale lowered by the 
thunderstorm, when Valerianus appeared, and they were trapped. According to Dio they lost 
20,000 men. Niger fled to Antioch. Anullinus followed and soon after captured the city. 
Niger apparently intended to flee to the Parthians, but he was caught on the outskirts and 
killed. His head was cut off and sent to Septimius, who sent it to the army besieging 
Byzantium, to induce that city to surrender. (It had no effect.) The defeat and death of 
Niger can hardly have been much later than the end of April. 13     
Pescennius Niger must remain a shadowy figure. On his proclamation as emperor he had 
assumed the additional name ‘Justus’, as if to announce the main theme of his rule. But he 
had little chance to put it into effect. Whether he would have succeeded is another matter. 
Dio notes that he was of equestrian origin. In a fragment of his account of the reign of 
Commodus there is a mention of Niger winning military renown, together with Albinus, in a 
war against the Dacians in the early 180s. Dio says that he was appointed governor of Syria 
because of his negative qualities— ‘he was remarkable for nothing, good or bad’. In other 
words, a grey figure who could be safely appointed to the key province of Syria during the 
confused last years of Commodus—especially as the Parthian empire was racked by civil war 
in 191. His coins portray him with long, narrow head, rather thick lips and a tense 
expression. The legends and reverse types represent him as the favourite of numerous 
gods. Herodian sneers at his vanity—and the anecdote about the ‘new Alexander’ recorded 
by Dio, already quoted, might seem to confirm this. The author of the HA, in a frank prelude 
to his biography of Niger, noted that it was an unusual and difficult task to record the lives 
of those ‘who through the victories of others remained pretenders to the throne only’. This 
did not deter him from concocting a curious farrago that passes for a factual biography, 
based on the thin substratum of fact—the tale of Niger’s ‘presumption, the battle in which 
he was overcome, and the punishment that he suffered’ —that he found in his source’s 
account of Septimius Severus. 14     
How long it took before Septimius himself arrived in Syria is uncertain. Over thirty years 
later the Palmyrene garrison on the Syrian frontier at Dura still celebrated a Severan victory


--- PAGE 98 ---
each year on 21 May. That could have been the day in the year 194 when the last of Niger’s 
soldiers capitulated and Septimius’ authority over the whole eastern empire was 
established. 
-113- 
It may have been in the aftermath of this take over that a decision of far reaching 
importance was taken. Niger had been minting silver coinage at a standard markedly 
inferior to that of any previous Roman denarii, below even those of Commodus’ last three 
years. Septimius’ first eastern issues followed suit. At the end of 194 the mint at Rome 
began issuing denarii which were only a little finer. They were still considerably inferior in 
silver content even to the late Commodan issues. Septimius was prepared to spend, on a 
massive scale: he was undertaking the ancient equivalent of ‘printing money’. 15     
In honour of Issus Septimius took a fourth acclamation as imperator. He still refrained from 
exacting full vengeance against the senators who had supported Niger. It would have been 
foolish to do so, when disaffected senators had a potential rallying point in the person of 
Clodius Albinus. Dio records how one Cassius Clemens defended his behaviour: ‘“I did not 
know either you or Niger,” he said, “but since I was surrounded by his followers I had to 
look to the moment, not to fight against you but to depose Julianus.”’ Septimius ‘admired 
his frankness’, and allowed him to retain half his property. Presumably the other prominent 
men, including most of the eastern governors and legionary legates, lost everything. One of 
the senators affected was a certain Flavius Athenagoras. Septimius later returned a million 
sesterces out of his confiscated property to the man’s daughter as a dowry. 16     
An important step was to replace these men with his own nominees. The names of some 
new governors are recorded. Q. Venidius Rufus, a kinsman of Marius Maximus, who had 
been commanding the Bonn legion I Minervia, was assigned to Cilicia. Syria was treated 
drastically—it was divided into two. Syria Coele, northern or ‘hollow’ Syria, with the legions 
IV Scythica and XVI Flavia, remained consular. Syria Phoenice, with III Gallica, was now 
governed by the legate of the legion. The capital of the new province was Tyre, mother-city 
of Carthage and the western Phoenicians. Tyre was also given the ius Italicum, exempting 
its citizens from the tribute paid by provincials. The first governor of Phoenice was Ti. 
Manilius Fuscus, who had been legate of the Dacian legion XIII Gemina. Rewards and 
punishments were distributed to other cities which had taken a positive stance for either 
side during the war. Antioch was severely punished. Septimius now had the opportunity to 
get his own back on the people who had made fun of him when he was a legionary legate. 
The city was entirely deprived of its civic status and relegated to being a parish of its rival 
Laodicea, which replaced it as capital of Syria Coele and also acquired the ius Italicum. 
Similar measures were taken with other cities. Funds were raised on a massive scale by 
‘merciless’ exactions. The immediate purpose may have been concealed. Septimius and 
Julia 
-114- 
must have derived enormous pleasure from their triumphal tour of Syria. He had left twelve 
years before, abruptly removed from his legionary command and obliged to abandon his 
career for some time. Julia had left seven years earlier, to take ship for Lugdunum. There 
can be no question but that she revisited Emesa on this occasion, and that her fellow-
Emesenes acclaimed their Augusta. 17


--- PAGE 99 ---
But Septimius had other matters to prepare for during the rest of 194. A fair number of 
Niger’s troops had taken refuge beyond the Euphrates, and various rulers in northern 
Mesopotamia had shown active support to Niger. Besides this, Septimius had some 
justification for taking action beyond the frontier. Nisibis, although far beyond the Euphrates 
and only fifty miles (80 km) from the Tigris, was in some sense dependent on Rome—it may 
even have had a token Roman garrison. When it was attacked by three peoples that had 
given aid to Niger—the Osrhoeni, Adiabeni and Scenite Arabs—Septimius took his 
opportunity. He rejected the claims of an embassy, that the attack on Nisibis had been 
made in his interest, against ‘soldiers that had favoured Niger’s cause’. In the spring of 195 
he mounted an invasion of Mesopotamia. Dio, the only one of the three main sources who 
give any details, is scornful: it was done ‘out of a desire for glory’ —the same motive that 
he had imputed to Trajan. Considerations of this kind may have entered into the decision. It 
would have been politic to gain some success over a foreign enemy after more than a year 
of civil war. Besides, with Byzantium still unconquered, it may have seemed premature to 
return to the west. A campaign was opportune: it would allow legions that had taken 
opposing sides at three battles to fight together against a common enemy, and, besides, 
the Parthian empire was now weak. But Septimius had already formed a serious, long-term 
design to extend the eastern frontier. His own experience fifteen years earlier as legate of 
IV Scythica and Julia’s personal knowledge of Syria, may have led him to believe that the 
Euphrates was seriously defective as a line of defence. The time was now ripe. He 
presumably crossed the frontier at Zeugma, his first objective being Osrhoene. The kingdom 
was annexed, and a procurator governor, C. Julius Pacatianus, was at once installed. 
However, its ruler Abgar was allowed to retain his capital, Edessa, and a small territory 
surrounding it. He evidently ingratiated himself with Septimius and was later to visit Rome 
with a large retinue. His dynasty’s origins closely resembled that of Emesa: both sprang 
from the bedouin of the desert, had installed themselves in a fertile district, and adopted 
the use of the Aramaic or Syriac language. 18     
Julia was at Septimius’ side, and on 14 April 195 was honoured with the title mater 
castrorum, ‘Mother of the Camp’. It was just twenty years 
-115- 
since Marcus Aurelius had awarded the same title, for the first time, to his wife Faustina. 
She had died, in Cilicia, less than a year later. Julia was to earn her title by her presence 
with Septimius and then with her elder son all over the empire during a quarter of a 
century. Early in the campaign Septimius assumed new titles, ‘Arabicus’ and ‘Adiabenicus’. 
Surprisingly, they appear on the coinage before any addition to the number of his 
acclamations. Some great achievement early in the campaign must be commemorated—an 
achievement won before serious fighting had taken place. The answer must be that the 
Arabs and Adiabeni had offered submission soon after Septimius entered Mesopotamia. In 
their fullest form the titles are ‘Parthicus Arabicus’, ‘Parthicus Adiabenicus’, emphasising 
that the peoples who had surrendered were vassals of the Parthians. Apparently, Septimius 
rejected the title of Parthicus on its own to avoid offence to the Parthian king. In any case, 
there was no fighting with the Parthians themselves. In the course of 195 three victories 
were won, which brought successively the titles Imperator V, VI and VII. The coins display 
two captives, seated back to back, on round shields, wearing pointed hats and with their 
hands bound. If the Arabs and Adiabeni did offer submission early in the campaign, they 
soon caused more trouble— otherwise there would hardly have been three further battles. 
The victories were probably hard won. The senate decreed a triumph to him. But this he 
rejected— ‘in case it should appear that he was celebrating a triumph for his victories in the 
civil war’. A triumphal arch was, however, accepted.


--- PAGE 100 ---
The desert conditions, including a dust storm and shortage of drinking water, caused severe 
hardship among his troops. When water was found, it was rejected by the troops until 
Septimius called for a cup and drained it. He will have been familiar with desert wells from 
his boyhood in Tripolitania. Did he also recall the trouble Cato had had over drinking-water 
on his epic march through the Syrtica, as portrayed in Lucan? At all events, Septimius 
successfully conducted his army to Nisibis. 19     
Dio’s account is too fragmentary to be really informative, but he gives the names of five 
generals. The first move out of Nisibis was made by three army corps, commanded by 
Claudius Candidus, Lateranus and Laetus. It is surprising to find Lateranus among them. T. 
Sextius Lateranus was a member of an Italian patrician family. But he was not the only man 
of his kind with Septimius. Lollianus Gentianus, son of Pertinax’s patron, was serving as 
comes of the emperor. Laetus is probably the same as the Julius Laetus who had led the 
advance guard in the march on Rome. After the completion of their mission, ‘laying waste 
the barbarians’ land and capturing their towns’, a second sweep was made, with the three 
corps commanded this time by Cornelius Anullinus, Laetus and a certain 
-116- 
Probus, otherwise unknown. Herodian’s account is unfortunately worthless, as he has 
confused this campaign with the later eastern war; and the HA reports it in one sentence. 
Further light comes from a Syriac source, the Msiha Zkha, which indicates that Vologaeses 
of Parthia had fomented revolt or agression by the Osrhoeni and Adiabeni against Rome, but 
that he himself was distracted from active participation by the need to crush a rebellion in 
Persis and Media. His absence may have been decisive. 20     
Soon after his first victory, Septimius took a remarkable step. He proclaimed himself to be 
the son of Marcus Aurelius. In the first bronze issue which give him the titles that celebrate 
his victories, one sestertius describes him as ‘Son of the deified Marcus Pius’. This title is 
repeated later in the year. Simultaneously, or soon after, he took another step. His son 
Bassianus, now seven years old, was renamed after Marcus, and from then on was known 
as ‘M. Aurelius Antoninus.’ He also received the title ‘Caesar’. The title mater castrorum 
which Julia now had recalled the empress of Marcus. It has been plausibly suggested that 
the rainstorm, to which the Septimian success at Issus seems to be attributed by Dio, may 
have been exaggerated as part of a programme to associate Septimius with his new ‘father’. 
After all, it recalled the two weather-miracles of the northern wars in the early 170s, which 
were at this very time newly commemorated in gleaming marble on the Aurelian Column at 
Rome. Indeed, a fragment of Dio even registers a northern ‘weather-miracle’ which 
supposedly took place while Septimius was in Mesopotamia. The ‘Scythians’ were about to 
invade, when their three chiefs were killed by thunderbolts. This must refer to the Goths, by 
now established on the Black Sea and beginning to eye the eastern empire hungrily. 
Septimius seems to have turned the episode to Rome’s advantage. A few years later Goths 
are found serving in the army of Arabia. 21     
His victory beyond the Euphrates for the time being led to the annexation only of 
‘Osrhoene’. The new province may at first have extended as far as Nisibis and indeed to the 
Tigris. Nisibis was ‘entrusted to a knight’, perhaps the successful cavalry commander 
Valerius Valerianus. His inscription appears to credit him with the ‘completion’ of the 
felicissima expeditio Mesopotamena. 22     
There can be little doubt that Septimius had already decided to make a break with Albinus. 
He must have been supremely confident of the eventual outcome, may indeed have already


--- PAGE 101 ---
taken steps to dispose of his temporary ally. Herodian records that Albinus was ‘acting more 
and more as if he were emperor’ and was receiving numerous letters from influential 
senators, ‘who were trying to persuade him to come to Rome while Severus was absent, 
engaged on other matters’. Albinus, ‘belonging to a noble family and regarded as being a 
good-natured man’, was preferred to 
-117- 
Septimius by the ‘aristocrats’. Septimius was kept informed of these developments. He 
therefore sent to Britain his most trusted couriers. They were to give despatches to Albinus 
openly, and then to request a private meeting to hand over ‘secret instructions’. Once they 
were alone with him they were to strike him down. In case this failed, they were given 
poison, ‘so that if the opportunity arose they could persuade one of Albinus’ cooks or 
cupbearers to administer a dose of it in secret’. Albinus’ advisers were suspicious and 
warned him to be on his guard. The couriers were seized, and revealed their instructions 
under torture. The HA has the same story in the mainly bogus Life of Albinus. Further 
details are probably derived from the author’s own imagination: the number of messengers
—five— and the place where they asked for the private conference—a distant portico. 
The whole story may have been put out as anti-Septimian propaganda. Certainly, it was not 
long before Septimius himself inspired anti-Albinian propaganda. It was probably now that it 
was first alleged that Albinus had instigated the murder of Pertinax. Since Didius Julianus’ 
mother came from Albinus’ home town of Hadrumetum, the story may have seemed 
plausible. The fact that Julianus himself had had no part in the murder of Pertinax would 
have been conveniently ignored. 23     
Herodian has perhaps preserved some portion of the truth: that Septimius was unwilling to 
initiate hostilities against Albinus. Yet he must have known that his self-adoption into the 
house of the Antonines and the renaming of his son were actions of which Albinus could not 
mistake the implications. There was no longer any question of the title of Caesar that he 
had accepted in 193 giving him any rights of succession. Indeed, Dio says that Septimius 
‘would no longer give him even the rank of Caesar’. Dedications were being made to 
Septimius ascribing to him divine ancestry back to Nerva and, incidentally, calling him the 
‘brother of the deified Commodus’. His son ‘Antoninus’ was now his Caesar. Albinus was 
superfluous. Albinus’ only recourse was to gamble for the highest stakes. During 195 he 
must have sent troops across into Gaul and proclaimed himself emperor. Septimius will 
have been ready for the move. Some of the troops brought east for the campaign were on 
their way back to Europe before the end of the summer. A soldier of the Pannonian legion X 
Gemina died at Ancyra in Galatia on 3 September, ‘returning from Parthia’. He must have 
been in Claudius Candidus’ army. The general himself may be on record at an earlier stage 
of the return march, between Samosata and Melitene. On a high ridge in sight of the 
Nemrud Dag a man called Candidus rebuilt a ‘primeval altar’, with a statue of ‘Zeus, mighty 
king’, in accordance with ‘Apollo’s deathless oracles’ —and in passable hexameter verse. 24     
-118- 
The rapid bringing to an end of the eastern campaign cannot have been forced on Septimius 
by events in the west. It must have been conceived from the start as a short-term punitive 
war. The assumption of the Antonine ancestry and the associated dynastic claims, probably 
in the spring of 195, were an open challenge to Albinus, which, if accepted, would make 
Septimius’ return to the west necessary. Still, he did not leave Mesopotamia until he heard 
that Byzantium had fallen, news that gave him exceptional pleasure, according to Dio. 25


--- PAGE 102 ---
The siege had lasted for more than two years, and Dio’s detailed account is preserved in full
—it naturally interested his epitomator Xiphilinus, whose eleventh-century Byzantine 
readers must have found this one of the most entertaining parts of the entire work. The late 
second-century Byzantines were evidently brave and resourceful, and the city only fell to 
Marius Maximus’ besieging army when the people were starving—even then many escaped 
by boat, and the rest almost succeeded in getting away also. The city was treated in 
predictable fashion. Its walls were demolished, and its civic status annulled. It was annexed 
to its neighbour Perinthus. Dio, who had seen the city in its glory, with ‘the seven towers 
extending from the Thracian Gates to the sea’ that would pass on an echo from one to the 
other, comments sadly on what he later observed. The place ‘looked as if it had been 
captured by some other people rather than by the Romans’. 26     
In recognition of the victory, Septimius now became Imp. VIII. An inscription preserves a 
letter that he wrote to the magistrates, council and people of Aezani, a city in Phrygia, in 
the eastern part of proconsular Asia. They had sent on to him the text of an honorific 
decree: 
I have clearly understood from your decree the pleasure that you take in my success and in 
the rise of my son Marcus Aurelius Antoninus with good fortune to the hopes of the empire 
and to a position alongside his father. And I am pleased that you celebrated a public festival 
and made sacrifices of thanks giving to your local gods, since you are a famous city and one 
that has been of value to the Roman empire from of old. And when I saw that news of the 
victory had come to bear witness to my success, together with your decree, I was pleased. I 
sent my reply to you to be placed with your local gods…. 
Septimius’ titles are those of 195, except that he is already Imp. VIII. Clearly the embassy 
from Aezani had arrived in Mesopotamia at the same time as the news of the capture of 
Byzantium. Imp. VIII is not otherwise recorded until the beginning of 196. Thus the fall of 
Byzantium must belong late in the year 195. Antoninus’ ‘rise…with good fortune…to a 
position alongside his father’ must refer to his having been made Caesar. 
-119- 
The only direct record from 195 which gives him the title, as well as the new names, come 
from Ulcisia Castra just north of Aquincum in Lower Pannonia. It is a dedication to 
Septimius, ‘Arabicus Adiabenicus’ and Imp. V by the garrison, the First Cohort of Syrians. 
On the coinage of 195 Antoninus is not yet called ‘Caesar’. No doubt the Danubian armies 
were in close touch with their emperor. 27     
The journey back to the west began at once, along the route taken the previous year. 
Meanwhile at Rome the senate was obliged to declare Albinus a public enemy. This evidently 
took place on 15 December, to judge from Dio’s reference to the ‘last chariot-races’ before 
the holiday. The realisation that another civil war was imminent—which can only mean that 
the breach had just been made open—caused dismay. 
We senators kept quiet [says Dio], but the people of Rome showed their feelings in no 
uncertain fashion. An enormous crowd had assembled to watch the last chariot-races before 
the Saturnalia, in the Circus Maximus. When the six-chariot races were over, there was a 
demand for silence and then a sudden clapping of hands. There were a series of shouts, 
prayers for the welfare of the state. Then the people began to shout appeals to the goddess 
Roma, addressing her as ‘Queen’ and ‘Immortal’, and crying out: ‘How long are we to 
endure such things?’ ‘And how long are we to go on waging war?’ After shouting out further


--- PAGE 103 ---
things of this kind, they finally ended, as suddenly as they had begun, with the cry ‘So 
much for that’ —and turned their attention to the horse-race. 28     
Dio was there, as guest of one of the consuls, who was a friend of his. He attributed the 
behaviour of the crowd to ‘some divine inspiration’. It may have been organised by 
supporters of Albinus. Dio noticed other omens, a ‘great fire in the northern sky’ and ‘a fine 
rain resembling silver which fell from a clear sky on the Forum of Augustus’. He admits that 
he did not witness the silver rain in person, but ‘after it had fallen I plated some bronze 
coins with it; they retained the appearance of silver for three days but on the fourth the 
substance had disappeared’. He does not expound the omen himself, but it has been 
shrewdly observed that silver, a white metal, could be taken to symbolise Albinus, whose 
name derived from albus, ‘white’. And his appearance of power for three years was to be 
ended in the fourth. 29     
-120- 
12 
THE WAR AGAINST ALBINUS 
SEPTIMIUS WENT RACING BACK to the west—according to Herodian— with the same 
breathless speed he had shown in three campaigns. But this seems to be imaginative 
history, or fiction. In reality he proceeded with thoroughness, making careful preparation. If 
the story of the unsuccessful attempt to assassinate Albinus, also reported by Herodian and 
embroidered by the HA, is true, Septimius’ opponent would have been alerted to what was 
coming long before the final encounter. And Septimius in any case could foresee how his 
former ally would react to the news of Bassianus’ transformation into ‘Antoninus Caesar’. 
Dio makes the sequence of events clear: ‘Septimius would no longer even give Albinus the 
rank of Caesar…but Albinus was seeking the imperial eminence.’ During 195 Septimius 
abrogated the agreement made in the spring of 193. Albinus was no longer to be ‘Caesar’ —
though what powers, if any, had been granted with the name is obscure. Septimius was to 
claim that ‘he had intended Albinus as his successor if anything should happen to himself, in 
other words, if he were to fail against Didius Julianus or Niger. Once these two were 
disposed of, Albinus’ role could lapse. But Albinus would not step down. He proclaimed 
himself Augustus. At the end of 195 he was declared a ‘public enemy’. 1     
Septimius began the march back before the end of 195. Others had gone ahead to ensure 
his hold on Rome, Italy and the northern provinces; the east and Africa were in firm and 
trusted hands. Some names can be registered. Fabius Cilo moved from Bithynia, which he 
had been governing since the victory at Nicaea, to take over Upper Moesia; and, it seems 
likely, Julia’s brother-in-law, the newly ennobled Emesene Avitus Alexianus, became legate 
of the Singidunum (Belgrade) legion IV Flavia. At Rome itself Septimius’ own kinsman, the 
ruthless Fulvius Plautianus, had been installed as Prefect of the vigiles by early summer 
195. Candidus began moving his Pannonian army back west, and Marius Maximus led his 
Moesian army from the captured Byzantium to the Danube. A third special force was formed 
from the vast Dacian army, under Ti. Claudius 
-121- 
Claudianus, the Numidian ex-equestrian officer. He had been serving as legionary 
commander with Geta. Steps were under way to recruit new legions and replenish the ranks


--- PAGE 104 ---
of the old, particularly in northern Italy. The year 196 opened with the trusted Domitius 
Dexter as one of the consules ordinarii. Soon he was to be replaced as City Prefect by 
Septimius’ senior marshal, Cornelius Anullinus. 2     
On his way back Septimius stayed again at Perinthus, where he dedicated a temple that he 
had vowed during his first stay. One of the legionary commanders in the recent compaign, 
T. Statilius Barbarus, was appointed governor of Thrace. During the journey westwards 
Pollienus Auspex, governor of Lower Moesia, greeted Septimius with a sarcastic comment on 
his self-adoption into the Antonine dynasty. ‘“I congratulate you, Caesar,” he said, “on 
finding a father.”’ Dio explains the point of the story: the emperor’s real father had been so 
obscure that it had seemed that he did not have one. 3     
Only one point on his journey is recorded after Perinthus. A ceremony took place at 
Viminacium on the Danube, the base of the legion VII Claudia. The HA says that Septimius 
‘named his son Caesar’ there, ‘to deter his own brother Geta from the hope of imperial 
power which he had conceived’. The new Antoninus had already become Caesar, in the east, 
presumably in spring 195. At Viminacium, it may be that he was displayed to the army; and 
no doubt Geta was present. As governor of Dacia he may have accompanied Claudius 
Claudianus’ exercitus Dacicus to an agreed rendezvous. There it would join the forces 
gathering ‘to suppress the Gallic conspiracy’. That was what they were calling Albinus and 
his followers. Marius Maximus, conducting the exercitus Moesiacus, was no doubt an 
eyewitness and the source of the HA’s anecdote (garbled a little in the transmission). 4     
Meanwhile in Noricum, Claudius Candidus, on his way west with his exercitus Illyricus, had 
to engage in a hunt for ‘public enemies’. Albinus must have supporters in that province. 
Elsewhere too Septimius’ rival was beginning to look more dangerous. He probably gained 
the support of the governor of Hispania Tarraconensis, Novius Rufus, and had seized 
Lugdunum, which became his headquarters. He expelled the governor, T. Flavius Secundus 
Philippianus. An attempt to occupy the Rhineland failed, although he did defeat the governor 
of Lower Germany, Virius Lupus. His forces besieged Trier in Gallia Belgica, but the city held 
out, defended by part of the Mainz legion XXII Primigenia under its legate Claudius Gallus. 
Septimius had naturally taken steps to secure the Alpine passes. One of the new legions 
was stationed in the Cottian Alps, under the command of Julius Pacatianus, recalled from 
the governorship of Osrhoene. Pacatianus, as a native of Vienne on the Rhône, will have 
been 
-122- 
a useful man for this campaign. The commissariat was again entrusted to Rossius Vitulus. 5     
There was, it is clear, an atmosphere of confusion, as is illustrated by an episode in Dio. A 
schoolmaster named Numerianus set out from Rome for Gaul, ‘pretending to be one of the 
senators appointed by Septimius to recruit troops’. After collecting a small force he entered 
Gaul and in a skirmish killed some Albinian cavalrymen. Septimius heard of his exploits. 
Under the impression that he was actually a senator, he sent a message of congratulations 
and instructions to increase the forces under his command. Numerianus thereafter managed 
to capture the impressive sum of seventy million sesterces. It was only after the war was 
over that he revealed his identity—and spent the rest of his life in retirement on a pension 
from the emperor. 6     
Septimius now proceeded to Rome, escorted by detachments under Fabius Cilo. Coins 
commemorate his ‘most fortunate advent’. Other coins record distribution of largesse and


--- PAGE 105 ---
the holding of lavish games. The behaviour of the urban plebs the previous December will 
not have gone unnoticed. Other issues emphasise war and peace—the martial prowess of 
the emperor and the peace that he would bring. During the first three years as emperor 
Septimius struck no fewer than 342 different issues. Coins struck for Antoninus advertised 
the ‘perpetual security’ and ‘perpetual hope’ that his proclamation as Caesar had brought. 
The boy now received the traditional title of heirs to the throne, princeps inventutis. 7     
The coinage of Albinus for the most part echoes that of Septimius: Jupiter who brings 
victory, Mars, Minerva the peace-bringer and Peace herself announce his confidence in the 
forthcoming struggle. The ‘spirit of Lugdunum’, his capital, is honoured, but there is no 
allusion to Africa. Septimius no longer felt the need to claim the loyalty of the army, but 
Albinus’ coins proclaim the fides legionum. Two reverses emphasise Albinus’ clementia and 
aequitas. Neither quality was claimed by Septimius. The aequitas reverse of Albinus closely 
matches one of Pertinax. These were the qualities that gained Albinus support among the 
senate. Some issues continue to give him the name Sep. or Sept., which appeared on his 
coinage as Caesar, the abbreviated form of Septimius. No doubt he had taken the name as 
a compliment to Septimius in 193. Why did he retain it? There seems to be no logical 
explanation. 8     
How long Septimius spent in Rome is not recorded. While there he made a dedication to ‘the 
deified Nerva, his ancestor’, on 18 September. It was the centenary of Nerva’s accession. 
The Code of Justinian preserves a large number of rescripts from 196. Whereas there is only 
one from 195 (early in March), one from 1 January 196 and one from 30 June, there are ten 
from the period 1 October to 29 December of that year. It is 
-123- 
reasonable to infer that Septimius’ return produced a spate of legal business. Or at least, 
while in Rome he was able to give it his personal attention. 9     
Septimius cannot have remained at Rome long. Once again he went to Pannonia, then 
through Noricum and Raetia into Upper Germany. From here he moved south on Lugdunum 
with his army. The roads in the region through which his armies had passed that year and 
through which he now went himself had been repaired in the previous year, further 
evidence that he had begun preparing for the campaign against Albinus in 195. Cilo 
probably escorted Septimius as far as Pannonia, remaining there as governor of the Upper 
Province. Septimius’ elder son was left in the care of Cilo. This passage through Pannonia 
was the occasion for Septimius to be assured of success by a prophecy. ‘Anxious about his 
generals having been defeated by the Albinians [this will refer to the defeat of Lupus], he 
learned from Pannonian augurs that he would be the victor. His adversary would, in fact, 
neither come into his power nor escape, but would perish next to the water.’ 10     
Dio records that 150,000 men were engaged when the decisive encounter came. Albinus 
had, it is true, the largest provincial army in the empire at his disposal. In the mid-second 
century, at least, for which detailed calculations can be made, the garrison of Britain had 
had some 35,000 auxiliary troops, including nearly 10,000 cavalry, in addition to its three 
legions. It is difficult to be sure if any of the auxilia had been withdrawn during the 
subsequent half century. But Marcus Aurelius had sent 5,500 Sarmatians to Britain in 175 
and there had been a major war against the Caledonians in the 180s, so the British army 
very probably still amounted to over 50,000 men. Albinus no doubt endeavoured to ensure 
that the northern tribes which submitted to Ulpius Marcellus in 184 kept the peace, but he 
must have left a holding garrison behind him when he shipped his expeditionary force


--- PAGE 106 ---
across the Channel. His British force in Gaul is unlikely to have numbered more than forty 
thousand. He may have hoped for the support of VII Gemina, the Spanish legion, and the 
modest auxilia in the peninsula. Whether his ally Novius Rufus, governor of Tarraconensis, 
could deliver is doubtful. Otherwise, he doubtless raised extra cohorts and alae, perhaps 
even legions, in Gaul. But he hardly had time to make them effective. Finally, there was the 
single Urban Cohort at Lugdunum, 500-strong, detached from the Rome garrison to police 
the Gallic metropolis. 11     
Septimius, by contrast, could draw on the entire forces of the empire other than those in 
Britain and Spain. The Rhine and Danube armies alone constituted an army of over 
200,000. He also had his new legions—one guarding the Cottian Alps—and the praetorians. 
As the inscriptions of 
-124- 
Candidas, Claudius Claudianus and Marius Maximus witness, it was to be the Danubian-
Balkan armies, once again, which bore the brunt of the fighting. The Rhine armies, already 
worsted in the opening encounter in 196, were probably assigned to cut off any attempt by 
the Albinians at retreat to the Channel ports. 12     
It was still winter when Septimius entered Gaul, early in 197, from Upper Germany. The 
first clash took place at Tinurtium (Tournous), sixty miles north of Lugdunum. Albinus was 
obviously trying to head his attackers off. But his forces were pushed back south to the 
outskirts of Lugdunum itself, where the final battle took place on 19 February. At first the 
Albinian left wing was defeated and fled back to its camp. But then the Septimian left fell 
into a trap. The Albinians had dug a series of concealed pits—the so-called lilia, which the 
British army must have been skilled at making from their experience on their northern 
frontier—and the Septimians were lured into them by a feigned retreat. Septimius himself 
came up on horseback with the praetorians, but instead of saving the situation got himself 
into extreme difficulties and was thrown from his horse. Then, ‘tearing off his riding cloak 
and drawing his sword’, he rushed after his retreating troops and shamed them into making 
a stand. That at least was the official version. According to Herodian, he simply fled with the 
rest—and flung off the purple cloak which revealed his identity. At this critical moment, 
while the pursuing British troops were already raising the chant of victory, Septimius’ 
general Laetus appeared with the cavalry and routed the Albinians. It turned out 
subsequently—or so it was alleged—that he had been waiting to see which side was winning 
before making a move, hoping that both leaders would be killed so that he could gain the 
throne for himself. 13     
Albinus’ troops were pursued into Lugdunum, which was sacked and burnt by the victorious 
army. Albinus himself was trapped in a house beside the Rhône and committed suicide. His 
body was brought to Septimius, who ‘feasted his eyes on it’, according to Dio. The version 
in the HA is that Albinus was half alive when brought to Septimius and that the prophecy of 
the Pannonian augurs was thereby fulfilled. The head was cut off and sent to Rome. The HA 
adds that ‘the corpse was, by Severus’ order, laid out in front of his own home, to be 
exposed to view, for a long time. Besides which, he himself rode over the body, and when 
the horse shied he spoke to it and loosened the reins, to make it trample boldly.’ Finally the 
body was thrown into the Rhône, with the bodies of Albinus’ murdered wife and sons. The 
HA also records that the bodies of senators who had fought for Albinus were mutilated by 
Septimius’ orders. 14


--- PAGE 107 ---
A whole series of administrative moves now had to be made. Claudius Candidus was sent 
into Spain as governor of Tarraconensis, with the 
-125- 
added mission of hunting down supporters of Albinus. It was a task for which his similar 
operations in Asia and Noricum had given him ample qualifications. Novius Rufus, who had 
been governor since at least 192, was put to death. But the legion VII Gemina must have 
changed sides, or at least failed to join Albinus. It was rewarded with the title pia, ‘loyal’. In 
Spain and Gaul numerous members of the local aristocracies were executed. They had 
clearly given Albinus financial backing. Their estates were confiscated, and in southern 
Spain much of the olive oil production thus fell into the hands of the state. In Gaul the 
factories that produced terra sigillata, Samian pottery, were either destroyed, or went out of 
production when their owners were killed and their property forfeited. Septimius’ aristocratic 
supporter Lollianus Gentianus was made governor of Lugdunensis with power to conduct a 
new census—it would be badly needed. 15     
These were not the only parts of the empire that were affected. The procurator Claudius 
Xenophon returned to the west from Asia to become procurator ad bona cogenda in Africa, 
‘to confiscate the property of the condemned’. Albinus had had allies in his native province, 
even though less powerful than those of Septimius. Three procurators are later found 
administering such property, evidently at Rome. Septimius was to institute a drastic purge 
of the senate when he returned to Rome from Lugdunum. 16     
First, urgent measures were taken in the north-west. Marius Maximus was made governor 
of Belgica and Valerius Pudens of Lower Germany, replacing Virius Lupus, who became 
governor of Britain. The defeated British legions were sent back, no doubt heavily reinforced 
with new manpower, necessary to restore losses—and their loyalty. Lupus faced an 
appalling situation. In the absence of the Roman garrison, the northern part of the province 
had been plundered by the Maeatae, probably joined by other tribes closer to Hadrian’s Wall 
and some of the Brigantes within the province. The destruction caused was far from total, 
but must have been serious; and they had taken captives. Lupus was obliged to buy off the 
Maeatae, who were on the point of bringing in the Caledonii when he arrived: the latter ‘had 
not kept their promises’, an excerpt from Dio records, ‘and were preparing to assist the 
Maeatae…Lupus was obliged to buy peace from the Maeatae for a great sum of money, 
receiving back a few prisoners’. Inscriptions show Lupus carrying out rebuilding in the 
north; but for the moment Britain was a sideshow. 17     
Septimius did not go straight to Rome. Once more he seems to have travelled via Germany 
and Pannonia. In Germany envoys came to him from the senate, no doubt bearing 
congratulations and protestations of loyalty. One of these was a young man from Cirta in 
Numidia, from 
-126- 
which so many of Septimius’ henchmen had already been drawn. The senate’s choice of 
such a man was undoubtedly politic. The embassy went on into Pannonia to take messages 
of a similar nature to Antoninus. While in Germany Septimius ordered Claudius Gallus, the 
deserving legate of the legion XXII Primigenia, and another Numidian, to muster an army 
corps drawn from all four German legions and set out with it for the east. Laetus, the man 
who had saved the day at Lugdunum, was probably sent post-haste to Mesopotamia.


--- PAGE 108 ---
Reports must have already reached Septimius—and they cannot have surprised him—that 
the Parthians had invaded. 18     
The senate awaited Septimius’ return with justifiable anxiety. Those who had had any 
dealings with Albinus must have trembled—Septimius had taken possession of Albinus’ 
correspondence. Once again populace and senate came out to greet him, as they had done 
four years earlier, with laurel branches. Once again, he made sacrifice in the Temple of 
Jupiter on the Capitol and went to the Palace. His first speech before the senate caused 
dismay and terror. He now demanded the formal deification of Commodus, whose ‘brother’ 
he was constantly calling himself, as well as ‘son of Marcus’. It is, however, unlikely that he 
carried out the ornate and elaborate rituals that had been performed for Pertinax in 193. He 
openly praised the severity and cruelty of Sulla, Marius and Augustus, and criticised Pompey 
and Caesar for their clemency (the very quality that Albinus had claimed for himself on his 
coinage). He defended the character of Commodus and attacked the senate for 
dishonouring him unjustifiably—since many of them lived worse lives. 
‘For if this was disgraceful, that he slew wild beasts with his own hands, yet only the other 
day at Ostia, one of you, a consular and an old man, was performing in public with a 
prostitute who imitated a leopard. Did Commodus fight as a gladiator, by Jupiter? And does 
not one of you fight as a gladiator? If not, how and why is it that some of you have bought 
his shields and those famous golden helmets?’ 
At the time he was making this speech some sixty-four out of the 600 members of the 
senate were under arrest. Thirty-five were then released, but the remaining twenty-nine 
were executed. There were some famous names among them, including Sulpicianus, the 
father-in-law of Pertinax, and Erucius Clarus, one of the consuls of 193. Clarus had been 
offered a free pardon if he would act as informer. He preferred death. Another man was 
easily found to play the role, in return for his life, but was obliged to submit to torture so 
that his evidence could be verified. 19     
A striking passage in Dio well conveys the atmosphere in Rome either before or after the 
battle of Lugdunum. Everyone did their best to pretend 
-127- 
to be loyal, but sudden news would catch men off their guard and their faces revealed their 
true feelings. ‘And some, because they exaggerated their pretence, were recognised more 
easily.’ It was ironic that one of the senators executed was Julius Solon. Four years earlier 
he had introduced the decree of the senate that the emperor should not put his peers to 
death without trial. Analysis of the names of the senators put to death reveals that more 
than a third were closely connected by birth or by property-ownership with proconsular 
Africa, and others were linked with Gaul and Spain. 20     
A natural corollary of this ruthless purge was the inflow of substantial funds to the Treasury. 
The procurators specially appointed to administer the property of the proscribed have 
already been mentioned. A more permanent step was taken with the transformation of the 
Privy Purse (res privata or ratio privata). Its operations were greatly extended by the 
setting up of regional offices throughout Italy. At this time the sinister Aquilius Felix was 
given the special task of revising the lists of Roman knights. Many changes will have been 
necessary—some sixty or more equites must have been serving as officers in the British 
army under Albinus. Few of these will have retained their rank, even if their lives were 
spared. This influx of funds, coupled with debasement of the silver coinage, made it possible


--- PAGE 109 ---
for Septimius to grant a major pay increase to the army, the first, indeed, for over a 
century. He also made a dramatic concession over terms of service: for the first time since 
Augustus soldiers were permitted to marry. The loyalty of the whole imperial army to 
himself and his dynasty was now secure. 21     
On 8 June 197 three troopers of the imperial House Guard (equites singulares Augusti) 
celebrated ‘the return of the unit’ —undoubtedly from the campaign in Gaul—by a 
dedication to ‘Unconquered Hercules and the other gods and goddesses’, for the safety of 
Septimius, of Antoninus, and of C. Fulvius Plautianus, Prefect of the Guard. Plautianus also 
had the title clarissimus vir, ‘right honourable’, and hence had been granted honorary 
senatorial rank. Septimius’ energetic and strong-willed kinsman had been at his side during 
most of the last four years. 22     
Antoninus was now frequently called imperator destinatus, ‘emperor designate’, and at the 
same time he was co-opted into the great priestly colleges. Septimius was awaiting an 
auspicious moment before making his son his full colleague. Measures were taken to ensure 
the favour of the urban populace at Rome with more lavish games and further distribution 
of largesse. Then he departed for his second war with Rome’s eastern enemies. 23     
-128- 
13 
PARTHIA AND EGYPT 
THIS TIME SEPTIMIUS WENT east by sea. Embarking at Brundisium he sailed directly across 
to Asia Minor, probably landing at the Cilician port of Aegeae and completing the journey to 
Syria by road. The bulk of the expeditionary force, including two of the new legions, had 
been sent on ahead. The other new legion, II Parthica, was left in Italy, garrisoned at a new 
fortress thirteen miles south of Rome on the Via Appia, at Alba. Together with part of the 
Guard and other elements of the enlarged Rome garrison, this would be sufficient insurance 
against possible trouble during his absence. II Parthica was given an equestrian rather than 
a senatorial commander, as were the other new legions. Septimius’ friend Anullinus was City 
Prefect. Other close associates of Septimius were in strategic positions. Fabius Cilo ruled the 
key province of Upper Pannonia during the entire period of his absence, Geta was still 
governing Dacia and a high proportion of the other military provinces were entrusted to 
men of African origin or connections. Septimius was to be away from Rome for five years. 
There is no hint of any trouble in this period. 1     
He was accompanied by Julia and their sons and by his kinsman the Prefect of the Guard, 
Plautianus. On arrival in Syria he immediately mustered his forces and crossed the 
Euphrates. Abgar of Edessa handed over his children as hostages and provided archers, and 
the king of Armenia, fearing that he would be attacked, likewise sent hostages, money and 
gifts, in return for which his status was recognised by a treaty. Septimius pushed on to 
Nisibis, which Julius Laetus had managed to rescue. The Parthians withdrew before 
Septimius arrived. These successes may have led him to accept a new imperatorial 
acclamation, his tenth, before returning to Syria to prepare for a much more ambitious 
undertaking. 2     
His plan now was to attack the Parthian capital itself, in person, unlike Lucius Verus thirty 
years earlier, who had remained in Syria while his generals, above all the Syrian Avidius


--- PAGE 110 ---
Cassius, took Roman armies to the Tigris. He constructed a fleet on the Euphrates and 
began moving his forces south when the summer was over, probably in late September. He 
was accompanied by a brother of the Parthian king. Dissension in the 
-129- 
Parthian empire gave an ideal opportunity to neutralise Rome’s major enemy in the east 
once and for all. Babylon, in any case a largely deserted city, had been abandoned by the 
enemy when Septimius’ forces reached it. They pressed across to the Tigris and found the 
once great city of Seleucia, ruined by Cassius’ troops in 165, likewise undefended. Across 
the river stood Ctesiphon, the royal city. Quite when the Roman army reached this point is 
unclear, but Parthian resistance was minimal. The king escaped and Septimius did not 
trouble to pursue him. Ctesiphon was sacked and plundered: ‘vast numbers were killed’, Dio 
says, ‘and 100,000 prisoners taken’. Herodian adds that ‘the royal treasury was captured 
and all the king’s jewels and valuables’. 3     
On 28 January 198 Septimius proclaimed that he had conquered Parthia, and took the title 
Trajan had first held, ‘Parthicus Maximus’. The date was carefully chosen: it was the exact 
centenary of Trajan’s accession. He was now the equal of the ‘best of emperors’, whose 
great-great-grandson he claimed to be. On the same day he conferred on his elder son, now 
nine years old, the title of Augustus and the status of co-emperor to which he had been 
clearly designated for the past year. His younger son Geta received the name of Caesar. 
Septimius was once again following the example of Marcus Aurelius, the first to take a 
colleague as co-emperor, as he had already done by making his wife mater castrorum. 
Whether he had intended to annexe the whole of the land between the two rivers down to 
the Persian Gulf, when he set out the previous autumn, is unclear. Trajan had tried this and 
failed. Dio suggests that he departed ‘as if his sole purpose had been plunder’, but that his 
real reason for abandoning Ctesiphon was ‘lack of supplies’ and inadequate military 
intelligence: ‘ignorance of the country’. He took the army back by a different route, up the 
Tigris. But he had a further military objective, the great desert city of Hatra. Like Edessa, 
Palmyra and—once—Emesa, it was an Arab caravan city, with powerful military forces of its 
own. Its ruler Barsemius had offered support to Niger and had not yet been punished. He 
could, if left alone, interfere with the passage of Roman troops along the Tigris. 
Furthermore, Trajan had failed to capture the city. Herodian, indeed, seemed to believe that 
the prime purpose of the entire expedition was to capture Hatra, and places the siege 
before the attack on Ctesiphon. Dio was much better informed, even if his accounts, as 
preserved by Xiphilinus, is hostile. Only Dio reveals that Septimius attacked Hatra twice. 
The first attempt, presumably in February or March 198, soon after the invasion army left 
Ctesiphon, is dismissed curtly as a failure: Septimius ‘crossed Mesopotamia to Hatra, which 
was not far off, but achieved nothing, in fact his siege engines were burned; many soldiers 
-130- 
perished, a great many more were wounded’. Septimius withdrew and moved elsewhere. 4     
During the siege there were two unpleasant episodes. A tribune of the Guard, Julius Crispus, 
was overheard quoting some lines of Virgil which expressed the army’s disgust at the 
apparent pointlessness of the siege. He was reported to Septimius and executed; and, Dio 
adds, the informer, a soldier named Valerius, was appointed to Crispus’ tribunate. The 
second episode was much more serious: this time the victim was Julius Laetus, who had 
been with Septimius in the march on Rome, had served in Mesopotamia in 195, had carried


--- PAGE 111 ---
the day at Lugdunum in 197 and raced off from there to rescue Nisibis from Parthian attack 
the same year. He had become too popular with the troops. Dio says that they were 
refusing to fight unless Laetus led them. After his death, no doubt, the story was put out 
that he had planned to seize the throne himself at Lugdunum and had held his men back 
deliberately. Laetus had presumably remained with Severus as a comes after the relief of 
Nisibis the previous autumn, but not given a field command. Septimius became unpopular 
with his army, and tried to disclaim responsibility. It may well be, indeed, that the initiative 
for the act came from Plautianus, who, according to the HA, was at this time engaged in a 
hunt for surviving supporters of Niger. A number of Septimius’ close associates lost their 
lives. Another prominent victim, now or a little later, was Claudius Candidus: his names 
were erased from the base of a statue in his honour at Tarraco. Plautianus could not brook 
any rival, and was well on the way to creating for himself a position of unmatched power. 
But besides this Plautianus could exploit Septimius’ superstition. The HA also reports that 
‘many who had consulted astrologers or prophets about his survival were put to death’; 
especially suspect were ‘any who seemed capable of being emperor’. 5     
After mentioning the death of Laetus, the HA, somewhat incongruously at first sight (no 
doubt because the author has drastically abbreviated his source), inserts an anecdote about 
Septimius’ sister Octavilla. ‘His sister, a woman of Lepcis, came to see him. She was 
scarcely capable of speaking Latin and the emperor was greatly embarrassed about her. He 
awarded her son the latus clavus and gave her many presents, and ordered her to return 
home [presumably to Lepcis], together with her son, who died shortly afterwards.’ There is 
no obvious connection with what precedes or follows this story in the HA: its source had 
presumably supplied the context. Septimius was by now, no doubt, back in the north, 
perhaps at Nisibis or in Syria. The fact that his sister’s son had to be given senatorial rank 
indicates that her husband was a non-senator. It may be that he was serving in the east, 
perhaps as a procurator. When 
-131- 
Octavilla herself died, before Septimius, she was commemorated with the title clarissimae 
memoriae femina, indicating that her husband had by then been made a senator. Octavilla’s 
poor Latin is generally taken to mean that she was more used to speaking Punic; it could be 
that her husband was a Greek-speaker and that her Latin had become rusty from lack of 
practice. 6     
During the spring and summer of 198 Septimius must have devoted attention to 
reorganising the eastern frontiers. Above all, he created a further new province, 
Mesopotamia. Osrhoene was retained as a province too, with its capital probably now at 
Carrhae, which was given the rank of a Roman colony. The territory to the east of Abgar’s 
residual kingdom of Edessa, which had perhaps been included in the province of Osrhoene 
when it was established in 195, now became Roman Mesopotamia, thus reviving the 
shortlived Trajanic province. This time it was to be permanent, ‘a bulwark for Syria’, 
Septimius claimed. Dio was later to be sceptical: Septimius was merely motivated by ‘a 
desire for glory’, he believed, and it was ‘a drain on Roman resources’. Nisibis became the 
capital of the new province, and it was placed under an equestrian Prefect, on the model of 
Egypt, with a legionary garrison formed by the newly raised I and III Parthica. The former 
was stationed at Singara, close to the Tigris, the latter at Resaina in the west of the 
province. Both these cities, and Nisibis, became coloniae. The first Prefect was a man from 
Numidian Cuicul, Ti. Claudius Subatianus Aquila. As if to underline the ascendancy of the 
Africans, another man from the same town, L. Alfenus Senecio, is found shortly afterwards 
governing Syria Coele. 7


--- PAGE 112 ---
The failure at Hatra still rankled. It was only just over sixy miles (100 km) from the new 
frontier along the Jebel Sinjar, and the only remaining strongpoint between the two rivers 
not under direct Roman control. The eastern provinces were now more strongly garrisoned 
than ever before and a powerful expeditionary force from his Danubian armies and Guard 
were still with him. He had the services of the engineer Priscus, who had done much to 
frustrate the besieging forces of Marius Maximus at Byzantium before the city surrendered 
(Dio notes with some pride that the man was a fellow-Nicaean). He could not resist making 
a renewed attempt. But Hatra was defended by a massive double wall, four miles in 
circumference. In spite of Septimius’ massive preparations—Dio writes of great supplies of 
food and many siege engines—the second attack on Hatra apparently also failed. ‘He lost a 
great deal of money’, Dio writes, ‘and all his engines except the ones built by Priscus, and 
many men too. Considerable numbers perished when foraging, from the rapid and violent 
attacks by the barbarian cavalry (that of the Arabs, I mean). The long-range archery of the 
Hatrans was also effective, and their artillery.’ 
-132- 
The defenders also used bituminous naphtha to set fire to the Roman siege engines. 
Septimius observed proceedings from a lofty tribunal. The Romans broke through the outer, 
earth wall and were ready to press the attack, but he ordered the retreat to be sounded, 
expecting that the Arab defenders would sue for peace to escape capture and enslavement. 
Dio draws attention to the great wealth of the sun god’s temple, implying that the defenders 
were likely to make terms rather than see it destroyed. During the night, however, they 
rebuilt the gap in the outer wall, and Septimius was obliged to renew the assault. At this 
point, according to Dio, the European troops refused to obey orders, enraged that they had 
been obliged to withdraw on the previous day. The Syrians who were sent in were wiped 
out. ‘One of Septimius’ officers told the emperor he could finish the job if he could have a 
mere 550 European soldiers. “Where could I get so many?”, Septimius replied, within the 
hearing of all, referring to the soldiers disobedience’. After only twenty days from the 
beginning of the second siege, Septimius ‘left Hatra and went to Palestine’, Dio concludes. 8     
In spite of the negative impression conveyed by Dio, Septimius may well have achieved his 
main objective at Hatra, the submission of king Barsemius. He seems to have claimed this 
operation as the culmination of his Parthian campaign, and may well have been able to 
impose a Roman garrison on the city. Some decades later the Ninth Cohort of Moors was 
stationed there; it may have been installed shortly after Septimius’ apparently abrupt 
departure. 9     
The sources are largely silent about Septimius’s activities during the next few months, when 
he remained in the east. Xiphilinus’ version of Dio jumps from Hatra, in the autumn or 
winter of 198, to Septimius’ entry into Egypt via Palestine late in the following year. Another 
excerptor of Dio refers to Septimius coming ‘into Arabia from Syria, and into Palestine’. It is 
clear enough that he would need more time in Syria, now divided into two provinces, Coele 
in the north with two legions, at Samosata and Zeugma—his old command, IV Scythica, had 
been busy in the past few years strengthening the military links with the new province of 
Osrhoene—and Phoenice in the south, governed by the legate of III Gallica at Raphaneae, 
with its chief city, Tyre, raised to the rank of colonia. Two prominent Syrians must by now 
have obtained positions of influence, both distinguished lawyers. Domitius Ulpianus, of Tyre, 
the younger of the two, was perhaps in a rather junior post at this stage. Aemilius 
Papinianus, a kinsman of Julia, may have already been holding the powerful position of a 
libellis, chief of the Petitions Bureau. It may


--- PAGE 113 ---
-133- 
have been on this visit to Syria that Septimius once more consulted the oracles of Zeus 
Belos at Apamea which gave him a promise of greatness when he was a legionary legate. 
This time, Dio records, the god’s answer was a quotation from Euripides: ‘Your House will 
utterly perish in blood.’ The city of Apamea itself was now connected to the imperial family. 
One of the two young daughters of Julia Domna’s sister Maesa, Julia Soaemias, was married 
to a young man from this place, Sex. Varius Marcellus; he had been made a junior 
procurator. Maesa’s husband Julius Avitus Alexianus, made a senator by Septimius, was at 
this time probably governing far off Raetia and soon would be consul. But her sons-in-law, 
Marcellus, and Gessius Marcianus, from another southern Syrian city, Arca, husband of Julia 
Mamaea, remained equestrian. 10     
Whatever else Septimius did in these parts during 198-9, it seems clear that he reorganised 
the frontiers. Parts of southern Syria Phoenice were detached and added to Arabia. That 
province, which a fragment of Dio indicates that he visited himself, received substantial 
strengthening: a burst of military construction has been identified from this time. Milestones 
attest work all along the Trajanic road, the great north-south trunk route. Further, a chain 
of forts was built or reinforced to control the Wadi Sirhan, the 300-mile-long depression 
from Basie (Qasr al Azraq in Jordan) to Dumata (Jawf in Saudi Arabia), Rome’s gateway to 
the Persian Gulf. The emperor born on the edge of the Sahara was doing his best to extend 
and solidify Roman control of the eastern deserts over a vast area. He and his wife, it may 
be argued, had a keener realisation of the importance of the eastern frontiers and a 
shrewder perception of how they should be controlled, than any previous Roman ruler. As 
for Syria, now two provinces, there was some redeployment of the legionary force of Syria 
Coele. The two legions, at Samosata and Zeugma, on the Euphrates, were no longer on the 
frontier, shielded by the new provinces of Osrhoene and Mesopotamia. Detachments from 
both were soon assigned to Dura, far down the river. Dura itself, which had only been added 
to the empire after Verus’ war in the 160s, was no longer the limit of Roman control on the 
lower Euphrates. Within a decade or so Roman garrisons were at Anatha, over eighty miles 
(130 km) further downstream, and at Kifrin a little beyond it. Another modification, of a 
different kind, was soon to follow. The great desert city of Palmyra had long had its own 
defence forces to protect the caravans that plied between the Parthian empire and the 
Mediterranean. For some years, at least since Hadrian’s day, they had supplied troops to 
Rome, including a garrison for Dura. Following the division of Syria in 194, Dura was 
assigned to Syria Coele, but Palmyra itself was controlled by or responsible to the governor 
of Phoenice. It may be only now that Palmyra became formally part of the empire. Its 
troops 
-134- 
became regular regiments of the Roman army, such as the cohors XX Palmyrenorum at 
Dura, rather than just ‘Palmyrenes’ and the great emporium, the ‘desert harbour’, became a 
Roman colonia. 11     
In what survives of Dio’s account no details are preserved of Septimius’ stay in Palestine, 
although in the context of the first Parthian war of 195 he mentions trouble with a brigand 
named Claudius who was overrunning Judaea and Syria. The HA has a brief remark about 
his ‘granting many privileges to the Palestinians on his journey’, and adds an implausible 
statement that ‘he banned conversion both to Judaism and Christianity.’ A few sentences 
earlier, in a thoroughly garbled section of the vita, the HA claims that Septimius’ son 
Antoninus was later granted a ‘Jewish triumph because of Septimius’ own achievements in


--- PAGE 114 ---
Syria’. This may be an invention by the HA, but Jerome in his Chronicle does list the 
outbreak of a ‘Jewish and Samaritan war’ in Septimius’ fifth year, which should be 197. 
Later chroniclers, Michael Syrus and Bar-Hebraeus, explain this as a violent outbreak of 
fighting between Jews and Samaritans. Some Roman intervention may have been necessary 
to restore the peace, but whether Septimius and his ten- or eleven-year-old son were 
involved remains uncertain. The ‘privileges granted’, may be reflected in the assumption by 
the cities of Eleutheropolis and Diospolis-Lydda of titles taken from Septimius’ names. At all 
events, the period was a favourable one for the Jews, whose privileges were protected in 
imperial rescripts. The Talmud reports pro-Roman activity by the Rabbis Eleazar and 
Ishmael, and Jerome, indeed, insists that Septimius and Antoninus ‘very greatly cherished 
the Jews’. 12     
Sixteen years earlier, Septimius had gone from Syria to Athens, when he was in disfavour. 
His expressed motives were study and interest in antiquities and religion. Then, as a 
senator, he would not have been permitted to go to Egypt. Now this was an obvious goal. 
The great province had supported his rival Niger, as it had earlier backed Avidius Cassius. 
There had been active discontent there during the reign of Commodus, when there were as 
many as ten prefects in thirteen years, hence an obvious need for reform. The HA and Dio 
both attest Septimius’ fascination with Egypt. Afterwards, says the HA, ‘he always indicated 
that he had enjoyed this tour, because he had taken part in the worship of the god Sarapis, 
had learned something of antiquity and had seen unfamiliar animals and places’. Dio reports 
that ‘he enquired into everything, including what was totally secret. For he was the sort of 
man to leave nothing, whether human or divine, uninvestigated. Accordingly, he removed 
from almost all the temples all the books he could find containing any secret lore; and he 
closed the tomb of Alexander. This was to prevent anyone else looking at the body of 
Alexander or reading what 
-135- 
was written in those books.’ Fear of the myth of Alexander, the potency of which had still 
not reached its peak, is understandable in an emperor who had campaigned on the Tigris, 
but had gone no further. Besides, his rival Niger had briefly posed as a new Alexander. As 
for the secret lore of Egypt, Septimius’ superstitious nature will have made him both fear 
and be fascinated by it. Well before he entered Egypt he sent instructions to the prefect 
denouncing divination and magic. Simple and ignorant people must be protected from 
‘dangerous inquisitiveness into the future’, whether practised by private consultation or 
oracles or through the magic arts. One year’s grace was offered: thereafter the penalty 
would be death, also applicable to any who harboured such criminals. The proclamation was 
to be posted by the strategi in their nome capitals and all the villages; and they were to 
exercise constant vigilance, and ‘send in fetters for judgment anyone found acting contrary 
to these regulations’. 13     
Septimius entered Egypt by land, stopping first at Pelusium, where he sacrificed at the tomb 
of Pompey, murdered there nearly two and a half centuries before. Reverence for the dead 
was a special characteristic of the Libyans in Septimius’ homeland. Besides, he was 
following the example of Hadrian, who had rebuilt the tomb on his visit in 130. But in 
Septimius’ case there may have been an additional motive for this act of piety. Pompey had 
been murdered by treacherous Egyptians commanded by a renegade Roman. According to 
Dio, their act ‘brought a curse upon themselves and all Egypt’, which he explains by their 
own deaths not long afterwards and by Egypt coming under the rule of Cleopatra, then of 
Rome. As it happens, the Roman who killed Pompey was a certain Lucius Septimius. The


--- PAGE 115 ---
emperor could not have failed to know this detail. He may even have remembered Lucan’s 
chilling lines about the murderer: 
Inmanis, violentus, atrox nullaque ferarum
Mitior in caedes…
Qua posteritas in saecula mittet
Septimium fama?
A monster, violent and savage, a killer worse 
than a wild beast…What verdict will posterity 
pass down the ages on Septimius? 
Even if there were no tie of descent to perpetuate any blood-guilt, he may have felt the 
need for a personal act of reconciliation with the dead. Ironically, Marcus Aurelius, whose 
son Septimius now claimed to be, had been a remote descendant of Pompey. This act at 
Pompey’s tomb was loaded with overtones. 14     
The imperial party made a festive entry into Alexandria. It was marred 
-136- 
a little, according to an anecdote in the late chronicler John Malalas. Septimius spotted an 
inscription on the city gate, which the Alexandrians had imprudently omitted to remove: 
‘Niger is the Master of the City’. His irritation may not have been assuaged by the excuse 
that, after all, he was the master of Niger. Apart from inspecting the embalmed body of 
Alexander, and sealing up the tomb, Septimius is said to have donated baths, a gymnasium 
and a temple of the Mother Goddess, Cybele, to the city. He also undertook a major 
programme of reform. The principal change was the granting of a council to Alexandria and 
the other major cities of Egypt. This right had been denied to them, alone among the cities 
in the empire, from the time of the conquest by Rome in 30 BC, because of imperial 
suspicion of the country’s volatile population. The Alexandrians, in particular, had been 
petitioning the emperors for a council almost continuously ever since. Septimius’ action was 
thus the rectification of an anomaly. Egyptians were also permitted to enter the Roman 
senate for the first time. The first beneficiary was to be a certain Aelius Coeranus, described 
as a hanger-on of Plautianus. 15     
Plautianus’ power was highly visible during this visit. Soon after arriving in Egypt the prefect 
of the province, Q. Aemilius Saturninus, was promoted to be Plautianus’ colleague in 
command of the Guard. Plautianus took extreme exception to receiving a colleague, and 
before long apparently had Saturninus murdered. He also took steps to reduce the powers 
of the Guard tribunes, to remove the possibility that one of them might become eligible for 
the Prefecture, so Dio reports. ‘Already he wanted to be Prefect for life, not merely sole


--- PAGE 116 ---
Prefect’, Dio adds, with two further stories to illustrate his ruthlessness and arrogance, 
which resulted in his acquiring ‘much more’ in the way of plunder from the provinces ‘than 
was sent to Septimius himself. Finally, he stole horses with tiger-like stripes [presumably 
zebras] sacred to the Sun, from the islands in the Red Sea [perhaps the Persian Gulf] 
sending centurions’ for the purpose. It was later discovered, Dio went on, that ‘at home 
[this presumably refers to Rome rather than Lepcis Magna] he had castrated a hundred 
Romans of noble birth, to give his daughter Plautilla an entourage of eunuchs, especially as 
teachers in music and the other arts’. He was no doubt already planning to marry his 
daughter to Antoninus. He and his brother Geta were meanwhile under the tuition of the 
sophist Aelius Antipater of Hierapolis. Septimius had made this man his Greek Secretary, ab 
epistulis Graecis. Philostratus claims that Antipater fulfilled his duties brilliantly. ‘No one 
composed letters better: like an outstanding tragic actor… whose phraseology was always in 
keeping with the imperial persona.’ Antipater used his influence with Septimius to find a 
husband for his own unattractive daughter. He also composed a History, exalting Septimius’ 
-137- 
achievements. ‘We used to call him “Tutor of the Gods” when we applauded his lectures’, 
Philostratus recalls. 16     
When Septimius was in Egypt it was inevitable that he would receive innumerable petitions, 
libelli. Some of the decisions of the emperors—for his son was his equal colleague—have 
been found on papyri. One particular papyrus preserves a whole series of imperial 
responses, apokrimata. Ulpius Heraclanus, also called Callinicus, was reminded that 
penalties imposed on the Alexandrians (no doubt for their support of Niger) had been 
revoked. Cronius son of Heraclides was told that transient sickness did not exempt him from 
compulsory public services (liturgies). Dioscorus son of Hephaestio and others were told 
that the emperors had forbidden the payment of money in lieu of grain. One Isidorus was 
referred to Plautianus: ‘Floueios Plaudianos [sic: the scribe had difficulty with the name] the 
Distinguished Prefect of the Guard and Our Kinsman will investigate’ an accusation against 
an official called Como; ‘as for the tax-collector Apio, if he is not involved in the charge 
against Como, the governor of the province will be your judge.’ Aemilius Saturninus had not 
yet been replaced as prefect; it seems that a man called Alfenus Apollinaris was acting-
governor for the time being. Septimius was still at Alexandria on 9 March 200, when 
delegations from communities in the Egyptian countryside (chora) appeared before him in 
the court-house. 17     
The emperor was a devotee of Sarapis, the god whose cult the Ptolemies had fostered, 
indeed invented, or adapted from that of the god of Memphis, Osor-Hapi. The massive 
temple at Alexandria constructed by Ptolemy III had been rebuilt under Roman rule in the 
Corinthian style. Its priests and rituals were largely Greek, and this was no doubt what was 
familiar to Septimius from early youth, when, no doubt, he had worshipped the god at 
Lepcis. In Egypt he would be identified by many with the god himself: he was often enough 
portrayed with Sarapis’ corkscrew curls and forked beard, and appears in this guise in a 
painted portrait found in Egypt, showing him with Julia and their sons (pl. 16). It may be 
the Alexandrian Sarapeum to which the HA refers when it recalls the emperor’s ‘pleasure in 
taking part in the worship of the god’. 18     
He had an opportunity, if he wished, to see the original Egyptian cult at Memphis, which he 
visited. At the Pharaohs’ old capital Osor-Hapi remained strictly Egyptian. Greeks from 
Egypt and other foreigners left some mark, for example with statues of philosophers and 
poets; but Memphis, with its pyramids and shrines of animal gods, the bull of Apis and the


--- PAGE 117 ---
ibis of Thoth, remained truly Egyptian, as had been ordained under Ptolemy V that it should. 
Apuleius had referred, in his Metamorphoses, to the ‘secrets of Memphis’. Here, if 
anywhere, Septimius might 
-138- 
have tried to collect and suppress ‘hidden lore’, such as the Ptolemaic Oracle of the Potter, 
foretelling the destruction of the foreign rulers, the ‘belt-wearers’ [Greeks], and the 
‘desertion’ of the alien city by the sea. Apuleius, on trial for magic in Tripolitania, had 
laughed off the accusation that he had a mysterious cult-image of an emaciated Mercury. It 
may have been a figure of ‘Thrice Greatest Hermes’, the strange amalgam of Egyptian 
Thoth and Greek Hermes, a powerful source of occult power. Apuleius had been planning a 
visit to Egypt when he fell ill at Oea; and Septimius’ contemporary and fellow-African, the 
Christian Tertullian, knew something of this cult. 19     
At Memphis he saw at any rate the pyramids and visited the statue of the Sphinx, which the 
prefect Saturninus had thoughtfully had repaired shortly before. A little further upstream he 
diverted to see the great Labyrinth on Lake Moeris, with its twelve covered courtyards and 
three thousand chambers. The next recorded stop was Thebes in Upper Egypt, where he 
saw the colossal statue of Memnon, the sitting figure of the Pharaoh Amenhophis III. 
Generations of Roman tourists had recorded their presence at dawn, when the statue ‘sang’. 
Septimius pressed on and on, stopping only ‘at the frontier of Ethiopia because of a plague’, 
Dio says. Since the Pharaohs, the ruler of Egypt had been a god, and the Nile was a sacred 
river. Every year at the end of May a ceremony was held on the Upper Nile, at which the 
monarch cast gold and silver gifts down into a rock cave near the river. Under Roman rule 
the ritual was performed by the prefect, as Viceroy, unless the emperor was in Egypt. There 
is little doubt that the deeply superstitious, or religious, Septimius took the opportunity of 
carrying out the sollemne sacrum in person, at Philae (Aswan), presumably in late May of 
the year 200. This visit will also have enabled him to inspect the defences of Egypt. Roman 
garrisons may have stretched as far south as Primis (Qasr Ibrim); and north of Philae the 
routes across the eastern desert to the Red Sea, especially the Berenice Road, and those 
linking the Nile valley with the other ports, such as Myos Hormos, with the porphyry 
quarries on the way, may have claimed his attention. 20     
If he returned northwards by the river, Septimius must have left in early June at latest: a 
religious taboo debarred the ruler of Egypt from sailing on the Nile while it was in flood. The 
coins of Alexandria indicate that he was still in Egypt after the beginning of his ninth year, 
which in the Egyptian calendar started on 29 August in 200. He left Egypt by ship for Syria, 
but neither the exact date nor his precise whereabouts during the year 201 are on record. 
Early in 201 he decided to hold the consulship again, with his son Antoninus as his 
colleague, in the following year. Before this the boy, who had his thirteenth birthday in 
April, was invested with the toga virilis and formally entered man’s estate. None of the 
sources 
-139- 
comment on the anomaly that Antoninus was already Augustus as a puer. Nor has any trace 
of criticism survived at the implied insult to tradition in making a thirteen-year-old consul. 
There was little difference, perhaps, from the action of Marcus who had given the fasces to 
his son when Commodus was only fifteen. But Marcus had at least invested Commodus with 
the toga of manhood before he was either Augustus or consul. 21


--- PAGE 118 ---
The ancient supreme magistracy was now an empty façade. But to be one of the two 
consules ordinarii was a highly prized distinction: not least, it meant that the year was 
known by these consuls’ names. Septimius adhered to tradition. The ordinary consuls of his 
reign were either members of the imperial family, City Prefects holding office for the second 
time—such as Dexter in 196, Anullinus in 199, and, before long, Fabius Cilo in 204—or 
members of long established senatorial families. Within these limits the choice of those after 
whom the year was named allowed the emperor a useful means of patronage and of 
signalling his favour. Thus in 197 one consul was the aristocrat Sextius Lateranus: this 
could be construed as a gesture to the past but was also a sign of how those who supported 
Septimius could be rewarded. Albinus had been said to enjoy the backing of the aristocracy; 
Lateranus had thrown in his lot with Septimius and had served in the first Parthian war. His 
colleague was Cuspius Rufinus, a Greek senator from Pergamum, whose selection might 
conciliate the eastern notables. In 198 one consul was Martius Sergius Saturninus, a 
member of the recently decimated Gallic aristocracy and son of Marcus Aurelius’ marshal 
Martius Verus. In 199 and 200 the sons of Marcus’ friend Victorinus, who were also 
grandsons of Fronto, held office. These two represented both the Marcan tradition and 
Septimius’ strong reliance on Numidia. Deference to Marcus’ memory was also underlined 
by the other consul of 200, his grandson Ti. Claudius Severus Proculus, whose wife was 
Marcus’ grand-niece. 22     
Septimius and Antoninus inaugurated the year 202 as consuls at Antioch. It was by now not 
uncommon even for consules ordinarii to hold office away from Rome; but it was rare for 
both to be absent. What is more, with the exception of 161, when Marcus and Verus were 
colleagues, there had never been an occasion when two emperors were consuls together; 
and in any case Marcus and Verus had not become emperor until after their consulship 
began. This made 202 a very special year and the honour shown to Antioch all the greater. 
Septimius had clearly decided to revoke the punishment inflicted on the city seven years 
previously. But it was announced that he did so at the request of Antoninus, thereby 
bringing his son into greater prominence and gaining him a fund of good will. 23     
The time had now come to return to Rome. On 9 April the tenth year 
-140- 
of his reign would begin and Septimius would celebrate his decennalia. He and the court 
probably left Antioch soon after the ceremonies on New Year’s Day. Only two stages in the 
first part of his journey, before he reached Europe, are recorded. Dio has two more 
anecdotes to illustrate the unchecked increase in Plautianus’ arrogance and power. At Tyana 
in Cappadocia he had fallen ill. Septimius went to visit him, but the soldiers guarding the 
Prefect made the emperor enter alone, without his escort. Septimius apparently ‘tolerated 
seeing Plautianus lodge in better quarters than himself, and have better and more abundant 
food than he did’. Dio confirms the latter point by relating how ‘at Nicaea, my native city, 
when Septimius once wanted a mullet—and the lake there produces large ones—he sent to 
Plautianus for one’. Dio adds that Plautianus had become a complete sensualist, gorging 
himself at banquets and freely indulging his lusts with both girls and boys. Yet his wife was 
kept more or less in purdah, and forbidden to see or be seen by anyone, even Septimius 
and Julia. Septimius’ authority was indeed being seriously undermined. When the a 
cognitionibus was asked to bring forward one of the cases due to be heard before the 
imperial tribunal, he told Septimius: ‘“I cannot do that unless Plautianus orders me to do 
so.” ‘Meanwhile Julia was treated by Plautianus with scorn and hatred; he often abused her 
violently to Septimius. 24


--- PAGE 119 ---
Julia took refuge in the company of sophists and the study of ‘philosophy’. One sophist 
whom she had perhaps already met, was Philostratus, a pupil of Aelius Antipater. He was 
later, at her request, to compose a biography of the wonder-working philosopher Apollonius 
of Tyana. Julia’s interest in the legendary sage may have been awakened in the course of 
this journey. Another literary figure who was in contact with the court was Cassius Dio. He 
had sent Septimius a copy of his first work, a little book ‘about the dreams and omens 
which led Severus to hope for the imperial power’. Septimius liked it, and thanked Dio in a 
long and complimentary letter. Dio received the emperor’s reply one evening and soon 
afterwards fell asleep. Then he himself had a dream, in which ‘the Divine Power commanded 
me to write history. He at once decided to write an account of the disturbances [staseis, i.e. 
civil wars] and wars which followed the death of Commodus.’ He covered, in other words, 
the events of the years 193-198, from the murder of Commodus to the end of the second 
Parthian war, clearly following the ‘official’ version. This work ‘also won great approval from 
Septimius, as well as from others’. 
Therefore [Dio wrote] I decided not to leave my first historical work as a separate 
composition, but to incorporate it in the present narrative, so 
-141- 
that in a single work I might write down and leave behind me an all-embracing history, from 
the beginning down to the moment that shall seem best to Fortune. 
Quite when Dio wrote his first two works is not clear, but his motives are not difficult to 
divine: the wish to conciliate the emperor. His home town, Nicaea, had made the mistake of 
supporting Niger in 193-4 and had been severely punished. It had always been obliged to 
play second fiddle to its rival Nicomedia, but under Commodus it had gained some imperial 
favour when the favourite Saoterus, a native of Nicomedia, was overthrown. Now Nicaea 
was denied even the title ‘first in the province’ with which it had sought to emulate 
Nicomedia, ‘the metropolis and first city in the province’, and ‘temple-warden’ of the 
imperial cult. Shortly after the imperial visit in 202, Nicaea proudly called itself ‘the most 
glorious, the most great, loyal Friend and Ally of the Roman People, from the time of our 
ancestors close to the Imperial House, Aureliana Antoniniana, most pious City of the 
Nicaeans’. Nicaea had no doubt won imperial favour through the efforts of Antoninus, or at 
least, as at Antioch, he could be given the credit. Byzantium too was to gain benefits, 
thanks to the intervention of Antoninus, and took the title ‘Antonina’, when its status as a 
city was restored and the public buildings that had been demolished after its capture were 
rebuilt. 25     
Cassius Dio may have played a part in gaining favour for Nicaea. Since his praetorship in 
194 he had doubtless been holding a number of official posts. He was to become consul a 
few years later, c. 205, and at the time of the imperial journey through Asia Minor may 
have been serving in the east. He reported in an early part of his History one further act by 
Septimius, which must have greatly interested him. He may even have witnessed it, but, if 
not, he will certainly have seen the result. The great Carthaginian opponent of Rome, 
Hannibal, had died an exile, in 183 BC, taking poison when the king of Bithynia planned to 
betray him. He died at a place in Bithynia called Libyssa, fulfilling the misleading oracle that 
had promised he would die ‘on Libyan soil’. Septimius erected a white marble tomb to his 
great fellow-countryman, for he too was ‘a Libyan by race’, as the Byzantine writer Tsetzes, 
whose information derives from Dio, expressed it. 26


--- PAGE 120 ---
After the stay in Bithynia, Septimius and the court crossed to Thrace. The governor of this 
province, who will have received them, was a Tripolitanian, from Oea: Q. Sicinius Clarus 
Pontianus. He was clearly a close kinsman, perhaps the son, of Sicinius Pudens, Apuleius’ 
loutish stepson. An inscription from Lepcis Magna may allude to the favour that Clarus 
Pontianus had enjoyed at the hands of the Lepcitane emperor. It is a 
-142- 
metrical dedication to Septimius, by one Pudens, in gratitude for his son’s advancement. An 
imperial instruction carried out in Thrace by the governor Pontianus was the establishment 
of an emporion at a place called Pizos, with a hundred and seventy-one settlers. ‘Moved by 
concern for the road-stations,’ the governor’s edict proclaims, ‘and wishing that their 
province should remain in the same state of prosperity throughout their lifetime, our Great 
and Most Divine Lords the Emperors gave orders that existing emporia should be improved 
and new ones established’. 27     
A great many dedications and building inscriptions from the time of Septimius’ visit have 
been preserved throughout the Danubian and Balkan region; but they do not prove that he 
visited the places in question. The coming decennalia, and the marriage between Antoninus 
and Plautilla, and indeed the successful conclusion of the Parthian war not long before, 
would have been ample occasion for most of the dedications, even without an imperial visit. 
Even if he did not set foot in a particular town, his presence somewhere in a province would 
result in the setting up of statues, altars and other marks of honour. Any who sought the 
emperor’s favour would hasten to meet him, armed with letters of recommendation which 
would refer to the petitioner’s loyalty to the imperial house as shown by the endowment of 
this or that monument. 
It is highly probable that the route followed was along the Danube. The welfare of the 
armies that had won him the throne would never be closer to Septimius’ heart than when 
the anniversary of his proclamation was approaching. It is plausible that he visited Lower 
and Upper Moesia, perhaps Dacia also, and then the two Pannonian provinces. It may even 
be that he chose to be at Carnuntum on 9 April, the dies imperii, and that his journey from 
there back to Rome was timed to repeat the stages and the timing of his march on Rome 
nine years before. But this is purely speculation. As he passed through these key military 
provinces he will have had the chance to confer with some of his most trusted adherents. In 
several of them new governors seem to have been installed in 202: they may have arrived 
with Septimius. In Lower Moesia L. Aurelius Gallus, who had commanded one of the Upper 
Pannonian legions under Septimius in 193, began his governorship in that year. Likewise a 
new governor was his neighbour in Upper Moesia, Q. Anicius Faustus, an African from 
Uzappa near Mactaris, who had just completed a lengthy term as commander of the 
Numidian legion III Augusta and as such had made sweeping changes to the whole frontier 
of Africa. Septimius will have especially welcomed the opportunity to hear from Faustus’ 
own lips about the defences of their homeland. Faustus had been extending the frontiers of 
Africa, where Septimius was being accorded the title propagator imperii. It is possible that 
Septimius extended Rome’s dominion beyond 
-143- 
the Danube at this time, although firm evidence is lacking. He may have ordered the 
eastward extension of the Dacian frontier from the line of the river Aluta (Olt) for some 
twenty-five miles or a little more (40-50 km) to the limes Transalutanus. At Carnuntum, 
perhaps the final stage of this northern journey, there was another new governor. Ti.


--- PAGE 121 ---
Claudius Claudianus, from Numidian Rusicade, who had been an equestrian officer in 
Septimius’ army in 193, and had served him well in the civil wars, was now the consular. 
The trusted Fabius Cilo, who had ruled this key province from 197 to 201, had been 
appointed to the City Prefecture. 28     
The return to Rome after five years’ absence was celebrated in high style. First there was a 
distribution of largesse to the urban plebs and the Guard, ten gold pieces a head. Dio says 
that ‘Septimius took particular pride in this generosity; indeed, no emperor had ever before 
made such a large donation to the entire population of the city. The total sum amounted to 
200,000 sesterces.’ Next followed the imperial wedding. Antoninus, the reluctant fourteen-
year-old bridegroom, received as his wife and indeed empress—she took the title Augusta—
Fulvia Plautilla, the Prefect’s daughter. Dio was among the guests: ‘Plautianus gave as much 
for his daughter’s dowry as would have sufficed for fifty women of royal rank. We saw the 
gifts as they were being carried through the Forum into the Palace. Then came the banquet, 
partly in royal and partly in barbaric style. We were given not only the usual kind of cooked 
meat, but raw meat too, and live.’ (Does he just mean oysters and other seafood?) 
Then came the main events, the ceremonies to mark the decennalia proper, certainly 
involving public sacrifices, and victory games and spectacles. None of the sources explicitly 
call the celebrations a triumph. The HA actually says that Septimius ‘was offered a triumph 
by the senate, but refused it: the disease in his limbs [apparently gout, from which he 
suffered] made it impossible for him to stand up in the triumphal chariot’. Be this as it may, 
games of the most spectacular kind imaginable were put on to honour decennalia and 
Parthian victories. Again, Dio has a full account. ‘At these spectacles sixty wild boars of 
Plautianus fought together at a signal and among other wild beasts that were slain were an 
elephant and a corocotta. This animal is Indian, and as far as I know was brought to Rome 
then for the first time. It has the colour of a lioness and tiger combined and the general 
appearance of those animals, as well as of a dog and a fox, in a curious mixture.’ The 
corocotta, which the HA, contrary to Dio, thinks had already been shown at Rome under 
Antoninus Pius, was probably a striped hyena. ‘The entire receptacle in the theatre’, Dio 
goes on, ‘had been constructed so as to resemble a boat…as it suddenly fell apart there 
came pouring out bears, lionesses, panthers, 
-144- 
lions, ostriches, wild asses and bison…so that seven hundred beasts in all, both wild and 
domesticated at the same time, were seen running about and then slaughtered’. Coins 
issued to commemorate the occasion show the great boat in the Circus Maximus rather than 
theatre. ‘To correspond with the duration of the festival, which lasted seven days, the 
number of animals slain was likewise seven times 100.’ Septimius, whose own name 
derived from septimus, seventh, seems to have been influenced by the magic of numbers. 
He would soon have an even more striking opportunity to commemorate the number seven: 
the time was approaching, two years hence, when he could celebrate the seventh in the 
series of ludi saeculares. 29     
-145- 
14 
RETURN TO AFRICA


--- PAGE 122 ---
SEPTIMIUS CAN SCARCELY HAVE remained much longer at Rome on this occasion than on 
the previous three flying visits: the triumphant entry in 193, when he stayed less than thirty 
days, and the brief periods in 196 and 197, before and after the war with Albinus. This time 
he planned a journey that should have been the most satisfying of all, a return to Africa. 
The stage was set for a celebratory passage of the African Emperor through the land of his 
origin. Only one predecessor had been before, Hadrian in 128. Septimius himself and 
Antoninus were consuls in this year. For the following year the designated consuls were two 
more sons of Lepcis, his brother Geta, holding his second consulship, and Plautianus— and 
he too was anomalously to be called ‘consul for the second time’, even though he had not 
really been consul before. Plautianus’ ‘honorary consulship’, ornamenta consularia, were 
thus made equivalent to actual tenure of the fasces. (Dio, and no doubt others, strongly 
disapproved.) 1     
Once again the entire imperial family appears to have gone with Septimius: Julia, both their 
sons, Plautianus and Plautilla. Indeed, it may be supposed that this time his brother Geta 
was of the company, at least in Tripolitania, likewise various cousins, Septimii and Fulvii, 
such as L. Septimius Aper, perhaps a grandson of Septimius’ ‘uncle’ Aper, who was to be 
consul in 207. The route chosen can only be guessed at. They might have gone first to 
Lepcis, but it is more probable that they landed at Carthage. The great metropolis, now well 
over 200 years old in its revived Roman form, was given a great privilege, the ius Italicum, 
carrying with it exemption from provincial taxation. This was something of an empty 
honour. The Caesarian colony had been assigned a vast ‘measure’, pertica, of land, and 
considerable if not complete tax-exemption, and was responsible for settlements, pagi, of 
Roman citizens and native communities far inland, at least as far as Thugga, over sixty 
miles (100 km) to the west. Now Thugga and two other communities in the region, Thignica 
and Thibursicum Bure, were granted the status of municipium, and were thus removed from 
Carthage’s territory. At least eight or nine other ‘peregrine’ communities were similarly 
treated. Carthage had been cut down to size. The move may have been in response to 
canvassing by 
-146- 
prominent persons from these areas—the Marii brothers, for example, probably from 
Thugga, and the family of the Gargilii Antiqui from that place, long established in the 
senate. Other measures were taken in the north-east of the province—the only part, other 
than Lepcis, so treated. Abitina in the Bagradas valley was made a colonia, promoted from 
municipium. Vaga, further west, which had already been promoted in this way early in the 
reign, actually received new veteran settlers, reviving the ancient custom: it was the first 
deductio for generations. Elsewhere in the old province, Utica, original capital of Roman 
Africa and by tradition the earliest Phoenician settlement in the continent, was given ius 
Italicum to match Carthage, and it may well be that she too lost territory in a similar 
manner. 2     
As would be expected, there is record of the imperial presence at Lambaesis, where the 
legion had its fortress. A few years after Septimius’ visit, Numidia, which the legionary 
legates had in effect governed for more than a century and a half, is on record as a province 
de iure. It is reasonable to suppose that the decision was made during the imperial visit. 
The newly appointed legate, Claudius Gallus, who had served with Septimius against Albinus 
and in the second Parthian war, was himself from the Cirta region. It is likely enough that 
Septimius visited the old royal capital of Syphax and Massinissa, perched on its rock, a site 
said to make it one of the most beautiful cities in the world. But he certainly went to 
Lambaesis, where the III Augusta had been since Trajan’s day, and may well have


--- PAGE 123 ---
inspected the new frontier posts far to the south. During the preceding five years the legate 
Anicius Faustus had undertaken a whole series of measures designed to improve the 
security of Roman Africa. From Castellum Dimmidi in the west, some 190 miles (over 300 
km) south of Algiers, to Cydamus and Gholaia (Bu-Ngem) deep in the desert south of 
Tripolitania, the frontiers had been extended and newly fortified. Dimmidi, founded in 198, 
lies on the same latitude as Agueneb, where a Roman patrol had been based briefly in 174, 
the year Septimius was in proconsular Africa as legate to his ‘uncle’ Gaius. A quarter of a 
century later he was to order the advance of Roman garrisons to this line on a permanent 
basis. 3     
Among the troops that constructed the fort of Dimmidi was a detachment from the Syrian 
legion III Gallica. It might seem at first sight surprising that men from the Syrian army 
should have been sent away from their base at the time of the Parthian war. But the 
deficiency was more than made good by the despatch of legionaries from III Augusta to 
Syria. A fruitful interchange of experience, it could be called. The lessons learned by the 
Syrian legion in controlling a desert frontier would be invaluable when a new desert frontier 
was being established in North 
-147- 
Africa. The notion was not new: Palmyrene and Syrian auxiliary units had long served in the 
Numidian army. As the same time, as a disciplinary measure for men who had supported 
Niger, a tour of duty in the Sahara could hardly have been bettered. The task assigned to 
the Numidian commanders was a formidable one: the line of military posts stretched from 
Dimmidi to Gholaia for a distance of nearly 1000 miles (over 1500 km). All this, a distance 
comparable to that of the entire Danube frontier, with only one legion and an auxiliary force 
that had amounted in the mid-second century to some 6000 men, a total of some 12,000. 
The threat, it must be conceded, was of a different order, no teeming hordes of ‘barbarian’ 
peoples, as there were beyond Rome’s northern frontiers. Nonetheless, the semi-nomads 
could cause serious trouble, as they had in Africa under Tacfarinas long before, and, more 
recently, when the Moors had risen under Pius, and had broken out to ravage Spain under 
Marcus (a foretaste of what was to happen five centuries later). Septimius had cause to 
remember that well—it had deprived him of his quaestorship in Baetica. The Moors had 
continued to give trouble and it is no surprise that the two Mauretanian provinces also 
received attention from him, whether or not he went in person. A new frontier line (nova 
praetentura) was established south of the Tell in Caesariensis. The work began in 198 under 
the procurator governor Octavius Pudens, himself a native of the province (his home town 
Auzia was promoted to colonia by Septimius, the only such change in Mauretania). 
Tingitana, cut off by mountains from the other Mauretania, shows no clear evidence of an 
advance of this kind, although there may have been campaigning precisely in the Taza Gap 
and upper Moulouya valley between the two provinces. A Victory monument was set up at 
Bou Hellou, fifty-five miles (90 km) east of Volubilis, perhaps the outcome of actions by the 
procurator Haius Diadumenianus, in office precisely in 202, or his probable successor 
Sallustius Macrinianus. Both these men were given the exceptional joint command over both 
Mauretanias, a sign that there was fighting going on. 4     
Then to Lepcis: perhaps directly from Lambaesis, east to Theveste, then south-east to 
Thelepte, down to Capsa, where Jugurtha’s treasure had been captured, and across to the 
coast at Tacape. From there, along the road he must have known well, the Carthage-
Alexandria highway, through Sabratha and Oea, to reach his patria. It may have been 
nearly thirty years since he had been at Lepcis, as he would be reminded by the arch on the 
Oea road. 5


--- PAGE 124 ---
There were new things for him to see. The baths had been restored, for one thing, under 
Commodus, but the inscription had already been revised: first Commodus’ name had been 
deleted after his death and damnatio, then Septimius’ own name and titles substituted. But 
this was 
-148- 
only one small item. The whole of Lepcis was now full of statues and dedications to 
Septimius, Julia, Antoninus, Geta, Plautianus, Plautilla, and indeed of Septimius’ father and 
mother, his grandfather and his first wife, Paccia Marciana (a woman of Lepcis, it will be 
remembered). The process had doubtless begun in the summer of 193, although the first 
dated examples belong to 197, with a statue in the shrine of Liber Pater in the Forum. It 
was dedicated to him with all his titles and the additional grandiloquent label conservatori 
orbis, ‘defender of the world’: the Lepcitani put it up, from public funds, because of his 
pietas ‘loyal affection’ in his public capacity (publicam) and, ‘towards them, in his private 
capacity’ (et in se privatam). Thus the emperor’s home town tactfully asserted their special 
relationship to the seat of power. A statue of Antoninus was alongside, calling him ‘M. 
Aurellius Antoninus Caes. imp. destinatus’. The Aurelian name, already very widespread 
after numerous grants of citizenship by the emperors from Antoninus Pius to Commodus, is 
spelt with a double L, an apparent attempt, which seems to have been officially inspired, to 
distinguish the new Antoninus from the common mass of Aurelii. A dedication to Geta has 
survived, set up at Lepcis by the colonia of Tyre, ‘mother-city of Phoenicia and of other 
cities’. The old links were remembered: at Tyre the Lepcitani reciprocated. 6     
In the years that followed, from 198-202, a mass of further such displays of loyalty 
appeared, by the Lepcitani as a community, by curiae and by zealous individuals. No doubt 
many more have vanished. A procurator, M. Ulpius Cerealis, ‘most devoted to his divine 
spirit’, devotissimus numini eius, put up a statue to Septimius in the south-east angle of the 
Forum in 198, and another to Geta Caesar (no doubt to Antoninus as well, but the 
inscription has not survived). Cerealis, like Plautianus, is presumably a Lepcitane beneficiary 
of Septimius’ rise to power. Two other procurators, M. Junius Punicus and D. Clodius Galba, 
who honoured Septimius at Lepcis may also be Lepcitanes, although they could be men 
from other cities who took steps to honour the emperor at his patria. A further procurator, 
Flavius Celer, who erected a statue to Fulvia Plautilla as the fiancée, sponsa, of Antoninus, 
did so with the freedmen and slave clerks attached to the tax bureau which he headed, 
presumably the Tripolitanian branch of the revenue, IIII publica Africae. Punicus styled 
himself procurator ad Mercurium (at Alexandria) on the dedications of his statues to 
Septimius and the rest of the imperial family set up in the theatre in 201. Clodius Galba put 
his statues up in the portico behind the theatre the year after the imperial visit, when he 
had just been promoted, from running imperial estates in western proconsularis, to an 
Italian district of the ‘privy purse’, ratio privata. The promotion may have resulted from the 
imperial visit. 7     
-149- 
In 202 the people of Lepcis erected further statues to Septimius, Antoninus and Geta in the 
baths, ‘on account of the extraordinary and divine favour towards them’ by the emperors; 
and the Lepcitani now call themselves Septimiani. Septimius may have waited until his 
arrival in the city before announcing the grant of ius Italicum: like Carthage and Utica—and 
indeed like Tyre and certain other cities he had already favoured—Lepcis Magna was to be 
treated as if it were part of Italy, and exempt from tax. It is perhaps fanciful to imagine 
Statius’ lines to the first Septimius Severus echoing in the emperor’s ears—sermo non


--- PAGE 125 ---
Poenus, non habitus tibi: Italus, Italus! —as he made the announcement, perhaps to an 
assembly of the curiae in the theatre. The curiae now, in some cases at least, added the 
name ‘Severa’ or ‘Severiana’ to their style. Apart from these private and public tokens of 
devotion the people of Lepcis honoured Septimius with a monumental quadrifrons arch over 
one of the major crossroads in the city, just where Aelius Lamia’s forty-four miles road was 
commemorated. It seems that the arch was already standing. It was now adorned with 
reliefs depicting the imperial family, with a scene of triumph evoking the celebrations of 
Parthian victory the previous summer and another showing Parthians being defeated. 8     
The benefit which Septimius conferred on Lepcis may have led the city notables, perhaps in 
response to his prompting, to offer something in return. At all events, Septimius is said to 
have provided free oil rations to the people of Rome in perpetuity. In other words, what was 
given with one hand, the exemption from tribute conferred by the ius Italicum, may have 
been taken away with the other. The quantities involved were very substantial, requiring 
considerable organisation. It is probably no coincidence that Tripolitanian oil containers 
begin to be stamped at precisely this time. Among the suppliers thus identified are, not 
surprisingly, the emperors, the Guard Prefect and L. Septimius Aper, further the family of 
the Silii Plautii. Equally, it was appropriate that a few years later the post of prefect of the 
Annona was to be held by one of the Lepcis Marcii, Q. Marcius Dioga. 9     
The only direct mention of Septimius’ stay in Africa in the literary sources comes in 
Philostratus’ Lives of the Sophists. Two rival sophists, Heraclides of Lycia and Apollonius of 
Athens, had competed with declamations before the emperor. Heraclides, who came off 
worst, ‘spread a false report about Apollonius, that he was about to set out straightaway for 
Libya, when the emperor was there and gathering the talented together from every 
country’. Whether sophists or poets accompanied the imperial party is not attested. It is not 
impossible that leading actors or other performers came from Rome, to Carthage and to 
Lepcis, to put on displays. But the archaeological evidence certainly suggests that leading 
-150- 
sculptors were commissioned. Septimius had ambitious plans for the embellishing of his 
native city. Work was begun shortly after his visit on a huge new Forum and Basilica, in the 
area between the Hadrianic Baths and the old Forum. Alongside the west bank of the Wadi 
Lebdah, once liable to flooding, a monumental colonnaded street was laid out, running from 
the Baths to the harbour, which was now reconstructed on a vast scale. Work on the new 
Forum and Basilica was not to be completed until 216. Expensive marble had been imported 
from the eastern Mediterranean on a grand scale, some of it marked ‘on the order of Fulvius 
Plautianus, c.v., Guard Prefect and Kinsman of our Lords, to be sent to the Most Splendid 
colonia Leptis Magna’. Apart from this, the city water supply was improved and the Circus 
enlarged and restored. 10     
On the far side of the new Forum from the Basilica was a great temple. It is generally 
assumed that it was dedicated to the Septimian house, as once Augustus and then later 
emperors had been so honoured here, in the old Forum and elsewhere. Dio refers acidly at 
one point to Septimius’ building activities: ‘he also wasted a great deal of money by 
repairing other buildings and building new ones: for example, he built an excessively large 
temple to Bacchus and Hercules.’ No Severan temple to Bacchus and Hercules has been 
identified at Rome. Perhaps, as was suggested long ago, it was this shrine at Lepcis to 
which Dio referred. He could have seen it not long after its completion, as proconsul of 
Africa about the year 223. Septimius’ devotion to the di patrii, Shadrapa-Liber or Bacchus 
and Melqart-Hercules, was to be displayed at Rome in 204. 11


--- PAGE 126 ---
The imperial party probably wintered at Lepcis and it was no doubt there that Septimius’ 
brother Geta and Plautianus inaugurated the Roman year as the consuls for 203. Septimius 
had more to do. He wanted to put the finishing touches to the defence of his patria. Much 
had been done already in the later second century to give Tripolitania protection. Under 
Commodus military posts were established at Vezereos, west of Gigthis, where the western 
route from the Sahara, between the Great Erg and the Hamada el Hamra—the ‘red rock’ —
comes up from the south, at Tisavar, and Tillibari. Under Anicius Faustus’ command there 
was activity at Vezereos and Tillibari. In 198 he ‘ordered a garrison to be placed’ south of 
Tillibari (at the modern Si Aioun), and, far down the road to the Garamantian country, at 
Cydamus (Ghadames), the first oasis which caravans from the Sahara could use after a 
journey of over 300 miles (500 km) from the nearest Garamantian settlement. On the Gebel 
road there was also a line of military posts. A dedication to the Syrian deity, Sol Hierabolus, 
at Auru, midway between Tillibari and Lepcis, was made for the welfare of Septimius, his 
sons and Julia and ‘the whole divine house’ by ‘a detachment of III Augusta and the men 
from the cohort of Syrian 
-151- 
archers’. At Thenadassa (Ain Wif), south-west of Mesphe (Medina Doga), fifty miles (80 km) 
south of Oea, over sixty miles (100 km) south-west of Lepcis, Caninius Adiutor 
Faustinianus, prefect of the Second Cohort of Hamii (raised at Hamath-Epiphania not far 
from Emesa) and acting commander of another detachment of the Third legion, set up an 
altar to Jupiter of Doliche for the ‘welfare and victory’ of Septimius and his sons and Julia. 
Just under fifty miles (75 km) south of Thenadassa, on the southern edge of the Gebel and 
at the western end of the Sofeggin valley (the modern Bir Tarsin) there was another post. 
Others may be postulated at this time, particularly on the road that went due south from 
Oea and, after being joined by the Lepcis—Thenadassa road, crossed the Gebel on its way 
to the Sahara skirting the east side of the ‘red rock’. Over 180 miles (nearly 300 km) south 
of Lepcis, two military posts at the Gheriat oases now guarded the approaches to the 
Sofeggin and Zem-Zem valleys, the Gebel and the emporia. Finally, in January 201 ‘a 
detachment of III Augusta came to build the fort Ghol (aia)’. The centurion C. Julius Dignus 
consecrated the site to the ‘Spirit of Gholaia’ (Genio Gholaiae), for the health of the 
emperors, ‘on the first day of coming to the place where our three Lords ordered a fort to 
be built’. Gholaia (Bu-Ngem), the most easterly of these forts, was sited by Faustus in the 
last year of his command to cover the main route from the eastern end of the Garamantian 
oases across the Black Mountain, leading caravans, or raiders, either north-west, past 
Gheriat to the Gebel, or north-east, across the Bei el-Kebir valley, to the Syrtica. From 
Gholaia to Lepcis is over 150 miles (some 250 km) as the crow flies, rather longer by the 
shortest passable routes. 12     
The three great valleys of the pre-desert zone between the Cinyps and Gholaia, Sofeggin, 
Zem-Zem and Bei el-Kebir, running parallel to the Gebel towards the sea, are at first sight 
arid and barren. The wadi beds are dry for all but a few days and annual rainfall is as low as 
two inches (50 mm) in the southern and eastern zone. Yet during the two centuries before 
Septimius’ return to Africa settlement had developed to a surprising extent. It was the 
native Libyan population, presumably elements of the great Macae tribe known to 
Herodotus, which had managed to cultivate olives and other crops and rear some stock in 
this unpromising territory, as the discovery of olive-presses and other remains have 
demonstrated. The people were strongly Punicised. It is they who provide the latest 
examples of the Punic language in this part of Africa, on inscriptions in the Latin alphabet, 
with names like ‘Julius Masthalul ben Chyrdidry’, a remarkable blend of the three elements 
in their culture. There were major settlements such as that overlaid by the modern Mizda,


--- PAGE 127 ---
immediately south of the Gebel in the upper Sofeggin basin, or Ghirza, the largest such 
centre, in the even more arid Zem-Zem valley. What the 
-152- 
legal status of these territories was is unclear. The Macae, or subdivisions of that people, 
may have had institutions of self-government. It is not impossible that they were 
‘attributed’ to Lepcis and controlled from there. Further, it is not known who owned the 
land. Some of it may have been in the hands of the major olive-growers of Lepcis; they are, 
at the least, likely to have played a major role in marketing the modest camel-loads brought 
up from the valleys, and to have shared in the profit from their sale. 13     
In the winter or early spring Septimius launched a campaign. It is hard to believe that he 
himself went right down to the heartlands of the Garamantes, the three parallel lines of 
Saharan oases, running east-west. The nearest oasis south of Gholaia was some 100 miles 
(160 km) away, and the total distance from Gholaia to Garama a good 300 miles or more 
(500 km). Yet Septimius had been as far as Ctesiphon, he was to go to the limits of North 
Britain. His restless energy may have impelled him to follow in the path of Balbus and 
Valerius Festus. At least it may be supposed that he went as far as Gheriat or Gholaia, and 
then entrusted the new legate of the Third, Claudius Gallus, and Plautianus with the final 
stage. Elements of the legion must have been involved, and the Syrian auxiliaries, 
presumably some of the Guard, if the Prefect was there (they will have been ill-adapted to 
the desert conditions). At all events, Aurelius Victor says unequivocally that Septimius ‘freed 
Tripolitania, the region from which he came, from fear of attack, by crushing most warlike 
tribes’. The Nasamones of the Syrtica may also have been on the receiving end—Gholaia 
was so sited as to be able to watch them too. 14     
If Septimius waited for some weeks at Gholaia he will have found baths ready for use, as an 
inscription of 202 records. Shortly after this time the legionary centurion Q. Avidius 
Quintianus set up an acrostic dedication in the bath-building, thirty-six lines of verse with 
the letters of his own name forming the first letter of every other line. He ‘found at last the 
name and spirit (nomen et numen) of the goddess’, and ‘hallowed her name as best he 
could’. In the baths ‘the true waters of health’ allowed all to ‘soothe their bodies by 
swimming in tranquillity’, to counteract the ‘scorching flames of the south wind…in these 
ever sandy hills’, an evocative description of the ghibli at Bu-Ngem. On 11 April, Septimius’ 
birthday, T. Flavius Marinus, a legionary centurion, dedicated an altar beside the Severan 
harbour, in front of the temple of Jupiter Dolichenus, ‘for the health and victory of our three 
Lords the Emperors [and—later deleted—of the prefect Plautianus] and for their return to 
their city’. It is not dated to a precise year, but it seems plausible that it was set up in 203, 
and that Septimius and his sons were not yet back at Lepcis. 15     
A few weeks earlier, on 7 March (which was the fourteenth birthday of 
-153- 
Geta) Carthage saw the worship of a god very different from the ancient Hittite storm-god 
of Commagene—a conservator mundi that appealed to the soldiers, with his thunderbolt, 
double axe, royal cuirass and sword. A young Christian called Vibia Perpetua was gored to 
death by a heifer in the arena, after trial and sentence by the acting governor, the 
procurator Hilarianus (the proconsul had died in office). A few years later Tertullian told the 
proconsul Scapula that Septimius had protected Christians of high rank against the fury of 
the mob. He gives no details, and the story may be suspect. But Tertullian also relates that


--- PAGE 128 ---
Septimius had the services of a therapist—perhaps a masseur, to relieve his gouty limbs—
called Torpacion or Proculus, a Christian all his life (‘nurtured on Christian milk’). ‘Antoninus 
knew this man’, he told Scapula. But it is doubtful whether Septimius and the imperial party 
took note of Perpetua’s martyrdom. Such events, not always spectacular, were becoming 
routine, and were certainly not the result of a change of policy initiated by Septimius. 16     
It was perhaps while the imperial party was at Lepcis that a rift was caused in Plautianus’ 
immense power. For some reason Septimius became displeased with him. Dio and the HA 
differ about the details, but what happened is clear enough. According to Dio, Septimius 
was annoyed at the number of statues that were set up to Plautianus. The HA specifies that 
he was angry that ‘Plautianus had placed his own statue among those of his kinsmen and 
relatives.’ There can hardly have been another city where images of the imperial house and 
the whole clan were so omnipresent as at Lepcis; and the Prefect and his daughter were 
included. Dio says that Septimius had some bronze statues of Plautianus melted down: from 
this act a rumour spread that he had been overthrown. Some in official positions took 
appropriate action and themselves demolished Plautianus’ statues. One was the governor of 
Sardinia, Racius Constans, who later paid the penalty. He and others who had acted 
similarly were tried and punished. The HA asserts that Septimius actually declared 
Plautianus a public enemy, and then relented. It is easy to understand that Septimius might 
have tolerated affronts from Plautianus elsewhere. At Lepcis Magna, the Lepcitane emperor 
would wish it to be clear that he, not Plautianus, was the city’s greatest son. At all events, 
for the time being the breach was healed, and the imperial party departed for Rome after a 
stay of many months. Shortly before 10 June 203 the Horse Guards, equites singulares 
Aug., made a dedication at the capital on their return from expeditio felic (issima), as the 
African year could fairly be called. 17     
-154- 
15 
THE YEARS IN ITALY 
SEPTIMIUS’ ENTRY INTO ROME on his return from Africa will certainly have been festive. It 
may be that he held a ‘minor triumph’, ovatio, for his military successes in Tripolitania. 
According to the HA, he entered the city, after his reconciliation with Plautianus, ‘as if 
celebrating an ovation’. (The author has drastically abbreviated his source: his notice about 
Plautianus is inserted, out of place, immediately before the mention of Septimius’ departure 
for the east in summer 197.) Septimius did receive one public honour. A magnificent arch, 
probably voted at the end of the first Parthian war, was dedicated in 203. It was set up in 
the north-east corner of the Forum, between the Rostra and the senate-house, in front of 
the temple of Concord. The monument towered more than seventy-five feet (22 m) above 
the level of the Comitium, adorned with reliefs commemorating the victoria Parthica. It was 
placed on the spot where, in his dream in early 193, Septimius had seen Pertinax fall from 
his horse, and himself being taken up on it. The imperial vision had already been 
commemorated by an equestrian statue. Now the massive arch, the first major addition to 
the architecture of the Forum for eighty years, gave the place more dramatic emphasis. 
Commemoration of the dream was not the sole reason for putting the arch there. The 
Comitium was the site of the legendary encounter between Romulus and Titus Tatius, and 
then the meeting place of the comitia curiata, the oldest assembly of the people. The 
Rostra, the curia of the senate, the temple of Concord, all had immense symbolic 
significance. Looming over the meetings of the senate, but next to the temple of Concord,


--- PAGE 129 ---
the arch was a powerful reminder of the emperor’s power but also perhaps a pointer to 
reconciliation. What is more, it stands diagonally opposite the arch erected to celebrate 
Augustus’ diplomatic success over the Parthians in 20 BC. Thus Septimius would be linked 
with the first emperor and perhaps subtly be shown to have surpassed him. Besides all this, 
the arch gave final definition to the architectural design of the Forum. 1     
The inscription in gilded lettering on the arch, honouring Septimius and his sons, states that 
the senate and people of Rome set it up to them, ‘on account of the restoration of the 
Republic and the extension of the 
-155- 
Empire of the Roman People by their outstanding virtues at home and abroad’. The 
‘restoration of the republic’ can only refer to the defeat of Didius Julianus, and perhaps the 
other rival claimants. ‘Extension of the Empire’ acclaims the new provinces of Osrhoene and 
Mesopotamia, perhaps also the advance of the African frontiers. Further extension of the 
boundaries of Rome was yet to come. 2     
The year 204 was inaugurated by Fabius Cilo, consul for the second time, and Annius Libo, 
grandson of Marcus Aurelius’ cousin. Cilo’s second consulship was the payment of a debt to 
a friend who had served Septimius well. Septimius’ gratitude also took tangible form. Cilo 
was among the emperor’s friends whom he endowed with substantial wealth, according to a 
late fourth-century writer. His palatial mansion, the ‘domus Cilonis’, became a city 
landmark. The choice of Libo as the other consul once again marked Septimius’ proclaimed 
membership of the Antonine dynasty. 3     
In the course of 203 arrangements had begun to mark the following year with ceremonies 
and celebrations of the most striking kind known to the Romans, Saecular Games. Their 
origin was cloaked in legend and uncertainty. Augustus, renovator of the Roman state and 
the Roman religion had chosen to celebrate them in 17 BC, which suited his political needs. 
It was possible to assert that these were the fifth in a series held at intervals of one 
hundred and ten years, the Etruscan era or saeculum. All were ready to agree that the 
establishment of his rule marked a new age. With the ending of the civil wars, the final 
conquest of Spain, the fruitful marriage of his daughter Julia, the recovery of the legionary 
standards from the Parthians, Saecular Games could fittingly denote the close of one era 
and inaugurate a new golden age. For three nights and three days, from 1-3 June, sacrifices 
and games were conducted by the quindecimviri sacris faciundis, the Board of Fifteen for 
performing sacrifices. 
The next games, the sixth, should have been celebrated in 94. Claudius found an excuse for 
holding his own in 47, which marked the eight hundredth year of Rome. Domitian ignored 
the Claudian games and held the sixth in the series, six years early, in 88—unless his 
reason was that the Augustan games had been postponed (as well as they might have 
been) from a date originally set in 23 BC. 4     
Now 220 years, two saecula, would have passed, by the summer of 204. What is more, by 
happy chance the time had come to celebrate the seventh in the series: Septimius was 
surely attached to the planetary number. That the celebration of these games was by 
tradition the task of the quindecimviri sacris faciundis may also have been of special interest 
to him. His kinsman C. Septimius Severus had been one, and he himself could have been 
co-opted before becoming emperor. Members of the


--- PAGE 130 ---
-156- 
great priestly colleges generally did their best to secure a priesthood for their relatives or 
protégés when vacancies arose. Or if a deceased priest had been respected by his 
colleagues, the man’s own nominee would be given the place that he had vacated. 
Septimius may have replaced his kinsman. Certainly, during Commodus’ reign there must 
have been a higher turnover than usual, as the number of victims continually rose. 5     
To the quindecimviri was entrusted the care of the Sibylline oracles and of foreign religious 
rites of which the worship was licensed at Rome, including the cult of Isis and Sarapis. If 
Septimius had indeed become a quindecimvir as a senator, he would have relished both 
aspects of his duties. It would not have required especial skill in sacred lore to establish that 
Saecular Games would soon be due. Under Commodus the quindecimviri may well have 
pondered what form the deranged emperor would impose on the solemn ceremonies. The 
oracles in their guardianship were those carefully vetted by Augustus and housed in the 
temple of Palatine Apollo. Other oracles circulated under the name of Sibyl, in the Greek 
east, composed by Jews. One prophesied the return of Nero and the fall of Rome in the year 
195. That year had safely passed. The civil wars were over. The Parthians had been 
defeated and a new land added to the empire of the Roman people. The emperor had ruled 
for more than ten years, his elder son was his colleague, there were now hopes, with 
Antoninus’ marriage to Plautilla, of a third generation in the divine imperial house. 6     
At a meeting of the senate in 203—the exact date has not survived on the inscription, but it 
was March, June or July—the quindecimviri stood before the consuls’ raised bench, and the 
Master of the College, Manilius Fuscus, read out a prepared speech. He recalled to the 
senate that the time was at hand for holding the Saecular Games. He spoke of the Sibyl’s 
prophetic song, that the longest span of human life reached the hundred and tenth year. It 
was the duty of the senate, in view of the happiness and joy of the human race, to render 
thanks for present benefits and to ensure their future continuance, by providing for the 
holding of these games. 
‘You should, with all worship and veneration of the immortal gods, for the security and 
eternity of the empire, frequent the most sacred shrines, for the rendering and giving of 
thanks, so that the immortal gods may pass on to the future generations what our 
ancestors have built up and the things which, after previously conferring them on our 
ancestors, they have granted to our own times as well.’ 
A motion was then formally introduced by Calpurnius Maximus: that the emperors and 
Septimius Geta the most noble Caesar should be requested to hold the Saecular Games, 
which were customarily held at intervals of 110 years, in the following year: that the games 
should be held at public 
-157- 
expense; and that there should be public holidays on the days when the games were held. 
Lawsuits should be postponed for thirty days, likewise mourning by women should be 
prohibited for a similar period, and to commemorate the proceedings a record should be 
inscribed on marble. 
Further arrangements were made at a meeting of the quindecimviri on the Palatine on 11 
November, and in February or March 204. On 15 April the members of the College received 
a letter from the emperors, read to them by the Master, Pompeius Rusonianus. They were


--- PAGE 131 ---
to assemble in the temple of Apollo on the Palatine on 25 May, ‘to choose by lot the places 
in which the members, seated on tribunals, are to distribute means of purification to the 
people’. A second letter was also read out, informing them that if they decided on which 
days and nights the games should be held, and the matrons should offer prayers and 
incense, the emperors would so decree. The College duly met and drew lots on 25 May, and 
on the same day issued an edict announcing the arrangements. 
On 26 May the quindecimviri took up their allotted positions on the Capitol, Palatine and 
Aventine hills, and distributed the incense and other purificatory materials. Probably three 
days later they took up their positions again, this time to receive symbolic offerings of first-
fruits from the people, after prayers to Jupiter Best and Greatest, Juno Queen of Heaven 
and Apollo Good and Beautiful, led by Septimius. On 31 May the solemn purificatory rites 
were undertaken. The Master, Pompeius Rusonianus, purified the spot known as Terentum 
or Tarentum, on the edge of the Campus Martius, where the Saecular rites, once a private 
ceremony of the Valerian gens, had always had their focus. It was sacred to the gods of the 
underworld, whose share in the ritual had largely been taken over by heavenly deities. The 
purification of the people followed, then preparatory sacrifices, in the presence of the 
quindecimviri and two senior Vestal Virgins, on the bank of the Tiber. 
The next night, after midnight when the Kalends of June began, the Saecular rites proper 
were inaugurated, with sacrifice and prayer to the Moerae or Fates, on the Campus Martius. 
At the second hour of the morning were staged performances on a specially erected stage. 
Meanwhile Julia Domna, with one hundred and nine other married women, one for each 
year of the saeculum, held sacred banquets (sellisternia) on the Capitol in honour of the 
goddesses Juno and Diana. 
Through the three days and two nights following Septimius and his sons performed all the 
traditional rituals of sacrifice and prayer, with games at intervals. On each occasion 
Septimius presided, Antoninus led the prayer and Geta carried it on. The traditional 
formulas used by Augustus in 17 BC were faithfully followed. The god or goddess was 
invoked by name, then came these words: 
-158- 
‘let all good fortune attend the Roman People, the Quirites, let sacrifice be made to you with 
[the appropriate sacrifice for the particular deity]. I beg and beseech you that just as you 
have increased the empire and majesty of the Roman People, the Quirites, in war and in 
peace, so may the Latin always be obedient; that you may grant everlasting safety, victory 
and health to the Roman people, the Quirites; that you may protect the Roman People, the 
Quirites, and the legions of the Roman People, the Quirites; that you may keep safe and 
magnify the republic of the Roman people, the Quirites; that you may be favourable and 
propitious to the Republic of the Roman People, the Quirites, the College of the 
Quindecimviri, to me, my house, my household.’ 
As in 17 BC, the final games in the Circus were preceded by a hymn, the Carmen Saeculare, 
sung first on the Palatine and then again on the Capitol, by two choirs of twenty-seven boys 
and twenty-seven girls. Augustus could call on Horace to compose the hymn. The name of 
the poet of 204 has not been preserved, and cannot be conjectured. Little of the hymn itself 
has survived, either. There is an invocation of Apollo and Diana, as in the Horatian carmen. 
There is reference also to the shores and cities of the empire, to Bacchus and the golden 
fields, to ships sailing the seas, to the camps of the army, and, at the end, a prayer to 
protect ‘our Leaders’. Bacchus is the same god as Liber Pater, one of the two guardian


--- PAGE 132 ---
deities of Lepcis Magna. However traditional the prayers and rituals may have been, there 
was clearly some modification in honour of the di patrii of Septimius, Hercules and Liber. 
The surviving portions of the commentarium do not contain any mention of them, apart 
from the name of Bacchus in the carmen. But the coins issued in commemoration of these 
games convey the impression that the two gods of Lepcis were the presiding deities of the 
whole occasion. 
Again in the tradition of the Augustan celebration, the three-day ceremony was followed by 
seven days of games, both stage performances and circus races. On the last day came the 
‘Troy Game’, performed by boys of senatorial family. One of the boys, who bore an historic 
name, being a Calpurnius Piso, was severely injured. There were still a few surviving 
descendants of the Republican nobility. They were kept well in the background. Augustus, 
mindful of the origin of the Saecular Games as a rite of the Valerii, had given two 
distinguished members of the gens a role in 17 BC, as quindecimviri. There were two men 
alive in the reign of Septimius who advertised descent from the patrician Valerii, L. Valerius 
Messalla Thrasea Priscus, consul ordinarius in 196, and L. Valerius Messalla, who was to 
hold the same distinction in 214. Neither was a quindecimvir. 7     
The composition of the College is an interesting study in itself, not least 
-159- 
for contrasts and comparisons with 17 BC. Then, together with Augustus himself, two Valerii 
Messallae, an Aemilius Lepidus, a Licinius Stolo and a Mucius Scaevola, noble names, 
balanced the novi homines, great soldiers and politicians such as Agrippa, Sentius 
Saturninus and Cocceius Nerva. The bearers of great names among the quindecimviri of 204 
had acquired them not from descent but from grant of citizenship to their ancestors—a 
Cassius, a Fabius, two Fulvii, a Manilius, a Pompeius. Some of the other nomina were 
redolent of provincial Italy: Gargilius, Ofilius, Pollienus, Vetina. But of the twenty-six 
quindecimviri recorded only one, Nonius Arrius Mucianus of Verona, is known to have been 
the son of a consular. Few besides Mucianus were even Italian. Pollienus Auspex, the 
sarcastic friend of Septimius, was probably one. The emperor, his sons and the Praetorian 
Prefect, had several fellow-Africans in the College, perhaps as many as nine. The magister 
in 204, Julius Pompeius Rusonianus, whose cognomen is otherwise recorded only at Lepcis, 
was given a special role to play in the rites—the purification on 31 May. It would not be 
surprising if he was another Lepcitane. 8     
In the list of married women and boys and girls who participated in the rites provincial 
names seem also to be dominant. Unlike the Augustan commentarium, which speaks only of 
the hundred and ten matronae, that of the year 204 specifies Julia Domna, mater 
castrorum, with 109 others who took part. Ninety-one were wives of senators. The 
remaining eighteen equestrian ladies were headed by Julia’s niece, Julia Soaemias, wife of 
Varius Marcellus of Apamea. 9     
Of the three narrative sources only Herodian contains any mention of these games. Dio’s 
account has obviously been omitted by his epitomator. The author of the HA gives up any 
pretence at detailed narrative after the first six years of the reign. Herodian is brief and 
inaccurate, but one sentence does strike a true note: ‘Heralds were sent out in Rome and 
Italy, calling all to come and see what they had never seen before and would never see 
again.’ As it turned out, no one was ever to see Saecular Games again. These were the last 
in the series. 10


--- PAGE 133 ---
In the course of 204, probably early in the year, Antoninus and Geta were designated to the 
consulship for the year 205. Thus the first year of the new saeculum would bear the names 
of Septimius’ sons. Geta, who had probably received the toga virilis the previous year, was 
by now known generally as ‘most noble Caesar’. For the past few years there had been 
some variation in his nomenclature: he had sometimes the praenomen Publius, sometimes 
Lucius. From now on he remained Publius officially. There must have been some reason for 
the change, although none of the ancient sources discusses it. It may be that when his elder 
brother changed his name to M. Aurelius Antoninus, Geta took Antoninus’ original 
-160- 
praenomen Lucius. Antoninus’ original praenomen is however unknown. Such a change of 
name would recall the action of Marcus Aurelius and Lucius in 161, when Marcus took the 
name ‘Antoninus’ and gave his original name ‘Verus’ to Lucius. Or perhaps Geta’s name was 
changed to Lucius to avoid confusion with the emperor’s brother. Geta the elder remained in 
the background after his Dacian command. The inscription from the base of his statue at 
Lepcis does not even mention his relationship to Septimius. Another inscription apparently 
in his honour, from Ancona where he had once served as curator, calls him cognatus of 
Septimius and avunculus of Antoninus and the younger Geta. Cognatus means ‘relation by 
marriage’ and avunculus means ‘maternal uncle’. It may be that the people of Ancona—and 
indeed everyone else—were forbidden to call Geta the brother and paternal uncle, patruus, 
of the emperors. The inaccurate description of Ancona may be the result of an evasion by 
people determined somehow to indicate that a man linked to their city was a kinsman of the 
imperial family. However this may be, in 204 the elder Geta died. On his deathbed, no 
longer restrained by his fear of Plautianus, he revealed all the facts about him to his 
brother. Septimius set up a statue to him in the Forum. And his attitude to Plautianus began 
to change. He stripped him of much of his power. 11     
The urban plebs, which had hardly had a chance to observe Plautianus during the years 
when he was building up his power, had soon commented on the Prefect’s extraordinary 
preeminence. At the Circus on one occasion, Dio records, there was a shout: ‘Why do you 
tremble? Why are you pale? You possess more than the Three!’ ‘Plautianus’, says Dio, ‘was 
in fact always pale and trembling because of his hopes and fears.’ Dio was much stirred by 
an event that he took to be an omen of impending change at the highest level, an eruption 
of Vesuvius. The blast could be heard at Capua over twenty miles away, where Dio was 
living on his estate. 12     
The marriage of Antoninus and Plautilla was not a success. In spite of this, some have 
deduced that Plautilla may have borne a child in 204. But the evidence thought to refer to 
such an event may indicate no more than pious hopes. The language of Dio allows one to 
doubt whether the marriage was even consummated. As the bridegroom was only fourteen 
at the time of the ceremony, this would not have been surprising, especially as he loathed 
his wife and her father. 13     
Dio’s account of the denouement has been preserved in some detail. In January 205 
Antoninus felt confident enough to try a bold stroke. He persuaded the freedman Euodus, 
who as his educator had supervised his early boyhood, to enlist the services of three 
centurions. The plan was carried out without a flaw. On 22 January, while the imperial 
family was about to begin dinner, after the ludi Palatini, the three centurions presented 
-161-


--- PAGE 134 ---
themselves to Septimius. They informed him that they and seven others had been ordered 
by Plautianus to kill both emperors, and read out a letter which appeared to confirm their 
story. Septimius believed them, not least because of the dream he had had the previous 
night that Albinus was alive and plotting against him. He immediately summoned 
Plautianus. When the Prefect arrived at the palace, his followers were not permitted to go in 
with him—as had once been the case with Septimius at Tyana, as Dio notes. He was 
alarmed at this, but could not withdraw. When he entered Septimius spoke to him in a mild 
tone, but reproachfully, merely asking him why he wanted to kill them. He intended to give 
him the chance of making his defence. Antoninus could not endure the suspense. As 
Plautianus began to express his innocence in tones of amazement, he rushed up, seized the 
Prefect’s sword and struck him with his fist. He wanted to kill him with his own hands, but 
Septimius restrained him. Antoninus then ordered one of the attendants to do the deed. 
Someone plucked some hairs from Plautianus’ beard and took them to Julia and Plautilla, 
who were together in another room and had not known what was happening. ‘Look at your 
Plautianus’, the man said. Julia was delighted, Plautilla griefstricken. The body was flung out 
into the street, and only later buried at Septimius’ orders. 
The senate was summoned to a special sitting. Septimius did not accuse his fallen favourite. 
He merely lamented the weakness of human nature. The honours given to the Prefect had 
been excessive. He blamed himself for loving and honouring the man so much. The three 
centurions were called in to testify, after some senators whom Septimius did not fully trust 
had been removed from the curia. Many who had enjoyed Plautianus’ friendship were now 
endangered. Some were put to death. One of his satellites, a procurator of Mauretanian 
origin, Opellius Macrinus, was saved by the intercession of Cilo. Septimius restrained the 
senate from voting a decree in praise of Euodus. It would be shameful, he told them, for an 
imperial freedman to be mentioned in a decree of the senate in this way. The senators, 
many of whom must have been in a state of panic, chanted out Septimius’ praises, even 
shouting, ‘Everyone does everything well because you rule well’. Plautilla, presumably after 
being divorced— although this is nowhere stated—was banished to the island of Lipara with 
her brother. The names of Plautianus and his family were sedulously erased from all public 
monuments and his statues defaced. The immensity of his wealth, now confiscated, required 
the appointment of a special procurator ad bona Plautiani to administer it. 14     
At a meeting of the senate, or soon afterwards, a detailed account of the ‘plot’ against the 
emperors by Plautianus must have been circulated. Herodian shows that he for one 
swallowed it, although some of the details 
-162- 
in his account are so implausible as to have been the product of his imagination rather than 
imperial propaganda. He is good at external description, however, and his picture of the 
Prefect of the height of his power conveys a vivid impression that is worth quoting. ‘He 
alone had the outward appearance of all-powerful authority. When he went out in public he 
was an object of fear. No one would approach him, and even those who came upon him by 
chance turned aside. The guards who preceded him did not allow anyone to stand near him 
or even look at him. They ordered people to step out of his path and keep their eyes fixed 
on the ground.’ The effort made to suppress Plautianus’ name from the record was largely 
successful, although a considerable number of inscriptions in his honour survive. A list of 
soldiers from Rome seems to show one deriving from a city named after him; its location is 
unknown. Dio says ‘that his power was equal to that of the emperors themselves…. All the 
soldiers and senators took oaths by his Fortune and all publicly prayed for this health.’ This


--- PAGE 135 ---
was the fault of Septimius himself, ‘who yielded to Plautianus to such a degree that the 
latter occupied the position of emperor and he himself that of Prefect’. He knew everything 
the emperor did, no one knew his secrets. Septimius ‘as good as prayed to have him as his 
successor, and once wrote in a letter: “I love the man so much that I pray that I die before 
he does”.’ Another fragment of Dio adds ‘that…someone actually dared to write to him as to 
a fourth Caesar’. 15     
There had never been a man like Plautianus among the ministers of the Caesars. Even 
Sejanus had not reached the same heights. Besides, Sejanus had built up his power when 
Tiberius let the reins of government slip out of his hands. Plautianus had been constantly at 
the side of Septimius. This was indeed the source of his strength. Alone among Septimius’ 
generals and ministers he had been continuously with him since 193. But the hold that 
Plautianus had over Septimius up till the last minutes of his life may have had its origin in 
the Lepcis of their youth. Herodian reports the story that he had been Septimius’ ‘boy-
lover’. 16     
Little is recorded about the three years that followed the fall of Plautianus. During his reign 
Septimius did much to improve the appearance of the City of Rome, but most of his work 
had probably been done before 205. The Temple of Peace, destroyed at the end of 
Commodus’ reign, was restored and a new version of the marble plan of the city, the forma 
urbis, was attached to the outside wall of its library. The Pantheon was restored in 202. The 
arch in the Forum has already been mentioned. Another striking arch in honour of Septimius 
and his family was erected in 204 by the argentarii, to form a monumental new entrance to 
the Forum Boarium. No trace now survives of a striking new building erected in 203, 
-163- 
at the corner of the Palatine that faced the Via Appia, the Septizodium. Nearly 100 feet (30 
m) high and more than 300 feet (90 m) long, it resembled a nymphaeum, or theatrical 
scaenae frons, and perhaps contained statues of the seven planetary gods, Saturn, Jupiter, 
Mars, the Sun, Venus, Mercury and the Moon. The central statue of the Sun was quite 
probably depicted in the likeness of Septimius himself—looking south towards Africa, and 
welcoming travellers coming from Africa. The symbolism behind this great monument can 
only be guessed at. In the Palace itself, Septimius also undertook rebuilding. New thermae 
were constructed and the front of the palace facing the Circus Maximus was extensively 
altered. Dio gives an interesting account of the interior decoration of part of the palace: the 
emperor had ‘the ceilings of the rooms where he heard lawsuits painted with the stars under 
which he had been born’. They were visible to everyone— ‘except that portion of the sky 
which “observed the hour”, as they call it, when he first saw the light of day’. This vital 
section was painted in different ways in two different rooms. Septimius did not want too 
much to be known about what the stars had ordained for him. 17     
The murder of Plautianus made necessary a new appointment. Septimius now reverted to 
previous practice by giving command of the Guard to a pair of Prefects, Q. Maecius Laetus, 
who had been Prefect of Egypt from 200-03, and Aemilius Papinianus. Maecius Laetus was 
the senior. Little is known of him except that he enjoyed favour with Antoninus throughout 
the next ten years, which could be said of very few. He no doubt had considerable military 
experience. Papinian was not a military man but a jurist. His experience went right back to 
the reign of Marcus when he had been a legal adviser to the Prefects. More recently, he had 
been serving as a libellis. The HA states that he was a great friend of Septimius, ‘and, as 
some record, related to him by marriage, through his second wife’. In that case, Papinian 
must have been a Syrian. Students of Roman law from the time of Justinian onwards have


--- PAGE 136 ---
concurred in rating Papinian highest among all its great classical exponents. This was indeed 
a great age of jurisprudence. A younger contemporary of Papinian was Domitius Ulpianus, 
also a Syrian, from Tyre. The third great jurist of the age, Julius Paulus, may have come 
from the east as well. What these jurists and their colleagues may have lacked in elegance 
of style or clarity in comparison with their predecessors of the previous generation, like 
Salvius Julianus, they more than made up for by their voluminous output. During the 
Severan age they distilled an enormous quantity of earlier material to produce the basis of 
the law codified by Justinian. 18     
Septimius himself took a keen interest in the administration of justice. Dio, who as a 
member of the emperor’s consilium could speak as an eyewitness, records with approval his 
patience in court: ‘He allowed the 
-164- 
litigants plenty of time and he gave us, his advisers, full liberty to speak.’ Apparently he was 
particularly strict in enforcing the law against adultery, to which he added. Dio says that 
during his own consulship, which was at about this time, he happened to notice that there 
were as many as three thousand cases pending. One piquant case is preserved in the 
Digest. A senator named Claudius Gorgus accused his wife of adultery. He was then 
discovered to have taken her back. Septimius did not wait for a prosecution, and convicted 
the man of procuring. The Digest and other legal compilations preserve numerous decisions 
of his, covering the whole range of private and public law, including the rights of women, 
minors and slaves, the obligations of curatores and tutores, or guardians, testamentary 
laws, property disputes. No attempt can be made here to deal with the legislative and 
juridical activity of the reign. Aurelius Victor called Septimius conditor legum longe 
aequabilium, ‘the establisher of thoroughly equitable laws’. Now, to be sure, it was openly 
asserted that ‘the emperor is not bound by the laws’, princeps legibus solutus est. But at 
the same time, he and Antoninus in a joint pronouncement declared that ‘although we are 
not bound by the laws, nevertheless we live in accordance with them’. 19     
As far as the vast majority of the inhabitants of the empire were concerned, the doctrine 
held good. The senate, unfortunately, was still too much feared as a source of possible 
danger to be treated in this way. The murder of Plautianus did not bring to an end the 
execution of senators. Dio speaks of ‘many being put to death, some of them after they had 
been formally arraigned before him, had made their defence, and had been convicted’. 
Several instances are preserved in excerpts from his History. Plautius Quintillus was the 
most eminent victim, a nephew of Verus and son-in-law of Marcus. His only recorded 
political action had been in May 193, when he intervened forcefully against Didius Julianus’ 
proposal that the senate and Vestal Virgins should meet Septimius’ advancing army as 
suppliants. He was now ‘at the gates of old age, living on his country estate, interfering in 
nothing and doing nothing wrong’. Nonetheless he was informed against, and forced to 
suicide. He called for his funeral shroud, which had been made for him long before. It was 
by now tattered with age. ‘“What is this?”, he said, “we are late!”’ Preparing to die, ‘he 
burned incense, and said: “I make the same prayer that Servianus made for Hadrian”’ —
that is, that the emperor should wish to die, but be unable to. 
The other case Dio records is that of the proconsul of Asia, Apronianus, condemned in 
absentia. His nurse had once dreamed he would become emperor: it was alleged that he 
had used magic to bring this about. A remarkable scene occurred during the trial. Under 
torture, a witness had been asked who had told the story about the dream, and to whom. 
The


--- PAGE 137 ---
-165- 
witness said that he had seen ‘a certain bald-headed senator peeping in’. When the report, 
prepared by the emperor himself, was read out, the senators were horrified. No name had 
been put down by Septimius, and everyone, even the ones who were only slightly bald and 
those who had never visited Apronianus’ house, was frightened. No one could remain calm 
except those with plenty of hair. Dio gives a vivid picture of the humiliating and absurd 
position the senators were placed in. 
We all looked around at the men who were bald, and murmurs spread, ‘It’s So-and-So’ — 
‘No, it’s So-and-So’. I will not disguise what happened to me, ridiculous though it is. I was 
so taken aback that I actually felt the hair on my head, with my hand. A good many others 
found themselves doing likewise. We took good care to stare at those who were more or 
less bald, feeling that this would divert the danger from ourselves onto them. 
Then evidence was read out that identified the bald senator as a certain Baebius 
Marcellinus. He stood up, came forward and said: ‘“The man will of course recognise me, if 
he has seen me.” ‘The informer was brought in and gazed around for some while. Then 
someone—Dio does not say who it was—gave an almost imperceptible nod towards 
Marcellinus, and the informer identified him. He was led out straight away, said goodbye to 
his four children in the Forum, and was executed—before Septimius had even learned of his 
condemnation. 20     
Septimius’ behaviour in January 205, and during the trials that followed, was hardly 
characteristic of the calm and ordered routine he followed in his Italian years. According to 
Dio he was always up and busy before dawn, and then would take a walk, on which affairs 
of state would be discussed. Then he would hold court, ‘unless there were some great 
festival’. Dio’s description of his patient and fair conduct of cases has already been quoted. 
At noon he would adjourn for a ride, ‘as far has his health permitted, and then would 
exercise in a gymnasium and take a bath’. This would be followed by a substantial meal, 
taken alone or with his sons, and a siesta. After more official business, he would once again 
take a passeggiata, walking about and conversing in both Greek and Latin. Towards evening 
he would bathe again and then dine with his intimates. ‘He very rarely invited guests to 
dinner, and only on days when it was unavoidable did he arrange expensive banquets.’ It 
must have been one of those rare banquets that was witnessed and described by the writer 
Sammonicus Serenus. A sturgeon ‘was brought in by servants [who were] garlanded with 
flowers, moving in time to the music of flutes’. 21     
No doubt Septimius and his sons attended meetings of the senate regularly. In 206, as 
Ulpian, writing a few years later attests, Septimius 
-166- 
and Antoninus made recommendations on the law regarding gifts between husband and 
wife: ‘the greatest emperors advocated these proposals and the senate so decreed’. 
Elsewhere, at greater length he quotes from the speech made by Antoninus. The eighteen-
year-old junior emperor, whose own wife was languishing in exile, was able to adopt a 
mature and compassionate approach: ‘It is wrong for him who made a gift to change his 
mind; but for the heir to seize the property against what may be the last wish of the donor 
is hard and avaricious.’ As likely as not the speech was written for him by Ulpian himself or 
one of the other imperial advisers. Ulpian sums up the speech as advocating ‘some 
relaxation in the rigour of the law’. 22


--- PAGE 138 ---
Another matter which presumably concerned the senate in 206 was the trial of Pollienus 
Sebennus, nephew of Septimius’ friend Auspex, accused of misconduct during his 
governorship of Noricum. Dio took some satisfaction in Sebennus’ conviction: he had made 
the preposterous charges that led to Baebius Marcellinus’ death. Sebennus was ‘delivered 
up to the Noricans…and he had to endure a most shameful experience. We saw him lying on 
the ground and pleading piteously.’ As once with the province of Africa and its rapacious 
governor Marius Priscus, it was still possible for Rome’s subjects to seek redress. Sebennus 
was ‘handed over to his accusers’ by the new governor, Catius Sabinus, who had 
presumably made the prosecution possible. However, the influence of Pollienus Auspex was 
sufficient to rescue Sebennus from death. 23     
The fact that Sebennus was tried by his peers may seem a welcome concession to the 
senate’s traditional prerogatives. Dio’s description hardly gives this impression, even if this 
trial was less hysterical than that of the Apronianus ‘dream’ case. Septimius no doubt 
wanted to restore a calmer atmosphere and may have shown himself conciliatory during 
those years. But what he expected from the senate was acquiescence. Tertullian, writing ten 
years earlier, in defence of the patriotism and loyalty of Christians, insisted that they prayed 
constantly for all emperors. What they asked God to give them was ‘long life, secure rule, a 
safe household, brave armies, a faithful senate (senatum fidelem), a well-behaved people, a 
quiet world’. 24     
It was perhaps during this period that Septimius composed his autobiography. That he had 
not forgotten his struggle for power is proved by his dream about Albinus the night before 
the murder of Plautianus. The work dwelt on dreams and other portents that had told him of 
his destiny, and it vilified Albinus and Niger. No direct quotations are preserved. It is not 
even known whether it was in Latin or Greek. If it was in Greek, Aelius Antipater may have 
helped him with it. If in Latin, perhaps the African lawyer Messius Saturninus gave some 
assistance. Saturninus was 
-167- 
the holder of the new post a declamationibus (and had a very high salary). In this capacity 
he clearly drafted Septimius’ speeches for delivery in court. Ulpian, quoting a letter of 
Septimius (and Antoninus) which gives the imperial decision (in a case involving acceptance 
of presents by a proconsul), describes it as ‘very elegant’. A Greek proverb is quoted and 
the emperor’s judgement is pithily phrased. 25     
There were certainly plenty of literary figures at the court. For one thing, the empress liked 
the society of such men. She had turned to this for consolation when Plautianus ousted her 
from her position of influence with her husband. There is no reason to believe that she sent 
the sophists packing when Plautianus went. The intellectual curiosity was genuine. 
Philostratus, who was with the empress and her son in the east after Septimius’ death, 
speaks of ‘the circle around Julia’. The coherence of this ‘circle’ has perhaps been 
exaggerated. But Philostratus himself was encouraged by Julia to compose his Life of 
Apollonius, the wonder-worker of Tyana; and he calls her ‘the philosopher’. Other members 
of the circle may be found. It would be uncritical, however, to assume that all the writers of 
the age, from Diogenes Laërtius to Alexander of Aphrodisias, must have at some time 
danced attendance at the salon of the philosophical empress. ‘Philosophy’ is in any case a 
courtesy term. To judge from the Life of Apollonius it meant a combination of religious 
superstition with somewhat pretentious erudition. 26


--- PAGE 139 ---
Julia had another reputation, for promiscuity. Perhaps she did have lovers. Dio implies that 
she was slanderously accused of misconduct by Plautianus. Herodian had little interest in 
the subject. Hence the only explicit accusation comes from much later times. But it was 
plausible enough; the intellectual stimulus of sophists may not have been enough to console 
her for the treatment she got from Plautianus. 27     
During these years in Italy Antoninus and Geta reacted to the removal of Plautianus as if 
been released from the charge of an oppressive tutor. The two youths ‘treated women 
shamefully, abused boys, embezzled money, hobnobbed with gladiators and charioteers’. 
What may have begun as harmless rivalry ended as mutual hatred—which the coin issues 
advertising their ‘harmony’ might have led one to suspect, even if Dio did not explicitly 
report it. During a fiercely contested chariot race Antoninus fell and broke his leg. 28     
In the meantime Italy was being subjected to a humiliating demonstration of how 
precarious was the recently re-established security and peace. A brigand named Bulla 
eluded capture again and again, and for two years ‘ravaged Italy in the presence of the 
emperors and a great host of soldiers’. Perhaps as a pun on the similarity of his name to the 
great Sulla, he also called himself ‘Felix’. ‘He had a great many runaway imperial freedmen 
-168- 
with him’, Dio notes. ‘Some of them had been paid very badly—and some had received no 
pay at all.’ Dio had earlier mentioned that Septimius’ strictness with his freedmen had won 
him praise—presumably from the senators. However, the ones who had joined Bulla would 
not have come from the Palace staff—they would be lowly employees on the imperial 
estates in Italy, now vastly increased in size by confiscation. Another element from which 
Bulla may have found support, although Dio does not specifically mention it, would be the 
several thousand Guardsmen discharged in June 193. But the men under Bulla’s command 
did not number more than six hundred. He was eventually captured through a trick. 
Brigandage was a problem that had probably become endemic. Tertullian, early in the reign, 
refers to ‘military garrisons in all the provinces being assigned to tracking down brigands’, 
and the HA calls Septimius ‘an enemy of brigands everywhere’. The problem was not new, 
but the Marcomannic wars, the ‘deserters’ war’ under Commodus and finally the civil wars 
of 193-7 had clearly made it more serious. 29     
Until 204, Septimius had not spent more than twelve months at a time in Italy for forty 
years. Apart from the Saecular Games, he cannot have found his life there in the years 204-
07 very much to his taste. The restlessness and impatience that marked his character were 
certainly exacerbated by the behaviour of his sons. The murder of Plautianus, the political 
trials, the frustrating Bulla Felix, must have made him yearn to be back with the armies. He 
was now over sixty, convinced that he had not long to live. He wanted to end on a 
triumphant note. 30     
-169- 
16 
EXPEDITIO FELICISSIMA BRITTANNICA


--- PAGE 140 ---
SEPTIMIUS ‘WAS BECOMING ANGRY’, says Dio, ‘that in Britain he was winning wars through 
others while being worsted by a brigand in Italy’. After the lengthy account, in Xiphilinus’ 
Epitome of Dio, of the two year campaign against the bandit chief Bulla and his 600 
followers, from which this quotation is taken, comes the story of the British expedition. It 
was undertaken, even though Septimius knew from the stars that he would not return, 
‘because he saw his sons becoming undisciplined and the armies slack through idleness.’ 
Herodian echoes Dio over the conduct of Antoninus and Geta: ‘he wanted to get his sons 
away from Rome, so that they would behave better, under military discipline, after being 
removed from the life of luxury at Rome’. Herodian offers more. Just when Septimius ‘was 
displeased by his sons’ behaviour and indecent enthusiasm for the shows, he received a 
letter from the governor of Britain. He wrote that the barbarians there were in rebellion, 
laying waste the countryside, carrying off plunder and wrecking almost everything. Hence 
there was need either for more troops to reinforce the garrison or for the imperial presence. 
This was welcome news for Severus, being in any case a lover of glory by nature, and eager 
for a triumph against the Britons to add to his victories and titles won in east and north.’ 1     
The governor to whom Herodian refers can be identified with a high degree of probability as 
L. Alfenus Senecio. He is recorded on no fewer than nine inscriptions in the north of 
England, four from the hinterland of the frontier, four from the forts along the line of 
Hadrian’s Wall, and one from the outpost of Habitancum (Risingham) north of the Wall, on 
the old road into Scotland. Most of these stones record building (some are incomplete or not 
explicit). At Bainbridge in Wensleydale, where his predecessor Valerius Pudens had built a 
barrack block for the Sixth Nervians under their prefect Vinicius Pius in 205, Senecio erected 
a rampart, probably in the next year (the same prefect was there). At Birdoswald on the 
Wall the First Aelian Cohort of Dacians and the First Cohort of Thracians built a granary 
under his direction. The First Vangiones, a part-mounted milliary cohort, under their tribune 
Aemilius 
-170- 
Salvianus, rebuilt a gate and adjacent walls, which had ‘collapsed from age’, at Habitancum, 
‘by order of Alfenus Senecio, right honourable consular’ —and, it is a surprise, ‘under the 
supervision of Oclatinius Adventus, procurator of our emperors’. The involvement of the 
highest-ranking equestrian official in the province, side by side with the governor and 
commander-in-chief, is unexpected and unusual in this military context. It is matched by 
another stone, from Cilurnum (Chesters) on the Wall itself, which, although fragmentary, 
clearly indicates that Senecio and Adventus were both engaged on work there too. One 
explanation seems to be that Adventus was a specialist in military intelligence. The notoriety 
which he was to achieve at the end of his career, a dozen or so years later, prompted Dio to 
describe his background in some detail. He had started as a military policeman, speculator, 
been a centurion in the secret service, frumentarii, and had commanded that force’s Rome 
headquarters as princeps peregrinorum, before becoming procurator. It is plausible to 
suppose that he had been given the British appointment not least with the mission of 
reporting on the state of the frontier and indeed of gathering intelligence on the enemies of 
Rome. 2     
Alfenus Senecio was doubtless a trusted servant of Septimius, like his two known 
predecessors in this reign. The first, Virius Lupus, had taken over the province immediately 
after the defeat of Albinus and the British army at Lugdunum in 197. Work was done that 
same year at Verterae (Brough) on Stainmore and Verbeia (Ilkley) in the Yorkshire Dales; 
undated inscriptions show Lupus’ hand at Lavatrae (Bowes) on Stainmore, where ‘a bath-
house, destroyed by fire, was rebuilt by the First Thracians’, and at Coria (Corbridge),


--- PAGE 141 ---
where a detachment of the Sixth legion was at work under his command. Dio reports how 
Lupus had to buy off the Maeatae with ‘large sums of money’, receiving ‘a few prisoners 
back’ in return. Clearly, in the absence of most of the British garrison in 196-7, Rome’s 
northern enemies had invaded the province, and the Brigantes of the Pennines had perhaps 
risen in rebellion. The Maeatae, whose home was north of the Antonine Wall, were on the 
point of being joined by the Caledonians, from the Highlands beyond, when Lupus arrived. 
How much damage had been done is hard to estimate. But in any case, there had been 
trouble in Britain not long before 196-7, with the death of a governor in a barbarian 
invasion c. 182 or 183, and the campaigns of Ulpius Marcellus followed by discontent and 
mutiny in the British legions. 3     
In Septimius’ boyhood and youth, Rome’s north-west frontier, the limit of her rule in Britain, 
had been the Antonine Wall. By the early 160s, barely twenty years after it had been 
created by Lollius Urbicus, the Antonine frontier had been abandoned. Some strongpoints 
were retained north of Hadrian’s Wall, it is true, but there had been a retreat. This will 
-171- 
have been the impression that Septimius’ brother Geta, as tribune in II Augusta, and 
Pertinax, as an equestrian officer in Britain, will have gained in the 160s, and no doubt 
transmitted to Septimius, years before. It is not certain who replaced Lupus as governor, 
but Valerius Pudens, who probably went to Britain c. 202, had been governor of Lower 
Pannonia in 193, in other words was a foundation member of Septimius’ winning team. He 
had gone on to be Lupus’ successor in Lower Germany and after his service in Britain was 
proconsul of Africa. As for Alfenus Senecio, it is known that he was Numidian, from Cuicul, 
and that he had been governor of Syria Coele in the year 200, at the very time of 
Septimius’ lengthy stay in the east. Senecio’s previous career is not known, unless he is 
identical with the procurator of the same names who after various junior posts was 
governor of Mauretania Caesariensis and then procurator of Belgica and the two Germanies. 
Otherwise the governor of Syria and Britain was presumably son of the procurator. 4     
Senecio seems to have done some fighting as well as building. As if to confirm Dio’s remark 
about ‘others winning wars in Britain’, there is an altar from Condercum (Benwell) on 
Hadrian’s Wall, dedicated ‘to the Victory of the Emperors’ by the cavalry regiment of 
Asturians based there, naming Alfenus Senecio as the consular. Julius Julianus, legate of II 
Augusta at this time, himself devoted an altar to Imperial Victory near Coria, while another, 
at Greetland in the southern Pennines, was set up by a private individual to the ‘Goddess 
Victoria Brigantia’ in the year 208. It might be possible to interpret these stray pieces of 
evidence as an indication that Senecio had fighting to do against Brigantians within the 
province as well as against external enemies beyond the frontier. It has to be admitted that 
the Condercum altar might quite well be a British commemoration, ten years on, of the 
Parthian victory of AD 198, and nothing more. Nonetheless, Dio’s story about ‘wars being 
won in Britain’ cannot be dismissed. Herodian’s report of the appeal from the governor of 
Britain is quite another matter. This writer’s account of the reign is riddled with mistakes, 
omissions and inaccuracies. Further, Herodian is a devotee of the rhetorical topos. It can be 
observed that on two later occasions in his work imperial expeditions are ostensibly brought 
about following letters from provincial governors (‘of Syria and Mesopotamia’, and ‘in 
Illyria’, respectively) describing enemy invasions. In the first of these later despatches 
Herodian reports the governors telling the emperor, as if it were urgent news, about an 
event which had taken place at least five years before the supposed despatch. It is better to 
reject Herodian’s story about the British governor’s letter as pure invention. 5


--- PAGE 142 ---
There may have been several changes of policy regarding Britain during the past few 
decades. It is quite possible that plans had been made 
-172- 
to reoccupy southern Scotland in the later 170s and that the governor defeated early in 
Commodus’ reign by tribes ‘crossing the Wall’ — unspecified, but mentioned by Dio in 
language similar to that used of the Antonine Wall—had been preparing to recommission the 
Antonine frontier. It is far from certain what orders Septimius had given to Virius Lupus or 
indeed to Valerius Pudens. They may conceivably have been told to move back into 
Scotland. On the other hand, the attention they were giving to forts in the Pennines makes 
it more probable that Hadrian’s Wall was still envisaged as the frontier, and this is certainly 
the inescapable inference from Alfenus Senecio’s activity at Birdoswald, Vindolanda, 
Cilurnum and Habitancum. One of Septimius’ governors— the name has not been preserved
—built a new granary at Coria (Corbridge), and the structural evidence from this base just 
south of Hadrian’s Wall, on the River Tyne, suggests that a major new stores building was 
being constructed at this time. Further downstream, on the south bank of the river near its 
mouth, at Arbeia (South Shields), the fort which formerly housed an auxiliary cohort was 
totally converted into a supply depot. The normal accommodation had been demolished to 
make way for an extra twenty granaries, giving a total of twenty-two. Arbeia could now hold 
enough corn to supply more than 40,000 men for three months. But presumably, once the 
imperial expeditionary force reached Britain, supplies of food were shipped continuously 
from southern Britain and the Rhineland, and redistributed from Arbeia up the coast to 
Cramond on the Forth and up the Tyne to Coria. It is not unlikely that the ‘Tigris bargemen’ 
recorded at Arbeia in late antiquity were first based on the Tyne at this very time. After the 
conquest of Mesopotamia, Arab lightermen had very likely been drafted into Roman service, 
some, perhaps, whose loyalty was suspect, to the other end of the empire. They were 
evidently to give their name to the port where they were based, for ‘Arbeia’ is simply a 
version of ‘Arabia’. It is fair to add that they would have found fellow-Arabs on the Tyne 
already, at any rate Palmyrenes. Barathes of Palmyra, dealer in ensigns, buried his young 
British freedwoman and wife Regina at Arbeia, giving her an ornate tombstone with epitaph 
in Latin and Palmyrene. Later he was to die at Coria. 6     
How soon orders were sent to prepare the great supply depots at Arbeia and Coria is 
uncertain. But once they came, the intention was surely clear: there was to be a massive 
imperial expedition, a Roman invasion of north Britain the like of which had never been seen 
before. Septimius had quite possibly read Tacitus’ Life of Agricola and his Histories, in which 
the ‘complete conquest of Britain’ by the historian’s father-in-law was immortalised—and its 
abandonment denounced. The governorship of Agricola was well known to Cassius Dio, and 
another contemporary of 
-173- 
Septimius, Tertullian, had also read some Tacitus. Septimius’ grandfather, as a pupil of 
Quintilian, and as one who had perhaps known Tacitus personally when he and Pliny were 
prosecuting Marius Priscus, very much in the interests of Lepcis Magna, could well have had 
personal copies of his writings. About another literary work of that era there can be no 
doubt. The first Septimius Severus must have had his own copy of Statius’ Silvae. His own 
family may, to be sure, have ignored everything in that work except the Ode Lyrica ad 
Septimium Severum in the fourth book. But there is a chance that Septimius also knew the 
Laudes Crispini Vetti Bolani filiii in the fifth book. Here he could have read how ‘Crispinus’


--- PAGE 143 ---
mighty father entered Thule, that sets a limit to the western waves, where Hyperion is ever 
weary, bearing the commands of Caesar.’ Statius asks where the young Crispinus will serve: 
‘But if the land curbed by your mighty parent receives you…what glory will exalt the fields of 
Caledonia! When some ancient dweller in that savage land shall tell you: “Here did your 
father dispense justice, from this mound did he address the cavalry…these gifts, these 
weapons did he dedicate to the gods of war…this breastplate did he himself put on when 
battle summoned, this one did he take from the breast of a British king.”’ 
Dio certainly ascribes Septimius’ Mesopotamian conquests to ‘desire for glory’. As far as 
Britain is concerned, he explicitly states that Septimius ‘intended to conquer it all’ —at last, 
it might be added, or for the first time since Julius Agricola. Septimius also had an insatiable 
curiosity, a love of peregrinatio, foreign travel, and of novelties. He had been virtually over 
the entire empire, except for ‘the great outermost island towards the west’. Now he would 
even see those ‘parts of Britain inaccessible to the Romans’ which Tertullian, shortly before, 
had claimed (Septimius would hardly have known this) were conquered by Christ. 7     
Whether driven by a remembered line of Statius (quanta Caledonios attollet gloria campos!) 
or by some more prosaic motive, Septimius will have consulted whatever British specialists 
were to be found before he departed. There would be the former governors, Lupus, if he 
was still alive, and Valerius Pudens. One Gaius Julius Asper, later consul ordinarius (in 212), 
was patron of the province of Britain, and may have had longstanding links and special 
knowledge. Polus Terentianus, Septimius’ ally as governor of Dacia in 193, had been legate 
of II Augusta in the mid-180s, and could have been consulted. So too might Septimius’ 
fellow-Lepcitane, Silius Plautius Haterianus, another former legate of the Caerleon legion. 
Then there was the quindecimvir Antius Crescens Calpurnianus, former iuridicus of Britain 
and acting governor at a moment of crisis 
-174- 
under Commodus. None of these men, as it happens, are known to have accompanied the 
imperial party in 208. One or more may have been among the comites of the emperors. 
Only two comites are explicitly attested. One was Julia’s brother-in-law, Julius Avitus 
Alexianus. He had held no office since the consulship, following his governorship of Raetia 
ten years before. It is probable that Plautianus’ hostility to Julia had extended to her 
relatives. Now the Emesene clan was back in favour. Alexianus’ own son-in-law, Sex. Varius 
Marcellus of Apamea, who had previously served only as procurator of the aqueducts at 
Rome, was made procurator of Britain, presumably as successor to Oclatinius Adventus. 
Another kinsman of Julia, Aemilius Papinianus, was of course still Guard Prefect, and he, 
rather than his colleague Maecius Laetus, was the Prefect who accompanied the expedition. 
The other senatorial comes was a man from proconsular Africa, C. Junius Faustinus 
Postumianus, who had recently governed Lower Moesia. Postumianus was to take over the 
governorship of Britain during the expedition, it seems, presumably as successor to Alfenus 
Senecio. A further high-ranking member of the imperial party may be postulated, Ulpius 
Marcellus, the son, it could be supposed, of the Commodan governor of that name who had 
battered the north Britons into submission twenty-five years earlier. 8     
Apart from these persons, Septimius will have taken a very considerable team with him. The 
whole business of the empire would have to be conducted from distant Britain for some 
while, and at the very least the head of the Secretariat, the ab epistulis, must have been of 
the company. Above all, a large number of the imperial slaves and freedmen from the 
familia Caesaris must have gone to Britain. Two are mentioned, Castor the chamberlain and


--- PAGE 144 ---
a memoria and Euodus, Antoninus’ old educator (neither would return). Inscriptions register 
two men involved in the expedition whose names are missing. One was the fleet 
commander, who, exceptionally, was assigned not merely the classis Britannica, but the 
Rhine and Danube flotillas as well, the classes Germanica and Pannonica and Moesica. No 
doubt they were involved in the laborious task of supply, as was another nameless official 
‘in charge of the granaries’ at Coria ‘at the time of the most fortunate expedition’, tempore 
expeditionis felicissi (mae) Brittanic (ae). The Rhine and Danube armies will also, it is clear, 
have contributed to the expedition, not merely the naval forces of those provinces. It may 
be that several whole legions were sent, although it is more probable that vexillationes only 
were detached. But the new legion II Parthica, effectively part of the Rome garrison, which 
now had the makings of a mobile field army, probably accompanied strong elements of the 
Guard. 9     
Before Septimius could leave Italy he had to take steps to ensure that 
-175- 
Rome and the rest of the empire remained loyal and secure in his absence. There are 
indeed hints of some kind of trouble at this time. Two inscriptions at widely separated 
places, Ephesus in Asia and Sicca in Africa, refer in very similar language to the defeat of 
‘insidious plots’. The first is not precisely dated, the second was set up in 208. Both suggest 
that some insurrection had been suppressed. There may have been an uprising in Gaul, for 
the legate of the Bonn legion I Minervia, Julius Septimius Castinus—a possible kinsman of 
the emperor—is known to have commanded at this time a force drawn from all four German 
legions ‘against defectors and rebels’. Coins issued in 208 honour ‘Jupiter the Victorious’; 
but they could refer to Senecio’s campaigns. In 207 the governor of Upper Pannonia, 
Egnatius Victor, made a dedication at Arrabona to ‘the Victory of the Emperors and of the 
legion I Adiutrix’, which might mean there had been fighting on or near the middle Danube. 
Perhaps Antoninus was there and participated in some military action: the coinage of 207 
gives great prominence to his martial prowess. Yet, as with the Victory dedications from 
Britain at this time, there remains the possibility that Victor was merely commemorating the 
Parthian war of 197-8. It has to be admitted that little is known about what was happening 
in 207. It is even possible that Septimius made a second visit to Africa: his silver coinage of 
that year depicts the personified province with her distinctive elephant-skin head-dress. 10     
It is possible to establish some of the arrangements made for the government of the empire 
during the imperial visit to Britain. Care was certainly taken to place reliable men in key 
positions. Syria Coele was in the hands of Marius Maximus, a legionary legate of the 
Septimian armies of 193, and later successful commander of the Moesian army corps at 
Byzantium and Lugdunum. He had gone on to govern Belgica and Lower Germany. One of 
Maximus’ recorded actions in Syria was to arrange for the passage of a Parthian envoy to 
the emperors. Before Septimius’ death in 211 Maximus had been replaced, but not by a 
senatorial governor: the financial procurator Minicius Martialis seems to have taken over as 
acting governor. Marius Maximus was hardly removed as potentially dangerous. He was 
certainly in high favour in the next reigns, and his brother Marius Perpetuus was governor of 
Upper Moesia at the time of Septimius’ death. Of the other provincial governors one may 
note the prefect of Egypt. From 206-11 this office was held by Ti. Claudius Subatianus 
Aquila, who had previously been first ever prefect of Mesopotamia. At this very time his 
close kinsman Subatianus Proculus was governor of their home province Numidia. It will be 
recalled that Alfenus Senecio was a native of the same town as the Subatiani, Cuicul. 
Septimius Castinus, possible kinsman of the emperor,


--- PAGE 145 ---
-176- 
became legate of Lower Pannonia at about this time. Egnatius Victor, governor of the Upper 
Pannonian province, and Aiacius Modestus Crescentianus, governor of Upper Germany, are 
among the further holders of powerful positions who may be identified, like the Marii, the 
Subatiani, Senecio and Castinus, as natives of Roman Africa. Septimius, it seems clear, felt 
he could trust these men. 11     
The year 208 was inaugurated once more, as in 205, by a joint consulship of Antoninus and 
Geta, holding office for the third and second time respectively. Antoninus had now equalled 
his father’s number of consulships and had been joint emperor for ten years. There was no 
sign that this brother, albeit less than a year younger, was destined for promotion: Geta 
remained ‘most noble Caesar’. Tenure of the fasces during the last years of Septimius’ reign 
was still reserved mainly for the high aristocracy, so it seems, men of old consular families, 
or for those with imperial connections. In 206 the consuls had been two Italians, Nummius 
Albinus, son of a stepbrother of Didius Julianus, and Fulvius Aemilianus. One of the consuls 
of 207 was a Septimius from Lepcis Magna, L. Septimius Aper, probably a grandson of 
Septimius’ ‘uncle’ Aper. In 209, as in 200 and 204, a member of Marcus Aurelius’ family 
held office: this time is was a son of old Claudius Pompeianus and Marcus’ daughter, the 
Augusta Lucilla. What is more, he flaunted the name Commodus as well as Pompeianus. His 
colleague was Plautius Avitus, grandson of Pertinax’s old patron Lollianus Avitus and also, 
through his mother, of Lucius Verus’ sister Ceionia Plautia. Avitus’ brother Gentianus was to 
be consul in 211. Their father had been an important early ally of Septimius and a comes in 
the wars of 193-7. Two daughters of Marcus Aurelius were still alive, who might have been 
potential figureheads for the disaffected: Septimius had effectively neutralised them by 
finding them husbands of humble status. Vibia Aurelia Sabina, widow of Antistius Burrus, 
murdered by Cleander in 189, was now the wife of L. Aurelius Agaclytus, son of a freedman 
of Lucius Verus. Cornificia, whose husband Petronius Mamertinus had lost his life in 190 or 
191, was supposed to have had an affair with Pertinax. Now she was safely married to a 
Syrian procurator, Didius Marinus. The emperor’s ‘sisters’ were safely out of reach. 12     
Coins of 208 show Septimius riding off to war. Herodian notes that ‘for most of the journey 
he was carried in a litter’. He was increasingly troubled by a painful condition in his legs or 
feet, variously interpreted as gout or arthritis. But in spite of this, and in spite of his age—in 
208 he reached what the ancients called the grand climacteric, his sixty-third birthday— ‘he 
was more vigorous in mind than any youth’. Herodian also claims that he and his sons 
‘completed their march to the coast with 
-177- 
amazing speed’. This is part of his standard description of a Severan campaign; it is far 
from certain that it is true. There was no particular necessity for breakneck speed in 208. 
Herodian also claims that ‘the Britons, thunderstruck by the sudden arrival of the emperor 
and hearing of the vast force assembled against them, sent embassies and proposed peace 
terms, and tried to make excuses for their offences. But the emperor was looking for 
reasons to delay, so as not to have to return to Rome again—for he still wanted to gain a 
British victory and title. He dismissed their envoys, who achieved nothing, and prepared for 
battle.’ 13     
It may be assumed that Septimius established himself initially at Eboracum, where lay the 
fortress of VI Victrix and a sizeable town often used as a residence by governors of Britain. 
The governor’s praetorium would, for the duration, become the imperial palatium. Its


--- PAGE 146 ---
location is unknown, but it was presumably somewhere in the civil town, now boasting the 
rank of municipium. One feature of Eboracum which will have pleased Septimius was a 
temple of Sarapis, erected not long before by a legate of VI Victrix, Claudius Hieronymianus. 14     
Dio and Herodian both introduce their accounts of the British campaigns with fanciful-
sounding travellers’ tales, or indeed tall stories, about the remote and watery north and its 
barbarous inhabitants. Dio, whose original version is missing, has the merit, in the epitome 
of Xiphilinus, of making it clear that he is referring to the free Britons ‘beyond the cross-wall 
which cuts the island in half, whose ‘two main tribes’ were ‘the Maeatae, next to the Wall 
and the Caledonians beyond them’. Dio, here as elsewhere, plainly regarded the Antonine 
Wall as the limit of Roman territory in Britain—even if Roman control over that Wall had not 
been effectively exercised for over forty years. ‘Both tribes’, according to Dio, ‘inhabit wild 
and waterless mountains and deserted marshy plains; they have no walls, no cities and no 
agriculture, but live off their flocks, from hunting, and on certain fruits—for they do not 
touch the fish, of which there are vast and inexhaustible quantities.’ He goes on to tell how 
they live ‘naked and barefoot in tents’, have their women in common, a mainly democratic 
form of society with war-leaders ‘chosen from the boldest, because of their love of plunder’. 
They had no body-armour, a shield and short spear and daggers were their arms. It is only 
when Dio concludes with stories of the north Britons ‘hiding themselves in their swamps for 
days on end with only their heads above water, and living off bark and roots’, and in 
emergencies ‘on a special food of which a small portion the size of a bean wards off hunger 
and thirst’, that the modern reader becomes a little sceptical. Herodian, whose brief account 
survives complete, clearly derives some items from Dio. He stresses the marsh-like nature 
of the whole of Britain: ‘most of the country of the Britons, being 
-178- 
flooded by the continual ocean tides, is marsh’ —which the more or less naked barbarians 
do not mind, either running or swimming in the swampy water. Mud does not bother them 
because they do not know about clothes, having iron belts and necklaces and tattoes all 
over their bodies (the reason for dispensing with clothes, which would cover the tattoes). 
After describing their weapons, in a manner similar to Dio, Herodian explains that they 
dispense with breast-plates and helmets ‘which would impede their movement through the 
marshes’. Finally, Herodian comments, ‘the atmosphere in that country is always gloomy, 
because of the thick mist arising from the marshes’. 15     
Septimius’ coinage in 208 shows a bridge, which it is tempting to associate with the efforts 
to cope with waterlogged country attributed to him by the two Greek writers. However the 
bridge is depicted as a monumental permanent structure. It could be at Eboracum, or 
indeed across the Tyne, at Pons Aelius. In the year 209, a bronze As or small medallion of 
Antoninus shows a bridge of boats with the legend TRAIECTUS. This may well 
commemorate what is described by Herodian as ‘putting pontoons across the marshy 
places’ or by Dio as ‘filling up the swamps and bridging rivers’. Dio opens his story of the 
fighting by depicting Septimius invading ‘Caledonia, wishing to subjugate the whole of it’ 
[i.e. Britain], and as he advanced running into immense difficulties because of the terrain, 
and failing to get the enemy into battle. They indeed enticed the Roman soldiers into danger 
by leaving sheep and cattle for them to seize, and luring them into swamps where they 
attacked them. Those who could not walk after this would be killed by their own men in 
preference to being captured by the Caledonians. As a result, says Dio, ‘up to 50,000 
perished’, surely an exaggeration. But Septimius


--- PAGE 147 ---
did not desist until he had approached the furthest limit of the island, where he observed 
most accurately the variation of the sun’s motion and the length of days and nights in 
summer and winter respectively. Having thus been conveyed through practically the whole 
of the enemy country—for he actually was carried in a covered litter for the most part 
because of his weakness—he returned to the friendly part of the island, having forced the 
Britons to come to terms, namely that they should surrender no small part of their territory. 16     
Herodian devotes a mere two sentences to this first campaign, but he prefaces his brief 
remarks with the statement that Septimius left his younger son Geta in the Roman part of 
the island ‘to administer justice and carry on the civil government of the empire, giving him 
for this purpose a council of senior advisers’. He specifically adds that Septimius took 
Antoninus with him on the expedition. The only conceivable trace 
-179- 
of independent activity in Britain by Geta, during the absence on campaign of his father and 
brother, may be preserved in the earliest manuscript of the Passio of Britain’s first Christian 
martyr, Albanus. St Alban’s death has generally been placed later, during the so-called 
Great Persecution under Diocletian and his colleagues. Yet it seems clear that at that time 
there were no martyrdoms, thanks to the protection afforded by Constantius Chlorus. Geta 
may thus be the ‘most impious Caesar’ who, after the saint had been put to death, called a 
halt: ‘Without an order from the emperors the most impious Caesar ordered the persecution 
to cease, reporting to them that slaughtering the saints was causing Christianity to flourish, 
rather than suppressing it.’ Geta is at any rate the only Caesar who could have operated in 
Britain at a time when there were also emperors, if Constantius is ruled out. 17     
Geta is also recorded, with his brother, on an inscription from Aenus in Thrace which reveals 
that on 12 September in one of the years that the imperial family was in Britain they heard 
an embassy from this town, at Eboracum. The decision made by the brothers, after hearing 
Diogenes, son of Theocharis, and his fellow-envoy, the defensores of the people of Aenus, 
was presumably favourable, hence the copy inscribed on white marble at Aenus, from the 
original in the imperial commentarii. It may be suggested that the year was 208 and that 
Antoninus and Geta, at Eboracum, received delegations and dealt with imperial business, 
while Septimius was inspecting the frontier. 18     
The evidence of Dio and Herodian suggests that there were two campaigns, the first, in 209, 
undertaken by Septimius and Antoninus jointly, leading to the submission of the 
Caledonians and their surrender of substantial territory. Early in 210 the emperors assumed 
the title Britannicus, and the coinage celebrated the Victoria Britannica; further-more, VI 
Victrix, and perhaps the other legions, became B (ritannica). The scope and direction of the 
expedition is now better understood in the light of archaeological discoveries. Two series of 
marching-camps have been traced by air photography over a large part of Scotland, both 
perhaps from this time. One series is of camps some 63 acres (25 ha.) in size, while the 
other series is of much larger camps, mostly 120 acres (48 ha.) but the southernmost 
examples are even larger—165 acres (66 ha.). The first of these massive camps is at 
Trimontium (Newstead) in the Eildon Hills, close to the fort which had been a Roman base, 
at intervals, since Julius Agricola’s day. Its vast extent makes it large enough to have 
included a major part of the army of Britain within its ramparts. No doubt other camps were 
set up further south, in which the army and its supply-train could halt on the way from 
Coria, a distance of over fifty miles (80 km), passing on their way Habitancum, where 
Senecio and Adventus had


--- PAGE 148 ---
-180- 
carried out repairs shortly before. But no camps as large as that at Trimontium have yet 
been identified along the road from Coria and Hadrian’s Wall. Trimontium was perhaps the 
point where Septimius and his generals concentrated their forces for the big push into 
hostile territory. Three more of these giant-sized camps, with perhaps one more at Inveresk 
on the south side of the Forth, show the line of advance, slow but menacing. Beyond the 
Forth more have been detected, now reduced in size by a quarter to some 120 acres, 
perhaps because part of the army had been detached to proceed by ship. The 120-acre 
camps begin at Ardoch, a few miles south of Agricola’s old legionary base at Victoria 
(Inchtuthil) on the Tay. More have been detected for miles further north, showing the 
expeditionary force swinging on across the Earn and Tay, around the foothills of the 
Grampians into the Dee valley, then right up as far as the Pass of Grange, a little way south 
of the Moray Firth. 19     
Septimius must be envisaged as going at least to the Moray Firth, where he could 
reasonably enough claim to have reached the ‘extremity of Britain’. The scale of these 
camps is such that they can only be associated with his expedition, confirming Dio’s 
evidence for ‘the great sums of money’ brought to Britain by Septimius and the indications 
of major troop reinforcements in Herodian and other sources. The smaller series of camps 
has been detected as far south as Kirkpatrick, some seven miles north of Aballava (Burgh-
by-sands) close to the western end of Hadrian’s Wall. Two possible examples to the north-
east of Kirkpatrick suggest that there was an advance into Scotland by the western route as 
well, which then moved across, skirting the Pentlands, towards the Forth. Further examples 
have been picked up beyond the Forth, the first at Ardoch, where it is evidently earlier than 
the 120-acre camp there. Beyond Ardoch there seem to be two parallel lines of 63-acre 
camps, perhaps representing a single army, setting out for the north and returning, by 
slightly different routes. From Ardoch the westerly line goes north-eastwards across the 
mouths of the glens running south-east out of the Highlands. The other line, first detected 
at Auchtermuchty in the Ochil Hills, goes on to Carpow on the south bank of the Tay, which 
must have been crossed here by a bridge of boats. Here perhaps was the TRAIECTUS on the 
coin or medallion of Antoninus from the year 209. A polygonal enclosure some seventy 
acres in size, bounded on the north by the steep descent to the river, presumably 
represents a base where the army could link with the fleet, and could be supplied by vessels 
plying from Tyne and Forth. On the north side was a small fortified post, no doubt to guard 
the bridge. From here the route went northeast via Longforgan, Kirkbuddo and Kinnell to 
Keithock, which also seem to be the goal of the 63-acre series beginning at Ardoch. 20     
-181- 
That it was Septimius’ intention to do more than merely ravage Caledonia might in any case 
be understood from the statement of Dio and from the scale and scope of these marching-
camps. Proof that he planned a permanent occupation of north Britain, such as had not 
been attempted since the time of Agricola, is supplied by the evidence from Carpow. Within 
the polygonal enclosure already described a stone fortress was constructed, measuring 24 
acres (9.6 ha.) internally and 27.6 acres (11 ha.) over the ramparts. It was of more or less 
orthodox plan, with principia of standard type and an elaborate praetorium adjacent, well 
equipped with baths. Its size made it too small for a legion, but it was probably intended for 
a special force including detachments from the two legions known to have participated in 
the building. VI Victrix is represented by over two hundred stamped tiles, on which it bears 
its new title B (ritannica), while the emblems of II Augusta are carved on the side of a 
monumental inscription from the porta praetoria. Although the new base was never to be


--- PAGE 149 ---
completed, the nature of its masonry alone shows that the occupation was intended to be 
permanent: the walls of the principia were over three feet (1 m) thick, and the floors were 
of high quality opus signinum. Troops stationed here would indeed need solid 
accommodation. However attractive the views across the river to the north, or westwards to 
the Highlands and south to the looming hills beyond Abernethy, the place was often damp 
and cold. Situated on a level shelf just east of the confluence of the Earn with the Tay, 
Carpow is well-drained, certainly, but there are reed-beds on the north side where the river 
floods from time to time at high water. It is not surprising that army rations included wine 
infused with horehound, recommended for chest complaints. 21     
The HA is almost useless as a source for these campaigns. Great emphasis is placed there—
following Aurelius Victor—on Septimius’ achievement in building the Wall. With no apparent 
knowledge that the work carried out under Septimius was merely a reconstruction of the 
Hadrianic frontier, the Wall is described as the greatest glory of the reign. Jerome’s 
Chronicle, which has the same basic story, dates the work of building to the year 207—
which is correct enough, for Alfenus Senecio had certainly still been at work on the Wall in 
that year. It looks as if later propaganda, after Septimius’ death, asserted that the purpose 
of his expedition all along had been the strengthening of the existing frontier fortifications, 
in conjunction with a punitive campaign. But the evidence of Dio, combined with the 
archaeological record, shows that in Britain, as in the east and in Africa, Septimius showed 
himself to be a propagator imperii. 22     
Dio has one or two stories to illustrate the campaign. Antoninus evidently continued to 
cause Septimius anxiety because of his lack of self- 
-182- 
restraint and his obvious wish to kill his brother if he could get the chance. He had a row 
with the freedman Castor, and burst out of his tent, yelling that Castor had ‘wronged him’. 
The thing was a put up job—he had primed a group of soldiers beforehand to join in his 
shouts and raise an outcry. Another episode was more serious. Septimius and Antoninus 
were riding forward to meet the Caledonians to discuss terms. The two emperors were out 
in front, with the army following. The enemy was arrayed on the other side. Antoninus 
suddenly reined in his horse and drew his sword. It looked as if he was going to strike his 
father in the back. Their attendants shouted out a warning, and he refrained from making 
the attempt. It seems incredible that he should have been so senseless as to try to kill his 
father in the presence of thousands of Roman soldiers. If Dio gave no further details it 
would have been natural to assume that a movement by Antoninus had been 
misunderstood. But that was not the end of the matter. Septimius turned when he heard 
the shouts, and saw his son’s sword, but remained silent. After the negotiations with the 
Caledonians were completed, and they had returned to headquarters—perhaps at Carpow—
he summoned Antoninus, Papinian and Castor. He ordered a sword to be placed within easy 
reach and then reclining on a couch, gave his son a tongue-lashing—not only for daring to 
try such a thing at all, but for trying it in the face of both armies. Then his tone changed to 
sarcasm. ‘“But if you really want to kill me, do it here. You are strong and I am an old man, 
and am lying down. If you don’t shrink from doing this, but hesitate to kill me with your own 
hands, there is Papinian the Prefect standing besides you, and you can order him to put me 
to death. For he will surely do anything that you command, since you also are emperor.”’ 
Nonetheless, Septimius refrained from taking any action against Antoninus, even though, 
according to Dio, he had now realised that his plans for the succession were less wise than 
he had thought. ‘He had often blamed Marcus for not removing Commodus—and he had


--- PAGE 150 ---
often threatened to do this to his son.’ His love for Antoninus outweighed his love for his 
country—yet to spare Antoninus was to betray Geta, ‘for he well knew what would happen’. 23     
Considering how superstitious Septimius was, his belief that his days were now numbered 
was presumably strengthened by a series of omens. In the version now preserved, Dio only 
has one of these, which occurred shortly before the departure from Rome in 208. Lightning 
struck an inscription on the gate through which Septimius planned to march out of the city, 
erasing the first three letters of his name. The remaining three formed the Greek word (h) 
ero. This was interpreted to mean that after three years he would die, and be deified. The 
HA, in its perverse fashion, after neglecting to give any details about the campaigning, 
records four 
-183- 
omens that may be assigned to the end of the year 209, if they are not the product of the 
author’s own imagination. The first purports to be a dream that Septimius had about his 
own deification. The second apparently took place at games in honour of the victory in the 
north. They will have taken place at the main base, perhaps Carpow. Three plaster figures 
of the goddess Victory were set up, one each for Septimius and his sons. The central one, 
bearing a globe inscribed with his name, was struck by a gust of wind, and fell down from 
the podium. The one honouring Geta was blown over and totally shattered, while Antoninus’ 
Victory lost its palm and barely remained upright. 
The third and fourth omens, which seem part of the same story, belong to Septimius’ 
journey southward to winter-quarters. The beginning of this passage is difficult to translate 
and is perhaps corrupt. It has been variously emended, but can be understood perfectly well 
as it stands, in the light of evidence from Britain. 
After giving a Moor his discharge from the army, on the Wall (apud vallum) [this would be 
something quite normal at the end of a campaign] when he returned to the nearest mansio 
[halting-place], not merely as victor but having established eternal peace, and turning over 
in his mind what sort of man should meet him [or ‘what omen he should meet with’] a 
certain ‘Ethiopian’ (black man) from the military numerus, with a wide reputation as a 
buffoon, and always noted for his jokes, met him with a garland made from cypress-boughs. 
When ordered that the man should be removed from his presence, in a rage, being upset by 
the man’s colour and the ill-omened nature of his garland, the man is said to have called 
out, as a joke: ‘You have overthrown all things, conquered all things, now be a conquering 
god!’ When he reached the town and wanted to make sacrifice, by a mistake on the part of 
the rustic soothsayer, in the first place he was taken to the temple of Bellona, and then the 
sacrificial victims that were provided were black. Then, when he had abandoned the 
sacrifice in disgust, and had withdrawn to the Palace, through the attendants’ carelessness 
the black victims followed him right up to its doors. 
The story could be easily rejected as a feeble concoction. But curiously enough, at the fort 
of Aballava (Burgh-by-stands), west of Luguvalium (Carlisle) on Hadrian’s Wall, the garrison 
in the third century included a numerus Maurorum, a unit of Moors, which could well have 
had black soldiers in its ranks. That Septimius should have used Aballava as a mansio is 
perfectly plausible. The fort guarded two important fords across the Solway and the 
marching-camp at Kirkpatrick shows that the western route was used at this time by the 
army. As for the shrine of Bellona, a


--- PAGE 151 ---
-184- 
dedication to the goddess has been found at the fort of Maglona (Old Carlisle) some ten 
miles away. The town may have been Luguvalium itself, although Eboracum might seem 
likelier, in view of the mention of a ‘Palace’. 24     
The HA’s anecdote, feeble or not, has the merit of locating Septimius apud vallum. It is not 
implausible that in 209, after his campaign, he traversed the western and central sectors of 
the old frontier. He may have instituted changes. Luguvalium, the largest town on the Wall, 
may now have become the administrative centre of the Carvetii, the tribe which inhabited 
the Solway plain and Eden valley. They had acquired the organs of self-government by the 
third century. Just outside Luguvalium was the base of Britain’s largest auxiliary unit, the 
only double strength cavalry regiment in the province, the ala Petriana. He would have 
proceeded east, by Castlesteads and Birdoswald, to Carvoran, where the Wall climbs up to 
the crags. There he would have found a shrine of the Syrian Goddess, for the fort had been 
garrisoned by archers from Hamath, or Epiphaneia, not far from Emesa, the cohors I 
Hamiorum. An elaborate verse dedication to the goddess identified her, in the syncretistic 
fashion of the age, with the Great Mother, Peace, Virtue and Ceres, and with the African 
Juno Caelestis, the ‘heavenly’ Tanit. At Vindolanda, further east, the villagers outside the 
fort had set up a humbler altar, ‘for the Divine House and Deities of the Emperors’, pro 
domu divina et numinibus Augustorum, to Vulcan. Nearby, at Housesteads, Septimius may 
have recognised the fort where Pertinax had commanded the First Tungrians more than 
forty years before. His route to Eboracum should have taken him on to Coria, where the old 
north road crossed the Tyne. At the great supply base he would have seen further shrines 
which would evoke recollections of earlier days, including one to the Phoenician deities 
Ashtaroth, of Sidon, and Melart, of Tyre—and of Lepcis. 25     
He presumably spent most of his time, after the campaign of 209, at Eboracum. Certainly, 
on 5 May 210, if the heading of a rescript in the Code of Justinian is accurate, a reply 
written ‘at Eboracum’ was sent in the names of Septimius and Antoninus in response to the 
enquiry of a lady named Caecilia. (The case concerned the ownership of a slave.) There are 
eighteen rescripts from the years 208-10, all of which, except three from February 208, 
were no doubt issued from Britain. This is a salutary reminder that Septimius could not 
relax his attention. Once a man was emperor his subjects would constantly crave his 
attention. An inscription from Ephesus records how an ambassador from that city came to 
Britain to petition Septimius and Antoninus. 
Dio has a pleasant story which shows that the empress found some intellectual diversion in 
the island. In conversation with the wife of a 
-185- 
Caledonian named Argentocoxus, after the treaty had been concluded, Julia joked with her 
about the sexual customs of her people, referring to their women’s freedom in having 
intercourse with men. The Caledonian woman showed a biting humour in her reply: ‘We 
fulfil the demands of nature in a much better way than you Roman women. We have 
intercourse openly with the best men—you allow yourselves to be seduced in secret by the 
worst.’ 27     
The peace that Septimius had imposed did not last long. The Maeatae broke out into revolt, 
and were soon joined by the Caledonians. It may well be that Maeatae had one of their 
tribal centres very close to the fortress of Carpow: the later Pictish capital of Abernethy is


--- PAGE 152 ---
only a mile or so away, and the Maeatae may be regarded as ‘proto-Picts’. They may have 
taken some months to realise that the Romans were settling down permanently in their 
heartland. Septimius decided on a campaign of extermination, quoting the Homeric 
Agamemnon’s exhortation to slaughter the Trojans: 
Let no one escape utter destruction, 
Let no one escape our hands, not even the babe in its mother’s womb, 
If it be male—let not even this escape utter destruction. 
The second campaign, in 210, was evidently conducted by Antoninus alone. Septimius, 
crippled by his illness, remained behind, probably at Eboracum. Once again a massive army 
was taken up into Scotland. Its route could be that indicated by one of the lines of camps 
already described. According to Herodian, Antoninus paid little attention to the war, but 
concentrated on winning the personal allegiance of the soldiers. Certainly Dio notes that 
Septimius began preparing to take over the command again in person after the Caledonians 
joined the revolt. But at last he must have realised that his life was nearly at an end, and 
that he must take a further step to protect the position of his younger son. He raised Geta 
to the rank of Augustus. An inscription from Athens happens to preserve the decree passed 
by the two Councils and the People of Athens in the month of Poseidon (December 210 or 
January 211) when they heard the news. They voted to hold a festival and public sacrifice, 
since ‘the most sacred and perfect of all days, longed for by all, on account of the undying 
concord of the Sacred Emperors, Lucius Septimius Severus Pertinax Augustus…and Marcus 
Aurelius Antoninus Pius Augustus… has been announced by a joint proclamation to all men 
by the great Emperors, in which, by their heavenly decree and judgment, they have made 
the most divine Emperor Publius Septimius Geta Pius Augustus an equal partner in the 
imperial rule, establishing the rule of the world in their whole family.’ 
-186- 
The promotion had been left surprisingly late, considering that Geta was less than twelve 
months younger than Antoninus. He had had to wait for more than twelve years to attain 
equal rank. Septimius clearly knew by 210 that he could not rely on Antoninus to make Geta 
his colleague. 28     
During the winter of 210-11, Septimius’ illness got worse and on 4 February 211, at 
Eboracum, he died. Dio notes that Antoninus was said by some to have hastened his death 
and Herodian states outright that he had tried to bribe his father’s doctors and nurses to 
bring this about. Septimius’ last words of advice to his sons—Dio claims to ‘give them 
exactly, without any embellishment’ —were, ‘“Do not disagree between yourselves, give 
money to the soldiers, and despise everyone else”’. Aurelius Victor, whose fault as an 
historian is simply incompetence—rather than fraud as in the case of the HA—reports that at 
the end of his life Septimius uttered the despairing remark that ‘I have been all things, and 
it has profited nothing’. The HA’s attempt at originality in the description of his death is 
better disregarded. Dio hits a convincing note: ‘He showed himself to be a man of such 
energy that even as he expired he gasped: “Come, give it to me, if we have anything to 
do”.’ 29


--- PAGE 153 ---
-187- 
17 
AFTERMATH AND ASSESSMENT 
THE BODY OF THE DEAD EMPEROR was cremated at Eboracum. His ashes were placed in an 
urn of ‘purple stone’, which he had ordered before his death, Dio says. After handling it he 
said, ‘You will hold a man that the world could not hold’. Antoninus and Geta at once made 
preparations to leave Britain. In Antoninus’ case this included the dismissal of Papinian from 
the prefecture and the execution of a number of members of the household, the freedmen 
Castor and Euodus among them, and the court doctors, according to Herodian, who ‘had 
refused to obey his orders to hasten the old man’s death’. Euodus, who had supervised 
Antoninus and Geta as boys, and had helped to dispose of Plautianus, and Castor, whom 
Antoninus hated, had ‘continued to urge him to live at peace with Geta’. In secret, Herodian 
says, Antoninus began bribing the officers to induce the troops to ‘accept him as sole 
emperor’. If Herodian’s account may be trusted for detail, it appears that Antoninus wanted 
to have Geta killed, and made his overtures to the army in the north, having left Geta and 
Julia at Eboracum. For the time being he did not succeed: the soldiers’ loyalty to Geta was 
partly inspired by ‘his very close resemblance to his father’. 1     
In the face of this refusal, Antoninus made peace with the enemy, ‘withdrawing from their 
territory and abandoning the forts’. For a short time the major new base at Carpow may 
have been retained, but the decision was now made to make Hadrian’s Wall the frontier 
once more. A concerted attempt to claim that this had been Septimius’ plan all along may 
have followed. If, as seems possible, the younger Ulpius Marcellus was now appointed 
governor, it may have been hoped that that name would inspire terror in the northern tribes 
which his father had crushed in 184. At Eboracum Julia made an attempt, backed by the 
imperial comites, to reconcile the brothers. Antoninus made a show of agreement and the 
imperial party hastily left the island. The outcome was obvious from the start. Even on the 
journey they had separate quarters; at Rome the palace was physically divided; and after 
the ceremony of deification for their father the two emperors led separate existences. The 
months that followed 
-188- 
saw a battle for support, a majority in the senate supposedly favouring Geta, who at least 
gave the appearance of being a cultivated person. Antoninus had adopted the role of the 
rough, plain soldier. 2     
The end came over the Saturnalia holiday in late December. Antoninus may have been 
desperate to remove Geta before the oath of loyalty was renewed on 3 January. On 26 
December, following the pattern of Plautianus’ murder, Geta was stabbed to death—in his 
mother’s arms: Julia had been persuaded to summon him for a ‘reconciliation’. Antoninus 
went post-haste to the Guards barracks, claiming hysterically that he had escaped an 
attempt on his life. He told the praetorians to rejoice: ‘for now I can do you favours’. In the 
senate the next day he proclaimed an amnesty, but there was a holocaust of Geta’s 
supporters. Dio says that 20,000 were killed, men and women of all ranks. Papinian was a 
prominent victim, others included Pertinax’s son, a sister of Commodus, and Antoninus’ own 
cousin, a Septimius Severus. Fabius Cilo narrowly escaped, after an outcry from the Urban 
Cohorts, which he had commanded as City Prefect, and a section of the plebs. Antoninus


--- PAGE 154 ---
appointed his cousin’s husband, Sex. Varius Marcellus, as acting commander of the Guard 
and simultaneously acting City Prefect. He had briefly served as head of the imperial 
finances, a rationibus, after returning from Britain. 
Geta’s memory was sytematically obliterated. All his portraits were defaced, his name 
erased from inscriptions. Where the empty space would have been a constant reminder, 
new titles for Antoninus and for Julia— who was now styled not merely ‘Mother of the Camp’ 
but ‘of the Senate and the Fatherland’ as well—were inserted. It was as if Geta had never 
existed. Even inscriptions that merely presumed his existence by the abbreviation Auggg. to 
show three emperors and in some cases from the past year Augg. (for the two brothers) 
were doctored by the deletion of a g. 3     
Antoninus’ sole reign lasted just over five years. History knows him as ‘Caracalla’ from the 
nickname the plebs gave him, a Celtic word for the hooded cloak he affected, not unlike the 
burnous. Dio also calls him ‘Tarautas’, after ‘a gladiator who was very small and extremely 
ugly, and of most violent and bloodthirsty character’. Dio’s hatred for him may render his 
account suspect, but there is little to set in the opposite scale. Herodian has one or two 
good words to say. He could grasp the essentials of a case and give a quick verdict. His 
attachment to the soldiers led him to share their burdens: ‘If a ditch had to be dug, the 
emperor was the first man to dig…grinding corn with his own hand, one man’s ration, he 
made a loaf, baked it in the coals and ate it. He scorned luxuries and used what was 
cheapest and issued to the poorest of the soldiers.’ He marched with the men, and 
sometimes even carried the legionary standards, ‘a very 
-189- 
heavy burden even for the strongest soldiers’. This won him the men’s admiration: ‘for a 
small man the performing of such efforts was praise-worthy’, Herodian concedes. Dio also 
reports this soldierly conduct. The trouble was, in his view, that even if Caracalla was a 
good soldier he made a hopeless general. 
True to his father’s practice, Caracalla soon went to the armies. In 213 he campaigned on 
the upper Danube, where his British experience was perhaps put to good use. He may be 
responsible for the stone wall, less massive than Hadrian’s in Britain, although longer, that 
was erected on the western part of the Raetian frontier, now threatened by the Alamanni. 
The next year he left for the east, taking the northern land route, and was never to return 
to Rome. There was conflict within the Parthian empire, of which he hoped to take 
advantage. The years 214-15 were spent in the eastern provinces, with a visit to 
Alexandria, during which some kind of massacre took place. In 216 he began a Parthian 
expedition: little had been achieved when one of the Guard Prefects, Opellius Macrinus, had 
him murdered, in April 217, in Osrhoene. 4     
One action of Caracalla’s mentioned briefly by Dio, ignored by Herodian and barely alluded 
to in the HA, has won him praise from posterity. Some time after his brother’s murder he 
issued an edict granting Roman citizenship to all free inhabitants of the empire. Dio includes 
it in a list of fund-raising measures: the motive was to increase revenue from taxes paid 
only by citizens, which were doubled. The taxes in question funded the military treasury, 
aerarium militare, to which his kinsman Varius Marcellus, now made a senator, was 
assigned as prefect. This institution paid bounties to veterans, and, given Caracalla’s clearly 
attested favour to the military—he further increased pay—Dio’s interpretation is plausible. 
The exact scope of the award may be debated. Some were evidently excluded, but in 
practice Dio’s statement that ‘he made all the people in his empire Roman citizens’ scarcely


--- PAGE 155 ---
exaggerates. The legal privileges attached to citizenship had by this time been much 
diluted, but the symbolic value of the measure cannot be denied. In the long term it gave a 
sense of unity to the empire: Rome became the ‘common fatherland’ of all, the communis 
patria. The lawyers, of whom Ulpian and Paulus were still in active service, may well have 
recommended the move. 5     
Caracalla had also taken measures in Britain. In 213 a new governor, C. Julius Marcus, had 
clearly ordered displays of loyalty. All over the frontier region—that is to say, along 
Hadrian’s Wail and its outposts, once more the limit of Roman rule, and in the Pennine 
hinterland—dedications were made expressing the troops’ devotion to the emperor, pro 
pietate et devotione communi. The army of Britain had seen more of Geta than any 
-190- 
other and may have taken the news of his murder badly. Julius Marcus himself evidently 
failed to retain imperial favour: his name is deleted on some stones. As for the province and 
its enormous army, Caracalla split it into two, following his father’s policy with Syria in 194. 
(Herodian mistakenly assigns the division of Britain to the aftermath of Lugdunum.) The 
commander of VI Victrix now became governor of ‘Lower Britain’, Britannia Inferior, 
responsible for the northern parts of eastern England, including the old Flavian colonia at 
Lindum. The civil town at Eboracum, already a municipium when Septimius died there, was 
elevated to the same status. The legions at Deva and Isca were in the Upper province, 
Britannia Superior, whose governor resided at Londinium, and, having two legions under 
him, was of consular status, whereas his colleague in Inferior was more junior. The identity 
of the earliest legate of Inferior on record is revealing: in the year 216 it was a certain M. 
Antonius Gordianus, an already elderly person of literary inclinations, whose home was in 
Cappadocia or Galatia. The army, or armies, of Britain, thus divided and with such 
commanders, would no longer be a threat. At the same time an adjustment was made in 
Pannonia. The Upper province, the army of which had put the dynasty in power, lost part of 
its territory and one legion, given to the other Pannonia. No province in the empire now had 
more than two legions. 6     
Italy, presumably accustomed by this time to seeing less of the imperial presence, 
submitted to treatment which foreshadowed its demotion to provincial status. One of 
Caracalla’s most trusted senatorial friends—for he did have some—held a hitherto unknown 
appointment: Suetrius Sabinus was ‘chosen to regulate the status of Italy’. During his brief 
sole reign Caracalla set many changes in train, it is clear. His further increase in army pay 
was coupled, not surprisingly, with monetary changes. These measures were to fuel 
galloping inflation, once it had been triggered by the instability which his own murder, and 
the events that followed, were to engender. 7     
Macrinus’ action was taken for self-preservation: he had intercepted a letter which might 
have been in effect his own death-warrant. He had to conceal his role in the murder, for 
fear of the army. To appease it, he added the name ‘Severus’ to his own, ‘Antoninus’ to that 
of his son and Caesar, Diadumenianus, still a child. He did not wait for recognition from the 
senate, but assumed the titles and functions of emperor. His fellow-Prefect, the now aged 
Oclatinius Adventus, acquiesced. Julia Domna, who had been constantly with Caracalla and 
a close adviser, was treated with cautious respect by the usurper. Nothing is heard of his 
own wife, if still alive: she was probably a daughter of Haius Diadumenianus, procurator of 
Macrinus’ native Mauretania fifteen years before. But Julia declined 
-191-


--- PAGE 156 ---
to remain in the background, began intriguing, and was ordered out of Antioch, where 
Macrinus had established himself. The sense of helplessness this brought, and shock at the 
news of rejoicing at Rome over Caracalla’s death, led her to suicide. 8     
Her sister Julia Maesa was not so ready to surrender the high position she had enjoyed as 
sister of the empress for twenty-five years. She was back at Emesa, a widow: her husband 
Avitus Alexianus had just died, in Cyprus, ‘from old age and disease’. After his return from 
the shadows in 208, when he went to Britain, presumably accompanied by Maesa, their 
daughter Soaemias and son-in-law Marcellus, he had been given several appointments by 
Caracalla, governing Dalmatia and Asia. Maesa had no doubt followed him there too. Now 
there was only one man left in her family—for Marcellus had died before Caracalla, as 
governor of Numidia: the other son-in-law, Gessius Marcianus, whose home was Arca 
Caesarea, not far from Emesa. 
But Macrinus had difficulty in establishing himself. Dio speaks of him with studied contempt. 
He was the first emperor who had not even been a senator. He was a ‘Moor’, albeit a native 
of the great city of Caesarea, and had been a satellite of Plautianus. Worse, he was 
incompetent, in war—he made an ignominious peace with Parthia—and in administration. 
Dio was horrified by his flouting of the rules of rank and precedence. He alienated the 
troops, not surprisingly finding it difficult to pay them at the new high levels introduced by 
Caracalla. By the winter the men in the east were openly discontented. 
A means of redress lay to hand. Maesa’s eldest grandchild, Varius Avitus Bassianus, now 
about fourteen, was at Emesa, already fulfilling the function of hereditary priest at the great 
temple, which had been further enhanced and adorned in the past two decades. The youth 
closely resembled the murdered Caracalla, his mother’s first cousin. A certain Eutychianus is 
credited with the proposal to present the boy-priest as Caracalla’s illegitimate son, dressed 
in clothes his alleged father had once worn. This man, also called Gannys, had been brought 
up in Maesa’s household, had some talent in acting and gymnastic exercises, had been 
made the guardian or tutor of young Avitus, and was the lover of his mother Soaemias. 
With a few freedmen and soldiers, some members of Emesa’s council and perhaps a few 
Roman knights (Dio’s text is fragmentary), he took Avitus by night to the fortress of the 
legion III Gallica at nearby Raphaneae. At dawn on 16 May 218 Avitus was displayed to the 
troops, who acclaimed him as emperor under the name ‘Marcus Aurelius Antoninus’. 
Macrinus had plenty of other troops, not just the two legions of Syria Coele, but the Guard 
and the Alban legion, II Parthica, not far north at 
-192- 
this time, at Apamea, and Moors, fellow-countrymen, summoned by Caracalla for his war. 
His Guard Prefect Julianus rapidly had Gessius Marcianus’ daughter and son-in-law, also in 
Syria at the time, put to death, and then Marcianus was killed too. Macrinus came down 
from Antioch to Apamea, and proclaimed his son co-emperor. But III Gallica repelled 
Julianus, Macrinus retreated and the revolt spread. It took less than a month to topple him: 
he was defeated near Antioch on 8 June and killed shortly afterwards. His reign of less than 
fourteen months could be regarded as a mere interlude. The dynasty had returned to 
power. At Rome the senate dutifully prayed that the new ‘Antoninus’, of whose bizarre 
nature they must have been quite unaware, should be like his alleged father, whom they 
had feared and loathed. The boy-emperor was to become known as ‘Elagabalus’, after his 
god: for good reason—he was a fanatical devotee. He quite literally brought him to Rome; 
the black stone, or betyl, was paraded all the way across Asia, and transported to the


--- PAGE 157 ---
capital. From Nicomedia, where he wintered, a portrait of the new emperor in his exotic 
priestly robes, gold and purple long-sleeved chiton and trousers, and jewelled crown, was 
sent ahead to be hung in the senatehouse, above the Altar of Victory. The magistrates were 
directed to call first on the new god in their official prayers. 
In early autumn 219 ‘Antoninus’ and Elagabalus, emperor and god, arrived. The two and a 
half years that followed were perhaps the strangest in Rome’s entire history. Julia Maesa 
was evidently powerless. Gannys, who had been trying to impose restraint, had been killed 
by the boy’s own hand at Nicomedia. Elagabalus’ mother Soaemias pandered to his 
extraordinary tastes. After the—very real—religious fanaticism, foremost among these were 
his sexual deviations. Dio expatiates on them in detail. The HA, it is a surprise, has less; the 
author preferred to embroider with a string of fictional anecdotes. Herodian passes over the 
deviations in silence, but mentions the exhibitionist tendencies: ‘he had no wish to sin in 
secret. He appeared in public with his eyes made up and rouged cheeks’, adding, 
characteristically, that this spoiled a naturally handsome face. Dio indicates that he had 
several male lovers, selected after research in the public baths. But he did not shun the 
opposite sex, and in spite of his youth had three successive wives during his short reign. 
One was a Vestal Virgin, and this marriage was complemented by the summoning from 
Carthage of an image of Juno Caelestis, the Queen of Heaven, the Punic Tanit, as consort 
for the Arab Lord of the Mountain who had become a Sun god. Another empress was a 
descendant of Marcus Aurelius, whose name the emperor bore. This marriage, to Annia 
Faustina, came in 221, when the prestige of her name was desperately needed. 
The troops at Rome were unimpressed by the new religion and 
-193- 
disgusted by the un Roman conduct. They and the senate watched with numbed horror as 
actors, dancers, charioteers and athletes were advanced to high office after gaining the 
emperor’s favour by their sexual prowess. It could not go on. In reserve was another 
grandson of Julia Maesa, child of her other daughter, Mamaea. On 26 June 221 this boy, 
Gessius Alexianus Bassianus, was formally adopted by Elagabalus as his son and heir. His 
name was changed to ‘Marcus Aurelius Alexander’ and he became Caesar. He had been 
deliberately shielded by his mother from his cousin’s excesses. Elagabalus soon became 
jealous when he saw his new Caesar’s popularity and tried to have him killed. That was too 
much for the enraged guardsmen. The ‘false Antoninus’, as Dio calls him among other 
names, was murdered along with his mother Soaemias, on 12 March 222, and Alexander 
became emperor. He at once took a further name, becoming ‘M. Aurelius Severus 
Alexander’. ‘Antoninus’, now irrevocably associated with Caracalla and Elagabalus, he 
shunned. Still, he too was proclaimed a bastard son of Caracalla— ‘the deified Antoninus the 
Great’ —and ‘Alexander’ was a further echo: Caracalla’s obsession with Alexander the Great 
had been pathological. 9     
Alexander was scarcely more than fourteen at his accession (he had assumed the toga 
virilis only the previous year, when he became Caesar). Still, he was to reign for thirteen 
years, a remarkable achievement given what had happened in the past decade. The opening 
of the reign seemed to augur well, when the great jurist Ulpian was appointed Guard 
Prefect. Alexander’s colleague as fellow-consul in 223 was Marius Maximus, one of 
Septimius’ marshals from the 190s, with an astonishing record of high office in the years 
208-18 (proconsul of both Asia and Africa and City Prefect). He was now in his sixties and 
perhaps already at work on his biographies of the Caesars from Nerva to Elagabalus. 
Cassius Dio belatedly began an intensive period of public service, governing Dalmatia and


--- PAGE 158 ---
Pannonia after holding the proconsulship of Africa, achieving his own second consulship as 
reward in 229. But by then things had begun to slide. Ulpian had been murdered by the 
Guard less than two years after assuming the Prefecture. Dio, who had offended the 
Pannonian army by his strict discipline, was in danger of similar treatment from the 
guardsmen as a result, and was advised by the young emperor to avoid Rome during his 
term of office. He soon withdrew to his native Bithynia, where he watched developments 
with some foreboding as he completed his great History of Rome. In the east there were 
ominous changes. Parthia, fatally weakened by the campaign of 197-8, was threatened by a 
revived Persia. The Parthian king Artabanus V was killed in 224, the Persian Ardashir, or 
Artaxerxes, was crowned in 226, as ruler of a reborn Persian empire. Submerged for five 
and a half centuries, the Persians re-emerged under 
-194- 
the Sassanid dynasty, to be a new and far more dangerous enemy on Rome’s eastern 
frontier. 
Julia Maesa did not long survive the accession of Severus Alexander. For a while, as long as 
there was peace, Julia Mamaea and her son made acceptable rulers. But when Ardashir 
invaded Mesopotamia and threatened Syria in 230, diplomacy was not enough. Alexander 
accompanied an expeditionary force to the east in 231 and after further unsuccessful 
negotiations entered Mesopotamia in 232. Ardashir withdrew and the status quo was 
restored; but the northern frontiers were now in turmoil— the Germans took advantage of 
the removal of some army units to the east. Alexander was back at Rome in 233 and in 234 
went to the Rhineland. Early in 235 all was ready for a campaign. Again he tried diplomacy 
first. The troops did not like it: diplomacy now meant payment to barbarian chiefs who 
swore oaths to keep the peace. The legions wanted to fight, and to keep the money 
themselves as a donative for victory. Alexander was murdered by his own men on 21 March 
235. The Severan dynasty had lasted—with the interlude of Macrinus—for forty-two years, 
less nineteen days. What followed is generally labelled the ‘third-century crisis’, exactly half 
a century of upheaval, with repeated Roman defeats in north and east, civil wars becoming 
endemic and the empire almost breaking apart. 10     
The senate, indeed, continued to enjoy great prestige. Predictably, after 193-7 some 
families disappear and new fortunes were founded. Septimius’ marshals, enriched and 
ennobled, formed the nucleus of a new aristocracy that was to be prominent for 
generations. Anicius Faustus is the most striking example. Septimius favoured his fellow 
Africans, that cannot be denied, likewise persons from Syria. His Guard Prefects Plautianus 
and Papinian were kinsmen of himself and Julia respectively. His brother Geta played a part 
at first, and Julia’s sister’s people, Avitus Alexianus and Varius Marcellus, were given 
influential, if minor posts. More significant, perhaps, are the governors of major military 
provinces, Alfenus Senecio in Syria Coele and Britain, the Marii, the Numidian Claudii 
(Candidus, Claudianus and Gallus), Subatianus Aquila and a good many more, all from 
North Africa. He could trust these men, he and they could understand each other. He was, 
after all, responsible for an important shift of military policy, and needed the right people to 
implement it. He did not, however, rely exclusively on his fellow-countrymen or on Syrians 
from Julia’s orbit. Cornelius Anullinus, Fabius Cilo and probably Manilius Fuscus were from 
Spain, Sextius Lateranus and Lollianus Gentianus were Italians, all five in high favour. 11     
As for the equestrian order, it had an obvious boost, with the command 
-195-


--- PAGE 159 ---
of the three new legions and the governorship of the new eastern provinces all going to 
equestrian prefects rather than senatorial legati Augusti. He appears to have created new 
posts for procurators, and more of the procurators from now on derive from the provinces 
rather than from Italy—sixty per cent from Africa and the east, on one estimate. Neither 
senate nor equestrian order received many recruits from the Danubian-Balkan region, the 
source of his power. But from its armies he was to draw the men for his new Guard. The 
twelve legions that were based along and beyond the Danube remained the largest 
grouping, and their links with Italy and in particular with the Guard (and with II Parthica at 
Alba) were to play a vital part in keeping the empire together. 
Septimius’ military policy is indeed significant. His dying advice to his sons— ‘Give the 
soldiers money and despise everyone else’, so Dio reports—seems to sum up his attitude. 
Dio and others shivered at the ‘barbarous soldiery’ that infested the streets of Rome. 
Herodian actually claims that he quadrupled the garrison, which cannot be substantiated. 
But the Guard itself, the Urban Cohorts and the vigiles were all considerably increased in 
size, and the legion at Alba was effectively part of the same force. There may have been 
further ‘special forces’, or specialist troops, based in the castra peregrina. The purpose may 
not have been merely to overawe the senate and people of Rome, but to create a larger and 
more effective central reserve than the old Guard had provided. Certainly, II Parthica as 
well as the Guard is attested on expeditions. The long wars under Marcus had demonstrated 
the dangers of shunting whole legions from one frontier to another: three at least had gone 
from Rhine and Danube to the east in the 160s, allowing the Marcomannic threat to 
develop. Septimius favoured the system pioneered in the 170s, of brigading detachments, 
vexillationes, from several legions into army corps. But that was still not ideal. II Parthica 
and the enlarged Guard provided further back up. His alleged ‘barbarisation’ of the Rome 
units must not be exaggerated. The Urban Cohorts, now 6000-strong, were larger than the 
old, mainly Italian, Guard; and the new vigiles, 7000-strong, formerly manned by freedmen, 
now accepted free-born recruits. Italians were not excluded from Rome’s security forces. 
Furthermore, Italians continued to serve as legionary centurions and equestrian officers—
but provincials had been well represented or even dominant in these categories fifty years 
before Septimius’ accession. It is true that army officers from his time on were more often 
of lower social standing than before. More came from frontier areas and some were ex-
rankers. Municipal notables or gentry were certainly not excluded. 
The increase in pay and improvements in conditions of service—the right to marry 
particularly—are held against him (by Herodian, for 
-196- 
example, the only explicit source on the subject). Pay had been constant for over a century 
and it may be that he increased it to compensate for inflation—but the evidence for inflation 
before 193 is defective. Also significant, of course, was his desire to keep the men loyal. But 
he may have been anxious to ensure a ready flow of volunteers: he had witnessed in Gaul 
the problem of mass desertion in the 180s. Besides, he had expanded the entire army, not 
merely in the Rome garrison and by raising three legions: new auxiliary regiments were 
formed. 12     His frontier policy demanded more troops, for he was indeed a propagator 
imperii. In Africa there was a new forward line, in Mauretania, Numidia and Tripolitania; in 
the east two new provinces beyond the Euphrates, extension of Syria down the river and 
into the desert, extension of Arabia. Perhaps—it is now doubted-he pushed the eastern 
limits of Dacia out beyond the Aluta. He very decisively altered the shape of the empire, 
weighting it much more towards the east (and to a lesser extent his native ‘deep South’). 
The long-term effects of this are not negligible. At the end of his life he was in the far west,


--- PAGE 160 ---
trying to repeat the conquests of Agricola. That part of his policy was aborted by his death. 
Still, the British campaign, manifestly intended to conquer the whole island, could be 
dismissed as motivated solely by ‘desire for glory’ with more justice than the annexations 
beyond the Euphrates to which Dio applied this judgement. Mesopotamia and the other 
extensions of territory in the east were worth more to Rome than Caledonia, as Caracalla 
recognised. Caracalla also tried to tackle the Alamanni-perhaps his father should have dealt 
with the northern frontiers, rather than succumb to the lure of the fabled island. 13     
Given the chaos into which the empire descended in the third century, and the contrast, 
grim in many respects, between the Antonine era and the new world that was to emerge, it 
is not surprising that Septimius Severus has been pilloried. His was by far the longest reign 
of any emperor between the death of Marcus in 180 and the accession of Diocletian in 284. 
‘The contemporaries of Severus, in the enjoyment of the peace and glory of his reign, 
forgave the cruelties by which it had been introduced’, wrote Gibbon. ‘Posterity, who 
experienced the fatal results of his maxims and example, justly considered him as the 
principal author of the decline of the Roman empire.’ Such a verdict, in the fifth chapter of 
the mammoth work, may seem over-hasty (Gibbon was to find other villains, such as 
Constantine, in later pages). But the decline set in soon enough, even if the fall was long 
postponed. Was it Septimius’ doing? 
His contemporaries, Galen, Tertullian, Dio and (perhaps) Herodian, are of differing value. 
The famous doctor, late in life (he seems to have died before 200), was delighted that the 
new emperor, unlike Commodus, 
-197- 
swore by his patent medicine, with which Marcus Aurelius had regularly dosed himself. This 
mixture, once familiar only to a narrow circle around Marcus, was now generally known—for 
the greatest of emperors (Septimius and his young son) wanted all to benefit from improved 
health. Galen’s prescription carried the imperial warrant; he was also gratified by an 
imperial summons to attend the eloquent Antipater, tutor to Antoninus and Geta, and ab 
epistulis Graecis, when he was suffering agonising kidney trouble. Various remarks of 
Tertullian in the De pallio refer to the flourishing state of Africa in Septimius’ reign. 
Addressing the citizens of Carthage, he rejoices in their prosperity, and the leisure it gives 
them to be critical judges of dress. (The tone is unmistakably sarcastic.) He enlarges on the 
theme: ‘What a great part of the world has been changed by the present era! What a great 
number of cities has the threefold virtue of the present emperors [i.e. Septimius and his two 
sons] created, amplified or restored!’ God has shown the emperors favour, and ‘in truth the 
world is the cultivated garden of this empire, all poisonous weeds of external hostility have 
been eradicated, the cactus and briar of conspiracy at home has been uprooted, and it is 
more pleasing than the orchard of Alcinous or the rose garden of Midas’. This does not really 
tell us anything about Septimius’ policies. 
One can find in Herodian gushing admiration of Septimius’ success in civil war. No battles or 
victories of the past could compare with his, even Caesar against Pompey, Octavian against 
Antony or the son of Pompey, Sulla against Marius. ‘Here is a single man who overthrew 
three emperors who were already in power, who gained control of the Guard by a trick, who 
succeeded in killing Julianus, the emperor in the palace, Niger who ruled the people of the 
east, and had been saluted as emperor by the people of Rome, and Albinus who had already 
the title and authority of a Caesar—this he did by virtue of his courage. One could not easily 
name his equal.’ Similar sentiments are expressed by Aurelius Victor, 100 years later, who 
had the excuse of being a fellow-countryman, and devoted more space to the African


--- PAGE 161 ---
emperor in his modest chronicle than to any other. Victor has his word of criticism, 
especially for the cruelty exhibited in the mass executions, but goes on to call Septimius 
wise as well as successful, especially in war, ‘so much so that he left no battle except as 
victor’. 14     
Cassius Dio is the only witness who knew the emperor personally (Galen can scarcely have 
met him). Dio introduces Septimius as the most intelligent of the three army commanders 
of 193. The obituary notice with which he ends Book 76 is respectful, almost affectionate in 
tone: 
He was a small man, but physically strong (although he did become 
-198- 
 
very weak from gout). His mind was extremely keen and vigorous. He did not get as 
much education as he wanted, and because of this he was a man of few words, although 
he had plenty of ideas. He did not forget his friends, his enemies he treated with a very 
heavy hand. He took a great deal of thought over all his plans; but never gave a thought 
to what was said about him. For this reason he raised money from every source—except 
that he never killed anyone for this reason—and he met all necessary expenditures 
unstintingly. 
As if to guarantee that he was writing quite freely, Dio goes on to criticise Septimius’ 
wasteful building programme and habit of inscribing his own name on buildings that he 
had merely restored, ‘as if he had erected them himself. Suspicion about Dio’s frankness 
is in any case removed by what is revealed in another passage. After Septimius’ death 
Dio had a dream. He saw the entire Roman army lined up on a great plain. The emperor 
was standing on a tribunal addressing the troops. When he saw Dio standing nearby and 
trying to hear what was being said, he spoke to him: ‘Come nearer, Dio, so that you can 
learn exactly what is being said and done, and write an account of it.’ As has been 
pointed out, Dio could hardly have had a dream like this if the emperor had not been ‘a 
respected and authoritative figure in his eyes’. 15     
Dio and the HA both stress, with more detail than any other sources, the number of 
senators put to death. Dio gives a figure for the purge after Lugdunum: twenty-nine 
executed, thirty-five pardoned (the HA gives a long list of names, a great many of them 
invented). ‘Many’ were killed a year or so later, for consulting astrologers about the 
emperor’s life expectancy, the HA reports. Dio says that ‘many other senators’, as well as 
Plautius Quintillus, died, some of them after a formal trial, some time after Plautianus’ 
death in 205—so Plautianus cannot be blamed for that batch, as he might be for earlier 
ones. There were times of terror—not surprising with civil wars—but perhaps, to senators 
like Dio, less horrific than what went on before and after, under Commodus and 
Caracalla. 
The stigma of cruelty cannot be covered up, even if the first emperor, Augustus, in his 
earlier career, could be invoked, as he was by Septimius himself before the senate in 
197. It was the happier times of Antoninus and Marcus, whom Dio and others wistfully 
remembered, that formed the damaging comparison. But the reign of Commodus and 
four years of civil war that followed had had a brutalising effect. At his first proclamation, 
Septimius proclaimed himself the avenger of Pertinax, who had promised to bring back


--- PAGE 162 ---
the spirit of Marcus’ rule. Septimius never dropped the name ‘Pertinax’, although it was 
squeezed out for lack of space as his titles proliferated. Indeed, his deference to that 
memory was 
-199- 
even emphasised, it could be maintained, when ‘Pius’ was inserted between ‘Severus’ and 
‘Pertinax’: that connoted loyalty. Septimius is an ambiguous figure. His grandfather, the 
Italianate man of Lepcis, at home in cultivated circles in Rome of the Silver Age, may seem 
worlds away. Septimius himself lacked this polish, may have remained closer to Lepcis’ 
Punic past, at least until he reached manhood. But his early adult life was spent mostly at 
Rome, in the reign of Marcus. In many respects he seems to have emulated that paragon: 
making his empress mater castrorum and his son co-emperor; adopting an expansionist 
policy; spending long years with the armies. More damaging, perhaps, in the long run, was 
his monetary policy. He unquestionably debased the silver currency to a far lower level than 
Marcus or even Commodus had. His pay increase for the troops, made possible by this 
means, resulted in far greater quantities of money in circulation. During his lifetime there 
was sufficient confidence in the strength of his government for this to act as a stimulus to 
the economy, above all in the frontier regions. The instability which soon followed his death, 
coupled with further increases in the volume of coinage, was in due course to bring about 
the great inflation of the later third century. 16     
He can at least be assessed as a remarkable phenomenon, the first truly provincial emperor, 
for Trajan and his successors from the western colonial élite were not only descended from 
Italian settlers but themselves thoroughly assimilated to the metropolitan society, born and 
brought up at Rome, not at Italica, Nemausus or Ucubi. Antoninus probably never visited 
the Gallic home of his ancestors, Marcus and Commodus certainly never set foot in Spain. 
Septimius Severus was a product of Africa, and of an African city in which Italian settlement 
had been unusually meagre. It cannot be known whether, for example, the ancestral gods 
whom he honoured under their Roman names were also familiar to him as Shadrapa and 
Milk’ashtart. In any case, the sole other mention in the sources of his religious inclinations is 
of the Greco-Egyptian Sarapis. The African emperor who died in Britain has to remain an 
enigma. 
-200- 
Abbreviations used in Appendices and 
Notes 
AE L’Année épigraphique (Paris 1888 ff.) 
ANRW Aufstieg und Niedergang der römischen Welt (Berlin & New York 1972 ff.), eds H. 
Temporini & W. Haase 
BAR British Archaeological Reports (Oxford) 
BMC Catalogue of Coins of the Roman Empire in the British Museum IV. Antoninus Pius 
to Commodus (London 1940); V. Pertinax to Elagabalus (London 1950) 
CIL Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum (Berlin 1863 ff.) 
CP; 
Supp. 
H.G. Pflaum, Les carrières procuratoriennes équestres sous le Haul-Empire remain 
(Paris 1960-1); Supplement (Paris 1982)


--- PAGE 163 ---
CRAI Comptes-Rendues de l’Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres (Paris) 
EE Ephemeris Epigraphica (Berlin 1872-1913) 
HA Historia Augusta, ed. E. Hohl (Leipzig 1927; repr. 1955) 
HAC Historia-Augusta-Colloquium (Bonn 1964 ff.) 
IG Inscriptiones Graecae (Berlin) 
IGLS Inscriptions grecques et latines de Syrie (Beirut 1929ff.) 
IGRR Inscriptiones graecae ad res Romanas pertinentes I, III, IV, ed. R. Cagnat (Paris 
1901-21) 
ILAfr Inscriptions latines d’Afrique, eds. R. Cagnat, A. Merlin, L. Cha telain (Paris 1923) 
ILAlg Inscriptions latines de l’Algérie I, ed. S. Gsell (Algiers 1923); II 1 ed. H.G. Pflaum 
(Algiers 1958); II 2 ed. H. G. Pflaum (Algiers 1976) 
ILS Inscriptiones latinae selectae, ed. H. Dessau (Berlin 1892-1916) 
IL Tun Inscriptions latines de Tunisie, ed. A. Merlin (Tunis 1944) 
IPT Iscrizioni puniche della Tripolitania (1927-1967), eds. G. Levi della Vida and M.G. 
Amadasi Guzzo (Rome 1987) 
IRT Inscriptions of Roman Tripolitania, eds. J.M. Reynolds and J.B. Ward Perkins 
(London 1952) 
JRS Journal of Roman Studies (London 1910 ff.) 
KAI Kanaanäische und Aramaische Inschriften, eds. H. Donner and W.Röllig (2nd ed. 
Wiesbaden 1968) 
-201- 
 
PIR1 Prosopographia Imperii Romani. I. A—C, ed. E. Klebs (Berlin 1897). II. D—O, ed. 
H. Dessau (Berlin 1897). III P—Z, eds. P. v. Rohden and H. Dessau (Berlin 1897) 
PIR2
Prosopographia Imperii Romani, ed. altera. I. A—B, eds. E. Groag and A. Stein 
(Berlin 1933). II. C, eds. E. Groag and A. Stein (Berlin 1936). III. D—F, eds. E. 
Groag and A. Stein (Berlin 1943). IV. 1. G. eds. E. Groag and A. Stein (Berlin 
1952). IV. 2. H, eds. E. Groag and A. Stein (Berlin 1957). IV. 3. I—J. ed. L. 
Petersen (Berlin 1966). V. 1. L, ed. L. Petersen (Berlin 1970). V. 2. M, ed. L. 
Petersen (Berlin 1983). V. 3, N—O, eds. L. Petersen et al. (Berlin 1987). 
RE Paulys Realencylopädie der classischen Altertumswissen-schaft, eds. G. Wissowa et 
al. (Stuttgart 1893-1978) 
RIB The Roman Inscriptions of Britain I. eds R.G. Collingwood and R.P. Wright (London 
1965) 
RIC The Roman Imperial Coinage, eds. H. Mattingly, E.A. Sydenham et al. (London 
1923 ff.) 
RIT G. Alföldy, Die Römischen Inschriften von Tarraco (Berlin 1975) 
RMD M.M. Roxan, Roman Military Diplomas 1954-1977; 1978-1984 (London 1978, 
1985) 
-202- 
APPENDIX 1


--- PAGE 164 ---
Ancient Evidence and Modern 
Scholarship 
A. ANCIENT EVIDENCE 
1. Septimius wrote an autobiography, referred 
to or cited a few times. HA Sev. 3.2 mentions his 
marriage to Marci [an] a, ‘de qua tacuit in 
historia vitae privatae’. Herodian 2.9.4-7, having 
mentioned the ‘dreams…and oracles and other 
signs’ that led Septimius to hope for the empire, 
says that he ‘has given an account of many of 
them himself in his autobiography’ and quotes 
the one about Pertinax’s horse. Dio 75.7.3, 
reporting Albinus’ suicide, says that ‘I am not 
stating what Severus wrote about it but what 
actually took place’. HA Nig. 4.7-5.1 purports to 
derive from the autobiography (‘in vita sua 
Severus dicit…si Severo credimus’), as also Alb. 
7.1 (‘ut…ipse in vita sua loquitur’): there may be 
some basis in the stories, illustrating Septimius’ 
alleged claims regarding his rivals; but it looks 
as if the HA has mangled them. In any case, it is 
probable that the author took them from Marius 
Maximus. Finally, Victor, De Caes. 20.22 refers 
approvingly to the work: ‘idemque abs se texta 
ornatu et fide paribus composuit’. Victor seems 
to have read his fellow-countryman. HA Sev. 
18.6 (in the section adapted from Victor, below, 
A.5) has ‘vitam suam privatam publicam ipse 
composuit ad fidem, solum tamen vitium 
crudelitatis excusans’. The last phrase is an


--- PAGE 165 ---
addition, reflecting the author’s use of Marius 
Maximus, cited earlier (15.6): ‘se excusabat [for 
the executions of 198] …quod de Laeto 
praecipue Marius Maximus dicit’. Hasebroek 8 
has little comment, Platnauer 17f., noting that it 
is uncertain even what language, Greek or Latin, 
the memoirs were written in, stresses that only 
Victor took their author at his word. Rubin 26 n. 
29 insists the work was in Latin; 130, 191f. 
argues that Herodian knew it second-hand; 
133ff., 171ff., 190ff. discusses at length the 
relationship between the autobiography and the 
biography by Maximus (also a lost work). 
2. Cassius Dio (often called ‘Dio Cassius’ in the Greek style), by his full names L. Cassius 
Dio Cocceianus (PIR2 C 492; praenomen: RMD no. 133), a senator’s son, from Bithynian 
Nicaea, born c. 165, himself a senator under Commodus, consul for the first time under 
Septimius (sometimes disputed, but clear), with Caracalla in Nicomedia; appointed curator 
of two Asian cities by Macrinus 217-8; proconsul of Africa c. 223, then—exceptionally senior
—legate of Dalmatia and Upper Pannonia, finally cos.II ord. with the emperor Severus 
Alexander, in 229. His first historical work on Septimius’ dreams, and other signs that 
forecast his rule, won favour; in a dream of his own, to daimonion told him to write about 
‘the 
-203- 
wars and very great disturbances’ that followed Commodus’ death, which should mean the 
civil and Parthian wars from 193-8; this too was well received and he eventually (the timing 
is vague) decided to incorporate it in a complete history of Rome. He spent ten years in 
research ‘from the beginnings down to Severus’ death’, and a further twelve in writing the 
work, which was extended from 211 to the moment of his own second consulship in 229. 
Opinion has varied over the interpretation of this passage, 72. 23.1-5. Millar 1964, whose 
monograph is an essential introduction to the man, his background and his work (see now 
also Ameling), unfortunately has a forced and unconvincing dating of its composition (G.W. 
Bowersock, Gnomon 37 (1965) 471). After various other proposals, by Eisman and Letta, 
Barnes 1984 argues convincingly that Dio began research in 211 at earliest, completed it 
220 or a little later, and wrote his work over the twelve years 220-31 (‘the actual dates, 
however, may be a little later’, Barnes 1984, 252). Exactly when he had written his 
preliminary works remains largely a matter of guesswork. But there is no reason why he 
should not have sent either or both to Septimius, i.e. he need not have presented copies in 
person—but, if he did hand over the second work himself, it could have been in Bithynia, 
e.g. in 202. Rubin 9ff., 41ff., and passim has a series of valuable observations on Dio, in 
particular related to the civil war period. His detailed analysis goes a long way towards


--- PAGE 166 ---
disentangling the uncritical dissemination of propaganda, incorporated by Dio from his 
earlier works, from the later rectifications. Dio’s History, in eighty books, has not survived 
complete. Of the last part, covering the history of his own life-time, only the years 217-18 
are preserved in full (with some lacunae). For the remainder we depend on excerpts and 
epitomes: standard edition by U.P. Boissevain (5 vols., 1895-1931); English translation in 
the last volume (IX) of the Loeb edition with parallel Greek text (E. Gary and H.B. Foster, 
1927 and reprints), numbered one book higher than in Boissevain (e.g. Dio Book 72 is 73 in 
Loeb, and so on; Boissevain’s numbering is cited here passim). Cf. also Bering-Staschewski; 
Šašel-Kos 18-48. 
3. Herodian wrote a history of the period 180-238 in eight books, probably in the 250s, 
which has survived in full. He has always had his fanciers, or defenders, but he was 
careless, ignorant and deceitful, a self-conscious stylist who wanted to write a ‘rattling good 
yarn’ and happily adjusted the facts to achieve readability and excitement. Platnauer 2 has 
some trenchant remarks about his faults, including ‘slovenliness’. Hohl 1954, 1956a and b, 
exposed his inadequacies on Commodus, Pertinax and the fall of Plautianus respectively. 
Alföldy, in a series of papers, especially 1971, a,b,c, 1972, 1973 and 1988, has further 
demonstrated Herodian’s shortcomings and fraudulence, as well as illuminating his 
background. Kettenhofen shows up his untrustworthiness on the Emesene empresses (some 
details on Elagabalus are defended by Bowersock 1975, which does not persuade me, cf. 
App. 2 n. 49), and, especially valuable, confirms, for the period 218 onwards, the use—or 
abuse—of Dio. This latter question is treated elaborately by Kolb, whose theories are too 
ingenious to convince completely (cf. 5, below) in every case. Herodian preferred heroines, 
and ascribes leading roles to a variety of princesses and empresses at dramatic moments. 
He happily trotted out clichés, often taken seriously (for an example, Birley 1972 and 
chapter 16, p. 172, above, in addition to the works already cited). The defence attempted in 
the valuable 
-204- 
Loeb edition and translation by Whittaker does not convince. For a fuller introduction, not 
uncritical but more sympathetic than I can offer, cf. Šašel-Kos 276-318, with useful 
bibliography. 
4. Marius Maximus wrote Lives of the Caesars from Nerva to Elagabalus, much read in late 
fourth century Rome (Ammianus 28.4.14). The life of Nerva is evidently cited by the 
scholiast on Juvenal 4.53, all other citations or references to his work come in the HA. He is 
assumed to be identical with L. Marius Maximus Perpetuus Aurelianus, whose career, 
spanning some forty-five years from c. 178 to his second consulship in 223, is known from a 
string of inscriptions, some papyri and a mention in Dio: PIR2 M 308. He was presumably 
son of the procurator L. Marius Perpetuus (CP no. 168; PIR2 M 313) and grandson or great-
grandson of another L. Marius Perpetuus, scriba of a proconsul of Africa (ILAfr 591: PIR2 M 
190, perhaps (M. Vitorius) Marcellus, if so c. 120). The scriba, the family’s tribe ‘Quirina’, 
the names ‘Marius’ and ‘Perpetuus’, among other indications, all point to African origin, see 
PIR2 M 308; note esp. Jarrett 1972, who adds C. Marius Perpetuus, patron of Thugga (CRAI 
1962, 55, AD 83-5): for the local origins of Thugga’s patrons cf. the list in Harmand 274. 
Maximus was clearly an important source for later Latin writers, including the HA and the 
so-called ‘Kaisergeschichte’ (KG), a lost work composed in the first half of the fourth century 
on which Victor, Eutropius and others relied (5-6, below). However, Syme and Barnes, in a 
series of publications since 1967, following earlier arguments e.g. by Barbieri 1954, 
minimise the use of Maximus by the HA and postulate an unknown, ‘good biographer’, 
‘Ignotus’: e.g. Syme 1971a, 30ff., 133ff.; 1983, 30ff.; Barnes 1978, 98ff. Their case is


--- PAGE 167 ---
accepted e.g. by Rubin 63ff.; but Maximus is preferred by (among others) Birley 1971, 
308ff.; Schlumberger 124ff.; Birley 1987, 229f. The question must remain undecided; but 
on Barnes’ appeal to Ausonius, De Caesaribus…Tetrasticha as evidence for Maximus’ 
coverage, see the comments of R.P.H. Green, JRS 69 (1979) 228: Maximus need not be 
Ausonius’ source. The mistake in the HA, Sev. 9.1, also in Victor 20.8 and Eutropius 8.18.4, 
that Niger was killed at Cyzicus, should not have been made by Maximus, who was 
commanding an army nearby at the time; but the author of the HA was about to plagiarise 
Victor (Sev. 17.5ff.) and could have taken over the error from him. The largely fictional 
character of HA Macrinus is odd if the HA could consult Maximus: the latter was actually 
made City Prefect by Macrinus: Dio 78.14.3, 38.1-37.3; 79.1. It is perfectly possible that 
Maximus deliberately declined to devote a separate life to a man treated as a usurper after 
his death, particularly since his own acceptance of high office was better passed over: Dio 
was perhaps concerned to draw attention to the behaviour of his contemporary. The two 
could have known each other’s work, Maximus certainly Dio’s monograph on the Wars, Dio 
some at least of the Lives. 
5. The so called Historia Augusta is a celebrated problem of historical scholarship, a 
‘Serbonian bog’ (Syme 1968, 220). Platnauer 4ff. displays the exasperation characteristic of 
the uninitiated who had to struggle with the often fanciful theories generated in the first 
wave of ‘Augustan historiography’, set off by Dessau in 1889. This work (Teubner ed. 
Leipzig, by E. Hohl, 1927, repr. with, corrigenda 1955; Loeb ed. with English translation by 
D. Magie and A.O’Brien- 
-205- 
Moore, 1921-32; English translation of first part, down to Elagabalus, Birley 1976) is a set 
of biographies of emperors, Caesars and usurpers, from Hadrian to the sons of Carus (AD 
117-284: a gap from AD 244-60), ostensibly by six separate biographers, of which the lives 
of Didius Julianus, Severus, Caracalla, Niger and Geta are attributed to ‘Aelius Spartianus’, 
Pertinax, Albinus, Macrinus to ‘Julius Capitolinus’ Commodus, Diadumenianus, Elagabalus 
and Severus Alexander to ‘Aelius Lampridius’ (to mention only those most relevant to the 
present study). Since Dessau argued that there were not really six authors, but one and 
that the work was written at the end of the fourth century, not at different times during the 
reigns of Diocletian and Constantine (as purports to be the case), controversy has raged 
and theories proliferated (for the latest, slightly strange, Honoré 1987). But defenders of 
the ostensible date and multiple authorship appear to have capitulated, retired or fallen 
silent, thanks not least to the series of Colloquia held at Bonn under the auspices of A. 
Alföldi and J. Straub, which have generated not only the series HAC, but a splendid series of 
books by Sir Ronald Syme: Syme 1968, 1971a and b, 1983. One must note, further, the 
valuable monograph on the HA’s sources by Barnes 1978 (in spite of my doubts over his 
adherence to ‘Ignotus’, above A.4; and his excessive rejection of Kolb, whose case that the 
HA used Dio may not be defensible as it stands but cannot be dismissed completely. The 
answer may lie, in my view, in Marius Maximus having used Dio, in places; but the question 
is probably insoluble). 
The HA Sev. is the most important portion of the work for this study. Hasebroek’s 
monograph remains indispensible, even if requiring correction in detail. On the first four 
chapters, Birley 1970. As the author reached the second Parthian war, covered 14.11-16.7, 
he became bored and impatient (his source, as I believe Maximus, is later described as 
‘homo omnium verbosissimus’, HA Quad. tyr. 1.2, and according to HA Get. 2.1 wrote 
several septenarii on Septimius, an obscure word, discussed Birley 1971, 322f.). The work 
had already gone to pieces with the insertion, out of order, of material from later parts of


--- PAGE 168 ---
the reign, 14.4-10, most of it about the statues row with Plautianus, datable to 203. Now, 
after jumbled remarks referring to the visit to Egypt and the last stay at Antioch (in reverse 
order), 16.8-17.4, he suddenly remarks, ‘And it is tedious to pursue minor details’; and 
summarises the entire reign, 17.5-19.3, in a passage closely based on Victor, De Caes. 20, 
written in 360, Dessau’s major clue to the false date conveyed in the HA. The author then 
presumably decided that he had ended the work too abruptly, and added some more, much 
of it fiction (especially 20.1-21.12, cf. Straub), omens of death (22.1-7, Hasebroek 148f.; 
Mouchova) and some miscellaneous items, particularly on Septimius’ death and burial. 
The lives of Niger, Albinus and Geta are mainly pure fiction, although where the author was 
adapting or re-using material from his sources for Sev., some of it is authentic, if often 
garbled. There is no simple yardstick. For some useful remarks, Barnes 1978, 48ff. Similar 
considerations apply to the lives of Macrinus and Diadumenianus, much of the Elagabalus 
and most of the Severus Alexander (the longest vita in the whole work, and one of the 
major sources of misinformation, still often disseminated, on the third century: Syme 
1971a, 146ff. is a valuable antidote). Access to the web of HA studies is now facilitated by 
the copious three volume bibliography of Merten. 
-206- 
6. The fourth-century and later Latin ‘chroniclers’, principally Victor, Eutropius, and the 
anonymous author of the Epitome de Caesaribus cannot be ignored but are of minor 
importance for this study. On Victor: Bird. On the Epitome: Schlumberger. The Epit. does 
supply a few useful names, e.g. of the father of Julia Domna, 21.3, 23.2 and of the four 
friends enriched by Septimius: Anullinus, Bassus, Cilo and Lateranus (20.6), of whom only 
the second is not certainly identifiable. Later Greek writers, e.g. Zosimus, either add little or 
nothing; or simply reproduce or summarise Dio and Herodian. On the so-called 
‘Kaisergeschichte’ on which the fourth century Latin writers depended, see Barnes 1978, 
91ff. with further references. 
7. The Digest and other legal compilations of Justinian reproduce a vast mass of Severan 
material, including numerous letters, rescripts, etc. of Septimius and his elder son. One 
cannot neglect the copious and controversial writings of Honoré on the jurists, particularly 
Ulpian, e.g. Honoré 1979; 1981; 1982; but Syme 1984, 863ff., 1393ff. is an essential 
corrective; also valuable Millar 1986. 
8. Contemporary writers are naturally important, for stray facts or for background. 
Philostratus, biographer of the sophists and (heavily fictionalised) of the sage Apollonius, is 
probably the most important: dealt with admirably by Bowersock 1969, who also has useful 
comments on Galen, 59ff. Tertullian, as a fellow-countryman of Septimius, from Carthage, 
and the most copious Latin writer of the period other than jurists, requires the attention of 
all students of the period: Barnes 1971 offers the most accessible introduction (with 
addenda in the reprinted edition, modifying some of his chronology). Champlin has 
reconstituted a Latin author: Serenus Sammonicus merging with Septimius Serenus and 
Septimius the author of the Latin Dictys Cretensis, Ephemeris Belli Troiani, dedicated to 
Aradius Rufinus of Bulla Regia (cf. App. 2 nos. 11; 51). The ‘courtier and man of letters’ 
Serenus Sammonicus, mentioned in the HA and cited by Macrobius, becomes ‘a grand 
personage at the court of the first African emperor…by turns scholar, translator, and a poet.’ 
(I hesitate to accept a few details, especially that he was tutor to Caracalla and Geta, 191; 
and cannot readily regard him as one of the Lepcis Septimii—after all, Tertullian also had 
the gentilicium ‘Septimius’). More might be said, e.g. about Athenaeus and other litterati of 
the age (cf. above all Bowersock 1969, especially his cautionary comments on the ‘circle of


--- PAGE 169 ---
Julia Domna’, 101ff.); or on other Christian writers of the age, apart from Tertullian. But 
that is too vast a topic for this purpose. 
9. Finally, the evidence derived (in the broad sense) from archaeology. For the coinage, one 
relies still on Mattingly’s RIC IV and BMC V, while noting the work of Hill: other numismatic 
contributions are cited in the notes. Much has been written on the question, important for 
the economic history of the period, of ‘devaluation’ or debasement, on which I have turned 
to Walker for guidance. Murphy’s sketch of the epigraphic material has not been enlarged 
upon; for Caracalla and Geta there is now the excellent volume of Mastino. IRT, so 
important for Lepcis and the Septimii, remains indispensible; IPT at last provides convenient 
and authoritative treatment of the Neo-Punic material from Tripolitania. As well as the 
apokrimata which shed light on the visit to Egypt (some 
-207- 
revisions offered by Merentitis) there is the remarkable Prefect’s letter issued just before the 
imperial party arrived (Rea). The results of excavation and fieldwork in various parts of the 
empire are cited in the notes, particularly to chapters 1-3, 14 (Africa); 11, 13 (eastern 
provinces); 16 (Britain). On buildings and sculpture, apart from works cited in notes to 
chapters 14 (Lepcis) and 15 (Rome), McCann on the portraits is essential. 
MODERN SCHOLARSHIP 
It remains to list recent work of importance for 
this biography not referred to above. Since 
Birley 1971 the only monograph on Septimius is 
that by Kotula (inspected but not yet read: in 
Polish). Walser provides a survey. The 
prosopographical method employed in Birley 
1971 and by others is attacked vigorously by 
Graham. Millar 1977 is a monumental treatment 
of what emperors did (at home; for foreign and 
military policy, omitted from the vast work, 
partial compensation in Millar 1982). Imperial 
travels are discussed and tabulated by 
Halfmann. Talbert’s massive study of the 
imperial senate is now essential reading. 
Barbieri 1952, still irreplaceable, although 
naturally outdated in places, is now 
supplemented by Thomasson, a source of


--- PAGE 170 ---
instant reference for all provincial governors; 
further volumes of PIR2 (L—O); Raepsaet-
Charlier on senatorial women; Schumacher on 
members of the priestly colleagues; and, above 
all, the two copious volumes, Tituli 4-5, the 
proceedings of the international ‘colloquio’ at 
Rome in 1981. For this reason it has been 
possible to dispense here with the attempts 
made in Birley 1971, 327-58, to provide a 
Severan ‘Who’s Who’. In particular, the African 
origins of many major figures is now better 
documented in that work, repeatedly cited in the 
notes here. 
Alföldy, G. 
1971a ‘Herodians Person’, Ancient Society 2 (1971) 204-33 
Alföldy G. 
1971b 
‘Cassius Dio und Herodian über die Anfänge des neupersischen Reiches’, 
Rheinisches Museum 114 (1971) 360-6 
Alföldy G. 
1971c ‘Zeitgeschichte und Krisenempfindung bei Herodian’, Hermes 99 (1971) 429-49 
Alföldy G. 
1972 
‘Der Sturz des Kaisers Geta und die antike Geschichtsschreibung’, Historia-
Augusta-Colloquim 1970 (Bonn 1972) 19-51 
Alföldy G. 
1973 ‘Herodian uber den Tod Mark Aurels’, Latomus 32 (1973) 345-53 
Alföldy G. 
1988 
‘Cleanders Sturz und die antike Überlieferung’, Geschichte, 
Geschichtsbetrachtung und Geschichtsschreibung in der Krise des Römischen 
Reiches (Heidelberg 1988) 
(The first five items are reprinted with addenda in the 1988 publication.) 
Ameling, W. ‘Cassius Dio und Bithynien’, Epigraphica Anatolica 4 (1984) 123-38 
Barbieri, G. 1952 L’Albo senatorio da Settimio Severo a Carino (Rome 1952) 
Barbieri, G. 1954 ‘Mario Massimo’, Rivista di filologia 82 (1954) 36-66, 262-75 
Barnes, T.D. 
1971 
Tertullian. A literary and historical study (Oxford 1971; reprinted with 
addenda 1985) 
-208- 
 
Barnes, T.D. 
1978 
The Sources of the Historia Augusta (Collection Latomus 155, Brussels 
1978) 
Barnes, T.D. ‘The composition of Cassius Dio’s Roman History’, Phoenix 38 (1984)


--- PAGE 171 ---
1984 240-55 
Bering-
Staschewski, R. Römische Zeitgeschichte bei Cassius Dio (Bochum 1981) 
Bird, H.W. Sextus Aurelius Victor (Liverpool 1984) 
Birley, A.R. 1970 ‘Some notes on HA Severus 1-4’, Historia-Augusta-Colloquium 1968-9 
(Bonn 1970) 59-77 
Birley, A.R. 1971 Septimius Severus the African Emperor (London 1971) 
Birley, A.R. 1972 ‘Virius Lupus’, Archaeologia Aeliana, 4th ser. 50 (1972) 179-89 
Birley, A.R. 1976 Lives of the Later Caesars (Harmondsworth 1976) 
Birley, A.R. 1987 Marcus Aurelius: a biography (London 1987) 
Bowersock, 
G.W. 1969 Greek Sophists in the Roman Empire (Oxford 1969) 
Bowersock, 
G.W. 1975 ‘Herodian and Elagabalus’, Yale Classical Studies 24 (1975) 229-36 
Champlin, E. ‘Serenus Sammonicus’, Harvard Studies Class. Philol. 85 (1981) 189-
212 
Dessau, H. ‘Über Zeit und Persönlichkeit der Scriptores Historiae Augustae’, 
Hermes 24 (1889) 337-92 
Eisman, M.M. ‘Dio and Josephus: parallel analyses’, Latomus 36 (1977) 657-73 
Graham, A.J. ‘The limitations of prosopography in Roman imperial history (with 
special reference to the Severan period)’, ANRW 2.1 (1974) 136-57 
Halfmann, H. Itinera Principum. Geschichte und Typologie der Kaiserreisen im 
Römischen Reich (Stuttgart 1986) 
Harmand, L. Le Patronat sur les collectivités publiques (Paris 1957) 
Hasebrook, J. Untersuchungen zur Geschichte des Kaisers Septimius Severus 
(Heidelberg 1921) 
Hill, P.V. The Coinage of Septimius Severus and his Family of the Mint of Rome 
(London 1964) 
Hohl, E. 1954 Kaiser Commodus und Herodian (Sitzungsber. Berlin 1954) 
Hohl, E. 1956 a, 
b 
Kaiser Pertinax und die Thronbesteigung seines Nachfolgers im Lichte 
der Herodiankritik, mit einem Anhang: Herodian und der Sturz 
Plautians (Sitzungsber. Berlin 1956) 
Honoré, T. 1979 ‘Imperial rescripts A.D. 193-305: authorship and authenticity’ Journal 
of Roman Studies 69 (1979) 51-64 
Honoré, T. 1981 Emperors and Lawyers (London 1981) 
Honoré, T. 1982 Ulpian (Oxford 1982) 
Honoré, T. 1987 ‘Scriptor Historiae Augustae’, Journal of Roman Studies 77 (1987) 156-
76 
Jarrett, M.G. ‘An album of equestrians from North Africa in the emperor’s service’, 
Epigraphische Studien 9 (1972) 146-230 
Kettenhofen, E. Die syrischen Augustae in der historischen Überlieferung (Bonn 1979) 
-209- 
 
Kolb, F. Literarische Beziehungen zwischen Cassius Dio, Herodian und der 
Historia Augusta (Bonn 1972) 
Kotula, T. Septymiusz Sewerus. Cesarz z Lepcis Magna (Wroclaw 1987) 
Letta, C. ‘La composizione dell’opera di Cassio Dione: cronologia e sfondo


--- PAGE 172 ---
storico-politico’, Ricerche di Storiografia greca e romana (Pisa 1979) 
117-89 
McCann, A.M. The Portraits of Septimius Severus AD 193-211 (Memoirs American 
Academy Rome 30, 1968) 
Mastino, A. Le titolature di Caracalla e Geta attraverso le iscrizione (indici) 
(Bologna 1981) 
Merentitis, J. ‘Die neugefundenen Reskripte des Septimius Severus (P. Col. 123)’, 
Platon 30 (1978) 31-43 
Merten, E. 
Stellenbibliographie zur Historia Augusta, 1. Hadrian-Didius Julianus 
(Bonn 1985). 2. Septimius Severus-Alexander Severus (Bonn 1986). 
3. Maximini duo-Tyranni triginta (Bonn 1986) (with corrigenda and 
addenda to 1-2) 
Millar, F. 1964 A Study of Cassius Dio (Oxford 1964) 
Millar, F. 1977 The Emperor in the Roman World (London 1977) 
Millar, F. 1982 ‘Emperors, frontiers and foreign relations’, Britannia 13 (1982) 1-23 
Millar, F. 1986 ‘A new approach to the Roman jurists’, Journal of Roman Studies 76 
(1986) 272-80 
Mouchova, B. ‘Omina mortis in der Historia Augusta’, Historia-Augusta-Colloquium 
1968-9 (Bonn 1970) 111-49 
Murphy, G.J. The Reign of the Emperor L. Septimius Severus from the Evidence of 
the Inscriptions (Philadelphia 1945) 
Platnauer, M. The Life and Reign of the Emperor L. Septimius Severus (Oxford 1918) 
Raepsaet-
Charlier, M.-T. 
Prosopographie des femmes de l’ordre sénatoriale (Ier-IIe siècles) 
(Louvain 1987) 
Rea, J.R. ‘A new version of P. Yale Inv. 299’, Zeitschrift fur Papyrologie und 
Epigraphik 27 (1977) 151-6 
Rubin, Z. Civil-War Propaganda und Historiography (Collection Latomus 173, 
Brussels 1980) 
Šašel-Kos, M. A Historical Outline of the Region between Aquileia, the Adriatic, and 
Sirmium in Cassius Dio and Herodian (Ljubljana 1986) 
Schumacher, L. 
Prosopographische Untersuchungen zur Besetzung der vier hohen 
Priesterkollegien im Zeitalter der Antonine und Severer (96-235 n. 
Chr.) (Diss. Mainz 1973) 
Schlumberger, J. Die Epitome de Caesaribus. Untersuchungen zur Heidnischen 
Geschichtsschriebung des 4. Jhdts n. Chr. (Munich 1974) 
Straub, J. ‘Die ultima verba des Septimius Severus’, Historia-Augusta-colloquium 
1963 (Bonn 1964) 171-2 
Syme, R. 1968 Ammianus and the Historia Augusta (Oxford 1968) 
Syme, R. 1971a Emperors and Biography (Oxford 1971) 
Syme, R. 1971b The Historia Augusta: a call for clarity (Bonn 1971) 
-210- 
 
Syme, R. 
1983 Historia Augusta Papers (Oxford 1983) 
Syme, R. 
1984 
‘Fiction about Roman jurists’, Roman Papers III (Oxford 1984) 1393-1414 
(reprinted from Zeitschrift der Savigny-Stiftung (Roman. Abt.) 97 (1980) 
78-104) 
Talbert, R.J.A. The Roman Imperial Senate (Princeton 1984)


--- PAGE 173 ---
Thomasson, 
B.E. Laterculi Praesidum I (Gothenburg 1984) 
Walker, D.R. The Metrology of the Roman Silver Coinage III: From Pertinax to Uranius 
Antoninus (BAR S40, Oxford 1978) 
Walser, G. ‘Die Beurteilung des Septimius Severus in der älteren und neueren 
Forschung’, Museum Helveticum 30 (1973) 104-16 
Whittaker, 
C.R. Herodian (Loeb edition, Cambridge, Mass. 1969-70) 
-211- 
APPENDIX 2 
The Septimii and Fulvii of Lepcis 
Magna, the Julii of Emesa and their 
Connections 
Over sixty persons, some of them of unknown name, and a few whose existence is 
hypothetical, are shown on the stemma, pp. 216-217. In some cases (notably the Petronii 
Mamertini, nos. 57-9, and Julius Agrippa, no. 43), relationship to Septimius or Julia is highly 
conjectural and is shown on the stemma by broken lines, interspersed with question-marks. 
Attested or highly probable descent or kinship, which cannot be exactly tabulated, is shown 
by broken lines without question-marks. One case of adoption (Anno Macer and Balitho 
Commodus, nos. 3-4) is shown by dotted lines. The numbered list of 60 persons which 
follows summarises the evidence for each individual (the unnamed persons are discussed 
under their parents). They are grouped under five main headings: A. Possible Punic 
ancestors at Lepcis; B. Septimii; C. Fulvii; D. the Emesene dynasty; E. Others. 
A. 
POSSIBLE PUNIC ANCESTORS AT LEPCIS 
Evidence cited under no. 26 (L. Septimius 
Severus the sufes) makes it clear that the first 
known Septimius of Lepcis was of Punic origin, a 
Roman knight in the year 95 or earlier, taken to 
an estate in Italy as a child. The Septimii were 
enrolled in the tribe ‘Quirina’ (no. 25), an early 
member of the family was called ‘Macer’ (no. 
23), and they used the praenomen ‘Gaius’ (nos. 
16, 25) as well as ‘Lucius’ (nos. 14, 17, 27, cf.


--- PAGE 174 ---
22) and ‘Publius’ (nos. 15, 20-22). One family 
among the quite numerous Punic notables of 
late first century BC and first century AD Lepcis 
uses the names ‘Macer’ and ‘Gaius’. They can be 
traced for four generations, the latest record 
being from the end of Claudius’ reign (IRT 338). 
It seems logical to identify them as the likeliest 
ancestors of Septimius before the family 
acquired a Roman-style gentilicium and 
citizenship. See also Birley 1988. 
1. Anno, known only from the filiation of no. 2 in IRT 338, IPT 26; he could be the same as 
the father of no. 5 in IPT 22. The name, Punic Ḥn’, vocalised at Lepcis as ‘Anno’, although 
generally ‘Hanno’ in Latin authors, means ‘give thanks’. It is also found in IPT 17 (date 
uncertain): Anno ben Arishom Ygm‘k; 18 (date uncertain): Candidus ben Candidus ben 
Anno ben Abdmelqart; 32 (date uncertain): Himilcho Dryds, ‘descendant of Anno’; and in 
IPT 21, Punic version of IRT 319, of 8 BC, as father of Muttun, sufes that year. 
-212- 
2. C. Anno. Gaius Anno, G‘y ben Ḥn’, paved the Forum and set up a portico in AD 53-4 ‘in 
the name of his grandson Gaius (G ‘y) by his son Macer (M‘qr)’; Macer’s adoptive son 
Balitho Commodus supervised the work (IRT 338, IPT 26) and a statue-base records that 
‘senate and people of the Lepcitani’ honoured the grandson Gaius, also called here 
‘Phelyssam’ (IRT 615). The Punic G‘y, latinised as ‘Gaius’, might represent the Libyan Gaia 
(the name of Massinissa’s father: Rössler 274ff.). ‘Phelyssam’ certainly seems Libyan rather 
than Punic (cf. IRT 698 for the form ‘Felyssam’ at Lepcis). 
3. Anno Macer. Known from IRT 338=IPT 26, IRT 615. The name ‘Macer’, meaning ‘lean’, is 
a fairly common Latin cognomen (Kajanto 244). It is rendered M‘qr in Punic and occurs on 
the independent coins of Oea, apparently as the name of a sufes (Jenkins nos. 26-9: the 
colleague’s name, Pyln or Pylt, remains unexplained, cf. IPT 21; it is missing from IRT 319, 
the Latin version), and in IPT 10 at Lepcis. It might be a Latinised version of a Libyan name. 
For names beginning ‘Mac-’ note the Macae tribe and IRT 886c, W. Sofeggin, Macarcum on 
a Latino-Punic inscription read in full by Elmayer 93f., who also produces Machrus ben 
Rogate on another stone from the same place. ‘Macer’ might also be linked with the god 
Melqart. Cf. the name ‘Amicus’, favoured at Lepcis and elsewhere in North Africa, very 
probably a Latin-sounding version of ‘Amilcar’ (Abdmelquart). See further Birley 1988. 
4. Balitho Commodus. Adopted son of no. 3 (IRT 338, 615; IPT 26). ‘Balitho’, Punic 
Ba‘alyaton (‘Ba‘al has given’) is also found at Lepcis on IPT 22, 26. 
5. Balitho G [.] Saturninus. Known only from IPT 22, recording him as sufes with 
Bodmelqart ben Bodmelqart, one of the Tapapii, when the statues of Tiberius and other 
members of the dynasty were set up around the Temple of Rome and Augustus c. AD 14-


--- PAGE 175 ---
19. He is called son of Anno, perhaps no. 1. His second name, clearly very short and 
beginning with G, was probably G‘y= ‘Gaius’. ‘Saturninus’ is the favourite Latin name in 
Africa (Kajanto 213: ‘Saturn’ was the equivalent of the Punic Ba’al). 
6. Gaius Phelyssam. Known from IRT 338, where he is ‘Gaius, son of Anno’ and its Punic 
version, IPT 26 (G‘y). On IRT 615 he is ‘C. Phelyssam’, cf. under no. 2 on the latter name, 
Libyan rather than Punic. 
B. 
SEPTIMII 
7. (Septimia). Postulated mother of no. 59, on 
the sole basis of his second cognomen 
‘Septimianus’ and the evidently African origin of 
the Petronii Mamertini. A sister of nos. 15 and 
25 would be of the right rank and age as wife 
for no. 57. 
8. Septimia Octavilla. Septimius’ sister, named only on IRT 417, set up after her death by 
three of the Lepcis curiae in the lifetime of Septimius, not before 198 (he is ‘Parthicus 
maximus’). Her title c.m.f. shows that she had been married to a senator, but as Chastagnol 
1978, 111ff. indicates, as she had to ask Septimius to confer the latus clavus on her son, 
her husband cannot have been a senator at the time. The story comes in HA Sev. 15.7, in a 
context suggesting 198, although it may be misplaced. Barnes 1967, 96 doubts the story 
that Septimius was embarassed at her poor Latin and sent her home. She might have 
married a 
-213- 
Greek-speaker, which would also explain her presence in the east, regarded as suspect by 
Barnes. If no. 17 is her son, her husband was presumably an L. Flavius. ‘Octavilla’ suggests 
that there was an Octavius or Octavia in an earlier generation, perhaps her maternal 
grandmother. The name is unattested at Lepcis, but cf. IRT 921 (Bu-Ngem/Gholaia) and, 
much more promising, L. Plautius Octavianus (IRT 517, redated by Di Vita-Evrard 1981, 
183ff. to the reign of Pius). The Lepcitane Plautii were certainly linked to the Fulvii (cf. nos. 
29, 32-3). Barbieri no. 611; Birley 1969, 256f.; Corbier 1982, 724f.; Raepsaet-Charlier no. 
697 (with further references). 
9. Flavia Neratia Septimia Octavilla. Known only from CIL VI 1415, Rome, which she set up 
to her father, no. 17. Her mother was presumably a Neratia, cf. no. 55. She was still c 
(larissima) p (uella) herself. Barbieri no. 2237; Raepsaet-Charlier no.372 (with further 
references). 
10. Septimia Polla. Sister of Septimius’ father (no. 20), who commemorated her at Lepcis 
with a silver statue, ‘the most expensive…in Africa’ (Duncan-Jones 68). Apparently 
unmarried. Her name ‘Polla’ evokes a lady in Statius’ Silvae, from the circle in which her


--- PAGE 176 ---
father moved (Silvae 2.2.10; 3.1.87, 159, 179; 4.8.14—the wife of Pollius Felix; 2. praef 
and 7, —Lucan’s widow (cf. Chapter 3 n. 1 below, p. 233). 
11. Septimia Severa. Wife of an Aradius Saturninus (no. 52), who prepared their 
sarcophagus in their lifetime at Interpromium in eastern central Italy (EE VIII 132). Her 
names may only coincidentally reflect those of the Lepcis family; but her husband should 
belong to the Aradii of Bulla Regia. Champlin 1981 202f.; Corbier 1982, 713. 
12. , 13. (Septimius) If no. 14 is grandson of 13, and 24 a grandson of 25, an intervening 
generation must be supplied. 
14. L. Septimius Aper cos. ord. 207. Known for certain only from his consulship, but 
probably identical with the cousin of Antoninus whom he murdered after Geta’s death (HA 
Carac. 3.6-7, called ‘Afer’). Presumably a grandson rather than son of no. 15, in view of the 
gap of fifty-four years before between their consulships. This man is likely to have been 
born c. 174. Unlikely to be the same as no. 17. Barbieri no. 466; Corbier 1982, 725; Torelli 
380. For his being an olive oil producer, Manacorda; Di Vita-Evrard 1985. 
15. P. Septimius Aper cos. 153. Called ‘patruus’ of Septimius in HA Sev. 1.2, but more 
probably cousin, ‘frater patruelis’, of Septimius’ father Geta, and son of no. 16. Birley 1969, 
258f.; 1970, 64f; 1976, 63f. The first recorded consul from Lepcis. Corbier 1982, 723. 
16. C. Cl (audius) Septimius Aper. Known only from IRT 316 a dedication at Lepcis in 
honour of Antoninus Pius, where his last name is read ‘[A] fer’. ‘[A] per’, conjectured Birley 
1969, 258; 1970, 64f., is confirmed by E. Birley’s observation (cited Birley 1976, 63f). He is 
presumably the ‘Gaius’ whose son was no. 25; and the cognomen of no. 15 surely indicates 
that this person was another son. He should thus be a brother of Septimius’ grandfather the 
sufes (no. 26). On his name ‘Gaius’, cf. the remarks above under no. 2. His name ‘Claudius’ 
could derive from 
-214- 
a marriage link with the family of Ti. Claudius Sestius, senior or junior (IRT 318, 347) or Ti. 
Claudius Amicus (IRT 590). His presumed father could have married a Claudia. 
17. L. Flavius Septimius Aper Octavianus. Known only from CIL VI 1415, Rome, set up in 
his honour by his daughter (no. 9). It gives him the following senatorial career: Xvir 
stlitibus iudicandis, sevir eq.R., quaestor of Cyprus, sodalis Hadrianalis, tribune of the plebs. 
Perhaps the unnamed son of Septimius’ sister, for whom she obtained the latus clavus (HA 
Sev. 15.7, cf. under no. 8, above). If so, he did not die quite so soon as the HA suggests, 
since he should have been at least twenty-six as tribune. That is perhaps not a serious 
difficulty. Torelli 380 and n. 14 argues that the career is too modest for a close kinsman of 
the emperor; yet Julia Domna’s kinsmen, nos. 36, 45, 50, were not given very exalted rank; 
the two younger ones were still equestrian when Septimius died. This man’s wife was 
presumably from the Saepinum family (PIR2 N 50ff., Barbieri nos. 2062-6), cf. no. 55 below. 
Barbieri no. 2237; Corbier 1982, 725. 
18. (L.?) Septimius Bassianus=M.AURELIUS ANTONINUS= ‘Caracalla’. Born 4 April 188, 
Platnauer 50ff., Barnes 1967, 93 n. 48. Named after his maternal grandfather (no. 46); 
original praenomen unknown. Renamed ‘M. Aurelius Antoninus’ and made Caesar in 195, as 
shown by Soproni. Further details in Mastino: co-emperor probably from 28 January 198, as


--- PAGE 177 ---
argued by Guey 1948. Betrothed to Fulvia Plautilla (no. 29) from 200, married in 202, 
divorced in 205. No certain record of any offspring. 
19. C. Julius Septimius Castinus cos. c. 211. His career is known from numerous 
inscriptions and, in its latter stages, from mentions in Dio. Tribune of I Adiutrix almost 
certainly under Septimius in 192-3, then of V Macedonica perhaps under Geta, then, after 
other posts, legate of I Minervia and dux of detachments from the four German legions 
against ‘defectores et rebelles’ c. 207, legate of Pannonia Inferior, consul, comes of 
Caracalla and his trusted friend (Dio 78.13.2, 79.4.3), governor of Dacia, removed by 
Macrinus and killed by Elagabalus in Bithynia in 218 (Dio 79.4.4,6). A possible kinsman of 
Septimius: Barbieri no. 308; PIR2 J 566. ‘Castinus’ is very rare (Kajanto 252) but ‘Castus’ is 
popular in Africa (Kajanto 251) and ‘Julius Castus’ occurs there sixteen times, Alföldy 1968, 
195. Alföldy 1967, 51; Thomasson 1984, 115f., 157. 
20. P. Septimius Geta. Septimius’ father, known from HA Sev. 1.2, Geta 2.1, the latter 
passage claiming that Marius Maximus had written at some length about his ‘vita et moribus 
in vita Severi…primo septenario’; he died when Septimius was about to set off for Baetica as 
quaestor, HA Sev. 2.3, i.e. in 171. Known also from his inscription in memory of his sister 
Polla (IRT 607, cf. no. 10 above), and from commemorative inscriptions at Lepcis (IRT 414, 
AD 201) and elsewhere. None record any career, local or imperial. He was certainly not a 
senator, but might have held local positions and he might even be the aedile ‘[]s Geta’, IRT 
597, doubted by Torelli 385. For the name Geta, Kajanto 204 is inaccurate. See Birley 
1988: there are only eighteen epigraphic examples (apart from senators) of free men, 
seven of them at or near Lepcis. It is conceivable that this Geta, the earliest at Lepcis, was 
named after C. Vitorius Hosidius Geta, son of the first Septimius 
-215- 
THE FAMILY OF SEPTIMIUS SEVERUS 
THE FAMILY OF SEPTIMIUS SEVERUS


--- PAGE 178 ---
-216- 
 
-217- 
Severus’ fellow-pupil Vitorius Marcellus, with whom he is associated in the preface to Silvae 
4, dedicated to Marcellus. Cf. also on ‘Polla’ under no. 10 above. In Birley 1971, 302 n. 1 it 
was suggestd that the story in Victor, Caes. 20.28, Eutropius 8.8 and HA Geta 2.4, that 
Septimius himself was advocatus fisci and equestrian military tribune before entering the 
senate might derive from a misunderstanding of Marius Maximus (who dilated at length on 
this man), i.e. that Septimius’ father held these posts. 
21. P. Septimius Geta cos. II ord. 203. Brother of Septimius. His career is fully known from 
IRT 541, set up in his honour at Lepcis by one of the curiae between 198 and 202 (his 
second consulship is not registered), originally published by Bersanetti. Birley 1969, 262f. 
argues that he was the elder brother, but the only clue is from the name: he was named 
after his father, Septimius after the paternal grandfather (but it must be conceded that 
practice varied: Mme G. Di Vita-Evrard informs me that she hopes to demonstrate that Geta 
was the younger). He is mentioned several times in HA Sev (also Get. 2.1): in 8.10 he met 
Septimius en route to the east from Rome in 193 and was told to remain in the province he 
had been assigned, probably still Moesia Inferior, which he is assumed to have held from at 
least 192; he was later governor of Dacia, attested in 195 (CIL III 905); in 196 he seems to 
have met Septimius at Viminacium, HA Sev. 3; shortly before his death, in 204, he warned 
Septimius about Plautianus, whom he had hated, Dio 76.2.4. The contacts he may have 
made and details of his career before 193 are registered in the appropriate places of this 
biography and need not be repeated here. No wife or children are known, but he might be 
the father of no. 24. Barbieri no. 469; Corbier 1982, 723; Thomasson 1975, 73f.; 1984, 
28f., 138, 155; 1985, 135. 
22. P. (L) SEPTIMIUS GETA. Younger son of Septimius. Born 7 March 189, as shown by 
Barnes 1968, 522ff. and murdered on 26 December 211, the date in HA Geta 3.1 being 
spurious. The true birthday is supplied by the tradition of Perpetua’s martyrdom which fell 
on the ‘natale Getae Caesaris’ and Dio 77.2.5 gives his age at death, see also Barnes 1971, 
253ff. Made Caesar in 198, when his brother became Augustus, cos. in 205, cos. II in 208,


--- PAGE 179 ---
but, although frequently called Augustus especially in Africa from 198, not in fact promoted 
until a year before his death. The date has been assumed to be late in 209, from IG II 2, 
1077, Athens, the sole evidence (quoted p. 186, above), but G. Di Vita-Evrard, to whom I 
am indebted for showing me her typescript, can demonstrate that this belongs a year later, 
cf. her summary, 1987. The evidence collected in Mastino 161, naturally limited following 
his damnatio, shows only four inscriptions with tr.pot. II, three with tr.pot. III, none with I 
(or no number) or IV. His grant would then belong to c. October or November 210, tr. pot. 
II from 10 December 210, tr. pot. III from 10 December 211. (The few coins that appear to 
show tr. pot. IV (IIII) may be discounted.) His praenomen fluctuates, see the listing in 
Mastino 153ff. It may be that it was deliberately changed, perhaps more than once, e.g. 
from original P. to L., to avoid confusion with no. 21, and back to P. after the latter’s death; 
but the incidence does not match this hypothesis. He is not known to have married. 
23. Septimius Macer. Known only from HA Sev. 1.2, where he is called ‘avus 
-218- 
paternus’. This must be wrong as IRT 412 gives the grandfather as L. Septimius Severus 
(no. 26). The latter should have been listed; perhaps omitted in error or in transmission, 
likewise ‘proavus’ before Macer. He should be the great-grand-father. ‘Macer’ is found at 
Lepcis (and Oea), borne by non-Romans, cf. under no. 3 above, suggesting that it could be 
a latinisation of a Punic or Libyan name. The gentilicium ‘Septimius’ (not specifically 
attested in his case) could have been chosen because of the presence of Septimius Flaccus, 
evidently legate of III Augusta, at Lepcis, in the Flavian period, thus Birley 1969, 255f. But 
that person is only so called in Ptolemy 1.8.4 and it is often assumed that ‘Septimius’ is a 
mistake for ‘Suellius’: Suellius Flaccus was active as legate, in the Syrtica, in 87 and could 
be Ptolemy’s man, cf. e.g. Thomasson 1984, 395, with further references. An unknown 
senatorial Septimius could have been at Lepcis as legate or even proconsul, cf. AE 1973. 
543 for one who was legate in Cilicia in AD 75. Alternatively, it is conceivable that the name 
was selected because to a Punic ear or eye it evoked špṭm, the plural of špṭ=Latin sufes. 
See further Birley 1988. 
24. Septimius Severus. Named only by Herodian 4.6.3 as a cousin of Caracalla killed after 
Geta’s death (cognomen only). If a first cousin he should be a son of no. 21, which is 
perfectly possible. He might be a grandson of no. 25. Barbieri no. 470 suggests he could be 
the same as no. 15, also killed at this time (HA Carac. 3.6-7, where the MSS have ‘Afer’); if 
so he had at least two cognomina, cf. no. 17. Herodian could well have guessed the name, 
however, so this person remains slightly wraith-like. Corbier 1982, 725; Torelli 398. 
25. C. Septimius Severus cos. 160, has emerged since 1963, when G. Di Vita-Evrard 
published the inscription from the arch of M. Aurelius at Lepcis giving his name as proconsul 
in 174, with Septimius as his legate (AE 1967. 536 repeats the text); she showed that he 
can be identified with ‘-mius Severus’, proconsul and patron of Thubursicu Numidarum on 
ILAlg I 1283, giving his full career, with minor gaps. The tabula Banasitana (AE 1971. 534) 
supplies his filiation, ‘C.f.’, and tribe, ‘Quirina’. That at last demonstrated that the Septimii 
were granted citizenship in the Flavian (or just possibly Claudio-Neronian) period, Birley 
1976, and disposed of the identification with a homonymous patron of Praeneste, in the 
‘Pupinia’ (CIL XIV 3004): that tribe is confined to Italy, and by inference the Septimii would 
have been Italian settlers. Praeneste is close to the ager Hernicus, where Statius’ friend had 
property, as well as at Veii and Cures, as pointed out in PIR1 S 345, and pressed by Barnes 
1967, 89. The filiation makes no. 16 a likely parent, and at any rate rules out no. 26, hence 
this man and no. 15 cannot be ‘patrui’ as in HA Sev. 1.2, but quite probably ‘fratres


--- PAGE 180 ---
patrueles’ of Septimius’ father. This person will also be the ‘adfinis’ who secured Septimius 
the latus clavus in the early 160s, but ‘bis iam consulari’ there must be an error, perhaps 
from textual corruption, Birley 1970, 63f. For his career, Thomasson 1975, 75f. and Alföldy 
1977, 174f., 188 n. 203, 227, 257; Eck 178f.; Schumacher 83f., 238; Corbier 1982, 723. 
After preliminary stages (no military tribunate), a road curator, legate of XVI Flavia in Syria, 
legate of Lycia-Pamphylia, consul, legate of one of the German provinces, almost certainly 
Inferior, proconsul of Africa; also XVvir s.f. and sodalis Hadrianalis. Last recorded July 177, 
in consilium of Marcus and Commodus (AE 1971. 534). 
-219- 
26. L. Septimius Severus. Grandfather of Septimius, sufes, praefectus when Roman 
citizenship was granted to Lepcis, i.e. when it became a colonia under Trajan, and first 
duumvir of the colonia: IRT 412, much discussed, notably in an article by Guey 1951, cf. 
also Birley 1969, 253ff., 1970, 63, 75ff. and now Di Vita-Evrard 1984. His identity with 
Statius’ friend, the rich Roman knight from Lepcis called Septimius Severus, brought to Italy 
as a child, commemorated in Silvae 4.5 and 4. praef., from at latest AD 95, is disputed, but 
is perfectly plausible. (The argument of Pflaum 1968, 57ff. that Statius’ friend could not be 
the iudex selectus of IRT 4.12 is misconceived: he could have been iudex at an early stage, 
rather than after being duumvir, as Pflaum assumes.) To the arguments brought forward 
elsewhere I would add simply the observation that the names of his children Polla and Geta 
evoke the circle of Statius, cf. above under nos. 10 and 20. Assumed to be the son of a 
Septimius Macer, no. 23 above; mother unknown, perhaps a different one from that of his 
assumed brother, no. 16. The Italian property may well have been divided, but the Veii part 
went to Septimius and perhaps his brother, HA Sev. 4.5, brilliantly emended by Hammond, 
142ff., backed by CIL XI 3816, a lead pipe found on the Via Cassia near Veii with the name 
‘P. Septimi Geta’, either Septimius’ brother or father (overlooked by Sailer 176 n. 156, who 
expresses scepticism). Also recorded in IRT 413. Cf. also Torelli 379ff., and on Statius’ 
poem Vessey. See further Birley 1988. 
27. L.SEPTIMIUS SEVERUS. His year of birth, 146 in HA Sev. 1.3, works out as 145 from 
Dio 76.17.4, giving his age at death sixty-five years, nine months, twenty-five days, and 
birthday as 11 April (9 April in HA, perhaps a corrupt text). Guey 1956 produced strong 
arguments (astronomical) for 145 being correct. Further discussion in Birley 1970, 65f.; 
Barnes 1976, 19f., 40; Rubin 33ff.: Septimius may have falsified the year. His titulature as 
emperor is briefly discussed by Murphy, 102f. 
C. 
FULVII 
They seem to be an immigrant family, calling 
themselves ‘Fulvii Lepcitani’ in 3/2 BC, IRT 320, 
328, as interpreted by Romanelli. But the names 
of nos. 29, 32-3 show they intermarried with 
enfranchised natives, as would be expected, viz. 
the Plautii, a powerful family in second century


--- PAGE 181 ---
Lepcis: Torelli, 385ff., plausibly suggesting 
(404) Ti. Plautius Silvanus Aelianus, son of the 
proconsul Lamia, as patron and source of the 
name, and Iddibal son of Balsillec, etc., the last 
dated non-citizen notable (IRT 300, AD 72), as 
an ancestor, citing IRT 734 (Torelli 402). 
Intermarriage with Marcii (perhaps descended 
from Annobal Ruso who paid for the temple of 
Ceres in AD 36, IRT 269: Torelli 402) is 
suggested in Birley 1969, 256ff. (citing IRT 
705). On the Plautii see now esp. Di Vita-Evrard 
1982. 
28. Fulvia Pia. Mother of Septimius, known only from IRT 415-6 (after AD 198) and HA Sev. 
1.2. Birley 1969, 256; 1970, 64 f. 
29. PU (BLIA) FULVIA PLAUTILLA. Daughter of no. 32, sister of 33, betrothed to 18 in 200, 
married in 202, divorced in 205, killed 212. Augusta 202-05. No children known, cf. under 
18. PIR2 F 564. 
30. Fulvius Pius. Maternal grandfather of Septimius, known only from HA Sev. 1.2. 
-220- 
31. Fulvius Pius cos. ord. 238. Presumed descendant of Septimius’ grandfather, no. 30. PIR2 
F 553; Barbieri no. 1054; Dietz 165f. Perhaps ‘Gaius’, if identical with the C. Fulvius Pius of 
AE 1930.67. 
32. C. Fulvius Plautianus. Kinsman of Septimius (Herodian 3.10.6), hence one of the Lepcis 
Fulvii, and perhaps the son of a Plautia, cf. above under C. Probably the ‘Fluvius’ in a 
fragment of Dio, 73.15.4, convicted by Pertinax as proconsul of Africa, for serious offences, 
probably in 188 or 189, but given some important post or distinction by Pertinax as emperor 
‘as a favour to Severus’. His career before he became Guard Prefect is difficult to establish 
because of his damnatio in 205, but Grosso 14ff. shows that CIL XIV S 4380 ought to be 
Plautianus as prefect of the vigiles in 195, not later than summer; and 17ff. that he was 
already Guard Prefect, not yet c.v., on 1 January 197 (from AE 1935. 156). He was not 
necessarily given command of the vigiles by Pertinax, as Grosso argues, and may be the 
man whose names are erased on IRT 572, as the editors suggest ad loc., honoured by his 
sister Fulvia Nepotilla, her husband, also a Fulvius and their sons. If so, he was praefectus 
vehiculorum and procurator XX hereditatium, cf. CP no. 238. It remains uncertain. He was 
comes of Septimius ‘on all his expeditions’: Corbier 1974 discusses this question in detail. 
The theory of Hasebroek, 109, 131ff., that there were two ‘rifts’ between Septimius and 
Plautianus before his overthrow was disputed by Judeich, rejected by Grosso. On the 
statues row, cf. p. 154 above. PIR2 F 554; Barbieri no. 255; Schumacher 36 (he was


--- PAGE 182 ---
pontifex as well as augur, yet another sign of his exceptional influence). Evidence for his 
being an oil-producer: Manacorda; Di Vita-Evrard 1985. 
33. C. Fulvius Plautius Hortensianus. Son of no. 32. Surely ‘Plautius’ as in Dio 77.1.2, in 
spite of PIR2 F 555. For his presumed mother see no. 54. CIL XIV 4392 shows he was in the 
‘Quirina’. Exiled with his sister and put to death with her. 
D. 
THE EMESENE DYNASTY 
34. Gessius Alexianus Bassianus=M.AURELIUS 
SEVERUS ALEXANDER. Son of no. 37 by her 
second husband, no. 36. Only twelve in 221 
according to Herodian 5.7.4, hence not the 
magister Arvalium of 214 (no. 35), who may be 
an elder brother. His sister and brother-in-law 
were murdered by Macrinus, as was his father, 
in 218 (Dio 78.31.4, 33.2-34.12, fragmentary). 
Bowersock 1975, 231ff. argues that Herodian 
5.3.3, 7.3 is correct in calling him Alexianus, but 
Dio 78.30.3, 79.17.2, 18.3 wrong, giving him 
Bassianus, before his change of name to 
Alexander in 221. Surely both are right. The 
family favoured double cognomina, cf. nos. 37, 
41, 45. PIR2 A 1610; Barbieri no. 966+Agg.; 
Kettenhofen. 
35. M. Julius Gessius Bassianus. Magister of the Arval Brethren in 214, but did not attend 
their ceremonies, probably because he was in the east. Unless Herodian is completely 
mistaken about no. 34’s age (not impossible), the suggestion in PIR2 J 342 that the 
magister is the future emperor seems implausible. An elder brother is more likely. Barbieri 
no. 296. 
36. Gessius Marcianus. From Area Caesarea in Syria, second husband of no. 37, father of 
no. 34 and of a daughter, murdered with her husband in 218; his own death followed soon 
after (cf. above under 34). He was a procurator, no details 
-221-


--- PAGE 183 ---
known (Dio 78.30.3). Mentioned by implication in Digest 1.9.12. PIR2 G 171; Bowersock 
1982, 665 takes him to have been adlected to the senate, but see Raepsaet-Charlier 12 and 
n.74. 
37. JULIA Avita MAMAEA. Mother of no. 34, and Augusta from 222, killed with him in 235. 
Her first cognomen comes from her father (no. 45), the second is ‘dynastic’ at Emesa (see 
under no. 40). First married to a consular and allowed to retain her rank when married to 
her second husband, the equestrian Gessius Marcianus (see under 36). PIR2 J 649; 
Kettenhofen, esp. 43ff. 
38. JULIA DOMNA. Could be the lady of this name who eventually inherited from her great-
uncle, ‘patruus’, a primipilaris named Julius Agrippa (see no. 43). Daughter of no. 46, date 
of birth unknown, married to Septimius at latest in 187. Her name was claimed to be a Latin 
translation— ‘dom (i) na’ —of Syrian ‘Martha’ by Domaszewski, but see Kettenhofen 76f; 
Shahid 41, who shows its relation to Arab names (meaning ‘black’). On the supposed 
horoscope, Kettenhofen, 77f.; Syme, 87ff.; Rubin, 178ff. (with the convincing argument 
that the story, ascribed to Marius Maximus in HA Sev. Alex. 5.4, also used in Sev. 3.6, Get. 
3.1, was spread as propaganda). On the allegations of adultery and conspiracy, of incest 
with Antoninus and supposed marriage with him (and the stepson idea), see especially 
Rubin 173ff. In general, Kettenhofen; Raepsaet-Charlier no. 436 (both with full 
bibliography). 
39. JULIA MAESA. Sister of no. 38, wife of no. 45, mother of nos. 37 and 41. Augusta from 
218 until her death. PIR2 J 678; Kettenhofen, esp. 23ff, 33ff., who shows that her role was 
greatly inflated by Herodian, and that Dio must be preferred. Further references in 
Raepsaet-Charlier no. 445. On her name, Shahid 41: ‘most probably the feminine nomen 
agentis of Arabic masa, a verb which signifies walking with a swinging gait.’ 
40. Julia Mamaea. Wife of Polemo II of Pontus (no. 60), as revealed by a bronze coin 
published by Seyrig; see also Sullivan, 926 n.85; Chad 68. She is taken to be daughter of 
Samsigeramus II, dynast of Emesa AD 14-47, and sister of the last ruler, the rex magnus C. 
Julius Sohaemus (no. 47). On the name, related to the Arab Mama, Shahid 42. The 
emergence of this woman helps to support the descent of nos. 38-9 from the old royal 
house of Emesa. 
41. JULIA SOAEMIAS Bassiana. Elder daughter of no. 39, sister of no. 37, wife of Sex. 
Varius Marcellus (no. 51) and mother of no. 50 and at least one other child (ILS 478, the 
sarcophagus of her husband was dedicated by her ‘cum filis’). Kettenhofen, 23ff. admirably 
corrects the often imaginary version of her role from 218 onwards, based on Herodian’s 
romanticised account. Note especially his welcome exposition of the true role of Gannys 
Eutychianus (often confused with another man, Valerius Comazon), Soaemias’ lover, who 
had been brought up in Maesa’s household (Dio 80.6.1—but this does not say he was the 
boy’s tropheus, as Kettenhofen 30). She was Augusta from 218 and murdered with her son 
in 222. PIR2 J 704; Raepsaet-Charlier no. 460 (with further references). For the name 
‘Soaemias’, related to the ‘Sohaemus’ —Suhaym name of the Arab dynasts of Emesa, 
Shahid 41f. (like ‘Domna’ it is linked to the colour black). ‘Bassiana’ is taken from her father 
the high-priest. 
-222- 
42. (Julius). Presumed father of 46 and brother of 43.


--- PAGE 184 ---
43. Julius Agrippa. This man, a primipilaris, left a will which was the subject of litigation 
some time after his death, his property eventually going to his grand-niece Julia Domna 
(Digest 32.38.4, from Book XIX of the Digesta of Cervidius Scaevola, repeated by him in his 
third book of Responsa, Dig. 32.93 pr., although there with stock names). Identity of the 
grand-niece with the empress is doubted in PIR2 J 662, and elsewhere and not discussed by 
Kettenhofen or Raepsaet-Charlier no. 436, but is perfectly possible. ‘Agrippa’ is of course a 
favoured name in the region, cf. esp. Rey-Coquais for a powerful Julius Agrippa at Apamea, 
and it is not inconceivable that a member of Julia’s family entered the centurionate, cf. 
Dobson, 15ff. His nos. 73, 75, 76, 94, 95 come from Heliopolis, and the man could have 
started ‘ex equite Romano’. 
44. Julius Alexander. A man of Emesa, hunted down and killed on Commodus’ orders c.190, 
allegedly for provoking his jealousy by his prowess at lion-hunting, Dio 72.14; for 
conspiracy according to HA 8.3. Letta argues that the lion-hunt was a royal activity and that 
Julius Alexander deliberately infringed on the imperial prerogative and had serious designs 
on the throne. At all events, he ought to be linked to the dynastic family, cf. IGLS V 2213-4, 
two Alexanders buried at Emesa in the second century AD, and Alexander, brother of the 
dynast Iamblichus, killed after Actium (Dio 51.2.2). 
45. C. Julius Avitus Alexianus cos. c. 200. This man’s identity and career has finally been 
pieced together properly, combining the inscriptions from Salonae (AE 1921. 64=1963. 42) 
and Augusta Vindelicorum (AE 1962. 229) with the mentions of him, as Avitus, husband of 
Maesa (no. 39) in Dio. An equestrian officer, after the tres militiae a procurator, ad 
annonam Ostiis, whence he was adlected to the senate by Septimius, made legate of the 
legion IV (Flavia, almost certainly), then legate of Raetia, where he dedicated an altar to 
Elagabalus, the Emesene god (AE 1962.229) and consul. Thereafter he was long out of 
service, probably through hostility from Plautianus, but reappears as comes of the emperors 
in Britain, i.e. 208-211, twice prefect of the alimenta in Italy under Caracalla, legate of 
Dalmatia and proconsul of Asia, comes of Caracalla, dying on a mission to Cyprus shortly 
before Caracalla’s murder. See Halfmann for the above reconstruction; there may be slight 
room for doubt over the date of his Asian proconsulship, cf. Barnes 1986. For his last name, 
cf. C. Julius Alexio of Emesa, father of C. Julius Sampsigeramus who built himself a 
monumental tomb there in AD 78 or 79, clearly from the royal house, PIR2 J 541; Chad 92. 
A useful summary in Thomasson 1985, 122f. 
46. Julius Bassianus. Named only in Epit. de Caes. 21.1, 23.2, presumably deriving from 
Marius Maximus. His second name, deriving from the Syrian basus, a priestly title 
(Domaszewski 209ff.), was borne by nos. 18 and 41, his grand-children and by nos. 34 and 
50 his great-grandchildren (hence 35 surely belongs in this family too). 
47. C. Julius Sohaemus. King of Emesa from AD 53, shortly afterwards made king of distant 
Sophene as well, called ‘rex magnus’ as king of more than one kingdom, also ‘philocaesar’, 
‘philorhomaeus’, given ‘ornamenta consularia’, was 
-223- 
dummvir quinquennalis and patron of the colonia at Heliopolis, ILS 8958, the inscription 
from his statue at that city. Son of Samsigeramus II, brother of Aziz, Iotape and—as now 
appears—of Julia Mamaea (no. 40). Assisted Rome against the Jewish rebels in 66, was 
among the first to support Vespasian in 69, brought troops to the siege of Jerusalem in 70 
and against Commagene in 73. Thereafter disappears from the record. PIR2 J 582 and 
Seyrig. His kingdom is assumed by most to have been absorbed in Syria on his death, but


--- PAGE 185 ---
there is no explicit evidence. The high-priesthood of the god Elagabalus is generally thought 
to have been retained by members of his family. On the name ‘Sohaemus’ see above, under 
41. Other bearers of the name, PIR1 S 541ff. 
48. (C. Julius) Sohaemus, consul before 164, Alföldy 1977, 195, made king of Armenia in 
164, expelled once but restored; length of his reign unknown, Dio 71.3.11. Iamblichus, the 
Emesene novelist, explicitly claims Sohaemus as a fellow-countryman (Photius, Bibl. 94), 
which the name would in any case suggest, cf. no. 47, says that he had been consul before 
becoming king of Armenia, and also labels him ‘the Achaemenid and Arsacid’, dismissed by 
Bowersock 1982, 665 as ‘ignorant glosses’. But the explanation must be descent from a 
Median Iotape: the name occurs in the Emesene dynasty as that of a daughter of 
Samsigeramus II, PIR2 I 45 (all based on Josephus, Ant. 18. 135), presumably derived by 
descent from the Median princess once betrothed to Alexander Helios, thus Macurdy 42, 
cited approvingly by Chad 66, who later, however, 119n.6 rejects the ‘Arsacid’ label as 
gratuitous (he also adheres to the old-fashioned dating of this Sohaemus, 118ff.; see 
Chaumont 147ff.) 
49. Varius Avitus Bassianus=M.AURELIUS ANTONINUS= ‘Elagabalus’. Probably born in 203, 
priest of Elagabalus at Emesa in 218, son of nos. 41 and 50. On his names, see the 
comment under 34; in spite of doubts by Bowersock 1975, there is no reason to reject Dio, 
who calls him ‘Avitus’, the first of two cognomina borne by his mother’s father (no. 45); his 
cousin was the given other one, Alexianus, and they both took ‘Bassianus’, the name of the 
priestly great-grand-father (no. 46). Kettenhofen, especially 23ff., is indispensable on this 
person, not least on the circumstances of his elevation. Otherwise, Barbieri no. 963+Agg. 
50. Sex. Varius Marcellus. His career, frequently discussed, e.g. by Pflaum in CP no. 237, 
Birley 1981, 296ff. (following the line in 1971, 304ff.), has now been reinterpreted by 
Halfmann on the lines of his treatment of no. 45. He shows that the puzzling appointment 
‘vice praefectorum praetorio et urbis functus’ can best be explained as a short-term post 
following the murder of Geta, rather than earlier; further that Marcellus was probably 
excluded, like no. 45, from holding appointment during Plautianus’ main period of power. 
The second post, procurator in Britain, can be assigned to the expedition, 208-11, followed 
by the powerful charge as a rationibus, the vice-prefecture, and adlection to senatorial rank 
within the first year or so after Septimius’ death; then prefecture of the military treasury 
(important in 212) and governorship of Numidia, where he probably died, without having 
been consul. His home was Apamea. 
E. 
OTHERS 
51. Aradius Saturninus. See above under no. 11, 
and, on the Aradii of Bulla 
-224- 
Regia, Corbier 1982, 689ff, 713. Their first consular seems to be Q. Aradius Rufinus Optatus 
Aelianus, ‘Severan’; the exact date is doubtful and much discussed, cf. e.g. Birley 1981, 
175f.; but new information keeps appearing, see also the brilliant conjectures of Champlin 
1981. This man should belong to the Bulla Regia family, but his wife Septimia Severa may


--- PAGE 186 ---
not be from Lepcis and the couple may be later, as the lettering of their sarcophagus from 
Italian Interpromium, EE VIII 132 is said to look. The Aradii went on a long time, their latest 
representative being City Prefect in 376. This man might have been polyonymous, and must 
remain doubtful. 
52. M. Cornelius Fronto cos. 143. The famous orator. Kinsman of the Petronii Mamertini, as 
pointed out by Champlin 1980, 10, 145 n. 22, picking up Fronto, Ad amicos 1.10.2. See 
nos. 56-8 below. 
53. (Hortensia). Conjectured wife of no. 32, based on the name of his son, no. 33. Hortensii 
are not found at Lepcis. 
54. (Neratia). Conjectured wife of no. 17, from the name borne by his daughter, no. 9. 
Presumably from the famous Saepinum family. 
55. (Octavia). Conjectured wife of no. 23 (or perhaps of 26), to explain ‘Octavilla’ and 
‘Octavianus’ in the names of nos. 8, 9 and 17. 
56. Paccia Marciana, first wife of Septimius, whom she married in 175. She died at latest in 
187, evidently childless: the alleged daughters mentioned in HA Sev. 8.1, provided with 
dowries and husbands in 193, could only have been hers, not Julia’s; but they are fictional, 
Hasebroek 49. Her marriage is mentioned in HA Sev. 3.2 (she is called ‘Marciam’): 
Septimius is there said to have omitted mention of her from his autobiography but to have 
set up statues to her as emperor; cf. IRT 410-11, Lepcis, CIL VIII 19494, Cirta. Her two 
names derive from first century proconsuls, Marcius Barea and Paccius Africanus, Birley 
1969, 256, showing that her family was of Punic origin. Raepsaet-Charlier no. 590 (with 
further references). 
57, 58, 59. M. Petronius Mamertinus cos. 150, was a kinsman of the orator Fronto, Ad 
amicos 1.10.2, as pointed out by Champlin 1980, 10, which supports the argument in Birley 
1969, 259f. for the African origin of these Petronii. The cos. 150 was probably nephew 
rather than son of the Guard Prefect of this name under Pius. His own sons, Sura 
Mamertinus cos.ord. 182 and Sura Septimianus cos. ord. 190, may have been the product 
of his marriage with a Septimia, the natural explanation for the cognomen ‘Septimianus’. A 
sister of nos. 15 and 25, or perhaps a daughter of one of them, would be suitable, although 
other Septimii could be found (not the procurator L. Septi—Petro—, who served in Egypt 
under the future Guard Prefect or his possible kinsman M. Petronius Honoratus; CP no. 146 
bis). The cos. 182 was son-in-law of M. Aurelius, married to Cornificia. He and his brother 
were killed by Commodus in 190 or 191, HA Comm. 7.5. 
60. Polemo II of Pontus. Husband of no. 40, as shown by Seyrig, yet another royal name 
lurking in the background of Julia Domna’s family. Also king of Cilician Olba, descended via 
his mother Antonia Tryphaena, wife of the Thracian 
-225- 
king Cotys, from Antony and Cleopatra: RE 21.2 (1952), 1285ff. (W. Hoffmann); Sullivan 
908ff. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY


--- PAGE 187 ---
a 
Alföldy, G. 1967 Die Legionslegaten der römischen Rheinarmeen(Epigraphische Studien 
3, Bonn 1967) 
Alföldy, G. 1968 ‘Septimius Severus und der Senat’, Bonner Jahrbücher 168 (1968), 
112-60 
Alföldy, G. 1977 Konsulat und Senatorenstand unter den Antoninen (Bonn 1977) 
b 
Barbieri, G. L’Albo senatorio da Settimio Severe a Carino (Rome 1952) 
Barnes, T.D. 1967 ‘The family and career of Septimius Severus’, Historia 16 (1967) 87-
107 
Barnes, T.D. 1968 ‘Pre-Dacian acta martyrum’,Journal of Theological Studies n.s. 19 
(1968) 509-31 
Barnes, T.D. 1971 Tertullian: a literary and historical study (Oxford 1971) 
Barnes, T.D. 1976 The Sources of the Historia Augusta (Collection Latomus 155Brussels 
1976) 
Barnes, T.D. 1986 ‘Proconsuls of Asia under Caracalla’, Phoenix 40 (1986) 202-5 
Bersanetti, G.M. ‘P. Settimio Geta, fratello di Settimio Severe’, Epigraphica 4 (1942) 
105-26 
Birley, A.R. 1969 ‘The coups d’état of the year 193’, Bonner Jahrbücher 169 (1969) 
247-80 
Birley, A.R. 1970 ‘Some notes on HA Severus 1-4’, HAC 1968-9 (Bonn 1970) 59-77 
Birley, A.R. 1971 Septimius Severus the African Emperor (London 1971) 
Birley, A.R. 1976 ‘C. Septimius C.f. Qui. Severus: a note’, HAC 1972-4 (Bonn 1976) 63-
4 
Birley, A.R. 1981 The Fasti of Roman Britain (Oxford 1981) 
Birley, A.R. 1988 ‘Names at Lepcis Magna’, Libyan Studies 19 (1988) 
Bowersock, G.W. 1975 ‘Herodian and Elagabalus’, Yale Classical Studies 24 (1975) 
229-36 
Bowersock, G.W. 1982 ‘Roman senators from the near east: Syria, Judaea, Arabia, 
Mesopotamia’, Epigrafia e ordine senatorio (Tituli 5, Rome 1982) 651-88 
c 
Chad, C. Les dynastes d’Émèse (Beirut 1972) 
Champlin, E. 1980 Fronto and Antonine Rome (Cambridge, Mass and London, 1980) 
Champlin, E. 1981 ‘Serenus Sammonicus’, Harvard Stud, in Class. Phil. 85 (1981) 189-
212


--- PAGE 188 ---
Chastagnol, A. ‘Latus clavus et adlectio dans l’Histoire Auguste’, HAC 1975-6 (Bonn 
1978), 107-31 
Chaumont, M.-L. ‘L’Arménie entre Rome et l’Iran I. De l’avènement d’Auguste à 
l’avènement de Dioclétien’, ANRW 2.9.1 (1976) 71-194 
-226- 
Corbier, M. 1974 ‘Plautien, comes de Septime-Sévère’, Mélanges P. Boyancé (Rome, 
1974) 213-18 
Corbier, M. 1982 ‘Les families clarissimes d’Afrique proconsulaire (Ier-IIIe siècle)’, 
Epigrafia e ordine senatorio (Tituli 5, Rome 1982) 685-754 
d 
Dietz, K. Senatus contra principem. Untersuchungen zur senatorischen Opposition 
gegen Kaiser Maximinus Thrax (Munich 1980) 
Di Vita-Evrard, G. 1963 ‘Un nouveau proconsul d’Afrique, parent de Septime Sévère’, 
Mélanges d’arch. et d’hist. école franç. de Rome 75 (1963) 389-414 
Di Vita-Evrard, G. 1981 ‘Le proconsul polyonyme IRT 517’, Mélanges d’arch. et d’hist. 
école franç. de Rome 93 (1981) 183-226 
Di Vita-Evrard, G. 1982 ‘Note sur “trois” sénateurs de Lepcis Magna. Le clarissimat des 
Plautii’, Epigrafia e ordine senatorio (Tituli 4, Rome 1982) 453-65 
Di Vita-Evrard, G. 1984 ‘“Municipium Flavium Lepcis Magna”’, Bull. du comité des 
travaux hist. n.s. 17 B (1984) 197-210 
Di Vita-Evrard, G. 1985 ‘Note sur quelques timbres d’amphores de Tripolitaine’, ibid. 19 
B (1985) 147-59 
Di Vita-Evrard, G. 1987 ‘De la date du procés d’Hérode Atticus à l’ére d’Hadrien et à 
l’association au pouvoir de Géta’, Praktika tou 8 diethnous synedrious ellenikes kai 
latinikes epigraphikes 1982 II (Athens 1987) 
Dobson, B. Die Primpilares (Bonn 1978) 
Domaszewski, A.V. ‘Die politische Bedeutung der Religion von Emesa’, Abhandlungen 
zur römischen Religion (Leipzig & Berlin 1909) 197-216 
Duncan-Jones, R.P. The Economy of the Roman Empire. Quantitative Studies 
(Cambridge 1974) 
e 
Eck, W. Die Statthalter der germanischen Provinzen vom 1.-3 Jahrhundert 
(Epigraphische Studien 14, Bonn 1985) 
Elmayer, A.F. ‘The reinterpretation of Latino-Punic inscriptions from Roman 
Tripolitania’, Libyan Studies 15 (1984) 93-105


--- PAGE 189 ---
g 
Grosso, F. ‘Richerche su Plauziano e gli avvenimenti del suo tempo’, Rendiconti. 
Accademia dei Lincei8 23 (1968) 7-58 
Guey, J. 1948 ‘28 janvier 98-28 janvier 198, ou le siècle des Antonins’, Revue des 
études anciennes 50 (1948) 60-70 
Guey, J. 1951 ‘L’inscription du grand-père de Septime-Sévère à Leptis Magna’, 
Mémoires…societé nationale…antiq. de France 82 (1951) 161-226 
Guey, J. 1956 ‘La date de naissance de l’empereur Septime-Sévère d’après son 
horoscope’, Bull…soc. nationale…antiq. de France 1956, 33-5 
h 
Halfmann, H. ‘Zwei syrische Verwandte des severischen Kaiserhauses’, Chiron 12 
(1982) 217-35 
Hammond M. ‘Septimius Severus, Roman bureaucrat’, Harvard Studies Class. Philology 
51 (1940) 137-73 
-227- 
Hasebroek, J. Untersuchungen zur Geschichte des Kaisers Septimius Severus 
(Heidelberg 1921) 
j 
Jenkins, G. Sylloge Nummorum Graecorum. North Africa Syrtica Mauretania 
(Copenhagen 1969) 
Judeich, W. ‘Plautianus und Severus’, Festschrift Alexander Cartellieri (Weimar 1927) 
63-71 
k 
Kajanto, I. The Latin Cognomina (Helsinki 1965) Kettenhofen, E. Die syrischen 
Augustae in der historischen Uberlieferung (Bonn 1979) 
l 
Letta, C. ‘Dal leone di Giulio Alessandro ai leoni di Caracalla. La dinastia di Emesa verso 
la porpora imperiale’, Studi E. Bresciani (Pisa 1985) 289-302 
m 
Macurdy, G. ‘Iotape’, Journal Roman Studies 26 (1936) 40-2 
Manacorda, D. ‘Testimonianze sulla produzione e il consume dell’olio nel III secolo’, 
Dialoghi di Archeologia 9-10 (1977) 542-601 
Mastino, A. Le titolature di Carcalla e Geta attraverso le iscrizioni (indici) (Bologna 
1981) 
Murphy, G.J. The Reign of the Emperor L. Septimius Severus from the Evidence of the


--- PAGE 190 ---
Inscriptions (1947) 
p 
Pflaum, H.G. 1968 ‘Les juges des cinq décuries originaires d’Afrique’, Antiquités 
africaines 2 (1968) 153-95 
r 
Raepsaet-Charlier M.-T., Prosopographie des femmes de l’ordre sénatoriale (Ier-IIe 
siècles) (Louvain 1987) 
Rey-Coquais, J.P. ‘Inscriptions grecques d’Apamée’, Annales archéol. Syrie 23 (1973) 
39-84 
Rössler, O. ‘Libyen von der Cyrenaica bis zur Mauretania Tingitana’, Die Sprachen im 
Römischen Reich, eds. G. Neumann, J. Untermann (Bonn 1980) 267-84 
Romanelli, P. ‘Fulvii Lepcitani’, Archaeologia Classica 10 (1958) 258-61 
Rubin, Z. Civil-War Propaganda and Historiography (Collection Latomus 173, Brussels 
1980) 
s 
Saller, R.P. Personal Patronage under the Early Empire (Cambridge 1982) 
Schumacher, L. Prosopographische Untersuchungen zur Besetzung der vier hohen 
römischen Priesterkollegien im Zeitalter der Antonine und der Severer(96-235n. Chr.) 
(Diss. Mainz 1973) 
Seyrig, H. ‘Monnaies hellénistiques. XVI. Polémon II et Julia Mamaea’, Revue 
numismatique, 6e sér., 11 (1969) 45-7 
Shahid, I. Rome and the Arabs (Washington D.C. 1984) 
Soproni, S. ‘Die Caesarwürde Caracallas und die syrische Kohorte von Szentendre’, 
Alba Regia 18 (1980) 39-51 
Sullivan, R.D. ‘The dynasty of Emesa’, ANRW 2.8 (1977) 198-219; ‘The dynasty of 
Judaea in the first century’, ibid. 296-354; ‘Papyri reflecting the eastern dynastic 
network’, ibid. 908-38 
Syme, R. ‘Astrology in the Historia Augusta’, Historia Augusta 
-228- 
 
Papers (Oxford 1983) 80-97 (reprinted from HAC 1972-4 (Bonn 1976) 291-309 
t 
Thomasson, B.E. 1975 Senatus Populusque Romanus (Gothenburg 1975) 
Thomasson, B.E. 1984 Laterculi Praesidum (Gothenburg 1984)


--- PAGE 191 ---
Thomasson, B.E. 1985 ‘Zur Laufbahn einiger Statthalter des Prinzipats’, Opuscula 
Romana 15 (1985) 109-41 
Torelli, M. ‘Per una storia della classe dirigente di Leptis Magna’, Rendiconti…
Accademia dei Lincei8 28 (1973) 377-410 
v 
Vessey, D.W.T.C. ‘Non solitis fidibus: some aspects of Statius, Silvae 4.5’, Antiquité 
Classique 39 (1970) 507-18 
-229- 
References and Notes 
For Bibliography to Chapters 1-3, see pp. 258-61 
1. 
The Emporia (pages 1-7) 
1 App. 2 nos. 27; 20; 28—consuls of 145: Birley 1987, 89. 
2 grandfather: App. 2 no. 26—self-adoption: Dio 76. 9.4; cf. pp. 117, 122 above. Geta: 
App. 2 no. 20—Aper, C. Septimius Severus: nos. 15; 25—Polla: no. 10— ‘another son…
Octavilla’: nos. 21; 8—Maximus: HA Geta 2.1 (cf. App. 1.A4). 
3 Phoenicians: Harden provides a useful introduction—language: Röllig 285f. —Carthage: 
Warmington—Cyrene: Herodotus 4.151ff. —Carthage’s response: Di Vita 1969—Lpqy 
and the other names: Rössler 272— ‘little island’: called Lyd […], IPT 32, and 
commentary, p.84— ‘Neapolis’: IRT p. 75. —Herodotus 4. 175 (Hill of the Graces); 198 
(Cinyps region). 
4 Cinyps, Dorieus: Herodotus 5.42—Carthage: Whittaker 1974; 1978. 
5 Tripolitania, geography and climate: Haynes 13ff. gives a concise introduction—
indigenous peoples: Bates remains fundamental; cf. also Desanges. On both topics I 
have benefited from consulting the as yet unpublished Ph.D. thesis by D.J. Mattingly 
(1984). 
6 Punic wars: Harris 182ff.; 200ff. provides an acute analysis of their causes— Massinissa 
in the Syrtica: Livy 29. 33. 9 (205 BC) — ‘one talent’: Livy 34. 62. 2— ‘commissioners’: 
34. 61-2; Badian 1958, 125ff.; Walsh 1965, 156ff. — ‘160s’: Polybius 31.21— ‘relative 
independence…Alexandria’: Di Vita 1968a; 1982, 528f. 
7 third Punic war: Harris 234ff. —formation of province, C. Gracchus: Romanelli 1959, 
43ff.; Lassère 35ff. —Jugurtha: Sallust, BJ 77.1-4—fossa regia: Badian 1958, 138f. 
(‘Rome’s first recorded attempt to mark out an artificial frontier’); Di Vita-Evrard 1986, 
33f. and figs, 1-11. 
8 ‘free states’: Di Vita 1982, 518ff. —coinage: Jenkins— ‘abomination’: II Kings 23.13. —
Sallust, BJ 78. 4-5— ‘inscription’: IPT 31; Di Vita 1968b—sufetes: RE 4A (1931) 643ff.


--- PAGE 192 ---
—Melquart and Shadrapa: Gese 198ff. —Ba’al Hammon, Tanit: Di Vita 1982, 562ff. 
9 Herennius: Cicero, II Verr. 1.14; 5. 155f.; Rebuffat 1986—Cyrenaica: Badian 1968, 22; 
29f. —Arsinoe: Moretti— ‘new city centre’: Di Vita 1968b, 202 n. 1, 203; 1982, 553ff. 
10 Juba: Caesar, Bell. civ.2.38; Bell. Afr. 97. —Cato: Aumont. — ‘fine’: Bell. Afr. 97; 
Plutarch, Caes. 55; Di Vita 1982, 521f.; Mattingly 1988. 
11 Romanelli 1959, 111ff.; Lassère 145ff.; 166ff.; 199ff. 
2 
Lepcis Magna: from Free State to Colonia (pages 8-22) 
1 ‘free cities’: Di Vita 1982, 522ff. — ‘Italians settled’: Lassère 1977, 145ff. (he 
-230- 
 
excludes Tripolitania) —Virgil, Ecl. 1.64; Deman 1969—Herennius; chapter 1, n.9 
above—Perperna: IRT 335 (dedicated statue to Drusus Caesar) —Fulvii: IRT 320; 
328; Romanelli 1958; App. 2.C. 
2 ‘triumphs’: Thomasson 1984, 371—Balbus: Pliny, NH 5.36-7; other sources on this 
man in PIR2 C 1331. Garamantes: Daniels 1970—trade: Di Vita 1982, 588ff. 
(convincingly reasserting its importance). 
3 ‘first dated inscription’: IRT 319+IPT 21— ‘presumably…of Melqart now rebuilt’: I 
follow Di Vita 1968b. 
4 Annobal: IRT 321+IPT 24; IRT 322-3—Fulvii: IRT 320; 328—Piso: IRT 520; Di Vita 
1982, 555f. Syme 1986, 369f. favours a date of 4-3BC. It was Piso who offered 
Strabo (2.130) the famous simile comparing North Africa to a leopard’s skin— 
‘spotted with inhabited places surrounded by waterless desert’. 
5 Quirinius: Florus 2.31; generally assumed to have been proconsul of Cyrenaica, e.g. 
Thomasson 1984, 361; Syme 1986, 320 suggests he could have governed Africa, 
either in 3 BC or AD 2—Lentulus (cos. 3 BC): Thomasson 1984, 373—Cossus (cos. 
AD 1): IRT 301; Thomasson 373. 
6 ‘cult of Augustus’: Di Vita 1982, 558f. —Chalcidicum: IRT 324—Caecina: not yet 
published; Di Vita-Evrard 1982, 467f. —Asprenas: AE 1952. 232; 1905. 177; 
Thomasson 1984, 373. 
7 Lamia: IRT 930; properly explained by Di Vita-Evrard 1979, 73ff. in the light of the 
Gallicus inscriptions, p. 16 above, n. 16 below. IPT 76. 
8 Tacfarinas: Tacitus, Ann. 2.52; 3.20-1; 73-4; 4.23-6 (3.9 refers to IX Hispana on its 
way through Italy) —Dolabella: AE 1961. 107f. Romanelli 1959, 227ff. discusses the 
war. 
9 ‘statues’: IPT 22—Marsus: IRT 308—Blandus: 330-1; also on 269; 540.


--- PAGE 193 ---
10 ‘legion’: Syme 1984, 1358 shows that Dio 60.20.7 rather than Tacitus, Hist. 4.48.1 
has the details right—Ptolemy, Mauretania: RE 23 (1959) 1780ff.; 14 (1930) 
2372f.; Daniels 1987, 239. 
11 Claudius and citizenship: Sherwin-White 1973, 237ff. —Ti. Claudii at Lepcis: Torelli 
1974, 377f. —Iddibal: IRT 273—March: Birley 1969, 257f.; Torelli 1974, 402; 
already in Guey 1951b, 315—Cornutus: PIR2 A 609—Lucan: A 611—Seneca at 
Alexandria; Cons. Helv. 19.4-7; PIR2 A 617. 
12 Patrons: Barea (IRT 273); Crassus Frugi (319); Caninius (521); Blandus and 
Lupercus (330-1); Lamia: for his son Silvanus Aelianus, Syme 1988, 168f.; 
postulated as a patron by Torelli 1974, 404. 
13 Silvanus: IRT 338+IPT 26; IRT 615; AE 1968. 549 (amphitheatre); Thomasson 
1984, 376. —statues: IPT 22; App. 2 nos. 1-6. Contrast the lowly patrons of e.g. 
Thugga, Harmand 274. 
14 amphitheatre: AE 1968. 549; Di Vita-Evrard 1965—Orfitus, Ithymbal: IRT 341—
harbour: Di Vita 1974 (on the old harbour); Bartoccini 1958. 
15 ‘Punic inscription’: IPT 18—Clodius Macer; PIR2 C 1170—Festus: Tacitus, Hist. 2.98; 
4. 49-50; Thomasson 1984, 393; Vitellius and Vespasian proconsuls of Africa: id. 
376f. —Statilius Capella: Suetonius, D. Vesp. 3.1—Festus’ campaign: Daniels 1970; 
Di Vita 1982, 530ff.; Romanelli 1959, 285ff. 
16 Nero’s confiscations: assumed from Pliny, NH 18.35—Vespasian’s financial problems 
and remedies: Suetonius, D. Vesp. 16.1-3—Gallicus: Di Vita-Evrard 1979 publishes 
and discusses the inscriptions which show him at work 
-231- 
 
17 
18 
19


--- PAGE 194 ---
20 
21 
22 
-
2
3
2
-
 
festival took place in March 90: Hardie 1983, 63— ‘country retreat’: Silvae 4.53-6. 
These lines encourage Vessey 1970, 512ff. to label Septimius Severus an Epicurean. 
Plausible enough. 
23 Nerva, Trajan: Syme 1958, esp. 1-44; 88f. (death or withdrawal of poets) — iudex 
selectus: as revealed by IRT 412. This of course assumes the identity of Septimius’ 
grandfather and the friend of Statius; argued by Birley 1970, 75ff.; see also App. 2 no. 
26; and chapter 3 n.1 below— ‘iron control’: Suetonius, Domitian 8.2 (contrasting what 
followed) —trial of Priscus: Pliny, Ep. 2.11; Syme 1958, 70f. 
24 Pliny, Ep. 2.11. 
25 Pliny, Ep. 2.11; Juvenal 1. 49-59; cf. 8.119-20—colonia: IRT 412; 353; 284; Guey 
1951a, esp. 202; IRT p. 81—Curiae: Kotula 1968, 83ff.; Torelli 1971— Arch: IRT 353 
(AD 110) also 523 (another proconsul, presumably earlier). The Arch marks the


--- PAGE 195 ---
terminus ante quem: the award of colonial status could have been several years earlier. 
IRT 543 refers to the restoration of the ‘Ulpian basilica and forum’ in late antiquity. 
Presumably built at this time; but not located. 
3 
Life in Roman Tripolitania (pages 23-36; for bibliography, pp. 258-61) 
1 Severus: App. 2 no. 26—Polla, Geta: nos. 10; 20. —Marcellus and son: Statius, Silvae 
4 pr.; 4.4 (the son Geta: line 72. For his grandfather Hosidius Geta: Birley 1981, 222); 
Syme 1984, 1133; 1160; 1269; 1306. Marcellus may have become proconsul of Africa 
(c. 120): id. 1305; 1306; 1313—Polla: Statius, Silvae 2.2 and 7; Nisbet 1978, 
convincingly identifying Lucan’s widow Argentaria Polla with Polla the wife of Pollius 
Felix. 
2 Servilius Candidus: IRT 357-9; 275. Rogate: KAI no. 178—Candidus ben Candidus 
(Q’ndd’ bn Q’ndd’ bn Hn’ bn ’bdmlqrt): IPT 18. —C. Cl. Septimius Aper: IRT 316; Birley 
1976; App. 2 no. 16. —Aper, C. Septimius Severus: App. 2 nos. 15; 25. 
3 App. 2, nos. 15; 25. 
4 Suetonius: Syme 1984, 1337ff.; Birley, JRS 1984, 245f.; 249f. —Mamertinus: cf. App. 
2, nos. 57-9—C. Septimius Severus: App. 2 no. 25. 
5 Fronto: Champlin 1980, passim; App. 2 no. 52. —Tuticius Proculus: HA Marcus 2.3; 
Birley 1968, 39ff. —Apollinaris: PIR1 S 707; Champlin 1980, 18; 36; 48; 50; 54—
Urbicus: Birley 1981, 112ff.; 1987, 275 n.9; Vidman 1977— Julianus: Corbier 1982, 
719f. 
6 ‘already senators’: Corbier 1982, 721f.; 727f.; 729; Di Vita-Evrard 1982, 453ff. —
Apuleius: Hijmans 1987, 412ff. discusses the chronology of his life and writing again— 
‘extracts’: the Florida; quotation from 8. 
7 ‘Madauros…equestrian rank’: Apol. 24.1; 7-9; Lassère 252ff. Apuleius’ father was 
presumably praefectus acting on behalf of an emperor who was (honorary) IIvir (‘loco 
principis IIviralem’); cf. RE 22 (1954) 1318ff. for parallels. — Carthage: Florida 18. 15, 
36; 20.10—Athens: 18.15; 20.4—Samos: Florida 15— Hierapolis: De Mundo 17—
Pontianus: Apol. 72.3. 
8 Orfitus: Florida 17.4—On the Metamorphoses: Walsh 1968; Millar 1981. 
9 Apol. 72.1-6. The date emerges from the proconsuls Avitus and Maximus, n.12 below. 
10 ‘language was Punic’, etc.: Apol. 98.8— ‘fluent Punic’: Epit. de Caes. 20.8 
-233-


--- PAGE 196 ---
(quoted p. 35 above) — ‘made himself at home…four million sesterces’: Apol. 73.1-
7. 
11 Apol. 68.2-72.1. 
12 ‘a year or so…toga of manhood’: Apol. 7-9— ‘study oratory’: 73.1—Avitus: 24.13; 
IRT 533-5; Guey 1951b— ‘recommended’: Apol. 94.3—Pertinax: HA Pert. 1.5; cf. 
Epit. de Caes. 18.4; pp. 63f above. 
13 ‘largesse’: Apol. 87.10—Rufinus: 74.3-78.4, etc. —letter: quoted in full 83.1; 
discussed 78.5ff.— ‘returned…two months’: 87.6. 
14 marriage: 87.10-99.7— ‘late husband’s property’: 9.3.3-6— ‘fifteen slaves’: 44. 5ff.’ 
— ‘town house’: 72.6— ‘a hundred miles’: 44.4-6. It is worth asking whether the 
nonagenarian Q. Apuleus Maxssimus (sic), ‘qui et Rideus vocabatur Iuzale f. Iurathe 
n.’, whose sons were Pudens, Severus and Maximus, his wife Thanubra, 
commemorated by a Latin and Neo-Punic tombstone at El-Amrun, might be a tenant 
on the estate of the Sicinii: he could have taken Apuleius’ name on enfranchisement
—and named one son after Sicinius Pudens. El-Amrun lies in the Gefara, a long way 
from Oea. Dated to late second or early third century by Brogan 1968, 54f; Millar 
1968, 132; Röllig 1980, 292; but cf. Mattingly 1987, 81— ‘modest property’: Apol. 
101.4-5—Lamia: IRT 930; its true significance elucidated by Di Vita-Evrard 1979, 
73ff.; 87ff. (on size of Lepcis’ territory; further, Mattingly 1988) — Carthage: 
Gascou 1982, 136ff. —Cirta: Garnsey 1978, 226. 
15 Apol. 93.6-94.6. 
16 ‘homeward…his uncle’: Apol. 28.8; 96.4-98.4—Aemilianus: Apol. 2.9-12; Vidman 
1977—Pudens: 98.5-8; 99.3-5. 
17 ‘change of proconsul’: Thomasson 1984, 382 summarises the evidence; Maximus is 
referred to in Apol. 1.1-7 and repeatedly throughout, cf. n.23 below—Granii: Apol. 
1.5 —’ scepticism’: 1.7—Pudens, Aemilianus: 2.1-3— Tannonius: 4.2. 
18 ‘names…matched’: Guey 1954— ‘agrarian economy’: Pavis d’Escurac 1974— 
‘multitude’: Apol. 28.3. 
19 ‘poems’: Apol. 6ff. — ‘magic’ 25-65 (fish: 29ff.; slave boy: 42ff.; cloth: 53ff.; 
nocturnal rites: 57ff.; image: 61ff. 
20 Quintianus, Crassus: Apol. 57-9—Mercury: 61-3. 
21 letter: 78. 5ff. — ‘sixty’: 89.1-7. Did the prosecution-deliberately-confuse the 
consuls of 116 (Aeliano et Vetere) with those of 96 (Valente et Vetere)? If so, that 
would make Pudentilla just over forty when she married Apuleius—Rufinus: 74.3-
76.6— ‘astrologers’: 97.4. 
22 Zaratha: Apol. 23.6; 24.10— ‘austerity…boorish’: 10.6— ‘long passage’: 16.10-13— 
‘a good joke…been hung’: 56.3-6— ‘lucifugus’: 16.13, cf. Minucius Felix, Octavius 
8.4; 10.1ff.; the parallel was noted by Griset 1957; Barnes 1971, 271f. notes that 
Griset misdates Minucius and regards the notion of an allusion to Christianity as 
implausible—Thyestes: Apol. 16.7 (not mentioned by Barnes), cf. Fronto, ap. Minuc. 
Fel. Octavius 8.3-9.6 (cf. 30.2-31.2), interpreted by Champlin 1980, 64ff. 
23 Maximus: Apol. 11.5; 25.3; 35.7; 38.1; 41.4; 48.5; 81.2; 91.3. Cf. PIR2 C 933;


--- PAGE 197 ---
Alföldy 1977, 143— ‘trump card’: Apol. 94.6-95.7— ‘at Carthage’: Florida 16.1, 
25ff.; Augustine, Ep. 138.19. —Granii: Apol. 1.5; IRT 532, 642, 708-9; Guey 1954, 
115ff. —Pudens: IRT 295 (cf. pp. 142f. above) — ‘nurse of 
-234- 
 
pleaders’: Juvenal 7.148— ‘plead his own case’: 2.1-2 (pp. 45f. above). 
24 ‘judges…prowess’: HA Sev. 1.4— ‘Punic’: Epit. de Cues. 20.8— ‘eager for more’: Dio 
76.16.1— ‘speech’: HA Sev. 1.5—Geta: App. 2 no. 21—Agricola: Birley 1981, 127ff. 
25 ‘ferment…war’: Birley 1987, 116ff.; 121ff. — ‘to study’: HA Sev. 1.5. 
26 Circus: Di Vita-Evrard 1965; Humphrey 1985, 25ff. — ‘superstitious’: cf. HA Geta 
2.6 (‘gnarus geniturae illius, cuius, ut plerique Afrorum, peritissimus fuit’) —
Apuleius, Apol. 97.4— ‘phallic symbols’: Vergara Caffarelli 1966, 111—Sarapis: HA 
Sev. 17.3-4; IRT 309-12. 
27 Statius, Silvae 4.5.45-6—Epitome de Caes. 20.8—Maximus: App. 1.A.4. 
28 ‘voice…accent’: HA Sev. 18.9—Apuleius, Apol. 24.1; Florida 9.7— ‘aitches’: 
Augustine, Confess. 1.18— ‘L’: Isidore, Orig. 1.31.8; Pompeius Maurus, Gramm. 
Lat. (ed. Keil) 286— ‘lengthening’: Consensus, Gramm. Lat. 392— ‘whistling’: 
Jerome, Ep. 103.5. As Röllig 1980, 295ff. points out, the three sibilants, for which 
Latin has only ‘S’, are represented in the late Latino-Punic inscriptions by S, sigma 
and a third sign $ (e.g. IRT 889; 892). The accent is discussed by Monceaux 1894, 
185ff. —Octavilla: HA Sev. 15.7; pp. 131f. above. 
29 Malalas 12, p. 291—colour portrait: pl. 16; Neugebauer 1936; and see McCann 
1968, passim, on the portrayal of Septimius. 
4 
The Broad Stripe (pages 37-46; for Bibliography, see pp. 261-3) 
1 ‘dying emperor’: HA Pius 12.4ff., Birley 1987, 114—war, id. 121ff. — kinsmen: App. 
2, nos. 15, 25. 
2 Verus: Birley 1987, 123ff. —Priscus: Birley 1981, 123ff. —Agricola, Eck 65ff. — 
‘transfers, promotions’: Birley 1987, 122ff. 
3 Marcianus: PIR2 J 340; Alföldy 1977, 182; Adventus, Agricola, Priscus, Laelianus, 
Julius Verus: Birley 1981, 129ff., 127ff., 123ff., 273ff., 118ff. Cassius, Pompeianus: 
Bowersock, 664, 665—Claudius Fronto: Halfmann 636—Martius Verus: PIR2 M 348—
Vindex: Birley 1982, 535—Maximianus: CP no. 181 bis. 
4 ‘dynasty’: Birley 1987, 232ff. 
5 HA Sev. 1.5; App. 2 no. 25. Cf. p. 18, above. 
6 ‘tribune’: App. 2 no. 25— ‘I Minervia’: ILS 1097-8.


--- PAGE 198 ---
7 ‘tribunate’: HA Sev. 2.2, Birley 1970, 69—Geta: App. 2 no. 21—Pertinax: p. 65 and 
n.5— ‘Hadrian’s Wall’: Breeze-Dobson 125ff. 
8 Birley 1981, 8ff. 
9 Geta: App. 2 no. 21— ‘vigintivirate: Birley 1981, 4ff. 
10 laticlavii: Talbert, 11ff., 513; Chastagnol 112ff. believes that S. only became 
senatorial as quaestor, pressing HA Sev. 3.1 too hard in my view. —Anullinus, Cilo: 
PIR2 C 1322, F27—Albinus: Birley 1981, 146ff. —Niger: Dio 74.6.1 (much of the vita 
in the HA is bogus) —Didius: Alföldy 1982, 354; Corbier 720. 
11 ‘autobiography’, Dio: App. 1, A.1-2—astrology: Cramer 208ff.; Rubin 27ff. 
12 HA Sev. 1.6 (cf. Augustine, Confessions 6.3.3 on reading habits), 7-10; Dio 74.3.1, 
3. 
13 Dio 76.16.1; Herodian 2.9.2; HA Sev. 19.7-10 (including at least some invention, as 
well as the error about his size) —grandfather: p. 20 above— Hadrian: HA Had. 3.1; 
1.3, 2.1; 2-5 with ILS 308 (a record equalled later only 
-235- 
 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22


--- PAGE 199 ---
5
 
I
n
t
o
 
T
h
e
 
E
m
p
e
r
o
r
’
s
 
S
e
r
v
i
c
e
 
(
p
a
g
e
s
 
4
7
-
5
6
;
 
f
o
r
 
B
i
b


--- PAGE 200 ---
l
i
o
g
r
a
p
h
y
 
s
e
e
 
p
p
.
 
2
6
1
-
3
)
 
1
 
‘
l
o
t
s
’
:
 
T
a
l
b
e
r
t
 
3
4
8
f
f
.


--- PAGE 201 ---
—
q
u
a
e
s
t
o
r
s
:
 
B
i
r
l
e
y
 
1
9
8
1
,
 
1
2
f
f
.
;
 
T
a
l
b
e
r
t
 
1
3
f
f
.
,
 
3
4
8
f


--- PAGE 202 ---
f
.
 
—
 
‘
1
3
 
A
p
r
i
l
’
:
 
D
i
o
 
6
0
.
1
7
.
3
 
(
c
f
.
 
6
0
.
 
1
1
.
6
)
,
 
a
n
d
 
c
f


--- PAGE 203 ---
.
 
T
a
l
b
e
r
t
 
4
9
7
f
.
 
—
c
o
n
s
u
l
s
:
 
A
l
f
ö
l
d
y
 
1
9
7
7
,
 
1
8
5
;
 
P
I
R2
 
E


--- PAGE 204 ---
9
5
,
 
c
f
.
 
9
4
,
 
9
6
-
7
;
 
G
 
9
8
;
 
I
I
 
1
8
9
.
 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8


--- PAGE 205 ---
9 
10 
-
2
3
6
-
 
his control by Caligula (pp.51-61 above), he was left with two only—Oea arch: IRT 232; 
—Apuleius, Florida 17. 
11 The arch: Di Vita-Evrard 1963—Thubursicu: ILAlg. I 1283, corrected by Di Vita-Evrard
—Agueneb: CIL VIII 21567, a dedication by a centurion of III Augusta after a 
successful expedition, Alföldy 1985, 103. Cf. p. 147 above. 
12 HA Sev. 2.6 
13 HA Sev. 2.8, cf. Dio 76.11.1. 
14 App 2 no. 56 
15 HA Sev. 3.1, Birley 1970, 70f. ‘suspect story’: HA Sev. 8.1, their supposed marriage in 
193, an invention: Hasebroek 49 
16 Talbert 185ff., etc. —Pliny, Ep. 1.23. 
17 Birley 1987, 184ff. — ‘detachments’: AE 1920. 45. 
18 Birley 1987, 188, 253f. 
19 Pertinax: p. 67 above—Geta: IRT 541—Victorinus: Alföldy 1969, 38ff. — kinsman: App 
2 no. 25. 
20 HA Sev. 3. —Commodus: Birley 1987, 197. 
21 Talbert 185ff, etc. — ‘supervised’: HA Marcus 24.2, cf. 12.3-4. 
22 AE 1971. 534, Banasa. 
23 games: Talbert 59f. —gladiators: Hesperia 24 (1955) 320ff., Birley 1987, 200f. —
Spain: HA Sev. 3.4, Alföldy 1969, 88f. 
24 HA Sev. 4.4; Had. 12.3. Marcus’ death: Birley 1987, 209f. 
25 Ammianus 31.5.14.


--- PAGE 206 ---
6 
A Caesar Born to the Purple (pages 57-62; for Bibliography see pp. 261-3) 
1 ‘nobilissimus’: ILS 397, cf. Herodian 1.5.5-6. On Commodus the massive study by 
Grosso remains essential. 
2 Dio 71.33.42 believed the poisoning story. 
3 ‘five sisters’: Birley 1987, 247f. —Pompeianus: PIR2 C 973—Praesens: B 165—Pollio: 
ILS 1112—Victorinus: Alföldy 1969, 38ff—Marcus’ hope: Grosso 95ff., perhaps valuing 
Herodian 1.4-5 too highly. 
4 ‘IV Scythica’: HA Sev. 4.4 and p. 68 above—HA Comm. 3.1 refers to dismissals of 
Marcus’ senior advisers, 4.8 to the appointment of criminals or criminally recommended 
as provincial governors. 
5 Meditations 1.17.19—teachers: HA Comm. 1.6—Sanctus: CP no. 178 bis— ‘twenty-
sixth year’: Birley 1987, 92ff. 
6 Dio 72.1.1; HA Comm. 1.7ff. —Maximus: App.1.A.4; PIR2 M 308 (tribune in the legions 
XXII Pr. and III Italica). 
7 Herodian 1.7.5. 
8 Faustina I: HA Pius 3.7—Verus: HA Verus 2.9-10, 4.4ff., 8.8ff., etc. — ‘illegitimate’: HA 
Marcus 19.1-11. 
9 Grosso 99ff. —Saoterus: id. 113ff. — ‘brothers-in-law’: Birley 1987, 247f. 
10 Alföldy 1988, warns against uncritical acceptance of this view, derived principally from 
the romanticised and distorted version of Herodian. 
11 pp. 48 above (brothers-in-law); 74, 77 (British army). 
12 Herodian 1.8.3-8; HA Comm. 4.1-5; Dio 72.4.4-5. Cf. Grosso 145ff. — Paternus’ 
nomen emerges from AE 1971. 534 (Banasa). 
13 Grosso 153ff. —HA Comm. 4.1.7-10; 3.2; Dio 72.5.1-2; HA Did. Jul. 1.9-2.2; Dio 
73.11.2. It is not known where Salvius’ command was. 
-237- 
 
14 Grosso 158f. —Dio 72.6.1-7.2, cf. HA Comm. 4.9—dismissals, pp. 67, 73 above. 
7 
The Great Marshal (pages 63-67; for Bibliography see pp. 261-3) 
1 See further chapter 8.


--- PAGE 207 ---
2 There is now an extensive literature on Pertinax. His origin and career are dealt with 
in HA Pert. 1.1-4 4, the basic accuracy of which is largely confirmed by the Bonn 
inscription, AE 1963. 52, giving his career up to the promotion from the German 
fleet to the Dacian procuratorship. His career from c. 158-79 is admirably handled 
by Alföldy, Situla 14/15 (1974) 199-215, reprinted as Alföldy 1987, 326-42, with 
addenda 342-8 giving comprehensive bibliography. Cf. also PIR2 H 73; CP no. 179—
Horace: PIR2 H 198— Apollinaris: Champlin 18, 36, 48, 50f., 54. Avitus: PIR2 H 40. 
This is the proconsul whom Apuleius knew, p. 33 above. Champlin 36 comments: 
‘The tight network of literary society may be…observed, for Pertinax was a pupil of 
Sulpicius Apollinaris and a client of Lollianus Avitus, both friends of Fronto.’ On the 
Lolliani, Alföldy 1982, 325ff. This man’s younger son, Lollianus Gentianus, was to be 
a prominent ally of Septimius. His wife, Plautia Servilia, was surely a daughter of 
Verus’ sister Ceionia Plautia and her husband Q. Servilius Pudens of Hippo Regius 
(Corbier 721): CIL XV 7514, generally read as ‘Servilia’, likewise in the names of her 
own daughter, ILS 1155—Turbo: CP no. 94— ‘failed to acquire’: thus, interpreting 
HA Pert. 1.5-6, E. Birley in PIR2 H 73, confirmed by AE 1963. 52—his unit was VII 
Gallorum: Roxan 246f. 
3 Dio 73.3.1—Pompeianus: PIR2 C 973—Cornelianus: HA Marcus: 8.6, PIR2 A 1341— 
‘made to walk’: HA Pert. 1.6 (not naming him). 
4 . Parthian war: Birley 1987, 121ff. —Verus, Priscus, Agricola: Birley 1981, 120, 126, 
127ff. —ab epistulis: E. Birley 1953, 142f.; 1963, 21f. 
5 ‘mainly administrative’: E. Birley 1953, 143ff. —VI Victrix: AE 1963. 52— Agricola: 
Breeze & Dobson 128ff. — ‘Coria’: i.e. Corbridge on Tyne, for which new evidence 
seems to confirm that this name, discussed by Rivet & Smith 322ff., cf. 320, is the 
right form. RIB 1120, 1122, 1125, 1130-32, 1137, 1159-63, 1175, 1190 all show 
men of VI Victrix at this place— ‘Tungrians’: this seems the only unit he could have 
commanded in the second militia, a military cohort anomalously commanded by a 
prefect, which is required by AE 1963. 52. It was at Housesteads in the third 
century, location uncertain between c. 158 and 198, perhaps already at 
Housesteads. Summary of evidence in Breeze & Dobson 251f.; Holder 122f. —Geta: 
IRT 541; App. 2 no. 21—men from II Aug. at Corbridge: RIB 1127, 1136, 1155-8. 
6 Pompeianus: PIR2 C 973—altar: ILS 407—Avitus: CP no. 188+add. 
7 ‘retire’: E. Birley 1953, 145— ‘fourth militia’: E. Birley 1966, 55ff. —alimenta: CP no. 
179—fleet: HA Pert. 2.2-3; AE 1963. 52—Dacia: ibid.; Alföldy 1987, 328f. 
8 HA Pert. 2.4-2.11; Alföldy 1987, 329ff., who draws attention throughout his study to 
the close association, in the period c. 158-79, between the careers of Pertinax and 
Valerius Maximianus, the other military phenomenon of these wars. — ‘clearing the 
invaders’: Birley 1987, 168f. — ‘Miracle’: id. 171-4— consulship: Alföldy 1977, 189
—Euripides, Supp. 119, quoted by Dio 
-238-


--- PAGE 208 ---
71.22.1— ‘praised’: HA Pert. 2.10—Cassius: Birley 1987, 184ff. —governorships: 
Alföldy 1987, 335ff. He was still in Dacia on 1 April 179, as shown by RMD 123. 
9 Retirement: not explicitly stated in HA Pert. 3.1-2, but implied by 3.3 (‘ordered at 
once to withdraw from Rome to his father’s villa in Liguria’). 
8 
Julia Domna (pages 68-80; for Bibliography see p. 263) 
1 legions: RE 12 (1925) 1525f.; 1560f.; 1765f. (E. Ritterling; 1560 on prestige of IV 
Scythica) — ‘uncle’: App. 2 no. 25— ‘Massilia’: HA Sev. 3.6, emended by Thomsen, 
who locates ‘Massyas’ in the modern Masyaf. But this is too far south, too close to 
Raphaneae. ‘Massias’ or ‘Marsyas’, vel sim. is common in Syria, RE 14 (1930) 
1985f., 2165f. For the western tributary of the Euphrates: Pliny, NH 5.86. 
2 ‘Antioch’: HA Sev. 9.4, cf. Herodian 2.10.2—Olympics: Downey 230ff. — Verus: 
Fronto, Princ. Hist. 17; HA Verus 4.6, 6.1, etc. —population: Downey 582f. 
3 Edessa: Drijvers 863ff. — ‘form of Aramaic’, i.e. Syriac. Millar 1987, 144, 159ff. is 
instructive. 
4 Palmyra: Matthews provides a stimulating introduction; Drijvers 846ff.; Teixidor; 
Millar 1987, 155ff. —Emesa: Chad’s monograph is the only one on the subject, 
worth consulting if antiquated and over-speculative in places; Millar 1983, esp. 58f.; 
1987, esp. 157ff. —Samsigeramus I: RE 1A.2 (1920) 2227—Iamblichus I: Cicero, 
Ad fam. 15.1; Josephus, AJ 14.129; BJ 1.188; Strabo 16. 753; Dio 50.13.7—
Iamblichus II: PIR2 I 7—Samsigeramus II: PIR2J 541—Iotape: I 47—Aziz: A 1693—
In general, Sullivan 198ff. 
5 Mamaea and Polemo: App. 2, nos. 40, 60. 
6 ‘absorbed into Syria’: Chad 103ff. argues that Emesa remained independent until 
the reign of Pius—Agrippa II’s kingdom: Sullivan 329-45—names: IGLS 2212, 2217, 
2385; 2362, 2366, 2216; 2339; 2565, etc. —Sohaemus: App. 2 no. 48—Iamblichus 
the novelist: Millar 1987, 150. 
7 Chad 24ff. evokes the setting—Millar 1983, on the Phoenician cities. 
8 Millar 1983, on the Phoenician cities; 1987, 157f. on the god; Herodian 5.3.2-7; AE 
1962. 229, set up at Augusta Vindelicorum by no. 45 in App. 2— The novelist: 
Heliodorus, Aethiopica 10.41.4, perhaps the Arab sophist of that name, Millar 1987, 
149 n.16. 
9 Coins: Wroth 237ff. —Bassianus: App. 2 no. 46. Herodian 5.3.2-7—names: App. 2 
nos. 38-9—horoscope: HA Sev. Alex. 5.4; Sev. 3.6; Get. 3.1, discussed App. 2 no. 
38. 
10 Sohaemus: App. 2 no. 48—Agrippa: no. 43—Emesenes in army: e.g. CIL III 7500 (V 
Macedonica), III 3301, 3334-10316 (II Adiutrix), VIII 2568,36 (III Aug.) and the 
cohortes Emesenorum, and note the primipilares from the region cited in App. 2 no. 
43— ‘plebeian’: Dio 78, 24.1.


--- PAGE 209 ---
11 Oracle: Dio 78.8.6 (Iliad 2.478f.) 
12 HA Pert. 3.1-3; Grosso 145, 162f. —Juncus, Rufus: HA Comm. 4.10, with the 
observations of Bowersock 1982, 662 (and 666 on their origins). 
13 Dexter: PIR2 D144—Cilo: F27—Athens: HA Sev. 3.7, Birley 1970, 72— Pontianus: p. 
26 above—Hadrianus and others: Philostratus, v. soph. 2.1, 10, 11, 12, 24. 
-239- 
 
14 ‘four emperors’: Birley 1987, 23, 126, 194—Apollonius: Philostratus, v. soph. 2.19. 
15 Grosso 164ff.; Birley 1981, 140ff. (Marcellus); 260f. (Priscus), on Dio 72.8.2-6, 9.2a
— ‘legates dismissed’: HA Comm. 6.2. 
16 ‘hostility…Danube’: HA Comm. 5.1-6.2—Herodian 1.9.2-5 has a romantic yarn about 
a Cynic philosopher denouncing Perennis at the Games, probably complete fiction, 
Hohl 16f. — ‘army of Danube’: this army had indeed won the final round in the civil 
wars of 69; subsequently it had grown in size. 
17 Herodian 1.9.7; Dio 72.9.2-3; HA Comm. 6.2—Cleander: Dio 72.9.3. 
18 Marcellus: Dio 72.8.6—Cleander: CP no. 180 bis+mantissa add. (p. 1007f.); Alföldy 
1988. —Victorinus: Dio 72.11.1-4—Pertinax: HA Pert. 3.5-6, 8-9; Dio 72.9.2, 
73.4.1; Birley 1981, 145—Lugdunensis: HA Sev. 3.8. 
19 Urban Cohort: RE Supp. 10 (1962) 1129f. —Maternus: only in Herodian, regarded 
as a fictional creation by Hohl 17ff.; Alföldy 1971, esp. 373f. is more judicious—The 
war gets a passing mention in HA Comm. 16.2, further in Niger 3.3-5, regarded as 
bogus by Alföldy 1971, 369f., more favourably by Barnes, 51. 
20 HA Sev. 3.9. App. 2 nos. 56, 38-9, 45-6. Trade; cf. e.g. Jones. 
21 Dio 74.3.1, 2.3; HA Sev. 3.5. 
22 languages: useful indications in Millar 1983; 1987—Bassianus: App. 2 no. 18; HA 
Sev. 3.9; Dio 77.6.1. 
23 Gentianus, Avitus: Alföldy 1982, 325f. —Cilo: PIR2 F 27—Niger: n.19 above—
Pertinax may well have passed through Lugdunum on his way back from Britain to 
Rome in 187, while S. was there. 
24 Sicily: HA Sev. 4.2; Birley 1970, 73—Geta: IRT 541, App. 2 no. 21. 
25 Pertinax: HA Pert. 3.5-10; Comm. 6.10-12; 8.4; Dio 72.9.2; 73.4.1; Birley 1981, 
145; Alföldy 1988. 
26 Aebutianus: HA Comm. 6.11.12; Grosso 239ff. —Antoninus: n. 28 below— Pertinax: 
HA Pert. 3.10-11. 
27 Horse: Dio 73.4.1-2 (it reappeared later, p. 87 above) —Burrus: HA Comm. 6.11-
12; Alföldy 1988—Cleander: CP no. 180 bis (p. 1007f. on AE 1961. 280); Alföldy 
1988.


--- PAGE 210 ---
28 Africa: HA Pert. 4.2, cf. Did. 2.3; Dio 73.15.4 (he convicted Plautianus of serious 
offences, App. 2 no. 32). —Asia: Tertullian, Scap. 5.1—Attalus; HA Comm. 7.1; 
Alföldy 1988—Thomasson 1984, 232; 384 summarises evidence for the two 
proconsuls. 
29 consuls: Dio 72.12.4; HA Sev. 4.4; Birley 1970, 74—Septimianus: App. 2 no. 59—
Cleander: Alföldy 1988, passim, showing the unreliability of Herodian’s version, 
1.9.2-5. Dio 72.13 must be preferred. 
30 Dio 72.13; Alföldy 1988. 
31 Julianus, Dionysius: CP nos. 180-1—Regillus; HA Comm. 7.4. 
32 Date: Alföldy 1988. Sicily: HA Sev. 4.3; Birley 1970, 73. 
33 ‘sole Prefect’: CIL XIV 4378—Motilenus: HA Comm. 9.2—Rufinus, ‘without 
employment’: HA Sev. 4.4. 
9 
The Conspirators (pages 81-88; for Bibliography see pp. 264-6) 
1 Grosso 1964, 321; HA Comm. 11. 2-3; 7.4; Dio 72.14.1. 
2 Dio 72.14.1-3; HA Comm. 8.3—Julius Alexander: App. 2 no. 44 (where the 
-240- 
 
theory that the lion-killing was part of a serious bid for power is discussed). 
3 ‘purge’: HA Comm. 7.5-8; Grosso 1964, 357ff. — ‘plague’: Dio 72.14.3-4; Millar 
1964, 131 (Grosso 250ff. prefers Herodian’s implied date, AD 188-9). 
4 Coins: BMC IV, pp. clxvi, clxxvii, clxxxi-ii; Grosso 1964, 331ff. (on the cults). —
debasement: Walker 51, 126f. provides important data and draws instructive 
conclusions. The imminent financial ruin (cf. p. 91 above on the almost empty 
treasury) could only be averted by drastic means. Pertinax and others were no 
doubt strongly influenced by these considerations. 
5 Laetus: AE 1949.38 revealed the origo; Birley 1969, 252f.; Jarrett 154— Eclectus: 
PIR2 E 3—Marcia: M 261. 
6 Victor: Eusebius, HE 5.22.1 (tenth year of Commodus), in office ten years, 5.28.7; 
African according to the Liber Pontificalis 1. 137f. (Duchesne) — ‘planned a visit’: 
HA Comm. 9.1— ‘two thirds’: Josephus, BJ 2.383, 386, a much discussed passage, 
e.g. Rickman 231ff. 
7 Pudens: AE 1949. 38; Birley 1969, 252f. He seems out of place in Halfmann’s list of 
comites, 1986, 250 no. 64, cf. 98. ‘in comitatu’ means something different—
Pannonia: HA Sev. 4.4; Birley 1969, 261—On the province, and specialisation, Birley 
1981a, 29ff.


--- PAGE 211 ---
8 HA Sev. 4.5; p. 220 above. 
9 Birley 1969, 252ff. —Marii: App. 1.A.4. 
10 legionary legates: Birley 1981a, 18ff. —patronage: E. Birley 1953, 141ff. — army of 
Pannonia: see e.g. the summary table (based on calculations by P.A. Holder, to 
whom I am indebted) in Birley 1981b, 40f., showing the numbers of units, auxiliary 
and legionary, in each province c. AD 150—Castinus: App. 2 no. 19. 
11 HA Pert. 4.3-4; Birley 1969, 250ff. 
12 Egypt: Thomasson 1984, 353—Sabinus: Birley 1969, 268f. —Vologaeses III: RE 
Supp. 9 (1962) 1851—Niger: Dio 74.6.1; HA Pesc. Nig. 1.5. Dio says that Niger and 
Albinus had performed well in a Dacian war (72.8.1). Piso argues that he was 
consular governor of III Daciae, 369 and n.35. In that case he was much senior to 
Albinus and Septimius. He cites CIL III 1066, on which he reads part of a deleted 
cognomen as GE. Barnes 1978, 51 accepts the story about Niger owing to his job to 
the athlete Narcissus in HA Nig. 1.5, cf. Comm. 17.2. Sev. 14.1 Aemilianus: Dio 
74.6.1f. (noting his kinship with Albinus, often neglected); Herodian 3.2.3 (Niger’s 
predecessor in Syria, where he is attested apparently in 184-5 or 185-6; Thomasson 
1984, 314, who doubts the date on IGR III 1262; but he could easily be the 
predecessor of Julius Saturninus, id. 313f., in which case Herodian, as often, is 
imprecise: Aemilianus would then not be Niger’s immediate predecessor as Herodian 
says) — Anullinus: Thomasson 1984, 385; 1985, 113; cf. p. 49 above. 
13 Dio 72.15. 1ff.; HA Comm. 8.5-9; 11.8-12.9; Grosso 1964, 360ff.; 365ff.; 369ff.; 
Nesselhauf 1966. 
14 Maximus: PIR2 M 308. He was legate of I Italica under Geta. Note the freedman 
(surely his) L. Marius Doryphorus, of this period, scribe of the aediles and tribunes 
(ILS 1899), an obvious source of information—fire: Dio 72. 24. 1-3; Galen 2.216K; 
13. 362K; Herodian 1.14.1-6; Grosso 1964, 361ff. 
15 Herodian 1.15.1-6; Dio 72.20.1; 72.18.1-4— ‘plebeian games’: Birley 1969, 248 
n.5. Kolb 25-37 argues that Herodian is not an independent witness but 
-241- 
 
has distorted and garbled Dio. Alas, Kolb is probably right, but without Dio’s original 
text certainty is beyond our reach. 
16 Dio 72.19.1-21.2; Herodian 1.15.1; Dio 73.4.3-4 (horse and club); 72.22.1-6 
(murder); HA Comm. 16.3 (Vectilian House). Kolb 38-47 argues convincingly that 
Herodian has made up the extra details in his version, raiding Dio’s story of 
Domitian’s murder (67.15.3-4). 
17 Herodian 1.16-17; Birley 1969, 249f. Contrast HA Pert. 4.4. 
18 Marcia: HA Comm. 8.6— ‘urgent insistence’: Dio 72.22.3; Birley 1969, 248ff. 
19 ‘dark’: Hohl 4. — ‘sent word’: Dio 73.1.1; HA Pert. 4.5 (omitting the first stage) — 
‘in secret…troops’ fears’: Dio 73.1.2— ‘thrust…power’: HA Pert. 4.6-7— ‘donative: …
threat’: Dio 73.1.2-3. Walker acutely interprets the ‘disturbing features’ as a veiled


--- PAGE 212 ---
reference to the imminent financial catastrophe, 127ff. ‘mediocre…smooth’: HA Pert. 
12.1— ‘response…rest followed’: Pert. 4.7, cf. Dio 73.1.2. ‘not yet midnight’: this is 
clear from Pert. 4.8, giving the dies imperii as 31 December (‘pr. kal. Ian’.), 
presumably overlooked by Herz 35 and others. The Kalends began at midnight: 
Plutarch, Quaest. Rom. 84. Hohl has shown that Herodian 2.1.1-2.10 is grossly 
inaccurate and is better discounted for these transactions. 
10 
the Year 193 (page 89-107; for Bibliography see pp. 264-6) 
1 ‘mist’: HA Comm. 16.2—dark…fate of Commodus…Pompeianus’: HA Pert. 4.9-10. 
Dio 73.1.4 also says that it was still dark— ‘not seen at Rome’: Dio 73.3.2. In what 
survives of his work, Dio says not that Pompeianus was at Rome before dawn on 1 
January or that Pertinax offered him the throne; but that he had been absent on his 
Tarracina estate with the excuse of bad health and failing sight; under Pertinax both 
improved; then they worsened and he withdrew again (back at Tarracina under 
Didius: HA Did. Jul. 8.3). Kolb 47-54 disbelieves the story of the offer in the Temple 
of Concord; but seems to me to miss the point; see my review, JRS 64 (1974) 267. 
He also rejects the Herodian version, 2.3.3-4, that it was Glabrio who was offered 
the throne. This is taken seriously by Champlin, who argues hard that Glabrio’s 
mother was from the Antonine dynasty, 288ff; this is doubtful, but Champlin’s 
general thesis (referred to in later parts to this chapter) that the pull of the Antonine 
dynasty was important, deserves serious attention. Glabrio (cos. II 186) is 
mentioned by Dio 73.3.3, being given a seat in the senate next to Pompeianus and 
Pertinax. Herodian has invented the rest, as Hohl 12, followed by Kolb argues. 
2 ‘curia…speeches in his honour’: HA Pert. 4.11-5.1; Dio 73.1.4-2.1—health: HA Pert. 
12.1; Dio 73.1.5—Marius Maximus quoted a lengthy letter of Pertinax attesting his 
‘horror imperii’: HA Pert. 15.8— ‘savage litany’: HA Comm. 18-19 contains a full 
text; Nesselhauf 1966—Larensis and Cilo: ibid. 20. 1-2—Larensis: CP no. 194; he is 
the host in Athenaeus’ Deipnosophistae— Cilo; PIR2 F 27, 
3 ‘outcry’: HA Comm. 20.2-5, cf. Dio 73.2.1-3— ‘thanks’ …an opportunity’: HA Pert. 
5.1-3; Birley 1969, 250f.; Hohl 7f. 
4 Dio 73.5.1; HA Pert. 5.4-6.2, cf. 6.9. 
5 HA Pert. 6.3-5—Maternus: Alföldy 1969, 87f.; Champlin 297ff. 
-242- 
 
6 ‘concessions’: HA Pert. 6.6— ‘7 January’: Herz 124f. — ‘proposals’: HA Pert. 6.7-8; 
Dio 73.5.2-3; HA Pert. 7.3-9.10; Dio 73.5.4-5. The precedent was Marcus’ auction 
in 169; HA Marcus 17.4-5— ‘old man’s pleasure’, reading ‘senem’ as in the MSS of 
HA Pert. 7.9 (emended to ‘Severum’ by editors, but Pertinax was no paragon and 
the HA vita is quite hostile in places). 
7 ‘coinage’: Walker 51 (‘the denarius returns to a purity it had not known for fifty 
years’); 127ff. —Herodian 2.5-7. — ‘regulate the senate’: HA Pert. 6.10— Maximus: 
PIR2 M 308 (he had omitted the praetorship by adlection; Dio 73.12.2).


--- PAGE 213 ---
8 ‘trick’: Dio 73.2.5-6—AD 69: Tacitus, Hist. 1.12ff. —Icelus: Suetonius, Galba 22. —
Rufus: Alföldy 1969, 42f. —Egypt: Loeb Select Papyri no. 222; on the chronology, 
Martin—Titiana: PIR2 F 444—younger Pertinax: H 74. Titiana is also ‘Augusta’ on the 
Alexandrian coins; otherwise only on a milestone in Gaul. Likewise with the son 
(also on three Arabian milestones) —Birley 1969, 269f. ‘children’: Herodian. 2.3-4 
(Asellius Aemilianus was a victim, p. 102 above). 
9 ‘dream’: Herodian 3.9.5-6, fuller than Dio 73.3.3; Bloch; Rubin 23f. — ‘21 April’: HA 
Pert. 12.8; Birley 1969, 251—Sulpicianus; Birley 1969, 266— Plautianus: Dio 
73.15.4, cf. Herodian 3.10.6; App. 2 no. 32. 
10 Dio 73.6.1-3. 
11 Dio 73.8.1-5—Alexianus: App. 2 no. 45. 
12 Falco: HA Pert. 10. 1-7 (not mentioning Ostia); Dio 73.8.1-5. Falco was married to a 
grand-niece of Avidius Cassius: PIR2 C, p. 166 (stemma). Champlin 300ff. offers 
interesting suggestions on possible links between Falco and the house of Antonines
—Walker 128f. stresses Dio’s tribute to Pertinax’s oikonomia beltiste, 73.5.2. He had 
hoped to cancel ‘ea…quae Commodus exigerat’ (HA Pert. 6-7) and was attacked, for 
reneging on the promise, by Lollianus Gentianus, his old patron’s son—On his 
meanness: HA Pert. 9. 4ff. 
13 HA Pert. 10. 1-7; Birley 1969, 252 n.12; Champlin. 
14 HA Pert. 10.8-11.13; Dio 73.9.1-10. Herodian is inadequate, Hohl 17ff. 
15 Birley 1969, 273. It was later asserted that Albinus was the guiding spirit, p. 118 
above. Presumably propaganda from 195-7, superficially plausible because Albinus 
came from Hadrumetum, home of Didius Julianus’ mother (p. 41, above). 
16 Hohl 19ff. is the best study—Repentinus: Corbier 730 (he turns out to be African, 
from Simitthu). Kolb 54-70 seeks to prove the dependence of HA Didius Julianus on 
Dio; Barnes 1978, 43ff. summarises the factual content of HA Did. Jul. (high). 
17 Dio 73. 11. 2ff. (very hostile to Didius); HA Did. Jul. 2.6-7 (restrained); Herodian 
2.6.8-14 adds a good deal of detail. All subject to a complex analysis by Kolb 54ff. 
18 Hohl 23ff. —Didius’ career: HA Did. Jul. 1.1-2.3 combines with ILS 412 to make the 
stages quite clear. On the origin and family, Corbier 720; Alföldy 1982, 354— 
‘betrothal‘: this may be bogus (HA Pert. 14.4-5; Did. Jul. 2.3), since only one 
daughter, Didia Clara, wife of Cornelius Repentinus (p. 95 above) is otherwise 
known— ‘Add “Severus” : HA Did. Jul. 7.1-2. 
19 ‘no fears’: HA Did. Jul. 5.1—Hadrumetum: Birley 1981a, 147, against Barnes 
-243- 
 
1970, 51ff. — ‘29 March’: Dio 73.13.2-5. He sent an assassin against Niger: HA Did. 
Jul. 5.1—Chronology: Martin 92ff. (earliest attestation in Egypt of Niger as emperor 
is 30 May. 
20 donative: HA Did. Jul. 3.2.


--- PAGE 214 ---
21 Domaszewski argued that S. was Laetus’ candidate all along, a theory that is 
implausible— ‘683 miles’: Hasebroek 18; thirty-four days march at normal rates— 
‘south-western borders’: Epit. de Caes. 19.2 in fact has ‘Savaria’ as the place of his 
proclamation, regarded as plausible by Šašel-Kos 364f. (Victor, De Caes. 19.4, 
Zonaras 12.7 and HA Did. Jul. 5.2 put him in ‘Syria’, usually taken as confusion 
between S. and Niger, but perhaps misled by ‘Savaria’ in a source) —Plautianus, 
Octavilla, Alexianus: App. 2 nos. 32, 8, 45. —Cilo: PIR2 F 27—Pudens: Thomasson 
1984, 115; Birley 1981a, 155ff. —Geta: App. 2 no. 21—other provinces: Birley 
1969, 265ff. —dies imperii: Herz 36, 178f., supplied by the Feriale Duranum—
repugnans: HA Sen 5.1— ‘avenger’: ibid. 5.5, cf. Herodian 2.10.1-9, etc. — 
‘children’: Herodian 3.2.4. 
22 Albinus’ origin: Birley 1981, 147; his kinship with Niger’s supporter Aemilianus (Dio 
74.6.2) gave S. reason to be nervous of his response— ‘emissaries’: Dio 73.15.1-2 
shows they went before S. reached Rome, indeed suggests that it was before he left 
Pannonia. Cf. Herodian 2.15.1-5; HA Sev. 6.9-10; Nig. 4.7; Alb. 3.2-6. Alb. 10.3 
seems to be clear and straightforward. Rubin 138ff. subjects it and Nig. 4.7 to an 
exhaustive analysis, concluding that they derive from Marius Maximus, who 
endorsed S.’s claims, happily slandered Niger, but was favourable to Albinus (151f.). 
I am not sure that I can grasp his argument—HA Sev. 6.10 names an emissary: 
Heraclitus. 
23 Niger: Martin 92ff. —Rufus: Alföldy 1969, 42f. —Quadratianus: Thomasson 1984, 
401f.; perhaps from African Mastar, Alföldy 1968, 418— ‘Thrace’: Dio 73.15.2; 
Herodian 2.14.6; HA Sev. 8.12, no doubt commanded by Marius Maximus (PIR2 M 
308), although conceivably Fabius Cilo was already with the armies (F 27). 
24 Vitulus: CP no. 224. He was later a resident of Bulla Regia, but his tribe ‘Pupinia’ 
shows that he is Italian; probably from Tergeste, which is in this tribe, Kubitschek 
271, and living at home—Valerianus: Speidel 1985 seems to me to have improved 
on all the numerous interpretations of AE 1966. 495— Laetus: PIR2 J 373+L 69. 
25 ‘coins’: BMC V 11f.; 14ff. — ‘public enemy…amnesty’: Dio 73.16.1; HA Sev. 5.5, etc. 
—Catullinus, Candidus: HA Did. Jul. 5.6-7, cf. Alföldy 1968, 152f. —Felix: HA Did. 
Jul. 5.8, etc.; CP no. 225. 
26 ‘borders of Italy’: Herodian 2.11.3—Ravenna, Crispinus: HA Did. Jul. 6.3-4; Dio 
73.17.1— ‘elephants’ etc.: ibid. 5.9; Dio 73.16.1-3—Laetus, Marcia: HA Did. Jul. 
6.2; Dio 73.16.5—Candidus: Dio 73.17.1—Felix: CP no. 225. ‘panic …programme’: 
HA Sev. 5.6-9; Did. Jul. 6.3; 6.5-8.2; Dio 73.17.1-3— Macrinus, Juvenalis: CP no. 
179 bis; PIR2 F 300—HA Did. Jul. 7.9-11 reports that Didius resorted to magic, 
including the hypnotising of a young boy (the practice of which Apuleius had been 
accused at Sabratha twenty-five years before, p. 31 above); Dio 73.16.5 soups this 
up and alleges human sacrifice, reproducing propaganda, Rubin 56f. argues—
Plautius Quintillus: Birley 1987, 182, husband of Fadilla, also the nephew of L. 
Verus. Barnes 1978, 52, otherwise generally sceptical (e.g. of Albinus’ Hadrumetine 
origin) surpris- 
-244-


--- PAGE 215 ---
ingly suggests that HA Clod. Alb. 10.7, which, in a bogus letter, calls Albinus son-in-
law of ‘Plautillus’, may be evidence for this man. Such a father-in-law for Albinus 
would be remarkable indeed. 
27 HA Did. Jul. 8.2-8; Sev. 5.9-10; Dio 73.17.3-5. The date is supplied by 73.17. 5—
Interamna: HA Sev. 6.2 (note that Fabius Cilo was curator of this town: PIR2 F 27. 
Conceivably for a short period that spring?) —Herodian 2.11.1ff. gives a breathless 
description of S.’s march; Dio 73.15.3 has the vivid detail— ‘messengers…children’: 
HA Sev. 6.7-8.10—Aemilianus: Herodian 3.2.3; Birley 1969, 270. 
28 Interamna: HA Sev. 6.1-4. Hasebroek 38 has an elaborate theory on the money 
present: it may represent the equivalent of 25,000 denarii, nominally worth 1,000 
aurei; but denarii of very different fineness were now in circulation: Walker 51—
Juvenalis: HA Sev. 6.5; PIR2 F 300—Macrinus: CP no. 179 bis. 
29 Juvenalis: HA Sev. 6.5; PIR2 F 300—Macrinus: CP no. 179 bis. 
30 This famous scene has been much discussed. HA Sev. 6.11 is very brief; Dio 74.1.1-
2; Herodian 2.13.1-12 provide details— ‘secret instructions’: Cn. Marcius Rustius 
Rufinus (CP no. 234+add.) was probably one of the co-operative officers, probably 
then a tribune of the Guard, ultimately prefect of the vigiles and perhaps Guard 
Prefect— ‘increases’, etc.: E. Birley 1969, 64f. 
31 ‘panic’: Herodian 2.12.1-2—Dio 74.1.3-5—Tertullian, Apol. 35.4—Sev. 7.1-3. Cf. 
Herodian 2.14.1-2, emphasising the bloodless nature of the capture of Rome—
Hasebroek 40 proposed 9 June as the day of entry, Herz 222 is cautious. It could 
have been a few days earlier. 
32 ‘following day’: Herodian 2.14.3-4; HA Sev. 7.4; 5.8—decree: ibid. 7.5; Dio 74.2.1-
2—disturbance: HA Sev. 7.5-7; Dio 46.46.7; Watson 113, 198 suggests that some 
of the men had been reading Appian, BC 3.94 on the donative of 43 BC. Why not? — 
‘special issue’: BMC V lxxxiif., xcvii, 21ff., 118. 
33 Dio 74.4.1-5.5; cf. HA Pert. 15.1-5; Sev. 7.8-9. 
34 ‘claimed’: Herodian 2.3; Birley 1969, 273— ‘refused’: HA Sev. 8.6. —Cilo: PIR2 F 27
—Maximus: PIR2 M 308. 
35 ‘mint’: BMC V 20ff., 117ff. Walker 59 calculates the fineness of the silver as below 
the restored level of Pertinax’s coinage but better than that of Commodus. It did not 
last—saeculum: BMC V 2; 20; 119; 38; 134ff. —Venus; ibid. 27f. Julia of course 
became Augusta, perhaps from 1 June: PIR2 J 663; Kettenhofen 78f. 
36 ‘consulship’: explicit only in HA Alb. 6.8 (garbled) — ‘little time’: HA Sev. 8.1-2 on 
his alleged daughters and their husbands is rejected by Hasebroek 54, rightly. 7.9; 
8.3, that he paid off his friends’ debts and executed Julianus’ friends, may be 
authentic. But 8.4-5 (especially on the ‘res frumentaria’) looks suspect. ‘27 June’: 
CJ 3.28.1—Dexter: PIR2 D 144—Bassus is named in HA Sev. 8.8 and is perhaps the 
friend enriched by S., mentioned with Anullinus, Cilo and Lateranus in Epit. de Caes. 
20.6. 
37 Felix: CP no. 228—Claudianus: Alföldy 1968, 139; Fitz 1983—Gallus: Alföldy 1968, 
139—Alexianus: App. 2 no. 45—Plautianus: App. 2 no. 32. 
38 ‘new legions’: E. Birley 1969, 67f. — ‘in the east’: HA Sev. 8.6— ‘children’: Herodian


--- PAGE 216 ---
3.2.5; HA Sev. 8.12. —Africa: ibid. 8.7—Sabinus: see p. 84 above. 
-245- 
 
39 ‘great departments’: he may have aheady chosen Aelius Antipater as ab epistulis 
Graecis (PIR2 A 137) —Galen: 14. 64-6K; 217K. 
11 
The War against Niger (pages 108-120; for Bibliography see pp. 264-6) 
1 Saxa Rubra: HA Sev. 8.10—Vitulus: CP no. 224. 
2 Perinthus, Byzantium: Dio 74.6.3; HA Sev. 8.12-13; Herodian 3.1.5-2.1— Cilo: PIR2 
F 27—coins: BMC V 73f. —Alexander: Dio 74.6.2a— ‘public enemies’: HA Sev. 8.13
—Aemilianus: Birley 1969, 270f. See Rubin 60ff.; 103ff.; 215ff.; Alföldy 1976. 
3 Carnuntum: Dio 74.8.1-2; Rubin 68. 
4 Candidus: the career is given by ILS 1140; Alföldy 1968, 139; 1969, 43ff. 
5 Geta: HA Sev. 8.10; Thomasson 1984, 155f.; 138. Auspex: there is a famous 
problem about the elder and younger Auspex (ILS 8841 and other evidence). For 
this interpretation, Birley 1981a, 151ff., esp. 154 n.22—Maximus: PIR2 M 208. 
6 Byzantium: Dio 74.6.3; cf. Herodian 3.2.1—Aemilianus: Herodian 3.2.2ff.; Dio 
74.6.1—Perinthus: Dio 74.6.3; Halfmann 1986, 219—children: HA Sev. 8.14-15. 
7 Cyzicus: HA Sev. 8.16 (confused, cf. n.13 below); Dio 76.6.4; Herodian 3.2.1-9. Cilo 
was curator of Nicomedia (PIR2 F 27), perhaps briefly at this very time—rivalry: 
Robert—Niger at Nicaea: Dio 74.6.6; Herodian 73.2.10. 
8 ‘detailed account’: Dio 74.6. 4-6—Rome: CIL XVI 134 has ‘imp. III’; cf. BMC V 
lxxxvii, etc. —Egypt: Martin 93ff. 
9 Cilo: PIR2 F 27—Candidus: ILS 1140; Alföldy 1969, 43ff. —Xenophon: CP no. 222— 
‘no executions’: HA Sev. 9.3 (9.6 refers to the aftermath of Issus). 
10 ‘imp II, III’: Rubin 202f. —pater patriae: BMC V lxxxviiff., xcviiff. —saeculum 
frugiferum: ibid. lxxxixf.; Birley 1981a, 147. 
11 Anullinus: p. 49 above; Alföldy 1969, 122f. Dio 74.7.1-8 names him as commander 
at Issus. 
12 Prusias: Halfmann 1986, 216; 219—Niger: Herodian 3.2.10-3.3.2—Arabis: Šašel 
1982 568—VI Ferrsta became ‘constans’: RE 12 (1925) 1593—Laodicea, Tyre: 
Herodian 3.3.3-5; Ziegler—Emesa: the coins are very dubious; Rubin 202ff., Walker 
60. 
13 ‘passes’: Herodian 3.3.1-2; 3.3.6-8—Issus: Dio 74.7.1-8; Herodian 3.4.1-5. Rubin 
66ff.; 101ff.; 104ff.; 117ff.; 224f. —Valerianus: the man named by Dio is surely the 
L. Valerius Valerisnus of the much discussed AE 1966.495. Speidel 1985 seems to


--- PAGE 217 ---
have produced the best interpretation of this inscription so far. HA Sev. 9.1 repeats 
the error in Victor, De Caes. 20.8; Eutropius 8.18.4, that Niger was killed at Cyzicus. 
Presumably an error in the ‘Kaisergeschichte’ — Date of Issus: Herz 36f. 421 
favours 31 March; Rubin 202 ‘spring’; Walker 70 n.6 argues for the second half of 
194. 
14 Niger: RE 19 (1937) 1086ff.; Alföldy 1968, 149—Parthia: RE Supp. 9 (1962) 1851—
coins: BMC V cvii ff. (too inclined to believe HA Nig.). See further Rubin 92ff. 
15 21 May: Herz 92; 210; 501; cf. 440 n.8—coinage: Walker 59; 60ff.; 129f. 
16 ‘imp. IV’: n.14 above—Clemens: Dio 74.9.1-4—Athenagoras: Digest 22.1.6; 
Halfmann 1982, 633 for persons of this name in Caria (not citing the Digest). 
-246- 
 
17 Rufus: Alföldy 1968, 153; Birley 1969, 276f. —Fuscus: PIR2 M 137— ‘rewards and 
punishments’: Dio 74.8.4-5; see now esp. Ziegler—Syria divided: only in Dio 
55.23.2 (list of legions in his own day by province), not in surviving excerpts of book 
74; perhaps vaguely alluded to by Herodian 3.5.1. Fuscus is shown as legate of 
Phoenice in 194 by AE 1930. 141. 
18 ‘Niger’s troops…Nisibis’: Dio 75.1.1ff. Herodian is ignorant of this war— glory: Dio 
75.1.1; cf. 75.3.2—Osrhoene: Wagner, publishing new inscriptions showing 
Pacatianus, previously known as governor from his career inscription (ILS 1353; CP 
no. 229+add.; PIR2 J 444), governor in 195 and Abgar still having a (reduced) 
kingdom round Edessa—Abgar at Rome: mentioned by Dio 79.1.2, a comparison 
with something completely different—Aramaic, etc.: p. 69 above. 
19 ‘mater castrorum’: Herz 37; Kettenhofen 80f. —Faustina: Birley 1987, 178; 191; 
254; Dio 72.10.5. ‘titles’: HA Sev. 9.9-11; BMC V 33, 35 (no. 86) —other 
salutations: Rubin 205ff. —triumph, arch: HA 9.10-11 (cf. p. 155 above) — ‘desert 
conditions’: Dio 75.2.1-3; Rubin 68ff. sees propaganda behind this story, 
unnecessarily in my view—Lucan 9.607ff—Nisibis: Dio 75.2.3. 
20 ‘five generals’: Dio 75.2.3; 3.2—Candidus: ILS 1140—Lateranus: PIR1 S 469 (cf. 
463-5; 468; 471-2) —Laetus: PIR2 L 69—Gentianus: Alföldy 1982, 324-6; 
Thomasson 1985, 120ff. —Anullinus: Alföldy 1969, 122f. —Probus: the name is very 
common (Kajanto 253 knows 200 cases, including nine senators) ‘one sentence’: HA 
9.10 (‘deinde circa Arabiam plura gessit’, etc.). — ‘Syriac source’: RE Supp. 9 
(1962) 1851. 
21 ‘son of M. Aurelius’: BMC V p. 136 (with Imp. V) — ‘rainstorm’: Rubin 66ff. — 
‘northern weather-miracle’: id. 72ff. on Dio 74.3.1—Marcan miracles: Birley 1987, 
171ff. —Aurelian column: id. 267—Goths: Speidel 1977, 712f. 
22 Nisibis: Dio 75.3.2—Valerianus: Speidel 1985. 
23 Albinus: Herodian 3.5.1-8; HA Alb. 7.2-8.3—murder of Pertinax: Birley 1969, 266 
on Eutropius 8.18.4; Victor, De Caes. 20.9; HA Alb. 1.1; 14.2 and 6. 
24 Herodian 3.5.3—Dio 75.4.1— ‘dedications’: e.g. CIL VIII 9317-3 September: AE 
1941. 166—Candidus: JRS 64 (1974) 173f.


--- PAGE 218 ---
25 Dio 74.14.2. 
26 Dio 74.10.1-14.6. He does not mention Maximus (PIR2 M 308), perhaps deliberately: 
one suspects there was no love lost between historian and biographer. Tertullian, 
Scap. 3.4 tells how ‘in illo exitu Byzantino’ (which must mean its fall to Maximus’ 
army) one Caecilius Capella shouted out: ‘Christiani gaudete’. 
27 ‘imp. VIII’: BMC V 111ff.; 145ff. —Aezani: IGR IV 566=ILS 8805. The date of 
Antoninus being made Caesar, much discussed, is now established by the Ulcisia 
Castra inscription published by Soproni; thus Halfmann 1986, 220. 
28 ‘journey back‘: HA Sev. 10.1-3; Herodian 3.6.1-10 (most of this a speech by S., 1-
7, placed before the fall of Byzantium; but Herodian is hopelessly ignorant and 
careless) — ‘Dio’s reference’; 75.4.2-7; Alföldy 1968, 118 n.4; Rubin 79f. prefers a 
later date. I do not believe this is necessary. 
29 Dio 75.4.6-7; Rubin 80ff. offers this acute interpretation. 
12 
The War against Albinus (pages 121-128; for Bibliography see pp. 264-6) 
1 Herodian 3.6.8 places the declaration of Albinus as a hostis, by the army, 
-247- 
 
before the fall of Byzantium— ‘racing’: id. 3.6.10— ‘unsuccessful attempt’: chapter 
11 n.23 above—Herodian 3.5.8 has Albinus beginning preparations ‘as against a 
declared enemy’ immediately after the failed murder attempt; but 3.7.1 puts his 
crossing to Gaul only after hearing of S.’s ‘rapid approach’ —Dio 75.4.1—S.’s claim: 
HA Alb. 10.3; cf. Nig. 4.7. Rubin 138ff. makes very heavy weather of this— 
‘Augustus’: PIR2 C 1186. 
2 Cilo: PIR2 F 27—Alexianus: App. 2 no. 45—Plautianus: ibid. no. 32—Candidus (PIR2 
C 823): ILS 1140; Alföldy 1968, 139—Claudianus (PIR2 C 834): ILS 1146; Alföldy 
1968, 139—Dexter: PIR2 D 144—Anullinus: PIR2 C 1322. 
3 Perinthus: Halfmann 1986, 217; RE 2A (1923) 1962—Barbarus: Birley 1969, 277; 
Thomasson 1984, 169—Auspex: Dio 76.9.4; Birley 1981a, 151ff., esp. 154 11.22. 
4 HA Sev. 10.3; cf. chapter 11 n.27—Geta: App 2 no. 21—Claudianus: PIR2 C 834—
Maximus: PIR2 M 308— ‘conspiracy’: ILS 3029, Poetovio. 
5 Candidus: ILS 1140—Rufus: Alföldy 1969, 42f. I am unconvinced by Christol’s 
suggested redating—Philippianus: ILS 1152; Alföldy 1968, 142— Lupus: Dio 75.62; 
Birley 1981a, 149ff. —Gallus: AE 1957.123; Alföldy 1968, 139—Pacatianus: ch. 11 
n.18 above—Alpine passes: cf. also ILS 1368 (CP no. 226) —Vitulus: CP no. 224. 
6 Numerianus: Dio 75.5.1. Pekáry 476f. places this in Galatia, unjustifiably. The story 
illustrates the point that recruiting for the legions was in full swing. Rubin 77f. has a 
forced interpretation of Numerianus (as a brigand).


--- PAGE 219 ---
7 Cilo: PIR2 F 27—coins: BMV V 50ff.; 150ff. —issues: Pekáry 456f. 
8 Albinus: BMC V civff.; Walker 59f; 130 finds that Albinus’ silver coinage was of 
superior fineness to that struck by S. from late 194 onwards. 
9 Nerva: ILS 418—Code: CJ 9.1.1 (195; the speech of 13 June 195 will have been 
read out in S.’s absence, Digest 27.8.1). 
10 Cilo: PIR2 F 27—roads: Hasebroek 95—augurs: HA Sev. 10.7; cf. Alb. 9.1-4; Rubin 
181ff.; Alföldy 1988, revising his study of 1960. 
11 Dio 75.6.1, misunderstood by all modern scholars until the truth was demonstrated 
by Graham—British army: Birley 1981b, 40 offers a summary (for which I am 
indebted to P.A. Holder) —Sarmatians: Dio 71.16— Marcellus: id. 72.8.2-6; Birley 
1981a, 140ff.; cf. Dio 75.5.4—VII Gemina; modest auxilia: Le Roux—Urban Cohort: 
RE Supp. 10 (1962) 1129f. 
12 S.’s forces: for the auxilia, Birley 1981b, 40; legions, 41— ‘worsted’: 75.6.2. 
13 Tinurtium: HA Sev. 11.1-19 February: ibid. 11.7. Rubin 210 implausibly argues that 
Tinurtium and Lugdunum were a single battle. The distance is too great. It may be 
noted that a suggested redating of Lugdunum from 197 to 196, attributed to C.L. 
Clay and favoured by Barnes, Gnomon 47 (1975) 373, without giving evidence, 
seems too implausible to require discussion here — on the battle: Dio 75.6.1-8; 
Herodian 3.7.2-6; HA Sev. 11.2—Laetus: PIR2 L 69. 
14 ‘pursued’: Herodian 3.7.6-7; Dio 75.7.1-8; HA Sev. 11.6-9—Rubin 210 (but cf. n.13 
above for reservations about Tinurtium). 
15 Candidus: ILS 1140—Rufus: HA Sev. 12.1; Alföldy 1968, 119ff.; 1970, 1ff. — VII 
Gemina: RE 12 (1925) 1642— ‘olive oil’: Remesal 104f. —terra sigillata: E. Birley in 
Stanfield xli—Gentianus: Thomasson 1985, 120ff.; more plausible than Christol. 
-248- 
 
16 Xenophon: CP no. 222—other procurators: nos. 228; 239; 240—Albinus’ allies: 
Alföldy 1968, 120. 
17 Maximus: PIR2 M 308—Pudens, Lupus: Birley 1981a, 155ff., 149ff. — ‘Lupus faced’: 
Dio 75.5.4; Birley 1972; cf. p. 171 above. 
18 envoys: ILS 1143—Gallus: AE 1957. 123; Alföldy 1968, 139—Laetus: PIR2 L 69. 
19 ‘correspondence’: Herodian 3.8.6— ‘laurel branches’: id. 3.8.3-4— ‘first speech’: Dio 
75-7.4-8.3; cf. Herodian 3.8.6—Commodus: HA Sev. 11.4, 8, etc. — ‘openly 
praised’: Dio 75.8.1-3; HA Sev. 12.7—executions: Dio 75.8.4; HA Sev. 12.9-13.9; 
Alföldy 1970 for a detailed analysis. 
20 Dio 75.8.5—Solon: id. 74.2.2; HA Sev. 13.4; Alföldy 1969, 145; 1970, 4; 8; 10. 
Narcissus, who strangled Commodus, was also killed: HA Sev. 14.1. 
21 ‘res privata’: Nesselhauf 1964—Felix: CP no. 225— ‘sixty or more’: Birley 1981b, 40
—coinage: Walker 59ff.; 129ff. —pay: Watson 188; Develin— marriage: Campbell


--- PAGE 220 ---
(on Herodian 3.8.4-5, the only explicit source for S.’s grants to the army at this 
time). 
22 Grosso 1968, 14ff. 
23 Antoninus: Mastino 29f.; Šašel 1983— ‘lavish games’: Herodian 3.8.9— ‘departed’: 
HA Sev. 14.11; Halfmann 1986, 217. 
13 
Parthia and Egypt (pages 129-145; for Bibliography see pp. 266-8) 
1 ‘Aegeae’: Hasebroek 111— ‘new legions’: RE 12 (1925) 1435f.; 1476ff.; 153pf. —
Anullinus, Cilo, Geta et al.: Alföldy 1968, esp. 156ff. 
2 Julia and sons: CIL VI 225, 227, 738, 31322, etc., cited by Hasebroeek 111— 
Nisibis: Dio 75.9.1-3—Laetus: PIR2 L 69—Euphrates: HA Sev. 16.1—king of 
Armenia: Herodian 3.9.2—imp. x: BMC V 59ff. —Rubin 1975, 231ff.; 1980, 210f. 
argues that imp. x was for the capture of Ctesiphon; an unnecessary hypothesis, 
even if there are difficulties over imp. xi and other matters of chronology, n.4 below. 
3 Dio 75.9.1, though brief, is the fullest version; HA Sev. 16.1 (end of summer) —
Verus, Cassius: Birley 1987, 129; 140ff. — ‘king’s brother’: Dio 75.9.3. —Ctesiphon: 
Dio 75.9.3-4; HA Sev. 16.2; Herodian 3.9.9-11 (peculiar: the campaign, in his 
version, was originally aimed at Hatra and the army got to Ctesiphon by mistake, 
swept downstream; but captured it anyway, ‘more by good luck than by good 
judgement’, ibid. 12). 
4 28 January: Herz 37; 135, from the Feriale Duranum, following the interpretation of 
Guey 1948. Rubin 1975, 231ff.; 1980, 210f. doubts that Ctesiphon was taken so 
late because of apparent evidence that Antoninus was Augustus before the end of 
197; not borne out by Mastino 87ff; cf. also Šašel 1983 on ‘imp. destinatus’. It is 
perfectly feasible to attach imp ix to Tinurtium and Lugdunum, imp. x to the opening 
phases of the war, imp. xi to the sack of Ctesiphon. Coins which show ‘Parthicus 
Maximus’ with imp. x need not present a problem—HA Sev. 16. 2-4 associates 
Ctesiphon with the elevation of S.’s sons— ‘plunder’: Dio 75.9.4-5—Hatra: Drijvers 
803ff. —Barsemius: named only in Herodian 3.1.3; 3.9.1 (as aiding Niger, hence to 
be punished). 
5 Dio 75.10.1-3 (Virgil, Aeneid 11.371-3) —Laetus: PIR2 L 69) —Plautianus: HA Sev. 
15.4—Candidus: ILS 1140=RIT 130—astrologers: HA Sev. 15.5. 
6. Octavilla: App. 2 no. 8, cf. 17. 
-249-


--- PAGE 221 ---
7 Mesopotamia: Kennedy 1979 on Subatianus Aquila (AE 1979. 625) — ‘bulwark’: Dio 
75.3.2.3—Osrhoene: Wagner—Senecio: Birley 1981, 157ff. — garrison: Speidel and 
Reynolds; Kennedy, Antichthon. 
8 Hatra: the second siege is reported only by Dio 75.11.1-13.1. It has generated an 
extensive modern literature: Drijvers 803ff. on the city; Rubin 1975 on the 
propaganda aspects, particularly on the depiction of Hatra on the Arch in the Roman 
Forum; Speidel 1986 on the ‘European’ soldiers, with the reply by Kennedy 1986; 
Campbell. 
9 Thus Rubin 1975, 424—coh. IX Maurorum: AE 1958. 239f. 
10 ‘another excerptor’: Dio ed. Boissevain III 150 (not in Loeb version) —Ulpian: he 
himself gives his origin in Digest 50.15.1 pr. —Papinian: HA Carac. 8.2 asserts the 
relationship ‘per secundam uxorem’. See esp. Syme 1984, 1393ff. on their careers 
and the fiction surrounding them—Zeus Belos: Dio 78.8.6 (no date; the quotation is 
Euripides, Phoenissae 20) —family: App. 2 nos. 41; 50; 45; 36; 37. 
11 Frontiers: survey in Kennedy 1987, 283-6. Of the now extensive literature I cite 
Bowersock 1983, 110ff.; Kennedy 1980; 1982, 69ff.; Speidel 1987 (on Dumata and 
Wadi Sirhan); Invernizzi; Kennedy and Northedge. On Palmyra: Mann. 
12 Claudius the brigand: Dio 75.2.4— ‘privileges’: HA Sev. 17.1, cf. 14.6— ‘banned 
conversion’: endlessly discussed, but almost certainly spurious, thus, concisely, 
Barnes 1968, 40f. — ‘Jewish triumph’: HA Sev. 16.7, accepted by Rubin 1980, 211f. 
(and associated with imp. xi), but highly doubtful, Hasebroek 70ff. and see id. 117; 
120ff. for a convenient survey of Roman-Jewish affairs in this period. 
13 Athens: HA Sev. 3.7; p. 73 above—Egypt: Thomasson 1984, 352f., nos. 70-9 (but 
no. 76, Dionysius, never got to the province, p. 78 above) — ‘fascination’: HA Sev. 
17.3-4; Dio 75. 13. 1-2—divination edict: Rea on P. Yale Inv. 299, issued before S.’s 
arrival, hence important for the date, but as Rea points out, the month, in the last 
line, is too fragmentary for certainty. Still, other evidence indicates that Hannestad’s 
early date for S.’s arrival will not do, Halfmann 220f. 
14 Pelusium: Dio 75. 13. 1—Hadrian: Dio 69.11.1; HA Had. 14. 4— ‘curse’: Dio 43.3. 
3ff.—Lucan 8. 608ff. Other references to L. Septimius: RE 2A (1923) 1561f. —M. 
Aurelius and Pompey: through his great-grandfather Rupilius Libo, PIR2 L 166. 
15 Niger, Cybele, baths: Malalas 293; gymnasium, Chron. Pasch. 493 (also a 
‘Pantheon’); Hasebroek 118; 123—council: HA Sev. 17.2; Bowman—Coeranus: Dio 
76.5.5, but not until 212; PIR2 A161. 
16 Plautianus: Dio 75. 14.2-5—Antipater: Philostratus v. soph. 2.24-5; CP no. 230; 
Bowersock 1969, esp. 55f. 
17 libelli, apokrimata: P. Columbia 123; some new readings in Merentitis— Apollinaris: 
Thomasson 1984, 353f. —delegations: P. Oxy. 3019. 
18 Sarapis: HA Sev. 17.3-4. I am indebted to Fowden 20ff—Lepcis: IRT 309-12— 
‘portrayed’: McCann 55f; 79f.; 110f. — ‘painted portrait’: Neugebauer. 
19 Memphis; Oracle of the Potter, etc.: Fowden 21f., Apuleius, Met. 2.28;


--- PAGE 222 ---
-250- 
 
Tertullian, Adv. Valent. 15.1 (‘Mercurius ille Trismegistus, magister omnium 
physicorum’). 
20 pyramids, Sphinx, Labyrinth, Memnon: HA Sev. 17.4— ‘repaired’: IGR I 1113— 
‘statue sang’; Bowersock 1984 (showing that S. did not silence it by repair-work). 
Plague: Dio 75. 13. 1—Nile journey: I follow Hannestad, but cf. n.13 above on 
chronology—frontier: Daniels 223ff. 
21 taboo: Hannestead—Syria: Halfmann 220f. —toga virilis: HA Sev. 16.8 (misplaced) 
—Commodus: Birley 1987, 188f.; 197. 
22 consuls: Alföldy 1968, 158f. 
23 Antioch: HA Carac. 1.7; Downey 242f. 
24 Dio 76. 15. 3-6. 
25 Julia: Dio 75.6-7; Philostratus, v. Apoll. 1.3; Bowersock 1969, 101ff. Dio 72.23.1-3 
on the genesis of his historical work is much discussed (App. 1.A.2) but no exact 
date is imposed—Nicaea: Robert, esp. 30ff. —Byzantium: id. 28 n.134, on HA 
Carac. 1.7. 
26 Dio’s career: App. 1.A.2—Hannibal: Dio 18. 65. 7 (Tsetzes, Chil. 1.798ff.; Zonaras 
9.21). 
27 Sicinius: I follow Guey 1952, 40ff. —Pudens: IRT 295—Pizos: IGR I 766. 
28 Halfmann 218; 221 on the journey—Gallus: Alföldy 1968, 135—Faustus: id. 134—
limes Transalutanus: Bogdan-Cǎtǎniciu 461; 466 (rejects Severan date). 
Claudianus: Alföldy 1968, 138; with Fitz—Cilo: Alföldy 1968, 141f. 
29 Dio 76. 1. 1-5; Chastagnol. 
14 
Return to Africa (pages 146-154; for Bibliography see pp. 268-70) 
1 In spite of doubts by Romanelli 1959, 413ff.; Kotula 1985, there can be no doubt 
that there was a visit to Africa, further, that it took place in 202-03: Halfmann 1986, 
88; 132f; 218; 222f. (cf. n.8 below) —Hadrian’s visit: id. 192; 203—Dio on ‘cos.II’ 
in the case of those who had had ‘ornamenta consularia’ and then a consulship 
(Octavian was an example; Plautianus the first to be called ‘cos. II’): 46.46.3-4. 
2 Carthage, ius Italicum, pertica: Gascou 1982, 215ff. —Thugga and other cities: id. 
209ff. —Marii: App. 1.A.4—Gargilii: Corbier 1982, 736f. —The ius Italicum is 
registered in Digest 50.15.8.11. 
3 Lambaesis: CIL VIII 2702; 18250 (ratio castrensis); Halfmann 1986, 88; 219; 222—
Gallus: Thomasson 1984, 403; Alföldy 1968, 139 (on his origo) — province de iure: 
Subatianus Proculus, in office 208-10 is the first dated legate of ‘Numidia’ rather


--- PAGE 223 ---
than ‘of the legion III Aug.’); ILS 9488; Thomasson loc. cit. —Cirta: the description 
is based on that by Pflaum 1959, 96; cf. also Champlin 1980, 5ff. —Faustus: 
Thomasson 1984, 402f. lists the enormous number of inscriptions which attest his 
activity—Dimmidi: Charles-Picard 1949—Agueneb: CIL VIII 21567; cf. p. 51 above. 
A valuable tour d’horizon is provided by Daniels 1987, 253ff. 
4 III Gallica: Charles-Picard 1949, 47ff. — ‘task…formidable’: Daniels 1987, 253ff. —
Moors: Alföldy 1985—Pudens: PIR2 O 51—Auzia: Gascou 1982, 207ff. —Victory 
monument: Daniels 1987, 255; Romanelli 406ff. —Haius, Sallustius: Thomasson 
1984, 412f. 
-251- 
 
5 P. 51 above. 
6 Baths: IRT 396—Barton 1977 provides a helpful conspectus of the dedications—197: 
IRT 387; 418 (note also 291, to Julia Domna as ‘deae Iunoni orbis terrae’, dedicated 
by one of the Lepcis Fulvii) — ‘double L’: Mastino 1981, 33f. (doubting official 
inspiration) —Geta: IRT 437. No doubt there were others to S. himself, Antoninus, 
Julia. Geta’s has survived, by paradox, because it was removed after his damnatio 
and re-used for building. —Tyre: Rey-Coquais. 
7 Cerealis: IRT 388; 440—Punicus: 392; 403; 422; 434—Galba: 395; 407; 424— 
Celer: 432. 
8 AD 202: IRT 393; 423; 441—ius Italicum: Digest 50.15.8.11—curiae: IRT 416; 420
—Arch: V.M. Strocka 1972 dates this, and the imperial visit, to the years 205-09. 
But he depends on the notion that the coins of 206-07 prove an African visit then, 
emanating from BMC V p. clix. See Halfmann 1986, 132f.; 222f. (There might, for 
all that, have been a second visit: cf. p. 255 n.10 below) —Lamia: IRT 930; p. 12 
above. 
9 ‘free oil’: HA Sev. 18.3— ‘stamped’: Di Vita-Evrard 1985; Mattingly 1988— Dioga: 
PIR2 M 231. 
10 ‘only direct mention’: Philostratus, v. soph 2.20.2. Kotula 1985 attempts 
unsuccessfully to explain this away. However, Procopius, De aedif. 4.4.5, referring 
to S. building a ‘palace’ (basileion, probably the new Basilica) at Lepcis, cited by 
Hasebroek 133 (followed by Halfmann 1986, 126; 222) as further direct evidence, is 
irrelevant, as Kotula 165 n.55 points out: enthende hormōmenos means that S.’s 
origo was Lepcis, nothing more—On the buildings: Guey 1950, 73ff.; Haynes 71ff.; 
meanwhile the forthcoming publication of the late J.B. Ward-Perkins’ work on the 
Severan building complex is eagerly awaited— ‘completed in 216’: IRT 427-8—
Plautianus: IRT 530. 
11 ‘great temple’: it is not in fact certain to which divinity this was dedicated. 
Hasebroek 149f. proposed that Dio 76.16.3 meant Lepcis, a suggestion dismissed by 
Di Vita 1982, 552 n.85 (but he does not refer to the possibility of the new Forum 
temple being the one in question. There are substantial areas as yet unexplored—
note that the ‘Ulpian basilica with its forum’ restored in late antiquity, IRT 543, is 
unlocated). The new Forum complex certainly honours Hercules (Melqart) and 
Dionysus/Bacchus (Shadrapa) with its relief decoration— Dio as proconsul: App.


--- PAGE 224 ---
1.A.2— ‘displayed at Rome’: p. 159 above. 
12 Vezereos: ILAfr. 26; ILTun. 5; 58—Tisavar: CIL VIII 11048—Tillibari: Trousset 1974, 
117f. (restoration in 197) —Si Aioun: ILAfr. 9; ILS 9117; Trousset 1974, 120—
Cydamus: IRT 909—Auru: Brogan and Reynolds 1960, 51—Thenadassa: IRT 868—
Bir Tarsin: IRT 887—Gheriat-el-Garbia: Supp. to Liema Antiqua 2 (1966) 107ff. Note 
also Gasr Zerzi: Brogan and Reynolds 1960, 43f. —Gholaia: AE 1976. 698; 700; IRT 
913-5; Rebuffat 1985 (with bibliography of his very numerous other publications). 
13 On the olive cultivation in the pre-desert, the work of the G.D.B. Jones and G.W.W. 
Barker UNESCO mission has fundamentally changed our understanding. See 
Mattingly 1985; 1987; 1988 for convenient and lucid exposition. Further results are 
awaited— ‘Julius Masthalul’: IRT 886b (Bir ed Dreder in the W. Sofeggin) registers 
the stone (not read and thought then to be ‘in the Libyan language’); see now 
Elmayer 1984—Ghirza: Brogan and Smith 1984. 
-252- 
 
14 Victor, De Caes. 20.9 (=HA Sev. 18.3). 
15 Quintianus: IRT 918— ‘11 April’: IRT 292; Guey 1950, 55ff. ‘urbem suam’ in the 
case of emperors ought to mean Rome; thus e.g. Halfmann 1986, 222. At Lepcis it 
might be otherwise. 
16 Geta’s birthday: Barnes 1971, 263ff.; 71ff. (on Perpetua’s martyrdom); 163 (with 
the acute observation that the procurator Hilarianus is the same as the P. Aelius 
Hilarianus who earlier, in Spanish Asturica, dedicated an altar ‘to the gods and 
goddesses in the pantheon to whom it is right and lawful to pray’, AE 1968. 228; a 
pious persecutor). On the Passio Perpetuae, see now Robert 1982; further, Barnes’ 
addenda (321-39) in the 1985 reprint of his work— ‘Hittite storm-god’ (i.e. 
Dolichenus): Speidel 1978, 76f. has an evocative description and explanation of the 
deity’s success among the military — Tertullian, Scap. 4.5 (Proculus: a servant of 
Antoninus’ educator Euodus); Barnes 1971, 70— ‘not…change of policy’: Barnes 
1971, 143-63. 
17 Dio 75.16.2-5; HA Sev. 14.7. The fact that the governor of Sardinia is the only 
named official to have misjudged what happened may not be coincidence. That 
province would get wind of rumours, from Rome or Lepcis, sooner than most and 
Constans presumably acted at once, before the rumour had been suppressed— ‘10 
June 203’: AE 1968. 8. 
15 
The Years in Italy (pages 155-169; for Bibliography see p. 270) 
1 ovatio: HA Sev. 14.7 (misplaced) —Arch: I rely on Brilliant, although not convinced 
by his interpretation of the reliefs, on which Rubin 1975. 
2 ILS 425. 
3 Alföldy 1968, 134; 141f.; 159.


--- PAGE 225 ---
4 Sec above all the monograph by Pighi. 
5 ‘kinsman’: App. 2 no. 25. 
6 role of XVviri: Syme 1958, 65f. —prophecy: Or. Sib. 8.139ff.; Syme 1958, 773. 
7 Pighi 140ff.; 144ff.; 146ff.; 222ff. —Troy Game: 167; 173—Piso: PIR2 C 295— 
Augustan Messallae: Pighi 236—the consuls of 196 and 214: Barbieri nos. 570-1. 
8 Augustan XVviri: Syme 1939, 382—in 204: Pighi 232ff.; Schumacher 157ff. — 
Africans: Aiacius Modestus (Corbier 743); Cocceius Vibianus (id. 741); Salvius 
Tuscus (id. 720); Gargilius Antiquus (id. 737); Julius Pompeius Rusonianus 
(cognomen only in IRT 396, 750; the case in Philostratus, v. soph. 2.25.2 is 
dubious); Venidius Rufus (Birley 1969, 277); Fulvius Fuscus (Corbier 722). Cassius 
Pius Marcellinus (RE Supp. 9 (1962) 19) and Fabius Magnus (in ‘Quirina’ tribe) are 
possibly from Africa too. Mucianus: Alföldy 1982, 344. 
9 Pighi 116f.; 241ff. —Soaemias and Marcellus: App. 2 nos. 41; 50. 
10 Herodian 3.9-10; Zosimus 2.4.3; 7.2 registers these games. 
11 App. 2 nos 21, 22— ‘deathbed’: Dio 76.2.4. 
12 Dio 76. 2.1-3. 
13 Dio 76.2.5; cf. Herodian 3.10.8. 
14 Dio 76. 3.1-6.3—Macrinus: 78.11.2; CP no. 257. 
15 Herodian 3.11.1-12.12, demolished by Hohl—city: CIL VI 32365. Dio 75.14.6-15.2a. 
16 Herodian 3.11.2-3. 
-253- 
 
17 Benario provides a convenient survey— ‘Septizodium’ proves to be the correct form 
of the name; even if it has, strictly, no connection with ‘septem’, this would not stop 
people so interpreting it. Guey 1946 is still worth consulting on the matter—
horoscope: Dio 76.11.1; Rubin 1980, 33ff. 
18 Laetus: PIR2 M 54. Papinian: HA Carac. 8.2; CP no. 220. Ulpian: Digest 50.15. 1 pr. 
Syme 1984, 1393ff. is essential reading on the three jurists. 
19 Dio 76.16.4—Gorgus: Digest 48. 5.2.6—Victor, De Caes. 20. 23. ‘principle’: Digest 
1.3.31— ‘pronouncement’: Int. 2.17.8. 
20 Dio 76.7.3-9.2. 
21 Dio 76.17.1-3—Sammonicus: Macrobius, Sat. 3.17.4; see further the intriguing 
discussion by Champlin. 
22 Frag. Vat. 294.2; Digest 24.1.32.2. 
23 Dio 76.9.2-4,


--- PAGE 226 ---
24 Tertullian, Apol. 30.4. 
25 App. 1.A.1—Saturninus: CP no. 231—Ulpian: Digest 1.6.3. 
26 Dio 75.15.7; 77.18.3; Philostratus, v. soph. 2.30; v. Apoll. 1.3; Bowersock 1969, 
101ff. 
27 Victor, De Caes. 21.3=HA Sev. 18.8—Herodian 4.9.3, etc.; Rubin 1980, 173ff. offers 
a plausible interpretation for Victor’s further charge, treason. 
28 Dio 76.7. 1-3. 
29 Dio 76. 10. 1-7; cf. 6.2; 74.2. 4-6; MacMullen 255ff. 
30 ‘not long to live’: Dio 76. 11. 1-2. 
16 
Expeditio Felicissima Brittannica (pages 170-187; for Bibliography see pp. 271-2) 
1 ‘angry’; Dio 76.10.6— ‘idleness’: 76.11.1—Herodian 3.14.1-2. 
2 Senecio: Birley 1981, 157ff—Bainbridge: id. 155— ‘next year’: reading ‘[Sen] ecio 
[ne et Aemiliano cos.]’ in the last line of RIB 722, as suggested in Northern History 
20 (1984) 240, pursuing a suggestion of Alföldy 1969, 4 n.1. The polyonymous first 
consul of 206, generally ‘Albinus’, is ‘Senecio’ e.g. in CIL VIII 6985. After 197 the 
former name might have been better avoided in Britain, the latter was shared by the 
governor. See further Alföldy 1969 on the Bainbridge stones—Birdoswald: RIB 1909
—Habitancum: RIB 1234— Cilurnum: RIB 1462—Adventus: CP no. 247+add.; Birley 
1981, 160, 298f.; Rankov. His career is outlined by Dio 78.14.1-3; 79.8.2. 
3 Lupus: RIB 757 (Verterae, name not preserved); 637 (Verbeia); 730 (Lavatrae); 
1163 (Coria). Dio 75.5.4; Birley 1972; 1981, 149ff. 
4 changes to two Walls: Breeze and Dobson, esp. 128f. —Geta, Pertinax: p. 65 above
—Lupus, Pudens, Senecio: Birley 1981, 149ff.; 155ff.; 157ff. 
5 Dio 76.10.6—Condercum: RIB 1337—Coria: 1138; Birley 1981, 265f. Herodian: 
Birley 1972, 186ff., comparing 6.1.2; 6.7.2; see further on this author App. 1A.3. 
6 ‘governor defeated’: Dio 72.8.1-2; Birley 1981, 135ff. —Vindolanda: Britannia 8 
(1977) 432; other sites, n.2 above—Arbeia: Dore and Gillam 61ff. On the name: 
Kennedy 1986; he suggests a fourth-century date for the Tigris bargemen (also at 
Lancaster: Shotter), but early third is quite possible— Barathes: RIB 1065; 1071. 
7 Agricola: Dio 39. 50. 4; 66. 20—Tertullian, Apol. 16, etc. —grandfather: pp. 
-254-


--- PAGE 227 ---
18ff. above—Bolanus: Statius, Silvae 5.2.140ff. —Dio 75.1.1; 76. 13.1— ‘outermost 
island’ Aristides, or 26.82. —Tertullian, Adv. Iudaeos 7.4. 
8 Asper: CIL XIV 2508; Birley 1981, 433f. —Polus: id. 261ff. —Haterianus: Di Vita-
Evrard 1982—Antius Crescens: Birley 1981, 137ff. —Alexianus, Marcellus: App. 2 
nos. 45, 50—Papinian: CP no. 220—Faustinus, younger Ulpius Marcellus: Birley 
1981, 161ff., 164ff. 
9 Castor, Euodus: Dio 76.14.1-2, 5; 77.1.1—classis: CIL VI 1643; CP no. 259; 
‘granaries’: RIB 1143. 
10 ‘two inscriptions’: 429-30—Castinus: App. 2 no. 19—coins in 208: BMC V 262; in 
207:265ff.; 348f. —Victor, I Adiutrix: CIL III 11082—Africa: cf. Robertson 137—On 
the British references on the coinage, see esp. the salutary discussion by Robertson. 
11 Maximus: PIR2 M 308—Martialis: M 608—Perpetuus: M 31.; Thomasson 1984, 129; 
1985—Aquila: Thomasson 1984, 339; 354—Proculus: id. 403. — Senecio: Birley 
1981, 158—Aiacius: p. 253 n.8 above—Victor: Alföldy 1968, 141—Castinus: App. 2 
no. 19. 
12 consuls: Alföldy 1968, 159—Aper: App. 2 no. 14— ‘Commodus’: revealed by RMD 
73, where the other consul is correctly identified— ‘daughters’: Pflaum 36f.; 37f. 
13 coins: BMC V 208ff.; 349ff. — ‘gout’: Dio 76.13.4; Herodian 3.14.3, 5; HA Sev. 
23.3. 
14 Eboracum: Victor, De Caes. 20.27. 
15 Dio 76. 12. 1-4; Herodian 3.14.5-8. 
16 ‘bridge’: Robertson corrects widespread error on this whole matter—208: BMC V 
351, no. 857-209:353 (frequently misdated) —Herodian 3.14.5; Dio 76.13.1-4. 
17 Herodian 3.14.9-10—Alban: argued by Morris. 
18 Aenus: Kaygusz 66f. 
19 Dio 76. 13. 4; Herodian 3.15.1—Britannicus: Dietz 382f. points out that neither ILS 
431 nor AE 1965. 338 of AD 209 can be used to date the title to this year: the 
former should read ‘f [ort. fel.]’ not ‘B [ritann.]’, the latter was doctored after Geta’s 
murder. For the evidence for ‘Britannicus’: Mastino 51f. and n.186—camps: JRS 59 
(1969) 114ff.; 63 (1973) 230ff. 
20 camps: see previous note— ‘extremity’: Dio 76.13.3— ‘money’: 76.11.2: Herodian 
3.14.2. 
21 Carpow: identified as belonging to this expedition by R.E. Birley 1962; 1963. Further 
work reported by Leach and Wilkes; cf. also JRS 55 (1965) 208f.; 56 (1966) 199; 
57 (1967) 175; 58 (1968) 177f.; 59 (1969) 202, 63 (1973) 231; 67 (1977) 144; 
Britannia 9 (1978) 277f. For ‘VI Vic. B. pf.’, ibid. 52 (1962) 197; 53 (1963) 164 
(which also reports an example from Eboracum); and ILAlg I 539.1 from Zattara in 
Numidia may register the title on a veteran’s tombstone—II Augusta: Wright, 
assigning the fragmentary inscription decorated with its emblem to 212; hard to 
prove or disprove— ‘horehound’: JRS 53 (1963) 166.


--- PAGE 228 ---
22 HA Sev. 18.2; Victor, De Caes. 20. 18; Eutropius 8.19; Epit. de Caes. 20.4; Jerome, 
Chron. p. 212 (Helm); Orosius 7.17.7 (a little extra detail—ditch and turrets) —207: 
a quarrying inscription, RIB 1009. 
23 Dio 76. 14.1-7; cf. Rubin 174f. 
24 Dio 76. 11. 1-2; HA Sev. 22.1-7—Aballava: RIB 2042—Bellona: RIB 890. 
-255- 
 
25 Carvetii: JRS 55 (1965) 224; Higham and Jones, esp. 9ff. —Syrian Goddess: RIB 
1791—Vindolanda: 1700—Phoenician deities: 1124; 1129. 
26 Eboracum: CJ 3.32.1; 8.25.2; 2.11.9; 3.28.4; 6.35.2; 8.13.4; 2.11.10; 6.53.4; 
8.40.3 (208); 7.62.1; 8.18.1; 7.8.3 (209); 3.32.1; 8.53.1; 6.4.1; 8.44.3; 8.37.2; 
3.1.2 (210). The issue of 28 April 211 (6.37.3) which bears his name may have 
been delayed—Ephesus: Die Inschriften von Ephesos (Bonn 1979-84) no. 881. 
Sarapis: RIB 658; Birley 1981, 263ff. 
27 Dio 76.16.5. 
28 revolt: Dio 16.15.1-2 (Iliad 6.57-9); Herodian 3.15.1—proto-Picts: Chadwick in 
Dillon and Chadwick 73f. on the view from the ‘great Iron Age hill fort of Castle Law 
above Abernethy…surely the heart of Pictavia’ —Geta: IG II/III 1077, redated by Di 
Vita-Evrard 1987, cf. App. 2 no. 22. 
29 Dio 76.15.2; 17.4; Herodian 3.15.2; Victor, De Caes. 20. 29. HA Sev. 20-1 was 
exposed as crass fiction by Straub. 
17 
Aftermath and Assessment (pp. 188-200; for Bibliography see pp. 272-3) 
1 ‘purple stone’: Dio 76.15.4 (also quoting S.’s words); Herodian says alabaster, 
3.15.7. Probably Derbyshire Blue John, often various shades of purple. HA Sev. 24.2 
says ‘a little gold urn’; trying to be different), ‘preparations’: …at Eboracum’: 
Herodian 3.15.4-5; Dio 77.1.1 (with names). One of the officers bribed could be 
Tineius Longus, prefect of cavalry at Condercum, designated quaestor (RIB 1329; 
Birley 1981b, 165) — ‘resemblance’: Dio 77.1.3. 
2 withdrawals, etc.: Dio 77.1.1 and Herodian 3.15.6 make this clear enough. Wright 
believes the fragmentary inscription from Carpow cannot be earlier than 212. Not 
certain: but a slight delay may be allowed— ‘concerted attempt’: cf. chapter 16 n. 
22 above—younger Marcellus: not believed in by everyone, argued by Birley 1981b, 
168ff. —Herodian 3.15.6-4.4.2; Dio 77.1-6 describe the return. Herodian produces 
the story that there was a serious plan to divide the empire; implausible, Alföldy 
1988. —Geta’s character: Dio 77.1.3; elaborated by Herodian 3.3.2-3 (and the HA). 
3 Dio 77.2.1 says Antoninus wanted to murder Geta at the Saturnalia but failed to 
carry it out. The date seems to have been established by Barnes 51f. Dio 77.2.2-6 
describes the murder; also Herodian 4.4.3; HA Carac. 2.4. The aftermath is given by


--- PAGE 229 ---
Dio 77.3.1-5.2; Herodian 4.4.4-6.5: HA Carac. 2.4-4.10 (same re-used in Geta 6.1-
8). To be used with caution, see Dietz; Alföldy 1988—Inscriptions: Mastino 175f. 
4 ‘Caracalla’: the correct form is established by a leaden curse tablet from Aquae 
Sulis, Wild—Dio on Caracalla: 78.3.3; 9.3, etc. Herodian 4.7.4-7. ‘Dio’s hatred’ etc.: 
see Books 77, 78. 1-9 — ‘soldierly conduct’: 77.13.1-2. Detailed annotation on 
events after 211 lies beyond the scope of this work. 
5 Dio 77. 9.4-5—Marcellus: App. 2 no. 50. Rome as the common fatherland has been 
much written about. 
6 My views on the division of Britain are set out in Birley 1981b, 166ff. (Julius Marcus 
as last governor of undivided Britain) —Gordianus: id. 181ff. 
7 ILS 1159—army pay: Develin; Watson 188 (with varying calculations). 
8 Dio 78.4.1-23.6. Herodian 4.12. 1ff. is better disregarded and the HA Macrinus and 
Diadumenianus are mostly fiction—Haius: PIR2 H 8. 
9 See above all the fundamental study by Kettenhofen. 
-256- 
 
10 On the reign of Alexander, in addition to Kettenhofen; Syme 146ff. 
11 See esp. Alföldy 1968. 
12 E. Birley; Smith; Graham offer estimates on military matters. 
13 Birley 1974 summarises the evidence for Septimius as ‘propagator imperii’. 
14 Galen 14. 217K; Tertullian, De pallio 1.1; 2.7; Herodian 3.7.7-8; Victor, De Caes. 
20.6, 10. 
15 Dio 76.16.1-4; Millar 139; Dio 78.10.1-2; Millar 180. 
16 Dio 75.7.4; HA Sev. 15.5; Dio 76.7.3. Perhaps I may be permitted to refer to my 
papers dealing with aspects of the third century: Birley 1976; 1981a. 
-257- 
Bibliographies 
Chapters 1-3 
a 
Alföldy, G. 1977 Konsulat und Senatorenstand under den Antoninen (Bonn 1977) 
Aumont, J. 1968 ‘Caton en Libye (Lucain, Pharsale IX 294-949)’, Rev. et. anc. 70 
(1968) 304-20 
b 
Badian, E. 1958 Foreign Clientelae (Oxford 1958)


--- PAGE 230 ---
Badian, E. 1968 Roman Imperialism in the Late Republic (2nd ed., Oxford 1968) 
Barnes, T.D. 1971 Tertullian. A literary and historical study (Oxford 1971) 
Bartoccini, R. 1958 Il porto romano di Leptis Magna (Rome 1958) 
Bates, O. 1914 The Eastern Libyans (London 1914) 
Birley, A.R. 1968 ‘Some teachers of Marcus Aurelius’, Historia-Augusta-Colloquium 
1966-7 (Bonn 1968) 39-42 
Birley, A.R. 1969 ‘The coups d’état of the year 193’, Bonner Jahrbücher 169 (1969) 
243-80 
Birley, A.R. 1970 ‘Some notes on HA Severus 1-4’, Historia-Augusta-Colloquium 1968-
9 (Bonn 1970) 59-77 
Birley, A.R. 1981 The Fasti of Roman Britain (Oxford 1981) 
Birley, A.R. 1987 Marcus Aurelius. A biography (London 1987) 
Brogan, O. 1968 ‘Henschir el-Ausaf by Tigi (Tripolitania) and some related tombs in the 
Tunisian Gefara’, Libya Antiqua 2 (1965) 47-56 
c 
Champlin, E. 1980 Fronto and Antonine Rome (Cambridge, Mass. 1980) 
Corbier, M. 1982 ‘Les families clarissimes d’Afrique proconsulaire’, Epigrafia et ordine 
senatorio II (Tituli 5, Rome 1982) 685-754 
d 
Daniels, C.M. 1970 The Garamantes of Southern Libya (Harrow 1970) 
Daniels, C.M. 1987 ‘Africa’, The Roman World, ed. J.S. Wacher (London 1987), I 223-
65 
Deman, A. 1962 ‘Virgile et la colonisation romaine en Afrique du Nord’, Hommages 
Grenier (Collection Latomus 68, Brussels 1962) 514-62 
Desanges, J. 1980 Pline l’Ancien. Histoire naturelle, livre V, 1-46, lère partie (L’Afrique 
du Nord) (Paris 1980) 
Di Vita, A. 1968a ‘Influences grecques et tradition orientale dans l’art punique de 
Tripolitaine’, Mélanges…école française de Rome 80 (1968) 7-83 
Di Vita, A. 1986b ‘Shadrapa et Milk’ ashtart dèi patri di Leptis ed i templi del lato nord-
ovest del Foro vecchio leptitano’, Orientalia 37 (1968) 201-11 
-258- 
Di Vita, A. 1969 ‘Le date di fondazione di Leptis e di Sabratha sulla base dell’ indagine 
archeologica e l’eparchia cartaginese d’Africa’, Hommages M. Renard III (Collection 
Latomus 103, Brussels 1969) 196-202


--- PAGE 231 ---
Di Vita, A. 1974 ‘Un passo dello Stadiasmos tes megales thalasses ed il porto ellenistico 
di Leptis Magna’, Mélanges P. Boyancé (Rome 1974) 229-49 
Di Vita, A. 1982 ‘Gli Emporia di Tripolitania dall’età di Massinissa a Diocleziano: un 
profile storico-istituzionale’, ANRW 2.10.2 (1982) 515-95 
Di Vita-Evrard, G. 1965 ‘Les dédicaces de l’amphithéatre et du cirque de Lepcis’, Libya 
Antiqua 2 (1965) 29-37 
Di Vita-Evrard, G. 1979 ‘Quatre inscriptions du Djebel Tarhuna: le territoire de Lepcis 
Magna’, Quaderni di arch, della Libia 10 (1979) 67-98 
Di Vita-Evrard, G. 1982 ‘Note sur “trois” sénateurs de Lepcis Magna. Le clarissimat des 
Plautii’, Epigrafia e ordine senatorio I (Tituli 4, Rome 1982) 453-65; ‘Contribution de la 
Tripolitaine à la prosopographie de deux sénateurs, proconsuls d’Afrique’, ibid. 467-70 
Di Vita-Evrard, G. 1984 ‘“Municipium Flavium Lepcis Magna”’, Bulletin…comité des 
travaux historiques, n.s. 17B (1984) 197-210 
Di Vita-Evrard, G. 1985 ‘Notes sur quelques timbres d’amphores de Tripolitaine’, ibid. 
18B (1985) 147-59 
Di Vita-Evrard, G. 1986 ‘La Fossa Regia et les diocèses d’Afrique proconsulate’, L’Africa 
Romana 3, ed. A. Mastino (Sassari 1986) 31-58 
g 
Garnsey, P.D. A. 1978 ‘Rome’s African empire under the principate’, Imperialism in the 
Ancient World, eds. Garnsey and C.R. Whittaker (Cambridge 1970, and 1978) 223-54 
Gascou, J. 1982 ‘La politique municipale de Rome en Afrique du Nord’, ANRW 2.10.2 
(1982) 136-320 
Gese, H., Höfner, M., Rudolph, K. 1970 Die Religionen Altsyriens, Altarabiens und der 
Mandäer (Stuttgart 1970) 
Griset, E. 1957 ‘Un cristiano di Sabrata’, Rivista di studi classici 5 (1957) 35-9 
Guey, J. 1951a ‘L’inscription du grand-père de Septime-Sévère à Leptis Magna’, 
Mémoires soc. nat. ant. de France 82 (1951) 161-226 
Guey, J. 1951b ‘Au théâtre de Leptis Magna. Le proconsulat de Lollianus Avitus et la 
date de l’Apologie d’Apulée’, Rev. ét. lat. 29 (1951) 307-17 
Guey, J. 1954 ‘L’Apologie d’Apulée et les inscriptions de Tripolitaine’, ibid. 32 (1954) 
115-119 
h 
Harden, D.B. 1962 The Phoenicians (London 1962) 
Hardie, A. 1983 Statius and the Silvae (Liverpool 1983) 
Harmand, L. 1957 Le Patronat sur les collectivités publiques des origines au Bas-
Empire (Paris 1957)


--- PAGE 232 ---
-259- 
 
Harris, W.V. 1979 War and Imperialism in Republican Rome (Oxford 1979) 
Haynes, D.E.L. 1959 The Antiquities of Tripolitania (Tripoli 1959) 
Hijmans, B.L. 1987 ‘Apuleius, philosophus Platonicus’, ANRW 2.36.1 (1987) 395-475 
Humphrey, J.H. 1986 Roman Circuses. Arenas for Chariot Racing (London 1986) 
j 
Jenkins, G.K. 1969 North Africa, Syrtica, Mauretania (Sylloge Nummorum 
Graecorum, Copenhagen 1969) 
k 
Kotula, T. 1968 Les curies municipales en Afrique romaine (Wroclaw 1968) 
l 
Lassère, J.M. 1977 Ubique populus (Paris 1977) 
m 
McCann, A.M. 1968 The Portraits of Septimius Severus (Rome 1968) 
Manacorda, D. 1977 ‘Testimonianze della produzione e il consume dell’olio 
tripolitano nel III secolo’, Dial. di Archeologia 9-10 (1976-7) 542-601 
Manacorda, D. 1983 ‘Prosopografia e anfore tripolitane: nuove osservazioni’, 
Prodduccion y comercio del aceite en la Antguedad, ed. J.M. Blázquez Martínez and 
J. Remesal Rodríguez (Madrid 1983) 483-500 
Mattingly, D.J. 1984 Tripolitania. A comparative study of a Roman frontier province 
(unpublished Ph.D. thesis, Manchester 1984) 
Mattingly, D.J. 1987 ‘Libyans and the ‘limes’: culture and society in Roman 
Tripolitania’, Antiquités africaines 23 (1987) 71-94 
Mattingly, D.J. 1988 ‘The olive boom. Oil surpluses, wealth and power in Roman 
Tripolitania’, Libyan Studies 19 (1988) 
Millar, F. 1968 ‘Local cultures in the Roman empire: Libyan, Punic and Latin in 
Roman Africa’, JRS 58 (1968) 126-34 
Millar, F. 1981 ‘The world of the Golden Ass’, JRS 71 (1981) 63-75Monceaux, P. 
1894 Les Africains. Étude sur la littérature latine d’Afrique (Paris 1894) 
Moretti, L. 1976 ‘Un decreto di Arsinoe in Cirenaica’, Rivista di Filologia 104 (1976) 
385-98 
n 
Neugebauer, K.A. 1936 ‘Die Familie des Septimius Severus’, Die Antike 12 (1936) 
155-72


--- PAGE 233 ---
Nisbet, R.G.M. 1978 ‘Felicitas at Surrentum (Statius, Silvae II 2)’, JRS 68 (1978) 1-
11 
p 
Pavis d’Escurac, H. ‘Pour une étude sociale de l’Apologie d’Apulée’, Antiquités 
africaines 8 (1974) 89-101 
r 
Rebuffat, R. 1986 ‘Un banquier à Lepcis Magna’, L’Africa Romana 3, ed. A. Mastino 
(Sassari 1986) 179-87 
Röllig, W. 1980 ‘Das Punische im Römischen Reich’, Die Sprachen im Römischen 
Reich der Kaiserzeit, eds. G. Neumann, J. Untermann (Bonn 1980) 285-99 
Rössler, O. 1980 ‘Libyen von der Cyrenaica bis zur Mauretania Tingitana’, ibid. 267-
84 
Romanelli, P. 1958 ‘Fulvii Lepcitani’, Archeologia Classica 10 (1958) 258-61 
-260- 
 
Romanelli, P. 1959 Storia delle province romane dell’ Africa (Rome 1959) 
s 
Sherwin-White, A. N. 1973 Roman Citizenship (2nd ed. Oxford 1973) 
Syme, R. 1958 Tacitus (Oxford 1958) 
Syme, R. 1984 Roman Papers III (Oxford 1984) 
Syme, R. 1986 The Augustan Aristocracy (Oxford 1986) 
Syme, R. 1988 Roman Papers IV-V (Oxford 1988) 
t 
Thomasson, B.E. 1984 Laterculi Praesidum I (Gothenburg 1984) 
Torelli, M. 1971 ‘Le “curie” di Leptis Magna’, Quaderni…archeologia della Libia 6 
(1971) 105-11 
Torelli, M. 1974 ‘Per una storia della classe dirigente di Leptis Magna’, Rendiconti…
Accad. Lincei, ser. 8 28 (1974) 377-410 
v 
Vergara Caffarelli, E. and Caputo, G. 1966) 1966 The Buried City. Excavations at 
Leptis Magna (London 
Vessey, D.W.T.C. 1970 ‘Non solitis fidibus: some aspects of Statius, Silvae 4.5’, 
L’antiquité classique 39 (1970) 507-18


--- PAGE 234 ---
Vidman, L. 1977 ‘Die Stadtpräfektur des Q. Lollius Urbicus und Apuleius, Apologia 2-
3’, Arheološki Vestnik 27 (1977) 373-84 
w 
Walsh, P.G. 1965 ‘Massinissa’, JRS 55 (1965) 149-60 
Walsh, P.G. 1968 ‘Lucius Madaurensis’, Phoenix 22 (1968) 143-57 
Warmington, B. 1964 Carthage (London 1964) 
Whittaker, C.R. 1974 ‘The western Phoenicians: colonisation and assimilation’, Proc. 
Cambridge Philol.Soc. n.s. 20 (1974) 58-79 
Whittaker, C.R. 1978 ‘Carthaginian imperialism in the fifth and fourth centuries’, 
Imperialism in the Ancient World, eds. P.D.A. Garnsey and C.R. Whittaker 
(Cambridge 1978) 59-90 
Chapters 4-7 
a 
Alföldy, G. 1969 Fasti Hispanienses. Senatorische Reichsbeamte und Offiziere in den 
spanischen Provinzen des römischen Reiches von Augustus bis Diokletian 
(Wiesbaden 1969) 
Alföldy, G. 1977 Konsulat und Senatorenstand unter den Antoninen (Bonn 1977) 
Alföldy, G. 1982 ‘Senatoren aus Norditalien. Regiones IX, X und XI’, Epigrafia e 
ordine senatorio II (Tituli 5, Rome 1982) 309-68 
Alföldy, G. 1985 ‘Bellum Mauricum’, Chiron 15 (1985) 87-105 (reprinted in Alföldy 
1987, 463-81) 
Alföldy, G. 1987 ‘P. Helvius Pertinax und M. Valerius Maximianus’, Situla 14/15 
(1974) 199-215, reprinted with addenda in the same scholar’s Römische 
Heeresgeschichte. Beiträge 1962-1985 (Amsterdam 1987) 326-48 
Alföldy, G. 1988 ‘Cleanders Sturz und die antike Überlieferung’, Geschichte, 
Ceschichtsbetrachtung und Geschichtsschreibung in der Krise des Römischen 
Reiches (Heidelberg 1988). 
-261- 
b 
Birley, A.R. 1970 ‘Some notes on HA Severus 1-4’, Historia-Augusta-Colloquium 1968-
9 (Bonn 1970) 59-77 
Birley, A.R. 1981 The Fasti of Roman Britain (Oxford 1981) 
Birley, A.R. 1982 ‘Senators from Britain?’, Epigrafia e ordine. senatorio II (Tituli 5, 
Rome 1982) 531-8 
Birley, A.R. 1987 Marcus Aurelius. A Biography (London 1987)


--- PAGE 235 ---
Birley, E. 1953 Roman Britain and the Roman Army (Kendal 1953) 
Birley, E. 1963 ‘Promotions and transfers in the Roman army. 2. The centurionate’, 
Carnuntum Jahrbuch 1963-4, 21-33 
Birley, E. 1966 ‘Alae and cohortes milliariae’,Corolla E. Swoboda (Graz 1966) 54-67 
Bowersock, G.W. 1969 Greek Sophists in the Roman Empire (Oxford 1969) 
Bowersock, G.W. 1982 ‘Roman Senators from the near east’, Epigrafia e ordine 
senatorio II (Tituli 5, Rome 1982), 651-88 
Breeze, D.J. and Dobson B. 1987 Hadrian’s Wall (3rd ed., London 1987) 
c 
Champlin, E. 1980 Fronto and Antonine Rome (Cambridge, Mass., 1980) 
Charles-Picard, G. 1959 La civilisation de l’Afrique romaine (Paris 1959) 
Chastagnol, A. 1978 ‘Latus clavus et adlectio dans l’Histoire Auguste’, Historia-
Augusta-Colloquium 1975-6 (Bonn 1978) 107-31 
Corbier, M. 1982 ‘Les families clarissimes d’Afrique proconsulaire’, Epigrafia e ordine 
senatorio II (Tituli 5, Rome 1982) 685-754 
Cramer, F.H. 1954 Astrology in Roman Law and Politics (Philadelphia 1954) 
d 
Di Vita-Evrard, G. 1963 ‘Un “nouveau” proconsul d’Afrique, parent de Septime-Sévère: 
Caius Septimius Severus’, MEFRA 75(1963) 389-44 
Di Vita-Evrard, G. 1985 ‘L. Volusius Bassus Cerealis, légat du proconsul d’Afrique T. 
Claudius Aurelius Aristobulus, et la création de la province de Tripolitaine’, in Mastino 
(below) 149-77 
e 
Eck, W. 1979 Die staatliche Organisation Italiens in der hohen Kaiserzeit (Munich 1979) 
Eck, W. 1985 Die Stalthalter der germanischen Provinzen (Cologne 1985) 
g 
Grosso, F. 1964 La lotta politica al tempo di Commodo (Turin 1964) 
h 
Halfmann, H. 1982 ‘Die Senatoren aus den Kleinasiatischen Provinzen des römischen 
Reiches vom 1. bis 3. Jahrhundert’, Epigrafia e ordine senatorio II (Tituli 5, Rome 
1982) 603-50 
Hasebroek, J. 1921 Untersuchungen zur Geschichte des Kaisers Septimius Severus 
(Heidelberg 1921) 
Holder, P.A. 1980 The Roman Army in Britain (London 1980)


--- PAGE 236 ---
m 
Mastino A. (ed.) 1985 L’Africa Romana II (Cagliari 1985), including the editor’s own 
contribution, ‘Le relazioni tra Africa e Sardegna in età romana: inventario preliminare’, 
27-91 
r 
Rivet, A.L.F. & Smith, C.C. 1979 The Place-Names of Roman Britain (London 1979) 
Roxan, M.M. 1972 ‘Epigraphic notes’, Epigraphische Studien 9 (1972) 246-50 
-262- 
 
Rubin, Z. 1980 Civil-War Propaganda and Historiography (Collection Latomus 173, 
Brussels 1980) 
t 
Talbert, R.J.A. 1984 The Senate of Imperial Rome (Princeton 1984) 
Chapter 8 
a 
Alföldy, G. 1971 ‘Bellum desertorum’, Bonner Jahrbücher 171 (1971) 367-76, 
reprinted with addenda in Alföldy 1988 
Alföldy, G. 1982 ‘Senatoren aus Norditalien. Regiones IX, X und XI’, Epigrafia e 
ordine senatorio II (Tituli 5, Rome 1982) 309-68 
Alföldy, G. 1988 ‘Cleanders Sturz und die antike Überlieferung’, Geschichte 
Geschichtsbetrachtung und Geschichtsschreibung in der Krise des Römischen 
Reiches (Heidelberg 1988) 
b 
Barnes, T.D. The Sources of the Historia Augusta (Collection Latomus 155, Brussels 
1978) 
Birley, A.R. 1970 ‘Some notes on HA Severus 1-4’, Historia-Augusta-Colloquium 
1968-9 (Bonn 1970) 59-77 
Birley, A.R. 1981 The Fasti of Roman Britain (Oxford 1981) 
Birley, A.R. 1987 Marcus Aurelius. A biography (London 1987) 
Bowersock, G.W. 1982 ‘Roman senators from the Near East: Syria, Judaea, Arabia, 
Mesopotamia’, Epigrafia e ordine senatorio II (Tituli 5, Rome 1982) 651-68 
c 
Chad, C. 1972 Les dynastes d’Emèse (Beirut 1972)


--- PAGE 237 ---
d 
Downey, G. 1961 A History of Antioch in Syria (Princeton 1961) 
Drijvers, H.J.W. 1977 ‘Hatra, Palmyra und Edessa’, ANRW 2.8 (1977) 799-906 
g 
Grosso, F. 1964 La lotta politica al tempo di Commodo (Turin 1964) 
h 
Hohl, E. 1954 Kaiser Commodus and Herodian (Sitzungsber. Berlin 1954) 
j 
Jones, C.P. 1978 ‘A Syrian in Lyon, AJP 99 (1978) 336-53 
m 
Matthews, J.F. 1984 ‘The tax law of Palmyra’, JRS 74 (1984) 157-80 
Millar, F. 1983 ‘The Phoenician cities: a case-study of Hellenisation’, Proc. 
Cambridge Phil.Soc. n.s. 29 (1983) 55-71 
Millar, F. 1987 ‘Empire, community and culture in the Roman Near East: Greeks, 
Syrians, Jews and Arabs’, J. Jewish Studies 38 (1987) 143-64 
s 
Sullivan, R.D. 1977 ‘The dynasty of Judaea in the first century’, ANRW 2.8 (1977) 
296-354; ‘The dynasty of Emesa’, ibid. 198-219 
t 
Teixidor, J. 1985 Un port remain du désert: Palmyre (Paris 1985) 
Thomasson, B.E. 1984 Laterculi Praesidum (Gothenburg 1984) 
Thomsen, P. 1945 ‘Massilia in Syrien, Ein Beitrag zur Historia Augusta und zur 
Ortskunde Syriens’, Zeitschr. d. deutschen PalästinaVereins 67 (1945) 75-81 
w 
Wroth, W. 1899 Catalogue of the Greek Coins of Galatia, Cappadocia, and Syria 
(London 1899) 
-263- 
Chapters 9-12 
a 
Alföldy, G. 1968 ‘Septimius Severus und der Senat’, Bonner Jahrbücher 168 (1968) 
112-60 
Alföldy, G. 1969 Fasti Hispanienses. Senatorische Reichsbeamte und Offiziere in den 
spanischen Provinzen des römischen Reiches von Augustus bis Diokletian (Wiesbaden


--- PAGE 238 ---
1969) 
Alföldy, G. 1970 ‘Eine Proskriptionsliste in der Historia Augusta’, Historia-Augusta-
Colloquium 1968-69 (Bonn 1970) 1-12; repr. in Alföldy 1988 
Alföldy, G. 1976 ‘Das neue saeculum des Pescennius Niger’, ibid 1972-4 (Bonn 1976) 
1-10; repr. in Alföldy 1988 
Alföldy, G. 1982 ‘Senatoren aus Norditalien. Regiones IX, X, und XI’, Epigrafia e ordine 
senatorio II (Tituli 5, Rome 1982) 309-68 
Alföldy, G. 1988 Geschichte, Geschichtsbetrachtung und Geschichtsschreibung in der 
Krise des Römischen Reiches (Heidelberg 1988) 
b 
Barnes, T.D. 1970 ‘A senator from Hadrumetum and three others’, Historia-Augusta-
Colloquium 1968-9 (Bonn 1970) 45-58 
Barnes, T.D. 1978 The Sources of the Historia Augusta (Collection Latomus 155, 
Brussels 1978) 
Birley, A.R. 1969 ‘The coups d’état of the year 193’, Bonner Jahrbücher 169 (1969) 
247-80 
Birley, A.R. 1972 ‘Virius Lupus’, Archaeologia Aeliana, 4th ser. 50 (1972) 179-89 
Birley, A.R. 1981a The Fasti of Roman Britain (Oxford 1981) 
Birley, A.R. 1981b ‘The economic effects of Roman frontier policy’, The Roman West in 
the Third Century, eds. A. King, M. Henig (BAR Int. Ser. 109, Oxford 1981) 39-53 
Birley, A.R. 1987 Marcus Aurelius. A biography (London 1987) 
Birley, E. 1953 Roman Britain and the Roman Army (Kendal 1953) 
Birley, E. 1969 ‘Septimius Severus and the Roman army’, Epigraphische Studien 8 
(1969) 63-82 
Bloch, H. 1943 ‘A dream of Septimius Severus’, Classical World 37 (1943-4) 31-2 
c 
Campbell, J.B. 1978 ‘The marriage of soldiers under the empire’, JRS 68 (1978) 153-66 
Champlin, E. 1979 ‘Notes on the heirs of Commodus’, AJP 100 (1979) 288-306 
Christol, M. 1981 ‘La carrière de Q. Hedius Rufus Lollianus Gentianus’, Rev. études 
anciennes 83 (1981) 75-84 
Corbier, M. 1982 ‘Les families clarissimes d’Afrique proconsulaire (Ier—IIIe siècle’, 
Epigrafia e ordine senatorio II (Tituli 5, Rome 1982) 685-754 
d 
Develin, R. 1971 ‘Pay rises under Severus and Caracalla and the question of the 
annona militaris’,Latomus 30 (1971) 687-95


--- PAGE 239 ---
Domaszewski, A. v. 1898 ‘Der Staatsstreich des Septimius Severus’, Rheinisches 
Museum 53 (1898) 638-9 
f 
Fitz, J. 1983 ‘A la carrière équestre de Ti. Claudius Clandianus’, Alba Regia 20 (1983) 
275-6 
-264- 
g 
Graham, A.J. 1978 ‘The numbers at Lugdunum’, Historia 27 (1978) 625-30 
Grosso, F. 1964 La lotta politica al tempo di Commodo (Turin 1964) 
Grosso, F. 1968 ‘Ricerche su Plauziano e gli avvenimenti del suo tempo’, Rendiconti 
Acc. Lincei, 8th ser. 23 (1968) 7-58 
h 
Halfmann, H. 1982 ‘Die Senatoren aus den Kleinasiatischen Provinzen des römischen 
Reiches vom 1. bis 3. Jahrhundert’, Epigrafia e ordine senatorio II (Tituli 5, Rome 
1982) 603-50 
Halfmann, H. 1986 Itinera Principum. Geschichte und Typologie der Kaiserreisen im 
Römischen Reich (Stuttgart 1986) 
Hasebroek, J. 1921 Untersuchungen zur Geschichte des Kaisers Septimius Severus 
(Heidelberg 1921) 
Herz, P. 1975 Untersuchungen zum Festkalender der römischen Kaiserzeit nach 
datierten Weih- und Ehreninschriften (Diss. Mainz 1975) 
Hohl, E. 1956 Kaiser Pertinax und die Thronbesteigung seines Nachfolgers im Lichte der 
Herodiankritik (Sitz. Berlin 1956) 
j 
Jarrett, M.G. 1972 ‘An album of the equestrians from North Africa in the emperor’s 
service’, Epigraphische Studien 9 (1972) 146-232 
k 
Kajanto, I. 1965 The Latin Cognomina (Helsinki 1965) 
Kettenhofen, E. 1979 Die syrischen Augustae in der historischen Überlieferung (Bonn 
1979) 
Kolb, F. 1972 Literarische Beziehungen zwischen Cassius Dio, Herodian und der Historia 
Augusta (Bonn 1972) 
Kubitschek, J.W. 1889 Imperium Romanum tributim discriptum (Vienna 1889) 
l


--- PAGE 240 ---
Le Roux, P. 1982 L’Armée romaine et l’organisation des provinces ibériques d’Auguste 
à l’invasion de 409 (Paris 1982) 
m 
Martin, A. 1982 ‘Les évènements des années 193-194 dans le papyrus, les ostraca et 
les inscriptions d’Egypte’, Anagennesis. Papyrologike Ephemeris 2 (1982) 83-97 
Mastino, A. 1981 Le titolature di Caracalla e Geta attraverso le iscrizioni (indici) 
(Bologna 1981) 
Millar, F. 1964 A Study of Cassius Dio (Oxford 1964) 
n 
Nesselhauf, H. 1964 ‘Patrimonium und res privata des römischen Kaisers’, Historia-
Augusta-Colloquium 1963 (Bonn 1964) 73-93 
Nesselhauf, H. 1966 ‘Die Vita Commodi und die Acta Urbis’, ibid. 1964-5 (Bonn 1966) 
127-38 
p 
Piso, I. 1982 ‘La place de la Dacie dans les carrières sénatoriales’, Epigrafia e ordine 
senatorio I (Rome 1982) 369-95 
Pekáry, T. 1959 ‘Studien zur römischen Währungs- und Finanzgeschichte von 161-
235n. Chr.’, Historia 8(1959) 443-89 
r 
Remesal Rodríguez, J. 1986 La Annona Militaris y la exportacion de aceite betico a 
Germania (Madrid 1986) 
Rickman, G. 1980 The Corn Supply of Ancient Rome (Oxford 1980) 
Robert, L. 1977 ‘La titulature de Nicée et de Nicomédie: la gloire et la haine’, Harvard 
Stud, in Class. Philol. 81 (1977) 1-39 
Rubin, Z. 1980 Civil-War Propaganda and Historiography (Collection Latomus 173, 
Brussels 1980) 
-265- 
s 
Šašel, J. 1982 ‘Senatori ed appartenenti all’ordine senatorio provenienti dalle province 
romane di Dacia, Tracia, Mesia, Dalmazia e Pannonia’, Epigrafia e ordine senatorio II 
(Tituli 5, Rome 1982) 553-81 
Šašel, J. 1983 ‘Dolichenus-Heiligtum in Praetorium Latobicorum. Caracalla, Caesar, 
imperator destinatus’, Zeitschr. f. Papyrol. u. Epigr. 50 (1983) 203-8 
Šašel-Kos, M. 1986 A Historical Outline of the Region between Aquileia, the Adriatic, 
and Sirmium in Cassius Dio and Herodian (Ljubljana 1986)


--- PAGE 241 ---
Soproni, S. 1986 ‘Die Cäsarwürde Caracallas und die syrische Kohorte von Szentendre’, 
Alba Regia 18 (1980) 39-51 
Speidel, M.P. 1977 ‘The Roman army in Arabia’, ANRW 2.8 (1977) 687-730 
Speidel, M.P. 1985 ‘Valerius Valerianus in charge of Septimius Severus’ Mesopotamian 
campaign’, CP 80 (1985) 321-6 
Stanfield, J.A. & Simpson, G. Central Gaulish Potters (Oxford 1958) 
t 
Thomasson, B.E. 1984 Laterculi Praesidum (Gothenburg 1984) 
Thomasson, B.E. 1985 ‘Zur Laufbahn einiger Statthalter des Prinzipats’, Opuscula 
Romana 15 (1985) 109-41 
w 
Wagner, J. 1983 ‘Provincia Osrhoenae: new archaeological finds illustrating the military 
organisation under the Severan dynasty’, Armies and Frontiers in Roman and Byzantine 
Anatolia, ed. S. Mitchell (BAR S156, Oxford 1983) 103-30 
Walker, D.R. 1978 The Metrology of the Roman Silver Coinage. III. From Pertinax to 
Uranius Antoninus (BAR S40, Oxford 1978) 
Watson, G.R. 1969 The Roman Soldier (London 1969) 
z 
Ziegler, R. 1978 ‘Antiochia, Laodicea und Sidon in der Politik der Severer’, Chiron 8 
(1978) 493-514 
Chapter 13 
a 
Alföldy, G. 1968 ‘Septimius Severus und der Senat’, Bonner Jahrbücher 168 (1968) 
112-60 
b 
Barnes, T.D. 1968 ‘Legislation against the Christians’, JRS 58 (1968) 32-50 
Birley, A.R. 1981 The Fasti of Roman Britain (Oxford 1981) 
Birley, A.R. 1987 Marcus Aurelius. A biography (London 1987) 
Bogdan-Cǎtǎniciu, I. 1986 ‘Repères chronologiques pour le limes sud-est de la Dacie’, 
Studien zu den Militärgrenzen Roms III (Stuttgart 1986) 461-8 
Bowersock, G.W. 1969 Greek Sophists in the Roman Empire (Oxford 1969) 
Bowersock, G.W. 1983 Roman Arabia (Cambridge, Mass., 1983) 
Bowersock, G.W. 1984 ‘The miracle of Memnon’, Bull. American Soc. Papyrologists 21 
(1984) 21-32


--- PAGE 242 ---
-266- 
Bowman, A.K. 1971 The Town Councils of Roman Egypt (New York 1971) 
c 
Campbell, D.B. 1986 ‘What happened at Hatra?’, The Defence of the Roman and 
Byzantine East, eds. P. Freeman and D.L. Kennedy (BAR Int. 297, Oxford 1986) 51-8 
Chastagnol, A. 1984 ‘Les jubilés décennaux et vicennaux des empereurs sous les 
Antonins et les Sévères’, Revue numismatique, 6e série, 26 (1984) 104-24 
d 
Daniels, C.M. 1987 ‘Africa’, The Roman World, ed. J.S. Wacher (London 1987), I 223-
65 
Downey, G. 1971 A History of Antioch in Syria (Princeton 1971) 
Drijvers, H.J.W. ‘Hatra, Palmyra und Edessa’, ANRW 2.8 (1977) 799-906 
f 
Fitz, J. 1983 ‘Notes. 20. A la carrière équestre de Ti. Claudius Claudianus’, Alba Regia 
20 (1983) 275-6 
Fowden, G. 1985 The Egyptian Hermes (London 1985) 
g 
Guey, J. 1948 ‘28 janvier 98-28 janvier 198, ou le siècle des Antonins’, Revue ét. 
anciennes 50 (1948) 60-70 
Guey, J. 1952 ‘Lepcitana Septimiana VI. 2’,Revue africaine 96 (1952) 25-63 
h 
Halfmann, H. 1986 Itinera Principum. Geschichte und Typologie der Kaiseneisen im 
Römischen Reich (Stuttgart 1986) 
Hannestad, K. 1944 ‘Sollemne sacrum praefecti Aegypti and its historical background’, 
Classica et Medievalia 6 (1944) 41-59; ‘Septimius Severus in Egypt. A contribution to 
the chronology of the years 198-202’, ibid. 194-222 
Hasebroek, J. 1921 Untersuchungen zur Geschichte des Kaisers Septimius Severus 
(Heidelberg 1921) 
Herz, P. 1975 Untersuchungen zum Festkalender der römischen Kaiserzeit nach 
datierten Weih- und Ehreninschriften (Diss. Mainz 1975) 
i 
Invernizzi, A. 1986 ‘Kifrin and the Euphrates lines’, The Defence of the Roman and 
Byzantine East, eds. P. Freeman and D.L. Kennedy (BAR Int. 297, Oxford 1986) 357-81 
k


--- PAGE 243 ---
Kennedy, D.L. 1979 ‘Ti. Claudius Subatianus Aquila, “first prefect of Mesopotamia”’, 
Zeitschr. f. Papyrol. u. Epigr. 36 (1979) 255-86 
Kennedy, D.L. 1980 ‘The frontier policy of Septimius Severus: new evidence from 
Arabia’, Roman Frontier Studies 1979, eds. W.S. Hanson and L.J.F. Keppie (BAR S71, 
Oxford 1980) 879-88 
Kennedy, D.L. 1986 ‘“European” soldiers and the Severan siege of Hatra’, The Defence 
of the Roman and Byzantine East, eds. P. Freeman and D.L. Kennedy (BAR Int. 297, 
Oxford 1986) 397-409 
Kennedy, D.L. 1987 ‘The East’, The Roman World, ed. J.S. Wacher (London 1987) I 
266-300 
Kennedy, D.L., Antichthon ‘The garrisoning of Mesopotamia in the late Antonine and 
early Severan period’, Antichthon (forthcoming) 
-267- 
Kennedy, D.L. and Northedge, A. ‘Ana in the classical sources’ (forthcoming) 
m 
McCann, A.M. 1968 The Portraits of Septimius Severus (Rome 1969) 
Mann, J.C. 1985 ‘The “Palmyrene” Diplomas’, Roman Military Diplomas 1978-84 
(London 1985) 217-19 
Mastino, A. 1981 Le titolature di Caracalla e Geta attraverso le iscrizioni (indici) 
(Bologna 1981) 
Merentitis, J. 1978 ‘Die neugefundenen Reskripte des Septimius Severus’, Platon 30 
(1978) 31-43 
n 
Neugebauer, K.A. 1936 ‘Die Familie des Septimius Severus’, Die Antike 12 (1936) 155-
72 
r 
Rea, J.R. 1977 ‘A new version of P. Yale Inv. 299’, Zeitschr.f. Papyrol. u. Epigr. 27 
(1977) 151-6 
Robert, L. 1977 ‘La titulature de Nicée et de Nicomédie: la gloire et la haine’, Harv. 
Studies in Class. Phil. 81 (1977) 1-39 
Rubin, Z. 1975 ‘Dio, Herodian, and Severus’ second Parthian war’, Chiron 5 (1975) 
419-41 
Rubin, Z. 1980 Civil-War Propaganda and Historiography (Collection Latomus 173, 
Brussels 1980) 
s


--- PAGE 244 ---
Šašel, J. 1983 ‘Dolichenus-Heiligtum in Praetorium Latobicorum. Caracalla, Caesar, 
Imperator destinatus’, Zeitschr. f. Papyrol. u. Epigr. 50 (1983) 203-8 
Speidel, M.P. 1986 ‘“Europeans” —Syrian elite troops at Dura-Europos and Hatra’, 
Roman Army Studies I (Amsterdam 1986) 301-10 
Speidel, M.P. 1987 ‘The Roman road to Dumata (Jawf in Saudi Arabia) and the frontier 
strategy of praetensione colligare’,Historia 26 (1987) 213-21 
Speidel, M.P and Reynolds, J.M. 1985 ‘A veteran of legio I Parthica from Carian 
Aphrodisias’, Epigraphica Anatolica 5 (1985) 31-5 
Syme, R. 1984 Roman Papers III (Oxford 1984) 
t 
Thomasson, B.E. 1984 Laterculi Praesidum I (Gothenburg 1984) 
w 
Wagner, J. 1983 ‘Provincia Osrhoenae: new archaeological finds illustrating the military 
organisation under the Severan dynasty’, Armies and Frontiers in Byzantine Anatolia, 
ed. S. Mitchell (BAR S156, Oxford 1983) 103-30 
Chapter 14 
a 
Alföldy, G. 1968 ‘Septimius Severus und der Senat’. Bonner Jahrbücher 168 (1968) 
112-60 
Alföldy, G. 1985 ‘Bellum Mauricum’, Chiron 15 (1985) 87-105 
b 
Barnes, T.D. 1971 Tertullian. A Literary and Historical Study (Oxford 1971) 
Barton, I.M. 1977 ‘The inscriptions of Septimius Severus and his family at Lepcis 
Magna’, Mélanges L. Senghor (Dakar 1977) 3-12 
Brogan, O. and Reynolds, J.M. 1960 ‘Seven new inscriptions from Tripolitania’, Papers 
British School at Rome 28 (1960) 1-5 
-268- 
Brogan, O. and Smith, D.J. 1986 Ghirza. A Libyan Settlement in the Roman Period 
(Tripoli 1984) 
c 
Champlin, E. 1980 Fronto and Antonine Rome (Cambridge, Mass., 1980) 
Charles-Picard, G. 1949 Castellum Dimmidi (Algiers 1949) 
Corbier, M. 1982 ‘Les families clarissimes de l’Afrique romaine’, Epigrafia e ordine 
senatorio II (Tituli 5, Rome 1982) 685-754


--- PAGE 245 ---
d 
Daniels, C.M. 1987 ‘Africa’, The Roman World, ed. J.S. Wacher (London 1987), I 223-
65 
Di Vita, A. 1982 ‘Gli Emporia di Tripolitania dall’età di Massinissa a Diocleziano: un 
profile storico-instituzionale’, ANRW 2.10.2 (1982) 515-95 
Di Vita-Evrard, G. 1985 ‘Notes sur quelques timbres d’amphores de Tripolitaine’, 
Bulletin du comité des travaux historiques 19B (1985) 147-59 
e 
Elmayer, A.F. 1984 ‘Latino-Punic inscriptions’, Libyan Studies 15 (1984) 93-105 
g 
Gascou, J. 1982 ‘La politique municipale de Rome en Afrique du Nord’, ANRW 2.10.2 
(1982) 136-320 
Guey, J. 1950 ‘Lepcitana Septimiana VI.1’, Revue africaine 94 (1950) 51-84 
h 
Halfmann, H. 1986 Itinera Principum. Geschichte und Typologie der Kaiserreisen im 
Römischen Reich (Stuttgart 1986) 
Hasebroek, J. 1921 Untersuchungen zur Geschichte des Kaisers Septimius Severus 
(Heidelberg 1921) 
Haynes, D.E. L. 1959 The Antiquities of Tripolitania (Tripoli 1959) 
k 
Kotula, T. 1985 ‘Septime-Sévère, a -t -il visité l’Afrique en tant qu’empereur?’, Eos 73 
(1985) 151-65 
m 
Mastino, A. 1981 Le titolature di Caracalla e Geta attraverso le iscrizioni (indici) 
(Bologna 1981) 
Mattingly, D.J. 1985 ‘Olive oil production in Roman Tripolitania’, Town and Country in 
Roman Tripolitania, eds. D.J. Buck and D.J. Mattingly (BAR Int. 274, Oxford 1985) 27-
46 
Mattingly, D.J. 1987 ‘Libyans and the ‘limes’: culture and society in Roman Tripolitania’, 
Antiquités africaines 23 (1987) 71-94 
Mattingly, D.J. 1988 ‘The olive boom. Oil surpluses, wealth and power in Roman 
Tripolitania’, Libyan Studies 19 (1988) 
p 
Pflaum, H.G. 1959 ‘Remarques sur l’onomastique de Cirta’, Limes Studien (Basel 1959) 
96-133


--- PAGE 246 ---
r 
Rebuffat, R. 1985 ‘Les centurions de Gholaia’, L’Africa Romana 2, ed. A. Mastino 
(Sassari 1985) 225-38 
Rey-Coquais, J.-P. 1986 ‘Une double dédicace de Lepcis Magna à Tyr’, L’Africa Romana 
4, ed. A. Mastino (Sassari 1987) 597-602 
Robert, L. 1982 ‘Une vision de Perpetue martyre à Carthage en 203’, Comptes-Rendues 
Acad. des Inscriptions 1982, 228-76 
Romanelli, P. 1959 Storia delle province romane dell’ Africa (Rome 1959) 
-269- 
s 
Speidel, M.P. 1978 The Religion of Iuppiter Dolichenus in the Roman Army (Leiden 
1978) 
Strocka, V.M. 1972 ‘Beobachtungen an den Attikareliefs des severischen Quadrifrons 
von Lepcis magna’, Antiquités africaines 6 (1972) 147-72 
t 
Thomasson, B.E. 1984 Laterculi Praesidum I (Gothenburg 1984) 
Trousset, P. 1974 Recherches sur le ‘limes Tripolitanus’ du chott el-Djerid à la frontière 
tuniso-libyenne (Paris 1974) 
Chapter 15 
a 
Alföldy, G. 1968 ‘Septimius Severus und der Senat’, Bonner Jahrbücher 168 (1968) 
112-60 
Alföldy, G. 1982 ‘Senatoren aus Norditalien. Regiones IX, X und XI’, Epigrafia e ordine 
senatorio II (Tituli 5, Rome 1982) 309-68 
b 
Barbieri, G. 1952 L’Albo senatorio da Settimio Severo a Carino (Rome 1952 
Benario, H.W. 1958 ‘Rome of the Severi’, Latomus 17 (1958) 712-22 
Birley, A.R. 1969 ‘The coups d’état of the year 193’, Bonner Jahrbücher 169 (1969) 
243-80 
Bowersock, G.W. 1969 Greek Sophists in the Roman Empire (Oxford 1969) 
Brilliant, R. 1967 The Arch of Septimius Severus in the Roman Forum (Rome 1967) 
c 
Champlin, E. 1981 ‘Serenus Sammonicus’, Harvard Stud, in Class. Philol. 85 (1981)


--- PAGE 247 ---
189-212 
Corbier, M. 1982 ‘Les families clarissimes d’Afrique proconsulaire’, Epigrafia e ordine 
senatorio II (Tituli 5, Rome 1982) 685-754 
Guey, J. 1946 ‘Note sur le Septizonium du Palatin’, Mélanges soc. toulousaine d’études 
classiques 1 (1946) 147-66 
h 
Hohl, E. 1956 Herodian und der Sturz Plautians (Sitz. Berlin 1956) 
m 
MacMullen, R. 1966 Enemies of the Roman Order (Cambridge, Mass., 1966) 
p 
Pighi, G.B. 1941 De ludis saecularibus populi Romani Quiritium (Rome 1941) 
r 
Rubin, Z. 1975 ‘Dio, Herodian, and Severus’ second Parthian war’, Chiron 5 (1985) 
419-41 
Rubin, Z. 1980 Civil-War Propaganda and Historiography (Collection Latomus 173, 
Brussels 1980) 
s 
Schumacher, L. 1973 Prosopographische Untersuchungen zur Besetzung der vier hohen 
römischen Priesterkollegien im Zeitalter der Antoninen und der Severer(96-235 n. Chr.) 
(Diss. Mainz 1973) 
Syme, R. 1939 The Roman Revolution (Oxford 1939) 
Syme, R. 1958 Tacitus (Oxford 1958) 
Syme, R. 1984 Roman Papers III (Oxford 1984) 
-270- 
Chapter 16 
a 
Alföldy, G. 1968 ‘Septimius Severus und der Senat’, Bonner Jahrbücher 168 (1968) 
112-60 
Alföldy, G. 1969 ‘Ein praefectus der cohors VI Nerviorum in Britannia’, Hommages M. 
Renard II (Collection Latomus 102, Brussels 1969) 3-6 (reprinted with addenda in 
Alföldy, Römische Heeresgeschichte, Amsterdam 1987, 223-7) 
b 
Birley, A.R. 1972 ‘Virius Lupus’, Archaeologia Aeliana, 4th ser. 50 (1972) 179-89


--- PAGE 248 ---
Birley, A.R. 1981 The Fasti of Roman Britain (Oxford 1981) 
Birley, R.E. 1962 ‘Excavation of the Roman fortress at Carpow, 1961-2’, Proc. Society 
of Ant. of Scotland 96 (1962-3) 184-207 
Birley, R.E. 1963 ‘The Roman legionary fortress at Carpow’, Scottish Historical Review 
42 (1963) 126-134 
Breeze, D.J. and Dobson, B. 1987 Hadrian’s Wall (3rd ed. Harmondsworth 1987) 
d 
Dietz, K. 1983 ‘Caracalla, Fabius Cilo und die Urbaniciani. Unerkannt gebliebene 
Suffektkonsuln des J. 212 n.Chr.’, Chiron 13 (1983) 381-404 
Di Vita-Evrard, G. 1982 ‘Note sur “trois” senateurs de Lepcis Magna. Le clarissimat des 
Plautii’, Epigrafia e ordine senatorio I (Tituli 4, Rome 1982) 453-65 
Di Vita-Evrard, G. 1987 ‘De la date du procès d’Hérode Atticus à l’ére d’Hadrien et à 
l’association au pouvoir de Géta’, Praktika tou 8 diethnous synedriou ellenikes kai 
latinikes epigraphikes 1982 II (Athens 1987) 
Dillon, M. and Chadwick, N.K. 1967 The Celtic Realms (London 1967) 
Dore, J.N. and Gillam, J.P. 1979 The Roman Fort at South Shields (Newcastle upon 
Tyne 1979) 
h 
Higham, N.J. and Jones, G.D.B. 1985 The Carvetii (Gloucester 1985) 
k 
Kaygusz, I. 1986 ‘Neue Inschriften aus Ainos (Enez)’, Epigraphica Anatolica 8 (1986) 
65-70 
Kennedy, D.L. 1986 ‘The place-name Arbeia’, Britannia 17 (1986) 332-3 
l 
Leach, J.D. and Wilkes, J.J. 1978 ‘The Roman military base at Carpow, Perthshire, 
Scotland: summary of recent investigations (1964-70, 1975)’, Limes. Akten d. XI Int. 
Limeskongresses (Budapest 1978) 47-62 
m 
Mastino, A. 1981 Le titolature di Caracalla e Geta attraverso le iscrizioni (indici) 
(Bologna, 1981) 
Morris, J. 1968 ‘The date of St Alban’, Hertfordshire Archaeology 1 (1968) 1-8 
p 
Pflaum, H.G. 1961 ‘Les gendres de Marc-Aurèle’, J. des Savants 1961, 28-41 
-271-


--- PAGE 249 ---
r 
Rankov, N.B. 1987 ‘M. Oclatinius Adventus in Britain’, Britannia 18 (1987) 243-9 
Robertson, A.S. ‘The bridges on the Severan coins of AD 208 and 209’, Roman Frontier 
Studies 1979, eds. W.S. Hanson and L.J. F. Keppie (BAR S71, Oxford 1980) 131-9 
Rubin, Z. 1980 Civil-War Propaganda and Historiography (Collection Latomus 173, 
Brussels 1980) 
s 
Shotter, D.C.A. ‘Numeri Barcariorum: a note on RIB 601’, Britannia 4 (1973) 206-9 
Straub, J. 1964 ‘Die ultima verba des Septimius Severus’, Historia-Augusta-Colloquium 
1963 (Bonn 1964) 171-2 
t 
Thomasson, B.E. 1984 Laterculi Praesidum I (Gothenburg 1984) 
Thomasson, B.E. 1985 ‘Zur Laufbahn einiger Statthalter des Prinzipats’, Opuscula 
Romana 15 (1985) 109-41 
w 
Wright, R.P. 1974 ‘Carpow and Caracalla’, Britannia 5 (1974) 289-92 
Chapter 17 
a 
Alföldy, G. 1968 ‘Septimius Severus und der Senat’, Bonner Jahrbücher 168 (1968) 
112-60 
Alföldy, G. 1988 Geschichte, Geschichtsbetrachtung und Geschichtsschreibung in der 
Krise des Römischen Reiches (Heidelberg 1988) 
b 
Barnes, T.D. 1968 ‘Pre-Decian acta martyrum’,Journ. Theol. Stud. n.s. 19 (1968) 509-
31 
Birley, A.R. 1974 ‘Septimius Severus, propagator imperii’,Actes du IXe congres 
International d’Etudes sur les frontieres romaines (Bucharest 1974) 297-9 
Birley, A.R. 1976 ‘The third century crisis in the Roman empire’, Bulletin John Rylands 
Library Manchester 58 (1976) 253-81 
Birley, A.R. 1981a ‘The economic effects of Roman frontier policy’, The Roman West in 
the Third Century, eds. A. King and M. Henig (BAR Int. 109, Oxford 1981) 39-53 
Birley, A.R. 1981b The Fasti of Roman Britain (Oxford 1981) 
Birley, E. 1969 ‘Septimius Severus and the Roman army’, Epigr. Stud. 8 (1969) 63-82 
d


--- PAGE 250 ---
Develin, R. 1971 ‘The army pay rises under Severus and Caracalla and the question of 
the annona militaris’,Latomus 30 (1971) 687-95 
Dietz, K. 1983 ‘Caracalla, Fabius Cilo und die Urbaniciani. Unerkannt gebliebene 
Suffektkonsuln des J. 212 n.Chr.’, Chiron 13 (1983) 381-404 
g 
Graham, A.J. 1973 ‘Septimius Severus and his generals, AD 193-7’, War and Society. 
Essays in memory of J. Western, ed. M.R.D. Foot (London 1973) 255-75; 336-45 
k 
Kettenhofen, E. 1979 Die syrischen Augustae in der historischen Überlieferung (Bonn 
1979) 
m 
Mastino, A. 1981 Le titolature di Caracalla e Geta (Bologna 1981) 
Millar, F. 1964 A Study of Cassius Dio (Oxford 1964) 
-272- 
s 
Smith, R.F. 1972 ‘The army reforms of Septimius Severus’, Historia 21 (1972) 481-500 
Syme, R. 1971 Emperors and Biography (Oxford 1971) 
w 
Watson, G.R. 1969 The Roman Soldier (London 1969) 
Wild, J.P. 1986 ‘Bath and the identification of the caracalla’,Britannia 17 (1986) 352-3 
Wright, R.P. 1974 ‘Carpow and Caracalla’, Britannia 5 (1974) 289-92 
ADDENDA (1999) 
a 
Alföldy, G. 1996 ‘Nox dea fiat lux! Caracallas Geburtstag’, Historiae Augustae 
Colloquium Barcinonense, eds. G. Bonamente and M. Mayer (Bari 1996) 9-36 
Alston, R. 1994 ‘Roman military pay’, Journal of Roman Studies 84 (1994) 113-23 
b 
Baharal, D. 1989 ‘Portraits of the Emperor L. Septimius Severus (193-211 AD) as an 
expression of his propaganda’, Latomus 48 (1989) 566-80 
Birley, A.R. 1991 ‘Caecilius Capella: persecutor of Christians, defender of Byzantium’, 
Greek, Roman & Byzantine Studies 32 (1991) 81-98 
Birley, A.R. 1992 ‘Persecutors and martyrs in Tertullian’s Africa’, University of London


--- PAGE 251 ---
Institute of Archaeology Bulletin 29 (1992) 37-68 
Birley, A.R. 1994 ‘Further notes on HA Severus’, Historiae Augustae Colloquium 
Genevense, eds. G. Bonamente and F. Paschoud (Bari 1994), 19-42 
Birley, A.R. 1995 ‘Indirect means of tracing Marius Maximus’, Historiae Augustae 
Colloquium Maceratense, eds. G. Bonamente and G. Paci (Bari 1995) 57-74 
Birley, A.R. 1997 ‘Marius Maximus: the consular biographer’, Aufstieg und Niedergang 
der römischen Welt II 34.3 (1997) 2678-757 
Birley, E. 1988 The Roman Army: Papers 1929-1986 (Amsterdam 1988) 
Birley, R. et al. 1998 Vindolanda 1997 Excavations. Praetorium Site: Interim Report 
(Green-head 1998) 
Bruun, C. 1995 ‘Pericula Alexandrina: The adventures of a centurion of the legio II 
Parthica’,Arctos 29 (1995) 9-27 
f 
Frey, M. 1989 Untersuchungen zur Religion und zur Religionspolitik des Kaisers 
Elagabal (Stuttgart 1989) 
g 
Grant, M. 1996 The Severans. The Changed Roman Empire (London and New York 
1996) 
k 
Koeppel, G.M. 1990 ‘Die historischen Reliefs der römischen Kaiserzeit, VII. Der Bogen 
des Septimius Severus, die Decennalienbasis und der Konstantins-bogen’, Bonner 
Jahrbücher 190 (1990) 1-64 
l 
Le Bohec, Y. 1989 La troisième légion Auguste (Paris 1989) 
Leunissen, P.M.M. 1989 Konsuln und Konsulare in der Zeit von Commodus bis Severus 
Alexander(180-235 n.Chr.) (Amsterdam 1989) 
Lewicki, T. Kotula, T. & 1986 ‘Un témoinage de Al-Bakri et le problème de la ratio 
privata sévérienne en Tripolitaine’, Antiquités africaines 22 (1986) 255-71 
Lewis, N. 1996 ‘The humane legislation of Septimius Severus’, Historia 45 (1996) 104-
13 
m 
Mattingly, D.J. 1995 Tripolitania (London 1995) 
Millar, F. 1993 The Roman Near East 31 BC-AD 337 (London 1993) 
r 
Roxan, M.M. 1994 Roman Military Diplomas 1985-1993 (London 1994)


--- PAGE 252 ---
s 
Schmidt, M.G. 1997 ‘Die “zeitgeschichtlichen” Bücher im Werk des Cassius Dio—von 
Commodus zu Severus Alexander’, Aufstieg und Niedergang der römischen Welt II 34.3 
(1997) 2591-649 
Speidel, M.A. 1992 ‘Roman army pay scales’, Journal of Roman Studies 82 (1992) 87-
106 
-273- 
Speidel, M.P. 1993 ‘Commodus the God-Emperor and the army’, Journal of Roman 
Studies 83 (1993) 109-14 
Speidel, M.P. 1994 Riding for Caesar (London and Cambridge, Mass. 1994) 
Steinby, E.M. (ed.) 1993 Lexicon Topographicum Urbis Romae (Rome 1993ff.) 
Swain, S. 1996 Hellenism and Empire. Language, Classicism, and Power in the Greek 
World AD 50-250 (Oxford 1996) 
t 
Thomasson, B.E. 1996 Fasti Africani. Senatorische und Ritterliche Amtsträger in den 
römischen Provinzen Nordafrikas von Augustus bis Diokletian (Stockholm 1996) 
v 
Vossing, K. 1997 Schule und Bildung im Nordafrika der römischen Kaiserzeit (Brussels 
1997) 
w 
Ward-Perkins, J.B. 1993 The Severan Buildings of Lepcis Magna: An Architectural 
Survey, ed. P. Kenrick (London 1993) 
Details on most prominent individuals of the age can be found in the excellent study by 
Leunissen. Thomasson’s revision of his work on the governors of the North African provinces 
is also valuable here. A further volume of PIR2 is now available, covering the letter P (1997). 
My own studies of 1994, 1995 and 1997 examine problems of the Historia Augusta, arguing 
that Marius Maximus was its major source for this period (also discussing the proscription of 
197 and the British expedition). Schmidt takes a different view from my own on the date of 
composition of Dio’s History. The African background is now much better covered, thanks to 
the monographs by Le Bohec, Mattingly and Vossing, and Ward-Perkins’ posthumous study 
of the architecture of Lepcis. Note also the fascinating paper by Lewicki and Kotula on 
imperial estates in Tripolitania. Further, there are now eleven issues of the splendid series 
of conferences on L’Africa Romana founded by A. Mastino of Sassari. On Christianity in 
North Africa I may mention my own papers of 1991 and 1992. On the east, Millar’s 
monograph is extremely useful (particularly on Emesa). Lewis focuses on the responses 
preserved on papyri from Egypt. Swain offers a new perspective on the Greek intellectual 
renaissance, with important insights on Galen. M.A. Speidel and Alston discuss army pay, 
with differing suggestions on Severus’ increase (100% or 50%). M.P. Speidel (1993) sheds 
interesting light on Commodus’ relations with the troops and his monograph is essential


--- PAGE 253 ---
reading on the equites singulares Augusti. E. Birley’s collected papers include that on 
Severus and the army. Baharal and Koeppel cover different aspects of the sculptural 
evidence for Severus. There is naturally a great deal of relevance to Severus in the new 
Lexicon edited by Steinby. R. Birley’s new excavations add detail on the mysterious stone 
huts at Vindolanda, erected during Severus’ reign perhaps to intern north Britons shortly 
before or during the expedition. On Caracalla, Alföldy demonstrates that he falsified his date 
of birth, from 188 to 186, not merely to increase the difference in age from his hated 
brother Geta, but because 4 April 186 was a Monday, dies Lunae, and he was a devoted 
Moon-worshipper (in 188 4 April was a Thursday, dies Iovis). Bruun sheds new light on the 
massacre Caracalla initiated at Alexandria in AD 215. On Elagabalus, Frey adds welcome 
precision to a subject that has attracted much fantasy. Grant offers a general survey of the 
Severan period, with excellent illustrations. 
Three corrections to what I wrote in 1988 can be made in the light of new military diplomas. 
Roxan no. 184 shows that Ulpius Marcellus, who defeated the Britons in AD 184 (pp. 74, 75, 
124, 171, 175 above) was already governor of Britain on 23 March 178. This makes my 
theory of a second Ulpius Marcellus, governor in 211 (pp. 175, 188), even less plausible 
than it was before. Roxan no. 191 shows that Geta was already Augustus and trib. pot. II 
on 7 January 210. Thus my acceptance (pp. 186f., 218) of Di Vita-Évrard’s argument (cited 
pp. 227, 287) that he was only promoted late in 210 turns out to have been misplaced: 
summer or autumn 209 must be the date. The third diploma, as yet unpublished (Werner 
Eck kindly informed me about it), shows that the consul of 207 was called not L. Septimius 
Aper but C. Septimius Severus Aper. This makes necessary an adjustment in the stemma 
(Appendix 2). He was presumably a grandson of no. 25, rather than of no. 15, and the 
praenomen L. (given him only in P. Michigan 5474) an error. 
-274- 
INDEX 
1 
Persons 
Abdmelqart, name of Lepcitane notables 15, 23, 212, 213 
Abgar IX of Osrhoene 69, 115, 129, 132 
Acilius Glabrio, M′. (cos. II ord. 186) 242 n.1 
Adherbal, Lepcitane notable 5 
Aelius Antipater, sophist 73, 137f., 167, 198, 246 n.39 
Aelius Coeranus, Egyptian senator 137 
Aelius Hilarianus, P., procurator 253 n.16 
Aelius Lamia, L. (cos. 3), proconsul of Africa 12f., 14, 16, 28, 150, 220 
‘Aelius Lampridius’, pseudonym of HA author 206 
‘Aelius Spartianus’, pseudonym of HA author 206 
Aemilia Pudentilla of Oea 26ff 
Aemilius Juncus, Syrian senator 73 
Aemilius Laetus, Q., Guard Prefect 82, 83, 84, 86, 87f., 90, 93, 94f., 96, 97, 99 
Aemilius Lepidus, Q. (cos. 21 BC), XVvir in 17 BC 160 
Aemilius Papinianus, jurist and Guard Prefect 133, 164, 175, 183, 188, 189, 195 
Aemilius Pudens, centurion 83 
Aemilius Salvianus, equestrian officer 170f. 
Aemilius Saturninus, Q., Guard Prefect 137, 138, 139 
Aeneas 20 
Agamemnon ix, 73, 186


--- PAGE 254 ---
Agrippa, M. Vipsanius (cos. III 27 BC), XVvir in 17 BC 160 
Aiacius Modestus Crescentianus, Q. (cos. II ord. 228), African senator 177 
Aius Sanctus, T., Commodus’ tutor 58 
Albinus see Clodius Albinus 
Alexander, name found at Emesa 70, 223 
Alexander, martyr 232 n. 20 
Alexander of Aphrodisias, sophist 168 
Alexander the Great 108, 112, 113, 135f., 137, 194 
Alexander Helios, Cleopatra’s son 224 
Alexio, name found at Emesa 70 
Alfenus Apollinaris, acting governor of Egypt 138 
Alfenus Senecio, L., African senator 132, 170f., 172, 173, 175, 176, 177, 180, 182, 
195 
Amenhopis III, Pharaoh 139 
Amicus, name at Lepcis 213 
Amilcar, name at Lepcis 213 
Ammianus Marcellinus, on wars under Marcus 56 
Annaeus Cornutus, L., of Lepcis, Stoic 14 
Anicius Faustus, Q. (cos. c. 198), African senator 143f., 147, 151, 152, 195 
Annia Faustina, empress 193 
Annis Fundania Faustina, Marcus’ cousin 81f. 
Annius Libo, M. (cos. ord. 204) 156 
Anno, Lepcitanes called 9, 18, 212, 213, 217 
Anno Macer, possible ancestor of Septimius 14f., 17, 18, 212, 213, 217 
Annobal Ruso, Lepcitane 220 
Annobal Tapapius Rufus, Lepcitane 9ff., 16, 17 
Antiochus XIII, Seleucid king 69 
Antistius Adventus, Q. (cos. c. 167), African senator 38, 39, 48, 77 
Antistius Burrus, L. (cos. ord. 181), Commodus’ brother-in-law 48, 77, 78, 83, 177 
Antius Crescens Calpumianus, M., XVvir174f. 
Antonia Tryphaena, queen 225f. 
Antonine dynasty, era 1, 24, 25, 30, 34, 38, 41, 60, 105, 106, 119, 122, 156, 207, 242 
n. 1, 243 n. 12 
Antoninus, M. Aurelius (Caracalla), Septimius’ elder son 98 ; 
his birth 76, 215 ; 
renamed Antoninus 117, 160f., 215 ; 
made Caesar 117, 118, 119f., 121, 123, 215 ; 
in Pannonia 127 ; 
emperor designate 128 ; 
Augustus 130, 140, 215 ; 
his alleged Jewish triumph 135, 143 ; 
tutor Antipater 137, 198 ; 
assumed toga virilis139f.; 
consul 139f., 146 ; 
supported Antioch 141, 142 ; 
married to Plautilla 137, 143, 144, 161, 162, 167, 215 ; 
honoured at Lepcis 149, 150 ; 
knew Torpacion 154 ; 
at Saecular Games 158 ; 
overthrew Plautianus 161ff.; 
cos. II 160 ; 
favoured Maecius Laetus 164 ; 
in senate 166f.;


--- PAGE 255 ---
quarrelled with Geta 168, 170, 183, 188 ; 
killed him 189, 256 n. 3 ; 
cos. III 177 ; 
in Britain 179, 180, 182f., 184, 185, 186, 187, 188 ; 
sole reign 189ff.; 
name ‘Caracalla’ 189 ; 
his expeditions 190, 197 ; 
Edict 190 ; 
division of Britain 190f; 
death 190, 192, 223 ; 
hated 192, 193 ; 
terror under 199 ; 
his cousin 189, 214, 219 ; 
alleged sons 192, 194 ; 
educator 175, 188, 253 n. 16 ; 
alleged incest 222 ; 
obsession with Alexander the Great 194 ; 
alleged villa 232 n. 20 ; 
coinage 123, 176, 179, 181, 191 
Antoninus Pius, emperor 1, 23f., 34, 37, 38, 44, 57, 71, 144, 148, 149, 199, 200, 214, 
225 
Antonius Gordianus, M. (Gordian I) 191 
Antony, Mark 6, 70, 198, 226 
Apio, tax-collector 138 
Apollonius of Athens, sophist 74, 150 
Apollonius of Tyana, sage 141, 168, 207 
-275- 
Appius Quintianus of Oea 26, 31 
Apronianus, proconsul of Asia 165f., 167 
Apuleius of Madauros 25, 232 n. 1 ; 
at Carthage 25, 32, 35, 45, 51 ; 
Athens 25f., 73 ; 
Rome 26 ; 
Oea 26ff.; 
knew senators 26, 27, 29, 32, 51, 76 ; 
married Pudentilla 28, 30, 31f.; 
his trial 30ff., 139, 244 n. 26 ; 
on astrology 32, 34f.; 
secrets of Memphis 138 ; 
his stepson 142 
Apuleius Rufinus (cos. 190) 80 
Apuleus Maxssimus, Q. 234 n. 14 
Aquilius Felix, M., procurator 99, 106, 128 
Aradii of Bulla Regia 214, 216, 224f. 
Aradius Rufinus Optatus Aelianus, Q., senator 225 
Aradius Saturninus 214, 216, 224f. 
Arcadius, emperor ix 
Ardashir, Persian king 194, 195 
Argentaria Polla, in Statius 23, 214, 232 n. 1 
Argentocoxus, Caledonian 186 
Arish, name of Lepcitane notables 5, 9, 15


--- PAGE 256 ---
Arishut, Lepcitane lady 15 
Aristobulus, Herodian prince 70 
Aristotle 33 
Arrius Antoninus, C. (cos. c. 170), African senator 43f., 77, 78, 83 
Artabanus V, Parthian king 194 
Asellius Aemilianus, ally of Pescennius Niger 85, 102, 108, 109, 110, 112, 241 n. 12 
Asmun, name at Lepcis 17 
Asprenas, L. Nonius (cos. 6), proconsul of 
Africa 12 
Athenaeus, the writer 207, 247 n. 2 
Atilius Aebutianus, Guard Prefect 77, 78 
Attalns, Asian potentate 78 
Attidius Cornelianus, L. (cos. 150), governor of Syria 37, 64 
Aufidius Fronto, M. (cos. ord. 199) 43, 140 
Aufidius Victorinus, C. (cos. 153) 37, 43, 44, 50, 54, 57, 74, 75, 140 
Augustus, emperor ix, 128, 155 ; 
his cruelty 127, 199 ; 
organisation of Africa 8f.; 
honoured at Lepcis 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 151, 213 ; 
in Spain 55 ; 
dealings with Emesa 70 ; 
his Saecular Games 156, 157, 158, 159, 160 
Aurelius Agaclytus, L., married daughter of Marcus 177 
Aurelius Commodus Pompeianus (cos. ord. 209) 177 
Aurelius Gallus, L. (cos. ord. 198) 143 
Aurelius Polus Terentianus, Q., possibly African senator 83, 84, 109, 174 
Aurelius Victor, Sex., historian on Septimius’ knowledge of law 44 : 
mistaken on Didius 45 ; 
on Septimius’ desert campaign in Africa 153 ; 
S.’s legislation 165 ; 
S. and Hadrian’s Wall 182 ; 
S.’s last words 187 ; 
his verdict on S. 198 ; 
knew S.’s autobiography 203 ; 
and ‘Kaisergeschichte’ 205 ; 
his views on Julia Domna 254 n. 27 ; 
verdict on S. 198 
Ausonius 205 
Avidius Cassius, C. (cos. 166) 38, 39, 53, 56, 60, 67, 68, 73, 129, 130, 135, 243 n. 12 
Avidius Quintianus, Q., centurion at Gholaia 153 
Avilius Castus, Lepcitane notable 51 
Aziz of Beroea 69 
Aziz of Emesa 70, 224 
b 
Baebius Marcellinus, senator 166, 167 
Ba‘alyaton Qmd’ = Balitho Commodus 14f., 18, 212, 213, 216 
Balitho, name at Lepcis 17 
Balitho G. Saturninus 213, 217 
Balsillec, Lepcitane notable 16, cf. 17, 220 
Balyaton ben Hanno, sufes at Lepcis 13 
Barathes, Palmyrene in Britain 173 
Bar-Hebraeus, on Jewish-Samaritan conflict 135


--- PAGE 257 ---
Barsemius of Hatra 130, 133 
Bassianus see Antoninus, M. Aurelius (Caracalla) 
Bassus, friend of Septimius 106, 207 
Berenice, Jewish princess 70 
Bodmelqart, name of Lepcitane notables 5, 9, 13, 17 
Bruttius Praesens, L. (cos. II ord. 180), Commodus’ father-in-law 57 
Bulla Felix, brigand 168f., 170 
Burrus, L. Afranius, Guard Prefect 19 
c 
Caecilia. rescript to 185 
Caecilius Capella, at Byzantium 247 n. 26 
Caecilius Metellus, Q. (cos. 109 BC), helped Lepcis 5 
Caecina Severus, A. (cos. 1), proconsul of Africa 12 
Caelius Optatus, friend of Cornelius Fronto 44 
Caesar, C. Julius, the Dictator 106, 146, 198 ; 
fined Lepcis 6, 8 ; 
assisted by lamblichus 70 ; 
his clemency 127 
Caligula, emperor 14 
Calpurnianus, friend of Apuleius 30 
Calpurnius Agricola, Sex. (cos. 154), governor of Britain 34, 37, 38, 39, 44, 64, 65 
Calpurnius Bestia, L. (cos. 111 BC), appealed to by Lepcis 5 
Calpurnius Celsus of Oea 51 
Calpurnius Maximus XVvir 157 
Calpurnius Piso, noble boy 159 
Candidus, Lepcitane official 15, 23, 212 
Caninius Adiutor Faustinianus, equestrian officer 152 
-276- 
Caninius Gallus, L. (cos. 2 BC), proconsul of Africa 14 
Caracalla see Antoninus, M. Aurelius (Caracalla) 
Carus, emperor 206 
Cassius Clemens, senator 114 
Cassius Dio Cocceianus, L. (cos. II ord. 229), historian his origin 59, 203 ; 
career 92, 151, 194, 203f.; 
historical work 41, 104, 141f., 194, 203, 204 ; 
on Septimius’ birth 220 ; 
education 34 ; 
personality 42 ; 
fervent believer in omens 41 ; 
on omens 41, 42, 109, 120, 183f.; 
S.’s horoscope 52, 164 ; 
Commodus 58 ; 
Saoterus 59 ; 
Paternus 61 ; 
Condianus 62 ; 
Pertinax’s early career 64 ; 
Julia Domna 72 ; 
S. at Apamea 72f.; 
fall of Perennis 74f.; 
S.’s dream of empire 76 ;


--- PAGE 258 ---
S.’s consulship 78 ; 
fall of Cleander 79 ; 
Julius Alexander 81 ; 
the plague 82 ; 
Niger 84f., 108, 113 ; 
fire under Commodus 85 ; 
Commodus’ last games 86f.; 
Commodus’ murder 87f., 89 ; 
was devoted to Pertinax 88, 92 ; 
on Claudius Pompeianus 89 ; 
Plautianus’ early career 93 ; 
the consul Falco 94 ; 
Pertinax’s murder 94f.; 
Didius 95f., 99 ; 
S.’s arrival in 193 103f.; 
Pertinax’s deification 105 ; 
Nicaeaa-Cius 110 ; 
Issus 112f., 117 ; 
Cassius Clemens 114 ; 
Mesopotamia 115, 132, 174, 197 ; 
S.’s self-adoption into Antonines 118, 122 ; 
breach with Albinus 118, 120, 121 ; 
fall of Byzantium 119 ; 
Numerianus 123 ; 
Lugdunum 124f.; 
Lupus in Britain 126, 171 ; 
aftermath of Lugdunum 127f; 
Ctesiphon 130 ; 
Hatra 130f., 132f.; 
Laetus 131 ; 
S. in the east 134, 135 ; 
in Egypt 135f., 139 ; 
Plautianus 137, 141, 161ff.; 
Hannibal’s tomb 142 ; 
decennnalia 144 ; 
S.’s building 151 ; 
rift with Plautianus 154 ; 
S. in court 164f.; 
trials in senate 165f., 167, 199 ; 
Julia 168 ; 
Antoninus and Geta 168, 170 ; 
Bulla 168f., 170 ; 
British expedition 170, 172, 173, 178f, 180, 181, 182f., 186, 187 ; 
Agricola 173 ; 
Julia in Britain 185f.; 
S.’s death 187, 188, 196 ; 
Caracalla 189f.; 
Macrinus 192 ; 
Elagabalus 192, 193, 194 ; 
his verdict on S. 197, 198f.; 
see also 205, 206, 207, 215, 221, 222, 223, 224, 241 n. 12, 242 nn. 1, 15, 16 ; 243 
nn. 12, 16, 244 n. 26, 246 n. 13, 247 nn. 18, 26, 256 n. 3 
Cassius Pius Marcellinus, L. (cos. 214), XVvir 160, 253 n. 8


--- PAGE 259 ---
Castor, imperial freedman 175, 183, 188 
Catius Sabinus, P. (cos. ord. 216) 167 
Cato, M. Porcius wintered at Lepcis 6 ; 
in Syrtica 116 
Ceionia Plautia, Verus’ sister 177, 238 n. 2 
Cervidius Scaevola, Q., jurist 72, 223 
Cicero, M. Tullius (cos. 63 BC) on the banker Herennius 6, 8 ; 
the Emesene dynasts 70 ; 
his pro Cluentio 30 
Cingius Severus, pontifex 90 
Claudia Rufina, British lady 20 
Claudii at Lepcis 17 
Claudius, emperor 14, 17, 57, 70, 156, 212 
Claudius, brigand 134 
Claudius Amicus, Ti., Lepcitane notable 215 
Claudius Candidus, Ti., African senator 109, 110, 116, 118, 121, 122, 124   125  , 126, 
131, 195 
Claudius Claudianus, Ti., African senator 106, 121f., 124, 144, 195 
Claudius Fronto, M. (cos. 165) 38, 66 
Claudius Gallus, African senator 106, 122, 127, 147, 153, 195 
Claudius Gorgus, senator 165 
Claudius Hieronymianus, legate of VI Victrix 178 
Claudius Maximus, proconsul of Africa 29f., 33 
Claudius Pompeianus, Ti. (cos. II ord. 173) 38, 48, 49, 57, 58, 59, 61, 64, 65, 66, 67, 
68f., 73, 86, 89, 96, 102, 177, 242 n. 1 
Claudius Sestius, Ti., Lepcitane notable 17, 215 
Claudius Severus, Cn, (cos. II ord. 173) 48 
Claudius Severus Proculus, Ti, (cos. ord. 200) 140 
Claudius Subatianus Aquila, Ti., prefect of Mesopotamia 132 ; 
of Egypt 176, 177, 195 
Claudius Subatianus Proculus, Ti., African senator 176, 177, 251 n. 3 
Claudius Xenophon, procurator 110, 126 
Cleander, M. Aurelius, chamberlain 75, 77, 78ff., 81, 82, 91, 104, 177 
Cleopatra, queen 6, 136, 226 
Clodius Albinus, D. (cos. II ord. 194), would be emperor 40, 83, 84, 85, 96, 98, 106, 
108, 112, 113, 114, 117ff., 120, 121ff., 124, 125, 127, 128, 140, 146, 147, 162, 167, 
171, 198, 203, 241 n. 12, 243 n. 15, 244 nn. 22, 26, 243 n. 15 
Clodius Galba, D., procurator 149 
Clodius Macer, L., legate of III Augusta 15 
Cluentius, A. of Larinum 30 
Cocceius Nerva, M., XVvir in 17 BC 160 
Commodus, emperor xi, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59f, 60f., 67, 68, 73, 74f., 77, 78, 79, 
81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86f, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 95, 96, 107, 118, 127, 135, 140, 141, 148, 
149, 151, 157, 163, 169, 173, 175, 183, 189, 197f., 199, 200, 203, 204, 206, 219, 
223, 225, 249 n. 20 
Como, official in Egypt 138 
Constantine I, emperor 197, 206 
Constantius Chlorus, emperor 180 
Cornelii at Lepcis 17 
Cornelius Anullinus, P. (cos. II ord. 199) 40, 49, 50, 85, 112, 113, 116, 122, 129, 140, 
195 
-277-


--- PAGE 260 ---
Cornelius Balbus, L., proconsul of Africa 9, 16, 17, 153 
Cornelius Cethegus, C. (cos. 197 BC), commissioner at Lepcis 4 
Cornelius Fronto, M. (cos. 143) 24, 32f., 37f., 41, 43, 44, 47, 58, 140, 216, 225 
Cornelius Repentinus, Didius Julianus’ son-in-law 95, 96, 102, 243 nn. 16, 18 
Cornelius Saturninus of Oea 31 
Cornelius Scipio, P. (cos. II 194 BC) 4 
Cornelius Scipio, P. (cos. II 134 BC) 4, 5 
Cornificia, Marcus’ daughter 177, 225 
Cotys, king 226 
Crassus Frugi, M. Licinius (cos. 14 BC) 9, 14 
Crispina, Bruttia, empress 60 
Crispinus, in Statius 174 
Cronius son of Heraclides, Egyptian 138 
Curio, C. Scribonius, Caesarian 6 
Cuspius Rufinus, L. (cos. ord. 197) 140 
d 
Darius, Persian king 112 
Diadumenianus, emperor 191, 206 
Didia Clara, daughter of Didius Julianus 243 n. 18 
Didius Julianus, M., emperor 40f., 45f., 54, 67, 95f., 96f., 98ff., 102, 114, 118, 121, 
156, 165, 177, 206, 242 n. 15 
Dio see Cassius Dio 
Diocletian, emperor 180, 197, 206 
Diogenes son of Theocharis, envoy to emperor 180 
Diogenes Laertius, sophist 168 
Dioscorus son of Hephaestio, Egyptian 138 
Dolabella, P. Cornelius (cos. 10), proconsul of Africa 13 
Domitian, emperor 17, 19, 20, 21, 156, 242 n. 16 
Domitius Dexter, C. (cos. II ord. 196) 68, 73, 106, 122, 140 
Domitius Ulpianus, jurist 133, 164, 166f., 168, 190, 194, 207 
Donatus, Lepcitane official 15 
Dorieus, Spartan coloniser 2f. 
Drusilla, Herodian princess 70 
Drusus Caesar, honoured at Lepcis 13 
e 
Eclectus, chamberlain 82, 83, 86, 87, 88, 95 
Egnatius Victor, senator 176 
Elagabalus, emperor 192, 193, 194, 204, 205, 206, 215, 217, 224 
Eleazar, Rabbi 135 
Erucius Clarus, C. (cos. ord. 170) 47 
Erucius Clarus Vibianus, C. (cos. ord. 193) 89, 127 
Etrilius Lupercus, M., proconsular legate 13, 14 
Euodus, imperial freedman 161, 162, 175, 188, 253 n. 16 
Euripides 67, 134 
Eutropius 205, 207 
f 
Fabius Cilo, L. (cos. II ord. 204) 40, 73, 76, 90, 97, 105, 108, 110, 121, 123, 124, 
129, 140, 144, 156, 162, 189, 195, 245 n. 27 
Fabius Magnus Valerianus, M., XVvir 160, 253 n. 8 
Fadilla, Marcus’ daughter 244 n. 26


--- PAGE 261 ---
Falco see Sosius Falco 
Faustina I, empress 59 
Faustina II, empress 53, 76, 116 
Flavia Neratia Septimia Octavilla 214, 217 
Flavia Titiana, Pertinax’s wife 90 
Flavian dynasty 17, 18, 19, 70 
Flavii at Lepcis 17 
(Flavius, L.), presumed husband of Septimius’ sister 214, 217 
Flavius Athenagoras, senator 114 
Flavius Celer, procurator 149 
Flavius Genialis, Guard Prefect 102 
Flavius Juvenalis, Guard Prefect 102f. 
Flavius Marcianus, Lepcitane notable 21 
Flavius Marinus, T., centurion at Lepcis 153 
Flavius Secundus Philippianus, T., governor 122 
Flavius Septimius Aper Octavianus, L., possible kinsman of Septimius 215, 217 
Flavius Sulpicianus, T., Pertinax’s father-in-law 84, 93, 94, 95, 127 
Fronto, senator from Lepcis 22 ; 
see also Cornelius Fronto 
Fulvia Nepotilla of Lepcis 221 
Fulvia Pia, Septimius’ mother 1, 216, 220 
Fulvia Plautilla, empress 137, 143, 144, 146, 149, 157, 161, 162, 167, 215, 216, 220 
Fulvii of Lepcis 8, 12, 52, 93, 214, 220f., 252 n. 6 
Fulvius Aemilianus (cos. ord. 206) 177 
Fulvius Fuscus Granianus, XVvir 160 
Fulvius Pius, Septimius’ grandfather 216, 220 
Fulvius Pius, C. (cos. ord. 238) 216, 221 
Fulvius Plautianus, C., Guard Prefect kinsman of Septimius 93, 97, 107, 216, 221 ; 
his early career 93, 221 ; 
sought Niger’s children 102, 107 ; 
promoted 107, 221 ; 
prefect of vigiles 121, 221 ; 
Guard Prefect 128, 129, 195, 221 ; 
executed opponents 131 ; 
his power 137, 138, 141, 162f.; 
hostile to Julia and her kin 141, 168, 175, 223, 224 ; 
his daughter 137, 144 ; 
‘second’ consulship 145, 151 ; 
in Africa 145, 149, 151, 153, 154 ; 
his rift with Septimius 154, 155, 206, 221 ; 
oil producer 150, 221, 232 n. 19 ; 
XVvir 160 ; 
his fall 161ff., 165, 167, 168, 169, 188, 189, 199 ; 
his satellite Macrinus 162, 192 
-278- 
Fulvius Plautius Hortensianus, C., Plautianus’ son 216, 221 
Furius Camillus, M. (cos. 8), proconsul of Africa 13 
g 
Gaia, Massinissa’s father 4, 213


--- PAGE 262 ---
Gaius Anno, Lepcitane notable 14f., 17, 18, 213, 217 
Gaius Caesar, honoured at Lepcis 12 
Gaius Phelyssam, Lepcitane notable 15, 18, 213, 217 
Galba, emperor 92 
Galen, doctor 43, 85, 107, 207 
Gannys Eutychianus made Elagabalus emperor 192, 193, 222 
Gargilii Antiqui of Thugga 147, 160 
Gavius Cornelius Cethegus, M. (cos. ord. 170) 47 
Geminius Marcianus, P. Julius, of Cirta 38 
Gentianus, Terentius (cos. ord. 211) 177 
Germanicus Caesar, honoured at Lepcis 13 
Gessius Marcianus, husband of Julia Avita Mamaea 134, 192, 193, 217, 221f. 
Geta, emperor 206, 207, 217 ; 
his birth 77, 218 ; 
made Caesar 130, 177, 218 ; 
honoured at Lepcis 149, 150 ; 
his birthday 153f., 218 ; 
tutor 198 ; 
at Saecular Games 157, 158 ; 
consulships 160, 177 ; 
nomenclature 160f.; 
quarrelled with brother 168, 183, 188 ; 
in Britain 179f., 184 ; 
made Augustus 186f., 218 ; 
murdered 189, 214, 218, 219, 224, 255 n. 19, 256 n. 3 ; 
perhaps supported in Britain 190f. 
Gracchus, C. Sempronius (tr. pl. 123-1 BC) 4 
Granii brothers, litigants at Sabratha 30, 33 
G’y ben Hanno, Lepcitane notable 14f. 
h 
Hadrian, emperor 23, 24, 25, 38, 41, 42, 44, 46, 53, 55, 57, 74, 90, 107, 134, 136, 
146, 151, 165 
Hadrianus of Tyre, sophist 73 
Haius Diadumenianus, Cn., governor of Mauretania 148, 191 
Hamilcar, Lepcitane notable 5 
Hannibal, Carthaginian leader 4, 9, 23, 142, 232 n. 21 
Hanno, Lepcitanes called 15, 23, 212 
Hannobal, at Lepcis 15 
Heliodorus, Emesene novelist 71 
Helvius Successus, Pertinax’s father 63 
Heraclides of Lycia, sophist 150 
Heraclitus, emissary of Septimius 244 n. 22 
Herennius, T. banker at Lepcis 6, 8 
Herennius Rufinus of Oea 27f., 29, 32, 35 
Herod the Great, Herod Agrippa I & II 70 
Herodes Atticus, Ti. Claudius (cos. ord. 143), sophist 73 
Herodian, historian on Septimius’ character 42 ; 
Commodus’ appearance 59 ; 
Lucilla’s conspiracy 60f.; 
temple of Elagabal 71f.; 
fall of Perennis 74 ; 
fire in 192   85   ;


--- PAGE 263 ---
Commodus’ last games 86 ; 
Commodus’ murder 87f.; 
Septimius’ dream 92 ; 
Plautianus’ early career 93 ; 
Septimius’ march on Rome 99 ; 
war with Niger 112, 113 ; 
Albinus 117f., 125 ; 
Hatra 130 ; 
Saecular Games 160 ; 
fall of Plautianus 162f.; 
British expedition 170, 172, 177ff., 179f., 181, 186 ; 
Septimius’ death 188 ; 
Caracalla 189f., 219 ; 
Elagabalus 193 ; 
Septimius’ army reforms 196f.; 
his verdict on Septimius 197f.; 
Severus Alexander 221 ; 
inflated role of women 222 ; 
his ignorance 59, 204, 247 n. 18, 249 n. 3 ; 
unreliable 242 n. 19, 256 n. 2 
Herodotus on Tripolitania 2, 3, 152 
Hilarianus, procurator 154, 253 n. 16 
Himilcho, Lepcitane notable 9, 212 
Himilis, Lepcitane notable 12 
Hoenius Severus, T. (cos. 170) 47 
Homer 72, 186 
Horace 63, 159 
Hortensia, possible wife of Plautianus 216, 225 
Hosidii 18 
Hosidius Geta, C., father-in-law of Vitorius Marcellus 233 n. 1 
Hostilius Firminus, corrupt proconsular legate 21 
i 
Iamblichus I of Emesa 70, 223 
Iamblichus II of Emesa 70 
Iamblichus, Emesene novelist 71, 224 
Icelus, Galba’s freedman 92 
Iddibal, Lepcitane notables called 9, 14, 16, 220 
Iddibal Caphada Aemilius, Lepcitane notable 12 
Idnibal, Lepcitane notable 15 
Iotape, princesses called 70, 71, 224 
Ishmael, Rabbi 135 
Ithymbal Sabinus, Lepcitane notable 15, cf. 17 
Iulus, son of Aeneas 20 
j 
Jerome on war in Palestine 135 ; 
Septimius in Britain 182 
Juba I, Numidian king 6 
Juba II, king of Mauretania 6, 14 
Jugurtha, Numidian king 5, 148 
Julia, daughter of Augustus 156 
Julia Avita Mamaea, empress 134, 194, 195, 217, 222


--- PAGE 264 ---
Julia Domna, empress her name, possible great-uncle 72, 222 ; 
origin xi, 72, 112 ; 
father 72, 207 ; 
relatives 133, 160, 195, 212, 215, 217, 225 ; 
possible kinsmen 81, 133, 195 ; 
sister 76, 134, 195 ; 
brother-in-law 93, 107, 121 ; 
marriage 75f., 115 ; 
elder son 76, 116 ; 
younger son 77 ; 
made Augusta 245 n. 35 ; 
-279- 
coinage 106 ; 
return to Syria in 194 114f.; 
mater castrorum115f., 117, 189 ; 
on eastern expedition 129, 134 ; 
in Egypt 138 ; 
her bad relations with Plautianus 141, 162, 168, 175 ; 
interest in ‘philosophy’ 141, 168, 207 ; 
in Africa 146, 149, 151, 152, 252 n. 6 ; 
at Saecular Games 158, 160 ; 
in Britain 185f.; 
her alleged promiscuity 168, 222 ; 
tried to reconcile sons 188, 189 ; 
with Caracalla in east 191f. 
Julia Maesa, empress 72, 76, 134, 192, 193, 194, 195, 217, 222 
Julia Mamaea, Emesene princess 70, 217, 222, 224 
Julia Soaemias Bassiana, empress 134, 160, 192, 193, 194, 217, 222 
Julianus, chief of Zegrenses 55 
Julianus, Guard Prefect 193 
Julio-Claudian dynasty 13, 57 
Julius Agricola, Cn. (cos. 77), governor of Britain 173, 174, 180, 181, 182, 197 
Julius Agrippa, primipilaris, possible kinsman of Julia Domna 72, 212, 217, 222, 223 
Julius Agrippa, L., of Apamea 223 
Julius Alexander of Emesa 81, 217, 223 
Julius Alexio, C., of Emesa 223 
Julius Asper, C. (cos. ord. 212), patron of Britain 174 
Julius Avitus Alexianus, C., husband of Julia Maesa 76, 93, 97, 107, 121, 134, 175, 
192, 195, 217, 223 
Julius Bassianus, priest of Elagabalus 72, 76 
‘Julius Capitolinus’, pseudonym of HA author 206 
Julius Crispus, Guard tribune 131 
Julius Dignus, C., centurion at Gholaia 152 
Julius Gessius Bassianus, M., apparent kinsman of Julia Mamaea 217, 221 
Julius Julianus, L., Guard Prefect 50, 79ff., 81, 82 
Julius Julianus, L., legionary legate in Britain 172 
Julius Laetus, general 98, 99, 116f., 125, 127, 129, 131 
Julius Marcus, C., governor of Britain 190f. 
Julius Masthalul ben Chyrdidry, Libyan 152 
Julius Maternus led transsaharan expedition 17 
Julius Pacatianus, C., procurator 115, 122f.


--- PAGE 265 ---
Julius Paulus, jurist 164, 190 
Julius Pollux, professor of rhetoric 73 
Julius Sampsigeramus, C., of Emesa 223 
Julius Saturninus, C., governor of Syria 241 n. 12 
Julius Septimius Castinus, C. (cos. c. 211), possible kinsman of Septimius 84, 176f., 
215, 216 
Julius Solon, senator 104, 128 
Julius Verus, Cn. (cos. c. 151) 38, 64 
Junius Crassus of Oea 31, 32 
Junius Faustinus Postumianus, C., governor of Britain 175 
Junius Montanus, T. (cos. 80), of Alexandria Troas 19 
Junius Punicus, M., procurator 149 
Justinian, emperor, 106, 123, 164, 185, 207 
Juvenal, on Marius Priscus 21f. 
l 
Larcius Memor, prefect of Egypt 84 
Lentulus, L. Cornelius (cos. 3 BC), proconsul of Africa 12 
Lentulus, Cossus Cornelius (cos. 1 BC), proconsul of Africa 12 
Licinius Stolo, C., XVvir in 17 BC 160 
Livia, empress 13, 14 
Livius Larensis, procurator 90 
Lollianus Avitus, L. Hedius Rufus (cos. ord. 144) 27, 29, 33, 63, 64, 76, 177, 238 n. 2 
Lollianus Gentianus, Q. Hedius Rufus (cos. c. 186), 76, 116, 126, 238 n. 2, 243 n. 12 
Lollius Urbicus, Q. (cos. c. 135) 25, 29, 39, 171 
Lucan his friend Cornutus 14 ; 
widow 23, 214, 232 n. 1 ; 
on Cato 116 ; 
on Pompey’s murderer 136 
Lucian 47 
Lucilla, empress 48, 57, 60f., 64, 66, 73, 177 
Lucullus, L. Licinius (cos. 74 BC) 69 
m 
Macarcum, Libyan 213 
Macer see Anno Macer, Septimius Macer 
Machrus ben Rogate, Libyan 213 
Macrinius Avitus, M., equestrian officer 65 
Macrinius Vindex, M., Guard Prefect 38 
Macrinus, M. Opellius, emperor 162, 190, 191ff., 195, 203, 205, 206, 215, 221 
Macrobius on Sammonicus Serenus 207 
Maecius Laetus, Q., Guard Prefect 164, 175 
Ma‘nu VIII of Osrhoene 69 
Mago, Lepcitane notable 14, 17 
Malalas, John on Septimius’ appearance 36 ; 
on S. in Egypt 137 
Manilius Fuscus, Ti. (cos. c. 197) 114, 157, 160, 195 
Mantennius Sabinus, L., prefect of Egypt 84, 92, 107 
Marcia, Commodus’ mistress 79, 82f., 84, 87, 88, 90, 99 
Marcii at Lepcis 14, 17, 150, 220 
Marcius Barea Soranus, Q. (cos. 34), proconsul of Africa 14, 52, 225 
Marcius Dioga, Q., Lepcitane prefect of the Annona 150 
Marcius Rustius Rufinus, Cn., Guard tribune 245 n. 30


--- PAGE 266 ---
Marcius Turbo, Q., Guard Prefect 64 
-280- 
Marcus Aurelius, emperor 1, 24, 33, 39, 41, 43, 44, 45, 50, 51, 55, 58, 68, 78, 79, 90, 
91, 105, 109, 124, 136, 140, 148, 164, 199, 200, 219, 243 n. 6 ; 
Antoninus’ heir 24, 34, 37, 38, 94, 161 ; 
his wife 116, 130 ; 
daughters 48, 99, 165, 177 ; 
son Commodus 53, 54, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 82, 86, 140, 182 ; 
relatives, descendants 61, 81, 140, 156, 193 ; 
northern wars 48f., 52ff., 58, 82, 196 ; 
Septimius his ‘son’ 1, 117, 127, 136 ; 
took Galen’s medicine 107, 198 ; 
his death 56, 57, 58, 60, 67, 82, 197 
Marii brothers, African senators 147, 177, 195 
Marinus of Tyre on transsaharan ventures 17 
Marius, C. (cos. 107 BC) 5, 127, 198 
Marius Doryphorus, L., freedman 241 n. 14 
Marius Maximus, L. (cos. II ord. 223), biographer of emperors his origin 35, 205 ; 
career 58, 68, 84, 85, 91, 109, 126, 194, 205 ; 
besieged Byzantium 105, 109, 119, 121, 132, 176, 205, 244 n. 23, 247 n. 26 ; 
commanded Moesian army corps 122, 124, 176, 194 ; 
wrote life of Nerva 205 ; 
source of HA 1, 35, 58, 61, 75, 85, 87, 89, 109, 122, 203, 205, 244 n. 22 ; 
on Septimius’ father 1, 215, 216 ; 
disgusted by Saoterus 60 ; 
imitated Suetonius 58 ; 
compared with Dio 205, 206 ; 
his kinsman 114 ; 
brother 84, 176, 205 
Marius Perpetuus, C., patron of Thugga 205 
Marius Perpetuus, L., scriba 205 
Marius Perpetuus, L., procurator 205 
Marius Perpetuus, L. (cos. c. 204) 84, 176, 205 
Marius Priscus, corrupt proconsul of Africa 21f., 167, 174 
Martial on Claudia Rufina 20 
Martius Sergius Saturninus (cos. ord. 198), Gallic senator 140 
Martius Verus, P. (cos. II ord. 179) 38, 53, 140 
Masinkaw, Libyan family 13 
Massinissa, Numidian king 4, 6, 25, 147, 213 
Maternus, deserters’ leader 75 
Maximus of El-Amrun 234 n. 14 
Messius Saturninus, a declamationibus167f. 
Michael Syrus, on Jewish-Samaritan conflict 135 
Minicia Paetina, wife of Rutilius Gallicus 16 
Minucius Felix on Christians 32f. 
Minicius Martialis, procurator 176 
Minicius Natalis, L. (cos. 139) his military tribunates 236 n. 13 
Minucius Rufus, M. (pr. 197 BC), commissioner at Lepcis 4 
Motilenus, Guard Prefect 80 
Mucius Scaevola, C., XVvir in 17 BC 160 
Muttun, sufes at Lepcis 9, 22


--- PAGE 267 ---
n 
Naevius Quadratianus, L., legate of III Augusta 98 
Narcissus, athlete 85, 87, 241 n. 12, 249 n. 20 
(Neratia), possible kinswoman of Septimii 214, 217, 225 
Neratii of Saepinum 214 
Nero, emperor 15, 16, 19, 57, 60, 70, 71, 92, 96, 157 
Nerva, emperor 20, 57, 90, 118, 123, 194, 205 
Niger see Pescennius Niger 
Nonius Arrius Mucianus, M. (cos. ord. 201), XVvir 160 
Novius Rufus, L., governor of Tarraconensis 92, 98, 122, 124, 126 
Numerianus, schoolmaster 123 
Nummius Senecio Albinus, M. (cos. ord. 206) 177, 254 n. 2 
o 
Oclatinius Adventus, M., Guard Prefect 171, 175, 181, 191 
(Octavia), possible ancestress of Septimius 214, 217, 225 
Octavian, Triumvir 104, 198, 251 n. 1 ; 
and see Augustus 
Octavius Pudens, governor of Mauretania 148 
Ofilius Valerius Macedo, XVvir 160 
Oppianicus, opponent of Cluentius 30 
Orfitus, Ser. Salvidienus Scipio (cos. ord. 51), proconsul of Africa 15 
p 
Paccia Marciana, Septimius’ first wife 52, 72, 75, 149, 203, 217, 225 
Paccii at Lepcis 17 
Paccius Africanus, C. (cos. c. 67), proconsul of Africa 16, 52, 225 
Pactumeius Fronto, Q. Aurelius (cos. 80), of Cirta 19 
Papinian see Aemilius Papinianus 
Papirius Dionysius, M. Aurelius, prefect of the Annona 78f. 
Pausanias his guide to Greece 73 
Perperna, settler at Lepcis 8 
Persius, poet 14 
Pertinax, P. Helvius, emperor 204, 206, 221 ; 
his humble origin 54, 63, 67 ; 
grammaticus 27, 63 ; 
his patrons 27, 48, 63, 64, 67, 76, 116, 177, 238 n. 2 ; 
early career 64ff.; 
made senator 51, 66 ; 
in northern wars 49, 54, 66f., 97 ; 
consul 54, 67, 96 ; 
governor of Syria 62, 63, 67, 68, 79, 84, 106 ; 
dismissed 62, 67, 68, 73 ; 
his service in Britain 39, 65, 75, 77f., 83, 172, 185 ; 
proconsul of Africa 78, 93, 96, 221 ; 
City Prefect 78, 79f., 84, 87 ; 
joined conspiracy 84, 87f.; 
made emperor 88, 89ff.; 
in Septimius’ dream 92, 155, 203 ; 
pater patriae 90, 110 ; 
his wife 90, 92 ; 
father-in-law 84, 127 ;


--- PAGE 268 ---
son 90, 105, 189 ; 
affair with Cornificia 177 ; 
coinage 91, 106 ; 123 ; 
coups against 91, 93ff.; 
murdered 95, 97, 98, 102, 103, 118 ; 
Septimius his avenger 97, 104, 
-281- 
199f.; 
deified 105, 127 ; 
Pertinax the race-horse 78, 87 
Pescennius Niger, C., would be emperor 206 ; 
Italian 40 ; 
hunted deserters 77 ; 
served in Dacia 241 n. 12 ; 
governor of Syria 84f., 96, 241 n. 12 ; 
proclaimed emperor 98 ; 
his support 102, 114, 115, 130, 131, 135, 136, 137, 138, 142, 148 ; 
coinage 113, 114 ; 
Septimius’ war against 108ff., 112f., 121, 198 ; 
posed as new Alexander 108, 113, 136 ; 
vilified by Septimius 167 
Petronius Honoratus, M., prefect of Egypt 225 
Petronius Mamertinus, M., Guard Prefect 24, 44 
Petronius Mamertinus, M. (cos. 150) 44, 216, 225 
Petronius Sura Mamertinus, M. (cos. ord. 182), son-in-law of Marcus 48, 78 ; 81, 177, 
216, 225 
Petronius Sura Septimianus, M. (cos. ord. 190) 78, 81, 216, 225 
Pharaohs 138, 139 
Philip, Seleucid pretender 69 
Philostratus, biographer of sophists 207 ; 
knew Julia Domna 141, 168 ; 
on Aelius Antipater 137f.; 
Septimius in Africa 150 ; 
his life of Apollonius 141, 168, 207 
Piso, Cn. Calpurnius (cos. 7 BC), proconsul of Africa 12 
Plato 33 
Plautia Servilia, wife of Lollianus Gentianus 238 n. 2 
Plautianus see Fulvius Plautianus Plautii at Lepcis 17, 214, 220 
‘Plautillus’, alleged father-in-law of Clodius Albinus 245 n. 26 
Plautius Avitus (cos. ord. 209) 177 
Plautius Octavianus. L., Lepcitane notable 214 
Plautius Quintillus, M. Peducaeus (cos. ord. 177), son-in-law of Marcus 99, 165, 199, 
244f. n. 26 
Plautius Silvanus Aelianus, Ti. (cos. II 74), probable patron of Lepcis 16, 220, 231 n. 12 
Pliny the elder on Garamantes 17 
Pliny the younger pupil of Quintilian 18 ; 
advocate 44 ; 
prosecuted Marius Priscus 21, 174 ; 
as tr. pl. 53 ; 
his protégés 41, 47 ; 
estates 45 ;


--- PAGE 269 ---
possible Celtic accent 42 
Plotina, empress 38 
Polemo II of Pontus 70, 217, 222, 225f. 
Pollienus Auspex, senator 109, 122, 160, 167 
Pollienus Sebennus, senator 167 
Pollius Felix, friend of Statius 23, 214 n. 1 
Pompeianus of Antioch 69 
Pompeius Magnus, Cn. (cos. III 52 BC) 6, 69f., 127, 136, 198 
Pompeius Rusonianus, Julius, XVvir, possible Lepcitane 158, 160, 253 n. 8 
Pompeius Silvanus, M., proconsul of Africa 14f. 
Pontius Laelianus, M. (cos. c. 142) 38 
Postumius Albinus, Sp. (cos. 110 BC) campaigned in Africa 5 
Priscus, legionary legate in Britain 74 
Priscus, engineer 132 
Probus, senator 117 
Procopius on Septimius’ building at Lepcis 252 n. 10 
Ptolemies 35 
Ptolemy III, Ptolemy V of Egypt 138 
Ptolemy of Mauretania 14 
Ptolemy the geographer on transsaharan ventures 17, 219 
Pyln, name on Oea coin 213 
q 
Quintianus, Claudius, would be assassin 61 
Quintilian, teacher of Septimius’ grandfather 18, 174 
Quintilii brothers 61, 79 
Quintilius Condianus, Sex. (cos. ord. 180) 61f., 73 
r 
Racius Constans, governor of Sardinia 154 
Regillus, Guard Prefect 79, 80 
Regina, British woman 173 
Regulus, M. Atilius (cos. 267 BC) his African disaster 4 
Rogate (Rogatus), Lepcis tile-maker 23 
Romulus 20, 42, 155 
Rossius Vitulus, M., procurator 98, 108, 123 
Rubellius Blandus, C. (cos. 18), proconsul of Africa 13, 14 
Rutilius Gallicus, C. (cos. II 85) helped Lepcis 16, 18f. 
s 
Sallust on Lepcis 5 
Sallustius Macrinianus, governor of Mauretania 148 
Salvius Julianus, P. (cos. ord. 148), the jurist 25, 41, 45f., 164 
Salvius Julianus, P. (cos. ord. 175) 61 
Salvius Liberalis, C. (cos. c. 84) 21 
Sammonicus Serenus on a banquet 166 ; 
his identity 207 
Samsigeramus I of Emesa 69f., 71 
Samsigeramus II of Emesa 70, 72, 222, 224 
Saoterus, chamberlain 59f., 61, 75, 142 
Sardius Saturninus, friend of Cornelius Fronto 44 
Saturninus, name favoured in Africa 213 
Scapula Tertullus Priscus, C. Julius (cos. 195), proconsul of Africa 154


--- PAGE 270 ---
Scipio, P. Cornelius Lentulus (cos. 24) legionary legate at Lepcis 13 
Scipio Orfitus, Ser. Salvidienus (cos. ord. 149), proconsul of Africa 26, 51 
-282- 
Sedatius Severianus, M. (cos. 153), governor of Cappadocia 37, 64 
Sejanus, L. Aelius, Guard Prefect 163 
Seneca, L. Annaeus (cos. 56) 14, 19 
Sentius Saturninus, C. (cos. 19 BC), XVvir in 17 BC 160 
Septi- Petro-, L., procurator 225 
Septimia, postulated wife of a Petronius Mamertinus 24, 44, 213, 216 
Septimia Octavilla, Septimius’ sister 1, 35, 131f., 213f., 217 
Septimia Polla, Septimius’ aunt 1, 23, 214, 215, 217 
Septimia Severa, wife of Aradius Saturninus 214, 216, 225 
Septimius, legate in Cilicia 219 
SEPTIMIUS, the emperor (L. Septimius Severus) his origin ixf., xi, 1f., 35, 42, 56, 63, 
107, 110ff., 116, 141, 146ff., 195, 200, 207, 212ff.; 
ancestors ix, 8, 18, 212ff.; 
grandfather ixf., 1, 18, 23, 35, 42, 43, 149, 174, 200, 214, 218f., 219f.; 
father 1, 24, 49, 77, 122, 149, 214, 215f., 219, 220 ; 
mother 1, 149, 220 ; 
birth 1, 220 ; 
brother xi, 34, 38, 39, 40, 45, 65, 77, 83, 109, 122, 146, 151, 161, 172, 218, 220 ; 
sister 131f., 213f., 215 ; 
kinsmen 24, 38f, 48, 51, 54, 55, 93, 97, 107, 121, 146, 149, 156f., 176f., 214, 215, 
219, 221 ; 
boyhood 33f., 116, 171 ; 
and trial of Apuleius 30, 33 ; 
his education 34, 35, 44, 73f.; 
fluent Punic 26, 34, 35, 63 ; 
African accent 35, 42 ; 
appearance 36, 42 ; 
character 42 ; 
devotee of Sarapis 35, 138 ; 
interested in antiquity 63, 73, 135 ; 
superstitious 41f., 52, 72f., 92, 108f., 141, 145, 162, 164, 183ff., 203 ; 
went to Rome 34, 37, 38f., 41 ; 
his early contacts at Rome 40f.; 
senatorial career ix, 38f.; 
omitted military tribunate, vigintivir 39, 40 ; 
his property in Italy 45, 83 ; 
trial for adultery 45f.; 
quaestor 39f., 46, 47ff., 55 ; 
legate in Africa 51f.; 
his first wife 52, 72, 75, 149, 225 ; 
tr. pl. 50, 52f.; 
praetor 54f.; 
iuridicus55f.; 
legionary legate 56, 58, 62, 63f., 68f., 72f., 114, 115 ; 
his first contact with Pertinax 63 ; 
dismissed 62, 73 ; 
at Athens 73f.; 
governed Lugdunensis 75ff.;


--- PAGE 271 ---
his second wife xi, 72, 75f., 81, 97, 112, 115f., 130 ; 
sons 97, 129, 169, 170, 184, 249 n. 4 ; 
elder son 54, 76, 117, 118, 119f., 122, 123, 124, 130, 135, 139f., 177, 182f., 191, 
200 ; 
younger son 77, 130, 179f., 186, 188 ; 
proconsul of Sicily 77, 78, 80 ; 
consul 78, 80 ; 
governed Pannonia Superior 83, 84, 92f., 96, 97 ; 
his coup 97 ; 
supporters 35, 49, 73, 76, 85, 97, 105, 112, 122, 124, 125, 129, 131, 134, 135f., 143, 
144, 156, 160, 164, 171, 195, 207 ; 
avenger of Pertinax 97, 105, 199f.; 
his alliance with Albinus 98, 106, 112, 123 ; 
march on Rome 98ff., 143 ; 
disbanded Guard 103, 169, 196 ; 
entered Rome 103f.; 
at Rome in 193 106f.; 
raised new legions 107, 129, 196 ; 
treated by Galen 107, 198 ; 
his war with Niger 108ff.; 
imp. II, III 110 ; 
imp. IV 114 ; 
1st Parthian war 115ff.; 
self-adoption into Antonine dynasty 1, 117, 118, 122, 127, 136 ; 
imp. V, VI, VII, Arabicus, Adiabenicus 116, 120 ; 
imp. VIII 119 ; 
his breach with Albinus 117ff., 121 ; 
war with Albinus 121ff., 147 ; 
confiscations 126, 128 ; 
2nd Parthian war 129ff., 141, 147 ; 
imp. IX, X, XI 129, 249 n. 4, 250 n. 12 ; 
Parthicus Maximus 130 ; 
in Egypt 135ff., 206 ; 
his decennalia 141, 143, 144f.; 
return to Africa 146ff.; 
Arch 155f.; 
Saecular Games 158ff.; 
building at Rome 163f.; 
legal activity 164f., 166f., 167f.; 
Italian routine 166 ; 
British expedition ix, x, 39, 170ff.; 
Britannicus 180, 255 n.19 ; 
his death 187f., 199, 204, 224 ; 
deified 188 ; 
verdicts on 197ff.; 
his coinage 112, 114, 116, 120, 123, 128, 179, 200 ; 
army reforms 128, 196f.; 
frontier policy ix, 115, 129ff., 134f., 143f., 151ff., 170ff., 197 ; 
autobiography 39, 41, 52, 167, 203, 225 
Septimius, translator of Dictys 207 
(Septimius), kinsman 214, 416 
Septimius, L., Pompey’s murderer 136 
Septimius Aper, C. Claudius 23f., 214f., 216


--- PAGE 272 ---
Septimius Aper, L. (cos. ord. 207) 146, 150, 177, 214, 216, 232 n. 19 
Septimius Aper, P. (cos. 153) 1, 24, 37, 146, 177, 214, 216 
Septimius Flaccus his desert expedition 16f., 219 
Septimius Geta, P., Septimius’, father 1, 23, 24, 77, 214, 215ff., 218, 220 
Septimius Geta, P. (cos. II ord. 203), Septimius’ brother 1, 39, 195, 216, 220 ; 
his early career 34, 39f., 45 ; 
in Britain 34, 39, 65, 172 ; 
curator of Ancona 49, 161 ; 
legionary legate 54, 77 ; 
governed Moesia Inferior 83, 84, 97, 98, 109, 215, 218, 241 n. 14 ; 
Dacia 109, 122, 129, 218 ; 
cos. II 146, 151, 218 ; 
denounced Plautianus, died 161, 218 
Septimius Macer, ancestor of Septimius 18, 217, 218ff., 220 
Septimius Primigenius, L. 232 n. 20 
Septimius Serenus, poet 207 
Septimius Severus, cousin of Caracalla 189, 216, 219 
Septimius Severus, C. (cos. 160) Septimius’ ‘uncle’ 1, 24, 39, 55, 147, 216, 219 ; 
his career 24, 37, 39, 51, 54, 55, 68, 147, 156f., 219 
Septimius Severus, L., Septimius’ grandfather 1, 218f., 220 ; 
taken to Italy as boy 18, 212 ; 
pupil of Quintilian 18, 174, 218 ; 
friend of Statius 18ff., 23, 150, 174, 219, 220 ; 
index 
-283- 
selectus20f., 220 ; 
sufes, IIvir 22, 23, 24, 220 ; 
his children 23, 220 ; 
possible brother 24 
Serenus Sammonicus see Sammonicus Serenus 
Servianus, L. Julius Ursus (cos. III ord. 134) 165 
Servilius Candidus, Q., Lepcitane notable 23, 27 
Servilius Pudens, Q. (cos. ord. 166), Verus’ brother-in-law 238 n. 2 
Severus of El-Amrun 234 n. 14 
Severus Alexander, emperor 194, 195, 203, 206, 217, 221 
Sextius Lateranus, T. (cos. ord. 197) 116, 140, 195, 207 
Sextus of Chaeronea, philosopher 43 
Sicinius Aemilianus of Oea 27, 29, 30, 31ff. 
Sicinius Amicus of Oea 27 
Sicinius Clarus Pontianus, Q., governor of Thrace 33, 142f. 
Sicinius Pontianus of Oea, friend of Apuleius 26ff., 29, 30, 31, 32, 35, 73 
Sicinius Pudens of Oea 26ff., 33, 142f. 
Silii Plautii of Lepcis 150 
Silius Celer, P., proconsular legate at Lepcis 15 
Silius Italicus 19, 20 
Silius Messala, consul in 193   102   
Silius Plautius Haterianus of Lepcis 39, 174 
Sittius, P., condottiere in Africa 7, 8 
Sohaemus, C. Julius, last ruler of Emesa 70, 71, 72, 217, 222, 223f. 
Sohaemus, Emesene king of Armenia 71, 72, 217, 224 
Sosius Falco, Q. (cos. ord. 193) 89, 90, 93f., 97


--- PAGE 273 ---
Statilius Barbarus, T., governor of Thrace 122 
Statilius Capella, T., of Sabratha 15 
Statius friend of Septimius Severus 18ff., 23, 33, 35, 39, 42, 150, 174, 219, 220 ; 
flattered Domitian 20 ; 
friend of Vitorius Marcellus 23 ; 
on Polla 23, 214 ; 
Vettius Bolanus 174 
Statius Priscus, M. (cos. ord. 159) 37, 38, 64 
Strabo on Africa 231 n. 4 
Suellius Flaccus, Cn., legate of III Augusta 18, 219 
Suetonius Tranquillus, C., biographer ab epistulis 24 ; 
imitated by Marius Maximus 58 
Suetrius Sabinus, C. Octavius Ap. (cos. ord. 214) 191 
Sulla, L. Cornelius, the Dictator 127, 168, 198 
Sulpicius Apollinaris of Carthage, grammaticus 24, 63, 238 n. 2 
Sulpicius Crassus, proconsul of Asia 81 
Sulpicius Quirinius, P. (cos. 12 BC), proconsul 12, 231 n. 5 
Synesius on emperor’s role ix 
Syphax, Numidian king 25, 147 
t 
Tacfarinas, Numidian rebel 13, 148 
Tacitus on Tacafarinas 13 ; 
Lepcis and Oea 15f.; 
Britain 173 ; 
prosecuted Marius Priscus 21, 174 ; 
his possible Celtic accent 42 ; 
read by Tertullian 174 
Tannonius Pudens, advocate 30 
Tapapii, Lepcis family 9, 13, 14, 15, 213 
Taruttienus Paternus, P., Guard Prefect 61 
Tatius, Titus, king 155 
Tausius, Tungrian 94f. 
Tertullian on Christians’ conduct in 193   104   ; 
knew of Hermes Trismegistus 139, 251 n. 19 ; 
on Septimius’ protection of Christians 154 ; 
Christian patriotism 167 ; 
brigandage 169 ; 
knew Tacitus’ work 174 ; 
on Christians in north Britain 174 ; 
contemporary of Septimius 197 ; 
on flourishing state of Africa 198 ; 
fall of Byzantium 247 n. 26 
Thanubra, Libyan woman 234 n. 14 
Thyestes 32 
Tiberius, emperor 12, 13, 14, 16, 163, 213 
Tigidius Perennis, Sex., Guard Prefect 61, 73, 74f., 77, 78, 95, 240 n. 16 
Tineius Longus, equestrian officer 256 n. 1 
Titus, emperor 17 
Torpacion Proculus Christian therapist 154 
Trajan, emperor 20, 21, 22, 38, 44, 45, 54, 115, 132, 134, 147, 200, 220 
Triarius Maternus, reluctant usurper 91, 97 
Tsetzes on Hannibal’s tomb 142


--- PAGE 274 ---
Tullius Crispinus, Guard Prefect 99 
Tuticius Proculus of Sicca, grammaticus 24 
u 
Ulpian see Domitius Ulpianus 
Ulpius Cerealis, M., procurator 149 
Ulpius Heraclanus Callinicus, Egyptian 138 
Ulpius Marcellus, governor of Britain 74, 75, 124, 171, 175 
Ulpius Marcellus, the younger 175, 188 
Ummidius Quadratus 61, 82 
v 
Valerii, patrician 158, 159, 160 
Valerius, soldier 131 
Valerius Catullinus, senator 98f. 
Valerius Comazon, P. (cos. ord. 220) 222 
Valerius Festus, C. (cos. 71), legate of III Augusta 15f., 17, 153 
Valerius Maximianus, M. (cos. c. 183) 38, 238 n. 8 
Valerius Messalla, L. (cos. ord. 214) 159 
Valerius Messalla Thrasea Priscus, L. (cos. ord. 196) 159 
Valerius Pudens, C. (cos. c. 194) 97, 170, 172, 173, 174 
Valerius Valerianus, L., cavalry commander 98, 113, 117, 246 n. 13 
Varius Marcellus, Sex., husband of Julia Soaemias 134, 160, 175, 190, 192, 195, 217, 
222, 224 
-284- 
Varus, P. Quinctilius (cos. 13 BC) 48 
Velius Rufus, Syrian senator 73 
Venidius Rufus, Q., senator 114 
Verres, C. 6 
Verus, Lucius, emperor 34, 37, 38, 43, 44, 45, 47f., 51, 57, 59, 64, 69, 71, 74, 129, 
134, 140, 165, 177, 238 n. 2, 244 n. 26 
Vespasian, emperor 15, 16, 25, 70, 91 
Vespronius Candidus, senator 99 
Vetina Mamertinus, XVvir 160 
Vettius Bolanus, M. (cos. 66), governor of Britain 174 
Veturius Macrinus, D., Guard Prefect 99ff. 
Vibia Aurelia Sabina, Marcus’ daughter 177 
Vibia Perpetua, martyr 154, 218 
Vibius Marsus, C. (cos. 17), proconsul of Africa 13 
Victor, bishop of Rome 83 
Vinicius Pius, L., equestrian officer 170 
Virgil 8, 131 
Virius Lupus, general 122, 124, 126, 171, 172, 173, 174 
Vitellius, emperor 15 
Vitellius Honoratus, corrupt Lepcitane 21 
Vitorius Hosidius Geta, C. 215 
Vitorius Marcellus, M. (cos. 105) 18, 23, 218, 232 n. 20, 233 n. 1 
Vitrasia Faustina, Marcus’, cousin 61, 81 
Vitrasius Pollio, T. (cos. II aid. 176) 57 
Vitruvius Secundus, ab epistulis 61 
Vologaeses III, Parthian king 84, 117


--- PAGE 275 ---
x 
Xiphilinus, John, epitomator of Dio 105, 119, 130, 133, 170, 178 
y 
Yatonbal, Lepcitane notable 15 
z 
Zosimus 207 
2 
Geographical 
a 
Aballava (Burgh-by-sands) 181   184   
Abernethy 182, 186, 256 n. 28 
Abitina 147 
Achaia 82 
Actium 70, 223 
Adiabeni 115, 116, 117 
Adriatic 47, 49 
Aegeae 129 
Aenus 180 
Aezani 119 
Africa ix, xi, 1-38, 40, 42, 45f., 47, 50, 51, 52, 56, 63, 67, 78, 82, 83f, 85, 93, 96, 
103, 106, 107, 112, 121, 123, 126, 128, 129, 132, 143, 146-54, 155, 156, 160, 164, 
167, 175, 176, 177, 182, 185, 195, 196, 197, 198, 200, 213, 214, 215, 218, 225, 231 
n. 4 ; 
proconsuls of 6, 9, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 21, 22, 25, 27, 28, 29f., 33, 45f., 51, 67, 78, 
85, 93, 96, 112, 151, 154, 167, 172, 194, 203, 219, 221, 231 n. 5, 236 n.10 
Agisymba 17 
Agueneb 51, 147 
Alamanni 190, 197 
Alba 20, 129, 192, 196 
Alba Pompeia 63 
Alexandretta, Gulf of 112 
Alexandria 4, 8, 12, 14, 15, 17, 26, 31, 63, 69, 92, 136f., 138, 139, 148, 149, 190 
Alexandria Troas 19 
Algiers 147 
Alps 122 
Aluta (Olt), R. 144, 197 
Anagnia 18 
Anatha 134 
Ancona 49, 161 
Ancyra 118 
Anti-Lebanon, Mt 68 
Antioch 36, 64, 68f., 72, 98, 110, 113, 114, 140f., 192, 193, 206 
Antonine Wall 171, 173, 178 
Apamea 68, 72, 134, 160, 175, 193, 223, 224 
Apennines 49 
Aphrodisias 168 
Aquae Sulis 256 n. 4 
Aquileia 47, 49, 66, 99, 109 
Aquincum (Budapest) 38, 65, 120


--- PAGE 276 ---
Arabia, Arabs xi, 3, 69, 70, 71, 72, 85, 112, 115, 116, 117, 130, 132, 133, 134, 173, 
193, 197, 222, 243 n. 8 
Aradus 71, 76 
Aramaic 63, 69, 71, 76 
Arbeia (South Shields) 173 
Area 134, 192, 221 
Ardoch 181 
Arethusa 69 
Ariminum (Rimini) 49 
Armenia 37, 64, 69, 71, 72, 129, 224 
Arrabona 176 
Arsinoe 6 
Ascania, Lake 110 
Asia 2, 3, 37, 38, 48, 63, 67, 77, 78, 81, 85, 102, 109, 110, 119, 126, 129, 142, 165, 
176, 192, 193, 194, 203, 223 
Assyria 2 
Asturia-Callaecia 55 
Asturians 172 
Asturica 253 n. 16 
Athens 20, 25f., 27, 73, 74, 135, 150, 186, 218 
Atlantic 75 
Atlas, Mt 13 
Auchtermuchty 181 
Augila 3 
Augusta Vindelicorum 223, 239 n. 8 
Auru 151 
Auzia 148 
-285- 
b 
Babylon 2, 71, 130 
Baccanae 18, 232 n. 20 
Baetica 42, 49, 50, 55, 148, 215 
Bagradas, R. 147 
Bainbridge 170, 254 n. 2 
Balkans 50, 125, 143, 196 
Basic (Qasr el Azraq) 134 
Bei el-Kebir, Wadi 152 
Bekaa valley 70 
Belgica 122, 126, 172 
Berbers 3 
Berenice Road 139 
Beroea (Aleppo) 69 
Berytus (Beirut) 71 
Birdoswald 170, 173, 185 
Bir Tarsin 152 
Bithynia 59, 110, 121, 142, 194, 203, 204, 215 
Bitia 236 n. 8 
Black Mountain 9, 152 
Black Sea 117


--- PAGE 277 ---
Bohemia 44 
Bonn 114, 176 
Bou Hellou 148 
Brigantes 126, 171, 172 
Britain ix, x, 20, 24, 25, 34, 37, 38, 39, 40, 44, 64, 65, 69, 74, 75, 77, 78, 83, 95, 96, 
98, 118, 124, 125, 126, 128, 153, 170-88, 190f., 192, 195, 197, 200, 224 
Brundisium 108, 129 
Bulla Regia 214, 225, 244 n. 24 
Byblus 71 
Byzacena 8, 25, 82 
Byzantium 105, 108, 109, 110, 113, 115, 119, 121, 132, 142, 176 
c 
Canaanites 2 
Caerleon see Isca 
Caesarea (Mauretania) 192 
Caledonians x, 124, 126, 171, 174, 178, 179, 180, 182, 183, 186 
Campania 7, 8, 19 
Cappadocia 37, 53, 64, 68, 112, 141, 191 
Capri 61 
Capsa 148 
Capua 161 
Carnuntum 97, 108, 143, 144 
Carpow x, 181, 182, 183, 184, 186, 188, 256 n. 2 
Carrhae 132 
Carthage, Carthaginians 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 12, 20, 24, 25, 29, 33, 35, 45, 51, 63, 78, 114, 
142, 146f., 148, 150, 154, 193, 198, 207 
Carvetii 188 
Carvoran 185 
Castellum Dimmidi 147, 148 
Castle Law 256 n. 28 
Castlesteads 185 
Celts, Celtic 42 
Channel (English) 75, 124, 125 
Chatti 37 
Cilicia 62, 70, 114, 116, 129, 219, 225 
Cilurnum (Chesters) 171, 173 
Cinithii 12, 13 
Cinyps, R. 2, 3, 4, 23, 152 
Cirta 7, 8, 19, 24, 25, 29, 38, 43, 109, 126, 147 
Cius 110, 112 
Colchester 38 
Cologne 38, 66 
Commagene 68, 70, 154, 224 
Condercum (Benwell) 172, 256 n. 1 
Coria (Corbridge) 65, 171, 172, 173, 175, 180, 181, 185, 238 n. 5 
Corsica 3, 4 
Cottian Alps 122, 124 
Cramond 173 
Crete 45 
Ctesiphon 44, 130, 153, 249 nn. 2, 3, 4 
Cuicul 132, 172, 176 
Cures Sabini 18, 219, 232 n. 20


--- PAGE 278 ---
Cydamus (Ghadames) 147, 151 
Cyprus 192, 215, 223 
Cyrenaica ix, 3, 6, 45, 63, 107, 231 n. 5 
Cyrene 2, 45 
Cyzicus 110, 205, 246 n. 13 
d 
Dacia, Dacians 66, 67, 83, 97, 99, 105, 106, 109, 110, 114, 121, 122, 129, 143, 144, 
161, 170, 174, 197, 215, 218 
Dacian wars 54, 113 
Dahar 3 
Dalmatia 38, 49, 109, 192, 194, 203, 223 
Damascus 68 
Danube, R. 13, 38, 44, 47, 48, 49, 50, 53, 54, 57, 59, 65, 66, 67, 74, 83, 85, 93, 96, 
98, 103, 105, 109, 120, 121, 122, 124, 125, 132, 143f., 148, 175, 176, 190, 196 
Daphne 47 
Dee, R. 181 
Deva (Chester) 191 
Diospolis-Lydda 135 
Doliche 152 
Dumata (Jawf) 134 
Durs Europus 69, 113, 134f. 
Dyrrhachium 108 
e 
Earn, R. 181, 182 
Eboracum (York) 65, 178, 179, 180, 185, 186, 187, 188, 191 
Eden, R. 185 
Edessa 69, 115, 129, 130, 132, 247 n. 18 
Egypt 2, 6, 8, 14, 35, 53, 58, 70, 78, 84, 85, 92, 98, 103, 107, 112, 132, 133, 135-9, 
164, 176, 200, 206, 225 
Eildon Hills 180 
El-Amrun 234 n. 14 
Eleutheropolis 135 
-286- 
Eleusis 74 
Emesa xi, 69-72, 75f., 81, 112, 115, 121, 130, 152, 175, 185, 192, 204, 221-4 
Emona (Ljubljana) 99 
England 170, 191 
Ephesus 176, 185 
Epiphania (Hamath) 152, 185 
Erg, Great Eastern 3, 151 
Ethiopia 17, 139, 184 
Etruria 18, 45 
Etruscans 3, 8, 156 
Euphrates, R. 37, 38, 68, 69, 81, 115, 117, 129, 134, 197 
Europe 108, 118, 133, 141 
f 
Fanum Fortunae 49 
Fezzan 3, 9


--- PAGE 279 ---
Forth, Firth of 173, 181 
Forum Novum 232 n. 20 
g 
Gades 9 
Gaetuli 9, 12, 25, 35 
Galatia 112, 118, 191, 248 n. 6 
Gallia Belgica see Belgica 
Garama 9, 17, 153 
Garamantes x, 3f., 9, 13, 15f., 17, 151, 153 
Gaul 3, 19, 38, 64, 74, 75, 76f., 118, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 128, 140, 176, 197, 
200, 243 n. 8 
Gebel 3, 6, 8, 12, 13, 16, 28, 151, 152 
Gebel Msellata 2, 28, 232 n. 17 
Gebel Tarhuna 28 
Gefara 3, 232 n. 17, 234 n. 14 
Germans, Germany 39, 43, 44, 48, 49, 59, 65, 66, 126f., 172, 176, 195, 215, 219 ; 
Upper Germany 37, 61, 75, 124, 125, 177 ; 
Lower Germany 39, 61, 122, 126, 172, 176 
Gheriat oases 152, 153 
Ghirza 152 
Gholaia (Bu-Ngem) x, 147, 148, 152, 153 
Gibraltar 14 
Gigthis 151 
Goths 117 
Grampians, Mts 181 
Greece, Greeks 2, 3, 4, 8, 22, 31, 38, 49, 63, 68, 71, 73, 138, 139, 140, 157 
Greek language, culture 26, 28, 34, 35, 63, 69, 71, 76, 132, 166, 167, 168, 179, 183, 
203, 214 
Greetland 172 
h 
Habitancum (Risingham) 170f., 173, 180f. 
Hadrian’s Wall x, 39, 65, 126, 170, 171f., 173, 181, 182, 184, 185, 188, 190 
Hadrumetum 25, 40, 41, 83, 96, 106, 112, 118 
Hamada el-Hamra 3, 151, 152 
Hamath 152, 185 
Hamii 152, 185 
Hatra 130f., 132f., 250 n. 8 
Hebrew 2 
Heliopolis (Baalbek) 70, 71, 73, 223, 224 
Hermes, Cape 15 
Hernici 18, 219 
Hierapolis (Phrygia) 25, 73, 137 
Highlands, Scottish 182 
Hippo Regius 24, 238 n. 2 
Hittites 154 
Housesteads 65, 185, 238 n. 5 
i 
Iliberris (Granada) 40 
Illyria 172 
Iluro 40 
India 144


--- PAGE 280 ---
Interamna 102 
Interpromium 214, 225 
Inveresk 181 
Isca (Caerleon) 39, 65, 174, 191 
Israelites 5 
Issus 112f., 114, 117 
Italians, Italy x, 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 18, 19, 20, 21, 23, 24, 38, 40, 42, 43, 45, 47, 49, 50, 
52, 54, 63, 66, 74, 83, 85, 86, 92, 99, 103, 116, 121, 129, 149, 160, 166, 168f., 170, 
175, 191, 195, 196, 200, 212, 214, 219, 220, 223, 225, 244 n. 24 
Italica 200 
j 
Jawf 134 
Jebel Sinjar 132 
Jerusalem 224 
Jews 70, 135, 157, 224, 250 n. 12 
Jordan 134 
Judaea 135 
k 
Keithock 181 
Kifrin 134 
Kinnell 181 
Kirkbuddo 181 
Kirkpatrick 181, 184 
l 
Labyrinth 139 
Lambaesis 147, 148 
Lancaster 254 n. 6 
Laodicea 47, 112, 114 
Lavatrae (Bowes) 171 
Latin language, culture 9, 15, 16, 17, 19, 20, 23, 25, 26, 34, 42, 43, 71, 72, 106, 
131f., 152, 166, 167, 173, 203, 212, 213 
Lebanon, Mt 68 
Lebdah, Wadi 4, 151 
León 50 
Lepcis Magna ix, x, 1f., 4, 5-9, 12-19, 21-4, 25, 26, 27, 28f., 30, 33, 34f., 39, 44, 45, 
48, 49f., 51, 52, 63, 110ff., 131, 137, 138, 142, 146, 147, 148-54, 159, 160, 161, 
163, 174, 177, 185, 200, 207, 212-21, 225, 252 nn. 10, 11 
-287- 
Lepti Minus 8 
Libya, Libyans 2, 3, 9, 13, 19, 35, 43, 52, 136, 142, 150, 152, 213 
Libyssa 142 
Libyphoenicians ix, 3, 43 
Liguria 5, 63, 73 
Lindum (Lincoln) 191 
Lipara 162 
Londinium 191 
Longforgan 181 
Lugdunensis 75, 76, 77, 126, 191


--- PAGE 281 ---
Lugdunum 75, 76, 115, 122, 123, 124, 126 ; 
battle of 125, 127, 130, 171, 176, 199, 248 n. 13, 249 n. 4 
Luguvalium (Carlisle) 184, 185 
Lusitania 77 
Lycia-Pamphylia 24, 150, 219 
m 
Macae 3, 152, 153, 213 
Macedonia 69 
Mactaris 143 
Madauros 25 
Maeatae 126, 171, 178, 186 
Maghreb 3, 4 
Maglona (Old Carlisle) 185 
Mainz see Moguntiacum 
Marcomannic wars 74, 77, 79, 97, 169, 196 
Marsyas, R. 68 
Massilia 3 
Massyas 68 
Mauretania 6, 14, 50, 162, 191, 197 ; 
Caesariensis 148, 172 ; 
Tingitana 55, 148 
Medes, Media 70, 71, 117, 224 
Mediterranean 3, 4, 43, 134, 151 
Melitene 118 
Memphis 138f. 
Meninx (Djerba) 3 
Mesopotamia 44, 68, 69, 115, 116, 117, 119, 127, 130, 131, 132, 134, 156, 172, 173, 
174, 176, 195, 197 
Mesphe (Medina Doga) 12, 152 
Milan 40f., 61 
Misenum 99 
Mizda 152 
Moeris, Lake 139 
Moesia 109, 110, 121, 176 ; 
Upper 54, 65, 67, 97, 121, 143, 176 ; 
Lower 54, 67, 77, 83, 84, 97, 98, 109, 122, 143, 175, 218 
Moguntiacum (Mainz) 76, 122 
Moors 4, 13, 50, 55, 133, 148, 184, 192, 193 
Moravia 44 
Moray Firth 181 
Moulouya, R. 148 
Musulamii 12, 13 
Myos Hormos 139 
n 
Naissus 109 
Narbonensis 76 
Nasamones 3, 12, 18, 19, 153 
Nemausus 38, 200 
Nemrud Dag 118 
Neo-Punic 5, 9, 12, 14f., 17 
Nervians 170


--- PAGE 282 ---
Nicaea 110, 112, 121, 132, 141, 142, 203 
Nicomedia 110, 112, 142, 193, 203 
Nile, R. 139 
Nisibis 69, 115, 116, 117, 129, 131, 132 
Noricum 66, 97, 98, 122, 124, 126, 167 
Numidia 4, 5, 6, 7, 13, 14, 19, 24, 25, 35, 38, 39, 48, 51, 77, 82, 96, 98, 102, 106, 
109, 122, 126, 127, 132, 140, 143, 144, 147, 148, 172, 176, 192, 195, 197, 224, 255 
n. 21 
o 
Ochil Hills 181 
Oea (Tripoli) 1, 2, 8, 12, 13, 15f., 25, 26-9, 30, 33, 51, 73, 139, 142, 148, 152, 213, 
219 
Olba 70, 225 
Orontes, R. 47, 68, 71, 72 
Osrhoene 68, 69, 115, 117, 122, 132, 133, 134, 156, 190, 247 n. 18 
Ostia 93, 107, 127 
p 
Palestine 38, 112, 133, 135 
Palmyra 69, 71, 113, 130, 134f., 148, 173 
Pannonia 38, 45, 49, 66, 74, 98, 109, 110, 118, 121, 124, 125, 126, 127, 191, 194 ; 
Upper 65, 83, 97, 98, 124, 129, 143, 176, 177, 203 ; 
Lower 65, 83, 97, 120, 143, 172, 177, 215 
Parthia 37, 69, 72, 81, 84, 113, 115, 116, 117, 118, 134, 155, 156, 176 ; 
Parthian wars 37ff., 44, 53, 64, 69, 70, 77, 107, 127, 129f., 131, 133, 135, 140, 141, 
143, 144, 147, 150, 155, 157, 172, 176, 190, 192, 194, 204, 206 
Pass of Grange 181 
Pelusium 136 
Pennines 65, 171, 172, 173, 190 
Pentland Hills 181 
Pergamum 43, 140 
Perinthus 105, 108, 109, 112, 119, 122 
Persia 117, 194f. 
Persian Gulf 130, 134, 137 
Philae (Aswan) 139 
Phoenicians 2, 3, 5, 63, 71, 72, 114, 147, 185 
Phrygia 25, 73, 75, 119 
Picts 186, 256 n. 28 
Pizos 143 
Po, R. 49 
Pons Aelius (Newcastle) 179 
Pontus 70 
Praeneste 84, 219 
Primis (Qasr Ibrim) 139 
Prusias ad Hypium 112 
Punic ix, 2, 3, 5, 12, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 22, 23, 26, 34, 43, 52, 76, 112, 132, 
152, 212, 213, 235 n. 28, 236 n. 8 
-288- 
q


--- PAGE 283 ---
Qasr al Azraq 134 
Qasr Ibrim 139 
r 
Raetia 66, 97, 98, 124, 134, 175, 190, 223 
Raphanaeae 68, 71, 133, 192 
Ravenna 49, 99 
Red Sea 137, 139 
Resaina 132 
Rhine, R. 44, 48, 74, 83, 92, 98, 105, 122, 124, 125, 173, 175, 195 
Rhône, R. 76, 122, 125 
Rome Arch of argentarii 163 ; 
Arch of Augustus 155 ; 
Arch of Severus 155f., 163, 250 n. 8 ; 
Athenaeum 94, 102 ; 
Aurelian Column 66, 117 ; 
Aventine 158 ; 
Caelian 87 ; 
Campus Martius 26, 105, 158 ; 
Capitol 90, 104, 127, 158, 159 ; 
Circus Maximus 79, 87, 96, 120, 145, 159, 161, 164 ; 
Colosseum 17, 87 ; 
Comitium 155 ; 
comitia 92 ; 
curia 89, 95, 104, 155, 162 ; 
domus Cilonis 156 ; 
Forum 92, 95, 105, 144, 155, 161, 163, 166, 250 n. 8 ; 
Forum Boarium 163 ; 
Forum of Augustus 120 ; 
Forum of Trajan 48 ; 
Mausoleum of Hadrian 90 ; 
Palace 42, 43, 76, 85, 87, 90, 91, 94, 102, 104, 127, 144, 164 ; 
Palatine 104, 157, 158, 159, 164 ; 
Pantheon 163 ; 
Rostra 105, 155 ; 
Sacred Way 85, 92 ; 
Septizodium 164 ; 
Temple of Concord 89, 155, 242 n. 1 ; 
Temple of Jupiter 127 ; 
Temple of Palatine Apollo 157, 158 ; 
Temple of Peace 85, 107, 163 ; 
Temple of Rome and Venus 76 ; 
Temple of Vesta 85 ; 
Vectilian House 87 ; 
and passim 
Rusicade 106, 144 
s 
Sabratha 1, 2, 12, 15, 25, 28f., 30, 31, 33, 51, 148, 244 n. 26 
Saepinum 215, 225 
Sahara 3, 9, 17, 134, 148, 151, 152, 153 
Salonae 49, 223 
Samaritans 135


--- PAGE 284 ---
Samos 25 
Samosata 24, 68, 118, 133, 134 
Sardinia 3, 4, 50, 154, 253 n. 17 
Sarmatians 124 
Saudi Arabia 134 
Savaria 244 n. 21 
Save, R. 109 
Saxa Rubra 108 
Scenite Arabs 115 
Scotland 25, 65, 173, 180, 181, 186 
Scythians 117 
Sea of Marmara 110 
Seleucia on the Tigris 44, 130 
Si Aioun 151 
Sicca 24, 176 
Sicily 2, 3, 4, 77, 78, 80 
Sidon 2, 5, 19, 63, 71, 72, 185 
Simitthu 96 
Singara 132 
Singidunum (Belgrade) 109, 121 
Sirhan, Wadi 134 
Sirmium 65 
Slovakia 44 
Sofeggin, Wadi 152 
Solway Firth 184, 185 
Sophene 70, 71, 223 
Spain 2, 3, 4, 16, 19, 20, 38, 40, 42, 49, 50, 55, 74, 76, 85, 98, 124, 125f., 128, 148, 
156, 195, 200 
Sparta 2 
Stainmore 171 
Syria, Syrians 2, 24, 37, 38, 48, 53, 56, 58, 61f., 63, 64, 67, 68-73, 75f., 84, 85, 96, 
106, 112, 113, 114f., 120, 147f., 151f., 153, 164, 172, 177, 185, 191, 193, 195, 219, 
222, 223, 224 ; 
Syria Coele 114, 132, 133, 134, 172, 176, 192, 195, 197 ; 
Syria Phoenice 114, 133, 134 
Syrtica 2, 3, 6, 18, 19, 26, 45, 116, 152, 153, 219 
t 
Tacape 12, 148 
Tarracina 89, 242 n. 1 
Tarraco 55, 92, 131 
Tarraconensis 50, 55, 92, 122, 124, 125 
Taurus, Mts 112 
Tay, R. x, 181, 182 
Taza Gap 148 
Teate Marrucinorum 18 
Tergeste 98, 244 n. 24 
Thaenae 82 
Thebes (Egyptian) 139 
Thelepte 148 
Thenadassa 28, 152 
Thera 2, 3 
Theveste 148


--- PAGE 285 ---
Thibilis 38 
Thibursicum Bure 146 
Thignica 146 
Thrace 33, 98, 105, 109, 112, 119, 122, 142f., 170, 171, 225f. 
Thubursicu 24, 51, 219 
Thugga 146f., 206, 231 n. 13 
Thule 174 
Tiber, R. 79, 158 
Tiddis 26 
Tigris, R. 44, 70, 115, 117, 129, 130, 132, 136, 173 
Tillibari 151 
Tinurtium 125, 248 n. 13, 249 n. 4 
Tisavar 151 
Trier 92, 122 
Trimontium (Newstead) 180, 181 
Tripolis (Syrian) 71, 73 
Tripolitania ix, x, xi, 1, 2, 3, 6, 8, 12, 13, 18, 
-289- 
19, 23-36, 43, 69, 107, 116   139  , 142, 146, 147, 149, 150, 151ff., 155, 197, 232 n. 21 
Troy 85, 186 
Tuareg 9 
Tungrians 65, 94f., 185 
Tunisia 4 
Turin 16 
Tyana 141, 162, 168 
Tyne, R. 173, 179, 181, 185 
Tyre 2, 5, 17, 63, 71, 72, 73, 112, 114, 133, 149, 150, 164, 185 
u 
Ucubi 200 
Ugarit 2 
Ulcisia Castra 120 
Utica 4, 6, 147, 150 
Uzappa 143 
v 
Vaga 147 
Vandals 3 
Vangiones 170 
Veii 18, 45, 83, 219, 220, 232 n. 20 
Verbeia (Ilkley) 171 
Verona 160 
Verterae (Brough) 171 
Vesuvius, Mt 161 
Vezereos 151 
Via Aemilia 65f. 
Via Appia 79, 129, 164 
Via Cassia 18, 45, 220, 232 n. 20 
Via Clodia 45 
Via Egnatia 108 
Via Flaminia 49, 108


--- PAGE 286 ---
Via Latina 18 
Via Salaria 18 
Victoria (Inchtuthil) 181 
Vienne 122 
Viminacium 109, 122, 218 
Vindobona (Vienna) 38 
Vindolanda 173, 185 
Volubilis 148 
w 
Wensleydale 170 
y 
Yorkshire Dales 171 
z 
Zaratha 32 
Zattara 255 n. 21 
Zegrenses 55 
Zem-Zem, Wadi 152 
Zeugma 68, 69, 115, 133, 134 
Zliten 17 
3 
Religious 
a 
Apis 138 
Apollo 157, 158, 159 
Ashtaroth 5, 185 
Astarte 5 
astrology 41, 52, 72, 75, 80, 108, 131, 164, 199, 222 
augurs 54, 99 
b 
Ba‘al 9, 72 
Ba‘al Hammon 5, 112 
Bacchus 5, 151, 159 
Bellona 184f. 
c 
Ceres 185 
Chaldaeans 32, 35 
Christians, Christianity 32f., 83, 104, 135, 154, 167, 178, 180, 247 n. 26 
Cupid 23 
Cybele 137 
d 
deification 48, 105, 127, 189 
Demeter 74 
Di Augusti 14 
Diana 158, 159 
di auspices 110 
Dionysus 5 
di patrii 151, 159


--- PAGE 287 ---
dreams see omens 
e 
Elagabalus 71f., 193f., 223, 224 
Eleusinian Mysteries 74 
f 
fetiales 54, 83f. 
flamen Helvianus 105 
g 
Genius Gholaiae 152 
h 
Heracles 5 
Hercules 5, 19, 34, 82, 85, 86, 87, 90, 110, 151, 159 
Hermes Trismegistus 139 
i 
imperial cult 8, 9, 12, 13, 14, 55, 142, 149, 151, 185 
Isis 26, 82, 157 
j 
Judaism 70, 135 
Juno 158 
Juno Caelestis 5, 185, 193 
Jupiter 112, 123, 127, 164 
Jupiter the Avenger 95 
Jupiter Best and Greatest 65, 158 
Jupiter Dolichenus 152, 153, 158 
l 
Liber Pater 5, 10, 34, 110, 149, 151, 159, 200 
ludi Ceriales 80 
m 
magic 30f., 136, 139, 165, 244 n. 26 
Magna Mater 17, 137, 185 
Mars 123, 164 
Mars the pacifier 112 
Mars the protector 65 
-290-


--- PAGE 288 ---
p
 
q
 
r
 
s
 
t
 
v


--- PAGE 289 ---
z
 
4
 
G
e
n
e
r
a
l
 
a
 
c


--- PAGE 290 ---
d
 
e
 
f
 
g
 
h
 
i
 
l
 
-
2
9
1
-


--- PAGE 291 ---
153 ; 
III Gallica 68, 71, 114, 133, 147, 192 ; 
III Parthica 107, 132 ; 
IV Flavia 121, 223 ; 
IV Scythica 58, 68, 69, 114, 115, 133 ; 
V Macedonica 215 ; 
VI Ferrata 38, 112, 246 n. 12 ; 
VI Victrix 65, 171, 178, 180, 182, 191, 255 n. 21 ; 
VII Claudia 122 ; 
VII Gemina 50, 124, 126 ; 
IX Hispana 13 ; 
X Gemina 38, 118 ; 
XIII Gemina 114 ; 
XIV Gemina 97 ; 
XVI Flavia 24, 68, 73, 114, 219 ; 
XXII Primigenia 76, 122, 127 ; 
XXX Ulpia 39 
m 
mahazim 15, 16 
municipia 16, 22, 146, 147, 178, 191 
o 
olives, olive oil 4, 6, 15, 18, 28f., 72, 126, 150, 152, 153, 232 n. 19 
p 
patricians 26, 40, 47 
plague 45, 82 
Praetorian Guard 78, 88, 90f., 94ff., 96f., 99, 102, 104, 106, 124, 125, 129, 132, 153, 
175, 189, 192, 194, 196, 198 
Praetorian Prefects 24, 44, 61, 67, 75, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 86, 93, 94, 95, 99, 
102f., 104, 106, 128, 129, 137, 138, 141, 144, 150, 151, 153, 160, 161f., 164, 175, 
183, 188, 189, 190, 191, 193, 194, 195, 225 
praetors 46, 54f., 66, 91f. 
q 
quaestors 39, 42, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49f., 55, 148, 215 
quattuorviri 16 
r 
ratio privata 106, 128, 149 
s 
senate, senators 1, 18, 20, 21, 24, 25, 34, 38ff., 42f., 44, 45, 46, 47, 50, 55, 56, 57, 
61, 66, 67, 73, 82, 86, 89ff., 93, 94, 95f., 99, 102, 104, 105, 106, 109, 116, 117, 120, 
126, 127, 131, 134, 140, 155f., 162f., 165f., 166f., 189, 192, 196, 199, 223, 224 
sophists 73, 74, 137f., 141, 150, 168, 207 
sufetes 5, 9, 15, 16, 22, 214, 219 
t 
tribunes, military 34, 39f., 42, 65, 84, 219 
tribunes of the plebs 46, 50f., 52f. 
triumphs 9, 44, 45, 54, 59f., 116, 144, 155 
triumviri 40 
u 
Urban Cohorts 75, 79, 95, 103, 189, 196


--- PAGE 292 ---
v 
vigiles 94, 103, 121, 196, 245 n. 30 
-292-

