=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Sherry Beck Paprocki Bob Marley Musician.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 121
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:12:39.035717
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
BlackrAmericansrofrAchievement
L E G A C Y E D I T I O N
BobrMarley
M U S I C I A N


--- PAGE 3 ---
MuhammadiAli
MayaiAngelou
JosephineiBaker
JohnnieiCochran
FrederickiDouglass
WxExBxiDuiBois
MarcusiGarvey
SavioniGlover
AlexiHaley
JimiiHendrix
LangstoniHughes
JesseiJackson
ScottiJoplin
CorettaiScottiKing
MartiniLutheriKingviJrx
MalcolmiX
BobiMarley
ThurgoodiMarshall
JesseiOwens
RosaiParks
ColiniPowell
ChrisiRock
SojourneriTruth
HarrietiTubman
NatiTurner
BookeriTxiWashington
OprahiWinfrey
BlackrAmericansrofrAchievement
L E G A C Y E D I T I O N


--- PAGE 4 ---
BlackrAmericansrofrAchievement
L E G A C Y E D I T I O N
BobrMarley
M U S I C I A N
Sherry Beck Paprocki


--- PAGE 5 ---
Bob Marley
CopyrightR©RnllrRbyRInfobaseRPublishing
AllRrightsRreservedi NoRpartRof thisRbookRmayRbeRreproducedRorRutilizedRinRanyRformRorRby
anyRmeansg electronicRorRmechanicalg includingRphotocopyingg recordingg orRbyRanyRinforh
mationRstorageRorRretrievalRsystemsg withoutRpermissionRinRwritingRfromRtheRpublisheri For
informationg contactv
ChelseaRHouse
AnRimprintRof InfobaseRPublishing
monRWestRomstRStreet
New YorkRNYRmlllm
ISBNhmlv lhsumlhunmohq
ISBNhmov usthlhsumlhunmohn
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Paprockig Sherryi
BobRMarleyRkRSherryRPaprockii
pi cmi —R cBlack AmericansRof achievementg legacyReditiond
IncludesRbibliographicalRreferencesRcpi dRandRindexi
ISBNRlhsumlhunmohqRchardcoverd
mi Marleyg Bobi ni ReggaeRmusicians—Jamaica—Biog raphyi Ii Titlei IIi Seriesi
MLpnliMoomoPosRnllr
stnipnmrprlun—dcnn nllrllpqst
ChelseaRHouseRbooksRareRavailableRatRspecialRdiscountsRwhenRpurchasedRinRbulkRquantities
forRbusinessesg associationsg institutionsg orRsalesRpromotionsi PleaseRcallRourRSpecialRSales
DepartmentRinRNew YorkRatRcnmndRurshttllRorRctlldRonnhtsqqi
YouRcanRfindRChelseaRHouseRonRtheRWorldRWide WebRat
httpvkkwwwichelseahouseicom
SeriesRandRcoverRdesignRbyRKeithRTregog TakeshiRTakahashi
PrintedRinRtheRUnitedRStatesRof America
Bang Hermitage mlRuRtRsRrRqRpRoRn
ThisRbookRisRprintedRonRacidhfreeRpaperi
AllRlinksRandRWebRaddressesRwereRcheckedRandRverifiedRtoRbeRcorrectRatRtheRtimeRof
publicationi BecauseRof theRdynamicRnatureRof theRWebg someRaddressesRandRlinksRmay
have changedRsinceRpublicationRandRmayRnoRlongerRbeRvalidi


--- PAGE 6 ---
Contents
CelebratingrarMusicalrLegend 1
TherGardenrParish 8
SurvivingrinrTrenchrTown 25
ToorHot 3r7
TherRastarInfluence 49
FreertorSing 65
DancingrinrtherSpirit 8r3
TherLegendrLivesrOn 95
Appendix:rSelectedrDiscograrprhry 101
Crhrrornrorlrorgry 102
FurtherrRerardrirnrg 10r4
Irnrdrerx 106
AboutrtherAuthor 111
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8


--- PAGE 7 ---



--- PAGE 8 ---
Thousands of people crowded into Meskal Square in Addis
Ababa, Ethiopia, to celebrate what would have been the sixti-
eth birthday of the legendary reggae singer Bob Marley. The
memory of Marley was powerful, and the music promised to
be good. The Africa Unite concert would feature several of
Marley’s adult children singing their own versions of the
music their much-beloved father made popular.
It was a sunny Sunday, February 6, 2005. The festive setting
brought thousands of people together. Members of the Marley
family flew in from Jamaica and the United States. Fans gath-
ered from far-off places like Israel, Spain, South America, Eng-
land, and even Japan.
For months, the anticipation of this event had built. Red,
gold, and green posters wrapped the lampposts in the city of
Addis Ababa. Taxi drivers handed out advertisements for the
big event. Even Coca-Cola was a sponsor, flying a banner that
Celebrating a 
Musical Legend
1
1


--- PAGE 9 ---
BOB MARLEY
said “Celebrating African Unity. ” A giant, inflatable Coke bot-
tle stood nearby.
The Marley family was recognizing its most famous member
with a month-long celebration that involved films, a photo exhi-
bition of Marley portraits, ceremonial tree plantings, soccer
games, and much more. Some events were charitable, with the
goal of raising funds for the victims of a tsunami on December
26, 2004, that had wrought devastation across the Indian Ocean,
from Indonesia to the Somali coastline. Other events involved
discussions about the future of Africa, held at a nearby United
Nations building. A fancy party was given at a local hotel to raise
money for an urban youth center. Bob Marley’s wife, Rita,
buzzed about the city for weeks in flowing African dresses as she
attended the many special events and ceremonies.
2
Thousands of fans gathered on February 6, 2005, in Meskal Square
(above) in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, for a concert to commemorate what
would have been the sixtieth birthday of reggae musician Bob Marley.
The event was billed as the largest concert in Ethiopia.


--- PAGE 10 ---
Celebrating a Musical Legend 3
On the Sunday of the free Africa Unite concert, people of all
ages and backgrounds gathered in the hot sun. Some had been
in town for days, participating in the discussions, exhibits, and
other events. Others were Ethiopians who came to hear the
free music. Some wore T-shirts imprinted with photos of their
idol, his trademark long dreadlocks providing an unmistak-
able image. Others wore jewelry fashioned in the green, gold,
and red colors of the Ethiopian flag. Still others wore the flag
itself, draped around their shoulders. Ethiopian government
officials arrived in limousines, while exiled Ethiopian royalty
showed up a bit more quietly. Backstage, Bob Marley’s long-
time music producer, Chris Blackwell of Island Records,
peered out at the crowd in amazement.
THE RASTA PROPHET
Many of the fans who gathered on this day to celebrate Mar-
ley’s birthday believed that the musician was also a prophet, a
symbol of the Rastafarians’ Jah, the name that Rastafarians use
to refer to their God. The Rastas are devoted followers of a reli-
gion rooted in Ethiopia that is based on the tenets of peace,
love, and unity. They honored Marley in a way that others
honor and praise God in their own religions. There was no
physical proof that Marley was or was not the prophet they
sought. The large number of Rastafarians who turned out for
the celebration, however, caused some concern to local Chris-
tian sects.
Local policemen closely watched the throngs of festival-
goers, but the officers’ sternness did not dampen the audi-
ence’s enthusiasm—everyone bounced to the beat when the
reggae music began. A few of the expected musical artists did
not show up, but no one seemed overly concerned. American
singer Lauryn Hill, the partner of one of Marley’s sons, Rohan,
agreed to break her musical silence and performed three new
tunes. Marley’s mother, 78-year-old Cedella Booker, went
onstage to read a poem she had written as a tribute to her son.


--- PAGE 11 ---
BOB MARLEY
“I never thought I would live to see this day, ” she later told a
newspaper reporter. “I can see that Bob Marley remains the
star of the show.”
The celebration got off to a riveting start, with Rita Marley
leading the crowd in “Happy Birthday, Bob, ” then joining Mar-
ley’s former backup singers for a few numbers. After that, five
of Marley’s sons sang several of his hits, including “Get Up,
Stand Up, ” “I Shot the Sheriff, ” and “War. ”
When the celebration was over, Rita Marley called it a huge
success: “There has been lots of hard work, lots of energy, lots
of faith, lots of tears, lots of happiness. But it has been a dream
come true. ”
4
Rita Marley, Bob Marley’s widow, is shown as she welcomed the
Ethiopian prime minister, Meles Zenawi, to the concert in Addis Ababa.
“There has been lots of hard work,” Rita Marley said about the birthday
celebration, “but it’s been a dream come true.”


--- PAGE 12 ---
Celebrating a Musical Legend 5
THE MUSIC AND THE MESSAGE
In all, it was an extraordinarily festive day that honored the
legendary reggae singer. It was a memorial not just to Marley,
but also to the slow, rhythmic tunes originated by him and
other Jamaican musicians during a time of social change in
the 1960s. Marley’s reggae music is still loved all over the
world for its distinct message.
Marley wrote “Get Up, Stand Up” with fellow musician
Peter T osh as a call-to-arms for the people in poor areas of
Jamaica to stand up for their rights. T oday, the song’s meaning
defies political, religious, and personal boundaries. It has sus-
tained its popularity across generational and geographical
borders. The organization Amnesty International even follows
that theme in its “Get Up, Sign Up” campaign.
Reggae music features the soothing beat of slow rock and
blues, mixed in with the familiar calypso sounds that devel-
oped their own distinct rhythm. In the beginning, reggae was
perhaps more the woeful call of destitute teens who grew up in
the slums of Kingston, Jamaica. They played homemade
instruments and hoped one day to be able to buy real ones. For
these youths, their music was the hope of a better future, one
in which they would have a bed to sleep in, plenty of food to
eat, and respect—especially respect.
Jamaica was undergoing political upheaval at the time that
Marley and other young musicians were mainly concerned
with their music. The unfairness with which their people were
treated, coupled with the fact that Jamaica was a nation crying
for its independence, spilled into their music.
Jamaica has a long history as an island ruled by outsiders. It
was claimed by the Spanish in 1494 when Christopher Colum-
bus landed there, but it was taken by the British about 160 years
later. During Great Britain’s rule, slaves were imported from
Africa to work on huge British sugar plantations. When the
slaves were emancipated in 1838, many settled into the


--- PAGE 13 ---
BOB MARLEY
Jamaican countryside on small farms. In 1962, Jamaica was
granted its independence from Great Britain.
Marley’s mother was a rural woman who took her young
son to Kingston, Jamaica’s capital and largest city, so that she
could earn a better living. There, in the Trench T own section
of Kingston, Marley’s focus was purely on his music even as
Jamaica was granted its independence. In the end, it was Mar-
ley and others, schooled by a few older Jamaican musicians,
who popularized a genre of music, reggae, that celebrates free-
dom, independence, and unity. As a young man, Marley sang
with a group known as the Wailers, and the message of their
lives was expressed in several of their hits. Their discontent
with excessive police curfews came through their song
“Burnin’ and Lootin’”; their disgust with police roadblocks
with the song “Rebel Music”; and their concern with famine in
the slums with their song “Them Belly Full. ” Though reggae
started on this island in the Caribbean Sea, it is now recog-
nized and celebrated around the world.
After years of struggle as a musician, Marley had only begun
to enjoy success when he died of cancer at the age of 36. He
had refused to accept traditional treatments because they were
opposed by his Rastafarian religion. Many of his Rastafarian
fans completely understood his choices.
A SYMBOLIC SETTING
Although Jamaica was his birthplace, Marley leaned toward
adopting Ethiopia as his spiritual home by the time of his
death. The country, in fact, is the base of the Rastafarian reli-
gion. Just weeks before his sixtieth birthday celebration, there
were reports in the news—later denied by his wife—that Mar-
ley’s family wished to take his tomb from its resting place in
rural Jamaica and place it in Ethiopia.
“It has always been the wish of Bob Marley to return to
Ethiopia and become a Rastafarian…, ” Rita Marley explained to
a reporter during the birthday celebration. “And with the African
6


--- PAGE 14 ---
Celebrating a Musical Legend 7
Union, Addis Ababa is the capital of Africa and therefore a very
symbolic place, ” she added. (The African Union, an organization
of African nations, is headquartered in Addis Ababa.) 
Though his tomb was not moved, the Marley family, for the
first time ever, selected this symbolic Ethiopian city to honor
the musician during his birthday celebration. Previously, the
family held the birthday celebrations in Jamaica. “The message
today is that Africa should unite. This is what we’re focusing
on,” his oldest son, Ziggy, explained to a reporter. “We don’t
listen to the skeptics or hypocrites who speak against the
dream of Africans.”
Music spilled out over the city that sunny afternoon and
into the chilly Ethiopian evening. “Get up, stand up. Stand up
for your rights, ” Ziggy Marley and his brothers sang, as they
continued to commemorate the legend of their father.
When Bob Marley released his most political album, Survival, at a time of
increased turmoil in Africa, he had a message for Africans around the world in
his song “Africa, Unite.” In the United States, his Survival tour opened at the
popular Apollo Theater in Harlem in October 1979, causing the community to
buzz with excitement after the show. Here is his call in “Africa, Unite”:
So Africa, unite ’cause the children wanna come home
Africa, unite ’cause we’re moving right out of Babylon
And we’re grooving to our father’s land
How good and how pleasant it would be
Before God and Man
To see the unification of all Rastaman, yeah
IN HIS OWN WORDS…


--- PAGE 15 ---
Nesta Robert Marley was born on February 6, 1945, in the ham-
let of Rhoden Hall, located in the mountainous country of the
parish of St. Ann in north-central Jamaica. T o residents of the
island—which lies south of the eastern end of Cuba—St. Ann
is the “garden parish,” renowned for its fertile land, natural
beauty, and strong-minded, independent inhabitants. For
black Jamaicans, it holds special significance as the birthplace
of the island’s two most prominent heroes, Bob Marley and
Marcus Garvey. In the early part of the twentieth century, Gar-
vey earned great fame, as well as political persecution, as an
advocate of black self-determination and the “back to Africa”
movement. Because of his supposed prediction that blacks
should look to Africa for the imminent crowning of a new
king who would bring redemption, Garvey is regarded by Ras-
tas as second in importance only to Haile Selassie
(1892–1975), the former Ethiopian emperor, who is considered
2
8
The Garden Parish


--- PAGE 16 ---
The Garden Parish 9
to be the Messiah himself. Garvey’s mantle as a prophet would
be inherited by Bob Marley.
Marley’s mixed ancestry embodied his homeland’s tor-
mented colonial past—fitting for someone who would offer
his “songs of freedom” as redemption for Jamaica’s black
Marcus Garvey, who was an advocate of black self-determi-
nation in the early twentieth century, was born in St. Ann, the
“garden parish” of Jamaica. Two of Jamaica’s national heroes
hailed from St. Ann—Garvey and Bob Marley.


--- PAGE 17 ---
BOB MARLEY
sufferers. Under British rule, Jamaica was initially best known
as the “pirate capital” of the Caribbean. From its harbors, buc-
caneers and privateers—pirates granted official license by the
English to prey on foreign ships—routinely plundered Span-
ish vessels. The English had also discovered another source of
wealth from the island’s natural bounty. Jamaica’s climate and
topography made it ideal for the production of sugar, for
which Europe and the North American colonies seemed to
have an inexhaustible appetite. Indeed, demand for the sweet-
ener was so great that it generated profits (in one modern-day
historian’s estimate) similar to those in the cocaine trade
today. Along with the other valuable British possessions in the
West Indies, Jamaica became one of a group of islands known
as the sugar islands, a huge agricultural factory devoted to the
cultivation of sugar cane, the refinement of sugar, and its ship-
ment to North America and Europe as part of the incredibly
lucrative “triangle trade. ”
A TORTURED PAST
In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, over one million
Africans were forcibly brought across the Atlantic to live,
work, and die as slaves in Jamaica’s sugar fields. They came
from what was known as the Slave Coast, from countries like
Ghana, T ogo, Benin, and Nigeria. Their labor made the island
the largest and richest sugar producer in the Caribbean: From
1673 to 1740, the number of sugar plantations on Jamaica
grew from 57 to 430, and the wealth of the white British
planter class on the island increased correspondingly.
Dominant economically, politically, and socially, the elite
white governing class was never more than a tiny numerical
minority in Jamaica. In 1775, for example, Jamaica was inhab-
ited by 13,000 whites and more than 200,000 blacks, virtually
all of them slaves. T oday, Jamaica’s population is estimated at
slightly more than 2.7 million pe ople. Less than one percent is
white, while 90 percent is black. Just under 10 percent of the
10


--- PAGE 18 ---
The Garden Parish 11
population is characterized as mixed in heritage. The whites’
small numbers during colonial times, combined with the
necessity of maintaining the slave system by the threat and
use of brute force and terror, contributed to their siege men-
tality. Nothing scared them more than the prospect of unified
black resistance, whether through armed uprisings or politi-
cal organization.
In Jamaica, black resistance commonly meant escape to the wilderness—
particularly the rugged Blue Mountains in the east and the impenetrable
Cockpit Country, the island’s west-central region, where the limestone
craters resemble the surface of the moon. The people there believed in the
establishment of self-governing, self-sufficient communities. The runaway
slaves, known to the British as Maroons (from the Spanish word 
cimarrón,
which means “wild”), became legendary for their ferocity and craftiness in
defending their hard-won freedom. For roughly 50 years, from 1690 to
1739—a time when the red-coated British Army was gaining a reputation as
the most formidable fighting force in the world—the Maroons fought the
British to a dead standstill. 
The Maroons’ daring exploits forced the British to grant them freedom on
their own land, where by treaty neither the British nor the colonial govern-
ment would have any legal jurisdiction. The whites, however, used a strategy
that would serve them increasingly well in Jamaica over the years: divide and
conquer. Aware that a half-century of warfare against a great world power
had left the Maroon communities exhausted, the British exploited the disdain
that the proud, freedom-loving runaways and their descendants felt for those
of their countrymen who “allowed” themselves to remain in slavery. By terms
of the peace treaty, the Maroons were obligated to help the British “kill, sup-
press or destroy” all future black rebels and to track down and return to their
masters all runaway slaves. Once an inspiration to black Jamaicans, the
Maroons became another feared oppressor.
Black resistance continued. A second, smaller-scale Maroon uprising
took place in 1795. The rebellious Maroons succeeded in burning the town
of Trelawney to the ground but were soon vanquished, with the surviving
rebels shipped into permanent exile in Nova Scotia, Canada.
The Maroons


--- PAGE 19 ---
BOB MARLEY
In 1831, a preacher named Sam Sharpe led the last major
slave rebellion on Jamaica. It took the authorities several days
to restore order. “Rather death than life as a slave,” were the last
words uttered by Sharpe as he met his end on the gallows in
the town of Montego Bay.
Deliverance for the rest of Sharpe’s fellow slaves came three
years later, in 1834, when the moral arguments of the island’s
religious leaders, coupled with the mounting conviction that
Jamaica would never know peace as long as the slave system
existed, brought about emancipation. Initially, freedom for
Jamaica’s blacks was only a legal formality, as the newly freed
slaves were required to work 40 hours a week for four years for
their former masters—for no wages. Finally, in 1838, slavery as
a legal institution was officially and genuinely abolished. Rela-
tively few of the former slaves chose to remain on the planta-
tions as contract laborers.
Though the Jamaican sugar industry’s peak had passed, the
planter class retained economic, political, and social control.
Denied the vote and the right to hold political office, blacks had
no power to influence the course of the nation. Newly raised
from slavery, they lacked the means to obtain land of any signif-
icant quantity or quality, the capital to establish businesses, and
access to higher education. Control of the island’s wealth and
opportunity remained where it always had been: with a small
white elite, the descendants of Jamaica’s colonial rulers.
PARENTS WITH LITTLE IN COMMON
Although he was not a descendant of the 21 families that are
thought to have owned most of Jamaica’s land, Bob Marley’s
father was a member of this ruling class. In 1944, Captain Nor-
val Sinclair Marley of the British West Indian Regiment was
appointed overseer of British lands in the parish of St. Ann.
His duties involved making periodic inspections, on horse-
back, of the government’s huge landholdings in the remote
rural area. The job brought him into regular contact with the
12


--- PAGE 20 ---
The Garden Parish 13
people of the parish, and he often relied on their hospitality for
shelter and food. Captain Marley often stayed in the large house
owned by an elderly black woman named Katherine Malcolm
(known to her family as Y aya) in the tiny settlement of Nine
Mile, so called because of its distance from St. Ann’s Bay.
The tale of the middle-aged British officer and the 17-year-
old Cedella Malcolm, Y aya’s granddaughter, is, according to
the son who was born of their relationship, an old and famil-
iar one on the island. “Like you can read it, you know; it’s one
o’ dem slave stories,” Bob Marley would say years later, with
some bitterness. “White guy get the black woman and breed
her. ” On another occasion, he explained, “I’m born in Babylon.
My father, a guy who got together with my mother, he’s a
English ... a guy who was a captain in the army, go to war. Y ou
can’t get no more Babylon than that! Y ou know what I mean?”
His mother, Marley asserted with considerable pride, was
“African, a black woman from way in St. Ann’s, way in Jamaica,
way in the country. ”
Bob Marley would say on many occasions that he was “born
fatherless. ” But when Norval Marley learned that Cedella Mal-
colm was pregnant, he did not immediately abandon her, as
men in his position usually did. Instead, to the surprise of
nearly everyone, especially his wealthy Kingston family, Norval
agreed to marry Cedella and promised to take care of her and
their son. The wedding took place on June 9, 1944, but by then
Norval was having second thoughts. Immediately before the
wedding, he told his bride that he was going away soon—the
next day in fact—to Kingston, where he was taking a new job
as a foreman on a construction project. Cedella was not to
come with him or join him later; his family would not like it.
He promised, however, to visit her every weekend and support
his son.
Predictably, Norval made few visits during Cedella’s preg-
nancy, and he appeared even less often once his mother and his
brother learned of the marriage and threatened to disinherit


--- PAGE 21 ---
BOB MARLEY
him. After the birth of the boy, Cedella saw her husband on only
a handful of occasions. Norval bestowed the name of Nesta
Robert on the seven-pound, four-ounce infant—Robert after
his brother and Nesta for reasons unexplained. He continued to
send money for a brief time, but he visited for only one pur-
pose—to convince Cedella that she should surrender her boy to
him to be raised in Kingston.
“Never you ever let him take that child from you, ” Cedella’s
father, Omeriah Malcolm, warned. Though poor by the stan-
dards of white Jamaicans, living in a crude cabin of plaster and
zinc, Omeriah Malcolm was the most prosperous and
respected farmer in the Nine Mile region. On his lands high in
the mountains, he grew coffee, bananas, mangoes, pimentos,
oranges, yams, and tangerines, which he hauled to market in a
donkey-drawn cart or an old truck. He also owned a small gro-
cery store, a bakery, and a dry-goods store. Descended from
the Cromanty people of Ghana, the Malcolms, like several
other families in the area, had resided in the vicinity of Nine
Mile since the early seventeenth century, living and working as
tenant slaves until emancipation, then helping to establish the
free village of blacks that even today appears on few maps; it is
far from the area’s only paved road, which connects the village
of Alexandria and the town of Claremont.
THE MYALMAN
Much more than his farming success and his ancestry made
Omeriah Malcolm the most respected citizen of Nine Mile. He
was also revered as a myalman, a kind of benevolent conjurer
or healer trained in the Jamaican folk religion, kumina. Just as
the patois spoken by Jamaican blacks was English overlaid
with numerous African grammatical formulations, usages,
and words, so too the religious faith of rural Jamaican blacks
was a blend of Christianity and traditional customs, practices,
and beliefs deeply rooted in the African heritage of the people.
14


--- PAGE 22 ---
The Garden Parish 15
The most important rituals were those associated with
obeah, which comes from an African word meaning “magic” or
“sorcery. ” The obeahman used his learning in the magical arts
to harness and exploit the powers of the duppies, the mis-
chievous, potentially malignant spirits of the dead. The obeah-
man was a figure of power in the community, someone to be
respected, even feared. In the time of the slaves, the obeahman
was the protector of the oppressed, their avenger against the
whites; now, more often, he was seen as a malignant influence.
The myalman was a more positive practitioner of the mys-
tic arts. Where the obeahman might enlist duppies to inflict
harm or even kill someone, the myalman used his learning to
counteract such negative influences. The myalman believed
that the power of the spirit world should be used only to do
good; he knew the curative and magical powers of the infinite
variety of herbs and plants that grew in the Jamaican bush,
and he could mix them into potions, fashion amulets, and
perform rituals that could protect a person from duppies or
even old Screwface himself, as rural Jamaicans sometimes
called Satan.
When Cedella became pregnant, Omeriah Malcolm cau-
tioned her to heed the Jamaican belief that expectant mothers
were particularly vulnerable to the work of malignant spirits.
“Always remember, ” he would say, “you are between life and
death until you give birth to that baby. ” He also taught Cedella
which herbs could ease the discomforts of pregnancy and
childbirth and which plant leaves were suitable for cleaning
the new baby’s delicate skin. When four-month-old Nesta sud-
denly took ill, it was Omeriah who concluded that the baby’s
vomiting and seizures were the work of Screwface. “Somebody
science him, ” he said, “put duppy on the boy. ” After consulting
with Y aya, his equally knowledgeable mother, Omeriah pre-
pared a potion of nearly a dozen herbs. When fed to Nesta, the
potion quickly caused the illness to lift.


--- PAGE 23 ---
BOB MARLEY
According to reports of his childhood, it wasn’t long before
people were noticing that the small, dark-eyed boy had unusual
powers of his own. Several qualities set him apart, aside from his
light skin tone and white ancestry (neither of which was seen
with particular favor by the people of Nine Mile, who were
extremely proud of their African heritage). There was his quiet-
ness, for example; for a boy of four or five, Nesta seemed unusu-
ally thoughtful, with a penetrating stare that seemed to be
searching for whatever secrets lay hidden beneath the surface of
things. Combined with his obvious intelligence, his gaze made
adults, even his mother, somewhat uneasy. He seemed to prefer
to spend much of his time alone, lost in thought; many were the
times that Cedella, walking along some dusty path through the
bush to or from the fields, would be startled to come upon
16
Fans of Bob Marley’s discuss the influence of his music at the entrance
to Marley’s grave at Nine Mile in St. Ann. Bob Marley lived the first six
years of his life in rural Nine Mile, before his father persuaded his
mother to send him to the Jamaican capital of Kingston. After a year, he
was back in Nine Mile.


--- PAGE 24 ---
The Garden Parish 17
spindly, barefoot Nesta, sitting contemplatively under a tree or
on a rock.“What are you doing,” she would ask him,“do you not
fear the blackheart man?” (The blackheart man is an evil spirit,
not unlike a bogeyman, who is said by Jamaicans to prey upon
disobedient or careless little children.) And always, she said, her
son would respond only with “a smile so blue-swee,” meaning
cunning, knowing, or elusive.
A YOUNG BOY’S POWERS
Then there was the fortune-telling. Cedella was not especially
surprised when neighbors began to tell her that they regularly
went to Nesta, a child of five, to have their palms read. The boy,
they insisted, told them things about themselves that he could
not possibly have known, and he made predictions that invari-
ably came true. “The finger of the Lord is upon the boy,” his
grandfather proclaimed. “Him a manchild with powers that
may grow or may fade.” It was an opinion that his mother soon
came to share, a harbinger of what was to come. Y ears later, she
recalled:
How he do things and prophesy things, he is not just
by himself—he have higher powers, even from when
he is a little boy. The way I felt, the kind of vibes I get
when Bob comes around.... It’s too honorable. I always
look upon him with great respect: there is something
inside telling me that he is not only a son—there is
something greater in this man. Bob is of a small
stature, but when I hear him talk, he talk big. When it
comes to the feelings and reactions I get from Bob, it
was always too spiritual to even mention or talk about.
Even from when he was a small child coming up.
In few ways did the boy seem typical. He was independent,
yet rarely disobedient; he knew his own mind but seldom
argued; he was solitary but made friends easily; he was


--- PAGE 25 ---
BOB MARLEY
confident, yet shy. He started school at age four, a year earlier
than normal, because the teacher said he had the intelligence of
a child twice his age. Later he would say, “Me not have educa-
tion, me have inspiration. If I was educated I would be a damn
fool.” Y et his teachers remember a student of rare ability, who
blossomed when he was given attention: The penetrating stare
disguised a gentle nature that craved love and affection and was
perhaps more easily hurt than he let on. “As he was shy, ” one of
his teachers, Clarice Bushey, recalled, “if he wasn’t certain he
was right, he wouldn’t always try. In fact, he hated to get
answers wrong, so sometimes you’d really have to draw the
answer out of him. And then give him a clap, he liked that, the
attention.” T o Bushey, it was clear that Nesta received a lot of
love and kindness at home: “I imagined he must have been very
much a mother’s pet, because he would only do well if you gave
him large amounts of attention. But it was obvious he had a lot
of potential. When he came by you to your desk, you knew he
just wanted to be touched and held; he was really quite soft. It
seemed like a natural thing with him—what he was used to. ”
In other ways he seemed an ordinary Jamaican child of his
time and place. When not in school, he spent his time, as did
the other children of Nine Mile, in the fields with his mother
and the rest of the large, extended Malcolm family, fetching
water and performing other chores. V ery early in the morning
and in the evenings, he might be expected to round up and
feed the chickens and goats; at any hour he could be seen rid-
ing along the steep mountain paths to the fields on his pet
donkey, Nimble. Most characteristically, he could be found
improvising a game of football. Nesta was crazy about foot-
ball—known as soccer in the United States—and would play
anywhere, anytime, with anyone; if a ball was not available, an
orange might do, or a tin can, or a gourd. If playmates were
not around, he would play by himself.
There was only one thing Nesta loved more than football:
music. It has been said that in Jamaica one can literally
18


--- PAGE 26 ---
The Garden Parish 19
breathe in melodies with the sweet tropical air, and little
Nesta was truly surrounded by music. One of Omeriah’s
brothers played violin, guitar, and banjo with several of the
semiprofessional groups that made dance music at various
parish gatherings. Omeriah himself played violin and accor-
dion; even more important, he owned a “sound system”—a
turntable, oversize speakers, and an amplifier. Cedella, too,
was a musician, a gifted vocalist who sang in the Shiloh
Apostolic Church choir and even gave several gospel concerts
around St. Ann.
Cedella sang to Nesta constantly, and the boy heard music
at home and in the fields, where it made the work go easier, as
well as in church and at communal social gatherings. He heard
hymns and spirituals; work songs, with their rhythmic calls
and responses; popular tunes on his grandfather’s sound sys-
tem; old mournful folk songs, the kind Cedella’s mother used
to sing; and the raucous reels and stomps of the homebred
Jamaican music known as quadrille, played by the string bands
with which his uncle performed. Of all the children in his
school, he was the most creative maker of musical instru-
ments, crafting a guitar out of a sardine box, a piece of wood,
and some baling wire, and then somehow coaxing melodic
sounds from it. His soft, somewhat high-pitched singing voice
made even more of an impression. “During school break,” he
told an American reporter in 1977, “the teacher, she say, ‘Who
can talk, talk; who can make anything, make; who can sing,
sing’; and me sing. ” But his musical calling had begun far ear-
lier than that, he explained—had begun, in fact, the moment
he entered the world. “How did you start out in singing?” he
was asked. “Started out ... crying, ” he replied. “Y eah, started out
crying, you know?”
LIFE IN KINGSTON
When Nesta was about six years old, his father persuaded his
mother to send him to Kingston, promising the bright young


--- PAGE 27 ---
BOB MARLEY
boy access to the city’s finer educational system. Reluctantly,
after consulting with her father, Cedella agreed, with the
understanding that she was not relinquishing custody and
could visit her son whenever she liked. In Kingston, Nesta
received more of an education outside the classroom, absorb-
ing lessons about the bleak social conditions plaguing
Jamaica’s poor, which would deeply influence his music and
his worldview.
20
Bob Marley would come a long way from his childhood in
Nine Mile to this concert in 1979. As a boy, he created
makeshift instruments, like a guitar made from a sardine box,
a piece of wood, and baling wire.


--- PAGE 28 ---
The Garden Parish 21
In the 1950s, tens of thousands of black Jamaicans came to
Kingston—primarily to the shantytowns that were springing
up in the western part of the city—in search of economic
opportunities not available to them in the country. With the
majority of Jamaica’s land held by a tiny white economic elite,
most blacks in the countryside lived on and worked relatively
small plots of property. Over time, the size of those plots was
further diminished by inheritance, and the quality of the soil
suffered from hard use. Added to these difficulties were the
eternal crises that small farmers face—low prices, foreign
competition, rising costs of supplies and provisions, and unfa-
vorable weather. Y ear by year, there was less good land for
Jamaica’s rural population. Overall, an estimated half of the
Jamaican population earned less than $10 a week. For these
reasons, an increasingly educated and mobile rural population
found itself eager to explore the experiences and opportunities
that Kingston had to offer.
But very few found Kingston to be the promised land. More
often, it was called the “house of bondage” by the suffering
inhabitants of Trench T own. The sites and names of the vari-
ous West Kingston shantytowns give some indication of the
quality of life there. Trench T own sprang up over and around
the municipal sewer ditch (or trench) that drained the waste of
the older part of the city. Another community, Dungle, named
as a Jamaican contraction for Dung Hill, was built atop a
municipal garbage dump. Back O’ the Wall spread out behind
the wall of the public cemetery.
For obvious reasons, the residents of these areas referred to
themselves as “sufferers” or, sometimes, “Israelites” (like the
Jews in the Old T estament book of Exodus, they were waiting
to be led out of exile in the wilderness). There was no elec-
tricity or running water in Trench T own, and the cooling
breezes from the mountains never blew down there, report-
edly leaving it the hottest spot in Jamaica. The residents lived
in hovels, shelters, and shanties cobbled together from a


--- PAGE 29 ---
BOB MARLEY
fantastic assortment of materials: discarded wood, packing
crates, corrugated tin, gasoline cans, newspapers, driftwood
gathered from the beaches of Kingston Bay, barrels, oil
drums, fruit crates, and whatever else could be scavenged
from the Dungle. Jobs were even harder to come by than they
were in the countryside; harder still to maintain, in the eyes of
some, was the dignified self-sufficiency of the rural Jamaican.
The shacks of Trench T own crowded together one after
another; the people cooked outside over open fires in com-
munal yards; they washed outside with water from standpipes
or from the sewage ditches, where they also relieved them-
selves. Pigs, goats, and chickens roamed free.
The more fortunate residents of Trench T own lived in “gov-
ernment yards”—public housing built by the British govern-
ment after the great hurricane of 1951 blew most of the
shanties away. The government yards were simple concrete or
stucco buildings, a couple of stories tall, usually built in a
horseshoe shape around a sometimes-gated communal yard.
Each building might contain a dozen or so apartments, each
with a couple of rooms. In the more luxurious places, two
apartments generally shared a kitchen, and several apartments
would share whatever indoor bathroom facilities there were.
More often, cooking was done outside in the yard, where resi-
dents also washed up at a communal standpipe. Marley would
memorialize the essentially communal life lived in these gov-
ernment yards in perhaps his most famous song, “No Woman,
No Cry.”
Norval Marley, as a member of the white ruling class, lived
in the better part of Kingston, but that did not make his son’s
life any easier. As soon as Nesta arrived in the city, his father
surrendered him to the custody of a family friend, an old,
sickly white woman whom the boy knew only as Mrs. Grey.
Nesta stayed with her for about a year, fetching her groceries
and coal and running other errands, sporadically attending
school, and all the time wondering why his mother did not
22


--- PAGE 30 ---
The Garden Parish 23
come to look for him. Cedella, meanwhile, was frantic with
worry; after initially giving her placid assurances about
Nesta’s well-being, Norval Marley steadfastly refused to tell
her of the boy’s whereabouts. Eventually, though, Cedella and
her son were reunited, and Nesta returned to St. Ann and to
his old life.
“He was very handy to Mrs. Grey, ” Cedella later told
Stephen Davis, a Marley biographer, “and the two of them
helped each other. Y ou could see she was helping him from her
heart. But he told us right away he wanted to go home. ”
Back in St. Ann, Nesta resumed the old routine of school,
chores, and football. Those closest to him noticed a change,
however; he seemed even more serious than before. He
quickly lost the weight he had gained in the city and in fact
became dangerously thin, as if something was burning away
from within him. When asked, he now refused to read palms,
telling those who had asked that he had found a new way to
prophesy: His talents were all to be devoted to music. “No,”
he would say, “I’m not reading no more hand: I’m singing
now. ” With her father’s help, Cedella had opened up a little
grocery store, and customers there would often pay Nesta to
sing for them.
Despite his return to the countryside, Nesta’s life was some-
what unsettled. Still very young, Cedella was trying to find
herself and became increasingly dissatisfied with the quiet life
of St. Ann. As she tried various situations in different towns,
her son was often entrusted to the care of relatives. Though
they were certainly more trustworthy than his father, who
died in 1955, Nesta nonetheless missed the company and care
of his mother.
Finally, in 1957, Cedella decided to move to Kingston. “Oh,
I just had to get out of the country,” she told Stephen Davis.
“Every young girl in St. Ann want to come out of the country
and, you know, shake up themself a little bit. So I want to go
to Kingston and try also. ” Initially, she stayed with various


--- PAGE 31 ---
BOB MARLEY
relatives in West Kingston and tried to find stable work. In a
short time, she set up house in a one-room apartment with
Thaddeus “Taddy” Livingston, a married man (who was not
living with his wife) she had become romantically involved
with back in St. Ann.
24


--- PAGE 32 ---
Cedella Marley and Taddy Livingston wereable to get government
housing at 19 Second Street in Trench T own in 1957. They
were soon joined by her son, who by then preferred the name
Bob to his childhood name of Nesta. Finding the money to pay
Bob’s private school tuition always presented a challenge, but
one that Cedella willingly met each term. “I never have to beg
nobody or borrow from nobody, ” she proudly recalled.
I could pay his fee, then save again to buy his shoes. I can’t
remember a time when I was so badly off that I couldn’t
find food for him. And he was not a child that demand
this or demand that. Never have no problem with him:
always obedient, would listen to me. Sometimes he get a
little mad with me, but it never last for time.
Also joining the makeshift family in Trench T own was
Neville “Bunny” Livingston, Taddy Livingston’s oldest son,
3
25
Surviving in Trench Town


--- PAGE 33 ---
BOB MARLEY
who was two years younger than Bob. The two had become
close friends in St. Ann and were stepbrothers of a sort:
Although Cedella Marley and Taddy Livingston never mar-
ried, they had a daughter, Pearl, in 1962. T ogether, the family
faced the difficult life of Trench T own.
“RUDE BOYS” REBELLION
Always independent, Bob now found excitement in the city
streets that kept him away from home. It was a lot easier here to
round up a group of boys for a football game, for example, and
Bob still loved the sport. In Trench T own, though, more illicit
activities abounded. Hanging out with the guys could easily
progress into trouble with the law. With their future prospects
seemingly so dim, West Kingston youth were quick to act out
their frustration. By the early 1960s, the “rude boys” of the West
Kingston ghetto had become Jamaica’s most troubling social
phenomenon. Inspired by American gangster films, martial arts
flicks, and the spaghetti Westerns of directors like Sergio Leone,
they celebrated criminal behavior, pointless violence, and disre-
spect toward all established authority as the only means of rebel-
lion available to them. The “rudie’s” weapon of choice was the
ratchet knife, a curved German-made switchblade, and if the
liquor-store holdup or his latest marijuana deal netted him
enough cash, he preferred to dress in gangster finery—broad-
brimmed hats, thin ties, and platform shoes.
Although he was never a rude boy himself, Bob came from
the same tough environment, and he certainly had rudies
among his friends. It was next to impossible not to, if someone
wanted to get by; it was the rare West Kingston family that
never had a member in trouble with the law. Trench T own
mothers considered that they had defied the odds if their boys
made it to 14—the age in Jamaica at which lower-class youths
usually quit school—without landing in jail.
Although no stranger to the roughest aspects of Trench
T own life, Bob had qualities that seemed to guide him through
26


--- PAGE 34 ---
Surviving in Trench Town 27
safely. Despite being quite small and generally soft-spoken, he
still exuded an aura that deterred people from messing with
him. His slightness was combined with a wiry strength, and his
skill in football won him mu ch respect. His thoughtfulness
made his few words—when he spoke—much more powerful.
And, he exhibited intelligence and charisma that made others
pay attention to what he said. Usually gentle, he could be fierce
if the situation required it. When pushed, he pushed back, and
he never backed down. On the street they called him the Tuff
Gong, and it was said that if you wanted to start something
with him, you had better be prepared to finish it, because he
would be sure to do so.
Cedella Marley Booker, Bob Marley’s mother, sent a kiss to the audience
after performing in February 2005 at city hall in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
When Bob was 12, he and his mother moved to the Trench Town section
of Kingston. About her son, Cedella said, “He was not a child that
demand this or demand that. Never have no problem with him: always
obedient, would listen to me.”


--- PAGE 35 ---
BOB MARLEY
Cedella tried to steer Bob away from the streets, but with lit-
tle success. Occupied with her own struggle, she did not have
as much time to spend with him as she would have liked, and
as he grew older, her strong-minded boy became even harder
to control. “Bob, these people, these boys who are around you,
seem like bad boys, ” she once warned. “A man is known by the
company he keeps. ”
“Y es, Mama, they are bad boys, ” Bob replied. “But I not
going do nothing that is wrong, you know?”
“I know you ain’t going do nothing that is wrong, ” Cedella
said, “but these people can go do bad and because you’re in
their company, they might lead the police to believe you are in
league with them. ”
“Mama, they don’t tell me what to do, ” Bob insisted.
“Nobody can get me into any trouble. My friends, I tell them
what to do.”
As his songs would demonstrate, Bob fully grasped the
despair, the hopelessness, the poverty, and the waste of ghetto
life, but he experienced—and expressed—the many other
more positive aspects of everyday existence there that the
upper class of Jamaica always overlooked: joy, wisdom, kind-
ness, generosity, dignity, and beauty. “Me grow stubborn you
know, ” Marley later explained of his coming of age in Trench
T own. “Me grow without mother or father. Me no have no par-
ent for have no big influence upon me. Me just grow in the
ghetto with the youth. Stubborn, no obey no one; but we had
qualities, and we were good to one another. ”
THE MUSIC IN THE AIR 
Trench T own was undeniably rich in music. For the sufferers,
music was perhaps the most affordable form of entertain-
ment, as well as the most accessible means of expression. Bob
Marley had sustained his love for music—he made his singing
debut in 1959 at a Queens Theatre talent show, where he won
a pound (roughly the equivalent of five dollars) and listened
28


--- PAGE 36 ---
Surviving in Trench Town 29
to a wide variety of styles. By the late 1950s, even some of the
poorest Jamaicans could afford a cheap transistor radio, and
at night in the yards, with the wind blowing from the north,
American radio stations—from Miami and even New
Orleans—came in clear. Arriving over the airwaves was Amer-
ican rhythm and blues, as performed by artists like Brook
Benton, Ray Charles, Fats Domino, and Ruth Brown. Espe-
cially popular with young Jamaicans were the harmonies of
male vocal groups like the Moonglows, the Impressions, and
Marley’s beloved Drifters. The silky vocals of Nat King Cole
and Sam Cooke were favorites, as were the somewhat more
exuberant jump blues of Louis Jordan; the flamboyant, pio-
neering rock and roll of Little Richard; and the relentless funk
of James Brown. Even American country music was admired,
with Jim Reeves, the East T exas hillbilly with the celebrated
“touch of velvet” in his voice, somewhat improbably claiming
a wide following among black Jamaicans. The hundreds of
thousands of Jamaicans who immigrated to the United States
to find work were assured the warmest welcome when they
returned home if they brought with them a batch of the latest
records from the American charts.
Proprietors who trucked in huge sound systems supplied
the residents of West Kingston with up-to-the-minute music.
On weekends, these sound-system owners would stage “jump-
ups, ” as the huge outdoor dances were called. Hundreds, even
thousands, of the sufferers would come together to dance to
the booming sounds, socialize with one another, and eat and
drink. The sound-system proprietors and their disc jockeys
were the first stars of the fledgling Jamaican music industry.
The DJs did much more than cue up records on turntables.
They had to work the crowd, understanding its mood and
gauging a sequence of songs that would keep everyone in the
groove, letting people simmer down as their energy began to
flag, and then raising the temperature to a boil with a new
track. Using several turntables, the DJ might segue from a


--- PAGE 37 ---
BOB MARLEY
popular instrumental section of one hit right into the rhythm
groove of another, creating, in a sense, a new track. In between
songs, over a repeating instrumental riff maintained by hold-
ing the turntable arm in a desired place so it did not progress
across the vinyl, or over a so-called dub track (an instrumen-
tal version of a popular song), the DJ would improvise rhymes,
often boastful proclamations of his sexual prowess, ribald
tales, commentary on events in the community, exhortations
to the dancers, or putdowns of rival sound-system operators.
The sound-system dances were one of the birthplaces of
today’s rap music.
By the late 1950s, the sound-system proprietors began to set
up their own recording studios to capitalize on the rich local
talent. There was a wealth of exceptional musicians who had
little opportunity to record, so the operators were able to
establish a stranglehold on the Jamaican recording industry,
paying new artists cut-rate flat fees for a record without royal-
ties. In other words, musicians were barely making any money
from their deals with these promoters. Among the newest gen-
eration of aspiring Jamaican musicians—the youths who were
inspired by the new sounds from America and had created the
fast-paced hybrid known as ska—the desire to make records,
even on such one-sided terms, was fierce.
No one was more driven in this regard than Bob Marley.
The many influences he had been exposed to in the city—
musical and otherwise—had only intensified his love of
music, sparked his creativity and imagination, and inflamed
his ambition. When he left school at 14, his mother found him
a position as an apprentice welder, despite his desire to devote
all his energies to music. After a short time on the job, a tiny
steel splinter became embedded in his eye, and the injury set-
tled the issue for good. Cedella later told the writer Malika Lee
Whitney, “[At the hospital] him say, ‘Y ou no hear me say is
nothing else me want to do beside sing?’ And I have to say,
‘Really, is true.’”
30


--- PAGE 38 ---
Surviving in Trench Town 31
REGGAE COLLEGE
So Bob Marley became a full-time student in the “reggae col-
lege, ” as some would later call the streets of Trench T own. If reg-
gae did not yet exist as a distinct musical form, the seeds of its
development were being planted in West Kingston. Among
those doing the planting was a singer, regarded as perhaps
Jamaica’s finest, named Joe Higgs, who lived in a yard right
behind the Marleys. Higgs had recorded several hits, but
because of the erratic payment practices of the Jamaican record-
ing industry, even the top musicians seldom earned enough to
move out of the yards. (Higgs, for example, received a flat fee of
$20 for each record he made.) In any event, Higgs was a remark-
ably able teacher, a man genuinely dedicated to imparting his
love and knowledge of music to those serious about learning.
For no other compensation than the joy of teaching and mak-
ing music, Higgs held nightly gatherings of Jamaican singers
and musicians and coached those just starting out.
Marley was among the most talented and serious beginners,
along with his constant companion, Bunny Livingston. The two,
who still made music with makeshift guitars fashioned out of a
bamboo staff, strands of electrical wire, and a large sardine can,
were regular participants in Higgs’s sessions, which often lasted
all night. Higgs taught these youths the principles of harmony,
rhythm, and melody, as well as how to learn from music seem-
ingly far removed from their own. A demanding teacher, Higgs
counseled Marley to listen to modern jazz artists like John
Coltrane. At first, Marley could not understand jazz, but at
Higgs’s insistence, he kept on listening. “Me try to get into the
mood where the moon is blue and see the feeling expressed, ”
Marley said, using the creative syntax of the Jamaican patois.“Joe
Higgs helped me understand that music. He taught me many
things. Him, y’know, is one heavy music man, Joe Higgs. ”
Under Higgs’s tutelage, Marley’s musical development was
rapid. As much as he had talent, he had seriousness and ambition
in his favor; more than the other youths around, he seemed to


--- PAGE 39 ---
BOB MARLEY
know exactly what he wanted to do. Reminiscences of the period,
starting with his own, provide a consistent characterization: a
single-minded boy sure of his destination, if not always of the
exact way to reach it. “Then we used to sing in the back of Trench
T own, ” Marley recalled, “and rehearse plenty until the Drifters
came upon the scene, and me love group singing so me just say,
well, me have for go look a group. ”
BIRTH OF THE WAILERS
The first member of that group, of course, was Livingston. The
two “spars” (close friends) found a third soulmate during the ses-
sions at Higgs’s yard. Tall, extroverted, and angry, carrying him-
self like a rudie, Hubert Winston McIntosh had a genuine
acoustic guitar and called himself Peter T osh. Under Higgs’s
direction, the three began honing their skills. Although the group
in these early days would sometimes feature other members—
like Junior Braithwaite and Beverly Kelso—and perform under
different names, the Wailers had been born. “The word wail
means ‘to cry’ or ‘to moan, ’” T osh later explained. “We were liv-
ing in this so-called ghetto. No one to help the people. We felt we
were the only ones who could express their feelings through
music, and because of that the people loved it. So we did it. ”
Long before the Wailers ever played a gig or made a record,
Marley was treating their music as a profession. Livingston and
T osh were extremely strong-willed, but Marley was even more
focused. As Higgs recalled,
Bob was the leader of the group.... Bob needed to know
about everything, but he was quick. It was kind of dif-
ficult to get the group to be precise in their sound and
put it over in their harmony structure. Just took a cou-
ple of years to get that perfect. But person to person,
they were each capable of leading at any time because I
wanted each person to be a leader in his own right, able
to lead anyone, or to be able to wail. That is where the
concept came from.
32


--- PAGE 40 ---
Surviving in Trench Town 33
As Higgs indicated, the Wailers formed a special vocal mix-
ture. Each of the three main members was able to handle the
lead vocals on a particular song, and in harmony their voices
blended together with a naturalness that belied their countless
hours of training and rehearsal. T osh’s voice was a deep, rum-
bling baritone, Livingston’s a virtual falsetto; together the two
were likened to Jerry Butler and Curtis Mayfield of the Impres-
sions. Marley, meanwhile, sang between the two, in a some-
what willowy tenor that was remarkably expressive.
He also had the greatest ability as a songwriter. When he
wasn’t rehearsing, he would spend his time alone with his gui-
tar, devising melodies and lyrics. In crowded Trench T own,
genuine solitude, of the kind conducive to artistic creativity,
was often difficult to come by. As she recalled for Marley’s
biographers Adrian Boot and Chris Salewicz, Pauline Morri-
son was among a group of students at this time who met Mar-
ley each day as they returned home from school. Every
afternoon they would encounter him as he sat under the
shade of a huge tree, working out his songs on his primitive
guitar. Although she remembers him as polite and easygoing,
she noticed a reserve, a part of himself that he only expressed
through music. “It was always the man and his guitar, ” she
said. “It was very rare you could just sit with him and be with
him. Because he was a very moody person, the way I see him.
Him is very moody. If people were sitting together with him,
he would suddenly just get up and go somewhere else. Just to
be by himself. ”
No doubt some of the moodiness Morrison observed was
loneliness. Around the time he was forming the Wailers, Mar-
ley fell in love for the first time, with a girl who was a neigh-
bor in his yard. Their romance was short-lived, however,
because the girl’s older brother objected to Marley’s mixed
ancestry and insisted that she end the relationship. As Cedella
recalled, “Her brother say to Bob, ‘We don’t want no white
man in our breed. ’ ... Her family kill off the romance. Them
style Bob as a white man. ”


--- PAGE 41 ---
BOB MARLEY
According to his mother, it was not the only time Marley was
made to suffer because of his ancestry. He “bore a sacrifice”
because of his white paternity, she said, and the frequent insults
he endured contributed to the air of sorrow that some saw in
him. “Sometimes he’d come across the resistance of being half-
caste, ” she recalled:
There was a problem with his counterparts: having come
through this white father caused such difficulties that
he’d want to kill himself and think, “Why am I this per-
son? Why is my father white and not black like every-
body else? What did I do wrong?” He was lost in that: not
being able to have anyone to say it’s not your fault, or
that there’s nothing wrong in being like you are. But that
was the atmosphere he came up in, that Trench T own
environment where everybody is rough.
Marley suffered an even greater loss soon after. With the birth
of her daughter, Pearl, in 1962, Cedella at last determined that
there was little future in her relationship with Thaddeus Liv-
ingston. She decided, as so many Jamaicans would during the
1960s, to immigrate to the United States. She planned to make
her new home in the small city of Wilmington, Delaware, where
some of her relatives lived among the Jamaican immigrant com-
munity there. She wanted Bob to come with her and even
obtained the documents he would need.
But Marley wanted to stay in Jamaica. He had his music now,
and that was the most important thing to him; he was 18 and
ready to stand on his own. Promising to join his mother at some
unspecified time in the near future, Marley bid her farewell.
ON HIS OWN IN TRENCH TOWN
He was homeless, without a job or any source of steady income,
but Trench T own youths were used to looking out for one
another. One of Marley’s closest friends was a young man named
34


--- PAGE 42 ---
Surviving in Trench Town 35
Vincent Ford, whom everyone called Tartar. Four years older
than Marley, Tartar had gone out on his own at an earlier age. As
a teenager, Tartar had earned his living as a chef at a boys’ school,
but by this time he made money from the little “kitchen” he set
up in his yard on First Street. One of many such unlicensed,
unofficial establishments in Trench T own, Ford’s kitchen, called
the “casbah” by his friends, sold the Jamaican equivalent of fast
food—calaloo, dumplings, roast yam, and breadfruit. Much later
in the evenings, the kitchen table would be cleared for some gam-
bling, which typically would go on almost until morning. Then
the table would be cleared again, and Marley would finally have
a place to sleep.
In the hours after midnight, Marley would sit near the huge
bonfire that was always kept burning in Tartar’s yard, playing
Bob Marley lived in this home in Trench Town, where he began singing
with the Wailers. As his songs made clear, Marley captured the despair
and poverty of ghetto life, but he also expressed the positive side of
everyday existence, the joy and dignity that others often overlooked.


--- PAGE 43 ---
BOB MARLEY
guitar and singing by the dancing firelight. Livingston was
usually there with him, and T osh, and sometimes Braithwaite.
A somewhat older man, George Headley Robinson, whom
everyone called Georgie, took responsibility for maintaining
the fire and taking care of the musicians. A fisherman, he built
the fire each night and stoked it with driftwood he picked up
while working. The day’s catch was offered to feed the musi-
cians and those who gathered to listen, and Georgie “would sit
there shirtless all night, ” Tartar said, “tending the flames as
they played. ” When they woke in the morning, Georgie would
brew a huge kettle of bush tea and a communal bowl of cin-
namon-flavored cornmeal porridge.
No words could capture the sorrowful joy of those times
better than Marley’s most beloved song, “No Woman, No Cry, ”
a musical evocation of that period in his life when the sadness
of the have-nots was tempered by hope; when loneliness was
alleviated by true friendship uncomplicated by material con-
cerns; when a mood of despair could be lifted by a simple
song; when the struggle was redeemed by a sharing of the bur-
den. Marley knew, amid the crime, poverty, and desolation,
that there were also values all too often overlooked, truths lost
in the pursuit of progress. “Good friends we have had, oh good
friends we’ve lost along the way / In this bright future you can’t
forget your past / So dry your tears, I say … And everything’s
gonna be alright, ” he would write in “No Woman, No Cry, ”
remaining firmly in touch with the sufferers at a time when his
stardom was on the rise. Georgie was mentioned by name in
the lyrics, and Marley gave his composer’s credit for the song
to Tartar, who had by then become disabled by diabetes. The
song held a special place not only in the hearts of Marley’s fans
but in his own heart. “Me really love ‘No Woman, No Cry, ’”
Marley later said, “because it mean so much to me, so much
feeling me get from it. Really love it. ”
36


--- PAGE 44 ---
The joy of making music in Trench Town, though, was dampened
by the huge frustration of doing business in the Jamaican
music industry. Marley experienced this aggravation before
the Wailers even made their first recordings. In 1961, when he
was 16 and just starting to organize the Wailers, Marley met
Leslie Kong, a Chinese-Jamaican restaurateur who also owned
his own record label, which was called Beverley’s. In just a cou-
ple of years, Kong had released many Jamaican songs.
Apparently, Marley hung around Beverley’s record store, pes-
tering the staff for a chance to sing for the boss, but he was
always rebuffed. At that point, either musicians Jimmy Cliff or
Derrick Morgan convinced Kong that he ought to listen to Mar-
ley sing. Marley recorded a half-dozen or so of his songs at
Kong’s Federal Studio. “Judge Not” was the first to be released,
under the name Robert Marley. Marley was still many years
from embracing Rastafari, but the song nonetheless anticipated
4
37
Too Hot


--- PAGE 45 ---
BOB MARLEY
the moral concerns and biblical tone of his greatest work.
“While you talk about me, ” the song warns, “someone else is
judging you.” It was followed by “T error” backed with “One Cup
of Coffee,” which were released under the name of Bobby
Martell. Kong had taken it upon himself—without consulting
Marley—to change his name.
None of the songs did particularly well, and Marley was
paid the paltry sum of $20 for his musical work. He had dif-
ficulty collecting even that and quickly broke off the relation-
ship with Kong, feeling exploited. “We will work together
again someday, ” the willful singer predicted to the producer,
“and you will make a lot of money off of me, but you will
never be able to enjoy it. ” Kong had a reputation as a tough
character who did not scare easily, but Marley’s words
unnerved him. Kong felt he had been told something that
Marley somehow mysteriously knew with a deep inner cer-
tainty. The story would make the rounds in Trench T own for
a long time.
The discouraging experience with Kong only spurred Mar-
ley’s determination to make the Wailers a success. Marley
played a handful of solo shows. Some observers, like Derrick
Morgan, thought that he was a better dancer than a singer, but
he devoted most of his energies to his endless rehearsal ses-
sions with Joe Higgs and the Wailers. For nearly two years, the
group’s only reward for its hard work was the certainty that it
was getting better. But for Marley, the hard times were getting
even harder. Tartar’s boundless hospitality often left his
kitchen too crowded for Marley to stay there, and the singer
spent a six-month period living on the streets, sneaking onto
rooftops at night to sleep, sometimes staying for a day or two
at one of the small Rasta colonies on the beaches.
AN AUDITION
Finally, in late December 1963, Alvin Patterson brought the
Wailers to audition for Clement “Sir Coxsone” Dodd at
38


--- PAGE 46 ---
Too Hot 39
Dodd’s Studio One in the northernmost part of Trench
T own. Patterson, whom the Wailers called “Seeco, ” was rec-
ognized as one of the island’s master musicians. A constant
participant in the sessions at Higgs’s yard and a great booster
of the Wailers, Patterson was a virtuoso in the traditional
Jamaican folk music of burru drumming, which uses three
drums. Derived from African tradition, burru drumming
had been done in the Jamaican countryside to welcome
home liberated prisoners, and modern practitioners like Pat-
terson sought ways to incorporate elements of burru into
Jamaican popular music.
Dodd, meanwhile, was perhaps the single most important
figure in the Jamaican music industry. A pioneering sound-
system operator, one of the first to make great use of Ameri-
can records, Dodd was also one of the first to branch out into
music production on his own. Known for his idiosyncrasies—
he addressed all men as “Jackson, ” for example—Dodd was as
talented as he was eccentric. Though not a musician himself,
Dodd was blessed, said the great Jamaican guitarist Ernest
Ranglin, with “an extraordinary pair of ears,” and an ability to
communicate musical ideas in language that musicians could
translate into new sounds. “He was really the man, ” Ranglin
said, “the man who came up with the ideas. But he couldn’t
play, so he would come and explain it to us. After explaining it,
I always knew what the man wanted. ”
The “us” Ranglin referred to was the superb house band
Dodd assembled at Studio One, consisting of, among others,
Ranglin and Jah Jerry on guitars; trombonist Don Drummond
(whom the masterful American jazz pianist George Shearing
classified as one of the top jazz musicians in the world); saxo-
phonists Roland Alphonso, T ommy McCook, and Lester Ster-
ling; Johnny “Dizzy” Moore on trumpet; Lloyd Knibbs on
drums; Lloyd Brevett and Cluett Johnson on bass; and Jackie
Mittoo on keyboards. Eventually these musicians would form
a group called the Skatalites. Having tired of the American


--- PAGE 47 ---
BOB MARLEY
sounds that many Jamaican artists persisted in imitating,
Dodd was looking for something more homegrown.
“I need something to get away from these blues, ” Dodd put it
to Ranglin one day. What Ranglin and his colleagues were devel-
oping was ska, an extremely fast-paced rhythmic sound, accen-
tuated with jazzlike horns, that emphasized the off beat. Ska
combined the best features of contemporary Jamaican and
American music, particularly in its intensity and intricate vocal
harmonies. Various explanations are offered for the derivation
of the name. Ranglin said ska was essentially a nonsense word
coined by musicians “to talk about the skat! skat! skat! scratchin’
guitar strum that goes behind the rest of the music. ” Others say
the name came from “skavoovee,” a slang term of approval then
popular in Jamaica and often used by bassist Cluett “Clue-J”
Johnson, who helped Ranglin create the sound. Similarly, the
peculiar, entrancing qualities of the music were said to be the
result of the musicians’ attempt to emulate the way the night-
time music from the United States faded in and out on the
cheap transistor radios in the West Kingston yards. Ranglin pro-
vided another source of origin as well: “We just wanted it to
sound like the theme music from one of those westerns that
were on TV all the time in the late 1950s. ”
Ska was the sound that dominated Marley’s first recordings
for Leslie Kong and most of the records the Wailers would
make for Clement Dodd at Studio One. The group auditioned
for Dodd beneath the mango tree in the dusty yard behind the
studio. Impressed by their vocal sophistication and evident
seriousness, Dodd was even more taken by the original mate-
rial they sang for him, especially “Simmer Down, ” a song that
addressed the escalating violence of the rude boys. Still search-
ing, as always, for authentic Jamaican music, Dodd recognized
that “Simmer Down” and the Wailers were exactly what he had
been seeking. With their eternal screwfaces—“We were
frowny, frowny people, ” Peter T osh conceded about that
time—and rude-boy aura, the group had the necessary “street”
40


--- PAGE 48 ---
Too Hot 41
credibility. And as one of the first Jamaican songs to capture
the situation in the Kingston ghetto in the language—musi-
cally and lyrically—of the ghetto dwellers themselves, “Sim-
mer Down” was the perfect vehicle to use to introduce the
group to the public.
A SIMMERING HIT 
“Simmer Down” reached the top of the Jamaican charts in
February 1964 and spent several months blaring from seem-
ingly every West Kingston barroom jukebox. Though the song
urged the rude boys to temper their violent ways, it also clearly
implied that the Wailers understood their anger and frustra-
tion and were, in fact, on their side. “Simmer down, ” the Wail-
ers sang, their own voices seething, “the battle will get hotter. ”
Hold your anger, that is, until the time is right. The music was
pure, relentless ska, the rude boys’ own hopped-up rhythm of
choice, clearly identifying the Wailers, in the popular mind, as
incipient street rebels. As the Trench T own denizens immedi-
ately realized, this was music made by the have-nots for the
have-nots.
That image was solidified by the various hits the Wailers
recorded with the Skatalites for Dodd over the next several
years, including “Rude Boy,” “Rule Dem Rude,” “Steppin’
Razor, ” and “Jailhouse. ” During that time, the group also
became almost as well known for its love songs, like “I Need
Y ou So” and Marley’s achingly beautiful “It Hurts to Be Alone, ”
which displayed the soft side that those who got beyond the
screwface always found so endearing.
Also, the band covered American songs, like Marley’s
rewrite of his beloved Drifters’“On Broadway” and the group’s
version of Aaron Neville’s “T en Commandments of Love,” not
to mention more unlikely remakes, like Burt Bacharach’s
“What’s New, Pussycat?” and Irving Berlin’s “White Christ-
mas. ” If such songs seemed odd material for the rebellious
Wailers, as incongruous as the gold lamé suits that Dodd


--- PAGE 49 ---
BOB MARLEY
42
Clement Dodd, shown here in 2002, was a mentor to Bob
Marley and the other Wailers in the early 1960s. The group
auditioned for Dodd, known as “Sir Coxsone,” under a
mango tree behind his Trench Town production facility,
Studio One. The Wailers’ vocal sophistication and
seriousness impressed Dodd.


--- PAGE 50 ---
Too Hot 43
dressed them in for their many appearances, the Wailers them-
selves were not greatly bothered by any possible contradiction.
“Knowing that we found reality and righteousness, we
relaxed, ” T osh said. “So when you saw us in the slick suits and
things, we were just in the thing that was looked on as the
thing at the time. So we just adjusted ourselves materially. ”
Gold lamé could not hide the group’s originality. “They
have a different sense of music, ” explained Alton Ellis, whose
recordings often competed with the Wailers’ on the Jamaican
charts, “and we all love it.... Bob’s sound was always different:
It mesmerized me from those times. His music always have a
roots sense of direction. Not even just the words—I’m talking
about the melody that him sing, the feel of the rhythm. Always
a bit different. ” Paradoxically, the spontaneity and rebellious-
ness that Ellis and others responded to in the Wailers’ music
was made possible only by intense preparation and endless
rehearsal: Their complete mastery of the material allowed the
Wailers to express it with perfect freedom. That dedication, in
turn, was only possible through a mutual friendship as tight as
the group’s harmonies. As Johnny Moore of the Skatalites
observed, “At the time, they were very young and vibrant and
you could see they were very good friends: they were very, very
close to one another. They really did care about each other. I
guess that’s why they made a success of it as it was. ”
For all the musical benefits of the Wailers’ association with
Dodd, the relationship was destined to be short-lived. After
their initial audition, Dodd had signed them on his usual
terms—a flat fee of 15 pounds (about $60) per record, with no
royalties. As newcomers to the recording game, with no clout
in the industry, the Wailers had no choice but to agree. Dodd’s
subsequent decision to put the group on a weekly salary of
three pounds did little to ease their discontent; for that money,
they found, they were expected to be on almost permanent call
at Studio One, available around the clock to record backing


--- PAGE 51 ---
BOB MARLEY
vocals on other tracks Dodd was producing, or to coach,
rehearse, and prepare other groups. If their inquiries about
royalties or more equitable arrangements grew too strident,
Dodd referred them to the pistol he kept in his studio as the
ultimate answer to such ingratitude.
Of the three Wailers, Marley was perhaps the most dis-
tressed by the group’s relationship with Dodd. The producer
liked to tell people that he had “adopted” the Wailers, and he
had, in fact, given Marley a home of sorts, a spare room in a
shack behind the studio where the musician slept on an
unhinged wooden door laid on two cinder blocks. The musi-
cal education he was getting at Studio One was priceless, too;
constant proximity to Ernest Ranglin had improved Marley’s
guitar playing, and he was being exposed to all kinds of
intriguing new sounds that were expanding his own musical
creativity. These new sounds included those of the Beatles and
Bob Dylan; Marley would even rework Dylan’s classic “Like a
Rolling Stone” for the Wailers. Y et there was certainly some-
thing wrong when the leader of the hottest group in Jamaican
music—at one point in 1965, records by the Wailers occupied
positions one, two, three, seven, and nine on the Jamaican
charts—was living penniless in a donated shack.
MARLEY IN LOVE
Complicating the situation by the end of 1965 was Marley’s rela-
tionship with Alvarita Anderson, an aspiring nurse and teacher
who also taught Sunday school and sang with her own Motown-
inspired group, the Soulettes. The dirt path the Wailers walked
each day to Studio One wound right behind the house where
Anderson lived with her aunt, and like others in Trench T own
she was fascinated by these boys who “sounded like angels” but
looked to her, as she watched them pass by every day,“like rough
little guys. ” (At six feet, T osh was by far the tallest of the Wailers;
Marley was, at most, five-foot-eight, and Livingston was several
inches shorter than that.) Anderson, known to everyone as Rita,
44


--- PAGE 52 ---
Too Hot 45
was too shy to introduce herself, but in time a friend arranged
for the Soulettes to audition for Dodd, and she reminded the
Wailers, who were present at the time, that she was the girl they
saw each day as they went to work.
Like Bob Marley, Peter Tosh saw music as a way out of
Trench Town. Shown here in the 1980s in the midst of his
solo career, Tosh had a personality that was as charming and
outgoing as it was sometimes menacing.


--- PAGE 53 ---
BOB MARLEY
Impressed by the Soulettes, Dodd agreed to record them,
and he assigned Marley to be their “manager”—that is, to
rehearse them and prepare them for their professional debut.
The decision did not make Anderson especially happy, as she
later recalled:
Bob was very strange from them times. He didn’t talk
much, and he didn’t laugh much. He was more observ-
ing. Also, he would lead the rehearsals, and we were
46
Rita Marley’s life has been filled with the highs of having musical success
and a family that continually surrounded her, and the lows of feeling alone
and unhappy.
Yet, since her husband’s death in 1981, Rita Marley has made sure that
the world continues to remember the music of Bob Marley. She has also pro-
vided support to his 12 children—the 5 children who are her own and the 7
others that Bob Marley fathered with other women during their marriage.
(After Bob’s death, Rita had another child, named Serita, whose father is her
longtime friend, Owen Stewart.)
The young Alvarita Anderson was only five years old when her mother left
her, her brother, and their father to be with another man. For a while, Rita
bounced back and forth between the homes of her mother and her grand-
mother. But her father eventually found this ridiculous and persuaded his
childless sister to help him take care of his children in his own home.
Rita’s Aunt Viola, whom she called Aunty, was the light in her life, and Rita
grew up under Aunty’s loving guidance. The Anderson family was a musical
group, and every evening the family gathered to sing under the plum tree in
their yard. Rita’s relatives sang in church choirs and at weddings and other
celebrations. Aunty recognized Rita’s musical talents and, when Rita was 10,
she encouraged her to try out for a local radio show called 
Opportunity
Knocks. When Rita won the contest on the program, she began taking herself
seriously as a singer. Encouraged in her ambitions by her Aunt Viola—Rita’s
Rita Marley


--- PAGE 54 ---
Too Hot 47
very scared of him because of the discipline he would
put on his rehearsals and the type of harmony that we
sing. So he wasn’t a favorite of ours at that time. We
used to think that this man is very cross. Nothing but
music. No girls, no anything. He was totally differ-
ent.... He was very firm about what we were about: if
you come to the studio, you don’t come to play; you’re
here to work. As long as Marley was there, that disci-
pline was established.
father lived in England for 10 years while she was growing up—Rita contin-
ued her musical pursuits into her teen years, singing for fun with a male
cousin and a good friend. 
Rita’s plan was to be a nurse and she was trained to do that, but before
she could begin a job she became pregnant by a boy she was dating. She
gave birth to her first child, Sharon, but never married the baby’s father.
Sharon was not even a year old when Rita met a Trench Town band called the
Wailers, whose members walked by her house nearly every day. Rita and two
female friends auditioned at the Wailers’ studio, and they became the
Soulettes, the back-up group for the Wailers. The Wailers’ shy guitarist,
whom Rita knew as Robbie, soon became the love of her life. After their wed-
ding, Sharon was officially adopted by her new father. 
For many years, Rita Marley hardly had the time to pursue a musical
career—she cared for her children and sometimes worked as a nurse or as
household help to supplement the family’s income. Later, she became part of
Marley’s back-up group, known as the I-Threes, and was on tour with him
when his cancer was diagnosed. Since her husband’s death, Rita has added
several solo singles and albums to her name. In 1991 her fourth album, 
We
Must Carry On , was nominated for a Grammy. She has bought a home in
Ghana, Africa, and has plans to build a recording studio there. And, she helps
support her grandchildren—numbering at least 38—with the proceeds from
the sales of Bob Marley records.


--- PAGE 55 ---
BOB MARLEY
She was thus stunned when, after several weeks, Livingston
told her that Marley was in love with her. Even with his secret
revealed, Marley found it hard to speak of his feelings directly; he
preferred to write love letters, which Livingston would deliver.
Though she was initially attracted to T osh, who could be as out-
going and charming as he was sometimes menacing, Anderson
began to look at Marley differently. “Y ou have to be prepared to
meet him, ” she explained. “Then when you do, you find that
behind all of that he is the nicest person, like an angel. ”
His developing relationship with Anderson gave Marley one
more reason for wanting a more settled existence. Even before
the two became a couple, he was growing desperate to escape
the barren quarters Dodd had given him. His seriousness and
air of withdrawal were more than just temperament, Anderson
learned; he was literally haunted. One day, he confided in her
that he got almost no sleep at night and felt his strength was
being gradually drained from his body: A duppy had been set
upon him and did its evil work each night in the shack behind
Studio One. Anderson was extremely skeptical, but when she
spent one night with Marley in the room she was awakened
from sleep by a terrifying sensation that “felt as though some-
one came into the room and held me down. Y ou’d try to get
out of this grip and feel as though you were going into a
trance; you couldn’t speak; you couldn’t talk; you couldn’t see
anything—you just felt the sensation. ” Frightened into belief,
she brought Marley home to the house where she lived with
her aunt, who, when she realized how serious the couple were
about their relationship, agreed to build a little shack for them.
A short time later, on February 10, 1966, Bob Marley and
Rita Anderson were formally married. The ceremony did not
mean that their life together was settled in any meaningful
way, however, for on the very next day Bob left—alone—for
the United States. Discouraged by the Jamaican music busi-
ness, he knew he had to find another way, and he hoped to find
some answers in the States.
48


--- PAGE 56 ---
Bob Marley returned to Kingston in October 1966, bringing with
him the first electric guitar he ever owned and $700 to start a
record company. Just a day after his marriage to Rita, Bob had
left Kingston to join his mother in Delaware to try to sort out
his life. There, he held a succession of odd jobs—working as a
laboratory assistant, washing dishes in a restaurant, driving a
forklift in a factory, and manning the assembly line in a
Chrysler automobile plant—while laying his plans. Now, he
was back in Kingston and ready to push ahead.
Musical success had not translated into financial reward for
the Wailers; if the group was to control its own destiny, it
needed financial as well as artistic independence. Accordingly,
Marley planned to use the money he made in the United
States—a large sum by Jamaican standards—to start his own
record label, enabling the Wailers to break free of Dodd. His
return to Jamaica came at a time when dramatic changes were
5
49
The Rasta Influence


--- PAGE 57 ---
BOB MARLEY
occurring that would affect the Wailers and their music. Dur-
ing the short time he was gone, a monumental event had
occurred: In April 1966, Emperor Haile Selassie I of Ethiopia
visited Jamaica.
For the island’s Rastas, Selassie’s arrival represented much
more than the stopover of a foreign dignitary on a state visit.
It was nothing less than the incarnation of the Messiah on
Jamaican soil. For the ever-growing number of Rastas,
Selassie’s crowning as emperor of Ethiopia in 1930 had ful-
filled biblical prophecy, most notably as expressed in the fifth
chapter of Revelation, which discusses “the Lion of the tribe of
Judah. ”
Selassie’s given name, Ras Tafari Makonnen, was adopted as
the name—Rastafari—by which the new religion became
known. That religion drew on a long tradition of black
Jamaicans thinking that Ethiopia was the lost homeland and
promised holy land of an exiled people—beliefs that held
obvious appeal for a people acutely aware of their slave her-
itage. Rastas believe their religion to be the pure and uncor-
rupted culmination of Judeo-Christian traditions, as
maintained over the years in the Ethiopian Orthodox Church.
As any Rasta knows, it takes three and a half years, at the
rate of a single chapter each day, to read the Bible from Gene-
sis to Revelation, and few of the genuine believers have not
completed this task. They apply their own interpretation to its
words, however, and regard the existing Christian churches as
corrupt agents of a social system that operates to oppress
blacks. Rastas metaphorically liken their situation in Jamaica
to the captivity of the Old T estament Jews in Babylon. (In the
New T estament, Babylon is also the name of the great earthly
city in the Book of Revelation that is made “desolate” for its
sinfulness.) Jamaica is thus literally regarded as hell on earth;
Ethiopia is the lost promised land to which the faithful aspire
to return; and Zion (a biblical name for the kingdom of Israel)
is the eternal land of redemption and rest awaiting the faithful
50


--- PAGE 58 ---
The Rasta Influence 51
at the end of one’s temporal life on earth. Babylon, for the
Rasta, is this temporal existence, in all its entirety and individ-
ual facets, as well as all those workings and manifestations of
society that keep “I and I” (as the Rasta refers to himself and
the rest of the brethren) “downpressed.”
Rastas seek as little contact with the system, with Babylon,
as possible. Many refuse to vote, pay taxes, send their children
to school, or otherwise engage with society. In the early days of
the movement, from the 1930s through the 1950s, as it gained
adherents among the impoverished elements of Jamaican soci-
ety, Rastas lived close to nature in encampments in the hills of
eastern Jamaica or on the less-frequented beaches, making a
Bob Marley’s religion, Rastafari, affected his hairstyle and his
lifestyle. Marley’s renowned dreadlocks were grown in response
to his dedication to the Rastafarian faith, which prohibits the
combing or cutting of hair. Rastas also use only natural sub-
stances to wash their hair, never resorting to chemically pre-
pared shampoos and products. Marley tried to grow dreadlocks
a few times, including once in 1968, but he cut them at the insis-
tence of his mother, whom he was visiting in the United States.
Finally, in 1972, Marley committed to growing the dreadlocks for
which he later acquired much fame. Named for the dread that
they conjured up in non-Rastas because of their unkempt look,
the popularity of dreadlocks has grown through the decades.
Also as a Rastafarian, Marley was a proponent for the legal-
ization of marijuana. Rastafarians believe that marijuana should
be used as a sacrament and as an aid to meditation. Rasta lead-
ers encourage the smoking of marijuana as a religious rite and
cite discussions of its use in biblical psalms. For the Rasta, mar-
ijuana is a natural instrument of meditation given by Jah (the
Supreme Being of Rastafari) to his people. They cite numerous
biblical passages that seem to sanction its use, such as Psalms
104:14: “He causeth the grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for
the service of man: that he may bring forth food out of the earth.”
DID YOU KNOW?


--- PAGE 59 ---
BOB MARLEY
subsistence living as small farmers, artists and craftsmen, or
fishermen.
Strictly adhering to a diet they consider ital—pure, unpro-
cessed, clean—they eat mostly grains, fruits, vegetables, and
fish, and forbid the consumption of meat and shellfish; like-
wise, beverages are restricted to products that come directly
from the earth: water, juices, and herbal teas, but not milk or
coffee. Rastas disdain the use of most seasonings, like salt, and
prohibit tobacco and alcohol use, which they see as a destruc-
tive force that has been pushed on blacks by whites. “Rum
mosh up your insides, ” Marley explained, “Just kill ya, like the
system.”
The opposition of the authorities and the disdain of most
elements of Jamaican society did not slow the growth of
Rastafari. When Haile Selassie’s plane touched down in
Kingston on April 21, 1966, more than 100,000 of the
brethren awaited him on the tarmac. The size and intensity of
the gathering startled the emperor no less than it did the
Jamaican government; initially, an overwhelmed Selassie
could not be persuaded to leave his jet, and he wept when he
emerged. The reception accorded the emperor also alerted the
government that this grassroots, hill-country religion was
not, as they had long hoped, dying out. The government soon
mounted one of its periodic crackdowns on the Rastas, cul-
minating in the bulldozing of the Back O’ the Wall shanty-
town, with its many Rasta enclaves, in the summer of 1966.
The destruction only confirmed what the Rastas believed
about the nature of Babylon.
Despite Rita Marley’s upbringing in the church, she had
come to mistrust the common characterization of the Rastas
as dangerous and violent; she was moved by their poverty,
their dignity, their humility, and the simple beauty of their call
for “One Love” to unite all people. On April 21, she was among
the huge throng of Jamaicans—even more than gathered at
the airport—who lined the streets of Kingston as Haile
52


--- PAGE 60 ---
The Rasta Influence 53
Haile Selassie, the emperor of Ethiopia from 1930 to 1974,
was regarded as a messiah by the Rastafarians. When he vis-
ited Jamaica in 1966, more than 100,000 people turned out
to meet him on the airport’s tarmac. After Rita Marley saw
Haile Selassie pass in his motorcade, she was moved to con-
vert to the Rastafarian religion.


--- PAGE 61 ---
BOB MARLEY
Selassie’s motorcade passed through. With a clear view of the
emperor’s limousine, she cautiously told herself that she would
await a sign of his divinity. As she caught her first glimpse of the
Ethiopian ruler, she was disappointed. He was small and slight:
not very impressive. But then he looked directly at Rita and
waved, and she has said she saw stigmata—the wounds of the
54
Since the mid-1700s, many Jamaicans have seen Ethiopia as their African
home. In 1930, Ras Tafari Makonnen, the great-grandson of King Saheka
Selassie of Showa, became the emperor of Ethiopia. Makonnen then took the
name of His Imperial Majesty Haile Selassie I. He was considered the 225th
king in a direct line of descent from the biblical King Solomon and the Queen
of Sheba. At the time of his coronation, poor Jamaicans saw him as the ful-
fillment of a prophecy; thus began the Rastafarian religion. 
Selassie himself was never a member of the Rastafari faith, and he did not
believe the divine claims the Rastafari made of him. During the 1960s and
1970s, he worked for pan-African issues, mainly through the Organization of
African Unity. On October 4, 1963, Selassie addressed the United Nations
about important issues of the time: disarmament and the establishment of
true equality for all. The following is an excerpt of his speech, summing up
his dedication to peace:
The preservation of peace and the guaranteeing of man’s basic freedoms
and rights require courage and eternal vigilance, that the least transgres-
sion of international morality shall not go undetected and unremedied.
These lessons must be learned anew by each succeeding generation, and
that generation is fortunate indeed which learns from other than its own bit-
ter experience. This organization and each of its members bear a crushing
and awesome responsibility: to absorb the wisdom of history and to apply it
to the problems of the present, in order that future generations may be born,
and live, and die, in peace.
Selassie continued to rule Ethiopia into the 1970s, until the army seized
control of the country in 1974. Selassie was gradually stripped of his pow-
ers, and he was deposed on September 12, 1974. A year later, he was killed
in prison by order of the coup leaders.
H.I.M. Haile Selassie I


--- PAGE 62 ---
The Rasta Influence 55
crucified Christ—in the palm of his hands. Her conversion to
the Rastafarian lifestyle was virtually immediate, and she wrote
to her husband about the moving experience.
More than any single event, Marley’s embrace of Rastafari
brought about the full flowering of his artistry, helping him
order his understanding of his individual identity, the nature
of Jamaican society, and perhaps even the very meaning of
earthly existence.
IN THE BUSINESS
The other Wailers were equally drawn to Rastafari, and the
three friends began growing their hair out and living according
to Rasta tenets. Using the money Marley had earned in
Delaware, they established the Wail’N Soul’M record store and
label (later just Wail’N Soul or sometimes Wailing Souls),
named in honor of its two acts, the Wailers and the Soulettes.
Ska was no longer the sound of Jamaica; the new music was
rock steady, a slower, less frantic rhythm with a more pro-
nounced bass line that suited the Wailers just fine. Though they
recorded some first-rate sides for Wail’N Soul—“Nice Time, ”
“Thank Y ou Lord,” “Hypocrites,” and “Pyaka,” for example—
having their own record label proved no guarantee of financial
success. The business of distributing the records—usually Rita
but sometimes Bob, carried them around town to stores, radio
stations, and bars by bicycle—proved exhausting, and the label
seldom had enough cash on hand to press enough records to
keep up with demand. As a result, the group’s popularity once
again far exceeded its earnings, as the increased political and
social directness of their songs’ lyrics was finding an extremely
receptive audience among the sufferers.
Discouraged, the Marleys even left Kingston for a time to
try their hands at farming the land that Bob’s grandfather,
Omeriah Malcolm, had left him in Nine Mile. Though the
country life was difficult, it put Marley in touch with his roots.
Rita, who had spent her entire life in Kingston, said:


--- PAGE 63 ---
BOB MARLEY
It was different. I had to carry water, collect wood to
make the fire, and I had to sleep on a little, small bed
on the dirt because they didn’t have flooring. But it
was all out of love—I had decided to do so, and it
didn’t matter. I was going into the faith of Rastafari,
and I was seeking to find an independent sort of self.
Because Bob was already exposed to this lifestyle, it
was a thrill for him to see me just living it. It was some-
thing he had decided he would do eventually—just be
a farmer and stay in the country and live. So this was
always his feeling: his need to go back into the open
country, and just be himself.
This more natural way of life reinforced Marley’s newfound
faith, and it opened a wellspring of creativity in him. Many of
the songs he would record in the next few years—some of his
most powerful and well-known works, like “Stir It Up” and
“Trench T own Rock”—had their genesis during this retreat to
the countryside. Before their return to Kingston in 1970, Bob
and Rita were blessed with the birth of two children, daughter
Cedella and son David (known as Ziggy), and Bob adopted
Rita’s daughter from a previous relationship, Sharon.
PRODUCER TO PRODUCER
The music business, though, remained a struggle. At different
times, Livingston and T osh were arrested for marijuana pos-
session and had to serve fairly lengthy sentences, preventing
the group from working together. Wail’N Soul went bust, forc-
ing the Wailers to hustle up new arrangements. They made a
deal with Johnny Nash, a moderately successful black Ameri-
can singer who had become fascinated by Jamaican music.
Nash had been introduced to Marley at a Rasta gathering,
where Marley played one extraordinary song after another on
his acoustic guitar. Nash and his manager, Danny Sims, imme-
diately arranged to sign Marley to their publishing company as
56


--- PAGE 64 ---
The Rasta Influence 57
a songwriter and to place the Wailers on retainer to make
demo records for them. The arrangement provided the Wail-
ers with some badly needed income, but it did little to further
their career and limited some of their creativity.
Desperate, the group even turned to Marley’s old nemesis,
Leslie Kong. T o that point, the only full-length albums released
in Jamaica were simply collections of singles. As a “pep talk” to
themselves, the Wailers had composed and recorded a cycle of
new songs that were related by theme and reflected their reli-
gious and political concerns. They wanted Kong to release the
material as a true album, just as other important contemporary
performers, most notably the Beatles and Bob Dylan, did with
their own music. Kong dismissed their concerns and insisted on
releasing the work as The Best of the Wailers . An angry Bunny
Livingston echoed Marley’s earlier prediction to the producer:
“How can you know the best of someone’s work, when we have
such a long trod ahead of us? If this is our best to you, it must
mean that you are at the end of your life. ” Kong released the
album as he had planned. Less than a week later, he dropped
dead of a heart attack, at age 38, and Livingston’s statement, as
well as Marley’s earlier warning, was frequently recalled.
Marley foresaw an early death for himself as well, offering a
possible explanation for the almost frightening sense of
urgency he brought to his music and career. In mid-1969, he
was in Wilmington, having returned there to earn some
money on the assembly line at Chrysler. He often thought
wistfully of Jamaica and the Wailers. One day a friend tried to
console him, assuring him that he had a long life ahead in
which to produce music. “No, mon, ” Marley told him quite
seriously, “me know I going to die when 36. ”
He was back in Kingston by the end of the year. A musician
who worked with the Wailers around that time remembered
the mood being constantly somber, urgent, “always screwface, ”
as he put it. The dread aspect the Wailers were taking on as a
result of their embrace of Rastafari and incidents like the one


--- PAGE 65 ---
BOB MARLEY
with Kong did little to ease their way in the music business.
Producers preferred to work with musicians who asked fewer
questions and were less likely to stand up for their rights.
A NEW COLLABORATION
Lee Perry, however, was not afraid of the Wailers. Perry was
known as “Scratch. ” “My name is Scratch, from the beginning,
and everybody have to start from scratch, ” he explained. “Any-
one deny that, him fall.” The diminutive, talkative producer
was carving out a reputation as one of Jamaica’s greatest musi-
cal artists. Most important, he was being credited with almost
single-handedly inventing Jamaica’s new sound, a mystifyingly
hypnotic music called reggae, which featured a beat even
slower than rock steady—one that made you feel, Scratch said,
“like you stepping in glue.” Though the origin of the word is
unknown, its practitioners were sure of its meaning. “Reggae
means coming from the people, you know?” explained lead
singer T oots Hibbert of T oots and the Maytals, one of the few
Jamaican groups that can rightfully consider themselves the
Wailers’ peers. “Reggae mean regular people who are suffering,
and don’t have what they want. ”
Perry’s collaboration with the Wailers seemed natural. Like
them, he had served his time—as a DJ and a producer—with
Clement Dodd and had left feeling criminally underpaid.
Determined, he said, “to upset” the Jamaican music scene with
his new sound, he had in his employ the island’s foremost
instrumental group, after the demise of the original Skatalites
in 1965. Membership in the Hippy Boys or Upsetters, as the
band variously billed itself, alternated around the group’s two
founders and rhythm section, bassist Aston “Family Man” Bar-
rett and, on drums, Aston’s younger brother, Carlton Barrett.
As fellow Rastas and musicians, the Barretts had long wanted
to hook up with the Wailers. “We have a special respect and
love for the Wailers, and the whole concept of them,” Family
Man said. “It was good energy coming from the beginning....
58


--- PAGE 66 ---
The Rasta Influence 59
The Wailers was the best vocal group, and I group was the best
little backing band at the time, so we say why don’t we just
come together and smash the world?”
With the Barretts’ band, the Wailers worked with Perry
through late 1969 and most of 1970. It was a nearly perfect
artistic collaboration. With its simmering, percolating beats,
reggae is bass-driven music above all, and in Family Man the
When the Wailers hooked up with producer Lee “Scratch”
Perry, they added the brothers Aston “Family Man” Barrett
and Carlton Barrett. With Aston Barrett’s instrumental support,
the Wailers took on the sound for which they are best known.
Many fans regard these recordings as the Wailers’ greatest.


--- PAGE 67 ---
BOB MARLEY
Wailers had one of the world’s best guitarists (as attested to by
no less a musical authority than Miles Davis, the peerless
American jazz trumpeter). Family Man was an unusually
melodic player who was also a thunderous rhythmic force.
Carlton Barrett was almost as inspired a player. Despite per-
sonal differences, Perry and Marley immediately established
an artistic relationship so close that it was difficult to see,
musically, where one left off and the other began.
Counting on Aston Barrett to oversee the instrumentals,
Marley began referring to Family Man as his “melodic super-
intendent,” and with his instrumental support the Wailers
took on the sound for which they are best known. Without
ska’s frantic pace, horns, and instrumentation, there was much
more space in this music, even more than rock steady had
allowed Marley. The Wailers’ vocal harmonies became less
studied, rougher, more natural, less consciously imitative of
American vocal groups. For Marley, the music was endlessly
open, receptive to all kinds of influence and experimentation,
including American-style rhythm and blues and doo-wop,
church-style backing vocals, tinges of rock guitar, burru drum-
ming, even modern jazz. This openness allowed him to com-
bine his talent for buoyant, infectious melodies with lyrics that
displayed a genuine gift for simple yet poetic language, mixing
Rastafarian, biblical, and folk wisdom with homespun
metaphors, distilled observation, and ever-more-direct social
and political criticism.
Though less widely distributed than his later work, and thus
less well known, the early recordings that Marley and the Wail-
ers made with Perry are regarded by many devotees as their
best. Many would become staples of Marley and the Wailers’
song catalog and live performances: “Small Axe, ”“Duppy Con-
queror,” “Lively Up Y ourself,” “Kaya,” and T osh’s “400 Y ears.” In
them, Marley proudly proclaimed that a new day had come;
armed with the power of Rastafari, the sufferers could be made
free. Jail could not hold them, nor even the power of the dead,
60


--- PAGE 68 ---
The Rasta Influence 61
as he explained in “Duppy Conqueror”: “The bars could not
hold me / Force could not control me, now / They try to keep
me down / But Jah put I around ... I’m a duppy conqueror.”
But there were still some problems that the Wailers could not
overcome. Perry packaged the sides the group had recorded for
him as three albums— Soul Rebels,Soul Revolution(sold in some
markets as Rasta Revolution), and African Herbsman—that he
sold for distribution in Great Britain and the United States,
where large Jamaican immigrant communities created a mar-
ket. Unfortunately, as Bunny Livingston explained, “We have
never made one dime from any of them. Perry refused to give us
our money when it came time for us to collect. He said he had
decided to just give us some royalties. But we have never seen
anything at all. Nothing. Not one penny. ” When Perry behaved
similarly regarding royalties from the Jamaican sales of the
records, particularly “Duppy Conqueror, ” Marley, Livingston,
and T osh, with little other recourse, beat him up. A fellow musi-
cian teased them, implying that the crazy dreads had only got-
ten what they deserved: “Hey, only a Rastaman dare sing about
duppy. ” Though Marley would work with Perry again on occa-
sion, the partnership was broken.
On the brink of greater stardom, the Wailers again turned to
the alternative of establishing their own label. Their production
company, Tuff Gong, was split in an almost equal three-way
partnership among the original Wailers, with Marley holding
the slight majority share. Besides financing the start-up cost of
the venture, Alan “Skill” Cole, a close friend of Marley’s and
Jamaica’s greatest soccer star, stayed on with the Wailers in an
unofficial yet most important capacity. Counteracting the long-
time payoff arrangements between the larger labels and the
handful of Jamaican radio stations, Cole applied the necessary
muscle to get air time for the Wailers. Cole said:
We have to go up there and have to beat boy. We go and
fight a system where they just have money power. We


--- PAGE 69 ---
BOB MARLEY
are on the street; we are street boy. We beat program
director, disc jockey. Conk them up in them head and
kick them batty. They was fighting us because we was
Rastas. Bob Marley was the singer; he was a quiet little
brethren. Can’t do nothing more than be quiet and give
you the best lyrics and the best music. So me just deal
with things the right and proper way.
Cole’s muscle, however, was not necessary to help the first
release on Tuff Gong in 1971. “One good thing about music:
when it hits, you feel no pain, ” Marley wrote and sang on
“Trench T own Rock,” and the sufferers clearly agreed with
him. The song topped the Jamaican charts for five months. For
Bunny Livingston, “Trench T own Rock” represented the Wail-
ers’ true breakthrough, “the tune that made us really start to
search. ” Peter T osh confirmed, “We were now gone into a
twelfth dimension. ”
THE WORLD DISCOVERS REGGAE
As the Wailers were catching fire in Jamaica, reggae was break-
ing through on the international scene. Johnny Nash’s reggae-
tinged blockbuster album I Can See Clearly Now , featuring
four songs written by Marley, went to number one on charts
around the world, including the United States. Barbra
Streisand was among the many singers who covered at least
one of the Marley compositions from the album—in this case,
“Guava Jelly. ” In the wake of the album’s success, Nash’s man-
ager, Danny Sims, arranged for Marley to go to Stockholm,
Sweden, to work on songs for the soundtrack of a planned film
starring Nash.
A short time later, a low-budget movie filmed in Kingston,
starring Jimmy Cliff as a talented young musician driven by
ghetto life and the greed of the music industry to become an
outlaw, was released in the United States. The Harder They
Come became one of the longest-running and highest-gross-
62


--- PAGE 70 ---
The Rasta Influence 63
ing cult films in U.S. history. Its epic reggae soundtrack, fea-
turing tunes by a number of the Wailers’ contemporaries, did
equally well. While Nash’s versions were watered-down,
homogenized reggae suited for American pop radio and
devoid of political content, The Harder They Come was the
real thing. Reggae was no longer Jamaica’s secret, and
Kingston was on its way to becoming the “Third World
Nashville. ” Among white rock musicians, like Eric Clapton
and the Rolling Stones, reggae was soon to become the
hippest new sound.
Only one step remained to complete this transformation.
From Stockholm, where the cold Scandinavian weather made
for an unpleasant stay, Marley was sent by Sims to London,
England. The movie had fallen through, but he was to be
joined there by the other Wailers, to back Nash on a concert
Reggae musician Jimmy Cliff (center) was the star of the 1972 movie The
Harder They Come. The film became a cult classic in the United States.
After its release, the audience for reggae broadened beyond Jamaica.


--- PAGE 71 ---
BOB MARLEY
tour. As with many of Sims’s ventures, however, this too fell
apart, and after just one gig, the Wailers found themselves
stranded in cold, rainy England without enough money for
return tickets home. T o make matters worse, the group mem-
bers got busted for a package of marijuana sent to their Lon-
don address by some Kingston friends.
64


--- PAGE 72 ---
Despite all of the frustrations he was experiencing as he tried to
popularize the Wailers and their music, Bob Marley did not
give up. He went to see Chris Blackwell, the founder and head
of Island, England’s largest and most successful independent
record company. It was after meeting with Blackwell that
Marley and the Wailers finally had license to focus on their
creativity, rather than their poor financial status. T o every-
one’s surprise, Blackwell advanced the Wailers the equivalent
of about $20,000 to return to Jamaica and record a true
album. He then spent another large sum of money to buy the
Wailers out of their arrangement with Sims. He even allowed
Tuff Gong to maintain the right to distribute the group’s
material in Jamaica. At last, the Wailers had a record agree-
ment that promised to be creatively and financially profitable
to them.
6
65
Free to Sing


--- PAGE 73 ---
BOB MARLEY
Many people in the music industry thought Blackwell had
taken leave of his senses to gamble on a group of reggae artists.
T o date, no individual reggae artist or group had demonstrated
the ability to sell an album in the British and American markets,
which is where Blackwell intended to “break” the Wailers. More-
over, of all the Jamaican acts he could have chosen, the Wailers
had the reputation of being the most difficult. Blackwell’s advi-
sors and other musicians told him to kiss the money good-bye,
that “those crazy Rastas” would return to Jamaica and that
would be the last he would ever hear from them.
But Blackwell had very good reasons for his actions. A
member of a prosperous Anglo-Jamaican family, Blackwell
had spent much of his childhood in Jamaica and revered its
culture and music. As a teenager, he had developed enormous
respect for Rastas when they came to his assistance after a
boating accident left him hurt and stranded on a remote part
of the island. He perceptively understood that Marley’s Rasta
beliefs and political convictions were essential to his greatness
as an artist—and even purely from a marketing standpoint, he
regarded them as a help rather than a hindrance.
T o Blackwell, Marley was the real-life counterpart of the
character Jimmy Cliff played in The Harder They Come,a
“rebel-type character” perfect for the rock music market. The
record executive savvily recognized that “what Bob Marley
believed in and how he lived his life was something that had
tremendous appeal for the media.... Now here was this Third
World superstar who had a different point of view, an indi-
vidual against the system, who also had an incredible look:
this was the first time you had seen anyone looking like that,
other than Jimi Hendrix. And Bob had that power about him,
and incredible lyrics. ” Given all this, Marley’s reputation as
“trouble, ” in Blackwell’s words, bothered him not a bit: “In my
experience when people are described like that, it usually just
means that they know what they want. ”
66


--- PAGE 74 ---
Free to Sing 67
CATCH A FIRE
The first true reggae album, Catch a Fire, was released in Great
Britain in December 1972 and in the United States soon after.
Though not initially an enormous seller, the album justified
Blackwell’s faith in the Wailers, garnering lavish praise from
critics in Great Britain and the United States. If some listeners
in those countries were puzzled by this new Jamaican music,
the sufferers had no trouble understanding the references in
such songs as “Slave Driver, ” “400 Y ears, ” and “Concrete Jun-
gle. ” Jamaican poet Linton Kwesi Johnson described Catch a
Fire as a landmark: “A whole new style of Jamaican music has
come into being. It has a different character, a different sound
... what I can only describe as ‘International Reggae. ’ It incor-
porates elements from popular music internationally: rock
and soul, blues and funk. ”
T o support the album, the Wailers toured Great Britain and
the United States, another first for a reggae group. Though in
the recent past they had only infrequently played live in
Jamaica, years of rehearsing and recording together had made
the Wailers a precise live act, able to live up to the under-
ground word of mouth that preceded them. At the Speakeasy
Club in London, the aristocracy of the British rock world—
Mick Jagger, Traffic, Bryan Ferry—turned out for the Wailers’
sets and were not disappointed. “Bob had such charisma, ” said
Mick Cater, who was assigned by Island to help the group with
its travel arrangements. “He was the best live act there’s ever
been, both with Peter and Bunny and later without them. A
complete powerhouse onstage, but off, nothing like that, just
very quiet. ”
But the warm reception the Wailers received was not suffi-
cient to hide new tensions within the group. The unfamiliar
grind of one-night stands in strange cities was especially wear-
ing on Livingston, who was always unhappy anywhere but in
Jamaica and often went days without eating when he could not


--- PAGE 75 ---
BOB MARLEY
get unprocessed food. T osh, meanwhile, was growing uncom-
fortable with what he regarded as an increasing emphasis on
Marley as the star, leader, and virtually sole songwriter of the
group, which he believed was part of a conscious plan by Mar-
ley and Blackwell. Livingston and T osh stayed on to record the
group’s second album, the uncompromising Burnin’ ,in early
1973, but that June, Livingston announced he would not be
part of the summer tour in the United States. (As a solo artist,
he changed his name to Bunny Wailer.) His place was taken by
68
Peter Tosh, one of the original members of the Wailers, is considered a
founding father of reggae. Tosh grew up in Trench Town, just a few blocks
from Bob Marley’s home. As a teenager, Tosh joined Marley and his friend,
Bunny Livingston, to form the Wailers. In the beginning, the tall Peter Tosh
told people he was the leader of the group and, like Marley, he saw music
as his only way out of Trench Town. Although the group’s other members were
very serious about their future, Tosh seemed even more serious.
It wasn’t long after the Wailers became a success that Tosh struck out on
his own. Tosh disagreed with music producer Chris Blackwell over finances
and, when Blackwell’s Island Records refused to pick up his solo album, he
quit the Wailers. With the help of Eric Clapton—who made the Wailers’ “I
Shot the Sheriff” a huge hit—and a network of others, Tosh recorded some
of his first tapes at CBS Studios in New York City. In 1975, his songs “Watcha
Gonna Do,” “Can’t Blame the Youth,” and “Legalize It”—recorded after a par-
ticularly harrowing police arrest for marijuana possession—were all banned
from Jamaican radio stations. Meanwhile, all copies sold out: “Legalize It” is
still one of Jamaica’s top-selling singles.
Tosh released five solo albums from 1976 to 1981. In 1981, his 
Wanted
Dread and Alive album climbed to No. 91 on Billboard magazine’s pop charts.
His next album, Mama Africa from 1983, went to No. 59. Tosh’s outspoken
support for the legalization of marijuana continued to cause violent run-ins
with Jamaican authorities, causing the musician to retreat to Africa in the
early 1980s. Tosh released other well-received albums—including his last,
No Nuclear War— before his death at age 42 in 1987, when he was killed by
unknown assailants in his home in Jamaica.
Peter Tosh


--- PAGE 76 ---
Free to Sing 69
Joe Higgs, and the Wailers played to enormous acclaim in var-
ious clubs in the Northeast, including Max’s Kansas City in
New Y ork, where they opened for an up-and-coming singer
named Bruce Springsteen.
By that time, Burnin’had been released. The album featured
reworkings of old Wailers material like “Small Axe” and
“Duppy Conqueror” as well as new songs: immediate classics
like “I Shot the Sheriff, ” “Burnin’ and Lootin’ ,” and “Rastaman
Chant,” an actual Rasta prayer sung to the accompaniment of
burru drums. Burnin’was immediately hailed as a reggae mas-
terpiece. It marked the end of the original Wailers, however.
During the British club tour that followed at the end of 1973,
the increasingly disgruntled T osh left the group. Alluding to
the Wailers’ notorious dislike for cold weather, Island
explained the cancellation of the remaining dates of the tour
with a simple communiqué: “It snowed. ”
Though hurt by his friends’ defection, Marley was also
relieved. He had little stomach for the silent tension and angry
outbursts that had characterized the trio’s relationship while
on the road. Never one to allow anything to interfere with his
own creative drive, he was increasingly less willing to compro-
mise to maintain group harmony.
A NEW GROUP
From that point forward, the group would be Bob Marley and
the Wailers, with no question as to who was the leader. Marley
expanded the group’s sound, adding to the Barretts, at various
intervals, young keyboard wizards Earl “Wire” Lindo and
Tyrone Downie, guitarists Al Anderson and Junior Marvin, his
old friend Seeco Patterson on percussion, and the I-Threes—
Rita Marley, Marcia Griffiths, and Judy Mowatt—on backing
vocals. If reggae purists sometimes decried the rock tinge that
the addition of the guitarists brought about, there was no
denying that the revamped Wailers constituted an ensemble of
unparalleled vocal and instrumental power. “One time I hear


--- PAGE 77 ---
BOB MARLEY
them say we finish with the tour, ” Family Man remembered
about the troubles with T osh and Livingston. “I think, ‘Finish
with it?’ I think the tour just get started. ”
The new group was first heard on record in late 1974, when
Natty Dread was released. The record was, in many ways, Mar-
ley’s most outspoken yet, featuring such melodic, militant,
poetic anthems as “Talkin’ Blues, ” “Revolution, ” “Them Belly
Full (But We Hungry), ” and “Rebel Music, ” as well as the
haunting, lovely “No Woman, No Cry. ”
Natty Dread was recorded over several months in 1974 in
Jamaica, where Marley, having achieved a certain level of the
success that had long eluded him, relaxed into an almost set-
tled way of life, at least for him. While his wife and their four
children lived in a modern house in the Rasta enclave at Bull
Bay, 10 miles east of Kingston, he spent much of his time at
70
The I-Threes sang backing vocals for Bob Marley and the Wailers. They
were (from left) Judy Mowatt, Rita Marley, and Marcia Griffiths. Of the
performances, Mowatt said, “It was a clean feeling: you leave a concert
as though you have learned something, have gained something.”


--- PAGE 78 ---
Free to Sing 71
Island House, the rambling home at 56 Hope Road, in a tony
section of Kingston, that Blackwell had sold to him.
LIFE OFF THE STAGE
At Island House, he occupied a small upstairs bedroom,
unfurnished and undecorated except for a small mattress, a
portrait of Haile Selassie on the wall, and his ever-present gui-
tar. Various Rastas and musicians were always in residence or
coming and going from the house, as were one or another of
Marley’s lovers, who included the acclaimed Jamaican actress
Esther Anderson; the women’s table tennis champion of the
Caribbean, Anita Belnavis; and the stunningly beautiful Cindy
Breakespeare, who would be named Miss World in 1976.
Sometimes Marley escaped with these companions to various
hideaways he had around the island; his grandfather’s house at
Nine Mile also remained a refuge for him.
This “gypsy” aspect of Marley’s personality, as a friend char-
acterized it, was no secret to those close to him, including his
wife: “It is something you learn to live with over a period of
time, ” Rita Marley said. “I think Bob had such a lack of love
when he was growing up. He seemed to be trying to prove to
himself whether someone loved him and how much they loved
him. There came a time when I had to say to him, ‘If that’s
what you want, then I’ll have to learn to live with it. ’” Indeed,
Rita opened up her home and helped raise many of the chil-
dren Marley fathered outside the marriage, all of whom he
acknowledged and supported. Although he was not constantly
living at Bull Bay, Bob and Rita’s daughter Cedella recalled that
“he was around, ” and that “it was kind of strict at home: you
came home, you did your homework, and you went to bed. ”
At 56 Hope Road, Marley maintained a similar kind of dis-
cipline. Able to function with very little sleep, he was unfail-
ingly the last one to bed at night—Judy Mowatt remembers
that “if you went to Bob’s room at midnight, one o’clock, three
o’clock, Bob would be playing a song”—and the first awake,


--- PAGE 79 ---
BOB MARLEY
usually with the sun. Most mornings, Alan Cole led Marley
and company on a training run, a “little eye-opener, ” as Mar-
ley called it, that sometimes stretched out as far as 18 miles.
Afterward, if there were no rehearsals or recording sessions
scheduled, Marley liked to sit with his guitar on the steps of
the back porch, one of his favorite spots for writing songs.
Such days were always punctuated with the frequent sacra-
mental intake of marijuana, followed by the freewheeling,
imaginative Rasta discussions known as “reasonings. ” And it
was the rare afternoon that passed by without some kind of
soccer game, the singer himself being a superb player of virtu-
ally professional caliber.
At some point, Marley would meet with the many people
who came to the house each day seeking his counsel. They
included friends; fellow musicians; gunmen, rudies, and
dreads from the ghetto; and poor people looking for help or
money. According to Gilly Gilbert, the cook at the house who
prepared such ital dishes as green banana porridge and fish
head stew, “People come, hungry, and him try for help hungry
people and poor people. Some him help, appreciate it, some
no appreciate.... He try to help everyone, please everyone.”
Friends say that Marley sometimes gave away as much as
$40,000 at such sessions.
“He gave whatever to whoever. He didn’t prize material
things. And he didn’t prize money. And he would always say
that it was just passing through, so it wasn’t important.... I
think he felt that that was part of his role in life—to do for
others and to give to others, and I think he felt very blessed
because of the level of inspiration and the work that he had
been called to do, ” said Cindy Breakespeare, who is the mother
of Marley’s son Damian, aka Junior Gong.
A SUPERSTAR
Despite his lack of interest in being a celebrity, Natty Dread
catapulted Marley into true international superstardom. The
72


--- PAGE 80 ---
Free to Sing 73
way had been prepared the previous summer, when Eric Clap-
ton’s cover of “I Shot the Sheriff” became a huge hit in Great
Britain and the United States. Marley and the “new” Wailers
The release of the album Natty Dread propelled Bob Marley
to international stardom. His performances were often emo-
tional for those attending. A critic for The Washington Post
called a concert by Bob Marley and the Wailers “an apoca-
lypse you can dance to.”


--- PAGE 81 ---
BOB MARLEY
thus went out on the road in the summer of 1975 to a tumult
of acclaim—interviews, magazine covers, sold-out shows at
ever-larger venues. The five shows at the Lyceum Ballroom in
London were recorded for a concert album, Live!, which fea-
tured a particularly moving rendition of “No Woman, No Cry”
and succeeded in capturing the live power of the “Trench
T own experience, ” the tag with which stage announcers some-
times introduced Marley and the Wailers.
Indeed, the magnitude of the emotions generated by Marley
onstage could be overwhelming. A listener at one of Marley’s
concerts, wrote a critic for The Washington Post , “would have
thought it was a political rally or a religious revival, not a pop
concert ... an apocalypse you can dance to. ” The first time she
saw her son perform, in Philadelphia in 1976, Cedella Marley
Booker was inspired to convert to Rastafari. Indeed, Marley
and his fellow musicians regarded themselves as missionaries,
dedicated to spreading the truth of Jah Rastafari. Judy Mowatt
remembered:
It was a crusade, it was a mission. We were like
sentinels, like lights. On tour the shows were like
church: Bob delivering his sermon. There were mixed
74
Global unity was the call from Bob Marley throughout his musical career. His
song “One Love” has become a simple two-word greeting by people around
the world. 
One love, one heart
Let’s get together and feel all right
Hear the children crying (One love)
Hear the children crying (One heart)
Sayin’, “Give thanks and praise to the Lord and I will feel all right.”
Sayin’, “Let’s get together and feel all right.”
IN HIS OWN WORDS…


--- PAGE 82 ---
Free to Sing 75
emotions in the audience: you see people literally cry-
ing, people in a frenzy, on a spiritual high.... There was
a power that pulled you there. It was a clean feeling:
you leave a concert as though you have learned some-
thing, have gained something.
Marley saw himself mainly as a peaceful “soul rebel. ” “Me
only have one ambition,” he asserted. “I only have one thing I
really like to see happen. I like to see mankind live together—
black, white, Chinese, everyone—that’s all.... I don’t come
down on you really with blood and fire, earthquake and light-
ning, but you must know, see, that within me all that exists,
too. ” Despite the mellow, sinuous melodies, Marley’s music
expressed some of the anger within, in his calls to “Stir It Up”
and “Get Up, Stand Up. ” “Slave driver, the table is turned /
Catch a fire so you can get burned, ” he sang on “Slave Driver. ”
“Ev’ry time I hear the crack of the whip / My blood runs cold. ”
GOVERNMENT OPPOSITION
Such messages greatly unsettled the political authorities in
Jamaica. The government strongly urged the tourist board and
other outlets to play down Jamaica’s association with reggae,
Rasta, and especially Marley. “We obviously face a contradic-
tion between the message of urban poverty and protest which
reggae conveys and that of pleasure and relaxation inherent in
our holiday product, ” read an internal Jamaica T ourist Board
memo dated October 10, 1975. “In short, when we promote
reggae music we are promoting an aspect of Jamaican culture
which is bound to draw attention to some of the harsher cir-
cumstances of our lives. ”
As these circumstances grew harsher, official opposition to
Marley intensified. The U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)
designated him for its “most-watched” list in Jamaica, and the
American ambassador told the head of his British record label
that the U.S. government was not happy about Marley, that “he


--- PAGE 83 ---
BOB MARLEY
was capable of destabilizing” the situation in the Caribbean.
After the release of Rastaman Vibration in 1976, the Jamaican
government formally banned four Marley songs from the
radio—“War, ” “Crazy Baldheads, ” “Who the Cap Fit, ” and “Rat
Race. ” As Marley became embroiled in the heightened tensions
during an election year in Jamaica, his life—like that of many
prophets before him—became endangered by those who
wished to silence his message of social justice.
In the previous national elections, held in 1972, Marley
openly supported the experiment in “democratic socialism”
proposed by Michael Manley, the leader of the People’s
National Party (PNP) and winner of the election. In contrast
to the conservative Jamaica Labour Party (JLP) agenda, the
PNP’s program was more appealing to Marley and other Ras-
tas because of its emphasis on various social programs for the
sufferers; its emphasis on socialism as opposed to capitalism as
a means of redistributing wealth more fairly among the vari-
ous levels of Jamaican society; restrictions on foreign exploita-
tion of Jamaican resources; and a foreign policy that moved
Jamaica closer toward Cuba and other Caribbean nations
(many of them predominantly black) and further from the
United States. In addition, Manley reached out to the Rasta
community, receiving an audience with Haile Selassie and
speaking positively of the Rastas’ cultural influence.
By 1976, Marley’s Rasta faith had become more militant.
Disillusioned by Manley’s failure to legalize marijuana and by
his creation of special courts that harshly dispensed summary
justice to poor blacks, Marley was reluctant to support the
PNP for re-election. Nonetheless, he was certainly more
inclined toward the PNP , with its slogans of “Power to the Peo-
ple” and “Better Must Come, ” than he was to Edward Seaga’s
conservative JLP , which had the backing of the CIA. Specifying
several conditions, Marley finally assented to the Manley gov-
ernment’s request that he play a concert. The performance on
December 5 at the National Heroes Circle Stadium was to be a
76


--- PAGE 84 ---
Free to Sing 77
nonpolitical, nonpartisan event. With the free concert, Marley
wished to thank Jamaicans for their support of his musical
career, a gesture that he hoped would help bring a year plagued
by election-related violence to a peaceful close. The concert
would be named after his latest single release, “Smile Jamaica, ”
a lighthearted declaration of his pride in his Jamaican identity.
The Manley government agreed to Marley’s conditions, but
almost immediately after the singer announced his plans for
the concert, the PNP declared that the national elections
would be held 15 days later, on December 20. The proximity of
the two dates made it appear as if Marley’s Smile Jamaica con-
cert was intended to be an endorsement of the PNP . Now Mar-
ley began receiving death threats.
As the day of the concert approached, the pressure
mounted. A PNP vigilante squad set up a 24-hour armed
guard outside Marley’s home at 56 Hope Road. The security
hardly made Marley, the Wailers, or the I-Threes feel safer as
they continued with their daily rehearsals. At this point Mar-
ley was nearly as great an irritant to the PNP as he was to the
JLP; perhaps the government would not mind if he were out of
the way. Perhaps he was being set up; the authorities could
always blame the JLP for any harm that came to him.
The constant tension undermined the Wailers’ usual musical
cohesiveness, and rehearsals proceeded fitfully. By late Novem-
ber, Marcia Griffiths, one of the I-Threes, became so unnerved
that she told Marley she could not perform with him and left
Jamaica. Another member of the trio, Judy Mowatt, was having
ominous recurring dreams, which she interpreted as meaning
that something awful was going to happen to Marley. Marley
himself was haunted by a shadowy dream in which he was pur-
sued by the sound of “pure gunshot. ”
ASSASSINS ATTACK
Around nine o’clock on the night of December 3, Marley and
the Wailers had just taken a short break from rehearsals.


--- PAGE 85 ---
BOB MARLEY
Marley had stepped into the kitchen to eat a grapefruit. From
the porch of 56 Hope Road, percussionist Seeco Patterson
noticed, with some concern, that the PNP vigilantes had dis-
appeared. Suddenly, two white cars drove into the compound.
Six gunmen exited the vehicles and began firing at the house
with automatic weapons. Two of them burst inside, shooting
wildly at anything that moved, and then the murderous
entourage vanished into the night.
Don Taylor, Marley’s manager, took four bullets in the back
and was initially pronounced dead at a Kingston hospital
before being airlifted to Miami, Florida, for surgery that saved
his life. A bullet grazed Rita Marley’s skull and knocked her
unconscious. Marley was wounded in the chest and left arm.
After being treated that night at a Kingston hospital, he
retreated to a home in the Blue Mountains owned by Island
Records chief Chris Blackwell. There, in seclusion, guarded by
a cadre of machete-wielding local Rastas, Marley pondered
what to do while rumors about his condition and the identity
and motives of his assailants swept the island.
Two days later, Marley was quiet as his escorts drove him
down the mountainside. His whereabouts had been a secret,
the subject of frenzied speculation. He was wounded; he was
unharmed. He was safe; he was dead. He would appear tonight
and prophesy for the people; no, he was gone, into exile in
England or Florida, on some other island or in some safer
place than the tortured paradise of Jamaica.
Sitting with Marley in the backseat of the red Volvo, the
police commissioner opened a small briefcase. Removing the
components of a submachine gun, he quickly assembled the
weapon. The officer in the passenger seat in front did the
same, as did those riding in the other vehicles in the swift-
moving motorcade. Just in case, the commissioner assured
the still-silent prophet, who was now wearing his famous
screwface. Marley’s message was with that expression: Do not
mess with me.
78


--- PAGE 86 ---
Free to Sing 79
“He would wear a screwface to keep people away, ” a friend
explained. “When you are pure in heart, you can feel when
impurity comes near you. The spirits don’t mesh. ” Another
friend agreed. “Him only shield he could wear was him noted
screwface, ” this man recalled. It was a means of self-protection
familiar to his fellow sufferers, learned from hard times and
hard knocks at the hands of the “downpressers.” The prophet
was “born screw, ” Rita Marley once said. “Him not have to
make it up. ”
His wife, her own head bandaged where a bullet had grazed
her skull, had begged him not to go with these men down the
mountain. Marley was still wearing bandages over his bullet
wounds. In front, the car’s radio crackled. One of Marley’s
guards spoke into a walkie-talkie, then listened intently and
relayed the information to him. The crowd at the National
Heroes Circle Stadium in Kingston, their destination, was
growing by the minute. Rumors that Marley’s appearance had
been canceled, even that he was dead, had not discouraged the
people. By four o’clock that afternoon, 50,000 spectators had
gathered at the stadium. The crowd then swelled to up to
80,000.
Outside the window of the automobile, a gentle Jamaican
December night was softly falling as the motorcade wound its
way down the mountainside. In the slowly gathering dusk,
firelight flickered here and there, leaping upward from rusty
metal barrels and stacks of recently gathered scrapwood—the
bonfires around which the sufferers gathered to cook, to
socialize, to talk, to sing, to remember the other nights they
had spent like this, and to remind one another to “no cry. ”
Marley had spent many nights like this, around the fire “with
the good people we meet” at the house of his friend, Tartar.
With those friends, he had not worn the screwface. Back then
he had smiled in his soft way and laughed and sang with them
all as his friend Georgie kept the fire burning, until at last he
would go to bed, alone on a wood table in a cold corner of a


--- PAGE 87 ---
BOB MARLEY
friend’s kitchen. He was one of them, the sufferers knew; even
death could never take him from them. “Cold ground was my
bed last night, and rock was my pillow too, ” Marley sang to and
of the sufferers in “Talkin’ Blues.”
Now fire glinted behind the window of the automobile as
Marley lit a marijuana cigarette. He inhaled rapidly and deeply as
the commissioner and his officers pretended that nothing out of
the ordinary was taking place. For the first time that night, his
taunt facial expression—the screwface—started to relax.
Then the line of cars slowed, and the screwface returned.
This was not the National Heroes Circle Stadium. Here the
fires burned brighter, and mobs of people flooded the street,
surrounding the cars, rocking them, peering through the win-
dows. Huge bonfires blazed, and amplified dance music crack-
led through tinny loudspeakers. This was, Marley immediately
realized, the stronghold of the JLP . Somehow, the motorcade
had blundered into a JLP “garrison” in the middle of an elec-
tion rally.
DANGER AGAIN
“JLP War Zone” proclaimed the brightly colored letters on the
neighborhood’s cinderblock walls, and that was no exaggera-
tion. The ghettos of Kingston were divided into many such
garrisons, each of them claimed and controlled by gunmen
loyal to the two rival political parties, the JLP and the PNP . In
the ghettos, where most of Jamaica’s voters lived, the parties
fought for allegiance, buying loyalty with jobs, housing, and
handouts, and enforcing it at the barrel of a gun. Party loyalty
in Jamaica was almost akin to religious faith, and national
elections were contested in an atmosphere just short of out-
right civil war. T o back the wrong party could cost people
their jobs, their houses, even their lives. The “ranking” gun-
men of each party became celebrities in their own right, pow-
erful figures revered as Robin Hoods by their followers,
reviled as gangsters and terrorists by their opponents. The
80


--- PAGE 88 ---
Free to Sing 81
1976 election campaign had already been the bloodiest in
Jamaica’s history.
The JLP faithful did not warmly receive the intrusion of a
government motorcade into their garrison. They swarmed
around the vehicles, undeterred by the sight of police uni-
forms or the sirens whirring on the vehicles’ roofs, slowing the
progress of the cars to a crawl and then a complete halt. They
peered inside the windows, trying to see who had dared breech
their stronghold.
Those inside the vehicles were not much happier. Was it a
mistake that had brought them here or more “poli-tricks,” as
the sufferers called it, of the same kind that had gotten Marley
and his wife and friends shot up in their home two nights ear-
lier? The shootings had clearly been a setup of some kind,
since the government guards appointed to patrol around the
house strangely disappeared just before the gunmen burst in
and began firing. Only Jah had allowed his prophet to survive.
Was he now being delivered to his enemies, handed over for
elimination, by his self-proclaimed friends in the PNP , whose
integrity he had good cause to mistrust? Was the botched
assassination now to be finished off properly?
Chanting campaign slogans, the crowd only seemed to grow
larger and more agitated. What thoughts the screwface hid then
are unknown, for in the dusk and firelight he was recognized.
Beside him, the police commissioner went unnoticed, but there
was no mistaking the identity of the man with the untamed
lion’s mane of dreadlocks, the wispy growth of beard on the
chin and lower jaw, the light brown skin, the deep-set, dark,
soulful eyes, the prideful carriage, and the indomitable air that
seemed to proclaim, as he had once said about himself: “I don’t
come to bow. I come to conquer. ”
In an instant, the identity of the passenger spread through
the crowd, his name whispered at first, like a curse or a bless-
ing—in either circumstance something too sacred or powerful
to be uttered aloud. It traveled to the outermost fringes of the


--- PAGE 89 ---
BOB MARLEY
crowd and then, like a wave gathering momentum, returned
inward, gaining in power and volume as the onlookers, as if
collectively obeying some unspoken order, parted to let the
motorcade pass. As they did so, they called out his name, the
solidarity of the sufferers, for this moment at least, overpow-
ering the partisan call of poli-tricks.
“Bob Mar-ley! Bob Mar-ley! Bob Mar-ley!” they chanted
over and over again, and the screwface dissolved into a gentle
smile, then laughter.
The cheers of the crowd receded as the motorcade rolled
onward, only to be replaced by a deeper roar, heard first through
the crackling static on the walkie-talkie and then outside, all
around them, filling the night. They were approaching the
National Heroes Circle Stadium, and the huge throng there had
just heard an official announcement from the stage: Bob Marley
was not only alive but was just minutes away. He would, as orig-
inally promised, sing for the people that evening.
82


--- PAGE 90 ---
Most of Bob Marley’s band was stillin hiding, and his wife, Rita,
had just been released from the hospital and was waiting back-
stage, dressed in her hospital gown and bandages. Upon reach-
ing the stadium, Marley was embraced by Michael Manley and
surrounded by a protective circle of 200 musicians and
friends, offering themselves as human shields in case snipers
were hiding among the otherwise ecstatic crowd of 80,000
people. It took Marley several minutes to quiet the roar that
the throng sent up when it heard the stage announcer pro-
claim: “The great, the great, the great, the great Bob Marley!”
“When me decided to do this here concert two-and-a-half
months ago, ” Marley said, “me was told there was no poli-
tics. ” He shook his dreadlocks in disgust. “I just wanted to
play for the love of the people. ” Explaining that he was
unable, because of his wounds, to play the guitar, he said he
would sing just one song. Then he let loose an unearthly,
7
83
Dancing in the Spirit


--- PAGE 91 ---
BOB MARLEY
reverberating wail, equal parts rebel cry and the screech of a
jungle bird, that cued the pickup group of crack reggae musi-
cians assembled onstage.
84
Two days after he was shot in December 1976, Bob Marley
performed in the Smile Jamaica concert at the National
Heroes Circle Stadium in Kingston. At the beginning of the
concert, he told the crowd of 80,000 that he would sing one
song. Then he performed for the next 90 minutes.


--- PAGE 92 ---
Dancing in the Spirit 85
Shaking his mane of dreadlocks, bobbing up and down and
dancing, feet together, in the movement he called the “rebel’s
hop, ” Marley brought his right hand to his temple and then
extended it, forefinger first, toward his audience—a prophet’s
gesture, admonishing them to listen to what he had to say.
Then he chanted as much as sang the opening words to a song
from his most recent album, one that he had never played
before an audience in his homeland. “What life has taught
me, ” he sang, “I would like to share with those who want to
learn. ”
He was “dancing in the spirit, ” said the I-Threes, who had
long been convinced that when Marley was onstage he became
entranced, virtually possessed. The backing vocalists regularly
“saw spiritual things happen to Bob onstage that no one else
was conscious of, ” Rita said. “Languages, Bob talking in
tongues in his songs. ” He continued to chant as he spun
around and around, dreadlocks whirling, his right forefinger
pointing out to the audience, then up to the heavens, warning
that “until the philosophy which holds one race superior and
another inferior / is finally and permanently discredited and
abandoned—everywhere is war, me say war. ” The song was
“War, ” Marley’s musical adaptation of a speech on human
rights given by Haile Selassie.
There was no containing Marley in the circle of protectors
now, and any idea he had held about limiting himself to one
song was quickly forgotten. For 90 mesmerizing minutes he
continued, singing his “songs of freedom. ” At the end, still in
the spirit, he rolled his left sleeve up and unbuttoned his shirt,
triumphantly displaying his bullet wounds to the crowd. “Y ou
can’t kill Jah, ” he had earlier sung—nor his messenger either,
he now demonstrated. He crouched and put his hands at his
hips, mimicking a gunfighter about to unholster his pistols.
Then he drew, in the “bang-bang” gesture seemingly and sadly
familiar to children everywhere, threw back his dreadlocks,
and laughed. It sounded, said one who was on stage, “like a


--- PAGE 93 ---
BOB MARLEY
lion’s roar.” The prophet left the stage, and the next morning,
he left his own land.
EXODUS
If the gunmen and the authorities had thought they could
silence Marley, they were mistaken. After relocating to London
and Miami, where he settled his wife, his children, and his
mother, he produced two albums that represented a reassess-
ment, not retreat. Exodus, released in the summer of 1977, was
Marley’s biggest-selling album to date, remaining on the
British charts for 56 weeks and yielding three smash singles—
“Exodus, ” “Jammin’, ” and “Waiting in Vain, ” the last being one
of Marley’s finest love songs, written for Cindy Breakespeare.
Other songs, like “Guiltiness, ” were clearly inspired by the
assassination attempt. The title cut reflected Marley’s growing
interest in Africa, both as the homeland of his ancestors and
the literal and figurative promised land of his religion.
A European tour followed the album’s release, but plans for
American shows were canceled after the big toe on Marley’s
right foot was spiked during a pickup soccer game in Paris. He
continued with the European dates, but to his great annoy-
ance, the wound grew extremely painful and refused to heal; at
the end of a show, he often had to pour blood from his boot.
A London doctor diagnosed the toe as cancerous and recom-
mended amputation, but Marley refused and sought another
opinion. Rasta tenets forbade such procedures, he explained.
“Rasta no abide amputation, ” he said. “I and I don’t allow a
man to be dismantled. ” A Miami physician suggested the less
invasive procedure of a skin graft, to which Marley agreed.
The period of enforced rest that followed the procedure,
spent mainly in Miami, inspired Marley’s most reflective
album, Kaya (another Jamaican word for marijuana), which
was released in the spring of 1978. A series of lovely, lilting
hymns to the simple joys of life—sunshine, a misty morning,
being in love—the record yielded one of Marley’s biggest hits,
86


--- PAGE 94 ---
Dancing in the Spirit 87
“Is This Love?” Though some saw the album as a withdrawal
from political concerns, Marley had always seen political
struggle as the means to an end—the ability of individuals to
live their life on Earth joyfully. He explained:
Y ou can’t show aggression all the while. T o make music
is a life that I have to live. Sometimes you have to fight
with music.... But me always militant, you know. Me
too militant. That’s why me did things like Kaya,t o
cool off the pace.... I know when everything is cool and
I know when I tremble, do you understand? Because
music is something that everyone follows, so it’s a
force, a terrible force.
A RETURN TO JAMAICA
Further proof of the forcefulness of Marley’s music and pres-
ence came in February 1978, when he returned to Jamaica for
the first time since the attempt on his life. In his absence, polit-
ical violence in Jamaica had escalated to such an extreme that
the ranking gunmen of the two opposition parties, Claudie
Massop and Bucky Marshall, felt compelled to call upon the
only man with the influence to bring about peace on the
island: Bob Marley. When Marley’s plane landed in Kingston
on February 24, a huge crowd showered him with adoration,
reminding many onlookers of Haile Selassie’s dramatic visit 12
years earlier. Nearly two months later, Marley gave a riveting
performance at the One Love One Peace concert, which
reached a dramatic conclusion when Marley persuaded politi-
cal enemies Michael Manley and Edward Seaga to join hands
onstage and pledge themselves to peace in Jamaica. Rarely had
the ability of music to affect positive change been so tangibly
demonstrated.
As the One Love One Peace concert demonstrated, Marley
was ready to return to the stage. The world tour that followed


--- PAGE 95 ---
BOB MARLEY
was a succession of artistic and personal triumphs, its magnif-
icence well documented on the live album Babylon by Bus.I n
the United States, as elsewhere, Marley was now playing larger
venues than ever. The review of his June 1978 performance at
Madison Square Garden by John Rockwell of The New York
Times could have described the entire tour: “The concert was
a triumph, for reggae in general but for Mr. Marley in partic-
ular.... Mr. Marley was extraordinary. Who would have
believed Madison Square Garden would have swayed en masse
to a speech by Haile Selassie, the words of which Mr. Marley
incorporates verbatim into ‘War’?”
While in New Y ork, Marley received one of his greatest hon-
ors. The combined African delegations to the United Nations
presented the singer with the Third World Peace Medal “on
88
Bob Marley extends his fist as he sings during a concert in Stockholm,
Sweden. A European tour followed the release of Exodus in 1977. Plans
for an American tour, however, were canceled after cancer was discov-
ered in Marley’s toe.


--- PAGE 96 ---
Dancing in the Spirit 89
behalf of five hundred million Africans” for his work for
“equal rights and justice. ” Meeting the press afterward, Marley
explained how his music served that cause: “When you fight
revolution, you use guns.... Well, the music is the biggest gun,
because it save. It no kill, right?” Earlier that year, he made his
David “Ziggy” Marley, Bob and Rita Marley’s oldest son, was named after the
biblical king David, but he quickly acquired the name “Ziggy” from his father.
It was a nickname the elder Marley also had as a youngster; he passed it on
to his infant son just days after his birth. Ziggy was a name that meant that
he had good legs for soccer, that he had the coordination to outrun everyone
else on the field.
Ziggy was born in October 1968, at a time when his father was struggling
to make money as a musician and the growing family—which included sis-
ters Sharon and Cedella—still lived in one cramped bedroom in the home of
Rita Marley’s Aunt Viola. Ziggy Marley first went into his father’s studio at the
age of 10, and he was continually surrounded by the music of his father and
other musicians of the era. 
Throughout his childhood, it was apparent that Ziggy Marley, as well as
his siblings, had great musical abilities. In 1979, the three oldest Marley
children—joined by Rita and Bob’s youngest son, Stephen—made their first
track as Ziggy Marley and the Melody Makers, a name they borrowed from a
British rock magazine called 
Melody Maker. Their first song, “Children Play-
ing in the Streets,” was written for them by their father.
The group’s first album, Play the Game Right, was released in 1985, fol-
lowed by Hey World! in 1986. The next album, Conscious Party , won a
Grammy Award for best reggae recording after being released in 1988. Sev-
eral other albums followed, including the Grammy winners 
One Bright Day in
1989 and Fallen Is Babylon in 1997. Members of the group have said that
their music is different from their father’s, although they don’t hesitate to
comment about humanity and the problems that people face in the world.
In 2003, Ziggy Marley produced his first solo album, 
Dragonfly. Although
he said working solo had never been a goal, he found the experience invig-
orating. Today, as other Marley siblings and half-siblings step out on their
own, Ziggy Marley—now a father himself—may be the leader of an entire
new generation of Marley recordings. 
Ziggy Marley and the Melody Makers


--- PAGE 97 ---
BOB MARLEY
first visit to the fatherland, to Kenya and Ethiopia, where a rel-
ative of Selassie’s gave him a ring with the figure of a lion on
it, which had once belonged to the emperor.
After shows in Europe, Marley and the Wailers became the
first reggae group to tour the Far East. In Japan, the group was
stunned when the audience at each show sang along with every
word of every song. Then in New Zealand, a delegation of
Maoris, the island’s native people, made a pilgrimage to Auck-
land to welcome Marley officially. At a traditional native cere-
mony of greeting, they awarded him a name that translates as
“the Redeemer.”
AFRICAN SOLIDARITY
Marley returned to the studio in the first months of 1979 to
record the songs for Survival. The new album reflected his
concern with African solidarity and independence. Marley was
especially gratified to learn that one of its tracks, “Zimbabwe, ”
was immediately adopted as the anthem of the black freedom
fighters who were working to end decades of colonial and
white rule in the former British colony of Rhodesia.
The following April, Marley was invited to play at the cere-
monies marking the official independence of the new nation
of Zimbabwe. He would perform amid the ruins of Great Zim-
babwe, a huge stone palace occupied by the kings of Zimbabwe
before their nation was dominated by Great Britain. Marley
was so moved by the invitation that he paid the enormous
expense of transporting his musicians and all their equipment
to Zimbabwe. While he waiting to change flights at Nairobi,
Kenya, a messenger boarded Marley’s plane with the informa-
tion that Prince Charles of Great Britain, also on his way to the
ceremonies in Zimbabwe, was in a nearby plane and would
like Marley to come speak with him. “The prince want for see
me, ” responded Marley in the best spirit of black indepen-
dence, “him have for come here to me. ” Though the actual cer-
emonies were chaotic, resulting in an interruption of Marley’s
90


--- PAGE 98 ---
Dancing in the Spirit 91
performance, he nevertheless regarded the event as the great-
est honor of his career.
In May 1980, the Wailers embarked on their most ambitious
tour yet, the Tuff Gong Uprising world tour. In six weeks in
Europe, they played before more than one million fans in 12
cities, making them the biggest concert attraction to that point
in the continent’s history. In Milan, Dublin, and London, the
group performed outdoor shows before crowds of more than
100,000. The Milan show even outdrew a recent appearance by
the pope.
The triumphant tour was marred only by the increasingly
evident fatigue of its leader. Though Marley roused himself
onstage night after night to give what many consider to be the
most inspired performances of his career, offstage he was hag-
gard, constantly exhausted, and more withdrawn than usual.
Regularly accommodating to the press, as a way to spread the
message of Rastafari and reggae music, he now often asked
keyboardist Tyrone Downie to be his spokesman.
Most of those closest to Marley supposed that he was sim-
ply worn out, physically and emotionally, by the accumulated
demands placed on him by family, friends, favor seekers, hang-
ers-on, and his music. “He was just so pressured by people
everywhere he went, ” Cindy Breakespeare recalled. “They were
just drawn like moths to a flame, they couldn’t stay away. ”
Wailer Al Anderson was somewhat less charitable, describing
the situation as “too many sharks on one piece of meat. ” The
undeniable truth of such observations nonetheless failed to
disclose the real cause of Marley’s malaise.
MARLEY COLLAPSES
The American leg of the Tuff Gong Uprising tour began in
September 1980. On September 21, the morning after he
played the second of two scheduled shows at Madison Square
Garden in New Y ork, Marley went for a jog in Central Park
with Alan Cole and some other friends. He had gone just a


--- PAGE 99 ---
BOB MARLEY
short distance, however, when he called out to Cole and col-
lapsed, going into convulsions. Cole managed to get Marley
back to his hotel, and physicians were consulted. The band
went ahead to Pittsburgh, the site of the next concert two days
later. The ignored cancer from Marley’s toe had spread
throughout his body; the musician had an inoperable brain
tumor, and the doctors estimated that he would live for only
two or three more weeks.
Marley proceeded to Pittsburgh, determined to play the
next show. Band members vividly recall the immense sorrow
of the sound check that day, when Marley sang over and over
an early number called “Keep on Movin’, ” until its chorus of
“Lord, I got to keep on moving” brought the I-Threes to tears
and they asked him to stop. That night he and the band took
the stage unannounced, Marley piercing the auditorium’s
darkness with his ululating rebel’s trill. “Y eaaah!” he shouted.
“Greetings in the name of His Imperial Majesty, Emperor
Haile Selassie I, Jah, Rastafari, who liveth and reigneth in I and
I I-tinually, ever faithful, ever sure. ” He then played an unfor-
gettable set. Appropriately, “Redemption Song” was the last
92
In 1980, Bob Marley was working on the Uprising album when he wrote
“Redemption Song.” The music to the song was said to be spiritual rather
than reggae, and Marley’s words have been inspirational to many people:
Emancipate yourselves from mental slavery
None but ourselves can free our minds
Have no fear for atomic energy
’Cause none of them can stop the time
How long shall they kill our prophets
While we stand aside and look
Some say it’s just a part of it
We’ve got to fulfill the book
IN HIS OWN WORDS…


--- PAGE 100 ---
Dancing in the Spirit 93
song on the last album released during Marley’s lifetime,
Uprising. That night onstage he played and sang it alone, pick-
ing out the beautiful melody on his battered acoustic guitar.
“Won’t you help to sing, ” he asked, “these songs of freedom,
’cause all I ever had—redemption songs; all I ever had,
redemption songs, these songs of freedom, songs of freedom.”
Backstage, the Wailers and the I-Threes sobbed. Judy
Mowatt said:
Now I realize what he went through. Alone, because it
had to be alone. We did not know how he was hurting.
We did not know the pain he was going through. We
did not know if he was afraid. We did not know if he
was wondering if he could do the show or not. He
didn’t say anything to anybody.
Summoning the Wailers back to the stage for four more
songs, Marley closed the concert, fittingly, with “Work,” with
its countdown of “five days to go ... four days to go ...” When
the show was over, he walked to the edge of the stage and
shook hands with members of the audience.
At that point, Bob Marley decided to seek treatment for the
cancer that was ravaging his body. He went to Germany for
treatment that met his religious beliefs. Even though his life
lasted about six months longer than doctors originally
thought when his cancer was diagnosed, in the spring of 1981,
Marley’s German doctor said he had done everything possible.
Marley asked Rita, who had just returned to Jamaica after
being in Germany, to meet him in Miami and to bring the chil-
dren along. He wanted to say good-bye. In her 2004 autobiog-
raphy, My Life With Bob Marley: No Woman No Cry , Rita
Marley remembers that day. He told son Ziggy: “On your way
up, please take me up; and on your way down, don’t let me
down.” And, to son Stephen, he issued this simple reminder:
“Money can’t buy life.”


--- PAGE 101 ---
BOB MARLEY
On May 11, 1981, at the age of 36, as he had foreseen, Bob
Marley died in Miami, Florida. In different places in Kingston,
Marcia Griffiths and Judy Mowatt received the news of his
death, they said, in the form of a lightning bolt and thunder
crash, whose import they each immediately understood. Mar-
ley’s funeral in Jamaica was attended by every important
politician and dignitary in the country. More appropriately, an
estimated one million people—virtually half the island’s pop-
ulation—lined the roads in respect as his body was driven to
its final resting place, a simple mausoleum next to the tiny
shack where he grew up in Nine Mile.
Marley’s greater political and spiritual message endures
throughout the world as well. Even though the CIA considers
the Rastafarians a political pressure group in Jamaica, those
who practice the religion try to stay true to its original cause—
to be a group focused on peace, love and unity.
94


--- PAGE 102 ---
Just two weeks before his sixtieth birthday celebration, Bob
Marley’s hit song, “No Woman, No Cry, ” was among 20 tunes
selected by the Grammy Hall of Fame for their historical sig-
nificance. A song deeply reminiscent of the young Marley’s
days spent growing up in Trench T own, it put words to the
oppression that had occurred and has remained a song that
crosses political, cultural, and religious boundaries.
Unlike many musicians and artists whose lives and accom-
plishments seem to stagnate after their deaths, the legend of
Bob Marley only continues to grow. He was a quiet, pensive
youngster when he was growing up in Trench T own, and his
mother has said that there seemed to be a uniqueness in the
young boy—a boy of small stature who had a knack for
Jamaican football as well as music. “I came to acknowledge
him as someone who was so different, ” Rita Marley recalled in
the book Bob Marley: Songs of Freedom. “It wasn’t about just
8
95
The Legend Lives On


--- PAGE 103 ---
BOB MARLEY
being great: it was about being really different. And at that
same time being able to maintain a certain humility, which
was taken for granted by most of his friends…”
It was barely a year after Marley’s death, though, that legal
battles began for his family. The two other members of the orig-
inal Wailers—Peter T osh and Bunny Livingston—first decided
that they would take over the Tuff Gong label. In response, Rita
Marley established RMM, for Rita Marley Music, which she also
said could stand for Robert Marley Music. Then, for several
years, many people tried to lay claims on the Marley estate.
Although myriad legal battles followed, Rita Marley and Bob’s
12 children still control Marley’s music.
T oday, his music is heard around the world in its original ver-
sions and in many reissues. Entertainment Weekly reported in
2005 that Marley’s songs had sold 21.3 million copies since
96
Rita Marley sat with two of his sons at the state funeral for Bob Marley
held on May 21, 1981, in Kingston, Jamaica. For years after Marley’s
death, several people tried to lay claims on his estate.


--- PAGE 104 ---
The Legend Lives On 97
1991. In 2000, Time magazine named his song “One Love” the
Song of the Century. At the same time, the magazine also named
Marley’s album Exodus as the Album of the Century.
The Marley family continues to release material created by
Marley, while new cuts are made involving past releases. Back
in 1976, Marley’s song “Johnny Was” was written as a protest
song about a mother whose son had been shot down in the
street. In October 2005, parts of that song were meshed with a
hit by the late rapper Notorious B.I.G. called “Suicidal
Thoughts. ” Sean “Diddy” Combs produced the new piece,
which was named “Hold Y a Head. ” Combs apparently thought
the combination was an interesting one since Notorious B.I.G.
was shot and killed in Los Angeles. Not only does Marley’s
music live on, it continues to take on new life.
THE FAMILY
Rita Marley said that Bob’s last words to her were, “Forget cry-
ing, Rita! Just keep singing. ” And she has, issuing several
releases since his death. Bob and Rita Marley had four children
of their own, and he had adopted Sharon, whom Rita had
before they were married.
Bob and Rita’s oldest son, Ziggy, has developed a musical
career of his own after singing for many years with his siblings—
Sharon, Cedella and Stephen—in a Grammy Award-winning
group called the Melody Makers. Stephen heads up the family’s
music-production company, called Ghetto Y ouths International.
Cedella Marley runs another family business called Tuff Gong,
and she started a clothing line inspired by her father’s style. Some
of Marley’s other children, who include Rohan, Robbie, Karen,
Julian, Ky-Mani, Damian, and Makeda, have musical careers of
their own. Marley’s last seven children were born to different
women, a fact that admittedly hurt Rita Marley. “I didn’t think I
could disrupt his relationships, though sometimes the situation
was painful and I couldn’t understand what was going on, ” she
wrote in her autobiography.


--- PAGE 105 ---
BOB MARLEY
Despite his mistakes, Bob Marley seemed to see himself as
a servant of his Rastafarian Jah, and he used his humility to
do what he saw as his life’s work—spreading peace and love
among the people of his native Jamaica, Africa, and the rest of
the world.
After his death, Rita Marley established the Bob Marley
Foundation in Jamaica, which has given money and support to
families, a children’s hospital, and many other charitable orga-
nizations. Eventually, Rita’s attention turned to Africa, and to
the poverty and health crises there. “It’s not just about being
his wife, ” Rita Marley said in her book, “it’s about being a per-
son who is carrying on a legacy that means so much in the
world. ” Marley’s children who were involved in the Melody
Makers also created a foundation, called URGE (Unlimited
Resources Giving Enlightenment).
98
Rita Marley—with three of Bob Marley’s sons (from left) Damian,
Stephen, and Julian—paid tribute to Bob Marley at the MOBO Awards
(Music of Black Origin) in September 2005 in London.


--- PAGE 106 ---
The Legend Lives On 99
The family also found it important that there be physical
reminders of Bob Marley’s life. The home that Chris Blackwell
sold Marley on Hope Road in Kingston became the Bob Mar-
ley Museum, which features historic artifacts of Marley’s
career, writings, photographs, news clippings, and ads as well
as guided tours and videos of Marley’s live performances.
FULL CIRCLE
Dusty, unpaved roads lead the way to Nine Mile, the town in
St. Ann Parish, Jamaica, where Bob Marley was born and
where his body was put to rest after his death. Nine Mile is
The Bob Marley Foundation was established in 1986 by his wife, Rita, and
some of his children, five years after the legendary reggae musician’s death.
Health, education, and nutrition are the primary concerns of this nonprofit,
charitable organization formed to provide support to people living in poverty,
specifically in Jamaica and Africa. The organization continues its effort to
empower individuals, groups, and entire countries to overcome the oppres-
sion imposed on them for many generations. 
Several of Marley’s family members stay directly involved with the foun-
dation, including Rita, who is the foundation’s chairwoman; his daughter
Cedella, who is the director; and his son Ziggy, the international advisor. The
foundation has become involved with programs in Jamaican and Ethiopian
schools, offering grants for books, teacher training, and improvements to
classroom facilities.
Another concern of the foundation is health. Africa is plagued with AIDS,
a disease that has killed more than 17 million people there. The foundation
also provides support to organizations that help cancer patients and those
who suffer from high blood pressure, malaria, and other illnesses. 
Providing children with a good breakfast before they begin their school
day has also been a foundation project. The organization helps establish
canteens where children can get food before their classes begin, and it con-
nects with various organizations around the world that deal with the issues
of hunger and poverty.
The Bob Marley Foundation


--- PAGE 107 ---
BOB MARLEY
where Cedella Marley Booker, Marley’s mother, lived when she
gave birth to her son and for a few years beyond that, until she
brought him to Kingston, where she had gone hoping to find
a better life. The fertile soil here is what made Marley’s grand-
father known as the best farmer of the region. Later in his life,
Nine Mile was a place the famed musician would visit to med-
itate for peace and clarity.
Three small buildings remain standing there, surrounded
now by pink roses and ferns. When Cedella Marley Booker isn’t
in Florida, where she spends much of her time, she tends to
return to Nine Mile, where she will greet visitors. Marley’s
favorite spot for meditation, Mount Zion Rock, is still on the
property. Nearby is the mausoleum with its stained-glass win-
dows, where Marley’s remains are kept. Visitors are often found
in the marble tomb, a room that contains Marley’s brass coffin,
a guitar, a soccer ball, a Bible, and other symbols of his life.
Near the end of his life, Marley sought out his form of God,
in the Rastafarians’ Jah, to help keep the humility and focus
that he knew was required. Just before he became severely ill,
he was talking of settling down in Jamaica, of building a
recording studio of his own and a house big enough for all of
his children. This final dream, though, never came true.
Bob Marley was a man whose musical fame emerged from
the political and social turmoil that surrounded him. While in
life he was a small, wiry man, in death he is a giant, not only in
the music industry, but as a prophet in the words he sang as he
preached for equality and unity among all races of the world.
T oday his legacy lives on in the charitable work and music cre-
ated by his children, his wife, and his fans around the world.
100


--- PAGE 108 ---
Selected Discography
Catch a Fire (1972)
Burnin’(1973, reissued 2001)
Natty Dread (1974)
Live! (1975)
Rastaman Vibration (1976)
Exodus (1977)
Kaya (1978)
Babylon by Bus (1978)
Survival (1979)
Uprising (1980)
Confrontation (1983)
Legend (1984)
Rebel Music (1986)
T alkin’ Blues(1991)
Songs of Freedom (1992)
Natural Mystic (1995)
Dreams of Freedom: Ambient Translations of Bob Marley (1997)
Chant Down Babylon (1999)
One Love: The Very Best of Bob Marley and the Wailers (2001)
Africa Unite (November 2005)
Appendix 101


--- PAGE 109 ---
1945 Is born Nesta Robert Marley on February 6, in the
parish of St. Ann, Jamaica
1959 Makes singing debut at a talent show; begins study-
ing music with singer Joe Higgs
1961 Forms the Wailers with Bunny Livingston and Peter
T osh
1963 Auditions with the Wailers for producer Clement
Dodd; the Wailers record “Simmer Down” with the
Skatalites
1965 Songs by the Wailers occupy 5 of the top 10 slots on
the Jamaican record charts; Marley begins a
romance with singer Rita Anderson
1966 Marley and Anderson are married; Emperor Haile
Selassie I of Ethiopia visits Jamaica; Marley and the
Wailers convert to Rastafari; they establish Wail’N
Soul’M record label
1967 Wail’N Soul’M label fails; Bob and Rita Marley
return to Nine Mile
1969 Marley writes and records for singer Johnny Nash
and again for producer Leslie Kong; begins collabo-
ration with Lee “Scratch” Perry and Aston “Family
Man” Barrett
1971 The Wailers establish the Tuff Gong production
company; their first release, “Trench T own Rock, ”
tops the Jamaican charts for five months; the
Wailers sign a contract with Island Records in
Great Britain
1972 Island releases the Wailers’Catch a Fire, the first true
reggae album
1973 The Wailers tour Great Britain and the United
States; record their second album, Burnin’;L i v -
ingston and T osh leave the group
Chronology102


--- PAGE 110 ---
1976 Jamaican government bans four songs from Mar-
ley’s Rastaman Vibration album; Marley is shot in an
assassination attempt; performs at Smile Jamaica
concert; leaves Jamaica to live in London and Miami
1977 Exodus is released and remains on British charts for
56 weeks; cancer is discovered in Marley’s toe
1978 Marley returns to Jamaica and performs at the One
Love One Peace concert; receives the Third World
Peace Medal from the African delegations to the
United Nations
1980 Attracts record crowds on the Tuff Gong Uprising
world tour; collapses in New Y ork; cancer has spread
through his body; plays his last concert in Pitts-
burgh
1981 Dies on May 11 in Miami
1986 The Bob Marley Foundation is created; the Bob
Marley Museum opens in Kingston at his former
home at 56 Hope Road
1994 Marley is inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of
Fame
2005 “No Woman, No Cry” is selected for the Grammy
Hall of Fame
CHRONOLOGY 103


--- PAGE 111 ---
Barrett, Leonard. The Rastafarians: Sounds of Cultural Dissonance.
Boston: Beacon, 1988.
Boot, Adrian, and Chris Salewicz. Bob Marley: Songs of Freedom.
New Y ork: Viking Studio, 1995.
Davis, Stephen. Bob Marley. Rochester, VT: Schenkman, 1990.
Davis, Stephen, and Peter Simon. Reggae Bloodlines: In Search of the
Music and Culture of Jamaica. New Y ork: Da Capo, 1992.
Lazell, Barry. Marley. London: Hamlyn, 1994.
Marley, Rita. My Life With Bob Marley: No Woman No Cry.N e w
Y ork: Hyperion, 2004.
Talamon, Bruce, and Roger Steffens.Bob Marley: Spirit Dancer.N e w
Y ork: Norton, 1994.
Taylor, Don.Marley and Me: The Real Bob Marley Story .N e w  Y o r k :
Barricade Books, 1995.
White, Timothy.Catch a Fire: The Life of Bob Marley .N e w  Y o r k :
Henry Holt, 1992.
Whitney, Malika Lee, and Dermott Hussey.Bob Marley: Reggae King
of the World. San Francisco: Pomegranate, 1994.
Further Reading104


--- PAGE 112 ---
WEBSITES
The Bob Marley Foundation
www.bobmarleyfoundation.org
The History of Jamaican Music, 1959–1973
http://niceup.com/history/ja_music_59-73.html
The Official Bob Marley Website
www.bobmarley.com
The Rita Marley Foundation
www.ritamarleyfoundation.org
The Ultimate Bob Marley Fan Site
www.thirdfield.com
The Wailers
www.wailers.com
The Wailers News
www.iration.com/wailers/
FURTHER READING 105


--- PAGE 113 ---
Addis Ababa concert, 1–7, 27
African Herbsman,6 1
African solidarity, 90–91
Africa Unite concert, 1–7
Alphonso, Roland, 39
Anderson, Al, 69
Anderson, Alvarita. See Marley,
Rita (wife)
Anderson, Esther, 71
Assassination attempt, of Bob
Marley, 77–80
Babylon, 50–52
Babylon by Bus,8 8
Back O’ the Wall, 21, 52
Barrett, Aston (“Family Man”),
58, 59–60, 69, 70 
Barrett, Carlton, 58, 60, 69, 70
Belnavis, Anita, 71
Beverley’s record store, 37–38
Birth date, of Bob Marley, 8
Blackwell, Chris, 3, 65–66, 68, 71,
99
Bob Marley Foundation, 98–99
Bob Marley Museum, 99
Booker, Cedella (mother)
Africa Unite concert and, 3–4,
27
immigration to United States
of, 34
Kingston and, 23–24, 25
as musician, 19
Nine Mile and, 100
Rastafari lifestyle and, 74
relationship with Norval
Marley and, 13–14
Braithwaite, Junior, 32
Breakespeare, Cindy, 71, 72, 91
Brevett, Lloyd, 39
Bunny Wailer, 68.See also
Livingston, Neville (“Bunny”)
Burnin’, 68–69
“Burnin’ and Lootin’ , ” 6, 69
Burru drumming, 39
Bushey, Clarice, 18
Cancer, and Bob Marley, 86, 88,
92, 93
Catch a Fire, 67–68
Central Intelligence Agency
(CIA), 75–76, 94
Clapton, Eric, 68, 73
Cliff, Jimmy, 62, 63, 66 
Cole, Alan, 61–62, 72, 92
Death, of Bob Marley, 94
Death threats, to Bob Marley,
77
Delaware, 34, 49
Democratic socialism, 76
Dodd, Clement, 38–49, 58
Downie, Tyrone, 69, 91
Dreadlocks, 51
Drumming, 39
Drummond, Don, 39
Dungle, 21
Duppies, 15
“Duppy Conqueror,” 60–61, 69
Education, of Bob Marley, 18,
20–21, 25
Emancipation, of slaves in
Jamaica, 12
Ethiopia, 1–4, 6–7, 27, 50–52, 54,
90
Exodus, 86, 97
Family Man. See Barrett, Aston
Farming, 55–56
Federal Studio, 37–38
Football, 18, 26, 72, 86
Ford, Vincent, 34–36
Index106


--- PAGE 114 ---
Garvey, Marcus, 8–9
“Get Up, Stand Up, ” 5
Ghetto Y ouths International, 97
Gilbert, Gilly, 72
Government, in Jamaica, 75–77,
80–82, 87
Grammy Hall of Fame, 95
Griffiths, Marcia, 69, 70, 77, 94
Hairstyle, 51
The Harder They Come, 62–63, 66
Higgs, Joe, 31, 32–33, 38
Hill, Lauryn, 3
Hippy Boys, 58
Hope Road, Marley’s house on,
71–72, 77–78, 99 
I Can See Clearly Now,6 2
“I Shot the Sheriff, ” 4, 69, 73
Island House, 71–72, 77–78, 99
Island Records, 3, 65–69
“Is This Love?,” 86–87
Ital, 52
I-Threes, 69, 70, 77, 85, 92 
Jah, 3, 51
Jamaica Labour Party (JLP), 76,
80–81
Jamaica T ourist Board, 75
Jazz, 31
Jerry, Jah, 39
Johnson, Cluett, 39–40
“Judge Not, ” 37–38
Jump-ups, 29–30
Junior Gong. See Marley, Damian
(son)
Kaya, 86–87 
Kelso, Beverly, 32
Kingston, Jamaica, 19–24, 25–36 
Knibbs, Lloyd, 39
Kong, Leslie, 37–38, 57
Legal battles, 96
“Legalize It, ” 68
Lindo, Earl, 69
Livingston, Neville (“Bunny”)
arrest of, 56
as family, 25–26, 31
touring and, 67–68
Tuff Gong and, 61, 96
Wailers and, 32–34
Livingston, Thaddeus, 24, 25, 34
Makonnen, Ras Tafari, 50, 54.See
also Selassie, Haile
Malcolm, Cedella (mother). See
Booker, Cedella (mother)
Malcolm, Katherine (great-
grandmother), 13, 15
Malcolm, Omeriah (grandfather),
14, 14–17, 19, 20
Manley, Michael, 76–77, 83, 87
Marijuana, 51, 56, 64, 72
Marley, Cedella (daughter), 56,
89, 97, 99
Marley, Cedella (mother). See
Booker, Cedella (mother)
Marley, Damian (son), 72, 97 
Marley, David (“Ziggy, ” son), 56,
89, 93, 97, 99
Marley, Norval Sinclair (father),
12–14, 19, 22–23
Marley, Rita (wife)
activities of after his death,
96–99
Africa Unite concert and, 2, 4,
6–7 
as backing vocalist, 69, 70
Bob Marley Foundation and,
99
initial relationship with Bob
Marley, 44–48
Marley estate and, 96
INDEX 107


--- PAGE 115 ---
Rastafarian lifestyle and, 52,
54–55
shooting of, 78
Marley, Rohan (son), 3, 97
Marley, Sharon (daughter of Rita
Marley), 56, 89, 97
Marley, Stephen (son), 89, 93, 97
Maroons, 11
Marshall, Bucky, 87
Martell, Bobby, 38
Marvin, Junior, 69
Massop, Claudie, 87
McCook, T ommy, 39
McIntosh, Hubert Winston.See
T osh, Peter
Melody Makers, 89, 97
Mittoo, Jackie, 39
Moore, Johnny, 39
Mowatt, Judy, 69, 70, 74–75, 77,
93, 94
Music of Black Origin Awards,
98
Myalman, 14–15
Nash, Johnny, 56–57, 62
National Heroes Circle Stadium,
76–77, 79–80, 83–86
Natty Dread, 70, 72–73
Nine Mile, 8, 13, 16, 55–56,
99–100
“No Woman, No Cry, 22, 36, 74,
95
Obeah, 15
“One Cup of Coffee,” 38
“One Love,” 74
One Love One Peace concert,
87–88
Organization of African Unity,
54
Palm reading, by a young Bob
Marley, 17, 23
Patterson, Alvin (“Seeco”),
38–39, 69, 78
People’s National Party (PNP),
76–77, 80–82
Perry, Lee (“Scratch”), 58–61
Politics, of Jamaica, 75–77,
80–82, 87
Ranglin, Ernest, 39–40
Rastafarians
Africa Unite concert and, 3, 6
diet, 52
medical care and, 86, 93
origin of term, 50
overview of, 50–52
spread of, 74–75
Rastaman Vibration,7 6
Rasta Revolution,6 1
“Redemption Song, ” 92, 93
Reggae, 56, 58, 62–64, 67 
Rita Marley Music, 96
Robinson, George Headley, 36
Rude boys, 26
Scratch. See Perry, Lee
(“Scratch”) 
Seaga, Edward, 76, 87
Seeco. See Patterson, Alvin
(“Seeco”)
Selassie, Haile, 8–9, 50, 52–55
Sharpe, Sam, 12
“Simmer Down, ” 40–41
Sims, Danny, 56–57, 62–64 
Sir Coxsone. See Dodd, Clement
Ska, 40
Skatalites, 39–40, 41
Slavery, 10–12
Soccer. See Football
Soulettes, 44–47
INDEX108


--- PAGE 116 ---
Soul Rebels,6 1
Soul Revolution,6 1
Speakeasy Club, 67
St. Ann parish, 8, 12–13, 16, 23
Sterling, Lester, 39
Studio One, 38–40
Sugar fields, 10–12
Survival,7 ,9 0
Tartar.See Ford, Vincent
T a y l o r ,D o n ,7 8
“T error, ” 38
T osh, Peter
arrest of, 56
“Get Up, Stand Up” and, 5
life of, 68
Tuff Gong and, 61, 96
Wailers and, 32–34
Trench Tow n
life in, 21–22, 25–26, 34–36
music in, 28–32
rude boys and, 26–28
sufferers in, 21–22
“Trench T own Rock,” 62
Tuff Gong, as Bob Marley’s
nickname, 27
Tuff Gong (production
company), 61–62, 65, 95, 97
Tuff Gong Uprising tour, 91
Unlimited Resources Giving
Enlightenment (URGE), 98
Uprising, 92, 93
Upsetters, 58
Wailers, The, 6, 32–34, 37–41,
42–45, 49, 56–64, 65–70 
Wail’N Soul’M, 55, 56
We Must Carry On,4 7
Yay a .See Malcolm, Katherine
(great-grandmother)
Ziggy Marley and the Melody
Makers, 89, 97
Zimbabwe, 90–91 
INDEX 109


--- PAGE 117 ---
110
2: Associated Press, AP
4: AFP/Getty Images
9: Library of Congress, LC-
USZ61-1854
16: Associated Press, AP
20: Associated Press
27: Associated Press, AP
35: Associated Press, AP
42: Associated Press, AP
45: Photofest
53: Associated Press, AP
59: Photofest
63: New World Pictures/Photofest
70: Getty Images
73: Getty Images
84: Associated Press, AP
88: Getty Images
96: Getty Images
98: Getty Images
page:
cover: ©Denis O’Regan/CORBIS
Picture Credits


--- PAGE 118 ---
111About the Author
Sherry Beck Paprocki is a freelance journalist and has written or con-
tributed to six books for children, including World Leaders: Vicente
Fox (Chelsea House, 2002); Women of Achievement: Katie Couric
(Chelsea House, 2001); and Women Who Win: Michelle Kwan
(Chelsea House, 2001). In addition, her bylines have appeared in
Pages magazine, Preservation magazine, The Chicago Tribune ,t h e
Cleveland Plain Dealer , The Philadelphia Inquirer , the Los Angeles
Times Syndicate, and many other publications. She is a graduate of
the Ohio State University School of Journalism and lives near
Columbus, Ohio, where she also serves as an adjunct faculty member
of Otterbein College.


--- PAGE 119 ---



--- PAGE 120 ---



--- PAGE 121 ---


