=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Student-Body-Constitution-and-Bylaws.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 12
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:20:28.157086
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Student Body Constitution and Bylaws 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“We, as members of the RBG Communiversity student body, desiring to improve the quality of life for all 
Black (New Afrikan) people here in the hells of North America and having a desire to increase human 
relations between all Afrikan people, do establish this constitution, in order to establish, maintain and build 
a college and people’s organization that…”  
                                                 
 
Documents Home


--- PAGE 2 ---
[RBG STUDENT BODY CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS] 
March 28, 2010 
 
RBG Communiversity 2 
 
PREAMBLE 
We, as members of the RBG Communiversity student body, desiring to improve the 
quality of life for all Black (New Afrikan) people here in the hells of North America and 
having a desire to increasing human relations between all Afrikan people, d o establish 
this constitution, in order to establish, maintain and build a college and organization 
that: 
Represents the interests and concerns of all students at RBG Communiversity, 
Brings together all aspects of New Afrikan  (Black) peoples life for the purpose of 
improving our social, political, economic, educational and moral condition in America, 
Encourages unity among our elders and youth, and the Afrikan Family, Community 
and Nation at large, 
Discourages and abates socio-structural, institutional and individual acts and symbols 
of white supremacy / racism. 
Heightens awareness and coalitions between all people, regardless of race, sex, 
religion, or national origin when said groups are willing to work in our best interest 
And promotes a Hip-Hop-Black Liberation spirit of academic excellence, prestige and 
scholarship 
ARTICLE I - NAME 
Section 1: The name of the organization shall be Red, Black and Green  (RBG) 
Communiversity 
ARTICLE II -MEMBERSHIP 
Section 1: Membership in Red, Black and Green (RBG) Communiversity shall be open 
to any enrolled student who is interested in improving human relations in general and 
the quality of life for Black (New Afrikan) people in America particular 
Section 2: Students that a re eligible for membership shall obtain membership by 
completing a RBG Street Scholar in Residence -student membership application. These 
students shall remain members for the time equal to their donation of support, as to 
keep the College up and running (Web Hosting and Bandwidth). 
Section 3: Members may renew or upgrade their membership at any time. Members will 
obtain renewed membership status only if already enrolled at RBG Communiversity.


--- PAGE 3 ---
[RBG STUDENT BODY CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS] 
March 28, 2010 
 
RBG Communiversity 3 
 
ARTICLE III- EXECUTIVE BOARD 
Section 1: The Executive  Board shall be the governing body of Red, Black and Green  
(RBG) Communiversity and shall consist of the Chairman of the Board, President, 
Executive Vice President, Administrative Vice President, Secretary, and Treasurer. 
Section 2: The duties of the Executive Board officers are as follows: 
A. The COB shall chair the Executive Board and represent Red, Black and Green 
(RBG) Communiversity at all appointed meetings.  
B. The President shall chair the Elections Board and coordinate the transition process 
for newly elected board members. 
C. The Executive Vice President shall assist in all duties of the President and shall 
assume the office and duties of President in lieu of an absence. The Executive Vice 
president shall call to order and adjourn the meetings of the General Assembly and 
shall chair the Advisory Board. 
D. The Administrative Vice president shall chair the Cabinet of Red, Black and Green 
(RBG) Communiversity. The Administrative Vice President shall maintain close c ontact 
with the appointed directors and report to the Executive Board weekly as to the status of 
these programs and committees. 
E. The Treasurer shall be responsible for all financial correspondence pertaining to Red, 
Black and Green ( RBG) Communiversity. The Treasurer should be able to report 
financial records at meetings of the General Assembly. The Treasurer  shall also 
represent Red, Black and Green (RBG ) Communiversity at Budget and Finance 
hearings. 
F. The Secretary shall record  minutes and prepare agendas at all General Assembly 
and Executive Board meetings and make them readily available to members upon 
request. The Secretary shall keep records of attendance at all General Assembly 
meetings. The Secretary shall keep all files and calendars.  
Section 3: The Executive Board Officers are allowed to miss only three Executive Board 
meetings and/or four General Assembly meetings annually, excluding the summer 
semester. 
Section 4: Excused absences are limited to class/work conflicts, f amily emergencies, 
university excuses, and sickness collaborated by the Executive Board and/or Advisor


--- PAGE 4 ---
[RBG STUDENT BODY CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS] 
March 28, 2010 
 
RBG Communiversity 4 
 
ARTICLE IV-CABINET AND ADVISORY BOARD 
Section 1: Red, Black and Green ( RBG) Communiversity shall include the following 
Cabinet Committees, with Directors appointed by the Administrative Vice President and 
approved by the Executive Board: 
A. The Public Relations Committee shall consist of the positions of Newsletter/Journal 
Editor, Historian, and Webmaster. These positions shall be appointed b y the 
Administrative Vice President and approved by the Executive Board. 
B. The Social Committee shall be responsible for coordinating social events for Red, 
Black and Green (RBG) Communiversity. 
C. The Communiversity Cultural Committee shall b e responsible for coordinating 
cultural events for Red, Black and Green (RBG) Communiversity. 
Section 2: The Executive Board, as necessary, shall appoint ad hoc committees and 
task forces of special interest / concerns of Red, Black and Green (RBG) 
Communiversity. 
Section 3: Red, Black and Green ( RBG) Communiversity shall include an Advisory 
Board that will consist of representatives of other Black organizations on through the 
U.S. These organizations shall be stated in the Bylaws. 
Section 4: The Advisory Board shall have the following duties: 
A. Discussion on methods of improving the relationship between the different Black 
organizations and groups. 
B. Improvement of communication among Afrikan centered groups. 
C. Provide opportunities for all Black (New Afrikan) students to get involved community 
activism. 
Section 5: The Executive Vice President shall appoint an Assistant Director and 
Corresponding Secretary from the Advisory Board. The Advisory Board shall meet once 
every three months during the fall and spring semesters. The Executive Vice President 
may convene a special meeting at any time deemed necessary. 
Section 6: All resolutions and programs sponsored by the Advisory Board must be 
submitted to the General Assembly  for approval. The Executive Vice President shall 
break any ties that occur in Advisory Board votes.


--- PAGE 5 ---
[RBG STUDENT BODY CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS] 
March 28, 2010 
 
RBG Communiversity 5 
 
ARTICLE V- ELECTIONS 
Section 1: There shall be an Elections Board, established to govern all elections that 
shall consist of the Chairman, President, Exe cutive Vice President, Administrative Vice 
President, and Advisor of Red, Black and Green  (RBG) Communiversity. One member 
of the General Assembly and one member of the Cabinet shall be appointed by the 
President with approval by the General Assembly.  
Section 2: Any member of the student body running for an Executive Board Office shall 
not be eligible to serve on the Elections Board. An alternate student member shall be 
appointed by the President, with approval of the General Assembly, to fill a nd vacancy 
that may occur.  
Section 3: The Elections Board duties consist of approving the applications and 
platforms of each candidate, the additional voting procedures, the design of the official 
ballot, and the certification of the vote tally. 
Section 4: The following procedures shall govern elections: 
A. Elections shall be held during the Spring Semester of every academic year, unless a 
special election is needed to fill a vacancy. 
B. Students must submit applications in order to run for an Executive Bo ard Office. 
Applications will be accepted no later than one-week prior to Election Day, unless a 
special election is needed to fill a vacancy.  
C. The Elections Board shall hold a special meeting in which all Executive Board Office 
Candidates will be introduced. The Elections Board shall coordinate a debate among 
candidates for President and shall have the option to do so among candidates for other 
offices. 
D. All active student members of Red, Black and Green(RBG) Communiversity shall be 
eligible to vote in elections for the Executive Board Offices. 
E. There shall be no absentee voting unless approved by the Elections Board.  
F. A quorum, as defined in the Bylaws, is needed to hold an election of Executive Board 
Officers.  
Section 5: Candidates for Executive Board Offices must have a cumulative grade point 
average of 3.00 at the time of the application deadline. Other qualifications are as 
follows:  
A. Candidates for President must be enrolled at RBG Communiversity for at least three 
(3) semesters prior to the semester of elections. The candidates must also have three 
(3) semesters of active membership in RBG Communiversity.


--- PAGE 6 ---
[RBG STUDENT BODY CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS] 
March 28, 2010 
 
RBG Communiversity 6 
 
B. Candidates for Executive Vice President, Administrative Vice President, and 
Treasurer must be enrolled at RBG Communiversity for at least two (2) semesters prior 
to semester of elections. The candidates must also have at least two (2) semesters of 
active membership in Red, Black and Green (RBG) Communiversity.  
C. Candidates for Secretary must be enrolled at RBG Communiversity for at least one 
(1) semester prior to the semester of elections. The candidates must also have at least 
one (1) semester active membership in Red, Black and Green(RBG) Communiversity.  
Section 6: Newly elected Executive Board Officers shall be installed no later than the 
last meeting of the General Assembly of the Spring Semester. 
Section 7: Vacancies in the offices of Executive Vice President, Administrative Vice 
President, T reasurer, and Secretary shall be filled through a special election. The 
Elections Board shall be responsible for all applicable duties outlined in Article V, 
Section 3. Qualified RBG members, as outlined in Article V, Section 5, shall be 
nominated during the first General Assembly meeting held after the vacancy. A special 
election shall be held the following General Assembly.  
 
ARTICLE VI-IMPEACHMENT 
Section 1: Any Executive Board Officer in violation of Article III, Section 3, in violation of 
any other section of the Constitution and Bylaws, and/or involved in any action that 
severely compromises the operation and integrity of Red, Black and Green (RBG) 
Communiversity, must appear before the Executive Board for evaluation.  
Section 2: In the event that violations have been proven through the evaluation process, 
a motion for impeachment shall in present by the Executive Board to the General 
Assembly.  
Section 3: A two -thirds (2/3) vote of the active members present at the General 
Assembly meeting, provided that a quorum is present, is needed to remove an 
Executive Board Officer.  
ARTICLE VII-GENERAL ASSEMBLY MEETINGS 
Section 1: Meetings of the  General Assembly shall be held on a schedule agreed upon 
by the Executive Board.  
Section 2: The President or a petition of two -thirds of active members may convene 
special meetings of the General Assembly.


--- PAGE 7 ---
[RBG STUDENT BODY CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS] 
March 28, 2010 
 
RBG Communiversity 7 
 
Section 3: Each meeting of the General Assembly shall include a Treasurer’s Report, 
Minutes, Cabinet Report, President’s Address, and Old/New Business. Reports from the 
Advisory Board shall take place at the first General Assembly meeting held after the 
Advisory Board meeting.  
Section 4: The Executive Board shall determine the format of the General Assembly 
meetings. Any additions to General Assembly meetings shall be included in the Bylaws. 
Section 5: Meetings of the General Assembly shall follow the format of parliamentary 
procedure outlined within th e Robert’s Rules of Order. Robert’s Rules of Order shall 
also be used to address any ambiguity involving parliamentary procedure within the 
meetings of the General Assembly.  
ARTICLE VIII-AMENDMENTS 
Section 1: The power to present plans to amend or repeal any section of the 
Constitution rest in the Executive Board. Actions within the Constitution must be 
approved by two-thirds (2/3) of the active members, provided a quorum is present. 
ARTICLE IX- BYLAWS 
Section 1: Bylaws, when consistent with the Constitution, shall be adopted, amended, or 
repealed by a vote of two -thirds (2/3) of the active members, provided a quorum is 
present. Any active member of Red, Black and Green (RBG) Communiversity can 
present action within the Bylaws to the Executive Bo ard for approval, at which time the 
proposed action will be presented before the General Assembly. 
RBG SSTT student-members (Street Scholars in Residence) Bylaws 
TITLE I - ACTIVE MEMBER STATUS 
Section 1: All students eligible for membership shall be grante d active member status 
upon completion of the membership application in the Fall Semester. Those students 
that attend four (4) meetings in the fall shall retain active member status through the 
Spring Semester. 
Section 2: All students eligible for membersh ip that are either unable to fulfill active 
membership requirements for the Fall Semester or wishing to apply for membership for 
the Spring Semester, shall be granted active member status upon the completion of four 
(4) meetings.


--- PAGE 8 ---
[RBG STUDENT BODY CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS] 
March 28, 2010 
 
RBG Communiversity 8 
 
TITLE II - QUORUM 
Section 1: A quorum shall consist of twenty -five (25) RBG members of active member 
status. 
 
TITLE III - ADVISORY BOARD MEMBERS 
Section 1: The Advisory Board shall consist of one representative of the following 
organizations, unless otherwise noted: 
A. Hip-Hop-Black Liberation General Assembly (1) 
B. International Student Organization (1) 
C. Student Events Advisory Council (1) 
D. Student Government Association 
E. Office of Cultural Development and Leadership Affairs (1) 
F. Office of Student Affairs (1) 
G. Three at-large members appointed by the President (Includes a representative from 
the Black Business Community) 
TITLE IV - SUMMER SEMESTER 
Section 1: The President and Administrative Vice President of Red, Black and 
Green(RBG) Communiversity shall be required to fulfill the duties and responsibilities of 
the office during the Summer Semester. 
Section 2: Cabinet Directors shall be required to fulfill the duties and responsibilities of 
their positions during the Summer Semester. Summer Replacements must  be provided 
for Directors unable to fulfill their duties during the Summer Semester.


--- PAGE 9 ---
[RBG STUDENT BODY CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS] 
March 28, 2010 
 
RBG Communiversity 9 
 
TITLE V - REPRESENTATION 
Section 1: Red, Black and Green (RBG) Communiversity shall be represented at the 
following events (TBA) 
A.  
B.  
C.  
D.  
E.  
Section 2: Red, Black and Green  (RBG) Communiversity shall also be present at other 
events agreed upon by the Executive Board. 
Section 3: One representative from the Executive Board and one representative from 
the Cabinet shall be required at all events i n which Red, Black and Green  (RBG) 
Communiversity shall be represented. 
TITLE VI - SALARIES 
Section 1: The President, Executive Vice President, Administrative Vice President, 
Treasurer, and Secretary shall receive salaries throughout their term in office. 
Section 2: Students that fill any vacancy of the Executive Board shall receive the salary 
of the person they replace.  
TITLE VII - EXECUTIVE BOARD TRANSITION 
Section 1: Incoming and outgoing Executive Board Officers shall hold a transition retreat 
no later than the last meeting of the Spring Semester. 
Section 2: New Executive Board Officers and Cabinet Directors shall hold a retreat no 
later than the first day of classes for the Fall Semester.  
 
TITLE VIII - TEMPORARY SUSPENSION 
Section 1: The Ex ecutive Board shall have the power to temporarily suspend certain 
sections of the Constitution and/or Bylaws provided there is a substantial organizational 
interest that makes a suspension necessary.


--- PAGE 10 ---
[RBG STUDENT BODY CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS] 
March 28, 2010 
 
RBG Communiversity 1
0 
 
Section 2: Motions to temporarily suspend a section of t he Constitution or Bylaws must 
be approved by two -thirds (2/3) of the active membership and shall be limited to the 
following sections: 
A. Article V, Section 4 – Election Procedure 
B. Article V, Section 5 – Candidate Qualifications 
C. Article V, Section 6 – Officer Installation 
D. Title III, Section 1 – Advisory Board Members 
TITLE IX - FALL SPECIAL ELECTIONS 
Section 1: Special elections needed to fill offices vacated over the summer shall be filled 
in a special election to take place during the first meeting of the Fall Semester. 
Section 2: RBG members that held active member status throughout the previous 
Spring Semester shall have exclusive voting power in such an election.  
 
TITLE X - VOTER ELIGIBILITY 
Section 1: RBG members, of a ctive member status, shall be eligible to cast votes for 
Elections, Constitutional matters, and/or Bylaw matters no sooner then one (1) week 
after submitting an application for membership.


--- PAGE 11 ---
[RBG STUDENT BODY CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS] 
March 28, 2010 
 
RBG Communiversity 1
1 
 
 
 
 
 
RBG Family Code of Conduct 
Click on me for our School's Theme Video/Photo Story 
 
 
NO SNITCHING 
The Police, Capitalism, the State etc. are an enemy to the people and to work with them 
is criminal, Ancestral Treason! Loose lips sink ships, snitching is unforgivable. 
NO RAPE 
To Rape is a violation of a person’s physical, mental, and spirit. It is Barbaric and anti-
African. Rapist should be dealt with. 
 
BANG FOR UHURU (FREEDOM)  
Warriors can only be initiated by an enemy. If you are going to bang-bang on the 
system, not other Africans. 
 
NO EXPLOITATION  
Don’t exploit your people. You live in the hood, they live in the hood and chances are 
they don’t have anything more than you do. We have enough community leaches and 
pork chop preachers robbing the people. 
 
WARRIOR CODE 
Security first! Protect Women, Children, & Elders. Train; work out get your fighting skills 
up to par. Police your own community. We don’t need pigs overseeing us.


--- PAGE 12 ---
[RBG STUDENT BODY CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS] 
March 28, 2010 
 
RBG Communiversity 1
2 
 
 
NO FALSE FLAGGIN’ 
Red, white, and blue ain’t never did sh*t for you. Don’t be a star-spangled slave. Get on 
the right team; rally round the flag on some Red, Black, and Green. 
 
DISCIPLINE 
Get your mind right, focus and organize your life. Be committed. 
 
 
BUILD SURVIVAL PROGRAMS  
The people come first. You are your Brother/Sisters keeper. Capitalism teaches 
individualism, which is anti-African. We have to create programs that are for the best 
interest of the people (especially Food, Clothing and Shelter). 
 
P.E. (POLITICAL EDUCATION) EACH 1 TEACH 1!  
It is important for African people to have knowledge of self. We have to be able to 
articulate why we are in the conditions we are in, who put us in these conditions and 
how can we get out of these conditions. 
 
YOUR WORD IS BOND (DEATH BEFORE DISHONOR)  
Warriors are only as good as their words. Make your word your bond!

