=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Survival-of-the-New-Afrikan-Independence-Movement-Rev-Khandi-Paasewe.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 20
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:20:28.616090
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Page 1 of 20 
 
Survival of the New Afrikan Independence Movement                                                  Rev. Khandi Paasewe   
 
Survival of the New Afrikan 
Independence Movement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
By Rev. Khandi Paasewe 
(http://www.facebook.com/MamaKhandi) 
©Copyright Nov' 27ADM ®Registered Washitaw/PGRNA 
Registered Washitaw/PGRNA 
Source: http://khandipages.com/SurvivaltheAfrikanIndependenceMovement.htm 
To learn more see: RBG-Republic of New Afrika (PG-RNA) Historical Studies Collection 
                              New Afrikan Independence Movement TV 
Imari Obadele, co -founder of N'COBRA, and former President of 
the Provisional Government of the Republic of New Afrika. 
Comrade Obadele joined the ancestors in January of 2010.


--- PAGE 2 ---
Page 2 of 20 
 
Survival of the New Afrikan Independence Movement                                                  Rev. Khandi Paasewe   
 
Outline Thesis: Discussion of New Afrikan Independence Movement Survival to  
spite united states governmental policy & CONstitutional Impacts  
I. Key terms  
  A. New Afrikan  
  B. grants  
  C. rescind  
  D. informed choice  
  E. viable options  
  F. plebiscite  
II. Author's note  
III. Content  
  A. Definition of New Afrikan  
  B. declaration of war against Afrikans  
  C. brief analysis of colonial europeans founding fathers  
  D. Three Viable options plus one  
  E. Afrikan nation builders  
IV. Conclusion  
Author's Note  
All spellings of amerikkka, overstand vs. understand, "i" lower case, We in 
capital, u.s.a., european, white, in lowercase, Black in upper case and the like   
are purely intentional, as symbolic of the efforts of this author to purge from  the 
psychopathology which is in opposition to the Afrikan centered ethos of  which 
this author subscribes.


--- PAGE 3 ---
Page 3 of 20 
 
Survival of the New Afrikan Independence Movement                                                  Rev. Khandi Paasewe   
 
 
Survival of the New Afrikan Independence Movement 
    
Thesis: Discussion of New Afrikan Independence Movement Survival to Spite  
united states governmental policy & CONstitutional Impacts New Afrikans are  
defined as a people linked by common experience, being captured by invaders of  
the new world, sold into slavery, suffering dehumanizing treatment and were  
denied basic human rights. Being denied our history, cultures, tradition and  
languages, the common thread that binds community and family were broken. 
So  
We could not build alliances on the basis of being identified as Ashanti or Hausa,  
Zulu, Yoruba or Mandinka. Thus, We find a New Afrikan, with new common  
bonds: Independence. New Afrikans set into full motion the revolutionary 
actions  necessary to fight amerikkkans for our own independence. The New 
Afrikan  
Independence Movement grew out of a desperate need to respond to 
governmental  
policy and CONstitutional laws of the united states.  
The written declaration of war against the New Afrikan Independence 
Movement  
in the form of Article one, paragraph one, section 9 (titled the legislative  
articles/powers denied to congress), states, "...the migration of importation of  
such persons as any of the states now existing shall think proper to admit,  
shall not be prohibited by the congress prior to the year one thousand eight


--- PAGE 4 ---
Page 4 of 20 
 
Survival of the New Afrikan Independence Movement                                                  Rev. Khandi Paasewe   
 
hundred and eight..." (Burns; 1989:22C) What this means in plain english is, the  
united states declares war on Afrikans in Afrika as well as New Afrikans. It  
also meant the slave trade would continue another 20 years and "...the full  
powers of the united states government would be used to protect all amerikkkans  
engaging in the trade." (Obadele; 1989:17) The united states, by law, supported  
war in Afrika against Afrikans.  
In brief analysis of some of the european colonial founding father's writings,  
We find some very interesting text, relating to New Afrikans. In the  
CONstitution for example, article 4, section 2, paragraph 3, interstate  
relations (in the portion some textbooks refer to as privileges & immunities),  
it states, "...no person held to service or labour in one state, under the laws  
thereof, escaping into another shall in consequence of any law or regulation  
therein, be discharged from such service or labour, but shall be delivered up on  
claim of the party to whom such service or labour may be due." (Burns; 1989:  
22d) This article was certainly never for the benefit of New Afrikans. For  
amerikkkans, article 4, section 2, paragraph 3 calls for no celebration of New  
Afrikans who dared to seize independence by fighting for our freedom. For New  
Afrikans, article 4, section 2, paragraph 3 represents a clear, unquestionable  
declaration of war which still stands today. The authors of various text books  
would have us think that the 13th amendment repeals this article. Such is not  
the case. Article 4, section 2, paragraph 3 is clearly defined in Imari  
Obadele's book titled, The New International Law Regime and united states


--- PAGE 5 ---
Page 5 of 20 
 
Survival of the New Afrikan Independence Movement                                                  Rev. Khandi Paasewe   
 
Foreign Policy, where he states, "...article 4, section 2, paragraph 3 ...  
pledged the full force of the united states' state structure -- president,  
governors, courts, militia, army, navy, sheriffs -- to prevent the quest of  
freedom of the brave New Afrikans and to return those to slavery who succeeded  
in winning their strikes for freedom." (Obadele; 1991:323) Clearly, the white  
founding fathers (policy makers) and their documents, they co-authored, were  
designed to have damaging affects on the New Afrikan Independence Movement.  
Further, more obstacles to the New Afrikan Independence Movement include the  
13th, 14th, & 15th amendments. Amendment 13 made a change in the law. New  
Afrikans held as slaves were no longer slave or property. Slavery was dead but  
the 13th amendment was merely declamatory of the fact that New Afrikans died  
with honors in the civil war for the rights of freedom.  
As for the 14th amendment, where it grants citizenship, it must be noted that,  
that which is granted can be rescinded. In fact, it is, at best an offer, not a  
grant. It is an option which We have and have never given up our rights to. The  
CONstitution assumes a conqueror's superiority when addressing New Afrikans 
in  
legislation under the facade of offers and grants. Such is the case with the  
united states and Turtle Islander (native amer. indian) nations like the  
Cherokee, Creek, and Tuscarora in which the supreme kkkourt stated these  
nations and others were not completely independent but "domestic and 
dependent  
nations." (Obadele; 1991:323) Thus, these amendments (even if well intended,


--- PAGE 6 ---
Page 6 of 20 
 
Survival of the New Afrikan Independence Movement                                                  Rev. Khandi Paasewe   
 
which is questionable) are in violation of New Afrikans' rights. Freedom,  
citizenship, the vote, which the 13th, 14th, and 15th amendments attempt to  
address, are rights, not grants or offers or acts of legislation; rights of choice of  
New Afrikans; rights demonstrated by plebiscite which has yet to occur. New  
Afrikans have the right to informed choice to follow the Strategies of Struggle.  
Until We vote to either:  
  1. build an Independent Nation State,  
  2. Choose united states citizenship,  
  3. go back to Afrika,  
  4. go to some other country of our choosing (not Afrika or u.s.a.); live with  
  independent Turtle Islander nations,  
any legislation constitutes an imposition of our right to self determination.  
New Afrikans must consciously and freely choose. The key element here is the  
right of free informed choice. It can not be emphasized enough that New 
Afrikans  
had and still have four logical choices of political futures. Choices other than  
united states citizenship find New Afrikans far less informed, since the other  
options still remain less palatable to white amerikkkans.  
Another example of the CONstitution assuming a conqueror's superiority stance 
is  
eloquently stated in Dr. Imari Obadele's book, Foundations of a Black Nation,  
"When the u.s. bought the Virgin Islands from Denmark... the u.s. never asked  
the Black Virgin Islanders... to express their views on future status. u.s.


--- PAGE 7 ---
Page 7 of 20 
 
Survival of the New Afrikan Independence Movement                                                  Rev. Khandi Paasewe   
 
congress simply passed a law and made all Virgin Islanders u.s. citizens."  
(1975:22) This is yet another clear example of the denial of our rights to  
self-determination. For those who celebrate Kwanzaa, the New Afrikan holiday  
created by Dr. Ron Karenga, you will relate to the principle of Kujichagulia  
(Self Determination). Defined, self determination means, man know thyself,  
determine for yourself who you are, and accept no one else's definition of you.  
Kujichagulia is one of the laws of the Nguzo Saba (Seven Principles) which  
govern conscious New Afrikans' lives and the holiday of Kwanzaa.  
The New Afrikan Independence Movement is not a new concept. Available to 
New  
Afrikans were what i refer to as the Three Viable Options, plus One. These  
options were/are:  
  1. return to Afrika,  
  2. integrate into united states society,  
  3. build an independent Nation State or  
  plus one: escaped to Turtle Islander Nations.  
History records a few instances where enslaved/captured Afrikans chose the  
option of returning to Afrika. Such instances of resistance to enslavement  
include the overtaking of the slave ship Little George in 1730, the overtaking  
of the slave ship the William in 1732 and the slave ship Creole in 1841. The  
Creole did not return to Afrikan but rather to the Bahamas to establish  
themselves as free, independent and sovereign Afrikans. In 1820, 88 New 
Afrikans


--- PAGE 8 ---
Page 8 of 20 
 
Survival of the New Afrikan Independence Movement                                                  Rev. Khandi Paasewe   
 
arrived on the west coast in the state of Liberia. Their return to Afrika,  
contributed to the building of Sierra Leone and Liberia. Hundreds of thousands  
of New Afrikans believed this to be the only way to uplift a degraded people.  
Among those who returned was David Coker, religious leader and schoolmaster 
of  
Baltimore. Others who returned to Afrika include John Russwurm, college grad,  
co-founder of the first New Afrikan newspaper; Alexander Crummell, minister 
and  
scholar; Lott Carey, clergy, doctor, agriculturist; Ed W. Blyden, scholar; Henry  
Garnet; and Dr. Martin Delaney who was a physician.  
The next option of integration was chosen by such Afrikans as Osborne Perry  
Anderson, who was a comrade of John Brown who led a force of white 
amerikkkans and New Afrikans on a successful attack on Harper's Ferry (the 
united states arsenal) in Virginia in 1859. Anderson's hope was that their 
collective  
would become a state of the united states. Instead, John Brown and others were  
hung, Perry Anderson escaped and became a fugitive thereafter. Other  
integrationists include Richard Allen, Frederick Douglas (who knew of John  
Brown's plan to attack Harper's Ferry and was forced to flee to europe for fear 
of  
united states prosecution of co-conspiracy), Harriet Tubman, David Walker,  
Henry Highland Garnet, Ida B. Wells and Sojourner Truth.  
The united states declared its independence in 1776. Its CONstitution went into  
effect in 1789. In 1800, on October 7th, a mere dozen years after the


--- PAGE 9 ---
Page 9 of 20 
 
Survival of the New Afrikan Independence Movement                                                  Rev. Khandi Paasewe   
 
CONstitution was approved, General Gabriel Prosser and his secret army of 
over  
1000 freedom fighters, armed with weapons and a careful, meticulous plan  
marched towards Richmond, Virginia. Fierce thunderstorms washed out roads  
and bridges, causing the revolt to be aborted. General Prosser and 22 others 
were  
hung when their plans were discovered. General Prosser's objective was not  
merely to abolish slavery but also to establish an independent nation state. His  
intentions are stated in his choice of target, the state capital. This objective  
makes clear that his was a movement and not an individual or small group 
attack,  
nor a blow in anger to kill evil slavemasters. Herein, Prophet Nat Turner  
deserves honorable mention for his revolt which killed 60 whites. Abolishment of  
slavery was his mission and less focused was he on New Afrikan Nation building.  
As it relates to the Three Viable Options (or the Strategies of Struggle),  
General Prosser was in the good company of fellow nation builders like General  
Gracia. General Gracia established Gracia Real De Santa Teresa De Mose in  
1739 to 1763. Then united states general andrew jackson uprooted and forced  
General Gracia southward; exercising the plus one option, General Gracia  
established the New Afrikan-Turtle Islander Seminole state in 1836-1842 in  
Spanish Florida. General Gracia was later captured and murdered. Also,  
following in the footsteps of General Gabriel Prosser was General Denmark  
Vesey, in 1822, whose army numbered over 9,000. His elaborate plan centered on


--- PAGE 10 ---
Page 10 of 20 
 
Survival of the New Afrikan Independence Movement                                                  Rev. Khandi Paasewe   
 
total secrecy and taking Charleston. Due to special preparations by 
amerikkkans,  
the attack was postponed. Rumors of revolt led to the arrests of Denmark, Peter  
Poyas and 4 others. They died silently. The army of over 9,000 was never  
discovered by the white amerikkkans.  
New Afrikan freedom fighters all over the new world fought and built 
independent  
nation states from Zumbi of Palmares Republic in Brazil; to General Kojo,  
Accompong, Kofi, Johnny and Nana Acheampong (a female) in Jamaica; to  
Toussaint L'Overture in Haiti. Other nation builders include Marin Delaney who  
published various Black Nationalist newsletters; Rev. Tunis Campell, who built a  
New Afrikan government on several islands including St. Catherine and Sapelo 
off  
the coast of Georgia with a 275 man defense force (u.s. army forced him to give 
up  
the islands); Henry Adams who appealed fruitlessly for land for his nation state  
in Louisiana; and finally, Edward McCabe who sought to make Oklahoma his  
national territory. Generals Prosser, Gracia, Vesey, Kojo and Rev. Campbell 
with  
all the above mentioned nation builders along with those whose names escape the  
history books, are prime examples of the support for and the practice of the  
viable option (strategic goal) of independent nation-statehood.  
The Plus One option, was not considered viable. Escape of New Afrikans to 
Turtle  
Islander states was considered temporary. Though, temporary, many New


--- PAGE 11 ---
Page 11 of 20 
 
Survival of the New Afrikan Independence Movement                                                  Rev. Khandi Paasewe   
 
Afrikans resorted to finding safehaven in these communities. "The strategic goal  
of escaping to the Indians and joining them was pursued by New Afrikans  
individually and in groups, but arguably, this goal never became a national  
strategic goal. It tended to be an expedient." (Obadele; 1991:329) Textbooks in  
amerikkka would have us think that New Afrikans escaping to Turtle Islander  
nations was not necessary and that freedom fighters like Gabriel, Denmark, 
Tunis  
and others, mentioned and not mentioned, were not worthy of note. When these  
New Afrikan heroes and sheroes are briefly commented upon, it is mostly in a  
unsuccessful or criminal context. But who are the real criminals? Are We to  
believe that washington, adams, hamilton, madison and jefferson along with such  
notables as roger sherman, robert livingston and ben franklin were lovers of  
freedom? Was their love of freedom merely a part of a feel good curriculum? 
Who  
were they really? Let's look at a few of these men from our Afrikan centered  
perspective.  
The first draft of the declaration of independence of 1775 reveals a compromise  
on the part of jefferson resulting in the omission of the indictment against  
slavery. "thomas jefferson never had a white woman by his side after his white  
wife died in 1782 and for the next twenty years as he was ambassador to france,  
secretary of state, and president of the united states, jefferson only had a  
Black woman by his side" named "Sally Hemmings," as stated in the most


--- PAGE 12 ---
Page 12 of 20 
 
Survival of the New Afrikan Independence Movement                                                  Rev. Khandi Paasewe   
 
capable words of Dr. Leonard Jefferies, (speech published in the Saturday, 
August 31,  
27ADM [91] issue of the New York Amsterdam News Paper:32). None of the 
slaves of  
jefferson were ever freed by him nor were the children of Sally Hemmings nor  
Sally herself.  
It needs to be overstood that any New Afrikan who opposed the lovers of 
freedom  
were taking a very principled stand. Benjamin Banneker for example, challenged  
thomas jefferson's beliefs of Afrikan inferiority. Banneker accomplished what  
franklin could only take credit for. Banneker and franklin lived during the same  
time period and were acquaintances. Both were scientists and creators of  
almanacs. However, Banneker's almanac was so accurate that it is still the basis  
of almanacs of today, where franklin's is not. Banneker was an inventor and  
engineer. When Banneker City (washington dc) was in jeopardy of not being 
built  
because the frenchman who had the plans left taking them with him, Banneker,  
from memory, drafted the plans. Therefore, Benjamin Banneker represents 
more  
than ben franklin (at least in the hears and minds of conscious New Afrikans).  
The real criminals? Throughout history franklin has taken credit for the works  
of Banneker. But isn't that typical behavior of white amerikkka? Lewis 
Latimer's  
work was taken credit for, by thomas edison. Granville Wood's work was taken  
credit for by alexander graham bell. Woods was a New Afrikan who is quoted in


--- PAGE 13 ---
Page 13 of 20 
 
Survival of the New Afrikan Independence Movement                                                  Rev. Khandi Paasewe   
 
Dr. Jeffries's speech, taking the principled stand of "i'm not going to be  
bought off by a white man." (Jeffries; 1991:32) Woods and his brother  
established the Woods Electric Co. in Ohio. It also should be noted in the face  
of text book omissions, that Woods took edison to kkkourt twice for stealing  
his patents and Woods won the case. So, We have franklin and jefferson, for  
example, with other white criminals who were claiming freedom for themselves,  
while simultaneously trying to protect and preserve the system of slavery,  
cultural imperialism and oppression of Afrikans globally.  
The New Afrikan Independence Movement today is still being met with violent  
opposition just as in the days of Tunis, Gabriel, Denmark and others. Those  
seeking the option of building our own New Afrikan independent nation state,  
like our New Afrikan ancestors, still sit, today, in u.s. jails, dead,  
discredited, in exile or in the underground network. The fact is, neither the  
state of Mississippi CONstitution, for example, nor the u.s. federal government  
CONstitution provides any methods whereby New Afrikans may exercise our 
right  
to build an independent nation, separating ourselves peacefully from the u.s.  
Congressman Fauntleroy and Conyers have forwarded legal documents on 
behalf  
of those seeking the option of an independent nation, placing proposals in the  
hands of richard nixon. With the exception of violent attacks against New  
Afrikans doing nation building work around the country, the u.s. chooses to  
ignore any such proposals.


--- PAGE 14 ---
Page 14 of 20 
 
Survival of the New Afrikan Independence Movement                                                  Rev. Khandi Paasewe   
 
So, in conclusion, the governmental policies and CONstitutional laws and  
legislation are merely tools to pacify New Afrikans and lull us into a state of  
illusionary contentment. The 15th amendment grants the vote via the imposed  
citizenship of the 14th amendment. Yet, all attempts to organize a plebiscite by  
New Afrikans to participate in an informed vote of self-determination, has been  
met with conspiracy, armed resistance and violence on behalf of the u.s.  
government and its various factions of its infrastructure. These amendments are  
mere pacifiers and like all pacifiers, they build gas and no nourishment will  
ever come from them. Therefore, the cons are amerikkka's persistence to 
cremate  
the New Afrikan place of genius, persistence and resistance in history. The pros  
are the afterlife of New Afrikans who continue to rise like the phoenix from the  
ashes, unwilling to die the death of historical cremation which amerikkka has  
prepared for us. From the rebellion on the first slave ships, to the present day  
efforts of New Afrikans to BE a force in the struggle for independence; We will  
not merely shut up and disappear; We can not be bought off; We will not fear. If  
the "price of freedom is death," in the words of Malcolm X, then We will pay it  
with commitment and devotion through New Afrikan Nation building: a viable  
alternative to racism, cultural imperialism and white supremacy in amerikkka.  
The New Afrikan Independence movement in its present day form: Provisional  
Government Republic of New Afrika. PGRNA


--- PAGE 15 ---
Page 15 of 20 
 
Survival of the New Afrikan Independence Movement                                                  Rev. Khandi Paasewe   
 
Country report Supplement  
3/10/28 ADM  
Country: Republic of New Afrika (RNA)  
Population: (based on the population of the five states in the Black Belt South,  
outlined as the national territory of RNA):  
  6,194,077.45 total Black population  
  21,391,663 total population  
  Louisiana - 4,287,195 total population 1,320,456.06 (30.8%) Black population  
  Mississippi - 2,614,294 total population 930,688.664 (35.6%) Black population  
  Alabama - 4,135,543 total population 1,046,292.379 (25.3%) Black population  
  Georgia - 6,751,404 total population 1,822,879.08 (27%) Black population  
  S. Carolina - 3,603,277 total population 1,073,761.646 Black population  
Land Size (based on the land size of the five states in the Black Belt South,  
outlined as the national territory of the RNA): 229,260 total square miles  
  Louisiana - 43,566 sq. mi.  
  Alabama - 50,750 sq. mi.  
  Mississippi - 46,914 sq. mi.  
  Georgia - 57,919 sq. mi.  
  S. Carolina - 30,111 sq. mi.  
  Significant Natural Resources:  
  Alabama - chief port in Mobile agriculture: peanuts, cotton, soybeans,  
  cottonseed, catfish, hay, corn, wheat, potatoes, sweet potatoes, pecans,


--- PAGE 16 ---
Page 16 of 20 
 
Survival of the New Afrikan Independence Movement                                                  Rev. Khandi Paasewe   
 
  peaches live stock: cattle, hogs, pigs, poultry, catfish timber/lumber: pine,  
  hard woods non-fuel minerals: stone, cement, clay, lime, sand and gravel  
  commercial fishing principle industries: pulp, paper, electronics, chemicals,  
  apparels, textiles, primary metals, lumber, wood products, food processing,  
  fabricated metals, automotive tires, oil & gas exploration  
  Georgia - chief ports: Savanna, Brunswick chief crops: peanuts, cotton, corn,  
  tobacco, hay, soybeans timber/lumber: pine, hardwood livestock: poultry,  
  cattle, hogs, pigs commercial fishing principle industries: services,  
  manufacturing, government, retail trade, textiles, foods, kindred products  
  Louisiana - chief ports: Baton Rouge, New Orleans, Lake Charles, S. Louisiana  
  Port Commission at LaPlate, Shreasport principle industries/goods:  
  wholesale/retail trade, transportation, mining, chemical products, foods,  
  transportation equipment, electronic equipment, petroleum, lumber, wood, 
paper  
  agriculture: soy beans, sugar cane, rice, corn, cotton, sweet potatoes, pecans  
  surahgum livestock: cattle, hogs, pigs, sheep, poultry timber/lumber: pine,  
  hardwood, oak natural minerals: salt, sand, gravel, sulfur commercial fishing  
  oil (off shore & under the ground)  
  Mississippi - Pascagoula, Vicksburg, Gulf Port, Natchez, Greenville principle  
  industries/goods: manufacturing, government, wholesale/retail trade, apparels,  
  food, kindred products, furniture, lumber, wood products, electrical  
  machinery, transportation products/chief crops: cotton, catfish, rice,


--- PAGE 17 ---
Page 17 of 20 
 
Survival of the New Afrikan Independence Movement                                                  Rev. Khandi Paasewe   
 
  soybeans livestock: cattle, hogs, pigs, broilers timber/lumber: pine, oak,  
  hardwoods non-fuel minerals: construction sand, gravel, commercial fishing oil  
   
  South Carolina - Charleston, Georgetown, Port Royal principle  
  industries/goods: tourism, agriculture, manufacturing, textiles, chemicals,  
  allied products, machinery, fabricated products, metals, apparels chief crops:  
  tobacco, soy beans, corn, cotton, peaches, hay livestock: cattle, hogs, pigs,  
  chickens, (excluding broilers)] timber/lumber: pine, oak non-fuel minerals:  
  crushed stone, cement, clay commercial fishing  
Economics/GNP/P.C.I. - diversified; no immediate use for thesse in the present  
provisional state  
National/Ethnic/Tribal Groups (%'s): Afrikan descendants, Turtle Islanders  
(native amer. indians)  
Religious Groups (%'s): Afrikan traditionalists and other beliefs  
Marriage system: both polygamous and monogamous  
Languages: KiSwahili (national language), english, and others  
History:  
  1. Ancient Civilizations: Songhai, Timbuktu, Khemet, Ethiopia, Inca Aztec  
  2. Major conflicts/wars (in 20th century): Cointel-Pro (fbi/cia's counter  
  intelligence programs waged against Afrikan and New Afrikan  
  nationalist/PanAfrikanist/integrationist structures  
  3. Independence: initial declaration October 7, 1800 by General Gabriel


--- PAGE 18 ---
Page 18 of 20 
 
Survival of the New Afrikan Independence Movement                                                  Rev. Khandi Paasewe   
 
  Prosser and New Afrikan army of more than 1,000 in Richmond, Va. 
Contemporary  
  declaration: 1968, Detroit, Michigan, New Afrikans meet to establish a written  
  document of their Declaration of Independence, establishing the Provisional  
  Government of the Republic of New Afrika  
Human Rights Assessments: Rating/Source: non-applicable  
Political Rights: All Afrikans born in amerikkka have the right as stated in the  
Code of Umoja (RNA Constitution)  
Voting Rights: All Afrikans born in amerikkka have the right to vote as stated  
in the Code of Umoja (also the National Black Elections texts)  
Criminal (Right of Accused): All New Afrikan citizens presently held in  
amerikkkan kkkoncentration kkkamps prisons) should be given POW/political  
prisoner status and then set free (refer to POW mailing list)  
Economic/Property Rights: All New Afrikan citizens have the rights as sighted in  
the Code of Umoja  
International/Regional Security/Trade Groups:  
  Libya: assist in RNA sovereignty and statehood  
  Cuba: same as Libya (give asylum to our military in exile)  
  Turtle Islanders: exchange assistance of our independence with theirs  
  Sources: The Libya Papers Turtle Islander Treaty Papers Cuban Alliance 
Papers  
Type of Government (Formal Structure):  
  Constitutional - Code of Umoja


--- PAGE 19 ---
Page 19 of 20 
 
Survival of the New Afrikan Independence Movement                                                  Rev. Khandi Paasewe   
 
  Parliamentary - PCC (People's Senate Council representatives elected by the  
  citizens), have a vote in the PCC  
  Ministries - not elected by popular vote, appointed by the head representative  
  (President), approved by the PCC, have no vote in the PCC  
  non-party system  
No cracies, isms, or other terms apply  
Current issue (political controversy or event) that is (or was recently)  
associated with the RNA: Afrikan Independence in the Diaspora (especially in 
the  
united states) What the political issue/controversy is about: Fundamental reason  
oppression of Afrikans born in amerikkka continues, is because We lack the 
power  
to control our lives; the way to gain that power and end oppression is to build  
a sovereign New Afrikan nation (wage parliamentary war) Source: New Afrikan  
Creed Primary goals in the issue: is to gain power, end our oppression, build  
state (military power, government, inter into relations with other states)  
Opposition to the objectives of the RNA: amerikkka wishes to continue to  
control, retain power, oppress and continue relations which affect Afrikan lives  
Initiatives for implementation of the Prime Minister/Chief Executive of the RNA:  
use the resources of Afrikans - brains, labor, natural resources, limited  
objective, domestic support, foreign support, inherent military viability, with  
second strike capability (ref. Eight Strategic Elements)  
What policy should u.s.a. president clinton and/or secretary of state initiate:


--- PAGE 20 ---
Page 20 of 20 
 
Survival of the New Afrikan Independence Movement                                                  Rev. Khandi Paasewe   
 
support all reparations bills submitted to congress on behalf of the RNA (ref.  
Conyers HR40 Bill) and open negotiations with elected representatives of RNA to  
begin peaceful relations; encourage and support RNA plebiscite.

