=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Survival-Knowledge-and-Training-Portal-Plus-Two-E-Books-4Download.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 13
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:20:06.586843
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
RBG Worldwide 1 Nation                                                                                   February 9, 2011 
 RBG Survival Knowledge & Training Portal 
 Page 1 
 
 
 
“Two Very Useful Books 4Download” 
And 
Survival Training Camp: “A shield is not made on the 
battlefield” 
 
The Black Survival Network  recognizes that we live in an insecure world. The ravages of 
Hurricane Katrina, the global food crisis, skyrocketing energy costs, and many other crises begs 
the questions - where is the world headed? How bad will things get? And more to the point - are 
you and your family prepared for what’s yet to come? 
 
 
When Africans were brought to the United States in 1619, they were brought for the express 
purpose of providing labor for the emerging colony. From 1619 until 1865 African labor fueled 
the economic machi nery of the United States, transforming it from an agrarian society into an 
industrial giant. 
But with the end of slavery arose a new question. This question - termed the Negro question 
asked succinctly: What is to be done about the troublesome presence of  the Negro? Abraham 
Lincoln proposed mass deportation. Others since him have proposed mass sterilization and the


--- PAGE 2 ---
RBG Worldwide 1 Nation                                                                                   February 9, 2011 
 RBG Survival Knowledge & Training Portal 
 Page 2 
relegation of the Black masses to the lowest rungs of the U.S. class structure. Despite the range 
of proposals the goal has been the same: the maximum control and subordination of the 
masses of African people. 
These control mechanisms have been both psychological and social. This subordination has 
been economic, political, and cultural. The imperiled state of the Black masses of New Orleans, 
LA is indicative of the manufactured deprivations born of racism/white supremacy. The brutal 
murder of Sean Bell in New York, NY is indicative of the devaluation of Black life and the failure 
of Africans in America to effectively response to our dehumanization . All of these crises may 
pale relative to the looming specters of Global Warming, Peak Oil, and water scarcity where 
whole sectors of the United States and the Earth will become uninhabitable. 
What will Africans do? What will you do? 
We are taught by our ancestors that a “shield is not made on the battlefield”. The Black Survival 
Network exists as the vanguard formation promoting the education, organization, 
empowerment, and independence of African people. If you are determined to survive, if you are 
resolved to create a different future for Africans, your community, your family, and yourself then 
“the time to prepare is now!” 
http://www.blacksurvivalnetwork.com/


--- PAGE 3 ---
RBG Worldwide 1 Nation                                                                                   February 9, 2011 
 RBG Survival Knowledge & Training Portal 
 Page 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Free e-Book Downloads 
Donations Accepted 
Go to RBG Worldwide 1 Nation 
donation button top left 
http://rbgnation.ning.com/ 
  
The Worst Case Scenario Survival Handbook 
 Wilderness Survival Dummies


--- PAGE 4 ---
RBG Worldwide 1 Nation                                                                                   February 9, 2011 
 RBG Survival Knowledge & Training Portal 
 Page 4 
SUPPLEMENTAL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Basic Wilderness Survival Skills Video Playlist


--- PAGE 5 ---
RBG Worldwide 1 Nation                                                                                   February 9, 2011 
 RBG Survival Knowledge & Training Portal 
 Page 5 
How to Build a decent Wilderness Kit 
Shttp://www.m4040.com/Survival/Survival%20Kit.htmurvival Kit 
 
    Another M40 Basement Project 
 
    A Wilderness Survival Kit is an absolute must if you spend any time away from civilization 
(hunting, fishing, camping, hiking, etc). There are commercial kits available out there for 
purchase, but building your own helps you to think about the what -ifs involved in living off the 
land, and also the opportunity to tailor the kit to your skill sets and tastes. I detail one of my 
relatively comprehensive kits below. I have listed each item and explained some of the various 
uses for each as well.  
    As a preparedness buff, I would also recommend having a Home Kit and a Car Kit. 
    A home kit is something every family should think about making. It could be a small closet 
that contains all emergency supplies (fire extinguishers, first aid kit, storm supplies , etc). 
Canned foods, some (stabilized) water, and maybe a 10 lb. sack of rice are a good start. Its also 
nice to keep some candles, flashlights and a radio there. A particularly nice thing to have is one 
of those hand-cranked radios. About 30 seconds of c ranking will give you about 20 -30 minutes 
of sound. I use one of these while camping. For a decent discussion on home preparedness 
and kits, see this page: http://mysite.verizon.net/resoqpqa/ 
    A Car Kit is also is something everyone should have. It should contain blankets or a sleeping 
bag, water, food, some warm clothing, flares, basic first aid supplies, and anything else you can 
think of to make a few days in the car pass easily. For the food, I recommend MRE's or canned.  
 
 
 
MY HOME-MADE WILDERNESS KIT 
I made this external pouch kit for my Ghurka Kukri Modification Project . It is what I consider 
to be a very comprehensive wilderness survival kit (for its size). For more on survival itself as 
well as some good woodsman skills and tips, see my survival page here.   This large kit has 
velcro attachment straps, and is therefore wearable either on the sheath as shown, on the belt 
alongside the knife, or alone without the large knife (in areas where wearing the large knife may 
not be appropriate).


--- PAGE 6 ---
RBG Worldwide 1 Nation                                                                                   February 9, 2011 
 RBG Survival Knowledge & Training Portal 
 Page 6 
I've had quite a few inquiries about whether I would offer kits for sale. I have been looking into it, 
but have had mixed success. I would need to keep pricing reasonable, and I'm still looking at 
sourcing. I was recently rebuffed by Coghlan's when I inquired about using some of t heir items 
(survival blanket, compass, whistle, etc) in my kit. See the story HERE. If you want to purchase 
a nice little starter kit for wilderness survival, I have reviewed a kit that is one hell of a good deal 
HERE. 
  
 
The items pictured below are referenced by number and explained in detail in the 
following section. Note that some items are not shown (everyone kn ows what an aspirin 
or a pencillook like). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE KNIFE - This is not shown with, or even listed among the rest of the kit items, as I see it as 
too obvious to even list, and it is also something that should suit your skillset, personal tastes 
and budget. A good knife is a survival kit unto itself. From chopping timbers for a shelter, to 
carving up the makings of a bow drill for fire to whittling the catch for a snare, a good knife in the 
hands of a knowledgeable individual is THE key item in a kit. The rest is just dressing. I 
recommend something that can CHOP. W hereas you'll need to drop small trees and branches


--- PAGE 7 ---
RBG Worldwide 1 Nation                                                                                   February 9, 2011 
 RBG Survival Knowledge & Training Portal 
 Page 7 
for all types of purposes, this is critical. Rambo's knife might have LOOKED mean, but in a 
survival situation? In a true survival situation, I'll take my $20 reworked Ghurka Kukri or $15 US 
Mil Spec Machete over his $500 Jimmy Lile custom any day of the week. I own a LOT of 
knives... some of them quite expensive, but for true chopping power, I've made my choice. If 
you want to bu y an off the shelf knife (that requires no rework) for this purpose, I recommend 
the Becker Brute for the job. For those that want to go cheaper, there are a variety of short 
machetes out there that serve the purpose admirably. 
 
ITEM 1 - Contents, Survival Tips & Guidelines  (Printed on Waterproof Paper). This item is 
just a primer to help focus someo ne on the task in hand. It is not intended to be a survival 
manual, but a survival organizer which may help someone to prioritize their objectives in an 
otherwise confusing situation. It is also flammable if you cannot find tinder anywhere else. If 
you'd like to read it, you can See It Here. 
ITEM 2 - Pencil & 3 Blank Sheets Waterproof Paper  (notes for self & others) - This can be 
very useful for making notes to yourself or to others who may be searching  for you. It is also 
flammable if you cannot find tinder anywhere else. 
ITEM 3 - Small Swiss Army Knife  (blade, scissors, file, small screwdriver, can opener, 
tweezers, etc) - I have since swapped the Swiss Army knife for a Leatherman Micra. It is built a 
little tougher, and the scissors are much better. This is included primarily because the main 
knife in the kit is a bit cumbersome for fine whittling or cutting small items. You can use 
whatever you are comfortable with here. 
ITEM 4 - 550 lb.test Para Cord (20 ft.) - (Not Shown, as it is wrapped around the knife sheath 
& handle). The uses of Para Cord in a survival situation are too numerous to fully list. As an 
example, use it for shelter, whether for tying frame members together, or for stringing up a tar p 
between trees. Also use it for snares and for building other weapons. I would recommend more 
than the 20 feet specified in the kit ( I personally switch out all my boot laces with para cord as 
soon as I get them ). The Para cord is stronger than any boot laces sold. True Para Cord is 
constructed of an outer sheath which houses 7 inner strands. Each inner strand is 50 pound 
test, and the outer sheathing is rated at about 200 pounds. As such, in an emergency situation, 
if more string were needed, one can rem ove the inner strands, and the outer sheathing will still 
serve admirably as shoelaces. If your bootlaces are each about 3 feet long, then you would be 
able to gain more than 40 feet of string from the laces if needed. Not bad, eh?   Make sure that 
what you get has 7 inner strands, and is 550 lb test! This typically sells for about $5 -$10 for a 
100 ft length. This takes up a good bit of space in a kit, so I wrap about 20 -25 feet of it around 
the outside of the sheath instead of packing it inside the pouch. P ara cord can be obtained from 
many sources, but be careful what you are buying.  
 
ITEM 5 - Removed & Replaced with small, LOUD whistle! 
ITEM 6 - Small Lighter  - As I mentioned before, the "Rambo" types out there seem to like 
roughing it. By keeping a dozen  matches crammed in the handle of their knife, it would seem 
that they are severely limiting their fire making ability (as well as compromising the overall 
strength of the knife). I hope it's not the rainy season, as these matches could well be gone in


--- PAGE 8 ---
RBG Worldwide 1 Nation                                                                                   February 9, 2011 
 RBG Survival Knowledge & Training Portal 
 Page 8 
about the first five minutes.  I chose to put a mini Bic lighter, as you can start a hell of a lot more 
fires with it as compared to a comparable volume of matches. As backups, I also include the 
magnesium / flint bar, which, with a little practice, can start  thousands of fires, and the 
magnifying glass, which can start limitless fires. 
ITEM 7 - Magnesium / Flintbar Firestarter (also use as signaling device) - This item is about 
$5-$6 in any camping goods store, Wal -Mart, etc. As I mentioned above, with a litt le practice 
this little item can start thousands of fires. Just shave the magnesium with a knife (or file if 
you're carrying a multi-tool that has a file). collect all the shavings into a pile about the size of a 
dime.  I have seen some sites out there saying that you are supposed to strike the flint with your 
knife. This is stupid, as you will ruin both the knife edge and the flintbar. Just rest the corner of 
the bar right in the pile of magnesium shavings and run a NON -SHARPENED corner of your 
knife down the flint. Practice this a little in your backyard... it's really easy to get the hang of. The 
magnesium ignites with a flame like a blow torch, and will burn for several seconds. Keep your 
tinder and fuel ready to pile on, or build the tinder pile around the magnesium in such a way as 
to still allow the magnesium to be hit with sparks). 
ITEM 8 - Mini LED Flashlight - This is a very bright little light. If you plan to purchase one, buy 
one that has either white, yellow, green or blue light. The red LED's ar e not very bright, as they 
are much older technology. This item is great for short durations where you need to locate items 
at night. For longer duration, build a fire. These can also be used for signaling at night (another 
reason not to use the red). You can pack along a couple extra button batteries as well. They 
take very little space, and each lasts for quite a while. I recommend some electrical tape 
between each to keep them from discharging. As each battery is about the size of a dime, this 
takes very little space in the kit. If your light requires tools to change the batteries, make sure 
you have something to do it with! 
ITEMS 9 and 10 - 30ft Fishing Line and 6 Fish Hooks (15 lb test line) - I shouldn't have to tell 
anyone what to do with these. except to say that in most cases, you're better off setting lines on 
the heavier line (80 lb test line below) and leaving them unattended. There are better things to 
do with your time than to spend hours fishing or hunting. Setting snares and baited lines out, 
and then checking from time to time will net your best results.  
ITEM 11 - 50ft Fishing Line  (Hvy 80 lb test) (snares, shelter making, etc) - This line is 
Spiderwire Fusion brand, ultra-High Performance saltwater line. It is not monofilament, meaning 
it has inner strands surrounded by a tough outer sheath. This stuff is tough as nails, and has 
about a thousand uses. It can be used for shelter building, snare making, and for unattended 
fishing purposes among others. 
ITEM 12 - Mirror (Signaling, grooming) - A signaling mirror is great for signaling at long 
distances or to passing ships or aircraft. It can also be used for self inspection. No, I'm not 
talking about fixing your hairdo, I'm talking about checking wounds, rashes, etc in p laces you 
would not otherwise be able to see without being double -jointed. The mirror is stainless steel, 
and can take a decent edge if necessary (it might not be a bad idea to put a good edge on it 
before packing it in the kit). 
ITEM 13 - Compass - As you can see above, I have shown two items labeled Item 13. If you 
know how to use a compass, it is an invaluable tool. If you typically pack topographical maps 
with you, then it's worth bringing something nice. If not, something that points North may 
suffice.  If you are not at all familiar, then save the space, and pack something else, as you


--- PAGE 9 ---
RBG Worldwide 1 Nation                                                                                   February 9, 2011 
 RBG Survival Knowledge & Training Portal 
 Page 9 
already have one compass in item 5. It is a good idea for everyone to learn at least the basics 
of using a compass , and to have a good idea of basic directional orientation before heading 
into the wilderness.  
ITEM 14 - Needles(3) and Heavy Upholstry Thread (10 ft)  - Excellent for mending clothing 
and other items ( I still have a scar from where I mended the back of my hand while camping... I 
now carry a Surgical Suture in my kit !! ) 
ITEM 15 - Safety Pins (3) - Used for quick repairs of clothing and other gear. Can also be used 
as additional emergency fishhooks, etc.  
ITEM 16 - Survival Blanket - This is used as a blanket (reflects body heat back to you). It is 
also great for signaling, as it will reflect a lot of sunlight. Make a frame out of sticks, and stretch 
the blanket over it, and you have an extra large signaling mirror! This can also be u sed to 
waterproof your shelter, and to collect rainwater. Remember that whereas this is waterproof, it 
does not allow your perspiration to escape, and can therefore leave you colder than before. do 
NOT roll up in this or use it as an under layer inside of a jacket. Just wrap it around you like a 
shawl or poncho. These are available in most any Wal-Mart or other store that has camping and 
outdoors gear. The cost is about $2-$3 each. 
ITEM 17 - Painter's Tarp 9'x7'  -  This is a thin plastic sheet that can be u sed for a variety of 
purposes. It can be used with a little para cord as a Tarp Shelter, or as a waterproofing for the 
roof of whatever you construct for shelter. It can be laid out  to collect rainwater, used as a 
poncho, or employed as a Solar Still. This item can be purchased at your local hardware store 
for a couple dollars. For size considerations, I used the 0.35 mil painters tarp. This is extremely 
thin, but will pack 3 times a s small as a 1 mil thick tarp. It is very easy to tear, so you may want 
to practice using this a bit to make sure you can use it without ruining it. I bought this stuff in a 
roll 9ft. x 400ft. for about $12, so destroying a few sheets in practice is no concern! 
Notes for Item 17: You can also use one or more trash bags as a substitute for this item. The 
large lawn and leaf bags work well. The 45 gallon type can be cut open to a size of 4'x6', which 
is large enough for a one person tarp Shelter., or to serve as waterproofing for the roofs of a 
variety of other shelter types. Carrying two bags allows one to use one for shelter, and the other 
as a poncho, by tearing a hole in the top for your head (I say tear instead of cut, because cutting 
it will create an opening that will easily rip further). 
ITEM 18 - Water purifying straw -  This is one of  the greatest pieces of kit I have ever come 
across. It is good for 20 -25 Gallons of water (depending on just how crummy the water is). It is 
not just a filter. It actually filters AND treats the water with antibacterials. Even if you don't use 
this in yo ur survival kit, it is great to bring camping or to any outdoors activity. Amuse your 
friends by suddenly leaning down and drinking from some green swampy festering puddle! 
Some sites out there try to whack you for $20-$30 for this item, but I found some for about $7/ea 
at Cheaper Than Dirt 
ITEM 19 - Water Purification Tablets (20)  - These can each purify 1 or 2 quarts of water 
depending on how dirty the water is. Whereas these are Iodine based, they can be used for 
sterilizing injuries in the field. Crush up one water purification tablet and add about a teaspoon 
of water to make a strong Iodine topical solution / salve. If you need to irrigate a wound, simply 
thin this a little more. As each tablet can purify up to a quart of water, I would think that anything


--- PAGE 10 ---
RBG Worldwide 1 Nation                                                                                   February 9, 2011 
 RBG Survival Knowledge & Training Portal 
 Page 10 
up to a cup of water would produce a strong disinfectant solution. These are available in most 
any Wal-Mart or other store that has camping and outdoors gear. 
ITEM 20 - 5 feet of duct tape, wrapped around ball point pen - Ahhh... the many and 
wondrous uses of duct tape!! Where to start? Repairs can be made to just about anythin g. 
Patch holes in tarps, fix a point to an arrow or spear, etc etc etc. It can also be used to bandage 
cuts and scrapes (put a square of cotton from a tee shirt under it, don't just cover the wound 
directly). Make a butterfly bandage for more serious wound s. The pen is used as a backup to 
the pencil. 
ITEM 21 - Surgical Suture, Sterile  - I still have a scar from where I mended the back of my 
hand while camping. At the time, my emergency kit had only standard needle and thread, and 
let me tell you... this was  NOT an easy task!! ... I now carry a Surgical Suture in my kit !! I used 
to get these from Nitro-Pak.com, but they're much cheaper at Medrepexpress .   
ITEM 22 - anti-diarrhea pills (4), Motrin (6) in a watertight capsule  - As someone who has 
traveled overseas frequently, this is not just a wilderness survival item!! These are invaluable in 
many places. Having a bad bout with diarrhea whilst traveling in M exico is an inconvenience... 
having the same thing whilst in a survival situation could be DEADLY. The Motrin can be 
replaced with whatever industrial strength prescription stuff you may have laying around. If you 
find yourself having to make your way thro ugh 20 miles of wilderness with a crudely splinted 
broken leg, you'll be happy for whatever painkillers you have at hand !! 
ITEM 23 - Ziploc Freezer Bags (2)  - Use as canteens, waterproof storage for kit, and other 
items.  
ITEM 24 - Slingshot kit - The Slingshot Kit is a Powerband Replacement Kit (No.RR-2, Heavy-
Pull Band) from slingshots.com, the price is $4. This consists of a leather pouch and surgical 
tubing. This can be attached to a forked stick with ParaCord to make a slingshot. I have made a 
basic sketch of the best (simplest) way to do this  HERE. Other uses for this item include the 
ability to string a bow with it, and also the ability to make a Hawaiian Fishing Spear. 
ITEM 25 - Small Rectangular Cooking Tin - This item was purchased in the baking section of 
my local supermarket, and is a cooking pan for small loaves of cornbread, etc. It was sold in a 
pack of three for about $5. These are 6" by 3.5" by 2.5" deep. These are primarily used as 
cooking vessels, but double as tough and convenient containers to pack the kits in! 
  
 
 
RECENTLY ADDED ITEMS 
ITEM 26 - Fresnel Lens - The Fresnel Lens is a credit card sized magnifying glass, and can be 
used to inspect small items, or to start fires. It packs very small, so is handy to have (I keep one 
in my wallet as well).


--- PAGE 11 ---
RBG Worldwide 1 Nation                                                                                   February 9, 2011 
 RBG Survival Knowledge & Training Portal 
 Page 11 
ITEM 27 - Scalpel Blades  - I pack 2 of the size 24 scalpel blades. These come in sterile 
wrapping, pack extremely small and have a multitude of uses, from medical to skinning and 
gutting game, to fine whittling.  
ITEM 28 - Fifty Dollar Bill - (NOT SHOWN) This was something I wish I thought of, but I saw it 
in someone else's kit, and decided that it was a GREAT idea. Imagine getting lost, and 
eventually finding your way out of the woods far from where you intended to be. It's nice to have 
some cab fare, or mone y for a Big Mac... after a few days eating bugs, it would be a shame to 
emerge next to a 7 -11, and have no money for food! This could be whatever bill you feel 
comfortable putting in, or even an extra credit card (make sure it stays current). It's also a g reat 
idea to keep an emergency card or bill in your car's kit (ever forget your wallet?). 
ITEM 29 - MilSpec Snare Wire  (10 ft) - This stuff has a multitude of uses, from snaring to 
tripwire, to hanging food items over a fire for cooking.  
  
Notes:  Notice that the standard and heavy fishing line and the Snare Wire are all wrapped 
around nails. The nails can be used for shelter building, spear points and other tools. The thread 
is wrapped around the three needles. I used a cordless drill to make the winding of all this a lot 
easier. I will be updating this picture soon to include all items. 
  
 
  
What Makes This Survival Kit Different 
If you've read about these kits or built your own, you'll notice a few things that make mine a bit 
different.  
 I do NOT waste space with matches. In the space taken up by 6 or 8 waterproof 
matches, I've put a mini Bic lighter. It's the choice between starting 6 fires or 600. The 
magnesium flint bar can start THOUSANDS of fires, and is 100% waterproof. (about $5 -
$7 in any camping goods store, Wal-Mart, etc). 
 I do not waste space or weight on a sharpening stone. With a little practice, just about 
anyone can sharpen a knife using a smooth rock found in the outdoors. 
 The McNett Water purifying straw is one of the best pieces of kit to  come down the pike. 
There are various types out there, but I recommend this one for its size and price. Rated 
at 20-25 Gallons, this little gizmo should last any adult at least a month in the woods. 
Some sites out there try to whack you for $20 -$30 for th is item, but I managed to find 
some for about $10/ea.  
 The Slingshot Kit is a Powerband Replacement Kit (No.RR -2, Heavy-Pull Band) from 
slingshots.com, the price is about $5. For those who had a slingshot  as a kid and know 
how to use it well, this is a great piece of survival gear, but if you don't know what you 
are doing with one, you can leave this out, and use the space for something else. You 
can make other hunting tools instead.


--- PAGE 12 ---
RBG Worldwide 1 Nation                                                                                   February 9, 2011 
 RBG Survival Knowledge & Training Portal 
 Page 12 
 I do NOT waste space with Band -Aids. The duct tape serves well for bandaging small 
cuts, and the suture kit is for more serious injuries. For anyone who has had to stitch 
themselves up in the woods using a regular needle and thread, you will know it sucks, 
and that a nice curved pre-threaded cutting needle makes for much quicker work. With a 
little searching, these can be had for about $7 - $10/ea. For sterilizing injuries in the field 
crush up one water purification tablet and add about a teaspoon of water to make a 
strong Iodine topical solution. (this also saves room in the kit where some folks put tubes 
of disinfectant, etc). If you need to irrigate a wound, simply thin this a little more. As each 
tablet can purify up to a quart of water, I would think that anything up to a cup of water 
would produce a strong disinfectant solution. 
 The Painter's Tarp is very thin, clear plastic, and is available at most hardware stores. I 
recommend the 0.5 mil thickness, as you can pack it much smaller. It's usually only 
available in bulk rolls. This is great for draping over a shelter to waterproof it, and for 
making solar stills in dry climates. If you can fit the whole 9'x12' sheet, you can easily cut 
this up in the field to cover a shelter, make a solar still, and have a poncho all from the 
one sheet.  
  
I built this kit in triplicate, as a couple friends wanted one. The first item in the kit is a very basic 
survival primer. It is far from comprehensive, as it is meant for someone who is already quite 
familiar with survival techniques. It is intended to help clear someone's mind and start them 
focusing on the right priorities. The text of this can be seen on my SURVIVAL PRIMER PAGE. 
  
  
 
 In cases where I cannot carry a large knife, I carry a Gerber Multi -Tool. Actually, I carry the 
Gerber pretty much ANY time I'm headed into the woods. If you don't own one, these are 
invaluable !! 
 
 
  
Alternative Pouch


--- PAGE 13 ---
RBG Worldwide 1 Nation                                                                                   February 9, 2011 
 RBG Survival Knowledge & Training Portal 
 Page 13 
  
The tin with the kit enclosed will also fit quite nicely into a US Mil Spec Magazine Pouch. In fact, 
it will even fit a few extra items as well (like the Gerber Tool).   This pouch is tough as nails, and 
can be purchased for under $10 from most any Army/Navy outlet. 
 
  
 
FM 21-76 US ARMY SURVIVAL MANUAL 
I will add to this page as often as I have time, but if you want the original be -all and end -all 
source of survival information, it is the FM 21 -76 US ARMY SURVIVAL MANUAL. I have 
crunched it all into an MS Word Document. I abridged it only by removing the  Appendixes from 
the end. It is 233 full size pages in all, and the overall file size is about 2.5Mb, so it is relatively 
easy to download. Whereas your tax dollars paid for it already, please feel free to distribute it as 
you see fit. Simply RIGHT CLICK HERE and select "Save As" to Download. 
Don't have MS Word? They give away the viewer for free HERE

