=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Teachers Guide Single Page.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 56
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:17:25.982029
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Teacher’s Guide


--- PAGE 2 ---



--- PAGE 3 ---
Teacher’s Guide 
A Congo Chronicle 
Patrice Lumumba in Urban Art
by
Nathaniel Johnson
Director of Education
and
Dana Elmquist
Education Associate
with assistance from
Bogumil Jewsiewicki
Professeur Titulaire au Département d’histoire
de l’Université Laval et chercheur au CELAT
December 2008
Museum for African Art, New York


--- PAGE 4 ---
This exhibition is organized by the Museum 
for African Art, New York and guest curated by 
Bogumil Jewsiewicki. Support for the creation 
of the exhibition was received from the LEF 
Foundation and the Lannan Foundation.
Copyright 2008 © Museum for African Art, 
New York. All rights reserved. No part of this 
publication may be reproduced except solely 
for educational purposes. All other uses require 
written permission from the Museum for African 
Art, 36-01 43rd Avenue, Long Island City, N. Y . 
11101, www.africanart.org.
Front cover:
Lumumba, Master of the World. By Burozi. ca. 1970s. Oil on 
cotton, 66 x 50,8 cm. Jewsiewicki Collection.
Frontispiece:
Lumumba breaking chains. By Burozi, signed Tshibumba, K.M., 
date unknown. Oil on facric, 43.2 x 33 cm. Museum for African Art, 
2008.06.19.
4


--- PAGE 5 ---
Table of Contents
7 About the Exhibition
 
9 Urban Art: Themes and Techniques
 10 Breaking the Chains     
 12 LUMUMBA, Portraits of a Leader 
 12 LUMUMBA, His Rise and Fall 
 12 LUMUMBA Immortalized 
 14 The Memory, the Legacy 
 14 Prophetic Ancestors  
17 Approaching the Guide
 Educational Objectives
 Observing the Art Works
 Analyzing Art and its Relationship to Culture
 Learning to Respond to Art
 18 Case Study One - History and Politics
 20 Timeline of the History of Congo and Patrice Lumumba
 22 Case Study Two - History Painting Across Cultures
27 Additional Resources
 27 Text Resources
 27 Film Resources
 28 Online Resources
 29 Lumumba’s June 30, 1967 speech
 
33 Full Plate Images
5


--- PAGE 6 ---
About the Exhibition  
A Congo Chronicle: Patrice Lumumba in Urban Art


--- PAGE 7 ---
A CONGO CHRONICLE: Patrice Lumumba in 
Urban Art, originally shown at the Museum for 
African Art, New York, is the first major exhibition 
dedicated to Congolese popular painting. During 
the past thirty years, one of its main subjects 
has been the dramatic political career of Patrice 
Lumumba (1925–1961), a major figure in the 
Congolese independence movement who has 
become an important symbol of African self-
determination.
This exhibition demonstrates how painters em-
bodied popular, sometimes mythical, traditions 
in symbolic images to create a national hero and 
martyr. This phenomenon is similar to that found 
in medieval Europe, where cycles of paintings 
about Christ and the saints were used to teach 
the Christian religion. Urban paintings re-create 
and preserve the past through visual imagery, 
just as oral traditions re-created and preserved 
the past in African villages. These images serve as 
a universal language in cities whose multi-ethnic 
populations speak different languages.
Most of the paintings were purchased in Katanga 
Province where, in 1961, Lumumba was killed. 
Mineral-rich Katanga, far from the political capital, 
then became the scene of attempted secession, 
civil war, and foreign military intervention in the 
early years of Congolese independence. By the 
1970s and 1980s, Lumumba had become a symbol 
of hope, which by that time had been lost. Until 
Mobutu’s overthrow in 1997, Lumumba was much 
more popular with the common people than with 
the central government, for whom his memory 
represented a threat to its policies. Paintings 
of Lumumba, usually displayed in homes, 
represent a counterpoint to the official version of 
history, and a safe, if indirect, way to criticize the 
government.
Katanga 
Province
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC 
OF THE CONGO
Opposite: Votez tous M.N.C.-L. Liste No. 4. Campagne électorale 
(1959) [Cast Your Vote for Lumumba. Election campaign, 1959]. 
By Kalume, date unknown. Oil on fabric, 59 x 43.8 cm. Museum 
for African Art, 2008.06.01.
7


--- PAGE 8 ---
URBAN ART: Themes and Techniques


--- PAGE 9 ---
Urban paintings throughout the country are 
based on a limited selection of themes, styles, 
and attitudes, although regional differences exist. 
The paintings presented here come mostly from 
present-day Lubumbashi and other industrial 
centers in Katanga Province.
The works in this gallery outline the main 
topics in Congolese urban art: individual and 
collective identity, chronicles of current affairs, 
and recollections of the past as related to the 
present.
Opposite, from left, clockwise:
I Lover Mami-Wata. By Chéri-Benga, 1993. Oil on fabric. 89.2 x 42 
cm. Museum for African Art, 2008.06.02.
Inakale [No way out]. By M. Maka, 1996. Oil on fabric, 49.5 x 61 cm. 
Museum for African Art, 2008.06.04.
Colonie belge, 1909-1959. [Belgian Colony, 1909-1959]. By Nkulu 
wa Nkulu, date unknown. Oil on fabric, 39.4 x 55.2 cm. Museum for 
African Art, 2008.06.03.
9
Temps arabe, 1789. [Arab Time, 1789]. By Angali, 1984. 
Oil on fabric, 43.2 x 77.5 cm. Museum for African Art, 
2008.06.17.


--- PAGE 10 ---
Breaking the Chains
The Belgians, who initially presented themselves 
as liberators, in turn became enslavers. Congolese 
independence was hailed as the deliverance from 
the colonial oppressor.
The currency note, dated 1970, though briefly 
in circulation for the short-lived proclamation 
of Lumumba as a national hero, is the model for 
several paintings. Artists do not seek to faithfully 
reproduce the facts of the event, but to underscore 
its significance. Tshibumba’s painting shows 
Lumumba as the leader of the riots of January 4, 
1959. These riots put the Belgian Congo’s inde-
pendence on the international agenda, though 
Lumumba did not participate. Here the artist 
shows Lumumba carrying the Mobutist banner, 
which did not exist during his lifetime.
The killing of Lumumba defeated the people’s 
hopes for liberation, and the dictatorship of 
Mobutu Sese-Seko, which began in 1965, was 
perceived as a return to slavery. The painter here 
depicts Laurent Kabila, the Congo’s President 
from 1997-2001, as a new Moses breaking the 
shackles.
Left:
S.M. Le Roi Baudouin Ie et Lumumba P . Entretien d’indépendance 
congolaise [His Majesty King Baudouin and Lumumba P . discuss 
the Congolese independence], date unknown. By Tinda Lwimba. 
Oil on fabric, 58.4 x 41.6 cm. Jewsiewicki Collection.
Above:
Mzee anakata munyororo ya utumwa. [Mzee (Kabila) is breaking 
the chains of suffering], 1998. By A.B.C. Jaz. Oil on fabric, 49.2 x 62 
cm. Museum for African Art, 2008.06.20.
10


--- PAGE 11 ---
Le martyrs de l’independance, 4 Janvier 1959 [Martyrs of Indepen -
dence, January 4, 1959], date unknown. By Tshibumba. Oil on fab-
ric, 39.4 x 73 cm. Bol collection.
Congolese currency, 20-makuta bill with an image of Lumumba 
breaking chains. Jewsiewicki Collection.
11


--- PAGE 12 ---
LUMUMBA, Portraits of a Leader
Lumumba is often shown with symbols of his 
political role. One portrait has Lumumba in a 
medallion placed in the middle of a map of Congo, 
representing his desire that all Congolese be part 
of the same family, in one independent nation. In 
other paintings, he holds a globe with the African 
continent turned towards the viewer (cover image), 
signifying Africa’s rightful place in the world. Like 
others in this exhibition, these paintings cull from 
photographs or printed images.
LUMUMBA, His Rise and Fall
The outrage over Lumumba’s execution inspired 
many paintings. He is often depicted as a secular 
Jesus Christ who accepted death to save his 
country and continent. Some works, as seen here, 
depict a group of men, known as Lumumba’s 
Judases. These betrayers are usually found near 
the aircraft that carried Lumumba and his two 
companions, Maurice Mpolo (his Minister of Youth) 
and Joseph Okito (the Senate Vice President), to 
their deaths. The paintings are filled with symbols 
that emphasize Lumumba’s Christ-like sacrifice, 
the Europeans’ responsibility, and Congolese 
powerlessness. 
LUMUMBA Immortalized 
Tshibumba explicitly portrays the dead Lumumba, 
with the bodies of Mpolo and Okito, as Jesus 
Christ at the place of His Crucifixion. Burozi’s 
subdued version of this image was meant for 
the Congolese public, while Tshibumba’s was 
intended for foreigners. Congolese memory has 
universalized Lumumba as the Christ of Africa 
and of all Humanity.
Above:
Patrice Emery Lumumba. By Tshibumba, date unknown. Oil on 
fabric, 66.7 x 48.9 cm. Jewsiewicki Collection.
Opposite:
Calvaire d’Afrique [Torment of Africa, also called “National Hero 
and Prophet of Our Liberation”], date unknown. By Tshibumba. 
Oil on fabric, 47 x 88.9 cm. Verbeek Collection.
La mort historique de Lumumba, Mpolo et Okoto le 17 Janv. 1961 
[Historic Death of Lumumba, Mpolo, and Okito, on 17 January 
1961], date unknown. By Tshibumba, K.M. Oil on fabric, 36.8 x 
55.9 cm. Jewsiewicki Collection.
12


--- PAGE 13 ---
13


--- PAGE 14 ---
The Memory, the Legacy 
In 1997, Kabila was victorious over Mobutu. He 
emphasized his Lumumbist past to persuade the 
people that he was the spiritual heir of Lumumba. 
The image of Lumumba “shining down” on Kabila, 
at the heart of the Congo, reflects the slain Prime 
Minister’s role as an ancestor. Another painter 
presents Kabila, a Katangese, with several figures 
from Congolese independence: Moise Tshombe 
(the Katangese President who was Lumumba’s 
political opponent and implicated in his killing by a 
U.N. report in 1961), Lumumba, and Joseph Kasa-
Vubu (the President of the newly independent 
Congo).
Prophetic Ancestors
Like Christ, Lumumba had prophetic ancestors 
who announced his coming. Foremost among 
them is the Songye chief Lumpungu II, who was 
executed in 1936. According to the Belgian official 
charges, he had murdered a woman and her son. 
According to the Songye, his real crime was in 
writing a letter to the Belgian king demanding 
independence. The Lumpungu story is usually 
told in a single painting of his execution. Here, 
Tshibumba tells the Belgian version in seven 
paintings made for foreign viewers, beginning 
with the departure of Kapinga and her son and 
concluding with the chief’s execution. 
Another symbolic ancestor of Lumumba, a 
domestic servant named François, was publicly 
hanged in 1922 in Elisabethville, the place of 
Lumumba’s death. François became an urban 
hero because he killed a white man to avenge 
adultery and defend his dignity. Tshibumba titled 
this work “True Justice not Applied.” 
Above:
Patrice Emery Lumumba, son esprit incarné dans Mze Libera¬teur. 
Mzee Laurent Désiré Kabila, Le libérateur de la R.D.C. [Patrice 
Emery Lumumba, his spirit is incarnated in Mze Liberator. Mzee 
Laurent Desire Kabila, the liberator of the Democratic Republic 
of Congo.], 1998. By A.B.C. Banza. Oil on fabric, 83.8 x 61 cm. 
Jewsiewicki Collection.
Opposite, left column, right column:
No. 1 - 7.  Series of paintings depicting the story of Songye 
chief, Lumpungu II, who was executed in 1936, according to the 
Songye, because he wrote a letter to the Belgian king demanding 
independence. By Tshibumba, K.M., date unknown. Oil on fabric, 
38 x 59.7 cm (nos. 1-6), 30.8 x 38.7 cm. (no. 7). Vincke Collection.
La vraie justice non appliquée, la pendeson de François à Lubum-
bashi [True justice not applied. Hanging of François in Lubum-
bashi (Elisabethville)], date unknown. By Tshibumba. Oil on 
fabric, 38.1 x 61 cm. Jewsiewicki Collection.
14


--- PAGE 15 ---
15


--- PAGE 16 ---
Approaching the Guide


--- PAGE 17 ---
After gaining a general familiarity with the tenor 
of this exhibition in the first section there are two 
proposed case studies forming the core of this 
guide. Use the additional resources including a 
film, several text resources and online resources 
to engage with the questions that follow in this 
section.
The case studies are divided into the historical 
and the art historical. The first, written by the 
exhibition’s curator, Bogumil Jewsiewicki, de-
tails the last 40 years of political history in the 
Democratic Republic of Congo (formerly Zaire). 
A running time line, presented alongside the text, 
provides dates and historical events to anchor a 
complex history. Determine points of intersection 
between these two narratives. Observe the relative 
brevity of independence and democratic rule – 
was this part and parcel to the collective sense 
of lost possibilities? Can you relate this mourning 
on the part of a whole society to creation of myth 
filling a possible power vacuum?
The second art historical case study, written by 
Steven Nelson, provides a second alternative 
walkthrough to the exhibition. Discover the 
similarities and differences of European history 
painting when compared to representations of 
Patrice Lumumba in the Congo. Is one genre 
more anchored in reality? Does one genre serve to 
create or perpetuate a myth more than the other? 
Nelson’s review is critical of the exhibition on 
several grounds. What are Nelson’s contentions 
regarding the display of the works in the various 
exhibits? How does Nelson relate the thematic 
of the exhibition to its presentation – are these 
forces reconciled?
Lastly, a primary source text is provided along 
with many text and digital resources in the 
Additional resources section. Lumumba’s June 
30th 1967 speech was given moments before 
his assassination. While it is tempting to read 
elements of prescience into the text it can serve as 
a very poignant comment on the Belgian influence 
in contemporary Congolese painting.
Opposite:
Le Congo est en trouble a cause de cet homme de Lumumba. Arre-
tons le. [Congo is in trouble because of this man, Lumumba. Arrest 
him], date unknown. By Burozi, signed Tshibumba. Oil on fabric, 
45.7 x 33 cm. Jewsiewicki Collection.
17


--- PAGE 18 ---
Case Study I  
HISTORY AND POLITICS
Bogumil Jewsiewicki
In the 1960s, vast numbers of Africans acquired 
independence from the colonial powers. Now, in 
the 1990s, in Congo and throughout Africa (not to 
mention the rest of the world), living testimony 
of the events of that decade is giving way to 
memory and history. Historians and other cultural 
brokers have taken charge of knowledge of the 
period, which between the Second World War 
and the relatively peaceful demise of the Soviet 
system, profoundly changed the second half of the 
twentieth century. As eyewitnesses of the events 
of the 1960s grow old and die, social knowledge 
becomes detached from experience, surviving only 
through the links that may be constructed, either 
by art or by academic knowledge, between the 
things that happened then (of which there remains 
only a never fainter trace) and the social demand to 
understand them in relation to what’s happening 
now—the past as we reconstruct it in the present.
For the last twenty years, the West—and parti-
cularly North America—has been trumpeting the 
end of the big metanarratives, their inability to 
account for present experience and give meaning 
to the past. There is a serious risk that this part of 
the world will confuse its own story with the future 
of all humanity, as it has for the last two hundred 
years. Meanwhile various national, regional, and 
in some cases ethnic narratives, including pictorial 
and performative narrative forms, are reconfiguring 
the past, shaping knowledge to make it consistent 
with an affirmation of political identity. 
The majority of humanity claims the right to 
imagine and formulate a collective identity in 
political and narrative terms—narration is a crucial 
political instrument. In the West, narrative has 
played a particular in, for example, novel, and 
before that in Christianity, the religion that the 
West has made its own. This is a historical fact, 
but it in no way allows us to claim that when other 
societies narrate, they are recycling a Western tool. 
Those societies make their own tools, and a great 
variety of them—tools that are both adapted to 
local conditions and remain understandable from 
one region of the world to another, like a pop song 
or an Indian movie that cannot be owned by the 
West.
It is in this perspective that the question of what 
is known of Patrice Lumumba, founding hero of a 
new political order in Congo, in Africa, and we may 
even say among all the “oppressed of the earth,” 
is explored here. The 1990s have seen the figure of 
Lumumba replaced by that of Nelson Mandela, yet 
Lumumba the romantic hero, symbol of a painful 
coming-to-be through revolution, cannot really be 
opposed to Mandela, the wise man moving forward 
to full dignity by means of pardon and negotiation. 
Lumumba is rather the other side of Mandela. 
And the essays collected here propose, each in 
its own way, a reading of narrative constructions 
of Lumumba, particularly visual narratives. The 
Lumumba imagined, the Lumumba represented, is 
a figure who speaks and makes the viewer speak, 
but he does not tell his own story, and his story is 
only rarely told. It is rather in relation to Lumumba 
as the present has constructed him that social 
actors recount their experiences and formulate 
their conception of a just political order. Lumumba 
is a realm of memory where men and women 
make use of their knowledge of the past and their 
experience of the present, and on the basis of which 
they demand recognition of their dignity.
In proposing to the reader who visits this exhi-
bition an experience of Lumumba as a realm of 
Congolese memory, a realm on the basis of which 
the Congolese affirm their right to dignity and 
their aptness to speak in the name of all humanity, 
it is important to clarify one thing. The norms of 
social communication, the narrative conventions, 
18


--- PAGE 19 ---
and the aesthetic canons operative in the urban 
societies of Congo are not the same as those of 
North America. Steering clear of loco-centrism, we 
should not assume that because Congolese painters 
use the same tools as Western painters, they are 
trying to obtain the same effects. To give just one 
example, repetition, about which Western culture 
is ambivalent, is a valued stylistic trope in Congo, 
while radical innovation has little role in Congolese 
communication, which is structured by an aesthetics 
of reception. We cannot annex Congolese painting 
to the history of Western painting. Let us try instead 
to participate actively in the dialogue between the 
paintings and the documents that the painters have 
used as local memory; between the paintings and 
the essays, especially those written by Congolese 
researchers; and lastly between Lumumba as 
painted and Lumumba as represented in books, 
narratives, and songs. The political space of the 
years 1960 to 1980—a space, it must be admitted, 
that like the working men’s bar was exclusively 
male—was a place of political debate. Let us go, 
men and women, into that space and participate in 
that debate.
Let the reader and visitor also be aware of a radical 
change that has not been our primary focus here. 
During most of the second half of the twentieth 
century, politics as a sphere of knowledge and 
action was a male domain, for historical reasons 
concerning access to modernity through salaried 
work, which in the Belgian Congo only men could 
have. Today, however, in the last decade of the 
twentieth century, such knowledge is constructed 
and debated not in working men’s bars but in 
churches and social associations. Family survival 
is no longer guaranteed by the salary of working 
men but by the resourcefulness and street-smarts 
of women and children. And the political space is 
no longer the bar but the house of prayer or the 
marketplace. 
La rebellion au Congo [The Congo rebellion]. By Tshibumba, K.M., 
1975. Oil on fabric, 38.1 x 60 cm. Collection of James Bullard, West-
port, NY .
19


--- PAGE 20 ---
Timeline of the History of Congo and Patrice Lumumba
1874–1877 Henry Morton Stanley crosses the Congo region from East to West.
1876 Brussels Conference, organized by King Leopold II: creation of the International African 
Association. The European powers agree to Leopold’s control of the Congo so that he can 
suppress the Arab slave trade.
1882 Leopold II founds the city of Leopoldville (Kinshasa).
February 26, 1885 The Berlin Conference: The European powers divide Africa among themselves. The Free 
State of Congo is founded, which King Leopold II of Belgium rules as a private domain. 
Soon, international opinion denounces inhuman treatment of the Congolese.
November 15, 1908 The Belgian state annexes Congo, despite the opposition of its king, Leopold II.
July 2, 1925 Birth of Patrice Emery Lumumba.
1955 The Belgian king, Baudouin, visits Congo.  Patrice Lumumba, a postal clerk in Stanleyville 
(Kisangani), is an active member of the cercle d’evolues, an organization of young 
educated Africans, and meets the king and the Belgian Minister of Colonial affairs, A. 
Buisseret.
1956 Lumumba, at the invitation of minister Buisseret, travels to Belgium. The contrast 
between Europe and Africa has a major effect on his political views. After his return to 
Congo, he is arrested and convicted for misappropriation of funds.
August 1958 Sales Director in Leopoldville (Kinshasa). Promotes Polard beer, named “Le Belge” in 
the African section of the city because it was what the Belgians drank. Because the 
Congolese believed that the beer made you impotent, Lumumba was hired to change that 
perception.
October 28, 1958 The manifesto of the M.N.C. (Mouvement National Congolais) is published. Lumumba is 
one of the authors.
1958–1959 France’s granting independence to its African colonies creates additional pressure for 
independence in the Congo.
January 4, 1959 Riots in Leopoldville in favor of immediate independence.
January 13, 1959 Royal and governmental declaration of the principle of Congolese independence without 
undue haste.
20


--- PAGE 21 ---
November 1, 1959 Lumumba is arrested after the Stanleyville riots and is accused of 
incitement to violence.
December 1959 Local elections: M.N.C. victory in Stanleyville (55 of the 73 seats).
January 25, 1960 Four days after his conviction, P . Lumumba is liberated to participate in the 
“Round Table Conference” in Brussels.
June 21, 1960 As the head of the winning party, Lumumba forms the first Congolese 
government.
June 23, 1960 Legislative elections. The M.N.C. obtains 74 of the 137 seats.
June 30, 1960 Day preceding the official independence of Congo, Lumumba’s Speech of 
30 June provokes a massive departure of colonial administrators.
July 7, 1960 Katanga declares secession.
September 5, 1960 President Kasa-Vubu dismisses Lumumba from his post as prime minister.
September 14, 1960 “Removal” of civil authorities by Colonel Mobutu. Home arrest of 
Lumumba.
December 1, 1960 Lumumba is arrested while fleeing.
January 17, 1961 Lumumba is transferred to Katanga where he is assassinated with Okito, 
Vice President of the Senate, and Mpolo, a member of his cabinet. Their 
bodies are never recovered.
December 1962 U.N. troops occupy Elisabethville.
June 1963 Katanga gives up its struggle to secede from Congo.
June 1964 Moise Tshombe prime minister of Congo.
October 1965 Tshombe regime overthrown. Mobutu seizes power.
1997 Mobutu flees. Laurent Kabila seizes power.
January 2001 Laurent Kabila assassinated during a failed coop attempt.  His son, Joseph 
Kabila, is sworn in as president. 
21


--- PAGE 22 ---
This exhibition, originally planned to accompany 
the Museum for African Art’s “Memory: Luba Art 
and the Making of History” (1996), was an intense 
examination of the ways in which Congolese 
visual artists have worked at the crossroads 
of history and collective memory. The nearly 
fifty paintings on display by Tshibumba Kanda-
Matulu and others are not only politically charged 
examples of Congolese urban art; they are also 
history paintings which, on a fundamental level, 
function in a fashion similar to that of works such 
as Jacques Louis David’s 1785 Oath of the Horatii 
as well as his 1793 Death of Marat. To make such 
a comparison is to underscore the affective power 
of the included work as well as the artists’ ability 
to deploy the past as a means to articulate a 
present reality. What is most striking about this 
history is how artists molded the figure of Patrice 
Lumumba, the first elected prime minister of the 
Congo, into a metonym for Congolese history 
itself. Lumumba’s dramatic rise to power and 
meteoric fall from grace became the foundation 
for an art of pain, an art of suffering, and an art of 
catharsis. Lumumba is canonized on canvas: he is 
the prophet rendered in paint.
Guest curator Bogumil Jewsiewicki designed the 
exhibition in six sections: “Urban Art: Themes and 
Techniques,” “Lumumba: Portraits of a Leader,” 
“Lumumba: His Rise and Fall,” “Lumumba 
Immortalized,” “The Memory, the Legacy, the 
Appiopliation,” and “Prophetic Ancestors.” An 
introduction to the exhibition provided the viewer 
with a timeline of Congolese history from Henry 
Morgan Stanley’s 1872 crossing of the Congo 
River to Mobutu Sese Seko’s 1997 removal from 
power and Laurent Kabila’s subsequent seizure 
of it. The timeline gave the visitor a cursory-and 
very helpful- list of paradigmatic moments in 
Congolese history and supplied a sociopolitical 
frame for the work on display. As part of this 
theoretical orientation, the exhibition also 
included a re-created “Congo Cafe,” complete 
with tables and chairs, its walls adorned with a 
mural and popular paintings. There one could 
read news clippings about Lumumba dating 
from the 1950s to his 1961 assassination as well 
as view a film, comprising documentary footage 
and interviews, about this political figure and his 
importance in Congolese art and national culture. 
All of these things resulted in a rich exhibition, 
allowing the visitor to examine a body of painting 
and to learn about its sources.
Case Study II 
HISTORY PAINTING ACROSS CULTURES
Steven Nelson
Oath of the Horatii, 
1785 and Death of 
Marat, 1793 by Jacques 
Louis David.
22


--- PAGE 23 ---
Jewsiewicki went to great lengths to lead the 
Western viewer to understand the paintings as they 
would have been perceived in their own cultural 
milieu. The first section, “Urban Art: Themes and 
Techniques,” functioned as a primer on Congolese 
urban art. Along with Kalume’s wonderful portrait 
of Lumumba, Cast Your Vote for Lumumba. 
Election Campaign, 1959, Jewsiewicki chose to 
include a scene of colonial barbarism, two Mami 
Wata paintings, street scenes, a generic landscape, 
and a generic portrait. Wall labels for the latter 
two acclimated viewers to another way of seeing 
and took them to another realm of experience. 
There was also a painting with its back displayed-
to show the types of canvas, or rather sacks, that 
were used in many of these works. Other labels 
helped point out their syncretic nature. The one 
for Tshibumba’s Lumumbashi, the new Chicago, 
hold up of 31 March 1980 explored the use and 
meaning of Western references in this genre.
In this section, the curator also defined urban 
memory, calling it “a selection of themes from both 
the present and the past. The painter’s intention is 
not to formulate a personal view. Urban paintings 
give shape and form to the people’s knowledge 
of a certain event.” This statement struck me 
as a bit odd, since Cheri-Benga’s 1993 canvas I 
Love Mami Wata is a self-portrait, depicting the 
famed mermaid goddess seated on the shoulders 
of the artist. Yet the section as a whole worked 
as a beginning for the show, although it could 
have used the space more economically. In going 
through it, it was too easy to be led away from 
the main point of the exhibition: the figure of 
Lumumba in urban art.
As part of the viewer’s retraining in Congolese ways 
of understanding urban art as Well as the role of 
the artist, the labels for the paintings emphasized 
the titles of works rather than the artists. This was 
not a particularly successful strategy. In Western 
culture we often want to know who made the 
work before we want to know its title. To have 
to reeducate oneself in the very reading of labels 
was at least for this Africanist art history an utterly 
frustrating, especially because in much of our field 
the opportunities to hear the names of artists are 
so few.
In the remaining sections of the exhibition, the 
visitor was able to use the work to explore not 
only the life of Lumumba as depicted in paint 
but also the ways in which a body politic has 
been haunted by and inflected through memory. 
These canvases show how memory plays with the 
factual, reinterpreting it for other means. They 
articulated political opposition to the Mobutu 
regime, the pain of Lumumba’s fall, and his ensuing 
martyrdom. One of the most powerful works was 
Tshibumba’s 1970s canvas Zaire Independence, 
June 30, 1960, included in the section “Lumumba: 
His Rise and Fall.” Here, Tshibumba used the 
inflammatory speech Lumumba had given in the 
presence of King Baudouin and the newly elected 
Congolese Parliament to create a tableau which 
retrospectively tapped into the elation of the 
newly emancipated state. He included some of 
the stock icons of politically charged Congolese 
urban art: Lumumba with a globe showing Africa, 
broken chains of slavery, and a hand upraised in 
victory. Like the paintings around it, it does not 
attempt to report an event per se, but rather to 
articulate its significance, a significance that 
had a very charged meaning under the regime 
of Mobutu, which for many was interpreted as a 
return to slavery.
A case on the opposite wall contained photographs 
and news clippings of Lumumba’s speech and 
23


--- PAGE 24 ---
the outrage it caused in the West. Above this 
were three Congolese paintings, ruminations 
on the panicked white response to Lumumba’s 
charges. Given the importance of this event in the 
Congolese psyche, this display would have been 
made even more powerful with the inclusion of a 
painting of the speech itself.
One of the striking things about this body of 
work was the attention given to the audience. In 
Abio’s Lumumba Signing the Congo Declaration 
of Independence, the book Lumumba signed is 
upside down so that the viewer can easily read it. 
Many of these works-as in history painting more 
generally-are not only political statements but 
also didactic tools, meant to educate the viewer 
to the significance of the past. In the realm of 
political protest, to educate could be seen as 
being a route to politicization as well as a way to 
make citizens.
The final two sections, “The Memory, the Legacy, 
the Appropriation” and “Prophetic Ancestors,” 
most overtly showed the place of Lumumba as 
a present-day symbol. In the former section, 
some of the paintings made explicit metaphorical 
connections between Lumumba and heroes, 
present and past. Others represented Kabila as 
the new Lumumba, a leader breaking the chains 
of slavery under Mobutu. In the latter section, 
Jewsiewicki attempted to place Lumumba within 
an existing Congolese practice of creating heroic 
visual icons.
As powerful as many of these canvases are, some 
of their evocative force was lost in the manner 
of presentation. On one wall there were just too 
many pieces crowded together and grouped in 
a salon-like fashion; some of them were hung so 
high that they were difficult to see. It was also 
difficult to figure out what some of the works 
were, as they were too far away from their labels. 
In addition, it was not always clear when one was 
moving from one section to another.
Upon leaving the exhibition, I also had questions 
about the authorship and provenance of many of 
the works. A good number of the paintings were 
made by an artist who would sign another’s name. 
It would have been helpful to know the reasons 
for this practice. Was it economic? Were some 
artists getting better prices? Few of the labels 
revealed provenance. As a specialist, I assumed 
that those without such information belonged to 
Jewsiewicki, but the omission might have been 
confusing to a non-specialist. As a whole, the 
execution of the exhibition did not live up to the 
show itself.
“A Congo Chronicle” quite successfully raised 
provocative questions surrounding the relationship 
between facts and how they are collectively 
remembered. At times, however, there seemed 
to be an unstated desire to show the difference 
between “real” facts and the artist’s interpretation 
of them. Next to Tshibumba’s canvas The Martyrs 
of Independence, January 4, 1959, the curator 
notes, “Tshibumba represents Lumumba as a 
leader of the January 4, 1959, riots although he 
was not directly involved.” Such an “explanation,” 
a sort of correction of the artist, undermined the 
evocative force of the piece. The factual is not 
important here. The ways in which it is understood 
is. On that level, should the exhibition have been 
called a “chronicle,” a record of events in the order 
that they happened? Perhaps not. 
Nevertheless, and to Jewsiewicki’s credit, “A 
Congo Chronicle: Patrice Lumumba in Urban 
Art” was an important exhibition, revealing 
24


--- PAGE 25 ---
how, in a specific cultural milieu, memory as 
a visual language weaves complex metaphors 
that articulate the relation between past and 
present, tradition and modernity, and Africa and 
the West. The paintings on display are powerful, 
syncretic tableaus in which these oppositions 
come together on canvas to articulate changing 
social values, and they showed how the past can 
be utilized as a powerful tool in the construction 
of a present reality.
Lumumba signing the Congo Declaration of Independence, date 
unknown. By Abis, signed Tshibumba. Oil on canvas, 50.8 x 69.9 
in. Jewsiewicki Collection.
25


--- PAGE 26 ---
Additional Resources


--- PAGE 27 ---
Text Resources
Kanza, T. (1979) The Rise and Fall of Patrice 
Lumumba:  Conflict in the Congo. Boston:  
G.K. Hall.
Lumumba, P . (1972). Lumumba Speaks: The 
Speeches and Writings of Patrice Lumumba, 
1958-1961. Ed. van Lierde, J. Trans. Lane,  
H. Boston:  Little Brown.
Nelson, S. (Spring, 2000). Untitled [A Congo 
Chronicle: Patrice Lumumba in Urban Art]. 
African Arts,33 (1), pp. 80-82.
Witte, L. (2001)  The Assassination of Lumumba. 
New York:  Versa.
Zeilig, L. (2008). Patrice Lumumba:  Africa’s Lost 
Leader. London:  Haus. 
Film Resources 
LUMUMBA:  La Mort du Prophete
DVD, 69 minutes, 1992, France
Director: Raoul Peck
French with English subtitles
Lumumba: la mort du Prophete offers a unique 
opportunity to reconsider the life and legacy of 
one of the legendary figures of modern African 
history. Like Malcolm X, Patrice Lumumba is 
remembered less for his lasting achievements 
than as an enduring symbol of the struggle for self-
determination. This deeply personal reflection by 
acclaimed fimmaker Raoul Peck on the events of 
Lumumba’s brief twelve month rise and fall is a 
moving memorial to a man described as a giant, a 
prophet, a devil, “a mystic of freedom,” and “the 
Elvis Presley of African politics.” 
If Lumumba: la mort du Prophete is a film about 
remembering, it is even more a film about 
forgetting. It is not so much a conventional 
biography as a study of how Lumumba’s legacy 
has been manipulated by politicians, the media 
and time itself. Haitian filmmaker Raoul Peck 
meditates on his own memories as the privileged 
son of an agricultural expert working for the 
regime which displaced Lumumba. He examines 
home movies, photographs, old newsreels and 
contemporary interviews with Belgian journalists 
and Lumumba’s own daughter to try to piece 
together the tragic events and betrayals of 1960. 
A film essay in the tradition of Night and Fog or 
The Sorrow and the Pity, Lumumba: la mort du 
Prophete explores how any image inevitably 
represses the multiple stories surrounding it, how 
the past as preserved by the media is always in a 
Opposite:
1er arrestation, Lumumba en 1959, à Buluo la Prison Central de 
Jadotville [First Arrest, Lumumba in 1959 at Buluo Cen¬tral Prison 
at Jadotville], date unknown. By Tshi¬bumba, K.M. Oil on fabric, 
36.2 x 55.9 cm. Jewsiewicki Collection.
27


--- PAGE 28 ---
sense the hostage of history’s winners. Therefore 
present-day Europe figures as prominently in 
Lumumba as the Congo in 1960, because Europe 
was the unseen hand behind the camera and 
the events leading to Lumumba’s assassination. 
Peck presents an unfamiliar Europe seen through 
the eyes of a visitor from the Third World - cold, 
affluent, a guilty present trying to forget its past. 
Yet, as this film testifies, Lumumba’s prophecy 
will not be silenced until Africa achieves its second 
independence where the promises of the first can 
be fulfilled.
Resources related to the film:
Essay by John Henrik Clarke: http://www.
africawithin.com/clarke/passing_of_patrice_
lumumba.htm
Biography of Lumumba:
http://www.africawithin.com/lumumba/
historical_bio.htm
About the director, Raoul Peck:
http://www.haitisurf.com/raoulpeck.shtml
Lumumba: la mort du Prophete is available at:
http://www.amazon.com/Lumumba-Eriq-
Ebouaney/dp/B00006LPHL/ref=pd_bbs_sr_1?ie=
UTF8&s=dvd&qid=1229399354&sr=8-1
Online Resources
General search engine for Africa
http://www.africaservice.com/
General Biography of Lumumba
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Patrice_Lumumba
Belgium accused of killing an African hero
http://www.guardian.co.uk/
print/0,,3950989-103681,00.html
28


--- PAGE 29 ---
Speech on June 30, 1960, Independence Day
by Patrice Lumumba
The First Prime Minister of the Congo (Zaire) 
Men and women of the Congo, 
Victorious fighters for independence, today victorious, I greet you in the name of the 
Congolese Government. All of you, my friends, who have fought tirelessly at our sides, 
I ask you to make this June 30, 1960, an illustrious date that you will keep indelibly 
engraved in your hearts, a date of significance of which you will teach to your children, 
so that they will make known to their sons and to their grandchildren the glorious 
history of our fight for liberty.
For this independence of the Congo, even as it is celebrated today with Belgium, a 
friendly country with whom we deal as equal to equal, no Congolese worthy of the 
name will ever be able to forget that is was by fighting that it has been won [applause], 
a day-to-day fight, an ardent and idealistic fight, a fight in which we were spared 
neither privation nor suffering, and for which we gave our strength and our blood. 
Le 30 Juin 1960, Zaire Indépendant [Zaire Independence, June 30, 
1960], date unknown. By Tshibumba M. Oil on fabric, 45 x 62.5 
cm. Bol Collection.
29


--- PAGE 30 ---
We are proud of this struggle, of tears, of fire, and of blood, to the depths of our 
being, for it was a noble and just struggle, and indispensable to put an end to 
the humiliating slavery which was imposed upon us by force. 
This was our fate for eighty years of a colonial regime; our wounds are too fresh 
and too painful still for us to drive them from our memory. We have known 
harassing work, exacted in exchange for salaries which did not permit us to 
eat enough to drive away hunger, or to clothe ourselves, or to house ourselves 
decently, or to raise our children as creatures dear to us. 
We have known ironies, insults, blows that we endured morning, noon, and 
evening, because we are Negroes. Who will forget that to a black one said 
“tu”, certainly not as to a friend, but because the more honorable “vous” was 
reserved for whites alone? 
We have seen our lands seized in the name of allegedly legal laws which in fact 
recognized only that might is right. 
We have seen that the law was not the same for a white and for a black, 
accommodating for the first, cruel and inhuman for the other. 
We have witnessed atrocious sufferings of those condemned for their political 
opinions or religious beliefs; exiled in their own country, their fate truly worse 
than death itself. 
We have seen that in the towns there were magnificent houses for the whites 
and crumbling shanties for the blacks, that a black was not admitted in the 
motion-picture houses, in the restaurants, in the stores of the Europeans; that 
a black traveled in the holds, at the feet of the whites in their luxury cabins. 
Who will ever forget the massacres where so many of our brothers perished, 
the cells into which those who refused to submit to a regime of oppression and 
exploitation were thrown [applause]? 
All that, my brothers, we have endured. 
But we, whom the vote of your elected representatives have given the right to 
direct our dear country, we who have suffered in our body and in our heart from 
colonial oppression, we tell you very loud, all that is henceforth ended. 
The Republic of the Congo has been proclaimed, and our country is now in the 
hands of its own children. 
Together, my brothers, my sisters, we are going to begin a new struggle, 
30


--- PAGE 31 ---
a sublime struggle, which will lead our country to peace, prosperity, and 
greatness. 
Together, we are going to establish social justice and make sure everyone has 
just remuneration for his labor [applause]. 
We are going to show the world what the black man can do when he works 
in freedom, and we are going to make of the Congo the center of the sun’s 
radiance for all of Africa. 
We are going to keep watch over the lands of our country so that they truly 
profit her children. We are going to restore ancient laws and make new ones 
which will be just and noble. 
We are going to put an end to suppression of free thought and see to it that 
all our citizens enjoy to the full the fundamental liberties foreseen in the 
Declaration of the Rights of Man [applause]. 
We are going to do away with all discrimination of every variety and assure for 
each and all the position to which human dignity, work, and dedication entitles 
him. 
We are going to rule not by the peace of guns and bayonets but by a peace of 
the heart and the will [applause]. 
And for all that, dear fellow countrymen, be sure that we will count not only on 
our enormous strength and immense riches but on the assistance of numerous 
foreign countries whose collaboration we will accept if it is offered freely and 
with no attempt to impose on us an alien culture of no matter what nature 
[applause]. 
In this domain, Belgium, at last accepting the flow of history, has not tried 
to oppose our independence and is ready to give us their aid and their 
friendship, and a treaty has just been signed between our two countries, equal 
and independent. On our side, while we stay vigilant, we shall respect our 
obligations, given freely. 
Thus, in the interior and the exterior, the new Congo, our dear Republic that my 
government will create, will be a rich, free, and prosperous country. But so that 
we will reach this aim without delay, I ask all of you, legislators and citizens, to 
help me with all your strength. 
I ask all of you to forget your tribal quarrels. They exhaust us. They risk making 
us despised abroad. 
31


--- PAGE 32 ---
I ask the parliamentary minority to help my Government through a constructive 
opposition and to limit themselves strictly to legal and democratic channels. 
I ask all of you not to shrink before any sacrifice in order to achieve the success 
of our huge undertaking. 
In conclusion, I ask you unconditionally to respect the life and the property 
of your fellow citizens and of foreigners living in our country. If the conduct 
of these foreigners leaves something to be desired, our justice will be prompt 
in expelling them from the territory of the Republic; if, on the contrary, their 
conduct is good, they must be left in peace, for they also are working for our 
country’s prosperity. 
The Congo’s independence marks a decisive step towards the liberation of the 
entire African continent [applause]. 
Sire, Excellencies, Mesdames, Messieurs, my dear fellow countrymen, my 
brothers of race, my brothers of struggle-- this is what I wanted to tell you 
in the name of the Government on this magnificent day of our complete 
independence. 
Our government, strong, national, popular, will be the health of our country. 
I call on all Congolese citizens, men, women and children, to set themselves 
resolutely to the task of creating a prosperous national economy which will 
assure our economic independence. 
Glory to the fighters for national liberation! 
Long live independence and African unity! 
Long live the independent and sovereign Congo!
32


--- PAGE 33 ---
Full Plate Images


--- PAGE 34 ---
Lumumba, Master of the World. By Burozi. ca. 
1970s. Oil on cotton, 66 x 50,8 cm. Jewsiewicki 
Collection.
34


--- PAGE 35 ---
Lumumba breaking chains. By Burozi, signed 
Tshibumba, K.M., date unknown. Oil on facric, 43.2 
x 33 cm. Museum for African Art, 2008.06.19.
35


--- PAGE 36 ---
Votez tous M.N.C.-L. Liste No. 4. Campagne 
électorale (1959) [Cast Your Vote for Lumumba. 
Election campaign, 1959]. By Kalume, date 
unknown. Oil on fabric, 59 x 43.8 cm. Museum 
for African Art, 2008.06.01.
36


--- PAGE 37 ---
I Lover Mami-Wata. By Chéri-Benga, 1993. Oil on fabric. 
89.2 x 42 cm. Museum for African Art, 2008.06.02.
37


--- PAGE 38 ---
Inakale [No way out]. By M. Maka, 1996. Oil on 
fabric, 49.5 x 61 cm. Museum for African Art, 
2008.06.04.
38


--- PAGE 39 ---
Colonie belge, 1909-1959. [Belgian Colony, 
1909-1959]. By Nkulu wa Nkulu, date unknown. 
Oil on fabric, 39.4 x 55.2 cm. Museum for African 
Art, 2008.06.03.
39


--- PAGE 40 ---
Temps arabe, 1789. [Arab Time, 1789]. By Angali, 
1984. Oil on fabric, 43.2 x 77.5 cm. Museum for Af-
rican Art, 2008.06.17.
40


--- PAGE 41 ---
S.M. Le Roi Baudouin Ie et Lumumba P . Entretien 
d’indépendance congolaise [His Majesty King Baud-
ouin and Lumumba P . discuss the Congolese inde-
pendence], date unknown. By Tinda Lwimba. Oil on 
fabric, 58.4 x 41.6 cm. Jewsiewicki Collection.
41


--- PAGE 42 ---
Le martyrs de l’independance, 4 Janvier 1959 [Mar-
tyrs of Independence, January 4, 1959], date un-
known. By Tshibumba. Oil on fabric, 39.4 x 73 cm. 
Bol collection.
Congolese currency, 20-makuta bill with an image 
of Lumumba breaking chains. Jewsiewicki Collec-
tion.
42


--- PAGE 43 ---
Mzee anakata munyororo ya utumwa. [Mzee 
(Kabila) is breaking the chains of suffering], 1998. 
By A.B.C. Jaz. Oil on fabric, 49.2 x 62 cm. Museum 
for African Art, 2008.06.20.
43


--- PAGE 44 ---
Patrice Emery Lumumba. By Tshibumba, 
date unknown. Oil on fabric, 66.7 x 48.9 cm. 
Jewsiewicki Collection.
44


--- PAGE 45 ---
Calvaire d’Afrique [Torment of Africa, also called 
“National Hero and Prophet of Our Liberation”], 
date unknown. By Tshibumba. Oil on fabric, 47 x 
88.9 cm. Verbeek Collection.
45


--- PAGE 46 ---
La mort historique de Lumumba, Mpolo et Okoto 
le 17 Janv. 1961 [Historic Death of Lumumba, 
Mpolo, and Okito, on 17 January 1961], date 
unknown. By Tshibumba, K.M. Oil on fabric, 36.8 
x 55.9 cm. Jewsiewicki Collection.
46


--- PAGE 47 ---
Patrice Emery Lumumba, son esprit incarné 
dans Mze Liberateur. Mzee Laurent Désiré 
Kabila, Le libérateur de la R.D.C. [Patrice 
Emery Lumumba, his spirit is incarnated in 
Mze Liberator. Mzee Laurent Desire Kabila, 
the liberator of the Democratic Republic of 
Congo.], 1998. By A.B.C. Banza. Oil on fab -
ric, 83.8 x 61 cm. Jewsiewicki Collection.
47


--- PAGE 48 ---
No. 1.  En 1936 Mme. Ka¬pinga quitte Lubumbashi 
vers Kabinda accompagnée de son fils [In 1936, 
Mme. Kapinga leaves Lubumbashi for Kabinda 
accompanied by her son], date unknown. By 
Tshibumba, K.M. Oil on fabric, 38.1x 59.7 cm. 
Vincke Collection.
No. 2.  A leur arrivée a Ka¬binda Mme. Kapinga et 
son fils se présent aux autorités  [At their arrival at 
Kabinda, Mme. Kapinga and her son introduce 
themselves to the authorities], date unknown. 
By Tshibumba, K.M. Oil on fabric,  38.1x 59.7 cm. 
Vincke Collection.
48


--- PAGE 49 ---
No. 3.  Kapinga se présente chez Lumpungu a 
Mwaba wa Mitanta [Kapinga introduces herself to 
Lumpungu at Mwaba wa Mitanta], date unknown. 
By Tshi¬bumba, K.M. Oil on fabric,  38.1x 59.7 cm.  
Vincke Collection.
No. 4  Kapinga prise dans le piége du chef Lumpun-
gu [Kapinga is caught in the trap for Chief Lum -
pungu ], date unknown. By Tshibumba, K.M. Oil 
on fabric,  38.1x 59.7 cm. Vincke Collection.
49


--- PAGE 50 ---
No. 5. Arrestation Lumpungu le chef Basonge à 
Kabinda [Arrest of Lumpungu, the Songye Chief 
in Kabinda], date unknown. By Tshibumba, K.M. 
Oil on Fabric, 38.1x 59.7 cm. Vincke Collection.
No. 6. Tentative de révolte à Kabinda [Attempted 
revolt in Kabinda], date unknown. By Tshibumba, 
K.M. Oil on fabric,  38.1x 59.7 cm. Vincke Collec -
tion.
50


--- PAGE 51 ---
La vraie justice non appliquée, la pendeson de François à Lubumbashi [True justice 
not applied. Hanging of François in Lubumbashi (Elisabethville)], date unknown. 
By Tshibumba. Oil on fabric, 38.1 x 61 cm. Jewsiewicki Collection.
Lumpungu pendu a Kabinda [Hanging of  Lumpungu in Kabinda], date 
unknown. By Tshibumba. Oil on fabric, 31.8x 38.7 cm. Vincke Collection.
51


--- PAGE 52 ---
Le Congo est en trouble a cause de cet homme de 
Lumumba. Arretons le. [Congo is in trouble be -
cause of this man, Lumumba. Arrest him], date 
unknown. By Burozi, signed Tshibumba. Oil on 
fabric, 45.7 x 33 cm. Jewsiewicki Collection.
52


--- PAGE 53 ---
La rebellion au Congo [The Congo rebellion]. By 
Tshibumba, K.M., 1975. Oil on fabric, 38.1 x 60 cm. 
Collection of James Bullard, Westport, NY .
53


--- PAGE 54 ---
Lumumba signing the Congo Declaration of In-
dependence, date unknown. By Abis, signed 
Tshibumba. Oil on canvas, 50.8 x 69.9 in. Jewsie -
wicki Collection.
54


--- PAGE 55 ---
1er arrestation, Lumumba en 1959, à Buluo la Pris -
on Central de Jadotville [First Arrest, Lumumba in 
1959 at Buluo Central Prison at Jadotville], date 
unknown. By Tshibumba, K.M. Oil on fabric, 36.2 
x 55.9 cm. Jewsiewicki Collection. 55


--- PAGE 56 ---
Le 30 Juin 1960, Zaire Indépendant [Zaire Indepen-
dence, June 30, 1960], date unknown. By Tshibum-
ba M. Oil on fabric, 45 x 62.5 cm. Bol Collection.
56

