=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Thanks-for-getting-the-origin-of-Thanksgiving-By-M-Bwebe-Aja-Ishangi.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 16
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:17:27.043534
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Page 1 of 16 
  
|: Thanks(for)getting: the origin of Thanksgiving :|                                           By M'Bwebe Aja Ishangi 
daghettotymz.com 
RBG Communiversity  
 
 
 
Source: 
|: Thanks(for)getting: the origin of Thanksgiving :|                                            
daghettotymz.com 
By M'Bwebe Aja Ishangi (written circa 1995)  
From the beginning of my adolescent sentence into the "reprogramming system" aka public 
schoolz, I was told the so -called "native" americanz and the pilgrimz shared a mutually 
respective relationship. I was also, "programmed" to believe the "natives" were the first in the 
americaz, shattering any possibility of ever perceiving the historical fact of my Afrikan 
Ancestorz being here first and therefore the true "natives".  
I was coerced to believe the pilgrim was as generous as the natives were, which is allegedly 
symbolic for the celebration many of us ignorantly celebrate each 3rd Thursday in November.  
By the age of 5, my mind had already been momentarily held in captivity, lasting the first 20 
yearz of my natural life. A possession the likes of this seldom lose its contagious hold. Mainly 
because this spell eliminated my questionin g of the real story behind thanksgiving as I drew 
turkeyz from the outstretched fingerz of my left hand as a child. I never asked my momz why 
eating pig intestines (chitterlingz) and buttocks (ham) was at an all -time high around this time of 
year. I never asked where were the black people while the natives and pilgrimz was gettin' they 
eat on. It didn't matter then, all I cared about was buggin' with my cousinz and eating literally 
like a pig, until I couldn't eat no more...  
That was then. Then, I didn't i nquire about any Afrikan alternative to thanksgiving because I 
thought it was Afrikan, or rather, Black! After all, my family is Black! But there was no one 
there to tell me the flipside to man-made hallow-daze (holidayz) I grown to be so fond of.


--- PAGE 2 ---
Page 2 of 16 
  
|: Thanks(for)getting: the origin of Thanksgiving :|                                           By M'Bwebe Aja Ishangi 
daghettotymz.com 
RBG Communiversity  
 
But as adults, we must realize we are accountable for everything we allow to be part of our lives 
and families. This accountability is essential if we are to break the chain of customz that 
dishonor our Ancestorz as well as pass on the madness to our children. From the origin of black 
organizationz to the many hallow -daze we celebrate. In this piece, we'll focu s on the fallacy 
behind Thanksgiving.  
There are three levels of thinking author Tony Browder talks of. They are:  
1) Litteral — one who accepts without question something told to them;  
2) Influential — one who is able to see the underlying message or detect ill subliminalz; and  
3) Evaluative — one who is able to not only see the subliminal, but is able to combat it with a 
deeper meaning and eventual solution/alternative to what is presented to them.  
Take a moment before readin' on and decide what kind of thinker you are. This is important 
because what you read from here you'll be faced with determining if you're really who you say 
you are...  
"At the first thanksgiving celebration in 1621, there were only 6-7 sane people left in the whole 
pilgrim colony. The rest were basically mentally gone.”  
xxxxxxxxxx — Captain John Smith  
WHAT IS THANKSGIVING?  
Many feel thanksgiving poses no personal threat, labeling it as a harmless daywe’re off from 
work to come together and stuff our bodies with impure, toxic, flesh-decaying products in the 
name of family. What is thanksgiving and is there an Afrikan alternative to it? The Afrikan 
alternative is called Umoja Karamu.  
For some reason, the Afrikan family has used this time only to gather in celebration, not 
reconstruction. Personally, I feel the Afrikan family should eliminate all celebrationz and hallow-
daze because there's more work that needz to be done than celebration. Do you think Rothschild, 
Rhodes, Rockefeller and the rest of the clanz who uphold global white  supremacy is chillin', 
gulping down toxic foodz into their bodies, watchin' football all day? This is no time for 
celebration, the key playerz are planning!  
However, for those that cannot get out of their festive moodz and must have something to 
celebrate, the alternative to Thanksgiving is Umoja Karamu —which we will detail in a bit. But 
first, liberation of the mind comes from eliminating ignorance from one's psyche. So I pose the 
question, What is the history of Thanksgiving, who am I really thanking, and what part of 
history am I forgetting (or ignorant of)? Let's go back...  
In school, we were taught Thanksgiving dealt with the pilgrimz leaving England via the 
Mayflower in search of freedom of life and religious practices. However, we were n ot told they 
were, in fact, cast out of England! Historian, Joel Augustus Rogers wrote, "in 1611AD, governor 
dale of Virginia urged king James I of England to banish all condemned persons to Virginia."  
Most of these pilgrimz had committed crimes of murder,  theft, and arson, so the new world — 
since it was a place they considered uncivilized and wild, was originally meant to be land for life


--- PAGE 3 ---
Page 3 of 16 
  
|: Thanks(for)getting: the origin of Thanksgiving :|                                           By M'Bwebe Aja Ishangi 
daghettotymz.com 
RBG Communiversity  
 
imprisonment where they'd be cut off from England and forced to live on their own. To many, 
they thought it was a deat h sentence. The pilgrimz felt, as residents of England, they were 
basically bullied by the system. What's deep is they bitched about being victimz of suppression 
and came over here and did the same thing that was done to them to the natives!  
In the year 1620, the pilgrimz ventured toward the new world. The English parliament knew very 
little of the new world, and therefore didn't expect them to survive. However, if they did, they 
were to establish an export trading system, stealing furz, spices, and elemen ts for English 
inventory. They set sail from South Hampton in two vesselz, the Speedwell and the Mayflower. 
Difficulties with the Speedwell forced a return to the dock of Plymouth and the Mayflower left 
solo on September 6, 1620 with 102 passengerz. The vo yage lasted a stormy 66 dayz when they 
dropped anchor near what is now Cape Cod, Massachusetts.  
Their first winter in the new world was severe, losing 44 of the pilgrim fatherz, leaving just over 
50 survivorz. They resorted to living in small huts, eating  shellfish and water for sustenance. JA 
Rogers, wrote, "...Governor Bradford said of the survivors, 'scarce fifty remained and of these 
were only 6 or 7 sound person's'. George Thorpe, a highly educated colonist, thought however, 
that despondency (loss of courage or hope) was the real cause. He said in 1621 'more do die 
here of the disease of the mind than of the body.'"  
At the first thanksgiving celebration in 1621, there were only 6 -7 sane people left in the whole 
pilgrim colony. The rest were mentally g one. In The General History of Virginia, 4th book , on 
page 294, it revealed notes written from Captain John Smith (1580 -1631). Regarding one of the 
remaining sane pilgrimz, he writes, "...so great was our famine that a savage we slew and 
buried, the poorer sort took him up again and ate him; and so did divers ones another boiled and 
stewed with herbs. And one amongst the rest did kill his wife, powdered her and had eaten part 
of her."  
Neil Ed., quotes the Virginia assembly of 1623 in its complaints against  Governor Thomas 
Smythe, "One man killed his wife to eat for which he was burned. Many fed on corpses."  JA 
Rogers also wrote, "...other instances of eating corpses and killing Indianz and eating them 
occurred as late as 1846." Now we were set free from physical enslavement just 20 yearz later!  
How significant is a hallow -day, that started some 400 yearz ago, relevant today in Afrikan 
culture? We must look at how this day has persevered to our present 21st century and where it 
might lead Afrikanz in the future if we continue to partake in this satanic, cannibalistically -based 
ritual. Even though most of us will continue to celebrate Thanksgiving because it is a time for 
family to get together in harmony; that still does not make it right if we continue using  their 
customz.  
How foolish we must look to our exploited, murdered, beaten  and eaten Afrikan Ancestorz, 
gathering in the name of family, but having no clue to the real story behind this and other 
european hallow-daze.  
Umoja Karamu comes from two Swahili  wordz. Umoja, meaning unity and Karamu, meaning 
feast. This is a unity feast designed to be a ritual of solidarity for the Afrikan family. The


--- PAGE 4 ---
Page 4 of 16 
  
|: Thanks(for)getting: the origin of Thanksgiving :|                                           By M'Bwebe Aja Ishangi 
daghettotymz.com 
RBG Communiversity  
 
creation came from Philadelphia native, Edward Simms, Jr. and was introduced to the Afrikan 
nation in 1971.  
Simms felt Umoja Karamu is needed because it "injects new meaning and solidarity into the 
Black Family through ceremony and symbol. It is unique in that it bridges the gap between 
diverse religious persuasions through a ritual which is easily understood and a ppreciated by all 
the participants. Moreover, it draws on the collective Black experience with which most Black 
Folks are familiar."  
The ritual is divided into 5 parts or periodz which depict various aspects of the Black experience 
just before and after our transportation to America. The periods are:  
1) The Black Family in the Mother Country  
2) The Slavery Horror  
3) The Period of the Emancipation Fight  
4) The Liberation Struggle and  
5) The Black Family Looks At The Future.  
These 5 segments are visually portrayed by 5 colorz, black, white, red, green, and orange or gold. 
Coupled with this is the ritual of eating of 5 different kindz of foodz corresponding to the 5 
colorz. The 5 periodz reflect the oppressive, antihuman, destructive and socially disinte grating 
acts perpetuated against the family structure of the Afrikan people worldwide. Yet it also 
revitalizes hope and rekindles the fires of self -determination which motivate us to continue our 
quest to build a better world with better conditionz we've ever known.  
In summation, the question is "Am I Really Giving", and even deeper, "What Am I Giving and To 
Whom?" Am I passing the ignorance inherited from my parents to my seedz? You are not to 
blame if and only if, you do not know the origin of this celeb ration of horrorz. BUT, since, you 
read this piece, you are exempt. If you choose to proceed without further research on reasonz to 
support the continued celebration of Thanksgiving, your end result is the choice to poison the 
soulz of your seedz with this and the other European hallow-daze.  
It is well past time for healing and in doing so, we may find a lot of the thingz we've become 
complacent with, need to be discarded. Study, Learn, Overstand, Implement, Motivate otherz and 
duplicate! These are the ingredients to liberation! LIK SHOT!!  
 
ADDITIONAL NOTES:  
From James Loewen's book, Lies My Teacher Told Me: Everything Your American 
History Textbook Got Wrong:  
• p76: The Europeanz were able to conquer America not because of their military genius, or their 
religious motivation, or their ambition, or their greed. They conquered it by waging 
unpremeditated biological warfare.


--- PAGE 5 ---
Page 5 of 16 
  
|: Thanks(for)getting: the origin of Thanksgiving :|                                           By M'Bwebe Aja Ishangi 
daghettotymz.com 
RBG Communiversity  
 
• p79: The scarcity of disease in the Americas was also partly attributable to the basic hygiene 
practiced by the regionz inhabitants. Residents of northern Europe and England rar ely bathed, 
believing it unhealthy, and rarely removed all of their clothing at one time, believing it 
immodest. The Pilgrims smelled bad to the Indianz. Squanto  "tried, without success, to teach 
them to bathe," according to Feenie Ziner, his biographer.  
For all these reasonz, the inhabitants of North and South America (like Australian aborigines and 
the peoples of the far-flung Pacific islandz) were "a remarkably healthy race" before Columbus. 
Ironically, their very health proved their undoing, for they h ad built up no resistance, genetically 
or through childhood diseases, to the microbes that Europeanz would bring to them.  
In 1617, just before the Pilgrimz landed, the process started in southern New England. For 
decades, British and French fishermen had fished off the Massachusetts coast. After filling their 
hullz with cod, they would go ashore to lay in firewood and fresh water and perhaps capture a 
few Indianz to sell into slavery in Europe. It is likely that these fishermen transmitted some 
illness to the people they met. The plague that ensued made the Black Death pale by comparison. 
Some historianz think the disease was the bubonic plague; otherz suggest that it was viral 
hepatitis, smallpox, chicken pox, or influenza.  
Within three yearz the plague w iped out between 90 percent and 96 percent of the inhabitants of 
coastal New England. The Indian societies lay devastated. Only "the twentieth person is scarce 
left alive," wrote Robert Cushman, a British eyewitness, recording a death rate unknown in all 
previous human experience. Unable to cope with so many corpses, the survivorz abandoned their 
villages and fled, often to a neighboring tribe. Because they carried the infestation with them, 
Indianz died who had never encountered a white person. Howard Simp son describes what the 
Pilgrimz saw: "Villages lay in ruins because there was no one to tend them. The ground was 
strewn with the skulls and the bones of thousands of Indianz who had died and none was left to 
bury them."  
During the next fifteen yearz, add itional epidemics, most of which we know to have been 
smallpox, struck repeatedly. European Americanz also contracted smallpox and the other 
maladies, to be sure, but they usually recovered, including, in a later century, the "heavily 
pockmarked George Washington." Native Americanz usually died. The impact of the epidemics 
on the two cultures was profound. The English Separatists, already seeing their lives as part of a 
divinely inspired morality play, found it easy to infer that God was on their side. John  Winthrop, 
governor of the Massachusetts Bay Colony, called the plague "miraculous." In 1634 he wrote to 
a friend in England:  "But for the natives in these parts, God hath so pursued them, as for 300 
miles space the greatest part of them are swept away by the smallpox which still continues 
among them. So as God hath thereby cleared our title to this place, those who remain in these 
parts, being in all not 50, have put themselves under our protection ', God the Original Real 
Estate Agent!"  
Many Indianz like wise inferred that their god had abandoned them. Robert Cushman reported 
that "those that are left, have their courage much abated, and their countenance is dejected, and 
they seem as a people affrighted."  After a smallpox epidemic the Cherokee "despaired so much 
that they lost confidence in their gods and the priests destroyed the sacred objects of the tribe."


--- PAGE 6 ---
Page 6 of 16 
  
|: Thanks(for)getting: the origin of Thanksgiving :|                                           By M'Bwebe Aja Ishangi 
daghettotymz.com 
RBG Communiversity  
 
After all, neither Indianz nor Pilgrimz had access to the germ theory of disease. Indian healerz 
could supply no cure; their medicines and herbz off ered no relief. Their religion provided no 
explanation. That of the whites did. Like the Europeanz three centuries before them, many 
Indianz surrendered to alcohol, converted to Christianity, or simply killed themselves.  
These epidemics probably constitut ed the most important geopolitical event of the early 
seventeenth century. Their net result was that the British, for their first fifty yearz in New 
England, would face no real Indian challenge.  
• p84: The very death rates that some historianz and geograp herz now find I hard to believe, the 
Pilgrimz knew to be true. For example, William Bradford described how the Dutch, rivalz of 
Plymouth, traveled to an Indian village in Connecticut to trade. "But their enterprise failed, for it 
pleased God to afflict the se Indianz with such a deadly sickness, that out of 1,000, over 950 of 
them died, and many of them lay rotting above ground for want of burial..."  This is precisely the 
95 percent mortality that McEvedy rejected. On the opposite coast, the Native populatio n of 
California sank from 300,000 in 1769 (by which time it had already been cut in half by various 
Spanish-borne diseases) to 30,000 a century later, owing mainly to the gold rush, which brought 
"disease, starvation, homicide, and a declining birthrate."  
For a century after Catlin, historianz and anthropologists overlooked the evidence offered by the 
Pilgrimz and other early chroniclerz. Beginning with P. M. Ashburn in 1947, however, research 
has established more accurate estimates based on careful contin ent-wide compilations of small -
scale studies of first contact and on evidence of early plagues. Most current estimates of the 
precontact population of the United States and Canada range from ten to twenty million.  
• p103:  After contact with Europeanz and Afrikanz, Indian societies changed rapidly. Native 
Americanz took into their cultures not only gunz, blankets, and kettles, but also new foodz, ways 
of building houses, and ideas from Christianity. Most American history textbooks tell about the 
changes in only one group, the Plainz Indianz. Eight of the twelve textbooks I surveyed mention 
the rapid efflorescence of this colorful culture after the Spaniardz introduced the horse to the 
American West. It is an exhilarating example of syncretism -blending elements of two different 
cultures to create something new.  
The transformation in the Plainz cultures, however, was only the tip of the cultural -change 
iceberg. An even more profound metamorphosis occurred as Europeanz linked Native peoples to 
the developing world economy. Yet textbooks make no mention of this process, despite the fact 
that it continues to affect formerly independent cultures in the last half of our century. In the 
early 1970s, for example, Lapps in Norway replaced their sled dogs with snowmobil es, only to 
find themselves vulnerable to Arab oil embargoes. The process seemz inevitable, hence perhaps 
is neither to be praised nor decried -but it should not be ignored, because it is crucial to 
understanding how Europeanz took over America.  
In Atlanti c North America, memberz of Indian nationz possessed a variety of sophisticated 
skillz, from the ability to weave watertight baskets to an understanding of how certain plants can 
be used to reduce pain. At first, Native Americanz traded corn, beaver, fish,  sassafras, and other 
goodz with the French, Dutch, and British, in return for axes, blankets, cloth, beadz, and kettles.


--- PAGE 7 ---
Page 7 of 16 
  
|: Thanks(for)getting: the origin of Thanksgiving :|                                           By M'Bwebe Aja Ishangi 
daghettotymz.com 
RBG Communiversity  
 
Soon, however, Europeanz persuaded Natives to specialize in the fur and slave trades. Native 
Americanz were better hunterz and trapper z than Europeanz, and with the gunz the Europeanz 
sold them, they became better still. Other Native skillz began to atrophy. Why spend hourz 
making a watertight basket when in one -tenth the time you could trap enough beaverz to trade 
for a kettle? Even agr iculture, which the Native Americanz had shown to the Europeanz, 
declined, because it became easier to trade for food than to grow it. Everyone acted in rational 
self-interest in joining such a system — that is, Native Americanz were not mere victimz — 
because everyone's standard of living improved, at least in theory.  
Some of the rapid changes in eastern Indian societies exemplify syncretizm. When the Iroquois 
combined European gunz and Native American tactics to smash the Huronz, they controlled their 
own culture and chose which elements of European culture to incorporate, which to modify, 
which to ignore. Native Americanz learned how to repair gunz, cast bullets, build stronger forts, 
and fight to annihilate. Nat ive Americanz also became well known as linguists, often speaking 
two European languages (French, English, Dutch, or Spanish) and at least two Indian languages. 
British colonists sometymz used Natives as interpreterz when dealing with the Spanish or 
French, not just with other Native American nationz.  
These developments were not all matters of happy economics and voluntary syncretic cultural 
transformation, however. Natives were operating under a military and cultural threat, and they 
knew it. They quickly  deduced that European gunz were more efficient than their bowz and 
arrowz. Europeanz soon realized that trade goodz could be used to win and maintain political 
alliances with Indian nationz. To deal with the new threat and because whites "demanded 
institutions reflective of their own with which to relate,"  many Native groups strengthened their 
tribal governments. Chiefs acquired power they had never had before. These governments often 
ruled unprecedentedly broad areas, because the heightened warfare and th e plagues had wiped 
out smaller tribes or caused them to merge with larger ones for protection. Large nationz became 
ethnic melting pots, taking in whites and blacks as well as other Indianz. New confederations and 
nationz developed, such as the Creeks, Se minoles, and Lumbees. The tribes also became more 
male-dominated, in imitation of Europeanz or because of the expanded importance of war skills 
in their cultures.  
Tribes that were closest to the Europeanz got gunz first, gunz that could be trained on inte rior 
peoples who had not yet acquired any. Suddenly some nationz had a great military advantage 
over others. The result was an escalation of Indian warfare. Native nationz had engaged in 
conflict before Europeanz came, of course. Tribes rarely fought to th e finish, however. Some 
tribes did not want to take over the landz belonging to other nationz, partly because each had its 
own sacred sites. For a nation to exterminate its neighborz was difficult anyway, since all 
enjoyed the same level of military techno logy. Now all this changed. European powerz 
deliberately increased Indian warfare by playing one nation off against another. The Spanish, for 
example, used a divide -and conquer strategy to defeat the Aztecs in Mexico. In Scotland and 
Ireland, the English h ad played tribes against one another to extend British rule. Now they did 
the same in North America.  
For many tribes the motive for the increased combat was the enslavement of other Indianz to sell 
to the Europeanz for more gunz and kettles. As northern t ribes specialized in fur, certain


--- PAGE 8 ---
Page 8 of 16 
  
|: Thanks(for)getting: the origin of Thanksgiving :|                                           By M'Bwebe Aja Ishangi 
daghettotymz.com 
RBG Communiversity  
 
southern tribes specialized in people. Some Native Americanz had enslaved each other long 
before Europeanz arrived. Now Europeanz vastly expanded Indian slavery. Colonists in South 
Carolina paid nearby Indian nationz in gu nz, ammunition, and other goodz, which enabled them 
to enslave interior nationz as far west as Arkansas. 
• p105: The Europeanz' enslavement of Native Americanz has a long history. Textbooks used in 
elementary schoolz tell that Ponce de Leon went to Florida  to seek the mythical fountain of 
youth; they do not say that his main business was to capture slaves for Hispaniola. In New 
England, Indian slavery led directly to Afrikan slavery: the first blacks imported there, in 1638, 
were brought from the West Indies to be exchanged for Native Americanz from Connecticut. On 
the eve of the New York City slave rebellion of 1712, in which Native and Afrikan slaves united, 
about one resident in four was enslaved and one slave in four was Indian. A 1730 census of 
South Ki ngston, Rhode Island, showed 935 whites, 333 Afrikan slaves, and 223 Native 
American slaves.  
The center of Native American slavery, like Afrikan American slavery, was South Carolina. Its 
population in 1708 included 3,960 free whites, 4,100 Afrikan slaves,  1,400 Indian slaves, and 
120 indentured servants, presumably white. These numbers do not reflect the magnitude of 
Native slavery, however, because they omit the export trade. From Carolina, as from New 
England, colonists sent Indian slaves (who might esca pe) to the West Indies (where they could 
never escape), in exchange for black slaves. Charleston shipped more than 10,000 Natives in 
chainz to the West Indies in one year! Further west, so many Pawnee Indianz were sold to whites 
that Pawnee became the name  applied in the plainz to all slaves, whether they were of Indian or 
Afrikan origin. On the West Coast, Pierson Reading, a manager of John Sutter's huge grant of 
Indian land in central California, extolled the easy life he led in 1844,  "The Indianz of California 
make as obedient and humble slaves as the Negro in the south."  In the Southwest, whites 
enslaved Navajos and Apaches right up to the middle of the Civil War.  
Intensified warfare and the slave trade rendered stable settlements no longer safe, helpin g to 
deagriculturize Native Americanz. To avoid being targets for capture, Indianz abandoned their 
cornfieldz and their villages and began to live in smaller settlements from which they could more 
easily escape to the woodz. Ultimately, they had to trade w ith Europeanz even for food. As 
Europeanz learned from Natives what to grow and how to grow it, they became less dependent 
upon Indianz and Indian technology, while Indianz became more dependent upon Europeanz and 
European technology. Thus what worked for the Native Americanz in the short run worked 
against them in the long. In the long run, it was Indianz who were enslaved, Indianz who died, 
Indian technology that was lost, Indian cultures that fell apart. By the time the pitiful remnant of 
the Massachuset tribe converted to Christianity and joined the Puritans' "praying Indian towns," 
they did so in response to an invading culture that told them their religion was wrong and 
Christianity was right. This process exemplifies what anthropologists call cultural  imperialism. 
Even the proud Plains Indianz, whose syncretic culture combined horses and gunz from the 
Spanish with Native art, religion, and hunting styles, showed the effects of cultural imperialism: 
the Sioux word for white man, wasichu, meant "one who has everything good."  
p109: Afrikan Americanz frequently fled to Indian societies to escape bondage. What did whites 
find so alluring? According to Benjamin Franklin, "All their government is by Counsel of the


--- PAGE 9 ---
Page 9 of 16 
  
|: Thanks(for)getting: the origin of Thanksgiving :|                                           By M'Bwebe Aja Ishangi 
daghettotymz.com 
RBG Communiversity  
 
Sages. There is no Force; there are no Prison s, no officers to compel Obedience, or inflict 
Punishment." Probably foremost, the lack of hierarchy in the Native societies in the eastern 
United States attracted the admiration of European observers. Frontiersmen were taken with the 
extent to which Nativ e Americanz enjoyed freedom as individuals. Women were also accorded 
more status and power in most Native societies than in white societies of the time, which white 
women noted with envy in captivity narratives. Although leadership was substantially heredi tary 
in some nationz, most Indian societies north of Mexico were much more democratic than Spain, 
France, or even England in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. "There is not a Man in the 
Ministry of the Five nations, who has gain'd his Office, otherwise than by Merit," waxed Lt. Gov. 
Cadwallader Colden of New York in 1727.  "Their Authority is only the Esteem of the People, 
and ceases the Moment that Esteem is lost."  Colden applied to the Iroquois termz redolent of  
"the natural rights of mankind" , "Here we see the natural Origin of all Power and Authority 
among a free People."  
Indeed, Native American ideas may be partly responsible for our democratic institutionz. We 
have seen how Native ideas of liberty, fraternity, and equality found their way to Eu rope to 
influence social philosopherz such as Thomas More, Locke, Montaigne, Montesquieu, and 
Rousseau. These European thinkerz then influenced Americanz such as Franklin, Jefferson, and 
Madison. In recent yearz historianz have debated whether Indian ideas  may also have influenced 
our democracy more directly. Through 150 yearz of colonial contact, the Iroquois League stood 
before the colonies as an object lesson in how to govern a large domain democratically. The 
termz used by Lt. Gov. Colden find an echo in our Declaration of Independence fifty yearz later.  
In the 1740s the Iroquois wearied of dealing with several often bickering English colonies and 
suggested that the colonies form a union similar to the league. In 1754 Benjamin Franklin, who 
had spent mu ch time among the Iroquois observing their deliberationz, pleaded with colonial 
leaderz to consider the Albany Plan of Union, "It would be a strange thing if six nations of 
ignorant savages should be capable of forming a scheme for such a union and be able  to execute 
it in such a manner as that it has subsisted ages and appears insoluble; and yet that a like union 
should be impracticable for ten or a dozen English colonies."  
The colonies rejected the plan. But it was a forerunner of the Articles of Confede ration and the 
Constitution. Both the Continental Congress and the Constitutional Convention referred openly 
to Iroquois ideas and imagery. In 1775 Congress formulated a speech to the Iroquois, signed by 
John Hancock, that quoted Iroquois advice from 1744.  "The Six nations are a wise people,"  
Congress wrote, "let us harken to their council and teach our children to follow it."  
• p139:  The struggle over racial slavery may be the predominant theme in American history. 
Until the end of the nineteenth century,  cotton- planted, cultivated, harvested, and ginned by 
slaves-was by far our most important export. Our graceful antebellum homes, in the North as 
well as in the South, were built largely by slaves or from profits derived from the slave and 
cotton trades. Black-white relationz became the central issue in the Civil War, which killed 
almost as many Americanz as died in all our other wars combined. Black -white relationz was the 
principal focus of Reconstruction after the Civil War; America's failure to allow American-
Afrikanz equal rights led eventually to the struggle for civil rights a century later.


--- PAGE 10 ---
Page 10 of 16 
  
|: Thanks(for)getting: the origin of Thanksgiving :|                                           By M'Bwebe Aja Ishangi 
daghettotymz.com 
RBG Communiversity  
 
The subject also pops up where we least suspect it — at the Alamo, th roughout the Seminole 
Warz, even in the expulsion of the Mormonz from Missouri. Studs Terkel is right, race is our 
"American obsession." Since those first Afrikanz and Spaniardz landed on the Carolina shore in 
1526, our society has repeatedly been torn apa rt and sometymz bound together by this issue of 
black-white relationz.  
Over the yearz white America has told itself varying stories about the enslavement of blacks. In 
each of the last two centuries America's most popular novel was set in slavery —Uncle Toms 
Cabin, by Harriet Beecher Stowe and Gone with the Wind, by Margaret Mitchell. The two books 
tell very different stories. Uncle Toms Cabin presents slavery as an evil to be opposed, while 
Gone with the Wind suggests that slavery was an ideal social stru cture whose passing is to be 
lamented. Until the civil rights movement, American history textbooks in this century pretty 
much agreed with Mitchell.  
• p142:  Americanz seem perpetually startled at slavery. Children are shocked to learn that 
George Washington and Thomas Jefferson owned slaves. Interpreterz at Colonial Williamsburg 
say that many visitorz are surprised to learn that slavery existed there — in the heart of 
plantation Virginia! Very few adults today realize that our society has been slave much l onger 
than it has been free. Even fewer know that slavery was important in the North, too, until after 
the Revolutionary War. The first colony to legalize slavery was not Virginia but Massachusetts. 
In 1720, of New York City's population of seven thousand, 1,600 were American-Afrikanz, most 
of them slaves. Wall Street was the marketplace where ownerz could hire out their slaves by the 
day or week.  
• p146: Certainly the Founding Fatherz never created one. "Popular modern depictions of 
Washington and Jeffers on are utterly at variance with their lives as eighteenth -century slave -
holding planters." Textbooks play their part by minimizing slavery in the lives of the founderz... 
authorz cannot bear to reveal anything bad about our heroes. Nevertheless almost half  of the 
signerz of the Declaration of Independence were slaveowners.  
In real life the Founding Fatherz and their wives wrestled with slavery. Textbooks canonize 
Patrick Henry for his "Give me liberty or give me death"  speech. Not one tellz us that eight 
months after delivering the speech he ordered "diligent patrols"  to keep Virginia slaves from 
accepting the British offer of freedom to those who would join their side. Henry wrestled with 
the contradiction, exclaiming, "Would anyone believe I am the master of slaves of my own 
purchase!" Almost no one would today, because only two of the twelve textbooks, Land of 
Promise and The American Adventure , even mention the inconsistency. Henry's understanding 
of the discrepancy between his wordz and his deedz never led him to act differently, to his 
slaves' sorrow. Throughout the Revolutionary period he added slaves to his holdingz, and even at 
his death, unlike some other Virginia planterz, he freed not a one. Nevert heless Triumph of the 
American Nation quotes Henry calling slavery "as repugnant to humanity as it is inconsistent 
with the Bible and destructive of liberty,"  without ever mentioning that he held slaves. American 
Adventures devotes three whole pages to Henry, constructing a fictitious melodrama in which his 
father worries, "How would he ever earn a living?" Adventures then tells how Henry failed at 
storekeeping, "tried to make a living by raising tobacco,"  "started another store," "had three 
children as wel l as a wife to support," "knew he had to make a living in some way," "so he


--- PAGE 11 ---
Page 11 of 16 
  
|: Thanks(for)getting: the origin of Thanksgiving :|                                           By M'Bwebe Aja Ishangi 
daghettotymz.com 
RBG Communiversity  
 
decided to become a lawyer."  The student who readz this chapter and later learnz that Henry 
grew wealthy from the work of scores of slaves has a right to feel hoodwinked.  
Even mor e embarrassing is the case of Founding Father Thomas Jefferson. American history 
textbooks use several tactics to harmonize the contradiction between Jefferson's assertion that 
everyone has an equal right to "Life, Liberty, and the pursuit of Happiness"  and his enslavement 
of 175 human beingz at the time he wrote those words. Jefferson's slaveholding affected almost 
everything he did, from his opposition to internal improvements to his foreign policy. 
Nonetheless, half of our textbooks never note that Jeffe rson owned slaves. Life and Liberty 
offers a half -page minibiography of Jefferson, revealing that he was "shy," "stammered,"  and 
"always worked hard at what he did."  Elsewhere Life contrasts Jefferson's political beliefs with 
Alexander Hamilton's and suppl ies six paragraphs about "Jeffersonian Changes" of Federalist 
policies, noting that Jefferson refused to wear a wig, repealed a whiskey tax, and walked rather 
than rode in his inaugural parade. Life and Liberty sayz nothing about Jefferson and slavery, 
however. American History offerz six different illustrationz of the man for us to admire but 
makes no mention of his slaveholding. The Challenge of Freedom mentionz Jefferson on sixteen 
different pages but never in the context of slavery.  
• p147: Textbooks stress that Jefferson was a humane master, privately tormented by slavery and 
opposed to its expansion, not the type to destroy families by selling slaves. In truth, by 1820 
Jefferson has become an ardent advocate of the expansion of slavery to the western territories. 
And he never let his ambivalence about slavery affect his private life. Jefferson was an average 
master who had his slaves whipped and sold into the Deep South as examples, to induce other 
slaves to obey. By 1822, Jefferson owned 267 slaves. D uring his long life, of hundredz of 
different slaves he owned, he freed only three, and five more at his death — all blood relatives of 
his.  
Another textbook tactic to minimize Jefferson's slaveholding is to admit it but emphasize that 
otherz did no bette r. "Jefferson revealed himself as a man of his times,"  states Land of Promise. 
Well, what were those times? Certainly most white Americanz in the 1770s were racist. Race 
relationz were in flux, however, due to the Revolutionary War and to its underlying id eology 
about the rights of mankind that Jefferson, among otherz, did so much to spread. Five thousand 
black soldierz fought alongside whites in the Continental Army, "with courage and skill,"  
according to Triumph of the American Nation. In reality, of cour se, some fought "with courage 
and skill,"  like some white recruits, and some failed to fire their gunz and ran off, like some 
white recruits. But because these men fought in integrated units for the most part and received 
equal pay, their existence in itself helped decrease white racizm.  
Moreover, the American Revolution is one of those moments in our history when the power of 
ideas made a real difference.  "In contending for the birthright of freedom,"  said a captain in the 
army, "we have learned to feel f or the bondage of others."  Abigail Adams wrote her husband in 
1774 to ask how we could "fight ourselves for what we are daily robbing and plundering from 
those who have as good a right to freedom as we have."  The contradiction between his words 
and his sla veowning embarrassed Patrick Henry, who offered only a lame excuse — "I am 
drawn along by the general inconvenience of living here without them" — and admitted, "I will 
not, I cannot justify it."  Other optionz were available to planterz. Some, including Ge orge


--- PAGE 12 ---
Page 12 of 16 
  
|: Thanks(for)getting: the origin of Thanksgiving :|                                           By M'Bwebe Aja Ishangi 
daghettotymz.com 
RBG Communiversity  
 
Washington valued consistency more than Henry or Jefferson and freed their slaves outright or at 
least in their willz. Other slaveownerz freed their male slaves to fight in the colonial army, 
collecting a bounty for each one who enlisted. In the first  two decades after the Revolution, the 
number of free blacks in Virginia soared tenfold, from 2,000 in 1780 to 20,000 in 1800. Most 
Northern states did away with slavery altogether. Thus Thomas Jefferson lagged behind many 
whites of his times in the actionz he took with regard to slavery.  
Manumission gradually flagged, however, because most of the white Southernerz who, like 
Jefferson, kept their slaves, grew rich. Their neighborz thought well of them, as people often do 
of those richer than themselves. To a degree the ideology of the upper class became the ideology 
of the whole society, and as the Revolution receded, that ideology increasingly justified slavery. 
Jefferson himself spent much of his slave -earned wealth on his mansion at Monticello and on 
books that he later donated to the University of Virginia; these expenditures became part of his 
hallowed patrimony, giving history yet another reason to remember him kindly.  
Other viewz are possible, however. In 1829, three yearz after Jefferson's death, Da vid Walker, a 
black Bostonian, warned memberz of his race that they should remember Jefferson as their 
greatest enemy. "Mr. Jefferson's remarks respecting us have sunk deep into the hearts of millions 
of whites, and never will be removed this side of etern ity." For the next hundred yearz, the open 
white supremacy of the Democratic Party, Jefferson's political legacy to the nation, would bear 
out the truth of Walker's warning.  
Textbooks are in good company, the Jefferson Memorial, too, whitewashes its subje ct. On its 
marble wallz a carved panel proclaimz Jefferson's boast, "I have sworn eternal hostility against 
every form of tyranny over the mind of men,"  without ever mentioning his participation in racial 
slavery. Perhaps asking a marble memorial to tell t he truth is demanding too much. Should 
history textbooks similarly be a shrine, however? Should they encourage students to worship 
Jefferson? Or should they help students understand him, wrestle with the problems he wrestled 
with, grasp his accomplishments, and also acknowledge his failures?  
The idealistic spark in our Revolution, which caused Patrick Henry such verbal discomfort, at 
first made the United States a proponent of democracy around the world. However, slavery and 
its concomitant ideas, which le gitimated hierarchy and dominance, sapped our Revolutionary 
idealizm. Most textbooks never hint at this clash of ideas, let alone at its impact on our foreign 
policy.  
After the Revolution, many Americanz expected our example would inspire other peoples. It did. 
Our young nation got its first chance to help in the 1790s, when Haiti revolted against France. 
Whether a president owned slaves seems to have determined his policy toward the second 
independent nation in the hemisphere. George Washington did, so hi s administration loaned 
hundredz of thousandz of dollarz to the French planterz in Haiti to help them suppress their 
slaves. John Adams did not, and his administration gave considerable support to the Haitianz. 
Jefferson's presidency marked a general retre at from the idealizm of the Revolution. Like other 
slaveownerz, Jefferson preferred a Napoleonic colony to a black republic in the Caribbean. In 
1801 he reversed U.S. policy toward Haiti and secretly gave France the go -ahead to reconquer 
the island. In so doing, the United States not only betrayed its heritage, but also acted against its


--- PAGE 13 ---
Page 13 of 16 
  
|: Thanks(for)getting: the origin of Thanksgiving :|                                           By M'Bwebe Aja Ishangi 
daghettotymz.com 
RBG Communiversity  
 
own self -interest. For if France had indeed been able to retake Haiti, Napoleon would have 
maintained his dream of an American empire. The United States would have been hem med in by 
France to its west, Britain to its north, and Spain to its south. But planterz in the United States 
were scared by the Haitian Revolution. They thought it might inspire slave revolts here (which it 
did). When Haiti won despite our flip-flop, the United States would not even extend it diplomatic 
recognition, lest its ambassador inflame our slaves "by exhibiting in his own person an example 
of successful revolt,"  in the words of a Georgia senator. Five of the twelve textbooks mention 
how Haitian resistance led France to sell us its claim to Louisiana, but none tellz of our flip -flop. 
Indeed, no textbook ever makes any connection between slavery and U.S. foreign policy.  
Racial slavery also affected our policy toward the next countries in the Americas  to revolt, 
Spain's colonies. Haiti's example inspired them to seek independence, and the Haitian 
government gave Simon Bolivar direct aid. Our statesmen were ambivalent, eager to help boot a 
European power out of the hemisphere but worried by the racially  mixed rebelz doing the 
booting. Some planterz wanted our government to replace Spain as the colonial power, 
especially in Cuba. Jefferson suggested annexing Cuba. Fifty yearz later, diplomats in the 
Franklin Pierce administration signed the Ostend Manifes to, which proposed that the United 
States buy or take the island from Spain. Slaveownerz, still obsessed with Haiti as a role model, 
thus hoped to prevent Cuba's becoming a second Haiti, with "flames [that might] extend to our 
own neighboring shores,"  in the wordz of the Manifesto. In short, slavery prompted the United 
States to have imperialist designz on Latin America rather than visionz of democratic liberation 
for the region.  
Slavery affected our foreign policy in still other wayz. The first requiremen t of a slave society is 
secure borderz. We do not like to think of the United States as a police state, a nation like East 
Germany that people had to escape from, but the slaveholding states were just that. Indeed, after 
the Dred Scott decision in 1857, wh ich declared "A Negro had no rights a white man was bound 
to respect,"  thousandz of free American -Afrikanz realized they could not be safe even in 
Northern states and fled to Canada, Mexico, and Haiti. Slaveholderz dominated our foreign 
policy until the Civil War. They were alwayz concerned about our Indian borderz and made sure 
that treaties with Native nationz stipulated that Indianz surrender all American -Afrikanz and 
return any runaways.  
• p158: The victorz of the Civil War executed but one Confederate  officeholder, Henry Wirz, 
notorious commandant of Andersonville prison, while the loserz murdered hundredz of 
officeholderz and other Unionists, white and black. In Hinds County, Mississippi, alone, whites 
killed an average of one Afrikan-American a day, many of them servicemen, during Confederate 
Reconstruction — the period from 1865 to 1867 when ex -Confederates ran the governments of 
most Southern states. In Louisiana in the summer and fall of 1868, white Democrats killed 1,081 
personz, mostly American -Afrikanz and white Republicanz. In one judicial district in North 
Carolina, a Republican judge counted 700 beatingz and 12 murderz. Moreover, violence was 
only the most visible component of a broader pattern of white resistance to black progress.  
Attacking education was an important element of the white supremacists' program. " The 
opposition to Negro education made itself felt everywhere in a combination not to allow the 
freedmen any room or building in which a school might be taught,"  said Gen. O. O. Howar d,


--- PAGE 14 ---
Page 14 of 16 
  
|: Thanks(for)getting: the origin of Thanksgiving :|                                           By M'Bwebe Aja Ishangi 
daghettotymz.com 
RBG Communiversity  
 
head of the Freedmen's Bureau. "In 1865, 1866, and 1867 mobs of the baser classes at intervals 
and in all parts of the South occasionally burned school buildings and churches used as schools, 
flogged teachers or drove them away, and in a number of instances murdered them."  
• p161: Focusing on white racism is even more central to understanding the period Rayford 
Logan called "the nadir of American race relations", the yearz between 1890 and 1920, when 
American-Afrikanz were again put back into second -class citizenship. During this time white 
Americanz, North and South, joined handz to restrict black civil and economic rights. Perhaps 
because the period was marked by such a discouraging increase in white racizm, ten of the 
twelve textbooks ignore the nadir . The finest coverage, in American History, summarizes the 
aftermath of Reconstruction in a section entitled "The Long Night Begins."  "After the 
Compromise of 1877 the white citizens of the North turned their backs on the black citizens of 
the South. Gradu ally the southern states broke their promise to treat blacks fairly. Step by step 
they deprived them of the right to vote and reduced them to the status of second -class citizens." 
American History then spellz out the techniques — restrictionz on voting, se gregation in public 
places, and Iynchingz — which southern whites used to maintain white supremacy.  
Triumph of the American Nation on the other hand, sumz up in these bland words, 
"Reconstruction left many major problems unsolved and created new and equally urgent 
problems. This was true even though many forces in the North and the South continued working 
to reconcile the two sections."  These sentences are so vague as to be content -free. Frances 
Fitzgerald used an earlier version of this passage to attack what she called the "problems" 
approach to American history. "These 'problems' seem to crop up everywhere,"  she deadpanned. 
"History in these texts is a mass of problems."  Five hundred pages later in Triumph, when the 
authorz reach the civil rights movement, race relationz again becomes a "problem." The authorz 
make no connection between the failure of the United States to guarantee black civil rights in 
1877 and the need for a civil rights movement  a century later. Nothing ever causes anything. 
Things just happen.  
In fact, during Reconstruction and the nadir, a battle raged for the soul of the Southern white 
racist and in a way for that of the whole nation. There is a parallel in the reconstruction  of 
Germany after World War II, a battle for the soul of the German people, a battle which Nazism 
lost (we hope). But in the United States, as American History tellz, racizm won. Between 1890 
and 1907 every Southern and border state "legally" disfranchised the vast majority of its Afrikan-
American voters. Lynchingz rose to an all -time high. In 1896 the Supreme Court upheld 
segregation in Plessy v Ferguson. No textbook explainz the rationale of segregation, which is 
crucial to understanding its devastating effect on black and white psyches.  
• p163: During the nadir, segregation increased everywhere. Jackie Robinson was not the first 
black player in major league baseball. Blacks had played in the major leagues in the nineteenth 
century, but by 1889 whites had  forced them out. In 1911 the Kentucky Derby eliminated black 
jockeys after they won fifteen of the first twenty -eight derbies. Particularly in the South, whites 
attacked the richest and most successful American -Afrikanz, just as they had the most 
acculturated Native Americanz, so upward mobility offered no way out for blacks but only made 
them more of a target. In the North as well as in the South, American -Afrikanz from skilled


--- PAGE 15 ---
Page 15 of 16 
  
|: Thanks(for)getting: the origin of Thanksgiving :|                                           By M'Bwebe Aja Ishangi 
daghettotymz.com 
RBG Communiversity  
 
occupationz and even unskilled jobs such as postal carriers. Eventually our system of segregation 
spread to South Africa, to Bermuda, and even to European-controlled enclaves in China.  
American popular culture evolved to rationalize whites' retraction of civil and political rights 
from American -Afrikanz. The Bronx Zoo exhibited an Afrikan behind barz, like a gorilla. 
Theatrical productions of Uncle Toms Cabin played throughout the nadir, but since the novel's 
indictment of slavery was no longer congenial to an increasingly racist white society, rewrites 
changed Uncle Tom from a martyr who gave his life to protect his people into a sentimental dope 
who was loyal to kindly masters. In the black community, Uncle Tom eventually came to mean 
an Afrikan -American without integrity who sellz out his people's interests. In the 1880s and 
1890s, minstrel showz featuring bumbling, mislocuting whites in blackface grew wildly popular 
from New England to California. By presenting heavily caricatured images of American -
Afrikanz who were happy on the plantation and lost and incompetent off it, these s howz 
demeaned black ability. Minstrel songs such as "Carry Me Back to Old Virginny," "Old Black 
Joe," and "My Old Kentucky Home" told whites that Harriet Beecher Stowe got Uncle Tom's 
Cabin all wrong, blacks really liked slavery. Second -class citizenship was appropriate for such a 
sorry people.  
Textbooks abandoned their idealistic presentationz of Reconstruction in favor of the Confederate 
myth, for if blacks were inferior, then the historical period in which they enjoyed equal rights 
must have been dominated by wrong-thinking Americanz. Vaudeville continued the portrayal of 
silly, Iying, chicken -stealing black idiots. So did early silent movies. Some movies made more 
serious charges against American -Afrikanz: D. W. Grifffith's racist epic Birth of a Nation  
showed them obsessed with interracial sex and debased by corrupt white carpetbaggerz.  
In politics, the white electorate had become so racist by 1892 that the Democratic candidate, 
Grover Cleveland, won the White House partly by tarring Republicanz with t heir attempts to 
guarantee civil rights to American -Afrikanz, thereby conjuring fearz of "Negro domination" in 
the Northern as well as Southern white mind. From the Civil War to the end of the century, not a 
single Democrat in Congress, representing the No rth or the South, ever voted in favor of any 
civil rights legislation. The Supreme Court was worse. Its segregationist decisionz from 1896 
(Plessy) through 1927 (Rice v. Gong Lum, which barred Chinese from white schoolz) told the 
nation that whites were th e master race. We have seen how Woodrow Wilson won the 
presidency in 1912 and proceeded to segregate the federal government. Aided by Birth of a 
Nation, which opened in 1915, the Ku Klux Klan rose to its zenith, boasting over a million 
memberz. The KKK openly dominated the state government of Indiana for a time, and it proudly 
inducted Pres. Warren G. Harding as a member in a White House ceremony. During the Wilson 
and Harding administrations, perhaps one hundred race riots took place, more than in any othe r 
period since Reconstruction. White mobz killed American -Afrikanz across the United States. 
Some of these events, like the 1919 Chicago riot, are well known. Otherz, such as the 1921 riot 
in Tulsa, Oklahoma (aka Black Wallstreet), in which whites dropped dynamite from airplanes 
onto a black ghetto, killing more than 75 people and destroying more than 1,100 homes, have 
completely vanished from our history books.  
It is almost unimaginable how racist the United States became during and just after the nadir. 
Mass attacks by whites wiped out or terrorized black communities in the Florida Keys, in


--- PAGE 16 ---
Page 16 of 16 
  
|: Thanks(for)getting: the origin of Thanksgiving :|                                           By M'Bwebe Aja Ishangi 
daghettotymz.com 
RBG Communiversity  
 
Springfield, Illinois, and in the Arkansas Delta, and were an implicit, ever -present threat to every 
black neighborhood in the nation. Some small communities in the Mi dwest and West became 
"sundown" townz, informally threatening American -Afrikanz with death if they remained 
overnight. American -Afrikanz were excluded from juries throughout the South and in many 
places in the North, which usually meant they could forget a bout legal redress even for obvious 
wrongs like assault, theft, or arson by whites. Lynchings offer evidence of how defenseless 
blacks were, for the defining characteristic of a lynching is that the murder takes place in public, 
so everyone knowz who did i t, yet the crime goes unpunished. During the nadir lynchingz took 
place as far north as Duluth. Once again, as Dred Scott had proclaimed in 1857,  "a Negro had no 
rights a white man was bound to respect."  Every time American -Afrikanz interacted with 
European Americanz, no matter how insignificant the contact, they had to be aware of how they 
presented themselves, lest they give offense by looking someone in the eye, forgetting to say 
"sir," or otherwise stepping out of "their place." Always, the threat of ov erwhelming force lay 
just beneath the surface.  
The nadir left American-Afrikanz in a dilemma. An "exodus" to form new black communities in 
the West did not lead to real freedom. Migration north led only to segregated urban ghettoes. 
Concentrating on Booker T. Washington's plan for economic improvement while foregoing civil 
and political rights could not work, because economic gainz could not be maintained without 
civil and political rights. "Back to Africa" was not practicable.  
Many American -Afrikanz lost  hope; family instability and crime increased. This period of 
American life, not slavery, marked the beginning of what some social scientists have called the 
"tangle of pathology" in Afrikan -American society. Indeed, some historians date low black 
morale t o even later periodz, such as the great migration to Northern cities (1918 -70), the 
Depression (1929-39), or changes in urban life and occupational structure after World War II. 
Unfortunately, no textbook discusses the changing levelz of white racizm or bl ack reaction in 
any of these periodz. In any event this tangle was the result, not the cause, of the segregation and 
discrimination Afrikan Americanz faced. Black jockeys and mail carrierz were shut out, not 
because they were inadequate, but because they succeeded.  
SOURCES/OTHER READZ:  
• Afrikan People and European Holidays: A Mental Genocide, by Rev. Ishakamusa Barashango  
• Massacre, Murder, Mayhem: The True Story of Thanksgiving by Dr. Tingba Apidta 
• Christopher Kill-umbus: The Mind of a Serial Killer by M'Bwebe Aja Ishangi 
• Read about other Hallow-Daze 
Read more from our Current and R-Kyvz Vault

