=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: The Practice of Diaspora Literature, Translation, and the Rise of Black Internationalism.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 408
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:18:15.832311
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 3 ---



--- PAGE 4 ---
THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA
Literature, T ranslation, and the Rise
of Black Internationalism
BRENT HAYES EDWARDS
HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS
Cambridge, Massachusetts and London, England 2003
[To view this image, refer to  
the print version of this title.]


--- PAGE 5 ---
Copyright © 2003 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Edwards, Brent Hayes.
The practice of diaspora : literature, translation, and the rise of
Black internationalism / Brent Hayes Edwards.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-674-01022-1 (cloth)
ISBN 0-674-01103-1 (paper)
1. Literature—Black authors—History and criticism. 2. Literature, Modern—20th
century—History and criticism. 3. Paris (France)—Intellectual life—20th century. I. Title.
PN841.E38 2003
809′.8896′0904—dc21 2002038813
“Jazz Band in a Parisian Cabaret” fromThe Collected Poems of Langston Hughes by
Langston Hughes, copyright © 1994 by The Estate of Langston Hughes. Used
by permission of Alfred A. Knopf, a division of Random House, Inc.
Quotations from Claude McKay’s works courtesy of the Literary Representative for
the Works of Claude McKay, Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture,
The New York Public Library, Astor, Lenox and Tilden Foundations.


--- PAGE 6 ---
FOR MY PARENTS


--- PAGE 7 ---



--- PAGE 8 ---
CONTENTS
List of Illustrations ix
Prologue 1
1 Variations on a Preface 16
T ranslating the WordNègre
The Frame of Blackness
Race and the Modern Anthology
Border Work
A Blues Note
2 On Reciprocity: René Maran and Alain Locke 69
Véritable Roman Nègre
A “Black Logic” of the Preface
Paris, Heart of the Negro Race
Encounter on the Rhine
The Practice of Diaspora
3 Feminism andL ’Internationalisme Noir:Paulette Nardal 119
Gender in Black Paris
Feminism and La Dépêche Africaine
Salons and Cercles d’Amis
Black Magic
Begin the Beguine
4 Vagabond Internationalism: Claude McKay’sBanjo 187
Légitime Défense: T ranslatingBanjo
Vagabond Internationalism
Diaspora and the “Passable Word”
The Boys in the Band
Black Radicalism and the Politics of Form


--- PAGE 9 ---
5 Inventing the Black International:
George Padmore and Tiemoko Garan Kouyaté 241
The Negro Worker
Black Collaboration, Black Deviation
Black Marxism in T ranslation
T oward a Francophone Internationalism
International African
1 Coda: The Last Anthology 306
Notes 321
Acknowledgments 387
Index 391
viii CONTENTS


--- PAGE 10 ---
ILLUSTRATIONS
Jane Nardal. La Dépêche africaine 1 (February 1928) 17
Lamine Senghor at the Brussels Congress of the League Against Imperialism
(February 1927) 29
La Voix des Nègres 1 (January 1927) 31
“Mardi-Gras.” Suzanne Lacascade,Claire-Solange, âme africaine (Paris: Eugène
Figuière, 1924) 58
Josephine Baker and Georges Henri Rivière at the Musée de l’Homme, 1933
(Lipnitski) 80
René Maran in Ubangui-Shari. Bingo, l’illustré africain73 (February 1959): 13 98
G. O. Marke, Kojo T ovalou Houénou and Marcus Garvey in Harlem, August
1924 (James VanDerZee) 101
Léopold Senghor and the editorial collective of La Revue du monde noir (June 26,
1932) 120
Alice Nardal and Jane Nardal (c. 1960) 127
La Dépêche africaine 31 (December 1930) 150
Paulette Nardal (c. 1960) 153
L ’Etudiant noir1 (March 1935) 178
Claude McKay in Paris in the 1920s 188
A group of men in Marseilles (c. 1927) 226
La Race nègre 1 (June 1927) 232
George Padmore (1937) 248
Tiemoko Garan Kouyaté (June 1932) 251
Masthead of the Negro Worker 1, no. 6 (June 1931). 260
Masthead of Le Cri des Nègres 3 (October 1931) 261
Masthead of International African Opinion (July 1938) 301


--- PAGE 11 ---



--- PAGE 12 ---
PROLOGUE
A
t the dawn of the last century, W . E. B. Du Bois coined a phrase
that was at once a prophecy and a preface. In July 1900, he came to
London from France, where he had helped install the American Ne-
gro exhibit at the grandiose bilan du siècle of the Paris Universal Exposition
on the banks of the Seine. Du Bois crossed the Channel to join such ﬁgures
as African American feminist Anna Julia Cooper, Haitian politician Benito
Sylvain, black British composer Samuel Coleridge-Taylor, and well-known
former slave Henry “Box” Brown at the Pan-African Conference organized
by T rinidadian lawyer Henry Sylvester Williams. In the ﬁnal sessions of the
conference in Westminster T own Hall, Du Bois gave a speech titled “T o the
Nations of the World” that opened with a stunning paragraph:
In the metropolis of the modern world, in this closing year of the
nineteenth century there has been assembled a congress of men and
women of African blood, to deliberate solemnly upon the present
situation and outlook of the darker races of mankind. The problem
of the twentieth century is the problem of the colour line, the ques-
tion as to how far differences of race...a r egoing to be made, hereaf-
ter, the basis of denying to over half the world the right of sharing
to their utmost ability the opportunities and privileges of modern
civilisation.
1
The second sentence (“the problem of the twentieth century is the problem
of the colour line”) would reverberate three years later in the famous “Fore-
thought” to Du Bois’s masterwork,The Souls of Black Folk,in a formulation
that is often considered an inauguration for thinking about the signiﬁcance
of race in the modern world.
2
Reading The Souls of Black Folk as an echo of the prior usage at the Pan-
African Conference necessitates coming to terms with the ways that the


--- PAGE 13 ---
phrase emphatically frames the “color line” not in the U.S. debates and civil
rights struggles that are commonly taken to be its arena, but in the much
broader sphere of “modern civilization” as a whole. This preface addresses
“the nations of the world,” but from the setting and in the name of a trans-
national gathering of men and women. Although the conference gathered
intellectuals of African descent, it aimed to “deliberate” on and even speak
for a larger population of the colonized and oppressed, the “darker races of
the world.” Or as Du Bois would underline again and again in the next few
years, the “Negro problem” in the United States is only a “local phase” of a
much greater problem: “the color line belts the world.”
3
If the Pan-African Conference was an ephemeral organization with little
lasting impact, still Du Bois’s phrase set the tone for the eruption of black
expressive culture and political initiatives in the 1920s. As he put it later, a
“world view” on the color line was all the more indispensable in the wake of
a series of earthshaking events in the second decade of the century, most of
all “that great event of these great years, the World War.”
4 What Nathan
Huggins terms the “post-war effort to thrust Negro social thought into an
international arena” is a constant thread in the work of black intellectuals of
the period no matter what their ideological outlook, whether Du Bois or
Marcus Garvey, whether Jessie Fauset or W . A. Domingo, whether Claude
McKay or Lamine Senghor.
5 The cosmopolite Howard University philoso-
phy professor Alain Locke claimed in the introduction to his 1925 anthol-
ogy The New Negro that his title was partly an allusion to the Negro’s “new
internationalism,” which represented one of the few “constructive chan-
nels” for black cultural institution building beyond the “cramped horizons”
of postwar U.S. racism and segregation.
6 With very different aims, the bril-
liant black socialist orator Hubert Harrison picked up the internationalist
implications of Du Bois’s “color line” right after the war, calling for atten-
tion to the self-determination struggles of the peoples of Egypt, India,
China, and Africa, and prescribing that “before the Negroes of the Western
world can play any effective part they must ﬁrst acquaint themselves with
what is taking place in that larger world whose millions are in motion. . . .
If our problem here is really a part of a great world-wide problem, we must
make our attempts to solve our part link up with the attempts being made
elsewhere to solve the other parts.”
7
T o note that the “New Negro” movement is at the same time a “new”
black internationalism is to move against the grain of much of the scholar-
2 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 14 ---
ship on African American culture in the 1920s, which has tended to em-
phasize U.S.-bound themes of cultural nationalism, civil rights protest, and
uplift in the literary culture of the “Harlem Renaissance.”8 This book is an
attempt to come to terms with the reminders of a handful of scholars such
as Robert Stepto, Michel Fabre, and Melvin Dixon that “the Renaissance
was international in scale both in terms of where its contributors came
from and in terms of its being merely the North American component of
something larger and grander.”
9 This approach means not only tracking the
transnational contours of black expression between the world wars, but also
accounting for the ways that expression was molded through attempts to
appropriate and transform the discourses of internationalism that seemed
to center “the destinies of mankind,” as Du Bois put it in 1919—the dis-
course of international civil society as embodied in the League of Nations,
the counter-universalism of proletarian revolution envisioned by the Com-
munist International, and the globe-carving discourse of European colo-
nialism.
10
One approach to the stirrings of the cultures of black internationalism is
to consider the ways that during and after the war, metropolitan France was
one of the key places where African Americans, Antilleans, and Africans
were able to “link up.” During World War I, about 370,000 African Ameri-
cans served in the segregated American Expeditionary Force in France, in
both service and combat units. Along with a warm reception from French
civilians, African American soldiers encountered the tangible presence of
soldiers of color from throughout the French Empire. During the war, the
French conscripted nearly 620,000 soldiers from the colonies, including
approximately 250,000 from Senegal and the Sudan and 30,000 from the
French Caribbean. France simultaneously imported a labor force of nearly
300,000, both from elsewhere in Europe and from the colonies. Although
France repatriated the great majority of the “native” troops, in 1926 there
were still at least 10,000 Caribbean students and workers and 1,500 black
African workers in Paris alone, along with hundreds of African American
visitors and expatriates.
11 After the war, tales of encounter and connection,
forged in the trenches and on the docks, traveled back to the United States
with the American ﬁghting forces. Some U.S. blacks stayed in France to
study or to perform, most gravitating to Paris—for Paris had simulta-
neously come to appreciate jazz and l’art nègre,partly through the perfor-
mances of military music units like James Reese Europe’s 369th Infantry
PROLOGUE 3


--- PAGE 15 ---
Regiment “Hellﬁghters” Band and postwar musicians including Palmer
Jones’s International Five, Louis Mitchell, Arthur Briggs, Cricket Smith,
Eugene Bullard, Ada Smith, and Florence Embry Jones.
12 Looking just at
the culture makers usually identiﬁed with the “Harlem Renaissance,” it
is striking that the exceptions are those who remained in the United States.
Not even to mention visual artists, almost all of the major literary ﬁgures
of the period, including Anna Julia Cooper, Claude McKay, Walter White,
Gwendolyn Bennett, Countee Cullen, Langston Hughes, Alain Locke,
James Weldon Johnson, Jessie Fauset, J. A. Rogers, Jean T oomer, Eric
Walrond, and Nella Larsen, spent time abroad and especially in Paris in the
1920s. It is often overlooked that many early Francophone Antillean and
African intellectuals (such as René Maran, Kojo T ovalou Houénou, Louis
Achille, Léo Sajous, and Léon-Gontran Damas) were equally mobile in the
period, in Europe, Africa, and in some cases the United States as well.
Still, these numbers are nowhere near the concentration of peoples of
African descent in Harlem. It is important to recognize that the signiﬁcance
of Paris in this period is not a question of sheer population size. Instead, as
Raymond Williams has argued, the European metropole after the war pro-
vided a special sort of vibrant, cosmopolitan space for interaction that
was available neither in the United States nor in the colonies. It allowed
“a complexity and a sophistication of social relations, supplemented in
the most important cases—Paris, above all—by exceptional liberties of ex-
pression....[ W ]ithin the new kind of open, complex and mobile society,
small groups in any form of divergence or dissent could ﬁnd some kind of
foothold.”
13 Paris is crucial because it allowed boundary crossing, conver-
sations, and collaborations that were available nowhere else to the same
degree.
At the same time the city resonates in the cultures of black international-
ism because it came to represent certain kinds of crossings, certain exten-
sions of the horizon, even for populations that did not travel. I will discuss
this point in more detail later with regard to a variety of genres, but to
sketch its implications quickly, one might note—just in terms of interwar
black U.S. novelistic production alone—that to ask about the function of
Paris is to ask a broader set of interrelated questions about the role of outer-
national sites even in texts that are putatively the canonical literature of
“Harlem.” It is as though certain moves, certain arguments and epiphanies,
can only be staged beyond the conﬁnes of the United States, and even
4 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 16 ---
sometimes in languages other than English. In other words, why does
James Weldon Johnson’sThe Autobiography of an Ex-Colored Man (which
predates the war, but only becomes a key text after its reprinting in the
1920s) place in Berlin the narrator’s realization about using folk materials
in classical composition? Why does Jessie Fauset’sPlum Bun need that Paris
ending; why is the last third of her Comedy: American Style set in the South
of France? One thinks equally of Nella Larsen’s Quicksand, with its crucial
scenes in Copenhagen, Claude McKay’s Banjo set in Marseilles, Du Bois’s
Dark Princess, so fascinated with the corridors of international power and
intrigue, or Eric Walrond’sTropic Death,unraveling the intricacies of impe-
rialism and labor migration in the Caribbean basin.
Many of the black literati invested in one way or another in the notion
of Harlem as a worldwide black culture capital, and yet many of them came
to view Paris as a special space for black transnational interaction, ex-
change, and dialogue. For African American intellectuals in particular, as
Tyler Stovall phrases it, the role of Paris
was both fascinating and deeply ironic. After all, the city was the seat
of one of the world’s great colonial empires, a place where anonymous
French ofﬁcials supervised the subjugation of millions of black Afri-
cans. ...O utside of Marseilles, London, and some other British cit-
ies, one could not ﬁnd a more diverse black population anywhere in
Europe. More so than in the United States, even New York, African
Americans found that in Paris the abstract ideal of worldwide black
unity and culture became a tangible reality ....F r ench colonialism
and primitivism thus paradoxically combined to foster a vision of
pan-African unity.
14
A vision of internationalism, perhaps, though not exactly “worldwide black
unity”: in these transnational circuits, black modern expression takes form
not as a single thread, but through the often uneasy encounters of peoples
of African descent with each other. The cultures of black internationalism
are formed only within the “paradoxes” Stovall mentions, with the result
that—as much as they allow new and unforeseen alliances and interven-
tions on a global stage—they also are characterized by unavoidable misap-
prehensions and misreadings, persistent blindnesses and solipsisms, self-
defeating and abortive collaborations, a failure to translate even a basic
grammar of blackness.
PROLOGUE 5


--- PAGE 17 ---
In part, as Stovall points out, black and brown encounters on the Seine
were uneasy due to the African American habit of thinking about Paris as
liberatory and “free of racism” precisely at the height of French colonial
exploitation. Claude McKay took the “Renaissance” literati to task on this
issue:
The good treatment of individuals by those whom they meet in
France is valued so highly by Negroes that they are beginning to for-
get about the exploitation of Africans by the French....Thus the
sympathy of the Negro intelligentsia is completely on the side of
France. It is well-informed about the barbarous acts of the Belgians in
the Congo but it knows nothing at all about the barbarous acts of the
French in Senegal, about the organized robbery of native workers,
about the forced enlistment of recruits, about the fact that the popu-
lation is reduced to extreme poverty and hunger, or about the total
annihilation of tribes. It is possible that the Negro intelligentsia does
not want to know about all this, inasmuch as it can loosely generalize
about the differences in the treatment of Negroes in bourgeois France
and in plutocratic America.
15
This blindness allowed the “Harlem Renaissance” intelligentsia to bask in
its own vanguardist myths, as it employed the putative universality of the
French “Rights of Man” to decry U.S. racism. In effect, transnational black
solidarity is traded in for a certain kind of national currency, an anti-racism
in one country. In this conﬁguration, the very notion of“Paris noir”is para-
doxical because it represents the elision of black French culture in all its
forms, whether that of the Francophone African and Antillian workers,
performers, and students in the metropole, or that of the expressive tradi-
tions and struggles of the populations in the French colonies themselves.
What is seldom recognized in the many condemnations of the New Ne-
gro movement as a “failure”—as myopic, elitist, or insufﬁciently radical—is
the degree to which the paradoxes of black Paris are in fact constitutive of
black modern expression in general, which is shaped to a signiﬁcant degree
by what Kenneth Warren has termed the “necessary misrecognitions” of
diasporic discourse.
16 Attempts to articulate the “race problem as a world
problem,” in Locke’s phrase—to foster links among populations of African
descent in order to organize the “darker peoples of the world” across the
6 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 18 ---
boundaries of nation-states and languages—are necessarily skewed by those
same boundaries. 17 That is, the level of the international is accessed un-
evenly by subjects with different historical relations to the nation (for in-
stance, in a collaboration between a U.S. citizen marked by a context of vi-
olent racist exclusion, disenfranchisement, and segregation of a minority
population, and a French West African citizen marked by a context of colo-
nialism, invasive subjugation of a majority population, and Eurocentric
structures of privilege and mobility). Thus, if the cultures of black interna-
tionalism are shaped by the imperatives of what Edward Said has called
“adversarial internationalizations” (attempts at organizing alliances to chal-
lenge the prevailing discourses of Western universalism), those cultures are
equally “adversarial” to themselves, highlighting differences and disagree-
ments among black populations on a number of registers.
18
Another way to put this point is to note that the cultures of black inter-
nationalism can be seen only in translation. It is not possible to take up the
question of “diaspora” without taking account of the fact that the great ma-
jority of peoples of African descent do not speak or write in English. I have
outlined some of the reasons that it makes sense to situate this question in
particular through the dialogues and encounters facilitated in the French
metropole between the world wars; if, as I argue, that space is privileged
and richly varied, it is by no means the exclusive prism of linguistic ex-
change. The larger point is that one can approach such a project only by at-
tending to the ways that discourses of internationalism travel, the ways they
are translated, disseminated, reformulated, and debated in transnational
contexts marked by difference.
It should be evident that undertaking such a project necessitates un-
earthing and articulating an archive, in the sense not so much of a site or
mode of preservation of a national, institutional, or individual past, but in-
stead of a “generative system”: in other words, a discursive system that gov-
erns the possibilities, forms, appearance, and regularity of particular state-
ments, objects, and practices—or, on the simplest level, that determines
“what can and cannot be said.”
19 In terms of the cultures of black interna-
tionalism between the world wars, one must consider a great variety of
texts: ﬁction, poetry, journalism, criticism, position papers, circulars, mani-
festoes, anthologies, correspondence, surveillance reports. One can come to
terms with what archivist Robert Hill calls the “stratiﬁcation of the depos-
its” in such a discursive ﬁeld only by taking stock of not just the most dura-
PROLOGUE 7


--- PAGE 19 ---
ble and widely circulated, but also the most ﬂeeting—the most time-
bound—modes of expressive production. 20
This particular archive turns especially on the multilayered, high-stakes
efforts between the wars to document the “fact” of blackness itself—to
frame race as an object of knowledge production in the service of a range of
adversarial internationalizations. Writing in the mid-1920s, Walter Benja-
min comments in one of the orchestrated fragments of Einbahnstrasse that
[t]he construction of life is at present in the power far more of facts
than of convictions, and of such facts as have scarcely ever become the
basis of convictions. Under these circumstances, true literary activity
cannot aspire to take place within a literary framework; that is, rather,
the habitual expression of its sterility. Signiﬁcant literary effectiveness
can come into being only in a strict alternation between doing and
writing; it must nurture the inconspicuous forms that ﬁt its inﬂuence
in active communities better than does the pretentious, universal ges-
ture of the book—in leaﬂets, brochures, articles, and placards. Only
this prompt language shows itself actively equal to the moment.
Opinions are to the vast apparatus of social existence what oil is to
machines: one does not go up to a turbine and pour machine oil over
it; one applies a little to hidden spindles and joints [Nieten und Fugen]
that one has to know.
21
The “spindles and joints” of a print culture that aims to construct the “fact”
of blackness, that attempts to intervene in conditions of great suffering and
social upheaval, that strains to be “actively equal” to the exigencies of crisis
and advocacy, are located above all at the stratum of periodical culture. Not
surprisingly, the periodical print cultures of black internationalism were
robust and extremely diverse on all sides of the Atlantic. If the list of jour-
nals and newspapers in the United States during the 1920s and 1930s
was better known (including the Negro World, the Messenger, the Crisis, the
Crusader, Opportunity, the Emancipator, the Voice of the Negro, Fire!!, the
Chicago Defender, and the Amsterdam News), their counterparts in France
and Africa (one might begin with Le Paria, L ’Action coloniale, Les Conti-
nents, La Voix des Nègres, La Race nègre, Le Courrier des Noirs, La Dépêche
africaine, Légitime Défense, La Revue du monde noir, Le Cri des Nègres,
L ’Etudiant martiniquais, L ’Etudiant noir,and Africa) were quite keen to
8 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 20 ---
“link up” with English-language sources and just as energetic, albeit more
ephemeral.
Taking up questions of the travels of discourses of black internationalism
requires investigating in particular the multiplicity of translation prac-
tices—and transnational coverage more generally—that are so crucial to
the fabric of this transatlantic print culture. A signiﬁcant subset of these
practices is the bilingualism espoused so frequently by black periodicals
in this period. In Europe, the Negro Worker circulated a mimeographed
French edition; in New York, the Negro World published a French page ed-
ited by Theodore Stephens and a Spanish page edited by M. A. Figueroa; in
Paris, a number of venues (La Revue du monde noir, Les Continents, La
Dépêche africaine) tried to publish an English-language section. If transla-
tions are in the most basic sense the practice of linguistic connection—if, in
other words, translation is one of the ways the “turbine” of the cultures of
black internationalism is lubricated—then it is no coincidence that this sit-
uation caused such disproportionate consternation among French and Brit-
ish colonial authorities. In June 1928, to take one example, an internal cor-
respondence from the political affairs branch of the French West African
colonies to the Ministère des Colonies in Paris reported that La Dépêche
africaine, published out of the French capital, had been reaching Senegal,
Guinea, and the Ivory Coast. The administrator counseled that the rela-
tively moderate periodical should continue on the list of “suspect publica-
tions” and added thatLa Dépêche africaine, “containing a page of articles in
English, could be treated a priori much more rigorously than publications
only in the French language.”
22 In other words, black periodicals were a
threat above all because of the transnational and anti-imperialist linkages
and alliances they practiced: carrying “facts” from one colony to another,
from the French colonial system to the British, from Africa to the United
States.
This is not to claim that what follows is an exhaustive survey of these is-
sues. I elaborate a limited set of U.S.-Francophone conjunctures that in-
volve especial concentrations of exchange and translation (as in the links
between Les Continents in Paris and Opportunity or the Negro Worldin New
York), but one could pursue them just as fruitfully in a range of periodical
contexts I hardly touch, whether the Diario de la Marina in Havana or Jus-
tice in Fort-de-France, La Voix du Dahomey in Cotonou or Wasu in Lon-
don, La Revue indigène in Port-au-Prince or Le Périscope africain in Dakar.
PROLOGUE 9


--- PAGE 21 ---
In New York, one could turn also to the Messenger, whose early issues are
likewise shot through with a pervasive concern with the potential of black
internationalism.23 Nor is this to claim that France and the French colonies
are the only privileged site of black transnational interaction, exchange, and
translation. It would be equally possible to investigate links between Har-
lem and Port-au-Prince during this period (when the United States was oc-
cupying Haiti), through the work of anthropologists such as Jean Price-
Mars and Zora Neale Hurston and the correspondence of intellectuals and
activists including James Weldon Johnson, Dantès Bellegarde, and Georges
Sylvain. Or one could consider Liberia as a ﬂash point for black interna-
tionalism, with scheming and heated squabbles among a number of intel-
lectuals, including W . E. B. Du Bois, Marcus Garvey, George Schuyler,
George Padmore, and the Haitian Léo Sajous. (Any given examples would
overlap in different ways, of course: these two possible lines of inquiry un-
derline the ways that in the interwar period, discourses about blacknational
autonomy—especially as ﬁltered through the passionate interest in the
three independent black states, Haiti, Liberia, and Ethiopia—played a for-
mative role in the formulation of black internationalist initiatives.)
Michel Foucault has suggested that the analysis of the archive involves a
“privileged region” that is in fact the “border” (bordure) of the present we
inhabit. The archive starts at the outside of our own social language prac-
tices (langage), and thus reading it “deprives us of our continuities; it dissi-
pates that temporal identity in which we are pleased to look at ourselves
when we wish to exorcise the discontinuities of history.” Reading the ar-
chive must not serve to buttress the pretensions and mystiﬁcations of the
present self or the current community, in other words. The archive instead
“establishes that we are difference, that...difference, far from being the
forgotten and recovered origin, is the dispersion that we are and make.”
24 If
this book tracks such an edge of history, it hopes to trace in shadow the
possibilities of adversarial internationalism in the current conjuncture. This
book is written with “something of the fever and the fret”
25 of a moment
when discourses of internationalism and globalization are resurgent, but
the unending exploitation of the “darker peoples of the world” is too of-
ten ignored or dismissed fatalistically. In a time when the notion of an
efﬁcacious black internationalism seems but the pipe dream of a few hag-
gard lobbyists and scattered radicals, this book attempts to hear the border
of another future of black internationalism in the archive of its past.
10 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 22 ---
Elsewhere I have noted the paradox that the term diaspora is not taken
up in the cultures of black internationalism until the mid-1950s. I have at-
tempted to sketch a genealogy of the term, an intellectual history of the rea-
sons it is adopted at a particular moment in the African historiography
of scholars such as George Shepperson and Joseph Harris.
26 That genealogy
is not my task here. I do however take up the term diaspora in what follows
as a term of analysis in the spirit of what I consider to be its particular inter-
vention: it makes possible an analysis of the institutional formations of
black internationalism that attends to their constitutive differences. Dias-
pora is a term that marks the ways that internationalism is pursued by
translation. This is not to say that internationalism is doomed to failure,
but instead to note that it necessarily involves a process of linking or con-
necting across gaps—a practice we might term articulation.
Stuart Hall’s work offers the most suggestive theoretical elaboration of
articulation in relation to the particular archive at stake here. His well-
known 1980 essay “Race, Articulation, and Societies Structured in Domi-
nance” attempts to theorize the function of difference in a global capitalist
mode of production. T o understand capitalist production on a “global
scale,” Hall writes (drawing on the work of Louis Althusser and Ernesto
Laclau), that Marx began to theorize
an articulation [Gliederung] between two modes of production, the
one “capitalist” in the true sense, the other only “formally” so: the two
combined through an articulating principle, mechanism, or set of re-
lations, because, as Marx observed, “its beneﬁciaries participate in a
world market in which the dominant productive sectors are already
capitalist.” That is, the object of inquiry must be treated as a complex
articulated structure which is, itself, “structured in dominance.”
27
Articulation here functions as a concept-metaphor that allows us to con-
sider relations of “difference within unity,” non-naturalizable patterns of
linkage between disparate societal elements. The functional “unity” of spe-
ciﬁc and strategically conjoined structures, then, is emphatically
not that of an identity, where one structure perfectly recapitulates or
reproduces or even “expresses” another; or where each is reducible to
the other....
The unity formed by this combination or articulation is always,
PROLOGUE 11


--- PAGE 23 ---
necessarily, a “complex structure,” a structure in which things are re-
lated, as much through their differences as through their similarities.
This requires that the mechanisms which connect dissimilar features
must be shown—since no “necessary correspondence” or expressive
homology can be assumed as given. It also means—since the combi-
nation is a structure (an articulated combination) and not a random
association—that there will be structured relations between its parts,
i.e., relations of dominance and subordination.
28
The notion of articulation is crucial not just because it combines the
structural and the discursive but also because it has a ﬂip side: such “socie-
ties structured in dominance” are also the ground of cultural resistance.
Hall, following Antonio Gramsci, contends that ideology must be consid-
ered the key site of struggle over competing articulations.
29 In a transna-
tional circuit, then, articulation offers the means to account for the diver-
sity of black takes on diaspora, which Hall himself explicitly begins to
theorize in the late 1980s as a frame of cultural identity determined not
through “return” but through difference: “not by essence or purity, but by
the recognition of a necessary heterogeneity and diversity; by a conception
of ‘identity’ which lives with and through, not despite, difference.”
30
Another way to make this point is to note that a discourse of diaspora
functions simultaneously as abstraction and as anti-abstraction. We have
generally come to make recourse unquestioningly to its level of abstraction,
grounding identity claims and transnational initiatives in a history of “scat-
tering of Africans” that supposedly offers a principle of unity—as Paul
Gilroy phrases it, “purity and invariant sameness”—to those dispersed pop-
ulations.
31 I am arguing here neither to disclaim this history of dispersal nor
to substitute another abstraction (an alternative principle of continuity,
such as the oceanic frame offered by Gilroy’s Atlantic). Instead, I am em-
phasizing the anti-abstractionist uses of diaspora. This is an ideological task
that cannot be simply “won”—it is continually necessary to attend to the
ways the term always can be re-articulated and abstracted into evocations of
untroubled essentialism or inviolate roots. Read as an anti-abstractionist
term, diaspora points to difference not only internally (the ways transna-
tional black groupings are fractured by nation, class, gender, sexuality, and
language) but also externally: in appropriating a term so closely associated
with Jewish thought, we are forced to think not in terms of some closed or
12 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 24 ---
autonomous system of African dispersal but explicitly in terms of a com-
plex past of forced migrations and racialization—what Earl Lewis has called
a history of “overlapping diasporas.”32 The use of the term diaspora, Ia m
suggesting, implies neither that it offers the comfort of abstraction, an easy
recourse to origins, nor that it provides a foolproof anti-essentialism: in-
stead, it forces us to articulate discourses of cultural and political linkage
only through and across difference in full view of the risks of that endeavor.
If a discourse of diaspora articulates difference, then one must con-
sider the status of that difference—not just linguistic difference but, more
broadly, the trace or the residue, perhaps, of what resists or escapes transla-
tion. Whenever the African diaspora is articulated (just as when black
transnational projects are deferred, aborted, or declined), these social forces
leave subtle but indelible effects. Such an unevenness or differentiation
marks a constitutive décalage in the very weave of the culture, one that can-
not be either dismissed or pulled out. Léopold Senghor has written sugges-
tively about the differences and inﬂuences between U.S. blacks and African
blacks as spun out across such a gap:
Le différend entre Négro-Américains et Négro-Africains est plus léger
malgré les apparences. Il s’agit, en réalité, d’un simple décalage—dans
le temps et dans l’espace.
33
Despite appearances, the difference between Negro-Americans and
Negro-Africans is more slight. In reality it involves a simple déca-
lage—in time and in space.
Décalage is one of the many French words that resists translation into
English; to signal that resistance and, moreover, to endorse the way that
this term marks a resistance to crossing over, I will keep the term in French
here.
34 It can be translated as “gap,” “discrepancy,” “time-lag,” or “interval”;
it is also the term that French speakers sometimes use to translate “jet lag.”
In other words, a décalage is either a difference or gap in time (advancing or
delaying a schedule) or in space (shifting or displacing an object). I would
suggest, reading somewhat against the grain of Senghor’s text, that there is a
possibility here in the phrase “in time and in space [italics added]” of a
“light”(léger) and subtly innovative model to read the structure of such un-
evenness in the African diaspora.
The verb caler means “to prop up or wedge” something (as when one leg
PROLOGUE 13


--- PAGE 25 ---
on a table is uneven). So décalage in its etymological sense refers to the re-
moval of such an added prop or wedge. Décalage indicates the reestablish-
ment of a prior unevenness or diversity; it alludes to the taking away of
something that was added in the ﬁrst place, something artiﬁcial, a stone or
piece of wood that served to ﬁll some gap or to rectify some imbalance.
This black diasporic décalage among African Americans and Africans, then,
is not simply geographical distance, nor is it simply difference in evolution
or consciousness; instead it is a different kind of interface that might not be
susceptible to expression in the oppositional terminology of the “vanguard”
and the “backward.” In other words, décalage is the kernel of precisely that
which cannot be transferred or exchanged, the received biases that refuse to
pass over when one crosses the water. It is a changing core of difference; it is
the work of “differences within unity,”
35 an unidentiﬁable point that is in-
cessantly touched and ﬁngered and pressed.
Is it possible to rethink the workings of “race” in the cultures of black in-
ternationalism through a model of décalage? Any articulation of diaspora in
such a model would be inherently décalé, or disjointed, by a host of factors.
Like a table with legs of different lengths, or a tilted bookcase, diaspora can
be discursively propped up (calé) into an artiﬁcially “even” or “balanced”
state of “racial” belonging. But such props, of rhetoric, strategy, or organi-
zation, are always articulations of unity or globalism, ones that can be “mo-
bilized” for a variety of purposes but can never be deﬁnitive: they are always
prosthetic. In this sense, décalage is proper to the structure of a diasporic
“racial” formation, and its return in the form of disarticulation—the points
of misunderstanding, bad faith, unhappy translation—must be considered
a necessary haunting. This reads against the grain of Senghor, if one can
consider his Négritude one inﬂuential variety of this diasporic propping up.
Instead of reading for the efﬁcacy of the prosthesis, this orientation would
look for the effects of such an operation, for the traces of such haunting,
reading them as constitutive to the structure of any articulation of diaspora.
Recall that Hall points out the word articulation has two meanings:
“both ‘joining up’ (as in the limbs of the body, or an anatomical structure)
and ‘giving expression to.’”
36 He suggests that the term is most useful in the
study of the workings of race in social formations when it is pushed away
from the latter implication, of an “expressive link” (which would imply
a predetermined hierarchy, a situation where one factor makes another
“speak”), and toward its etymology as a metaphor of the body. Then the re-
14 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 26 ---
lationship between factors is not predetermined; it offers a more ambiva-
lent, more elusive model. What does it mean to say, for example, that one
articulates a joint? The connection speaks. Such “speaking” is functional, of
course: the arm bends at the elbow to reach down to the table, the leg swiv-
els at the hip to take the next step. But the joint is a curious place, as it is
both the point of separation (the forearm from the upper arm, for example)
and the point of linkage. Rather than a model of ultimate debilitation or of
predetermined retardation, then, décalage, in providing a model for what
resists or escapes translation through the African diaspora, alludes to this
strange “two-ness” of the joint. It directs our attention to the “antitheti-
cal structure” of the term diaspora, its risky intervention. My contention,
ﬁnally, is that articulations of diaspora demand to be approached this way,
through their décalage. For paradoxically, it is exactly such a haunting gap
or discrepancy that allows the African diaspora to “step” and “move” in var-
ious articulations. Articulation is always a strange and ambivalent gesture,
because ﬁnally, in the body it is only difference—the separation between
bones or members—that allows movement.
PROLOGUE 15


--- PAGE 27 ---
CHAPTER 1
VARIATIONS ON
A PREFACE
I
n December 1927, a Martinican student in classics at the Sorbonne
named Jane Nardal wrote to Dr. Alain Locke at Howard University in
Washington, D.C., requesting permission to translate his 1925 collec-
tion The New Negro into French. She had proposed the project to the Pari-
sian publisher Payot and noted that her sister Paulette (who held a degree in
English from the Sorbonne) would be assisting her in the preparation of the
volume. The publisher and the Nardals had already agreed that The New
Negro would have to be abridged for a French edition. She adds, “As an
Afro-Latin [en ma qualité d’Afro-Latine], I was well positioned to tell him,
on his request, the excerpts that might interest the French public, generally
so out of touch with what is happening outside of France.”
1 The letter asks
Locke for advice about these choices, commenting optimistically: “For a
book written by American Negroes to be translated by French Negroes,
wouldn’t that be an obvious sign of the workings of that Negro internation-
alism [cet internationalisme noir en marche] that Mr. Burghardt Du Bois
speaks about so prophetically in his masterful exposé, ‘Worlds of Color’?”
Nardal is alluding to the essay that concludes The New Negro, “The Negro
Mind Reaches Out,” in which Du Bois sketches the possibility of an alli-
ance of intellectuals of African descent that might “shadow” and speak
against the creeping domination of European imperialism around the
world. “Led by American Negroes,” Du Bois writes, “the Negroes of the
world are reaching out hands toward each other to know, to sympathize, to
inquire.”
2
Locke responded favorably, offering to compose a new introduction for
the French version. He adds that he would “gladly rewrite the whole thing
in a connected story of the new movement of the American Negro Renais-
sance, using excerpts of poetry, short stories, and several folk tales. And I


--- PAGE 28 ---
send this as a counter proposal to you and M. Payot.” In the meantime,
he suggests, the Nardals might start—perhaps with the assistance of the
Martinican novelist René Maran, with whom Locke had been correspond-
ing for years—translating his prefatory essays in The New Negro, as well as
some of the poems and Du Bois’s piece, since all would “undoubtedly be
included either in an abbreviated translation...o ri nwhat I would rewrite
as a new book on this movement.”
3
Jane Nardal mentions in her letter that she would be able to publicize
the translation through her connections to a number of Parisian newspa-
pers, including Le Soir and La Dépêche africaine, a new periodical founded
by a Guadeloupean named Maurice Satineau. In fact, she says, she has just
written an essay for the latter’s inaugural issue. But she neglects to inform
Locke that her contribution to Satineau’s paper—whose masthead trum-
peted the subtitle “grande organe républicain indépendant de correspon-
dence entre les Noirs” (“major independent republican journal of corre-
spondence among Negroes”)—was in fact the source of the phrase she used
in describing Du Bois. Nardal’s essay “L ’internationalisme noir” appeared
in February 1928, opening with a forceful invocation of the world-strad-
dling political ambitions that emerged after World War I:
VARIA TIONS ON A PREFACE 17
Jane Nardal. From La Dépêche
africaine 1 (February 1928).
Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris.
[To view this image, refer to  
the print version of this title.]


--- PAGE 29 ---
L ’on abaisse ou plutôt l’on tente d’abaisser en cet après-guerre les
barrières qui existent entre les pays. Les frontières, les douanes, les
préjugés, les mœurs, les religions, les langues diverses permettront-ils
jamais de réaliser ce projet? Nous voulons l’espérer, nous autres qui
constatons la naissance dans le même temps d’un mouvement qui
ne s’oppose nullement au premier. Des noirs de toutes origines, de
nationalités, de mœurs, de religions différentes sentent vaguement
qu’ils appartiennent malgré tout à une seule et même race.
In this postwar period, the barriers that exist between countries are
being lowered, or are being pulled down. Will the diversity of fron-
tiers, tariffs, prejudices, customs, religions, and languages ever allow
the realization of this project? We would like to hope so, we who af-
ﬁrm the birth at the same time of another movement which is in no
way opposed to the ﬁrst. Negroes of all origins and nationalities, with
different customs and religions, vaguely sense that they belong in
spite of everything to a single and same race.
4
Whereas previously, there had been only mutual miscomprehension—with
the “more favored” populations in the Americas looking down on Africans
as savages, and the Africans themselves thinking of New World blacks as no
more than slaves, subjugated “cattle”(bétail)—in the 1920s another kind of
consciousness began to become possible, Nardal claims, largely due to
transnational circuits of expressive culture: the advent of the vogue nègre in
France and the increasing popularity of the spirituals, jazz, and African art.
She concludes her summary history with an espousal of the “birth of racial
spirit” in the metropolitan Negro intellectual: “Dorénavant, il y aurait
quelque intérêt, quelque originalité, quelque ﬁerté à être nègre, à se re-
tourner vers l’Afrique, berceau des nègres, à se souvenir d’une commune
origine. Le nègre aurait peut-être à faire sa partie dans le concert des races
où jusqu’à présent, faible et intimidé, il se taisait” (“From now on, there
will be a certain interest, a certain originality, a certain pride in being black,
in turning back toward Africa, cradle of the blacks, in recalling a common
origin. The Negro will perhaps have to do his part in the concert of races,
where until now, weak and intimidated, he has been silent”).
In theorizing this internationalisme noir, however, Nardal is not will-
ing to turn to a rhetoric of rootless racial belonging that would deny
her background and upbringing—what her sister Paulette elsewhere termed
18 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 30 ---
her “Latin education” (formation latine). 5 And thus Jane Nardal turns to
a neologism:
A idées nouvelles, mots nouveaux, d’où la création signiﬁcative des
vocables: Afro-Américains, Afro-Latins. Ils conﬁrment notre thèse
tout en jetant une lueur nouvelle sur la nature de cet internationalisme
noir. Si le nègre veut être lui-même, afﬁrmer sa personnalité, ne
pas être la copie de tel ou tel type d’une autre race (ce qui lui vaut
souvent mépris et railleries) il ne s’ensuit pourtant pas qu’il devienne
résolument hostile à tout apport d’une autre race. Il lui faut, au con-
traire, proﬁter de l’expérience acquise, des richesses intellectuelles, par
d’autres, mais pour mieux se connaître, et afﬁrmer sa personnalité.
Etre Afro-Americain, être Afro-Latin, cela veut dire être un encour-
agement, un réconfort, un exemple pour les noirs d’Afrique en leur
montrant que certains bienfaits de la civilisation blanche ne con-
duisent pas forcément à renier sa race.
For new ideas, new words are required, and thus the meaningful cre-
ation of terms: Afro-Americans, Afro-Latins. These conﬁrm our the-
sis while throwing a new light on the nature of this Negro interna-
tionalism. If the black wants to be himself, to afﬁrm his personality,
not to be the copy of some type of another race (as often brings him
resentment and mockery), it still does not follow that he becomes res-
olutely hostile to any element from another race. On the contrary,
he must proﬁt from acquired experience, from intellectual riches,
through others, but in order to better understand himself, to assert
his own personality. T o be Afro-American, to be Afro-Latin, means to
be an encouragement, a comfort, an example for the Negroes of Af-
rica by showing them that certain beneﬁts of white civilization do not
necessarily drive them to deny their race.
One notes the ingenuity of the term “Afro-Latin,” which strikes an intrigu-
ing parallel to “Afro-American.” The neologism is not a direct profession of
loyalty to a nation-state or empire, but instead an appropriation of a wider
cultural heritage of which republican France is a part. Oddly, though, it
implies that “American” and “Latin” are parallel terms—apparently, as si-
multaneously regional and cultural distinctions within a broader Western
space. Nardal does not espouse biological assimilation or miscegenation
VARIA TIONS ON A PREFACE 19


--- PAGE 31 ---
(“Afro-Americans” and “Afro-Latins” share a “racial” identity asnègres) but
one of acculturation within a context of colony-metropole migration (“cer-
tain beneﬁts of white civilization do not necessarily drive them to deny
their race”). Although Jane Nardal was not a colonial apologist, as were
many of the other contributors to La Dépêche africaine, her invention of
“Afro-Latin” gives voice to a political moderation that she shared with the
circle around Satineau’s organization. She shies away from anything ap-
proaching Du Bois’s ﬁerce condemnation of colonial exploitation and rac-
ism, his ﬂat pronouncement that “modern imperialism and modern indus-
trialism are one and the same system.”
6 As one might expect, Nardal’s
brand of internationalisme noir may be most closely attuned to the interna-
tionalist thread in the writings of Alain Locke—above all, in its emphasis
on cultural exchange and in its persistent New World Negro vanguardism.
I open with Nardal’s initiative not because it was successful. Although
The New Negro in its original edition remained a touchstone text for
Francophone intellectuals in the late 1920s and early 1930s, a full transla-
tion never appeared in French. In 1931, the leftist journal Europe ﬁnally
published a version of Locke’s introductory essay, now translated by Louis
and Renée Guilloux, under the title “Le Nègre nouveau.”
7 What I want to
highlight is precisely the semantic shifts in this bilingual ﬂood of racial ap-
pellations and adjectives, the transformations enacted through what Nardal
terms “la création signiﬁcative des vocables.” Not a linear chain, but a ﬁeld
through which are carried signiﬁers of “racial identity”: New Negro, inter-
nationalisme noir, Afro-Latin, noirs américains, nègres, Afro-American, nègre
nouveau. I emphasize the multiplicity of this ﬁeld to point out that in this
regard, the practice of translation is indispensable to the pursuit of any
project of internationalism, any “correspondence” that would connect in-
tellectuals or populations of African descent around the world. If transla-
tion is a “poietic social practice that institutes a relation at the site of
incommensurability,” then reading the speciﬁcs of that practice are the only
way to gauge the ensuing “relation” that is articulated acrossdécalage.
8 This
is also to point out that translation is not just the arena of any possible
institutionalization of internationalism, but also the arena of ideological ar-
gument over its particular contours and applications.
T o read this ﬁeld, one must come to terms with the heterological slip-
page among vocables such as nègre and noir. What difference does it make
20 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 32 ---
to translate The New Negro as Le Nègre nouveau instead of Le Nouveau noir?
Of course, a term such as Negro is already contested in English alone. Thus
critics such as Henry Louis Gates, Jr., and Lawrence Levine have identiﬁed
a struggle around the political valence of New Negro among U.S. black in-
tellectuals in the 1920s: the socialist journal the Messenger espoused A.
Philip Randolph’s vision of an irrepressible, militant New Negro, while the
journal Opportunity came to adopt a very different version of that phrase in
the image of Alain Locke’s cultural sophisticate.
9 But both these competing
formations simultaneously insist on inﬂecting their differing deﬁnitions
of the New Negro toward internationalism—whether the Messenger’s social-
ist anticolonialism or Opportunity’s “Talented T enth” cosmopolitanism. In
other words, to comprehend the internationalist aspirations among intel-
lectuals of African descent after World War I, it is necessary to read evoca-
tions of Negro in the U.S. context next to the simultaneous debates around
the applications and connotations of terms such as nègre in French. The
space of any possible internationalisme noir is the place these (and other)
contexts come into contact: in discrete if variable instances of translation.
T o undertake such an inquiry is in part to follow the suggestions of Ray-
mond Williams in the introduction to Keywords regarding one of the limi-
tations of that work. Except in a few cases (as with the terms alienation and
culture), Williams’s book does not offer any comparative linguistic analysis
of the “vocabulary” it sketches, what he calls the “shared body of words and
meaning in our most general discussions, in English, of the practices and
institutions which we group as culture and society.” Such comparative stud-
ies would be helpful, he admits, since “many of the most important words
that I have worked on either developed key meanings in languages other
than English, or went through a complicated and interactive development
in a number of major languages.”
10
Characteristically, Williams lets that “we” drift, effectively allowing the
contours of his envisioned community of vocabulary sharers to remain
assumed, undeﬁned, and uncontested. Keywords opens with another char-
acteristic gesture: the invocation of Williams’s “working class family in
Wales,” his service in the army, and his years studying at Cambridge. The
common phrase “we just don’t speak the same language” becomes in this
ﬁeld of experience the key to a consideration of the social dynamics of what
might be termed the heteroglossia of “Englishness”:
VARIA TIONS ON A PREFACE 21


--- PAGE 33 ---
When we come to say “we just don’t speak the same language” we
mean something more general: that we have different immediate val-
ues or different kinds of valuation, or that we are aware, often intan-
gibly, of different formations and distributions of energy and interest.
In such a case, each group is speaking its native language, but its uses
are signiﬁcantly different, and especially when strong feelings or im-
portant ideas are in question. No single group is “wrong” by any lin-
guistic criterion, though a temporarily dominant group may try to
enforce its own uses as “correct.”
11
But what if “we just don’t speak the same language” is the literal—instead
of the ﬁgurative—ground of heteroglossia? It is to encounter a situation
where, indeed, “no single group is ‘wrong’ by any linguistic standard” but
any alliance across those differences (of values, of formations, of energy, of
interest, and of language itself) will be skewed by the peculiarities of inter-
action. It is to ask about the ramiﬁcations of semantic transformations in
such a situation, since as Williams comments elsewhere, pursuing such an
issue “across language” would demonstrate that “certain shifts of meaning
indicate very interesting periods of confusion and contradiction of out-
come, latencies in decision, and other processes of a real social history,
which can be located rather precisely in this other way, and put alongside
more familiar kinds of evidence.”
12
The discontinuities and disjunctures in any translation, the unavoidable
skewing in any institutionalization of internationalisme noir, might be best
described not as predetermined failure but as the rich complexity of a mod-
ern cultural practice characterized above all by what Edouard Glissant calls
“detour.” He suggests that populations formed through forced exportation
and exploitation are traumatically wrenched away from their habitual social
forms and into a speciﬁc kind of colonial context: not one formed by hos-
tile incursion into a homeland, but one of “uprooting” (déracinement).
Glissant contrasts retour and détour as two strategic cultural responses to
such uprooting. “Return,” he writes, “is the obsession with the One: one
must not alter being. T o return is to consecrate permanence, non-rela -
tion.”
13 Detour, on the other hand, is a turning away ﬁrst of all from such
an obsession with roots and singular genealogy. In Glissant’s words:
Detour is the ultimate resort of a population whose domination by an
Other is concealed: it then must search elsewhere for the principle of
22 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 34 ---
domination, which is not evident in the country itself: because the
mode of domination (assimilation) is the best of camouﬂages, because
the materiality of the domination (which is not only exploitation,
which is not only poverty, which is not only underdevelopment, but
actually the complete eradication of the economic entity) is not di-
rectly visible. (32/20, modiﬁed)
The great utility of such a model is that it allows us to consider the work of
ﬁgures such as Aimé Césaire and Frantz Fanon without recourse to simplis-
tic models of expatriation and exile, working instead with a paradigm in
which indirection can be functional—can indeed be strategically necessary
in certain conditions.
Thus detour is helpful in considering the complexities of international-
ism, the sometimes “camouﬂaged” dynamics of formations in which two or
more differently positioned populations attempt to counter a transnational
“system of domination”—one thinks back to Du Bois’s phrase: the incur-
sions of “modern imperialism and modern industrialism” in the broadest
sense—by organizing around a common “elsewhere,” a shared logic of col-
laboration and coordination at a level beyond particular nation-states. For
intellectuals such as Nardal, Locke, and Du Bois, black internationalism
aims to translate “race” as the vehicle of that detour, as the shared and shift-
ing ground of that “elsewhere.” Unfortunately, Glissant’s discussion of de-
tour in Le Discours antillais tends to fall back on the nation-state and the
national community as the ﬁnal points of entanglement, the end of the
road. Admittedly, he writes, it is necessary to come to terms with the Afri-
can roots of Martinican culture. And familiar modern black transnational
projects—he cites Marcus Garvey’s Back-to-Africa movement and Négri-
tude—exemplify the necessity in detour to “go somewhere,” in the ways
that they usefully “link a possible solution of the insoluble to the resolution
other peoples have achieved” (35/23). Still, these examples are “singular”
evidence of the difﬁculties of moving beyond borders; as Glissant notes
with irony, intellectuals such as Césaire, Fanon, and the T rinidadian radical
George Padmore are much better known in Africa than in their home
countries in the Caribbean—in other words, their detours are “camou-
ﬂaged or sublimated variants of the return to Africa” (35/24). It requires
“an intense effort of generalization” for Africans and Antilleans to share the
common ground of some internationalist project, with the result that a for-
VARIA TIONS ON A PREFACE 23


--- PAGE 35 ---
mation such as the Négritude movement remained abstract, ineffectual,
unable to “take particular situations into account.”
This dismissal of the “generalizing” drive of detour is unfortunate, be-
cause it defuses the term’s capacity as a tool to theorize the position of pop-
ulations undergoing “modes of domination” that exceed the nation-state—
whether continuing and pervasive patterns of conﬂict-driven refugee move-
ment (in contemporary Central Africa, for instance), economically com-
pelled migration (in Mexico or Haiti), marginalization or eradication on
national frontiers (as with the Kurds or the Basques), and involuntary exile
(as with the Palestinians or Algerian secular intellectuals and feminists).
Glissant’s wariness of “generalization” relegates such diverse transnational
or extranational ﬂows of populations to the status of exceptions—or what
he terms, in the case of Fanon, the “radical break” (coupure radicale) with
the properly national context (36/25). Glissant is careful not to claim that
intellectuals such as Césaire and Fanon are irresponsible or “abstract,” but
there appears to be little use to their “generalizing”:
The plans [tracés] of Négritude and the revolutionary theory of The
Wretched of the Earth are generalizing, however ....They illustrate
and demonstrate the landscape of a shared Elsewhere. One must re-
turn to the site [Il faut revenir au lieu]. Detour is not a useful ploy un-
less it is nourished by return: not a return to the dream of origin, to
the immobile One of Being, but a return to the point of entangle-
ment [point d’intrication], from which one was forcefully turned
away; that is where it is ultimately necessary to set to work the ele-
ments of Relation, or perish. (36/26, modiﬁed)
What appears unthinkable in this conclusion is the possibility that detour
may be the only strategy in certain situations: that the point d’intrication
may in fact be “elsewhere” rather than in what Glissant refers to as the “pays
natal,” the native homeland.
In what follows, I take up the role of a particular set of “elsewheres” in
the formulation and translation of black internationalist initiatives during
the 1920s and 1930s. T o take one, Paris represents a different detour for
African Americans (whether soldiers, musicians, artists, or the New Negro
intelligentsia), for Antilleans, and for Africans. T raveling to Paris is obvi-
ously a detour for the African American, a voyage considered an escape
(even if partial, even if temporary) from the outrages and frustrations of
24 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 36 ---
racism in the United States. But it must be considered another sort of de-
tour even for the Francophone citizen or subject traveling from colony to
metropole—if only because that move allows certain unpredictable kinds of
boundary crossings and encounters. There is a multiple detour, in other
words, in the way that, arguably more than anywhere in the world, Paris
functions as a space of interaction among populations of African descent.
In 1929, Franck Schoell argued in one of the ﬁrst French-language over-
views of the “Harlem Renaissance” that Paris had played a crucial role as
transnational meeting ground:
For it is France, it is England, it is Belgium that for a number of years
have offered if not the ﬁrst, then at least the most fruitful possibilities
for real [effectif ] contact among African blacks and American blacks
[Nègres d’Afrique et Nègres d’Amérique]. If a Du Bois, a Langston
Hughes has visited West Africa, it is through Europe that they passed
to get there—in all the senses of the phrase. It is in the quartier of
Pigalle and in the cafés of Montmartre, even in the cafés of Mont-
parnasse, that the ﬁrst encounters between Harlemites and Da-
homeans were formed [nouées].
14
Critics Tyler Stovall and Michel Fabre have more recently concurred that
diasporic encounters possible in Paris were unparalleled in the interwar
period.
15 Of course, some African Americans (including Du Bois and
Hughes) went directly to West Africa in the 1920s, just as some Africans
(Kwame Nkrumah and Kojo T ovalou Houénou, for example) went directly
to the United States. Nevertheless, the European metropole was the privi-
leged point of encounter, particularly in the small, ephemeral organizations
and periodicals that sprung up throughout the interwar period in Paris
and attempted to pursue internationalist alliances with similarly oriented
groups in Harlem or in Kingston, in Fort-de-France or in Porto-Novo.
Translating the WordNègre
If any point d’intricationis necessarily shared—necessarily also a crossroads,
a point where linguistically and ideologically heterogeneous detours meet
—then a consideration of the internationalist projects enabled in those
meetings must begin by grappling with the semantic shifts and altered vo-
cables they occasion. T o gain a sense of the paleonomy of Negro and nègre
in the context of American racism and European colonialism, one would
VARIA TIONS ON A PREFACE 25


--- PAGE 37 ---
have to turn to a work such as Jack Forbes’s impressive study Africans and
Native Americans: The Language of Race and the Evolution of Red-Black Peo-
ples, a painstaking archival inquiry into the sedimentation of terms of racial
designation through the period of slavery and colonization in the Ameri -
cas.
16 Forbes’s argument is far-reaching in its implications: after Colum-
bus’s nearly genocidal initial incursion, the process of re-populating the
New World (especially throughout the Caribbean basin) was not character-
ized by the “replacement of Americans by Africans and African-European
mixed-bloods” as has been often assumed, but instead by the incorporation
of native Americans into the general slave population (269). This merging,
Forbes argues, was concealed by the use of increasingly racialized terms of
identity, which disenfranchised this “colored” labor force by imposing a
“caste regime” system of social exclusion, thereby erasing what was in fact
the highly varied background of populations throughout the Americas.
Forbes informs us that he uses “the term ‘American’ for Indians in the colo-
nial era and ‘African’ rather than ‘negro’ for presumably unmixed sub-Saha-
ran Africans” (192); this basic premise must slowly but radically alter our
sense of the phrase “African American” throughout his book.
Because Africans and Native Americans is structured around multi-
linguistic etymological studies of the use of various racial terms (negro,
mulat(t)o, mestizo, pardo, loro, moor, and mustee), the work is especially in-
structive about the historical relationship between Negro and nègre. In
French, the ﬁrst translations of African narratives of the early Spanish and
Portuguese explorers and slave traders in the mid-sixteenth century almost
exclusively used noir for the Spanish or Portuguese negro (meaning “black,”
the color), which was read as representing solely a color description. Only
in the late 1500s and early 1600s did there begin to develop an understand-
ing of negro that considered the term to represent a particular people and to
mark their “difference.” Other linguists including Simone Delesalle and
Lucette Valensi have charted the way the word nègre came to be used in
French to represent that speciﬁc alterity. As the French entered the slave
trade (the Code Noir, the legal basis of the trade in France, was established
in 1685), there developed an association between nègre and esclave (“slave”)
as synonyms, cemented in early dictionaries including Savary’sDictionnaire
universel de commerce (1723), the work that single-handedly deﬁned the
French conception of Africans as a “race of slaves” in a phrasing copied in
almost all the dictionaries of the next two hundred years.
17 Forbes argues
26 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 38 ---
that a crucial feature of the development of this logic of racialization was
the invention of “miscegenation” terms such as mulat(t)o, mestizo, and
mulâtre, which were used to extend the regime of exclusion and to control
the access to civil rights and privileges (269). The spread of these terms over
the next century served to impose racial difference as singular, distinguish-
ing between only “black” Africans and “white” Europeans (125–130). The
term Negro in English was adopted only relatively late from negro and nègre
in Spanish and French, which were understood not as simple color designa-
tions but as variations on the term “slave” (84–85).
18
Interestingly, in French the development ofnègre had relatively little im-
pact on the color designation noir, and thus we ﬁnd French abolitionists
adopting the latter term as a proper noun in the late eighteenth and early
nineteenth century, attempting to invest it with connotations of humanity
and citizenship. As Serge Daget notes, “With the word Noir, the abolition-
ist considered himself the master of a relatively new term, one which he
would consider capable of introducing ideological substratums into his lit-
erature of combat.”
19 This set of circumstances helps to explain the reasons
black French citizens in the early twentieth century tended to describe
themselves as “Noirs”—which indeed was second only to “hommes de
couleur” as a self-designation among the elite. The connotations these
terms held in the 1920s and 1930s has most famously been described by
Frantz Fanon:
The African, for his part, was in Africa the real representative of the
black race [la race nègre]. As a matter of fact, when a boss made too
great demands on a Martinican in a work situation, he would some-
times be told: “If it’s a nigger [nègre] you want, go and look for him in
Africa,” meaning thereby that slaves and forced labor had to be re-
cruited elsewhere. Over there, where the niggers [nègres] were.
The African, on the other hand, apart from a few rare “evolved”
[évolués] individuals, was looked down upon, despised, conﬁned
within the labyrinth of his epidermis. As we see, the positions were
clear-cut: on the one hand, the black [nègre], the African; on the
other, the European and the Antillean. The Antillean was a Negro
[noir], but the black [nègre] was in Africa.
20
In English, on the other hand, there is no such separation between black
and Negro, both of which were taken after the Civil War to refer to a pre-
VARIA TIONS ON A PREFACE 27


--- PAGE 39 ---
dominantly African-derived emancipated population, and both of which
retained (in different degrees) the stereotypical baggage of nègre in French.
In Forbes’s account, this is due, again, to the pervasive “Africanization” of
the slave population in the United States. T oni Morrison has described
this process in terms of the U.S. literary imagination with the neologism
“American Africanism,” a phrase which indicates the common invocation
of a “real or fabricated Africanist presence” as a means to consolidate the
“white” citizen-subject in American ﬁction.
21 For Forbes, moreover, the
civil rights initiatives of African American intellectuals and activists in the
modern period do not serve to challenge the core assumptions of linguistic
racialization—on the contrary they risk buttressing and even extending
them (262). This is not to suggest that Forbes is consequently hostile to
civil rights, but his work does make clear that the African American “legiti-
mation by reversal”
22 of terms of racial designation during the 1920s and
1930s—one example is Du Bois’s defense of the capitalized word “Negro”
as a proper appellation—is a project fraught with risks.
23
Let us return to the Francophone context after World War One. The
very suggestion that the French word nègre translates English words such as
Negro and black during the 1920s may seem odd, since one of the long-
standing assumptions of Francophone literary criticism is that the noun
nègre is not rehabilitated until much later.Nègre still had extremely negative
connotations in the early 1920s, and a number of sympathetic French com-
mentators refused to use the term at all. Thus Lucie Cousturier, who wrote
a fascinating book about teaching French to West African soldiers stationed
in Provence during the war, shudders at nègre, calling it an offensive word
“that doesn’t apply to real objects.”
24 It is commonly supposed that Aimé
Césaire is the ﬁrst writer of African descent to claim the termnègre as a pos-
itive appellation: as one critic phrases it, Césaire “must be credited with be-
ing the ﬁrst black intellectual outside Africa to have taken the humiliating
term nigger and boldly transformed it into the proud term black.”
25 How-
ever, notwithstanding the remarkable intervention of Césaire’s neologism
“Négritude” on the eve of World War II, he is by no means the ﬁrst to ap-
propriate the noun nègre.
In January 1927, Lamine Senghor published an essay called “Le Mot
‘Nègre’” (The word “Nègre”) in the ﬁrst issue of a newspaper call La Voix
des Nègres, the organ of his group the Comité de Défense de la Race Nègre.
Born on September 15, 1889, Senghor was the most charismatic and elo-
28 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 40 ---
quent black Marxist of the interwar era during the few years that he was ac-
tive in the metropole. He apparently volunteered for service among the
West African recruits (tirailleurs sénégalais) in the French Army during
World War I and was gassed in action at the front. Repatriated to Senegal,
he moved again to France in 1921, working as a postal clerk and informally
auditing classes at the Sorbonne. By the summer of 1924, he had joined the
Union Intercoloniale, the unit of the French Communist Party that had
been formed to sponsor rebellion throughout the French colonies (other
members included the Antillean Max Clainville Bloncourt, the Haitian
Camille Saint-Jacques, Samuel Stéphany from Madagascar, Jacques
Barquisseau from the island of Reunion, the Algerian Hadj Ali Abdelkader,
and a young Indochinese intellectual named Nguyen Ai Quoc, who would
later be better known as Ho Chi Minh). Around this time, Senghor mar-
ried a white Frenchwoman and had two children; although his family lived
in Fréjus, in the south of France, he spent most of his time working for rad-
ical causes in the capital.
In March 1926, sensing like the other African and Antillean members of
VARIA TIONS ON A PREFACE 29
Lamine Senghor at the
Brussels Congress of the
League Against Imperial-
ism (February 1927).
From Survey 58, no. 9
(August 1, 1927).
[To view this image, refer to  
the print version of this title.]


--- PAGE 41 ---
the Union Intercoloniale that the Party was paying too much attention to
the Riff war in Morocco and rebellions in Indochina, and too little to
struggles in West Africa and the Caribbean, Senghor left the Communist
Party to found the Comité de Défense de la Race Nègre (CDRN). La Voix
des Nègres published only two issues in January and March 1927 before
there occurred a split in the group between Senghor’s supporters (the hard-
line activists and unbending anticolonialists committed to labor organiz-
ing) and a circle around Maurice Satineau, the Guadeloupean who would
found La Dépêche africaine the next winter. Senghor and Tiemoko Garan
Kouyaté brought together a new group called the Ligue de Défense de
la Race Nègre, which founded a new periodical called La Race nègre. In
February 1927, Senghor attended the inaugural congress in Brussels of
the League Against Imperialism, organized by the German Marxist Willi
Munzenberg (attendees included the Indian Jawarharlal Nehru, the Alge-
rian Messali Hadj, the Barbadian Richard B. Moore, and Max Clainville
Bloncourt). There, Senghor gave a stunning, impassioned speech that was
highly inﬂuential and widely reprinted.
26 Senghor was arrested in 1927 in
Cannes for his agitation activities and imprisoned in Draguignan for part
of the spring. His war injuries, already quite serious, were aggravated dur-
ing the imprisonment, and he died in November 1927 at his home in
Fréjus.
27
Senghor’s “Le Mot ‘Nègre’” is an extraordinary and scathing analysis of
linguistic colonialism through the terminology of racialization in French. 28
The word Nègre, Senghor opens, “is the dirty word of our times; it is the
word by which some of our race brothers no longer wish to be called.” He
continues:
[t]he dominators of the peoples of the race nègre, those who divided
up Africa for themselves under the pretext of civilizing the nègres, are
employing an abominable divisive maneuver in order to better reign
over them. In addition to the primitive division of caste, of tribes and
religions, which they exploit in their favor in our lands, the imperial-
ists are working to break the very unity of the race so as to keep us
eternally in the state of slavery where we have been held by force for
centuries.
T o accomplish this, they are extracting two new words out of the
word nègre, in order to divide the race into three different categories,
30 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 42 ---
La Voix des Nègres 1 (January 1927). Centre des Archives d’Outre-Mer, Aix-en-
Provence, Archives Nationales, France. SLOTFOM V , Box 3.All rights reserved.
[To view this image, refer to  
the print version of this title.]


--- PAGE 43 ---
namely: “hommes de couleur,” “noirs”—simply—and Nègres. The for-
mer are made to believe that they are “hommes de couleur”and neither
noirs nor nègres (ﬁrst category); the others are made to believe that
they are “noirs”simply and not nègres (second category). As for the
“leftovers” [Quant aux “restes”], they arenègres (third category).
There are a number of remarkable moves in this passage. First, rather than
contesting or historicizing the term itself, Senghor starts by assuming la
race nègre to be a valid descriptive. Nègre is in fact the unmarked category
here, in linguistic terms. Thus “hommes de couleur” (“men of color”) and
“noirs”are marked off by quotation marks as colonial impositions, terms
that “divide and conquer.” The analysis understands these terms to be re-
lated in a socially imposed hierarchy that achieves through nominalized
racialization what Forbes calls a “caste” system of exclusion “with each suc-
cessive layer from top to bottom experiencing a greater degree of exclusion
than the one above it.”
29
The essay’s schema breaks down the function of an imposed tripartite
system of racialized designation in French colonization. In this sense, it is
especially notable that Senghor does not dawdle in the then-current debates
around assimilation. He refrains from an attack against collaborationist
politicians such as the legislators Blaise Diagne and Gratien Candace—who
commonly insisted they were “Black Frenchmen” (noirs français)—or re-
formist defenders of the empire such as Maurice Satineau (when he left the
CDRN, Satineau founded a group signiﬁcantly named the Comité de
Défense des Intérêts de la Race Noire). Senghor instead wrenches open the
chromaticism of “hommes de couleur”and “noir”with more than a little hu-
mor, not to squabble but to close ranks. He contends that even persons
claiming to fall under those “extracted” categories are actuallynègres:
What does “hommes de couleur” mean? We contend that this name
designates all the men of the earth. The proof: there isn’t a single man
in the world who is not of one color or another. Thus, we cannot take
for ourselves alone what belongs to all. And “noir”?We do not think
that the word “noir”can serve to designate all the nègres in the world,
given that all African nègres recognize with us that there exist, in vari-
ous points of the continent, nègres as white as some European whites,
nègres who have nothing nègre aside from their features and hair. We
thus refuse to admit that only those who live in the depths of the
32 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 44 ---
Senegalese jungle, those who are exploited in the cotton ﬁelds of
the Niger valley, the sugarcane cutters in the plantation ﬁelds
of Martinique and Guadeloupe, are nègres. Whereas one of our broth-
ers holding a diploma from a European institution of higher learning
would be a homme de couleur, and another who hasn’t reached that
level, but who works the same job as a white man and who adapts like
white men to their life and their customs—the worker—would be
simply a “noir.”
No, Mr. Divide-and-Conquer!
Senghor closes with a clarion call to arms around exactly that term which
had been the most derogatory designation for African diasporic popula-
tions under colonialism and slavery:
The youth of the Comité de Défense de la Race Nègre have made it
their duty to take this name out of the mud where you are dragging
it, so as to make of it a symbol. This name is the name of our race.
Our lands, our rights and our liberty no longer ours, we cling to that
which, along with the radiance of our skin color, is all that remains of
the inheritance of our ancestors....Y e s ,sirs, you have tried to use
this word as a tool to divide. But we use it as a rallying cry: a torch!
[Nous, nous en servons comme mot d’ordre de ralliement: un ﬂambeau!]
We do ourselves honor and glory by calling ourselves Nègres, with a
capital N. It is our race nègre that we want to guide on the path of to-
tal liberation from its suffering under a yoke of enslavement. We want
to demand the respect due to our race, as well as its equality with all
the other races of the world, as is its right and our duty, and we call
ourselves Nègres!
Christopher Miller has pointed out that in the way it reclaims Nègre, a
word dragged in the mud of history, this argument is a “space-clearing ges-
ture” that is “radical in the etymological sense: it attacks the roots of domi-
nation.”
30 The strategy is not to undo the term’s naturalized racialism
(Nègre is still “the name of our race”) but to “rally” and realign the term
in the ideological “service” (nous, nous en servons comme mot d’ordre de
ralliement) of a new anti-imperialist solidarity.
With a sense of the complexity of this ﬁeld of signiﬁers, we are left with
the question: how would we translate Nègre in Senghor’s usage into Eng-
VARIA TIONS ON A PREFACE 33


--- PAGE 45 ---
lish? T urning to contemporary literature in English, one thinks of Du
Bois’s propaganda campaign to capitalize Negro—but is this term then
equivalent to Senghor’s capitalized Nègre? One might also think of Carl
Van Vechten’s 1926Nigger Heaven (translated into French as Le Paradis
des Nègres), a novel that caused considerable controversy not only because
its author was white, but also because of its title, with readers debating
whether the phrase was simply an intentionally outrageous advertising ploy
or an “honest” attempt to employ nigger as a “non-derogatory” appellation
for African American urban characters.
31 Another work to note is U.S.
Southern writer Roark Bradford’s 1928 Ol’ Man Adam an’ His Chillun,a
collection of folktales in which we encounter a seemingly similar three-tier
typology of the African American population.
32 In the foreword to this
“personal study of the black race,” Bradford notes that he has somewhat in-
formally “divided it into three general groups: The ‘nigger,’ the ‘colored
person,’ and the Negro—upper case N.”
33 Again, we are presented with a
hierarchy, but here uncritically as a natural typology of the race—invested
with all the familiar paternalistic baggage of stereotypes. So the “Negro” “is
...am a no fcharacter and understanding who realizes that his people
could not possibly have acquired in two hundred years the same particular
brand of civilization that the white people built up in thousands of years,”
whereas the “colored person” is simply “tragic,” “neither ﬁsh nor fowl.”
34
The “nigger,” as one might expect, interests Bradford “more than the rest.”
Rather than Senghor’s biting etymology, we are offered an abstract litany of
“traits”: the “nigger” is uninterested in work but highly loyal, irresponsible
but responsive to any stimuli, intuitively and endlessly creative within the
conﬁnes of a fading rural folk culture.
35 Do the niggers in Van Vechten and
Bradford (not necessarily the same ﬁgures, of course) jibe with Senghor’s
Nègre, a more or less rehabilitated term of derision?
It should be evident that it is difﬁcult to match up any such hierarchy of
social usage in the two contexts. I will risk constructing a shorthand, as fol-
lows: in the interwar period, the various ideological accentuations of this
group of signiﬁers share a ground-level connotation that Negro in English
functions most like noir in French (both are adopted by assimilationists and
civil rights activists; both aim at a certain “respectability” on the national
front). At the same time, the function of nègre in French—while not unlike
that of nigger in English—may be closest to the word black, a derogatory
appellation in the 1920s (both are terms that populist radicals such as
34 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 46 ---
Lamine Senghor in French and Marcus Garvey in English were keen to re-
habilitate in the service of a certain nationalism). The best “translation” of
nègre, though, might not be a literal translation at all, but a linguistic nu-
ance, an effect achieved in a particular nongeneralizable discursive instance.
Consider this anecdote from Langston Hughes’s autobiography The Big
Sea, a hilarious recounting of his encounter with the woman who would re-
place him as an English teacher in Mexico:
Professor T ovar had neglected to tell the new teacher that I was an
americano de color, brown as a Mexican, and nineteen years old. So
when she walked into the room with him, she kept looking around
for the American teacher. No doubt she thought I was one of the stu-
dents, chalk in hand, standing at the board. But when she was in-
troduced to me, her mouth fell open, and she said: “Why, Ah-Ah
thought you was an American.”
I said: “I am American!”
She said: “Oh, Ah mean a white American!” Her voice had a south-
ern drawl.
I grinned.
At the end of the ﬁrst day, she said: “Ah never come across an edu-
cated Ne-gre before.” (Southerners often make that word a slur be-
tween nigger and Negro.)
I said: “They have a large state college for colored people in Arkan-
sas, so there must be some educated ones there.”
She said: “Ah reckon so, but Ah just never saw one before.”
And she continued to gaze at me as her ﬁrst example of an educated
Negro.
36
Hughes’s cutting commentary on the woman’s racism is coy and formalis-
tic. His phonetic transcription of her accent simply relegates her ﬁrst per-
son singular to the level of a stammer (“Ah-Ah”), and that record of her idi-
ocy defuses any derogatory force her slurred “Ne-gre” might have carried.
But as an accentuation “between nigger and Negro,” “Ne-gre,” as described
by Hughes, places its nominal force close to that of nègre in French both
phonetically and ideologically.
Some of the most intriguing moments in the interwar period occurred
when these racialized terms were re-accentuated back toward what Forbes
describes as their “originary” sense of “multi-raciality,” alluding to the mix-
VARIA TIONS ON A PREFACE 35


--- PAGE 47 ---
ture of disenfranchised populations in transatlantic patterns of dispersion.
What is perhaps most suggestive about this occurrence is that it established
a means of historicizing transnational formations, or as Gayatri Spivak
puts it, “‘inter-nationalizing’ subalternist work from below.”
37 Thus when
Forbes cites the 1854 case where the California State Supreme Court
“sought to bar all non-Caucasians from equal citizenship and rights” by cre-
ating a catchall term “Black,” a designation designed to include not just all
“Negroes” but also all the other “non-white” races as well, we should read
this term in subtle resonance with the uses of “Black” to refer to Afri-
cans, Caribbeans, and Southeast Asians in post-World War II Britain—uses
which have made possible at certain moments during the past twenty years
a number of progressive “inter-national” alliances there.
38 This historical et-
ymology should also resonate when we attempt to come to terms with cur-
rent usage in France, where interestingly enough, the chosen self-designa-
tion of the younger generation of Africans and Antilleans is sometimes les
Noirs, but just as often les blacks—a term adopted from English in the past
thirty years.
Likewise, there may be similar possibilities in the history of French usage
of nègre, an epithet that at isolated moments during the history of the
French Empire was applied liberally to a variety of populations. It should
be clear that Lamine Senghor’s claiming of the word Nègre is not an argu-
ment for return, in Glissant’s terminology. It does not propose a usable
originary blackness or a single African identity, but instead begins by ac-
cepting the historical fact of colonization and the contemporary racialized
ideologies of exploitation in order to construct an appeal for solidarity.
What’s fascinating is that other Francophone radicals were at certain mo-
ments going even further: attempting to wrench the termnègre into the ser-
vice of anti-imperialist alliances among what W . E. B. Du Bois called “the
darker peoples of the world.”
One instance is the contribution by Martinican poet and schoolteacher
Gilbert Gratiant to the single issue of the journal L ’Etudiant noir,which ap-
peared in March 1935. Apparently the young students who were assem-
bling L ’Etudiant noir(including Aimé Césaire and Léopold Sédar Senghor)
asked Gratiant to write a response to the attacks that had been launched
against him, especially in the predecessor student journal Légitime Défense
(1932). His essay, “Mulâtres . . . pour le bien et le mal,” is ultimately a de-
fense of his unique political position and his own understanding of “creole”
36 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 48 ---
culture in the French Caribbean. 39 Gratiant clariﬁes that in writing about
creole culture, he is not at all denying the African roots of the “black soul”
(âme nègre) and the importance of African cultural forces in present-day
Antillean life. He does argue, however, that the Caribbean is a mixed-
race population from the beginning and that its cultural issues cannot be
neatly packaged using inapplicable racialist dividing lines. The word nègre,
Gratiant contends, has no “real” referent in some population linked by
common roots. It can be employed only as a discursive strategy, an act of
language to mark certain historical and material relations of domination
and suffering. The position is signiﬁcant, not least because Gratiant articu-
lates it from a strong Marxist standpoint (speciﬁcally commending the
work in Paris of the Communist Party–afﬁliated journal, Le Cri des Nègres).
He advises conserving the use of nègre for that revolutionary context, which
goes beyond a racial designation:
[I]f the fact of proclaiming: I am nègre! [je suis nègre!] is the record of
the limited historical fact I have tried to analyze, then I proclaim it,
but that proclamation has no value elsewhere. If one wants to under-
stand thereby that, recognizing that there subsists in me a nègre soul,
in its creole form, or more vaguely in its unawakened forms, I am
publicly paying tribute to that wonderful fact, I cry with a joyful
wonder: je suis nègre, but the cry is not an exclusive one and my joy
is just as deep at feeling myself a Martinican mulatto or just sim-
ply French in Vendômois, the Vendômois of the sweet Loire valley,
that of my childhood, my friends, my brother’s daughters. If, with
this cry launched in deﬁance, one wants to understand a coura-
geous and vehement support for the cause of the persecuted, my
brothers in opprobrium whose skin is black, martyrs of race hatred,
martyrs of villainous imperialisms: then I show my solidarity and
shout: je suis nègre!
40
In this limited sense, Gratiant accepts the word being brandished by the
young students. But he refuses to take up what he sees as its racialist
mystiﬁcations: even in underlining the survivals of African cultural forms
in the French Caribbean, Gratiant insists on the other forces and factors
that have shaped “creole” identity. But if the word nègre is a term of “soli-
darity” that is not essentialist, that is “not exclusive,” then it allows some-
thing beyond a racial nationalism: for Gratiant, it is the lever of an anti-im-
VARIA TIONS ON A PREFACE 37


--- PAGE 49 ---
perialist rallying cry that is articulated as an internationalism, a “support for
the cause of the persecuted” in a more generalizable sense.
The Frame of Blackness
Claiming the term nègre, investing it with particular signifying content,
and then deploying it as a link to another context (using it to translate Ne-
gro, for instance) are clearly practices with implications that go beyond the
“simply” linguistic. In a larger sense, these are allframing gestures. Thus the
divergent interventions of Lamine Senghor and Gilbert Gratiant, for exam-
ple, do not just deﬁne the word nègre. They also frame it: positioning, de-
limiting, or extending its range of application; articulating it in relation to a
discursive ﬁeld, to a variety of derived or opposed signiﬁers (homme de
couleur, noir); ﬂeshing out its history of use; and imagining its scope of im-
plication, its uses, its “future.” It is not coincidental that the interventions I
have outlined so far take place in a particular limited range of sites within
print culture, sites that imply a certain transitionality or instability if not
rupture. Framing gestures work the edges, in other words: in the manifesto,
in the impassioned response or open letter, in the broadside, in the editorial
or position paper that stakes out ground in the inaugural issue of a newspa-
per. In the 1920s and 1930s, they emerge most emphatically in concerted
efforts to “preface blackness” in all the senses of that phrase, particularly in
introductions to books, collections, and anthologies.
41 As David Scott has
recently noted, an introduction “frames a text by placing it in relation to its
conditions of enunciability, and in relation to the system of discursivity
that governs the production and organization of its statements. An intro-
duction shows how a text occupies a certain space of problems, a particular
context of questions, a distinctive domain of arguments. In short, it shows
what the relations are to that background of knowledge—the archive—that
sustains it.”
42 Here I will brieﬂy elaborate this broader sense of framing
race, in order to argue that internationalist initiatives during the interwar
period make recourse to certain strategies of literary formalism—and in
particular, to certain practices of the preface.
Literary critics and historians including Robert Stepto, Henry Louis
Gates, Jr., John Blassingame, and William Andrews have demonstrated in
work on the slave narrative tradition in the nineteenth century that the
emergence of African American narrative involves an inescapable grappling
with the politics of literary form. Narratives by former slaves were a persis-
38 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 50 ---
tently framed mode of production: they are almost always supported and
sometimes suffocated by a mass of documentary and verifying material
serving to “authenticate” the Negro subject’s discourse by positioning and
explicating it. This material includes prefaces and postfaces from promi-
nent abolitionists, the signature of the former slave on the frontispiece,
photographs, avowed and unavowed editorial addendums and elisions,
guarantees and testimonials to the former slave’s upstanding character, an-
cillary tales or narratives, appended letters, and explanatory notes.
43 In par-
ticular, Stepto’s 1979 study From behind the Veil argues convincingly that
the representation of the black modern subject relies on the control over
the framing apparatus even after the slave narratives, as works including
Booker T . Washington’sUp from Slavery (1901), Du Bois’s The Souls of
Black Folk (1903), James Weldon Johnson’s The Autobiography of an Ex-
Colored Man (1912), and Ralph Ellison’sInvisible Man (1952) represent a
variety of “archetypes” of black identity through the manipulation of fram-
ing structures and especially prefatory material.
On the one hand, Du Bois’s The Souls of Black Folk attains this effect
through a set of operations one might term “allegories of reading,” which
articulate the various levels of the text—their shifting, carefully calibrated
points of entry to an “inside” marked as “Negro”—in a manner that stands
in for social and epistemological access to the multiple layers and “deeper
recesses” of the “world in which ten thousand thousand Americans live and
strive.” Thus it is on the textual border, in the book’s “Forethought,” that
Du Bois announces that “herein lie buried many things which if read with
patience may show the strange meaning of being black here in the dawning
of the T wentieth Century.”
44 At the same time, the book draws not just on
formal strategies of the “authenticating frame” but also on the ﬁgurative
rhetoric characteristic of the slave narratives. The most obvious example is
the trope of the “veil.” This trope does not commence with Du Bois but in
fact recurs throughout the slave narrative tradition, in works by Frederick
Douglass, Olaudah Equiano, Harriet Jacobs, and Mary Prince, usually de-
ployed at moments of great narrative stress to mark the excesses of slavery
that are in some sense “unspeakable.” The veil is a metaphor for a particular
kind of border, both rhetorical and moral. T oni Morrison, whose 1987
novel Beloved may indeed be read as a more recent elaboration of this same
inherited trope, has discussed the veil’s prevalence and its implications as a
particular kind of silence that shapes the tradition: “Over and over, the
VARIA TIONS ON A PREFACE 39


--- PAGE 51 ---
writers pull the narrative up short with a phrase such as, ‘But let us drop a
veil over these proceedings too terrible to relate.’ In shaping the experience
to make it palatable to those who were in a position to alleviate it, they
were silent about many things, and they ‘forgot’ many things. There was a
careful selection of the instances that they would record and a careful ren-
dering of those that they chose to describe.”
45
The Souls of Black Folk rearticulates the trope of the veil to indicate the
frontier of a black counterculture of modernity in a manner that allows the
text to authenticate itself—to invest the narrator’s ﬁrst person with author-
ity over that social and epistemological boundary. As the “Forethought” an-
nounces: “Leaving, then, the world of the white man, I have stepped within
the Veil, raising it that you may view faintly its deeper recesses,—the mean-
ing of its religion, the passion of its human sorrow, and the struggle of its
greater souls.”
46 For Stepto, Du Bois’s text not only puts pressure on its
joints in this way, but also multiplies its framing gestures into an “orches-
tration” of every possible register.
47 Thus the “Forethought” and “After-
thought” are echoed at another level by the epigraphic structure of each
chapter, where the prose is preceded by an ambiguous pairing of a quote
from a European-language poem and a fragment of a musical score of a Ne-
gro spiritual (without the lyrics).
48 The Souls of Black Folk, which manipu-
lates many kinds of data, facts, and evidence about blackness and which
“weaves” together “varying modes of formal writing, including historiogra-
phy, autobiography, eulogy, and . . . ﬁction,” is a “new way of thinking
about documentary writing and about what constitutes authenticating evi-
dence.”
49 The book continually shifts the epistemology of race through its
complex layering of frames.
Many critics have noted the debts of James Weldon Johnson’s 1912The
Autobiography of an Ex-Colored Man to Du Bois’s work.50 I would add that
the importance of the novel is intimately linked to the ways it applies and
revises the framing strategies of The Souls of Black Folk. The Autobiography
is the “ﬁrst sophisticated structural exploration,” as Richard Yarborough
has suggested, “of the generic ﬂuidity underlying much of Afro-American
autobiographical writing . . . and the ﬁrst successful attempt to exploit this
generic ﬂuidity as an apt representation of the psychological tensions . . .
inherent in the black experience.”
51 One might push this insight even fur-
ther and note that the novel explores this “generic ﬂuidity” most promi-
nently through a reformulation of the relation between preface and text.
40 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 52 ---
Like the “Forethought” to The Souls of Black Folk, the preface to The
Autobiography promises sociological facts and documentation to come in
the text: it claims that the book will be a “human document,” one which
“shows in a dispassionate, though sympathetic, manner conditions as they
actually exist between whites and blacks today.”
52 It takes up the trope of
the veil as well, marking a textual border as allegory: “In these pages it is as
though a veil has been drawn aside: the reader is given a view of the inner
life of the Negro in America, is initiated into the freemasonry, as it were, of
the race” (xl). But this preface (written by Johnson, but signed “The Pub-
lishers”)—combined with the novel’s anonymous publication—signals a
small but crucial shift of authority.
53 The Negro world is not a “prison-
house” as it is described inThe Souls of Black Folk,nor is “double conscious-
ness” at once a gift and a deprivation that is conferred or imposed from
without.
54 Instead, it is the white readership that is shut out, and which
must by implication undergo a transformation, an initiation “into the free-
masonry” of the Negro race, in order to cross what now seems to be a much
more unsettling frontier. The sensationalism has been inverted, in other
words—the book offers not the thrill of access to a “veiled” world, but the
threat of incomprehension, of indistinguishable limits. So the preface here
is not a door or frontier, but a kind of parodic “hinge” both opening and
closing an “impossible text.” As Aldon Nielsen describes it,The Autobiogra-
phy of an Ex-Colored Man “produces the impossibility of a stable reading of
its own narrative as exemplary of the instability, the impossibility, of Ameri-
can racial deﬁnition.”
55 As in George Schuyler’s 1931 novelBlack No More,
sociology becomes a kind of joke on the reader, since the “color line” is ex-
posed not as a tragic American fact but as the paradigmatic American
ﬁction. When the narrator comments near the end of The Autobiography
that he is “an ordinarily successful white man who has made a little money”
(211), one realizes that Johnson’s novel is less a revelation of “veiled” black-
ness than a critical exposure of normative American “whiteness.” In the
end, the narrative is nothing other than what Nielsen calls “the tale of the
creation of an ordinary white man.”
56
It is sometimes overlooked that the rearticulation of framing strategies in
The Autobiography of an Ex-Colored Manis anchored not just in the form of
the novel but also by its transatlantic journey out of the nation-space. Al-
though the preface promises a “vivid and startlingly new picture of condi-
tions brought about by the race question in the United States” (xxxix), the
VARIA TIONS ON A PREFACE 41


--- PAGE 53 ---
unnamed narrator’s most trenchant epiphany about race takes place during
a trip to Europe with his wealthy patron. At the beginning of chapter 9, on
the ocean liner to the old continent, the narrator comments that the ship
“ran in close proximity to a large iceberg. I was curious enough to get up
and look at it, and I was fully repaid for my pains. The sun was shining full
upon it, and it glistened like a mammoth diamond, cut with a million fac-
ets. As we passed, it constantly changed its shape; at each different angle of
vision it assumed new and astonishing forms of beauty” (126–127). It is as
though the reader is being offered an optic image to replace the binarism
and simplicity of the veil—a reminder that the “color line” must be com-
prehended in its subtle “facets” (and in international waters). It is a “con-
stantly changing,” “mammoth” whiteness at once beguiling and glisten-
ingly treacherous. The so-called “Negro problem,” as Johnson would later
put it (taking his point of departure from The Souls of Black Folk’s famous
rhetorical query, “How does it feel to be a problem?”), is “not a problem in
the sense of being a ﬁxed proposition involving certain invariable factors
and waiting to be worked out according to certain deﬁned rules. It is not a
static condition; rather, it is and always has been a series of shifting interra-
cial situations, never precisely the same.”
57
The Ex-Colored Man’s epiphany about black popular music, inspired by
a German pianist at a party in Berlin, is the same kind of realization:
My millionaire planned, in the midst of the discussion on music, to
have me play the “new American music” and astonish everybody pres-
ent. The result was that I was more astonished than anyone else. I
went to the piano and played the most intricate rag-time piece I
knew. Before there was time for anybody to express an opinion on
what I had done, a big bespectacled, bushy-headed man rushed over,
and, shoving me out of the chair, exclaimed: ‘“Get up! Get up!” He
seated himself at the piano, and, taking the theme of my rag-time,
played it through ﬁrst in straight chords; then varied and developed it
through every known musical form. I sat amazed. I had been turning
classic music into rag-time, a comparatively easy task; and this man
had taken rag-time and made it classic. The thought came across me
like a ﬂash—It can be done, why can’t I do it? From that moment my
mind was made up. (141–142)
42 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 54 ---
The German brusquely pushes the narrator away from the piano to prove
that musically, too, the “line” shifts, that it can be crossed both ways. The
scene shows in microcosm what the novel as a whole achieves: the trou-
bling, ambiguous framing of blackness, the performance of a “state of sus-
pension between racial realms of cognition.”
58
But why does this scene need to be set in Berlin? In its staged syncretism,
it is almost a kind of dramatization of the Germanic predilections of The
Souls of Black Folk, in which Du Bois (who had himself studied in Berlin)
quotes lyrics from Wagner’s opera Lohengrin, or places a musical snippet
from a Negro spiritual beneath a poem by Schiller. But even more point-
edly, the contention in The Autobiography of an Ex-Colored Man is that a
transnational foray is necessary to undo the “ﬁxed” and “static” nature of
the “Negro question” in the United States. The “ﬂash” is predicated on a
confrontation, on the violence of a “shove” and a re-voicing of a “theme,”
on a “shifting interracial situation.” The scene of two pianists in a party,
jousting with improvised variations, is a scene where heterogeneous detours
intersect at yet another point d’intrication—in this case the transnational
circulation of African American music (“rag-time”) in the European me-
tropolis. In other words, the epiphany can be framed only as another sort of
translation.
Race and the Modern Anthology
Gerald Early has recently made the provocative assertion that “the book
that really kicked off the phase of the New Negro Movement known as the
Harlem Renaissance—the phase that tried to produce a school or an iden-
tiﬁable discipline of black American letters—was not Jean T oomer’s Cane
(1923) or Claude McKay’sSpring in New Hampshire (1922), it was James
Weldon Johnson’s 1922 anthologyThe Book of American Negro Poetry, the
ﬁrst collection of its type but surely not the last to display a considerable
obsession in anthologizing the Negro.”
59 The extension of formalist strate-
gies from the slave narratives into African American literature in the twenti-
eth century is evident not just in generically hybrid, subtly prefaced books
by Du Bois, Johnson, and others. It is also, perhaps most importantly, evi-
dent in the Negro anthologies that seemed to be pouring out of publishing
houses on both sides of the Atlantic in the early 1920s. For the ﬁrst time—
and in a rush that with hindsight is astonishing—there was great interest in
VARIA TIONS ON A PREFACE 43


--- PAGE 55 ---
researching, notating, transcribing, assembling, and packaging almost any-
thing having to do with populations of African descent. Because the com-
pulsively documentary New Negro movement coincides with the vogue
nègre (the acquisition-minded European fascination with black perfor-
mance and artifacts) and with the institutionalization of anthropology as a
discipline, there appears to be an almost overnight explosion of textual col-
lections after the war. It is possible to cite literally dozens and dozens of an-
thologies around black themes, from Blaise Cendrars’s Anthologie Nègre
(1921) in Paris and Johnson’sBook of American Negro Poetry(1922) in New
York all the way through the next decade.
60
T o note this ﬂood of energy in modern print culture is to raise the ques-
tion of the particular way an anthology frames race, the particular way it ar-
ticulates an epistemology of blackness. As Theodore O. Mason, Jr., has
pointed out in a smart treatment of the history of African American anthol-
ogizing efforts, it is also to highlight the perhaps surprising and perhaps
ironic function that the anthology plays—not in conﬁrming the canon, not
in a backward-looking survey of the high points in a trajectory, but instead
in founding and enabling the very tradition it documents, “at the begin-
ning rather than the end of literary history making.”
61 At the same time, it
is crucial to place a text such as The Book of American Negro Poetry within
this much wider, multilingual, Western rush to anthologize blackness, even
if James Weldon Johnson’s concerns and motivations are not at all conso-
nant with the aims of V . F . Calverton, not to mention Cendrars, Maurice
Delafosse, or Leo Frobenius. Such a juxtaposition makes clear the high
stakes of framing the black subject in the 1920s, which is not just a na-
tional issue. The anthology is a means more broadly to grapple withmoder-
nity itself: the form serves to “mark time,” whether for the purposes of ra-
cialist retrenchment (positioning the Negro as paradigmatically backward
and primitive, innocent and unlettered, as in many of the European colo-
nial and anthropological texts) or racialist vindication (positioning the Ne-
gro as paradigmatically modern and up to date, historical and literate, as in
the anthologies that emerge during the Harlem Renaissance).
The anthology takes on such a central role in this period of “consider-
able obsession” with the Negro partly because the form is above all a way of
accounting for a given cultural conjuncture. It delimits the borders of an
expressive mode or ﬁeld, determining its beginning and end points, its local
or global resonance, its communities of participants and audiences. In do-
44 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 56 ---
ing so it necessarily “presumes some idea of difference” (whether national,
linguistic, generic, thematic, or identity-based) and aims to present the spe-
ciﬁc contours of that difference, in a way that both articulates it—makes it
speak—and marks it off. 62 The anthology’s expressive force is concentrated
not just in the contents of a given collection or in its apparatus (its bibliog-
raphy, its illustrations) or in its methodology (the sources it admits, the no-
tational techniques it prefers, the way it limits its scope and pursues its as-
semblage). Most strikingly, the power of the anthology is concentrated in
its discursive frame—in its preface, introduction, or opening statement. It
should be no surprise that in a form so intimately concerned with framing,
the preface becomes a point of great tension: the frame of the frame, as it
were, the place where the collection itself is collected.
The allographic preface of the anthology “speaks before” (prae-fatio)
what it collates.
63 A preface is always early or late, always a mask or a coda.
It conditions the protocols of reception for the documents it presents. It
purports to strike a path, to point the reader through a door or over a hori-
zon, but paradoxically is usually written only after the text has been assem-
bled. If the preface functions as a frame, we should recall that a frame in the
etymological sense (as in the phrase “to frame an idea”) refers both to the
materiality of the limits or the edges of an object and to the interior force
that gives it shape, that gives it life—not just the container but also the
contained, not just the skin but also the blood or the skeleton. As a formal
device, the preface speaks double in this way: it is outside, it marks what is
not within the book, it precedes the book’s “speaking,” but it is also the
very force that animates the book, that opens it for us and shows its con-
tents. The preface therefore is a frame not always easily separable from the
artifact itself, even as it rhetorically holds itself to be distinct from and prior
to what it introduces.
64
Let us consider in more detail James Weldon Johnson’s anthology The
Book of American Negro Poetry.The successful 1922 collection not only was
the ﬁrst gathering of Negro verse handled by a major U.S. publisher, but
also was distinguished by its preface, a forty-two page essay on “The Cre-
ative Genius of the Negro” that, as Johnson put it a dozen years later, force-
fully “called attention to the American Negro as a folk artist, and pointed
out his vital contributions, as such, to our national culture.”
65 Like Du
Bois, Alain Locke, Charles S. Johnson, and Carter G. Woodson, Johnson
hoped to provide overwhelming proof of the vitality, modernity, and histor-
VARIA TIONS ON A PREFACE 45


--- PAGE 57 ---
ical depth of black expressive culture with the aim of reshaping the parame-
ters of “the Negro question” in the United States. The famous declaration
on the ﬁrst page of the preface is characteristic: to varying degrees, these
culture-framers shared Johnson’s belief that nothing would accomplish
more to change the “national mental attitude toward the race...than a
demonstration of intellectual parity by the Negro through the production
of literature and art.”
66
Johnson’s effort to “demonstrate” parity through culture is above all a
concern with the “universality” of black modernity. It is clear from the ﬁrst
page of the preface that The Book of American Negro Poetry aims to note
how a black culture is distinctive, while at the same time lays claim to what
Johnson terms black culture’s “universal appeal.” The rhetorical appeal to
universality is by no means an unfamiliar strategy. Immanuel Wallerstein
has pointed out that any project of cultural resistance necessarily must con-
test “the ideology of the system by appealing to antecedent, broader ideolo-
gies (that is, more ‘universal’ values),” which in effect accepts “the terms of
the debate as deﬁned by the dominant forces.”
67 Johnson attempts to walk
this tightrope when he begins the preface to The Book of American Negro
Poetry with the oft-cited sweeping statement that “[a] people become great
through many means, but there is only one measure by which its greatness
is recognized and acknowledged. The ﬁnal measure of the greatness of all
people is the amount and standard of the literature and art they have pro-
duced. The world does not know that a people is great until that people
produces great literature and art” (9). He takes on the parameters of culture
as they have been deﬁned by the very defenders of the Western high cul-
tural tradition who would dismiss Negro American expression as formless
or infantile.
But after these grand opening gestures, Johnson moves into a preface
that seems at times to contradict this announcement about universality and
“greatness.” Ostensibly the preface frames black U.S. literature, but on the
second page, Johnson indulges in an extended digression on the “creative
genius of the Negro” not in terms of literature, not through the poetry col-
lected in the anthology, but instead in terms of African American vernacu-
lar art: folklore (“the Uncle Remus stories”), music (“the ‘spirituals’ or slave
songs”), dancing (“the cakewalk”), and popular commercialized music
(“ragtime”) (10–20). If the goal is to argue the achievements of African
Americans in “high art,” then why does the preface commence with a pas-
46 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 58 ---
sionate defense of the “vital spark” of “lower forms” (15, 17)? In the end,
the preface is most remarkable in that it digresses precisely in order to con-
tend that Negro expression is both constitutive of the American “cultural
store” and excessive to it—what Paul Gilroy terms a “counterculture,” but
one that simultaneously deﬁnes the core of national culture.
68 Indeed,
Johnson worries not that U.S. culture will absorb or consume African
American culture, but in fact that the latter has so fully deﬁned the national
culture that its origins have gone unrecognized (13).
More speciﬁcally, Johnson argues that it is the Negro’s “transfusive qual-
ity” that places black expression in a privileged relation to the “national
spirit” as the predominant voice of “our common cultural store” (3). The
Negro is “the creator of the only things artistic that have yet sprung from
American soil and been universally acknowledged as distinctive American
products” (10). But that “transfusive quality” is not a characteristic limited
to the populations of African descent on U.S. territory. It is instead a “racial
gift” that expresses itself wherever Negroes are found: “This power of the
Negro to suck up the national spirit from the soil and create something ar-
tistic and original, which, at the same time, possesses the note of universal
appeal, is due to a remarkable racial gift of adaptability; it is more than
adaptability, it is a transfusive quality. And the Negro has exercised this
transfusive quality not only here in America, where the race lives in large
numbers, but in European countries, where the number has been almost
inﬁnitesimal” (20). With this move, Johnson is able to position black cul-
ture as the deﬁning American culture without limiting black creativity to a
national origin. It eludes the frame of the nation, even as it indelibly deﬁnes
what is “universally recognized” as national.
When the preface ﬁnally does get to poetry, it goes “a little aﬁeld” again,
this time geographically, discussing the literature as a phenomenon that
straddles the entire hemisphere. Johnson includes Claude McKay (from Ja-
maica) and George Reginald Margetson (from St. Kitts) in the collection
along with the many poets from the United States. In his autobiography,
Johnson explains that his preface “went a little aﬁeld and mentioned some
of the Negro poets of the West Indies and South America, giving most
space to Plácido, the popular poet of Cuba. My selections for the anthology
proper increased to three or four times the number I had originally planned
for, but I felt that in the case of this particular book, there was more to be
gained by being comprehensive than would be lost by not being exclu-
VARIA TIONS ON A PREFACE 47


--- PAGE 59 ---
sive.”69 It should be noted that this shift is enacted with a shift in terminol-
ogy, another “creation of vocables.” In the ﬁrst pages of the preface, John-
son writes of the “Negro” or “American Negro poets.” As he moves “aﬁeld”
at the end of his discussion of Paul Laurence Dunbar, he introduces a new
racial appellation: “Aframerican” (36). Although Dunbar “is the most out-
standing ﬁgure in literature among the Aframericans of the United States,
he does not stand alone among the Aframericans of the whole Western
world. There are Plácido and Manzano in Cuba; Vieux and Durand in
Haiti; Machado de Assis in Brazil, and others still that might be men-
tioned, who stand on a plane with or even above Dunbar” (37). This word
is a transport term in that it allows Johnson to extend the deﬁnition of
“American” in another fashion beyond the borders of the U.S. nation, for
“Aframerican” designates, as he puts it, “Negroes of...N o r t hAmerica,
South America, or the West Indies.”
70 Part of the accomplishment of the
preface is making proper this expanded sense of racial identity; by the dis-
cussion of “Negro dialect” toward the end of the preface, it is no longer so
striking that he deﬁnes black culture as exorbitant to the nation, with the
result that the nation is the subset of a larger regional space, as in references
to “Aframerican poets in the United States” (42).
Functionally, a preface differs from an introduction in that the latter is
unique, with “a more systematic, less historical, less circumstantial link
with the logic of the book.”
71 Prefaces “are multiplied from edition to edi-
tion and take into account a more empirical historicity,” and so it is worth
noting that in the preface to the revised 1931 edition of The Book of Ameri-
can Negro Poetry, Johnson seems to include the term “Aframerican” in his
contention that, in the intervening decade, the claims of the preface to the
ﬁrst edition had been accepted as “facts,” a matter of “historical data.”
72
The second edition is often considered the more authoritative, because it
includes the poetry of what Johnson calls the “World War group”: the
younger generation of talented New Negro poets who emerged in the mid-
1920s including Langston Hughes, Sterling Brown, Helene Johnson, Arna
Bontemps, Gwendolyn Bennett, Frank Horne, and Waring Cuney—as
well as Johnson’s own experiments in vernacular poetry in his 1927 God’s
Trombones.
73 In the new edition’s shorter preface, Johnson now uses
“Aframerican” interchangeably with “Negro.”
In the ﬁrst edition, the term “Aframerican” allows the preface to frame
Negro expressive culture as exceeding the U.S. nation in yet another, even
48 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 60 ---
more remarkable manner. Johnson concludes his move “aﬁeld” with an ex-
traordinary subversive gesture that mobilizes the new word:
In considering the Aframerican poets of the Latin languages I am im-
pelled to think that, as up to this time the colored poets of greater
universality have come out of the Latin-American countries rather
than out of the United States, they will continue to do so for a good
many years....T h ecolored poet in the United States labors within
limitations which he cannot easily pass over. He is always on the de-
fensive or the offensive....Ithink it probable that the ﬁrst world-
acknowledged Aframerican poet will come out of Latin America.
(39–40)
In an anthology titled The Book of American Negro Poetry that claims a cer-
tain “universality” for that poetry, this can only be called a startling depar-
ture. One might best characterize this move as what Jacques Derrida terms
a “textual feint,” a way of using the preface that undermines the very pre-
tensions of the anthology form.
74 It is also of course still a certain framing
of blackness, even if the frame here ends by undoing itself, by demonstrat-
ing the instability—even the impossibility—of framing within national
bounds.
The Book of American Negro Poetrydoes not simply tip the scale the other
way, of course. It isnot an anthology of “Aframerican” poetry in the sense of
an exhaustive, or even vaguely representative, collection of poetry by writ-
ers of African descent throughout the Americas. In fact, Johnson declines
to abstract the generalizing drive of the term “Aframerican” and, on the
contrary, emphasizes the differences between the placement of the Cuban
poet Plácido and any of the black U.S. poets. “Over against the probabil-
ity” that the ﬁrst “world-acknowledged Aframerican” poet will emerge from
Latin America, he thus writes, is “the great advantage possessed by the col-
ored poet in the United States of writing in the world-conquering English
language” (40). Johnson is looking for an uneasy balance here in which a
racial generalization or internationalism will not trump American national-
ism. The sooner that “Aframerican poets in the United States” write “Amer-
ican poetry spontaneously, the better,” and the primary referent remains
national even though the descriptive “American” is thrown into question or
opened up suggestively.
In terms of its content, the anthology pursues this shuttling or ambiva-
VARIA TIONS ON A PREFACE 49


--- PAGE 61 ---
lence in the signiﬁcance of “Aframerican” in at least two ways. The poetry
in the body of the text is itselfgeographically transnational, as I have pointed
out, due to the inclusion of Margetson and McKay from the Anglophone
Caribbean. Although there are no foreign-language poets featured in the
anthology, it demonstrates the linguistic diversity implied by “Aframerican”
ﬁrst by undercutting its interior (the section of work by Jessie Fauset in-
cludes her translation of “Oblivion,” by the Haitian poet Massilon Coicou
[208]) and then by proliferating its edges: providing a single poem by
Plácido not in the body of the text, but in an appendix to the book. The
Spanish evidence of “Aframerican” writing sits at the back door, not quite
counted in the body of American Negro Poetry,not quite exterior to it. Even
this closing frame is itself split, for Johnson includes Plácido’s original
Spanish of “Despida a Mi Madre” followed by two quite different transla-
tions of the poem, one by William Cullen Bryant and another by Johnson
himself (293–294). The anthology breaks and breaks again, as though to
make décalage manifest in an open set of overlapping spaces. It invests in
the signiﬁer “Negro” and then extends it with “Aframerican”; it writes in
English and then supplements it with Spanish; it carries the Spanish back
to English and then translates it again. It is impossible to sew this fraying
into some seamless space of common blackness. So if The Book of American
Negro Poetry frames its particular motivating difference by overﬂowing the
nation-state—even while deﬁning national culture through a “racial gift”—
the same framing overﬂows itself, extending and questioning the limits of
its difference. The book splits its own binding.
Border Work
I do not mean to suggest that such strategies cannot be located in Fran-
cophone literary culture in the 1920s. The French black drive to document
and anthologize was not comparable to the activities in Harlem, and not
simply because the black presence in France (although vibrant and visible)
was much smaller. Nor was the problem that Francophone intellectuals
were unconcerned with collecting Negro culture (as we have already seen
with Jane Nardal’s approach to Alain Locke). Even in the midst of thevogue
nègre, the circuits of ﬁnancing and patronage that supported the Harlem
intelligentsia until the onset of the Depression were never available in Paris.
Still, black intellectuals in Paris were reading works such as The Book of
50 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 62 ---
American Negro Poetry and The New Negro, and it is possible to track—in
other forms—a Francophone engagement with and reformulation of fram-
ing practices.
At times in Francophone periodical print culture, one might read in-
stances of framing in effects of juxtaposition: departures from a context
(whether translations, articles by an unlikely source, or pieces in a different
tone) that are equally insertions into that context. I am thinking for in-
stance of an exceptional document that was inserted into the ﬁrst issue of
La Race nègre, the newspaper that in June 1927 succeeded La Voix des
Nègres as the organ of Lamine Senghor’s Ligue de Défense de la Race
Nègre. Titled “Réponse d’un ancient tirailleur sénégalais à M. Paul Bon-
cour” (Response of a former African soldier to M. Paul Boncour), the piece
is the testimony of a soldier from the Sudan named Baba Diarra concerning
the harsh treatment of African recruits during the war. But unlike the
pieces that surround it in the issue, Diarra’s text is composed not in stan-
dard French but in a transcription of the version of French called petit
nègre, which was spoken by many soldiers. It opens:
1912 moi ngasi volontaire partir la guerre Moroco pasqui mon com-
mandant mon cercle li promi boucou bons quand moi y a bien
travailler pour Lafranci tuer boucou Morocains. Moi venir 2e régi-
ment Kati, Ayéyé-yéye! Mon boucou maloré plus que esclave. Capo-
rani y a frapper moi, sergent y a toujours manigolo...Yap a sbon, y
a pas boucou manger . . . 1914, la guerre Lafrance avec bochi y a
comenser, moi vinir encore...m o igagné gallon caporani. 1916 moi
gagne sagent. Mais sagent ropéen parler moi comme lui y a parler
tirailleur 2e classe. Gradé ropéens y a compter nous comme sauvasi,
comme plus mauvais chien encore. Si nous faire clamison ﬁciers y
a dire nous, vous pas droit, vous pas citouin français, vous...
ndigènes.
75
In 1912 I volunteered to go to the war in Morocco because the com-
mandant of my district promised great rewards if I worked well for
France and killed many Moroccans. I came in the second Kati regi-
ment [from Bamako], Ayéyé-yéye! I suffered a great deal, more than a
slave. The corporal hit me, the sergeant always had his cudgel ...I t
wasn’t good, there wasn’t much to eat...1914, the war between
VARIA TIONS ON A PREFACE 51


--- PAGE 63 ---
France and the Germans started, and I came back again...Iearned
my corporal’s stripes. But the European sergeant spoke to me like he
spoke to a private second class. Europeans consider us savages, even
worse than dogs. If we complain to the ofﬁcers they tell us, you have
no rights, you aren’t a French citizen: you’re...natives.
I have provided a relatively straightforward English translation of the pas-
sage, because there is no way to reproduce the effect the passage has in the
original. In La Race nègre, Diarra’s “response” is not introduced, explained,
or translated in any manner, and it confronts a French reader with its unfa-
miliar syntax and vocabulary (Ayéyé, manigolo, sauvasi, ﬁciers).
Historian Philippe de Witte has noted that the inclusion of this docu-
ment in La Race nègre attempts “to elevate a ‘patois’ to the rank of a lan-
guage of communication” and that as a result “an infantilized, ridiculed,
and humiliating language [langue] becomes ...apopular language, rich
and full of images.”
76 Another critic who has considered the piece, Christo-
pher Miller, is certainly correct to point out that petit nègre functions here
as a “means of resistance.” 77 But it is necessary to clarify that petit nègre
is not precisely a patois, and—as Frantz Fanon recognized—nor is it a
creole.
78 In fact, petit nègre is one of the strangest legacies of World War I: it
was a simpliﬁed, deformed version of French that the military codiﬁed and
deliberately taught to African soldiers as they came to ﬁght in Europe, as a
means both to infantilize them and to control their modes of interaction
with their mainly white French commanding ofﬁcers. It is no coincidence
that the same issue of La Race nègre excerpts a passage from Lucie Cous-
turier’s 1920Des Inconnus chez moi, which is the ﬁrst text in metropolitan
France to take issue with the policy of petit nègre instruction in training
camps:
The instructors were able to generalize an esperanto, or “petit nègre,”
proper to the fabrication and the delivery of soldiers through the
quickest possible means. The instructors’ role was restricted to this
end; they did not at all anticipate that these soldiers might want to
speak French in France. This is the proof of a military machine’s per-
fection: not to make life easier, but...t odestroy it.
Suppose that having to teach our language to an Englishman, we
carefully took note of all the deformations his ﬁrst attempts inﬂict on
French pronunciation and syntax, and that from then on, we draw
52 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 64 ---
on them to present him with a French reduced to his English compat-
ibilities.79
As de Witte comments, were Diarra’s account “translated into Parisian
French or into communist jargon, the indictment would have lost a good
deal of its force.”
80 But one might add that the text’s “force” is located in
its form: linguistically, petit nègre makes the same critique as the narrative it-
self. It implies that the proper mode of critique is a spoken vernacular
(since petit nègre is not a written language, the text points to a certain
orality, whether Diarra wrote it himself or whether it was transcribed from
his speech). The text gains its “force” not only because it represents a popu-
list gesture of inclusion in a black metropolitan periodical, but also be-
cause petit nègre is itself evidence—the framed documentation, confront-
ing the reader—of the mistreatment of French West African soldiers during
the war.
My second example is a singular novel published in 1924, the Gua-
deloupean Suzanne Lacascade’s Claire-Solange, âme africaine. The story
takes place in “that period of internationalism” just before World War I, as
a successful colonial administrator named Etienne Hucquart arrives in the
metropole from Fort-de-France with his daughter Claire-Solange.
81 Set in
Paris, the novel follows the unfolding of a love affair between the young
mulâtresse (Claire-Solange is the product of Etienne’s marriage to an Antil-
lean woman) and Jacques Danzel, a distant cousin. The title character is
one of the more remarkable characters in early Francophone ﬁction: impul-
sive, highly educated, and ﬁercely proud of her African ancestry. At one
point, as the extended household is discussing the evils of prejudice in the
modern world, an aunt asks Claire-Solange if she is anti-Semitic. She re-
sponds deﬁantly: “Papa has traveled around the world, ﬁghting against
prejudices; and how could I despise another oppressed race, I who amnègre
[moi qui suis nègre]” (36). When her aunt, appalled at the word nègre, tries
to dismiss this declaration as folly, Claire-Solange launches into a soliloquy:
Look my frizzy hair. I couldn’t smooth it down into tresses against my
cheeks, like the Jews of Aden; I couldn’t lift it up into a 1830chignon
b u n ....M ynègre hair must be separated with headbands, twisted for
better or worse against the nape of my neck. ...I no r d e rt odeny my
African origin, I would have to live under a veil, hiding both my eyes
VARIA TIONS ON A PREFACE 53


--- PAGE 65 ---
and my nose from view....Come on, aunt, smile. Accept as she is a
woman of color, who will give some variety to the family. (36–37)
Elsewhere she declares that her hobby (marotte) is to “protect and glorify
the Negro race [la race noire].” “I am African,” she proclaims, “African,
through atavism and despite my paternal heritage!” offering a fanciful enu-
meration of the royal lineage of her African family line (65–66). Claire-
Solange—whose mother perished when she caught a chill on a visit to Eu-
rope—even advances a sort of continental climatology, contending that her
maternal “African” side is genetically far superior to her “cold,” “artiﬁcial,”
“dull” European heritage.
Claire-Solange eventually falls in love with Jacques and, despite her ab-
horrence of the European winter, decides to stay with him in the metropole
as the war breaks out, offering him the “unique love of an African woman”
(220). Her choice to remain in Paris is both the result of Jacques “conquer-
ing” her “African pride” and the result of her own patriotism as a French
citizen herself: “This city that I didn’t love, this city is all of France, it’s the
honor of the country, it’s you, it’s my life....M ypride as an African
woman [orgueil d’Africaine] has been conquered by you, Jacques, my pride
as a Frenchwoman [orgueil de Française] remains intact” (170). As Maryse
Condé has pointed out, this dénouement is an all-too-familiar stereotype of
the “hot-blooded” Antillean woman surrendering as erotic object, even if
for once she is rewarded with a French husband rather than a temporary
colonial lover.
82 Still, Claire-Solange’s racialist rhetoric, its strong female
characterization, and its rich portrait of creole popular culture were appar-
ently radical enough that the book aroused great indignation in the Carib-
bean, with the result that Lacascade was forced to leave Guadeloupe.
83
Claire-Solange, âme africaine is particularly innovative in its depiction of
Caribbean vernacular culture and music. The novel contains a great deal of
Creole, which is usually explicated or contextualized in French although
not always fully translated, in passages such as the one when an Antillean
servant comes into the room where Claire-Solange and Jacques are talking;
the servant, who was supposed to do Claire-Solange’s hair, and has been
looking for the young woman all over the house, complains, “ Man jouque
croué ou bliez moin, tit ﬁlle. . . . Je commence à croire que vous m’oubliez”
(“I’m starting to think that you’re forgetting about me”). Claire-Solange
chides her with a vulgarity, but then refuses to translate it for Jacques: “Pas
54 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 66 ---
fais guiolle kiou poule, da chè....Oh! Monsieur Danzel, je ne me risque pas
à traduire....L ecréole en ces mots brave l’honnêteté. ...I lm efaut vous
quitter pour un étrange devoir. Je dois prêter ma tête à ma bonne” (“Pas fais
guiolle kiou poule, da chè....Oh! Monsieur Danzel, I don’t dare trans-
late....T h eC r eole in these words deﬁes respectability....Ih a v et oleave
you for a strange fate. I have to lend my head to my maid”) (47).
84 Over
and over, the text performs the edges of Caribbean vernacular culture,
pointing at all that cannot be carried over. This is often a way of ﬁguring
Claire-Solange’s “mixed” parentage, as in the amusing scene when she sits
down at the piano in the parlor to play Schumann’s Carnaval and impro-
vises away from the theme into “strange, nostalgic cadences, brief com-
plaints, hoarse joys—a tam-tam of sorrowful drunkenness, whose syncopa-
tions tear the fevered soul: it is Ramadan, the African Carnival. Then the
rhythm, starting to skip, creating a youthful gaiety, recalls a habanera.” “Le
Mardi Gras à Fort-de-France,” Claire-Solange announces, and starts to sing
a lyric in Creole (31). Carnaval is a signiﬁcant choice, since Schumann’s
1835 suite is already virtuosic and polyvocal, with each section of the suite
designed to represent what the composer called the “many different mental
states” brought about by his marriage (drawing on a coded musical tone se-
quence based on the letters of his wife’s birthplace). Schumann sometimes
referred to it as a Maskentanz, a masked ball, and the piece was inspired not
just by what he considered to be the pieces of his personality (two sections
are called Florestan and Eusebius, Schumann’s imaginary names for the “two
sides” of his nature), but also by the European improvisational tradition:
many of the fragments are titled after characters in the commedia del l’arte
and other ﬁgures from the popular theater (Pierrot, Arlequin, Pantalon et
Colombine).
85 So for Claire-Solange to play this particular piece “with origi-
nality” (31) and then to transport it across the Atlantic toward another Car-
nival tradition (Le Mardi Gras à Fort-de-France) is an excursion at least as
suggestive as the epiphany in Johnson’sThe Autobiography of an Ex-Colored
Man.
But if music ﬁgures mixed heritage through cultural transport in Claire-
Solange, it also comes to mark a certain inaccessibility, a certain part of
an “African” heritage that remains elusive and unconquered. At one point,
depressed on a cold, rainy day, Claire-Solange stays in the house, trying
to soothe herself with music: “Anguish agitates her moving nostrils, makes
her eyelids heavy, but the tears do not fall: Africans, you should know,
VARIA TIONS ON A PREFACE 55


--- PAGE 67 ---
conceal their impressions; if they cannot contain their suffering, they sing
passionately. This is what the mulâtresse did.” There follows a short in-
dented refrain:
Tchah, béhoué, kika, kika
Tchah, béhoué, kika!
Krinon-no-no-no-no béhoué
Ahah, béhoué, ahah (43)
The tune is described as “a tune of savage revolt, it cracks like the blow of
the lash on the naked back of Negro slaves [esclaves noirs], it is repeated
indeﬁnitely . . .” (44). When her father, standing in the doorway (sur le
seuil), says that he doesn’t recognize it, she explains, “it’s what that servant
boy was singing in Zanzibar, on the N’Gamba bridge, the day when he
stopped trafﬁc with his contortions; no one dared to pass [ personne n’osait
plus passer], thinking that he was possessed.”
Strikingly, this is a moment when the text multiplies its own thresholds
(seuils). The indented lyrics are footnoted with the following sentence:
“L ’auteur a entendu ces paroles dans des circonstances analogues à celle que
relate Claire-Solange, mais personne n’a pu, ou n’a voulu lui en donner le
sens” (“The author heard these words in circumstances analogous to those
that Claire-Solange relates, but no one could, or would, give her their
meaning”) (43). The gesture is immediately reminiscent of W . E. B. Du
Bois’s repeated telling—in each of his four principal autobiographies—of a
story about his “grandfather’s grandmother,” who used to sing an old Bantu
song that no one could translate into English: Do ba-na co-ba, ge-ne me, ge-
ne me! / Ben d’nu-li, nu-li, nu-li, nu-li, den d’le. It had been passed down
through the generations, and “we sing it to our children,” Du Bois writes,
“knowing as little as our fathers what its words may mean, but knowing
well the meaning of its music.”
86 The song in Claire-Solange similarly ﬁg-
ures a link to an African past. She tells her father, accepting his embrace,
“Don’t worry, I’m just going through a little bout of nostalgia [Je traverse un
petit accès de nostalgie]” (44). However, this moment is slightly different in
signiﬁcance from Du Bois’s familial anecdote. Claire-Solange’s song is not
an ancestral hand-me-down, representing both a possessed heritage and
that heritage’s inherent distance in unfamiliar, untranslatable words. Hers is
a personal memory of an individual past in a ambiguous position in Africa,
as the daughter of a colonial administrator with some imagined “access”
56 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 68 ---
(accès) to an “African” identity, but with constant reminders of what sepa-
rates her from the “natives.” “No one could, or would, give her [the words’]
meaning,” as the footnote puts it. The footnote claims to provide a “docu-
mentary” source and conﬁrms the song through the “analogue” of autobi-
ography, although the note’s insertion is both a way of indicating the en-
trance of an authorial voice into the text and at the same time a way of
marking a distance between author and character (since the circumstances
are “analogous” but not identical).
The explanatory footnote makes the text generically hybrid in another
sense, since it confers an ethnographic rhetoric of citation around the song’s
use in the ﬁction. In fact, this rhetoric—what “the author heard” herself—
is given a certain privilege as a recording, because it is distinguished from
the pretensions of European colonial travel literature and anthropology. A
few pages later, remarking that spring is arriving in Paris, Claire-Solange ex-
plains to Jacques, “I imagined the spring, and France itself, from your liter-
ature, yes, just as you imagine the colonies from the lying tales of explorers
[d’après les récits mensonges des explorateurs]” (46). Lacascade’s own artifact is
apparently meant to convey knowledge about Africa in a mode different
from the old récits mensonges—though intriguingly, it discovers that mode
not in travel narrative or anthropology per se, but in a “mixed” form that
appends or grafts a musical document into the “imagined” space of the
novel. The footnote, in other words, attempts to articulate itself as a fact
within a ﬁction, a framing that tells a certain truth about colonialism with
the evidence of a recorded music of “savage revolt,” a remembered music
that is insistent and repeated in a manner that metaphorically represents
“the blow of the lash on the naked back of Negro slaves.” As with Du Bois,
what makes the music powerful as evidence is precisely that it cannot be
translated—that it marks a certain inaccessibility, a space of expression ex-
terior to the colonial system, a certain resistance that “no one dares to pass.”
Even as it is transcribed, even as it is “authenticated” by Lacascade’s foot-
note, the song remains elusive. Perhaps it is truthful evidence about colo-
nialism not just in that it represents African resistance through its own re-
sistance to translation, but also in the sense that no one dares to pass it
on—Lacascade transmits it to the reader only as something that cannot be
transmitted as evidence in any disciplinary sense, as something that can ap-
pear only in this oblique, layered space in a ﬁction. This point is empha-
sized by a countergesture at the end of the book: Lacascade includes an ap-
VARIA TIONS ON A PREFACE 57


--- PAGE 69 ---
pendix of “T rois Bel-Airs Des Antilles” (Three T unes from the Antilles),
handwritten manuscripts that the text indicates were harmonized by Joseph
Salmon. The scores provide the lyrics, melody, and musical accompani-
ment of three songs that appear in the novel: “Le Clair Solange,” “Dis-Moi
Doudou,” and “Mardi-Gras” (the tuneLe Mardi Gras à Fort-de-France that
Claire-Solange segues into during her performance of Schumann’s Carna-
val). There are other interwar examples of Francophone writers appending
ethnographic data or texts to their ﬁctions—one thinks for instance of
Ousmane Socé’s 1935 Karim, roman sénégalais, which includes a ninety-
page appendix of nine “Contes et légendes d’Afrique noire” (Negro African
tales and legends) at the end of the novel.
87 What’s different about Lacas-
cade’s book, of course, is that the appendix does not include that strange,
untranslatable, footnoted song sung by the servant boy in Zanzibar. If the
appendix as a framing gesture represents a certain documentary impulse
with regard to Antillean vernacular culture, it also closes Claire-Solange,
âme africaine by pointing the reader to an impassable “record” of colonial-
ism that remains outside the book’s grasp.
58 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA
“Mardi-Gras.” Suzanne Lacascade,Claire-Solange, âme africaine (Paris: Eugène
Figuière, 1924). Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library, Yale University.
[To view this image, refer to  
the print version of this title.] 
 
 
 
[To view this image, refer to  
the print version of this title.]


--- PAGE 70 ---
A Blues Note
I close with one more variation, one more take on these framing strate-
gies in yet another genre. It would be possible to devote an entire study
to the uses of framing in Langston Hughes’s oeuvre, especially in his work
as a translator and editor. If we should recall that both Aimé Césaire and
Léopold Sédar Senghor published translations of African American poetry
early in their careers, we should equally recognize that Hughes is the
most proliﬁc black poet-translator of the twentieth century (publishing ver-
sions of Léon-Gontran Damas, Jacques Roumain, Nicolás Guillén, Regino
Pedroso, Gabriela Mistral, David Diop, and Jean-Joseph Rabéarivelo,
among many others) and at the same time a prodigious and groundbreak-
ing anthologist in his own right.
88 Here, however, I will focus solely on
framing practices and translation aesthetics in Hughes’s poetry itself. His
second book, Fine Clothes to the Jew(1927), was one of the more controver-
sial black publishing events of the second half of the decade, a lightning rod
for impassioned reviews both positive and negative.
89 The Pittsburgh Cou-
rier judged that Hughes’s new book was “trash,” while the headline in the
New York Amsterdam News proclaimed, “Langston Hughes—The Sewer
Dweller.” Another paper called him “the poet lowrate of Harlem,” punning
in derision of the writer who would later be fondly referred to as the “Ne-
gro poet laureate.” Critic Benjamin Brawley averred that “it would have
been just as well, perhaps better, if the book had never been published. No
other ever issued reﬂects more fully the abandon and the vulgarity of its
age.”
90 Another array of intellectuals, including James Weldon Johnson,
Margaret Larkin, and Alice Dunbar-Nelson attempted to argue for the
book’s signiﬁcance. Howard Mumford Jones went so far as to contend that
with his “blues poems,” Hughes “has contributed a really new verse form to
the English language,” in an accomplishment reminiscent of the experi-
ments with the spoken vernacular in the Lyrical Ballads composed by
Wordsworth and Coleridge at the turn of the nineteenth century.
91 But
it is only much more recently that critics have begun to come to terms
with Fine Clothes, which Arnold Rampersad rightly calls Hughes’s “ﬁnest
achievement in language” and “one of the most astonishing books of verse
ever published in the United States.”
92
The oft-noted innovation in Hughes’s new poetry is that, in contrast to
the rhetorical distancing in earlier efforts such as “The Weary Blues”—in
VARIA TIONS ON A PREFACE 59


--- PAGE 71 ---
which an ambivalently placed speaker reports that he “heard a Negro play”
in Harlem “the other night,” and then describes and quotes the lyrics of the
singer’s music—the poems in Fine Clothes are unmediated: blues lyrics re-
corded directly on the page with no intervening or exterior voice.
93 The
lines are enjambed at the caesura, so that the A-A ′-B structure of the
twelve-bar blues forms a six-line stanza, as in “Young Gal’s Blues,” which
concludes as follows:
When love is gone what
Can a young gal do?
When love is gone, O,
What can a young gal do?
Keep on a-lovin’ me, daddy,
Cause I don’t want to be blue.
94
The blues poems allude to recording not just in their parallels to blues
structure, but also in their length, which is always either three or four stan-
zas—just like the songs of Ma Rainey, Bessie Smith, and Ida Cox. As Mar-
tin Williams has noted, the limitations of the ten-inch record (which al-
lowed a singer only about three minutes, enough time to sing four blues
stanzas) were a crucial factor in the expressive possibilities of early blues re-
cordings, and Hughes’s blues poems operate within the constraints of the
recorded form.
95
The unmediated quality of the poems has an effect that is often stun-
ning, especially since they are sung or spoken mainly in the voices of young
black women. The reader encounters stark, unleavened voices of the black
working class not just in the performance situations of the blues but also in
everyday, domestic moments. The poem “Baby” is no more or less than the
voice of a parent yelling at her child: “Albert! / Hey, Albert! / Don’t you
play in the road.” The most radically minimalist poem in this vein is
“Shout,” which in its entirety runs three lines: “Listen to yo’ prophets, /
Little Jesus! / Listen to yo’ saints!”
96 These poems attain the economy of
haiku, but the aesthetic is not so much concerned with observation and dis-
tillation as it is with what one might call the technologies of recording: cap-
turing the varied and fragmented soundscape of black Memphis or Wash-
ington, D.C., in a roving aural sampling that includes sung blues as well as
splintered, seemingly overheard exclamations and exchanges. What is strik-
ing is the implied proposition that the spoken black vernacular can provide
60 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 72 ---
the material of a modernist lyric poetics—without mediation, without ele-
vation, without any of the rareﬁed quirks that are so often taken to connote
“poetry.”
This is not to say that Fine Clothes abandons framing devices. The book
opens with a prefatory gesture, “A Note on the Blues” designed to instruct
the reader in the peculiarities of the form:
The ﬁrst eight and the last nine poems in this book are written after
the manner of the Negro folks-songs known as Blues. The Blues, un-
like the Spirituals, have a strict poetic pattern: one long line repeated
and a third line to rhyme with the ﬁrst two. Sometimes the second
line in repetition is slightly changed and sometimes, but very seldom,
it is omitted. The mood of the Blues is almost always despondency,
but when they are sung people laugh.
The preface announces the structure of the book to be itself framed by the
blues poems it contains, a form whose “inescapable persistence” returns at
the end of the volume.
97 This framing is itself doubled, since the ﬁrst poem
(“Hey!”) and the last poem (“Hey! Hey!”) inFine Clothes are succinct com-
panion pieces that frame the book within the temporal space of a single
night: “Sun’s a settin’...W onder what the blues’ll bring?” opens the ﬁrst,
whereas the second echoes, “Sun’s a risin’, / This is gonna be my song.”
98
Since the unmediated blues poems imply a certain recording or transcrip-
tion of a performance, it is important that the “Note” emphasizes that the
poems are “written after the manner of” the blues—not ethnographic re-
productions of a given blues context, but a written form that aims at the
“mood” of that context in a way that may have a complex and even
transformative relation to it. That is, if the blues poem suggests a transcrip-
tion, it also suggests the graphic particularities of a musical score: a writing
that precedes and structures a performance rather than follows and records
it. One might add that the blues involves a split between affect and recep-
tion: its “mood” is sorrow—or more precisely melancholia, as Jahan Rama-
zani argues—but its performance triggers the release of laughter in the au-
dience.
99
In his autobiography The Big Sea (1940), Hughes explains that Fine
Clothes was mainly about black working class culture: its voices are those of
“workers, roustabouts, and singers, and job hunters on Lenox Avenue in
New York, or Seventh Street in Washington or South State in Chicago—
VARIA TIONS ON A PREFACE 61


--- PAGE 73 ---
people up today and down tomorrow, working this week and ﬁred the next,
beaten and bafﬂed, but determined not to be wholly beaten, buying furni-
ture on the installment plan, ﬁlling the house with roomers to help pay the
rent, hoping to get a new suit for Easter—and pawning that suit before the
Fourth of July.”
100 The book moves through ﬁve sections (titled “Blues,”
“Railroad Avenue,” “Glory! Hallelujah!,” “Beale Street Love,” “From the
Georgia Roads,” “And Blues”), traveling through what Robert Stepto terms
the “symbolic geography” of sacred and secular, urban and rural spaces in
African American life in the ﬁrst decades of the twentieth century. Even in
this controlled progress, though, Fine Clothes jumps and skips at various
points, shifting register, articulating a black symbolic geography in unex-
pected ways. Hughes would write elsewhere that the blues are para-
digmatically “songs you sing alone.”
101 But a number of the poems in the
volume (including “Closing Time,” “Brass Spittoons,” and “Mulatto”) de-
part from the single-voiced blues lyrics and experiment with many-voiced
interwoven constructions.
On a larger scale, the individual poems are situated in a broader poly-
vocality precisely through their contrasts—the interpoem “conversations”
the book performs in the way it is arranged. So one of the most controver-
sial pieces in the book, “Red Silk Stockings” (in which an unidentiﬁed
speaker instructs, “Put on yo’ red silk stockings, / Black gal / Go out an’ let
de white boys / Look at yo’ legs / ...A n ’tomorrow’s chile’ll / Be a high
yaller”) is undeniably inﬂammatory when taken as an isolated statement.
But it is provocative in a different manner when it is read next to the poem
that precedes it, “Mulatto” (with its repeated refrain—“I am your son, white
man!”—interspersed with the father’s rejection—“You are my son! / Like
hell!”—and another gnawing, intermittent voice—“What’s the body of your
mother?”). And the confrontation in “Mulatto” is tempered in turn by the
subtle ethics of the poem that comes before it, “Magnolia Flowers.” There a
speaker searches for “ﬂowers” but instead ﬁnds “this corner / Full of ugli-
ness.” The description of the search for magnolias is interrupted by a re-
peated plea for forgiveness (“’Scuse me, / I didn’t mean to stump ma toe on
you, lady”) that seems to form—even as it interrupts, or “stumps its toe” on
the body of the poem—a fragile model for ethical interaction in a context
of gendered violence.
102 In other words, the dynamics of framing operate si-
multaneously at the level of the book (its prefaces and divisions), between
62 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 74 ---
poems (in contrast, juxtaposition, or echoing), and within poems (in care-
fully layered polyvocality).
These three poems all appear in the section of Fine Clothes called “From
the Georgia Roads.” The poem that follows “Red Silk Stockings” appears to
break dramatically from that context, and indeed to break the frame of the
book as a whole. Rather than the blues context of violence and labor in the
U.S. South, we are offered “Jazz Band in a Parisian Cabaret”:
Play that thing,
Jazz band!
Play it for the lords and ladies,
For the dukes and counts,
For the whores and gigolos,
For the American millionaires,
And the school teachers
Out for a spree.
Play it,
Jazz band!
You know that tune
That laughs and cries at the same time.
You know it.
May I?
Mais oui.
Mein Gott!
Parece una rumba.
Play it, jazz band!
You’ve got seven languages to speak in
And then some,
Even if you do come from Georgia.
Can I go home wid yuh, sweetie?
Sure.
103
Apparently Hughes wrote the poem in early 1924, when he was a twenty-
two year old expatriate scraping by in Paris working as a dishwasher at a
club in Montmartre called Le Grand Duc. Founded three years earlier,
Le Grand Duc had been purchased that winter by the African American
boxer and sometimes drummer Eugene Bullard, who had joined the French
VARIA TIONS ON A PREFACE 63


--- PAGE 75 ---
Légion Etrangère to ﬁght in World War I (eventually becoming the only
black pilot in the Lafayette Escadrille, a squadron of U.S. ﬁghter pilots
ﬁghting for the French), and then stayed in Paris. When the headliner, Afri-
can American singer Florence Embry Jones, left that spring to open a new
club down the street called Chez Florence, Bullard hired a relative un-
known from Harlem named Ada Smith, who would soon be one of the
most famous entertainers in Paris, performing under a nickname that paid
tribute to her red hair: “Bricktop.” Le Grand Duc became known as an af-
ter-hours joint: “when all the other clubs were closed,” Hughes explains,
“the best of the musicians and entertainers from various other smart places
would often drop into the Grand Duc, and there’d be a jam session until
seven or eight in the morning—only in 1924 they had no such name for
it.”
104 The musicians included the trumpeter Cricket Smith, the drummer
Buddy Gilmore, pianist Arthur “Dooley” Wilson, violinist Louis Jones,
singers Mabel Mercer and Sophie T ucker, the dancer Louis Douglas, and
pianist Palmer Jones (Florence’s husband). The audiences at Le Grand Duc
seemingly drew every celebrity in Paris: Mistinguett, Louis Aragon, the
Prince of Wales, Fred Astaire, Charlie Chaplin, Fatty Arbuckle, Gloria
Swanson, Nora Baynes, Fannie Ward, Nancy Cunard, Jimmy Walker, Er-
nest Hemingway, F . Scott Fitzgerald, Robert McAlmon, Cole Porter, Man
Ray, Kiki, and Kojo T ovalou Houénou.
105
“Jazz Band in a Parisian Cabaret” is a singular evocation of Hughes’s ex-
patriate experience. But what is it doing in Fine Clothes? First of all, the
poem links jazz as a music—“that tune that laughs and cries at the same
time”—to the doubled-edged description of blues in the book’s prefatory
“Note.” It reminds us that the two forms were not always easily distinguish-
able in the 1920s. Indeed, in recounting his months working in Le Grand
Duc, Hughes’s autobiography refers to the jazz musicians who played at the
club, but calls their music blues:
Blues in the rue Pigalle. Black and laughing, heartbreaking blues in
the Paris dawn, pounding like a pulse-beat, moving like the Missis-
sippi!...
Play it, Mister Palmer Jones! Lawd! Lawd! Lawd! Play it, Buddy
Gilmore! What you doin’ to them drums? Man, you gonna bust your
diamond studs in a minute!
106
64 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 76 ---
The new word “jazz” pulls the blues poems of Fine Clothes out of their
frame, out of the conﬁnes of black performance spaces in the United States.
In other words, if poems such as “Railroad Avenue” and “Bound No’th
Blues” articulate a migrancy particular to U.S. spaces, “Jazz Band in a Pari-
sian Cabaret”—with its “new vocable” for the music—tugs that allusion to
black modern mobility into another register, now transnational. The caba-
ret is an “amphibious space” of situational, temporary mobility in a number
of senses: not only in nationality and language, but also class (allowing in-
teraction and seduction among the European aristocracy, new American
“millionaires,” middle-class professionals “out for a spree,” and the musi-
cians themselves).
107 That mobility is at the same time a quality in the mu-
sic as well, mirrored in jazz’s ability to change its affective implications, to
“laugh and cry at the same time.”
The indented lines in four languages can be read on a number of levels.
On the one hand, they are a recording:
May I?
Mais oui.
Mein Gott!
Parece una rumba.
Four voices in the audience of a cosmopolitan cabaret like Le Grand Duc—
disparate responses, sounded: an English speaker inviting someone to
dance or requesting a cigarette; a French speaker’s afﬁrmative reply; a Ger-
man speaker’s exclamation of shock or surprise (“My God!”); an analysis
and re-contextualization in Spanish (“It sounds like a rumba”). This poly-
vocal strategy is one that Hughes experimented with in a few other poems
around the same time, all in an effort to capture the particular aural over-
load of a club scene. The best known may be another poem evoking the
late-night jam sessions in Le Grand Duc, “The Cat and the Saxophone (2
a.m.),” which appeared in Hughes’s ﬁrst book, The Weary Blues (1926). It
interweaves the lyric transcription of a dialogue with lines from the 1924
song “Everybody Loves My Baby, But My Baby Don’t Love Nobody But
Me,” written by Jack Palmer and Spencer Williams:
Say!
everybody
VARIA TIONS ON A PREFACE 65


--- PAGE 77 ---
Yes?
wants my baby
I’m your
but my baby
sweetie, ain’t I?
don’t want nobody
Sure.
108
But like the lines in “The Cat and the Saxophone,” the multilingualism
in “Jazz Band” may be an effort not just to capture a conversation, but also
to describe the workings of the music itself. In this poetics, jazz is deﬁned as
“communication,” as Hughes puts it elsewhere: the lyric draws on many
languages to represent the music’s dialogic qualities (thus, each language
ﬁgures the speciﬁc intonation and expressive mode of a given instrument in
the music’s fabric).
109 The many languages in the poem are a means of ap-
prehending a music so intimately concerned with dialogue and exchange
among a group of performers and the audience that it can be approached
only through a kind of critical multilingualism.
110 As Duke Ellington writes
in his foreword to The Encyclopedia of Jazz: “I don’t think there are enough
words in the English language to do all of this right, and unless a man has a
grasp of other languages it may be impossible for him to ﬁnd the nuances
and subtleties, the varying degrees of quality, in music.”
111
This is also a poetics of universality, to return to the terms of Johnson’s
preface to The Book of American Negro Poetry. Jazz “plays it” for a range of
audiences that is wide, if not potentially unbounded: “You’ve got seven lan-
guages to speak in / And then some.” Or as Hughes writes about the blues,
the music has “something that goes beyond race or sectional limits, that ap-
peals to the ear and heart of people everywhere.”
112 At the same time, the
music embodies the particular: if it speaks to everyone, it also always speaks
for the place it “come[s] from.” And that place inescapably carries certain
connotations in the midst of what Bricktop called le tumulte noir, the
exoticist craze in Paris for all things black. Thus the somewhat sneering
tone to the qualiﬁer that follows: “Even if you do come from Georgia.”
This is of course another sort of framing. (It may also be a way of moving
from the ﬁgurative register back to the descriptive: the lines may be a re-
minder that Eugene Bullard himself was originally from Georgia—a re-
minder that the poem speaks to a particular context,a Parisian Cabaret and
66 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 78 ---
only one: Le Grand Duc. This may likewise be the reason that the next line
is the only moment in the poem that implies a black Southern vernacular:
“Can I go homewid yuh, sweetie?”) But like the other framings I have elab-
orated, the poem undoes the very frame it sets up, since it places “Georgia”
in Paris. It articulates the “blues in the rue Pigalle” that are “moving like
the Mississippi.” These imaginative shifts transform and expand the con-
tours of the symbolic geography of black modern culture that Fine Clothes
articulates.
Also indented, the last lines of the poem can be read as a recording, too.
“Can I go home wid yuh, sweetie? / Sure”: the transcription of two voices
in a successful seduction, a mutual agreement to “go home” together. But
they are also an approach to the music, in a poem that is ﬁrst of all an apos-
trophe—a form of lyric that calls out to the lyric, words that demand and
beckon music (“Play it, jazz band”). The poem performs the intimacy, the
erotics, of a sound that travels: what in the music takes you “home,” and
goes “home” with you. In other words, these last lines attempt to hold at
least two things together in a fragile balance: on the one hand, an individ-
ual listener’s affective connection to the music, and, on the other, the col-
lectivity of listeners the music allows, the connections it fosters.
Does “Jazz Band in a Parisian Cabaret” imagine that collectivity in any
broader sense? Does it represent anything that might approach Jane
Nardal’sinternationalisme noir? T o ask such a question, of course, is to sug-
gest a complex articulation of the disparate instances of formalist strategies
I have outlined here: to suggest a link among discursive practices that aim
(at a wide variety of points in a transnational print culture) to frame black-
ness as an object of knowledge beyond the nation-state. Next to the po-
lemics of Senghor and Johnson, the diasporic gestures of Lacascade and
Hughes seem no more than whispers: a footnote in a novel, a few lines of a
lyric. In “Jazz Band,” one might say that the smallest frame is just a hint,
even a mishearing: the possibility that in the ﬁrst two indented lines of the
poem (“May I?/Mais oui”), the English reader is asked to hallucinate the
joint of collectivity in a bilingual pun. “May I?” might also ask us to mis-
hear the next line, written in French, as its English homophone: May we.
We are back where we started, with the complexities of linguistic differ-
ence. This effect would be the smallest hint of a broader coming together in
the popular good-time spaces of the vogue nègre, in the guise of a corrective:
don’t ask for yourself alone (“May I?”)—we’re going to dancetogether. Even
VARIA TIONS ON A PREFACE 67


--- PAGE 79 ---
if the poem is written in many languages, this hint can be heard only by its
primary readership: it is audible only for an English speaker because it is
produced by partage, a nonsignifying difference between languages.
113 But
for an English-speaking audience, in the “yes” (oui) there is at once a fore-
shadowing of community—the sound of the afﬁrmation that brings “us”
together, the articulation of a connection across difference—and also the
kernel of what cannot be carried over: the sound of another tongue. At the
smallest level, then, in the play of that productive ambivalence where “Jazz
Band” breaks the book’s frame to reach Paris “from the Georgia roads,” the
possibility of black internationalism is heard to be a matter of music.
68 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 80 ---
CHAPTER 2
ON RECIPROCITY:
RENÉ MARAN AND ALAIN LOCKE
I
n the fall of 1921, Batouala, the ﬁrst novel by an obscure Martinican
poet named René Maran, was awarded the Prix Goncourt, the most pres-
tigious literary prize in France.1 The next year a rather unhappy transla-
tion by Adele Seltzer was published in New York, and the novel garnered a
rush of attention particularly in the African American press, even though—
as Hubert Harrison lamented in one review—“the ﬁne Gallic ﬂavor of
Batouala has evaporated from the English version.”
2 What is remarkable
about the black U.S. reception of Batouala is that it received rave reviews
from all quarters of the “New Negro” movement. Charles Chesnutt called
the novel a “triumph”; Alain Locke extolled its “bold realism,” and later
added that its inﬂuence was “educative and emancipating” for the “younger
generation” of African American writers.
3 The inaugural issue of Opportu-
nity in January 1923 boasted that the journal would tell “more about
René Maran.” In the Crisis (which featured a portrait of Maran on its
May 1922 cover), Jessie Fauset praised the “almost cinema-like sharpness”
of this “great novel,” commenting that Maran—who had been working
since 1909 as an administrator in the French Central African colony of
Ubangi-Shari (in what is now the Central African Republic)—had “lived
with these people many years and he tells with a wealth of detail and great
plainness what he has seen.”
4 Another notice in the Crisis gushed, “The
whole world is reading it!”5 At the same time, Robert Machray, William H.
Ferris, J. A. Rogers, and Hubert Harrison lauded Batouala in Marcus
Garvey’s newspaper, theNegro World, and Garvey himself opened the 1922
convention of the Universal Negro Improvement Association by citing
Maran’s book as proof of “the universality of the dissatisfaction that now
exists among far-seeing, self-respecting Negroes, over the mis-Government
and exploitation that is carried on in Africa.”
6 T wo years later, W . E. B. Du
Bois would echo his nationalist nemesis, writing that Maran’s “attack on


--- PAGE 81 ---
France” inBatouala “marks an era. Never before have Negroes criticized the
work of the French in Africa.”7
T o take account of the impact of Batouala at the dawn of the “Harlem
Renaissance” would mean reconﬁguring the accepted cartography of black
literary modernism. It would mean coming to terms with a black New York
journalistic reception that took a French Caribbean colonial bureaucrat for
an “‘African’ point of reference”(point de répère africain), as Michel Fabre
phrases it.
8 It would mean considering Maran’s own adamant articulation
of diaspora, his insistence—in the preface to Batouala—that his ﬁction
would have relevance because prejudice and violence in the U.S. South (as
well as the postwar debates about the presence of French African soldiers
guarding the German front) had made “the Negro question” apropos:
“Mon livre n’est pas de polémique. Il vient, par hasard, à son heure. La
question nègre est ‘actuelle.’ Qui a voulu qu’il en fût ainsi? Mais les Améri-
cains. Mais les campagnes des journaux d’outre-Rhin” (“My book is not a
polemic. It comes, by chance, when its hour strikes. The Negro question is
‘of the moment.’ Who made it thus? Why, the Americans. Why, the press
campaigns on the other side of the Rhine”).
9 It would mean asking, indeed,
how a book that proclaims itself timely, a book written in Africa that links
itself to America and to Europe, a book that claims a certain applicability to
“la question nègre” might not be “polemic.” It would mean theorizing a
Francophone mode of framing blackness, a Caribbean approach to the
formalist manipulation of the preface.
It would also mean taking account of the peculiar role of Maran’s novel
in its particular literary ﬁeld, in the development of what came to be called
“colonial literature” in France, an emergent tradition that African American
critics such as Locke and Fauset were following with great interest. How
much do Batouala’s internationalist take on “the Negro question” and its
critique of colonialism stand out in French literature of the period? How
exceptional is Maran’s book? In fact, although early colonial anthologies in
French such as Blaise Cendrars’s 1921Anthologie nègre are obviously trans-
national in the simplest sense, in that they extend their gaze beyond the
borders of France itself, it is possible to argue that in this orientation they
are nonetheless not international, for they begin and end obsessed with the
modernity of France, peering out at what is imagined to be an African
Other. The colonies, in other words, are presented at best as a culture or
“backward” civilization and put more or less directly in juxtaposition to the
70 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 82 ---
modernity of the French national culture. (In this operation, African civili-
zations are never described as having anything in common with the mod-
ern European nation-state.) So the possibility of internationality is at best a
lacuna. But as T oni Morrison has pointed out, “invisible things are not nec-
essarily ‘not there’....[C]ertain absences are so stressed, so ornate, so
planned, they call attention to themselves; arrest us with intentionality and
purpose, like neighborhoods that are deﬁned by the population held away
from them.”
10
In French colonial literature, internationality is this kind of “arresting,”
constitutive gap. It is not a passive absence, but the force that must be
pushed away and controlled in the service of a greater project: the cultural
representation of France to the French. Colonial literature turns its at-
tention to the colonies with the aim of “worlding a world,” in Gayatri
Chakravorty Spivak’s phrase—shaping a blank and indeﬁnite France d’outre
mer into the inscribed and deﬁnite entity of la plus grande France. Inter-
nationality and difference must be swallowed in the service of an expansive,
anthropophagic nationalism. This is an epistemic violence because it must
take for granted that the ground it claims is history-less, is uninscribed.
11
And any articulation that attempts to demonstrate otherwise—to argue
that Africa or Asia already is inscribed by culture or that natives be framed
in other ways (by race sentiment or by class consciousness)—is an immedi-
ate challenge to such a project. Thus, just as the competing British empire
represents a threat to the linguistic and cultural dominance of France over
its colonies, likewise any hint of black internationalism represents another
kind of threat to this dominance—perhaps even more of a threat, in the
end, since black internationalism imperiled not just France’s colonial pos-
sessions, but also one of France’s main ways of deﬁning itself. So it should
be noted that the framing gestures of the early anthologies such as Cen-
drars’s, which present African culture as primitive and studiously ignore les
nègres elsewhere in the world, are the other side of the coin of the colo-
nial administration’s efforts to prevent black U.S. papers such as Marcus
Garvey’sNegro World from seeping into the colonies.
Cendrars’sAnthologie nègre is the direct descendant of nineteenth-cen-
tury European travel narratives and early ethnography.
12 René Maran later
would term the approach of such work anthroponégrisme: the vulgar collec-
tion of black cultural and biological “data,” with a prevailing and almost
bureaucratic pretension to objectivity, in a manner that at once exoticizes
ON RECIPROCITY: RENÉ MARAN AND ALAIN LOCKE 71


--- PAGE 83 ---
and distances the black subject into a premodern or infantile specimen. 13
Often this anthropologizing frame amounts to no more than the most
crude Western technique of distancing or retarding black culture in order
to consolidate certain ideas of a racialized European modernity—in this
sense, it is not unconnected to strategies that Edward Said has categorized
with the term Orientalism.
14 The innovative French ethnographer and au-
tobiographer Michel Leiris wrote later that Cendrars’s book was one of the
opening forays of the vogue nègre in the 1920s: “More than a book, this was
an act,” Leiris proclaimed.
15 And the Anthologie nègre is as sensationalist as
this statement suggests: it is composed of already-published, sloppily trans-
lated, poorly organized “facts” and documents (often of questionable valid-
ity in the ﬁrst place) culled from travel journals and collections by previous
European voyagers in Africa. The anthology’s success speaks more to the
demands of the period for any “exotic” material at all than for any quality
in the book itself.
Cendrars’s preface is almost amusingly thin. In a page and a half, he
makes no effort at all to collate his jumbled excerpts or to situate the reader
and, in fact, opens inauspiciously by apologizing that the translations are so
poor. “The present volume is a compilation,” he explains. “I have repro-
duced these tales just as the missionaries and explorers brought them back
to us in Europe and just as they published them. They are not always the
most original versions, nor the most faithful translations.”
16 But what be-
comes evident in the somewhat surprising lack in the book of any mention
of black art or culture in the United States or in the Americas in general
is indeed the very purpose of this “act.” Paul Morand, another popular
French writer on exotic subjects in the 1920s, punctuated his review of the
Anthologie nègre by noting that it “brought back to black art [l’art nègre]a
public that other manifestations had distanced.”
17 Cendrars’s framing not
only projects its own disorganization onto its subject’s “primitivism,” but
moreover is also concerned to battle against those “other manifestations”:
the emerging evidence of a transnational black modern culture. So the very
possibility of a black internationalism plays a central role in the Anthologie
nègre in the way it is not voiced, in the way it is silenced. This compilation,
in other words, even as it plays a part in thevogue nègre right alongside early
jazz, African art, and emergent Francophone and Harlem Renaissance liter-
ature, quite deliberately attempts to push out of the picture the “manifesta-
tions” of a black modern expressive culture that had scandalized, titillated,
72 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 84 ---
and ultimately “distanced” the French public—precisely because the prox-
imity and inﬂuence of that culture posed an immediate threat to the tradi-
tion of imagining a reassuringly distant and backward African.
A different debate started to develop, though, in the medium of such
framing gestures, about the efﬁcacy of the old French colonial policy of as-
similation, which, unlike the British policy, actively tried to cultivate a na-
tive elite harvested from the best and brightest black French citizens of
West African society. Inhabitants of the Four Communes of Dakar, Saint
Louis, Gorée, and Ruﬁsque in Senegal were given voting privileges and citi-
zenship rights, but the overwhelming majority of French West African “na-
tives” (indigènes) were disenfranchised “subjects” and actually fell under a
different, harsher set of legal strictures—the notorious indigénat—than
black or white French citizens.
18 Increasingly the black African elite had
been brought to the metropole to be educated in French schools. Although
the policy of assimilation depended on an unwieldy centralization of the
colonial administration and on the exploitation of the African peasantry
through forced labor in extravagant “public” construction projects and
forced conscription in World War I, the French collaboration with the na-
tive elite allowed France to claim that it was antiracist in philosophy and
practice and that it was “civilizing” the natives as quickly as possible.
But in the wake of Colonial Minister Albert Sarraut’s project for the
“Mise en Valeur” of the African colonies, announced in early 1921, which
envisioned a great wave of construction of ports, railroads, highways, and
irrigation systems in order to increase the economic yield of the posses-
sions, critiques of French “native policy” became louder and louder.
19 The
critique emanated from an odd couple: a loose and shifting alliance of
former and current French colonial administrators (Pierre Mille, André
Demaison, Gaston Joseph) and, later on, the early French ethnographers
(especially students of Marcel Mauss and Lucien Levy-Bruhl), fast becom-
ing an academic force in their own right.
20 This coalition was institutional-
ized with the creation of the Institut d’Ethnologie in 1925 and led directly
to the re-formation (carried out by Georges Henri Rivière and Paul Rivet)
of the Musée d’Ethnologie-T rocadéro into the Musée de l’Homme in the
1930s.
21 These scholars and administrators began to argue that Africans
were not unformed savages to be molded into Frenchmen, but instead peo-
ple with a long history and a rich civilization, albeit a primitive or “back-
ward” one. For example, Maurice Delafosse, another former colonial minis-
ON RECIPROCITY: RENÉ MARAN AND ALAIN LOCKE 73


--- PAGE 85 ---
ter who published a number of books on African culture and civilization in
the 1920s, wrote: “We now have a much clearer and broader idea of the ex-
istence, alongside and outside of our society, of other societies, each of
whom has its civilization, its own aspirations, its special needs as we do our-
selves; and no one can now deny to these societies, however different they
may be from French society, the right to maintain their civilization, to real-
ize their aspirations, to provide for their needs, according to their genius
[génie] and temperament.” 22 As Raymond Leslie Buell noted a few years
later in The Native Problem in Africa: “There is a growing recognition in
France, as well as elsewhere, that because of environment and heredity, it is
impossible to convert a native into a Frenchman simply by teaching him
the French language and by giving him a few years in a French school.”
23
The weight of publications supporting this revisionist culturalist argu-
ment accrued in the early part of the decade, with increasingly comprehen-
sive and encyclopedic works by authors including Delafosse, Demaison,
Louis Huot, Lucien Levy-Bruhl, Robert Delavignette, and Leo Frobenius
appearing in Paris in rapid-ﬁre succession.
24 This social science attack on
the philosophy behind assimilation led to calls for drastic reform, for a
“new native policy,” as Delafosse put it, which
will take as a point of departure the accurate and profound recogni-
tion of native societies and as an aim the maintenance and the rein-
forcement of these societies and of everything in their institutions and
moral development, it being well understood that this development
will have as a corollary the development of our own civilization.
The rights of native groups on the soil which they occupy should
be recognized; these groups should be given every necessary guarantee
that they may enjoy these rights in liberty and security. Respect
should be accorded to their traditional customs in everything that is
not contrary, not to our ideal of civilization, but to the welfare of the
native societies themselves; native law should be justly applied to local
tradition, education should be adapted to native needs and aspira-
tions, and this policy should be accompanied by necessary measures
for the improvement of the native health and for native economic de-
velopment.
25
Such a seemingly generous concept of “indirect rule” or association did not
transform colonial policy in French West Africa—the economic stakes were
74 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 86 ---
too high, ﬁrst of all, and the racist ideology that required a “backward” Af-
rican other was too deeply entrenched.
Ironically, this reformist assault met some of its toughest resistance from
many of the évolués—the “evolved” African and Antillean elite—who had
both a vested interest and an ideological commitment to a colonialism
based on the principle of making a small and privileged minority of black
“natives” into Frenchmen. A number of scholars have pointed out the para-
doxes of the shift in French policy from assimilation to association, and
some have asserted that indeed the anthropological argument was only in-
cidental to more basic imperial concerns: “France’s reassessment was moti-
vated more by a desire to contain the évolués in particular, and to re-estab-
lish authority among their subjects in general, than by any intrinsic interest
in either African civilizations or democratization.”
26 So association in prac-
tice came to refer to a shift in emphasis away from the education of the
évolués, who were considered too independent and “undisciplined,” threat-
ening both traditional social structures and colonial power, and toward
a renewed cooperation with the old African elites—religious authorities,
chieftains, and ruling notables—whom the French attempted to use as in-
termediaries in the colonial exploitation of the masses.
It is seldom noticed that the colonial administration’s wariness of the
évolués was a reaction to the Pan-African Congress movement in the early
1920s as much as a result of French ethnographic scholarship. The French
were worried that the Pan-African Congresses could foment new revolts, es-
pecially in the West African colonies, and the policy decision around assim-
ilation and association was largely hashed out in communiqués between
Paris and Dakar in the wake of black internationalist stirrings. The admin-
istration often viewed Pan-Africanism as a force effectively in collusion
with international communism, which was already attempting to aid anti-
colonial movements in the European colonies. In one such memo from the
fall of 1921, the Governor General wrote that
[t]he ideas of emancipation, which the backers of the anti-European
movement are attempting to spread in Africa, are obviously destined
to create illusions among the young educated blacks [ les jeunes noirs
lettrés], agents of the administration or of commerce, who desire to
equal the white man....O nt h eother hand, new impressions have
been stimulated amongst the masses, who up until now have stayed
ON RECIPROCITY: RENÉ MARAN AND ALAIN LOCKE 75


--- PAGE 87 ---
attached to the land and to their ancient customs, by the accounts of
liberated soldiers or of soldiers returned from trips to the metropole
or to the coastal cities. ...I tthus behooves us to confront these un-
healthy stimuli [excitations malsaines] with the notions of order and
social discipline, which should direct the evolution of the black races
[des races noires] and preserve Africa from upheavals, whose certain ef-
fect would be to annihilate the work of civilization that has begun, re-
turning the continent to its ancient barbarism.
27
The Ministre des Colonies was so fearful that news of the Pan-African gath-
ering in particular might reach “the natives” that a memo was sent to each
of the colonial governors in Africa, asking for reports on the effects of the
congress and on the “state of mind”(état d’esprit)of the masses.
28
Even within the parameters of such a debate on colonial policy, then, the
very idea of a particular black modern culture remains a lacuna, still the
possibility that must be concealed or pushed away. Writing in 1931, André
Demaison insists that there once existed an African literature, not just oral
but written, but describes only the far-off “classical” literature written cen-
turies earlier in Arabic and a few West African languages, for example,
without noting that Africans had begun to write in European languages as
well.
29 In the 1922 Les Noirs de l’Afrique,one of the ﬁrst works synthesizing
the material on the history of African civilization, Maurice Delafosse goes
so far as to present his book as a possible “preface” to a black modernity—
but that possibility is necessarily out of the book’s scope, displaced to some
unspeciﬁed future moment. First and foremost, one must consider the
question of the origins of African civilization, Delafosse says. In fact, his
opening chapter goes on to argue that the black populations originated in
Oceania and only later migrated to Africa—so “African culture” is not even
originally African. Then he quickly limits the scope of his inquiry, saying
that he will not be writing about the “important role” played by “the white
race” (la race blanche) in the history of North Africa or about Islamic inﬂu-
ences on African societies. He frames his object as a “pure” and purely con-
tinental black culture: “the civilizations and the material, intellectual, and
social characters of Negro populations [populations de race noire] living on
the African continent.” This means of course that the book will not speak
of other parts of the world that “possess blacks [Nègres],” in particular “the
countries, such as America, where the appearance of the Negro race [la race
76 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 88 ---
noire] only occurred in a recent era, following the generally involuntary mi-
grations whose genesis and circumstances we know.”30
Delafosse dispenses with this single mention of forced migration and the
slave trade on the second page and never suggests that this history “whose
genesis and circumstances we know” might have any impact on the African
civilization he goes on to describe so neatly. On the contrary, he then is
conveniently able to describe African civilization as “isolated” in a manner
that consolidates French modernity even as it laments African history as
distant and divorced from the world, sadly deprived of cultural contact
aside from the Arab and European slave trades, which were invasive and
oppressive and thus not conducive to growth:
But the Negroes of Africa [les Noirs de l’Afrique], through no fault of
their own, have had the disastrous misfortune of not being able to
evolve as the other great human races have. Whereas, for centuries,
the descendants of our ancestors the Gauls found themselves con-
stantly in contact with populations more evolved or differently
evolved than themselves, but from a civilization contemporary to
their own, and they were able, taking from some, being inspired by
others, to become the French of today, during the same period the
unfortunate blacks [les malheureux Nègres] were almost completely
isolated from humanity.
31
So Delafosse’s own rhetorical dismissal of the disparate cultural inﬂu-
ences on Africa becomes a sign of European sophistication, on the one
hand, and more slyly an apology for reformed colonialism (as an avenue for
Africa to the cultural “contact” necessary for “evolution”). At this point, at
the other end, he can close his work with the following paragraph, a re-
markable twist in French colonial strategies of framing:
The isolation in which natural barriers have shut off the environment
of the blacks of Africa [des Nègres de l’Afrique] for too long has made
them backward [des arriérés] or, more precisely, belated [des attardés]
in relation to the more favored Europeans: they have lost a great deal
of time, and will not be able to catch up in a day or even in a century.
But they certainly have not said their last word, and their history
is not ﬁnished. Perhaps it is only beginning, and this book is but a
ON RECIPROCITY: RENÉ MARAN AND ALAIN LOCKE 77


--- PAGE 89 ---
preface [Peut-être ne fait-elle que commencer et ce livre n’est-il qu’une
préface].32
This notion of African civilization as stunted due to isolation is an ar-
gument that depends to a large degree on Delafosse’s opening moves to
shut out any consideration of syncretism or cultural cross-fertilization. Of
course Africa is isolated if one cuts out Egypt, Islam, and Greece and de-
clines to discuss the slave trade! The book not only frames the history of
traditional African civilization with this gesture, but also concludes by
framing itself. Here are the origins, it says, here is the history—but the
story is not over. It may be just beginning. But if Delafosse’s book serves as
a “preface” to black modernity, that modernity is thereby distanced, de-
ferred, a time to come. “They will not be able to catch up in a day, or even
in a century”: the book thus ﬁrmly closes its frame to any contemporary
black modern culture through the very underhanded gesture which pa-
tronizingly admits the possibility of such an “unﬁnished” history.
Raoul Girardet has argued that the increasingly nuanced claims ex-
pounded in such works of early French ethnology and colonial reform were
not only supported by the cultural waves of the vogue nègre, but in fact pre-
ceded and introduced by the ﬁrst stirrings of the “colonial novel” even be-
fore the war, with works such as Victor Segalen’s Les Immémoriaux (1907)
and the Tharaud brothers’ La Fête arabe (1912).
33 René Maran, in a 1929
entry on “French African Literature” for the Encyclopaedia Britannica,
makes no mention of the few Africans who had published in French
(Ahmadou Mapaté Diagne, Kojo T ovalou Houénou, Bakary Diallo,
Lamine Senghor), but instead basically offers a list of colonial literature, of
what might more accurately be termed “French Literature about Africa,”
including not just novels but also nonﬁction such as Lucie Cousturier’sDes
Inconnus chez moi (1920) and André Gide’s Voyage au Congo (1928). He
notes moreover that ﬁction like his own work and that of the Tharaud
brothers, Gaston Joseph, Demaison, and the Leblonds has “also contrib-
uted to the researches of such men as Delafosse, Bruel and missionaries of
all classes, lay, military, commercial and religious.”
34 “French African Liter-
ature” is deﬁned here, then, neither as African nor as simply ﬁction: it indi-
cates a cross-genre compendium of writings about the dark continent.
What becomes apparent in such material might be described as a facet of
a cultural ﬁeld even broader than Maran’s already broad deﬁnition. In the
78 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 90 ---
1920s, there developed a multidisciplinary and relatively ﬂexible apparatus
for framing les nègres, combining popular cultural and administrative and
academic techniques. The novel approaches social science, anthropology
ﬂirts with ﬁction, and jazz itself is viewed even by the most perceptive Pari-
sian listeners not as an expression of a “black counterculture of modernity,”
but more as an “African” ethnographic event, even as a sort of religious pos-
session ceremony. In this sleight of hand, American jazz—whether Mitch-
ell’s Jazz Kings holding court at the Casino de Paris from 1919 to 1923;
or Ada “Bricktop” Smith wowing the Prince of Wales with “Insufﬁcient
Sweetie” and “Miss Otis Regrets” at the Grand Duc; or Sydney Bechet’s ar-
rival on the scene in 1920 at the Théâtre de l’Apollo in Montmartre with
the Southern Syncopated Orchestra; or Copeland and MacHenry playing
the old Jockey Bar in Montmartre in 1923; or Josephine Baker and Bechet
in the legendary “Revue Nègre” at the Théâtre des Champs-Elysées in
1925—in any version, becomes a document of Africa.
For this reason, the group of French ethnographers who emerged in the
1920s had a singularly odd relationship to jazz. Looking back at his nights
spent roaming the Montmartre jazz clubs with Georges Bataille, Michel
Leiris would later comment famously that he considered jazz in Paris to be
the “première manifestation des nègres, mythe des édens de couleur qui
devait me mener jusqu’en Afrique et, par-delà l’Afrique, jusqu’à l’ethno-
graphie” (“ﬁrst manifestation of the blacks, myth of colored Edens which
were to lead me all the way to Africa, and, beyond Africa, to ethnogra -
phy”).
35 Other French intellectuals had more complex and more direct rela-
tions to black expressive culture in the 1920s, complicating the framing of
jazz as ethnographic document. For instance, Georges Henri Rivière, the
driving force in French museology and the emergence of the Musée de
l’Homme, was a passable pianist who often played at jam sessions at the in-
famous jazz club Le Boeuf sur le T oit. In 1926 Rivière even penned a frivo-
lous tune for Josephine Baker, who was performing at the Folies-Bergère.
While Baker danced, a singer dressed as an “academic” sighed, “Et ma tête
matin et soir / Est pleine d’idées noires / T out’les femmes veulent prendre
l’air / De Joséphine Baker.... ”( “ A n dmorning and night, my head / is full
of black ideas / All the women want to assume the airs / of Josephine
Baker”).
36 Most signiﬁcantly, in 1924 Rivière also served as the “music
critic” (critique musical) for Les Continents, the short-lived newspaper
founded and edited by Kojo T ovalou Houénou with René Maran, contrib-
ON RECIPROCITY: RENÉ MARAN AND ALAIN LOCKE 79


--- PAGE 91 ---
uting a couple of articles including a review of a classical concert by the
African American singer Roland Hayes. 37 But by 1928 Rivière stopped
playing music in public to concentrate on his museum work, entering the
institution that would become the Musée de l’Homme “as one enters a
religion.”
38
The best-known hint of Rivière’s prior diversions is a series of notably
strange photos taken in 1933, where Rivière and Josephine Baker ﬂirt
among African artifacts and musical instruments brought back by the Mis-
sion Dakar-Djibouti. In the photos, Rivière seems to offer Baker the instru-
ments in poses that at once frame her as female, black Other—“putting her
under glass” (en vitrine) as one commentator phrases it—and simulta-
neously envision the space of the museum as a space of play for two old
friends snickering at the erotic stereotypes of anthropological exoticism.
39
But this complexity stands outside the general tenor of the times—except
in the way its racial spectacle cobbles together unlikely faces and unlikely
spaces in the metropole. Overall, the history of the vogue nègre in the 1920s
80 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA
Josephine Baker
and Georges Henri
Rivière at the Mu-
sée de l’Homme,
1933
(photo by Lip-
nitski). Collection
Musée de l’Homme,
Paris.
[To view this image, refer to  
the print version of this title.]


--- PAGE 92 ---
can be read as instances of the articulation of an unwieldy framing appara-
tus—discontinuous and contradictory ones, at times announced with great
force and at times announced in ways that were awkward, if not sopho-
moric and downright ludicrous. René Maran’s Batouala enters this mine-
ﬁeld with a bang of its own.
Véritable Roman Nègre
Maran’sBatouala was described by one critic as “by no means a work of
art,” but another cultural artifact to be placed alongside early African
American jazz in Europe, galas of modernist primitivism such as the Fêtes
Nègres produced by the Comte de Beaumont after the war, avant-garde
music such as Poulenc’s Rhapsodie nègre (1917) and Stravinsky’s Ragtime
pour onze instruments (1918), exoticist literature including Robert Gofﬁn’s
jazz-inspired poems, and the early exhibitions of African and Oceanic art
arranged by collectors such as Paul Guillaume. In this extended ﬁeld,
Batouala was original only because it was a novel “écrit et pensé en nègre”
(“written and thought in nègre”). “We should have expected it,” the critic
continues. “After the invasion into our orchestras of that epileptic cacoph-
ony called jazz-band, where the mooing of car horns and the howls of delir-
ious darkies [moricauds en délire] are jumbled together; after the expositions
of puerile drawings and formless black statues [informes statues nègres], the
black novel [roman nègre] had to have its turn.”
40
It should come as no surprise that so much critical energy swirled
around Maran—not just in Harlem, but in Paris as well—when Batouala
was awarded the Prix Goncourt on December 14, 1921. For Batouala rep-
resents both the inception of the tradition of the colonial novel and the
great exception to that tradition. It is both formative and exorbitant for one
simple reason: because René Maran was, in the words of another journalist,
“lui-même, parait-il, un homme de couleur” (“himself, it would seem, a
man of color”).
41 Maran’s novel is not a rupture because it is especially radi-
cal in its style or insights. The conundrum and the provocation is packaged
in the book’s subtitle: “véritable roman nègre.” This seemingly innocuous
phrase speaks double, not exactly in the vocabulary of “double conscious-
ness” elaborated by Du Bois and Johnson, but in a manner that one might
term particularly Francophone.
On the one hand, the novel is véritable in the sense of being “true.” This
pretension to verisimilitude imposes parameters that become deﬁnitive for
ON RECIPROCITY: RENÉ MARAN AND ALAIN LOCKE 81


--- PAGE 93 ---
the genre: an obsession for absolute “cultural truth” that approaches a kind
of “psychological naturalism,” as Raoul Girardet puts it, often one with ex-
plicit claims to something like social science. Gaston Joseph’s Kofﬁ, roman
vrai d’un Noir(1922), a portrait of an obsequious “native” who works as as-
sistant and interpreter for a French colonial ofﬁcial, was considered to be
the ofﬁcial “anti-Batouala” novel and was coronated as such in 1924 with
the ﬁrst Grand Prix de la Littérature Coloniale—a new prize expressly con-
cocted to counter Maran’s Goncourt win.42 Nevertheless Joseph was forced
to challenge Batouala on Maran’s terms, the oxymoronic paradigm of the
“true novel.” As described in the preface by Gabriel Angoulvant, a former
governor of the colonies, Kofﬁ is “as its title indicates, the Novel of a Black
Man [le Roman d’un Noir], and I am tempted to say the History [l’Histoire],
because this is a true story [une histoire vraie], lived, exact in the smallest de-
tails: there is not one characteristic, one expression, one incident, one ad-
venture, that the author did not capture and note from life, on the spot [sur
le vif et sur place].”
43 This compulsion is echoed without exception through-
out the genre, as stressed for example in the preface by Jean and Jérôme
Tharaud to André Demaison’s 1923Diato, another novel ﬁlled to the brim
with “authentic” African tales, songs, and proverbs.
44 Maurice Delafosse’s
incensed review of Batouala focuses precisely on the novel’s claims to
“truth.” He contends that Maran would never have won the Goncourt if he
were white; indeed, he would have been prosecuted by the colonial admin-
istration for his libelous fabrications about the colonial situation. “Some
people,” Delafosse snarls, “are quite lucky to benègres.”
45 There were even a
number of anthropological works that sold themselves as “correctives” to
Batouala’s excesses, again purporting to offer the “truth” about conditions
in the colonies.
46
But on the other hand, Batouala is also véritable in that it is seen as being
“written in nègre”—it is the ﬁrst celebrated novel in French published by a
writer of African descent. 47 The problem with Batouala, however, is not
that it expresses some essential blackness or even some creole identity. The
problem is more simple: this very double “veritable-ness” challenges the
main assumption behind the multifaceted efforts at framing blackness, as
laid out in works such as Cendrars’sAnthologie, which works so hard to po-
sition les nègres as distant, primitive, isolated, and above all silent—anthro-
pological objects that never talk back. Batouala is a counter-“act” because
Maran’s novel is considered to representthe black modern speaking himself—
82 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 94 ---
a black voice that intervenes and that is inescapably metropolitan, current,
and independent.
In France, then, the double entendre of Maran’s subtitle stirred up a
great deal of consternation since the gesture was perceived as an interven-
tion and shift. As with the Pan-African movement, a number of commenta-
tors accused Batouala of anti-colonial “propaganda,” even charging that the
novel aimed to provoke rebellion in Africa.
48 It is interesting to note in con-
trast that in the black U.S. press the valence of Maran’s phrase was either
blatantly misunderstood by the reviewers (a surprising number) who sim-
ply assumed that Maran himself was a “contemporary African”49 or taken at
face value by reviewers such as Locke and Fauset. The latter wrote guile-
lessly that “Batouala is really what its sub-title indicates, a story of actual
Negro life (véritable roman nègre),” not seeming to notice that her transla-
tion does not at all capture the ambiguity of the French phrase.50
The subtlety of Maran’s gesture is a radical departure in the history of
colonial literature, and in the vogue nègre. Still, Batouala confounded
French critics also because Maran himself claimed repeatedly throughout
his career to have been wholly unaware of the radical implications of his
“act” in publishing the novel. Almost forty years later, it is still with some
puzzlement that Maran describes Batouala’s “non-conformisme, dont je ne
me rendais pas compte” (“non-conformity, which I did not realize”).
51 Al-
though many French critics read the book as a troubling expression of black
modernity—and worse, as a dangerous expression of diasporic solidarity
between educated French Caribbean citizens and peasant French African
subjects—what is exceptional about Batouala’s exceptionalism is precisely
the discrepancy between the novel’s orientation and its reception. Maran
does not identify himself as a “nègre” in the preface. Although he certainly
intends his novel both as a political intervention (into debates around colo-
nial reform) and as a stylistic shift (rejecting any romanticism in the colo-
nial novel), he does not seem to anticipate that the very specter of him—an
évolué Martinican colonial administrator, after all—writing about Africa
will be received as blasphemy and threat.
It must be emphasized that Batouala’s doubleness is reinforced at a for-
mal level. The fulcrum of the discrepancy lies in the often-noted shift in
tone and seeming shift in argument between the book’s preface, a ﬁerce dia-
tribe against French colonial abuses, and the story itself, in which the focus
is wholly placed on a decaying African traditional culture.
52 Compared
ON RECIPROCITY: RENÉ MARAN AND ALAIN LOCKE 83


--- PAGE 95 ---
to the tale of the chief Batouala’s betrayal at the hands of his favorite
wife Yassiguindiji and his best friend Bissibingui, Maran’s preface hits hard,
describing in excruciating detail the devastation of the Kemo region of
Ubangui-Shari in French Equatorial Africa caused by persistent famine and
forced labor:
Civilisation, civilisation, orgueil des Européens, et leur charnier d’in-
nocents. ...T ubâtis ton royaume sur des cadavres. Quoi que tu
veuilles, quoi que tu fasses, tu te meus dans le mensonge. A ta vue, les
larmes de sourdre et la douleur de crier. T u es la force qui prime le
droit. T u n’es pas un ﬂambeau, mais un incendie. T out ce à quoi tu
touches, tu le consumes....(11)
Civilization, civilization, pride of the Europeans, and their slaughter-
house of innocents....Y o ubuild your kingdom on top of corpses.
Whatever you want, whatever you do, you are mired in lies. At the
mere sight of you, eyes well up with tears and cries break out. You are
the force that supersedes right. You are not a torch, but a conﬂa-
gration. You consume whatever you touch....
T o French readers used to the romantic exoticism of Pierre Mille and Pierre
Bonardi, these words were a slap in the face. When Batouala became a
bestseller and was awarded the Goncourt—which Proust’s A l’ombre des
jeunes ﬁlles en ﬂeurs had won two years earlier—this canonized affront, con-
sidered to be the ﬁrst literary attack on the French system, with its com-
plaints about the excessive drinking, “intellectual anemia,” and “moral
asthenia” of colonial administrators (14), escalated into a full-ﬂedged
scandal.
Even in the preface, though, Maran is never simply accusatory. He is en-
gaged in the project of framing the “colonial question” in highly striking
terms, but throughout, he remains a reformer, not a revolutionary. He
chooses to stake out a certain distance from the Africans he portrays, even
when his reformist aims are most explicit. Thus he insists, for example, on a
version of what Talal Asad has called “cultural translation”—a trope that
also becomes pivotal to the emerging colonial novel genre’s articulation of
itself as a kind of social science.
53 “J’ai mis six ans à le parfaire” (“I have
spent six years perfecting it”), Maran tells us:
84 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 96 ---
J’ai mis six ans à y traduire ce que j’avais, là-bas, entendu, à y décrire
ce que j’avais vu.
Au cours de ces six années, pas un moment je n’ai cédé à la
tentation de dire mon mot. J’ai poussée la conscience objective
jusqu’à supprimer des réﬂexions qu’on aurait pu m’attribuer. (9)
I have taken six years to translate what I had heard, there, and to de-
scribe what I had seen.
In the course of those six years, I never yielded a single moment to
the temptation of saying my own word. I have pushed objective con-
sciousness to the point of suppressing reﬂections which might have
been attributable to me.
Such a translating frame necessarily installs cultural distance, posing the
novelistic “translator” as a mediating ﬁgure. It is a trope that reappears of-
ten in colonial literature: Demaison, for one, is said to “translate the com-
plication that naturally escapes the notice of the visitor simply passing
through [au regard du simple passant],” and the Tharaud brothers offer a
longer passage with the same ﬂavor in their preface to La Randonnée de
Samba Diouf, describing a conversation with Demaison:
We imagined this tale [récit] while listening to you talk, and you gave
us the thousand details necessary to give it life—details as much in
the language of the Wolofs as in that of the Mandingos, both of
which you speak with the same ease as the patois of Périgord. “Ah!
dear friend,” I said to you once, “truly, your Negroes [ Noirs] express
themselves like academics!” “My word, yes,” you responded. “But
what would you have me do? I am translating what they say, word for
word. If their languages [langues] are supple and rich, and capable of
rendering the most subtle nuances, it is simply testimony that these
people of West Africa are not at all the brutes that a mediocre colonial
literature likes to represent to us. A beautiful language [un beau
langage] is a collective and unconscious masterpiece. These Negroes
would not speak this way if there were not a civilization behind them,
a very simple one, but a civilization all the same.”
54
Speaking of translation in these prefaces becomes a way of representing a
frontier. When one speaks of “translating” a culture, one rhetorically posits
ON RECIPROCITY: RENÉ MARAN AND ALAIN LOCKE 85


--- PAGE 97 ---
it both to be discrete and to be inaccessible without mediation—and so the
work of translating is the work of carrying it across that linguistic border,
bringing it closer to a home audience. This of course privileges the transla-
tor as an agent of cultural commerce with absolute authority.
T ranslationturns here, as all tropes do, for there is a continual slippage
in the use of this term: sometimes (as when Cendrars or Delafosse writes
of translating myths or folktales, or when the Tharaud brothers describe
Demaison as speaking Wolof and Mandingo “with the same ease as the pa-
tois of Périgord”) the term alludes to linguistic translation, to the knowl-
edge of an African language. But sometimes (as with the Tharauds them-
selves) it alludes to metaphoric translation—one “translates” a culture into
some form comprehensible to the European audience. In other words, the
translation metaphor represents not just a trope of authority, but also a par-
ticular kind of invasive gesture, one that works by eliding the difference be-
tween anthropological and linguistic studies, as Talal Asad has pointed out:
One difference between the anthropologist and the linguist in the
matter of translation is perhaps this: that whereas the latter is imme-
diately faced with a speciﬁc piece of discourse produced within the
society studied, a discourse that is then textualized, the former must
construct the discourse as a cultural text in terms of meanings implicit
in a range of practices. The construction of cultural discourse and its
translation thus seem to be facets of a single act.
55
In purporting to read what Asad calls “the implicit in alien cultures” (or
what Demaison terms “the collective and unconscious masterpieces” of Af-
rican expression), the colonial novelist as cultural translator actively con-
structs a discursive image of the other culture, while crouching behind the
alibi that he is only “passively” translating—that is, letting the object cul-
ture “speak for itself.”
The trope serves three functions, then: ﬁrst, it acts to mark off cultural
difference by emphasizing linguistic difference, in a move that simulta-
neously distances les nègres and confers absolute interpretative power on the
author—only through his expertise can their complexity be understood.
Second, it latches onto an argument then becoming widespread in social
linguistics—that a language reﬂects a particular way of comprehending the
world—to support its anti-assimilationist project. Africans would not speak
in such supple, rich, nuanced ways “if there were not a civilization behind
86 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 98 ---
them,” so one should not try to transform them into Frenchmen. And
third, it adds to the social science allure of the enterprise of colonial novel
writing. Thus the profusion of phrases such as “word for word” and “pains-
taking.” Using a metaphor of translation, writers such as Maran and
Tharaud take advantage of the trappings of literal translation to paint
themselves as engaged in a sort of precise, “objective” craft.
Maran’s approach to translation is all the more complex because de-
spite the claims in the preface, the many African words in the novel itself
(tourougou, kouloungoulou, ga’nzas, koufrou, bazi’nguérs, boundjouvoukou)
are not translated directly.
56 At most Batouala offers what in ethnolin-
guistics is termed contextualization, or cushioning: a brief explanatory phrase
in the target language that allows the reader to infer the meaning of the Af-
rican-language words or phrases describing “culturally bound objects or oc-
currences,” as they are “sprinkled” through the prose.
57 (Maran increased
his use of cushioning to some extent in the “deﬁnitive” 1938 revision
of Batouala partly in response to criticism about the many untranslated
words.) Thus at one ceremony, we learn that there are “‘bangaos’ ou patates
douces” (“‘bangaos’ or sweet potatoes”) (65); in the opening pages of the
novel, dawn breaks to the accompaniment of animals crying in the forest,
including “l’appel rauque des ‘bacouyas,’ singes au museau allongé comme
celui du chien” (“the hoarse call of ‘bacouyas,’ monkeys with elongated
muzzles like dogs”) (20). If anything, this approach to “translation” in
Batouala ultimately serves to emphasize Maran’s authoritative positioning,
as the text continually re-marks the linguistic barriers of cultural alterity.
As though to be sure to avoid any confusion, the preface to Batouala
quickly goes beyond the habitual translator’s alibi, adding a vivid image of
disjunction. Maran describes writing the novel over a six-year period while
serving in the administration of the Central African colony of Ubangui-
Shari. The book is “completely objective,” he explains, emphasizing the
décalage between him and “les nègres de l’Afrique Equatoriale”:
Ce roman est donc tout objectif. Il ne tâche même pas à expliquer: il
constate. Il ne s’indigne pas: il enregistre. Il ne pouvait en être autre-
ment. Par les soirs de lune, allongé en ma chaise longue, de ma
véranda, j’écoutais les conversations de ces pauvres gens. Leurs
plaisanteries prouvaient leur résignation. Ils souffraient et riaient de
souffrir. (10)
ON RECIPROCITY: RENÉ MARAN AND ALAIN LOCKE 87


--- PAGE 99 ---
This novel is thus completely objective. It does not even attempt to
explain: it states. It does not become indignant: it registers. It could
not have been otherwise. On moonlit evenings, stretched out on the
chaise lounge on my veranda, I listened to the conversations of these
poor people. Their jokes gave proof of their resignation. They suf-
fered and laughed at their suffering.
What is surprising, considering the way the book is received, is that there is
no black internationalist consciousness expressed here, much less an expres-
sion of solidarity. This is on the contrary a clear image of distinction:
Maran the administrator on his veranda, unseen, listening in the half-light
to the conversations and laughter of the Africans below. At best it continues
the claim of anthropological objectivity, and at worse it is a rather plain ad-
mission of Maran’s posturing as anhomme de couleur—an odd sort of para-
site, literally and ﬁguratively above les nègres. Maran goes further in this di-
rection in a letter to one critic who had written an especially unfavorable
review of Batouala:
Au cours de ce laps de temps, j’ai étudié quotidiennement l’indigène,
je l’ai fait parler....S ij’ai reproduit, traduit les doléances indigènes,
si je me suis efforcé de rendre tangible leur mentalité, je ne peux
admettre que l’on veuille m’imputer ce qu’ils pensent vraiment et ce
qu’ils disent lorsqu’ils croient qu’on ne les entend pas. Mon livre, la
préface mise à part, ne contient rien de mes idées. Je n’ai été là qu’un
appareil à enregistrer.
58
During this period, I studied the native every day; I made him
speak. ...I fIh a v er e p roduced, translated the sorrows of the natives,
if I have striven to render their mentality tangible, I cannot allow that
people impute to me what the natives really think, and what they say
when they think that no one hears them. My book, the preface aside,
contains none of my ideas. In it, I have only been a recording device.
The aesthetic of overhearing is troubling, to say the least. What does it
mean to insist that one has recorded what the natives say “when they think
that no one hears them”? The claim is an extension of the familiar insis-
tence on “objectivity,” that the novel “contains none of my ideas”: Maran
has provided his readers a record of what the Africans “really think” when
88 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 100 ---
they are among themselves, when they are not mollifying French ofﬁcials
by masking their real impressions. There is not exactly an insinuation
of sympathy with the “natives” here, and no suggestion that Maran has
slipped even slightly in his loyalty to the French colonial project. On the
contrary: it is difﬁcult not to wonder whether Maran is not positioning
himself—as a black colonial administrator—as a special kind of funnel,
a privileged conduit of “native” information imbued with insight pre-
cisely because of his racial status, which somehow places him closer to
the Africans, better able to hear and “translate” even as he lounges above
them. Even though this recording recalls the aesthetic of Langston Hughes’s
blues poems, Maran’s rhetoric of self-distancing and orientation in framing
(always “translating” the native “mentality” for a privileged metropolitan
French colonial audience) clearly distinguish the positioning in Batouala
from the populist lyricism of Fine Clothes to the Jew.
One striking feature of Maran’s language in these passages is his insis-
tence that he has “never yielded to the temptation to say his own word,”
that he is in fact, curiously, “only a recording instrument.” Alain Locke, in
his Opportunity review of “The Colonial Literature of France,” uses similar
language as he describes the contours of the genre, emphasizing the stylistic
advances of Maran’s novel. Compared to the “tainted or inartistic sources”
of traditional colonial literature, carelessly jotted down by “the exploiting
charlatans, the incompetent romancers, and the moralistic missionaries,”
Maran’s work represents a huge leap forward toward “realism,” Locke ar-
gues.
59 Locke reads colonial literature in 1923 as standing at a kind of ge-
neric crossroads, choosing between the popular romance of the Tharaud
brothers, the enlightened humanitarianism of Gaston Joseph, and the “aes-
thetically objective” approach of Maran.
60 Signiﬁcantly, when Locke argues
that Maran’s work represents this crucial new stylistic development—and a
black modern expression, as well—he turns to a similar kind of “recording”
metaphor:
Even more so than in the American school of ﬁction was the native in
colonial literature merely a dark note by which the false high-lights of
the painting were keyed up....B u tt h epublic mind, with its predi-
lection for fake and lurid chromos, by this brilliant, daring etching of
Maran’s has been, so to speak, resurfaced for a new impression, at
ON RECIPROCITY: RENÉ MARAN AND ALAIN LOCKE 89


--- PAGE 101 ---
once more artistic and true....I tw a sh e r o i cw o rk—and required to
be done by the Negro himself—this revolutionary change from senti-
mentality to realism, from caricature to portraiture.61
Here, the recording metaphor is phrased in terms of the visual arts—appar-
ently Locke is expanding on a phrase on the ﬁrst page of Maran’s preface
(“Il n’est, à vrai dire, qu’une succession d’eaux-fortes” [“T o tell the truth, it
is only a succession of etchings”] (9)). Maran abandons this visual meta-
phor and concentrates on aural tropes of recording, but Locke runs with
this ﬁrst image, with a contradictory ﬂourish: Batouala is an “etching” that,
in being carved into the tabula rasa of the “public mind,” has “resurfaced”
that material and prepared it for a new, truer impression. It is rhetoric that
is reminiscent, say, of Freud’s “Mystic Writing Pad” essay a year later,
though here somewhat muddled: for it is unclear how an etching can clean
or erase the surface it marks.
62 And while they are an intriguing transatlan-
tic stretch, Locke’s words about “the Negro” ring slightly off key, as well:
there is no mention of Maran’s self-positioning in relation to the Africans in
Ubangui-Shari, and Locke’s sentence ends up more a chest-swelling boast
of pride in The Race than a serious reﬂection on the literary representation
of differently positioned populations of African descent. This tone contin-
ues throughout the essay, as in the following passage: “We can take much
satisfaction in the fact that the path to candid portraiture of the colonial
system and of native life has been shown by one from whom it was least of
all expected, but through whom it comes with the greatest acceptability—
an educated Negro colonial ofﬁcial” (334).
In Maran’s hands, though, the “recording instrument” metaphor seems
to be doing more complicated work. It seems possible that he is alluding
here to the recording technology that would develop as a medium both for
the so-called Race Records boom in the mid- and late-1920s and for the
ﬁrst efforts at anthropological documentation of black culture (for in-
stance, the French excursion that traveled from Dakar to Djibouti from
1931 to 1933 included recording technician Eric Lutten and musicologist
André Schaeffner, who attempted to document musical performances).
The metaphor of the “recording instrument”—a stylus carving grooves into
a disc?—also marks the interface between the oral and the written, for the
relatively new technology in principle allowed a listener to preserve the spe-
90 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 102 ---
ciﬁcs of a sonic performance: the inﬂections of the voice, the dynamics and
singular timbre of an instrument, the precise intervals of a scale.
But the syntax of Maran’s metaphor (“Iam an apparatus for recording”)
might imply something more subtle than a reference to modern technol-
ogy. It is possible, in other words, that this image of the black administrator
as recording apparatus is a striking example of what Bruce Robbins has
termed an “allegory of vocation.”
63 If Maran is accused of the treason of ra-
cial solidarity, then perhaps his defense is also inﬂected by a racial logic.
What is fascinating is that he attempts to erase his identity altogether, mak-
ing no reference to “race” at all, and claiming moreover that he “does not
speak” at all in his novel. In this formulation, the évolué Antillean colonial
administrator is singularly placed: as an implicitly modern, new “technol-
ogy,” but only a technology, only a tool serving to register the African, of-
fering a clear and untainted reﬂection of the white European’s black African
Other. It is a strange triangulation, because here the “recording instrument”
insists loudly that it does not speak; this modern technology claims not to
speak its own modernity.
This twisted metaphor recalls the well-known characterization of the
Antillean in Frantz Fanon’s 1952 Peau noire, masques blancs. Fanon de-
scribes the French Caribbean subject as a sort of ontological void: “Nègres
are comparison. First truth. ...E v e r ytime they ﬁnd themselves in contact
with another, it is a question of value, of merit. Antilleans have no proper
value; they are always tributaries of the apparition of the Other.”
64 But the
triangulation here goes even further: for Maran, the Antillean is the “tribu-
tary” for the apparition not just generally of the black Other, but spe-
ciﬁcally of the “true” African Other. The Antillean functionary “evolves”
only to echo his darker brother for European ears. Locke is correct when he
writes that “Maran’s real thrust is more anti-romantic and anti-sentimental-
ist than anti-imperialist; it is the literary traducers whom he would annihi-
late.”
65 But when read with attention to the way Maran places himself in
relation to the Africans he claims to “record,” Batouala’s “real thrust” goes
beyond issues of style: it is a complex kind of diasporic positioning.
I should note that even in the awkward phrasing of Locke’s metaphor—
“so weakly winding round and round and getting nowhere,” as Claude
McKay once described Locke’s prose—there is still a hint of this more sub-
tle reading.
66 For Locke, in writing of an “etching” that somehow erases a
ON RECIPROCITY: RENÉ MARAN AND ALAIN LOCKE 91


--- PAGE 103 ---
surface in the very process of inscription, may be attempting to catch the
speciﬁc sense in Maran’s language of a recording instrument that, in doing
its work, is silent—that declines to speak, itself. If this image indeed repre-
sents an effort to capture the harsh quality of Maran’s metaphorology, still it
must be considered a failure. Saying thatBatouala is an “etching” that clears
a surface is not the same as saying that “Je n’ai été là qu’un appareil à
enregistrer.” Not only does Locke’s formula lack a sense of the way Maran’s
preface is an articulation of diaspora, but it is also unable to account for
Maran’s anthropological aims, his approach to modern technologies of cul-
tural recording. This novel is work “required to be done by the Negro him-
self”—but for Maran, it is “required” because the job calls for an Antillean
whose évolution, whose entrance through the revolving doors of modernity,
allows the novel to be an instrument of “impersonal observation” (18), not
erasing prior “impressions,” but erasing the very positionality of the author
in the process. In the end, it is because he is a modern black subject that he
“only” records: as though it is precisely Maran’s modernity that silences
him, that makes him a monstrous mute “apparatus”(appareil).
Maran claims that he “does not speak” at all in his novel—“the preface
aside” (la préface mise à part). And this is the knot at the heart of Batouala.
The preface frames the novel, and—however “objective” it may be—condi-
tions its reception. T o put it another way, the contradiction is that Maran,
in employing the metaphor of the “recording instrument,” thereby speaks,
and speaks as a black modern voice, ﬁguring himself even as he claims with
the same gesture to be silent. Though Maran does not seem to anticipate it,
this two-step is what French critics respond to in Batouala. And the critical
response, as much as it attempts to defend French colonial policy, also at-
tempts to control Maran, this confusing ﬁgure both black and French, both
mute and modern. The favorable reviews from the left journals, such as
L ’Humanitéand Le Populaire, simply ignore the complexity of Maran’s
stance and celebrate him as condemning the entire enterprise of colonial-
ism.
67 And the more numerous negative reviews perform the familiar dance
of racism: either Batouala is artless propaganda, a book so intent to slander
colonialism that it gladly castigates “heathen” Africans as well in the pro-
cess, or the novel is inherently ﬂawed, poorly written, a sign of Maran’s nat-
ural inferiority and of his failed attempt to assimilate to European culture.
68
Either Maran is portrayed as exceptional—a talented stylist who somehow
eluded the normative stupidity of blacks (an exception formed, of course,
92 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 104 ---
through a French education)—or he is portrayed as atavistic—an innate
nègre, as a savage who might show signs of civilization but is still essentially
a savage.
A “Black Logic” of the Preface
One example of the latter and more common response is an essay called
“La Logique Noire,” which appeared in the conservative daily Le T empsaf-
ter Batouala won the Prix Goncourt.69 The critic, J. L., who usually wrote
political commentary for the paper, allows that there is something notewor-
thy in the novel, though it may be more of an anthropological curiosity
than a literary event: “Without doubt, it is the ﬁrst work in the French
language written by a black man [nègre] where one recognizes an artistic
sensibility perceptible to our sensibility. And that is a ‘case’ for the ethnog-
raphers, as well as for the literary critics.” The attack centers on the sup-
posed gap in orientation between the preface and the novel itself. The for-
mer is “a sort of political manifesto; in it, a black man [nègre] denounces
the faults and even the crimes of the ‘whites.’” But although one expects to
ﬁnd “frightening revelations about the savagery of the civilized” in the
novel that follows, in fact “all of Batouala is a tableau of black savagery
[barbarie nègre] ....I ti sd a r kr ealism [réalisme sombre], in all the senses of
the word.” The critic uses this distinction to conclude with the following
comment, turning again on an “instrument” metaphor:
But why, in composing this sincere work, did M. René Maran com-
ment on it with a preface that contradicts it? It is that our novelist is a
black man [nègre]; it is that he lacks, as blacks do, logic and measure.
His gods, assisted by Bordeaux professors, conferred on him the tal-
ent of writing; they refused him the talent of reason. The brain of the
blacks [nègres] is still an intermittently functioning mechanism; but it
is not futile to hope that the culture of our ideas will perfect this
primitive and maladjusted instrument.
With wicked humor, J. L. uses the “objective” rhetoric of modern science to
proclaim Maran’s black brain to be an “intermittently functioning mecha-
nism,” unable to produce a clear and uncorrupted recording because it is
“primitive and maladjusted.” This reading of a “black logic” of course relies
on the critic’s characterization ofBatouala as utterly split (“Ce livre est dou-
ble,” he writes), and J. L. conveniently ignores all evidence to the con-
ON RECIPROCITY: RENÉ MARAN AND ALAIN LOCKE 93


--- PAGE 105 ---
trary—the few passages in the novel itself that seem to echo the critique of
colonialism in the preface. 70 The question remains, in any case, how one
might counter J. L.’s accusation that if Maran is a “recording device,” then
that “mechanism” functions only “intermittently,” forcefully anti-imperial-
ist at one moment and exoticist or sensationalist the next. And more im-
portant, why does Maran stress over and over that his voice is heard “only”
in the preface? If Batouala’s formalist turn—its “black logic”—is an impor-
tant innovation, as Locke argues, rather than the halting squeamishness of a
colonial bureaucrat, then exactly how does the strategy work?
Léopold Sédar Senghor, like a number of Francophone literary crit-
ics, also describes Maran in terms of a “black logic” of doubleness.
71 For
Senghor, it would be perhaps more appropriately termed a “Logique
Nègre,” though. He reads Maran as the ﬁrst to express the “âme noire, avec
le style nègre, en français” (“Negro soul, with black style, in French”), in a
way that leads directly to the Négritude movement. But Senghor’s descrip-
tion of Batouala’s contradictions is relevant here:
Here he is engaged as an administrator and as a Nègre, h e r eh ei se n -
gaged in a situation full of contradictions. As an administrator, he must
serve Colonization, ﬁrmly, at times harshly, in applying the Justice of
the Colonizer. As a Nègre, he cannot avoid sensing that there is a law
superior to colonial policy: French Law [le Droit français]. And supe-
rior to that, the Rights of Man [les Droits de l’Homme] invoked by the
Nègres held away from the Residence of the “Commandant.” How are
these contradictions surmounted? The Writer will do it for the Man.
72
Rather than evade these “contradictions” of his awkward positionality,
then, Maran aestheticizes and formalizes them. As Senghor puts it, Maran
“fut le premier à refuser de choisir” (“was the ﬁrst to refuse to choose”), at-
tempting to inhabit the seemingly paradoxical position where one could
both claim French citizenship and articulate a reformist critique of French
colonization. As I have argued with respect to the phrase véritable roman
nègre, “race” itself is the hinge of this “situation full of contradictions,” the
force that must be managed (through the appropriation of “impersonal”
modern discourses of ethnographic translation and recording technology)
in order to straddle this force.
In one arena, Maran does elaborate a rhetoric that parallels these read-
94 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 106 ---
ings of doubleness. Not in his novels or his autobiographical efforts, but in-
stead, interestingly enough, in his more explicitly “polemic” works of re-
formist journalism. His essays continually describe French colonialism itself
as double, as “Janus-faced” or as having “two countenances.”
73 In a 1924
essay, Maran argues that there exists a “true France,” the republican France
of the Rights of Man, “whom all who come to see and know love, and love
eternally.” But this ideal is jeopardized by “ofﬁcial France,” the scheming
and imperialist France represented in its colonies by its colonial administra-
tion, which attempts to conceal its abuses to the world with the “conjurer’s
mirage” of the ideal image. Maran warns against buying into the idea of a
kinder, gentler French colonial policy, calling the indigénat “codiﬁed slav-
ery.”
74 The doubleness of the French nation-state for Maran is ﬁnally a split
between metropole and empire: “Perhaps it is not too late...t oplace colo-
nial France in opposition to metropolitan France, in order to show that the
ﬁrst, through measures and intolerance which anger as much as they con-
tradict its most eloquent afﬁrmations, is alienating little by little the true af-
fection for the latter that colored populations are glad to afﬁrm.”
75 The
convoluted phrasing of this passage gives evidence of the tortured rhetoric
provoked by such characterizations in Maran’s essays.
Again, although Maran displays a kind of solidarity with the African
subjects, with phrases like “nos frères noirs,” he continually steps away
from any afﬁrmation of black internationalist consciousness that seems too
strong by emphasizing that he is mainly interested in the treatment of black
French citizens—Antillean or African—like himself, working in the colo-
nial service. “We are tolerated here, it is true,” he sighs, “as one can espe-
cially realize who considers how on account of the decline of French man-
power, they have increasing need of us. We are tolerated perhaps because,
submerged in the mass, we pass almost negligibly. But that has not hin-
dered France up to the very present from using every method to block our
way to posts of prime importance.”
76 At times he comes close to speaking
for French blacks in general: in a 1923 article, he contends that “it would
be a lie to assert about nègres, as it is proclaimed to the four winds, that they
love their conquerors. In truth, vaguely resigned to their obscure destiny,
they observe them, curiously, hiding their deep thoughts as much as possi-
ble.” But immediately, the article pulls back with a disclaimer, limiting the
scope of the complaint to the mistreatment of French black citizens in the
ON RECIPROCITY: RENÉ MARAN AND ALAIN LOCKE 95


--- PAGE 107 ---
colonies and to the glass ceiling they face in the colonial service: “T oday I
only want to occupy myself with the French blacks [des nègres français]—
Antillean, Guyanese, Senegalese, and Reunionais—who are the object of
the deep hatred of the Central Colonial Administration, a hatred actively
seconded by most of the colonial governors and administrators.”
77 The
preface to Batouala takes a similar stance when Maran follows his condem-
nation of French imperial “civilization” with a call addressed not to his fel-
low “natives”—much less any invocation of racial alliance or proletarian
revolution—but instead to his “brothers in spirit” (frères en esprit), his fel-
low French writers, who must take up the “beautiful task” of condemning
colonial abuses in the interests of “the nation of which you are the keepers”
(13, 15).
Clearly this is no anticolonialist stance. But as Senghor points out, it is a
political aesthetic: Maran considers it the task of colonial literature to undo
this duplicity, this two-faced countenance of metropolitan and colonial
France, with the harsh truths of the pen.
78 But this implies neither anti-im-
perialism nor an inherent sympathy for the “natives.” As he told one jour-
nalist (anticipating the title of one of his later novels, Un Homme pareil aux
autres): “The nègre is a man like other men [un homme comme les autres]; by
that I mean that he is fundamentally malicious. And far from spicing up
my tale, I weakened it [loin de corser mon récit, je l’ai anémié].”
79 In this
quote one gets a sense of Maran’s unique stance: his reformist intentions are
wholly polemic, but his literary aesthetic refuses any polemicism, insisting
that human decadence is universal and in a sense beyond “race” and region.
Again, this is not just a stylistic but also a political stance.
In other words, Maran’s rhetoricis indeed “doubled”: it moves toward a
kind of solidarity with les nègres, as he invokes the Rights of Man and rails
against colonial abuses, but then it tacks in the opposite direction with a
proclamation of ﬁdelity to the French empire. Finally, here, black interna-
tionalism (an espoused link between the Antillean administrator Maran
and his African “subjects”) can be imagined only as a potential within the
embrace of la plus grande France, as a common assimilation into the greater
imperialist nation. As he concludes one article:
“Colonialism” as it is practiced only engenders disaffection or passiv-
ity. Its law is founded on force. The day when its latent hatred and its
96 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 108 ---
dissimulated malice become negligible, the nègres, understanding that
their destiny is linked to the destiny of France, will run voluntarily to
die for her—even those who are not yet “assimilated Europeans.”80
Thus, in “speaking his word” in the preface toBatouala, Maran attempts to
create a doubled effect in a manner both formally reminiscent of and ideo-
logically divergent from the preface-work of African American intellectuals
such as Du Bois and Johnson. Maran attempts to mobilize the structural
divergence between preface and text to manage “race” in the ways I have
suggested, articulating a discourse in which a gesture of black solidarity is
re-coded as the “true” promise of the colonial endeavor. He seems to move
toward a rhetoric of black internationalism, but only in the service of a
greater nationalism—a greater France ﬁnally animated by the republican
principles of the Rights of Man.
It is a particularly Francophone version of a formalized double con-
sciousness, in which what Du Bois terms the “gift of second sight” is never
a suggestion of a possible racial identity, but is always inherently a vision of
the true potential of the nation-state. But in Batouala’s reception, this artic-
ulation, so painstakingly elaborated and formalized, is invisible. It is simply
overwhelmed by the force of a discursive context that insists on reading any
expression of the black modern as a threat—for as I have pointed out, the
modern self-construction of France relies on an array of representational
strategies to distance the nègre as silent Other, as well as political strategies
to mitigate against any black internationalist alliance undermining the
smooth borders of the nation. In Paris, Maran’s Batouala falls in this trap.
And in the United States, its particular version of doubleness, potentially in
dialogue with “New Negro” work, is misunderstood by a black intelligen-
tsia that knew little about Africa and less about the Francophone world. In
later writings, it is clear that Maran recognizes that his preface-work has
been misread—that it was in fact perhaps unreadable in the sensationalized
context of the vogue nègre in the early 1920s. In an interview, he laments:
“Because of the Goncourt Prize, my preface is given a signiﬁcance [ une
portée] beyond what my own thinking had given it; it reaches colonial of-
ﬁcials who once respected me, and now they turn their backs, thinking that
I was describing them.”
81 Signiﬁcantly, when he left his post in the colonial
administration, disgraced by the “L ’AffaireBatouala,” and moved to Paris
ON RECIPROCITY: RENÉ MARAN AND ALAIN LOCKE 97


--- PAGE 109 ---
to write full-time, he also abandoned this formal strategy, this attempt to
articulate a particularly Francophone version of the black modern. None of
his subsequent works possessed any sort of sustained preface.
Paris, Heart of the Negro Race
Maran’s wariness of any explicit project of black internationalism should
not be construed as isolationism. In fact, from the publication of Batouala
throughout the interwar period, Maran may be the Francophone intellec-
tual in closest contact with his African American counterparts in New York
and Washington, D.C. He corresponded or interacted with almost all the
signiﬁcant participants in the “Harlem Renaissance,” including Langston
Hughes, Countee Cullen, Gwendolyn Bennett, Jessie Fauset, Claude
McKay, and Rayford Logan.
82 In 1927, he was closely involved in the effort
by Paulette and Jane Nardal to translate Alain Locke’s anthology The New
98 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA
René Maran in Ubangui-
Shari. From Bingo, l’illustré
africain 73 (February 1959).
[To view this image, refer to  
the print version of this title.]


--- PAGE 110 ---
Negro, and the next year he was instrumental in the publication of a French
version of Walter White’s 1924 novelThe Fire in the Flint.83
The key conduit of Maran’s dialogue with black U.S. intellectuals was a
periodical, the Paris-based Les Continents, which—even though it only
lasted from May until December 1924—was a crucial forum for debates
around black modernity and Pan-Africanism in Francophone circles, inﬂu-
encing many of its successors in the French metropole (La Race nègre, La
Dépêche africaine, Le Cri des Nègres).84 Founded by the Dahomean philoso-
pher, lawyer, and brazen social climber Kojo T ovalou Houénou,Les Conti-
nents was linked with two groups he attempted to organize in the mid-
1920s, ﬁrst a “solidarity association” called L ’Amitié Franco-Dahoméenne,
and then a group oriented more toward questions of colonial reform and
black internationalism, the Ligue Universelle pour la Défense de la Race
Noire (LUDRN)—a title which may well reﬂect T ovalou Houénou’s ad-
miration for Marcus Garvey’s Universal Negro Improvement Association
(UNIA). The day-to-day operations of the bimonthly paper were run by
T ovalou Houénou and the white French critic Jean Fangeat, but Maran
played a crucial role in shaping its contents, both as a regular contributor
and in editorial decisions. Les Continents was forced to cease publication
when it was sued for libel by Blaise Diagne, after the paper printed an arti-
cle (unsigned, but almost certainly written by Maran) contending that the
Senegalese legislator was a master of “the art of selling his brothers” who
had been paid “a certain commission for each solider recruited” in French
West Africa during World War I.
85 Notably, the trial occasioned the ﬁrst
appearance in the public record of a former tirailleur sénégalais who would
go on to found the more radical papersLa Voix des Nègresand La Race nègre
two years later. Lamine Senghor spoke brieﬂy about the tribulations of his
fellow African soldiers during the war and testiﬁed to the widespread dislike
for Diagne, whom he estimated “was paid well enough not to need twenty
sous for each recruit.”
86
In almost every issue, Les Continents boasted of its echoes across the At-
lantic, noting for instance that a portrait of T ovalou Houénou had been
published in the Crisis or pointing its readers to his contributions inOppor-
tunity. As we shall see, it also published an article by Alain Locke, as well as
poems in English by Countee Cullen and Langston Hughes.
87 One might
assume that this was meant to highlight the paper’s transnational resonance
for a French readership, but in factLes Continents—as implied by the plural
ON RECIPROCITY: RENÉ MARAN AND ALAIN LOCKE 99


--- PAGE 111 ---
title—had ambitions of transatlantic distribution and toward the end of its
run attempted to begin publishing a second English-language section. 88
Even before then, it was read regularly by the members of the New Negro
intelligentsia who had a command of French (including Du Bois, Locke,
Fauset, and Gwendolyn Bennett). So when Les Continents commented on
“La Presse Noire d’Amérique,” it was above all because it was attempting to
articulate itself as part of a broader multilingual diasporic dialogue about
the shape and direction of black modern culture.
89
This interest likewise shaped the activities of the LUDRN, which at-
tempted to foster links between black cultural forms across the Atlantic.
The small group of intellectuals around Les Continents combined a critical
attention to French colonialism in Africa with coverage of black expres-
sive culture in the metropole, and the paper actively promoted African
American music and literature. In late May and early June 1924, T ovalou
Houénou hosted two soirées of “musique nègre américano-africaine” featur-
ing jazz and spirituals (by musicians including the singers Florence Jones
and Ada “Bricktop” Smith, the vocal duo Crutcher and Evans, and the
drummer Buddy Gilmore), as well as a classical pianist (the Cuban Gloria
de la Cuesta).
90 Later in the summer, Roland Hayes gave a beneﬁt concert
for the LUDRN at the Salle Gaveau, singing Schubert and Debussy as well
as a selection of spirituals.
91
That summer, T ovalou Houénou visited the United States, undertaking
a speaking tour during the second half of the year in an attempt both to
publicize Les Continents and to extend its black internationalist connec-
tions. Maran put him in contact with W . E. B. Du Bois at the ofﬁces of the
Crisis.
92 The two men never met, in part because Du Bois was irritated that
T ovalou Houénou dared contact him and Marcus Garvey simultaneously.
“One thing has happened which we do not like,” Du Bois wrote to Maran
with characteristic imperiousness. “He is visiting the Garvey convention
and associating with Garvey. We want to be as charitable as possible and we
gladly receive all difference of opinion but there is absolutely no doubt that
Marcus Garvey is a scoundrel and a thief and is using all the arts of the low
demagogue to deceive his ignorant followers.”
93 T ovalou Houénou, a char-
ismatic Dahomean “about six feet, well-formed, straight as a birch” with
“long, black ﬁngers like a musician’s and ﬁne lacquer-black complexion” (as
Claude McKay described him in the Crisis), was indeed the featured guest
at the annual convention of the UNIA, wooing Harlem in a white suit.
94
100 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 112 ---
T ovalou Houénou had adopted the title “Prince”—claiming to be related
to Behanzin, the king of Dahomey who had been ousted by the French—
and the spectacle of “authentic” African royalty was irresistible in the UNIA
atmosphere of regal pomp. At the convention banquet, he was toasted by
ON RECIPROCITY: RENÉ MARAN AND ALAIN LOCKE 101
G. O. Marke, Kojo T ovalou Houénou, and Marcus Garvey in Harlem, August
1924 (photo by James VanDerZee). Courtesy of Mrs. Donna Mussenden VanDerZee.
[To view this image, refer to  
the print version of this title.]


--- PAGE 113 ---
Garvey himself, and they were photographed on a Harlem rooftop by
James VanDerZee.95
On August 18, T ovalou Houénou’s speech in French to the convention
audience was translated by Theodore Stephens, the spokesman of the Hai-
tian delegation of the UNIA (as well as the editor of the French section of
the Negro World).96 Welcomed by the “lively”(vibrant) crowd with a stand-
ing ovation, he told Garvey that the UNIA was “the Zionism of the Negro
Race [la Race Noire]” and said that he spoke “in the name of millions of
Africans” to tell the organization that “our cities [cités] are ready to wel-
come you!” A once and future king, beaming from the stage in Liberty
Hall—the vision did nothing to counter the ways that for a vindicationist
Harlem audience, “Africa is always imagined in retrospect—as the place
one has come from—or in a retrospective prospect—as the home one is go-
ing to.”
97 But if his welcoming words seemed to be exactly what the audi-
ence wanted to hear, what T ovalou Houénou proposed next must have
come as a surprise. The “goal” of black political groupings around the
world must be “diversité dans l’action” (“diversity in action”), differently
placed organizations “contributing to the work of redemption according to
their methods, their disciplines, their resources, their activities.” But the
LUDRN in Paris was prepared to play the central role in coordinating this
variety. T ovalou Houénou proposed his group as an umbrella organization
to “rally in federation all the existing societies” in order to present “our
claims” to the League of Nations. Why the ﬂedgling LUDRN? Why Paris?
As T ovalou Houénou opined:
The choice of Paris as the center for our activities seems to me to offer
the highest advantages. Paris is the capital of France, which shares
with England almost the whole of Africa. Paris is six hours from
London and Brussels; closer to New York than any other capital of
Europe; the artistic and intellectual center of the world; the diplo-
matic capital and the capital of great reformist ideas [grandes idées
rénovatrices]. And what interests us most is that France is the only
country that not only has no race prejudice itself, but also ﬁghts for
its disappearance.
98
If, as I suggested earlier, coming to terms with the work of René Maran
necessitates remapping the parameters of black modernity, then T ovalou
Houénou announces another version of that task—right on the stage of
102 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 114 ---
Liberty Hall in Harlem, with a proposition at once stunningly radical
and hopelessly naive. At the closing session of the Convention, T ovalou
Houénou spoke again, praising the UNIA’s work for the “redemption of
Africa” and adding that “the problem of the race in toto is not national, but
international.”
99 In a mélange as peculiar as Maran’s brand of colonial re-
formism, T ovalou Houénou’s ardor for black internationalism was matched
only by his ideological innocence—he held the simplistic notion that all in-
tellectuals of African descent are ultimately working toward the same end.
Before undertaking a speaking tour in the Midwest (Philadelphia, Buffalo,
Gary, Detroit, and Chicago, where he made a point of taking a bouquet of
ﬂowers to Lincoln’s grave), T ovalou Houénou wrote to Du Bois in French,
expressing regret that they hadn’t been able to meet. T ovalou Houénou
wanted to have it both ways, to have it “double” in a different sense. He
told Du Bois that “I knew about the serious and profound disagreements
that separate you from Mr. Garvey. In Paris I was told to choose between
two brothers who are enemies [deux frères ennemis]. I refused. I am for all
parties who are interested in Negroes [noirs] ....A n yplace where a fellow
Negro [un congénère] creates a movement favorable to the evolution of the
race, he will be my friend, I’ll be on his side.”
100
At the same time it is important to recognize that this episode did have
an effect on the UNIA. T ovalou Houénou’s visit was one of the key points
of contact between the Garvey movement and the black Francophone
world—one of the elements of the UNIA that remains understudied. The
impact was reﬂected in the Negro World, whose French section is particu-
larly active during this period: the paper not only published Alain Locke’s
aforementioned article on “The Colonial Literature of France” (which ap-
peared nearly simultaneously in Opportunity), but also reprinted articles
from a wide variety of French-language periodicals: Le T emps de Paris, Le
Journal Schoelcher, L ’Action coloniale, Le Courrier haïtien,and especially Les
Continents.
101 Thus Les Continents directly shaped the discourse of the
UNIA, the Francophone contours of the “Universal Negro” pursued in
its own periodical. This theme does not vanish from the movement, even
after Garvey’s prison sentence. In 1928, Garvey was still leaning toward
Francophone connections, announcing to readers of the Negro World dur-
ing his trip through Europe that “we have already cemented a working plan
with the French Negro by which we hope to carry out the great ideals of
the UNIA.”
102
ON RECIPROCITY: RENÉ MARAN AND ALAIN LOCKE 103


--- PAGE 115 ---
In the fall of 1928, Garvey visited Paris and gave a speech at the Club du
Faubourg that attracted an audience of more than 1,500. Garvey said that
France, as “the only country which offers to the Negro legal equality and
the humane rights of citizenship,” must “continue to aid the Negro in his
ambition to establish his own country and his own government in Af -
rica.”
103 At the conclusion of the speech there was a barrage of hostile ques-
tions—“vehement accusers, defenders without conviction, subtle denigra-
tors”—and, reported the conservative French newspaper La Dépêche colon-
iale, a couple of sly queries from the “father of Batouala.” “Is it out of love
for France that American Negroes [noirs] came to ﬁght on her soil, or were
they convinced by the promises of liberation they’d been given?” Maran
asked. “In America, aren’t there clubs for light-skinned Negroes [noirs peu
colorés] that deny entry to dogs and to full Negroes [noirs intégraux]”? Ap-
parently Garvey did not answer.
After a number of lengthy attacks and aggressive challenges, another
black man arose, this time “a prince” whose “tender name”(nom caressant),
the newspaper reported, was “Novalou” [sic]. In a “soft voice,” the dapper
T ovalou Houénou tried to play the peacemaker, “invit[ing] the whites,
whose fashion of dress [système vestimentaire] he borrows tastefully, to love
and to liberate” his Negro “brothers.” But Maran interrupted once again,
declaring that he saw “hardly any difference between the European coloniz-
ers—even if he’d admit that the French beat the blacks [bat les nègres] a little
less than the Americans or the English.”
104 T wo weeks later, Maran wrote to
Alain Locke, saying he’d taken on “that dark visionary [cet obscur illuminé],
the illustrious Marcus Garvey.” As though something had been apparent in
the exchange besides what La Dépêche coloniale called the realization that
“between intellectual and civilized Negroes [noirs] there exist profound dis-
sensions,” Maran crowed: “doubtlessly your newspapers have already in-
formed you that I was excessively brilliant.”
105
Encounter on the Rhine
The correspondence between Maran and Locke is the single most extensive
point of contact in the 1920s between the “Harlem Renaissance” culture
framers and the Francophone intelligentsia. I will now turn to one portion
of their dialogue from the middle of the decade in order to consider the
links between Les Continents and another of the most inﬂuential Harlem
journals, Opportunity. In the January 1924 issue ofOpportunity, Locke pub-
104 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 116 ---
lished an article called “The Black Watch on the Rhine,” a report of his
visit to see French African troops guarding the border with Germany after
World War I.
106 “My title is no misnomer,” he begins, and immediately
goes on to make extravagant claims for the signiﬁcance of the tirailleurs
sénégalais watching over the frontier: “[T]he ﬁrst troops I saw on entering
the occupied territory, and the last I saw on leaving, were colored—and a
very impartial observer, let us say the traditional martian, would have jotted
down in his diary that a polyglot, polyracial African nation had in alliance
with France conquered Germany” (6). Locke, surprised at the sight of such
a large contingent of integrated African and Antillean soldiers comporting
themselves responsibly and with more autonomy than would be imaginable
in the U.S. armed forces, gushes in the article about the putative nonracist
policies of France in relation to its colonies. He writes:
[M]ere social miracle as it may seem to the Anglo-Saxon eye, they are
not merely French soldiers, they are French citizens, comrades not
only in arms but in all the basic human relationships....
The instinctive social logicality of the French mind has made a
clean sweep of the whole ﬁeld [of prejudice], and in spite of its handi-
caps of militarism and colonial imperialism, France has here worked
out a practical technique of human relationships which may very pos-
sibly earn for her world-mastery as over against her apparently more
experienced and better equipped competitors. (8)
Moreover, Locke commends the “human quality” of the French military
(“other armies are machines, the French is human” [8]), noting with plea-
sure the diversity tolerated in its colonial ranks. The barracks in Caseme
Hoche in Mayence, Locke writes,
was a medley of types, costumes and manners—more like a bazaar
than a garrison: here natives in French uniforms, there French in
adapted native uniforms—and pervading all a good fellowship that
was amazing. And if in an army barracks one could get the unmistak-
able impression of freedom of life and respect for alien customs—and
at times this impression was strong enough for one to imagine himself
already across on the other side of the Mediterranean—then it was
quite to be understood how different the French colonial attitude is
ON RECIPROCITY: RENÉ MARAN AND ALAIN LOCKE 105


--- PAGE 117 ---
from all others. Instead of imposing her civilization and culture,
France super-imposes them. (9)
Latin justice and tolerance is set implicitly against the racism and segrega-
tion of the U.S. “Anglo-Saxon” military model (6), as might be expected, in
what is ultimately a propaganda piece in the context of U.S. civil rights and
antilynching struggles. Of course, the choice of example itself is signiﬁcant,
because in the early 1920s, German propaganda (and parts of the interna-
tional media) had been attempting to incite U.S. opposition to the French
occupation of the Rhine by portraying the African soldiers there as “sav-
ages” and “rapists”—with a logic explicitly indebted to U.S. lynch mobs.
But Locke wants not only to dispel racist myths about the comportment of
black soldiers in Europe, but also to criticize the resurgence of racism in the
United States after the war. Slyly, Locke writes, “I am not going to discuss
motives in this article—(that makes another article, if you please)” (6), and
yet his own motives are nonetheless clear. Above all, his discussion of the
ways “Anglo-Saxon and Latin ways...differ widely” uses a fawning depic-
tion of French military “humanism” to decry—indirectly, by juxtaposi-
tion—the terrors and inequities of racial oppression across the Atlantic.
Later that year, Opportunity published a remarkable exchange of letters
stemming from Locke’s article. Maran wrote an “Open Letter to Professor
Alain Leroy Locke,” initially published in the June 15 issue of Les Conti-
nents and then translated for Opportunity in September.
107 Maran, writing
that “it grieves me to shatter your illusions,” critiques the blindnesses of
Locke’s “Rhine” piece, repeating his argument about the “double counte-
nance” of French colonialism. “The benevolence of France toward subject
races,” Maran remarks bitingly, “is a matter of theory and ofﬁcial pretense.
It is little more than a subterfuge” (261). One shouldn’t be confused about
the conditions of “codiﬁed slavery” in the colonies, nor about the violent
history of forced conscription and forced labor instigated by the French
during the war (262). Maran suggests that Locke “take pains to read” cri-
tiques of French colonial policy such as Lucie Cousturier’s Des Inconnus
chez moi and colonial literature such as the Tharaud brothers’ 1922 La
Randonnée de Samba Diouf.
108 “Reading them,” he continues,
will make clear our position and creed. . . . You will then understand
that the black, brown and yellow soldiers [les volontaires noirs ou
jaunes] did not come to the French colors as the little children come
106 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 118 ---
to Jesus. Far from it. On the contrary, either by express order, or at
least with the tacit approval of the Colonial Administration, in cer-
tain of the colonies government ofﬁcials under one pretext or other of
recruiting actually engaged in seizure and man-hunting.
Thus, summarily, do the ofﬁcial representatives of France superim-
pose civilization. France well understands that job. (262)
Maran concludes by calling for an international strategy of collaboration to
expose the hypocrisy of the French colonial system: “Europeans, Asiatics,
Negroes [nègres], we must work assiduously in the same cause. We must
gather, bit by bit, the evidence of these things in irrefutable fact. And one
by one they will be exposed in the French parliament” (262). While this
call is notable in itself, we should not overlook the tenor of Maran’s cri-
tique: his “Open Letter” is a way of telling Locke not to use blacks “else-
where” in the service of African American civil rights struggles in the
United States. It contests Locke’s articulation of diaspora in his argument,
which prioritizes national integration over international antiracism and
anti-imperialism. In this sense, Maran’s letter is the “ﬂip” side of Locke’s
ﬂippant “watch on the Rhine”—the diaspora writing back, as it were.
Locke, scrambling mightily, admits his narrow motives in his reply,
which is addressed to Maran as “Dear Friend and Kinsman” (262). Re-
treating from the claims of his article, Locke explains that his “ﬁring-range
was set from our own trenches and for a very special purpose. I was not dis-
cussing French policy in Africa, but merely the French treatment of her Ne-
gro soldiers in Europe. At the time I was primarily concerned with con-
trasting this treatment of the man of color in the armies of France with that
of our own American army” (262). The military metaphor is pressed to the
breaking point as a means of claiming “common” purpose between them:
The need for international coordination among us is imperative; that
is why, no matter what you might say, the very sound of your voice is
welcome. ...B u tt h eessential thing, my dear Maran, is not that we
should have common tactics, but common counsel. We cannot all
wear the uniform of the same national loyalty, or carry the weapons of
the same social philosophy. But we can and must coordinate our ef-
forts, and share our burdens as we hope also to share our victories.
(262)
ON RECIPROCITY: RENÉ MARAN AND ALAIN LOCKE 107


--- PAGE 119 ---
The military metaphor seems oddly inappropriate in a discussion of mili-
tary policy toward troops of color. In fact, it allows Locke the seemingly ac-
tive discourse of “commands” and “enlistments” and “barrages” while at the
same time excusing him from the possibility of discussing an international
alliance that would place global democratic rights and anti-imperialism be-
fore civil rights in one country—such a step is “impossible,” for “we cannot
all wear the uniform of the same national loyalty.”
In many ways, Maran’s “Open Letter” calls the bluff of another article
published by Locke in Opportunity, the February 1924 “Apropos of Africa,”
in which Locke had called for the attention of African Americans to the ed-
ucational, economic, and political affairs of Africa in the postwar period.
“American Negroes,” Locke writes, are “culturally the heirs of the entire
continent” of Africa. He goes on to claim that “as the physical composite of
eighty-ﬁve per cent at least of the African stocks, the American Negro is in
a real sense the true Pan-African.”
109 Although the “Africa interest” among
African Americans is a kind of necessary vanguardism for Locke, it is im-
portant to recognize that it is also a kind of necessary anti-Americanism, an
emphatic privileging of black internationalism over and above nationalism:
“[I]t is rather against than within the wish of the interested governments,
that the American Negro must reach out toward his rightful share in the so-
lution of African problems and the development of Africa’s resources.”
110
This pronounced theme in Locke’s work is seldom noted, but it is one of
the more inﬂuential articulations of internationalism in the “New Negro”
period—an argument in the vein of what Locke, in the essay titled “The
Colonial Literature of France,” terms “cosmopolitan humanism.”
111 Even
as Locke writes in the service of civil rights in the United States, he is hedg-
ing his bets, arguing for an explicit strategy that would use the channels of
international arbitration available after World War I to inﬂuence and over-
ride U.S. racial debates. Locke, not surprisingly, is speciﬁcally fascinated by
the possibilities of the League of Nations and the mandates commission
that had placed the former German colonies under international control af-
ter the war. He claims that
[m]inorities have as their best protection today the court of world
opinion; if they do not live on an international scale and in the eyes
of the world, they are doomed even in the twentieth century to medi-
eval conditions and hardships. . . . [T]he Jew has been made interna-
108 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 120 ---
tional by persecution and forced dispersion,—and so, potentially,
h a v ew e ....[A]s a minority threatened here and there, its only intel-
ligent safe-guard has been international appeal and international or-
ganization....
We have for the present, in spite of Mr. Garvey’s hectic efforts, no
Zionistic hope or intention. But for protection and mutual develop-
ment, we must develop the race mind and race interest on an interna-
tional scale. For that reason, we should be most vitally interested in
the idea of the League of Nations and all kindred movements.
112
In one interview, Locke went so far as to describe the seat of the League,
Geneva, as “the Mecca of the liberal and progressive elements of all na-
tions.”
113
In the most remarkable section of this essay, however, Locke not only
advocates such a black internationalism but also begins to temper his
vanguardism with a call for what he terms “reciprocity” in African diasporic
politics.
114 In his view, the “best channels of cooperative effort” lie in educa-
tional exchanges and economic investment projects, precisely because black
internationalism in politics gives rise to “inevitable contentiousness and
suspicions.”
115 The “spirit” of emerging black political internationalism,
then, must for Locke be “reciprocal,” rather than provincial or condescend-
ing (the notion of some “civilizing mission”), because that international-
ism is necessarily a politics of difference—a dialogue among blacks placed
unevenly in transnational political environments, or something like
what T ovalou Houénou terms “diversité dans l’action.” “We must real-
ize that in some respects we need what Africa has to give us as much as, or
even more than, Africa needs what we in turn have to give her,” Locke
instructs:
[U]nless we approach Africa in the spirit of the ﬁnest reciprocity, our
efforts will be ineffectual or harmful. . . . [T]he meeting of mind be-
tween the African and the Afro-American is dependent upon a broad-
ening of vision and a dropping of prejudices from both sides. The Af-
rican must dismiss his provincialism, his political-mindedness, his
pride of clan; the Afro-American, his missionary condescension, his
religious parochialism, and his pride of place. The meeting of the two
will mean the inauguration of a new era for both.
116
ON RECIPROCITY: RENÉ MARAN AND ALAIN LOCKE 109


--- PAGE 121 ---
As he envisions this model for a truly “Pan-African” politics, Locke argues
that mainly through the work of the Garvey movement, “the ﬁrst great
span in the archway” has already in large part been established: “communi-
cation, exchange of thought and information between American Negroes
and their brothers in the West Indies.”
117 But Maran’s “Open Letter” stakes
out a challenge to this model from the perspective of the Caribbean, in the
voice of a Martinican intellectual, around the issue of the African presence
in the French military (and from a Parisian newspaper run by a West Afri-
can, T ovalou Houénou), by criticizing Locke’s strategic misrecognition of
French colonialism. In this case of black international politics, Maran re-
minds Locke, there is no way to consider the “American Negro” to be “the
most disinterested party,” as Locke would have it.
118 Locke’s commitment
to civil rights in the United States is as context-bound, as “provincial,” as
Maran’s commitment to the ideals of French universalist humanism.
Maran’s intervention is black internationalism as reciprocity, in other
words. One should note that reciprocity is not quite the same as “call and
response,” that structure of antiphony we so often associate with black ex-
pression. Reciprocity is less an originating appeal that is answered than a
structure of mutual answerability: articulations of diaspora in tension and
in dissonance, without necessary resolution or synthesis. As Kenneth War-
ren has argued, diasporic thought is marked by ambiguities and contradic-
tions that exceed capture by any one individual or text, but it is “perhaps
most of all, a desire to speak these contradictions in a single voice. Yet...
this voice could not be single but was, and is, poignantly dependent on get-
ting an answer from invisible shores.”
119 In this sense, diaspora can be con-
ceived only as the uneasy and unﬁnished practice of such dialogue—where
each text both fulﬁlls the demand of the other’s “call” and at the same time
exposes its necessary “misrecognitions,” its particular distortions of the way
race travels beyond the borders of nation and language.
What are the effects of this debate? In fact, there are deep reverberations
from what is at ﬁrst glance a moment of mishearing and miscommuni-
cation—from this exchange of articulations, “takes” on the diaspora, differ-
ent invocations of blacks elsewhere. Early in 1925, Maran’s work began to
be translated regularly for publication in Opportunity, and Locke would
strive unsuccessfully in later years to have Maran’s novels (includingLe Ro-
man d’un Nègre and Djouma, chien de la brousse) published in English.
120
110 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 122 ---
Through Maran and Paulette Nardal, Locke would meet the younger gen-
eration of Francophone students in Paris.
Moreover, this dialogue had important consequences for the shape of
Opportunity itself. Scholars of the journal such as David Levering Lewis,
Abby Arthur Johnson, and Ronald Maberry Johnson have noted a shift in
the magazine’s focus during its second year of existence, a transformation
usually linked to the inﬂuence of the famous March 1924 Civic Club din-
ner (in celebration of the publication of Jessie Fauset’s novelThere Is Confu-
sion), which the journal’s editor, Charles S. Johnson, and Locke used to in-
augurate the “New Negro” movement. In Lewis’s view, this shift was the
result of Johnson’s new editorial emphasis on literary material in the jour-
nal, moving away from the previously dominant sociological vision of Ur-
ban League directors George Edmund Haynes and Eugene Kinckle Jones:
Until late 1924, most of Opportunity’s articles had read like chapters
from Johnson’sThe Negro in Chicago: Horace Mann Bond’s analysis
of wartime army intelligence testing; E. Franklin Frazier’s discussions
of Negro education; Melville Herskovits’s statistical conclusions about
racial variations in physiology; Joseph A. Hill’s study of migration to
the cities; and Monroe W . Work’s study of rural and urban demogra-
phy. Now, following the Civic Club affair, the magazine’s literary con-
tent began to grow rapidly.
121
It is just as important, though, to consider this shift in terms of diasporic is-
sues in the wake of Maran’s “Open Letter.” Since its ﬁrst issue in January
1923, Opportunity had always evidenced an interest in transnational black
culture, reporting on a wide variety of topics: Claude McKay’s attendance
at the meetings of the Communist International, the publication of
Maran’sBatouala, sociological studies and ﬁction in French on “Negro”
topics, the racism of American tourists in France, and the condition of Af-
rica after World War I.
122 This interest was certainly reﬂected in the May
1924 issue of the journal, which focused on “African art,” and included es-
says by Locke, Albert C. Barnes, and the French art critic and collector Paul
Guillaume, as well as an essay by Carl Van Doren introducing the “younger
school of Negro writers.” We should not ignore the fact that two of the
three poems included as examples of the emergent school (Claude McKay’s
ON RECIPROCITY: RENÉ MARAN AND ALAIN LOCKE 111


--- PAGE 123 ---
“Africa” and Lewis Alexander’s “Africa”) are thematically not “Harlem” po-
ems, but works reﬂecting the “Africa interest” of the issue.123
It may not be possible to separate the turn to literature in Opportunity
from the turn to the diasporic, in other words. The clearest example is in-
deed the ﬁrst time the journal decides to publish creative material, in April
1923. One of the two poems in the issue is Countee Cullen’s “The Dance
of Love (After Reading René Maran’s Batouala).”
124 It is one of Cullen’s
weaker efforts, certainly, apparently inspired by one of the controversial
erotic scenes in Maran’s novel: “All night we danced upon our windy hill, /
Your dress a cloud of tangled midnight hair, / And love was much too
much for me to wear / My leaves; the killer roared above his kill, / But we
danced on.... ”B u ti ti salso surely signiﬁcant that the journal chose this
expressly intertexual poem in particular as one of its ﬁrst forays into pub-
lishing poetry.
Even more interestingly, Cullen’s exoticist poem goes on to become part
of the initial batch of material exchanged between Opportunity and Les
Continents in the wake of Maran’s “Open Letter.” During the summer of
1924, as Locke was composing his response to Maran’s critique, other ma-
terial was exchanged as well: for instance, Kojo T ovalou Houénou’s “The
Problem of Negroes in French Colonial Africa” appeared in the JulyOppor-
tunity, preceding his arrival in New York by a few weeks.
125 And the ex-
change was reciprocal: in the September Les Continents, there was a feature
on the new generation of U.S. black poets, which reprinted Cullen’s “The
Dance of Love” as its centerpiece. It seems that T ovalou Houénou and
Maran asked Locke to provide a brief statement on the “younger” New Ne-
gro poets, such as McKay, Hughes, and Cullen. In the Parisian journal,
“The Dance of Love” is published in English, but Locke’s brief intro-
duction is translated into French under the title “La jeune poésie africo-
américaine.”
126
Locke’s statement is notable, not only because it is one of the ﬁrst de-
scriptions of the younger Harlem “Renaissance” generation published any-
where, but also for the way the translation introduces yet another racial
appellation (“Africo-Americans”)—another instance of the awkward ways
black modern thought is translated, often in such novel and oddly formu-
lated vocables. It is tempting to read the term as a trace of the sea changes
that any racial representation must undergo in the process of dissemina-
tion: the ways that translation always involves not just a transport of con-
112 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 124 ---
tent but a “regulated transformation.” 127 Locke prefaces the Cullen poem
with these words:
La plus jeune génération de la culture Africo-Américaine est brillam-
ment représentée par toute une pléiade de jeunes poètes noirs: Claude
Mac-Kay, Jean T osmer [sic], Langston Hughes, et Countee Cullen, à
qui nous devons le poème suivant. Chez tous ceux-ci on reconnaît
sans peine un beau résultat acquis et un espoir justiﬁé, chose triple-
ment signiﬁcative au point de vue personnel, national et racial. Il est
permis d’insister sur ce dernier trait, l’importance au point de vue ra-
cial, car il semble démontré que le mouvement dénommé par les
alarmistes réactionnaires “la marée montante du péril noir” est plus
vraisemblablement destiné à rendre la culture plus profonde et plus
vaste, et non à embourber et engloutir la civilisation. Le poème sur le
“Batouala” de René Maran n’implique-t-il pas en lui-même le futur
enrichissement de l’art par ce nouveau mouvement du génie africain,
par ce nouveau commerce intellectuel entre les continents?
The youngest generation of Africo-American culture is brilliantly rep-
resented by a whole host of young Negro poets: Claude McKay, Jean
T oomer, Langston Hughes, and Countee Cullen, to whom we owe
the poem that follows. In all of them, one easily recognizes great ac-
complishment and a fulﬁlled hope, something triply signiﬁcant, from
a point of view at once personal, national and racial. We may insist on
this last characteristic, their importance from a racial point of view,
because it seems to have demonstrated that the movement called “the
rising tide of the black peril” by reactionary alarmists is destined not
to bog down and engulf civilization, but more realistically to render
culture deeper and broader. Doesn’t the poem about René Maran’s
“Batouala” itself imply the future enrichment of art by this new
movement of the African genius, by this new intellectual commerce
between the continents?
Locke introduces a notion of an increasing universalization of “culture,”
which is here understood as inherently cosmopolitan and diverse, rather
than as the paradigmatic self-representation of a particular civilization. In
fact, Locke returned often to this call for a strategic disjuncture between
culture and civilization, which should be understood in its most robust
ON RECIPROCITY: RENÉ MARAN AND ALAIN LOCKE 113


--- PAGE 125 ---
sense, as an early and salutary attempt to think beyond the pitfalls of what
Edward Said has more recently helped us comprehend as the “cultures of
imperialism.”
128
As Locke puts it in a 1925 essay on internationalism and art: “Our cul-
tural relations, especially with widely divergent cultures, have thus been in
the mood of imperialism, and with the more closely related bodies of art
there has been too much of the spirit of exclusive proprietary claims and
too little of the feeling of equivalent human expressions.”
129 In this piece,
Locke argues that the contemporary establishment of “culture-capitals”
such as Harlem might not be either balkanizing or nationalist at all. The
development of particular cultural expression, Locke claims, can foster
not “reactionary political nationalisms” but instead “progressive cultural na-
tionalism,” leading somewhat paradoxically to an “internationalization of
culture” wholly consistent with universalist humanism. Citing the philoso-
pher George Santayana, Locke prophesies that “civilization and culture
[will] come to a parting of the ways, when development of the one must
proceed in the direction of an ever-spreading unity and uniformity, and of
the other in the opposite and non-competitive direction of an increased
and enriched diversity.” Locke suggests that not art itself, but criticism (the
ideological positioning and interpretation of expressive culture) must be
dislodged from “reactionary” political nationalisms:
Cutting across the established lines of cleavage, springing up within
the borders of the old nationalisms, [cultural diversiﬁcations] are
already irreconcilable with the old order, but the clash which ap-
proaches holds doom not for nationalism in art but for chauvinism in
criticism. Not much longer shall we be able to make jingoes of our
poets, propaganda of our art, and stalking-horses of our cultural in-
heritances. Purged of chauvinistic motives and ideals, national and
racial expression, as cultural individualities, will have scope and in-
centive to develop more freely and with sounder values. (75)
In other words, the uniﬁcation of international civil society foreshadowed
in the League of Nations does not preclude the increasing variety of partic-
ular cultural expressive forms.
What is especially interesting about “La jeune poésie africo-américaine”
is that Locke ﬁnds evidence of a cultural “enrichment” in Cullen’s poem, as
an example of black “intellectual commerce between the continents.” Left
114 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 126 ---
unsaid, but implicit in the positioning of the passage, is that Locke consid-
ered his own exchanges with Maran and Les Continents to be equally felici-
tous commerce—a diasporic movement “of the African genius” that deep-
ens and broadens art, even as it explores a “racially” speciﬁc literary
expression. Moreover, a reading of Opportunity demonstrates the degree to
which Locke considered translation to be the necessary mode of such ex-
change. The many translations subsequently published in the journal by
some of the major “Renaissance” intellectuals (Jessie Fauset, Mercer Cook,
Rayford Logan, Countee Cullen) may indeed be the major legacy of the
Maran/Locke encounter.
130
The Practice of Diaspora
My argument about the dynamics of print culture between Harlem and
Paris recalls Benedict Anderson’s well-known suggestion that the “steady
onward clocking of homogenous, empty time” in the newspaper is one of
the pivotal means by which an “imagined community” is represented. The
“profound ﬁctiveness” of the newspaper is based in its reliance on “essential
literary convention”: the “inclusion and juxtaposition” of events that are
“linked” above all by their coincidence in time, their simultaneous surfac-
ing in a given moment in a serial mass publication.
131 Here, though, I di-
verge from Anderson in asking whether the periodical can function not
simply as the “technical means for ‘re-presenting’ the kind of imagined
community that is the nation,” but more complexly, also and at the same
time as the “technical means” for representing the imagined community of
a diaspora.
132
More speciﬁcally, this means asking about the function of translation in
publications such as Opportunity, the Negro World, or Les Continents. What
exactly is being “imagined” when one periodical translates an article origi-
nally written in a different language in another periodical in a different na-
tion-state? On the one hand, since almost all the articles translated in these
publications are current (not historical or archival), part of the work per-
formed has to do with what Anderson calls “simultaneity”—the sense of
reading now what peoples of African descent are doing or thinking else-
where. On the other hand, Anderson’s emphasis on “anonymity” seems less
useful in this context, since translations so regularly highlight the speciﬁcity
and irreducibility of difference: particular examples of “black” people else-
where doing different things, or the same things in different ways. A trans-
ON RECIPROCITY: RENÉ MARAN AND ALAIN LOCKE 115


--- PAGE 127 ---
national community of “race” structured by décalage involves a special sort
of imaginative work, in other words.
If the practice of translation is ﬁrst of all the “simple miming of the re-
sponsibility to the trace of the other in the self,” then translation plays a pe-
culiar role in the imagining of “racial” identity.133 It is a role that is necessar-
ily “double-edged,” as Lawrence Venuti puts it: designed for a particular
constituency, bringing outside material “in” to a domestic context, but at
the same time transforming that domestic “inside” with the inhabiting of
an “outside” or “foreign” voice.
134 This is particularly true for publications
geared to frame black modern identity. For as “foreign” as it might be (in
terms of language, perspective, ideology), a French article, say, ontirailleurs
sénégalais or on biguine in Martinique in the end aims differently at the
same discursive formation as Opportunity: the framing of modern identity
under the sign of race. The “double-edge” is that translation both provides
support for the “domestic” agenda and continually threatens to undermine
it or reconﬁgure it. T ranslations of Francophone material in the “Harlem
Renaissance” give evidence of black modernity and perhaps most impor-
tant show the ways that “race” actually transcends the nation-state: if the
color line is global, if people of African descent are persecuted around the
world, then the black U.S. intellectual can lay claim to a discourse of uni-
versality, and can gain purchase on the institutionalization of universality
represented by international civil society. But at the same time, translations
open “race” to the inﬂuence of an exterior, pulling and tugging at that same
signiﬁed in an interminable practice of difference, through an unclosed
ﬁeld of signiﬁers (Negro, noir, black, nègre, Afro-American, Aframerican,
Africo-American, Afro-Latin, etc.) whose shifts inescapably reshape the pos-
sibilities of what black modern culture might be.
The exchange between Maran and Locke theorizes a way to inhabit,
even collaborate, in this uneasy space of diaspora. “Reciprocity,” in de-
manding not just mutual attention, mutual translation, but also mutual
answerability, aims toward a practice of imagining diaspora in print culture
that would be structured through what Kenneth Warren terms “the imagi-
native contemporaneity of Africa and the ‘West’ and of black elites and
masses.”
135 Anderson’s “simultaneity” may not sufﬁce here, since the notion
that each segment in the diasporic imagined community is simply “out
there” (“moving along quietly, awaiting its next reappearance in the plot”)
can also serve as an alibi for silencing, ignoring what is outside a given hori-
116 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 128 ---
zon of competence or predilection. A better term might be coevalness,
which for Johannes Fabian covers both the synchronous (“events occurring
at the same physical time”) and the contemporary (“co-occurrence in...
typological time”), and moreover connotes answerability: “a common, ac-
tive ‘occupation,’ or sharing, of time.”
136 As a model for dialogue and ex-
change, reciprocity would attend to the décalage of diaspora by ensuring
coevalness in the very structure of any black internationalist endeavor.
It should already be evident, even from the contrast between the corre-
spondence of Les Continents with the Negro World and with Opportunity,
that this model is a structure for the political articulation of black interna-
tionalism, rather than a structure that would install some predetermined
politics. We should not overlook the fact that Maran and Locke ﬁnd com-
mon ground in a commitment to an elitist (and sexist) black vanguardism.
They are “stretched out” on different “chaise lounges” on different “veran-
das,” but both assume the impossibility of black internationalism as any
sort of popular project, as anything but a correspondence among theévolués
and the Talented T enth.
137 Thus, theorizing the practice of diaspora
through reciprocity does not evade the kind of complaint that the Guya-
nese writer Léon-Gontran Damas, for example, still ﬁnds it necessary to
voice in 1939, in an essay titled “Misère Noire” (Black Misery).
138 “ I ti sr i -
diculous to pretend that the American Negro [nègre américain] is not, ma-
terially, the most privileged in the world,” Damas writes. “In no other
country has the Negro race [la race noire] had as many economic and ﬁnan-
cial possibilities. ...I nn oother country has the Negro race been able to
develop in a racial sense [développer dans le sens de sa race] to the same de-
gree” (341). Still, Damas laments the “incomprehension that threatens to
slip into the international relations between blacks” [incompréhension qui
risque de se glisser dans les rapports internationaux entre nègres] (342). He tells
of a conversation in Paris between a “special envoy” from black American
newspapers and a Caribbean man who had been living in Africa for the
prior ten years. The black American was impressed to see Blaise Diagne, the
ﬁrst African to be elected to the French legislature (and at that time the vice
president of the Chambre des Députés), preside over a session of the legisla-
tive body, whereas the Caribbean man was impressed by the black journal-
ist’s friendly, respectful reception from the mainstream French newspapers.
They talked over and around each other’s heads. And meanwhile, Damas
complains, although all the world knew about the horrors of lynching in
ON RECIPROCITY: RENÉ MARAN AND ALAIN LOCKE 117


--- PAGE 129 ---
the United States, no one paid attention to French colonial abuses in Af-
rica; no one paid attention to Diagne’s remark in the Chambre that educa-
tion in African colonies was “excessive.” For Damas, such skewed patterns
of perception are intimately linked to the shape of print culture: noting the
brief history of the bilingual journal La Revue du monde noir, Damas argues
that part of the problem is there has never been a speciﬁcally black literary
vehicle (publication nègre) appearing with any consistency or duration in
French.
Such “misery,” such mutual incomprehension, may well be constitutive
in the elaboration of black modernity as a transnational phenomenon, even
in a structure of reciprocity. In other words, the ambiguities of diaspora do
not resolve. As Fabian comments, coevalness is not a thing or a state with
certain properties, but a “mode of temporal relations” that is necessarily
“embedded in culturally organized praxis.”
139 In this sense, black interna-
tionalism is above all practiced in the multilayered and convoluted ex-
changes between periodicals such as Opportunity and Les Continents, in
their sometimes uneasy and sometimes misdirected attempts to carry black-
ness beyond the boundaries of nation and language, to read the race prob-
lem as a world problem. In this sense, diasporic reciprocity is above all a call
to translate.
118 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 130 ---
CHAPTER 3
FEMINISM AND L ’INTERNA TIONALISME NOIR:
PAULETTE NARDAL
I
n the summer of 1931, a Martinican student named Paulette Nardal and
a Haitian dentist named Léo Sajous founded La Revue du monde noir, a
French-English bilingual literary journal that, during its six-issue run un-
til the following spring, became a crucial focal point for African diasporic
arts and the growing movement of African and Caribbean intellectuals in
Paris. Paulette Nardal would later explain that the Revue “was Dr. Sajous’
idea originally. He had noticed that there was very little community of
tastes between Negroes of different nations, and in different parts of the
world; he felt if he could found a common journal of some kind, to include
all sorts of articles, scientiﬁc, literary, geographical, etc., and a correspon-
dence page on which all kinds of questions from Negroes everywhere could
be answered, it would help draw Negroes all over the world together.”
1
Sajous is a crucial interwar ﬁgure whose role has not been fully appreciated:
he was active both in the anticolonialist and communist organizations such
as Lamine Senghor’s Ligue de Défense de la Race Nègre (Sajous offered free
dental service to black workers in his ofﬁces in Ménilmontant) and in more
moderate groups associated with Maurice Satineau’s La Dépêche africaine.
But Nardal’s role, as editor, translator, and contributor, was at least as im-
portant as Sajous’s. The roots ofLa Revue du monde noir lie not just in the
periodicals that preceded it in the previous decade (Les Continentsand espe-
cially La Dépêche africaine), but also in the weekly salons hosted by Nardal
and her three sisters in their home in Clamart, just outside Paris, or by their
cousin Louis Thomas-Achille in his apartment at 51, rue Geoffrey St.
Hilaire, overlooking the Jardin des Plantes, or by René Maran in his apart-
ment on rue Bonaparte. With her ﬂuent English, Paulette Nardal became
the most important connection between the “Harlem Renaissance” writers
and the Francophone university students who would become the core of
the Négritude movement.


--- PAGE 131 ---
More than any other interwar periodical, La Revue du monde noir sys-
tematically strove to practice black internationalism as bilingualism, run-
ning English and French in parallel columns throughout every issue. This
approach comprehends the link among intellectuals of African descent to
be paradigmatically a link across linguistic difference, and thus it is ﬁrst and
foremost the journal’s translations that attempt to “create among the Ne-
groes [les Noirs] of the entire world, regardless of nationality, an intellectual
and moral bond [lien] that will permit them to know each other better, to
love one another fraternally, to defend their collective interests more effec-
tively, and to glorify their Race.”
2 Nardal’s interest in creating “bonds”
among black intellectuals carried over into her salon, where she served as
a “cultural intermediary,” introducing the young Léopold Sédar Senghor
not just to Maran but also to Claude McKay, Mercer Cook, Carter G.
Woodson, Alain Locke, Countee Cullen, and Hale Woodruff.
3
The narrative of the emergence of Négritude has been a story of “rep-
120 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA
Léopold Senghor and the editorial collective of La Revue du monde noir (June 26,
1932). Paulette Nardal is on the far right, Clara Shepard is sixth from the right,
and Senghor is third from the right. Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris.
[To view this image, refer to  
the print version of this title.]


--- PAGE 132 ---
resentative colored men”: Senghor, Léon-Gontran Damas, and Aimé
Césaire. The symbology of the movement is sung not only though Léopold
Sédar Senghor’s hymns to the “Black Woman”(Femme Noire), but equally
through a range of commentary on the black woman’s role that systemati-
cally overlooks the direct contributions of women like Nardal to the move-
ment’s emergence.
4 We are left with more or less explicit metaphors of
the “fathers of Négritude” that frame its birth as a special kind of immacu-
late conception. In a 1972 interview, for example, Damas told Keith
Warner:
In Vermont at the Conference on Black Francophone Literature, they
asked me, “Who is the father of Négritude?” I said, “I’m fed up of all
that. I don’t understand why Négritude needs so many fathers.” Any-
way I recalled an African proverb. I said that in Africa we don’t know
our fathers, we know our mothers. Now, the man who coined the
word “Négritude” was Aimé Césaire, and Senghor has been obliged
to admit this. But, for many reasons, Senghor is ﬁrst now, the father
of Négritude. In Vermont they asked me who I was among the three.
I said, “Perhaps I’m the Holy Spirit.”
5
What’s fascinating about this passage is the way Damas moves slyly from
matrifocal foundation (“we don’t know our fathers, we know our mothers”)
to paternal dénouement (“Senghor is...t h efather of Négritude”), from
“Mama’s Baby, Papa’s Maybe” to the T rinity. Although both Césaire and
Senghor would pay tribute to Paulette Nardal after her death in 1985,
6
there has never been a thorough attempt to take account of her work dur-
ing the ﬁfteen years she lived in Paris—arriving in the metropole in the
mid-1920s to pursue a licence degree in English (she wrote a thesis on
Stowe’sUncle T om’s Cabin), taking up a pivotal role in black periodical cul-
ture while she was completing her studies (she contributed to La Dépêche
africaine, Le Soir, La Revue du monde noir, L ’Etudiant noir, France-Outremer,
and Le Cri des Nègres among other venues), participating in the demonstra-
tions that erupted in Paris following the Italian invasion of Ethiopia in
1935, and ﬁnally departing to return to Martinique on the eve of World
War II. What becomes clear is that the history of this impossibility is also
the question of whether such an erasure is constitutive in the elaboration of
a Négritude aesthetic, and moreover whether it might indeed be concomi-
FEMINISM AND L ’INTERNA TIONALISME NOIR 121


--- PAGE 133 ---
tant with the forgetting of a more avowedly anticolonial black politics in
the 1920s and 1930s, represented in the work of intellectuals including
Sajous, Lamine Senghor, and Tiemoko Garan Kouyaté.
Paulette Nardal complained in 1963 in a letter to Jacques Hymans, one
of the biographers of Léopold Senghor, that a complete “silence was main-
tained for a long period” about her activities in the 1930s. She wrote that
her sister Jane Nardal was the ﬁrst “promoter of this movement of ideas, so
broadly exploited later,” and that Senghor and Césaire “took up the ideas
tossed out by us and expressed them with more ﬂash and brio ....[ W ] e
were but women, real pioneers—let’s say that we blazed the trail for them.”
7
What would it mean, though, to stake out a “silenced” genealogy of Négri-
tude through the transnational intellectual circuits of African American
and Caribbean women during the interwar period? What would it mean to
theorize a feminist articulation of diaspora?
In the last issue of La Revue du monde noir, Nardal asserted that Fran-
cophone women in particular had instigated the “awakening” of black cul-
tural interest and correspondence. Her essay “Eveil de la conscience de
race” (“Awakening of Race Consciousness”) may be the single most sig-
niﬁcant work to be published in the journal. It is often overlooked that her
evocation of an emergent black cultural internationalism is linked to an
equally nascent feminism—a critical understanding of the particular posi-
tioning of upwardly mobile women of African descent in the metropole,
and a consideration of the relations between Caribbean men and women in
migration. Among the Caribbean communities in Paris (les Noirs Antillais),
she contends, there have been momentous shifts in attitude toward “ques-
tions of race” in the wake of the International Colonial Exposition in the
summer of 1931:
I lyaàpeine quelques années, on pourrait même dire quelques mois,
certains sujets étaient tabous à la Martinique. Malheur à qui osait y
toucher: on ne pouvait parler d’esclavage ni proclamer sa ﬁerté d’être
descendante de Noirs Africains sans faire ﬁgure d’exaltée ou tout au
moins d’originale.
A few years ago, we might even say a few months ago, certain ques-
tions were simply tabooed in Martinica. Woe to those who dared to
approach them! One could not speak about slavery, or proclaim his
122 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 134 ---
pride of being of African descent without being considered as an over-
excited or at least as an odd person.8
The English translation of “Awakening of Race Consciousness”—as with all
the articles in La Revue—is by Nardal herself and the African American
schoolteacher Clara Shepard, living in Paris at the time. It is worth consid-
ering the complexities of this bilingual, collaborative practice, despite the
minor slips and idiosyncrasies in their English. In this passage, for instance,
it should be noted that the French “descendante” is feminine. Thus the
phrase might be rendered more faithfully: “One could not speak about slav-
ery, or proclaim one’s pride in being a woman of African descent without
being considered reckless, or at least eccentric.”
Nardal contrasts this shift in Antillean attitudes with the more histori-
cally rooted racial consciousness among African Americans, offering a brief
survey of black U.S. history and literature. With language that evidences
the inﬂuence of both James Weldon Johnson’s preface toThe Book of Amer-
ican Negro Poetry and Langston Hughes’s 1926 essay “The Negro Artist
and the Racial Mountain,” Nardal argues that “without abandoning black
themes [thèmes nègres] and the emotional contribution due to their ances-
tral sufferings,” modern African American writers
en font le point de départ de leur inspiration, les universalisent, et,
chose plus importante encore, abandonnent les moyens d’expression
spéciﬁquement nègres, pour employer les formes et les symboles de la
littérature traditionnelle. Nos lecteurs ont eu, par les vers de Claude
Mac Kay, un aperçu de cette nouvelle attitude et plus récemment en-
core, par les poèmes de Langston Hughes, ils ont pu constater que les
américains, ayant écarté tout complexe d’infériorité, expriment tran-
quillement leur “être individuel à la peau noire, sans crainte et sans
honte.”
took them as the starting point of their inspiration and gave them a
universal purport. It is important to note that they abandonned [sic]
the Negro dialect in favour of the forms and symbols of traditional
literature. The poems of Claude Mac-Kay which were published in
this Review have acquainted our readers with this new attitude, and
more recently, those of Langston Hughes have shown how the young
FEMINISM AND L ’INTERNA TIONALISME NOIR 123


--- PAGE 135 ---
Negro writers, rejecting all inferiority complex, “intend to express
their individual dark-skinned selves without fear or shame.” (27)
Nardal advances the conjecture that the French colonial policy of assimila-
tion kept previous generations of Antillean writers from making the same
progression and traces the rise of a black modern Francophone intellec-
tual culture through work such as Maran’s Batouala, the newspapers Les
Continents and La Dépêche africaine, and the Guyanese writer Leo Cressan’s
1928 Heimatlos. Although exile and “uprooting” (déracinement) gives
much of this work “en dépit de leur formation latine, une âme nègre” (“a
real Negro soul, in spite of the authors’ Latin education”) (25), Nardal
makes a strong case that La Revue du monde noir represents a break in this
tradition. Unlike the Francophone literature in the 1920s, La Revue con-
ceives black culture as an autonomous and transnational tradition rather
than a subset of French colonial history. The predecessor works in the
1920s remained “tributaries of Latin culture” rather than attempts at study-
ing the “Negro question” on its own terms (la question noire en elle-même):
“Aucun d’entre eux n’exprime la foi en l’avenir de la race, et la nécessité de
créer un sentiment de solidarité entre les différents groupements noirs
disséminés par le monde” (“In none of them do we ﬁnd the expression of a
sincere faith in the future of the race and the necessity of creating a feeling
of solidarity between the different groups of Negroes living throughout the
globe”) (29).
Notably, Nardal locates this break in modern Francophone culture spe-
ciﬁcally in the group of Antillean women students living in the metropole
after World War I:
Pourtant, parallèlement aux efforts isolés cités plus haut s’afﬁrmaient
chez un groupe d’étudiantes antillaises à Paris les aspirations qui
devaient se cristalliser autour de la Revue du Monde noir. Les femmes
de couleur vivant seules à la métropole moins favorisées jusqu’à
l’Exposition coloniale que leurs congénères masculins aux faciles
succès, ont ressenti bien avant eux le besoin d’une solidarité raciale
qui ne serait pas seulement d’ordre matériel: c’est ainsi qu’elles se sont
éveillées à la conscience de race. Le sentiment de déracinement . . .
aura été le point de départ de leur évolution.
124 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 136 ---
However, parallel to the isolated efforts above mentioned, the aspira-
tions which were to be crystallized around “The Review of the Black
World” asserted themselves among a group of Antillean women stu-
dents in Paris. Until the Colonial Exposition, the coloured women
living alone in the metropolis have certainly been less favoured than
coloured men who are content with a certain easy success. Long be-
fore the latter, they have felt the need of a racial solidarity that would
not be merely material. They were thus aroused to race consciousness.
The feeling of uprooting which they experienced . . . was the starting
point of their evolution. (29)
This chapter is an attempt not only to reconsider Nardal’s work, but also to
elaborate the theoretical implications of the suggestion that black interna-
tionalism in Paris has a historical origin among migrant communities of
women of African descent. Nardal goes on to record the number of Fran-
cophone women students who had turned to the study of issues of race (la
race noire), mentioning not only her own study of Stowe’s Uncle T om’s
Cabin, but also other students’ theses on subjects including Lafcadio
Hearn, Père Labat, and, more recently, “les écrivains afro-américains” (30).
She hopes that these female pioneers will inﬂuence future students, male
or female (étudiants), to follow such paths of inquiry. “Au cours de leur
évolution,” she comments,
leur curiosité intellectuelle s’est tournée vers l’histoire de leur race et
de leurs pays respectifs. ...A ulieu de mépriser leurs congénères
attardés ou de désespérer de voir jamais la race noire arriver à égaler
la race aryenne, elles se sont mises à l’étude. . . . Espérons que
les étudiants qui préparent des licences d’histoire et de géographie
tireront parti des richesses que leur offrent le passé de la race noire et
le continent africain....
In the course of their evolution, their intellectual curiosity applied it-
self to the history of their race and of their respective countries....
Instead of despising their retarded brothers [sic] or laying aside all
hope of about [sic] the possibility of the black race ever being on a par
with the Aryans, they began to study ....L e tu shope that the stu-
dents coming up for degrees in History and Geography will avail
FEMINISM AND L ’INTERNA TIONALISME NOIR 125


--- PAGE 137 ---
themselves of the riches which the black race and the African conti-
nent offer to them. (29–30)9
With these lines, Paulette Nardal is alluding not just to her own thesis
and to her published journalism, translations, essays, and short stories, but
also to the work of other women. In her letter to Hymans, she mentions
her sister Jane, who returned to the Caribbean in late 1928 but contributed
a number of inﬂuential articles to Maurice Satineau’s La Dépêche africaine,
including her aforementioned “L ’internationalisme noir” in the newspa-
per’s ﬁrst issue. In the words of Paulette Nardal, the black Caribbean
women in Paris,
après s’être docilement mises à l’école de leurs modèles blancs, peut-
être ont-elles passé, comme leurs frères noirs américains, par une
période de révolte. Mais, plus mûres, elles sont devenues moins
sévères, moins intransigeantes, puisque tout est relatif. Leur position
actuelle est le juste milieu.
after a period of obedient imitation of their white models, they may
have passed through their period of revolt, just as [sic] their American
brothers. But, as they grew older, they became less strict, less ultra,
since they have understood the relativity of all things. At present their
position is the middle ground. (29)
T o begin to sketch out this circuit of activity, we might ﬁrst return to the
letter Jane Nardal wrote in French to Alain Locke in December 1927 ask-
ing permission to translate The New Negro. Nardal’s note opens with a sig-
niﬁcant anecdote: “More than two years ago,” she writes, “I attended the
dissertation defense of Mrs. JJ Cooper.”
10 Despite the erroneous ﬁrst initial,
Nardal is clearly alluding here to the open session on March 23, 1925, at
which the great African American feminist Anna Julia Cooper took an un-
approved leave of absence from her job teaching at Dunbar High School in
Washington to defend her Ph.D. dissertation at the Sorbonne on the sub-
ject of “L ’attitude de la France dans la question de l’esclavage entre 1789 et
1848.”
11 Cooper was the fourth black American woman to receive the
Ph.D. She was 65 years old at the time.12 Nardal continues:
Connue, en ma qualité d’étudiante noire, j’allais la complimenter,
une dame de ses amies, me demanda si j’allais, moi aussi, faire
126 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 138 ---
quelque chose pour “my niggers.” Pas précisément, lui répondis-je, en
toute sincérité; en bonne négresse française, je ne voyais rien que de
négligeable et de gênant dans le passé de notre race. Pourtant, ma
curiosité, mon intérêt déjà sollicité par d’autres faits nègres, com-
mençaient à s’éveiller. Ce serait abuser de votre attention que de vous
raconter par quelle série d’expériences je passai avant de découvrir,
tout au fond du creuset, l’esprit de race, entièrement enseveli sous
l’éducation et l’instruction françaises qui m’avaient été données, con-
formément au travail d’assimilation auquel on s’est attelé, depuis
1848, dans les colonies françaises. Car je ne vous écris pour vous faire
“l’Autobiography of a Re-Coloured Woman,” mais pour essayer, moi
aussi, de faire œuvre utile à ma race.
Known in my status as a Negro student, I went up to compliment
her, and one of her friends asked me if I, too, was going to do some-
thing for “my niggers.” Not exactly, I told her in all sincerity; a good
French negress, I did not see anything beyond the negligible and the
painful in the past of our race. Yet, all the same, my curiosity, my in-
FEMINISM AND L ’INTERNA TIONALISME NOIR 127
Alice Nardal and Jane Nardal (c. 1950). Courtesy of Christiane Eda-Pierre.
[To view this image, refer to  
the print version of this title.]


--- PAGE 139 ---
terest, already captured by other things nègre, began to awaken. It
would be an abuse of your time to recount the entire series of experi-
ences through which I discovered, down at the bottom of the cruci-
ble, my racial spirit, completely shrouded under the French education
and instruction given to me, in accordance with the work of assimila-
tion that we have been buckling down to since 1848 in the French
colonies. For I am not writing to tell you the “Autobiography of a Re-
Colored Woman,” but instead to attempt, in my turn, to do work
useful to my race.
One can only imagine Alain Locke, perusing his daily correspondence in
some quaintly decorous ofﬁce in Howard University, coming to the phrase
“faire quelque chose pour ‘my niggers’”! On the one hand, Nardal may have
misheard the accent of an English-speaking friend of Anna Julia Cooper
who was saying the word “Negroes.” On the other hand, this may be
Nardal’s (mis)translation of the French word nègres, which she most likely
would have considered a derogatory term in 1925 (this would explain the
use of nègre later on: she is pointing out her “awakening racial conscious-
ness,” her reconception of the term in the preceding few years). At the same
time, Jane Nardal possessed more than a streak of sarcasm: it is possible that
she is trying to use the phrase to joke with Locke, not quite understanding
its weight in English. After all, Jane Nardal had taken a degree in Classics at
the Sorbonne, not in English like her sister. Reading it as awkward humor
would make sense in light of the rest of the passage: her tongue-in-cheek
descriptions of the ways Antilleans “buckled down” to the task of assimila-
tion, and her more successful joke with the title of James Weldon Johnson’s
The Autobiography of an Ex-Colored Man. All we can say with some cer-
tainty, I think, is that it seems unlikely that Cooper’s friend is a lonely har-
binger of late-twentieth century rehabilitations of “nigger” in casual black
U.S. speech and hip-hop culture.
After this remarkable introduction, she moves to the business of her let-
ter, requesting permission to translate Locke’s collection The New Negro
with Paulette for the French publisher Payot. She requests Locke’s advice
about editing down the volume for an abridged French publication, noting
that such a task is difﬁcult for her, as she cares so deeply for the work of so
many of the authors:
128 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 140 ---
Pourtant mon embarras fut grand: il me fallait choisir entre tous ces
auteurs qui me sont déjà de vieilles connaissances (car je suis une
lectrice assidue d’Opportunity que Miss Nellie Bright a l’obligeance
de nous envoyer, à ses amies et à moi). Comment ne pas réduire les
noms et les articles de W . White, A. Locke, W . Pickens, Domingo,
Mrs. MacDougal, Burghart Du Bois, les poèmes de C. MacKay,
Lanston Hughes, Jean T oomer, etc.? (Je cite de mémoire.) J’ai été
aussi particulièrement charmée par l’artistique présentation de “The
New Negro,” par les illustrations si modernes et si carac-
téristiques....
Yet my consternation was great: I had to choose among all these au-
thors who are already old acquaintances (for I am an assiduous reader
of Opportunity, which Miss Nellie Bright is kind enough to send us,
her friends and me). How to trim the names and articles of W . White,
A. Locke, W . Pickens, Domingo, Mrs. MacDougal, Burghart Du
Bois, the poems of C. McKay, Langston Hughes, Jean T oomer, etc.?
(I cite from memory.) I have also been charmed in particular by the
artistic presentation of The New Negro, by the illustrations, so mod-
ern and so characteristic. . . .
The quote is fascinating as much for its matter-of-fact evocation of a trans-
national community of interaction and interest among black women in
Paris (Francophone women going to support Anna Julia Cooper at her de-
fense; Nellie Bright regularly sending Jane Nardal copies of Opportunity in
Paris) as for its enthusiasm about The New Negro.
Gender in Black Paris
Unfortunately, we have only a scattered sense of the travels of black women
intellectuals and artists in the ﬁrst part of the twentieth century. Cooper
was one of three black women to address the World’s Congress of Repre-
sentative Women in 1893 and one of the few women to attend the 1900
Pan-African Conference in London.
13 There are fragmented records of the
transnational voyages, both physical and ﬁctional, of Bright, Mary Church
T errell, Jessie Fauset, Nella Larsen, Gwendolyn Bennett, Zora Neale
Hurston, and others.
14 There is a good deal of recent scholarship on inter-
national feminism in the interwar period and on women in France, particu-
FEMINISM AND L ’INTERNA TIONALISME NOIR 129


--- PAGE 141 ---
larly in the suffrage movement. Yet one is hard-pressed to ﬁnd work on
French feminism that includes any discussion of feminist participation in
debates around French colonialism in the interwar period.
15 Even the brief
commentaries on Josephine Baker in some work on French women be-
tween the wars tend to read her as a sort of inconsequential stage alien,
untethered to the world around her. On the one hand, the performer the
French called “La Baker” is portrayed as exceptional, with no links to the
community of black performers in France. At the same time, there is no at-
tempt to account for the earth-shattering impact of her image on notions
of French femininity during the period. As Countee Cullen remarked, Jose-
phine Baker was “like Cinderella touched with a magic wand—only this
Cinderella balked at clothes. And Paris is in a state of violent hysteria over
her; there are Josephine Baker perfumes, costumes, bobs, statuettes; in fact,
she sets the pace. All that remains now is for her to try on the glass slipper
and marry the prince.”
16 The scholarship has generally failed to consider
the ways both French feminism in particular and ideologies of gender in
general were molded by notions of race in the very period when European
colonialism was at its apex and Baker “set the pace” of fashion for Parisian
women.
It is relatively uncommon to ﬁnd work on French feminism such as Joan
Wallach Scott’s essay on Olympe de Gouges, in which Scott argues that in
considering the ideological construction of French citizenship, we cannot
overlook the ways that race has intersected with gender from the begin-
ning—thus complicating any discussion of suffrage, la garçonne, or “depop-
ulation” in interwar France. “Feminism was not a sign of the benign and
progressive operations of liberal individualism, but rather a symptom of its
constitutive contradictions,” Scott writes, and she attempts to demonstrate
that these contradictions were articulated around a variety of ideological
sites including citizenship, colonialism, class, revolutionary struggle, sexual-
ity, and gender itself. Scott recounts a resonant story from the ofﬁcial re-
cord of the National Convention in 1794, when slavery was temporarily
abolished in the French colonies by the revolutionaries in Paris. When the
legislature made its emancipation proclamation, the two colored represen-
tatives in the French assembly approached the tribune to accept a presiden-
tial embrace of goodwill. Another legislator, Pierre-Joseph Cambon, then
took the ﬂoor to announce that “a citizeness [citoyenne] of color who regu-
larly attends the sittings of the Convention has just felt so keen a joy at see-
130 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 142 ---
ing us give liberty to all her brethren that she has fainted. (Applause) I de-
mand that this fact be mentioned in the minutes, and that this citizeness be
admitted to the sitting and receive at least this much recognition for her
civic virtues.” Scott comments:
The woman was allowed to sit near the president for the rest of the
session; as she took her place, brushing tears from her eyes, she was
greeted with cheers and applause. The woman’s “civic virtue” con-
sisted in her outpouring of gratitude to legislators, who had acted on
her behalf by permitting the men of her race to represent her. It was
no accident that Cambon seized on this moment of fraternal inclu-
sion to make a black woman the sign of the entry of black men into
the ranks of citizenship. The men’s difference from women served to
eradicate differences of skin color and race among men; the universal-
ity of the abstract individual was in this way and at this moment es-
tablished as a common maleness.
17
I would rephrase the last sentence in a slightly different direction. The
point is not simply that any “difference—for purposes of deﬁning the indi-
viduality that conferred political citizenship—was equated with sexual dif-
ference,” as Scott puts it. Such an approach would iron out the very com-
plexity of the anecdote, as though race simply stands in for gender, when in
fact both are at work in the spectacle of the tearful citoyenne de couleur
seated at the head of the assembly. It would be more useful to note that a
racial articulation always necessarily underlies this construction of the “uni-
versality of the abstract individual” as a “common maleness.” Still, Scott’s
use of this vignette is a break from trends in French feminist history, for it
shifts the ground of inquiry from a single axis (what Scott terms the fallacy
of choosing either gender equality or gender difference) to a varied, shifting
foundation where race and gender cannot necessarily even be thought of as
separate categories, where we will no longer be able to read the suffrage
movement in post–World War I France without placing it in the historical
context of the apotheosis of French colonialism.
Likewise, with regard to the United States, while there is a growing body
of discussion of the “profeminist” politics of W . E. B. Du Bois, there is little
scholarship on the transnational work both of radical black women intellec-
tuals such as Amy Jacques Garvey and of more moderate ﬁgures including
Mary Church T errell, Adelaide Casely-Hayford, and Fauset.
18 There is a
FEMINISM AND L ’INTERNA TIONALISME NOIR 131


--- PAGE 143 ---
woeful lack of information on the Fourth Pan-African Congress in New
York in 1927, which is usually considered to be the least signiﬁcant Con-
gress politically, but which was almost exclusively organized by black
U.S. women such as Mrs. A. W . Hunton and the women of the Circle of
Peace and Foreign Relations, who brought in speakers such as the Haitian
politician Dantès Bellegarde, the anthropologist Melville Herskovits, Leo
Hansberry, and Chief Amoah III of the Gold Coast.
19 We know that the
National Association of Colored Women, after being represented by Mary
Church T errell at the 1904 Berlin Congress of the International Council of
Women, decided that the global feminist organization paid too little atten-
tion to racial issues and founded a sister group called the International
Council of Women of the Darker Races, which functioned in the early
1920s.
20 Still much recent work on women in the “Harlem Renaissance”
period tends to take it for granted that, for the black female writer, “jour-
n e y ,...though at times touching the political and social, is basically a per-
sonal and psychological journey. The female character in the works of
Black women is in a state of becoming a ‘part of an evolutionary spiral,
moving from victimization to consciousness.’”
21 These kinds of facile as-
sumptions are still all too common, often leading to insipid, depoliticized
readings that indiscriminately “psychologize” black women’s expression—
this despite the more recent injunctions of critics such as Cheryl Wall
that “metaphors of travel recur in writing by Harlem Renaissance women.
Despite the restrictions against it, they traveled widely in fact and in imagi-
nation.”
22
The necessity of rethinking the imbrication of gender and black interna-
tionalism is immediately evident when one attends to the periodical print
culture of the period. A number of African American women published
their most signiﬁcant work in the small journals and newspapers that were
to a large extent the vehicles of the New Negro movement. The essays of
Gwendolyn Bennett, for instance, often demystify the common African
American mythology of a lack of prejudice in France, and some of her sto-
ries such as “T okens” and “Wedding Day” explore black expatriate life in
Paris, where she lived in the middle of the decade.
23 From 1926 to 1928,
with her column “The Ebony Flute” in Opportunity, Bennett was one of a
group of writers including Countee Cullen, Alain Locke, J. A. Rogers, and
Jessie Fauset who wrote extensively and often about events and publica-
tions in French, commenting on “attempts at the uniﬁcation of Negroes
132 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 144 ---
throughout the world.”24 It is revelatory to recognize just how closely these
supposedly Harlem-obsessed ﬁgures followed events in the Francophone
world, even ones that have been considered relatively obscure. Bennett not
only wrote on Josephine Baker, but also followed Francophone left-wing
newspapers such as Lamine Senghor’s short-livedLa Voix des Nègresin 1927
and the spin-off publication edited by Camille Saint-Jacques (another
member of the Ligue de Défense de la Race Nègre) called Le Courrier des
Noirs.
25 Bennett generally offers sanguine appraisals of the potential for
black transnational organizing, emphasizing the differences and difﬁculties
of understanding between African American expatriates and Francophone
communities in Paris. In one column, for example, she notes that René
Maran “is extremely interested in the American situation, and is constantly
writing in French journals and magazines critical notes on the recent litera-
ture and cultural advance of the American Negro.” When Bennett met him
in Paris, Maran “brought out a copy of a current French news sheet and
showed an article on lynching....H e ,himself, was incensed at the idea of
such barbarity and told me that in a like manner the white Frenchman
could in no way understand the toleration of such cruelty in a civilized
country.” But her conclusion is sharply noncommittal: “It was a beautiful
thing to note the kindredship that existed in his heart because of the
irradicable black of our skins.”
26 For Bennett, Maran’s race consciousness is
at best a “beautiful thing,” a sort of sentimental chromaticist quirk, rather
than the foundation of an internationalist project.
While Gwendolyn Bennett’s published writings in sum do not raise is-
sues of gender in an international frame, her journals during her year study-
ing in Paris from June 1925 through the summer of 1926 and her Oppor-
tunity columns conﬁrm that there were extensive connections between
black U.S. women intellectuals and their black Francophone counterparts
throughout the late 1920s and early 1930s.
27 Unfortunately, even in schol-
arship whose speciﬁc goal is to sketch a “Black Atlantic” imaginary, there is
little attempt to consider not just the way black women travel, but more
important, the ways the ideological uses and abuses of gender always un-
dergird any articulation of diaspora—the ways evocations of black popula-
tions elsewhere are always shaped by the representation of reproduction,
motherhood, and the relations between men and women.
28 It is precisely
through the lens of this kind of inquiry into “Black Atlantic” modernity,
however, that we should read the work not only of Paulette Nardal, but also
FEMINISM AND L ’INTERNA TIONALISME NOIR 133


--- PAGE 145 ---
of her U.S. counterparts such as Bennett and Jessie Fauset, who served as
literary editor of the Crisis under W . E. B. Du Bois from 1919 until 1926.
Like Paulette Nardal with regard to Négritude, Jessie Fauset has been fa-
mously described as a “midwife” of Harlem cultural activity—that is, as an
editor and supportive elder intellectual who facilitated the careers of emerg-
ing writers including Langston Hughes and Claude McKay, but who by
implication was secondary or ancillary in the conception of the “Renais-
sance” moment.
29 Fauset is also often characterized as a “paradox,” an intel-
lectual whose tastes were squeamish and proper, and whose own novels
were mainly ideological propaganda for the new black middle class, but
who provided crucial support as an editor for many of the more politically
radical and so-called primitivist writers in the New Negro movement.
Critic Robert Bone banishes Fauset (along with Nella Larsen) to what he
calls the bourgeois idealistic “Rear Guard” of black modern ﬁction, and
adds that “her novels are uniformly sophomoric, trivial, and dull.” But
Bone concludes his brief overview of her career with the caveat that Fauset
represents “something of a paradox, for in her editorial work on the Crisis
she often championed the young rebels of the Harlem School. Unlike Du
Bois, who was a Philistine and objected to the Harlem School on moral
grounds, she showed a genuine interest in the development of Negro art
even when its main current ran counter to her own social prejudices.”
30
Cheryl Wall has argued that we must turn our attention to a certain de-
gree away from Fauset’s novels to her essays, which together form an im-
pressive body of work comparable to the criticism and journalism of Alain
Locke or George Schuyler.
31 With translations from the French, book re-
views, historical portraits, and travel narratives of her voyages to Europe
and North Africa, Fauset’s work in the Crisis was instrumental in casting
the New Negro movement in a transnational frame. Her vision of metro-
politan black culture strives to articulate connections and correspondences
among intellectuals of African descent throughout the Western world. Even
in Fauset’s New York salon, the currents constantly blew in from points dis-
tant. Langston Hughes jokes in his autobiography that
[a]t the novelist, Jessie Fauset’s, parties there was always quite a differ-
ent atmosphere from that at most other Harlem good-time gather-
ings. At Miss Fauset’s, a good time was shared by talking literature
and reading poetry aloud and perhaps enjoying some conversation in
134 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 146 ---
French. ...A th e rhouse one would usually meet editors and stu-
dents, writers and social workers, and serious people who liked books
and the British Museum, and had perhaps been to Florence. (Italy,
not Alabama.)
32
Reading her essays as evidence of this persistent and pervasive interna-
tionalist outlook, it is evident that Fauset cannot be easily pigeonholed as
solely an apologist for the urban U.S. black bourgeoisie. Most of Fauset’s
articles in the Crisis make no mention of U.S. black urban class tensions:
instead, they focus on the beginnings of the Great War (Fauset was in
France in the summer of 1914), or Fauset’s visit to Algiers in the mid-
1920s, or nationalism and Egypt.
33 In such work we discover a different
Fauset than the one we have been taught to expect by criticism on Plum
Bun and her other novels. In the essays, the historical analysis is clear and
cogent, and the anti-imperialist commitment is pronounced. In the piece
on Egypt, she offers a remarkably detailed account of the rise of rebellion
and nationalist propaganda in the wake of Britain’s 1882 establishment of a
“veiled protectorate,” which dominated Egyptian internal affairs through
the ﬁrst decades of this century. She reads the independence movement as a
long-smoldering ﬁre that had been “fanned” after World War I “by the
wonderful pronouncements, made during the war, on the rights of small
nations to self-determination.”
34 Explaining the violent reaction to the of-
ﬁcial recognition of the British protectorate during the Versailles Peace
Conference, Fauset concludes: “Egypt is thoroughly aroused now. She sees
English motives clearly and estimates their worth....W h odoubts that
Egypt is really speaking for the whole dark world? Thus is the scene being
staged for the greatest and most lasting conﬂict of peoples.”
35
Many of Fauset’s essays clearly evidence the inﬂuence of Du Bois, espe-
cially in their consistent commitment to the Pan-African project and their
anti-imperialism. Yet in the place of Du Bois’s grand pronouncements and
sometimes overblown romantic internationalism, we ﬁnd Fauset more of-
ten turning her eye to the telling detail, to the elaboration of the nuances of
an encounter, to the everyday lives of her subjects. As critics such as Wall,
Deborah McDowell, and Gloria Hull have pointed out, Fauset’s authority
at the Crisis was almost exclusively editorial: she had no access to institu-
tional funding or the patronage that underwrote so many of the male Har-
lem writers.
36 Before and after her stint with the NAACP journal, she
FEMINISM AND L ’INTERNA TIONALISME NOIR 135


--- PAGE 147 ---
taught French and Latin at the M Street (Dunbar) High School in Wash-
ington, D.C.—where she fostered ties to other educator-writers such as
Anna Julia Cooper, Georgia Douglas Johnson, and Angelina Grimké. It is
not surprising then that she manifested a teacher’s attentiveness to what
she describes as “breathing-spells, in-between spaces where colored men
and women work and love and go their ways with no thought of the ‘prob-
lem.’”
37
Those “in-between spaces” are also sometimes the result of diasporic
décalage, the traces of signiﬁcant difference in black internationalist efforts.
Take for instance the piece she wrote on the Second Pan-African Congress
in 1921, after she had accompanied Du Bois to the meetings in London,
Brussels, and Paris.
38 Fauset’s coverage is suffused by the optimism and en-
thusiasm of the moment, and it gushes in admiration of Du Bois’s charisma
and leadership. Nevertheless, Fauset offers a number of perspicacious obser-
vations that amount to a take on the congress wholly her own.
39 Describing
the Brussels session, where an argument broke out between the U.S. dele-
gates led by Du Bois and the Francophone constituency led by the Senega-
lese député Blaise Diagne concerning the discussion of the French African
colonies in the congress’s ﬁnal resolutions, Fauset bluntly lays out the colo-
nial economics at stake in the collusion between Diagne and the Belgians.
Noting that there were more Europeans present for the meetings than there
had been for the ﬁrst sessions in London, she comments:
[I]t was not long before we realized that their interest was deeper,
more immediately signiﬁcant than that of the white people we had
found elsewhere....A n yinterference with the natives might result in
an interference with the sources from which so many Belgian cap-
italists drew their prosperity....
After we visited the Congo Museum we were better able to under-
stand the unspoken determination of the Belgians to let nothing in-
terfere with their dominion in the Congo. Such treasures! Such illim-
itable riches! What a store-house it must plainly be for them. . . .
Small wonder that the Belgian men and women watched us with
careful eyes. (371–372)
In this hostile context, the strategy of the U.S. delegation was relatively
straightforward: “We knew the tremendous power of capital organized to
exploit the Congo, but despite this we proposed before the Congress was
136 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 148 ---
over to voice the wrongs of Negroes temperately but clearly” (374). What
is new about Fauset’s version of the events is that she is one of the ﬁrst
participants in the Pan-African movement to lay out the political differ-
ences among representatives from Africa and the Americas that continually
threatened the stability and structure of the organization. By the third ses-
sion of meetings in Paris, Fauset had turned sober about the movement’s
potential: “Already we had realized that the black colonial’s problem while
the same intrinsically, wore on the face of it a different aspect from that of
the black Americans” (376).
At the end of her description of the meetings in Brussels, where the U.S.
delegation compromised, allowing Diagne to jam through a mild resolu-
tion “stating that Negroes were ‘susceptible’ of education and pledging co-
operation of the Pan-African congress with the international movement in
Belgium” (374), but successfully retaining the more progressive London
resolutions on the table for consideration in Paris, Fauset recorded a small
act that she felt encapsulated the entire conﬂict—the forced silences, the
high stakes between colonial exploitation and international justice, the mi-
nuscule gestures that can carry immense weight:
How great was this smothering power which made it impossible for
men even in a scientiﬁc Congress to be frank and to express their in-
most desires? Not one word, for instance, had been said during the
Congress by Belgian white or black, or French presiding ofﬁcer which
would lead one to suspect that Leopold and his tribe had ever been
other than the Congo’s tutelary angels. Apparently not even an im-
provement could be hinted at. And the few Africans who were present
said nothing. But at that last meeting just before we left, a Congolese
came forward and fastened the button of the Congo Union in Dr. Du
Bois’ coat.
What lay behind that impassive face? (375)
Fauset’s original contribution in her political and historical essays is to
capture this kind of “translation of hitherto unsyllabled, unuttered prayers”
(378), the seemingly minor and unrecorded signifying acts that in such
situations can in fact comprise the real work of communication across
difference.
Unfortunately, whereas Fauset’s essays are unprecedented in the ways
they introduce gender issues, they never sustain this approach toward an ar-
FEMINISM AND L ’INTERNA TIONALISME NOIR 137


--- PAGE 149 ---
ticulation of diaspora that would combine anti-imperialism with a feminist
critique. In one sense, this is due to Fauset’s habitual self-effacement: for ex-
ample, although she herself gave a speech about the status and activities of
African American women at the meetings of the 1921 Congress, Fauset
does not use this material in her summary of the events. Nor does she won-
der how her own insights might be linked to the political issues at stake.
She ﬂatly puts herself in the third person, without elaboration: “Miss
Fauset told of the colored graduates in the United States and showed the
pictures of the ﬁrst women who had obtained the degree of Doctor of Phi-
losophy” (373). In another article which offers a survey of all the European
press coverage of the Pan-African Congress, she only allows her own contri-
butions to be described tangentially, as in the quote from an article in the
Scottish Glasgow Herald: “Miss Fauset, of Philadelphia, literary editor of
the Crisis, spoke on the subject of the colored women in America, who, she
said, had been a great moving force behind all the movements for emanci-
pation.”
40
This kind of reticence carries over into Fauset’s essays on poverty and ev-
eryday life in Europe: the portraits of women in her articles—about France
on the brink of war, about the Clignancourt ﬂea market, about lodging
houses (pensions) in France—never push issues of gender as far as they
might. Even the critic Deborah McDowell, who strains to argue that
Fauset’s ﬁction uses the “convention of the novel of manners” not in the
spirit of the ultimately conservative aesthetic that most critics have identi-
ﬁed, but instead “as protective mimicry, a kind of deﬂecting mask for her
more challenging concerns,” concludes by admitting that Fauset ends up
with only an “oblique and ambivalent treatment of feminism.”
41 The es-
says, like the ﬁction, are full of subtle descriptive passages that fall mute or
close off prematurely, such as the following section from a piece Fauset
wrote after weeks of living in the cheapest pensions in Paris:
In the pension a line from a melancholy hymn of my Presbyterian
childhood comes back to me: “Change and decay in all around I see.”
. . . And about the boarders there was this same air of desiccation. An
old, old lady, a widow I judged from her deep black and her son of
perhaps 55; another old lady, once the matron I should say of some
frightfully corrective institution, erect and with a terrible, raucous
138 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 150 ---
voice; four or ﬁve depressed young men, bookkeepers, clerks, hope-
lessly nondescript. The food was nondescript too.42
Where one might expect this to lead to a consideration of her cloistered
upbringing in Philadelphia, or to a sketch of the ancient Frenchwoman
boarder, Fauset tumbles back onto an easy generalization in the next para-
graph: “Life in a pension is not French life only; it is life everywhere in sim-
ilar environment.” Cheryl Wall has observed that this kind of writing “of-
ten works to deny the difference that is its most promising subject. In
the end, the [essays’] too-easy universalism is the clearest evidence of the
constraints that constructions of race and gender impose upon Fauset’s
work.”
43
Similarly, in “This Way to the Flea Market,” her 1925 essay on the well-
known marché aux puces at the northern tip of Paris, Fauset presents a vivid
rumination on life at the border of urban economic existence: the diverse
crowd (“representatives of the poorer groups of all those nationalities with
which Paris teems”), the petty haggling, the obsessive puttering through
piles of “gee-gaws” and trinkets, the resolute will to survive, signiﬁed in
small acts of buying and selling. Describing a tough bargain negotiated be-
tween her guide and a woman merchant, she writes that the “hard and
stratiﬁed” qualities in the French character are evidenced “nowhere more
plainly than in the poor and middle-class French woman. It is an extension
of that instinct which makes the small and cornered animal ﬁght so bitterly,
converting him ﬁnally into a truly formidable opponent. Woman being the
weaker creature must harden herself proportionately just that much more
to meet the exigencies of her existence.”
44 But this is as far as Fauset can
go—and she seems incapable of extrapolating on this characterization, or
linking it to other moments of her visit when gender (and race) come into
play, as when for instance a boy with a “box of shoe-blacking” approaches
as they are leaving the market and sarcastically suggests that Fauset could
use some to augment the color of her light-brown skin (“you’d better buy
some for mademoiselle!” the boy says to Fauset’s friend, holding open the
polish).
45 Fauset makes no comment on this last confrontation. She simply
takes comfort in regaining the interior of Paris: “Behind us curved and
closed the fortiﬁcations; viewed from this side they emanated security, pro-
tection. ‘Pass in,’ they murmured, ‘You are safe!’” (163) And thus the
FEMINISM AND L ’INTERNA TIONALISME NOIR 139


--- PAGE 151 ---
shroud of bourgeois respectability and comfort falls back over her, even as
she dares to peek through its seams.
Paris seems to attract Fauset in part because she is able there to test what
she recognizes in herself as a reluctance to broach issues concerning the in-
terconnections of class, race, and gender. Not surprisingly, she professes the
common reasons of U.S. black expatriates to visit France: “I like Paris be-
cause I ﬁnd something here, something of integrity, which I seem to have
strangely lost in my own country. It is simplest of all to say that I like to live
among people and surroundings where I am not always conscious of ‘thou
shalt not.’”
46 What is peculiar about Fauset is that the “thou shalt not” is
above all an internalized injunction, not the more explicit discrimination
that black artists from William Wells Brown to James Baldwin have elo-
quently expressed a need to escape. Fauset confesses,
I am somewhat tired, pardonably so, I think, by the unnatural re-
straint imposed when both races meet, and this restraint is mostly my
own. It manifests itself in my personal behavior because I am con-
scious of belonging to another race. In order to offset criticism, the
reﬁned colored woman must not laugh too loudly, she must not
stare—in general she must stiffen her self-control even though she
can no longer humanly contain herself. (47)
There is thus justiﬁcation to Cheryl Wall’s assessment that Fauset was a “re-
luctant explorer,” since “the potential risk was too great, as much to the im-
age she reﬂected as a proper Negro woman as to herself.”
47 The risk of
crossing barriers is a recurring theme in Fauset’s career, as when she de-
clined to translate René Maran’sBatouala in 1922 and wrote in sheepish ex-
planation to Joel Spingarn that “Alas, alack, I know my own milieu too
well. If I should translate that book over my name, I’d never be considered
‘respectable’ again.”
48
It is not useful, however, to overemphasize Fauset’s conservatism to the
point that we no longer recognize the originality of her work on Pan-
Africanism and European life. Hazel Carby is correct to posit a link be-
tween the novels of Fauset and Nella Larsen—both are inventive in their
treatment of class conﬂict in northern cities, a focus that departs from the
obsession with reconstructing what she terms “folk authenticity” in other
literature of the “Harlem Renaissance.”
49 But Carby may be too quick to
insist on a ﬁrm distinction between Fauset’s strategy of “adapting” the ro-
140 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 152 ---
mance genre without radically transforming it and Larsen’s more resolved
refusals of the standard of middle-class respectability in Quicksand.50 Most
important, it must be recognized that the ﬁction of Larsen and Fauset
shares a common critique of the ways the black modernist modes of imag-
ining expatriation and migration are always gendered. In Larsen’s 1928
Quicksand, Helga Crane travels to Copenhagen only to discover—through
Axel Olsen’s courtship of her as no more than an exotic sexual creature—
that while she can consume, she can always become a gendered object of
consumption as well.
51 Europe, supposedly free of prejudice, does not allow
Helga an escape from a gendered economy of race relations; as Farah
Grifﬁn has described it, “Her body becomes the text on which the narrative
of a sexualized other is written.”
52 Fauset’s often-overlooked 1933 novel
Comedy: American Style makes a similar point when the Philadelphian
T eresa Cary marries Aristide Pailleron, her white French phonetics teacher
at the University of T oulouse, and assumes she will easily “pass” into the
comfort of French middle-class life. With terrible irony, she comes to learn
that she is effectively stranded in the south of France with her new hus-
band, who turns out to be a hardened racist and a ridiculous miser to boot.
“She did not know what to make of her life. It was so strange, so differ-
ent from anything she had anticipated. Was she to spend it thus forever
with her vapid, unimaginative man, her scolding mother-in-law, her petty
household duties? ...G radually her expectation of a change died away and
she settled down into an existence that was colorless, bleak and futile.”
53
Both Quicksand and Comedy: American Style, placing “race” in a trans-
national context, emphasize the way black modern migrancy is always
gendered, in ways that inescapably constrain the paths open to black
women. Both are an implicit critique of the painless expatriation com-
monly portrayed in novels from Johnson’s The Autobiography of an Ex-
Colored Man throughout the period: the ﬁction of Larsen and Fauset argues
against the view that would articulate black transnational migrancy as a
simple escape from U.S. racism without taking into account sexism, Euro-
pean exoticism, or class barriers.
Even in this critique of black modern migrancy, however, Fauset’s work
tends to retrench its own limitations and to reproduce its own injunctions,
especially by recourse to a rhetoric of sentimentality. Her vision of black in-
ternationalism, as sharp-sighted as it can be in her essays on the Pan-Afri-
can Congress, curdles into a discourse of nostalgia as it strains to elide or
FEMINISM AND L ’INTERNA TIONALISME NOIR 141


--- PAGE 153 ---
compensate for the very gaps and discrepancies it uncovers. Fauset intro-
duces what will become a key term for her writing in “Nostalgia,” a 1921
essay published in the Crisis.54 “Love of fatherland,” Fauset writes, is “nos-
talgia’s cause.” The piece encompasses four vignettes. Three are centered on
the longings of U.S. immigrants for “home”: Fauset talks with the Greek
owner of a fruit shop on Seventh Avenue in New York, the Italian cobbler
on 12th Street, and a Romanian girl named Rachel, whose father is a Zion-
ist. The fourth anecdote departs from the pattern: an old Philadelphia ac-
quaintance, a “colored boy whom [Fauset] used to know at the Art School,”
comes back after serving in the war and living in France. He tells her, “I
never knew what home was until I went to France” (156). But then he an-
nounces that ever since returning to the States, his only desire has been to
get away from American racism and go back to Europe. Citing Du Bois’s
anecdote about the untranslatable, haunting old Bantu song his ancestress
sang, Fauset argues that the “American Negro” is afﬂicted with a special
kind of “spiritual nostalgia” due to what Edouard Glissant would call his
radical “uprooting” (déracinement) from his African “fatherland” (157).
“The black American,” Fauset writes, “is something entirely new under the
sun” (158), unable to translate—to carry over into a new context—the Af-
rican cultural inheritance. The homeland that haunts the black American
psyche is not Africa, ﬁnally, but an imaginary and, one might add, an en-
tirely exegetical ideal:
In the main, the American Negro is without ties and the traditions
that throw back. Instead, he has built unconsciously from his child-
hood a dream-country, and yet surely no dream country [sic] since
it is founded on that document which most realizes and sets forth
the primal and unchanging needs of man—the Constitution of the
United States.
Where the Greek dreams of his statues, he dreams of Justice; where
the Italian yearns for his opera, he yearns for Opportunity; and where
the Jewish visionary longs for freedom of sect, he cries out for an es-
cape from Peonage. (157)
The passage seems at once incisive and inane. In a sense, it expresses per-
fectly the civil rights ﬁgure of the “New Negro” as envisioned by the Crisis
and the NAACP after World War I, a ﬁgure that attempts to bring into be-
ing the “dream country” of American constitutional democracy. With the
142 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 154 ---
same stroke, the notion of “spiritual nostalgia” is exemplary of the ulti-
mately phantasmic nature of the “New Negro” paradigm. In the words of
Henry Louis Gates, Jr., “just asutopia signiﬁes ‘no-place,’ so does ‘New Ne-
gro’ signify a ‘black person who lives at no place,’ and no time. It is a bold
and audacious act of language, signifying the will to power, to dare to recre-
ate a race by renaming it, despite the dubiousness of the venture.” Fauset’s
version of black internationalism is unique in that it continually produces a
rhetorical tension between what Gates calls “the weary black dream of a
perfect state of being, with no history in particular detail” on the one hand
and “the search for a group of black and especial historical entities” on the
other.
55 Hers is a rhetoric that always resolves this tension in favor of nostal-
gia, in favor of the easy universalism that—as evidenced by the acquain-
tance from Art School, who ﬁnally doesn’t know where he wants to be, ex-
cept that he doesn’t want to be here—resides in perpetual unfulﬁllment, a
“sadness without an object.”
56 At the same time, this resolution acquiesces
to the implicit gendering of the “New Negro.” Although Fauset provoca-
tively describes nostalgia in reference to maternity, arguing that it “is as uni-
versal a phenomenon as that of possessing a mother,” she then deﬁnes the
term as longing for a “fatherland”—unlike Du Bois himself, who explores
the possibility of theorizing diaspora as scattered or broken maternity by ar-
guing that Africa might be “perhaps better” termed his “motherland.”
57
Fauset’s essay describes nostalgia with a portrait of a male ﬁgure in longing,
refusing to extend the theme to her own stays in France, and never intimat-
ing whether she might share her acquaintance’s sentiment.
Extending these issues to the context of Francophone intellectuals in
Paris during this period would necessitate coming to terms with the
décalage between the literary imaginings of African American expatriates
and black Francophone migrants. One might juxtapose Fauset’s rhetoric of
nostalgia with a Francophone instance such as the short story called “En
Exil” (In exile) that Paulette Nardal published in La Dépêche africaine in
December 1929.
58 It is a brief account of an Antillean woman named Elisa
on her way home from work as a maid, day-dreaming of her “native town”
(bourg natal), Sainte-Marie in Martinique. As she walks through the rain
down the windswept rue des Ecoles to catch the bus, she thinks to herself:
“This country really doesn’t suit an old Negress [une vieille négresse] already
weighed down by age and stiff with rheumatism.” Her only wish is that her
son, who has been “trying his fortune” for the past ﬁve years in Colomb
FEMINISM AND L ’INTERNA TIONALISME NOIR 143


--- PAGE 155 ---
(Algeria), will comes back with a little money so that she can return “to her
country” (au pays), which “she should have never exchanged for the mirage
of Paris.”59 Her imagination “had almost personiﬁed” the French winter, a
“cruel and implacable enemy,” but it also delivers her from the drudgery of
her journey. With a “distant look” (regard lointain) on her face, she day-
dreams she is back in the Sainte-Marie of her youth:
After a day of ironing, she sits down on a worm-eaten bench in front
of the door of her low-roofed house, attracted by the chatter of
friends who, like her, are savoring the salty air....S omeone starts to
“tell tales” [conter contes], not forgetting the traditional opening for-
mulas: “Titime?” “Bois sec.”—“T rois fois bel conte.” As always, it’s
the adventures of Brer Rabbit [Compère Lapin]...African tales
adapted to the Antillean soul.
Drums off in the distance “ring out like an anguished call,” and for Elisa “it
is all the soul of old Africa that passes in that Antillean tam-tam, awakening
an obscure emotion in the talkers, who are now suddenly attentive.”
60 Her
“rêverie” is ﬁnally torn (déchiré) by the “brutal” voice of the driver calling
out her stop: “Rue de Rennes!” But at her building on the boulevard Pas-
teur, the concièrge hands her a letter from Colomb: her son writes that “the
Americans bought his leatherware business for a good price” and that he’ll
be coming soon to take her back home. Weeping with “unexpected joy,”
Elisa bounds up the six ﬂights of stairs with newfound energy as the story
concludes: “[T]he neighbors, who pity her every night hearing her wearily
climb the worn steps, no longer recognize this light footfall, and ask them-
selves who it could be humming that strange refrain with its staccato
rhythm, with its guttural and soft syllables [ce refrain étrange, au rythme
saccadée, aux syllabes gutturales et douces] .... ”
Clearly the story is not structured around the rhetorical “non-place” of
Fauset’s nostalgia. Here, Elisa is not drifting in abstract “homesickness,”
but on the contrary is emphatically “in exile.” The condition of migration
is exilic for the colonial subject, and she dreams of return to a particular
New World home. At the same time, Martinique is deﬁned outside or be-
yond the logic of colonialism: Elisa recalls the rhythms of dusk in Sainte-
Marie, the “languid” chatting and tale-telling of friends, and above all the
African roots of Caribbean popular life.
This ﬁctional rendering of migration, longing, music, and gender iden-
144 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 156 ---
tity is a common theme in the interwar period, not just in early Fran-
cophone literature but also in conventional and commercial French imag-
inings of the Caribbean. Take for instance the introductory text
accompanying a 1930 catalog of Odéon Records (one of the companies
keen to proﬁt from the Parisian craze for Caribbean music such as the
Martinican beguine). Titled “L ’ame nègre en exil...a ub a lantillais” (The
nègre soul in exile...a tt h eAntillean ball), the text draws on language im-
mediately reminiscent of Nardal’s piece, but used for entirely different pur-
poses:
These powerful and sweet blacks [nègres puissants et doux] left in
France by the war, these naive négresses with sparkling smiles who
have come to “serve” in our families, have retained a nostalgia for
their wonderful distant country. And they’ve communicated it to us!
[Et ils nous l’ont communiquée!]
One of them, wearing a hat covered in yellow cockleshells that
reigned over the Vaugirard sidewalk, suddenly announced that she
was leaving her mistress. “What?” cried the latter. “Aren’t you satis-
ﬁed?”—“Yes, yes,” protested the dark child, “me real happy here
with Madame” [moi, bien content ici avec madame]. Then, with a
smile at once happy and sorrowful, she added:—“But I have a travel-
ing soul. ... ”[ Mais j’ai l’âme voyageur.... ]
How many others who aren’t able to leave Paris are going to make
that beautiful, long voyage in their dreams, in one of the black popu-
lar dance halls [bals populaires nègres] on the left bank of the Seine,
which have recently been so much in vogue, and which are indeed so
curious?
Close your eyes, spin the record [Fermez les yeux, faites tourner le
disque].
61
The catalog, with its narrative of the gendered Antillean “traveling soul,”
attempts to commodify the expressive longing of the subject trapped in mi-
gration, dreaming of home in a metropolitan dance hall as Martinican mu-
sic wafts through the “curious” space. In the rhetoric of this text, it is the
record itself that holds or carries the “communication” of black nostalgia,
and thus having the record allows the listener access to those sounds. As
Theodor Adorno pointed out a few years later, the phonograph record is
the “ﬁrst means of musical presentation that can be possessed as a thing.”
62
FEMINISM AND L ’INTERNA TIONALISME NOIR 145


--- PAGE 157 ---
In a certain sense, the record here is represented as a peculiar kind of souve-
nir, an object that “speaks to a context of origin through a language of long-
ing, for it is not an object arising out of need or use value; it is an object
arising out of the necessarily insatiable demands of nostalgia.”
63 It is pecu-
liar, of course, because the record as object is the souvenir of someone else’s
nostalgia—indeed, the souvenir of the nostalgia of those “nègres puissants
et doux,” those “négresses naîves à l’éclatant sourire,” who have come to
work for “our” families. So the commodiﬁcation of recorded beguine is si-
multaneously the commodiﬁcation of the colonies, of “native” homesick-
ness: another way for the European to appropriateLa France d’outre-mer.In
other words, the beguine record serves as a reminder that commodities are
indeed above all “sensuous things which are at the same time suprasensible
or social,” the reﬂection of “the deﬁnite social relation between men” (the
system of colonization itself) in a “fantastic” or “mysterious” form.
64 That
form explicitly works by an operation of metaphor, a “troping” or “turning”
(Fermez les yeux, faites tourner le disque)that links the listener’s possession of
the object to France’s possession of the colonies.
One might remark that in “En Exil” Nardal writes directly against such a
rhetoric of appropriation, even if—or precisely because—she draws on the
same set of ﬁgures. The story attempts to practice a mode not of com-
modiﬁable nostalgia but instead of elusive exile. In so doing, it never loses
sight of the politics of colonial labor, however: thus Elisa’s reverie takes
place on the bus ride home from a difﬁcult day at work “serving” a Euro-
pean family. Even in the Caribbean context of “nostalgia,” Elisa imagines
passing the day “ironing.” The story very subtly broaches an international-
ist representation at the same time, since her upwardly mobile son has trav-
eled to “try his fortune” in Algeria. In fact, it is not the grace of France, but
the aggressive ﬁnance capital of another imperial power lately stretching its
inﬂuence into the region (“the Americans”) that ﬁnally provides Elisa’s son
the money to realize her dream, to fetch her and take her home. This is not
a critique of colonialism in general but a critique of the ways that the long-
ings of a bourgeois Antillean évoluée are necessarily bound up with a globe-
girdling system of expansion: exploitation in the double sense of that word
in French (both “making a proﬁt from” and “taking advantage of”). What
is elusive about exile in Nardal’s story is that its “means of musical presenta-
tion” cannot be grasped, cannot be “turned” to the service of the colonial
146 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 158 ---
project. The story points us at what can’t be caught in Elisa’s musical rev-
erie, the sound of its “strange refrain.”
Feminism andLa Dépêche Africaine
In the scholarship on the emergence of the Négritude movement, there is a
common assumption that the group around Paulette Nardal and her sisters
was simply “assimilationist” and therefore to be dismissed, representative of
the “stage of consciousness” that an intellectual such as Aimé Césaire had
to pass through or bypass in order to reach his formulation of a new
Négritude aesthetic. The group around La Revue du monde noir, even if it
pursued an interest in an African heritage with unprecedented verve, re-
mained at best politically reformist and “superﬁcial,” celebrating the trium-
phant exoticism of the 1931 Colonial Exposition in Paris and working ulti-
mately to “preserve the status quo while exhibiting the relative prestige and
the advantages of a colored elite. This group prided itself on what it
thought to be its perfect assimilation into French society.”
65 These kinds of
assumptions are fueled not just by Césaire’s few disparaging statements
about Nardal’s salon, but also by the usual failure to link intellectual groups
and journals in the early 1930s, such as La Revue du monde noir, to their
predecessors, such as La Dépêche africaine and Les Continents.
The most pernicious version of this trend in the historical literature ends
by racializing the development of Négritude, arguing that the movement
was produced out of a conﬂict between one group of “mixed” Antillean stu-
dents and intellectuals—who espoused not just cultural assimilation into la
plus grande France but moreover racial miscegenation—and another group
of more radical, “pure Negro” Africans. For instance, the Belgian critic
Martin Steins, accepting without question the racialist presuppositions of
terms such as métis (“half caste”) and mulâtre (“mulatto”), argues sum-
marily that “in the history of the movement that concerns us here, analysis
of the relationship between mulattos and blacks [la relation mulâtres-nègres]
has almost always been avoided. But, from all evidence, this relationship is
at the core of the question; it even seems that the Négritude movement was
born out of a change in the attitude of the Antillean métis.”
66 Steins goes so
far as to extend this kind of racialism to black modernist cultural politics
more broadly, writing that a “mixed-blood International” (Internationale
métisse) dominated the interwar period “on both sides of the Atlantic.”
67
FEMINISM AND L ’INTERNA TIONALISME NOIR 147


--- PAGE 159 ---
Even more strangely, he identiﬁes racial miscegenation as the “driving idea”
of the New Negro movement in Harlem. 68 Even granting the many U.S.
debates around “passing” after World War I, it is plainly foolish to argue
that all the culture framers of the New Negro movement—Du Bois, Locke,
James Weldon Johnson, and Charles Johnson, among others—were by any
stretch of the imagination calling for intermarriage or “whitening the race”
as the central civil rights strategy. Steins furthermore assumes that all the
mulâtre intellectuals from Martinique, Guadeloupe, and French Guyana
who were in Paris in the 1920s shared the same outlook: “As their Ameri-
can counterparts [sic], they thought that the burning problems of the race
would eventually brown out: the Negro’s soul would mate with the genius
of France and give birth to a creole culture, a promising hybrid that would
animate the imperial community. Both concepts, the one cultural, the
other political, were of a somehow-mulatto type.”
69 Interestingly, begin-
ning with the Martinican journal Lucioles and the work of Gilbert Gratiant
in the mid-1920s, there were in fact intellectuals who elaborated a position
that Caribbean culture was “creole.” But even for Gratiant, this position
was more a kind of regionalism, an attempt to come to terms with the
speciﬁcity of the Antillean experience, articulated in connection with
Gratiant’s ﬁrm Marxist politics, and never a simple proposition for “racial”
amalgamation.
70
Steins conﬂates the work of Gratiant in Martinique with the activities of
ﬁgures such as the Nardals in Paris and cites Jane Nardal’s neologism Afro-
Latin as exemplary of “the ‘brown’ solution.”71 In fact, though, as we have
seen, Jane Nardal deliberately uses the term nègre in her article “L ’inter-
nationalisme noir” and makes no call for miscegenation. On the contrary,
Afro-Latin is a term speciﬁcally geared to approximate or translate what
Nardal considers the racial consciousness inherent in the appellation “Afro-
American” in the interest of a larger project of black internationalism. It
should be evident that Nardal’s article is not concerned with either cultural
or racial assimilation to a French standard, but with the elaboration of a
transnational circuit of black modern culture among intellectuals whose
“American” or “Latin” education has “not necessarily driven them to deny
their race.”
72
If nothing else, the circles of black intellectual activity among Carib-
bean, African, and U.S. migrants in Paris in the 1920s and 1930s were het-
erogeneous and volatile. At every turn, we encounter a wide range of inter-
148 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 160 ---
connected cultural work, contentious debates, and shifting positions. In no
way can this context be reduced to either a cultural or a racial schema that
would pit “brown” against “black,” “bourgeois” against “proletariat.” A
number of the most conservative proponents of the French imperialist sys-
tem were “dark-skinned”; a number of the most radical anti-imperial and
Communist intellectuals were “brown” Antilleans originally of petit bour-
geois origins. A number of intellectuals, most notably Léo Sajous, but also
Kojo T ovalou Houénou, Tiemoko Garan Kouyaté, Jules-Marcel Monnerot,
and Emile Faure, shifted political positions and afﬁliations and served as
links especially between the more hard-line Communist groups and the
more reformist cultural groups. Even with regard to La Dépêche africaine—
which overall is without a doubt the most conservative of the interwar
Francophone journals in the metropole—it is difﬁcult to agree with Steins
that the newspaper represents the “depoliticization of the black question;
the desire for collaboration between French and native with the Empire ...
and the defense of racial and cultural cross-breeding.”
73 In La Dépêche afri-
caine, as in other black Parisian periodicals (and as in U.S. journals such as
the Crisis and Opportunity), there is never a single, consistent party line, but
a variety of political positions, in varying degrees of accordance with one
another. There is a signiﬁcant distance between Maurice Satineau’s editori-
als defending the French imperial system and celebrating the economic ex-
ploitation of the African colonies, art collector Paul Guillaume’s articles
lauding “primitive” African sculpture as the “sperme viviﬁcateur du ving-
tième siècle spirituel” (“life-giving sperm of the spiritual twentieth cen-
tury”), African American bandleader Noble Sissle’s explanation of “Why
Jazz Has Conquered the World,” the Dahomean Félix Couchoro’s pasto-
ral African tales, Charles Bellan’s calls for education and development in
the African colonies, Dantès Bellegarde’s essay criticizing the U.S. occupa-
tion of Haiti, the numerous reports on “Harlem Renaissance” cultural ac-
tivity and African American artists in Paris, and Paulette Nardal’s cultural
criticism.
74
There is an equally striking range among the contributions to La
Dépêche africaine that make claim to a feminist stance. Madame Winter
Frappier de Montbenoît, from the island of Réunion, was the founder of a
group called “La Française Créole” (The Creole Frenchwoman) and was es-
pecially concerned to protect the interests of “mixed-race”(métis) citizens in
the French colonies. In one essay, she argues that this issue should be para-
FEMINISM AND L ’INTERNA TIONALISME NOIR 149


--- PAGE 161 ---
mount in colonial policy: whereas illegitimate children of the ﬂeeting rela-
tions between French men and “native” women were scorned in the colo-
nies, Montbenoît claims (against all historical evidence, and against her
own patronizing anecdote of subjugation) that black populations (les
nègres) had always been well respected:
There exists an enormous difference between the nègre in the United
States, the nègre who is an English subject, and the nègre of the old
French colonies. The ﬁrst, whom the Americans boycott in the ways
we already know, are only tolerated as inferiors. I am irritated when I
observe their exhibitions, for in Réunion and the French Antilles, the
nègre has always enjoyed on the contrary the greatest esteem. My fa-
ther always used to give his Negro [noirs] servants dangerous mis-
sions, certain they would carry them out wonderfully.
75
150 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA
La Dépêche africaine 31
(December 1930).
Collection of the author.
[To view this image, refer to  
the print version of this title.]


--- PAGE 162 ---
Montbenoît is less interested in suffrage for women than in equal social
treatment. Thus she makes the relatively radical suggestion that to over-
come discrimination against the métis in the French colonies, family de-
scent and inheritance should be deﬁned as matrilineal, rather than depen-
dent on the absent or reluctant white father.
Another feminist, Marcelle Besson, wrote for La Dépêche africaine about
French women in colonial affairs, not by calling for suffrage or solidarity
but by taking up another argument familiar in French feminism of the pe-
riod: that the proper role of woman is to spread her positive “moral” inﬂu-
ence. With “a clear head and a large heart,” Besson argues, the French
woman can help by working to stop the disease and pestilence devastating
colonized populations, by advising politicians on policies to “hasten the
evolution” of “primitive peoples,” or by combating exploitation in colonial
policy “to a certain extent.” This variety of conservative feminism is not a
call for social equality, but an argument for the strategic use of woman’s “in-
direct” authority. Besson contends that “each of us can, in fact, indirectly
manage our country in suggesting ideas to relatives, friends, and acquain-
tances who hold effective control.”
76
The articles of Jane and Paulette Nardal in La Dépêche africaine move in
yet another direction. I point out the diversity of this work in the journal in
the spirit of Joan Scott’s argument that French feminism necessarily oper-
ates within a paradox, articulating claims from the seemingly universal
ground of “woman” even while critiquing in various ways the very found-
ing discourses of rights, citizenship, and individuality that had worked and
naturalized a split between the categories of man and woman. Rather than
reading feminism simply as an autonomous and singular political stance,
then, one must comprehend feminism through difference, as the plural and
shifting “legacy” of this paradox, “reading the repetitions and conﬂicts of
feminism as symptoms of contradictions in the political discourses that
produced feminism and that it appealed to and challenged at the same
time.”
77 We are often accustomed to thinking the other way around: thus
Sylvia Wynter, in one of the better-known essays on black diasporic femi-
nism, aims to construct a narrative in which “race” is a term, a “variable,”
which troubles the intervention of black women into feminism, in the
same way that feminism had earlier inserted the term of gender into the
supposedly “universal” doctrines of Western liberal humanism and Marx-
FEMINISM AND L ’INTERNA TIONALISME NOIR 151


--- PAGE 163 ---
ism.78 But the multifaceted feminist work in La Dépêche africaine may offer
another possible trajectory of development—one that will be echoed, say,
in Etienne Balibar’s formulation that racism always “presupposes” sexism.79
This is to take Paulette Nardal’s claim about the origins of “racial” con-
sciousness among Francophone women intellectuals in the metropole as a
serious theoretical position rather than a simple historicist point of order.
The point is not that “race” troubles the supposed universality of femi-
nism—for there are only feminisms, plural and interested articulations of
that legacy of paradox—but instead that “race” and gender are always inex-
tricably interwoven. The possibility therefore opens that in a transnational
cultural context, feminism, as one strategic unraveling of that weave, may
precede and lead to black internationalist consciousness.
Salons andCercles d’Amis
Interestingly, one of the only biographical portraits of Paulette Nardal was
written by Eslanda Goode Robeson, the wife of actor and activist Paul
Robeson. She penned two articles about “Black Paris” for the journalChal-
lenge in the 1930s. The article on Nardal opens: “Paulette Nardal is beauti-
ful. Her lovely clear dark-brown skin has bronze lights in it; her face is
full of intelligence and repose; her voice is low and soft, cultured and
controlled, and her diction faultless. She is equally ﬂuent in French, her
mother tongue, and in English. She has poise and charm. She carries herself
with quiet unselﬁsh dignity like some magniﬁcent dusky queen.”
80
Paulette Nardal was born in the town of François, Martinique, on Octo-
ber 12, 1896. Her father, Paul Nardal, was an important construction engi-
neer from St. Pierre who had been trained in France and who served as the
unofﬁcial manager of construction on the whole island. Relatively “dark-
skinned” like his daughters, Paul Nardal faced a good deal of color preju-
dice in the Martinican government despite his talent and expertise.
Robeson writes that the “[g]overnment never formally recognized his posi-
tion....I ti ssaid, had he been a mulatto, the Government would probably
have appointed him; but being a pure Negro, they considered it bad policy
for him to hold such a position.”
81 His wife Louise Achille was a govern-
ment piano teacher who never left the island. (It was through their mother’s
father, originally from Guadeloupe, that the Nardal sisters were related to
their cousin Louis-Thomas Achille, who like them came to study at the
Sorbonne and who later would teach at Howard University in Washington,
152 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 164 ---
D.C.) The portrait of Martinique that Paulette Nardal gave Robeson dur-
ing their interview demonstrates not just a keen sense of the historical in-
terrelations of race and class, but also a sense of the particular difﬁculties af-
fecting Antillean women:
It is almost impossible for Negroes to accumulate money, because all
the land in Martinique belongs to the white plantation owners; the
peasants, Negroes, are merely workmen, civil ofﬁcers, and a few have
small unimportant businesses. . . .
Until nearly twenty years ago, the Negro girls in Martinique did
not work, but remained at home and waited for a husband.
82
Four of the seven Nardal sisters were among the ﬁrst generation to go to
France to study to qualify for government positions in teaching and the
civil service. Alice Nardal became a professor of music; Jane, with her de-
gree in classics, returned to the Caribbean to teach high school Latin at the
FEMINISM AND L ’INTERNA TIONALISME NOIR 153
Paulette Nardal (c. 1970).
Bibliothèque Nationale,
Paris.
[To view this image, refer to  
the print version of this title.]


--- PAGE 165 ---
Basse-T erre Lycée in Guadeloupe; and Cécyl, trained as a midwife, opened
a practice in Guadeloupe with Jane’s husband, who was a doctor.83
Paulette Nardal began her higher education at the Colonial College for
Girls in Martinique and then spent some time in the British West Indies to
perfect her English. She won a competitive scholarship to study for a grad-
uate degree in Paris at the Sorbonne in the early 1920s; after returning to
Martinique for a year to teach English, she moved to Paris and worked as a
journalist and translator for a number of publications, including Le Soir
and La Dépêche africaine. After she founded La Revue du monde noir in
1931, Paulette was commissioned to write a tourist guidebook to Mar-
tinique later that year.
84 As we shall see, she retained close ties to Antillean
students in Paris through organizations such as the Association des
Etudiants Martiniquais and the journal L ’Etudiant noir.Nardal was equally
active on the feminist front, working with moderate groups including Ad
Lucem Per Caritatem and the Union Féminine Civique et Sociale. Even so,
she found time throughout the 1930s to meet the many U.S. black artists
and intellectuals who visited Paris. When John Paynter was in Paris in
1936, for instance, staying with Louis-Thomas Achille, Nardal “was on sev-
eral occasions the cheerful medium of conversation, particularly at the al-
ways enjoyable dinner hour.” She took Paynter on a tour of the Palais
Royale and the Place de la Concorde, and they went to see Josephine Baker
and the African dancer Feral Benga at the Folies Bergère one night. Paynter
writes,
Later, through the entree to this kindly family, I had the pleasure of
an afternoon and evening with Mlle. Paulette Nardal as my charming
guide. It was not strange, perhaps, that—with her unusual Parisian
charm, yet with a richly dark complexion, so decidedly strange in
contrast with the native Parisienne—she, and even her escort, who
was decidedly not native though less attractive, should win some un-
usual attention from the passers-by. But it was an attention of polite
and restrained curiosity, French to the core. However, Mlle. Nardal
was, or seemed, oblivious; concerned with only where to go and how
to get there.
85
When she was forced to ﬂee France in 1939 on the eve of the war, Paulette
Nardal had been working for some time as the secretary to Galandou
Diouf, the Senegalese Député who had replaced Blaise Diagne in the French
154 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 166 ---
Assembly. She went on to pursue a long and celebrated career in Mar-
tinique until her death in 1985, both in feminist work (founding the
Rassemblement Féminin there in 1945 and editing a journal titled La
Femme dans la cité), and in cultural endeavors, especially through her choir,
“La Joie de Chanter” (The Joy of Singing), which in 1954 presented the
ﬁrst concert of “Negro spirituals” in Martinique and also performed
Nardal’s own arrangements of creole folk tunes.
86
The history of the ﬁrst generation of Antillean and African students to
study in the metropole after World War I remains to be written. Eslanda
Robeson contends that the black women Francophone students in Paris
had a very different experience of the metropole than the men:
They did not have a happy time in Paris. There are usually about two
hundred and ﬁfty Negro students in Paris, mostly boys from Gua-
deloupe, Martinique, Africa, and a very few from America. The Ne-
gro boys often have great success, and are sometimes lionized by the
French girls; the mulatto is often successful, too. But the Negro girls
of the better class, often proud and sensitive, have a difﬁcult time;
their own boys are much more interested in making conquests in the
new ﬁeld, and leave them sadly alone; and French boys are not inter-
ested in them, except as friends.
87
The constellation of intellectuals that gathered around the Nardal sisters
is characterized above all by a concerted effort to establish new and inde-
pendent intellectual institutions, support groups for discussion and publi-
cation, and even performing arts networks. Although historians acknowl-
edge the role of this loose-knit group in introducing black luminaries in the
pre-Négritude period, their weekly meetings and concerts (not to mention
their extensive work as literary and musical critics, musicians, journalists,
translators, editors, and activists) are almost always quickly dismissed as no
more than a “salon” in the traditional French bourgeois model. But on
closer inspection, the group around the Nardals might not be best de-
scribed as a salon at all. Indeed, perhaps to distinguish her own aims,
Paulette Nardal preferred to call her gatherings a “cercle d’amis” (“circle of
friends”) instead.
88 In a recent reﬂection on the period, Louis-Thomas
Achille has attested to the singularity of the Sundaycercle d’amisthat met at
the Nardal house at 7 rue Hébert in Clamart, a suburb of Paris:
FEMINISM AND L ’INTERNA TIONALISME NOIR 155


--- PAGE 167 ---
A dominant feminine mood ruled the tone and the rituals of these
convivial afternoons, not at all like a business circle or a masculine
club. The furniture of the two connecting rooms, the living room and
the dining room, did not reproduce in any way the decor of a salon of
the traditional bourgeoisie of France or of the Antilles. Some English
armchairs, airy, comfortable and light, furnished the accommoda-
tions for the conversation, which took place rather naturally also in
English. There was neither wine, nor beer, nor French cider, nor
whisky, nor exotic coffee, nor even creole ti-punch to refresh the
throat. Only English tea cut into these meetings, which never went
beyond the dinner hour....
89
I wonder whether the quick urge of Césaire to dismiss this space as
“superﬁcial” and as ultimately tangential to the birth of the Négritude
movement is not in fact another kind of reaction, directed more at the
dominant ﬁgures of the Nardals as women—and in particular as religious
women—than at the class forces that shaped the environment.
90
It is crucial to recognize the experimentalism and innovation in this in-
stitution building, in this effort to create a new kind of migrant black com-
munal space in Paris—a space sometimes identiﬁable as “bourgeois,” some-
times identiﬁable as “feminist,” sometimes identiﬁable as “intellectual,”
sometimes identiﬁable as “Anglophile,” but more generally characterizable
as shifting and subtly deﬁant to our anticipations. Moreover, the Nardal
cercle amounts to an argument that l’internationalisme noirrequires what we
might term the institutionalization of reciprocity: the creation of open, in-
formal spaces designed to allow certain kinds of transnational, translin-
guistic dialogue rather than to voice any particular social doxology.
In terms of New Negro activity on the other side of the Atlantic,
Achille’s evocation of thecercle d’amisis immediately reminiscent of the sa-
lons led by black U.S. female intellectuals such as Jessie Fauset, Regina An-
derson, and Ethel Ray Nance in New York and Georgia Douglas Johnson
in Washington, D.C.
91 Johnson’s “Saturday Nighters,” hosted at her home
at the corner of S and 15th Streets in Washington, are perhaps the best
known.
92 African American salons had been held in Washington as early as
1905 by the Mu-So-Lit Club and then after World War I by Edward C.
Williams’s Literary Lovers.
93 But in the 1920s it was Johnson’s “Saturday
Nighters” (originally Jean T oomer’s idea) that gathered the widest range
156 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 168 ---
of the East Coast black literati including Langston Hughes, Zora Neale
Hurston, Bruce Nugent, Angelina Grimké, Jessie Fauset, Alain Locke, Alice
Dunbar Nelson, Kelly Miller, Wallace Thurman, and Sterling Brown.
Other intellectuals and writers such as Gwendolyn Bennett, Countee Cul-
len, James Weldon Johnson, Charles S. Johnson, A. Philip Randolph, and
Carter G. Woodson sometimes made plans to stop by Johnson’s house
when they came to visit Washington, D.C.
94 Bruce Nugent would tell an
interviewer later that “Georgia Douglas Johnson’s salon was the most
unique one because it was almost like a throwback to ancient days when sa-
lons were the property of women. Women always had salons. Nobody went
to Georgia’s to meet writers, you went there to meet people.”
95 The eve-
nings attracted “a freewheeling jumble of the gifted, famous, and odd,” and
chances were that the crowd would even include some of the well-known
white literary ﬁgures who passed through black circles, such as Vachel
Lindsay, Edna St. Vincent Millay, Waldo Frank, and H. G. Wells.
96
Although I am suggesting that the innovative dialogic spaces assembled
by black women played an often underappreciated role in transnational
cultural circuits during the interwar period, it is necessary to add that the
salons led by black U.S. women such as Georgia Douglas Johnson differed
in important ways from the Nardals’ cercle d’amisin Paris. The New York
and Washington gatherings were ﬁrst of all less cosmopolitan, less spaces of
translation, less geared to foster links in a vision of black internationalism.
And while the Paris circuits constructed a diasporic cultural space within a
mostly indifferent European milieu, the New York and Washington group-
ings constructed a supportive network within a mostly hostile black middle
class context. The point of Johnson’s group was not belletristic pretentious-
ness or “Saturday night adventures in tidy parlors, among mostly tidy-
minded literati.”
97 As Ronald M. Johnson has pointed out, the gatherings
functioned on the contrary as a haven for “Harlem Renaissance” intellectu-
als and artists, a buttress against isolation in an insufferable middle-class
black climate. The “Saturday Nighters,” Johnson writes, “brought together
an isolated and otherwise ignored group of individuals. Here they read
their works, exchanged criticisms, and argued views on literature, art, and
politics; here they found the nurture, encouragement, and reception that
black Washington seemed unwilling to extend.”
98 Langston Hughes, for ex-
ample, singled out the literary community as one of the few high points of
his time in Washington, which were “unhappy years, except for poetry and
FEMINISM AND L ’INTERNA TIONALISME NOIR 157


--- PAGE 169 ---
the friends I made through poetry.” His assessment of the class obsessions
of the segregated black community in D.C. is particularly resentful: “the
‘better class’ Washington colored people,” he writes, “were on the whole as
unbearable and snobbish a group of people as I have ever come in contact
with anywhere.”
99
Although there were certainly readings during the “Saturday Nighters”
in Washington, the gatherings run by the Nardal sisters seemed much more
open to a wide variety of participatory performance. Whereas the Washing-
ton sessions sometimes centered on political discussions about the history
of slavery or miscegenation, Louis-Thomas Achille’s description of the Paris
cercles d’amishighlights their communal and improvised engagement with a
variety of black expressive forms: “Alternating with the piano, readings or
recitations of Antillean poems by Daniel Thaly and E. Flavia Léopold, or
poems by Gilbert Gratiant written in Creole, provided a literary interlude.
Sometimes a chorus formed on the spur of the moment to read through
Negro American ‘spirituals’ or ‘blues.’”
100 Such a juxtaposition—which
again may not be representative of the range of practices in either locale—
implies that the Nardals’ gatherings focused on performance, whereas the
discussions in the living rooms of Jessie Fauset or Georgia Douglas John-
son were spaces of casual interaction and debate.
What is especially important and particularly unique about the circle
around the Nardal sisters is that it cleared space for a kind of feminist prac-
tice that otherwise was not possible in the midst of the vogue nègre in Paris.
If as Joan Scott contends, feminism “is produced, differently at different
moments, at sites of difﬁcult, historically speciﬁc discursive contradic -
tion,”
101 then the work of the Nardal sisters as cultural critics is signiﬁcant
in the way it strives to contend with its particular historical “contradiction”:
the pernicious framing of black Francophone women in the gendered met-
aphors of colonial exoticism, travel, and desire speciﬁc to the modern Euro-
pean imagination. Hortense Spillers has famously described an “American
grammar book” of tropes conscribing black U.S. women, a “locus of con-
founded identities, a meeting ground of investments and privations in the
national treasury of rhetorical wealth.”
102 The work of the Nardals is in part
a feminist response to what we should understand to be a transnational
modern “treasury of rhetorical wealth,” which exploited stereotypes of
“dark” and “dusky” women from around the globe.
This discursive ﬁeld has deep roots in French colonial history, which
158 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 170 ---
critic Régis Antoine has partially traced through readings of the ﬁgure of
the doudou, an image as integral to the French imperial imagination as that
of the grinning Senegalese soldier in Banania advertisements. French dis-
course around the vieilles colonies in the Antilles consistently describes the
islands with phrases such as “l’île enchanteresse” (“the enchanting isle”),
“une colonie heureuse de son sort” (“a colony happy with its fate”), phrases
about the “wonders” of Martinique or the “luxuriant” and “transporting”
verdure of Guadeloupe. This metaphorology contributed not just to the
exoticization but also to what Antoine terms the “hyper-feminization” of
the islands.
103 As early as 1769, the popular song Adieu foulards, adieu ma-
dras, attributed to M. de Bouillé, then gouverneur of Guadeloupe, immor-
talized this set of tropes with a highly charged narrative of desire, which in-
troduced a female “type” that came to be termedla doudou. The lyrics tell a
tale of a Caribbean woman separated from her French lover, in a formula
that “took on a symbolic function, ad nauseam, as the ideal representation
of an amorous relation projected onto the political backdrop between the
Antilles and France.”
104 By the late nineteenth century the doudou was
commonly understood both in the Antilles and in metropolitan France to
be any “smiling, sexually available black or colored woman (usually the lat-
ter) who gives herself heart, mind, and body to a visiting Frenchman (usu-
ally a soldier or colonial ofﬁcial) and is left desolate when her lover aban-
dons her to return to France, having, of course, refused to marry her
though often leaving her with a child who will at least ‘lighten the race.’”
105
By the turn of the twentieth century this ﬁgure had begun to extend or
“unfurl” into the literary arena, in a subset of colonial literature that came
to be termed la littérature doudou or doudouisme. In the depiction of the
Antillean context, Antoine explains, “The young woman of color and her
heartaches effectively became a motif inseparable from the countryside mo-
tif [motif paysage].
106 Providing the mythical foundation for any number of
poems, sentimental novels, and travel narratives, the ﬁgure of the doudou
came to serve as a reservoir of immediately recognizable tropes to inscribe
the “wonderful islands” and to propel readerly desire. By World War I, the
literary doudou presented an “an erotic object obligingly proposed for the
consumption—the textual consumption—of metropolitan readers, by
Antillean writers themselves as well as by French voyagers.”
107
This particularly Antillean “grammar book” worked against other possi-
ble characterizations of the islands, helping to elide the racialized speciﬁcity
FEMINISM AND L ’INTERNA TIONALISME NOIR 159


--- PAGE 171 ---
of class relations and labor exploitation in the French Caribbean. At the
same time, the mystiﬁcation whereby the doudou came to stand in allegori-
cally for the islands served to elide other possible resistant or anti-imperial-
ist images of Antillean women. 108 There were a few scattered attempts just
after the war to challenge this complex metaphorical ﬁeld around Antillean
femininity. One thinks of Suzanne Lacascade’s aforementioned Claire-
Solange, âme africaine, or Oruno Lara’s pedantic 1923 novel Question de
couleurs (blanches et noirs).
Lara’s book opens with a double dedication “to colored women from all
countries and all colonies, in a hopeful homage” and “to white women who
frequent Negroes [qui fréquentent les noirs], in a homage of gratitude and re-
spect.”109 It is mainly structured as a Socratic dialogue between René Frault
and Nelly Guérin, two Guadeloupean civil servants who meet in Paris after
having known each other as teenagers in the Caribbean. In a series of hu-
morous exchanges, René convinces his old acquaintance to recognize that
she is a négresse. As he puts it, when one is called a nègre,
the best thing was to face up to idiotic color prejudice....O n e
shouldn’t lower one’s head, declare oneself “half-white,” cowardly
turning one’s back to the epithet. . . . And besides, to what good?
You’d be scorned anyway. Ah! Let them come, those who say such
prejudices don’t exist in France, let them come! . . . [I]t was better to
show oneself as one was, to call oneself Negro [noir] because one was,
to claim the word nègre and work to instruct oneself, to better oneself,
in order to make it respected, both the word and the thing, in ac-
quired rights.
110
In the course of their debates about the race problem, René also seduces
Nelly. YetQuestion de couleurs is no simple story of “native” love discovered
in the metropole. In a version of the feminism espoused in Marcelle
Besson’s articles inLa Dépêche africaine, René instructs Nelly that she has a
historic duty as an Antillean woman to “uplift” and “inﬂuence” her race
through moral education. In an extraordinary twist, he is assisted in this
pedagogic undertaking by a number of white Frenchwomen who tell Nelly
about woman’s proper inﬂuence. One white feminist explains that if she
spends time with Negroes, it is “not a preference, but a generous tendency
to love those who are misunderstood [méconnus]. Those who do so brave
prejudice and open the paths unto the future. The white women who fre-
160 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 172 ---
quent Negroes [les noirs] are the true messengers of Progress.” 111 By the
conclusion of the novel, a convinced Nelly returns to Guadeloupe, writing
to René that he has made her conscious “of a nobler duty, the uplift of our
race; of a better and sweet virtue, the collaboration of the woman in the
man’s bold dream.” “I’m yours,” she proclaims in the letter, but adds that
“it’s over, I’ll never get married.” Nelly has decided to “consecrate” herself
to the “task” of being a teacher in Guadeloupe in order to educate “a gener-
ation that will follow in your footsteps.”
112 She leaves “without a glance be-
hind her,” asking René to help her by composing an instruction book (un
livre d’enseignement) she can use in “popular education.” 113 And René re-
mains in the metropole to write and study. Lara’s short novel is largely for-
gotten, but noteworthy as an unprecedented attempt at renovating the im-
age and self-conception of the Antillean woman—even if the book ends up
a bizarrely reactionary vision of a gendered division of labor in the service
of racial nationalism.
In her biography of Josephine Baker, Phyllis Rose notes that a major dif-
ference between French colonialism and British colonialism is manifested
culturally, visible in the “fantasy productions” of the Paris music halls:
The French were publicly willing to imagine themselves making love
with colonial women. ...A nimportant colonial administrator put it
tellingly in his book about governing West Africa: “The territory is
not just raw material for ﬁnance, commerce, army and administration
to work with; nor is it something to be made an idol of. It is a living
body, and we must enter into relations with it if we are to govern it
with full knowledge of what we are doing.”
114
Still, after World War I, the vogue nègre brings about a ground shift in the
feminization of the colonial relationship, particularly due to contact in
Paris between French artists and colonial “natives” (former soldiers, labor-
ers, servants, students, performers). Between the world wars, the construc-
tion of the “colonial woman” becomes inherentlymetonymic: it is no longer
simply that French Caribbean islands are “feminized,” but moreover that
metropolitan popular culture elaborates and commercializes a broader “co-
lonial grammar book” that represents “exotic” women throughout the em-
pire. What changes drastically is that this discourse of the “native” sexual
other becomes increasingly indiscriminate, paying less attention than ever
to detail and projecting a vision of a nearly continuous feminized object of
FEMINISM AND L ’INTERNA TIONALISME NOIR 161


--- PAGE 173 ---
desire across la France d’outre-mer.It is not by chance that this development
neatly coincides with the evolution in political discourse of the notion of
the “greater” French Empire as a single unifying entity.
Expatriate African American performers played an important role in this
extension, and none was as successful and instrumental in this regard as Jo-
sephine Baker. In 1931, at the height of her popularity, Baker was even
asked to serve as the “Queen” of the Exposition Coloniale, an honor which
was quickly rescinded due to a chorus of loud objections that Baker was a
U.S. citizen, not an indigène (she had never even been to the French colo-
nies). But in a complex dynamic between the craze for jazz and the desire
for a feminized exoticism, shows were constructed around Baker precisely
to make the point that she could represent a kind of universal feminine co-
lonial other. She opened in the fall of 1930 at the Casino de Paris with a
show called “Paris qui remue” (Paris When It Sizzles), “a series of colonialist
fantasy skits, in which Baker generally played a young native girl from
somewhere in the French Empire in love with a dashing Frenchman.”
115
“Paris qui remue” was hugely successful, running through the year for 481
performances, and in it Baker’s body was the consummate “ideological arti-
fact,” as James Clifford has put it. In her shows, “archaic Africa (which
came to Paris by way of the future—that is, America) was sexed, gendered,
and invested with ‘magic’ in speciﬁc ways.”
116 But her performances not
only enabled an exotic Africanist detour, but also served as the locus of a
metonymic operation: black, brown, and yellow bodies were all incarnated
in the writhing limbs and “sculptural” gestures of Baker as interchangeable
objects of colonial desire. In “Paris qui remue,” she not only danced the
Charleston, but also sang in one skit, “Voulez-vous de la canne à sucre?”
(“Would you like some sugar cane?”), as the sexually teasing Martinican
doudou; in another, she was “La Petite T onkinoise,” a little Vietnamese girl
singing about her French lover.
117 The revue also introduced what became
Baker’s signature song, “J’ai deux amours”: “J’ai deux amours, / Mon pays
et Paris. / Par eux toujours / Mon coeur est ravi” (“I have two loves, / My
country and Paris. / By them my heart / Is always delighted”). In later
years, Baker would sometimes add a new line at the end of the song, pro-
claiming her cosmopolitan autonomy: instead of “Mon pays et Paris,” she
would sing “Mon pays c’estParis” (“My country is Paris”). But as Rose
points out, the song, which had been originally written by Vincent Scotto
162 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 174 ---
in 1905 for another music hall star, was not the sugary nostalgia of an
American in Paris, but yet another colonial metonym:
“J’ai deux amours” was not the song of an American girl who has
made it in Paris and yearns for home. It was part of an elaborate
sketch called “Ounawa,” for which the leopard Chiquita had been
purchased, set in the equatorial jungle. It is the song of an African girl
in love with a French colonist. He invited her to return with him to
Paris and she wants to go, but the people of her tribe won’t allow this
betrayal. She is torn: “J’ai deux amours.” On the one hand racial and
national identity, on the other romance, sex, and swinging Paris.
118
Indeed, much of the pleasure of Baker’s performance seems to have come
precisely from its metonymic structure: that here on the Parisian stage of
the Casino, the modern and the primitive coexisted in an eroticized female
body—at once the light-skinned black American performer from Harlem,
with her jazzy dance steps and pronounced American accent, and the “ar-
chaic” colonial others from so far away. Unlike most women from the colo-
nies, however, Josephine Baker herself was in the end able to transcend
many of the stereotypes of this troubling grammar book, for as the greatest
star of the music hall era she “was able to mock the role of the exotic primi-
tive even as she played it to the hilt.”
119
Black Magic
With regard to the African diaspora, the most pernicious example of this
metonymic extension of the doudou may be the 1928 best-selling collection
of short stories by Paul Morand called Magie noire (“black magic”), which
was translated the next year in a widely read English edition illustrated by
Aaron Douglas.
120 The stories featured locales across the Atlantic basin,
from Haiti to the Ivory Coast, from Brussels to Charleston, from Liberia to
the Côte d’Azur, from Baton Rouge to Paris. Animated by Morand’s sopho-
moric but sensational writing style, the tales all strove to bring together car-
icatures of familiar black modern ﬁgures (Baker, Du Bois, A’Lelia Walker)
with overdetermined references and primitivist stereotypes of the Jazz Age
(lynching, “passing,” “voodoo,” the Pan-Africanist and Garvey movements,
the U.S. occupation of Haiti, international communism) to portray a uni-
ﬁed black world ultimately determined by its atavism—the susceptibility of
FEMINISM AND L ’INTERNA TIONALISME NOIR 163


--- PAGE 175 ---
even the most seemingly civilized and modern black subject to revert at any
moment to his or her “essential” primitive nature. The order of the stories
followed the route of Morand’s travels through the Americas and then Af-
rica in 1927 and 1928, when he was on honeymoon with his wife Hélène,
reading the racist theories of Gobineau.
121 Magie noire shares with much
colonial literature a pretension to a social scientiﬁc “verisimilitude,” enu-
merating in a chronological preface the “30,000 miles, 28 Negro countries”
that Morand claimed to have traversed during the book’s composition
(481–482/v–vi).
W . E. B. Du Bois must have been especially incensed by “Syracuse ou
l’homme panthère,” the story that featured a Renaissance man who closely
resembles him: Dr. Lincoln Vamp, founder and leader of a “House of the
New Negro” of educational and social uplift, to which he had given a gran-
diose classical name: “Syracuse” (one thinks of Du Bois’s evocations of
“Atalanta” inThe Souls of Black Folk). The story is set during the Brussels
session of the 1921 Pan-African Congress, where Vamp takes a break from
the grueling debates to visit the Congo Museum. Wandering alone through
the building, the doctor undergoes a strange and irresistible transforma-
tion: ﬁrst, he recognizes himself as having the same seductive eyes as a “fe-
tish-conjurer” depicted in an exhibit, and then he starts hearing the “calls”
of the magical objects collected around him, the “plain, harmonious expres-
sion of happiness, the happiness of the man whom nothing has reft from
his soil or his setting, who continues to live just where God placed him”
(566/87). The “spirits” inhabiting the old fetishes, calabashes, amulets, and
death shrouds speak to Dr. Vamp, resuscitating his “true” nature (with a
mocking pun on his name):
“Flee!” they were saying, “ﬂee! Leave the land that is your dwelling-
place; her fertility is but a show, and ruin broods over her. Her prog-
ress is an illusion. She makes you a vampire, no more. Come back to
the land where stones and trees speak in the name of the Spirit.”
(566/87–88, modiﬁed)
Vamp ends up hallucinating that he has turned into a panther, being
hunted deep in the jungle, and when his colleagues come to search for him
the next day when he is absent at the Pan-African Congress, he has van-
ished without a trace: the museum guard recalls seeing only “un grand
164 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 176 ---
nègre fou, qui rougissait” (“a tall Negr o...mad—and bellowing”) (568/
89) running out of the museum.
Du Bois held himself above this kind of preposterous pulp, writing in a
supercilious review of the translation simply that Black Magic “is mainly
nonsense. It is built around the thesis that all persons of Negro descent have
atavistic urges to ‘go native’ on the slightest provocation.”122 The more cen-
tral objects of the atavism thesis in Morand’s collection, however, are black
women, and the stories go to great lengths—picking up on the metonymic
culture of the Parisian stage and dance hall and on the older literary tradi-
tion of the doudou—to make the argument that black women, as the
“mothers of the race,” have an especially pronounced susceptibility to “go
native.” In “Good-Bye, New York!” for example, the reader is presented
with Pamela Freedman-Orfei, a young “light-skinned” American woman,
who takes a transatlantic cruise to see the coast of Africa. Pamela is the
daughter of a woman who invented a well-known hair straightener (the
portrait is loosely based on A’Lelia Walker). She grew up in Paris and is
“passing” for white on the cruise ship. There is a man on the ship who
knows Pamela’s mother—as often in the tales, black atavism passes through
the maternal line—and eventually her secret is the main course of gossip
among the scandalized and disgusted white passengers. Partly due to their
machinations, the ocean liner (named the “Mammoth”) leaves her in Africa
by mistake, after a day at anchor along the shore. Pamela is panicked at
ﬁrst, lost in the jungle, but after she ﬁnds a French colonial administrator,
she quickly adapts to the situation and becomes his obliging mistress. The
narration switches to present tense as “son atavique manque de mémoire,
l’ardeur à vivre qui est dans son sang” (“her atavistic shortness of memory
and the ardor for life that runs in her blood”) (587/164) make Pamela for-
get the day before and enable her to live in the bliss of an eternal present.
One day she goes into the jungle with one of the administrator’s servants,
Mamadu, who eagerly leads her to his village to witness a ritual ceremony.
In a startling passage, yet another metonymic mix of modern jazz and
“primitive” percussion, Pamela succumbs:
The terrible musky smell of the nègre was overwhelming her, but she
could not withhold it from her nostrils. She felt herself entering into
the black world [le monde noir]; she was drowning in it. Ritually, the
moon had risen....P amela remembered Irving Berlin’s latest success:
FEMINISM AND L ’INTERNA TIONALISME NOIR 165


--- PAGE 177 ---
Niggers are only really niggers in the moonlight [Les nègres ne sont
vraiment des nègres que sous la lune]...
In that dull thudding of the tom-toms she felt once more the same
numbness, the same ecstasy, that she sought in Montmartre jazz at
the hour of the full blast of intoxication....S h ew a ssick of being a
fake White woman! Why should she take pride in a progress bor-
rowed from others? Her own progress was to return, in an astound-
ing, harmonious union, to the land of her ancestors....Ot h efemi-
ninity, the vast maternity of this continent! The négresses are the
queens of the black world. (591–593/172–173, modiﬁed)
It is the perfect image of atavism—embodied in the reversion of a thor-
oughly modern black American woman with only a fraction of “black
blood,” which is still powerful enough to call her back to “the vast mater-
nity of this continent.” Pamela Freedman ﬁnally yields to Mamadu’s ad-
vances in an orgiastic sex ritual and goes “back into the womb of Africa”
where she rightfully belongs:
Good-bye, New York! Pamela Freedman was going back into the
womb of Africa. No longer was she worth three million dollars: she
was worth three oxen, like the other women. There she was, clapping
her palms, bent double at every cadence, her feet together and legs
tightly pressed, her loins held stiff like all the Negro women. She was
one of them now. (593/173)
Many of the African and Antillean students and intellectuals in Paris at
the end of the 1920s wrote reviews of Morand’s collection.
123 Perhaps the
most extraordinary perspective is offered in Léon-Gontran Damas’s 1939
essay “Misère noire,” which reads Magie noire as an example of the “irrita-
tion” caused by the cultural conquest of Europe by black art and music. He
retells the story of “Good-Bye, New York!” slightly changing the details: as
Damas recalls it, the tale is the story of a perfectly civilized colored Ameri-
can woman who “during the course of a cruise in Africa, seeing a coconut
tree, rejects all the customs of civilization as useless garments, and climbs
back up the ancestral coconut tree.” Damas writes, “This ‘story’ vexed con-
siderably the better French Negro society [la bonne société noire française],
which believes that the apex of human dignity consists in going back to
166 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 178 ---
the cave era via the paths offered by Mr. Paul Morand’s civilization.” He
goes on:
We are of a certain number, on the contrary, to consider the act of
Paul Morand’s heroine with a great deal of sympathy....
Nevertheless, what is most interesting is that on the one hand Paul
Morand kindly sends back to the coconut trees a Minister of Justice, a
Vice-President of the Legislative Chamber, a good half-dozen gener-
als, etc. ...,o fhis country, while at the same time, in the salons that
M. Paul Morand haunts, the sisters of M. Paul Morand are dancing
the tango, the fox-trot, the blues, the rumba, the conga, the son....
The Romans showed more propriety. When they offered sacriﬁces
to the gods of those they colonized, they at least refrained from offer-
ing them in their own homes.
124
As rudely humorous as the passage is—reminding a French readership that
assimilation is a double-edged sword—Damas relies throughout on a ra-
cialist vision of “civilizations” competing through the exchange of women.
Thus his critique matches Morand’s atavistic banishment of Pamela Freed-
man up the coconut tree with its own images of “Paul Morand’s sisters”
shaking their hips to the sounds of black rhythms.
In La Dépêche africaine, Jane Nardal wrote another review ofMagie noire
speciﬁcally in a manner not just to challenge the atavism thesis as an exten-
sion of earlier ﬁgures such as the doudou, but also to critique the gendered
construction of “civilization” that Damas takes for granted. In an essay ti-
tled “Pantins exotiques” (Exotic puppets), she focuses on the images of
black Francophone women that comprise “illusions profondément ancrées
dans l’esprit français et tombées de la littérature dans le domaine public”
(“illusions profoundly anchored in the French mind and fallen out from
literature into the public domain”).
125 She writes: “De la puissance
d’évocation de certains mots, le créole qui a séjourné en France peut
facilement se rendre compte. Vient-on à savoir ou à s’apercevoir que vous
êtes ‘exotique,’ vous suscitez un vif intérêt, des questions saugrenues, les
rêves et les regrets de ceux qui n’ont jamais voyagé: ‘Ah! les Isles d’or! les
pays merveilleux! aux heureux, aux naïfs, aux insouciants habitants!’” (“The
creole who has visited France can easily attest to the evocative power of cer-
tain words. As soon as people learn or perceive that you are ‘exotic,’ you
elicit lively interest, ludicrous questions, the dreams and regrets of those
FEMINISM AND L ’INTERNA TIONALISME NOIR 167


--- PAGE 179 ---
who have never traveled: ‘Ah! The Golden Isles! The wonderful country-
side! The happy, naive, carefree inhabitants!’”). In false innocence, Nardal
queries:
Aurions-nous le courage de nous dépouiller du prestige que nous
confère la littérature exotique et de détonner, modernes, sur le décor
passé, rococo des hamacs, palmiers, forêts vierges etc.
Quelle déception pour celui qui évoque en votre honneur des prin-
cesses exotiques, si vous alliez lui dire que, tout comme une petite
bourgeoise française, vous poursuivez à Paris des études commencées
là-bas, sous les tropiques, au Lycée?
Will we have the courage to shed the prestige that exotic literature
confers upon us, and to clash, as modern women, with the decor of
the past, the rococo of hammocks, palm trees, virgin forests, etc.
What a disappointment it would be for he who evokes exotic prin-
cesses in your honor, if you were to tell him that—just like any
French petit bourgeois girl—you were here in Paris to pursue studies
you’d started over there, in the tropics, in high school?
In the face of these persistent stereotypes and assumptions, she jokes, the
only question left is “à quelle sauce voulons-nous être mangés: à la sauce
idéaliste ou à la sauce réaliste?” (“in which sauce would we like to be eaten:
the idealist sauce or the realist sauce?”). She sketches a brief survey of the
literary ﬁgurations of black women, from the early exoticism of Bernardin
de Saint-Pierre, to the humanitarian or abolitionist romanticism of Victor
Hugo, Alphonse de Lamartine, and Jules Michelet in France and Harriet
Beecher Stowe in the United States, up through the more naturalistic por-
traits of Marius-Ary Leblond’sUlysse nègre or Joseph Conrad’sThe Nigger of
the Narcissus around the turn of the century, and concluding with the cur-
rent violent urban primitivism of Philippe Soupault’s 1927 novel Le Nègre
and Carl Van Vechten’s 1926Nigger Heaven.
But Nardal suggests that the grammar book of such metaphors has
shifted in recent years away from the romanticism of exotic literature. Of
late, “la boîte aux accessoires exotiques soit boulversée” (“the box of exotic
accessories has been shaken up”). This shift, Nardal argues, is thanks to the
metonymic whirlwinds of the vogue nègre and black popular culture in the
168 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 180 ---
Parisian metropole. It is especially Josephine Baker who has “shaken up”
the standards of nineteenth-century doudouisme:
Voilà que bondit en scène une femme de couleur, aux cheveux laqués,
à l’étincelant sourire; elle est bien encore vêtue de plumes ou de
feuilles de bananes, mais elle apporte aux Parisiens les derniers
produits de Broadway (Charleston, jazz, etc.). La transition entre le
passé et le présent, la soudure entre la forêt vierge et le modernisme,
ce sont les noirs américains qui l’accomplissent, et la rendent tangible.
Then onto the stage leaps a colored woman with lacquered hair and a
sparkling smile; she is still clothed in feathers or banana leaves, but
she brings the latest Broadway products (the Charleston, jazz, etc.) to
the Parisians. The transition between the past and the present, the
fusing of virgin forest and modernism—it is American Negroes who
are carrying it out and rendering it tangible.
French artists—“blasé snobs,” in Nardal’s estimation—have discovered in
ﬁgures such as Baker and Ada “Bricktop” Smith a means to renovate and
extend the doudou image. Like James Clifford, Nardal describes this
metonymic ﬁeld in terms of eroticized collage and alluring juxtaposition:
“le contraste savoureux, pimenté, d’êtres primitifs dans un cadre ultra-
moderne de la frénésie africaine se déployant dans le décor cubiste d’une
boîte de nuit” (“the ﬂavorful, spicy contrast of primitive beings in an ultra-
môdern frame of African frenzy, situated in the cubist decor of a night
club”).
Nardal reads Paul Morand’s collection as no more than an exploitation
and sensationalization of this development. She offers a few conjectures
about his sources: besides popular culture, there is the apparent inﬂuence of
Lucien Lévy-Bruhl’sLa Mentalité primitive, and for the U.S. sections, per-
haps Alain Locke’s The New Negro. As for the Caribbean sections of the
book, there are the literary models of the doudou and the “dangerous mu-
latto,” to supplement Morand’s brief “stop-overs” (escales) in the islands.
She also notes that Morand was known to “haunt” the Bal Nègre on the rue
Blomet, the Antillean dance hall featuring beguine that in the late 1920s
became an attraction to Parisian society as fashionable as the Cotton Club
in Harlem. In fact, Nardal blames the vogue nègre and clubs such as the Bal
FEMINISM AND L ’INTERNA TIONALISME NOIR 169


--- PAGE 181 ---
Nègre for instilling images of blacks as only entertainers for white metro-
politan amusement, for the “artistic or sensual pleasure of the white man.”
She complains that “lorsqu’il s’agit de qualités intellectuelles, ou morales,
lorsqu’il s’agit de ne plus être leur bouffon, mais leur égal par l’intelligence,
cela dérange le plan de la nature et les vues de la providence” (“when it has
to do with intellectual or moral qualities, when it has to do with no longer
serving as the whites’ buffoon, but instead their equal in intelligence—that
disturbs the natural order and the plans of fortune”). The black woman is
left in a conundrum: for the “aesthetic pleasure of Paul Morand and com-
pany,” she is a “puppet”(pantin) consumed in a sauce putatively both ideal-
ist (“the vast maternity of the African continent”) and realist (her essential
atavism).
Nardal is not so concerned with countering each and every stereotype
deployed in Magie noire; instead, she looks for the ways such a text is re-
ceived in the social context of the vogue nègre. Morand’s position, she con-
tends, amounts to an ultimately unsurprising brand of paternalism, involv-
ing, on the one hand, a lament for a “pure” or “authentic” black primitive
culture that is disappearing as colonized black populations come into con-
tact with Western civilization and, on the other hand, an infatuation with
the “magic” of African diasporic religious practice, ritual, and music.
Morand’s entire stance on black modern culture is shaped through such as-
sumptions: the nègres “nous modiﬁent, mais nous les déformons” (“modify
us, but we deform them”), as he puts it in a contemporaneous article.
126 In
the end, Nardal recognizes that Morand’s construction of a gendered and
atavistic set of black images is self-reﬂexive—more about “the representa-
tion of the French to the French” than any kind of sociological claim about
black modern life. Encountering a key passage in “Good-Bye, New York!”
that basically concedes this point, Nardal expresses relief. One of the char-
acters on the ocean liner announces that
our age is a nègre age. Just think of the general slackness, the distaste
of the young for hard work, the nudity on the Lido or on Palm
Beach, equality, fraternity, clay houses that last three years, public
lovemaking, divorce, advertising....T h echarlatans, the soap-box or-
ators, the fortune-tellers, the petters, the fake jeweller y...A l li nall,
the nègre is just our own shadow! [En somme, le nègre, c’est notre
ombre!] (577/150, modiﬁed)
170 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 182 ---
The atavistic nègre is exposed as a function of the French imagination, a
way of coming to terms with the threats of modernity. In Magie noire,
Nardal comments, one ultimately encounters not the “portrait du nègre,
mais celui de l’Européen d’après-guerre, assimilé au nègre, pour qu’il en
éprouve de la honte” (“portrait of the black man, but that of the European
after the war, assimilated to the nègre, who therein expresses his shame over
that assimilation”). Thinking back to the racist reception of a book such as
Batouala, Nardal concludes by expressing hope that one day a European
critic will attribute to la race nègre not just the physical and performative
prowess of a Josephine Baker, but also the intellectual and moral qualities
of a René Maran.
Begin the Beguine
In their writings, Jane and Paulette Nardal both evidence an interest in
those instances of black modern culture in the Parisian metropole, like
Baker’s performances, where “the box of exotic accessories has been shaken
up.” It is to this end that they turn especially to considerations of black mu-
sic in the interwar period. A number of historians have written of the “in-
ternational style” of Parisian popular musical activity between the wars, the
quickly changing and highly syncretic mix of black U.S. jazz and fox-trot,
European artistes such as Jean Cocteau and the avant-garde composers
known as Les Six jamming their versions of le jazz hot at the club Le Boeuf
sur le T oit, Martinican beguine and Cubanson and rumba, and the French
popular chanson in the music halls and casinos.
127 Like Kojo T ovalou
Houénou and Les Continents in 1924, the Nardal circle and La Dépêche
africaine sponsored a number of musical performances toward the close of
the decade, both in the salon and in theaters. Programming included
“Grandes Fêtes Coloniales,” which featured a wide range of black musi-
cians in the spirit of the “international style”: for example, one featured Er-
nest Léardée’s Orchestre Antillais de la rue Blomet, the Noble Sissle jazz
orchestra, the dancer Jeanne Longrais performing demonstrations of the
beguine, Fernande Dorade and Félix Ardinet dancing the “black bottom,”
and the African American singer Ethel Oughton Clarke offering a short
classical recital of arias by Mozart and Rossini.
128
The critical work of the Nardals shows a particular interest in the
beguine [biguine], which had emerged in the ﬁrst decades of the twentieth
century at the same time as jazz in the United States, paseo in T rinidad,
FEMINISM AND L ’INTERNA TIONALISME NOIR 171


--- PAGE 183 ---
tango in Argentina, and son and danzon in Cuba. The form had been devel-
oped during the last half of the nineteenth century in Saint-Pierre, Mar-
tinique. In one of the great traumas of Antillean history, Saint-Pierre was
obliterated by the eruption of the Mt. Pelée volcano on May 8, 1902
(which claimed at least 30,000 victims), but until that tragedy the city was
one of the most important cultural crossroads of the Antilles, with a lively
theater and music scene featuring popular dance tunes with lyrics in creole,
which were performed in a range of musical forms such as the beguine, the
polka, the valse créole, the mazurka, the quadrille, and the Central Ameri-
can valse pasillo.
In the late 1920s, after Fort-de-France had been established as the new
artistic and political capital of the island, a number of musicians from
Martinique brought the music to France. The most famous was Alexandre
Stellio, the Martinican clarinetist in whose playing some heard echoes of
the great jazz reedman Johnny Dodds. Stellio would go on to record at least
130 sides in the boom of interest in Caribbean music in the next decade.
He became a recognizable ﬁgure in black Francophone circles in Paris and,
according to Paulette Nardal, was a spectacular performer on the band-
stand:
Don’t assume that he exerts himself like a black jazz musician [un noir
de jazz band], acrobat and juggler. Stellio’s moves are entirely differ-
ent. He doesn’t just use his mouth to propagate that unique cadence,
it is his whole body, his eyes, his head, which he turns from right to
left, his neck, his shoulders, his right foot marking time, everything in
him drawing out such intensity, such driving power, that you can
only let yourself get carried away by the spirited rhythm of the
beguine. And meanwhile, this remarkable man [ce diable d’homme]i s
still able to retain his gentlemanly airs.
129
Stellio brought a traditional beguine dance band with him to Paris, includ-
ing Ernest Léardée on violin, Archange St. Hilaire on trombone, Victor
Colas on cello, and Crémas Orphélien on percussion, and they played
Antillean dance halls around Paris until Léardée left to form his own band
at the Bal Nègre on the rue Blomet in 1930.
Once in Paris, though, beguine underwent a transformation through the
inﬂuence of the black transnational music scene. Fascinating derivatives be-
gan to develop in the cauldron of metropolitan popular culture. In particu-
172 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 184 ---
lar, there were a number of musicians who crossed over between forms such
as black American jazz and black Caribbean beguine during this period,
cross-fertilizing and reconceptualizing each in the process. For example,
Bertin Depestre Salnave, a Haitian who had come to Paris in October 1913
to study classical music, ended up playing with Will Marion Cook’s orches-
tra in London in 1919 and then pursued a career playing jazz in Europe
with black U.S. musicians such as Sidney Bechet, Arthur Briggs, and
Crickett Smith. There was the Cuban guitarist Don Barreto, in Paris after
1925, who was active in both Cuban and jazz circles and whose band fea-
tured musicians from the States, Cuba, and the French Caribbean, as well
as gypsies such as the clarinetist Edouard Pajaniandy. T rumpeter Arthur
Briggs played with the drummer Robert Monmarché, an Antillean who
went on to work with U.S. saxophonist and orchestra leader Benny Carter.
And Antillean musicians such as the reed players Félix Valvert and Robert
Mavounzy commonly recorded with both jazz musicians and beguine
groups and introduced jazz instruments (the trap set, the banjo, the saxo-
phone) and swing rhythms into beguine performances.
130
The beguine remained a dance music, however, and no dance hall was
more famous than the Bal Nègre located at 33 rue Blomet in the Fifteenth
Arrondisement. It was open on Saturday, Sunday, T uesday, and Thursday
nights, and at the height of its popularity it was easily attracting crowds of
four or ﬁve hundred dancers each night.
131 In the New York Amsterdam
News, J. A. Rogers described the Bal for black U.S. readers: “Paris now has a
miniature Harlem and all within the space of three months. It is the Bal
Nègre on the Rue Blomet.”
132 He compares the increasing hordes of white
French gawkers and hangers-on to Manhattanites slumming uptown in
Harlem. “The majority of the Negroes,” Rogers writes, “are very dark, and
come from the French West Indies or parts of Africa. The visitor who
speaks only English had better take his interpreter with him. And as to the
racial composition of the hall, the scientist who said that there were only
ﬁve varieties of the human race must have been buried in some hole at the
time, for here there are at least twenty-ﬁve: among them are Chinese, Japa-
nese, Egyptians, Russians, Hungarians, Germans. One is faced with the fact
that the human race, if it is anything at all, is certainly mixed.” Rogers
notes the differences between beguine and U.S. jazz in terms of the music
itself as well as the styles of dancing and patterns of dress. He is especially
fascinated by the chacha, the percussion instrument that sets the basic roll-
FEMINISM AND L ’INTERNA TIONALISME NOIR 173


--- PAGE 185 ---
ing rhythmic foundation of the beguine and propels the dancers, writing
that “the tempo is set by a shiny tin container ﬁlled with pebbles. This con-
tainer resembles a cocktail shaker pierced with many holes; the leader
shakes it in a manner as if he were continually throwing it away from him.”
But the dancing was the point of the Bal Nègre, of course, and the unique
and easy grace of the beguine mesmerized European and American com-
mentators alike. Andrée Nardal, another of the sisters, described the dance
in an article published in La Revue du monde noir:
In the real biguine, as it is danced by the Creoles themselves, the
performers do not embrace; they mimic the everlasting pursuit of
woman by man. The former advances and withdraws to the accompa-
niment of a thousand enticing gestures while her partner artfully ap-
proaches and feigns a haughty indifference which he drops quickly in
order to catch up to his ﬂippant companion who is running away,
borne along by her swishing skirts.
133
Nonetheless, as we might expect, the feature of the Antillean dances that
always attracted the most interest was the black women: their hairstyles,
their dress, their accessories, such as the “bright-colored” bandanna de-
scribed by Rogers (“worn outward like the horns of a snail”), and above all
their “everlasting pursuit ...b yman.” In the many descriptions of the
beguine, it is as though those “thousand enticing gestures” are mobilized for
the composition of that new modern and metropolitan grammar book, up-
dating the doudou. In one frivolous article, journalist George Paul spends
paragraphs simply cataloging the “dark women that give the real verve and
color to this melange,” with intense, almost clinical attention. One, he ef-
fuses, is dancing
with a very little black man with a Charlie Chaplin mustache, whose
head comes only level with her vast bosom....S h edances with her
head ﬂung back, and her great brown eyes from their burning, melt-
ing depths actually cast sparks upward to meet the glances of the row
of hanging heads that gaze down from the balcony railings. The little
black man with his ﬁngers moving up and down over his partner’s
hips plays some strange tune, with all the care and precision and ap-
parent foreknowledge as a musician lovingly ﬁngering the keys of a
piano.
134
174 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 186 ---
In this account, a great deal of work goes into imagining erotic “sparks”
between the writer and the female dancers, whose burning glances are
depicted in communication with and in supplication of the “row of hang-
ing heads” in the balcony (at the Bal Nègre, journalists and wallﬂowers
watched the dancing masses from the balcony). The women are silent in-
struments beckoning to be used, and the writer’s own “frank” desire is to
join that melange, “one jungle melody of motion, to which is added the
technique of the piano, played by men’s hands, black, white and yellow,
upon the heaving backs of women.”
The African American poet Countee Cullen also visited the Bal Nègre in
the summer of 1928. That April he had married W . E. B. Du Bois’s daugh-
ter, Yolande, in what was considered the “Harlem social event of the dec-
ade.”
135 But in a sign of the state of their relationship (and possibly his own
predilections), two months later Cullen left her in the States, kicking off his
year-long Guggenheim Fellowship by voyaging to France with his friend
Harold Jackman. He sampled the dance scene without his new wife, who
joined him in Paris at the end of the summer. In his “Dark T ower” column
in Opportunity, he described the Bal Nègre as “probably the most cosmo-
politan and democratic dance hall in Paris, which may mean in the world.”
The beguine “is a weird sort of playing, a melange or cross between modern
jazz and the residue of old West Indian folk pieces.”
136 Like Rogers, Cullen
comments on the mixed crowd, but instead of hanging out in the balcony
with the tourists, he heads to the dance ﬂoor where “all the fun is being
had.” Even though the music reminds him of jazz, Cullen immediately rec-
ognizes that this isn’t an easy black transnational space to navigate. The
dashing young poet ﬁnds himself a tongue-tied “alien”: “As an American
Negro we are somewhat startled to ﬁnd that our dark complexion avails us
nought among these kindredly tinted people. Language must be the open
sesame here, and it must be French. The Martiniquan lady whom we have
had the temerity to ask to dance with us seems to sense an alien tongue in
us, for she glides along amiably enough, but allows our painful attempts at
conversation to languish gently” (272).
Cullen’s description of the dancing is somewhat patronizing, but he
takes the time to note differences even within the Martinican community,
singling out one older couple in traditional dress who are “perhaps the rem-
nants of what the Bal Colonial was before the tourists discovered it.” He
comments:
FEMINISM AND L ’INTERNA TIONALISME NOIR 175


--- PAGE 187 ---
The dancing for the most part is hard and slightly reprehensible,
faintly suggestive of the antics of some of the New York night clubs.
In the midst of it all, however, one couple, as if disdaining such mod-
ern contortions, glides slowly along in an old Martiniquan step. Per-
haps it is not strange that the woman is the only one who has not
doffed her homeland costume, a one piece dress with a tightly fas-
tened waist and a long ﬂowing skirt, the whole brilliantly colored.
And perched like a blazing star on her head she wears the old home-
land turban. Her partner is dressed modern fashion, but there is a de-
risive curve to his lips and a mocking light in his eyes as he glides
along, one hand upon his hip, the other gently supporting his com-
panion. These two are like strong trees in a storm; they do not bend.
(272)
The beguine in Paris dance halls often draws out language like Cullen’s:
claims of authenticity, testimonies to rapid cultural transformation drama-
tized among the diversity of dancers and parasitic onlookers in a single
dance hall, all in addition to the familiar straining to describe this “dance of
love” while invoking all the old deep-set desires, all the familiar “exotic ac-
cessories,” all the echoes of the literary doudou suddenly staged among a
modern and cosmopolitan crowd. Paulette Nardal’s essays on the dances are
especially concerned with the implications of this rhetoric. In the 1930
“Musique nègre: antilles et aframérique,” she sketches the differences be-
tween the “two genres of nègre music” then confronting one another in
Paris: Antillean music such as the beguine, which she describes as “essen-
tially choreographic,” and U.S. black music such as jazz and the spiritu -
als.
137 Here, Nardal is interested in protecting what she sees as the “true
beguine” from its metropolitan appropriation; but that desire is expressed
less out of a prudish sensibility (and much less out of any disapproval of
Antillean folk culture) than out of a critical stance against the commercial-
izing and exoticizing appropriation of yet another element of black popular
expression in the quicksand of les années folles in Paris.
Nardal is also critical of the ways that appropriation hinges on a depic-
tion of the black Francophone woman, on a pernicious extension of the
doudou into the metonymic space of the metropole. With such concerns in
mind, she wrote an article on the new, second Bal Nègre that opened in
1929 in a large union meeting hall located in the industrial and popular
176 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 188 ---
neighborhood of La Glacière. It was mainly a means for the Antillean com-
munity to evade the throngs of European spectators who were overwhelm-
ing the ﬁrst Bal Nègre on the rue Blomet. (This was a losing battle: as J. A.
Rogers put it, describing the insane thirst for black bodies in motion in
Paris in the 1920s, “[t]he American Negro was brought from over 3,000
miles away, and were he taken ‘back’ to Africa, it is sad to say that an equal
number of boats would have to be provided for the white people who
would want to go along.”)
138 Unlike the ﬁrst Bal Nègre, violinist Ernest
Léardée explains, the Bal Nègre de la Glacière was explicitly “reserved for
natives [originaires] of Overseas France, and it was necessary to have the
blue card of the ‘Foyer Colonial’ in order to get in. Not once was there ever
a brawl, unlike a number of Antillean bals that I had the occasion to fre-
quent later.”
139
Nardal visited the new Bal a few months after publishing her short story
“En Exil,” and part of what emerges in her impressions is her own nostalgic
fondness for Martinican music. But most important, she focuses on the Bal
as an attempt to ﬁnd room for black cultural expression unsusceptible to
appropriation in the metropole—a desire for what Georgia Douglas John-
son once called a “clearing space, elbow room in which to think and write
and live beyond the reach of the Wolf’s ﬁngers.”
140 Not surprisingly, Nardal
is also one of the only commentators on the Bals to evidence a related de-
sire to establish critical space for the Antillean women dancing there to ex-
press themselves without immediately falling prey to the same doudouisme,
as still more exotic puppets in an eternally revised colonial grammar book.
Nardal’s description of a woman dancing alone is subtly effective:
Here is a woman who does not seem to have found a partner “up to
her speed” [de cavalier “à la hauteur”], for she has launched herself all
alone into the dance, arms lifted, hips rolling, in a sort of rhythmic
gallop, reminiscent of the progression of the crowd of an Antillean
masque coming wearily down the streets of Fort-de-France with music
in their heads on a Carnival Sunday.
141
Looking back to Fort-de-France, this passage is clearly a response to “exile,”
but it is neither backward-looking nor utopian: it evidences a determina-
tion above all to recuperate—and if necessary, to invent—such “clearing
spaces” of cultural expression and memory for the female Antillean migrant
in the metropole.
FEMINISM AND L ’INTERNA TIONALISME NOIR 177


--- PAGE 189 ---
I will close by returning to Paulette Nardal’s short ﬁction in tracing this
determination to discover spaces of autonomy in the metropole. She con-
tributed a brief récit called “Guignol Ouolof” (“Wolof clown”) to the single
issue of L ’Etudiant noir,the journal of the Association des Etudiants
Martiniquais en France.142 Published in March 1935, L ’Etudiant noiris the
journal that is generally considered to mark the inception of the Négritude
movement, bringing Aimé Césaire and Léopold Senghor together in a uni-
ﬁed “black” student movement for the ﬁrst time. In her groundbreaking
book on the Négritude generation, Lilyan Kesteloot devotes ten pages to
the importance of L ’Etudiant noirwhile admitting that she had never even
178 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA
L ’Etudiant noir1( M a r c h
1935). Centre des Ar-
chives d’Outre-Mer, Aix-
en-Provence, Archives
Nationales, France.
SLOTFOM V , Box 21.
All rights reserved.
[To view this image, refer to  
the print version of this title.]


--- PAGE 190 ---
seen a copy of the journal. She cites an unpublished essay by Léon-Gontran
Damas (who, though active in student circles at the time, was not even a
contributor), which calls L ’Etudiant noira “corporative journal of combat
with the objective of ending tribalization, the clannish system in force in
the Latin Quarter. One ceased to be an essentially Martinican, Guade-
loupean, Guyanese, African, Malagasy student, in order to be only one sole
and same black student [étudiant noir]. It was the end of life in isolation [la
vie en vase clos].
143
As Edward Ako and Martin Steins have more recently shown, the eleva-
tion of L ’Etudiant noiras the periodical of the incipience of Négritude is a
misrepresentation of the journal’s contents and signiﬁcance. 144 In reality,
Senghor was the only African contributor, and the publication was still
very much centered on the Martinican student group. Moreover, as in La
Dépêche africaine, there is in fact a great deal of ideological divergence
among the pieces in this legendary eight-page document rather than any
sort of collective claim of a unifying “black” identity. There are a number of
straightforward articles in the ﬁrst section of the journal, which is titled
“Questions Corporatives”: these include Aristide Maugée’s “La question des
bourses” (The question of scholarships), André Charpentier’s “Puisse-t-on
nous entendre!... ”(Let us be heard!), and André Midas’s “A propos
de l’Association” (About the Association), that are simply accounts of the
concerns of the Association, especially around the issue of government
scholarships.
There is an especially sharp contrast between the contributions of
Senghor and Césaire in the second section of the journal, “Les idées et les
livres.” Senghor’s essay, “L ’humanisme et nous: René Maran” (Humanism
and us: René Maran), reads the Francophone precursor’s work to construct
a notion of “black humanism” (l’humanisme noir), deﬁned as “a cultural
movement which has as its goal the black man, with Western reason and
the black soul [l’âme nègre] as the instruments of its research; for both rea-
son and intuition are necessary” (4). In deﬁning the term, Senghor writes
that he “will not cross the Atlantic today,” arguing that “Negro humanism”
is evident “right beside us”(tout près de nous) in Maran’s Francophone met-
ropolitan oeuvre. The essay espouses Maran’s “objectivity” as the proper
perspective in investigations of black culture, a means to unite rationality—
a quality of Western civilization imparted in education—with intuition—a
quality that allows the “black soul” (l’âme nègre) to sense the “âme de la
FEMINISM AND L ’INTERNA TIONALISME NOIR 179


--- PAGE 191 ---
Brousse, dont l’homme noir est, en quelque sorte, l’émanation” (“soul of
the jungle, of which the Negro is in some sense the emanation”) (4). If
Batouala “tries a little too much to strike a blow [frapper],” Maran’s human-
ism emerges in later works, including Djouma, chien de la brousse (1927)
and especially Le Livre de la brousse (1934). For Senghor, Maran’s recent
work relies both on l’âme nègre(as the Martinican author “follows with in-
terest the slow intellectual ascension of his race, to which he contributes so
effectively” [4]) and on “Western reason” (as Maran continues to ﬁnd ex-
pressive resources in his reading of classical Greek and French literature).
The holistic humanism of Senghor’s essay appears tepid in contrast to
the essay that precedes it in the journal, Aimé Césaire’s “Nègreries: jeunesse
noire et assimilation” (3). Césaire calls for a sharp and complete break with
Western civilization and with the assimilation espoused by the “elders” (la
tribu des Vieux).
145 The essay hypothesizes three stages or “episodes” in the
maturation of a people: servitude, assimilation, and emancipation. At the
same time, it relies on a gendered rhetoric of emancipation that implies
that servitude and assimilation, both “passive,” are both implicitly
gendered: “‘Men,’ they will call us, for only a man walks without a tutor on
the great paths of thought. Servitude and assimilation resemble one an-
other; they are two forms of passivity.” The strident tone of “Nègreries” re-
calls Langston Hughes’s 1926 essay “The Negro Artist and the Racial
Mountain” with its emphasis on self-deﬁnition and “Negro youth.” Césaire
writes:
Negro youth [La Jeunesse Noire] wants to act and to create. It wants to
have its poets, its novelists, who will tell it of its own failings, of its
own greatnesses; it wants to contribute to universal life, to the hu-
manization of humanity; and for that, once again, it is necessary to
preserve or to rediscover the primacy of the self [le primat du soi].
But to be oneself [pour être soi], it is necessary to struggle; ﬁrst of all
against those lost brothers who are afraid to be themselves. This is the
senile mob of the assimilated. (3)
Still, even with this loud critique, Césaire is vague at best in suggesting
where that “primacy of the self” might be located: he does not call for
the end of colonialism, and he never uses the word he would invent four
years later, négritude. As we have seen, the single piece that takes an anti-
imperialist and Marxist stance in the journal is by far the longest piece in
180 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 192 ---
L ’Etudiant noir,Gilbert Gratiant’s essay, “Mulâtres...pour le bien et le
mal” (5–7). In contrast, Césaire’s essay concludes with a somewhat opaque
call to “be oneself” not just by rejecting servitude and assimilation but
also by “struggling against oneself [lutter contre soi]: it is necessary to de-
stroy indifference, to eradicate obscurantism, to cut off sentimentalism at
its root” (3).
In the midst of such hue and cry, it is easy to overlook the single piece in
the journal that might fall under the heading of literature. Precisely because
there is no other ﬁction or poetry, Paulette Nardal’s “Guignol Ouolof” (4)
raises a question of genre, as it is a short narrative written in the ﬁrst person
of an Antillean woman in the metropole. Its deliberate tone and its generic
wavering toward autobiography is a striking departure from the company
of the criticism in the journal (including Césaire’s youthful soapbox ire,
Senghor’s lofty universalism, Gratiant’s impassioned creolity, as well as
Henry Eboué’s “Langage et musique chez les Nègres du Congo” and
Léonard Sainville’s article on “Littérature antillaise” praising the work of
Lafcadio Hearn as a model for French Caribbean literature). Placed back in
the wider trajectory of Nardal’s writing, “Guignol Ouolof” is another at-
tempt to ﬁnd the space in which the black woman in the metropole can
speak—here, speciﬁcally, an attempt to ﬁnd the space for the practice of
black interaction across national, class, and gender difference in the midst
of the exploitation and overdetermination of the vogue nègre. I reproduce
the story in full:
Huit heures du soir. Avant le théâtre, “quick lunch” dans un café du
Quartier Latin, qu’illumine le bariolage barbare des tubes de néon.
T out à coup, entre la lumière et moi s’interpose la silhouette d’un
Noir immense. Costume de général d’opérette. Drap noir sur lequel
éclatent des brandebourgs imposants, épaulettes, casquette plate d’of-
ﬁcier allemand, galonnée d’or et de rouge, et détail encore plus inat-
tendu, monocle à cordonnet noir, encastré dans l’arcade courtilière
gauche. Ce détail incongru, dans ce costume absurde n’arrive pas à
donner au long visage ouolof, l’effet de grotesque recherché. Pris en
lui-même, il me rappelle curieusement certain visage blanc, au sourire
grave et à l’air inﬁniment noble...
Mais l’ensemble est indéniablement comique, et quand passe à coté
de notre chasseur noir, vendeur de cacahouètes, son collège métro-
FEMINISM AND L ’INTERNA TIONALISME NOIR 181


--- PAGE 193 ---
politain, éphèbe blond à la sobre livrée marron, et qui vend, lui, des
cigarettes, le contraste est simplement révoltant.
Révoltant? Du point de vue d’une Noire antillaise trop occi-
dentalisée, peut-être. Mais ce Noir caricatural est là pour la plus
grande joie des consommateurs blancs; et quelle magniﬁque réclame
il représente pour l’établissement en question!
Il s’approche de notre table. Il va nous parler. T ous les yeux sont
braqués sur nous. Allons-nous contribuer nous aussi, à amuser un
moment les Blancs désœuvrés? Ou allons-nous, comme telle mulâ-
tresse antillaise, nous enfuir à la vue de ce Noir grotesque, le coeur
plein de ressentiment contre ce congénère sans dignité et son em-
ployeur Blanc? Ou encore, prendrons-nous des airs pincés et
affecterons-nous de ne pas le voir?
Car enﬁn, en acceptant de porter cette livrée ridicule, qu’il n’a pas
composée, il contribue à ancrer chez les Blancs, le préjugé du Noir
amoureux du grotesque, histrion, baladin, non perfectible, toutes
choses fort désagréables aux Noirs assimilés qui se prennent au
sérieux...
Il y a cependant, entre nous et lui, à défaut de solidarité réelle, celle
apparente de la couleur.
Et puis, rejetant cette mauvaise gêne, pour ne penser qu’à la
fraternité réelle qui nous unit aussi bien à ce Noir qu’à ces Blancs
pleins d’illusions, nous répondons gentiment au vendeur de
cacahouètes.
Poussée par la curiosité professionnelle, je n’hésite pas à lui poser
une question dénuée de tact: “Ne trouve-t-il pas pénible de porter ce
costume ridicule, et de faire rire les gens?” La voix éraillée et un peu
assourdie, il me répond avec beaucoup de bon sens: “Pas plus qu’un
acteur comique au théâtre. J’ai d’ailleurs été acteur. J’aime autant faire
ce métier ridicule que d’être chômeur ou de vivre des femmes . . .” Et
puis, avec un sourire d’une inimitable ﬁnesse: “Les Blancs veulent
qu’on les fasse rire; moi, je veux bien...a umoins, je peux man-
ger . . .”.
Eight o’clock in the evening. Before the theater, a “quick lunch” in a
Latin Quarter café, illuminated by a barbarous motley of neon lights.
Suddenly, the silhouette of an immense Negro is interposed be-
182 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 194 ---
tween me and the light. A general’s costume from the operetta. Black
cape on which imposing brandenburgs glitter, epaulettes, the ﬂat cap
of a German ofﬁcer, trimmed with braid of gold and red, and an even
more unexpected detail, a monocle attached to a black cord, set in
courtly arch to the left. This incongruous detail in the absurd cos-
tume does not succeed in giving the long Wolof face the desired gro-
tesque effect. Taken by himself, he reminds me curiously of certain
white faces, with grave smiles and an inﬁnitely noble air...
But the ensemble is undeniably comic, and when next to our black
bellhop, the peanut vendor, there passes his metropolitan colleague, a
blond ephebe in a sober brown livery, selling cigarettes, the contrast is
simply revolting.
Revolting? From the point of view of an overly Westernized
Antillean Negro woman, perhaps. But this caricatural Negro is there
for the greater pleasure of the white customers; and what a wonderful
advertisement he is for the restaurant!
He comes toward our table. He is going to speak. All eyes are ﬁxed
on us. Are we too going to contribute to the amusement of these idle
whites? Or are we going to ﬂee, like some Antillean mulatress, at the
sight of this grotesque Negro, heart full of resentment against this fel-
low Negro without dignity and his white employer? Or else, will we
put on airs, tight-lipped, and pretend not to see him?
For ﬁnally, in accepting to wear this ridiculous outﬁt that he did
not arrange himself, he helps to anchor the whites’ prejudice against
the Negro, grotesque, histrionic, showman, unperfectible, all those
things so displeasing to assimilated Negroes who take themselves seri-
ously...
Meanwhile, there is between us, in the absence of real solidarity,
the apparent solidarity of color.
And then, rejecting this discomfort, thinking only of the real fra-
ternity which unites us as much to this Negro as to these whites, full
of their illusions, we reply kindly to the peanut vendor.
Pushed by professional curiosity, I do not hesitate to ask him a
question devoid of tact: “Doesn’t he ﬁnd it hard to wear that ridicu-
lous costume, and to make people laugh?” His voice hoarse and
slightly lowered, he replies with a great deal of sense: “No more than
a comic actor in the theater. Besides, I used to be an actor. I like do-
FEMINISM AND L ’INTERNA TIONALISME NOIR 183


--- PAGE 195 ---
ing this ridiculous job as much as being unemployed, or living off
women... ”A n dthen, with a smile of an inimitable ﬁnesse: “The
Whites want us to make them laugh; me, I really want...a tleast, I
can eat . . .”.
There are a number of ﬁnely honed, sometimes surprising turns in the
short tale. We are informed that the narrator is a woman of African descent
(apparently, an “overly Westernized Antillean Negro woman [Noire]”), but
only after being given certain other markers: she is relatively privileged, in
that she has the leisure to attend the theater, and educated—perhaps bilin-
gual, since she preciously terms her pre-curtain snack a “quick lunch” in
English. Her reaction to the Noir in the “general’s costume” is complex and
multilayered. Note that she ﬁrst sees his “silhouette,” his shadow rather
than his face—that is, the way he is framed by the optics and play of illumi-
nation in the café. From the ﬁrst, she refers to him with the term Noir (the
same term she uses to refer to herself) rather than the derogatory nègre.
Hers is not at all a knee-jerk reaction of disgust or shame. On the contrary
she notes that the elaborate “absurd costume” in fact “does not succeed in
giving the long Wolof face the desired grotesque effect”; in fact, the African
peanut vendor attains a certain gravity and nobility that reminds her of cer-
tain white faces. The narrator is “revolted” instead by the contrast between
the vendor and his European (“blond ephebe”) colleague, selling cigarettes
in a “sober brown livery.” That response is both announced and immedi-
ately distanced with a phrase that underlines the ironies of the speaker’s
own position in the third person: it is revolting “from the point of view
of an overly Westernized Antillean Negro woman,” who is disturbed by
the way the contrast strives to frame or “silhouette” a racialized grotesque
(or “caricature”) in the service of commercial spectacle (a “wonderful adver-
tisement”).
In anxious hesitation and reﬂection, the narrator considers what to do as
the African vendor approaches the table. Her consternation in the face of
having to perform herself as a gendered Other before a metropolitan audi-
ence is palpable—as though she were leaﬁng through that grammar book of
doudous and “evil mulattas,” every page a more hideous image of the self
that that audience demands she assume. (Of course, the power of this mo-
ment is heightened by the fact that she is on her way to the theater.) She
considers three possibilities. The ﬁrst would be to participate in the
184 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 196 ---
racialized spectacle (“contribute to the amusement of these idle whites”).
Or else, she can “ﬂee like some Antillean mulatress” from theNoir immense
and the atavistic racial “truth” he represents. Or, as an “overly Westernized”
Noire antillaise, she can “put on airs” and ignore the African vendor, since
his willingness to wear the grotesque costume only serves to “anchor the
whites’ prejudice.” In another sarcastic aside, she pulls away from this last
possibility, the reaction of “assimilated Negroes who take themselves seri-
ously.”
There is an echo of what Jessie Fauset describes as the self-imposed
“restraints” on the “reﬁned colored woman,” here, but the narrator is de-
termined to ﬁnd a way out. What follows is a one-sentence paragraph:
“Meanwhile, there is between us, in the absence of real solidarity, the ap-
parent solidarity of color.” There is no grounds for “real” solidarity here, no
way to forge and naturalize an alliance across the many differences that sep-
arate them. She rejects the “discomfort” of the “apparent solidarity of color”
because for her it only undergirds the spectacle: the white customers are
looking at them to watch the ﬁreworks between differently placed Fran-
cophone individuals with dark skins (citizen and subject, évoluée and
indigène). Interestingly, the speciﬁc phrase is the seemingly redundant “bad
discomfort” (mauvaise gène), as though—in a different context, in another
cercle—the discomfort and irritation of that difference might be “good,”
might be useful or acceptable or negotiable.
Their short, open-ended conversation ﬁnds a bond not exactly on the
basis of race or skin color, but instead through what I would term a mutual
recognition of coevalness, the cohabitation of this particular metropolitan
space in all its contradictions. The phrase “real fraternity” is obviously an
allusion ﬁrst of all to the rhetoric of French national identity, the Rights of
Man and the putatively abstract citizen-subject. But it is also an allusion to
the very circuslike exploitation that has put the two of them on this kind of
public stage in the ﬁrst place: thus, the “real” racist metropolitan culture
that “unites” the narrator, the African vendor, and the “whites, full of their
illusions.” It is a feminist gesture in the sense that it exposes the “symp-
toms” of the “constitutive contradictions” of imperial “fraternity,” the ways
it is predicated on certain gendered and racial exclusions.
146
Then, in an extraordinary nuance, the narrator (speaking, it should be
added, in “professional curiosity,” although we are not told what profes-
sion—a journalist?) asks the African vendor not directly about himself, but
FEMINISM AND L ’INTERNA TIONALISME NOIR 185


--- PAGE 197 ---
instead about his white colleague: “Doesn’the ﬁnd it hard to wear that ri-
diculous costume, and to make people laugh? [italics added].” This is a
stunning shift, but there is no other way to read the direct address to the
peanut vendor; she pointedly does not say “you,” but asks about the ciga-
rette seller. (The reader’s resistance to this grammatical positioning—the re-
action that she must mean the African vendor with the pronoun “he,” that
it must be a “slip,” that itmust be a faulty use of quotes indicating direct ad-
dress—might best be considered a “symptom” of the reader’s own implica-
tion in this narrative staging of colonial spectacle.) We have already been
informed that the African’s costume does not render him “grotesque”; here
she reiterates this point by implying that it is precisely the white vendor’s
uniform (his “sober brown livery”) that is “ridiculous.” The story closes
with the “inimitable ﬁnesse” of the African’s smile and his awareness of the
ways his situation is overdetermined. He cannot express what he “wants,”
but at least the role does not involve some other exploitation (“living off
women”), at least it allows subsistence (“at least, I can eat . . .”).
The work of this small tale is to propel us from the impositions of a “box
of exotic accessories” to the moment when an Antillean female intellectual
can speak to an Senegalese would-be actor attempting to work his way
through hard times. Another indicator of that moment’s vulnerability is the
subtlety of its ﬁrst person plurals. “The whites want us to make them
laugh”(les Blancs veulent qu’on les fasse rire),the peanut vendor says; and the
possibility of a shared positionality between these two Noirs hangs in the
ambiguity of the French pronoun “on,”which can suggest the abstract third
person (“one”), the second person (“you”), the passive, or the ﬁrst person
plural. So the point of contact—the hint of a “we”—is quiet and vulnera-
ble, “hoarse and slightly lowered,” endlessly imperiled in a racist metro-
politan context of spectacle. That subtlety is also an insistence that
l’internationalisme noir is not predetermined “solidarity” but a hard-won
project only practiced across difference, only spoken in ephemeral spaces.
186 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 198 ---
CHAPTER 4
VAGABOND INTERNATIONALISM:
CLAUDE MCKAY’S BANJO
A
side from Alain Locke’s 1925 collection The New Negro, the book
that had the most profound inﬂuence on black intellectuals in Paris
between the world wars was Claude McKay’s 1929 Banjo, written
while the great Jamaican writer was living in Marseilles and then ﬁnished in
Barcelona, Casablanca, and Rabat.
1 Early in 1924, McKay had met Franco-
phone ﬁgures including the Nardal sisters and Kojo T ovalou Houénou in
Paris; that April, he published a fascinating portrait of T ovalou Houénou in
the Crisis.
2 McKay dropped from view in Francophone circles when he left
the capital at the end of the year to live in the south of France. But his work
remained inﬂuential, especially when a translation of Banjo was published
in 1931.
3 McKay’s poetry was translated inLa Revue du monde noir,and the
following year, Banjo itself was excerpted in the explosive single issue of
the journal Légitime Défense, assembled by the young radical students of the
Martinican Surrealist Group, a planned offshoot of the Association des
Etudiants Martiniquais en France.
4 The journal openly expressed the hope
that, in the words of Etienne Léro, “the wind rising from black America
will quickly cleanse our Antilles of the aborted fruits of an obsolete cul-
ture.” In particular, Léro pointed to the work of “deux poètes noirs révolu-
tionnaires,” McKay and Langston Hughes, whose writing (“soaked in red
alcohol”) offered “the African love of life, the African joy of love, the Afri-
can dream of death.”
5
Banjo was just as indispensable for the students who would go on to
found the Négritude movement a few years later. Aimé Césaire considered
Banjo “truly one of the ﬁrst works in which one saw an author speaking of
the nègre and giving the nègre a certain literary dignity.”
6 Léon-Gontran
Damas, whose well-known 1937 poem “Hoquet” unravels the racist stereo-
types around the banjo, would call McKay’s book a “fountain of youth.”
Damas claimed that he, Césaire, and Léopold Sédar Senghor “contributed


--- PAGE 199 ---
to its success, to the measure of our means,” passing Banjo to their fellow
black students “whose eyes were opening up to reality.”7 In 1937, Senghor
closed his ﬁrst speech in Africa, at the Foyer France-Sénégal in Dakar, with
a famous quote from the section of McKay’s novel printed in Légitime
Défense: “Plonger jusqu’aux racines de notre race et bâtir sur notre profond
fond, ce n’est pas retourner à l’état sauvage: c’est la culture même” (“Diving
down to the roots of our race and building on our deep reserves is not re-
turning to a savage state: it is culture itself”).
8 Senghor may have quoted
from memory, as his version differs both from the published French trans-
lation and from McKay’s original: “Getting down to our native roots and
building up from our own people...i sn o ts a vagery. It is culture” (200). In
the 1937 novel Mirages de Paris, another Senegalese student of the Négri-
tude generation, Ousmane Socé, placed McKay’s Banjo on the bookshelf
188 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA
Claude McKay in Paris in
the 1920s. Beinecke Rare
Book and Manuscript Li-
brary, Yale University.
[To view this image, refer to  
the print version of this title.]


--- PAGE 200 ---
of one of his characters, a black Francophone intellectual living in the
metropole, along with the poetry of Langston Hughes and an eccentric as-
sortment of European-language works: René Maran’sLe Livre de la brousse,
Maurice Delafosse’sLes Nègres, Albert Londres’ T erre d’ébène,Durkheim’s
Du suicide, and Hitler’sMein Kampf.9 Banjo’s inﬂuence even reached black
Britain, where Paul Robeson starred in a mediocre 1936 ﬁlm version called
Big Fella, which attempts—with ludicrous results—to revise the book into
a tale of upstanding racial heroism in which the Banjo character helps the
Marseilles police ﬁnd a boy missing from an ocean liner in the port.
10
Banjo’s portrait of the Vieux Port section of Marseilles, especiallyLa Fosse
(the Ditch), a popular red-light district just off the harbor of that Mediter-
ranean city, has been widely celebrated as well, especially after the quarter
became a center of French resistance activity in World War II and was com-
pletely leveled by the Germans in February 1943. Banjo is often cited next
to other key reportages on the “lost quarter” of Marseilles by writers and
journalists such as André Suarès, Albert Londres, Pierre MacOrlan, and
Walter Benjamin.
11 As McKay biographer Wayne Cooper writes, “Because
[La Fosse] no longer exists, McKay’s description of its congested alleyways,
dark habitations, seedy bars, and sinister denizens has become for some
French a classic evocation of the quarter as it was between the wars.”
12 In-
deed, as we shall see, it is possible to read Banjo as a roman à clef portraying
friends and acquaintances from McKay’s time living in Marseilles, particu-
larly in the summer of 1926 and the spring of 1928. McKay would later
comment that he “may have sinned” in Banjo “by being too photographic,
too much under the fetid atmosphere of the bottoms of Marseilles,” and at
least one of the French critics who reviewed the book claimed in extrava-
gant detail to have met the owner of the Café Africain as well as the man
who provided the inspiration for the title character.
13
Banjo is subtitled with a striking phrase: “A Story without a Plot.” The
book immediately raises a question of literary form, in other words—a
question of the relation between its apparent “plotlessness” and its portrait
of a transnational community of black drifters and dockers in Marseilles.
The loose-knit group includes Lincoln Agrippa Daily, better known as
“Banjo,” a generous and uninhibited musician from the American South;
Ray, the Haitian intellectual and writer (who ﬁrst appeared in McKay’s
Home to Harlem) who befriends Banjo in the second section of the book;
the ill-fated Bugsy, the militant black nationalist and dark-skinned West In-
VAGABOND INTERNA TIONALISM: CLAUDE MCKAY’S BANJO 189


--- PAGE 201 ---
dian; Malty, the cocky West Indian guitarist and drummer; Taloufa, the
Nigerian guitar man who had worked in Cardiff and who is an ardent
Garveyite; Goosey, the “high yellow” American ﬂute player who grew up
middle-class in New Jersey, but is at least as much a “race man” as Bugsy
(Goosey insists that he will never go back to what he calls the “United
Snakes”) (117); Dengel, the fun-loving Senegalese, “always in a state of
heavenly inebriety” (33); and Latnah, the big-hearted and ﬁnancially sensi-
ble “Oriental”
14 prostitute who is the sole woman to befriend the gang.
In three faintly distinguished sections, these characters come into various
ﬂeeting conﬁgurations: talking, debating the “race problem” around the
world, telling tall tales, drinking cheap wine, working for food sporadically
as dockers or loaders or errand boys, swimming off the breakwater, playing
music now and then, and wandering through the Ditch, from bars and
dives (the Café Africain, the Cairo Café, the British-American Bar, the An-
tilles Restaurant, the Monkey Bar) past the prostitutes on narrow streets
such as rue de la Bouterie (which they call “Booty Lane”) over to the Place
Victor Gélu (or “Bum Square”) along the Vieux Port.
Nearly all the contemporary reviews of Banjo comment on the subtitle,
often in order to claim the book is not a novel at all. Even if its language is
“dense and variegated,” according to French critic André Levinson (who re-
viewed the English original in 1929), Banjo in the end is “an invertebrate
tale [récit] with the inconsistency of a mollusk.” The book is not a novel, he
continues, but “a suite of episodes aligned at random, of detached chapters
that one by one crumble away into an anecdotal dust.”
15 Likewise, Georges
Friedmann, who wrote the preface to the French edition, describes Banjo as
a “suite de vagabondages.” It is perhaps not coincidental that so many crit-
ics turn to musical metaphors in attempting to describe the formal qualities
of the work. Gwendolyn Bennett, for example, writing in Opportunity,
lauds it as “a symphony of vagabondry.”
16 The trope has something to do
with the slippery nature of the work—critics turning to another expressive
medium in an attempt to describe the structure of a “story without a plot,”
a tale without a scheme in which the qualities of the narrative would seem
geared to parallel the wandering of the characters through the bars and
along the breakwater of Marseilles. But it also bespeaks a realization that—
even if the book does not aim directly to imitate musical form—in Banjo, a
black transnational community is deﬁned more than anything else by a cer-
tain relation to music.
190 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 202 ---
Légitime Défense:Translating Banjo
The glowing reception of Banjo in metropolitan Francophone circles was
cemented by the publication of a section of the novel in the journal
Légitime Défense in June 1932. The ﬁrst and only issue of Légitime Défense
is a telling document of the time not because it led directly to any lasting
project—in fact, the planned Martinican Surrealist Group never came into
being—but because of the violence of its break with traditions of reformist
and assimilationist Caribbean intellectualism. The young students, includ-
ing Etienne Léro, René Ménil, Jules-Marcel Monnerot, and Pierre Yoyotte,
announced a kind of class suicide, railing against the decrepitude of the
bourgeoisie in Martinique and the misère of Caribbean literature in French
and allying themselves explicitly with both international communism and
surrealism. As the opening “Declaration” proclaimed:
We insist on being completely committed. We are certain that there
exist other young people besides ourselves who are prepared to sign
what we have written and who...r efuse to become part of the sur-
rounding ignominy....W erise up against all those who are not
suffocated by this capitalist, Christian, bourgeois world, to which,
denying our bodies, we reluctantly belong....[ W ] eadhere to
Marx’s dialectical materialism freed of all tendentious interpretation
and victoriously put to the test of events by Lenin. In this respect,
we are ready to accept the discipline such convictions demand. In
the concrete realm of ﬁgurative modes of human expression, we
equally unreservedly accept surrealism to which—in 1932—we bind
our destiny.
17
Much of the prestige of this journal, roundly condemned in the conserva-
tive press of the Antilles as a pernicious revolutionary inﬂuence,
18 was
established by the ﬁrst major study of the roots of Négritude, Lilyan
Kesteloot’s 1963Les Écrivains noirs de langue française, which many critics
now consider to have overemphasized the importance ofLégitime Défense at
the expense of the wide range of black intellectual work in the 1920s and
1930s.
19 In this broader sphere of material (almost all of which was unavail-
able to Kesteloot), Légitime Défense looks much less like a radical break and
much more like the loud but rather hasty student journal that it was.
The main accomplishment of the journal was its attempt to propel
VAGABOND INTERNA TIONALISM: CLAUDE MCKAY’S BANJO 191


--- PAGE 203 ---
Antillean literature away from an insipid and bourgeois acceptance of the
stereotypes of colonial literature, by mercilessly assailing the assimilationist
“Antillais de couleur” (colored Antillean) who denies “his race, his body, his
fundamental and particular passions, his particular way of reacting to love
and death, and ﬁnally comes to live in an unreal domain determined by the
abstract ideas and the ideal of another people.”
20 Ménil and Léro castigate
Martinican literature, which too often passively accepts French exoticism,
doudouisme, and Eurocentrism as the only possible models for Antillean
writing. This results, they contend, in a debased and sycophantic literature
in which
expression is given neither to strange bursts from afar, nor to mille-
narian revolts, nor to fundamental needs, all of which are condemned
for the sole reason that they are not encountered in European litera-
ture. The feelings of the cane cutter in front of the implacable factory,
the lonely feeling of the noir throughout the world, the revolt against
the injustices he often suffers, especially in his own country, the love
of love, the love of alcohol dreams, the love of inspired dances, the
love of life and of joy, the refusal of power and the acceptance of life,
etc., etc.: here are the things our distinguished writers never speak
about, things that would affect black, yellow and white people [ noirs,
jaunes et blancs] just as the poems of the American nègres affect the
whole world.
21
Although some have connected Légitime Défense to subsequent revolution-
ary political work in the Antilles, it is in fact more appropriate to note that
the young students tend to undermine their own radicalism by explicitly
conceptualizing their audience as the small circle of their peers, rather than
even considering the labor organizing of black Communists such as Lamine
Senghor and Tiemoko Garan Kouyaté. The students of Légitime Défense
claim a poor excuse for this abdication, placing the burden of communica-
tion on the proletariat rather than assuming it themselves: “For the lack of
the Negro proletariat [à défaut du prolétariat noir], from which interna-
tional capitalism has withheld the means of understanding us, we address
ourselves to the children of the Negro bourgeoisie.”
22
Scholars who celebrate Légitime Défense as “unprecedented” in its radi-
calism tend also to overemphasize the inﬂuence of André Breton’s surrealist
movement on circles of young Francophone intellectuals in Paris. In the
192 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 204 ---
presentation of Légitime Défense in the promising 1996 collection Refusal of
the Shadow: Surrealism and the Caribbean, for example, editor Michael
Richardson shapes the selections from Légitime Défense and Aimé Césaire’s
journal Tropiques (published in Martinique between 1941 and 1945)
largely in the aim of reﬂecting the inﬂuence of Breton’s surrealism. T ell-
ingly, Refusal of the Shadow disregards the excerpt from McKay’sBanjo pub-
lished in Légitime Défense—without even noting its absence—as well as es-
says from Tropiques such as Aimé Césaire’s July 1941 essay on the poetry of
the Harlem Renaissance, which offered translations of James Weldon John-
son and Jean T oomer. By all appearances, the collection has been deliber-
ately framed and edited to emphasize surrealist models at the expense of
African American inﬂuences. Richardson’s introduction underlines this po-
lemical construction:
Surrealism was instrumental in providing the students [of Légitime
Défense] with a point of departure for their critique of colonial society
for, in breaking with the ethics of European culture, it offered them a
sort of T rojan Horse in which to enter the previously impregnable
white citadel. In surrealism they heard white masters with new voices,
voices that renounced that mastery.
23
The implication that Breton’s surrealism is a “white master” (even one that
“renounces mastery”) at the origin of all radical Caribbean intellectual work
is strange enough; the introduction reinforces it with a wrong-minded
quote from critic Jacqueline Leiner (“Reinvented by the Other, the Black
could no longer deny himself”)
24 as though the great and pure accomplish-
ments of surrealism single-handedly broke through the alienation of the
group of Caribbean students. The characterization of surrealism as a “T ro-
jan Horse” is just as bizarre—Richardson seems to forget that these are
scholarship students, children of the bourgeoisie of Martinique, ﬁrmly in
the channels of establishment power before they conceive their rebellion. If
Légitime Défense discovers anything in surrealism, it is a way to break out of
the prison house of assimilation. Indeed this is the reason the journal was so
controversial to the bourgeoisie in Martinique, which did not take lightly
the revolt of its scions.
This skewed emphasis ends up ﬂattening out to some degree what is ac-
tually a complex ﬁeld of inﬂuence and debate, in which surrealism is only
one term, and a hotly contested one at that. In fact, for instance, the debt
VAGABOND INTERNA TIONALISM: CLAUDE MCKAY’S BANJO 193


--- PAGE 205 ---
of Césaire’sTropiques (published in the Caribbean during World War II) to
Légitime Défense (published in Paris between the wars) has long been in
question—they are not simply linked by a trajectory of inﬂuence originat-
ing with Breton’s surrealism. In April 1967, Césaire told biographer Geor-
ges Ngal that he “found [Légitime Défense] to be quite penetrated by
assimilationism. These angry young men were surrealists like the French
surrealists; communists like young French communists. They weren’tnègre
enough [Ils n’étaient pas assez nègres].”
25 For Césaire, Légitime Défense “knew
how to critique” but not how to “construct.” Ménil and Léro castigate ear-
lier generations of Caribbean poets with a standard of “racial” authenticity,
but their own poems are equally ﬂaccid and ironically even less “racially”
informed.
26 Similarly, though they offer grand pronouncements about sur-
realism and communism, the students have no idea how to negotiate the
tensions between the two movements, and no means to articulate their po-
tential function in the environment of the Caribbean.
The most lucid and unsparing critique of Légitime Défense may be René
Ménil’s own preface to the 1978 reissue. Ménil ﬁrst distinguishes the work
in the journal from the Négritude movement, dispelling any illusion that it
was simply a precursor for the postwar efforts of Césaire and Senghor:
“Whereas négritude afﬁrms the priority of ‘black values’ [ valeurs nègres]
with regard to social contradictions—Légitime Défense, on the contrary,
concerned principally with the anti-imperialist struggle that pits the colo-
nized peoples both against the western bourgeoisies and against their own
bourgeoisie, situates political action in the marxist frame of social transfor-
mations and only conceives of the development of ‘black values’ within this
political combat.” For Ménil, the journal was closer to the perspective of
Frantz Fanon avant la lettre than Senghorian or even Césairist. At the same
time, Ménil writes, “it must be acknowledged that Légitime Défense, prac-
ticing a kind of naive and spontaneous—thus false—psychology, started
(with the best of intentions) to sketch the features [traits] of a general nègre
mentality [une mentalité nègre en général], which can be found, ampliﬁed
and pushed to the extreme, in the incredible caricature of the ‘négro-
africain’of which Senghor has made himself the humorless theoretician.”
Even though these “features” held a largely “polemic” importance in
Légitime Défense—analyzing the “result of a concrete and transitory histori-
cal situation” of colonialism in the Antilles—they were ultimately suscepti-
ble to appropriation for the purposes of an “alienating mythology.” Ménil
194 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 206 ---
concludes by criticizing the poetry in the journal as well: “In Légitime
Défense, we accepted a disjunction that would be shocking to us later. On
the one hand, we took Antillean colonial society into account, and we of-
fered a realist critique and description of it. But on the other hand, we were
producing poems that were without roots in that society, poems of no-
where, poems of nobody.” 27 With the last phrases (poèmes de nulle part,
poèmes de personne), Ménil alludes to one of his own contributions to
the verses in the journal, the rather indistinct “Nulle part,” which runs in
part: “L ’été tournant autour de son noyau / déplie l’écharpe d’inconscience
/ Les paroles oscillent leur mâture / Lançons à la tête du ciel / à la dérive /
l’étourdissement lappé au bord de midi” (“The summer turning around its
core / unfolds the scarf of unconsciousness / Words waver their masts / Let
us throw the dizziness lapped up at the edge of midday / to the top of the
sky / adrift”).
28
Légitime Défense demands to be read in a complex ﬁeld of debate among
black periodicals of the period, especially in its conjunction with La Revue
du monde noir. Légitime Défensewas founded one month after the demise of
the Revue by Etienne Léro (who, like Monnerot and Ménil, had contrib-
uted to Nardal’s journal), and Légitime Défense is explicitly designed to
combat some of what the young students considered to be the frailties of
the predecessor journal. In fact, however, as critic Régis Antoine has
pointed out, Légitime Défense, its virulent rhetoric notwithstanding, ac-
tually takes some steps backward from the achievements of La Revue du
monde noir.
29 Most signiﬁcantly, the younger journal relinquishes the eth-
nographic interest of the Revue, replacing the analyses of black cultural
forms (by Jean Price-Mars, Louis-Thomas Achille, Andrée Nardal, and Leo
Frobenius, among others) with pseudo-surrealist platitudes about “alcohol”
and “the African love of life, the African joy of love.” It also gives up the
breadth of the Revue’s project, concentrating only on Martinique, but fail-
ing even to offer an articulate call for a Martinican nationalism in the place
of the Revue’s ambitious pan-Africanism. In this light, it is difﬁcult to argue
either that Légitime Défense marks the single deﬁnitive break in the genesis
of the Négritude movement or that it initiates the period of revolutionary
communist activity in Martinique itself. The latter is more properly rooted
in Jules Monnerot’s “Jean Jaurès” group, which published the journalJustice
beginning in 1920, as well as the “Front commun” alliance of young intel-
lectuals linked to the Popular Front in 1933–34, and individual radicals in-
VAGABOND INTERNA TIONALISM: CLAUDE MCKAY’S BANJO 195


--- PAGE 207 ---
cluding André Aliker and Stéphane Rosso, who worked throughout the
1920s with Parisian black radical groups such as Lamine Senghor’s Ligue de
Défense de la Race Nègre.
30
Let us look in more detail at the section from McKay’sBanjo included in
Légitime Défense, in the journal’s most signiﬁcant gesture toward diasporic
concerns. The passage reproduced in Légitime Défense comes from the be-
ginning of chapter 16, “The ‘Blue Cinema,’” where the main character,
Ray, encounters a Martinican student:
Ray had met a Negro student from Martinique, to whom the greatest
glory of the island was that the Empress Josephine was born there.
That event placed Martinique above all the other islands of the Antil-
les in importance.
“I don’t see anything in that for you to be so proud about,” said
Ray. “She was not colored.”
“Oh no, but she was a Créole, and in Martinique we are rather
Créole than Negro. We are proud of the Empress in Martinique.
Down there the best people are very distinguished and speak a pure
French, not anything like this vulgar Marseilles French.” (199)
Ray spends the next two pages putting the aliéné Martinican student in his
place, telling him: “You’re a lost crowd, you educated Negroes, and you will
only ﬁnd yourself in the roots of your own people” (201). In Légitime
Défense, then, the excerpt seems to serve a clear didactic purpose, preaching
respect for black folk culture, praising the beauty of “native African dia-
lects,” and advocating a nationalism modeled on “the Irish cultural and so-
cial movement,” as well as Gandhi and the Indian anticolonial struggle. Ac-
cording to Ray, Negroes are “merely beginners” in the “modern race of life.”
Cultural achievement and “racial advancement” must involve a racial con-
sciousness that does not simply reproduce the class hierarchies and preju-
dices of the “white race.” “If this renaissance we’re talking about is going to
be more than a sporadic and scabby thing,” Ray contends, “we’ll have to get
down to our racial roots to create it” (200).
Banjo was translated by Ida T reat and Paul Vaillant-Couturier, the Com-
munist legislator from Paris who also served as an editor at the French
Communist Party newspaper, L ’Humanité,and held close ties to the Com-
munist-afﬁliated black pressure groups in Paris in the 1920s including the
Union Intercoloniale and the Ligue de Défense de la Race Nègre. As critic
196 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 208 ---
Martin Steins has pointed out, their French version of Banjo plays a direct
role in a subtle but crucial misapprehension of the “Harlem Renaissance”
in Légitime Défense. I have retranslated some of the passages back into Eng-
lish for the discussion that follows. It might seem redundant at ﬁrst glance
to retranslate a French translation of a passage originally in English. But the
selection provides a number of nuances that prove crucial to any under-
standing of the politics of Légitime Défense. The journal places the passage
from chapter 16 of Banjo under the title “L ’étudiant antillais vu par un noir
américain” (The Antillean student seen by an American Negro) in a man-
ner to elide the speciﬁcs of that Americanness: McKay, of course, is Jamai-
can, and his character Ray is—as is often forgotten—Haitian.
31 In Légitime
Défense, the passage is framed as the “étudiant antillais” in the metropole
learning blackness Socratically from the U.S. Negro, from an exemplary
text of the Harlem Renaissance, in a narrative of vanguardism and “inﬂu-
ence” that is too often taken for granted. But when one considers this en-
counter as an intra-Caribbean dialogue in the metropole, as a dialogue be-
tween an exiled Haitian writer and an assimilated Martinican bourgeois
snob, the contestatory exchange takes on quite different contours. Take the
central passage of Ray’s speech:
We educated Negroes are talking a lot about a racial renaissance. And
I wonder how we’re going to get it. On one side we’re up against the
world’s arrogance—a mighty cold hard white stone thing. On the
other the great sweating army—our race. It’s the common people,
you know, who furnish the bone and sinew and salt of any race or na-
tion. (200)
The last two sentences are translated into French as:
De l’autre, l’immense armée des travailleurs: notre race. C’est le
prolétariat qui fournit, savez-vous, l’os, le muscle et le sel de toute
race ou de toute nation. (Fr 257)
On the other the great army of workers: our race. It’s the proletar-
iat, you know, who furnish the bone, muscle and salt of any race or
nation.
Steins enumerates a number of examples of this kind of dogma-adding
(mis)translation as contributing directly to the abortive project of the black
VAGABOND INTERNA TIONALISM: CLAUDE MCKAY’S BANJO 197


--- PAGE 209 ---
Martinican surrealist group, which in Légitime Défense never comes close to
espousing the racial consciousness associated with later forms of Negritude
and which—buttressed in part by this passage—positions itself rhetorically
in terms of a “black proletariat” that it does not know how to grasp concep-
tually, much less approach organizationally.
32
I depart from Steins, though, when he sets up an easy opposition be-
tween the communist-inﬂected surrealism of the Légitime Défense group
and the “ethnic renaissance of the race” that he reads in McKay’s work. 33
For Steins, McKay’s “ambition” inBanjo is to bring about neither a class
revolution nor a racial nationalism, but instead “to promote in each of the
different black populations of the world the consciousness that they formed
peoples, ethnicities.”
34 It seems to me on the contrary that what one might
term the “vagabond internationalism” elaborated inBanjo, with its dizzying
portrayal of the great idiosyncratic variety of ideological and group com-
mitment among shifting black male communities in Marseilles, is shaped
by an extreme skepticism about any such “promotion” of consciousness.
Vagabond Internationalism
The book is marked by radical “doubt,” to use McKay’s word, that blacks
can “ﬁt” into the logics of modern civilization. For Ray:
. . . with the growth of international feelings and ideas he had
dreamed of the association of his race with the social movements of
the masses of civilization milling through the civilized machine.
But traveling away from America and visiting many countries, ob-
serving and appreciating the differences of human groups, making
contact with earthy blacks of tropical Africa, where the great body of
his race existed, had stirred in him the ﬁne intellectual prerogative of
doubt. (324)
Such “international feelings and ideas” are at least twofold. On the one
hand, Ray’s race does not ﬁt into the “international idea” of capitalist devel-
opment. The vagabond “boys” in Banjo, part of what McKay would later
describe in his autobiography as a transnational ﬂotsam community of
“beachcombers, guides, procurers, prostitutes of both sexes and bistro ban-
dits—all of motley-making Marseilles, swarming, scrambling and scraping
sustenance from the bodies of ships and crews,”
35 work when they have to,
play music when they can, generally roam and range the teeming port.
198 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 210 ---
Banjo is a “barbarous international romance” (69) of men without a
country, aliens drifting along the edge of the Mediterranean “as if all the
derelicts of all the seas had drifted up here to sprawl out the days in the
sun” (18). While the encounters and episodes are freely stitched together
around the seam of Banjo, Ray, and their “black gang” of friends and hang-
ers-on, the novel presents a broader swathe of modern existence, even a
global community of the dispossessed: “white men, brown men, black men.
Finns, Poles, Italians, Slavs, Maltese, Indians, Negroids, African Negroes,
West Indian Negroes—deportees from America for violation of the United
States immigration laws—afraid and ashamed to go back to their own
lands, all dumped down in the great Provençal port, bumming a day’s
work, a meal, a drink, existing from hand to mouth, anyhow any way, be-
tween box car, tramp ship, bistro, and bordel” (6). Marseilles is attractive
because it is loose, because the city doesn’t tie the refugees and drifters
down: it is a “ﬁne big wide-open hole” (68), giving out into the “gorgeous
bowl of blue water unrestingly agitated by the great commerce of all the
continents” (66).
In contrast to what historian Winston James rightly describes as
McKay’s “Bolshevist” period in the early 1920s, when McKay wrote (dur-
ing his trip to Moscow) that the duty of the Negro Communist was to
“spread revolutionary ideas among the ignorant masses of his own race,”
36
Banjo would appear to mark a shift in McKay’s political focus away from
the proletariat, traditionally conceived, and toward such cosmopolitan,
ﬂeeting communities of men. The book’s fascination with Marseilles’s tran-
sient denizens points less to an interest in the expansion and unionizing of
the port city’s industrial maritime base than to the margins of that develop-
ment. Though some of them serve on ships to get to Marseilles, the black
boys of Banjo are not even the short-term ship workers, the stokers and
mess help, who are at the bottom rung of the labor pool. Every now and
then, they ﬁnd day work as dockers or loaders. But this is hardly steady em-
ployment. Albert Londres, describing the men on the edges of the Place de
la Joliette (near the Marseilles seaport) in his classic description of the city
written in the same period, argues that being a docker is not even a true
profession (métier). “What is a docker?” he asks.
They’ll tell you: It’s a man who loads and unloads the ships in
p o r t s ....O bviously, a docker is a man who lugs bundles around the
VAGABOND INTERNA TIONALISM: CLAUDE MCKAY’S BANJO 199


--- PAGE 211 ---
docks. But what kind of man becomes a docker? One learns to be a
mechanic, a coppersmith, or a mason. One becomes a docker. Being a
miner, a blacksmith, a carpenter is a profession. Docker isn’t one. Be-
ing a docker, one isn’t a worker. If circumstances demanded it, I
would require time to be a watchmaker, a roofer or a glazier. I’d be a
docker the next morning at seven o’clock. One meets workers among
dockers; they are precisely workers without work. A docker is a man
who works hard for the sole reason that he has nothing to do....B u t
one has to eat.
37
Banjo, Ray, Bugsy, and Taloufa are men who would rather beg for food
from sympathetic black crews on Mediterranean coal freighters than work
under the racist capitalism that is the only available mode of labor relations.
The book earned the wrath of a number of critics precisely because of
the space it gave to black “laziness” and “bumming.” In the Chicago De-
fender, Dewey Jones titled his review with one word: “Dirt.”
38 He reads
Banjo as a catalog of vices, proclaiming that one might be “enthusiastic”
about it only “if you like ﬁlth, obscenity, vagabondage, pimpery, prostitu-
tion, panhandlery, and more ﬁlth.” Part of the problem is that the book
veers toward autobiography and documentary: McKay (whom Jones de-
scribes as “poet and vagabond”) has obviously “done some independent
studying of the subject he chooses to discuss.” Still, no one can “rave over
the photography of a dung heap.” Jones considers Banjo, even more than
McKay’s ﬁrst novelHome to Harlem, a direct assault on the upward mobil-
ity and bourgeois respectability (the “air of decency,” as he puts it) preached
by organs such as the Defender and is particularly appalled by the charac-
ters’ disdain for labor: the book features “a group of tramp sailors who pre-
fer loaﬁng and bumming to working and earning an honest dime.” It is a
critique that Banjo itself anticipates. One “Negro steward” on a ship yells at
them when they ask him for food: “I wouldn’t even give you all a bone to
chew on. Instead a gwine along back to work, you lay down on the beach a
bumming mens who am trying to make a raspactable living. You think if
you-all lay down sweet and lazy in you’ skin while we others am wrastling
with salt water, wese gwine to fatten you moh in you’ laziness?” (28). In the
French press, André Levinson sneered more sarcastically that even though
the author of Banjo did not manifest much “indulgence” toward France, his
“lazzaroni noirs, the scum of two continents” were living quite a “benign
200 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 212 ---
poverty” (misère bénigne) that would only be possible there, in the “land of
plenty” (pays de cocagne).39
With the Italian word lazzaroni, this critique alludes to a familiar Euro-
pean catalog of epithets for those outside the labor pool. Indeed, it is dif-
ﬁcult not to hear, in McKay’s extended enumerations of this “bawdy” pop-
ulation at Europe’s “best back door” (69), an echo of Karl Marx’s own
catalogs in his dismissive descriptions of the lumpenproletariat—the mar-
ginal, the drifters, eking out an existence, sometimes parasitically, on the
edges of modern industrialized society. The most often-cited deﬁnition of
the lumpenproletariat appears in The Eighteenth Brumaire, in a passage
where Marx is lambasting Louis Bonaparte’s strategy of marshalling inﬂu-
ence through a political group he formed in Paris in 1849, called the Soci-
ety of 10 December:
Alongside decayed roués of doubtful origin and uncertain means of
subsistence, alongside ruined and adventurous scions of the bourgeoi-
sie, there were vagabonds, discharged soldiers, discharged criminals,
escaped galley slaves, swindlers, conﬁdence tricksters, lazzaroni, pick-
pockets, slight-of-hand experts, gamblers, maquereaux, brothel-keep-
ers, porters, pen-pushers, organ-grinders, rag-and-bone merchants,
knife-grinders, tinkers, and beggars: in short, the whole indetermi-
nate mass, tossed backwards and forwards, which the French call la
bohème.
40
Marx excoriates this self-professed “charitable organization” as being chari-
table only in the way that “all its members, like Bonaparte, felt the need to
provide themselves with charity at the expense of the nation’s workers.”
Marx’s unforgiving characterization of those who do not ﬁt, or who reject,
the logic of the class struggle as deﬁned in the mid-nineteenth century—
what he terms “the scum, the leavings, the refuse of all classes”—has always
represented a problem area in Marxist theory, for the few intellectuals who
have not chosen simply to toss lumpen around as a broad term of sectarian
denigration.
The recent work of historians such as Peter Linebaugh and Marcus
Rediker has in part attempted to rethink and to problematize this whole-
cloth, albeit vivid, classiﬁcation, through explorations of the role of what
Linebaugh calls “proletarian internationalism”
41 in the period of expansion
of British mercantile capital. As Linebaugh writes: “just as the accumula-
VAGABOND INTERNA TIONALISM: CLAUDE MCKAY’S BANJO 201


--- PAGE 213 ---
tion of international capital depends on the exploitation of Atlantic labour,
so ‘pauses’ or ‘arrests’ in the process of accumulation are the results of the
many-sided oppositions of living labour brewing within and among the
modes of production” (92). Linebaugh’s aim is to sketch the rich “anti-
nomian tradition” represented in the mobile and vulnerable communities
of “sturdy rogues and beggars,” sailors, itinerant workers, and vagrant wan-
derers throughout ports in the greater Atlantic Ocean. Marx’s critique of
political economy, he argues, functions only within the limits of that tradi-
tion and thus is bound by the conventional “ideological fetters of political
economy that chain the understanding of living labour to the wall of cap-
italist development.” He continues,
thus, the pauper or “surplus population” is understood either as the
passive recipient of alms ...o ra scompromising, to quote C. H.
George, the “swollen streams of human misery.” In the sixteenth cen-
tury, however, there is a powerful history of proletarian self-activity
that cannot be understood within the limits of these largely passive
notions. (96)
Linebaugh emphasizes the juridical construction of a malleable labor force
in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, through criminalization codes
and press gangs throughout the port cities of the Atlantic and Mediterra-
nean (100).
In Banjo, there is a twentieth-century version of this argument, with re-
gard to the “the scum, the leavings, the refuse” of European colonialism and
global commerce: port city communities of color, likewise characterized by
their “mobility, their freedom, and their footlooseness” (95), and equally re-
sistant to the passive frame that political economy would have them ﬁt.
Early circum-Atlantic abstention from the expansion of the industrial age
does not disappear in the modern age, in other words: the “pauses” or “ar-
rests” in the process of accumulation are closely woven into the fabric of co-
lonial development. It is not as though capitalist accumulation develops
and then is infected “later” by race and gender: on the contrary, accumula-
tion proceeds only through the institutions of capitalism and slavery.
42 So it
will not be surprising to discover in the high colonialism of the early twen-
tieth century new mixes of that same rhythm, new “brews” of those same
“many-sided oppositions of living labour” in teeming cosmopolitan ports
such as Marseilles. In this regard, it is crucial to recall that the word “vaga-
202 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 214 ---
bond” ﬁrst appears in Banjo not in a proclamation of irresponsibility or bo-
hemian excess, but as a term imposed by the authorities in an attempt to
deport the black drifter with the “long-term record of existence on the
beach.” Ginger, McKay writes, “had lost his seaman’s papers. He had been
in prison for vagabondage and served with a writ of expulsion. But he had
destroyed the writ and swiped the papers of another seaman” (5).
A number of scholars considering black structural underemployment
in the twentieth century have extended a rehabilitation of the lumpen to
note the ways resistance to racist wage labor conditions can occasion quite
creative modes of expression, an entire range of what Robin D. G. Kelley
calls “dissident political culture.”
43 One particularly apropos example is the
concluding chapter of Policing the Crisis, the brilliant 1978 study of the
black “settler colony” in Britain written collectively by Stuart Hall, Chas
Critcher, T ony Jefferson, John Clarke, and Brian Roberts. There, in a thor-
ough reconsideration of the applicability of the term lumpenproletariat to
the question of black joblessness in the 1970s, the authors contend that a
range of activities that fall under the popular term “hustling” should be
conceived not at all as the taint of black pathology and behavioral back-
wardness, but instead as “modes of survival,” and even as the potential
ground of black consciousness and community resistance.
44 One might see
the sketch of black music making and “vagabondage” in Banjo in the same
light—not simply as evidence of cultural transmission and “survival,” but
moreover as the sign of such a culture of opposition. So when, in seedy bars
around the quarter such as the Café Africain and the Cairo Café, the “black
boys” sing lyrics such as “Dry land will nevah be my land,/ Gimme a wet
wide-open land for mine” (48), it is expressive in exactly this rebellious,
“vagabond” spirit.
The black vagabonds in Banjo cannot be understood simply as an emer-
gent proletariat, however. Certainly they ﬂoat among “proletarians from far
waters” (67) in the Ditch, and initially Ray’s ambition is to ﬁnd a “haven”
where he can “exist en pension proletarian of a sort and try to create around
him the necessary solitude” to write (66). But there are signiﬁcant tensions
between the black drifters and the regularly employed sailors who descend
on the port—tensions that sometimes erupt in racial violence. Indeed, the
organized proletariat, especially the white ethnic unions, view the black
groups drifting along the docks with condescension: at best as a “swollen
stream of human misery” to be registered in the ranks of the class struggle,
VAGABOND INTERNA TIONALISM: CLAUDE MCKAY’S BANJO 203


--- PAGE 215 ---
and at worst as parasites feeding off life in the Vieux Port, worthless and
lazy “bums” to be violently stamped out of existence. The novel recounts
an incident when a gang of white laborers come en masse into the quarter,
indiscriminately beating and kicking any “Senegalese” they see (71–72).
Aware of this charged imbrication of class and race, Ray espouses “proletar-
ian politics” as a strategic stance, but one that in no way softens the bitter-
ness of his distaste for traditional union organizing. He tells Crosby, a “sen-
timental radical,” white American poet whom he befriends brieﬂy, that
I hate the proletarian spawn of civilization. They are ugly, stupid, un-
thinking, degraded, full of vicious prejudices, which any demagogue
can play upon to turn them into a hell-raising mob at any time. As a
black man I have always been up against them, and I became a revo-
lutionist because I have not only suffered with them, but have been
victimized by them—like my race....
I’ve never confused faith with politics. I should like to see the inde-
cent horde get its chance at the privileged things of life, so that de-
cency might ﬁnd some place among them. (270–271)
Ray’s politics are the hard politics of a vagabond in the face of the “ideologi-
cal fetters” on all sides, which forcibly strive to deﬁne his gang’s “vagabond
existence” only as a surplus labor population needing to be either pressed
into service or absolved into organized labor.
In Banjo, ultimately the “vagabond existence” does not ﬁt—it lives its
own logic and will not be passive in the face of such forces. Ray regards it
neither as a lifestyle choice nor as a passing fancy, but as the most crucial
tool of survival in the modern world: “He had associated too closely with
the beach boys not to realize that their loose, instinctive way of living was
more deeply related to his own self-preservation than all the principles, or
social-morality lessons with which he had been inculcated by the wiseacres
of the civilized machine” (319). Vagabonding is not the irresponsible eva-
sion of a proletarian normalcy, but a necessary recourse for those like
Banjo, Ray, and Taloufa who do not possess the “instinct of civilization,” as
Ray puts it (289). They reject what they consider to be the hypocrisy and
cynicism of modernity; even college-educated Ray, with his supposed “so-
cial advantages” and “better breeding,” ultimately cannot bring himself to
“scramble out of the proletarian world into that solid respectable life,
whence he could look down on the Ditch and all such places with the
204 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 216 ---
mean, evil, and cynical eyes of a respectable person” (288). It is in this sense
that the black boys, like the sixteenth- and seventeenth-century rogues and
vagabonds described by Linebaugh, represent what Banjo terms a “chal-
lenge of civilization”:
When the police inspector said to Ray that the strong arm of the law
was against Negroes because they were all criminals, he really did not
mean just that. For he knew that the big and terror-striking criminals
were not Negroes. What he unconsciously meant was that the police
were strong-armed against the happy irresponsibility of the Negro in
the face of civilization.
For civilization had gone out among these native, earthy people,
had despoiled them of their primitive soil, had uprooted, enchained,
transported, and transformed them to labor under its laws, and yet
lacked the spirit to tolerate them within its walls....
Thus [the Negro] became a challenge to the clubbers of helpless
vagabonds—to the despised, underpaid protectors of property and its
high personages. He was a challenge of civilization itself. (313–314)
In rejecting the principle of wage labor, they challenge the very logic of
civilization itself and, moreover, expose its underbelly, its elusive escape
hatch—precisely by proving with “happy irresponsibility” that civilization
can be deﬁed.
What should be noted is that this stance represents a shift in Ray. In
McKay’s earlier novel,Home to Harlem, Ray adopts the position of an exile,
with the pronounced sense of deprivation and uprooting that characterizes
the state of forced departure from one’s home country. He is bitterly critical
of the U.S. occupation of Haiti and remembers his pride “to be the son of a
free nation.” This sentiment is closely related to Ray’s sense of injustice at
his life in Harlem: whereas he used to feel sorry for U.S. blacks, these “ten
millions of suppressed Yankee ‘coons,’” suddenly “he was just one of them
and he hated them for being one of them.” In New York, Ray ultimately
consoles himself not with some new-found sentiment of black internation-
alism, but with the nationalist certainty that “he was not entirely one of
them. ...H epossessed another language and literature that they know not
of. And some day Uncle Sam might let go of his island and he would escape
from the clutches of that magniﬁcent monster of civilization and retire be-
VAGABOND INTERNA TIONALISM: CLAUDE MCKAY’S BANJO 205


--- PAGE 217 ---
hind the natural defenses of his island, where the steam-roller of progress
could not reach him.”45
Though we ﬁnd a similar critique of civilization in Banjo, Ray’s sense of
nationalist privilege has vanished: now, in Marseilles, “the vagabond lover
of life ﬁnds individuals and things to love in many places and not in any
one nation.” Indeed, nationalism has been linked, for Ray, to the perni-
ciousness of modern civilization: “Man loves places and no one place, for
the earth, like a beautiful wanton, puts on a new dress to fascinate him
wherever he may go. A patriot loves not his nation, but the spiritual
meannesses of life of which he has created a frontier wall to hide the beauty
of other horizons” (136). This sense of footlooseness and mobility (gen-
dered, as is characteristic in McKay’s writing: the earth dresses “like a beau-
tiful wanton” to fascinate “him”), this extreme antinationalism, gives Ray a
purpose that is in many ways reminiscent of McKay’s own adoption of the
term “vagabond” in his 1937 autobiography, A Long Way from Home.
There, McKay writes:
I became a vagabond—but a vagabond with a purpose. I was deter-
mined to ﬁnd expression in writing....Ilooked for the work that
was easy to my hand while my head was thinking hard: porter, ﬁre-
man, waiter, bar-boy, houseman. I waded through the muck and the
scum with one objective dominating my mind. I took my menial
tasks like a student who is working his way through a university. My
leisure was divided between the experiment of daily living and the ex-
periment of essays in writing.
46
The recurrent use of the word “vagabond” in Banjo must be understood in
this light: not as what Ray dismisses as “mere unexciting drifting, a pur-
poseless, live-for-the-moment, negative” mode of existence in some of the
inhabitants of the Ditch (138), but instead the vibrant resistance of the
black boys to the forces that would contain them, to the civilization that
Ray knows would “take the love of color, joy, beauty, vitality, and nobility
out of his life and make him like one of the poor mass of its pale creatures”
(164).
Ray, who is regularly reading newspapers—including the N e wY o r kH e r-
ald Tribune and the mainstream French Le Journal (264, 274), the Com-
munist Party weekly L ’Humanité(269), the London Daily Mail (136), and
even rabidly imperialist, “obscene” French papers such as L ’Action française
206 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 218 ---
(273–274)—and ruminating over the social position of his little gang of
friends, is particularly attuned to the ways both French state authorities and
broader transnational commercial forces relentlessly control and reshape
the lives of men of color in the Vieux Port. Some of the other characters
such as Goosey and Banjo recognize change—they notice that it is more
difﬁcult to ﬁnd black ship crews who will feed them, that the police and co-
lonial authorities are becoming “more brutal and strict” (23)—without
quite understanding the historical signiﬁcance of this development. At
times the narrative steps back and offers such a perspective, noting at one
point that the black boys
did not know that the Radical government had fallen, that a
National-Union government had come into power, and that the franc
had been arrested in its spectacular fall and was being stabilized. They
knew very little about governments, and cared less. But they knew
that suddenly francs were getting scarce in their world, meals were
dearer in the eating-sheds and bistros....(222–223)
T oward the end ofBanjo, the drifters, dockers, and seamen are discussing a
shift in British colonial policy that repatriates all undocumented migrants,
giving them fresh papers stamped with an ofﬁcial phrase, “Nationality
Doubtful” (312). When his Nigerian friend Taloufa is denied entry to Eng-
land, Ray considers this new restriction of mobility:
West Africans, East Indians, South Africans, West Indians, Arabs, and
Indians—they were all mixed up together ....This was the way of
civilization with the colored man, especially the black. The happen-
ings of the past few weeks from the beating up of the beach boys
by the police to the story of Taloufa’s experiences, were, to Ray, all
of a piece. A clear and eloquent exhibition of the universal atti-
tude, which, though the method varied, was little different anywhere.
(312–313)
Ray sees a consistency to the “way of civilization” as evidenced in the state’s
treatment of colored men, the “universal” refusal of their civil rights. Just as
a gratuitous and “merciless beating” one afternoon at the hands of the Mar-
seilles police demonstrates a capricious state control of their bodies (261–
262), papers stamped with the phrase “Nationality Doubtful” by a state
immigration ofﬁce denies any claim to national identity and citizenship.
VAGABOND INTERNA TIONALISM: CLAUDE MCKAY’S BANJO 207


--- PAGE 219 ---
Both are means of herding the black drifters, giving them “no place to go”
(313) at the margins of the transnational wage labor system and in a limbo
of undocumented, ofﬁcially “doubtful” status.
In a chapter called “Everybody Doing It,” the lyrics of an old popular
American song, an insipid invitation to “T urkey T rot” (“Everybody’s doing
it, / Everybody’s doing it”), ridiculously but stubbornly stick in Ray’s head
like a refrain to this realization. The phrase alludes to the universal schem-
ing on the quayside: the denizens “peddling” or “plugging” to get by, all
“massed pell-mell together in a great gorgeous bowl” (141). But it also de-
scribes the ubiquity of oppression. As Ray tells one Englishman in a café at
the corner of the rue de la République and the Quai du Port, it is always
“we, the poor, the vagabonds, the bums of life” who pay heaviest “for ban-
ditry in high places” (142). We are told later that “as a Negro,” Ray is par-
ticularly sensitive to the fact that “many of the titled and ennobled and
fashionable and snobbish gentry of this age have the roots of their fortunes
in the selling of black bodies” (288). The most complex point inBanjo may
be this suggestive double entendre (“Everybody’s Doing It”) that points
both to sexuality and desire and to bodily exploitation in the modern cap-
italist system. “Selling black bodies” here has to do with gender and sexual-
ity, not just race. This is suggested both in particular encounters—love af-
fairs gone wrong, disputes over money—and in the broader claims of the
narrative: “Commerce! Of all words the most magical. The timbre, color,
form, the strength and grandeur of it. T riumphant over all human and nat-
ural obstacles, sublime yet forever going hand in hand with the bitch,
Bawdy. In all relationships, between nations, between individuals, between
little peoples and big peoples, progressive and primitive, the two lovers
spread and ﬂourish together as if one were the inevitable complement of
the other” (307). At the same time, this point is given additional nuance by
the gender politics of the nearly all-male community portrayed in the
novel,
47 where casual talk refers to ships in the port as “broads,” and Mar-
seilles itself as a “bum hussy” (168). One thinks in particular of Ray’s hy-
pothesis that “society is feminine,” as he tells Goosey:
Property controls sex. . . . When you understand that, Goosey, you’ll
understand the meaning of the struggle between class and class, na-
tion and nation, race and race. You’ll understand that society chases
after power just as a woman chases after property, because society is
208 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 220 ---
feminine. And you’ll see that the white races today are ahead of the
colored because their women are emancipated, and that there is
greater material advancement among those white nations whose
women have the most freedom. (205–206)
This proposition is a peculiar mix of feminism (a call for the emancipation
of women) and the claim that if “woman chases after property,” that pur-
suit has an essentially “feminine” quality that can be extended by analogy
into social analysis. For Ray, “woman is woman all over the world,” and
that identity is deﬁned by two characteristics: “she is cast in a passive rôle
and she worships the active success of man and rewards it with her body”
(206). In other words, a cogent feminist critique is combined with a prob-
lematic insistence about the “nature” of woman.
With regard to Latnah, the one signiﬁcant female character in Banjo,
there is something like this uneven approach. Among the black boys, there
is on the one hand an understanding of her position as a prostitute: “What-
ever personal art she might use as a woman to increase her chances was her
own affair” (32). At the same time, there are disturbing elements to the
portrait of Latnah in the book, especially after she becomes Banjo’s lover,
as in one scene when she thinks that Banjo has abandoned her for a
white woman and is left “seething with that deep-rooted sexual resent-
ment that the women of the colored and white races nourish against one
another—a resentment perhaps even more profound among the women
than among the men of the species, because it is passive, having no out-
let for brutal expression” (169). And whenBanjo ends with the title charac-
ter and Ray leaving Marseilles together to “go vagabonding,” Ray mentions
that it would have been nice to take Latnah along, but Banjo tells him
he should never “get soft ovah any one wimmins.” Indeed, the book
concludes with his dismissal: “Tha’s you’ big weakness. A woman is a con-
junction. Gawd ﬁxed her different from us in moh ways than one. And
theah’s things we can git away with all the time and she just kain’t. Come
on, pardner. Wese got enough between us to beat it a long ways from
here” (326).
Diaspora and the “Passable Word”
The second part of Banjo’s critique of the logic of internationalism is more
complicated and more surprising, given the reception of the novel. Just af-
VAGABOND INTERNA TIONALISM: CLAUDE MCKAY’S BANJO 209


--- PAGE 221 ---
ter the passage quoted in Légitime Défense, in which Ray would appear to
preach racial consciousness and self-sufﬁciency, the vehemence of the ar-
gument with the Martinican student is drastically pulled back: “It was no
superior condescension, no feeling of race solidarity or Back-to-Africa dem-
onstration—no patriotic effort whatsoever—that made Ray love the envi-
ronment of the common black drifters. He loved it with the poetical enthu-
siasm of the vagabond black that he himself was” (202). What is somewhat
unexpected about Banjo is that the depiction of the community of “black
boys” along the Marseilles docks evidences a resistance to the modern idea
of black internationalism as well. Thus the novel concludes with the group
scattering and Ray professing reluctance to make easy gestures of racial con-
sciousness as he leaves the city. In the end, Banjo, the most emphatically
transnational black novel of the interwar period, is paradoxically also a radi-
cal critique of black internationalism.
Time and time again, the book emphasizes the pronounced diversity of
the community of black boys and elaborates their heated arguments about
the “race question.” In a 1929 letter to his agent William Aspenwall Brad-
ley, McKay writes similarly about the beach boys’ conceptions of France:
“Goosey loves France and wants to stay. Banjo is not in the least disturbed
about loving or hating any country. The Senegalese opts for America. Ray
is cynical about it all. He is intelligent enough to know that all human be-
ings suffer and enjoy life in varying degrees in every country under the sun,
although he is not unaware that the colored man has especial handicaps to
meet with under the world-wide domination of occidental civilization.”
48
This critique is furthermore worked out on the grounds of translation, the
slippery babel of tongues and dialects clashing in color on the waterfront.
W . E. B. Du Bois’s review ofBanjo called it “on the one hand, the descrip-
tion of a series of episodes on the docks of Marseilles, and on the other
hand a sort of international philosophy of the Negro race.”
49 But ﬁnally the
episodes are the philosophy, and it is not an internationalism of coordi-
nated social movement, but an internationalism of debate, miscommu-
nication, and light-hearted and hot-headed accusation—the Dozens writ
large, with Ananse, Frère Lapin, and the Signifying Monkey soused and
clamoring for the soapbox.
Encounters begin and end over disputes. Recall that Ray ﬁrst meets
Banjo by offering to translate in an argument over prices with a bistro
210 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 222 ---
owner who has overcharged him. As the angry discussion of the prix ﬁxe
menu outdoes the black American musician’s slim mastery of the native
language,
Banjo’s tongue turned loose a rich assortment of Yankee swear
w o r d s ....“ God-damned frog robbers. I eat prix ﬁxe. I pay moh’n
enough. Moi paye rien plus. Hey! Ain’t anybody in this tripe-stinking
dump can help a man with this dawggone lingo?”
A black young man who had been sitting quietly in the back went
over to Banjo and asked what he could help about.
“Can you get a meaning, boh, out of this musical racket?” Banjo
asked.
“I guess I can.” (63)
Ray’s success at interceding and negotiating with the woman cements his
friendship with Banjo, who proclaims: “Le’s blow this heah two francs to
good friendship beginning. ...M ytwinkling stars, but this Marcelles is a
most wonderful place for meeting-up” (64).
As Michel Fabre has noted, the French language is positioned inBanjo as
“a barrier, or an open sesame. Language and culture appear as important
as color or nationality in creating cleavages in group consciousness.”
50
This point is only emphasized all the more when one reads the novel in
English next to the 1931 French translation read by Senghor and Césaire.
What I have termed a basic grammar of blackness is often fully dislodged,
lost in translation, as it becomes impossible to trace the putative links be-
tween “Negro,” “black,” “darky,” “man of color,” on the one hand, and
“noir,” “nègre,” “bon nèg,” “homme de couleur,” on the other. Take this ex-
change:
“Did he say niggers?” cried Goosey.
“I should say not. He said ‘colored people.’”
“Well, I wish you would all learn to say ‘colored’ and ‘Negroes’ and
drop ‘darky’ and ‘niggers,’” said Goosey. “If we don’t respect ourselves
as a race we can’t expect white people to respect us.” (128)
“Il disait nègre?” s’écria l’Oison.
—Jamais d’la vie! Il disait ‘peuple de couleur.’
VAGABOND INTERNA TIONALISM: CLAUDE MCKAY’S BANJO 211


--- PAGE 223 ---
—Ben moi, je voudrais que vous disiez ‘de couleur’ ou encore ‘noir’
et que vous laissiez tomber ‘nègre’ et ‘négro’. (Fr 177)
Here “nègre” is used at ﬁrst to translate “nigger” and then to translate
“darky” (another term, “négro”—even more derogatory, but less common
—is also used for “nigger”). At another point, when Goosey again takes of-
fense at Ray’s use of derogatory terms, the French version uses still another
word, “bon nèg,” to translate “niggah,” and the word “raton” (rat) to trans-
late Ray’s dismissal of Goosey as a “coon—a stage thing, a made-up thing
. . . half baked, half educated, full of false ideas about Negroes” (183).
“Raton” is perhaps the best choice, but in French it is an epithet more com-
monly directed at North Africans, and the translators put it in quotes to in-
dicate they are stretching its application: “toi tu es bien un ‘raton,’” Ray
says, “quelque chose d’artiﬁciel, de théâtral” (Fr 239).
But this isn’t solely a point about the French translation: what is evident
in Banjo is the degree to which characters such as Ray and Goosey do not
share an understanding of the basic terms of racial identiﬁcation in English
alone. Thus their arguments over the ideological accentuation of “Negro”
or “nigger” turn caustic precisely because they are arguments about the con-
tours of racial politics in a transnational sphere. More than any other inter-
war work, Banjo relentlessly underlines the inescapable, nearly mundane,
gaps in comprehension: the impossibility of translating a racial conscious-
ness through some foolproof or stable system. We are left with the vertigo
of intradiasporic communication, the small and crucial work of carrying
words over, one by one, often only to have them thrown back or miscon-
strued.
Banjo makes this point most emphatically in a startling passage that ut-
terly loses its texture in French translation. At one point, Ray is mulling
over the common myth that France offers a civilized “paradise” for colored
people, annoyed, for he knows so intimately the persistence of colonial
prejudice in the country. Ray “looked deeper than the noise for the truth,
and what he really found was a fundamental contempt for black people
quite as pronounced as in the Anglo-Saxon lands.” Indeed, the French dif-
ference, if there is one, could hardly be called a heavenly bounty: “There
was, if anything, an unveiled condescension in it that was gall to a Negro
who wanted to live his life free of the demoralizing effect of being pitied
212 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 224 ---
and patronized.” The question for Ray is the proper response in the face of
such hypocrisy:
Here, like anywher e...o n eblack villain made all black villains as
one black tout made all black touts, one black nigger made all black
niggers, and one black failure made all black failures....
Supposing he were to react to French or any other civilization
solely from the faits divers columns of the newspapers. For one crazy
month of the past summer he had read of nothing but crazy crimes
. . . all the sordid crimes d’amour et de la passionthat were really crimes
d’argent.(275–276)
Ray is particularly amused by one newspaper article recounting a “terrible
crime” committed by an African soldier. The unnamed journalist, appar-
ently writing in one of the conservative pro-imperialist French papers, ex-
trapolates from the singular horror to hale the entire black race “before the
bar of public opinion.” What is startling for the English-language reader is
that Banjo goes on to quote the entire editorial (nearly a page and a half in
the original edition) in French, with no translation or summary:
Un tirailleur sénégalais, pris d’on ne sait quel vertigo, a fait, à T oulon,
un affreux carnage.
On s’évertue maintenant à savoir par quelle suite de circonstances
ce noir a pu fracturer un coffre et s’emparer des cartouches avec
lesquelles il a accompli le massacre.
Qu’on le sache, soit. Mais la question me semble ailleurs. Il
faudrait peut-être se mettre la main sur le cœur et se demander s’il est
bien prudent d’apprendre à des primitifs à se servir d’un fusil.
Je n’ignore pas qu’ilyad ebelles exceptions; qu’il y a des “nègres”
députés, avocats, professeurs et que l’un d’eux a même obtenu le prix
Goncourt. Mais la majorité de ces “indigènes” à peau noire sont de
grands enfants auxquels les subtilités de notre morale échappent
autant que les subtilités de notre langue. La plus dangereuse de ces
subtilités est celle-ci:
T u tueras des êtres humains en certaines circonstances que nous
appelons guerre.
Mais tu seras châtié si tu tues en dehors de ces circonstances.
VAGABOND INTERNA TIONALISM: CLAUDE MCKAY’S BANJO 213


--- PAGE 225 ---
Le Sénégalais Yssima appartient à une catégorie humaine où il est
d’usage, paraît-il, quand on doit mourir de ne pas mourir seul. Le
point d’honneur consiste à en “expédier” le plus possible avant d’être
soi-même expédié.
Si cela est vrai, on voit oú [sic] peuvent conduire certaines blagues
de chambrées. Pour tout dire franchement, il n’est pas prudent de
faire des soldats avec des hommes dont l’âme contient encore des
replis inexplorés et pour qui notre civilisation est un vin trop fort.
Sous les bananiers originels, Yssima était sans doute un brave noir, en
parfaite harmonie avec la morale de sa race et les lois de la nature.
T ransplanté, déraciné, il est devenue un fou sanguinaire.
Je ne veux tirer de cet horrible fait divers aucune conclusion. Je
dis que de semblables aventures (qui ne sont d’ailleurs pas isolées)
devraient nous faire réﬂéchir sérieusement. . . . (278)
51
An African soldier, seized by who knows what kind of vertigo, has
caused a terrible carnage in T oulon.
The authorities are doing their utmost to ﬁnd out by what se-
quence of events this noir was able to break into a chest and seize the
ammunition with which he enacted the massacre.
If they ﬁnd an answer, so be it. But it seems to me that the question
lies elsewhere. It might be necessary to put one’s hand on one’s heart
and ask oneself if it is really prudent to teach primitives how to use a
gun.
I am not unaware that there are some ﬁne exceptions; that there are
“nègre”legislators, lawyers, professors, and that one of them even won
the Prix Goncourt. But the majority of these black-skinned “natives”
are big children, for whom the subtleties of our ethics are as evasive as
the subtleties of our language. The most dangerous of these subtleties
is the following:
You will kill human beings in certain circumstances that we call
war.
But you will be punished if you kill outside of these circumstances.
The Senegalese Yssima belongs to a human category for whom it is
a custom, apparently, not to die alone, when one has to die. The
point of honor consists in “sending off” as many others as possible
before being killed oneself.
214 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 226 ---
If this is true, one sees how far certain barrack-room jokes can lead.
T o put it frankly, it is not prudent to make soldiers out of men whose
souls still contain unexplored corners, and for whom our civilization
is too strong a wine. Originally, under his banana trees, Yssima was
doubtlessly a good black man, in perfect harmony with the ethics of
his race and the laws of nature. T ransplanted, deracinated, he has be-
come a bloodthirsty madman.
I do not want to draw any conclusion from this horrible news
item. I say that such adventures (which moreover are by no means
isolated) should make us reﬂect seriously....[ m ytranslation]
The silliness Ray reads in this patronizingly magnanimous exercise (its
measured call to “reﬂect” on whether it is a good idea to conscript Africans,
“for whom our civilization is too strong a wine”) is obvious—if one can
read it. The abrupt page and a half in French can appear only as a confron-
tation to the English-speaking reader who stops short, challenged to ﬁnd a
way to continue, but unable to navigate a thicket of unfamiliar words. In-
deed, for a bilingual reader the joke of the passage becomes the editorial’s
lament that ethics don’t carry over from one linguistic context to another:
the claim that for the indigènes, “the subtleties of our ethics are as evasive as
the subtleties of our language.”
The passage thus functions as Banjo’s stark performance of linguistic dif-
ference. Not just for the black vagabonds themselves, but for some readers
too, French is “barrier and open sesame”: moving through the narrative, the
reader is forced to negotiate a disjuncture between a strongly worded intro-
duction and its inaccessible example. The article is framed with the aside
that Ray had saved it as an “amusing revelation of civilized logic” particu-
larly because “he was in tacit agreement with the thesis while loathing the
manner of its presentation” (277). If one cannot follow the French, this
sentence is bewildering: what would Ray ﬁnd to agree with in an article
that extrapolates a fait divers into a racist generalization? The answer would
seem to reside in the editorial’s claim that the norms of Western civilization
are incomprehensible to the transplanted African. Presumably Ray would
accentuate the argument somewhat differently, though: in other words,
what the editorial calls “subtlety” (“You will kill human beings in certain
circumstances that we call war. But you will be punished if you kill outside
of these circumstances”) Ray would term perversion and illogic. As the nar-
VAGABOND INTERNA TIONALISM: CLAUDE MCKAY’S BANJO 215


--- PAGE 227 ---
rative explains, the newspaper in question supports the colonial regime un-
der which Africans during World War I had been “torn out of their native
soil, wrenched away from their families and shipped to Europe to get ac-
quainted with the arts of war and the disease of syphilis” (276–277). The
argument takes on a different resonance if it is “presented” with such a cri-
tique of “civilized logic.” Still, the primary lesson of the passage for the ma-
jority of English readers must be the jarring inaccessibility of its French.
And it is precisely this effect (a linguistic disjuncture in the reading process
itself) that cannot be reproduced in the French translation of Banjo, where
the quoted passage does not stand out at all. In this sense, the subtleties do
not carry over.
In the modern transnational context depicted in Banjo, if terms such as
nègre and noir—each hotly contested and “multi-accentuated” in French—
can be understood only in their diachronic relation of tension and diver-
gence, then equally contested uses of the term Negro must be read as a
name for the synchronic failure of that tension to carry over into English.
With the limited lens of translation in the strict sense (translation between
languages), Banjo suggests that this is the only way to read a diaspora. This
state of affairs should not be understood to be solely negative, an impass-
able wall, however: Banjo also makes it clear that the walls are continually
vaulted—those incommensurabilities, the gaps, the points of décalage, are
the reservoir of communication across which diaspora is practiced. So the
constant arguments in the novel do not come across as frustrating dead
ends, but instead as precisely the most vibrant and creative moments. It is
in an awareness of this creativity in a hostile linguistic context and across
difference—this recognition that the workable translation, the “passable”
word, is always discovered—that Ray admires
the black boys’ unconscious artistic capacity for eliminating the rot-
ten-dead stock words of the proletariat and replacing them with star-
tling new ones. There were no dots or dashes in their conversations—
nothing that could not be frankly said and therefore decently—no act
or fact of life for which they could not ﬁnd a simple passable word.
He gained from them ﬁner nuances of the necromancy of language
and the wisdom that any word may be right and magical in its proper
setting. (321)
216 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 228 ---
We are still left with the consequences of that “crossing over,” of course—
exempliﬁed most starkly in the ideological mutation from McKay’s “com-
mon people” to the FrenchBanjo’s “le prolétariat,” misrecognitions that ap-
pear unavoidable in any effort to translate among diasporic settings.
We are still confronted with difference, in other words. With those inex-
tricable gaps and discrepancies, stitched up provisionally in the “necro-
mantic” fabric of communication. In the passage from Banjo reprinted in
Légitime Défense, on the one hand, the French translation of “common peo-
ple” as “le prolétariat” is simply incorrect, an imposition of an explicit
Marxist vocabulary onto a text that in English is nothing if not reluctant to
assent to such institutional forms of radicalism. But on the other hand, the
translation raises the necessary question of just how one might translate in
this period a phrase such as “common people” (or “folk”), which resonates
in English with U.S. populist discourse and the history of African Ameri-
can lives in the rural South, to a French metropolitan context molded by a
very different set of forces, including labor migrancy and imperial notions
of a “backward” native populace in the overseas colonies. Even if the trans-
lation fails, then, it remains true to Banjo’s overall aim of indicating the
ways that black internationalism is necessarily haunted by difference.
The Boys in the Band
If part of the work of Banjo is to imagine the “passing word,” the means of
translation, it should be apparent that more often than not the successful
connections in the book hinge on black expressive production. This in-
cludes oral culture in the famous chapter 10, “Story-T elling,” where Ray,
“trying to get some of the Senegalese to tell stories like the Brer Rabbit kind
or the African animal fables of the West Indies” (114), is only successful
when he himself tells a folk tale from his own home—then, “nearly all the
Senegalese wanted to tell a native story” (121). But Banjo ﬁnds its links es-
pecially in music. Most of the men in the group play one kind of instru-
ment or another, and on a number of occasions they get together to jam in
one of the many cafés and bars around the squalid Vieux Port.
They play a varied repertoire that includes both lesser-known or made-
up lyrics (“Stay, Carolina, Stay”; “Everybody’s Doing It”; “Hallelujah Jig”)
and a number of popular hits from the 1920s such as “Shake That Thing,”
which was recorded by Ethel Waters, among others, in 1925 (49, 280);
VAGABOND INTERNA TIONALISM: CLAUDE MCKAY’S BANJO 217


--- PAGE 229 ---
“Yes, Sir, That’s My Baby” (7, 14); “Then I’ll Be Happy,” a mid-decade hit
for the Fletcher Henderson orchestra (35); and Jelly Roll Morton’s 1915
composition “Jelly Roll Blues” (46). At one point, Malty sings a bit of
“West Indies Blues” (81), a lyric written by J. Edgar Dowell, Spencer Wil-
liams, and Clarence Williams that is of interest not only because it was one
of the top-selling “race records” of 1924 (with versions by at least eleven
groups) but also because it is one of the socially conscious popular songs of
the period. The refrain expresses a Jamaican’s desire to return to the Carib-
bean: “Gwine home, won’t be long / Gwine home, sure’s you born, / I’m
gwine home, won’t be long / ‘Cause I’ve got no time to lose. / ...I ’ m
gwine home, I can’t wait / ’Cause I’ve got the West Indies Blues.” And one
verse mentions Marcus Garvey by name: “I’m gonna be a great big ‘Mon’ /
Like my frien’ Marcus Garvey.”
52 Malty doesn’t sing the lyrics to “West In-
dies Blues” in Banjo; still, the allusion would be clear to any reader familiar
with black musical culture in the 1920s.
It is only at these brief dance-driven encounters that the language of
Banjo turns exalted and inclusive. At the Martinican-owned Antilles Res-
taurant, one night, the group unites spontaneously to play through an
unlikely mix of black musical forms, squeezed into unity by the force of
the prose:
They played the “beguin,” which was just a Martinique variant of the
“jelly-roll” or the Jamaican “burru” or the Senegalese “bombé.”...I t
was an eye-ﬁlling ensemble of delicious jazzing, and the rhythm of it
went tickling through the warm blood of Taloufa, who was still
smacking his lips over his sausage-and-rice, tempered with a bottle of
old Bordeaux.
“Beguin,” “jelly-roll,” “burru,” “bombé,” no matter what the name
may be, Negroes are never so beautiful and magical as when they do
that gorgeous sublimation of the primitive African sex feeling. In its
thousand varied patterns, depending so much on individual rhythm,
so little on formal movement, this dance is the key to the African
rhythm of life. (105)
Such ecstatic writing about the unifying qualities (and common roots) of
the variety of black music in Marseilles—from the United States, the Ca-
ribbean, and Africa itself—is almost entirely unique in descriptions of the
“lost quarter” of the city. Much more common are the words of André
218 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 230 ---
Suarès, in his well-known 1933 Marsiho, describing black music as an ab-
horrent savage soundtrack overwhelming the thin streets. Suarès, writing
about rue de la Bouterie, complains that “infernal black music [musique
noire] sets the rhythm for all sounds. Without a doubt, this racket is the
voice of hell. Is there a nègre orchestra hidden on every ﬂoor? The phono-
graphs are nègres too, omnipresent and invisible....T h ewhole quarter is
no more than a monstrous saucepan being beaten in measure by a thousand
pairs of feet.”
53
Banjo is above all else a book about a boy who wants to start a band.
“Banjo dreamed constantly,” we are told early on, “of forming an orchestra,
and the boys listened incredulously when he talked about it. He had many
ideas of beginning” (19). Often under the inﬂuence of wine stolen along
the docks, Banjo waxes rhapsodic about this dream at every opportunity,
in spite of the boys’ skepticism and his own lack of organizational and
conductorial skills. “It would need an orchestry to ﬁx them right,” he
thinks. “The American darky is the performing fool of the world today.
He’s demanded everywhere. If I c’n only git some a these heah panhandling
fellahs together, we’ll show them some real nigger music. Then I’d be set-
ting pretty in this heah sweet dump without worrying ovah mah wants”
(14). Ever the proper nationalist, Goosey tells him in no uncertain terms
that the banjo is an inappropriate instrument for “race music”: “Banjo
is bondage. It’s the instrument of slavery. Banjo is Dixie” (90). But for
Banjo it is “preëminently the musical instrument of the American Negro”
and his “loud music of life—an afﬁrmation of his hardy existence in the
midst of the biggest, the most tumultuous civilization of modern life” (49).
Banjo tells Goosey that he doesn’t want to play minstrel music, but instead
wants to play what he calls “the money stuff today” in the craze for black
U.S. performance sweeping France: “that saxophone-jazzing” and “them
blues” (91).
The dream expressed in the word “orchestra” is of course bigger than
simply playing music: more than anything, Banjo wants to ﬁnd in the
music a model of the social, a way to institutionalize the black boys’ easy
good-time interaction. This word, and the sporadic, ephemeral attempts to
achieve it, are the closest the book comes to espousing any form of black in-
ternationalism, any means for a relatively permanent structure that would
articulate a black transnational community into a singular albeit shifting
expression of the “African rhythm of life.” Although there is no suggestion
VAGABOND INTERNA TIONALISM: CLAUDE MCKAY’S BANJO 219


--- PAGE 231 ---
that musical performance would evade the economic exploitation around
them, this dream of a black band is the only exit offered in Banjo, imagi-
nary or otherwise, into some form of stability that the men can accept in
the “capitalist machine.” Banjo seems to have no trouble seeing himself
bound in a stereotype, as the “the performing fool of the world today.” In a
broader sense, an orchestra expresses a dream to formalize in musical per-
formance the “spirit of solidarity” (158) among the black drifters, their
ways of supporting each other with food, drink, shelter, and commisera-
tion. Music seems for Banjo equally to provide an aesthetic model of the
“vagabond existence.” In one early scene, he tells Bugsy: “When I turn
mahsalf loose for a big wild joyful jazz a life, you can bet you’ sweet life I
ain’t gwine neveh regretting it” (24). Here “jazz” comes to describe a vision
of life, “loose” and joyous and without regret. So if the dream to form an
orchestra is the dream to institutionalize a vision of black international-
ism, it is inherently an open and wandering, performative representation of
the links between men of African descent, a vision of “vagabond interna-
tionalism.”
And yet Banjo can’t even remember to pass a hat to collect money from
bar customers after they play, much less produce some kind of regular date
for a performance or organize rehearsals (40). In fact, it is Latnah, with “all
her instincts of acquisitiveness and envious rivalry” (25), who insists that he
should be making money for his performances:
[W]hen he played in any of the bistros of the quarter and she was
there, she always took up a collection. . . . That was the way the white
itinerants did it, she said. They never played for fun as Banjo was
prone to do. They played in a hard, unsmiling, funereal way and only
for sous. Which was doubtless why their playing in general was so ex-
ecrable. When Banjo turned himself loose and wild playing, he never
remembered sous. (40)
The implication of this arrangement is that there is something in Banjo’s
approach to music that makes the vision of an orchestra a mirage or a delu-
sion. It seems that a vagabond approach to the music (“loose and wild”)
never remembers to collect—and indeed, this obliviousness to wage and
proﬁt seems to be not just absentmindedness but actually inherent in the
aesthetic. This is a contradiction that neither Banjo nor Latnah can resolve
with any permanence.
220 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 232 ---
The nearest that Banjo, “quite unconscious of it,” comes to the “aes-
thetic realization of his orchestra” (97) is just another of these informal
jam sessions at a no-name café that the boys simply refer to as “Banjo’s
hang out”:
Taloufa had taught them a rollicking West African song, whose music
was altogether more insinuating than that of “Shake That Thing.”
“Stay, Carolina, stay,
Oh, stay, Carolina, stay!”
That was the refrain, and all the verses were a repetition, with very
slight variations, of the ﬁrst verse. Taloufa had a voluptuous voice,
richly colored like the sound of water lapping against a bank. And he
chanted as he strummed the guitar:
“Stay, Carolina, stay.... ”
The whole song—the words of it, the lilt, the pattern, the color of
it—seemed to be built up from that one word, Stay! (95–96)
It is as though, in this recurring chorus, in the tune of the Nigerian coast
calling out to the American Carolinas like a distant lover with an endless
complaint, black music itself is the ﬁgure that would keep the band to-
gether, the forlorn voice that would have them “stay.” On the one hand
there is a gendered representation of desire, which is also an exilic desire for
a home that is ever-receding, ever-elusive, always slightly beyond the reach
and capacities of the speaker: “I took her on a swim and she swim more
than me, / Stay, Carolina, stay” (96). But the song “built up from that one
word, Stay!” might also be heard as an expression of desire for the music it-
self, a desire to continue and even to perpetuate the state of collaboration
and communion it orchestrates.
For Ray, the music becomes a sign both of the ways community is per-
formed and of a particularly “African rhythm of life.” It is almost exclu-
sively in these passages that one encounters what is usually the only feature
emphasized in readings of Banjo—that is, its supposed evocation of the
“primitivism” of black culture. “Close association with the Jakes [the pro-
tagonist of Home to Harlem who shows up brieﬂy in Banjo (292)] and
Banjoes,” Ray thinks, “had been like participating in a common primitive
birthright” (321). It is as near as Ray comes to expressing a racial conscious-
ness. Given the linguistic vertigo that the novel foregrounds, it is not insig-
VAGABOND INTERNA TIONALISM: CLAUDE MCKAY’S BANJO 221


--- PAGE 233 ---
niﬁcant that Ray’s sentiment is rooted especially in hearing African lan-
guages:
Ray was not of the humble tribe of humanity. But he always felt hum-
ble when he heard the Senegalese and other West African tribes
speaking their own languages with native warmth and feeling.
The Africans gave him a positive feeling of wholesome contact
with racial roots. They made him feel that he was not an unfortunate
accident of birth, but that he belonged deﬁnitely to a race weighed,
tested, and poised in the universal scheme. (320)
It is crucial to notice that Ray’s “feeling” of “wholesome contact with racial
roots” is based in a “humbling” experience of difference. “Belonging,” here,
is predicated on privation, on Ray hearing languages he can’t speak or un-
derstand. Not surprisingly, he feels no such conﬁdence about African-
derived populations in the Americas, “who, long-deracinated, were still
rootless among phantoms and pale shadows and enfeebled by self-efface-
ment before condescending patronage, social negativism, and miscegena-
tion” (320). In such passages there is both the “primitivism” that many crit-
ics expect from McKay and a more critical pragmatism that the boys
“buttress” Ray with a “rough strength and sureness that gave him spiritual
passion and pride to be his human self in an inhumanly alien world.” In
fact, for Ray the drifters have “more potential power for racial salvation
than the Negro literati, whose poverty of mind and purpose showed never
any signs of enrichment, even though inﬂated above the common level and
given an appearance of superiority” (322). Still, it is this kind of language in
the novel that has attracted an apparently endless critical litany about
McKay’s portraits of “primitive Negroes, untouched by the decay of Occi-
dental civilization,” and the “lower-class Negro’s stubborn resistance to as-
similation.”
54
It is risky, however, to accept blindly a discourse of “primitivism” with-
out noting the ways that McKay’s book twists it and wrenches it out of
shape. The word “primitive” is always used with a certain sarcasm, as an
imposed vocabulary. It is seldom noticed, for instance, that in Banjo the
discourse cuts both ways: McKay invokes the “jungles of civilization” (194)
as much as the “African rhythm of life.” And “black primitivism” is not all
about instinct and intuition, but is sometimes positioned as the basis of the
most rational—albeit unruly—social critique. When Crosby wants Ray to
222 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 234 ---
lodge a formal complaint about police brutality and demand “justice,” Ray
thinks to himself that he doesn’t believe in that word, “that prostitute lady
who is courted and caressed by every civilized tout” (265). He tells Crosby
that “for me there is no such animal as a civilized nation” (274). In his mus-
ing over the fait divers columns in the daily papers, it becomes clear that
“primitive” is most of all a method of reading the pretensions and hypocri-
sies of “civilization.” A “primitive sense of comparative values” is precisely
what keeps Ray from jumping to conclusions, from condemning Western
modernity with overarching and prejudiced generalizations. Ray considers
the innumerable articles about violence and crime he reads every day in the
papers:
It could have been easy for him, a black spectator of the drama, to
seize upon and gloat over these things as evidences of the true nature
of this civilization if he had allowed them to warp and rob him of his
primitive sense of comparative values and his instinct to see through
superﬁcial appearances to the strange and profound variations of hu-
man life. (275–276)
This is much less the atavistic primitivism, the primitivism that hinges
around some “racial” essence, that we have been taught to consider the
dominant theme of Home to Harlem and Banjo, and much more a position
that understands “primitive” as the basis of another ethical system, oneexte-
rior to the crushing logic of “civilization”—as the foundation for a ﬁne-
tuned insistence that “the most precious thing about human life is differ-
ence” (208).
It may not be helpful to think about primitivism in Banjo simply in op-
position to civilization, in other words. Indeed, the word “primitive” in
Banjo is trying to do something very different, to open a very different kind
of space from what we might expect in the context of black modernist de-
bates about culture as propaganda, and “high class” or “low class” literary
themes. It is possible to suggest, in fact, that in thinking through the com-
plex speciﬁcity of this usage, it might be more instructive to readBanjo next
to some of the other works opening up similar issues in the same period,
rather than next to works such as Carl Van Vechten’s Nigger Heaven and
Paul Morand’sMagie noire. Elsewhere I have suggested that Banjo and the
later work of black surrealists such as Aimé Césaire might be not unrelated
to the work of Georges Bataille and the journal Documents in 1929 and
VAGABOND INTERNA TIONALISM: CLAUDE MCKAY’S BANJO 223


--- PAGE 235 ---
1930.55 Documents, like the work of McKay and Césaire, was a journal
geared to rethinking the term “primitive” at the very moment when Euro-
pean exoticism reigned supreme, when the 1931 Exposition Coloniale was
just around the corner. Bataille, rather like McKay, considers black expres-
sion less as atavistic or savage, and more as the “excretion” or waste pro-
duced by the Western “civilizing machine” during the process of assimi-
lation to the standard of capitalist accumulation. This is to suggest an
unfamiliar “back door,” to unearth one of the unsuspected links that
traverse and reconﬁgure the seemingly neat cartography of Western mod-
ernism.
Banjo attempts to locate what eludes or exceeds the logic of capitalist
civilization. It is for this purpose, as much as any mystiﬁcation of African
roots, that Banjo falls into passages suggesting for instance that “a black
man, even though educated, was in closer biological kinship to the swell of
primitive earth life. And maybe his apparent failing under the organization
of the modern world was the real strength that preserved him from becom-
ing the thing that was the common white creature of it” (323). If this lan-
guage ﬂirts with “racial” essentialism, it also announces a fascination with
the ﬂotsam and jetsam of life, the goings-on at the margins, the pungent
and busy “wide-open dumps” of whatever any system must reject and ex-
trude in order to function. Ray often expresses a characteristically modern
admiration for waste in the world, in precisely the spirit of what Bataille a
few years later would term heterology: “There was something sublime about
waste. It was the grand gesture that made life awesome and wonderful.
There was a magical intelligence in it that stirred his poetic mind. Perhaps
more waste would diminish stupidity, which was to him the most intolera-
ble thing about human existence” (260).
In Banjo, then, black culture ends up being portrayed not in juxtapo-
sition to modern civilization, but as resistive expression that evades the
“civilizing machine.” That elusiveness in turn must be denigrated by the
civilizing system with words such as “primitive,” as the system attempts to
preserve its own integrity through what Bataille calls “the excretion of unas-
similable elements.”
56 It is thus not surprising that those denigrated, those
violently pushed out, such as the beach boys and Ditch-dwellers in Banjo,
would claim such terms as their own, as the clearest proof of that resistance
and resiliency. T oward the end of the novel, this relationship between black
224 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 236 ---
culture, the “composite voice of the Negro,” and the “civilizing machine” is
expressed with a memorable metaphor:
Looking down in a bull ring, you are fascinated by the gay rag. You
may even forget the man watching the bull go after the elusive color
that makes him mad. The rag seems more than the man. If the bull
wins it, he horns it, tramples it, sniffs it, paws it—bafﬂed.
As the rag is to the bull, so is the composite voice of the Negro—
speech, song, and laughter—to a bawdy world. More exasperating,
indeed, than a Negro’s being himself is his primitive color in a world
where everything is being reduced to a familiar formula, this remains
strange and elusive. (314)
The “rag” is not the man who holds it, obviously: so-called primitive black
culture is not the sign of some essential black identity. But it is the colorful
expression of resistance and evasion in the face of an onslaught of trampling
force. The use of “elusive” here is reminiscent of James Weldon Johnson’s
use of the term in his prefaces to the Book of American Negro Spirituals.
57
The passage evokes an autonomous system, a “composite voice,” at the
fringes of modernity: irrepressible, goading, infuriating the civilization that
would crush it—and yet elusive, somehow of a different order, of a differ-
ent logic, one that civilization wants desperately to reject and obliterate as a
social possibility.
Black Radicalism and the Politics of Form
I would like to return to the questions of form and genre raised by this
“story without a plot.” Does Banjo’s ambition to portray a cosmopolite
group of black vagabonds, arguing about internationalism on the docks,
have something to do with what McKay himself described as its documen-
tary, even “photographic” characteristics? Banjo is ﬁrst of all the depiction
of a group of men McKay knew while he was living in Marseilles, working
on a collection of short stories and then on Home to Harlem. In McKay’s
papers conserved at the Beinecke Library at Yale University, there is even a
somewhat mysterious photo that may be a snapshot of the group that in-
spired the black boys in the book: ten men, smiling, gathered outdoors
around a French café table. There is no banjo, but one is casually cradling a
guitar. Afﬁxed to the bottom of the photo is a faint handwritten card with a
VAGABOND INTERNA TIONALISM: CLAUDE MCKAY’S BANJO 225


--- PAGE 237 ---
phrase in petit nègre (“Y’a bon,” with a connotation something like the U.S.
Southern “Sho’ nuff good”), as though to headline the complex good times
McKay enjoyed in the city with that phrase, associated with advertisements
featuring popular stereotypes of the “smiling African.”
58 Aside from Banjo
itself, this unannotated, unidentiﬁed photo may be the only documenta-
tion of a group that assembled and dissipated around the port while McKay
was there in the summer of 1926. When he returned the next spring, the
men were mostly gone. He wrote to William Aspenwall Bradley that “their
number was diminished by about one-half. T wo had died in hospital and
three others, after being very ill in hospital were sent home by the American
Consul. The guitar and banjo players were hired by some kind of traveling
show, but a few remain rather sad, dirty and scantily-clothed, but hanging
on the beach all the same and having no desire to leave it.”
59
226 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA
A group of men in Marseilles (c. 1927). Claude McKay Papers, Beinecke Rare Book
and Manuscript Library, Yale University.
[To view this image, refer to  
the print version of this title.]


--- PAGE 238 ---
Banjo is also a historical record that touches on some of the most impor-
tant black intellectuals and activists in the metropole during the period. In
the conversations and debates, René Maran’sBatouala is mentioned (199),
and one character even recounts the story of Kojo T ovalou Houénou being
thrown out of a Montmartre bar in 1923 at the insistence of a racist Ameri-
can tourist (194). But Lamine Senghor and Pierre M’Baye are featured
more prominently. Although their original encounter may have been ear-
lier, Lamine Senghor probably met McKay in Marseilles during the spring
of 1927, when Senghor was making regular trips to the south in an effort to
organize black dock workers, who were largely ignored by traditional Com-
munist and Socialist unions. Senghor’s main contact in Marseilles was Pi-
erre M’Baye, the Senegalese bar owner who had lived in the United States
and made enough money to buy a café along the Vieux Port waterfront.
Called the Comptoir Marseillais, the café (located at number 42 on the
Quai du Port) was the center of radical activity in the port, and M’Baye
would later serve an ofﬁcial role as secretary of the regional (Bouches-du-
Rhône) section of the Ligue de Défense de la Race Nègre.
60 M’Baye not
only distributed copies of journals such as the Ligue’sLa Race nègre to black
sailors traveling around the world, but also fostered links between West Af-
rican sailors and their Vietnamese and North African counterparts—gar-
nering a signiﬁcant amount of surveillance from the colonial authorities in
Marseilles in the process.
61 In the subsequent years, M’Baye took out an ad-
vertisement in La Race nègre that highlights the Comptoir’s crossroads cre-
dentials (“English Spoken, Se Habla Español”); in fact, the main text is
written in an English that wouldn’t have been out of place in the Amster-
dam News: “if you want a good time / come and try our place / danc-
ing saloon open all / night.”
62
Banjo’s Café Africain is patterned after M’Baye’s bar. McKay’s descrip-
tion of M’Baye inA Long Way from Homeis worth quoting here. “One Sen-
egalese had a big café on the quay,” he writes,
and all the Negroes ganged there with their friends and girls. The
Senegalese was a remarkable type, quiet, level-headed, shrewd. He
had served in France during the World War and had been a sergeant.
He went to the United States as soon as he could after the armistice.
He got a job such as the average Negro works at and at the same time
VAGABOND INTERNA TIONALISM: CLAUDE MCKAY’S BANJO 227


--- PAGE 239 ---
he ran a rooming house for Africans and Negroid Moslems in New
York. He amassed a tidy sum of money, returned to France after six
years, and bought the bar in the Vieux Port. His family in Goree was
old, large and important.
63
In one extended scene in Banjo, the unnamed patron, described as “small
and eager,” wearing glasses and a “melancholy aspect,” tells a Senegalese
seaman that racism exists in France and that it is “no better than America.
In fact, America is better every time for a colored man.” He goes on to lav-
ish praise on U.S. “industry, business, houses, theaters, popular music, and
progress and opportunity for everybody—even Negroes” and says that “the
Negroes knew how they stood among the Americans, but the French were
hypocrites” (73). He brings out an issue of La Race nègre, which is “dis-
played conspicuously for sale in the café, although some colored visitors
had told the proprietor they did not think it was good for his business to
sell it there” (74). When the Senegalese sailor continues to insist that he’s
wrong, the bar owner starts reading a list of complaints about the abuses of
the French colonial system in La Race nègre, to the “murmurs of approval”
of a growing crowd, until “the protesting seaman appeared crushed under
the printed accounts” (75–77). When the owner extends his anticolonial
declamation into praise for Marcus Garvey’s Back-to-Africa movement,
Banjo himself butts in, exclaiming that Garvey was “nothing but a fool,
big-mouf nigger” (77). He “had a white man’s chance” to succeed and to
help other blacks, but “he done nigger it away” (76). The owner replies that
U.S. Negroes have wasted the “biggest chance that black people ever had in
the world” because most of them are “just triﬂing and no-’count like you,”
and Banjo storms out of the Café Africain. He asks Ray why he didn’t say
anything, and Ray replies, “I always prefer to listen....Y o uk n o wwhen he
was reading that paper it was just as if I was hearing about T exas and Geor-
gia in French” (77). It is his only comment about the scene: beneath the
bluster and grandstanding, Ray hears a kind of translation, a consonance to
racist oppression that extends from the U.S. South to the French colonies.
Lamine Senghor, the original editor of La Race nègre, is also discussed in
McKay’s autobiography. One day McKay is introduced by M’Baye to “one
of his countrymen named Senghor. This Senghor was also a war veteran
and a Negro leader among the Communists. He was a tall, lean intelligent
Senegalese and his ideas were a mixture of African nationalism and interna-
228 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 240 ---
tional Communism.”64 McKay records a “strange scene” between M’Baye
and Senghor about the latter’s white French wife: the café owner tells his
friend that as a race leader, he should not be married to a white woman,
and Senghor responds that he considers that “as Communism was interna-
tional, it was an international gesture for him to be married to a white
woman, especially since white chauvinists objected to intermarriage.”
65
(The two men abruptly stop discussing the question when M’Baye’s lover,
also a white French woman, comes into the bar.) Senghor takes McKay to
the Communist International Seaman’s Building in Marseilles and instructs
him about the special difﬁculties faced by black dock workers and stokers.
66
Lamine Senghor is mentioned by name in Banjo as well, although only
brieﬂy and elliptically. It is clear that Ray knows him, but no details are
provided. When the black boys are discussing intermarriage, Ray says that
he cannot understand an “intelligent race-conscious” black man marrying a
white woman: “Take Senghor and his comrades in propaganda for exam-
ple. They are the bitterest and most humorless of propagandists and they
are all married to white women. It is as if the experience has oversoured
them. As if they thought it would bring them close to the white race, only
to realize too late that it couldn’t” (207). Later, when he is arguing with
Crosby about police brutality in Marseilles, Ray says that the French “imag-
ine that the Negroes like them. But Senghor, the Senegalese, told me that
the French were the most calculatingly cruel of all the Europeans in Africa”
(267). But intriguingly, Lamine Senghor is portrayed in A Long Way from
Home as one of the only people pushing McKay to write not just about
Harlem, but about Marseilles, while he is in France. “Senghor was inter-
ested in my writing,” McKay recalls, “and said he wished I would write the
truth about the Negroes in Marseilles. I promised him that I would some
day.” Later, McKay is having a drink with a man called Le Corse who
wishes him success in his writing, and “right then I remembered Senghor,
the Senegalese, begging me to write the truth. I settled down to work and
began Banjo.”
67
Before his premature death later in 1927, Senghor himself found time to
write his own ﬁction, a short book published by a French Communist
Party printing house titled La Violation d’un pays(The violation of a coun-
try).
68 In A Long Way from Home, McKay writes that Senghor handed him
“a little pamphlet he had written about the European conquest of Africa.
The sentiment was quaint and naïve, like the human ﬁgures stamped on
VAGABOND INTERNA TIONALISM: CLAUDE MCKAY’S BANJO 229


--- PAGE 241 ---
old-fashioned plates.”69 La Violation d’un pays is a didactic text, sketching
the history of French colonialism in Africa. Illustrated with the drawings
McKay mentions, the book opens by describing a “perfect harmony” (une
parfaite entente) among a family deep in the jungle that reigns until the ar-
rival of a strange “pale man” who comes down the river to trade his alcohol
and leather for the animal hides, cattle, fruit, jewels, and gold of the people.
The “pale man,” whose name is Bourgeois, convinces one of the natives—
who are described either as “ebony” (à couleur d’ébène) or as “tan” (les
bronzés)—named Dégou Diagne that if he delivers one of his own brothers
in captivity to the “pale man,” the man will give him a powerful “fetish.”
70
When Diagne (a rather obvious caricature of Blaise Diagne, the Senegalese
legislator who was in charge of African “recruitment” for France during
World War I) delivers one of his brothers, Bourgeois shows him how to
use his “fetish” (a riﬂe, as it turns out). Bourgeois returns later as a represen-
tative of “King Colonialism” (le roi Colonialisme) to claim the country
and enlist the people in the war between the king’s sister, “La reine
République,” and one of her brothers named “Germain Bourgeois.” The
Queen promises to end the people’s slavery if they ﬁght in her war, but she
instead doubles their taxes and increases their workload. Throughout the
world, the different peoples suffering under her rule (les bronzés, but also les
jaunes [the yellow men] and ﬁnally even the “pale citizens” of the Queen as
well) revolt and overthrow the Queen and King, forming a “fraternal alli-
ance of free countries”(l’alliance fraternelle des pays libres).“vive la revolu-
tion!!!” the book concludes.
Critic Christopher Miller has evaluated the goals of this text, which he
summarizes drawing on the preface. (The preface was written by none
other than Paul Vaillant-Couturier, the translator ofBanjo.) For Miller, “the
idea of breaking through the bounds of francophone literacy and touching
the African masses” is explicit inLa Violation, where in the preface Vaillant-
Couturier proclaims that “one must read it, and have it read [ Il faut le lire,
le faire lire] ....I tmust return to the countries from which it departed like
a plant from hot lands, and it must grow there....This tale [récit] must ﬂy
from mouth to mouth, and the old men, at the thresholds of their huts,
must tell it in the evening to the women and the young people.”
71 Miller
argues that Senghor’s text “must be seen as an early experiment along these
lines” and compares it to another early Francophone African ﬁction, the
“equally propagandistic” but ideologically “diametrically opposed,” pro-
230 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 242 ---
French Les Trois Volontés de Malic published in 1920 by Ahmadou Mapaté
Diagne. As Miller explains, “The procolonial text describes French letters as
miraculous and powerful tools; the anticolonial text tries to transcend its
own francophone medium.”
72 In fact, there is at least one record of the dis-
semination of La Violation d’un paysin Africa in the ﬁles of the colonial au-
thorities from the period. As historian J. S. Spiegler recounts it:
In late July, the ship Nil called at Dakar and reportedly, cards with a
hammer and sickle emblem were passed out to dockers unloading the
boat. Police suspected that a stoker on the Nil had brought a package
of Race Nègre, but they couldn’t identify him in time and the ship
proceeded to other coastal ports. Moreover, a Senegalese foreman had
previously given the Ruﬁsque-born headwaiter on the Nil a photo-
graph for enlargement in France. On the ship’s return, the latter
handed him the enlargement together with a pamphlet, reportedly
saying with apparent nonchalance “look here, take this book. It
doesn’t interest me. Seems that it’s been written by a Negro. Read it
and pass it along.” The pamphlet in question was Lamine Senghor’s
Violation d’un pays.
73
Nevertheless, for Miller the text is ultimately an interesting “failed at-
tempt” that dramatizes “the gap between, on the one hand, active and orga-
nized resistance to colonialism in France and, on the other, the effective
suppression of dissent within the colonized territories during this period.”
74
Considering the ﬁve “crude” drawings (Miller terms them “cartoons”) that
accompany La Violation d’un pays, he analyzes the “impoverished produc-
tion values available to anticolonial resistance” and characterizes the “aes-
thetic quality” of the illustrations as “roughly equivalent to the literary
quality of the novella itself: this is a work of propaganda, with no attempt
at subtlety or ﬁnesse.” Its main value is that despite its “artlessness,” it is the
“ﬁrst ﬁctional text from francophone Africa to oppose colonialism.”
75
But just what kind of ﬁction is La Violation d’un pays? Miller terms it a
“novella,”76 although he cites Papa Samba Diop’s description of the work as
a “fable” (Diop more speciﬁcally reads the book in the Wolof tradition of a
léeb or a didactic, coded parable). The book opens with the lines: “Il y avait
une fois, dans un pays perdu aux ﬁns fonds des brousses...( “ O n c eupon
a time, in a country lost deep in the jungle”).
77 Diop also claims that
Senghor’s text adheres to “norms established between African authors be-
VAGABOND INTERNA TIONALISM: CLAUDE MCKAY’S BANJO 231


--- PAGE 243 ---
tween 1915 and 1946: short texts, aimed at a public of schoolchildren, and
illustrated if possible.” In 1968, the ﬁrst historian to write on the text in
English, J. S. Spiegler, calls La Violation d’un pays“a vigorous pamphlet at-
tacking the European colonization of Africa.”
78 More recently, the French
historian Philippe de Witte has described it as a “symbolic story” (conte
symbolique) and “a little brochure” (une petite brochure), following La Race
nègre itself, which in its June 1927 inaugural issue announced the publica-
tion of a work by its director, La Violation d’un pays,“une brochure” whose
price of two francs would beneﬁt the Ligue. 79 Even Vaillaint-Couturier’s
preface vacillates as to the text’s genre, characterizing it as a “tale”(récit) that
would seem to have some historiographic elements, since it contains in
“simple and striking” form “the whole history of colonialism” (toute l’his-
toire du colonialisme). Vaillant-Couturier adds that the book “possesses,
232 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA
La Race nègre 1 (June
1927). Centre des Archives
d’Outre-Mer, Aix-en-Pro-
vence, Archives Nationales,
France. SLOTFOM V , Box
3. All rights reserved.
[To view this image, refer to  
the print version of this title.]


--- PAGE 244 ---
along with discrete doctrinal qualities, the lively and seductive colors of
popular imagery,” and even says that he read it in one sitting “like a mar-
velous legend [une légende merveilleuse], as cruel as the children’s stories
[contes] that make up the foundation of the folklore of all peoples.”80 In ad-
dition to this range of characterization, I would also note that with its de-
scriptions of “Bourgeois” and “King Colonialism,” La Violation d’un pays
clearly aims at a sort of allegory as well.
It is crucial, I would argue, to attempt to account for such complexity,
which raises ﬁrst of all a question of the formal parameters of radical writ-
ing in the interwar period. The only way to achieve this is to recognize the
speciﬁc aims and accomplishments of works such as La Violation d’un pays
and Banjo, neither of which is simply an extension or an evocation of some
sphere of “pure” politics of labor activism and historical context. As I have
attempted to attend to the singularity of McKay’s “story without a plot,” I
would also like to hold onto the experimental form—albeit uncertain and
polemic, perhaps hurried and perhaps “impoverished”—of La Violation
d’un pays,which should not be dismissed too quickly. Indeed, what are the
(apparently quite pressing) reasons that a peripatetic and extremely devoted
black labor organizer, suffering from severe lung ailments that would kill
him only months later, would take the time to write a ﬁctional text? Cer-
tainly, Senghor was trying to support the Ligue with the proﬁts ofLa Viola-
tion, but the illustrated, generically uncertain form he chooses would ap-
pear to evidence an imperative based on the conviction that writing aﬁction
(even one that tells “the whole history of colonialism”) does a kind of work
that labor organizing and more straightforward history are unable to do.
81
This is an issue that is not limited to the texts of Senghor and McKay, but
one that affects much of the black writing in this period, which is charac-
terized so often by generic searching and mixture—particularly in the texts
that aim to express a certain vision of black radicalism and revolution.
This is equally a question for another book I will consider brieﬂy, a kind
of contemporary to the transnational themes of McKay’s Banjo: W . E. B.
Du Bois’s extraordinary 1928 novelDark Princess: A Romance. The book is
a spectacular fantasy of an underground organization of “the darker races
of the world,” which is racially consummated in a love affair between the
African American intellectual Matthew T owns and the Indian Princess
Kautilya.
82 Here I am not going to take up recent critiques of Du Bois’s ex-
oticism (an “Afro-Orientialism”) in his depiction of Kautilya, nor the ques-
VAGABOND INTERNA TIONALISM: CLAUDE MCKAY’S BANJO 233


--- PAGE 245 ---
tion of Du Bois’s supposed feminism or his “All-Mother Vision”83 as articu-
lated in the novel. I want to focus on the peculiar generic status of the
book, which Arnold Rampersad has termed a “queer combination of out-
right propaganda and Arabian tale, of social realism and quaint romance.”84
The novel is often read as proposing an internationalism, an anti-imperial
movement culminating in the union of Matthew and Kautilya—and, as
Alys Weinbaum has pointed out, literally incarnated in their royal “golden
brown” baby, born at the end of the novel into his role as the “Messenger
and Messiah of the Darker Worlds.”
85 In this sense it heals through “ro-
mance” what Du Bois had elsewhere diagnosed as the “vast gulf between
the red-black South and the yellow-brown East,”
86 forming a common
globalist consciousness.
The novel’s structure, its “queer combination” of forms, is not incidental
to this larger project, however. It should be no surprise that an intellectual
so taken with the edges of his texts—the “Forethoughts,” prologues, post-
scripts, “Afterthoughts,” and epigraphs that formally limn the “veils” into
which the reader enters—would so carefully frame Dark Princess, his own
professed “favorite” among his works.
87 The book is dedicated to “Her
High Loveliness” Titania XXVII,
by her own grace
queen of fairie,
Commander of the Bath; Grand Medallion of
Merit; Litterarum Humanarum Doctor; Fidei
Extensor; etc., etc.
of whose faith and fond affection
this romance
was surely born
Why this deliberate—and oddly whimsical, for a novel so politically ambi-
tious—allusion to Shakespeare? (At least one commentator on the novel,
Mary White Ovington, recalled the Indian Princess whom Du Bois met at
the 1911 Universal Races Congress in London, who is often considered to
be the model for Kautilya, and connected that encounter precisely to this
framing of the book: “Did this Indian Princess remain in the American
Negro’s memory to becomes the Titania of his Midsummer Night’s
Dream?”)
88
We should recall ﬁrst that Shakespeare’s A Midsummer Night’s Dreamis
234 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 246 ---
nothing if not a play about “combining totally disparate worlds.” It places
the artisan Nick Bottom next to the trickster fairy Puck. Titania, Queen of
Fairie, falls in love with a man far below her “station,” like Kautilya inDark
Princess—but Titania is tricked: her jealous husband Oberon gives her
“magic juice,” which makes her fall for the ﬁrst face she sees upon waking
(who happens to be Bottom, given the head of a donkey by a mischievous
Puck). Recall also that King Oberon is jealous because Titania has taken
into her train of servants “a lovely boy, stolen from an Indian king,” a
“sweet changeling” who Oberon wants for himself. What is the relationship
between this hinted reference to a desired youth from India, on the one
hand, and the explicit royalist vision of “India” inDark Princess’s portrait of
Kautilya, on the other?
The chapters of Dark Princess are framed by dates: the novel unfolds be-
tween August 1923 and May 1927. Interestingly, the dates are not without
resonance in Du Bois’s own life; the ﬁrst chapters of the novel, for instance,
up to the point Matthew is sentenced to prison for revolutionary conspir-
acy, are set in the fall of 1923, the period not only of the Third Pan-African
Congress in Lisbon in November, but also of Du Bois’s momentous ﬁrst
trip to Africa, to Liberia and Sierra Leone. In his 1940 autobiography Dusk
of Dawn, Du Bois comments that his trip to Africa was “in a way the cul-
mination of this Congress.”
89 Du Bois claims in Dusk of Dawn that the
greatest day in his memory was the ﬁrst of January 1924, in Liberia:
Liberia had been resting under the shock of world war into which
the Allies forced her ....Liberia stood naked, not only well-nigh
bankrupt, but peculiarly defenseless amid scowling and unbelieving
powers.
It was then that the United States made a gesture of courtesy, a lit-
tle thing, and merely a gesture, but one so unusual that it was ep-
ochal. President Coolidge . . . named me, an American Negro trav-
eler, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary to Liberia...
the special representative of the President of the United States to the
President of Liberia, on the occasion of his inauguration.
90
I wonder how much of an echo we might hear between Du Bois’s pompous
title in Liberia and the ridiculous epithet he confers on the Queen of Fairie
in the dedication to Dark Princess. Of course, to ask this is to ask about the
status of humor in the novel—to ask whether Du Bois might not be at-
VAGABOND INTERNA TIONALISM: CLAUDE MCKAY’S BANJO 235


--- PAGE 247 ---
tempting to escort the reader into a narrative laced with parody (indeed,
self-parody) rather than solely portentous social importance.
Likewise, the blow-out “pageant” of Negro spirituals and Hindu pomp
that crowns the baby of Matthew and Kautilya “Messenger and Messiah” is
intriguingly set on May 1, which is International Labor Day (and thus an
appropriate day to culminate a revolution), but also the same date as the
wedding ceremony in A Midsummer Night’s Dream.(Of course, too, part of
what moves Du Bois greatly during his stay in Liberia is a “Christmas
masque” in Kru-town, a performance of the Christ story: “the little black
mother of Christ crossing with her baby, in ﬁgured blue, with Joseph in
Mandingan fez and multi-colored cloak and beside them on her worship-
ping knees the white wreathed ﬁgure of a solemn dark angel.”)
91 In other
words, Du Bois would appear to turn to Shakespeare’s play in attempting to
posit a concordance between his romance of the “darker peoples of the
world” and a radical internationalist politics. But this glue may be humor, a
bit of melodramatic farce and sly self-parody, as much as it is the weight of
coincidence. Dark Princess, thus, ends with a “play inside the play” that
both brings the framing action to a culmination (the realization of a project
of anti-imperialist international organization) and exposes its artiﬁce (the
pretensions of its globalism, its reliance on a heterosexist consummation
and a brown “Messiah” to incarnate that alliance).
This attempted light touch frames the book, in fact, returning in the
novel’s “quaint postscript,”
92 which is called—perhaps not coincidentally
echoing Du Bois’s designation as special ambassador on his Liberia trip—
the “Envoy”:
The tale is done and night is come. Now may all the sprites who, with
curled wing and starry eyes, have clustered around my hands and
helped me weave this story, lift with deft delicacy from out the crevice
where it lines my heavy ﬂesh of fact, that rich and colored gossamer of
dream which the Queen of Faërie lent to me for a season.
93
This single paragraph send-off goes on to ask the Queen’s elves to return
the “rich and colored gossamer of dream” to her “Mauve Majesty” and to
“beg her, sometime, somewhere...t otell to us hard humans: Which is re-
ally T ruth—Fact or Fancy? the Dream of the Spirit or the Pain of the
Bone?” Even if this gesture is often overlooked, the concluding frame of
Dark Princess forces us to question the relation between the historical
236 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 248 ---
“facts” of imperialism and exploitation and the exoticist “dreams” of an un-
derground revolutionary internationalism.
This is not just a “utopian exercise,” however, as some critics would have
it. It is a structuring that strives to force the reader to consider the possibili-
ties of ﬁction itself—as a means to line the “heavy ﬂesh of fact” with imag-
ined correspondences and “dreamt” connections. They may be potential
links, usable strategies in the world, or they may not. As Bottom comments
in Shakespeare’s play upon awakening: “I have had a dream, past the wit of
man to say what dream it was. Man is but an ass, if he go about to expound
this dream....I tshall be called ‘Bottom’s Dream,’ because it hath no bot-
tom” (4.2.218–22). In other words, it is precisely the generic ambivalence
of this framed historical “Romance” that undoes readerly expectations
and creates space to think across the boundaries of nation and language.
The complexly articulated imagination of black internationalism, in other
words, is what “pulls the bottom” out from under the color line anddreams
it toward a radical articulation of diaspora.
If Dark Princess thus posits the imaginary as a necessary supplement to
any “political” radicalism of labor organization and propaganda, then simi-
larly La Violation d’un payswants to ﬁnd “toute l’histoire du colonialisme”
in a fable or allegory, and Banjo strives to imagine the music that would al-
low a radical, “wandering” black internationalism to coalesce. This is not to
say, of course, that the three works’ experiments in ﬁction result in anything
like similar articulations of diaspora. In La Violation d’un pays,Senghor re-
mains committed to a Leninist vision of revolutionary internationalism as a
“fraternal alliance of free countries” under the banner of socialism. This vi-
sion bears more than a passing resemblance to the internationalism devel-
oped by the pressure group Senghor belonged to in the early 1920s with
Nguyen Ai Quoc (Ho Chi Minh) and Hadj Ali: the Union Intercoloniale,
an afﬁliation of activists from various French colonies (Algeria, Indochina,
Senegal, Madagascar, Martinique) under the aegis and tutelage of the
French Communist Party. La Violation d’un pays, describing only a single
pays des bronzés, does not even broach the issue of Pan-Africanism. More-
over, Senghor’s ﬁction holds to a vanguardist Party conception of the dis-
semination of revolutionary consciousness, in which the metropolitan left
makes the colonial subjects “comprehend” their exploitation. Patronizingly,
the metropolitan left “would give back” the freedom of self-determination
to the colonial subjects:
VAGABOND INTERNA TIONALISM: CLAUDE MCKAY’S BANJO 237


--- PAGE 249 ---
The anger increased...a n dincreased...a n dincreased until one
day, the pale citizens, wanting to revolt against their queen, thought
that if they did not bring along [s’ils n’entrainaient pas] the other
slaves, then the defenders of the “crown”...would indoctrinate them
and make them counter-revolutionaries.
They sent qualiﬁed emissaries to all the enslaved countries to or-
ganize their revolt, making them comprehend how they had been
tricked and despoiled....
You see! They said...y o u rb rothers in poverty [vos frères de misère]
would give you back [rendraient] the freedom of self-determination;
everyone who recognizes the truth of their speeches understands their
duty.
94
Du Bois’sDark Princess concludes quite differently, not with a successful
revolution, but with the incarnation of the requisite internationalist alli-
ance to bring about a revolution. If it is framed as fantasy, the “dream” that
lines the “heavy ﬂesh of fact” in Dark Princess is no less a ﬂirtation with
a doctrinal elitism, most egregiously in its depiction of Matthew and
Kautilya, the would-be royal couple of antiracist global radicalism. Here,
experimentation in ﬁction may function ﬁnally as a kind of alibi for Du
Bois’s tendencies toward “oligarchy,” toward visions of “mass” organizations
led by enlightened elites. As Kenneth Warren phrases it, Dark Princess in
this way serves Du Bois as a “tool with which to eroticize, spiritualize, and
thus revitalize his technocratic rationalism so that it could continue to play
a role in his political and aesthetic interventions over the next decade.”
95
Banjo goes yet another route. In 1928, as he was concluding revisions on
the book manuscript, McKay was living in Morocco. McKay describes an
encounter in his autobiography A Long Way from Home:
A chaoush (native doorman and messenger) from the British Consul-
ate had accosted me in a souk one day and asked whether I was Amer-
ican. I said I was born in the West Indies and lived in the United
States and that I was an American, even though I was a British sub-
ject, but preferred to think of myself as an internationalist. The
chaoush said he didn’t understand what was an internationalist. I
laughed and said that an internationalist was a bad nationalist. He re-
plied gravely: “All the Moors call you an American, and if you are
British, you should come and register at the Consulate.”
96
238 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 250 ---
McKay comments that he dropped this line “by way of a joke without
thinking of its radical implications.” But it is tempting to take those impli-
cations seriously and consider whether “bad nationalism” might indeed be
a decent phrase to describe Banjo, where for Ray “the vagabond lover of life
ﬁnds individuals and things to love in many places and not in any one na-
tion” (136). A “bad nationalist” is not exactly a “cosmopolitan,” nor is it a
“ﬂexible citizen.”97 It would seem to describe a subject that is mobile and
loosely transnational (“I was born in the West Indies and lived in the
United States and . . . was American, even though I was a British subject”);
but more pointedly, it indicates a subject who doesn’tperform nationalism,
who doesn’t follow the protocol, who doesn’t register. A “bad nationalist” is
a subject defective for nationalism. What’s intriguing here is the seeming
conundrum that an “internationalist” is deﬁned as defective for national-
ism—stubbornly, McKay insists on locating internationalism against the
grain of nationalism without grounding it in any alternate universalism (an
internationalism of the “human” or an internationalism of the “proletariat,”
for instance). This is an internationalism of the defective: the unregistered,
the undocumented, the untracked—an ab-nationalism, as it were, of all the
“Doubtful.”
The consulate worker in A Long Way from Homeis disturbed by McKay’s
self-description precisely because it laughs at the logic of consulates.
Though his papers are in order, McKay writes, he does not register his pres-
ence because “I have always relied on my personality as the best passport.”
But in his joke and smile, the “grave” Moroccan hears a threat. A week
later, McKay is confronted by a French police inspector, who escorts him to
the British Consulate, where he is accused of “sleeping in native houses”
and of being a “radical propagandist.” The ofﬁcials cannot ﬁnd any proof
to deport him, but McKay’s “native holiday” is spoiled because the experi-
ence makes him recall “miserable” times in Europe: “now even in Africa I
was confronted by the specter, the white terror always pursuing the black.
There was no escape anywhere from the white hound of Civilization.”
98
McKay’s experiment in ﬁction strives to articulate a culture of “bad na-
tionalism,” and more, to imagine an institution for that culture in the mu-
sic of black drifters at Europe’s back door. AsBanjo would have it, the Ne-
gro is the “one signiﬁcant and challenging aspect of the human life of the
world as a whole” (272) because black expressive culture—and music in
particular—represents an active threat, the “rag” constantly mocking and
VAGABOND INTERNA TIONALISM: CLAUDE MCKAY’S BANJO 239


--- PAGE 251 ---
deforming the pretensions of a civilization that “had uprooted, enchained,
transported, and transformed” peoples of African descent “to labor under
its laws, and yet lacked the spirit to tolerate them within its walls” (313–
314). The colored rogues and vagabonds along the Marseilles docks in
Banjo are struggling irritants to the “normal” cycles of life around them—
above all refusing to ﬁt into the grooves of the machines that would work
them, above all traveling, elusive, moving on. T o return to the double met-
aphor in the novel’s subtitle (“A Story without a Plot”): music is the only
place the black boys stand—there is no other “plot,” no other ground or
foundation, whether nation or narrative, engine or economy, that contains
them. The music’s “composite voice” is itself still ephemeral (and still un-
salaried), but in Banjo it is all that riffs across difference: only the music
sings “Stay, Stay.”
240 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 252 ---
CHAPTER 5
INVENTING THE BLACK INTERNATIONAL:
GEORGE PADMORE
AND TIEMOKO GARAN KOUYATÉ
I
n his 1973 memoir, Pan-Africanism from Within, T . Ras Makonnen
poses a provocative formulation about the emergence of anticolonialism
among intellectuals of African descent during the period between the
two world wars. For him, shifts in consciousness among the interwar gener-
ation were rooted above all in their experience of migration to Europe, in
their exposure to the centers of imperial dominance. “But when you look at
the results of those Africans who had been to England,” he observes with
characteristic irreverence, “you wouldn’t be far wrong in saying that Eng-
land had been the executioner of its own colonial empire. In the sense that
she had allowed these blacks to feel the contrast between freedom in the
metropolis and slavery in the colonies. Hence it became the old retort:
‘What are you going to do with these boys back on the farm, once they
have seen Paree (Paris)?’”
1
Born under the name Thomas Grifﬁths in British Guyana, Makonnen
was one of the key collaborators in the anticolonial organizations that
sprung up around George Padmore and C. L. R. James in London in the
mid-1930s. But even taking into account Makonnen’s tireless work as an
organizer, propagandist, and tenacious fund-raiser in the period leading up
to the 1945 Pan-African Congress in Manchester, it is hard not to be trou-
bled by Makonnen’s rather glib suggestion that England was the main cata-
lyst in black anticolonialism, the “executioner of its own colonial empire.”
Cedric Robinson has noted a tone of “near-reckless admiration” in Makon-
nen’s book for England and all things English, an uncritical metropolitan
enthrallment that can only be read as “delusion.”
2 What is intriguing about
the passage, though, is its shift between metropolitan contexts, from Eng-
land to France (“Paree”)—a shift that can slip by quickly in the lightness of
the rhetoric.


--- PAGE 253 ---
It should be evident to any student of the complex interactions of intel-
lectuals of African descent with organized Marxism that “the socialist tradi-
tions to which Blacks of Africa and the Caribbean were exposed in the Brit-
ish metropole differed decidedly from those of their Francophone and
American counterparts.”
3 But I would like to hold on to this conjuncture,
this possibly careless shift in contexts. Makonnen does have a point to
make, clariﬁed in his next paragraph: “Africans were not only compelled to
think out the position of their own people, but were forced by the pres-
sures of the times into making alliances across boundaries that would
have been unthinkable back home” (155). For Makonnen, in other words,
the interwar historical context was above all else multiple and heteroge-
neous—fostering alliances among “natives” that broke the hold of the
metropole-colony dichotomy. The metropolitan situation allowed contacts
and collaborations that would have been “unthinkable” in the colonial
world, so dominated by that dichotomy, so overwhelmed by the special re-
lation to an imperial Mère-Patrie. In this sense, these many moves “across
boundaries” (from colony to metropole, from one colonial system to an-
other) were the real threat to colonialism, which is a discourse articulated
ﬁrst of all as singular and inescapable. This chapter considers one instance
of this kind of collusive, boundary-crossing work, a Caribbean-African,
Anglophone-Francophone alliance in Paris.
My example is the collaboration during the 1930s between George
Padmore, the intellectual and agitator who was born in T rinidad but best
known for his work in the Pan-African movement ﬁrst in Britain and then
in Ghana, and Tiemoko Garan Kouyaté, the West African labor organizer
and propagandist who led the Ligue de Défense de la Race Nègre and then
the Union des T ravailleurs Nègres. Kouyaté is one of the many Franco-
phone ﬁgures whose story has only partly been told, and part of my aim is
to resuscitate his role and the role of the French context in interwar black
anticolonialism. Histories of blacks and organized communism and histo-
ries of Pan-Africanism both tend to focus on Anglophone intellectuals such
as Padmore and C. L. R. James, neglecting their Francophone counterparts
and sometime collaborators such as Kouyaté, Lamine Senghor, and Emile
Faure.
4 James himself, commissioned to write an essay on “Black Intellec-
tuals in Britain,” used the occasion to comment that he found the title to
be inherently problematic (“I doubt if there are many black men who have
made the impact on England that Paul Robeson has made”) and insisted on
242 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 254 ---
“a few words about similar activities in France,” sketching the work of
Alexandre Dumas, René Maran, Aimé Césaire, and Frantz Fanon. 5 As
James says, “Once the complexity of deﬁnition has been established we can
go ahead cheerfully, knowing that many who are in ought to be out and
quite a few who are out ought to be in.” With regard to Kouyaté, part of
my intention is to reintroduce a ﬁgure who “ought to be in” a genealogy of
the Pan-African movement.
But I also want to use this approach, this reading of a collaboration, to
make a larger point about black intellectuals in this period. It is not only
that Padmore and Kouyaté travel. More important, my argument is that
their radicalism is forged ﬁrst and foremost by the very way they are “forced
by the pressure of the times” to cross boundaries, to move through and be-
yond the “decided differences” of their Francophone and Anglophone colo-
nial contexts. I am suggesting, in other words, that black internationalism
is not a supplement to revolutionary nationalism, the “next level” of anti-
colonial agitation. On the contrary, black radicalism necessarily emerges
through boundary crossing—black radicalism is an internationalization.
Such a conjuncture does not commence with Padmore and Kouyaté. In-
deed, it characterizes black activism throughout the interwar period, going
back to the intellectuals prominent during and directly after World War I,
who were equally keen to work internationally, even when they did not
travel to the European metropoles. In the United States, for instance, the
initial demands for a “Black International,” an explicitly anticapitalist alli-
ance of peoples of African descent from different countries around the
world, were quite deliberate attempts to respond to and intervene in the
discourses of policy and institution building that arose after World War I in
the Communist International and the League of Nations. Hubert Harri-
son, the legendary street speaker and black nationalist born in St. Croix in
the Virgin Islands, who inﬂuenced the entire generation of 1920s radical
intellectuals in New York, was one of the ﬁrst to call for such an alliance.
Writing in Marcus Garvey’s Negro World in May 1920, Harrison com-
mented bitterly that internationalism appeared to be something “of varying
value” to the “overlords” who ran the postwar world. Harrison writes:
“When Mr. Morgan wants to ﬂoat a French or British loan in the United
States; when Messrs. Wilson, Clemenceau, Lloyd George and Orlando
want to stabilize their joint credit and commerce; when areas like the Bel-
gian Congo are to be handed over to certain rulers without the consent of
INVENTING THE BLACK INTERNA TIONAL 243


--- PAGE 255 ---
their inhabitants—then the paeans of praise go up to the god of ‘interna-
tionalism’ in the temple of ‘civilization.’” But when the world’s oppressed
peoples, the world’s “disinherited,” decide to come together in their com-
mon interest, those same Western leaders denounce the very idea of inter-
nationalism as “anarchy, sedition, Bolshevism and disruptive propaganda.”
The reason is that “the international linking up of peoples is a source of
strength to those who are linked up ....T oday the great world-majority,
made up of black, brown and yellow peoples, are stretching out their hands
to each other and developing a ‘consciousness of kind’....They are seek-
ing to establish their own centers of diffusion for their own internation-
alism, and this fact is giving nightmares for Downing Street, the Quai
d’Orsay and other centers of white capitalist internationalism.”
6 Neverthe-
less, Harrison’s attempts at what he would come to call a “Colored Interna-
tional” (particularly in the group he founded in 1924, the International
Colored Unity League) never succeeded in establishing a lasting organiza-
tion with the transnational reach of Du Bois’s Pan-African Congress or es-
pecially Marcus Garvey’s Universal Negro Improvement Association.
7
The institution building pursued by Padmore and Kouyaté in the subse-
quent decade diverges from the model of the International Colored Unity
League in a number of ways, most important, in its relationship to interna-
tional communism. Harrison’s calls emphasize mainly the ways that African
Americans’ “enforced participation in the ﬁrst World War brought us into
contact with the wider world of color.”
8 But the war also introduced peo-
ples of African descent to the revolutionary discourse incarnated in com-
munism, which for many intellectuals of African descent implied both
anticapitalism and anticolonialism: both the Communist International’s
critique of economic exploitation, and Lenin’s 1920 call for national self-
determination in the colonial world.
9 Unlike Harrison, Padmore and
Kouyaté—both working in uneasy, shifting afﬁliations with the Comin-
tern—strove in the early 1930s to ﬁnd a way to “develop racial solidarity”
and to institutionalize an autonomous “center of diffusion” for black inter-
nationalism within the structures of communism.
Describing the emergence of a black intelligentsia between the wars,
Cedric Robinson contends that “the social cauldron of black radicalism is
western society. Western society, however, has been its location and its ob-
jective conditions but not—except in a most perverse fashion—its speciﬁc
inspiration. Black radicalism is a negation of western civilisation, but not in
244 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 256 ---
the direct sense of a simple dialectical negation.” Somewhat confusingly, at
the same time Robinson writes of a black intelligentsia emerging through
the “dialectic of imperialism.”
10 Is it correct to theorize the interaction of
black radicalism and Western society as a “dialectic,” and if so, how would
one describe its particular form? Since ﬁgures such as Padmore and Kouyaté
are mobile not just in their own colonial spheres, but moreoveramong met-
ropolitan “centers,” within each other’s circuits of activity (Padmore mov-
ing from a British colony in the Caribbean to the United States, and then
not just to London but to Moscow, Hamburg, and Paris; Kouyaté moving
from one French colony to another and then to Paris and to Moscow),
would it make more sense to think of this emergence as something more
like what Edward Kamau Brathwaite—in a spirit of serious play—calls a
“tidalectic”: a counterlogic, a more unruly pattern of ﬂows and alliances, a
structure interweaving at least three points?
11 Although I will take up the is-
sue Robinson raises (considering black radicalism as a special sort of “nega-
tion” of Western civilization), I will not retain the term “dialectic” in what
follows, as I remain unconvinced that it will sufﬁce to describe the complex
dynamics of this emergence. With Kouyaté and Padmore, we encounter a
collaboration, a nascent discourse of black internationalism, that is at once
inside communism, ﬁercely engaged with its ideological debates and fun-
neled through its institutions, and at the same time aimed at a race-speciﬁc
formation that rejects the Comintern’s universalism, adamantly insisting
that racial oppression involves factors and forces that cannot be summed up
or submerged in a critique of class exploitation. Here, black radicalism as
internationalization is a special sort of “negation” because Padmore and
Kouyaté do not entirely relinquish a communist class analysis. Most strik-
ing, black internationalism takes shape in detour, in dialogue, as one intel-
lectual from the Caribbean and another from Africa attempt to ﬁnd com-
mon ground in Paris.
The Negro Worker
James Hooker’s biography of George Padmore is especially thin around the
early 1930s. He tells us for example that 1933 “was a lean year and not
much of Padmore appears on the record.”
12 This is unfortunate, for the
period in the mid-1930s may be the most important in understanding
Padmore’s evolution toward Pan-Africanism in that decade. In 1933,
Padmore leaves his position as head of the International T rade Union Com-
INVENTING THE BLACK INTERNA TIONAL 245


--- PAGE 257 ---
mittee of Negro Workers (ITUC-NW), the unit created by the Communist
International to organize workers of African descent around the world, and
by 1935 he ends up in London with C. L. R. James’s International African
Friends of Ethiopia. How do we explain this striking shift from the institu-
tions of international communism to a nonaligned effort at “international
African” work? Hooker does include one tantalizing letter to W . E. B. Du
Bois, written in February 1934. Intriguingly, Padmore types this missive on
letterhead from the Union des T ravailleurs Nègres in Paris, a group headed
by Tiemoko Garan Kouyaté between 1931 and 1933. Padmore had appar-
ently corresponded with Du Bois before, because he thanks Du Bois for
“the acknowledgment of my article,” adding that he is “glad it came in use-
ful.” Publication of the Negro Worker (the journal Padmore edited for the
ITUC-NW) has been suspended, but “we are trying to re-organize our
forces.” He continues:
The French Negroes recently held a conference under the leadership
of a young Sudanese whom you no doubt have heard about, Mr.
Garan Kouyaté, the editor of La Race Nègre. The Negro problem was
discussed relative to the present economic and social crisis the world
over, and the fascist danger which threatens our racial extermination.
It was the most serious political discussion which I have ever listened
to among Negroes. The Conference decided to take the initiative to
convene a Negro World Unity Congress, for the purpose of hammer-
ing out a common program of action around which world unity
among the blacks can be achieved. The Negro students in Europe are
demanding action. I also found this attitude very evident among the
West African students when I was recently over in London.
I took the opportunity of informing the French Negroes about the
work of the N.A.C.P . [sic] and your work in connection with the Pan
African movement. They decided to invite your organization to par-
ticipate in the Congress which has been ﬁxed for the summer of
1935—providing the war-makers give us so much time. This is an-
other question which is agitating the minds of French Negroes very
much. For they have not forgotten how Diagne and other so-called
leaders inveigled them into the last one, but this time they will have a
wideawake youth to deal with.
246 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 258 ---
Will you help us in trying to create a basis for unity among Ne-
groes of Africa, America, the West Indies, and other lands?13
Padmore asks Du Bois to put his Negro World Unity Congress effort in
contact with Negro student groups at Atlanta University and elsewhere,
specifying that his “personal correspondence” should be sent to Kouyaté’s
address on rue Mouton-Duvernet in the Fourteenth Arrondissement of
Paris. It is an odd request, since by the spring of 1934 Kouyaté no longer
had a connection to the Union des T ravailleurs Nègres, and he had not ed-
ited La Race nègre since 1931. Still, the letter represents the inception of a
relationship between Padmore and Du Bois, opening the door to mutual
respect and ﬁnally to collaboration in the Fifth Pan-African Congress orga-
nized after World War II. Not long before, in the Negro Worker, Padmore
had habitually referred to Du Bois and a list of nationalist and civil rights
leaders as a “wing of misleaders,” the “black agents of international cap-
italism,” the “petty-bourgeois reformists” who were “merely ofﬁce-seekers
and demagogues paid by the ruling class to befuddle the Negro masses.”
14
C. L. R. James has famously described the 1945 Pan-African Congress in
Manchester as incarnated in this alliance between Du Bois and Padmore. 15
What is suggestive is that the impetus of Padmore’s gesture to Du Bois orig-
inates not in London, but in Paris; not around the international crisis when
Italy invaded Ethiopia, but around a meeting of Francophone blacks, “the
most serious political discussion” Padmore “had ever listened to among Ne-
groes”; not even in the Union des T ravailleurs Nègres, as the stationery
would imply, but in a different, ﬂeeting organizational impulse to create a
“Negro World Unity Congress” planned for the summer of 1935. Sig-
niﬁcantly, such a congress is conceived at the very moment when both
Padmore and Kouyaté are each ofﬁcially expelled from the Communist In-
ternational. It is a signal period in the history of black internationalism:
two formerly Communist black radicals groping toward a new institution
for their work.
One might be tempted to say that Padmore and Kouyaté are “uprooted,”
here, even desperate. Still, I will suggest that it is possible to read this period
as enabling in certain ways, not simply in terms of the “boundary-crossing”
alliance between the two men, but for more practical reasons as well. For
Padmore leaves the Comintern already established as an “institution all by
INVENTING THE BLACK INTERNA TIONAL 247


--- PAGE 259 ---
himself,” taking with him his carefully fostered “net” of more than 4,000
connections “throughout the colonial world.”16 Born in T rinidad in 1904,
Padmore had been educated in the United States (at Fisk University in
Nashville and at Howard University in Washington, D.C.), studying law
before joining the Communist Party in the late 1920s. Between 1929 and
1933, he was vaulted into a position of great power and inﬂuence as the
highest black representative in the Comintern at a moment when Moscow
was keenly interested in the “Negro question,” and his work attempted to
“organize and educate the black masses on a world scale in the theory and
practice of modern political parties and modern trade unionism.”
17 His ex-
ploits in these years are legendary. There are whispers that he led “a gun-
running expedition into the Belgian Congo to help a native revolt there”
and that he personally recruited a “bumper crop” of sixty or more African
radicals to study in Moscow, smuggling them into Europe. Supposedly he
248 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA
George Padmore. From Afrika:
Unter den Joch der Weissen
(Erlenbach-Zurich/Leipzig: Rotapfel
Verlag, 1937).
[To view this image, refer to  
the print version of this title.]


--- PAGE 260 ---
was a master of disguises, a “ﬁrst class conspirator, a specialist in decoys,
codes, and stratagems.”18 He told one reporter that he had arranged passage
on one of his recruiting trips to Africa by pretending to be an “anthropolo-
gist” embarking on ﬁeld work to “study the life and customs of primitive
peoples.” When he went to South Africa, he entered posing as a “chauffeur”
for the white junior ofﬁcer who was actually his assistant.
19
In May 1930, the French Consulate in Bathurst (in Gambia) wrote to
the gouverneur général of French West Africa to report that Padmore had
attempted to travel from that port to Dakar. The British authorities inter-
cepted him and forced him to board a ship (named the “Henry Stanley,” of
all things) traveling instead to Sierra Leone. Referring to Padmore under his
birth name, Malcolm Nurse, the letter comments somewhat confusedly
that “without being a convinced Bolshevist, [he] seeks to win the support
of the Negroes [noirs] in Africa for the cause of the blacks [nègres] in Amer-
ica.” The note adds that Padmore had undertaken suspicious activities in
Gambia and links him to trade union activism and to a publication called
the Gambia Outlook.
20 It is an interesting document, given that in Novem-
ber 1929, one of the ﬁrst trade unions in West Africa, the Bathurst T rade
Union in Gambia—led by E. F . Small, the editor of the Outlook and later a
correspondent for the Negro Worker under Padmore’s editorship—brought
about a general strike that led to armed clashes between African workers
and the British colonial authorities, in an uprising that succeeded in dis-
rupting economic activity in all of Gambia for nearly three weeks.
21
Kouyaté was never as peripatetic as Padmore, but he also might be de-
scribed as an “institution” of Francophone anticolonial activity. He had his
own extensive set of contacts in West Africa, and indeed, when he was
ousted from the Union des T ravailleurs Nègres and the journal Le Cri des
Nègres, one of his main transgressions had been a refusal to turn over his ad-
dress lists—rumored to run to 2,800 names in Africa and the Caribbean.
22
In this speciﬁc sense, the initial pan-African coalition represented by the
“Negro World Unity Congress” is rooted transnationally—grounded in a
global black radical circuit that is literally wrenched out of the Communist
International by two of the preeminent black organizers of the time. Even if
their “Negro World Unity Congress” ends up an abortive collaboration,
these origins have a great deal to tell us about the complex ways Pan-
Africanism emerges out of and against Communism. In this collaboration,
we ﬁnd the roots of the network that Padmore took with him to England in
INVENTING THE BLACK INTERNA TIONAL 249


--- PAGE 261 ---
1935, and on which later organizations such as the International African
Service Bureau were constructed. As C. L. R. James would later describe it:
“The basis of that work [in the International African Service Bureau] and
the development of ideas was Padmore’s encyclopedic knowledge of Africa,
of African politics and African personalities, his tireless correspondence
with Africans in all parts of the continent, the unceasing stream of Africans
who made the Bureau and its chairman their political headquarters when in
London. Revolutionaries and bourgeois nationalists all came.”
23
Kouyaté was born April 27, 1902, in Segu in the French Sudan. He
studied at the celebrated Ecole William Ponty on the Ile de Gorée in Sene-
gal and then worked as a schoolteacher in the Ivory Coast from 1921 to
1923. That year, he was sent to Aix-en-Provence in France for further
studies, but in 1926 was reportedly thrown out of school for circulating
“communist propaganda” among the students. He moved to Paris, audited
courses at the Sorbonne, and fell in with the group of French African and
Caribbean communists afﬁliated with Lamine Senghor that became the
Comité de Défense de la Race Nègre in 1926. After the schism of that
group, he followed its more radical section into the Ligue de Défense de la
Race Nègre (LDRN) in 1927, playing a central role in the publication of
the newspaper La Race nègre, and upon Senghor’s death later that year, be-
came the general secretary of the LDRN. In 1931, the LDRN split as well:
Emile Faure and his black nationalist supporters kept the name and the
publication, while Kouyaté left with a group of left-leaning radicals and la-
bor organizers to form a new group, the Union des T ravailleurs Nègres,
founding a new paper called Le Cri des Nègres. In 1933, the hard-line mem-
bers of the group loyal to the Parti Communiste Français ousted Kouyaté,
in part due to the history of tension between him and the French Commu-
nist hierarchy, and in part for his collaboration with outside ﬁgures includ-
ing Padmore. By the middle of the decade, Kouyaté was afﬁliated with
Messali Hadj’s Algerian independence group, the Etoile Nord-Africaine
and, with its support, founded another more moderate journal called Af-
rica. Increasingly beleaguered and isolated as the war approached, he be-
came a supporter of the Popular Front, eventually accepting ﬁnancial sup-
port from it and apparently even from the French Ministère des Colonies.
Little is known about Kouyaté’s activities after about 1938, but it is gener-
ally accepted that in 1942 he was executed by the Germans at the Fort de
Montluçon in central France.
24
250 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 262 ---
Padmore and Kouyaté apparently ﬁrst met at the July 1929 Second Con-
gress of the League Against Imperialism in Frankfurt.25 The African Ameri-
can communist James W . Ford brought Padmore from the United States to
serve on a Provisional Executive Committee on “the Negro Question”
formed directly after the Frankfurt Congress to organize a long-term strat-
egy for an international conference of Negro workers. Kouyaté was also
named to the Provisional Committee.
The year 1929 brought a number of shifts in the organization Kouyaté
led, the Ligue de Défense de la Race Nègre. The group had been in difﬁcult
ﬁnancial straits, and in late January, the Guadeloupean militant Stéphane
Rosso (who would later become a paid Communist functionary) came to
Kouyaté with an offer for a possible monthly subvention from the French
Communist Party, one that the Ligue decided it had to accept. On Febru-
ary 2, 1929, the LDRN received 800 francs, a sum that increased to 1000
francs per month. This was enough to fund part of the publication costs of
the Ligue’s monthly newspaper La Race nègre, allowing it to appear regu-
larly for the ﬁrst time (in 1927, the paper appeared only four times, while
INVENTING THE BLACK INTERNA TIONAL 251
Tiemoko Garan Kouyaté.
From the Negro Worker 2,
no. 6 (June 1932). General
Research Division,
Schomburg Center for
Research in Black Culture,
Astor, Lenox and Tilden
Foundations.
[To view this image, refer to  
the print version of this title.]


--- PAGE 263 ---
in 1928, it was even more sporadic, with issues only for May and Octo -
ber).26 Even as he granted the necessity of an alliance with the Party,
Kouyaté resisted full Communist control of the Ligue and of La Race nègre.
The ﬂuctuation in his viewpoints and ideological positions were a source of
constant concern for the Party.
The ideological shifts in La Race nègre, even in this period of Party sup-
port, are pronounced and sometimes bewildering. Kouyaté’s reluctance to
relinquish control of the periodical is also an insistence that the Ligue
maintain an independent (even if Party-funded) venue for debate and ex-
perimentation with the very language of radicalism. Indeed, what is most
striking in the journal is its internal variance, the constant sense of search-
ing, the sometimes convoluted attempts at innovative theorization, the dis-
parate realms of knowledge thrown together, all in a quest to discover the
most efﬁcacious modes of black anticolonialism. In the March 1929 issue,
Kouyaté published a long front-page essay called “Vox Africae” that called
for the extension of the Ligue into permanent African and Caribbean sec-
tions, relying on the already-existing structures of society:
Businessmen, planters, harvesters, workers, forestry developers, bu-
reaucrats, students, schoolchildren, Negroes and mulattos [ noirs et
mulâtres], in a word all the blacks [nègres] who are conscious of the vi-
tal interests of the race, must join the Ligue and subscribe to La Race
Nègre. ...T a k ec a r e ,compatriots! The minor colonists [petits colons],
small businessmen and white workers are also suffering economically.
They must not be neglected. In sum, a racial problem on the one
hand, an economic and social problem on the other.
27
Here Kouyaté seems to call for an organization based primarily on racial
lines (“the interests of the race”) rather than class. At the same time, he goes
so far as to argue that, if the situation calls for unity among nègres, some
Europeans implicated in colonialism (the “petits colons”) are “also suffer-
ing” from the “economic and social problems” of that system and that they
shouldn’t be forgotten(il ne faut pas les négliger).
In the same issue, also on the front page, La Race nègre published an un-
signed editorial called “Vers l’élaboration d’un programme” (T oward the
elaboration of a program), which shuttles between a global anti-imperial-
ism, an “African Zionism,” and a more traditional communist analysis:
28
252 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 264 ---
“Destruction and reconstruction,” building national institutions on
the ruins of those imposed by the conqueror: this is a program which
responds to the urgent needs of all oppressed peoples, especially colo-
nized peoples. The Vietnamese, the North Africans, and the nègres
should be in accord on this essential point in order to coordinate their
efforts....
But what is our program, we nègres? A complex and varied prob-
lem! For the Negro problem [le problème nègre], ever global, is aggra-
vated more and more by the social question. The Ligue de Défense de
la Race Nègre, attentive to this evolution of difﬁculties, is presently
elaborating a program which will be published after its discussion in
general assembly....
T o realize this program as quickly as possible, nègres must under-
stand each other, join the Ligue en masse, take support from other
oppressed peoples, whether in Europe, Asia or America, and take
support from the intellectual and manual workers of France. Race
prejudice will have lived out its life the day that a great Negro State
[un grand Etat nègre] is established on modern foundations: African
Zionism.
On the one hand, this language recalls the anticolonial alliance among radi-
cals throughout the French colonies pursued in the early 1920s in the
Union Intercoloniale, which united Caribbeans, West Africans, North Afri-
cans, and Vietnamese militants under the aegis of the French Communist
Party. Some of the language here even echoes the cadences of Lamine
Senghor’sLa Violation d’un pays,as when the editorial claims that “the peo-
ples will love one another because they will live with national liberty and
international equality.” But the editorial also reverberates with the ideas of
Marcus Garvey—whose poetry and articles had been translated in La Race
nègre as early as November 1927.
29 Black nationalism here seems to be ar-
ticulated as a vanguardist version of what would later come to be called
“continental Pan-Africanism”—a “Zionist” call for return to an Africa
united into a “grand Etat nègre.” The shifts and contrasts within and be-
tween “Vox Africae” and “Vers l’élaboration d’un programme” are fairly
representative of the dizzying ﬂuctuation of opinion that characterized La
Race nègre in the late 1920s.
By the summer of 1929 and the Frankfurt Congress, Kouyaté apparently
INVENTING THE BLACK INTERNA TIONAL 253


--- PAGE 265 ---
decided to hew more closely to the Comintern line. In his address to the
League Against Imperialism, he opened by invoking the memory of the leg-
endary speech by his predecessor in the LDRN, Lamine Senghor, at the
League’s ﬁrst congress in Brussels in 1927. Kouyaté gave a detailed critique
of colonial exploitation in the French Congo and in the Antilles. Then, re-
counting a long list of rebellions against colonialism, Kouyaté called these
uprisings the “prelude” to “the true struggle for national independence, the
struggle without useless sacriﬁces, the struggle organized against imperial-
ism and its agents [succédanés]. We will do everything to coordinate, cen-
tralize, unify the national emancipation movements of the Negroes of black
Africa [les Nègres de l’Afrique noire]. We will continue to demand the abso-
lute independence of Liberia and Ethiopia. The national emancipation
movement of the Negroes of Africa and the Negro movement for political
and social emancipation in America will mutually support each other.”
30
It should be noted that even here, Kouyaté turns to an explicit pan-
Africanism—“mutual support” among Africans and African Americans,
not necessarily under the aegis of the worldwide Communist revolutionary
movement. His particular gift as an organizer was an ability to foster just
these kinds of transnational links. After the congress in Frankfurt, Kouyaté
traveled through Eastern Europe, visiting Poland and the Soviet Union. In
Berlin, he helped assemble a section of the LDRN (called the Liga zur
Verteidigung der Negerrasse), led by an architect from Cameroon named
Joseph Bile, that was reported to involve as many as two hundred mem -
bers.
31 From Paris, Kouyaté was an energetic letter writer, keeping in touch
with correspondents in the Americas and in Africa itself, especially among
the évolués of the small West African bourgeoisie in many of the categories
he enumerated in “Vox Africae”: small businessmen, schoolteachers, bu-
reaucrats. (The lists of Kouyaté’s contacts, meticulously gathered by French
surveillance, contain a number of surprises, showing for instance that he
was in touch with Léon M’Ba, the future president of independent Ga-
bon.)
32 T o the dismay of the colonial authorities, the LDRN succeeded in
establishing sections in Senegal and along the railway between Dakar and
Bamako, and attempted to found units in Dahomey and French Camer-
oon. Most of these were ﬂeeting efforts, but in 1929 the LDRN reportedly
sent militants to the French Congo in the midst of a series of violent re-
volts, calling for “absolute and immediate independence.” In the summer
254 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 266 ---
of that year, the French gouverneur générale contended that the Ligue’s
“clearly communist” propaganda and activism were behind uprisings in the
Upper Sangha Province (in what is now the Central African Republic),
which brieﬂy liberated the area from French control. In 1931, the LDRN
was even rumored to be planning an armed rebellion in Cameroon.
33
In 1930 on his return from Moscow, Kouyaté devoted himself to labor
organizing, especially among the African and Antillean dock workers and
sailors in Marseilles, Bordeaux, and Le Havre. At the end of January, he
sent a telegram to Pierre M’Baye (the café owner portrayed in McKay’s
Banjo), announcing his arrival in Marseilles and scheduling a meeting at
the International Seaman’s Club. At the subsequent gathering (involving a
few hundred West Africans, a number of Malagasies, a dozen Central Afri-
cans, a handful of North Africans and Antilleans, and a few Europeans),
Kouyaté spoke both in French and Bambara, urging the workers to join a
branch of the Ligue. Perhaps inspired by his visit to the Lenin Institute in
Russia, he added that he wanted to found an educational institute “that
would receive children sent from the colonies in large numbers—two thou-
sand in the beginning—in order to prepare them to spread in the future the
idea of independence in their countries.”
34 Others spoke out in favor of
the Ligue in other West African languages (Saracolé and T ukolor) and in
Arabic, and Kouyaté distributed the January 1930 issue of La Race nègre.
He also passed out a ﬂyer titled “Appel aux Nègres” (A call to Negroes),
which called not just for union organizing, but speciﬁcally for independent
black unions attentive to the special concerns of black workers in French
port cities:
Considering that black sailors [navigateurs nègres] must be conscious
of their interests, of those of the working class, without becoming the
instrument of syndicalist politics elaborated outside of their direct
collaboration....
Considering that, taking everything into account, the situation of
the black sailors remains frustratingly particular and that in order to
ameliorate it, the black sailors must ﬁrst of all count on themselves in
forming a single union for all the black sailors in the port of Mar-
seilles....
The goal of the union is to protect and to support the corporative
INVENTING THE BLACK INTERNA TIONAL 255


--- PAGE 267 ---
claims of the black sailors in all categories ...r egarding questions of
hiring, salaries, unemployment, food, sleeping arrangements, security
and hygiene on board, etc.35
Not surprisingly, the French Communist Party reacted quickly and nega-
tively to these efforts at race-based labor organizing, the construction of
unions that would refuse to become “the instruments of syndicalist politics
elaborated outside of their direct collaboration.” An unsigned Party state-
ment published in May mentioned that “for some time, we have been
aware of attempts to organize black port workers [ des travailleurs nègres des
ports] on the basis of autonomy ....This is a danger to the unity of the
working class. The CGTU [the Confédération Générale du T ravail Uni-
taire of the French Communist Party] and its colonial ofﬁce cannot remain
indifferent in the face of this movement, and they denounce it as counter-
revolutionary.”
36 Kouyaté pulled back from his language of “autonomy,”
but this exchange represents a pattern of disagreement over strategy that
would characterize his interactions with the Party over the next three years.
As early as July 1928, the Comintern had published a bulletin called the
International Negro Workers’ Reviewunder the editorship of James Ford and
a group called the “International Negro Workers Information Bureau.”
37
The Provisional Executive Committee created at the 1929 Frankfurt Con-
gress was charged with making the Bureau a permanent one, seeking ways
to spread its inﬂuence not just in Moscow but throughout the colonial
world. T oward this end, Padmore was instrumental in putting together the
World Conference of Negro Workers in Hamburg, held in July 1930. The
Red International of Labor Unions (RILU), also known as the Proﬁntern,
named Padmore the head of the newly created ITUC-NW and the editor
of the Negro Worker, which was to coordinate a “syndicalist approach” to
black workers throughout the globe.
38 The Committee included the Afri-
cans E. F . Small (Gambia), Albert Nzula (South Africa), Herbert Macauley
(Nigeria), and Kouyaté; Ford and Padmore (representing U.S. black work-
ers); and G. Reid (representing the West Indies).
39 Even though Kouyaté
was involved in the planning of the Hamburg conference, he was unable to
attend the meeting, and it is possible that the French Communist Party, fu-
rious over his race-based organizing in Marseilles, refused him funds for his
journey. But forgiveness came quickly, for the next month, Kouyaté was
again sent to Moscow for the initial meetings of the ITUC-NW .
256 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 268 ---
The importance of the Negro Worker under Padmore’s editorship should
not be underestimated. Padmore announced the aims of the journal in the
ﬁrst issue he assembled, in January 1931:
This journal is the ofﬁcial organ of the International T rade Union
Committee of Negro Workers. But it is our aim not to make this a
sort of “theoretical” journal to discuss resolutions, “opinions” etc....
It is our aim to discuss and analyse the day to day problems of the Ne-
gro toilers and connect these up with the international struggles and
problems of the workers. It is therefore necessary that we receive the
fullest cooperation of Negro workers. This means that articles, letters,
points of view and pictures of your daily life must be sent to us. It is
only in this way that we can build a much needed popular journal,
taking up the broad international problems of Negro workers.
40
In other words, even if the journal emanates from the highest echelons of
the Proﬁntern, Padmore intends its orientation to be driven by the needs
and concerns of the workers themselves: their “day to day problems.” The
Negro Worker has propagandistic aims as well, as the editorial goes on to
outline: ﬁrst, to “raise the international outlook of the Negro workers”
(mainly by providing news of the international labor movement) and, sec-
ond, to “enlighten” black workers against the forces of “Negro bourgeois
nationalism” (Garvey) and “trade union reformism” (Kadalie in South Af-
rica, A. Philip Randolph in the United States). But what stands out most of
all is Padmore’s determination to make the Negro Worker a space for the
“points of view” and “daily life” of workers of African descent, rather than a
place for the Communist hierarchy to debate the “Negro question.”
One sees just how much of a shift this is when one compares Padmore’s
mode of address (“your daily life”) with the editorial Losovsky wrote for the
old International Negro Workers’ Reviewin 1928, which seemed to envision
an entirely different readership and an entirely different program, in which
black labor is the object of inquiry rather than a participating audience.
“The Negro workers must be drawn into the political and trade union
movement,” Losovsky prescribed, adding that it was important to publish
the journal directed at black workers because “their potential force must be
turned into an active force, into an instrument that will free the exploited
masses from the capitalist yoke.”
41 In contrast to this familiar tone, Pad-
more’s call for “a much needed popular journal, taking up the broad inter-
INVENTING THE BLACK INTERNA TIONAL 257


--- PAGE 269 ---
national problems of Negro workers” is a notable departure not just in its
unprecedented internationalism but also in its aspirations as a “popular”
publication driven by the “fullest cooperation” of black workers around the
world.
Edward Wilson has argued that the content of theNegro Workerwas to a
large extent controlled by Moscow even when Padmore was nominally the
editor, and certainly the periodical emphasizes the themes one might ex-
pect: that black workers in Africa should emulate the great example of the
Soviet Union (there was a regular feature on life “in the Land of Social-
ism”); that the Soviet political model offered the best solutions and strate-
gies for the struggle for national independence and rights; that there was no
racial prejudice in Soviet society; that international affairs and colonialism
were best understood through a communist lens.
42 At the same time, the
journal contains an unprecedented wealth of information on contempo-
rary politics in Africa, with contributions not only from the redoubt-
able Padmore himself and from Kouyaté, but also from correspondents
in East Africa (Jomo Kenyatta), South Africa (Nzula), and West Africa
(Small and I. T . A. Wallace-Johnson) reporting on local scenes. C. L. R.
James has made the most forceful argument for the journal’s signiﬁcance,
claiming that “tens of thousands of black workers in various parts of the
world received their ﬁrst political education” from the Negro Worker. Ac-
cording to James,
[i]t gave information, advice, guidance, ideas about black struggles on
every continent. All movements need an ideology, a body of ideas and
information to which effort can be related and which has signiﬁcance
beyond that which is immediately visible. This The Negro Worker
gave to hundreds of thousands of active blacks; and while the edu-
cated in T rinidad, for example, were sunk in the acceptance of ideas
inculcated through British imperialism, Uriah Butler and the work-
ers of the oil-ﬁelds were nourishing themselves on illicit copies of
Padmore’s paper and preparing for the outburst which was to launch
the West Indies on the paths of nationalism and democracy. It devel-
oped too, the consciousness among blacks that they were part of an
international movement.
43
Perhaps the most convincing proof of its signiﬁcance is the extraordi-
nary lengths taken by both British and French colonial authorities to
258 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 270 ---
squelch the paper’s circulation in Africa. As Wilson concedes, “beyond its
immediate utility to the Comintern as an instrument for spreading propa-
ganda and revolutionary advice, The Negro Worker provided one of the
ﬁrst channels for political communication” and “cross-pollination” among
Africans.44
Kouyaté was given special responsibility in the ITUC-NW for organiz-
ing black port workers and sailors in the International of Seamen and Har-
bor Workers that was established in 1931, and he regularly covered this ac-
tivity in articles for the Negro Worker.
45 That summer, Kouyaté was arrested
and jailed for a few weeks after he led a protest of African sailors along the
Canebière in Marseilles.46 On his release, he worked with Padmore to orga-
nize the Conference of the International of Seamen and Harbor Workers in
Hamburg that took place in May 1932, drawing a large audience from
around the world and featuring a visit from Ada Wright, the mother of two
of the African American teenagers falsely accused of rape in Scottsboro, Al-
abama. Kouyaté was in charge of the entire French delegation and pre-
sented the “colonial report” at the conference.
47
Starting in 1930, Padmore also wrote for La Race nègre, and the French
journal began to reﬂect his editorial inﬂuence and Anglophone connec-
tions.
48 But the Ligue de Défense de la Race Nègre was torn apart by dis-
sension that autumn, when the group’s other primary leader, the Senegalese
engineer Emile Faure, grew increasingly impatient with Kouyaté’s extended
absences and loose managerial style. Throughout 1930, the LDRN was also
destabilized by a series of articles by a Parisian editor named François Coty,
a reactionary who ran a far-right newspaper called L ’Ami du Peuple.Written
in a tone of apocalyptic breathlessness, Coty’s articles (under the title
“Contre le communisme”) relied on information gathered by the spies of
the French Ministère des Colonies—including the names and home ad-
dresses of a number of black students and militants—to charge that all the
groups of Africans and Antilleans in Paris (including not only the political
pressure groups, but also the moderate student and cultural groups) were
“taking orders” directly from the Communist International.
49 Coty’s vitriol
caused confusion and squabbling in the LDRN, where members began to
suspect each other of being the inﬁltrators who had provided the informa-
tion to the colonial administration. In this climate, the “personal conﬂict
between Kouyaté (pre-eminently an organizer—impatient, pragmatic, and
at best rather careless in money matters) and Faure (deliberate, more scru-
INVENTING THE BLACK INTERNA TIONAL 259


--- PAGE 271 ---
pulous and more pre-occupied with consistency in the initiatives and
thinking of the Ligue)” was incendiary, and the Ligue fractured.50
With the Ligue in disarray, La Race nègre fell silent after its November–
December 1930 issue. The next April, there appeared competing versions
of the newspaper, one printed by Faure’s faction and another printed by
Kouyaté’s. By the middle of 1931, Kouyaté and a group of committed
black Communists founded the Union des T ravailleurs Nègres (UTN).
The new group’s organ,Le Cri des Nègres, opened publication with an illus-
tration on its masthead similar to the image adopted a few months earlier
for the Negro Worker: a bare-chested black worker “breaking the chains of
enslavement that bind the Negro masses in the main Negro centers of the
world—United States, West Indies and Africa.”
51 The single worker sym-
bolizes the “power and strength that lies in the organization of the great
masses of Negro toilers,” but is at the same time an articulation of diaspora,
260 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA
Masthead of the Negro
Worker 1, no. 6 (June
1931).
[To view this image, refer to  
the print version of this title.]


--- PAGE 272 ---
a great revolutionary body straddling the Atlantic. (Kouyaté’s paper empha-
sizes this point by revising the image: whereas on the Negro Worker cover,
the ﬁgure simply reaches across the United States, Cuba, Haiti, and Africa,
in Le Cri the worker stands with one foot on the United States—identiﬁed
only by its Caribbean appendix: “Floride”—and one foot on Africa, while
a bright star rises behind him in the Soviet East.) Le Cri des Nègres was
much more frankly Communist than La Race nègre, although the paper
continued to feature articles on African American life in the United States
and found space for “cultural” questions, particularly in a ﬂood of articles
condemning the Paris International Colonial Exposition, the ostentatious
celebration of worldwide colonialism (featuring life-size replicas of West
African villages, North African mosques, and even Angkor Wat), which at-
tracted tens of thousands of visitors to the Bois de Vincennes in the sum-
mer of 1931.
52 Kouyaté also kept up his ties with a remarkable number of
African contacts and with Padmore, who contributed to the new journal.53
Black Collaboration, Black Deviation
How should one consider the exceptional activity of this period, as Kouyaté
and especially Padmore were increasingly ensconced in communist institu-
tions, increasingly committed to the Comintern’s effort to theorize and or-
ganize a revolutionary black proletariat in the port cities of Europe and in
Africa itself? A number of scholars tend to characterize Padmore’s position
as ultimately ineffectual, a kind of sideshow in the midst of the temporary
diversion when Moscow deigned to throw its energies toward revolution in
the African colonies. When the ITUC-NW was established, Padmore was
given an ofﬁce in the Kremlin and the privileges of a high member of the
INVENTING THE BLACK INTERNA TIONAL 261
Masthead of Le Cri des Nègres 3 (October 1931). Centre des Archives d’Outre-Mer,
Aix-en-Provence, Archives Nationales, France. SLOTFOM V , Box 23.
[To view this image, refer to  
the print version of this title.]


--- PAGE 273 ---
Comintern bureaucracy. But to what extent was his position itself a facade,
directed at an entirely different audience? According to Edward Wilson,
“the elevated status he was accorded in the Kremlin was itself a propaganda
device” geared to demonstrate the Soviet Union’s “benevolent treatment of
Negroes,” in contradistinction to capitalist racism in the West. This in-
volved a certain kind of staging: “when the occasion arose for May Day pa-
rades in Red Square, he was duly displayed on the sacrosanct balcony of the
Lenin Mausoleum—a black ﬁgure of the Soviet socialist utopia.”
54 C. L. R.
James recalled later that Padmore told him about the spectacular ﬁction of
his “election” to the Moscow Soviet during this period. A Party functionary
had pressed him to run, and although Padmore argued that he didn’t
know anything about Moscow politics or even speak Russian, he ﬁnally re-
lented. He was duly elected along with Stalin and Kaganovich, but was
never given any responsibilities and promptly forgot about the matter. Its
utility became apparent only some time later, when a group of “distin-
guished” British ﬁgures (including George Bernard Shaw) visited Russia.
The same Party functionary made a point of introducing the visitors to
Padmore, noting that he was a member of the Soviet and adding, “Now
look at you all. You have the British empire there for so many years. You
never had a Negro as a Member of Parliament. Look at us. He is not even a
Russian. He is a member of the Moscow Soviet. You see the difference be-
tween our system and yours.” The visiting group was visibly impressed,
staring at Padmore in silence. It was the last he ever heard of his member-
ship on the Soviet.
55
Kouyaté was in a somewhat different situation, given access through the
ITUC-NW to high circles in the Proﬁntern, but wrestling mainly with the
French Communist Party and the lumbering, veiled racism of its organiz-
ing efforts in France. In a different sense, though, he found himself in
something like Padmore’s position. Kouyaté lived during this time at 43 rue
des Ecoles in the Fifth Arrondissement of Paris, and like many of his
colleagues in the Ligue, he survived by passing through a series of tempo-
rary jobs. He worked in the 1920s in the accounting department at the
Hachette department store, but he also regularly found part-time work as a
ﬁgurant (an extra or walk-on in music theater productions) at the Casino de
Paris.
56 It is not difﬁcult to imagine precisely the kind of humiliating spear-
shaking stereotypes he would have been asked to embody in the theater. In
262 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 274 ---
this sense Padmore and Kouyaté, both striving tirelessly to radicalize black
labor, found themselves on different versions of the same European stage of
racialized spectacle.
But is this characterization accurate? Is it possible to make the more
nuanced argument that the institutions of international communism ac-
tually proved enabling to both Padmore and Kouyaté? Certainly, the two
militants were brought together in the corridors of the Comintern. But
more broadly, one might argue that especially Padmore was able to ﬁnd po-
litical leverage, even in the moments when his position appeared to have
more to do with spectacle than with policy. As with La Race nègre in 1930,
the French Communist Party strove in 1933 to ensure that their funding of
Le Cri des Nègres would mean complete Party control over its contents.
What is remarkable is that in both cases an alliance developed between
Padmore and Kouyaté in which the latter would go over the heads of the
French Party, turning directly to Padmore at the Comintern for ﬁnancial
assistance. In 1931, for instance, Padmore responded with a stern letter re-
garding La Race nègre, reminding the French Party of the need to prioritize
any channels to organizing the black dock workers in crucial port cities
such as Marseilles and Bordeaux:
There is no need to stress the importance of work among the Nègres
and your obligations concerning the application of the colonial reso-
lution of the Fifth Congress. ...W emust consider our central task to
be the integration of the nègre dockers and sailors of French ports
(Marseilles, Bordeaux, Le Havre) into revolutionary unions.
T o this end, we suggest that you use the services of comrade
Kouyaté as broadly as possible. ...H o w e v e r ,this is not to say that the
comrade should be placed under the general control of the Colonial
Commission of the CGTU....P r eviously, one of the great dif-
ﬁculties you encountered in this union work among the Nègres was
the absence of a special propaganda organ. The newspaper La Race
Nègre did not sufﬁciently reﬂect the economic situation of the Negro
workers [travailleurs noirs] in France and in the Colonies. In view of
remedying this state of affairs, we have decided to assist comrade
Kouyaté in the regular publication of this journal in conformity with
the resolution.
57
INVENTING THE BLACK INTERNA TIONAL 263


--- PAGE 275 ---
On at least one other occasion when the French Communist Party proved
troublesome, in October 1932, Kouyaté received funds for Le Cri des
Nègres directly from Padmore.58
In this extraordinary arrangement, a transnational alliance between two
black militants “cries” through the Comintern—speaks the language of in-
ternational communism—in order to trump the limitations of a particular
national communist party. The structures of authority of international
communism are used as a lever to inﬂuence and reshape national commu-
nism in the context of the French Empire. There are at least two versions
of black internationalism here. The Padmore-Kouyaté collaboration is on
the one hand a function of the Comintern policy envisioning an “interna-
tional trade union” approach to black labor. But their circumventing of the
French national party points toward another internationalism as well, one
not wholly subsumed in a Comintern agenda, one that emphasizes race-
based organizing and anticolonial alliances among differently positioned
revolutionaries of African descent.
Another way to make this point is to note that it is precisely the dis-
course of the Communist International that opens the possibility of a Black
International—even if the Comintern insists that race-speciﬁc movements
are ultimately antithetical to (and even a threat to) worldwide proletarian
revolution. As Philippe de Witte has suggested, even to discuss the “Negro
question,” the term of choice in the Comintern, is to theorize a black inter-
nationalism. Moscow “itself legitimizes the idea of a worldwide black iden-
tity [identité nègre]” in founding a “Negro Worker” division, because that
institution frames the issue precisely as universally “Negro”—implying that
black labor raises a set of concerns that are unique and consistent interna-
tionally and then formulating an approach to those concerns through race,
above and beyond particular national contexts.
59 Working in and against
the French Party, Kouyaté came to consider “the Third International as not
only a natural ally, but as in itself ameans toward international Negro unity,
a Negro International through the Worker’s International.”
60 If we are to be-
lieve C. L. R. James, Padmore comes to arrive at such a pragmatic position
as well: “But nevertheless [Padmore] called them ‘those people’ and it be-
came clear to me afterwards...that he had never been completely swept
away by the Stalinist conception of Marxism. He said: ‘I lived there; I saw
what was going on....Istayed there because there was a means of doing
work for the black emancipation and there was no other place that I could
264 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 276 ---
think of.’”61 It should be underlined that the “means toward” a Black Inter-
national is primarily a trio of periodical publications: the Negro Worker, La
Race nègre, and Le Cri des Nègres. Print culture is the ground of the collabo-
ration because these periodicals are the ground of a nascent discourse of
black internationalism—spaces of independent thinking, alternative modes
of expression and dissemination, articulating transnational groupings of
black intellectuals into collectives and conversations.
The collaboration ran into an unexpected problem in 1933. Not surpris-
ingly, when the French Party again withheld funds for Le Cri des Nègres af-
ter the January–February 1933 issue, Kouyaté tried to approach Padmore
once more.
62 But at the beginning of the year, Nazi terror had descended
on Hamburg, where Padmore was editing the Negro Worker.In its April is-
sue (printed exceptionally in Copenhagen), the Negro Worker announced
that Padmore had been “dragged from his bed by Nazi police and impris-
oned for about two weeks, during which time the Nazi[s] raided the ofﬁces
of the Negro workers’ Union and destroyed all their property.”
63 Padmore
was deported from Germany on his British passport. Although he traveled
a great deal over the following months, after July 1933 his main base of op-
erations was established in Paris, where he lived with Kouyaté and with an-
other UTN member, the Haitian Camille Saint-Jacques. But until mid-
summer, Padmore was largely out of contact and unable to intervene in
Kouyaté’s dispute with the French Party. This time the Party started inter-
nal proceedings to remove Le Cri des Nègres from Kouyaté’s control and
prevented him from publishing it independently.
By April 1933, Kouyaté had lost all hope of prevailing in the proceed-
ings against him. In the face of defeat and what he considered betrayal at
the hands of the Party’s colonial section, he turned again to concentrate on
race-based work. On June 22, at the restaurant of La Samaritaine on the
Right Bank of Paris, he convened a planning meeting for an old dream
of his: to found a West African student foyer in Paris, a “Maison des
Nègres”—envisioned as something akin to the hostel established by the
West African Students’ Union and the League of Coloured Peoples in Eng-
land.
64 The meeting attracted a fascinating collection of young scholars
who would be active in the 1935 journal L ’Etudiant noirand later in the
Négritude movement: Léonard Sainville of the Association des Etudiants
Guadeloupeans, a student named Megrone of Association des Etudiants
Martiniquais, and—most intriguingly—an aspiring poet named Léopold
INVENTING THE BLACK INTERNA TIONAL 265


--- PAGE 277 ---
Sédar Senghor, the leader of the Association des Etudiants Ouest-
Africains.65
It was not the ﬁrst time Kouyaté had pursued ties with the moderate and
student elements of African and Caribbean society in Paris: the LDRN had
attempted to form a “student section” in the late 1920s, and a number of
the young Africans and Antilleans in the metropole in the next decade, in-
cluding Senghor, Aimé Césaire, René Ménil, and Bernard Dadié, would
later recall the inﬂuence of Kouyaté and especially Le Cri des Nègres.
66 Aside
from his ties to Léo Sajous of La Revue du monde noir, Kouyaté was re-
ported to be in “close contact” (relations étroites) with Etienne Léro, the
young poet and editor of Légitime Défense, whose ideas the colonial author-
ities considered “revolutionary and anti-French.” 67 According to one sur-
veillance report, Kouyaté told Sainville, Megrone, and Senghor that the
UTN’s goals were “material, moral, and cultural assistance” and that he
wanted to create a sanctuary (une maison de refuge) for nègres in Paris, as
well as a library and a university. The students asked how they would raise
money for the project—and indeed, how the UTN funded Le Cri des
Nègres—and Kouyaté explained evasively that the group asked for help
from individuals who were “favorable to Negro causes.”
68
The students wanted time to consider an alliance, which of course
would have been a remarkable ideological stretch. None of the groups was
particularly critical of the French Empire—for instance, when Léopold
Senghor wrote an article about the Association des Etudiants Ouest-
Africains a year later in the student journal L ’Etudiant martiniquais,he
speciﬁed that its “precise cultural goal” was a “common ideal” born out of
the “agreement [accord] between [its members’] indigenous civilizations
and the demands of the modern world.” It could be summed up, Senghor
wrote, with a “slogan”: “assimiler la culture européenne en restant près de
son peuple” (“assimilate European culture while remaining close to one’s
people”). According to Senghor, this slogan was in no way “anti-European”
or “anti-French,” even though the “riches of French culture” were above all
an inspiration to develop “a critical spirit and originality, rather than mech-
anized and bleached [oxygénée] imitation.”
69 Still, at least Senghor kept
up his ties with the UTN even after Kouyaté’s departure and went on to
publish a modest announcement about his association in Le Cri des Nègres
more than a year later, in August 1934.
70 But the initial meeting between
Kouyaté and the students led nowhere. A follow-up was scheduled with the
266 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 278 ---
students for July 8, but it never came about: on July 3, the Control Com-
mission of the French Communist Party suspended Kouyaté from his du-
ties in the UTN and demanded he appear to explain his activities.
When Padmore, released from jail in Germany, arrived in Paris in the
middle of the summer and met with members of the UTN (Kouyaté, of
course, not among them), he was shocked to learn that Le Cri des Nègres
had not been appearing. Padmore had been planning to send facsimiles of
the most recent Negro Worker bundled with copies of Le Cri des Nègres out
to contacts in the colonies. According to the French surveillance ﬁles, he
said, “It’s the ﬁrst time that I’ve seen a Negro [Communist Party] section
holding everything in hand, and yet doing nothing.”
71
Kouyaté’s ofﬁcial expulsion from the Party was not published in
L ’Humanitéuntil October 1933. It was reprinted in the Negro Worker (by
then no longer under Padmore’s editorship), which announced his expul-
sion from the ITUC-NW and from the editorial board of the paper. The
statement provides four “reasons” for the “exclusion,” all quite vague:
1. Kouyaté deceived the revolutionary movement, he never wanted to
give an account of the administration in the responsible posts that
were entrusted to him.
2. He tempted [sic] to disrupt the organization of the Union of Negro
Workers.
3. He entertains connections with expelled members and enemies of
the revolutionary T rade Union Movement.
4. Called twice to explain his actions he did not respond.
72
In Le Cri des Nègres, the list was slightly different: an article a few weeks
later charged that Kouyaté refused to hand over the UTN’s accounting
books; that he refused to discuss the conﬂict, except to say that he “had de-
cided to resign”; that his “attitude” toward the Union was “plainly hostile”;
and that he “entertains relations with suspect elements, the same elements
who provoked the scission in the old Ligue de Défense de la Race Nègre.”
73
A follow-up article added the complaint that Kouyaté never turned over the
membership cards, subscription lists, and ofﬁcial seal of the Union.
74 The
charge that Kouyaté “entertains connections with expelled members and
enemies” of the movement is the most interesting in terms of Kouyaté’s
later activities. The “suspect elements” may be an allusion to the students in
the June meeting, as well as to the wide range of ﬁgures that Kouyaté began
INVENTING THE BLACK INTERNA TIONAL 267


--- PAGE 279 ---
to contact in September as he began to plan the Negro World Unity Con-
gress, including former adversaries such as René Maran, Maurice Satineau
(the publisher of La Dépêche africaine), and even Emile Faure.
One of the most peculiar and persistent rumors concerning this period,
apparently originating in James Hooker’s biography of Padmore, is that
Kouyaté was expelled from the Communist Party for some form of “embez-
zlement.”
75 There were numerous accusations on both sides of the Union
des T ravailleurs Nègres conﬂict, but the only ones that come close to this
rumor are Emile Faure’s assertion that Kouyaté was “wasteful” in the use of
funds at his discretion and that he did not have the “elementary delicacy” of
returning the books and membership lists of the UTN after his expulsion.
Nevertheless, as reﬂected in the expulsion notices, embezzlement was never
charged. As Spiegler has pointed out, Hooker’s patronizing professions of
incomprehension about the friendship between the two men (“Padmore’s
attachment to the man remains unexplained, for Padmore was scrupulous
about money matters and thoroughly law-abiding”) originates with this
error.
76
In the middle of August 1933, just as Kouyaté was being expelled from
the UTN and the Party, Padmore apparently learned of a drastic about-
face in Comintern policy: the ITUC-NW would be abandoned, and the
International’s long-standing efforts in the African colonies would be re-
linquished in a strategic decision to concentrate on events in Europe. The
Soviets had decided to align themselves with the so-called democratic im-
perialist countries against fascism, even if it meant ignoring the abuses of
European colonialism. Padmore immediately resigned from the Interna-
tional. He would later discuss his decision in some detail. In one essay pub-
lished a few years later, he writes that the Comintern
was called upon...t op u tabrake upon the anti-imperialist work of
its afﬁliate sections and thereby sacriﬁce the young national liberation
movements in Asia and Africa. This I considered to be a betrayal of
the fundamental interests of my people, with which I could not iden-
tify myself. I therefore had no choice but to sever my connection with
the Communist International. I formulated my position quite clearly
in a political statement which I submitted to the Comintern Execu-
tive, and which was subsequently published by the Negro Press, so
that my case would be put before my own people.
77
268 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 280 ---
In any case, he all but announced his resignation publicly in an editorial—
written in Paris and called “Au Revoir”—in the August–September issue of
the Negro Worker, which indeed ceased publication for almost a year.
78
There, Padmore says nothing about policy debates or personal dissatisfac-
tion and offers the vague explanation that the paper is having a “difﬁcult
time in trying to make ends meet,” even ﬁnding itself “faced with bank-
ruptcy.” Nevertheless, when the Negro Worker was ﬁnally revived under
new direction in May 1934, the Communist International kept up the
usual tradition of announcing expulsions by publishing the “Expulsion of
George Padmore from the Revolutionary Movement” (in a note dated Feb-
ruary 23, 1934).
79 The newspaper published a series of denunciations of
Padmore as a “betrayer of the Negro struggle,” reserving special disdain for
the “dim prospects” of “his proposed ‘Negro Congress.’”
80 Likewise Le Cri
des Nègres called Kouyaté an individual with grands appétits, willing to taint
himself with “fat bourgeois nègres” as he “nourished the speculative dream
of organizing” a “Congrès Mondial Nègre.”81 Of course, if Padmore indeed
stepped down as early as August 1933, then the charge that Kouyaté “enter-
tains connections with expelled members and enemies” may refer to the
collaboration between the two and their ﬁrst efforts to plan the congress.
The crisis between Kouyaté and the Union des T ravailleurs Nègres cul-
minated in November 1933, when he scheduled a meeting of the planning
committee for the “Congrès Mondial Nègre” (Negro World Unity Con-
gress) on the same day and hour as the UTN meeting at which he was sup-
posed to explain his conduct. Kouyaté was reluctant to meet the hard-lin-
ers, but he sent the UTN an effusive letter on November 4.
82 Fiercely
assertive and at the same time almost anguished in tone, it is a vivid articu-
lation of Kouyaté’s position at the time and, as such, is worth quoting at
some length:
J’espère que les diviseurs de nègres, instruments de blancs qui tien-
nent les ﬁcelles dans les coulisses politiques parleront avec mesure,
impartialité et loyauté. Ils doivent se rappeler qu’il n’est pas aisé de
salir un militant qui en quinze ans de lutte à la direction des nègres
pour la libération de notre race [sic]. On doit vous dire pourquoi je ne
veux plus militer dans l’Union ce qu’est devenu le Cri des Nègres. . . .
On a transféré dans notre association mon conﬂit avec le Parti com-
muniste français au mépris de tout intérêt du mouvement nègre.
INVENTING THE BLACK INTERNA TIONAL 269


--- PAGE 281 ---
I hope that the dividers of blacks, instruments of the white men who
hold the political purse strings, will speak with restraint, impartiality,
and loyalty. They should remember that it is not easy to tarnish a mil-
itant who has fought for ﬁfteen years to lead blacks in the liberation
of our race. They should tell you why I no longer want to be a mili-
tant in this Union that Le Cri des Nègres has become....They have
transferred into our association my conﬂict with the French Commu-
nist Party, disregarding the interests of the black movement.
For Kouyaté, the issue is not the Negro World Unity Congress, but his ear-
lier personal power squabbles with the French Communist Party, now be-
ing used as an excuse to undermine the work of the UTN.
Ma réponse paraîtra dans un livre “Je demande la parole” aﬁn de me
donner une audience mondiale nègre. On y trouvera des documents,
chiffres, photos, fac-similés etc....mettant à nu les graves maladies
qui rongent le mouvement nègre. On y verra déﬁler des ﬁgures plus
ou moins étranges, plus ou moins hypocrites, ou sincères, comment
notre mouvement est freiné, saboté, désagrégé sous le couvert des
grandes phrases de solidarité de races, de travailleurs, comment la
provocation policière et la délation sont organisées, comment on
élimine les meilleurs d’entre nous, pour mieux opprimer les autres
avec l’inévitable mentalité impérialiste. Le problème maladroitement
soulevé à l’occasion de mon cas dépasse les cadres français. Ce sont les
mêmes maux en Angleterre, Afrique du Sud, États-Unis, partout la
même attitude de domination du dernier des blancs envers le nègre. Il
se trouve malheureusement que ces blancs découvrent des instru-
ments dévoués et serviles comme l’esclave parmi les éléments de notre
race. Les impérialistes eux-mêmes n’ont pas d’autre doctrine séculaire:
diviser pour régner, éliminer les résistants pour avili[r] les autres dans
la soumission honteuse et l’humiliation de race ou de peuple. Or, les
traditions nationales et familiales de la grande Afrique m’ont inculqué
l’amour inné de la liberté dans la discipline[,] une indépendance de
caractère et une ﬁerté de race que j’aime à chérir et à conserver, sinon
je ne serais plus Africain.
My response will appear in a book called “I Demand the Floor” in or-
der to reach a worldwide Negro audience. In it there will be docu-
270 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 282 ---
ments, ﬁgures, photos, reproductions, etc. . . . bringing to light the
grave maladies that are gnawing at the black movement. One will see
a parade of ﬁgures, more or less strange, more or less hypocritical, or
sincere; how our movement is halted, sabotaged, divided under the
cover of grand phrases of racial solidarity, worker solidarity; how
police provocation and denouncement are organized; how the best
among us are eliminated, so as to better oppress the others with the
inevitable imperialist mentality. The problem awkwardly raised by
my own case goes beyond the French frame. There are the same
wrongs in England, South Africa, the United States, everywhere the
same attitude of domination of every last white man with regard to
the black. Unfortunately, it so happens that the whites discover in-
struments among our race who are devoted and servile like slaves.
The imperialists themselves have no other secular doctrine: divide
and conquer, eliminate those who resist, in order to degrade the oth-
ers in shameful submission and in the humiliation of a race or a peo-
ple. But the national and familial traditions of great Africa have incul-
cated in me an innate love of freedom in discipline, an independence
of character, and a racial pride that I would like to cherish and pre-
serve—otherwise I would no longer be African.
In announcing his “true” audience to be a worldwide black one, Kouyaté
preﬁgures Padmore’s explanation of his own resignation, in which he claims
that the African American press is a “medium” that makes it possible to
bring “the real facts of the situation” to his “own people.” Padmore pro-
claims similarly that even if the Comintern would not dare to give him a
hearing, “I intend nonetheless to take my day in court. The Negroes of
America, of Africa, of the West Indies, of the world, will be my judges.
They will know who are the liars.”
83 In one of the articles Padmore pub-
lished in the Amsterdam News, he complains that “the international Negro
work is being sacriﬁced at a time when we cannot afford to weaken the Ne-
gro liberation struggles, especially in the black colonies where there are no
Communist parties.”
84 Here the shift in priorities is explicit: African inde-
pendence movements, and more broadly “the international Negro work,”
deserve support whether or not communism takes root in Africa—indeed,
the “liberation struggles” need immediate assistance “especially” in those
colonies where there are no communist parties.
INVENTING THE BLACK INTERNA TIONAL 271


--- PAGE 283 ---
Kouyaté’s proposed exposé is envisioned not as an autobiographical doc-
ument but as a larger project, a kind of counterhistory of the encounter of
the black radical intelligentsia with the globe-straddling and ultimately re-
strictive discourse of international Communism. (In this light, one might
read Padmore’s 1956 bookPan-Africanism or Communism? in part as some-
thing like his own belated version of Kouyaté’s project for “Je demande
la parole.”) Kouyaté rejects the divide-and-conquer mentality that he
considers common among imperialists and Communists alike, writing de-
ﬁantly in his letter to the UTN that it is precisely the “friends” who speak
against his transnational black connections and his work for African libera-
tion who are the ultimate betrayers:
Un dicton vous enseigne que nul n’est plus dangereux qu’un ami qui
déclare nous aimer mieux que nous-mêmes, et il nous embrasse pour
nous étrangler et nous donner le baiser de Judas. Rien ne m’em-
pêchera de procéder au travail urgent de redressement nègre avec
l’appui des dirigeants et masses nègres du monde entier surtout et
principalement de la grande Afrique dont la libération par les Afri-
cains eux-mêmes conditionnent [sic] l’émancipation de notre race et
la pratique vraie de l’égalité des races.
There is a saying that teaches that nothing is more dangerous than a
friend who claims to love us better than ourselves, and embraces us to
strangle us and give us the Judas kiss. Nothing prevents me from pro-
ceeding with the urgent work of black retribution with the support of
black leaders and masses worldwide, especially and principally in
great Africa, whose liberation by the Africans themselves is a condi-
tion of the emancipation of our race and the true practice of the
equality of the races.
At this point, Kouyaté seems much more willing than Padmore to speak in
racial terms, going so far as to uphold the necessity of what he calls
“racisme nègre.” In one fascinating passage, he comments on his own up-
bringing and on the metropolitan black intellectual’s responsibilities to
“home”:
Je concéderais peut-être que ma tendance soit imprégnée de racisme
nègre dû à l’éducation familiale, si exalter [sic] les possibilités de
développement, encourager ses capacités d’expansion sans haïr au-
272 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 284 ---
cune autre race, créer une psychose de conﬁance illimitée en elle-
même, aﬁn de lui permettre un réveil national salutaire pour briser les
chaînes d’esclavage, son corset séculaire, à ce racisme nègre là, j’aurais
adhéré avec enthousiasme puisque beaucoup de dirigeants révolu-
tionnaires blancs ont toujours l’esprit farci de la prétendue supériorité
de leur race. Ils ont raison quand on bénéﬁcie de la domination
impérialiste de son pays, on “contribue” à sa consolidation sous une
forme que la masse ignore.
I would perhaps concede that my tendency is impregnated with black
racism, due to familial education, if [such racism means] to celebrate
possibilities of development, to encourage capacities of expansion
without hating any other race, to create a psychosis of unlimited con-
ﬁdence, in order to permit a salutary national awakening, to break the
chains of slavery and the corset of secularity. T o that black racism, I
would adhere with enthusiasm, because so many white revolutionary
leaders have always had their minds stuffed with the pretended supe-
riority of their race. They are right: when one proﬁts from the imperi-
alist domination of one’s country, one “contributes” to the consolida-
tion of that domination, in a form of which the masses remain
unaware.
Especially striking in this formulation is Kouyaté’s espousal of a racisme
nègre that would mean creating a “psychosis of unlimited conﬁdence” cul-
minating in nationalism. In clinical psychiatry, the term “psychosis” ﬂuctu-
ated in application in the early part of the twentieth century and was used
in reference to a whole range of mental illnesses. But it is nonetheless in-
triguing that Kouyaté suggests that racism be understood as a kind of illness
in the human psyche that is “salutary” when it leads to “national awaken-
ing.” Decades later, Frantz Fanon would analyze examples of what he
termed “reactionary psychoses” engendered in the Algerian “native” by the
violence of colonialism, but in general Fanon’s idiosyncratic vocabulary
(drawn both from clinical psychiatry and from an unsystematic reading in
psychoanalysis) describes the “colonial situation” primarily as one ofneuro-
sis in the “native,” not psychosis.
85 In this informal, impassioned passage,
Kouyaté ﬂirts with an argument that anticolonialism necessitates—“cele-
brates”—a kind of deliberate derangement, a madness of “pretended supe-
riority” in the ﬁght for independence and “expansion.” Although Fanon
INVENTING THE BLACK INTERNA TIONAL 273


--- PAGE 285 ---
does not use the clinical term, Kouyaté’s application of “psychosis” here is
somewhat anticipatory of the argument in Fanon’s Les Damnés de la terre
that the “native intellectual,” in rejecting the old claim of colonialism that
there was no culture in Africa, must “break away” (s’arracher)from Europe
in an “ardent, despairing return to anything.” This breaking away often
ends up as a boundless exaltation of “race” and “unknown roots” (racines
ignorés), precisely a kind of “unlimited conﬁdence” that permits a national-
ism to emerge.
86
If the fall of 1933 had seen a ﬂurry of collaboration and coincidences,
February 1934 was a cataclysm. There were violent demonstrations in the
streets of Paris: on February 6, a revolt of French fascist mobs “tried to ﬁght
their way from the Place de la Concorde across the Seine bridge to the
Chambre des Députés” and were met in the streets by leftist and labor
groups throughout the city—with the Parisian police protecting the fascists
and shooting at counterdemonstrators.
87 The battles culminated in a gen-
eral strike on February 9. Many of the radical black French intellectuals
participated. One Senegalese member of the Ligue de Défense de la Race
Nègre, Aldolphe Mathurin (a cousin of Alioune Diop, the founder of
Présence africaine after World War II), would later recall that “the parties of
the Left had appealed to us to come out on the streets....O nF e b .6 t ha n d
afterwards we were there, along with Communists, Socialists and Radicals
against the supporters of [François] Coty and the Croix de Feu, who carried
poles set with razor blades, and used to single us out.”
88 Mathurin added
that in the street battles, they had “a score to settle” in particular with Coty,
whose inﬂammatory articles had been an important factor in the split in
the LDRN in 1930.
The next two weeks saw a tumult of activity. On February 15, 1934,
Nancy Cunard, the feisty English shipping heiress—a friend of both Pad-
more and Kouyaté—ﬁnally published her monumental collection Negro:
An Anthology after years of work. On February 17, Padmore composed his
aforementioned letter to W . E. B. Du Bois, on stationery Kouyaté still had
from the Union des T ravailleurs Nègres. And on February 23, the Control
Commission of the Comintern ﬁnally published Padmore’s “ofﬁcial” expul-
sion from the Party that he had quit six months before. Just as the French
Communist Party appeared to use Padmore as an excuse to exclude
Kouyaté, the Communist International used Kouyaté as an excuse to oust
Padmore:
274 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 286 ---
Padmore, a member of the Communist Party, despite repeated warn-
ings did not break off his connections with the exposed provocateur
Kouyaté and lived in the apartment of the provocateur [Camille
Saint] Jacques. In order to deceive the Party organs, Padmore repeat-
edly stated that he had already broken with Jacques....
Padmore carried on work which undermined the class unity of the
toiling Negro masses, and under the pretense of advocating the neces-
sity for the unity of all Negroes on a racial basis, he tried to lay the
path for unity with the Negro bourgeois exploiters and with their
agents, the national-reformists.
89
After the whirlwind of early 1934, the Negro World Unity Congress ef-
fort crumbled. There was a meeting at Kouyaté’s home on February 2, and
Padmore agreed to try to raise money to print up copies of a subscription
notice for the Congress, but apparently was not able to do so.
90 (One as-
sumes that it was at least partly with such a task in mind that Padmore
wrote to ask Du Bois for assistance two weeks later.) Kouyaté fell seriously
ill during the spring of 1934 and spent an extended period in the hospi -
tal.
91 Padmore, for his part, turned to other work, sending his “Open Let-
ter” to contacts in the Negro press in the United States and working on a
book that was published two years later asHow Britain Rules Africa. In June
1934 Padmore was staying with Nancy Cunard in her home in Normandy,
where Cunard said that he “spent all the day and half the night writing . . .
and most of the hours of the day I typed for him, from his rather difﬁcult
handwriting. ...H i scapacity for sheer, lengthy hard work was very great,
and his knowledge seemed to me immense.”
92 It is unclear how much con-
tact there was between Padmore and Kouyaté during the remainder of
1934, and Padmore left for England early the next year, even though his
bylines in the press in England and the United States reported that he was
living in Paris as late as May 1935.
93 C. L. R. James recalls that “George
came to London to live some time in the spring or summer of 1935.”94
Although it is commonly assumed that Padmore and Kouyaté were no
longer in touch after the middle of the decade, there is a wealth of evidence
to the contrary.
95 As we shall see, Kouyaté was quite active in the organiza-
tions and pressure groups that sprung up in Paris during the crisis around
Italy’s invasion of Ethiopia in 1935, and it seems likely that the two kept in
contact around that effort, since James’s International African Friends of
INVENTING THE BLACK INTERNA TIONAL 275


--- PAGE 287 ---
Ethiopia in London was linked to sibling groups in Paris such as the
Comité de Défense d’Ethiopie. 96 Describing the London organization,
Makonnen names Kouyaté among the group’s “closest associates in the
pan-African movement.”
97 Padmore and Kouyaté were deﬁnitely in touch
during the second half of the decade. When the African American intellec-
tual Ralph Bunche visited Paris in the summer of 1937, Padmore sent him
Kouyaté’s address on rue Cité de Paradis in the T enth Arrondissement and
wrote, “Do look him up. I shall soon be writing to him.”
98 Likewise,
Padmore was adamant that C. L. R. James meet Kouyaté while James was
researching The Black Jacobins in the Bibliothèque Nationale in Paris, prob-
ably in 1936.
99 James comments that “George kept up that acquaintance
with Kouyaté although Kouyaté remained in the CP and George had left
and would have nothing to do with them.”
100 Evidently James was unaware
of the history of Kouyaté’s own break, but the statement remains important
for the purposes of chronology. In a later interview, James recounted an ex-
change with Kouyaté that had amused him: “I knew one man who was very
friendly with Padmore—that was Garan Kouyaté. When I went to Paris,
Padmore insisted I see him. I discussed the T rotskyist movement with him
and he commented that he could agree with me about everything except
that one thing would be needed. I asked what that was. ‘That T rotsky was a
black man, that’s all.’”
101
Black Marxism in Translation
The ﬁles of the French National Archives hold a smattering of materials rel-
evant to the plans for the Congrès Mondial Nègre (Negro World Unity
Congress): surveillance reports, minutes from the meetings, the organiza-
tion’s statutes, and a call for participation written in French by Kouyaté and
translated and expanded in English by Padmore. Generally the Italo-Ethio-
pian crisis is considered to represent the ﬁrst impetus toward worldwide
networks of black organizations, laying the ground for what J. S. Spiegler
calls a “Negro Popular Front” and for the Fifth Pan-African Congress in
1945.
102 I will suggest that the Negro World Unity Congress, as proposed
by Padmore and Kouyaté for 1935, represents an earlier effort to think
in such international terms, extending the impulses of Du Bois’s Pan-
Africanism and Garvey’s Back-to-Africa movement in the 1920s. As we
have seen, calls for a Black International were not uncommon even earlier:
Kouyaté himself, writing to American Civil Liberties Union lawyer Roger
276 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 288 ---
Baldwin in the spring of 1929, had insisted on the necessity for an interna-
tional approach to the “Negro question”:
The black leaders [leaders nègres] in the United States are mistaken
not to comprehend the necessity of broad mutual support within the
race. The world situation of blacks [situation mondiale des nègres]i s
such that no action can lead anywhere if its results are only partial
and momentary, responding to the needs of only a small group of
blacks—in a word, satisfactions without future and without exten-
sion, rock of Sisyphus.
103
Such an approach is carried to its logical extreme in the Congrès Mondial
Nègre effort in the fall of 1933. After assembling his contacts in Paris,
Kouyaté convened a meeting in early December to design and ratify some
initial organizational decisions about the shape the Congress would as-
sume.
The Congress was to be held in July 1935 in Paris, London, or Geneva,
depending on the political circumstances in Europe at the time, “particular
reasons not permitting the Congress to meet in Ethiopia, in Liberia, or in
another Negro country, in spite of the Assembly’s desire.” The broad goal
of the Congress was summarized as follows:
Le Congrès mondial aura pour but de faire le bilan de la situation
morale, économique, intellectuelle, sociale et politique de la race
nègre, de réaliser son unité, de lui créer une charte et de constituer
une organisation universelle destinée à diriger à l’avenir le mouve-
ment nègre de tous pays.
The world Congress will have as its goal to take stock of the moral,
economic, intellectual, social and political situation of the Negro
race, to unify it, to create a charter for it, and to establish a universal
organization destined to direct the future of the Negro movement in
all countries.
The members of the planning committee included a striking and politically
diverse collection of the black intellectual luminaries on the Paris scene at
the time: Kouyaté, Padmore, André Beton, Camille Saint-Jacques, Emile
Faure, René Maran, Joseph Ebele, Jules Alcandre, Ibrahim Sow, Rita
Diallo, and even one member from Cuba, Medina Perez, and one from
INVENTING THE BLACK INTERNA TIONAL 277


--- PAGE 289 ---
Portugal, Joan Segure. (Documentation from the Congress and a perma-
nent journal that was to emerge out of the event, titled Le Monde nègre—in
a deliberate evocation of Garvey’sNegro World?—were to be translated into
Spanish and Portuguese.) The committee was divided into the following
sections: politics and propaganda; workers and peasants; economics and
ﬁnancial; press and news; cultural and artistic; women and children (section
féminine et de l’enfance);and ethnology and sociology. National committees
were to be established worldwide, both in colonies and in independent
states. The documentation shows an especial interest in reaching South
America and also a particular concern with the three historically indepen-
dent black nations: Haiti, Ethiopia, and Liberia.
104
The “Manifesto” is the most signiﬁcant surviving document available.
It is undated, but apparently was written some time around December
1933.
105 It is, in effect, two documents: a typescript of Kouyaté’s original
draft, and a translation into English, which Padmore extensively revised
and expanded. In his portrait of Padmore, C. L. R. James noted that “de-
spite his wide contacts” Padmore knew “no foreign languages,” and so his
interaction with Kouyaté would have involved constant cobbled interpreta-
tion of the latter’s makeshift English as much as Padmore’s poor French.
106
One surveillance report from the fall of 1932 records that Padmore arrived
at a UTN meeting with a translator (un nègre interprète) from Sierra Leone
named T ouret; at another meeting in Paris the next year, he arrived with
a female translator named Jeanne who apparently was employed by the
French Communist Party.
107 Nothing more is recorded about these ﬁgures,
but they indicate the degree to which the friendship and collaboration be-
tween Padmore and Kouyaté was a confrontation with linguistic difference,
a conversation across boundaries that made their interaction a continual se-
ries of revisions and re-accentuations. Whatever the particular process with
the “Manifesto,” the result is that the draft in English is not simply a trans-
lation of the draft in French. From the beginning, Padmore’s version re-
writes and rethinks Kouyaté’s, talks back to it, edits it, and repositions it
ideologically. In French, the “Manifesto” opens: “Depuis plus de cinq
siècles, les nations blanches du monde ont opprimé l’Afrique et les Noirs”
(“For more than ﬁve centuries, the white nations of the world have op-
pressed Africa and the Blacks”). The English tweaks this proposition into
cynicism: “For more than ﬁve centuries the so-called white ‘civilizing na-
278 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 290 ---
tions’ have been oppressing Africa and the Blacks.” So we are left with two
takes, two slightly aberrant visions of the Congress’s call.
I will simply outline a few of the divergences here. The English draft
excises a number of Kouyaté’s references to Hitler and German fascism,
placing the emphasis much more directly on a crisis around the abuses of
world imperialism rather than on a single culpable European regime. Thus,
Kouyaté writes:
Partout, les forces de la réaction sont mobilisées contre nous. Partout
ceux qui nous oppressent et nous dénient tous “droits humains”
preparent ﬁèvreusement une nouvelle guerre sans égale dans les An-
nales de l’Histoire et pour laquelle ils s’apprêtent, une fois de plus, à
se servir de nous comme chair à canon—précipitant ainsi l’extermi-
nation de notre race pour compléter l’œuvre criminelle de stérilisa-
tion de masse proposée par hitler.
Everywhere, the forces of reaction are mobilized against us. Every-
where those who oppress us and deny us all “human rights” are fever-
ishly preparing a new war, without equal in the annals of history, and
for which they are preparing, once more, to use us as cannon fod-
der—thus bringing about the extermination of our race so as to com-
plete the criminal project of mass sterilization proposed by hitler.
Compare this to Padmore:
We can see from these manoeuvres that the forces of reaction are ev-
erywhere mobilized against us. In Africa, in America, in the West In-
dies, in South and Central America—to be Black, is to be a slave. De-
spised, humiliated, denied justice and human rights in every walk of
life. Everywhere the ruling powers which oppress us and deny us
those universal principles embodied in the “Rights of Men,” are today
preparing a new world slaughter unparalleled in the annals of history,
in which they are planning to use us once more as cannon fodder to
all the quicker hasten our racial extermination.
The speciﬁc announcement of the Congress also diverges: where Kouyaté
writes of a kind of vanguard based in the metropole, Padmore elaborates a
INVENTING THE BLACK INTERNA TIONAL 279


--- PAGE 291 ---
much more pointed vision of solidarity and the politics of intellectual labor.
Kouyaté writes:
En présence de ces dangers imminents, nous, vos compatriotes
d’Europe, avons pris l’initiative salutaire d’organiser un Congrès
Mondial de la Race Nègre, en juillet 1935, aﬁn de les combattre et de
hâter l’amélioration de vos conditions de vie en Afrique et dans les
autres pays.
Africains, Frères, sœurs nègres, et surtout ardente jeunesse Nègre
du monde entier!
Facing these imminent dangers, we, your European compatriots, have
taken the salutary initiative of organizing a World Congress of the
Negro Race, in July 1935, in order to combat these dangers, and in
order to hasten the amelioration of your living conditions in Africa
and in other countries.
Africans, Negro brothers and sisters, and above all, ardent Negro
youth of the world!
And here is Padmore’s more incisive version:
Because these forces of oppression and reaction seek to devour us and
the old men who posed as our leaders have deserted the camp at the
moment when 250 million of your people are crying for leadership,
we, the African youths—workers, students and intellectuals—have
taken the initiative to organize a Congress of the Negro Peoples of the
World for the purpose of establishing unity in our ranks and adopting
a platform of struggle for the Africans and people of African descent
the world over. This is the historic task of the toiling masses, revolu-
tionary intellectuals, and youth of our race!
In the ﬁnal paragraph, Kouyaté closes with an almost desperate appeal to
“brotherhood” that seems to bespeak his personal fatigue at the time:
Frères, ne perdons pas d’espoir! Ne devenons pas des victimes de
pessimisme et de défaitisme. Quoique le présent soit sombre, l’avenir
de l’Afrique et les destinées de notre race sont entre nos propres
mains. Si nous restons faibles, nous continuerons d’être méprisés par
amis et ennemis. C’est pourquoi nous devrons nous rassembler en
280 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 292 ---
compacts bataillons d’acier, pour faire de notre Congrès la démon-
stration la plus forte qu’on ait jamais vue au monde.
Brothers, let us not lose hope! Let us not become victims of pessi-
mism and defeatism. Though the present may be dark, the future of
Africa and the destinies of our race are in our own hands. If we re-
main weak, we will continue to be despised by friends and enemies.
This is why we will have to come together in compact battalions of
steel, to make our Congress the strongest demonstration the world
has ever seen.
Padmore adjusts this to form more of an admonition toward unity of un-
derstanding among various groups of African descent:
West Indians, stop hating American Negroes! American Negroes,
stop despising West Indians! Negroes of the Western World stop con-
sidering Africans as savages and “cannibals.” Africans, cease reproach-
ing your American and West Indian brothers to be the children of
slaves! Mulattos and Blacks—cease ﬂying at each others’ throats!—
For, while we squabble and ﬁght each other, the whites are getting
away with the spoils!
What interests me in this translated and doubled document, ﬁnally, is
the possibility of reading a structure—more, a mode—of black radicalism
as situated somewhere between the two texts. Although it is likely that the
French version preceded the English, they stand not quite in a hierarchy of
(infallible) original and (inadequate) translation. Due to Padmore’s revi-
sions, they read obliquely as two texts that speak to and sometimes against
one another. T o a certain extent, the effect is reminiscent of the famous
theory of translation elaborated by Walter Benjamin a decade earlier, in
the introduction to his 1923 translation of Baudelaire’s T ableaux parisiens.
Benjamin suggests that just as a tangent “touches a circle lightly [ ﬂüchtig]
and at but one point, with this touch rather than with the point setting the
law according to which it is to continue on its straight path to inﬁnity, a
translation touches the original lightly and only at the inﬁnitely small point
of the sense, thereupon pursuing its own course according to the laws of
ﬁdelity in the freedom of linguistic ﬂux.”
108 Benjamin’s introduction con-
tends that in this approach, the translation cannot carry over the particular
relationship between signiﬁer and signiﬁed in the original; instead, it sup-
INVENTING THE BLACK INTERNA TIONAL 281


--- PAGE 293 ---
plements the original language’s “mode of intention” in signiﬁcation. For
Benjamin, “the language of a translation can—in fact, must—let itself go,
so that it gives voice to the intentio of the original not as reproduction but
as harmony, as a supplement [Ergänzung] to the language in which it ex-
presses itself.” Ultimately this effect expresses a yearning for what Benjamin
terms “pure language”(reine Sprache), a “language of truth” that reconciles
and fulﬁlls all the “intentions” of particular languages in a “predestined,
hitherto inaccessible realm.”
109
Notwithstanding the complex implications of Benjamin’s argument,
which has garnered a great deal of critical attention in translation studies, it
should be evident that if the French and English versions of the “Mani-
festo” supplement each other in such a manner, their differences are by no
means simply a matter of signiﬁcation and syntax. Padmore’s English may
touch Kouyaté’s French ﬂeetingly, but it does not proceed simply “in the
freedom of linguistic ﬂux.” The shifts in the English are speciﬁcally ideo-
logical departures and revisions, rephrasings of the political “language” of
black internationalism. In this light the tangential relation between two
versions reveals the linguistic sign to be what Volosinov a few years later
called an “arena” of ideological struggle. The décalage between the two
“Manifestos” highlights the “multiaccentuality” of the sign—language as
the vital and mutable “intersecting of accents”—as a particularly social dy-
namic (as Volosinov writes, “accent, as such, is interindividual”).
110 In other
words, Kouyaté’s French and Padmore’s English versions, together, point at
an ideological “language” of black internationalism that inheres in the ways
their “modes of intention” diverge from and supplement each other. In the
tangential relation between the two texts, what is “concealed and fragmen-
tary,” to use Benjamin’s phrase, is not just a “higher” realm of language
(reine Sprache) but also a “harmony” of ideology: black internationalism.
Toward a Francophone Internationalism
I hope that the connections and collaborations sketched here will ulti-
mately lead to a rethinking of the possibilities and impossibilities of the ad-
vent of the 1945 Manchester Pan-African Congress. Indeed, it should re-
mind us that the Congress was originally scheduled to take place in Paris,
planned to coincide with the World T rade Union Conference in September
1945. Under Padmore’s initiative, a “provisional committee” (including
members from Africa, the West Indies, British Guyana, and Great Britain)
282 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 294 ---
drafted a “Manifesto to the United Nations” as a Pan-African “call to ac-
tion” in preparation for the revival of the movement Du Bois had initiated
decades earlier. Just as the black organizations that emerged in the 1920s
appropriated the discourse of Wilson’s Fourteen Points and the League of
Nations, the provisional committee’s manifesto is expressly written in the
wake of the Atlantic Charter and the United Nations, the new “Interna-
tional Organization” established to provide “the framework of future world
security and prosperity.” The manifesto included six demands to the in-
ternational community: the demand for the “rapid development of the
economic, social and cultural life of the African peoples”; the demand that
Africans must have the opportunity to participate “at all level[s] of adminis-
tration of the International Organization”; the demand that the “present
system of exploitation” in Africa, in which the majority of the continent’s
wealth goes to enrich “foreign monopoly ﬁrms and individuals,” must be
replaced with “systematic planning and development whereby in the ﬁrst
place the Africans themselves shall be the principal beneﬁciaries of the
wealth produced”; and perhaps most provocatively, the demand for inde-
pendence, that “steps should be taken to associate Africans with the man-
agement of their own affairs with a view towards the achievement of a full
self-government within a deﬁnite time-limit.” Padmore published an article
in the Chicago Defender in March 1945 outlining the manifesto and calling
for a gathering in France later that year, and Du Bois quickly offered his
services in the effort.
111
Various complications made it unworkable to organize the Congress in
postwar Paris, and the meeting was held in Manchester in October. But the
initial plans, and Padmore’s previous work in Paris, prompt the question of
the almost complete absence of Francophone participation in the gather-
ing. Ras Makonnen is one of the few commentators to take up this issue:
There was very little French African participation in the conference,
partly because of language differences, but mainly stemming from the
structure of black association with metropolitan politics in France
which was very different from English-speaking blacks....
It made one reﬂect with thanks that the British system was not the
same as the French; if it had been, many of these fellows would have
been caught by it, and remained in London as deputies representing
their various constituencies. They would have become possibly like
INVENTING THE BLACK INTERNA TIONAL 283


--- PAGE 295 ---
some of the French blacks with their houses in Paris, and the occa-
sional visit back to their constituency in Martinique or wherever.
Here, therefore, in the British world was a historic process of decen-
tralization, moving out from London to declare war on the empire;
no longer worried about the stamp of approval in London, but deter-
mined to show that the system at the outpost of that empire was
shady. 112
This explanation is unacceptable. Certainly, if one looks at Algeria, Viet-
nam, or even parts of West Africa, the “move out” from Paris “to declare
war on the empire” is equally evident. Makonnen’s ﬁerce anticommunism
seems to cloud his vision: certainly black labor organizers and propagan-
dists such as Lamine Senghor, Emile Faure, and Kouyaté are no “deputies”
lounging in Paris! Makonnen disingenuously reduces the complex history
of Francophone intellectuals in the metropole to the story of the few
conservative black legislators in the French assembly (Blaise Diagne and
Gratien Candace, for instance) whom the LDRN and UTN battled bitterly
both in Paris and in Africa.
An explanation becomes apparent if instead one simply examines the sit-
uation of Francophone intellectuals in 1945, after the destruction of World
War II. By the conclusion of hostilities, the Francophone internationalist
and radical movements are simply “defunct,” as J. Ayodele Langley puts it.
With the exception of René Maran (who stayed in Paris but suffered greatly
during the German occupation), the central interwar ﬁgures are almost all
deceased, imprisoned, or no longer in France. Kouyaté, Lamine Senghor,
Etienne Léro, and Kojo T ovalou Houénou are dead; Emile Faure is in
forced exile; Paulette Nardal, Aimé Césaire, and René Ménil are back in
Martinique; Léo Sajous is a diplomat in Liberia; Léopold Sédar Senghor is
back in Senegal after the summer of 1945, having served time in a Nazi
prison camp.
113 Moreover, the main thread in the history of black Franco-
phone intellectual activity is not abstention or ideological timidity—much
less a rush to “assimilation” in any overarching sense—but instead the
French colonial authorities’ persistent and ruthless suppression of black in-
tellectuals. Even the most innocuous cultural efforts were crushed. The
moderate La Dépêche africaine, which habitually supported the “civilizing
mission” of French colonization, was described in 1928 intelligence reports
as “a disguised communist enterprise.”
114 Repeated efforts to found a center
284 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 296 ---
or residence for African immigrants in Paris, including Kouyaté’s Maison
des Nègres and a 1930 effort at an Institut Nègre, all met resistance from
the Paris police.
115 In a 1927 article sardonically titled “French Generosity
under the Third Republic,”La Race nègre commented on the “still medieval
conception of generosity” that had led the French ministry of the colonies
to attempt to ban its circulation in Africa. “We will always remember that a
Mahatma Gandhi would never have the right to live freely in a French col-
ony,” the article notes. Referring to the West African National Congress in
the 1920s, it continues:
[I]n the English colonies of Africa, the Africans hold congresses, have
outspoken [hardi] and active newspapers, are in intellectual relations
with the outside world. In French Africa, it is entirely different. If we
were ill-advised enough to hold congresses for example in Dakar,
Bamako, Grand Bassam, Porto-Novo or Libreville, we know what
would lie in store for us....I nF r ench West Africa, it is forbidden for
us to receive the papers of our race brothers of the United States,
Brazil, Argentina, etc. Without a doubt, we are living under the three
colors that have protected the Principles of 1789 with a sublime hero-
ism.
116
Having spent signiﬁcant time in France, Padmore himself harbored no
illusions about the state of affairs in the empire, either in the colonies or in
Paris. In an essay written for the Crisis in 1940, he remarks that
most non-French Negroes, especially Americans, visiting Paris, with
its relative absence of color prejudice, its gaiety and charming cul-
tured atmosphere, invariably adduce that France is the most liberal
imperialist nation in the world. There is no greater illusion. It is quite
true that the French, as compared with the Anglo-Saxon peoples,
manifest less racial antipathy toward people of color. But the same
can be said of...other Latin races, regardless of their political ideol-
o g y ....[ W ]hile I personally consider the French in many ways a
charming people and Paris a delightful city, this in no way blinds me
to the fact that French colonial policy is as reactionary, and in many
respects more repressive than that of the British.
117
Makonnen at least implies that he is cognizant of this repression. When he
encounters a number of Francophone intellectuals (including Kouyaté,
INVENTING THE BLACK INTERNA TIONAL 285


--- PAGE 297 ---
Félix Houphouët-Boigny, Lamine Gueye, Aimé Césaire, and Léon-
Gontran Damas) a conference in Paris in 1938, he comments that “what
one noticed in contrast to Britain was a lack of freedom of expression. The
French blacks gave the impression of being pursued.”
118 Still, Makonnen
does not think through the implications of this state of affairs (not to men-
tion the effects of the German occupation during the war) for French par-
ticipation in the 1945 Pan-African Congress.
What would it mean to resuscitate this unrecognized French chapter as
crucial to the development of Manchester Pan-Africanism and the postwar
drive toward independence? Most important, it would be necessary to con-
sider the impact of living in Paris, and collaborating with ﬁgures in the
Francophone world (Kouyaté in particular), on Padmore’s subsequent
career. For instance, there is little question that Padmore’s notion of knowl-
edge production changes drastically during the early 1930s. Much of Pad-
more’s writing up to this point—whether in the Negro Worker or in infor-
mational and propaganda pamphlets such as The Life and Struggles of the
Negro T oilers—is, as James Hooker has noted, “pragmatic and unsentimen-
t a l...a n di tassumed an identity of interest, though not of culture, among
all blacks wherever they might be.”
119 C. L. R. James concurs that Pad-
more’s writing “was not noticeable for style; it was usually a remorseless
compilation of the facts of tyranny and oppression and the struggle against
them. He was at his best as a journalist, knocking off at short notice an arti-
cle on a remote African problem with a clear orientation and bristling with
detail.”
120 One of the striking propositions in Padmore’s opening editorial
statement for the Negro Worker is his goal to rebuild it as “a much needed
popular journal.” By the end of his tenure in 1933, Padmore is starting to
achieve a deﬁnition of “popular”: the Negro Worker expands its purview,
printing poetry by Langston Hughes and Nancy Cunard as well as exten-
sive coverage of the Scottsboro trial, and Padmore himself begins to write
differently and to conceive differently of his intended readership, thinking
in particular about the uses of the “medium” of the black press. Of course,
one of the complaints of the Comintern in ousting Padmore was that—
while still in Paris—he had begun publishing articles in “Negro bourgeois
newspapers” such as the Pittsburgh Courier and the Amsterdam News, peri-
odicals (along with the Chicago Defender and the Crisis) that he would re-
main committed to during the rest of his lifetime.
121
In the spring of 1934, Padmore even ﬂirted with the French popular
286 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 298 ---
press, publishing an article called “Un Noir Accuse” under the pseudonym
“Africanus” in the “special colonization issue” ofVu, a large-format, glossy
Parisian weekly.122 In an editorial statement, the magazine describes “Afri-
canus” as a “Negro [noir] from a foreign colony” and distances itself from
his “violent indictment against the white race,” arguing that any opinion is
valuable “when, as is the case here, it gives the sound of authenticity and
translates a widespread state of mind.” Padmore pulls no punches, opening
with “[f]or more than four centuries, Europe has made Africa its prey, and
it is only due to the extraordinary vitality of the Negroes [Noirs] that they
have avoided, so far, complete extermination.” The article, which the mag-
azine illustrated with sensationalist photos (a “fetishist” in the Congo;
women suffering under forced labor; tirailleurs sénégalais in Niger), com-
ments speciﬁcally on the French colonial system, citing critiques such as
André Gide’s Voyage au Congo (1927) and Albert Londres’s T erre d’ebène
(1929). “The French have a lower degree of racial prejudice than all the An-
glo-Saxon peoples,” Padmore concludes, “but where colonial questions are
concerned, they are no different from other propagandists of ‘the white
man’s mission.’”
Even with examples such as the Vu article, it is difﬁcult to gauge the pre-
cise effect of Padmore’s Paris sojourn on his writings. But it seems reason-
able to assume that he was exposed to a wider variety of contacts and black
popular culture there than he had encountered in Moscow or Hamburg.
In the spring of 1933, the Union des T ravailleurs Nègres—like T ovalou
Houénou’s Les Continents and Satineau’s La Dépêche africaine in the
1920s—decided to throw a beneﬁt, in the Maison de la Mutualité on rue
Saint Victor in the Fifth Arrondissement. They called it afête nègre, perhaps
inadvertently echoing the primitivist gala the Comte de Beaumont con-
cocted for the Parisian avant garde in 1919.
123 With a ﬁve-franc entrance
fee, the party drew a mixed audience of about four hundred, who watched
a boxing exhibition and danced to a jazz band (organized by Léo Sajous,
who had tried unsuccessfully to hire Josephine Baker). The UTN appar-
ently lost money on the event, but Kouyaté considered it “good for propa-
ganda.” Even in June 1933, as Kouyaté’s conﬂict with the Party was unrav-
eling the organization, the UTN was considering throwing another beneﬁt
to raise money for the defense in the Scottsboro trial.
124 These efforts were
part and parcel of a broader line of thinking in the LDRN and UTN,
which even as they attempted to organize dock workers and foster anti-
INVENTING THE BLACK INTERNA TIONAL 287


--- PAGE 299 ---
colonial consciousness, remained committed to what as early as the fall of
1927 was being referred to as a necessary “afﬁrmation of the black personal-
ity” (la personnalité nègre) in their efforts.125
I am suggesting, in other words, that under Kouyaté’s leadership, the
LDRN and UTN in Paris pursued a vision of black cultural politics that—
perhaps more forcefully than any other black group of the late 1920s and
early 1930s, whether the NAACP or the Urban League in New York, or
formations in London including Garvey’s UNIA, the West African Stu-
dents’ Union, and Harold Moody’s League of Coloured Peoples—con-
joined anticolonialism with a rich attention to black expressive culture.
This was not the principal theme articulated in either La Race nègre and Le
Cri des Nègres, but a great deal of the work in the periodicals is written un-
der the assumption that (to rephrase James Hooker) peoples of African de-
scent shared not only political concerns, but a complex cultural heritage as
well. Moreover, these newspapers were not content simply to celebrate
black art, but contended that it was necessary to theorize a politics of black
expressive culture at the height of European colonialism. Thus, although
some of the debates recapitulate earlier work in the United States, such as
mid-1920s exchanges among African American writers in Opportunity, the
Nation, and the Messenger, the issue of cultural politics is posed in La Race
nègre and Le Cri des Nègres not so much in the familiar Harlem context—
civil rights, class concerns, American cultural nationalism, skin color ten-
sions—as under the particular pressures of French imperialism: surveillance
and harassment in Paris; censorship, brutality, and exploitation in Africa.
One of the best examples of the Francophone radical take on black cul-
tural politics is Kouyaté’s review of Paul Morand’s Magie Noire in the fall
of 1928.
126 J. S. Spiegler remarks that “on no other occasion did an article
of similar orientation and tone appear, and this one seems rather a dis-
play of Kouyaté’s versatility than an indication of his main concerns.”
127
Certainly the essay, as a work of literary criticism, is exceptional both
among Kouyaté’s contributions and in the overall scope of the articles inLa
Race nègre. (It would be incorrect, though, to claim that the paper generally
neglected literature: on other occasions, for example, it published excerpts
from books by Lucie Cousturier and André Gide, a poem by Jeanne
Marqués, and a reprinted review of Philippe Soupault’s 1927 novel Le
Nègre.)
128 At the same time, the essay hews to the periodical’s consistent in-
vestment in a notion of “la personnalité nègre” and insists on situating its
288 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 300 ---
reading of Morand’s ﬁction within the contemporary context of French co-
lonialism. The subject of the article is not haphazard, of course: just as La
Race nègre’s publication of poems by Marcus Garvey in 1927 had forcefully
marked a departure from the common representation of African American
literature in the moderate “cultural” periodicals in Paris such asLa Dépêche
africaine, Kouyaté’s review amounts to a contention that the “political”
Ligue de Défense de la Race Nègre had a position with regard to the liter-
ary representation of peoples of African descent. Kouyaté’s reading is at
least as eloquent and passionate as the reviews by Jane Nardal, Léon-
Gontran Damas, and W . E. B. Du Bois mentioned earlier, but his inﬂec-
tion of the issues raised by Morand’s book diverges in signiﬁcant ways from
other black critiques.
Kouyaté’s review essay is called “La trahison du clerc Paul Morand” (The
treason of the clerk Paul Morand). The title alludes to another work that
had appeared in 1928, philosopher Julien Benda’s La Trahison des clercs
(translated into English as The Treason of the Intellectuals).
129 Kouyaté
commences by invoking Benda, the “restless philosopher” (le philosophe
inquiet), and then asks a pointed rhetorical question: “When is it that the
intellectual betrays?” Since his “social role” is “to illuminate the people, to
guide the masses towards an ideal of existence,” the intellectual commits
“treason”
when he preaches an aggressive patriotism instead of the love of one’s
country, when he cultivates race hatred, which leads to national or in-
ternational insecurity; in a word, when he places his spiritual author-
ity in the service of an unjust collective cause. (2)
Kouyaté charges that “M. Morand has betrayed his intellectual mission [ sa
mission de clerc] in writing Black Magic” since the book is nothing more
than a “plea in favor of color prejudice.” Although ﬁve years later, the no-
tion of a Black International would be quite concrete for Kouyaté, here (a
year before he ﬁrst met Padmore) he lists it as one among the fanciful cal-
umnies that Morand imposes in his catalog of the rising tide of color:
In it, the author has deliberately piled all the sins of Israel on the head
of the poor race nègre. The approaching formation of a “Negro Inter-
national” [Internationale noire] annexed to the Third International,
the inexistence of a national language permitting the nègres to under-
INVENTING THE BLACK INTERNA TIONAL 289


--- PAGE 301 ---
stand each other, the impossibility for our American race brothers to
live in Africa because of their stage of evolution, the imperfectibility
of the nègre, his overﬂowing sexual vitality, such are the principal
themes treated with disconcerting verve and imagination. (2)
Of all of Morand’s hallucinated “heresies,” Kouyaté writes, the most offen-
sive is the supposed “imperfectibility of the nègre.” In contrast to Nardal’s
feminist complaint and Damas’s biting sarcasm, Kouyaté’s critique draws
its force from its measured tone and astonishing erudition. The review
makes reference to an overwhelming barrage of contemporary French intel-
lectuals (including Pierre Mille, Maurice Delafosse, Paul Souday, René
Maran, André Gide, and Lucie Cousturier), as well as quoting from classi-
cal sources (Epicurus, Herodotus, Horace). Interestingly, rather than dis-
miss Black Magic as racist fantasy, Kouyaté attacks Morand’s credibility as
an anthropological observer and self-professed scholar of the black world.
T o contend that the black man was incapable of civilization, one would
have to ignore the “beautiful history of Africa, which for so long has been
evolving alone, without the aid of any other continent, and which has had
its centuries of thought and reﬂection, for example in the Sudan from the
fourteenth to the eighteenth century.” Although Morand claims to have
traveled more than “30,000 miles, [in] 28 Negro countries” while writing
the book, Kouyaté comments that “his descriptions of the countries are
pale, to the point that one cannot tell whether he is speaking of the savan-
nas of the Sudanese plains, the mountains of the Fouta-Djallon, the clear-
ings in the woods of the Sudan, or the hundred-year-old virgin forest of the
Ivory Coast” (2).
Above all, Morand the “voyager” should have told us “something new”
about black music, Kouyaté complains. For black music (la musique nègre)
is “inﬁnitely richer in varied notes than European music.” In Africa, he
continues,
where the least resonance makes the atmosphere divine and quiver-
ing, where exuberant nature, still untouched by certain profanations
of men, whispers with musical vibrations whose beauty equals the
very solemnity of the surrounding silence, the voyager heard nothing.
He stayed on the beaten paths, in search of something picturesque,
out of fashion, and ridiculous. One hoped to see M. Morand, the art-
ist, be stirred by real African music, mother of jazz. (3)
290 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 302 ---
Kouyaté’s profession of disappointment shifts into a fulsome appreciation
of music in Africa. The songs of African warriors (les chants guerriers), for
Kouyaté, contain “something distant, something nostalgic.” For Kouyaté,
they “evoke the grandeur of heroic and sublime times,” and when one
understands their historical and traditional signiﬁcation, they drive
you [ils vous conduisent] from Orphic elation to ecstasy, to the inebria-
tion of the Dionysian dream. The soul of the subject [ l’âme du sujet]
is annihilated for a time in immanent logos [le logos immanent]. Psy-
chological reactions thus follow from the imperious need to seek a
ﬁeld of energy [rechercher un champ d’énergie]. This explains the dyna-
mism of our dances, the mimed scenes of war. (3)
It is an extraordinary attempt to explicate the function of “possession” in
African performance traditions without recourse to the then widespread
notions such as Lévy-Bruhl’s “primitive mentality.” Kouyaté attempts to
develop a different theoretical vocabulary for what he calls one of the
“mystères d’Afrique”: the effect of black music in performance. What music
brings about is not oblivion or the abolition of functions of signiﬁcation
or an atavistic return to nature, but on the contrary a condition of abso-
lute intimacy (to the point of the temporary “annihilation” of the subject)
with what Kouyaté terms “immanent logos,” the materiality of the linguis-
tic sign.
Subtly countering the old Western contentions about Africa, Kouyaté
theorizes the “psychological” effects of African music as an eminently his-
torical sensibility. The music is “dynamic” and effectual due to the listener’s
“understanding” of history and tradition; indeed, the quest for a “ﬁeld of
energy” appears to depend on (or even be rooted in) the listener’s sense of
the past. Even if it can involve affective “ecstasy” and “inebriation,” the
quest is not blind or wild, but an action marked by a certain “research”
(rechercher) that the songs “drive” (conduisent) in the listener who knows
their signiﬁcance. Surprisingly, the article closes almost graciously—or to
use Kouyaté’s own word, with a certain “indulgence” (usons d’un trésor
d’indulgence envers notre contempleur M. Paul Morand)—lightly discarding
Morand’s offenses rather than obsessing over them, in order to focus in-
stead on the richness of African culture. In order to “penetrate the psychic
atmosphere of our countries,” Kouyaté concludes, “one would need more
of a visit than M. Morand gave, more sympathy than he can give....A f -
INVENTING THE BLACK INTERNA TIONAL 291


--- PAGE 303 ---
rica, whose geographic form is that of the heart, encloses in its sad destiny
the beginning, the goals and the end of human civilization [enferme dans sa
triste destinée le commencement, les buts et la ﬁn de la civilisation humaine]”
(3). In another shift of register, a trope of sentimentality allows Kouyaté to
position continental Africa as the origin and ultimate object of a universal
humanism.
I have already argued that to a remarkable extent, the impetus for trans-
national communication and exchange among intellectuals of African de-
scent in the interwar period arises from the Francophone side. Like René
Maran opening a dialogue with Alain Locke, Kojo T ovalou Houénou pur-
suing ties with Marcus Garvey and W . E. B. Du Bois, or the Nardal sisters
questioning Locke about translating The New Negro, Kouyaté was keen
to engage black U.S. and Caribbean ﬁgures in correspondence. In fact,
Kouyaté was the most proliﬁc letter writer among Francophone intellectu-
als during the interwar period—a pursuit that may have had some inﬂu-
ence on Padmore during the years leading up to his own missive to Du Bois
from Paris in February 1934. Even as the Congrès Mondial Nègre effort
was collapsing, Kouyaté was thinking about transnational connections: the
same week Padmore wrote Du Bois, Kouyaté arranged a meeting with a
black journalist from the United States who wanted to write an article
about their plans.
130
As early as September 1927, an unsigned article in La Race nègre in-
structed that “our American brothers offer us a living example of the way
we must struggle. It is in their school that we will learn how to emancipate
ourselves, bringing some originality to the expression of our personality
[l’expression de notre personnalité], in harmony with the catalyzing mi -
lieu.”
131 This injunction ﬁrst of all led to the paper’s concerted interest in
the African American press over the next few years, as in its translations of
writings by Garvey and other items from the United States. In the spring of
1929, for instance, the paper translated an article from the Pittsburgh Cou-
rier that itself was a review of a previous issue of La Race nègre.
132 In other
words, the translations functioned not just in the service of an ideology of
vanguardist “instruction” from the Harlem Renaissance, but also to con-
ﬁrm the transnational audience of La Race nègre—as though the fact that
the French periodical had garnered a readership among U.S. blacks (and
speciﬁcally the African American press) was itself evidence that the black
292 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 304 ---
French struggle was viable and “original,” a vital part of a broader dialogue
on black liberation and modernity.
But whether penned by Kouyaté himself or not, the 1927 article is also
consonant with his many attempts during the period to contact black intel-
lectuals directly. In one case, the exchange seems to have commenced with
a note from London. That same September, one of the surveillance agents
for the French government charged with tracking the LDRN reported that
Kouyaté had “received a letter from London from Mme Marcus Garvey,
congratulating him and urging him to persevere in the struggle undertaken
by French Blacks [Nègres de France] for the emancipation of the race. At the
same time she [sent] him an English-language pamphlet, suggesting that he
translate it and give her his opinion.”
133 Amy Jacques Garvey, Garvey’s for-
mer secretary and second wife, by the fall of 1927 was a central force and a
key feminist voice in the UNIA. She had developed into a leader of the
movement after Garvey was indicted for mail fraud in 1923, even serving
for a time as associate editor of the Negro World.
134 This contact apparently
led to other Anglophone ties as well. In August 1927, the Nigerian Lapido
Solanke of the West African Students’ Union in London had written in
English to Kouyaté, addressing him as “brother,” and noted that Amy
Jacques Garvey had suggested he contact Kouyaté to request a copy of La
Race nègre. Solanke included a copy of the latest issue of his own organiza-
tion’s periodical,Wasu, and in the next two years La Race nègre would trans-
late material not only from Garvey’sNegro World but also from Wasu.
135
Marcus Garvey may have had links to Kouyaté and the LDRN even ear-
lier, since one list of subscribers to La Race nègre in August 1927, compiled
by the French colonial authorities, recorded one “Marcus Garvey, P .O. Box
1913, Atlanta, Georgia” (Garvey served his sentence for mail fraud in the
Atlanta Federal Penitentiary from February 1925 until his deportation
from the United States in December 1927).
136 The UNIA leader was
deﬁnitely in touch with Kouyaté by the beginning of 1928, when the
French Colonial Ministry intercepted a letter in which Garvey wrote that
he regretted that he could not send a ﬁnancial contribution to the LDRN,
but that he hoped to work together in the future “for the good of the blacks
[nègres] of French Africa.”
137 In Amy Jacques Garvey’s autobiographical his-
tory of the movement, she offers the tantalizing but vague information that
she and Garvey met with members of the “Comte [ sic] de la Race Nègre”
INVENTING THE BLACK INTERNA TIONAL 293


--- PAGE 305 ---
when they visited Paris in August 1928. Some historians have even claimed
that Garvey actually became a member of the Comité de Defense de la
Race Nègre around this time.
138 (Given the timing of the visit, it seems
more likely that it would have been the LDRN, the Comité’s successor—
unless Garvey had joined before his visit to France and before the schism of
the Comité in April 1927.) Just before that visit, in July, Kouyaté had writ-
ten to Garvey himself, sending a letter in French that is familiar to the
point of being chatty, including some details (a reference to a previous tele-
gram and other letters) that imply a more voluminous correspondence be-
tween the two men. “For a number of months, we haven’t had any news
from you, and we assume that all is well,” the letter opens. “If we haven’t
written you again, it is because we thought that you would be here during
the spring, and that our letter would ﬁnd neither you nor Mme Amy
Jacques Garvey in Jamaica. We can only hope to see you in the summer.”
139
Even in the midst of his ongoing squabbles with the French Communist
Party, Kouyaté sought connections with black intellectuals across the politi-
cal spectrum, just as Kojo T ovalou Houénou had in 1924. He corre-
sponded with the Garveys, but also was in contact with the NAACP . In
October 1927, the French surveillance reported that Kouyaté received a
brochure about the activities of the civil rights organization, as well as a
number of press releases.
140 Nearly a year later, he wrote to James Weldon
Johnson, asking if Johnson could provide some sort of directory or address
listing of African America, in which one could ﬁnd the addresses of all the
“important establishments” under black ownership: “universities, newspa-
pers, industrial enterprises, banks, churches and temples, businesses, etc.”
Such a direct resource, Kouyaté explained, “would permit us if the need
arose to make connections between black American businesses [ les entre-
prises nègres d’Amérique] and those in Africa and the French Antilles.”
Kouyaté also thanked Johnson for the assistance of the “Press Service” (ap-
parently referring to the Associated Negro Press, one possible source for the
previously mentioned article from the Pittsburgh Courier that La Race nègre
published in the spring of 1929) in providing articles from U.S. periodicals
and added that the NAACP would be receiving a regular subscription toLa
Race nègre.
141
In the summer of 1929, Kouyaté apparently used an address list pro-
vided by the NAACP , sending a circular to a wide variety of individuals and
organizations in the United States (including W . E. B. Du Bois at the
294 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 306 ---
NAACP and administrators at a number of historically black colleges and
universities) to announce that the LDRN was forming a “Student Group”
(Groupe des Etudiants). “Young Negro intellectuals”(la jeunesse intellectuelle
noire) must count on each other,” he writes, “cooperating across national
and linguistic borders towards the development of quality systems of in-
struction in Africa, Europe, and the Americas.” As T ovalou Houénou had
argued in 1924, Kouyaté writes that even if there had been great strides in
black education in the United States, the center of the common effort
should be located in Paris, which “in the future will be the place of rendez-
vous of all the black [nègres] intellectuals passing through France.”
142 This
letter followed up on two articles in La Race nègre in the spring of 1929,
calling for a student section in the Ligue. Black intellectual youth “stag-
nates” (végète) since it develops without aid, “without a national ﬂag, with-
out existing governments who are concerned for its full education [éduca-
tion intégrale].”
143 So the initiative was an attempt to come to terms with
the condition of diaspora: an attempt to conceive an institution fostering
intellectual exchange and development by providing support and dissemi-
nation networks that might have otherwise been the responsibility of a
nation-state or states.
It was not the ﬁrst time he had written to W . E. B. Du Bois. At the end
of 1928, Kouyaté and a delegation from the LDRN had been received by
Roger Baldwin, the American Civil Liberties Union lawyer, who apparently
suggested they contact the great scholar and Crisis editor.
144 In April 1929,
Kouyaté followed up by posting an effusive description in French of the
work of the Ligue, dropping Baldwin’s name and asking for the “moral and
ﬁnancial solidarity” of the NAACP . “The goal of our Ligue,” Kouyaté ex-
plained,
is the political, economic, moral and intellectual emancipation of the
whole of the black race [la race nègre]. It is a matter of winning back,
by all honorable means, the national independence of black peoples
in the colonial territories of France, England, Belgium, Italy, Spain,
Portugal, etc....a n do fsetting up in black Africa a great Negro State
[un grand Etat nègre] ....O nt h eother hand, we desire to co-ordinate
our actions with your efforts....[I]t is for the American Negroes
[Nègres américains] to tell us what they wish, and how they intend to
fulﬁll their aspirations. The cardinal point lies in the elaboration of a
INVENTING THE BLACK INTERNA TIONAL 295


--- PAGE 307 ---
common and precise program, in the uniﬁcation of the world Negro
movement [mouvement nègre mondial], without ever losing sight of
the details of difference.
145
Du Bois may have been amenable to the letter’s focus on emancipation and
even anticolonial nationalism. Nevertheless, the patrician statesman would
have taken Kouyaté’s call for “un grand Etat nègre” as wishful thinking at
best—and at worst, as an echo of Marcus Garvey’s imperialist fantasies. But
the letter also expresses Kouyaté’s keen interest in pan-African initiatives of
any sort, as well as his conviction that the “Negro race” suffers above all
from “internecine divisions” and a “lack of a spirit of solidarity” (an argu-
ment Kouyaté made in many venues in this period, such as the previously
cited “Vox Africae” from La Race nègre and his speech to the League
Against Imperialism in Frankfurt). In closing, Kouyaté requests “ﬁnancial
help,” a “temporary” assistance for the “fortiﬁcation of [the Ligue’s] liaison
with the black [nègres] masses of Africa and the Antilles.” In a signiﬁcant
aside, he adds that “the regularity [périodicité] of our newspaper would es-
pecially beneﬁt” from the NAACP’s aid.
In these varied instances, it is possible to glean a sense of what the
institutionalization of a particularly Francophone black internationalist
practice—at least in Kouyaté’s vision—might have involved, had it found
the necessary resources and response: the possibility of educational ex-
changes and ﬁnancial support for students of African descent around
the world; the pursuit of transnational black business cooperatives and
economic alliances; the fostering of channels of information sharing and
strategizing among differently placed civil rights organizations, periodicals,
and anticolonial pressure groups; and an understanding of cultural politics
that insisted on combining critiques of racial representation in literature
and music with critiques of colonial exploitation. But for the most part, the
promise of such initiatives, and more broadly the promise of a Franco-
phone internationalism, remain only conjecture, only shadows in the ar-
chive, only traces and hints. Du Bois never answered Kouyaté’s letter.
International African
The high point of black transnational organizing between the wars arose in
response to the Italian invasion of Ethiopia in the middle of the decade.
The travesty of the fascist incursion into one of the three independent sov-
296 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 308 ---
ereign black nation-states, and the feeble response of both the international
community generally and the League of Nations in particular, triggered an
explosion of outrage and concern among communities of African descent
around the world, punctuated by large public protest demonstrations
throughout the period.
146 A number of commentators considered the inva-
sion not just an outrage but more ominously the initial gambit in a coming
“race war,” a new tentacle of European colonialism. “The real dimensions,”
Makonnen explains, “can only be gathered by estimating the kind of vast
support that Ethiopia enjoyed amongst blacks everywhere. ...I tw a sclear
that imperialism was a force to be reckoned with, because here it was at-
tacking the black man’s last citadel.”
147 The efforts around the crisis, which
began with the initial Italo-Ethiopian disputes in late 1934 and escalated
with the invasion ordered by Mussolini in the autumn of 1935 and the fall
of Addis Ababa in May 1936, might also be said to mark the high point of
Francophone participation in black transnational organizing in the ﬁrst
half of the twentieth century—and as such (particularly due to the decima-
tion of the Francophone intellectual and activist community in Paris dur-
ing World War II) they are crucial to a reconsideration of the emergence of
postwar Manchester Pan-Africanism.
It should come as no surprise that even compared to those in London,
the protest organizations that sprang up in Paris were characterized by an
astounding degree of boundary crossing and “intercolonial” projects, draw-
ing together not just peoples of African descent but a much broader coali-
tion of colonial peoples and oppressed minorities around the globe. In
1936, there was held in Paris an International Conference of Arabs and Ne-
groes, which “attracted representatives from African organizations through-
out Europe and Africa. The gathering was apparently concerned with wider
issues than simply Ethiopian independence and harbored ambitions of be-
coming a permanent political organization uniting Arabs and Negroes.”
148
The longest lasting and most signiﬁcant of these efforts was the Ras-
semblement Coloniale, organized in 1937 by Algerian nationalist Messali
Hadj, which brought together activists from North Africa, the French Ca-
ribbean (Raoul Cénac-Thaly), Africa (Kouyaté, Ramananjato, Faure), and
Asia (Nguyen The T ruyen).
149 T . Ras Makonnen and a group of black
Anglophone ﬁgures attended at least one meeting of the Rassemblement,
which brought together trade union activists and anticolonial intellec -
tuals.
150
INVENTING THE BLACK INTERNA TIONAL 297


--- PAGE 309 ---
Almost all the major interwar ﬁgures still living in the metropole were
involved in organizing around the Ethiopian crisis. René Maran published
a number of articles calling for France to intervene against fascist Italy. 151
Kouyaté, while publishing a stream of essays mainly in the Algerian nation-
alist newspaper El Ouma, went on a speaking tour in the capital region
(“Paris, Boulogne-Billancourt, Livry-Gargan, Chatou, Croissy, etc.”) with
none other than Professor Marcel Griaule, the great French ethnologist and
scholar of Ethiopia who had led the government-sponsored Mission Dakar-
Djibouti from 1931 to 1933. One Saturday afternoon in October 1935,
they appeared together at the Club du Faubourg, debating the politics
of the “war in Ethiopia” with conservative speakers from the Front Na-
tional.
152
Paulette Nardal played a key role in the effort due to her ﬂuent English.
She served as the secretary of the “Comité de Défense d’Ethiopie” (Ethio-
pian Defense Committee) founded by Kouyaté that year. The Comité
served as an umbrella organization in Paris that united a host of “colonial”
groups in protest and educational activities in order to “call for, centralize,
harmonize and stimulate their efforts towards a solidarity acting in favor of
Ethiopia.”
153 The groups brought together included Emile Faure’s LDRN,
Messali Hadj’s Etoile Nord Africaine, the UTN (now headed mainly by
Stéphane Rosso), the League Against Imperialism, the Comité Schœlcher
(run by a Guadeloupean, Léon Hanna-Charley), the T unisian Parti
Destourien, and a Catholic group called “Aide-toi, le Ciel d’aidera.” In Le
Cri des Nègres, Nardal published a short article including a telegram sent to
the League of Nations protesting the invasion in the name of “the colored
peoples [les groupements de couleur] of the entire world, without distinction
of nationality, party or class.”
154 She was one of the rare black intellectuals
in Paris to publish on the Ethiopian crisis in Africa itself, penning a moder-
ate article on the upswing of black internationalist consciousness for Le
Périscope africain, a bi-monthly newspaper edited in Dakar by Galandou
Diouf and Ibrahim Sow.
155
Nardal was the primary relay between the Comité de Défense d’Ethiopie
in France and a parallel group formed in England by C. L. R. James called
the International African Friends of Ethiopia (IAFE), which George Pad-
more joined when he moved to London in 1935.
156 I will close by com-
menting brieﬂy on the group that emerged out of this formation: the Inter-
298 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 310 ---
national African Service Bureau (IASB), which was assembled by Padmore
in March 1937. Its executive committee included Padmore, James, Makon-
nen, Jomo Kenyatta, I. T . A. Wallace Johnson, Peter Milliard (Guyana),
William Harrison (Jamaica), Chris Jones (Barbados), Laminah Sankoh (Si-
erra Leone), and Babalola Wilkey (Nigeria).157 The IASB “devoted itself to
the study of the colonial question and the spread of propaganda and agita-
tion all over Britain, in Africa and in the territories inhabited by people of
African descent.”
158 It also would provide the most direct connection be-
tween interwar black anticolonialism and the movements after World War
II, since the IASB was at the center of a number of smaller groups that
merged in 1943 to form the Pan-African Federation, which would revive
Du Bois’s movement over the next two years.
159
The origins of this small but crucial organization are usually located in
the Italo-Ethiopian protests, for as Makonnen puts it, the “whole move-
ment towards the IASB derived directly from the Ethiopian crisis, and al-
though our interests now became broader, a link was maintained with Ethi-
opia right through the period in London.”
160 But I am concluding with the
IASB in order to suggest some of the ways this formation points further
back, at the internationalist projects Kouyaté and Padmore pursued in
Paris. Like the earlier formations, the IASB was especially concerned with
knowledge production and the politics of print culture. Its members spoke
at numerous leftist gatherings in London, but concentrated their efforts on
a remarkable series of publications over the next four years: books (includ-
ing James’sThe Black Jacobins and A History of Negro Revolt, as well as his
play T oussaint l’Ouverture,in which Paul Robeson acted the lead role in a
1936 London production; Padmore’s How Britain Rules Africa and Africa
and World Peace), periodicals (African Sentinel and International African
Opinion), and pamphlets (including titles such as The West Indies T o-day,
Hands Off the Protectorates, Kenya, Land of Conﬂict, African Empires and
Civilization, The Negro in the Caribbean, and the quixotic Socratic dialogue
between Nancy Cunard and Padmore published as The White Man’s Duty).
From July until October 1938 (when he departed for the United States),
C. L. R. James served as the editor of International African Opinion, the
monthly journal of the Bureau. The “Editorial” to the ﬁrst issue in July—
unsigned, but most likely written largely by James—is perhaps the most
emphatic statement of the aims of the group. The two-page piece is both a
INVENTING THE BLACK INTERNA TIONAL 299


--- PAGE 311 ---
position paper on “black political consciousness” in the period of the apo-
theosis of European imperialism and a call to internationalization. It explic-
itly addresses a transnational audience, avowing its Anglophone origin but
grounding its appeal in what Aimé Césaire a year later would term the
“compass of suffering” among black populations throughout the world,
“scattered” by imperialism and by language: “Although our position in
London makes us more immediately familiar with the problems of Negroes
in the British colonies, yet our appeal for collaboration is to Negroes wher-
ever they are, in French and Belgian colonies, in the United States and in
South America. Problems differ from country to country, but there is a
common bond of oppression, and as the Ethiopian struggle has shown, all
Negroes everywhere are beginning to see the necessity for international or-
ganization and the uniﬁcation of their scattered efforts.”
161
The editorial is forcefully antivanguardist, basing its conception of revo-
lutionary change in what James would come to call “the self-activity of
the masses.” In this regard it recalls earlier work such as Kouyaté’s “Vox
Africae” and Padmore’s editorial stance in theNegro Worker in its effort at a
theoretical articulation of the complex relations between radical intellectual
work in the metropole and black mass resistance in the colonies themselves:
“We base ourselves upon the great masses of the people. The individual
achievements of a few black men do not and cannot solve the problems of
the blacks.” The black intelligentsia and the black middle classes must learn
that “in the present state of world affairs there is no way out for them by
seeking crumbs from the tables of their imperialist masters” (2). But this
does not mean that the highly educated, the upwardly mobile, the évolués
hold a privileged position in the ongoing struggle against colonialism. On
the contrary,
[w]e know our limitations. We know that we cannot liberate the mil-
lions of Africans and people of African descent from their servitude
and oppression. That task no one can do but the black people them-
selves. But we can help to stimulate the growing consciousness of the
blacks, to give them the beneﬁt of our daily contact with the Euro-
pean movement, to learn from the black masses the lessons of the
profound experiences that they accumulate in their daily toil, to point
out certain pitfalls that may be avoided, to co-ordinate information
and organization, to do an incessant propaganda in every quarter of
300 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 312 ---
Britain, exposing evils, pressing for such remedies as are possible, and
mobilising whatever assistance there is to be found in Europe for the
cause of African emancipation. (2–3)
Here the editorial is attempting, in other words, to theorize the precise
valence of the term “service” in the phrase “International African Ser-
vice.” What can a journal accomplish? For International African Opinion,
the answer involves education (the “study” of colonial questions) and con-
sciousness raising, links between colony and metropole through exchange
and dialogue in its pages, debates over political strategy and coordination,
ﬁnancial assistance for anticolonial struggles in Africa, and propaganda in
Europe. Reminiscent of the Negro Worker and Le Cri des Nègres, the mast-
head prints the phrase “International African Service” under an image of an
INVENTING THE BLACK INTERNA TIONAL 301
Masthead of International African Opinion (July 1938).
[To view this image, refer to  
the print version of this title.]


--- PAGE 313 ---
African woman holding up a torch, superimposed on a map that highlights
points in the diaspora, naming the “West Indies,” “Brazil, etc.,” “Africa,”
and—interestingly—“Malaysia” and “Borneo, etc.” The “service” designa-
tion is to some degree itself strategic, in a milieu when any organization not
afﬁliated with the Popular Front was being designated as “fascist.” As
Makonnen recalls, as early as 1937 “we had naturally considered the possi-
bility of reviving DuBois’s pan-African movement, but it seemed safer to
operate under the umbrella of service rather than risk a frontal attack by
taking a bolder pan-African title.”
162
Aside from a lengthy description of a speech by Emile Faure criticizing
the colonial policy of the Popular Front government in France, there is al-
most no Francophone coverage or participation in International African
Opinion, and Kouyaté’s name never appears.
163 Nevertheless, as I men-
tioned earlier, Padmore was still in contact with Kouyaté at this point and
was deﬁnitely aware of Kouyaté’s journal Africa, founded in December
1935 with the help of the Etoile Nord Africaine and the LDRN.
164 There
are intriguing parallels in the ideological positioning of the two journals, al-
though overall Kouyaté’s Africa evidences his “passage from far to centre
Left”
165 during the period, moving away from any kind of overt critique of
French colonialism and eventually accepting an afﬁliation with (and ﬁnan-
cial support from) the Popular Front, which had come into power in the
legislative elections in May 1936 just prior to the fall of Addis Ababa. But
the editorial statement in the ﬁrst issue of Africa announces its project as
one of education and propaganda in a tone that presages the appeal in In-
ternational African Opinion: Kouyaté writes that his journal “has the ambi-
tion of contributing to informing, enlightening, and educating the public
opinion of France and its Colonies about all problems relating to Africa,
about the vital interests of its peoples, and about the interests of peoples of
African origin.”
166
The editorial in International African Opinion announces that it will be
“no literary journal or giver of advice from the mountain-tops. It will be a
journal of action.” As with La Race nègre, the refusal of a high literary elit-
ism in International African Opinion does not mean the journal ignores
the politics of literary representation. On the contrary, alongside Pad-
more’s “Labour Unrest in Jamaica” and Makonnen’s “A Plea for Negro Self-
Government,” the reader also encounters detailed reviews of Zora Neale
Hurston’sTheir Eyes Were Watching God and Kenyatta’s Facing Mount
302 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 314 ---
Kenya, as well as shorter notes on the death of James Weldon Johnson and
the publication of Richard Wright’s Uncle T om’s Children,and poems by
Langston Hughes, Paul Potts, J. R. Ralph Casimir, and Claude McKay (a
reprint of the militant “If We Must Die”).167 The larger issue involves the
deﬁnition of the phrase “journal of action”—a periodical geared to “serve,”
as the editorial puts it, as “a living weapon in the struggle” (3).
What makes International African Opinion a “journal of action” is not
only the space it creates for political dialogue and cultural criticism in the
interest of a black internationalist project, but also the particular version of
diaspora it articulates: the way it speaks across décalage, an avowedly un-
even and “scattered” transnational context of “unco-ordinated struggle.” It
is important to recognize that this articulation is not just symbolic (the
masthead) and ideological (the variety of opinions and sites represented),
but perhaps most pointedly discursive, lodged ﬁrst and foremost in the very
proposition stated in the journal’s title: “International African.” The IASB
“styles itself African,” the editorial speciﬁes (2). In one of the IASB’s public-
ity statements, the group claims to be “primarily an African organisation,
run solely by Africans.”
168 But what exactly is an “international African,”
especially as a description in a periodical run primarily by Caribbean intel-
lectuals? “African” here indicates not some mystiﬁcation of “roots” or “com-
mon blood,” but instead an expressly antiracialist stance (rejecting any “ra-
cial chauvinism,” the editors “repudiate the idea of substituting a black
racial arrogance for a white”) (2). In other words, the term “African” is
above all a claimed identity, an identity clutched and guarded and cele-
brated, in something approaching the way Ralph Ellison would later de-
scribe “Negro American” identity as a “willed (who wills to be a Negro? I
do!) afﬁrmation of self as against all outside pressures.”
169
At the same time, “African” marks a particular take on internationalism:
as a project of “service” rather than elitist directives; as a space for exchange
and argument that prioritizes—rather than ignores or mentions in pass-
ing—the “African struggle” (2); as an insistence on self-reliance and self-
emancipation instead of any “forced dependence” on patronage and aid
(2); as a populist dialogue and open collaboration similar to that which
Padmore had announced in the Negro Worker (“We . . . ask our black
brothers to look upon this journal as their own, to see with us that it is
through their co-operation that we can make it effective”) (3). Moreover,
the “styling” of the journal and of the IASB more generally as “African” po-
INVENTING THE BLACK INTERNA TIONAL 303


--- PAGE 315 ---
sitions black internationalism in a broad array of contemporary antifascist
and anticolonial ﬁghts. “We take no isolated view of our task,” the editorial
notes. “With the struggle of the Spanish Revolution, with China’s ﬁght
against Japan, with India’s struggle for independence, and with the struggle
of the workers everywhere against Fascism in all its aspects, we unite our-
selves not only in words but in action, and shall strive to arouse in our peo-
ple a consciousness of the common destiny of all the oppressed of whatever
nationality or race” (3).
The journal, in the end, recalls the Congrès Mondial in that it attempts
to institutionalize a space not for some predetermined or hierarchized inter-
action but precisely for the practice of black internationalism. The editorial
argues that
international organization of all forms of struggle is a necessity and
the aim of all thinking persons today, but this will not be achieved by
abstract repetition of forms of words, which cover a half-conscious
denial of African aspirations and needs, it will be accomplished only
by mutual conﬁdence and respect on a basis of complete equality,
learnt in discussion, struggle and danger honestly shared and recipro-
cal assistance generously given. (3)
This call echoing what a decade earlier René Maran termed “reciprocity”
does not set the scope of “action,” the particular strategic contours, or the
ultimate prospects of an anticolonial project pursued through a transna-
tional organization. It aims to install a structure of interaction among vari-
ous actors—the many meanings of “international African”—that is both
just and efﬁcacious: a practice where equality is “learnt in discussion, strug-
gle and danger honestly shared.” As with the Congrès Mondial, its main
ideological imperative is ideological autonomy—as Makonnen puts it, the
establishment of an “international African” movement “free from any en-
tanglement.”
170 This imperative, that the “international African” also and
above all means the independent African, is part of what Cedric Robinson
means when he writes that the experience of slavery and Western imperial-
ism is “merely the condition for black radicalism—its immediate reason for
and object of being—but not the foundation for its nature or character.
Black radicalism, consequently, cannot be understood within the particular
context of its genesis. It is not a variant of western radicalism whose propo-
nents happen to be black.”
171
304 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 316 ---
It is at ﬁrst glance a perplexing claim: is it possible to divorce the emer-
gence of black radicalism from the history of Western radicalism, especially
when so many of its key activists and intellectuals (including Padmore,
Kouyaté, and James) were formed through contact with international com-
munism? Interestingly, this is an assertion that appears in Padmore’s own
work in the 1930s, in his claims that “black civilisation was heterogeneous
to the civilisation of Europe.”
172 Later C. L. R. James, looking back at the
interwar period, wrote in a similar vein that “whatever the future of tropi-
cal Africa will be, one thing is certain, that it will not be what the colo-
nial powers are trying to make of it. It will be violent and strange, with the
most abrupt and unpredictable changes in economic relations, race rela-
tions, territorial boundaries and everything else.”
173 The prevalence of such
language demands the recognition that the unﬁnished, groping nature of
projects such as the Congrès Mondial Nègre and the International African
Service Bureau marks the work of constructing something radically new,
framing a space in the midst of worldwide turmoil and unrest for a radi-
cally new kind of collaboration and political practice: an other epistemol-
ogy of blackness, “heterogeneous,” “unpredictable,” “violent and strange.”
If one result—one celebrated practice of the “international African”—is the
1945 Manchester version of Pan-Africanism, then the embattled, aborted,
eclipsed Paris collaboration between Padmore and Kouyaté is one of its
lesser-known blueprints.
INVENTING THE BLACK INTERNA TIONAL 305


--- PAGE 317 ---
CODA:
THE LAST ANTHOLOGY
O
ne might approach T . Ras Makonnen’s provocative paean to the
European metropole from an entirely different angle. “What are
you going to do with these boys back on the farm, once they have
seen Paree?”—this phrase isn’t an “old retort” at all, and it doesn’t originate
in the context of the British Empire either. In fact, it is an allusion to U.S.
popular culture. The boundaries are crossed in yet another sense. In 1919,
one of the greatest hits among American audiences was a tune called “How
’Ya Gonna Keep ’Em Down on the Farm (after They’ve Seen Paree?).” The
song was a collaboration of the lyricists Sam M. Lewis and Joe Young and
the composer Walter Donaldson (later the source of hits including “Yes Sir,
That’s My Baby,” “Love Me or Leave Me,” and “What Can I Say after I Say
I’m Sorry”). In facetiously countriﬁed verbiage, the lyrics enunciate the
worry of a rural couple that their son will come back from the war so ut-
terly enthralled by the French metropolis and the excesses of modern life
that it will be impossible for him to stand the simple life on the family
farm. The song culminates in the chorus:
How ’ya gonna keep ’em down on the farm
After they’ve seen Paree?
How ’ya gonna keep ’em away from Broadway,
Jazzin’ aroun’ and paintin’ the town?
How ’ya gonna keep ’em away from harm?
That’s a mystery;
They’ll never want to see a rake or a plow,
And who the deuce can parley vous a cow?
1
(In the second verse, the last two lines were replaced by another couplet:
“Imagine Reuben when he meets his pa, / He’ll kiss his cheek and holler


--- PAGE 318 ---
‘oo-la-la!’”) The song was popularized in versions by Nora Bayes and Ar-
thur Fields. But it had a special resonance for African Americans, too, espe-
cially in recordings by Ford Dabney and James Reese Europe. Nearly sixty
years later, the scabrous Harlem critic George Schuyler recalled in an inter-
view the ways the lyric touched on issues crucial to the lives of African
Americans during the Great Migration, when in the space of three decades,
tens of thousands moved from the U.S. South to the urban centers of the
North, seeking employment and opportunity. It meant something slightly
different for a black audience, as Schuyler points out, to raise the risk of
“jazzin’ around,” to wonder what happens when commerce and modernity
“bring the boys into town.”
2
T o note the source of Makonnen’s phrase in a popular song lyric is
also to suggest a point about the ways that, after World War I, discourses
of black internationalism—and modes of imagining transnational mi-
grancy—were not necessarily limited by class in the ways one might expect.
They were not conﬁned to the corridors of elitism, to conversations among
the Talented T enth in rareﬁed venues such as the sparsely attended Pan-Af-
rican Congresses or Paulette Nardal’s salon, where a dozen or two sipped
tea. Nor, inversely, were they limited to the vagabond dreams of the men
who attempted to evade or resist class interpellation, improvising transna-
tional bands at Europe’s best back door.
Coming back from the war, James Reese Europe’s 369th U.S. Infantry
Band, known as the “Hell Fighters,” were renowned not just for their con-
certs in the United States but also because they had been received so
warmly in France as one of the ﬁrst “exporters” of jazz.
3 Both in their con-
certs and in their March 1919 recordings for Pathé, Europe’s group popu-
larized a black version of the war experience for broad African American
audiences with songs such as “How ’Ya Gonna Keep ’Em Down on the
Farm?” (with the vocals sung by Noble Sissle), “All of No Man’s Land is
Ours,” and “My Choc’late Soldier Sammy Boy.”
4 During their ten-week
U.S. tour in the spring of 1919, the Hell Fighters’ “variety format” shows
for black audiences included “straight (or ‘High Brow’ as the program
sometimes explained) renditions of classical or operatic selections, medleys
of popular Broadway and Tin Pan Alley tunes, familiar ‘plantation’ or
Southern melodies, short recent compositions by black composers (like
William Tyers’ ‘Panama’), and their own jazz specialties.” Just before the
CODA 307


--- PAGE 319 ---
ﬁnale (a “rousing march”), Europe played the piano accompanying Sissle
singing “On Patrol in No Man’s Land,” which featured a battery of light
and sound effects in an imitation of cannons and guns.
5
It is possible to track the cultures of black internationalism in a number
of popular forms. John J. Niles, a white pilot who came to Paris in the U.S.
army at the end of 1917, published a book ten years later calledSinging Sol-
diers that attempted to document the music of African American soldiers,
which he considered to be “something original—a kind of folk music,
brought up to date and adapted to the war situations—at the same time sa-
voring of the haunting melodic value found in the negro music I had
known as a boy in Kentucky.”
6 In a remarkably detailed, illustrated narra-
tive, he transcribes dozens of songs sung in camps and on battleﬁelds by the
black soldiers, including prototypical blues (“Deep Sea Blues”) and—not
surprisingly, since the majority of African Americans who served in the war
were put on service details—work songs: “Motor trucks and caissons / Cut
a mighty trench, / have to pile de metal on / Fur dese poor damn French /
Diggin, diggin, diggin in Kentucky, / Diggin in T ennessee; diggin in North
Carolina—Diggin in France” (30–32). There are call and response songs,
prideful boasts, and more salacious songs about sexuality and desire across
the waters, such as the two-faced choruses Niles heard from soldiers in the
367th Infantry Regiment nicknamed the “Buffaloes”:
Mademoiselle from Armentiers, parlez-vous,
Mademoiselle from Armentiers, parlez-vous,
I’d like to git myself a sip
O’ what you got restin’ on your hip—
Inky Dinky, parlez-vous.
Mademoiselle from Armentiers, parlez-vous,
Mademoiselle from Armentiers, parlez-vous,
I wouldn’t give my high-brown belle,
For every mademoiselle dis side o’ hell—
Inky Dinky, parlez-vous. (61–62)
And the soldiers adapted a number of spirituals to their situation, including
“I’m a Soldier in the Army of the Lord” (42), “I Don’t Want to Go” (44),
“De Old Ark’s a Moverin’ an I’m Goin’ Home” (80–81), and “Roll, Jordan,
Roll”:
308 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 320 ---
Roll, Jordan, roll—roll, Jordan, roll—
Soldier, you’ll be called on,
T o shake that thing you’re settin’ on,
Dey’s a battle bein’ fought in de Argonne,
Roll, Jordan, roll. (151)
When a tune was appropriated from the white soldiers, “the colored fellows
made up their own verses,” sometimes with extraordinary results: “When I
came over I was mama’s pride and joy— / Now I’m just one of the Hoy-
P o l o y ....  /  Id o n ’ twant any more France. . . . / Jesus, I want to go home”
(69–71). These inventions and improvisations shaped more of black popu-
lar culture in the United States after the war than is sometimes recognized:
the issues they raise echoed in the weekly concerts sponsored by Garvey’s
UNIA at Liberty Hall in New York and were discussed at length in periodi-
cals such as Cyril Briggs’s theCrusader (where the Malagasy composer Andy
Razaf was a regular contributor of poems).
7 They ﬁltered even into blues
lyrics in the South, where Sonny Boy sang: “When you go to heaven,
gonna stop by France / When you go to heaven, gonna stop by France /
Gonna stop by there just to give these girls a chance.”
8 Ras Makonnen’s al-
lusion to popular culture should serve as a reminder, in other words, that
black internationalism is elaborated not just at the podium and in the class-
room, but in the barbershop and in the blues:
Hey, when Uncle Sam call you, leave by one, two and three
Yes, when Uncle Sam call you, be by one, two and three
There’s no use you a worryin’—just leave all your women back
here with me.
9
Although James Weldon Johnson goes “aﬁeld” to consider black popular
culture and Aframerican expression in the preface to The Book of American
Negro Poetry, there is only one anthology in the interwar period that at-
tempts to document discourses of black internationalism in a manner that
would combine the political—and more particularly, the communist—
with the poetic, the musical, the vernacular, the historical, the sculptural,
and the ethnological. The only work that dares such a constellation is the
1934 Negro: An Anthology, the monumental work compiled over the space
of four years by Nancy Cunard.
10
Raised in an upper-class family in England, Cunard moved to Paris in
CODA 309


--- PAGE 321 ---
1920 and was quickly ensconced in the swirling whirlpools of metropolitan
modernist culture. Her salons and parties attracted all the literary lights,
and the small publishing house she ran, the Hours Press, published a storm
of controversial literature by Ezra Pound, Robert Graves, Louis Aragon,
Laura Riding, and Samuel Beckett. Cunard was by all accounts an extra-
ordinary personage, tall and rail-thin, adorned in African bracelets and
trinkets up to her elbows. She was voracious and volcanic in appetites
and interests, working in the 1920s as “a poet, essayist, editor, journalist,
war correspondent, memoirist, translator, avant-garde publisher, African art
collector, and political activist.”
11 She was also a woman notorious for her
sexual relationships with black men, and her efforts at collecting works for
her anthology reverberate with some of the same dynamics that infuse
black vernacular lyrics such as “Mademoiselle from Armentiers”: a shifting
erotics of black transnational culture, a complex politics of seduction and
danger-laden ﬂirtation across the color line and across the sea.
In this sense Negro is also one record of the ways “the arc of desire” can
“intersect with the arc of intellectual activity,” as Jane Marcus phrases it.
12
The anthology attempts to “record” black internationalism as a sort of
dialectal materialism precisely by producing blackness as an inescapable
presence (Cunard writes that “the growing volume of the Communist con-
sciousness among the black workers, and in some of the Negro intellectu-
als” is “something new, more and more tangible”) (74). This materialist de-
sire is made manifest above all in the document-gathering materiality of the
book itself. At one point, frankly discussing the “desire to get close to the
other race” among white visitors to Harlem, Cunard writes that “whites are
unreal in America; they aredim. But the Negro is very real; he isthere” (69).
Negro’s relentless acquisitiveness and its mind-boggling breadth thus enact
an eroticized consumption of blackness that is part and parcel of what the
foreword announces to be the necessary “recording of the struggles and
achievements, the persecutions and the revolts against them, of the Negro
peoples” (iii).
This is also to suggest that Negro is the recording or embodying of
Cunard herself as a remarkable “living network” of black internationalist
connections and alliances in the early 1930s.
13 If George Padmore and
Tiemoko Garan Kouyaté strive to institutionalize a new International, a
working organization channeling and linking the networks of activists and
information they represented, Cunard’s practice of the anthology strives to
310 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 322 ---
archive her own related International—to torque and cajole her worldwide
contacts into a collaborative articulation of diaspora, into what one con-
tributor called a “collective book” (livre collectif). 14 It is an archive in the
sense that Jacques Derrida envisions when he describes a mal (both “fever”
and “trouble”) constitutive to any project of documentation—Cunard’s big
book betrays a compulsive desire for the archive in its excess, in its over-
whelming weight, a condition where the drive to collect and assemble
seems “never to rest, interminably, from searching for the archive right
where it slips away.”
15
Arlette Farge has argued that the archive is inherently “difﬁcult in its ma-
teriality,” and perhaps it should not be surprising that every consideration
of Negro: An Anthology opens by marveling at its sheer unwieldy size.
16 The
original edition weighs eight pounds and runs to 855 pages, including 385
illustrations. The book involves approximately 150 contributors, around
two-thirds of whom were of African descent.
17 (It was an extremely expen-
sive book to produce, and in fact Cunard—who had been disinherited by
her family—was able to pay the London printing house Wishart only when
she successfully sued a number of English newspapers for libel after they
published salacious reports of her interracial love affairs.) Negro is com-
posed of seven sections, a hodgepodge of regional, thematic, and generic
designations. “America” includes poetry (Langston Hughes’s “I, T oo” opens
the volume [3]); historical coverage on slavery, abolition, and lynching;
memoirs (varying from personal narratives of racial prejudice to William
Carlos Williams’s “The Colored Girls of Passenack,” a disturbingly lurid ac-
count of spying on his family’s maid in her bath [93–96]); U.S. journalism
on the “Negro question”; Cunard’s review of her visit to Harlem; a glossary
of Negro slang; literary criticism (by V . F . Calverton, John F . Matheus, and
Alain Locke); sociology (by E. Franklin Frazier and James W . Ivy, among
others); W . E. B. Du Bois’s overview of “Black America” (which, in an
inﬂammatory gesture, Cunard preceded with her own unsparing denuncia-
tion of the NAACP’s insufﬁcient radicalism, a piece titled “A Reactionary
Negro Organisation: A Short Review of Dr. Du Bois, The Crisis, and the
NAACP in 1932” [142–152]); essays on African Americans and commu-
nism by Will Herberg, Michael Gold, Eugene Gordon, and James Ford;
Cunard’s consideration of the Scottsboro case; and the ﬁrst publication of
some of Zora Neale Hurston’s most important ethnographic work (includ-
ing the incomparable “Characteristics of Negro Expression” [39–46]).
CODA 311


--- PAGE 323 ---
The second section, “Negro Stars,” includes essays and poems on jazz,
surveys of black theater and ﬁlm, and memoirs by the boxers Bob Scanlon
and Jack Taylor. Next “Music,” assembled with the help of the composer
George Antheil, covers the United States, the Caribbean, and Africa, repro-
ducing a number of scores. It has not been previously noticed that the arti-
cle on Martinican music (“The Biguine of the French Antilles,” signed only
with the pseudonym “Madiana”) (401–402) is actually the article Andrée
Nardal wrote for La Revue du monde noir in 1931, reprinted with a some-
what different and longer opening.
18 (It is unclear whether Nardal herself
contributed the piece to Negro or whether Cunard reprinted it without
crediting the original source.) “Poetry” assembles “white poets on Negro
themes” as well as Aframerican poets in James Weldon Johnson’s expanded
sense of the term (Langston Hughes, Arna Bontemps, Sterling Brown,
Countee Cullen, Nicolás Guillén, Regino Pedroso, Jacques Roumain,
among others), with the Spanish and French works translated by Hughes.
The ﬁfth section, “West Indies and South America,” contains historical es-
says, folklore, and sociological analyses, while “Europe” documents racism
in England and on the Continent with articles and illustrations (including
an inﬂammatory poster for François Coty’s bookLe Péril rouge en pays noir,
a publicity poster from the 1931 Exposition Coloniale in Paris, and a
Banania advertisement). This section includes the screed against colonial-
ism called “Murderous Humanitarianism” (574–575) by the Paris Surrealist
Group (including André Breton, Roger Callois, Paul Eluard, Yves Tanguy,
and the Martinicans Jules-Marcel Monnerot and Pierre Yoyotte), which
was translated by a young Samuel Beckett (Beckett in fact translated the
majority of the French-language prose in Negro).
19 The last quarter of the
book is devoted to “Africa” and includes maps, historical portraits, Arthur
Schomburg’s consideration of African explorers, Ezra Pound’s “A Note on
Leo Frobenius” (623), anthropological studies by Melville Herskovits and
others, dozens of reproductions of African art, and essays on colonialism
and contemporary African politics in Ethiopia, Liberia, and elsewhere.
After page 580 in the “Europe” section, there is a hole in Negro. The
pagination halts, and there is inserted an essay that doesn’t appear in the ta-
ble of contents: René Crevel’s “The Negress in the Brothel” (paginated I–
III), a hard-hitting and sarcastic take on the ways race and gender are impli-
cated in the dynamics of imperialism, spectacle, and sex in the metropole.
It is another critique of the endless variations on the doudou. “When for
312 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 324 ---
one reason or another” the Frenchman “is obliged to remain at home he de-
mands to be entertained and debauched by the exotic curiosity that lifts
him clear of the national fact into an illusion of renewal. Hence the popu-
larity of Martinique jazz, Cuban melodies, Harlem bands and the entire
tam-tam of the Colonial Exhibition. . . . Then again the average French-
m a n...,w h oi sm e r e l yseeking the picturesque, can go to the brothel and
meet a thoroughbred Negress” (III). Evidently the piece is hidden because
of its incendiary content, in a strategy to evade the censors. But more
pointedly, “The Negress in the Brothel” rips a hole in the very fabric of the
anthology’s “Europe” section: its framing is itself part of the critique, for
it parallels on the level of the book itself the central (if obfuscated and
unavowed) economics of sexual exoticism that lurk at the heart of the
metropole.
Negro’s acknowledgments thank Raymond Michelet, who lived and
worked with Cunard for two years to edit the volume. It is sometimes for-
gotten that aside from Michelet and Beckett, two of Cunard’s most impor-
tant collaborators were Padmore and Kouyaté. Padmore was instrumental
in helping ﬁnd African contributors, and his own participation is impres-
sive: “Ethiopia T oday” (612–618), an excerpt fromThe Life and Struggles of
Negro T oilers (807–809), “How Britain Governs the Blacks” (809–813),
and “White Man’s Justice in Africa” (813–816). On a number of occasions
Negro also reprints material Padmore had edited for theNegro Worker.
20 For
his part, Kouyaté most likely provided the 1930 excerpt from La Race nègre
(“American Attempt to Plant Race-Poison in France”) that appears in the
section of Negro called “From the European Press” (559). The long con-
cluding essay by Michelet, “The White Man Is Killing Africa: Colonisation
in Africa,” draws from a wide range of sources including Du Bois, André
Gide, and Albert Londres, as well as periodicals such as Le T emps, Le
Courrier de l’Afrique,the Missionary Year, and Le Cri des Nègres (from 1931
when the paper was under Kouyaté’s editorship).
In fact, Cunard was a subscriber to Le Cri des Nègres in the early 1930s.
After Padmore later recruited her to be the British organizer of funds for
the Scottsboro defense effort, Kouyaté’s UTN organized at least one fund-
raising fête in Paris for the case, taking similar events Cunard had hosted
in London as a model.
21 In her brilliant indictment of the events in Scotts-
boro, an essay that reads the case not as a singular instance of extraordinary
injustice but as one particularly publicized example of the “world-issue” of
CODA 313


--- PAGE 325 ---
“capitalist oppression and brutality” against black workers, Cunard surveys
the broad international outcry over the case and adds:
A sidelight on the ofﬁcial American mentality, regarding the intellec-
tual status of the Negro, is given by Comrade Garan Kouyaté (a
Bambara African) after going with a delegation to the American Em-
bassy in Paris at the time of the U.S. Supreme Court appeal in No-
vember 1932: “When we got there we were told the ambassador was
out. The chargé d’affaires who received us admitted that deputations
had been coming all day with the same object. His whole manner
showed the utmost surprise at Negroes talking correct French. His as-
tonishment turned to anger and mortiﬁcation when we told him in
plain terms that we held [Ambassador] Miller and the President of
America responsible for the lives and fate of the boys.” (260)
French surveillance reported that Cunard received frequent visits around
this time not just from Kouyaté but also from Léo Sajous, who passed on
copies of Le Cri des Nègres along with his own journal, La Revue du monde
noir.
22 Cunard was in touch with Kouyaté even as World War II broke out,
since she moved through France and Spain in the late 1930s working as a
correspondent for the Associated Negro Press, the Manchester Guardian,
and Sylvia Pankhurst’s newspaperNew Times and Ethiopia News. In the fall
of 1939, she devoted an article in New Times to Kouyaté, calling him “a
writer of merit, long considered one of the principal leaders of his race in
France, a man whom I know very well.”
23
T wo months afterNegro’s publication, Alain Locke wrote Cunard to con-
gratulate her on what he calls “the ﬁnest anthology in every sense of the
word ever compiled on the Negro.” He had “feared a scrapbook,” he ad-
mits, but the anthology’s “miracle of arrangement” brings about a “unity of
effect and a subtle accumulative force of enlightenment that is beyond all
contradiction and evasion.”
24 But the majority of the few critics who have
considered the anthology since then have stressed its disparity and its odd
incongruities. For instance, Michael North writes that “what is most re-
markable about Negro is how little connection there is between the outrage
about the Scottsboro Boys and the relish expressed for black popular art.
The episodic nature of the anthology form has a weirdly dissociative effect
that is nonetheless quite distinct.” Even taking into account Negro’s atten-
tion to “responsible black commentary,” North avers, “the anthology still
314 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 326 ---
tended to present African Americans as objects of pity or comedy.” 25 In
North’s view, all language for Cunard is either “instrumental” or “decora-
tive,” and so the anthology ends up split between its sectarian pronounce-
ments about racist oppression (not to mention Cunard’s “hectoring” about
glories of the Soviet Union) and its lush, exoticist praise-songs to the glories
of black art and music. Negro “succeeds in deﬁning political action in an ex-
ceedingly narrow way,” North contends.
26 He contrasts the collection with
Zora Neale Hurston’s “The Eatonville Anthology,” a short and suggestive
hybrid suite of fragments published in the Messenger in 1926, and with
Hurston’s essays inNegro such as “Characteristics of Negro Expression,” in
order to claim that Negro’s framing strategies serve ironically to divide “what
Hurston’s contribution did so much to connect, political action and perfor-
mance.”
27
One might note ﬁrst of all that the group anthologized in Negro is not
“African Americans.” The book’s many sections, its astounding reach, and
its concluding long section on Africa make it clear that we must read the ti-
tle itself as a particular kind of intervention, one that tries to take the term
“Negro” and revise the signiﬁcance of that vocable in something like the
spirit of “International African.” It would seem crucial to ask furthermore
whether, in an effect reminiscent of Hughes’s Fine Clothes to the Jew, the
achievement of Negro is precisely to highlight the discontinuity among its
pieces—a discrepancy that, when one reads through the volume, seems
much more various than any simple binary between the instrumental and
the decorative. That is, one might read the preface as a sort of gambit
that above all produces its own failure. The stern ideological frame of
Cunard’s two-page foreword (“The Communist world-order is the solution
of the race problem for the Negro,” it proclaims summarily; “to-day in Rus-
sia alone is the Negro a free man, a 100 per cent. equal” [iii]) by no stretch
of the imagination can contain or appropriate the interpretive power of
Hurston’s prose, much less the more disparate texts that populate the an-
thology. If Negro attempts to frame its 850 pages of contents, it is a framing
that is deﬁed over and over again, a framing that fails.
The effect has something to do with Cunard’s observation in her review
of Harlem that any “appreciation of the race” necessarily demonstrates—
with the very excess of its materiality, its unmanageable variety—that “the
different types are uncountable” (74). If one of the main functions of
an anthology is to determine “who counts in the cultural whole,” then
CODA 315


--- PAGE 327 ---
Cunard’s collection signiﬁes the difﬁculty of that project with regard to that
revised, outer-national vocable Negro.28
Certainly, one could simply call this the effect of an editorial naiveté or
overambitiousness. Cunard herself said much later that “my making of it
was, I suppose, much of it, going out into the blind.”
29 Hugh Ford muses
that “despite efforts to bring some order to Negro, it continued to push out
in all directions. Contributions often deﬁed classiﬁcation. No clear thesis
emerged from the articles that had arrived, and the situation worsened as
contributors failed to send Nancy the essays they had promised. Little by
little it was decided that Negro would have to be published with gaps.”
30
But in the end it may be more useful to come to terms with the text we
have, and with its constitutive “gaps,” whether “decided” or not. And any
attempt to read the sprawling, messy text of the anthology necessitates
coming to terms with the ways that it exhibits “an internal limit to formal-
ization.”
31 It is “the last anthology” neither in the sense that it is canonical
or deﬁnitive, nor in the sense that it somehow closes a historical period.Ne-
gro is “last” in the sense that it demonstrates—it attempts to practice—the
impossibility of anthologizing blackness.
In a 1932 letter to Claude McKay, Cunard explains that the book she is
working on is “not a literary anthology” but instead what she terms “a very
large symposium.”32 A symposium would seem to imply a gathering or dia-
logue that is at once more various and more documentary than a “literary
anthology” of Negro creative writing. At the same time a symposium con-
notes an assembly that is relatively informal—or deforming—in relation to
the framing pretensions of the modernist anthology. In another early plan
for the book, a 1931 circular, Cunard emphasizes not only that the book
will be “entirely documentary,” but also that she wants “contributions from
Negroes” in particular:
I want outspoken criticism, comment and comparison from the Ne-
gro on the present-day civilisations of Europe, America, South Amer-
ica, the West Indies, African Colonies, etc.—where conditions are
best for Colored people—individual documents, letters, photographs
from those that have travelled and can judge of [sic] the attitude of di-
verse countries and races.
This is the ﬁrst time such a book has been compiled in this man-
316 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 328 ---
ner. It is primarily for the Colored people and it is dedicated to one
of them.33
In other words, North’s critique may be misleading in suggesting that the
aim of Negro is to “present African Americans as objects” not just because
the book constellates blackness beyond the U.S. nation, but also because
the book has quite speciﬁc notions about the audience of its symposium. “It
is primarily for the Colored people”—one has to reconsider the complex
framing of the book in view of its goal of “recording” a symposium of the
self-representation of this “new” international Negro.
In this regard, the project of Negro has a more intriguing relation to the
claims Hurston makes in “Characteristics of Negro Expression” about an-
gularity and asymmetry being two paradigmatically Negro qualities. “The
presence of rhythm and the lack of symmetry are paradoxical,” Hurston
comments. “There is always rhythm, but it is the rhythm of segments. Each
unit has a rhythm of its own, but when the whole is assembled it is lacking
in symmetry. But easily workable to a Negro who is accustomed to the
break in going from one part to another, so that he adjusts himself to the
new tempo” (41). Like the anthology as a whole, this passage ﬁgures its
privileged reader as a Negro able to navigate the “break” that necessarily in-
terrupts any moving—a Negro able to negotiate the condition of diaspora,
in other words. Thus Negro has a way of deﬁning “political action” that is
more subtle and more suggestive than a simple reading of the more hard-
boiled communist contributions might imply. Political action in the sphere
of black internationalism is modeled in the book by the kind of reading it
demands, in the book’s very difﬁculty and discontinuities. Unlike Hurston’s
“The Eatonville Anthology,” which as North argues convincingly is woven
together by a careful calibration of a vernacular narrative voice, Negro: An
Anthology demands that the reader articulate the discrepant relation be-
tween its documents—“adjusting,” say, to the “break” between Hurston’s
“Characteristics” and the horriﬁc photo of a Maryland lynching that faces
its ﬁrst page.
34
Over and over again, Negro attempts to ﬁnd the link between politics
and performance through ﬁgurations of black musical practices. Cunard
closes her foreword with the explanation that Michelet’s “The White Man
Is Killing Africa” is the last piece in the book: “I have ended the book with
CODA 317


--- PAGE 329 ---
this—I cannot say: I have ended it on this note, for the chord of oppression,
struggle and protest rings, trumpet-like or mufﬂed, but always insistent
throughout” (iv). In this metaphor, “oppression, struggle and protest” are
not a single “note” but a shifting harmonic principle, the “insistent” if not
consistently audible characteristic that links the disparate documents. Even
George Antheil’s peculiar and sometimes sensationalist contribution to the
music section, “The Negro on the Spiral, or A Method of Negro Music,”
strives to deﬁne the ways that black music is “so intricate in rhythmic pat-
tern, so delicately balanced in contra-rhythms and proportions” (346–
347). One might hear these passages in counterpoint with Hurston’s well-
known description of what she terms “jagged harmony” in another essay
in Negro, “Spirituals and Neo-Spirituals,” where she describes the perfor-
mance style in the spirituals as one that in harmonizing, undoes the princi-
ple of harmony—a style of “harmony and disharmony,” “shifting keys and
broken time.” Hurston instructs that “each singing of the piece is a new
creation. The congregation is bound by no rules. No two times singing is
alike, so that we must consider the rendition of a song not as a ﬁnal thing,
but as a mood” (360). What if the anthology enables the articulation of a
mood rather than conducting a census, drawing a map, or founding a mu-
seum?
35 Neither “a ﬁnal thing” (a framing of the past) nor a “prophecy” (a
prediction of the future), but a space of “new creation” in the performance
of reading that takes place in the subjunctive, in a condition of probability.
As Cunard writes elsewhere, probability “links conviction with instinct, is
almost instinct itself, is the feeling of coming things.”
36 Here what is hinted
in the breaks, what must be continually recreated and debated, what must
be translated “from one part to another,” is the symposium that is black in-
ternationalism in practice. Reading the Negro anthology, then, offers a
model for that practice, in which diaspora can be articulated only in forms
that are provisional, negotiated, asymmetrical. Black internationalism, the
book suggests, is less like a sturdy ediﬁce or a deﬁnitive program than like
the uncertain harmony of a new song.
318 THE PRACTICE OF DIASPORA


--- PAGE 330 ---
NOTES ACKNOWLEDGMENTS INDEX


--- PAGE 331 ---



--- PAGE 332 ---
NOTES
Prologue
1. W . E. B. Du Bois, “T o the Nations of the World,” in W . E. B. Du Bois: A
Reader, ed. David Levering Lewis (New York: Henry Holt, 1995), 639. See
also Lewis, W . E. B. Du Bois: Biography of a Race, 1868–1919 (New York:
Henry Holt, 1993), 246–251.
2. Du Bois, “The Forethought,” The Souls of Black Folk (1903), in Writings
(New York: Library of America, 1986), 359.
3. Du Bois, “The Color Line Belts the World,” Collier’s Weekly(October 20,
1906): 30, collected in W . E. B. Du Bois: A Reader,42.
4. Du Bois, “The Negro Mind Reaches Out,” Foreign Affairs 3, no. 3 (1924),
collected in The New Negro (1925; reprint, New York: Atheneum, 1989),
385.
5. Nathan Huggins, Harlem Renaissance (New York: Oxford University Press,
1971), 41.
6. Alain Locke, “The New Negro,” in The New Negro, 13, 14. I should note
that the characteristically modernist gesture that announces this internation-
alism as “new” does not preclude the fact that—even if World War I marks a
certain different historical conjuncture in ways I will emphasize here—black
internationalist discourses do not begin only in the twentieth century. Afri-
can Americans have long made recourse, of course, to a two-pronged strategy
of national civil rights work and international appeal, and it would be possi-
ble to track the history of this strategy back to abolitionism (the European
appeals against U.S. slavery by Frederick Douglass, William Wells Brown,
and Mary Prince) and forward to movements such as the Chicago Defender’s
“Double V” (victory against fascism abroad, victory against racism at home)
in World War II. Nikhil Pal Singh has recently termed this persistence “black
worldliness,” a useful phrase in that it encapsulates both the considered
breadth (the move beyond the level of the nation-state) and the explicit polit-
ical ambition (the universalism) of such a strategy. Indeed, Singh argues that
this imperative “is perhaps this country’s only consistent universalism.” See


--- PAGE 333 ---
Singh, “Culture/Wars: Recoding Empire in an Age of Democracy,”American
Quarterly 50 (September 1998): 514.
7. Hubert Harrison, “Our International Consciousness,” When Africa Awakes
(1920; reprint, Baltimore: Black Classic Press, 1997), 100–101, 103.
8. I will use the term “Harlem Renaissance” at times in this book, despite my
dissatisfaction with it, partly as a means to approach critically the scholarship
that has accepted it. I would echo the concerns of dissenters such as Sterling
Brown, who comments that “the New Negro is not to me a group of writers
centered in Harlem during the second half of the twenties. Most of the writ-
ers were not Harlemites; much of the best writing was not about Harlem,
which was the show-window, the cashier’s till.... ”B r o w n ,“ T h eN e wN e g r o
in Literature (1925–1955),” in A Son’s Return: Selected Essays of Sterling A.
Brown, ed. Mark A. Sanders (Boston: Northeastern University Press, 1996),
185. See also Gerald Early, “Introduction,” in My Soul’s High Song: The Col-
lected Writings of Countee Cullen, Voice of the Harlem Renaissance (New York:
Doubleday, 1991), 24–25. Conversely, George Hutchinson has recently
made a convincing argument that “Renaissance” is in fact an appropriate
moniker, at least for Locke’s anthologyThe New Negro. See Hutchinson, The
Harlem Renaissance in Black and White (Cambridge: Harvard University
Press, 1995), 424–428.
9. Robert B. Stepto, “Sterling A. Brown: Outsider in the Harlem Renaissance?”
in The Harlem Renaissance: Reevaluations, ed. Amritjit Singh, William S.
Shiver, and Stanley Brodwin (New York: Garland, 1989), 73. See also Melvin
Dixon, “Rivers Remembering Their Source: Comparative Studies in Black
Literary History—Langston Hughes, Jacques Roumain, and Negritude,” in
Afro-American Literature: The Reconstruction of Instruction, ed. Dexter Fisher
and Stepto (New York: MLA, 1979), 25–43; Melvin Dixon, “T oward a
World Black Literature and Community,” in Chant of Saints: A Gathering of
Afro-American Literature, Art, and Scholarship, ed. Michael S. Harper and
Stepto (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1979), 175–194.
10. Du Bois, “My Mission,” Crisis 19 (May 1919): 9.
11. French policy during the war envisioned Africans mainly as soldiers, not
as workers, and the numbers reﬂect this: in 1918, the projections were for
85,000 soldiers from Africa (70,000 from French West Africa, and 15,000
from French Equatorial Africa), but only 10,000 workers; this in comparison
to 10,000 soldiers and 15,000 workers from Madagascar, and 80,000 soldiers
and 100,000 workers from Indochina. See Jean Vidalenc, “La main d’œuvre
étrangère en France et la Première Guerre Mondiale (1901–1926),”Francia 2
(1974): 524–550; Tyler Stovall, “Colour-Blind France? Colonial Workers
during the First World War,” Race and Class 35 (1993): 35–55; The Marcus
322 NOTES TO PAGES 2–3


--- PAGE 334 ---
Garvey and Universal Negro Improvement Association Papers, vol. 1: 1826–Au-
gust 1919, ed. Robert A. Hill (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1986),
292n1; Philippe de Witte, “Le Paris noir de l’entre-deux-guerres,” inLe Paris
des étrangers: depuis un siècle, ed. A. Kaspi and A. Marès (Paris: Imprimérie
Nationale, 1989), 157–169. As de Witte points out, it should be noted that
French Caribbeans were considered citizens and thus not counted as immi-
grants.
12. Reid Badger, A Life in Ragtime: A Biography of James Reese Europe(New York:
Oxford University Press, 1919); Chris Goddard, Jazz Away from Home (New
York: Paddington Press, 1979); Michael Haggerty, “T ranses Atlantiques,”
Jazz Magazine 325 (January 1984): 30–31.
13. Raymond Williams, The Politics of Modernism: Against the New Conformists
(London: Verso, 1989), 45.
14. Tyler Stovall, Paris Noir: African Americans in the City of Light (Boston:
Houghton Mifﬂin, 1996), 90.
15. Claude McKay, The Negro in America, translated from the Russian by Robert
Winter, ed. Alan McLeod (Port Washington, N.Y.: Kennikat Press, 1979),
49. The celebration in the U.S. black press of the “apparent absence of racism
in Europe” is also discussed usefully in Kenneth R. Janken, “African Ameri-
can and Francophone Black Intellectuals during the Harlem Renaissance,”
Historian 60 (1998): 490–491, 503–504.
16. Kenneth W . Warren, “Appeals for (Mis)recognition: Theorizing the Dias-
pora,” in Cultures of United States Imperialism, ed. Amy Kaplan and Donald
E. Pease (Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 1993), 404–405.
17. Locke, “The New Negro,” 14.
18. Edward Said, “Third World Intellectuals and Metropolitan Culture,”Raritan
9 (Winter 1990): 31.
19. David Scott, “Preface,” in “The Archeology of Black Memory: An Interview
with Robert A. Hill,” Small Axe 5 (March 1999): 82. See also Michel Fou-
cault, The Archeology of Knowledge, trans. A. M. Sheridan Smith (New York:
Pantheon, 1972), 129.
20. Hill, “The Archeology of Black Memory,” 120.
21. Walter Benjamin, “One-Way Street” (1928), in Selected Writings, vol. 1:
1913–1926, trans. Edmund Jephcott, ed. Marcus Bullock and Michael W .
Jennings (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1996), 444 (modiﬁed). The
original is Benjamin, Einbahnstrasse (1928; reprint, Frankfurt am Main:
Suhrkamp Verlag, 1955), 8.
22. More than a bit hyperbolically (yet in a tone that is by no means extraordi-
nary in such missives), the letter goes on to warn of “potential repercussions
of a propaganda whose goals and means may seem normal to metropolitan
NOTES TO PAGES 4–9 323


--- PAGE 335 ---
mentalities, but whose results can be singularly disappointing within turbu-
lent minorities, still in a state of ambiguous fermentation more than healthy
evolution, and for this reason too naturally inclined to welcome without
proper judgment those who, in the name of independence, ﬂatter unsatisﬁed
pride and in truth prepare the paths to anarchy.” Jules Carde, Direction des
Affaires Politiques, letter to the Ministère des Colonies, June 26, 1928, La
Dépêche africaine folder, Archives Nationales, Section d’Outre-Mer, Service
de Liaison avec les Originaires des T erritoires de la France d’Outre-Mer (ab-
breviated henceforth as SLOTFOM), series V , box 2 (abbreviated hence-
forth as “V , 2”).
23. As with other journals, this attention took many forms. On the one hand,
there was coverage of the experiences of African American soldiers in the war:
see “Black French T roops in Germany,”Messenger 2, no. 7 (July 1919): 65;
“T wo Frenchmen on the Negro T roops,” Messenger 5, no. 2 (Feb. 1923):
592–593; William N. Colson, “Propaganda and the American Negro Sol-
dier,”Messenger 2, no. 7 (July 1919): 24–25; Colson, “The Social Experience
of the Negro Soldier Abroad,” Messenger 2, no. 10 (Oct. 1919): 26–27. On
the other hand, there were broader interventions concerning the possibilities
and pitfalls of internationalism in the period: see “Internationalism,” Mes-
senger 2, no. 8 (August 1919): 5–6; “Three Schools of Internationalist
Thought,” Messenger 2, no. 12 (December 1920): 169–170; A. Philip Ran-
dolph, “Internationalitis,” Messenger 3, no. 2 (July 1921): 216; William S.
Nelson, “The International Viewpoint,”Messenger 6, no. 7 (July 1924): 222–
223. At the same time, one might note an especial concern with the French
context, too: see “Americanism in France,” Messenger 4, no. 9 (September
1922): 477; “France and the Negro,” Messenger 5, no. 9 (September 1923):
806.
24. Michel Foucault, The Archeology of Knowledge, trans. A. M. Sheridan Smith
(New York: Pantheon, 1972), 131. The original is L ’Archéologie du savoir
(Paris: Gallimard, 1969), 172–173.
25. C. L. R. James, “Preface” (1938), inThe Black Jacobins: T oussaint L ’Ouverture
and the San Domingo Revolution, 2nd ed. (New York: Vintage, 1963), xi.
26. Brent Hayes Edwards, “The Uses of Diaspora,” Social T ext66 (spring 2001):
45–73.
27. Stuart Hall, “Race, Articulation, and Societies Structured in Dominance”
(1980), reprinted in Black British Cultural Studies: A Reader, ed. Houston A.
Baker, Manthia Diawara, and Ruth H. Lindeborg (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1996), 33.
28. Ibid., 38.
324 NOTES TO PAGES 10–12


--- PAGE 336 ---
29. Other work touching on the importance of the term in Birmingham cultural
studies includes Jennifer Daryl Stack, “The Theory and Method of Articu-
lation in Cultural Studies,” in Stuart Hall: Critical Dialogues in Cultural
Studies, ed. David Morley and Kuan-Hsing Chen (New York: Routledge,
1996), 112–130; and the interview with Hall, “On Postmodernism and Ar-
ticulation,” 131–150, in the same volume. Fredric Jameson offers a more
idiosyncratic genealogy of the term (in his review essay “On ‘Cultural Stud-
ies,’”Social T ext34 [1993]: 30–33), but elegantly notes the ways the term
implies a “poetic” between the structural and the discursive (32).
30. Stuart Hall, “Cultural Identity and Diaspora,” in Identity, Community, Cul-
ture, Difference, ed. Jonathan Rutherford (London: Lawrence and Wishart,
1990), 235.
31. T ommy Lott, “Black Cultural Politics: An Interview with Paul Gilroy,”
Found Object 4 (fall 1994): 56–57.
32. Earl Lewis, “T o T urn as on a Pivot: Writing African Americans into a History
of Overlapping Diasporas,” American Historical Review 100 (June 1995):
765–787.
33. Senghor, “Problématique de la Négritude” (1971), inLiberté III: Négritude et
civilisation de l’universel(Paris: Seuil, 1977), 274. The translation is my own.
34. Historian Ranajit Guha is one of the few scholars writing in English who reg-
ularly makes recourse to the term décalage, using it to indicate a structural
overlap or discrepancy, a period of “social transformation” when one class,
state bureaucracy, or social formation “challenges the authority of another
that is older and moribund but still dominant.” Guha, Dominance without
Hegemony: History and Power in Colonial India(Cambridge: Harvard Univer-
sity Press, 1997), 13, 157. See also Guha, Elementary Aspects of Peasant Insur-
gency in Colonial India (Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 1999), 173,
330.
35. Senghor, “Problématique de la Négritude,” 278.
36. Hall, “Race, Articulation, and Societies Structured in Dominance,” 41.
1. Variations on a Preface
1. Jane Nardal, letter to Alain Locke, December 27, 1927, Alain Locke Papers,
box 164–74, folder 25, Moorland-Spingarn Manuscript Division, Howard
University. Unless otherwise indicated, all translations are my own.
2. Du Bois, “The Negro Mind Reaches Out,” Foreign Affairs 3, no. 3 (1924),
collected in The New Negro (1925; reprint, New York: Atheneum, 1989),
412–413.
3. Alain Locke, letter to Jane Nardal, n.d., Alain Locke Papers.
NOTES TO PAGES 12–17 325


--- PAGE 337 ---
4. Nardal, “L ’internationalisme noir,”La Dépêche africaine1 (February 1928): 5.
5. Paulette Nardal, “Eveil de la conscience de race,” La Revue du monde noir 6
(1932): 25.
6. Du Bois, “The Negro Mind Reaches Out,” 386.
7. Locke, “Le Nègre nouveau,” trans. Louis and Renée Guilloux, Europe 102
(June 15, 1931): 289–300.
8. Naoki Sakai, Translation and Subjectivity: On “Japan” and Cultural National-
ism (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1997), 13.
9. Gates, “The T rope of a New Negro and the Reconstruction of the Image of
the Black,” Representations 24 (fall 1988): 129–157; Levine, “The Concept
of the New Negro and the Realities of Black Culture,” in The Unpredictable
Past: Explorations in American Cultural History(New York: Oxford University
Press, 1993), 86–106.
10. Williams, Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1976), 20, 15.
11. Ibid., 11.
12. Raymond Williams, “Keywords,” in Politics and Letters: Interviews with New
Left Review (London: New Left Books, 1979), 177.
13. Edouard Glissant, Le Discours antillais (Paris: Seuil, 1981), 30. A partial
translation by J. Michael Dash has been published asCaribbean Discourse: Se-
lected Essays (Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 1989), 16. Subse-
quent citations will be indicated with page numbers for the French and Eng-
lish editions (in that order) in parentheses in the text. I have modiﬁed many
of the English translations.
14. Franck L. Schoell, “La ‘Renaissance Nègre’ aux Etats-Unis,”La Revue de Paris
(January 1, 1929): 158.
15. Stovall calls Paris a “Gateway to Africa” inParis Noir: African Americans in the
City of Light (Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin, 1996), 97.
16. Jack D. Forbes, Africans and Native Americans: The Language of Race and the
Evolution of Red-Black Peoples (1988; reprint, Carbondale: University of Illi-
nois Press, 1993). Page numbers for subsequent citations will be indicated in
parentheses in the text.
17. See Simone Delesalle and Lucette Valensi, “Le Mot ‘Nègre’ dans les diction-
naires français d’Ancien Régime: histoire et lexicographie,” Langue Française
15 (September 1972): 79–104.
18. See Lucette Valensi, “Nègre/Negro: recherches dans les dictionnaires français
et anglais du XVIIème au XIXème siècles,” in L ’Idée de race dans la pensée
politique française contemporaine, ed. Pierre Guiral and E. T emime (Paris:
Editions du Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque, 1977), 157–170.
Other comparative works focusing on the development of racial terminology
326 NOTES TO PAGES 18–27


--- PAGE 338 ---
in English include H. L. Mencken, “Designations for Colored Folk,” Ameri-
can Speech (October 1944): 161–174; James W . Ivy, “Le fait d’être nègre dans
les Amériques,” Présence africaine 24–25 (February–May 1959): 123–131;
Nathan Hare, “Rebels without a Name,” Phylon 23, no. 3 (fall 1962): 271–
277; Harold R. Isaacs, “A Name to Go By,” inThe New World of Negro Amer-
icans (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1963), 62–72; Richard B. Moore, The Name
“Negro”: Its Origin and Evil Use, ed. W . Burghardt T urner and Joyce Moore
T urner (1960; reprint, Baltimore: Black Classic Press, 1992).
19. Serge Daget, “Les mots esclave, nègre, Noir, et les jugements de valeur sur la
traite négrière dans la littérature abolitionniste française de 1770 à 1845,”Re-
vue française d’histoire d’outre-mer60 (1973): 518. Daget notes that this proj-
ect was largely ineffectual in the abolitionist movement.
20. Fanon, “Antillais et Africains,” inPour la révolution africaine (Paris: Maspero,
1964), 26; translated by Haakon Chevalier as “West Indians and Africans,”
in T oward the African Revolution: Political Essays (New York: Grove Press,
1988), 21 (modiﬁed).
21. T oni Morrison, Playing in the Dark: Whiteness and the Literary Imagination
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1992), 6.
22. The phrase “legitimation by reversal” is adopted from Gayatri Chakravorty
Spivak, “Race before Racism and the Disappearance of the American: Jack D.
Forbes’Black Africans and Americans: Color, Race and Caste in the Evolution of
Red-Black Peoples,” Plantation Society 3, no. 2 (1993): 89.
23. With a certain amount of fanfare, the New York Times ﬁnally gave in to Du
Bois’s crusade and granted the word “Negro” a capital “N” in a patronizing
Op-Ed—but only on March 15, 1930, much later than we might expect. See
Isaacs, The New World of Negro Americans, 65. This came no less than nearly
a hundred and ﬁfty years after English sealed the link between “Negro” and
“slave” precisely by removing that very capital “N”—early translations of the
Spanish negro had been written as “Negro” in English from the mid-1500s
until the end of the eighteenth century. (See Ivy, “Le fait d’être nègre dans les
Amériques,” 125.) For critics of Negro such as Richard B. Moore, however,
the futility and inconsequentiality of such “petty” struggles to “ﬁne-tune” or
rehabilitate the designation represent a supreme irony.
24. Cousturier took it upon herself to tutor a number of the soldiers in French in
her home, lamenting the abysmal quality of language instruction in the mili-
tary. “The word nègre has not remained a simple vocable of practical usage,”
she writes, “and is not used for real objects [ne saurait s’appliquer à des objets
réels]. As poetically as the word ‘dove’ [colombe], which evokes white peace,
innocence, divine love, for us the word ‘nègre’ effectively symbolizes inversely
brutal frenzy, satanic ugliness and other nocturnal nightmares.” As Cous-
NOTES TO PAGES 27–28 327


--- PAGE 339 ---
turier saw it, her black pupils were ultimately just des hommes like any others.
She goes on to say that she thinks of the African soldiers as inconnus, “un-
known,” because they have been so consistently misnamed and misused.
Cousturier, Des Inconnus chez moi (Paris: Editions la Sirène, 1920), 9.
25. A. James Arnold, Modernism and Negritude: The Poetry and Poetics of Aimé
Césaire (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1981), 36.
26. On this congress and Senghor’s speech, see Willi Munzenberg, “Pour une
conférence coloniale,” La Correspondence internationale 91, no. 6 (August 14,
1926): 1011; “La question nègre devant le Congrès de Bruxelles,”La Voix des
Nègres (March 1927): 1; “A Black Man’s Protest,”Living Age 332 (May 15,
1927): 866–868.
27. For more detail on Senghor’s activities, see Philippe de Witte, Les Mouve-
ments nègres en France, 1919–1939 (Paris: L ’Harmattan, 1985); J. Ayodele
Langley, Pan-Africanism and Nationalism in West Africa, 1900–1945 (Lon-
don: Oxford University Press, 1973); J. S. Spiegler, Aspects of Nationalist
thought among French-Speaking West Africans, 1921–1939 (Ph.D. diss., Ox-
ford University, 1968); Lamine Senghor: vie et oeuvre (Dakar: Front Culturel
Sénégalais, 1979); Robert Cornevin, “Du Sénégal à la Provence: Lamine
Senghor (1889–1927), pionnier de la négritude,” Provence historique 25, no.
99 (January–March 1975): 69–77; Tiemoko Garan Kouyaté, “La ligue est en
deuil: son très dévoué président Senghor Lamine est mort,” La Race nègre 5
(May 1928); Brent Hayes Edwards, “The Shadow of Shadows,” Positions
(forthcoming winter 2003). I should note that Lamine Senghor was not re-
lated to Négritude founder Léopold Sédar Senghor.
28. Lamine Senghor, “Le mot ‘Nègre’,”La Voix des Nègres 1 (January 1927): 1.
Although the article is signed “Le Comité” of the Comité de Défense de la
Race Nègre, it was written exclusively by Senghor, as it is nearly identical to
an article called “Le réveil des Nègres” that he had previously published un-
der his own name in Le Paria (The pariah), the journal of the French Com-
munist branch of colonial radicals, the Union Intercoloniale. (See Senghor,
“Le réveil des Nègres,” Le Paria 38 [April 1926]: 1–2.) For other consider-
ations of this essay, see Christopher Miller, “Involution and Revolution: Afri-
can Paris in the 1920s,” in Nationalists and Nomads: Essays on Francophone
African Literature and Culture (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998),
30–37; Philippe de Witte, Les Mouvements nègres en France, 1919–1939
(Paris: L ’Harmattan, 1985), 143–146.
29. Jack D. Forbes, “The Manipulation of Race, Caste and Identity: Classifying
Afroamericans, Native Americans and Red-Black People”The Journal of Eth-
nic Studies 17, no. 4 (winter 1990): 5. In her review, Gayatri Spivak is some-
328 NOTES TO PAGES 28–32


--- PAGE 340 ---
what critical of the application of “caste” to this context. See Spivak, “Race
before Racism and the Disappearance of the American,” 87.
30. Miller, “Involution and Revolution,” 36–37.
31. At the time, a segregated balcony in a theater was called “nigger heaven.” The
phrase also ﬁguratively depicts the way Harlem “hangs” out over the rest of
Manhattan. Carl Van Vechten, Nigger Heaven (New York: Knopf, 1926),
translated as Le Paradis des Nègres (Paris: Editions Kra, 1927). For two sides
of the U.S. response, see W . E. B. Du Bois’s caustic review in “Books,”Crisis
33 (1926): 81–82; and James Weldon Johnson’s more positive “Romance
and T ragedy in Harlem—A Review,” Opportunity 4 (1926): 316–317, 330.
For commentary on this controversy, see George Hutchinson, The Harlem
Renaissance in Black and White (Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
1995), 166–167; David Levering Lewis, When Harlem Was in Vogue (New
York: Oxford University Press, 1981), 182–189.
32. Roark Bradford, Ol’ Man Adam an’ His Chillun, Being the T ales They T ell
about the Time When the Lord Walked the Earth Like a Natural Man (New
York: Harper and Brothers, 1928). I would like to thank Robert O’Meally
for drawing my attention to this collection.
33. Ibid., x.
34. Ibid., x–xi.
35. Ibid., xii.
36. Langston Hughes, The Big Sea (1940; reprint, New York: Thunder’s Mouth,
1986), 78–79.
37. Spivak, “Race before Racism,” 84, 85.
38. See Winston James, “Migration, Racism and Identity: The Caribbean Expe-
rience in Britain,” New Left Review 193 (May–June 1992): 49–55.
39. Gratiant, “Mulâtres...pour le bien et le mal,” L ’Etudiant noir1( M a r c h
1935): 5–7. This essay has been reprinted in Gratiant, Fables créoles et autres
écrits, ed. Isabelle Gratiant et al. (Paris: Stock, 1996), 701–710.
40. Ibid., 7.
41. See Henry Louis Gates, Jr., “Preface to Blackness: T ext and Pretext,” inAfro-
American Literature: The Reconstruction of Instruction, ed. Dexter Fisher and
Robert Stepto (New York: Modern Language Association, 1978), 44–69.
42. David Scott, preface to “The Archaeology of Black Memory: An Interview
with Robert A. Hill,” Small Axe 5 (March 1999): 83.
43. See William L. Andrews, T o T ell a Free Story: The First Century of Afro-Ameri-
can Autobiography, 1769–1865 (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1986).
44. Du Bois, “Forethought,” The Souls of Black Folk, in Du Bois, Writings (New
York: Library of America, 1986), 359. Here I am adopting the title phrase of
NOTES TO PAGES 33–39 329


--- PAGE 341 ---
Paul de Man’sAllegories of Reading: Figural Language in Rousseau, Nietzsche,
Rilke, and Proust (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1979).
45. T oni Morrison, “The Site of Memory,” in Inventing the Truth: The Art and
Craft of Memoir, ed. William Zinsser (Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin, 1987),
109–110.
46. Du Bois, 359.
47. Robert Stepto, From behind the Veil: A Study of Afro-American Narrative (Ur-
bana: University of Illinois Press, 1979), 52.
48. On the epigraphs to The Souls of Black Folk, see Eric Sundquist, T o Wake the
Nations: Race in the Making of American Literature (Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1993), 490–493.
49. Stepto, 62.
50. See for example the sections on the novel in Stepto, From behind the Veil
and Sundquist, T o Wake the Nations;and also Aldon Nielsen’s “James Weldon
Johnson’s Impossible T ext:The Autobiography of an Ex-Colored Man, ”i n
Writing between the Lines: Race and Intertextuality (Athens: University of
Georgia Press, 1994), 172–184. Houston Baker, Jr., goes so far as to
claim that “in a sense, The Autobiography of an Ex-Colored Man is a ﬁctional
rendering of The Souls of Black Folk. ” Baker, Singers of Daybreak: Studies
in Black American Literature (Washington, D.C.: Howard University Press,
1974), 22.
51. Richard Yarborough, “The First-Person in Afro-American Fiction,” in Afro-
American Literary Study in the 1990’s,ed. Houston A. Baker and P . Redmond
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989), 118.
52. James Weldon Johnson, The Autobiography of an Ex-Colored Man (1927; re-
print, New York: Vintage, 1989), xxxix. Page numbers of subsequent cita-
tions will be indicated parenthetically in the text.
53. Interestingly, the book was received as a valid autobiographical document,
and Johnson did not ofﬁcially claim authorship until 1915. See Eugene Levy,
James Weldon Johnson: Black Leader, Black Voice(Chicago: University of Chi-
cago Press, 1973), 161.
54. Du Bois, 364, 365.
55. Nielsen, 173–174.
56. Nielsen, 178.
57. Johnson, “Race Prejudice and the Negro Artist,” Harper’s Magazine 157
(1928), reprinted in The Selected Writings of James Weldon Johnson, vol. 2: So-
cial, Political and Literary Essays, ed. Sondra Kathryn Wilson (New York: Ox-
ford University Press, 1995), 397.
58. Nielsen, 173.
330 NOTES TO PAGES 40–43


--- PAGE 342 ---
59. Gerald Early, “Introduction” My Soul’s High Song: The Collective Writings
of Countee Cullen, Voice of the Harlem Renaissance (New York: Doubleday,
1991), 33.
60. Here is an inexhaustive, chronological sampling of the unprecedented explo-
sion of anthologies and collections of “Negro materials” in English, French,
and German after World War I. T o give a sense of the breadth of this activity,
I have included popular, literary, anthropological, musicological, and histori-
cal works (some collections would fall under more than one of these cate-
gories). Anthologie nègre, ed. Blaise Cendrars (Paris: Editions de la Sirene,
1921); Petits Contes nègres pour les enfants des blancs, ed. Cendrars (Paris:
Denoël, 1921); Atlantis: Volksmärchen und Volksdichtungen afrikans, 12 vol-
umes, ed. Leo Frobenius (Jena: E. Diederichs, 1921–1928); Afrikanische
Märchen, ed. C. Meinhof (Jena: E. Diederichs, 1921); The Book of American
Negro Poetry, ed. James Weldon Johnson (New York: Harcourt Brace, 1922);
Negro Folk Rhymes, Wise and Otherwise, ed. Thomas Talley (New York:
Macmillan, 1922); L ’Ame nègre,ed. Maurice Delafosse (Paris: Payot, 1922);
La Poésie chez les primitifs, ed. E. Hurel (Brussels: Goemaere, 1922); Negro
Poets and Their Poems, ed. Robert Kerlin (Washington, D.C.: Associated
Press, 1923); Congo Life and Jungle Stories, ed. J. H. Weeks (London: Reli-
gious T ract Society, 1923); An Anthology of Verse by American Negroes, ed.
Newman Ivey White and Walter Clinton Jackson (Durham, N.C.: T rinity
College Press, 1924); Fernando Ortiz, Glosario des Afronegrismos (Havana: El
Siglo, 1924); The New Negro, ed. Alain Locke (New York: Albert and Charles
Boni, 1925); Negro Orators and Their Orations, ed. Carter G. Woodson
(Washington, D.C.: Associated Publishers, 1925); The Negro and His Songs,
ed. Howard W . Odum and Guy B. Johnson (Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press, 1925); On the Trail of Negro Folk Songs, ed. Dorothy
Scarborough (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1925); The Book of
American Negro Spirituals, ed. James Weldon Johnson and J. Rosamond
Johnson (New York: Viking, 1925); Die Schilluk: Geschichte, Religion und
Leben eines Niloten-Stammes, ed. Wilhelm Hofmayr (Mödling bei Wien:
Verlag der Administration des Anthropos, 1925); The Mind of the Negro, as
Reﬂected in Letters Written during the Crisis, 1800–1860, ed. Carter G.
Woodson (Washington, D.C.: Association for the Study of Negro Life and
History, 1926); The Blues—An Anthology, ed. W . C. Handy and Abbe Niles
(New York: Albert and Charles Boni, 1926); Negro Workaday Songs, ed.
Odum and Johnson (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1926);
Primitive Negro Sculpture, ed. Paul Guillaume and Thomas Munro (1926; re-
print, New York: Hacker Art Books, 1968); Among the Bantu Nomads, ed.
NOTES TO PAGES 43–44 331


--- PAGE 343 ---
J. T . Brown (London: Seeley, Service and Co., 1926); Four Negro Poets, ed.
Locke (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1927); Caroling Dusk: An Anthology
of Verse by Negro Poets,ed. Countee Cullen (New York: Harper and Brothers,
1927); Ebony and T opaz: A Collectanea, ed. Charles S. Johnson (New York:
Opportunity, 1927); L ’Art nègre: l’art animiste des noirs d’Afrique,ed. Georges
Hardy (Paris: H. Laurens, 1927); La Littérature populaire à la côte des esclaves:
contes, proverbes, devinettes, ed. R. T rautmann (Paris: Institut d’Ethnologie,
1927); A Decade of Negro Self-Expression, ed. Locke (Charlottesville: John F .
Slater Fund, 1928); Le Nègre qui chante, ed. Eugène Jolas (Paris: Cahiers
Libres, 1928); Anthology of American Negro Literature, ed. V . F . Calverton
(New York: Modern Library, 1929);Neue Märchen aus Afrika, ed. A. Mislich
(Leipzig: R. Voigtländers, 1929); Akan-Ashanti Folk-T ales,ed. R. S. Rattray
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1930); African Stories, ed. A. D. Helser (New
York: Fleming H. Revell, 1930); Diaeli, le livre de la sagesse noire, ed. André
Demaison (Paris: H. Piazza, 1931); Proverbes et maximes peuls et toucouleurs
traduits, expliqués et annotés, ed. H. Gaden (Paris: Institut d’Ethnologie,
1931); Ce que content les Noirs, ed. O. de Bouveignes (Paris: P . Lethielleux,
1935); Negro: An Anthology, ed. Nancy Cunard (1934; reprint, New York:
Negro Universities Press, 1969).
Regarding the history of anthologies in African American literature, see
John S. Lash, “The Anthologist and the Negro Author,” Phylon 7, no. 1
(1947): 68–76; Kenneth Kinnamon, “Anthologies,” in The Oxford Compan-
ion to African American Literature, ed. William L. Andrews, Frances Smith
Foster, and T rudier Harris (New York: Oxford University Press, 1997), 22–
28; Theodore O. Mason, Jr., “The African-American Anthology: Mapping
the T erritory, Taking the National Census, Building the Museum,”American
Literary History 10, no. 1 (1998): 185–198.
61. Mason, “The African-American Anthology,” 187.
62. Ibid., 192.
63. The phrase “allographic preface” is adopted from Gerard Genette, Paratexts:
Thresholds of Interpretation, trans. Jane E. Lewin (Cambridge: Cambrige Uni-
versity Press, 1997), 161, 263–275.
64. See Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, “T ranslator’s Preface,” in Jacques Derrida,
Of Grammatology (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1976), ix–xiii.
65. James Weldon Johnson, Along This Way: The Autobiography of James Weldon
Johnson (1933; reprint, New York: Penguin, 1990), 374–375. On the publi-
cation of The Book of American Negro Poetry, see Levy, James Weldon Johnson,
304–305.
66. “Preface to the First Edition,” The Book of American Negro Poetry (rev. 2nd
332 NOTES TO PAGES 44–46


--- PAGE 344 ---
ed., New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1931), 9. Page numbers for sub-
sequent references will be indicated parenthetically in the text.
67. Immanuel Wallerstein, “The National and the Universal: Can There Be Such
a Thing as World Culture?” in Culture, Globalization and the World-System:
Contemporary Conditions for the Representation of Identity, ed. Anthony D.
King (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota, 1997), 100.
68. Paul Gilroy, The Black Atlantic: Modernity and Double Consciousness (Cam-
bridge: Harvard University Press, 1993), 36. Interestingly, Gilroy takes this
phrase without comment from a context that inﬂects it rather differently,
Zygmut Bauman’s “The Left as the Counterculture of Modernity,” T elos70
(winter 1986–1987): 81–93.
69. Johnson, Along This Way,375.
70. Ibid., 375. He notes that “the word was coined, so far as I know, by Sir Harry
H. Johnston,” and says that it acquired a “slightly derisive sense” in the 1920s
when it was adopted by H. L. Mencken.
71. Jacques Derrida, Dissemination, trans. Barbara Johnson (Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1981), 17.
72. Johnson, “Preface to the Revised Edition,” The Book of American Negro Po-
etry, 3.
73. Ibid., 5. On Johnson’s prefaces toGod’s Trombonesand The Book of American
Negro Spirituals and his arguments about “Negro dialect,” see Brent Hayes
Edwards, “The Seemingly Eclipsed Window of Form: James Weldon John-
son’s Prefaces,” inThe Jazz Cadence of American Culture,ed. Robert O’Meally
(New York: Columbia University Press, 1997), 580–601.
74. Derrida, Dissemination, 36.
75. Baba Diarra, “Réponse d’un ancien tirailleur sénégalais à M. Paul Boncour,”
La Race nègre 1 (June 1927): 158.
76. Philippe de Witte, Les Mouvements nègres en France, 157.
77. Miller, “Involution and Revolution,” 44.
78. Fanon writes for instance that the Antillean “knows that what the poets call
divine crooning [roucoulement divin] (that is: Creole) is only a middle term
between pidgin-nigger [petit-nègre] and French.” Fanon, “The Negro and
Language,” in Black Skin, White Masks, trans. Charles Lam Markmann (New
York: Grove, 1967), 20 (modiﬁed). The original is “Le noir et le langage,” in
Peau noire, masques blancs (Paris: Seuil, 1952), 15.
79. Cousturier, Des Inconnus chez moi, 103. The excerpt in the paper is “Notre
page littéraire: un général sauvage, de Lucie Cousturier,” La Race nègre 1
(June 1927): 3. On petit nègre, see also Myron Echenberg, Colonial Con-
scripts: The Tirailleur Sénégalais in French West Africa, 1857–1960 (Ports-
NOTES TO PAGES 46–53 333


--- PAGE 345 ---
mouth, N.H.: Heinemann, 1991), 15, 115–116. The petit nègre instruction
manual used during the war was the sublimely titled Le Français tel que
le parlent nos tirailleurs sénégalais (French as our African soldiers speak it)
(1916).
80. De Witte, Les Mouvements nègres en France, 158.
81. Lacascade, Claire-Solange, âme africaine (Paris: Eugène Figuière, 1924), 95.
Page numbers of subsequent quotes will be indicated parenthetically in the
text.
82. Maryse Condé, La Parole des femmes, essai sur les romanciers des Antilles de
langue française (Paris: L ’Harmattan, 1979), 28–31.
83. See Jack Corzani, La Littérature des Antilles-Guyane françaises, vol. 3: la Négri-
tude (Fort-de-France: Editions Desormeaux, 1978), 211–213. I have located
no information on Lacascade aside from this anecdote.
84. Pas fais guiolle kiou poule, da chè translated literally means “Don’t make a face
like a hen’s ass, my dear.”
85. See Peter Ostwald, Schumann: The Inner Voices of a Musical Genius (Boston:
Northeastern University Press, 1985), 115; Frederick Niecks, Robert Schu-
mann (London: J. M. Dent, 1925), 176.
86. Du Bois, “The Sorrow Songs,” The Souls of Black Folk, 538–539. Other
slightly different versions of this anecdote are “The Shadow of Years,” chapter
1i nDarkwater: Voices from within the Veil (1920; reprint, New York: Dover,
1999), 3; “The Concept of Race,” chapter 5 in Dusk of Dawn: An Essay to-
ward an Autobiography of a Race Concept (1940), in Writings (New York: Li-
brary of America, 1986), 638; and The Autobiography of W . E. B. Du Bois: A
Soliloquy on Viewing My Life from the Last Decade of Its First Century (New
York: International Publishers, 1968), 62.
87. Ousmane Socé, Karim, roman sénégalais (1935; reprint, Paris: Nouvelles Edi-
tions Latines, 1948).
88. For the often overlooked translations by the fathers of Négritude, see Sterling
Brown, “Les Hommes Forts” (Strong Men), trans. Aimé Césaire, Charpentes
1 (June 1939): 52–53 [the issue features poetry from around the world, al-
though there is no U.S. rubric: the translation of Brown’s poem is listed along
with poems by Senghor and Léon-Gontran Damas under “Afrique noire”];
Léopold Sédar Senghor, “T rois poètes négro-américains,”Poésie 45 23 (Feb-
ruary–March 1945): 32–44 [the selection offers translations and the English
originals of Jean T oomer, “Song of the Sun” and “Georgia Dusk”; Langston
Hughes, “Our Land,” “An Earth Song,” and “Minstrel Man”; and Countee
Cullen, “Heritage”]. On Hughes’s own work as translator, see Alfred J. Guil-
laume, Jr., “And Bid Him T ranslate: Langston Hughes’ T ranslations of Poetry
from French,”The Langston Hughes Review 4, no. 2 (fall 1985): 1–23; John F .
334 NOTES TO PAGES 53–59


--- PAGE 346 ---
Matheus, “Langston Hughes as T ranslator,” in Langston Hughes: Black Ge-
nius, ed. Therman B. O’Daniel (New York: William Morrow, 1971), 157–
170.
89. Langston Hughes, Fine Clothes to the Jew (New York: Knopf, 1927).
90. Regarding reviews of Fine Clothes to the Jew,see Langston Hughes: Critical Per-
spectives Past and Present, ed. Henry Louis Gates, Jr., and K. A. Appiah (New
York: Amistad, 1993); and Hughes,The Big Sea: An Autobiography (1940; re-
print, New York: Thunder’s Mouth Press, 1986), 264.
91. Howard Mumford Jones, Chicago Daily News (June 29, 1927), in Langston
Hughes: Critical Perspectives, 67.
92. Arnold Rampersad, The Life of Langston Hughes, vol. 1: I, T oo, Sing America
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1986), 141.
93. Hughes, “The Weary Blues,” The Weary Blues (1926), collected in The Col-
lected Poems of Langston Hughes, ed. Arnold Rampersad (New York: Knopf,
1994), 50.
94. Hughes, “Young Gal’s Blues,” inFine Clothes, 83.
95. Martin Williams, “Recording Limits and Blues Form,” in The Art of Jazz:
Essays on the Nature and Development of Jazz,ed. Williams (New York: Grove,
1959), 91–94.
96. Hughes, “Baby,” “Shout,” inFine Clothes, 61, 49.
97. Jahan Ramazani, Poetry of Mourning: The Modern Elegy from Hardy to Heaney
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994), 153.
98. Hughes, “Hey” and “Hey! Hey!” in Fine Clothes, 17, 89. Indeed, Hughes
would republish these poems as a single two-stanza poem, “Night and
Morn,” in his book The Dream Keeper (New York: Knopf, 1932).
99. Ramazani, Poetry of Mourning, 140–143.
100. Hughes, The Big Sea, 264.
101. Hughes, “Songs Called the Blues,” Phylon 2 (second quarter 1941): 143.
102. Hughes, “Magnolia Flowers,” “Mulatto,” “Red Silk Stockings,”Fine Clothes,
70, 71–72, 73.
103. Langston Hughes, “Jazz Band in a Parisian Cabaret,” in Fine Clothes, 74.
104. Hughes, The Big Sea, 162.
105. See Hughes, The Big Sea, 158–163, 171–183; Craig Lloyd, Eugene Bullard:
Black Expatriate in Jazz-Age Paris (Athens: University of Georgia Press,
2000), 90–100; William A. Shack, Harlem in Montmartre: A Paris Jazz Story
between the Great Wars (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2001), 33;
Bricktop [Ada Smith Ducongé] with James Haskins, Bricktop (New York:
Atheneum, 1983), 84–103; Rampersad, The Life of Langston Hughes, vol. 1,
85.
106. Hughes, The Big Sea, 162.
NOTES TO PAGES 59–64 335


--- PAGE 347 ---
107. I have adopted the phrase “amphibious spaces” from Stepto, From behind the
Veil, 102.
108. Hughes, “The Cat and the Saxophone (2 a.m.),” The Weary Blues (1926),
collected in The Collected Poems, 89. Rampersad gives the source of the lyric
in his endnote, 624.
109. Hughes, “Jazz as Communication,” in The Langston Hughes Reader (New
York: G. Braziller, 1958), 492.
110. Signiﬁcantly, the poem was originally titled “T o a Negro Jazz Band in a Pari-
sian Cabaret” when published in the Crisis in 1925; the revised title in Fine
Clothes allows the phrase to be read both as an apostrophe and as a descrip-
tive. Hughes, “Jazz Band in a Parisian Cabaret,”Crisis (December 1925): 67.
See Rampersad’s note inThe Collected Poems, 620.
111. Duke Ellington, “The Encyclopedia of Jazz,” foreword to Leonard Feather,
The Encyclopedia of Jazz (New York: Bonanza Books, 1960), 15.
112. Hughes, “Songs Called the Blues,” 145.
113. See Jacques Derrida, “Schibboleth, pour Paul Celan,” in Midrash and Litera-
ture, ed. Geoffrey Hartman and S. Budick (New Haven: Yale University
Press, 1986), 324–325.
2. On Reciprocity: René Maran and Alain Locke
1. René Maran, Batouala (Paris: Albin Michel, 1921). Page numbers of subse-
quent citations to this edition will be indicated parenthetically in the text.
Nearly two decades later, Maran published a thoroughly revised “deﬁnitive
edition” (Paris: Albin Michel, 1938).
2. Maran, Batouala, trans. Adele Szold Seltzer (New York: Thomas Selzter,
1922). The English translation was also published in London by Jonathan
Cape in 1922. A different, somewhat better translation of the “deﬁnitive edi-
tion” appeared in the 1970s: see Maran, Batouala: A True Black Novel, trans.
Barbara Beck and Alexandre Mboukou (Washington, D.C.: Black Orpheus,
1972). Hubert Harrison, “M. Maran’sBatouala, a French-African Tale: Work
of a Negro Novelist as It Impresses a Negro Reviewer—Prize Story of a Land
That Has Known the Abuses of Civilization,” New York World (August 20,
1922), collected in A Hubert Harrison Reader, ed. Jeffrey B. Perry (Middle-
town, Conn.: Wesleyan University Press, 2001), 334.
3. Charles Chesnutt, Letter to Benjamin Brawley, March 24, 1922, Moorland-
Spingarn Collection, Howard University, quoted in Michel Fabre, “René
Maran, the New Negro and Negritude,”Phylon 36, no. 3 (September 1975):
341. Alain Locke, “The Colonial Literature of France,” Opportunity 1( N o-
vember 1923): 331. Interestingly, in an extremely uncommon link, Locke’s
336 NOTES TO PAGES 65–69


--- PAGE 348 ---
essay was published nearly simultaneously in Marcus Garvey’s the Negro
World (December 15, 1923): 6. Alain Locke, “Negro Youth Speaks,” in The
New Negro,ed. Alain Locke (1925; reprint, New York: Atheneum, 1968), 51.
4. “More about René Maran,” Opportunity 1 (January 1923): 31. Jessie Fauset,
“No End of Books,” Crisis (March 1922), collected in The Chinaberry Tree
and Selected Writings, ed. Mary Jane Knopf (Boston: Northeastern University
Press, 1995), 346. See also Fauset, “‘Batouala’ is translated,”Crisis 24 (Sep-
tember 1922): 218–219.
5. “The Whole World Is Reading It!” Crisis 23 (March 1922): 208–209.
6. Robert Machray, “The Negro Problem of France,” Negro World (May 5,
1923); William H. Ferris, “The Signiﬁcance of René Maran,” Negro World
(March 11, 1922); J. A. Rogers, review, Negro World (Sept. 23, 1922). See
also “Speech by Marcus Garvey” (August 1, 1922), inThe Marcus Garvey and
UNIA Papers, vol. 4: 1 Sept. 1921–2 Sept. 1922,ed. Robert A. Hill (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1985).
7. W . E. B. Du Bois, “The Negro Mind Reaches Out,” Foreign Affairs 3, no. 3
(1924), collected in The New Negro, 392.
8. See Michel Fabre, “Autour de Maran,”Présence africaine 86 (second trimester
1973): 171.
9. Maran, Batouala, 11–12; Maran, Batouala, trans. Seltzer, 10 (modiﬁed).
10. T oni Morrison, “Unspeakable Things Unspoken: The Afro-American Pres-
ence in American Literature,” in Modern Critical Views: T oni Morrison, ed.
Harold Bloom (New York: Chelsea House, 1990), 210.
11. Spivak, “Three Women’s T exts and a Critique of Imperialism,” in ‘Race,’
Writing and Difference, ed. Henry Louis Gates, Jr. (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1986), 279.
12. Anthologie nègre, ed. Blaise Cendrars (Paris: Editions de la Sirene, 1921). An
expanded edition was published a few years later (Paris: Au Sans Pareil,
1927). This second edition was translated into English under the title The
African Saga, trans. Margery Bianco (1927; reprint, New York: Negro Uni-
versities Press, 1969).
13. Maran, “Le Professeur Alain Leroy Locke,” Présence africaine 4 (1949): 137.
Also see Fabre, “René Maran, the New Negro and Negritude,” 350.
14. Edward W . Said,Orientalism (New York: Vintage, 1978).
15. Leiris, quoted in Steins, Blaise Cendrars: bilans nègres (Paris: Lettres
Modernes, 1977), 10.
16. Cendrars, “Notice,” Anthologie nègre, n.p.
17. Steins, Blaise Cendrars, 18.
18. On the indigénat, see Jean Suret-Canale, French Colonialism in Tropical Af-
NOTES TO PAGES 69–73 337


--- PAGE 349 ---
rica, 1900–1945, trans. Till Gottheiner (New York: Pica Press, 1971), 331–
336. The original is Afrique noire, vol. 2: l’ère coloniale, 1900–1945 (Paris:
Editions Sociales, 1964).
19. See Sarraut’sLa Mise en valeur des colonies françaises (Paris: Payot, 1923).
20. For discussions of this developing discipline in France, see Raoul Girardet,
L ’Idée coloniale en France de 1871–1962(Paris: La Table Ronde, 1972), 231–
233; Herman Lebovics, “Identity Conﬂicts: Folklore and National Heritage,”
True France: The Wars over Cultural Identity, 1900–1940 (Ithaca: Cornell
University Press, 1992), 135–162.
21. Michel Leiris, “Du Musée d’Ethnographie au Musée de l’Homme,”La Nou-
velle Revue française 299 (August 1938): 344–345; Paul Rivet, “Organisation
d’un musée d’ethnologie,”Museum 1, no. 1–2 (July 1948): 68–69, 111–112;
Georges Henri Rivière, “My Experience at the Musée d’Ethnologie,” inPro-
ceedings of the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland for
1968 (London: Royal Anthropological Institute, 1969), 17–21.
22. Maurice Delafosse, “Sur l’orientation nouvelle de la politique indigène dans
l’Afrique noire,” Renseignements coloniaux 6, supplement to L ’Afrique fran-
çaise (1921), 145; quoted in Raymond Leslie Buell, The Native Problem in
Africa, vol. 2 (New York: MacMillan, 1928), 88–89 (modiﬁed). On his com-
plex career, see Maurice Delafosse: entre orientalisme et ethnographie: l’itinéraire
d’un africainiste (1870–1926), ed. Jean-Loup Amselle and Emmanuelle
Sibeud (Paris: Maisonneuve and Larose, 1998).
23. Buell, The Native Problem in Africa, vol. 2, 85.
24. Maurice Delafosse, Les Civilisations négro-africaines (Paris: Librairie Stock-
Delamain, 1925); André Demaison, Diaeli, le livre de la sagesse noire (Paris:
Editions d’Art H. Piazza, 1931); Louis Huot, “L ’âme noire: l’homme primitif
centre-africain,” Mercure de France 560 (October 15, 1921): 372–405;
Lucien Levy-Bruhl, La Mentalité primitive (Paris: Librairie Félix Alcan,
1923); Robert Delavignette, Les Paysans noirs (Paris: Stock, 1931); Leo
Frobenius, Histoire de la civilisation africaine, trans. H. Back and D. Ermont
(Paris: Gallimard, 1936).
25. Delafosse, quoted in Buell, 88–89.
26. Alice L. Conklin, A Mission to Civilize: The Republican Idea of Empire in
France and West Africa, 1895–1930 (Stanford: Stanford University Press,
1997), 175.
27. M. le Gouverneur Général to MM. les Lieutenants-Gouverneurs, “Circulaire
conﬁdentielle au sujet du Congrès panafricain de Bruxelles et de Paris,” Sep-
tember 17, 1921, quoted in Conklin, 190.
28. These reports are collected in the Archives Nationales: “Rapport des colonies
sur l’état d’esprit des populations indigènes: la repercussion des congrès pan-
338 NOTES TO PAGES 73–76


--- PAGE 350 ---
africains de Bruxelles et de Paris (1921),” Archives Nationales de la Répub-
lique du Sénégal (hereafter ANS) Archives du gouvernement général de
l’Afrique occidentale française, fonds moderne, series 21G, folder 124. Cf.
also “Garveyisme,” ANS series 21G, folder 126.
29. Demaison, Diaeli, le livre de la sagesse noire, 3.
30. Delafosse, Les Noirs de l’Afrique(Paris: Payot, 1922), 3–4.
31. Ibid., 157.
32. Ibid., 159–160.
33. Girardet, L ’Idée coloniale en France,236–238.
34. René Maran, “French African Literature,” Encyclopaedia Britannica, 14th ed.
(1929), 755.
35. Leiris, L ’Age d’homme(Paris: Gallimard, 1939), 162. In Africa, though, Leiris
would depart from such a position; see L ’Afrique fantôme(1934; reprint,
Paris: Gallimard, 1981) and his interview with Michael Haggerty, “L ’autre
qui apparaît chez vous,” Jazz Magazine 325 (January 1984): 33–36.
36. Michael Haggerty, “Georges Henri Rivière: ‘un mariage d’amour,’”Jazz Mag-
azine 325 (January 1984): 48–49; J. F . Leroux-Dhuys, “Georges Henri
Rivière, un homme dans le siècle,” in La Muséologie selon Georges-Henri
Rivière, ed. Anne Gruner Schlumberger (Paris: Dunod, 1989), 16–17.
37. Rivière, “Roland Hayes,” Les Continents 3 (June 15, 1924): 2; “Lettre d’un
provincial,” Les Continents 8 (September 1, 1924): 2.
38. Leroux-Dhuys, 17.
39. Ibid., 17. Also see Brent Hayes Edwards, “The Ethnics of Surrealism,” Tran-
sition 78 (1999): 84–91.
40. Paul Gaultier, “Du jazz-band au roman nègre,” Revue politique et littéraire
(Revue bleue) (January 21, 1922); reproduced in Jazz Magazine 325 (January
1984): 37.
41. Paul Souday, “Livres,” Le T emps(December 15, 1921).
42. Girardet, L ’Idée coloniale en France,240.
43. Angoulvant, “Préface” to Gaston Joseph, Kofﬁ, roman vrai d’un Noir (Paris:
Editions du Monde Nouveau, 1922), 7. The novel was translated as Kofﬁ:
The Romance of a Negro by E. A. Wood (London: J. Bale, 1923).
44. The Tharaud brothers make much of the fact that Demaison not only lived
“in the jungle among the blacks of l’Afrique Occidentale,” but also was an
expert in African languages, immersing himself in African culture to the
point that he was able in Diato, “so lively and so colorful, to translate the
complication that naturally escapes the notice of the visitor simply passing
through.” In “Préface,” Demaison,Diato, roman de l’homme noir qui eut trois
femmes et en mourut (Paris: Albin Michel, 1923).
45. Delafosse, Broussard ou les états d’âme d’un colonial, suivis de ses propos et opin-
NOTES TO PAGES 76–82 339


--- PAGE 351 ---
ions (Paris: Emile Larose, 1923), 173; quoted in Iheanachor Egonu, “Le Prix
Goncourt de 1921 et la ‘querelle de Batouala,’”Research in African Literatures
11, no. 4 (winter 1980): 533.
46. Among others, see René T rautmann, Au pays de ‘Batouala’: noirs et blancs de
l’Afrique (Paris: Payot, 1922); and J. Blanche, Vrais noirs et vrais blancs
d’Afrique au XXe siècle (Orléans: Maurice Caillette, 1922). Maran later ex-
tended the debate in the anthropological context by publishing his own
“non-ﬁction” version of many of the tales and customs represented in
Batouala. Maran, “Légendes et coutumes nègres de l’oubangui-chari: choses
vues,” Les Œuvres libres 147 (1933): 325–381.
47. It is not the ﬁrst, though. That distinction belongs to Ahmadou Mapaté
Diagne’s short didactic novel for children, Les Trois Volontés de Malic (Paris:
Larousse, 1920). On Diagne, see Christopher Miller, “Unﬁnished Business:
Colonialism in Sub-Saharan Africa and the Ideals of the French Revolution,”
in The Global Ramiﬁcations of the French Revolution, ed. Joseph Klaits and
Michael H. Haltzel (New York: Woodrow Wilson Center Press/Cambridge
University Press, 1994), 105–126.
48. G. Barthémey, “Batouala,” Les Annales coloniales 24, no. 1 (January 2, 1923);
Henri Bidou, “Parmi les livres,” La Revue de Paris (January–February 1922):
400–405. A few of the reviews in English reﬂect this charge that Batouala
was “propaganda”; see Julia Wood, “Black Shame and France,” New York
Times (April 30, 1922).
49. Fabre points out that “the phrase ‘contemporary African’ was used again and
again” to describe Maran in American reviews of the novel. Arna Bontemps
praised “this ﬁrst novel by an African to receive the great French prize”
(Bontemps interview, March 16, 1972, quoted in Fabre, “René Maran, the
New Negro and Negritude,” 342). Similarly, Robert Machray writes that
Maran is a “pure African Negro” in “The Negro Problem of France,” Negro
World (May 5, 1923). Interestingly, Ernest Hemingway, writing for the To-
ronto Star Weekly, gave the novel an accurate and positive review, noting that
Maran’s defenders “have rallied to him and asked the politicians to take the
novel as a work of art which it is: great art, except for the preface, which is the
only bit of propaganda in the work.” Hemingway, “A Prize-Winning Book is
Centre of Storm,” T oronto Star Weekly(March 25, 1922): 3.
50. Fauset, “No End of Books,” 346. But see Fauset’s smart commentary on the
faults of the original English translation: “‘Batouala’ Is T ranslated,”Crisis 24
(September 1922): 218–219.
51. Maran, “Souvenirs d’un ancien Prix Goncourt,” Bingo, l’illustré africain 73
(February 1959): 13.
52. The best consideration of the French critical response to Batouala is Egonu,
340 NOTES TO PAGES 82–83


--- PAGE 352 ---
“Le Prix Goncourt de 1921 et la ‘querelle de Batouala,’” 529–545. Fabre, in
“René Maran, the New Negro and Negritude,” considers the African Ameri-
can response in a general sense, while the most thorough take on the many
reviews in the Negro Worldis T ony Martin’sLiterary Garveyism (Dover, Mass.:
Majority Press, 1983), 95–99. For criticism on the story itself rather than
the reception of Batouala as a cultural force, one might begin with Lilyan
Kesteloot, Les Écrivains noirs de langue française: naissance d’une littérature
(Brussels: Université Libre, 1963), 83–90; Femi Ojo-Ade, René Maran, the
Black Frenchman: A Bio-Critical Study (Washington, D.C.: Three Conti-
nents, 1984), 47–52; Keith Cameron, René Maran (Boston: T wayne, 1985),
14–41; Manuel Gahisto, “La genèse deBatouala,”i nHommage à René Maran
(Paris: Présence Africaine, 1965), 93–155.
53. Asad, “The Concept of Cultural T ranslation in British Social Anthropology,”
in Writing Culture: The Poetics and Politics of Ethnography, ed. James Clifford
and George Marcus (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1986), 160.
54. Demaison, “Préface,” in Diato n.p.; Jérôme and Jean Tharaud, “Préface,” in
La Randonnée de Samba Diouf (Paris: Librairie Plon, 1922), 3–4.
55. Asad, “The Concept of Cultural T ranslation,” 160.
56. In fact, one of the main complaints in reviews of Batouala was that the novel
contained too many unfamiliar African words. This response was common
both in Paris (the review in La Nouvelle Revue française complained about the
abundance of “vocables nègres”) and in English-language reviews of the
translation. When an episode from the novel appeared in the journal theLiv-
ing Age, for example, the accompanying commentary complained that the
African words were a “nuisance.” See “‘Batouala’ and the Winner of the Prix
Goncourt,” Living Age 312 (February 4, 1922): 307–309. Also see Egonu,
“Le Prix Goncourt de 1921 et la ‘querelle de Batouala,’” 536–537.
57. Chantal Zabus, The African Palimpsest: Indigenization of Language in the West
African Europhone Novel (Amsterdam: Rodopi, 1991), 157–158.
58. Maran, letter to M. Burel, November 6, 1922, correspondence ﬁle, René
Maran papers, collection of Michel Fabre, Paris.
59. Locke, “The Colonial Literature of France,” 331.
60. Ibid., 334.
61. Ibid., 331.
62. Although Freud and Locke both employ a metaphor of inscription to suggest
the workings of the psyche, the differences between these models are sig-
niﬁcant. Freud is describing the “hypothetical” structure of perceptual and
mnemic systems in the individual psyche. Locke’s image, on the other hand,
is both more ambitious and more loosely formulated: it aims to describe a
model of the impression of cultural, even ideological, data onto a collective
NOTES TO PAGES 84–90 341


--- PAGE 353 ---
psyche, the “public mind.” Locke’s confusing proposition of an etching that
erases implies that racist ideology can be wiped clean or corrected—appar-
ently it can be erased without leaving a trace. For Freud, on the contrary, the
attraction of the novelty “mystic writing-pad” (Wunderblock) is precisely its
ability to “provide both an ever-ready receptive surface and permanent traces
of the notes that have been made upon it.” Sigmund Freud, “A Note upon
the ‘Mystic Writing-Pad’” (1925), collected inGeneral Psychological Theory,
ed. Philip Rieff (New York: Collier, 1963), 209.
63. Bruce Robbins, “Comparative Cosmopolitanism,” Social T ext31–32 (1992):
178.
64. Frantz Fanon, Peau noire, masques blancs (Paris: Seuil, 1952), 170–171. The
English edition is Black Skin, White Masks, trans. Charles Lam Markmann
(New York: Grove, 1967), 211 (modiﬁed).
65. Locke, “The Colonial Literature of France,” 331.
66. McKay, A Long Way from Home (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,
1937), 313.
67. See Egonu, “Le Prix Goncourt de 1921 et la ‘querelle de Batouala,’” 530.
68. Egonu, 531–533, 537. On the “failed assimilation” critique, see ibid., 534–
535.
69. J. L., “La logique noire,” Le T emps(February 18, 1922). It should be noted
that the author, though he writes les nègres, always puts “les blancs”in quotes,
as though to question at the level of grammar the word’s status as a category.
So “white” is, in linguistic terms, the “marked” category—what normally
would not even have to be named, in other words—and, of course, this is be-
cause “white” is deﬁned as “notnègre”; it is located precisely by the differenti-
ation of the Other.
70. For example, Batouala’s drunken speech about the “evilness” (méchanceté)
and “duplicity” of the French(des blancs) is similar to the rhetoric in the pref-
ace: the blancs, he says in a long soliloquy, “lie for nothing. They lie with
method and memory, they lie the way one breathes....U s ?W e ’ r eless than
animals, we’re the lowest of the low. They’re killing us slowly” (75–77).
71. Chidi Ikonné’s candid and thorough essays on Maran are one example of the
criticism that chooses to read Maran through this “doubled” logic, attempt-
ing to explain it—usually biographically—as a fault that damns Batouala to
ambivalence or self-contradiction. See “René Maran and the New Negro,”
Colby Library Quarterly 15, no. 4 (December 1979): 224–239; “René Maran,
1887–1960: A Black Francophone Writer between T wo Worlds,”Research in
African Literatures 5, no. 1 (spring 1974): 5–22; and especially “What is
‘Batouala’?”Journal of African Studies 3, no. 3 (fall 1976): 373–391.
342 NOTES TO PAGES 91–94


--- PAGE 354 ---
72. Senghor, “René Maran, précurseur de la Négritude,” in Hommage à René
Maran (Paris: Présence Africaine, 1965), 11, 13.
73. Maran, “French Colonial Policy: Open Letters,” Opportunity 2 (September
1924): 201.
74. Ibid., 262.
75. Maran, “La France et ses Nègres,” L ’Action coloniale5, no. 90 (September 25,
1923): 1.
76. Maran, “French Colonial Policy: Open Letters,” 201.
77. Maran, “La France et ses Nègres,” 1.
78. Also see his article “Un appel aux écrivains combattants: comment on traite
nos frères noirs,”La Rumeur coloniale, La Rumeur ﬁnancière 445 (January 28,
1929).
79. Maran, letter to M. Burel, November 6, 1922; Maran, Un Homme pareil aux
autres (Paris: Editions Arc-en-Ciel, 1947).
80. Maran, “La France et ses Nègres,” 1.
81. Léon T reich, “René Maran,”Le Soir 116 (May 14, 1960): 2.
82. See Ikonné, “René Maran and the New Negro,” 232–233.
83. Walter F . White, L ’Etincelle,trans. Marguerite Humbert-Zeller (Paris: Plon,
1928).
84. On the journal’s brief but important publication history, see Iheanachor
Egonu, “Les Continents and the Francophone Pan-Negro Movement,”Phylon
42 (September 1981): 245–254; J. Ayodele Langley, “The Movement and
Thought of Francophone Pan-Negroism: 1924–1936,” chapter 8 in Pan-
Africanism and Nationalism in West Africa, 1900–1945: A Study in Ideology
and Social Classes (London: Oxford University Press, 1973), 286–300; J. S.
Spiegler, “Kojo T ovalou-Houénou andLes Continents,” chapter 3 inAspects of
Nationalist Thought among French-Speaking West Africans, 1921–1939(Ph.D.
diss., Oxford University, 1968), 50–80.
85. See “Le bon apôtre,” Les Continents 11 (October 15, 1924). I suggest that
Maran penned the article not only judging from the piece’s tone, but also be-
cause the scandal was quickly portrayed as a personal battle between the two
men—or “Maranism vs. Diagnism,” as Les Continents described it.
86. “Le procès fantôme,” Les Continents 13–14 (November 15–December 1,
1924).
87. Hughes, “The Negro” and “A Black Pierrot,” Les Continents 5 (July 15,
1924). The original sources are “The Negro,” Crisis (January 1922): 113; “A
Black Pierrot,” Amsterdam News (April 4, 1923): 12. See The Collected Poems
of Langston Hughes, ed. Arnold Rampersad (New York: Knopf, 1994),
612n24, 614n31.
NOTES TO PAGES 94–99 343


--- PAGE 355 ---
88. See for example “Maranism vs. Diagnism,” Les Continents [English section]
13–14 (November 15–December 1, 1924): 1–2. The section includes the
“ﬁrst list of the American members of the Ligue Universelle pour la Défense
de la Race Noire,” with six subscriptions, all for individuals in Chicago (most
likely a reﬂection of T ovalou Houénou’s speaking tour through the Midwest
that fall).
89. “La presse noire d’Amérique,” Les Continents 15 (December 15, 1924). For
U.S. awareness of the periodical, see Gwendolyn Bennett, “The Ebony
Flute,” Opportunity 5 (August 1927): 243. On August 25, 1924, Du Bois
wrote to Maran: “I have read ‘Les Continents’ with great pleasure. I hope it
will live and I hope that the forward-looking Negroes of America and the
world can be brought into close cooperation with your league.” W . E. B. Du
Bois Papers, University of Massachusetts-Amherst.
90. “Au Caméléon,” Les Continents 3 (June 15, 1924).
91. Announcement of Roland Hayes beneﬁt concert, June 19 and June 25, 1924,
Les Continents 3 (June 15, 1924).
92. It is not clear when Du Bois and Maran met, but they knew each other be-
fore 1924. The next year, Maran would serve as a judge (along with H. G.
Wells, Charles Chesnutt, Sinclair Lewis, and Mary White Ovington) in the
short story division of the Amy E. Spingarn Prizes in Negro Literature and
Art, organized by the Crisis.
93. Du Bois, letter to Maran, August 25, 1924, W . E. B. Du Bois Papers. This
letter comes in the midst of a strange exchange between the two. Maran, hav-
ing recommended T ovalou Houénou, then wrote Du Bois in English on Au-
gust 15 to warn him that the Dahomean was an “escroc” (the word escroc in
French means a “swindler” or “conman”) and shouldn’t be trusted. Four days
later, Maran wrote again, saying that although there had been a “few dif-
ﬁculties of private order” with regard to T ovalou Houénou, his prior warning
should be disregarded.
94. Claude McKay, “What Is and What Isn’t,” Crisis 27 (April 1924): 259. On
T ovalou Houénou, see also the later article by Eslanda Goode Robeson,
“Black Paris,”Challenge 1, no. 4 (January 1936): 12–18.
95. “Convention Report” (New York, August 20, 1924), in The Marcus Garvey
and UNIA Papers, vol. 5: September 1922–August 1924, ed. Robert A. Hill
(Berkeley: University of California, 1983), 762.
96. “Convention Report” (New York, August 18, 1924), in The Marcus Garvey
and UNIA Papers, 750.
97. Kenneth W . Warren, “Appeals for (Mis)recognition: Theorizing the Dias-
pora,” in Cultures of United States Imperialism, ed. Amy Kaplan and Donald
E. Pease (Durham: Duke University Press, 1993), 395.
344 NOTES TO PAGES 100–102


--- PAGE 356 ---
98. “Discours prononcé le 19 Aout, 1924, au Congrès Annuel de l’Association
Universelle pour l’Avancement de la Race Noire, pas S. A. le Prince Kojo
T ovalou Houénou, Président de la Ligue Universelle pour la Défense de la
Race Noire, Directeur Fondateur du Journal ‘Les Continents,’”Negro World
(September 13, 1924). The speech was also excerpted in “Paris, coeur de la
race noire,” Les Continents 9 (September 15, 1924). See also “Notre directeur
en Amérique: du Liberty Hall au Carnegie Hall et à Philadelphie,”Les Conti-
nents 9 (September 15, 1924); “Notre directeur en Amérique: de New York à
Chicago,” Les Continents 15 (December 15, 1924).
99. “Convention Reports” (New York, August 31, 1924), in The Marcus Garvey
and UNIA Papers, 823.
100. T ovalou Houénou, letter to Du Bois, September 3, 1924, W . E. B. Du Bois
Papers.
101. As one might expect, there is a great deal written by and about T ovalou
Houénou, such as T ovalou Houénou, “Le problème de la race noire,”Negro
World (May 1924): 15, and Negro World (May 17, 1924): 17; T ovalou
Houénou, “L ’esclavagiene [sic] colonial,”Negro World (June 14, 1924): 13;
“The Prince of Dahomey Arrives from France,” Negro World (August 23,
1924): 7. For articles culled directly from issues of Les Continents, see John
H. Whitaker, “Une crise politique aux Philippines,” Negro World (June 14,
1924): 13; Georges-Henri Rivière, “Deux heures avec Roland Hayes,” Negro
World (August 16, 1924): 17; “Réponse du Professeur Locke à René Maran,”
Negro World (September 20, 1924): 14; “Après l’ouverture du Congrès de
New York: le Prince Kojo T ovalou Houénou en Amérique,” Negro World
(September 20, 1924): 14; “Rapport de Madame Lucie Cousturier,” Negro
World (September 27, 1924): 14.
102. “Hon. Marcus Garvey, Writing from France, Discusses T reatment Accorded
Negroes There and in Other Countries of the World,” Negro World (August
11, 1928).
103. “Report of Speech by Marcus Garvey,” Chicago Tribune (October 6, 1928),
Paris edition, collected in The Marcus Garvey and Universal Negro Improve-
ment Association Papers, vol. 7: November 1927–August 1940, ed. Robert A.
Hill (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1983), 278. See also “Garvey
in Paris Speaks to Famed Club de Faubourg,” Negro World (October 27,
1928): 1; “Garvey Corrects False Press Report of What T ook Place at Fau-
bourg Club, Paris,” Negro World (November 10, 1928): 1.
104. Daniel Legrand, “L ’agitateur au Faubourg: le conférencier Marcus Garvey,
dont les geôles américaines n’ont pas refroidi l’ardeur, rêve de conduire ses
frères de couleur jusqu’à la Société des Nations,”La Dêpêche coloniale et mari-
time, (October 9, 1928): 1. SLOTFOM, 3, 65.
NOTES TO PAGES 102–104 345


--- PAGE 357 ---
105. Maran, letter to Locke, quoted in Ikonné, “René Maran and the New Ne-
gro,” 234.
106. Locke, “The Black Watch on the Rhine,”Opportunity 2 (January 1924): 6–9.
Page numbers for further references will be indicated parenthetically in the
text.
107. Maran, “Lettre ouverte au professeur Alain-Leroy Locke, de l’Université
d’Howard (Etats-Unis),” Les Continents 3 (June 15, 1924): 1; Maran and
Locke, “French Colonial Policy: Open Letters,” Opportunity 2 (September
1924): 261–263. Page numbers for subsequent references to the Opportunity
exchange will be indicated parenthetically in the text.
108. It is unclear whether Maran is aware of Locke’s 1923 article “The Colonial
Literature of France,” in which Locke reviews not only Maran’s own
Batouala, but also the Tharauds’ La Randonnée de Samba Diouf, Gaston Jo-
seph’sKofﬁ (1923), Cousturier’sLa Forêt du Haut-Niger (1923), and Llewel-
lyn Powys’sEbony and Ivory (1922).
109. Locke, “Apropos of Africa,” Opportunity 2 (February 1924): 37.
110. Locke, 37 (emphasis added).
111. Locke, “The Colonial Literature of France,” Opportunity 1 (November
1923): 331.
112. Locke, “Apropos of Africa,” 40. This is of course the theme that reappears in
Locke’s introduction to the anthology he compiled later that year: “As with
the Jew, persecution is making the Negro international.” Locke, “The New
Negro,” in The New Negro, 14.
113. Locke told the Chicago Defender that “[a]mong the progressive movements
of today none is more important than the work of the league of nations. Its
basic principles of the equality of nations, of self-determination of peoples,
and the moral responsibility of governments before the court of world opin-
ion, are the only basis upon which we can hope for a world free of the
oppressions and exploitations of the old order of things, the only program
that may successfully avoid race war on a scale even bigger than the war we
called the World war.” Locke, “America Must Aid in Affairs of Africa: Philos-
opher Sees New Era for Continent,” Chicago Defender (October 22, 1927),
sec. II: 1.
114. For Locke’s notion of reciprocity, see also his “The Contribution of Race to
Culture,”The Student World23 (1930): 349–353; collected in The Philosophy
of Alain Locke: Harlem Renaissance and Beyond, ed. Leonard Harris (Philadel-
phia: T emple University Press, 1989), 201–206.
115. Locke, “Apropos of Africa,” 37.
116. Ibid., 37.
117. Ibid., 38.
346 NOTES TO PAGES 104–110


--- PAGE 358 ---
118. Ibid., 38.
119. Warren, 405.
120. See René Maran, “Gandhi,” trans. Edna Worthley Underwood, Opportunity
3 (February 1925): 40–42; Maran, “The Harriet Beecher Stowe of France”
[on Lucie Cousturier], trans. Edna Worthley Underwood, Opportunity 3
(August 1925): 229–231; Maran, “T wo Book Reviews” [on Albert Londres,
T erre d’ebene;Claire Goll, Le Nègre Jupiter enlève Europa], trans. Rayford W .
Logan, Opportunity 7 (December 1929): 379–380, 394; Maran, “French
Colonization—What It Might Have Been,” trans. Francis Hammond, Op-
portunity 14 (1936): 57, 63.
121. David Levering Lewis, When Harlem Was in Vogue (New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 1981), 95.
122. Here are just a few examples aside from Locke’s “The Colonial Literature of
France”: “More about René Maran,”Opportunity 1 (January 1923): 30 [this
article was reprinted in part from Brentano’s Book Chat (Thanksgiving
1922)]; William H. Baldwin, “Africa—A Study in Misunderstanding,” Op-
portunity 1 (February 1923): 5–6, 28; “Claude MacKay before the Interna-
tionale,” Opportunity 1 (September 1923): 258–259; “The Color Line in
Paris,” Opportunity 1 (September 1923): 287–288; “Fair France,” Opportu-
nity 1 (October 1923): 317–318; Alain Locke, “As Others See Us” [on
Franck Schoell, La Question des Noirs aux Etats-Unis], Opportunity 2 (April
1924): 109–110.
123. “African Art” issue, Opportunity 2 (May 1924). The other poem is Langston
Hughes’s “Our Land”; the three appear on p. 142. The pivotal inﬂuence of
French and German art criticism on Locke’s thinking is described in Matgor-
zata Irek, “From Berlin to Harlem: Felix von Luschan, Alain Locke, and the
New Negro,” inThe Black Columbiad: Deﬁning Moments in African American
Literature and Culture, ed. W . Sollors and M. Diedrich (Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1994), 174–184; Mark Helbling, “African Art: Albert C.
Barnes and Alain Locke,” Phylon 43 (March 1982): 57–67; and Locke, “Eu-
rope Discovers Negro Art,” in Negro Art: Past and Present (1936; reprint,
New York: Arno, 1969), 34–42. One might also note that Locke met both
Barnes and Guillaume in Paris.
124. Cullen, “The Dance of Love (After Reading René Maran’sBatouala),” Oppor-
tunity 1 (April 1923): 30. The other poem in this issue is Leslie Pinckney
Hill, “Voyaging,” 23.
125. Kojo T ovalou Houénou, “The Problem of Negroes in French Colonial Af-
rica,” Opportunity 2 (July 1924): 203–207. This lecture was originally deliv-
ered in February 1924 at the Ecole Interalliée des Hautes Etudes Sociales in
Paris.
NOTES TO PAGES 110–112 347


--- PAGE 359 ---
126. Locke, “La jeune poésie africo-américaine,” Les Continents 8 (September 1,
1924).
127. Jacques Derrida, “Semiology and Grammatology,” in Positions (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1981), 20.
128. Edward Said, Culture and Imperialism (New York: Knopf, 1993).
129. Locke, “Internationalism—Friend or Foe of Art?” World T omorrow(March
1925): 75–76. Subsequent page numbers for this reference are noted in text
in parentheses.
130. Maran’s work in Opportunity is cited earlier. For other translations from the
French, see for example: Louis Charbonneau, “Fièvres d’Afrique,” trans.
Edna Worthley Underwood, Opportunity 4 (April 1926): 114–115, 138;
“Legend of Ngurangurane” [from Blaise Cendrars, Anthologie nègre], trans.
Violette de Mazie, Opportunity 4 (May 1926): 153–55, 170; Dantès Belle-
garde, “Haiti under the Rule of the United States,” trans. Rayford W . Logan,
Opportunity 5 (December 1927): 354–357; Frederic Marcelin, “Jan-Jan: A
Haitian Idyll,” trans. Suzanne Sylvain,Opportunity 6 (January 1928): 16–18,
27; Jenner Bastien, “Haiti and Haitian Society,” trans. Countee Cullen, Op-
portunity 6 (June 1928): 176–177; Dantès Bellegarde, “The American Occu-
pation of Haiti,” trans. J. A. Rogers, Opporunity 8 (December 1929): 10–12;
Fernand Grogh, “Negroisms,” trans. Countee Cullen, Opportunity 8 (April
1930): 124–125.
I should note that it is equally possible to trace such an interest in the
pages of the other major “Harlem Renaissance” journal, theCrisis. This is es-
pecially due to the work of Jessie Fauset as literary editor in the 1920s. See
Yvette Guilbert, “Joseph and Mary Come to Bethlehem,” trans. Jessie Fauset,
Crisis 21 (December 1920): 72–73; Amédée Brun, “The Pool,” trans. Fauset,
Crisis 22 (September 1921): 205; Oswald Durand, “T o a Foreign Maid,”
trans. Fauset, Crisis 25 (February 1923): 158; G. D. Perier, “Kirongozi”
(from Curiosités congolaises), trans. Fauset, Crisis 27 (March 1924): 208–209;
Frank L. Schoell, “La question des Noirs aux Etats-Unis” (selections), trans.
Fauset, Crisis 28 (June 1924): 83–86; Af Carl Kjersmeier, “Negere som
digtere” [Negroes as poets], trans. E. Franklin Frazier, Crisis 30 (August
1925): 186–189.
131. Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities (1983; 2nd ed., New York:
Routledge, 1991), 33.
132. Ibid., 25.
133. Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, “The Politics of T ranslation,” in Outside in the
T eaching Machine(New York: Routledge, 1993), 179.
134. Lawrence Venuti, The Scandals of Translation: T owards an Ethics of Difference
(New York: Routledge, 1998), 69.
348 NOTES TO PAGES 112–116


--- PAGE 360 ---
135. Warren, “Appeals for (Mis)recognition,” 393.
136. Johannes Fabian, Time and the Other: How Anthropology Makes Its Object
(New York: Columbia University Press, 1983), 31.
137. In Locke’s work in particular, this bias reveals itself in his notions of expres-
sive forms. Indeed, in introducing the notion of a “cosmopolitan human-
ism,” Locke pictures it as trickling down from high art to popular art and to
“the masses”: “In other forms of art and art appreciation, aesthetic cosmopol-
itanism has been achieved, but ﬁction has always seemed to reﬂect the nar-
rower, more stunted values, and to have absorbed the worst provincialisms
and prejudices of the Caucasian and European bias. However emancipated
the elite, the masses will never respond to the broader view until it expresses
itself in the forms of the popular taste and the arts of the masses. Thus the
importance, and the peculiar social importance, of a broadening view in
drama and ﬁction—the popular arts. When they begin to reﬂect cosmopoli-
tan humanism, then to the wakeful eye the great day of humanity almost
dawns.” Only ﬁction and drama are “popular” here—ﬁlm and popular music
(and “recording technology”) are apparently not even worthy of mention.
Locke, “The Colonial Literature of France,” 331.
138. Damas, “Misère noire,” Esprit 7, no. 81 (June 1939): 333–354. Page num-
bers for further references will be cited parenthetically in the text.
139. Fabian, 34.
3. Feminism and L ’Internationalisme Noir:Paulette Nardal
1. Eslanda Goode Robeson, “Black Paris,” part II, Challenge 1, no. 5 (June
1936): 11–12. T ellingly, Nardal adds that “[t]he only forbidden subject, the
only taboo, is politics, because it is dangerous.”
2. “Ce que nous voulons faire” (“Our Aim”),La Revue du monde noir 1 (1931):
1–2.
3. The phrase “cultural intermediary” comes from Michel Fabre, “Autour de
Maran,” Présence africaine 86 (second trimester 1973): 169–170. Senghor
did not meet Langston Hughes until he visited the United States after World
War II. See Mercer Cook, “Afro-Americans in Senghor’s Poetry,”Hommage à
Léopold Sédar Senghor, homme de culture (Paris: Présence Africaine, 1976),
152; Janet G. Vaillant, Black, French, and African: A Life of Léopold Sédar
Senghor (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1990), 91–92; Senghor,
“Problématique de la Négritude,” in Liberté III: Négritude et civilisation de
l’universel(Paris: Seuil, 1977), 274. English-language contributions to the
journal include Langston Hughes, “I, T oo,” La Revue du monde noir 3
(1931): 34; Claude McKay, “T o America,”La Revue du monde noir 1 (1931):
38; McKay, “Spring in New Hampshire,”La Revue du monde noir 3 (1931):
NOTES TO PAGES 116–120 349


--- PAGE 361 ---
34; John Matheus, “Fog,” La Revue du monde noir 1 (1931): 39–52; Cugo
Lewis, “T’appin” [originally in Locke’sThe New Negro], La Revue du monde
noir 4 (1932): 44–47; Walter White, excerpt from “The Fire in the Flint,”La
Revue du monde noir 5 (1932): 37–43; Clara W . Shepard, “T uskegee Normal
and Industrial Institute,” La Revue du monde noir 2 (1931): 15–18; Shepard,
“The Utility of Foreign Languages for American Negroes,” La Revue du
monde noir 4 (1932): 28–31.
4. Senghor, “Femme noire,” Chants d’ombre(1945), in Senghor, The Collected
Poetry, trans. Melvin Dixon (Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press,
1991), 270.
5. Keith Warner, interview with Damas, in Critical Perspectives on Léon-Gontran
Damas, ed. Warner (Washington, D.C.: Three Continents, 1988), 24.
6. In Senegal, Senghor named Nardal an Ofﬁcier des Palmes Académiques,
Chevalier de la Légion d’Honneur, et Commandeur de l’Ordre National de
la République du Sénégal. When Nardal died in 1985, Césaire, as député-
maire in Fort-de-France, Martinique, arranged an elaborate funeral cortege in
the city, and a square was renamed after her. See Louis-Thomas Achille, “In
Memoriam: Paulette Nardal,”Présence africaine 133–134 (1985): 291.
7. Quoted in Hymans, Léopold Sédar Senghor: An Intellectual Biography (Edin-
burgh: Edinburgh University Press), 36.
8. “Eveil de la conscience de race” (“Awakening of Race Consciousness”), La
Revue du monde noir 6 (April 1932): 25. Page numbers for subsequent cita-
tions from this essay will be noted in the text in parentheses.
9. It should be evident that the phrase congénères attardés (translated as “retarded
brothers”) does not refer to mental deﬁciency, but to the “backward” or “de-
layed” intellectual state of “fellow blacks” (congénères) around the world. In
addition, the gendered pronouns in the French make it clear that the “they”
(elles) in the ﬁrst part of the passage are female, while the “students coming
up for degrees” (étudiants) can be both male and female.
10. Jane Nardal to Alain Locke, December 27, 1927. Alain Locke Papers, box
164-74, folder 25, Moorland-Spingarn Manuscript Division, Howard Uni-
versity.
11. Cooper, “The Social Conditions of the French-American Colonies: The
Class Structure (1925),” and “Black Slavery and the French Nation,” in The
Voice of Anna Julia Cooper, Including A Voice from the South and Other Impor-
tant Essays, Papers, and Letters, ed. Charles Lemert and Esme Bhan (Lanham:
Rowman and Littleﬁeld, 1998), 272–279, 280–290. See also “The Third
Step: Cooper’s Memoir of the Sorbonne Doctorate (1945–1950?),” in the
same volume, 320–330.
350 NOTES TO PAGES 121–126


--- PAGE 362 ---
12. See Louis Daniel Hutchinson, Anna Julia Cooper: A Voice from the South
(Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1981), 139.
13. On Anna Julia Cooper’s career and transatlantic work, see Mary Helen Wash-
ington’s introduction to Cooper,A Voice from the South, by a Black Woman of
the South (1892; reprint, New York: Oxford University Press, 1988); Leona
C. Gabel, From Slavery to the Sorbonne and Beyond: The Life and Writings of
Anna J. Cooper (Northampton, Mass.: Dept. of History of Smith College,
1982); David W . H. Pellow, “Anna J. Cooper: The International Dimen-
sions,” in Recovered Writers/Recovered T exts: Race, Class, and Gender in Black
Women’s Literature,ed. Dolan Hubbard (Knoxville: University of T ennessee,
1997), 60–74.
14. A good introduction to this history is Michel Fabre, From Harlem to Paris:
Black American Writers in France, 1840–1980 (Urbana: University of Illinois
Press, 1991), especially chapters 3, 8, 9, and 10. See also Nellie Bright’s essay
“Black,” Opportunity 5 (November 1927): 331–334, collected in Harlem’s
Glory: Black Women Writing, 1900–1950, ed. Lorraine E. Roses and Ruth E.
Randolph (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1996), 241–248.
15. Leila Rupp’s work brieﬂy considers the International Council of Women of
the Darker World and the Women’s International League for Peace and Free-
dom, as well as issues of “feminist orientalism” in attempts to include women
from the colonized world in international feminist organizations. See Worlds
of Women: The Making of an International Women’s Movement (Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1997), 73–80. Most works on French women be-
tween the wars tend to gloss over the colonial issue: see Mary Louise Roberts,
Civilization without Sexes: Reconstructing Gender in Postwar France, 1917–
1927 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994); James E. McMillan,
Housewife or Harlot: The Place of Women in French Society, 1870–1940 (New
York: St. Martin’s, 1981); Dominique Desanti,La Femme au temps des années
folles (Paris: Stock, 1984). Works more speciﬁcally on French feminism are
also marred by this gap: see Christine Bard,Les Filles de Marianne: histoire des
féminismes 1914–1940 (Paris: Fayard, 1995); Paul Smith, Feminism and the
Third Republic: Women’s Political and Civil Rights in France, 1918–1945(Ox-
ford: Clarendon, 1996); Siân Reynolds, France between the Wars: Gender and
Politics (London: Routledge, 1996).
16. Countee Cullen, “The Dark T ower,”Opportunity 5 (February 1927): 53.
17. Joan Wallach Scott, Only Paradoxes to Offer: French Feminists and the Rights of
Man (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1996), 8–9.
18. The term “profeminist” comes from Joy James, “Profeminism and Gender
Elites: W . E. B. Du Bois, Anna Julia Cooper, and Ida B. Wells-Barnett,” in
NOTES TO PAGES 126–131 351


--- PAGE 363 ---
Transcending the T alented T enth: Black Leaders and American Intellectuals
(New York: Routledge, 1997), 35. In terms of work on gender and black in-
ternationalism more generally, one counterexample is the ﬁne recent scholar-
ship of Barbara Bair on issues of gender and black internationalism: see “T rue
Women, Real Men: Gender, Ideology, and Social Roles in the Garvey Move-
ment,” in Gendered Domains: Re-Thinking Public and Private in Women’s His-
tory, ed. Dorothy O. Helly and Susan Reverby (Ithaca: Cornell University
Press, 1992), 154–166; “Pan-Africanism as Process: Adelaide Casely Hay-
ford, Garveyism, and the Cultural Roots of Nationalism,” in Imagining
Home: Class, Culture and Nationalism in the African Diaspora, ed. Sidney
Lemelle and Robin D. G. Kelley (New York: Verso, 1994), 121–144.
19. See W . E. B. Du Bois’s summary article, “The Pan-African Congresses: The
Story of a Growing Movement,” Crisis (October 1927): 263–264.
20. Cynthia Neverdon-Morton, Afro-American Women of the South and the Ad-
vancement of the Race, 1895–1925 (Knoxville: University of T ennessee Press,
1989), 198–199; Leila Rupp, Worlds of Women,75.
21. Deborah McDowell, “New Directions for Black Feminist Criticism,” Black
American Literature Forum 14, no. 4 (winter 1986): 157, quoted in Carole
Boyce Davies, Black Women, Writing and Identity: Migrations of the Subject
(New York: Routledge, 1994), 131.
22. Cheryl Wall, Women of the Harlem Renaissance (Bloomington: Indiana Uni-
versity Press, 1995), xiv.
23. Bennett, “T okens,” inEbony and T opaz: A Collectanea, ed. Charles Johnson
(New York: Opportunity, 1927): 149–150; “Wedding Day,” Fire!! (Novem-
ber 1926): 25–28.
24. Bennett, “The Ebony Flute,” Opportunity 5 (September 1927): 277.
25. On Josephine Baker and La Voix des Nègres, see Bennett, “The Ebony Flute,”
Opportunity 5 (March 1927): 90. Regarding Le Courrier des Noirs, see “The
Ebony Flute,” Opportunity 5 (September 1927): 277.
26. Bennett, “The Ebony Flute,” Opportunity 5 (August 1927): 243.
27. See Fabre, From Harlem to Paris, 120. Bennett’s journals are housed at the
Schomburg Center, New York Public Library.
28. Joy James critiques Paul Gilroy’s 1993 The Black Atlantic on this score in
Transcending the T alented T enth,57.
29. Langston Hughes wrote that “Jessie Fauset at the Crisis, Charles Johnson at
Opportunity, and Alain Locke in Washington, were the three people who
midwifed the so-called New Negro Literature into being.” Hughes, The Big
Sea (1940; reprint, New York: Thunder’s Mouth, 1986), 218. T ellingly, one
never sees this term applied in scholarship on the careers of Johnson or
Locke, but it is a common descriptive in introductions to Fauset’s work, as in
352 NOTES TO PAGES 132–134


--- PAGE 364 ---
Abby Arthur Johnson, “Literary Midwife: Jessie Redmon Fauset and the Har-
lem Renaissance,” Phylon 39, no. 2 (June 1978): 143–153. Melvin Dixon,
evidently echoing Hughes’s characterization, has written more recently that
“the Nardal sisters were the unsung heroines of the negritude movement,
midwives to the birth of black consciousness in French literature.” Dixon, in-
troduction to Senghor, The Collected Poetry, xxvii.
30. Robert Bone, The Negro Novel in America (1958; reprint, New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1965), 101.
31. Wall, Women of the Harlem Renaissance,48. Another argument for the impor-
tance of the essays is Erica L. Grifﬁn, “The ‘Invisible Woman’ Abroad: Jessie
Fauset’s New Horizon,” inRecovered Writers/Recovered T exts,75–89.
32. Hughes, The Big Sea, 247.
33. Fauset, “T racing Shadows,”Crisis 10 (September 1915): 247–251; “Dark Al-
giers the White,” Crisis 29 (April–May 1925): 255–258; “Nationalism and
Egypt,” Crisis 19 (April 1920): 310–316; “Yarrow Revisited,” Crisis 29
(1925): 107–109.
34. Fauset, “Nationalism and Egypt,” 310.
35. Ibid., 316.
36. See Wall, Women of the Harlem Renaissance, ch. 2; McDowell, “The Ne-
glected Dimension of Jessie Redmon Fauset,” in Conjuring: Black Women,
Fiction, and Literary Tradition, ed. Marjorie Pryse and Hortense Spillers
(Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1985), 86–104; Hull, Color, Sex,
and Poetry: Three Women Writers of the Harlem Renaissance(Bloomington: In-
diana University Press, 1987), 7–12.
37. Fauset, Foreword, The Chinaberry Tree and Other Writings, ed. Mary Jane
Knopf (Boston: Northeastern University Press, 1995), xxxi.
38. Fauset, “Impressions of the Second Pan-African Congress,” Crisis 22 (No-
vember 1921), collected in The Chinaberry Tree and Other Writings, 367–
382. Page numbers of further references to this essay will be indicated in the
text in parentheses.
39. Compare Du Bois’s discussion of the congress in “A Second Journey to Pan-
Africa,” New Republic 29 (December 7, 1921): 39–42.
40. Fauset, “What Europe Thought of the Pan-African Congress,”Crisis 22 (No-
vember 1921): 66.
41. McDowell, “The Neglected Dimension of Jessie Redmon Fauset,” 87, 88.
42. Fauset, “Yarrow Revisited,” 108.
43. Wall, Women of the Harlem Renaissance, 38.
44. Fauset, “This Way to the Flea Market,” Crisis 29 (February 1925): 163.
45. Here is the whole passage: “A laughing youngster offering us a box of shoe-
blacking, opened the box and pretended to lick it, closing his eyes in an ec-
NOTES TO PAGES 134–139 353


--- PAGE 365 ---
stasy because it was so good. ‘So shoe-blacking your favorite dish now,’ ban-
tered my Alsatian, ‘and how does it taste?’ ‘It’s all right, my old one,’ grinned
back the boy, ‘you’d better buy some for mademoiselle!’” Fauset, “This Way
to the Flea Market,” 163. Page numbers of subsequent references to this essay
will be indicated in the text in parentheses.
46. Pierre Loving, interview with Fauset, “We’re in Paris Because ..., ”i nThe
Left Bank Revisited: Selections from the Paris Tribune, 1917–1934, ed. Hugh
Ford (University Park: Penn State University Press, 1972), 47.
47. Wall, Women of the Harlem Renaissance, 35.
48. Fauset to Spingarn, January 25, 1922, Joel Spingarn Collection, New York
Public Library, quoted in Wall, Women of the Harlem Renaissance, 58. Fauset
did, however, go on to translate articles and poetry for the Crisis.
49. Carby, Reconstructing Womanhood: The Emergence of the Afro-American
Woman Novelist (New York: Oxford University Press, 1987), 166.
50. Ibid., 168.
51. Nella Larsen, Quicksand (1928), collected in Quicksand and Passing, ed.
Deborah E. McDowell (New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 1986), 1–
135. On this point also see Carby, 173.
52. Farah Jasmine Grifﬁn, “Who Set You Flowin’?” The African-American Migra-
tion Narrative (New York: Oxford University Press, 1995), 155.
53. Fauset, Comedy: American Style (1933; reprint, New York: G. K. Hall, 1995),
183.
54. Fauset, “Nostalgia,” Crisis 22 (August 1921): 155. Page numbers of subse-
quent references will be indicated parenthetically in the text.
55. Gates, “The T rope of a New Negro and the Reconstruction of the Image of
the Black,” Representations 24 (fall 1988): 132.
56. Susan Stewart, On Longing: Narratives of the Miniature, the Gigantic, the Sou-
venir, the Collection (Durham: Duke University Press, 1993), 23.
57. Du Bois, Dusk of Dawn: An Essay toward an Autobiography of a Race Concept
(1940; reprint, New York: Library of America, 1986), 639.
58. Paulette Nardal, “En Exil,” La Dépêche africaine 19 (December 15, 1929): 6.
Subsequent page numbers for this reference are noted in the text in parenthe-
ses.
59. In the 1920s, the Algerian city Bechar was known in French as Colomb-
Béchar. See Larousse du XXe siècle, ed. Paul Augé (Paris: Libraire Larousse,
1929), 346 s.v. “Colomb-Béchar.”
60. This passage uses the verb éveiller to describe the “obscure emotion” of “Afri-
can” consciousness, thus preﬁguring Nardal’s “Eveil de la conscience de race”
in La Revue du monde noir two years later. This rhetoric of “awakening”
would characterize Nardal’s take on racial identity during the next decade,
354 NOTES TO PAGES 140–144


--- PAGE 366 ---
even as late as the article she wrote about Italy’s invasion of Ethiopia in 1935.
There, she characterizes black internationalism as “un élan purement senti-
mental, irraisonné, véritable réﬂexe racial du semblable vers le semblable” (“a
purely sentimental, unreasoned surge, a veritable racial reﬂex of like towards
like”). Ethiopia’s “sorrow”(malheur), Nardal continues, has been able to “re-
awaken”(réveiller) in peoples of African descent around the world the “secret
nostalgia” for a “mysterious bond [lien] of race that, suddenly, brings all colo-
nized Negroes, no matter how loyalist, assimilated, and conformist, together
with these ‘savages.’” Paulette Nardal, “Levée des races,”La Périscope africain
318 (October 15, 1935): 2.
61. “L ’âme Nègre en exil....a ub a lantillais,” Odéon Records catalog (1930), re-
produced in Jean-Pierre Meunier and Brigitte Léardée, La Biguine de l’Oncle
Ben’s: Ernest Léardée, raconte(Paris: Editions Caribéennes, 1989), 157.
62. Theodor W . Adorno, “The Form of the Phonograph Record” (1934), trans.
Thomas Y. Levin, October 55 (winter 1990): 58.
63. Stewart, On Longing, 135.
64. Karl Marx, Capital, vol. 1 (1867), trans. Ben Fowkes (New York: Vintage,
1977), 165.
65. A. James Arnold, Modernism and Negritude: The Poetry and Poetics of Aimé
Césaire (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1981), 11.
66. Steins, “Jeunesse Nègre,” Neohélicon 4, nos. 1–2 (1976): 98.
67. Steins, “Black Migrants in Paris,” inEuropean-Language Writing in Sub-Saha-
ran Africa, vol. 1, ed. Albert S. Gerard (Budapest: Academiai Kiado, 1986),
363.
68. Steins, “Brown France vs. Black Africa: The Tide T urned in 1932,” Research
in African Literatures 14, no. 4 (winter 1983): 477–478.
69. Ibid., 477.
70. For an introduction to Gratiant, see Patrick Chamoiseau and Raphaël Con-
ﬁant, Lettres créoles: tracées antillaises et continentales de la littérature: Haïti,
Guadeloupe, Martinique, Guyane, 1635–1975 (Paris: Hatier, 1991), 109–
111; and especially Jack Corzani, La Littérature des Antilles-Guyane françaises,
vol. 3: la Négritude (Fort-de-France: Editions Desormeaux, 1978), 222–235.
71. Steins, “Brown France vs. Black Africa,” 478.
72. Nardal, “L ’internationalisme noir,”La Dépêche africaine1 (February 1928): 5.
73. Steins, “Black Migrants in Paris,” 363.
74. Satineau writes for instance that “[c]ertainly the colonizing methods of the
civilized nations are far from perfect; but colonization in itself is a necessary
human undertaking....[I]n the present state of things, the autonomy of the
colonies can neither facilitate nor hasten the evolution of the latecomer
races [races retardataires].” See Satineau, “Notre but—notre programme” La
NOTES TO PAGES 145–149 355


--- PAGE 367 ---
Dépêche africaine 1 (February 1928): 1. See also his “La défense des libertés
coloniales,” La Dépêche africaine 7 (September 1928); “Le Communisme et
l’opinion indigène,”La Dépêche africaine 29–30 (October–November 1930).
Paul Guillaume, “Opinion sur l’art nègre,”La Dépêche africaine 17 (October
15, 1929): 4. See also his “L ’art nègre et l’esprit de l’époque,” La Dépêche
africaine 1 (February 1928): 6. Noble Sissle, “Why Jazz Has Conquered the
World: It Is the T onic for the Depressed Condition of the War Weary
World,” La Dépêche africaine [English page] 7 (September 1928). Félix
Couchoro, “Le mari parjuré, conte africain,” La Dépêche africaine 4 (June
1928): 4; “La reconnaissance chez les noirs,” La Dépêche africaine 6 (August
1928): 6; “Folklore africain: la providence,”La Dépêche africaine 17 (October
15, 1929): 4; Charles Bellan, “Sauvons nos colonies,” La Dépêche africaine 1
(February 1928): 1. See also Robert Wibaux, “Elites noires,” La Dépêche
africaine 13 (April 1929): 1. Dantès Bellegarde, “L ’occupation de Haïti et ses
conséquences économiques,” La Dépêche africaine 21 (February 15, 1930): 4.
One article on activities in Harlem is “Nos triomphes,” La Dépêche africaine
21 (February 15, 1930): 1.
75. Madame Winter Frappier de Montbenoît, “Les métis des colonies,” La
Dépêche africaine 25 (June 15, 1930): 2. See also her “Les femmes de couleur
devant la colonisation,” La Dépêche africaine 23 (April 15, 1930): 2.
76. Besson, “La femme et l’action coloniale,” La Dépêche africaine 6 (August
1928): 7. A recent history of this approach to feminism is Cynthia Enloe’s
Bananas, Beaches and Bases: Making Feminist Sense of International Politics
(London: Pandora, 1989).
77. Scott, Only Paradoxes to Offer,xii, 3.
78. Sylvia Wynter, “Beyond Miranda’s Meanings: Un/silencing the ‘Demonic
Ground’ of Caliban’s ‘Woman,’” inOut of the Kumbla: Caribbean Women
and Literature, ed. Carole Boyce Davies and Elaine Savory Fido (T renton: Af-
rica World Press, 1990), 355–372. Wynter writes: “And the central point I
want to make in this After/Word is that the contradiction inserted into the
consolidated ﬁeld of meanings of the ostensibly ‘universal’ theory of femi-
nism by the variable ‘race’...points toward the emergent ‘downfall’ of our
present ‘school like mode of thought’...i nt h esame way as feminist theory
itself had earlier, inserted the contradiction of the variable gender into the os-
tensibly ‘universal’ theories of Liberal Humanism and Marxism-Leninism”
(356–357).
79. Balibar writes: “The phenomenon of ‘depreciation’ [minorisation] and ‘racial-
ization’ [racisation] which is directed simultaneously against different social
groups which are quite different in ‘nature’ . . . does not represent a juxtaposi-
tion of merely analogous behaviors and discourses applied to a potentially
356 NOTES TO PAGES 150–152


--- PAGE 368 ---
indeﬁnite series of objects independent of each other, buta historical system of
complementary exclusions and dominations which are mutually interconnected.
In other words, it is not in practice simply the case that an ‘ethnic racism’ and
a ‘sexual racism’ (or sexism) exist in parallel; racism and sexism function to-
gether, and in particular, racism always presupposes a sexism.” Balibar, “Racism
and Nationalism,” in Balibar and I. Wallerstein,Race, Nation, Class: Ambigu-
ous Identities, trans. Chris T urner (New York: Verso, 1991), 49 (translation
modiﬁed). The original is Race, nation, classe: les identités ambiguës (Paris: La
Découverte, 1988), 71.
80. Robeson, “Black Paris,” part II, 9.
81. Ibid., 9.
82. Ibid., 10.
83. Besides Paulette, Alice, Cécyl, and Jane, the other sisters were Andrée (who
became a pianist), Emilie (who worked as an accountant), and Lucie (who
was a math and physics teacher). Interview with Alice Nardal Eda-Pierre,
Dec. 3, 1997, Fort-de-France, Martinique. See also Louis-Thomas Achille,
“In Memoriam: Paulette Nardal,” 292.
84. Paulette Nardal, Martinique, in Guides des colonies françaises: Martinique,
Guadeloupe, Guyane, St. Pierre-Miquelon (Paris: Société d’Editions Géogra-
phiques, Maritimes et Coloniales, 1931).
85. John H. Paynter Fifty Years After (New York: Margent Press, 1940), 63–64,
66. See also Michel Fabre, From Harlem to Paris, 142.
86. This biographical information comes from my conversation with Alice
Nardal Eda-Pierre, from Robeson’s “Black Paris” essay, and from the entry
“Paulette Nardal,” in Fort-de-France: les hommes d’hier dans nos rues d’au-
jourd’hui,ed. Marie-Eugénie André et al. (Fort-de-France: Editions Femmes
Actuelles, n.d.).
87. Robeson, 10.
88. Nardal, quoted in Michel Fabre, “Autour de Maran,” Présence africaine 86
(second trimester 1973): 167.
89. Achille, preface to La Revue du monde noir (1931–32), reprint edition (Paris:
Jean-Michel Place, 1992), xv.
90. Paulette Nardal was stridently Catholic, as were some of the organizations
she was afﬁliated with, such as the Union Féminine Civique et Sociale. She
contributed to explicitly religious publications as well, e.g., her article “L ’évo-
lution familiale et sociale des femmes noires,” Univers, bulletin catholique in-
ternational 3, no. 26 (September 1937): 120–122.
91. See Hull, Color, Sex, and Poetry, 5; and David Levering Lewis, When Harlem
Was in Vogue, (New York: Oxford University Press, 1981) 123, 127–128,
156–157, on salons and “literary evenings” in New York, as well as Boston
NOTES TO PAGES 152–156 357


--- PAGE 369 ---
(the Quill Club), Philadelphia (the Black Opals group), Washington, D.C.
(around Georgia Douglas Johnson, and the journal the Stylus at Howard
University), and Cleveland.
92. For information on Georgia Douglas Johnson’s salons, see Ronald M. John-
son, “Those Who Stayed: Washington’s Black Writers of the 1920’s,”Records
of the Columbia Historical Society 50 (1980): 484–499; Claudia Tate, intro-
duction to The Selected Works of Georgia Douglas Johnson ( N e wY o r k :G .K .
Hall, 1997), xxix–xxxii; Hull, Color, Sex, and Poetry, 165; and George B.
Hutchinson, “Jean T oomer and the ‘New Negroes’ of Washington,”Ameri-
can Literature 63, no. 4 (December 1991): 683–692.
93. Johnson, “Those Who Stayed,” 488–489.
94. Hull, Color, Sex, and Poetry,165; Johnson, “Those Who Stayed,” 496–497.
95. Charles Michael Smith, “Bruce Nugent: Bohemian of the Harlem Renais-
sance,” in In the Life: A Black Gay Anthology, ed. Joseph Beam (Boston:
Alyson Publishers, 1986), 211–212.
96. Lewis, When Harlem Was in Vogue,127.
97. Ibid., 121.
98. Johnson, “Those Who Stayed,” 494.
99. Hughes, The Big Sea, 216–217, 206–207.
100. Achille, preface to La Revue du monde noir, xv.
101. Scott, Only Paradoxes to Offer,174.
102. Hortense Spillers, “Mama’s Baby, Papa’s Maybe: An American Grammar
Book,” Diacritics 17, no. 3 (summer 1987): 65.
103. Régis Antoine, Les Ecrivains français et les antilles, des premiers pères blancs aux
surréalistes noirs (Paris: G. P . Maisonneuve et Larose, 1978), 352, 379–380.
104. Ibid., 209.
105. Richard D. E. Burton, “‘Maman-France Doudou’: Family Images in French
West Indian Colonial Discourse,”Diacritics 23, no. 3 (fall 1993): 81.
106. Antoine, Les ecrivains français et les antilles, 353.
107. Ibid., 353.
108. Ibid., 379–380.
109. Oruno Lara, Question de couleurs (blanches et noirs): roman de moeurs (Paris:
Nouvelle Librairie Universelle, 1923). On Lara’s career, see Antoine, 322–
323; and Maryse Condé, La civilisation du bossale: réﬂexions sur la littérature
orale de la Guadeloupe et de la Martinique(Paris: L ’Harmattan, 1978), 57–59.
110. Lara, Question de couleurs, 18.
111. Ibid., 36.
112. Ibid., 106–107.
113. Interestingly, Lara himself goes on to undertake precisely this kind of task:
358 NOTES TO PAGES 156–161


--- PAGE 370 ---
see Oruno Lara, Histoire de la Guadeloupe (1492–1920) (Paris: Nouvelle
Librairie Universelle, 1923).
114. Phyllis Rose, Jazz Cleopatra: Josephine Baker in Her Time (New York: Dou-
bleday, 1989), 148. The interior quote comes from the administrator and
writer Robert Delavignette, Freedom and Authority in French West Africa
(London: Oxford University Press, 1950), a translation of Delavignette’s
1946 Service africain.
115. Tyler Stovall, Paris Noir: African Americans in the City of Light (Boston:
Houghton Mifﬂin, 1996), 90.
116. Clifford, “Histories of the T ribal and the Modern,” in The Predicament of
Culture: Twentieth-Century Ethnography, Literature, and Art (Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1988), 197.
117. Rose, Jazz Cleopatra, 146.
118. Ibid., 147.
119. Wall, Women of the Harlem Renaissance, 105.
120. Paul Morand, Magie noire (1928), in Nouvelles complètes, vol. 1, ed. Michel
Collomb (Paris: Gallimard, 1992). The novel was translated by Hamish
Miles as Black Magic (New York: The Viking Press, 1929). Page numbers of
subsequent references to the French and English editions (in that order) will
be indicated in the text in parentheses.
121. Michel Collomb, introduction to Morand, Nouvelles complètes, 1026.
122. Du Bois, “The Negro in Literature,” Crisis 36 (November 1929): 376.
123. See for instance René Maran, “Paul Morand et les Nègres,” Le Monde (Sep-
tember 19, 1928); Georges Joseph-Henri, “Magie noire,”La Revue du monde
noir 1 (1931): 57–60.
124. Damas, “Misère noire,” Esprit 81 (June 1939): 352.
125. Nardal, “Pantins exotiques” [Exotic puppets], La Dépêche africaine 8 (Octo-
ber 1928): 2.
126. Morand, “L ’age du Nègre: à propos de ‘Magie noire,’”Candide 226 (July 12,
1928): 4.
127. Jean-Claude Klein, “Borrowing, Syncretism, Hybridisation: The Parisian Re-
vue of the 1920’s,” in Popular Music 5: Continuity and Change, ed. Richard
Middleton (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985), 181.
128. “Le Concert de 6 Octobre à la Salle Hoche,” La Dépêche africaine 9( N o v e m-
ber 1928): 1.
129. Paulette Nardal, “Le Nouveau Bal Nègre de la Glacière,”La Dépêche africaine
14 (May 30, 1929): 3.
130. Alain Boulanger, liner notes to “Musique of Martinique, 1929–50” (Sussex,
England: Interstate Music Ltd., 1985), Fly CD 947. Some of these crossover
NOTES TO PAGES 161–173 359


--- PAGE 371 ---
ﬁgures are covered in Chris Goddard, Jazz Away from Home (New York:
Paddington Press, 1979). Jean-Pierre Meunier calls the resulting hybrids
“musique métisée” (mixed music) in his thorough liner notes to the compact
disc “Biguine: biguine, valse et mazurka créoles (1929–1940)” (Paris:
Frémaux et Associés, 1993), FA 007.
131. The Bal is described in Ernest Léardée’s autobiography,La Biguine de l’Oncle
Ben’s,151.
132. J. A. Rogers, “The French Harlem,” New York Amsterdam News (April 4,
1928) sec. II, 1.
133. Andrée Nardal, “Notes on the Biguine Créole,” La Revue du monde noir 2
(1931): 51–52.
134. George F . Paul, “The Gayest Dance in Gay Paree!”Abbott’s Monthly(August
1928).
135. David Levering Lewis, W . E. B. Du Bois: The Fight for Equality and the Amer-
ican Century, 1919–1963 (New York: Henry Holt, 2000), 221.
136. Countee Cullen, “The Dark T ower,”Opportunity 6 (September 1928): 271–
273. Page numbers for further references will be indicated parenthetically in
the text. Cullen’s “The Dark T ower” ran from Opportunity 4 (December
1926) until Opportunity 6 (September 1928). Later, Cullen also wrote a Eu-
ropean travel column for the Crisis: see “Countee Cullen to His Friends,”
Crisis 36 (April 1929): 119; “Countee Cullen on French Courtesy,”Crisis 36
(June 1929): 193; “Countee Cullen in England,” Crisis 36 (August 1929):
270; “Countee Cullen on Miscegenation,”Crisis 36 (November 1929): 373.
137. Nardal, “Musique Nègre: antilles et aframérique,” La Dépêche africaine 25
(June 1930): 5.
138. Rogers, “The French Harlem.”
139. Léardée, La Biguine de l’Oncle Ben’s,146.
140. Georgia Douglas Johnson, autobiographical statement, Opportunity 5 (July
1927): 204.
141. Nardal, “Le nouveau Bal Nègre de la Glacière,”La Dépêche africaine 14 (May
30, 1929): 3.
142. L ’Etudiant noir, journal de l’Association des Etudiants Martiniquais en France
(March 1935). Page numbers for subsequent citations will be indicated par-
enthetically in the text.
143. Damas, “Notre génération,” quoted in Lilyan Kesteloot,Les Ecrivains noirs de
langue française: naissance d’une littérature(Brussels: Institut de Sociologie de
l’Université Libre de Bruxelles, 1963), 91.
144. See Edward O. Ako, “L ’Etudiant Noir and the Myth of the Genesis of the
Negritude Movement,” Research in African Literatures 15, no. 3 (fall 1984):
360 NOTES TO PAGES 173–179


--- PAGE 372 ---
341–353; Martin Steins, “Jeunesse noire,” Neohelicon 4, nos. 1–2 (1976):
91–121.
145. Césaire’s essay “Nègreries” is discussed and reproduced in Georges Ngal,
Aimé Césaire: un homme à la recherche d’une patrie (1975; reprint, Paris:
Présence Africaine, 1994).
146. Scott, Only Paradoxes to Offer,8.
4. Vagabond Internationalism: Claude McKay’sBanjo
1. Claude McKay, Banjo: A Story without a Plot (1929; reprint, New York: Har-
court Brace Jovanovich, 1957). Page numbers for subsequent citations will be
indicated in the text in parentheses.
2. See Wayne F . Cooper,Claude McKay: Rebel Soujourner in the Harlem Renais-
sance: A Biography (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1987),
214–215, 232, 259–260. McKay, “What Is and What Isn’t,”Crisis 27, no. 6
(April 1924): 259–262.
3. McKay, Banjo, trans. Ida T reat and Paul Vaillant-Couturier (Paris: Rieder,
1931). Page numbers for subsequent citations from this translation will be
indicated in the text in parentheses, with the indicator “Fr.” It is not insig-
niﬁcant for the Francophone reception of McKay that Banjo was his ﬁrst
book to be translated: Home to Harlem (published in English in 1928) would
follow in 1932, and Banana Bottom (published in English in 1933) in 1934.
McKay, Quartier noir, trans. Louis Guilloux (Paris: Rieder, 1932); Banana
Bottom, trans. F . W . Laparra (Paris: Rieder, 1934).
4. McKay, “T o America,”La Revue du monde noir 1 (1931): 34; “Spring in New
Hampshire,” La Revue du monde noir 3 (1931): 38. The excerpt from Banjo
is titled “L ’étudiant antillais vu par un noir américain,” Légitime Défense 1
(1932; reprint, Paris: Jean-Michel Place, 1978): 13–14. All subsequent cita-
tions refer to this edition. All translations from the journal are my own.
5. Etienne Léro, “Misère d’une poésie,”Légitime Défense 1 (1932): 12.
6. René Depestre, “Entretien avec Aimé Césaire,” in Bonjour et adieu à la
négritude (Paris: Seghers, 1980), 73; translated by Maro Riofrancos as “An In-
terview with Aimé Césaire,” in Césaire, Discourse on Colonialism (New York:
Monthly Review, 1972), 71.
7. Léon-Gontran Damas, “Hoquet,” Piments (1937), in Piments/Névralgies
(Paris: Présence Africaine, 1972), 38; “Naissance et vie de la Négritude”
(1968), in Léon-Gontran Damas: l’homme et l’œuvre,ed. Daniel Racine (Paris:
Présence Africaine, 1983), 185. In the same volume, see also Racine,
“Entretien avec Léon-Gontran Damas” (1977), 200.
8. Senghor, “Le Problème culturel en A.O.F .” (September 1937), collected in
NOTES TO PAGES 180–188 361


--- PAGE 373 ---
Liberté I: négritude et humanisme (Paris: Seuil, 1964), 21. The divergences be-
tween Senghor’s version and the French published translation (and the ex-
cerpt in Légitime Défense) are subtle but interesting. Senghor speaks of the
“roots of our race” in the place of the book’s “racines de notre peuple” [roots
of our people]—neither of which is quite consonant with McKay’s phrase
“our native roots.” (One imagines that the French word for “native”—
indigène—would have rather different connotations for Senghor in a French
West African colony than in McKay’s Marseilles.) Senghor also evokes “notre
profond fond” (“our deep reserves”) instead of the published translation’s
“notre propre fonds” (our own funds) (Fr 258).
9. Ousmane Socé, Mirages de Paris (1955; reprint, Paris: Nouvelles Editions
Latines, 1964), 145. See also Christopher Miller, “Hallucinations of France
and Africa,” Nationalists and Nomads: Essays on Francophone African Litera-
ture and Culture (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998), 59–65.
10. Martin Duberman, Paul Robeson (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1988), 207–
209.
11. See for example Pierre MacOrlan, Rues secrètes (1934; reprint, Paris: Arléa,
1989), 137; Pierre Guerre, preface to Marseille (Paris: Arts et Métiers
Graphiques, 1962), 11.
12. Cooper, Claude McKay, 255. On the section of the port destroyed during the
war, see André Bouyala d’Arnaud, Evocation du vieux Marseille (Paris: Les
Editions de Minuit, 1959). Also see Michel Fabre’s informative afterword to
his revised translation of Banjo (Marseille: André Dimanche, 1999), 317–
331.
13. McKay, “A Negro Writer to His Critics,” New York Herald-Tribune Books
(March 6, 1932), collected in The Passion of Claude McKay: Selected Poetry
and Prose, 1912–1948, ed. Wayne F . Cooper (New York: Schocken Books,
1973), 136–137. The French critic is Gabriel Bertin, “Avec Banjo et les
‘Frères du Port,’”Cahiers du Sud 141 (June 1932): 397.
14. Latnah’s background is left unclear: she is often described as “Oriental” (e.g.,
169), although without any more speciﬁcity. She reminds Malty of an Indo-
Caribbean girl he knew as a schoolboy (30–31), and there are also hints that
she is Indian, or Arab (32). Malty ﬂatly says, “I don’t know whether she is
Arabian or Persian or Indian” (10).
15. André Levinson, “De Harlem à la Cannebière,” Figures américaines (Paris:
Editions Victor Attinger, 1929), 190.
16. Georges Friedmann, preface to Banjo [1931 French translation], 14;
Gwendolyn Bennett, “Our Book Shelf,”Opportunity 7 (August 1929): 254.
17. Etienne Léro, Thélus Léro, René Ménil, Jules-Marcel Monnerot, Michel
362 NOTES TO PAGES 189–191


--- PAGE 374 ---
Pilotin, Maurice-Sagas Quitman, August Thésée, Pierre Yoyotte, “Avertisse-
ment” [Declaration], in Légitime Défense 1 (1932): 1.
18. Légitime Défense was not immediately banned in Martinique, however, as has
often been asserted. The acting governor of the colony, the Guyanese Félix
Eboué, was criticized for his inaction both by the colonial administration and
by the white and creole elite on the island. Brian Weinstein, Eboué (New
York: Oxford University Press, 1972), 140.
19. See “Les Origines: Légitime Défense,” part I of Kesteloot,Les Écrivains noirs de
langue française: naissance d’une littérature(Brussels: Université Libre, 1963),
25–87. For critiques of Kesteloot, see Martin Steins, “Black Migrants in
Paris,” in European-Language Writing on Sub-Saharan Africa, vol. 1, ed. Al-
bert S. Gerard (Budapest: Academiai Kiado, 1986), 354; Steins, Les Antécé-
dents et la genèse de la négritude senghorienne (Ph.D. diss., Université de Paris
III, 1981), 557–563; Iheanachor Egonu, “Les Continents and the Franco-
phone Pan-Negro Movement,” Phylon 42, no. 3 (September 1981): 245. In
her emphasis on Légitime Défense, Kesteloot was inﬂuenced most of all by
Léon-Gontran Damas, who claims to have been involved with the group
around Légitime Défense (though none of his work is included in the journal,
and his name is not among the signatures). See “Leon Damas: Interviewed
Feb. 18, 1977,” Journal of Caribbean Studies 1, no. 1 (winter 1980): 70–71.
20. René Ménil, “Généralités sur ‘l’écrivain’ de couleur antillais,” Légitime
Défense 1 (1932): 7.
21. Ibid., 8.
22. “Avertissement,” 2.
23. Richardson, introduction to Refusal of the Shadow: Surrealism and the Carib-
bean, ed. Richardson, trans. Richardson and Krzysztof Fijalkowski (London:
Verso, 1996), 5.
24. Ibid., 5.
25. Césaire, interview with Georges Ngal, April 1967, in Ngal, Aimé Césaire: un
homme à la recherche d’une patrie (1975; reprint, Présence Africaine, 1994),
59.
26. Césaire, interview with Régis Antoine, July 17, 1974, quoted in Antoine, Les
Ecrivains français et les Antilles: des premiers pères blancs aux surréalistes noirs
(Paris: G. P . Maisonneuve et Larose, 1978), 375.
27. Réné Ménil, preface (1978 reissue), Légitime Défense 1 (1932), n.p.
28. Ménil, “Nulle part,” Légitime Défense 1 (1932): 18.
29. Antoine, Les Ecrivains français et les Antilles, 364–376.
30. Jules Monnerot was the father of Jules-Marcel Monnerot, the student linked
with Légitime Défense who would later be aligned with Georges Bataille’s
NOTES TO PAGES 191–196 363


--- PAGE 375 ---
Collège de Sociologie before becoming a conservative Gaulliste after World
War II. Stéphane Rosso was a Guadeloupean born in 1889, active with
Senghor’s Ligue and with the journal La Race nègre in the late 1920s before
his return to the Antilles. During the celebrations of the 300-year anniversary
of the French conquest of the Antilles, Rosso wrote an incendiary work called
Le Tricentenaire des Antilles(1935), denouncing the mystiﬁcation of colonial-
ism, calling for a socialist revolt on the islands, and envisioning the creation
of an “independent federation of the Antilles.” See Jack Corzani, La Littéra-
ture des Antilles-Guyane françaises vol. 3: la Négritude (Fort-de-France: Ed.
Desormeaux, 1978), 222, 244–246; Richard D. E. Burton, “Between the
Particular and the Universal: Dilemmas of the Martinican Intellectual,” in
Intellectuals in the Twentieth-Century Caribbean, vol. 2: Unity in Variety: The
Hispanic and Francophone Caribbean, ed. Alistair Hennessy (London: Mac-
millan, 1992), 197–200.
31. In Home to Harlem, Ray gives Jake a long lesson in Haitian and Ethiopian
history. In fact, Ray originally comes to the States in exile from the U.S. oc-
cupation of Haiti, where his father had been jailed and his brother murdered
by U.S. marines. McKay,Home to Harlem (1928; reprint, Boston: Northeast-
ern University Press, 1987), 131–139, 155–156. See also John Lowney’s in-
sightful “Haiti and Black T ransnationalism: Remapping the Migrant Geogra-
phy of Home to Harlem,” African American Review 34, no. 3 (fall 2000): 413–
429.
32. Martin Steins, Les Antécédents et la genèse de la négritude senghorienne (Paris:
Université Paris III, Thèse d’Etat, 1981), 588–589.
33. Ibid., 589.
34. Ibid., 588.
35. McKay, A Long Way from Home (1937; reprint, New York: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, 1970), 277.
36. See Winston James, Claude McKay: The Making of a Black Bolshevik, 1889–
1923 (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, forthcoming), and James, Holding
Aloft the Banner of Ethiopia: Caribbean Radicalism in Early Twentieth-Century
America (New York: Verso, 1998), 165–166. The quote comes from McKay,
“The Negro Communist and his Race,” Bolshevik (December 2, 1922),
quoted in appendix 2 to McKay, The Negroes in America (1923), trans. from
the Russian by Robert Winter, ed. Alan McLeod (Port Washington, N.Y.:
Kennikat Press, 1979), 89.
37. Albert Londres, Marseille, porte du Sud (Editions de France, 1927), 54.
38. Dewey R. Jones, “Dirt,” Chicago Defender (July 27, 1929): 12. Jones may be
alluding to an exchange in the “Story-telling” chapter, where Ray, explaining
that he wants to write about black life in Marseilles, quotes the proverb “Let
364 NOTES TO PAGES 197–200


--- PAGE 376 ---
down your bucket where you are,” and Goosey jokes: “You might bring up a
lot of dirt.” Ray counters: “Many ﬁne things come out of dirt—steel and
gold, pearls and all the rare stones your nice women must have to be happy”
(115–116).
39. Levinson, “De Harlem à la Cannebière,” 190.
40. Karl Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte (1852), collected in
Surveys from Exile: Political Writings, vol. 2, trans. Ben Fowkes, ed. David
Fernbach (New York: Penguin, 1973), 197.
41. Peter Linebaugh, “All the Atlantic Mountains Shook,” Labour/Le Travailleur
10 (autumn 1982): 88. Page numbers for subsequent references will be given
in the text. On this point, also see Linebaugh and Marcus Rediker, The
Many-Headed Hydra: Sailors, Slaves, Commoners, and the Hidden History of
the Revolutionary Atlantic (Boston: Beacon Press, 2000).
42. See Linebaugh, 108 ff., for a consideration of slavery in this connection.
43. Robin D. G. Kelley, introduction to Race Rebels: Culture, Politics, and the
Black Working Class (New York: The Free Press, 1994), 8. See also Chris
Booker, “Lumpenization: A Critical Error of the Black Panther Party,” inThe
Black Panther Party Reconsidered,ed. Charles E. Jones (Baltimore, Md.: Black
Classic Press, 1998), 337–363; and especially Frantz Fanon, The Wretched of
the Earth, trans. C. Farrington (New York: Grove Press, 1963), 129–137.
44. Stuart Hall, Chas Critcher, T ony Jefferson, John Clarke, and Brian Roberts,
Policing the Crisis: Mugging, the State, and Law and Order(New York: Holmes
and Meier, 1978), 352–353.
45. McKay, Home to Harlem, 155.
46. McKay, A Long Way from Home, 4.
47. One might note a certain homoeroticism in this portrait of black male drift-
ers, of course. There are a few scenes such as the moment when the boys are
surrounded on the Place de la Bourse by a “troop of painted youths” who
dance around them “with queer gestures and queerer screams” (196), but
they are ﬂeeting in Banjo. This element becomes explicit in a manuscript
McKay attempted to write in 1930 and thereafter, called “The Jungle and the
Bottoms” and then “Romance in Marseilles.” In this book (centered on the
story of the Nigerian who was the base of the Taloufa character in Banjo),
there is an entire chapter devoted to a homosexual couple. See “Romance in
Marseilles,” McKay Papers, Schomburg Center for Research in Black Cul-
ture, New York; Wayne Cooper,Claude McKay, 237, 267–269.
48. McKay to W . A. Bradley, November 1, 1929, James Weldon Johnson Collec-
tion, Beinecke Rare Book Library, Yale University. See Michel Fabre, From
Harlem to Paris: Black American Writers in Paris, 1840–1980 (Urbana: Uni-
versity of Illinois Press, 1991), 109.
NOTES TO PAGES 201–210 365


--- PAGE 377 ---
49. Du Bois, “The Browsing Reader,” Crisis 36 (July 1929): 324.
50. Michel Fabre, From Harlem to Paris, 110.
51. Since McKay spoke French passably, but perhaps not well enough to feign a
newspaper editorial, it seems reasonable to assume that this article is quoted
from an actual French periodical of the period. (Earlier, Banjo quotes from
La Race Nègre—in English, however [75–76].) But I have not been able to
locate the article (it would take some luck, as we are given neither the date
nor the source).
52. The music and lyrics to “The West Indies Blues” are reproduced in The
Marcus Garvey and Universal Negro Improvement Association Papers, vol. 5:
Sept. 1922–Aug. 1924, ed. Robert Hill (Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1986), 801n14, 803–804. See also T ed Vincent, Keep Cool: The Black
Activist Who Built the Jazz Age (London: Pluto Press, 1995), 129–130.
53. André Suarès, Marsiho (Marseille: B. Grasset, 1933), quoted in Michel Fabre,
postface to Banjo (Marseille: André Dimanche, 1999), 321.
54. Robert Bone, The Negro Novel in America (1958; reprint, New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1965), 69, 71.
55. See Brent Edwards, “The Ethnics of Surrealism,” Transition 78 (1999): 84–
135.
56. Georges Bataille, “The Use Value of D. A. F . de Sade (An Open Letter to My
Current Comrades),” in Visions of Excess: Selected Writings 1927–39, ed.
Allan Stoekl (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1985), 99.
57. On “elusive” in Johnson, see Brent Edwards, “The Seemingly Eclipsed Win-
dow of Form: James Weldon Johnson’s Prefaces,” in The Jazz Cadence of
American Culture, ed. Robert G. O’Meally (New York: Columbia University
Press, 1998), 586, 589–590.
58. Photographs ﬁle, Claude McKay Papers, James Weldon Johnson Collection,
Beinecke Rare Book Library, Yale University. The phrase on the card is usu-
ally associated with an infamous advertising campaign for Banania, a choco-
late-ﬂavored breakfast drink, that used drawings of a grinning black soldier in
the typical uniform of the World War I tirailleurs sénégalais and the phrase:
“Y’a bon Banania.” See Anne Donadey, “‘Y’a bon Banania’: Ethics and Cul-
tural Criticism in the Colonial Context,” French Cultural Studies 11 (2000):
9–29; NégriPub: l’image des noirs dans la publicité, ed. R. Bachollet, J.-B.
Debost, A.-C. Lelieur, and M.-C. Peyrière (Paris: Somogy, 1992). The Eng-
lish approximation I have suggested follows Charles Lam Markmann’s ver-
sion of Frantz Fanon’s Black Skin, White Masks, which translates “Y’a bon
Banania” with “Sho’ good!” (unfortunately, without the French, this trans-
lation captures the connotation but conceals the particular context of French
stereotypes that Fanon is analyzing). Black Skin, White Masks (New York:
366 NOTES TO PAGES 210–226


--- PAGE 378 ---
Grove, 1967), 34; published originally as Peau noire, masques blancs (Paris:
Seuil, 1952), 27.
59. McKay to Bradley, March 11, 1927, quoted in Cooper, Claude McKay, 235–
236.
60. “La Vie de nos sections,” La Race nègre 3, no. 2 (February–March 1930): 3.
61. The French government surveillance of M’Baye’s bar during the period shows
an especial interest in these activities. See for example the report on Tiemoko
Garan Kouyaté’s recruiting visit by the agent Fouqué, report of January 23,
1930, Archives Nationales, SLOTFOM, III, 111, “Ligue de Défense de la
Race Nègre”; on M’Baye’s links to Vietnamese and North African sailors, see
Fouqué, report of February 10, 1930; unsigned reports, March 11 and 18,
1930, SLOTFOM III, 111.
62. Advertisement for the Comptoir Marseillais, La Race nègre (March 1929): 3.
63. McKay, A Long Way from Home, 279. The reviewer of Banjo who claimed to
know the milieu in Marseilles also writes of M’Baye’s “rare discretion” and
“charming modesty.” Gabriel Bertin, “Avec Banjo et les ‘Frères du Port,’”
397.
64. McKay, A Long Way from Home, 278.
65. Ibid., 279.
66. Ibid., 278. This building is extensively described in chapter 14 of McKay’s
manuscript for “Romance in Marseilles.” There, the Nigerian character
Lafala meets a labor organizer named Etienne St. Dominique, a “mulatto”
former student from Martinique. They are tailed by a pair of spies as they go
to visit the Seamen’s Building, where St. Dominique tells the Nigerian about
the “class struggle for a new society.” (The description of St. Dominique is so
vivid that one wonders whether McKay might have met other black activists
in Marseilles—one thinks immediately of the similarly named Camille St.
Jacques, also associated with La Revue nègre in that period.) See “Romance in
Marseilles,” Claude McKay collection, Schomburg Center for Research in
Black Culture, New York Public Library, 98–105.
67. McKay, A Long Way from Home, 278, 288.
68. Lamine Senghor, La Violation d’un pays (Paris: Bureau d’Editions de Diffu-
sion et de Publicité, 1927).
69. McKay, A Long Way from Home, 278.
70. For the descriptives à couleur d’ébèneand les bronzés, see for instance La Vio-
lation d’un pays,26, 29.
71. Christopher Miller, “Involution and Revolution: Black Paris in the 1920s,”
in Nationalism and Nomads: Essays on Francophone African Literature and Cul-
ture (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995), 25. Vaillant-Couturier,
“Préface,”La Violation d’un pays,n.p.
NOTES TO PAGES 226–230 367


--- PAGE 379 ---
72. Ibid., 25. See also Ahmadou Mapaté Diagne, Les Trois Volontés de Malic
(Paris: Larousse, 1920).
73. J. S. Spiegler, “Aspects of Nationalist Thought among French-Speaking West
Africans, 1921–1939” (Ph.D. diss., Oxford University, 1968), 125–126.
74. Miller, “Involution and Revolution,” 28.
75. Ibid., 26, 27.
76. Ibid., 25.
77. Papa Samba Diop, Ecriture romanesque et cultures régionales au Sénégal: des
origines à 1992 (Frankfurt: IKO Verlag, 1993–95), 155–156, quoted in
Miller, “Involution and Revolution,” 25. See also Diop, “Un texte sénégalais
inconnu: La Violation d’un pays(1927) de Lamine Senghor,”Komparatistische
Hefte 9–10 (1984): 123–128.
78. Spiegler, “Aspects of Nationalist Thought among French-Speaking West Afri-
cans,” 121.
79. “Bibliographie,” La Race nègre 1 (June 1927): 2.
80. Valliant-Couturier, “Préface,”La Violation d’un pays,n.p.
81. I have taken up this argument in more detail elsewhere, speciﬁcally in terms
of Senghor’s relationship to his Vietnamese counterpart Nguyen Ai Quoc
(Ho Chi Minh), a writer also experimenting with the proper form of radical
prose. See Edwards, “The Shadow of Shadows,” in Rethinking Black Marx-
ism, ed. Edwards, Nikhil Singh, and Penny Von Eschen (Durham: Duke
University Press, forthcoming).
82. Du Bois, Dark Princess: A Romance (1928; reprint, Jackson: University Press
of Mississippi, 1995).
83. Joy James, “Profeminism and Gender Elites: W . E. B. Du Bois, Anna Julia
Cooper, and Ida B. Wells-Barnett,” Transcending the T alented T enth: Black
Leaders and American Intellectuals (New York: Routledge, 1997); Patricia
Morton, “The All-Mother Vision of W . E. B. Du Bois,” inDisﬁgured Images:
The Historical Assault on Afro-American Women (New York: Greenwood,
1991), 55–65.
84. Rampersad, Art and Imagination of W . E. B. Du Bois (Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1976), 204. Another work that raises some of these ques-
tions around the status of ﬁction in Du Bois’s work is Kenneth Warren, “An
Inevitable Drift? Oligarchy, Du Bois, and the Politics of Race between the
Wars,”boundary 2 27, no. 3 (fall 2000): 153–170. And see Edwards, “Intro-
duction: The ‘Autonomy’ of Black Radicalism,” Social T ext 67 (summer
2001): 3–4.
85. See Alys Eve Weinbaum, “Reproducing Racial Globality: W . E. B. Du Bois
and the Sexual Politics of Black Internationalism,” Social T ext67 (summer
2001): 15–41.
368 NOTES TO PAGES 231–234


--- PAGE 380 ---
86. Du Bois, “The Negro Mind Reaches Out,” Foreign Affairs 2, no. 3 (1925),
reprinted in The New Negro ed. Locke (1925; reprint, New York: Atheneum,
1968), 408–409.
87. Du Bois, Dusk of Dawn: An Essay toward an Autobiography of the Race Con-
cept (1940), collected in Writings (New York: Library of America, 1986),
751.
88. Ovington, quoted in Rampersad, Art and Imagination of W . E. B. DuBois,
165.
89. Du Bois, Dusk of Dawn, 758.
90. Ibid., 643–644.
91. Du Bois, “Little Portraits of Africa,” Crisis (April 1924), collected in W . E. B.
Du Bois: A Reader, ed. David Levering Lewis (New York: Henry Holt, 1995),
668.
92. Rampersad, Art and Imagination of W . E. B. DuBois,215.
93. Du Bois, Dark Princess, n.p.
94. Senghor, La Violation d’un pays,30–31.
95. Warren, “An Inevitable Drift?” 158.
96. McKay, A Long Way from Home, 300.
97. Cosmopolitics: Thinking and Feeling beyond the Nation, ed. Pheng Cheah and
Bruce Robbins (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1998); Aihwa
Ong, Flexible Citizenship: The Cultural Logics of Transnationality (Durham:
Duke University Press, 1999).
98. McKay, A Long Way from Home, 302, 304.
5. Inventing the Black International:
George Padmore and Tiemoko Garan Kouyaté
1. T . Ras Makonnen, Pan-Africanism from Within, ed. Kenneth King (Nairobi:
Oxford University Press, 1973), 155. Further page references will be indi-
cated parenthetically in the text.
2. Cedric Robinson, Black Marxism: The Making of the Black Radical Tradition
(London: Zed Press, 1983), 373. Robinson does not quote the last sentence
of the paragraph, as I have, perhaps in deference to its vexing incongruity.
3. Cedric Robinson, “Black Intellectuals at the British Core, 1920s–1940s,” in
Essays on the History of Blacks in Britain, ed. Jagdish S. Gundara and Ian
Dufﬁeld (Aldershot: Avebury, 1992), 173.
4. Such a critique is elaborated by J. Ayodele Langley, Pan-Africanism and Na-
tionalism in West Africa, 1900–1945 (London: Oxford University Press,
1973), 286–288. Also see George Shepperson, “Pan-Africanism and ‘pan-
Africanism’: Some Historical Notes,”Phylon 23, no. 4 (winter 1962): 355–
356.
NOTES TO PAGES 234–242 369


--- PAGE 381 ---
5. C. L. R. James, “Black Intellectuals in Britain,” in Colour, Culture and Con-
sciousness: Immigrant Intellectuals in Britain, ed. Bhikhu Parekh (London: G.
Allen and Unwin, 1974), 154, 162.
6. Hubert Henry Harrison, “A New International,” in When Africa Awakes
(1920; reprint, Baltimore: Black Classic Press, 1997), 111–112.
7. See Jeffrey B. Perry, “The International Colored Unity League and the Way
Forward,” in A Hubert Harrison Reader, ed. Jeffrey B. Perry (Middletown,
Conn.: Wesleyan University Press, 2001), 397–398; and “Program and Prin-
ciples of the International Colored Unity League,” Voice of the Negro 1, no. 1
(April 1927): 4–6, reprinted in A Hubert Harrison Reader, 399–402.
8. Harrison, “Wanted—A Colored International,” in A Hubert Harrison Reader,
228.
9. See Lenin, “Theses on the National and Colonial Questions,” in The Com-
munist International, 1919–1943: Documents, ed. Jane Degras (London:
Frank Cass, 1956), 142; and the Indian Marxist M. N. Roy’s debate with Le-
nin regarding the role of the national bourgeoisies, in Roy, “Supplementary
Theses on the National and Colonial Question,” The Selected Works of M. N.
Roy, vol. 1, 1917–1922, ed. Sibnaraya Ray (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1987), 174–178.
10. Robinson, “Coming to T erms: The Third World and the Dialectic of Imperi-
alism,” Race and Class 22, no. 4 (1981): 369.
11. Nathaniel Mackey, “Interview with Edward Kamau Brathwaite,” Hambone 9
(winter 1991): 44; Brathwaite, “Metaphors of Underdevelopment: A Proem
for Hernan Cortez,” New England Review and Bread Loaf Quarterly 7, no. 4
(summer 1985): 460.
12. James Hooker, Black Revolutionary: George Padmore’s Path from Communism
to Pan-Africanism (New York: Praeger, 1967), 30.
13. Padmore, letter to Du Bois, February 17, 1934. W . E. B. Du Bois Papers,
University of Massachusetts–Amherst.
14. See for instance George Padmore, “Bankruptcy of Negro Leadership,” Negro
Worker 1, no. 12 (December 1931): 5; Padmore,The Life and Struggles of Ne-
gro T oilers(London: Red International of Labor Unions, 1931), 124.
15. C. L. R. James, Nkrumah and the Ghana Revolution (London: Allison and
Busby, 1977), 75.
16. Hooker, Black Revolutionary,26. St. Clair Drake characterizes Padmore as “an
institution all by himself” in “A Report on the Brown Britishers,” Crisis 56
(June 1949): 188.
17. C. L. R. James, “Notes on the Life of George Padmore,” Nation [T rinidad]
(c. 1960), in The C. L. R. James Reader, ed. Anna Grimshaw (New York:
Blackwell, 1992), 290.
370 NOTES TO PAGES 243–248


--- PAGE 382 ---
18. Roi Ottley, No Green Pastures(New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1951), 62.
19. Some sources of these rumors include James, “Notes on the Life of George
Padmore.” Undated typescript, 2. Padmore Library, Accra, Ghana. Copy in
the collection of the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture.
(There is some overlap between these “Notes” and the article by James of the
same title, collected in The C. L. R. James Reader. But the unpublished
“Notes” is much longer and much more detailed.) Russell Warren Howe,
“George Padmore,” Encounter 75 (December 1959): 53; Roi Ottley, No
Green Pastures, 66.
20. Letter from the French Consulary Agent (Bathurst) to the Gouverneur
Général of French West Africa, May 7, 1930, Archives Nationales de la
République du Sénégal (ANS), Archives du gouvernement général de
l’Afrique Occidentale Française,fonds moderne. Series 17G folder 58.
21. On the events in Bathurst, see Edward T . Wilson,Russia and Black Africa be-
fore World War II (New York: Holmes and Meier, 1974), 240–241 (an ac-
count that does not mention Padmore’s presence).
22. Unsigned report, September 19, 1933; report of Agent Joe, November 3,
1933, “Union des T ravailleurs Nègres” folder, Archives Nationales, Section
d’Outre-Mer, SLOTFOM, III, 53.
23. James, Nkrumah and the Ghana Revolution, 65.
24. This biographical information comes in part from the entry for Kouyaté in
the Dictionnaire biographique du movement ouvrier français, 1914–1939, ed.
Jean Maitron and Claude Penneiter (Paris: Les Editions Ouvrières, 1988),
vol. XLI, 249–250. The best single evaluation of his career is found in J. S.
Spiegler, Aspects of Nationalist Thought among French-Speaking West Africans,
1921–1939 (Ph.D. diss., Oxford University, 1968), 166 ff. Philippe de Witte
echoes some of Spiegler’s arguments in his solid historical overview, Les
Mouvements nègres en France, 1919–1939 (Paris: L ’Harmattan, 1985), espe-
cially 171–210, 277–320, 381–386.
25. See Wilson, Russia and Black Africa, 179–181; Hooker, Black Revolutionary,
12.
26. See de Witte, Les Mouvements nègres, 189; Wilson, Russia and Black Africa,
232.
27. Kouyaté, “Vox africae,” La Race nègre 2, no. 1 (March 1929): 1.
28. “Vers l’élaboration d’un programme,”La Race nègre 2, no. 1 (March 1929): 1.
29. See Marcus Garvey, “L ’Afrique aux Africains,” La Race nègre 1, no. 4 (No-
vember–December 1927): 2; “Le Nègre à travers la presse,” La Race nègre 1,
no. 4 (November–December 1927): 3.
30. “Discours du Camarade Kouyaté au Congrés de la Ligue [Contre Im-
périalisme],” Ouvrier nègre 2, no. 4 (August 1929): 28.
NOTES TO PAGES 249–254 371


--- PAGE 383 ---
31. Letter from the Commissaire central (Bordeaux) to the Directeur de la Sureté
Générale, March 19, 1930, “Ligue de Défense de la Race Nègre” folder,
SLOTFOM III, 111.
32. de Witte, Les Mouvements nègres, 172.
33. Wilson, Russia and Black Africa, 231–232, 236. See also Report of Agent
Paul, May 25, 1930, SLOTFOM V , 3; “Au Caméroun: une colonie torpille,”
La Race nègre 4, no. 2 (September 1930).
34. Report of Agent Fouqué, January 23, 1930, SLOTFOM III, 111.
35. Report of Agent Fouqué, March 1930, SLOTFOM III, 36. Quoted in de
Witte, Les Mouvements nègres, 198–199.
36. Le Reveil coloniale 3 (May 1930), in SLOTFOM III, 74. Quoted in de
Witte, Les Mouvements nègres, 203.
37. Wilson, Russia and Black Africa, 177.
38. Ibid., 185, 200.
39. Hooker, Black Revolutionary, 17. See also the obituaries for Nzula and
Macauley: “Albert Nzula,”Negro Worker4, no. 1 (May 1934): 9; “The Death
of Comrade Macauley,” Negro Worker 1, no. 10–11 (October–November
1931): 42. See Wilson, Russia and Black Africa, 240–243, on the career of
Small, and 243–244, on Macauley.
40. Padmore, “Our Aims,” International Negro Workers’ Review1, no. 1 (January
1931): 3.
41. A. Losovsky, “Greetings to Negro Workers,” Negro Worker 1 (1928), re-
printed in Negro Worker 1 (January 1931): 7.
42. Wilson, Russia and Black Africa, 214–215.
43. C. L. R. James, “Notes on the Life of George Padmore,” inThe C. L. R. James
Reader, 290.
44. Wilson, Russia and Black Africa, 220.
45. Ibid., 201, 224–225. See for example Kouyaté, “Black and White Seamen
Organize for Struggle,”Negro Worker1, no. 12 (December 1931):19–20; “La
grève nationale de marins,” Le Cri des Nègres 4–5 (November–December
1931): 1; “Solidarity between White and Coloured Sailors,” Negro Worker 2,
no. 3 (March 1932).
46. “Alerte! camarades Nègres la répression s’accentue,”Le Cri des Nègres 2( S e p-
tember 1932): 1. See also de Witte, Les Mouvements nègre, 287.
47. “World Congress of Seamen,” Negro Worker 2, no. 6 (June 1932): 23. On
international organizing around the Scottsboro case and speciﬁcally Ada
Wright’s tours in Europe during the early 1930s, see James A. Miller, Susan
D. Pennybacker, and Eve Rosenhaft, “Mother Ada Wright and the Interna-
tional Campaign to Free the Scottsboro Boys, 1931–1934,”American Histor-
372 NOTES TO PAGES 254–259


--- PAGE 384 ---
ical Review (April 2001): 387–430, especially 418. See also Stéphane Rosso,
“Au ‘Paradis Américain,’”Le Cri des Nègres 1 (August 1931): 1–2.
48. Padmore, “Comment vivent les fermiers nègres en Amérique,” La Race nègre
4, no. 1 (July 1930): 2.
49. For one example in the series: François Coty, “Contre le communisme: les
intellectuels noirs aux ordres de Moscou,” L ’Ami du peuple (January 27,
1930). A number of these articles were collected in a book the following year
titled Sauvons nos colonies: le péril rouge en pays noir. Kouyaté responded to
Coty’s attacks in “François Coty, directeur de ‘l’ami du peuple’ a calomnié,”
La Race nègre 3, no. 2 (February–March 1930): 1.
50. Spiegler, Aspects of Nationalist Thought, 178. See also de Witte, Les Mouve-
ments nègre, 210–216.
51. “The Change in the Name of Our Journal (‘The Negro Worker’),” Negro
Worker 1, no. 3 (March 1931): n.p.
52. On Le Cri des Nègres and Africa, see Spiegler, Aspects of Nationalist Thought,
181–183. Articles on the exposition include a series of pieces by Saumane ti-
tled “L ’exposition coloniale internationale: son véritable sens,” Le Cri des
Nègres 1–3 (August–October 1931): 1; V .D., “L ’exposition anti-impérialiste,”
Le Cri des Nègres 3 (October 1931): 1. Both the LDRN and the UTN were
involved in the protests that culminated in an “Anti-Colonial Exposition” or-
ganized by the League Against Imperialism at the Pavillion des Soviets in
Paris. The protest exhibition was underfunded, hurriedly assembled, sparsely
attended, and largely ignored. There is an increasing amount of scholarship
on the Exposition Coloniale (and some coverage on the Exposition Anti-
Coloniale): one might begin with Sylviane Leprun, Le Théâtre des colonies
(Paris: L ’Harmattan, 1986); Herman Lebovics, True France: The Wars over
Cultural Identity, 1900–1943 (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1992), 51–
97; Christopher L. Miller, “Hallucinations of France and Africa,” in Nation-
alists and Nomads: Essays on Francophone African Literature and Culture (Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press, 1998), 55–89.
53. Padmore, Les Ouvriers nègres et l’intervention armée antisoviétique (excerpt),
Le Cri des Nègres 2 (September 1931): 3. This is a French translation of
Padmore, Negro Workers and the Imperialist War—Intervention in the Soviet
Union (Hamburg: Red International of Labor Unions, 1931).
54. Wilson, Russia and Black Africa, 212.
55. James, “Notes on the Life of George Padmore,” typescript, 15–16.
56. Report of Agent Désiré, July 15, 1927, SLOTFOM, II, 5; report of Agent
Coco, June 8, 1929, SLOTFOM II, 19.
57. Letter from the Communist International ITUC-NW [Padmore] to the
NOTES TO PAGES 259–263 373


--- PAGE 385 ---
Confédération Générale de T ravail Unitaire [CGTU] of the Parti Com-
muniste Française, July 21, 1931, “CGTU” folder, SLOTFOM III, 31.
Quoted in de Witte, Les Mouvements nègre, 285.
58. Unsigned reports, October 28 and 30, 1932, “Le Cri des Nègres” folder,
SLOTFOM, V , 23. Quoted in Spiegler,Aspects of Nationalist Thought, 187.
59. de Witte, Les Mouvements nègre, 205.
60. Spiegler, Aspects of Nationalist Thought, 175.
61. James, “George Padmore, Black Marxist Revolutionary—A Memoir,” At the
Rendezvous of Victory (London: Allison and Busby, 1984), 255.
62. Spiegler, Aspects of Nationalist Thought, 190.
63. “Fascist T error against Negroes in Germany,” Negro Worker 3, nos. 4–5
(April–May 1933): 2. See also Jan Valtin (pseudonym of Richard Krebs),Out
of the Night (New York: Alliance Book Corporation, 1941), 400–404.
64. See Hakim Adi, West Africans in Britain, 1900–1960: Nationalism, Pan-
Africanism and Communism (London: Lawrence and Wishart, 1998), 39–42,
57–76.
65. Unsigned report, June 22, 1933, SLOTFOM III, 79. Quoted in de Witte,
Les Mouvements nègre, 305–306.
66. See René Depestre, “An Interview with Aimé Césaire” (1967), in Césaire,
Discourse on Colonialism (1972; reprint, New York: Monthly Review, 2000),
86; Régis Antoine, La Littérature franco-antillais: Haïti, Guadeloupe et
Martinique (Paris: Editions Karthala, 1992), 260 (quoting an interview with
Ménil); Bernard Dadié, “Senghor, mon parrain,” in Hommage à Léopold
Sédar Senghor: homme de culture (Paris: Présence Africaine, 1976), 209;
Léopold Sédar Senghor, “Problématique de la Négritude” (1971), in Libertés
III: Négritude et civilisation de l’universel (Paris: Seuil, 1977), 276; Gilbert
Gratiant, “Mulâtres...pour le bien et le mal,” L ’Etudiant noir1( M a r c h
1935): 7. Also see “La vie des étudiants nègres,” La Race nègre 2, no. 1
(March 1929): 2, which devotes an entire page to the lives and needs of stu-
dents and calls for a “groupe d’étudiants nègres de la ligue”; J. Bourgarel,
“Pour une association unique d’étudiants nègres,”Le Cri des Nègresnew series
3 (November–December 1933): 1; “Chez les étudiants martiniquais,” Le Cri
des Nègres new series 24 (January 1936): 3.
67. On Léro, see Report of Agent Désiré, August 17, 1932, SLOTFOM II, 11.
68. Report of Agent Paul, June 23, 1933, SLOTFOM II, box 19.
69. “Nouvelles dans les associations sœurs: afrique occidentale,” L ’Etudiant mar-
tiniquais new series 1 (May 1934): 2.
70. Léopold Senghor, “Association des Etudiants Ouest-Africains,” Le Cri des
Nègres new series 8 (August 1934): 2.
71. Unsigned reports, July 21 and 25, 1933, SLOTFOM III, 53.
374 NOTES TO PAGES 264–267


--- PAGE 386 ---
72. “Expulsion of Kouyaté,” L ’Humanité(October 31, 1933), reprinted in Negro
Worker 4, no. 1 (May 1934): 32. The Liste noire of the French Communist
Party was more blunt: “Chassé du parti pour attitude désagrégatrice, anti-
communisme et indélicatesse” (“Kicked out of the Party for disintegrative
attitude, anticommunism and indelicacy”). Liste noire 2 (1933), quoted in
Dictionnaire biographique, 250.
73. “Communiqué: l’exclusion de Kouyaté,” Le Cri des nègres new series 3 (No-
vember–December 1933).
74. “Le ‘Cri des Nègres’ seul organe des travailleurs nègres: Soutenez-le!” Le Cri
des Nègres new series 4 (January 1934): 1.
75. Hooker, Black Revolutionary, 37. He also recounts an anecdote about
Kouyaté’s death (apparently told to Nancy Cunard by Jules Marcel Mon-
nerot, the intellectual linked to Légitime Défense in the early 1930s): that the
Germans had killed him for the misappropriation of funds they had given
him to produce anti-French propaganda. However, this rather ﬂimsy, third-
hand hearsay has never been corroborated by the historians who have at-
tempted to investigate Kouyaté’s mysterious death (see Spiegler, Aspects of
Nationalist Thought, 190).
76. See Spiegler, Aspects of Nationalist Thought, 173, 190n5.
77. Padmore, Controversy (July 1937), quoted in Hooker, Black Revolutionary,
31.
78. “Au Revoir,”Negro Worker 3, no. 8–9 (August–September 1933): 18.
79. “Expulsion of George Padmore from the Revolutionary Movement,” Negro
Worker 4, no. 2 (June 1934): 14.
80. Helen Davis, “Rise and Fall of George Padmore as a Revolutionary Worker,”
Negro Worker 4, no. 4 (August 1934): 17, 21. See also “A Betrayer of the Ne-
gro Liberation Struggle,” Negro Worker 4, no. 3 (July 1934): 6–10.
81. “Le ‘Cri des Nègres’ seul organe des travailleurs nègres:soutenez-le!”1 .
82. Kouyaté, letter to the UTN, November 4, 1933, SLOTFOM III, 53.
83. Padmore, “An Open Letter to Earl Browder,”Crisis 42 (October 1935): 302,
315.
84. Padmore, “Expelled Red Scores Party,” Amsterdam News (June 17, 1934): 1.
Padmore sent versions of the letter to Browder and other communiqués from
Paris to black U.S. newspapers: see “Exposure of Communists Is Promised,”
Amsterdam News (July 28, 1934): 1; “Padmore Hits Soviets Again,” Amster-
dam News (September 15, 1934): 1.
85. On the variances in the etymology of “psychosis” in psychiatry and psycho-
analysis, see Jean Laplanche and J.-B. Pontalis, “Psychosis,” in The Language
of Psycho-Analysis, trans. Donald Nicholson-Smith (New York: Norton,
1973), 369–372. See also Fanon, “Colonial War and Mental Disorders,”The
NOTES TO PAGES 267–273 375


--- PAGE 387 ---
Wretched of the Earth, trans. Constance Farrington (New York: Grove, 1963),
251–252. For Fanon’s analysis of the colonial condition as neurosis, see gen-
erally Black Skin, White Masks, trans. Charles Lam Markmann (New York:
Grove, 1967).
86. Fanon, The Wretched of the Earth, 217–218 (modiﬁed). The original is Les
Damnés de la terre (1961; reprint, Paris: Maspero, 1968), 150.
87. François Girard, “The Anti-Fascist Movement in France,” New Statesman
and Nation (September 7, 1935): 300. The battles were also covered exten-
sively in the journal Commune, the review published by the Association of
Revolutionary Writers and Artists: see Louis Aragon, “Fevrier,” Commune 9
(May 1934): 894–896; “Les Ouvriers de Paris à l’assaut du ciel” [The work-
ers of Paris assault the heavens] Commune 5–6 (January–February 1934):
487–490.
88. Adolphe Mathurin, interview with Spiegler, Aspects of Nationalist Thought,
209n4. Regarding the link to Diop see Spiegler, 289n2.
89. “Expulsion of George Padmore from the Revolutionary Movement,” Negro
Worker 4, no. 2 (June 1934): 14.
90. Report of Agent Moïse, February 3, 1934, SLOTFOM, III, 53.
91. “Kouyaté, Tiemoko Garan,” in Hommes et destins: dictionnaire biographique
d’outre-mer,vol. 1, ed. Robert Cornevin (Paris: Publications de l’Académie
des Sciences d’Outre-Mer, 1975), 327.
92. Hooker, Black Revolutionary, 34.
93. See the biographical note to George Padmore, “Ethiopia and World Politics,”
Crisis 42 (May 1935): 138.
94. James, “Notes on the Life of George Padmore,” typescript, 27.
95. Hooker, Black Revolutionary, 45.
96. In June 1935, British ofﬁcials in West Africa were even under the impression
that Kouyaté and Padmore had founded an organization called the “Pan-Af-
rican Brotherhood” that sent out “a manifesto on behalf of Ethiopia” criticiz-
ing the Italian invasion. See S. K. B. Asante, Pan-African Protest: West Africa
and the Italo-Ethiopian Crisis, 1934–1941 (London: Longman, 1977), 52. I
have seen no other indication of such an organization, however.
97. Makonnen, Pan-Africanism from Within, 159. Langley even asserts that when
Padmore formed the International African Service Bureau in March 1937,
the executive committee included Kouyaté as the sole Francophone member
(representing the French Sudan). Langley, Pan-Africanism and Nationalism,
337–338. I have seen no conﬁrmation of this claim, however.
98. Padmore, letter to Bunche, July 27, 1937, Ralph Bunche Papers, General
Correspondence, folder 13, box 10b, Schomburg Center for Research in
Black Culture, New York Public Library.
376 NOTES TO PAGES 274–276


--- PAGE 388 ---
99. There is some confusion around the precise time line of James’s research for
The Black Jacobins. In the one document where he recounts the book’s gene-
sis, James implies that although he had visited France as early as 1933, he
spent “three or four months” in the archives in Paris in the second half of
1936. See James, “Lectures on the Black Jacobins 1: How I Wrote the Black
Jacobins,” Small Axe 8 (September 2000): 70. Also see Robert Hill, “In Eng-
land, 1932–8,” in C. L. R. James: His Life and Work,ed. Paul Buhle (London:
Allison and Busby, 1986), 67–68.
100. James, “George Padmore, Black Marxist Revolutionary—A Memoir,” 258.
101. Alan Mackenzie, “Radical Pan-Africanism in the 1930s: A Discussion with
C. L. R. James,” Radical History Review 24 (fall 1980): 73.
102. Spiegler, Aspects of Nationalist Thought, 240.
103. Letter from Kouyaté to Baldwin, April 18, 1929, SLOTFOM III, 24.
104. “Extrait des déliberations et des décisions initiales des réunions des 4 nov. et
9 dec. 1933,” in “Congrès Mondial Nègre” folder, SLOTFOM III, 34. All
subsequent quotes from the Congress materials come from this source.
105. Padmore apparently had Kouyaté’s text translated around the middle of that
month. Unsigned report, December 13, 1933, SLOTFOM III, 34.
106. James, “Notes on the Life of George Padmore” typescript, 54.
107. Reports of Agent Paul, October 7, 1932, and July 25, 1933, SLOTFOM II,
19.
108. Walter Benjamin, “The Task of the T ranslator” (1923), inIlluminations. ed.
Hannah Arendt, trans. Harry Zohn (New York: Schocken, 1969), 80.
109. Ibid., 79, 74–75.
110. V . N. Volosinov, Marxism and the Philosophy of Language (1929), trans.
Ladislav Matejka and I. R. Titunik (Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
1986), 23, 22.
111. George Padmore, “Call for Pan-African Parley in Paris Drafted by British Co-
lonial Leaders,” Chicago Defender (March 17, 1945): 18. For Du Bois’s re-
sponse to Padmore’s call (at ﬁrst he suggests the Congress should be held in
Africa, but later acquiesces to the idea of Paris), see The Correspondence of
W . E. B. Du Bois, vol. 3: Selections 1944–63,ed. Herbert Aptheker (Amherst:
University of Massachusetts Press, 1978), 56 ff. See also David Levering
Lewis, W . E. B. Du Bois: The Fight for Equality and the American Century,
1919–1963 (New York: Henry Holt, 2000), 501, 512–513; Penny M. Von
Eschen, Race against Empire: Black Americans and Anticolonialism, 1937–
1957 (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1997), 50–53.
112. Makonnen, Pan-Africanism from Within, 166, 170.
113. One error in Padmore’s Pan-Africanism or Communism? is his assertion that
Faure was “banished to the Sahara for the duration of the war,” which con-
NOTES TO PAGES 276–284 377


--- PAGE 389 ---
jures images of the nationalist leader languishing in the desert (313). In fact,
Faure was arrested in Paris in December 1939, when the LDRN was ofﬁcially
dissolved. He was transferred for trial to the Ivory Coast, where a local court
sentenced him as a “threat to the security of the state” to ﬁve years in prison.
He served time in the Ivory Coast (including seven months solitary con-
ﬁnement) and then in Bamako, Mali; on his release in 1944, he recuperated
in Saint Louis, Senegal, and then returned to Paris, where again he was
closely watched by government surveillance. He did publish an interesting
article based in part on his experiences: “French T error in Negro Africa,”
trans. James W . Ivy,Crisis 54 (April 1947): 108–110, 124–125. (One won-
ders whether Padmore—who was writing for Crisis during this period—ar-
ranged for Faure’s essay to be translated.) The biographical account comes
from this article and from Spiegler, Aspects of Nationalist Thought, 256.
114. “Note sur la propagande révolutionnaire intéressant les pays d’outre mer,”
February 20, 1928, SLOTFOM III, 144.
115. The Institut Nègre plan brought together a slice of black intellectuals in Paris
(Kouyaté, Léo Sajous, Emile Faure) and some Antillean professionals: the
dentist Hélène Jadfard and the lawyers André Breton and Samuel Stéphany.
See “Note sur la propagande révolutionnaire intéressant les pays d’outre
mer,” March 19, 1930, SLOTFOM III, 81; Report of Agent Désiré, March
15, 1930, SLOTFOM III, 24; “Comité universel de l’Institut Nègre de
Paris,” ANS 17G 53.
116. “Le générosité française sous la IIIe République,” La Race nègre (September
1927): 1.
117. Padmore, “Subjects and Citizens in French Africa,” Crisis 47 (March 1940):
76.
118. Makonnen, Pan-Africanism from Within, 156. The quote refers to a meeting
of the Rassemblement Coloniale, a group discussed later in this chapter.
119. Hooker, “The Impact of African History on Afro-Americans, 1930–1945,”
Black Academy Review (spring–summer 1972): 45.
120. James, “Notes on the Life of George Padmore.” Typescript, 50.
121. Helen Davis, “The Rise and Fall of George Padmore as a Revolutionary
Fighter,”Negro Worker4, no. 4 (August 1934): 17. See also James R. Hooker,
“Africa for Afro-Americans: Padmore and the Black Press,” Radical America
2, no. 4 (1968): 61–80.
122. Africanus [George Padmore], “Un noir accuse,” Vu (March 3, 1934): 28. On
Padmore’s use of the pseudonym, see Reports of Agent Moïse, February–
April 1934, SLOTFOM, III, 53. Padmore also seems to have used this
pseudonym for publication in English: see for example the especially caustic
“The Empire This Month,”Controversy 24 (September 1938).
378 NOTES TO PAGES 284–287


--- PAGE 390 ---
123. On the Comte de Beaumont and the earlier fête nègre, see Bernard Gendron,
“Jamming at Le Bœuf: Jazz and the Paris Avant-Garde,” Discourse 12, no. 1
(fall–winter 1989–90): 10.
124. Report of Agent Paul, March 10, 1933, and Report of Agent Joe, March 10,
1933, SLOTFOM III, 34. Report of Agent Joe, March 17, 1933, and un-
signed report, June 17, 1933, SLOTFOM III, 53.
125. Spiegler, Aspects of Nationalist Thought, 150. One example of the use of this
phrase is in Siragnouman, “La necessité de nous organiser,” La Race nègre 1,
no. 1 (June 1927): 4.
126. Kouyaté, “La trahison du clerc Paul Morand,” La Race nègre 1, no. 6 (Octo-
ber 1928): 2–3. Subsequent page references will be indicated parenthetically
in the text.
127. Spiegler, Aspects of Nationalist Thought, 155.
128. Some early issues featured a column titled “Notre page littéraire.” See Lucie
Cousturier, “Un général sauvage,”La Race nègre 1, no. 1 (June 1927) [an ex-
cerpt from her book Des Inconnus chez moi]; André Gide, “L ’oeuvre de la
colonisation,” La Race nègre 1, no. 3 [an excerpt from Voyage au Congo]. See
also Jeanne Marqués, “A ma pauvre négresse,” La Race nègre 1, no. 5 (May
1928). The November–December 1927 issue (1, no. 4) reprints Jean-Louis
Finot’s review of Philippe Soupault’s novelLe Nègre from La Revue mondiale.
129. Julien Benda, The Treason of the Intellectuals,trans. Richard Aldington (1928;
reprint, New York: Norton, 1969). For a discussion of Benda see Edward
Said, Representations of the Intellectual (New York: Vintage, 1994), 5–8.
130. Report of Agent Désiré, February 13, 1934, SLOTFOM II, 11. There is a
marginal note in different handwriting on this report, indicating that the
journalist’s name was “Johnson.”
131. “Aux Etats-Unis d’Amérique: l’activité des nègres,” La Race nègre 1, no. 3
(September 1927): 1.
132. See Marcus Garvey, “L ’Afrique aux Africains,” La Race nègre 1, no. 4 (No-
vember–December 1927): 2; “Le Nègre à travers la presse,” La Race nègre 1,
no. 4 (November–December 1927): 4 [translation of an article from the Ne-
gro World]; “Le réveil des Nègres francais,” La Race nègre 2, no. 1 (March
1929): 3 [a translation of an article from the Pittsburgh Courier, reviewing is-
sue 1, no. 3 of La Race nègre]. Another issue translated a brief article on Har-
lem by Carl Van Vechten that makes speciﬁc note that the “Negro quarter”
possessed its own journals (mentioning the Crisis, Opportunity, and the Mes-
senger); see Van Vechten, “La cité nègre,”La Race nègre 1, no. 4 (November–
December 1927): 5.
133. Report of Agent Désiré, September 17, 1927, SLOTFOM II, 5.
134. On Amy Jacques Garvey, see especially Winston James, Holding Aloft the
NOTES TO PAGES 287–293 379


--- PAGE 391 ---
Banner of Ethiopia: Caribbean Radicalism in Early T wentieth-Century
America (New York: Verso, 1998), 141–155.
135. Lapido Solanke, letter to Kouyaté, October 1, 1927, SLOTFOM II, 5. The
paper reprinted a long open letter that had appeared in Wasu: see “Lettre du
président de l’Union des Etudiants de l’Ouest-Africain de la Grande Bretagne
à l’editeur de ‘WASU,’ publiée par cette intéressante revue,”La Race nègre 1,
no. 4 (November–December 1927): 1; “Adresse du Président J. B. Danquah
à l’éditeur de la revue ‘Watu’ [sic],”La Race nègre 2, no. 1 (March 1929): 3.
136. Spiegler, Aspects of Nationalist Thought, 160n6.
137. Garvey, letter to Kouyaté, January 31, 1928 (French translation), in “Note
sur la propagande révolutionnaire intéressant les pays d’outre mer,” February
20, 1928, SLOTFOM III, 144.
138. Amy Jacques Garvey, Garvey and Garveyism (Kingston, Jamaica: Amy Jacques
Garvey, 1963), 182. Theodore Vincent claims that Garvey’s CDRN mem-
bership card is in the papers of Amy Jacques Garvey. See Vincent, Black
Power and the Garvey Movement (Berkeley: Ramparts Press, 1971), 176;
Rupert Lewis, Marcus Garvey: Anti-Colonial Champion (T renton: Africa
World Press, 1988), 160. I should note that, along with the confrontation
with René Maran and Kojo T ovalou Houénou I mentioned in chapter 2,
there is also evidence of contact between Garvey and the group around La
Dépêche africaine in this period. Another surveillance report mentions that
his mailing address during his visit was the address of La Dépêche africaine.
Unsigned report, December 18, 1928, SLOTFOM III, 81.
139. Copy of letter from Kouyaté to Marcus Garvey, report of Agent Désiré, July
10, 1928, SLOTFOM III, 24.
140. Report of Agent Désiré, October 1, 1927, SLOTFOM II, 5; “Note sur la
propagande révolutionnaire intéressant les pays d’outre mer,” October 31,
1927, SLOTFOM III, 67.
141. Kouyaté, letter to James Weldon Johnson, c. September 1928, SLOTFOM
III, 24.
142. Ligue de Défense de la Race Nègre, circular, June 14, 1929, SLOTFOM III,
111.
143. “La vie des étudiants nègres,” La Race nègre (April 1929): 2. See also “La vie
des étudiants nègres,” La Race nègre (March 1929): 2.
144. Report of Agent Désiré, December 1928, SLOTFOM III, 111.
145. Letter from Kouyaté to Du Bois (May 2, 1929), SLOTFOM III, 111.
Langley found a copy of this letter in the Archives Nationales du Dahomey
(Porto Novo), sent from the ministere des colonies to the governeur générale
of French West Africa. See Langley,Pan-Africanism and Nationalism,312. He
380 NOTES TO PAGES 293–296


--- PAGE 392 ---
suggests that the letter was intercepted by the French police and thus never
delivered. In fact, though, the surveillance reports in the Archives Nationales
often include handwritten copies or typescripts of such letters, implying that
the originals were indeed sent. And indeed, there is a copy of the letter in the
Du Bois ﬁles conserved at the University of Massachusetts.
146. There is a great deal of historical work on the Italo-Ethiopian conﬂict: see
Robert G. Weisbord, “British West Indian Reaction to the Italian-Ethiopian
War: An Episode in Pan-Africanism,” Caribbean Studies 10, no. 1 (April
1970): 34–41; Weisbord, “Black America and the Italian-Ethiopian Crisis:
An Episode in Pan-Negroism,” Historian 34, no. 2 (February 1972): 230–
241; S. K. B. Asante, Pan-African Protest: West Africa and the Italo-Ethiopian
Crisis, 1934–1941 (London: Longman, 1977); Cedric J. Robinson, “The Af-
rican Diaspora and the Italo-Ethiopian Crisis,” Race and Class 27, no. 2 (Au-
tumn 1985): 51–65; William R. Scott, The Sons of Sheba’s Race: African-
Americans and the Italo-Ethiopian War, 1935–1941 (Bloomington: Indiana
University Press, 1993); Joseph E. Harris, African-American Reactions to War
in Ethiopia, 1936–1941 (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press,
1994); Kevin A. Yelvington, “The War in Ethiopia and T rinidad 1935–
1936,” in The Colonial Caribbean in Transition: Essays on Post-Emancipation
Social and Cultural History, ed. Bridget Brereton and Yelvington (Gainesville:
University Press of Florida, 1999), 189–225.
147. Makonnen, Pan-Africanism from Within, 116–117.
148. Wilson, Russia and Black Africa, 368n27. Also see Adami, “International
Conference of Negroes and Arabs,”International Press Correspondence 16, no.
24 (May 23, 1936): 659.
149. On the Rassemblement Coloniale, see Spiegler, Aspects of Nationalist
Thought, 251–253.
150. Makonnen, Pan-Africanism from Within, 156.
151. See for example René Maran, “Le conﬂit italo-ethiopien et la France,” Bec et
Ongles 123 (October 19, 1935): 3–4; Maran, “La guerre italo-ethiopien et le
problème coloniale,” Bec et Ongles 124 (October 26, 1935): 3–4.
152. “Activité du comité de défense d’Ethiopie,”Africa 1 (December 1, 1935): 3;
“Au Faubourg,”Bec et Ongles 123 (October 19, 1935): 12. Kouyaté’s articles
include “Il est préférable de mourir libre que de vivre comme esclaves,” El
Ouma (August–September 1935); “Silence aux négriers complices de Musso-
lini,” El Ouma (October 1935).
153. “Activité du comité de défense d’Ethiopie,” 3.
154. Paulette Nardal, “On nous prie d’insérer,” Le Cri des Nègres 4, no. 17 (June
1935): 2.
NOTES TO PAGES 297–298 381


--- PAGE 393 ---
155. Paulette Nardal, “Levée des races,” Le Périscope africain 318 (October 15,
1935): 2. The article was provided to Le Périscope by the Agence Metromer, a
news service run in Paris by the Dahomean Augustin Azango. See Spiegler,
Aspects of Nationalist Thought, 268.
156. “Hommage aux bonnes volontés,” La Race nègre new series, no. 1 (January–
February 1936): 3. On the IAFE, see George Padmore, Pan-Africanism or
Communism (1956; reprint, Garden City, N.J.: Doubleday, 1971), 123.
157. James, Nkrumah and the Ghana Revolution, 64; Robert A. Hill, “In England,
1932–1938,” in C. L. R. James: His Life and Work, ed. Paul Buhle (London:
Allison and Busby, 1986), 74–75. As I mentioned earlier, Langley also con-
tends that Kouyaté was a member of the IASB.
158. James, Nkrumah and the Ghana Revolution, 64–65.
159. Immanuel Geiss, The Pan-African Movement: A History of Pan-Africanism in
America, Europe, and Africa,trans. Ann Keep (New York: Africana Publishing
Co., 1974), 387–388; J. Ayodele Langley, Pan-Africanism and Nationalism,
343.
160. Makonnen, Pan-Africanism from Within, 120.
161. “Editorial,” International African Opinon 1, no.1 (July 1938): 2. Page num-
bers of subsequent citations will be indicated parenthetically in the text. The
famous claim that “la négritude, non plus un indice céphalique, ou un
plasma, ou un soma, mais mesurée au compas de la souffrance” [Negritude,
no longer a cephalic index, or plasma, or soma, but measured by the compass
of suffering] appears in Aimé Césaire, Cahier d’un retour du pays natal(Note-
book of a return to my native land) (1947), trans. Clayton Eshelman and
Annette Smith in Aimé Césaire: The Collected Poetry (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1983), 76.
162. Makonnen, Pan-Africanism from Within, 117.
163. Leila Seleau, “The French Colonies under the Popular Front,” International
African Opinion 2 (August 1938): 5.
164. Padmore mentions Africa in his aforementioned letter to Bunche, July 27,
1937.
165. Spiegler, Aspects of Nationalist Thought, 276.
166. Kouyaté, “A nos lecteurs!” Africa 1 (December 1, 1935): 1.
167. “The Literary Scene,” International African Opinion 1 (July 1938): 14;
Hughes, “Poem on Scottsboro,” International African Opinion 2 (August
1938); C. L. R. James, “The Voice of Africa,”International African Opinion 2
(August 1938): 3; Claude McKay, “If We Must Die,” International African
Opinion 6 (February–March 1939); Paul Potts, “Hello, Langston Hughes”
and J. R. Ralph Casimir, “O Africa,” International African Opinion 7 (May–
June 1939): 5.
382 NOTES TO PAGES 298–303


--- PAGE 394 ---
168. “What Is the International African Service Bureau?” in C. L. R. James,AH i s-
tory of Negro Revolt, in Fact 18 (September 1938): 95.
169. Ralph Ellison, “The World and the Jug,” inShadow and Act (New York: Ran-
dom House, 1964), 132.
170. Makonnen, Pan-Africanism from Within, 117.
171. Robinson, “Coming to T erms,” 369. See also Brent Hayes Edwards, “The
‘Autonomy’ of Black Radicalism,”Social T ext67 (summer 2001): 1–13.
172. Padmore, “The White Man Is Killing Africa,” in Negro: An Anthology, ed.
Nancy Cunard (London, 1934), 854.
173. James, Nkrumah and the Ghana Revolution, 69.
Coda: The Last Anthology
1. See Frederick G. Vogel, World War I Songs: A History and Dictionary of Popu-
lar American Patriotic Tunes, with Over 300 Complete Lyrics (Jefferson, N.C.:
McFarland and Co., 1995), 99, 325. A copy of the published score is held in
the Sam De Vincent Collection, subseries 2.4, box 49, Armed Forces: World
War One, Archives Center, Museum of American History, Smithsonian In-
stitution.
2. Richard A. Long, “An Interview with George Schuyler,” Black World 25, no.
4 (February 1976): 77.
3. Reid Badger, A Life in Ragtime: A Biography of James Reese Europe(New York:
Oxford University Press, 1995), 7.
4. “On Patrol in No Man’s Land,”James Reese Europe’s 369th U.S.Infantry “Hell
Fighters” Band: The Complete Recordings (Memphis Archives CD MA 7020,
1996), 13.
5. Badger, A Life in Ragtime, 207. See also Arthur W . Little,From Harlem to the
Rhine: The Story of New York’s Colored Volunteers (New York: Covici-Friede,
1936).
6. John J. Niles, Singing Soldiers (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1927).
Niles, in keeping with conventional usage (even in the major newspapers) of
the period, does not capitalize the word “negro.” Page numbers for subse-
quent references will be indicated parenthetically in the text.
7. T ed Vincent,Keep Cool: The Black Activists Who Built the Jazz Age (London:
Pluto Press, 1995), 152–160. On the UNIA and music, see especially Vin-
cent, 106–144.
8. See Sonny Boy and his Pals, “France Blues,” inThe Blues Line: A Collection of
Blues Lyrics, ed. Eric Sackheim (New York: Mushinsha, 1969), 306.
9. Vincent, Keep Cool, 11. Vincent also cites a song called “The 15th Regiment”
that was penned in honor of James Reese Europe’s success by Andy Razaf
(Razaﬁnkeriefo), the poet and lyricist who would later work with musicians
NOTES TO PAGES 303–309 383


--- PAGE 395 ---
such as Eubie Blake and Fats Waller on tunes including “Ain’t Misbehavin’,”
“S’posin’,” and “Honeysuckle Rose.”
10. The original edition of Negro: An Anthology was published by Wishart in
London in 1934. There are two reprint editions: a complete facsimile edition
published by the Negro Universities Press in New York in 1969, and a se-
verely abridged version (cut nearly in half) assembled by Hugh Ford in 1970
(reprinted by Continuum in New York in 1996). Unless otherwise noted,
subsequent citations will include parenthetical reference to the pagination of
the 1969 facsimile reprint edition.
11. Susan Stanford Friedman, “Nancy Cunard (1896–1965),” in The Gender of
Modernism: A Critical Anthology, ed. Bonnie K. Scott (Bloomington: Indiana
University Press, 1990), 63.
12. Jane Marcus, “Bonding and Bondage: Nancy Cunard and the Making of
the Negro Anthology,” in Borders, Boundaries, and Frames: Cultural Criti-
cism and Cultural Studies, ed. Mae Henderson (New York: Routledge,
1995), 36.
13. Marcus, “Bonding and Bondage,” 35.
14. Raymond Michelet, “Nancy Cunard,” in Nancy Cunard: Brave Poet, Indomi-
table Rebel, 1896–1965, ed. Hugh Ford (Philadelphia: Chilton Book Com-
pany, 1968), 128.
15. Jacques Derrida, Mal d’archive: une impression freudienne (Paris: Galilée,
1995); Archive Fever: A Freudian Impression, trans. Eric Prenowitz (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1996), 91.
16. Arlette Farge, Le Goût de l’archive(Paris: Seuil, 1989), 10.
17. See Hugh Ford, “Introduction,” Negro: An Anthology, ed. Cunard, abridged
ed. (1970; reprint, New York: Continuum, 1996), xvii.
18. Andrée Nardal, “Etude sur la biguine créole,” La Revue du monde noir 2
(1931): 51–53.
19. See Beckett in Black and Red: The Translations for Nancy Cunard’s Negro
(1934), ed. Alan Warren Friedman (Lexington: University Press of Kentucky,
2000).
20. Material in Negro that originally appeared in the Negro Worker includes
Charles Alexander, “Negro Workers Starving in Cuba” (483); “Race Preju-
dice in England” (554–555); an untitled excerpt from the paper (562); and
“Letter from a Native Worker in South Africa” (792–793).
21. On Cunard’s links to Le Cri and to Padmore, see Philippe de Witte, Les
Mouvements nègres en France, 1919–1939 (Paris: L ’Harmattan, 1985), 302.
When she contributed a poem to the Negro Worker in 1933, Padmore intro-
duced her as “a staunch friend and champion of the Negro masses.” Cunard,
384 NOTES TO PAGES 309–313


--- PAGE 396 ---
“Lincoln’s Grinding Verbiage,” theNegro Worker 3, nos. 8–9 (August–Sep-
tember 1933): 32. See also the book they wrote in collaboration a decade
later, White Man’s Duty (Manchester: Panaf Services, 1945). For the UTN
Scottsboro fundraising party, see the unsigned report dated June 17, 1933,
SLOTFOM III, 53.
22. Report of Agent Désiré, February 2, 1932, SLOTFOM II, 11.
23. Nancy Cunard, “An African Call to Duty,” New Times and Ethiopia News
(October 21, 1939): 3. By this time Kouyaté’s politics had greatly moderated,
to the point of being almost unrecognizable. He gave her a “Proclamation to
the Negroes of French West Africa” he had written, which argues that “all the
treaties signed by France, our ‘Mère Patrie,’ are ours as well. Her commit-
ments are ours....W e ,t h eblack peoples of French Africa, esteem that we
are responsible for her honour, her prestige, her word that is given, her future
before man, God and history.”
24. Locke, letter to Cunard (April 14, 1934), quoted in Marcus, “Bonding and
Bondage,” 56.
25. Michael North, The Dialect of Modernism: Race, Language and Twentieth-
Century Literature (New York: Oxford University Press, 1994), 191.
26. Ibid., 191, 192.
27. Ibid., 191. See Hurston, “The Eatonville Anthology,”Messenger (September–
November 1926), collected in Hurston, Folklore, Memoirs, and Other Writ-
ings (New York: Library of America, 1995), 813–825.
28. Theodore O. Mason, Jr., “The African-American Anthology: Mapping the
T erritory, Taking the National Census, Building the Museum,”American Lit-
erary History 10, no. 1 (1998): 193.
29. Cunard, letter to Hugh Ford, 1964, quoted in Anne Chisholm, Nancy
Cunard (New York: Knopf, 1979), 191.
30. Ford, “Introduction,” xxi.
31. Jacques Derrida, “Des T ours de Babel,” trans. Joseph F . Graham, in Differ-
ence in Translation,ed. Graham (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1985), 166.
32. Cunard, letter to Claude McKay, January 28, 1932, quoted in Beckett in
Black and Red, xix.
33. Cunard, circular regarding Negro [then titled Color], April 1, 1931, quoted in
Ford, “Introduction,” xvii.Negro was dedicated to Henry Crowder, Cunard’s
longtime African American lover.
34. In a subtle reading, North writes that it is the black vernacular voice that
concludes Hurston’s “Eatonville Anthology” (“Stepped on a tin, mah story
ends”) that frames or “enclose[s] the whole anthology” and that “it is only
within this voice . . . that the anthology can leap from seemingly factual ac-
NOTES TO PAGES 314–317 385


--- PAGE 397 ---
counts of real people, to parabolic folktales to stories in which animals talk,
and then simply saunter off without concluding.” North, 188.
35. See Mason’s consideration of the African American anthology in relation to
the census, the map, and the museum, in “The African-American Anthology.”
36. Ford, “Introduction,” xxvii.
386 N O T E ST OP A G E3 1 8


--- PAGE 398 ---
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This book has spread its debts across many continents. I could not have un-
dertaken this project without the support of a broad foundation of friends
in the United States, Europe, the Caribbean, and Africa, who in one way or
another kept me sane and healthy as the project took form and lumbered or
sped through its phases. I am deeply grateful for all the kindness, patience,
commiseration, and cajoling they provided—not to overlook the more
practical hospitality of the many beds and couches they lent. In Paris and
Dakar: Thierno (Gilles) Soulemane Bâ, Valérie Castan, Antoine Effroy,
Emmanuelle Ertel, Lynn Festa, Pamela Golbin, Amélia Radrigan, Antoine
Rajon, Amadou Tapsoba, Patrick T ricoit, Dominique Vincent, Anne Wirz,
Olwen Wolfe, and especially Bénédicte Alliot and Janet Yesk. In Marseille
and Aix-en-Provence: Damien Bonelli, Emmanuel Effroy, Monique Patris,
Nico and Manu Patris, Mike Vann, and Uli Wolters. In Fort-de-France:
Dawn Fulton, Jacques Eda-Pierre, and especially the late Alice Nardal, who
was gracious enough to invite me to her home and speak with me about her
family at the end of 1997. In France, her daughter Christiane Eda-Pierre
also weathered my enthusiasm during a number of long-distance phone
calls, and allowed me to reproduce some of the wonderful photos of the
Nardal sisters in her possession. There are too many to name in New York
and elsewhere in the United States, but I would especially like to thank
Roberto Calasanz, Yvette Christiansë, Emily Coates, Rodney Crump,
Laura Harris, Rayna Kalas, Katya Kazakina, Peter Mendelsund, Rosalind
Morris, Fred Moten, Jorge Pérez, Anne Protopappas, Ellen Przybyla, Ma-
rina Rustow, Tara Susman, Mike Vazquez, and Robert Weston.
I met Michel and Geneviève Fabre in 1995, when I was living for a year
and a half in France through the assistance of a foreign research grant from
Columbia University. I do not know how to thank them sufﬁciently for
their generosity since then. Michel Fabre put me in touch with a number of


--- PAGE 399 ---
other scholars, shared his extraordinary personal library with me, allowed
me access to a number of manuscripts in his possession, and gave me indis-
pensable advice too many times to count on everything from issues of
methodology to details of bibliography.
A number of librarians and curators have helped me navigate the intrica-
cies of the archival research this project has required. Michèle Le Pavec of
the Bibliothèque Nationale went out of her way to help me track down
some elusive items. The curators at the Schomburg Center for Research
in Black Culture in New York have assisted me time and time again, espe-
cially when I was a scholar-in-residence there on a post-doctoral fellowship
funded by the National Endowment of the Humanities in 1997–1998; I
would particularly like to thank Diana Lachatanere, André Elizée, and
Howard Dodson. I also am grateful for the assistance of librarians at the
Moorland-Spingarn Collection at Howard University, the James Weldon
Johnson Papers at the Beinecke Library at Yale University, and especially
the Centre des Archives d’Outre-Mer in Aix-en-Provence. In addition, I
thank Henry Louis Gates, Jr., Richard Newman, and Lisa Thompson for
their encouragement during my year in 1996–1997 as a scholar-in-resi-
dence at the W . E. B. Du Bois Institute for Afro-American Research at
Harvard University.
The process of revision over the past four years has beneﬁted in particu-
lar from the scholars who read some or all of the book at one point or
another. Many responded with thorough (sometimes unﬂinching) com-
ments, criticisms, and suggestions. In particular, I thank Marcellus Blount,
Daphne Brooks, Maryse Condé, Michael Denning, Ann Douglas, Kevin
Gaines, Phillip Brian Harper, David Kazanjian, Wahneema Lubiano,
Nathaniel Mackey, Jane Marcus, Randy Martin, Chandan Reddy, Cedric
Robinson, David Lionel Smith, Werner Sollors, Penny Von Eschen, Ken-
neth Warren, and Kevin Yelvington. In facing the impossible necessities of
translation, I relied on a number of friends and colleagues for a second ear;
Gil Anidjar, Simon Kohn, Nora Nicolini, and Bénédicte Alliot helped with
some particularly thorny points. Nora Nicolini undertook the heroic task
of proofreading the French in the text. (All translations are my own unless
otherwise indicated.) The book’s fabric was also shaped, indelibly if
ﬂeetingly, by two who have passed on: François Manchuelle, who (when I
popped into his ofﬁce unexpectedly in 1995) gave me crucial bibliographic
leads as well as pointers about the Archives Nationales; and Joe Wood,
388 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


--- PAGE 400 ---
whom I knew for many years but never knew well until we hooked up in
1999 for a few lively bull sessions about the politics of diaspora.
At Rutgers, the support from my colleagues has been heartening and
sometimes transformative. Many have given useful feedback on sections
of the book, including Herman Bennett, Chris Brown, Elin Diamond,
Daphne Lamothe, and Cheryl Wall. Richard Dienst, Donald Gibson, and
Bruce Robbins read an earlier version of the entire manuscript, and how
much it has changed is a sign of their inﬂuence. The Black Atlantic/African
Diaspora Seminar at the Rutgers Center for Historical Analysis has been a
vital space for me to think about this project throughout the past ﬁve years,
and I have presented three parts of chapters to that audience. I am espe-
cially grateful to Mia Bay, David Brown, Wesley Brown, Abena Busia,
Belinda Edmondson, Renée Larrier, Jennifer Morgan, and Deborah White.
I would also like to thank my students at Rutgers, especially my graduate
students in my seminar “Black Cultural Studies: Issues and Approaches” in
the fall of 1998, where some of my thinking about diaspora crystallized.
Portions of the book have been presented as lectures at other institu-
tions, including the Yale University Afro-American Studies Department,
the Princeton University Social History Workshop, the City University of
New York Graduate Center, the New York University History Department,
and the Université de Paris VII. I am grateful for the comments of the audi-
ences on those occasions. In addition, parts of the prologue and chapters 2
and 4 previously appeared in different form in the journals Social T extand
Transition, and in the collection T emples for T omorrow: Looking Back at the
Harlem Renaissance, edited by Geneviève Fabre and Michel Feith (Indiana
University Press, 2001).
Lindsay Waters, my editor at Harvard University Press, has been remark-
ably patient with what must have seemed at times the glacial progress of
the manuscript. T om Wheatland has walked me, baby step by baby step,
through the labyrinth of the publishing process. Hilary Selby Polk copy-
edited the book with a sharp eye and offered a wealth of excellent substan-
tive suggestions.
I have had the extraordinary fortune of being able to draw on a few
scholars who have always found the time to give me advice about my schol-
arship, about publishing, and about academia in general. Robin Kelley,
Farah Grifﬁn, and Patricia Williams have given me more than I could ever
know how to thank them for—with their time, their openness, and their
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 389


--- PAGE 401 ---
wisdom. Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak has shaped my thinking in ways I’m
still discovering. But I also treasure our small follies: working dinners on
the ﬂy, drives downtown, grocery runs, bad bad movies. From that ﬁrst af-
ternoon I peeked into his ofﬁce at Barnard College, Robert O’Meally has
taught me and supported me and pushed me in too many ways to count.
His Center for Jazz Studies at Columbia remains one of the centers of my
intellectual life, and Bob and Jacqui Malone have welcomed me into their
home, lent me books, played me records, and taken me to concerts. These
debts cannot be repaid. All I can do is to take them as models for the ways I
approach teaching and mentoring my own students.
Above all, this book was written and rewritten in the company of family
and a few fellow travelers. Nikhil Singh and Alys Weinbaum have been my
best collaborators, comrades, readers, and friends, now too far away but al-
ways there for the steps this project has taken. My parents, my sister
Michelle, and my grandmothers Angella Hayes and Esther Gordy Edwards
have granted me everything and welcomed me home no matter how far I
roamed. Une seule m’a donné plus que tout: Nora Nicolini, martillo mío.
Vos has esperado tanto el ﬁn, cuando éste sería solamente otro mueble. T u
as patienté, au-delà—Ceci n’est pas ton livre, mais il s’écrit.
390 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


--- PAGE 402 ---
INDEX
Achille, Louis-Thomas, 4, 119, 152, 154,
155, 158
Adorno, Theodor, 145
Africa (journal), 8, 250, 302
Algeria, 29, 143, 144, 237, 250, 273, 284,
297, 298
Aliker, André, 196
Amsterdam News, 8, 173, 271, 286
Anderson, Benedict, 115–116
anthologies, 43–44, 70–72, 310–311, 317–
318, 331n60; prefaces of, 38, 45, 46–50,
315
Antoine, Régis, 159, 195
archive, 7–10, 311
Asad, Talal, 84, 85, 86
Association des Etudiants Martiniquais,
154, 178–179, 265
Baker, Josephine, 133, 154, 169, 171, 287;
relationship with Rivière, 79–80; impact
on Paris fashion, 130; in context of
French colonialism, 161–163
Baldwin, Roger, 276–277
Balibar, Etienne, 152
Bal Nègre (dance hall in Paris), 145, 169,
170, 173–177
Bataille, Georges, 223–224
beguine, 116, 145–146, 171–177, 218. See
also jazz
Bellegarde, Dantès, 132, 149
Benda, Julien, 289
Benjamin, Walter, 8, 189, 281–282
Bennett, Gwendolyn, 98, 100, 129, 132–
133, 157, 190
Berlin, 42–43, 254
blues, 60–68, 89, 90, 158, 309
Bradford, Roark, 34
Bradley, William Aspenwall, 210, 226
Brathwaite, Edward Kamau, 245
Breton, André, 192–193, 194
“Bricktop” (Ada Smith), 4, 64, 66, 79, 100,
169
Buell, Raymond Leslie, 74
Bullard, Eugene, 4, 63, 66
Bunche, Ralph, 276
Candace, Gratien, 32, 284
Carby, Hazel, 140–141
Cendrars, Blaise, 44, 70, 71–73, 82, 86
Césaire, Aimé, 23, 24, 38, 59, 193, 243,
284, 286, 300; and Négritude move-
ment, 28, 121, 122; and L ’Etudiant Noir,
36, 178, 179–180; on the Nardal sisters,
147, 156; on Banjo, 187, 211; on
Légitime Défense, 194; on Le Cri des
Nègres, 266
Chicago Defender, 8, 200, 283, 286
Clifford, James, 162, 169
colonialism, French, 6, 9, 94, 96–97, 99,
230; reﬂected in language, 26–33; and
gender, 54, 56–57, 80–81, 159, 161–
163, 184–186; threatened by black inter-
nationalism, 70–71, 75–76, 83; and ste-
reotypes, 71–72, 73, 158–159, 167–
171; and indigénat, 73, 95; and assimila-
tion, 73–74, 86–87, 124, 128, 147,
193; and association, 74–75; and
metonymy, 146, 158, 161–163; com-
pared to British, 161, 238–239, 241–
242, 283–284, 285


--- PAGE 403 ---
colonial literature, French, 57, 70, 71, 78–
79, 81–82, 94, 106, 164
Comintern (Communist International), 3,
111, 163, 191, 229, 237–238; and black
internationalism, 244, 245, 259, 263–
265, 268, 271, 289, 315; and Padmore,
245–246, 248, 268–269; expulsion of
Padmore, 247, 269, 274–275
Comité de Défense de la Race Nègre, 28,
30, 33, 250
Communist International. See Comintern
(Communist International)
Communist Party, French, 29, 237, 278;
expulsion of Kouyaté, 247, 250, 267,
274; relationship to Ligue de Défense de
la Race Nègre, 251–252; policy on race-
based organizing, 256, 262, 263–264;
and Le Cri des Nègres, 260–261, 263–
264, 265, 267
Condé, Maryse, 54
Congo, Belgian, 6, 136–137, 243, 248
Congrès Mondial Nègre, 246, 247, 249,
269, 275, 276–282, 292, 304, 305
Continents, Les, 9, 99–100, 147, 287; ex-
changes with Negro World, 103; ex-
changes with Opportunity, 106, 112–
113, 115, 118
Cook, Mercer, 115, 120
Cooper, Anna Julia, 1, 4, 126–128, 136
Coty, François, 259, 274, 312
Cousturier, Lucie, 28, 78, 106, 288, 290
Creole language, 52, 54–55, 158
Cressan, Léo, 124
Cri des Nègres, Le, 8, 37, 99, 121, 250, 263,
266, 267, 269, 270, 301; masthead of,
260, 261; funded by French Communist
Party, 260–261, 263–264, 265, 267;
Padmore contributor to, 261; Paulette
Nardal contributor to, 298; cited in Ne-
gro: An Anthology, 313
Crisis, 8, 69, 134, 135, 138, 142, 149, 285,
286
Cullen, Countee, 98, 99, 115, 120, 130,
132, 157, 312; poem about Batouala,
112, 113, 114; on Bal Nègre, 175–176
Cunard, Nancy, 274, 286; relationship with
Padmore, 275, 299, 313; biography of,
309–310; Negro: An Anthology, 309–318;
relationship with Kouyaté, 313–314
Damas, Léon-Gontran, 4, 59, 121, 286,
289, 290; “Misère Noire,” 117–118; on
Morand, 166–167; on L ’Etudiant Noir,
179; on McKay, 187–188
décalage, 13–15, 20, 50, 87, 117, 136, 143,
282, 303
Delafosse, Maurice, 73–74, 76–78, 82, 86,
189, 290
Demaison, André, 73, 74, 78, 82, 85, 86
Dépêche africaine, La, 8, 17, 30, 99, 119,
121, 126, 147, 154, 179, 268, 284, 287;
English page of, 9; articles by Jane
Nardal, 17–20, 167–171; articles by
Paulette Nardal, 143–145, 146–147,
176–177; and feminism, 149–152, 160
Derrida, Jacques, 49, 311
de Witte, Philippe, 52, 53, 232, 264
Diagne, Ahmadou Mapaté, 231
Diagne, Blaise, 117, 136, 137, 154, 199,
230, 246, 284
Diarra, Baba, 51–52
diaspora, 11–15; relation to international-
ism, 7, 11; and difference, 7, 11–12, 15,
18, 44, 102, 186, 212, 217; and transla-
tion, 7, 67–68, 115–116, 120, 175, 212,
228, 318; and periodical print culture,
8–9, 38, 115–116, 265; and articulation,
11, 14–15, 70, 107, 237, 303; and
décalage, 13–15, 20, 87, 117, 136, 143,
303; and reciprocity, 109–110, 116–118,
156; as practice, 110, 118, 120, 186,
304, 316, 318; as imagined community,
115–118; and coevalness, 117, 185; and
popular culture, 306–309
Diop, Alioune, 274
Diop, Papa Samba, 231
doudou, 159, 163, 165, 169, 174, 176,
184, 192, 312
Du Bois, W . E. B., 1–2, 3, 10, 23, 43, 131,
134, 142, 143, 148, 175; The Souls of
Black Folk, 1, 39, 40, 41, 42, 164; and
Pan-African movement, 1, 135, 136,
137, 283; on “color line,” 1–2; Dark
Princess, 5, 233–237, 238; “Worlds of
392 INDEX


--- PAGE 404 ---
Color,” 16, 17; anti-imperialism of, 20,
36; trip to Africa, 25, 235–236; cam-
paign to capitalize “Negro,” 28, 34; on
black music, 56, 57; on Maran, 69–70;
on double consciousness, 81, 97; and
T ovalou Houénou, 100, 103, 292; on
Morand, 164–165, 289; on McKay, 210;
correspondence with Padmore, 246–247,
274, 283; receives letter from Kouyaté,
294, 295–296; contributor to Negro: An
Anthology, 311
Early, Gerald, 43
Ellington, Duke, 66
Ellison, Ralph, 39, 303
Ethiopia, 10, 121, 254, 275–276, 278,
296–297, 299, 302, 313, 355n60
ethnography, French, 10, 73–74, 78, 79–
80, 90, 92, 195
Etoile Nord-Africaine, 250, 298, 302
Etudiant martiniquais, L ’,8, 266
Etudiant noir, L ’,36–38, 121, 154, 178–
186
Europe, James Reese, 3–4, 307–308
évolués, 75–76, 83, 91, 146, 185, 254,
300
Exposition Coloniale (1931), 122, 147,
162, 224, 261, 373n52
Fabian, Johannes, 117
Fabre, Michel, 3, 25, 70, 211
Fanon, Frantz, 23, 24, 27, 52, 91, 194,
243, 273–274
Faure, Emile, 149, 242, 250, 259–260,
268, 277, 284, 298, 302
Fauset, Jessie, 2, 4, 5, 50, 100, 111, 115,
129, 131, 132, 134–143, 144, 157, 158,
185; Comedy, American Style, 5, 141; on
Batouala, 69, 140; relationship with
Maran, 98; essays of, 134–143; “Impres-
sions of the Second Pan-African Con-
gress,” 136–137; and feminism, 138–
139; “This Way to the Flea Market,”
139–140; “Nostalgia,” 141–143, 144
feminism, 122, 130–131, 151–152, 209
Fire!!, 8
Forbes, Jack, 26–28, 32, 35–36
Fort-de-France, Martinique, 25, 177
Foucault, Michel, 20
Freud, Sigmund, 90
Frobenius, Leo, 74, 195, 312
Garvey, Amy Jacques, 131, 293, 294
Garvey, Marcus, 2, 10, 23, 35, 99, 110,
243, 257, 276, 296, 309; on Maran, 69;
meeting with T ovalou Houénou, 100–
104, 292; named in “West Indies Blues,”
218; mentioned in Banjo, 228; poetry
translated in La Race nègre, 253, 289,
292; relationship with Kouyaté, 293–
294
Gates, Henry Louis, Jr., 21, 38, 143
Gilroy, Paul, 12, 14
Girardet, Raoul, 78, 82
Glissant, Edouard, 22–24, 36, 142
Grand Duc (jazz club in Paris), 63–64, 65–
66, 67
Gratiant, Gilbert, 36–38, 148, 158, 181
Griaule, Marcel, 298
Grifﬁn, Farah Jasmine, 141
Guillaume, Paul, 81, 111, 149
Haiti, 10, 24, 48, 50, 163, 197, 205–206,
278
Hall, Stuart, 11–12, 14, 203
Harlem Renaissance, 3, 16, 70, 72, 140,
149, 322n8; transnational contours of,
3, 111, 292; views of France in, 6; and
anthologies, 44; relation of Maran to,
70; and translation, 116; and gender,
132, 134–135; Francophone views of,
197, 292
Harrison, Hubert, 2, 69, 243–244
Hayes, Roland, 80, 100
Hill, Robert A., 7
Ho Chi Minh, 29, 237, 368n81
Hooker, James, 245, 268, 286
Huggins, Nathan, 2
Hughes, Langston, 4, 25, 35, 48, 113, 123;
as translator, 59; Fine Clothes to the Jew,
59–69, 89, 315; poem in Les Continents,
99; “The Negro Artist and the Racial
Mountain,” 129, 180; on Washington,
D.C., 157–158; mentioned in
INDEX 393


--- PAGE 405 ---
Hughes, Langston (continued)
Légitime Défense, 187; poem in the Negro
Worker,286; contributor to Negro: An
Anthology, 311, 312
Hurston, Zora Neale, 10, 129, 157, 302,
315, 311, 315, 317–318
indigénat. See colonialism, French
International African Friends of Ethiopia,
246, 276, 298
International African Opinion, 299–305;
masthead of, 301
International African Service Bureau, 250,
299–305
James, C. L. R., 241, 246, 305; on
Francophone intellectuals, 242–243; on
Pan-African movement, 247; on
Padmore, 250, 258, 262, 264, 275, 278,
286; and International African Service
Bureau, 250, 299; on Negro Worker,258;
on Kouyaté, 276; and International Afri-
can Friends of Ethiopia, 298; and Inter-
national African Opinion, 299–305
James, Winston, 199
jazz, 3–4, 18, 63, 64–65, 66, 67, 81, 100,
162, 169, 171, 287; compared with
beguine, 172–174, 175, 176, 218, 313
Johnson, Charles, 45, 111, 148, 157
Johnson, Georgia Douglas, 136, 156–158,
177
Johnson, James Weldon, 4, 10, 59, 81, 97,
148, 157; The Autobiography of an Ex-
Colored Man, 5, 39, 40–43, 45–50, 55,
128, 141; The Book of American Negro
Poetry, 43, 44, 51, 66, 123, 309; on
“Aframerican,” 48–49, 312; on Hughes,
59; poetry translated in Tropiques, 193;
Book of American Negro Spirituals, 225;
correspondence with Kouyaté, 294;
mentioned in International African Opin-
ion, 303
Johnson, Ronald M., 157
Jones, Florence Embry, 4, 64, 100
Kelley, Robin, 203
Kesteloot, Lilyan, 178–179, 191
Kouyaté, Tiemoko Garan, 122, 149, 192,
242, 243, 244, 245, 252, 256, 259, 266,
284; expulsion from Communist Party,
247, 267, 274, 290; biography of, 250,
262–263; relationship with Padmore,
251, 261–264, 265–266, 275–276, 278,
286; “Vox Africae,” 252, 253, 254; and
organization of black dockers and sea-
men, 255–256, 259; letter to Union des
T ravailleurs Nègres, 269–271, 272–274;
and Congrès Mondial Nègre, 276–282;
letter to Baldwin, 277; “La trahison du
clerc Paul Morand,” 288–292; relation-
ship with Garvey, 293–294; letter to
Johnson, 294; letter to Du Bois, 294,
295–296; speaking tour with Griaule,
298; relationship with Cunard, 313–
314. See also Ligue de Défense de la Race
Nègre; Race nègre, La; Union des
T ravailleurs Nègres
Lacascade, Suzanne, 53–58, 67, 160
Langley, J. Ayodele, 284
Lara, Oruno, 160–161
Larsen, Nella, 4, 5, 129, 134, 140, 141
League Against Imperialism, 29, 30, 251,
254, 296, 298
League of Nations, 3, 102, 108, 109, 114
Léardée, Ernest, 171, 172, 177
Légitime Défense, 187, 191–198
Leiris, Michel, 72, 79
Léro, Etienne, 187, 191, 192, 284
Levinson, André, 190, 200–201
Lévy-Bruhl, Lucien, 73, 169, 291
Liberia, 10, 163, 235, 254, 278, 284
Ligue de Défense de la Race Nègre, 30,
119, 133, 196, 232, 242, 254–255, 284,
288, 289; and La Race nègre, 51; opera-
tions in Marseilles, 227, 255, 259; ideo-
logical variance in, 250, split in, 251–
252, 259, 267, 274
Linebaugh, Peter, 201–202, 205
Locke, Alain, 4, 6, 20, 23, 45, 98, 100,
104–115, 129, 132, 134, 148, 157; The
New Negro, 16–17, 20, 21, 126, 128–
129, 169, 187; correspondence with Jane
Nardal, 16–17, 50, 126–129; on colo-
394 INDEX


--- PAGE 406 ---
nial literature, 89–90; correspondence
with Maran, 104, 106–108, 112, 115,
117; “The Black Watch on the Rhine,”
105–108; “Apropos of Africa,” 108–110;
and Negro: An Anthology, 311, 314
Londres, Albert, 189, 199–200, 287, 313
lumpenproletariat, 201–203
Makonnen, T . Ras, 302, 304; on
metropole, 241–242, 306, 309; on
Francophone intellectuals, 283–284,
285–286; on Italo-Ethiopian crisis, 297,
299
Maran, René, 4, 71, 79, 243, 290, 298,
304; correspondence with Alain Locke,
17, 104, 106–108, 110, 112, 115, 117;
Batouala, 69–70, 81–85, 87–98, 104,
111, 113, 124, 140, 171, 180, 227; on
colonial literature, 78, 96; prefaces of,
83–84, 87–98; and black international-
ism, 95–96, 98–99; correspondence with
Du Bois, 100; encounter with Garvey,
104; and reciprocity, 110, 304; and Cul-
len poem on Batouala, 112, 113, 114;
participation in salons, 119, 120; de-
scribed by Bennett, 133; described by
Jane Nardal, 171; described by Senghor,
179–180; mentioned in Banjo, 227; and
Congrès Mondial Nègre, 268, 277; dur-
ing World War II, 284
Marcus, Jane, 310
Marx, Karl, 11, 201
Mason, Theodore, Jr., 44
Mathurin, Adolphe, 274
M’Baye, Pierre, 227, 228, 255
McKay, Claude, 2, 4, 43, 47, 50, 98, 111,
112, 113, 120, 123, 129, 303, 316;
Banjo, 5, 187, 188, 189–190, 196–200,
202–225, 233, 239–240; on French co-
lonialism, 6; on Locke, 91; and Mar-
seilles, 189, 225–229; Banjo translated in
Légitime Défense, 191, 196–198; Home to
Harlem, 200, 205–206, 221, 223; use of
“vagabond,” 202–203, 206; and nation-
alism, 206, 238–239; and music, 208,
217–221, 239–240; and black interna-
tionalism, 210, 217, 219–220, 239; and
translation, 210–211, 212–215, 216–
217, 222; use of “primitive,” 221–223,
224–225
Ménil, René, 191, 194–195, 284
Messenger, 8, 9, 21, 288
Miller, Christopher, 52, 230–231
Mission Dakar-Djibouti, 80, 90, 298
Monnerot, Jules, 195
Monnerot, Jules-Marcel, 149, 191, 195
Moody, Harold, 288
Morand, Paul, 72–73, 163–171, 223, 288–
292
Morrison, T oni, 28, 39–40, 71
music, 42–43, 155, 208, 290–291, 312;
and literary form, 54–58, 61, 63–68,
219–220, 221, 317–318; as ﬁgure for
diasporic community, 67–68, 190, 219–
220, 239; soirees and beneﬁt concerts in
Paris, 100, 171, 287, 313; and World
War I, 306–309, 310. See also beguine;
blues; jazz; McKay, Claude; recording
technology
Nardal, Andrée, 154, 174, 195, 312
Nardal, Jane, 16–17, 23, 98, 122, 153; and
Afro-Latin, 16, 19–20, 148; correspon-
dence with Locke, 16–17, 50, 126–129,
292; “L ’internationalisme noir,” 17–20,
148; “Pantins exotiques,” 167–171, 289
Nardal, Paulette, 16, 98, 111, 284, 307; sa-
lon of, 119, 120, 155–158; on
Francophone students in Paris, 121–126;
“Eveil de la conscience de race,” 122–
125; “En Exil,” 143–145, 146–147, 177;
feminism of, 148, 149, 185–186; biogra-
phy of, 152–155; on beguine, 176–177;
“Guignol Ouolof,” 178–186; article in
Le Cri des Nègres, 298; “Levée des
Races,” 354n60
nationalism, 198, 238–239, 243, 244, 264
Nègre. See translation
Négritude, 14, 24, 120–121, 147, 156,
178–179
Negro: An Anthology (Cunard), 274, 309–
318
Negro Worker,9, 249, 256, 260, 265, 269,
286, 301, 313
INDEX 395


--- PAGE 407 ---
Negro World, 8, 9, 103, 115, 243–244,
278, 293
New Negro, The. See Locke, Alain
Nielsen, Aldon, 41
Niles, John J., 308–309
North, Michael, 314–315
Opportunity, 9, 21, 103, 129, 149, 288; ex-
changes with Les Continents, 104–112,
115, 116, 118; Bennett’s column in,
132, 133; Cullen’s column in, 175–176
Padmore, George, 10, 23, 241, 242, 243,
244, 245; and Comintern, 245–246,
248, 264–265, 268–269; and Interna-
tional T rade Union Committee of Negro
Workers, 245–246, 256, 259, 261, 262,
268; correspondence with Du Bois, 246–
247; expulsion from Comintern, 247,
269, 274–275; covert operations of, 248,
249; biography of, 248–249; relationship
with Kouyaté, 251, 261–264, 265–266,
267, 275–276, 278, 286; and Negro
Worker,256, 257–259; articles in French
periodicals, 259, 261, 286–287; and So-
viet politics, 261–262; writing style of,
275, 286–287; and Congrès Mondial
Nègre, 276–282; on France, 285; and
International African Service Bureau, 299
Pan-African movement, 83, 108, 237, 241,
244, 249, 254, 276; Pan-African Confer-
ence (1900), 1–2, 129; Second Pan-Afri-
can Congress (1921), 75–76, 136–138,
163, 164; Third Pan-African Congress
(1923), 235; Fourth Pan-African Congress
(1927), 132; Fifth Pan-African Congress
(1945), 241, 247, 282, 286, 299, 305
Paria, Le, 8
Paris, and black internationalism, 4–5, 102,
241–242
Paul, George, 174–175
Paynter, John, 154
periodical print culture. See diaspora
Périscope africain, Le, 9, 298
petit nègre, 51, 52–53, 226, 366n58
Plácido, 48, 49, 50
Price-Mars, Jean, 195
Race nègre, La, 8, 30, 99, 247, 250, 259,
261, 294, 313; article in petit nègre, 51–
52; contacts in Marseilles, 227, 255;
quoted in Banjo, 228; distributed in Af-
rica, 231; masthead of, 232; described by
Padmore, 246; funded by French Com-
munist Party, 251; shifts in ideology of,
252, 253; Padmore contributor to, 259;
on French colonialism, 285; and cultural
politics, 288, 302; quotes Pittsburgh
Courier, 292, 294; and audience, 292–
293; excerpted in Negro: An Anthology,
313
Ramazani, Jahan, 61
Rampersad, Arnold, 59, 234
Randolph, A. Philip, 21, 257
recording technology, 56–58, 60, 89–92,
145–146
Revue du monde noir, La, 8, 9, 118, 119,
121, 124, 147, 154, 314; and bilingual-
ism, 120; article by Paulette Nardal,
122–125; article by Andrée Nardal, 174;
poem by McKay, 187; relation to
Légitime Défense, 195
Richardson, Michael, 193
Rivière, Georges-Henri, 73, 79–80
Robbins, Bruce, 91
Robeson, Eslanda Goode, 152–153, 155
Robeson, Paul, 152, 189, 242, 299
Robinson, Cedric, 241, 244–245, 304
Rogers, J. A., 4, 69, 132, 173–174, 177
Rose, Phyllis, 161–163
Rosso, Stéphane, 196, 251, 364n30
Said, Edward, 7, 72
Saint-Jacques, Camille, 29, 265, 275, 277
Saint-Pierre, Martinique, 172
Sajous, Léo, 4, 10, 119, 122, 149, 284,
287, 313
salons, literary, 119, 120, 134–135, 155–
158, 307
Satineau, Maurice, 17, 30, 32, 119, 149,
268, 287
Schoell, Franck, 25
Schumann, Robert, 55
Schuyler, George, 10, 41, 134, 307
Scott, David, 38
396 INDEX


--- PAGE 408 ---
Scott, Joan Wallach, 130–131, 151, 158
Senegal, 6–9, 99, 188, 231, 250, 254
Senghor, Lamine, 2, 35, 51, 78, 122, 192,
254, 284; biography of, 28–30; “Le Mot
‘Nègre,’” 28–34, 36, 38; quoted inLes
Continents, 99; relationship with McKay,
227, 228–229; La Violation d’un pays,
229–233, 237, 253; and split in Comité
de Défense de la Race Nègre, 250
Senghor, Léopold Sédar, 13, 14, 36, 59, 94,
120, 121, 211; on Maran, 94, 179–180;
and L ’Etudiant Noir,178, 179–180, 265;
on Banjo, 187, 188; on Le Cri des Nègres,
266; and World War II, 284
Shakespeare, William, 234–235, 236
Singh, Nikhil Pal, 321n6
Small, E. F ., 249, 256, 258
Smith, Ada. See “Bricktop” (Ada Smith)
Socé, Ousmane, 58, 188–189
Soupault, Philippe, 168, 288
Spiegler, J. S., 231, 232, 268, 276, 288
Spillers, Hortense, 158
Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty, 36, 71
Steins, Martin, 147–148, 179, 197, 198
Stellio, Alexandre, 172
Stepto, Robert, 3, 38, 39, 40
Stovall, Tyler, 5, 6, 25
students, Francophone, 126–127, 154–
155, 161, 191; encounters with Harlem
Renaissance intellectuals in Paris, 111,
120; and gender, 124, 125; and Anna
Julia Cooper, 126–128, 129; and
L ’Etudiant noir,178–179; and
Négritude, 188; and Légitime Défense,
191–192; portrayed in Banjo, 196–198;
meeting with Kouyaté, 265–266; efforts
to organize by Ligue de Défense de la
Race Nègre, 295
Suarès, André, 189, 219
surrealism, 192–194, 223–224, 312
tirailleurs sénégalais, 29, 51–53, 99, 105,
106, 116, 213–214, 287
T oomer, Jean, 4, 43, 113, 129, 156
T ovalou Houénou, Kojo, 4, 64, 78, 112,
149, 227, 284, 292, 295; trip to the
United States, 25, 99, 100–104; and Les
Continents, 79, 109, 171, 287; article in
Opportunity, 112; described by McKay in
the Crisis, 187; portrayed in Banjo, 227
translation, 7, 20; and French colonial au-
thorities, 9; of the word nègre, 20, 25–
38, 128, 211–212, 216; as trope in colo-
nial literature, 84–89; and periodical
print culture, 115–118; and La Revue du
monde noir, 120, 123; in Banjo, 197–
198, 211, 216, 228; and Congrès
Mondial Nègre, 278–282
Union Intercoloniale, 29, 196, 237
Union des T ravailleurs Nègres, 242, 247,
250, 268, 269, 278, 284, 287
United Nations, 283
Universal Negro Improvement Association,
99, 102–103, 244, 288, 309
Vaillant-Couturier, Paul, 196–197, 230, 232
Van Vechten, Carl, 34, 168, 223
Venuti, Lawrence, 116
Voix des Nègres, La, 8, 30–33, 51, 133
Walker, A’lelia, 163, 165
Wall, Cheryl, 132, 134, 135, 139, 140
Wallerstein, Immanuel, 46
Walrond, Eric, 4, 5
Warren, Kenneth, 6, 110, 116, 238
Wasu (journal), 9, 293
Weinbaum, Alys, 234
White, Walter, 4, 99, 129
Williams, Raymond, 4, 21–22
Williams, Spencer, 65, 218
Wilson, Edward, 258, 259, 262
Woodson, Carter G., 45, 120, 157
World Negro Unity Congress. See Congrès
Mondial Nègre
World War I: effect on France of, 3, 29,
52–53, 99, 131, 216, 230, 322n11; sig-
niﬁcance for African Americans of, 3–4,
64, 108, 244, 307–309; and internation-
alism, 17–18, 21, 243, 244. See also
tirailleurs sénégalais
Wynter, Sylvia, 151–152
Yarborough, Richard, 40
INDEX 397

