=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: The_Gospel_of_Truth.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 9
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:35:26.293628
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
THE GOSPEL OF TRUTH 
 
1. The Gospel of Truth is joy for those who have received from the Father of truth 
the gift of recognizing him, thru the pow er of the meaning who comes forth from 
the fullness which is in the thought and mind of the Father. This is he who is 
called the Savior— that being the name of  the task which he is to do for the 
atonement of those who had been unacquainted with the Name of the Father.  
 
2. Now the Gospel is the revelation of the hopeful, it is the finding of those who seek 
him. For since the totality were search ing for him from whom they came forth— 
and the totality were within him, the incomprehensible inconceivable, he who 
exists beyond all thought— hence unacquain tance with the Father caused anxiety 
and fear. Then the anxiety condensed like a fog so that no one could see. 
 
3. Wherefore confusion grew strong, contriving its matter in emptiness and 
unacquaintance with the truth, preparing to substitute a potent and alluring 
fabrication for truthfulness. But this was no humiliation for him, the 
incomprehensible inconceivable. For the anxiety and the amnesia and the deceitful 
fabrication were nothing— whereas the established truth is immutable, 
imperturbable and of unadornable beauty. Th erefore despise confusion! It has no 
roots and was in a fog concerning the Fa ther, preparing labors and amnesia and 
fear in order thereby to entice those of the transition and take them captive.  
 
4. The amnesia of confusion was not made as  a revelation, it is not the handiwork of 
the Father. Forgetfulness does not occu r under his directive, although it does 
happen because of him. But rather what exists within him is acquaintanceship— 
this being revealed so that forgetfulness might dissolve and the Father be 
recognized. Since amnesia occurred b ecause the Father was not recognized, 
thereafter when the Father is recognized there will be no more forgetting. 
 
5. This is the Gospel of him who is sought, which he has revealed to those perfected 
thru the mercies of the Father as the secret mystery: 
Y'shua the Christ! 
He enlightened those who were in darkness because of forgetfulness. He illumined 
them. He gave them a path, and that path is the truth which he proclaimed. 
 
6. Therefore confusion was enraged at him and pursued him in order to suppress and 
eliminate him. He was nailed to a tree, he became the fruit of recognizing the 
Father. Yet it did not cause those who cons umed it to perish, but rather to those 
who consumed it he bestowed a rejoicing at such a discovery. For he found them 
in himself and they found him in themselves— the incomprehensible 
inconceivable, the Father, this perfect-one  who created the totality, within whom 
the totality exists and of whom the tota lity has need. For he had withheld within 
himself their perfection, which he had not yet conferred upon them all.  
 
7. The Father is not jealous, for what envy could there be between him and his 
members? For if the way of this aeon had prevailed they would not have been able 
to come unto the Father, who retains within himself their fulfilment and bestows it 
upon them as a return to hi mself with a recognition whic h is single in perfection. 
It is he who ordained the totality, and the totality is within him and the totality had


--- PAGE 2 ---
need of him. It is like a person with wh om some have been unacquainted, yet who 
desires that they recognize and love hi m. For what did they all lack except 
acquaintance with the Father?  
 
8. Thus he became a reposeful and leisurel y guide in the place of instruction. The 
Logos came to the midst and spoke as thei r appointed teacher. There approached 
those who considered themselves wise, putting him to the te st— yet he shamed 
them in their vanity. They hated him because they were not truly wise. Then after 
them all there also approached the little children, those who have the acquaintance 
of the Father. Having been confirmed, they learned of the face-forms of the 
Father. They recognized, they were recognized; they were glorified, they glorified. 
Revealed in their heart was the living book of life, this which is inscribed in the 
thought and mind of the Father and which has been within his incomprehensibility 
since before the foundation of the totality. No one can take this book away, 
because it was appointed for him who would take it and be slain. 
 
9. No one of those who trusted in salvation could have become manifest unless this 
book had come to the midst. This is why the merciful and faithful-one— 
Yeshua!— patiently endured the sufferings in order to take this book, since he 
knew that his death would become life for many. Just as the fortune of the 
deceased master of the estate remains secret until his bequest is opened, so also 
the totality remained hidden so long as th e Father of the totality was invisible— 
this-one thru whom all dimensions orig inate. This is wh y Yeshua appeared, 
clothed in that book.  
 
10. He was nailed to a tree in order to publis h the edict of the Father on the cross. Oh 
sublime teaching, such that he humbled hi mself unto death while clad in eternal 
life! He stripped off the rags of mortality  in order to don this imperishability 
which none has the power to ta ke from him. Entering into the empty spaces of the 
terrors, he brought forth those who had b een divested by amnesia. Acting with 
recognition and perfection, he proclaimed wh at is in the heart of the Father, in 
order to make wise those who are to receive the teaching. Yet those who are 
instructed are the liv ing, inscribed in this book of  life, who are taught about 
themselves and who receive themselves from the Father in again returning to him. 
 
11. Because the perfection of the totality is in the Father, it is requisite that they all 
ascend unto him. When someone recognizes, he receives the things that are his 
own and gathers them to himself. For he who is unacquain ted has a lack— and 
what he lacks is great, since what he  lacks is Him who w ill make him perfect. 
Because the perfection of the totality is in the Father, it is requisite that they all 
ascend unto him. Thus each and every one receives himself.  
 
12. He pre-inscribed them, having prepared this gift for those who emerged from him. 
Those whose names he foreknew are all ca lled at the end. Thus someone who 
recognizes has his name spoken by the Fath er. For he whose name has not been 
spoken remains unacquainted. How indeed  can anyone hearken whose name has 
not been called? For he w ho remains unacquainted until the end is a figment of 
forgetfulness and will vanish with it. Ot herwise why indeed is there no name for 
those wretches, and why do they not heed the call?


--- PAGE 3 ---
13. Thus someone with acquainta nce is from above. When he is called he hears and 
heeds and returns to him who called, ascending unto him. And he discovers who it 
is that calls him. In recognition he does  the volition of him who called. He desires 
to please him, and granted repose he receives the Name of the One. He who 
recognizes thus discovers from whence he has come and whither he is going. He 
understands like someone who was intoxicated and who has shaken off his 
drunkenness and returned to himself, to set upright those things which are his 
own.  
 
14. He has brought many back from confusion. He went before them into the spaces 
thru which their hearts had migrated in going astray due to the depth of him who 
encompasses all dimensions without himself being encompassed. It is a great 
wonder that they were within the Father  without recognizing him, and that they 
were able to depart unto themselves b ecause they could neither comprehend nor 
recognize him in whom they were. For thus  his volition had not yet emerged from 
within himself. For he revealed himself so that all his emanations would reunite 
with him in recognition. 
 
15. This is acquaintance with the living book, whereby at the end he has manifested 
the eternal-ones as the alphabet of his revelation. These are not vowels nor are 
they consonants, such that someone might read them and think of emptiness, but 
rather they are the true alphabet by whic h those who recognize it are themselves 
expressed. Each letter is a perfect thought, each lette r is like a complete book 
written in the alphabet of unity by the Father, who inscribes the eternal-ones so 
that thru his alphabet they might recognize the Father. 
 
16. His wisdom meditates on the Meaning, hi s teaching expresses it, his acquaintance 
revealed it, his dignity is cr owned by it, his joy unites w ith it, his glory exalted it, 
his appearance manifested it, his repose r eceived it, his love embodied it, his faith 
embraced it. 
 
17. Thus the Logos of the Father comes into th e totality as the fruit of his heart and 
the face-form of his volition. But he s upports them all, he atones them and 
moreover he assumes the face-form of ev eryone, purifying them, bringing them 
back— within the Father, within the Moth er, Yeshua of infinite kindness. The 
Father uncovers his bosom, which is the Holy Spirit, revealing his secret. His 
secret is his Son! Thus thru the comp assions of the Father the eternal-ones 
recognize him. And they cease their toil of seeking for the Father and repose in 
him, recognizing that this is the repose.  
 
18. Having replenished the deficiency, he dissolved the scheme. For the scheme is this 
world in which he served as a slave, and deficiency is the place of jealousy and 
quarreling. Yet the place of the unity is perfect. Since deficiency occurred because 
the Father was not recognized, thereafter when the Father is recognized there shall 
be no deficiency. Just as with ignora nce, when someone comes to know, the 
ignorance dissolves of itself— and also  as darkness dissipates when the light 
shines— so also deficiency vanishes wh en perfection appears. Thus from that 
moment on there is no more scheme, but rather it disa ppears in the fusion of the 
unity. For now their involvements are made equal in the moment when the fusion 
perfects the spaces.


--- PAGE 4 ---
19. Each one shall receive himself in the unification and shall be purified from 
multiplicity into unity in acquaintanceship— consuming matter in himself like a 
flame, darkness with light, and death with  life. Since these things have thus 
happened to each one of us, it is appropriate that we think of the totality so that the 
household be holy and silent for the unity. 
 
20. It is like some who move jars from their proper pla ces to unsafe places, where 
they are broken. And yet the master of  the house suffered no loss but rather 
rejoiced, for those unsound jars were replaced by these which are fully perfect. 
This is the judgment which has come from above, like a double-edged sword 
drawn to cut this way and that as each one is judged.  
 
21. There came to the midst the Logos, which is in the heart of those who express it. 
This was not a mere sound, but rather it was incarnate. A great disturbance 
occurred among the jars— for lo some we re emptied, others were filled, some 
were supplied, others were overturned, so me were cleansed, others were broken. 
All of the spaces quaked and were agitate d, having neither order nor stability. 
Confusion was in anguish at not discerning what to do— distressed and lamenting 
and cropping hair² from understanding nothing.  
 
22. Then when recognition approached w ith all its emanations, this was the 
annihilation of confusion which was emptied into nothingness. The truth came to 
the midst, and all his emanations recogni zed and embraced the Father in truth and 
united with him in a perfect power. For everyone who loves the truth attaches 
himself to the mouth of the Father with his tongue by receiving the Holy Spirit. 
The truth is the mouth of the Father, his language is the Holy Spirit joined to him 
in truth. This is the revelation of the Father and his self-manifestation to his 
eternal-ones. He has revealed his secret, explaining it all.  
 
23. For who is the existent-one, except for th e Father alone? All dimensions are his 
emanations, recognized in coming forth fr om his heart like s ons from a mature 
person who knows them. Each one whom the Father begets had previously 
received neither form nor name. Then they  were formed thru his self-awareness. 
Although indeed they had b een in his mind, they had not recognized him. The 
Father however is perfectly acquainted with all the dimensions, which are within 
him. 
 
24. Whenever he wishes he manifests whomever he wishes, forming him and naming 
him. And in giving him a name, he causes him to come into being. Before they 
came into being, these assuredly were unacquainted with him who fashioned 
them. I do not say however that those who have not yet come into being are 
nothings— but rather they pr e-exist within him who shall intend their becoming 
when he desires it, like a season yet to come. Before anyone is manifest the Father 
knows what he will bring forth. But the fruit that is not yet manifest neither 
recognizes nor accomplishes anything. Thus  all dimensions themselves exist 
within the Father who exists, from whom  they come forth, and who established 
them unto himself from that which is not.


--- PAGE 5 ---
25. Whoever lacks root also lacks fruit, but st ill he thinks to himself: ‘I have become, 
so I shall decease— for everything that earlier did not yet exist, later shall no 
longer exist.’ What therefore does the Father desire that such a person think about 
himself?: ‘I have been like the shadows and the phantoms of the night!’ When the 
dawn shines upon him, this person ascertain s that the terror wh ich had seized him 
was nothing. They were thus unacquainted with the Father because they did not 
behold him. Hence there occurred terror and turmoil and weakness and doubt and 
division, with many deceptions and empty fictions at work thru these.  
 
26. It was as if they were sunk in sleep and found themselves in troubled dreams— 
either fleeing somewhere, or powerlessly pursuing others, or delivering blows in 
brawls, or themselves suffering blows, or falling from a high place, or sailing thru 
the air without wings. Sometimes it even seems as if they are being murdered 
although no one pursues them, or as if they themselves are murdering their 
neighbours since they are sullied by their blood. 
 
27. Then the moment comes when those who have endured all this awaken, no longer 
to see all those troubles— for they are naught. Such is the way of those who have 
cast off ignorance like sleep and consider it to be nothing, neither considering its 
various events as real, but rather leav ing it behind like a dream of the night. 
Recognizing the Father brings the dawn! This is what each one has done, sleeping 
in the time when he was unacquainted. A nd this is how, thus awakened, he comes 
to recognition.  
 
28. How good for the person who returns to himself and awakens, and blest is he 
whose blind eyes have been opened! And the Spirit ran after him, resurrecting him 
swiftly. Extending her hand to him who was prostrate on the ground, she lifted 
him up on his feet who had not yet ar isen. Now the recognition which gives 
understanding is thru the Fa ther and the revelation of his Son. Once they have 
seen him and heard him, he grants them to taste and to smell and to touch the 
beloved Son.  
 
29. When he appeared, telling them about th e incomprehensible Father, he breathed 
into them what is in the thought of do ing his volition. Many received the light and 
returned to him. But the materialists were alien and did not behold his likeness nor 
recognize him, although he came forth incar nate in form. Nothing obstructs his 
course— for imperishability is indomitable. Moreover he proclaimed beforehand 
that which was new, expressing what is in the heart of the Father and bringing 
forth the flawless Logos.  
 
30. Light spoke thru his mouth, and his voice gave  birth to life. He gave to them the 
thought of wisdom, of mercy, of salvation, of  the Spirit of power from the infinity 
and the kindness of the Father. He abolished punishment and torment, for these 
caused some who had need of mercy to go astray from his face in confusion and 
bondage. And with power he pardoned them, and he humbled them in 
acquaintanceship.  
 
31. He became a path for those who had strayed, acquaintance for the unaware, 
discovery for those who seek, stability for the wavering, and immaculate purity 
for those who were defiled.


--- PAGE 6 ---
32. He is the shepherd who left behind the 99 sheep which were not lost, in order to 
go searching for this-one wh ich had strayed. And he rejoiced when he found it. 
For 99 is a number that is counted on the left hand, which tallies it. But when 1 is 
added, the entire sum passes to the right hand. So it is with him who lacks the 
One, which is the entire ri ght hand— he takes from the left what is deficient in 
order to transfer it to the right, and thus the nu mber becomes 100. Now, the 
signification within these words is the Father. 
 
33. Even on the Sabbath he labored for the sh eep which he found fallen into the pit. 
He restored the sheep to life, bringing it up from the pit, so that you Sons of heart-
understanding may discern th is Sabbath on which the work of salvation must 
never cease, and so that you may speak fr om this day which is above, which has 
no night, and from the perfect light which never sets.  
 
34. Speak therefore from your hearts, for you are this perfect day and within you 
dwells this abiding light. Speak of the truth with those who seek it, and of 
acquaintanceship unto those who in conf usion have transgressed. Support those 
who stumble, reach out your hand to the sick, feed those who are hungry, give 
repose to the weary, uplift those who yearn to arise, awaken those who sleep— for 
you are the wisdom that rescues!  
 
35. Thus strength grows in action. Give heed  to yourselves— be not concerned with 
those other things which you have already cast out of yourselves. Do not return to 
what you have regurgitated, be not moth-eaten, be not worm-eaten— for you have 
already cast that out. Do not become a place for the Devil, for you have already 
eliminated him. Do not reinforce those things that made you stumble and fall. 
Thus is uprightness! 
 
36. For someone who violates the Torah harms himself more than the judgment harms 
him. For he does his deeds illicitly, whereas he who is righteous does his deeds for 
the sake of others. Do therefore the voli tion of the Father, because you are from 
him. For the Father is kind, and things are good thru his volition. He has taken 
cognizance of whatever is yours, so that you may repose yourselves concerning 
such things— for in their fruition it  is recognized whose they are.  
 
37. The Sons of the Father are his fragrance,  for they are from the grace of his face. 
Therefore the Father loves his fragrance and manifests it everywhere. And 
blending it with matter, he bestows his fragrance upon the light, and in his repose 
he exalts it over every likene ss and every sound. For it is  not the ears that inhale 
the fragrance, but rather th e breath spirit has the sense of smell and draws it to 
oneself— and thus is someone baptized  in the fragrance of the Father.  
 
 
38. Thus he brings it to harbor, drawing his original fragrance which had grown cold 
unto the place from which it came. It was something which in psychic form had 
become like cold water permeating loose soil, such that those who see it think it to 
be dirt. Then afterwards, when a warm and fragrant breeze blows, it again 
evaporates. Thus coldness results from separation. This is why the faithful-one 
came— to abolish division and bring the wa rm fullness of love, so that the cold


--- PAGE 7 ---
would not return but rather there should be the unification of perfect thought. This 
is the Logos of the Gospel of the findi ng of the fullness by those who await the 
salvation which comes from on high. Prol onged is the hope of those who await— 
those whose likeness is the light which contains no shadow— at that time when 
the fullness finally comes.  
 
39. The deficiency of matter did not originate thru the infinity of the Father, who 
came in the time of inadequacy— al though no one could predict that the 
indestructible would arrive  in this manner. But the profundity of the Father 
abounded, and the thought of confusion was not  with him. It is a topic for falling 
prostrate, it is a reposeful topic— to be set upright on one's feet, in being found by 
this-one who came to bring him back. For the return is called: Metanoia!  
40. This is why imperishability breathed fort h— to seek after the transgressor so that 
he might have repose. For to forgive is to remain behind with the light, the Logos 
of the fullness, in the deficiency. Thus the physician hastens to the place where 
there is illness, for this is his heart's de sire. But he who has a lack cannot hide it 
from him who possesses what he needs. Thus the fullness, which has no 
deficiency, replenishes the lack. 
 
41. The Father gave of himself to replenish wh omever lacks, in order that thereby he 
may receive grace. In the time of his defi ciency he had no grace. Thus wherever 
grace is absent, there is inferiority. At th e time when he received this smallness 
which he lacked, then the Father revealed to him a fullness, which is this finding 
of the light of truth that dawned upon hi m in unchangeability. This is why the 
Christ was invoked in their midst— so that  they would receive their returning. He 
anoints with the Chrism those who have been troub led. The anointing is the 
compassion of the Father who will have mercy upon them. Yet those whom he has 
anointed are those who are perfected.  
 
42. For jars which are full are those which are sealed. Yet when its sealant is 
destroyed, a jar leaks. And the cause of its being emptied is the absence of its 
sealant, for then something in the dynamics of the air evaporates it. But that is not 
emptied from which no sealant has been removed, nor does anything leak away, 
but rather the perfect Father replenishes whatever is lacking. 
 
43. He is good. He knows his seedlings, for it is he who planted them in his paradise. 
Now his paradise is his realm of repose. This is the perfection in the thought of the 
Father, and these are the logoi of his me ditation. Each one of his logoi is the 
product of his unitary volition in the reve lation of his meaning. While they were 
still in the depths of his thought, the Logos was the first to come forth. 
Furthermore he revealed them from a mi nd that expresses the unique Logos in the 
silent grace called thought, since they exis ted therein prior to becoming manifest. 
So it occurred that the Logos was the firs t to come forth at the time when it 
pleased the will of him who intended it.  
 
44. Now the volition of the Father is that whic h reposes in his heart and pleases him. 
Nothing exists without him, nor does a nything occur without the volition of the 
Father. But his volition is unfathomable. His volition is his imprint, and no one 
can determine it nor anticipate it in order to control it. But whenever he wills, 
what he wills exists— even if the sight does not please them. They are nothing


--- PAGE 8 ---
before the face of God and the volition of the Father. For he knows the beginning 
and the ending of them all— at their end he shall question them face-to-face. Yet 
the ending is to receive acquaintance with  this-one who was hidden. Now this is 
the Father— this-one from whom the beginning came forth, this-one to whom all 
these shall return who came forth from hi m. Yet they have been manifest for the 
glory and joy of his Name.  
 
45. Now the Name of the Father is the Son. He first named him who came forth from 
himself, and who is himself. And he be got him as a Son. He bestowed his own 
Name upon him. It is the Father who from  his heart possesses all things. He has 
the Name, he has the Son who can be see n. Yet his Name is transcendental— for 
it alone is the mystery of the invisible, which thru him comes to ears completely 
filled with it.  
 
46. For indeed the Name of the Father is not spoken, yet rather it is manifested as a 
Son. Accordingly, great is the Name! Who therefore could proclaim a Name for 
him, the supreme Name, except him alone w hose Name this is, together with the 
Sons of the Name?— those in whose hear t the Name of the Father reposes and 
who themselves likewise repose in his Name. Because the Father is unchangeable, 
it is he alone who begot him as his own Name before he fashioned the eternal-
ones, so that the Name of the Father would be Lord over their heads— this-one 
who is truly the Name, secure in his command of perfect power.  
 
47. The Name is not mere wordage, nor is it only terminology, but rather it is 
transcendental. He alone named him, he  alone seeing him, he alone having the 
power to give him a name. Whoever does not exist has no name— for what names 
are given to nothingness? But this existi ng-one exists together with his Name. 
And the Father alone knows him, and he alone names him. 
 
48. The Son is his Name. He did not keep hi m hidden as a secret— but rather the Son 
came to be, and the Father alone named him. Thus the Name belongs to the 
Father, such that the Name of the Fa ther is the Son. How otherwise would 
compassion find a name, except from the Fa ther? For after all,  anyone will say to 
his companion: ‘Whoever could give a name to someone who existed before 
him?— as if children do not thus receive  their names thru those who gave them 
birth!’ 
 
49. Firstly, therefore, it is appropriate that we think on this topic: what is the Name? 
Truly the Son is the Name— thus also he is the Name from the Father. He is the 
existent Name of the Lord. Thus he did not receive the Name on loan as do others, 
according to the pattern of each individual who is to be created in his heart. For he 
is the Lordly Name. There is no one else who bestowed it upon him, but he was 
unnamable and it was ineffable until the time when He who is Perfect gave 
expression to the Son alone. And it is th e Son who has the power to express his 
Name and to see him. Thus it pleased the Father in his heart that his desired Name 
be his Son, and he gave the Name to him— this-one who came forth from the 
profundity. 
 
50. The Son expressed his secret, knowing that  the Father is benevolent. This is 
exactly why the Father brought  this-one forth— so that he might speak of the


--- PAGE 9 ---
dominion and his place of repose from wh ich he came, and render glory to the 
fullness, the majesty of his Name, and th e kindness of the Father. He shall speak 
of the realm from which each one came— and each one who issued from that 
place shall thus be hastened to return  unto it again, to share in receiving his 
substance in the place where he stood¹, rece iving the taste of that place, receiving 
nourishment and growth. And his own dominion of repose is his fullness.  
 
51. Thus all the emanations of the Father ar e plenitudes, and the source of all his 
emanations is within the heart of Him fr om whom they all flourish. He bestowed 
their destinies upon them. Thus is each one made manifest, such that thru their 
own meditation they return to the place to  which they direct their thought. That 
place is their source, which lifts them thru all the heights of heaven unto the 
Father. They attain unto his head, whic h becomes their repose. And they are 
embraced as they approach him, so that they say that they have partaken of his 
face in embraces. Yet they are not thus made manifest by exalting themselves. 
They neither lack the glory of the Father, nor do they think of him as being trite or 
bitter or wrathful. But rather he is benevolent, imperturbable and kind— knowing 
all the dimensionalities before they come  into existence, and having no need of 
edification. 
 
52. This is the form of those who themselves belong on high thru the grandeur of the 
immeasurable, as they await the single and perfect-one who makes himself there 
for them. And they do not descend unto the abode of the dead. They have neither 
jealousy nor lamentation nor mortality there among them, but rather they repose 
within him who is reposeful. They are neither troubled nor devious concerning the 
truth, but rather they themselves are the tr uth. The Father is within them and they 
are within the Father, pe rfected and made indivisi ble in the truly good, not 
inadequate in anything but rather given repose and refreshed in the Spirit. And 
they shall obey their source in leisure, these within whom his root is found and 
who harm no soul. This is the place of the blest, this is their place!  
 
53. Wherefore let the remainder understand in their places that it is not appropriate for 
me, having been in the realm of repose, to say anything further. But it is within his 
heart that I shall be— forever devoted to the Father of the totality, together with 
those true Brothers upon whom pours th e love of the Father and among whom 
there is no lack of him. These are they  who are genuinely ma nifest, being in the 
true and eternal life and sp eaking the perfect light which is filled with the seed of 
the Father, and who are in his heart and in the fullness and in whom his Spirit 
rejoices, glorifying him in whom they ex ist. He is good, and his Sons are perfect 
and worthy of his Name. For it is children of this kind that he the Father desires.

