=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: The-Assassination-of-Fred-Hampton.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 401
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:22:03.590336
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
The Assassination of
Fred Hampton
How the FBI and the Chicago Police
Murdered a Black Panther
Jeffrey Haas
The Assassination of
Fred Hampton
Haas
“A riveting account of the 
assassination, the plot behind 
it, the attempted cover-up, 
the denouement, and the 
lessons that we should draw 
from this shocking tale of 
government iniquity.” 
—Noam Chomsky, author 
and political activist
$26.95 (CAN $29.95)
I
t’s sometime around 7:00 a.m., on 
December 4, 1969, and attorney 
Jeff Haas is in the Monroe Street 
police lockup in Chicago, interview-
ing Fred Hampton’s fiancée. Only 
four hours earlier, she was lying 
in bed next to Hampton when the 
police burst into their apartment. She 
is still in her nightgown, describing 
how the police pulled her from the 
room as Fred lay unconscious on 
their bed. She heard one officer say, 
“He’s still alive.” She then heard two 
shots. A second officer said, “He’s 
good and dead now.” She looks at 
Jeff and asks, “What can you do?”   
 The Assassination of Fred 
Hampton is attorney Jeff Haas’s per-
sonal account of the eighteen-month 
trial in which he and People’s Law 
Office partner Flint Taylor pursued 
Hampton’s assassins, ultimately 
prevailing over FBI stonewalling and 
unlimited government resources 
bent on hiding the conspiracy that 
led to Hampton’s death. The book 
not only tells the story of justice 
delivered but also puts Hampton in 
a new light as a dynamic community 
leader whose dedication to his peo-
ple and to truth telling inspired the 
young lawyers of the People’s Law 
Office, solidifying their lifelong com-
mitment to fighting injustice.
Attorney Jeff Haas has spent his 
career working for justice. In 1969 he 
and three other lawyers set up the 
People’s Law Office, whose clients 
included the Black Panthers, SDS, 
and other political activists. Haas 
went on to handle cases involving 
prisoners’ rights, police torture, and 
the wrongfully accused. He lives 
in Santa Fe, New Mexico, with his 
wife and children and continues to 
represent victims of police brutality.
Front cover photos: (top) © Bettman/CORBIS;
(bottom) courtesy of Chicago Mobile Crime Lab
Author photo: Meridel Rubenstein, Santa Fe
Cover design: Jonathan Hahn
Printed in the United States of America
true crime / african american 
“This is an extremely important book—and a tale well told—for America to read if 
it wants to become what it says it has always been—the land of the free and the 
home of the brave.” —Ramsey Clark, former United States Attorney General 
“At once journalist, lawyer and storyteller, Jeff Haas manages to sear into every 
page of this book a compassion seemingly forgotten, providing a riveting 
eyewitness account of the government assassination of Fred Hampton. This is 
mandatory reading for those who love and believe in freedom.”
 —Elaine Brown, author and former chairman 
of the Black Panther Party
“This book is more important NOW than it was THEN. . . . A remarkable work.” 
 —Studs Terkel
“A true crime story and legal thriller, this powerful account puts together all 
the pieces, giving us the anatomy of a despicable episode in recent American 
history. . . . The overall impact [is] devastating.” 
 —Phillip Lopate, author of Getting Personal
“A chilling account . . . essential reading.” 
—Kathleen Cleaver, Emory University School of Law, former 
communications secretary of the Black Panther Party
“Part history, part courtroom drama, part literary memoir, Haas evokes with 
chilling precision a bloody and desperate repressive state apparatus locked in 
conflict with its greatest fear, a charismatic young black man with revolution on 
his mind.”  —William Ayers, professor of education, University of Illinois at 
   Chicago, former SDS leader, and author
“A must-read.”  —Len Weinglass, lawyer and civil rights activist 
“People should not forget that State’s Attorney Hanrahan, the Chicago police, 
and the FBI murdered my son. . . . Who knows what he may have become, if 
they hadn’t killed him?”
 —Iberia Hampton, Fred Hampton’s mother
ISBN 978-1-55652-765-4
9 7 8 1 5 5 6 5 2 7 6 5 4
5 2 6 9 5
$26.95 (CAN $29.95)
FH_mechanical_new.indd   1 8/11/09   12:55:09 PM


--- PAGE 2 ---
The Assassination of
Fred Hampton
How the FBI and the Chicago Police
Murdered a Black Panther
Jeffrey Haas
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   1 7/29/09   1:28:33 PM


--- PAGE 3 ---
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Haas, Jeffrey.
  The assassination of Fred Hampton : how the FBI and the Chicago police 
murdered a Black Panther / Jeffrey Haas.
       p. cm.
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN 978-1-55652-765-4 (hardcover)
 1.  Hampton, Fred, 1948-1969. 2.  Assassination—Illininois—Chicago. 3.  Black 
Panther Party.  I. Title.
  HV6289.C4H33 2009
  322.4'2092—dc22
                                                                    2009025604 
Interior design: Jonathan Hahn
Photo credits: photo gallery pages 1–2 courtesy of the Hampton family; 
pages 4–7, 8 (bottom), 9 (top), 10, 12, 13 (bottom) and 14 © Paul Sequeria; 
page 11 (top) courtesy Joe Moreno, Chicago Daily News, with permission 
by the Sun-Times News Group; page 16 (top) © Kathy Richland; page 16 
(bottom) © Delores Smith
© 2010 by Jeffrey Haas
All rights reserved
Published by Lawrence Hill Books
An imprint of Chicago Review Press, Incorporated
814 North Franklin Street
Chicago, Illinois 60610
ISBN 978-1-55652-765-4
Printed in the United States of America 
5  4  3  2  1
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   2 7/29/09   1:28:33 PM


--- PAGE 4 ---
This book is dedicated to the life and memory of Fred Hampton 
(1948–1969). He refused to compromise in the struggle for justice, 
equality, and freedom, and he paid the ultimate price. And to those 
who have been inspired by him to pursue these goals.
In memory of my father, Joseph Haas, and my friend Juancho 
Donahue, and for my mother, Betty Haas.
To my loving wife, Mariel, and my children, Roger, Andrew, Justin, and 
Rosa.
To my other family, the People’ s Law Office, as they continue the 
legacy of Fred Hampton.
To Iberia and Francis Hampton and Fannie Clark, who endured the 
loss of a son but persevered to keep the memory alive.
To all those who have died, lost loved ones, or been imprisoned 
pursuing justice and freedom.
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   3 7/29/09   1:28:33 PM


--- PAGE 5 ---
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   4 7/29/09   1:28:33 PM


--- PAGE 6 ---
Contents
Introduction  1969: The Year of No Return ix
Part I: Rendezvous with Death 1
    1 Meeting a Revolutionary 3
   2  Born and Bred in Atlanta 6
   3  Young Fred Hampton, an Early Activist 15
   4  Chicago, Becoming a Lawyer 21
   5 Fred and the Rise of the Panthers 27
   6  Convergence 33
   7  Struggle in the Streets—PLO Begins 43
   8  Panthers Versus Police 61
   9  Last Glimpse 68
10  A Knock at the Door 72
  1
1 Hanrahan Versus Panthers 83
Part II: Exposing the Murder 87
12  “ A Northern Lynching” 89
13  The Battle for Hearts and Minds 94
14 
 Farewell to a Revolutionary 108
15 
 Panthers Indicted 111
16 
 The Survivors Go Public 116
17 
 A Puzzling Victory 121
18 
 Sue the Bastards 127
19 S
hootout in Carbondale 135
20 Vietnam and Protest  142
21  The Carbondale Trial 145
22 
 Prosecuting Hanrahan 151
23 
 Revolt at Attica 154
24 T
wo Bad Decisions 163
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   5 7/29/09   1:28:34 PM


--- PAGE 7 ---
Part III: The FBI’s Clandestine Operation 171
25 The Snitch 173
26  Back in Court 182
27 
 Floor Plan for Murder 188
28 
 On the Trail of COINTELPRO  192
29  Groth’ s Informant 203
30 
 Hiding COINTELPRO  213
31  Number One on the “Hit” Parade 224 
Part IV: Injustice on Trial 231
32  Opening Day 233
33  “I Am No Solomon” 239
34 
 The Deluge 245
35 
 O’Neal Gets a Bonus 251
36 
 December 4, Revisited 255
37 
 An Honest FBI Man 261
38 
 Witness O’Neal 268
39 
 The Shooters 272
40 
 Facing Hanrahan and Jail 276
41 
 Fred, the “Messiah” 282
42 
 A Shameful End  286
43 
 Boiling Over 291
44 
 Rock Bottom 300
45 
 Out of the Abyss 314
Part V: Vindication 323
46  A Victory 325
47  Onward  330
48 
 Seize the Time 337
Epilogue
 349
Acknowledgments 358
Glossary 364
Sources 367
Index 372
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   6 7/29/09   1:28:34 PM


--- PAGE 8 ---
vii
Introduction
1969: Year of No Return
W
hile 1969 was pivotal  for me, it was fatal for Fred Hampton. His 
life moved so much more quickly than mine and burned so much 
more brightly, only to be extinguished at age twenty-one by two police 
bullets to the head at four-thirty in the morning on December 4. Yet the 
story of his life has never been told, and the story of his death, once par-
tially illuminated, has mostly been forgotten. These stories exist in the 
memories of those who knew Fred, who heard him speak, who respond 
with excitement and recognition when I ask about him, as though I’m 
speaking about yesterday or last week rather than forty years ago. The 
memory of Fred is there in the continuing sadness in Fred’ s mother 
Iberia’ s eyes as she approaches her late eighties. 
Maybe we all have points at which our consciousness changes and 
we cannot return to our former path. For many political activists, that 
dividing line occurred in the late 1960s. We were fed up with a system 
that thrived on war, racism, and patriarchy. We were young people 
who at first hadn’t understood why the United States was waging war 
in Vietnam but who by 1969 believed that it was endemic to an unjust 
system we felt compelled to stop or overthrow. 
Many of the same evils are still with us, as was glaringly appar-
ent in recent years under Bush Jr.: a war of conquest and occupation 
abroad and ever-growing government eavesdropping and intimidation 
at home. There is currently a movement to make public U.S. involve-
ment in torture and hold those who authorized it accountable. The 
Bush-Cheney-Rumsfeld team, with their legal apologists John Ashcroft 
and Alberto Gonzales, implemented secret domestic and foreign poli-
cies in total violation of the constitution and international law and 
still seek to justify those abuses. Many of the same perpetrators and 
apologists for Watergate, COINTELPRO, and the Iran-Contra scandal 
returned to implement even more Draconian measures. If this wrong-
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   7 7/29/09   1:28:35 PM


--- PAGE 9 ---
viii
doing is not exposed and those who perpetuated it are not held crimi-
nally liable, then it is bound to repeat itself in clandestine programs 
like COINTELPRO. The need to protest, expose, and hold accountable 
those in power who violate our laws and personal liberties continues 
and remains a fundamental struggle of our society and any society.
Introduction
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   8 7/29/09   1:28:35 PM


--- PAGE 10 ---
Part I 
Rendezvous 
with Death
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   1 7/29/09   1:28:35 PM


--- PAGE 11 ---
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   2 7/29/09   1:28:35 PM


--- PAGE 12 ---

Meeting a Revolutionary
T
he first time I  heard Fred Hampton speak was in August 1969. He 
was the chairman of the Illinois Black Panther Party, and I was at 
the “People’ s Church” on Ashland Avenue in the heart of Chicago’ s black 
West Side. I was two years out of law school, and it was two days after 
my law partners had obtained Fred’ s release from Menard Prison. The 
sanctuary of the church was filled to capacity with rows of wooden pews 
going back into dimly lit corners, and it was warm inside.
My colleague Flint Taylor and I found an opening in a row about half-
way back. After a few minutes, things quieted down. There was a hush. 
A moment later Fred emerged from the side and strode to the pulpit. 
Everyone stood up and clapped. The walls shook with the thunder of 
three hundred voices chanting “Free Fred Hampton.” Unlike at other 
Panther events, Fred was not surrounded by Panthers in leather jackets 
and black berets. He stood alone, dressed in a button-down shirt with a 
pullover sweater. He was twenty years old, with smooth, youthful skin 
and a boyish smile. He had grown a little goatee in prison and wore a 
medium-length Afro. 
Fred Hampton held the microphone in his right hand and looked out 
at the crowd.
“I’m free,” he began in a loud voice. Then repeated it. 
People shouted their approval. 
His voice got softer. “I went down to the prison in Menard, thinking 
we were the vanguard, but down there I got down on my knees and lis-
tened and learned from the people. I went down to the valley and picked 
up the beat of the people.” A drumbeat started, and everyone clapped 
to the rhythm. Fred chanted, a cross between a Baptist preacher and Sly 
and the Family Stone. “I’m high.” Making each high into a two-syllable 
word, he sang, “I’m high—ee, I’m high—ee off the people,” and then 
1
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   3 7/29/09   1:28:35 PM


--- PAGE 13 ---

chanted the words again. It was impossible for me not to join in, and 
soon I clapped and stomped with everyone else.
When the refrain was over, Fred repeated the most common Panther 
slogan, “Power to the people,” but added his own variation: “White 
Power to white people, Brown Power to brown people, Yellow Power to 
yellow people, Black Power to black people, X power to those we left 
out, and Panther 
Power to the Vanguard Party.” After a volley of “right 
ons,” Fred said: 
If you ever think about me and you ain’t gonna do no revolutionary act, 
forget about me. I don’t want myself on your mind if you’re not going to 
work for the people. If you’re asked to make a commitment at the age 
of twenty, and you say I don’t want to make a commitment at the age of 
twenty, only because of the reason that I’m too young to die, I want to 
live a little longer, then you’re dead already. You have to understand that 
people have to pay a price for peace. If you dare to struggle, you dare to 
win. If you dare not struggle then damn it, you don’t deserve to win. Let 
me say peace to you if you’re willing to fight for it.
 
Later, Fred asked the audience to stand up. We did. He then told 
everyone to raise his or her right hand and repeat “I am,” and we 
responded, “I am.” He then said “a revolutionary” and some in the 
audience repeated “a revolutionary.” I considered myself a lawyer for 
the movement but not necessarily of the movement. The word revolu-
tionary stuck in my throat. Again Fred repeated “I am,” and the audi-
ence responded in kind. This time when he said “a revolutionary,” the 
response was louder. By the third or fourth time, I hesitantly joined in, 
and by the seventh or eighth time I was shouting as loudly and enthusi-
astically as everyone else, “I am . . . a revolutionary!” It was a threshold 
to which Fred took me and countless others. I felt my level of commit-
ment palpably rising. 
Fred was speaking in a quieter voice:
I believe I was born not to die in a car wreck or slipping on a piece of ice, 
or of a bad heart, but I’m going to be able to die doing the things I was 
born for. I believe I’m going to die high off the people. I believe that I’m 
going to be able to die as a revolutionary in the international proletarian 
Rendezvous with Death
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   4 7/29/09   1:28:36 PM


--- PAGE 14 ---

struggle. And I hope that each of you will be able to die in the interna-
tional revolutionary proletarian struggle or you’ll be able to live in it. And 
I think that struggle’ s going to come. Why don’t you live for the people? 
Why don’t you struggle for the people? Why don’t you die for the people?
 
Fred finished. Everyone stood and applauded again, unaware of the 
truth of his prophecy. We chanted “Free Fred Hampton,” and the church 
reverberated with the clapping and stamping of feet. 
It was cold in  the tiny, windowless interview room at the Wood Street 
police station. I looked across the wooden table at the large-boned 
woman with a short Afro who was shaking and sobbing. Deborah 
Johnson’ s patterned nightgown outlined her protruding belly, revealing 
her pregnancy. 
“Fred never really woke up,” she said. “He was lying there when they 
pulled me out of the bedroom.” She paused. 
“ And then?” I asked. 
“Two pigs went back into the bedroom. One of them said, ‘He’ s barely 
alive, he’ll barely make it.’ I heard two shots. Then I heard, ‘He’ s good 
and dead now!’” 
Fred’ s fiancée looked at me with sad, swollen eyes. “What can you 
do?” 
I couldn’t think of any reply. I couldn’t bring Fred back to life. 
Meeting a RevolutionaryFred Hampton_FINAL.indd   5 7/29/09   1:28:36 PM


--- PAGE 15 ---

Born and Bred in Atlanta
A 
group of young lawyers  opened the People’ s Law Office (PLO) 
the same week Fred spoke at the People’ s Church. We wanted to 
become lawyers for the movement. Who were we and how did we get 
there? I begin with me, not because I was the most important; I wasn’t. 
But it’ s my story. I knew Fred Hampton only briefly, but as with so many 
others who knew him, he changed my life.
It’ s difficult to separate the parts of my life that led me to become a 
Panther lawyer. Who knows for certain how or why we become who we 
are? I don’t. But there were people and events that influenced the course 
I took.
I was born in Crawford Long Hospital on September 18, 1942. My 
sister Sue, four years older, and I are from a German Jewish family that 
settled in Atlanta in the 1850s. My grandfather, Herbert Haas, was one of 
the lawyers who defended Leo Frank, the Jewish manager of the Atlanta 
Pencil Factory. In 1913, Frank was falsely accused of murdering a thir-
teen-year-old, white, Protestant girl named Mary Phagan, whose body 
was found at the factory on a Saturday morning.
Defending him was so unpopular my grandfather hired a detective 
to protect his family. The anti-Semitic Hearst newspapers and local 
press portrayed the murder as a Jewish ritual killing, and with southern 
resentment against northern carpetbaggers fanned by populist Tom 
Watson, Frank was convicted and sentenced to death. Governor Frank 
Stanton, convinced of Frank’s innocence, commuted his sentence to 
life, further angering the riled-up public, and a fellow inmate stabbed 
Frank in the neck. While he was recuperating, a lynch mob, organized 
by some of the most prominent families in Atlanta, kidnapped him 
from the infirmary at nearby Milledgeville, and hanged him outside 
Atlanta. 
2
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   6 7/29/09   1:28:36 PM


--- PAGE 16 ---

My grandfather had been the first person Frank called when he was 
arrested, and they wrote to each other frequently. The last letter from 
Frank arrived the day before the lynching. My grandfather refused to 
discuss the case for the rest of his life, and my father said the Jewish 
community was traumatized for a generation. Yet as far as I know, and 
despite the fact that the Anti-Defamation League was born out of this 
case, the Jewish community failed or refused to make the connection 
between Frank’ s death and the lynching of fourteen black people in 
Georgia alone that year without any trials at all. 
My father, Joseph Haas, while primarily a business lawyer, was also 
the attorney for the Southern Regional Council, a civic organization con-
cerned with racial inequalities in the South. He worked with civil rights 
organizers including the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee’ s 
chairman John Lewis to implement the 1965 Voting Rights Act. My dad 
came up with the name the Voter Education Project to make the group 
eligible for grants from charitable foundations. The IRS would not have 
allowed them to fund a voter registration drive. When Dad died in 2000, 
John Lewis, today a U.S. congressman, wrote the eulogy that I proudly 
read at the memorial service. 
His work made a major and lasting contribution to the civil rights move-
ment and to liberating white and black Southerners. The Voter Education 
Project registered more than four million new voters; black voters in the 
eleven Southern states where it operated. We relied on his legal advice 
and counsel and “can do” spirit. Without him, those of us on the Freedom 
Rides and elsewhere on the so-called front lines could not have done 
what we did.
My mother, Betty Geismer, grew up in middle-class, integrated Shaker 
Heights, a suburb of Cleveland, where she was a classmate of the track 
star Jesse Owens. When Mom attended Wellesley College in the early 
1930s, the school was swarming with would-be Bolsheviks, socialists, and 
New Dealers. She fit right in, and became an ardent admirer of Eleanor 
Roosevelt. She had a shock when she married my father in 1936 and 
moved to Atlanta, a city still in the long-entrenched throes of segrega-
tion. The racial attitudes of most white Atlantans at the time she moved 
Born and Bred in AtlantaFred Hampton_FINAL.indd   7 7/29/09   1:28:37 PM


--- PAGE 17 ---
to the South were reflected in the big social event the next year: the grand 
opening of the movie Gone with the Wind, a story of nostalgic longing for 
a romanticized antebellum South that, of course, included slavery. 
In the late 1950s my mother organized the Atlanta Committee for 
International Visitors (ACIV). Its function was to host persons brought 
to the United States by the State Department and other governmen-
tal agencies. Atlanta was becoming the government’ s showcase for 
Southern cities because it had not fought integration with the violence 
of Birmingham, Alabama, or Little Rock, Arkansas. Rather, a majority of 
Atlanta’ s white business leaders united with leaders of the black com-
munity to implement slow but peaceful integration. A notable exception 
was segregationist Lester Maddox. At his Pickrick Cafeteria he sold ax 
handles to use against blacks who might try to integrate segregated facili-
ties, including his own. This stance got him elected governor of Georgia. 
My mother’ s work for ACIV included hosting African delegations, 
which put her in touch with Coretta Scott King, Dr. Martin Luther King 
Jr., and the deans of the Atlanta University colleges. One problem the 
newly formed ACIV faced was that most Atlanta hotels were still seg-
regated. A few, including the Biltmore, were willing to house all-black 
delegations from other countries, but they would not allow mixed 
delegations to stay at their hotels or eat in their restaurants. One day 
I heard my mother on the phone. “That is unacceptable and simply 
won’t work,” she said. “If you want our business you have to accom-
modate integrated delegations and that includes their black and white 
hosts.” The Biltmore acceded, and soon other hotels became integrated 
as well.
Like many Southern white kids from upper-middle-class families, 
I was raised in part by blacks. When I was five, we moved to a farm 
just north of Atlanta. By the time I was eight, my parents hired Walter 
McCurry to work the farm. Walter was six feet tall, barrel chested, and 
muscular, with light brown skin, a small mustache, a round face, and a 
shaved head. A World War II navy veteran, he returned to Georgia after 
the war to take up farming, which his family had done for generations. 
Walter wore overalls and drank sweetened iced tea out of mason jars. 
He was forty years old when he started working for us. 
Our farm consisted of twenty-six hilly acres containing a small lake, 
a two-acre vegetable and berry garden, several hay fields, a barn with 
Rendezvous with Death

Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   8 7/29/09   1:28:37 PM


--- PAGE 18 ---

a pasture behind it, and thirty-three pecan trees. With Walter’ s help we 
raised chickens, turkeys, and pigs, and kept a horse and a mule. 
Walter taught me how to plow behind our mule, Boley—not only 
how to handle the reins but how to address her with the commands 
“gee” and “haw” to get her to turn right or left. He chuckled when the 
plow got stuck or I would get off course. 
“Boy, I hope you learn how to plow while we still got some rows left,” 
he would say, adding with a smile, “I spec you ain’t done too much 
damage.” 
My favorite activity was when Walter put a bridle on Boley and 
brought her around to the haystack where my two friends and I could 
get on. Off we’ d ride into the woods, where we built forts and kept our 
stash of sardines and saltines.
I emulated Walter, and he took great pride in showing me what he 
knew. He was my Jim, and I was his Huck. But unlike our predecessors, 
the traveling Walter and I did together was to baseball games. My friend 
Henry lived near Ponce de Leon Ballpark, where the Atlanta Crackers, 
our local all-white minor league team, played. Only forty years later did 
I learn that the Black Crackers shared the same ballpark. 
The first time Walter took us to a game we were ten. It was a warm, 
humid evening, and Henry and I went to buy tickets. I looked around 
and saw Walter was walking off toward the hill in right field, where the 
black spectators were sitting. I wanted to call out to him, Come back 
and sit with us. But I said nothing. 
“Why should he have to sit out there?” I asked Henry. 
“Yeah,” he replied. “There’re plenty of seats here.” 
There was silence as we each waited for the next thing to be said, but 
neither of us would take the next step of inviting Walter back to sit with 
us.
“I hope Country Brown is in the lineup tonight,” I finally chipped in. 
“You got money for lemonade?” 
After the game we met Walter outside. We all knew it was wrong and 
mean that he and other black people were banished to the worst seats. 
But I never talked about it with him. Nor did he mention it to me. I’m 
not sure why. I think Walter didn’t want to embarrass me. 
As for why I didn’t say anything, it was probably my fear and timid-
ity, issues that I would confront years later. I was ashamed of the status 
Born and Bred in Atlanta
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   9 7/29/09   1:28:37 PM


--- PAGE 19 ---
10
quo but not willing to take it on. As Alan Paton wrote in Cry, the Beloved 
Country about white South Africans’ fear of challenging apartheid, “It 
was not a thing lightly done.”
Lily May Glenn also played a large role in raising me. She worked for us 
as a maid five and a half days per week, from the time I was six or seven 
until after I went away to college. Lily had her own small bedroom and 
bathroom in our house. She was tall and statuesque, with high cheek-
bones, suggesting some Cherokee roots. She was one of twelve children 
whose family had been sharecroppers on the remains of a cotton plan-
tation in Georgia. 
I loved to hear Lily’ s stories about growing up in the country, in par-
ticular her animated accounts of the horrors of picking cotton. “It was 
hot and sweaty with long days, dirty work, and boring to beat,” she said. 
“Seemed like the sun would never go down. I’ d be sick or hide, any-
thing. If I was forced to pick, I’ d put rocks and green cotton boles in my 
sack to make it weigh more so I could make my quota earlier.”
Nearly three decades later, in 1975, one of the main presenters at 
a radical women’ s gathering made the mistake of speaking nostalgi-
cally about being raised by her parents’ black employees. Servants 
was the postslavery word. Her listeners took her presentation to imply 
that she believed her upbringing was acceptable because it was such 
a fertile source of memories and support. My friends who attended 
were appalled at her seeming  acceptance of the exploitation of the 
black people who worked for her family. She was tarred and feathered 
politically. 
As I write about my memories of Walter and Lily, I realize the con-
trast between the benefits that flowed to me and my family from these 
relationships and the extreme cost to Walter and Lily. Both worked long 
hours for low wages with no social security, health, or retirement ben-
efits. They were not equals in our house. They never ate dinner with us, 
and they addressed my parents as “Mr. Haas” and “Mrs. Haas,” while we 
addressed them by their first names. 
I was the first Jew  to attend Liberty Gwinn, the county elementary 
school near our house. My classmates were country white kids, and 
before they knew I was Jewish, they told me, “Jews have horns.” 
Rendezvous with Death
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   10 7/29/09   1:28:38 PM


--- PAGE 20 ---
11
One day I decided to be bold. “I’m Jewish,” I told a group of class-
mates after school. They looked for my horns and found none. That was 
the end of the anti-Semitic comments. I liked the kids, they liked me, 
and I achieved the highest honor, being voted captain of Safety Patrol. 
While my classmates withheld name-calling of Jews, they showed 
no similar restraint with respect to blacks. Like all the other schools in 
Fulton County, students at Liberty Gwinn went downtown to hear the 
Atlanta Symphony at least one time each year. Atlanta was totally seg-
regated in the early 1950s. Black kids not only went to different schools 
but were assigned different times to go to the symphony. 
One morning, as my mother was driving my classmates and me back 
from the concert, we saw three black kids walking on the sidewalks 
toward the auditorium. 
“Niggers, go home,” one of my classmates yelled through an open 
window. 
“Y’all niggers don’t deserve to go to our auditorium,” another yelled. 
I was embarrassed. The black kids stopped, hurt and anger on their 
faces. One of them reached down as if to pick up a rock. Their teacher, 
who had been walking behind them, intervened and stopped him. 
“Roll up the windows,” my mother said. “We’re getting too much cold 
air in the car.”
And that was that. The racial slurs stopped, but she said nothing 
more. I too remained silent. 
One day in the late 1950s, some teenage friends and I drove to Lake 
Spivey, a privately owned lake near Atlanta, to enjoy a swim and some 
relief from the Georgia sun. As we were walking down the beach, a beefy 
white man in a uniform yelled “Get out of there” to a young black kid 
knee-deep in the water. 
“Why?” the boy asked simply. 
“Cause we don’t allow no Negras here.” 
“But this is a public place, ain’t it?” the boy replied. Public pools in 
Atlanta had been ordered integrated and had either integrated or closed 
down. 
“No, this is private, for whites only, can’t you see the sign? I don’t 
know how you got in here at all.” 
We looked past the uniformed man to see a sign on the beach that 
read 
no coloreds allowed. The boy continued to protest and was dragged 
Born and Bred in Atlanta
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   11 7/29/09   1:28:38 PM


--- PAGE 21 ---
12
from the water crying. His mother came over to comfort him and take 
him away from the security guard. 
As he and his mother started toward the exit, I watched. The secu-
rity guard weighed more than two hundred pounds to my scrawny one 
hundred forty. I said something under my breath, low enough not to 
be heard. When the boy and the guard were gone, I walked to the lake 
and waded in. I was still outraged and also felt humiliated, having done 
nothing to stop or even confront the guard. I couldn’t enjoy the swim. 
Our failures to stand up against segregation made cowards of us all. 
In 1958 our temple (called the Temple) was bombed because our 
rabbi, Jacob Rothschild, supported Dr. King’ s push for integration. 
Unlike the Frank case, where the Jewish community withdrew for a 
generation, our congregation rallied behind our rabbi and became 
more committed to civil rights for blacks. Jews in Atlanta were more 
secure, and many were inspired by the struggle of black people to end 
segregation.
When I was a high  school senior in 1960, one of the few hip things I 
did was frequenting the Royal Peacock Social Club on Auburn Avenue, 
where you could drink if you were under twenty-one. It was on the sec-
ond floor, a couple of blocks from the Ebenezer Baptist Church headed 
by Martin Luther King Sr. and his son. Lily May had told me about the 
Peacock and usually knew who was playing there. 
The Peacock had the best music in town and was the city’ s only inte-
grated nightclub. Part of the “chitlin circuit,” its patrons were 90 percent 
black. The white 10 percent was mostly Jewish. Whites were usually 
seated together, but the warm feelings in that room were unique for me 
at that time. I think the black people knew we came there to appreciate 
their music and their scene.
Otis Redding, Sam Cooke, Aretha Franklin, B. B. King, and Marvin 
Gaye made regular appearances at the Peacock. We brought our own 
half-pint bottles of bourbon or Seagram’ s Seven inside our coat pockets 
and poured generous amounts into the paper cups of Coke we bought 
for mixers. Packed in there together, at the table or on the dance floor, 
even I lost my inhibitions, overcoming my self-consciousness enough 
to do a little making out.
Rendezvous with Death
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   12 7/29/09   1:28:38 PM


--- PAGE 22 ---
1
The band I remember best was Hank Ballard and the Midnighters. 
Hank wrote the original music and lyrics to “The Twist.” Unfortunately 
for him, he let Chubby Checker record it, and Hank never quite made 
it past being a regional hero. Hank and the Midnighters put on quite a 
show. Somewhere toward the conclusion of their act, the room dark-
ened. The music started quietly and slowly, and then gradually picked 
up its tempo. Suddenly a spotlight appeared directly on Hank. He had a 
pair of women’ s panties draped over his head. He slowly removed them 
using his tongue as the music got louder and the beat got stronger. The 
audience, black and white, clapped to the beat as the panties slowly 
descended. When they were gone, the audience erupted. It was crude, 
and I loved it.
At one or two in the morning, climbing down the stairs from the syr-
upy warmth of the Peacock onto Auburn Avenue, I felt like I was putting 
on my white skin again and separating into the two familiar worlds of 
black and white. 
After high school I attended  the University of Michigan, from 1960 
to 1963, where I remained mostly oblivious to political events, 
disinterested in the formation of Students for a Democratic Society 
(SDS) on the campus. After I graduated, I sat in my parents’ living room, 
drinking beer and listening to Tchaikovsky and Brahms, conjuring up 
lofty ideas inspired by my readings of Camus and Sartre, Nietzsche and 
Kierkegaard. What to be or not to be? 
Not quite ready to answer that question, I realized I had lived a privi-
leged life. I needed an equalizer. What better leveler than army basic 
training at Fort Jackson, South Carolina? There I would be an enlisted 
man, going through the same physical training as other lowly privates. I 
wanted to prove to myself that I could survive in a setting without rely-
ing on my privilege or my family’ s money. I had no awareness of the 
U.S. troop presence building in Vietnam when I enlisted in the Army 
Reserve in 1963. 
I reported to Fort Jackson, near Columbia, South Carolina, on 
November 19. Three days later President Kennedy was assassinated. 
Rumors spread on the base that the Russians or Cubans had killed 
him. 
Born and Bred in Atlanta
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   13 7/29/09   1:28:39 PM


--- PAGE 23 ---
1
“You men better shape up fast,” our drill sergeant, a Cuban exile, 
yelled on our first day on the tarp. “We’re sending you straight off to 
Cuba as soon as you learn to fire that rifle.” He told us with certainty that 
Castro killed Kennedy and we would soon be invading the Caribbean 
island. This was not what I had had in mind. All of a sudden I felt like I 
was in a straitjacket headed for war. This was not the nonthreatening, 
life warm-up experience I had signed up for.
Rendezvous with Death
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   14 7/29/09   1:28:39 PM


--- PAGE 24 ---
1
Young Fred Hampton,                 
an Early Activist 
F
red Hampton, the third child of Francis and Iberia, was born August 
30, 1948, in Argo, a suburb on the southwestern side of Chicago. 
His parents grew up outside the small town of Haynesville in northern 
Louisiana. Their families farmed the land their great-grandparents had 
worked as slaves. Fred’ s father, like many blacks from the rural South, 
moved to Chicago in the 1930s seeking employment. He found work at 
the Corn Products Company in Argo.
Among the Hamptons’ neighbors in Argo were Mamie Till and her 
son, Emmett. Mamie Till had come to Chicago from Mississippi a few 
years earlier. Emmett’ s father also had found a job at Corn Products. 
One of Iberia’ s first Chicago acquaintances was Fannie Wesley, Emmett 
Till’ s regular babysitter. Because Iberia stayed home with her three kids 
until Fred, the youngest, was eight, she helped Fannie by sometimes 
watching Emmett, whom everyone called Bobo. Iberia told me young 
Emmett was “curious and quite rambunctious, a handful.” 
It was difficult for a black family with three kids to find housing in 
the Chicago area. Black neighborhoods were crowded and expensive. 
In 1951 the Hamptons moved from Argo to a small house near a lake in 
Blue Island, a suburb of Chicago.
“I liked the place because it was more like where I grew up,” Iberia said. 
“But there were some rednecks there who gave our kids a tough time.” 
Dee Dee, Fred’ s sister, said she and Fred were frequently called into 
the principal’ s office for fighting with the white kids after school. “Fred 
and me never started nuthin’ ,” she said, “but we didn’t let them call us 
names either. We got in a lot of trouble trying to set them straight after 
school. Together we did all right, but seems like we were always having 
to explain what happened on the playground to the principal.” 
Iberia also got a job with Corn Products in 1956, doing quality con-
trol on the bottles and caps as they came down the assembly line. “They 
3
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   15 7/29/09   1:28:39 PM


--- PAGE 25 ---
1
Rendezvous with Death
made me the union steward,” she told me. “I loved it. Once we cooked 
meals at the Union Hall for over seven hundred people, every day dur-
ing a two-month strike.” Talking to Iberia, I got a glimpse of the source 
of Fred’ s strength. 
In 1958, when Fred was ten, his family moved to Maywood, a work-
ing-class suburb, at that time about one-quarter black, west of Chicago.  
Fred attended Irving Elementary School, across the street from their 
house. “ All the kids loved Fred,” Iberia said, smiling. “ And the teachers, 
too. Seems like he was never alone.” 
Fred, like his mother, had a large head, although I could see from 
photos that by his teens he had also developed a solid, powerful body. 
But when Fred was younger, kids teased him, Iberia said. “They called 
him peanut head and watermelon head. He was upset for a while, but 
he learned to defend himself with words. He earned the reputation of 
‘king of signifying.’” 
I knew what she meant: called the nines in Chicago or the dozens 
in New York, signifying meant talking bad to people in an insulting but 
joking way, like “Your mama . . .” Fred’ s friends from Louisiana told 
me, “Nobody wanted to take on his mouth,” but they also said a big 
grin usually followed his put-downs. He’ d step back and apologize if he 
feared he had gone too far. 
“When he was very young he fell and landed on his face,” Francis told 
me. This loosened some of his front teeth, and he developed a tempo-
rary lisp or whistle sound when he spoke. Francis said he overcame this 
problem by practicing speaking as clearly as possible. “Even in elemen-
tary school everyone recognized he was a sharp talker. He always had a 
mouth on him. Later he was a genius about speaking.” 
“On Saturday mornings Fred would round up the neighborhood 
kids,” Iberia said in describing her son. “They would buy food and come 
back to the house, where they would cook breakfast together for them-
selves and all of us.” Fred knew some of the children didn’t get much 
to eat at home. “Francis and I didn’t have to do anything on Saturday 
mornings but eat,” Iberia said pointing to the same table in the dining 
room where Fred had laid out the food for the kids. 
“Fred liked school, especially the social part of it. He was a good, but 
not great, student,” Iberia went on. “But he loved to read, especially 
history.” 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   16 7/29/09   1:28:40 PM


--- PAGE 26 ---
1
One of Fred’ s friends told me, “He was smart as the dickens, but his 
grades didn’t reflect his smartness.” 
During the summers, Fred, his older brother, Bill, and Dee Dee vis-
ited Iberia’ s parents at their farm outside Haynesville, Louisiana. 
“Yeah, I was a little nervous letting them go back south,” Iberia said. 
“Particularly because Fred had such a big mouth.”
She remembered how Bobo Till was killed during a visit to the South. 
In 1955, when Fred was six, fourteen-year-old Emmett Till left Chicago 
to visit his mother’ s family in Mississippi. He was kidnapped from his 
uncle’ s home, brutally beaten, and shot because he had supposedly 
whistled at a white woman outside a local store in the town of Money. 
His body was found floating in the Tallahatchie River several days after 
his abduction. His face was so badly beaten he was recognizable only 
to his mother. 
“I couldn’t stand going to his funeral and seeing him like that,” Iberia 
said. “I wanted to remember him as the active and saucy kid I babysat 
for.” 
When she learned of Emmett’ s murder, Mamie Till demanded that 
her son’ s body be returned to Chicago. She defied the explicit orders 
of the Mississippi authorities, who had sealed his casket, and ordered 
that it be opened. Her son’ s mutilated face displayed to the entire world 
what Southern racism had done. Thousands of Chicagoans walked by 
the open casket in 1955 at the Rayner Funeral Home, aghast at what 
they saw. Years later, Rosa Parks told Mamie Till that the photograph 
of Emmett’ s disfigured face in the casket was set in her mind when she 
refused to give up her seat on the Montgomery bus. 
Fourteen years after Emmett’ s murder, thousands of Chicagoans 
would walk through the same Rayner Funeral Home to see Fred’ s body 
displayed. Many thousands more would take the tour through the bul-
let-riddled apartment where Fred and Mark Clark were slain by the 
Chicago police. One of the neighborhood residents described the police 
raid as “nuthin but a northern lynching.”
“Fred, Dee Dee, and I used to talk about Emmett, particularly when 
we went south,” Fred’ s brother Bill told me. “My mother had told us 
Emmett had a funny lisp like Fred had when he was younger. We heard 
that it was his lisp, which sometimes came out like a whistle, that had 
cost Emmett his life. 
Young Fred Hampton, an Early Activist
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   17 7/29/09   1:28:40 PM


--- PAGE 27 ---
1
Rendezvous with Death
“We pretty much stayed out of trouble down South,” Bill said. “We 
couldn’t help but notice the for coloreds signs in town over the nastiest 
drinking fountains and bathroom doors. But generally we kept away 
from public places.”  
Fred attended Proviso East High School in Maywood, a huge urban 
facility with twenty-four hundred students, about one fourth of whom 
were black. He loved sports and played on the football, basketball, and 
wrestling teams. On the basketball court Fred was known for being 
aggressive, and in pick-up games for his “mouth,” his trash talking. 
In his sophomore and junior years, Fred was reading black political 
authors, including Marcus Garvey, Malcolm X, and W . E. B. DuBois. Joan 
Elbert, a Maywood Village Board member, who was taking a course in 
African American history, asked Fred for advice for a bibliography for her 
term paper. “In spite of Fred’ s hectic schedule and his constant harass-
ment by the police, he took the time to come over to our house with a 
huge stack of books and materials,” she said. “Fred was an immensely 
well-read y
oung man who rose early and read at least two hours before 
he faced the day.” 
Fred tape-recorded and memorized the speeches of both Dr. King 
and Malcolm X. He visited Reverend Clay Evans’ s church on Drexel 
Avenue, where Jesse Jackson and Operation Breadbasket and later 
Operation PUSH were headquartered, and practiced these preachers’ 
techniques.  
Iber
ia and Francis had been churchgoing Baptists in Louisiana, and 
they joined the Mount Calvary Baptist Church in Morgan Park shortly 
after they arrived in Chicago. They also attended Reverend McNelty’ s 
Second Baptist Church in Melrose Park. Fred liked going to both 
churches but particularly admired Reverend McNelty’ s appeals to his 
congregation to fight racial injustice and inequality. As Fred became 
more politically active, Reverend McNelty was “right there with him,” 
according to Francis. He frequently asked Fred to address his congrega-
tion about issues in the black community. 
“Fred was not bashful and did not back down from anything,” 
Francis continued. “He could not tolerate injustice to anyone. Reverend 
McNelty admired my son.
” 
At Proviso East, Fred encountered inequalities that infuriated him. He 
recognized that the mostly white faculty and entirely white administra-
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   18 7/29/09   1:28:40 PM


--- PAGE 28 ---
1
tion did not adequately prepare the black students for the technological 
world around them. Black students doing poorly were either counseled 
out of school or flunked out. They had no remedial programs. He felt 
that many of the white teachers were tired of teaching and had stopped 
caring. Some used racial slurs when talking about black students. Fred 
spoke out, demanding more black teachers and black administrators at 
the school.  
Charles Anderson, a 
former Proviso East dean, credited Fred’ s cam-
paign to bring in more black teachers and administrators with his get-
ting a job. “Fred was the reason I was hired at Proviso East High School 
as dean in charge of attendance,” he said. “Until that time, I had been 
applying for six years and never had been given an interview.”
Fred also believed it was unfair that only white girls were nominated 
for homecoming queen. He organized a student walkout and led a boy-
cott to protest this policy. This resulted in Proviso East students electing 
their first black homecoming queen. “Some people in Maywood said a 
black homecoming queen was not worth missing school for,” Francis 
told me. “For Fred it was simply a matter of fairness.” 
The black and white students at Proviso East seldom mixed socially 
outside of classes. Because of his popularity and stature with both, Fred 
was selected to be head of the Inter-racial Council, which met when-
ever there was racial friction. “Fred’ s powerful and resonating voice 
called for calm and discussion,” Anderson told me. 
The year after Hampton graduated, the principal called Fred back 
to ease growing racial tensions. White, black, and Latino students par-
ticipated in a three-day workshop, along with school officials and com-
munity members. Fred listened to all the grievances and put together a 
joint plan to empower each of the student groups and give them a voice 
in how the school was run.
While in high school, Fred also worked regularly. During the school 
year, he was a stock boy at the Jewel grocery store in Maywood. When he 
was older but still in high school, he washed dishes at Dino’ s restaurant 
in Elmhurst. In the summers he found factory jobs at the American Can 
Company and twice at Corn Products. He saved and eventually used his 
earnings to pay his college tuition. 
Fred found jobs for some of the many unemployed black teenag-
ers in his neighborhood as well and successfully pushed the Village 
Young Fred Hampton, an Early Activist
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   19 7/29/09   1:28:41 PM


--- PAGE 29 ---
20
Rendezvous with Death
of Maywood to fund a summer job program. Of specific concern to 
Fred was the absence of a municipal swimming pool. Too far from 
Lake Michigan for trips to the beach, Maywood had no amenities to 
provide blacks with relief from Chicago’ s very hot and sticky summers. 
The white kids went to the pool at the private Veteran Industrial Park 
in neighboring Bellwood, but black kids weren’t allowed. Though Fred 
couldn’t swim, he and his friends carpooled black kids from Maywood 
to a Chicago Park District pool in the suburb of Lyons, several miles 
away. He began to talk to the kids and their parents about organizing for 
a public pool in Maywood. 
Fred’ s outspokenness earned the attention of Don Williams, the head 
of the West Suburban NAACP chapter. Williams was doing a study of 
civil rights grievances and identified the same issues Fred had: youth 
education, recreation, and jobs. There was no active unit of the youth 
branch of the NAACP in the western suburbs, so Williams asked Fred if 
he would organize one. He told Fred he could invite his friends to join 
the NAACP as well. Fred accepted. In 1965 he started the West Suburban 
Youth Chapter of the NAACP , which drew up a list of grievances. Williams 
presented the grievances to the NAACP Board, which vowed to support 
the youth chapter. With Fred as the chair, it grew to more than two hun-
dred members in less than a year. 
Under Fred’ s leadership, young black people in Maywood acceler-
ated the campaign for a public pool and ultimately a recreational cen-
ter. They were met with a mixed reaction by the Village Board. Some 
members didn’t want an integrated facility, which they feared would 
result in racial strife. Others didn’t want to spend the money. But two 
members, Reverend Tom and Doris Strieter, were extremely impressed 
with Fred’ s presentations and joined him in advocating for the pool. 
Reverend Strieter had Fred speak at the religious college where he 
taught; he later 
wrote, “Fred was a master orator. His rhetoric was stun-
ning as he confronted his white audience with a picture of America’ s 
unjust society that most had never imagined before.” 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   20 7/29/09   1:28:41 PM


--- PAGE 30 ---
21
Chicago, Becoming a Lawyer
I
n 1964, as sixteen-year-old Fred  was speaking out in Maywood, I 
began at the University of Chicago Law School. On the South Side of 
Chicago I was surrounded by a poor black community, one being par-
tially displaced by the university I was attending. With black militancy 
permeating the political atmosphere, amplified by the recent murder 
of Malcolm X, I could not ignore the blatant inequality between their 
lives and mine. 
At law school I met my classmate Bernardine Dohrn. Intense and 
persuasive and very attractive, she would become the leader of the 
Weathermen faction of Students for a Democratic Society. She wore 
short skirts and high boots and looked you in the eye. Bernardine was 
passionate and adept at expressing her left politics. She also had a lively 
sense of humor and an endearing laugh that drew you in and made you 
laugh, too. 
Bernardine chaired the Law Students Civil Rights Research Council 
(LSCRRC), which provided funds for law students to take summer jobs 
with civil rights lawyers in the South. In 1965 she matched me with the 
black law firm of Hollowell and Moore in Atlanta. I had to go to Chicago 
to take my first steps to confront segregation where I grew up. 
My parents knew both Donald Hollowell, a respected older lawyer in 
Atlanta, and Howard Moore, his younger, more fiery partner. Moore had 
defended many sit-in protesters and had represented civil rights leader 
Reverend C. B. King and his followers in Albany, Georgia, when they 
were beaten for marching and organizing sit-ins to integrate Albany’ s 
restaurants and stores. Most of the work I did was on Howard’ s paying 
civil cases to free him up so he could do his civil rights work. 
But one day Howard Moore called me into his office. “Jeff, I want 
you to bust Bonners Supper Club,” he said. “It’ s a small restaurant in 
4
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   21 7/29/09   1:28:41 PM


--- PAGE 31 ---
22
Rendezvous with Death
Crawfordsville that claims to be a private club. Why don’t you take a 
friend and see if they’ll wait on you?” 
If we could establish that Bonners served white nonmembers like us, 
we could prove that their “private club” designation was merely a cha-
rade and a way to avoid serving blacks.
I asked my friend Henry Bauer—who had gone to the Atlanta Cracker 
ballgames with Walter and me—to come along. The restaurant was in a 
white frame building a block from the central square. Below the words 
on the painted sign, 
bonners supper club, etched on a separate board, 
were the words private club, members only.
We entered the small, plain restaurant, little more than a diner. Its 
ten round wooden tables were half occupied, as were the bar stools 
along the side bar. 
“Howdy, come on in,” the manager said and led us to a table. “How’re 
y’all tonight?” We sat down, ordered chicken something, and waited 
nervously for the food to arrive. 
An eternity seemed to pass. We felt everyone was staring at us. 
Meanwhile, the town’ s uniformed sheriff, a middle-aged, husky man 
with a tin star on his tan shirt and a holstered gun on his hip, entered. 
He pulled up a chair at the table next to us and began shelling peas with 
a couple patrons already sitting there. Henry and I were silent after he 
sat down. 
“How y’all boys doin’?” he leaned over and asked us. 
I responded in my best and deepest Southern accent. “We’re faan.” 
“Where y’all coming from?” he inquired. 
“ Atlanta.” 
I was waiting for the next question, Why’d you come all the way out 
here to eat? It wasn’t long coming. 
“We got some friends we’re going to see in Savannah,” I said. That 
was about as far as I had worked our excuse for being there. Fortunately, 
I never had to explain why we weren’t on the most direct route to 
Savannah. The sheriff went back to shelling peas.
Finally our food arrived. I pushed it around the plate, eating enough 
to be polite, and asked the waitress for the check. “Can I have a receipt 
also?” She looked puzzled. 
“Won’t that do?” she said pointing at the torn slip from one of those 
anonymous green pads. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   22 7/29/09   1:28:42 PM


--- PAGE 32 ---
2
“It will if you sign your name, the name of the restaurant, and the 
date,” I responded. 
Again, she gave me a questioning look. After an awkward pause she 
wrote down the information and gave the receipt back to me. We were 
out of there before another pea could be shelled. 
The next morning I reported what happened to Howard Moore and 
gave him the receipt. He had me fill out an affidavit about getting served 
at the restaurant. Three months later, Howard wrote me that Bonners 
Supper Club “was no longer segregated.” 
At the University of Chicago, even in our nonradical law school, Vietnam 
was on everyone’ s mind. Through 1966 and 1967, the United States 
steadily increased its troop level and expanded the war. As casualties 
rose on both sides, students at campuses across the country increased 
the militancy of their protests. A few University of Chicago students 
were arrested for seeking to enter the back porch of provost Edward 
Levi’ s home. A right-wing law professor threw his radio and struck an 
antiwar protester at another demonstration. Although I was sympa-
thetic to the protesters’ objectives, I wasn’t ready to join in and accept 
the consequence—likely expulsion from school. 
At the law school, you were either against the war or you kept quiet. 
I don’t recall any student, not even my classmate John Ashcroft, who 
would become President George W . Bush’ s attorney general, vocally 
supporting the war. Like many of his reactionary brethren, he laid low 
in the 1960s. His time had not yet come. 
I was horrified and found no justification for the napalm and phos-
phorous bombs being 
dropped, or for the U.S. presence in Vietnam at 
all. I read about Ho Chi Minh and the decades of Vietnamese resistance 
to colonialism—against the French, then the Japanese, the French 
again, and finally the United States. As I followed the war more closely, 
I went from ignorance to skepticism to strong opposition. I eventually 
supported the National Liberation Front, the Vietcong. The Vietnamese 
wanted not just peace, but liberation. 
Our opposition to the war appeared to have little effect on Lyndon 
Johnson. By 1967 he had a half million American troops in Vietnam and 
was seeking more. He promised to call up reserve units, and I feared 
mine would be included. I had joined a military intelligence unit in 
Chicago, Becoming a Lawyer
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   23 7/29/09   1:28:42 PM


--- PAGE 33 ---
2
Rendezvous with Death
Chicago in 1966 because unassigned reservists were the first to be 
called to active duty. I could not see myself fighting, killing, or being 
killed in Vietnam. 
In March 1967, Dr. King came to Chicago. Together with Dr. Benjamin 
Spock, he led a five-thousand-person march through downtown to the 
Coliseum. Bernardine had urged me to come along on King’ s integra-
tion marches the year before, but I wasn’t willing to be pelted by rocks 
in the white ethnic neighborhoods where the marches went. This time I 
was in the Coliseum, when Dr. King spoke about Vietnam: 
Poverty, urban problems and social progress are generally ignored when 
the guns of war become a national obsession. . . . America is a great 
nation, but honesty impels me to admit that our power has often 
made us arrogant. We feel that our money can do anything. We arro-
gantly feel that we have some divine, messianic mission to police the 
whole world. . . . We arm Negro soldiers to kill on foreign battlefields, 
but offer little protection for their relatives from beatings and killings 
in our own South. I am disappointed with our failure to deal positively 
and forthrightly with the triple evils of racism, extreme materialism and 
militarism.
Dr. King went on: 
Those of us who love peace must organize as effectively as the war hawks. 
As they spread the propaganda of war, we must spread the propaganda of 
peace. We must combine the fervor of the civil rights movement with the 
equal fervor of the peace movement. We must demonstrate, teach, and 
preach, until the very foundations of our nation are shaken.
His speech brought together the black struggles for equality and lib-
eration and the antiwar movement. Both demanded action. Two years 
later, when I heard Fred Hampton speak with equal fervor, I wondered 
if he had been in that vast hall of the Coliseum, taking notes. 
The press, as well as the leadership of the NAACP and other civil 
rights organizations, condemned Dr. King for expressing his opposition 
to the Vietnam War. They thought it would jeopardize his civil rights 
agenda. A month after his address in Chicago, Dr. King responded to 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   24 7/29/09   1:28:42 PM


--- PAGE 34 ---
2
these criticisms at the Riverside Church in New York in his most famous 
antiwar speech. 
I do feel that the Negro people, because of their peculiar experiences 
with oppression through the use of physical violence, have a particu-
lar responsibility to not participate in inflicting oppressive violence on 
another people. This is not a privilege but an exceptional moral responsi-
bility. . . . There comes a time when one must have a stand that is neither 
safe, nor popular, but he must take it because it is right. This is where I 
find myself today.
Dr. King accepted the responsibility of the formerly oppressed not to 
be oppressors. 
That spring shortly after I heard Dr. King denounce the war, I met 
Mary Frank. She was twenty-three, a year younger than me, and lived in 
a studio apartment overlooking the botanical gardens and the grounds 
of the Lincoln Park Zoo. Mary had recently divorced a brilliant, alco-
holic English professor at Northwestern University. 
Mary was short, vibrant, and attractive, with an infectious smile, long 
dark hair, and big brown eyes. She was enthusiastic and warm, given to 
hyperbole, and had a great sense of humor. We “meshed.” Mary’ s fam-
ily, like mine, was upper-middle-class Jewish, although she possessed 
Hungarian passion in contrast to the German reserve I’ d inherited from 
my mother. 
Mary had been more precocious and aware than I was in my col-
lege years. She had attended Reed College and then Berkeley and par-
ticipated in the free speech movement. When we met in 1967, she was 
working for the Film Group, a small progressive filmmaking company. 
The next year they began making a documentary film about a young 
charismatic Black Panther leader: Fred Hampton. 
When I graduated from law school, I moved into Mary’ s studio apart-
ment, where we slept in a single bed for almost a year. I decided to stay 
in Chicago after I graduated law school and took a job with the Legal 
Assistance Foundation, representing indigent people in noncriminal 
cases. 
In the summer of 1967, I worked half time and studied for the bar 
exam. When I passed, I took the train to the State Capitol in Springfield 
Chicago, Becoming a Lawyer
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   25 7/29/09   1:28:43 PM


--- PAGE 35 ---
2
Rendezvous with Death
for the swearing-in ceremony. We were welcomed by one of the older 
members of the Illinois Supreme Court. I sat in the large crowd, with my 
lefty friends from law school and Legal Aid. I expected a bland speech. 
Instead, we were harangued by a Supreme Court justice, whose wel-
coming address was a warning:
As young men and women about to be admitted to the bar, I feel com-
pelled to warn you about the greatest danger to civil liberties and to our 
peace loving society; that which threatens the very core of our nation, 
that which can only lead to the destruction of harmony and to the prom-
ulgation of violence. I am talking about Black Power.
I sat forward, irritated. Given the escalating war in Vietnam, and the 
degrading conditions in which urban blacks lived, Black Power hardly 
seemed the threat we should be worrying about. The justice continued 
to expound on the duty each of us young lawyers had to condemn Black 
Power in whatever form it took. His reactionary rhetoric made Black 
Power more attractive to me. Still, I had no hint that my next ten years 
would be spent representing some of its strongest advocates. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   26 7/29/09   1:28:43 PM


--- PAGE 36 ---
2
Fred and the Rise of the Panthers
W
hen Fred Hampton turned eighteen in 1966, he refused to register 
for the draft. The year before, the United States had started bomb-
ing North Vietnam. The Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee 
(SNCC) led the campaign to register Southern blacks to vote and set up 
Freedom Schools in Mississippi. They opposed fighting and dying for 
democracy in Vietnam when registering to vote in Mississippi could be 
a capital offense for blacks. In 1966, Muhammad Ali refused to register 
for the draft, declaring, “Why should they ask me to put on a uniform 
and go ten thousand miles from home and drop bombs and bullets on 
brown people in Vietnam while so-called Negro people in Louisville are 
treated like dogs and denied simple human rights?” He also was well 
known for the more succinct version: “I ain’t got no quarrel with the 
Vietcong. No Vietcong ever called me Nigger.” 
Fred decided with many others, “Hell, no, we won’t go.” He was read-
ing Mao Tse-Tung, Che Guevara, and Ho Chi Minh and identified with 
the socialist struggles of the Third World. Soon he declared he was not 
just for “peace in Vietnam,” but “victory in Vietnam” for the Vietnamese. 
In 1966, Fred’ s opposition to the U.S. war effort was contrary to the views 
expressed by Dr. King’ s Southern Christian Leadership Conference 
and the NAACP , the two civil rights organizations with whom he was 
working. 
Fred’s evolution cannot be separated from the political events and 
movements around him. In 1964 riots broke out in Harlem. The fol-
lowing year a riot erupted in the Watts neighborhood in South Central 
Los Angeles in response to an incident of police harassment. In the 
five days of looting and setting fires that followed, thirty-six black 
people were killed, one thousand were injured, and four thousand 
were arrested. The Public Accommodations Act of 1964 and the Voting 
Rights Act of 1965 did nothing to change the conditions of blacks in 
5
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   27 7/29/09   1:28:43 PM


--- PAGE 37 ---
2
Rendezvous with Death
ghettos outside the South. There was a consensus among civil rights 
groups: they had to confront the poverty and discrimination facing 
urban blacks—problems caused more by institutional practices and 
economic inequality than Jim Crow laws. 
In 1966, James Meredith, the first black to integrate the University of 
Mississippi, organized a march from Memphis to Jackson, Mississippi. 
SNCC organizer Cleveland Sellers described what happened: 
Meredith is shot walking down the highway in Mississippi. Meredith was 
marching against fear in Mississippi. No better place for us to then . . . 
introduce Black Power. We had talked about “Freedom Now”; we had 
talked about anti-Vietnam; we had different issues along the way. So when 
we talked about Black Power it was in a political context of building politi-
cal institutions and social institutions in the black community, where we 
worked. I had no idea, and I’m being honest, that Black Power was going 
to take off the way it did. The only other incident that I can think of that 
took off like Black Power was the emergence of Malcolm X.
The response of the media and most whites to the term Black Power 
was swift, negative, and hysterical. Many saw Black Power as an attack 
on all white people. Blacks saw it differently. SNCC organizer Courtland 
Cox explained: “It delivered a positive message to them (the black com-
munity). It said ‘You are beautiful, you must be strong, you have a proud 
history, and there’ s strength in unity.’” The message of Black Power res-
onated with Fred Hampton. He saw Black Power not as a tool to attack 
whites but as a concept to bring blacks together and build their confi-
dence. Fred said that “blackness was what was in your heart, not the 
color of your skin.” But any symbol of black unity, including the modest 
Afro that Fred wore, threatened many whites. 
In 1966 high school senior Fred Hampton was working on his own 
version of black empowerment. He set up a black cultural center in 
Maywood with a black history section and continued his campaign to 
hire more black teachers and administrators at Proviso East. During this 
period two young Californians were similarly engaged. They demanded 
more black administrators and black history courses at Merritt College 
in Oakland, California. One was twenty-four-year-old Huey Newton; 
the other, thirty-year-old Bobby Seale. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   28 7/29/09   1:28:43 PM


--- PAGE 38 ---
2
Newton and Seale worked at the North Oakland Poverty Center. 
They went door to door asking residents what they needed and wanted. 
The information gleaned became the basis of the Ten Point Program 
when they formed the Black Panther Party for Self-Defense later that 
year. The program called for 1) freedom to determine the destiny of the 
black community, 2) full employment for blacks, 3) an end to capitalist 
exploitation of the black community, 4) decent housing, 5) informed 
education, 6) exemption for black men from military service, 7) an end 
to police brutality and murder, 8) freedom for black prisoners, 9) black 
juries for black criminal defendants, and 10) “Land, Bread, Housing, 
Education, Clothing, Justice and Peace.”
The Black Panthers derived their name from the Lowndes County 
Freedom Organization, organized by SNCC in Alabama, which formed 
the Black Panther Party as an alternative to the all-white Democratic 
Party. The Black Panthers in Oakland adopted Malcolm X’s later posi-
tion that while black culture and black history were beautiful and 
significant, not all whites were bad, and that whites could be allies 
as long as blacks controlled the main policies and the agenda for 
action. 
One of the first actions of the newly formed Black Panther Party 
in Oakland was for members to arm themselves, which was legal in 
California as long as the weapons were not concealed. They followed 
Oakland police cars around the ghetto to monitor their treatment of 
black citizens. This outraged the Oakland Police Department and 
gave the Panthers immediate visibility. Incidents of police brutality 
decreased substantially during their patrols, increasing acceptance of 
the Panthers by the black community. 
In Chicago Fred Hampton also spoke out against police brutality. As 
the leader of the NAACP Youth Chapter, he originally marched for raises 
of police salaries to get more professional police in Maywood. Later he 
pushed for changes to make the police more accountable and to give 
Maywood citizens the power to fire brutal cops. 
Dr. King and his organization, the Southern Christian Leadership 
Conference, accepted the need to confront the issues facing urban 
blacks. Like other civil rights leaders, Dr. King attempted to address the 
poverty and discrimination highlighted by the urban riots that by 1966 
had spread to Detroit, Michigan; Newark, New Jersey; and many other 
Fred and the Rise of the Panthers
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   29 7/29/09   1:28:44 PM


--- PAGE 39 ---
0
Rendezvous with Death
cities. That year he moved to Chicago to mount a campaign against 
racial discrimination in jobs, housing, and schools. 
Dr. King rented an apartment on the West Side and led marches 
protesting the exclusion of blacks from many white neighborhoods 
of the city and its southwestern suburbs. Marchers were met by rock-
throwing mobs with people dressed as Nazis. Dr. King was struck by a 
rock thrown in Marquette Park and later commented, “Swastikas blos-
somed in Chicago’ s parks like misbegotten weeds.” As Bill Hampton 
saw it, “In the South the motto is ‘you can live near me but don’t get too 
big.’ In the North it is ‘you can get big but don’t live near me’ .” 
In 1966, the summer Dr. King was marching and living in Chicago, 
Fred graduated high school and worked at Corn Products in a job pro-
gram designed for high school seniors and college students, earning 
money to go to college the next year. At seventeen he was supporting 
himself. One of the people Fred impressed most was Bill Taylor, the 
president of the Oil, Chemical, and Atomic Workers Union at the Corn 
Products plant. He describes Fred as “very dynamic, quick witted, and 
much less focused on himself than on the world around him. He was 
always trying to bring black people together.” He remembers Fred say-
ing, “If you walk through life and don’t help anybody, you haven’t had 
much of a life.” 
Bill Taylor walked with Fred in several of Dr. King’ s marches. “Fred 
was enthusiastic for awhile,” Taylor said, “but in Jefferson Park, a heck-
ler spit in the face of a woman with us. After that Fred told Reverend 
King he couldn’t keep marching for nonviolence in the face of the vio-
lent mobs around them.” Fred was not alone. At one rally young blacks 
booed Dr. King for his nonviolent response to the rock-throwing whites. 
When Dr. King threatened to march through Cicero, then considered 
the most racist neighborhood in Chicago, Mayor Richard J. Daley inter-
vened. Dr. King called off the march in exchange for an agreement by 
the mayor and the Chicago Association of Realtors to promote fair hous-
ing practices. Some people in SNCC, the Congress of Racial Equality 
(CORE), and local organizations saw the agreement as a sellout. They 
continued with the march. 
Dr. King did not achieve the success in Chicago that he had in 
Alabama. His nonviolent tactics and religious outlook did not attract 
young blacks in urban areas. Meanwhile, his marches stirred up the 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   30 7/29/09   1:28:44 PM


--- PAGE 40 ---
1
whites. I watched on TV as news cameras showed the angry faces and 
Nazi signs of the white mobs who came out to jeer and attack Dr. King’ s 
marchers. Mayor Daley and the Democratic Party were beholden to 
those Irish, Italian, and Eastern European whites to maintain control 
of city hall.
After Dr. King failed to make major changes in Chicago, Fred tended 
more toward Malcolm X’ s message of self-defense. Still Fred continued 
to speak highly of Dr. King: “Every time I speak in church, I always try 
to say something, you know, about Martin Luther King. I have a lot of 
respect for Martin Luther King. I think he was one of the greatest ora-
tors that the country ever produced.” 
Fred’ s attention, like many other young blacks, was drawn to an event 
on the West Coast. In May 1967, thirty Oakland Panthers, twenty-four 
men and six women, went to the California legislature in Sacramento 
carrying rifles to dramatize their right of self-defense, as well as to pro-
test pending legislation that would overturn the law allowing them to 
legally carry unconcealed weapons. 
Even though Bobby Seale and many of the other Panthers ended up 
with six-month sentences for “conspiracy to disturb the peace,” and the 
legislation passed, the photos and TV images of the armed Panthers in 
leather jackets and black berets at the capitol steps was a shot heard 
‘round the world. The media responded with horror at blacks with guns 
invading the legislature. Most whites felt threatened by the images they 
saw. Many young blacks had a different response and supported the 
action. Panther chapters started up in Los Angeles, Atlanta, New York, 
and Detroit. 
Black militancy was on the rise in Chicago as well. In the fall of 1967, 
Fred and Bill Ivory, a respected dentist and NAACP member, addressed 
a Maywood rally of over a hundred young people. Fred urged his lis-
teners to come to the Maywood Village Board meeting the next night 
to press their demands for a public swimming pool and recreational 
center. 
The following evening a large crowd, mostly young blacks, went to 
the Maywood Village Board meeting. Not all were allowed inside. Fred 
urged the board to find a larger space or let those outside come in, even if 
they had to stand. The Maywood police panicked, tear-gassing the peo-
ple who had not been let in. Angered by the police reaction, the young 
Fred and the Rise of the Panthers
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   31 7/29/09   1:28:44 PM


--- PAGE 41 ---
2
Rendezvous with Death
people left the village hall, and ran down Fifth Avenue, Maywood’ s main 
street. They broke store windows and threatened residents, including 
Methodist minister Ron Graham and his wife. A guest at their home was 
punched by one of the teenagers running from the police. 
Seeking a scapegoat, the Maywood police arrested and charged Fred 
and Bill Ivory with “mob action” because of their speeches the night 
before, even though they were inside the village hall when the violence 
took place. Fred stayed in jail for three days before he could post the five 
hundred dollar bail. 
There was disagreement over the tactics of the marches and rallies 
led by Fred Hampton and the NAACP Youth Chapter. Some NAACP 
members thought they were too confrontational. The police felt partic-
ularly threatened by the sight of large numbers of black youth coming 
to the village board meetings making demands. While the adult NAACP 
chapter did not withdraw its support for the youth chapter’ s activities, 
neither did it publicly endorse their tactics. As Fred’ s friend and fel-
low activist Marvin Carter put it, “They were sort of behind us but not 
exactly with us.” 
Following the village board meeting, Fred was targeted by the 
Maywood police and arrested on several occasions for technical traffic 
violations. The harassment became so great that Fred stopped driving. 
The local police were not the only law enforcement agency watching 
Fred Hampton. After his arrest for mob action, he was put on the FBI’ s 
Key Agitator Index, a list of activists that FBI director J. Edgar Hoover 
ordered FBI agents to monitor closely. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   32 7/29/09   1:28:45 PM


--- PAGE 42 ---

Convergence
I
n the fall of 1967,  Army Reserve units like mine were being activated 
everyday. If I refused to go, it would be desertion, not merely draft 
dodging. But fighting for the United States in Vietnam went against 
everything I had come to believe. When I realized this, the decision 
became easy. I woke up one morning and said to Mary, “I’m not gonna 
go, no matter what. I won’t kill and I won’t be killed in Vietnam and I’ll 
take the consequences.” The decision behind me, I felt at ease. I never 
had to decide whether to leave the country or assume a public stance 
and have a political trial. My unit was never called to active duty. 
That winter Mary’ s mother suggested, since we were already living 
together, we should get married. Her sister had just died in a scuba div-
ing accident and her family needed something to give them joy. Marriage 
seemed a rather natural next step, not one I pondered over. Our fami-
lies loved it, particularly my dad, who shared with Mary’ s father a great 
sense of humor and both men enjoyed telling jokes. We had a small 
wedding at her house and resumed life together in a Lincoln Park apart-
ment, with some new furniture, dishes, and a queen-size bed. Neither 
of us dwelt much on ceremony in 1968. 
A month later, on April 4, I sat behind a desk on the second floor of the 
Robert Taylor Homes project on the South Side of Chicago. Constructed 
in the 1950s, Robert Taylor Homes housed over forty thousand African 
Americans in rows of twenty-five-story, concrete and cinder block 
buildings extending ten blocks north to south on the east side of the 
Dan Ryan Expressway. 
There were no parks or even trees where we worked, only boarded-
up businesses and cement playgrounds strewn with shattered glass and 
broken equipment. The U.S. Census Bureau had identified the Robert 
Taylor Homes area as both being the most densely populated and hav-
ing the lowest per capita income of any community in the country. 
6
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   33 7/29/09   1:28:45 PM


--- PAGE 43 ---

Rendezvous with Death
I handled landlord/tenant, consumer fraud, and welfare cases, and 
became particularly skillful at preventing or delaying evictions. I could 
guarantee my clients several months of extensions before being thrown 
out on the streets, but I had no way to address the underlying prob-
lem of too little money to pay rent and other necessities. In spite of the 
poverty, many families managed to decorate their homes as refuges of 
sanity and order in the midst of the gangs, graffiti, violence, and squa-
lor all around them. Inside, many apartments were furnished with 
comfortable, sometimes even plush, furniture. Pictures of nature, reli-
gious shrines, and graduation photos adorned every available wall and 
countertop, symbols of love and hope amidst despair. Photographs of 
President Kennedy and Dr. King adorned many mantels. 
That morning, Ruth, our paralegal, rushed into my office crying. 
“I just heard on the radio that Martin Luther King was shot dead in 
Memphis,” she said. 
My stomach sank. I flashed on Dr. King speaking at the Coliseum a 
year earlier. 
“What happened?” 
Ruth’ s voice quivered between sobs. She had been a community orga-
nizer in Chicago for years and marched with Dr. King two years earlier. 
“He was shot on a motel balcony. The radio said it was a sniper.” 
I followed her into her office to hear more on the radio. The announcer 
reported that Dr. King was standing with SCLC friends when he was 
shot. He was already dead when he arrived at the hospital. 
When I returned to my office, I was shaken, disoriented. Who really 
killed him? Was it the government ? I thought of all those apartments 
with his picture over the mantel, many of them next to President 
Kennedy. Now they both had been assassinated, and Malcolm too. Who’s 
left for black people to believe in?  The eviction notices and installment 
sales contracts on my desk became a blur. I looked out the window at 
the vast expanse of project buildings with their concrete balconies bor-
dered by chain-link fences and wondered what the reaction would be. I 
didn’t have to wait long. We soon heard reports that African Americans 
were rebelling on the West Side. They were in the streets, breaking win-
dows, looting, and setting fires. Early in the afternoon, Ruth walked in 
and told Layton Olson, the other attorney in the office, and me rather 
firmly, “I think you should leave Robert Taylor Homes. You all might 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   34 7/29/09   1:28:45 PM


--- PAGE 44 ---

not be safe here, you know what I mean?” We were the only whites in 
the projects. 
“Yeah, you’re right,” I said. Although I didn’t think our office had 
made enemies, I knew that we were unknown to 99 percent of the peo-
ple in the area. We heeded Ruth’ s advice and walked briskly to the park-
ing lot, leaving my files open on my desk and expecting to come back 
the next morning. Although the South Side remained calm, that office 
never reopened! 
The rebellion on the West Side continued through the night. Mayor 
Daley issued orders to the police to “shoot to kill rioters, shoot to maim 
looters.” Like the rest of the white people in Chicago, I was hunkered 
down at home watching the TV coverage of looting and fires and hun-
dreds of spectators. African American teenagers were being arrested 
and beaten en masse. The broadcasts were frequently interrupted with 
warnings that it was not safe to go near the rioting—for most white peo-
ple that meant all black neighborhoods. With news accounts of mount-
ing arrests and high bails, I couldn’t stop pacing. 
“It looks like they’re rounding up every black person on the West 
Side,” I said to Mary, after an eyewitness camera showed the police 
arresting a group of young African Americans standing a block away 
from a burning store. 
“Yeah, King is dead, and the police are going crazy,” Mary said 
angrily. 
“I can’t just sit here!” I answered. “I’m going to court. Fuck it. 
Somebody has to represent those kids.” 
Her anger turned to apprehension. 
“Don’t worry, they’re not gonna shoot me,” I said, fingering the lapel 
of the suit I had never taken off. 
It was after nine o’clock when I drove downtown and parked near 
police headquarters, a thirteen-story concrete edifice that was also 
used as the pretrial detention center and bond court. I had to flash my 
lawyer card to get on the elevator to bond court on the eighth floor. The 
court was in recess when I arrived. I showed my ID to the bailiff to be 
admitted to the bullpen area behind the courtroom. 
The metallic smell of nervous sweat smacked me in the face. The 
barred section consisted of a bare room, with cracked linoleum and no 
chairs and a partially hidden toilet. Wrappers from bologna sandwiches 
Convergence
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   35 7/29/09   1:28:46 PM


--- PAGE 45 ---

Rendezvous with Death
littered the area and I yelled above the din of the prisoners’ voices, “I’m 
a lawyer here to try to get your bond reduced. Come over here if you 
want help.” After a pause, a line formed on the other side of the bars. I 
began to interview the young men, resting my legal pad on my knee as 
I took down their personal information.
The men were in their late teens to midtwenties; some attended 
school and some worked. Most lived with their families and few had 
criminal records. From the charges against them, mob action and dis-
orderly conduct, I determined almost all were arrested for being in the 
streets rather than any specific unlawful act. My legal pad was almost 
full when I saw another lawyer come into the bullpen, a tall, spectacled, 
thirtyish Ichabod Crane, his thin hair going in all directions. “I’m Dennis 
Cunningham,” he said, shaking my hand. Because of his disheveled 
appearance, including a well-worn tweed sport coat with reinforced 
elbows, I assumed he was a hustler lawyer, someone who hung out in 
the criminal courts to drum up business. 
“Judge Bailey has been told to keep these guys locked up until the 
riots subside,” he explained. “We’ll be lucky to get a few out. Those with 
no backgrounds who can show they have a job or school to go to tomor-
row are our best shot.” We worked for many hours until well after mid-
night interviewing the arrestees and presenting what facts we could. 
“C’mon, Judge,” Dennis would urge in his informal style. “It’ s clear 
the police don’t have anything on this defendant except he was black 
and in the streets.” In a few cases the judge allowed a reasonable bond 
(one hundred dollars cash) or recognizance bond (no money required). 
But Dennis was right. In the majority of cases, Judge Bailey, whom I 
came to know and dislike as an extremely prosecution-oriented judge, 
set bonds requiring more than the defendant’ s family could make. 
These defendants would remain in custody. 
As for my initial assessment of Dennis, I was dead wrong. Dennis 
had grown up in Winnetka, an affluent suburb of Chicago. He attended 
New Trier Township High School and went to the University of Chicago 
as an undergraduate in their program for prodigies. He then enrolled 
at Loyola Law School with the purpose of representing the civil rights 
movement. After he graduated, four years earlier than me, Dennis 
began representing movement protesters. He met his wife Mona Mellis 
at Chicago’ s Second City, where she was part of the improvisational cast 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   36 7/29/09   1:28:46 PM


--- PAGE 46 ---

and he was a bartender and part-time actor. That April night I began a 
friendship and political relationship with Dennis that continues to this 
day. It led to my joining the People’ s Law Office. 
Six months after our night at bond court, Howard Alk, the film 
editor at The Film Group where Mary worked, introduced Dennis 
Cunningham to Fred Hampton. “This is the guy we are making the doc-
umentary about,” Alk said. “ And Fred, this is an attorney who wants to 
be a people’ s lawyer.” 
“That’ s what I have always wanted to be,” said Fred. After a brief con-
versation, Fred asked Dennis, “What’ s your phone number? I may need 
you.” 
Over two months later, in February 1969, Dennis got a call from a 
judge in Maywood. “Where are you, Attorney Cunningham? Your client 
is here. We’re ready to start his trial.” 
Dennis didn’t know he had any clients in Maywood. “Can I speak to 
him, Judge?” Dennis stalled. 
“No,” the judge said. “But since it’ s late already, I’ll give you until 
tomorrow morning to be ready to start Fred Hampton’ s trial.” 
Dennis hesitated, but he did not disclose his surprise. “I’ll be there.” 
I don’t know many lawyers who would have accepted the challenge 
of going to trial the next day, never having interviewed his client. Dennis 
didn’t want to give up the opportunity to represent the young leader. 
When Dennis showed up the next morning, he was more than a little 
nervous—for good reason. He’ d never tried a criminal jury case. He had 
to look at the file to learn the charge was mob action and that it was about 
some street violence in Maywood. Outside the courtroom in the hall-
way, Fred told Dennis, “I want the jury to know exactly why we marched 
to the village board. I wasn’t there when the skirmishes happened, but I 
know the violence was provoked by the police using tear gas.” 
“I hear you,” Dennis said, “and so will the jury.” 
Despite his inexperience, Dennis’ s political approach and folksy style 
were well suited to the task. The attorney representing Bill Ivory, Fred’ s 
codefendant, was a smart and savvy African American lawyer named 
Jim Montgomery. After serving as an assistant U.S. attorney, Jim was 
rapidly becoming one of the top criminal lawyers in Chicago. 
Dennis and Montgomery had to settle for a white jury because pros-
ecutors at that time were allowed to use their peremptory challenges to 
Convergence
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   37 7/29/09   1:28:46 PM


--- PAGE 47 ---

Rendezvous with Death
strike black people without any justification. After the police testified 
about the violence, Dennis called Fred Hampton to the witness stand. 
Montgomery later wrote: “When Fred Hampton took the stand and 
with total frank, honest, confrontational rhetoric denied any criminal 
activity and conceded what he was doing, you could see the faces of the 
jurors change.”
In his closing argument Dennis echoed Fred’ s testimony that he was 
targeted for organizing a march and not for any criminal conduct. 
“Not guilty,” was the jury’ s verdict. Afterward, Fred took Dennis aside 
and gave him the ultimate compliment: “That’ s the way I would have 
done it.” Fred was still saying he wanted to be “a lawyer for the people,” 
but he had become the leader of the Chicago Panthers and prefaced his 
stated aspiration with “if I had time.” 
By 1969 it seemed like none of us had time. We were heading for the rap-
ids, not knowing what was ahead. In March 1968, Stokely Carmichael 
and H. Rap Brown came to Chicago and shortly thereafter opened a 
SNCC office on the South Side on Forty-Third Street. Fred went to the 
office and invited Stokely to speak in Maywood. A few weeks later Fred 
introduced him at a large Maywood rally. Fred’ s introduction was so 
impressive that Bobby Rush and Bob Brown, the two leaders of Chicago’ s 
SNCC Chapter, came up to Fred afterward and introduced themselves. 
“I was immediately impressed with Fred’ s ability to speak powerfully 
and engage and energize the young audience,” U.S. congressman Bobby 
Rush told me over breakfast, thirty-five years later. “He was physically 
imposing with a powerful personality and deep guttural laugh. I made 
up my mind I wanted to work with Fred. He was such a magnetic young 
man.” Rush still spoke Fred’ s name with reverence. “ After the rally, I 
introduced myself to Fred and asked him if he was part of any organiza-
tion. He said he was the head of the youth chapter of the NAACP .” 
Later that year Bobby Rush went to Oakland, where he met with the 
Panther Central Committee. Stokely and Rap Brown had temporar-
ily joined the Panthers, so there was no conflict between the Panthers 
and SNCC. Rush returned with a mandate to form a Panther chapter 
in Chicago. The first person he recruited was Fred Hampton, and they 
opened the Panther office in November 1968. In four years Fred had 
evolved from organizing for black homecoming queens to becoming 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   38 7/29/09   1:28:47 PM


--- PAGE 48 ---

chairman of the Illinois chapter of the Black Panthers. By 1968 he was 
advocating revolution. 
Six months later, the Chicago chapter temporarily stopped tak-
ing new members so they could integrate all those who had joined. 
The Breakfast for Children Program, providing free hot breakfasts for 
kids before school, had expanded beyond its first site, the Better Boys 
Foundation, to several other locations. Securing the food from mer-
chants, getting it prepared and delivered to the kitchens, supervising 
the kids eating before school, and cleaning up afterward was major 
work for many of the Panther cadre. The rest of the day was often spent 
selling Panther newspapers, interviewing people and filling out ques-
tionnaires on their needs and priorities, getting petitions for commu-
nity control of police signed, attending political education classes, and 
maintaining the office. 
Early on, women in the party, including Joan McCarty, Ann Campbell, 
Barbara Sankey, Joan Gray, Stephanie Fisher, Beverlina Powell, and Leta 
Harrison, took the lead and did the majority of preparation for the break-
fast program. Panther member Bradley Greene said the women were 
the hardest and most effective workers in all the Panther programs. 
One Panther woman described being in the Panther office when the 
phone rang. The person who answered it walked over to Fred and said, 
“The brothers are here from the West Coast and they are staying at a 
hotel downtown. They want you to send some Panther sisters down 
there.” 
Fred responded quickly and curtly, “You can tell them Panther 
women in Chicago are working on Panther programs, not as whores for 
Panther leaders.” 
“Fred was twenty years old,” the Panther sister insisted. “It took a lot 
of courage for him to stand up to the West Coast guys.” 
A lot has been written about sexism and the role women held in 1960s 
and 1970s activist groups. Stokely Carmichael’ s alleged statement, “The 
only position for women in SNCC is prone” has been widely quoted. It 
no doubt expressed some men’ s sentiments. But women I have inter-
viewed from the Chicago Panther chapter said this was not the prevail-
ing attitude in Chicago, nor was it Fred Hampton’ s. 
“There were some guys always trying to come on to women, but they 
didn’t do this when Fred was around,” one former woman Panther told 
Convergence
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   39 7/29/09   1:28:47 PM


--- PAGE 49 ---
0
Rendezvous with Death
me. Another said, “It wasn’t perfect, and we could have done more to 
elevate women, but feminism was just coming to the fore. We weren’t 
immune from the sexism in the culture.” Yvonne King said that Fred 
helped her and other women practice their elocution skills so they 
could speak publicly for the Party. Women were given leadership posi-
tions on both the Chicago and Illinois Central Committees. 
Fred went from site to site working at the breakfast programs and talk-
ing to the kids and their parents about what the Black Panther Party was 
trying to do for the community. Kids were taught revolutionary songs. 
Parents were asked to participate in the programs, although it was not 
a requirement for their kids to get fed. In one of his later speeches, Fred 
said: 
The pigs say, “Well the Breakfast for Children Program is a socialistic pro-
gram, it’ s a communistic program.” And the women say, “I don’t know 
if I like communism. I don’t know if I like socialism. But I know that the 
Breakfast for Children Program feeds my kids.” A lot of people think the 
Breakfast for Children Program is charity. But what does it do? It takes the 
people from a stage to another stage. Any program that’ s revolutionary is 
an advancing program. Revolution is change. Honey, if you just keep on 
changing, before you know it—in fact, you don’t have to know what it is—
they’re endorsing it, they’re participating in it, and supporting socialism.”
Doc Satchel, who started the Panther Health Clinic in Chicago, put 
it another way: 
The Panthers were an armed propaganda unit that raised the contradic-
tions, set the example and provided the vehicle that the people could ride 
to revolution. We do not say the Black Panther Party will be overthrowing 
the government; we heighten the contradictions so the people can decide 
if they want to change the government.
Fred urged Panther members to sell increasing numbers of the Black 
Panther newspaper throughout Chicago. The paper was printed weekly 
on the West Coast and delivered to most major cities, where Panther 
members and supporters sold it on street corners. Party members were 
given a sales quota. The paper contained articles about Panther activi-
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   40 7/29/09   1:28:47 PM


--- PAGE 50 ---
1
ties throughout the country, with a heavy emphasis on the Oakland 
Chapter, as well as explanations of the Ten Point Program, articles on 
national liberation struggles, and some straight-up ideological presen-
tations and cartoons satirizing government figures with police sporting 
pig snouts.
By and large the Panthers advanced a class analysis, with their party 
representing the vanguard of the proletariat. In one speech that summer, 
Fred responded to the criticism of the nationalists who had refused to 
participate with the Panthers, accusing them of being “engrossed with 
oppressor country radicals, or white people, or honkies.” Fred called 
these critics “dashiki nationalists.” 
We got a lot of answers for those people. First of all, we say primarily that 
the priority of this struggle is class. That Marx and Lenin and Che Guevara 
and Mao Tse-Tung, and anybody else who ever said or knew or practiced 
anything about revolution, always said that a revolution is a class strug-
gle. It was one class—the oppressed—versus those other classes—the 
oppressor. And it’ s got to be a universal fact. Those who don’t admit to 
that are those who don’t want to get involved in a revolution, because 
they know as long as they’re dealing with a race thing, they’ll never be 
involved in a revolution.
Fred frequently spoke about how nationalism could not replace edu-
cation: “You can’t build a revolution with no education. Jomo Kenyatta 
did this in Africa and because the people were not educated he became 
as much an oppressor as the people he overthrew. Look at Papa Doc 
Duvalier in Haiti. He got everyone to hate whites and he turned into the 
dictator himself. How will people end up without education?” 
As for working with whites, Huey Newton relied on white San 
Francisco attorney Charles Garry when he was charged with killing a 
police officer because, as he pointed out, Garry was successful in the 
white judicial system and had never lost a capital case. In Chicago, Fred 
and the Panthers sought out the services of white progressive lawyers. 
Four of us responded by creating an independent law collective that 
could represent them. 
Bradley Greene said the Panthers wanted a twenty-four-hour-a-day 
commitment. “It was hard for people like me to hold a regular job. Many 
Convergence
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   41 7/29/09   1:28:48 PM


--- PAGE 51 ---
2
Rendezvous with Death
of the new Panther recruits were college and high school students. They 
often ended up in Panther cribs where the party paid the rent.” Bradley 
went on, “When couples formed in these apartments, they frequently 
moved out and got jobs. They could no longer do as much work for the 
Panthers and it led to some of them leaving the party.” 
While the Panthers’ vision of how the revolutionary struggle would 
actually come about was not always clearly articulated or understood, 
at least by me, the work of the programs and organizing was always 
present. They provided a reality check and a complement to the revo-
lutionary rhetoric. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   42 7/29/09   1:28:48 PM


--- PAGE 52 ---

Struggle in the Streets—         
PLO Begins
P
anther members in Chicago went door-to-door in many black com-
munities to find out what peoples’ complaints and priorities were 
and to get signatures on petitions for community control of the police. 
These neighborhood activities sometimes put them in conflict with 
Chicago street gangs, who considered many areas their exclusive terri-
tories. The gangs had become home for many ghetto youth. They were 
armed and organized. Sometimes they exercised their power to benefit 
the community. The Black P . Stone Nation, successor to the Blackstone 
Rangers, carried out a “no-vote” campaign on the South Side to take 
votes away from the Democratic machine in favor of more progressive 
and community-oriented candidates. In 1969 members of the Black 
Disciples, Chicago’ s second-largest street gang, made up the majority 
of demonstrators who picketed and actually halted Chicago construc-
tion projects in the Loop, Chicago’ s business center, until they won 
positions for African Americans in the building trades unions, which 
had been a bastion of discrimination.
Unfortunately, gang leaders were often focused on controlling the 
proceeds from the most thriving business in the ghetto, the drug trade. 
Gang members were encouraged and sometimes required by their lead-
ers to sell drugs and keep rivals groups out of their territory. Everyone 
assumed the Chicago police were getting their cut. 
In 1969, Fred met and worked out a treaty with David Barksdale, 
the leader of the Black Disciples. The agreement allowed the Panthers 
to organize and recruit in areas controlled by the Disciples. Fred had 
been less successful when he met with the leadership of the Blackstone 
Rangers. One face-to-face meeting took place at the Rangers head-
quarters in Chicago’ s Woodlawn neighborhood. Fred and several other 
armed Panthers went to the meeting but were quickly surrounded by 
7
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   43 7/29/09   1:28:48 PM


--- PAGE 53 ---

Rendezvous with Death
many better-armed Rangers including Jeff Fort, their leader, and other 
representatives of the Main 21, the Rangers’ governing body. 
Fred started rapping, making it clear that the Panthers were not try-
ing to control turf. He wanted the Rangers to join in Panther efforts to 
stop police brutality, as well as join the Party if they desired. At least 
he wanted an agreement that Panthers could sell their paper without 
harassment. 
Fort told Fred he could be rich if he and the Panthers joined the 
Rangers’ drug operation. Fred refused. Fred did not use drugs and he 
and Panther policy did not allow Panther members to use them. Drugs 
and alcohol were prohibited in the Panther office. The meeting ended 
with Fort acknowledging that the Panthers were not a rival gang but 
still refusing to permit them to operate in Ranger territory. The meeting 
lessened tensions only slightly. 
Nevertheless, Fred’ s efforts to work with and organize gang members 
caused fear throughout the police and FBI. After the meeting at Ranger 
headquarters, Chicago police, following an FBI tip, arrested a carload of 
armed Panthers driving away. This resulted in criminal charges against 
the Panthers and set off speculation that the Rangers had snitched on 
them. Years later we would learn that an FBI informant in the Panthers 
had tipped off his FBI control, who then notified the police. 
On January 24, 1969, the Chicago police arrested Fred following an 
FBI tip that he was appearing on a local TV station. In front of the live 
cameras he was led away on an old traffic warrant. Later, Fred told peo-
ple that when he got to the police car, he noticed he hadn’t been cuffed. 
When placed in the back seat he saw there was a gun resting there. “I 
spotted a set-up,” he said. “I put my wrists outside the car and started 
screaming, ‘There’ s a gun in the car that somebody left.’” His quick 
thinking worked. That day he avoided police bullets. 
Fred and the Panthers sought alliances with other groups in Chicago. 
One of them was the Young Lords Organization (YLO), which had started 
as a Puerto Rican street gang. In the late 1960s, under the leadership of 
Cha-Cha Jimenez, they focused on stopping Chicago’ s Department of 
Urban Renewal and other city agencies from forcing poor and working-
class people, many of whom were Puerto Rican, out of the Lincoln Park 
neighborhood. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   44 7/29/09   1:28:49 PM


--- PAGE 54 ---

In 1969 the YLO took over Reverend Bruce Johnson’ s church on 
Armitage Avenue, and renamed it the People’ s Church. With Reverend 
Johnson’ s support, the church became the headquarters for the Lincoln 
Park Poor People’ s Coalition, which included black, white, and Mexican 
groups who were fighting to keep Lincoln Park from being gentrified. 
Following the Panther example, the YLO started a Breakfast for Children 
Program as well as a health clinic in the church. The police were con-
stantly harassing and arresting Cha-Cha for organizing the Puerto 
Rican community against the city’ s gentrification plan. For a period in 
1969, Dennis went to court regularly to get him released on bond. The 
Panthers, Young Lords, and Young Patriots, an organization of white 
Southern youth from Uptown, formed their own Rainbow Coalition, 
a precursor to Jesse Jackson’ s, to protest police brutality and abuse in 
Chicago and support the Panther demand for community control of 
police. 
On April 4, 1969, Manuel Ramos, a Puerto Rican teenager and the 
minister of defense of the YLO, was shot and killed by an off-duty 
Chicago police officer at a Young Lords party. Another Young Lord was 
shot and critically wounded. The police officer’ s version, that Ramos 
had attacked him, did not fit with other witness accounts or with the 
location and direction of the bullets fired into Ramos’ s body. 
The Rainbow Coalition organized a march on May 3 to protest 
Ramos’ s killing and demand a new and independent investigation. The 
police had declared Ramos’ s death “justifiable homicide,” the standard 
ruling in police shooting cases. In the thirty-five years I practiced civil 
rights law in Chicago, I don’t recall the police ever finding any on-duty 
police killing anything but “justifiable.” 
I was growing weary of working at the Legal Assistance Foundation 
and was drawn more and more to helping organizations such as the 
Young Lords and the Panthers. And so I was present on that bright and 
windy spring day in 1969 at People’ s Park, marching with the Manuel 
Ramos family. We intended to present a letter to the police demand-
ing a thorough investigation of Ramos’ death. In addition to the coali-
tion, the marchers included SDS members and other white leftists. Our 
march was scheduled to go from Lincoln Park south to the Eighteenth 
District Police Station on Chicago Avenue. 
Struggle in the Streets—PLO Begins
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   45 7/29/09   1:28:49 PM


--- PAGE 55 ---

Rendezvous with Death
Dennis and I were among the nearly one thousand protesters who 
assembled around noon at the plot of vacant land at Halsted and 
Armitage that the Young Lords had named People’ s Park. The plot was 
across the street from where we would open our law collective four 
months later. We left the park with the Young Lords, in their brown 
berets with red stars on the front, leading the procession. The march 
took us through the all-black Cabrini-Green housing project, controlled 
by the Cobra Stones, part of the Black P . Stone Nation.
As we left the projects heading south, our procession picked up a 
tail: about one hundred Cobra Stones with red caps turned sideways. 
Some were holding car radio antennas as weapons and taunting us 
from behind. When we turned left on Chicago Avenue and arrived at 
the Eighteenth District Police Station, a hundred cops in formation and 
full riot gear started marching toward us from the other side. They wore 
helmets with plastic face guards and carried batons. The Cobra Stones 
were still approaching us from behind, the gap closing quickly. We were 
trapped. 
I was standing near the Ramos family when I heard, “Join arms 
together! Protect our march!” I felt paralyzed. My legal training had 
not taught me how to handle this situation. I considered fleeing but 
there were no safe havens for legal observers that day. As I deliberated, I 
saw my friend Ted Stein, another lawyer, unhesitatingly join arms with 
those on both sides of him. I got a sense of what solidarity means. Well, 
Jeff, I thought,  this is it. There ain’t no ducking today. There’s only one 
honorable thing to do.  I locked arms with the people on my right and 
left, ready to face whatever came. As we stood our ground waiting for 
the confrontation, Hilda Ignatin, a community organizer working with 
the Young Lords, left our line and approached the Cobra Stones. They 
stopped within a few feet of us. 
“We’re marching to protest a police killing,” she said. “Why don’t you 
join us?” They looked surprised and hesitated. Their leaders conferred. 
“The police told us the Young Lords were helping the Panthers take 
over our Projects,” one of them said. 
“That’ s not true,” Hilda replied. “Our issue is a police killing right 
here in the Eighteenth District. The same police who brutalize you.” 
The Cobra Stones conferred again. I watched intently. It looked like 
they were arguing. Then one of them stepped out front. “OK, we’ll join 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   46 7/29/09   1:28:49 PM


--- PAGE 56 ---

you,” he said. I relaxed a bit. They stood with us, even joined our chants 
for justice for the Ramos family. Their presence temporarily stopped 
the cops coming from the east. Dennis and the Ramos family presented 
their letter demanding a new investigation to the district commander, 
who came out to take it, then quickly vanished inside. It was a rare 
moment when the left and black street gangs connected.
All of us left together. We started walking, but when we turned north 
on LaSalle Street, it became a trot, and then a run. The crowd smashed 
store windows with rocks and bottles. I had never been in a group that 
was breaking windows. My level of alarm rose with each burst of shat-
tering glass. It was electric. I didn’t break any windows, but I didn’t run 
away. 
The year 1969 was the era of “Street Fightin’ Man.” The Rolling 
Stones song was often played as a warm-up for militant demonstra-
tions. Excesses became the norm, whether it was the pulse, passion, 
and drugs of Janis Joplin and Jimi Hendrix or the increased bombing 
in southeast Asia. Nikki Giovanni wrote a poem in which she asked, 
“Nigger can you kill?” Many saw it as a legitimate call to arms for black 
rage. I too became drawn to the exhilaration of street confrontations 
and was convinced of their political effectiveness. These were what the 
press reported and what made headlines. Orderly protests were mostly 
ignored. However, as a lawyer, the activity was a lot safer for me than 
the people I supported. I was seldom in the streets, only in court with 
the unlucky arrestees. 
In May 1969, shortly after the Ramos march, Fred had another trial. The 
summer before, an ice cream vendor in Maywood had been pushed 
down inside his truck and seventy-one bars of ice cream were handed 
out to Maywood kids. The police later arrested Fred Hampton after 
they claimed the victim identified Fred’ s picture, which they had shown 
him. Fred always denied he did the robbery. Recently while visiting 
the Hampton household, I met Thomas Blair, a neighbor of theirs in 
Maywood since the 1960s. Blair told me he took and passed out the ice 
cream. His knowledge of the details, as well as his physique, which was 
similar to Fred’ s, convinced me he told the truth. 
Jean Williams, a female attorney Fred had met on King’ s marches, 
represented him. The prosecution brought the ice cream vendor back 
Struggle in the Streets—PLO Begins
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   47 7/29/09   1:28:50 PM


--- PAGE 57 ---

Rendezvous with Death
from Vietnam to testify, an unusual expense and effort in a case with 
no injuries and so little loss, but Cook County state’ s attorney Edward 
Hanrahan wanted Fred in jail. Hanrahan had a broad face and a deter-
mined look. He came from Daley’ s Bridgeport neighborhood and com-
bined Irish appeal with a Harvard Law School education. Ambitious 
and serious, with a short temper and little sense of humor, he was 
widely regarded as heir apparent to Mayor Richard J. Daley. In his pub-
lic speeches after he was elected Cook County state’ s attorney in 1968, 
Hanrahan referred to the Panthers as a “gang.” This would serve his pur-
pose well when later that year he and Mayor Daley declared a “war on 
gangs.” Hanrahan presented himself as the guardian of law and order, 
defending society against black chaos and violence. 
After he took office in January 1969, Hanrahan created a nine-man 
Special Prosecutions Unit (SPU) to deal with gangs, even though a simi-
lar Gang Intelligence Unit (GIU) already existed in the police department. 
Hanrahan’ s SPU was given primarily police functions. Hanrahan had 
served as the U.S. attorney for Chicago and its suburbs, and he appointed 
his former assistant, Richard Jalovec, to be in charge of the SPU. In June 
an additional team of police officers, led by Sergeant Daniel Groth, was 
added. It included Officer James “Gloves” Davis, a black cop notorious 
for brutally beating black youth after he put on black leather gloves. 
Mayor Daley made the police chief, superintendent of schools, fire 
commissioner, and head of human resources a top-level committee to 
direct the city’ s actions against gangs. Hanrahan, the spokesman for the 
campaign, promised to increase prosecution of gang members. At one 
point, speaking to a group of African American mothers, he referred to 
gang members as “animals unfit for society.” He was booed. After that 
his antigang campaign lost favor among blacks. 
Even though Hanrahan vilified Fred and the Panthers publicly, par-
ticularly their antipolice rhetoric, many Maywood board members and 
community activists, black and white, attended Fred’ s ice cream trial to 
support him. Some testified as character witnesses. The village board 
agreed to let Fred do a mock trial using their assembly room as the 
courtroom. In the mock trial Fred represented himself before a people’ s 
tribunal consisting of prominent Maywood citizens and some board 
members. Exercising the lawyer skills he was never able to utilize in 
a real courtroom, Fred obtained a “not guilty” from the citizen’ s jury. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   48 7/29/09   1:28:50 PM


--- PAGE 58 ---

Many of those who acted as jurors and spectators later told me how 
impressed they had been with the sharpness of his cross-examination 
and the power of his argument. 
At the time of Fred’ s real trial, I worked with Skip Andrew and Donald 
Stang, two young lawyers just out of law school in the main Legal 
Assistance office in downtown Chicago. Skip had spent two years in the 
Peace Corps in the Dominican Republic. There he witnessed the demo-
cratic election of the leftist Juan Bosch, who was quickly overthrown 
by a U.S.-supported coup. Some of the people Skip worked with were 
killed in the U.S. invasion. He and other Peace Corps volunteers were 
so outraged that only a special emissary from the White House talked 
them out of holding a press conference denouncing the United States. 
Skip, the son of a Protestant minister in Iowa, was intense and metic-
ulous, bordering on the compulsive, and took practicing law very seri-
ously. He usually wore a suit and tie, sported a trimmed mustache and 
goatee, and looked older and more conservative than the rest of us, 
which added to his credibility in court. Skip and his wife Nancy lived on 
Burling Street, a few doors from Mary and me in Lincoln Park. 
Donald Stang was a Harvard Law School graduate and came from a 
liberal, Jewish, upper-middle-class family in New York. He was intellec-
tual, cautious, and quiet. He picked his words carefully. Don also had 
a wry sense of humor and a baby face. His hair was shorter than mine, 
but we both sported the shorter version of the Afro, a “Jew-fro.” 
Skip and Don attended Fred’ s ice cream truck robbery trial. In 
the small courtroom, they made eye contact with Fred, who later 
approached them in the hall. Fred pointed a finger at Skip’ s suit and tie 
and asked who he was. 
“I’m a lawyer at Legal Assistance . . . and so is he,” Skip replied, point-
ing to Don.
“Which side are you on?” Fred asked. 
“Yours,” Skip responded, assuming Fred was asking whether he was 
for the prosecution or the defense. 
“No, I mean what are you two doing for the revolution? Are you for 
us or against us?” 
More than a bit taken aback, Skip and Don sputtered, “For you.” 
“Then come to the Panther office at nine tonight and knock on the 
steel door.” 
Struggle in the Streets—PLO Begins
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   49 7/29/09   1:28:50 PM


--- PAGE 59 ---
0
Rendezvous with Death
No one but Fred could pull off his “in your face” directness with-
out incurring resentment. That evening Skip and Don went to Panther 
headquarters and knocked. A voice came over a speaker, “Who’ s there?” 
They gave their names and were buzzed into a dark vestibule. A speaker 
from the top of the stairs above them bellowed, “By whose authority are 
you here?” 
“Chairman Fred sent for us” Skip replied. 
“Come up one step at a time,” the faceless speaker responded. Skip 
made out a shotgun pointed at them. As they approached the upper 
part of the stairs, the door at the top opened, and a bright light shined 
in their eyes. They walked in and Fred greeted them with a grin and a 
big hug.
That night Fred recruited Skip and Don to be Panther lawyers. Fred’ s 
magnetism was irresistible. He laid out the Panther program, told Skip 
and Don that “the police are trying to destroy the Panthers any way they 
can. We need your help.” 
When Don explained that Legal Assistance lawyers couldn’t take 
criminal cases, it didn’t satisfy Fred—or Don. After talking with each 
other, Skip and Don met with Dennis the next week to discuss the for-
mation of an independent law office, one that would be free to repre-
sent not only the Panthers but the movement as a whole. 
Two days after Fred confronted Skip and Don, he was convicted. 
Sidney Jones, a black trial judge who was well connected to the Demo-
cratic machine, indicated he intended to grant Fred probation, the 
expected sentence for an offense where no weapon was used, no one 
was injured, and the defendant had no criminal record. But during the 
three weeks between the conviction and the sentencing hearing, State’ s 
Attorney Hanrahan held a press conference. He blasted the Panthers 
and Fred Hampton and criticized the trial judge for considering proba-
tion. Hanrahan carried a lot of clout in the Democratic Party, and any 
sitting judge wanted his endorsement for reelection. 
On May 27, Fred was sentenced. The prosecutor questioned Fred. 
His lawyer, Jean Williams, let him answer. “ Are your principles consis-
tent and compatible with those of Mao Tse-Tung of Red China?” the 
prosecutor asked. 
“We take things from Mao Tse-Tung and Martin Luther King or any-
body else applicable to what we are after,” Fred said. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   50 7/29/09   1:28:51 PM


--- PAGE 60 ---
1
“Do you feel that a legitimate means of obtaining what you are after 
is armed violence or armed revolution?” 
“I believe if we tried anything else we would end up like Dr. Martin 
Luther King.” 
Judge Jones had taken his cue from Hanrahan and sentenced Fred to 
two to five years in the state penitentiary. Fred’ s bond was revoked and 
he was taken into custody. He was soon transferred to Menard Prison in 
southern Illinois, 350 miles from Chicago, to begin his sentence.
On June 4, 1969, a week  after Fred went to prison, FBI agents, led by 
Chicago’ s Special Agent in Charge (SAC), Marlin Johnson, raided Pan-
ther headquarters. They had obtained a search warrant by swearing 
before a judge that George Sams, a fugitive, was present in the office. 
Sams had been there but left forty-eight hours earlier. Looking for 
George Sams was the official reason for FBI raids on Panther offices in 
at least two other cities. In each instance, Sams left shortly before the 
raid. It was later revealed that Sams was an FBI informant. He went to 
these offices to provide the FBI the pretext for a raid. 
FBI agents called and told the Chicago Panthers that the office was 
surrounded, that they had a search warrant, and that no one would be 
hurt if the Panthers did not resist. Agents then came to the entrance, 
broke down the front door, and went upstairs, where they pointed their 
guns at the eight people inside. No one resisted. The FBI seized three 
thousand dollars in cash and took property and records, including lists 
of contributors. Food for the breakfast program was dumped on the 
floor, and legally purchased weapons were confiscated. Nothing was 
ever returned. 
The eight Panthers on the premises were arrested and charged with 
harboring a fugitive. Skip and Don defended them and procured their 
release on bond. There were banner headlines that proclaimed the 
Panthers’ arrests for “Multiple Weapons” and “Harboring a Fugitive.” 
These were much more prominently displayed than the back-page 
news stories several weeks later noting all charges were dropped. 
Some Panther members became frightened and left after Fred’ s 
incarceration and the FBI raid. Bradley Greene had come to the office 
to join the Panthers in early May and was told that because there were 
so many new Panther members, he could only become a “friend of the 
Struggle in the Streets—PLO Begins
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   51 7/29/09   1:28:51 PM


--- PAGE 61 ---
2
Rendezvous with Death
Panthers” until the section chiefs had integrated the new members. 
When he returned in June, he was immediately accepted and soon 
made a section chief himself.
Skip and Dennis started working on Fred’ s appeal. They recruited 
Flint Taylor and Seva Dubuar, two law students, to go to Maywood to 
get affidavits from community leaders to be used in support of releas-
ing Fred on an appeal bond. Before a trial there is the presumption of 
innocence and a right to bail except where the defendant is likely to flee 
or presents a danger to the community. After a conviction, the granting 
of bail is discretionary. Support and endorsements by community lead-
ers are crucial. Interviewing people in Maywood about Fred was Flint’ s 
first experience working closely with black people. 
Flint came from an old Boston family that came over on the 
Mayflower. He attended Brown University and was finishing his first 
year at Northwestern Law School. His hippy exterior, including long, 
reddish-blond hair, disguised a tireless work ethic. He was competitive 
in sports and didn’t like to lose at anything. Flint is a person you want 
on your side whether it’ s in a lawsuit or a basketball game. His thor-
oughness and tenacity have made him an indefatigable advocate for 
civil rights for over forty years and earned him the reputation of being 
one of the most dogged and successful civil rights litigators in the coun-
try. He dates his commitment to civil rights to learning about Fred from 
his family and friends in Maywood. 
In July, Dennis and ACLU attorney Kermit Coleman appeared before 
chief justice Walter V . Schaefer of the Illinois Supreme Court with the 
affidavits Flint and Seva had obtained supporting Hampton’ s release. 
State’ s Attorney Hanrahan’ s representative spoke out vigorously against 
granting bond, arguing that they “could not keep track of Fred if he was 
released and he was a risk of flight.” 
“ Are you telling me you don’t know where Fred Hampton is every 
minute of the day?” the chief justice responded incredulously. The 
state’ s attorney had no response. 
On July 31, while Justice Schaefer was considering granting bail, the 
Chicago police and the Panthers exchanged gunfire at the Panther head-
quarters. The police said the incident started with sniper fire, but sev-
eral witnesses said the police opened fire on the Panther office without 
provocation. Five police officers were wounded and three Panthers—
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   52 7/29/09   1:28:51 PM


--- PAGE 62 ---

Larry White, Dwight Corbett, and Alfred Jeffries—were arrested. Again 
the office was ransacked and Panther property was seized and never 
returned. The police formed a gauntlet at the bottom of the stairs. They 
beat and kicked the three as they walked outside. 
Skip showed up in court to represent the Panthers at their prelimi-
nary hearing. His cross-examination of the police witnesses exposed 
so many contradictions in their testimony that charges against all the 
defendants were dropped.
A few days later Justice Schaefer granted Fred Hampton’ s petition for 
an appeal bond, allowing him to be released from Menard Prison. He 
also set an expedited appeal schedule. On August 13, Fred returned to 
Chicago, and the next day the Panthers had him speak at the Church 
of the Epiphany, known as the People’ s Church, located at Ashland and 
Adams. It was still warm outside when Flint and I entered to hear Fred. 
The large stone edifice was in the heart of Chicago’ s black West Side 
community, less than a mile from the Panther office. The vestibule was 
full when we entered. Mike Gray and Howard Alk had set up their film-
ing equipment at the front of the center aisle. Major parts of his speech 
that evening have been preserved in the Film Group’ s The Murder of 
Fred Hampton, released in 1971. I have repeated some of them in the 
opening scenes of this book. Near the end Fred told us we should all 
say “I am a revolutionary” before we went to sleep in case there was 
a “revolutionary happy hunting ground” and we might not wake up. 
Some truth hidden in a joke. 
After Fred finished and the church shook with its final reverberation 
of “Power to the people” and we had all declared “I am a revolutionary,” 
we stood up to leave. Mike Gray turned off his camera. Fred’ s prophetic 
words that night, “I’m not gonna die slipping on ice . . . I’m gonna die 
in the proletarian revolution,” became the ending to his film. On the 
twentieth anniversary of Fred’ s murder, Mike wrote: 
A few months after he died, I began to understand exactly what it was 
about him that separated him from the rest of us. Watching that footage 
hour after hour in the editing room with Howard Alk, I finally saw that 
Fred Hampton was fearless. Literally, without fear. And as we listened to 
the speeches again and again, it became apparent he had accommodated 
death. He knew he was going to die. It was OK And so he had set aside 
Struggle in the Streets—PLO Begins
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   53 7/29/09   1:28:52 PM


--- PAGE 63 ---

Rendezvous with Death
the ultimate fear, the one that stopped all of us in our tracks, no matter 
how courageous, the net fear upon which we base all our other fears, the 
one that keeps us all in line. Hampton had simply set that fear to rest. He 
was free. Thus he was able to speak clean simple truths that hit you like 
a thunderbolt.
If I had not been a lawyer that night I might have gone into the streets 
or underground. Fred’ s fearlessness challenged my own fears. Instead, I 
joined the People’ s Law Office (PLO). I had been part of the discussions 
with Dennis, Skip, and Don and was intrigued by the new venture but 
fearful and hesitant as well. Even with its limitations, Legal Assistance 
had stability and a paycheck. Income from the new office would be 
uncertain at best. But the hardest thing was casting my lot outside the 
mainstream; becoming a lawyer for the movement that challenged the 
very institutions that most lawyers used their skill to support. Law col-
lectives had formed in New York and L.A., but the concept was still new 
and no one had enough experience to know how they would fare. 
I had to see and hear Fred to overcome my reluctance and my own 
fear. It’ s not an exaggeration to say that a part of Fred’ s legacy is the 
People’ s Law Office, which formed a few months after Skip and Don 
encountered Fred and his “up against the wall” recruitment tactics and 
when Flint and I heard him speak. 
I went home from Fred’ s speech, grabbed a cold beer, and told Mary 
we needed to talk. “I want to be part of the new office to represent Fred 
and the Panthers,” I said, as we sat on our living room couch, across 
from the handmade bookshelves filling up with political literature. 
To my surprise, she replied, “Go for it. I can support us for a while on 
my salary from the Film Group.” 
“What about film school?” I asked. 
“It can wait; I like what I’m doing now.” She smiled. 
When we opened our new office in the summer of 1969, our clients 
included the Panthers, the Young Lords, antiwar protesters, and SDS. 
Chicago’ s political and social movements were a microcosm of those 
throughout the United States, if not the entire world. I once was told 
every generation has its chance to make a revolution. The last had 
been in the 1930s. This was ours. If we doubted our success, we saw the 
people in Vietnam, Cuba, and China winning liberation struggles led by 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   54 7/29/09   1:28:52 PM


--- PAGE 64 ---

revolutionary forces. Many other countries of Africa and South America 
were also engaged in anticolonial struggles, seeking radical change and 
separation from the United States. Here we were in the “belly of the 
beast,” where it was most vulnerable. 
From today’ s perspective, what I felt had to be done in 1969 may 
seem shortsighted and impulsive. This is partly true. I certainly did not 
appreciate the strength, staying power, and violence the U.S. govern-
ment would use to suppress our movement. It didn’t turn out to be a 
“paper tiger,” as Mao had predicted. 
But we did not accept the bourgeois society, imperialism, and patri-
archy we encountered. We held the government responsible for the 
Vietnam War, for buttressing reactionary governments throughout 
the world, including the apartheid regime in South Africa, and for the 
continuous oppression and exploitation of blacks, Latinos, and Native 
Americans as well as women. Like much of the rest of the world, we had 
come to believe radical, indeed revolutionary change, was necessary. 
We divided the world much as Eldridge Cleaver did: “You are either 
part of the solution or part of the problem.” The solution seemed to 
be revolution “by any means necessary.” We felt empowered; we could 
make history. Only a lack of will or courage could stop us. 
As for the personal implications of being a “revolutionary,” I, like 
other “mother country radicals,” as we whites called ourselves, had 
to figure it out. Tennis? OK, but who had time? Tasty food? A hard one 
to give up and maybe OK if not overindulged, not too expensive, and 
everyone got to share—potlucks preferable. Maintaining relationships 
with your parents? The radical movement line was maybe, but my gut 
said try. My parents were more accepting of me than I was of them. 
There was a distance, but I didn’t burn my bridges. The Weathermen, 
who had taken over SDS and with whom we had the closest personal 
relationships, pushed the line. “Smash monogamy!” they cried, arguing 
it was the source of patriarchy and women’ s oppression. Yet the alter-
natives of many partners or serial monogamy had their own problems. 
I can’t say how much we were guided by our theory and how much by 
our hormones. Sex? No limit. It was free, but of course there could be an 
emotional toll. Type? Heterosexual not preferred, but allowed, and most 
of us indulged heartily. Living in nuclear families? The line said no—
kids and parents benefit from a communal setting. I had no kids. For a 
Struggle in the Streets—PLO Begins
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   55 7/29/09   1:28:52 PM


--- PAGE 65 ---

Rendezvous with Death
while we helped with Dennis’ s kids, and I did eventually live in a collec-
tive. I had many good and a few bad experiences living in a group scene 
but found it difficult to maintain over a long period. Mind-expanding 
drugs like LSD? No prohibition if used to gain better understanding and 
awareness. Taken infrequently, which I did, they helped me see things I 
had never seen before and some of these things contained truths even 
after the trip was over. Like seeing Dennis and his wife Mona as the 
gurus, those with special insights, at PLO. Money? The line was give it 
to the movement; share it. I did give up most of mine but held out a 
little, hedging my bet. Dealing with personal issues? The line said, “the 
personal is political,” which has some truth, but the line didn’t take into 
account the heart, and often neither did I. I left my feelings out of the 
equation of what should be done. 
My cubicle at the newly opened People’ s Law Office was in the middle 
of the five other hexagons that made up the interior offices. It was dif-
ficult to find enough straight wall to align a desk. A local architect had 
designed the space to “make us different and to save money,” although 
I never figured out how it did the latter. He also glued egg cartons to the 
ceiling as noise baffles because the hexagonal walls of each office didn’t 
reach the ceiling. The soundproofing didn’t work, but it was a conversa-
tion starter with clients. 
My first week at the office, we erected a four-foot-high, hollow 
wooden barricade in front of the glass windows that looked out on busy 
Halsted Street in Lincoln Park. We filled it with concrete for protection 
against anyone shooting in from the street. We considered the local 
police, or their friends, the most likely candidates. 
“I wonder how many law offices in Chicago do this,” I said to Flint. 
We also installed a three-foot-high steel gate between the inner 
office and entrance door. The gate could only be opened by the buzzer 
on the receptionist’s desk. We took the possibility of a police attack 
on our office seriously. We had a built-in gun cabinet stocked with 
a legally purchased and registered shotgun and a nine-millimeter 
handgun. Some of my partners had taken target practice a few times 
before I joined PLO, and I went to a private pistol range with the nine 
millimeter. Firing the gun itself wasn’t nearly as uncomfortable as 
being on the range with a lot of off-duty cops. As it turned out we 
never had occasion to use or even pull out our weapons. When we 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   56 7/29/09   1:28:53 PM


--- PAGE 66 ---

moved downtown six years and a political era later, I was surprised 
to find them still there in the cabinet in the wall. They had become 
period pieces. 
We didn’t need a lot of money to live on and the structure of sharing 
fees, with Dennis getting a little more because he had a family, suited 
us. We began operating on the Marxist principle “From each according 
to his ability and to each according to his need,” but the complexities of 
defining need quickly caught up with us. 
Should we take into account money from a working spouse or par-
ents in determining what each lawyer needed or received? Karl Marx 
said yes, but we found this impractical and difficult to calculate. Why 
should a spouse take on onerous work to get more money, if it only 
resulted in her partner’ s salary being decreased? I still had some money 
from my family. Should I work for free until it was gone? These issues 
became so complicated that after a year we opted for a standard salary, 
with an increase if you had children. At first legal workers and secretar-
ies earned the same money as the lawyers, but this too changed over 
time. They continued to earn salaries and the lawyers divided up what 
was left. In the early years the nonlawyers did better. 
Getting paid depended on whether money was coming in. When 
we started in 1969, we hoped to make two hundred dollars per month 
each. For me, that was enough for basic living expenses. With money 
from my family, Mary and I bought a house in Lincoln Park, discounted 
because it backed on the El, or elevated train. We lived collectively with 
other PLOers including Flint, Susan Waysdorf and Courtney Esposito, 
legal workers who did everything from answering phones to investi-
gation, and, later, attorneys Michael Deutsch and Susan Jordan, when 
they joined the office. 
PLO’ s decision making was democratic. Everyone who worked at PLO 
had an equal vote at office meetings—even Jim Sorflaten, who swept 
the office once a week. However, Jim had not been selected because of 
his activism, and the issues we voted on both confused and bored him. 
We soon decided that only full-time PLOers got to vote. 
Dennis proposed the name People’ s Law Office because it fit with 
the times and our mission. Later we realized we had the same initials 
as the Palestine Liberation Organization. This never proved much of a 
handicap with our clients, who generally opposed Israel’ s expansion 
Struggle in the Streets—PLO Begins
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   57 7/29/09   1:28:53 PM


--- PAGE 67 ---

Rendezvous with Death
and sympathized with the other PLO. In Chicago the two organizations 
were never confused with each other. 
Our office was bustling from day one. Defending the Panthers, the 
Young Lords, and two white groups, Rising Up Angry and the Young 
Patriots, was a lot of work for four lawyers requiring frequent court 
appearances. I was quickly drawn into the criminal cases, which sus-
tained the office financially. I became the rainmaker in the office, 
although for my first twenty years, I would call it a drizzle. We had no 
shortage of criminal cases, most of which were referred by the Panthers 
and Young Lords. It was not unusual to have five cases a morning in 
different courtrooms spread throughout Cook County. Every criminal 
courtroom was crowded. The only way to cover all your cases, which 
most often involved continuances, was to get in and out quickly. This 
required handing the clerk a five-dollar bill under your appearance 
form to get your case called rapidly. 
Another strategy we learned for misdemeanor cases with hostile trial 
judges was to demand a jury trial. This resulted in the case being sent 
to Branch 46, a courtroom in the traffic court building. The cops fre-
quently did not follow the cases to the new court and, if they did, often 
gave up after a few continuances. 
I recall the regular Branch 46 judge chiding Dennis as his client’ s 
case was dismissed, 
“Well, Mr. Cunningham, you’ve outlasted another 
one.” 
“Twenty-sixth Street” (2600 South California) was where the majority 
of the city’ s felony criminal cases were sent. Cases were often decided 
at preliminary hearings or at short bench trials. In both situations the 
judges were in a hurry. If you didn’t speak up loudly and quickly, you 
were overlooked. The hearings and trials frequently turned into shout-
ing matches between the prosecutors and defense counsel, with each 
using every objection as an opportunity to argue their entire case. 
My first political case was defending the twelve SDS Weathermen 
arrested on September 24, 1969, for demonstrating outside the 
Conspiracy Eight trial. The Weathermen, who took their name from 
Bob Dylan’ s lyrics “You don’t need to be a weatherman to know which 
way the wind blows,” were advocating confrontations with the police.  
The Conspiracy Eight defendants included Panther chairman 
Bobby Seale, whose case would be severed on November 5, to be tried 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   58 7/29/09   1:28:53 PM


--- PAGE 68 ---

later. Those left on trial would become the Conspiracy Seven:  Youth 
International Party leaders Abbie Hoffman and Jerry Rubin; SDS 
founder Tom Hayden; longtime antiwar organizer David Dellinger; and 
Rennie Davis, John Froines, and Lee Weiner of the Mobilization to End 
the War in Vietnam. These seven were among the leaders who organized 
the thousands of antiwar protesters who came to Chicago and were 
attacked while protesting outside the 1968 Democratic Convention. 
Bobby Seale had done nothing but attend the convention and talk with 
some of the others. 
Although the Walker Report, the Illinois governor’ s investigation of 
the events outside the convention, concluded it was a “police riot,” eight 
defendants were charged with conspiring to cross state lines with the 
intent of inciting violence. This was a violation of the new Rap Brown 
Act, which was passed earlier in 1968 to prosecute protesters for activity 
otherwise protected by the First Amendment. It forbade crossing state 
lines with the intent to cause a riot and was an attempt to deter people 
from or punish them for making radical speeches. The Act was eventu-
ally ruled unconstitutional. 
On the day the Conspiracy Eight trial started, many protesters, in-
cluding a small group of the Weathermen, gathered outside the federal 
courthouse to protest the government’ s prosecution of the eight for ex-
ercising their right to free speech and assembly. When the police pushed 
the demonstrators up on the sidewalks, some pushed back. One pro-
tester was taken into custody and later escaped from the paddy wagon. 
Twelve other SDS Weathermen were arrested. Video footage showed only 
minor shoulder shoving between the protesters and the police. Although 
no one was injured on either side, the arrestees were all charged with 
at least two felony counts of aggravated battery, a felony count of mob 
action, and several misdemeanors. One eighty-five-pound demonstra-
tor was charged with offenses carrying up to thirty years for what the 
videotape disclosed was a light touching of a police officer’ s shoulder 
in response to him pushing her. State’ s Attorney Hanrahan wanted to 
demonstrate he was tough on demonstrators as well as street gangs. 
A few days after the twelve SDS Weathermen were released on bail, 
we stood in front of Chief Judge Power for the arraignment. The charges 
against the defendants were read out loud. Judge Power, a small man 
with a complex to match his name, asked, “How do you plead?” 
Struggle in the Streets—PLO Begins
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   59 7/29/09   1:28:54 PM


--- PAGE 69 ---
0
Rendezvous with Death
I gave the standard reply. “The defendants plead not guilty and waive 
formal reading of the indictment.” 
Power’ s next question caught me by surprise. “Who is the leader of 
this SDS group?” 
Before I could respond, Howie Machtinger, one of my clients, replied 
“Ho Chi Minh.” The defendants broke out in laughter. 
Judge Power was not amused. “Since you think this is so funny, I find 
you in contempt. You can spend the day locked up. Sheriff, put them up 
in the bullpen.” The defendants were herded into the lock-up behind 
the courtroom while I argued on their behalf. 
“Your Honor, this was a harmless attempt at humor. There was no 
disrespect intended,” I argued, trying to put the best face on the situa-
tion while trying not to laugh myself. 
“You can join your friends in the lock-up if you continue arguing, Mr. 
Haas,” was the judge’ s response. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   60 7/29/09   1:28:54 PM


--- PAGE 70 ---
1
Panthers Versus Police
A 
particularly brutal incident occurred on  October 4, 1969. Some-
one fired at the Panther office, and the Panthers fired back. The 
Chicago police were called. They broke down the front door, charged 
inside, and pushed everyone down the front steps. Che (Billy Brooks) 
was the first to emerge at the bottom, where Officer Richard Curly hit 
him in the temple with the butt of his shotgun. Panther member Brad-
ley Greene was also struck and beaten outside the front door. The police 
said they had seen someone on the roof with a shotgun who looked like, 
but in fact wasn’t, Terry Watson, a Panther inside the office. When they 
arrested Watson, they beat and kicked him more than anyone else. 
The police made no efforts to hide what they were doing on busy 
Madison Street outside the Panther office. When a spectator outside 
the Panther office objected to the police beatings, he was grabbed and 
struck as well. In all, six Panthers and the bystander were arrested and 
taken to the Wood Street station. 
In the station parking lot, the arrestees were removed from the police 
wagon and beaten again. One of the cops, who weighed over two hun-
dred pounds, sat on Watson’ s back as Watson lay on the ground, and 
slammed his head into the pavement. Bradley Greene thought they 
were going to kill him. As Terry lay moaning and crying, one of the other 
Panthers said he shouldn’t be making sounds like that because “He’ s a 
Panther.” Bradley disagreed and yelled for the cops to stop.
Afterward, the Panthers were picked up and made to run a gauntlet 
fending off punches and clubbing by the two shifts of officers, one leav-
ing and one coming on duty. The next morning, they were charged with 
attempted murder of the cops who came to the Panther office. Skip and 
Don represented them in court. Skip pointed to the defendants’ bruised 
and swollen faces and told the bond judge, “Look at this, this is what the 
police did to them after the raid.” The injuries obviously needed medi-
8
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   61 7/29/09   1:28:54 PM


--- PAGE 71 ---
2
Rendezvous with Death
cal attention. The judge reduced their bonds, ordered medical treat-
ment for those who could not make bail, and set a preliminary hearing 
for November 10. On that date Skip cross-examined the arresting offi-
cers so skillfully that the contradictions between their testimonies and 
their arrest reports, as well as between each other, became so obvious 
that all charges except those against Terry Watson were dropped. 
During the October 4 raid, the police had again ransacked the Panther 
office, and important files containing lists of members and contributors 
were confiscated or destroyed. William O’Neal, who joined the Panthers 
shortly after they opened their office in November 1968, voluntarily 
took charge of repairing the damage. He was one of the few Panthers 
with mechanical and carpentry skills and he was able to repair even the 
walls damaged by the police. 
Flint and Seva, PLO’ s law students, brought Fred Hampton to speak 
at Northwestern Law School later in the fall. Flint drove out to the sub-
urbs to pick up Fred and during the ride, Flint said, “Fred was speed-
rapping about the cops, describing them as out to get him.” 
Flint had expected a few students to show up for the talk. When they 
walked into Northwestern’ s Robert McCormick Hall, it was packed with 
over three hundred people. Flint had never spoken before a large audi-
ence. He stumbled through his introduction of Fred. Humiliated, he 
turned the podium and microphone over to Fred, who received a stand-
ing ovation. Fred chided Flint about his awkwardness, but he added 
that Flint was part of the reason he was out on bail. Fred said that Flint, 
and the rest of the lawyers who wanted to help the Panthers, had better 
get their act together because “what the Panthers are doing is serious, 
and the police are serious about trying to stop us.” 
Fred described the police raid on the Panther office a few days earlier. 
He told how Panther members had been taken outside and beaten and 
how the police had gone out of their way to dump out the kids’ food in 
the Panther office. Fred talked with particular satisfaction about seeing 
the children eating and Panther members serving them. He explained 
this was how people could understand socialism, “through participa-
tion and serving the people.” 
Fred ended by telling the law students and lawyers that they had a role 
to play in helping make revolutionary change and that he particularly 
respected lawyers who had gone South to represent civil rights activists. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   62 7/29/09   1:28:55 PM


--- PAGE 72 ---

Fred adapted his talk to law students without diluting the militancy and 
energy I had witnessed at the People’ s Church in August. When Fred 
ended with “Power to the people,” the normally staid law school audi-
ence responded in kind, loudly, mesmerized. After the speech Flint and 
Seva proudly introduced Fred to the dean and faculty. Fred was at home 
in any conversation. But during the ride back with Flint, Fred switched 
into his earlier mode, talking continuously about how the police were 
targeting him and the Panthers. 
In October, Fred was still spending some nights at his parents’ home 
in Maywood and some in other Panther apartments. Deborah Johnson 
was seven months pregnant with Fred’ s baby; she and Fred wanted 
to live together. When he had gone to prison in May, Fred had asked 
his friends, including Che, to look out for her. Later Che warned Fred 
against getting his own place in the city, urging Fred to get an apart-
ment in the suburbs, further from the Chicago police. 
Despite the warnings, Fred and Deborah rented a small five-room 
apartment on the first floor of a two story flat at 2337 West Monroe, one 
street over from the Panther office. It quickly became a Panther hangout 
where Che, Doc, and others often stayed with them. Sometimes, Debo-
rah and Fred moved to other Panther cribs as a cautionary measure. 
The FBI and local police immediately took note of Fred’ s new 
address. In retrospect, it’ s a little hard to understand why Fred, who was 
so conscious of being a target of the Chicago police, did not see the 
danger of living so close to the Panther office. They were in the heart 
of a community 
that was in a virtual state of war with the police. Guns, 
usually registered, were often kept at the apartment. While they may 
have given an illusion of security, there seems to have been little control 
over who brought what weapons into the apartment and how they were 
accounted for and maintained. 
The Panthers, including Fred, used rhetoric that increased hostility 
with law enforcement. Expressions such as “You kill one pig, you get 
some satisfaction, you kill all the pigs, you get complete satisfaction,” 
were taken literally by some police. The Panthers also didn’t heed their 
own words for the truth they contained. Fred and the Panthers knew 
that J. Edgar Hoover and the FBI as well as the local police were out to 
get them. Fred understood he was a marked man, but the security at the 
new Panther crib was irregular and haphazard. 
Panthers Versus Police
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   63 7/29/09   1:28:55 PM


--- PAGE 73 ---

Rendezvous with Death
A few blocks away from Hampton’ s new apartment, residents of 
Henry Horner Homes, an all-black housing project, were having their 
own confrontations with the police. For over a year teenagers from the 
projects had been petitioning for the installation of a traffic light at a 
corner where people crossed to get to local schools and the neighbor-
hood health clinic. In September, one month before Fred moved into 
his new apartment, two young kids had been killed on separate days 
crossing the intersection. The city still refused to install the light. 
Seventeen-year-old John Soto became the leader of the campaign to 
get a traffic light put in and organized protests in the neighborhood. 
His brother, Michael Soto, a twenty-year-old decorated Army sergeant, 
came home on leave from Vietnam to visit his family and participated 
in the protest led by his brother in September.
On October 5, the police killed John Soto. The police version was that 
John Soto had been stopped by the police and when he fought with 
them, an officer’ s weapon went off “accidentally” firing a shot into the 
back of Soto’ s head. Several witnesses denied that John had fought with 
the police and said he had been shot without provocation. 
Community anger grew and Michael extended his leave to attend his 
brother’ s funeral. On October 10, Michael Soto was also shot and killed 
by the Chicago police, who claimed they shot him after he pulled a gun. 
Again, the police version contradicted that of civilian witnesses, who 
said the incident started when a police squad car blocked the path of 
Michael Soto and two friends. When the youths separated, the police 
chased Michael to the second floor of the projects, where they shot him. 
People on the second floor said Michael had been unarmed.  
Immediately the community became more outraged and rioting 
escalated into gunfire. In the exchanges of gunfire ten police officers and 
a twelve-year-old were reported wounded. According to the NAACP’ s 
Commission of Inquiry set up later, “The Commission discovered that 
a substantial segment of the community believed that, contrary to all 
police reports, John and Michael Soto had been murdered by the police 
because of their participation in the traffic light protests.” 
The coroner’ s inquests were delayed; meanwhile the internal police 
investigation found John’ s death to be “accidental homicide,” and 
Michael’ s “justifiable homicide.” The Soto killings were well publicized 
locally. They took place in the same neighborhood as the Panther office 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   64 7/29/09   1:28:55 PM


--- PAGE 74 ---

and confirmed for many people the Panthers’ view that the police were 
licensed thugs, who served as an occupying army in their community. 
There was no effective means of redress for the victims of police abuse. 
The prosecutor and the internal police investigative agency invariably 
closed ranks to support the cops. It is hard to overestimate the effect the 
Soto brothers’ deaths had on both the community and the Panthers. 
In speeches, Fred spoke about the incidents repeatedly. They became 
exhibit number one in the Panthers’ demand for community control of 
police and added credibility to their call for armed self-defense. 
Ten years later, our office could well have been the one called to 
represent the family of John and Michael Soto. By then we had learned 
how to prosecute a civil rights case. High profile cases against the 
police became our specialty. The transparently implausible police 
explanations of the Soto killings matched the patterns we would come 
to recognize later. But in 1969 we had neither the experience nor the 
reputation as civil rights lawyers to attract these cases, and few Chicago 
lawyers wanted to sue the police without an airtight case. We felt as 
helpless as everyone else when we read that no action, either disci-
plinary or criminal, was being taken against the cops responsible for 
the Soto brothers’ deaths. A few weeks after Michael Soto was killed, 
Fred spoke at Northern Illinois University in DeKalb, about eighty miles 
from Chicago, and devoted a substantial part of his speech to police 
abuse and killings: 
You’ve got Bobby Seale being chained and gagged at the federal build-
ing. You’ve got John and Michael Soto, who were murdered in two days. 
We need some guns, we need some guns, and we need some force. Now 
they brutalize without even arresting them. They shoot somebody with 
no intention of arresting them.
After specifically attacking Mayor Daley and “Hammerhead” 
Hanrahan, Fred continued with the words that were often quoted after 
his death. Words that inspired his audiences and that we very much 
wanted to be true:
Don’t worry about the Black Panther Party. As long as you keep the beat, 
we’ll keep on going. If you think that we can be wiped out because they 
Panthers Versus Police
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   65 7/29/09   1:28:56 PM


--- PAGE 75 ---

Rendezvous with Death
murdered Bobby Hutton and Bunchy Carter and John Huggins, you’re 
wrong. If you think because Huey was jailed the party’ s gonna stop, you 
see you’re wrong. If you think because Chairman Bobby was jailed, the 
Party’ s gonna stop, you see you’re wrong. If you think because they can 
jail me you thought the Party was gonna stop, you thought wrong. You can 
jail a revolutionary but you can’t jail revolution. You can lock up a freedom 
fighter, like Huey Newton, but you can’t lock up freedom fighting.
Looking back on history, it’ s not so clear that you can’t kill a revo-
lution or a movement if you assassinate its leaders. It’ s unlikely the 
Chinese Revolution would have succeeded with Mao dead, or that the 
Vietnamese would have obtained their independence without Ho Chi 
Minh. The latter continued successfully after Ho died, but only after he 
had put in forty-six years of organizing and fighting. The Cubans would 
not have driven Fulgencio Batista out and gotten rid of his oppressive 
government without Fidel Castro and Che Guevara. The Colonists may 
not have been successful in establishing a democracy without George 
Washington’ s determination and leadership, particularly when he 
stopped his rebellious unpaid soldiers from their attempt to impose mil-
itary rule after defeating the British. The murder of Patrice Lumumba in 
the Congo in 1961 and Salvador Allende in Chile in 1973 are examples 
of freedom struggles that were defeated because the CIA determined to 
kill their leaders. 
In another part of Fred’ s November speech, he said: 
And when pigs move on our cribs, we have to protect our cribs with gun 
force. Pigs don’t move on Panther cribs, they make sure the Panther’ s out 
of town. . . . Because they know when they comin’ to a Panther crib that 
we might talk a lot of rhetoric, but we deal with the same basic jargon that 
the people in Babylon dealt with. It takes two to tango, motherfucker. As 
soon as you kick that door down, I have to kick it back on you. We don’t 
lock our doors. We just get us some good guns and leave them mother-
fuckers open.
It’ s hard to imagine Fred believed the police were afraid to raid an 
apartment with the Panthers present. So what was he saying? Knowing 
the police were listening, was he warning them the Panthers were 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   66 7/29/09   1:28:56 PM


--- PAGE 76 ---

armed? Was he telling Panthers they should have guns in their homes 
to protect themselves or was he signifying big time with the police? The 
rhetoric that energized the Panthers was often the same rhetoric that 
the police used to justify attacks on them. 
From the time Fred and Deborah moved in, there were guns kept at 
2337 West Monroe. While the outer doors were locked, the tiny locks 
at the front and rear were not reinforced. As for security, people with 
guns were normally assigned to stay awake by the front door when Fred 
slept there. But even later, after I interviewed the Panther survivors, I 
never heard of any drills or preparation for an actual raid, or any spe-
cific instructions of what the Panthers were supposed to do if the police 
came. 
Fred ended his speech to the students at Northern Illinois with the 
Panther refrain, “Time is short, let’ s seize the time.” 
It’ s often difficult to separate Fred’ s rhetoric from what he believed. I 
have wondered if he was always able to make this distinction. 
Panthers Versus Police
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   67 7/29/09   1:28:56 PM


--- PAGE 77 ---

9
Last Glimpse
I
n late November we got word from the appellate court that Fred’ s ice 
cream robbery conviction had been upheld. He had to serve the rest 
of his two-to-five-year sentence. His appeal bond would be revoked 
within ten days. Rumors spread that Fred might go underground, or 
leave the country. Some believed that he would return to the peniten-
tiary, where he had organized several prisoners. 
At our December 1 PLO meeting, Dennis announced Fred had the six 
thousand dollars needed to buy the Panther headquarters building. The 
Chicago police had consistently put pressure on the Panthers’ landlord 
to evict the Panthers. Owning their own building made sense. Because 
I had done some housing work, I volunteered to go and help complete 
the purchase. I relished the idea of working with Fred, though I was a bit 
intimidated by the reverential respect people had for him. I called the 
Panther office and set up a meeting with Fred for the next day. 
I went there the following afternoon and stood on the street outside 
the steel door. Bullet holes from the previous police attacks marred the 
building’ s facade. Two faded posters with the Panther emblem hung on 
each side of the door. I pushed the buzzer and cleared my throat. 
“This is Jeff from the People’ s Law Office and I have a meeting with 
Chairman Fred at four o’clock,” I said. 
After a pause the door was buzzed open. At the top of the steep stair-
case another door opened and I was led into the large, open space that 
made up the main office. It hummed with noise and activity. Around me 
people were criticizing each other about a snafu that morning getting 
the food delivered on time to one of the breakfast program locations. 
There were stacks of Panther newspapers on the floor in the corner and 
on some of the desks I saw piles of signed papers titled “Petition for 
Community Control of Police.” 
Boxes of cereal and pancake mix, donations to the breakfast program, 
were piled in another corner. Familiar posters of Ho Chi Minh, and the 
9
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   68 7/29/09   1:28:56 PM


--- PAGE 78 ---

Vietnamese woman carrying a rifle with a baby slung from her shoul-
der decorated the walls. The famous poster of Huey Newton and Bobby 
Seale with leather jackets, black berets, and rifles, one standing, one 
sitting on a fanned-back wicker chair, hung on the back wall. A Panther 
I didn’t recognize told me Fred was talking to people in the back and 
would be out soon. Someone stood next to a chalkboard containing 
a listing of the breakfast sites and was filling in names for tomorrow’ s 
assignments. 
A few minutes later Fred emerged. Before I could introduce myself—
I wasn’t sure if he knew who I was—he smiled. “Hello, Jeff, come on in.” 
I followed him to the office in the back where he sat down behind a 
wooden desk. It was hot in the office and Fred wore a T-shirt. I took off 
my suit jacket and faced him. 
“I got the person who’ s giving us the money ready to go. Can we close 
tomorrow?” he asked, clearly in a hurry to complete the purchase. 
“I have to draw up a deed and get the owner to meet us and sign it,” 
I explained. “I’ve got court in the morning and the coalition’ s housing 
proposal to finish after that. How about—” 
“How’ s that housing plan coming?” Fred interrupted, referring to 
the proposal for low- and moderate-income housing sponsored by the 
coalition of the Panthers, Young Lords, and Young Patriots. 
“I have to file our proposal with the Department of Urban Renewal 
on Thursday morning. It really looks good. If the City follows its guide-
lines, we should get the money to build, but that’ s a big ‘if,’ given who 
we are. How ’bout if I meet you and the owner here Thursday after-
noon?” I asked. 
Fred agreed. Buying the Panther building was not the kind of real 
estate deal where an inspection was required. The Panthers knew every 
crack in the plaster and bullet hole in the ceiling, because they had 
repaired the office after each of the three police raids. 
“How’ s the boiler, have you checked that out?” I asked. 
“You can see, we get plenty of heat, except when the police bullets 
give us too much ventilation,” he replied, a slow smile spreading across 
his face. 
“We put some cement in our walls when we opened the People’ s Law 
Office last August. Maybe you should try that,” I said, only half joking. 
“It’ s the windows they shoot at, not the walls,” Fred said, “but I’ll 
check it out.” 
Last Glimpse
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   69 7/29/09   1:28:57 PM


--- PAGE 79 ---
0
Rendezvous with Death
I showed Fred the completed real estate papers. “Here’ s where you 
sign. I’ve listed you as the chairman of the Panthers, to make it legal.” 
“That’ s accurate,” he smiled again. “Let’ s get this done quick.” He 
signed and I gathered up the papers and slipped them into my briefcase. 
As we were walking up to the front, Fred paused in our conversation 
to talk to some Panthers who had entered the office. This handsome, 
powerfully built man of twenty-one, six years my junior, was giving 
instructions. “Show up on time for the breakfast program; sell your 
quota of Panther papers; be at political education class on Monday and 
Wednesday nights.” Fred was talking continuously, asking questions 
and answering them. His voice had the staccato tempo and energy of 
a rapper. There were few pauses and a lot of rhythm. He seemed to be 
driven by some inner force that created a continuous flow of orders and 
encouragement. Even though he appeared relaxed and jovial, there was 
a sense of urgency to his directions. The Panthers appeared to run on 
Fred’ s energy. 
He stopped for a moment to thank me. “I’ll see you Thursday. Power 
to the people.” 
I answered, “Power to the people.” Opening the door and leaving, 
I hoped I was playing a small role in helping the Panthers gain self-
determination—at least over their own building. 
It was late in the afternoon when I left, so I went home instead of 
returning to work. “Fred is amazing,” I told Mary as soon as I walked in. 
“He’ s in perpetual motion. I wish I had half his energy. I feel like I have 
to run in place to keep up with him.” 
“I know what you mean,” she replied. “Some of the footage we’ve 
shot of Fred makes him look like he’ s on speed; but it’ s a natural high.” 
“You should see the way he gets people around him motivated,” I 
said. “I don’t know what they’ll do when he goes back to finish his prison 
term.”
We went out to eat that night, as neither of us had time to shop. 
Over flautas and beer we talked more about Fred. “You know he’ s only 
twenty-one. At his age I was nowhere,” I said, still impressed over my 
recent encounter with him. “If he can avoid the police and prison, he’ s 
going to be a great leader.”
“We’re trying to figure out how to end our documentary,” Mary said. 
“We want to complete the film so more people in the country see him 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   70 7/29/09   1:28:57 PM


--- PAGE 80 ---
1
in action. We’ve got some wonderful footage of Fred speaking outside 
the Conspiracy trial about freeing Bobby Seale, and also of his August 
speech at the People’ s Church. We also took a lot of him serving break-
fast to the kids. We need an ending.” 
“I’m sure it will come to you. If you capture half his dynamism, you’ll 
have a great film.”
The next morning I went to court and then to the office to make the 
final corrections in the coalition housing proposal. The deadline for fil-
ing was the next day, Thursday, December 4, at 9:00 
a.m. I worked all 
afternoon handwriting my corrections on the typed draft. In this pre-
computer era everything was done on typewriters with corrections 
painted on carbon copies with White-Out. If a document had to be flaw-
less, like a court paper or housing proposal, corrections meant retyp-
ing the entire document. We kept the typist-secretary–legal workers at 
our office busy. We were fortunate to have a steady flow of movement 
people, mostly women, type for us; some even volunteered to work eve-
nings. One thing the computer age corrected was our sexist division of 
labor. We all learned to type and correct our own court submissions. I 
learned later that while I was working on the paperwork for the hous-
ing proposal, Fred, with William O’Neal by his side, was meeting with 
Conspiracy Seven lawyer Lenny Weinglass on the South Side, inquir-
ing about getting an extension on his appeal bond from the Illinois 
Supreme Court, which would allow Fred time to decide if he wanted to 
flee the country to avoid going back to prison.
By six o’clock Wednesday evening I was still laboring over the hous-
ing document. Liz Stern, the wife of a friend, had offered to help type 
the final draft at her home. I went over to Liz’ s apartment about eight 
o’clock that night to give her handwritten edits and corrections. We 
worked through the night keeping awake on coffee, cookies, and ciga-
rettes. In that partially unenlightened era, I was still smoking, which 
today seems as much an anachronism as White-Out. At five o’clock in 
the morning the final draft was done. I was exhausted. It was still dark 
when I got home. I climbed the outside stairs, walked into our second-
floor apartment, threw off my clothes, and collapsed on the couch. 
Last Glimpse
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   71 7/29/09   1:28:57 PM


--- PAGE 81 ---
2
A Knock at the Door
I
’d just fallen asleep when  I heard a loud knock at the front door. 
Dazed, I got up and opened it. My partner Skip Andrew was standing 
there dressed in suit and tie. 
“Chairman Fred is dead. I just got a call from Rush. The pigs vamped 
on the chairman’ s crib this morning.” 
I remained stuck on the words “Chairman Fred is dead.” 
“Someone else was killed and a lot of people were shot. Deborah 
Johnson and some others are at the Wood Street police station; the peo-
ple wounded are at Cook County Hospital.” 
“What should I do?” I asked. 
“I’m meeting Rush at the morgue and then we are going to the chair-
man’ s crib. Why don’t you go to Wood Street and try to talk to some of 
the survivors?” 
“Sure,” I stammered. He turned abruptly and was gone down the 
steps. 
Fred Hampton dead? I had just seen him at the Panther office, look-
ing bigger than life. I couldn’t imagine him motionless. I went to the 
bedroom and shook Mary. 
“Fred Hampton’ s been killed.” 
Mary stirred, coming out of sleep. “Huh, what?” 
I repeated the news. She bolted upright. “Noooo!” she cried, shaking 
her head back and forth. 
“I don’t want to believe it either, but I think it’ s true. I’m going to 
interview some of the survivors at the lock-up.” 
“How can I help? What can I do?” Mary pleaded. 
“I have to go,” I urged. “I’ll call you later if you can help.” 
I went back to the living room and put on the same suit I had just 
thrown off. I grabbed my briefcase, the housing proposal inside, and 
walked out the door before seven o’clock. 
10
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   72 7/29/09   1:28:58 PM


--- PAGE 82 ---

I replayed Skip’ s words in my mind. “The chairman is dead.” It was 
Fred who made us believe we were strong and unstoppable. Now he 
was dead. 
It was well below freezing and the snow was piled up on the edges of the 
streets. Francis and Iberia Hampton approached the entrance gate to 
the Corn Products plant in their 1966 green Ford. They’ d been expect-
ing Fred to come home when they went to bed the previous evening, 
but Fred’ s bed was still made and the chitterlings they’ d left on the stove 
for him were untouched when they got up in the morning of December 
4. Francis dropped Iberia off at the front gate and parked. Iberia’ s shift 
started at seven o’clock, a half-hour before his.
Francis worked as a painter, glazier, and repairman in the mainte-
nance section. After dropping Iberia off at the entrance gate, he usually 
parked the car and went to the paint shop where he made coffee for 
everyone and put the place in order before his shift started. As Francis 
walked toward the entrance gate, the gate did not open as it usually 
did. Tilman Malrey, the middle-aged security guard whom Francis had 
known for years, came out of his booth and walked up to him.
“I think you and your wife need to go home. We heard on the radio 
there was a police raid and I think your son was shot.”
Francis looked at Malrey. “What happened to him?”
 “I think you need to go home,” Malrey repeated. “Maybe you can 
find out more on the radio.” Although Francis sensed Malrey was try-
ing to help him, he also thought Malrey was withholding information. 
Francis knew his son had become the target of police raids. He had told 
Fred when he joined the Panthers that he did not want him to be vio-
lent. Fred responded, “I will defend myself if I have to.”
He remembered his son’ s speech at Reverend McNelty’ s Baptist 
Church four weeks earlier. Fred had told the large and enthusiastic 
crowd, “The next time you see me I may be in a collar and tie.” Fred sel-
dom wore a dress shirt or tie, and Francis assumed his son was talking 
about being dressed for burial. Indeed, since Fred’ s release from prison 
in August, and even more recently he had said things that made Francis 
believe he knew he might not live much longer. 
Francis asked Malrey if he would put in a call to Iberia’ s workstation 
and tell her that she should come outside to meet him. As he waited in 
A Knock at the Door
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   73 7/29/09   1:28:58 PM


--- PAGE 83 ---

Rendezvous with Death
the car, he heard on the radio that his son was dead. The reporter from 
WBBM “ All News Radio” said that Black Panther leader Fred Hampton 
and another unknown Panther were killed at four thirty that morning 
in a shootout at 2337 West Monroe. Francis recognized the address. The 
radio announcer went on to say that the police entered the Panther 
apartment with a search warrant looking for guns, that the Panthers 
had opened fire on the police after the officers announced their pres-
ence, and the police had responded with gunfire of their own. Two 
police officers were injured, along with four Black Panthers who were 
taken to Cook County Hospital. 
The report continued, indicating that the raiding police officers were 
assigned to State’ s Attorney Hanrahan’ s office. Francis knew Hanrahan 
was the prosecutor who had campaigned on the platform “war on 
gangs.” He also knew Fred had repeatedly criticized Hanrahan in his 
speeches for using antigang rhetoric to carry out what Fred called “a 
war on black youth.” 
Before Iberia could punch the clock on the way to her assembly line 
post, she saw a slip of paper with a message for her to call her daughter 
Dee Dee at home and the other message from Malrey. She called her 
daughter. “The police killed Fred. You gotta come home,” Dee Dee told 
her. 
Francis saw Iberia walk slowly past the entrance gate looking down at 
the ground. He knew from her slow pace that she had heard about their 
son. They didn’t have to say anything. Francis opened the car door for 
her and they drove home in silence. She had wanted Fred to come home 
to Maywood the night before. Although he was spending the night with 
his parents less and less, Iberia still considered him to be living at home 
and kept his bedroom intact. Even when he had introduced Deborah 
to her a month earlier and said “This is my baby” pointing to Deborah’ s 
pregnant belly, Iberia did not envision Fred moving out completely. 
Iberia was upset when Fred became a Black Panther. She felt uncom-
fortable with their talk about guns. She was afraid he would become a 
police target. Why was he was always the one to be out front, the spokes-
person? But she also was proud of Fred. He was doing what he believed 
in, standing up for black people. Iberia herself was a seasoned union 
steward. She had cooked for seventeen hundred striking workers at the 
union hall during a five-month strike several years before. She knew 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   74 7/29/09   1:28:59 PM


--- PAGE 84 ---

where Fred got his courage and determination, and she had shown her 
support by cooking for the Panthers’ Breakfast for Children Program. 
By the time Francis and Iberia arrived home, the radio had identi-
fied the other Panther killed in the raid as eighteen-year-old Mark Clark 
from Peoria, Illinois. A spokesperson from Hanrahan’ s office was on TV 
saying the police had been fired at from the back bedroom where Fred 
was found dead. 
When Joan Elbert, a close friend of the Hamptons, came over to their 
home, she saw Iberia sweeping the floor looking stone-faced. She hardly 
spoke. Francis was trying hard to hold back tears. Later on, Iberia would 
tell Joan that Francis wasn’t tough enough to handle their son’ s murder. 
His face would get sad and tear up when Fred’ s death was brought up. 
On my way to the police station, I heard the news flash: “Fred Hampton 
and another Panther member were killed this morning in a predawn 
raid by police officers assigned to state’ s attorney Edward Hanrahan. 
Hanrahan’ s office indicated the officers were serving a search warrant 
for weapons when they were fired upon by the occupants and returned 
the fire.” Why was Hanrahan the prosecutor in charge of a police raid? 
I arrived at the Wood Street police station at 7:30 
a.m. I parked on 
the street and walked a block to the dilapidated building. I entered 
through the glass door on the side and approached the counter that 
separated me from several uniformed officers. It looked like business 
as usual, with the cops behind the counter filling out forms and talking 
on desk phones. A middle-aged sergeant approached and asked what 
I wanted. 
I showed him my attorney identification card. “I want to see Deborah 
Johnson, and anyone else arrested after the police raid on Monroe 
Street.” The sergeant looked as though he was expecting me. “State’ s 
Attorney Hanrahan has given orders that the prisoners arrested after 
the raid are not to be seen by anyone, including attorneys.” 
I wasn’t surprised that Hanrahan would give such an order, but it was 
illegal. “Hanrahan’ s order violates an Illinois criminal statute specifically 
forbidding anyone to interfere with the right of a person in custody to 
see their attorney,” I said as authoritatively as possible. As a practicing 
criminal law attorney, I carried a paperback copy of the Illinois Criminal 
Code in my briefcase. I pulled it out and read the sergeant the statute 
A Knock at the Door
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   75 7/29/09   1:28:59 PM


--- PAGE 85 ---

Rendezvous with Death
Hanrahan and he were violating. He wouldn’t budge, and he wouldn’t 
call Hanrahan. Frustrated and outraged, but with a 9:00 a.m. deadline 
for filing the housing proposal, I left and drove downtown to the City 
Urban Renewal Office. This project, which had been many months in 
the making and had successfully brought together black, Latino, and 
white community groups, suddenly seemed distant and insignificant. 
After filing the housing proposal, I was driving back to the police 
station when I heard two police officers interviewed over the car ra-
dio. They claimed they had been on the raid but hadn’t known it was 
a Panther apartment. Suddenly shots were fired at them from the rear 
bedroom where they said they later found Fred’ s body. They made it 
sound as if they barely escaped alive. 
Back at the counter inside Wood Street, I heard the same response 
from a different sergeant. He was shorter and stockier than the first one 
but had the same look of satisfaction when he turned down my request 
to see the people arrested. I went over to the pay phone next to the lock-
up and called Hanrahan’ s office. Sheldon Sorosky answered. I knew him 
as a “special state’ s attorney” assigned to prosecute political cases. That 
fall I had argued against him in bond court and at preliminary hear-
ings defending the Weathermen. He was a slim, Jewish guy who liked to 
schmooze. He had been defensive about the tough positions his boss 
Hanrahan had required him to take and let me know by inference that 
what went on in court was just a job and less important than maintain-
ing our Jewish professional acquaintance in the hallway outside. 
“Shelly,” I said, “What the fuck’ s going on? The police here won’t let 
me see the Panthers in the lock-up based on orders from your boss. You 
know you can’t do this.” 
“Hold on,” he said. I could hear Sorosky conferring with someone I 
was certain was Hanrahan. When the muddled voices ceased, Shelly got 
back on the line. 
“It’ s all right.” Apparently Hanrahan had given in. “You can visit 
them.” 
“How ’bout telling the cops here that. They think they’re under orders 
from your boss not to let me in.” 
“Will do, Jeff,” he confirmed. Then added, “You owe me one.”
A few minutes later, a patrolman came out from behind the coun-
ter and led me to the back of the station. He unlocked the door to a 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   76 7/29/09   1:28:59 PM


--- PAGE 86 ---

tiny, windowless interview room, with a small wooden table and two 
wooden chairs on either side.
There was a knock at the door. The patrolman unlocked it and 
Deborah Johnson was brought into the cramped room. This was our 
first meeting. She leaned over, crying and shaking, supporting herself 
with one hand on the table. Slowly she sat down. She looked at me 
guardedly, not quite fathoming who I was or why I was there.
“I’m Jeff Haas with the People’ s Law Office.” The mention of my PLO 
connection and my Afro appeared to relax her a little.
“How are you and your baby?” I asked.
There was a pause as if she didn’t hear me, then she responded, “I 
wasn’t shot like a lot of the others. The pigs pushed me around, but I 
think my baby is OK.” She paused again. “Fred never really woke up. 
We were sleeping. I woke up hearing shots from the front and back. I 
shook Fred but he didn’t open his eyes.” Deborah demonstrated how 
she had pushed against Fred several times trying to wake him. “ At one 
point he sort of raised up and then lay back down again.” She repeated 
that he never opened his eyes. “I got on top of him to try to protect 
him from the gunshots. The bed was shaking from the bullets.” She 
said the shooting stopped only after someone in the bedroom with 
her yelled, “We got a pregnant sister in here.” She told me two “pigs” 
came into the bedroom. One of them pulled up her nightgown and 
called out, “Look, we got a broad here.” Then they pulled her out into 
the kitchen.
Deborah stopped talking as she wiped her eyes on the sleeve of her 
nightgown. I was nodding my head trying to be supportive, “Fred never 
really woke up,” she repeated. “He was lying there when they pulled me 
out of the bedroom.” She paused.
Then she described two police officers going into their bedroom, 
hearing one of them fire two shots, followed by, “He’ s good and dead 
now.” Deborah put her head down. A moment later she raised it sud-
denly and looked at me. “What can you do?” she asked.
Indeed, what could I do about the horrible murder she had just 
described?
Not knowing what to say, I wrestled with the idea of putting my arm 
around her but instead asked her, “Did it look like Fred had been shot 
already when you were pulled out of the bedroom?”
A Knock at the Door
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   77 7/29/09   1:29:00 PM


--- PAGE 87 ---

Rendezvous with Death
“He didn’t have any blood on him that I could see,” she replied. “I 
crawled on top of him during the shooting to try to protect him.” She 
showed me her patterned blue and white nightgown. There was no 
blood. Deborah’ s description of Fred rising up but not opening his eyes, 
then lying back down, seemed strange. I couldn’t understand why he 
appeared dazed and semiconscious when he had not been shot.
“Were the men who raided the apartment in uniform?”
“No, but they were definitely the pigs.” She described how, after 
she was taken out of the back bedroom, she and other Panthers were 
pushed into the kitchen, handcuffed, and made to stand facing the back 
door. They were ordered not to turn around. She knew they had killed 
Fred because the police were bragging to each other, “Fred Hampton, 
the Panther chairman, is dead.” They told the occupants to keep their 
heads down as they took them outside and put them in police cars.
“ Are you injured?” I asked.
“I guess I’m OK, but my baby could come any time.”
Even though by her account she was innocent of any criminal acts, I 
knew the police would try to justify what they did by accusing the vic-
tims of being the aggressors, initiating the gunfire. 
“I’ll do everything to get you out as soon as possible and try to make 
sure you and the baby get medical care until you’re released. Some of 
the doctors who work at the jail hospital work at the Panthers clinic. I’ll 
ask them to look in on you.”
I wrote down Deborah’ s mother’ s name and phone number. “I’ll call 
and tell her you weren’t wounded and seem to be OK. She should start 
raising money for bail.” We shared a brief hug. She had never stopped 
crying.
I tapped the door to indicate that the consultation was over. In the 
next thirty-five years, I interviewed more than a hundred people in 
police lock-ups. None imprinted on my memory as strongly as Deborah 
Johnson, pregnant, in her nightgown, sobbing, and telling me that the 
police had just murdered her boyfriend in their bed.
After Deborah was led out, I sat down and tried to picture what she 
had described. It was difficult to imagine the scene. I had never been to 
the apartment and I was determined to get a sketch of the layout.
A few minutes later there was another knock. This time the lock-up 
keeper brought in a tall, square-shouldered man with short hair, about 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   78 7/29/09   1:29:00 PM


--- PAGE 88 ---

my age and another man, short and in his late forties with graying hair. 
Their handcuffs were removed and the keeper brought another chair to 
the table.
The tall, younger man introduced himself. “I’m Harold Bell from 
Rockford.” He said he was a Vietnam veteran and a college student. The 
other man was Louis Truelock. He told me Fred recruited him when 
they were in prison together at Menard and he had joined the party 
after his release, a couple of months after Fred’ s. Both Bell and Truelock 
were trembling and looked in shock. Truelock was particularly anxious 
to tell what happened. He described how he had been asleep in the liv-
ing room at the front of the apartment when he heard footsteps in the 
entranceway and a knock on the front door. Truelock said he asked who 
it was and he heard somebody say “Tommy,” followed by gunfire from 
outside. Harold said he heard “two thuds in the entrance hallway and 
then two shots.” I was writing furiously on my legal pad trying to keep 
their accounts straight.
Truelock and Bell said they immediately left the living room and ran 
to the back bedroom to wake up Fred. Bell saw “men with guns coming 
in the back through the kitchen door,” as he reached the entrance to 
Fred’ s bedroom. He got on the bed with Fred and Deborah and shook 
Fred, yelling, “Chairman, the pigs are vamping!” But Fred would not 
wake up. “He only raised his head and slowly put it back down.” Bell 
saw pistols and shotguns being fired into the rear bedroom; he could 
also hear firing from the front of the apartment. He spoke in a formal, 
stiff way that partially covered his fear.
Bell told me that as he huddled on the bed with Fred and Deborah, “ A 
hand reached in the room and pulled me out. I was pushed onto the floor 
in the dining room where I was told to lie spread-eagled. Then someone 
kicked me really hard in the groin. The police shooting in the apartment 
was like a firefight. They moved to strategic positions. It seemed to last 
forever. The police definitely knew what they were doing.”
Bell said after he, Truelock, and Deborah were in the kitchen, two 
police officers returned to the bedroom. “I heard more shots from the 
back bedroom. I could tell those were shots from a handgun.” Then he 
heard the police yelling, “That’ s Fred Hampton, that’ s Fred Hampton.”
Truelock said he also went to the bed where Fred and Deborah had 
been sleeping. After a brief pause in the shooting, he yelled, “We have a 
A Knock at the Door
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   79 7/29/09   1:29:00 PM


--- PAGE 89 ---
0
Rendezvous with Death
pregnant sister in here!” The police entered the back bedroom, pulled 
Deborah and him out, and pushed them toward the kitchen. Truelock 
heard more gunshots from inside the rear bedroom. When the gunfire 
finally stopped, Bell, Deborah and he were being held in the kitchen. 
“We were handcuffed and told to look at the floor.”
Truelock continued: “ A policeman dragged Fred’ s body out of the 
back bedroom and onto a door lying on the floor of the dining room. 
He wasn’t moving.”
As they were being led out of the apartment, Bell saw Fred lying in 
his underwear with a pool of blood around his head. “I saw where he 
had been shot in the head. I was told to keep moving, look straight 
ahead,” while the police were taunting, “Chairman Fred Hampton is 
dead.” I was trying to write down everything, but I finally stopped. I 
asked Bell to draw a sketch of the apartment from front to rear, from 
the north entrance and vestibule on Monroe Street to the kitchen 
door at the rear. His diagram depicted an entrance door off the vesti-
bule into the living room and a hallway to the right of the front door, 
heading south toward the back of the apartment. The hallway lead 
past a small bedroom on the left, and then past another one, also on 
the left, where Deborah and Fred had been sleeping. Toward the rear 
of the apartment the hallway opened on the right into a dining room, 
followed by the kitchen. The kitchen was at the rear of the apartment 
with the kitchen door opening onto a landing and then the back 
stairs.
“Mark Clark . . . was lying on the floor in the living room after the raid,” 
Truelock added, pointing inside the living room square on Bell’ s sketch, 
next to the front door. “He wasn’t moving.” Truelock said the police kept 
firing even after they had been brought out of the back bedroom.
Then Truelock pointed to the front bedroom on the diagram. “The 
people in there, Doc, Verlina Brewer and Blair Anderson, were all shot, 
and so was China Doll in the living room. Doc looked really bad. He was 
bent over holding his stomach. We were all told to shut up, look at the 
floor and not talk to each other.”
Bell asked me if I knew what happened to the people who were 
wounded. I told him they were at Cook County Hospital, but no one 
had been in to see them yet. Both Bell and Truelock were particularly 
concerned about Doc.
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   80 7/29/09   1:29:01 PM


--- PAGE 90 ---
1
“His shirt was covered in blood. He could hardly stand up, but the 
pigs kept shouting at him not to lean over and stand up straight. He was 
trying, but he kept falling down,” Truelock said.
“What about Deborah? How’ s she doing?” Bell asked.
I told him Deborah was still crying when I saw her a few minutes ago, 
but I thought she and her baby were OK.
Bell and Truelock explained that things happened so fast, they never 
even picked up or fired a gun. Instead, they were trying to wake up Fred 
to figure out what to do. Someone must have been assigned security, with 
so many Panthers sleeping in one place. Because of their location in the 
living room by the front door, it was likely Bell or Truelock or both. I didn’t 
ask them specifically whether they had been assigned security. They were 
miserable enough. They kept repeating how quickly the gunfire had fol-
lowed the knock, and that they ran to the back to wake up and warn Fred. 
I thought they were embarrassed that they had done nothing to defend 
the apartment, but they didn’t try to make themselves look better.
Suddenly, as though he had just remembered something, Truelock 
leaned over and whispered, “Look out for Rush.”
“What do you mean?” I whispered back.
“One of the police officers here was bragging ‘Rush is next,’ and they 
said something about another raid.”
“Can you identify the cop who said this?” I asked instinctively. He said 
that although he could hear the police voices from his cell, he couldn’t 
see who was talking.
“I’ll warn him,” I said.
At the time of my interview, Bell and Truelock had been in custody 
four hours. They told me the police officers at Wood Street were laugh-
ing and gloating about Fred’ s death. I told both of them that I didn’t yet 
know what charges would be placed against them but that our office 
would try to get them bail. I wrote down the necessary information to 
fill out petitions to reduce bond and collected the names of their peo-
ple to contact about bail money and to inform them of their court date 
when it was announced.
I rapped on the door to signal the guard to let us out. “Try to get per-
mission to call me at PLO later on in the afternoon,” I advised, as the 
door was being opened. “We will know more about your charges and 
the conditions of the people at Cook County Hospital.”
A Knock at the Door
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   81 7/29/09   1:29:01 PM


--- PAGE 91 ---
2
Rendezvous with Death
On my way out I checked at the front desk to find out if specific 
charges had been filed (they had not), and drove back to PLO.
 I’m a slow emotional processor, gleaning the facts and ruminating 
over them before responding with my feelings. Not a bad trait for a law-
yer, but not so helpful as a human being or spouse. It took awhile for 
me to comprehend the full impact of what the survivors had told me. 
What they described was nothing short of deliberate murder, certainly 
by the two officers who had gone into the bedroom and executed Fred. 
The raid looked like an assassination, something I had connected with 
the deaths of Malcolm X, Dr. King, and the Kennedys. Now I was staring 
at one up close.
Part of me wanted to gather evidence to help the survivors win their 
criminal trials and, if possible, prove through the courts that Fred was 
intentionally killed. The other side of me believed Fred’ s murder proved 
the legal system didn’t work. What good did it do to have lawyers and 
courts and a constitution and legal precedent if the police under the 
direct control of the prosecutor could murder you in your bed? I wasn’t 
sure whether I wanted to be a lawyer fighting for justice inside an unjust 
system or on the outside exposing the legal system as a fraud, taking 
direct action against Fred’ s killers. In the 1960s we used to repeat Lenny 
Bruce’ s words, “In the halls of Justice, the only Justice is in the halls.” As 
lawyers for activists, it took us awhile to discover that in most cases, we 
could both participate in the legal system and expose its inequities.
When I left, I called Bobby Rush, the Panther defense minister, at the 
Panther office. I told him what Truelock had said about the police com-
ing to his apartment next.
There was a pause. “Those motherfuckers will do anything. Don’t 
worry. I won’t go home.” Then, his voice crackling with emotion, he 
added, “Jeff, when I was at the apartment with Skip this morning, I saw 
the bloody mattress. Did they really shoot Fred in his bed?”
“That’ s what Deborah said, and Bell and Truelock too. They said the 
police came in shooting. They went into Fred’ s room and executed him 
right there on his bed. Deborah said he never really woke up.”
There was another long pause. “That fits,” Rush finally said. “The 
bullet holes at the apartment show they were shooting towards Fred.” 
“They urged me to get the word out about what happened,” I added.
“I’ll do that,” Rush promised.
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   82 7/29/09   1:29:01 PM


--- PAGE 92 ---

Hanrahan Versus Panthers
 
W
hen I got back to  the office there was a message from Skip that 
said he was still at Fred’ s apartment and was working with Mike 
Gray, who was filming the scene and recording Skip’ s gathering of bul-
lets and shell casings. Apparently the police had not sealed off Fred’ s 
apartment—a striking departure from police rules. The police had a 
duty to protect a crime scene where people were shot and killed. I won-
dered if they’ d abandoned the premises because, having accomplished 
their dirty work, they did not want to face the community’ s response. I 
was amazed that Skip had the presence of mind, after hearing that Fred 
had been killed, to call Mike Gray and bring him to the apartment to 
film evidence collection.
 “Hanrahan’ s about to hold a press conference!” someone yelled from 
the next cubicle. Everyone ran next door to Glascott’ s Groggery and I 
asked the bartender to turn the TV on.
Edward Hanrahan was sitting in the library of the State’ s Attorney’ s 
Office behind a dark mahogany table covered with rifles, shotguns, 
handguns, and many hundreds of rounds of ammunition, all arranged 
in neat rows. He began reading from a sheet of paper in an authoritar-
ian, indignant voice.
As soon as Sergeant Daniel Groth and Officer James Davis, who were 
leading our men, announced they were policemen, occupants of the 
first-floor apartment attacked them with shotgun fire. The officers took 
cover, and the occupants continued firing at our policemen from several 
rooms in the apartment. Three times after that Sergeant Groth ordered 
all his men to cease firing and told the occupants to come out with their 
hands up. Each time one of the occupants replied, “Shoot it out,” and the 
police officers continued firing at the occupants. The immediate, violent 
criminal reaction of the occupants in shooting at announced police offi-
11
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   83 7/29/09   1:29:02 PM


--- PAGE 93 ---

Rendezvous with Death
cers emphasizes the extreme viciousness of the Black Panther Party. So 
does their refusal to cease firing at the police officers when urged to do so 
several times. We wholeheartedly commend the police officers for their 
bravery, their remarkable restraint, and their discipline in the face of the 
Black Panther attack, as should every decent citizen in our community.
While speaking, Hanrahan frequently pointed to the weapons in 
front of him, indicating the police had seized them from the Panther 
apartment. Police procedures required that contraband confiscated be 
inventoried and taken directly to the crime lab. This was the only way 
to maintain the chain of custody as well as to preserve the condition of 
any evidence that had to be tested. Hanrahan bypassed that procedure 
so he could display the weapons to the press. He appeared confident 
that if he could show weapons seized from Panthers and remind the 
public of the Panthers’ “extreme viciousness,” then “every decent citi-
zen” would support the police actions without challenge.
Hanrahan was not only taking responsibility for the raid but also 
praising the raiders for their courage. Hanrahan’ s statement that each 
time after the police officers called for a cease-fire the occupants 
answered with shouts of “shoot it out,” sounded more like the lingo in 
a TV Western than what a Panther, or anyone, would yell in the middle 
of a gun battle.
In answers to reporters’ questions, Hanrahan said Fred Hampton 
was found dead in a back bedroom near a .45-caliber handgun. He 
indicated a similar handgun had been seen firing from that room at the 
police in the rear. He stopped and pointed to a .45-caliber pistol on the 
table, indicating this was Hampton’ s weapon.
Sergeant Daniel Groth, the apparent leader of the raid, also spoke: 
“There must have been six or seven of them firing. The firing must have 
gone on ten or twelve minutes. If two hundred shots were exchanged, 
that was nothing.” The tall deep-voiced sergeant acted as though he 
had miraculously escaped an ambush.
When I went back to my office, I called the news desk at the Chicago 
Daily News, the more widely circulated and liberal of Chicago’ s after-
noon papers. I told the person who answered they should send a reporter 
to Hampton’ s apartment and that Bobby Rush, the Panther defense 
minister was holding a press conference there shortly. I also told them 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   84 7/29/09   1:29:02 PM


--- PAGE 94 ---

Hanrahan had originally denied me access to talk to the Panther survi-
vors, because he did not want his version to be challenged.
Of course I didn’t know for sure exactly what did happen during the 
raid, only what the Panthers had told me. But there was a spontane-
ity and consistency to what they said. I thought they would have been 
proud to defend Fred’ s apartment and told me if they had. Their admis-
sions of being caught unprepared, even frightened, and putting up no 
resistance had the ring of truth.
Later that afternoon I bought the Chicago Daily News, which carried 
two very different versions of the raid. Under the front-page banner 
headlines, “Panther Chief, Aide Killed in Gun Battle with Police,” there 
were two subheads. One was titled “Six Injured in Shootout.” The other 
was “Police ‘Murdered’ Hampton—Panther, We Can Prove It.”
The first one repeated much of Hanrahan’ s press statement and 
added that he was going to charge all the surviving occupants with 
attempted murder of the police. An additional statement from Sergeant 
Groth was included: “ As we entered, a girl who was lying on a bed in 
the living room fired a blast from a shotgun at us,” and “a .45-caliber 
pistol was found in Hampton’ s hand, when officers entered a rear bed-
room and found him lying in a pool of blood on a bed. A shotgun was 
found next to the bed.” Two other raiders, Detectives Carmody and 
Ciszewski had synchronized their stories with Groth. They told the 
Daily News reporters that “a man later identified as Hampton had fired 
at them with a shotgun and a pistol from the rear bedroom.” Deputy 
Police Superintendent Nygren supported Groth’ s account: “Miss Harris 
touched off the gun battle by firing at the police with a shotgun.”
The other version in the Daily News was based on information I had 
provided Rush from my interviews with the survivors:
Bobby Rush, deputy minister of defense for the Black Panther Party said 
Thursday that Panther chairman Fred Hampton was “murdered while 
he slept in bed.” “We can prove that,” Rush said at a press conference 
on the steps outside the blood-spattered first floor apartment at 2337 W. 
Monroe, the scene of Thursday’s Panther police shootout. “This vicious 
murder of Chairman Fred and Mark Clark, our defense minister from 
Peoria, was implemented by that dog Nixon and Hanrahan and all the 
rest of the pigs. Hampton never fired back when the pigs came into his 
Hanrahan Versus Panthers
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   85 7/29/09   1:29:02 PM


--- PAGE 95 ---

Rendezvous with Death
back room and shot Fred in the head. He couldn’t have fired because he 
was asleep.” 
The Daily News article stated that Rush took reporters on a tour of 
the apartment and “showed them bullet holes that he said indicated 
that policemen had fired into rooms, but no shots had been fired out.”
A growing chorus in the black community rejected the raiders’ 
accounts. It was clear to anyone viewing the ravaged apartment that 
Fred was shot to death on his bed. By late Thursday the Panthers were 
leading tours for the press, neighborhood residents, and interested 
civic leaders, pointing out the locations of the bullet holes as well as 
the bloody mattress. Observers demanded an independent investiga-
tion. One organization that immediately challenged Hanrahan was the 
Afro-American Patrolmen’ s League, the black police union that regu-
larly spoke out against police brutality. Their leader, Renault Robinson, 
went to 2337 West Monroe, and held a press conference the night of the 
raid. He declared unequivocally that Fred had been “murdered.” 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   86 7/29/09   1:29:03 PM


--- PAGE 96 ---
Part II 
Exposing 
the Murder
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   87 7/29/09   1:29:03 PM


--- PAGE 97 ---
12
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   88 7/29/09   1:29:03 PM


--- PAGE 98 ---

“A Northern Lynching”
S
kip pushed open the door to the living room and Mike Gray turned 
on his camera as they entered the ransacked apartment. Skip and 
Rush cleared a pathway through the debris toward the rear. When they 
came to the back bedroom, they stopped. Skip leaned down and peeled 
a blood-soaked poster from a door lying unhinged on the floor. He 
looked at the coagulated pool of blood below him and pointed. “This is 
where the chairman must have died.” 
Mike Gray’ s camera captured the condition of each room and the 
bullet-pocked walls as well as the overturned dressers and clothes 
strewn throughout, exactly as the police had left them, just four hours 
earlier. Then, Skip went to work. Forensics had been his favorite course 
at Northwestern Law School and he had learned the art of evidence 
gathering and preservation from Fred Inbau, the legendary expert on 
police techniques. Mike Gray filmed each shell casing or bullet frag-
ment as it was picked up. Skip described the object, the location where 
he found the object, and then placed it in an envelope that he marked 
“2337 apt, exhibit number 1, 2, 3, etc.” Jim Reed, a minister who also 
had come to the apartment at Skip’ s urging, signed the outside of the 
envelope as a witness. Soon Flint, Seva, and Ray McClain, another law 
student from PLO joined Skip, and in the following days my wife, Mary, 
and Skip’ s wife, Nancy Dempsey, helped pick up and mark bullet frag-
ments and shell casings.
Viewing Mike Gray’ s film later, as I have many times, I continue to 
be astounded at how Skip had the presence of mind and the self-
control to react so calmly and methodically to Fred’ s death. He appears 
so technical and matter-of-fact, standing there inserting each metal 
fragment into an evidence folder. He reacted professionally and clini-
cally while the rest of us were trying to decide what we should do. Years 
later I asked Skip what he felt when he saw Fred’ s body at the morgue 
12
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   89 7/29/09   1:29:03 PM


--- PAGE 99 ---
0
Exposing the Murder
that morning and how, an hour later, inside the apartment he was able 
to respond so methodically.
“My lawyer training came out,” he said. “Something from law school 
kicked in and I just automatically applied what I had learned about 
gathering evidence and the chain of custody.” He agreed that my char-
acterization of him as “cold, calculating, and efficient” was probably 
accurate. He said he hadn’t thought about his feelings.
Skip and Rush were not sure when or if the police would come back 
to seal the apartment, so Skip worked pretty much around the clock 
for two days, gathering, identifying, and filming the physical evidence. 
That afternoon Rush directed Panthers to lead guided tours for the 
neighborhood residents gathered outside. The apartment was freezing 
cold even with the space heater in the living room on. It was also quite 
dark, until Mary and Nancy, Skip’ s wife, brought in more lamps.
When I went to 2337 a couple of days after the raid, it was still freez-
ing and the new lamps only partially illuminated the rooms. I knew 
there had been nine Panthers in the apartment at the time of the raid, 
and I was struck by how small the five rooms were, and the thinness of 
the walls, which looked as if they were made of cardboard. The run that 
Truelock and Harold Bell made from the living room to Fred’ s bed was 
no more than ten feet. I walked to the back. The blood-soaked mattress 
took up most of the bedroom. The wall to my left, which separated the 
two bedrooms, was riddled with bullets holes coming from the living 
room.
The bloody door on which Fred’ s body was dragged was lying in the 
doorway, plainly visible throughout the apartment. It indicated his ex-
ecutioners wanted to show off their “kill” to the other raiders as one 
might show off the carcass of a slain deer. A police photo showed Fred’ s 
body on the door in polka dot underwear and a T-shirt, with blood 
pouring from his head wounds. Another photo showed the uniformed 
police officers carrying Fred’ s body down the front steps on a stretcher. 
They smiled for the police photographer. Their grins reminded me of 
the spectators’ smiles in the lynching photos from the South, includ-
ing the people photographed standing around the just-lynched body 
of Leo Frank.
The Panthers started leading tours through the apartment even 
before the physical evidence had been analyzed. These tours were com-
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   90 7/29/09   1:29:03 PM


--- PAGE 100 ---
1
pelling because there were almost one hundred bullet holes in the 
east walls of the apartment where the police had fired at the Panthers, 
and none on the west walls where shots would have impacted had the 
Panthers fired at the police. “People looked different after they walked 
through the apartment,” one of the Panthers who led the tours said. 
“They were angry.”
The Philadelphia chapter of the Panthers sent two members to 
Chicago to assess what happened. One of them, Mumia Abu-Jamal, 
described what he saw: “People were lined up in the bitter Chicago cold 
in a way that made the apartment building resemble a movie theater.” 
After the visit he wrote, “We had seen with our own eyes the walls cut 
through with cop machine gun fire. We had seen the mattress where 
Fred and his woman had lain, blood caked like tomato soup deep into 
the material.” He described the effect it had on Rosemary, the other per-
son who came with him. “When Rosemary came out, something in her 
had changed. When she entered the apartment, she was a supporter of 
the BPP . When she left the building she was a Panther.”
An elderly woman touring the apartment shook her head and com-
mented, “This was nuthin but a Northern lynching.”
Fred’s body was sent to the Rayner Funeral Home on Friday, December 
5, after a very hurried autopsy by Dr. Constantinou, a Greek-born phy-
sician with a temporary Illinois medical license. His protocol showed 
he found two bullet wounds in Fred’ s head. He did no analysis on the 
contents of Fred’ s stomach or his blood. He determined that Mark Clark 
was struck and killed by a single bullet through the heart.
Not satisfied, Skip asked the Hamptons for permission to have an 
independent autopsy done at the Rayner Funeral Home. The Hamptons 
gave their consent.
On Saturday morning a second autopsy was done by Dr. Victor 
Levine, a former Cook County coroner, with two physicians and Skip 
present. Dr. Levine found that both head wounds came from bullets 
fired from the top right side of the head in a downward direction. One 
shot entered directly in front of the right ear and exited from the left 
side of the throat, and the other entered the right forehead and was 
probed to a point behind the left eye. They were consistent with two 
shots to the head at point blank range from the doorway to the south 
“A Northern Lynching”
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   91 7/29/09   1:29:04 PM


--- PAGE 101 ---
2
Exposing the Murder
bedroom. The downward angles of the bullets were inconsistent with 
the horizontal shots that came through the wall from the front.
Dr. Eleanor Berman, the Cook County chemist retained by Dr. Levine, 
tested Fred’ s blood. In two separate tests she found a high dosage of the 
barbiturate Seconal, enough to make him unconscious or very drowsy. 
The barbiturates explained why Fred never woke up. Fred did not use 
drugs, so the question was, how did the barbiturate get there?
On Saturday, December 6, Skip and Dennis asked Herbert MacDonnell, 
a prominent firearms expert in Corning, New York, to come to Chicago. 
Two days later MacDonnell examined, measured, and photographed 
the locations, directions, and diameters of the bullet holes throughout 
the apartment and gathered what remained of bullet fragments and 
shell casings.
MacDonnell determined that the upper panel of the living room door 
contained two bullet holes, not one, as the police found. The smaller 
hole on top indicated a shot fired in, and the larger one several inches 
below was made from a shot exiting. The smaller bullet hole was chest 
high and it lined up with a bullet found in the rear living room wall 
that matched Sergeant Groth’ s handgun. The larger hole was made by a 
shotgun slug and matched up with a shotgun wad found high up in the 
ceiling of the anteroom. This type of ammunition matched that found 
in the shotgun attributed to Mark Clark.
MacDonnell measured the upward trajectory of the deer slug as sev-
enteen degrees and determined it was fired from a place near the floor in 
such a manner as to strike the door at waist level and then impact high 
on the ceiling outside. The strange upward angle would be consistent 
with a shot being fired by Mark Clark as he was falling to the ground.
MacDonnell also measured the angles of both shots through the front 
door and concluded that the door was more open for Mark Clark’ s shot 
than it was for Sergeant Groth’ s. Thus, if the door was opening when the 
shots were fired, Groth’ s shot came first.
Skip removed this panel to preserve what he recognized as a critical 
piece of evidence, one that might reveal who fired the first shot at the 
front. He stored the front door panel, together with the bloodstained 
mattress, at the home of Reverend Reed.
MacDonnell noted another entrance hole in the vestibule. A wad 
found inside the hole matched up with the ammunition in the shotgun 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   92 7/29/09   1:29:04 PM


--- PAGE 102 ---

carried by Officer Jones, who had entered the front. One of these three 
shots was the first one fired. Which came first cannot be conclusively 
proven from the physical evidence alone. We later concluded that the 
most likely scenario was that Jones’ s shot, fired in the crowded entrance 
foyer either as a signal to the police at the rear or by accident, set off the 
other two.
MacDonnell showed Skip that a bullet makes a larger hole as it exits 
a wall than when it enters and the wood is splayed outward at the exit 
hole. Thus, we could look at the bullet holes in the apartment and 
determine the direction from which they had been fired. MacDonnell 
confirmed that except for one of the two bullet holes in the front door, 
all the eighty or more shots poured in from the direction of the police 
entering the apartment.
13
“A Northern Lynching”
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   93 7/29/09   1:29:04 PM


--- PAGE 103 ---

The Battle for Hearts and Minds
O
n December 4, while Hanrahan was  giving his press conference, 
members of his office were drawing up felony charges of attempted 
murder, aggravated battery, and unlawful use of weapons against each 
of the survivors. The raiding officers prepared sworn complaints that 
each of the occupants had fired at them. Bonds were set at one hundred 
thousand dollars each.
Following his interview with the Daily News, Bobby Rush was inter-
viewed on camera. He declared that Fred had been “murdered in his 
bed” and called the raid an “assassination” ordered by J. Edgar Hoover. 
Although the press quoted Rush, much of the public dismissed Rush’ s 
charges as Panther rhetoric.
Donald Stang went to Cook County Hospital later on December 4 
to check on the four wounded survivors. When he returned to PLO, he 
reported Doc Satchel—nicknamed for his role in organizing the Panther 
health clinic—had the most serious injuries. He had four bullets in him, 
including two in his abdomen. He was just coming out of surgery.
“He’ll probably survive, but it’ s not clear in what condition,” Don 
said. 
Doc was no more than five feet six inches tall and weighed maybe 
one hundred and forty pounds. It was hard to imagine him being hearty 
enough to survive two bullets in his abdomen.
Verlina Brewer, a student from Ann Arbor, Michigan, was shot in 
her left buttock and left knee. Don said she was doing OK, but the 
knee wound could give her some trouble. Blair Anderson, a young 
guy who was a former Blackstone Ranger whom they call BJ, was hit 
in both thighs and his penis. Don said the other person was a student 
from Champaign, Illinois, Brenda Harris, whom he described as a tiny 
woman with a big Afro known as China Doll. She was shot two times in 
the thigh and in her hand.
13
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   94 7/29/09   1:29:05 PM


--- PAGE 104 ---

Doc was the only one I knew. He was always so positive and 
enthusiastic.
“They’re all handcuffed to their hospital beds, and I don’t think they’re 
going to bring them to court until they’ve improved,” Don added. 
Later that day someone talked to Fannie Clark, the mother of Mark. 
She told us Mark had been one of many black children mistreated in the 
Peoria schools. He had started a Panther chapter and breakfast program 
in Peoria the previous summer and came up to Chicago at Fred’ s urg-
ing to find out how the Panthers there ran their chapter and program. 
Mark had been traveling around the state attempting to organize more 
Panther chapters. He was one of eighteen children. Now his mother was 
contacting the coroner to take his body back to Peoria for burial.
On the afternoon of December 4, Brian Boyer, a young reporter for 
the Chicago Sun-Times reported to work at about four o’clock. Boyer 
asked for permission to visit the apartment. His editors said it was too 
dangerous for a white reporter to go there and that no black reporters 
were available. Boyer went anyway. 
“I guess my first reaction was to check the walls again to see if they’ d 
plastered anything over,” he said. “Then I called in and said they weren’t 
going to believe it, but it looked like murder to me. I asked for editors 
and other reporters to come down and go through the apartment, but 
they weren’t interested.” Boyer returned to the paper and reported what 
he had seen. 
One of his editors responded, “If we run that story and the West Side 
burns down, we’ll be responsible.” Jim Hoge, the Sun-Times chief editor 
ordered the story to run, but in the next day’ s edition it was buried on 
page thirty-two. 
Brian Boyer responded, “I quit.”
On December 5, Deborah Johnson, Harold Bell, and Louis Truelock 
were brought to preliminary hearing court on Twenty-Sixth Street. The 
press sat in the front row, and Panthers and their supporters filled the 
rest of the wooden spectator benches. Skip, Don, and I stood up as 
the defendants were led out from the holding cell into the courtroom. 
Shouts of “Power to the people” came from the rear, and Harold Bell 
raised his fist in the defiant Black Power gesture. 
Skip, Don, and I handed up written appearance forms, and when our 
clients names were called we answered, “Ready for trial.” We had cho-
The Battle for Hearts and Minds
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   95 7/29/09   1:29:05 PM


--- PAGE 105 ---

Exposing the Murder
sen this strategy because we wanted to show the world and the press 
that our clients were eager and prepared to confront the state’ s so-called 
evidence. By answering “ready,” we also began the 120-day term for the 
prosecutor to bring our clients to trial.
“The State is not ready and is seeking a continuance,” Nick Moth-
erway, one of Hanrahan’ s subordinates, replied. In a political case like 
this, the prosecutor generally does not want his witnesses, the police 
officers, subjected to cross-examination at a preliminary hearing. By 
continuing the case he’ d be given time to get a direct indictment from 
the grand jury. In that circumstance he would be allowed to present 
testimony of the police officers with no cross-examination. The indict-
ment would then supersede the need for a preliminary hearing.
“Continuance granted for two weeks until December 19,” the judge 
responded.  
“Then we move that our clients bonds be lowered,” Skip said. 
“Deborah Johnson is eight months pregnant, Your Honor.”
“Denied,” Judge Epton answered again. “Bond will remain at one hun-
dred thousand dollars.” There was hissing from the back. “I will order 
that Deborah be seen by a doctor at Cermak Hospital. Next case.”
Skip was interviewed in front of the TV cameras just outside the 
courtroom. I was a couple feet away as he stood in front of the cam-
eras and declared, “Hanrahan is guilty of murder.” A day of looking at 
the blood and bullet holes in the apartment had shocked and outraged 
Skip. “Let’ s tell it like it is,” he said afterward. I congratulated him.
Our office took responsibility for  defending the survivors. As we heard 
their accounts and saw the apartment, we knew the truth had to be 
told. We lost our innocence on December 4.
When I lived in Chicago, in the middle of the cold, gray winters peo-
ple would ask me why I stayed. Over time I had an answer: “I was bitten 
by Chicago and in particular the murder of Fred Hampton. I have been 
trying to bite back ever since.” 
Bobby Rush was not home early in the morning on December 5 when 
the police raided his apartment in the projects at 2040 South State. The 
police claimed they found marijuana and put out an arrest warrant for 
Rush. It’ s doubtful that was true, both because Rush didn’t use mari-
juana and because I had warned him the police were coming. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   96 7/29/09   1:29:05 PM


--- PAGE 106 ---

We wanted to devise a way for Rush to surrender himself safely and 
publicly so that the police would not use his arrest as an opportunity 
to harm him. One of the Panthers suggested we ask Jesse Jackson to 
accompany Rush when he turned himself in. We reasoned that if Rush 
turned himself in with a public figure and in front of the media that 
Jackson would attract, the police could not say he resisted. 
I didn’t understand why PLO was selected to make the liaison with 
Jesse Jackson, but I made the contact more than willingly. I wanted 
to meet this great orator. I phoned Jackson, told him Flint and I were 
Panther attorneys and needed to meet with him. He invited us to come 
to his Hyde Park apartment early the next day. 
Jackson’ s apartment was on the second floor of a three-story Victo-
rian building. A very large and muscular black man, whom we took to be 
a bodyguard, opened the door and let us in. The apartment was modest 
in size but well furnished. We sat down on the couch in the small living 
room and waited. Jackson came out in silk pajamas, a bathrobe, and 
slippers. Flint and I introduced ourselves and stood to greet him. He 
asked why we had come. 
“We represent the Panthers and the reason we’re here is that Bobby 
Rush has an arrest warrant for marijuana. He’ s hiding out, and we’re 
afraid if the police find him they might kill him. We would like you to be 
with him when he turns himself in,” I said.
“So now the Panthers are coming to me,” Jackson said. “When Fred 
was alive, the Panthers spent a lot of time attacking me; some of them 
even called me a sissy. Are they going to keep that up?” 
I knew Fred had accused Jackson and Operation Breadbasket of 
developing programs focused primarily on helping black business-
men rather than poor and working-class people, but I was surprised by 
Jackson’ s response. Fred criticized many black organizations, although 
the criticisms I heard had been on political, not personal, grounds. 
“I’m sure the Panthers would be very grateful if you helped to protect 
Rush, and I certainly doubt if any personal attacks would continue,” I 
answered. 
Jackson walked back and forth in the small open space in the living 
room, pondering our proposal. Then he stopped. 
“You know what? Rush should come to Breadbasket and turn himself 
in when the Saturday morning service at the Drexel [Avenue] church 
The Battle for Hearts and Minds
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   97 7/29/09   1:29:06 PM


--- PAGE 107 ---

Exposing the Murder
is televised at eleven o’clock.” He looked pleased with his suggestion 
and continued, “I’ll make an introduction and then welcome Rush as 
he comes onstage.” 
“Sounds like a good scenario to me,” Flint said. 
“Thank you, and I’m sure the Panthers will appreciate your gesture. 
We’ll make sure he’ s there tomorrow morning,” I added.
Renault Robinson, president of the Afro-American Patrolmen’ s 
League, was more than willing to assist us. He agreed to accompany 
Rush to the Operation Breadbasket meeting. The black police com-
mander from the district nearest the Drexel Church also assured us 
he would accept Rush into his custody and vouch for Rush’ s personal 
safety. He acceded to our plan, no questions asked. 
On Saturday morning Kermit Coleman, the ACLU lawyer who had 
worked with us on Fred’ s appeal, picked up Rush in his red two-seater 
sports car. They then picked up Renault Robinson, who carried Rush on 
his lap as they headed for Operation Breadbasket. 
There were more than five hundred people in the Drexel Church 
when Flint and I arrived at ten o’clock. We were among the few whites, 
and we sat in the third or fourth row, with a good view of the stage. We 
waited, listening to the glorious sound of the choir singing hymns from 
the balcony in the rear of the church. 
At 10:30 
a.m. Reverend Jackson came out to the pulpit area as the sing-
ing ended. The program was being broadcast live on WVON radio, and 
the next hour segment would be televised. Jesse spoke with his usual 
dramatic flair, giving an earlier version of his “I am somebody” speech, 
and the audience responded enthusiastically. At 11:00 
a.m. a group of 
police officers from the Afro-American Patrolmen’ s League, all in uni-
form, came up on the dais with Renault Robinson. Shortly afterward 
Rush came from the side, accompanied by Kermit Coleman. 
Jesse put his arms around Rush. “You belong to the community,” he 
said, and he warned the police not to harm him. The audience stood 
and applauded. Jesse preached that the attack on the Panthers was an 
attack on all blacks , and he expressed the sentiment I had heard from 
many black people: “If it happened to Fred, it could happen to us.” Most 
whites didn’t see it that way. 
Jackson praised Fred as a courageous and inspiring young leader who 
had been taken away from the people he served by Hanrahan’ s mur-
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   98 7/29/09   1:29:06 PM


--- PAGE 108 ---

derous raid. Again, the audience clapped as Jackson and Rush stood 
together. The police commander, who had joined them, repeated his 
vow to protect his new prisoner. Rush surrendered himself, his fist in 
a Black Power salute. “Power to the people,” he shouted as he was led 
away. 
Jackson’s public pronouncements condemning the  raid were echoed 
by virtually all civil rights organizations in Chicago. Hanrahan had 
counted on the black community denouncing the Panthers after the 
raid. Instead, like the people in this enormous church, they condemned 
Hanrahan and the raiders. For many, Hampton was seen as yet another 
young black leader who, like Malcolm X and Dr. King, had fought against 
injustice and was assassinated because of what he stood for. Only this 
time, the government’ s connection to the murder was more apparent. 
The fatal bullets had come from the police under the command of the 
local white prosecutor. The fact that Fred was killed in his bed at four 
o’clock in the morning continued to horrify the majority of black peo-
ple in Chicago. To them it was a political assassination. 
One of the strongest reactions to Fred and Mark’ s deaths came from 
Maywood mayor Cabala and the Maywood Village trustees. They vis-
ited the site of the raid and called for Illinois attorney general Scott to 
seek indictments against the officers for “a blatant act of legitimized 
murder.” The national NAACP called for an inquiry, which led to a 
large-scale investigation cochaired by former attorney general Ramsey 
Clark and Roy Wilkins, the head of the NAACP . Former Supreme Court 
justice Arthur Goldberg joined several black congressman, aldermen, 
and state senators calling for an independent inquiry. Many commu-
nity leaders came to Chicago on December 20 to participate in a public 
forum. They heard testimony from elected officials, civil rights lead-
ers, businesspeople, and Panthers who reiterated their demand for an 
independent investigation. The steady pressure from civil rights groups 
kept the question of how Fred died in the public eye in Chicago. 
The police never explained why they departed from police procedure 
and vacated the apartment rather than sealing it, at least until the evi-
dence was gathered. The raiders claimed Richard Jalovec, Hanrahan’ s 
assistant, ordered them to leave, although he does not recall this. Later 
Jalovec said the police feared retaliation. Like the thousands of people 
The Battle for Hearts and Minds
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   99 7/29/09   1:29:06 PM


--- PAGE 109 ---
100
Exposing the Murder
who walked past Emmett Till’ s casket at the Rayner Funeral Home in 
1955 and remember his swollen, beaten face as a stark symbol of white 
Southern violence, the people who filed through 2337 fourteen years 
later saw the large number of bullet holes and the bloodstained mat-
tress as symbols of Chicago police violence. 
Chicago political analyst and campaign strategist Don Rose was inter-
viewed twenty years later in the Medill School of Journalism’ s student 
paper, the Monitor. In the article (part of a Fred Hampton commemora-
tion issue), entitled “ After Raid, Blacks Leave Democrats’ Machine,” he 
described the political fallout after December 4: 
The raid and the cover-up were probably pivotal in galvanizing the black 
community. They had not, for years and years, had an issue this offen-
sive stir this many people. A fury built up as events unfolded. The unveil-
ing of the assassination and the cover-up turned the black community 
around. There was a lot of anger against the machine and against Daley 
in particular.
Mayor Daley supported the police after the raid, as he did in all 
their confrontations with civilians, and condemned the Panthers, 
but he didn’t go out of his way to publicly stand up for Hanrahan. 
Chicago’ s black aldermen, state representatives, and congressman 
Ralph Metcalfe—all loyal to and dependent upon the Democratic ma-
chine in the past—bolted, openly condemning Hanrahan. This was the 
same machine that in November 1968, a year earlier, had made elect-
ing Hanrahan state’ s attorney a higher priority than getting Democrat 
Hubert Humphrey elected president. Hanrahan won, and Nixon car-
ried Illinois and the election. 
West Side alderman Danny Davis described, in the above-mentioned 
Monitor article, how the raid impacted the black community: “[The 
raid] instilled a sense of militancy and resistance, that certain things 
would not be tolerated. It sparked a determination that had not existed 
before.” The only black person in Chicago with an official position who 
publicly supported the police action was United States district judge 
William Parsons, who was contacted by the FBI to be its mouthpiece.
In law we have a term, res ipse loquitur, “things speak for themselves.” 
This was true of 2337. TV and newspaper reporters viewed the premises 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   100 7/29/09   1:29:07 PM


--- PAGE 110 ---
101
and came away disbelieving Hanrahan’ s claims that there had been an 
extended shootout. Black reporter Lu Palmer of the Chicago Daily News, 
one of the few black writers with his own column, visited the scene on 
the day of the raid. His job was to comment on the news from a black 
perspective, and he had written several columns before December that 
were sympathetic to the Panthers. Fred warmly called him “the Panther 
with the pen.” In his column the day following the raid—entitled “Is 
There a Drive to Get Panthers?”—Palmer answered his question with 
an emphatic yes. He wrote that when he visited  the apartment, “it was 
immediately clear that this was murder.” 
John Kifner, the Chicago correspondent for the New York Times, also 
described going to the apartment:  
The crowds were a cross section of the black community: workmen in paint-
stained clothes, angry young men and women, elderly people, middle-aged 
women in flowered hats, people in coats and ties and others in Army jackets, 
a smattering of whites. In the late afternoon there would be lines of small 
children in their bright school clothes. “Right here is where the first brother 
Mark Clark was murdered,” a young man in the Panthers black leather jacket 
would say just inside the front door, gesturing with a thin pointer. “The pigs 
say that a girl fired a shotgun at them and they started shooting. Now you 
can see, ain’t no bullet holes around the door.” He would go on, “no shoot-
ing coming out; all the shooting coming in.” The reaction was particularly 
strong when people gathered around the bloodstained mattress in the back 
bedroom where Hampton died. “They killed him when he was asleep, he 
never had a chance,” was the response of a middle-aged woman.
On December 8, Hanrahan held another press conference to coun-
ter the snowballing criticism. He again portrayed the Panthers as the 
aggressors, responding to the officers’ calls for cease-fires with continu-
ous firing. He said a “more detailed statement would be improper in 
view of the criminal charges pending against the survivors.” He added, 
“We were then and are still convinced that our officers used good judg-
ment, considerable restraint, and professional discipline.”
Shortly thereafter, reputed Daily News columnist Mike Royko, an 
iconoclastic reporter but no friend of the Panthers, went to the prem-
ises and responded to Hanrahan’ s claims:
The Battle for Hearts and MindsFred Hampton_FINAL.indd   101 7/29/09   1:29:07 PM


--- PAGE 111 ---
102
Exposing the Murder
State’ s Attorney Edward Hanrahan says it was only through the “grace 
of God” that his men escaped with scratches in their predawn raid on 
a Black Panther flat. Indeed, it does appear that miracles occurred. The 
Panthers’ bullets must have dissolved in the air before they hit anybody 
or anything. Either that or the Panthers were shooting in the wrong direc-
tion–namely, at themselves.
Years later I learned that the Panthers had considered retaliation 
against the police, but they decided against it when they saw so much 
of the public and media condemning the raid. 
After the private autopsy on Saturday, December 6, Fred’ s body was laid 
out for public viewing for two days at Rayner Funeral Home. Thousands 
of people walked past. He was dressed in a dark suit with a pale blue 
turtleneck shirt, not the way he would have dressed a week earlier. His 
wounds had been hidden by the mortician’ s impressive skills. Unlike 
Mamie Till, Iberia and Francis Hampton did not tell Sammy Rayner to 
show the wounds. Panthers in leather jackets stood at each end of the 
coffin, and there were bouquets of flowers, some dyed black. A ribbon 
on one said 
you can kill a freedom fighter, but you can’t kill the fight. 
On Fred’ s chest were political buttons, rosary beads, even class rings 
people had dropped into the coffin. 
Many of Chicago’s top criminal defense lawyers volunteered to represent 
the survivors. James Montgomery, who defended Fred’ s codefendant in 
the Maywood Mob Action case, agreed to represent Deborah; and Eugene 
Pincham, probably Chicago’ s most prominent criminal defense lawyer, 
became counsel for Verlina Brewer. Warren and Jo-Anne Wolfson filed 
appearances for Brenda Harris and Blair Anderson. Warren wore a crew 
cut, was very calm, and was known for his precise, stilettolike cross-
examination, while his red-haired, flamboyant wife Jo-Anne added fire to 
the defense. Kermit Coleman from the ACLU’ s prison project became 
Doc’ s attorney, and we continued as counsel for Truelock and Harold Bell. 
Standard defense strategy was to wait for trial to present your 
defense. “We don’t tell them a damn thing until they finish putting on 
their evidence,” one of the lawyers said at a hastily called meeting with 
the Panthers to discuss strategy. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   102 7/29/09   1:29:08 PM


--- PAGE 112 ---
10
“You haven’t seen the horror on the faces of people coming through 
the apartment,” one of the Panthers responded. 
We were faced with the seeming contradiction between the need to 
tell the public what happened, and thus provide support for the grow-
ing tide of opposition to Hanrahan or, alternatively, to provide what 
some considered the best legal defense for the survivors. Our group 
decision was to take the offensive, to tell the press what happened 
as recounted by the survivors and as demonstrated by the physical 
evidence. This public approach became critical in determining how 
PLO would represent the movement and victims of police and official 
misconduct in the future. We presented the case in a political, not a 
criminal, framework. “Putting the state on trial” is the way we came to 
characterize this strategy. We learned it was the best strategy to expose 
government wrongdoing and educate the public. It was also the best 
strategy to win. 
Following the meeting Dennis talked to Chicago Daily News reporter 
Hank Di Sutter and told him the survivors’ version of the raid. Di Sutter 
reiterated the Panther accounts in detail in the Daily News the next day, 
on December 10, under the headline “Panther Story of Killings.” 
Hanrahan went into a rage, a state even his friends say was common. 
He called the Daily News story “an obvious effort by the counsel of the 
Black Panthers to try their case in the press. It is outrageous.” Hanrahan 
felt he had the exclusive right to present his case publicly, but we were 
in a duel with Hanrahan to win public support. 
That afternoon, responding to what he termed “an orgy of sensation-
alism in the press and on TV that has severely damaged law enforce-
ment and the administration of justice,” Hanrahan and his top assis-
tants Jalovec and Boyle called the Chicago Tribune editors. They offered 
to make the police raiders available for exclusive interviews with their 
reporters. They also provided photos that they said “conclusively proved 
the Panthers opened the gun battle by firing a shotgun blast through 
the front door.” The Tribune accepted. 
The next morning, December 11, the Tribune’ s front page contained 
headlines, one and one half inches high, labeled EXCLUSIVE. In the 
police version printed in the Tribune exclusive, Sergeant Daniel Groth 
and many of the officers gave their detailed stories of what transpired at 
2337. The article went for several pages. 
The Battle for Hearts and Minds
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   103 7/29/09   1:29:08 PM


--- PAGE 113 ---
10
Exposing the Murder
Sergeant Groth said that he picked the early morning hour for the raid 
to catch the occupants by surprise, after an informant told him there 
was a cache of weapons in the apartment. He knocked on the door and 
announced they were police and said they had a search warrant. He 
heard movement inside and called out, “Police! Open up!” After a per-
son responded, “Just a minute,” Groth ordered Davis to kick the door 
open. Groth claimed that as they entered the anteroom he heard a shot-
gun blast that was fired through the closed living room door, just miss-
ing Officer Davis and himself. After Davis crashed through the living 
room door ahead of him, Sergeant Groth saw a woman on the couch 
fire a second shotgun blast at him as he was standing in the doorway, 
just missing him. “The flash of her weapon illuminated her face,” he 
said. Groth fired two shots at the woman. 
Gloves Davis told the Tribune reporters the light from Sergeant 
Groth’ s shot allowed him to see both the woman on the couch, whom 
he shot with his .30 carbine, and a man in a chair with a shotgun in his 
hands ready to fire. “I don’t know for sure if he ever got a shot in at me or 
not. I fired twice and hit him. He stood up and I jumped up too, strug-
gling with him until he fell. Then I fell across his body.” The person on 
the ground was Mark Clark. 
Sergeant Groth said the first time he called for a cease-fire, “the words 
were barely out of my mouth before there was the whomp of a shotgun 
blast from the front bedroom that slammed into the bathroom door 
almost directly across the hall.” Hanrahan gave the Tribune reporters 
photos of the bathroom door to show where the shotgun pellets struck 
the wood. 
In his account, Officer Carmody said Panther fire was directed at 
him from the rear bedroom as he entered the back of the apartment. 
He returned the fire with his .38-caliber snub-nosed pistol. During one 
of the cease-fires, Carmody heard someone in the back bedroom yell, 
“We’re coming out, don’t shoot. We’ve got an injured man back here.” 
Carmody said Truelock and Bell came out of the back bedroom. He 
then said he ran into the back bedroom and found a man later identi-
fied as Hampton lying face down on the bed with his head facing the 
bedroom door. 
He was lying with his arms hanging over the foot of the bed. On the floor 
at his right hand was a .45-caliber automatic and at his left a shotgun. I 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   104 7/29/09   1:29:08 PM


--- PAGE 114 ---
10
could see he’ s been hit but I didn’t know if he was alive or dead. All I know 
was that room was full of shotguns and rifles and ammo. So I grabbed 
him by a wrist and dragged him into the dining room away from all those 
guns.
Officer Joe Gorman’ s account in the exclusive followed Groth’ s. He 
described shooting each of the three people in the front bedroom just as 
they were rising to shoot him. To back up the raiders’ accounts, Hanrahan 
and Jalovec gave the Tribune three police photos. One depicted the liv-
ing room door with one rather large hole circled on it. The photo was 
offered to prove the Panthers fired the first shot. The second photo, 
mentioned earlier, was represented as being the bathroom door. It had 
numerous bullet holes in it and in the exclusive was captioned “Hail of 
lead tore thru bathroom door in fire from opposite bedroom, according 
to police.” The third photo was the inside of the kitchen door. Carefully 
circled on the photo were two black dots to highlight that they were bul-
let holes from shots Fred had supposedly fired. 
The same night as the Tribune exclusive ran, Hanrahan offered each 
of the major TV stations the unprecedented opportunity to come to his 
office in the Daley Center and film the officers staging a reenactment 
of the raid. Hanrahan’ s office had hired carpenters who used two-by-
fours to construct a mock up of the apartment. Hanrahan required the 
TV stations that participated to air the entire police version without 
interruption. Only WBBM, the local CBS affiliate, accepted Hanrahan’ s 
conditions. 
Despite a careful rehearsal, the raiders had to do several takes to get 
the version they wanted. Fortunately for us the outtakes were kept and 
became valuable sources for cross-examination of the raiders. The final 
twenty-eight-minute version, gleaned from more than five hours of 
filming, aired on WBBM-TV the same day the Tribune “Exclusive” was 
published. 
The TV reenactment was much like the story theater staged by Paul 
Sills of the nearby Second City, where each character tells his story as 
he acts it out. “I took my handgun and knocked loudly against the front 
door,” Groth began, and then struck the wooden mockup with a real 
automatic. “I took my machine gun and I put it on automatic fire,” 
Gorman later continued, moving the mock machine gun across the pre-
tend living room wall. The officers’ descriptions of a plethora of Panther 
The Battle for Hearts and Minds
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   105 7/29/09   1:29:09 PM


--- PAGE 115 ---
10
Exposing the Murder
shots were almost amusing. They were lies, and we could prove it by the 
absence of bullet holes lining up with the supposed shots.
Careful readings of the Tribune exclusive and the transcript of the 
reenactment have Brenda Harris firing two shotgun blasts at the police 
while sitting on the living room couch; enough shotgun blasts and 
other fire emanating from inside the front bedroom to break the cease-
fire “on three separate occasions”; at least one shot at the police from 
Panthers running down the hallway; and several shotgun blasts and 
handgun fire from the rear bedroom and from Hampton himself as the 
police entered from the kitchen door.
Angered at being scooped by the Tribune, Chicago Sun-Times report-
ers came to the apartment the next morning, December 12, to compare 
the police photos displayed in the Tribune with the actual scene. Skip 
and the Panther guides demonstrated that the Tribune photo of the two 
black spots on the kitchen door, supposedly proof of Panther firing, 
were actually the dark heads of nails near the doorknob. There were 
no bullet holes near the kitchen door where the raiders had entered. 
Skip also stood in the kitchen and demonstrated to the reporters that 
Carmody could not have seen Hampton or any Panther firing from the 
back bedroom because the kitchen wall blocked the entire line of vision 
between where Carmody had entered and the back bedroom.
At the front of the apartment Skip sat on the couch exactly where 
the raiders placed Brenda Harris in their staged reenactment. “Come sit 
here and you can see Brenda could not have fired a shotgun at the offi-
cers from here without striking one of them or the walls behind them. 
Yet look, there are no bullet holes there.” Skip pointed to the entrance-
way and living room walls around the front door, which had no impact 
points. “ As for the front door, if you look carefully in this photo, you can 
see there are two bullet holes, one made by Groth’ s revolver firing into 
the living room.”
One of the Panther guides led the reporters to the door Hanrahan 
had represented as the bathroom door to prove the Panthers fired out 
of the front bedroom across the hall into that door. “Hanrahan’ s photo 
is not the bathroom door he claimed. It’ s this door to the north bed-
room,” the guide showed. “It was flush against the living room wall and 
those holes line up with the police firing from the living room.”
The reporters saw that he was right. “This is the real bathroom door 
and you can see there isn’t a single bullet hole in it,” the Panther contin-
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   106 7/29/09   1:29:09 PM


--- PAGE 116 ---
10
ued. When Skip told me the Sun-Times photographer took a snapshot 
of the nail heads and the real bathroom door with no impact points, I 
couldn’t wait to see the article.
Sure enough, there was a gleeful tone in the Sun-Times headlines 
that same day: “Bullet Holes Were Nail Heads.” The article, complete 
with photos, showed not only Hanrahan’ s misrepresentations but that 
the raiders’ stories about the Panthers’ firing from the two bedrooms 
and Brenda’ s firing from the couch had to be lies. Other newspaper 
reporters came to see for themselves and echoed the Sun-Times accu-
sations that Hanrahan and the raiders were lying. The account of the 
raid offered by the police officers became the Tribune’ s most infamous 
front-page story since their misinformed headlines in November 1948: 
“Dewey Defeats Truman.”
Hanrahan’ s rapid decline in credibility vindicated our decision three 
days earlier to force his hand by going on the offensive. The UPI was 
sending out a “mandatory kill” order on transmission of the photos 
Hanrahan had provided the Tribune. He called another press confer-
ence to denounce “trial by the press.” We went to Glascott’ s to watch.
Hanrahan was in the library where he first displayed the Panther 
weapons. He told the now cynical TV and newspaper reporters, “I have 
made no evaluations of the pictures other than to say they portrayed 
the scene accurately. We have made no characterization of the pic-
tures.” Hanrahan disclaimed any responsibility for the captions, snap-
ping back at one questioner, “We are not editors.”
With the TV camera going, another reporter asked, “Do you intend 
to resign?”
Hanrahan stopped. He glared at the questioner who dared ask such 
an impertinent question. Then he calmed himself and looked away 
with an air of disgust, before refocusing on the reporters in front. “ Are 
there any serious questions?”
“That one sounded pretty serious to me,” I said to Flint. 
Enraged that he was being challenged, Hanrahan continued indig-
nantly, “I would have thought our office is entitled to expect to be 
believed by the public. Our officers wouldn’t lie about the act. I’m talk-
ing about the credibility of our officers here and myself.” Then, in the 
middle of his own press conference, Hanrahan stomped out.
The Battle for Hearts and Minds
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   107 7/29/09   1:29:09 PM


--- PAGE 117 ---
10
Farewell to a Revolutionary
T
housands of people went to  see Fred’ s body lying in the Rayner 
Funeral Home on the South Side on the weekend after the raid. On 
the following Monday, five thousand more walked past the open cas-
ket at Reverend McNelty’ s church in Melrose Park. After the procession, 
the church was filled to capacity for the memorial service. Mike Gray’ s 
documentary film about Fred’ s life had become a film about his mur-
der. He filmed the service and I have watched his documented footage 
many times.
The pallbearers were Panther men in black leather jackets. William 
O’Neal had visited the Hamptons the night after the raid and begged 
them to allow him to serve as a pallbearer. They consented. He joined 
Rush and four other Panther men around the coffin. Together they 
wheeled the casket into the sanctuary to begin the service with the 
church chorus singing “Onward Christian Soldiers.” The flower bearers 
were eight Panther women, who were stalwarts in the party. They sat in 
the front row in dresses and joined in the singing.
The Honor Guard was composed of Hanrahan’ s Most Wanted list. It 
included David Barksdale, the chief of the Black Disciples; Jeff Fort, the 
leader of the Black P . Stone Nation; Cha-Cha Jimenez, chairman of the 
Young Lords Organization; Obed Lopez of the Latin American Defense 
Organization (LADO); and a representative from the Latin Kings. Father 
Clemens, the popular black priest from a South Side Catholic church, 
read the obituary prepared by Fred’ s family.
In 1967, Fred became president of the Maywood NAACP Youth Chapter, 
leading, without fear for personal safety, protest marches for recreational 
activities for black youth of Maywood who had none, for open housing 
and improvement of school relationships at Proviso East High School. 
In November 1968, Fred became chairman of the Illinois chapter of the 
Black Panther Party, working with superhuman strength and dedica-
14
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   108 7/29/09   1:29:10 PM


--- PAGE 118 ---
10
tion to better the lot of black people. On Thursday morning, December 
4, 1969, his life was ended, but his dedication and passion for freedom 
lives.
Father Clemens, known for his advocacy for black youth, ended with 
the refrain familiar to everyone who knew Fred: 
You can kill the revolutionary, but you can’t kill the revolution. You can 
jail the liberator, but you can’t jail the liberation. You can run the free-
dom fighter all around the country, but you can’t stop freedom fighting. 
So believed Fred—so said Fred—so say we all.
Father Clemens was followed by eulogies from Reverend Ralph 
Abernathy, leader of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, 
and Russell Meek, a well-known Chicago journalist and media com-
mentator. Skip spoke next. We had just received the informal report of 
the independent autopsy a few hours before his speech, which con-
firmed Deborah’ s account that Fred died of two shots fired into his head 
when he was in a reclining position. With the self-righteousness and 
fire inherited from his Calvinist preacher father, Skip declared: “What 
Hanrahan and Jalovec don’t understand, and what those police officers 
who put those two bullet holes in his head don’t understand, and what 
Nixon and John Mitchell [the attorney general] don’t understand, is that 
you can’t kill the chairman, and anyone who tries is an enemy of the 
people and is a pig. Pigs die, but Chairman Fred lives.” 
Jesse Jackson gave the main eulogy, proclaiming again that “the 
police attack on Fred and Mark was an attack on the entire black com-
munity.” He called for the community to work to get rid of racist politi-
cians like Hanrahan. 
Bobby Rush and Reverend McNelty delivered the last remarks and 
benediction. Rush reiterated Fred’ s admonition to “Be strong” and to 
carry on his work. In spite of his entreaties, Rush had noticed a change 
in the party, which was to increase in the coming weeks and months. He 
described this to me years later: “Fred’ s death played a tremendous role 
in destroying the party. After that night, the party slowly declined and 
members left one by one.”
In the pageantry of Fred’ s death, this decline was not immediately 
discernible. We hid the devastating effects by repeating the slogan, “You 
Farewell to a Revolutionary
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   109 7/29/09   1:29:10 PM


--- PAGE 119 ---
110
Exposing the Murder
can kill a revolutionary, but you can’t kill the revolution.” It’ s what we 
wanted to believe, but that didn’t make it true. 
Fred’ s casket was taken from the sanctuary by the pallbearers and 
placed in a hearse, where it was driven to O’Hare airport. It was flown 
to Haynesville, Louisiana, for a final service before burial at the Bethel 
Baptist Church cemetery. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   110 7/29/09   1:29:10 PM


--- PAGE 120 ---
111
Panthers Indicted
ll of the other survivors  were released on bail by the end of the           
  month. Deborah gave birth to Fred Jr. on December 18. Doc was 
recovering slowly after much of his colon was removed in surgery. He 
was left with an eight-inch scar extending from his abdomen to his 
chest. The wounds of the other survivors had mostly healed, although 
with her permanently stiff finger, Brenda Harris would never play the 
violin again.
Following the raid, members of the heavily rigged police Internal 
Investigations Division (IID) exonerated the raiders after asking them 
only three questions and furnishing them with the answers. Then there 
was a coroner’ s inquest, led by an old Democratic Party loyalist, Martin 
Gerber. Not surprisingly, it found Fred and Mark’ s deaths “justifiable 
homicide.” Their decision was based on two police accounts. First, a 
Chicago crime lab technician swore there was only one hole in the front 
door after the raid (the one going out), and John Sadunas, another tech-
nician, testified that two shotgun shells found by the police were fired 
from the Panther weapon held by Brenda Harris. 
During the inquest a showdown occurred between Gerber and our 
office. Skip was held in contempt and spent a weekend in jail for refus-
ing to produce the front door panel. He didn’t bring it in until the raid-
ers’ had testified that no police officer fired through the front door. The 
panel clearly contained the bullet hole of an incoming shot.
The IID investigation and the coroner’ s inquest findings convinced 
almost no one of the raiders’ innocence. Rather than easing public pres-
sure, they added to the momentum for an independent investigation. 
This led the U.S. Justice Department to announce in December that a 
federal grand jury would convene in Chicago to determine if there was 
sufficient evidence to indict the police and their supervisors, including 
Hanrahan, for violating the civil rights of the Panther occupants, both 
15
A
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   111 7/29/09   1:29:11 PM


--- PAGE 121 ---
112
Exposing the Murder
during the raid and with their false accounts afterward. The Grand Jury 
started hearing testimony in January 1970.
Each of the Panther survivors was indicted by the county grand jury 
on January 31 on at least one count of attempted murder, one count of 
armed violence, and numerous other weapons counts. Hanrahan had 
presented the grand jury with the raiders’ stories and Sadunas’ s report. 
The defendants were required to appear in court on February 11. 
Thousands of people go to trial at the Twenty-Sixth Street building 
and even more thousands plead guilty to crimes to avoid the harsher 
penalty meted out if you lose at trial. Twenty-Sixth Street was my main 
workplace for many years. There was always a funny smell in the seven-
story building. People said it was tears. I believed them.
When PLO and the other Panther defense lawyers arrived at Twenty-
Sixth Street on February 11, the press was there en masse, with the 
reporters and sketchers in the courtroom and the TV camera crews on 
the first floor. Our case was assigned to Judge Epton, a moderate but 
often self-righteous judge, who sat in one of the spacious courtrooms 
on the higher floors of Twenty-Sixth Street.
“People v. Johnson, et al. ,” the clerk called as we and the Panther 
survivors stepped up before Epton. The courtroom was full of Panther 
supporters and sympathizers and again I heard some of the specta-
tors in the back call out “Power to the people” as we stepped forward. 
Hanrahan was absent, keeping a lower profile after his press debacle.
Judge Epton handed the lawyer for each defendant a copy of the 
charges. As was the custom, we waived formal reading of the indict-
ment and entered pleas of not guilty. I was representing Harold Bell. 
The lawyers had collaborated on a set of pretrial motions. In addition 
to the standard discovery requests (which asked for the names of all the 
state’ s witnesses and any documents the prosecution intended to use), 
we asked for disclosure of all information about informants, police infil-
tration, and surveillance relating to the raid. We argued that we could 
not properly prepare the defense if one of the survivors was collaborat-
ing with the police or prosecutors. Judge Epton looked at Bob Beranek, 
the heavyset prosecutor, and ordered the prosecution to disclose if any 
of the defendants or witnesses were informants.
Judge Epton continued the case until May to give both sides time to 
comply with the other’ s discovery requests. We had asked the state to 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   112 7/29/09   1:29:11 PM


--- PAGE 122 ---
11
tell us if any of the defendants were in fact informants. There was wide-
spread suspicion inside the party that one of the people in the apart-
ment during the raid was an informant. This suspicion was fed by the 
reports of Seconal in Fred’ s blood as well as the fact that the people on 
security in the front room had failed to protect the chairman.
O’Neal directed the distrust toward Truelock. Not only had Truelock 
been stationed near the front door on security, but he was an ex-con 
who met Fred in prison and was released shortly after Fred and then 
joined the party. We were familiar with jailhouse snitches who fabri-
cated testimony about their cellmates in exchange for early release. 
Truelock, at least superficially, fit the profile.
But our investigation demonstrated Truelock had completed his 
original sentence. It was he who’ d told me he’ d overheard the police 
saying Rush’ s apartment would be next, which allowed me to warn him. 
Truelock’ s tip may have saved Rush’ s life, and seemed inconsistent with 
being a police informant. Also, Truelock appeared so upset and forth-
coming when I interviewed him originally, that I never believed he was 
working for the police. We never uncovered any evidence that he was.
Fred’s murder had pushed the  Weathermen further toward furtive 
political activity. The United States was set to invade Cambodia and 
expand the war. Nonviolent opposition seemed to have had no effect 
in stopping the escalation. Mary and I had opposite reactions to the 
swell of political events. I was getting drawn in more just as she began 
pulling back from what she saw as a one-dimensional and increasingly 
threatening and maybe dangerous political life.
Two police cars were firebombed at the Nineteenth District Police 
Station on December 6, two days after the Panther raid. The Weathermen 
later claimed credit, stating it was a response to Fred’ s murder. In a 
statement issued clandestinely in early 1970, the group called itself 
the Weather Underground Organization (WUO) for the first time and 
issued a “Declaration of a State of War” against the U.S. government. Its 
members were adopting fake identities and pursuing covert activities.
Skip had a different reaction to the police raid than did the rest of 
us at PLO. His response was to become the best prepared—indeed, the 
consummate—criminal defense lawyer, which he believed was neces-
sary to defeat Hanrahan and the police in court. Don, Dennis, and I 
Panthers Indicted
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   113 7/29/09   1:29:11 PM


--- PAGE 123 ---
11
Exposing the Murder
had less and less confidence in the legal system. For the time being, my 
increasing disillusion with the political system and the courts was con-
sistent with representing the sectors of the movement seeking the most 
radical change. Similarly, while the Weathermen sought to win converts 
to their politics and actions, they also wanted lawyers to represent them 
and were content that we remained in our roles.
The issue of “armed struggle” was of primary importance to a large 
number, if not the majority of movement people in 1970. Most of us 
supported the Vietnamese, the African National Congress in South 
Africa, and the other liberation movements who, in President Kennedy’ s 
words, had found no nonviolent means of struggle open to them. But 
support for armed struggle in the United States, as well as the wisdom 
of carrying it out, was widely debated and we liked to say that it was the 
“cutting edge” issue of the time. 
I supported the need, necessity, and rightness of armed struggle 
because I saw it winning and freeing people around the world. I felt 
the frustration of seeing all the nonviolent antiwar work we had done 
appear to have little effect on Nixon and Kissinger’ s pursuit of the war. 
The “Vietnamization” of the war, where Vietnamese bodies would be 
substituted for Americans, and the Phoenix Program of targeted assas-
sinations were not progress. As a movement attorney, I had the luxury 
of supporting armed struggle by defending its adherents, without the 
personal risks inherent in carrying it out. I was not underground and 
did not even have to sacrifice a generally comfortable lifestyle for my 
political beliefs. 
Many of the Weather people who went underground came from mid-
dle- and upper-middle-class backgrounds similar to my own. The chal-
lenge to give up what was a privileged life was part of the motivation and 
allure of both the Weather people and myself toward armed struggle. 
They did it, at least for a while, and I didn’t. I still believe in the rightness 
of armed struggle in certain circumstances. I don’t think the leaders of 
the slave rebellions, John Brown, Nat Turner, or Crazy Horse were wrong. 
Nor were Patrick Henry and George Washington, who were hardly non-
violent. And I respect the partisans who resisted the Nazis with guns.
The Weathermen and Panthers both wanted revolution. Both 
believed, with substantial historical and contemporary proof, that it 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   114 7/29/09   1:29:12 PM


--- PAGE 124 ---
11
would not come about nonviolently. Not in the violent United States. 
Today I realize our revolutionary vision did not take into full account 
the strength of the forces against us. No strategy would have succeeded. 
Our position inside the United States made it easier to expose and some-
times block U.S. military actions abroad, but it did not mean we could 
successfully use the tactics of those we supported to fundamentally 
change this country. In different ways the Panthers and the Weather 
people risked their safety and their lives to bring about the change we 
all believed was necessary. I want to understand both their mistakes 
and their contributions. I have learned it’ s far easier to review history 
than to make it. I’m not sure what I would have done had I not had a 
law license and been using it to defend those who espoused revolution-
ary change. Would I have had the courage to take up armed struggle 
even if I had been willing to risk imprisonment? Could I actually com-
mit violent acts that were so antithetical to the liberal, nonviolent, and 
rational way I was raised? Even if I could screw up my courage, would it 
have been right?
It was difficult in those days to balance political effectiveness and 
personal challenges. Indeed, have we not all imagined ourselves behind 
the telescopic sight of a rifle aimed at Hitler’ s head as he rose to power 
in the 1930s and wondered if we could pull the trigger? I think there 
were mistakes made when peoples’ desires to challenge their own limi-
tations overshadowed the political correctness or viability of what they 
were attempting. I can understand this. It does not condemn all violent 
acts or actors, but it’ s something to watch out for as you head for the 
point of no return.
The People’ s Law Office survived and grew because we did not 
require uniformity on political issues. It was a delicate balance at PLO 
to stay politically involved, aware, and participating, without requiring 
support of the same movement factions.
On March 6, 1970, three Weathermen were killed in an explosion 
inside a townhouse in Greenwich Village in New York City, when a 
bomb they were making accidentally detonated. Ted Gold, who was 
killed, and Cathy Wilkerson who was reported fleeing, had stayed with 
Mary and me a week before when they came to Chicago for their court 
dates. The war had come home. 
Panthers Indicted
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   115 7/29/09   1:29:12 PM


--- PAGE 125 ---
11
The Survivors Go Public
s we sat on the modern couches facing each other at the Wolfson’s
  townhouse in fashionable Sandburg Village, Jo-Anne wore an Afro 
wig and twirled the chamber of an empty revolver. Although a very 
serious and skillful defense lawyer, she was also caught up in “Panther 
chic.” We were at a meeting of the Panther defendants and their lawyers 
to decide if Panther survivors should tell their stories publicly. 
The indictment of the survivors had created more resentment in the 
black community. Hanrahan was trying to bolster the credibility of the 
prosecution with public statements that “the only people with actual 
knowledge of the raid, who had talked publicly, were the police officers.” 
The survivors had only spoken through their lawyers. The Panthers pro-
posed a people’ s inquest at Malcolm X College, with Chancellor Charles 
Hurst presiding. The tribunal would take place in a large auditorium 
open to the public, and the testimony would be transcribed.
Some of the defense lawyers objected to our clients testifying pub-
licly. “My client won’t testify unless and until I tell him too, and that deci-
sion will be made after the state rests its case,” one of the lawyers said. 
There was a murmur of agreement. This was the conventional wisdom. 
“We’ve been able to build a consensus in the black community and large 
segments of the public that the raid was not a shootout but a shoot-in,” 
Dennis answered. “We did this by speaking out. We can’t pull back now.”
We at PLO, and the Panthers, wanted more than a “not guilty” in 
criminal court. We wanted to continue the public condemnation of 
Hanrahan and the raiders enough to get them indicted on criminal 
charges. “The people’ s inquest will keep up the pressure to bring crim-
inal charges against Hanrahan,” I said. The Panthers argued it would 
also demonstrate how an alternative institution could work. In spite of 
the reluctance expressed by many of the other defense lawyers, PLO 
and the Panthers prevailed. The survivors would testify publicly.
16
A
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   116 7/29/09   1:29:12 PM


--- PAGE 126 ---
11
To build support for the people’ s inquest, the Panthers issued a 
“Statement to the Black Community” that read: “Daley and Hanrahan, 
following the orders of Nixon and Agnew, sent their pigs to murder 
Chairman Fred. They broke into his home, murdered him in bed while 
he slept. But that was not enough; they decided to try to kill everyone 
there.” The Panther communiqué continued, “We demand the decen-
tralization of the police so that the people can control the pigs in their 
neighborhood and no pigs would get the opportunity to murder our 
people and kill our youth.”
Referring to the police as “pigs” was also a Panther trademark. While 
this terminology obviously led to some loose rhetoric—as in the chant 
“oink, oink, bang, bang, dead pig”—the term was generic for police 
who preyed on the community, not a personal attack,  although I don’t 
think many law enforcement officers made the distinction. Certainly 
the term pig was intended to vilify the police, but the Panthers’ main 
objective was to organize community opposition to police abuse and 
gain control over what they saw as the “occupation” of their neighbor-
hoods by police, who showed no respect for them. 
The Panther bulletin concluded: “The People Must Indict Hanrahan 
and Impeach Nixon and Agnew.” These goals were obviously ambi-
tious, but the authors of the communiqué rightly sensed the raid was 
more than a local effort. 
The Panthers were looking to the black community for some form 
of justice. On March 8 the people’ s inquest convened at the First 
Congregational Church at Washington and Ashland. Six of the seven 
survivors testified in the converted lecture hall, where a large audience 
of spectators and some press had assembled. 
A tribunal of six community leaders was picked to hear the testi-
mony and determine the guilt of Hanrahan and the raiders. There was 
substantial interest and curiosity on the part of the public and the 
press to hear the first-hand accounts of the raid from the Panthers who 
survived. 
Doc’ s description of waking up in the dark, ducking, and being hit 
by machine gun fire had moved the spectators and the jury. Deborah 
spoke of Fred’ s death publicly for the first time. Her testimony was the 
most moving. Without using the word, Deborah described what could 
only be termed an execution. There was silence in the room after she 
The Survivors Go Public
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   117 7/29/09   1:29:13 PM


--- PAGE 127 ---
11
Exposing the Murder
reported hearing the two gunshots from the bedroom followed by the 
words of Fred’ s slayer, “He’ s good and dead now.” 
The tribunal was also given the pathology report of former Cook 
County coroner Levine that indicated that the parallel nature of the 
shots and the closeness of their entry points in Fred’ s head made it 
likely that they were fired at close range from the same spot while Fred 
was not moving. Hanrahan and the police were invited to testify at the 
people’ s inquest but refused. Their prior public statements at the reen-
actment were made available to the inquest jurors. After the testimony 
ended, the tribunal members recessed to discuss the evidence. When 
they returned they announced a “peoples’ indictment of Hanrahan” and 
the raiders for murder. The mainstream press reported the verdict duti-
fully. The tribunal’ s verdict carried no legal effect and was symbolic, but 
it was important to the Panthers’ goal to educate the community. Just 
as Fred had done a mock trial following his conviction for the ice cream 
truck robbery, the people’ s inquest suggested a system where power 
was in the hands of the people. Each gave a vision of something that 
was possible and could work, and each was an example of the Panthers’ 
efforts to involve people in police issues. 
On April 30, the month after  the people’ s inquest, Nixon went on TV to 
report that the United States was expanding the Vietnam War by invad-
ing Cambodia. Lon Nol, the puppet the United States had installed to 
replace a popular government in Cambodia, was so uniformly hated 
that Pol Pot was able to ride anti-U.S. feeling to seize power and even-
tually carry out the extermination of over two million Cambodians, a 
third of the population. 
Students across the country reacted to Nixon’ s announcement with 
rage and immediate mobilization. I, like many of them, saw it as proof 
that he and Kissinger were only making a pretense of seeking peace, but 
were still seeking victory. If victory was not attainable, they would sub-
stitute the annihilation of the Vietnamese people and their neighbors. 
“We’re going to bomb them back into the Stone Age,” General Curtis 
Lemay had threatened in 1964, and the B-52 bombing of Hanoi was 
now happening. Three days after the invasion of Cambodia, there was 
a call for a national student strike at a mass meeting at Yale University. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   118 7/29/09   1:29:13 PM


--- PAGE 128 ---
11
Immediately, student protests and strikes spread throughout the coun-
try. On some campuses, such as Kent State in Ohio, the National Guard 
was summoned. But the antiwar and anti-ROTC protests continued.
On May 4, members of the National Guard, without warning, fired 
sixty-one shots into a demonstration of approximately two hundred 
Kent State students. Within thirteen seconds four students were dead, 
and nine wounded. One would remain paralyzed for life. None of us 
in the antiwar movement could remain still or silent when we heard 
this. Nixon further fueled our outrage by casting the students as the vio-
lent ones when he declared, “When dissent turns to violence, it invites 
tragedy.” The protesters had not turned to violence, the National Guard 
had. In Chicago I joined demonstrations protesting the Kent State kill-
ings, which were part of over 350 protests in the country. More than half 
of all U.S. colleges and universities were shut down, and more than 60 
percent of the students joined in student actions and strikes. Some of 
the universities remained closed for over a year. Two thousand protest-
ers were arrested. 
It was disclosed later from notes and memoirs of cabinet members 
that Nixon and Kissinger had considered dropping nuclear bombs on 
Vietnam. Fear of campus rebellion was one of the reasons they decided 
against it.
A week after the Kent State shootings, a National Guard building was 
bombed in Washington, D.C. The Weathermen took credit and issued a 
communiqué stating it was in retaliation for the killing of the four Kent 
State students. The small amount of physical damage caused by the 
bomb seemed a justified response to the deliberate shooting and kill-
ing of four students, not to mention the daily munitions being dropped 
on the Vietnamese. I did not question the bombing. In fact, it gave me 
pleasure to think there was some retaliation for the escalation of the 
Vietnam War and the killing of the Kent State students. If they could 
raise the stakes, perhaps so could we.
Ten days after Kent State, two more students were killed when white 
state police officers opened fire on an unarmed group of black students 
at Jackson State University in Mississippi. There was much less outcry, 
but there were demonstrations at many black colleges. I joined a small 
protest in Chicago. By the end of the month, the National Guard was 
The Survivors Go Public
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   119 7/29/09   1:29:13 PM


--- PAGE 129 ---
120
Exposing the Murder
patrolling over twenty university campuses in sixteen states. The mas-
siveness of the insurrection can hardly be comprehended today. For a 
moment it appeared campus radicals were a new revolutionary class. 
The escalation of the political climate tore at the fabric of my mar-
riage. Mary and I began to realize that we were not going to make it. 
I was pulled in more, politically, as she retreated. My overall feelings 
during that period were a mixture of exhilaration and hope, loss and 
tragedy: a sense of empowerment sometimes shaken but not gone; 
a pessimism and anger about the United States, and still a hope and 
belief that our movement would change things.
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   120 7/29/09   1:29:14 PM


--- PAGE 130 ---
121
A Puzzling Victory
T
here was a strange hush  in Epton’ s courtroom on May 8 when the 
Panther defendants returned. “They’ve got to produce the names 
of informants today,” Skip said as we entered. He had his yellow pad 
out with his argument outlined in case the state refused to disclose the 
informants. Judge Epton was finishing his morning call, and nodded to 
us that he would call our case shortly. Our clients sat nervously in the 
front row of the spectator section.
Nick Motherway, one of Hanrahan’ s top assistants, came out from the 
rear and stood next to the court stenographer. One of the defense law-
yers approached him, but he waved him off. “People v. Deborah Johnson, 
et al.,” the clerk announced. Seven defendants and seven defense law-
yers stood up and we walked forward to stand in front of the bench. 
The clerk called each defendant by name and each answered “here.” 
Motherway addressed the court: “Because our evidence, gathered by 
our police, may prevent us from meeting standards satisfying judicial 
standards of proof, we are compelled to dismiss the indictment.” 
“Motion granted,” Epton responded, in a perfunctory tone. Clearly, 
he had been forewarned. 
We looked at each other and at our clients, too stunned to smile. A 
few seconds later Jim Montgomery broke the silence: “On behalf of my 
client Deborah Johnson, I hereby answer ready for trial and demand 
trial.” This trial demand would prevent the state’ s attorney from ever 
reinstating the case, at least after the 160-day speedy trial period had 
run. Each of the defense lawyers made a similar trial demand for his or 
her own client. Epton’ s clerk then declared, “Court is in recess.”
We turned and walked through the court to the hallway, followed by 
a slew of spectators yelling “Indict Hanrahan.” We and our clients hud-
dled in one corner of the tiled vestibule. “ After all his huffing and puff-
17
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   121 7/29/09   1:29:14 PM


--- PAGE 131 ---
122
Exposing the Murder
ing about the Panthers’ attacks on the police, Hanrahan has dropped 
the charges,” Skip said triumphantly, a smile emerging.
“Maybe he didn’t want to have to expose the informant,” Dennis 
said. “Or maybe the federal grand jury pressured him into dismissing 
the cases.”
“It’ s not what Motherway said,” Warren Wolfson chimed in. “The 
state frequently gathers evidence improperly. There’ s something else.”
“Don’t look a gift horse in the mouth,” chimed in Eugene Pincham, 
the most senior and prominent lawyer among us.
By this time the press was begging us to go downstairs for a comment 
in front of the TV cameras. We descended to the first floor. The defense 
lawyers said the charges were dismissed because the Panthers were 
innocent and the evidence proved it. Skip added, “The same evidence 
shows Hanrahan and the raiders are the ones who should be indicted 
for murder.”
It was true: the physical evidence showed the survivors’ innocence, 
but it would be another five years before we found why the indictments 
were dropped so abruptly. The same day our clients charges were dis-
missed, they were handed subpoenas to appear in front of the federal 
grand jury the following Tuesday. Failure to appear would be contempt 
of court and they could be jailed until they complied. But the Panthers 
were hesitant to give the federal grand jury credibility by testifying 
before it. 
Milton Branch, a black assistant U.S. attorney from Denver, who was 
on loan to the federal grand jury, urged us to have our clients partici-
pate. But we distrusted the federal government. The head of Chicago’ s 
FBI field office, Marlin Johnson, had personally led the FBI raid on the 
Panther office the previous June. He gave the orders as the FBI agents 
tore up the office. FBI chief J. Edgar Hoover had publicly declared the 
Panthers to be “the greatest threat to the internal security of the coun-
try,” and John Mitchell, the attorney general, put the Panthers on his 
hit list and determined they posed a sufficient enough threat to justify 
wiretapping them without warrants. 
We got together with the survivors to weigh the options. I still had 
some hope the grand jury might indict Hanrahan and the raiders. I 
knew if the Panthers refused to testify, the government would blame us 
for failing to indict Hanrahan. As we reviewed and discussed the his-
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   122 7/29/09   1:29:14 PM


--- PAGE 132 ---
12
tory, it seemed that no matter what we did, indictments by this grand 
jury were unlikely.
At the meeting, Skip repeated what Jay Miller, head of the ACLU in 
Chicago had told him about Jerris Leonard, the deputy attorney gen-
eral in charge of the federal grand jury: “Jerris Leonard told me to my 
face that Bobby Seale was added as a defendant in the Conspiracy case, 
because ‘The Panthers are a bunch of hoodlums,’ and ‘We’ve got to get 
them.’ Miller would not have made this up.” We told the survivors what 
we knew about some of the FBI actions against the Panthers, which 
included its raids on Panther offices across the country.
Dennis brought up the federal grand jury in San Francisco that was 
investigating the Panthers. It was still sitting. “The black U.S. attorney 
in San Francisco, Cecil Poole, charged that their objectives were ‘to get 
the Panthers and harassment.’” 
We were in a no-win situation. If the survivors testified and no 
indictments were returned, which was likely, then the grand jury 
would have appeared to have weighed all the evidence and found no 
wrongdoing. If they refused to testify, then the grand jury would blame 
them for their failure to return indictments, even though the survi-
vors’ testimony at the people’s inquest in March was available to the 
grand jury.
On Tuesday, May 12, the day the subpoenas were returnable, Rush 
held a press conference announcing the survivors’ decision, with Skip 
and Doc by his side. He told the press “It has been our experience that 
grand juries, including the one that indicted the seven survivors and 
refused to indict the police who took part in the raid, are illegal shams 
used to excuse illegal actions of the police. We want to testify, but we 
feel the grand jury is rigged.” He also pointed out that there were only 
two blacks on the twenty-three-member federal grand jury.
Three days later, a TV reporter called Skip at PLO to say the federal 
grand jury had just issued a 132-page report and no indictments. We 
huddled around Skip after he yelled the news into our open cubicles. 
“He wants to know if we have ever heard of a report with no criminal 
charges,” Skip inquired. We shook our heads, disgusted. Skip told the 
reporter, “No, they’re supposed to return indictments or do nothing.”
When Skip hung up, Dennis said, “I’ d bet the purpose of this report 
was to justify their failure to indict.”
A Puzzling Victory
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   123 7/29/09   1:29:15 PM


--- PAGE 133 ---
12
Exposing the Murder
Someone went to the Dirksen Federal Building and returned with 
four copies of the official-looking, blue, bound report and a copy of the 
Sun-Times. The headlines were “U.S. Jurors Assail Hanrahan’ s Raiders,” 
with the subheadings: “Rip Panthers, Crime Lab, IID; Only One Shot 
Fired at Police.” Flint, Dennis, Skip, and I each took copies of our report 
to our cubicles to read before we reconvened in Skip’ s office. 
The report began with an introduction citing the “nearly 100” wit-
nesses called and “over 130 exhibits” examined, whereby its authors 
claimed a thorough and exhaustive investigation. Robert Zimmers, 
the FBI’ s firearms expert, testified that the two shotgun shells, which 
the Chicago Police Crime Lab had positively identified as coming from 
Brenda’ s shotgun, were fired from Officer Ciszewski’ s shotgun. The 
Chicago Crime Lab must have fabricated their test results to fit the offi-
cers’ stories. 
Zimmers also concluded from the configurations of the bullet holes, 
as well as the bullet fragments and shell casings recovered, that there 
was only one Panther shot fired and it came from the gun held by Mark 
Clark. The police fired at least ninety times. 
A third autopsy, performed by a new pathologist working for the fed-
eral grand jury, confirmed that the fatal shots were fired into the top 
of Fred’ s head downward from right to left with roughly parallel trajec-
tories. Other than these bullet holes, the only physical marks on Fred 
were a bullet found imbedded in the exterior of his shoulder and a graze 
wound in his leg. The exact caliber of the bullets that went through 
Fred’ s head could not be determined from the holes but were consis-
tent with the diameters of the .38-caliber bullets fired by Carmody and 
also with the .30 carbine bullets fired by Gloves Davis. Nevertheless, the 
federal prosecutors never sought to determine who fired the fatal shots, 
where they were fired from, or whether they were fired deliberately to 
murder Fred. 
The chemist advising the grand jury disputed our chemist, Dr. 
Berman’ s, findings that Fred’ s blood contained Seconal. He testified that 
the blood samples he examined showed no traces of Seconal and that 
the drug would not have dissipated between Berman’ s testing and his 
own, done a month later, after Fred’ s body was exhumed in Louisiana. 
But he could not offer an explanation why the Seconal showed up both 
times in her tests. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   124 7/29/09   1:29:15 PM


--- PAGE 134 ---
12
In spite of the physical evidence, the grand jury report blamed the 
deaths and injuries on Panther provocations and hostility toward the 
police, as much as on the actions of the police themselves. A large part 
of the report was an indictment of the Panthers, portraying them as a 
violent revolutionary organization that sought confrontation with the 
police. Ultimately, Jerris Leonard and the other authors of the grand jury 
report claimed they could not charge Hanrahan and the raiders “with-
out the testimony and cooperation” of the survivors, even though they 
had access to the transcripts of the survivors’ people’ s inquest testimony. 
“Given the political nature of the Panthers,” the authors said, “the grand 
jury is forced to conclude that they are more interested in the issue of 
police persecution, than they are in obtaining justice. It is a sad fact 
of our society,” they continued, “that such groups can transform such 
issues into donations, sympathy and membership, without ever submit-
ting to impartial fact-finding by anyone. Perhaps the short answer is that 
revolutionary groups simply do not want the legal system to work.”
A footnote at the end of the grand jury report states: “Finally, the 
grand jury wishes to acknowledge the invaluable investigative contribu-
tions of the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Without the cooperation, 
professionalism and proficiency of this agency, the grand jury could not 
have completed its assignment.” The irony of this statement became 
much clearer years later.
“Well, the FBI’ s firearms examination supports our clients’ accounts,” 
Skip said, after we came back together.
“If the raiders fired ninety to ninety-nine shots to the Panthers’ one, 
then what happened at 2337 was a massacre, not a shoot-out.” Flint 
added.
“But the grand jury, or I should say the federal prosecutors and 
FBI case agents directing the grand jury, refused to draw the obvious 
conclusions from what the physical evidence demonstrated,” Dennis 
responded.
“They never answered or even addressed the most important ques-
tion of how Fred died. Was he deliberately assassinated?” I joined in.
“The report indicates there was an FBI informant who provided the 
same info as Groth’ s informant. It would be good to find out who that 
is. Maybe there’ s a connection between the disclosure of that informant 
and the dismissal of the Panther cases,” Flint said.
A Puzzling Victory
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   125 7/29/09   1:29:15 PM


--- PAGE 135 ---
12
Exposing the Murder
The worst thing was that the report’ s heaviest criticisms of Hanrahan 
and the raiders were for their lack of care in planning the raid and their 
efforts to prejudice prospective jurors afterward rather than for their 
killing two people. The grand jury leveled stronger criticism at the 
Internal Investigations Division than at Hanrahan, calling it “so seri-
ously deficient that it suggests purposeful malfeasance.”
“Well at least the grand jury recommended that police functions be 
done by the police, not the state’ s attorney,” Flint said. “Taking guns 
away from Hanrahan is positive.”
“You know what?” Dennis said. “This report and its conclusions were 
written before the Panthers refused to testify three days ago. It’ s too 
lengthy to have been written after. They had made up their minds not 
to indict anyone whether the Panthers testified or not, and then blamed 
it on the Panthers’ noncooperation. This is bullshit.”
The federal grand jury report satisfied neither side. While the head-
lines gave us some solace, the report ultimately equated the conduct 
of the police during the raid with the Panthers’ “antipolice” rhetoric. 
Hanrahan and the raiders had still gotten away with murder. Large seg-
ments of the black community reiterated their demands that the raiders 
be brought to justice. The Afro-American Patrolmen’ s League continued 
to push for prosecution; the NAACP was pursuing its own investigation. 
Black community groups and liberal whites joined in demanding the 
appointment of an independent prosecutor.
Black politicians loyal to the Democratic Party withdrew their sup-
port for Hanrahan and joined the call for justice. Alderman Ralph 
Metcalfe, previously a staunch supporter of the mayor and the 
Democratic Party, led the movement of black politicians away from 
the Daley Machine. That fall Metcalfe’s independence got him elected 
United States congressman.
What could we do next? We were criminal defense lawyers who 
defended the movement. But now no criminal charges were pending 
against the Panthers, the raiders faced no charges, and there would be 
no trial to expose the police as the attackers.
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   126 7/29/09   1:29:16 PM


--- PAGE 136 ---
12
Sue the Bastards
 
“W
hat about a civil rights suit?”  Dennis threw out at our next 
office meeting. The dropping of criminal charges made it pos-
sible for our clients to testify without fear of prosecution. Suing the 
perpetrators of the raid would put us on the offensive, but we lacked 
the know-how, the resources, and the permission of our clients. These 
formidable obstacles were exacerbated by the ambivalence of many of 
us about using the courts at all. Still, as plaintiffs, we would be the mov-
ing party; we could make the claims and define the issues. On the other 
hand, we would have the burden of proof and the responsibility of car-
rying the case forward.
We had never done a complex civil case, much less a civil rights claim 
against powerful and well-funded government officials. We were just 
beginning to learn how to poke enough holes in a prosecutor’ s case to 
raise reasonable doubt. We had never written a civil rights complaint. 
Moreover, civil rights cases were brought in federal court under the fed-
eral civil rights laws. To sue there, we’ d have to learn an entirely new 
court system and set of procedures. 
The prospects for winning a judgment at the end of years of legal 
wrangling seemed remote. We needed the unanimous verdict of a jury, 
and the December 4 raid remained as controversial and divisive as ever. 
Many, if not most, white people still supported Hanrahan. Jurors for 
federal trials were picked from the registered voters who lived not only 
in Chicago and Cook County, but the white suburbs in DuPage and Lake 
Counties as well as rural areas extending as far north as Wisconsin. We 
would be lucky to get one black juror. Filing a civil suit could be setting 
the survivors and the families of Mark and Fred up for another defeat. 
Into this chasm between what was needed and what we knew how to 
do stepped Arthur Kinoy. With short legs and a slightly hunched upper 
torso, he was an elf of a man of some fifty years. He taught constitutional 
18
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   127 7/29/09   1:29:16 PM


--- PAGE 137 ---
12
Exposing the Murder
law at Rutgers Law School and came to Chicago as an emissary from 
the Center for Constitutional Rights in New York. The National Lawyers 
Guild spread the word that we were considering filing a civil rights suit. 
Arthur had traveled to the South during the late 1950s and the 1960s. 
He and his cohort Bill Kunstler, had represented Dr. King, Fannie Lou 
Hamer, and the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party. They also rep-
resented the families of James Chaney, Andrew Goodman, and Michael 
Schwerner, three civil right workers kidnapped and slain by Klan mem-
bers after they went to Neshoba County, Mississippi to investigate the 
burning of a black church that was being used as a freedom school. 
“You can do it,” Arthur kept repeating. He stood and leaned forward, 
waving his closed right hand for emphasis. The rest of us were sitting 
on the window ledges, countertops, and a few chairs at the front of our 
office. This was the biggest meeting space we had preserved in our con-
verted sausage shop. 
Arthur continued: “In the South, the civil rights activists we worked 
with were constantly being harassed and jailed. Some were beaten and 
even killed. We had to figure out ways to protect them.” He said they 
had found an old statute that allowed them to remove cases to federal 
court and get away from the more racist state judges. “We sued local 
police and officials for denying our clients the right to vote, or march, 
or even sit at a restaurant. We forced Southern courts to issue orders 
protecting the civil rights workers.” He was cooking—nodding his head 
and pounding his knee. I felt like I was right there with Arthur in a North 
Carolina jail, strategizing with the people arrested at a lunch counter, 
or in Mississippi advising people turned away from voting. He believed 
using the Constitution to help the movement was what radical lawyers 
should be doing. 
There was no “I can’t” with this salesman for “taking ’em to court.” His 
infectious excitement, as much as his arguments, made us believe we 
could win too. For the moment I put aside my skepticism about using 
the courts. A few days later we suggested filing a civil rights lawsuit to 
Iberia and Francis, and they wanted to know more. Dennis, Flint, and I 
then called Mark’ s mother—Fannie Clark—Doc Satchel, and the other 
survivors to a meeting at the Hamptons’ home in Maywood. Iberia 
served lemonade as we sat on upholstered chairs and the living room 
sofa arranged in a rough circle. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   128 7/29/09   1:29:16 PM


--- PAGE 138 ---
12
Our clients were skeptical of obtaining any good outcome from 
the courts. They had seen Hanrahan manipulate the criminal pro-
cess to indict them, while he and the raiders went uncharged. Dennis 
attempted to answer their misgivings: “ A civil suit will allow us to be the 
prosecutors,” he argued. “We go first and put on the evidence. We will 
be able to define the issues and set the terms for the trial. Also, we get 
to question each of them in depth under oath about what happened. 
They’ve told so many lies there’ s no way they can look believable.”
“Who do we sue?” Verlina asked. 
“We want to sue everyone responsible; the planners, the raiders, and 
those who lied to cover up what occurred. This includes Hanrahan, his 
assistant Jalovec, and of course the police.” I added. “We would also try 
to include as defendants the people in the Chicago Police Crime Lab 
and the state’ s attorneys who did the phony investigation.” 
Flint, who was still a law student and didn’t often speak up, added, 
“Our legal research shows we can charge them all with conspiracy 
together in one suit.”
The argument that won the day was Fannie Clark’ s: “We can’t just do 
nothing. Mark and Fred should still be alive. I want to bring their killers 
to trial.” Nobody countered what she said. 
“Let’ s go ahead. We’re in,” Iberia Hampton said. I saw the determina-
tion on her face and knew, despite the difficulties, we had to go after 
everyone responsible for Fred’ s murder and the cover-up afterward. 
Iberia had another reason for wanting to file a civil suit: “The way 
he was described in the papers, people didn’t really know who my son 
was.” She didn’t like the way he was constantly portrayed with his fist 
in the air and talking about “pigs.” She wanted the lawsuit to show her 
son as the young organizer, the gifted speaker, the would-be lawyer, 
the young man on whom she and Francis had placed so much hope. 
Fred was a combination of her own ability to bring people together and 
Francis’ s quiet but resolute militancy. 
Doc was also anxious to begin a lawsuit. The pain and medical com-
plications from his gunshot wounds were still with him. “Let’ s go all the 
way. Whatever it takes,” he urged. After only partial recuperation from 
his injuries, Doc had resumed responsibility for running the Panther 
medical clinics and was back on a fourteen-hour-a-day work schedule. 
“I’m going to have these scars and the pain for the rest of my life,” he 
Sue the Bastards
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   129 7/29/09   1:29:17 PM


--- PAGE 139 ---
10
Exposing the Murder
said. “Why shouldn’t the people who shot me and their bosses pay?” 
After he spoke, all the survivors agreed to sign up for the lawsuit.
Deborah had been quiet, but she was moved by the resolution of the 
others. “I want Little Fred to be proud of his father,” she said. “I hope 
the suit will show how great he was and make the pigs answer for what 
they did.” 
As we lawyers overcame our fears, we began to focus on the positive. 
In civil cases, extensive discovery is allowed. We would get to cross-
examine all the defendants under oath at depositions, with court report-
ers recording what they said. The contradictions between Hanrahan’ s 
and the raiders’ accounts and the physical evidence made the prospect 
of confronting the defendants a trial lawyer’ s dream. 
Arthur Kinoy’ s experience in finding solutions that protected civil 
rights workers in the South, even in the most racist courts, gave me 
hope. Wasn’t this our job? I would learn that civil cases, where we were 
on the offensive, actually gave lawyers the best opportunities to expose 
government wrongdoing. There were also provisions in the Civil Rights 
Act that required the defendants to pay our attorneys fees if we won. 
This allowed us to support ourselves without burdening our clients. But 
then we only got paid if we won.
Having decided to proceed with civil litigation, we needed to write the 
complaint to combine the claims of the survivors and the deceased into 
one lawsuit against all the perpetrators. We didn’t have the resources or 
the desire to bring nine separate suits, nor did we want to sue each set 
of prospective defendants separately. The legal construct we had found 
was to charge all the actors in a conspiracy to act together. That way we 
combined Hanrahan, Jalovec, the fourteen raiders, the crime lab peo-
ple, and those who falsified the investigation into one lawsuit. 
Skip, who had carried the burden of the criminal defense and who 
knew the evidence best, did not assist in the filing of the civil case. As 
I mentioned earlier, he was moving in the direction of becoming a top 
criminal defense lawyer—not only one who would win but one who 
could charge big bucks. Years later he told me with some regret that 
he had always feared being as poor as his family had been when he 
grew up, and that money and reputation were important to him. He left 
PLO because we refused to open a second office on prestigious LaSalle 
Street. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   130 7/29/09   1:29:17 PM


--- PAGE 140 ---
11
Flint and Dennis drafted a complaint using our facts and lan-
guage and Arthur’ s prior pleadings. Ray McClain, a bright University 
of Chicago Law School student, assisted them. Finally, the Center for 
Constitutional Rights sent Bill Bender, an experienced civil rights law-
yer, to Chicago regularly to help draft pleadings and oversee the legal 
work. 
After a week of drafting, we all pitched in and reviewed the complaint 
for its factual accuracy, tweaking it where necessary. Dennis added some 
purple prose to spice up the allegations. Essentially, we were charging 
the defendants with conspiring to deprive our clients of their constitu-
tional rights to life, liberty, due process, and equal protection, and the 
right to be free from illegal searches. In May of 1970 we filed our com-
plaint. We had no idea we were embarking on a thirteen-year battle. 
On June 27, 1970, Chief Criminal Court Judge Joseph Power bowed 
to the pressure from the coalition of forces dissatisfied with the federal 
grand jury and appointed a special prosecutor. This was only the sec-
ond time this had ever occurred in Cook County. It is nearly impossible 
to get the chief judge, selected for that position by the local Democratic 
Party, to rule that the local prosecutor, elected by the same party, is not 
fit or has a conflict of interest in a criminal prosecution. Judge Power 
appointed Barnabas Sears, an elderly, white-haired lawyer with a patri-
cian manner who was well respected by the legal establishment and who 
had gained fame prosecuting the Summerdale police scandal, to inves-
tigate Hanrahan. While not known for representing blacks, Sears was 
viewed as independent of Daley. Sears hired two assistants—Weyland 
Cedarquist, an experienced trial lawyer, and Ellis Reid, a young, pro-
gressive black lawyer, to help him. 
In spite of what I believed were his good intentions, I didn’t think 
Sears had enough energy or trial savvy, not to mention killer instinct, 
to prevail. He was too much of a gentleman to win against the down- 
and-dirty tactics he would face. But the Panthers had been among the 
groups calling for the special prosecutor and wanted us to assist Sears 
in any way possible. 
Mary and I separated in  1970. As I was being pulled more and more 
into the most radical sectors of the movement, she was looking for 
other friends and stepping back from what seemed to her like the rap-
Sue the Bastards
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   131 7/29/09   1:29:17 PM


--- PAGE 141 ---
12
Exposing the Murder
ids before the falls. We had started our marriage believing we could 
live a middle-class life but still support radical groups. Looking back, I 
think this might have been possible. But in 1970 I didn’t want a separa-
tion between my personal and political lives. It was hard to tell my dad 
about the breakup. I knew he really loved Mary and was sad about the 
breakup, but I think he hid his feelings out of loyalty to me. As for me, 
I’m ashamed to say I was too caught up in events to feel the pain of 
separation and the loss of what we had both hoped would be our part-
nership for life.
When Mary moved out of the Bissell Street house in 1970, other peo-
ple moved in, and we operated more as a collective. Flint came to live at 
Bissell Street after his girlfriend, Seva, left the office and Chicago. Liza 
Lawrence, a close friend of Courtney Esposito’ s who, like me, sported a 
large Afro, occupied one of the bedrooms in our house. Susan Waysdorf, 
another temporary dropout from the University of Chicago, occupied 
another. All the bedrooms were on the second floor, but movement 
people coming into town for court dates or just needing a place to crash 
frequently occupied the couches in the living room or the spare bed-
room at the back of the house, four feet from the El tracks. 
Courtney Esposito had been part of a Weatherman collective in 
Chicago, but after the townhouse explosion, she left SDS and started 
working at PLO in 1970. She and I began a relationship after Mary and 
I split up. Courtney soon moved into Bissell Street. Olive-skinned with 
green eyes and light brown hair, she had a tough outwardly manner 
reinforced by a sarcastic tongue. We shared a bedroom most of the time. 
I say “most” because we, the men, were constantly being lectured to 
(justifiably) about our failure to do our share of the housework, particu-
larly the cleaning. The withholding of sex was a frequent punishment. 
We had weekly meetings, and chores were parceled out, from shop-
ping and cooking to cleaning. Everybody pitched in for food, and I paid 
the utilities and mortgage. As a movement person with access to money 
and in this case the ownership of the house, I felt hypocritical. I got 
some consolation from a saying attributed to Ho Chi Minh: “You can’t 
control what life you were born into, you can only control what you do 
with it.” 
PLO’ s first woman lawyer, Susan Jordan, came to live in our house 
shortly after she joined the office. She was my age, in her late twenties, 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   132 7/29/09   1:29:18 PM


--- PAGE 142 ---
1
and had just graduated from Northwestern Law School. With a sharp 
tongue and a very self-assured manner, Susan could more than hold 
her own with the men. She quickly established herself as a very com-
petent criminal lawyer. There were few women criminal lawyers at that 
time, and shortly after she joined the office, she teamed with Jo-Anne 
Wolfson to defend a prisoner at Stateville Correctional Center, in Joliet, 
Illinois, who was accused of assaulting a guard. It was our introduction 
to prison work. 
Susan also began a relationship with PLO partner Don Stang. Don’ s 
wife Laura Whitehorn had left Chicago to join a women’ s collective in 
Pittsburgh. Don remained with PLO until 1973. Don and Laura had 
started with many of the middle-class assumptions that Mary and I 
had, but their comfortable Hyde Park apartment, filled with the books 
of their Harvard-Radcliffe educations, was a shell that no longer fit. 
Don rented an apartment directly across Bissell Street. We learned 
later when we got our FBI files that FBI agents occupied an apartment 
directly above his. They monitored and recorded our comings and 
goings with great interest and took photos of everyone who visited.
The Hampton civil suit was assigned to Joseph Sam Perry, an old, 
feisty judge, much like his cohort Julius Hoffman, who had presided 
over the Conspiracy Seven trial. Perry grew up in Alabama, was diminu-
tive in stature and imperial in style. Both Hoffman and Perry were bad 
draws for civil rights plaintiffs. 
Hanrahan, and indeed all the defendants, moved for more time to 
obtain lawyers and answer our complaint. Subsequently, they per-
suaded the county to appoint John Coghlan and the city to appoint 
Camillo Volini, two private attorneys, to represent them. There was no 
limit on their expenses or on the hours they could bill. It was a payoff 
for two Democratic Party loyalists. 
John Coghlan was a rough-and-tumble, red-faced Irish lawyer. He 
wore glasses, and could be tough, dramatic, or sarcastic, as the occa-
sion required. He had been a cop, and was at his best portraying police 
as the unsung heroes of our society. He would represent Hanrahan, his 
assistant Jalovec, and the seven raiders who were permanently assigned 
to the State’ s Attorney’ s Office. 
Camillo Volini, an overweight Italian lawyer with a round face and 
flabby jowls, was appointed for the other cops and the crime lab per-
Sue the Bastards
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   133 7/29/09   1:29:18 PM


--- PAGE 143 ---
1
Exposing the Murder
sonnel. He was less intense and confrontational than Coghlan, and 
even had a jocular side. Both Coghlan and Volini were seasoned in the 
politics of Chicago’ s white ethnic communities and knew well how 
to appeal to their fear of blacks. Although Coghlan and Volini were 
appointed solely so they could receive public monies, they used their 
titles as “special state’ s attorney” and “special corporation counsel” to 
claim governmental status, seek privileges from the court, and intimi-
date witnesses. 
Perry allowed Coghlan and Volini substantial time to respond to our 
complaint. We were still awaiting their answers that fall. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   134 7/29/09   1:29:18 PM


--- PAGE 144 ---
1
Shootout in Carbondale
O
n November 12, 1970, Chicago newspaper headlines described an 
early morning shootout between the Panthers and the local police 
in Carbondale, Illinois, at a house the Panthers rented. Amazingly, no 
one was killed, although the confrontation was reported to have lasted 
several hours. Bullets struck two Panthers and one police officer. Neigh-
bors, awakened by the gunfire, came out and urged the police to stop 
firing, and a truce was arranged. Four Panthers were arrested inside, 
and two some distance away. All were charged with multiple counts of 
attempted murder and were being held on one-hundred-thousand-
dollar bond. 
Because we had come to be accepted as the “Panther lawyers,” Bobby 
Rush asked PLO to go to Carbondale to represent the men arrested. 
Their families had contacted Chicago lawyers, and they were asking 
twenty-five thousand dollars apiece to represent the defendants. They 
didn’t have that kind of money. 
“ Anyone able to go to Carbondale?” Dennis asked at the impromptu 
meeting put together at the front of the office after Rush’ s call. 
Susan Jordan said she wanted to go, but she and Jo-Anne Wolfson 
were preparing their defense for their Stateville prisoner client. 
“I’ll go,” I said. 
“Me too,” added Flint, who was taking the semester off from law 
school. 
Courtney Esposito said she would go also. 
To my surprise and delight, Michael Deutsch said he’ d help with the 
trial. We were hoping he would join PLO, and he had started attend-
ing our office meetings. He had been an academic standout at the 
University of Illinois, as well as at Northwestern Law School, where he 
was on the law review. When he graduated in 1969, he had taken the 
19
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   135 7/29/09   1:29:19 PM


--- PAGE 145 ---
1
Exposing the Murder
prestigious position of clerking for Seventh Circuit Justice Otto Kerner, 
the former Illinois governor. 
Moved by the tumultuous events of 1969 and 1970, Michael became 
more interested in PLO’ s work than rising in the professional or aca-
demic world. He is one of the most incisive thinkers I’ve ever known. My 
dad used to say the most important thing in law is determining what is 
relevant. Michael does this as quickly as any lawyer I’ve met. Flint and I 
immediately accepted Michael’ s offer to help at trial. 
Among the three of us I had the most experience even though I was 
only three years out of law school and had only one felony trial under 
my belt. I had no idea what the courtroom atmosphere in southern 
Illinois would be like. 
I asked my partners what we should charge. I was the most hard-
nosed about finances. For Dennis, money was an afterthought, if con-
sidered at all. We decided we would offer to represent everyone for a 
total of ten thousand dollars. We had never taken money for defending 
the survivors of the December 4 raid, but we were often covering five 
cases a day per lawyer, in different courthouses around Cook County, 
just to pay the rent and our three-hundred-dollars-per-month salaries. 
Two days later, Flint, Courtney, and I drove to Carbondale in south-
ern Illinois. It was closer to Mississippi than Chicago, so I anticipated 
a very racist environment. In Cairo (pronounced Kayro), Illinois, fifty 
miles south of Carbondale, white supremacists had been driving 
around the black housing project shooting into it nightly. However, 
we found Carbondale, home to Southern Illinois University, less like 
the Old South than we expected. Most of the students were from the 
Chicago area. 
Our first stop was the Panther office located in an unheated storefront 
at the edge of the small black community. I introduced myself to Jimmy 
Brewton, an intelligent former student who had started the Carbondale 
Panther chapter, and Paul Atwood, a white guy in overalls in his early 
twenties. Paul was missing his right forefinger; I later learned he had cut 
off his “trigger” finger to avoid being drafted for Vietnam. 
They offered to walk with us the three blocks to the Panther house. 
The neighborhood consisted of two-story wood-frame houses in rea-
sonably good condition. They reminded me of neighborhoods in 
Atlanta where even the poorest blacks owned their own homes. The 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   136 7/29/09   1:29:19 PM


--- PAGE 146 ---
1
Panther house was also two stories, with windows on all sides of the 
second floor. I saw bullet holes in the glass panes of some of them. I also 
saw the outlines of sandbags above the window frames. Paul said they 
had been put there weeks before the shootout. 
“That’ s where the Panthers were defending themselves,” Jimmy said, 
pointing to the second floor. “ And the cops were spread out behind their 
squad cars and those trees.” 
A white-haired black man in work clothes came out of his house and 
asked who we were. 
“We’re lawyers from Chicago, who may be representing the Panthers,” 
I answered. “Did you see the shootout?” 
“Part of it,” he replied. “I was sleeping when shots woke me up. I 
looked out and saw all these cops running around in the dark with guns. 
I thought they were going to kill us. I didn’t know what was going on. I 
grabbed my shotgun and looked outside from behind my curtain.” 
“Did you see who started it?” Courtney asked. “Did you hear the 
police give any orders over bullhorns before the shooting started?” 
“No, first thing I remember hearing was shots from around my house 
and then some shots from this house right here, where those Panther 
boys stayed.” 
“Would you be willing to testify at a trial?” Flint asked. 
“Sure. I don’t want the police coming in here shooting,” he said, 
angrily. “Some kids could end up getting killed.” We had found our first 
witness. 
Later that afternoon, Flint, Courtney, and I went to see the men in 
custody at the Murphysboro jail, fifteen miles from Carbondale. The 
sheriff let Flint in as a law student, but not Courtney, even though I told 
them she was our paralegal. 
An hour later Flint and I were led to a small dingy room with a card 
table and a couple of chairs. We sat down. After a few minutes, four 
men were brought in. We introduced ourselves, shook hands, and stood 
around the table, a little awkwardly. 
The men looked haggard and exhausted after three days in jail. Three 
of them were SIU students from Chicago. In the newspaper accounts the 
authorities claimed the shootout had started when the police followed 
a burglary suspect to the house. The police said when they surrounded 
the house and ordered the occupants out, the Panthers started firing. 
Shootout in Carbondale
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   137 7/29/09   1:29:19 PM


--- PAGE 147 ---
1
Exposing the Murder
The most vocal of the men in custody was Leonard Thomas, dark 
skinned and handsome, with a finely featured face and horn-rimmed 
glasses. Even though his clothes were ruffled, he looked as if he would 
be more at home in a classroom than firing a rifle. 
“It was a real firefight, but they started it,” Leonard said. “Bullets were 
flying everywhere. I don’t know why nobody got killed.” 
“’Cause we were prepared to defend ourselves,” Milton Boyd (nick-
named Houseman) jumped in. He was tall and slender, with very dark 
skin and cheeks that pumped in and out when he talked. “We had our 
place barricaded. We weren’t going to be ambushed and killed in our 
beds like the brothers in Chicago.” 
“Most of us were asleep when somebody from the front yelled that 
the police were surrounding the house. We heard shots and we went to 
our battle stations,” Leonard added. 
We later learned that Elbert Simon, the black postmaster general 
of Carbondale, had entered the Panther house and convinced the 
Panthers to surrender after he received assurances from the police that 
they would not fire as the Panthers came out. 
The men in custody wanted to know more about us. I explained that 
we represented the Panthers in Chicago, including the Hampton fam-
ily, and we had been asked by Bobby Rush to help them. They looked 
skeptical. We were dressed in jeans and looked more like hippies than 
lawyers, with Flint’ s ponytail and my Afro. They thanked us for coming 
down, but I sensed we would have to prove our merits in court. 
“How about bail?” Leonard asked. “If you get us out, we can earn 
money and pay you without burdening our parents.” 
This was not the type of agreement most criminal lawyers relished. 
They wanted cash up front. Sometimes we did too, but we weren’t going 
make them sit in jail. Getting your client out on bond is the first, and 
often most critical, step in a criminal case. With a client out of jail, there’ s 
no pressure to go to trial quickly. Generally the defendant benefits from 
postponing the trial, particularly when there is a lot of publicity around 
the event that led to the arrest. Clients can assist in finding witnesses, 
working out the necessary defense, and preparing courtroom testi-
mony. Also, it makes a much better impression on the judge and jury 
for your client to be free. Not only can he go to and from court with-
out a marshal escorting him, but the jury knows he has been trusted 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   138 7/29/09   1:29:20 PM


--- PAGE 148 ---
1
enough to be released and is voluntarily appearing for trial. Unless we 
got the bond lowered, these defendants would be in custody at the time 
of trial, several months away. Because they were Panthers, getting the 
bond reduced would be difficult. This was the test for the defendants of 
whether we could deliver. 
The bond hearing took place in Murphysboro in the regular court-
room in the old courthouse, located in the middle of the town square. 
Flint and I sat down at the counsel table in the empty, cavernous, wood-
paneled courtroom. 
Richard Richmond, the prosecutor, arrived shortly thereafter. He was 
a stocky but handsome man in his late thirties who came from a promi-
nent local family. He walked over, introduced himself, and shook our 
hands. He was friendlier than I had anticipated. The judge, who arrived 
shortly thereafter, was less cordial. 
The defendants were led into the courtroom shackled hand and foot. 
I stood up. “Your Honor, it’ s demeaning for the defendants to be brought 
into court like this. I move to have the marshals remove their handcuffs 
and leg chains.” The judge looked at Richmond, who said he had no 
objection. The judge looked annoyed that Richmond had acceded to 
our request but begrudgingly ordered the sheriff to remove the hand-
cuffs and leg chains. 
I stood up and explained that the defendants had no criminal 
backgrounds, were students who came from working- and middle-
class families, and had not sought this confrontation with the police. 
At worst, some of them had defended themselves when the police 
attacked. Richmond opposed our motion to reduce bond based on the 
length of the standoff, the number of shots fired, and the danger to the 
officers. To my surprise, he didn’t focus on the defendants being Black 
Panthers. 
The judge quickly ruled: “Motion to reduce bond is denied.” 
Back in our tiny visiting room in the jail, our clients were under-
standably upset. They were facing six months or more in custody before 
trial. 
“We’re not giving up,” I said. “There was too much pressure on this 
judge for him to let you guys out.” 
“We’ll appeal his decision,” Flint rejoined. “I’ve already started draft-
ing a petition to the Supreme Court to ask for a bond reduction.” 
Shootout in Carbondale
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   139 7/29/09   1:29:20 PM


--- PAGE 149 ---
10
Exposing the Murder
We called some local activists together to set up a defense commit-
tee. Somebody had a photograph of the six Panthers chained together 
in handcuffs and leg restraints after the shootout. The men in the photo 
looked like slaves being led to a slave ship or an auction block. The photo 
with the words “Free the Carbondale Six, Stop the Railroad” in bold let-
ters under it became the official poster of the defense committee. 
Flint and I spent two days drafting and filing the appeal. Within a cou-
ple days, Justice Goldenhersh’ s clerk called to say the Illinois Supreme 
Court justice set a hearing at his Mount Vernon office the following 
Monday. He had a reputation for being open-minded, even liberal. 
The next Monday morning Flint and I were called into Justice 
Goldenhersh’ s law office along with the prosecutor, Dick Richmond. 
Flint introduced himself as a third-year law student and obtained per-
mission to participate in the hearing. I repeated my arguments from 
the earlier bail hearing but emphasized that the defendants were or 
had been college students with firm family roots in their communi-
ties. They were not going to break contact with their families and flee. I 
argued that Illinois law includes the presumption of innocence before 
trial, which requires releasing defendants on bail unless the state dem-
onstrates they are a danger of flight or a risk to the community, which 
these defendants were not. Flint cited cases to support me. 
“Do you agree with their premise, Mr. Richmond?” Justice Golden-
hersh asked. 
Richmond said that he accepted our formulation of the law and 
he didn’t argue against bail very forcefully. Here was a prosecutor 
unlike those in Cook County’ s criminal courts: a prosecutor with a 
conscience. 
Shortly after we left the judge, his clerk brought out his order. I 
glanced at the bottom line: “The Appellants Motion to Reduce Bond is 
hereby granted. Bond is set at $10,000.” Our clients would be released 
as soon as their families put up 10 percent, or one thousand dollars. 
Flint and I were exuberant. “Let’ s get out of here before he changes 
his mind,” I said. 
At the Jackson County Jail we reported the good news. There is noth-
ing more satisfying than seeing the smile when you tell a client in jail he 
or she is going home. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   140 7/29/09   1:29:20 PM


--- PAGE 150 ---
11
“You guys really did it,” Leonard said. 
“You the one,” Houseman joined in, giving us a high five. 
James Holley, nicknamed Blood, was short and stocky. He had hardly 
said a word on any of our earlier visits. This time he gave us our biggest 
compliment: “You guys are our trial team.” 
Shootout in Carbondale
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   141 7/29/09   1:29:21 PM


--- PAGE 151 ---
12
Vietnam and Protest 
B
ack at PLO, Flint and  I were greeted with congratulations. We 
wanted to push the Hampton case, but it seemed stuck in slow 
motion. The defendants filed motions to dismiss, challenging the suf-
ficiency of our conspiracy allegations and claiming Hanrahan was 
immune from civil suit because he was the prosecutor. Judge Perry was 
in no hurry to decide the motions or to allow us to begin deposing the 
defendants. 
By 1971 the Panthers in Chicago and nationally had diminished 
in size and influence. They weren’t recruiting new members and the 
Chicago chapter never regained the size it was before Fred’ s murder. No 
one could replace Fred’ s charisma, energy, or organizing ability. 
The Panthers’ primary activities became the selling of the Black 
Panther paper, the maintenance of the office on Madison Street, and 
administering a now-diminished breakfast program and health clinic. 
Many municipalities, including Chicago, began to implement their 
own free breakfast programs, taking away one of the Panthers’ pri-
mary sources for community outreach and support. While the Panthers 
could rightfully claim they had initiated the breakfast programs, they 
received only the continued harassment from the city officials who had 
copied them. Years later, with the community pressure gone, the city 
abandoned the breakfast program. 
The split between most of the West Coast Panthers, including Huey 
Newton and Eldridge Cleaver, who was living in exile in Algeria, took its 
toll on all the Panther chapters. Many Panthers left because they sym-
pathized with Eldridge, who espoused the need for underground armed 
units. The Chicago chapter allied itself with the West Coast Panthers, 
who had given up much of their militancy. With their leadership con-
stantly being arrested and put on trial, the West Coast Panthers devoted 
most of their energy to freeing them. 
20
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   142 7/29/09   1:29:21 PM


--- PAGE 152 ---
1
Some revelations in 1971 suggested additional reasons for the 
Panthers’ decline. In March antiwar protesters who later identified 
themselves as the Citizens Committee to Investigate the FBI broke into 
an FBI office in Media, Pennsylvania, a suburb of Philadelphia. After 
the break-in, they clandestinely began releasing documents they had 
seized. These documents exposed the secret FBI Counterintelligence 
Program (COINTELPRO). One of the documents they released was 
a memo from FBI director J. Edgar Hoover to all FBI offices, ordering 
FBI agents in all cities with Panther chapters to develop “hard-hitting 
programs designed to expose, disrupt, misdirect, discredit, or other-
wise neutralize” black nationalist organizations, including SNCC and 
the Nation of Islam. Another stated objective was to “prevent the rise of 
a messiah who could unify and electrify the militant black nationalist 
movement.” Stokely Carmichael, Dr. King, and Elijah Muhammad were 
named as potential “messiahs.” Hoover ordered that COINTELPRO’ s 
existence be kept secret. Every office was to report directly to him on its 
efforts to carry out the program’ s mandates. 
“Do you think this COINTELPRO had something to do with the raid?” 
Dennis asked Flint and me when the documents were first published. 
I was wondering the same thing. “We always thought this was 
Hanrahan’ s thing,” I answered. “But maybe he had help.” 
In 1971, William O’Neal left the Panthers. He became the lessee and 
manager of an Arco gas station in Maywood, only a few blocks from 
the Hampton home. When Dennis and I visited O’Neal, he told us “this 
gas station supports Panthers involved in underground activities.” He 
said he was sure clandestine work was “what Fred would have wanted” 
and he was carrying out Fred’ s intentions. He claimed a vague connec-
tion to the politics of armed struggle that Eldridge Cleaver espoused. 
O’Neal was particularly vehement in denouncing the Chicago Panthers 
for having no military capability. 
Even with his businessman aura, O’Neal tried to impress Dennis and 
me by bragging about how he could go in and out of the business and 
criminal worlds. He claimed he and his friends Robert Bruce and Nathan-
iel Junior, two ex-Panthers, were regularly committing burglaries. 
In June of 1971 the  New York Times and the Washington Post printed 
the Pentagon Papers. These were top-secret documents smuggled out 
Vietnam and Protest
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   143 7/29/09   1:29:21 PM


--- PAGE 153 ---
1
Exposing the Murder
of the Defense Department and copied by Daniel Ellsberg while he was 
working for the Rand Corporation. The files demonstrated that military 
advisors in the Johnson administration understood that the war could 
not be won and that continuing would lead to many times more casual-
ties than the government admitted publicly. Ellsberg faced possible life 
imprisonment if he released the documents but took the risk because 
he was convinced the war in Vietnam had become so destructive that 
militant and courageous resistance was needed. 
The Pentagon Papers confirmed everything we in the antiwar move-
ment already believed about the government’ s willingness to carry 
out heinous crimes and inflict mayhem in a war it knew it could not 
win. The publication of these documents greatly increased the antiwar 
movement’ s credibility with the media and intelligentsia. 
Nixon’ s paranoia about leaks brought on by Ellsberg’ s release of 
the Pentagon Papers led to the creation of the White House–directed 
“Plumbers unit.” These ex-CIA recruits carried out the burglaries at 
Watergate and at Ellsberg’ s psychiatrist’ s office, which led to Nixon’ s 
impeachment when he tried to hide his knowledge of the burglar-
ies. The country’ s repulsion for the government overreaching and the 
intrusions of the Plumbers and the cover-ups that followed eventually 
created the atmosphere for uncovering other clandestine government 
activities, including COINTELPRO. 
Years later, Ellsberg said it was the daily, relentless protesters out-
side the Rand Corporation where he worked that caused him at first to 
question, then repudiate his role in supporting the war in Vietnam, and 
ultimately to risk years in prison to help end it. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   144 7/29/09   1:29:22 PM


--- PAGE 154 ---
1
The Carbondale Trial
I
n the summer of 1971  the Center for Constitutional Rights was help-
ing us answer Hanrahan’ s motions to dismiss. They had generously 
provided us with assistance from Bill Bender, one of their most skilled 
lawyers. Hanrahan’ s lawyers took the position that as a prosecutor, 
Hanrahan had absolute immunity for any actions he took. We argued 
that executing a police raid was a police function, not a prosecutorial 
one, thus Hanrahan was not entitled to complete immunity. The law 
was on our side, but out of deference to Coghlan and Volini, Judge Perry 
wasn’t. 
More briefs and memos were still due on both the immunity and 
conspiracy issues as Flint, Michael, and I went to trial in August in the 
Carbondale Panther case. Judge Perry stopped our discovery while the 
special grand jury considered criminal charges against Hanrahan. There 
was nothing to do but answer their motions and wait for Perry to rule. 
The Carbondale Six became the Carbondale Three after the prosecu-
tor decided to indict the Panthers separately. The first trial would be for 
Leonard Thomas, Milton “Houseman” Boyd, and James “Blood” Holley, 
all of whom were arrested inside the house after the shootout. 
Though we feared the Carbondale Panthers would not get a fair 
trial in front of the humorless and prosecution-oriented Judge Prosser, 
we were hopeful about the jury. Michael and Flint had opened a PLO 
branch in Carbondale that spring, and had become familiar with the 
jury pools there. A lot of SIU students, faculty, and ex-students were on 
the registered voting lists in Jackson County, along with a lot of weed-
smoking folks who didn’t love the police. We wanted a young jury, which 
in that period meant an iconoclastic jury. 
Our understanding of the law was that the prosecutor had to prove 
that an individual defendant fired at a specific police officer with the 
intent to kill him in order to prove any of the seven attempted murder 
21
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   145 7/29/09   1:29:22 PM


--- PAGE 155 ---
1
Exposing the Murder
charges pending against each defendant. It would be nearly impossible 
for any of the police officers to identify which individuals had fired at 
him. If we could pick a jury that would hold the prosecution to its legal 
burden, we thought we had a good chance of winning. 
For jury selection, the spectator section of the courtroom was packed 
with supporters, mostly current or recent college students or those 
who had taken a brief respite from the university. The Carbondale Six 
Defense Committee, which comprised primarily student activists and 
was formed shortly after the shootout, had done its work. It makes a huge 
difference for a jury to see there are people in court who care about the 
defendants on trial. This is particularly true in a political case, where the 
prosecution invariably tries to show the defendants to be on the fringe. 
As the trial began, our clients were dressed in sports clothes, and 
Michael and I had on court suits. Flint was wearing a tan sport jacket 
and a red, curly-haired wig to cover his shoulder-length reddish-brown 
hair. From a certain angle he looked a little clownish. The wig did not 
quite fit and had an orange tint. 
Eleven of the twelve white jurors selected were in their twenties. 
In 1971, age was a strong indicator of one’ s sympathy toward change 
and to political movements in general. We assumed most of the jurors 
would relate to our youthful and iconoclastic style and exuberance, not 
to mention our suspicion of the police. 
Michael made our opening statement; it was the first time he’ d ever 
spoken to a jury. Nervous at first, he quickly got into the rhythm, pre-
senting the case from the defendants’ perspective. They woke up in the 
early morning hours to flashes and the sounds of gunshots coming from 
the darkness. Without indicating whom, he acknowledged that some of 
the people inside had fired back to protect themselves. While an open-
ing statement is not the time for argument, it is a time when defense 
lawyers talk about reasonable doubt, and Michael told the jury that 
the state couldn’t meet its burden on any of the twenty-one attempted 
murder counts because they couldn’t show who had fired any of the 
shots or at whom they were fired.
After openings, Richmond called the first of the seven officers. He 
testified that he and the other officers surrounded the Panther house 
after chasing a burglary suspect they had seen run inside. It had been 
early morning and still dark. The police had given warnings over a bull-
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   146 7/29/09   1:29:22 PM


--- PAGE 156 ---
1
horn to the occupants to come out. After that, the officer testified, he’ d 
seen and heard shots from the second floor of the house, and returned 
the fire from behind a tree a hundred feet away. 
When I questioned the first police officer, he admitted he could not 
identify who had fired at him. He also acknowledged he knew the house 
was where the Panthers lived and the police had contingency plans for 
a raid. I was trying to establish a motive for the police firing and picked 
the obvious one—they knew they were Panthers. 
Michael and I took turns cross-examining each of the other six police 
officers. Their testimony was similar to the first, but one of the officers 
was especially adamant that following a particular flash from the house, 
he felt the bullets “whizzing past” him as he ducked, and he could tell 
from which window the shots came. Although the officers got occa-
sional views of the Panther house, they could not identify the persons 
firing. Still, I feared the jury might sympathize with these young, white, 
earnest-sounding cops and find our clients guilty, even if the jurors 
could not identify who fired at which police officers. 
On the Saturday after the trial’ s second week, Flint, Michael, and I drove 
the fifty miles to Mount Vernon, Illinois. It was a hot, humid afternoon 
with only a few clouds to protect us from the sun. We stood in an open 
area next to a freshly dug grave. It was the final resting place of George 
Jackson, shot and killed two days earlier on August 21, 1971, by guards 
at San Quentin State Prison. Jackson had served more than ten years of 
a one-year-to-life sentence for stealing seventy-one dollars from a gas 
station. He was the Malcolm X of the prison movement. Like Malcolm, 
he had educated himself in prison and become a compelling writer and 
spokesperson for black revolt. He had also been a Panther. 
Jackson’ s book, Soledad Brother, gives a gripping account of the 
racism in the criminal justice and prison systems. Like Malcolm’ s 
biography, Jackson’ s contains vivid descriptions of the development of 
consciousness of a black revolutionary; his life was a symbol of resis-
tance. Jackson’ s death resulted in work stoppages, memorial services, 
and teach-ins at prisons throughout the country. The men inside Attica 
Correctional Facility in New York declared a day of silence during which 
no one spoke. They also stepped up their demands for humane treat-
ment and set a timetable for the administration to meet with them.
The Carbondale Trial
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   147 7/29/09   1:29:23 PM


--- PAGE 157 ---
1
Exposing the Murder
The San Quentin guards who shot Jackson claimed he’ d been trying 
to escape using a pistol that he had concealed in his Afro, supposedly 
passed to him in the visiting room. Other reports raised the questions 
of whether he was trying to escape at all and whether the pistol was 
planted. Jackson had become a particular target of the guards because 
they suspected that he and two other prisoners, known collectively as 
the Soledad Brothers, were involved in the killing of a guard in retali-
ation for another guard’ s killing of three prisoners at Soledad Prison. 
George’ s brother, Jonathan Jackson, had entered the Marin County 
courthouse a year earlier demanding freedom for the Soledad Brothers. 
He was shot and killed leaving the courthouse, as were the judge he’ d 
taken hostage and two other prisoners who had been on trial and left 
the building with Jonathan.
George Jackson’ s burial took place in a cemetery in an open field, 
surrounded in the distance by pine trees. From there FBI agents dressed 
in suits were peering at us through binoculars. George and Jonathan 
had grown up in Mount Vernon. George’ s freshly dug grave sat next to 
Jonathan’ s, and their headstones were only a couple feet apart. We were 
sweating in our suits. Of the fifty people there, Flint, Michael, and I were 
the only whites. Georgia Jackson, a stately woman, asked the three of us 
as we stood next to her sons’ graves who we were. 
“We’re Chicago lawyers, defending the Panthers on trial from 
Carbondale,” I answered. 
She told us that what we were doing was important. “You would have 
liked my son. He was so strong. He taught himself to be a writer. He could 
have been greater,” she said. “It was such a waste, him spending all those 
years in prison for nothing. He wasn’t the way they portrayed him. He 
was smart and read a lot. He was a natural leader and could have helped 
a lot of people. He had courage. There wasn’t anything he wouldn’t do, if 
he thought it was right.” She reminded me of Iberia talking about Fred. 
Georgia Jackson urged the three of us to continue fighting to keep 
black people, particularly Panthers, out of jail. I went back to the 
trial feeling blessed and inspired, and even more keyed up to free the 
Carbondale Three. 
In court the following Monday, I called the neighbor we had met on our 
first day in Carbondale. He had a practical, down-home air about him 
that made his testimony about waking, hearing gunshots, and reaching 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   148 7/29/09   1:29:23 PM


--- PAGE 158 ---
1
for his gun, that much more credible. On cross-examination Richmond 
asked him if he would have shot if he knew it was the police. “Yeah, if 
they were firing at me,” he replied. We hoped with similar testimony 
from other neighbors, we would convince the jury that the Panthers’ 
defending themselves was reasonable and justifiable. 
In the closing argument I attempted to go into the history of white 
violence against black groups, including the December 4 raid by the 
Chicago police. Richmond objected but I kept talking, finishing my 
sentence. I tried to put the jurors in the shoes of the neighbors, and 
by implication, the Panthers. “What would you do if you woke up and 
heard shots, looked outside, and saw people shooting at you?” I asked. 
The issue of whether the police announced their office and ordered 
people to surrender was very much in dispute. I reiterated the defense’ s 
position that this had never happened. The jury went out to deliberate 
early in the afternoon. 
Four hours later we received a call from Judge Prosser’ s clerk. The 
jury had reached their verdict. We hoped the short deliberation could 
be taken as a sign that we had won without much dissent. On the other 
hand, it could mean the jury felt the state’ s case was clear-cut and that 
the Panthers were guilty. 
I called the defense committee and our friends so that they could 
come to court for the verdict. Opposite us as we sat down was Dick 
Richmond, looking weary after the three-week ordeal. The jury came 
out, not smiling exactly, but not looking at the ground as juries with 
guilty verdicts frequently do. They looked at the defendants. 
The foreman of the jury stood up and announced, “We have reached 
a verdict.” 
The clerk took the jury form and went to the witness stand to read 
it. “ As to count one, the charge of attempted murder against Leonard 
Thomas, we the jury find him not guilty.” One down and forty-one to 
go. The clerk continued reading, describing each count. They were each 
followed by “not guilty.” 
When the clerk read the last “not guilty” verdict and started to put 
the paper down, a spontaneous shout went up from the defendants and 
spectators. The hugging and crying of relief began. I couldn’t hold back 
my own tears of joy. Hugging my clients, realizing we had kept them out 
of prison and that they were going home was spectacular. Flint took off 
his wig and threw it in the air. 
The Carbondale Trial
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   149 7/29/09   1:29:23 PM


--- PAGE 159 ---
10
Exposing the Murder
I went over to thank the jury and learned they not only were on our 
side but wanted to come to the victory party we had announced for 
that night. They told us one of the four hours they spent deliberating 
was trying to decide whether Flint’ s red curly hair was a wig. They had 
guessed right. 
Later that night we went down to Little Grassy, a lake just outside 
Carbondale. We shed our clothes and sang and shouted in the warm 
water well into the night. 
The next day we drove back to Chicago. “Panthers Acquitted in Car-
bondale” was the banner headline, even in the Chicago newspapers. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   150 7/29/09   1:29:24 PM


--- PAGE 160 ---
11
Prosecuting Hanrahan
“G
rand Jury Indicts Hanrahan” was  the headline that greeted us 
after we returned to Chicago. The indictment charged Han-
rahan, his assistant Jalovec, the fourteen raiders, and the police per-
sonnel who conducted the investigation with “knowingly and willfully, 
fraudulently and deceitfully, conspiring, combining, confederating, 
and agreeing to obstruct justice,” to prevent the criminal prosecution 
of Daniel Groth and the other raiders as well as to obstruct the crimi-
nal defense of the survivors. Police Superintendent James Conlisk was 
named as a coconspirator but not indicted. 
Hanrahan and company would have to face criminal charges, but 
the obstruction of justice charges hardly matched the seriousness of 
what they had done. 
“I don’t understand how the grand jury could believe that Fred’ s 
death from the two parallel gunshot wounds to his head at close range 
could be anything but deliberate murder,” I said to fellow PLOers con-
gregated at our office the day after our return. 
“Who knows?” Dennis responded. “Maybe Hanrahan or the police 
had a grand juror or two in their pockets from the start.” 
“Or maybe they recruited some along the way,” I answered. 
“Well, I think it’ s amazing Hanrahan was indicted at all,” said Susan 
Jordan.
When I considered the events of the previous year and how long it 
took to get Hanrahan charged, I realized she was right. The time frame 
was in stark contrast to the five minutes of a cop’ s grand jury testimony 
that had been sufficient for Hanrahan to indict our clients. 
In December 1970, Barnabas Sears convened a special grand jury, 
and the survivors testified for the first time before a government body. 
Publicly, Sears kept his distance from us at PLO. He didn’t want to be 
tainted by appearing to be too close to our radicalism or a Panther sym-
22
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   151 7/29/09   1:29:24 PM


--- PAGE 161 ---
12
Exposing the Murder
pathizer. Privately, we worked with Cedarquist and Reid, his assistants. 
This cooperation included allowing them to review our files on the raid. 
We didn’t give their access a second thought. 
In April 1971, when rumors were circulating that the special grand 
jury was about to return indictments, Hanrahan and the other targets 
of the grand jury hired attorneys to represent them: Thomas Sullivan, 
the former U.S. attorney; George Cotsirilos, one of the best and most 
polished criminal lawyers in Chicago; and John Coghlan, the infighter 
from Daley’ s area of Bridgeport who already was representing Hanrahan 
in our civil suit. Sullivan had distinguished himself as U.S. attorney, and 
later as an advocate for civil liberties in representing protesters from the 
1968 Democratic Convention. His background as well as his cool, pre-
cise courtroom style added prestige and skill to Hanrahan’ s defense. 
In May, at Sullivan’ s urging, Judge Power ordered the grand jury to 
stop deliberations and hear Hanrahan and the raiders’ side of the story. 
This was unprecedented. Persons being investigated have no right to 
present any evidence to the grand jury. When Sears criticized Judge 
Power for this intervention, he was fined for contempt. 
In June, despite Power’ s efforts to prevent it, the grand jury announced 
they had returned an indictment. Judge Power immediately ordered the 
indictments sealed and suppressed, another outrageous and unprec-
edented act. Not only the liberal Chicago Council of Lawyers but also 
the more staid Chicago Bar Association condemned Judge Power for his 
interference and urged Hanrahan to step down as state’ s attorney until 
the grand jury was completed. 
The position of presiding judge of the Cook County Criminal Courts, 
the largest criminal court system in the United States, was a political 
appointment directed from the mayor’ s office and Judge Power knew 
who provided his gavel. He was a close friend, neighbor, and former 
law associate of Mayor Daley. Clearly, Daley and the machine did not 
want Hanrahan charged, and the usual prohibitions against interfer-
ence with the grand jury did not apply. 
At one point, Power even cut off funding to the special prosecutor, 
and went so far as to appoint Mitchell Ware, head of the Illinois State 
Police, to investigate Barnabas Sears. Fortunately, Ware never got 
started. On August 24 the Illinois Supreme Court overruled Power. Their 
unanimous opinion, written by Justice Schaefer, the same justice who 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   152 7/29/09   1:29:24 PM


--- PAGE 162 ---
1
had granted Fred Hampton an appeal bond, concluded that “the inter-
ests of justice would best be served by opening the indictment and pro-
ceeding pursuant to the law.” The opinion further ordered that Mitchell 
Ware’ s appointment be revoked. 
Unfortunately, the Supreme Court turned down Sears’ s request to 
appoint a trial judge from outside Cook County. Judge Power’ s last rul-
ing before transferring the case was to appoint Judge Philip Romiti, a 
friend of Mayor Daley and former dean of DePaul Law School, to be the 
trial judge.
“What’ s Judge Romiti like?” I asked, continuing the conversation 
with Dennis and Susan. “I’ve never had a case before him.” 
“He’ s pretty tough on defendants in a regular criminal case,” 
Dennis said. “But here, with Hanrahan on trial, and Romiti’ s ties to the 
Democratic Party, I’ll bet the defendants are licking their chops. I’m 
sure they’ll take a bench trial.” 
I didn’t feel optimistic, either. “I think Sears is outgunned, particu-
larly if, as you say, the defense lawyers have Romiti in their pocket.” 
“Thomas Sullivan is as good as they get,” Susan pitched in. “He’ s cool 
and calculating and Coghlan will be the hatchet man.” 
“Romiti will be looking for any excuse to acquit Hanrahan,” Flint 
said. 
Sears had an uphill fight. To my knowledge, cops had been charged 
with bribery, drugs, and burglaries but never for incidents where they 
wounded or killed civilians while on duty. State’ s attorneys worked with 
the police in their criminal prosecutions. Hanrahan, like all the Cook 
County prosecutors before and after him, granted police officers de 
facto immunity from criminal prosecution, no matter what they did on 
the streets. 
Prosecuting Hanrahan
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   153 7/29/09   1:29:24 PM


--- PAGE 163 ---
1
Revolt at Attica
O
n September 9, 1971, as we  contemplated how we could assist 
the special prosecutor, twelve hundred prisoners seized control 
of one quarter of New York’s Attica Correctional Facility. The prisoners 
took thirty-nine guards hostage and demanded to meet with Commis-
sioner Russell Oswald and that Warden Mancusi be fired. For over a 
year the prisoners had put forth a list of demands for humane treat-
ment including decent food and medical care, educational and occu-
pational programs, and an end to overcrowding and guard brutality. 
George Jackson’s death in San Quentin the month before accelerated 
their demand to meet with the head of the Department of Corrections. 
Their pleas had been ignored, but with the takeover of the prison, they 
were finally being heard. 
Observers were called in: New York Times reporter Tom Wicker, New 
York assemblyman Arthur Eve, and New York congressman Herman 
Badillo. Bill Kunstler came to Attica after the prisoners requested he 
represent them. I watched the confrontation on television, moved by 
the bravery of the mostly black and Latino prisoners and by the rea-
sonableness of what they sought. I had visited enough Illinois prisons 
to know that the conditions they protested were endemic to the entire 
prison system. 
Over the next four days, negotiators and observers were televised 
entering and leaving the prison gates. For a moment it seemed nego-
tiations might succeed, but they then reached an impasse. While the 
prison administration said it would comply with some of the demands, 
they were adamant about no amnesty for the rebellious prisoners. The 
prisoners who led the takeover would be criminally prosecuted. 
A deadlock loomed. Tensions grew. The prisoners asked for Governor 
Nelson Rockefeller to come to Attica and meet with them. He refused. 
Instead, he ordered hundreds of state police to surround the prison.
23
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   154 7/29/09   1:29:25 PM


--- PAGE 164 ---
1
On September 12, Bill Kunstler, the chief lawyer at the Conspiracy 
Seven trial, who had decried Fred’ s killing as “murder,” came out of 
Attica begging for more time. “I fear the worst,” he said. His passionate 
plea went unanswered. 
The next morning a light rain fell at Attica. I watched on TV as hun-
dreds of state police wearing yellow raincoats and armed with rifles 
entered the front gate. A few minutes later the television crews picked 
up muffled sounds of gunfire. Cold-blooded murder, I thought. The 
prisoners have no way to defend themselves. 
A couple of hours later the media reported twenty-nine prison-
ers shot dead and ten hostages killed; scores of other prisoners were 
wounded. The prison had been retaken, but it took a massacre to do it. 
There was an immediate lockdown. No one was allowed in the prison 
except employees. A spokesperson for Warden Mancusi reported that 
the dead hostages’ throats had been cut and many had been castrated. 
It sounded terrible, but then I wondered if their reports were true. 
That night, as the National Lawyers Guild in New York was calling for 
lawyers to go to Attica to interview and assist the prisoners, we held a 
meeting at Dennis’ s house. I’ d come to the meeting prepared to argue 
that since Attica was near Buffalo, lawyers from New York should be the 
ones to go. But Dennis, always the visionary, spoke most eloquently. 
“ Attica was about rebellion, black rebellion,” he argued. “Those men 
were murdered and somebody has to tell their story. We have to go 
there. We told the Hampton story and we have to go there to be the wit-
nesses to tell this one.” 
He was right. I was too cautious. It was a time for action. 
Perhaps it was as arbitrary as who had the lighter court schedule the 
next week, but I was selected to drive to Attica and interview the pris-
oners along with Mzizi Woodson, an outgoing and enthusiastic twenty-
one-year-old African American woman working at PLO as a legal 
worker. She sported a big Afro and a warm smile. As soon as we decided 
that PLO would send someone to Attica, she volunteered. 
“Let me go,” she said. “I can leave tomorrow.” I knew seeing Mzizi 
would be a welcome sight for the men inside. They were calling them-
selves the Attica Brothers. 
Mzizi and I left Chicago on September 15, two days after the assault. 
We drove all night. The next morning we met Dan Pachoda and Eliot 
Revolt at Attica
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   155 7/29/09   1:29:25 PM


--- PAGE 165 ---
1
Exposing the Murder
Wilk, National Lawyers Guild lawyers from New York City, at the entrance 
gate of the huge concrete-walled prison. The administration had just 
begun to allow lawyers inside the day before. Pachoda and Wilk had 
the list of those who led the rebellion. These were the prisoners most in 
danger of reprisals by the guards. We divided up the list so that between 
us we could see all the leaders in the next two days. I also copied down 
the names of the prisoners killed, knowing the people we visited would 
want to know who died. 
“We’re here to see Frank Smith,” I told the guard at the front desk. His 
name came from the top of our list. Frank had been in charge of secu-
rity during the takeover. I was afraid they wouldn’t let Mzizi enter, but I 
explained she was a paralegal and she was admitted. 
We were led to the interview room, where a glass barrier two feet high 
ran across the middle of the table, separating visitors from prisoners. 
We sat down in the hard plastic chairs on our side and waited. I could 
hear guards’ voices echoing from outside, the clang of gates slamming 
shut. The room was dingy and smelled of sweat. 
An hour later the guards brought in a huge bear of a man. He was 
just over six feet tall with broad shoulders and a huge chest and belly. 
His neck was thick like the rest of him, his face round, and his head was 
shaved. He was wearing only boxer shorts and a T-shirt. As soon as the 
guards unshackled his hands, he stuck one out in our direction around 
the glass. 
“I’m Big Black,” he said, in a deep, rumbling voice, looking us directly 
in the eye. He was indeed big and very dark skinned. There was some-
thing disarming in his straightforwardness. 
After the guards left, I explained that we came from a movement law 
office in Chicago at the urging of the National Lawyers Guild to help the 
Attica Brothers. He looked at both of us: I had an Afro, the Jewish, curly 
kind. It was a little shorter than Mzizi’ s. 
“Y’all came all the way from Chicago for us? Ain’t that something!” 
He shook his head in disbelief. He looked at Mzizi. “ Are you a lawyer, 
too?” 
“No, but I work with them. We’re here to help you if we can.” Her 
simple words seemed to relax him. 
Big Black began his story. He sat back and gave us some background. 
Because of his size and the fact that he got along with everyone, includ-
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   156 7/29/09   1:29:25 PM


--- PAGE 166 ---
1
ing the Black Muslims, he had been chosen as head of security for the 
yard. He oversaw the protection of the hostages. “The hostages got 
the same food and water as everybody else, and we didn’t let anyone 
bother them. No one got near them without my permission. We even 
shared our blankets with them.” He said the guards/hostages wanted 
the administration to work out the demands “as much as we did.” 
He went on to describe the siege. When the state troopers appeared 
above them on the walls with rifles, Frank ordered the hostages be taken 
to different parts of the yard and the catwalk. He told the men leading 
them to stand close by. “I figured the police wouldn’t fire at the brothers, 
for fear of hitting the guards. The hostages were blindfolded and clearly 
identified.” 
“First came the tear gas,” he said. “People looked for something to 
cover their face. When I first heard shots, I thought they were blanks. 
Then the people around me in the yard started dropping. I realized they 
were real bullets, and everyone ducked and ran for cover. 
“L. D. Barkley [a main inmates spokesperson who’ d declared, ‘We are 
men, not beasts, and we will not be driven and beaten as such’] was one 
of the first persons I saw go down, like he had been targeted.
“When I looked up on the catwalks,” he went on, “I saw the hostages 
lying on the ground next to the men guarding them. Some weren’t mov-
ing and I saw blood around them.” 
I asked Frank, “What about the stories that the hostages had been 
castrated?” 
“That’ s total bullshit and they know it. The hostages were shot down 
like dogs, like the rest of us. The troopers had all the guns. It was a 
slaughter and they didn’t care who they hit.” 
As with Hampton, the official version was a cover-up to hide deliber-
ate killing. 
“I’m sorry about the underwear,” Frank said to Mzizi. “It’ s the best I 
could do.” 
“Where are your clothes?” she asked. 
“The guards stripped us naked after the shooting. Then they made us 
crawl naked in the mud through a gauntlet where they beat us. They’ve 
only given us back underwear and T-shirts.” 
“It’ s been three days,” I said. “You should have some pants and a shirt 
by now. Maybe I can do something about this.” 
Revolt at Attica
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   157 7/29/09   1:29:26 PM


--- PAGE 167 ---
1
Exposing the Murder
“Well, you see what clothes I got,” he said. “Some men don’t even 
have T-shirts yet.” Leaving them in underwear looked like retaliation by 
the prison administration. 
Frank went on to describe how all the prisoners were made to lie 
on the ground. Some of them had an X drawn on their back and were 
marched off in a different direction. He wanted to know what had hap-
pened to them. I said I didn’t know but would try to find out when we 
interviewed more prisoners. 
Frank tried to continue. Then his powerful, booming voice stopped. 
Tears came. Mzizi’ s and my eyes met, searching for something to say. 
Frank’ s tone turned quieter, almost pleading. 
“They took me out of the line. They made me lie on a table naked 
on my back and put a football under my chin. They put their burning 
cigarettes out on me. Some dropped them from the catwalk above and 
were laughing. They told me if I moved and the football hit the ground 
I was dead. I tried not to move. I was sure they were going to kill me. 
They knew that I was in charge of security and used me as an example 
to scare everybody else, because nobody else got this treatment.” 
Frank raised his shirt and showed us the reddish, blistered burn 
marks on his stomach, shoulders, and arms. There were a lot of them. 
He lowered his shirt, his eyes full of tears. I reached around the glass and 
put my hand on his broad shoulder. Mzizi was also crying. She leaned 
over and hugged the part of his upper body she could reach. 
I felt an immediate bond with Big Black. He reminded me of Walter, 
with his broad shoulders and warm manner. There was an openness in 
Frank, a willingness to share his life and his feelings. Later on, I realized 
what it was. Frank trusted me, trusted us. 
Before we left, Frank described what it was like in the yard during 
the four days when the prisoners were in control. “We set up our own 
government,” he said. “We voted on things: what the demands would 
be, who would negotiate, and how to divide the food and water we got. 
Everybody was treated equally and the guards got as much as everyone 
else, including food, water, and blankets. When the troopers pointed 
their guns and opened fire, the guards were just as scared and were cry-
ing like the rest of us.” 
Our time was up. We had been allowed nearly two hours with Frank, 
and wanted to see other prisoners. We stepped to the side of the table. I 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   158 7/29/09   1:29:26 PM


--- PAGE 168 ---
1
put my arms around Frank and he hugged me back. I’ d never done that 
with a prisoner. He and Mzizi exchanged a longer hug. “We will tell the 
story of you and the Attica Brothers,” she vowed, as he was shackled 
and led away. 
We came out of the prison late in the afternoon, charged up after see-
ing more prisoners who gave us similar accounts of what happened in 
the yard. “We’ve just got to tell what happened,” Mzizi said. “What the 
state troopers did was nothing but a cold-blooded massacre.” 
 “Rockefeller ordered them to do it,” I said. “He should be held 
responsible.” 
That night Mzizi and I went to a meeting at the home of Herman 
Schwartz, an ACLU lawyer and professor at the University of Buffalo 
Law School. All the lawyers who had been inside that day were there, 
along with Schwartz and some of his law students. He had a reputation 
as an expert in prisoner rights and ran a clinic at the law school. 
For the meeting, he arranged the chairs in his living room in rows 
facing a large cushioned chair where he would sit. Before the meeting 
started we proposed putting the chairs in a circle so that we faced each 
other. We were used to the more equal arrangement from our collec-
tive’ s meetings. One of the law students, Mara Siegel, agreed with us. 
Professor Schwartz seemed reluctant but agreed and we rearranged the 
chairs; the meeting began. 
Mzizi and I were adamant about going to the press right away. 
Schwartz wanted to keep a tight rein over what was said and avoid any-
thing too inflammatory, or too political. “Let’ s be careful about what we 
say,” he said. “So far, everything’ s been cleared through me.” It reminded 
me of the lawyer meetings after the Panther raid, when some of the law-
yers urged too much caution. 
We’ d learned from the Hampton case that the battle for the public’ s 
mind was critical; most people formed their opinions based on the early 
reports. Rockefeller’ s office and the prison administration were trying 
to justify the orders to fire based on the supposed threats to the hos-
tages, but they had discarded the castration and throat-cutting stories 
after the coroner reported they all died of gunshot wounds. None of the 
lawyers who had visited the prisoners after the assault had talked to the 
press about the gauntlet or prisoners being singled out for more beat-
ings with an X placed on their back or even the lack of proper clothes. 
Revolt at Attica
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   159 7/29/09   1:29:26 PM


--- PAGE 169 ---
10
Exposing the Murder
At the meeting we obtained a consensus that the prisoners’ stories 
had to be told, and soon. Schwartz agreed to hold a press conference. 
One of the New York lawyers who’ d been inside and heard accounts 
similar to ours would tell what happened. 
After the meeting Mzizi, Mara Siegel, and I went to the local motel/
restaurant for a drink. 
“So what do you do in Chicago?” Mara asked. She had huge brown 
eyes, long, straight, dark hair, and a contagious laugh. She spoke with 
excitement. The more we told her about the history of the People’ s Law 
Office, the more interested she became. 
I was explaining how it was that we came to Attica, when I noticed 
five or six guys crowded around the table next to us. They were noisy, a 
little drunk, and appeared to be celebrating, with their glasses of beer 
raised high as if in a salute to something. I leaned over to hear what they 
were saying. 
“It was like shooting fish in a barrel,” one of them said. 
“Yeah, I know I got a few of them,” the guy next to him responded. 
“You should have seen them running, trying to get away.” They all 
laughed. 
It took me a moment to realize what they were talking about. These 
were the state police, now in civilian clothes. Seventy-two hours earlier 
they’ d come into the prison firing their assault rifles. I listened to see if I 
could pick up any more of the details of what they were saying. 
They saw me looking at them and lowered their voices. When I told 
Mzizi and Mara what I’ d heard they didn’t believe it. Then they did. 
Shocked, we paid our check and got out of there. I’m pretty sure I heard 
Mara say “killers” under her breath as we walked past them to leave. We 
should have said it out loud.
Mzizi and I spent two more days interviewing the Attica prisoners, 
returning once to see Big Black who was still in his underwear. It was 
like visiting an old friend. We communicated greetings to him from 
other prisoners and told him what we had learned. He asked us when 
we were coming back and I said somebody from our office would return 
soon. 
“Don’t forget me and what we did,” he said. 
I never have. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   160 7/29/09   1:29:27 PM


--- PAGE 170 ---
11
I returned from Attica ready to pass on the powerful but tragic stories 
told to me by the men inside. I spoke at a rally outside of Cook County 
Jail from the back of a pick-up truck. My message—in reality their mes-
sage—was a call to prisoners, and indeed to all of us, to stand up and 
rebel against brutality and inhumane conditions, and to people on the 
outside to support prisoner demands for humane treatment. 
“Who is Attica?” I asked, after recounting the stories of Big Black and 
the other Attica Brothers.
“ Attica is all of us!” The crowd responded enthusiastically (I’ve never 
had a more receptive audience). The conditions at Attica were no worse 
than the conditions in Illinois prisons or the Cook County Jail, and 
many in the audience had friends or relatives inside. 
Everyone at PLO agreed we should continue representing the Attica 
Brothers. In the short term this meant working to improve the condi-
tions for the men in the prison, which was on lockdown. On the not-too-
distant horizon, it meant criminal defense. It was a certainty that the 
leaders of the rebellion who had survived would face criminal charges 
including murder. The administration was blaming the prisoners for 
the guards’ deaths, rather than the state troopers who shot them. 
For the next five years, we and many other Guild attorneys, including 
Bill Kunstler, who had been an observer during the takeover, worked for 
the Attica Brothers defense. Liz Fink and Danny Meyers from New York 
eventually made representation of the Attica Brothers their full-time 
work along with Dennis and Michael from PLO. 
I returned to Attica several times, but eventually my major respon-
sibility shifted to the Hampton case. I was building a private practice 
in Chicago to support the office financially, and also became more 
involved in the local issues of urban renewal, police brutality, and 
prison conditions in Illinois. And, I confess, Michael and Dennis were 
more willing to travel than I was. They put the fate of the Attica Brothers 
ahead of everything else.
There was plenty to do in Chicago. In addition to the Hampton and 
Clark cases and our regular criminal cases, the People’ s Law Office repre-
sented the antiwar movement, Weatherman fugitives, grand jury resist-
ers, Puerto Rican political prisoners, the Young Lords Organization, 
and prisoners who challenged the poor conditions in Illinois and fed-
Revolt at Attica
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   161 7/29/09   1:29:27 PM


--- PAGE 171 ---
12
Exposing the Murder
eral prisons in court. We could not have taken all this on without being 
a collective, sharing both a common political commitment as well as 
work and money. I could pull back on representing the Attica Brothers 
because Michael and Dennis took over. Dennis could stop working on 
the Hampton case when he moved to Buffalo because Flint and I made 
it our priority. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   162 7/29/09   1:29:27 PM


--- PAGE 172 ---
1
Two Bad Decisions
 
B
y the fall of 1971,  our civil suit against Hanrahan was over a year 
old but still barely moving along. Hanrahan’ s lawyers, Coghlan 
and Volini, had now moved to stay discovery until the completion of 
Hanrahan’ s criminal case. Judge Perry’ s resulting order barred us from 
both written discovery and taking the oral depositions of the defen-
dants. Judge Perry was angered by our straightforward accusations 
against Hanrahan and the raiders, labeling our claims that they con-
spired to murder Fred Hampton “outrageous.” He seemed more intent 
on denouncing our allegations of murder than in determining their 
truthfulness. 
When we filed the civil suit, I didn’t understand how important 
the politics and demeanor of a federal judge could be in determining 
the outcome. Had we known how much of an adversary Perry would 
become, we may not have continued in federal court at all. The federal 
suit could have been voluntarily dismissed and filed in state court but 
without the constitutional claims. In later years we would sometimes 
take this route when assigned a judge as hostile to civil rights cases as 
Perry. 
Perry focused on the defendants’ lengthy motions to dismiss as 
well as their accompanying briefs. Fortunately, Bill Bender and Jon 
Hyman, the head of Northwestern’ s legal clinic in Chicago, helped us 
research and draft opposing memos and briefs. PLO had limited time 
and resources to counter the myriad pretrial motions filed by the well-
paid defendants’ lawyers, all designed to defeat or slow down the litiga-
tion. At that time we also had little knowledge of federal civil rights laws. 
Coghlan and Volini challenged and moved to strike each paragraph of 
our complaint, even though civil rights pleadings are supposed to be 
construed broadly, which means you don’t have to describe every fac-
24
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   163 7/29/09   1:29:28 PM


--- PAGE 173 ---
1
Exposing the Murder
tual allegation in detail. Judge Perry took all their motions seriously, no 
matter how baseless. 
The defendants’ lawyers also pushed the very substantial legal issue 
that, as the state’ s attorney, Hanrahan was immune from prosecution 
and thus could not be sued. The law was clear that prosecutors had 
total immunity from civil liability for decisions they made prosecut-
ing criminal cases, even including situations in which they intention-
ally directed their witnesses to commit perjury. Our response was that 
Hanrahan was acting not as a prosecutor but as a law enforcement offi-
cial supervising the state’ s attorney’ s police. It was his function, not his 
title, that should determine whether he had immunity. There was no 
clear legal precedent on the issue. 
Coghlan and Volini made huge sums of money billing for hundreds, 
and ultimately thousands, of hours defending Hanrahan and company. 
Coghlan took perverse pleasure in filling out his time sheets while sit-
ting in court at the counsel table next to Flint and me. If the judge hadn’t 
arrived in the courtroom, Coghlan would whistle as he completed each 
form. He knew Flint and I were being paid little. He and Volini made in 
an hour what we earned in a week. 
On February 3, 1972, Judge Perry ruled. He dismissed Hanrahan and 
Jalovec and the other assistant state’ s attorneys, saying they were enti-
tled to full immunity. “Obviously he cared more about their title than 
what they did,” Flint said to me at PLO. 
I was even more cynical: “I think if Hanrahan ordered Groth to kill 
Fred and gave him the gun, Perry would find him immune.” 
Perry also dismissed the defendants from the crime lab and Internal 
Investigations Division and threw out our entire complaint, saying our 
allegations were scandalous and our language was improper. “What 
they did was abhorrent, not our naming it,” I continued.
“He did say he might allow a new complaint, if we used the proper 
wording. How do you say murder in a nice way?” Flint asked. 
“We’ll appeal his ass,” Dennis said.
I was outraged by the rulings of this capricious, conniving judge. 
Our only option was to appeal Judge Perry’ s dismissals to the Seventh 
Circuit. This would take six to eighteen months. Bill Bender and Tom 
Geraghty, head of the Northwestern Legal Clinic, agreed to take the 
major role in writing the appellate brief. Meanwhile, Hanrahan and 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   164 7/29/09   1:29:28 PM


--- PAGE 174 ---
1
the other defendants in our civil suit were set for trial on their criminal 
charges of obstructing justice. 
On July 10, 1972, the long-awaited criminal trial of Hanrahan and 
company for conspiracy to obstruct justice began before Judge Romiti. 
Hanrahan’ s lawyers could have delayed the trial past July, but Hanrahan 
was running for reelection as Cook County state’ s attorney in November. 
He wanted to be acquitted before the election. I was still skeptical that 
Sears and Cedarquist were a match for Hanrahan’ s lawyers, neverthe-
less we supported them and continued to allow them access to our 
Panther raid files. These were being kept in Tom Geraghty’ s office in the 
legal clinic at Northwestern Law School, because Geraghty and his stu-
dents were working on the civil appeal. 
On a warm Saturday afternoon, two weeks after Hanrahan’s trial 
started, Flint called me in Wisconsin, where I had gone for the week-
end. “Jeff, listen,” he said frantically. “Cedarquist found a signed 
statement from Louis Truelock in our files. Truelock claimed to have 
fired two shots at the police from a pump rifle as he ran down the 
hall to wake up Fred. Cedarquist wants permission to copy it. He’s 
threatening to get an order requiring us to produce it. What do we 
do?” 
I vaguely remembered there were survivors’ statements taken, but I 
never saw them or knew their contents and had forgotten they existed 
until Flint’ s call. Truelock’ s statement was totally different from what 
he’ d told me four hours after the raid. If Truelock had fired a rifle any-
where on his path from the living room to the back bedroom, there 
would have been shell casings, bullet fragments, and resulting bullet 
holes at the rear of the apartment or in the hallway. None of these were 
ever found, nor was a pump rifle found. 
“Truelock must have lied in the statement because he wanted to take 
suspicion off himself. Everyone was calling him an informant then,” I 
said to Flint. Regardless of discrediting the accuracy of the statement, I 
knew its discovery was huge. Cedarquist was acting as the prosecutor, 
and the criminal rules required it be turned over to Hanrahan. 
“We don’t want to be the ones hiding evidence,” I finally responded. 
“But I think Skip took the statement and knows more about it. You 
should call him.” 
“Will do,” he said. Flint hung up. 
Two Bad Decisions
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   165 7/29/09   1:29:28 PM


--- PAGE 175 ---
1
Exposing the Murder
Skip had been gone from PLO for over a year. He didn’t want to be 
accused of withholding evidence. Without consulting Truelock or the 
other survivors, he agreed to allow Cedarquist to copy the survivors’ 
statements in our files and turn them over to the defense. 
We should have asked Truelock, not Skip. We lost sight of the simple 
legal principle that the attorney-client privilege belongs to the client, 
not the lawyer. Even if we had inadvertently disclosed the statement to 
Cedarquist, it was for Truelock to decide whether the statement should 
be released beyond that. Instead of upholding our client’ s privilege and 
refusing Cedarquist’ s request, Flint and I hesitated and let Skip decide. 
It was a big mistake. When Jim Montgomery, who had been represent-
ing Deborah Johnson, refused to turn over her statement, Judge Romiti 
upheld his position. 
Hanrahan’ s lawyers were given Truelock’ s statement and it was big 
news. The criminal trial was suspended; suddenly we were the ones 
who had to answer questions. Skip and Donald Stang, who had wit-
nessed Truelock’ s statement, and Flint were subpoenaed to a hearing 
on how, why, and where the statement was taken and whether Truelock 
had, in fact, said what was contained in it. Skip could only say he pre-
sumed Truelock did make the statement because it was written down 
and signed on every page by Truelock. He couldn’t remember Truelock’ s 
words and of course he couldn’t say whether Truelock was telling the 
truth. Flint testified that he did not know the contents of the statement, 
which was true, and that he was as surprised as I was about Truelock’ s 
claims. Don Stang refused to testify.
The defense knew that Truelock could explain away the statement’ s 
contents as boasting to make himself look less culpable for Fred’ s death 
and to take suspicion off himself as a possible informant. So they focused 
on the “hiding” of the statement by Skip and Sears, rather than relying 
on its contents, which were in conflict with the physical evidence. 
When the trial resumed, Hanrahan’ s lawyers had everyone’ s state-
ment except Deborah Johnson’ s. Sullivan and Coghlan accused Sears 
of the “deliberate and dishonest cover-up” of the statements, although 
only Truelock’ s asserted that its author ever fired. 
The overall defense strategy was to downplay evidence of what actu-
ally happened. Instead, they contrasted the Panthers, whom they por-
trayed as dangerous, malevolent black revolutionaries, with their cli-
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   166 7/29/09   1:29:29 PM


--- PAGE 176 ---
1
ents, whom they characterized as the zealous, brave, unheralded pro-
tectors of our safety. It was a strategy likely to succeed because Sears, 
their opponent, never challenged and probably believed it. 
I was excluded from the trial because, like other PLO lawyers, I was a 
potential witness. Unfortunately, the accounts we read in the newspa-
pers and from those who attended the trial made it painfully clear that 
Sears was losing. 
Michael Arlen, a well-known essayist and journalist, came to Chicago 
to observe and record Hanrahan’ s trial. The next year he published An 
American Verdict, an impressionist view of what he saw in court, a mon-
tage set against Chicago’ s political landscape.
Arlen wrote about how Harahan’ s attorneys portrayed the two sides: 
“One [myth] was the racist objectification of the Panthers as threats to 
everything civil, and the other was the bravery of the police when forced 
to carry out their ultra-dangerous duties.”
In contrast, Arlen wrote: “The prosecutors only had the physical evi-
dence drily presented and no sustaining myth.” Sears had the facts but 
no clear theory of why it happened, and Arlen points out that the white, 
aged, formal Chief Special Prosecutor Sears was not about to embrace 
the Panthers. 
Every trial lawyer learns that a case is a combination of the evidence 
and the theory that ties it together. Without a myth or theory, Sears’ s 
presentation carried no punch. 
During the last week of October 1972, the prosecution rested its case. 
There would be no time for a defense if the trial were to end before the 
elections. The defendants filed motions for acquittal, arguing the state 
had failed to prove them guilty. Judge Romiti scheduled the oral argu-
ments on the motions to begin on October 26.
Arlen gave detailed accounts of the lawyers’ closing arguments:
The defense argument begins with Thomas Sullivan, dressed in a serious 
suit, who . . . proceeds to bring up once more the Panthers’ predilection 
for violence, their antisocial habits, and their dishonesty as indicated by 
the changed testimony—a revelation, as he now construes it, that had 
been extracted from an unwilling and probably dishonest prosecution by 
the aggressive, truth-seeking tactics of the defense. 
Two Bad Decisions
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   167 7/29/09   1:29:29 PM


--- PAGE 177 ---
1
Exposing the Murder
But it was likely Coghlan who stole the show in that courtroom 
packed with prosecutors, police, and Democratic Party loyalists. From 
court transcripts, Coghlan’ s closing words:
You know, we all understand—as men and policemen—that it’ s open sea-
son these days on policemen, and they know it from the day they put on 
the star. . . . There’ s only one way that I know of for a copper to prove that 
he’ s on the square and that is to die. . . . 
There’ s a funny thing about being a policeman. A policeman has the 
same fears for his life that any of the rest of us have. But he has one more 
thing that only a policeman understands, and that is: if he goes yellow on 
his partners, he is through on the job. He never gets another partner. . . . 
I’ll tell you right now we wouldn’t be here today if Officer Davis had taken 
a shotgun deer slug through the belly as he went through that door. . . . 
When Joe Gorman followed him with his machine gun, he didn’t know 
what he was going to find in there. There was action, there was shooting, 
there was darkness. But Joe Gorman knows that if he doesn’t go through 
that door, he is through as a policeman. He’ll never be able to hold up his 
head again. And he’ d sooner die. If Duke Davis hadn’t been bent over with 
that alley-wise cunning that comes from twenty years on the force, part 
of him would have been up there on the stairway. He’ d have proved then 
he was an honorable man. In this town, about the only way a copper can 
prove he’ s an honorable man is by dying. 
A masterful argument from the cop’ s perspective. Of course it had 
nothing to do with the facts. 
Hanrahan spoke for himself, something not normally allowed a 
defendant with three attorneys. Hanrahan spoke, not only to the judge 
but to the electorate:
We have listened to the philosophy of the Black Panther Party describing 
the mandate that every member of the organization have a gun, be able 
to use it, and know how to defend his pad. We listened this morning to Mr. 
Sullivan recall the testimony of Deborah Johnson when she related the 
poem by Fred Hampton—that revolting poem—expressing satisfaction 
from killing a police officer. And when I listened to that evidence, and I 
think about Duke Davis and these other officers—well, I believe that the 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   168 7/29/09   1:29:29 PM


--- PAGE 178 ---
1
people of Cook County owe a medal to every one of these officers who 
had the integrity to go into that apartment under fire to seize those weap-
ons, which, if the Black Panther philosophy had been allowed to continue 
in force, would have undoubtedly been used to kill other people.
In fact this is an outlandish case—and how easy it is to make these 
false allegations, and how difficult to disprove the falsity—that is so easily 
leveled at men who have no defense except that they come here to trial, 
or else die. 
Thank God Duke Davis did use his twenty-four years of police know-
how to come in low. Thank God Joe Gorman did have the guts to follow 
him. And thank God for men like Ed Carmody. 
Hanrahan went on to equate criticisms of the raiders’ actions with 
a criticism of law enforcement in general, referring to the accusations 
of misconduct in the press as, “These irresponsible statements that 
undermined public confidence in law enforcement.”
Unrepentant to the end, in fact congratulatory of the raiders’ actions, 
Hanrahan remained indignant that anyone had the temerity to accuse 
him of wrongdoing. 
Arlen writes: 
Sears rose to answer. “Your Honor, I suppose the next thing I will hear from 
the defense is that I have some communion with the Panthers.” This com-
munion or connection was the last thing Sears wanted to be tainted with, 
so he went on to establish his credentials: born and bred in North Dakota. 
Sears was anxious to show he was from the same white, male, professional, 
law-abiding world as were the defendants and their lawyers and the Judge.
On the morning of Wednesday, November 1, as Romiti was sched-
uled to announce his verdict, Donald Stang and I were about to start a 
murder trial one floor below Romiti’ s courtroom. I had seen the camera 
crew poised in the lobby when I arrived. By eleven o’clock, reporters, 
cops, and state’ s attorneys were heading for Romiti’ s courtroom to hear 
the ruling. 
I was still sitting on the wooden bench in the front row waiting for 
my trial to begin when I heard a commotion in the hallway outside. I 
walked to the rear of the courtroom, opened one of the large paneled 
Two Bad Decisions
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   169 7/29/09   1:29:30 PM


--- PAGE 179 ---
10
Exposing the Murder
doors, and looked out. The stairways in the middle of the floor were 
filled with people heading down toward the lobby. 
“What happened?” I asked. 
“Not guilty! Everybody!” someone descending the stairs yelled. I 
ducked back into my courtroom. I didn’t want to see the smiling faces 
of Hanrahan, the raiders, or their supporters. 
Was this it? I wondered. Three years after the raid, no federal prose-
cution, not guilty on the state prosecution, and our civil case dismissed. 
Would Hanrahan ever have to pay? 
I walked over and told Don what I just learned. 
“They got away with it,” he said. 
The newspapers later reported that Romiti said he had to vote his 
conscience and not respond to pressure, comments that must have 
momentarily given Sears and his team some hope. But Romiti had 
quickly followed with, “This court can only conclude and does con-
clude that evidence is not sufficient to establish or prove any conspir-
acy against any defendant. A judgment of acquittal is entered as to each 
defendant and each defendant is discharged.”
Six days later blacks in Chicago delivered their verdict. They voted for 
Democrat George McGovern for president, Democrat Daniel Walker for 
governor, and regular machine candidates for judge and lower county 
offices. But they didn’t vote for Hanrahan: Bernard Carey became the 
first Republican state’ s attorney in Cook County in recent history.
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   170 7/29/09   1:29:30 PM


--- PAGE 180 ---
Part III 
The FBI’s 
Clandestine 
Operation
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   171 7/29/09   1:29:30 PM


--- PAGE 181 ---
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   172 7/29/09   1:29:30 PM


--- PAGE 182 ---
1
The Snitch 
O
n a cold Saturday morning  in February 1973, I was drinking my 
coffee while sitting on the bench Dennis had built in the alcove in 
the kitchen. I picked up the paper. The Chicago Tribune headline read, 
“Informer Aids FBI in Quiz.” The article stated that a Chicago police ser-
geant was a suspect in the kidnapping and murder of two drug dealers 
on Chicago’ s South Side. The person named as the witness against the 
sergeant was William O’Neal. 
The article indicated O’Neal had been an FBI informant since 1968. 
I looked to see if it was the same O’Neal I knew, the former Panther 
chief of security. A picture on the second page of the article confirmed 
it. That motherfucker , I thought. I pictured O’Neal, smiling, joking, 
cynical—always seeking the upper hand, constantly claiming he knew 
how to get over on the man. The article continued. O’Neal and a for-
mer Chicago vice detective, Stanley Robinson, had been detained in the 
kidnapping of several drug dealers, some of whom had been murdered 
and dumped in the Chicago River. A confidential FBI report quoted in 
the article said Robinson had executed Jeff Beard while O’Neal “drove 
the death car and witnessed the murder.” 
Could the guy I knew with the disarming smile and casual attitude 
be involved in murder for hire? More important, did he drop the dime 
on Fred? O’Neal’ s self-satisfied grin stuck in my mind. His swagger. His 
flashy clothes and big ride. Did the FBI pay for those? Robinson told the 
Tribune reporter that he had infiltrated O’Neal’ s criminal enterprise and 
was about to arrest him when he was apprehended. O’Neal countered 
that he had infiltrated Robinson’ s extortion ring, which was involved in 
shaking down and killing drug dealers. The Tribune reporter was uncer-
tain whether Robinson or O’Neal would be charged.
“I got the techniques down,” O’Neal used to say, bragging about how 
he got away with burglaries and stickups. His fascination with criminal 
25
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   173 7/29/09   1:29:31 PM


--- PAGE 183 ---
1
The FBI’s Clandestine Operation
activity seemed inconsistent with him being an informant. Then I real-
ized maybe not; it made his cover that much better. 
Deborah told me O’Neal had driven her to Fred’ s apartment the night 
of the raid, but O’Neal left before they went to sleep. Did he know what 
was coming? Would the FBI risk disclosing the raid plan to an infor-
mant? Would it risk its informant getting shot and possibly turning on it 
if he was inside and survived? Had he drugged Fred with the barbiturate 
found in Fred’ s blood? 
O’Neal didn’t talk politics. He proposed actions, frequently armed 
ones. This conflicted with my image of an informant as the silent, obser-
vant type, following orders from his control to remain inconspicuous. 
Looking back, he was clearly a provocateur, but I hadn’t realized then 
that this could be a good cover for an informant. 
Like a lover who discovers betrayal, I reconsidered O’Neal’ s behavior 
in light of the new disclosure. It fit uncomfortably well. He always had 
money; he was constantly offering to chauffeur Fred and Rush and later 
Deborah in his big car; he never attended political education classes 
and pushed actions over thought and politics; he advocated the most 
militaristic line; he often carried a gun; he was constantly suggesting 
other Panthers engage in criminal activities; he was at Fred’ s apartment 
the night before the raid when everyone ate dinner. Then he left. 
The Tribune article reported the FBI had first contacted O’Neal 
because he had flashed phony FBI identification at a Chicago cop 
arresting him for driving a stolen car. The Chicago police had turned 
the matter over to the FBI because impersonating an FBI agent is a fed-
eral crime. No one heard anymore about the case. Somebody in the FBI 
must have recognized his knack for deceit and recruited him. 
Dennis was finally getting up. As he came into the kitchen in his 
bathrobe, I held up the newspaper. 
“Check this out,” I said. “O’Neal was working for the FBI.” 
Dennis winced. The news hit him like a slap in the face. He took off 
his glasses and wiped them with his T-shirt as though he needed a clean 
lens to comprehend what I had said. Even more than me, Dennis had 
befriended O’Neal, invited him to his house, hung out with him, and 
trusted him. Dennis reached for the newspaper and read the article. He 
didn’t say anything for a while, but his brow remained creased. For once 
he had a puzzled look unlike the usual calm and gleam in his eye that 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   174 7/29/09   1:29:31 PM


--- PAGE 184 ---
1
came from having anticipated the situation. This time he clearly had 
not. He’ d been deceived like the rest of us. 
After a long pause Dennis said, “I’ve gotta say he was good at his 
game. He took me in. There was enough there to be suspicious, but I 
have to admit I wasn’t.” 
“Me either,” I admitted. We all had heard, even repeated, the com-
mon refrain that the party was infiltrated, but I was still alarmed to dis-
cover it was someone we knew. It made me feel more vulnerable. 
I also felt critical of myself, not because I had ever confided anything 
so damaging to O’Neal but because I had congratulated myself on being 
able to maintain a friendship with a black person with street savvy. 
That day I realized Dennis was not invincible. I had seldom challenged 
his perceptions or even his prophesies. He had been the first to recognize 
the need for an independent law office to represent the Panthers, and the 
first to conceptualize and implement it. He had proposed People’ s Law 
Office as the name we carry to this day. Dennis had advocated going on 
the offense with our evidence and accusations after Fred’ s death, which 
had caused Hanrahan to respond and lose his credibility, and Dennis 
immediately saw the need for our office to get involved in Attica follow-
ing the assault and killings by the New York State Police. But on this day, 
I realized that Dennis, like me, was capable of being deceived. I can’t 
attribute all of our being taken in to our pride. O’Neal had fooled the 
Panthers themselves and was good, very good, at his game. 
Later that morning Dennis and I got over venting our anger and frus-
tration at being so effectively hoodwinked and tried to figure out how 
O’Neal really worked. 
“He used his car, his supposed street smarts, and his mechanical 
skills to get near the leadership,” Dennis commented. “None of these 
required any political understanding.” 
“ And because he was always the first one to build some military 
device or advocate some military action, people didn’t suspect him. We 
should know better,” I said. “ And frankly, I thought it was cool to hear 
this streetwise guy supposedly telling it like it is.” 
“Do you think he provided the information for the raid?” I contin-
ued, thinking out loud. 
It had come out at the federal grand jury that Jalovec’ s tip came from 
the FBI, but Sergeant Groth swore he had his own source. A valid search 
The Snitch
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   175 7/29/09   1:29:31 PM


--- PAGE 185 ---
1
The FBI’s Clandestine Operation
warrant had to be based on information that the informant had person-
ally provided the officer who was signing the affidavit. If Groth didn’t 
have an informant, then the warrant would be invalid and the search 
and raid illegal. 
“I think O’Neal told them there were guns in Fred’ s apartment.” Dennis 
said. “ And if he was working for the FBI, I doubt he would be working for 
Groth as well.” If we could prove Groth had no informant, the raid per 
se would be unconstitutional; that is, without probable cause. We could 
win the civil case on legal grounds and at least get sanctions against 
Groth. The jury would only have to decide the amount of damages. 
However, proving Groth’ s informant did not exist would be difficult. 
Thus far neither the federal grand jury nor Judge Perry had demanded 
Groth name his informant or offer proof that he even existed. 
“Kind of interesting, in six months of investigation, that the grand 
jury overlooked O’Neal,” I said, “and never interviewed his FBI control 
agent.” 
All of us had been suspicious that the federal grand jury was mostly 
about blunting public outrage, giving the appearance of a fair investiga-
tion without doing anything. I now began to see its function as hiding 
the FBI role. 
“The FBI might be behind this whole thing. It’ s outrageous, they pre-
tend to be the impartial fact-finders for the raid, and really they’re cov-
ering their own ass. I think we should take O’Neal’ s deposition,” Dennis 
said, once again thinking ahead. 
“ At the moment we don’t have a lawsuit in which to depose anyone,” 
I reminded him. “Unless the court of appeals reverses Perry, we may 
never learn what the FBI did.” 
When the article exposed O’Neal, documents had already surfaced 
that demonstrated Hoover and the FBI had targeted the entire black 
movement, from Dr. King and the Southern Christian Leadership 
Conference to the Muslims. The FBI had blackmailed Dr. King by 
threatening to release tapes showing his infidelity if he didn’t kill him-
self. “There is only one thing left for you to do. You know what it is,” the 
cryptic FBI note attached to the tapes read. 
Although Hoover consistently sought to defame and discredit Dr. 
King and other black leaders and organizations, it was the Panthers 
whom Hoover labeled “the biggest threat to the security of the United 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   176 7/29/09   1:29:32 PM


--- PAGE 186 ---
1
States.” We had copies of the FBI memos in which Hoover ordered FBI 
agents to attack the Panthers with “hard-hitting programs to destroy, 
disrupt, and neutralize” them. These directives, including using local 
police to achieve their aims, were contained in the FBI documents 
released by the antiwar protesters who carried out the burglary of the 
FBI’ s office in Media, Pennsylvania. In 1971, when they were first circu-
lated, we didn’t know how to connect them to our case. O’Neal might 
well be the link. 
We understood that Fred, with his charismatic appeal, bringing hun-
dreds of young blacks into the movement, was a threat. Why wouldn’t 
Hoover perceive that as well? Of course he did. The question was what 
did he do to “neutralize” Fred? 
By the middle of 1973,  the Watergate scandal was exploding, and it 
became clearer that the break-in was connected directly to the White 
House. Public interest in uncovering government wrongdoing in-
creased dramatically. Disclosure was at the top of the national agenda 
as well as our own. We already knew the outlines of the FBI’ s Counterin-
telligence Program. We wanted to find out what steps were taken by the 
local FBI office in Chicago to implement the program, and ultimately to 
learn if the December 4 raid was a COINTELPRO operation. 
Subsequently, we began to receive  FBI COINTELPRO documents 
released by the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, known as the 
Church Committee. It was holding open hearings investigating the 
break-ins at the Democratic headquarters at Watergate and at Daniel 
Ellsberg’s psychiatrist’s office. After Ellsberg had released the secret 
documents nicknamed the Pentagon Papers to the New York Times and 
the Washington Post, the White House was so infuriated that not only 
did they order Ellsberg be prosecuted for espionage, but Nixon’s top 
advisor, H. R. Haldeman, ordered a break-in to Ellsberg’s psychiatrist’s 
office to try to find data they could use against him at his criminal 
trial. 
The Church Committee’ s mandate went beyond investigating 
Nixon’ s “Plumbers” and included uncovering all illegal government 
spying and dirty tricks. They began asking questions and started the 
subpoena process for obtaining documents on the FBI’ s formerly secret 
Counterintelligence Program. 
The Snitch
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   177 7/29/09   1:29:32 PM


--- PAGE 187 ---
1
The FBI’s Clandestine Operation
Interest in government malfeasance is cyclical. Gaining the momen-
tum to get to the bottom—or actually the people at the top—of the ille-
galities depends upon many factors. Watergate was now two years old, 
but only after the disclosure of the Plumbers breaking into Ellsberg’ s 
office did it gain momentum. Years later, in the 1980s, our office exposed 
that Chicago police commander Jon Burge had tortured black suspects 
to get confessions from them, but it took over fifteen years before Mayor 
Richard M. Daley, who at the time was the prosecutor who used the 
tainted confessions to get convictions, was confronted. In 1973 we were 
finally getting a real national investigation of COINTELPRO, after many 
of its victims were dead or in prison and its existence had been public 
knowledge for two years.
Soon after O’Neal’ s exposure, Flint pointed out to me that the Church 
Committee had uncovered that Jerris Leonard—the head of Nixon’ s 
Civil Rights Division of the Justice Department and coincidentally the 
person who led the federal grand jury investigation of the December 
4 raid—also headed a secret intelligence unit charged with gathering 
information on black militants and passing it on to law enforcement. 
He was supposed to be looking into civil rights violations against the 
Panthers, yet he had the responsibility to help the FBI and other law 
enforcement agencies monitor and destroy them. “Talk about the fox 
watching the chickens,” Flint said. “Jerris Leonard had no intention in 
1970 of exposing the then secret COINTELPRO, no matter how large a 
role it had in the raid.”
The pieces were beginning to fit. “Now we know why the federal grand 
jury he led never uncovered O’Neal, and never examined the details of 
Fred’ s death to see if it was murder. Probably because they were behind 
it,” I said, getting hotter as I realized they had successfully kept the FBI 
role in the raid hidden for four years. 
“ And worst of all, that sanctimonious bastard Leonard blamed the 
Panthers for both causing the raid and preventing the grand jury from 
learning the truth. I gotta admit he was clever,” Flint responded. 
Things changed as the public and media came to understand the 
danger represented by clandestine government spying and dirty tricks. 
We benefited from that national momentum. We needed the help. We 
were working to uncover an outrage even bigger than the Plumbers; 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   178 7/29/09   1:29:32 PM


--- PAGE 188 ---
1
a deliberate political killing, set in motion from FBI headquarters in 
Washington. 
In May, three months after we learned about O’Neal, the NAACP 
Commission of Inquiry released their book-length report on the 
December 4 raid. It was aptly titled Search and Destroy, the name given 
to military missions in Vietnam to ferret out and kill Vietcong. The com-
mission was cochaired by former attorney general Ramsey Clark and 
NAACP chairman Roy Wilkins. Law professor Herb Reid from Howard 
University wrote the report. The commission examined every bit of 
physical evidence and scrutinized all the prior testimony as well as the 
existing expert opinions. Where the facts were in dispute (for example, 
who fired the first shot, how Fred was killed, and whether or not he was 
drugged), they not only analyzed the existing expert opinions, but when 
they felt those were deficient, they retained experts of their own. 
The commission ridiculed the federal grand jury report because it 
had been more critical of the Panthers for their violent rhetoric and for 
their refusal to trust the federal prosecutors leading the grand jury than 
it was of the police actions. 
The commission understood the police were viewed skeptically 
in the black community and the issue of police abuse of citizens was 
much more important to blacks than to whites. They documented the 
reasons for, rather than criticized, the Panthers’ lack of trust of law 
enforcement. As a result, they gained the cooperation of the Panthers, 
and the survivors willingly testified before the commission. However, 
as the NAACP report explained, if federal prosecutors had really been 
interested in determining if criminal conduct, including murder, took 
place, they could have relied on the transcripts of the survivors’ testi-
mony at the people’ s inquest. 
Search and Destroy noted, “The federal grand jury’ s Report scarcely 
deals with the precise manner of Hampton’ s death except to assume 
that Fred was killed by one of the bullets coming through the wall.” To 
the befuddlement of the NAACP commission, the feds were inexplica-
bly not interested in learning how Fred died or who killed him.
In contrast, Search and Destroy began, “Those of us who want to 
love our country are not anxious to ask whether our police are capable 
of murder. So we do not ask. We do not dare concede the possibility.” 
The Snitch
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   179 7/29/09   1:29:33 PM


--- PAGE 189 ---
10
The FBI’s Clandestine Operation
Unlike the federal grand jury, the NAACP report delves directly into how 
Fred was killed. 
Search and Destroy reached four conclusions about the raid. The 
first one was that the police fired all but one shot. This was largely con-
ceded by the federal grand jury and supported by the findings of Robert 
Zimmers, the FBI’ s firearms identification expert. 
The second conclusion was that Officer Jones most likely fired the 
first shot in the hallway next to the front door. This was based on the 
shotgun impact hole and shotgun wads found outside and to the left 
of the living room door, which matched Jones’ s shotgun and was where 
the raiders forced their way in. The commission concluded that Jones’ s 
shot led to a second shot, by Sergeant Groth, through the front door and 
a third shot from Mark Clark, quite possibly after he had been mortally 
wounded. This sequence, they found, best fit the angles of Groth’ s and 
Clark’ s shots through the front door, because Groth’ s shot was fired as 
the door was opening and Clark’ s after it was opened further. 
The commission’ s third and most dramatic conclusion was: 
The shots in Hampton’ s head, their closeness to each other, and their 
proximity to the shoulder wound indicate they were fired by persons who 
could see their target. If Hampton could be seen and was then shot it was 
likely that Johnson and Truelock, if on the same bed, could also be seen 
and shot. It is therefore probable either that Fred Hampton was shot after 
the occupants were removed from the room by an officer or officers who 
could see his prostrate body on the bed, or that Hampton was deliber-
ately selected as the sole target. . . . The death of Fred Hampton appears to 
the Commission to have been isolated from the killing of Mark Clark and 
the wounding of Brenda Harris on the one hand, and from the wounding 
of Ronald Satchel, Verlina Brewer, and Blair Anderson on the other. The 
Commission has concluded that there is probable cause to believe that 
Fred Hampton was murdered—that he was shot by an officer or officers 
who could see his prostrate body lying on the bed.
The fourth finding was, “The Commission has been unable to deter-
mine whether Hampton was drugged at the time of his murder, but 
considers it more probable than not that he was.” After an exhaustive 
analysis of all the pathologists’ reports and testimony, the commission 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   180 7/29/09   1:29:33 PM


--- PAGE 190 ---
11
found the most reliable report was done by Eleanor Berman, the former 
Cook County Deputy Coroner retained by PLO. They also acknowledged 
that discrepancies in the handling of the blood and the first autopsy 
made it more difficult to reach a definitive conclusion. 
Search and Destroy  concludes, “Summary execution is not accept-
able and summary punishment cannot be condoned.” 
Finally, they named it. Not murder or assassination (killing for a 
political purpose) but summary execution, an alternative but accurate 
description of what happened. “They laid it out,” I said to Flint after I 
finished the report. “It took them more than two years, but they got it.” 
“I’ d like to wave this in Perry’ s face,” Flint answered. “He won’t even 
let us suggest Fred’ s death was deliberate. I hope the Seventh Circuit 
reads this before it decides our appeal. Better yet, I’ d like to get the 
report into evidence after they’ve ordered Perry off our case. 
Search and Destroy was widely quoted in the Chicago papers. Its con-
demnation of Hanrahan and the raid, as well as its finding of summary 
execution reignited the public’ s, and in particular the black commu-
nity’ s, skepticism about the police version. Roy Wilkins, Ramsey Clark, 
and Jesse Jackson, as well as some white leaders, called for reopening a 
federal criminal investigation. 
The Snitch
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   181 7/29/09   1:29:33 PM


--- PAGE 191 ---
From left: Fred’ s brother Bill, Fred, sister Dee Dee circa 1950.
Birthday gathering for Fred’ s uncle Roosevelt White. 
Seated at the table are Roosevelt, Fred, and brother 
Bill; behind Fred is sister Dee Dee, mother Iberia, 
Francis, and Iberia’ s brothers, sisters, and spouses.  
FH_photo insert_final for printe1   1 8/11/09   3:54:45 PM


--- PAGE 192 ---
Fred Hampton and friend Marvin 
Carter, around age ten.
Fred Hampton’s twenty-first birthday party.
Fred and his 
mother, Iberia, 
1957.  
FH_photo insert_final for printe2   2 8/11/09   3:55:02 PM


--- PAGE 193 ---
Hoover’ s outline 
of CoIntelpRo 
objectives, including 
pr
evention of the 
“rise of a ‘messiah’” in 
the black nationalist 
movement.
Ralph Abernathy, Fred 
Hampton, and Jesse 
Jackson at the Southern 
Christian leadership 
C
onference office in 
1967.  
FH_photo insert_final for printe3   3 8/11/09   3:55:31 PM


--- PAGE 194 ---
Fred Hampton, 1969. 
FH_photo insert_final for printe4   4 8/11/09   3:55:34 PM


--- PAGE 195 ---
Bobby Rush and Fred Hampton, 
Chicago, 1969. 
FH_photo insert_final for printe5   5 8/11/09   3:55:37 PM


--- PAGE 196 ---
Fred Hampton in the Black panther office, 1969. Fred Hampton pr esiding at a Black panther wedding, Chicago, August 1969. 
FH_photo insert_final for printe6   6 8/11/09   3:55:40 PM


--- PAGE 197 ---
Fred Hampton presiding at a Black panther wedding, Chicago, August 1969. 
FH_photo insert_final for printe7   7 8/11/09   3:55:43 PM


--- PAGE 198 ---
Black panther headquarters on Madison Street, 1969.
Black panthers free breakfast 
program, Chicago, 1969.
FH_photo insert_final for printe8   8 8/11/09   3:55:49 PM


--- PAGE 199 ---
Aftermath of october 1969 police raid on the Black panthers’ 
headquarters.
FBI’ s “anonymous” 
letter intended 
to ignite violence 
against the Black 
panthers within the 
black community.
FH_photo insert_final for printe9   9 8/11/09   3:56:26 PM


--- PAGE 200 ---
Street door to the Black panthers’ headquarters 
after the october 1969 police raid. 
FH_photo insert_final for printe10   10 8/11/09   3:56:28 PM


--- PAGE 201 ---
Chicago police removing Fred Hampton’ s body from his apartment.
enhanced FBI floor plan provided to police raiders showing where 
Hampton slept.
FH_photo insert_final for printe11   11 8/11/09   3:57:17 PM


--- PAGE 202 ---
Fred Hampton’ s bedroom 
after his assassination. 
FH_photo insert_final for printe12   12 8/11/09   3:57:19 PM


--- PAGE 203 ---
line of people waiting to pay their last respects to Fred Hampton 
at the Rayner Funeral Home, Chicago, 1969.
nail heads (circled) claimed by state’
s attorney to be bullet holes 
and proof of panther firing. 
FH_photo insert_final for printe13   13 8/11/09   3:57:25 PM


--- PAGE 204 ---
Fred Hampton, Rayner Funeral Home, Chicago, 1969. 
FH_photo insert_final for printe14   14 8/11/09   3:57:28 PM


--- PAGE 205 ---
Fred Hampton, Rayner Funeral Home, Chicago, 1969. 
FBI request for a bonus for the informant providing the 
information leading to the raid.
FH_photo insert_final for printe15   15 8/11/09   3:58:09 PM


--- PAGE 206 ---
the author and lawyer Flint taylor in front of Black panther 
headquarters, 1979. 
the author; Fr
ed 
Hampton’ s mother, 
Iberia Hampton; and 
Fred’ s brother Bill 
Hampton, 2009.
FH_photo insert_final for printe16   16 8/11/09   3:58:12 PM


--- PAGE 207 ---
12
Back in Court 
I
t was August 4, 1973, already a warm morning and the office air con-
ditioner was barely holding its own against the muggy heat. I was 
in my cubicle when I heard Flint yell from the front of the office, “We 
won!” I ran out to find him talking on the phone by the front desk. He 
put the receiver down to his waist. “It’ s the Tribune. The Seventh Cir-
cuit just handed down their decision. They reversed Perry. We’re back 
in court.” 
He picked up the phone. “ As soon as we get the opinion, we’ll make a 
comment.” By this time a crowd had formed. 
“Take that, Judge Perry,” I said. “You can’t get rid of us that easy.” 
Forty-five minutes later we assembled again. “Here it is,” Flint said, 
reading from the unanimous opinion. “The state’ s attorney’ s alleged 
participation in the planning and execution of a raid of this character 
has no greater claim to complete immunity than activities of police offi-
cers allegedly acting under his direction.” 
The Seventh Circuit reinstated our case against all the cover-up peo-
ple too. They found that as long as we alleged the conspiracy to hide the 
facts prolonged the prosecution, they are legitimate defendants. The 
decision gave us new life. We could confront the defendants in deposi-
tions and at trial and probe O’Neal about his and the FBI’ s role. One 
problem remained. The court refused to get rid of Perry. We would be 
back before the cantankerous old man with the spotted hands.
“ At least they are ordering Perry to let our case go to the jury, not 
dismiss it,” Flint said. “I hope he listens to them, ’cause he sure don’t 
listen to us.” 
“I hope this ain’t a Pyrrhic victory,” someone said. “Perry may be 
down, but he’ s not out.” 
We decided to go after O’Neal first. We knew what the raiders were 
going to say, but we didn’t know what his story would be. We needed to 
26
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   182 7/29/09   1:29:34 PM


--- PAGE 208 ---
1
learn how deeply the FBI was involved. And so we began the torturous 
process called discovery to find out the FBI’ s role in the raid. 
Discovery in federal civil cases is different from criminal cases, where 
neither side has the opportunity to depose the other side’ s witnesses. In 
a civil case every witness is deposed (questioned under oath in front of 
a court reporter), and there are not supposed to be any surprises at trial. 
At a deposition you are allowed to ask a witness anything that might 
lead to evidence, even if the answer itself would be irrelevant or inad-
missible at trial. Thus, the scope of questioning is quite broad. 
The thoroughness allowed in a deposition permits you to explore all 
the information and opinions the witness has. If it is done carefully and 
you have anticipated every way the witness might try to hurt you, then 
you should not be surprised by their answers at trial. You can also avoid 
asking the questions that lead to answers you don’t want the jury to 
hear. The courts are supposed to assure full disclosure. The premium 
is on preparation. Before trial both sides are supposed to know all the 
evidence the other side has. 
Our plan was simple. We would subpoena the FBI for all the docu-
ments that showed the FBI’ s involvement in the raid. The first and most 
obvious connection to the FBI was O’Neal. In October, two months 
after our case was reinstated, we subpoenaed him to a deposition and 
subpoenaed the FBI record keeper in Chicago for documents concern-
ing the raid. 
The response was a motion to quash the document subpoena. 
Sheldon Waxman, the U.S. attorney representing the FBI, also resisted 
complying with our subpoena, claiming O’Neal was no longer in gov-
ernment custody and his identity might be jeopardized if he appeared, 
even though we had agreed not to ask him his current name and 
address. 
Perry ordered Waxman to produce O’Neal but then reversed himself 
when Waxman refused to comply. We reissued the subpoena several 
times, but Perry refused to enforce it, although it was very likely O’Neal 
had information relevant to the planning and perhaps the execution of 
the raid. Perry had no real legal basis for denying us access to O’Neal, 
but protecting the FBI was an instinct that ran deep for Perry. Flint, who 
prepared the motions to compel after the government refused to pro-
duce either documents or O’Neal, would return to the office frustrated 
Back in Court
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   183 7/29/09   1:29:34 PM


--- PAGE 209 ---
1
The FBI’s Clandestine Operation
and angry but always with the will to continue. A few days after being 
turned down, a new, sharply worded motion to enforce the subpoenas 
would appear bearing his signature. 
Perry seemed as resolute as Flint, but public pressure was building 
to interrogate O’Neal. The press was hungry for information on the 
informant who had sent Stanley Robinson to prison for life and who 
had infiltrated the Black Panthers. Perry didn’t like to buck the press. 
The NAACP report suggesting Fred was probably drugged added to 
the public sentiment to uncover O’Neal and the FBI’ s role in the raid. 
Locally, Jesse Jackson focused on the FBI and the drugging in demand-
ing another investigation, while Roy Wilkins and Ramsey Clark echoed 
his demands nationally. 
At every court date, we characterized the government’ s refusal to 
produce O’Neal as a “cover-up,” which it was. The press picked up on 
our characterization, and newspaper editorials echoed our demand to 
expose the FBI role. 
In January 1974, after six months of wrangling, U.S. Attorney Waxman 
summoned us to Perry’ s courtroom for an unscheduled court date. 
When the case was called, Waxman stepped up to the bench. “We’ve 
agreed to produce O’Neal for a deposition,” he announced. No reason 
was given. Perry frowned and shook his head. He’ d gone out on a limb 
to protect the FBI and now it was yielding to public pressure. “The gov-
ernment will inform counsel of the date and location of the deposition 
shortly,” Waxman continued. “We want this information kept under 
protective order for O’Neal’ s safety.” 
“We’ll agree,” I blurted. I looked over and Waxman gave me a nod. I 
wasn’t completely surprised. Waxman was the garrulous type and had 
given me the impression he did not like his job, which mostly involved 
fighting off our requests for evidence connecting the FBI to the raid. Still, 
the decision to produce O’Neal was probably made at a higher level. 
Meanwhile, Waxman claimed the FBI’ s record keeper could not locate 
any FBI files about O’Neal or the raid. We wanted to question O’Neal 
after we had the documents, but we didn’t want to miss the opportu-
nity to depose him. We reluctantly agreed to take O’Neal’ s deposition 
without the FBI reports. Shortly thereafter we got a call from Waxman 
directing us to be at the U.S. Attorney’ s Office at the Federal Building in 
Detroit on January 12. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   184 7/29/09   1:29:34 PM


--- PAGE 210 ---
1
We all wanted a piece of O’Neal but we decided that Bill Bender would 
lead off questioning, and Dennis and I would follow. Flint, just recently 
admitted to the bar, would help on preparation and slip us questions if 
we missed something. 
“It’ s going to be strange seeing him now, knowing he was an infor-
mant,” I said, as we rode the elevator to the U.S. Attorney’ s Office in 
Detroit’ s Federal Building. “We knew him, or thought we knew him, 
pretty well.” 
Bender had a full goatee, dressed in suit and tie, and showed the con-
fidence in court of the legal expert he was. Bill was only a little older 
than me but seemed much more adult and experienced. Bill had briefed 
and argued many civil rights cases. He was married to Rita Schwerner, 
widow of slain civil rights worker Michael Schwerner. 
“I know you guys feel he chumped you,” Bender said. “But he’ll be 
more forthcoming if we’re not too hostile.” 
“We won’t attack him, at least not physically,” Dennis said. “I just 
want to see what makes him tick.” 
“Bill, I don’t think I can shake his hand,” I said. “Is that all right? 
Strangely enough I still believe O’Neal admired Fred. He told me in 
almost every conversation I had with him after Fred’ s death how much 
he respected Fred and how the Panthers went downhill after he was 
killed. I don’t think he was just making it up.” 
“We don’t know what he made up,” Dennis reminded me. “How ’bout 
those tears after Fred was killed. O’Neal was inconsolable.” 
“Maybe we’ll see the real O’Neal, today,” I said, “if there is one.” 
We checked in at the U.S. Attorney’ s Office and were led to a small 
windowless room, somewhere in the bowels of Detroit’ s Federal 
Courthouse. When we entered, O’Neal was sitting at a table with 
Waxman, Volini, and Joe Witkowski, Coghlan’ s young associate. A court 
reporter had set up his stenographic machine at the end.
Dressed in a tweed sport coat and tie, O’Neal turned toward us but 
did not stand up. His expression was amazingly relaxed. “Hello, Dennis, 
Jeff, Flint. How are you guys doing?” he asked, as if nothing had changed. 
To my relief he did not offer his hand.
“Hello, Bill,” Dennis nodded his head. 
“Long time,” I said, as neutral as possible. “This is Bill Bender. He’ll 
begin the questioning. 
Back in Court
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   185 7/29/09   1:29:35 PM


--- PAGE 211 ---
1
The FBI’s Clandestine Operation
Bill Bender nodded also but didn’t offer his hand. “Let’ s begin,” he 
said. 
O’Neal testified that he joined the Panthers in 1968 at the request of 
FBI Agent Roy Mitchell. Mitchell paid him one hundred dollars per week 
at the outset. He became Fred and Rush’ s bodyguard and ultimately 
chief of security. His job was “ferreting out” informers and making sure 
the Panthers had their weapons in working order. “From March 1969 
on,” he said, “guns weren’t too much of an issue because he [Mitchell] 
knew they had a lot of guns. It wasn’t that important unless a trainload 
of guns or something came in, and that never happened.” O’Neal’ s tes-
timony conflicted sharply with Jalovec and Groth, who claimed it was 
the sudden appearance of guns at 2337 that led to the raid. 
O’Neal testified that Mitchell had been interested in Fred’ s apartment 
as soon as Fred moved in and O’Neal told him who lived there. His tone 
was nonchalant, even when he described being in Fred’ s apartment the 
night of the raid. He calmly denied drugging Fred but admitted Fred 
never took drugs on his own. Finally, Bender asked him how he felt after 
he learned Fred was killed. 
O’Neal shrugged his shoulders and responded coolly: “I knew 
another agency had made the raid, so I wasn’t concerned with it.” His 
answer was a little too glib to believe. O’Neal said he was “surprised” 
when the raid happened, but when Mitchell assured him he had not 
passed O’Neal’ s information on to the police, he was satisfied. O’Neal 
was no dummy, and I doubted that Mitchell could have so easily con-
vinced him that his information was not used. 
O’Neal displayed no sense of guilt or responsibility or even satisfac-
tion. When we asked him what he thought of Fred and the Panthers, 
he answered, “I respected them, I respected what they were doing. I 
respected them, period.” I had expected O’Neal to denounce Fred at the 
deposition to justify his informing on him. But his endorsement was 
worse, more outrageous. I wondered who this moral eunuch was who 
could betray Fred for money and then pr
aise him.  
Without FBI reports documenting his activities as an informant, 
it was difficult for any of us to challenge O’Neal’ s general assertions 
and often vague memory. I left the deposition frustrated. We had not 
obtained a clear picture of how O’Neal and his informing fit into the 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   186 7/29/09   1:29:35 PM


--- PAGE 212 ---
1
raid or COINTELPRO. He did not come across as either the boasting 
beast or the remorseful penitent. He had successfully walked the line. 
After the deposition Flint wrote an article for our local National 
Lawyers Guild paper irreverently titled “Up Against the Bench,” which 
ended, “There are too many unanswered questions about the govern-
ment’ s actions against the Black Panthers, specifically their involve-
ment in the December 4 raid. . . . For in an event such as the murder of 
Fred Hampton lies the true meaning of Watergate.” 
Back in Court
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   187 7/29/09   1:29:35 PM


--- PAGE 213 ---
1
Floor Plan for Murder
F
ollowing O’Neal’s deposition, we were  even more determined to 
overcome the FBI’ s stonewalling of our document requests. Flint 
put together an amended subpoena duces tecum for Mitchell’ s deposi-
tion, which we served on the FBI in March. Duces tecum means that, 
in addition to appearing to answer questions, the person must bring 
along documents designated in the subpoena. Flint characterized the 
documents we were seeking broadly as “all FBI documents concerning 
O’Neal, the Black Panther Party, and the raid.” He described the docu-
ments and the files in every way imaginable so that the lawyer or FBI 
agent responding could not credibly avoid locating what we were seek-
ing. Flint attached a twenty-six page legal memo in support of enforc-
ing the subpoena. The law was clearly on our side, even if Judge Perry 
wasn’t. 
One might wonder why the FBI didn’t just purge its files of all incul-
patory material. The FBI filing system made this almost impossible. For 
example, an FBI memo from headquarters titled “Counterintelligence 
Program—Black Nationalist Hate Groups” or “COINTELPRO—Black 
Extremists” would be routed to files in more than forty local FBI offices. 
Similarly, if an FBI agent in Chicago wrote a document about Fred 
Hampton, one copy went into the Fred Hampton file, another into the 
Black Panther file, and yet another into the Racial Matters Squad (RMS) 
and local COINTELPRO files. 
Not only were multiple copies produced and maintained, but also 
each copy displayed the routing of all the other copies. Purging the 
Black Panther file in Chicago would only dispose of one copy. The rout-
ing on the copy in the Washington, D.C., file would show that a copy 
should exist in the Chicago Black Panther file unless the file had been 
purged. Purging all the dispersed files required collusion on a massive 
scale by many people. The FBI preferred stonewalling to destruction. 
27
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   188 7/29/09   1:29:36 PM


--- PAGE 214 ---
1
After Flint argued the law in court on March 11, Sheldon Waxman 
responded that the government had found and intended to produce 
a “truckload” of documents. Maybe the FBI realized that Flint was a 
bloodhound on the scent of a conspiracy and wouldn’t quit until he got 
what he was after. 
On April 9, Flint and I came to court with a shopping cart in place 
of a truck. “How are we going to have time to read this stuff before 
Mitchell’ s dep?” I asked Flint, as we approached the outer doors of the 
courtroom. 
“We’ll get some help from people in the office. We can do short 
abstracts of the important documents.” We parked the cart in the cor-
ridor and entered the courtroom. 
When the case was called, Flint and I went up to the podium before 
the bench. I saw no truckload. I thought Waxman might have left the 
documents in his office. Then he approached the bench with a stack of 
papers about one-half-inch thick. 
“What are those?” Flint asked. 
“These thirty-four documents are all we have,” Waxman said 
apologetically. 
Flint and I looked at each other in disbelief. This is total bullshit, I 
thought. Flint and I were about to explode. Perry recognized our fury. 
He called his next case. 
“Maybe big things come in small packages,” I said to Flint. 
Still curious about the contents of the new disclosures, Flint and I 
rolled the empty cart down the hall until we found an open witness 
room. We sat down at the circular table inside. Flint divided the stack in 
half, and we began to read through them. The FBI had blacked out such 
large portions that some contained nothing more than headings such 
as “Black Panther Party.” 
One document in the middle of the stack caught my eye: a hand- 
drawn sketch that looked like Fred Hampton’ s apartment. At the bottom 
of the diagram were the hand-printed words “1st floor, 2337 W . Monroe.” 
Every room in Fred’ s apartment was carefully diagrammed. Even the 
location of the furniture in each room was noted. The entranceways 
at the front and back were also marked. Above the square marking the 
rear bedroom was hand printed, “Room of Hampton and Johnson when 
they stay here.” Inside the bedroom were broken lines in the shape of a 
Floor Plan for Murder
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   189 7/29/09   1:29:36 PM


--- PAGE 215 ---
10
The FBI’s Clandestine Operation
rectangle, and inside the lines was the word “bed.” It was the exact loca-
tion where Fred was lying when he was shot and killed. 
I handed Flint the sketch. 
“This could only have been made to use in the raid,” Flint said. 
“We got ’ em,” I said. “The attachment says they furnished the infor-
mation in this diagram to the state’ s attorney two weeks before the 
raid.” My jubilation over the discovery overshadowed my outrage at 
how intricately they had set things up. “They can pretend the FBI didn’t 
initiate the whole thing, but this proves them liars.” 
Flint agreed. “It’ s the closest thing we’ll get to a smoking gun.” 
There was no indication on the diagram of who made it or what file 
it had been pulled from. These would be questions we would put to 
O’Neal’ s control, Roy Mitchell, and to O’Neal if we got another crack at 
deposing him. The information on the floor plan came from “CGT-1,” 
which we had learned meant Confidential Government Informant 1. 
“I’m sure O’Neal was CGT-1,” Flint said. 
Below the floor plan, on the same page, was a map of the neighbor-
hood highlighting the relationship of 2337 West Monroe to the sur-
rounding streets. 
“The FBI didn’t leave anything to chance. They made sure the raiders 
could find 2337,” I said. 
The other document of the thirty-four that had not been totally 
deleted and that contained real, substantive information was dated 
November 21, 1969. It was from Special Agent in Charge Marlin Johnson 
to J. Edgar Hoover. It was partly excised but indicated that CGT-1 had 
provided information on November 19 that a large number of weap-
ons were being stored at 2337 West Monroe, “a Panther crib, that is 
available to any BPP member for use such as sleeping and eating.” 
Included among the weapons listed were several rifles, shotguns, and 
two handguns. 
The FBI memorandum continued: “Source stated that all these 
weapons were allegedly purchased on local Illinois Gun Registration 
cards.” It named the persons “most frequently seen” at the address: 
Fred Hampton, Billy Brooks, Doc Satchel, and Louis Truelock and Debra 
Johnson, who is allegedly pregnant by Hampton.
It was clear the FBI was zeroing in on Fred at 2337 two weeks before 
the raid. O’Neal told us Mitchell wasn’t really interested in weapons, but 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   190 7/29/09   1:29:36 PM


--- PAGE 216 ---
11
either he was lying or Mitchell used old information about weapons to 
lure the police into a raid.
The memo concluded, “The Chicago Police Department and AFTD 
[the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives of the Treasury 
Department—commonly known as the ATF] has been furnished the 
contents of information set forth in this LHM [letterhead memoran-
dum] as well as the Illinois State’ s Attorney’ s Office.” 
I flashed on Carmody’ s press interview a few minutes after the raid, 
at which he claimed complete surprise that there were Panthers there. 
“That was bullshit what Carmody said—that they didn’t even know it 
was a Panther crib. They knew they were raiding Fred Hampton’s apart-
ment and knew exactly where he would be sleeping,” I said. I imagined 
Carmody coming in the rear, knowing Fred’ s bed was only a few feet 
away. 
“The FBI set Hanrahan up pretty good,” Flint answered. “Everything 
he needed for a raid plus FBI endorsement.” 
Floor Plan for Murder
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   191 7/29/09   1:29:37 PM


--- PAGE 217 ---
12
On the Trail of COINTELPRO
W
ith the floor plan as our main exhibit, Flint and I set out to prove 
the raid was a COINTELPRO action planned and initiated by the 
FBI. If we could prove this, then the illegal goals and methods explicitly 
endorsed in the program would provide the necessary intent to show 
FBI participation in an illegal conspiracy. We also needed to get enough 
information on individual FBI personnel to add them as defendants, as 
we could not sue the FBI directly. 
Our first federal deposition after O’Neal was Roy Mitchell. For two 
days in May 1975, Bill Bender, Flint, and I questioned Mitchell in down-
town Chicago in an office larger than any of our cubicles, loaned to us 
by the Lawyers’ Committee for Civil Rights (LCCR). LCCR also had a 
copy machine, something PLO couldn’t afford, and which we needed to 
duplicate documents. 
Mitchell came into the deposition room with Arnold Kanter, a young, 
clean-shaven, and overly earnest U.S. attorney who had suddenly 
replaced Sheldon Waxman. Agent Roy Mitchell looked like a marine 
recruiter. He was in his late thirties, had a straight jaw, and wore his 
light brown hair in a crew cut. He sat straight up in his chair during his 
deposition, as if at attention. He did his best to come off as a “Yes sir, no 
sir,” by-the-books kind of FBI agent. He presented a stark contrast to 
the freewheeling O’Neal, his informant. 
Mitchell never offered information beyond what we asked for, yet he 
prided himself on his memory, part of his professional competence. So 
when we pinned him down and asked specific questions, we learned 
many of the details of his relationship with O’Neal as well as his role in 
initiating the raid. 
Mitchell recruited O’Neal in 1968 while investigating an auto theft. 
In exchange for his testimony against the other car thieves, charges 
were dropped, and O’Neal became a paid informant. Several months 
28
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   192 7/29/09   1:29:37 PM


--- PAGE 218 ---
1
later, after the relationship had lapsed, O’Neal was arrested for imper-
sonating a federal officer by possessing phony FBI identification. Again 
Mitchell intervened, and soon thereafter he asked O’Neal to join the 
Black Panther Party and resume his informant status. 
Mitchell claimed he gave no specific instructions to O’Neal as to how 
to act in the Party. Nevertheless, he admitted he was aware of O’Neal’ s 
construction of an electric chair, his advocacy of violent and illegal 
acts, and his obtaining of weapons for the Panthers. COINTELPRO 
memos directed agents to use provocateurs to incite Panther members 
to violence, but Mitchell claimed his work with O’Neal “had nothing 
to do with COINTELPRO.” Judge Perry’ s refusal to enforce our subpoe-
nas for COINTELPRO documents made it impossible to challenge his 
assertion. 
Nevertheless, Mitchell provided a critical link in our conspiracy when 
he admitted he shared information with Richard Jalovec, the supervisor 
of Hanrahan’ s Special Prosecutions Unit, about the Panthers, including 
the fact that O’Neal was working for him as an informant. Sharing an 
informant’ s identity was not routinely done and was a strong indication 
of the regular communication between Mitchell and Jalovec as well as 
between the FBI and Hanrahan’ s office. 
Conspirators seldom admit planning illegal acts together. Usually 
the most you can do to prove a conspiracy is show regular contacts and 
a common purpose, then ask the jury to draw the necessary inferences. 
Mitchell made our case substantially stronger by acknowledging his 
close ties and regular meetings with Jalovec. 
Mitchell also testified that he obtained a floor plan from O’Neal of 
the Panther office in June 1969, which led to the June 4 raid. At the 
outset, the FBI called the Panther office and got the Panthers to agree 
to not resist. After arresting everyone inside, the FBI trashed Panther 
headquarters and stole their records. Mitchell was in radio contact with 
Marlin Johnson as the trashing went on.
Mitchell also testified that he regularly kept his superiors, Robert 
Piper, the head of the Racial Matters Squad, and Marlin Johnson, the 
Special Agent in Charge (SAC) of the Chicago FBI office, informed about 
Fred Hampton and the Panthers through conversations and memos. 
In early October 1969, Mitchell wrote a memo to SAC Johnson and 
FBI headquarters that said Hampton and Deborah Johnson had rented 
On the Trail of COINTELPRO
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   193 7/29/09   1:29:37 PM


--- PAGE 219 ---
1
The FBI’s Clandestine Operation
the apartment at 2337 West Monroe. In early November, Mitchell 
learned that Hampton had visited the West Coast, and reported to 
Piper and Johnson that Fred was about to become part of the national 
leadership of the Black Panther Party. The more Mitchell implicated 
Piper and Johnson, the easier it would be to show they were part of the 
conspiracy. 
“Mitchell and his bosses certainly understood that a national role 
would push Fred’ s charisma and influence beyond Chicago,” I said to 
Flint at the break. 
“ And make him the type of leader, or ‘black messiah,’ Hoover ordered 
all the FBI offices to target,” Flint agreed. 
 “I believe Mitchell’ s Chicago and D.C. superiors were following the 
information he was getting from O’Neal about Fred very closely and 
were giving Mitchell instructions,” Bill Bender added. 
Mitchell’ s supervisors had approved O’Neal receiving three hundred 
dollars per month, a relatively large payment for informants at that time, 
as well as additional payments when his information was particularly 
useful. Every time Bender asked Mitchell about the parallel between 
his and O’Neal’ s activities and the mandates of the Counterintelligence 
Program, Mitchell repeated in robotic fashion, “The raid had nothing to 
do with COINTELPRO.” On the instruction of U.S. Attorney Kanter, he 
would then refuse to answer any more questions about COINTELPRO. 
Our questioning of Mitchell proceeded chronologically up to the 
middle of November 1969. I jotted down notes, waiting to confront him 
with the floor plan and trying to anticipate how he would explain its 
evolution. Up to this point Mitchell had remained unruffled. 
As we approached the days leading up to the raid, Mitchell took 
more time to answer the questions, and he consulted with his attorney, 
Kanter, more frequently. He testified that on the evening of November 
13, 1969, the day Chicago police officers John Gilhooly and Frank 
Rappaport were slain in a gunfight with ex-Panther Jake Winters, he 
met with O’Neal at the Golden Torch restaurant in downtown Chicago. 
That day the newspapers covered the police deaths with banner head-
lines, and it was the lead story on all the TV network stations. Mitchell 
had to know that evening when he met with O’Neal that the police and 
state’ s attorney would be anxious to respond to the police killings and 
get revenge. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   194 7/29/09   1:29:38 PM


--- PAGE 220 ---
1
Mitchell said he brought graphic pictures of the slain officers to the 
meeting and showed them to O’Neal, who reported that the Panthers 
were naming the medical clinic after Jake Winters. 
O’Neal and Mitchell met six days later, on November 19, again at the 
Golden Torch restaurant. There, while sitting at a table, they constructed 
the floor plan. Mitchell claimed he had not asked O’Neal to get the floor 
plan and “couldn’t recall” whether he or O’Neal suggested making one. 
I sat there staring at Mitchell, knowing that there was no way that such 
an orderly and detail-conscious person would not remember who sug-
gested the floor plan, or that O’Neal could have proposed it. (O’Neal 
wasn’t going to initiate the raid.) 
Mitchell claimed it was the newly acquired information from O’Neal 
on November 19—that there were weapons at 2337—that caused him 
to construct the sketch and ultimately to disseminate the “informa-
tion in the floor plan” to the Cook County State’ s Attorney’ s Office. If 
he had admitted ordering the floor plan six days earlier, before he said 
he learned about weapons in the apartment, it would have been tanta-
mount to admitting the weapons were merely the pretext for the raid. 
The extremely detailed nature of the floor plan, however, disproved that 
it could have been constructed spontaneously from memory by O’Neal. 
He clearly had been ordered to focus on the layout of the apartment 
after the deaths of Gilhooly and Rappaport. 
Mitchell’ s opportunistic seizing of the November 13 shootout to ini-
tiate a raid plan for the local police employed a tactic very similar to the 
stated COINTELPRO objective of using local law enforcement to harass 
and confront the Panthers. I again asked Mitchell about his knowledge 
of COINTELPRO and its objectives. Following the advice of his lawyer, 
Mitchell refused to answer, repeating, “COINTELPRO had nothing to do 
with the raid.” 
“That was not my question, Mr. Mitchell. What did you know about 
COINTELPRO?” I still got the same answer, but Mitchell was becoming 
restless. 
“He’ s a lying sack of shit,” I said to Flint in the bathroom at the break, 
after checking the stalls to make sure no one else was present. “ And he 
tries to come across as the straight guy just doing his job. Maybe that’ s 
what’ s so maddening. He never expresses any emotion, or even sug-
gests the ability to be so manipulative.” 
On the Trail of COINTELPRO
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   195 7/29/09   1:29:38 PM


--- PAGE 221 ---
1
The FBI’s Clandestine Operation
“But he doesn’t look good,” Flint answered. “ As Fred said, when you lie, 
‘you come up with answers that don’t answer and with explanations that 
don’t explain.’ His denials of COINTELPRO playing a role look flaky.” 
Mitchell testified that O’Neal told him on November 19 that among 
the weapons in the apartment was a sawed-off shotgun and a sto-
len police riot shotgun. He passed this information on to the Gang 
Intelligence Unit at a face-to-face meeting that very day. He said the 
GIU then scheduled a raid for November 25. 
This contradicted Mitchell’ s November 21 memorandum, which 
stated that all these “weapons were allegedly purchased on legal 
[emphasis added] Illinois State Gun Registration Cards issued to female 
BPP members who have never been arrested.” 
When I asked Mitchell why he had not included the information 
about the two illegal weapons in his memo to his superiors, he replied 
it was an “oversight.” 
Oversight, my ass, I thought. This guy does not have oversights, cer-
tainly not involving such critical information. Here was another moment 
when Mitchell’ s meticulous manner and recall of details undermined 
the credibility of his testimony. 
As my probing continued, the slight talkativeness with which 
Mitchell had described his meetings with O’Neal disappeared. His 
answers became sharper. He began to shift in his chair. 
Mitchell testified that the Gang Intelligence Unit had originally 
planned a raid based on the information he provided them but had 
called it off when he advised them the weapons were removed. He then 
told the State’ s Attorney’ s Office the weapons had been returned, but he 
never told the GIU this.
My hunch then was that the FBI preferred the raid be done by 
Hanrahan’ s office; perhaps because the GIU was suspicious they were 
being set up to do the FBI’ s dirty work. They may have questioned why 
Mitchell passed his information to them rather than sending it to the 
ATF . Perhaps Mitchell picked up on their suspicions and felt Hanrahan’ s 
Special Prosecution Unit would be more anxious to do the raid and ask 
fewer questions. He no doubt realized Hanrahan would like to get credit 
for a Panther raid. 
Mitchell admitted that he placed the only copy of the floor plan in 
the O’Neal confidential informant file, to which only he, Piper, and 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   196 7/29/09   1:29:38 PM


--- PAGE 222 ---
1
Johnson had access. Copies of other documents containing significant 
information from O’Neal about Fred Hampton were routed at least 
into the Fred Hampton and the Black Panther files in Chicago. Mitchell 
couldn’t explain why only one copy of this document was made, but he 
admitted this made it possible to destroy the floor plan without leav-
ing a trace that it ever existed. I believed that Mitchell was scheming 
from November 13 not only how to provoke a raid but how to hide the 
FBI’ s role in initiating it. He might have succeeded, but for Sheldon 
Waxman. 
In an interview years later over lunch, Waxman, now a former  U.S. 
attorney, told me with a very satisfied expression, “They [the FBI Agents 
who brought Waxman the diagram of 2337] looked at me as if to say, 
‘you know what to do with this.’ But I didn’t want to take the weight 
for them and destroy it. They were pissed when I turned the document 
over to you guys. After that my days in the U.S. Attorney’ s Office were 
numbered.” 
During the next break I asked Flint what he thought of Mitchell’ s 
credibility. It’ s difficult when you’re asking the questions to compre-
hend the full effect of the answers. 
“He looks totally ridiculous telling Hanrahan the weapons were illegal 
and writing a memo saying they weren’t. It also looks like the raid was a 
COINTELPRO action to me, despite his lame denial,” Flint surmised. 
After we learned of the FBI floor plan, we wanted to add O’Neal and 
his FBI controls as defendants so they would go to trial with Hanrahan. 
Conspirators belong together, particularly in court, and maybe by now 
Hanrahan was beginning to realize he had been set up. Perhaps he’ d 
join us in pointing a finger at the FBI. We were actually shooting (figura-
tively of course) for adding Hoover as a defendant, and attorney general 
John Mitchell, who was overseeing the operation of the government’ s 
illegal intelligence operation. 
We didn’t know how far we could get up the chain of command, but 
we were aiming high. Our conspiracy, like the one that resulted in the 
Watergate break-in and the burglary of Ellsberg’ s psychiatrist’ s office, 
started at the top. The cover-up reached to the top as well. The question 
was whether Perry would allow us the documents to learn what Hoover 
and the attorney general knew about Fred Hampton and the plan to kill 
him. Meanwhile, I had to finish Mitchell’ s deposition. 
On the Trail of COINTELPRO
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   197 7/29/09   1:29:39 PM


--- PAGE 223 ---
1
The FBI’s Clandestine Operation
John Coghlan, Groth’ s attorney, was shouting something at Mitchell 
and his lawyer when Flint and I reentered the deposition room. He 
stopped short when he saw us. Coghlan’ s face was more flushed than 
usual, and his jaw was tense. He was not wearing his cocky smile. 
Camillo Volini, the other lawyer for the cops, was frowning and shuf-
fling his oversized body in his chair. 
Earlier, I had hardly noticed Coghlan and Volini. Because Mitchell 
was not their client, they couldn’t direct him to refuse to answer ques-
tions. Coghlan was accustomed to running the show and wasn’t pleased 
that Mitchell admitted such a close relationship with Jalovec. 
After the break, Mitchell testified that he had talked to Jalovec, 
Hanrahan’ s assistant, “five to seven times” between November 26 and 
December 2. The subject matter of all these conversations was Fred 
Hampton’ s daily movements, his apartment, and the fact that weapons 
were being stored there. Mitchell’ s communications with Jalovec culmi-
nated in a face-to-face meeting on December 2 with both Jalovec and 
Sergeant Groth at the Cook County State’ s Attorney’ s Office. 
Coghlan and Volini remained uncharacteristically quiet as I contin-
ued questioning Mitchell. Now I understood why they had been so riled 
up earlier. They knew Mitchell was directly contradicting their clients. 
Jalovec had never admitted continuous collaboration with Mitchell 
and had denied any face-to-face meeting with him before December 4. 
Groth had claimed he’ d never talked to Mitchell, not even on the phone. 
Trying to appear unconcerned, Coghlan scratched the inside of his ear 
with a pencil and looked toward the ceiling. Volini attempted a look 
of boredom as he rocked back and forth in his chair, but a discernible 
frown made its way across his face. 
Mitchell testified that at their half-hour meeting on December 2 at 
Hanrahan’ s office, he again told Jalovec and Groth about the large cache 
of weapons at 2337. He also told them for the first time that there was 
a sawed-off shotgun and a stolen police riot shotgun in the apartment. 
Mitchell specifically informed Groth and Jalovec the apartment would 
be vacant on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday evenings when Fred led 
political education classes. 
I asked Mitchell if he had shown Jalovec and Groth anything. Volini’ s 
chair stopped rocking. Mitchell didn’t hesitate. He testified that he 
brought and showed O’Neal’ s floor plan to the two men. I went through 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   198 7/29/09   1:29:39 PM


--- PAGE 224 ---
1
the details of the plan, asking him if he had specifically mentioned par-
ticular items. “I may have pointed out the bed where Hampton would 
be sleeping,” he admitted. The “may have” was the best I was going to 
get, but it was all I needed to argue that the raiders knew exactly where 
to go. 
Neither Groth nor Jalovec had ever admitted to seeing O’Neal’ s floor 
plan, although Mitchell had admitted the floor plan would be “invalu-
able” for anyone conducting a raid. For five years the FBI and Hanrahan’ s 
office had maintained the fiction that it was a call to Groth from his 
informant that had provided the information for the raid. Groth had 
testified numerous times that Jalovec’ s information from the FBI came 
later, was secondary, did not include a floor plan, and had merely cor-
roborated the data from his own informant. Within fifteen minutes 
Mitchell had totally contradicted Groth and Jalovec’ s accounts. 
Every lawyer has a way of disguising his chagrin when a witness gives 
testimony damaging to his case. I look down at my legal pad to avoid 
eye contact with the jury or the other lawyers and pretend to be writing 
away. Coghlan had gone to his other ear with his pencil, looking distant 
and inscrutable. Volini sat there with a blank stare, rocking. 
Mitchell seemed to enjoy describing his critical communications 
with Hanrahan’ s office, taking credit for what followed, while suggest-
ing Groth’ s claim of having his own informant was a lie. Mitchell wanted 
to get credit for his work setting up the raid. He avoided eye contact 
with Coghlan and Volini during this questioning. I thought we had got-
ten just about everything we could expect from Mitchell. But there was 
more. 
On the morning of December 4, Johnson and Piper sent Mitchell to 
Hanrahan’ s office to “determine additional information about the raid.” 
Mitchell testified that he met with Jalovec and Hanrahan in the library, 
where the Panther weapons had been put on display. In just a few min-
utes Hanrahan would hold his first press conference there. It was about 
10:30 
a.m. and already Jalovec and Hanrahan had put together their 
story, which they repeated to Mitchell: the Panthers opened fire on the 
unsuspecting police, they continued firing throughout the ordeal, and 
Hampton himself had fired at the police from his rear bedroom. 
“What else did they tell you at that meeting?” I asked. 
Coghlan tried to interrupt, but I instructed Mitchell to answer. 
On the Trail of COINTELPRO
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   199 7/29/09   1:29:39 PM


--- PAGE 225 ---
200
The FBI’s Clandestine Operation
“Jalovec asked me if I minded if it got out that I was the  source for 
the raid.” 
If he was “the” source, there wasn’t any other. Mitchell was not 
careless with his words. I couldn’t avoid turning and winking at Flint. 
Coghlan and Volini glanced at each other and quickly looked away. 
Jalovec’ s acknowledgment that Mitchell’ s information alone had led to 
the raid indicated that Jalovec and Groth were guilty of perjury. In his 
affidavit for the search warrant, prepared by Jalovec, Groth swore under 
oath that he relied on information from his own informant. 
The creation of an informant for Groth was necessary because if 
Groth had told the truth, that his information came from the FBI, no 
judge could have legally signed the warrant. A search warrant can only 
be issued on probable cause. This was then interpreted by the Supreme 
Court to mean that law enforcement officers seeking warrants must 
swear that they are either an eyewitness to the information they are 
reporting or they have a reliable informant who saw it and reported it 
directly to them. If Groth had told the truth and swore he got his infor-
mation from Jalovec who got it from Mitchell who got it from O’Neal, it 
would have been triple hearsay. He and Jalovec knew such an affidavit, a 
truthful one, would have been insufficient to obtain a search warrant. 
Jalovec told Mitchell he did not mind if it got out that the FBI was the 
source of information for the raid. Yet for five years, and through two 
grand jury investigations and Hanrahan’ s criminal trial, the FBI never 
admitted this. In fact, Hanrahan, Jalovec, and Groth had repeatedly 
denied it under oath. 
“Why have you never told anyone that the FBI was the source for the 
raid?” I continued. 
“No one ever asked me,” Mitchell explained, incredibly. 
At the next break Flint and I found an empty room, closed the door, 
and did high fives. “Mitchell’ s killing them,” Flint congratulated me. “I 
never dreamed he would contradict Jalovec and Groth so much.” 
“He wants to show off. He’ s had to hide his role for so long. He can 
barely contain himself,” I agreed, smiling. 
“That’ s definitely part of it, but I think what he’ s testifying to must 
also be laid out in FBI documents. He’ s chosen to go with what’ s in the 
files rather than what Jalovec and Groth want. We’ve got to get the FBI 
memos,” Flint insisted. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   200 7/29/09   1:29:40 PM


--- PAGE 226 ---
201
We went back into the deposition room with a bit of a swagger. I 
couldn’t help shooting Coghlan a knowing glance. “Informant, indeed,” 
I whispered. He and Groth were manipulating the claim of informant’ s 
privilege not to protect an informant but to protect Groth from perjury. 
Coghlan put on his pugnacious grin, which I took to mean, “You may 
be right, but you’ll never prove it.” 
Mitchell had revealed a lot, but he continued to deny the raid had 
any connection to COINTELPRO. He also refused to produce the FBI 
documents showing payments to O’Neal. Instead, he gave us an affi-
davit showing how much he paid O’Neal. Flint and I suspected the 
payment documents themselves would be more revealing, perhaps 
containing an evaluation of O’Neal and summaries of the information 
he provided. We had to rest on speculation. Perry continued to uphold 
their objections to payment records, but at some point the dam had to 
crack open. 
In 1974, PLO was in its fifth year. Our clients included the Attica Brothers, 
Puerto Rican Independentistas, the Hampton plaintiffs, and the anti-
war movement. Arthur Kinoy said that movement lawyers had to be 
twice as good because we started with the judicial system against us. 
Charles Garry, the Panther lawyer in San Francisco, said he was a better 
lawyer than Perry Mason because Mason’ s clients were innocent. Our 
cases were never easy, whether our clients were innocent or not. 
I worked to recruit other lawyers and law students for the movement 
through the National Lawyers Guild, which experienced a great influx 
of young, progressive, and sometimes radical lawyers and legal workers 
in the late 1960s and 1970s. We started the Guild Anti–Police Brutality 
Project in Chicago in 1972, and Flint and I met Peter Schmiedel there. 
He joined our office the next year. 
Later, we obtained our own Chicago police “red squad” (intelligence 
division) files, which showed the police had sent an undercover recruit 
(under the false name Kostro, ironically) into the Anti–Police Brutality 
Project. We had wondered what happened to “that Castro guy,” as he’ d 
introduced himself. The files showed he had taken quite thorough 
notes and regularly reported on Flint’ s and my activities there. I’ve 
never known whether the police were looking for an inside view of our 
Hampton strategy or just a clearer profile of us. 
On the Trail of COINTELPRO
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   201 7/29/09   1:29:40 PM


--- PAGE 227 ---
202
The FBI’s Clandestine Operation
By 1974, I had a good bit of court experience, but it was mostly in 
criminal cases. Flint had less, having passed the bar two years earlier. We 
were already spending half our time on the Hampton civil case. Dennis 
and Michael were spending two-thirds of their time in Buffalo working 
with other lawyers defending the sixty indicted Attica Brothers. 
This left Peter Schmiedel and Mara Siegel, who had recently joined 
the office, as our only other full-time Chicago lawyers. Peter Schmiedel, 
tall and handsome with premature salt-and-pepper hair, was just get-
ting used to going to court. He had already taken some assignments 
researching and writing motions on the Hampton case under Flint’ s 
tutelage. Mara continued to be the fire-eater she had been when Mzizi 
and I met her at Attica. Her style was flamboyant, and she was the first 
person I remember wearing a nose ring. Mara had a robust and some-
times crude sense of humor. She kept us men, whom she frequently 
referred to as “the boys,” on our toes by chiding us on our sexism. Mara 
liked going to court and was getting more confident and effective by the 
day. (She removed the nose ring after she passed the bar.) Pat Handlin, 
more conventional and sober than Mara, came to Chicago after grad-
uating from SIU and became a legal worker in the office. At SIU she 
had been an antiwar student activist and a strong supporter of the 
Panther defendants in the Carbondale trial. She later started a prison 
project supporting women prisoners and jailhouse lawyers at Dwight 
Correctional Center. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   202 7/29/09   1:29:40 PM


--- PAGE 228 ---
20
Groth’s Informant
 
“W
ho’s gonna try the Hampton case?”  Flint asked at the PLO 
meeting in early August 1974. We were sitting in the small area 
at the back of the office, baking in the Chicago heat. The air conditioner 
was broken and the one small, portable fan didn’t have a chance. 
“I want to be involved, but the Attica cases will keep Michael and me 
in Buffalo most of the time,” Dennis said. I had assumed Dennis would 
try the Hampton case. Now it was up to Flint and me. 
I realized then with both trepidation and excitement that I would 
be the most experienced PLO lawyer at the trial. I would have to take 
the lead in court: the backup quarterback who finds himself in the big 
game. I was not as good at strategizing as Dennis, nor as incisive at 
articulating the law as Michael. With only one civil rights case behind 
me, I didn’t know the civil rules of discovery very well. I had no experi-
ence proving damages and felt awkward and slightly ridiculous asking 
for money to compensate for someone’ s life or injuries. 
But the challenge was as exciting as it was daunting. Our accusations 
were more significant than Watergate: the murder of Fred Hampton, 
a promising young leader, was a greater crime than burglarizing the 
Democratic headquarters. The orders for both emanated from the 
same seat of power. It wasn’t Nixon aides H. R. Haldeman and John 
Ehrlichman giving them as in Watergate, instead it was J. Edgar Hoover 
and Nixon’ s attorney general, John Mitchell. 
I was happy to resolve my criminal cases and focus on Hampton. 
Uncovering government wrongs was PLO’ s mission, and our lawsuit 
fit with the angry mood in the country. The week before our meeting, 
two thousand of us stood and applauded at the National Lawyers Guild 
convention in Minneapolis, Minnesota, as we watched Nixon resign. 
The Senate Intelligence Committee, led by Democrat Frank Church, 
was holding public hearings investigating and exposing illegal intelli-
29
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   203 7/29/09   1:29:41 PM


--- PAGE 229 ---
20
The FBI’s Clandestine Operation
gence operations. Their purview included the FBI’ s Counterintelligence 
Program, which Hoover claimed had been disbanded in 1972. Never-
theless, the Senate committee was looking for ways to outlaw similar 
abuses in the future. The FBI’ s role in the Hampton assassination, when 
fully exposed, should be exhibit number one. All we had to do was fol-
low the evidence up the chain of command. Unfortunately, Judge Perry 
stood in the way. 
After it was decided that Flint and I would lead the trial team, Peter 
Schmiedel and new attorney Holly Hill indicated they wanted to work 
on the Hampton trial as well. “It’ s why I joined the office,” Holly said, 
and they both were already well grounded in the facts. The plan was for 
them to work their way into taking depositions and eventually speaking 
in court. They would even participate in the trial if we had the resources 
to support four of us in the courtroom. 
I had become the chief rainmaker at PLO. But I was less and less avail-
able to do paying criminal cases as the Hampton case moved toward its 
trial date in January 1976. The income stream to the office became a 
trickle. 
When Holly and Ralph Hurvitz graduated from Northwestern Law 
School, they turned down the opportunity to make a minimum twenty-
five thousand dollars per year, even at a Legal Aid job. They could 
have earned two or three times that in private practice. Instead, they 
accepted the one hundred dollars per week that PLO would try to pay 
them. 
Charles Hoffman, nicknamed Chick, joined PLO shortly after Holly 
and Ralph. Chick grew up in Maywood, where he hung out mostly with 
black kids. He knew and emulated Fred at Proviso East High School. 
He joined us as part of Fred’ s legacy. Chick was particularly adept at 
research and writing. He also was refreshingly even-keeled in the midst 
of the tensions our practice engendered. 
We used to say that satisfaction from our work was our real compen-
sation. I still feel that way. In the late 1960s and early 1970s we were part 
of a movement. We had sympathetic ears to listen to our struggles and 
had the added compensation of feeling we were making a difference. 
With Dennis in Buffalo, Flint shared major responsibility for the case 
with me. If he felt any apprehension, he didn’t show it. He was an inde-
fatigable scrapper, a battler. I knew this from playing basketball with 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   204 7/29/09   1:29:41 PM


--- PAGE 230 ---
20
him. He was the driving point guard, passing or taking it to the hoop, 
whatever was necessary to score and to win. He was just as relent-
less when he was on the trail of documents or tracing the FBI’ s devi-
ous efforts to avoid discovery. He wasn’t yet sophisticated or smooth in 
court, but his persistence and his loyalty made up for it.
I mentioned that Holly and Ralph had joined PLO after graduating 
from law school. When I first met Holly, with her warm brown eyes, high 
cheekbones, and mischievous smile, I became infatuated with her, and 
we started a relationship. A year later she moved into Seminary Street, 
where she, Michael, Mara Siegel, and I each had our own bedroom. My 
relationship with Holly was tempestuous from the get-go. I protected 
myself from the vulnerability of love by deciding Holly wasn’t politi-
cal enough. She protected herself as well. After we broke up I realized 
my feelings too late. There was tension as we both continued to work 
together. But despite broken hearts and hurt feelings the show went on, 
and so did our pursuit of Hampton’ s killers. 
All of PLO remained committed to the Hampton case, even if Flint 
and I took primary responsibility. When we needed to write motions, 
others in the office helped with the research and drafting. PLO was far 
from perfect, but in retrospect I don’t think any one or two or three of us 
could have worked so hard and so long had we not had the collective to 
support us. It was the retreat where we found camaraderie and sympa-
thy after a tough day in court, the place we came to tell our stories and 
be tended to, and where we got help with legal strategies. It gave us the 
strength to endure. 
“How come you guys are so down in the mouth?” Mara Siegel would 
ask, mimicking our “serious selves.” “Doing time in the courtroom can’t 
be as bad as time behind bars.” 
Of course, she was right. We’ d lick our figurative wounds and go on. 
Flint asked about moving the office downtown for the trial later that 
fall. It was a burden bringing boxes of files downtown for every court 
date. At trial we couldn’t retreat to our office for lunch breaks, or go there 
as easily in the evenings after court. Looking around at our hexagonal 
cubicles with dirty, plasterboard walls that were four feet short of the 
ceiling and egg cartons above to muffle the sound, I realized we could 
never do depositions at our current location. Also, the neighborhood 
had become increasingly gentrified. The struggle to maintain Lincoln 
Groth’s Informant
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   205 7/29/09   1:29:41 PM


--- PAGE 231 ---
20
The FBI’s Clandestine Operation
Park as a place affordable to Puerto Ricans and other working-class 
people had been lost. There was less and less reason to stay. 
 I liked being able to walk to work in blue jeans and walk home late 
at night. There would be a different atmosphere in an elevator building 
in the Loop. Despite my reservations, I could see the move was going to 
come before the Hampton trial started. 
The Hampton team—Flint, Dennis, Holly, Peter, and I—stayed 
together after the regular office meeting. We decided to work in three 
major areas to get ready for trial. One was proving what happened dur-
ing the raid. We could rely on the plaintiffs’ accounts, the ballistics evi-
dence, and the testimony of Robert Zimmers from the FBI crime lab as 
well as the many false stories of the raiders.
I agreed to handle the firearms evidence although technical detail 
was not my strength. I accepted the assignment with some trepidation. 
Unlike Skip, the fine points of evidence gathering and testing were not 
my forte. Not yet anyway. 
The second area of work was obtaining the evidence to prove the 
raid was part of COINTELPRO. Flint had renewed our requests for FBI 
and COINTELPRO files after Mitchell’ s deposition. Without stating it, 
we understood Flint would continue to take the lead in enforcing our 
document demands and uncovering the COINTELPRO connection to 
the raid. 
And finally there was Groth and his supposed informant. His deposi-
tion was scheduled for the next week. John Coghlan, Groth’ s attorney, 
had already stalled Groth’ s deposition for six months. We had gotten 
a hint of his reason earlier that summer: Coghlan was trying to find a 
dead Panther who might qualify as Groth’ s informant if Groth were ever 
ordered to name someone. A live person would obviously be harder to 
control and would likely dispute Groth’ s claim. From his questioning of 
the survivors at their depositions, we knew Coghlan was considering 
Clifton Morgan, aka Babatunde Omowale Babatunde, who had died in 
July 1970 in an explosion near some Illinois Central Railroad tracks. The 
police, FBI, and coroner had concluded he blew himself up acciden-
tally, carrying or trying to detonate a bomb. 
Coghlan asked every plaintiff at his or her deposition if they knew 
Babatunde and if he had been at 2337 West Monroe the week before 
the raid. Most of the plaintiffs did not know him and none of them said 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   206 7/29/09   1:29:42 PM


--- PAGE 232 ---
20
he was present in early December, when Groth claimed his informant 
viewed the weapons in the apartment. This didn’t deter Coghlan. We 
later learned he was secretly taping interviews with other witnesses, 
trying to find someone who would say Babatunde had been in Fred’ s 
apartment. 
When we finally got the transcripts of these interviews after the trial, 
they showed Coghlan suggesting, begging, and even threatening wit-
nesses to place Babatunde at 2337 prior to the raid. “I don’t recall seeing 
him there,” was the universal response. 
Holly agreed to work on the Groth issue and Peter on amending the 
complaint to add the FBI higher-ups. “Groth is lying about having an 
informant to protect,” Flint said as we ended the meeting. “He’ s pro-
tecting his own ass from perjury.” 
On August 24, Sergeant Daniel Groth entered the deposition room 
of the Lawyers’ Committee for Civil Rights, with Coghlan at his side. 
Groth refused to look toward Flint and me, and didn’t say hello. Several 
minutes later his nostrils flared when he finally turned in our direction 
and shot us a nasty sneer. PLO had been a thorn in his side ever since 
we exposed his trumped-up version of the raid delivered to the news-
papers and TV stations in December 1969. I remembered his televised 
words: “It was fifteen minutes of hell, and a miracle not one policeman 
killed, not one policeman shot. It only stopped because their arsenal 
was not equal to our police arsenal.” 
Sergeant Groth was tall, with dark hair, a bony, angular face, and a 
deep voice. He spoke like someone used to giving orders and not being 
questioned. Groth would have been tough to question on his own, but 
with Coghlan running interference, it was even harder. Coghlan often 
interrupted our questions with objections and instructions to Groth not 
to answer. Sometimes he signaled Groth: “Sergeant Groth has already 
answered that question and told you . . . ” adding what Coghlan wanted 
Groth’ s answer to be. 
Nevertheless, Groth took responsibility for many of the question-
able police actions. He unapologetically stated that he authorized his 
officers to carry their own personal weapons on the raid. This included 
shotguns, automatic pistols, and Gloves Davis’ s .30-caliber rifle. He 
also approved Officer Gorman being issued a .45-caliber machine gun, 
although he admitted no one had ever taken a machine gun on a previ-
Groth’s Informant
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   207 7/29/09   1:29:42 PM


--- PAGE 233 ---
20
The FBI’s Clandestine Operation
ous raid led by him. Groth said he hadn’t run the raid at 8:00 p.m., when 
his informant had told him the apartment would be vacant, and instead 
changed the raid time to 4:00 a.m., because he wanted to use “surprise.” 
He chose not to take bullhorns or make a phone call to announce the 
police presence, although he knew that when the FBI had done this in 
June it had led to the Panthers not resisting their entry. He also decided 
against tear gas. 
Groth called the raiders together at 4:00 
a.m. on December 4. In his 
early statements, Groth, like the other raiders, pretended it was a rou-
tine search and they were totally surprised to find armed Panthers there. 
That didn’t look credible given the arsenal of weapons they took on the 
raid. Moreover, it conflicted with their defense at their criminal trial, 
which focused on how dangerous the Panthers were. Groth’ s current 
testimony fit our conspiracy claim quite well. He admitted informing 
the raiders that 2337 West Monroe was the apartment frequently occu-
pied by Fred Hampton, and he told them that there was a large cache 
of weapons there. Groth testified that he warned the raiders, “Hampton 
sleeps with a .45 by his bed.” 
I kicked Flint under the table. Groth had not mentioned this most 
provocative detail in his previous testimony. Telling the raiders this at 
the preraid briefing and showing them where Fred slept on the layout 
was an invitation to murder. Groth also admitted he had referred to a 
“rough sketch” when describing the layout of Fred’ s apartment to his 
officers. 
Flint then asked Groth what transpired at the meeting on December 
2 when, Mitchell had testified, Mitchell showed Groth and Jalovec the 
floor plan. “I have no recollection of the meeting,” Groth answered. Flint 
stared at him. Flint kept pressing Groth for what he did recall about his 
contact with Mitchell. Groth pushed the lie more: “I never met or spoke 
with Roy Mitchell.” 
I looked at Flint, rolling my eyes and nodding sarcastically. Coghlan 
threatened to terminate the deposition, commenting that Flint and I 
were showing his client disrespect. We didn’t respond. Instead, Flint 
formulated the next and most obvious question: “Where did you get 
the information for the search warrant?” 
Groth hesitated, looked at Coghlan, and then began to testify. It 
sounded like even the cadences had been rehearsed. Groth said that 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   208 7/29/09   1:29:43 PM


--- PAGE 234 ---
20
on the night of December 2 he received a call at home “out of the blue” 
from an informant who told him there were weapons at 2337—the 
same information that Mitchell testified he gave Groth and Jalovec at 
their face-to-face meeting on the same day. 
When Flint probed Groth on when his informant saw the weapons in 
Fred’ s apartment, Coghlan interjected authoritatively, “I order Sergeant 
Groth to refuse to answer on the grounds that to do so would endanger 
the lives of other persons.” 
“Is your informant alive or dead?” Flint asked Groth, which elicited 
the same objection from Coghlan.
“Is it the informant or someone else Groth is protecting?” Flint  
turned and asked Coghlan. 
Coghlan [ignoring Flint]: “I order Sergeant Groth to refuse to 
answer.”
The only question Groth answered was, “Did you pay him?” He said 
he didn’t pay him. The informant provided Groth with information for 
“advancement in other areas.” 
Groth testified that he took notes of his conversation with his infor-
mant and made a sketch on a yellow pad from his informant’ s descrip-
tion of 2337. He used both to brief the other raiders, and he had them 
with him when he briefed Hanrahan on December 3. He kept his notes 
and his sketch of the layout of 2337 in a file with information from other 
informants. 
“ And where are those notes and sketch today?” Flint asked. 
“I destroyed them immediately after the raid,” Groth responded. 
“ And the larger ‘informants’ file?” 
“I destroyed that also.” 
After Groth’ s deposition, Flint, Holly, and Peter drafted a motion to 
compel the court to order Groth to answer questions about his infor-
mant. The law was clear; the informant’ s privilege protected only the 
safety of the informant, not “other persons.” 
Four months later we got a hearing. Because of the importance of the 
motion, Morty Stavis, a seasoned constitutional lawyer and a founder 
of the Center for Constitutional Rights, came to Chicago to argue for 
our side. 
Flint introduced Morty Stavis to Judge Perry, highlighting some of 
his many accomplishments, including briefing and arguing several U.S. 
Groth’s Informant
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   209 7/29/09   1:29:43 PM


--- PAGE 235 ---
210
The FBI’s Clandestine Operation
Supreme Court cases with important constitutional issues. Judge Perry 
couldn’t have appeared nicer or more open-minded as he welcomed 
Stavis and said he looked forward to hearing his arguments. 
Morty Stavis, approaching sixty, was short and stocky, with curly hair 
and a well-trimmed goatee. He was wearing a herringbone sport coat 
and had a relaxed confidence as he approached the lectern to address 
the judge. 
His argument was both impassioned and simple. The informant, if 
he was alive, had critical information that could decide many of the 
factual issues in dispute, such as whether Fred was drugged and what 
the police knew before the raid, and possibly what took place during 
the raid. The law required a balancing test between the interests of the 
party seeking the information and the need to protect the informant. 
In this instance, the very existence of the informant, whether he was 
reliable, and his value as a witness to the events of December 4 greatly 
outweighed law enforcement’ s interest in keeping his identity secret. 
If the defendants intended to name a dead man, then of course there 
was no legitimate law enforcement purpose or legal basis to refuse to 
disclose his identity. If the informant never existed, then the claim of 
privilege was being put forth in bad faith, and sanctions were appropri-
ate against the defendants and their lawyers. 
 When he sat down, I thought maybe even Judge Perry had been 
convinced. Coghlan and Volini responded in their most indignant, 
pontificating rhetoric. Volini went first: “The county of Cook is a politi-
cal subdivision of the state of Illinois, as is the city of Chicago, and the 
privilege was asserted by Sergeant Groth upon direction by me and Mr. 
Coghlan for the protection of the citizens of the city of Chicago, and it 
was asserted by the government and has been consistently asserted by 
these two governmental agencies.” 
Not to be outdone, Coghlan stood up and stressed that Groth had 
refused to answer based on Coghlan’ s instructions as “the state’ s attor-
ney of Cook County as far as this case is concerned.” They puffed them-
selves up, pretending to speak on behalf of government entities rather 
than as the court-appointed private lawyers they actually were. 
Judge Perry ordered us to return the next day, when he would make 
his ruling. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   210 7/29/09   1:29:43 PM


--- PAGE 236 ---
211
“For once I think Perry is taking our arguments seriously,” Flint said 
as we left. 
When we returned the next morning, Morty Stavis had flown back to 
New York. Judge Perry began, “I am concerned with the naming of the 
informant because of the danger that counsel for the defendants have 
stated they believe honestly and sincerely would result.” 
Coghlan: “ And danger to the lives of other persons.” 
Judge Perry: “Oh, yes, the danger to the lives of the informer and 
maybe other persons.” 
Perry raised our hopes when he ordered Coghlan to bring Groth to 
court that afternoon so he could question him about the identity of 
the informant in chambers. Coghlan and Volini were surprised by the 
judge’ s order. They objected, but when Perry appeared determined, 
Coghlan asked that the interview be conducted without a court reporter. 
Flint and I immediately objected to this private ex parte interview with 
a party to the lawsuit without a record being made. I didn’t trust Perry to 
accurately report what happened, and we would have no transcript of 
Groth to impeach him with later. Perry overruled our objections. 
After lunch, Coghlan brought his client to court. Groth looked a bit 
miffed but determined as ever. Flint and I were waiting expectantly, 
hoping for a breakthrough. 
Judge Perry asked Groth to come with him through the rear door 
toward his chambers. We didn’t know what Perry would do.
“If Groth names Babatunde as his informant, they have a problem,” 
Flint said. “They can’t prove he was an informant or was even in Fred’ s 
apartment in December.” 
“Do you think Groth will take contempt to cover up his lies?” I 
responded. 
A few minutes later the rear door opened. Groth followed Perry into 
the courtroom and the judge ordered Groth to take the witness stand. 
Groth stood by the witness chair without sitting down. He seemed to 
know the questioning would be brief. 
Judge Perry: “Will you refuse to reveal the informant’ s identity even 
if ordered to?” 
Groth: “I will continue to refuse. ( pause) I am refusing to answer 
based on my experience in this case as a police officer.” 
Groth’s Informant
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   211 7/29/09   1:29:44 PM


--- PAGE 237 ---
212
The FBI’s Clandestine Operation
Judge Perry: “Even though I should commit you to custody, would 
you still refuse? Is that your position?” 
“I would respectfully decline, yes sir.” This could be the record a judge 
made before finding a witness in contempt. I was getting excited. 
Judge Perry: “The witness may step down. The plaintiffs motion is 
denied.”
Flint and I both jumped up, fuming. This was a new one. The court 
was not going to require Groth to answer his question because Groth 
was willing to take contempt. Based on this logic, why would any wit-
ness answer any question he didn’t like? 
“Sit down,” Perry ordered. He threatened us with contempt. 
Groth hurried for the exit doors at the rear of the courtroom, shoot-
ing Flint and me a sadistic grin as he passed. 
Perry scuttled off the bench a moment later. 
Outraged by his decision, we filed a mandamus asking the court of 
appeals to reverse him. We argued that Perry’ s ruling was so significant 
to the case, and so far off on the law, it constituted an abuse of discre-
tion. Unfortunately, the higher courts gave trial judges a great deal of 
leeway on discovery issues. 
Judge Perry responded with a vengeance to our accusation that he 
abused his discretion. “So you guys want to play hardball,” he chal-
lenged us on the next court date. He rescinded his previous order allow-
ing us to take depositions by tape recorder, which we had sought in 
order to save court reporter’ s fees. 
The court of appeals turned us down. We went to trial under Perry’ s 
order that we could not challenge Groth on the witness stand about the 
existence or identity of his informant. Orders we were determined to 
disobey. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   212 7/29/09   1:29:44 PM


--- PAGE 238 ---
21
Hiding COINTELPRO
The purpose of discovery is to make trial less a game of blind man’s bluff 
and more a fair contest with the basic issues and facts disclosed to the full-
est extent possible.  —Supreme Court Justice William O. Douglas, 1958
I
n general, FBI agents do not voluntarily admit wrongdoing. They must 
be confronted with one or more documents they wrote or approved. 
We had the memos Agent Mitchell had authored, stating that he told 
State’ s Attorney Hanrahan’ s office about guns at Hampton’ s apartment, 
and that he had shown Hanrahan’ s assistants the floor plan designating 
the bed where Fred and Deborah slept. Mitchell sent these memos to 
his supervisor, Robert Piper, and to the head of the Chicago FBI office, 
Marlin Johnson. Flint and I intended to confront Piper and Johnson 
with these at their depositions to make them admit their knowledge 
and approval of Mitchell’ s actions. That would be the easy part. 
We also had COINTELPRO documents with orders from FBI direc-
tor J. Edgar Hoover to the heads of all FBI field offices, including Marlin 
Johnson, to come up with “hard hitting programs” to “disrupt, expose, 
misdirect, discredit, or otherwise neutralize” the Panthers and “prevent 
the rise of a messiah who could unify and electrify the militant black na-
tionalist movement.” We planned to cross-examine Piper and Johnson 
using these documents, which they had read and initialed, and force 
them to acknowledge their roles in executing the Counterintelligence 
Program. This would be harder. 
Flint and I deposed Robert Piper in the unadorned but cramped con-
ference room loaned to us by the Lawyers’ Committee for Civil Rights. 
From the windows of the room, you could see the midriff of several 
Chicago office buildings. We had arrived first and were sitting at the 
Formica conference table talking to Julian Carter, our court reporter. 
30
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   213 7/29/09   1:29:44 PM


--- PAGE 239 ---
21
The FBI’s Clandestine Operation
He had just set up his stenograph machine when Piper and Assistant 
U.S. Attorney Arnold Kanter entered. After perfunctory introductions, I 
asked if they were ready to start. Kanter nodded. 
“Would you swear the witness?” I asked the court reporter. 
“Do you swear to tell the whole truth, the honest truth, and nothing 
else but the truth?” Carter asked hurriedly, typing as he spoke. 
“I do,” affirmed Piper. He was tall and gaunt with an aloof, erudite 
manner. 
I opened with the preliminaries, questioning Piper about his training 
and background in the FBI. Before answering each question, he lifted 
his bony nose and looked at me as if I were an irksome child. 
“Were you aware that your subordinate, Roy Mitchell, provided 
Hanrahan’ s office with a floor plan, in fact this floor plan?” I asked, pick-
ing up the diagram of Hampton’ s apartment. “Let the record indicate I 
am showing the witness Piper Deposition Exhibit Number 1.” 
“Yes, I was,” he stated. He had initialed Mitchell’ s memo. 
“Did you approve Mitchell meeting with members of the State’ s 
Attorney’ s Office and giving them information about guns in Hampton’ s 
apartment?” 
Again, he replied, “Yes.” He had initialed that memo as well. 
“ And were you aware they intended to use this information to con-
duct a raid on Hampton’ s apartment?” 
He hesitated but admitted that the “information would be valuable 
in conducting a raid.” 
Piper acknowledged speaking with Mitchell the morning following 
the raid. He testified that he had “no particular concern” when Mitchell 
told him about the Panther deaths and injuries. He recalled the Mitchell 
interview with satisfaction. His coldness was disturbing, even to me, 
who did not expect a show of compassion from FBI officials. 
Piper testified that he was head of the Racial Matters Squad, charged 
with monitoring the Panthers and other black groups. Thus, he would 
have been the likely person to supervise the agents and their informants 
carrying out COINTELPRO. “Were you and Mitchell acting pursuant to 
the Counterintelligence Program when you provided Hanrahan with 
the floor plan?” 
 He sneered. I was about to comment sarcastically that the court 
reporter couldn’t take down his expression, he would have to answer 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   214 7/29/09   1:29:45 PM


--- PAGE 240 ---
21
orally, when Kanter intervened. He held up his open hand toward 
me from the other side of the table, like a crossing guard signaling a 
stop. In a well-rehearsed voice, Kanter stated: “I object to the ques-
tion and instruct the witness not to answer any questions concerning 
COINTELPRO on the grounds that COINTELPRO is irrelevant.” 
“Me thinks Kanter doth protest too much,” I said to Flint when Piper’ s 
deposition was over. “He knows Piper’ s Racial Matters Squad executed 
COINTELPRO directives against the Panthers in Chicago. Clearly, they 
were the ones dealing with black militant organizations.”
“Kanter knows it and we know it,” Flint agreed. “Now let’ s figure out 
how to prove it.” 
 At a PLO meeting in the summer of 1975, we decided that the office 
could finance only two lawyers in court, Flint and me. Holly and Peter 
would have to work on other cases when the trial started. 
Civil litigation is expensive. Even then, deposition transcripts could 
run five hundred dollars per day. The December 4th Committee, which 
included the survivors and supporters, was holding monthly fundraisers 
to help defray expenses with performers like Chaka Khan, Oscar Brown 
Jr., and Dick Gregory. Even with that and contributions from the NAACP 
and the Lawyers’ Committee for Civil Rights, plus frequent benefits, we 
were always short of funds. Our black court reporter, Julian Carter, al-
lowed us to postpone part of the payment for deposition transcripts un-
til after the trial. Only his generosity allowed us to continue discovery. 
I called my parents to ask for financial help. They agreed to send me 
three hundred dollars per month during the trial. My parents, and my 
dad especially, were proud I was using my law degree for something 
other than to make money. He had derived much of his satisfaction 
from the legal work he had done pro bono, like working for the Voter 
Education Project. He was somewhat, though not entirely, put off by 
the violent Panther rhetoric, but he supported me in my efforts to prove 
Fred Hampton was murdered. Years later, I discovered Dad kept a file of 
Hampton newspaper accounts. 
Jim Montgomery, the prominent trial attorney who had represented 
Deborah Johnson after the raid, agreed to represent her at the upcom-
ing trial. He had a deep baritone voice and was a convincing figure in 
the courtroom. I thought the combination of his trial savvy and our 
knowledge of the evidence would be a good fit. 
Hiding COINTELPRO
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   215 7/29/09   1:29:45 PM


--- PAGE 241 ---
21
The FBI’s Clandestine Operation
We familiarized Montgomery with the federal case we hoped to pre-
sent, and he agreed to do part of the deposition of Piper’ s boss, Marlin 
Johnson.
On September 24, Montgomery began. Johnson had left the FBI and 
become the CEO of Canteen Corporation, a vending machine company. 
Mayor Richard J. Daley had subsequently appointed him chairman of 
the Chicago Police Board, which decided civilian complaints of police 
brutality. Johnson’ s deposition took place in the posh conference room 
of the law firm Sidley and Austin, where he had retained his own coun-
sel in addition to Kanter. Johnson shook our hands as though we were 
old friends and then sat down with a pleasant smile. He was particularly 
cordial to Montgomery. Johnson, a little past middle-aged, with a round 
face and a receding hairline, appeared relaxed, clearly experienced in 
public relations. He began answering our questions earnestly, as if he 
wanted to be helpful. 
Like Piper, he acknowledged receiving the memo, which bore his 
initials, stating Mitchell had met with Hanrahan’ s men and supplied 
them with weapons information. But Johnson claimed no knowledge 
of Mitchell obtaining the floor plan of Hampton’ s apartment and pass-
ing it on to the eventual raiders, despite the fact that Mitchell’ s memo 
stating this was directed specifically to him. 
“I have no recollection of that,” was his repeated response to 
Montgomery’ s questions about the floor plan. Marlin Johnson had 
been specifically ordered by FBI Director Hoover to implement the 
Counterintelligence Program, as had all the FBI office heads (SACs) 
throughout the country. Montgomery asked Johnson what he did to 
implement COINTELPRO in Chicago. Johnson looked to his attorney. 
Kanter didn’t miss his cue. 
“I object to the question and instruct the witness not to answer any 
questions concerning COINTELPRO on the grounds that COINTELPRO 
is irrelevant,” Kanter said, repeating his mantra. Montgomery contin-
ued patiently but was blocked by Kanter’ s objections to every question 
concerning COINTELPRO. Kanter knew Perry would uphold his objec-
tions, no matter how specious, if it blocked us from getting evidence of 
the FBI’ s involvement in the raid. 
By the end of Johnson’ s deposition I was grinding my teeth and 
swearing under my breath. Unlike his predecessor, Sheldon Waxman, 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   216 7/29/09   1:29:45 PM


--- PAGE 242 ---
21
who had demonstrated some integrity, Kanter unhesitatingly carried 
out the FBI policy of concealment. By the deposition’ s end Flint and I 
ranted at Kanter that we knew he was covering up, and that one day he 
would be exposed. 
We filed another motion asking Judge Perry to order Piper and 
Johnson to answer questions about COINTELPRO. Again he denied it. 
He also denied us access to the thirty-four COINTELPRO documents 
the FBI had given him in camera (without our viewing them) months 
earlier. In July 1975 we appealed. Again, the appellate court refused to 
overrule Perry. 
I felt we had hit a stone wall. But not my partner: “There’ s more than 
one way to skin a cat,” Flint said a few days later, walking into my office. 
“Perry can’t very well deny us access to files specifically about Fred 
Hampton. Let’ s ask for every FBI document naming Hampton, and I 
bet we’ll get some COINTELPRO memos.” 
I agreed, ready to try Flint’ s new tactic. We demanded that our sub-
poena for all the FBI files naming Hampton be enforced. Even Kanter 
had difficulty objecting. 
Perry reluctantly ordered the FBI to produce documents specifi-
cally naming Fred Hampton and any of the plaintiffs. A few days later, 
193 highly excised internal memos arrived by messenger. Flint and I 
divided up the new batch of materials in my office. He sat on the other 
side of my desk while I cleared off some papers. We put our feet up and 
started reading. 
The documents showed the FBI had monitored Fred Hampton on a 
daily basis and recorded nearly everything he did, from speaking at col-
leges to serving breakfast to kids. 
“The FBI was on Fred like white on rice,” Flint commented, partway 
through his stack. “Their antennae definitely went up when Fred and 
Deborah rented the apartment on Monroe.” 
My stack of reports showed the same close FBI scrutiny of Fred’s 
actions. Halfway through my pile I saw a one-page memo from 
Marlin Johnson to Hoover dated April 8, 1970. It was captioned “Fred 
A. Hampton (Deceased) et al.—Victims Summary Punishment.” 
Summary punishment was a way of describing the police meting 
out their form of street justice on the spot without a trial or due 
process. 
Hiding COINTELPRO
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   217 7/29/09   1:29:46 PM


--- PAGE 243 ---
21
The FBI’s Clandestine Operation
“Check this out,” I said, handing the paper to Flint. “This is another 
piece in the conspiracy.” 
He read it carefully, his eyes focusing intently as they went down the 
page. When he finished, he looked up excitedly. “I can’t believe they 
wrote this down.” Marlin Johnson’ s memo to Hoover stated: 
AAG JERRIS LEONARD, Civil Rights Division, Department of Justice, 
at Chicago, advised SAC Marlin Johnson in strictest confidence that no 
indictments of police officers are planned in captioned matter . [emphasis 
added] The above is based upon an agreement whereby Hanrahan will 
dismiss the local indictment against Black Panther Party (BPP) members. 
Hanrahan is to be given 30 days to dismiss this local indictment, which will 
be based upon the change in testimony of John Sadunas of the Chicago 
Police Department Crime Lab. Subsequent to this dismissal, BPP victims 
will then be subpoenaed before the FGJ for their testimony in this case. 
“It was fixed!” I exclaimed. “Leonard never intended to indict any-
one.” As angry as I was, I was also amazed at how smoothly the feds 
and Hanrahan had closed ranks to protect each other. The Justice 
Department had impaneled the 1970 federal grand jury in response to 
the black community’ s outcry to investigate Hanrahan’ s raiders for civil 
rights violations. Attorney General John Mitchell, who we later learned 
was the White House contact for the Watergate burglars, appointed 
Jerris Leonard, the head of the Civil Rights Division, to lead the grand 
jury investigation. At the time, Leonard was reputed to be the liberal in 
Nixon’ s Justice Department. In his press statements he assured everyone 
that he intended to carry out a thorough and impartial investigation. 
The document we were reading was dated a month before the Grand 
Jury concluded and well before the Panther victims were subpoenaed 
to testify. 
“We always wondered why Hanrahan dropped the charges on the 
survivors so abruptly,” Flint said. “Now we know. It wasn’t just because 
they were innocent. It was also part of the deal to prevent his men and 
him from being indicted.” 
The concealment of the FBI role in Fred’ s murder was particularly 
important in 1970. Disclosure of the FBI involvement would have also 
led to exposing the Counterintelligence Program. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   218 7/29/09   1:29:46 PM


--- PAGE 244 ---
21
“I don’t think Hoover’ s orders for every FBI office to develop plans 
to ‘neutralize and destroy’ the black movement or his sanctioning of 
violent means to accomplish this would have washed with the public if 
they’ d known about it back in 1970,” I said. 
In fact within a year after the Counterintelligence Program was 
exposed in 1971, it was terminated, at least in name. 
The “deal document,” as we quickly labeled the April 8 memo, 
exposed the cozy arrangement between Hanrahan and the FBI. The 
feds wouldn’t indict him or his raiders for civil rights violations, and he 
would maintain his secrecy concerning the FBI’ s role in the raid. Their 
agreement was made before the survivors were asked to testify; their 
testimony would have made no difference. 
Few pieces of evidence are more damning or harder to come by, when 
trying to prove a conspiracy, than an explicit agreement by the coconspir-
ators—in this case Hanrahan and the FBI —to conceal their actions. The 
FBI produced the deal document under a strict protective order, which 
prevented us from releasing it or even mentioning it in open court. 
“Remember what Leonard wrote in the grand jury report,” I reminded 
Flint. “The Panthers were more interested in police persecution than in 
obtaining justice. What a fraud. Leonard did a masterful job blaming 
the victims.” 
In August 1975 we added as defendants the FBI informant William 
O’Neal, his FBI control Roy Mitchell, Mitchell’ s boss Robert Piper, and 
Special Agent in Charge Marlin Johnson. We hoped to add their superi-
ors in D.C., the FBI heads of COINTELPRO, Attorney General Mitchell, 
Jerris Leonard, and the estate of J. Edgar Hoover, who died in 1971, after 
we took more depositions pinpointing their roles. 
In the late summer I drove out to Maywood to tell Fred’ s parents 
about the new developments. The Hamptons lived in the same two-
story brick house where Fred grew up. Every year on December 4, Flint 
and I, along with Dennis, when he was in town, attended the memorial 
service for Fred at Reverend McNelty’ s church, followed by a big spread 
at the Hampton home. Almost every black political figure in Chicago 
had participated in the memorials at one time or another. Fred’ s brother 
Bill had set up the Hampton Scholarship Fund to select and provide 
support for one black law student every year. Attendees at the memo-
rial service were encouraged to contribute.
Hiding COINTELPRO
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   219 7/29/09   1:29:46 PM


--- PAGE 245 ---
220
The FBI’s Clandestine Operation
When I arrived at the Hampton home, Iberia, wearing an apron over 
a flowered dress, greeted me at the door with a big hug. She led me 
straight to the kitchen, saying, “There’ s food on the stove.” She knew I 
had grown up in the South and loved her cooking. 
At her kitchen table, I devoured fried chicken, a piece of fried catfish, 
a large helping of macaroni and cheese, and two helpings of collard 
greens, my favorite, along with a tall glass of sweetened iced tea. She 
sat and watched, smiling, commenting that she and Francis had eaten 
before I got there. I begged to hold off on the peach cobbler, and we 
adjourned to the living room.
The Hampton living room was packed with several large stuffed 
chairs and two sofas. I could be comfortable in any of them as long as I 
didn’t have to get up soon. Iberia and I sat down on her couch and soon 
were joined by Francis, who came from the back of the house. He gave 
me a warm smile when he shook my hand, and said he was glad to see 
me. He looked a bit wearied by the six years since Fred’ s death. Still, he 
had taken good care of himself. He farmed a plot of land in a neighbor-
ing suburb a few miles from their home, and went fishing regularly. He 
and Iberia still drove down to Louisiana at least twice a year. They had 
not given up their connection to the South and their attraction to its 
slow, rural lifestyle. 
“We’ve added some new people, new defendants to the lawsuit,” I 
began. “They worked for the FBI and we think they were responsible for 
setting up the raid.” 
Iberia’ s expression always changed when we began talking about 
Fred or his death. She’ d look down at the floor and then raise her eyes 
up sadly, fearful but wanting to hear more. Her hair was grayer than 
when I had met her, and many more lines were traced in her forehead. 
A permanent weariness seemed to have set in. 
“Fred was more than a target of the Chicago police and Hanrahan,” 
I told them. “We think his death was instigated by FBI agents carrying 
out a national program targeting black leaders. FBI Director Hoover 
ordered those agents to stop—‘neutralize’ was the word they used—up 
and coming leaders like your son.” 
Iberia’ s expression hardened as I spoke. “I believe it!” she blurted 
out. “Fred was always out front, always on TV . Sometimes I wished he’ d 
let someone else do the talking.” I had heard her say this before. She 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   220 7/29/09   1:29:47 PM


--- PAGE 246 ---
221
resented that her son had paid the ultimate price for saying what he 
believed while others stood behind him and remained unharmed. 
“He spoke too much truth for them to let him live,” Francis added. 
“He didn’t know how to keep quiet about injustice.” His voice trailed 
off. 
“We think the FBI used Hanrahan’ s ambition to get him to carry out 
its plan,” I said. “He was more than willing.” I paused a moment then 
continued: “Have you read about what they did to Dr. King?” 
“Yeah, I read it. Blackmailed him and then suggested he kill his self,” 
Iberia answered. 
“The FBI targeted the Panthers even more than Dr. King,” I replied. 
“ And Fred was a leader they saw as a particular threat. They watched his 
every move.” 
“How was O’Neal connected to this?” Francis asked. O’Neal’ s role as 
an informant had received wide publicity. 
I explained that O’Neal had been instructed by his FBI handler to go 
to Fred’ s apartment and get a floor plan. He did this, marking the loca-
tion where Fred and Deborah slept, and gave it to the FBI, which passed 
it on to Hanrahan and the raiders. 
“I brought a copy of it if you want to see it.” I had hesitated bringing the 
floor plan with me but felt Fred’ s parents had a right to know. I pointed 
out the rectangle on which “bed” was written inside the room O’Neal had 
designated the “room of Hampton and Johnson when they stay here.” 
“Lord have mercy!” Iberia declared shaking her head. “They didn’t 
leave nuthin to chance,” she said. Tears came to her eyes. 
Francis remained only slightly more composed. He was studying the 
details on O’Neal’ s sketch. “ And that’ s where all the policemen’ s shots 
came together, right at the head of Fred’ s bed on the diagram,” he said, 
pointing to the same rectangle in the back bedroom. 
“Most of the bullets went in that direction,” I answered. “But we think 
Fred was actually killed after Deborah was pulled out of the room. He 
was shot at close range. The direction of the bullets and the location of 
the bullet wounds in his head prove this.” 
Was I being too clinical? This was their son, and I was describing his 
murder. But they had never shied away from knowing the truth. 
“We’ve added O’Neal and the FBI people in Chicago supervising 
him to our lawsuit,” I continued. “We’ d like to include the higher-ups 
Hiding COINTELPRO
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   221 7/29/09   1:29:47 PM


--- PAGE 247 ---
222
The FBI’s Clandestine Operation
running the Counterintelligence Program in D.C., but so far Perry has 
blocked us from getting the evidence against them.” 
“I don’t like that judge,” Iberia said. “He treats me and Fannie Clark 
like we’re the criminals. He’ s always calling us the defendants as though 
we’re on trial. He really doesn’t like black people.” 
I told her I wished I could disagree, but the situation was even worse 
than what she knew. As much as Perry defended Hanrahan and the 
police, he was even more protective of the FBI. “He goes into a rage 
whenever we suggest that the raid was part of a federal conspiracy. The 
very idea is an insult to him. He acts as if his duty is to shield the FBI,” 
I said. 
“ Are you ever gonna get him to do right?” Iberia asked. 
“I doubt it,” I responded. “I wish I could be more optimistic.” 
In spite of our difficulties with Judge Perry, Iberia and Francis were 
pleased when I described our efforts to sue everyone responsible for 
Fred’ s death. 
“That’ s what we want you to do,” she urged. “Go after them all.” 
Francis nodded his approval. 
I left the Hampton home by way of the kitchen, with a large portion 
of cobbler in my belly and another on a paper plate to deliver to Flint. 
When I hugged Iberia good-bye she said, “I love you.” Then she added, 
“Go after everyone who killed my son.”
“We will,” I answered. “I love you too.” 
The lawsuit became more real, more human, each time I saw Iberia 
and Francis. The visits reminded me that the case wasn’t about docu-
ments or legal motions or conflicts with Perry. It was about killing a 
young man in his bed, about a family who had lost their son and the 
movement that lost a leader. 
In August, as soon as we added the federal defendants to our lawsuit, 
Judge Perry confirmed the trial date for January 1976. With only four 
months lead time and a bar on questioning anyone about COINTEL-
PRO, it would be almost impossible to get the evidence we needed to 
prove that the policy makers in D.C. were responsible for the raid. 
That fall Flint and Holly went to Washington to depose Jerris Leonard 
and the heads of the Counterintelligence Program. By the first week 
of September, with time for adding new defendants running out, we 
filed a motion to compel answers to deposition questions, again ask-
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   222 7/29/09   1:29:47 PM


--- PAGE 248 ---
22
ing Judge Perry to order the deponents to answer our questions about 
COINTELPRO. 
“He’ s gonna hold out forever,” I told Flint, frustrated by how many 
times we had to argue the obvious. 
“He’ll have to,” Flint responded, “because so will we.” 
On September 11, Flint and I went to court to argue our motion 
before Perry. As soon as we arrived, the shriveled old man with his 
double hearing aids bounded out from chambers, took the bench, and 
peered down at us. Our presence pumped life into his shrunken frame. 
“Hampton v. Hanrahan, et al., 70 C 1384,” Perry’ s clerk called out. 
Flint and I walked to the rostrum six feet below the bench. Kanter stood 
to our left. 
For an hour Flint and I argued the obvious relevance of COINTELPRO 
to the federal conspiracy. Perry sat above us, unfazed. We pointed out 
that the Counterintelligence Program itself outlined an FBI conspiracy 
to destroy the Panthers and neutralize charismatic black leaders, and 
we should be allowed to discover if its mandates led to the raid. 
Kanter answered that nothing in the thirty-four documents turned 
over to the judge or from COINTELPRO itself “even tangentially dealt 
with what occurred on December 4 or the question of the raid.” Judge 
Perry nodded approvingly. 
“Let us see the documents and we’ll show you how they are relevant,” 
Flint and I responded. 
Judge Perry said he’ d heard enough. “I’ll rule next week,” he 
announced. Flint and I grabbed our papers and hurried out of the 
courtroom, shaking our heads in disgust. 
A week later, Judge Perry issued his written order: “I have still found 
that none of these documents that have been submitted to me show any 
testimony relevant to this case . . . no questions [about COINTELPRO] 
to the deponents shall be asked.” 
We were out of patience and just about out of time. 
Hiding COINTELPRO
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   223 7/29/09   1:29:48 PM


--- PAGE 249 ---
22
Number One on the “Hit” Parade
 
I
t was November 1975,  two months before our trial date. We had just 
moved downtown to the sixth floor of an office building three blocks 
from the federal court. I traded a noisy cubicle for a spacious office with 
large windows looking out on busy Dearborn Street. We got a deal on 
rental space in a building that was due to be razed in a few years.
“Holy shit. Look at these—look what I just got from Arthur Jefferson!” 
Flint exclaimed, holding up some papers as he came into my office fol-
lowed by Dennis. Flint dropped the papers on my desk. Arthur Jefferson 
was a staff member of the Church Committee, the Senate subcommittee 
headed by senator Frank Church investigating Watergate. Jefferson had 
told Flint the subcommittee was broadening its investigation to look 
into other clandestine government activities, including COINTELPRO. 
“I met Jefferson in person in Washington in September,” Flint said. 
“He sends me FBI documents they uncover through their subpoena 
power, and I send him what dribbles we get through discovery here.” 
I read the four internal FBI memos Flint had dropped on my desk, six 
pages in all. My excitement rose as I went from one to the next. “These 
are crucial!” 
The first document was a memo to FBI Director Hoover written by 
our defendant Marlin Johnson. It was captioned “Counterintelligence 
Program . . . (Black Panther Party).” The memo read: 
Chicago now recommends the following letter be sent to Fort, handwrit-
ten on plain paper. 
Brother Jeff: 
I’ve spent some time with Panther friends on the West Side lately and I 
know what’ s been going on. The brothers that run the Panthers blame 
you for blocking their thing and there’s supposed to be a hit out for you 
31
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   224 7/29/09   1:29:48 PM


--- PAGE 250 ---
22
[emphasis added]. I’m not a Panther, or a Ranger, just black. From what 
I see these Panthers are out for themselves not black people. I think you 
ought to know what their [ sic] up to. I know what I’ d do if I was you. You 
might hear from me again. 
A black brother you don’t know 
It is believed the above may intensify the degree of animosity between 
the two groups and occasion Fort to take retaliatory action, which could 
disrupt the BPP or lead to reprisals against its leadership. 
The memo documented an FBI effort to exploit the animosity 
between Jeff Fort, the leader of the Blackstone Rangers, Chicago’ s larg-
est and most well-armed street gang, and the Panthers. Although we had 
learned the general contents of the memo earlier, we had not known it 
was a COINTELPRO document and likely one of the thirty-four Perry 
had been given and refused to release. A prior effort by Marlin Johnson 
to have Fred killed was certainly relevant to our case, in which the FBI 
was claiming it was merely passing on information and had no intent 
to have Fred murdered. 
“For some reason Fort didn’t go for it,” I said. “Maybe he figured the 
‘black brother’ sounded a little white. Marlin Johnson’ s not exactly a 
street person.” 
“If Fort and the Rangers had retaliated against Fred, the FBI would 
have walked away clean,” Dennis said. “No one would have known they 
precipitated the violence.” 
“I wish we’ d had this when we deposed Johnson,” I said. “I’ d like to 
know how he’ d justify this.” 
Flint pointed to the second document. It carried the same caption, 
“Counterintelligence Program.” Like the Fort hit letter, it bore Marlin 
Johnson’ s initials. Dated December 3, 1969, it was a COINTELPRO “peri-
odic progress report.” It read: 
The BPP continues to be considered the focal point of counterintel-
ligence. Chicago has continued to advise local authorities of instances 
where BPP members appear vulnerable to arrest on local charges. 
In this regard, Chicago letter to the Bureau dated November 21, 1969, 
captioned “Black Panther Party (BPP), RM” is concerned with the loca-
Number One on the “Hit” Parade
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   225 7/29/09   1:29:48 PM


--- PAGE 251 ---
22
The FBI’s Clandestine Operation
tion in Chicago of weapons reportedly purchased legally by BPP mem-
bers. This information has been furnished to local law enforcement offi-
cials. Officials of the Chicago Police Department have advised that the 
Department is currently planning a positive course of action relative to 
this information.
The “positive course of action” was the raid planned by Hanrahan’ s 
police. The document’ s COINTELPRO heading demonstrated that the 
FBI’ s dissemination of information to the police and Hanrahan was 
made pursuant to the Counterintelligence Program. 
“How can Perry justify concealing this memo?” I asked. “This is a 
COINTELPRO document specifically targeting Fred, and I’m sure it’ s 
one of the thirty-four he’ s been sitting on.” 
“Perry had to think we’ d never see it,” Dennis said. “He didn’t figure 
we’ d get FBI documents from the Church Committee.”
In one of the other two documents, Hoover directed FBI offices to 
“submit imaginative and hard-hitting counterintelligence programs 
aimed at crippling the BPP .” 
“That mandate requires some creativity,” Dennis observed drily. “ A 
dirty trick, in fact a crippling trick, every two weeks. I wonder what else 
Johnson and company tried to do to the Panthers in the year between 
this memo and when they killed Fred.” 
The fourth document was a periodic report by the San Diego FBI 
office dated September 18, 1969. In it, the Special Agent in Charge 
bragged to Hoover about the “tangible results” already accomplished in 
the Counterintelligence Program: 
Shootings, beatings, and a high degree of unrest continues to prevail in 
the ghetto area of southeast San Diego. Although no specific counterintel-
ligence action can be credited with contributing to this overall situation, 
it is felt that a substantial amount of the unrest is directly attributable to 
this program.
I was appalled both at the candid acknowledgment that “unrest” in 
the black community was a celebrated part of the program’ s objectives 
and that this sentiment would have been memorialized in a letter to 
Hoover seeking credit for the violent conditions. When I read it today, I 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   226 7/29/09   1:29:49 PM


--- PAGE 252 ---
22
am reminded of the CIA ’ s counterinsurgency plan for Central America 
in the 1980s or the military plan for Iraq. But here the FBI was promot-
ing violence at home against U.S. citizens and groups. 
The next day, Dennis cornered Flint and me and read us parts of 
the motion he had typed out in response to the new documents and 
Hoover’ s specific mandate “to prevent the rise of a messiah.” 
A messianic figure, Fred Hampton, who could and did unite and elec-
trify the masses of black people (and white people!) wherever he went 
did indeed arise in Chicago. In the atmosphere which existed at the 
time, with the murders of Malcolm X and Martin Luther King already 
accomplished, and much of the Panther leadership in jail or exile, Fred 
Hampton became, to the agents of government responsible for suppres-
sion of the movement, Number One on the Hit Parade: and thus he met 
his end.
Dennis always had a flair for the dramatic. As a lawyer, this found 
expression in his pleadings and arguments in court. They were often 
eloquent, always insightful, and sometimes a bit too accusatory for 
the court’ s ear. Flint and I frequently toned down his written drafts but 
always enjoyed the originals. 
“I love it,” I applauded. “It’ s Dennis unleashed!” 
What Dennis read became paragraph seven of the motion for dis-
covery and disclosure of evidence, which we filed a few days later. We 
attached the four documents we had received, together with others 
recently released by the Church Committee, which showed the FBI 
blackmailing and targeting Dr. King. 
At the end, after accusing Perry of being “quite unenlightened by 
the lessons of Watergate,” our motion gave him the opportunity to 
redeem himself, a way out from of being seen as “embedded” with the 
defendants. 
The court’ s actions in affording the defendants this protection [from dis-
closure] are misguided to an extreme degree. We fully sympathize with 
the chagrin of any person so long accustomed to relying on the hon-
esty and good faith of government officials, when it is so shockingly and 
undeniably shown to exist no more. But today the frightening ethic which 
Number One on the “Hit” Parade
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   227 7/29/09   1:29:49 PM


--- PAGE 253 ---
22
The FBI’s Clandestine Operation
has replaced detachment, trustworthiness, and honor in government is 
cover-up, deception, and plausible deniability. If the courts of our coun-
try or the judges of our country allow themselves to be made tools of this 
philosophy, then neither the plaintiffs nor anyone else can be expected to 
maintain respect for the law. 
We felt there was nothing to lose by being straightforward, or more 
precisely, nothing to gain by being diplomatic. 
On November 26, I filed the motion—fifteen pages long with fifty 
pages of FBI documents attached—and hand delivered copies to the 
pressroom, where each of the Chicago dailies had a desk. 
We had developed working relationships with several investigative 
reporters from Chicago’ s newspapers: Tom Dolan from the Chicago 
Sun-Times, Rob Warden from the Chicago Daily News, and Bob McClory 
from the Daily Defender wrote most often about what we uncovered. 
They quoted us frequently, usually reporting our courtroom battles 
sympathetically. Why not? We provided them with revelations of ille-
gal and clandestine government intelligence activities, certainly more 
newsworthy than the blanket denials from the other side. I returned to 
the office after filing the motion and called all of our friendly reporters. 
“Yeah, that’ s the same Marlin Johnson that Daley appointed to head the 
Chicago Police Board,” I told Rob Warden. “But I don’t think he put his 
anonymous communication with Fort on his resume.” 
The Fort hit letter made front-page news in all the papers, even the 
Tribune. Everyone in Chicago knew Jeff Fort’ s name, and no one took 
the Blackstone Rangers lightly. It was a great story, not without irony. 
The current head of Chicago’ s Police Board had assumed the guise of 
a “black brother,” scribbling information in what he thought was black 
jargon, about a phony death threat in his effort to induce Fort and the 
Rangers to retaliate violently against Fred Hampton. Johnson’ s pub-
lic denial that he ever intended or expected a violent reaction by the 
Rangers made it even more macabre. 
On December 10, 1975, Dennis, Flint, and I walked into Perry’ s court-
room and sat down at the polished wooden table reserved for plaintiffs’ 
attorneys. The December 4th
 Committee had put out the word that this 
was an important court date. The benches for spectators in the rear of 
the courtroom were full. The press packed the front row. The sketch-
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   228 7/29/09   1:29:50 PM


--- PAGE 254 ---
22
ers for the newspapers began making their drawings of the three of us. 
Dennis, tall and lean, with a sculpted face, a Max von Sydow profile, 
but with receding hair going in all directions; Flint with his blond mut-
ton chop sideburns, tinted glasses, and serious but boyish look; and me 
sporting my dark Afro and bushy beard, a tad overweight, and looking 
skeptically at the Judge’ s bench, even before Perry arrived. 
The FBI defendants’ lawyers, Arnold Kanter and Alexandra Kwoka, 
were at one counsel table; Coghlan and Volini, the lawyers for the city 
and county defendants, sat at the other. 
Judge Perry scurried out from the back of the courtroom, adjusting 
his hearing aid as he took his seat on the bench. He was wearing his dark 
glasses, which he claimed were to prevent the glare, but we thought he 
actually wore them to allow him to doze through our arguments. The 
clerk called the case, and the three of us went up to the podium.
The record says we were in court for almost three hours. Dennis, 
Flint, and I all took target practice at the FBI lawyers and defendants for 
hiding COINTELPRO and at the judge for letting them do it. This time 
we had the advantage of having in our possession many of the critical 
documents the FBI and judge were refusing to release, documents they 
had previously sworn did not exist or were not relevant. 
We tried our best to argue the merits, but Perry only became more 
irritated and impatient. Then we tried to shame him into correcting his 
previous efforts to protect the FBI. How could you allow them to hide 
these, Judge? And now they have you hiding them, too. We repeated our 
plea that the trial be continued past the scheduled date of January 5 to 
allow us time to question the FBI defendants on the new documents, 
depose their superiors, and add new defendants. 
Kanter responded as expected that COINTELPRO had nothing to do 
with the raid. This led to skeptical looks from the reporters, who had 
read our motion and seen the attached documents. 
Dennis responded that two of the new COINTELPRO memos pro-
vided by the Church Committee named and targeted Hampton specifi-
cally. Perry nodded. Maybe he was wavering. Perry grabbed his papers. 
“I’ll decide this next week,” he said over his shoulder as he walked out. 
He often got up and walked away if we pressed an argument. 
In the corridor outside, I commented to Dennis, “I think we made it 
into the press, but who knows if we got through to Perry.” 
Number One on the “Hit” Parade
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   229 7/29/09   1:29:50 PM


--- PAGE 255 ---
20
The FBI’s Clandestine Operation
Indeed, the press gave a lot of play to the new documents and quoted 
generously from our motion and our argument. If we had to start the 
trial without the COINTELPRO evidence, at least the world would know 
the FBI was responsible for the raid. On December 15, five days after 
the argument, I walked the three blocks from our new office downtown 
to the Dirksen Federal Building to pick up Perry’ s written ruling. I read 
it outside the clerk’ s office. 
The order urged the defendants to search their files again for “records 
or exhibits they may have overlooked or misplaced.” But Perry refused 
to release the COINTELPRO documents in his possession or to make 
the defendants answer deposition questions about the program. He 
concluded, “The motion is not well taken and that more particularly 
there is no reason to delay the trial in this cause.” 
That was it, the court’ s entire rationale. We filed a last-minute peti-
tion again asking the Seventh Circuit to reverse and recuse Judge Perry. 
We begged them to continue the case to allow us to proceed with dis-
covery around COINTELPRO. Again, our appeal was denied. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   230 7/29/09   1:29:50 PM


--- PAGE 256 ---
Part IV 
Injustice   
on Trial
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   231 7/29/09   1:29:50 PM


--- PAGE 257 ---
32
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   232 7/29/09   1:29:50 PM


--- PAGE 258 ---
2
Opening Day 
W
e sat at the counsel table in the well of the vast Ceremonial Court-
room in the Dirksen Federal Building. After more than five years 
of preparation, we were starting jury selection. 
The thick, dark blue carpet muffled the sounds of the attorneys 
and clients taking their places at the tables around me. This cavern-
ous space was normally used for the induction of new judges or other 
special ceremonies. But because there were so many parties, lawyers, 
and spectators, as well as prospective jurors, Judge Perry had obtained 
permission to use it for our jury selection. Even the bench was grander 
than normal, a curved mahogany behemoth that rose five feet above 
the floor and extended twenty feet to each side, with raised chairs and 
room enough for several judges in the middle. 
The area below was filled with six polished mahogany tables sur-
rounded by cushioned black leather chairs on rollers. The walls were in 
the same dark brown wood as the tables, and the rich wood and thick 
carpet created a muted effect, unlike the filthy cacophony of the crimi-
nal court building. Business was conducted quietly, in a more sophisti-
cated manner, in the federal courts. 
The party with the burden of proof, the plaintiff, always sits nearest 
the jury. So Flint and I sat at the table only a few feet from the empty 
jury box. It, too, was surrounded by brown mahogany railings. I had 
lightly starched my shirts and dry-cleaned all three of my suits. That 
day I wore my brown wool one. Even Flint’ s blue suit showed only a few 
wrinkles. Seated at our table was the large and swarthy Jay Schulman, 
director of the National Jury Project. His belly protruded from his cor-
duroy sport coat. Jay was a sociologist and statistician from Columbia 
University. For four months he and his associates had been interview-
ing registered voters from Chicago and its suburbs, the area from which 
our jury would be selected. 
32
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   233 7/29/09   1:29:51 PM


--- PAGE 259 ---
2
Injustice on Trial
Jay had used surveys in the Attica, Wounded Knee, and Daniel 
Ellsberg trials to show that prospective jurors in well-publicized 
political cases had strong biases and preset opinions about the facts. 
Schulman’ s survey of the Chicago area showed that 96 percent of those 
interviewed had “some recollection of the events of December 4.” Two-
thirds had already formed an opinion, and a majority of these believed 
the Panthers were partially or totally at fault. 
The survey also indicated that half the people thought the govern-
ment should use “any means necessary” to destroy groups “which 
threaten the present system of government.” A third said they would 
not award money for damages to the families of dead Panthers even if 
the evidence showed the police acted illegally. A vast majority said they 
would believe the testimony of a police officer over that of a Panther. 
The survey results did not surprise me and confirmed that we had an 
uphill battle. 
We attached Schulman’ s affidavit containing his findings to support 
our motion to allow us extra peremptory challenges. We needed many 
times the normal number because so many prospective jurors would 
enter with a bias against our clients. We also gave the judge a list of 
questions we felt were necessary to get jurors to divulge their opinions 
and prejudices. 
On the other side of Schulman was Jim Montgomery, relaxed and 
smiling, not a wrinkle in his suit. 
“I hope Jim is more effective with Perry than we are,” Flint said to me 
the day before. 
“I’m sure he’ll be good with the jury,” I said. We were pleased to have 
him on the case. 
Herbert Reid, an African American lawyer from the NAACP Legal 
Defense and Education Fund, sat next to Montgomery. Ever since their 
May 1972 report, Search and Destroy, condemning the raid, the NAACP 
had supported us, sometimes with funds and now with a full-time 
attorney for the trial. Reid, a law professor from Howard University, was 
an able and experienced trial attorney, but he was also in his seventies. 
We would learn he was prone to naps in the afternoon court sessions. 
The seven survivors sat at the table next to us. Their expressions 
reflected their skepticism about the proceedings. “I hope we get a jury 
that can see through that old racist judge,” Doc Satchel whispered to 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   234 7/29/09   1:29:51 PM


--- PAGE 260 ---
2
me shortly after he walked in. Deborah Johnson, still with her Afro, and 
looking more together and resigned now than when I interviewed her 
after Fred’ s murder, sat next to Doc. At our urging the plaintiffs were 
in their nice clothes, the women in dresses and the men in sweaters. 
Only Truelock was unshaven, giving a hint of his precarious life on the 
streets. 
The Hampton and Clark families occupied the front row of the spec-
tator section behind us. They wore guarded expressions also. They’ d 
seen Hanrahan acquitted and didn’t trust the courts. Six-year-old Fred 
Jr. sat next to Iberia. He was looking around curiously, swinging his legs 
back and forth. His large, round face and broad smile already reminded 
me of his dad. We wanted the jury and the press to see this six-year-old 
fatherless boy; Fred’ s brother Bill, a ganglier version of Fred, also was in 
the front row. 
Fannie Clark, Mark’ s mother, sat next to the Hamptons. She was a 
stout woman with a matronly air, who wore magnificent hats. Flint and 
I went over to thank her for coming from Peoria. She gave us each a big 
hug. “Thank you for what you’re doing,” she said warmly. Three of Mark’ s 
eleven brothers and sisters were sitting with their mother. Behind the 
Hamptons and Clarks sat the plaintiffs’ friends, our friends, and folks 
working with the December 4th Committee. 
The police officer and state’ s attorney defendants stood around 
tables in the middle of the courtroom behind their attorneys Coghlan, 
Volini, and Witkowski, Coghlan’ s associate. They smiled, patted each 
other on the shoulder, and joked. Many had been through this before 
with Hanrahan, when they were facing obstruction of justice charges. 
They knew the routine: they got paid their regular salaries to wear civil-
ian clothes and watch and doze in the courtroom. 
The FBI defendants—Mitchell, Piper, and Johnson—sat calmly in 
gray suits at their own table across from their attorneys Arnold Kanter, 
Alexandra Kwoka, and Edward Christenbury, on loan from the Justice 
Department. Only William O’Neal was missing. The FBI was keep-
ing a tight rein on his whereabouts. The twenty-eight defendants, 
nine plaintiffs, and ten lawyers filled the buffed mahogany tables. 
Newspaper and TV people filled in the front rows of the spectator sec-
tion. Cameras weren’t allowed. The sketchers with their large artist 
pads leaned forward from the front row in the center. Two were draw-
Opening Day
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   235 7/29/09   1:29:51 PM


--- PAGE 261 ---
2
Injustice on Trial
ing Hanrahan, seated by himself. He had dropped out of the public eye 
after losing his last election. His forehead seemed furrowed in a per-
manent scowl. 
Suddenly, Perry’ s clerk stood up from his raised stand on the other 
side of the courtroom and bellowed, “ All rise.” The door to the left of the 
bench swung open. 
Perry entered and took his seat above us. He looked pleased to see 
the crowd below. “Be seated,” the clerk called again, and there was a 
rustle of clothing as we all sat in unison. Perry began by hearing the 
motions we had filed. First, we asked him to order the defendants to tell 
us if any of the persons we put on our witness list had ever been govern-
ment informants. 
“Motion denied.” 
I argued our motion for extensive voir dire (questioning of the jury) 
and asked that we as plaintiffs be allowed extra peremptory challenges 
because of the prejudices our jury survey had uncovered in the jury 
pool. Judge Perry listened and then dismissed the National Jury Project’ s 
four months of research with one comment: “I think we overemphasize 
this problem of prejudice because I find when jurors are fully informed, 
they want to do the right thing.” Schulman shook his head in disgust. 
Perry did agree to question the jurors individually about their recol-
lection of the case but refused to allow us follow-up questions. Perry 
also ruled we could have only six peremptory challenges, fewer than he 
allowed the defendants. 
Before we could object to his rulings, Perry told the clerk to “call the 
jury in.” The rear doors of the courtroom on our side opened and the 
first fifty potential jurors entered in single file. They occupied four rows 
of benches, cordoned off in the center of the spectator section. 
I saw only a few black faces, and the average age appeared to be 
around fifty. It turned out that of the four hundred persons in the spe-
cial panel, only twenty-three—less than 6 percent—were black. Voter 
registration lists were 17 percent black. Later we learned blacks called 
for jury duty were excused much more easily than whites. 
Perry told the candidates that the trial “will take many weeks, possi-
bly as much as three months.” In describing the incident, Perry referred 
to December 4 as a “gun battle,” the defendants’ position. He said, in his 
most skeptical tone, the plaintiffs “were alleging a national conspiracy 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   236 7/29/09   1:29:52 PM


--- PAGE 262 ---
2
to murder Fred Hampton and destroy the Panthers and that the police 
did all the shooting, and that there was a massive cover-up of the facts 
by all the defendants.” Perry quickly reminded them “these are only alle-
gations.” He proceeded to tell the jurors that the defendants “vigorously 
denied” all our claims and their defense was that they were unexpect-
edly fired on when they sought to lawfully execute a search warrant. 
As the questioning proceeded, Perry dismissed the jurors who 
claimed it would be a hardship to sit in a lengthy trial. This left house-
wives, retirees, and those employed by large corporations, which were 
required to pay their employees’ salaries during jury duty. Perry made 
a mockery of many of the questions we had submitted. He asked all the 
black prospective jurors, “ Are you a member of the Ku Klux Klan?” and 
he asked the whites, “ Are you a member of the Black Panthers?” Ignoring 
the puzzled looks he got in response, Perry continued. He often referred 
to African Americans as “colored people,” in spite of our objections. 
Perry did question the jurors individually and asked many of the ques-
tions we had submitted. But by disallowing follow-up questions, he had 
closed the door to exposing the depth of the jurors’ biases. Day after day 
we sat helplessly as he quickly rehabilitated whites who expressed neg-
ative feelings about the Panthers or even black people generally. “Can 
you put your feelings aside and give the parties a fair trial?” was his typi-
cal follow-up question. Only the most hard-nosed and clueless racist or 
someone who didn’t want to be on the jury answered in the negative. 
The defense attorneys convinced Perry to strike black people who 
expressed the slightest sympathy for the Panthers or skepticism toward 
law enforcement. Perry did make it clear at one point in the three weeks 
of jury selection that he wanted at least one black juror. He told the de-
fendants’ lawyers that Florence Smith, a middle-aged, pleasant-looking 
black woman, was “particularly well qualified.” 
Ten days after the questioning started, Judge Perry imposed a gag 
order, prohibiting us from discussing the case with the press. He entered 
his order in chambers. When Flint and I objected to the gag order in 
open court, he told the bailiff to remove us from the courtroom. 
“He wants a gag order on the existence of the gag order,” I griped to 
Flint as we were escorted out of the courtroom temporarily. 
By the fourth week of January, questioning of prospective jurors had 
ceased, and it was time for us to exercise our six peremptory challenges. 
Opening Day
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   237 7/29/09   1:29:52 PM


--- PAGE 263 ---
2
Injustice on Trial
These gave us the right to challenge six prospective jurors without giv-
ing a rationale. We excused family members of cops. But we didn’t have 
enough challenges to excuse the heavily bouffanted Judy Norgle, who 
was dating a cop! Perry refused to excuse her for cause. 
“I’m sure she’ll be fair,” Perry said as Norgle shot us a hostile glance. 
After both sides exercised all their challenges, ten people remained 
in the jury box, nine whites and Florence Smith. Six would be regular 
jurors, and four would serve as alternates. Our jury’ s average age was 
fifty, and most had no more than a high school education. This was not 
a good start. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   238 7/29/09   1:29:53 PM


--- PAGE 264 ---
2
“I Am No Solomon”
 
J
im Montgomery, in a dark tailored suit, squared his broad shoulders 
and rose to address the judge. His argument was our last chance to 
get Perry to release the FBI’ s COINTELPRO documents before we called 
our first witness. Edward Christenbury from the Justice Department 
had just reiterated the FBI position; COINTELPRO was “immaterial and 
irrelevant.” 
Montgomery enunciated slowly and emphatically, highlighting that 
our complaint charged that “the raid was accomplished as a result of 
COINTELPRO.” We should have the opportunity to prove our allega-
tions. There was no doubt COINTELPRO targeted the Black Panther 
Party, and the issue was whether the FBI program lead to the raid. The 
FBI defendants claimed that they were “innocently in good faith fur-
nishing intelligence to brother law enforcement agencies.” We claimed 
the purpose of supplying the information was to further the illegal goals 
of the COINTELPRO program including destroying the Black Panther 
Party and its leadership. Montgomery argued that COINTELPRO was 
critical to showing the FBI’ s intent. 
Montgomery then gave a succinct history of the Counterintelligence 
Program and explained that the clear purpose of the COINTELPRO hit 
letter to Jeff Fort was to get Fred Hampton killed. Montgomery pointed 
out that the motive and intent of the defendants was a critical part of 
our proof and COINTELPRO was committed to “preventing the rise of 
a black messiah.” 
“We can’t rely on the defendants’ denial of relevancy, and if the court 
accepts their claims, you will have precluded us from putting on our 
case,” Montgomery ended, putting the weight squarely on the judge. 
When he finished, Perry seemed to soften his position. “I am con-
cerned that the plaintiffs have not seen it,” he responded, referring to 
the hit letter. Montgomery had pressed hard on our right to determine 
what evidence was relevant to our case, not the defendants. 
33
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   239 7/29/09   1:29:53 PM


--- PAGE 265 ---
20
Injustice on Trial
Volini tried to save the day for the defendants, complaining that 
“no ruling is final,” referring to Perry’ s numerous prior denials of our 
requests for COINTELPRO information. 
Perry responded, “I think these counsel should have an opportu-
nity to look at the material that I have received in camera. . . . I am no 
Solomon; I made a mistake. I have let the defendants determine what is 
relevant to the plaintiffs’ case.” 
With that Perry pulled a document out from under his papers and 
read an order he had prepared requiring the federal lawyers to produce 
the entire Chicago COINTELPRO file as well as all the Chicago FBI files 
on O’Neal, Fred Hampton, and each of the plaintiffs. 
I rolled my eyes in disbelief. Flint had a similar look. The same argu-
ment by Flint and me had been rejected so many times. I couldn’t believe 
Perry was actually ordering the FBI to turn over the COINTELPRO 
files: the ones we had been seeking for two years, through ten subpoe-
nas, seven motions, and six arguments. Looking back, it’ s clear that 
Montgomery’ s argument provided Perry a convenient opportunity 
to come off his untenable position of denying the relevance of docu-
ments he knew would be made public by the Church Committee, if not 
through other litigation, and that, because of their obvious evidentiary 
value to us in proving the FBI’ s motivation to neutralize the Panthers, 
and Hampton in particular, would only expose Perry’ s collusion with the 
federal defendants. Now, he didn’t have to admit he was wrong directly 
to Flint and me, and he could send the message that our lawyering was 
the problem, not his rulings.
Flint immediately asked Perry to recess the trial until we had received 
and read the recently ordered documents and questioned the FBI 
defendants about them. He refused but said we could spend “half days” 
the next week questioning Johnson outside the presence of the jury. 
After court Flint and I went out in the hallway. We congratulated 
Montgomery. He smiled, knowing he’ d done a good job, but he also 
gave us credit. “You guys did the footwork,” he said. “I just finished it 
off.” 
The press wanted to know why Perry finally reversed himself. Because 
we were likely to be quoted, we didn’t want to slam him too hard. “Well, 
let’ s just say he was slow to understand how important COINTELPRO is 
to this case,” was my response to press inquiries. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   240 7/29/09   1:29:53 PM


--- PAGE 266 ---
21
Flint and I followed the reporters to the pressroom and briefed them 
further on why the FBI’ s Counterintelligence Program was behind the 
raid and how the release of documents would be critical to proving this. 
“It started with Hoover,” Flint told them. “It ended at 2337, but it was part 
of a common conspiracy and COINTELPRO provided the directions.” 
We had some of the COINTELPRO documents released to the Watergate 
Committee, ready to give them. “Yes, I think ‘neutralize the BPP’ includes 
killing,” I said. “It sends the message while maintaining deniability.” 
We called Marlin Johnson as our first witness. With COINTELPRO no 
longer out of bounds, he would have to acknowledge and explain its 
mandates. He admitted that he received the August 1967 directive to set 
up a COINTELPRO operation in Chicago whose purpose was to neutral-
ize black leaders and to “prevent the rise of a messiah” who could unite 
the black movement. Johnson also admitted to receiving Hoover’ s memo 
urging FBI offices to use local law enforcement to harass and disrupt 
black groups, and that he authored the memo to Hoover wholeheart-
edly approving the goals of COINTELPRO. Nevertheless, contradicting 
the explicit entreaties in the COINTELPRO memos, Johnson repeatedly 
asserted that “the purpose of COINTELPRO was to prevent violence.” 
Perry would not let Montgomery impeach Johnson by showing that Dr. 
King was one of the leaders targeted by COINTELPRO. Because many 
COINTELPRO memos were titled “COINTELPRO—Black Nationalist 
Hate Groups,” Montgomery asked Johnson for his definition of a black 
nationalist group. Johnson’ s answer was “any black organization that 
had a national headquarters.”
Johnson testified that he received and read only the COINTELPRO 
documents on which his initials appeared, and only a “part” of those. 
He portrayed COINTELPRO as a minor program run by a small section 
of his office, barely making the radar screen of someone as busy as him-
self. Johnson claimed he had no recollection of any specific action he 
took to implement the program in Chicago. He “did not recall” receiv-
ing Hoover’ s memo calling on all FBI offices to “submit imaginative, 
hard-hitting counterintelligence measures aimed at crippling the BPP ,” 
even though it was addressed and routed to him. The growing chorus to 
Montgomery’ s questions was “I don’t recall.” The COINTELPRO memos 
addressed to Johnson were admitted into evidence even if Johnson 
claimed no memory of them. 
“I Am No Solomon”
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   241 7/29/09   1:29:54 PM


--- PAGE 267 ---
22
Injustice on Trial
“How could this guy with such a pathetic memory serve as chair of 
Chicago’ s police board?” I leaned over and asked Flint. 
On the second day of cross-examination, Montgomery read Johnson 
the contents of the letter he authorized warning Fort about the sup-
posed hit out on him by the Panthers. He also read Johnson’ s memo to 
Hoover explaining that the purpose of his letter was to get Fort to take 
“retaliatory action” and carry out “retribution against Panther lead-
ers.” Johnson insisted a hit was “nonviolent,” and no physical harm or 
violence was intended. “I would never approve any document in this 
program, Sir, where I felt the results of the program would lead to vio-
lence.” Johnson claimed the “retribution” he intended to follow from 
his letter meant “disorganization.” 
“So your intent was not that Jeff Fort blow somebody’ s head off as a 
result of this?” Montgomery asked the question on everyone’ s mind. 
“Yes sir, that is correct.” Johnson replied, because there was an “FBI 
understanding” that the program and letter were intended to be non-
violent. I heard muffled laughter from the back of the courtroom. 
Montgomery followed up, asking Johnson if anyone explained the 
FBI understanding to Jeff Fort. 
“No.” 
“ Are you aware Fort had only a sixth-grade education?” 
“No.” 
Montgomery asked Johnson what he’ d meant by “I know what I’ d do 
if I was you.” 
“It meant nothing as far as I was concerned. It was just more street 
language put in there to make it sound more realistic.” Johnson crossed 
and recrossed his legs, directing an occasional inappropriate smile at 
the judge, trying to defuse the absurdity of his answers. 
“What is it that you know about the Rangers that would indicate that 
no harm would come to the Panther leaders as a result of this letter?” 
Montgomery pressed on.  
“I considered an anonymous letter to be practically nothing. . . . I 
doubted that it would even be read.” 
I glanced at the jury. Florence Smith was shaking her head back 
and forth in disbelief. She knew more about the Rangers than Johnson 
wanted her to. 
That evening Bob Greene, a columnist for the Chicago Sun-Times, 
wrote a satirical editorial entitled, “No Hits, No Guns, No Terror.”  He 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   242 7/29/09   1:29:54 PM


--- PAGE 268 ---
2
interviewed several organized crime experts and asked them for their 
definition of a hit. Their answers were “a contract for murder” and “to 
kill, or eradicate.” 
The next day Johnson continued his vocabulary jumble. One of the 
COINTELPRO documents he authored praised O’Neal’ s actions as “an 
indication of the use of this source (O’Neal) in harassing and impelling 
the criminal activities of the Panthers locally.” Johnson testified that he 
understood impelling to mean restraining. There were more snickers in 
the courtroom. The primary definitions of impelling, according to the 
Webster’s Unabridged Dictionary, 2nd Edition  that was retrieved from 
the judge’ s chambers, were “to drive or urge forward to incite to action, 
to give an impulse to.” Johnson claimed he knew nothing of O’Neal’ s 
provocative acts. 
Johnson denied any knowledge of the floor plan before or after the 
raid. He also claimed he was never told there were illegal weapons at 
2337 and if he had this information, he was required to pass it on to the 
ATF . Instead, he simply denied receiving it. 
Even though it came from SAC Chicago, the acronym for his official 
title, Johnson claimed no recollection of the contents of the December 
3 COINTELPRO memo from himself to Hoover describing the passing 
of information about 2337 (and the weapons stored there) to the state’ s 
attorney. Similarly he didn’t know what was meant by the “positive 
course of action” he expected to be taken in response. 
Constant objections by the defense and Johnson’ s consistent loss 
of recollection made his cross-examination long and tedious. When 
Montgomery probed Johnson about the usefulness of a floor plan in a 
raid, the judge called his questions “speculative.” When Montgomery 
asked Johnson why the ATF was not given the information about a 
sawed-off shotgun, Perry intervened and said the question was “far 
afield.” Perry told the jury that O’Neal’ s receiving increased payments 
because the FBI reported his effectiveness at carrying out the FBI’ s 
COINTELPRO objectives was “not an issue.” 
Toward the end of his questioning, Montgomery came down with the 
flu. He asked me to finish the cross-examination. February 26 was my 
first day questioning a witness before this jury. I was nervous approach-
ing the podium in the intimidating atmosphere of the grand federal 
courtroom. By this time we had moved to a regular courtroom, but the 
atmosphere was the same. 
“I Am No Solomon”
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   243 7/29/09   1:29:54 PM


--- PAGE 269 ---
2
Injustice on Trial
I asked Johnson what he understood to be the purpose of the federal 
grand jury, the words coming out hesitatingly at first. 
“Leonard told me he was primarily interested in the June 4 raid,” he 
responded. (A blatant lie.) My nervousness and dry mouth vanished as 
I listened to his absurd answer. Johnson was trying to justify his fail-
ure to tell the grand jury about the FBI role in obtaining the floor plan 
and initiating the raid. He knew the grand jury was about December 4  
and he had already admitted meeting with Assistant Attorney General 
Leonard, who was in charge of the grand jury, several times. Later, I got 
him to acknowledge that Leonard wanted to know what the FBI told 
Hanrahan’ s raiders before the raid. Johnson claimed he never told the 
grand jury prosecutors about either the floor plan or illegal guns, be-
cause he was never told those things before the raid or by the unknown 
“staff person” who briefed him before his grand jury testimony. 
I challenged Johnson’ s claim of ignorance. “Wasn’t it your respon-
sibility to investigate Leonard’ s request?” I asked. The defense lawyers 
stood up and objected to give him more time to answer. Johnson asked 
for the question to be read back three times.
All he could come up with after the delay was “I would have felt they 
[whoever briefed him] knew, but I do not recall whom I asked.” He 
admitted he never asked Mitchell, the person he knew was involved, 
or Piper, his supervisor, for information about the raid. Johnson denied 
knowing about the deal between Hanrahan and Leonard to assure 
there would be no disclosure of the FBI role, even though the April 8 
FBI memo specifically states he was told of the agreement by FBI agent 
Leonard Treviranus. Perry refused to permit me to confront Johnson 
either with the document or Treviranus’ s testimony. 
That night a local newspaper described Johnson as someone “whose 
memory seems to be deteriorating during questioning.” His lawyers 
seemed at a loss on how to rehabilitate him, but Perry did the rehabili-
tation himself. The next day he told the jury that Johnson “was not eva-
sive at all.” This comment was a gross violation of the Judge’ s supposed 
impartiality and an invasion of the jury’ s duty to assess the credibility of 
the witnesses, but for Judge Perry it was business as usual. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   244 7/29/09   1:29:55 PM


--- PAGE 270 ---
2
The Deluge
 
R
oy Mitchell, the point man in the FBI conspiracy and O’Neal’ s han-
dler, walked to the witness box a few feet in front of us on March 11 
to begin his testimony. His crew cut was even shorter than at his depo-
sition. His stiff posture and military bearing gave him a straight appear-
ance that contradicted what we knew from his deposition.
In our most recent discovery, we received a COINTELPRO memo 
that indicated Mitchell instructed O’Neal to create a rift between the 
Panthers and SDS by circulating racist cartoons and attributing them to 
SDS. Another showed O’Neal proudly reporting to Mitchell that as chief 
of security he had devised a “security plan” for Panther headquarters 
that included nerve gas and an electric chair. Mitchell still denied that 
he or O’Neal was following COINTELPRO directives. Other Mitchell 
memos showed O’Neal reporting to him on Fred’ s daily activities in late 
1969, as well as the content and attendance at his speeches. O’Neal told 
Mitchell about Fred and Deborah renting the apartment in October and 
that Fred met with national Panther leaders and “would take Hilliard’ s 
position on the central staff if he [Hilliard] went to jail.”
As Montgomery’ s inquiries moved forward chronologically to the 
period before the raid, Mitchell testified about a speech Fred gave in 
Chicago in November 1969. The cross-examination was going smoothly 
enough, if not dramatically.
Montgomery: “What information did [O’Neal] give you other than 
that he was making a speech?”
Mitchell: “Well, he’ s given me information about Mr. Hampton and a 
few other Panthers traveling to Rockford, Illinois.”
Montgomery: “ At some time he told you about his speech—”
Coghlan [interjecting]: “I don’t believe the witness completed his 
answer, Your Honor.”
34
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   245 7/29/09   1:29:55 PM


--- PAGE 271 ---
2
Injustice on Trial
Perry: “Well, I thought he had, but if he hadn’t, he may do so. Is there 
something further?”
Mitchell had gotten a cue from Coghlan. He hesitated, but for only 
a moment. “Yes, Your Honor, when they were contemplating killing a 
state police officer.”
Perry: “I stand corrected, Mr. Coghlan.”
Montgomery came over to the table where Flint and I were seated. 
He leaned over and whispered, “The motherfucker just sandbagged me. 
Do we have any document reflecting what he’ s saying?”
“No,” Flint and I responded in unison shaking our heads. 
Montgomery returned to the lectern. I saw a sinister smile on 
Coghlan’ s face
. 
Montgomery: “Did you make a written memo of that? What you just 
said?” 
Mitchell: “I don’t know if it’ s recorded.”
Montgomery: “Have you read anything with that in it?”
Mitchell: “I believe so, yes.”
Montgomery: “Where is it?”
Mitchell: “I assume it’ s in the FBI files.”
Montgomery [curtly]: “Would you produce it, please? Thank you.” 
Mitchell was trapped. He had made a striking accusation against 
Fred Hampton. If there were no report memorializing this, then he 
would look like a liar. If there was one, we should have received it in 
discovery. Every day for the next two weeks after cross-examination, we 
asked Mitchell if he had found the missing Rockford document. At one 
point he claimed he had “gone through thirty volumes of files trying to 
locate it,” but had not found it.
Flint’ s ears perked up. “How could he be looking through thirty vol-
umes of files when we supposedly have the complete files, which are 
less than one volume?”
Kanter jumped in stating emphatically we had received all the files 
with information from or about O’Neal.
 
“The entire informant file?” Flint asked. 
Kanter: “That’ s correct.”
Taylor: “Could we have an affidavit on that?”
Perry: “That’ s not necessary.” 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   246 7/29/09   1:29:55 PM


--- PAGE 272 ---
2
After two weeks of questioning Mitchell, Perry told Montgomery, “I 
expect you to conclude with this witness this afternoon.” Montgomery 
focused on the key points in the conspiracy. Roy Mitchell again admit-
ted he had “five to seven” meetings with Jalovec, including a face-to-face 
meeting at the State’ s Attorney’ s Office on the morning of December 1 
or 2 with Jalovec and Groth, and there he had told them about illegal 
weapons at 2337.
Montgomery: “Did you draw them a floor plan?”
Mitchell: “I had notes with me, yes, I do not recall them taking notes, 
whatsoever.”
 
Montgomery: “Did you show this outline to Groth and Jones?”
Mitchell: “They could have seen it, yes. I took it over there with the 
purpose of disseminating it to them. They didn’t appear that interested 
in it.” 
Montgomery: “Did you show it to them?”
Mitchell: “I believe so.” 
Montgomery: “Did you discuss the possibility of conducting a raid?”
Mitchell: “We never discussed a raid in the five to seven meetings. . . . 
I did tell Jalovec that Fred Hampton, Deborah Johnson, Louis Truelock, 
and Doc Satchel frequented the apartment.”
By agreement, I interrupted Montgomery’ s cross-examination and 
asked Mitchell if he had found the missing memo.
Mitchell: “That document was found last night. It’ s being prepared. It 
will be ready sometime this afternoon.” 
How convenient. Just after he expects to leave the witness stand. 
As Mitchell was stepping down, I asked him to tell us where he’ d 
found the document. 
Perry
: “Now just a minute. Let’ s put him on the witness stand and get 
it all.” 
Perry was hoping to help Mitchell but had inadvertently volunteered 
him to answer questions on the missing document under oath.
Mitchell [back on the witness stand ]: “I have found the document, 
yes.”
Haas: “In what file did you locate it?” 
Mitchell: “In the file captioned ‘Powell.’”
Haas: “Was a copy of that document in the Black Panther file?” 
The Deluge
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   247 7/29/09   1:29:56 PM


--- PAGE 273 ---
2
Injustice on Trial
Mitchell knew the FBI had been ordered to produce that file for us 
in discovery.
Mitchell: “I did not find it there.” 
A clever nonanswer.
I asked Mitchell why it took him so long to find the Rockford docu-
ment. He testified that he’ d looked for days in the Panther file but admit-
ted his search did not include the time period of the Rockford incident. 
Mitchell said he then switched to the much smaller Lincoln Powell file 
and found it in half an hour. We had never asked for the Lincoln Powell 
file; in fact we had never heard the name, so finding it there would not 
expose that the FBI had withheld files Perry ordered. 
In the afternoon, Kanter sheepishly admitted that copies of the 
document were also in the files titled “Hampton,” “O’Neal,” and “Black 
Panther.” “Well, why were they not produced?” Judge Perry asked. 
Kanter: “I must apologize, because it has been my understanding. . . . 
We will take a recess and bring up the whole file.”
 Christenbury: “I would now, for what it’ s worth, apologize to the court 
and to counsel. We did misunderstand the court’ s order. . . . I apologize 
for the inconvenience it has caused the court and other counsel.”
Court recessed until 9:30 
a.m. the next day.
“Sorry we concealed all those documents for so long and told every-
one they didn’t exist,” I mimicked the straight-laced Christenbury in 
the hallway when Flint and I left court.
“That’ s OK,” Flint replied in the same sarcastic tone. “Just because we 
are in the third month of the trial and may have to start all over, it’ s just 
a slight inconvenience.” 
“Seriously, what are we going to do if they produce a lot more mate-
rial?” I asked.
“I don’t know,” he replied. “We’ve been fighting so long to get the 
documents. Now I can’t see how we can use them effectively without a 
long delay.” 
The next morning, Flint, Montgomery, Dennis (just back from Attica), 
and I waited in court. Maybe, just maybe, the FBI was going to come 
clean. I had alerted the media and they were present with sketchpads 
in hand. 
Twenty minutes later both doors at the rear of the court swung open. 
I heard the rattle of wheels rolling down the corridor outside. A gray 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   248 7/29/09   1:29:56 PM


--- PAGE 274 ---
2
cart emerged through the doorway, pushed by Assistant U.S. Attorney 
Kwoka. Its two shelves were packed with black bound notebooks. There 
was more rattling from the hallway, and Christenbury entered push-
ing an identical cart, followed by Kanter wheeling a third one. The pro-
cession continued down the aisle of the courtroom past the spectator 
benches, past the attorneys’ tables, and came to rest at the podium 
before the judge.
Kanter stood next to the carts, looking up at Perry like a disobedi-
ent puppy. A quick count showed fifty 500-page volumes from the 
Hampton and O’Neal files, which should have been produced long ago 
and certainly in January. The remainder, another 150 volumes, held 
Black Panther Party files. The parts of those relating to our clients were 
supposed to have been produced. FBI Agent Deaton testified that Piper 
and Kanter told him what to turn over. Let the jury hear that, I thought. 
Concealing evidence is evidence of guilt.
How could we possibly read, catalog, and use this material effectively 
two months into the trial? It’s impossible. It can’t be done. It’s outrageous. 
We need to start all over and they need to pay for their concealment.
With the press staring at him and the withheld evidence before him, 
Perry repeated that these were documents he had previously ordered 
produced. Flint said it would take us six months to read and catalogue 
the material after the FBI copied and excised it, not to mention another 
several weeks asking the FBI defendants in depositions if they had read 
or authored the reports. In a quick huddle at a court break, Flint sug-
gested that we ask for sanctions and a mistrial. Montgomery was hesi-
tant to start all over, so we agreed to pursue sanctions only.
Flint walked to the podium. “Your Honor, we want to file a motion for 
sanctions and contempt against the federal defendants and their law-
yers for deliberately concealing this evidence and for violations of the 
discovery rules. We also want to question Kanter on his role in keeping 
the documents secret.” 
Perry looked befuddled for a moment, shifting through the papers 
on his desk as if the answer were there. Then suddenly he regained his 
composure and declared, “It was a mistake, negligence on the part of 
the FBI. 
“Call the jury in,” he told the clerk, before we could respond.
“Hard to overlook one hundred and fifty volumes,” Flint replied.
The Deluge
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   249 7/29/09   1:29:56 PM


--- PAGE 275 ---
20
Injustice on Trial
After the FBI lawyers had removed the carts, the jury was brought in. 
“There’ s been a misunderstanding of my rulings,” Perry told them. “We 
are going to recess this case for another week. You should blame me, 
not any of the parties or their lawyers.”
The jurors shook their heads, annoyed and puzzled at another delay. 
They would have found out the reason that afternoon, but Judge Perry 
had ordered them not to read the papers. “Government Caught Hiding 
Thousands of Files,” one of the headlines ran. Our jurors were among 
the few adults in Chicago who were never informed that the FBI had 
been caught hiding evidence. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   250 7/29/09   1:29:57 PM


--- PAGE 276 ---
21
O’Neal Gets a Bonus
 
D
uring the week of recess,  the FBI delivered a batch of documents 
from the newly produced files in court every day. Some showed 
O’Neal tracking Hampton’ s every move. Others showed O’Neal involved 
in criminal activities. 
On April 8, during a recess, Flint and I were scanning the newest 
ones. I stopped short and reread a one-page document. “Flint, this is 
unbelievable. It’ s what we’ve been waiting for!” I said, unable to con-
tain my excitement. I thought we had them at last. I handed the sheet 
to Flint. It was a one-page airtel, or air telegram, from Piper to Hoover 
dated December 11, a week following the raid. The document sought a 
“special payment” to O’Neal because
he provided a detailed inventory of the weapons and also a detailed floor 
plan of the apartment at 2337 W . Monroe . . . to local authorities. This 
information was not available from any other source and proved to be of 
tremendous value in that it subsequently saved injury and possible death 
to police officers participating in a raid at the address on the morning of 
12/4/69. The raid was based on the information furnished by informant. 
It is felt that this information is of considerable value in consideration of 
a special payment to informant.
The document was an admission that O’Neal, not Groth’ s supposed 
informant, was the source of information for the warrant and the raid. 
What was particularly haunting was Piper’ s cold assessment that a 
bonus was due the informant because of his role in Fred and Mark’ s 
deaths and that local FBI agents were claiming credit for the murder-
ous raid. In the same pile with Piper’ s bonus request we found a sim-
ilar memo urging a reward for O’Neal from Roy Mitchell, as well as an 
FBI memo approving the bonus. In another newly produced docu-
35
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   251 7/29/09   1:29:57 PM


--- PAGE 277 ---
22
Injustice on Trial
ment Mitchell described O’Neal as a “counterintelligence agent,” which 
Mitchell had repeatedly denied on the witness stand. 
“We should have had these when Mitchell was testifying,” Flint said. 
We have to get sanctions.” But Perry refused to grant us even a hearing 
on the sanctions motion we filed. He accused us of “filing motions in 
the newspapers” and stalling. He said he would consider the sanctions 
motion at the end of the trial—when it would no longer be a viable rem-
edy. The FBI was allowed to benefit from its secreting of documents. We 
were the ones he punished. Perry withdrew his agreement to allow us to 
recall Mitchell and ordered, “Call your next witness.” 
 “The plaintiffs will call Robert Piper,” I said angrily. Because we were 
still getting documents, I asked Perry to postpone my questioning of 
Piper.
The Court: “I’m telling you, you’ve got a witness on the stand and we 
will not hear anything until you proceed with this witness. Proceed.”
Haas: “We would like to have the evidence before we proceed with 
the witness.”
The Court: “Proceed, Mr. Haas. You’ve had thousands of documents.”
When Piper took the witness stand, he still wore that smirk he’ d worn 
at his deposition, but he was no longer shielded by the judge’ s orders 
prohibiting questions about COINTELPRO. When I confronted Piper 
with his paper trail, he admitted to most of the facts that outlined the 
conspiracy. It just took a long time. Seven weeks in fact, much of which 
was spent at nights as well as in court reviewing the remainder of the 
many volumes of files the FBI had finally produced. 
During Piper’ s testimony the FBI produced two new volumes of in-
structions to FBI agents that bore Piper and Johnson’ s signatures. These 
directed FBI agents to “destroy what the BPP stands for,” “escalate actions 
against the BPP ,” and “destroy the Breakfast for Children Program.” 
Piper testified that Mitchell had immediately notified him when 
Fred and Deborah moved into 2337 and that he was passing on infor-
mation about guns in the apartment to Hanrahan’ s office and the Gang 
Intelligence Unit. Piper passed the information to Marlin Johnson 
because he knew Johnson was “vitally interested in the Panthers and 
Fred Hampton.” A far different image than the aloofness Johnson 
tried to project. Piper testified that Mitchell told him on December 1 
or 2 that the weapons were being returned to Hampton’ s apartment. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   252 7/29/09   1:29:57 PM


--- PAGE 278 ---
2
Nevertheless, Piper called GIU head Thomas Lyons and told him that 
the Panthers were expecting a raid. Lyons assured Piper the GIU would 
not go ahead. 
Piper never informed either the ATF or FBI headquarters that there 
were illegal weapons in the apartment, which would have required 
them to take action themselves. Instead, he approved Mitchell’ s meet-
ings with Groth and Jalovec to set up the raid and provide them the floor 
plan. On December 3, Piper initialed the COINTELPRO status report 
to Hoover stating the Chicago FBI office expected a “positive course of 
action” to result.
Later, when the federal grand jury met, Piper provided the case 
agent, Treviranus, with negative information about the Panthers and 
Fred Hampton. He never divulged the existence of the floor plan or that 
the FBI initiated the raid or was the source for the search warrant. 
With Plaintiff’ s Exhibit 83—the document memorializing his request 
for O’Neal’ s bonus—in my hand, I approached Piper. I asked him if he’ d 
authored that document. “Yes,” he had. And “yes,” O’Neal had provided 
the information for the raid and “yes” O’Neal deserved a bonus for the 
results. Piper remained unabashedly proud of the FBI’ s contribution 
and enjoyed his opportunity to take credit publicly. In what may or may 
not have been a slip of the tongue, Piper’ s exuberance got away from 
him, and he described the raid as a “success .” I stopped questioning 
him for a moment to contemplate the best response.
“You consider it a success because Hampton and Clark were killed, 
don’t you?” A pause. Piper’ s lawyers must have been afraid Piper’ s arro-
gance might get him to agree, so they intervened and objected to pre-
vent him from answering. I made another effort to confront him.
Haas: “Now, Mr. Piper, was it your belief in 1969 that because the 
Panthers were a threat, that you and the FBI had a right to violate their 
constitutional rights?”
The Court: “Objection sustained. [None had been made.] That is not 
the type of question to ask the witness, and you know it, counsel. It is 
time you begin to ask correct questions. The difficulty of those ques-
tions is that it infers an answer—if the question goes unanswered, it is 
something the jury may hold against the witness.”
Haas: “Your Honor, this is cross-examination of a defendant, I 
believe.”
O’Neal Gets a Bonus
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   253 7/29/09   1:29:58 PM


--- PAGE 279 ---
2
Injustice on Trial
The Court: “This is cross-examination. Will you shut up?”
Haas: “Well, I object to the court’ s remarks, Your Honor.”
The Court: “Objection noted and overruled. Just one more quip from 
you, and I will hold you in contempt.”
All this took place in front of the jury. At the first recess I responded.
Haas: “Yes, Your Honor, I am forced, I think, because of Your Honor’ s 
comments, to move for a mistrial based on what happened this morn-
ing. I believe we were . . .”
The Court: “Motion denied.”
By June, after six months  of trial, only three defendants had testified, 
although we had uncovered thousands of secreted files. I feared our jury 
was hopelessly bored and confused by the endless delays and objec-
tions as well as prejudiced by Perry’ s hostile and disdainful remarks. 
“Panther Trial Slowed by Discovery of Documents” one news story ran, 
describing the “twenty shelf feet of files” the U.S. attorneys had wheeled 
into court. Jim Montgomery was beginning to leave courtroom duties 
to Flint and me as he tended to his own criminal caseload. He saw the 
trial becoming endless. 
The routine was wearing all of us down. My one regular escape from 
the pressure of the courtroom was yoga. I had learned the ten postures 
of hatha yoga, beginning with the sun salutations and ending with the 
headstand. In the morning and sometimes after court at the beach, 
when it was warm, I would look at the world upside down for five min-
utes, my head and forearms supporting my body. The world looked dif-
ferent, sometimes clearer. I always finished refreshed. I also was what 
people considered a polar bear in Chicago. I swam in Lake Michigan 
most of the year. By June, I swam off the rocks at Lincoln Park and had 
most of the still-freezing lake to myself.
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   254 7/29/09   1:29:58 PM


--- PAGE 280 ---
2
December 4, Revisited 
T
he seven raid survivors testified during the summer, from June 
until September, most of it during lengthy cross-examination. Doc 
Satchel walked to the witness stand hunched over at the waist from his 
bullet wounds and resulting surgeries and stitches. Slight, with a boyish 
face, he had left his premed courses at the University of Illinois to join 
the Panthers and eventually headed up the medical clinics. 
On the night of the raid, Doc had been asleep in the front bed-
room when the police came to the front door. “I was awakened by 
what sounded like a knock on the door,” he testified. “I began to listen 
to become alert to what was going on, when I heard gunshots. They 
sounded as if they came from the front of the apartment.”
Doc tried to wake the others in the first bedroom, yelling for them to 
get down as more shots were fired. He was lying on the floor himself in 
the dark between two beds when he heard “a rapid succession of shots 
and noticed that I was hit several times, and I hollered in agony and I 
heard them [Verlina and Blair] holler in agony also. From the doorway 
a voice said, ‘We got ’em, we got ’em.’” 
Doc testified that he yelled, “I’m shot, and I can’t move.” Then he 
heard, “If Black Panthers kill police, police will kill Black Panthers.” Doc 
was ordered to stand up and walk out. When he stumbled, the police 
told him “Get up, Nigger.” He dragged himself up and hobbled out. The 
police pushed everyone into the kitchen. One police officer told Doc, 
“You won’t be able to have kids now,” and the other officers laughed.
Doc was shot four times from knee to stomach. His colon was torn 
up and was partially removed. During his month-long stay in the hospi-
tal, he was handcuffed to his bed twenty-four hours a day. 
“Would you show the jury the scar from your bullets wounds?” 
Montgomery asked. Doc raised his shirt to expose an eight-inch gray 
36
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   255 7/29/09   1:29:58 PM


--- PAGE 281 ---
2
Injustice on Trial
and scarlet scar running from his lower chest to his abdomen. It was 
crisscrossed with stitch marks. At Montgomery’ s request, Doc pointed 
to the entry points of the two .45-caliber bullets that struck his stomach. 
The pain, the operations, and his lengthy rehabilitation had destroyed 
his former buoyancy.
Harold Bell, with his large muscular body, looked stiff and uncom-
fortable as he took the stand. He testified that he woke up in the liv-
ing room to the police knock and ran to the back to wake up Fred. “I 
shook the chairman, I shook him twice, and he just looked up like he 
was sleeping, just raised his head up and opened his eyes and his head 
went back down.” 
Unable to rouse the chairman, Harold crouched in the corner of the 
bedroom to avoid being shot. A police officer stuck a shotgun into the 
room, saw Harold, and pulled him out. Harold was pushed to the floor 
on his stomach, and his hands were cuffed behind him. 
Harold testified that the police continued shooting from the kitchen 
until Truelock called out from the bedroom that there was a pregnant 
girl in there. During a pause, Truelock and Deborah came out from the 
bedroom. Harold heard a raider say, “That’ s Fred Hampton.” He saw 
Gloves Davis in the kitchen, and he and another officer fired into Fred’ s 
bedroom. After more shots, he heard a raider ask, “Is he dead?” Then 
Harold heard, “Bring him out,” followed by the thud of something hit-
ting the floor. Harold later saw Fred lying in the dining room, blood 
dripping from his head. 
Harold described the raid as similar to military operations he had 
witnessed in Vietnam because the raiders moved to a series of vantage 
points under covering fire, quickly gaining control of the apartment. 
There was no cross-examination. 
In late summer, Louis Truelock, whose testimony was the most prob-
lematic of the plaintiffs, was due to testify. Not only did he have a sub-
stantial criminal record, he had made the sworn statement to my law 
partners claiming he’ d fired a pump rifle at the police as he ran down the 
hallway to rouse Fred. This statement had been the focus of Hanrahan’ s 
and the raiders’ criminal defense.
We had no choice but to call Truelock. If we didn’t, the defendants 
would. Even without his testimony, they could put his statement in as 
evidence of an admission. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   256 7/29/09   1:29:59 PM


--- PAGE 282 ---
2
 Flint was going to be away during Truelock’ s testimony. I had no one 
to watch my back. Montgomery only came to court occasionally now. 
Herbert Reid’ s presence in the courtroom was becoming less frequent 
and he seldom spoke. Herb had signed on for a long trial, but we were 
in our ninth month with no end in sight. His energy waned. 
When Truelock came to my office for his trial preparation, his clothes 
were disheveled, and it was clear he was living on the streets. His hair 
and beard had changed from salt-and-pepper to mostly white, and he 
looked haggard. Still I felt a bond from my first interview, and he trusted 
me. 
 “It ain’t gonna be fun,” I told him. “They’re going to grill you about 
the statement. You remember what that was like in Hanrahan’ s trial.”
“Yeah, and Sears [the special prosecutor] didn’t try to protect me. He 
didn’t object to any of their questions.”
“Well, I’ll do my best to stop them,” I said,” but the judge doesn’t 
listen to me.”
“You know Jeff, I never picked up a gun. I told you that the first day. 
Later, when people were saying I was the snitch, I wanted it to look like 
I had done something to save Fred.”
I believed Truelock, because of what he told me originally and 
because there was no pump rifle, bullets, shell casings, or resulting bul-
let holes that matched a shot from the hallway. 
“So keep it simple,” I said. “Just tell the jury what you told me when 
we first talked and what you said today about the statement. We can 
handle the truth.” He relaxed a little. 
Truelock told me that it was primarily O’Neal who accused him of set-
ting Fred up. Before that they had been friends, and O’Neal frequently 
bragged to him about burglaries and robberies he committed. When 
Fred saw O’Neal carrying a gun, he ordered him to stop and changed 
his role from bodyguard to errand runner. Truelock said O’Neal once 
pulled out a satchel full of explosives and told him they could use them 
to blow up an armory and get some guns. He had putty, blasting caps, 
and plastic bottles filled with some kind of liquid, which he said was an 
explosive. 
In court Truelock testified that he woke to a knock followed by voices 
and then gunshots. He ran down the hall to wake Fred. 
“Did you have anything in your hands?” I asked. 
December , Revisited
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   257 7/29/09   1:29:59 PM


--- PAGE 283 ---
2
Injustice on Trial
“No!” He said he couldn’t wake Fred up and after a lot of shooting, he 
called out that there was a “pregnant sister” in the room. After Deborah 
and he were pulled out and placed in the kitchen, he heard more gun-
shots and later saw Fred’ s body lying on the door. He had to walk around 
it when he was led out the front. He was then taken to the Wood Street 
station.
“ And what happened there?” 
“Objection,” Coghlan intervened.
“Sustained,” Perry responded. The judge wasn’t about to let Truelock 
testify about his overhearing the Wood Street police say, “Rush is 
next.”
I asked Truelock if he ever told anyone from my office that he had 
fired at the police. He said he had. It was because some Panthers, par-
ticularly O’Neal, were labeling him an informant. Truelock then started 
to describe O’Neal’ s provocative role in the party. The objections started 
flying from all the defendants’ lawyers that O’Neal’ s illegal acts were 
“irrelevant.” Perry excused the jury and sustained their objections. 
The next day I questioned Truelock outside the presence of the jury. 
“Panther Misdeeds Urged by FBI Spy” (the UPI headlines) went out 
all over the country and even made it to the Atlanta papers. The news 
stories contained Truelock’ s description of O’Neal’ s efforts to induce 
Panthers to commit burglaries and robberies and use explosives. Our 
jury never heard it. 
 One morning in September, when Truelock was scheduled to con-
tinue testifying, he wasn’t in court. Perry came out on the bench and 
asked where the witness was. I had to admit I didn’t know. Three phone 
calls later, I had no new information. I told the judge I had not been able 
to reach Truelock, perhaps he was sick. Could we recess for the day? 
Sensing blood, the defendants’ attorneys said if they were not allowed 
to finish cross-examination, his direct testimony should be stricken, 
his statement admitted, and the jury should be informed that he had 
refused to return. I begged for time. Judge Perry gave me until the next 
morning to produce Truelock or get proof he was dead or in a hospital 
somewhere.
It was 11:00 
a.m. on a very hot day when I went out to find Truelock. 
PLO had no investigative staff. I drove out to the West Side to the last 
address I had for Truelock and climbed to the third floor and knocked. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   258 7/29/09   1:30:00 PM


--- PAGE 284 ---
2
A middle-aged woman in a housedress came to the door. “Does Louis 
Truelock live here?” I asked.
“Sometimes,” she said, “but he didn’t come home last night.”
“Do you know where I can find him? I’m his lawyer and he needs to 
come to court.”
“Sometimes he stays at his daughter’ s house, but she ain’t got a 
phone.” The woman described the building where his daughter lived, 
several blocks away. 
I was sweating as I entered the unlocked front door of a dilapidated 
three-story building. There was a strong urine smell in the stairway. This 
is the pits, I thought. Here I am trying to find my client, who was getting 
roasted on the witness stand, to coax him back. At the top of the stairs, I 
knocked on the apartment door. No answer. Then I heard some rustling 
noises inside. Another long wait. “Who’ s there?” a woman’ s voice finally 
asked.
“It’ s Jeff Haas. I’m Louis Truelock’ s lawyer. He needs to come to 
court.”
A few minutes later Truelock appeared, red-eyed and half awake but 
a welcome sight.
“Let’ s go have some breakfast,” I suggested. 
“Man, I can’t take their shit no more,” he said over scrambled eggs 
and toast at a nearby diner.
“You gotta hang in there, not only for you but for the Hamptons and 
Mrs. Clark.”
“You know I’m telling the truth, but the judge don’t want to hear it,” 
he said.
I explained that if he didn’t finish, they would argue from his state-
ment that he fired at the police. “Only you can testify that the state-
ment’ s not true.”
“OK,” he said. “I’ll be there.”
“Do you want to stay with me tonight, or I can get you a motel 
room?”
“No, I’m straight.” 
We agreed I’ d pick him up at his daughter’ s for court at eight the next 
morning.
I spent the rest of my day worrying whether Truelock would be there. 
But he was, and even wore a clean shirt. After breakfast I drove him 
December , Revisited
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   259 7/29/09   1:30:00 PM


--- PAGE 285 ---
20
Injustice on Trial
to court. I mumbled something to Perry about Truelock having a bad 
headache. Perry admonished him to be on time. Truelock resumed tes-
tifying. He didn’t excel on cross, but he endured. We had just dodged a 
bullet.
When Jim Montgomery called Deborah to the witness stand, a hush 
descended on the courtroom. She was a large woman with a big Afro. 
She identified six-year-old Fred Hampton Jr., sitting with Iberia and 
Francis, as her and Fred’ s son. She testified that he often asked about 
his father, whom Deborah spoke of with reverence, elongating the 
name “Fre-ed.” She fell in love with him the first time she saw him. They 
had moved into 2337 West Monroe in October, but Fred didn’t always 
sleep there because of security concerns. Sometimes he stayed at his 
parents’ house in Maywood. Fred never used drugs and only “once or 
twice” had she seen him with a beer. When Deborah found out she was 
pregnant, Fred wanted them to be together and raise their child. They 
talked about marriage.
On December 3, they went to bed after midnight. Fred called his par-
ents but fell asleep on the phone. Deborah had to finish the conversa-
tion with Fred’ s sister, Dee Dee. Deborah testified she woke up to gunfire. 
Harold was shaking Fred, trying to wake him. The bullets were coming 
so fast that “the mattress was shaking . . . Fred never really woke up. He 
just raised up slowly and put his head back down.” Deborah crawled on 
top of Fred to protect him. After someone in the room yelled, “We got a 
pregnant sister in here,” the police pulled her out and made her stand 
in the kitchen. Two police entered the bedroom.
 “One of the policeman asked, ‘Is he still alive?’ I heard two shots, 
then ‘He’ s good and dead now.’” Deborah broke down in tears several 
times. She had expected she and Fred would raise their child together, 
and Fred would support them. Deborah testified that she had no blood 
on her nightgown as she was pulled out of the bedroom and did not 
see blood on Fred at that point. Montgomery uncovered the mattress, 
which had been placed in front of the jury. The top third was covered 
with dried blood. Deborah broke down crying. She said the blood was 
not there or on Fred when she left the bedroom.
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   260 7/29/09   1:30:00 PM


--- PAGE 286 ---
21
An Honest FBI Man
 
T
he autumn leaves lay wet on the ground in late October when Rob-
ert Zimmers, the FBI’ s most senior and respected firearms exam-
iner, came to Chicago. I met him at his hotel room on Lincoln Park West, 
across from the zoo. Zimmers had already told the federal grand jury 
that only one shot could have come from the Panthers. He would be a 
key witness for us. 
Zimmers was a smallish man in his sixties with a short crew cut, and 
he appeared to be a by-the-books kind of guy. But he was more person-
able than I expected. He opened his briefcase to pull out his notes and 
we got to work. Two things stood out as we discussed his findings. One 
was his objectivity in examining and testing the physical evidence and 
stating his conclusions. The other was his disdain for the sloppy work 
and false reports of the Chicago Police Crime Lab. We would later write 
in our appellate brief, “Of the government officers to become involved 
in this case, only Zimmers firmly placed his obligation to the truth 
above his fealty to ‘Law Enforcement.’” 
He showed me that Sadunas’ s false matching of the two shotgun 
shells found in the apartment to Brenda Harris’ s weapon could not 
have been an honest mistake. He compared the firing pin marks on 
those shells with the marks on shells he had test-fired from the shotgun 
the police claimed Brenda was holding. He put one of the shells found 
at the apartment under one side of a double-lens microscope and the 
shell he test-fired from Brenda’ s weapon under the other. He pulled out 
photos of the hammer marks. They were totally dissimilar. “Sadunas 
was experienced enough to see the difference. He must have yielded to 
pressure.”
We spent that evening and the next going over his examinations, 
test-firings, and each of his conclusions. By the time I put him on the 
stand, I was confident he knew his stuff and, just as important, I actually 
37
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   261 7/29/09   1:30:01 PM


--- PAGE 287 ---
22
Injustice on Trial
understood it. Zimmers was a thirty-year veteran of the FBI, and he’ d 
been selected to work on the Kennedy assassination. His credentials 
and impartiality would be difficult for government lawyers to challenge. 
Nevertheless, they had objected to his using the scale model he’ d pre-
pared for the federal grand jury until he’ d gone back to Washington with 
the scale model and redrilled several of the holes he had not originally 
made himself. To stall more, the defendants refused to stipulate that the 
weapons examined by Zimmers were the ones carried by the cops.
A point of contention throughout the trial had been whether to refer 
to the events of December 4 as a “raid,” as we would have it, or as “the 
service of a search warrant,” the terms the defendants wanted. They 
often objected when we labeled the incident a “raid,” but the defen-
dants’ attorneys often slipped and called it a “raid” themselves. 
On November 1, 1976, the defendants agreed to a stipulation that 
the shotgun Zimmers had examined and marked as RZ#51 was the one 
carried by Officer Jones “on the raid.” Two days later when I correctly 
quoted the same stipulation, Coghlan protested to Judge Perry that I 
misread the stipulation in a “deliberate, willful, and intentional attempt 
to prejudice the jury.”
Flint said we could clear up the matter quickly if we had access to the 
transcript. (We had no transcript because we could not afford the three 
dollars per page being charged for daily copy.) 
Taylor: “Judge, we want the transcript brought here.” Perry had his 
own copy.
Perry: “Keep quiet. I will fine you right now if you don’t keep quiet.”
Taylor: “You are going to make [an] error.”
Judge Perry: “Shut up and bring the jury. Be seated ladies and gen-
tlemen. Mr. Haas has deliberately and willfully misread a statement. I 
direct that you read that statement, that stipulation, correctly.”
Because I had in fact read it correctly, I explained to the judge that he 
was mistaken. 
Coghlan falsely stated the stipulation contained the words “the ser-
vice of the search warrant.” 
Judge Perry: “Now that is it.”
Taylor: “That is not the stipulation, Your Honor, I object to that.”
Judge Perry [with the jury still present]: “Just a minute. Shut up. Now 
that is the correct stipulation.”
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   262 7/29/09   1:30:01 PM


--- PAGE 288 ---
2
I couldn’t read the real stipulation without being held in contempt. I 
wasn’t going to lie and repeat Coghlan’ s incorrect stipulation. The next 
question I asked Zimmers ducked the issue and referred to the sawed-
off shotgun as “the weapon carried by Officer Jones.”
Two days later Flint and I went to the offices of Claude Youker, Perry’ s 
court reporter, to purchase the transcript. Youker ushered us into a side 
office. He said he feared “being bugged.” 
Youker was well aware of the controversy around the stipulation. 
Before the trial he had agreed to provide us transcripts on a “pay when 
you can” basis but had stopped suddenly in February. 
Youker found his stenographic notes. “You’re right. The words 
‘weapon carried on the raid’ were what they stipulated to.”
“There’ s something else,” he said, looking down. “The reason I told 
you that daily copy was three dollars per page was because Coghlan 
told me he and the other defendants’ lawyers would pay me that rate 
for each copy if I charged you the same. Normally the three dollar fee 
would be split among all the lawyers. You should be paying less than 
one dollar.” Youker told us we’ d been cut off because Coghlan found out 
he was giving us the transcript for less and he threatened to stop pay-
ing the extra. Youker also said Coghlan warned him “to keep our deal a 
secret,” and that he had been contacting him consistently to make sure 
we weren’t getting transcripts.
Not only had the higher fee kept us from daily copy, the city, county, 
and feds were paying tens of thousands of taxpayer dollars extra so we 
couldn’t afford it.
I asked Youker if he would include what he told us in an affidavit. To 
my surprise, he said he would.
When we returned to the office, we agreed Flint would write the tran-
script motion, and I’ d write the one asking Perry to correct his nasty 
remarks. The first one asked that the defendants’ lawyers be held in 
contempt and that we receive past transcripts at the cost of five cents 
per page. It further sought to inform the city council and county board 
that Coghlan’ s deal had already cost taxpayers more than one hun-
dred thousand dollars and that Coghlan and Volini’ s legal bill already 
exceeded $1.2 million. The other motion asked Perry to correct his 
“grossly prejudicial and erroneous remarks,” and declare a mistrial. 
We charged that Coghlan had read “an imaginary stipulation,” and 
An Honest FBI Man
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   263 7/29/09   1:30:01 PM


--- PAGE 289 ---
2
Injustice on Trial
Judge Perry had “accepted it as the gospel.” We tipped off the press to 
Coghlan’ s secret transcript deal and gave them copies of our motions. 
The headlines the following day were “Charge Transcript Fee Gouge in 
Panther Case,” and “New Rip-off Charge at the Panther Trial.”
As we argued the motions, Perry sat stone-faced. He ignored my 
entreaty that every day his prejudicial remarks went uncorrected, their 
harm was amplified. He gave the defendants ten days to respond to our 
motions, told Flint and me to “shut up and stop arguing,” and ordered 
me to proceed with Zimmers’ s testimony. 
I was beyond pissed off. As we returned from the lectern, Flint 
hurled his notebook and papers onto our counsel table. “Something 
like a handball serve,” is the way one reporter described it. His papers 
slid across the table and hit a water pitcher, which fell to the carpet in 
front of the empty jury box. The glass lining broke and the water spilled. 
Judge Perry looked up. 
Perry: “ All right, let the record show the conduct of both counsel in 
throwing papers around and one of them—what is it that is broken over 
there.”
Coghlan [ever the snitch]: “Sir, there is a broken glass pitcher.”
Perry: “ All right. Mr. Taylor, you did that, and you are now held in 
contempt and the court now orders you committed into the custody 
of the attorney general of the United States for a period of twenty-four 
hours and orders the marshal to take you into custody forthwith. Court 
is in recess,” said Perry as he left the courtroom. 
Flint stood there in shock, looking at the empty bench. The marshals 
let him gather his papers before they escorted him toward the lock-up.
 It wasn’t over. Out bounced Perry.
As I went to pick up the pieces of the water pitcher, Perry ordered me 
to stop and sit down. He then demanded that the jury be brought back 
into the courtroom to observe the broken pitcher. When they had been 
marched in and out, with puzzled faces, as no explanation was given, 
Perry allowed a recess for Volini to photograph the debris. Looking for 
a way around the ban on the press taking photographs in the court-
room, Perry told Volini the press “may have a copy of the picture that is 
taken,” but to make sure they “pay you for whatever it costs.” Coghlan’s 
phony accusation about us misstating the stipulation had paid off big 
time.
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   264 7/29/09   1:30:02 PM


--- PAGE 290 ---
2
Nevertheless, Zimmers’ s testimony continued, protracted but un-
shaken. He explained that when he visited the apartment he had seen 
an indentation containing gunpowder in the foyer. Zimmers testified 
that a shotgun blast fired toward the apartment from just outside and 
to the left of the front door would make the impression he saw and that 
the powder and wadding found in the impression were consistent with 
#8 shot, the type loaded only into Officer Jones’ s weapon. Zimmers had 
labeled Jones’ s shot number 1 on his diagram. 
 Zimmers testified that Groth fired through the front door into the 
living room when the door was opening and the door was also open 
when Clark’ s shot was fired. The shot from Mark Clark’ s shotgun was 
at a substantial upward angle, consistent with his weapon going off as 
Clark fell to the floor behind the door. Zimmers also stated unequiv-
ocally that the two shotgun shells Sadunas had identified as coming 
from a Panther weapon actually were fired by Officer Ciszewski, one of 
the raiders.  
Zimmers explained that if Truelock had fired a pump rifle when he 
was running down the hall, as his statement claimed, there would have 
to be resulting impact points and expended shells. There were none. 
And of course there was no pump rifle found. Similarly, if Fred Hampton 
had fired from the back bedroom, as Officer Carmody claimed, there 
would have to be expended shells in the bedroom and impact points in 
the kitchen and there were none. 
 I had Zimmers come down from the witness stand and walk over to 
his three-dimensional scale model of the apartment set up in front of 
the jury. He had constructed the model at FBI Headquarters from his 
observation of the bullet holes he’ d seen, measured, and photographed 
in the apartment. With a pointer, he demonstrated the absence of any 
impact points on the west side of the apartment or at the back door. 
These were the locations where the police had entered. It is where the 
Panther shots would have struck if they’ d fired at the police. 
Zimmers resumed the witness stand. He matched the .30-caliber 
bullet removed from Fred’ s superficial chest wound to Gloves’ s carbine. 
The two fatal entry and exit wounds in Fred’ s head could have come 
from a handgun or Gloves’ s carbine. Zimmers testified that if Fred was 
lying with his head toward the bedroom door, as everyone had placed 
him, then the two trajectories were consistent with him being shot at 
An Honest FBI Man
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   265 7/29/09   1:30:02 PM


--- PAGE 291 ---
2
Injustice on Trial
point-blank range from above and at the head of the bed or the door-
way. The fatal shots did not come through the wall. 
Zimmers refused to give credence to the raiders’ implausible theo-
ries about bullets and shotgun blasts disappearing out windows, doors, 
and into thin air, leaving no impact points or shells behind. He was so 
clear and unyielding in refuting Coghlan’ s hypothetical scenarios, Judge 
Perry intervened to tell Zimmers “not to argue the plaintiffs’ case,” and 
even told the jury Zimmers “clearly did not want to admit a mistake.”
After a particularly difficult Zimmers day, I noticed a tall, thirtyish 
woman with long brown hair and pale blue eyes sitting on our side of 
the spectator section. I had seen her a couple times before. I introduced 
myself. She said her name was Maggie Roche.
“I see they’re giving you and Flint a rough time,” she said. 
“That’ s a bit of an understatement,” I replied. “What brings you 
here?” I asked.
“I was out of town when I heard Fred Hampton was killed. I’ve been 
angry ever since that nothing was done to Hanrahan or the cops. If 
Hampton were white, they never would have killed him. Their smiles 
make me sick.” 
By this time we were walking outside in the hall. Maggie asked me 
when the informant was due to testify.
“In a couple weeks,” I said. “If you give me your number, I’ll call and 
let you know when O’Neal, that
’ s his name, hits the stand.” 
The next day I called her, and we went out to dinner at a Vietnamese 
restaurant. Over dinner I learned that Maggie was a public school 
teacher working with children with special needs.
“That’ s got to be about as tough as this job,” I said. 
“It can be, but I chose it over teaching the gifted.” 
She said that she had devoted her teaching career to working with 
those most in need and constantly had to fight against the racist poli-
cies of the Chicago school board. Fighting racism was something we 
had in common.
After a couple months of dating, I moved into Maggie’ s apart-
ment. Although she came from the same Irish Catholic background as 
Hanrahan and his lawyer Coghlan, she despised their attitudes toward 
blacks and had rebelled against similar prejudices in her own family. 
For eleven months my life had been the trial day and night. Other than 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   266 7/29/09   1:30:02 PM


--- PAGE 292 ---
2
yoga and swimming, my world had become court and the office. I was 
lucky to get an afternoon on a weekend to spend outside. It was a com-
fort and a relief to have someone to be with and talk to about the frus-
trations of court.
An Honest FBI Man
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   267 7/29/09   1:30:03 PM


--- PAGE 293 ---
2
Witness O’Neal 
nticipation grew over William O’Neal’s  imminent appearance.
  Those of us close to the Panthers wanted to see how this cocky, 
streetwise Judas would conduct himself in the courtroom. To my sur-
prise and delight, my mother came up from Atlanta to watch me ques-
tion him. She too had been following the trial.
Spectators and press filled the courtroom on November 30 as O’Neal, 
dressed in a dark conservative suit, took the witness stand. Low mur-
murs of “pig” emanated from our side of the spectator section. The 
defendants had convinced Perry to provide extra security for O’Neal, 
and a marshal was stationed next to the door where the jurors entered 
and exited. At Montgomery’ s insistence, the marshal was moved out of 
the jury’ s path.
O’Neal was calm, polite, and showed little emotion as he answered my 
preliminary questions with “yes, sir,” or “no, sir.” The FBI had prepped 
him well. “I joined the FBI because I believed in law enforcement,” 
O’Neal told the jury, even though I confronted him with his deposi-
tion testimony that he had “no other reason than money” for becom-
ing an informant. He also had conveniently forgotten that Mitchell had 
arranged for criminal charges in his car theft case to be dropped.
When I confronted O’Neal about his building an electric chair and 
wiring the office to electrocute intruders, he claimed these were done 
at the urging of Hampton and Rush. He admitted taking the Panthers 
out for target practice at a friends’ farm in Michigan, but glibly added, 
“Better they shoot at trees than police officers.” He denied entirely a 
plan to construct an airplane armed with explosives to drop on City 
Hall, and the many burglaries he carried out with Panthers Robert 
Bruce and Nathaniel Junior. Other provocative and illegal acts he didn’t 
“remember at this time, sir.”
38
A
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   268 7/29/09   1:30:03 PM


--- PAGE 294 ---
2
 O’Neal admitted meeting with Mitchell in November and testified 
that Mitchell brought with him “gruesome” photos of the two police 
officers slain that day in a shootout with former Panther Jake Winters. 
He said Mitchell requested information about the layout of Hampton’ s 
apartment, but O’Neal claimed he “didn’t know why” Mitchell wanted 
it. Concerning his next meeting with Mitchell, O’Neal testified, “I don’t 
recall providing him with a floor plan, no sir.” 
I pulled the large cardboard blow-up of the floor plan out from under 
the counsel table and put it on an easel in front of O’Neal, where the 
jury could see it. I pointed to each table, bed, desk, lamp, and dresser 
and asked O’Neal who provided the location for each item on the blow-
up. He admitted it all came from him. “ And you provided Mitchell with 
the information that this was the bed that Fred Hampton and Deborah 
Johnson slept in when they were there, didn’t you?”
 “I did,” he testified, reluctantly. By the time I had shown him every 
room, it was clear he could not have recalled so many details without 
sketching the plan himself while he was at 2337 or shortly thereafter. He 
would not have done this without Mitchell’ s request and he must have 
brought his sketch to their meeting. I asked O’Neal if later he had been 
concerned that his floor plan led to Fred’ s death. “I was curious but not 
concerned,” he said. “I think at some point I was curious, and that was 
about the extent of it.” 
After expressing such nonchalance over his responsibility for Fred’ s 
death, I was surprised when O’Neal admitted approaching Fred’ s par-
ents asking to serve as a pallbearer. “It was something I did, sir. I don’t 
recall exactly what my motivation was other than an act of condolence. 
Yes, I felt sorry. I don’t like to see anyone killed. I didn’t particularly 
appreciate that he was killed, but it did not make me feel bad.”
This ambivalent response made me more determined to probe his 
motivation. I had always been puzzled why O’Neal had cried more after 
Fred died than anyone in the Party, and why he had volunteered to be 
a pallbearer. O’Neal stuck with his claim that being a pallbearer was 
a genuine act of condolence. His ability to get into the roles and even 
the feelings of both the informant-provocateur as well as the enthusi-
astic Panther is what made him so effective and so hard to recognize—a 
moral eunuch and a schizophrenic. 
Witness O’Neal
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   269 7/29/09   1:30:03 PM


--- PAGE 295 ---
20
Injustice on Trial
I probed O’Neal’ s strange psyche and lack of memory for several court 
days. December 4 went by with a larger-than-usual gathering at the 
Hampton home but with no acknowledgment of the day’ s significance 
in the courtroom. After the noon recess on Wednesday, December 8, 
we returned to court, but there was no O’Neal. “ A serious problem has 
arisen concerning the health of a member of the witness’ s family, who 
is now hospitalized. It has been necessary to allow the witness to return 
home for the serious matter,” U.S. Attorney Kanter reported.
Perry accepted Kanter’ s representations without challenge and told 
the jury a sudden emergency “not connected to our case” had caused 
the witness to be unavailable. 
“I think O’Neal is holding them up for more money,” I said to Flint 
after O’Neal’ s third day as a no-show. 
“He’ s already been getting eleven hundred dollars per month, plus 
another eighty-five hundred since July for what they call ‘trial atten-
dance,’” Flint said. “How much does he want?” 
“Enough to have a new suit to wear every day on the witness stand,” 
I replied. O’Neal had worn seven different suits, all well tailored, dark, 
conservative, and expensive. “He makes you look pretty shabby.” 
“Just ’cause your mother’ s in town and bought you a new suit doesn’t 
exactly make you a clothes horse,” Flint shot back. Indeed, when O’Neal 
had failed to appear on Wednesday, my mother took me across State 
Street to Marshall Field’ s and bought me a charcoal suit. “Your outfit 
shouldn’t detract from your cross-examination,” she said. My mother 
had attended two years of law school and was both sharp and critical. I 
accepted her comment as a compliment to my legal skills.
By Monday my mother had returned to Atlanta. I was wearing the 
charcoal suit when O’Neal reappeared. We demanded written proof of 
O’Neal’ s emergency, and Kanter became more vague in his explana-
tions of O’Neal’ s absence and refused. Ultimately, Perry denied us the 
documentation and ordered me not to question O’Neal on the reason 
for his absence.
O’Neal was on the witness stand for another week. He came back 
more prepared, probably wealthier as well. He admitted meeting with 
Kanter and Coghlan and speaking with Mitchell during his absence, 
furthering our suspicions that he wanted more money.
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   270 7/29/09   1:30:04 PM


--- PAGE 296 ---
21
 O’Neal insisted that Mitchell convinced him he had no role in set-
ting up the raid. 
“Wasn’t what Mitchell told you a lie?” I asked.
After a pause O’Neal responded, “That is possible.” He admitted he 
“may have heard that [Mitchell passed the floor plan on to the raiders] 
before today.” When I asked him what other uses a floor plan would 
serve besides facilitating a raid, he answered, “The building depart-
ment used them.” 
The most emotion O’Neal showed was when he whispered “fuck 
you” to Flint and me after he descended from the witness stand and 
walked past our table. 
Witness O’Neal
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   271 7/29/09   1:30:04 PM


--- PAGE 297 ---
22
The Shooters 
S
ergeant Daniel Groth had testified at so many legal proceedings and 
press conferences that there were major inconsistencies he could 
not reconcile. This was partly because the theory of the defense had 
changed. Originally the raiders claimed they did not know that they were 
raiding a Panther apartment. Later, when indicted, they tried to justify 
being so heavily armed and firing so many shots by asserting they had 
detailed foreknowledge of the dangerousness of Hampton and the other 
Panthers at the apartment. Groth’ s lawyers’ strategy was to have him 
recall as few details as possible and then harass Flint when he confronted 
Groth with his prior testimony. Groth was Flint’ s first major witness.
Groth testified he “could not remember” being told by his informant 
that it was a Panther crib, or that weapons came and went there. When 
Flint read his prior testimony to refresh his recollection, his standard 
answer was “No, that doesn’t refresh my recollection.” When Flint asked 
him if his memory had been better when he gave his prior testimony, 
often within days of the incident, Groth responded cutely, “I don’t know 
that it is or not.” When Flint then attempted to read the prior testimony 
as a statement of a party or to impeach his feigned lack of memory, 
Witkowski, a Coghlan wannabe, would consistently argue that the prior 
testimony was not impeaching and move that what was read be struck. 
Three other defense lawyers would echo his objections. The result was 
that every ounce of information Groth gave up took ten times longer 
than necessary. The jury was getting annoyed and bored and Flint was 
increasingly frustrated.
Taylor [referring to Groth’s former testimony]: “You sketched out a 
rough draft of the floor plan of the apartment, did you not?”
Groth: “I don’t recall that I did.”
Taylor: “Do you recall that you did not?”
Groth: “No, sir.”
39
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   272 7/29/09   1:30:04 PM


--- PAGE 298 ---
2
Taylor: “You numbered those rooms, didn’t you.”
Groth: “ As I sit here now, I can’t recall that I did.”
Groth had previously testified that he told Hanrahan that Hampton 
had a .45 and that he showed Hanrahan the search warrant. In court he 
could not recall this. In his deposition he said Hanrahan had approved 
the raid plan, but in court when Flint confronted him with his prior 
statement, Witkowski objected, and Perry sustained the objection.
Flint, who had indexed all of Groth’ s statements, shook his head in 
disgust as Groth’ s lawyers and Perry protected his lack of recall. Adding 
to his pique, on his first question to Groth about his alleged informant, 
Groth responded he could not answer because of instructions from his 
attorneys and “because of a promise to his informant.”  This was the 
first time that Groth had mentioned this “promise.” It smelled like a 
Coghlan twist to win the jury’ s sympathy. 
Flint asked more questions to probe whether Groth had an infor-
mant. Perry intervened, “The identity of the informant is not relevant 
anymore because the reliability has been fully established by the facts 
of the case that the weapons described were found there.” 
I jumped up and cited a Supreme Court case that said items found in 
the search could not prove reliability for the search warrant, but Perry 
ignored me. 
Flint kept at it. “You knew Roy Mitchell was Jalovec’ s reliable infor-
mant. Did you have an informant?” 
Perry: “I will terminate your questioning if you don’t proceed and 
don’t come back to it.”
Taylor: “Our position is he is hiding it.”
Perry: “I don’t care what your position is. An informant has the right 
to protect his family, even if he is dead.” 
I had to chuckle at this twisted bit of legal reasoning and newly found 
right. I still managed to reply, “That’ s not what the law says. We don’t 
even know if he has a family.”
Taylor: “You didn’t have an informant, did you, Mr. Groth and still 
don’t?”
Groth: “That is a total untruth.”
Taylor: “Well, who is he?”
As the defense lawyers rose to protest, Perry ordered, “Objection sus-
tained. I am terminating your examination of this witness.”
The Shooters
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   273 7/29/09   1:30:05 PM


--- PAGE 299 ---
2
Injustice on Trial
Flint was allowed to continue only after an apology and a promise 
that he would avoid challenging Groth about the existence or identity 
of his informant. 
Groth eventually recalled that he knew it was a Panther apartment 
where Fred spent many nights, that he told his men that Fred slept with 
a .45 near him, and that his informant gave him a description of the 
apartment. 
Montgomer
y asked the last questions. Groth had originally testified 
that Brenda fired at him from the southeast corner of the living room. 
What Zimmers had made clear in his testimony and what the model 
demonstrated was that a shot from the southeast corner would have 
had to strike a living room wall or door and leave impact points, and 
none were found. So now Groth claimed Brenda moved.
Montgomery read Groth his testimony at the coroner’ s inquest.
Question: “Where was Brenda Harris when she fired the shot?” 
Answer: “In the very southeast corner of the living room. Yes sir, she 
was in a semisitting position which is the position she held throughout 
the time I was in the apartment.” 
With a straight face, Coghlan rose and objected, arguing this testi-
mony was not impeaching. Perry declared, “Overruled.” 
Finally, Montgomery asked Groth if he was familiar with the Chicago 
police regulation that stated, “The following practices are specifically 
forbidden: firing into buildings or through doors when the person fired 
at is not clearly visible.” Groth, who had fired through the front door 
and who directed Gorman and Davis to stitch the living room wall, 
claimed he was not. 
Edward Carmody was the only officer to enter from the rear and fire a 
gun of the caliber that could have caused bullet holes of the size found 
in Fred’ s head. We believed he was the officer who shot Fred from inside 
the doorway to Fred’ s bedroom. The people in the back of the apart-
ment testified that they heard a thump shortly after hearing shots and 
then saw Carmody dragging Fred’ s body out. Carmody admitted he had 
pulled Fred’ s body off the bed and into the dining room. 
Right after the raid, Carmody had told a TV reporter that as soon as 
he entered the apartment, Fred Hampton fired at him three times with 
a .45 from the rear bedroom and that another shot was fired at him 
from there a few moments later when he was in the kitchen. Carmody’ s 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   274 7/29/09   1:30:05 PM


--- PAGE 300 ---
2
description was the basis of Hanrahan’ s claim that Fred had shot at the 
police. It was clear from Zimmers’ s model that from Carmody’ s loca-
tion—either at the back door or in the kitchen—the dining room wall 
blocked any view of the back bedroom. At the federal grand jury, where 
Zimmers’ s model was on view, Carmody admitted his earlier story was 
a lie. “You didn’t see any shots come from the bedroom, sir,” I said, “not 
the one where Hampton was found, no one could shoot from the rear 
bedroom to the kitchen door?” 
He again admitted during my cross-examination that he never saw 
Hampton fire at him but now claimed he’ d never told anyone that.
In his court testimony, Carmody denied shooting anyone. But in his 
firearms use report, mysteriously never produced for the federal grand 
jury, Carmody indicated he had “critically wounded” someone. Next to 
the inquiry “How many feet were you from your assailant or the person 
you wounded?” he put a question mark. 
“ And is the reason you put the question mark in there, sir, that you 
didn’t want to put in the two feet away you were from Fred Hampton’ s 
head when you fired your shot?” 
I’ve never seen a trial where the prosecutor doesn’t confront the 
defendant with the criminal act he is charged with, but my question 
upset Perry. Before Carmody could respond to me, Perry defended him: 
“There is no evidence that would warrant that question and the jury is 
instructed to disregard it.” 
I protested, “This was cross-examination.” 
I asked Carmody if he knew Fred was dead when he dragged him out. 
“I didn’t know,” he answered. 
“Did he do anything that made him appear alive?” I asked. 
“He didn’t do anything to appear dead,” he snapped back sarcastically . 
“Did you do anything to determine if Fred was alive?” I asked. 
“No,” he replied. 
“Did you check his breathing?” 
“Sir, I was in a hurry, no.” 
 The evidence was there. In closing argument, we could explain that 
the reason Carmody never checked to see if Fred was alive was because 
he had just shot him two times in the head and knew he was dead. 
The Shooters
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   275 7/29/09   1:30:05 PM


--- PAGE 301 ---
2
Facing Hanrahan and Jail
O
n the walkway outside the  Dirksen Federal Building, fifty picket-
ers passed out handbills with the photo of the smiling police offi-
cers carrying Fred’ s body from the apartment alongside a photo of the 
bloody mattress. The leaflets read, “Hanrahan: Wanted for Murder, Not 
for Mayor.” 
Inside the packed courtroom everyone was waiting to see the pub-
lic figure most identified with the raid. Hanrahan had lost the race for 
state’ s attorney and another for Congress. He was now, in February 
1977, a candidate for mayor in the Democratic primary running on his 
tough law-and-order stance.
Perry asked the jury if they had seen the protesters. Judy Norgle 
raised her hand and stuck up her nose disdainfully, acknowledging she 
saw them. She recoiled even further when Perry asked if it had affected 
her, but she insisted she “could be fair.” Perry warned the spectators 
not to display any handbills in court or they would be removed and 
gave orders to ban the picketing on the federal plaza, something he had 
no authority to do. “You may be causing very serious damage to the 
plaintiffs by your posters and picketing,” he warned, and threatened a 
mistrial.
I was pumped to cross-examine Hanrahan. My weariness from thir-
teen months of trial gave way to a rekindled excitement. Hanrahan was 
no doubt pumped too. The newspapers reported that his lawyers were 
seeking to restrain him and dampen his hair-trigger temper with sensi-
tivity training in a mock trial.
The first day, we were like two wrestlers testing each other. Coghlan 
interrupted at every opportunity, even though I was only asking pre-
liminary questions to elicit Hanrahan’ s history and close connection to 
Marlin Johnson and the FBI. Perry excused the jury to hear arguments 
for most objections. The Daily News reporter described the court scene 
in the afternoon paper: “The jury paraded in and out of the courtroom 
40
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   276 7/29/09   1:30:06 PM


--- PAGE 302 ---
2
like ducks in a row during arguments and objections. They have, one 
lawyer suggested, logged several miles between the jury box and the 
jury room.” 
Hanrahan admitted he and local FBI head Marlin Johnson had talked 
over two hundred times about “wide-ranging” topics but never about 
COINTELPRO. Hanrahan had stated publicly that a major part of his 
job as state’ s attorney was to “sell the police to the public . . . to maintain 
civilized safe society.” 
“Our major problem is to overcome antipolice/antigovernment 
propaganda repeatedly and regularly and professionally issued by the 
Black Panther Party. It was as a result of that this incident developed,” 
he had told the federal grand jury, implying that the raid was a neces-
sary response to Panther criticism of the police. 
“I point to the .45 automatic used by Hampton in attacking the 
police,” Hanrahan had boldly asserted at his first December press 
conference. 
I asked him who’ d informed him that Hampton attacked the police 
with a .45, and his reply was vague—one of the police officers, he said, 
but he was unable to recall a name. He also could not offer how they 
had known it was Hampton. I asked him whether, in light of the lack of 
bullet holes or expended shells from Panther weapons, he still accepted 
the police accounts. 
“I did and I do,” he said, with the same fury he had always displayed 
when his or their account was challenged. 
Hanrahan continued to claim no responsibility for the misidentified 
photos given to the Tribune for their exclusive. He could “not recall” 
who told Bob Wiedrich, the Tribune reporter, that the nail heads in the 
kitchen door were bullet holes from Hampton’ s firing or who misrepre-
sented the bathroom door to be the bedroom door. 
The next day, I asked Hanrahan for his evaluation of the investiga-
tion of his officers done by the Internal Investigation Division, the same 
one that IID chief Harry Ervanian termed a “whitewash” and the “worst 
I’ve ever seen.”
“Mr. Hanrahan, you do recognize, do you not, that the questioning of 
your officers was less thorough than the usual case at an IID investiga-
tion?” I asked.
Hanrahan sat up straight, squinted his eyes to show his indignation, 
and replied, “ As of this time I certainly do not recognize that, nor do I 
Facing Hanrahan and Jail
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   277 7/29/09   1:30:06 PM


--- PAGE 303 ---
2
Injustice on Trial
believe that.” I started to impeach Hanrahan with his prior testimony. 
The defendants objected, and I had to read Hanrahan’ s prior testimony 
with the jury excused. “ A lot of things went wrong. Admittedly I am 
not pleased with the IID investigation. I asked, I insisted upon the IID 
investigation. I am not pleased with the way it was done. I am looking 
for efficiency, for an excellent product in this building, and I don’t want 
anything less than that.” 
Perry: “That is what he said in court today.”
Volini: “Precisely.”
Haas: “Where are we? Are we in Alice in Wonderland? What the man 
has said today was that his only complaint with the IID investigation 
was the fact that the Panthers [the victims] didn’t come forward and 
make a complaint there. He has yet to—”
Perry: “Oh, counsel, he has not said a word about that today.”
Haas: “Judge we are not on the same . . . planet.
Flint had entered during the argument and was watching from the 
spectator section.
Coghlan: “May the record show that Mr. Taylor was seated in the 
spectators’ row, chortling and chuckling, while Mr. Haas was making 
his speech, and rose to address the court from the spectator section of 
the courtroom.” 
Haas: “Let the record show that Mr. Coghlan . . . is trying to incite the 
court against us.”
Perry: “Shut up.”
Haas: “Obviously successful.”
Then came the unexpected. 
Perry: “I am overruling the objection, I am going to let it be read 
and let the jury hear exactly what he said. It is the same thing he said 
today.”
Small victory—our sarcasm actually shamed the judge into letting 
us read Hanrahan’ s former testimony as impeachment, but not without 
Perry’ s belittling remark. 
Despite the physical evidence, Hanrahan remained loyal to the 
police: “I still believe the truthfulness of what the police officers have 
told me.”
“You are going to put on a firearms identification expert to confirm 
your theories?” I asked. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   278 7/29/09   1:30:06 PM


--- PAGE 304 ---
2
Objection sustained.
“ Are you aware of any report of physical evidence which supports 
your theory?”  
Objection sustained.
“
Wasn’t it because two persons had been killed in the apartment by 
police officers that it became difficult for you to continue to arouse the 
public to support the police?”
“No, it wasn’t the fact of those unfortunate killings. It was the trag-
edy of the orgy of the press and the distortion and the reckless printing 
of charges and statements by persons who had no knowledge of the 
facts.” 
 “Didn’t it occur to you that your actions stirred up peoples’ anger?” 
Objection sustained. 
I changed subjects. I asked Hanrahan if he had made a deal with 
Jerris Leonard to dismiss the Panther indictments in exchange for no 
indictment against himself and his officers. Hanrahan denied the deal, 
directly contradicting the FBI document that memorialized his agree-
ment with Leonard. When I sought to probe him about the discrepancy, 
Coghlan and Volini objected and asked for a hearing.
After listening to Coghlan and Volini’ s argument in chambers but not 
allowing Flint or me to respond, Perry came out and instructed the jury 
to disregard my last question to Hanrahan.
Haas: “Mr. Hanrahan, do you know how it was that Jerris Leonard 
knew on April 8th that the Grand Jury—”
Kanter: “Objection.”
The Court: “Now, Mr. Haas, Mr. Haas, wait a minute. You will not go 
into subject matter any further.”
Haas: “I didn’t even get to argue it. Well, Judge, the deal—”
The Court: “I said you may not go into it any further.”
Haas: “Judge, you can’t cover up the cover-up. That is part of our 
complaint, that they covered up, Judge.”
The Court: “Mr. Haas, you are now held in contempt of court for 
your last remark directed to the court, and I will prepare an order 
accordingly.”
Haas: “ All right, Judge. I think all the people who have spoken the 
truth have always ended up in contempt, and the cover-up goes on and 
on.”
Facing Hanrahan and Jail
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   279 7/29/09   1:30:07 PM


--- PAGE 305 ---
20
Injustice on Trial
The Court: “I will now turn you over to the custody of the U.S. mar-
shal for contempt, and hold you in custody until tomorrow morning at 
nine o’clock.”
Marshals grabbed me by each arm and escorted me from the court-
room by the side (prisoner) door and into the barred holding cell out-
side. As I exited, Flint yelled, “I’ll try to get you out on an appeal bond.”
A few minutes later, the U.S. marshals took me from the holding cell, 
down the prisoners’ elevator to the basement, and then by car to the 
underground receiving area of the Metropolitan Correctional Center. 
Moving from the courtroom to the MCC happened so quickly, I didn’t 
realize how angry I was until I arrived. I had decided in advance to ques-
tion Hanrahan about the deal no matter what the judge tried to do to 
block it, but still I wasn’t expecting to go to jail for it. 
The MCC is a modern, triangular-shaped, twenty-story, concrete 
building with vertical slits for windows, located two blocks from the 
courthouse. It housed mostly pretrial and presentence detainees in 
federal criminal cases. I was processed, fingerprinted, and my belong-
ings were inventoried. I was allowed to keep my briefcase after it 
was searched. I donned a heavily starched orange jumpsuit and was 
assigned the top bunk bed in a dorm with a low ceiling. It was my first 
confinement. 
What if I had to get out? I couldn’t. A tiny bit of the reality of a prison 
sentence set in, which I had only partially understood while negotiat-
ing plea agreements for my clients . I could do my twenty-four hours, 
but what about six months or a year? Did one ever overcome the trapped 
feeling when the cell door slammed shut? 
Later in the afternoon, I was telling the other prisoners, “I’m a lawyer 
and I’m here because the judge didn’t like my questions.” Before any of 
my new roommates could respond, I heard a guard call my name. I was 
led from the day room to the attorney-client cubicle. Flint was there 
with a stack of papers. He didn’t look happy. Like the stock scene from 
the movies, I sat down with my lawyer to learn my fate. 
“They denied the appeal bond.” 
“What?” I said, incredulous. 
Flint said the appellate judge who denied bond gave no reason; I 
contemplated a night in jail. I imagined a hellish work release whereby 
I was in court during the day and in the MCC at night. Flint assured me 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   280 7/29/09   1:30:07 PM


--- PAGE 306 ---
21
that we would resume the next day. He handed me my legal pad and a 
folder with my notes on Hanrahan’ s cross-examination. Flint looked as 
glum as I felt when he left the interview room.
 That night I lay 
on my bunk with my chin about six inches from 
the ceiling. This is not where cross-examination is supposed to end up , 
I thought. Exposing the deal was important enough to risk being here, 
but God knows what the jury thinks. I knew the press would be in court, 
ready to ask me questions. What could I say to the press to embarrass the 
judge? I spent more time scheming about what I would tell the report-
ers than preparing for the continued cross-examination of Hanrahan. 
At 8:00 
a.m. I was released and walked out of the MCC. Flint brought 
me my suit for a quick change at the office, and we went to court. Before 
the jury and judge entered, a Chicago Tribune reporter approached me. 
He asked what it was like to be in the MCC. I was ready: “Well, I can’t say 
much for the accommodations, but the company was more congenial 
than that of some persons in Judge Perry’ s courtroom.” My sound bite 
made the paper, and I was pleased to get revenge, even if it sounds a bit 
sophomoric today.
Perry began court with the  stern warning, “Now let me make one 
thing very clear, Mr. Haas. We are not going to have anymore Kunstler-
inspired methods of trying this case.” I felt proud to be a compared to 
the famous Conspiracy Seven lawyer but also a little nervous. Kunstler 
had ended the Conspiracy trial sentenced to four years for contempt. 
Despite the fact that I had spent a night in jail for mentioning it, 
the next day the deal between Hanrahan and Leonard was fair game. 
Hanrahan was allowed to give his fully prepped denial of there being 
any quid pro quo for his dropping charges. I was not allowed to use the 
deal document to impeach him, but at least the subject of the agreement 
was not out of bounds. After ten more days of questioning—or more 
accurately, two days of questioning and eight lengthy, long-worded, 
and self-serving days of objections and argument—Hanrahan stepped 
down. His lawyers were pleased that he hadn’t erupted, but they didn’t 
want to press their luck. They had no questions for him.
Facing Hanrahan and Jail
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   281 7/29/09   1:30:08 PM


--- PAGE 307 ---
22
Fred, the “Messiah”
 
W
e had three more witnesses. Each presented an important piece of 
the mosaic. Robert Bruce, a former Panther and friend of O’Neal, 
was light skinned with freckles. He testified in a quiet voice, almost a 
whisper. Bruce testified that O’Neal constructed an electric chair, com-
plete with wires and straps, to be used, in O’Neal’ s words, “to punish 
and deter informants.”
Bruce went on to describe the Rockford trip when O’Neal claimed 
Fred threatened to shoot a highway patrolman. Bruce said the patrol-
man was particularly courteous, he had called a tow truck when he 
saw they were stranded, and neither Fred nor anyone else threatened 
to harm him in any way. Bruce described how O’Neal was always urg-
ing him and others to commit robberies and burglaries. “To go into the 
streets and get money to live,” is what O’Neal called it. 
On the morning of December 4, Bruce saw O’Neal crying. “They 
killed Fred,” he sobbed. Later O’Neal and Bruce drove around playing 
tapes of Fred’ s speeches. 
O’Neal and Coghlan had visited Bruce after the trial started at Bruce’ s 
father’ s house and again at his job. They warned him not to testify, par-
ticularly about O’Neal’ s criminal acts. 
Elaine Brown was the leader of the national Black Panther Party in 1977 
when she came to Chicago from Oakland to testify. “We wanted Fred to 
become a national spokesperson,” she told Flint and me. “He could say 
what everyone else did, but say it better. He had the ability to move peo-
ple, whether college students or welfare women, better than anyone I 
ever heard.” Elaine told us she had visited Chicago before December 4, 
and Fred had given up his sleeping in his bed so she and Deborah, both 
of whom were pregnant, would have a place to sleep.
With her full Afro, practiced enunciation, and animated expressions, 
Elaine was an impressive witness. Her enthusiasm showed when she 
41
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   282 7/29/09   1:30:08 PM


--- PAGE 308 ---
2
talked about the Panthers. She explained the Ten Point Program in 
detail and that “Power to the people” means the people have the right 
to power over their own lives. “It’ s what Patrick Henry, Abe Lincoln, and 
Martin Luther King believed. Then and now,” she said.
Elaine testified that in November 1969, when Fred came out to the 
West Coast, she’ d asked him to take her place and speak to an assembly 
of three hundred UCLA law students. He spoke about forming coali-
tions with other groups and putting aside racist attitudes. “Have you 
ever heard anybody just reach you, just reach into your heart, even 
though you might have heard the words before?” she asked. “I suppose 
this is what he did that day, and I was so overwhelmed.” 
Elaine Brown was no slouch as a speaker herself, so her admiration 
for Fred was that much more impressive.
I had some fears that Bobby Rush, our last witness, might want to 
disown his Panther days. It was rumored he was aiming for a political 
career in the Democratic Party. He came into the PLO office in a suit and 
tie; he still had his goatee and mustache, although better trimmed, and 
wore the same dark framed glasses. After five minutes of interviewing 
him, my fears were allayed. “Fred was an amazing speaker and leader, 
and I held him in awe,” Rush said. “They murdered Fred because he 
reached people when he spoke; lumpen, college students, even law stu-
dents, they all related to Fred.” 
Rush began his testimony by mentioning that he was still in school, 
getting his degree at age thirty. 
“I got out of high school at twenty-four-and-a-half and out of law 
school at thirty-one, so you have plenty of time,” Perry responded, more 
congenial than usual.
“Thank you, Your Honor, that’ s encouraging,” Rush answered. “Fred 
was the motivating force inside the party. Fred’ s influence was the 
greatest. . . . [He had] the dedication of a Malcolm X, the speaking abil-
ity of Martin Luther King, and as far as courage, there are few with that 
type of courage. No one displayed leadership qualities like Fred did at 
twenty-one.” 
Rush explained that the Panthers organized poor people, primarily 
blacks, into a structure to correct problems such as housing and edu-
cation. They had no military wing. He described the ordinary Panther 
day—rising at 5:30 
a.m. to go to one of the six Breakfast for Children sites 
to prepare and serve breakfast to the kids and then clean up. Members 
Fred, the “Messiah”
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   283 7/29/09   1:30:08 PM


--- PAGE 309 ---
2
Injustice on Trial
would spend their days selling Panther papers, soliciting contributions, 
including food for the breakfast program, or working in the office. They 
would eat a communal dinner at Panther headquarters and often have 
political education classes afterward. For most members, it was a full- 
time job. The party provided money for food and rent from contribu-
tions and speaking honoraria. Friendly doctors provided free medical 
care. 
Rush testified that Fred banned the cartoon coloring book that 
depicted Panthers attacking the police and it was never used in Chicago. 
When O’Neal told Fred he was building a mortar, Fred called him in 
front of the entire chapter and told O’Neal he was “crazy and accused 
him of being a police agent.” Fred later told the entire membership that 
“the electric chair and missile were madness” and ordered O’Neal to 
dismantle them.
Rush stated that he had visited Fred’ s apartment on a “daily basis,” 
and would have stayed there the night of the raid except for a family 
problem at home. My questioning of Rush lasted about two hours. For 
three days, Kanter and Coghlan’ s sidekick, Witkowski, tried to dirty-up 
Fred, the Panthers, and Rush himself. 
Rush had said Fred often sounded like a preacher. Kanter asked him, 
“Ever hear a preacher say, ‘You kill a few pigs you get a little satisfac-
tion, but when you kill them all, you get complete satisfaction’?” Rush 
replied that he had not heard Fred say that, but by “pigs,” the Panthers 
meant “police officers who have no regard for the constitutional rights 
of individuals,” and the Panthers only had the right to kill pigs when 
attacked first.
Even with Rush’ s explanation, it was difficult to make Panther rheto-
ric palatable to our predominantly white, suburban jury. What Fred said 
in the heat of passion to Panther supporters at a rally was not easy to 
deal with in a sterile courtroom. Nevertheless, Kanter was mostly inef-
fective at challenging Rush’
s explanations. 
Witkowski was even more inept as he tried to discredit Rush by 
replaying the televised statement he’ d made at noon on December 4. 
Responding to Hanrahan’ s claim that the “vicious Panthers” had opened 
fire on his unwary police, Rush, angry and outraged, answered, “I don’t 
want to get into a verbal debate with Hanrahan about the words he used. 
Fred Hampton was lying in his bed and we will prove it. We will prove to 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   284 7/29/09   1:30:09 PM


--- PAGE 310 ---
2
the world that Fred Hampton was murdered in his bed.” Contrary to the 
impression Witkowski wanted to convey, that those charges were irre-
sponsible, Rush had gotten his information from me after I interviewed 
the survivors, and his charges matched the evidence. Witkowski had 
unwittingly opened the door to my questioning Rush about the source 
of his information, but Perry refused to allow my follow up.
Fred, the “Messiah”
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   285 7/29/09   1:30:09 PM


--- PAGE 311 ---
2
A Shameful End 
W
hen the testimony was over,  we argued the admissibility of the 
final scraps of evidence. Coghlan, Volini, and Kanter were absent 
from court. Witkowski argued endlessly for several days, giving absurd 
reasons for why clearly admissible evidence should be left out. On April 
13 we found out why: he had been stalling while the defendants’ other 
lawyers had been writing motions to dismiss—two hundred pages 
worth asserting we had not presented enough evidence against any of 
the defendants to allow the jury to determine their liability. On that day, 
they gave us copies and told Perry they were ready to argue. 
Perry’ s response was, “Some of the defendants fired guns. I couldn’t 
with a straight face grant the motions in those cases, so this case has to 
go to the jury for some of the defendants.” He gave us a week to answer 
their motions.
“They’re in a hurry because the mayoral primary is coming up. They 
want Hanrahan exonerated before then,” Flint said over our third beer 
that night. Judge Romiti’ s dismissal of Hanrahan’ s criminal charges 
right before the state’ s attorney’ s election had always seemed rigged, 
and this looked all too familiar.
“How are we gonna answer their motions?” I asked. We didn’t have 
transcripts to dispute their statement of facts, and Linda Turner, our 
main typist, was out of town over Easter weekend. Besides, I was 
exhausted. Perry had said we would take a recess in April, and I was 
looking forward to the break. I’ d hardly had time to take a walk outside 
for weeks. Maggie and I had planned a short weekend trip to Starved 
Rock, a park with scenic trails through narrow canyons, an hour and a 
half from Chicago. 
“
Let’ s give Perry a sample of our handwriting,” Flint suggested. 
“He’ll hate mine; that I’m sure of,” I responded with a slight smile. 
Court papers from lawyers were always typed, but we didn’t have the 
42
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   286 7/29/09   1:30:09 PM


--- PAGE 312 ---
2
time or the typists. The defendants’ nine motions to dismiss cited over 
fifty cases. Attached were hundreds of pages of transcript excerpts to 
support their factual assertions. The standard on a motion to dismiss 
is whether the evidence, “taken in the light most favorable to the non-
moving party” (our clients, in this instance), was sufficient for the jury 
to decide in our favor. The defendants argued from an interpretation 
of the evidence favorable to them, but it would take hundreds of hours 
for us to sift through the thirty-thousand-page trial transcript to refute 
their claims. 
“We ain’t going nowhere,” I told Maggie when I got home later that 
evening. I showed her the three-inch-thick stack of motions the defen-
dants had filed. She wasn’t surprised. She had learned to expect the 
worst. 
The next mor
ning Flint dared to ask Perry if we could have access to 
his copy of the transcript to respond to their motions and extra time to 
answer them. Christenbury replied haughtily, “Your Honor I grow weary 
of continually having to pay the price of the plaintiffs’ lack of diligence. 
They have a battery of lawyers to work on it, and there is absolutely no 
excuse for their now coming in and saying they need additional time. 
They have had ample time.”
I was seething and rose to answer, but Flint spoke first: “The battery 
of lawyers at the People’ s Law Office are two lawyers who have been out 
of law school for two years working to pay our salaries. We are the other 
two lawyers. We have been in court fifteen months. We are facing the 
head of the Special Litigation Unit of the Justice Department; the head 
of the Civil Division of the Chicago office of the FBI, sometimes known 
as the U.S. Attorney’ s Office; another attorney from the U.S. Attorney’ s 
Office; and a full-time FBI agent, Larry Deaton—all paid by the day. 
“We are facing Mr. Volini, paid $350,000 of the city of Chicago’ s 
money, and Mr. Coghlan, special state’ s attorney for Cook County, paid 
$50 an hour to the tune of $650,000; Mr. Witkowski; John Touhy as spe-
cial corporation counsel spent three weeks writing this brief at $35 per 
hour; Mike Conneely, GIU cop assigned full time since May 1974; secre-
taries, Xeroxes, three copies of the transcript at $9.00 per page. We don’t 
have the transcript. We have to see it only during lunch times and court 
proceedings.”
Perry was not moved and refused to give us his transcript.
A Shameful End
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   287 7/29/09   1:30:09 PM


--- PAGE 313 ---
2
Injustice on Trial
For the next five days, Flint and I sat at our conference table sur-
rounded by our notes and the few transcripts we had managed to copy. 
We handwrote our answers to their motions. My handwriting was noto-
riously sloppy and my fast printing, which I did hour after hour for sev-
eral days, was hardly better. I didn’t think Perry would read what we 
wrote, but I wanted to have a filed document refuting the defendants’ 
arguments. Jack Kerouac supposedly wrote On the Road in a single sit-
ting, high on LSD. Flint and I wrote our hundred-plus page answer to 
their motions in five days with only coffee, cigarettes, and outrage to 
keep us going. 
On Wednesday afternoon we filed the accumulation of legal-size, 
handwritten pages with the clerk and left copies at Perry’ s chambers 
and with the defendants.
The next day we were in court opposing the defendants’ motions. 
They again claimed the prosecutors were immune, and they inter-
preted the evidence favorably to themselves to conclude the FBI was 
only passing on information and the raiders were merely executing a 
search warrant when they were attacked with Panther gunfire. They 
returned the fire in self-defense.
Flint responded by showing how the COINTELPRO-inspired defen-
dants were on a course to destroy the Panthers and neutralize their 
leadership, and Fred Hampton in particular. They tried to get Fred mur-
dered with the Fort hit letter and then, after two police officers were 
killed by an ex-Panther, they set up Hanrahan to do their dirty work. 
Both the bonus for O’Neal and Piper’ s acknowledgement of the raid as a 
“success” were further proof of the FBI intention for the raid. He ended 
by answering Coghlan’ s argument about us not proving “invidious dis-
crimination,” required under the Civil Rights Act.
“Your Honor,” Flint said, “when I stood in the blood of Fred Hampton 
on December 4 as I helped to collect evidence because the police had 
left after tearing up the apartment, black people were walking through 
that apartment, and an older black woman, looking around, said, ‘It’ s 
nothing but a northern lynching.’ And that is what it was, and if that is 
not invidious discrimination, I don’t know what is.”
I focused on the law. “Judge, I don’t understand why we are making 
such a big to-do over these motions today. They have all been pretty 
much ruled upon in the past by the Seventh Circuit, and yet we are back 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   288 7/29/09   1:30:10 PM


--- PAGE 314 ---
2
as though we hadn’t heard fifteen months of evidence.” I cited lengthy 
portions of the Seventh Circuit opinion reversing Perry’ s earlier dis-
missal of our case on the same incorrect grounds the defendants were 
urging upon him again. I pointed out that a conspiracy does not require 
everyone knowing each other personally or what exact roles they would 
play. Citing the Supreme Court, I stated, “It is elementary that an unlaw-
ful conspiracy may be and often is formed without simultaneous action 
or agreement on the part of the conspirators.” Conspiracy law devel-
oped through drug cases was on our side. The importer did not have to 
know the distributor on the street to be in a conspiracy with him.
Christenbury asserted that the FBI was not in a conspiracy with 
Hanrahan or the raiders; COINTELPRO had nothing to do with the raid, 
as Hanrahan and the police didn’t even know about it. 
Perry recessed at noon and announced he would rule later that day.
Flint and I were sitting in the black leather chairs and I was rock-
ing back and forth when Perry came out from the side door at 4:00 
p.m. 
I made a halfhearted effort to stand and then quickly resumed rock-
ing. The artists from the media were focusing on Perry and sketching 
noiselessly on their giant pads. The defendants had alerted them to the 
imminent ruling. We had encouraged the Hamptons and Mrs. Clark 
and a few supporters to come to court.
“I have a very bad voice,” Perry began. “I am not going to attempt to 
read the orders. There are a number of motions.” The volume of typed 
orders in Perry’ s hand indicated they must have been written before we 
submitted our answers. 
Perry first denied our countermotions for directed verdicts against 
the shooters and denied our sanctions motion against the feds.
No surprises there. He’ d never even given us the chance to argue the 
sanctions motion.
Perry cleared his throat. He denied the seven shooters’ motions to 
dismiss their individual counts and ordered us to proceed the follow-
ing Monday with damages witnesses followed by the defense. He then 
dismissed the conspiracy count and ended, “The motion as to all other 
fifteen defendants is granted. The court now stands in recess.”
The little man in the black robe scurried off the bench. It took 
only fourteen minutes for him to gut our lawsuit, exonerating every-
one except the seven police shooters. I sat there stunned, looking at 
A Shameful End
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   289 7/29/09   1:30:10 PM


--- PAGE 315 ---
20
Injustice on Trial
Flint, who looked similarly paralyzed in his chair. So much work, so 
much proof, and dismissed so summarily. No justice here, I thought. On 
the other side of the court Johnson, Piper, and Mitchell were shaking 
Kanter’ s and Christenbury’ s hands. They were all smiling as they picked 
up their papers to leave. Hanrahan didn’t smile, not even now, but all 
the other defendants who had been dismissed were patting each other 
on the back and thanking Coghlan and Volini. 
I finally stood up and walked over and explained the dismissals as 
best I could to the Hamptons and Fannie Clark.
“He just ignored all that evidence,” Mrs. Clark said. “He didn’t care 
what Hanrahan and the FBI did to our sons.”
Iberia had withdrawn into that shell I’ d seen before. Her expression 
was fixed in a mask of anger and determination. 
“He just don’t wanna do right,” she finally said. That summed it up 
pretty well.
In spite of Perry’ s ruling, Hanrahan finished a distant fifth in the 
mayoral primary the following Tuesday. Hanrahan had convinced few 
people besides Judge Perry that he was innocent.
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   290 7/29/09   1:30:11 PM


--- PAGE 316 ---
21
Boiling Over 
B
y April, spring had sprung,  but we only saw it on our way to and 
from court. Our world was formal, sterile, and mean. And my atti-
tude wasn’t much better. I didn’t want to take any more shit from Perry, 
who’ d dismissed so much of our case and years of work with such ease. 
Our last witnesses, solely on the issues of damages, were Maywood 
mayor Leonard Chabala, Fannie Clark, Iberia Hampton, and Renault 
Robinson, head of the Afro-American Patrolmen’ s League. “One more 
day,” we told the impatient judge. 
Mayor Chabala knew Fred in high school when he was part of the 
Human Relations Council. Chabala testified that Fred had frequently 
been called upon to calm racial tensions in the high school and had 
been an especially good communicator. Fred had led the campaign 
to get a public swimming pool and recreation park for Maywood kids, 
which was started in his lifetime and was now named the Fred Hampton 
Pool.
The cross-examination was the expected, “Ever hear Fred say, ‘Kill a 
few pigs, get some satisfaction . . .’?” and “Did Fred know and respect 
the Constitution?” 
On redirect, I asked if Fred knew that under the Constitution “Black 
people have the right not be killed in their beds or murdered by the 
police?” 
Objection sustained. 
Next we called Fannie Clark.  She was dressed, as always, in a print 
dress buttoned to the chin and a large flowery hat. She had sat solid 
as a rock on the front row of the spectator section most of the sixteen 
months we had been in court.
Fannie testified that her son Mark was one of eleven children from her 
marriage to Reverend William Clark, who had died in 1967. Mark com-
pleted high school through correspondence and worked at Caterpillar 
43
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   291 7/29/09   1:30:11 PM


--- PAGE 317 ---
22
Injustice on Trial
and as a barber and helped support his family from his earnings. Mark 
had worked for the NAACP , including in their hunger program, and 
helped start the first Breakfast for Children Program in Peoria. Fannie 
Clark testified her son was “intelligent, energetic, and dedicated.” Mark 
had found something in his commitment with the Panthers that was 
missing from the rest of his life. They made him feel pride in himself. 
Volini’ s only question was whether she disagreed with Mark about 
the acquisition of guns. She said, “Yes, I did.” 
Renault Robinson had been a Chicago police officer for twenty years. 
Trim and earnest, he spoke loudly and unapologetically. He and Howard 
Saffold had founded the Afro-American Patrolmen’ s League ten years 
earlier. Its objectives were to improve relations between the black com-
munity and the police and to reform the police disciplinary system. 
Judge Perry refused to allow Renault to tell the jury how he and Fred 
had testified at city and state hearings on the issue of police brutality. 
“The jury is concerned with December 4, not police brutality,” Perry 
said.
Fred was a “self-starter” and spoke about the “betterment of people,” 
Renault testified in a quiet tone. “I saw him as a leader of black youth, 
offering an alternative to gangs and drugs. I was a pallbearer at his 
funeral.” The defendants did not cross-examine him. 
Our last witness was Iberia Hampton. She walked slowly to the 
witness stand, weary from so many months watching Perry and the 
defense lawyers trivialize our claims and her son’ s life. She paused for 
a moment, and I wondered if she was thinking, was it even worthwhile 
trying to describe Fred in the atmosphere of this courtroom? 
Iberia testified about Fred growing up in Maywood, where he was 
well liked and had lots of friends. He’ d worked in high school and 
helped support the family. When she and Francis bought a car for their 
three children, Fred said they couldn’t afford it and told them to sell it. 
In high school Fred became the leader of the suburban NAACP . He 
was often called upon to quiet racial trouble and once, “when he inter-
vened at the request of the high school principal, he was arrested by the 
police.”
Iberia testified that Fred wrote her from prison that Deborah was 
pregnant, and when he got out he said he “wanted me to take care 
of their child if anything happened.” At that point Iberia stopped and 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   292 7/29/09   1:30:11 PM


--- PAGE 318 ---
2
put her handkerchief up to her eyes. I was surprised. I had never seen 
her lose control of her feelings. She put her handkerchief down. “We 
have supported the child,” she said, looking at Fred Jr. sitting next to 
Francis in the front row. She ended simply telling the jury that Fred 
had wanted to be a lawyer. There was no cross-examination. We rested 
our case.
The defense called the chemist, Dr. Morton Mason, who testified that 
even though two months had passed since Fred’ s body had been buried 
in Louisiana, and it had been injected with embalming fluid, which can 
cause barbiturates to dissolve, he interpreted the February lab tests on 
Fred’ s blood to prove that no substantial amount of barbiturates was 
ever present. He offered no explanation for the earlier, contrary find-
ings by Dr. Berman that Fred had barbiturates in his blood.
Flint had done his homework and confronted Mason with his own 
lack of knowledge about the temperature of the body since buried, 
whether the blood and tissue samples were refrigerated, and the pH 
of the aqueous solution of the samples—all of which are factors that 
can dissolve or mask barbiturates. When Flint moved to strike Mason’ s 
unresponsive comments, Coghlan jumped up in pretend indignation.
Coghlan: “Now since the time he was licensed in 1973, this being 
1977, that means he has spent an awful lot of time in the preparation of 
this case and darn little in a courtroom, and if you ask me, it shows in 
the type of questions he asks. He just refuses to sit down and look at a 
law book of trial technique because it is inconsistent with his political 
views . . . and then he throws the load on Your Honor for his stupidity.”
Coghlan went on to accuse Flint, as he had done many times before, 
of yelling in a high voice and flapping his wrists. It worked. Flint was 
clearly frustrated.
Taylor [in response]: “I am getting a little sick and tired of Mr. Coghlan 
getting up here and having open license from this court to insult my 
integrity, to insult—”
Coghlan [continuing his attack]: “Would the court reporter show that 
the remarks preceded by the shrieked “what,” and the interruptions of 
Mr. Taylor were shouted in very high decibels.”
Taylor: “You allow Mr. Coghlan to get up here and say these things 
and insult me . . . my tone of voice, my competency.”
Judge Perry: “Bring the jury.”
Boiling Over
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   293 7/29/09   1:30:12 PM


--- PAGE 319 ---
2
Injustice on Trial
Coghlan: “Let the record reflect Mr. T aylor is yelling in a loud voice. . . . 
What Mr. T aylor may or may not do in the night is of no concern to me.”
Taylor [angrier than ever ]: “It is an affront to any decorum in this 
courtroom to let these attacks go on and to not listen to me. That is all 
I ask, that you listen to me—not to go to sleep when I make arguments, 
not to put your dark glasses on.” 
Flint had crossed another line.
Judge Perry: “Now, just a minute, you know that is a falsehood.”
Perry was more outraged at being accused of sleeping during our 
arguments than at the gay-baiting he had allowed in his courtroom. He 
never reprimanded Coghlan.
Despite the contradictions in their  stories, the defense called each of 
the remaining shooters to deny wrongdoing. We had called Groth 
and Carmody. They called Joe Gorman, the raider who wielded the 
Thompson machine gun.
Stocky, with jet-black hair and a chiseled chin, Gorman talked like 
someone who liked his job and the opportunities it gave him to use 
force. After he claimed he saw a bullet “rip through the front door,” 
Gorman admitted firing his machine gun on semiautomatic fire in an 
arc around Brenda Harris, who was lying wounded on the bed. He also 
claimed he heard a shot that he was sure came from the north bed-
room. He testified that each of the wounded persons—Doc, Verlina, 
and Blair—rose up like ducks in a shooting gallery, weapons pointing 
at him, just before he fired at each of them. However, the locations of 
their wounds were not consistent with them facing him or even being 
vertical as he had described.
 
I exposed Gorman’ s falsehoods, beginning with his claiming to see 
the hole rip through the front door. Gorman admitted entering behind 
Groth, Davis, and Jones, so I sought to place figurines on the model 
to show how he could not have seen what he claimed while standing 
behind three other police officers. I also wanted to demonstrate that 
Brenda’ s alleged shots could not have gone by the four large officers 
in the doorway without striking one of them. The defendants objected 
to my using the figurines, on the ridiculous rationale that they had not 
been used on direct examination, but the judge sustained their objec-
tion nonetheless. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   294 7/29/09   1:30:12 PM


--- PAGE 320 ---
2
My cross-examination was gaining momentum when Volini inter-
rupted. This time he told Perry about a demonstration going on twenty-
five floors below, which he said was being led by Fred’ s brother, Bill 
Hampton. “Reverse Perry’ s Racist Outrage,” “Stop the Cover-up, Jail the 
Murderer,” and “Coconspirators FBI, Hanrahan, Local Police, and now 
Perry,” were the slogans Volini reported. He said the demonstrations 
were being “perpetrated by the plaintiffs’ attorneys.”
I was delighted to see Perry publicly labeled part of the conspiracy, 
but we could not claim credit for organizing the protest. “Jesse Jackson 
and Reverend [Charles] Koen are not our clients,” Flint said. “There are 
several hundred demonstrators, not all are our clients.” Indeed, a large 
part of the black community that had followed the trial was outraged by 
Perry’ s dismissal of Hanrahan and the FBI.
“I am surprised that you are not out there,” Perry responded to Flint, 
who defended himself by saying that although he was not participating, 
he had that right.
What made Perry the angriest were the revelations that led to the 
demonstration. These were contained in our most recent motion seek-
ing Perry’ s recusal. One year into the trial, Sheldon Waxman, the former 
U.S. attorney who had defended the FBI, called us. He had encountered 
Perry at a fundraising dinner as the trial started and asked him if he 
had seen the recent newspaper revelations of the Church Committee, 
including the FBI’ s hit letter to Jeff Fort urging violence against Hampton. 
Perry indicated that he hadn’t seen them and they probably weren’t rel-
evant to the Hampton case, anyway. Waxman told Perry, “They seemed 
relevant to me.” 
A month later Waxman saw Perry again, and Perry told him, “You 
were wrong about the material that was in the paper. That stuff wasn’t 
relevant. They’ll never be able to prove that the FBI killed those fellas.” A 
self-fulfilling prophecy if there ever was one. We attached Waxman’ s affi-
davit about his conversation with Perry to our motion for recusal. The 
affidavit was widely reported in the press. It led to us receiving another 
phone call. This one was from Reverend Thomas Strieter, who had read 
about Perry’ s conversation with Waxman and had been reminded of a 
similar conversation he’ d had with Perry on May 31, 1976. Strieter had 
been selected to be the chaplain in a Memorial Day Parade where Perry 
was the marshal. They rode in the same car. Reverend Strieter told Perry 
Boiling Over
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   295 7/29/09   1:30:12 PM


--- PAGE 321 ---
2
Injustice on Trial
he was from Maywood, and Fred Hampton was one of his constitu-
ents. He asked Perry how the trial was going. Perry responded that it 
was “endless.” Later on, Perry volunteered, “If only the lawyers would 
stick to what happened on December 4, 1969, they might make a case. 
But this conspiracy involving the FBI and Hanrahan is impossible. This 
cannot be true. There is no earthly way to establish that.”
Together, the affidavits of Waxman and Strieter exposed that Perry 
had decided both before and during the trial that what we were try-
ing to prove against the FBI was in fact “impossible.” One out-of-court 
admission of prejudgment is worth a hundred in-court biased rulings 
when it comes to recusing a judge. It’ s what you need. We had filed the 
motion to recuse Perry with the accompanying affidavits, knowing they 
would infuriate Perry but slightly hopeful that he would be forced to 
refer the motion, and maybe even the case, to another judge.
We asked Perry for a hearing on the recusal motion. The defendants’ 
lawyers moved to strike our motion entirely. Perry denied both and said 
he took the motion “under advisement.” 
 
The next day, Coghlan and Volini fanned the flames of the judge’ s 
wrath further by answering our recusal motion, on the judge’ s behalf, 
accusing us of suborning perjury. They had an affidavit by the driver of 
the car, who contested Strieter’ s version of their conversation. We said 
we welcomed a hearing on what transpired during the parade.
“Judge, I think the court should really take heed of what is happening 
here and recognize that the court is no longer a fit and unbiased judge,” 
I said to Perry. 
“The conduct of the plaintiffs constitutes an attempt to tear down 
the judicial structure of the U.S. District Court . . . and to tear down 
the establishment,” Coghlan responded, and Volini pitched in with “Mr. 
Haas . . . has turned to attacking the lawyers, and now he has turned on 
the judge. He is saying such terrible and disgraceful things about you, 
that a weaker man would have folded by now.” Coghlan added that I 
was committing acts of “insolent defiance” and compared me to Hitler 
and Joe McCarthy. Coghlan’ s misuse of history was too much to take.
I said he was the one who had borrowed McCarthy’ s tactics. I then 
addressed Perry.
Haas: “What we see now is the outright prejudice of the court affect-
ing every single act that goes on here.”
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   296 7/29/09   1:30:13 PM


--- PAGE 322 ---
2
Perry: “Well, you don’t like anything as far as you are concerned 
except your way. And you are not going to have your way.”
Haas: “I know. My way is a fair trial, and I’m not going to get it.”
Perry: “You bet your life you are not going to get it.”
Thank you, Judge, for that gracious admission. I had to turn away 
from the lectern to hide my smile. Coghlan tried to correct the record to 
show Perry had not intended what he said.
Gloves Davis testified next. He was tall and graceful, almost cat-like 
in the way he had moved through the front door in the reenactment, 
and said he shot Mark Clark two times. Davis testified on direct for less 
than ten minutes, enough to say he saw Brenda Harris fire her shotgun 
at him, which lit up Mark Clark behind the living room door. He fired 
and hit Brenda in the leg and turned his carbine toward Mark, who was 
standing up, and shot him two times. After that, Davis claimed they 
struggled briefly and Mark fell to the ground dead.
Because the details of Gloves’ s previous accounts conflicted with the 
physical evidence, Volini hadn’t attempted to bring them out. His strat-
egy was to object to my questions, preventing the clarifying of details, 
meanwhile harassing me and confusing the jury.
Perry aided Volini’ s effort by refusing to allow me to have Davis mark 
his and Brenda’ s position on the scale diagram of the apartment, al-
though the defense lawyers had used it while cross-examining the plain-
tiffs. Perry would not let me mention Davis’ s nickname, Gloves, or explain 
where he got it, although he had admitted at his deposition that he rel-
ished the nickname because it “deterred youth.” I argued, but was not al-
lowed, to refer to Davis’ s sixty-eight prior complaints for excessive force.
Coghlan jumped in. “On the streets, a person with such limp-wristed 
arguments would be called ‘sissy.’” 
Recently, when I read the transcript, I was pleasantly surprised to 
see my response: “I just want to say that I guess on Mr. Coghlan’ s terms 
I am a sissy because I don’t like to sit around the courtroom and tell 
dirty, crude jokes about women, which is what he likes to do after court. 
If that is what being a man is, I would just as soon be a sissy.” I had 
learned something from the women’ s movement.
As for the cross-examination of Davis, I had a lot to work with. Davis, 
like Gorman and Groth, had previously placed Brenda in the southeast 
corner of the living room when she fired. Davis also had testified, “I 
Boiling Over
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   297 7/29/09   1:30:13 PM


--- PAGE 323 ---
2
Injustice on Trial
know very definitely none of the officers fired through that [the living 
room] door,” which I easily disproved by pointing to the entry hole in 
the panel Groth’ s bullet had made coming from the outside. Davis also 
was certain the door was open at ninety degrees during Groth’ s shoot-
ing, again conflicting with the proof that the door was only slightly ajar 
when Groth shot through it. Zimmers disproved all of Davis’ s descrip-
tions of Panther firing.
But Davis’ s biggest contradiction came from his statement that he 
“never moved out of the living room.” One of his .30-caliber bullets 
made the superficial wound in Fred’ s chest. Its angle indicated it may 
have been fired from the south bedroom door. Several of the plaintiffs 
placed Gloves at the rear of the apartment, and Davis had told Larry 
Kennon, a black attorney, on the morning of the raid that he’ d seen Fred 
lying in his bed. Larry was a founder and leader of the all-black Cook 
County Bar Association. He was also a friend and reported Gloves’ s 
statement to us. 
Moreover, Davis’ s quick movements in shooting the people in the liv-
ing room, firing toward the bed where the floor plan showed Fred slept 
and then proceeding to the rear, supported our position that the defen-
dants’ objective from the outset was to murder Fred Hampton. Our 
stance was also buttressed by Davis’ s absurd claim that Fred Hampton’ s 
being in the apartment “never entered my mind.”
George Jones was the other black cop besides Davis who fired. He 
was soft-spoken and neatly dressed. The defense wanted to end their 
case with a favorable impression. Although Jones denied firing in the 
entrance foyer, the physical evidence indicated he had. Whether it was 
accidental or the signal to attack, Jones likely fired the opening shot as 
he and the other raiders were poised to strike. During a recess in Jones’ s 
testimony, I went into Perry’ s antechamber to return a transcript. I spot-
ted juror Norgle, looking as unfriendly as ever. In the courtroom, I asked 
Perry why she was there. Trial judges are not allowed to communicate 
with jurors without notice to the parties. Perry looked embarrassed. 
He said he was speaking to Norgle about a friend of hers, a graduating 
law student who had come into his chambers looking for a job. He had 
never told us about this. It gave Perry the opportunity to ingratiate him-
self with this juror by helping her friend. 
Coghlan quickly realized his best ally may have compromised him-
self. He urged Perry to order that none of the lawyers communicate 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   298 7/29/09   1:30:13 PM


--- PAGE 324 ---
2
with the young man for “fear of contacting Norgle.” Before we could 
demand a hearing, Perry entered Coghlan’ s protective order, and we 
never learned what Perry said to Norgle’ s friend in chambers.
Jones’ s direct examination, like the other defendants, was quite short. 
He attempted to explain the timing of the early morning raid, saying 
8:00 
p.m. was dangerous in that “highly volatile area,” even though he 
knew the occupants would not be present at that time.
Jones testified he saw Brenda fire a shotgun and fired his weapon, a 
shotgun, into the north bedroom. That was it. When I asked Jones if he 
had been told it was a Panther apartment, he answered, “It may have 
been discussed, but I have no memory of it.” He just couldn’t recall why 
these fourteen men armed themselves with a machine gun, shotguns, 
a carbine, and numerous handguns to serve this warrant. “Could it 
have been a raid on a seventy-eight-year-old woman’ s apartment for an 
unregistered weapon?” I asked. Before he could “not recall,” his lawyers 
objected.
The next day, May 19, Jones’ s memory was no better. I was already 
frustrated with his refusal to recall specifics, when Volini had the audac-
ity to argue, “They shouldn’t be allowed to pin him down when he does 
not recall the exact sequence of events.” 
“He doesn’t recall any sequences,” I responded angrily. It is the 
understood objective of the cross-examiner to “pin down” evasive hos-
tile witnesses—exactly what Volini had the temerity to ask Perry to pre-
vent. Perry just smiled and refused to allow us to impeach Jones with 
the details in his police report.
On May 27 the defense rested, and we began our rebuttal. Flint called 
our chemist, Dr. Eleanor Berman, to the stand to rebut the defendants’ 
expert’ s testimony that Fred’ s blood contained no barbiturates. She sys-
tematically analyzed the tests run by the FBI chemist, Mason, and con-
cluded there were several intervening factors that would account for 
Mason not discovering the barbiturates. 
Perry disallowed Dr. Berman’ s most convincing testimony—that the 
FBI’ s tests had isolated a substance that upon further testing may have 
proved to be barbiturates—because the defendants claimed we had not 
given them notice. 
When Dr. Berman stepped down, and after seventeen months, both 
sides rested.
Boiling Over
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   299 7/29/09   1:30:14 PM


--- PAGE 325 ---
00
Rock Bottom
N
o rest for the weary.  Flint and I had two days to put together jury 
instructions. They contain the law the jury applies in evaluating 
the facts. Each side submits the instructions they want. Some lawyers 
say a jury decides with their gut. Others say the instructions are criti-
cal, both in determining how the lawyers argue the case in closing and 
ultimately how the jury will decide. I waver between the two but now 
believe the instructions are critical in a close case.
Most of our important instructions were rejected, just as our motions 
had been. The instructions Perry approved were submitted by the 
defendants and defined the law in such a manner that, if applied, the 
jury could not possibly find in our favor. For example, Perry gave the 
defendants’ instruction on “assumption of risk,” a tort defense, which 
allowed them to argue that the jury could find that the Panthers’ pos-
session of weapons justified their murders. Flint and I realized the jury 
would have to disobey the instructions to find for the plaintiffs. “Maybe 
they’ll see through him and go with what they know is right,” I tried to 
convince Flint. 
“That
’ s giving them a lot of credit,” he said. “Maybe Florence Smith 
will get it, but I don’t know about the rest.” We divided up closing argu-
ments. Montgomery had called and, despite being gone for most of the 
past six months, said he wanted to lead off. 
At three o’clock in the afternoon of June 15, Montgomery returned 
to court for the first time in many weeks and began closing argument. 
The courtroom, which had been largely vacant of late, was packed once 
again, and the press was back. I wondered if I looked the five years older 
I felt since the trial started. Montgomery began by telling the jury what 
the case was not about. This included the Panther philosophy, the con-
duct of lawyers, and revolution. The defendants chose not to conduct 
44
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   300 7/29/09   1:30:14 PM


--- PAGE 326 ---
01
the raid at 8:00 p.m. when it was safe. “If they had, Fred and Mark would 
be alive.” 
Montgomery described the predawn events. Jones fired first, and 
then the police burst through the front door. The apartment was secure 
immediately after the officers entered the “threshold of the living room,” 
but they kept firing. He explained that the defendants were stuck with 
their original lie that “Brenda had sat on the bed calmly pumping her 
shotgun,” as they entered. There were no shells and no impact points 
to corroborate their story. He demonstrated how ridiculous the defen-
dants were in trying to move Brenda from where they had clearly placed 
her originally to a position where it might have been physically pos-
sible to fire out the front three doors leaving no impact point. Next he 
derided “the most ridiculous part of their story,” the defendants’ claim 
of how the occupants broke the three cease-fires.
“Throughout the whole of my life,” Montgomery said, “in movies or 
events, I never heard anybody, anybody, use ‘Shoot it out.’ I’ve heard, 
‘You’re going to have to kill me.’ Why say ‘shoot it out’ and fire one shot? 
Any idiot wouldn’t do that. If you said ‘shoot it out,’ you would do it. 
Bring your common experience of life to bear.” 
Montgomery offered as proof that Fred had never left his bed, an 
argument I had not considered. The photo of Fred lying in the din-
ing room showed plaster dust on his back. Deborah had described it 
descending in her bedroom while the police were firing and the bed 
was shaking. Fred must have been lying on his stomach to end up with 
the dust on his back. 
Finally, he got to Carmody. Both his early statement and written 
report indicated he saw a hand extending from the rear bedroom firing 
a .45 at him as he entered. Later he saw the .45 next to Fred’ s hand as 
he lay in that room. Carmody was now saying the hand extended from 
the dining room, which he had called the rear bedroom. But there was 
no bed in there. 
Montgomery continued, saying
When Abraham Lincoln was talking to his cabinet, he asked them, “If I 
said a donkey’ s tail was a leg, how many legs would a donkey have?” To a 
man, the cabinet in unison answered “five.” Lincoln responded, “No. You 
Rock Bottom
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   301 7/29/09   1:30:14 PM


--- PAGE 327 ---
02
Injustice on Trial
cannot make a donkey’ s tale a leg by simply calling it a leg. He would have 
but four legs.” You cannot make a dining room a rear bedroom by calling 
it a rear bedroom.
Montgomery walked over and stood in front of the jury box. “History 
will look at this case and your verdict. Your verdict is important. You will 
have the opportunity to sit here and put to rest finally and forever what 
happened on December 4, 1969.”
The next morning, Flint focused on Groth’ s inconsistent stories about 
a floor plan. First Groth had claimed, “No, I didn’t have a floor plan, 
didn’t have a layout.” Later Groth admitted he did have a floor plan but 
destroyed it. Then Flint reeled off the evidence of Fred being drugged, 
showing how carefully our expert, Dr. Berman, had run her tests, in con-
trast with the coroner’ s office representative George Christentopolos, 
whose experience was “testing mayonnaise for Durkees.” The defen-
dants’ experts had failed to adjust the pH downward in the tissue sam-
ples and had run standards thirty times too high, which masked the 
barbiturates. Eleanor Berman had gone back and run the same tests as 
the defense expert, Dr. Mason, with samples containing secobarbital 
and they did not turn yellow as Dr. Mason said they must if secobarbi-
tal, were present.
 
Flint ended with, “We still haven’t heard from Groth’ s supposed 
informant.” 
“You will not go into the question of the informant any further,” Perry 
said.
Two hours later, I asked the jury to come down and gather around 
the scale model that showed the location of all the bullet holes, while I 
walked them through the raid. The model was large, and it was easy to 
demonstrate that the shots the defendants claimed the plaintiffs fired 
could not have occurred without striking one of the interior walls or the 
entrance area. There were no bullet holes in these locations. 
The model and Zimmers’ s testimony told the story. Ninety shots to 
one; no shots from the Panthers except one from Mark Clark’ s gun at an 
upward angle as he fell from a police bullet.
 
 “The plain fact is there was no shooting at the rear of the apart-
ment other than by police officers,” I said. “The plain fact was that they 
knew where Fred was, they knew where he slept, and that killing Fred 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   302 7/29/09   1:30:15 PM


--- PAGE 328 ---
0
Hampton was the intent of at least some of the officers who came on 
this raid.”
I argued that Carmody was the only officer who entered at the rear 
whose weapon could have caused the fatal bullet wounds to Fred’ s 
head. Carmody dragged Fred’ s body into the dining room for all to see, 
claimed he did not know whether Fred was dead but never checked, and 
brought his body out to where guns were within easy reach. “Carmody 
knew Fred was dead because he’ d just fired two shots into his head with 
his .38 snub-nosed revolver.”
“When you put it all together, you will find that Edward Carmody 
went in there to murder F
red Hampton.” I sat down. 
Volini, the big man with the suit jacket that always bulged over a roll 
of fat around his middle, walked over to face the jury. “The 1960s was 
[sic] a violent time, and the Panthers aided the violence. Did police 
officers have to analyze and understand what ‘Off the pig’ and ‘Power 
comes from the barrel of a gun’ meant? Gilhooly and Rappaport were 
twenty-five years old when they were ambushed.” 
I objected. The facts of the November 13 incident were disputed and 
were not in evidence.
Overruled. 
Volini argued that Truelock fired, and the others picked up guns and 
may have shot. The “shells of the Black Panthers are in the pockets of 
the lawyers who gathered evidence.” This was the first time Volini had 
made this accusation.
As expected, Volini attempted to convince the jury that the Panthers’ 
possession of weapons was an assumption of risk that exonerated the 
defendants. He went further: “Fred Hampton assumed the risk of get-
ting shot if he took some drugs.” 
I objected. This legal theory was a bit much even for Perry, who told 
Volini he would instruct the jury on the law. 
“Watch for the low blows,” I whispered to Flint later that afternoon 
as we watched Coghlan approach the jury. We had come to despise this 
bully, who flaunted the freedom Perry gave him to make every nasty 
insinuation he could against the plaintiffs, the Panthers, and Flint and 
me. Sometimes, when he got excited, Coghlan’ s mouth would stay nar-
rowly open like a fish. His red cheeks inflated and deflated as he tried 
to breathe through the opening. Despite his uncharming appearance 
Rock Bottom
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   303 7/29/09   1:30:15 PM


--- PAGE 329 ---
0
Injustice on Trial
and unsubtle ways, or perhaps because of them, Coghlan was the most 
effective of the defense attorneys.
He began by commenting that all the attorneys except Flint and me 
had conducted themselves “honorably.” Quickly he moved to his main 
theme. “I believe Fred Hampton was a leader and told the truth,” he 
said, “including that he would blow peoples’ heads off.” A few minutes 
later we recessed.
The next morning, Perry reversed his ruling of a week before and 
allowed us to ask for punitive damages. Perry claimed he had ruled 
against us because we had withheld a key case from him that proved 
our position was correct. Perry said that he had only discovered the case 
in reviewing our mandamus petition to the Seventh Circuit. In fact Flint 
had provided Perry’ s clerk with the correct citation to the case before 
Perry ever ruled. But Perry didn’t want to admit he’ d been so anxious 
to rule against us he’ d made a mistake that might get him reversed on 
appeal or at a minimum one that would show his bias. The judge inter-
rupted Coghlan’ s closing argument and gave us five minutes to prepare 
to argue punitive damages to the jury. 
Flint pointed out the defendants’ meetings, their planning, the floor 
plan, and the resulting bullets directed toward Fred’ s bed—clearly 
marked on the floor plan—to show intent and malice, requirements for 
the awarding of punitive damages. I focused on the volume of police 
shots, the beatings, kicking, and racial slurs inflicted on the plaintiffs 
after the raid, and the photos that showed how the defendants tore up 
the apartment when they were done shooting. 
“Of all the photos,” I said, “the one that demonstrates their intent 
most clearly is the one of Fred lying on the door, bleeding from his 
head. Nobody checked his life signs or attempted to help him. Nobody 
covered him up. They waited for the photographers.” 
Coghlan countered. “I will tell you how a police officer feels. They 
don’t publicly admit fear but they have it. Police who don’t protect their 
partners end up in the mailroom. No one wants to ride with them. 
Officer Davis was a tough guy in a tough business. If he had not gone 
in low, part of him would be splattered where Jim Montgomery said the 
rifled deer slug was in the entrance foyer.
“What is common to all good policemen is that they would as soon 
be dead than be known as the guy that backed down when his partner is 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   304 7/29/09   1:30:15 PM


--- PAGE 330 ---
0
needed.” Coghlan praised Gorman and Groth for their bravery in enter-
ing the apartment to back up Davis.
 
Coghlan’ s closing argument was based on what Coghlan implied 
was his own personal knowledge. A lawyer is not allowed to tell the jury 
about his life or refer to supposed experiences outside the courtroom, 
but Coghlan got away with it. 
I had ten minutes for rebuttal. I told the jury Coghlan had obviously 
been a cop.
Coghlan jumped up, feigned surprise, and claimed I had brought up 
a new matter. He wanted time to respond. I objected, but Perry gave 
him two minutes when I finished. 
Going back to the facts after Coghlan’ s emotional appeal was diffi-
cult, but there were some points I wanted to clarify. Coghlan had argued 
that Jones’ s shotgun would not fit horizontally in the entranceway, so 
he could not have fired the first shot. I demonstrated that it could, and if 
it was held with the butt against the entrance hall door, the barrel would 
be at exactly the three-to-five-degree angle upward that Zimmers spec-
ified was the direction of Jones’ s shot. 
I argued Davis’ s testimony that Mark Clark was just rising from his 
chair when Davis shot him was totally improbable. Davis placed Clark 
and his chair “in the middle of the living room.” For Davis’ s testimony 
to be true, Clark would have had to fire his shot at an upward angle from 
below and just inside the living room door, as the ballistics evidence 
indicated, stand up and move himself and his chair to the middle of the 
living room, and then sit back down, all in the midst of gunshots from 
Groth and Davis. The more likely scenario was that Clark had been shot 
near the living room door and his gun went off as he fell.
My argument ended with a flourish. Perry wrongly accused me 
of showing the jury a photo that he claimed had not been admitted 
into evidence, but in fact it had. Perry told the jury, “Listen to me, not 
Haas.”
I responded, “You are the determiners of fact, ladies and gentlemen, 
thank God.”
Coghlan’ s two-minute rebuttal was well rehearsed.
“I’ve never been called upon to explain how I worked my way through 
law school,” he said. “I was a police officer from 1955 to 1957. I quit 
when I got my license. My partner was black and took five bullets in the 
Rock Bottom
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   305 7/29/09   1:30:16 PM


--- PAGE 331 ---
0
Injustice on Trial
belly, and I was with him when he died. I did not have what it takes to 
go through that again.”
Of course everything he said was inflammatory, irrelevant, and 
based on a supposed incident outside our courtroom. After the jury was 
excused, I moved for a mistrial for Coghlan’ s “pulsating and probable lie 
to the jury.” D
enied. Perry let him get away with it. 
Later, Perry spent two hours reading the instructions to the jury, and 
at 7:15 p.m. on Thursday he sent them to dinner and told them to orga-
nize themselves and begin deliberating in the morning. They would 
remain sequestered at a hotel until they reached a verdict. 
I felt some relief but little confidence when the jury finally marched 
out to deliberate. There was nothing more to be done but collect the 
admitted exhibits to send to them . . . and wait.
Flint and I had more than our usual two beers that night at John 
Barleycorn, a Lincoln Park pub, but underneath the momentary 
warmth and buzz, I feared what our jury would do. It was clear Perry 
and the defendants expected a quick verdict in their favor. Perry even 
suggested to the jurors that they might finish their deliberations before 
the weekend. That would have been on Friday, after only one day of 
deliberations, a remarkable feat given the lengthy trial. 
On Friday, Flint and I went to the office in blue jeans. We sat there 
nervously, with our suits hanging nearby, ready for the call telling us the 
jury had reached a verdict. In the afternoon Flint said, “Well, we’ve kept 
them out for a day. That ain’t bad, given Perry’ s instructions.”
“Whoever heard of ‘assumption of risk’ in a civil rights suit?” I 
replied.
“Can you believe Volini argued that if Fred had taken drugs, he 
assumed the risk of being murdered in his bed?” Flint asked. “By that 
logic, any black kid on Chicago streets after dark assumes the risk of 
being beaten by the police.”
Our cynical banter continued over the weekend with no calls from 
court. On Sunday morning, the Sun-Times ran a lengthy article with 
photos of Flint, straight blond hair almost to his shoulders, and me with 
bushy curls and sideburns. Today I see how young and unlawyerly we 
looked. Dennis Fisher, the Sun-Times reporter who had been covering 
the case, came to our office the day before with a photographer and 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   306 7/29/09   1:30:16 PM


--- PAGE 332 ---
0
interviewed Flint and me. The article called us “Panther lawyers: tight-
budget crusaders . . .” and noted that 
even before the trial started, Haas and Taylor were deeply involved in 
preparing the case. Throughout their effort, they have worked 70 and 
80-hour weeks at negligible pay trying to win for the plaintiffs $47.7 mil-
lion in damages from the police raiders. Their performance hasn’t always 
been polished, but their enthusiasm never has flagged, in spite of what 
they continue to regard as the hostility of the judge.
“It’ s like playing in the World Series against the Yankees with their 
manager as the umpire,” Flint was quoted.
I spared the metaphor. “Whether it’ s his will or his whim, the eigh-
teen months have been excruciating. The law has been turned upside 
down and stretched every way to defeat us. We can’t underestimate the 
vengeful side of Judge Perry, and no matter which way it goes we think 
the other side will attempt to put us in jail to cover the cover-up.” Perry 
had taken a number of contempt claims against Flint and me under 
advisement, and we feared he would give us more jail time when the 
case concluded. Our efforts to expose the judge’ s bias were not merely 
letting off steam, although there was plenty of anger behind them. They 
were to alert the public that a verdict against the plaintiffs did not fol-
low a fair trial and should have no credibility.
The news story continued. “Coghlan . . . has referred to Haas and 
Taylor as ‘young punks.’ Haas and Taylor have called Coghlan a ‘Nazi 
storm trooper.’”
After the recriminations, Flint explained our position more clearly 
near the end of the article. “We dare to come to the king’ s throne and 
say he’ s wrong. But he’ s got all the power. We can’t forget that. We’re 
just committed to an idea, and every piece of evidence that comes out 
showing more FBI involvement has told us we must pursue this case. 
It’ s a matter of government assassination being exposed.” 
On Monday, June 20, the clerk called us in. When we arrived in court, 
Perry passed us four notes sent to him by the jury over the weekend. The 
first one on Saturday morning came from four of the jurors and asked 
if they could go to mass on Sunday. Perry told us he responded “only if 
Rock Bottom
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   307 7/29/09   1:30:17 PM


--- PAGE 333 ---
0
Injustice on Trial
they all agreed,” and they had not gone. The second was sent Saturday 
afternoon and said the jury was “hopelessly deadlocked and cannot 
reach a verdict.” Perry said he ordered them to continue deliberating, 
which led to the next two notes on Sunday, which said the same thing, 
the last one adding, “More deliberations will not result in a unanimous 
verdict.”
Eighteen months and then a hung jury, it seemed a nightmare, but 
then I thought, Could we realistically have hoped for more? It was better 
than a verdict against us.
Perry should have called the lawyers in after each note. He didn’t, I 
realized, because he didn’t want a hung jury. He wanted them to con-
tinue to deliberate and decide for the defendants, as his instructions 
had all but mandated.
The defendants asked that the jury be instructed to continue delib-
erations and negotiate with each other. Flint and I conferred. Normally, 
plaintiffs would seek further deliberations that could lead to a favor-
able verdict. A hung jury is usually considered a victory for the defense. 
But we knew the atmosphere in the courtroom and the one-sided jury 
instructions. “Do you really think they understand the judge’ s bias, so 
they can discount his remarks, ignore the instructions, and vote dam-
ages for Panthers?” I asked Flint.
To ask the question was to answer it. Flint responded, “I doubt it.” 
Neither of us liked our chances with this jury after this one-sided trial. 
In addition, the jurors’ notes had been signed by our presumed nem-
esis, “Judy Norgle, foreperson.” Another bad sign.
Perry asked each side our position. Coghlan and Volini then said 
they wanted Perry to declare the jury hung, which meant a mistrial, but 
before he did, they wanted him to reconsider the defendants’ motions 
for directed verdict, which they had filed but had never argued. If their 
motion was granted, the case would be dismissed based on lack of 
evidence.
I said that after three days of a deadlocked jury, Flint and I wanted 
Perry to declare a mistrial, but since Montgomery wasn’t there, we 
needed to recess until we could confer.
Perry called the jury in and asked Judy Norgle, “ Are you able to arrive 
at a verdict?”
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   308 7/29/09   1:30:17 PM


--- PAGE 334 ---
0
“No, we are not, Your Honor,” she said emphatically. Perry told the 
jury they did not need a unanimous verdict on every plaintiff or every 
defendant to reach a verdict on the others, and they should continue 
deliberating until he called them back at 2:00 
p.m.
Later we met with Montgomery and told him why we doubted more 
deliberations would work to our benefit. “I don’t want to do this again,” 
he said. “I want a verdict now.” 
 I suspected the case was at its end when the jury returned at 2:30 
p.m. In addition to Flint, Montgomery, Reid, and me, the rest of PLO was 
present for our side. The press was there along with as many plaintiffs 
and supporters as we could reach by phone. 
Perry called in the jury. They looked haggard and angry. Florence 
Smith, the sole black juror, was the only one who looked at us. “I am 
asking again if you are able to arrive at a verdict,” Perry said. 
“No, Your Honor, we haven’t,” Ms. Norgle responded, resolutely.
“Is it likely with further deliberations you will be able to reach a ver-
dict?” Perry inquired. 
“We will not.” She was unequivocal.
Perry excused the jury and again asked each side its position. 
Montgomery spoke first. He argued that the length of the trial and ani-
mosity between the parties and lawyers might make a verdict “difficult 
to reach, but they should continue deliberating.” Flint and I disagreed. 
I argued that “Judy Norgle was firm, no hesitation in her response.” The 
jury had been declaring they were deadlocked for three days.
Coghlan also asked that deliberations cease but again urged the court 
to rule on the defendants’ directed verdict motions before the jury was 
excused.
As soon as he finished, Perry commanded, “Bring the jury.”
I sensed something bad was about to happen. I stood up and 
approached the lectern. “Judge, I don’t see any basis for making rul-
ings on those motions at this time. I would oppose that and ask for an 
opportunity to argue.”
Perry: “We have it under advisement. We don’t need further argu-
ment on them.”
Haas: “This is an attempt to preempt the ruling of the jury. I don’t 
think this would be the appropriate time for the ruling.”
Rock Bottom
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   309 7/29/09   1:30:17 PM


--- PAGE 335 ---
10
Injustice on Trial
Perry: “ Are we finished now? Bring the jury.”
The jury entered and was seated. Perry continued,
In twenty-six years I’ve never seen a more competent, fair-minded jury. 
I recognize, I can see it, that there is a tension, there is a division in the 
jury as I am sure it will pass as you members go from its grip. I have before 
me under advisement a motion that counsel for defendants have made, 
and the court feels that as a matter of law that the plaintiffs and each of 
them has failed to sustain the burden of proof on the issues of evidence 
on every count remaining in the amended complaint.
Accordingly, the defendants’ motion for a directed verdict in favor 
of each and every defendant against each and every plaintiff is granted, 
and judgment is entered here together with costs against each and every 
plaintiff and in favor of every defendant. The jury is hereby discharged 
from further duty. Each juror is free to talk about the case to the attorneys 
for the parties and to anyone. 
Perry hurried off the bench. I felt a pain in my stomach like some-
one just kicked me. I glanced at Flint, shaking my head in disgust. He 
looked angrily at the bench, but the judge was gone. I was stunned. I 
had anticipated some type of jury verdict or even a hung jury. Instead 
Perry dismissed the case against the defendants without a jury decision 
and assessed costs against us. As if the ruling weren’t bad enough, we 
had to watch Coghlan and Volini laughing, getting congratulated, and 
shaking hands with their clients. 
“Let’ s get out of here,” I said, but first I had to say something to 
Florence Smith, our one black juror. She was walking from the jury box. 
When I called her name, she turned around. 
“I was with you,” she said. “I would have held out forever.” 
“Thank you,” I said. “What you did was important.” And it was. A 
white juror heading for the door, who had looked uncomfortable dur-
ing the trial, also came over and shook my and Flint’ s hands. It turned 
out she and Ms. Smith were the jurors willing to vote our way.
In a small conference room off the hallway, we explained what hap-
pened to the Hamptons and Clarks. “Perry couldn’t do it with the jury, 
so he did it himself,” I told them.
“Is this the end of the road?” Iberia asked. As down as I was, I replied, 
“No way.” 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   310 7/29/09   1:30:18 PM


--- PAGE 336 ---
11
Flint added the one bit of good news. “Since Perry decided it, the evi-
dence will be considered favorably to us on appeal. We won’t have the 
burden of overcoming a jury verdict.”
“We owe Florence Smith a tribute,” I said. “If the jury had found for 
the defendants, we would have an almost impossible burden.” As soon 
as I said it, I realized the legal distinctions made little difference to our 
clients or hardly to us at that moment. They seemed insignificant next 
to the overwhelming fact that after seven years, our case had just been 
dismissed.  
Iberia 
told me years later that she did not “see any hope for any of us.” 
She and Francis had missed one or more days of work every week for 
eighteen months to attend the trial. Now the judge had thrown out their 
son’ s case. Iberia and Fannie both wore that expression of tired outrage, 
a familiarity with suffering that black people have had in America; a 
look that says, “I see what your justice system did again.” Herb Reid 
understood that look and said he and the NAACP were not giving up.
On the first floor, I told the press how Perry had made himself the 
jury, and Flint explained how absurd it was for Perry to dismiss a case 
on the grounds that there was insufficient evidence to go to the jury, 
while the jury itself was deadlocked. Montgomery said nothing. I could 
tell he blamed us for the verdict as much as the judge. He headed back 
to his office. Herb Reid came back with us to PLO. There we slumped 
down in the hard chairs of our conference room. For once, there was 
silence. In spite of the hope we conveyed to our clients, I felt we had hit 
rock bottom. 
For two days I stayed home feeling terrible. The free time and walks 
outside I had longed for were not comforting. On Thursday, PLO law-
yers gathered in our conference room. We were not a happy crowd. 
“Things could be worse,” Dennis said. “The jury could have acquitted 
the defendants.” 
“That’ s true if we ever get to appeal,” I said. “Perry is going to make us 
pay the defendants’ costs. This could be tens of thousands of dollars.”
“We’ve gotta appeal,” Flint interrupted. “The bastard can’t get away 
with this.”
“I’ll work on it,” Chick added. “I’ve already done a lot of the 
research.”
“ And who’ s gonna pay for the transcript we need to read and cite in 
our brief?” I asked.
Rock Bottom
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   311 7/29/09   1:30:18 PM


--- PAGE 337 ---
12
Injustice on Trial
“I’m sure it’ s over thirty-five thousand pages.” Nobody answered. 
“It’ s gotta be done,” Dennis said. “We have too much evidence to let 
Perry win.”
“If we get the right appellate panel, we have a chance,” Flint perked 
up.
“Do you think Fred would quit?” someone threw out. We all knew the 
answer. That comment pulled me up. Fred wouldn’t have given up, so 
how could we, who were representing him and his legacy?
“Don’t mourn. Appeal.” Someone threw out, a takeoff on the union 
rallying cry, “Don’t mourn. Organize.” I had to laugh and declare the 
mourning period over.
“I’m in,” I said. “Let’ s get that transcript and nail Perry’ s ass.”
“One good thing,” Flint added. We get to consolidate our entire case 
in one appeal. There’ s nothing left before Perry, thank goodness.” I could 
see he relished another shot at proving the FBI conspiracy.
It’ s a truism that what appears to be our worst nightmare often turns 
out to be a blessing. So it was with Perry’ s ruling. Had he not dismissed 
the shooters, we would have been left with another trial against them, 
still in front of him—a trial we would probably never win.
Before things got better they  got much worse. First, Judge Perry ruled 
our clients must pay the defendants’ costs, consisting mostly of the 
time and expense of the FBI’ s reproducing the documents it had hidden 
and even some transcript costs. Perry assessed their costs at one hun-
dred thousand dollars. On top of that, he set an appeal bond of another 
hundred thousand, creating what appeared to be an insurmountable 
financial obstacle to prevent us from appealing his dismissal. Perry 
continued the sentencing on the pending contempt citations against 
Flint and me until after any appeal, reserving the right to incarcerate 
us later. 
The final blow, the least expected, came by messenger from Jim 
Montgomery. It was a letter announcing that he would now be the sole 
attorney for Iberia Hampton, Deborah Johnson, Verlina Brewer, and 
Brenda Harris. 
When we talked to the other plaintiffs, we found out what happened. 
Montgomery had told each of them he no longer wanted to work with 
us and that our tactics only led to infuriating the judge and prolong-
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   312 7/29/09   1:30:18 PM


--- PAGE 338 ---
1
ing litigation and would not result in winning the case either by way of 
settlement or trial. He implied he could negotiate a settlement if they 
would accept his exclusive representation, but he would also require 
that they sign a new fee agreement, raising the percentage of his con-
tingency fee from one-third to 45 percent.
The letter from Montgomery was demoralizing. I understood why 
our strategy of confrontation did not look like it would bring success. 
Montgomery offered accommodation, which works in most civil cases, 
but I believed that our defendants would not settle until we gained the 
upper hand. For now they were riding high.
“Do you think Montgomery has been offered a deal if he separates 
from us?” I asked Flint and Dennis.
“I think he hopes he can cop a deal,” Dennis said. “But I don’t think 
there is one—not now, anyway.”
“Why would Coghlan and Volini want to settle now after they have 
a verdict? Their gravy train is guaranteed through the appeal and ten 
more hung juries,” Flint said. 
“They’re certainly not going to settle until we get an appeal going, 
and right now that’ s problematic,” Dennis added. “We have to get over 
the hurdle of the appeal bond.” 
Rock Bottom
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   313 7/29/09   1:30:19 PM


--- PAGE 339 ---
1
Out of the Abyss 
W
e still represented Fannie Clark,  as well as Doc Satchel, Harold 
Bell, Blair Anderson, and Louis Truelock. We didn’t have a lot of 
time to bemoan the division of plaintiffs. We had to file the notice of 
appeal and draft the motion to convince the Seventh Circuit to overturn 
Perry’ s requirement of an appeal bond, and time was running out. 
Dennis and Chick helped Flint and me research and draft the motion. 
We argued our clients’ indigence; the importance of being permitted an 
appeal; the political, legal, and public significance of the case; and the 
strength of the evidence—enough to cause the jury to be divided even 
after a one-sided trial. Perry’ s appeal bond was a vengeful effort to pre-
vent us from exposing and reversing his unjust rulings. 
Although Montgomery’ s time for challenging the appeal bond had 
expired, he filed nothing for the other plaintiffs. We had warned him of 
the deadline. I feared that his plaintiffs, including Iberia, would have to 
post the appeal bond or, more likely, forfeit their right of appeal when 
they could not raise the bond. Obtaining and even winning a new trial 
without Iberia, not to mention Deborah, Verlina, and Brenda, would be 
sad indeed.
  A few days later, the appellate court struck down the appeal bond. 
Fortunately, they didn’t restrict their order to our plaintiffs. We were free 
to challenge on appeal all of Perry’ s dismissal orders, his contempt cita-
tions, and his vindictive awarding of costs. We were back in business, or 
at least in court.
Writing an appeal from a thirty-five-thousand-page transcript, which 
we did not yet have, seemed an overwhelming task. The brief required 
a statement of facts with each factual assertion backed up by a citation 
to the trial transcript. This was followed by legal arguments, supported 
by facts and the law. Sorting and prioritizing the issues was a huge task. 
Most important was demonstrating that we had enough evidence to 
warrant at least a jury’ s verdict on all our claims, including conspiracy.
45
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   314 7/29/09   1:30:19 PM


--- PAGE 340 ---
1
Our first objective was getting a copy of the trial transcript that the 
other side had received every day during the trial. We filed a petition 
to proceed in forma pauperis (as poor persons) before Judge Perry. He 
quickly denied the motion, gratuitously stating that the appeal was 
“frivolous” and “without merit.” We then went to Claude Youker, Perry’ s 
court reporter. He agreed to provide us copies of the trial transcript to be 
paid for when and if we got the money. Then Perry did us a favor, unwit-
tingly of course. He wrote a twenty-five-page “Summary of the Facts,” 
which he sent the parties with an accompanying letter. “Because of the 
complexity of this case and the extensive documentation involved,” he 
wrote, “I am of the opinion that copies of the summary may help the 
attorneys for all parties in organizing the appeal.”
Perry’ s summary was nothing more that the defendants version of 
the evidence. He wrote that the purpose of COINTELPRO was to pre-
vent violence and accepted as fact that Groth obtained his information 
from his own reliable informant. Thank you, Judge Perry, I thought. 
His summary proved he had considered the evidence in the light most 
favorable to the defendants, the opposite of what the correct legal stan-
dard required.
As soon as the trial transcript arrived, Flint, Dennis, and I began 
working with Chick and other PLO members to write the brief. Flint 
spent whole days at Lake Michigan reading and outlining the tran-
script and writing up the facts, while I reviewed and corrected the 
emerging statements of fact. We received some legal and financial 
support from the NAACP and their counsel, Jim Myerson, in New 
York. The National Council of Churches raised money for transcript 
costs. Given the publicity of the trial, Flint and I had plenty of calls 
for representation, but we only had time to take a few cases. When 
I wasn’t writing the facts for our brief, I was defending paying cli-
ents in criminal court to support the office. Flint was becoming an 
expert on civil rights law, interpreting new decisions for civil rights’ 
attorneys.
In the fall of 1977, PLO moved. Our old building was torn down, and 
our new offices on the sixteenth floor of the Fisher Building were even 
closer to the federal courts, where we were beginning to take on more 
civil rights cases. Maggie and I still lived in her apartment on Roscoe 
Street, and our relationship coalesced around our new son, Roger, and 
the excitement of raising him.
Out of the Abyss
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   315 7/29/09   1:30:19 PM


--- PAGE 341 ---
1
Injustice on Trial
That fall was a blur of reading transcripts, gleaning salient facts, writ-
ing them down coherently, and carefully citing each fact to the relevant 
page of the transcript. For three months I wrote in longhand, as did 
Flint. Linda Turner typed up our drafts. Her willingness to stay up all 
night as we made corrections and she retyped each draft made it pos-
sible to meet our deadlines. Dennis and Chick did much of the editing 
and rewriting, and others helped with the legal argument. 
The brief ended up 274 pages long with 100 pages of appendices. 
Dennis supplied the adjectives, and Fred’ s inspiration had a hand in 
writing it. We began the section entitled “The Massive Prejudice of the 
Court Below” with Perry’ s declaration from page 33,365 of the transcript 
about a fair trial: “You bet your life you are not going to get it.”
Our brief was an indictment of government wrongdoing and cover-
up. It is at least as applicable today as when it was written. We gath-
ered the injustices we’d seen, the realizations that came from trying 
to expose them, and our eight years of frustrations into its final 
passages.
[Perry] conducted a trial, which was an agonizing reenactment of the raid, 
and cover-up—a counterintelligence action in which the Defendants 
again cooperated to neutralize and disrupt the Plaintiffs and their lawyers 
in the Courtroom by discrediting them to the jury, whom they constantly 
sought to misdirect. The Federal Defendants again stayed in the back-
ground, hiding their involvement while encouraging the State Defendants 
and their counsel to do the dirty work. In their corner was the trial Judge 
who unfailingly supported their cause because he was committed to its 
triumph.
This Court must see to it that the conspiracy proceeds no further, as 
well as holding those shown to be responsible accountable. Plaintiffs have 
sought to prosecute this case for eight years in the public interest as well 
as their own. FBI racial counterintelligence was a star-spangled blueprint 
for genocide, and still is if allowed to exist, and if those who operate it are 
still allowed to do so. They still have the mission of neutralization against 
their perceived political opponents, and they still demand immunity for 
their operations. They still purport to be protecting the country; and they 
still do not accept the Bill of Rights.
For all this, the undersigned demand detailed and determined redress, 
to be ordered and guaranteed by this Honorable Court through the full 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   316 7/29/09   1:30:20 PM


--- PAGE 342 ---
1
and timely exercise of its judicial responsibility, upon the authority of the 
truth and the People of the United States, until full justice is finally done.
All Power to the People. 
Montgomery filed a short brief adopting some of our research and 
arguments. He focused on getting a new trial against the shooters. He 
didn’t join in our accusations of Perry’ s prejudice.
In their answer filed sixty days later, The FBI defendants claimed 
that they were immune from liability because they were acting within 
the scope of their official duties as FBI employees carrying out the 
Counterintelligence Program. This was an ironic twist given their years 
of denial that COINTELPRO was relevant. Taken to its logical exten-
sion, this defense would allow FBI agents to destroy and neutralize the 
Panthers, or any other political organization, by violent means. They 
asked for carte blanche to commit murder and violate the Constitution 
with impunity. It is the “good German” defense of “just doing my duty” 
that was rejected at the Nuremberg trials. It is similar to the immunity 
being claimed today for those who ordered and implemented torture 
at Abu Ghraib and Guantánamo Bay detention centers based on their 
carrying out the government-mandated torture policy. 
Our reply brief warned that the urge to grant immunity to all govern-
ment wrongdoing was a fascist impulse: “The court must reject these 
‘I was only following orders’ assertions out of hand. To do otherwise 
would sanction a program of official lawlessness of a magnitude never 
before contemplated and a viciousness never before seen.”
The state defendants’ answer contained an egregious attempt to 
protect Groth from having to name his purported informant. They 
argued that disclosure would be “a disastrous blow to law enforcement 
. . . and dry up police sources.” In our reply brief, we countered, “The 
defendants’ contention that the anonymity of the informant must be 
protected at all costs is really nothing more than an attempt to shield 
themselves from liability.”
Finally, all the defendants strongly objected to the sanctions we 
asked the court to impose and the interim fees we sought. Our reply 
brief answered their objections:
Unless this Court exercises its statutory and equitable powers and pro-
vides Plaintiffs with the resources with which to continue the battle, the 
Out of the Abyss
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   317 7/29/09   1:30:20 PM


--- PAGE 343 ---
1
Injustice on Trial
Defendants’ economic war of attrition against the Plaintiffs will continue 
and the dollar bill will prove more powerful than the Bill of Rights.
Janis Joplin sang, “Freedom’ s just another word for nothing left to 
lose.” When we wrote the reply brief, we had lost everything but the 
freedom to speak the truth. We argued that the defendants were broadly 
inviting the court to join in the conspiracy to cover up their crimes. And 
on our eighty-fourth page, we concluded:
This Court must fully accept the reality that a mere acknowledgment of 
the wrongdoing which has taken place is not enough; decisive, compre-
hensive action is required to prevent the ultimate success of the conspir-
acy. It cannot be left to these indigent Plaintiffs and exhausted lawyers to 
return to the beginning, and face the richly financed resistance of three 
governments, still bent on suppressing the truth.
The Plaintiffs must be armed on remand with all of the evidence, and 
with enough money to carry through; and it must be made clear to the 
District Court that the law, the rules, and the truth will be upheld. 
On August 18, 1978, Flint, Dennis, and I rode the elevator to the top floor 
of the Dirksen Federal Building to argue the appeal. We had been practic-
ing our argument for days in front of Chick and Jon Moore, who had re-
cently joined the office and had worked on the reply brief. We signed in 
as three of the appellants’ attorneys. Montgomery’ s signature was already 
there as the fourth. Thomas Fairchild, Luther Swygert, and Wilbur Pell 
were the names of the judges listed to hear each of the three cases.
“We’re two out of three,” Flint said excitedly when we found a small 
briefing room and sat down at the table. We had researched the judges. 
We had a good draw.
We couldn’t have done better than Judge Swygert. He was regarded as 
the most liberal judge on the circuit. Thomas Fairchild, the chief judge, 
was more in the center but was solid on the Civil Rights Act and the 
Constitution. He was part of the panel that reversed Perry in 1973 after 
Perry had dismissed our case the first time. The third judge, Wilbur Pell, 
was an archconservative who belittled civil rights claims. We had little 
chance with him, but we hoped he would not have much influence on 
the other two.
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   318 7/29/09   1:30:21 PM


--- PAGE 344 ---
1
“We have a shot with this bunch,” Dennis said. I was relieved. I 
couldn’t imagine arguing before a panel of three judges like Perry, if 
indeed three of his kind even existed. It was my first appellate argument 
and I was nervous as hell.
At 9:00 
a.m. we entered the large, heavily carpeted courtroom. There 
was a table for counsel on each side, and in front was the podium 
with a microphone, well below the bench where the three judges sat. 
We put our papers on the appellant’ s table on the right, next to Jim 
Montgomery. The rows of benches for the spectators behind us were 
full, with the front rows reserved for the plaintiffs, defendants, and the 
press. My mother had again come up from Atlanta, and she was sitting 
behind Iberia. 
Some of the familiar tension returned as we faced Coghlan and Volini 
for the first time in more than a year. Next to them were Touhy, Witkowski, 
and Harland Leathers, a Justice Department attorney who argued for 
the FBI. Jon Moore and Chick Hoffman had brought Zimmers’ s scale 
model into the courtroom at 8:45 
a.m. and placed it below the bench.
We all stood as the three judges walked in from the left and assumed 
their places in their high-backed leather chairs. Chief Judge Fairchild 
was in the middle and stated the rules: Ninety minutes for each side; 
the clerk would turn on the white light on the podium when there was 
a minute left, and the red light would come on when time was up. Time 
would be strictly enforced. The lawyers did not have to repeat the evi-
dence because the judges had read our briefs, but both sides were free 
to emphasize specific facts they felt were important. 
Montgomery spoke slowly and dramatically, with pauses after each 
salient fact. He walked over and pointed to the rooms in the scale model 
to show the judges where each event had occurred. He described Fred 
“being shot in his bed as he lay drugged and asleep,” and the two fatal 
shots “coming from the doorway of his bedroom,” while pointing to 
these locations. The large appellate courtroom reverberated with his 
deep, rich voice as he highlighted Brenda’ s testimony. She had seen 
“Mark Clark fall toward the floor after a shot from Davis, and she saw 
the flash of Mark’ s gun as he was falling.” Montgomery emphasized 
that after the police had shot Brenda and Mark and secured the living 
room, they had total control of the apartment and should have stopped 
firing.
Out of the Abyss
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   319 7/29/09   1:30:21 PM


--- PAGE 345 ---
20
Injustice on Trial
I spoke next, afraid that I’ d be asked about a case whose facts I 
couldn’t remember. I always had a tough time connecting the facts of a 
case with its title. I described the specific actions of each FBI defendant 
and explained how they fit together to set up the deadly raid. The acts 
themselves were sufficient for a jury to find them part of the conspiracy. 
When we added that they were operating pursuant to COINTELPRO 
mandates to destroy, disrupt, and cripple the Panthers and neutralize 
their leadership, the evidence was overwhelming. 
As Flint walked up to face the judges, he picked up the silver pitcher 
resting on the podium and poured water into a glass. He looked up but 
kept pouring as the glass overflowed, spilling water on Flint and the car-
pet. Recalling the earlier contempt order surrounding the water pitcher 
in the trial court, Judge Fairchild interjected, “I knew we shouldn’t have 
an open pitcher here.” Everyone laughed, including Flint. For a brief 
moment the charged atmosphere was broken. 
Flint continued and focused on the cover-up as evidence of the 
defendants’ guilt. He emphasized the contrast between the federal 
grand jury, where Johnson, Piper, and Mitchell never mentioned the 
FBI role, and the bonus documents where they claimed credit for the 
raid and its “success.” When we finished our arguments, the judges had 
asked us very few questions.
John Touhy had a much harder time. After a long, boring recitation 
having to do with the peripheral defendants, the judges became impa-
tient and questioned him about the discrepancies between the physical 
evidence and the raiders’ testimony. He wasted a lot of time explaining 
that Volini would answer their questions. His cocounsel finally passed 
him a note telling him to sit down. 
When Volini started, little time was left. He repeated the raiders’ ver-
sion of the opening event; Brenda fired her shotgun at the incoming 
police. Judge Fairchild confronted him with Brenda Harris’ s testimony 
denying this. Volini tried to discredit her, but Fairchild kept asking, “Isn’t 
the credibility of the witnesses for the jury to decide?” Every time Volini 
repeated the raiders’ testimony, Fairchild and Swygert confronted him 
with the conflicting accounts and physical evidence.
Volini became more and more frustrated and finally blurted out, 
“Who are we fooling here?” We’re “nitpicking,” he said, referring to the 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   320 7/29/09   1:30:21 PM


--- PAGE 346 ---
21
judges’ questions. He regressed to his trial litany of how dangerous the 
Panthers were and how many unregistered guns they possessed.
Judge Swygert stopped him. “ Are you saying the Panthers have no 
constitutional rights?” 
 Volini paused and tried to backtrack. “No, Your Honor, I wouldn’t 
suggest that.”
Swygert confronted Volini with Hanrahan’ s statement that Hampton 
had fired at the police from the back bedroom. Volini was forced to 
admit that no one had told Hanrahan this.
After Volini, Witkowski defended Groth’ s refusal to name his infor-
mant. He argued that we had failed to provide enough evidence show-
ing his nonexistence to make Groth release the name. This seemed 
absurd; everyone knew proving a negative is almost impossible, par-
ticularly when the person with knowledge is shielded from questioning. 
Fairchild forced Witkowski to agree that if the informant did not exist, 
this would undermine the entire basis for the raid. Fairchild asked him, 
what was the reason Groth had withheld the name? Witkowski hesi-
tated then replied, “Danger to the informant.” He didn’t dare argue the 
nonexistent “danger to other persons” privilege that Coghlan had con-
cocted for Perry. 
Justice Department attorney Harland Leathers started by saying the 
FBI defendants were immune because they were carrying out national 
policy and acting pursuant to their duties. The “acting under orders” 
defense. Swygert asked, “ Are you saying that they could act illegally and 
still be immune? Would they have immunity if they gave Hanrahan a 
gun and told him to shoot Fred Hampton?”
Leathers tried a new strategy, arguing that the FBI defendants did 
not participate in the raid and were only passing along information. 
Fairchild responded, “If the FBI gave a floor plan to someone planning 
a bank robbery, wouldn’t they be accountable?” 
Leathers answered that the FBI had no knowledge of any illegal 
activity and no intent to cause any. Fairchild asked, couldn’t the FBI 
assume after November 13 that the police might want revenge? Didn’t 
COINTELPRO indicate an intent to destroy the Panthers and their 
leadership? Weren’t these questions for the jury to decide? Leathers 
responded by repeating that the FBI defendants had acted lawfully.
Out of the Abyss
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   321 7/29/09   1:30:22 PM


--- PAGE 347 ---
22
Injustice on Trial
As he finished, Leathers said he was appalled that in our reply brief, 
we accused him of a “fascist” mentality when he’ s claiming that the FBI 
was immune from liability for its actions pursuant to COINTELPRO 
because they were doing their duty and carrying out national policy.
When Dennis rose for rebuttal, Pell asked him if the court would also 
be part of the fascist conspiracy if it upheld Perry’ s rulings. This ques-
tion looked like trouble.
We could not ignore the fascist aspect of COINTELPRO, Dennis 
replied, with its claim of absolute immunity for government miscon-
duct. COINTELPRO was “so outrageous” that it “can’t be properly char-
acterized” any other way. 
Pell again challenged Dennis on his terminology, but Dennis con-
tinued. He shared our dilemma with the judges. “We were constantly 
forced to choose between exaggeration and restraint in describing the 
most notorious event of our lives and the most incredible train of events 
following it.” 
I feared Swygert and Fairchild would feel the need to protect Pell 
against Dennis’ s characterizations of the FBI.
After a few more back-and-forths, Fairchild intervened and told 
Dennis to focus on the facts of our case, not the abstract labels. Dennis 
balked at first, saying we could not ignore the threat that COINTELPRO 
imposed nationally. He then described specifically how COINTELPRO 
had led to the December 4 raid. He ended with a plea to the court not 
merely to reverse Perry but to arm us with the necessary tools—interim 
attorney’ s fees and sanctions—to have a fair chance at the next trial.
“This case will be taken under advisement,” Fairchild announced. 
The judges stood and walked out. Flint, Dennis, and I gave each other 
positive nods. We shook hands with Montgomery; he had been at his 
best. As we exited, I saw my mother talking to Iberia. 
“I hope you get some justice,” my mother said. “Jeff’ s told me how 
much you’ve had to take.”
“Well, he and Flint have had to take it also,” Iberia responded. “They 
deserve to win.” 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   322 7/29/09   1:30:22 PM


--- PAGE 348 ---
Part V 
Vindication
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   323 7/29/09   1:30:22 PM


--- PAGE 349 ---
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   324 7/29/09   1:30:22 PM


--- PAGE 350 ---
2
A Victory
tlanta in April is as beautiful as any city in the world. The white dog- 
  woods, the multicolored azaleas, the pink flowering quince all come 
to life everywhere, particularly in the Chastain Park area where my par-
ents live. It was still chilly and gray in Chicago when Maggie and I came 
to my parents’ house for a visit in 1979 with one-and-a-half-year-old 
Roger and Maggie six months pregnant. My dad watched incredulously 
as Roger donned a hat and cane and did an amazingly graceful version 
of a tap shoe routine he’ d learned to mimic before he learned to talk.
On the Monday afternoon of a particularly gorgeous day, Maggie 
and I were visiting friends of hers who lived outside Atlanta. We were in 
the kitchen of their home when the phone rang. “It’ s for you,” Maggie’ s 
friend said. I had left the number where we would be with my mom. I 
took the phone and walked out onto the steps outside.
“Jeff, we won,” I heard Flint say. “The decision came down today.”
“What, are you kidding?” I asked, knowing he wasn’t. 
“No, it’ s real and it’ s amazing. We won on everything. A new trial 
against all the defendants, sanctions against the feds, Groth has to 
name his informant, and even our contempts were reversed.”
“ And—,” I started to ask.
“Yes, they got rid of Perry and even awarded us interim fees. It’ s 
incredible, from the little I’ve read so far. Swygert wrote the opinion 
and adopted our uncompromising view of the case and analysis of the 
evidence.”  
I was elated.
Flint added that Pell had written a vicious dissenting opinion attack-
ing us, and he expected that the defendants would seek a rehearing 
from the entire Seventh Circuit. A chilling thought, too demoralizing to 
contemplate at that moment.
46
A
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   325 7/29/09   1:30:23 PM


--- PAGE 351 ---
2
Vindication
“I only wish I was at PLO to celebrate,” I ended. “Congratulate Dennis, 
Chick, Jon, and Peter for me,” I said. “They made it possible. And of 
course you, Flint, you’ve been the best.” I was crying. 
“You weren’t bad yourself,” Flint said. We laughed.
Maggie had heard my excitement and came outside. “We did it,” I 
said. “We won everything.”
She was so happy tears came, and we hugged. She’ d been through a 
lot. I had hardly relaxed since the trial. “Call your parents,” Maggie said. 
“No, let’ s surprise them when Dad gets home.”
That night I told them to sit down. When they did I said, “Guess what? 
Mom, that call you forwarded was from Flint. We won!”
I have never seen my dad happier. His smile and hug made me feel it 
was OK I didn’t get into Harvard. I’ d still done well practicing law. Mom 
wanted to know the details, so I told her all I knew.
The next day the opinion arrived. Flint had included some press 
clippings. I took the whole packet into my dad’ s study, sat down in his 
comfortable black reclining chair with the matching ottoman, and 
read. “New Panther Trial Granted, Survivors Get Another Chance at 
Hanrahan,” the Chicago Defender headlines declared over the photo 
of Fred’ s bloodstained bed. The Tribune and Sun-Times had similar 
headlines.
I began reading Judge Swygert’ s opinion. After a few pages of his 
opinion, it was clear he understood the implications of our evidence 
and grasped how the conspiracy worked. He understood the signifi-
cance of Mitchell’ s placing the floor plan in the one file where it could 
be destroyed; Jalovec’ s acknowledging to Mitchell that his information 
was the source for the raid; and the manner in which the federal grand 
jury was used to cover up the FBI’ s role. 
 Judge Swygert rejected the defendants’ arguments that the FBI 
defendants and the raiders couldn’t be in a conspiracy because they 
didn’t know each other. He wrote:
The participants in the conspiracy must share the general conspirato-
rial objective, but they need not know all the details of the plan designed 
to achieve the objective or possess the same motives for desiring the 
intended conspiratorial result. . . . Plaintiffs did offer sufficient evidence 
to warrant a jury determination of whether a conspiracy existed. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   326 7/29/09   1:30:23 PM


--- PAGE 352 ---
2
We had always alleged a single conspiracy including both the exe-
cution of the raid and the cover-up. Swygert said we could show two 
conspiracies—
the first conspiracy was designed to subvert and eliminate the Black 
Panther Party and its members . . . the second conspiracy harassed the 
survivors of the raid. Moreover, the postraid conspiracy was intended to 
frustrate any redress the plaintiffs might seek and more important to con-
ceal the true character of the preraid and raid activities of the defendants 
involved in the first conspiracy.
Swygert directed, “the trial court upon remand should provide jury 
instructions that will insure the jury is aware of the alternatives of find-
ing single or multiple conspiracies in the evidence presented by plain-
tiffs.” Swygert intended for a jury, not the next trial judge, to decide the 
case. 
Judge Swygert rejected Hanrahan’ s claims of absolute immunity, stat-
ing it did not apply when he was supervising police officers or holding 
press conferences prejudicing defendants’ rights to a fair trial. Neither 
did the FBI defendants have immunity from the Civil Rights Act when 
they acted in conspiracy with each other and with local officials to vio-
late established constitutional rights.
The court ruled that we had made a case under Section 1985 of the 
Civil Rights Act, “Conspiracies involving racial or discriminatory intent.” 
Swygert commented, “The statute was intended, perhaps more than 
anything else, to provide redress for victims of conspiracies impelled by 
a commingling of racial and political motives. And this is precisely the 
sort of conspiracy alleged by plaintiffs in this case.” 
Judge Swygert’ s pronouncements on the nature and scope of conspir-
acies to violate civil rights remain a primer of civil rights and conspiracy 
law today. So do his findings that state actors who fail to intervene to 
protect the civil rights of citizens are also liable. Thus, the nonshooters 
who witnessed the Panther beatings after the raid but did nothing to 
intervene could be held liable. 
In addition to reinstating our case and ordering a new trial, Swygert 
made three other rulings that greatly improved our posture in the 
lawsuit.
A Victory
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   327 7/29/09   1:30:23 PM


--- PAGE 353 ---
2
Vindication
First, he rejected Groth’ s claim of an absolute informant privilege. “ A 
considerable amount of evidence was introduced leading to the conclu-
sion that either Groth did not have an informant and merely repeated 
the information he had received from Jalovec in the affidavit for the war-
rant, or that O’Neal was Groth’ s informant.” Swygert acknowledged that 
if Groth’ s informant did not exist, the warrant would be invalid, sup-
ported only by “misrepresented triple hearsay, and this would further 
bolster plaintiffs’ conspiracy claims” and “highlight the importance of 
the federal defendants in the alleged conspiracy.”
Amen, he’s got it right there.
Next Swygert took on the issue of the FBI defendants’ violations of 
pretrial discovery: “Moreover, sanctions should be imposed against the 
federal defendants and counsel representing them at the first trial for 
repeatedly disobeying court orders to produce documentary material.”
This was too good to be true. I’d love to see Kanter’s and Christenbury’s 
faces when they read this. I had to call Flint. 
“I just read the part about sanctions. What do you think this means?” 
I asked. 
“Dennis and I have been talking about that,” he said. “It’ s interesting 
that Swygert cared more about enforcing Perry’ s discovery orders than 
Perry ever did. We think we should get the next trial judge to consider 
entering judgment against the FBI defendants and fining their lawyers. 
If not, the next jury should be told the FBI hid evidence, and they may 
consider that as evidence of guilt.”
“They all sound good to me,” I replied. “ And well deserved.”
“Have you gotten to our contempts yet?” Flint asked. 
“Coming up,” I replied. “I can’t wait.” I hung up and kept reading.
Swygert described the circumstances that led to Flint’ s contempt, 
including Perry’ s erroneous accusation that I had “deliberately and will-
fully misread the stipulation,” his refusal to provide us with a transcript, 
and his refusal “to correct the record immediately.” He continued with, 
“These combined circumstances apparently caused Taylor to reach the 
breaking point of his patience and forbearance.” Swygert noted that the 
incident occurred while the jury was in recess. “While we do not intend 
to condone Taylor’ s gesture of anger, we are convinced . . . there was no 
interference with the conduct of the trial. There was no obstruction in 
the administration of justice.”
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   328 7/29/09   1:30:24 PM


--- PAGE 354 ---
2
One down. Let’s see what he says about me. 
Haas was held in contempt for saying “we can’t cover up the cover-up.” 
After saying this, he tried to explain: “that is part of our complaint that 
they covered up, Judge.” The judge, however, took the remark as person-
ally directed at him. In the context of what happened before, the judge, in 
our opinion, had no reason to interpret the remark in that manner; and 
should have given Haas the benefit of every doubt.
Thank you, Judge Swygert.
He went on to cite with approval the principle stated in the Seventh 
Circuit’ s reversal of Kunstler and Weinglass’ s contempts in the 
Conspiracy Seven trial: 
Attorneys have a right to be persistent, vociferous, contentious, and 
imposing, even to the point of appearing obnoxious, when acting on their 
client’ s behalf. An attorney may, with impunity, take full advantage of the 
range of conduct that our adversary system allows. Accordingly, we find 
the contempt citations are unwarranted when considered in their factual 
setting. 
Vindicated again. A long time comin’, but it sure felt good. 
Swygert also awarded us interim attorneys’ fees for winning the 
appeal and declared that the case should be reassigned to a new trial 
judge, who should give the “retrial high priority.” 
“Perry’ s history!” I exclaimed. 
“It won’t be nearly as good theater next time,” Maggie said, with a 
whimsical smile, “but your chances of surviving are much better.” 
Swygert’s opinion in Hampton v. Hanrahan (cited at 600 F . 2d 600) 
remains among the most famous civil rights decisions ever rendered. 
Pell’s vituperative dissent conceding he had not read the entire record 
was a sharp criticism on Swygert and an outright attack on PLO and 
the Panthers. It reminded me of how easily the opinion could have 
gone the other way. Nevertheless, it was time to celebrate, and the day 
I got back to Chicago we partied well into the night wearing freshly 
lettered T-shirts proclaiming, 
right on, luther! compliments of Chick 
Hoffman.
A Victory
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   329 7/29/09   1:30:24 PM


--- PAGE 355 ---
0
Onward 
B
y the time the Seventh  Circuit decision came down, the after-
math of another event was demanding more of my time than the 
Hampton case. On July 22, 1978, a few weeks before our Hampton oral 
argument, there was a riot at Pontiac Correctional Center in central 
Illinois. Three guards had been stabbed to death and the prison was on 
indefinite lockdown. After Attica, I had represented prisoners in a num-
ber of suits challenging conditions in Illinois prisons. The century-old 
maximum-security prison in Pontiac was among the worst in the state. 
Two days after the riot, or rebellion as we called it, I visited prisoners 
I knew at Pontiac. They urged me to get involved in defending whoever 
would be charged with the guards’ deaths. Prison officials were pub-
licly stating they would seek the death penalty. For the next six months, 
I drove the one hundred miles to Pontiac Correctional Center at least 
once a week. 
First, I gathered information on the conditions there, which included 
weeks and then months of twenty-four-hour-a-day lockdowns in tiny 
cells five tiers high in a steel cell house that was brutally hot during the 
day and freezing at night. Food, often containing rat feces and human 
hair, was passed to the prisoners through chuckholes in their cell doors.
PLO brought a suit challenging the continued lockdown. After we 
provided the court with prisoners’ firsthand accounts, we convinced 
Judge John Powers Crowley to accompany me to the prison for a sur-
prise visit. The prison had been on twenty-four-hour lockdown for two 
months. He and I walked the intensely hot galleries strewn with stink-
ing, uncollected garbage, watching comatose men sleeping in their 
underwear at noon. Judge Crowley did not want to tell me his impres-
sions informally, but he kept shaking his head, and I could tell he was 
mortified. The next day he ordered that the lockdown be lifted.
47
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   330 7/29/09   1:30:25 PM


--- PAGE 356 ---
1
 The success of our lawsuit and the sympathetic and dramatic TV foot-
age of the conditions at Pontiac Correctional Center turned the public’ s 
sympathy from the guards and toward the prisoners as people came to 
understand the riot as a spontaneous response to inhumane treatment. 
Nevertheless, by the middle of 1979, the Department of Corrections 
charged seventeen prisoners with conspiracy to riot and murder. As 
the lawyer who had been visiting regularly since the riot, I had earned 
the confidence of most of the defendants. I was in the best position to 
organize the Pontiac Brothers legal team. With seventeen men facing 
the death penalty, I couldn’t abandon them. There were other PLOers to 
help with the Hampton case, and the new trial seemed far away. 
The Pontiac defense occupied the majority of my time from late 1978 
through the criminal trial, which began two years later. I played Flint’ s 
role, marshaling and indexing the documents, and with Michael’ s help, 
drafting many of the legal motions. I met with the defendants regularly 
in Pontiac and helped them recruit lawyers who would work for a joint 
defense. The Cook County Bar Association, Chicago’ s black lawyers 
organization, encouraged their members to help the Pontiac Brothers. 
We wanted quality lawyers for all the men charged as quickly as pos-
sible to avoid the defendants getting nervous and suspicious and testi-
fying against each other in exchange for leniency. 
The follow-up legal work on the Hampton case fell heavily on Flint 
and Dennis, with backup from Chick and Jon Moore. Both were excel-
lent writers and researchers. Jon had joined the office to work on the 
Hampton appeal and had proved his merits working on our reply brief. 
I was still available to read their motions, strategize, and argue in court, 
but the defense of the Pontiac prisoners was becoming as intense as the 
Hampton trial had been. Also needing my attention was our second son, 
Andrew Hampton Haas-Roche, who was born on September 5, 1979.
Flint’ s stature in the legal community and his self-assurance grew 
with the Hampton trial and especially the appeal. He and other Lawyers 
Guild members started the Police Misconduct Litigation Manual, which 
remains the most highly regarded primer for civil rights attorneys. The 
first issue was devoted to an analysis of Judge Swygert’ s opinion. 
Flint tackled the new legal challenges in the Hampton case, more 
determined than ever. The defendants were petitioning the entire 
Onward
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   331 7/29/09   1:30:25 PM


--- PAGE 357 ---
2
Vindication
Seventh Circuit to reverse Swygert. They needed a majority of the 
eight circuit judges to get a rehearing. Flint took the lead in answer-
ing the multiple arguments contained in the defendants’ briefs, which 
were basically rewrites of the issues they lost in the original appeal. On 
September 12, by a 3–3 vote, the rehearing was denied. If the two judges 
who’ d recused themselves had remained on the panel, Swygert’ s deci-
sion would have likely been revisited and very likely reversed. 
A month after the court of appeals ruling, the Chicago Sun-Times 
reported that Judge Pell, who wrote the scathing dissent and who 
voted for a rehearing, had been an FBI agent and remained active in 
the Society of Former Special Agents of the FBI. This group lobbied for 
and funded the legal defense of former FBI director L. Patrick Gray, 
accused of illegal surveillances of radicals, as well as Thomas Kearney, 
an FBI agent charged with illegal mail opening and wiretapping. Pell 
had excluded his FBI stint and membership in the former FBI support 
organization from his official resume. 
When the Justice Department informed Judge Perry it had decided 
not to appeal Swygert’ s reversal of Flint and my contempts, Perry was 
so disappointed he wrote his own brief to justify his actions and uphold 
his contempt findings. This unprecedented partisan action by the trial 
judge did more to show “he was an activist seeking combat,” as we had 
described him in our appellate brief, than anything we could have done. 
I was delighted when the Seventh Circuit denied his plea.
Following Swygert’ s instructions, Flint submitted a bill for our appel-
late work. He calculated he had put in 1,532 hours at $80 per hour and 
I had put in 542 hours at $90. Together with hours from the rest of our 
office and a multiplier because of the difficulty of the work and the 
uncertainty of getting paid, we sought $500,000 in appellate fees. John 
Coghlan, who had received more than twice that amount personally, 
was quoted in the paper, saying, “I’m pleased to see that for once they 
are not posing to be in this thing for the public good. I’m glad to see they 
like the buck the same as the rest of us do. It reinforces my opinion of 
human nature.” 
Despite this endorsement of our humanity, Coghlan filed strenuous 
objections to our receiving any fees, and the Seventh Circuit set our fee 
award at one hundred thousand dollars.
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   332 7/29/09   1:30:25 PM


--- PAGE 358 ---

As expected, Coghlan and Volini, who had already received over two 
million dollars of public money, filed for certiorari, or leave to appeal 
Swygert’ s ruling to the U.S. Supreme Court. Putting more resources into 
defending Hanrahan and the raiders was met with strong resistance 
from black members of the Cook County Board of Commissioners 
and the City Council. A Chicago Daily Defender  editorial captured the 
majority black sentiment:
The major decision makers at the Cook County and federal government 
levels deserve contempt for their decision to fight the Black Panther rul-
ing. . . . Essentially, this means all of us taxpayers will continue to pour 
millions of dollars into an endless and futile effort. . . . As a small, vocal 
segment of the public, we state our resentment of this action. We believe 
the folks out in the street resent it too. There is no real doubt about what 
happened on Dec. 4, 1969. The only doubt is when our exalted public offi-
cials will stop playing games at our expense. 
We answered the government’ s petition to the Supreme Court on 
behalf of our five plaintiffs and hoped that our pleading would stand 
for all the survivors because Montgomery filed nothing on behalf of 
the four he was representing. We still had received no money, and the 
lengthy briefs in the Seventh Circuit and again in the Supreme Court 
were time consuming and exhausting. Michael and I were getting paid 
thirty-five dollars per hour by the state of Illinois for the Pontiac defense. 
That kept PLO afloat.
We feared that the defendants would get the four judges they needed 
to have the Supreme Court grant certiorari and take the case. Justice 
John Paul Stevens, a liberal justice formerly from the Seventh Circuit, 
had removed himself because he wrote the first Hampton opinion 
reversing Perry. We filed a brief to disqualify the very conservative justice 
William Rehnquist because he had worked in the Justice Department 
during the time of the federal grand jury and had been the chief attor-
ney for Attorney General John Mitchell, a potential defendant in our 
case. Rehnquist refused to step down.
 On June 2, 1980, more than a year after Swygert had ruled, the 
Supreme Court, by a 7–1 vote on the shooters and a 5–3 vote on the 
Onward
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   333 7/29/09   1:30:26 PM


--- PAGE 359 ---

Vindication
federal defendants, refused to take the case. Justice Lewis Powell issued 
a scathing dissent with respect to the federal defendants, reminiscent 
of Pell. He wrote that our objective was not monetary damages but “a 
larger target—the FBI.” Not surprisingly, Rehnquist joined Chief Justice 
Warren Burger and Powell in the dissent. Despite the decision uphold-
ing our opinion, the court reversed Swygert 7–1 on awarding interim 
fees, with only Justice Thurgood Marshall dissenting. Again, we had no 
funds to pursue the case and unpaid bills from the first trial.
When the Supreme Court denied certiorari, I was preparing the 
defense of Joseph Smith, one of ten Pontiac Brothers set to go on trial in 
September 1980. Each man faced the death penalty, and each had his 
own lawyer. Michael had convinced the trial judge to remove the case 
to Chicago, and the ten defense lawyers were meeting on a daily basis 
to prepare. I had never done a death penalty case, and here I was one 
of the chief counsel in what some called the largest death penalty case 
in U.S. history.
 After seventeen months of Perry, I felt I could handle just about any-
thing in court. I was by no means alone. The Pontiac Brothers had inter-
viewed and recruited many of the top black criminal lawyers in Chicago 
and nationally for the defense team.
The family and friends of the men on trial, together with those con-
cerned with Illinois prison conditions, formed the Pontiac Brother 
Defense Committee. They sent out a steady stream of information about 
the overcrowding and abhorrent conditions in Illinois prisons. “Put the 
state on trial” was our motto, and hundreds of spectators, mostly from 
the black community and many from families of prisoners, came to 
support the men on trial. 
In August 1980, I hauled my boxes of Pontiac files to Twenty-Sixth 
Street, where the Pontiac defense team had been given an office and 
where the defense lawyers met regularly. The trial was set to start the 
next month. “I’m sure you can handle Hampton,” I said to Flint, as I was 
about to embark on another long and contentious trial.
“No problem. Got it covered,” my less-than-effusive but dogged 
partner replied. 
Flint had been studying and cataloging the transcript and the record 
to implement Judge Swygert’ s orders that Groth must disclose his infor-
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   334 7/29/09   1:30:26 PM


--- PAGE 360 ---

mant and the new judge must consider sanctions against the feds. Jon 
Moore and Chick Hoffman also worked with Flint. 
In September, as the Pontiac trial was starting, Flint and his team 
filed a new interrogatory and document request on Groth to name his 
informant, to produce documentary proof that he had an informant, 
and to schedule his deposition. Ten days later they filed a motion to 
amend our complaint to add Hoover’ s estate, former attorney general 
John Mitchell, Jerris Leonard, and the FBI heads of COINTELPRO as 
defendants. 
The Hampton case was reassigned to Judge Milton Shadur, a lib-
eral judge and scholar of constitutional law. We were optimistic. On 
September 25, 1980, he set the first status date. Flint opened the ses-
sion appropriately: “Ten years later, here we are back in court—the city, 
state, and federal governments are still spending millions of taxpayers’ 
dollars to defend this murder.” That was as far as he got. 
The defendants had filed a motion to recuse Shadur. They argued that 
he was prejudiced because one of his former law partners had been a 
member of the Lawyers’ Committee for Civil Rights, which had written 
an amicus curiae, or friend of the court, brief in support of the special 
prosecutor seeking to indict Hanrahan in 1971. Before Shadur could 
take any action, he had to resolve the recusal issue. He announced he 
would rule in October. Frustrated, Flint told the press as he walked out, 
“They’re trying to get rid of the only judge who might be fair.” 
In October, Shadur wrote in an opinion that he believed he was 
impartial, but his “impartiality might be said to be questioned” because 
of the position of his former law partner. He declined to keep the case. 
Shadur was a stickler on the law and very protective of constitutional 
rights. We appealed, claiming there was insufficient basis for him to 
remove himself, but the Seventh Circuit judge refused to reverse his 
decision.
Judge John F . Grady, a former federal prosecutor with a reputation for 
issuing tough sentences to criminal defendants, was assigned the case. 
Grady was a large man with a particularly big head and thick bushy 
hair with a lock that frequently dropped over his forehead. He had an 
imposing manner reinforced by a deep voice. Grady was known as a 
no-nonsense judge. At the first court date, he addressed the lawyers: “It 
Onward
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   335 7/29/09   1:30:27 PM


--- PAGE 361 ---

Vindication
will be a long, arduous trial. It will cause the reliving of events extremely 
painful to people in this community. Settling out of court would be an 
act of legal statesmanship.” 
Grady recessed the case for two weeks to give the parties an opportu-
nity to explore settlement options. I liked Grady’ s instinct to settle, but 
I knew the defendants weren’t worried enough yet to offer real money. 
We’ d have to change their prospects for the new trial. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   336 7/29/09   1:30:27 PM


--- PAGE 362 ---

Seize the Time 
F
lint and Dennis, now returned  from Attica, began our offensive by 
writing and filing a fifteen-page motion for sanctions against the 
FBI. Flint had chronicled each deceptive statement the defendants and 
their attorneys had made, providing dates on which the documents 
were produced that proved their withholding of evidence. He also listed 
every hour we had wasted in depositions and at trial questioning FBI 
witnesses while the documents we needed were deliberately concealed. 
Flint calculated these at 2,861 hours pretrial and 1,871 hours at trial. 
Only Flint had the patience and persistence to prepare such a detailed 
compilation. It was necessary because Judge Fairchild had amended 
Swygert’ s order to say sanctions might be issued rather than must be, 
and we had to convince Grady to punish the FBI for its obstruction in 
the first trial. 
Flint’ s motion asked for production of all FBI documents still with-
held, default judgment against the FBI defendants, and an attorneys fee 
award to compensate for the unnecessary time it took to obtain mate-
rials that should have been produced early in discovery. We hoped to 
prevail on this motion and put the FBI in such a bad trial posture that 
they would have to settle.
The next Sunday, I took the afternoon off from working on the Pontiac 
trial, now in its third month of jury selection, to meet with Flint and 
Dennis. We sat in the conference room, flipping the Bears game on and 
off at breaks. The city wasn’t offering more than fifty thousand dollars, 
and the FBI was saying it had no authority to indemnify the FBI defen-
dants, who could pay only small amounts out of their pockets.
“Sounds like settlement isn’t going anywhere,” I said. 
“It won’t until we hold their feet to the fire,” Dennis responded. “They 
think they can stall and play us off forever and still hang another jury. 
48
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   337 7/29/09   1:30:27 PM


--- PAGE 363 ---

Vindication
They haven’t been taught their lesson yet. I think they should pay big 
time for their arrogance. Three million sounds about right.”
That seemed like a lot. Not too long ago we were tossed out of court. 
“Let’ s go for it,” Flint said. “If Grady gives us half a chance, we can 
really tighten the screws.” His determined expression reinforced his 
words. “Let’ s see what they say after Groth has to give up a name for his 
supposed informant and after Grady rules on sanctions.”
I marveled at Flint’ s will. We all knew there was no easy way home. 
He was fully aware of the continued imbalance of resources and our 
empty bank account. But the lure of winning, of proving the conspiracy, 
trumped everything else.
“Let’ s tell Montgomery to tell the defendants we’re not interested in 
chump change,” Dennis said. “Scheme on.” 
On the next court date, Flint reported to Grady in chambers that the 
defendants had offered nothing and were not serious about settlement. 
The plaintiffs wanted answers to the three motions we filed. Grady, 
who was used to having his suggestions followed, wasn’t happy but he 
couldn’t force the defendants to settle; not yet anyway. He set schedules 
for their responses.
The defendants’ attorneys answered our motion to add the FBI and 
John Mitchell, the estates of Hoover and Clyde Tolson (an associate 
director of the FBI who was also Hoover’ s lover and heir), and the heads 
of COINTELPRO by arguing that the statute of limitations had run out 
and also that they were immune from prosecution. After lengthy briefs 
by both sides, Grady ruled in our favor. On August 4, 1981, he allowed 
us to join and charge as defendants in the conspiracy John Mitchell, 
Hoover’ s estate, Jerris Leonard, and the D.C. heads of COINTELPRO—
everyone we wanted with the exception of the FBI itself, which he ruled 
had sovereign immunity as a federal agency. Adding the new defen-
dants opened the door to more discovery about COINTELPRO in D.C., 
at FBI headquarters. Strike one against the defendants, I thought. 
After lengthy briefing, and reading Flint’ s detailed compendium, 
Grady determined that sanctions against the FBI defendants were war-
ranted. These included allowing us to put on evidence at the second 
trial that they had intentionally concealed evidence at the first trial, 
which the jury could construe to be evidence of their guilt. This rul-
ing was devastating to the defendants on two fronts. It acknowledged 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   338 7/29/09   1:30:28 PM


--- PAGE 364 ---

a pattern of concealment by the defendants and their attorneys, which 
was greatly embarrassing to the FBI and U.S. Attorneys’ Office, and it 
undermined their credibility in their denial of responsibility for the 
raid. The FBI’ s mantle, its arrogant assumption of propriety and good 
faith, would not be available at a second trial. Strike two.
The third avenue opened by the Seventh Circuit was Groth being 
forced to disclose a name for his supposed informant. Coghlan sought a 
sweeping protective order preventing us from following up with discov-
ery after Groth disclosed the name of his informant. Coghlan asserted 
that further investigation would present great danger to the informant 
and his or her family. Grady entered the protective order temporarily. 
Meanwhile, our Pontiac jury, nine out of twelve of whom were black, 
returned their verdict. I sat with nine other lawyers and ten men facing 
the death penalty as the clerk read the verdicts. “Not guilty for Albert 
Jackson on murder count one. . . . Not guilty for Lawrence Talbert on 
murder count one. . . . And finally, forty “not guilty” verdicts later, “Not 
guilty for Joseph Smith on murder count one.” The jury found all the 
defendants “not guilty” on every count.
 I looked at the relieved faces of the men on trial. Then there was jubi-
lation—crying and hugs and thanks to the jury. The Pontiac Brothers’ 
families were ecstatic as well. From possible death to freedom, many 
of them were released that afternoon. We had a dinner celebration with 
most of the jurors present. I was still high from the Pontiac verdicts 
when Flint came to tell me Groth’ s answer to our simple interrogatory, 
“What is the name of your informant?”
“They named Babatunde, just like we figured,” Flint said. 
“Big surprise,” I said, “naming the dead man we thought they would. 
He can’t deny it.”
“But I think we can,” Flint said. “They’re gonna have to come up with 
some corroboration. Grady is going to be suspicious that after all these 
years of claiming how dangerous it would be to disclose the informant, 
they’re now claiming a dead person.” 
Several days later we were in Judge Grady’ s plush, carpeted cham-
bers. Flint and I had expected Groth to name Babatunde, but Grady 
was visibly shaken when Flint announced in the judge’ s chambers that 
the person Groth named had been dead for ten years. Grady shook his 
head, and his big hands opened palms up in a gesture of, what is this? 
Seize the Time
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   339 7/29/09   1:30:28 PM


--- PAGE 365 ---
0
Vindication
He was sitting at the end of his conference table with Flint and me on 
one side and Coghlan and Volini on the other. 
“The impression I have had all along is that we have some live per-
son there whose physical safety was allegedly in danger. Now, we have 
somebody who’ s been dead for ten years, a very different picture than 
I have been given up until now,” Grady said, shaking his head in disbe-
lief. Coghlan was fidgeting in his chair, trying his best to look earnest. 
He begged the judge to extend the protective order until Babatunde’ s 
mother decided if she needed protection. Grady reluctantly agreed. It 
gave Coghlan time for one last effort.
While the protective order remained in effect, Coghlan, together with 
uniformed Chicago police officer Michael Conneely, paid two visits to 
the home of Babatunde’ s mother, Theresa Morgan. From statements 
we obtained later from her, this is what happened: Coghlan told Mrs. 
Morgan that they were looking into the death of her son, which they 
claimed was part of a recently reopened investigation. He told her that 
Babatunde had given information to the police that provided the basis 
for the raid on Hampton’ s apartment in 1969 and this was about to be 
publicly announced. Mrs. Morgan later told us she was very upset and 
very suspicious. 
On his next visit, Coghlan told her that he had information that 
Panther Milton Boyd murdered her son because he was the informant 
who caused Fred Hampton’ s death. Coghlan concocted the story that 
Boyd had struck her son in the head, detonated explosives near him, 
and drove his car away. To convince her, Coghlan drove her past the 
spot where he said Babatunde had been murdered. 
Coghlan persuaded Mrs. Morgan to come to his office, where he 
introduced her to Sergeant Groth, whom he identified as “the one who 
knows [your son] was an informer.” After Groth left, Coghlan dictated a 
statement he showed to Babatunde’ s mother. In Coghlan’ s typed state-
ment, Mrs. Morgan stated that her son was a police informant and that 
the Morgans felt their lives would be in danger if this was disclosed—
and they wanted police protection. Coghlan tried to persuade Mrs. 
Morgan and her remaining son to sign it by telling them that their lives 
were in danger from Hampton’ s friends.
Theresa Morgan refused to sign Coghlan’ s document despite his 
threats and entreaties. “Coghlan became angry and gave us cab fare to 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   340 7/29/09   1:30:28 PM


--- PAGE 366 ---
1
return home,” she said. On his next appearance before Grady, again in 
chambers, Coghlan sought an extension of the protective order, claim-
ing there had been an unexplained fire at Ms. Morgan’ s home sometime 
in the past. He sought to imply that the Morgans had already been vic-
tims of retaliation and thus needed protection. 
Grady was growing impatient. He told Coghlan, “Given the plain-
tiffs were proceeding on the theory that there was not an informant for 
Groth, [Grady] could not imagine how his family could be in danger.” 
Grady continued addressing Coghlan: “If there was any real danger to 
the relatives of a person who had been dead for several years, they would 
have felt the effects of it before now, and in a more palpable sense than 
an unexplained fire.” He dissolved the previous protective order. 
But Grady was not done. He wanted to know how long Coghlan had 
known Groth would name a dead person, since Coghlan had repre-
sented to Judge Perry, to the Seventh Circuit, and to Judge Grady that 
disclosure would endanger the life of the informant as well as other 
persons. If Coghlan knew the informant was dead, his representa-
tions would have been false and made in bad faith. The noose around 
Coghlan’ s neck was tightening. He turned redder than usual. 
He cleared his throat before looking at the judge and answered, “I 
had not been told by Groth who the informant was. I had been doing 
my own figuring it out.” Coghlan should have stopped, but now he 
was nervous and talked too much. “The reason I suspected him came 
from a statement Groth made on a deposition question that one of the 
meeting places, as I recollect, was a West Side elevated train.” Coghlan 
claimed he connected Groth’ s “meeting” with his informant when he 
found out Morgan had worked as a conductor on the West Side El.
As we left Grady’ s chambers, Flint said to me, “I don’t think Groth 
ever said anything about meeting his informant on a West Side El.” 
“I think Coghlan made that up,” I answered. We went back to the 
office, where Flint and I reviewed the transcripts from Groth’ s deposi-
tion. After an hour we finished scanning them. There was nothing there 
about meeting his informant at or near a West Side El.
Two weeks later, at his deposition, Groth claimed an implausible 
lack of memory about anything that could be verified with respect to 
Babatunde being his informant. The worse his memory got, the clearer 
it became that not only was Babatunde not his informant but that he 
Seize the Time
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   341 7/29/09   1:30:29 PM


--- PAGE 367 ---
2
Vindication
never had one. Groth testified—“testilied” would be more accurate—that 
he uncovered key information that the Panthers murdered Babatunde, 
but he could not substantiate or recall any of it. Significantly, he never 
reported his supposed information to the police or state’ s attorney.
The final piece in the puzzle came to us a week after Groth’ s deposi-
tion. On August 20, 1982, Flint and Sherman Randall, an investigator 
who worked on the Pontiac case, went to visit Theresa Morgan. When 
Flint introduced himself as a lawyer for the survivors in the Hampton 
raid, she looked relieved. “You know my son had nothing to do with 
that, don’t you?” she said. “Those men tried to get me to say he was an 
informant and the Panthers killed him. There was no reason he would 
have been helping the police kill those boys.” 
“Do you mind if we tape what you say?” Flint asked. 
“Not a bit,” she said, and continued talking about Coghlan’ s visit.
“He never identified himself as a lawyer for Groth and Hanrahan. He 
acted like he was doing an investigation with the police. He took me 
to his office to sign a statement he wrote up. I refused to sign because 
it wasn’t true and because my son wasn’t here to talk for himself. That 
lawyer was trying to fool us.” 
Throughout her taped statement, Theresa Morgan made it clear 
she did not believe her son had ever been an informant and resented 
Coghlan’ s assertion that he was.
When Flint returned to PLO, he came into my office and played 
the tape of Theresa Morgan’s interview. “That’s a new low, even for 
Coghlan,” I said, “telling Mrs. Morgan that her son was an informant 
and had been murdered. He has no shame.” 
“Well, we got him this time,” a smiling Flint said, holding up the tape.
Flint amended our complaint to include the facts of Groth and 
Coghlan’ s ten-year deception of the courts with a false claim of privilege 
and how, when that was about to be exposed, Coghlan had attempted 
to mislead and frighten a witness into signing an untrue statement to 
cover their fraud and perjury. A few days after we filed the amended 
complaint with these allegations, Coghlan resigned. The newspapers 
reported that the county fired him. Strike three.
We were on a winning streak, having greatly bettered our position for 
the next trial. On the other hand, we still had no money and a case that 
would likely polarize a jury, making it difficult for a unanimous verdict. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   342 7/29/09   1:30:29 PM


--- PAGE 368 ---

Our posttrial interviews showed that only one juror besides Florence 
Smith wanted to assess damages against the police. There was the addi-
tional reality of our clients, who had been waiting thirteen years and 
had received no compensation for their injuries and losses. Many of 
them would not turn down real money if it were offered. 
Montgomery had noted our success and had become quite solicitous 
of our work, complimenting Flint regularly with “nice job” each time 
Judge Grady ruled in our favor. But Montgomery also said that despite 
the improved position we were in legally, his clients wanted to settle, 
and he was duty bound to try to get the defendants to offer money. 
Flint, Dennis, and I, together with the rest of PLO, called a meeting to 
weigh our position, much improved due to the recent successes. There 
is a point in civil litigation, after you have obtained an advantage stra-
tegically, when you must decide whether to cash in or roll the dice and 
try for the most at trial. 
“I’m more than willing to keep going,” Flint said as we sat around our 
conference table. “I really want to take John Mitchell’ s deposition and 
find out what he and the White House knew about COINTELPRO.” 
“I want to take it all the way to the top, too,” I responded. “But when 
John Mitchell and the other defendants get new lawyers, they could 
delay the case for months, probably years. They’ll claim the right to 
read the trial transcript and the thousands of pages of deposition testi-
mony to get up to speed.” 
“Montgomery has been talking to the other side,” Dennis said. “He 
says we’ll be lucky to get two million. He’ s gonna make a deal no matter 
what we say. I think they should pay us three million dollars if they don’t 
want to go to trial.”
“If we do settle, a third should come from the FBI no matter what 
claim about agents not being indemnified,” I said. “They can find a way, 
even if they have to pass legislation.”
  “Dan Webb, the U.S. attorney, would also like to settle this case and 
remove the taint of cover-up from his office,” Flint added.
For so long it seemed our clients would never collect anything. But 
when I thought about the depth of the FBI conspiracy, Fred and Mark’ s 
deaths, the bullet wounds, and the thousands of hours we had put in, 
Dennis’ s number was no longer unrealistic. And of course it didn’t really 
pay for the killing of Fred and Mark. Nothing would. 
Seize the Time
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   343 7/29/09   1:30:29 PM


--- PAGE 369 ---

Vindication
I had been running the prospect of settlement by our clients. “Doc 
is as loyal as ever and Fannie Clark is also,” I reported. “They will go 
with whatever we propose.” I thought Harold and Blair would also, and 
Truelock was always broke, so he’ d probably support a settlement. 
“I think our clients would be pleased with a substantial settlement,” 
I continued. “We can’t begrudge them that. And it wouldn’t hurt for us 
to get paid for the last thirteen years, either. We can’t finance the case 
forever. Can you live with a settlement, Flint?”
There was silence in the room. Flint didn’t want to stop fighting, 
maybe didn’t know how. He could go on forever. He shrugged, “If that’ s 
what people want, but I’m gonna keep pushing until a deal is signed.”
Before our next court date in chambers, we went into a small confer-
ence room and discussed with Montgomery what we wanted. He said 
the defendants were now thinking in terms of “serious money.” 
“We want to get three million for all of us,” I said. 
“I would like to get that too, but my clients want to settle,” he told us 
emphatically. “Coghlan and I have already discussed two million, and 
it’ s likely to work. I’m going to tell Grady we’re in serious negotiations.” 
I had a mixed reaction. He wasn’t demanding the three million we 
wanted, but two million still seemed like a hefty settlement. It was 
three times what the plaintiffs in the Kent Sate shootings settled for and 
would be one of the highest settlements in civil rights history. There 
was a difference between what we wanted and seeing real money on 
the table. The two million looked better than anything we had imagined 
months before. It would be enough to make people understand we’ d 
won, but we agreed that it wasn’t what the plaintiffs deserved or what 
we wanted. We would have to run it by our clients. We had always told 
them it would be their decision.
In chambers, Montgomery indicated that the two sides were mak-
ing progress toward a settlement. We didn’t contradict him. Robert 
Gruenberg was representing the FBI defendants, and with the cer-
tainty of sanctions being leveled against his clients at the next trial, 
he no longer dismissed our demand that the FBI put up one-third 
of the settlement. Grady hinted again that the sanctions he would 
invoke for their malfeasance at the first trial would be severe. Volini 
and Witkowski said the city and county would only pay if the feds paid 
their one-third. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   344 7/29/09   1:30:30 PM


--- PAGE 370 ---

“ Any settlement will have to include money from the FBI,” Flint 
said. 
Gruenberg said he would do his best to get authorization for the FBI 
to pay its share. 
“How much are we talking about?” Grady asked.
“Two million for all the plaintiffs is what we have been discussing,” 
Montgomery said. Grady nodded as if he thought that might be an 
appropriate figure. Flint and I didn’t object.
“I don’t know what Montgomery’ s been told, but my clients haven’t 
agreed to pay a third of that figure,” Volini said, playing hardball to the 
end. But now he was bluffing. There was political pressure on the city 
from the black community to settle. 
“Our clients haven’t approved any settlement either,” I pitched in. 
“We need time to discuss it.”
“Well, I’m going to have all of you consult with your clients and then 
come back to see where we are. My position is clear,” Grady said, look-
ing at the defense lawyers. “This case should be settled. If I have to bring 
your superiors, the decision makers, in here to do it, I will.”
“It sounds pretty good to me,” Doc said when I called and told him 
we were negotiating in the range of two million dollars. “How much will 
each one of us get?”
“We haven’t done all the numbers yet, but you will get more because 
of your injuries, around $150,000 after our fees and costs. And we’re try-
ing to get Fannie Clark at least $200,000.” 
“Whose gonna pay?” he asked. 
“ All of them,” I said, “the city, county, and feds.” 
“Is some of it coming out of Hanrahan’ s pocket?” 
“Unfortunately, no. The county will pay his bill. None of the defen-
dants have to pay themselves. It’ s a drag, but at least we’ll get paid.” 
“It don’t seem right that the people who shot us pay nothing.”
It always pisses off victims of the police to learn that taxpayers foot 
the bill. “It isn’t right,” I said. “But the police contract requires they be 
indemnified. I wish we were getting money from them too. It might 
deter them next time.”
“Sound’ s OK, I guess.” Not a totally enthusiastic endorsement of our 
twelve years of work. Then Doc added, “I know you guys did your best, 
and what you did was incredible. If the others say OK, it’ s OK with me.”
Seize the Time
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   345 7/29/09   1:30:30 PM


--- PAGE 371 ---

Vindication
As I hung up, I realized it might actually be over soon. I felt strangely 
ambivalent. We were about to win, or at least settle. We had presented 
enough proof of the conspiracy and the murders to force them to pay 
damages. But none of the perpetrators had to pay themselves. None of 
them had been convicted. Not even Carmody, who we believed shot Fred 
and who admitted dragging his body out for all to see. Not Hanrahan for 
endorsing Fred’ s murder, not the FBI for plotting the whole thing. 
The negotiations went on for several weeks. On July 25, 1982, the 
Sun-Times headlined a story, “ After 12 years, Panther Suit Nearing 
Settlement.” Inside, the story stated unidentified sources claimed the 
negotiations were “positive” and that all lawyers were to submit their 
claims for fees at the next August court date.
Both sides had in fact been weighing the same number, $1.85 million. 
But when we submitted our claims for fees, we hit a snag. Montgomery 
wanted 45 percent of his clients’ one-half of the settlement. We would 
presumably get the one-third share of our clients’ settlement money, 
based on the agreement we had signed with all the plaintiffs at the 
beginning of the case. Flint calculated that we had done more than 90 
percent of the work, and put in over 90 percent of the time. We didn’t 
think Montgomery should get two-thirds of the legal fees.
 Grady brought all of us together in chambers on October 6. 
“I understand the plaintiffs and defendants have agreed to settle for 
$1.85 million with one-third coming from the city, one-third from the 
county, and one-third from the federal government,” Grady announced. 
It seemed simple, anticlimactic. The money would mean a lot to our cli-
ents, but did it make up for what had been done and the decade spent 
uncovering it? However, once settlement negotiations begin, they have 
their own momentum. We weren’t going to stop now.
“We have a fee dispute with Mr. Montgomery, but we don’t believe 
that should hold up the settlement,” I told Judge Grady.
“Have you prepared a document reflecting the settlement?” Grady 
asked.
Montgomery had brought three copies of the settlement agreement 
setting forth the terms. “I have it here,” he said. 
Grady looked at it hurriedly and then passed it around the table for 
each of the lawyers to sign. Flint, Dennis, and I looked at each other. 
Last chance to bail out, I thought. But we signed the paper as it passed 
our side of the table, and Montgomery signed it as well.
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   346 7/29/09   1:30:31 PM


--- PAGE 372 ---

“We’ll need your clients’ signatures on releases,” Grady said, stand-
ing up. “ As soon as you get them, bring them to my clerk. I’ll enter an 
order dismissing the case.”
News of our impending settlement, and the amount, reached the 
press a few weeks later from an undisclosed Justice Department source. 
“$1.85 Million Accord Reached in 1969 Black Panther Case,” the  Los 
Angeles Times reported on October 24, 1982. At the same time, the 
county board was about to vote to approve the settlement. “Pay and 
move on,” was the official position. 
 
On Sunday, November 14, the New York Times did a follow-up article 
on the settlement. Bill, Fred’ s brother, was quoted: “ At times when we 
had to go to court almost daily it seemed that we should just give up. 
But we in the family knew we were right, that the police were wrong, so 
we kept praying and kept fighting.” 
Flint commented in the article, “The case may be almost over in the 
legal sense but it will live on as a reminder to people of how far the gov-
ernment can and will go to suppress those whose philosophies it does 
not like.”
Assistant U.S. Attorney Gruenberg denied that the settlement was an 
admission of responsibility and said it “was intended to avoid another 
costly trial.” This is what the government says when it settles, regardless 
of the size of the payout. Hanrahan refused to comment.
Still it was not over. Nothing came easy. Montgomery’ s clients refused 
to sign the releases. He claimed they objected to us getting paid for 
the time we put in for them, but we couldn’t check this out because 
his new retainer gave him the exclusive power to negotiate with us. On 
November 24 we appeared in Grady’ s chambers. Bob Gruenberg, who 
had worked to get the FBI to come up with its part of the settlement, 
warned Grady that he was “worried” the federal government might 
renege and withdraw its offer. 
Grady was riled. He did not want the deal to collapse. He looked at 
Montgomery, and in the sternest tone he could muster said, “There is 
no one who can predict what might happen here, and it seems very 
plain to me that these plaintiffs [Montgomery’ s clients] are making a 
mistake by not signing these releases.”
On December 2, Dennis, Flint, and I sent a memo to Montgomery’ s cli-
ents, the Hamptons, Deborah Johnson, Verlina Brewer, and Brenda Har-
ris: “We firmly believe that PLO is legally, morally, and in every other way 
Seize the Time
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   347 7/29/09   1:30:31 PM


--- PAGE 373 ---

Vindication
entitled to be fairly paid for the work we did for our former clients both 
before and after we represented you directly; and that it would be morally 
and legally wrong for Jim Montgomery to receive 45 percent of half of this 
settlement fund while we are left with one-third of the other half.”
We attached a breakdown of the hours of pretrial, trial, and appeal. 
PLO attorneys expended thirty-seven thousand hours and Montgomery 
slightly fewer than four thousand. The breakdown stated: “The record 
shows that we did at least nine-tenths of the work on the case as a 
whole. . . . We feel that we should receive at least three-fourths of the 
combined lawyers share.” Our memo also said the settlement should 
include reimbursement to the organizations that had paid expenses—
the Center for Constitutional Rights, the Lawyers’ Committee for Civil 
Rights, the National Jury Project, and the NAACP—as well as James 
Carter, whose firm of black court reporters we owed nine thousand dol-
lars, and, finally, Robert Zimmers, for the remainder of his expert fee. 
“December 4 is almost here again, and we shouldn’t let it pass with 
the entire settlement, and everything it means to all of us for the past 
and future, still hanging fire,” our memo concluded. Two months later, 
on February 28, Grady called. He had the signed releases. We could pick 
up the settlement order. 
Later that day, almost thirteen years after we filed our suit, Dennis, 
Flint, and I stood in front of the news cameras at our office and read our 
press release. We gave credit for the settlement to the court of appeals, 
the work done before Judge Grady, and “the continuing community 
concern particularly among black people.” We ended:
It is entirely appropriate that the legal portion of this case has been con-
cluded during Black History month, for the murders of Hampton and 
Clark by the agents of three governments is a most significant event not 
only in black history but also in the history of this city and in history as 
recorded by all people of conscience. We intend to continue to keep the 
memory and meaning of December 4 alive, so that it will be more difficult 
for government officials to conspire to murder two black leaders and to 
destroy the movement, which they led.
f
lint taylor
Jeffrey haas
dennis cunningham
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   348 7/29/09   1:30:31 PM


--- PAGE 374 ---

Epilogue
I
t’s Mother’s Day weekend 2005  in Haynesville, Louisiana. Iberia 
and Francis have asked me to come for their annual family reunion. 
They want me to see where they grew up, where Fred spent his sum-
mers when he was young. Where he is now buried. I arrive at the fam-
ily home on Saturday morning. It is a simple wooden, one-story house 
with wood panels and linoleum floors. Outside is a huge oak tree, which 
gives us shade on this hot, humid day. We sit on folding chairs, sipping 
lemonade.
On the dirt road in front of us, Tennessee walking horses are parading 
up and down in twos and threes. Suddenly they break into the elaborate 
prance that they are known for. Bits of dirt flash about their hooves. 
Iberia’ s nephew, who still lives on the family compound, hosts a horse 
show with Tennessee walkers every year. Family members and friends 
who left Louisiana come back with their horses in trailers and compete 
in a horse ring around the bend in the road from Iberia’ s house. Before 
the show, the riders are putting the horses through their paces. 
“Things are a lot different now from when Iberia and I grew up,” 
Iberia’ s sister Marie tells me. She shakes from an advanced case of MS. 
“Black kids ride the school bus now, and there’ s one school for every-
one. It isn’t like when Iberia and I grew up. We had to walk the five miles 
into school on Sunday night and stay with an aunt until after school on 
Friday,” she said. “ And coming home, the white kids on the school bus 
would throw mud at us and call us names.” She still carries the hurt. Her 
story reminds me of watching my classmates in Atlanta yell “nigger” at 
the black kids going to the symphony. “Even though most everybody 
left the country, our family kept this place here. I still come on week-
ends from Baton Rouge,” Marie said.  
Fred’ s cousin, Charles White, comes up to us. Apparently he’ s heard 
that one of Fred’ s lawyers is here. I’m not hard to find, being the only 
white person among the scores of black families celebrating. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   349 7/29/09   1:30:32 PM


--- PAGE 375 ---
0
“So you were one of our family’ s lawyers?” he asks.
“For a long time,” I say. “It took us thirteen years to prove they mur-
dered Fred.”
“Fred and me did ’most everything together when he came down 
here. We stood on our heads in the shallow end of the lake and we rode 
horses. I sure hated it when he got killed. I was gonna move to Chicago 
to be with him.” He paused. “But I’ve done all right staying here. Got 
jobs mostly working on oil rigs, and I love the horses. I wasn’t cut out 
for city life.”
Francis is fanning himself with a paper plate and tells me a story of 
his grandfather.
“Uncle Wylie, that’ s what they called my grandfather, heard the Klan 
was coming after him one night,” Francis said. “Nobody messed with 
Uncle Wylie. He told my father and his brother to get behind the house 
and shoot at anything white that moves. Uncle Wylie sat in a chair inside 
the front door with his double-barreled shotgun in his lap. When them 
Klan boys came up on the front porch, Uncle Wylie opened the front 
door and faced them with his shotgun. They took off running so fast 
and made such a commotion that Uncle Wylie’ s son, my uncle, shot one 
of them white-faced cows running away.” We both laughed.
I could see Francis recounting that story to Fred as a boy with the 
same chuckle. “Fred had a lot of Uncle Wylie in him,” Francis says. 
I look at the etched lines on the faces of Iberia and Francis. I can see 
fifty years of Chicago winters, working in the industrial plant at Corn 
Products, raising a family, teaching their children to stand up for what 
they believed—and then having a son shot down by Chicago police. 
Despite everything, they are still at home in Louisiana.
Every year on the Saturday before Mother’ s Day, Iberia’ s family visits 
Fred’ s grave. This is my first time joining them. It’ s hot and I’m already 
sweating at 11:00 
a.m. when I step into the Hampton car. We join the 
caravan heading for the cemetery in the country. The graveyard is near 
the church, long since destroyed by fire. The Church was where Iberia 
and Francis first met at Sunday services. Fred’ s grave, like the others 
around it, is set in a clearing with a grove of pine trees behind, much 
like the landscape around the Georgia farm where I grew up. 
I squint from the sun as Iberia and I approach the tombstone. It has 
several pockmarks.
Epilogue
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   350 7/29/09   1:30:32 PM


--- PAGE 376 ---
1
“Some people came and fired shots to deface the tombstone the year 
after we buried him,” Iberia said. “People down here heard about Fred. 
A group of Panthers came down for the burial and stood around guard-
ing his body in the church. The sheriff almost went crazy, arming his 
deputies and surrounding the church, but there was no trouble.”
Fred’ s granite tombstone had a pair of outstretched hands, palms 
upward. On it are carved the words, “Fred said, ‘If I were free, what 
would I spend my life doing?’” I don’t know where the quote came from. 
I walk a short distance away, leaving Iberia to stand there silently facing 
the tombstone, and watch her put down the fresh flowers she brought. 
Someone brings her a chair, and she sits down looking straight ahead at 
the tombstone, chin resting on her hands.
It is twenty-two years since  Flint, Dennis, and I announced the settle-
ment. The case did not end with our press release. It took three more 
years to resolve our fee dispute with Montgomery. Eventually, Judge 
Grady ruled our way. The plaintiffs shared two-thirds of the $1.85 mil-
lion dollars. Our office got paid some $450,000, less than $15.00 per 
hour for the over 300,000 hours we put in. Still, it was a lot of money for 
us back in 1986, and it kept the People’ s Law Office going. 
By the end, all the plaintiffs—including Montgomery’ s clients—
understood who earned them the settlement. Mrs. Clark told us when 
she came to get her check, “My family and I will never forget the work 
you did. You won, and you showed the world that Mark was trying to 
do something to make things better.” Doc kept in regular contact, even 
after he moved from Chicago. In 2004, I interviewed Brenda Harris in a 
West Side apartment. Her Afro was showing a bit of gray, and her youth-
ful face was drawn, but her voice was as soft as ever, and her slight, frag-
ile appearance reminded me of her nickname, China Doll. She’ s now a 
Muslim and a nationalist. Life has not been easy for Brenda, who left 
college at the University of Illinois to join the Panthers. 
“There were so many people who joined so quickly. We had no way 
to check them out,” she said over the sound of a space heater churn-
ing along to keep us warm. “We talked so much about guns, and most 
people didn’t know how to use them. We didn’t have enough classes in 
black history or a clear idea about the role of women.”
“How were women treated?” 
Epilogue
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   351 7/29/09   1:30:32 PM


--- PAGE 377 ---
2
“Some of the brothers hit on us. But not Fred, he wouldn’t allow 
women being put down, and he gave women a lot of responsibility. He 
understood we did a lot of the work.”
“What happened after he was killed?” I asked. 
 “ After he was killed, the party floundered. We lacked leadership. A lot 
of people were scared after the raid. I left in October.” 
“Did your injuries heal?” 
“My fingers are still stiff from the bullets. I never played the violin 
again.” 
Deborah Johnson, who now goes by Akua Njeri, worked as a parale-
gal at PLO in the late 1980s and worked with us to organize the twen-
tieth anniversary commemoration of Fred’ s death. After the ceremony 
late at night on December 4, 1989, many of us went from the event to 
2337 West Monroe, by then a boarded-up and dilapidated building. It 
was not planned, but Dennis, Flint, and I pried open the back door and 
twenty or so of us went inside. It was pitch black. We took everyone on 
an eerie tour with flashlights. “This is where Fred died,” Dennis said, 
standing in the bare dining room, repeating what Skip had said on that 
spot twenty years earlier in front of Mike Gray’ s camera. 
Iberia, Francis, and Bill Hampton were honored guests at PLO’ s 
twentieth and thirtieth anniversary celebrations and received stand-
ing ovations both times. PLO and the entire progressive community in 
Chicago have paid tribute to Fred Hampton’ s brief but indelible impact 
as well as his family’ s loss.
Jim Montgomery’ s professional reputation continued to grow after 
the case. Mayor Harold Washington picked him as Chicago’ s corpora-
tion counsel. Several years ago, Jim and I participated in a trial practice 
seminar at the University of Chicago Law School. His hair was gray and 
there were more wrinkles, but he still had that broad smile.
“How are you, and how is good old Flint?” he asked, his deep, bari-
tone voice bringing back the days in Perry’ s courtroom. “You guys are 
still fightin’ the good fight, I hear,” he said amicably. 
“Flint’ s fine,” I said. “It’ s been a long time, but it’ s good to see you.” 
I meant it. His cordiality made me forget the fee dispute and the argu-
ments. We talked about cases, Chicago’ s political situation, Harold 
Washington’ s death, and the trial seminar as though there had never 
been a rift. Montgomery later affiliated with Johnnie Cochran and 
returned to representing civil rights plaintiffs.
Epilogue
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   352 7/29/09   1:30:33 PM


--- PAGE 378 ---

Shortly after his reversal by the Seventh Circuit, Judge Perry and 
his cohort Judge Julius Hoffman were prohibited from taking complex 
cases and those requiring more than five trial days. Perry retired in 1983 
at the age of eighty-seven and died the following February.
Edward Hanrahan never publicly accepted the settlement. On the 
day we gave our press statement, he responded by saying the Panthers 
were rewarded for their “lawbreaking and irresponsible charges,” and 
he said the settlement shielded the “FBI’ s deception of the federal grand 
jury, the State’ s Attorney’ s Office, and the public.”
 Hanrahan remained bitter at the FBI—as well as the Panthers and 
us—and disappeared from the public scene in Chicago. In ensuing 
years, Flint and I occasionally saw him standing hunched over with a 
briefcase in the Dirksen Federal Building elevator on his way to the fed-
eral law library, a dreary relic of the person he had been in 1969. We 
always recognized each other, but Flint and I never could bring our-
selves to say hello. Nor could he. His 1972 prediction, “Monroe Street 
will be my obituary,” turned out to be accurate, at least politically. In 
early 2009, I attempted to interview Hanrahan, but he did not respond 
to my call. Five months later, on June 9, he died at age eighty-eight. His 
obituaries focused on his role in the Hampton raid and cover-up and 
the fatal toll these took on his political career.
In the late 1980s, William O’Neal agreed to be interviewed on camera 
for the PBS Eyes on the Prize television series documenting the civil rights 
movement. In the documentary he describes arriving at the Panther 
office with Bobby Rush on the morning of December 4, after the raid:
We both were speechless. We just walked through the house and saw 
where—what had taken place and where he’ d died—and it was shocking. 
And then I was, you know, I just began to realize that the information that 
I had supplied leading up to that moment had facilitated that raid. I knew 
that, indirectly, I had contributed, and I felt it, and I felt bad about it. And 
then I got mad. You know, I had—. And then I had to conceal those feel-
ings, which made it worse. I couldn’t say anything; I just had to continue 
to play the role. 
Years after the trial and not under oath, O’Neal finally acknowl-
edged his responsibility for the raid. Shortly thereafter, on January 17, 
1990, he ran in front of an oncoming car at 2:00 a.m. on the Eisenhower 
Epilogue
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   353 7/29/09   1:30:33 PM


--- PAGE 379 ---

Expressway on Chicago’ s West Side. When I read the short column in 
the newspaper describing his death, I felt no joy and no sadness, only 
the recognition that even O’Neal must have had a conscience.
Iberia is still sitting at  Fred’ s grave and someone announces, “It’ s time 
for lunch.”
I get back in Francis’ s car and we head to Iberia’ s house. My plate isn’t 
big enough to get all the chicken, corn bread, greens, and catfish I want, 
but Francis follows me to the table with a smaller plate containing the 
macaroni and cheese and candied sweet potatoes I’ d passed up.
 “Fred would like it here, too,” Iberia says after she sits down with us. 
“But he wouldn’t have been content. He had to be doing something for 
someone else. He could never sit still.”
“He was never happy if someone else was being mistreated,” Francis 
adds. “That’ s why he wanted to be a lawyer. But he couldn’t wait.”
“The sixties were a hard time to wait,” I say. “It seemed like the world 
was exploding. There was no sitting on the sidelines.”
“Not everyone paid the price Fred did,” Iberia says. She was right. 
Bobby Rush is now a fourth-term U.S. congressman. Rush never dis-
avowed his membership in the Panthers or his admiration for Fred. He 
was the first to proclaim that the FBI and federal government murdered 
Fred. Others who had protested Fred’ s murder had also risen to promi-
nence. Danny Davis, an alderman when he decried Fred’ s murder, is 
now in the U.S. Congress. Harold Washington, who was a state senator 
when he loudly and persistently demanded an independent investiga-
tion of Fred’ s death, became mayor of Chicago in 1983. In fact it was 
the coalition of blacks and progressive whites and Latinos that came 
together to protest Fred’ s murder and to unseat Hanrahan that later 
coalesced into the force that elected Washington as Chicago’ s first black 
mayor. 
But another legacy of Fred’ s death was that Chicago’ s West Side dete-
riorated further into a haven for drugs and gangs. Fred was an inspira-
tional leader with the ability to reach street kids and get them involved 
in supporting and building their communities, not preying on them.
 I didn’t want to explore the diverse legacies of Fred’ s assassination 
with Iberia. She was still bitter. “We should own city hall for what they 
did to my son,” she blurted out at one point. On Sunday morning at a 
Epilogue
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   354 7/29/09   1:30:33 PM


--- PAGE 380 ---

communal breakfast, I am welcomed. I say goodbye to Francis, Iberia, 
and her family, and they invite me back for next year.
Maggie and I separated in 1983. By the time we realized our relationship 
had become a routine focused on the kids, it was too late to reclaim. 
Moving out and away from living with Roger and Andrew was the most 
wrenching experience of my life. But we continued to share the parent-
ing, and I discovered there is life after divorce. 
In 1988, Mariel Nanasi, a law student from Denver, came to work at 
PLO. I first noticed her when she propped her red, calf-length boots 
on my desk and asked me why I thought law would change things. We 
made a date to discuss this and ended up starting a relationship. We’re 
still discussing her question. My work and my love life have always been 
intertwined. We now have two children and have been married almost 
twenty years. And yes we are still very much in love. 
In 1989, Flint and I, together with John Stainthorp, who had worked 
on Attica and joined the office in 1980, were on trial once again in the 
Dirksen Federal Building. The three of us had just won a large civil 
rights verdict, and with the proceeds of our attorneys’ fees we bought 
the building where PLO is presently located on Milwaukee Avenue at 
Division and Ashland. Janine Hoft, Stan Willis, Michael Deutsch, and 
Jan Susler were now partners, and Erica Thompson would be shortly. 
We were suing Jon Burge, a Chicago police commander who tortured 
black suspects using electroshock and “dry submarino,” a technique 
similar to water boarding, in which a plastic bag is placed over the vic-
tim’ s head to prevent breathing until the victim loses consciousness. 
Many of Burge’ s victims spent the best parts of their lives on death row 
because of the false confessions he and his cohorts extracted. 
 After twelve years and two lengthy trials with another hostile, rac-
ist judge, who held both Flint and I in contempt and who maneuvered 
a verdict for Burge, we obtained a reversal in the Seventh Circuit and 
eventually got a summary judgment from a judge similar to Grady and 
a settlement of 19.8 million. Again it was a very lengthy, hard-earned 
legal victory against publicly funded attorneys. The exposures and our 
organizing to publicize them eventually led to Burge getting fired. Many 
people on death row had their convictions reversed, and our lawsuit 
played a large role in Governor Ryan’ s pardoning or commuting to life 
Epilogue
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   355 7/29/09   1:30:34 PM


--- PAGE 381 ---

everyone on Illinois death row in January 2003. Flint and PLO contin-
ued seeking compensation for Burge’ s victims and in 2008 announced a 
19.8 million-dollar settlement for some of them. Also as a result of PLO 
and others working together, Burge was indicted on federal charges in 
October 2008.
I now live in New Mexico, having left Chicago in 2001. Leaving was 
not easy. I spent the major part of my adult life there. It’ s still my city. But 
life in the shadow of Taos Mountain was different, spectacularly beauti-
ful, muse to lofty thought. Yet the beauty here also makes me remember 
the cold gray of Chicago, the El train rumbling close to the apartments 
where I lived, and driving down Lakeshore Drive looking up at the sky-
scrapers and catching glimpses of the gray-green lake with whitecaps 
on my way to the Loop. Half my years in New Mexico have been spent 
writing about Fred Hampton. My memory of him and our pursuit of his 
killers remain the defining points of my life. 
Some of us are born with courage. Others, like me, need models to 
help us stand up. I would like to think I picked up some of Fred’ s daring, 
determination, and commitment, as many others did. After Mariel and 
I moved to Taos, we learned that former secretary of defense Donald 
Rumsfeld had several estates here and frequently visited. She and I, with 
help from local activists, formed the Action Coalition of Taos (ACT). 
We organized a march and demonstration of three thousand people, 
the largest in northern New Mexico history, to protest the Iraq War. We 
chanted and marched to Rumsfeld’ s house. There, at sixty years old, I 
stood precariously perched on his fencepost, my ankles held by friends. 
Self-conscious after all these years, I wondered what I was doing there. 
Then I flashed back to Fred speaking out at the church and remembered 
his words, “If you don’t struggle, you don’t deserve to win.” Reenergized, 
I declared Rumsfeld “a war criminal for waging aggressive war, the same 
crime we prosecuted and executed Nazis for at Nuremberg. The crowd 
repeated, “Rumsfeld’ s a war criminal.” A charge that has been repeated 
often since. It is the moment I am most proud of in Taos.
Like others who heard Malcolm X, Dr. King, and Fred Hampton 
speak in the 1960s, I learned that fighting injustice and inequality is the 
struggle of our lives, and perseverance in this struggle is what makes 
our lives valuable.
Epilogue
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   356 7/29/09   1:30:34 PM


--- PAGE 382 ---

In 2006 the black aldermen and alderwomen on Chicago’ s City 
Council introduced a resolution to name the block of Monroe Street 
where the raid occurred Fred Hampton Way. The proposal was about to 
be approved when the Fraternal Order of Police objected. A bitter fight 
ensued between black and white aldermen, and the resolution was 
defeated. Mayor Richard M. Daley refused to take a position. 
The conflict in city council demonstrated how strongly Chicagoans 
are still divided over the killing of Fred Hampton. By contrast, the sub-
urb of Maywood has continued to operate the Fred Hampton Memorial 
Pool for more than thirty-five years. In 2007 a bronze statue of Fred was 
unveiled outside its gates in a ceremony presided over by local officials. 
Many of the people who knew Fred and protested his murder back in 
1969 were present and spoke. Flint was one of them.
“I’m glad the pool and his statue are in Maywood. This is where Fred 
lived,” Iberia told me when I visited her in 2008. Francis had just passed 
away. “I didn’t want the place where Fred was killed named after him, 
anyway. It made me sad.” 
It was also sad visiting the Hampton home without Francis there, 
even though the collard greens, sweet potatoes, and cornbread were as 
good as ever. 
“Fred’ s son came by the other day,” Iberia told me, thankful, but 
regretting that she and Francis had had little contact with their grand-
son in the past ten years. Recently, Fred Hampton Jr. has been work-
ing closely with Aaron Patterson, one of Burge’ s torture victims, and 
speaking out against the still unpunished torture by Chicago police. He 
is chairman of the Prisoners of Conscience Committee, in which his 
mother, Akua, is also active.
“ Are you going down to Haynesville for Mother’ s Day this year?” I 
asked Iberia.
“I’m gonna try,” she said. I knew she’ d make it.
A few minutes later, I stood up to leave. We hugged, and I started 
toward the door, but there was a question I had to ask her. 
“ After all these years, what do you think our lawsuit proved?”
Without hesitation Iberia replied, “They got away with murder.” 
Epilogue
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   357 7/29/09   1:30:35 PM


--- PAGE 383 ---

Acknowledgments
To Those Who Worked to Uncover the Assassination
Although this book describes events  from my perspective, I want to 
make it clear that the People’ s Law Office and I never acted alone. We 
always had help. The list of individuals who actively worked to help 
expose and condemn the murders of Fred Hampton and Mark Clark 
includes other lawyers, students, community activists, reporters, film-
makers, elected officials, and many ordinary citizens. 
Within a few hours of the raid, PLO lawyers, law students, and several 
volunteers began gathering, tabulating, and securing evidence. Renault 
Robinson, leader of the Afro-American Patrolman’ s League, went to the 
scene, examined the bullet holes resulting from shots coming into the 
apartment, and quickly condemned the raid as a “police murder.” After 
seeing the bullet holes in the apartment walls and hearing the survivors’ 
descriptions of the raid as a military-style surprise attack, Bobby Rush, 
Fred Hampton’ s coleader of the Panthers, declared to the public and 
press that the FBI and its director, J. Edgar Hoover, were responsible.
It took the next thirteen years and the sustained efforts of hun-
dreds of dedicated people to fight against the deliberate cover-up by 
the Chicago police, Hanrahan’ s office, and the FBI and finally prove the 
conspiracy accusations correct. The Chicago Panthers and the seven 
survivors of the raid, Doc Satchel, Harold Bell, Brenda Harris, Verlina 
Brewer, Akua Njeri, Louis Truelock, and Blair Anderson, kept the issue 
in the public spotlight. I also want to clearly recognize that the unnamed 
thousands from the black community—as well as many white people of 
conscience—who stood in line to view the murder scene, who walked 
solemnly past Fred Hampton’ s casket, who attended his memorial ser-
vice, or who voted to defeat and oust Hanrahan in the next election, 
played critical roles. 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   358 7/29/09   1:30:35 PM


--- PAGE 384 ---

Attorneys Eugene Pincham, Sam Adams, Kermit Coleman, and 
Warren and Jo-Anne Wolfson were our early mentors and helped us 
represent the Panthers after the raid. Jim Montgomery taught us about 
trial technique and devoted huge chunks of his time and practice to vin-
dicating the rights of the victims of the December 4 raid. Herbert Reid 
of the NAACP and Howard Law School came to Chicago and assisted 
us through the long trial. Arthur Kinoy, Bill Bender, and Morty Stavis 
of the Center for Constitutional Rights and Rutgers Law School helped 
us to shape our complaint, answer numerous motions to dismiss, 
and ultimately keep our litigation alive. Many other lawyers and legal 
groups gave us substantial help and support along the way, including 
James Meyerson and Nathaniel Jones of the NAACP; Tom Geraghty and 
Jonathon Hyman of the Northwestern Legal Clinic; Jay Shulman from 
the National Jury Project and Diane Rappaport, Sarah Vanderwicken, 
and Liza Lawrence, who assisted Shulman with our jury selection in 
Chicago; Larry Kennon and the Cook County Bar Association; Sybille 
Fritsche and Nancy Preston of the Lawyers’ Committee for Civil Rights; 
the Chicago Council of Lawyers; the National Lawyers Guild; and attor-
neys Stephen Seliger, David Thomas, Barry Spevak, and Kenneth Tilsen, 
who helped on the appellate briefs. 
Fred Hampton’ s life and the raid that ended it were captured for all 
time in the film footage by Mike Gray and the Film Group. It is dramati-
cally incorporated in their subsequent documentary film, The Murder 
of Fred Hampton, directed and edited by Howard Alk. Norris McNamara  
took photos of the raided apartment for the defense.
A group of local and national reporters refused to accept the police’ s 
version of the event. They delved deeper and played a critical role in 
informing the public about what actually happened. The Chicago 
reporters were Chris Chandler, Brian Boyer, Lu Palmer, Rob Warden, 
Tom Dolan, Betty Washington, Hank Di Sutter, Lillian Calhoun, Bob 
McClory, Dennis Fisher, and Ron Dorfman. They were joined by John 
Kifner and Nathaniel Sheppard of the New York Times, Francis Ward of 
the Los Angeles Times, and Salim Muwakkil of In These Times.
The December 4th Committee—which was often headed by Akua 
Njeri (previously  named Deborah Johnson), Fred Hampton’s fian-
cée—was made up of raid survivors Doc Satchel, Harold Bell, Brenda 
Harris, and Verlina Brewer, and community activists Prexy Nesbitt 
Acknowledgments
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   359 7/29/09   1:30:35 PM


--- PAGE 385 ---
0
and David Saxner. They kept the public and media informed about 
the trial, brought people to court, and held fundraisers for legal 
costs. 
Public figures who spoke out loudly to condemn the raid included 
then state representative Harold Washington and then alderman 
Danny Davis, former congressman Abner Mikva, former alderman 
Leon Despres, former Supreme Court justice Arthur Goldberg, for-
mer attorney general Ramsey Clark, former NAACP executive director 
Roy Wilkins, and Reverend Jesse Jackson. The list is longer than I can 
include here but also includes Reverend Tom Strieter and the Maywood 
Town Council, Howard Saffold, attorney Tom Todd, and Mary Powers. 
Dick Gregory and former Black Panther Party leader Elaine Brown also 
protested Hampton’ s assassination to a national audience.
Two people who did their jobs with integrity rather than joining the 
government cover-up were assistant U.S. attorney Sheldon Waxman, 
who turned over the FBI’ s floor plan in spite of his implicit instructions 
to keep the organization’ s role in the raid hidden; and Robert Zimmers, 
the FBI firearms expert, who proved the falsity of the police’ s version 
of the raid by accurately connecting the bullet holes, bullet fragments, 
and shell casings to police weapons. He also exposed that the Chicago 
Crime Lab deliberately falsified their findings to fit the police’ s story. 
Herbert MacDonnell and Eleanor Berman were also experts who acted 
with honor.
I want to acknowledge the courage and legal acumen of Judge Luther 
Swygert, who took the time to carefully and thoroughly read the mas-
sive record, analyze the compelling evidence of government conspiracy 
and cover-up, and write a careful, incisive opinion on the facts and the 
law. The decision was implemented by Judge John F . Grady, who like-
wise recognized the strength of our evidence and was willing to impose 
sanctions against the defendants for their efforts to obstruct its pro-
duction. Their tenacity in upholding the basic principles of civil rights 
and constitutional law must be contrasted with that of Appellate Judge 
Wilbur Pell. He dismissed our claims and our proof as “unbridled, den-
igrating attacks on public officials,” while he acknowledged he never 
read the record. He also never divulged that he had been an FBI agent, 
which would have allowed us to get him dismissed from ruling on the 
appeal.
Acknowledgments
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   360 7/29/09   1:30:36 PM


--- PAGE 386 ---
1
Of course I must recognize my partners, comrades, and fellow work-
ers at the People’ s Law Office, who had the vision and perseverance to 
pursue the case legally and in the public forum for so many years and 
against tremendous odds. To Skip Andrew, who had the presence of 
mind to go to the scene within minutes of the police’ s departure and 
film the gathering of physical evidence the police left behind. To Dennis 
Cunningham, who provided the vision and political will to pursue the 
case to its end. To the many PLOers who worked on the case over the 
years—they are too numerous to name, but especially to then law stu-
dents Seva Dubuar, Jack Welch, and Ray McClain, who helped gather 
evidence, and to my law partner Donald Stang and attorney Marc 
Kadish, who assisted the criminal defense of the survivors . To Nancy 
Dempsey, Mary Frank, Victory Kadish, and Reverend Jim Reed, who 
also went to the scene early and helped collect evidence. An especially 
big thanks to Peter Schmiedel and Holly Hill, who devoted two years 
to our trial preparation; to Charles Hoffman, Jon Moore, and Michael 
Deutsch, who, with help from Mara Siegel and Ralph Hurvitz, worked 
assiduously to prepare the many trial briefs and appellate pleadings; 
and to Linda Turner, who typed them all. 
And of my brilliant and irrepressible partner Flint Taylor I am proud 
to express the highest praise and respect. His steadfast pursuit of  the 
truth was the engine that kept the litigation going until we prevailed. 
Finally to Pat Handlin and Maggie Roche, Flint’ s and my respective 
partners, who not only put up with us during this long episode but also 
supported and encouraged us.
There is something else I must say. In many ways the whole is greater 
than the parts. PLO has stood up to confront and expose government 
illegality and atrocities for forty years. The inspiration for us, like for 
many others, came from the Vietnamese liberation and other anti-
colonial struggles, from the black struggles for equality and power of 
the sixties, and from women’ s challenge to patriarchy. Much has been 
written about the supposed excesses of that period, and most of it has 
been exaggerated and even manufactured in an attempt to return to 
the “good old days” of unbridled colonialism, explicit segregation, and 
accepted patriarchy. There were some mistakes, and I have included my 
criticisms of our actions and myopia. But for many of my comrades—at 
PLO and elsewhere around the nation—and me, it is the light, energy, 
Acknowledgments
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   361 7/29/09   1:30:36 PM


--- PAGE 387 ---
2
and fervor of those times, so well articulated and symbolized by the 
short but inspiring life of Fred Hampton, that has driven our lives and 
commanded us to pursue justice.
To Those Who Helped Me Write the Story
While writing is a lonely pursuit, I have benefited from the input, ideas, 
criticism, encouragement, and support of many writers and friends, all 
of whom made this book possible. 
Kira Jones, Summer Woods, Allegra Huston, and Henry Bauer read 
my first efforts at telling this story and encouraged me to continue writ-
ing. Bill Ayers and Bernardine Dohrn convinced me that this book had 
to be written and that I should take the time to do it. My Bennington 
College MFA-program mentors were critical in helping me interweave 
my own story with the historical events I witnessed. My writing circle 
in Taos kept me going with directed criticism and strong support. This 
group included Connie Josefs, Veronica Golos, Helen Rynaski, and 
Monique Parker. I owe a special thanks to my friend, writer David Perez. 
He has been my main editor, collaborator, and critic. When the manu-
script was done, Bill Ayers, Sandy Snyder, and my Bennington class-
mate Wendy Call gave generously of their time and thoughts, putting in 
many hours editing and commenting on this book. 
I also want to express my appreciation to one of my fellow cofound-
ers of the People’ s Law Office, Dennis Cunningham, who remains a 
visionary and a comrade. He did a final reading and shared with me his 
knowledge, analysis, and memories of the events of so long ago. 
Bradley Greene, aka Abdul Shanna, has been a constant source of 
information on life inside the Chicago Panthers. And I thank former 
Panthers Bobby Rush, Yvonne King, Lynne French, Billy Brooks, and 
Brenda Harris for sharing their experiences as Panthers and their rec-
ollections of Fred with me. I also want to thank Mumia Abu-Jamal for 
writing up and sharing with me his impressions upon visiting 2337 West 
Monroe Street shortly after the raid.
Flint Taylor was particularly helpful in finding transcripts and doc-
uments from the PLO historical files, and his daughter Kate scanned 
Acknowledgments
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   362 7/29/09   1:30:37 PM


--- PAGE 388 ---

the entire thirty-seven-thousand-page trial transcript onto CDs, which 
made them accessible to me from fifteen hundred miles away.
I also want to thank my wonderful agent, Frances Goldin, who 
responded to my initial query with “How could I say no?” as if there 
were any doubt the book needed to be published. Frances has become 
a friend and someone I greatly respect. I want to thank Susan Betz of 
Lawrence Hill Books for publishing my account and guiding me through 
the steps necessary to complete it. 
In addition to thanking those who helped me during the writing and 
production processes, I must thank Fred Hampton’ s parents, Iberia and 
Francis, who, together with Fred’ s brother Bill and sister Dee Dee, took 
me in as a son and welcomed me in their Maywood home. So did their 
family and friends in Maywood and Haynesville, Louisiana. They were 
all so willing to share with me their experiences with Fred and what he 
meant to them.
I was continually encouraged to write the best book I could by my 
mother, Betty Haas, who, well into her nineties, remains a dedicated 
and scrupulous reader of my work and provides valuable criticism and 
support.  
Finally, to my wonderful wife, Mariel Nanasi, I thank you for the end-
less hours during which you tolerated my preoccupation with the book, 
including my 4:00 
a.m. risings to meet deadlines, your continued will-
ingness to read and comment on drafts, and your love and support dur-
ing the four years it took to complete. And of course to my loving kids, 
Justin and Rosa, who were willing to share their dad so I could complete 
this project, and to my older sons, Roger and Andrew, who constantly 
asked about the progress of the book and supported my writing. 
Acknowledgments
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   363 7/29/09   1:30:37 PM


--- PAGE 389 ---

Glossary
appeal bond (civil case): The money required to be posted to allow the 
losing party to pursue the appeal.
appeal bond (criminal case): The money required to be posted to allow 
a convicted person to remain out of jail during his or her appeal. 
“Black Nationalist Hate Groups”:  The FBI’ s all-inclusive term for U.S.-
based black civil rights and human rights organizations (included the 
Southern Christian Leadership Conference and the Black Muslims).
Black P. Stone Nation: A black Chicago street gang previously known as 
the Black Stone Rangers. Jeff Fort led the gang from 1968 to 1969.
Black Panther Party, Black Panther Party for Self-Defense (BPP):  A 
national black liberation organization formed in Oakland, California, 
in 1966 by Huey Newton and Bobby Seale.
COINTELPRO: The FBI acronym for a series of covert action programs 
directed against dissident groups. With regard to large sectors of the 
black movement COINTELPRO’ s stated objectives were to “expose dis-
rupt, misdirect, discredit, or otherwise neutralize the activities of black 
nationalist, hate-type organizations and groupings, their leadership, 
spokesmen, membership, and supporters.” 
Conspiracy Seven Trial  (originally the Conspiracy Eight Trial ): The 
federal criminal trial of people the government claimed led the dem-
onstrations at the August 1968 Democratic Convention in Chicago. 
The contentious trial lasted from September 1969 to February 20, 
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   364 7/29/09   1:30:37 PM


--- PAGE 390 ---

1970. Bobby Seale was severed as a defendant to be tried separately on 
November 5, 1969, after Judge Hoffman sentenced him to four years in 
prison for contempt.
FBI field offices: Local offices of the FBI in major U.S. cities.
Gang Intelligence Unit (GIU):  A special unit of the Chicago Police 
Department charged with monitoring and arresting Chicago street 
gang members engaged in criminal activities. 
mandamus: A legal procedure in which one party asks the higher court 
to order the lower court to take or refrain from some action.
Pentagon Papers:  The Department of Defense’ s secret history of the 
Vietnam War. The document was leaked by Daniel Ellsberg, a former 
defense department analyst, to the New York Times and the Washington 
Post and first published in the New York Times on June 13, 1971. The 
papers contradicted the optimistic picture of the war put forth by offi-
cials; their publication outraged President Nixon and national security 
advisor Henry Kissinger. 
Racial Matters Squad (RMS): FBI squads mandated to target black orga-
nizations and achieve COINTELPRO objectives. Robert Piper was head 
of Chicago’ s Racial Matters Squad in 1969.
recusal: The act of removing a judge from hearing a case.
Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC):  The civil rights 
organization founded and headed by Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. 
Special Agent in Charge (SAC): The designation for an FBI agent head-
ing a local field office. Marlin Johnson was the SAC of Chicago in 1969.
Special Prosecutions Unit (SPU) of the Cook County State’s Attorneys 
Office: A police unit created by State’ s Attorney Edward Hanrahan to 
enforce his “War on Gangs.” The unit executed the December 4 raid.
Glossary
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   365 7/29/09   1:30:38 PM


--- PAGE 391 ---

Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC):  A civil rights 
organization founded in the South that confronted segregation and 
advocated black power. Stokely Carmichael was one of its leaders.
Students for a Democratic Society (SDS): A leftist student organization 
founded in Ann Arbor, Michigan, in the early 1960s. 
Watergate: The White House scandal that began with the arrest of five 
men for breaking into and entering the Democratic National Committee 
headquarters at the Watergate office complex in Washington, D.C., on 
June 17, 1972. FBI and Senate Watergate Committee investigations 
revealed that this burglary was one of many illegal activities authorized 
and carried out by Nixon’ s staff. The discovery of Nixon’ s attempts to 
destroy the White House tapes, which proved his early knowledge of the 
break-in, led to his resignation on August 8, 1974. 
Weathermen: The radical faction of Students for a Democratic Society 
(SDS). The Weathermen took control of SDS and its national office 
in Chicago in the summer of 1969 and called for violent confronta-
tions with the police. In 1970 they became the Weather Underground 
Organization and took credit for several bombings of U.S. buildings in 
retaliation for the Vietnam War and police violence toward blacks.
Young Lords Organization (YLO): A former Puerto Rican Chicago street 
gang that opposed the expulsion of Puerto Ricans from and gentrifica-
tion of Lincoln Park, a Chicago neighborhood. They formed an alliance 
with the Chicago Black Panthers and Young Patriots.
Young Patriots: A group of primarily Southern, white youth relocated 
to the North Side of Chicago that opposed urban renewal and set up a 
health clinic. The Young Patriots (now disbanded) formed an alliance 
with Chicago’ s Black Panthers.
Glossary
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   366 7/29/09   1:30:38 PM


--- PAGE 392 ---

Sources
M
y primary sources for this book have been my own observations, 
experiences, and memory, which are admittedly subjective. How-
ever, when documented accounts of events are available, such as trial 
and deposition transcripts, I relied on these. This process required 
reading, or in many cases rereading after thirty years, the entire thirty-
seven-thousand-page trial transcript, many of the deposition tran-
scripts, hundreds of FBI documents, thousands of pages of motions and 
attachments, all the appellate briefs and Hampton court decisions, and 
transcripts of the tapes of the oral argument in the Seventh Circuit. 
I base my accounts of events at which I was not present on per-
sonal interviews and written descriptions of those events by persons 
who were present. My descriptions of Hanrahan’ s criminal trial, from 
which I was excluded because I was a potential witness, are based on 
Michael Arlen’ s book An American Verdict. Courtroom testimony comes 
directly from the official transcript from that trial. My interviews include 
lengthy conversations with Fred’ s parents, Iberia and Francis Hampton, 
in Maywood, Illinois, and in Haynesville, Louisiana, at a family reunion; 
with Fred’ s brother Bill and sister Dee Dee; with numerous childhood 
and adult friends in Maywood and Chicago; with relatives and friends 
of Fred Hampton in Haynesville; with former Panthers from Chicago, 
Oakland, New York, New Haven, and Philadelphia; with Mark Clark’ s 
mother, Fannie Clark, and his sister Eleanor Clark; and with the survi-
vors of the raid.  
Real names are used throughout this book, with the exception of 
jurors “Florence Smith” and “Judy Norgle,” which are pseudonyms used 
to protect the jurors’ identities.
I relied on numerous newspaper articles from the Chicago Sun-
Times, Chicago Tribune, Chicago Daily News, and the Defender to show 
what was being reported and the public reaction. Some of the more sig-
nificant articles are listed below.
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   367 7/29/09   1:30:38 PM


--- PAGE 393 ---

Additional Sources
Abu-Jamal, Mumia. “Memories of Chicago, 1969.” Letter to author, 
2007. 
Arlen, Michael J. An American Verdict. Garden City, NY: Anchor Press/
Doubleday, 1974.
Ayers, William. Fugitive Days: A Memoir. New York: Beacon Press, 2001.
Berlet, Chip. “Perry Ex Parte Messages in Panther Case Revealed.” 
Chicago Lawyer, December 1979.  
Br
anegan, Jay. “Taxpayer Panther Case Bill Put at $2.1 Million.” Chicago 
Tribune, August, 20, 1979.
Brown, Elaine. A Taste of Power: A Black Woman’s Story. New York: 
Anchor Books, 1992.
Canton, Susan. “Fred Hampton: A Political Assassination.” First 
Principles National Security and Civil Liberties 2, no. 3 (1976).
Carmichael, Stokely. Ready for Revolution: The Life and Struggles of 
Stokely Carmichael (Kwame Ture). New York: Scribner, 2003.
Churchill, Ward and Jim Vander Wall. Agents of Repression. Cambridge, 
MA: South End Press, 2002.
Cunningham, Dennis, Flint Taylor, and Jeffrey Haas. Press release 
announcing settlement, February 28, 1983.
Davey, Monica. “Chicago Divided Over Proposal to Honor Slain 
Panther.” New York Times, March 5, 2006.
December 4th Committee. Fred Hampton: 20th Commemoration . 
Chicago: Salsedo Press, 1989.
December 4th Committee. “Wanted For Murder Not for Mayor.” (flyer, 
February 1977).
DeZutter, Hank. “The Death of Fred Hampton: A Special Report.” 
Chicago Journalism Review 2, no. 12 (December 1969).
Foner, Philip S. The Black Panthers Speak. New York: De Capo Press, 
1995.
Frank, Leo and Lucille Frank. Letters to and from Herbert Haas, 1915. Leo 
Frank Exhibit and Archives, Bremen Jewish Heritage and Holocaust 
Museum, Atlanta.
Giovanni, Nikki. “The True Import of Present Dialogue, Black vs. Negro.” 
Black Feeling, Black Talk, Black Judgment. New York: William Morrow 
& Company, 1979.
Sources
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   368 7/29/09   1:30:39 PM


--- PAGE 394 ---

Gray, Mike and Howard Alk, dirs. The Murder of Fred Hampton. VHS. 
The Film Group and Facets Multimedia, 1971.
Greenberg, Cheryl L, ed. A Circle of Trust: Remembering SNCC. New 
Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1998.
Greene, Bob. “Laundered Box Score? No Hits, No Guns, No Terror.” 
Chicago Sun-Times, February 12, 1976. 
Harr, Jonathan. A Civil Action. New York: Vintage Books, 1995.
Hampton, Henry, prod.  Eyes on the Prize II: America at the Racial 
Crossroads. Blackside, 1990. 
Hampton, William, Delores and Paul Smith, Dorothy Smith, Tom and 
Doris Strieter, Joan and Ted Alpert, “The Essence of Fred Hampton.” 
Maywood, Illinois, 1994.
Hanrahan Press Conference. WBBM-TV Chicago, a CBS affiliate. 
December 4, 1969, 11:00 
a.m. 
Jones, Thai. A Radical Line: From the Labor Movement to the Weather 
Underground, One Family’s Century of Conscience . New York: Free 
Press, 2004.
Kifner, John. “White Paper on the ‘Police Murder’ of Fred Hampton and 
Mark Clark.” May 9, 1970. Chicago.
Kunstler, William M. Deep in My Heart. New York: Morrow, 1966.
McClory, Robert. “ Agent Provocateur.” Chicago Magazine, February 
1979.
———. “Judge Walks out in Panther Trial.” Chicago Defender, August 11, 
1976.
———. “Why Don’t Jeff Haas and Flint Taylor Just Give Up?” Chicago 
Reader 7, no. 42 (August 4, 1978).
Lindell, Rebecca. “ After Raid, Blacks Leave Democrats’ Machine.” The 
Monitor, Fall 1989.
Oney, Steve. And the Dead Shall Rise: The Murder of Mary Phagan and 
the Lynching of Leo Frank. New York: Pantheon Books, 2003.
Orwell, George. “Why I Write.” Gangrel (London), Summer 1946. 
“Panther Case Revisited.” Chicago Sun-Times, August 25, 1975. 
“Panther Chief, Aide Killed in Gun Battle.” Chicago Daily News, 
December 4, 1969.
Paton, Alan. Cry, the Beloved Country. New York: Scribner, 1948.
People’ s Law Office, Lawyers and Staff. “People’ s Law Office—20 
Years Working with People and Their Movements for Justice and 
Sources
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   369 7/29/09   1:30:39 PM


--- PAGE 395 ---
0
Liberation.” Chicago: Chicago Chapter National Lawyers Guild, 
November 18, 1989.
———. “People’ s Law Office—30th Anniversary Working with People 
and Their Movements for Justice and Liberation.” Chicago Chapter, 
National Lawyers Guild, November 13, 1999.
“Reenactment.” WBBM-TV Chicago, a CBS affiliate. December 11, 
1969.
Sayles, James. “Fred Hampton: August 30, 1948—December 4, 1969.” 
Vita Wa Watu, A New Afrikan Theoretical Journal, Bk. Eleven (August 
1987). 
Sheppard, Nathaniel. “Slain Black Panther’ s Family Pressed Legal Fight 
Because ‘We Were Right.’” New York Times, November 14, 1982.
T aylor, Flint, Margaret Van Houten, and Chip Berlet, “Counterintelli-
gence.” Chicago, National Lawyer’ s Guild. Task Force on Counterin-
telligence and the Secret Police. Vol. 1, 1978. 
Till-Mobley, Mamie and Christopher Benson. Death of Innocence: The 
Hate Crime That Changed America. New York: Random House, 2003.
United States District Court, Northern District of Illinois. “Report of the 
January 1970 Grand Jury.” Chicago, May 1970. 
U.S. Congress. “The FBI’ s Efforts to Disrupt and Neutralize the Black 
Panther Party.” Supplementary Detailed Staff Reports of Intelligence 
Activities and the Rights of Americans: Book III: Final Report of the 
Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with Respect 
to Intelligence Activities United States Senate, Washington, DC: U.S. 
Government Printing Office, April 23, 1976. Report no. 94-755, vol. 3, 
pp. 185–222.
Warden, Rob. “The Panther Lawyers.” Chicago Lawyer 5, no. 12 
(December 1982): 4–7.
———. “ A ‘Nonperson’ at Panther Trial.” Chicago Daily News, December 
2, 1976.
Wiedrich, Robert. “Exclusive.” Chicago Tribune, December 11, 1969.
Wilkens, Roy and Ramsey Clark. Search and Destroy: A Report by the 
Commission on Inquiry into the Black Panthers and the Police . New 
York: Metropolitan Applied Research Center, 1973.
Sources
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   370 7/29/09   1:30:40 PM


--- PAGE 396 ---
1
Hampton Case Citations
City of Chicago et al. v. Hampton, 415 U.S. 917 (1974).
Hampton v. Hanrahan, 339 F . Supp. 695 (N.D. Ill. 1972).
Hampton v. Hanrahan, 484 F . 2d 602 (7th Cir. 1973).
Hampton v. Hanrahan, 600 F . 2d 600 (7th Cir. 1979).
Hanrahan v. Hampton, 446 U.S. 754 (1980).
Hampton v. Hanrahan, 499 F . Supp. 640 (1980).
Hampton v. Hanrahan, 522 F . Supp. 140 (1981).
SourcesFred Hampton_FINAL.indd   371 7/29/09   1:30:40 PM


--- PAGE 397 ---
2
Index
Abernathy, Reverend Ralph, 109
Abu Ghraib, 317
Abu-Jamal, Mumia, 91
African National Congress, 114
Afro-American Patrolmen’s League, 86, 
98, 126, 291–92
Agnew, Spiro, 117
Ali, Muhammad, 27
Alk, Howard, 37, 53
Allende, Salvador, 66
American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), 
52, 98, 102, 123, 159
American Verdict, An (Arlen), 167
Anderson, Blair, 80, 94, 102, 180, 255, 
294, 314, 344
Anderson, Charles, 19
Andrew, Skip, 72–73, 82
and evidence gathering after 
Hampton death, 83, 89–93, 106–7, 
165–66
and grand jury report, 123–25
at Hampton’s funeral, 109
leaving PLO, 130, 166
and Panther defense, 49–54, 61–62, 
95–96, 111, 113, 121–22
Anti-Defamation League, 7
anti-Semitism, 6, 11
antiwar protests. See Vietnam War, 
protests against
apartheid, 10, 55
Arlen, Michael, 167, 169
Ashcroft, John, 23
Atlanta Committee for International 
Visitors (ACIV), 8
Atlanta Crackers baseball team, 9, 22
Atlanta Symphony, 11
Attica Brothers, 159, 202
Attica Correctional Facility, 147, 154
Atwood, Paul, 136–37
Babatunde, Babatunde Omowale, 206–7, 
211, 339, 341–42
Badillo, Herman, 154
Ballard, Hank, 13
Barkley, L. D., 157
Barksdale, David, 43, 108
Batista, Fulgencio, 66
Bauer, Henry, 8, 22
Beard, Jeff, 173
Bell, Harold, 79–82, 90, 95, 102, 104, 
112, 256, 260, 314, 344
Bender, Bill, 131, 145, 163–64, 185–86, 
192, 194
Beranek, Bob, 112
Berman, Eleanor, 92, 124, 181, 293, 
299, 302
Bethel Baptist Church cemetery, 110
Better Boys Foundation, 39
Black Crackers baseball team, 9
Black Disciples, 43, 108
Black Muslims, 157, 176
Black P. Stone Nation, 43, 46, 108
Black Panther newspaper, 40–41, 44, 
142, 284
Black Panther Party for Self-Defense, 29. 
See also Black Panthers
Black Panthers, 237, 277, 282–83, 327, 
329, 351. See also Black Panther Party 
for Self Defense
Alabama chapter, 29
Atlanta chapter, 31
building purchase, 68–70
Carbondale chapter, 135–38
 trial of, 146–50, 202
Chicago chapter, 39–42, 142–43, 
184
Chicago Police, raids on, 61–62, 188
decline of, 142–43
defense of, by PLO, 54, 58, 61–62, 
115
Detroit chapter, 31
and drugs, 44
FBI raid on, 51
health clinic, 40, 94, 129, 142, 
195, 255
Illinois chapter, 3, 38–42, 108, 284
and Jackson, Jesse, 97–99
Los Angeles chapter, 31
New York chapter, 31
Oakland chapter, 29, 31, 38, 41
Peoria chapter, 95
Philadelphia chapter, 91
and Rainbow Coalition, 45–47
rhetoric, 4, 48, 63, 67, 94–95, 99, 
179, 215, 283–84
and socialism, 40, 62
and “Statement to the Black 
Community,” 117
targeted by FBI, 239, 241
on trial, 112–13. See also People v. 
Johnson, et al.
viewed as a gang, 48
and Weathermen, 114–15
women in, 352
Black Power, 26, 28, 95, 99
Blackstone Rangers, 43–44, 94, 225, 
228, 242
Blair, Thomas, 47
Bonners Supper Club, 21–23
Bosch, Juan, 49
Boyd, Milton “Houseman,” 138, 141, 
145, 340
Boyer, Brian, 95
Boyle, Robert, 103
Branch, Milton, 122
Breakfast for Children Program (Black 
Panthers), 39–40, 45, 62, 68, 71, 75, 95, 
142, 252, 283–84, 292
Brewer, Verlina, 80, 94, 102, 129, 180, 
255, 294, 312, 314, 347
Brewton, Jimmy, 136–37
Bridgeport, 48
Brooks, Billy “Che,” 61, 63, 190
Brown, Bob, 38
Brown, Elaine, testimony of, 282–83
Brown, H. Rap, 38
Brown, John, 114
Brown, Oscar Jr., 215
Bruce, Lenny, 82
Bruce, Robert, 143, 268
testimony of, 282
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms 
and Explosives of the Treasury 
Department (AFTD), 191, 196, 243, 253
Burge, Jon, 178, 355–56
Burger, Warren, 334
Bush, George W., 23
Cambodia, 118
Campbell, Ann, 39
Carbondale Six Defense Committee, 146
Carey, Bernard, 170
Carmichael, Stokely, 38–39, 143
Carmody, Edward, 85, 104, 106, 124, 169, 
191, 265, 274–75, 294, 301, 303, 346
Carter, Bunchy, 66
Carter, James, 348
Carter, Julian, 213–15
Carter, Marvin, 32
Castro, Fidel, 14, 66
Cedarquist, Weyland, 131, 152, 165–66
Center for Constitutional Rights, 128, 
131, 145, 348
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), 66
counterinsurgency plan for Central 
America, 227
Chabala, Leonard, 291
Chaney, James, 128
Checker, Chubby, 13
Chicago Bar Association, 152
Chicago Council of Lawyers, 152
Chicago Daily Defender, 228
on Hampton appeal, 333
Chicago Daily News, 228
on Hampton death, 84–86, 94, 101–3
on Hampton trial, 276–77
Chicago Defender, on Hampton appeal, 
326
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   372 7/29/09   1:30:41 PM


--- PAGE 398 ---

Index
Chicago Police Department, 191, 226
Crime Lab, 84, 111, 124, 129–30, 
133, 164, 218, 261, 360
Gang Intelligence Unit (GIU), 48, 
196, 252–53, 287
intelligence division, 201
Internal Investigations Division 
(IID), 111, 126, 164, 277–78
Chicago Sun-Times, 228
on grand jury report, 124
on Hampton appeal, 326, 332
on Hampton death, 95, 10607
on Hampton settlement, 346
on Hampton trial, 242
on People’s Law Office, 306–7
Chicago Tribune
on civil case reversal, 182
on FBI informant, 173–74
on Fort letter, 228
on Hampton appeal, 326
on Hampton death, 103–7, 277
on Hampton trial, 281
China Doll. See Harris, Brenda
Christenbury, Edward, 235, 239, 248–49, 
287, 289–90, 328
Christentopolos, George, 302
Church Committee, 177–78, 203–4, 224, 
226–27, 229, 240, 295
Church, Frank, 203, 224
Church of the Epiphany. See People’s 
Church
Ciszewski, John, 85, 124, 265
Citizens Committee to Investigate the 
FBI, 143
Civil Rights Act, 130, 288, 318, 327
civil rights workers, 128, 130
civil suits, Hampton. See Hampton v. 
Hanrahan, et al.
Clark, Fannie, 95, 128–29, 222, 235, 
289–90, 291–92, 311, 314, 344–45, 351
Clark, Mark, 17, 75, 80, 85, 91–92, 95, 
101, 104, 109, 124, 180, 253, 265, 
291–92, 297, 301–2, 305, 319, 343, 
348, 351
Clark, Ramsey, 99, 179, 181, 184
Clark, Reverend William, 291
Cleaver, Eldridge, 55, 142–43
Clements, Father George, 108–9
coalition housing plan, 69, 71
Cobra Stones, 46
Cochran, Johnnie, 352
Coghlan, John, 133–34, 145, 152–53, 
163–64, 166, 168, 185, 198–201, 206–
11, 229, 235, 245–46, 258, 262–64, 
266, 270, 272–74, 276, 278–79, 282, 
284, 286–88, 290, 293–99, 303–10, 
313, 319, 332–33, 339–42, 344
Coleman, Kermit, 52, 98, 102
collective living, 55–56, 132, 133, 205
Congress of Racial Equality (CORE), 30
Conlisk, James, 151
Conneely, Michael, 287, 340
Conspiracy Eight Trial, 58–59, 71
Conspiracy Seven, the, 59, 133, 155, 329
Constantinou, Dr., 91
Cook County Bar Association, 331
Cooke, Sam, 12
Corbett, Dwight, 53
Cotsirilos, George, 152
Cox, Courtland, 28
Crazy Horse, 114
Crowley, John Powers, 330
Cry, the Beloved Country (Paton), 10
Cunningham, Dennis, 36, 45, 50, 52, 54, 
56–58, 68, 92, 103, 143, 151, 153, 219
and Attica prisoners’ defense, 155, 
161–62, 202, 203–4
and Carbondale Panthers, 135–36
on FBI informant, 174–76
and grand jury report, 122–26
and Hampton appeal, 314–16, 318, 
322, 326, 328
and Hampton murder, 92, 103, 
113, 116
and Hampton v. Hanrahan, et 
al., 127–29, 131, 164, 185, 206, 
225, 227–29, 248, 311–13, 331, 
337–38, 343, 348
and Maywood riot defense, 37–38
and Ramos protest, 46–47
Curley, Richard, 61
Daley, Richard J., 30–31, 35, 48, 65, 100, 
117, 126, 131, 152–53, 216, 228
Daley, Richard M., 178, 357
Davis, Danny, 100, 354
Davis, James “Gloves,” 48, 83, 104, 124, 
168–69, 207, 256, 274, 294, 304–5, 
319
testimony of, 297–98
Davis, Rennie, 59
Deaton, Larry, 287
December 4th Committee, 215, 228, 
235, 367
Dellinger, David, 59
Dempsey, Nancy, 89–90
DePaul Law School, 153
Deutsch, Michael, 57, 135–36, 145–47, 
148, 161–62, 202, 203, 205, 331, 
333–34, 355
DiSutter, Hank, 103
Dohrn, Bernardine, 21, 24
Dolan, Tom, 228
Douglas, William O., on discovery, 213
Drexel Avenue church, 97–98
DuBois, W.E.B., 18
Dubuar, Seva, 52, 62–63, 89, 132
Duvalier, Papa Doc, 41
Dwight Correctional Center, 202
Dylan, Bob, 58
Ebenezer Baptist Church, 12
Ehrlichman, John, 203
Elbert, Joan, 18, 75
Ellsberg, Daniel, 144, 177, 197
Epton, Saul A., 96, 112, 121
Ervanian, Harry, 277
Esposito, Courtney, 57, 132, 135–37
Evans, Reverend Clay, 18
Eve, Arthur, 154
Eyes on the Prize television series, 353
Fairchild, Thomas, 318–22, 337
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), 32, 
63, 100, 124–25, 148
access to files of, 133, 177, 188–91, 
240, 248–49, 251–52, 328, 337
Counterintelligence Program 
(COINTELPRO), 143–44, 177–
78, 187, 188, 192–97, 201, 204, 
206, 213–19, 222–23, 224–26, 
229–30, 239–41, 243, 245, 
252–53, 277, 288–89, 315, 317, 
320–22, 335, 338, 343
“deal document,” 218–19
and Hampton murder, 176, 182–83
and Hampton surveillance, 217
Key Agitator Index of, 32
Racial Matters Squad (RMS), 188, 
193, 214–15
raid on Panther Chicago 
headquarters, 51, 122, 193
Film Group, 25, 37, 53–54
Fink, Liz, 161
First Congregational Church, 117
Fisher, Dennis, 306–7
Fisher, Stephanie, 39
Fort, Jeff, 44, 108
FBI letter to, 224–25, 228, 239, 242, 
288, 295
Frank, Leo, 6–7, 12, 90
Frank, Mary, 25, 35, 37, 54, 57, 70, 72, 
89–90, 113, 115, 120, 131–32
Franklin, Aretha, 12
Freedom Rides, 7
freedom schools, 128
Froines, John, 59
Garry, Charles, 41, 201
Garvey, Marcus, 18
Gaye, Marvin, 12
Geismer, Betty, 7
Geraghty, Tom, 164–65
Gerber, Martin, 111
Gilhooly, John, 194–95, 303
Giovanni, Nikki, 47
Glascott’s Groggery, 83
Glenn, Lily May, 10, 12
Gold, Ted, 115
Goldberg, Arthur, 99
Goldenhersh, Joseph H., 140
Gone With the Wind, 7
Goodman, Andrew, 128
Gorman, Joseph, 105, 168–69, 207, 274, 
294, 297, 305
Grady, John F., 335, 337–38, 341, 343–48, 
355
Graham, Ron, 32
grand jury
on police raid on Panthers, 111–12, 
122–23, 131, 145, 151–52, 175–
76, 218, 244, 253, 261–62, 275, 
277, 279, 320, 326, 333, 353
report of, 124–26, 179–80, 219
Gray, Joan, 39
Gray, L. Patrick, 332
Gray, Mike, 53, 83, 89, 108, 352
Greene, Bob, 242
Greene, Bradley, 39, 41, 51, 61
Gregory, Dick, 214
Groth, Daniel, 48, 83–85, 92, 103–5, 125, 
151, 164, 175–76, 180, 186, 198–99, 
201, 210–12, 247, 253, 265, 294, 
297–98, 302, 305, 315, 317, 321, 325, 
328, 334–35, 338–42
deposition of, 206–9, 341
testimony of, 272–74
Gruenberg, Robert, 344–45, 347
Guantanamo Bay, 317
Guevara, Che, 27, 41, 66
Guild Anti-Police Brutality Project, 201
Haas, Herbert, 6–7
Haas, Joseph, 7
Haas-Roche, Andrew Hampton, 331
Haldeman, H. R., 177, 203
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   373 7/29/09   1:30:42 PM


--- PAGE 399 ---

Hamer, Fannie Lou, 128
Hampton, Bill, 17–18, 30, 219, 295, 
347, 352
Hampton, Dee Dee, 15, 17, 74, 260
Hampton, Francis, 15–16, 18–19, 73–75, 
102, 128–29, 220–22, 260, 289–90, 
311, 347, 349–50, 352, 354–55, 357
Hampton, Fred, 268, 283
and antiwar movement, 27
autopsy of, 91–92, 181
childhood of, 15–16, 349–50
community reaction to death of, 
99–103
documentary on, 25, 53, 70–71, 
83, 89, 108, 352. See also 
Murder of Fred Hampton, The 
(documentary)
FBI files on, 197, 247, 252
FBI sketch of apartment, 189–91, 
192, 196–99, 214, 221, 243–44, 
251, 253, 269, 271, 272, 302, 
304, 326
funeral of, 108–10
high school years of, 18–19, 28, 291
“ice cream” trial of, 47–49, 68
murder of, 5, 72–82, 163, 179–81, 
187, 203, 253, 275, 285, 301–3, 
321, 343, 348, 350, 354
as NAACP youth organizer, 20, 292
Seconol in blood of, 113, 124, 174, 
210, 299, 302
speaking at Northern Illinois 
University, 65–67
speaking at Northwestern Law 
School, 62
speaking at “People’s Church,” 3–5, 
53–54, 71, 356
on trial, 37–38
Hampton, Fred Jr., 111, 130, 235, 260, 
293, 357
Hampton, Iberia, 15–18, 73–75, 102, 
128–29, 148, 220–22, 235, 260, 289–
90, 291–93, 310–12, 314, 319, 322, 
347, 349–52, 354–55, 357
Hampton Scholarship Fund, 219
Hampton v. Hanrahan, et al., 127–31, 
133–34, 142, 176, 201, 206, 223, 
227–30, 233–322, 326–27, 333
appeals, 163–65, 314–22, 325–29, 
331–33
depositions, 184–87, 192–201, 
206–9, 213–15, 216, 341
hung jury in, 308–9
jury selection for, 236–38
settlement of, 336, 343–48, 351
testimonies, 241–48, 252–53, 
255–56, 258, 260, 265–66, 
268–71, 272–74, 276–85, 297–99, 
301, 321
verdict, 286–90
Handlin, Pat, 202
Hank Ballard and the Midnighters, 13
Hanrahan, Edward, 59, 65, 109, 127, 266
criminal case, 113, 163–70, 200, 
208, 286
on defensive after Hampton death, 
98–106, 116, 118
drops charges on Panthers, 121–22
election defeats, 170, 290
and FBI, 143, 191, 193, 197, 199, 
218–21, 244, 276–77, 281, 289, 
295–96, 353
and grand jury, 111–12, 125
and Hampton “ice cream” trial, 48, 
50–52
and Hampton v. Hanrahan, et al., 
127–31, 142, 152, 163–64, 273, 
327, 333, 342, 346–47, 355
indictment of, 151–52, 335
and press conference after Hampton 
death, 83–85, 94, 199, 277, 327
and raid on Panthers, 74–76, 86, 117, 
209, 275
testimony of, 276–81, 321
at trial, 235–36
Harris, Brenda, 80, 85, 94, 102, 106–7, 
111, 180, 261, 274, 294, 297, 299, 301, 
312, 314, 319–20, 347, 351–52
Harrison, Leta, 39
Hayden, Tom, 59
Hearst newspapers, 6
Hendrix, Jimi, 47
Henry Horner Homes, 64
Henry, Patrick, 114, 283
Hill, Holly, 204–7, 209, 215, 222
Hilliard, David, 245
Ho Chi Minh, 27, 60, 66, 68, 132
Hoffman, Abbie, 59
Hoffman, Charles “Chick,” 204–5, 311, 
314–16, 326, 329, 331, 335
Hoffman, Julius, 133, 353
Hoft, Janine, 355
Hoge, Jim, 95
Holley, James “Blood,” 141, 145
Hollowell and Moore law firm, 21
Hollowell, Donald, 21
Hoover, J. Edgar, 32, 63, 94, 122, 143, 
176–77, 190, 194, 197, 203–4, 213, 
216–20, 224, 226–27, 241–43, 251, 
253, 335, 338
Huggins, John, 66
Humphrey, Hubert, 100
Hurst, Charles, 116
Hurvitz, Ralph, 204–5
Hutton, Bobby, 66
Hyman, Jon, 163
Ignatin, Hilda, 46
Illinois Criminal Code, 75
Illinois Supreme Court, 140, 152
Inbau, Fred, 89
Iraq, 227, 356
Ivory, Bill, 31–32, 37
Jackson, Albert, 339
Jackson, George, 147–48, 154
Jackson, Georgia, 148
Jackson, Jonathan, 148
Jackson, Reverend Jesse, 18, 45, 181, 
184, 295
and Black Panthers, 97–99
at Hampton’s funeral, 109
Jackson State University, 119
Jalovec, Richard, 48, 99, 103, 105, 109, 
129–30, 151, 164, 175, 186, 193, 
198–200, 208–9, 247, 253, 273, 326, 
328
Jefferson, Arthur, 224
Jeffries, Alfred, 53
Jim Crow laws, 28
Jimenez, Cha-Cha, 44–45, 108
Johnson, Deborah, 5, 63, 67, 72, 74–75, 
77–82, 95–96, 102, 109, 111, 117–18, 
130, 166, 168, 174, 180, 190, 193, 215, 
217, 221, 235, 245, 247, 252, 258, 
269, 292, 312, 314, 347, 352. See also 
Njeri, Akua
testimony of, 260, 301
on trial, 112, 121
Johnson, Lyndon, 23, 144
Johnson, Marlin, 51, 122, 190, 193–94, 
197, 199, 213, 217, 219, 224–26, 228, 
235, 240, 252, 276–77, 290, 320
deposition of, 216
testimony of, 241–44
Johnson, Reverend Bruce, 45
Jones, George, 93, 180, 247, 262–63, 265, 
294, 305
testimony of, 298–99
Jones, Sidney, 50–51
Joplin, Janis, 47, 318
Jordan, Susan, 57, 132–33, 135, 151, 153
Junior, Nathaniel, 143, 268
Kanter, Arnold, 192, 194, 214–17, 223, 
229, 235, 246, 248–49, 270, 284, 
290, 328
Kearney, Thomas, 332
Kennedy, John F., 34, 114
assassination of, 13–14, 82, 262
Kennon, Larry, 298
Kent State University, and Vietnam War 
protests, 119, 344
Kenyatta, Jomo, 41
Kerner, Otto, 136
Kerouac, Jack, 288
Khan, Chaka, 215
Kifner, John, 101
King, B.B., 12
King, Coretta Scott, 8
King, Martin Luther Sr., 12
King, Reverend C.B., 21
King, Reverend Martin Luther Jr., 8, 12, 
18, 50–51, 128, 143, 283, 356
in Chicago, 29–31
death of, 34, 82, 99, 2287
and FBI, 176, 221, 227, 241
on Vietnam war, 24–25
King, Yvonne, 40
Kinoy, Arthur, 127, 127–28, 130–31, 201
Kissinger, Henry, 118–19
Koen, Reverend Charles, 295
Ku Klux Klan, 128, 237, 350
Kunstler, Bill, 128, 154–55, 161, 281, 
329
Kwoka, Alexandra, 229, 235, 249
Latin American Defense Organization 
(LADO), 108
Latin Kings, 108
Lawrence, Liza, 132
Lawyers’ Committee for Civil Rights 
(LCCR), 192, 207, 213, 215, 335, 348
Leathers, Harland, 319, 321
Legal Assistance Foundation, 25, 45, 
49–50, 54
Lemay, Curtis, 118
Lenin, Vladimir, 41
Leonard, Jerris, 123, 125, 178, 218–19, 
222, 244, 281, 335, 338
Levi, Edward, 23
Levine, Victor, 91–92, 118
Lewis, John, 7
Lincoln, Abraham, 283, 301
Lincoln Park Poor People’s Coalition, 45
Lon Nol, 118
Index
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   374 7/29/09   1:30:43 PM


--- PAGE 400 ---

Lopez, Obed, 108
Los Angeles Times, on Hampton 
settlement, 347
Lowndes County Freedom Organization, 
29
Lumumba, Patrice, 66
Lyons, Thomas, 253
MacDonnell, Herbert, 92–93
Machtinger, Howie, 60
Maddox, Lester, 8
Malcolm X, 18, 28–29, 31, 147, 283, 356
murder of, 21, 82, 99, 227
Malcolm X College, 116
Malrey, Tilman, 73–74
Mancusi, Vincent R., 154–55
Mao Tse-Tung, 27, 41, 50, 55, 66
Marshall, Thurgood, 334
Marx, Karl, 41, 57
Mason, Morton, 293, 299, 302
Maywood Village, swimming pool issue, 
20, 31–32, 37, 291, 357
McCarty, Joan, 39
McClain, Ray, 89, 131
McClory, Bob, 228
McCurry, Walter, 8–9, 22, 158
McGovern, George, 170
McNelty, Reverend Harry, 18, 73, 108–9, 
219
Medill School of Journalism, 100
Meek, Russell, 109
Mellis, Mona, 36, 56
Menard Prison, 3, 53, 79
Meredith, James, 28
Merritt College, 28
Metcalfe, Ralph, 100, 126
Metropolitan Correctional Center, 280–81
Meyers, Danny, 161
Miller, Jay, 123
Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party, 
128
Mitchell, John, 109, 122, 197, 204, 
218–19, 333, 335, 338, 343
Mitchell, Roy, 186, 188–91, 213–14, 216, 
219, 235, 244, 251–53, 268–71, 273, 
290, 320, 326
deposition of, 192–201, 206, 208–9
testimony of, 245–48
Mobilization to End the War in Vietnam, 
59
Montgomery, James, 37–38, 102, 121, 
166, 215–16, 234, 239–43, 245–49, 
254, 255–57, 260, 268, 274, 300–302, 
304, 308–9, 311–13, 314, 317–19, 322, 
333, 338, 343–48, 351–52
Moore, Howard, 21, 23
Moore, Jon, 318, 326, 331, 335
Morgan, Clifton. See Babatunde, 
Babatunde Omowale
Morgan, Theresa, 340, 342
mother country radicals, 55
Motherway, Nick, 96, 121–22
Muhammad, Elijah, 143
Murder of Fred Hampton, The 
(documentary), 53. See also Hampton, 
Fred, documentary on
Murphysboro jail, 137, 139
Myerson, Jim, 315
Nanasi, Mariel, 355
Nation of Islam, 143
National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People 
(NAACP), 24, 27, 31, 64, 99, 126, 179, 
184, 215, 292, 311, 315, 348
Legal Defense and Education 
Fund, 234
West Suburban Youth Chapter, 20, 
29, 32, 38, 108
National Council of Churches, 315
National Jury Project, 233, 236, 348
National Lawyers Guild, 128, 155–56, 
161, 187, 201, 203, 331
National Liberation Front. See Vietcong
New York Times
and Attica revolt, 154
on Hampton death, 101
and Pentagon Papers, 143, 177
Newton, Huey, 28–29, 41, 66, 69, 142
1968 Democratic Convention, 59
Nixon, Richard, 85, 100, 109, 114, 
117–19, 144, 178, 203, 218
Njeri, Akua, 352, 357. See also Johnson, 
Deborah
Norgle, Judy (juror pseudonym), 238, 
276, 298–99, 308–9
Northwestern Law School, 62, 133, 
135, 204
Legal Clinic, 164–66
Nygren, Merle, 85
Oil, Chemical, and Atomic Workers 
Union, 30
On the Road (Kerouac), 288
O’Neal, William, 62, 71, 109, 113, 143, 
235, 246, 257–58, 282, 284
death of, 353–54
deposition of, 184–87
as FBI informant, 173–79, 182–83, 
188, 190, 192–200, 219, 221, 240, 
243, 245, 251–53, 266, 288, 328
testimony of, 268–71
Operation Breadbasket, 18, 97–98
Operation PUSH, 18
Oswald, Russell, 154
Pachoda, Dan, 155–56
Palestine Liberation Organization, 57–58
Palmer, Lu, 101
Parks, Rosa, 17
Parsons, William, 100
Paton, Alan, 10
Patterson, Aaron, 357
Pell, Wilbur, 318, 322, 325, 329, 332, 334
Pentagon Papers, 143–44, 177
People v. Johnson, et al. See Johnson, 
Debra, on trial
People’s Church, 3, 45, 53, 63
people’s inquest, on police raid and 
Fred’s death, 117–18, 123, 125, 179
People’s Law Office (PLO), 6, 37, 54, 
56–58, 62, 68–69, 89, 123, 130, 151, 
161, 175, 204, 207, 258, 287, 329, 352, 
355–56
and antiwar movement, 201
and Attica prisoners’ defense, 
155–62, 175, 201–4
changes at, 132–33
and Hampton v. Hanrahan, et al., 
163, 201, 309, 315, 326, 342–43, 
347–48, 351
and Hanrahan criminal case, 165–67
and Jackson, Jesse, 97–99
moving the office, 205–6, 224
and Panthers’ defense, 77, 81–82, 
103, 112, 113, 115, 116, 135–36, 
138–41, 181
and prisoner defense, 133, 135, 
330, 333
and Puerto Rican Independentistas, 
161, 201
People’s Park, 45–46
Perry, Joseph Sam, 0, 35, 133–34, 142, 
145, 163–64, 176, 181, 182–84, 
188–89, 193, 197, 201, 204, 209–12, 
216–17, 222–23, 225–30, 233–34, 
236–37, 239–40, 244, 246–50, 254, 
258, 262–64, 266, 268, 270, 273, 275, 
276, 278–79, 281, 283, 286–89, 291–
92, 294–99, 300, 302–12, 315, 317–18, 
325, 332, 334, 341, 355
Phagan, Mary, 6
Phoenix Program, 114
Pincham, Eugene, 102, 122
Piper, Robert, 193–94, 196, 199, 216, 219, 
235, 249, 251, 288, 290, 320
deposition of, 213–15
testimony of, 252–53
Pol Pot, 118
police brutality, 29, 44, 86, 100, 117, 161, 
179, 216, 292, 357
Police Conduct Litigation Manual, 331
Ponce de Leon Ballpark, 9
Pontiac Brothers, PLO defense of, 331, 
333–34, 337, 339
Pontiac Correctional Center, 330–31
Poole, Cecil, 123
Powell, Beverlina, 39
Powell, Lewis, 334
Powell, Lincoln, 248
Power, Joseph, 131, 152–53
Prisoners of Conscience Committee, 357
Prosser, Everett, 145, 149
Proviso East High School, 18–19, 28, 
108, 204
Public Accommodations Act of 1964, 27
Puerto Rican Independentistas, 161, 201
Rainbow Coalition, 45
Ramos, Manuel, protest against shooting 
of, 45–47
Rand Corporation, 144
Randall, Sherman, 342
Rap Brown Act, 59
Rappaport, Frank, 194–95, 303
Rayner Funeral Home, 91, 100, 102, 108
Redding, Otis, 12
Reed, Reverend Jim, 89, 92
Rehnquist, William, 333–34
Reid, Ellis, 131, 152
Reid, Herbert, 179, 234, 257, 309, 311
revolutionaries, 39, 54–55, 62, 114–15, 
120, 125, 147
Richmond, Richard, 139–40, 146, 149
Rising Up Angry, 58
Robert Taylor Homes project, 33–34
Robinson, Renault, 86, 98, 291–92
Robinson, Stanley, 173, 184
Roche, Maggie, 266, 286–87, 315, 
325–26, 329, 355
Rockefeller, Nelson, 154, 159
Romiti, Philip, 153, 165–67, 169–70, 286
Roosevelt, Eleanor, 7
Rose, Don, 100
Rothschild, Jacob, 12
Royal Peacock Social Club, 12–13
Index
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   375 7/29/09   1:30:44 PM


--- PAGE 401 ---

Royko, Mike, on police raid on Panthers, 
101
Rubin, Jerry, 59
Rumsfeld, Donald, 356
Rush, Bobby, 38, 72, 81–82, 84–86, 
89–90, 94, 113, 135, 138, 258, 268, 
354
on federal grand jury, 123
at Hampton funeral, 108–9
police raid on, 96–99
testimony of, 283–85
Rutgers Law School, 128
Ryan, George, 356
Sadunas, John, 111–12, 218, 261, 265
Saffold, Howard, 292
Sams, George, 51
San Quentin State Prison, 147–48, 154
Sankey, Barbara, 39
Satchel, Doc, 40, 63, 80, 94–95, 102, 111, 
117, 123, 128–29, 180, 190, 234–35, 
247, 294, 314, 344–45, 351
testimony of, 255–56
Schaefer, Walter V ., 52–53
Schmiedel, Peter, 201–2, 204, 206–7, 209, 
215, 326
Schulman, Jay, 233–34, 236
Schwartz, Herman, 159–60
Schwerner, Michael, 128, 185
Schwerner, Rita, 185
Scott, William J., 99
Seale, Bobby, 28–29, 31, 58–59, 65–66, 
69, 71, 123
Search and Destroy (NAACP), 179–81, 
234
Sears, Barnabas, 131, 151–543, 165–67, 
169–70, 257
Second City, 105
segregation, in the South, 7–12, 22–23
Sellers, Cleveland, 28
Senate Select Committee on Intelligence. 
See Church Committee
Seventh Circuit Court, 136, 164, 181, 182, 
230, 288–89, 304, 314, 325, 329, 330, 
332–33, 335, 339, 341, 353, 355
Shadur, Milton, 335
Siegel, Mara, 159–60, 202, 205
signifying, 16
Sills, Paul, 105
Simon, Elbert, 138
Smith, Florence (juror pseudonym), 237, 
242, 300, 309–11, 343
Smith, Frank “Big Black,” 156–61
Smith, Joseph, 334, 339
Society of Former Special Agents of the 
FBI, 332
Soledad Brother (Jackson), 147
Soledad Brothers, 148
Soledad Prison, 148
Sorflaten, Jim, 57
Sorosky, Sheldon, 76
Soto, John, 64–65
Soto, Michael, 64–65
Southern Christian Leadership 
Conference, 27, 29
Southern Christian Leadership Council, 
109, 176
Southern Regional Council, 7
Special Prosecutions Unit (SPU), 48, 
193, 196
special prosecutor. See Sears, Barnabas
Spock, Benjamin, 24
Stainthorp, John, 355
Stang, Donald, 49–51, 54, 61, 94–95, 113, 
133, 166, 169–70
Stanton, Frank, 6
Stateville Correctional Center, 133, 135
Stavis, Morty, 209–11
Stein, Ted, 46
Stern, Liz, 71
Stevens, John Paul, 333
“Street Fightin’ Man,” 47
Strieter, Doris, 20
Strieter, Reverend Thomas, 20, 295–96
Student Nonviolent Coordinating 
Committee (SNCC), 7, 27–30, 38, 143
women in, 39
Students for a Democratic Society (SDS), 
13, 21, 45, 54–55, 60, 132, 245
Sullivan, Thomas, 152–53, 166–68
Summerdale police scandal, 131
Susler, Jan, 355
Swygert, Luther, 318, 320–22, 325–29, 
331–34, 337
Talbert, Lawrence, 339
Taylor, Bill, 30
Taylor, Flint, 3, 52–54, 56–57, 62–63, 89, 
97–98, 107, 132, 143, 148, 178, 181, 
182, 356
and Carbondale Panthers, 135–40, 
145–47, 149–50
and FBI documents, 188–89, 217–19, 
224, 227, 251
and grand jury report, 124–26
and Hampton appeal, 314–16, 318, 
320, 322, 325–26, 328, 332
and Hampton depositions, 206–9, 
213, 215, 222–23
and Hampton v. Hampton, et al., 
128, 131, 153, 162, 164, 183–85, 
187, 190–91, 202, 228–29, 233, 
237, 240–41, 246, 248, 254, 257, 
262–64, 266, 270–71, 272–74, 
278–81, 286–88, 293–95, 299, 
300, 302–3, 306–13, 331, 334–35, 
337–48
and Hanrahan criminal case, 165–66
and Mitchell deposition, 194, 
197–98, 201
Ten Point Program, 29, 41, 283 
Thomas, Leonard, 138, 141, 145
Thompson, Erica, 355
Till, Emmett “Bobo,” murder of, 17, 100
T
ill, Mamie, 17, 102
Tolson, Clyde, 338
Touhy, John, 287, 319–20
tours, of Hampton apartment after raid, 
90–91
Treviranus, Leonard, 244, 253
Truelock, Louis, 79–82, 90, 95, 102, 
104, 113, 165–66, 180, 190, 235, 247, 
256–57, 259–60, 265, 303, 314, 344
testimony of, 258
Turner, Linda, 286, 316
Turner, Nat, 114
University of Buffalo Law School, 159
University of Chicago Law School, 21, 
23, 131, 352
urban riots, 29
U.S. Constitution, 128, 317–18
U.S. Supreme Court, 333–34
Vietcong, 23, 27, 179
Vietnam, 13, 114
Vietnam War, 24–25, 55, 118, 136
protests against, 23–25, 54, 59, 
114, 118–20, 143–44, 161, 177, 
201–2, 344
V olini, Camillo, 133–34, 145, 163–64, 
185, 198–200, 210–11, 229, 235, 240, 
263–64, 278–79, 286–87, 290, 292, 
295–97, 299, 303, 306, 308, 310, 313, 
319–21, 333, 340, 344–45
V oter Education Project, 7, 215
V oting Rights Act of 1965, 7, 27
Walker, Daniel, 170
Walker Report, 59
Warden, Rob, 228
Ware, Mitchell, 152–53
Washington, George, 66, 114
Washington, Harold, 352, 354
Washington Post, and Pentagon Papers, 
143, 177
Watergate, 144, 177–78, 187, 197, 203, 
218, 224, 227, 241
Watson, Terry, 61–62
Watson, Tom, 6
Waxman, Sheldon, 183–85, 189, 192, 197, 
216–17, 295–96
Waysdorf, Susan, 57, 132
Weathermen, 21, 55, 76, 113–15, 119, 
132, 161
and Conspiracy Eight trial, 58–59
Weathermen Underground Organization 
(WUO). See Weathermen
Webb, Dan, 343
Weibner, Lee, 59
Weinglass, Lenny, 71, 329
White, Charles, 349–50
White, Larry, 53
Whitehorn, Laura, 133
Wicker, Tom, 154
Wiedrich, Bob, 277
Wilk, Eliot, 155–56
Wilkerson, Cathy, 115
Wilkins, Roy, 99, 179, 181, 184
Williams, Don, 20
Williams, Jean, 47, 50
Willis, Stan, 355
Winters, Jake, 194–95, 269
Witkowski, Joe, 185, 235, 272–73, 
284–85, 286–87, 319, 321, 344
Wolfson, Jo-Anne, 102, 116, 132, 135
Wolfson, Warren, 102, 122
Woodson, Mzizi, 155–60, 202
Youker, Claude, 263, 315
Young Lords Organization (YLO), 44–46, 
54, 58, 69, 108, 161
Young Patriots, 45, 58, 69
Youth International Party, 59
Zimmers, Robert, 124, 180, 206, 261–63, 
274–75, 298, 302, 305, 319, 348
testimony of, 265–66
Index
Fred Hampton_FINAL.indd   376 7/29/09   1:30:44 PM

