=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: The-New-Afro-American-Nationalism-Dr-John-Henrik-Clarke-Fall-1961.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 9
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:36:32.588272
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Page 1 of 9 
 
The New Afro-American Nationalism  John Henrik Clarke (Fall 1961) 
 
The New Afro-American Nationalism 
By John Henrik Clarke (Fall 1961) 
 
From: RBG DR. JOHN HENRIK CLARKE STUDIES COLLECTION 
No people are really free until they become the instrument of their own liberation. Freedom is 
not legacy that is bequeathed from one generation to another. Each generation must take and 
maintain its freedom with its own hands. 
The February 1961, riot in the gallery of the United Nations in protest against the foul and 
cowardly murder of Patrice Lumumba introduced the new Afro -American Nationalism. This 
nationalism is only a new manifestation of old grievances with deep roots. Na tionalism, and a 
profound interest in Africa, actually started among Afro -Americans during the latter part of the 
nineteenth century. Therefore, the new Afro-American nationalism is really not new.


--- PAGE 2 ---
Page 2 of 9 
 
The New Afro-American Nationalism  John Henrik Clarke (Fall 1961) 
The demonstrations in the United Nations  gallery interpre ted the murder of Lumumba as the 
international lynching of a black man on the altar of colonialism and white supremacy. Suddenly, 
to them at least, Lumumba became Emmett Till and all of the other black victims of lynch law 
and the mob. The plight of the Africans still fighting to throw off the yoke of colonialism and the 
plight of the Afro -Americans, still waiting for a rich, strong and boastful nation to redeem the 
promise of freedom and citizenship became one and the same. Through their action the U.N. 
demonstrators announced their awareness of the fact that they were far from being free and a 
long flight still lay ahead of them. The short and unhappy life of Patrice Lumumba announc ed 
the same thing about Africa. 
Belatedly, some American officials began to realize that the foreign policy of this country will be 
affected if the causes of the long brooding dissatisfaction among Afro -Americans are not dealt 
with effectively. Others, quick to draft unfavorable conclusions and compound misconceptions, 
interpreted this action as meaning there was more Afro -American interest in African affairs than 
in the affairs of the United States. Both interpreters seemed to have missed a vital point  the 
United States has never had an official policy based only the granting of  complete citizenship to 
Afro-Americans, nor has the United States ever had an official policy based on the complete 
elimination of, or approving of the complete elimination, of colonialism in Africa. 
 Patrice Lumumba became a hero and a martyr to Afro-American nationalists because he was the 
symbol of the black man's humanity struggling for recognition. The life of Patrice Lumumba 
proved that he was a product of Belgian paternalism and misrule in the Congo. In more favorable 
circumstances, he might have b ecome one of the most astute national leaders of the twentieth 
century. When the Congo emerged clearly in the light of modern history he was its bright star. 
Lumumba was a true son of Africa and was accepted as belonging to all of Africa, not just the 
Congo. No other personality in African history has leaped so suddenly from death to martyrdom. 
This spirit was a natural choice to rekindle the flame of Afro-American nationalism. 
Harlem has always been the incubator for Black Nationalism in too many organiz ations and too 
many leaders with conflicting programs. Some of these "leaders" are self -seeking money 
changers who have found a haven and a bonanza in the African nationalist movement. The major 
nationalist groups and their programs are briefly outlined here: 
Nation of Islam: A nation -wide organization, dating to 1930, led since 1933 by Elijah 
Muhammad, born Elijah Poole in Georgia sixty -three years ago. Headquarters in Chicago. 
Temple No. 7 in New York is led by 35 year -old Minister Malcolm X. The Black Muslim 
movement is presently the most dynamic force for protest and change in the United States. Of all 
the Afro-American nationalists groups this is the one that is most feared by white  people. More 
about them later. 
Muslim Brotherhood: This group cla ims to be authentic Muslim and is hostile to the Nation of 
Islam group, whose followers are massive and growing fast. The hostility between these two


--- PAGE 3 ---
Page 3 of 9 
 
The New Afro-American Nationalism  John Henrik Clarke (Fall 1961) 
groups has been overplayed by the press. Muslim Brotherhood is led by Talib Ahmed Dawud, 
husband of singer Dakota Staton. 
United African Nationalist Movement: This group was started in 1948 by James R. Lawson, 
formerly an official in the Harlem Labor Union. Lawson's many enemies insist that his 
movement is mostly on paper. This accusation notwithstanding he c ontinues to be one of the 
most active of the Harlem group of nationalists. He maintains liaison with most of the African 
missions at the United Nations, he says, "to exchange information, ideas and techniques and to 
coordinate demonstrations in the common cause." 
The Universal African Nationalist Movement: This organization has been led by Benjamin 
Gibbons for over twenty years. This is one of the numerous groups that was formed after the 
breaking up of the major "Back To Africa" movement The Universal Neg ro Improvement 
Association, after the decline of Marcus Garvey, who was the most colorful and the most 
effective of all African nationalists of the 20th century. This group still uses Garvey's old slogan, 
"African for the Africans those at home and those abroad." 
Cultural Association for Women of African Heritage: This group is important because it 
represents the entry of Afro -Americans from the entertainment field into the nationalist 
movement. Headed by a dynamic personality, singer Abby Lincoln, who par ticipated in the 
demonstration at the U.N. In defense of her group, she says, "We Afro -Americans will be heard 
by any means you make it necessary for us to use." She is without reservations in denouncing, 
"crumb-crunching, cocktail-sipping Uncle Tom leadership paid by colonialist." 
The African Nationalist Pioneer Movement headed by Carlos Cooks, is the most active of the 
splinter nationalist groups born out of the breaking up of the Garvey Movement. Other groups in 
this category are: The Garvey Club, Unite d Sons and Daughters of Africa, and the First Africa 
Corps. 
The most active of the new nationalist groups are: Liberation Committee for Africa, On Guard 
Committee for Freedom and the Provisional Committee For a Free Africa. 
The National Memorial Book Store, operated by Lewis H. Michaux is the main gathering place 
for Harlem nationalists. It is called the Home of Common Sense and Proper Propaganda, 
Headquarters, of Black to African Movement. The backroom of the bookstore conta ins a 
collection of pictures of the great personalities in the history of Afro -Americans. The area in 
front of the store has been renamed "Harlem Square." 
Of all the nationalist groups in the United States, the Nation of Islam, called the Black Muslims, 
are the most written about and the most misunderstood. The interpreters of this group have not 
been able to decide whether the movement is religious or political. In a recent interview with 
Malcolm X, he said to me : "Our religion is mainly trying to find a  way for the black man to get 
some heaven while he is down here on earth."


--- PAGE 4 ---
Page 4 of 9 
 
The New Afro-American Nationalism  John Henrik Clarke (Fall 1961) 
To accomplish the above-mentioned objective, the Black Muslim Movement will have to be both 
religious and political. It will have to be a spiritual, political and economic force. 
A recent convert to the Black Muslim Movement, explaining why he joined the movement, and 
the basis of its appeal to an increasing number of Afro -Americans, said: "I am a man of forty 
years of age. I fought against people who were supposed to be this count ry's enemies in the 
Second World War, and my father fought in the First World War. I have been a patriotic citizen 
and I have always obeyed this country's laws. Yet, I have never been able to feel like a citizen or 
a man. I was a 33rd degree Mason and I ha ve been a deacon in two different churches. I am a 
first class cabinetmaker and I've had my own shop for nearly ten years. In spite of all of this, 
white people still treated me as if I was a boy. The Muslims have taught me that I am a man , a 
black man, and that's something I can feel proud of." 
This convert has stated the case for the Black Muslims, in capsule. The drama of this search for 
dignity, definition and direction is old, the cast of characters is new. To some extent the Black 
Muslims are a latter-day version of the Garvey Movement, with a new sounding dogma which is 
basically the same as Marcus Garvey's. 
To the Black Muslim the American promise and the American dream have grown sour with 
fulfillment. They have lost faith in the United States as a democratic nation. 
The Black Muslims in the United States have created what is essentially a proletarian movement. 
This is the largest movement of this nature to emerge among Afro -Americans since the heyday 
of Marcus Garvey and the collapse of his "back to Africa" dream. 
In the following quote from Eric Lincoln's book, The Black Muslims in America, he explains 
why the Black Bourgeoisie "leaders" have been a complete failure with the Afro -Americans who 
make up the growing Black Muslim Movement. 
"Organizations such as the NAACP and the National Urban League, for all their virtues, have not 
caught the imagination and adherence of the Negro masses. Their memberships tend to comprise 
middle and upper-class Negroes and whites, in each case the least disprivileged of their race. The 
Black Muslims, by contrast, are undeniably a mass movement. From their present base of more 
than 100,000 members, they are reaching for the support of the entire Negro lower class  and 
ultimately, of all other black Americans." 
With this program it can be clearly seen that the Black Muslims have flung down a challenge to 
all other existing Afro -American organizations. How this challenge is answered will determine 
the future of the people of African descent in the Western World. 
Religious convictions involved 
The explainers of the new Afro -American Nationalism have given most of their attention to the 
Black Nationalist splinter groups, heirs to the once powerful Garvey movement, and the Black


--- PAGE 5 ---
Page 5 of 9 
 
The New Afro-American Nationalism  John Henrik Clarke (Fall 1961) 
Muslims. In taking this all too narrow a pproach, they have neglected another vital manifestation 
of the new Afro-American Nationalism. Afro-Americans are turning away from both Christianity 
and Islam. There is a growing tendency to study and adhere to religions and customs that 
originated and developed in Africa. 
The most notable trend in this direction can be observed in the rise of Voodoo cults in Harlem 
and other large Afro-American communities. The name of the cult, like the cult itself is of West 
African origin. In Africa these cults were o nce predominant among the Fon people of Dahomey 
and the Yoruba people of Western Nigeria. This African religion, now being reintroduced is not 
new to the people of African descent in the Western world. In Janheim Jahn's book Muntu, The 
New African Culture, he gives the following report of the early manifestations of Voodoo in the 
slaves who were brought to England, the West Indies and the United States: 
The reason why it (Voodoo) was the religious conception of Dahomey in particular that came to 
prevail in  Haiti is apparent from a London report of 1789 which tells us that ten to twelve 
thousand slaves were exported yearly from the Kingdom of Dahomey. The English exported 
only seven to eight hundred of these, the Portuguese about three thousand and the Frenc h the 
remainder. In other words more than six to eight thousand a year, were shipped to the French 
Antilles, above all to Saint-Dominique, as the principal French colony of Haiti was then called. 
Moreau de Saint -Mery, a relative of the Empress Josephine, wrote several volumes on the 
plantation life of the transplanted African in the West Indies. He describes, among other things a 
Voodoo ceremony. 
"According to the Arada Negroes Voodoo means a grea t supernatural being, a snake that knows 
the past and the present and, through the medium of the high priestess foretells the future. These 
two are called King and Queen, Master and Mistress pr Papa and Mama." "The meeting takes 
place," he says, "only secr etly and at night, far from profane eyes. The initiated put on sandals 
and wrap themselves in red clothes. Sacrificial gifts are brought; the King and Queen receive 
them. The receipts are used to meet the expenses of the community and assist needy member s. 
Then follows an oath similar to that at the opening of the meeting and 'As fearful as the first,' an 
oath of secrecy and obedience." 
In a recent announcement to his Afro -American brothers, Ofuntola Oserjeman, the self -
proclaimed Priest of the Yoruba Te mple of New Oyo (Harlem's new African name) called for a 
return not only to African religions, but to an African way of life in its entirety. In his message 
he says: 
 We must Africanize everything! Our names, our hats, our clothes, our clubs, our churches , our 
religion, our schools, home furnishings, business, holidays, games, arts, social functions, 
political parties, our manners and customs, etc., etc., etc.


--- PAGE 6 ---
Page 6 of 9 
 
The New Afro-American Nationalism  John Henrik Clarke (Fall 1961) 
Begin with yourself today. You have nothing to lose or fear. It is as natural for persons of 
African descent to take and maintain the customs, dress and traditions of their motherland, as it is 
natural for persons of European descent to continue European customs and traditions in America. 
It is distinctly unnatural and degrading, even ridiculous, for  persons of African descent to have 
and keep European customs and habits forced upon them during their enslavement. Our 
liberation must be complete. Every technique of slavery must be wiped out. We must begin with 
our so-called leaders. Support Africanizat ion! Note to men: adopt the African look: cut the brim 
off your hats, you will look like you should, and less like an imitation. Change! 
And thus the Afro -Americans' search for identity continues. The search is both heroic and 
pathetic. In growing numbers  Afro-Americans are turning back to and African religions and 
ways of life at a time when some Africans are beginning to turn away from them. The new 
African-minded Afro-Americans are accepting old African religions and ways of life, literally, at 
a time w hen the Africans are accepting these religions and ways of life, selectively and with 
some reservations. 
All African life is now going through a period of transition and modernization. An attempt is 
being made to preserve the best of old African ways of life. In increasing numbers, Africans with 
a western education and a western oriented religion, principally Christianity, are beginning to 
feel spiritually unfulfilled. Now, with new insight, Africans are looking back and reevaluating 
the worth of old Afric an ways of life, while concurrently looking forward to the building of 
modern and industrialized African states. Therefore, the direction and predicament of the African 
and the Afro -American is basically the same  being both  progressive and regressive. Dist ance, 
years of separation and alien ways of life imposed by rulers not of their choosing, have created 
misunderstanding and a lack of coordination of effort between these two African people. This 
fact notwithstanding, the Africans and the Afro -Americans ar e traveling different roads to the 
same ultimate goal , the realization and projection of themselves as full -fledged and dignified 
human beings. The notion that Europe and North America represents the only accomplishment 
that can be called a civilization is no longer accepted and believed. The European concept of the 
Africans and the North American concept of the Afro -American is now being both questioned 
and challenged. 
Among the Afro -Americans, particularly, very often the question is awkward and the chall enge 
is ill-prepared. This is due, in part, to the fact that the new nationalist movements among Afro -
Americans are led, mainly, by aroused proletarians, unlike the nationalist movements in Africa, 
whose leadership consist of a more articulate educated eli te. The new Afro -American 
nationalism was born, and is growing without the encouragement of the so -called "Negro 
leadership class."


--- PAGE 7 ---
Page 7 of 9 
 
The New Afro-American Nationalism  John Henrik Clarke (Fall 1961) 
The new Afro-American nationalists, with all their awkwardness and inadequacy, have learned a 
lesson and discovered a great  truth that still eludes the "Negro leadership class" referred to here. 
They have learned the value of history and culture as an instrument in stimulating the spiritual 
rebirth of a people. 
 The cultural heritage of a people is directly related to their h istory. There can be no true 
understanding of the people of African origin in the United States until there is a better 
understanding, and more respect for, their African background. The culture of a people is the fuel 
that feeds the fires of their ambitio n, pride and self -esteem. There can be no meaningful 
advancement without this stimulation. A people must take pride in their history and love their 
own memories in order to fulfill themselves. This is the lesson, I believe, the new Afro-American 
nationalists are trying to learn and teach. 
I think I can bring the picture clearer into focus by paraphrasing a statement made by Saunders 
Redding at the first "American Negro Writers Conference," in March 1959. 
A people's ultimate purpose is to use their gifts to develop their awareness of themselves in order 
to become a better instrument for living together with other people. This sense of identity is the 
root by which all honest creative effort is fed. A people's relation to their culture is the same as 
the relation of a child to its mother's breast. 
In spite of the charlatans and money changers who occasionally invade the camps of the new 
Afro-American nationalists, their influence continues to spread. Their numerous and conflicting 
programs leave much to be d esired. There is a hunger among Afro -Americans for a new and 
more dynamic leadership. This hunger often drives them from one inadequate leader to another. 
The smug middle class leadership of organization like the NAACP and the National Urban 
League have mi ssed (or misjudged) the new tempo of restlessness among the Afro -American 
newly alerted masses. They still seem to think of this group as being uneducated, unwashed and 
unorganized worthy of being led but not worthy of being touched or listened to. The Ame rican 
dream and the American promise of full citizenship, with dignity, after being so long delayed, is 
now being discarded as a hope and an objective by large numbers of Afro -Americans. Africa has 
become the magic word and the new hope. There is now, in Harlem, an African oriented political 
party. This party, called the Alajo Party, recently sent out the following summons to action to its 
present and potential followers.


--- PAGE 8 ---
Page 8 of 9 
 
The New Afro-American Nationalism  John Henrik Clarke (Fall 1961) 
"UNITY, ACTION, POWER" 
The re-Africanization of the black people of America has begun. Like yeast in a hot oven we are 
suddenly beginning to rise. Each person must do his part. 
In traditional Africa every person of 14 years of age must join a society to learn the culture, 
history, and political aims of his nation and his people. For 100 years blacks in America have 
grown old with little or no knowledge of themselves or political aims to which they should 
aspire. Now, for the first time the ALAJO PARTY has a school for the training of our people and 
their leaders. 
All leaders must be educated by their own people in their own aims. Our present leaders are not. 
That is why our power is wasted. The U.S. owes us millions of dollars in indemnity for slavery. 
We must have strong leadership to collect this money which is due to each family. You and your 
friends should join the ALAJO PARTY now to petition the U.S. to pay its debt to us. 
Admittedly, the chances of collecting this vast indemnity are thin indeed. That is not the 
important point here. The fact that this issue has been placed on the agenda of things desired by 
the Afro -Americans and a demand has been made for its consideration represents a new and 
extreme approach to the plight of the people of African origin in the western wo rld. This 
approach also represents a concession. There is now a growing number of Afro -Americans who 
have given up all hopes of ever being completely integrated American citizens. 
The Priest Rev. Ofuntola Oserjeman Adefunmi, of the Yoruba Temple, Ogboni ( Keeper of 
Ancestral Customs) is also chief and founder of the Alajo Party. According to his literature: 
By his initiation into the Priesthood of the Orisha -Vudu-Religion, he is the first of the blacks of 
America to return wholeheartedly to the culture and traditions of Africa. He is bound therefore to 
uphold and establish the national customs of his Ancestors. He and the members of his party, and 
all who join them are adding new glory to the pageantry of West African civilization, as they 
sacrifice, not for barren integration or separation but to restore to Africans, born in America, the 
foundations of their cultural genius. 
The position of Priest Rev. Adefunmi (like it or not) is clear , much clearer than the position of 
the moderate Black Bourgeoisie "l eaders," who are not leading. The Afro -American today 
represents a revolutionary force in the United States. Again, I think I should emphasize, the 
leadership of this force is basically proletarian. By proletarian I do not mean communist. The 
new Afro-American nationalists, like the African nationalists, are gravitating toward a form of 
African Socialism. This new African Socialism will be nothing more than a rehash and an 
updating of the old communal Socialism that existed in Africa for more than a thousan d years 
before the European Karl Marx was born. An increasing number of thinking Africans and Afro -
Americans are now looking back at their history and culture, and within themselves, for the 
spiritual and philosophical stimulus for their survival and direction.


--- PAGE 9 ---
Page 9 of 9 
 
The New Afro-American Nationalism  John Henrik Clarke (Fall 1961) 
On this matter the position of the new Afro-American nationalists is extreme, and presently there 
is no apparent middle ground. The Yoruba Temple nationalists represent a more articulate 
manifestation of this extreme position. Unlike most of the other Afro-American nationalists, they 
have created a sizeable body of literature explaining their point of view. 
"The Yoruba Temple," the Priest Rev. Adefunmi explains, "is the advance guard for the change 
now being felt in the minds of every awaking Afro -American. It is farther ahead in its program 
for the future of the Afro-American than any society of its kind. In fact it is the only society of its 
kind in America. It is the only society which is the same in West Africa, Cuba, Haiti, Trinidad 
and Brazil, because it is African through and through. 
"The soul of the black is his religion. The Yoruba Temple does not believe we can ever fully 
succeed by trying to act and be like Europeans (Americans). This is ridiculous when you stop to 
think what foolishness this is. There is only one thing we can be , Africans, because that is what 
we were meant to be, face it!" 
Well! Let's brace ourselves and face it. So far as the greater number of Afro -American 
nationalists are concerned, the showdown is now. The issue is cl early joined. In spite of the 
diversity and contradictions in words and objectives, all of the Afro -American nationalists 
basically are fighting for the same thing. They feel that the Afro -American constitutes what is 
tantamount to an exploited colony with in a sovereign nation. Their fight is for national, and 
personal liberation. No people are really free until they become the instrument of their own 
liberation. Freedom is not legacy that is bequeathed from one generation to another. Each 
generation must t ake and maintain its freedom with its own hands. In this regard the Afro -
American nationalists have extended the basis of their fight to include the reclaiming of their 
African heritage. In identifying their fight for national liberation with the new resur gence of Pan-
Africanism (actually an Afro -American creation) the Afro -American not only as an instrument 
for the unification of Africa, but as a broader means for the unification of all people of African 
descent the world over. In taking this historical step they have turned away from a leadership that 
was begging and pleading to a more dynamic leadership that is insisting and demanding.

