=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: The-Haitian-Declaration-of-Independence-1804.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 9
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:23:31.848554
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                   March, 2011  
The Haitian Declaration of Independence 1804 
 
 Translation by Laurent Dubois and John Garrigus 
Page 1 
 
  
What people fought for us? What people wanted to gather the fruits of 
our labor? 
And what dishonorable absurdity to conquer in order to be enslaved. 
Enslaved?... 
Let us leave this description for the French; they have conquered but are 
no longer free. 
Toussaint                                                                                                                                                                                     Dessalines 
 
  
  
 
The Haitian Declaration of Independence 1804  
Translation by Laurent Dubois and John Garrigus 
 Source: http://www.nathanielturner.com/haitiandeclarationofindependence1804.htm 
The Commander in Chief to the People of Haiti 
Citizens:  
It is not enough to have expelled the barbarians who have bloodied our land for two 
centuries; it is not enough to have restrained those ever-evolving factions that one after 
another mocked the specter of liberty that France dangled before you. We must, with one 
last act of national authority, forever assure the empire of liberty in the country of our 
birth; we must take any hope of r e-enslaving us away from the inhuman government that 
for so long kept us in the most humiliating torpor. In the end we must live independent or 
die. 
Independence or death . . . let these sacred words unite us and be the signal of battle and of 
our reunion. 
Citizens, my countrymen, on this solemn day I have brought together those courageous 
soldiers who, as liberty lay dying, spilled their blood to save it; these generals who have 
guided your efforts against tyranny have not yet done enough for your happines s; the 
French name still haunts our land. 
Everything revives the memories of the cruelties of t his barbarous people: our laws, our


--- PAGE 2 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                   March, 2011  
The Haitian Declaration of Independence 1804 
 
 Translation by Laurent Dubois and John Garrigus 
Page 2 
habits, our towns, everything still carries the stamp of the French. Indeed! There are still 
French in our island, and you be lieve yourself free and independent of that Republic 
which, it is true, has fought all the nations, but which has never defeated those who 
wanted to be free. 
What! Victims of our [own] credulity and indulgence for 14 years; defeated not by French 
armies, but by the pathetic eloquence of their agents' proclamations; when will we tire of 
breathing the air that they breathe? What do we have in common with this nation of 
executioners? The difference between its cruelty and our patient moderation, its color and 
ours the great seas that separate us, our avenging climate, all tell us plainly that they are 
not our brothers, that they never will be, and that if they find refuge among us, they will 
plot again to trouble and divide us. 
Native citizens, men, women, girl s, and children, let your gaze extend on all parts of this 
island: look there for your spouses, your husbands, your brothers, your sisters. Indeed! 
Look there for your children, your suckling infants, what have they become?... I shudder 
to say it ... the prey of these vultures. 
Instead of these dear victims, your alarmed gaze will see only their assassins, these tigers 
still dripping with their blood, whose terrible presence indicts your lack of feeling and 
your guilty slowness in avenging them. What are yo u waiting for before appeasing their 
spirits? Remember that you had wanted your remains to rest next to those of your fathers, 
after you defeated tyranny; will you descend into their tombs without having avenged 
them? No! Their bones would reject yours. 
And you, precious men, intrepid generals, who, without concern for your own pain, have 
revived liberty by shedding all your blood, know that you have done nothing if you do not 
give the nations a terrible, but just example of the vengeance that must be wroug ht by a 
people proud to have recovered its liberty and jealous to maintain it let us frighten all 
those who would dare try to take it from us again; let us begin with the French. Let them 
tremble when they approach our coast, if not from the memory of thos e cruelties they 
perpetrated here, then from the terrible resolution that we will have made to put to death 
anyone born French whose profane foot soils the land of liberty. 
We have dared to be free, let us be thus by ourselves and for ourselves. Let us imi tate the 
grown child: his own weight breaks the boundary that has become an obstacle to him. 
What people fought for us? What people wanted to gather the fruits of our labor? And 
what dishonorable absurdity to conquer in order to be enslaved. Enslaved?... L et us leave 
this description for the French; they have conquered but are no longer free. 
Let us walk down another path; let us imitate those people who, extending their concern 
into the future, and dreading to leave an example of cowardice for posterity, p referred to 
be exterminated rather than lose their place as one of the world's free peoples.


--- PAGE 3 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                   March, 2011  
The Haitian Declaration of Independence 1804 
 
 Translation by Laurent Dubois and John Garrigus 
Page 3 
Let us ensure, however, that a missionary spirit does not destroy our work; let us allow our 
neighbors to breathe in peace; may they live quietly under the laws th at they have made 
for themselves, and let us not, as revolutionary firebrands, declare ourselves the lawgivers 
of the Caribbean, nor let our glory consist in troubling the peace of the neighboring 
islands. Unlike that which we inhabit, theirs has not been drenched in the innocent blood 
of its inhabitants; they have no vengeance to claim from the authority that protects them. 
Fortunate to have never known the ideals that have destroyed us, they can only have good 
wishes for our prosperity. 
Peace to our neigh bors; but let this be our cry: "Anathama to the French name! Eternal 
hatred of France!" 
Natives of Haiti! My happy fate was to be one day the sentinel who would watch over the 
idol to which you sacrifice; I have watched, sometimes fighting alone, and if I have been 
so fortunate as to return to your hands the sacred trust you confided to me, know that it is 
now your task to preserve it. In fighting for your liberty, I was working for my own 
happiness. Before consolidating it with laws that will guarantee you r free individuality, 
your leaders, who I have assembled here, and I, owe you the final proof of our devotion. 
Generals and you, leaders, collected here close to me for the good of our land, the day has 
come, the day which must make our glory, our independence, eternal. 
If there could exist among us a lukewarm heart, let him distance himself and tremble to 
take the oath which must unite us. Let us vow to ourselves, to posterity, to the entire 
universe, to forever renounce France, and to die rather than live  under its domination; to 
fight until our last breath for the independence of our country. 
And you, a people so long without good fortune, witness to the oath we take, remember 
that I counted on your constancy and courage when I threw myself into the caree r of 
liberty to fight the despotism and tyranny you had struggled against for 14 years. 
Remember that I sacrificed everything to rally to your defense; family, children, fortune, 
and now I am rich only with your liberty; my name has become a horror to all those who 
want slavery. Despots and tyrants curse the day that I was born. If ever you refused or 
grumbled while receiving those laws that the spirit guarding your fate dictates to me for 
your own good, you would deserve the fate of an ungrateful people. B ut I reject that awful 
idea; you will sustain the liberty that you cherish and support the leader who commands 
you. Therefore vow before me to live free and independent, and to prefer death to 
anything that will try to place you back in chains. Swear, fina lly, to pursue forever the 
traitors and enemies of your independence. 
*   *   *   *   * 
Done at the headquarters of Gonaives, the first day of January 1804, the first year of


--- PAGE 4 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                   March, 2011  
The Haitian Declaration of Independence 1804 
 
 Translation by Laurent Dubois and John Garrigus 
Page 4 
independence. 
The Deed of independence 
Native Army 
Today, January 1st 1804, the g eneral in chief of the native army, accompanied by the 
generals of the army, assembled in order to take measures that will insure the good of the 
country; 
After having told the assembled generals his true intentions, to assure forever a stable 
government f or the natives of Haiti, the object of his greatest concern, which he has 
accomplished in a speech which declares to foreign powers the decision to make the 
country independent, and to enjoy a liberty consecrated by the blood of the people of this 
island; and after having gathered their responses has asked that each of the assembled 
generals take a vow to forever renounce France, to die rather than live under its 
domination, and to fight for independence until their last breath. 
The generals, deeply moved b y these sacred principles, after voting their unanimous 
attachment to the declared project of independence, have all sworn to posterity, to the 
universe, to forever renounce France, and to die rather than to live under its domination. 
 *   *   *   *   * 
January 1, 1804 -- The Founding of Haiti  
 
The twelve -year struggle was over. What had begun as a protest against cruelty, and 
continued as a fight for liberty, had ended with independence. The land still shuddered 
with the terror that had gripped it and the horrors it had seen. The white world that sighed 
with relief when Toussaint was kidnapped now found itself confronted by an entirely new 
nation of Blacks, victors of the greatest slave revolt in history. 
Dessalines summoned his generals to les Gonaïves to renew the oaths they had taken a


--- PAGE 5 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                   March, 2011  
The Haitian Declaration of Independence 1804 
 
 Translation by Laurent Dubois and John Garrigus 
Page 5 
year before at L'Arcahaye and to confirm him as governor -general of the state to which 
they restored the ancient Carib name of Haiti —the land of the mountains. On January 1, 
1804, they swore "to each other, to posterity and to the entire universe, to renounce France 
for ever and to die rather than live under her domination" -- and proudly dated their 
declaration "the 1st day of the independence of Haiti."  
The generals returned to their comma nd—Christophe in the North, Pétion in the West and 
Geffrard in the South, while Dessalines occupied himself with drawing up regulations for 
uniforms and badges of rank, and ordered a capital city to be built at Fort Marchand on his 
favourite plantation and to be named Dessalines. 
There were French soldiers in the former Spanish part of the island and isolated bands of 
unsubmitted brigands in the South — notably one led by Jean -Baptiste Perrier, who called 
himself Goman. To deal with them Dessalines still had  need of arms and ammunition and 
for these he turned to the British once more. 
 *   *   *   *   * 
The Conspirators against Dessalines 
[Christophe] knew that Dessalines disapproved of his inclus ion of both white and mulatto 
advisors in the group of administrators that he had formed at Le Cap and with whom he 
discussed events in the world outside and the future of his own troubled country, using 
their learning and experience to supplement his own lack of education. 
In August he sent a schooner laden with flour to the principal ports of the West and the 
South, ostensibly to barter its cargo for sugar and coffee. But besides flour the schooner 
carried one of his confidential agents, Bruno Blanchet, who had conversations at Jérémie 
with General Férou, at Les Cayes with General Geffrard, and, on the return journey, at 
Port-au-Prince with General Pétion. The talks were secret, their purpose obscure -- a 
tentative sounding of the generals' attitude towards the emperor. 
All of them were suspicious, none went further than agreeing that he was not entirely 
satisfied with the existing government. If Christophe intended recruiting allies in a plot 
against Dessalines, the attempt was a failure. . . . 
*   *   *   *   * 
The Rise and Decline of Emperor Dessalines  
Another version 
*   *   *   *   *


--- PAGE 6 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                   March, 2011  
The Haitian Declaration of Independence 1804 
 
 Translation by Laurent Dubois and John Garrigus 
Page 6 
The Impact of the Haitian Revolution in the 
Atlantic World   
Reviewed by Mimi Sheller 
The slave revolution that two hundred years ago created the 
state o f Haiti alarmed and excited public opinion on both 
sides of the Atlantic. Its repercussions ranged from the world 
commodity markets to the imagination of poets, from the 
council chambers of the great powers to slave quarters in 
Virginia and Brazil and most  points in between. Sharing 
attention with such tumultuous events as the French 
Revolution and the Napoleonic War, Haiti's fifteen -year 
struggle for racial equality, slave emancipation, and colonial 
independence challenged notions about racial hierarchy th at 
were gaining legitimacy in an Atlantic world dominated by 
Europeans and the slave trade. The Impact of the Haitian 
Revolution in the Atlantic World explores the multifarious 
influence—from economic to ideological to psychological —
that a revolt on a smal l Caribbean island had on the 
continents surrounding it.  
 
Fifteen international scholars, including eminent historians David Brion Da vis, Seymour 
Drescher, and Robin Blackburn, explicate such diverse ramifications as the spawning of 
slave resistance and the stimulation of slavery's expansion, the opening of economic 
frontiers, and the formation of black and white diasporas. Seeking to d isentangle the 
effects of the Haitian Revolutionfrom those of the French Revolution, they demonstrate 
that its impact was ambiguous, complex, and contradictory. —Publisher, University of South 
Carolina Press 
David P. Geggus is a professor of history at the University of Florida in Gainesville and a 
former Guggenheim and National Humanities Center fellow. He has published extensively 
on the history of slavery and the Caribbean, with a particular focus on the Haitian 
Revolution. He is the author of Slavery, War and Revolution: The British Occupation of 
Saint Domingue, 1793 –1798 and an editor of A Turbulent Time: The French Revolut ion 
and the Greater Caribbean. Geggus lives in Gainesville.  
*   *   *   *   *


--- PAGE 7 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                   March, 2011  
The Haitian Declaration of Independence 1804 
 
 Translation by Laurent Dubois and John Garrigus 
Page 7 
 
Slave Revolution in the Caribbean, 1789-1804 
A Brief History with Documents 
By Laurent Dubois and John D. Garrigus  
This is t he most succinct, convenient and accurate history 
of the Haitian Revolution currently available. It fills a 
significant gap in the historiography between monographs 
and general histories on one side and novels and creative 
literature on the other. The auth ors have produced an 
intelligent and highly useful collection of documents, 
many virtually inaccessible, and conveniently translated 
them for the English -speaking audience. Their ability to 
contextualize the events of the revolution briefly is simply 
exemplary.' - Franklin Knight, Johns Hopkins University, 
USA 'This is the most amazing document collection I have 
ever read. It is emotionally gripping, intellectually 
stimulating, morally provocative, action-packed and full of 
points of comparison to histories  of slavery and freedom 
everywhere. It has a terrific narrative flow and inherent 
pathos. . . .This is a wonderful achievement for which all 
sorts of teachers will be most grateful. —Evan Haefeli, Tufts 
University 
This volume details the first slave rebell ion to have a successful outcome, leading to the 
establishment of Haiti as a free black republic and paving the way for the emancipation of 
slaves in the rest of the French Empire and the world. Incited by the French Revolution, 
the enslaved inhabitants of  the French Caribbean began a series of revolts, and in 1791 
plantation workers in Haiti, then known as Saint -Domingue, overwhelmed their planter 
owners and began to take control of the island. They achieved emancipation in 1794, and 
after successfully opp osing Napoleonic forces eight years later, emerged as part of an 
independent nation in 1804. A broad selection of documents, all newly translated by the 
authors, is contextualized by a thorough introduction considering the very latest 
scholarship. Laurent Dubois and John D. Garrigus clarify for students the complex 
political, economic, and racial issues surrounding the revolution and its reverberations 
worldwide. Useful pedagogical tools include maps, illustrations, a chronology, and a 
selected bibliography.—Publisher, Bedford/St. Martin's  
*   *   *   *   *


--- PAGE 8 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                   March, 2011  
The Haitian Declaration of Independence 1804 
 
 Translation by Laurent Dubois and John Garrigus 
Page 8 
The Haitian Revolution, 1791 to 1804: Or, Side Lights 
On the French Revolution  
By Theophilus Gould Steward 
This is a reproduction of a book published before 1923. 
This book may have occasional imperfections such as 
missing or blurred pages, poor pictures, errant marks, etc. 
that were either part of the original artifact, or were 
introduced by the scanning process. We believe this work is 
culturally important, and despite the imperfections, have 
elected to bring it back into print as part of our continuing 
commitment to the preservation of printed works 
worldwide. We appreciate your un derstanding of the 
imperfections in the preservation process, and hope you 
enjoy this valuable book.—Amazon.com 
 
The Haitian Revolution, 1791 to 1804 . By T. G. Steward. Thomas Y. C rowell 
Company, New York, 1915. 292 pages. $1.25. 
Reviewed by J.R. Fauset. The Journal of Negro History. Vol. I., No. 1, January. 1916. 
In the days when the internal dissensions of Haiti are again thrusting her into the limelight 
such a book as this of Mr. Steward assumes a peculiar importance. It combines the 
unusual advantage of being both very readable and at the same time historically 
dependable. At the outset the author gives a brief sketch of the early settlement of Haiti, 
followed by a short ac count of her development along commercial and racial lines up to 
the Revolution of 1791. The story of this upheaval, of course, forms the basis of the book 
and is indissolubly connected with the story of Toussaint L'Overture. To most Americans 
this hero is known only as the subject of Wendell Phillips's stirring eulogy. As delineated 
by Mr. Steward, he becomes a more human creature, who performs exploits, that are 
nothing short of marvelous. Other men who have seemed to many of us merely names —
Rigaud, Le Clerc, Desalines, and the like--are also fully discussed. 
Although most of the book is naturally concerned with the revolutionary period, the author 
brings his account up to date by giving a very brief resumé of the history of Haiti from 
1804 to the present time. This history is marked by the frequent occurrence of 
assassinations and revolutions, but the reader will not allow himself to be affected by 
disgust or prejudice at these facts particularly when he is reminded, as Mr. Steward says, 
"that the political history of Haiti does not differ greatly from that of the majority of South 
American Republics, nor does it differ widely even from that of France." 
The book lacks a topical index, somewhat to its own disadvantage, but it contains a map 
of Haiti, a rathe r confusing appendix, a list of the Presidents of Haiti from 1804 to 1906


--- PAGE 9 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                   March, 2011  
The Haitian Declaration of Independence 1804 
 
 Translation by Laurent Dubois and John Garrigus 
Page 9 
and a list of the names and works of the more noted Haitian authors. The author does not 
give a complete bibliography. He simply mentions in the beginning the names of a few 
authorities consulted.—J. R. Fauset. 
 
Books on the Caribbean 
Hubert Cole. Christophe: King of Haiti. New York: The Viking Press, 1967. 
C.L.R. James. The Black Jacobins: Toussaint L'Ouverture and the San Domingo Revolution  (1938) 
Edourad Gissant. Caribbean Doscourse (2004)  /  Barbara Harlow. Resistance Literature (1987) 
Josaphat B. Kubayanda. The Poet's Africa: Africanness in the Poetry of Nicolas Guillen and Aime Cesaire  
(1990) 
  
Paul Laraque and Jack Hirschman.  Open Gate An Anthology of Haitian Creole Poetry (2001)  
David P. Geggus, ed. The Impact of the Haitian Revolution in the Atlantic World.  University of South Carolina 
Press, 2001. 
Jean-Bertand Aristide. Eyes of the Heart: Seeking a Path for the Poor in the Age of Globalization  
*   *   *   *   *

